The Pagan Tribes of Borneo, Vol. 2 (Charles Hose and William McDougall, 1912)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (archive.org/details/pagantribesofbor02hose). Vol. 2: religion and magic in Borneo - soul beliefs, shamanism, headhunting ritual and the cult of the omen-birds.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

C6e li&rarg 

of tfje 

2Jntoer$itp of iQortt) Carolina 

— - ■ ^\ _— .. 

_9 

3 

JOI 

2 

oa 

~£> 

THE LIBRARY OF THE 

UNIVERSITY OF 

NORTH CAROLINA 

AT CHAPEL HILL 

ENDOWED BY THE 

DIALECTIC AND PHILANTHROPIC 

SOCIETIES 

GN635 

•B6 
H6 
v. 2 

UNIVERSITY OF N.C. AT CHAPEL HILL 

llllllllll 

10000562623 

This book is due at the LOUIS R. WILSON LIBRARY on the 
last date stamped under "Date Due." If not on hold it may be 
renewed by bringing it to the library. 

DATE OVT 

due re;l. 

DATE 
DUE 

7™TW 

1S!gC$mm®mM 

MW O*^ 

51 3 

Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2013 

http://archive.org/details/pagantribesofbor02hose 

THE PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

MACMILLAN AND CO., Limited 

LONDON ■ BOMBAY • CALCUTTA 
MELBOURNE 

THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 

NEW YORK • BOSTON • CHICAGO 
DALLAS • SAN FRANCISCO 

THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, Ltd. 

TORONTO 

SMb35 

THE PAGAN TRIBES 
OF BORNEO 

A DESCRIPTION OF THEIR PHYSICAL 

MORAL AND INTELLECTUAL CONDITION 

WITH SOME DISCUSSION OF THEIR 

ETHNIC RELATIONS 

BY 

CHARLES HOSE, D.Sc. 

FORMERLY DIVISIONAL RESIDENT AND MEMBER OF THE SUPREME COUNCIL OF SARAWAK 
AUTHOR OF ' A DESCRIPTIVE ACCOUNT OF THE MAMMALS OF BORNEO ' 

AND 

WILLIAM McDOUGALL, M.B., F.R.S. 

FELLOW OF CORPUS CHRISTI COLLEGE 
AND READER IN MENTAL PHILOSOPHY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD 

WITH AN APPENDIX ON THE PHYSICAL CHARACTERS 
OF THE RACES OF BORNEO 

BY 

A. C. HADDON, D.Sc, F.R.S. 

IN TWO VOLUMES 
VOL. II 

MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED 

ST. MARTIN'S STREET, LONDON 

1912 

COPYRIGHT 

CONTENTS OF VOLUME II 

CHAPTER XIII 

PAGE 

Ideas of Spiritual Existences and the Practices 

arising from them . . . . .1 

CHAPTER XIV 

Ideas of the Soul illustrated by Burial Customs, 

Soul-Catching, and Exorcism . . .28 

CHAPTER XV 

Animistic Beliefs connected with Animals and Plants 5 1 

CHAPTER XVI 

Magic, Spells, and Charms . . , . 1 1 5 

CHAPTER XVII 
Myths, Legends, and Stories . . . .136 

CHAPTER XVIII 

Childhood and Youth of a Kayan . , 1 53 

O* *l <$ O f <J ' i 

vi PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

CHAPTER XIX 

PAGE 

The Nomad Hunters . . . . 177 

CHAPTER XX 
Moral and Intellectual Peculiarities . .194 

CHAPTER XXI 
Ethnology of Borneo . . . . .223 

CHAPTER XXII 

Government . . . . . .257 

APPENDIX 

The Physical Characters of the Races of Borneo. 

By A. C. H addon . . . . -311 

INDEX 343 

LIST OF PLATES 

FACE PAGE 

Kenyah Women husking Padi (in Colour) . . Frontispiece 

144. Kenyah Altar showing large round Stones known as Batu 

tuloi. Eggs offered to the Omen-birds in the Jungle 2 

145. A Klemantan (Barawan) making Offerings of Eggs to 

the Gods ........ 4 

1 46. Balawing Pole on the left ; Altar - post of Bali 

Penyalong on the right ; and in the middle a Post 
to which Pieces of the Flesh of slain Enemies have 
been skewered as Thank-offerings after successful War, 
set up before House of Long Pokuns (Klemantan) . 8 

147. Wooden Images set up before a Kenyan House at the 

Approach of an Epidemic of Cholera . . . 12 

148. Wooden Image of Bali Atap, a Kenyah God . . 16 

149. Altar-posts set up before Klemantan House on return 

from War ........ 20 

150. (a) Temporary Shelter for Heads. (&) Gallery of a 

Kayan Long House . . . . . . 24 

151. Kenyah Dayongs wearing Masks .... 30 

152. Tomb of the Wife of a Chief of the Long Patas (Kle- 

mantan). The white Discs were formerly made of 
Shell, but nowadays European Crockery is used, and a 
German Firm supplies Dinner-plates provided with two 
Perforations which facilitate the attachment of the 
Plates ......... 34 

36 

40 

44 

46 

153. Tomb of a Sekapan (Klemantan) Chief 

154. The Grave of Kuling, Daughter of Boi Jalong, the 

principal Kenyah Chief of the Batang Kayan River 

155. Malanau Graves near Rejang Village . 

156. Peng Coffins deposited on Ledges of overhanging Cliff 

on the Mahakam River ..... 

157. (a) Tama Bulan sacrificing a Pig to Bali Penyalong 

{b) Balari, a Kenyah, sacrificing a Fowl to Bal 
Penyalong ....... 

158. A Kayan charging a Pig with a Message to the Gods 

159. Kayans discussing the Liver of a Pig . 

58 
68 
80 

viii PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

1 60. Image of a Hornbill made by Ibans for use at 

Ceremonies ........ 

161. Group of Kenyahs. On the Top of the Pole can be 

seen an Image of the Hawk, Bali Flaki . 

162. An Enemy's Head decorated by Kayans with various 

Charms ........ 

163. Image of Crocodile, and House provided for the Spirit 

whose Aid is invoked by Malanaus at the Bayoh 
Ceremony ........ 

164. A wooden Figure of Crocodile, and Decorations used 

at the Bayoh Ceremony by Malanaus 

165. Mixed Group of Kenyah and Klemantan Boys 

166. A Sekapan (Klemantan) Woman carrying Child in a 

Cradle ......... 

167. Iban Boys bathing. The Fence is for Protection 

against Crocodiles ....... 

168. (1) Fire-piston. (2) Pusa, used to make Fire at the 

naming of a Kayan Child. The Figure represents 
Laki Pesong 

169. Kayans wrestling 

170. A Dance which nearly resembles some recent European 

Developments of the Art 

171. A Kayan dancing 

172. A Lesson in Wood-carving (Kenyahs) 

173. An Iban Wedding . 

174. Punans of the Baram 

175. Elderly Punan Headman . 

176. A Punan Headman of the Tinjar 

177. Punans of Bok (Baram) 

178. Tatued Ukit of Rejang District . 

179. A Punan Camp in the Dapoi River 

180. Punans working wild Sago 

181. Punans working Camphor. 

182. Punan Mother and Child . 

183. Creeper hung across Mouth of tributary Stream to 

prohibit All-comers from ascending the Stream . 

184. Brass Hooks and Sword-handles sent by Tama Kuling 

to the Resident of the Baram as Symbols of Peace 

185. A Kayan of the Mahakam River 

1 86. A Kayan Woman of the Mahakam River, East Borneo 

187. An Orang Bukit (Klemantan) Woman, Baram District 

188. Profile of Woman in Plate 187 

189. Long Pokuns (Klemantans) of Dapoi River, Baram 

District . . . . 

190. Lirong (Klemantan) Youths of Tinjar River 

191. A Lirong Woman (Klemantan) of the Tinjar River 

192. A Kajaman (Klemantan) Woman of the Upper Class . 

94 

106 

126 

132 
154 

156 
158 

160 
164 

166 
168 
172 

174 
178 
180 
180 
182 
184 
186 
188 
190 
192 

206 

220 
224 
226 
228 
230 

234 
238 
240 
244 

LIST OF PLATES 

IX 

FACE PAGE 

193. Land Dayak Men (Klemantans) from Upper Sarawak . 250 

194. (a) Land Dayak Girls of the Sadong District, (b) Land 

Dayaks of Upper Sarawak . . . . . . 252 

195. Iban Women, Rejang District . . . . .254 

196. A small Fort at Kanowit, Rejang District . . . 260 

197. The Fort at Claudetown (Marudi), with Squad of 

Rangers who form the Garrison . . . .264 

198. Entrance of the new Fort at Marudi, Baram District . 268 

199. Court-room in Baram Fort . . . . .272 

200. The Silat River descending from Usun Apo to join the 

Baram, the High Road between East and West 
Borneo ......... 276 

201. Kenyah masked Men going to meet former Enemies 

with Overtures of Peace . . . . .280 

202. Klemantan Mask . . . . . . .284 

203. Tama Ruling {alias Boi Jalong), principal Kenyah Chief 

of the Batang Kayan District . . . . .288 

204. Tama Ruling's (Kenyah) Village at Tana Puti, Batang 

Kayan District ....... 292 

205. Madangs (Kenyahs) at the Peace-making at Marudi 

(1899) .296 

206. The great Peace-making at Marudi (1899), Baram 

District, between the Kayan, Kenyah, and Klemantan 
Tribes of East and West Borneo . . . . 298 

207. Racing of War-boats at Marudi during the Peace-meeting 

(1899) 300 

208. Party of Kenyah Chiefs from the Batang Kayan on the 

Way to visit the Rajah of Sarawak at Kuching, before 

the Peace-making in the Baram in 1901 . . . 302 

209. Final Instructions from the Resident of the Third 

Division of Sarawak to a Kayan Party about to attack 
Stronghold of Iban Rebels ..... 304 

210. Peace-making with Kana and the Iban Rebels at 

Kanowit . . . . . . . . 306 

211. Madangs of Pliran with two Children newly restored to 

their Parents by the Government from Captivity with 

Ibans . 308 

N.B. — The following names are those of the gentlemen to whom 
we are indebted for permission to reproduce their photographs. 
After each name stands a list of the plates thus reproduced. 

Dr. W. H. Furness. (Nos. 11, 32, 33, 40, 42, 44, 45, 48, 51, 
52, 55, 62, 63, 82, 85, 87 ip), 93, 96, 99, 104, 147, 149, 152, 162, 
165, 175, 179, 180, 181, 182.) 

Dr. A. W. Nieuwenhuis. (Nos. 28, 37, 61, 67, 81, 151, 154, 
165, 172, 183, 185, 186, 201, 204.) 

PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

Dr. A. C. Haddon. (Nos. 6, 22(a), 43, 54, 76, 144, 150.) 

Dr. C. S. Myers. (No. 157.) 

Dr. C. G. Seligmann. (Nos. 87 (a), 207.) 

Dr. Harrison W. Smith. (No. 194(a).) 

Mr. A. Moor. (No. 208.) 

Mr. R. Shelford. (Nos. 193, 194^).) 

The rest of the plates are from photographs taken by C. H. 

MAPS 

The Eastern Archipelago .... At end of Volume 

Borneo ........ „ 

Sketch Map of the Baram District, Sarawak . „ 

Sketch Map of Sarawak .... ,, 

CHAPTER XIII 

IDEAS OF SPIRITUAL EXISTENCES AND THE 
PRACTICES ARISING FROM THEM 

The Kayans believe themselves to be surrounded 
by many intelligent powers capable of influencing 
their welfare for good or ill. Some of these are 
embodied in animals or plants, or are closely con- 
nected with other natural objects, such as mountains, 
rocks, rivers, caves ; or manifest themselves in such 
processes as thunder, storm, and disease, the growth 
of the crops and disasters of various kinds. There 
can be no doubt that some of these powers are 
conceived anthropomorphically ; for some of them 
are addressed by human titles, are represented by 
carvings in human form, and enjoy, in the opinion 
of the Kayans, most of the characteristically human 
attributes. 

Others are conceived more vaguely, the bodily 
and mental characters of man are attributed to 
them less fully and definitely ; and it is probably 
true to say that these powers, all of which, it would 
seem, must be admitted to be spiritual powers (if 
the word spiritual is used in a wide sense as 
denoting whatever power is fashioned in the like- 
ness of human will and feeling and intelligence), 
range from the anthropomorphic being to the power 
which resides in the seed grain and manifests itself 
in its growth and multiplication, and which seems 

2 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

to be conceived merely as a vital principle, virtue, 
or energy inherent in the grain, rather than as an 
intelligent and separable soul.1 

It has been said of some peoples of lowly culture 
that they have no conception of merely mechanical 
causation, and that every material object is regarded 
by them as animated in the same sense as among 
ourselves common opinion regards the higher 
animals as animated. On the difficult question 
whether such a statement is true of any people we 
will not presume to offer an opinion ; but we do 
not think that it could be truthfully made about 
any of the peoples of Borneo. It would be absurd 
to deny all recognition or knowledge of mechanical 
causation to people who show so much ingenuity 
in the construction of houses, boats, weapons, and a 
great variety of mechanical devices, such as traps, 
and in other operations involving the intelligent 
application of mechanical principles. These opera- 
tions show that, though they may be incapable of de- 
scribing in abstract and general terms the principles 
involved, they nevertheless have a nice appreciation 
of them. If a trap fails to work owing to its faulty 
construction, the trapper treats it purely as a 
mechanical contrivance and proceeds to discover 
and rectify the faulty part. It is true that in this and 

1 The following statement, which was written by us of the Kenyahs in a 
former publication, holds good also of the Kayans : ' ' They may be said to 
attribute a soul or spirit to almost every natural agent and to all living things, 
and they pay especial regard to those that seem most capable of affecting their 
welfare for good or ill. They feel themselves to be surrounded on every 
hand by spiritual powers, which appear to them to be concentrated in those 
objects to which their attention is directed by practical needs ; adopting a mode 
of expression familiar to psychologists, we may say that they have differentiated 
from a ' continuum ' of spiritual powers a number of spiritual agents with very 
various degrees of definiteness. Of these the less important are very vaguely 
conceived, but are regarded as being able to bring harm to men, who must 
therefore avoid giving offence to them, and must propitiate them if they 
should by ill-chance have been offended. The more important, assuming 
individualised and anthropomorphic forms and definite functions, receive 
proper names, are in some cases represented by rude images, and become 
the recipients of prayer and sacrifice " (Journ. of Anthrop. InstiHtte, vol. 
xxxi. p. 174). 

KENYAH ALTAR SHOWING LARGE ROUND STONES 
KNOWN AS BATU TULOI. 

Plate 144. EGGS OFFERED TO THE OMEN-BIRDS 
IN THE JUNGLE. 

SPIRITUAL EXISTENCES 3 

numberless similar situations a man's movements 
may be guided by his observation of omens ; but 
if, after obtaining good omens, he has success in 
trapping, he does not attribute the successful opera- 
tion of the trap to any activity other than its purely 
mechanical movements ; though it may be, and 
probably in some such cases is, true that the 
Kayan believes the omen bird to have somehow 
intervened to direct the animal towards the trap, 
or to prevent the animal being warned against it. 
The Kayan hangs upon the tomb the garments and 
weapons and other material possessions of the 
dead man ; l and it would seem that he believes 
that some shadowy duplicate of each such object is 
thereby placed at the service of the ghost of the 
dead man. This, it might be argued, shows that 
he attributes to each such inert material object a 
soul, whose relation to the object is analogous to 
that of the human soul to the body. But such an 
inference, we think, would not be justified. As 
with the Homeric Greeks, the principle of in- 
telligence and life is not to be altogether identified 
with the ghost, or shade, or shadowy duplicate of 
the human form that is conceived to travel to the 
Kayan Hades. The soul seems to be rather an 
inextended invisible principle ; for, as the procedure 
of the soul-catcher 2 shows, it is regarded as capable 
of being contained within, or attached to, almost 
any small object, living or inert. It would seem, 
then, that after death the visible ghost or shade of 
a man incorporates and is animated by the soul ; 
and that the visible shade of inert objects is, 
like themselves, inert and inanimate. 

There is, then, no good reason to suppose that 
the Kayans attribute life, soul, or animation to 

1 If the dead man possessed no sufficiently presentable garments, these may 
be supplied by friends. This last act of respect and friendship has not 
infrequently been permitted to one of us. 

2 See vol. ii. p. 29. 

4 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

inert material objects ; and they do not explain 
the majority of physical events animistically. 

The spiritual powers or spirits may, we think, 
be conveniently regarded as of three principal 
classes : — 

(i) There are the anthropomorphic spirits 
thought of as dwelling in remote and vaguely 
conceived regions and as very powerful to intervene 
in human life. Towards these the attitude of the 
Kayans is one of supplication and awe, gratitude 
and hope, an attitude which is properly called 
reverential and is the specifically religious attitude. 
These spirits must be admitted to be gods in a 
very full sense of the word, and the practices, 
doctrines, and emotions centred about these spirits 
must be regarded as constituting a system of 
religion. 

(2) A second class consists of the spirits of 
living and deceased persons, and of other anthropo- 
morphically conceived spirits which, as regards the 
nature and extent of their powers, are more nearly 
on a level with the human spirits than those of the 
first class. Such are those embodied in the omen 
animals and in the domestic pig, fowl, dog, in the 
crocodile, and possibly in the tiger-cat and a few 
other animals. 

(3) The third class is more heterogeneous, and 
comprises all the spirits or impalpable intelligent 
powers that do not fall into one or other of the 
two preceding classes ; such are the spirits very 
vaguely conceived as always at hand, some malevo- 
lent, some good ; such also are the spirits which 
somehow are attached to the heads hung up in the 
houses. The dominant emotion in the presence of 
these is fear ; and the attitude is that of avoidance 
and propitiation. 

SPIRITUAL EXISTENCES 

The Gods 

The Kayans recognise a number of gods that 
preside over great departments of their lives and 
interests. The more important of these are the 
god of war, Toh Bulu ; three gods of life, Laki Ju 
Urip, Laki Makatan Urip, and Laki Kalisai Urip, 
of whom the first is the most important ; the god of 
thunder and storms, Laki Balari and his wife Obeng 
Doh\ the god of fire, Laki Pesong\ gods of the 
harvest, Anyi Lawang and Laki Ivong ; a god of the 
lakes and rivers, Urai Uka ; Balanan, the god of 
madness ; Toh Kiho, the god of fear ; Laki Katira 
Murei and Lakijup Urip, who conduct the souls of 
the dead to Hades. 

Beside or above all these is Laki Tenangan, 
a god more powerful than all the rest, to whom 
are assigned no special or departmental functions. 
He seems to preside or rule over the company 
of lesser gods, much as Zeus and Jupiter ruled 
over the lesser gods of the ancient Greeks and 
Romans. 

The Kayans seem to have no very clear and 
generally accepted dogmas about these gods. Some 
assert that they dwell in the skies, but others regard 
them as dwelling below the surface of the earth. 
The former opinion is in harmony with the practice 
of erecting a tree before the house with its branches 
buried in the ground and the root upturned when 
prayers are made on behalf of the whole house ; for 
the tree seems to be regarded as in some sense 
forming a ladder or path of communication with the 
superior powers. The same opinion seems to be 
expressed in the importance attached to fire and 
smoke in prayer and ritual. Fire, if only in the 
form of a lighted cigarette, is always made when 
prayers are offered ; it seems to be felt that the 

6 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

ascending smoke facilitates in some way the com- 
munication with the gods. 

While some gods, those of war and life, of harvest 
and of fire, are distinctly friendly, others, namely, the 
gods of madness and fear, are terrible and malevo- 
lent ; while the god of thunder and those that 
conduct the souls to Hades do not seem to be pre- 
dominantly beneficent or malevolent. 

Laki Tenangan seems to be the supreme being 
of the Kayan universe. He is conceived as bene- 
ficent and, as his title Laki implies, as a fatherly 
god who protects mankind. He is not a strictly 
tribal god, for the Kayan admits his identity with 
Pa Silong and with Bali Penylong, the supreme 
gods of the Klemantans and Kenyahs respectively. 
In this, we think, the Kayan religion shows a catho- 
licity which gives it a claim to rank very high among 
all religious systems. 

Laki Tenangan has a wife, Doh Tenangan, who, 
though of less importance than himself, is specially 
addressed by the women. The god is addressed by 
name in terms of praise and supplication ; the prayers 
seem to be transmitted to him by means of the souls 
of domestic pigs or fowls ;x for one of these is always 
killed and charged to carry the prayer to the god. 
At the same time a fire is invariably at hand and 
plays some part in the rite ; the ascending smoke 
seems to play some part in the establishment of 
communication with the god. As an example of a 
prayer we give the following. The supplicant, having 
killed a pig and called the messengers of the god, 
cries, " Make my child live that I may bring him up 
with me in my occupations. You are above all 
men. Protect us from whatever sickness is abroad. 
If I put you above my head, all men look up to me 
as to a high cliff." 

Similar rites are observed on addressing Doh 

1 See vol. ii. p. 61. 

XIII 

SPIRITUAL EXISTENCES 

Tenangan. The following was given us as an 
example, " Oh ! Doh Tenangan, have pity upon me ; 
I am ill — make me strong to-morrow and able to 
find my food." 

The Kayans are not clear whether Laki 
Tenangan is the creator of the world. He does 
not figure in the Kayan creation myth.1 There 
seems to be no doubt about his supremacy over 
the other gods ; these are sometimes asked by 
Kayans to intercede with him on their behalf.2 

As regards the minor departmental gods, it is 
difficult to draw the line between them and the 
spirits of the third class distinguished above. All 
of them are approached at times with prayers and 
with rites similar to those used in addressing Laki 
Tenangan. Several wooden posts, very roughly 
carved to indicate the head and limbs of a human 
form, stand before every Kayan house. When the 
gods are addressed on behalf of the whole house- 
hold, as before or after an important expedition, 
the ceremony usually takes place before one of 
these rudely carved posts.3 But the post cannot 
be called an idol. It is more of the nature of an 
altar. No importance attaches to the mere posts, 
which are often allowed to fall away and decay and 
are renewed as required. A similar post may be 
hastily fashioned and set up on the bank of the 
river, if a party at a distance from home has special 
occasion for supplication. 

An altar of a rather different kind is also used in 
communicating with the gods. It seems to be 
used especially in returning thanks for recovery of 
health after severe illness. It consists of a bamboo 
some four or five feet in length fixed upright in the 
ground. The upper end is split by two cuts at 

1 See vol. ii., p. 137. 

2 For the views of an individual Kayan on Laki Tenangan, see vol. ii., 
p. 74* 3 See vol. ii., p. 53. 

VOL. II B 

8 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

right angles to one another, and a fresh fowl's tgg 
is inserted between the split ends (PL 145). Leaves 
of the Long (a species of Caladium), a plant grown 
on Xh&padi field for this purpose, are hung upon the 
post. These leaves serve merely to signalise the fact 
that some rite is going forward ; they are also hung, 
together with a large sun hat, upon the door of any 
room in which a person lies seriously ill, to make 
it known as lali or tabu ; and in general they seem 
to be used to mark a spot as pervaded by some 
spiritual influence, or, in short, as " unclean." The 
bodies of fowls and pigs sacrificed in the course of 
the rites performed before such an altar-post are 
generally hung upon sharpened stakes driven into 
the ground before it, i.e. between it and the house, 
towards which the post, in the case of posts of 
the former kind, invariably faces ; and the frayed 
sticks commonly used in such rites are hung 
upon the altar- post. Such posts are sometimes 
fenced in, but this is by no means always the case 

(PL 144). 

The Kayans seek to read in the behaviour of 
the omen birds and in the entrails of the slaughtered 
pigs and fowls indications of the way in which the 
gods responds to their prayers. For they regard 
the true omen birds as the trusty messengers of 
the gods. After slaughtering the pigs or fowls to 
whose charge they have committed their petitions, 
they examine their entrails in the hope of discover- 
ing the answer of the gods ; and at the same time 
they tell off two or three men to look for omens 
from the birds of the jungle.1 If the omens first 
obtained are bad, more fowls and pigs are usually 
killed and omens again observed ; and in an import- 
ant matter, e.g. the illness of a beloved child, the 
process may be repeated many times until satis- 
factory omens are forthcoming. Whatever may 

1 See Chap. X. 

Plate 146. BALAWING POLE ON THE LEFT, ALTAR - POST OF BALI 
PENYALONG ON THE RIGHT, AND IN THE MIDDLE A POST TO WHICH 
PIECES OF THE FLESH OF SLAIN ENEMIES HAVE BEEN SKEWERED AS 
THANK-OFFERINGS AFTER SUCCESSFUL WAR, SET UP BEFORE HOUSE 
OF LONG POKUNS (KLEMANTANS). 

SPIRITUAL EXISTENCES 9 

have been the origin and history of such rites, it 
seems to be quite clear that the slaughtering of 
these animals is regarded as an act of sacrifice in 
the ordinary sense of the word, i.e. as an offering 
or gift of some valued possession to the spiritual 
powers ; for, although on some occasions a pig 
so slaughtered is eaten, those stuck upon stakes 
before the altar-post are left to rot ; and the idea 
of sacrificing, or depriving oneself of, a valued 
piece of property is clearly expressed on such 
occasions in other ways ; e.g. a woman will break 
a bead of great value when her prayers for the 
restoration to health of a child remain unanswered, 
or on such an occasion a woman may cut off her 
hair.1 

The custom of approaching and communicating 
with the gods through the medium of the omen 
birds, seems to be responsible in large measure for 
the fact that the gods themselves are but dimly 
conceived, and are not felt to be in intimate and 
sympathetic relations with their worshippers. The 
omen birds seem to form not only a medium of 
communication, but also, as it were, a screen which 
obscures for the people the vision of their gods. As 
in many analogous instances, the intercessors and 
messengers to whose care the messages are com- 
mitted assume in the eyes of the people an undue 
importance ; the god behind the omen bird is apt 
to be almost lost sight of, and the bird itself tends 
to become an object of reverence, and to be regarded 

1 The idea of giving up a valued possession to the god or spirit in order to 
appease or propitiate him seems to underlie a curious rite formerly practised 
by the Jingkangs, a Klemantan subtribe living on the great Kapuas river. 
These people, like most of the peoples of Borneo, value their male children 
more highly than their female children. If a boy seems to be at the point of 
death, and if all other efforts to restore him have proved unavailing, ihe 
relatives would kill an infant sister of the boy, and would cause the boy to eat a 
small bit of the roasted flesh. The intention seems to be to appease some male- 
volent spirit that is causing the sickness ; and the eating of the flesh seems to 
be considered necessary in order to connect the sacrifice clearly with the 
sick child. 

io PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

as the recipient of the prayer and the dispenser of 
the benefits which properly he only foretells or 
announces.1 

We have little information bearing upon the 
origin and history of these Kayan gods. But a few 
remarks may be ventured. The names of many of 
the minor deities are proper personal names in 
common use among the Kayans or allied tribes, 
such as Ju, Balari, Anyi, Ivong, Urai, Uka ; and 
the title Laki, by which several of them are 
addressed, is the title of respect given to old men 
who are grandfathers. These facts suggest that 
these minor gods may be deified ancestors of great 
chiefs, and this suggestion is supported by the 
following facts : — 

First, a recently deceased chief of exceptional 
capacity and influence becomes not infrequently the 
object of a certain cult among Klemantans and Sea 
Dayaks. Men will go to sleep beside his grave or 
tomb, hoping for good dreams and invoking the 
aid of the dead chief in acquiring health, or wealth, 
or whatever a man most desires. Sea Dayaks some- 
times fix a tube of bamboo leading from just above 
the eyes of the corpse to the surface of the ground ; 
they will address the dead man with their lips to 
the orifice of the tube, and will drop into it food and 
drink and silver coins. A hero who is made the 
object of such a cult is usually buried in an isolated 
spot on the crest of a hill ; and such a grave is 
known as rarong. 

Secondly, all Kayans, men and women alike, 
invoke in their prayers the aid of Oding Lahang 
and his intercession with Laki Tenangan. That 
they regard the former as having lived as a great 
chief is clearly proved by the following facts : 
firstly, many Kayans of the upper class claim to 
be his lineal descendants; secondly, a well-known 

1 Cf. vol. ii., p. 75, for the statement of a Kayan on this question. 

SPIRITUAL EXISTENCES n 

myth,1 of which several variants are current, describes 
his miraculous advent to the world ; thirdly, he is re- 
garded by Kayans, Kenyahs, and many Klemantans 
as the founder of their race. 

The Kenyahs also invoke in their prayers several 
spirits who seem, like Odin Lahang> to be regarded 
as deceased members of their tribe ; such are Tokong 
and Utong, and Pa Balan and Pliban. From all 
these descent is claimed by various Kenyah and 
Klemantan subtribes ; and that they are regarded 
as standing higher in the spiritual hierarchy than 
recently deceased chiefs, is shown by the prefix 
Bali,2 commonly given to their names, whereas this 
title or designation is not given to recently deceased 
chiefs ; to their names the word urip is prefixed by 
both Kayans and Kenyahs. The word urip means 
life or living ; the exact meaning of this prefix in 
this usage is obscure, possibly it expresses the re- 
cognition that the men spoken of are, though dead, 
still in some sense alive. 

A further link in this chain of evidence is afforded 
by the Kenyah god of thunder, Balingo. This 
spirit, it would seem, must be classed among the 
departmental deities, being strictly the Kenyah 
equivalent of Laki Balari of the Kayans ; and all 
the Kenyahs and many Klemantans seem to claim 
some special relation to Balingo? while one Madang 

1 See vol. ii. , p. 138. 

2 See vol. ii. , p. 29, for usage of this word. 

3 This relation is illustrated by the fact that among the charms and objects 
of virtue which the Kenyahs hang beside the heads in the galleries of their 
houses, or over the fireplaces in their rooms, are to be found in many houses 
one or two specimens of stone axe-heads. The original use of these objects 
is not known to the great majority of their possessors, who regard them as 
teeth dropped from the jaw of the thunder-god, Balingo. It is generally 
claimed that some ancestor found these stones and added them to the family 
treasures. A man who possesses such "teeth," carries them with him when 
he goes to war. The Madang chief Tama Kajan Odok, mentioned in the 
following note as claiming descent from Balingo, possessed the unusual number 
of ten such teeth. The credit of having first obtained specimens of these stones 
from the houses belongs to Dr. A. C. Haddon, who discovered a specimen in 
a Klemantan house of the Baram basin in the year 1899. The existence of such 
stones in native houses in Dutch Borneo had been reported by Schwaner many 
years before that date. 

12 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

(Kenyah) chief at least claims direct descent from 
him.1 

The last mentioned instance completes the series 
of cases forming a transition from the well re- 
membered dead chief to the departmental deity, the 
existence of which series lends colour to the view 
that these minor gods have been evolved from de- 
ceased chiefs. The weakness of this evidence 
consists in the fact that the series of cases is drawn 
from a number of tribes, and is not, so far as we 
know, completely illustrated by the customs or 
beliefs of any one tribe. 

There is, then, some small amount of evidence 
indicating that the minor gods are deified ancestors, 
whose kinship with their worshippers has been 
forgotten completely in some cases, less com- 
pletely in others. If this supposition could be 
shown to be true, it would afford a strong presump- 
tion in favour of the view that Laki Tenangan also 
has had a similar history, and that he is but primus 
inter pares. For among the Kayans, as we have 
seen, a large village acknowledges a supreme chief 
as well as the chiefs of the several houses of the 
village ; and in the operations of war on a large 
scale, a supreme war chief presides over a council 
of lesser chiefs. And it is to be expected that the 
social system of the superior powers should be 
modelled upon that of the people who acknowledge 
them. 

On the other hand, none of the facts, noted in 
connection with the minor gods as indicating their 
ancestral origin, are found to be true of Laki 

1 When questioned as to this claim, he gave us at once without hesitation the 
names in order of the ancestors of nineteen generations through whom he traces 
his descent from Balingo. It is perhaps worth while to transcribe the list as 
taken down from his lips in ascending order : — Kajan, Tama Kajan Odok, Sigo, 
Apoi, Baun ( ? ), Odok Sinan ( $ ), Along, Apoi, Laking, Laking Gz'lzng, Giling 
Sinjan, Sinjan Putok, Putoh Ati, Ati Aiai Jalong, Balari, Umbong Doh ( ? ), 
Kusun Patu Balingo. This succession of names, it will be noticed, is consistent 
with the custom, common to the Kenyans and Kayans, of naming the father 
after his eldest child. 

SPIRITUAL EXISTENCES 13 

Tenangan, except only his bearing the title Lakiy 
which, as we have seen, is the title by which a man 
is addressed as soon as he becomes a grandfather. 
The name Tenangan is not a proper name borne by 
any Kayans, nor, so far as we know, does it occur 
amongst the other peoples. Laki in Malay means 
a male. The name is possibly connected with the 
Kayan word tenang which means correct, or genuine. 
The termination an is used in several instances in 
Malay (though not in Kayan) to make a substantive 
of an adjective. The name then possibly means — 
he who is correct or all-knowing ; but this is a very 
speculative suggestion. 

It is possible that the Kayans owe their concep- 
tion of a supreme god to their contact with the 
Mohammedans. But this is rendered very im- 
probable by the facts : firstly, that the Kayans have 
had such intercourse during but a short period in 
Borneo, probably not more than 300 years, (though 
they may have had such intercourse at an earlier 
period before entering Borneo); secondly, that 
among the Sea Dayaks, who have had for at least 
1 50 years much more abundant intercourse with the 
Mohammedans of Borneo than the Kayans have 
had, the conception has not taken root and has not 
been assimilated. 

The Kenyah gods and the beliefs and practices 
centering about them are very similar to those 
of the Kayans. This people also recognises a 
principal god or Supreme Being, whose name is 
Bali Penylong, and a number of minor deities 
presiding over special departments of nature and 
human life. The Kenyahs recognise the following 
minor deities : Bali Atap protects the house 
against sickness and attack, and is called upon in 
cases of madness to expel the evil spirit possessing 
the patient. A rude wooden image of him stands 
beside the gangway leading to the house from the 

i4 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

river's brink ; it holds a spear in the right hand, a 
shield in the left ; it carries about its neck a fringed 
collar made up of knotted strips of rattan ; the head 
of each room ties on one such strip, making on it a 
knot for each member of his roomhold. Generally 
a wooden image of a hawk, Bali Flaki, stands 
beside it on the top of a tall pole. 

The Kenyahs carve such images more elaborately 
than the Kayans, who are often content merely to 
indicate the eyes, mouth, and four limbs, by slashing 
away with the sword chips of wood from the surface 
of the log, leaving gashes at the points roughly 
corresponding in position to these organs. The 
Kenyahs treat these rude images with rather more 
care than do the Kayans ; and they associate them 
more strictly with particular deities. The children 
of the house are not allowed to touch such an 
image, after it has been once used as an altar post ; 
it is only when it is so used, and blood of fowls or 
pigs sprinkled upon it, that it seems to acquire its 
" uncleanness." 1 

Bali Utong brings prosperity to the house. Bali 
Urip is the god of life ; he too has a carved altar- 
post, generally crowned with a brass gong. Balingo 
is the god of thunder. 

Bali Sungei is the name given to a being which 
perhaps cannot properly be called a god. He is 

1 There are four words used by the Kayans to express the notion of the 
forbidden act, malan, lali, parit, and tulah. All these are used as adjectives 
qualifying actions rather than things ; but they are not strictly synonymous 
terms. Malan and parit seem to be true Kayan words ; lali and tulah to have 
been taken from the Malay, and to be used generally by Kayans in speaking 
with Kenyahs or men of other tribes to whom these words are more familiar 
than the Kayan terms. 

Malan applies rather to acts involving risks to the whole community, parit 
to those involving risk to the individual committing the forbidden act : thus, 
during harvest it is malan for any stranger to enter the house, and the whole 
house or village is said to be malan ; but it is parit for a child to touch one of 
the images. Again, it is not malan for the proper persons to touch the dried 
heads on certain occasions, but it is always in some degree parit for the indi- 
vidual, and for this reason the task is generally assigned to an elderly man. 
Lali and tulah seem to be the lingua franca equivalents of malan and of 
parit respectively. 

SPIRITUAL EXISTENCES 15 

thought of as embodied in a huge serpent or dragon 
living at the bottom of the river ; he is supposed to 
cause the violent swirls and uprushes of water that 
appear on the surface in times of flood. He is 
regarded with fear ; and is held to be responsible 
for the upsetting of boats and drownings in the 
river. It is not clear that he is the spirit of the 
river itself; for floods and the various changes of 
the river do not seem to be attributed to him. 

Bali Penyalong, like Laki Tenangen, has a 
wife Bungan. She is not so distinctly the special 
deity of the women folk as is Doh Tenangan among 
the Kayans. 

A special position in the Kenyah system is 
occupied by Bali Flaki, the carrion hawk, which is 
the principal omen bird observed during the 
preparation for and conduct of war. Something will 
be said of the cult of Bali Flaki in a later chapter ; 
but we would note here that this bird is peculiar 
among the many omen-birds of the Kenyahs, in that 
an altar-post before the house is assigned to him, 
or at least one of the posts rudely carved to suggest 
the human figure is specially associated with Bali 
Flaki, and in some cases is surmounted by a 
wooden image of the hawk. It seems to us 
probable that in this case the Kenyahs have carried 
further the tendency we noted in the Kayans to 
allow the omen birds to figure so prominently in 
their rites and prayers as to obscure the gods whose 
messengers they are ; and that Bali Flaki has in 
this way driven into the background, and more or 
less completely taken the place of, a god of war 
whose name even has been forgotten by many of 
the Kenyahs, if not by all of them. 

Peculiar adjuncts of the altar-posts of the 
Kenyahs are the Draccena plant (whose deep red 
leaves are generally to be seen growing in a clump 
not far from them) and a number of large spherical 

16 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

stones, Batu tuloi. These are perpetual possessions 
of the house. Their history is unknown ; they are 
supposed to grow gradually larger and to move 
spontaneously when danger threatens the house. 
When a household removes and builds for itself a 
new home, these stones are carried with some 
ceremony to the new site (PL 144). 

We reproduce here a passage from a paper 
published by us some ten years ago 1 in which we 
ventured to speculate on the development of the 
Kenyah belief in a Supreme Being. 

We cannot conclude without saying something as to 
the possible origin of their conception of a beneficent Being 
more powerful than all others, who sends guidance and 
warnings by the omen birds, and receives and answers the 
prayers carried to him by the souls of the fowls and pigs. 
It might be thought that this conception of a beneficent 
Supreme Being has been borrowed directly or indirectly 
from the Malays. But we do not think that this view is 
tenable in face of the fact that, while the conception is a 
living belief among the Madangs, a Kenyah tribe that 
inhabits a district in the remotest interior and has had no 
intercourse with Malays, the I bans, who have had far more 
intercourse with the Malays than have the Kayans and 
Kenyahs, yet show least trace of this conception. As Arch- 
deacon Perham has written of the I bans, there are traces 
of the belief in one supreme God which suggest that the 
idea is one that has been prevalent, but has now almost 
died out. We are inclined to suppose that the tribes of the 
interior, such as the Kenyahs and Kayans, have evolved 
the conception for themselves, and that in fact Bali 
Penyalong of the Kenyahs is their god of war exalted 
above all others by the importance of the department of 
human activity over which he presides ; for we have seen 
that they had been led to conceive other gods — Balingo, 
the god of thunder, Bali Sungei, the god of the rivers, 
whose anger is shown by the boiling flood, and Bali Atap, 
who keeps harm from the house, while the Kayans have 
gods of life, a god of harvesting, and other departmental 

1 "The Relations between Men and Animals in Sarawak," J. Anth. 
hist. vol. xxxi. 

Plate 148. WOODEN IMAGE OF BALI ATAP, A KENYAH GOD. 

SPIRITUAL EXISTENCES 17 

deities. It seems to us that the only difficult step in such 
a simple and direct evolution of the idea of a beneficent 
Supreme Being is the conception of gods or spirits that 
perform definite functions, such as Bali Atap, who guards 
the house, and the gods that preside over harvesting and 
war, as distinct from such gods or nature-spirits as 
Balingo and Bali Sungei. But there seems to be no doubt 
that this step has been taken by these peoples, and that 
these various gods of abstract function have been evolved 
by them. And it seems to us that, were a god of war 
once conceived, it would be inevitable that, among com- 
munities whose chief interest is war and whose prosperity 
and very existence depend upon success in battle, such a 
god of battles should come to predominate over all others, 
and to claim the almost exclusive regard of his worshippers. 
Such a predominance would be given the more easily to 
one god by these people, because the necessity for strict 
subordination to their chiefs has familiarised them with 
the principles of obedience of subjects to a single ruler and 
of subordination of minor chiefs to a principal chief ; while 
the beneficence of the Supreme Being thus evolved would 
inevitably result; for the god of battles must seem beneficent 
to the victors, and among these people only the victors 
survive. Again, this conception is one that undoubtedly 
makes for righteousness, because it reflects the character of 
the people who, within the community and the tribe, are 
decent, humane, and honest folk. 

We are conscious of presumption in venturing to adopt 
the view that the conception of a beneficent Supreme 
Being may possibly be neither the end nor the beginning 
of religion, neither the final result of an evolution, 
euhemeristic, totemistic, or other, prolonged through 
countless ages and generations, nor part of the stock-in- 
trade of primitive man mysteriously acquired. Yet we 
are disposed to regard this conception as one that, amid 
the perpetual flux of opinion and belief which obtains 
among peoples destitute of written records, may be com- 
paratively rapidly and easily arrived at under favourable 
conditions (such as seem to be afforded by tribes like the 
Kenyans and Kayans, warlike prosperous tribes subordin- 
ated to strong chiefs), and may as rapidly fall into neglect 
with change of social conditions ; and we suggest that it 
may then remain as a vestige in the minds of a few individ- 
uals only to be discerned by curious research, as among 

18 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

the I bans or the Australian blacks, until another turn of 
Fortune's wheel, perhaps the birth of some overmastering 
personality or a revival of national or tribal vigour, gives it 
a new period of life and power. 

We still regard as highly plausible the view 
suggested in this passage. We would add to what 
we have written only a few words in explanation of 
what may seem to be a difficulty in the way of this 
view. It was mentioned above that the Kayans 
recognise a god of war, Toh Bulu. This fact may 
seem incompatible with the view that the idea of 
Laki Tenangan has been reached by exalting the 
god of war above his fellow-departmental deities ; 
but it is not, we think, a fatal objection. For Toh 
Bulu seems to be a god of but small account with 
the Kayans ; his name figures but little in their 
rites ; and the name itself indicates his subordinate 
position ; for toh is, as we have seen, the generic 
name for spirits of minor importance, and bulu is 
the Kayan word for feather ; Toh Bulu, literally 
translated, is then the feather -spirit or spirit of 
the feathers. It seems possible, therefore, that 
Toh Bulu was nothing more than the spirit con- 
cerned with the hornbill's feathers, which are the 
emblems or badges of acknowledged prowess in 
battle ; and that with the exaltation of the original 
god of war above his fellows, this minor spirit 
concerned in warfare has acquired a larger sphere 
and importance. 

With the Kenyahs similar processes, we suggest, 
have led to the exaltation of Bali Penyalong> the 
original god of war, into the position of the Supreme 
Being, and of Bali Flaki, his special messenger, 
into the position, or almost into the position, of the 
god of war. This view derives, we think, con- 
siderable support from the fact that the Kenyahs 
recognise no special god of war ; and in view of 
their tendency to create deities to preside over 

SPIRITUAL EXISTENCES 19 

each of the great departments of nature and of 
human activity, the absence from their system of a 
special god of war requires some special explana- 
tion such as we have offered above. 

The Klemantan gods are more numerous and 
more vaguely conceived, and the whole system 
seems more confused than that of the Kayans or 
Kenyahs. It is probable that the Klemantan tribes 
have borrowed freely from these more powerful 
neighbours. Many of them are very skilful in 
wood-carving, and it is probably largely owing to 
this circumstance that they make a larger number 
of images in human form. Some of these are kept 
in the house, while others stand before the house 
like those before the Kayan houses. The former 
are generally more highly regarded, and it is before 
them that their rites are generally performed. It 
seems not improbable that these stand for the gods 
proper to these people, and those outside the house 
for the borrowed gods. 

The supernatural beliefs and cults of the Sea 
Dayaks differ so widely from those described above 
that we think it best to bring together in one 
place (vol. ii., p. 85) what we have to say about 
them. 

The Lesser Spirits of Ill-Defined Nature 

In the second of the three classes of spiritual beings 
distinguished above (vol. ii., p. 4) we put the souls 
of men and of some of the animals. Some account 
of beliefs connected with these will be given in the 
following two chapters. We conclude this chapter 
by describing the spirits of the third class, spirits or 
intelligent powers vaguely conceived, of minor im- 
portance, but imperfectly individualised and not 
regularly envisaged in any visible forms or embodied 
in any material objects. The generic Kayan name 

20 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

for spirits of this class is Toh. All the spirits of this 
class seem to be objects of fear, to be malevolent, 
or, at least, easily offended and capable of bringing 
misfortunes of all kinds upon human beings. 

The most important of these Toh are perhaps 
those associated with the dried human heads that 
hang in every house. It seems that these spirits 
are not supposed to be those of the persons from 
whose shoulders the heads have been taken. Yet 
they seem to be resident in or about the heads, 
though not inseparable from them. They are said 
to cause the teeth of the heads to be ground together 
if they are offended or dissatisfied, as by neglect of 
the attentions customarily paid to the heads or by 
other infringement of custom. The heads are thus 
supposed to be animated by the Toh ; if a head falls, 
through the breaking of the rattan by which it is 
suspended, it is said to have thrown itself down, 
being dissatisfied owing to insufficient attention 
having been paid to it. This animation of the heads 
by the Toh is illustrated by the treatment accorded 
by the people to the heads from the time they are 
brought into the house. Having been dried and 
smoked in a small hut made for the purpose, they 
are brought up to the house with loud rejoicings and 
singing of the war chorus. For this ceremony all 
members of the village are summoned from the 
fields and the jungle, and, when all are assembled 
in the houses, every one puts off the mourning 
garments which have been worn by all since 
the death of the chief for whose funeral rites 
the heads have been sought. Everyone having 
donned the ordinary attire, the men carry the 
heads in procession adorned with daun silat, the 
dried and frayed leaves of a palm, before one of 
the altar posts that stand between the house and 
the river. There fowls and pigs are sacrificed in 
the usual way, and their blood is scattered upon 

o 
& 

D 

h 
W 

o 
w 

1/3 

o 

X 

< 

< 

w 

O 

w 

PQ 

cu 

D 

H 

CO 
CQ 

H 
C 

Oh 

0-' 
< 

H 
< 

SPIRITUAL EXISTENCES 21 

the assembled men with a wisp of shredded palm- 
leaves. 

Then the procession carries the heads into the 
house and up and down the gallery. The men 
dressed in their war coats, carrying shields and 
swords, drawn up in a long line, sing the war 
chorus, and go through a peculiar evolution, known 
as Sega lupar. Each man keeps turning to face his 
neighbours, first on one side, then on the other, with 
regular steps in time with all the rest. This seems 
to symbolise the alertness of the warriors on the 
war-path, looking in every direction. The heads, 
which have been carried by old men, are then hung up 
over the principal hearth on the beam on which the 
old heads are hanging ; they are suspended by 
means of a rattan, of which one end is knotted 
and the other passed upward through the foramen 
magnum and a hole cut in the top of the skull. 
After this the men sit down to drink, and the 
chief describes the taking of the heads, eulogising 
the warrior who drew first blood in each case, 
and who is credited with the glory of the taking 
of the head. Then follows a big feast, in every 
room a pig or fowl being killed and eaten ; after 
which more borak is drunk, the war chorus break- 
ing out spontaneously at brief intervals. Borak 
is offered to the heads by pouring it into small 
bamboo cups suspended beside them ; and a bit of 
fat pork will be pushed into the mouth of each. The 
heads, or rather the Tok associated with them, are 
supposed to drink and eat these offerings. The 
fact that the bits of pork remain unconsumed does 
not seem to raise any difficulty in the minds of the 
Kayans ; they seem to believe that the essence of 
the food is consumed. 

At all times the heads hanging in the house are 
treated respectfully and somewhat fearfully. When 
it is necessary to handle them, some old man under- 

22 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

takes the task, and children especially are prevented 
from touching them ; for it is felt that to touch them 
involves the risk of madness, brought on by the 
offended Toh or spirits of the heads. 

The fire beneath the heads is always kept alight 
in order that they shall be warm, and dry, and com- 
fortable. On certain special occasions they are 
offered borak and pork in the way mentioned 
above. 

On moving to a new house the heads are tempo- 
rarily lodged in a small shelter built for the purpose, 
and are brought up into the house with a ceremony 
like that which celebrates their first installation. 
The Kayans do not care to have in the house more 
than twenty or thirty heads, and are at some pains 
occasionally to get rid of some superfluous heads — 
a fact which shows clearly that the heads are not 
mere trophies of valour and success in war. The 
moving to a new house is the occasion chosen for 
reducing the number of heads. Those destined to 
be left are hung in a hut built at some distance from 
the house which is about to be deserted. A good 
fire is made in it and kept up during the demolition 
of the great house, and when the people depart they 
make up in the little head-house a fire designed to 
last several days. It is supposed that, when the 
fire goes out, the Toh of the heads notice the fact, 
and begin to suspect that they are deserted by the 
people ; when the rain begins to come in through 
the roof their suspicions are confirmed, and the Toh 
set out to pursue their deserters, but owing to the 
lapse of time and weather are unable to track them. 
The people believe that in this way they escape the 
madness which the anger of the deserted Toh would 
bring upon them. 

The precautions described in the foregoing para- 
graph illustrate very well the power for harm attri- 
buted to the Toh of the heads and the fear with 

SPIRITUAL EXISTENCES 23 

which they are regarded. Nevertheless these 
beings are not wholly malevolent. It is held that 
in some way their presence in the house brings 
prosperity to it, especially in the form of good crops ; 
and so essential to the welfare of the house are the 
heads held to be that, if through fire a house has 
lost its heads and has no occasion for war, the 
people will beg a head, or even a fragment of one, 
from some friendly house, and will instal it in their 
own with the usual ceremonies. 

The Toh of the heads are but a few among many 
that are conceived as surrounding the houses and 
infesting the tombs, the rivers, the forests, the 
mountains, the caves, and, by those who live near 
the coast, the sea ; in fact every locality has its 
Toh, and, since they are easily offended and roused 
to bring harm, the people are careful to avoid 
offence and to practise every rite by which it is 
thought possible to propitiate them. Death and 
sickness, especially madness, accidental bodily in- 
juries, failure of crops, in fact almost any trouble 
may be ascribed to the malevolent action of Toh. 
Examples of the way conduct is influenced by this 
belief are the following : — 

In clearing va patch of jungle in preparation for 
sowing fiadi, it is usual to leave a few trees standing 
on some high point of the ground in order not to 
offend the Toh of the locality by depriving them of 
all the trees, which they are vaguely supposed to 
make use of as resting-places. Such trees are 
sometimes stripped of all their branches save a few 
at the top ; and sometimes a pole is lashed across 
the stem at a height from the ground and bunches 
of palm leaves hung upon it ; a " bull-roarer," which is 
used by boys as a toy, is sometimes hung upon such 
a cross-piece to dangle and flicker in the breeze.1 

1 We are not aware that the " bull -roarer" is put to any other uses than 
this by any of the tribes. 

VOL. II C 

24 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

Again, young children are held to be peculiarly- 
subject to the malevolent influence of the Tok. 
We have already mentioned that no name is given 
to a child until it is two or three years of age, in 
order to avoid attracting to it the attention of the 
Tok. For the same reason the parents dislike any 
prominent person to touch an infant ; and if for any 
reason such contact has taken place, it is usual to 
give the mother a few beads, which she ties about 
the wrist or ankle of the child, " to preserve its 
homely smell " as they say, and so, it would seem, 
avoid the risk of the Tok being attracted by the 
unusual odour of the child. Parents who have 
lost several young children will give to a child, 
when the time comes for naming it, some such 
name as Tai (dung), or Tai Manok (birds' dung), or 
Jadt (bad), in order that it may have a better chance 
of escaping the unwelcome attention of the Tok. 
If for any reason it is suspected that the attention 
of some evil- disposed Tok has been drawn to a 
child (and the same practice is sometimes observed 
by adults under similar circumstances), a sooty 
mark is made upon the forehead, consisting of a 
vertical median line and a horizontal band just above 
the eyebrows. This is thought to render it difficult 
for the Tok to recognise his victim. Such a black 
mark is worn more especially on going away from 
the house. Sea Dayaks sometimes go farther 
under such circumstances. They place the new- 
born child in a small boat and allow it to float down 
river, and standing upon the bank call upon all the 
evil spirits to take the child at once, if they mean 
to take it, in order that the parents may be spared 
the greater bereavement of losing it some years 
later. If, after floating some distance down stream, 
the child is found unhurt, it is carried home, the 
parents feeling some confidence that it will be 
" spared " to grow up 

TEMPORARY SHELTER FOR HEADS. 

Plate 150. GALLERY OF A KAYAN LONG HOUSE. 

SPIRITUAL EXISTENCES 25 

Again, on going to the territory of people who 
have recently come to friendly terms with their 
village, men will make a black mark across the 
forehead with soot in order to disguise themselves 
from the Toh of this region. In the main, although 
all regions are infested with Toh, those of the 
locality in which a man dwells are regarded by him 
as less dangerous than those of other parts ; for 
experience has shown him that in the neighbour- 
hood of his own village he may behave in certain 
ways with impunity, whereas in distant regions all 
is uncertain. It is for this reason that, when boys 
enter any river or branch of the river for the first 
time, a special rite is performed. An old man will 
take them apart from the company to some spot on 
the bank of the river, and, calling all the spirits of the 
place, will ask them to favour the boys and to give 
them vigorous life. An Qgg (which on this occasion 
is spoken of only by the name ove = sweet potato) 
is offered to the spirits on behalf of each boy (or 
sometimes merely a fowl's feather) by placing it in 
the split end of a bamboo stick thrust into the 
ground. Not until this rite has been performed 
are the boys considered to be safe in the strange 
region. 

The more remote and inaccessible the region, 
the more are the Toh of it feared ; rugged hill tops 
and especially mountain tops are the abodes of 
especially dangerous Toh, and it was only with 
difficulty that parties of men could be induced 
to accompany us to the summits of any of the 
mountains. 

The influence of the Toh is not always pernicious; 
certain spots become credited with the presence of 
Toh of benign influence. Thus, tradition relates of 
a streamlet (Telang Ading) falling over the rocky 
bank of the Baram river some little distance below 
the mouth of the Akar, that a wild pig recently killed 

26 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

with spears fell into it and was allowed to lie there, 
and that after a little while it jumped up and made 
off. Through this event the streamlet has acquired 
a great reputation, and passing boats generally stop 
in order that the crews may splash some of the 
water on their heads and faces, and so be cured of 
any ailments they may happen to have at the time. 
These therapeutic effects are attributed to the Toh 
of the stream. 

The Toh play a considerable part in regulating 
conduct ; for they are the powers that bring mis- 
fortunes upon a whole house or village when any 
member of it ignores tabus or otherwise breaks 
customs, without performing the propitiatory rites 
demanded by the occasion. Thus on them, rather 
than on the gods, are founded the effective sanctions 
of prohibitive rules of conduct. For the propitia- 
tion of offended Toh fowls' eggs and the blood of 
fowls and of young pigs are used, the explanations 
and apologies being offered generally by the 
chief or some other influential person, while the 
blood is sprinkled on the culprit or other source 
of offence. 

The beliefs and practices of the Kenyahs and 
Klemantans in regard to spirits of this class are 
very similar to those of the Kayans. They designate 
them by the same general name, Toh. 

We are doubtful whether the Sea Dayaks can 
properly be said to have any religion. They believe 
in a number of mythical and legendary heroes in 
whose honour they indulge in heavy feasting; but 
none of these seem to be credited with the attri- 
butes of a god, or to evoke on the part of the 
people the specifically religious emotions and at- 
titudes— awe, reverence, supplication, trust, grati- 
tude, and hope. Their cult of the Petara seems 
to show traces of Javanese and Hindu influence 
or origin. They believe in a multitude of ill- 

SPIRITUAL EXISTENCES 27 

defined spirits which they speak of as Antu, and 
towards which their attitude is very similar to 
that of the Kayans towards the Toh. Some 
further account of I ban superstitions will be found 
in Chapter XV. 

CHAPTER XIV 

IDEAS OF THE SOUL ILLUSTRATED BY BURIAL 
CUSTOMS, SOUL-CATCHING, AND EXORCISM 

As among ourselves, several very different systems 
for the cure of sickness are practised among the 
Kayans, and these seem to imply very different 
theories of the cause of disease. But the Kayans, 
less consistent or more open-minded than ourselves, 
are not divided into sects, each following one system 
of therapeutics, but rather the various systems are 
held in honour by all the people, and one or the 
other is applied according to the indications of each 
case. Thus, bodily injuries received accidentally or 
in battle are treated surgically by cupping, splints, 
bandaging, and so forth. Familiar disorders, such 
as malarial fever, are treated medically, i.e. by rest 
and drugs. Cases of severe pain of unknown origin 
are generally attributed to the malign influence of 
some Tok,1 and the method of treatment is usually 
that of extraction.2 Madness also is generally 
attributed to possession by some Toh. But in cases 
of severe illness of mysterious origin that seems to 
threaten to end mortally, the theory generally 
adopted is that the patient's soul has left his body, 
and the treatment indicated is therefore an attempt 
to persuade the soul to return. The first two 
modes of treatment are not considered to demand 
the skill of a specialist for their application, but the 

1 See Chap. XIII. 2 Vol. ii., p. 120. 

28 

chap. xiv IDEAS OF THE SOUL 29 

third and fourth are undertaken only by those who 
have special powers and knowledge. 

Among the Kayans the professional soul-catcher, 
the Dayong, is generally a woman who has served 
a considerable period of apprenticeship with some 
older member of the profession, after having been 
admonished to take up this calling by some being 
met with in dreams — often a dream experienced 
during sickness. The Dayong does not necessarily 
confine his or her activities to this one calling ; for 
in a large village there are usually several Dayongs, 
and the occasions demanding their services recur at 
considerable intervals of time. The relatives of the 
sick man usually prefer to call in a Dayong from 
some other village. The Dayong is expected to 
make the diagnosis and to determine upon the line 
of treatment to be practised. If he decides that 
the soul or Blua of the patient has left his body, 
and has made some part of the journey towards the 
abode of departed souls, his task is to fall into a 
trance and to send his own soul to overtake that of 
his patient and to persuade it to return. The 
ceremony is usually performed by torch-light in the 
presence of a circle of interested relatives and 
friends, the patient being laid in the midst in the 
long public gallery of the house. 

The Dayong struts to and fro chanting a tra- 
ditional form of words well known to the people, 
who join in the chorus at the close of each phrase, 
responding with " Bali- Dayong"1 i.e. " Oh powerful 

1 The word Bali is used on a great variety of occasions, generally as a form 
of address, being prefixed to the proper name or designation of the being 
addressed or spoken of. The being thus addressed is always one having 
special powers of the sort that we should call supernatural, and the prefix 
serves to mark this possession of power. It may be said to be an adjectival 
equivalent of the Mana of the Melanesians or of the Wakanda or Orenda of 
North American tribes, words which seem to connote all power other than the 
purely mechanical. It seems not improbable that the word Bali has entered 
the Kayan language from a Sanskrit source ; for in Sanskrit it was prefixed to 
the names of priests and heroes. The word is even more extensively used by 
the Kenyahs, who prefix it to the names of several of their gods ; and the 
Klemantans use the word Vali in the same way. 

30 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

Dayong ; " the meaning and intention of this chorus 
seem to be that of the "Amen" with which a 
Christian congregation associates itself with the 
prayer offered by its pastor. For the chant with 
which the Dayong begins his operations is essenti- 
ally a prayer for help addressed to Laki Tenangan, 
or, in case of a woman, to Doh Tenangan also. 

The Dayong may or may not fall and lie inert 
upon the ground in the course of his trance ; but 
throughout the greater part of the ceremony he 
continues to chant with closed eyes, describing with 
words and mimic gestures the doings of his own 
soul as it follows after and eventually overtakes 
that of the patient. When this point is reached 
his gestures generally express the difficulty and 
the severity of the efforts required to induce 
the soul to return ; and the anxious relatives then 
usually encourage him by bringing out gongs or 
other articles of value, and depositing them as 
additions to the Dayong s fee. Thus stimulated, he 
usually succeeds in leading back the soul towards 
the patient's body. One feature of the ceremony, 
not quite logically consistent with its general 
scheme, is that the Dayong takes in his hand a 
sword and, glancing at the polished blade with a 
startled air, seems to catch in it a glimpse of the 
wandering soul.1 The next step is to restore the 
soul to the body. The Dayong comes out of his 
trance with the air of one who is suddenly trans- 
ported from distant scenes, and usually exhibits in 
his palm some small living creature, or it may be 
merely a grain of rice, a pebble, or bit of wood, in 
which the captured soul is in some sense contained. 
This he places on the top of the patient's head, and 

1 This procedure seems to be one of the many varieties of " crystal gazing " 
that are practised among many peoples ; and it seems probable that the 
Dayong, in some cases at least, experiences hallucinatory visions of the scenes 
that he so vividly describes as he gazes on the polished metal. The sword so 
used becomes the property of the Dayong. 

IDEAS OF THE SOUL 31 

by rubbing causes it to pass into the head. The soul 
having been thus restored to the body, it is 
necessary to prevent it escaping again ; and this is 
done by tying a strip of palm-leaf about the patient's 
wrist. 

A fowl is then killed, or, in very severe cases of 
sickness, a pig, and its blood is sprinkled or wiped 
by means of the sword or knife upon this confining 
bracelet. In mild cases the fowl may be merely 
waved over the head of the patient without being 
killed. The Dayong then gives directions as to the 
malan (the tabus) to be observed by the patient, 
especially in regard to articles of diet, and retires, 
leaving his fee to be sent after him. 

This ceremony clearly involves a curious con- 
fusion of symbolical and descriptive acts, which are 
not ordered in strict consistency with any clearly 
defined theory of the nature of the soul and of its 
relations to the body, or of the exact nature of the 
task of the soul-catcher. 

The catching of souls is practised in very similar 
fashion among all the peoples of Borneo, even by 
the Punans, though the details of the procedure 
differ from tribe to tribe. 

Mental derangement is commonly attributed to 
possession by evil Tok> and exorcism is practised 
among some of the tribes, but very little by the 
Kayans, who generally content themselves with con- 
fining any troublesome madman in a cage. 

No doubt the catching of the soul does make 
strongly for the recovery of the patient, through 
inspiring him with hope and confidence. But it 
cannot always stave off death. If, in spite of the 
operations of one soul-catcher, the patient's strength 
still sinks, some other practitioner is usually called 
in for consultation. In the case of a chief the help 
of three or even four may be invoked successively 
or together ; and the ceremony of catching the soul 

32 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

may be repeated again and again with greater 
elaboration of detail, and may be prolonged through 
many hours and even days with brief interruptions. 

When all these efforts prove unavailing, despair- 
ing relatives sometimes put the end of a blow-pipe 
to the dying or dead mans ear (or merely their 
lips) and shout through it, " Come back, this is 
your home, here we have food ready for you." 
Sometimes the departed soul is believed to reply, 
" I am far from home, I am following a Toh and 
don't know the way back." 

If, in spite of all these efforts, the patient dies, 
a drum is loudly beaten (or in case of a female 
a tawak) in order to announce the decease to 
relatives and friends gone before, the number of 
strokes depending upon the rank and sex of the 
departing spirit. The corpse is kept in the house 
during a period which varies from one night for 
people of the lower class, to three nights for middle 
class folk, and ten days for a chief. During this 
time the dead man lies in state. The corpse has a 
bead of some value under each eyelid ; * it is dressed 
in his finest clothes and ornaments, and is enclosed 
within a coffin hollowed from a single log, the lid of 
which is sealed with resin and lashed round with 
rattans. 

The coffin is covered with a particular design in 
red and black and white, and is placed in the gallery 
on a low platform, surrounded by the most valuable 
personal property of the dead man, whose family 
will take pains to make the display of property as 
imposing as possible. A fire is kept burning near 
the coffin, and small packets of cooked rice and of 
tobacco are placed upon it for the use of the dead 
man's soul. Hundreds of cigarettes are hung in 
bundles about the platform by people of the house, 

1 These beads seem to be designed for use by the ghost in paying for its 
passage across the river of death. 

IDEAS OF THE SOUL 33 

sent by them as tokens of kindly remembrance to 
their departed friends, who are believed to be able 
to recognise by smell the hands that made each 
bundle. During the whole period the dead man is 
attended continuously by at least two or three 
mourners, either relatives or, more rarely, hired 
mourners, who from time to time throughout both 
day and night wail loudly, renewing their wailing at 
the arrival of each party of friends or relatives. 

These parties come in from neighbouring villages 
in response to news of the death sent them by 
special messengers, and in the case of an influential 
chief several thousand men and women sometimes 
congregate in this way to do him honour. 

Upon the arrival of any person of importance, 
gongs and drums are beaten, and the dead man is 
informed of the fact by the Dayong or by a relative. 
The visitor is led to a seat near the coffin, where he 
will sit silently or join in the wailing, until after a 
few minutes he enters into conversation with his 
hosts. When all the expected guests have arrived, 
pigs are slaughtered and a feast is made. 

While the coffin lies in the house all noises other 
than the wailing are avoided in its immediate 
neighbourhood, and the children, dogs, and fowls 
are kept away from it. The Dayong will sit beside 
the coffin occasionally brandishing a sword above 
it in order to keep in check the Toh who, attracted 
to the neighbourhood of the corpse, might grow 
too bold. 

On the day appointed for the removal of the 
corpse it is the duty of the Dayong to instruct the 
dead man's soul how to find his way to the other 
world ; this he does, sitting beside the coffin and 
chanting aloud in doleful tones. For (curiously 
enough in view of the theory implied by the soul- 
catching ceremony) the man's soul is regarded as 
remaining in, or in the proximity of, the body so 

34 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

long as it remains in the house. This is one of 
several indications that the Kayans vaguely dis- 
tinguish two souls — on the one hand the ghost-soul 
or shade, which in dreams wanders afar, on the 
other hand the vital principle. It would seem that 
so long as this vital spark remains in the body the 
ghost-soul may return to it ; but that, when death 
is complete, this vital spark also departs, and then 
the ghost-soul will return no more. 

The use of the word urip further bears out this 
interpretation. In common speech urip means 
alive, but it is applied also as a prefix to the names 
of those recently deceased, and seems to mark the 
speaker's sense of the continuance of the personality 
as that which has life in spite of the death of the 
body. 

Thus blua and urip seem to mark a distinction 
which in Europe in different ages has been marked 
by the words soul and spirit, anima and animus> 
psyche and pneuma, and which was familiar also to 
the Hebrews. In this, of course, Kay an thought 
on this subject does but follow on the lines of many 
other peoples of more advanced civilisation. 

When the Dayong has completed his instruc- 
tions, the rattan lashings about the head of the 
coffin are loosed. Since this is the moment at 
which the soul is believed to take its final departure 
from the body, it is probable that this custom of 
unlashing the coffin is connected with the idea of 
facilitating its escape, although we have obtained 
no definite statement to this effect. At the same 
time the fire that has been kept burning by the 
coffin is allowed to die out. To the coffin, which 
is shaped roughly like a boat, two small wooden 
figures are attached — a figure of a woman at the 
head, a male figure at its foot. These figures are 
not improbably a vestige of a bygone custom of 
killing slaves, whose souls would row the boat of 

Plate 152. TOMB 

OF A CHIEF OF 

(KLEMANTAN). 

THE LONG PATAS 

The white discs were formerly made of shell, but nowadays European crockery is 
used, and a German firm supplies dinner-plates provided with two perforations which 
facilitate the attachment of the plates. 

IDEAS OF THE SOUL 35 

the dead man on his journey to the other world. 
This interpretation is borne out by the fact that a 
live fowl is usually tied to one of these wooden 
figures. The coffin is then conveyed out of the 
house by lowering it to the ground with rattans, 
either through the floor, planks being taken up for 
the purpose, or under the eaves at the side of the 
gallery. In this way they avoid carrying it down 
the house-ladder ; and it seems to be felt that this 
precaution renders it more difficult for the ghost to 
find its way back to the house.1 All this is done 
with great deliberation, the coffin being brought by 
easy stages to the river bank. There it is laid in 
a large boat gaily decorated with bright-coloured 
cloths, which is paddled down river to the grave- 
yard, followed by the boats of the mourning friends, 
who refrain from speaking to any persons en- 
countered on the way. The tombs of the village 
are on the river bank some quarter of a mile below 
the house, generally on the opposite bank. Here 
the final resting-place of the coffin has been pre- 
pared by erecting a great log of timber, which is 
large in proportion to the social standing of the 
dead man. In the case of a chief the log is of iron- 
wood, some three feet or more in diameter and 
some thirty feet in length. One end of this is sunk 
some four or five feet into the ground. The erect- 
ing of such a massive support is a task of some 
difficulty, achieved by first digging the pit at the 
foot of the log and then hauling up the other end 
with a rough windlass. The upper end, which is 
always the root-end of the log, is cut in the form of 
a deep cleft, just wide enough to receive the coffin. 
Above the cleft a large slab of hardwood forms a 

1 Among some of the peoples it is customary to beat a big gong while this 
operation is in progress, or, in the case of a woman, a drum, in order to 
announce to the inhabitants of the other world the coming of the recently 
deceased. The beating of gongs is in general use for signalling from house to 
house. 

36 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

cover for the coffin, and this is often elaborately 
carved (see Pis. 152, 153). In some cases two, and 
in others even four, smaller poles are used for the 
support of the coffin, but this usually only to avoid 
the labour of erecting one very large one. The 
coffin is lifted into this cleft by the aid of a scaffold- 
ing which is built around the large pole, and which 
afterwards falls away when the lashings are cut. 
On landing at the graveyard the mourners carry 
the coffin between the two parts of a cleft pole 
which are fixed in the ground so as to make a large 
V (this is called nyring, the wall), and all the 
mourners are expected to pass through this cleft, 
each, in doing so, placing his foot upon a fowl 
which is laid bound upon the ground. The coffin is 
then lifted to its cleft, and the weapons, implements, 
and war clothes, the large hat, the cooking-pot, and 
in fact any articles of personal property that may be 
of use to the departing soul, are hung upon the 
tomb.1 If a gong is hung up, it may be cracked 
or pierced beforehand, but it is not usual among 
Kayans to spoil other articles before hanging them 
on the tomb.2 The scaffolding about the tomb is 
then caused to fall away, and it only remains for 
the mourners to purify themselves. This they do 

1 Small articles specially valued by the deceased are enclosed in the coffin ; 
thus, Oyang Luhat, a Kayan penghulu (see Chap. XXII), who bled slowly to 
death from an accidentally inflicted wound, gave strict instructions as he lay 
dying that his certificate of office bearing the Rajah's signature and his 
Sarawak flag, the public badge of his office, should be put in his coffin with 
his body ; and there can be no reasonable doubt that he hoped to display 
them, or rather their ghostly replicas, in the other world. As a clear instance 
of such belief it seems worth while to mention the following case. One of us 
had given some coloured prints to a Kayan boy, an only son to whom his 
parents were much attached. On a subsequent visit he was told by the 
bereaved mother that the child had been very fond of the pictures, and that 
she had put them in his coffin because she knew that he would like to look at 
them in the other world. 

2 Among Klemantans it is usual to spoil all articles hung upon a tomb ; 
and they give the reason that in the other world everything is the opposite of 
what it is here : the spoilt shall be perfect, the new and unspoilt shall be old 
and damaged, and so on. It is probable that the real or original motive for 
this practice is the desire to avoid placing temptations to theft in the way of 
strangers. 

Plate 153. TOMB OF A SEKAPAN (KLEMANTAN) CHIEF. 

IDEAS OF THE SOUL 37 

with the help of the lower jaws of the pigs that 
were consumed at the funeral feast. The jaws are 
placed together with water in a gong or other basin, 
and the Dayong, taking a fowl's feather, sprinkles 
drops of water from the basin upon all the assembled 
mourners, pouring out the while a stream of words, 
the purport of which is — may all evil things, all 
sickness and such things be kept away from you. 
Then the mourners return in a single file through 
the V formed by the cleft pole, each one again 
placing his foot on the fowl (which dies before the 
end of the ceremony), spitting as he goes through, 
and exclaiming, " Keep off evil " (ball jaat, i.e. liter- 
ally, spiritual or supernatural evil). When all have 
passed through, the upper ends of the two parts of 
the cleft pole are brought together and lashed round 
with rattans ; and a small tree, pulled up by the 
roots, and having its branches cut away, is laid 
beside the pole with its roots turned towards the 
grave (this is called selikang) ; and on the other 
side of the pole is put another vertical pole with a 
cross-piece tied at its upper end. Fire is left 
burning beside these structures. In this way the 
Kayans symbolically prevent any of the uncanny 
influences of the graveyard following the party back 
to the house ; though they do not seem to be clear 
as to whether it is the ghosts of the dead, or the 
Toh of the neighbourhood, or those which may have 
contributed to his death, against whom these pre- 
cautions are taken. This done, the whole party 
returns as quickly as possible to the village, halting 
only to bathe on the way. 

The whole household of which the dead man was 
a member continues in mourning for a period which 
is long in proportion to his social standing ; the 
mourning rules are observed most strictly by the 
nearest relatives. The signs of mourning are the 
wearing of bark-cloth or of clothes made yellow 

38 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

with clay, allowing the hair to grow on the parts of 
the head and face usually kept shaved,1 and the 
putting aside of ornaments such as ear-rings, neck- 
laces, or the substitution of wooden ear-rings for 
the metal ones commonly worn by the women. All 
music, feasts, and jollifications are avoided. The 
period of mourning can only be properly terminated 
by a ceremony in which a human head plays an 
essential part. Where the influence of the European 
governments has not made itself felt, the death of a 
chief necessitates the procuring of a fresh head, and 
a party may be sent out to cut off in the jungle, on 
the farms, or on the river, some small party of a 
hostile village. The common people must postpone 
the termination of their mourning until some such 
occasion presents itself. Nowadays in the districts 
in which head hunting has been suppressed, an old 
head, generally one surviving from an earlier period, 
is borrowed or begged for the purpose from another 
village, and is brought home with all the display 
properly belonging to a return from successful war 
(see Chap. X.). As soon as the head is brought 
into the house the period of mourning terminates 
amid general rejoicing. The head, or a fragment 
of it, or the bundle of palm leaves (daun isang) 
with which it has been decorated, is hung upon 
the tomb.2 

In case of any dispute regarding the division of 
the property of a dead man, his ghost may be called 
upon by a Dayong and questioned as to the dead 
man's intentions ; but this would not be done until 
after the harvest following upon the death. The 
ceremony is known as dayong janoi. A small model 
of a house, perhaps a yard in width and length, is 

1 Among some of the Klemantan tribes the opposite practice of shaving the 
whole scalp is observed in mourning. 

2 In some of the remoter forts of the Sarawak government old heads that 
have been confiscated are kept, and are occasionally lent for the purpose of 
enabling a village to go out of mourning without shedding human blood. 

IDEAS OF THE SOUL 39 

made and placed in the gallery beside the door 
of the dead man's chamber. Food and drink of 
various kinds as prepared for a feast are placed in 
this house, together with cigarettes. The Dayong 
chants beside the house, calling upon the soul of the 
dead man to enter the soul-house, and mentioning 
the names of the members of his family. From 
time to time he looks in, and after some time 
announces that all the food and drink has been 
consumed. The people accept this statement as 
evidence that the ghost has entered the soul-house.1 
The Dayong acts as though listening to the whisper- 
ing of the soul within the house, starting and clucking 
from time to time. Then he anounces the will of the 
ghost in regard to the distribution of the property, 
speaking in the first person and reproducing the 
phraseology and peculiarities of the dead man.2 
The directions so obtained are usually followed, and 
the dispute is thus terminated. But in some cases 
the people apply a certain test to verify the alleged 
presence of the ghost. A shallow dish (often a 
gong) of water is placed near the soul-house, and 
a ring-shaped armlet of shell is placed vertically in 
this basin, the water covering its lower half. A few 
fine fibres of the cotton-seed are thrown on to the 
surface of the water, and by tapping on the planks 
the people keep these in movement. If the threads 
float through the ring, that is conclusive evidence of 
the presence of the ghost ; but so long as the threads 
cannot be got to pass through the ring, the people 
are not satisfied that the ghost is present. 

1 When pressed in private after a ceremony of this kind, a certain 
admitted to us that perhaps, if we should look into the house, we should see the 
food apparently untouched ; but he maintained that nevertheless all the strength 
or essence of the food would have been consumed, the husks merely being left. 

2 Apparently it is not that the Dayong claims to be " possessed " by the soul 
of the dead man ; for from time to time he inclines his ear again to the soul- 
house to catch the faint voice of the ghost. We know of no cases in which it 
is claimed that the body of a living man is " possessed " by a departed soul. 

VOL. II D 

40 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

Ideas of Life after Death 

The soul of the dead man is supposed to wander 
on foot through the jungle until he reaches the crest 
of a mountain ridge. From this point he looks 
down upon the basin of a great river, the Long 
Malan, in which five districts are assigned as the 
dwelling-places of souls, the destination of each 
being determined by the mode of death. The 
ghosts of those who die through old age or disease 
go to Apo Leggan, the largest of these districts, 
where they live very much as we do in this life. 
Those who die a violent death, whether in battle or 
or by accident, go to the basin of a tributary river, 
Long Julan, where is Bawang Daha (lake of blood) ; 
there they live in comfort, and become rich though 
they do no work : they have for wives the ghosts of 
women that have died in child-bed. Those that 
have been drowned find a home beneath the rivers, 
and are supposed to become possessed of all property 
lost in the water by their surviving friends ; this 
place (or places) bears the name of Ling Yang. 
The souls of still-born children dwell in Tenyu 
Lain ; they are believed to be very brave, owing 
to their having experienced no pain in this world. 
Finally, suicides1 have assigned to them a special 
district, Tan Tekkan, where they live miserably, 
eating only roots, berries, and other jungle produce. 

Other districts of this great country are vaguely 
assigned to the souls of Malays and other peoples. 
It is generally said that the left bank of the river 
is the place of the tribes of Borneo, while the right 
bank is assigned to all other peoples ; and the soul 
is especially warned by the Dayong to avoid the 
right bank lest it should find itself among foreigners. 
These beliefs seem to involve some faint rudiment 

1 Cases occur among the Kayans, though but rarely. The method most 
employed is to stab a knife into the throat. 

Plate 154. THE GRAVE OF RULING, DAUGHTER OF BOI JALONG, THE 
PRINCIPAL KENYAH CHIEF OF THE BATANG KAYAN RIVER. 

xiv IDEAS OF THE SOUL 41 

of the doctrine of post-mortem retribution or, at least, 
compensation, — a rudiment which does not appear 
in the beliefs of the other peoples. 

The departed soul standing on the mountain 
ridge surveys these regions ; and it is not until he 
stops here to rest that he becomes aware that he 
is finally separated from his body. This fact is 
brought home to him by the arrival of the ghost- 
souls of the various articles hung upon his tomb, 
which hurry after him, but only overtake him at 
this his first resting - place ; and he bewails his 
unhappy fate. 

There are current among Kayans several versions 
of the further journey of the soul. The ghost 
descends the mountain to the banks of Long Malan, 
which river he must cross to reach his appointed 
place. The river must be crossed by means of a 
bridge consisting of a single large log suspended 
from bank to bank. This log, bitang sekopa, is 
constantly agitated by a guardian, Maligang by 
name. If the ghost has during the earthly life 
taken a head, or even merely taken part in a 
successful head-hunting raid, a fact indicated by 
the tatuing of the hands, he crosses this bridge 
without difficulty ; but if not, he falls below and is 
consumed by maggots or, according to another 
version, is devoured by a large fish, Patau, and so 
is destroyed. When the ghost reaches the other 
bank, he is greeted by those of his friends who 
have gone before, and they lead him to their 
village. Some part of the journey is generally 
regarded as made by boat, though it is not possible 
to make this fit consistently into the general scheme. 
Another point on which opinion is very vague is 
the part played by Laki Jup Urip, a deity or spirit 
whose function it is to guide the souls to their 
proper destinations. 

In many Kayan villages stories are told of 

42 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

persons who are believed to have died and to have 
come to life again. This belief seems to have 
arisen in every case from the person having lain 
in a trance for some days, during which he was 
regarded as dead. The Kayans accept the cessation 
of respiration as evidence of death, and they assert 
that these persons cease to breathe.1 

It seems that such persons usually give some 
account of their experiences during the period in 
which they have deserted their bodies. They 
usually allege that they have traversed a part of the 
road to the land of shades, and describe it in terms 
agreeing more or less closely with the traditional 
account of it current among the Kayans. Since in 
these cases the person is thought to be dead, no 
efforts are made by the Dayong to lead back his 
departing soul, and its return has to be explained 
in some other way. In some cases the returned 
soul describes how he was turned back by Maligang, 
the awful being who guards the bridge across the 
river of death.2 

Mr. R. S. Douglas, Resident of Baram, has 
recently reported a similar belief held by the Muriks, 
a Klemantan tribe, where it is supported by the 
following legend. The soul or spirit of a certain 
man, Uku Pandah by name, left his body two years 
before the time appointed as the term of its in- 
corporate life, and gained admittance to the land 
of shades in the shape of a pig. It was, however, 
recognised by the ruler of that land, and ordered by 
him to return to its mortal body. The command 
was obeyed, and Uku Pandak, having been dead for 

1 In one such case the body was laid out in the gallery of the house and 
preparations for the funeral were far advanced, when one of us (C. H. ) arrived. 
On glancing at the alleged corpse he suspected that life was not extinct, and 
succeeded, by the application of ammonia to the nostrils, in restoring the en- 
tranced Kayan to animation, and shortly to a normal condition of health. 

2 The man mentioned in the foregoing footnote had given to a Dayong (no 
doubt in response to leading questions) a circumstantial account of adventures 
of this kind, before we had an opportunity of questioning him after an interval 
of some ten days. He then admitted that he could remember nothing clearly. 

IDEAS OF THE SOUL 

43 

two days, came to life again and lived for two years, 
during which he described to his friends the country 
of the dead of which he had thus obtained a glimpse ; 
and this knowledge has been preserved by the tribe. 
The beliefs and traditions of the various tribes 
in regard to the other world seem to have been 
confused through the intercourse between them, so 
that it is not possible to mark off clearly what 

ft 

Bawang Matei Muong 
Lake of suzddee 

Lake of BloocL.where thepeople go\j 
who are TcUled, ut battie , alsdthose- 

vjomzjv who dbu. i/v ckddii 

x Apo Masi 

/rang tadang apui jupan 

Hver cfi 

Fig. 78. 

StantzrrOS Qtogt Estatf, ZawEw 

features properly belong to each of the tribes. The 
general features are similar with all the peoples. 
The Kenyah story is very similar to that of the 
Kayans, though the names of the various places are 
different, and they usually conceive the first part of 
the soul's journey as being made by boat on the 

river. 

Tama Kajan Odoh, the Madang chief whose line 
of descent from Balingo is given on p. 1 2, vol. ii., made 
us a rough map of the land of the shades (Fig. yS) 

44 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

and of the country traversed by the ghost on its 
journey thither. This was done in the way maps 
of their own country are always made by the 
Borneans, namely, he laid upon the floor bits of 
stick and other small objects to represent the 
principal topographical features and relations. We 
tested the trustworthiness of his account by asking 
him to repeat it on a subsequent occasion ; when he 
did so without any noteworthy departure from the 
former description. A point of special interest is the 
appearance in the land of shades of the house of 
Bali Penyalong and of Oko Perbungan (which seems 
to be the Madang name for the wife of the Supreme 
Being). This map brings out clearly what seems 
to be the essential feature of all these schemes, 
namely, that the land of shades is the basin of a river 
divided by a mountain ridge from that from which the 
ghost departs. 

The Punans add some picturesque incidents. 
According to their version, a huge helmeted horn- 
bill1 {Rkinoflax Vigil) sits by the far end of the 
bridge across the river of death, and with its screams 
tries to terrify the ghost, so that it shall fall from 
the bridge into the jaws of the great fish which is in 
league with the bird. On the other side of the river 
is Ungap, a woman with a cauldron and spear. 
Ungapy if appeased with a gift, aids the ghost to 
escape from the monstrous bird and fish. Pebbles 
or beads are put in the nostrils of the Punan corpse 
in order that they may be presented to Ungap. 

The Punans recite or sing a story in blank 
verse descriptive of this passage of the soul. It is 
sometimes sung in very dramatic fashion, the per- 
former acting the principal incidents and pitching 
his voice in a doleful, though musical, minor key. 
Such a recitation of the passage of the soul, delivered 

1 The cry of this species is peculiar ; it terminates with an interrupted 
series of cries that sound like mocking laughter. 

Plate I55. MALANAU GRAVES NEAR REJANG VILLAGE. 

IDEAS OF THE SOUL 45 

by a wild and tragic figure before an intently listen- 
ing group of squatting men and women illuminated 
by flickering torchlight, is by no means unimpressive 
to the European observer. The following lines are 
a rough literal translation of a fragment of the story 
which describes the meeting with Ungap of Batang 
Mijong, a departed soul : — 

Ungap speaks — 

Batang Mijong stands waving his shield. 

The helmsman Saramin with body of brass will carry 
over Batang Mijong. 

Batang Mijong seeks the place of the Punans. 

Good journey to you, Batang Mijong. 

Batang Mijong, O, why are you called ? 
Batang Mijong speaks — 

Why do you question me, why do you stare at me ? 
Ungap answers — 

Your limbs are shapely, smooth is your skin and slender 
your body. 

My eyes are dazzled by your bodily perfections. 

Some of the Malanaus, one of the many branches 
of the Klemantan people, hold peculiar views about 
the soul. Each man is credited with two souls. 
After his death one of these goes to some region 
in the heavens where it becomes a good spirit that 
assists at the Bayoh ceremonies.1 The other makes 
a journey to a world of the dead much like Apo 
Leggan of the Kayans ; and the journey involves 
the crossing of the river on a single log, the passage 
of which is disputed by a malign being, who tries 
to shake the nerve of the ghost by flinging ashes 
at him as he traverses the bridge. Other Malanaus 
(of Muka) describe this opposing power as a two- 
headed dog, Maiwiang by name, whom it is 
necessary to propitiate with the gift of a valuable 
bead. For this reason a bead of some value is 
fastened to the right arm of the corpse before the 
coffin is closed. It is said of the Malanaus that 

1 See below, vol. ii. p. 130. 

46 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

they were formerly in the habit of killing several 
slaves at the tomb of a chief; and, since it was 
believed that, if the victims died a violent death, 
their souls would not go to the same place as the 
dead chief, and would thus be of no service, they 
were allowed to die from exposure to the sun while 
bound to the tomb. Now that homicide is pro- 
hibited, these people arrange a great cock-fight; 
and there can be little doubt that the death of 
many of the birds is felt to compensate in some 
degree for the enforced abstention from homicide. 

The last case on record of the killing of a slave 
at the entombment of a chief occurred about fifteen 
years ago among the Orang Bukits (Klemantans) in 
Bruni territory. The son of the dead chief (Datu 
Gunong) went to Bruni city, and there bought an 
aged slave from one of the principal officers of 
state. The slave was kept in a bamboo cage until 
the day of entombment, when he was killed, each 
of the funeral guests inflicting a small wound with 
a spear. His head was hung on the tomb. From 
circumstantial accounts of this incident which 
reached one of us, we infer that those who took 
part in this brutal act were moved only by a sense 
of duty and that the co-operation was repugnant to 
all of them.1 

Exorcism 

The Kayans, as well as most of the peoples, 
regard madness as due to possession by an evil 
spirit,2 but the Malanaus extend this theory to 
many other forms of disease, and practise an 
elaborate rite of exorcism. This will be described 
in the chapter (XVI.) dealing with charms and 
magical practices. 

1 The incident was reported by Dr. Hose to the British Consul at Bruni, 
who entered an effective warning against repetitions of such acts. 

2 A dangerous madman is generally kept shut up in a large strong cage in 
the gallery of the house. 

XIV 

IDEAS OF THE SOUL 47 

It will be gathered from what has been said in 
the foregoing pages that the life after death is 
regarded as not in any way very different from this 
life, as neither a very superior nor an inferior con- 
dition ; although, as we have said, those who die 
a violent death are believed to have a rather better 
lot, and suicides a worse fate, than others. Social 
distinction and consideration, especially such as is 
achieved by the taking of heads in war, is carried 
over into the life after death ; and men are anxious 
that outward marks of such distinction should go 
with them. This is undoubtedly one of the grounds 
for tatuing the body. Among the Kayans a man's 
hands are only fully tatued when he has taken a 
head ; while the social status of a woman is 
marked by the degree of fineness of the tatuing.1 
It follows that death is neither greatly feared nor 
desired ; but an old man will sometimes affirm that 
he is quite ready or even desirous to die, although 
he may seem cheerful and fairly vigorous. 

The Kayans believe in the reincarnation of the 
soul, although this belief is not clearly harmonised 
with the belief in the life in another world. It is 
generally believed that the soul of a grandfather 
may pass into one of his grandchildren, and an old 
man will try to secure the passage of his soul to a 
favourite grandchild by holding it above his head 
from time to time. The grandfather usually gives 
up his name to his eldest grandson, and reassumes 
the original name of his childhood with the prefix or 
title Laki, and the custom seems to be connected 
with this belief or hope. There is no means of 
discovering whether the hope is realised. The 
human soul may also, in the belief of all the peoples, 
be reincarnated in the body of almost any animal ; 
but opinions in regard to this matter are very 

1 It is believed that the tatuing on the woman's hands and forearms 
illuminates for the ghost dark places traversed on the journey to the other 
world. 

48 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

vague. Thus the Kayans believe that the objec- 
tion of the Mohammedan Malays to the eating of 
pig is due to reincarnation of their souls in animals 
of that species, which belief naturally causes some 
vexation to the Malay traders. 

Among the Kayans and other peoples sceptics 
are to be found, and, as no inquisitorial methods are 
in vogue among them, such persons will on occasion 
give expression to their doubts about the accepted 
dogmas, although speech about such topics is 
generally repressed by some touch of awe. One 
man, for example, argued in our hearing that he 
could hardly believe that man continues to exist 
after death, for, said he, if men and women still lived 
after death, some of those who have been very fond 
of their children would surely return to see them, 
and would be in some way perceived by the living. 
But all such discussions are usually terminated with 
the remark, " Nusijam ? " (" Who knows ?") 

The Kenyans' disposal of their dead is very 
similar in all respects to the Kayan practice. But 
the burial customs of most of the Klemantan tribes 
are different. Their usual practice is to keep the 
coffin containing the corpse in the gallery of the 
house until the period of mourning is terminated. 
A bamboo tube carried down through the floor to 
the ground permits the escape of fluids resulting 
from decomposition. The coffin itself is sealed 
closely with wax, and elaborately decorated with 
carved and painted wood-work. After several 
months or even years have elapsed a feast is made 
(the feast of the bones) ; the coffin is opened and 
the bones taken out and cleaned. They are then 
packed into a smaller coffin or a large ovoid jar, 
which is carried to the village cemetery. There it is 
placed either in the hollowed upper end of a massive 
post, or into a large wooden chamber containing, or 
to contain, the remains of several persons, generally 

xiv IDEAS OF THE SOUL 49 

near relatives. These tombs are in many cases 
very elaborately decorated with painted wood- 
work. 

Since the Klemantans who use the jar to contain 
the bones are not capable of making such large jars, 
but procure jars of Indo-Chinese and Chinese 
manufacture, it seems probable that the jars are 
comparatively modern substitutes for the smaller 
wooden coffin or bone-box. Only the richer folk 
can afford the luxury of a jar. 

A rather different procedure is sometimes 
adopted by the same Klemantans who use the 
wooden coffins, namely, the corpse is placed in a jar 
a few days after death. Since the mouth of the jar 
is generally too small to admit the corpse the jar is 
broken horizontally into two parts by the following 
ingenious procedure. The jar is sunk in the water 
of the river until it is full of water and wholly sub- 
merged ; it is held horizontally by two men, one at 
either end, just beneath the surface of the water. 
A third man strikes a sharp downward blow with an 
axe upon the widest circumference of the jar ; it is 
then turned over and he strikes a second blow upon 
the same circumference at a spot opposite to the 
first. At the second stroke the jar falls in two, 
sometimes as cleanly and nicely broken as though 
cut with a saw.1 The corpse is then packed in with 
its knees tied closely under the chin ; the upper 
part of the jar is replaced and sealed on with wax. 
When the time of the feast of the bones arrives, the 
jar is reopened, the bones cleaned, and replaced in 
the jar. 

This mode of jar burial is commonly practised by 
the Muruts, and is commoner in the northern parts 
of the island than elsewhere. It may be added 
that the jars used are generally valuable old jars, 

1 Coco-nuts are commonly opened by two blows with a sword struck upon 
opposite sides, and it seems probable that the method of splitting the jar was 
suggested by this practice. 

50 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO ch.xiv 

and that the cheap modern copies of them find little 
favour. 

The Klemantans put selected pieces of the 
property of the deceased within the tomb, but do 
not generally hang them on it externally as the 
Kayans and Kenyahs do. 

The Sea Dayaks bury their dead in the earth, 
generally in a village graveyard on the river banks 
not far from the house. The body, together with 
personal property, is merely wrapped in mats and 
laid in a grave some three feet in depth. It is not 
usual to keep it in the house for some days as the 
Kayans do, and the burial is effected with com- 
paratively little ceremony. The grave of the 
common man is not marked with any monument, 
but that of a chief may be marked by a sungkup ; 
this consists of two pairs of stout posts, at head and 
feet respectively ; each pair is erected in the form of 
an oblique cross ; the upper end of each post is 
carved in decorative fashion. Two broad planks 
laid between the lower parts of these crossed posts 
form a roof to the grave. In the case of a man 
noted for great success in farming or fighting, a 
bamboo tube may be sunk through the earth to the 
spot just above the root of the nose, and through 
this they speak to him and pour rice spirit in order 
to strengthen their appeal. 

The Land Dayaks of upper Sarawak, as well as 
some other Klemantan tribes in South Borneo, are 
peculiar in that they burn the dead, or the bones 
alone after the flesh has dropped away. The 
burning of the whole body is in some tribes carried 
out by the richer families only ; the bodies that are 
not burned are buried in the earth. 

CHAPTER XV 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS CONNECTED WITH ANIMALS 
AND PLANTS1 

Many of the animals, both wild and domesticated, 
are held by the Kenyahs in peculiar regard ; those 
that most influence their conduct are the omen- 
birds, and among the omen-birds the common 
white-headed carrion-hawk (Haliaster intermedius) 
is by far the most important. The Kenyahs always 
observe the movements of this hawk with keen 
interest, for by a well-established code of rules 
they interpret his movements in the heavens as 
signs by which they must be guided in many 
matters of moment, especially in the conduct of 
warlike or any other dangerous expeditions.2 The 
hawk is always spoken of and addressed as Bali 

1 In this chapter we have departed from our rule of describing first and 
most fully the facts and beliefs of the Kayan people, because before planning 
this book we had paid special attention to this topic, and had obtained fuller 
information in regard to the Kenyahs than to other peoples, and had published 
this in the form of a paper in the Journal of the Anthropological Institute 
("The Relations between Men and Animals in Sarawak, n J. Anth. Instit. 
vol. xxxi. ). This paper, modified and corrected in detail, forms the substance 
of this chapter. We wish to express our thanks to the Council of the Royal 
Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland for permission to make 
use of this paper. 

2 We find that the practices of these people in connection with omens or 
auspices so closely resemble those of the early Romans that it seems worth 
while to draw attention to these resemblances, and we therefore quote in foot- 
notes some passages from Dr. Smith's Dictionary of Classical Antiquities, 
referring to the practice of the Romans : "In the most ancient times no trans- 
action, whether private or public, was performed without consulting the 
auspices, and hence arose the distinction of auspicia privata and auspicia 
publico,.^ 

52 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

Flaki, and is formally consulted before any party 
of Kenyahs sets out from home for distant parts. 

To illustrate the formalities with which they read 
the omens we will transcribe here a passage from 
a journal kept by one of us. The occasion of the 
incidents described was the setting out of a large 
body of Kenyahs from the house of Tama Bulan 
(PL 27), a chief who by his personal merits had 
attained to a position of great influence among the 
other Kenyah chiefs, and who had been confirmed in 
his authority by His Highness the Rajah of Sarawak. 
The object of the expedition was to visit and make 
peace with another great fighting tribe, the 
Madangs, who live in the remotest interior of 
Borneo.1 Tama Bulan, whose belief in the value 
of the omens had been slightly shaken, was willing 
to start without ceremonies, and to make those 
powers which he believed to protect us responsible 
for himself and his people also. But the people 
had begged him not to neglect the traditional rites, 
and he had yielded to their wishes. 

At break of day, before I was up, Tama Bulan was 
washed by the women at the river's brink with water and 
the blood of pigs to purify him for his journey, and later 
in the morning the people set to work to seek omens and a 
guarantee of their safety on the journey from the hawks 
that are so numerous here. A small shelter of sticks and 
leaves was made on the river-bank before the house, and 
the women having been sent to their rooms, three men of 
the upper class2 sat under this leaf-shelter beside a small 
fire, and searched the sky for hawks. After sitting there 
silently for about an hour the three men suddenly became 
animated ; one of them took in his right hand a small chick 
and a stick frayed by many deep cuts with a knife, and 
waved them repeatedly from left to right, at the same time 
pouring out a rapid flood of words. They had caught sight 
of a hawk high up and far away from them, and they were 
trying to persuade it to fly towards the right. Presently 

1 See Chap. XXII. 
2 " No one but a patrician could take the auspices." 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 53 

the hawk, a tiny speck in the sky, sailed slowly out of sight 
behind a hill on the right, and the men settled themselves 
to watch for a second hawk which must fly towards the 
left, and a third which must circle round and round. In 
the course of about half-an-hour two hawks had obligingly 
put in an appearance, and behaved just as it was hoped and 
desired that they should behave ; and so this part of the 
business was finished, and about a score of men bustled 
about preparing for the next act. They brought many 
fowls and several young pigs, and a bundle of long poles 
pointed at either end. Before the house stand upright two 
great boles of timber ; the upper end of each of them is 
carved into a rude face and crowned with a brass gong 
(PI. 157). These are two images of the one Supreme 
Being, Bali Penyalong, and they seem to be at the same 
time the altars of the god. A tall young tree, stripped of 
all but its topmost twigs, stands beside one of them, and is 
supposed to reach to heaven or, at least, by its greater 
proximity to the regions above, to facilitate intercourse. 
As to the meaning of this and many other features of these 
rites it is impossible to form any exact idea, for the opinions 
of these people in such matters are hardly less vague and 
diversified than those of more civilized worshippers. Tama 
Bulan, in his character of high priest,1 took his stand before 
one of these images, while a nephew, one of the three men 
who had watched the hawks, officiated before the other 
and went through exactly the same ceremonies as his uncle, 
at the same time with him. Tama Bulan held a small 
bamboo water-vessel in his left hand, and with a frayed 
stick in his right hand sprinkled some of the water on the 
image, all the time looking up into its face and rapidly 
repeating a set form of words. Presently he took a fowl, 
snipped off its head and sprinkled its blood upon the 
image, and so again with another and another fowl. Then 
he held a young pig while a follower gashed its throat, 
and as the blood leapt out he scattered it on the image, 
while the score of men standing round about put their 
hands, some on him, some on one another ; maintaining 
in this way physical contact with one another and with 
their leader, they joined in the prayer or incantation which 
he kept pouring forth in the same rapid mechanical fashion 
in which many a curate at home reads the Church service. 

1 " Romulus is represented to have been the best of augurs, and from him 
all succeeding augurs received the chief mark of their office. " 

54 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

In the house, meanwhile, four boys were pounding at two 
big drums to keep away from the worshippers all sounds 
but the words of their own prayers.1 Then another fowl 
and another pig were sacrificed in similar fashion at each 
altar, and the second part of the rite was finished by the 
men sticking the carcases of the slaughtered beasts each 
one on the point of a pole, and fixing the poles upright in 
the earth before the images. 

Tama Bulan now came up into the house to perform the 
third and last act. A pig was brought and laid bound 
upon the floor, and Tama Bulan, stooping, with a sword in 
his right hand, kept punching the pig gently behind the 
shoulder as though to keep its attention, and addressed it 
with a rapid flow of words, each phrase beginning " O Bali 
Bouin." The pig's throat was then cut by an attendant, 
and Tama Bulan, standing up, diluted its blood with water 
and scattered it abroad over all of us as we stood round 
about him, while he still kept up the rapid patter of words. 
Then he pulled off the head of a fowl and concluded the 
rites by once more sprinkling us all with blood and water. 
Everyone seemed relieved and well satisfied to have got 
through this important business, and to have secured pro- 
tectors for all the party during the forthcoming journey. 
For the three hawks will watch over them, and are held to 
have given them explicit guarantees of safety. The frayed 
stick that had figured so largely in the rites was stuck 
under the rafters of the roof among a row of others 
previously used, and there it will remain, a sign and a 
pledge of the piety of the people, as long as the house shall 
stand. And then as Tama Bulan, pretty well covered with 
blood, went away to wash himself, I felt as though 1 had 
just lived through a book of the Aeneid, and was about to 
follow Father Aeneas to the shores of Latium. 

This elaborate rite, so well fitted to set agoing 
the speculative fancy of any one acquainted with the 
writings of Robertson Smith and Messrs. Jevons 
and Frazer, was one of the first that we witnessed 
together. After giving all our facts we shall return 
to discuss some of the interesting questions raised 
by it, but it will be seen that we are far from having 

1 "Hence devices were adopted so that no ill-omened sound should be 
heard, such as blowing a trumpet during the sacrifice." 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 55 

discovered satisfactory explanations of all its features. 
Obscure features to which we would direct attention 
are the use of the fire and the frayed stick, for these 
figure in almost all rites in which the omen-birds 
are consulted or prayers and sacrifices made. 
The Kenyahs seem to feel that the purpose of 
fire is to carry up the prayers to heaven by means 
of the ascending flame and smoke, in somewhat the 
same way as the tall pole planted by the side of the 
image of Bali Penyalong facilitates communion with 
the spirit ; for they conceive him as dwelling some- 
where above the earth. 

Before going out to attack an enemy, omens are 
always sought in the way we have described, and if 
the expedition is successful the warriors bring home 
not only the heads of the slain enemy, but also 
pieces of their flesh, which they fix upon poles 
before the house, one for each family, as a thank- 
offering to Bali Flaki for his guidance and protection. 
It seldom occurs that a hawk actually takes or eats 
these pieces of flesh, and that does not seem to be 
expected. Without favourable omens from the 
hawks Kenyahs will not set out on any expedition, 
and even when they have secured them, they still 
anxiously look out for further guidance, and may be 
stopped or turned back at any time by unfavourable 
omens. Thus, should a hawk fly over their boat 
going in the same direction as themselves, this is a 
good omen ; but if one should fly towards them as 
they travel, and especially if it should scream as it 
does so, this is a terribly bad omen, and only in case 
they can obtain other very favourable omens to 
counteract the impression made by it will they con- 
tinue their journey. If one of a party dies on the 
journey, they will stop for one whole day for fear 
of offending Bali Flaki. If a hawk should scream 
just as they are about to deliver an attack, that means 
that some of the elder men will be killed in the battle. 

VOL. 11 e 

56 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

Bali Flaki is also consulted before sowing and 
harvesting the rice crop, but besides being appealed 
to publicly on behalf of the whole community, his 
aid may be sought privately by any man who wishes 
to injure another. For this purpose a man makes 
a rough wooden image in human form, and retires 
to some quiet spot on the river bank where he sets 
up a tegulun, a horizontal pole supported about a 
yard above the ground by a pair of vertical poles. 
He lights a small fire beside the tegulun, and, taking 
a fowl in one hand, he sits on the ground behind it 
so as to see through it a square patch of sky,1 and 
so waits until a hawk becomes visible upon this 
patch. As soon as a hawk appears he kills the 
fowl, and with a frayed stick smears its blood on the 
wooden image, saying, " Put fat in his mouth " 
(which means " Let his head be taken and fed with 
fat in the usual way "), and he puts a bit of fat in the 
mouth of the image. Then he strikes at the breast 
of the image with a small wooden spear, and throws 
it into a pool of water reddened with red earth, and 
then takes it out and buries it in the ground. While 
the hawk is visible, he waves it towards the left ; for 
he knows that if it flies to the left he will prevail 
over his enemy, but that if it goes to the right his 
enemy is too strong for him. 

When a new house is built, a wooden image of 
Bali Flaki with wings extended is put up before it, 
and an offering of mixed food is put on a little shelf 
before the image, and at times, especially after 
getting good omens from the hawks, it is offered 
bits of flesh and is smeared with pig's blood. If the 
people have good luck in their new house, they 
renew the image ; but if not, they usually allow it 
to fall into decay. If, when a man is sitting down 
to a meal, he espies a hawk in the heavens, he will 

1 " The person who has to take them (the auspices) first marked out with 
a wand ... a division of the heavens called ' templum,' . . . within which 
he intended to make his observations." 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 57 

throw a morsel of food towards it, exclaiming, " Bali 
Flaki!" 

We have seen that during the formal consulta- 
tion of the hawks the women are sent to their rooms. 
Nevertheless many women keep in the cupboards in 
which they sleep a wooden image of the hawk with 
a few feathers stuck upon it. If the woman falls 
sick she will take one of these feathers and, waving 
it to and fro, will say, " Tell the bad spirit that is 
making me sick that I have a feather of Bali Flaki." 
When she recovers her health Bali Flaki has the 
credit of it. 

Although Kenyahs will not kill a hawk, they 
would not prevent us from shooting one if it stole 
their chickens ; for they say that a hawk who will 
do that is a low-class fellow, a cad, in fact, for there 
are social grades among the hawks just as there are 
among themselves. 

Although the Kenyahs thus look to Bali Flaki 
to guide them and help them in many ways, and 
express gratitude towards him, we do not think 
that they conceive of him as a single great spirit, 
as some of the other tribes tend to do ; they rather 
look upon the hawks as messengers and inter- 
mediators between themselves and Bali Penyalong,1 
to which a certain undefined amount of power is 
delegated. No doubt it is a vulgar error with 
them, as in the case of professors of other forms of 
belief, to forget in some degree the Supreme Being, 
and to direct their prayers and thanks almost 
exclusively to the subordinate power, which, having 
concrete forms, they can more easily keep before 
their minds. They regard favourable omens as 
given for their encouragement, and bad omens as 
friendly warnings.2 We were told by one very 

1 " It was from Jupiter mainly that the future was learnt, and the birds 
were regarded as his messengers." 

2 "The Roman auspices were essentially of a practical nature ; they gave 
no information respecting the course of future events, they did not inform men 

58 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

intelligent Kenyah that he supposed that the hawks, 
having been so frequently sent by Bali Penyalong 
to give them warnings, had learnt how to do this 
of their own will, and that sometimes they probably 
do give them warning or encouragement independ- 
ently without being sent by him. 

All Kenyahs hold Bali Flaki in the same peculiar 
regard, and no individuals or sections of them claim 
to be especially favoured by him or claim to be 
related to him by blood or descent. 

Other Omen-Birds 

Kenyahs obtain omens of less importance from 
several other birds. When favourable omens have 
been given by the hawks, some prominent man is 
always sent out to sit on the river-bank beside a 
small fire and watch and listen for these other birds. 
Their movements and cries are the signs which he 
interprets as omens, confirming or weakening the 
import of those given by the hawks. Of these 
other omens the most regarded are those given by 
the three species of the spider-hunter (Arackno- 
thera Chrysogenys, A. modest a, and A. Longirostris). 
All three species are known as " Sit " or " Isit." 
When travelling on the river, the Kenyahs hope to 
see " Isit" fly across from left to right as they sit 
facing the bow of the canoe. When this happens 
they call out loudly, saying, " O, Isit on the left 
hand ! Give us long life, help us in our under- 
taking, help us to find what we are seeking, make 
our enemies feeble." They usually stop their 
canoes, land on the bank, and, after making a small 
fire, say to it, " Tell Isit to help us." Each man of 
the party will light a cigarette in order that he 

what was to happen, but simply taught them whether they were to do or not 
to do the matter purposed ; they assigned no reason for the decision of Jupiter, 
they simply announced — Yes or No." 

TAMA BULAN SACRIFICING A PIG TO BALI PENYALONG. 

Plate 157. BALARI, A KENYAH, SACRIFICING A FOWL 
TO BALI PENYALONG. 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 59 

may have his own small fire, and will murmur some 
part at least of the usual formulas. After seeing 
" Isit " on their left, they like to see him again on 
their right side. 

Next in importance to the spider-hunters are 
the three varieties of the trogan {Harpactes Diardi, 
H. Duvauceliiy and H. kasumba). They like to 
hear the trogan calling quietly while he sits on a 
tree to their left ; but if he is on their right, the 
omen is only a little less favourable.1 On hearing 
the trogan's cry, they own it, as they say, by 
shouting to it and by stopping to light a fire just as 
in the case of " Isit." 

Kieng, the woodpecker {Lepocestes porpkyromelas), 
has two notes, one of which is of good, the other of 
bad omen. If they have secured good omens from 
the birds already mentioned, they will then try to 
avoid hearing Kieng, lest he should utter the note of 
evil omen ; so they sing and talk and rattle their 
pa'ddles on the sides of the boat. 

Other omen-birds of less importance are A si 
(Carcineutes melanops), whose note warns them of 
difficulties in their path, and Ukang (Sasia abnormis), 
whose note means good luck for them. Telajan, 
the crested rain-bird {Platylophus coronatus), an- 
nounces good luck by its call and warns of serious 
difficulties also. 

Kong, the hornbill (Anorrkinus comatus), gives 
omens of minor importance by his strange deep cry. 
The handsome feathers of another species of 
hornbill (Buceros rhinoceros), with bold bars of black 
and white, are worn on war-coats and stuck in the 
war-caps by men who are tried warriors, but may 
not be worn by mere youths. The substance of the 

1 " It was only a few birds which could give auguries among the Romans. 
They were divided into two classes : Oscines, those which gave auguries by 
singing or their voice ; and Alites, those which gave auguries by their flight. " 
"There were considerable varieties of omen according to the note of the 
Oscines or the place from which they uttered the note ; and similarly among 
the Alites, according to the nature of their flight." 

60 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

beak of the helmeted hornbill {Rhinoflax vigil) is 
sometimes carved into the form of the canine tooth 
of the tiger-cat, and a pair of these is the most 
valued kind of ear-ornament for men. Only elderly- 
men, or men who have taken heads with their own 
hands, may wear them. One of the popular dances 
consists in a comical imitation of the movements of 
the hornbill, but no special significance attaches to 
the dance ; it seems to be done purely in a spirit of 
fun. Young hornbills are occasionally kept in the 
house as pets. 

We know of no other bird that plays any part in 
the religious life of the Kenyahs or affects them in 
any peculiar manner. 

The Pig 

All Kenyahs keep numerous domestic pigs, 
which roam beneath and about the house, picking 
up what garbage they can find to eke out the scanty 
meals of rice-dust and chaff given them by the 
women. It seems that they seldom or never take 
to the jungle and become feral, although they are 
not confined in any way. 

The domestic pig is not treated with any show 
of reverence, but rather with the greatest contumely, 
and yet it plays a part in almost all religious 
ceremonies, and before it is slaughtered explana- 
tions are always offered to it, and it is assured that 
it is not to be eaten. We have seen that, in the 
rites preparatory to an important and dangerous 
expedition, the chief was washed with pig's blood 
and water, and that young pigs were slain before 
the altar-post of Bali Penyalong, and their blood 
sprinkled on the post and afterwards upon all or 
most of the men of the household. It is probably 
true that Bali Penyalong is never addressed with- 
out the slaughter of one or more pigs, and also that 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 61 

no domestic pig is ever slaughtered without being 
charged beforehand with some message or prayer 
to Bali Penyalong, which its spirit may carry up to 
him. But the most important function of the pig is 
the giving of information as to the future course of 
events by means of the markings on its liver.1 

Whenever it becomes specially interesting or 
important to ascertain the future course of events, 
when, for example, a household proposes to make 
war, or when two parties are about to go through a 
peace-making ceremony, a pig is caught by the 
young men from among those beneath the house, 
and is brought and laid, with its feet lashed together, 
before the chief in the great gallery of the house. 
And it would seem that the more important the 
ceremony the larger and the more numerous should 
be the pigs selected as victims. An attendant 
hands a burning brand to the chief, and he, stooping 
over the pig, singes a few of its hairs, and then, 
addressing the pig as " Bali Bouin," and gently 
punching it behind the shoulder, as we have already 
depicted him, he pours out a rapid flood of words. 
The substance of his address is a prayer to Bali 
Penyalong for guidance and knowledge as to the 
future course of the business in hand, and an 
injunction to the soul of the pig to carry the prayer 
to Bali Penyalong. 

Sometimes more than one chief will address one 
pig in this way ; and then, as soon as these prayers 
are concluded, some follower plunges a spear into 
the heart or throat of the pig, and rapidly opens its 
belly in the middle line, drags out the liver and lays 
it on a leaf or platter with the underside uppermost, 
and so carries it to the chief or chiefs. Then all 
the elderly men crowd round and consult as to the 
significance of the appearances presented by the 

1 " They endeavoured to learn the future, especially in war, by consulting 
the entrails of victims." 

62 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

underside of the liver. The various lobes and 
lobules are taken to represent the various districts 
concerned in the question on which light is desired, 
and according to the strength and intimacy of the 
connections between these lobes, the people of the 
districts represented are held to be bound in more 
or less lasting friendship. While spots and nodules 
in any part betoken future evils for the people of 
that part, a clean healthy liver means good fortune 
and happiness for all concerned. 

The underside of the liver, which alone is sig- 
nificant, varies considerably from one specimen to 
another, and this must prevent any very definite 
and consistent identification of the parts with 
the different districts of the country. The rule 
generally observed is to identify the under surface 
of the right lobe [Arti tok) with the territory of the 
party that kills the pig and makes the enquiry ; the 
adjacent part of the left lobe (Sunan) with the 
territory of any party involved in the question which 
adjoins that of the first party ; and the under surface 
of the caudal extremity \Arti arkat) with that of any 
remoter third party (see Fig. 79). If the ridge that 
runs up between the right and left lobes is sharp, it 
indicates that there will still be some bad feeling 
(or, as they say, the swords are still sharp). A 
gall-bladder which is long and overlapping indicates 
more trouble between the parties to the right 
and left ; but one which is sunk almost out of 
sight in the substance of the liver is a sign that 
no further trouble is to be expected. The grooves 
on the under surface of the right lobe stand for the 
waterways and, if they are strongly marked, imply 
freedom of intercourse. Notches at the free edges 
stand for past injuries suffered (the scars of wounds 
received, as it were) ; and if these are equally 
marked in the several parts they indicate peace, 
because it is implied that no balance of old scores 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 

63 

remains to any one of the parties concerned. A 
sore or abscess in any part foretells the speedy 
death of one of the chiefs of the people of that 
part. 

Fig. 79. 

Sketch of ventral side of pig's liver from which omens are read. The 
several parts are taken to represent the several districts in which the augur is 
interested, and the future relations between the communities inhabiting these 
districts are foretold from the observation of the ligaments, fissures, and 
prominences, etc. , connecting or separating these parts, and their good or bad 
fortune is implied by the state of the surface of corresponding parts. On one 
occasion the signs were read as follows : — Arti toh (right lateral lobe) stood 
for the Tinjar district and people ; Arti arkat (the right central lobe) for the 
Madangs ; Sunan (the left central lobe) for the main Baram and its people ; 
Tokong (the left lateral lobe) for a particular Kayan village in thejBaram. The 
shortness of the gall-bladder (Pedu) which separates the Baram and the Madang 
districts was held to be of good omen, as also the large development of the 
caudate lobe and the strength of the ligaments connecting Arti toh with Arti 
arkat. A pit in the area Sunan was held to foretell the early death of some 
Baram chief. 

It is obvious that this system of interpretation, 
which is common to nearly all the peoples, gives 
much scope for the operation of prejudice, sugges- 
tion, and ingenuity. But the group of interpreting 

64 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

chiefs and elder men generally achieves unanimity 
in giving its verdict. 

The omens thus obtained are held to be the 
answer vouchsafed by Bali Penyalong to the prayers 
which have been carried to him by the spirit of the 

If the answer obtained in this way from one pig 
is unsatisfactory, they will often kill a second, and 
on important occasions even a third or fourth, in 
order to obtain a favourable answer. Unless they 
can thus obtain a satisfactory forecast, they will not 
set out upon any undertaking of importance. 

After any ceremony of this kind the body of 
the pig is usually divided among the people, and 
by them cooked and eaten without further ceremony. 
But we have seen that, after the ceremony in 
preparation for an expedition, the bodies of the 
young pigs whose blood was scattered on the altar- 
post of Bali Penyalong were fixed upon tall poles 
beside this altar-post and there left ; and this seems 
to be the rule in ceremonies of this sort, though it 
is not clear whether the carcases are left there as 
offerings to the hawks or to Bali Penyalong, or 
because they are in some sense too holy to be used 
as food after being used in such rites. 

Probably Kenyahs never give to the spirits in 
this way the whole body of a large pig, but only of 
quite small pigs, and in this they are probably 
influenced by considerations of economy. 

It may be said generally that Kenyahs do not 
kill domestic pigs simply and solely for the sake of 
food. The killing of a pig is always the occasion 
for, or occasioned by, some religious rite. It is 
true that on the arrival of honoured guests a 
pig is usually killed and given to them for food ; 
but its spirit is then always charged with some 
message to Bali Penyalong. It is said that, when 
the pig's spirit comes to Bali Penyalong, he is 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 65 

offended if it brings no message from those who 
killed the pig, and he sends it back to carry off 
their souls. 

On many other occasions also pigs are killed ; 
thus, on returning from a successful attack on 
enemies, a pig is usually killed for each family of 
the household, and a piece of its flesh is put up on 
a pole before the house ; and during the severe 
illness of any person of high social standing, pigs 
are usually killed, and friendly chiefs may come 
from distant parts, bringing with them pigs and 
fowls that they may sacrifice them, and so aid in 
restoring the sick man to health. On the death of 
a chief, too, a great feast is made, and many pigs 
are slaughtered, and their jaw-bones are hung up 
on the tomb. A pig is sometimes used in the 
ceremony by which a newly-made peace is sealed 
between tribes hitherto at blood-feuds, but a fowl is 
more commonly used. 

The wild pig which abounds in the forest is 
hunted by the Kenyahs, and when brought to bay 
by the dogs is killed with spears, and it is eaten 
without ceremony or compunction by all classes. 
The wild pig is never used as messenger to the 
gods, and its liver is not consulted. The lower 
jaws of all wild pigs that are killed are cleaned and 
hung up together in the house, and it is believed 
that if these should be lost or in any way destroyed 
the dogs would cease to hunt. 

The domestic fowls are seldom killed for food, 
and their eggs too can hardly be reckoned as a 
regular article of diet, though the people have no 
prejudice against eating them. And it would seem 
that the fowls are kept in the main for ceremonial 
purposes, and that their table use is of very 
secondary importance. 

Fowls are killed on many of the occasions on 
which pigs are sacrificed, and, as we have seen in 

66 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

the description of the ceremony at Tama Bulan's 
house, their blood may be poured upon the altar- 
posts of Bali Penyalong. It would seem that 
fowls and pigs are to some extent interchangeable 
equivalents for sacrificial purposes. Perhaps the 
most important occasion on which the fowl plays 
a part is the performance of the rite by which a 
blood-feud is finally wiped away. The following 
extract from the journal previously quoted describes 
an incident of this kind : — 

In the evening there was serious business on hand. Two 
chiefs, who some years ago were burned out of their homes 
in the Rejang district by the government, have settled 
themselves with their people in the Baram district. They 
had made a provisional peace with the Kayans some years 
ago, but the final ceremony was to be performed this 
evening. The two chiefs of the immigrants, who had 
remained hitherto in a remote part of the house, seated 
themselves at one side, and the Kayan chiefs at the other, 
and Tama Bulan and ourselves between the two parties. 
First, presents of iron were exchanged. In the old days 
costly presents of metal-work used to be given ; but, as this 
led sometimes to renewed disputes, the government has 
forbidden the giving, in such ceremony, of presents of a 
greater value than two dollars. So now old sword-blades 
are given, and the other essential part of the present has 
been proportionately reduced from a full-grown fowl to a 
tiny chick. After much preliminary talking, two chicks 
were brought and a bundle of old sword-blades, which 
Tama Bulan, in his character of peace-maker, carries with 
him whenever he travels abroad. A chief of either party 
took a chick and a sword and presented them to the other. 
Then one led his men a little apart and began to rattle off 
an invocation beginning, " O sacred (Bali) chick," snipped 
off its head with the sword, and with the bloody blade 
smeared the right arm of his followers as they crowded 
round him. The old fellow kept up the stream of words 
until every man was smeared ; and then they all stamped 
together on the floor raising a great shout. Then the other 
party went through a similar performance ; and the peace 
being thus formally ratified, we sat down to cement it still 
further by a friendly drinking bout. 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 67 

Another ceremony in which the fowl plays a 
prominent part is that by which the wandering soul 
of a sick person is found and led back to his 
body by the medicine-man. This is described in 
Chapter XIV. 

It seems clear that the fowl, like the pig, is used 
on these occasions as a messenger sent by man to 
the Supreme Spirit. In most cases when a fowl is 
slaughtered in the course of a ceremony, it is first 
waved over the heads of the people taking part in 
it, and its blood is afterwards sprinkled upon them. 

In the blood-brotherhood ceremony, when each 
of the two men drinks or smokes in a cigarette a 
drop of the other's blood drawn with a bamboo- 
knife, a fowl is in many cases waved over them and 
then killed, and occasionally a pig also is killed. In 
such a case the man who has killed the fowl will 
c^rry its carcase to the door of the house, and there 
he will wave towards the heavens a frayed stick 
moistened with its blood, while he announces the 
facts of the ceremony to Bali Penyalong. So that 
here again the fowl seems to play the part of a 
messenger. The carcase and the bloody stick are 
afterwards put up together on a tall pole before 
the house. After going through this ceremony a 
man is safe from all the members of the house- 
hold to which his blood -brother belongs ; and in 
the case of two chiefs all the members of either 
household are bound to those of the other by a 
sacred tie. 

Fowls' eggs are sometimes put on the cleft poles 
as sacrifices. In one instance, when we were 
engaged in fishing a lake with a large party in boats, 
we came upon a row of eight poles stuck upright at 
the edge of the lake, each holding a fowl's egg in 
its cleft upper end. These had just been put there 
by the crew of one of the canoes as an offering to 
the crocodiles, which were regarded as the most 

68 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

influential of the powers of the lake and able to 
ensure us good sport. 

In such cases the eggs are probably economical 
substitutes for fowls, as seems to be indicated by the 
following facts : When Kenyah boys enter a strange 
branch of the river for the first time, they go, each 
one taking a fowl's egg in his hand, into the jungle 
with some old man, who takes the eggs, puts them 
into the cleft ends of poles fixed upright in the earth, 
and thus addresses all the omen-birds collectively, 
" Don't let any harm happen to these children who 
are coming for the first time to this river ; they give 
you these eggs." Sometimes instead of eggs the 
feathers of a fowl are used ; and both the eggs and 
feathers would seem to be substituted for fowls, as 
being good enough in the case of mere children 
performing a minor rite. 

When the belly of a fowl is opened there are 
prominent two curved portions of the gut. The 
state of these is examined in some cases before the 
planting of padi} and sometimes before attempting 
to catch the soul of a sick man. If the parts are 
much curved, it is a good omen ; if straight or but 
slightly curved, it is a bad omen. 

The Crocodile 

Like all other races of Sarawak, the Kenyahs 
regard the crocodiles that infest their rivers as more 
or less friendly creatures. They fear the crocodile 
and do not like to mention it by name, especially if 
one be in sight, and refer to it as "old grandfather." 
But the fear is rather a superstitious fear than the 
fear of being seized by the beast. They regard 
those of their own neighbourhood as more especially 
friendly, in spite of the fact that members of their 
households are occasionally taken by crocodiles, 
either while standing incautiously on the bank of 

jfcft 

ji 

I 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 69 

the river or while floating quietly at evening time 
in a small canoe. When this happens, it is believed 
either that the person taken has in some way 
offended or injured one or all of the crocodiles, or 
that he has been taken by a stranger crocodile that 
has come from a distant part of the river, and there- 
fore did not share in the friendly understanding 
usually subsisting between the people and the local 
crocodiles. But in any case it is considered that the 
crocodiles have committed an unjustifiable aggression 
and have set up a blood -feud which can only be 
abolished by the slaying of one or more of the 
aggressors. Now it is the habit of the crocodile to 
hold the body of his victim for several days before 
devouring it, and to drag it for this purpose into 
some muddy creek opening into the main river. A 
party is therefore organised to search all the neigh- 
bouring creeks, and the first measure taken is to 
prevent the guilty crocodile escaping to some other 
part of the river. To achieve this they take long 
poles, frayed with many cuts, and set them up on 
the river-bank at some distance above and below 
the scene of the crime and at the mouths of all the 
neighbouring creeks and streamlets ; and they kill 
fowls and pray that the guilty crocodile may be 
prevented from passing the spots thus marked. 
They then search the creeks, and if they find the 
criminal with the body of his victim they kill him, 
and the feud is at an end. But, if they fail to find 
him thus, they go out on the part of the river 
included between their charmed poles, and, with 
their spears tied to long poles, prod all the bed of 
this part of the river, and thus generally succeed in 
killing one or more crocodiles. They then usually 
search its entrails for the bones and hair of the 
victim so as to make sure that they have caught 
the offending beast. But, even if they do not 
obtain conclusive evidence of this kind, they seem 

jo PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

to feel that justice is satisfied, and that the beast 
killed is probably the guilty one. 

Except in the meting out of a just vengeance in 
this way, no Kenyah will kill a crocodile, and they 
will not eat its flesh under any circumstances. But 
there is no evidence to show that they regard them- 
selves as related by blood or descent to the croco- 
diles or that their ancestors ever did so. 

When Kenyahs go on a journey into strange 
rivers or to the lower part of the main river, they 
fear the crocodiles of these strange waters, because 
they are unknown to them, and any one of them 
might easily be mistaken by the crocodiles for 
some one who has done them an injury. Some 
Kenyahs tie the red leaves of the Draccena below 
the prow of their boat whenever they go far from 
home, believing that this protects them from all 
danger of attack by crocodiles. 

The Dog 

In all Kenyah houses are large numbers of dogs, 
which vary a good deal in size and colour, but 
roughly resemble large, mongrel - bred, smooth- 
haired terriers. Each family owns several, and 
they are fed with rice usually in the evening ; but 
they seem to be always hungry. The best of them 
are used for hunting ; but besides these there is 
always a number of quite useless, ill-fed, ill-tempered 
curs ; for no Kenyah dare kill a dog, however much 
he may wish to be rid of it. Still less, of course, 
will he eat the flesh of a dog. The dogs prowl 
about, in and around the house, much as they 
please, but are not treated with any particular 
respect. When a dog intrudes where he is not 
wanted it is usual to click with the tongue at him, 
and this is usually enough to make him pass on ; 
but blows with a stick follow quickly if the animal 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 71 

does not obey. They display little affection for 
their dogs, and they do not like children to touch 
or play with the dogs, but of course cannot alto- 
gether prevent them. 

One young Kenyah chief, on being questioned, 
said that the reason they will not kill dogs is that 
they are like children, and eat and sleep together 
with men in the same house ; and he added that, 
if a man should kill a dog, he would go mad. 

If a dog dies in the house, the men push the 
carcase out of the house and into the river with 
long poles, and will on no account touch it with 
their hands. The spot on the floor on which the 
dog died is fenced round with mats for some few 
days in order to prevent the children walking 
over it. 

It is usual for the Kenyah men to have one 
or 4 more designs tatued on their forearms and 
shoulders. Among the commonest of these designs 
are those known as the prawn and the dog (see 
Chap. XII.). They seem to be conventionalised 
derivatives from these animal forms. It is said 
that the dog's head design was formerly much more 
in fashion than it is at the present time. 

Deer and Cattle 

Very few Kenyahs of the upper class will kill or 
eat deer and wild cattle. They believe that if they 
should eat their flesh they would vomit violently 
and spit out blood. They have no domestic cattle, 
and the buffalo does not occur in their districts. 
Lower-class Kenyahs and slaves, taken as war- 
captives from other tribes, may eat deer and horned 
cattle, but they must take the flesh some little 
distance from the house when they cook it. A 
woman who is pregnant, or for any other reason is 
in the hands of a physician, has to observe the 

VOL. II F 

72 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

restrictions with regard to deer and cattle more 
strictly than other people, and she will not touch or 
allow to be brought near her any article of leather 
or horn. 

The war-coats of the men are often made of the 
skin of goats or deer, and any man may wear such 
a war-coat. But when a man has a young son, he 
is particularly careful to avoid contact with any part 
of a deer, lest through such contact he should 
transmit to his son in any degree the timidity of 
the deer. On one occasion when we had killed a 
deer, a Kenyah chief resolutely refused to allow its 
skin to be carried in his boat, alleging the above 
reason. 

The cry or bark of the deer (Cervulus muntjac) 
is a warning of danger, and the seeing or hearing of 
the mouse-deer or plandok {Tragulas napu) has a 
like significance. 

The Tiger-Cat 

The only large species of the Felidcz that occurs 
in Borneo is the tiger-cat (Felis nebulosa). Kenyahs 
will not eat it, as men of some tribes do, but will 
kill it ; and they fashion its handsome spotted skin 
into war-coats. Such coats are worn only by men 
who have been on the war-path. The canine teeth 
of the tiger-cat are much prized as ornaments ; they 
are worn thrust through holes in the upper part of 
the shell of the ear, but only by full-grown men. 
Kulek, the name of this beast, is sometimes given 
to a boy. 

The true tiger does not now occur in Borneo, and 
it is doubtful whether it ever was a native of the 
island. Nevertheless the Kenyahs know it by name 
(Linjau) and by reputation, and a few skins are in 
the possession of chiefs. No ordinary man, but only 
a distinguished and elderly chief, will venture to 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 73 

wear such a skin as a war-coat, or even to touch it. 
These skins have been brought from other lands by 
Malay traders, and it is probable that whatever know- 
ledge of the tiger the Kenyahs possess has come 
from the same source. 

A chief will sometimes name his son Linjau, that 
is, the Tiger. 

Other Animals 

A carnivore (Arctogale leucotis) allied to the civet- 
cat warns of danger when seen or heard. 

There is a certain large lizard ( Varanus) that is 
eaten freely by other tribes, but Kenyahs may not 
eat it, though they will kill it. 

They regard the seeing of any snake as an 
unfavourable omen, and will not kill any snake 
gratuitously. 

Kenyahs, like all, or almost all the other natives 
of Borneo, are more or less afraid of the Maias 
(the orang-utan) and of the long-nosed monkey, 
and they will not look one in the face or laugh 
at one. 

In one Kenyah house a fantastic figure of the 
gibbon is carved on the ends of all the main cross- 
beams of the house, and the chief said that this has 
been their custom for many generations. He told 
us that it is the custom, when these beams are being 
put up, to kill a pig and divide its flesh among the 
men who are working, and no woman is allowed to 
come into the house until this has been done. None 
of his people will kill a gibbon, though other Kenyahs 
will kill and probably eat it. They claim that he 
helps them as a friend, and the carvings on the 
beams seem to symbolize his supporting of the 
house. 

In other parts of the same house are carvings of 
the bangat, Semnopithecus Hosei, but the old chief 

74 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

regards these as much less important and as recent 
innovations. 

We do not know of any other animals to which 
especial respect or attention is paid by the Kenyahs. 

Animal Cults of the Kayans 

The white-headed hawk (Bali Flaki) of the 
Kenyahs has its equivalent among the Kayans in 
the large dark-brown hawk, which they call Laki 
Neho. But as it is not possible to distinguish these 
two kinds of hawks when seen flying at some dis- 
tance, they address and accept all large hawks seen 
in the distance as Laki Neho. 

The function and powers of Laki Neho seem to 
be almost identical with those of Bali Flaki. He is 
a giver of omens and a bringer of messages from 
Laki Tenangan. The following notes of a conver- 
sation with an intelligent Kayan chief will give 
some idea of his attitude towards Laki Neho. It 
must be remembered that these people have no 
priesthood and no dogmatic theologians to define 
and formulate beliefs, so that their ideas as to the 
nature of their gods and their abodes and powers 
are, though perhaps more concrete, at least as 
various in the minds of different individuals as are 
the corresponding ideas among the average adherents 
of more highly developed forms of religion ; and 
perhaps no two men will agree exactly on these 
matters, and any one man will freely contradict his 
own statements. 

Laki Tenangan is an old man with long white 
hair who speaks Kayan and has a wife, Doh 
Tenangan. They sometimes see him in dreams, 
and if fortunate they may then see his face,1 but 
if unlucky they see his back only. In olden times 
powerful men sometimes spoke with him, but now 

1 This phrase as commonly used implies the exchange of greetings. 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 75 

this never occurs. He dwells in a house far away. 
Laki Neho also has a house that is covered with 
palm leaves and frayed sticks. It is in a tree-top, 
yet it is beside a river, and has a landing-place 
before it like every Kayan house. This house is 
sometimes seen in dreams. It is not so far away 
as the house of Laki Tenangan. At first our 
informant said that help is asked directly of Laki 
Neho ; but, when pressed, he said that Laki Neho 
may carry the message to Laki Tenangan. Some 
things Laki Neho does of his own will and power ; 
for example, if a branch were likely to fall on a 
Kayan boat he would prevent it, for Laki Tenangan 
long ago taught him how to do such things. When 
a man is sick, Kayans appeal to Laki Neho ; but if 
he does not make the patient well they then appeal 
to Laki Tenangan directly, killing a pig, whose 
spirit goes first to the house of Laki Neho, and 
then on to the more distant house of Laki Tenangan. 
For they believe that in such a case the patient 
has somehow offended Laki Neho by disregarding 
or misreading his omens. A man suffering from 
chronic disease may himself pray to Laki Tenangan. 
He lights a fire and kills a fowl, and perhaps a pig 
also, and calls upon Laki Neho to be his witness 
and messenger. He holds an egg in one hand and 
says, "This is for you to eat, carry my message 
direct to Laki Tenangan that I may get well and 
live and bring up my children, who shall be taught 
my occupations and the true customs." The fire is 
lighted to make Laki Neho warm and energetic. 

It will be seen from the above account that the 
Kayans have formed a concept of the power of the 
hawks in general, and have given it a semi- 
anthropomorphic character, and we shall see below 
that the Sea Dayaks have carried this process still 
further. 

76 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

CROCODILES 

The Kayan's attitude towards the crocodile is 
practically the same as the Kenyan's. We append 
the following notes of a conversation with a young 
Kayan chief, Usong, and his cousin Wan : — 
There are but very few Kayans who will kill a 
crocodile except in revenge. But if one of 
their people has been taken by a crocodile 
they go out together to kill the criminal, and 
they begin by saying, " Don't run away, you've 
got to be killed, why don't you come to the surface ? 
You won't come out on the land because you have 
done wrong and are afraid." After this he will 
perhaps come on land ; and if he does not, he will 
at least float to the surface of the water, and is then 
killed with spears. In olden days Kayans used to 
make a crocodile of clay and ask it to drive away 
evil spirits ; but now this is not done. A crocodile 
may become a man just like themselves. Some- 
times a man dreams that a crocodile calls him to 
become his blood-brother, and after they have gone 
through the regular ceremony and exchanged 
names (in the dream), the man is quite safe from 
crocodiles. Usong's uncle has in this way become 
blood-brother to a crocodile, and is now called 
" Baya " (the genericname for the crocodile), while 
some crocodile unknown is called Jok, and Usong 
considers himself the nephew of the crocodile Jok. 
Usong's father has also become blood-brother to 
a crocodile, and Usong calls himself a son of this 
particular unknown crocodile. Sometimes he asks 
these two, his uncle- and his father -crocodiles, to 
give him a pig when he is out hunting, and once 
they did give him one. After relating this, Usong 
added, " But who knows if this be true ? " 

Wan's great-great-grandfather became blood- 
brother to a crocodile, and was called " Klieng 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 77 

Baya." Wan has several times met this crocodile 
in dreams. In one dream he fell into the river 
when there were many crocodiles about. He 
climbed on to the head of one, which said to him, 
" Don't be afraid," and carried him to the bank. 
Wans father had charms given him by a crocodile 
and would not on any account kill one, and Wan 
clearly regards himself as being intimately related 
to crocodiles in general. 

The Kayans regard the pig and the fowl in much 
the same way as the Kenyahs do, and put them to 
the same uses. The beliefs and customs with regard 
to deer, horned cattle, dogs, and the tiger-cat, are 
similar to those of the Kenyahs save that they will 
not kill the last of these. They are perhaps more 
strict in the avoidance of deer and cattle. One old 
chief, who had been ailing for a long time, hesitated 
to enter the Resident's house because he saw a pair 
of horns hanging up there. When he entered he 
asked for a piece of iron, and on returning home 
he killed a fowl and a pig, and submitted to the 
process of having his soul caught by a dayong, lest 
it should have incurred some undefined injury in 
the neighbourhood of the horns. 

The Kayans avoid the skin of the tiger even 
more strictly than the Kenyahs or any other tribe ; 
even a great chief will not touch a tiger-skin, and 
we have known one refuse to enter a house because 
he knew that it contained a tiger-skin war-coat. 

Like the Kenyahs, the Kayans entertain a 
superstitious dread of the Maias and the long-nosed 
monkey, but the Dok (Macacus nemestrinus), the 
coco-nut monkey of the Malay States, has special 
relations to them. It is very common in their 
district, but they will kill it only when it is stealing 
their rice-crop ; and they will never eat it as other 
peoples do. There is a somewhat uncertain belief 

7S PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

that it is a blood-relative, and the following myth is 
told to account for this. A Kayan woman of high 
class was reaping padi with her daughter. Now 
it is against custom to eat any of the rice during 
reaping ; and when the mother went away for a 
short time leaving the girl at work, she told her on 
no account to eat any of the rice. But no sooner 
was the mother gone than the girl began to husk 
some padi and nibble at it. Then at once her body 
began to itch, and hair began to grow on her arms 
like the hair of a Dok. Soon the mother returned 
and the girl said, " Why am I itching so ? " The 
mother answered, " You have done some wicked 
thing, you have eaten some rice." Then hair 
grew all over the girl's body except her head 
and face, and the mother said, " Ah, this is what 
I feared, now you must go into the jungle and 
eat only what has been planted by human hands." 
So the girl went into the jungle and her head 
became like a Dok's, and she ceased to be able 
to speak. 

The Dok does not help them in any way, but 
only spoils their crops. A very popular dance is 
the Dok dance, in which a man imitates very 
cleverly the behaviour of the Dok. It is a very 
ludicrous performance, and excites boisterous mirth. 
They say it is done merely in fun. 

In one Kayan house the ends of all the main 
crossbeams that support the roof are ornamented 
with fretwork designs, which are clearly animal- 
derivatives and apparently all of the same animal. 
The form suggests a crocodile, and some of the men 
agreed that that was its meaning, while others 
asserted that it was a dog. No doubt it was 
originally one or other of these, but has now become 
a conventional design merely, and its true origin has 
been forgotten. 

A pattern which seems to be derived from the 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 79 

outline of a dog, and which goes by the name 
Kalang asu ( = dog-pattern), occurs in a great variety 
of forms in the decorative art of the Kayans, and 
also, though to a less extent, in that of the Kenyahs. 
It is tatued on arm and thigh, is reproduced in 
beadwork, and carved in low relief on decorative 
panels.1 

Neither Kayans nor Kenyahs make much use of 
snakes of any kind, but there is one snake with red 
head and tail (Batang lima) which, when they see it 
in the course of a journey, they must kill, else harm 
will befall them. Again, if they see a certain snake 
just as^ they are about to enter a strange river or a 
strange village, they will stop and light a fire on the 
bank in order to communicate with Laki Neho. 
Kayans will not eat any species of turtle or tortoise. 

Klemantans 

The following notes of a conversation with the 
Orang Kaya Tumonggong, the influential chief of 
the Long Pata people (one of the many groups of 
Klemantans), show that these people regard the 
hawk in much the same way as the Kenyahs do : 
The hawk, Bali Flaki, is the messenger of " Bali 
Utong," the Supreme Being. When a party is 
about to set out on any expedition they explain 
their intentions to Bali Flaki, and then observe the 
movements of the hawks. If a hawk circles round 
over their heads, some of the party will fall sick on 
the journey and probably will die. If the hawk flies 
to the right when near at hand, it is a good omen ; 
but if it flies to the right when at a distance, or to 
the left, whether near or far, that is a bad omen. 
The people then light a fire and entreat the hawk 
to give a more favourable sign, and if it persists in 
going to the left they give up the expedition. If, 

1 See Chap. XII. 

8o PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

while the omens are being read, the hawk flaps his 
wings, or screams, or swoops down and settles on a 
tree, the omen is bad. But if it swoops down and 
up again, that is good. If two or three hawks are 
visible at the same time, and especially if they all 
fly to the right, that is very good ; but if many are 
visible, and especially if they fly off in different 
directions, that is very bad, for it means that the 
enemy will scatter the attacking force. If the 
hawk should capture a small bird while it is under 
observation, that means that they will be made 
captives if they persist in their undertaking. The 
hawk is not claimed as a relative by Klemantans. 
They take omens from various other birds in matters 
of minor importance. 

Klemantans use the domestic pig and fowl as 
sacrificial animals just as the Kenyahs and Kayans 
do, and they have the same superstitious dread of 
killing a dog. One group of them, Malanaus, use a 
dog in taking a very solemn oath, and sometimes 
the dog is killed in the course of this ceremony. 
Or instead of the dog being killed, its tail may be 
cut off, and the man taking the oath licks the blood 
from the stump ; this is considered a most binding 
and solemn form of oath. The ceremony is spoken 
of as Koman asu, i.e. " the eating of the dog." 

Most Klemantans will kill and eat both deer 
and cattle freely. But there are exceptions to this 
rule. Thus Damong, the chief of a Malanau 
household, together with all his people, will not kill 
or eat the deer Cervulus muntjac, alleging that an 
ancestor had become a deer of this kind, and that, 
since they cannot distinguish this incarnation of 
his ancestor from other deer, they must abstain 
from killing all deer of this species. We know of 
one instance in which one of these people refused 
to use again his cooking-pot, because a Malay who 
had borrowed it had used it for cooking the flesh of 

Plate 159. KAYANS DISCUSSING THE LIVER OF A PIG. 

xv ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 81 

deer of this species. This superstition is still rigidly 
adhered to, although these people have been con- 
verted to Islam of recent years. 

On one occasion another chief resolutely refused 
to proceed on a journey through the jungle when a 
mouse-deer, Plandok, crossed his path ; he will not 
eat this deer at any time.1 

The people of Miri, who also are Mohammedan 
Malanaus, claim to be related to the large deer, Cervus 
equimis> and some of them to the muntjac deer also. 
Now, these people live in a country in which deer 
of all kinds abound, and they always make a clearing 
in the jungle around a tomb. On such a clearing 
grass grows up rapidly, and so the spot becomes 
attractive to deer as a grazing ground ; and it seems 
not improbable that it is through frequently seeing 
deer about the tombs that the people have come 
to entertain the belief that their dead relatives 
become deer, or that they are in some other way 
closely related to the deer. 

The Bakongs, another group of Malanaus, hold 
a similar belief with regard to the bear-cat (Artictis) 
and the various species of Paradoxurus ; in this case 
the origin of the belief is admitted by them to be 
the fact that, on going to their graveyards, they 
often see one of these beasts coming out of a tomb. 
These tombs are roughly constructed wooden 
coffins raised a few feet only from the ground, and 
it is probable that these carnivores make their way 
into them, in the first place, to devour the corpse, 
and that they make use of them as lairs. 

The relations of the Klemantans to the crocodiles 
seem to be more intimate than those of other tribes. 
One group, the Long Patas, claim the crocodile as 
a relative. The story goes that a certain man 
named Silau became a crocodile. First he became 

1 Of the Romans it is said : " When a fox, a wolf, a serpent, a horse, a dog, 
or any other kind of quadruped, ran across a person's path or appeared in an 
unusual place, it formed an augury." 

82 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

covered with itch, and he scratched himself till he 
bled and became rough all over. Then his feet 
began to look like a crocodile's tail ; as the change 
crept up from his feet to his body, he called out to 
his relatives that he was becoming a crocodile, and 
made them swear that they would never kill any 
crocodile. Many of the people in olden days knew 
that Silau became a crocodile ; they saw him at 
times and spoke to him, and his teeth and tongue 
were always like those of a man. Many stories are 
told of his meeting with people by the river-side. 
On one occasion a man sat roasting a pig on the 
river-bank, and, when he left it for a moment, Silau 
took it and divided it among the other crocodiles, 
who greatly enjoyed it. Silau then arranged with 
them that he would give a sign to his human 
relatives by which the crocodiles might always be 
able to recognise them when travelling on the river. 
He told his human friends that they must tie leaves 
of the Dracczna below the bows of their boats ; 
this they always do when they go far from home, 
so that the crocodiles may recognise them and so 
abstain from attacking them. 

If a man of the Long Patas is taken by a 
crocodile, they attribute this to the fact that they 
have intermarried to some extent with Kayans. 
When they come upon a crocodile lying on the 
river-bank, they say, " Be easy, grandfather, don't 
mind us, your are one of us." Some of the 
Klemantans will not even eat anything that has 
been cooked in a vessel previously used for cooking 
crocodile's flesh, and it is said that if a man should 
do so unwittingly his body would become covered 
with sores. 

If a crocodile is seen on their left hand by Long 
Patas on a war expedition, that is a bad omen ; 
but if on their right hand, that is the best possible 
omen. 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS S3 

The Orang Kaya Tumonggong tells us that in 
the olden times the crocodiles used to speak to 
his people, warning them of danger, but that now 
they never speak, and he supposes that their 
silence is due to the fact that his people have 
intermarried with other tribes. The Long Patas 
frequently carve a crocodile's head as the figure- 
head for a war-canoe. 

The Batu Blah people (Klemantans) on return- 
ing from the war-path make a huge effigy of a 
crocodile with cooked rice, and they put fowl's eggs 
in its head for eyes and bananas for teeth, and 
cover it with scales made from the stem of the 
banana plant. When all is ready it is transfixed 
with a wooden spear, and the chief cuts off its head 
with a wooden sword. Then pigs and fowls are 
slaughtered and cooked, and eaten with the rice 
from the rice-crocodile, the chiefs eating the head 
and the common people the body. The chief of 
these people could give us no explanation of the 
meaning of this ceremony ; he merely says they do 
it because it is custom. 

One community of Klemantans, the Lelak people, 
lived recently on the banks of a lake much infested 
with crocodiles. Their chief had the reputation of 
being able to induce them to leave the lake. To 
achieve this he would stand in his boat waving a 
bundle of charms, which included among other 
things teeth of the real tiger and boars' tusks, and 
then address the crocodiles politely in their own 
language. He would then allow his boat to float 
out of the lake into the river, and the crocodiles 
would follow him and pass on down the river. 

Many, probably all, Klemantans put up wooden 
images of the crocodile before their houses, and 
many of them carve the prow of their war-canoes 
into the form of a crocodile's head with gaping 
jaw. 

84 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

Some of the Muruts make an effigy of the 
crocodile from clay for use on the celebration of a 
successful expedition. 

The Punans 

The Punans make use of all the omen-birds that 
are used by the Kenyahs, and they regard them 
as in some degree sacred, and not to be killed or 
eaten. They seem to read the omens in much the 
same way as the Kenyahs do ; but they are not so 
constant in their cult of the omen-birds, and Punans 
of different districts differ a good deal from one 
another in this respect. In fact, it is doubtful 
whether those that have mixed least with the other 
peoples pay any attention to the omen-birds ; and 
it seems not unlikely that the cult of the omen- 
birds is in process of being adopted by them. 

With the exception of these birds there is prob- 
ably no wild animal of the jungle that the Punans 
do not kill and eat. They refuse to eat the domestic 
pig, but this, they say, is because they know nothing 
of it, it is strange to them. Having no domestic 
pigs and fowls, they of course do not sacrifice them 
to their gods, nor do they seem to practise the rite 
of sacrifice in any form. 

They give the names of various animals to their 
children, and they use these names in the ordinary 
way. 

The crocodile seems to be regarded as a god by 
the Punans — they speak of it as Bali Penyalong. 
(This, as we have already said, is the name of the 
Supreme Spirit of the Kenyahs.) They sometimes 
make a wooden image of it, and hang it before the 
leaf shelter or hut in which they may be living at 
any time ; and if one of their party should fall ill, 
they hang the blossom of the betel-nut tree on the 
figure, and the medicine-man addresses it when 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 85 

he seeks to call back the wandering soul of his 
patient. 

Punans certainly ascribe significance to the 
behaviour of a few animals other than those 
observed by the other peoples. Thus, if they see 
a lizard of any kind upon a branch before the 
shelter in which they are encamped, and especially 
if it utters its note, they regard this as a sign that 
enemies are near. 

The Sea Dayaks or I bans 

The I bans do not seem to have any conception 
that corresponds closely to the Supreme Spirit of 
the races with which we have already dealt. Arch- 
deacon Perham * has given an account of the Petara 
of these people, showing how it is a conception of 
one god having very many manifestations and func- 
tions, each special function being conceived vaguely 
as an anthropomorphic deity. He has described also 
the mythical warrior-hero and demi-god Klieng, and 
the god of war, Singalang Burong. As Archdeacon 
Perham has said, this last deity has a material animal 
form, namely, the white-headed hawk, which is the 
Bali Flaki of the Kenyahs, and plays a somewhat 
similar part in their lives. But Singalong Burong 
is decidedly more anthropomorphic than Bali Flaki ; 
he is probably generally conceived as a single being 
of human form living in a house such as the Ibans 
themselves inhabit ; whereas Bali Flaki, even if 
sometimes conceived in the singular as the great 
Bali Flaki, is very bird-like. We have seen that 
the Kayans describe their hawk-god, Laki Neho, as 
dwelling in a house, which, though in the top of a 
tree, has a landing-stage before it on the river-bank. 
In the case of the Kayans, the conception is only 
half-way on the road to a full anthropomorph ; 

1 Journ. of Straits Asiatic Society -, Nos. 8, 10, and 14. 

86 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

whereas with the I bans the change has been com- 
pleted and the hawk-god is completely anthropo- 
morphic. Corresponding with this increased im- 
portance and definition of the anthropomorphic 
hawk-god, we find that for the I bans the virtue has 
departed out of the individual hawks, and that they 
are no longer consulted for omens ; for the I bans 
say that Singalang Burong never leaves his house, 
and that for this reason they do not take omens 
from the hawks when going on the war-path. 
Nevertheless, he is the chief or ruler over all the 
other omen birds, who are merely his messengers. 
He thus seems to have come to occupy almost the 
supreme position accorded to Bali Penyalong by the 
Kenyahs. The following notes are the statements 
made upon this subject by a very intelligent I ban 
of the Undup district : Once a year they make a 
big feast for Singalang Burong and sing for about 
twelve hours, calling him and Klieng and all the 
Petara to the feast. (This is the .ceremony known 
asgawai burong. It is a most tedious and monoton- 
ous performance after the first few hours.) In olden 
days Singalang Burong used to come to these feasts 
in person as a man just like an I ban in appearance 
and behaviour. At the end of the feast he would 
go out, take off his coat, and fly away in the form 
of a white-headed hawk. Now they are not sure that 
he comes to their feast, because they never see him. 
Singalang Burong is greater than Klieng, although 
it is Klieng that gives them heads in war. Singa- 
lang Burong married an I ban woman, Kachindai 
Lanai Pantak Girak, and he gave all his daughters 
in marriage to the omen-birds. Dara Inchin Tem- 
baga Monghok Chelabok married Katupong (Sasza 
abnormts); Dara Selaka Utih Nujut married Mam- 
buas (Carcurentis) ; Pingai Tuai Nadai Mertas Indu 
Moa Puchang Penabas married Bragai (Harpactes); 
Indu Langgu Katungsong Ngumbai Dayang Katu- 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS Sy 

pang Bunga Nketai married Papau (Harpactes 
diardi) ; and, lastly, Indu Bantok Tinchin Mas Ndu 
Pungai Lelatan Pulas married Kotok (Lepocestes). 
He had also one son, Agi Melieng etc., who 
married the daughter of Pulang Gana, the god 
of agriculture, her name being Indu Kachanggut 
Rumput Melieng Kapian. 

It was amusing and instructive to hear this 
Iban rattle off these enormous names without any 
hesitation, while another Iban sitting beside him 
guaranteed their accuracy. 

In the olden days, it is said, there were only 
thirty-three individuals of each kind of omen-bird 
(including Singalang Burong). But although these 
thirty-three of each kind still exist, there are many 
others which cannot be certainly distinguished from 
them, and these do not give true omens. It would 
be quite impossible to kill any one of these thirty- 
three true representatives of each kind, however 
much a man might try. 

Nevertheless, if an Iban kills an omen-bird by 
mistake, he wraps it in a piece of cloth and buries it 
carefully in the earth, and with it he buries rice and 
flesh and money, entreating it not to be vexed and to 
forgive him, because it was all an accident. He then 
goes home and will speak to no one on the way, and 
stays in the house for the rest of that day at least. 

The I bans read omens not only from the birds 
mentioned above as the son-in-law of Singalang 
Burong, but also from some other animals. And 
it is interesting to note that they have made a verb 
from the substantive burong (a bird), namely, 
beburong (to bird), i.e. to take omens of any kind, 
whether from bird or beast. An excellent account 
of the part played by omens in the life of the I bans 
has been given by Archdeacon Perham in the paper 
referred to above, and we have nothing further to 
add to that account. 

VOL. II g 

88 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

The hornbill must be included among the sacred 
birds of the Iban, although it does not give omens. 
On the occasion of making peace between hostile 
tribes, the I bans sometimes make a large wooden 
image of the hornbill and hang great numbers of 
cigarettes upon it ; and these are taken from it 
during the ceremony and smoked by all the men 
taking part in it. On the occasion of the great 
peace-making at Baram in March 1899, at which 
thousands of Kenyans, Kayans, Klemantans, and 
Ibans were present,1 the Ibans made an elaborate 
image of the hornbill some nine feet in height, and 
hung upon it many thousands of cigarettes, and 
these were smoked by the men of the different 
tribes, all apparently with full understanding of the 
value of the act. 

A special deity or spirit, Pulang Gana, presides 
over the rice-culture of the Ibans, but the crocodile 
also is intimately concerned with it. The following 
account was given us by an intelligent Iban from 
the Batang Lupar : — 

Klieng first advised the Ibans to make friends 
with Pulang Gana, who is a Petara and the grand- 
father (" aki") of padi. Pulang Gana first taught 
them to plant padi and instructed them in the 
following rites : — 

On going to a new district Ibans always make a 
life-size image of a crocodile in clay on the land 
chosen for the padi-izxva. The image is made 
chiefly by some elderly man of good repute and 
noted for skilful farming. Then for seven days 
the house is mali, i.e. under special restrictions — no 
one may enter the house or do anything in it except 
eat and sleep. At the end of the seven days they 
go to see the clay crocodile and give it cloth and 
food and rice-spirit, and kill a fowl and a pig before 
it. The ground round about the image is kept 

1 See Chap. XXII. 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 89 

carefully cleared and is held sacred for the next 
three years, and if this is not done there will be 
poor crops on the other farms. When the rites 
have been duly performed this clay crocodile 
destroys all the pests which eat the rice. If, in 
a district where I bans have been long settled, the 
farm-pests become very noxious, the people pass 
three days mali and then make a tiny boat of bark, 
which they call utap. They then catch one specimen 
of each kind of pest — one sparrow, one grasshopper, 
etc. — and put them into the small boat, together 
with all they need for food, and set the boat free 
to float away down the river. If this does not 
drive away the pests, they resort to the more 
thorough and certainly effectual process of making 
the clay crocodile. 

Many Ibans claim the live crocodile as a relative, 
and, like almost all the other peoples, will not eat 
the flesh of crocodiles, and will not kill them, 
save in revenge when a crocodile has taken one of 
their household. They say that the spirit of the 
crocodile sometimes becomes a man just like an 
I ban, but better and more powerful in every way, 
and sometimes he is met and spoken with in this 
form. 

Another reason given for their fear of killing 
crocodiles is that Ribai, the river-god, sometimes 
becomes a crocodile ; and he may become also a 
tiger or a bear. Klieng, too, may become any one 
of five beasts, namely, the python, the maias, the 
crocodile, the bear, or the tiger, and it is for this 
reason that Ibans seldom kill these animals. For 
if a man should kill one which was really either 
Ribai or Klieng, he would go mad. 

The Ibans are by nature a less serious-minded 
and less religious people than the Kenyahs and 
Kayans, and they have a greater variety of myths 
and extravagant superstitions ; nevertheless, they 

90 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

use the fowl and the pig as sacrificial animals in 
much the same way as the other tribes. They eat 
the fowl and both the wild and domestic pig freely, 
except in so far as they are restrained by somewhat 
rigid notions of economy in such matters. The 
fowl plays a larger part than the pig in their 
religious practices, and its entrails are sometimes 
consulted for omens. 

Ibans will kill and eat all kinds of deer, but there 
are exceptions to this rule. The deer are of some 
slight value to them as omen-givers. Horned cattle 
they will kill and eat, but they are not accustomed 
to their flesh, and few of them relish it. 

Ibans have numerous animal fables that remind 
one strongly of ^Esop's fables and the Brer Rabbit 
stories of the Africans. In these kora, the land- 
tortoise, and plandok, the tiny mouse-deer, figure 
largely as cunning and unprincipled thieves and 
vagabonds that turn the laugh always against the 
bigger animals and man.1 

The Ngarong or Secret Helper 

An important institution among some of the 
Ibans, which occurs but in rare instances among 
the other peoples, is the ngarong'1 or secret helper. 
The ngarong is one of the very few topics in regard 
to which the Ibans display any reluctance to speak 
freely. So great is their reserve in this connection 
that one of us lived for fourteen years on friendly 
terms with Ibans of various districts without ascer- 
taining the meaning of the word ngarong, or suspect- 
ing the great importance of the part played by the 
notion in the lives of some of these people. The 

1 See Chap. XVII. 

2 In the paper from which the greater part of this chapter is extracted this 
word was spelt nyarong. It is now clear to us that it should be spelt as above, 
with the initial ng, a common initial sound in the Sea Dayak language. The 
most literal translation of the word is, the thing that is secret, or simply, the 
secret, or my secret. 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 91 

ngarong seems to be usually the spirit of some 
ancestor or dead relative, but not always so, and it 
is not clear that it is always conceived as the spirit 
of a deceased human being. This spirit becomes 
the special protector of some individual I ban, to 
whom in a dream he manifests himself, in the first 
place in human form, and announces that he will be 
his secret helper ; and he may or may not inform 
the dreamer in what form he will appear in future. 
On the day after such a dream the I ban wanders 
through the jungle looking for signs by which he 
may recognise his secret helper ; and if an animal 
behaves in a manner at all unusual, if a startled 
deer stops a moment to gaze at him before bounding 
away, if a gibbon gambols about persistently in the 
trees near him, if he comes upon a bright quartz- 
crystal or a strangely contorted root or creeper,1 
that animal or object is for him full of a mysterious 
significance and is the abode of his ngarong. Some- 
times the ngarong then assumes the form of an I ban 
and speaks with him, promising all kinds of help 
and good fortune. If this occurs the seer usually 
faints away, and when he comes to himself again 
the ngarong will have disappeared. Or, again, a 
man may be told in his dream that if he will go 
into the jungle he will meet his ngarong in the form 
of a wild boar. He will then, of course, go to seek 
it, and if by chance other men of his house should 
kill a wild boar that day, he will go to them and beg 
for its head or buy it at a good price if need be, 
carry it home to his bed-place, offer it cooked rice 
and kill a fowl before it, smearing the blood on the 
head and on himself, and humbly begging for pardon. 
Or he may leave the corpse in the jungle and 
sacrifice a fowl before it there. On the following 
night he hopes to dream of the ngarong again, and 

1 Almost every Iban possesses and constantly carries with him a bundle of 
such objects ; they are regarded as charms and are called pengaroh ; but few 
probably claim to enjoy the protection of a secret helper. 

92 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

perhaps he is told in his dream to take the tusks 
from the dead boar and that they will bring him 
good luck. Unless he dreams something of this 
sort, he feels that he has been mistaken, and that 
the boar was not really his secret helper. 

Perhaps only one in a hundred men is fortunate 
enough to have a secret helper, though it is ardently 
desired by many of them. Many a young man goes 
to sleep on the grave of some distinguished person, 
or in some wild and lonely spot, and lives for some 
days on a very restricted diet, hoping that a secret 
helper will come to him in his dreams. 

When, as is most commonly the case, the secret 
helper takes on the form of some animal, all in- 
dividuals of that species become objects of especial 
regard to the fortunate Iban ; he will not kill or 
eat any such animal, and he will as far as possible 
restrain others from doing so. A ngarong may after 
a time manifest itself in some new form, but even 
then the Iban will continue to respect the animal- 
form in which it first appeared. 

In some cases the cult of a secret helper will 
spread through a whole family or household. The 
children and grandchildren will usually respect the 
species of animal to which a man's secret helper 
belongs, and will perhaps sacrifice fowls or pigs to it 
occasionally, although they expect no help from it ; 
but it is asserted that if the great-grandchildren 
of a man behave well to his secret helper, it will 
often befriend them just as much as its original 
protege. 

The above general account of the secret helper 
is founded on the descriptions of many different 
Ibans, and we will now supplement it by describing 
several particular instances. 

Anggus (an Ulu Ai Iban of the Batang Lupar) 
says that every Iban who has no ngarong hopes to 
get some bird or beast as his helper at the begawai. 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 93 

the feast given to the Petara. He himself has 
none, but he will not kill the gibbon because the 
ngarong of his grandfather, who died twenty years 
ago, was a gibbon. Once a man came to his 
grandfather in a dream and said to him, " Don't 
you kill the gibbon," and then turned into a grey 
gibbon. This gibbon helped him to become rich 
and to take heads, and in all possible ways. On 
one occasion, when he was about to go on the 
war-path, his ngarong came to him in a dream and 
said, " Go on, I will help you," and the next day 
he saw in the jungle a grey gibbon which was un- 
doubtedly his ngarong. When he died he said to 
his sons, " Don't you kill the gibbon," and his sons 
and grandsons have obeyed him in this ever since. 
Anggus adds that when a man dreams of a ngarong 
for the first time he does not accept it, and will still 
kill animals of that kind ; nor is a second dream 
enough ; but when he dreams the same dream a 
third time, then his scepticism is overcome and he 
can no longer doubt his good fortune. 

Anggus himself once shot a gibbon when told to 
do so by one of us. He first said to it, " I don't 
want to kill you, but the Tuan who is giving me 
wages expects me to, and the blame is his. But if 
you are really the ngarong of my grandfather, make 
the shot miss you." He then shot and missed three 
times, and on shooting a fourth time he killed a 
gibbon, but not the one he had spoken to. Anggus 
does not think the gibbon helps either his father or 
himself. 

Payang, an old Katibas I ban, tells us that he 
has been helped by a python ever since he was a 
youth, when a man came to him in a dream and 
said, " Sometimes I become a python and some- 
times a cobra, and I will always help you." It has 
certainly helped him very much, but he does not 
know whether it has helped his children ; neverthe- 

94 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

less he has forbidden them to kill it. He does not 
like to speak of it, but he does so at our request. 
Payang concluded by saying that he had no doubt 
that we white men have secret helpers, very much 
more powerful than the I ban's, and that to them 
we owe our ability to do so many wonderful 
things. 

Imban, an I ban who had recently moved to the 
Baram river from the Rejang, had once when sick 
seen in a dream the Labi-Labi, the large river-turtle 
( Trionyx subplanus), and had made a promise that 
if he should recover he would never kill it. So when 
he settled on the Baram river as head of a house- 
hold, he attempted to impose a fine on his people 
for killing the Labi- Labi, insisting that it was 
mali to kill it or bring its carcase into his river. 
They appealed to one of us as the resident magis- 
trate, and it was decided that if Imban wished 
to insist on this observance he must remove to a 
small tributary stream. This he has done, and a 
few of his people have followed him ; and on them 
he enforces a strict observance of his cult of the 
river-turtle. 

A still more interesting case is the following 
one :— A community of Ibans were building a new 
house on the Dabai river some years ago, and one 
day, while they were at work, a porcupine ran out 
of a hole in the ground near by. During the follow- 
ing night one of the party was told by the porcupine 
in a dream to join their new house with his (the 
porcupine's). So they completed their house ; and 
ever since that time they have made yearly feasts in 
honour of the porcupines that live beneath the house, 
and no one in the house dare injure one of them, 
though they will still kill and eat other porcupines in 
the jungle. They have had no death in the house 
during the seven years that it has been built, and 
this they attribute to the protecting power of the 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 95 

porcupines ; and when any one is sick, they offer 
food to them, and regard their good offices as far 
more imp'ortant than the ministrations of the manang 
(the medicine-man). Last year some relatives of 
these I bans moved to this village, and for three 
months the knowledge of the part played by the 
porcupines was hidden from them as a mysterious 
secret. At the end of that time this precious 
mystery was disclosed to the new-comers, and the 
porcupines were feasted with every variety of cooked 
rice, some of it being made into a rude image of a 
porcupine, and with rice-spirit and cakes of sugar 
and rice-flour, salt and dried fish, oil, betel-nut, and 
tobacco. Several fowls were slain, and their blood 
was daubed on the chin of each person in the house, 
a ceremony known as enselan. The liver of one 
fowl was carefully taken out and put with the food 
offered to the porcupines, that they might read the 
omens from it ; and they were then informed of the 
arrival of the new-comers. The fowls were waved 
over the heads of the people by the old men, while 
they prayed the porcupines to give them long life 
and health, and a token of their goodwill in the form 
of a smooth rounded pebble. On an occasion of 
this sort it is highly probable that the required 
token will be found ; for the secret helper would no 
doubt be surreptitiously helped by some member of 
the household who, being deficient in faith, prefers 
to make a certainty of so important a matter rather 
than leave it entirely to the ngarong. 

Inquiries made since the publication of the 
facts reported in the foregoing paragraphs have 
shown us that the cult of the ngarong or secret 
helper is probably not common to all branches of 
the Sea Dayaks people. We have heard of its 
occurrence amongst the Ulu Ai Dayaks both of the 
Batang Lupar and Rejang districts, but we have no 
positive knowledge of its occurrence among other 

96 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

branches unless the custom known as nampok has 
some connection with it. 

Conclusion 

We have now to discuss some problems sug- 
gested by a review of the facts set forth above, and 
to bring forward a few additional facts that seem to 
throw light on these questions. 

The question that we will first discuss is this : 
Are all or any of the instances of peculiar regard paid 
to animals, or of animals sacrificed to gods or spirits, 
or of the ceremonial use of their blood, to be 
regarded as institutions surviving from a fully 
developed system of totemism now fallen into 
decay ? It will have been noticed that many of 
the features of totemism, as it occurs in its best 
developed forms, occur among the people of one or 
other of the tribes of Sarawak. We have, in the 
first place, numerous cases in which a whole com- 
munity refuses to kill or eat an animal which is 
believed to protect and aid them by omens and 
warnings and in other ways, and in which the 
animal is worshipped with prayer and sacrifice (e.g. 
the hawk among various tribes) ; we have at least 
one instance of a community claiming to be related 
to a friendly species (Long Patas and the crocodile), 
and having as usual an extravagant myth to account 
for the belief ; we have the domestic animal that is 
sacrificially slain, its blood being sprinkled on the 
worshippers and its flesh eaten by them, and that is 
never slain without religious rites (pig of the 
Kenyahs and Kayans) ; we have the animal that 
must not be killed tatued on the skin of the men 
(the dog), or its skin worn by fully grown men only 
(the tiger-cat), or images of it made of clay or carved 
in wood and set up before the house (the hawk and 
crocodile) ; we have also the animal that is claimed 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 97 

as a relative imitated in popular dances (the Dok- 
monkey of the Kayans) ; the belief that the souls of 
men assume the form of some animal that must 
not be killed or eaten (deer and the Arctogale 
among Klemantans) ; the observance by invalids of 
a very strict avoidance of contact with any part of an 
animal that must not be killed or eaten in any case 
(horned cattle among many Kenyahs and Kayans). 
Not only do we see these various customs, which 
in several parts of the world have been observed as 
living elements of totem-cults, and which in other 
parts have been accepted as evidence of totem- 
worship in the past, but in the agricultural habits of 
the people we may see an efficient cause of the 
decay of totemism, if at some time in the past 
it has flourished among them. For it has been 
pointed out, especially by Mr. Jevons in his Intro- 
duction to the History of Religion, that totemism 
seems to flourish most naturally among tribes of 
hunters, and that the introduction of agriculture 
must tend towards its decay. Now there is some 
reason to suppose that the introduction to Borneo 
of rice and of the art of cultivating it is of compara- 
tively recent date. Crawford reckoned that the 
cultivation of padi was introduced to the southern 
parts of Borneo from Java some 300 years ago, and 
into the northern parts from the Philippine Islands 
about 1 50 years ago. But whatever the date of the 
occurrence may have been, it seems to be certain 
that, by the introduction of padi cultivation from 
some other country, most of the tribes of Sarawak 
were converted, probably very rapidly, from hunting 
to agriculture. This conversion must have caused 
great changes in their social conditions and in 
their customs and superstitions ; and, if totemism 
flourished among them while they were still simple 
hunters, its decay may well have been one of the 
chief of these changes. 

98 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

A second factor that would have tended to bring 
about this change is the prevalence of a belief in a 
god or beneficent spirit more powerful than all 
others, and more directly concerned with the welfare 
of his worshippers, however this belief may have 
come into being. And a third factor that may have 
tended in the same direction is the custom of head- 
hunting, and the important part played by the 
heads in the religious life of the people. For there 
is some reason to think that head-hunting is a com- 
paratively young institution among the tribes of 
Sarawak. 

But in spite of all this, and although we do not 
think it is possible completely to disprove the truth 
of the hypothesis that some or all of these animal 
cults are vestiges of a once fully developed totemic 
system, we are inclined to reject it. We are led to 
do so by four considerations. In the first place, if 
by totemism we mean a social organisation con- 
sisting in the division of a people into groups or 
clans, each of which worships or holds in super- 
stitious regard one or more kinds of animal or plant, 
or other natural objects to which the members of 
the group claim to be related by blood or by descent, 
then it seems to us sufficiently wonderful that this 
system should have existed among peoples so 
remote from one another in all things, save certain 
of the external conditions of life, as the Indians 
of North America and the natives of Australia. 
And it seems to us that to invoke the aid of the 
hypothesis of totemism in the past to explain the 
existence of a set of animal or plant superstitions 
in any particular case is but to increase the mystery 
that shrouds their origin ; for unless it can be shown 
that the adoption or development of totemism by 
any people brings with it immense advantages for 
them in the struggle for existence, every fresh case 
in which the evidence compels us to admit its 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 99 

occurrence, whether in the past or as a still flourish- 
ing institution, can but increase the wonder with 
which we have to regard its wide distribution. 

Secondly, we have in the total absence of totemism 
among the Punans very strong ground for rejecting 
the suggestion of its previous existence among the 
Kenyahs. For in physical characters, in language, 
and, as far as the difference in the mode of life 
permits, in customs and beliefs, the Punans resemble 
the Kenyahs so closely that we must assume them 
to be closely allied by blood ; and it seems probable 
that the Punans have merely persisted in the 
cultural condition from which the Kenyahs and 
other tribes have been raised by the adoption of 
agriculture and the practice of building substantial 
houses. Yet, as we have said, the Punans, although 
in that condition of nomadic hunters which is prob- 
ably the most favourable to the development and 
persistence of totemism, observe hardly any restric- 
tions in their hunting, and in fact seem to kill and 
eat with equal freedom almost every bird and beast 
of the jungle, shooting them with the blow-pipe and 
poisoned darts with consummate skill. The only 
exceptions to this rule are, so far as we know, the 
omen-birds, a carnivore, and a lizard, and, as we 
have said, it seems doubtful whether even these are 
excepted in the case of Punans who have not had 
much intercourse with other peoples. 

Thirdly, although it may be said that even at 
the present time many of the features of the religious 
side of totemism are present, we have not been able 
to discover any traces of a social organisation based 
upon totemism. There is no trace of any general 
division of the people of any tribe into groups which 
claim specially intimate relations with different 
animals, except in the case of the Klemantans ; and 
in their case such special relations seem to be the 
result merely of the different conditions under 

ioo PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

which the various scattered groups now live. There 
are no restrictions in the choice of a wife that might 
indicate a rule of endogamy or exogamy. There 
are no ceremonies to initiate youths into tribal 
mysteries ; certain ceremonies in which the youths 
take a leading part are directed exclusively to 
training them for war and the taking of heads in 
battle. We know of no instance of any group of 
people being named after an animal or plant which 
is claimed as a relative ; and in the case of the 
more homogeneous tribes, such as the Kenyahs 
and Kayans, all prohibitions with regard to animals 
and all benefits conferred by them are shared 
equally by all the members of any one community, 
and, with but very few exceptions, are the same for 
all the communities of the tribe. 

Lastly, we think it unnecessary to regard the 
various animal superstitions of these tribes as 
survivals of totemism, because it seems possible to 
find a more direct and natural explanation of almost 
every case. The numerous cases seem to fall into 
two groups : the superstitious practices concerned 
with the sacrificial animals, the pig and fowl on the 
one hand, and all those concerned with the various 
other animals on the other hand. These latter 
may, we think, be regarded as the expression of 
the direct and logical reaction of the mind of the 
savage to the impression made upon it by the 
behaviour of the animals. 

It has been admirably shown by Professor Lloyd 
Morgan l how we ourselves, and even professed 
psychologists among us, tend to overestimate the 
complexity of the mental processes of animals ; and 
there can be no doubt that savages generally are 
subject to this error in a very much greater degree, 
that, in fact, they make, without questioning and in 
most cases without explicit statement even to them- 

1 Introduction to Comparative Psychology, and elsewhere. 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 101 

selves, the practical assumption that the mental 
processes of animals — their passions, desires, 
motives, and powers of reasoning — are of the same 
order as, and in fact extremely similar to, their own. 
That the Kenyahs entertain this belief in a very 
practical manner is shown by their conduct when 
preparing for a hunting or fishing excursion. If, 
for example, they are preparing to poison the fish 
of a section of the river with the " tuba " root, they 
always speak of the matter as little as possible, and 
use the most indirect and fanciful modes of ex- 
pression. Thus they will say, " There are many 
leaves floating here," meaning, " There are plenty of 
fish in this part of the river." And these elaborate 
precautions are taken lest the birds should overhear 
their remarks and inform the fish of their inten- 
tions— when, of course, the fish would not stay to be 
caught, but would swim away to some other part of 
the river. 

Since this belief seems to be common to all or 
almost all savages and primitive peoples, it would 
be a strange thing if prohibitions against killing 
and eating certain animals and various superstitious 
practices in regard to animals were not practically 
universal among them. Bearing in mind the 
reality of this belief in the minds of these peoples, 
it is easy to understand why they should shrink 
from killing any creature so malignant - looking 
and powerful for harm as a snake, and why they 
should feel uneasy in the presence of, and to 
some extent dread, the maias and the long- 
nosed monkey, creatures whose resemblance to 
man seems even to us somewhat uncanny. Their 
objection to killing their troublesome and super- 
fluous dogs seems to be due to a somewhat simi- 
lar feeling — a recognition of intelligence and 
emotions not unlike their own, but mysteriously 
hidden from them by the dumbness of the animals. 

102 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

In the same way it is clear that it is but a very- 
simple and logical inference that the crocodiles 
are a friendly race, and but the clearest dictate 
of prudence to avoid offending creatures so power- 
ful and agile ; for if the crocodiles were possessed 
of the mental powers attributed to them by the 
imagination of the people, they might easily make 
it impossible for men to travel upon the rivers 
or dwell on their banks. A similar process 
would lead to the prohibition against the eating 
of the tiger-cat, the only large and dangerous 
carnivore. 

The origin of the prohibitions against killing 
and eating deer and horned cattle is perhaps not 
so clear. But it must be remembered that until 
very recently the only horned cattle known to the 
tribes of the interior were the wild cattle (the 
Seladang of the Malay peninsula), very fierce and 
powerful creatures. These wild cattle hide them- 
selves in the remotest recesses of the forests, and, 
as they are but very rarely seen, they may well 
be regarded as somewhat mysterious and awful. 
Deer, on the other hand, abound in the forests, and, 
like most deer, are very timid ; and it is perhaps 
their timidity that has led in some cases to the 
prohibition against their flesh, for we have seen 
how a Kenyah chief feared lest his little son, safe at 
home, should be infected with the deer's timidity if 
he himself a hundred miles away should come in 
contact with the skin of one. In another case we 
have seen that by the people of one community deer 
are regarded as relatives, or as containing the souls 
of their ancestors, and that this belief probably had 
its origin in the fact that deer are in the habit of 
frequenting the grassy clearings made about the 
tombs by the people. And we saw that a similar 
belief in respect of certain carnivores probably had 
a similar origin. 

- ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 103 

We think that even the elaborate cult of the 
hawk and of the other omen-birds is to be explained 
on these lines. If we think of the hawk's erratic 
behaviour, how he will come suddenly rushing down 
out of the remotest blue of the sky to hover over- 
head, and then perhaps to circle hither and thither 
in an apparently aimless manner, or will keep flying 
on before a boat on the river, or come swiftly to 
meet it, screaming as he comes, — if we think of this, 
it is easy to understand how a people whose whole 
world consists of dense forests and dangerous rivers, 
a people extremely ignorant of natural causation, 
yet intelligent and speculative, and always looking 
out for signs that shall guide them among the 
mystery and dangers that surround them, may have 
come to see in the hawk a messenger sent to them 
by the beneficent Supreme Being. For this Being 
is vaguely conceived by them as dwelling in the 
skies whence the hawk comes, and whither he so 
often returns. And then we may suppose that the 
messenger himself has come to be an object of 
worship in various degrees with the different tribes, 
as seems to be the rule in all religious systems in 
which servants of a deity mediate between him and 
man. 

The origin of the various rites in which the fowl 
and pig are sacrificed, and their blood smeared or 
sprinkled on men or on the altar-posts of gods, or 
on the image of the hawk, and their souls charged 
with messages to the Supreme Being — the origin of 
this group of customs must be sought in a different 
direction. To any one acquainted with Robertson 
Smith's Religion of the Semites, and with Mr. Jevon's 
Introdttction to the History of Religion, the idea 
naturally suggests itself that these animals are or 
were true totems, of which the cult has passed into 
a late stage of decay. It might be supposed that, 
being originally totem animals, they thereby became 

VOL. II H 

io4 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

domesticated by their worshippers ; that they were 
occasionally slain as a rite for the renewal of the 
bond between them and their worshippers, their 
blood being smeared or sprinkled on the latter, and 
their flesh ceremonially eaten by them ; and that 
the eating of them has become more and more 
frequent, until now every religious rite, of however 
small importance, is made the occasion for the killing 
and eating of them. It might also be supposed 
that, with the development or the adoption of the 
conception of a Supreme Being, the original purpose 
and character of the rites had become obscure, so 
that the slaughtered animals are now regarded in 
some cases as sacrifices offered to the deity. 

But we do not think that this tempting hypothesis 
as to the origin of the rites can be upheld in this 
case. In the first place, the wild pig of the jungle 
is hunted in sport and killed and eaten freely by all 
the various tribes, and is, in fact, treated on the 
whole with less respect and ceremony than perhaps 
any other animal. Secondly, the domestic pig differs 
so much from the wild pig that Mr. Oldfield Thomas 
has pronounced it to be of a different species, and 
it seems possible that it has been introduced to 
Borneo by the Chinese at a comparatively recent 
date. Further, there is reason to suppose that the 
custom of sacrificing pigs and fowls arose through 
the substitution of them for human beings in certain 
rites. For there is a number of rites of which it is 
admitted by the people that the slaughter of human 
beings was formerly a central feature ; of these, the 
most important and the most widely spread are the 
funeral rites of a great chief, the rites at the building 
of a new house, and those on returning from a 
successful war expedition. In all these fowls or 
pigs are now substituted as a rule, but we know of 
instances in which in recent years human beings 
were the victims. Thus some years ago, on the 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 105 

death of the chief of a community of Klemantans 
(the Orang Bukit), a slave was bought by his son, 
and a feast was made, and the slave was killed 
through each man of the community giving him a 
slight wound. This was said to be the revival of 
an old and almost obsolete custom. In another 
recent case, when a mixed party of Kayans and 
Kenyahs returned from a successful war expedition, 
only the Kenyahs had secured heads. The Kayans 
therefore took an old woman, one of the captives, 
and killed her by driving a long pole against her 
abdomen, as many of them as possible taking part 
by holding and helping to thrust the pole. The 
head was then divided among the parties of Kayans, 
and pieces of the flesh were hung on poles beside 
the river, just as is done with the flesh of slain 
enemies and with the flesh of the pigs that are 
always slaughtered on such occasions. It was said 
that this killing of a human being was equivalent to 
killing a pig, only much finer. 

Kayans tell us that they used to kill slaves at 
the death of a chief, usually three, but at least one, 
and that they nailed them to the tomb, in order 
that they might accompany the chief on his long 
journey to the other world and paddle the canoe in 
which he must travel. This is no longer done, but 
a wooden figure of a man is put up at the head and 
another of a woman at the foot of the coffin of a 
chief as it lies in state before the funeral. And a 
small wooden figure of a man is usually fixed on the 
top of the tomb, and it is said that this is to row the 
canoe for the chief. A live fowl is usually tied to 
this figure, and although it is said to be put there 
merely to eat the maggots, we think there can be 
no doubt that we see here going on the process of 
substitution of fowl for slave. 

In building a new house it is customary among 
almost all these tribes to put a fowl into the hole 

106 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

dug to receive the first of the piles that are to 
support the house, and to allow the end of the pile 
to fall upon the fowl so as to kill it. The Kenyahs 
admit that formerly a girl was usually killed in this 
way, and there is reason to believe that in all cases 
a human victim was formerly the rule, and that the 
fowl is a substitute merely.1 

In the following cases, too, we see the idea of 
substitution of fowls or pigs for men. 

It is customary with the Malanaus of Niah to 
kill buffalo, and also to kill fowls, and put them 
together with eggs on poles in the caves in which 
the swifts build the edible nests, in order to secure 
a good crop of nests. One year, when the nests 
were scanty they bought a slave in Brunei, and killed 
him in the cave, in the hope of increasing the 
number of nests. 

It was formerly the custom to exact a fine of one 
or more slaves as punishment for certain offences, 
e.g. the accidental setting fire to a house. At the 
present time, when slaves are scarcer than of yore, 
they are rarely given in such cases, but usually brass 
gongs ; and the gongs are always accompanied by 
a pig. 

Now, when slaves were killed and nailed to the 
tomb of a chief, the purpose was perfectly clear and 
simple. It was done in just the same spirit in 
which the weapons and shield and clothing are still 
always hung on the tomb of a deceased warrior, in 
order, namely, that his shade may not be without 
them on the journey to the other world. On the 
introduction of the domestic pig it may well have 
become customary for the poorer classes, who could 
not afford to kill a slave, or for families which owned 
no slaves, to kill a pig as in some degree a compen- 
sation for the want of human victims. If such a 

1 Now that the sacrifice of human victims is forbidden, Kenyahs and 
Klemantans sometimes carve a human figure upon the first of the main piles 
of a new house to be put into the ground. 

Plate 161. GROUP OF KENYAHS. 
On the top of the pole can be seen an image of the hawk, Bali Flaki. 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 107 

custom were once introduced, it may well have 
spread rapidly from motives of both economy and 
humanity ; for a slave is as a rule very kindly treated 
by his master, and in many cases comes to be 
regarded as a member of the family. 

We may suppose, too, that it was formerly the 
custom to kill a slave when prayers of public 
importance were made to the Supreme Being, in 
order that the soul of the slave might carry the 
prayer to him. If this was the case, the substitution 
of pig for slave, on the introduction of the domestic 
pig, may be the more readily conceived to have 
become customary, when we remember that these 
people regard the souls of animals as essentially 
similar to their own.1 If such a custom of substitu- 
tion once gained a footing, it would naturally become 
usual to take the opportunity of communicating with 
the higher powers whenever a pig was to be 
slaughtered. 

This view, that in all sacrifices of the pig and 
fowl these are but substitutes for human victims, 
finds very strong support in the following facts : — 
The Kalabits, a tribe inhabiting the north-western 
corner of the Baram district, breed the water-buffalo 
and use it in cultivating their land. It has probably 
been introduced to this area from North Borneo at 
a recent date. The religious rites of this people 
closely resemble those of the tribes with which we 
have been dealing above ; but in all cases in which 
pigs are sacrificed by the latter, buffaloes are used 
by the Kalabits. 

The rite of sprinkling the blood of pigs and 
fowls on men and on the altar -posts and images 
may, we think, be an extension or adaptation of the 
blood-brotherhood ceremony. We have seen that 
with the Kayans and Kenyahs the essential feature 
of this ceremony is the drawing of a little blood 

1 See vol. ii., p. 4. 

108 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

from the arm of the two men, each of whom then 
drinks or consumes in a cigarette the blood of the 
other one. Such a rite calls for no remote explana- 
tion ; it seems to have suggested itself naturally to 
the minds of primitive people all the world over as 
a process for the cementing of friendship. When 
two hostile communities wished to make a permanent 
peace with one another, it would be natural that 
they should wish to perform a ceremony similar to 
the rite of blood-brotherhood. But the interchange 
of drops of blood between large numbers of persons 
would obviously be inconvenient ; and if the idea 
of substituting fowls and pigs for human victims 
had once taken root in their minds, it would have 
been but a small step to substitute their blood for 
human blood in the peacemaking ceremonies. We 
have seen above that in such a ceremony fowls are 
exchanged by the two parties, so that the men of 
either party are smeared with the blood of the fowl 
originally belonging to the other party. It may be 
that here, too, the blood of slaves was formerly 
used, but of this we have no evidence. The custom 
of smearing the blood of fowls and pigs on the two 
parties to a friendly compact having been arrived 
at in this way, the rite might readily be extended 
to the cases in which the hawk, represented by his 
wooden image, or the Supreme Being, also repre- 
sented by an image, is invoked as one of the parties 
to the compact. We are inclined to think that in 
some such way as we have here suggested, namely, 
by the substitution of pigs and fowls for human 
victims, and of their blood for human blood, the 
origin of the customs of sacrificing fowls and pigs, 
and of ceremonially sprinkling their blood, may be 
explained. 

We conclude, then, that the various superstitions 
entertained by these tribes in regard to animals are 
not to be looked upon as survivals of totemism, 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 109 

but that they may all be explained in a simpler and 
more satisfactory manner. 

Suggested Theory of the Origin of Totemism 

Before bringing this chapter to an end, we would 
point out that among the facts we have described 
there are some which seem to suggest a possible 
and, indeed, as it seems to us, a very natural and 
probable mode of origin of totem - worship. We 
refer to the varieties of the Ngarong of the I bans 
and sporadic analogous cases among the other 
tribes. We have seen that the Ngarong may 
assume the form of some curious natural object, or 
of some one animal distinguished from its fellows 
by some slight peculiarity, which receives the atten- 
tions of some one man only. In such cases the 
Ngarong is hardly distinguishable from a fetish. 
In other cases the man, being unable to distinguish 
the particular animal which he believes to be 
animated by his Ngarong, extends his regard and 
gratitude to the whole species. In such a case it 
seems difficult to deny the name " individual totem " 
to the species, if the term is to be used at all. In 
other cases, again, all the members of a man's family 
and all his descendants, and, if he be a chief, all the 
members of the community over which he rules, 
may come to share in the benefits conferred by his 
Ngarong, and in the feeling of respect for it and in 
the performance of rites in honour of the species of 
animal in one individual of which it is supposed to 
reside. In such cases the species approaches very 
closely the clan -totem in some of its varieties. 
(In speaking of the "Kobong" of certain natives 
of Western Australia, Sir G. Grey1 says, "This 
arises from the family belief that some one indi- 
vidual of the species is their nearest friend, to kill 

1 Quoted in Mr. Frazer's Totemism , ist ed., 1887, p. 8. 

no PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

whom would be a great crime, and to be carefully 
avoided.") 

Of similar cases among other tribes of guardian- 
animals appearing to men in dreams and claiming 
their respect and gratitude, we must mention the 
case of Aban Jau, a powerful chief of the Sebops, a 
Klemantan subtribe. He had hunted and eaten 
the wild pig freely like all his fellow-tribesmen, until 
once in a dream a wild boar appeared to him, and 
told him that he had always helped him in his 
fighting. Thereafter Aban Jau refused, until the 
day of his death, to kill or eat either the wild or 
the domestic pig, although he would still consult 
for omens the livers of pigs killed by others.1 

We have described above (vol. ii., p. 76) how a 
Kayan may become blood-brother to a crocodile in a 
dream, and may thereafter be called Baya (crocodile), 
and how in this way one Kayan chief had come to re- 
gard himself as both son and nephew to crocodiles, 
and how he believed that they brought him success 
in hunting and carried him ashore when (in a dream) 
he had fallen into the river. The cousin of this 
chief, too, regarded himself as specially befriended 
by crocodiles because his great-grandfather had 
become blood-brother to one in a dream. So it is 
clear that the members of the family to which these 
young men belong are likely to continue to regard 
themselves as related by blood to the crocodiles, and 
bound to them by special ties of gratitude. 

In another case we saw how all the people of 
one household regard themselves as related to the 
crocodiles and specially favoured by them, explaining 

1 Aban Jau possessed a large curiously shaped pig's tusk which he wore on 
his person in the belief that any firearm fired at it would not go off. It is 
probable that his belief in this charm was connected with his belief in the 
dream - pig. The belief was very genuine, until in a moment of excessive 
confidence he hanged the tusk upon a tree and invited one of us to fire at it. 
The tusk was shattered. Aban Jau said nothing ; but presumably a process 
of disintegration began in his mind ; for after some hours he remarked that 
his charm had lost its power. 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS in 

the relation as due to one of their ancestors having 
become a crocodile. In another case we saw that 
some ill-defined relation to the gibbon is claimed 
by a community of Kenyahs whose house is 
decorated with carvings of the form of the gibbon, 
and whose members will not kill the gibbon. And 
in yet another case we saw that a Kayan house is 
decorated with conventionalised carvings of some 
animal whose species has been forgotten by the 
community. In each of these last three cases, it 
seems highly probable that the special relation to 
the animal was established by some such process 
as we see going on in the preceding case ; so that 
we seem to have in this series one case of incipient 
totemism and others illustrating various stages of 
decay of abortive beginnings of totemism. And it 
is easy to imagine how in the absence of unfavour- 
able conditions such beginnings might grow to a 
fully developed totem-system. For suppose that 
in any one community there happened to be at 
one time two or more prosperous families, each 
claiming to be related with and protected by some 
species of animal as the result of friendly overtures 
made by the animals to members of the families in 
their dreams. It would then be highly probable 
that members of other families, envious of the good 
fortune of these, would have similar dream ex- 
periences, and so come to claim a similar protection ; 
until very soon the members of any family that 
could claim no such protection would come to be 
regarded as unfortunate and even somewhat disre- 
putable beings, while the faith of one family in its 
guardian-animal would react upon and strengthen 
the faith of others in theirs. So a system of clan- 
totems would be established, around which would 
grow up various myths of origin, various magical 
practices, and various religious rites. 

It is well known that such dreams as convince 

ii2 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

the Iban, the Kayan, and the Kenyan of the reality 
of his special relation to some animal, and lead him 
to respect all animals of some one species, produce 
similar results in other parts of the world. We quote 
the following passages from Mr. Frazer's remarks on 
individual totems in his book on totemism : — " An 
Australian seems usually to get his individual totem 
by dreaming that he has been transformed into an 
animal of that species." " In America the individual 
totem is usually the first animal of which a youth 
dreams during the long and generally solitary fast 
which American Indians observe at puberty." Such 
dream experiences are then the vera causa of the 
inception of faith in individual totems among the 
peoples in which totemism is most highly developed ; 
and among the tribes of Sarawak we find cases 
which illustrate how a similar faith, strengthened 
by further dreams and by the good fortune of its 
possessor, may spread to all the members of his 
family or of his household and to his descendants, 
until in some cases the guardian animal becomes 
almost, though not quite, a clan-totem. The further 
development of such incipient totems among these 
tribes is probably prevented at the present time, 
not only by their agricultural habits, but also by 
their passionate addiction to war and fighting and 
head-hunting; for these pursuits necessitate the 
strict subordination of each community to its chief, 
and compel all families to unite in the cult of the 
hawk to the detriment of all other animal-cults, 
because the hawk is, by its habits, so much better 
suited than any other animal to be a guide to them 
on warlike expeditions.1 

1 Dr. Boas is of the opinion that the totems of the Indians of British Columbia 
have been developed from the personal maniton, the guardian animals acquired 
by youths in dreams. Miss A. C. Fletcher is led to a similar conclusion by 
a study of the totems of the Omaha tribe of Indians {Import of the Tote??i, Salem, 
Mass., 1897). The facts described above in connection with the Ngarong of 
the Ibans and similar allied institutions among other tribes of Sarawak would 
seem, then, to support the views of these authors as to the origin of totemism. 

ANIMISTIC BELIEFS 113 

The prevalence of the belief in a Supreme Being 
must also tend to prevent the development of 
totemism. 

Plants 

In Chapter VI. we have described most of the 
superstitious beliefs and practices connected with 
the padi plant and the rice. 

It is not clear that any other plants are regarded 

as be-souled ; but we mention here certain customs 

in connection with some of them that seem to point 

in that direction. The silat, a common jungle palm, 

figures most prominently in rites and beliefs of the 

Kayans. The leaves of this palm are used to 

decorate the heads taken in war ; and on the 

occasion of any ceremonial use of the heads, fresh 

leaves are always hung upon or about them. No 

other leaves will serve this purpose, though it is 

difficult to say in what the special virtue of this 

plant consists. The leaves of the same plant are 

hung about the doorway of a new house when the 

people first take up their abode in it ; but it is hung 

in such a way that passers-by do not brush against 

it, and children especially are kept away from it. It 

is commonly hung about the altar-posts of the gods ; 

and it is a strip of this leaf that is tied about the 

wrist of a sick man to confine his soul to his body 

at the close of the soul-catching ceremony. It is 

tied also about the wrists of men returning from 

any warlike expedition. When applied for any 

ceremonial purpose it is called isang ; and it is 

not until it has been so used that it becomes an 

" unclean " object. It is used in its merely material 

aspect for roofing leaf shelters in the jungle, and is 

put to other similar uses to which the broad tough 

leaves are well adapted. Most or all of the peoples 

use the leaves of this plant in the same ways as the 

Kayans. 

ii4 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap, xv 

Long, a species of Caladium, is commonly hung, 
both root and leaves, upon the door of a room 
to mark that it is lali (tabu) owing to sickness, 
harvesting, or any other circumstance. 

Orobong, a weed (not unlike the foxglove in 
appearance) which always grows freely among the 
young padiy is gathered by the female friends of any 
woman passing through the ordeal of childbirth. 
They boil the leaves and wash her body with the 
decoction on several days following the delivery. 
It is held that, if this is not done, the woman's 
abdomen will not regain its normal state. This 
usage also is common to the Kayans with many 
other tribes. 

The leaves of the Dracczna are sometimes tied 
beneath the prow of a boat during journeys to 
distant parts (as mentioned on p. 70, vol. ii.) ; they 
are also hung upon the tombs and, with the isang, 
upon altar posts, when the rites are performed. 

The Ibans and some of the Klemantans will not 
make the first stroke in cutting down the tapang 
tree {Arbouria), alleging that, if they do so, great 
troubles will befall them. 

Supplementary Note on the Ngarong 

Since correcting the proofs of this chapter we have come upon a 
brief account of the guardian spirits of the I ban, which corroborates 
our account of the Ngarong. It is contained in a series of papers 
entitled Religious Rites and Customs of the Ibans or Dyaks of 
Sarawak, Borneo, written by Leo Nyuak (an I ban educated in a 
mission school), and translated by the Very Rev. Edm. Dunn 
(Anthropos, vol. i. p. 182, 1905). In this account the guardian 
spirit is called Tua, and we are told that "The Tua or guardian 
spirit of an I ban has its external manifestation in a snake, a leopard, 
or some other denizen of the forest. It is supposed to be the spirit 
of some ancestor renowned for bravery, or some other virtue, who 
at death has taken an animal form ... it is revealed in a dream 
what animal form the honoured dead has taken." 

CHAPTER XVI 

MAGIC, SPELLS, AND CHARMS 

Magic is in a comparatively neglected and back- 
ward condition among the Kayans and Kenyahs, 
Punans, Ibans, and the more warlike up-country 
Klemantans. On the other hand, some of the coast- 
wise tribes of Klemantans, especially the Malanaus 
and Kadayans, cultivate magic with some assiduity. 

The Kayans dislike and discourage all magical 
practices, with the exception of those which are 
publicly practised for beneficent purposes and have 
the sanction of custom. 

In the old days they used to kill those suspected 
of working any evil by magic. There are no 
recognised magicians among them other than the 
dayongs, and these, as we have seen, perform the 
functions of the priest and the physician rather than 
those of the wizard or sorcerer. 

Some of the dayongs make use at certain 
ceremonies of a rough mask carved out of wood, 
or made from the shell of a gourd. The mask is 
merely an oval shell with slits for eyes and mouth, 
generally blackened with age and use. It may be 
worn during the soul -catching ceremony, but not 
during attendance on the recently deceased. This 
use of a mask is not known to us among any other 
of the peoples (PL 151). 

The medicine man of the Ibans is known as 
manang; the manangs are more numerous than 

115 

n6 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

the dayongs of the Kayans ; they are more strictly 
professional in the sense that they do but little other 
work, depending chiefly on what they can earn by 
their treatment of disease and by other ways of 
practising upon the superstitions of their fellows. 
They generally work in groups of three or four, or 
more in cases of serious illness, and, with the 
imitativeness and disregard for tradition character- 
istic of the Iban, they have developed a great variety 
of procedures,1 into most of which the element of 
deliberate fraud enters to a much greater extent than 
into the practice of the Kayan dayongs. The Sea 
Dayak manang is usually covered with skin disease 
(tinea) and shirks all hard work with the other 
members of the village. 

A peculiar and infrequent variety of Sea Dayak 
manang are the manang bait. They are men who 
adopt and continuously wear woman's dress and 
behave in all ways like women, except that they 
avoid as far as possible taking any part in the 
domestic labour. They claim to have been told in 
dreams to adopt this mode of life ; they are em- 
ployed for the same purpose as the more ordinary 
manangsy and they practise similar methods. 

Among the I bans certain persons get a bad 
reputation for working harm by magic. They are 
said to be cunning in sorcery {tau tepang), and these 
persons may properly be said to be sorcerers or 
witches. They are believed to work harm in many 
ill-defined ways, especially to health ; but their pro- 
cedures are not generally known ; they probably 
include poisoning, but, like the practices of our 
European witches in recent times, they probably 
have but little existence outside the timorous 
imaginations of the people. Such persons are dis- 
liked and shunned, though not killed as they would 

1 Sixteen different methods, most of which combine the notion of soul-catch- 
ing with that of exorcism, are enumerated and described by Mr. E. H. Gomes 
in his recent work, Seventeen Years amongst the Dayaks of Borneo. 

xvi MAGIC, SPELLS, AND CHARMS 117 

be among Kayans or Kenyahs. They are not 
professional sorcerers, i.e. their help is not called in 
by other persons who wish to work evil on their 
enemies, for others do not dare to do this. At the 
present time in Sarawak, if a man accuses another 
of practising tepang, he is liable to be sued for libel 
and fined.1 

Black Magic 

The most important of the magical practices is 
one known and occasionally resorted to among all 
the peoples for the purpose of bringing about the 
death of a personal enemy. We describe the pro- 
cedure as carried out by the Sebops (Klemantans), 
but in all essentials the account holds good for all 
or nearly all the peoples. It is not usual to invoke 
the aid of any recognised magician. The man 
whose heart is filled with hatred against another 
will retire secretly to a spot at the edge of a padi 
field, or of some other clearing, where he can see 
a large expanse of sky and yet feel sure of being 
unobserved. Here he sets up the batang pra, a 
pole supported horizontally some six or eight feet 
above the ground, its ends resting on two vertical 
poles. A little figure of a man or woman (according 
to the sex of the person aimed at), which has been 
carved for the purpose out of soft wood, is fixed 
upright in the ground beneath the batang pra. 
This is called tegulun kalingai usa, which, literally 
translated, is " the reflected image of the body.,, 
The operator makes a fire beside the tegulun, digs 
a small hole in the ground, and fills it with water 
coloured with ferruginous earth. This pool is 

1 In a recent note in the Journal of the Sarawak Museum, Jan. 191 1, Mr. 
W. Howell states that the power of tau tepang is supposed to be transmitted 
in certain families from generation to generation ; that the head of a tau tepang 
man leaves his body at night and goes about doing harm, especially to the 
crops ; that the power is passed on to a child of a tau tepang family by the 
mother, who touches the cut edge of the child's tongue with her spittle. 

n8 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

called Bawang Daar} the lake of blood. Sitting 
before the tegulun he scans the space of sky framed 
by the batang pra> searching for some hawk upon 
the wing. As soon as he sees a hawk within this 
area, he addresses it, waving in one hand a small 
frayed stick, and saying, " Put fat in the mouth of 
So-and-So," and he puts a bit of pork fat into the 
mouth of the tegulun. Then saying, "Send him to 
Bawang Daar" he immerses the tegulun in his pool 
of reddened water ; and taking it out again he 
thrusts into it a little wooden spear. After this he 
buries the tegulun in a hole in the ground, covering 
it with earth. (Only people who die by violence or 
of some much-feared disease are normally buried in 
this fashion.) This done he keeps shouting to the 
hawk to go to the left, at the same time waving his 
stick in that direction. If the hawk passes out of 
the area of operations towards the right, he knows 
that his attempt will not succeed, and he desists for 
the time being ; if it flies out to the left he knows 
that his arts will prevail, and he addresses the 
hawk as follows : — 

" Bali Flaki tuai musit, ou matei iya kalunan ito 
Tama Odoh (the name of the victim), tuju kau, Bali 
Flaki, mieu tuor bawang daar au muloh usuk, Bali 
Flaki, mieu niak boin na alam ujun, pala uja matei 
sagam ; matei daar kayu sagam ; matei suat ; matei 
aioh sagam; matei many at alam sungei ; matei 
padam ; matei nakap bay a ; matei sakit ulun ; matei 
sakit usok." (Translation runs — " O Bali Flaki, go 
your way, let this man Tama Odoh die ; go and 
put him in the lake of blood, O Bali Flaki ; stab 
him in the chest, Bali Flaki, put fat of pig in his 
mouth that he may die to-morrow (this is equivalent 
to — let his head be taken ; for fat is always put in 
the mouth of the head taken in battle) ; let him be 
killed by a falling tree, to-morrow ; let him die from 

1 Cf. Bawang Daka, the lake of blood of the Kayan Hades, vol. ii., p. 40. 

xvi MAGIC, SPELLS, AND CHARMS 119 

a wound ; let him die by the hand of his enemy, to- 
morrow ; let him be drowned, to-morrow ; let him 
die of a deadly disease ; let him be caught by a 
crocodile ; let him die of pain in the head ; let him 
die of pain in the chest.") It will be observed that 
the formula calls upon the hawks to give effect to 
the malevolent wishes, so that the operation is not 
one of direct magical or sympathetic action, but 
rather is one by which the aid of a higher power is 
invoked. This feature of the process renders it 
one which the strongest minded cannot pooh-pooh. 

With this comprehensive curse the rite is con- 
cluded and the vengeful man returns home and 
secretly observes his enemy. The latter may be- 
come aware that magic is being worked against him 
through dreaming that fat is put into his mouth ; 
and as he is probably more or less aware of the 
hatred of his enemy, it is not unlikely that such a 
dream will come to him.1 There can be no doubt 
that, if in this or any other way a man learns that 
he has been made the object of a magical attempt 
of this sort, he, in many cases, suffers in health ; and 
it is probable that in some cases such knowledge 
has proved fatal. If it is discovered that any man 
has attempted to injure another in this way, he falls 
into general reprobation, and, if the case can be 
proved against him, heavy damages in the form of 
pigs, gongs, etc., may be awarded by the house- 
chief. 

1 The people are naturally reticent about this rite. The facts were brought 
to our knowledge by a case which is instructive in several ways. A Sebop had 
murdered a Chinese trader and taken his head. He was ordered to surrender 
himself for trial at the fort within the space of one month, and informed that 
he would be taken alive or dead if he failed to present himself. He refused 
and took to the jungle. Upon which one of the up-country chiefs (Tama Bulan) 
was commissioned to arrest him. The murderer was found in the jungle and 
called on to surrender, but refused, and died fighting. At this his brother was 
enraged against the chief and made the tegtdun against him ; and being at a 
distance from his victim, the man was at no pains to keep the matter secret, 
and it came to the ears of the chief. He, although the most enlightened native 
in the country, felt uneasy under this terrific malediction and complained 
to the Resident, who insisted on a public taking back or taking off of the 
curse. 

VOL. II I 

120 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

A curse is sometimes imposed without formality, 
and in the heat of the moment, in the face of their 
enemy. Under these circumstances the curse is 
usually muttered indistinctly, and seems then to 
work upon the victim all the more powerfully. The 
words used are similar to those of the curse written 
out above. 

A characteristic bit of I ban magic is the follow- 
ing : — A man, angered by finding that some one has 
deposited dirt in or about his property or premises, 
takes a few burning sticks and, thrusting them into 
the dirt, says, " Now let them suffer the pains of 
dysentery." 

Therapeutic Magical Procedures 

It was said in Chapter XIV. that the Kayans treat 
disease by three distinct methods, namely, by soul- 
catching, by drugs and regimen, and by extraction 
of the supposed cause of the trouble. This last 
operation seems to fall under the head of magic and 
may be described here. It is usually performed by 
the Dayongsy and is applied more particularly in 
cases in which localised pain is a prominent feature 
of the disorder. The Dayong comes provided with 
a short tube, prepared by pushing out the core of 
a section of the stem of a certain plant of the ginger 
family. After inquiring of the patient the locality 
of his pains, he holds up the polished blade of a 
sword, and, gazing at it as one seeing visions, he 
sings a long incantation beginning : — 

Bali Dayong usun lasan 

Urip ulun kam kelunan 

Nini ketai natong tawang Leman 

Bali Dayong? 

1 A free translation runs : — 

" O holy Dayong, thou who lovest mankind, 
Bring back thy servant from Leman, 
The region between the lands of life and death, 
O holy Dayong." 

Plate 162. AN ENEMY'S HEAD DECORATED BY KAYANS WITH 
VARIOUS CHARMS. 

xvi MAGIC, SPELLS, AND CHARMS 121 

The crowd of people, men and women, sitting 
round the central figure, join in the Bali Dayong, 
which recurs as the refrain at the end of each verse, 
intoning in loud deep voices. It seems clear from 
the use of the words Bali Dayong that the whole is 
addressed to some superior power ; for no human 
Dayong, and indeed no human being, is addressed 
or spoken of with the title Bali. And it would 
perhaps be more correct, therefore, to describe 
the address as a supplication rather than an in- 
cantation, and the whole operation as a re- 
ligious rite rather than a magical procedure. 
But we are here on the disputed borderland 
between magic and religion, and other features 
incline us to regard the process as magical rather 
than religious. 

During the singing of a number of verses in this 
way, the Dayong seems to become more and more 
distraught and unconscious of his surroundings ; and 
when the singing ceases he behaves in a strange 
manner, which strikes the attendant crowd with awe, 
starting suddenly and making strange clucking noises. 
Then he produces the tube mentioned above, and 
pressing one end upon the skin of the part indicated 
by the patient as the seat of the pain, he sucks 
strongly, and, presently withdrawing it, he blows 
out of it on to his palm a small black pellet, which 
moves mysteriously upon his hand as he exhibits it 
to the patient and his friends as the cause of the pain ; 
and if the patient has complained of more than one 
seat of pain, the operation is repeated. It only 
remains for the Dayong to return gradually with 
some violent gestures and contortions to his normal 
state, and to receive his fee, which properly consists 
of the sword used by him in the ceremony, and a 
live fowl. The whole procedure is very well adapted 
to secure therapeutic effects by suggestion. The 
singing and the atmosphere of awe engendered by 

122 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

the Dayong' s reputation and his uncanny behaviour 
prepare the patient, the suction applied through 
the tube gives him the impression that something 
is being drawn through his skin, and the skilful 
production of the mysterious black pellet completes 
the suggestive process, under the influence of which, 
no doubt, many an ache or pain has suddenly dis- 
appeared. On one occasion, one of us being a little 
indisposed in a Klemantan house, we made an 
opportunity to examine the methods of the Dayong 
a little more closely than is usually possible, by 
inviting one to undertake the extraction of his pains. 
We were then able to realise more vividly the 
suggestive force of the procedure, and to see that 
the black pellets were bits of dark beeswax which 
were carried upon the finger-nails of the Dayong, and 
surreptitiously introduced by him into his mouth as 
they were required for exhibition after being blown 
through the tube ; we could see also that the 
mysterious movements of the pellets upon his palm 
were produced by the help of short fine hairs pro- 
truding from it. It seems impossible to deny the 
presence of a certain element of fraud in this 
procedure, but we think that it would be hasty 
and uncharitable to assert that the Dayong s attitude 
is wholly one of fraud ; we must remember that 
our most orthodox medical practitioners accord a 
legitimate place in their armamentarium to mistura 
rubra (solution of burnt sugar) and to similar aids 
whose operation is purely suggestive. 

Most of the coastwise tribes seek to drive away 
epidemic disease by the following procedure : — One 
or more rough human images are carved from the 
pith of the sago palm and placed on a small raft or 
boat, or full-rigged Malay ship, together with rice 
and other food carefully prepared. The boat is 
decorated with ribbons of the leaves and with the 
blossoms of the areca palm, and allowed to float out 

xvi MAGIC, SPELLS, AND CHARMS 123 

to sea with the ebb-tide in the belief or hope that it 
will carry the sickness with it. 

Among the I bans, if a man has deceived people 
in a serious matter by means of a malicious lie, and 
if the untruth is discovered, one of the deceived 
party takes a stick and throws it down at some spot 
by which people are constantly passing, saying in 
the presence of others, " Let any one who does not 
add to this liar's heap (tugong bula) suffer from pains 
in the head." Then others do likewise, and the 
nature of the growing heap becoming known, every 
passer-by throws a stick upon it lest he should 
suffer pains. In this way the heap grows until it 
attains a large size, in some cases that of a small 
haystack, and, being known by the name of the liar, 
is a cause of great shame to him. 

When any man has his hair cut or shaved, he 
sees that the hair cut off is burnt or otherwise care- 
fully disposed of. This is common to all the 
Borneans. It would seem that this is not prompted 
by fear of any definite harm, nor is there, so far as 
we know, any recognised way of using the hair cut 
off to work injury to its former owner. The custom 
seems rather to be due to the fact that shields and 
swords are decorated with the hair of enemies by 
Kenyahs and others ; therefore it is felt that to use 
a man's hair for this purpose is almost equivalent 
to taking his head ; and it is well to guard against 
this possibility. No doubt also it is vaguely felt 
that if the hair of one's head should come into the 
possession of any other person, that person would 
acquire some indefinable power over one. 

Magical practices for the injury of enemies and 
rivals are more various and frequent among the 
coastwise Klemantans, especially the Bisayas, 
Kadayans, and Malanaus. It is probable that they 
have learnt much of this from the Malays. One 
variety is to hang up at the edge of a padi field a 

i24 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

yam or other root covered with projecting spikes of 
bamboo cane. This is done openly to spoil the crop. 
Another trick is to tie under a bench in the boat 
of one's enemy a pebble, generally of quartz. This 
is supposed to make the boat so heavy that it can 
only travel very slowly. 

Charms 

These practices involve the application of charms. 
Charms are extensively used by all the peoples, 

least so by Kayans. In 
every house is at least one 
bundle of charms, known 
as siap aioh by the Ken- 
yans, by whom more im- 
portance is attached to it 
than by any of the other 
tribes. This bundle, which 
is the property of the 
whole household or village, 
generally contains hair 
taken from the heads that 
hang in the gallery ; a 
crocodile's tooth ; the 
blades of a few knives 
that have been used in 
special ceremonies ; a few crystals or pebbles of 
strange shapes ; pig's teeth of unusual shape (of 
both wild and domestic pig) ; feathers of a fowl 
(these seem to be substitutes for Bali Flaki's 
feathers, which they would hardly dare to touch) ; 
stone axe-heads called the teeth of Balingo ; * and 
isangy i.e. palm leaves that have been put to cere- 
monial use (Fig. 80). 

The whole bundle, blackened with the smoke 
and dust of years, hangs in the gallery over the 

1 See vol. ii., p. II. 

Fig. 80. — Kenyah Siap. 

XVI 

MAGIC, SPELLS, AND CHARMS 125 

principal hearth beside the heads, usually in a wide- 
meshed basket. It constitutes the most precious 
possession of the household, being of even greater 
value than the heads. No one willingly touches or 
handles the stop, not even the chief. And when it 
becomes necessary to touch the bundle, as in trans- 
ferring it to a new house, some old man is specially 
told off for the duty ; he who touches it brings 
upon himself the risk of death, for it is very parit 
to touch it, i.e. strongly against custom and there- 
fore dangerous.1 Its function seems 
to be to bring luck or prosperity of 
all kinds to the house ; without it 
nothing would prosper, especially in 
warfare. 

Many individuals keep a small 
private bunch of stop, made up of 
various small objects, of unusual 
forms, generally without any human 
hair (Fig. 81). These are generally 
obtained through dreams. A man 
dreams that something of value is to 
be given him, and then, if on waking 
his eye falls upon a crystal of quartz, fig. 81. — Kenyah 
or any other slightly peculiar object, ^ crTodne'stooth1 
he takes it and hangs it above his 
sleeping-place ; when going to bed he addresses it, 
saying that he wants a dream favourable to any busi- 
ness he may have in hand. If such a dream comes 
to him, the thing becomes stop ; but if his dreams are 
inauspicious, the object is rejected. Since no one 
can come in contact with another man's stop without 
risk of injury, the inconvenience occasioned by 
multiplication of stop bundles puts a limit to their 
number. Nevertheless a man who possesses private 
stop will carry it with him attached to the sheath of 

1 Although breach of custom and of lali by any individual may bring mis- 
fortune on the whole household, the offending individual is regarded as specially 
liable to wasting sickness with diarrhoea and spitting of blood. 

126 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

his sword, and special hooks are provided in most 
houses for the hanging up of such swords (Fig. 82). 
There are many instances of siap of specialised 
function. A man specially devoted to hunting with 
the blowpipe will have a special blow-pipe siap tied 
to his quiver (this is especially common among 
Punans). He will dip this siap in the blood of 
every animal he kills, so that it becomes thickly 
encrusted. This is thought to increase or preserve 
its virtue. 

Another special kind of siap is that which ensures 
a man against hurt from firearms, through causing 
any gun aimed at him to miss 
fire. 

The I bans use personal charms 
which they call pengaroh ; but in 
accordance with their more indi- 
vidualistic disposition, they have 
no important charm common to 
the whole household correspond- 
ing to the household siap of the 
other peoples. The objects com- 
posing the pengaroh are an assort- 
ment even more varied and 
fantastic than the siap of other 
peoples. In many cases they 
are carried with small china pots 
of oil, which are used to rub on the body as a 
universal remedy. 

A curious object to be occasionally seen in some 
Sea Dayak houses is the empugau. It is a blackened 
bundle hung in a basket among the heads above the 
hearth. It is covered with the smoke and soot of 
ages, and though it is generally claimed as the 
property of some one man who has inherited it from 
his forefathers, even he knows nothing of its history 
and composition, and is unwilling to examine it 
closely. It is regarded by the I bans as the head of 

Fig. 82. — Kayan Hook. 

o 
% 

& 

u 

o 
< 

pq 
W 
h 

S3 

c/3 
D 
< 

< 

< 

xvi MAGIC, SPELLS, AND CHARMS 127 

some half-human monster. On careful examination 
of several specimens we have found the empugau to 
consist of a large cocoanut in its husk, tricked out 
with a rude face mask having part of the fibrous 
husk combed out to look like hair. The I bans 
regard it with some awe, and it seems probable 
that it has formerly played some part in magical 
procedures. 

Love Charms 

w 

Love charms are used by most of the peoples, 
though the Kayans and Kenyahs are ex- 
ceptions, since they prefer to rely chiefly 
upon the power of music and personal 
attractions. These charms are in almost 
all cases strongly odorous substances. 
The Iban youth strings together a neck- 
lace of strongly scented seed known as 
buak balong. This he generally carries 
about with him, and, when his inclination 
is directed towards some fair one, he places 
it under her pillow, or endeavours to per- 
suade her to wear it about her neck. If 
she accepts it, he reckons her half won. 

Klemantans, among whom love charms 
go by the generic name sangkil, make use 
of a variety of charms, of which one of 
the most used is a scented oil that they 
contrive to smuggle on to the garments or other 
personal property of the woman. 

Those that have had much contact with Malays 
make use of pieces of paper on which they scrawl 
certain conventional patterns. 

Charms are used by I bans to ensure success in 
trapping. The trapper carries a stick one end of 
which is carved to represent the human form (Fig. 
83). He uses this to measure the appropriate height 
of the traps set for animals of different species. 

Fig. 83. 

Iban Trapper's 
Charm. 

128 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

All the peoples observe a large number of re- 
strictions in regard to contact with objects, especially 
articles of food. Some of these are mentioned in 
other chapters. Here we notice a few typical 
instances. In Chapter XV. we related that each of 
the peoples avoid certain animals ; in some cases 
they avoid not only killing or touching these animals, 
but also even very remote relations with them : as, 
for example, taking food from a vessel in which 
their flesh has been cooked on some previous 
occasion ; coming within the range of the odour of 
the object ; coming into a house in which there is 
any part of such an animal. 

The evil resulting from breach of any such 
prohibitions generally takes the form of wasting 
sickness with pains in the head, chronic cough, 
dysentery, or spitting of blood. When a Kenyah 
has knowingly for any reason, or unintentionally, 
come in contact with any one of the forbidden 
objects, or if he finds himself suffering from any of 
these things, and therefore suspects that he has 
unwittingly come under their influence, he subjects 
himself to a process of purification. At break of 
day he descends, with other members of his family, 
to the brink of the river provided with a chicken, a 
sword-blade, two frayed sticks, and a length of spiky 
vine known as atat. This latter is bent into the 
form of a ring, within which he takes his stand and 
awaits the appearance of I sit (the spider hunter — 
one of the omen-birds). He calls it by name, Bali 
I sit ; and as soon as I sit calls in reply, he pours out 
a long-winded address, charging him to convey to 
Bali Penyalong his prayer for recovery or protection. 
Then he snips off the head of the chicken, and wipes 
some of its blood on the frayed sticks arid on the 
ring. The ring, with the chicken and the frayed 
sticks, are then lifted above his head by his at- 
tendants, and water is poured upon them from a 

xvi MAGIC, SPELLS, AND CHARMS 129 

bamboo, so that it drips from them on to his head. 
Eight times the ring is lifted up, and each time the 
pouring out of the water is repeated. Then, stand- 
ing on the blade of the sword, he again addresses 
the omen-bird as before. This completes the rite, 
which is known as lemazua, 

A similar rite of purification is practised by most 
of the other peoples. In some cases the principal 
feature of the rite of purification is being spat upon 
by the chief. 

It may be broadly said that all these peoples are 
constantly on the alert to provide against unknown 
dangers ; that, having no definite theories of causa- 
tion, they are apt to accept every hint of danger or 
hurtful influence suggested by the attributes and 
relations of things, and to seek to avoid these 
influences or to ward them off or counteract them 
by every means that in any way suggests itself to 
their minds as possibly efficacious. 

Although the Kayans regard a madman as 
possessed by an evil spirit, they seem to have no 
traditional methods of casting out the spirit ; but 
some of the Klemantans practise a rite of exorcism ; 
this varies in detail from tribe to tribe, and attains 
the greatest elaboration among the Malanaus. 
The rite is known as bayoh, and bears a general 
resemblance to the corresponding Malay rite known 
as berkantu. The Malanaus are Klemantans of the 
coast regions of Sarawak, most of whom have 
recently become converted to Islam, while all of 
them have been much influenced by contact with 
Malays. The following account is reproduced from 
a paper published by one of us (C. H.) in the 
Review of the Far East (Feb. 1907), to the editor of 
which we are indebted for permission to make use 
of the paper : — 

The ceremony of casting out evil spirits is of frequent 
occurrence among Malanaus, and the noise of gongs and 

130 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

drums throughout the night, lasting every night for some- 
times a whole week, cannot fail to impress even a casual 
observer. 

The natives of Niah, who are Malanaus, believe in a 
multitude of spirits, good and bad, great and small, im- 
portant and of little account. At the head of these is Ula 
Gemilang, the sea divinity, a power who works for the good 
of man.1 Adum Girang is another spirit of the sea, as also 
is Raja Duan, who has power over the sun, a spirit who is 
distinguished, when he appears in human form, by his 
white head-cloth. Majau is said to be pre-eminently rich. 
Aiar Urai Arang is said to be a small child whose mother 
is Aiar. Besides these there are other powerful spirits of 
the sea, the land, the up-river country, and so forth, and 
each is attended by innumerable slaves and attendants of 
ghostly kind ; they have influence of many kinds over the 
dwellers in this world, some for good, others very much for 
evil. Madness is caused by various evil spirits throwing 
themselves into mortals, ghosts with red eyes which flash 
like lightning. The " amok " devil, which comes from the 
swamp, differs from those which drive people to commit 
suicide — these again being quite distinct from those which 
cause merely harmless lunacy. 

It not infrequently happens that when a woman (or 
more rarely a man) is insane or is very ill, she is urged to 
admit that a devil has possessed her, and to become a 
medicine woman. By this means she becomes well of her 
complaint, and at the same time acquires the power of 
helping others to cast out devils. But she is not able of 
her own accord to determine whether she shall become a 
medicine woman or not. For three nights she is taken 
through the ceremony of bayoh, afterwards to be described, 
without a rattan swing, and then for three nights with the 
swing. If the indications are favourable, some three weeks 
are allowed to elapse before she undergoes the final test of 
five nights with the swing. The first bayoh is to satisfy the 
people, the second to appease the demon ; and if her malady 
is cured by the eleven nights of artificial hysteria, she is 
considered to have been accepted both by men and spirits 
in her new role of exorciser. 

As one woman expressed it, she is now " in with the 

1 We have a wooden image of this being. It is rudely anthropomorphic, 
and is covered with fish-like scales. Its sex is indeterminate. He is supposed 
to ascend the river from the sea, kneeling on the back of a sting-ray. 

xvi MAGIC, SPELLS, AND CHARMS 131 

demons." Even then, however, it does not follow that she 
is able to see when an evil spirit has ceased to possess a 
person. One old female, who had worked at bayoh for 
fifteen years, admitted that if a devil went into herself she 
could turn it out, but only a more powerful woman than 
herself could turn devils out of others. 

Two forms of bayoh are known to the people of Niah, but 
it is only with the bayoh sadong that there is any need to 
deal here. The other form is used by the Punans, or mixed 
Punans and Malanaus. If it is supposed that some illness is 
due to possession by an evil spirit, it is decided to call the 
medicine women and get the unwelcome visitant to depart, 
though it is not considered possible in all cases to turn a 
demon out of his mortal abode. Offerings of eggs and fowls 
to the good spirits having proved fruitless, a day is fixed for 
the bayoh, preferably shortly after a good harvest, and the 
household begins its preparations for the occasion. As 
powerful spirits are to be invited to the house, the room 
where they are to appear is decked with a profusion of 
ornaments suited to such exalted guests. Great tassels of 
white shavings are hung upon the walls, a white cloth adorned 
with the blossoms of the areca palm hides the rafters, and 
these graceful inflorescences are spread out fanwise over 
the doors and among the shavings. In one corner a hollow 
cone of areca blossoms and shavings spread over a frame- 
work of rattan is suspended from a rafter ; and a model of 
a ship or raft is placed just outside an open window. As 
the function takes place at night, candles of beeswax are 
set about to give light. At the appointed time brass dishes 
are put on the floor with rice of many colours — yellow, red, 
and blue — spread in patterns of crocodiles ; popcorns of rice 
and maize, water, and washing utensils, boxes of betel ready 
for chewing, tobacco, and cigarettes, to appease the varied 
appetites of the spirits invoked. Just after sundown the 
neighbours troop in and settle themselves round the room, 
the ill-mannered pushing themselves in front. Certain of 
the villagers agree to form the band. Soon the house is 
full of people, boys and old men contentedly chewing and 
smoking, women retiring to darker parts of the room to 
gossip. A person of importance will be received with 
some show of civility, but without any definite ceremony. 
Arabian incense, kamanyan, which is used nowadays 
because the native garu has too high a value for export 
to be consumed at home, disperses a not unpleasant smell 

132 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

through the gathering. Then the fun begins, gongs and 
drums are struck, and the strains of music sound 
through the village. With intervals of a quarter of an 
hour every two hours, the monotonous melody proceeds 
until seven the next morning, to be resumed, in all prob- 
ability, the next night for another twelve hours, and 
perhaps maintained night after night for a whole week. 

The medicine women — one, two, or three, rarely four 
in number — have collected in the middle of the room. 
Generally experienced by years of performing, they are 
often too old to be attractive, despite the gorgeous raiment 
with which they conceal their aged frames and the hawk- 
bells which jingle as they move. At first they collect round 
the earthenware censers to warm their hands. They then 
begin to step with the music and wave their arms, hissing 
loudly through their teeth the while, and occasionally 
breaking into a whistle. After a time they sit down and 
nod this way and that to the music, as though engaged in 
training the muscles of the neck. But the drums and gongs 
go faster, till the long hair of the woman flies round with 
her head. The whistling is varied by a chant, sadong^ in an 
ancient language now barely understood. 

" Why do you speak? Why do you sadongl W^hy 
are you such a long time ? As long as it takes a pinang 
(areca) to become old ? The fruit of the cocoanut has had 
time to reach maturity and drop. Come to this country 
below the heavens. What do you wish? What is your 
desire ? I have come to heal the sick one who lies on the 
floor, feeble and unable to rise, thin and shrivelled like a 
floating log. Have pity from your heart and prevent my 
soul from parting from my skin and my bones from falling 
away. This sickness is very severe and I am unable to 
contend against it." 

One of the women goes to the patient, who, clad in 
black, sits alone on a mat, and brings her a pinang blossom 
to hold, covering her head with a cloth. The unfortunate 
being is then brought to the hollow cone of shavings and 
seated within it ; it is then whirled round till the white 
shreds rise like a ballet dancer's skirt. Gradually the sick 
person is worked up to a frenzy, and, keeping time with 
the music, the medicine women sway about and wag their 
heads. So the proceedings go on, with weird fantastic 
dancing, noddrng, howling, whistling, chanting, for all the 
hours of the tropical night. Then the medicine women are 

Plate 164. A WOODEN FIGURE OF CROCODILE, AND DECORATIONS 
USED AT THE BAYOH CEREMONY BY MALANAUS. 

xvi MAGIC, SPELLS, AND CHARMS 133 

whirled round in the cone, and one by one they fall into a 
faint, to be recovered by fanning with the pinang blossom. 
They dance about and brush against the onlookers as 
though unable to control their movements, and are only 
kept at a distance by finding handfuls of rice flung in 
their faces. The point of giddiness and hysteria eventually 
reached can only be compared with certain stages of 
drunkenness. 

The outsider will find it difficult to detect much method 
in the madness, but on more sober occasions the performers 
can offer intelligible explanations of their behaviour. The 
account given by an old medicine woman at Niah, and 
confirmed by the man who conducts the ceremonies at the 
same village, shows that the part taken by the spirits is 

Fig. 84. — Boat used in bay oh ceremony. 

quite as definite as the performance of the exorcisers. 
Attracted by the music, the followers of the chief evil 
spirits gather round the house when the bayoh has begun, 
and hunt about. These little demons ask the chief medicine 
woman, " Why have you called us?" She replies, uTell your 
master that I have called you because there is a person here 
sick." They then go back and fetch the more powerful 
spirit whom they serve. This demon comes up from the 
sea to the jong, a small ship or raft that stands behind the 
house (Fig. 84), and finds his way up the rope ladder. He 
asks the bayoh woman, " Why have you called me, mother?" 
She answers, " I have called you because there is a sick person 
here. You can help him ! See whether you can help him 
or not." If the demon finds the sickness beyond his power 
to cure, he says, " I cannot help you ; get some one else " ; 
and the next night another one is invoked, until the evil 

i34 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

spirit is cast out of the patient. If for seven nights the 
attempt is made in vain, the bayoh is stopped and medicines 
are tried again, but with little hope that they will do much 
good. One of the bayohs I saw at Niah was on behalf of 
a slightly mad woman, who became very violent during the 
performance. She was said to be mad because she had 
become a Mohammedan, and it was explained that the 
Malanau demons had no power over the evil spirits of 
Islam. The poor woman was consequently put into stocks 
in her own room, and not long afterwards recovered. 

When a big spirit comes into one of the medicine 
women, as they say, like a flash she feels its presence, but 
does not see its form. If it agrees to help, the woman goes 
on with the regular bayoh, and soon feels confident that she 
is able to make the patient well. She asks for rice and 
other food, and spirit made from fruit, which she eats and 
drinks to gratify the demon within her. She calls upon the 
people to see that the viands are good, but not from any 
selfish motive, for it is said that she is not aware that she 
is eating at all. The coloured rice, which has been prepared, 
is the spirit's share, and eggs are also given. The demon 
invoked to help calls out to the evil spirit in possession of 
the sick person, " You stay in this craft whilst I sit here." 
" If you don't wish to stay here you can go to the woods, 
or your former abode." The evil spirit then goes from the 
patient into the basket prepared for his reception, and is 
then induced or ordered to depart by the demon in the 
medicine woman. What remains of the food set apart for 
the spirit is scattered along the river. The bayoh is stopped, 
and thanksgiving offerings are floated out to sea that the 
exertions of the supernatural powers may not have been in 
vain, or these gifts may be taken into the jungle, where the 
hollow cone and raft are also placed or hung from a tree. 

The medicine women work for a fee, and it is likely 
enough that the length of the bayoh is influenced to some 
extent by their pay. Sometimes the ceremony is most 
gorgeous. A rattan swing, covered with a beautiful cloth, 
is provided for the women and the patient to swing in, with 
a platform near at hand to receive the evil spirit. Some- 
times Ula Gemilang himself is invoked. On these occasions 
the expenditure is profuse. A box is placed in the middle 
of the room with a handsome covering. The walk up the 
floor is covered with cloth of gold thread. There are seven 
candles in seven brass sticks, seven betel stands, and seven 

xvi MAGIC, SPELLS, AND CHARMS 135 

men carrying spears. When the god arrives, seven people 
carry the umbrella over his head. If everything is not 
perfectly satisfactory in his judgment, he demands through 
the medicine woman whose body he has occupied some 
expensive gift, and if this is refused she may fall in a dead 
faint. Rice is thrown on her and she is fanned with the 
pinang blossoms, but the women who attend to her only 
share her fate and also become senseless. Eventually they 
recover, but there is now but little hope for the patient, 
for Gemilang is angry. In a despairing mood the bay oh 
women then seek help from lesser powers. 

Needless to say, the women bear out their part of the 
pantomime with great skill, becoming "possessed" at the 
proper time, snatching at the sick person's head as though 
to catch the evil spirit, and so forth. It is probable that 
in some cases the ceremony works a cure by suggestion. 
In any case the villagers have not too many occasions for 
social gatherings and feasts, and since those who hold 
bayohs must offer a good deal of hospitality to their neigh- 
bours, such meetings in a village are exceedingly popular 
with all except those who wish to go to sleep. 

VOL. II K 

CHAPTER XVII 

MYTHS, LEGENDS, AND STORIES 

Among all the peoples of Borneo a number of 
myths are handed on from generation to generation 
by word of mouth. These are related again and 
again by those who make themselves reputations 
as story-tellers, especially the old men and women ; 
and the people are never tired of hearing them 
repeated, as they sit in groups about their hearths 
between supper and bed-time, and especially when 
camping in the jungle. The myths vary consider- 
ably in the mouths of different story-tellers, especially 
of those that live in widely separated districts ; for 
the myths commonly have a certain amount of local 
colouring. Few or none of the myths are common 
to all the peoples ; but those of any one people are 
generally known in more or less authentic form to 
their neighbours. 

Although many of the myths deal with such 
subjects as the creation of the world, of man, of 
animals and plants, the discovery of fire and agri- 
culture, subjects of which the mythology has been 
incorporated in the religious teachings of the 
classical and Christian worlds, the mythology of 
these peoples has little relation to their religion. 
The gods figure but little in the myths, and the 
myths are related with little or no religious feeling, 
no sense of awe, and very little sense of obligation 
to hand them on unchanged. They are related in 

136 

ch.xvii MYTHS, LEGENDS, STORIES 137 

much the same spirit and on the same occasions as 
the animal stories, of which also the people are fond, 
and they may be said to be sustained by the purely 
aesthetic or literary motive, rather than the religious 
or scientific motives. In fact it is not possible to 
draw any sharp line between myths and fables. If 
it is asked, Do the people believe the myths? no 
clear answer can be given ; for few of the myths 
have any direct bearing upon practical life, and 
therefore belief in them is not brought to the test 
of action, the only test that can reveal the reality of 
belief, or indeed differentiate belief from merely 
unreflective acceptance of a story. Where such 
practical bearing is not altogether wanting, we 
commonly see conduct regulated in conformity with 
the myth or story, as in the case of the story of the 
bat carrying to the creatures in the river the news 
of the intention of the people to poison the water. 

A certain number of the Bornean myths and 
legends have been published in Mr. Ling Roth's 
book and elsewhere, especially those of the I bans. 
We have chosen for reproduction some repre- 
sentative specimens that have not hitherto appeared 
in well-known publications. A few stories that 
properly belong to this chapter are scattered in 
other parts of this book. 

We give first in a condensed form the substance 
of a long rambling creation-myth current among 
all branches of the Kayan people. This myth is 
sung in rhymed blank verse, a fact which is partly 
responsible for the wealth of names occurring in it. 

In the beginning there was a barren rock. On 
this the rains fell and gave rise to moss, and the 
worms, aided by the dung-beetles, made soil by 
their castings. Then a sword handle (haup malat) 
came down from the sun 1 and became a large tree. 

1 The sword handle is sometimes made of hard wood, but generally of deer's 
horn, very elaborately carved (see PL 129). It seems possible that this 

138 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

From the moon came a creeper, which hanging from 
the tree became mated with it through the action of 
the wind.1 From this union were born Kaluban 
Gat and Kalubi Angai, the first human beings, male 
and female. These were incomplete, lacking the 
legs and lower half of their trunks, so that their 
entrails hung loose and exposed. Leaves falling 
from the tree became the various species of birds 
and winged insects, and from the fallen fruits sprang 
the fourfooted beasts. Resin, oozing from the trunk 
of the tree, gave rise to the domestic pig and fowl, 
two species which are distinguished by their under- 
standing of matters that remain hidden from all 
others, even from human beings. The first in- 
complete human beings produced Pengok Ngai and 
Katira Murei; the latter bore a son, Batang Uta 
Tataiy who married Ajai Aval and begot Sijau 
Laho, Oding Lahang, Pabalan, Pliban, and Tokong, 
who became the progenitors of the various existing 
peoples. Oding Lahang is claimed as their ancestor 
by the Kayans, and also by the Kenyahs and some 
of the Klemantan tribes. 

Tokong is claimed as ancestor by the Sebops (a 
tribe of Klemantans) and by the Punans. The 
former attribute to him the introduction of head 
hunting. The story goes that once upon a time, 
when Tokong and his people were preparing to 
attack a village, he was addressed by the frog, who 
called out, " Wong ka kok, tetak batok." This fairly 
represents the cry of this species of frog (Bufo) ; 
and tetak batok in the Sebop language means " cut 
through the neck." At first the people, who hitherto 
had taken only the hair of their enemies to adorn 
their shields, scoffed at this advice ; but the frog 
assured them that the taking of heads would bring 

elaborate carving which, in spite of many minor variations, is of only two 
fundamental types, is or was at one time connected with this myth. But we 
have not been able to get any statement to this effect. 
1 The creeper is here regarded as the male partner. 

MYTHS, LEGENDS, STORIES 139 

them prosperity of every kind, and demonstrated 
the procedure he advised by decapitating a small 
frog. Tokong therefore determined to follow the 
frog's advice and carried away the heads of his 
enemies ; this was followed immediately by increased 
prosperity. As the party returned home and passed 
through their fields the padi grew very rapidly. 
As they entered the fields the padi was only 
up to their knees, but before they had passed 
through it was full-grown with full ears. As they 
approached the house their relatives came to meet 
them, rejoicing over various pieces of good fortune 
that had befallen them. The words of the frog thus 
came true, and Tokong and his people continued to 
follow the new practice, and from them it was learned 
by others. 

Although the help of the stars is not needed 
by the Borneans in directing their course when 
travelling, since all but very short journeys are 
made on the rivers, most of them are familiar 
with the principal constellations, and name them in 
accordance with the resemblances they discover to 
men, animals, and other objects. Some of the tribes 
determine the arrival of the season for sowing padi 
by the observation of the stars. Thus the Long 
Kiputs (Klemantans) name the great square of 
Pegasus Palai, the padi storehouse (these houses 
are generally square) ; the Pleiades they call a 
well ; and the constellation of which Aldebaran is a 
member they call a pig's jaw. They measure the 
altitude of a star by filling a tall bamboo vessel with 
water, inclining it until it points, directly to the star, 
and then setting it upright again, and measuring the 
height at which the surface of the water remaining 
in the vessel stands above its floor. Orion is inter- 
preted as the figure of a man, Lafaang, in much the 
same way as by Europeans ; but his left arm is 
thought to be wanting. They tell the following 

i4o PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

story about Lafaang, who of course is regarded as 
of their own tribe. 

The Story of Lafaang 

The daughter of Palai (the constellation Pegasus) 
fell in love with a Long Kiput youth, Lafaang by 
name, and invited him to ascend to the heavens, 
warning him at the same time that the customs in 
her celestial home were very different from those of 
earth. The girl was very beautiful, and Lafaang 
was not slow to find his way to her father's house. 
Palaiy surprised to see this mortal visitor, enquired 
of his daughter, " Who is this man, and why does he 
come here ? " " It is the man I wish to wed," replied 
the girl. The kind-hearted father told her to give 
her lover food, and consented to the realisation of 
her hopes. So Lafaang took up his abode in the 
house of Palai and was wedded to his daughter. 
But in spite of repeated instructions, Lafaang found 
it very difficult to conform to the customs of his 
adopted country. He put his food into his mouth 
with his fingers instead of using a needle for the 
purpose, and by doing so distressed his wife, who 
chid him for his disobedience to her instructions. 
On the morrow of his arrival he was invited to clear 
a patch of jungle for a padi field ; and his wife told 
him that, in order to fell a tree, he was merely to 
lay the axe she gave him at the foot of the tree, 
which would forthwith fall to the ground. But 
habit was too strong to be controlled, and, when 
Lafaang set his hand to the task, he fell to chopping 
at the tree. But though he chopped with might 
and main he made no impression, and his gentle 
spouse was horrified to see the crudeness of his 
methods. On the next day he was told to watch 
Palai at work felling the trees. Squatting in the 
jungle he saw how the great trees fell when Palai 

xvii MYTHS, LEGENDS, STORIES 141 

merely laid the blade of the axe at the foot of each 
one. This spectacle filled Lafaang with terror and 
he would have ran away, but that his wife re- 
proached him for cowardice. On the following day 
he set to work again ; and once more forgetting his 
lesson, he began to chop at the stems of the trees. 
This gross breach of custom was punished by the 
fall of a tree from the patch of jungle hard by that 
on which Palai was at work ; for the tree in falling 
cut off Lafaang 's left arm. Disgusted by these dis- 
agreeable incidents and by the awkward appearance 
of his wife, who was now far advanced in pregnancy, 
Lafaang made up his mind to return to his own 
people. His wife reproached him for his intention ; 
but, when she could not alter his determination, she 
gave him sugar-cane tops and banana roots, 
previously unknown to men, and let him down to 
earth by means of a long creeper. Before he 
reached the ground he heard the cry of his new-born 
child, and begged to be allowed to go back to see 
him. But his entreaties were unavailing, and weep- 
ing bitterly, he alighted on the earth at Tikan Orum 
(a spot in the upper Baram district). Still his dis- 
obedience was not overcome ; for, although he had 
been told to plant the sugar-cane and banana by 
merely throwing them on the ground, he planted 
them carefully in the soil ; and to this day a tall 
coarse grass (dru) grows on the spot. Nevertheless 
some sugar-cane and banana plants grew up ; but 
they were of an inferior quality, and such they have 
remained wherever they have spread in this world. 
Lafaang died among his own people on earth, but 
the bright constellation that bears his name and 
shape still moves across the heavens, reminding 
men of his journey to the world above the sky and 
of the misfortunes he suffered there.1 

1 Cf. an Iban story given in Perham's "Sea-Dayak Gods" J.S.B.R. A. Soc, 
ix. 236. 

142 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

The Story of Usai 

The following myth, current under several forms 
among the Klemantans, accounts for a number of 
the geographical features of the Baram district, in 
which it was told us. The story was evoked from 
an old man of the Long Kiputs by a question as to 
his views about the nature of the stars. He 
explained that the stars are holes in the sky made 
by the roots of trees in the world above the sky 
projecting through the floor of that world. At one 
time, he explained, the sky was close to the earth, 
but one day Usai, a giant, when working sago with 
a wooden mallet accidentally struck his mallet 
against the sky ; since which time the sky has been 
far up out of the reach of man. Our informant, 
warming up with the excitement of the recital, went 
on to give us the following history of Usai : — 

Usai was the brother of the guardian of the 
shades of men. His wife desired to have a large 
prawn that lived in the Baram river ; so Usai built 
a dam across the river at Lubok Suan (a spot where 
the river is about 250 yards in width) and baled out 
the water below it, seizing the crocodiles with his 
fingers and whisking them out on to the bank. 
While this operation was in progress, the dam gave 
way ; and Usais wife was drowned in the sudden 
rush of water. In vain he sought for his wife, 
weeping bitterly. Disconsolately he waded down 
the river. At the mouth of the Pelutan he wept 
anew, throwing aside the crocodiles as he explored 
the bed of the river. At Long Salai he found his 
wife's coat and wept again. At Long Lama he 
found his wife's waist-cloth and gave up hope, and 
at Tamala he clucked like a hen, so great was his 
grief. Still he went on wading down the river. 
The water, which at Long Plusan was only just 
above his ankles, reached his middle at the mouth 

MYTHS, LEGENDS, STORIES 143 

of the Tutauy and covered all his body at the place 
where the Tinjar (the largest tributary) flows into 
the Baram. At the mouth of the Adoi he wailed 
aloud, " Adoi, Adoi!" (a sorrowful cry in common 
use, nearly the equivalent of our Alas ! ). He began 
to shiver with cold, but at the mouth of the Bakong 
he wept again. When he reached Lubok Kajaman 
he was out of his depth (this is a part known to be 
very deep) and colder than ever ; but he kept on, 
and presently the water reached only to his belly, 
and when he reached the sea it came only to his 
knees. (There is a shallow bar at the river mouth.) 
On seeing the boundless ocean, Usaigzve up the 
search and strode down the coast to Miri, where he 
lived on charcoal and ginger. (The belief is widely 
held that the people of Miri, formerly ate charcoal 
in large quantities.) The people of Miri seemed to 
him like maggots ; and they, taking him to be a 
great tree, climbed up on him. When he brushed 
them off, he killed ten men with each sweep of his 
hand. The Miri people set to work to hew down 
this great tree, and blood poured from Usais foot 
as they worked. Then Used spoke to them, asking 
them what sort of creatures they might be, and 
said, " Listen to my words. I am about to die. 
My brains are sago, my liver is tobacco. Where my 
head falls there the people will have much knowledge, 
where my feet lie will be the ignorant ones." Then, 
his legs being cut through, he fell with a mighty 
crash, his head falling towards the sea, his feet point- 
ing up river. (u This accounts for the fact that white 
men and Chinese know so many things, while the 
people of Borneo are ignorant " said our informant ; 
but this was probably his own comment.) The 
Miris, of whom a thousand were killed by the fall 
of Usaiy have beautiful hair, because his head fell 
in their district ; but the other people have only 
such hair as grew on Usais limbs. The mosquitoes 

144 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

that existed in the time of Usui were as big as fowls,, 
and their bites were terribly painful. The people 
hewed them into small pieces, so that now they are 
the smallest of the animals ; but their bite is still 
painful. 

The I ban Story of Simpang Impang 

The following story, which is an old favourite 
among the I bans (Sea Dayaks) of the Batang 
Lupar, will serve to illustrate, with its many hetero- 
geneous features, the myth-making faculty of this 
imitative and fun-loving people. It will be noticed 
that the story combines the characters of a creation- 
myth, an animal fable, and a fairy tale : — 

Once upon a time some people were looking for 
edible vegetables in the jungle, when they came 
upon a huge python, which they took to be a log. 
Sitting upon it to cut up their vegetables, they by 
chance wounded it, and caused the python's blood 
to flow out. Recognising then the nature of their 
resting-place, the people cut up the python and 
began to cook its flesh. Then heavy rain began to 
fall, and it rained like anything for days and days, 
so that all the land was covered with water, and 
only the top of Tiang Laju (the highest peak of the 
Batang Lupar district) stood out above the flood. 
All the people and animals were drowned except 
one woman, a dog, a rat, and a few other small 
animals, which climbed to the top of this mountain. 
The woman, seeking shelter from the rain, noticed 
that the dog seemed to have found a warm place 
beneath a creeper. The creeper was swaying in the 
wind and rubbing against a tree, and thus was 
warmed by the friction. The woman, taking the hint, 
rubbed the creeper hard on a piece of wood, and so 
for the first time produced fire. Having no husband 
the woman took the creeper for her mate, and soon 

MYTHS, LEGENDS, STORIES 145 

afterwards gave birth to a son, who was but one-half 
of a human being, having one arm, one leg, one 
eye, and so on. This child, Simpang Impang, whose 
only companions were the animals, often complained 
bitterly to his mother of his incompleteness. One 
day Simpang Impang discovered some padi grain 
which the rat had hidden in a hole. He spread it 
out to dry on a leaf, which he put on top of a stump. 
On this the rat demanded the padi back ; and when 
Simpang Impang refused it, he grew very angry, and 
swore that he and all his race would always retaliate 
by taking the padi of men whenever they could get 
at it. While they were disputing, Selulat Antu 
Ributy the wind-spirit, came by and scattered the 
padi grains far and wide in the jungle. Simpang 
Impang looked round in anger and astonishment, 
and could perceive nothing but the noise of the 
wind. So he set out with some of his companions 
to get back his corn from the wind-spirit, or know 
the reason why. After wandering for some days he 
came to a tree on which were many birds ; they 
picked off its buds as fast as the tree could push 
them out. Simpang Impang asked the tree to tell 
him the way to the house of the wind-spirit ; and the 
tree said, " Oh, yes, he came this way just now, and 
his house is far away over there. When you come 
to it, please tell him I am tired of putting out my 
leaves to have them bitten off by these rascal birds, 
and that I want him to come and end my miserable 
life by blowing me down." 

Simpang Impang went on and came to a lake, 
which said, " Whither are you going, friend ? " And 
when he answered that he was going to find the 
wind-spirit, the lake complained that its outlet to 
the river was blocked with a lump of gold, and told 
him to get the wind-spirit to blow away the obstruc- 
tion. Simpang Impang promised to put in a word 
for the lake, and, passing on, came to a cluster of 

146 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

sugar-canes and bananas. " Whither are you going, 
friend ? " said they. " I'm going to the wind-spirit " 
he answered. " Oh ! then, will you please ask him 
how it is we have no branches like other trees ; we 
should like to have branches like them." 1 " Yes, I'll 
remember it," said Simpang Impang, and, passing on, 
he soon came to the home of the wind-spirit. There 
he heard a great noise of wind blowing, and the 
wind-spirit said, " What do you want here, Simpang 
Impang." He answered angrily that he had come 
to demand the padi that the wind-spirit had carried 
away. " We'll settle the dispute by diving" said 
the wind-spirit,2 and he dived into the water ; but 
being only a bubble, he very soon popped up to the 
surface. Then Simpang Impang called on his com- 
panion the fish to dive for him ; and when the wind- 
spirit saw that he had no chance of coming out the 
winner in this ordeal, he said, " No, this is not fair, 
we'll settle the matter by jumping," and he leapt 
right over the house. Simpang Impang called on 
the swift as his substitute, and the swift, rising from 
the ground, jumped right out of sight. Still the 
wind-spirit would not give in. " We'll have another 
test ; let's see who can go through this blow-pipe " ; 
and he went whistling through. Then Simpang 
Impang did not know what to do, for none of his 
companions seemed able to help him. But he had 
forgotten the ant, until a little squeaky voice called 
out, " I can do it " ; and forthwith the ant crawled 
through the blow-pipe. Still the wind-spirit would 
not give in, and Simpang Impang was very angry, 
and seizing his father, the fire-drill, he set the wind- 
spirit's house on fire. Then at last the wind-spirit 
called out that he would make compensation for the 
padihe had taken away. " But," said he, " I haven't 

1 This greeting of the passer-by and the charging him with some commission 
is very characteristic of the Ibans. 

2 A form of trial by ordeal occasionally practised by Ibans and other 
tribes. 

MYTHS, LEGENDS, STORIES 147 

any gongs or other things to pay you, so I'll make 
you a whole man with two arms and two legs and 
two eyes." Simpang Impang accepted the bargain, 
and was overjoyed to find himself a whole man. 
Then he remembered the messages he had brought 
from the tree and the lake, and the wind-spirit 
promised to do as he was asked. And then Simpang 
Impang put to him the question of the bamboo and 
of the banana plant ; and the wind-spirit said, "They 
have no branches because human beings are always 
offending against custom ; they often utter the 
names of their father-in-law and mother-in-law, and 
sometimes they walk before them in going through 
the jungle ; that is why the bamboo and the banana 
have no branches." 

Kenyah Fable of the Mouse-Deer and 
the Tortoise 

Animal fables are current among all the peoples 
of Borneo, and are frequently repeated and listened 
to with much enjoyment ; some individuals who 
acquire the reputation of being good story-tellers 
are frequently called upon to practise their art. 
Closely allied with this enjoyment of fables is the 
practice of describing incidents of social or tribal 
intercourse in fables, parables, or allegories, which 
are made to suit the occasions and to point the 
appropriate moral. 

Once upon a time Plandok (the tiny mouse-deer) 
and Kelap (the water-tortoise) went out together to 
find fruit. They found a tree laden with ripe fruit 
close by a house. " I can't climb up that tree," said 
Plandok, " but I'll give you a leg up, and then you 
can get on to that branch." So he pushed up Kelap 
on to the lowermost branch. Kelap threw down all 
the fruit, but then didn't know how to get down, and 
called to Plandok for help. " Oh ! get down anyway 

148 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

you like," said Plandok. " But I can't get down 
forwards and I can't get down backwards." " Then 
throw yourself down," said Plandok, and Kelap threw 
himself down and came to the ground with a great 
thud. The people in the house heard the sound 
and said, " There's a durian falling." Then Plandok 
began to divide the fruit into heaps. " This is for 
me and that's for you ," he kept calling out; and every 
time he put some more fruit to Kelap' s heap, he 
shouted louder than before. " Hello," said the 
people in the house, " there's somebody dividing 
something," and they ran out to see what was going 
on. Plandok skipped away with his share of the fruit, 
and left Kelap to hide himself as best he could under 
the broad leaves of a Caladium plant. The people 
saw the tree stripped of its fruit, and Kelap 's tracks 
on the ground soon led to the discovery of his hiding- 
place. " Here's the thief," said the people, " let's 
put him in the fire." " Oh yes," said Kelap, " please 
put me in the fire ; last time they put me in the fire 
they only half did the thing, and left one side quite 
untouched by the fire."1 " Oh ! that won't do," said 
the people, " let's squeeze him in the sugar-cane 
press." "Oh yes, please squeeze me in the press," 
said Kelap, " last time they put me in the press they 
only squeezed one side of me." 2 " Then that won't 
do either," they cried, " let's throw him into the 
river." " Oh ! don't throw me into the river," said 
Kelap, and began to weep. So they threw him into 
the river. Kelap swam out to the middle of the 
river and, putting up his head above the surface, 
called out, "That's alright, this is my home." At 
this the people saw that he had got the better of 
them, and determined to turn the tables by poison- 
ing the water with tuba? The bat overheard 
what they were saying, and at once flew off to 

1 This refers to the difference of colour between the carapace and the plastron. 

2 Refers to the flat under surface contrasting with the rounded back. 

3 See vol. i. p. 139. 

MYTHS, LEGENDS, STORIES 149 

Kelap, and advised him to get out of the river. 
" No, I shall stay here," said Kelapy "this is the 
safest place for me," and he went and stood quite 
still among the big stones in the shallow water. 

Presently the people began to beat out the tuba 
root on the stones, and one man, taking Kelafts 
back for a stone, began to beat his tuba upon it. 
Then Kelap made his back sink lower little by little, 
so that the water began to cover it. " Hello ! " 
said the man, " the water's rising, it's no good 
trying to poison the river when the water's rising." 
So they went home. 

The Kenyah Story of the Belira Fish 

The belira is a fish that has an extraordinary 
number of bones. The following story accounts 
for this exceptional number of bones and, in con- 
junction with the foregoing story, explains why 
Kenyahs, when proposing to poison the river with 
tuba in order to take the fish, speak of their inten- 
tions only in parables. 

The fish began to complain that they were so 
often caught by men who poisoned the river. So 
they decided they must have a dayong who could 
make rain for them * so as to prevent the poisoning 
of the water. They asked one fish after another to 
become a dayong ; but all refused until they came 
to the belira, who said he would do his best to 
become a dayong and to make rain for them, if each 
of the other fishes would give him a bone. They 
accepted the bargain and each gave him a bone, 
and that is why the belira has so many bones. 

The Story of the Stupid Boy 

The following Klemantan story illustrates the 
taste of the people for the comic : — 

1 This is the only mention of rain-making that has come to our notice 
among any of the Borneans. 

150 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

One day Saleh and his father set out in their 
boat for their farm. " Look out for logs " {i.e. 
floating timber), said Saleh 's father. They had not 
gone very far when Saleh sings out, " I see some 
timber." " Where ? " says his father. " Why, there 
on the bank," says Saleh, pointing to the jungle. 
" Oh ! you silly," says his father, " go on." So they 
went on and landed, and the father, leaving Saleh 
to cook some rice in the large pot, began to cut 
down some trees. Presently he came back and 
found Saleh with the pot upside down over the fire, 
and nothing cooked. " What are you at ? " cries 
the father. " Well," says Saleh, " I put the pot over 
the fire as you told me to do, but when I poured 
the water on it, it all ran into the fire and put it 
out." " You stupid boy, you should have put the 
pot on the other way up." " But you didn't tell me 
so," says Saleh. 

The father had chipped his axe, so he sends 
Saleh home to fetch another. Saleh sets out gaily 
singing, the blade of the axe lying in the bow of the 
boat. Soon the boat strikes a snag and overboard 
goes the axe -blade. " Oh, bother ! " says Saleh, 
" but never mind, I'll mark the place," and he whips 
out his knife and cuts a notch in the gunwale of the 
boat at the spot where the axe fell in. Arriving at 
the landing stage before his father's house, he 
begins to dive into the water to find the lost 
axe-head, and continues vainly seeking it till his 
mother comes out to ask what he is doing. " I'm 
looking for the axe that fell into the water just 
at this notch, as I was coming down river," says 
Saleh. "Oh! you are a stupid," says his mother, 
and fetches him a new axe. Saleh goes back to 
his father, who has found a fruit tree. He tells 
Saleh to gather the fruit in his basket while he goes 
on felling trees. Presently the father comes back 
and finds Saleh fastened with his back to the tree 

MYTHS, LEGENDS, STORIES 151 

by the shoulder-basket, which he has put right 
round its stem, and his legs going up and down. 
" Hello ! what are you up to now ? " says the father. 
" Why, I'm carrying away the whole tree to save 
trouble," says Sa/ek, " and I'm watching the clouds 
up there to see how fast I'm walking with this tree 
on my back." 

A Story with a Moral 

We conclude this chapter with an example of 
a fable which points a moral. It is told by the 
Barawans of their neighbours, the Sebops (both are 
Klemantan tribes), who, they say, put off every 
task till the morrow. 

One wet night Kra, the monkey, and Raong, 
the toad, sat under a log complaining of the cold. 
" Kr-r-r-k" went Kra, and " Hoot-toot-toot" went 
the toad. They agreed that next day they would 
cut down a kumut tree and make themselves a coat 
of its bark. In the morning the sun shone bright 
and warm, and Kra gambolled in the tree-tops, while 
Raong climbed on the log and basked in the sun- 
light. Presently down comes Kra and sings out, 
" Hello, mate ! How are you getting on ? " " Oh ! 
nicely," says Raong. "Well, how about that coat 
we were going to make ? " says Kra. " Oh ! bother 
the coat," says Raong, " we'll make it to-morrow ; 
I'm jolly warm now." So they enjoyed the sun- 
shine all day long. But, when night fell, it began 
to rain again, and again they sat under the log 
complaining of the cold. " Kr-r-r-k" went Kra, 
and " Hoot-toot-toot " went Raong. And again 
they agreed that they must cut down the kumut 
tree and make themselves a coat of its bark. But 
in the morning the sun was shining again warm and 
bright ; and again Kra gambolled in the tree-tops 
and Raong sat basking in the sunshine ; and again 

VOL. II L 

152 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO ch.xvh 

Raong said, " Oh ! bother the coat, we'll make it to- 
morrow." And every day it was the same, and so to 
this day Kra and Raong sit out in the rain com- 
plaining of the cold, and crying " Kr-r-r-h" and 
" Hoot-toot-toot." 

CHAPTER XVIII 

CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH OF A KAYAN 

From the time that the parents of a Kayan 
become aware of his existence they faithfully 
observe, without intermission until his appearance 
in the world, certain tabus. Or, in their own 
language, they are malan and certain things and 
acts are lali for them. The belief that the child 
will resemble in some degree the things which 
arrest the glance of his mother while she carries him 
(lemali) is unquestioningly held and acted upon ; 
hence the expectant woman seeks to avoid seeing 
all disagreeable and uncanny objects, more 
especially the Maias and the long-nosed monkey ; 
she observes also the tabus imposed upon sick 
women in general, and besides these a number of 
other tabus peculiar to her condition, most of which 
apply to acts or situations which may symbolise any 
difficulty in delivery of the child ; for example, she 
must not tie knots, she must not thrust her hand 
into any narrow hole to pull anything out. The 
tabus of the latter class are observed by the husband 
even more strictly, if possible, than by the wife. The 
woman must also avoid certain kinds of flesh and 
fish. It frequently happens that the woman begins 
to crave to eat a peculiar soapy earth (batu kraft), 
and this is generally supplied to her. 

The woman will also take positive measures to 
ensure the prosperous course of her pregnancy and 

153 

154 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

delivery. At the quickening she sacrifices a young 
pig and charges it to convey her prayer to Doh 
Tenangan ; and on the occurrence of any untoward 
incident, such as a fall, the prayer and sacrifice are 
repeated. The carcases of the victims are stuck 
upon poles before the house near her door, and the 
inevitable feathered sticks, smeared with blood, are 
thrust behind a roof beam in the gallery opposite 
her door. 

In every Kayan house are certain elderly women 
(not the Dayongs) who have a reputation for special 
knowledge and skill in all matters connected with 
pregnancy and childbirth. One of these is called in 
at an early stage ; she makes from time to time a 
careful examination of the patient's abdomen and 
professes to secure the best position of the child. 

She has also a number of charms, which she 
hangs in the woman's room, and various unguents, 
which she applies externally. But all these pro- 
cedures are surrounded by a veil of secrecy which 
we have failed to penetrate. And, in fact, all 
information in regard to the processes of childbirth 
is difficult to obtain, for all Kayans are very reticent 
on the matter, even among themselves. 

In all other respects the pregnant woman follows 
her ordinary mode of life until the pains of labour 
begin. Then she is attended by the wise woman 
and several elderly relatives or friends. She sits in 
her room which is lali to all but her attendants and 
her husband ; and she is hidden from the latter by a 
screen of mats. During the pains she grasps and 
pulls on a cloth fixed to a rafter above and before 
her. The pains seem to be severe, since the woman 
generally groans and cries out ; but the duration of 
labour is commonly brief, perhaps two or three 
hours only. The attendants' great anxiety is lest 
the child should go upward, and to prevent this they 
tie a cloth very tightly round the patient about the 

CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH 155 

upper part of her abdomen. During the pains two 
of them press down with great force upon the 
uterus, one from each side. The wise woman pro- 
fesses to accomplish version by external manipula- 
tion, if she judges that the feet are about to present. 
But we do not know whether her claim to so. much 
skill is well founded. If the after-birth does not 
follow immediately upon the child, the attendants 
become very anxious ; two of them lift up the patient, 
and, if it does not soon appear, an axe-head is 
tied to the cord in order to prevent its return 
within the body, and possibly that the weight may 
hasten its extrusion. We have no reason to suppose 
that any internal manipulation is attempted at this 
or any other stage of labour or of pregnancy. Im- 
mediately after delivery the cord is tied and cut 
across with a bamboo knife. If the child does not 
cry at once, its nostrils are tickled with a feather. 

The after-birth is usually buried or merely thrown 
away. But if the child is born enclosed in the mem- 
branes (with a caul), they are dried and preserved 
by the mother. It is said that, when dried, it is 
pounded to a powder and mixed with medicines 
administered to the child in later years. 

If labour is unusually difficult or prolonged, or if 
accidents happen, the news spreads quickly through 
the house ; and, if the attendants begin to fear a 
fatal issue, the whole household is thrown into con- 
sternation, for death in childbirth is regarded with 
peculiar horror. All the men of the house, includ- 
ing the chief and boys, will flee from the house, or, 
if it is night, they will clamber up among the beams 
of the roof and there hide in terror ; and, if the worst 
happens, they remain there until the woman's corpse 
has been taken out of the house for burial In such 
a case the burial is effected with the utmost despatch. 
Old men and women, who are indifferent to death, 
will undertake the work, and they expect a large fee. 

156 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

The body, wrapped in a mat, is buried in a grave 
dug in the earth among the tombs, instead of being 
put in a coffin raised on a tall post ; for the soul of 
the woman who dies in childbirth goes, with the 
souls of those who fall in battle, or die by violence 
of any kind, to Bawang Daha (the lake of blood). 

If twins are born, one is chosen, generally the 
boy, if they are of different sexes. The other is 
got rid off by exposure in the jungle. The avowed 
motive for this practice (which, of course, is rapidly 
passing away under the influence of the European 
governments) is the desire to preserve the life of 
the survivor ; for they hold that his chances of life 
are diminished not only by the necessity of dividing 
the mother's care and milk between the twins, if 
both survive, but also by the sympathetic bond 
which they believe to exist between twins, and 
which renders each of them liable to all the ills and 
misfortunes that befall the other ; and to Kayans 
the loss of a child of some years of age is a calamity 
of the first magnitude, whereas the sacrifice of one 
of a pair of new-born twins is hardly felt. 

At the moment the child is completely born, a 
tawak or a drum (according as it is male or female) 
is beaten in the gallery with a peculiar rhythm. All 
members of the household {i.e. all whose rooms are 
under the roof of the one long house, and who, there- 
fore, are under the same omens and tabus) who are 
within the house at this moment have the right to 
a handful of salt from the parents of the child ; and 
all members who are not under the roof at the 
moment are expected to make a present of some 
piece of iron to the child. This is an ancient custom, 
which is no longer strictly observed, and which seems 
to be undergoing a natural decay. 

During the confinement of a woman, Kayans 
(more especially those of the upper Rejang) some- 
times perform a dance which is supposed to facilitate 

CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH 157 

delivery. It is commonly performed by a woman, 
a friend or relative of the labouring woman, who 
takes in her arms a bundle of cloth, which she 
handles like a baby while she dances, afterwards 
putting it into the cradle (havat) in which a child 
is carried on the back. An old story relates the 
origin of this dance as follows. A widow died in 
childbirth, and the child was given to a woman 
who happened to be dancing at the time of its birth, 
and who afterwards became a very influential and 
prosperous person. 

When the delivery has been normally accom- 
plished and all goes well, the mother at once nurses 
the child ; and a woman of the lower class may 
resume her lighter household duties within twenty- 
four hours. A woman of the upper class may remain 
recumbent for the most part of several days or even 
weeks. For seventeen days the mother wears threads 
tied round the thumbs and big toes, and during this 
time she is expected to avoid heavy labour, such 
as farm-work and the pounding of padi. There 
seems to be no trace of any such custom as the 
couvade, though the father observes, like the mother, 
certain tabus during the early months and years of 
the child's life, with diminishing strictness as the 
child grows older. The child also is hedged about 
with tabus. The general aim of all these tabus 
seems to be to establish and maintain about the 
child a certain atmosphere (or, as they say, a certain 
odour) 1 in which alone it can thrive. Neither father 
nor mother will eat or touch anything whose pro- 
perties are thought to be harmful or undesirable for 
the child, e.g. such things as the skin of the timid 
deer (see vol. ii. p. 72), or that of the tiger-cat ; and 

1 This notion of an atmosphere or ' ' odour " of virtue attaching to material 
objects pervades the thought and practice of Kayans. As another illustration 
of it, we may remark that a Kayan will wear for a long time, and will often 
refuse to wash, a garment which has been worn and afterwards given to him 
by a European whom he respects. 

158 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

the child himself is still more strictly preserved from 
such contacts. Further, nothing used by or about 
the child — toys, garments, cradle, or beads — must be 
lost, lent, sold, or otherwise allowed to pass out of the 
possession of the parents ; though, if one child has 
thriven, its properties are preferred to all others for 
the use of a younger brother or sister. It is im- 
portant also that no stranger shall handle or gaze 
too closely upon the child ; and when it is put down 
to sleep in the parents' room, the mat or rude wooden 
cradle on which it lies is generally surrounded by a 
rough screen. The more influential the stranger, the 
more is his contact to be feared ; for any such con- 
tact or notice may attract to the infant the unwelcome 
and probably injurious attentions of the toh. For the 
same reason it is forbidden, ox par it, to a child to lie 
down on the spot where a chief has been sitting or 
where he usually reposes. And it is a grave offence 
for a child to jump over the legs of a reclining chief; 
but in this case the disrespect shown is probably 
the more important ground of the disapprobation 
incurred. 

If any such contact has unwittingly occurred, or 
if, for example, a Kayan mother has consented to 
submit an ailing child to inspection by a European 
medical man, the danger incurred may be warded 
off by the gift from the stranger to the child of 
some small article of value. In a similar way the 
breach of other tabus, such as the entering of a 
room which is lali, may be rendered innocuous. 

The infant is carried by the mother almost con- 
tinuously during the waking hours of its first year 
of life ; it is generally suspended in a sling made of 
wood or of basket-work, resembling in shape the 
baby's swing familiar in our nurseries ; the child 
sits on a semicircular piece of board, its legs de- 
pendent, its knees and belly against the mother's 
back, and its own back supported by the two 

Plate 167. IBAN BOYS BATHING. THE FENCE IS FOR PROTECTION 
AGAINST CROCODILES. 

CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH 159 

vertical pieces of the cradle (see PI. 166). The 
mother nurses the infant in her arms during most 
of her leisure moments, and she hushes it to sleep 
by crooning old lullabies as she rocks it in her arms 
or in a cradle suspended from a pliable stick.1 
The father hardly handles it during its first year, 
but many fathers nurse and dandle the older infants 
for hours together in the most affectionate manner ; 
and, if the child's grandfather is living, he generally 
becomes its devoted attendant. 

About the end of its first year the infant begins 
to crawl and toddle about the room and gallery, to 
sprawl into the hearth and eat charcoal, and to get 
into all sorts of mischief in the usual way. During 
the first year he lives chiefly on his mother's milk, 
but takes also thick rice-water from an early age. 

Towards the end of the first year the lobes of 
the ears are perforated, and a ring (or, in the case 
of a girl, several small rings) is inserted in each. 
Of childish affections of health, the commonest at 
this age is yaws (fram&cesza) about the mouth. 
Kayan mothers believe that every child must go 
through this, and that one attack protects against 
its recurrence ; and the rareness of the disease in 
adults seems to bear out this belief. Most of the 

1 We give the original and translation of one such lullaby : — 

" Megiong ujong bayoh 

Mansip anak yap — cheep, cheep. 

Lematei telayap, 

Telayap abing, 

Lematei Laki Laying oban, 

Lematei Laki Punan oban." 

The translation runs : — 

' ' The branches of the bayoh tree are swaying 
With the sound of little chicks — cheep, cheep, 
The lizards are dead, 
There are no lizards any more, 
Gray-haired Laki Laying is dead, 
The old jungle man is dead." 

The reference to the Punan in this lullaby may be explained by saying that 
the children are frightened sometimes by being told that the jungle man will 
lake them. 

160 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

children are weaned about the end of their second 
year. 

During the next years, until the boy is five or 
six years of age, he remains always under the care 
of his mother. He spends the day running about 
within and around the house and among the boats 
at the landing-place, playing with his fellows, chasing 
the pigs and fowls, and bathing in the river. The 
children are in the main what is commonly called 
good, they cry but little, and quarrels and outbreaks 
of temper are few. During the boy's third year a 
hole is punched in the shell of each ear. A single 
blow with a bamboo punch takes out a circular piece ; 
into this a circular plug of wax or wood is inserted. 
The girl, on the other hand, has more rings added 
to the lobes of her ears, which gradually yield to 
the weight, and begin to assume the desired charac- 
ter of slender loops. During these years the boy 
normally takes the first step of his initiation as a 
warrior by striking a blow at a freshly taken head, 
or, if need be, at an old one (see vol. ii. p. 169). 

It is at some time in the course of these years, 
usually not earlier than the beginning of the child's 
third year, that he first receives a name. The 
occasion of the rite is a general naming of all the 
children of the house of suitable age ; and the time 
is determined by the conclusion of a successful 
harvest ; for a general feast is made for which much 
rice and burak are required, and these cannot be 
spared in a year of poor harvest. For each child 
who is to be named a small human image in soft 
wood is prepared. This is an effigy of Laki Pesong, 
the god whose special function it is to care for the 
welfare of the children. A small mat is woven and 
a few strips of rattan provided for each child. Each 
child sits with his (or her) mother in the gallery 
beside the door of their room, and the parents 
announce the name they propose for the child. 

Plate 168. (i) FIRE PISTON. (2) PUSA, USED TO MAKE FIRE AT 

THE NAMING OF A KAYAN CHILD. 

The figure represents Laki Pesong. 

CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH 161 

Then the father, or some other man, after killing 
a chick or young pig, lays the image on the mat 
before the child, passes one of the rattan strips 
beneath it, and, holding the image firmly with a 
big toe on each end of it, pulls the strip rapidly to 
and fro, until it is made hot by its friction against 
the image, and smoke begins to rise. While this 
goes on, the same man, or another, pours out a stream 
of words addressed to Laki Pesong, the sense of 
which is a supplication for an answer to the question, 
" Is this a suitable name ? Will he be prosperous 
under it ? Will he enjoy a long life ? " etc. He 
continues the sawing movement until the strip 
breaks in two. The two pieces are then compared ; 
if they are of unequal length, this result is regarded 
as expressing the approval of the proposed name by 
Laki Pesong ; if they are of approximately equal 
length, the god is held to have expressed his dis- 
approval, and another name is proposed and sub- 
mitted to the same test. If disapproval is thus 
expressed several times, the naming of the child is 
postponed to another occasion (Pis. 53, 168). 

If a name has been approved, the image, together 
with the knife used in killing the pig or chicken, is 
wrapped up in the small mat ; the bundle, which, as 
well as the ceremony, is called pusa, is thrust behind 
the rafters of the gallery opposite the door of the 
child's room, to remain there as a memento of the 
naming. 

When the naming is accomplished a general 
feast begins, the parents of the newly named children 
contributing the chief part of the good things ; and a 
number of specially invited guests may participate. 

The name so given at this ceremony is borne 
until the child becomes a parent ; when he resigns 
it in favour of the name given to his child with the 
title Taman ( = father) prefixed (or Tinan in the case 
of a woman). 

1 62 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

Among the Kayans of the upper Rejang the 
naming ceremonies differ widely from those described 
above, and are even more elaborate. The following 
description was given us by Laki Bo, a Kayan 
penghulu} A child is named sometime between its 
third month and the end of its second year, the 
date depending partly on the father's capacity to 
afford the expenses incidental to the ceremony. 
The father and his friends obtain specimens of all 
the edible animals and fish, and after drying them 
over the fire, set them up in his room in attitudes 
as lifelike as possible. He procures also the leaves 
of a species of banana tree which bears very large 
horn-like fruit, known as puti oran ; and having 
procured the services of a female dayong, who has a 
reputation for skill in naming, he calls all the friends 
and relatives of the family to the feast. The dayong 
enters the room where the child is, bearing a fowl's 
egg, while gongs and drums are beaten and guns 
discharged. She strokes the child from forehead to 
navel with the egg, calling out some name at each 
stroke, until she feels that she has found a suitable 
name. The whole company then pretends to fall 
asleep ; and presently some go out into the gallery. 
The dayong then calls upon sixteen of the women to 
enter the room ; they enter led by a woman who, 
pretending to be a fowl, clucks and crows, and 
says, " Why are you all asleep here ? It has been 
daylight for a long time. Don't you hear me crow- 
ing ? Wake up, wake up." The child, which has 
been kept in its parents' cubicle during this first 
part of the ceremony, is then brought into the large 
room, and a fowl and small pig are slaughtered and 
their entrails examined. If these yield favourable 
omens, the dayong begins to chant, invoking the 
protection of good spirits for the child. Then 
sixteen men and sixteen women, whose parents are 

1 The penghulu is the leading chief of a district ; cf. Chap. XXII. 

CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH 163 

still living, are sent to fetch water for the use of the 
child and its mother. The feasting then begins, 
some person eating on behalf of the child, if it is 
too young to partake of the feast. Eight days 
later the dayong again invokes the protection of the 
beneficent spirits, and the child is taken out into 
the gallery and shown to all the household. Some 
near relative makes a cross upon its right foot with 
a piece of charcoal, and the child is taken to the 
door of each room to receive some small present 
from each roomhold. The child must then return 
to its parents' room and remain there eight days. 
After the next harvest a similar feast of pigs' flesh 
and dried animals is made, and the name is confirmed. 
But if in the meantime the child has been ill, or any 
other untoward event has happened, a new name 
is given to it. In this case it would be usual to 
choose the well-tried name of some prosperous 
uncle or aunt. Again the child must be confined 
to its parents' room for eight days following the 
feast ; and after that time it is free to go where it 
will, or rather wherever children are allowed to go. 
From five or six years onwards the boy more 
and more accompanies the men in their excursions 
on the river and in the jungle, and is taught to 
make himself useful on these occasions, and also on 
the padi farm, where he helps in scaring pests and 
in other odd jobs. But he still has much leisure, 
which is chiefly devoted to playing with his fellows. 
Among the principal boys' games the following 
deserve mention : — Spinning of peg-tops of hard 
wood, usually thrown overhand, but sometimes 
underhand, in a manner very similar to that of 
English boys, each boy in turn striving to strike the 
tops of the others with his own ; this game is played 
about the time of padi harvest. Simple kites are 
flown. A roughly made bow with unfeathered arrow 
is a somewhat rare toy. Most of the out-door games 

1 64 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

are of the nature of practice for the chase and war, 
and of trials of strength and of endurance of pain. 
Wrestling is perhaps the most popular sport with 
the older boys and with men. Each grips his 
antagonist's waistcloth at its lower edge behind, 
and strives to lay him on his back (PL 169). 
Throwing mock spears at the domestic pigs or 
goats, and thrusting a spear through a bounding 
hoop, afford practice for sport and war. Running 
games like prisoner's base, and diving and swim- 
ming games, are also played. All these boys' games 
are but little organised, and the competitive motive 
is not very strongly operative ; there are few set 
rules, and but little scope for training in leadership 
and subordination is afforded by them. 

In the house less active games are played. In 
one of the most popular of these a number of chil- 
dren squat in a ring upon the floor ; one takes a 
glowing ember from a hearth, and passes it on to 
his neighbour, who in turn passes it on as quickly 
as possible. In this way it goes round and round 
the ring until the last spark of fire goes out. He 
or she who holds it at that moment is then dubbed 
Aban Lalu or Balu Doh ( = widower Lalu or widow 
Doh). 

Pets, in the form of birds and the smaller 
mammals, especially hornbills, parrokeets, squirrels, 
porcupines, are kept in wicker cages. 

About the age of ten years the Kayan boy begins 
to wear a waistcloth — his first garment — his sister 
having assumed the apron some two or three 
years earlier ; we are not aware of any ceremony 
connected with this. From this time onward the 
boy begins to accompany his father on the longer 
excursions of the men, especially on the long expedi- 
tions in search of jungle produce ; and on these 
occasions he is expected to take an active part in 
the labours of the party. Participation in such 

xviii CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH 165 

expeditions affords, perhaps, the most important part 
of his education. There is little or no attempt 
made to impart instruction to the children, whether 
moral or other, but they fall naturally under the 
spell of custom and public opinion ; and they absorb 
the lore, legends, myths, and traditions of their tribe, 
while listening to their elders as they discuss the 
affairs of the household and of their neighbours in 
the long evening talks. They learn also the pro- 
hibitions and tabus by being constantly checked ; a 
sharp word generally suffices to secure obedience. 
Punishments are almost unknown, especially physical 
punishments ; though in extreme cases of dis- 
obedience the child's ear may be tweaked, while it 
is asked if it is deaf. A sound scolding also is not 
infrequent, and an incorrigible offender, especially 
if his conduct has been offensive to persons outside 
his family, may be haled before the chief, who rates 
him soundly, and who may, in a more serious case, 
award compensation to be paid by the delinquent's 
father. But in the main the Spencerian method of 
training is followed. A parent warns his child of 
the ill effects that may be expected from the line of 
behaviour he is taking, and when those effects are 
realised, he says, " Well, what did I tell you ? " 
and adds a grunt of withering contempt. 

The growth of the children in wisdom and 
morality is aided also by the hearing from the lips 
of their elders wise saws and ancient maxims that 
embody the experience of their forefathers, many 
of which are possibly of Malay origin. A few 
of these seem worthy of citation here : — 

" Never mind a drop or two so long as you don't 
spill the whole." 

11 Better white bones than white eyes " (which 
means — that death is preferable to shame). 

" If you haven't a rattan do the best you can with 
a creeper." 

1 66 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

It is difficult to say exactly at what age puberty 
begins with the youths. The girls mostly begin 
their courses in the fourteenth or fifteenth year. 
By this time the girl of the better class has the 
lobes of her ears distended to form loops, which 
allow her heavy ear-rings to reach to her collar-bone 
or even lower, and she is far advanced towards com- 
pletion of her tatu on thighs, feet, hands, and fore- 
arms (see Chap. XII.). The process is begun at 
about the tenth year, and is continued from time to 
time, only a small area being covered at each bout, 
owing to the pain of the operation and the ensuing 
inflammation and discomfort. 

The boys begin at about fifteen years, or rather 
earlier, to assert their independence, by clubbing 
together with those of their own age, and taking 
up their sleeping quarters with the bachelors in the 
gallery. At an earlier age the children have picked 
up a number of songs and spontaneously sing them 
in groups, but now they begin to develop their 
powers of musical expression by practising with the 
keluri, Jew's harp, drum and tawak. 

Of these instruments the first is the most used, 
especially by the youths. 1 1 is a rude form of the bag- 
pipes. The keluri consists of a dried gourd which has 
the shape of an oval flask with a long neck (Fig. 85). 
The closed ends of a bundle of six narrow bamboo 
pipes are inserted in the body of the gourd through 
a hole cut in its wall, and are fixed hermetically with 
wax. Their free ends are open, and each pipe has 
a small lateral hole or stop at a carefully deter- 
mined distance from the open end. The artist blows 
through the neck of the gourd, and the air enters 
the base of each pipe by an oblong aperture which 
is filled by a vibrating tongue or reed ; this is formed 
by shaving away the wall of the bamboo till it is 
very thin, and then cutting through it round three 
sides of the oblong ; it is weighted with a piece of 

XVIII 

CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH 

167 

wax. The holes are stopped by the fingers, each 
pipe emitting its note only when its hole is stopped. 
The physical principles involved are ob- 
scure to us. Varieties of this instrument 
are made by all the tribes of Borneo as 
well as by many other peoples of the far 
East (PL 70). 

The bamboo harp is similar to that made 
and used by the Punans (see Fig. 86) ; the 
sapeh is a two-stringed instrument of the 
banjo order ; the strings are thin strips of 
rattan ; the whole stem and body are carved 
out of a single block of hard wood (see 
PL 170 and Fig. 20). 

Some of the girls learn to execute a 
solo dance, which consists largely in slow 
graceful movements of the arms and hands 
(PL 170). The bigger boys are taught 
to take part in the dance in which the 
return from the warpath is dramatically 
represented. This is a musical march 
rather than a dance. A party of young 
men in full war-dress form up in single 
line ; the leader, and perhaps two or three 
others, play the battle march on the keluri. 
The line advances slowly up the gallery, 
each man turning half about 
at every third step, the even 
numbers turning to the one 
hand, the odd to the other 
hand, alternately, and all 
stamping together as they 
complete the turn at each 
third step. The turning to 
right and left symbolises the 
alert guarding of the heads 
which are supposed to be carried by the victorious 
warriors. 

Fig. 85.— Keluri. 

VOL. II 

M 

1 68 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

A more violent display of warlike feeling is given 
in the war-dance which is executed by one or two 
warriors only. The youth, in full panoply of war, 
and brandishing a parang and shield, goes through 
the movements of a single combat with some fanciful 
exaggeration (PL 171). He crouches beneath his 
shield, and springs violently hither and thither, emit- 
ting piercing yells of defiance and rage, cutting and 
striking at his imaginary foe or his partner in the 
dance. But it is characteristic of the Kayans that 
neither in this dance nor in actual practice in fencing 
do they attempt to strike one another. The boy, 
besides watching these martial displays, is instructed 
in the arts of striking, parrying, and shielding by the 
older men, who strike at him with a stick but arrest 
the blow before it goes home. And we have found it 
impossible to introduce among them a more realistic 
mode of playful fencing. The ground of this 
reluctance actually to strike one another in fencing 
is probably their strong feeling for symbolism and 
the prevailing tendency to believe that the sym- 
bolical art brings about that which it symbolises. 
In part also it is due to the fact that to draw the 
blood of any member of the household is lali and 
involves the penalty of a fine.1 

The youth goes through no elaborate rite of 
initiation to manhood ; and, to the best of our 
knowledge, there exists no body of secret knowledge 
or of tradition or rites shared in only by the adult 
men, to participation in which he might be admitted 
in the course of such a rite. The only rite that is 
required to qualify him for taking his place as a full- 
fledged member of the community is the second 
occasion on which he strikes at the heads taken 
in battle. We have seen that he performs this 
ceremonial act for the first time when still of tender 

1 Even when in tatuing blood is drawn, as almost inevitably occurs, beads 
are given the tatuer to indemnify her and make it clear that the deed was not 
intended. 

Plate 171. A KAYAN DANCING. 

CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH 169 

age. The age at which he repeats it depends in 
part upon the occurrence of an opportunity ; it 
commonly falls between his eighth and fifteenth year. 
If in a house there is a number of big lads who have 
not performed this rite, owing to no heads having 
been taken for some years, a head may be borrowed 
for the purpose from a friendly household ; and in 
this case the borrowed head is brought into the 
house with all the pomp and ceremony of successful 
war. 

As the returning war -party approaches the 
village, the boys who are to take part in the rite are 
marshalled before the house by a master of the 
ceremonies. He kills a fowl and thrusts a sharpened 
stake right through it, so that the point projects 
from its beak, and slashes the carcase into three 
pieces, one for the adults of the house, one for 
the boys, and one for the infants. He then takes a 
short bamboo knife, and a bunch of isang leaves, and, 
after making a short address to the boys, ties a band 
of isang round the wrist of each of them, and, dilut- 
ing the blood of the fowl with water, smears some 
of the mixture on each boy's wrist-band. He puts 
a handful of rice on a burning log and gives a grain 
of it to each of the boys to eat. 

Some old man of the house goes down to the 
river to meet the returning war-party and brings up 
the head (or one of the heads) and holds it out, 
while the master of ceremonies, holding the portion 
of the fowl's carcase assigned to the boys, leads up 
each boy in turn to strike at the head with a sword. 
The boys then go down to the river ; and, 
while they bathe, a bunch of isang with which the 
head has been decorated is waved over them. 
During the feasting which follows the boys may eat 
only twice a day. No youth may join a war-party 
until he has taken part in this rite. The boys are 
with few or no exceptions keen to go out to war and 

170 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

therefore they like to go through this ceremony at 
the earliest permissible opportunity. 

When the youth begins to feel strongly the 
attraction of the other sex, he finds opportunities 
of paying visits, with a few companions, in friendly 
houses. It is then said in his own house that he 
has gone "to seek tobacco," a phrase which is well 
understood to mean that he has gone to seek female 
companionship.1 

We must not pass over without mention a 
peculiar mutilation which is practised by most of 
the Kayan youths as they approach manhood, 
namely, the transverse perforation of the glans penis 
and the insertion of a short rod of polished bone or 
hard wood. 

A youth of average presentability will usually 
succeed in becoming the accepted lover of some girl 
in his own or another house (cp. Chap. V.); and 
though he may engage himself in this way with two 
or three girls in turn before deciding to "settle 
down," he is usually not much over twenty years of 
age when he becomes accepted as the future husband 
of a girl some years his junior. A Kayan youth 
who has rendered pregnant a girl with whom he 
has kept company can be relied upon to acknowledge 
his responsibility and to marry her before her time 
comes. In general it may be said that the rite of 
marriage does not mark so complete a change in 
the recognised relations of the young couple as 
with ourselves, except perhaps in those parts of 
this country where " handfasting " is recognised 
as customary and regular. A time is appointed for 
the wedding, generally shortly after the completion 
of the padi- harvest ; but this date is liable to be 
repeatedly postponed to the following year by the 
occurrence of various events which are regarded as 

1 It came into use, no doubt, through the hospitable offering of cigarettes 
by the women of the household. 

CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH 171 

of evil omen and as foretelling the early death of 
one of the couple if they should persist in going 
through the ceremony. Such omens are hardly ever 
disregarded ; not even if the girl is far advanced in 
pregnancy.1 In the latter case the girl does not 
incur the odium that attaches to the production of 
bastard offspring (see Chap. XX.) ; she is treated 
as a married woman would be, and her child is 
regarded as legitimate. 

We describe in the following paragraphs the 
wedding of the son of an influential Kayan chief to 
the daughter of the chief of another house of the 
same village, such as we have had occasion to assist 
at. The weddings of couples of less exalted station 
are correspondingly less elaborate in all particulars. 

When the appointed time draws near, the bride- 
groom sends a trusted friend (his " best man ") to 
open negotiations with the bride's parents. The 
emissary carries with him a number of presents whose 
value accords with the status and wealth of the 
bridegroom's parents. For some time the fiction 
is maintained that the object of his visit is not even 
suspected by the family, who make enquiries into 
the nature of his business. After some fencing 
he comes to the point and asks on behalf of his 
friend for a definite date at which he may marry 
the daughter. The parents raise objections and 
difficulties of all sorts, and perhaps nothing is 
settled until a second or third visit. If the parents 
accept the proposal, the best man hands to them 
five sets each of sixteen beads, the beads of each 
set being of uniform shape and colour, namely 
(1) small yellow beads (utek); (2) black beads 
(medak) ; (3) a set known as habarani which may 

1 The omen birds are not consulted in the hope of obtaining favourable 
omens ; but rather special events are regarded as of evil omen ; such are any 
outbreak of fire in the house, any fatal accident to any member of the house, 
the repeated crying of the muntjac (the barking deer) about the house. In one 
instance known to us the attractive daughter of a Kenyah chief had three times 
been compelled by series of bad omens to break off the betrothals. 

172 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

not be worn by the bride before the naming of her 
first child ; (4) light blue beads (krutang) ; (5) dark 
blue beads (tobi). Each of these sets of beads is 
held to ensure to the bride the enjoyment of some 
moral good. The girl also sends a string of beads 
to her lover by the hand of his best man, and at 
last the date is fixed, due regard being paid to the 
phases of the moon ; new moon is considered the 
most favourable time of the month. The importance 
ascribed to the phase of the moon seems to arise 
from the fact that the shape of the half- moon 
suggests the state of pregnancy. Tally is kept by 
both parties of the date agreed upon. On two 
long strips of rattan an equal number of knots is 
tied. Each party keeps one of these tallies (often 
it is carried tied below the knee) and cuts off one 
knot each morning ; when the last knot alone 
remains, the appointed day is at hand. 

The parties on both sides invite the attendance 
of their friends and relatives, who crowd the gallery 
of the bride's house. Early in the morning the 
bridegroom arrives with his best man and a party 
of young friends in full war-dress ; they land from a 
boat even though they have come but a few yards 
by water. They march up to the house, some of 
them carrying large brass gongs ; ascending the 
ladder, they lay the gongs down the gallery from 
the head of the ladder towards the door of the bride's 
room at such intervals that the bride can step from 
one to another. It is understood that these gongs 
become the property of the bride and her parents. 
Others of the bridegroom's band carry other articles 
of value, and when the party reaches the door of 
the bride's room, they parley with her parents and 
friends who are gathered in the room, displaying 
and offering these objects to the defenders of the 
room as inducements to admit them. They strive 
also to push open the door. Presently the men of 

CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH 173 

the defending party make a sortie from the room 
fully armed, and repel the attackers with much show 
of violence, but without bloodshed. After this sham 
fight has been repeated, perhaps several times, the 
bridegroom and his supporters are at last admitted 
to the room, and they rush in, only to find, perhaps, 
that the coy maiden has slipped away through the 
small door which generally gives access to a neigh- 
bouring room. The impatient bridegroom cannot 
obtain information as to her whereabouts, and so he 
and his men sit down in the room and accept the 
proffered cigarettes. Presently the bride relents and 
returns to her parents' room accompanied by a bevy 
of her girl friends. But the bridegroom takes no 
notice of her entry. The inevitable pig meanwhile 
has been laid in the gallery, together with a few 
gifts for the dayong who is to read its liver. Here 
the final steps of the bargaining are conducted by 
the friends of the bridegroom. (It is impossible to 
say in each case how far this bargaining is genuine 
and how far the terms of the bargain have been 
arranged beforehand.) More gongs are added to 
the row upon the floor, chiefly by the friends invited 
by the bridegroom, who thus make their wedding 
gifts, perhaps until the row extends to the door of 
the bride's room. The pig is then killed and its 
liver examined ; and, if necessary, this is repeated 
with another and another pig, until one whose liver 
permits of favourable interpretation is found. (A 
series of bad livers would lead to postponement.) 
The dayong then sprinkles pig's blood and water 
from a gong upon all the assembly, invoking the 
blessing of the gods upon the young couple, asking 
for them long life and many children. Then the 
bride and bridegroom walk up and down the row 
of gongs eight times, stepping only upon the metal. 
In some cases the bridegroom descends to his boat 
at the landing-stage on each of these eight excur- 

174 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

sions, thus showing that he is free to come and go 
as he pleases and has no entanglements. In this 
degenerate age the ceremony terminates with this 
act, but for the feasting and speech-making which 
fill up the evening hours. But in the old days, 
as we are credibly informed by those who have 
been eye-witnesses, the bride descended with the 
groom and his party to his boat and was then carried 
off at full speed, pursued by several boat-loads of 
her friends. The fleeing party would then check 
the pursuit by throwing out on to the bank every 
article of value still remaining among them ; each 
article in turn would be snapped up by the pursuers, 
who then, having thus resisted to the last and 
extorted the highest possible price from the bride- 
groom, would allow the happy pair to console each 
other in peace for the many trials they had had to 
endure. 

It may seem difficult to reconcile the form of the 
marriage ceremony (involving as it does a blending 
of symbolical capture with actual purchase) with the 
fact that, in accordance with the custom almost 
universally followed among Kayans, the bridegroom 
becomes a member of the room of his father-in-law 
and remains there for some years before carrying 
off his wife to his own house. But we think this 
latter practice, which in some quarters has been 
regarded as a survival from a matriarchal organisa- 
tion of society, is a recently introduced custom, which 
has come rapidly into favour as a means by which 
the bridegroom and his friends avoid a part of the 
expense involved in the older form of marriage. 
For the residence for a period of years of the young 
couple in the house and room of the wife's parents 
is made a part of the marriage contract. If the 
bride is the only child of a chief, her husband may 
remain permanently in her home and succeed her 
father as chief. But in most cases the couple 

CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH 175 

migrates to the husband's house after a few years, 
generally on the occasion of the building of a new 
house or on the death of his father, both of which 
events afford him the opportunity of becoming head 
of a room and thus taking rank as, and assuming 
the full responsibilities of, a pater familias. 

The marriage ceremonies of the Kenyahs and 
Klemantans are similar but less elaborate. But 
the Sea Dayak ceremony is different. A feast is 
made in the house of the girl's parents. The bride- 
groom makes no considerable gifts to the parents of 
the bride, though he is generally expected to become 
a member of their household for the first few years 
of his married life. The principal feature of the 
ceremony is the splitting open of a pinang (the seed 
of the areca palm) during the feast, in the presence 
of the young couple and their relatives. The two 
halves are examined for signs of decay or imper- 
fection ; and if there are none, the marriage is 
regarded as approved. A live fowl is waved over 
the couple by the chief of the house as he says, 
" Make them prosperous, make them happy, give 
them long life, make them wealthy, etc. etc." The 
phrases conform to a conventional pattern, but each 
orator modifies and adapts them freely. The words 
seemed to be addressed to the fowl, and it seems 
impossible to discover in the Iban mind any con- 
ception of a higher power behind or beyond the 
fowl, though we may suspect that in a vague way 
the live fowl symbolises or represents Life in general 
or the power behind Nature (PL 173). 

Few or no Kayans can state their age without 
going through some preliminary calculations, and 
even then their statements are apt to be vague and 
uncertain. A Kayan mother can generally work 
out the age of each of her children on request. She 
puts down in a row bits of leaf or stick, one for each 
year, working back from the present, and recalling 

176 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO ch.xvih 

each year by the name of the place where the padi 
crop of that year was raised. When she reaches 
back to the year of the birth of any one of her 
children, she says that the child was born about or 
before or soon after this particular harvest, and by 
counting the pieces of stuff laid down she then 
arrives at the child's age. 

An elderly man can generally make no more 
accurate statement regarding his age than that at 
the time of the great eclipse he had just begun to 
wear a waistcloth, or that when the great guns were 
heard (i.e. the sound of the eruption of Krakatoa) 
he was just beginning " to look for tobacco." 

We mention here a statement commonly made 
by Kayans, which, if true, is of some interest as 
reporting a curious exception to a world - wide 
custom commonly regarded as directly determined 
by the difference of nature between the sexes, the 
report, namely, that among the Kalabits the initiative 
in all love-making is taken by the women. We have 
no detailed information in regard to their courtship 
and marriage procedures. 

CHAPTER XIX 

THE NOMAD HUNTERS 

In almost all parts of Borneo there are to be found 
hidden in the remotest recesses of the jungles small 
bands of homeless nomad hunters. All these closely 
resemble one another in physical characters and in 
mode of life ; but differences of language mark them 
as belonging to several groups, of which the Punans, 
the Ukits, the Sians, the Bukitans, the Lugats, and 
the Lisums are the best known. Hitherto we have 
designated all these groups by the name Punan, 
which properly belongs to the largest group only. 
These groups inhabit different areas, though there 
is considerable overlapping ; and it seems probable 
that they are merely local varieties of one stock, and 
that their differences are mainly the results of 
geographical separation and of intercourse with, and 
probably some mingling of blood with, the settled 
tribes of the regions inhabited by the several groups. 
For their languages seem to be closely allied ; but in 
each region the nomads seem to have adopted many 
words from their settled neighbours, with whom 
they trade ; and instances are known to us in which 
the men of the settled tribes have married women 
of the nomads and have adopted their mode of life, 
and others in which children of nomad women, 
married into Kenyah, Kayan, or other villages, 
have gone back to their mothers' people. 

The Punans proper are found in the central 

177 

178 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

highlands wandering through the upper parts of the 
basins of all the large rivers ; here and there they 
range into the lowlands, and in rare instances they 
even reach the coast. The Ukits, on the other 
hand, confine themselves to the interior, and are 
found chiefly in the upper parts of the basins of the 
Kotei, the Rejang, the Kapuas, and Banjermassin 
rivers. The Bukitans inhabit chiefly the upper 
basins of the rivers of Sarawak. Although these 
nomads wander perpetually in the forests, moving 
their camp every few weeks or months, any one 
group attaches itself to a particular area, partly 
because they become familiar with its natural 
resources, partly because they establish friendly 
relations with the villagers of the region, with whom 
they barter jungle-produce to the advantage of both 
parties. The settled tribesmen of any region find 
this trade so profitable that they regard the harmless 
nomads with friendly feelings, learn their language, 
and avoid and reprobate any harsh treatment of 
them that might drive them to leave their district. 
In fact they look upon them with a certain sense of 
proprietorship and are jealous of their intercourse 
with other tribes ; the nomads, in fact, rank high 
among the many natural products of the jungle that 
render any particular region attractive to the tribes- 
men. 

Of all these nomad groups the Punans are the 
most numerous and we have seen more of them 
than of any others. We therefore describe their 
peculiar mode of life ; but it may be understood that 
what we say of them holds good in the main of the 
other groups of nomads with but little modification. 

From the point of view of physical development 
the Punans are among the finest of the peoples of 
Borneo. They resemble the Kenyahs more closely 
than any other tribe ; that is to say, they are of very 
pale yellow colour, of short stature with long body 

Plate 174. PUNANS OF THE BARAM. 

xix THE NOMAD HUNTERS 179 

and short legs, but otherwise well proportioned and 
very sturdily built with well-rounded limbs and 
large muscular development. Their heads are sub- 
brachycephalic and inclining to be square ; their 
features are more regular than those of most other 
tribes ; their most distinctive physical characters are 
a relatively well-developed nasal bridge, nostrils 
directed so much forward that one seems to look 
right into their heads through them, and the slight 
greenish tinge and fine silky texture of their pale 
yellow skins. The greenish tinge may be noticed 
in all nomad Punans, and it is possible that the 
ruddier darker tint of the agricultural peoples is 
largely or wholly due to their greater exposure to 
the sun ; for the Punan fears the broad daylight and 
rarely or never leaves the deep shade of the jungle. 

In fineness of texture of the skin they surpass all 
the other tribes, and they seldom or never suffer 
from the disfiguring scaly affections of the skin so 
common among the others. 

The Punans are more uniform as regards their 
physical characters than the other peoples ; there 
are no distinctions of upper and lower social strata 
as among the other tribes, and thus the mixture of 
blood, which in the Kayan and Kenyah communities 
results from the adoption of war captives into the 
lower class, does not occur with them ; and they 
present none of the wide diversities of type such as 
are common in the other tribes, especially between 
the upper and lower social classes. They corre- 
spond, in fact, to the relatively pure bred upper 
classes of the other tribes, and present the same 
high standard of physical development and vigour. 
It is not improbable that the severer conditions of 
their mode of life contribute to maintain this high 
standard. 

The facial expression and the bodily attitudes of 
the Punans are also characteristic. When gathered 

180 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

in friendly talk with strangers, even those whom 
they have every reason to trust, they prefer to 
remain squatting on their heels, rather than to sit 
down on a mat ; and the tension of their muscles, 
combined with the still alert watchfulness of their 
faces, conveys the impression that they are ready to 
leap up and flee away or to struggle for their lives at 
any moment. It is doubtless this alertness of facial 
expression and bodily attitude that gives the Punan 
something of the air of an untameable wild animal. 

In spite of his distrustful expression the Punan 
is a likeable person, rich in good qualities and 
innocent of vices. He never slays or attacks men 
of other tribes wantonly ; he never seeks or takes 
a head, for his customs do not demand it ; and he 
never goes upon the warpath, except when occasion- 
ally he joins a war-party of some other tribe in order 
to facilitate the avenging of blood. But he will 
defend himself and his family pluckily, if he is 
attacked and has no choice of flight ; and, if any one 
has killed one of his relatives, he will seek an oppor- 
tunity of planting a poisoned dart in his body. In 
a case of this kind all the Punans of a large area 
will aid one another in obtaining certain information 
as to the identity of the offender ; and any one of them 
will avenge the injury to his people, if the opportunity 
presents itself. They do not avenge themselves 
indiscriminately on all or any member of the 
offender's village or family, but they will postpone 
their vengeance for years, if the actual offender cannot 
be reached more promptly. It seems worth while 
to recount a particular instance of Punan vengeance. 
The Punans of the Tinjar basin were claimed by a 
Sebop chief; that is to say, the chief, Jangan by 
name, regarded them as under his protection and 
as therefore under an obligation to trade with him 
and his people only. But the Pokun people in the 
basin of a neighbouring river, the Balaga, a tributary 

Plate 175. ELDERLY PUNAN HEADMAN. 

Plate 176. A PUNAN HEADMAN OF THE TINJAR. 

THE NOMAD HUNTERS 181 

of the Rejang, also claimed similar rights over the 
Punans of the district. One of these Pokuns, a man 
of the upper class, being angered by the adhesion 
of the Punans to the chief Jangan and by their re- 
fusal to trade with him, cut down one of them during 
an altercation in the jungle, leaving him dead on the 
spot. The companions of the murdered man retired, 
and all the Punans deserted the neighbourhood of 
the Pokuns. Some four years later the Pokun com- 
munity migrated to the Tinjar ; and shortly after- 
wards the murderer, thinking the whole matter was 
forgotten, set out through the jungle with a small 
party to seek to trade with another group of 
Punans. While on the march he was struck in the 
cheek (the favourite spot for the aim of the Punan 
marksman) by a poisoned dart from an unseen 
assailant and died within ten minutes. His com- 
panions, remembering the incident of four years 
before, suspected the Punans, but saw no trace 
of any. 

The Punans confessed the act of vengeance to 
Jangan, and he communicated the facts to the 
Resident of the Baram district (C.H.), who happened 
to be in the neighbourhood at the time. The Pokuns 
wished to take vengeance on the Punans, and they 
would undoubtedly have turned out in force to hunt 
down and kill all the Punan men they could find, 
but that the Resident forbade them to take action, 
and enforced his command by threatening to burn 
down their houses in their absence. It is only fair 
to add that the Pokun chief recognised the justice 
of this prohibition and showed no resentment. 

That the Punans will not allow the slaying of 
any one of their number to go unavenged on the 
person of the slayer is well known to all the people 
of the country, and this knowledge does much to 
give them immunity from attack. 

The Punans cultivate no crops and have no 

182 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

domestic animals. They live entirely upon the wild 
produce of the jungle, vegetable and animal. Of 
the former, sago and a form of vegetable tallow 
found in the seed of a tree (Skorea) are the most 
important. Animals of all kinds are eaten, and are 
secured principally by the aid of the blow-pipe and 
poisoned darts, in the use of which the Punans are 
very expert. The Punan dwelling is merely a rude 
low shelter of palm leaves, supported on sticks to 
form a sloping roof which keeps off the rain but 
very imperfectly, and leaves the interior open on 
every side.1 

A Punan community consists generally of some 
twenty to thirty adult men and women, and about 
the same number of children. One of the older 
men is recognised as the leader or chief. He has 
little formally defined authority, but rather the 
authority only that is naturally accorded to age and 
experience and to the fuller knowledge of the tribal 
history and traditions that comes with age. His 
sway is a very mild one ; he dispenses no substantial 
punishments ; public opinion and tradition seem to 
be the sole and sufficient sanctions of conduct among 
these Arcadian bands of gentle wary wanderers. 
Decisions as to the movements of the band are 
arrived at by open discussion, in which the leader 
will exercise an influence proportioned to his reputa- 
tion for knowledge and judgment. He is mainly 
responsible for the reading of the omens, and has 
charge of the few and simple household gods — if that 
lofty title may be given to the wooden image of a 
crocodile and the bundle of charms attached to it 
which are always to be seen in a Punan camp. 

If, in case of disagreement, one or more of the 

1 Some few communities of Punans live in the large caves of the limestone 
mountains ; it seems possible that this is a survival of a very ancient custom 
that preceded the making of shelters, however rude ; but we know of no facts 
which can be regarded as supporting this view, save that we have found human 
bones of uncertain age in several caves. Some of these caves have undoubtedly 
been used as burial-places, possibly during epidemics of cholera or smallpox. 

THE NOMAD HUNTERS 183 

members of a band refuses to accept the judgment 
of the leader and of the majority, he, or they, will 
withdraw from the community together with wife 
and children, to form a band which, though in the 
main independent of the parent group, will usually 
remain in its near neighbourhood and maintain some 
intercourse. Fighting between Punans, whether of 
the same or of different communities, is very rare ; 
the only instances known to us are a few in which 
Punans have been incited by men of other tribes to 
join in an attack on their fellows. 

The members of the band are for the most part 
the near relatives of the leader, brothers and sons 
and nephews with their wives and children. Each 
man has usually one wife. We know of no instances 
of polygyny amongst them; though we know of cases 
in which a Punan woman has become the second 
wife of a man of some other tribe. On the other 
hand, polyandry occurs, generally in cases in which 
a woman married to an elderly man has no children 
by him. They desire many children, and large 
families are the rule ; a family with as many as eight 
or nine children is no rarity. 

Marriage is for life, though separation by the 
advice and direction of the chief, or by desertion of 
the man to another community, occurs. Sexual 
restraint is probably maintained at about the same 
level as among the other peoples, the women being 
more strictly chaste after than before marriage. The 
ceremony of marriage is less elaborate than among 
the settled tribes. A young man will become the 
lover of a girl generally of some other group than his 
own, and when she becomes pregnant the marriage 
is celebrated. There is little or no formal arrange- 
ment of marriages by the elders on behalf of the 
young people. 

The ceremony of marriage consists merely in a 
feast in which all, or most of, the members of the 

VOL. II N 

1 84 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

two communities take part. Speeches are made, 
and the leaders exhort the young couple to industry 
and to obedience to themselves, making specific 
mention of the principal duties of either sex, such as 
collecting camphor and procuring animal food for 
the man, the preparing of sago, cooking, and tend- 
ing the children for the woman. 

After the ceremony, the husband joins the wife's 
community and generally remains a member of it ; 
unlike the Kayans, among whom a husband, though 
he may live for some years with his wife's people, 
eventually brings her to his father's village. No 
definite payment is made to the parents of the 
bride, but some small gift, perhaps two or three 
pounds of tobacco, is usually presented to them by 
the bridegroom. 

Adverse omens may cause the postponement of 
a marriage ; but beyond this there seems to be no 
regular method of obtaining or seeking divine sanc- 
tion for the marriage ; an offering of cooked food 
may be made to Bali-Penyalong, by placing it on 
a stake beneath the image of the crocodile (which 
seems to serve as an altar) with some dedicatory 
words — for like the other peoples the Punans are 
voluble in speech, both in human intercourse and 
in appealing to the supernatural powers. On such 
occasions the words uttered usually take in part the 
form of a prayer for protection from danger. 

Those who are accustomed to all the complex com- 
forts and resources of civilisation, and to whom all 
these resources hardly suffice to make tolerable the 
responsibility and labour of the rearing of a family, 
can hardly fail to be filled with wonder at the thought 
of these gentle savages bearing and rearing large 
families of healthy well-mannered children in the 
damp jungle, without so much as a permanent shelter 
above their heads. The rude shelter of boughs and 
leaves, which is their only house, is perhaps made 

:|Plate 178. TATUED UKIT OF REJANG DISTRICT. 

THE NOMAD HUNTERS 185 

a little more private than usual for the benefit of the 
labouring woman. The pregnant woman goes on 
with her work up to the moment of labour and re- 
sumes it almost immediately afterwards. She at 
once becomes responsible for the care of the infant. 
The only special treatment after childbirth is to sit 
with the back close to a fire, so as to heat it as 
much as can be borne. The delivery is sometimes 
aided by tightly binding the body above the gravid 
uterus in order, it would seem, to prevent any re- 
trogression of the process. While the mother goes 
about her work in camp, the infant is usually sus- 
pended in a sling of bark-cloth from a bent sapling 
or branch, an arrangement which enables the mother 
to rock and so soothe the child by means of an 
occasional push. When travelling or working in 
the jungle the mother carries the infant slung upon 
her back, either in a bark-cloth or a specially con- 
structed cradle of plaited rattan such as is used by 
the Kayans. The infant is suckled from one to two 
years, and then takes to the ordinary diet of boiled 
wild sago, varied with other animal and vegetable 
products of the jungle. 

The children begin to help in the family work at 
a very early age. They are disciplined largely by 
frequent warnings against dangers, actual and sup- 
positious, of which they remain acutely conscious 
throughout life. This discipline no doubt contri- 
butes largely to induce the air and the attitude of 
timid alertness which are so characteristic of the 
Punan. Harmony and mutual help are the rule 
within the family circle, as well as throughout the 
larger community ; the men generally treat their 
wives and children with all kindness, and the women 
perform their duties cheerfully and faithfully. 

The religious beliefs and practices of the Punans 
are similar to those of the Kayans, but are less 
elaborated. They observe a simpler system of 

i86 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

omens, of which the behaviour and calls of lizards 
and grasshoppers and of the civet cat (Arctogale) 
are the chief. They pray to Bali Penyalong, who 
seems to be the principal object of their trust. This 
being is probably conceived anthropomorphically, 
but his human qualities are not so clearly marked 
as in the case of the gods of the settled tribes. 
They make no images in human form, and we do 
not know that Bali Penyalong is supposed by them 
to have a wife. The only image used in rites is the 
wooden image of the crocodile, which is carried from 
place to place with every change of camp. In com- 
municating with the omen -creatures, fire and the 
frayed sticks are used in much the same way as by 
the Kayans. Their rites involve no animal sacrifices, 
and they do not look for guidance or answer to 
prayer in the entrails of animals. It seems probable 
that the Punans in each region have absorbed some 
of their religious and superstitious notions from the 
settled tribes of the same region ; for in each region 
the Punan beliefs are different, showing more or 
less affinity to those of the settled tribes. It is an 
obscure question whether all their religious belief 
has been thus absorbed from more cultured neigh- 
bours, or whether the Punans represent in this and 
other respects the perpetuation (perhaps with some 
degeneration or impoverishment) of a more primitive 
culture once common to the ancestors of all, or the 
greater part of, the tribes of Borneo.1 The fact that 
the principal divinity recognised by them bears the 
same name (Bali Penyalong) as the chief god of the 
Kenyahs is compatible with either view. 

Beside Bali Penyalong the Punans are aware of 
the existence of other divinities, which, however, are 
very obscurely conceived and seldom approached 
with prayer or rite. As regards the land of shades 
and the journey thither, Punan beliefs are closely 

1 See Chap. XXI. 

THE NOMAD HUNTERS 187 

similar to those of Kenyahs and some of the 
Klemantans. Their account of the journey of the 
dead includes the passage of a river guarded by a 
great fish and a hornbill (see Chap. XIV.). But they 
practice no burial and no funeral rites. As soon as 
a man dies in any camp, the whole community 
moves on to a new camp, leaving his body under 
one of their rude shelters, covered only with a few 
leaves and branches. 

Their view of the life after death seems to 
involve no system of retribution and to be wellnigh 
devoid of moral significance. Their religious beliefs 
probably influence their conduct less strongly than 
do those of the Kayans ; for among the latter such 
beliefs certainly make strongly for social conduct, 
i.e. for obedience to the chiefs and for observance of 
custom and public opinion ; but in the Punan 
community the conditions of life are so simple and 
so nearly in harmony with the impulses of the 
natural man that temptations to wrong-doing are few 
and weak ; external sanctions of conduct, therefore, 
are but little needed and but little operative. 

Danger assails the Punan on every side and at 
all times, hence alertness, energy, and courage are 
the prime virtues ; courage is rated highest, and a 
woman looks especially for courage in her husband. 
But though courageous and active, Punans are not 
pugnacious ; as was said above, they rarely or never 
fight against one another, and the nomadic groups 
of each region maintain friendly relations with one 
another. Within each group harmony and mutual 
helpfulness is the rule ; each shares with all members 
of the group whatever food, whether vegetable or 
animal, he may procure by skill or good fortune. 
On returning to camp with a piece of game, a Punan 
throws it down in the midst and it is treated as 
common property. If he has slain a large pig or 
deer, too heavy for him to bring in unaided, he 

188 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

returns to camp and modestly keeps silence over his 
achievement until some question as to his luck is 
put to him ; then he remarks that he has left some 
small piece of game in the jungle, a mere trifle. 
Three or four men will then set out and, following 
the path he has marked by bending down twigs on 
his way back to camp, will find the game and bring 
it in. If a present of tobacco is made to one 
member of a group of Punans, the whole mass is 
divided by one of them into as many heaps as there 
are members of the band present ; and then each of 
them, men and women alike, takes one heap for his 
or her own use, the one who divided the mass taking 
the heap left by the rest. 

In spite of their shyness and timidity, they 
respond readily to kind treatment. They are never 
seen on the rivers, as they have no boats and 
cannot easily be persuaded to venture a trip in a 
boat. It is possible to make many expeditions 
through the jungle without getting any glimpse of 
them. One of us (C. H.) had lived in the Baram 
district six years before succeeding in seeing a 
single Punan. The history of his first meeting 
with Punans may serve to illustrate their timidity, 
caution, and good feeling. On making a long 
hunting trip on the slopes of Mount Dulit, he took 
with him a Sebop who was familiar with Punans and 
their language. For some days no trace of them 
was seen ; but one morning freshly made footprints 
were observed round about the camp. The follow- 
ing night a cleft stick was set up at some twenty 
paces from the camp with a large cake of tobacco in 
the cleft, and on the stick a mark was carved which 
would be understood by the Punans as implying 
that they were at liberty to take the tobacco. This 
is a method of opening communications and trade 
with them well known to the Klemantans. In the 
morning the tobacco had disappeared, and fresh foot- 

xix THE NOMAD HUNTERS 189 

prints showed that its disappearance was due to 
human agency. The following night this procedure 
was repeated, and in the course of the day Punan 
shouts were heard, coming from a distance of some 
hundreds of yards. The interpreter was sent out 
with instructions to parley and, if possible, to persuade 
the Punans to come into camp. Presently he 
returned with two shy but curious strangers, who 
squatted at some distance and were gradually 
encouraged to come to close quarters. After 
staying a few minutes and accepting presents of 
tobacco and cloth, they made off. On the following 
day they returned with eight male companions, 
bringing a monkey, a hornbill, and a rare bird, all 
killed with their poisoned darts ; and they enquired 
how much rubber they should bring in return for the 
tobacco. They were told that no return was 
expected, but, understanding that animals of all 
sorts were being collected, they attached themselves 
to the party, lent their unmatched skill to adding to 
the collections, and brought in many rare specimens 
that now repose safely in the Natural History 
Museum at South Kensington. They soon gained 
confidence and took up their sleeping quarters 
under the raised floor of the rough hut ; and, when 
after some weeks the time for parting came, they 
voluntarily took a prominent part in carrying down 
the collections to the boats, and went away well 
satisfied with the simple presents they received. 

Punans never build boats or travel on the water 
of their own initiative and agency. In fact they 
dislike to come out from the shade of the forest on 
to a cleared space or the stony bed of the river. 
They are very conservative in spite of their inter- 
course with more advanced tribes, and they harbour 
many irrational prejudices. They entertain a 
particular aversion to the crocodile, an aversion 
strongly tinged with awe. They will not kill it or 

i9o PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

any one of their omen-beasts. They are very shy 
of whatever is unfamiliar. Many of them will not 
eat salt or rice when opportunity offers. 

The medicine men or Dayongs of the Punans 
are distinguished for their knowledge and skill, and 
are in much request among the other tribes for 
the catching of souls and the extraction of pains and 
disease. They are therefore fairly numerous ; but, 
as among the other peoples, the calling is a highly 
specialised one, though not one which occupies a 
man's whole time or excuses him from the usual 
labours of his community. Their methods do not 
differ widely from those of the Kayan and Kenyah 
Dayongs. 

The Punan has great faith in charms, especially 
for bringing good luck in hunting. He usually 
carries, tied to his quiver, a bundle of small objects 
which have forcibly attracted his attention for any 
reason, e.g. a large quartz crystal, a strangely 
shaped tusk or tooth or pebble, etc., and this 
bundle of charms is dipped in the blood of the 
animals that fall to his blow-pipe. 

As regards dress and weapons the Punan differs 
little from his neighbours. A scanty waist-cloth 
of home-made bark-cloth, or equally scanty skirt 
for the woman, strings of small beads round wrists 
or ankles or both, numbers of slender bands of 
plaited palm-fibre below the knees and about the 
wrists, and sometimes a strip of cloth round the 
head, make up his costume for all occasions. 

All his belongings are such as can easily be 
transported. He carries a sword, a small knife, a 
blow-pipe with spear-blade attached, and a small 
axe with long narrow blade for working camphor 
out of the heart of the camphor-tree. Besides 
these essential tools and weapons, which he con- 
stantly carries, the family possesses sago-mallets 
and sieves, dishes and spoons or spatulas of hard- 

.*rIV»/VtfTO 

4f^@Mfl« 

Plate 181. PUNANS WORKING CAMPHOR. 

r\ 

THE NOMAD HUNTERS 191 

wood, and tongs of bamboo for eating sago,1 a few 
iron pots,2 large baskets for carrying on the back, 
a few mats of plaited rattan, and small bamboo 
boxes. 

These are the sum of the worldly goods of a 
Punan family, and it would, we suppose, be difficult 
to find another people who cor bine so great a 
poverty in material possessions with so high a level 
of contentment and decent orderly active living. 

Although his material possessions are so few, 
the Punan is not capable of fashioning all of them 
by his own independent efforts. All his metal tools 
he obtains from the Kayans (or other tribes) who 
are his patrons. But everything else he makes 
with his own hands. The long blow-pipe of polished 
hard-wood, which is his favourite weapon, he makes 
by the same methods and as well as the Kayans. 
But the iron rod which he uses in the process of 
boring the wood he cannot make. This illustrates 
his intimate dependence on other tribes, and seems 
to imply that the blow-pipe, at least in the highly 
finished form in which it is now used, cannot have 
been an independent achievement of the Punans. 
They are especially skilful in the plaiting of rattan 
strips to make baskets, mats, and sieves. They do 
little wood-carving, but carve some pretty handles 
for knives and decorative pieces for the sword- 
sheaths from the bones of the gibbon and deer. 
They are expert also in making bamboo pipes 
with which to imitate the calls of the deer and of 
some of the birds. 

Hunting, tracking, and trapping game are the 
principal and favourite pursuits of the men ; they 
display much ingenuity in these pursuits and attain 

1 Perhaps the most commonly used is a double-ended spatula. With this 
the head of the family stirs the boiled sago, and then conveys it to his own 
mouth on one end and to his wife's mouth on the other. 

2 Formerly, they say, they cooked in green bamboos ; and this is still done 
occasionally. They also occasionally boil their sago in the large cups of the 
pitcher-plant {nepenthes). 

192 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

a wonderful skill in the interpretation of the signs 
of the jungle. For example, a Punan is generally- 
able to read from the tracks left in the jungle by 
the passage of a party of men, the number of the 
party, and much other information about it. They 
are expert scouts, and, when their neighbourhood is 
invaded by any party whose intentions are not 
clearly pacific, they will follow them for many days, 
keeping them under close observation while 
remaining completely hidden. 

The Punan has few recreations. His highest 
artistic achievement is in song. His principal musical 
instrument is a simple harp made from a length of 
thick bamboo (Fig. 86) ; from the surface of this six 
longitudinal strips are detached throughout the length 

Fig. 86. — Punan Bamboo Harp. 

of a section of twenty inches or more, but retain at 
both ends their natural attachments. Each strip is 
raised from the surface by a pair of small wooden 
bridges, and is tuned by adjusting the interval 
between these. The only other musical instrument 
is a very simple " harmonica." A series of strips of 
hard-wood, slightly hollowed and adjusted in length, 
are laid across the shins of the operator, who beats 
upon them with two sticks. But the finest songs 
are sung without accompaniment and are of the 
nature of dramatic recitals in the manner of a some- 
what monotonous and melancholy recitative. To 
hear a wild Punan, standing in the midst of a 
solemn circle lit only by a few torches which hardly 
seem to avail to keep back the vast darkness of the 
sleeping jungle, recite with dramatic gesture the 

THE NOMAD HUNTERS 193 

adventures of a departing soul on its way to the 
land of shades, is an experience which makes a 
deep impression, one not devoid of aesthetic quality. 

In dancing, the Punan attains only a very modest 
level. The men dance upon a narrow plank (for 
the good reason that they have nothing else to 
dance upon) ; and the exhibition is one of skilful 
balancing on this restricted base while executing a 
variety of turning movements and postures. The 
women dance in groups with very restricted move- 
ments of the feet, and some monotonous swaying 
movements of the arms and body. The men also 
imitate the movements of monkeys and of the horn- 
bill and the various strange sounds made by the 
latter. 

The most striking evidence of the low cultural 
standing of the Punan is the fact that he cannot 
count beyond three (the words are/#, dua, telo) ; all 
larger numbers are for him merely many (pina). 
Yet, although in culture he stands far below all 
the settled agricultural tribes, there is no sufficient 
reason for assuming him to be innately inferior to 
them in any considerable degree, whether morally 
or intellectually. Any such assumption is rendered 
untenable by the fact that many Punans have quickly 
assimilated the mode of life and general culture of 
the other tribes ; and there can be no doubt, we 
think, that many of the tribes that we have classed 
as Klemantan and Kenyah are very closely related 
to the Punans, and may properly be regarded as 
Punans that have adopted Kayan or Malay culture 
some generations ago. 

CHAPTER XX 

MORAL AND INTELLECTUAL PECULIARITIES 

In this chapter we propose to bring together a 
number of observations which have found no place 
in foregoing chapters but which will throw further 
light on the moral and intellectual status of the 
pagan tribes. 

We have seen that among the Kayans the 
immediate sanction of all actions and of judgments 
of approval and disapproval is custom, and that the 
sanction of custom is generally supported by the 
fear of the toh and of the harm they may inflict upon 
the whole house. The principle of collective or 
communal responsibility of the household, which is 
thus recognised in face of the spiritual powers, as 
well as in face of other communities, gives every 
man an interest in the good behaviour of his 
fellows, and at the same time develops in him the 
sense of obligation towards his community. The 
small size of each community, its separation and 
clear demarcation by its residence under a single 
roof, its subordination to a single chief, and its 
perpetual conflict and rivalry with other neighbour- 
ing communities of similar constitution, all these 
circumstances also make strongly for the develop- 
ment in each of its members of a strong collective 
consciousness, that is to say, of a clear conscious- 
ness of the community and of his place within it and 
a strong sentiment of attachment to it. The attach- 

194 

chap, xx PECULIARITIES 195 

ment of each individual to his community is also 
greatly strengthened by the fact that it is hardly 
possible for him to leave it, even if he would. For 
he could not hope to maintain himself alone, or 
as the head of an isolated family, against the 
hostile forces, natural and human, that would 
threaten him ; and it would be very difficult for 
him to gain admittance to any other community. 

It is only when we consider these facts that we 
can understand how smoothly the internal life of 
the community generally runs, how few serious 
offences are committed, how few are the quarrels, 
and how few the instances of insubordination 
towards the chief, and how tact and good sense can 
rule the house without inflicting any other punish- 
ment than fines and compensatory payments. 

And yet, when all these circumstances have been 
taken into account, the orderly behaviour of a Kayan 
community must be in part regarded as evidence of 
the native superiority of character or disposition of the 
Kayans. For though the Sea Dayaks, Klemantans, 
and Muruts, live under very similar conditions, they 
do not attain the same high level of social or moral 
conduct. Among the Muruts there is much 
drunkenness and consequent disorder, and the same 
is true in a less degree of the Sea Dayaks ; among 
them and some of the Klemantan tribes quarrels 
within the house are of frequent occurrence, gener- 
ally over disputed ownership of land, crops, fruit- 
trees, or other property. And these quarrels are not 
easily composed by the chiefs. Such quarrels not 
infrequently lead to the splitting of a community, or 
to the migration of the whole house with the 
exception of one troublesome member and his 
family, who are left in inglorious isolation in the 
old house. 

But the higher level of conduct of the Kayans is 
in most respects rivalled by that of the Kenyahs, 

196 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

and some importance must therefore be attributed 
to the one prominent feature of their social organ- 
isation which is peculiar to these two peoples, 
namely a clearly marked stratification into three 
social strata between which but little intermarriage 
takes place. This stratification undoubtedly makes 
for a higher level of conduct throughout the 
communities in which it obtains ; for the members 
of the higher or chiefly class are brought up with 
a keen sense of their responsibility towards the 
community, and their example and authority do 
much to maintain the standards of conduct of 
the middle and lower classes. 

We have said that almost all offences are 
punished by fines only. Of the few offences which 
are felt to require a heavier punishment, the one 
most seriously regarded is incest. For this offence, 
which is held to bring grave peril to the whole 
house, especially the danger of starvation through 
failure of the padi crop, two punishments have 
been customary. If the guilt of the culprits is 
perfectly clear, they are taken to some open spot 
on the river-bank at some distance from the 
house. There they are thrown together upon the 
ground and a sharpened bamboo stake is driven 
through their bodies, so that they remain pinned to 
the earth. The bamboo, taking root and growing 
luxuriantly on this spot, remains as a warning to all 
who pass by ; and, needless to say, the spot is looked 
on with horror and shunned by all men. The other 
method of punishment is to shut up the offenders in 
a strong wicker cage and to throw them into the 
river. This method is resorted to as a substitute 
for the former one, owing to the difficulty of getting 
any one to play the part of executioner and to drive 
in the stake, for this involves the shedding of the 
blood of the community. 

The kind of incest most commonly committed is 

PECULIARITIES 197 

the connection of a man with an adopted daughter, 
and (possibly on account of this frequency) this is 
the kind which is most strongly reprobated. It is 
obvious also that this form of incest requires a 
specially strong check in any community in which 
the adoption of children is a common practice. For, 
in the absence of severe penalties for this form of 
incest, a man might be tempted to adopt female 
children in order to use them as concubines. We 
find support for this view of the ground of the 
especially severe censure on incest of this form in 
the fact that intercourse between a youth and his 
sister-by-adoption (or vice versa) is not regarded as 
incest, and the relation is not regarded as any bar 
to marriage. We know of at least one instance 
of marriage between two young Kenyahs brought 
up together as adopted brother and sister.1 Of 

1 This occurrence of incest between couples brought up in the same house- 
hold is, of course, difficult to reconcile with Prof. Westermarck's well-known 
theory of the ground of the almost universal feeling against incest, namely that 
it depends upon sexual aversion or indifference engendered by close proximity 
during childhood. But medical men who have experience of slum practice in 
European towns can supply similar evidence in large quantity. And the 
medical psychologists of the school of Freud could cite much evidence against 
this theory. 

We cannot refrain from throwing out here a speculative suggestion towards 
the explanation of the feeling against incest which seems to find support in 
certain of the facts of this area. It seems to us that the feeling with which 
incest is regarded is an example of a feeling or sentiment engendered in each 
generation by law and tradition, rather than a spontaneous reaction of indi- 
viduals, based on some special instinct or innate tendency. The occurrence 
of incest between brothers and sisters, and the strong feeling of the Sea Dayaks 
against incest between nephew and aunt (who often are members of distinct 
communities), are facts which seem to us fatal to Prof. Westermarck's theory, 
as well as to point strongly to the view that the sentiment has a purely 
conventional or customary source. Now, if we accept some such view of the 
constitution of primitive society as has been suggested by Messrs. Atkinson 
and Lang {Primal Law), namely, that the social group consisted of a single 
patriarch and a group of wives and daughters, over all of whom he exercised 
unrestricted power or rights ; we shall see that the first step towards the 
constitution of a higher form of society must have been the strict limitation of 
his rights over certain of the women, in order that younger males might be 
incorporated in the society and enjoy the undisputed possession of them. The 
patriarch, having accepted this limitation of his rights over his daughters for 
the sake of the greater security and strength of the band given by the inclusion 
of a certain number of young males, would enforce all the more strictly upon 
them his prohibition against any tampering with the females of the senior 
generation. Thus very strict prohibitions and severe penalties against the con- 
sorting of the patriarch with the younger generation of females, i.e. his 

198 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

other forms of incest the more common (though, 
it should be said, incest of any form is very in- 
frequent) are those involving father and daughter, 
brother and sister, and brother and half-sister. 

The punishment of the incestuous couple does 
not suffice to ward off the danger brought by them 
upon the community. The household must be 
purified with the blood of pigs and fowls ; the 
animals used are the property of the offenders or 
of their family ; and in this way a fine is imposed. 

When any calamity threatens or falls upon a 
house, especially a great rising of the river which 
threatens to sweep away the house or the tombs of 
the household, the Kayans are led to suspect that 
incestuous intercourse in their own or in neighbour- 
ing houses has taken place ; and they look round for 
evidences of it, and sometimes detect a case which 
otherwise would have remained hidden. It seems 
probable that there is some intimate relation be- 
tween this belief and the second of the two modes 
of punishment described above ; but we have no 
direct evidence of such connection.1 

daughters, and against intercourse between the young males admitted to 
membership of the group and the wives of the patriarch, would be the essential 
conditions of advance of social organisation. The enforcement of these 
penalties would engender a traditional sentiment against such unions, and these 
would be the unions primitively regarded as incestuous. The persistence of the 
tendency of the patriarch's jealousy to drive his sons out of the family group as 
they attained puberty would render the extension of this sentiment to brother- 
and-sister unions easy and almost inevitable. For the young male admitted to 
the group would be one who came with a price in his hand to offer in return 
for the bride he sought. Such a price could only be exacted by the patriarch 
on the condition that he maintained an absolute prohibition on sexual relations 
between his offspring so long as the young sons remained under his roof. 

It is not impossible that a trace of the primitive state of society imagined by 
Messrs. Atkinson and Lang survives in the fact that a Kayan chief may, if he 
is so inclined, temporarily possess himself of the wife of any of his men with- 
out raising the strong resentment and incurring the penalties which would 
attend adultery on the part of any other man of the house ; but the law against 
incest with his daughters, whether natural or adopted, would be enforced 
against him by the co-operation of the chiefs of neighbouring houses and 
villages. 

1 A limestone cliff whose foot is washed by the Baram river and which 
contains a number of caves (known as Batu Gading, or the ivory rock) is said by 
a Kayan legend to have been formed by a Kayan house being turned into stone 
owing to incestuous conduct within it. 

PECULIARITIES 199 

All the other peoples also, except the Punans, 
punish incest with death. Among the Sea Dayaks the 
most common form of incest is that between a youth 
and his aunt, and this is regarded at least as seriously 
as any other form. It must be remembered that, 
owing to the frequency of divorce and remarriage 
among the Sea Dayaks, a youth may find himself 
in the position of step-son to half a dozen or more 
divorced step-mothers, some of them perhaps of his 
own age, and that each of them may have several 
sisters, all of whom are reckoned as his aunts ; 
therefore he must walk warily in his amorous 
adventures. 

Sexual perversion of any form is, we think, ex- 
tremely rare among the pagan tribes of Borneo. 
We have never heard of any case of homosexuality 
on good authority, and we have never heard any 
reference made to it ; and that constitutes, to our 
thinking, strong evidence that vice of that kind is 
unknown among most of the tribes. It is not un- 
known, though not common, among the Malays and 
Chinese, and, if cases occur sporadically among the 
pagans, they are presumably due to infection from 
those quarters. 

Homicide 

Kayans, as we have seen, have no scruple in 
shedding the blood of their enemies, but they very 
seldom or never go to war with other Kayans ; and 
the shedding of Kayan blood by Kayans is of rare 
occurrence. To shed human blood, even that of 
an enemy, in the house is against custom. Never- 
theless murder of Kayan by Kayan, even by 
members of the same house, is not unknown. In 
a wanton case, where two or more men have de- 
liberately attacked another and slain him, or one 
has killed another by stealth, the culprit (or culprits) 

vol. 11 o 

200 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

would usually be made to pay very heavy compensa- 
tion to relatives, the amount being greater the 
higher the social status and the greater the wealth 
of the culprit ; the amount may equal, in fact, the 
whole of his property and more besides ; and he 
might, in order to raise the amount, have to sell 
himself into slavery to another, slavery being their 
only equivalent to imprisonment. The relatives 
would probably desire to kill the murderers ; but the 
chief would generally restrain them and would find 
his task rendered easier by the fact that, if they 
insist on taking the murderer's life, they would 
forfeit their right to compensation.1 The amount 
of the compensation to be paid would not depend 
upon the social standing of the murdered man, but 
the fine paid to the house or chief would be heavier 
in proportion to his rank. But we have knowledge 
of cases in which chiefs have, with the approval of 
the house, had a murderer put to the sword. The 
murderer who has paid compensation has, however, 
by no means set himself right with the household ; 
they continue to look askance at him. Set fights 
or duels between men of the same house are very 
rare. If a Kayan of one house kills one of another, 
his chief would see that he paid a proper compensa- 
tion to the relatives, as well as a fine to his own 
house. If a man killed his own slave, he would be 
liable to no punishment unless the act were com- 
mitted in the house ; but public opinion would 
strongly disapprove. 

1 Running amok ' is not unknown among Kayans, 
though it is very rare. If a man in this condition 
of blind fury kills any one, he is cut down and killed, 
unless he is in the house ; in which case he would 
be knocked senseless with clubs, carried out of the 
house into the jungle, and there slain. 

Drunkenness during an act of criminal violence 

1 This would not be always true of similar cases among Sea Dayaks. 

PECULIARITIES 201 

is regarded as a mitigating circumstance, and the 
fines and compensation imposed would be of smaller 
amount than in a case of similar crime deliberately 
committed. 

Suicide is strongly reprobated, and, as we have 
seen, the shades of those who die by their own 
hands are believed to lead a miserable and lonely 
existence in a distressful country, Tan Tekkan, 
in which they wander picking up mere scraps 
of food in the jungle. Nevertheless, suicides occur 
among Kayans of both sexes. The commonest 
occasion is the enforced separation of lovers, 
rather than the despair of rejected lovers. We 
have known of two instances of Kayan youths who, 
having formed attachments during a long stay in a 
distant house and who then, finding themselves 
under the necessity of returning home with their 
chief and unable to arrange marriage with their 
fair ones, have committed suicide. The method 
most commonly adopted is to go off alone into the 
jungle and there to stab a knife into the carotid 
artery. The body of a suicide is generally buried 
without ceremony on the spot where it is found. 
Suicides of women are rarer than those of men ; 
desertion by a lover is the commonest cause. 

Dishonesty in the form of pilfering or open 
robbery by violence are of very rare occurrence. 
Yet temptations to both are not lacking. Fruit- 
trees on the river-bank, even at some distance from 
any village, are generally private property, and 
though they offer a great temptation to passing 
crews when their fruit is ripe, the rights of the 
proprietor are usually respected or compensation 
voluntarily paid. Theft within the house or village 
is practically unknown. Even before the European 
governments were established, Malay and Chinese 
traders occasionally penetrated with boat-loads of 
goods far into the interior ; and now such enter- 

202 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

prises are regularly and frequently undertaken. 
Occasionally a trader establishes himself in a 
village for months together, driving a profitable 
trade in hardware, cloth, tobacco, etc. These 
traders usually travel in a small boat with a 
company or crew of only two or three men, and 
they are practically defenceless against any small 
party of the natives who might choose to rob or 
murder them. Such traders have now and again 
been robbed, and sometimes also murdered, by 
roving bands of Sea Dayaks, but we know of no 
such act committed by Kayans or Kenyahs. The 
trader puts himself under the protection of a chief 
and then feels his life and property to be safe. 

It would not be true to say that the Kayans or 
any of the other peoples are always strictly truth- 
ful. They are given to exaggeration in describing 
any event, and their accounts are apt to be 
strongly biassed in their own favour. Nevertheless, 
deliberate lying is a thing to be ashamed of, and 
a man who gets himself a reputation as a liar is 
regarded with small favour by his fellows. 

The Kayans, as we have said elsewhere, are not 
coarse of speech, and both men and women are 
strictly modest in respect to the display of the body. 
Though the costume of both sexes is so scanty, 
the proprieties are observed. The Kayan man 
never exposes his genitalia even when bathing in 
the company of his fellows, but, if necessary, uses 
his hands as a screen. The bearing of the women 
is habitually modest, and though their single 
garment might be supposed to afford insufficient 
protection, they wear it with an habitual skill that 
compensates for the scantiness of its dimensions ; 
they bathe naked in the river before the house, but 
they slip off their aprons and glide into the water 
deftly and swiftly ; and on emerging they resume 
their garments with equal skill, so that they cannot 

PECULIARITIES 203 

be said to expose themselves unclothed. The same 
is true of most of the other tribes, with the exception 
of the men of Kenyah and Klemantan communities 
that inhabit the central highlands ; these, when 
hauling their boats through the rapids, will divest 
themselves of all clothing, or will sit naked round a 
fire while their waist-cloths are being dried, without 
the least embarrassment. 

There is no Kayan word known to us that could 
properly be translated as justice or just, injustice or 
unjust. Yet it is obvious that they view just 
conduct with approval and unjust with disapproval ; 
and they express their feelings and moral judgments 
by saying laconically of any particular decision by a 
chief, tekap or nusi tekap. But the word tekap is 
of more general application than our word 'just/ 
and might be applied to any situation which evokes 
a judgment of moral approval ; for example, on 
witnessing any breach of custom or infringement of 
tabu a Kayan would say nusi tekap ; tekap > in short, 
is applicable to whatever is as it ought to be. 

Specialised terms for moral qualities of character 
and conduct are, however, not lacking. A just and 
wise chief would be said to be tenang) but this word 
implies less purely a moral quality than our word 
justice and more of intellectual capacity or knowledge 
or accuracy ; the word is more especially applied as 
a term to describe the quality of a political speech 
which meets with approval. The word haman means 
skilful, or clever, or cunning, in the older sense of 
capable both physically and intellectually. A man 
who fights pluckily is said to be makang, and the 
same word is applied to any daring or dashing feat, 
such as crossing the river when it is dangerously 
swollen. To disregard omens would be makang also ; 
it seems, therefore, to have the flavour of the word 
rash or foolhardy. 

Saioh means good in the sense of kindly, pleasantly 

204 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

toned, or agreeable. Jaak is bad in the sense of a 
bad crop or an unfortunate occurrence, or a sore 
foot, i.e. it conveys no moral flavour. Morally bad 
is expressed by sala ; this is used in the same sense 
in Malay and may well be a recently-adopted word. 
In general the language seems to be very poor in 
terms expressive of disapproval, adverse judgments 
being generally expressed by putting nusi, the 
negative or primitive particle, before the correspond- 
ing word of positive import ; thus a cowardly act or 
man would be denounced as nusi makang. 

We think it is true to say that, although they thus 
distinguish the principal qualities of character and 
conduct with appropriate adjectival terms, they have 
no substantival terms for the virtues and vices, and 
that they have not fully accomplished the processes 
of abstraction implied by the appropriate use of such 
highly abstract substantives. 

As regards the influence of their religious beliefs 
on the moral conduct of the Kayans, we have seen 
that the fear of the toh serves as a constant 
check on the breach of customs, which customs are 
in the main salutary and essential for the mainte- 
nance of social order ; this fear does at the least 
serve to develop in the people the power of self- 
control and the habit of deliberation before action. 
The part which the major spirits or gods are 
supposed to play in bringing or fending off the 
major calamities remains extremely vague and in- 
capable of definition ; in the main, faithful observa- 
tion of the omens, of rites, and of custom generally, 
seems to secure the favour of the gods, and in some 
way their protection ; and thus the gods make for 
morality. Except in regard to that part of conduct 
which is accurately prescribed by custom and tradi- 
tion, their influence seems to be negligible, and the 
high standard of the Kayans in neighbourliness, in 
mutual help and consideration, in honesty and for- 

PECULIARITIES 205 

bearance, seems to be maintained without the direct 
support of their religious beliefs. 

The high moral level attained by individuals 
among the Kayans and Kenyahs, and less frequently 
by Klemantans, is, we think, best exemplified by the 
enlightened and public-spirited conduct of some of 
the principal chiefs. It might have been expected 
that the leading chiefs of warlike and conquering 
peoples like the Kayans and Kenyahs, which, until 
the advent of the European governments, had never 
encountered any resistance which they could not 
break down by armed force, would have been 
wholly devoted to conquest and rapine ; and that 
a chief who had acquired a high prestige and found 
himself able to secure the adhesion in war of a 
number of other chiefs and their followers would 
have been inspired with the barbarous ideals of an 
Alexander, a Napoleon, a Chaka, or a Cetewayo. 
But though some of them have shown tendencies of 
this kind, there have been notable exceptions who 
have recognised that chronic hostility, distrust, and 
warfare, which had always been characteristic of the 
relations between the various tribes and villages, 
were an unmixed evil. Such men have used their 
influence consistently and tactfully and energetically 
to establish peaceful relations between the tribes. 
Unlike some savage chieftains of warrior tribes in 
other parts of the world, such as some of those 
produced by the Bantu race, or those who 
established the great confederation of the Iroquois 
tribes, they have not sought merely to bring about 
the combination of all the communities of their own 
stock in order to dominate over or to exterminate 
all other tribes. They have rather pursued a policy 
of reconcilement and conciliation, aiming at estab- 
lishing relations of friendship and confidence between 
the communities of all languages and races. One 
such powerful Kenyah chief of the Baram district, 

206 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

Laki Avit, had earned a high reputation for such 
statesmanship before the district was incorporated 
in the Raj of Sarawak. His policy was to bring 
about intermarriages between the families of the 
chiefs and upper-class people of the various tribes. 
Tama Bulan (see PL 27), the leading Kenyah chief 
of the same district at a later time, spared no efforts 
to bring about friendly meetings between chiefs of 
different tribes, for the purpose of making peace 
and of promoting intercourse and mutual under- 
standing.1 It should be added that these peace- 
making ceremonies are generally of lasting effect; 
the oaths then taken are respected even by succeed- 
ing generations. Tama Ruling, who a decade ago 
was the most influential of the Batang Kayan chiefs, 
had also spontaneously pursued a similar policy.2 

It has been said of many savage peoples that they 
recognise no natural death, but believe that all 
deaths not due to violence are due to black magic. 
No such statement can be made of the Kayans ; few, 
if any, deaths are ascribed by them to the efforts of 
sorcerers. Natural death is recognised as inevitable 
in old age, and disease is vaguely conceived as the 
effect of natural causes ; though as to what those 
natural causes are they have no definite ideas. This 
attitude is shown by their readiness to make use of 
European drugs and of remedies for external applica- 
tion. Quinine for fever, and sulphate of copper for 
the treatment of yaws, are most in demand. Cholera 
and smallpox are the great epidemic diseases which 
have ravaged large areas of Borneo from time to 
time. The Kayans recognise that both these 
diseases spread up river from village to village, and 
that to abstain from intercourse with all villages 

1 See vol. ii. p. 296 for a striking example of self-control displayed by this 
great man under most trying circumstances. 

2 Only one evil effect of the success of these efforts for the spread of peace 
has come under our notice, namely, a tendency in some communities to 
economise labour by building flimsy houses in place of the massive and roomy 
structures which were fortresses as well as dwelling-places. 

PECULIARITIES 207 

lower down river and to prevent any one coming 
up river contributes to their immunity. With this 
object the people of a tributary stream will fell trees 
across its mouth or lower reaches so as to block it 
completely to the passage of boats, or, as a less drastic 
measure, will stretch a rope of rattan from bank to 
bank as a sign that no one may enter (PL 183). 
Such a sign is generally respected by the inhabit- 
ants of other parts of the river-basin. They are 
aware also of the risk of infection that attends the 
handling of a corpse of one who has died of epidemic 
disease, and they attempt to minimise it by throw- 
ing a rope around it and dragging it to the grave- 
yard, and there burying it in a shallow grave in the 
earth, without touching it with the hands.1 

The Kayans have some slight knowledge of the 
medicinal properties of some herbs, and make general 
use of them. They administer as an aperient a 
decoction of the leaves of a certain plant, called 
Orobong, which they cultivate for the purpose on 
their farms. The root of the ginger plant is used 
both internally and for external application. A 
variety of vegetable products are used in preparing 
liniments ; the basis most in request for these is the 
fat of the python and of other snakes, but wild pig's 
fat is used as a more easily obtainable substitute. 

There is a small common squirrel (Sciurus exilis), 
the testicles of which are strikingly large in pro- 
portion to his body. These organs are dried and 

1 The desire of the people inhabiting a branch of the river to shut them- 
selves off from all intercourse with the areas in which an epidemic disease is 
raging, is sometimes disregarded by Malay or Chinese traders ; such disregard 
has sometimes led to trouble. 

This desire for seclusion as a safeguard against epidemics is by no means 
peculiar to the tribes of the interior of Borneo, but seems to be shared by many 
savage and barbarous peoples. It is one that ought to be strictly respected by 
all travellers ; and we have no doubt that the disregard of this desire by European 
explorers, ignorant, no doubt, of its existence or of the practical and rational 
grounds on which it is based, has been the cause in many cases of their hostile 
reception by native tribes and potentates, and has led to bloodshed and 
punitive expeditions which might have been wholly avoided if the explorers 
had been equipped with some general knowledge of, and some respect for, the 
principles of conduct of savage peoples. 

208 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

reduced to powder, and this powder, mixed with pig's 
fat, is rubbed over the back and loins in cases of 
impotence.1 

Kayan mothers treat colic in their children by 
chewing the dried root of a creeper (known as pado 
tana) with betel nut, and spitting out the juice on 
the belly of the patient. 

Some of the coastwise Klemantans make use of a 
bitter decoction of a certain creeper as a remedy for 
jungle fever. It is asserted by Kayans and others 
that the Punans make use of the poison of the ipoh 
tree (the poison used on their darts) as an internal 
remedy for fever. It is said also (probably with 
truth, we think) that the Punans also apply the ipoh 
poison to snake-bites and to festering wounds.2 

Surgery 

Broken limbs are bound round with neat splints 
made of thin slips of bamboo tied in parallel series. 
Little effort is made to bring the broken ends of the 
bones into their proper positions or to reduce 
dislocations. Abscesses are not usually opened 
with the knife, but are rather encouraged to point, 
and are then opened by pressure. A cold poultice 
of chopped leaves is applied to a bad boil or 
superficial abscess, and it is protected from blows 
and friction by a small cage of slips of rattan. 
Festering wounds are dressed with the chewed 
leaves or the juice of the tobacco plant, or are 

1 In view of the valuable properties now attributed to spermin in some 
scientific quarters, it would be rash to assert that this treatment can have 
no therapeutic value. It is of interest to note that prolonged working of 
camphor in the jungle is said to produce impotence and that, in order to avoid 
this, the workers make frequent breaks and will not prolong a camphor-gather- 
ing expedition beyond a limited period. For impotence is regarded by a young 
Kayan as a very great calamity. 

2 It seems possible that the Punans acquire some degree of immunity to the 
effects of the ipoh poison through constantly handling it and applying it in the 
ways mentioned above. The only evidence in support of this that we can offer 
is the fact that the Punans handle their poisoned darts much more recklessly 
than the other peoples. 

PECULIARITIES 209 

washed with a solution of common salt. But a 
clean wound is merely bound up with a rag ; or, if 
there is much haemorrhage, wood ashes are first 
applied. They practise no more efficient methods 
for arresting haemorrhage. 

Headache is treated by tugging the hair of the 
scalp in small bundles in systematic order. Massage 
of the muscles is practised for the relief of pain, and 
massage is applied to the abdomen in cases of 
obstinate constipation ; in certain cases they claim 
to break up hard lumps in the belly by squeezing 
them with the hands. Bodily aches and fatigue are 
relieved by pulling and bending the parts of the 
limbs until all the joints crack in turn. 

Cupping is perhaps the most frequently practised 
surgical operation. Severe internal bruising from 
falls or heavy blows is the usual occasion. The 
operation is performed by scratching the skin with 
the point of a knife, and then applying the mouth of 
a bamboo cup previously heated over the fire. The 
cup is a piece of bamboo some five or six inches in 
length and an inch or rather more in diameter. 
Its edge is thinned and smoothed. Several of 
these may be simultaneously applied in a case of 
extensive bruising. Since this operation, like 
tatuing, involves the shedding of blood, some small 
offering, such as a few beads, must be made to the 
patient by the operator. 

The Kayans have distinct numerals up to ten 
(ji, dua, telo, pat, limer, nam, tusu, soya, pitan, 
pulu). Those from eleven to nineteen are formed 
by prefixing pulu ( = ten) to the names of the digits ; 
and those from twenty to twenty-nine by prefixing 
dua pulu ( = two twenty) ; and so on up to ji ator 
( = one hundred). Two hundred is dua ator, three 
hundred is telo ator, and so on up to mibu ( = one 
thousand). All or most of the other tribes (except 
the Punans) have a similar system of numerals, 

210 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

though the numbers beyond the first ten are little 
used. In counting any objects that cannot be held 
in the hand or placed in a row, the Kayan (and 
most of the other peoples) bends down one finger for 
each object told off or enumerated, beginning with 
the little finger of the right hand, passing at six to 
that of the left hand, and then to the big toe of the 
right foot, and lastly to that of the left foot. When all 
the names or objects have been mentioned, he holds 
the toe reached until he or some one else has told 
off the number ; if the number was, say, seventeen, 
he would keep hold of the second toe of the left foot 
until he had counted up the number implied by that 
toe, either by means of counting or by adding up 
five and five and five and two ; unless the count 
ends on the little toe of the left foot, when he knows at 
once that the number is twenty. If a larger number 
than twenty is to be counted, as when, for example, 
a chief has to pay in tax for each door of his house, 
he calls in the aid of several men, who sit before 
him. One of these tells off his fingers and toes as 
the chief utters the names of the heads of the 
rooms ; and when twenty have been counted in this 
way, a second man begins on his fingers, while the 
first continues to hold on to all his toes. A third 
and a fourth man may be used in the same way to 
complete the count ; and when it is completed, the 
total is found by reckoning each man as two tens, 
and adding the number of fingers and toes held 
down by the last man. The reckoning of the tens 
is done by addition rather than multiplication. 
Both multiplication and division are almost unknown 
operations. 

When a chief is getting ready to pay in the door 
tax of two dollars a door, he does not count the 
doors and then multiply the number by two : he 
simply lays down two dollars for each door and 
pays in the lot, generally without knowing the sum 

XX 

PECULIARITIES 211 

total of the dollars. If a chief were told to pay in 
the tax for half his doors only, he would not know 
how to carry out the instruction. Subtraction is 
accomplished only in the most concrete manner, e.g. 
if a man wished to take away eight from twenty-five, 
he would count out twenty-five of the objects in 
question, or of bits of leaf or stick, then push away 
eight and count up the remainder. A dodge some- 
times adopted, especially by the Kenyah, for count- 
ing the persons present, is to take a fern-leaf with 
many fronds, tear off a half of each frond, hand- 
ing each piece to one of the men, until every man 
present affirms that he has a piece, and then to count 
the number of torn fronds remaining on the stalk. 

It will thus be seen that the arithmetical 
operations of the Kayans are of an extremely 
concrete character ; those of the other tribes are 
similar (with the exception again of the Punans, 
who do not count beyond three) ; though many of 
the Klemantans get confused over simple counting 
and reckoning, which the Kayans accomplish 
successfully. 

Tama Bulan, the Kenyah chief whom we have 
had occasion to mention in several connections, 
obtained and learnt the use of an abacus from a 
Chinaman, and used it effectively. This deficiency 
in arithmetic is, however, no evidence of innate 
intellectual inferiority, and there seems to be no 
good reason to doubt that most of the people could 
be taught to use figures as readily as the average 
European ; those children who have entered the 
schools seem to pick up arithmetic with normal 
rapidity. 

The Sea Dayaks sometimes deposit sums of 
money with the Government officers, and they know 
accurately the number of dollars paid in ; but when 
they withdraw the deposit, they generally expect to 
receive the identical dollars paid in by them. 

2i2 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

Measurement 

The Kayans use two principal standards of length, 
namely, the buka and the buhak. The former is 
the length of the span from finger-tip to tip of 
outstretched arms ; the latter is the length of the 
span from tip of the thumb to tip of the first finger 
of the same hand. In buying a pig, for example, 
the price is determined by the number of buhak 
required to encircle its body just behind the fore- 
legs. The half buka is also in general use, especi- 
ally in measuring rattans cut for sale, the required 
length of which is two and 3. half buka. In order 
to express the half, they have adopted the Malay 
word stingah, having no word of their own. 

Distances between villages are always expressed 
in terms of the average time taken by a boat in 
ascending the stream from one to the other. 
Distances by land are expressed still more vaguely ; 
for example, the distance between the heads of two 
streams might be expressed by saying that, if you 
bathe in one, your hair would still be wet when you 
reach the other (which means about one hour) ; or 
a longer distance, by saying that if you started at 
the usual time from one of the places you would 
reach the other when the sun is as high as the 
hawk (which means a journey from sunrise to about 
10 a.m.), or when the sun is overhead (i.e. noon), or 
when it is declining (about 3 p.m.), or when the sun 
is put out (sunset), or when it is dark. 

In order to describe the size of a solid object 
such as a fish, a Kayan would compare its thickness 
with that of some part of his body, the forearm, 
the calf of the leg, the thigh, or head, or the waist. 
In describing the thickness of the subcutaneous fat 
of a pig, he would mention one, two, three, or even 
four fingers. 

PECULIARITIES 213 

COSMOLOGICAL AND GEOGRAPHICAL NOTIONS 

The more intelligent Kayans can give a fairly 
good general description of the geographical 
features and relations of the district in which they 
live. In order to do this a Kayan will map out the 
principal features on a smooth surface by placing 
pieces of stick to represent the rivers and their 
tributaries, and pieces of leaf to represent the hills 
and mountains ; he will pay special attention to the 
relations of the sources of the various streams. In 
this way a Kayan chief of the Baram would 
construct a tolerably accurate map of the whole 
Baram district, putting in Bruni and Usun Apo 
and the heads of the Rejang, Batang Kayan, 
Tutong, and Balait rivers. He knows that all the 
rivers run to the sea, though few Kayans have 
seen the sea or, indeed, been outside the basin 
of their own river. To have been to another 
river, or to have seen the sea, is a just ground of 
pride. He does not know that Borneo is an island, 
though he knows that the white men and the 
Chinese come from over the sea ; he will confi- 
dently assert that the sea is many times larger 
than the Baram river, even ten times as large. 
They seem to regard the sea as a big river of which 
their main river is a tributary. 

I bans sometimes speak of Airopa (meaning 
Europe), which they take to mean the river Ropa, 
as the home of the white man ; and all the tribes- 
men are apt to think of foreigners as living on the 
banks of rivers in forest-covered country much like 
their own. 

Although the Kayans do not observe the stars 
and their movements for practical purposes, they 
are familiar with the principal constellations, and 
have fanciful names for them, and relate mythical 

2i4 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

stories about the personages they are supposed to 
represent (Chap. XVII.).1 They seem to have paid 
no special attention to the planets. Inconsistently 
with the star myths, the stars are regarded as small 
holes in the floor of another and brighter world, 
and it is said that these holes have been made by 
the roots of plants which have penetrated through 
the soil of that world. 

The sky is regarded as a dome which meets the 
earth on every hand, and this limiting zone is spoken 
of as the edge of the sky ; but they have no notion 
how far away this edge may be ; they recognise that, 
no matter how many days one travels in any one 
direction, one never gets appreciably nearer to it, 
and they conclude, therefore, that it must be very 
distant. They understand that the clouds are very 
much less distant than the sky, and that they merely 
float about the earth. Neither sun nor moon seems 
to be regarded as animated. 

Two total eclipses of the sun have occurred in 
Borneo in the last half-century. These, of course, 
caused much excitement and some consternation.2 
The former of them serves as a fixed date in relation 
to which other events are dated. 

The traditional lore of the Kayans provides 
answers of a kind to many of the deep questions 
that the spirit of enquiry proposes whenever man 
has made provision against the most urgent needs 
of his animal nature. Yet the keener intelligences 
among them do not rest satisfied with these conven- 
tional answers ; rather, they ponder some of the 
deepest questions and discuss them with one another 
from time to time. One question we have heard 

1 There is current among the Klemantans a larger number of such myths 
than among the Kayans. 

2 The second occurred during the residence of one of us (C. H.) in the Baram, 
and the alarm of the people was largely prevented by the issue to all the chiefs 
of tebuku (tallies) foretelling the date of its incidence. Nevertheless one 
woman, at least, was so much frightened by the spectacle that she ran into 
her house and dropped down dead. 

PECULIARITIES 215 

debated is — Why do not the dead return ? Or 
rather, Why do they become visible only in dreams 
and even then so seldom ? The meeting of dead 
friends in dreams generally leaves the Kayan doubt- 
ful whether he has really seen his friend ; and he will 
try to obtain evidence of the reality of the revenant 
by prayer and by looking for a favourable answer in 
the liver of a pig, the entrails of a fowl, or in the 
behaviour of the omen birds. They argue that 
persons who have been much attached to their 
relatives and friends would surely return to visit 
them frequently if such return were at all possible. 

The relation of the sky to the earth remains also 
an open and disputed question. One of us well 
remembers how, when staying in a Kenyah house, 
he was approached by a group of youths who 
evidently were debating some knotty problem, and 
how they very seriously propounded the following 
question : — If a dart were shot straight up into the 
air and went on and on, what would become of it ? 
Would it come up against the sky and be stopped 
by it ? 

The whereabouts of the home of the white men, 
and how long is spent on the journey thither, are 
questions often raised. Tama Bulan once raised 
the question of the motion of the sun, and having 
been told that really the earth revolves and that the 
sun only appears to move round it, he argued that 
this could hardly be, since we see the sun move 
every day. For a long time he said nothing more 
on this topic to us, but it continued to occupy his 
mind ; for some years later he recurred to it and 
announced that he now accepted the once incredible 
doctrine, because he had inquired concerning it of 
every European he had been able to meet, and all 
had given him the same answer. 

The methods of argument of the Kayans are 
characteristic and worthy of a short description. 

vol. 11 p 

2i6 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

As we have said, they are great talkers and orators. 
They are by no means an impulsive people ; far less 
so than the Kenyahs or the Sea Dayaks. Although 
they are not a vivacious or talkative people in general 
intercourse, every undertaking of any importance is 
carefully discussed in all its aspects, often at what we 
should consider unnecessary length, before the first 
step is taken ; and in such discussions each man 
likes to have his say, and each is heard out patiently 
by his fellows. They have a strong belief in the 
efficacy of words ; this is illustrated by the copious 
flood of words which they pour out whenever they 
perform any religious or other rite. 

In arguing or persuading, or even threatening, 
they rely largely on indirect appeals, on analogy, 
simile, and metaphor, flavoured with a good deal of 
humour of a rather heavy kind. Or they may con- 
vey a strong hint by describing a professed dream 
in which the circumstances under discussion are 
symbolised. 

The following incident illustrates this mode of 
speech. Two Kayans quarrelled over the sale of a 
pig. The current price was a dollar a buhak (i.e. the 
span from finger-tip to thumb-tip, see vol. ii. p. 212). 
The buyer had insisted on measuring it by spans 
from thumb to tip of second finger, whereas the 
customary span is to the tip of the index finger. 
The case was brought before the chief, who of 
course might have contented himself, but not 
perhaps the purchaser, by authoritatively laying 
down the law of custom. He, therefore, being a 
man of tact and experience, thrust out his second 
finger and pointed it at the purchaser of the pig, 
saying, " Suppose any one pointed at you like that, 
instead of with the index finger; you would all laugh 
at him." All the people sitting round laughed, and 
the purchaser went away convinced of the propriety 
of using the index finger in measuring a pig. 

PECULIARITIES 217 

To illustrate the way in which a chief may exert 
influence in matters in which he has no footing 
for the exercise of formal authority, we cite the 
following bit of history. It is an ancient custom 
of the Kayans to have in the house a very large 
lampit (the mat made of parallel strips of rattan), 
the common property of the household, which is 
spread on the occasion of the reception of visitors 
to serve as a common seat for guests and hosts. 
The Kayans of the Baram, under the individualis- 
ing influences of trade and increasing stocks of 
private property, neglected to renew these com- 
munal mats ; and thus the good old custom was in 
danger of dying out. This was observed with 
regret by an influential chief, who, therefore, found 
an opportunity to relate in public the following 
story. " A party of Kayans," he said, " once came 
over from the Batang Kayan to visit their relatives 
in the Baram. The latter dilated upon the benefits 
of the Rajah's government, peace, trade, and the 
possibility of fine dress for themselves and their 
wives and of many other desirable acquisitions, all 
for the small annual payment of two dollars a door. 
The visitors looked about them and confessed that 
they still had to be content with bark clothing, 
bamboo cups, and wooden dishes ; ' but,' they added, 
1 if you come to our house you will at least find 
on the floor a good lampit on which we can all sit 
together.'' The story quickly went the round of 
the Kayan villages in the Baram, with the result 
that large lampits quickly came back into general 
use and the good old custom was preserved. 

The Kayans have a keen sense of humour 
and fun. As with ourselves, the most frequent 
occasions of laughter are the small mishaps that 
happen to one's companions or to oneself; and 
practical jokes are perpetrated and appreciated. 
For example, at the time when the wild pigs were 

218 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

dying in large numbers, a boat-load of Kayans 
working up-river encountered a succession of pigs' 
carcases floating down, most of them in a state of 
decomposition and swollen with gases. A practical 
joker at the bow conceived the notion of prodding 
the carcases with his spear and thus liberating the 
foul-smelling gases for the benefit of those who sat 
in the stern of the boat, to their great disgust and 
the amusement of those on the forward benches. 
Again — a Klemantan example — a chewer of betel- 
nut and lime sometimes prepares several quids 
wrapped carefully in sirik leaf, and sets them aside 
till they are required. On one occasion, while the 
crew of a boat landed to cook their dinner, a 
youngster carefully opened such a quid and sub- 
stituted a piece of filth for the betel-nut. When 
the victim of the joke spat out the morsel, splutter- 
ing with disgust and anger, the crew was moved to 
loud laughter, which they tried in vain to suppress 
out of consideration for the feelings of the victim ; 
for no one likes to be laughed at. 

But, although the Kayans have a strong sense of 
the ridiculous, their laughter is not so violent and 
uncontrollable as that of Europeans is apt to be, 
and it is not so apt to recur from time to time at 
the mere recollection of an amusing incident. 

We refer to some of the stories reproduced in 
Chapter XVII. as examples of the less crude forms of 
humour appreciated by the people. These stories 
are repeated again and again, without failing to 
amuse those who are perfectly familiar with them. 
yEsop's fables transposed into a Bornean key were, 
we found, much appreciated. In a large proportion 
of the entertaining stories of the Kayans, as well as 
of the other tribes, the point of the story depends 
on some reference to sexual relations or actions. 
But such references are not, as a rule, coarsely put, 
but rather hinted at merely, often in a somewhat 

PECULIARITIES 219 

obscure way ; e.g. such a story may terminate before 
the critical point is reached with some such phrase 
as " Well, well, what of it ? " and a shrug of the 
shoulders. 

The tendency of the Kayans to laconic speech 
is well illustrated by their way of referring to well- 
known stories or fables with one or two words, in 
order to sum up or characterise a situation — much 
as we say " sour grapes ! " 

Like all other varieties of mankind (some few 
savage tribes perhaps excepted), the Kayans and 
other tribes are apt to distort the truth in their own 
favour, in describing from memory incidents that 
seriously affect their interests. When a party has 
allowed itself to commit some reprehensible action, 
such as over-hasty and excessive reprisals, a whole 
village, or even several villages, may conspire 
together more or less deliberately to " rig up " some 
plausible version of the affair which may serve to 
excuse or justify the act in the eyes of the govern- 
ment. A good Penghulu1 will set about the 
investigation of such an affair with much tact and 
patience. He will send for those immediately 
concerned and patiently hear out their version of the 
incident. If it departs widely from the truth, he 
will find reason to suspect the fact. But, instead of 
charging the men with untruthfulness, or attempt- 
ing to extort the truth by threats, or bullying, or 
torture (as is so often done in more highly civilised 
courts), he keeps silence, shrugs his shoulders, and 
tells them to go away and think it over, and to 
come back another day with a better story. In 
the meantime he hears the version of some other 
group, who view the affair from a different angle, 
and thus puts himself in a position to suggest 
modifications of the new version of the former 
group. When he has in this way gathered in a 

1 See vol. ii. p. 272. 

220 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

variety of accounts of the incident, he find himself 
in a position to construct, by a process of moral 
triangulation, an approximately correct picture ; 
this he now lays before the party immediately 
concerned, who, seeing that the game is up, fill in 
the details and supply minor corrections. Through- 
out this process the tactful Penghulu never shuts 
the door upon his informants or tries to pin them 
down to their words, or make them take them back ; 
rather he keeps the whole story fluid and shifting, so 
that, when the true account has been constructed, the 
witnesses are not made to feel that they have lost 
their self-respect. 

It seems worth while to describe here one of a 
large class of incidents which illustrate at the same 
time the workings of the native mind and the way 
in which an understanding of such workings may be 
applied by the administrator. The Resident of the 
Baram having heard of the presence in the central 
no-man's land of a considerable population of 
Kenyahs under a strong chief, Tama Kuling, sent 
friendly messages to the latter. He responded by 
sending a lump of white clay, which meant that he 
and his people recognised that they were of the 
same country as the people of the Baram and that 
their feelings were friendly ; and with it came an 
elaborately decorated brass hook (PI. 184), which 
was to serve as a complimentary and symbolical 
acknowledgment of the white man's power of bind- 
ing the tribes together in friendship. He sent also 
a verbal message acknowledging his kinship with 
the Kenyahs of the Baram ; but he added that 
he and his people were in the dark and needed a 
torch [i.e. they wanted more explicit information 
about the conditions obtaining in the Baram). In 
reply to these representations, the Resident 
despatched trusty messengers to Tama Kuling 
bearing the following articles : a large hurricane 

Plate 184. BRASS HOOKS AND SWORD - HANDLES SENT BY 
TAMA KULING TO THE RESIDENT OF THE BARAM AS SYMBOLS, 
OF PEACE. 

PECULIARITIES 221 

lamp for Tama Ruling, and smaller ones for the 
other principal chiefs of the district : smaller lamps 
again were sent for the heads of houses, and with 
them a large stock of boxes of lucifer matches, which 
were to be dealt out to the heads of the rooms of 
each house. In this way the desired torch was 
provided for every member of their communities. 
With these symbols went a large horn of the 
African rhinoceros, out of which Tama Ruling might 
fashion a hilt for his sword.1 

We were afterwards informed that, on the arrival 
of these symbolic gifts, Tama Ruling called 
together the chiefs of all the surrounding villages to 
receive their share, and to discuss the advisability 
of accepting the implied invitation to migrate into 
the Baram. The proposition was favourably re- 
ceived, and a large proportion of the population of 
that region have since acted upon the resolution 
then taken. 

To the disjointed collection of remarks which 
make up this chapter we venture to add the follow- 
ing observations. It has often been attempted to 
exhibit the mental life of savage peoples as pro- 
foundly different from our own ; to assert that they 
act from motives, and reach conclusions by means of 
mental processes, so utterly different from our own 
motives and processes that we cannot hope to 
interpret or understand their behaviour unless we 
can first, by some impossible or at least by some 
hitherto undiscovered method, learn the nature of 
these mysterious motives and processes. These 
attempts have recently been renewed in influential 
quarters. If these views were applied to the savage 
peoples of the interior of Borneo, we should char- 
acterise them as fanciful delusions natural to the 
anthropologist who has spent all the days of his life 

1 The horn of the small and rare Bornean rhinoceros is the most highly- 
valued of the various substances out of which the sword hilts are carved. 

222 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap, xx 

in a stiff collar and a black coat upon the well-paved 
ways of civilised society. 

We have no hesitation in saying that, the more 
intimately one becomes acquainted with these pagan 
tribes, the more fully one realises the close 
similarity of their mental processes to one's own. 
Their primary impulses and emotions seem to be in 
all respects like our own. It is true that they are 
very unlike the typical civilised man of some of the 
older philosophers, whose every action proceeded 
from a nice and logical calculation of the algebraic 
sum of pleasures and pains to be derived from 
alternative lines of conduct ; but we ourselves are 
equally unlike that purely mythical personage. The 
Kayan or the Iban often acts impulsively in ways 
which by no means conduce to further his best 
interests or deeper purposes ; but so do we also. 
He often reaches conclusions by processes that 
cannot be logically justified ; but so do we also. 
He often holds, and upon successive occasions acts 
upon, beliefs that are logically inconsistent with one 
another ; but so do we also. 

CHAPTER XXI 

ETHNOLOGY OF BORNEO 

In the foregoing chapters it has been shown that 
the six groups which we have distinguished by 
the names Kayans, Kenyahs, Klemantans, Muruts, 
Nomads or Punans, and I bans or Sea Dayaks, differ 
considerably from one another in respect of material 
and moral culture as well as of mental and physical 
characters. We have used these names as though 
the groups denoted by them were well denned and 
easily to be distinguished from one another. But 
this is by no means the case. Our foregoing de- 
scriptions are intended to depict the typical com- 
munities of each group, those which present the 
largest number of group-marks. Besides these more 
typical communities, which constitute the main bulk 
of the population, there are many communities or sub- 
tribes which combine in some measure the character- 
istics of two or more of the principal groups. It is this 
fact that renders so extremely difficult the attempt to 
classify the tribes and sub-tribes in any consistent 
and significant fashion, and to which is largely due 
the confusion that reigns in most of the accounts 
hitherto given of the inhabitants of Borneo. We 
believe, however, that the divisions marked by the 
six names we have used, namely, Kayan, Kenyah, 
Klemantan, Murut, Punan, and Iban, are true or 
natural divisions ; and that the intermediate forms 
are due, on the one hand, to crossing through inter- 

223 

224 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

marriage, which takes place continually in some 
degree, and, on the other hand, to the adoption of 
the customs and beliefs and traditions and to the 
imitation of the arts and crafts of one natural group 
by communities properly belonging to a different 
group. The main groups seem to us to be 
separated from one another by differences of two 
kinds : some by racial or ethnic differences, which 
involve differences of physical and mental constitu- 
tion, as well as by cultural differences ; others by 
differences of culture only, the racial characters being 
hardly or not at all differentiated. 

We propose in this chapter to attempt to justify 
these main distinctions, and to define more nearly 
their essential nature and grounds. This attempt 
must involve the statement of our opinion as to the 
ethnic affinities of all the principal tribes. We are 
fully aware that this statement can be only of a 
provisional nature, and must be liable to modifica- 
tion and refinement in the light of further observa- 
tion and discussion. But we think that such a 
statement may serve a useful purpose ; namely, that 
it may serve as a basis upon which such corrections 
and refinements may later be made. 

The most speculative part of this statement must 
necessarily be that which deals with the affinities of 
the tribes of Borneo with the populations of other 
areas ; but even here we think it better to set down 
our opinion for what it may be worth, not conceal- 
ing from the reader its slight basis. We state in 
the following paragraph the main features of the 
history of the tribes of Borneo as we conceive it. 

The wide distribution of remnants of the Negrito 
race in the islands round about Borneo and in the 
adjacent parts of the mainland of Asia renders it 
highly probable that at a remote period Negritos 
lived in Borneo ; but at the present time there 
exist no Negrito community and no distinct traces of 

Plate 185. A KAYAN OF THE MAHAKAM RIVER. 

ETHNOLOGY OF BORNEO 225 

the race, whether in the form of fossil remains or of 
physical characters of the present population, unless 
the curly hair and coarse features of a few individuals 
to be met with in almost all the tribes may be re- 
garded as such traces. These negroid features of a 
small number of the present inhabitants are perhaps 
sufficiently accounted for by the fact that slaves 
have been imported into Borneo from time to time 
throughout many centuries by Arabs and Malays 
and by the Illanum pirates ; and some of these 
slaves were no doubt Negritos, and some, possibly, 
Africans or Papuans.1 

We leave open the question of an ancient Negrito 
population, and go on to the statement that the present 
population is derived from four principal sources. 
From a very early period the island has been in- 
habited in all parts by a people of a common origin 
whose surviving descendants are the tribes we have 
classed as Klemantans, Kenyahs, and Punans. This 
people probably inhabited Borneo at a time when 
it was still connected with the mainland. Their 
cultural status was probably very similar to that of 
the existing Punans. It seems not improbable that 
at this early period, perhaps one preceding the 
separation of Borneo, Sumatra, and Java from the 
mainland, this people was scattered over a large 
part of this area. For in several of the wilder 
parts, where the great forest areas remain untouched, 
bands of nomads closely resembling the Punans 
of Borneo are still to be found, notably the Orang 
Kubu of Sumatra, and perhaps the Bantiks of 
northern Celebes. The principal characteristics of 
this primitive culture are the absence of houses or 
any fixed abode ; the ignorance of agriculture, of 
metal-working, and of boat-making ; and the nomadic 

1 Although it is impossible to form any estimate of the numbers of such im- 
ported slaves of negroid type, it is, we assert, a fact that some have been 
imported. We have trustworthy information of the possession of two Abyssinian 
slaves in recent times by a Malay noble. 

226 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

hunting life, of which the blow-pipe is the principal 
instrument. The chief and only important improve- 
ment effected in the condition of the Punans since 
that early period would seem to be the introduction 
of the superior form of blow-pipe of hard wood. 
This cannot be made without the use of a metal 
rod for boring, and, since none of the Bornean tribes 
which still lead the nomad life know how to work 
metals, it may be inferred that they have learnt the 
craft of making the sumpitan from more cultured 
neighbours, procuring from them by barter the iron 
tools required — as they still do. 

It is impossible to make any confident assertion 
as to the affinities of this widely diffused people from 
which we believe the Punans, Kenyahs, and 
Klemantans to be descended. But the physical 
characters of these tribes, in respect of which they 
differ but slightly from one another, lead us to 
suppose that it was formed by a blending of 
Caucasic and Mongoloid elements, the features of 
the former predominating in the race thus formed. 
The fairness of the skin, the wavy and even, in some 
individuals, the curly character of the hair ; the 
regular and comparatively refined features of many 
individuals ; the frequent occurrence of straight and 
aquiline noses ; the comparatively large, horizontal, 
or only slightly oblique, palpebral aperture ; the not 
infrequent absence of all trace of the Mongolian fold 
of the eyelid and its slightness when present — all 
these characters point to the predominance of the 
Caucasic element in the ethnic blend. 

On the other hand, the smooth yellowish skin, the 
long dark thick hair of the scalp, and the scantiness 
of the hair on the cheeks, chin, and lips ; the rather 
broad cheek-bones, the prevailing slight obliquity of 
the eyes, the rather narrow palpebral aperture, and 
the presence of a slight Mongolian fold — these 
characters (all of which are found in a considerable 

ETHNOLOGY OF BORNEO 227 

proportion of these peoples) are features that point 
to Mongol ancestry.1 

It was said above that the skin of these tribes is 
of very pale yellow colour. In this respect there is 
little to choose between them, but on the whole the 
Punans are of rather lighter colour than the others, 
and, as was said before, of a faintly green tinge. 
This difference is, we think, sufficiently accounted for 
by the fact that the Punan seldom or never exposes 
himself to full sunlight, whereas the others are 
habitually sun-browned in some degree. But the 
lighter colour of this whole group of tribes (as com- 
pared especially with the Kayans and I bans) cannot 
be explained in this way ; for the habits and con- 
ditions of life of Kenyahs and Klemantans are very 
closely similar to those of the Kayans ; and it must, 
we think, be regarded as a racial character. 

The name Indonesian is perhaps most properly 
applied to this people which we suppose to have 
resulted from the contact and blending of the 
Caucasic and Mongoloid stocks in this corner of 
Asia. The systematic ethnographers use this term 
in a vague and uncertain manner. Deniker 
defines the Indonesians by saying that they com- 
prise "the little intermixed inland populations of 
the large islands (Dyaks of Borneo, Battas of 
Sumatra, various " Alfurus " of Celebes, and certain 
Moluccas)." 2 He seems doubtful whether the name 

1 In the course of measuring and observing the physical characters of some 
350 individuals of the various tribes, we recorded in each case the eye 
characters. Of a group of 80 subjects made up of Kenyahs, Klemantans, and 
Punans (who in this respect do not differ appreciably from one another), we 
noted a moderately marked Mongolian fold in 14 subjects, the rest having in 
equal numbers either no fold or but a slight trace of it. As regards obliquity 
of the aperture, in rather more than half it was recorded as slight, in one 
quarter as lacking, and in the rest as moderate. As regards the size of 
palpebral apertures, half were noted as medium, and about one quarter as small, 
and the remaining quarter as large. In the main, obliquity and smallness of 
aperture go with the presence of the Mongolian fold. The most common form 
of eye in this group may therefore be described as very slightly oblique, 
moderately large, and having a slight trace of the Mongolian fold. 

2 The Races of Man, p. 486, London, 1900. 

228 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

Indonesian should be applied to the eight groups 
of aborigines of Indo-China which he distinguishes.1 
He recognises that the Indonesians and the 
Malayans are of very similar physical characters, but 
distinguishes them as two of four races which have 
given rise to the population of the Malay Archi- 
pelago— namely, Malayans, Indonesians, Negritos, 
and Papuans. He regards the Indonesians (used in 
a wide sense to include Malays) as most closely 
akin to the Polynesians ; but he expresses no opinion 
as to their relations to the Mongol and Caucasic 
stocks. 

Keane describes the Indonesians as a Proto- 
Caucasic race which must have occupied Malaysia 
and the Philippines in the New Stone Age. He 
separates them widely from the Malays and Proto- 
Malays, whom he describes as belonging to the 
Oceanic branch of the Mongol stock ; 2 and the 
" Dyaks " of Borneo are classed by him with strict 
impartiality sometimes with the Proto-Malays, 
sometimes with the Proto-Caucasians. 

If these oldest inhabitants of Borneo may be 
regarded as typical Indonesians (and we think that 
they have a strong claim to be so regarded), then 
we think that the usage of the term by both 
Keane and Deniker errs in accentuating unduly 
the affinity of the Indonesians with the Polynesians, 
and that Keane's errs also in ignoring the Mongol 
affinities of the Indonesians. 

The most plausible view of the relations of these 
stocks seems to us to be the following. Poly- 
nesians and Indonesians are the product of an 
ancient blend of southern Mongols with a fair 
Caucasic stock. In both the Caucasic element 
predominates, but more so in the Polynesian than 
in the Indonesian. We imagine this blending to 

1 Op. cit. p. 392. 
2 Man, Past and Present, London, 1899, pp. 562 and 143. 

Plate 187. AN ORANG BUKIT (KLEMANTAN) WOMAN 
BARAM DISTRICT. 

ETHNOLOGY OF BORNEO 229 

have been effected at a remote period in the south- 
eastern corner of Asia, probably before the date at 
which Borneo became separated from the mainland. 
If, as seems probable, this blending was effected by 
the infusion of successive doses of Mongol blood 
from the north into a Caucasic population that had 
previously diffused itself over this corner of Asia 
from the west,1 the smaller proportion of the 
Mongol element in the Polynesians may be due to 
their having passed into the islands, while the 
Indonesians remained on the continent receiving 
further infusions of Mongol blood. 

The separation of Borneo from the mainland then 
isolated part of the Indonesian stock within it, at 
a period when their culture was still in a very 
primitive condition, presumably similar to that of the 
Punans. The Proto-Malays, on the other hand, 
represent a blending of the Mongol stock (or of 
a part of the Indonesian race) with darker stock 
allied to the Dravidians of India, which is perhaps 
properly called Proto-Dravidian, and of which the 
Sakai of the Malay peninsula (and, perhaps, the 
Toala of central Celebes) seem to be the surviving 
representatives in Malaysia. In this blend, which 
presumably was effected in an area south of that in 

1 Prof. A. H. Keane {Man, Past and Present, p. 206), after citing the 
statements of various observers to the effect that persons of almost purely 
Caucasic or European type are not infrequently encountered among several 
of the tribes of Upper Burma, Tonking, and Assam, notably the Shans, 
and the allied peoples known as Chins, Karens, Kyens, and Kakhyens, 
writes : " Thus is again confirmed by the latest investigations, and by the 
conclusions of some of the leading members of the French school of anthropo- 
logy, the view first advanced by me in 1879, that peoples of the Caucasic 
(here called ' Aryan ') division had already spread to the utmost confines of 
south-east Asia in remote prehistoric times, and had in this region even 
preceded the first waves of Mongolic migration radiating from their cradle- 
land on the Tibetian plateau." While we accept this view, so ably maintained 
by Keane, it is only fair to point out that J. R. Logan, in a paper published in 
1850, had maintained that a Gangetic people (by which he meant a people 
formed in the Gangetic plain by the blending of Caucasic and Mongoloid 
stocks) had wandered at a remote epoch into the area that is now Burma, 
following the shore of the Indo-Malayan sea ; and that he recognised the 
Karens and Kakhyens as the modern representatives of this people of partially 
Caucasic origin ("The Ethnology of Eastern Asia," The Journal of the Indian 
Archipelago, vol. iv. p. 481, 1850). 

23o PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

which the Indonesian blend was formed, the Mongol 
element seems to predominate. 

After the separation of Borneo from the mainland, 
there came a long period throughout which it 
remained an isolated area, the population of which 
received no important accessions from other areas. 
It is probable that during this period the Indonesian 
population of the mainland continued to receive 
further infusions of Mongol blood ; for there is 
abundant evidence that for a long time past there has 
been a drifting of Mongol peoples, such as the Shans, 
southwards from China into the Indo-Chinese area. 

We may suppose that during this period the 
knowledge and practice of working iron, of building 
long houses and boats, and of cultivating padi, 
became diffused through the greater part of the 
population of this corner of the Asiatic continent. 
This advance of culture would have rendered 
possible the passage of these peoples to the islands 
in boats. But it seems probable that no consider- 
able incursion of people from this area was effected 
until a comparatively recent date. 

In Chapter II. we have mentioned the evidences 
of Hindu-Javan influence on Borneo, to which 
must be ascribed the existence of the Buddhist 
court at Bruni before the coming of the Malays, 
as well as traces of Hindu culture in south Borneo, 
including the practice of cremation by the Land 
Dayaks, the burning of the bones by other tribes, 
stone carvings,1 and articles of gold and fragments 
of pottery of Hindu character. There must have 
been a certain infusion of Javanese and perhaps 
Hindu blood at this time ; but both in physical 
type and in culture the surviving traces seem to be 
insignificant. 

1 Nieuwenhuis publishes a photograph of such carvings found in the 
Mahakan or Upper Kotei river. They included fragments of a cylindrical 
column and what seems to be a caparisoned kneeling elephant. Quer durch 
Borneo, vol. ii. p. 116. 

xxi ETHNOLOGY OF BORNEO 231 

We have mentioned also in Chapter II. the early 
intercourse between China and the Buddhist rulers 
of Bruni and other parts of north and north- 
west Borneo, and the legend of an early settlement 
of Chinese in the extreme north. 

But these civilised or semi-civilised visitors 
and settlers were separated from the indigenous 
Borneans by a great culture gap, and they prob- 
ably had but little friendly intercourse with them 
and affected their culture but little, if at all ; and 
though it is possible that they bartered salt, metal, 
tools, and weapons, for camphor and other jungle 
produce, their influence, like that of the Malays, 
probably extended but a little way from the coasts 
in most parts of the island. The higher culture of 
the indigenous tribes of the interior has been 
introduced, we believe, by invasions of peoples less 
widely separated from them in cultural level, who 
have penetrated far into the interior and have 
mingled intimately with them. Three such invasions 
may be distinguished as of principal importance : 
that of the Kayans in the south and perhaps in the 
south-east, of the Muruts in the north, and of the 
Ibans in the south-west. Each of these three 
invading populations has spread up the course of 
the rivers to the interior and has established its 
communities over large areas, until in the course of 
the nineteenth century they have encountered one 
another for the first time. Besides these three 
most numerous and important invasions, there have 
been many smaller settlements from the surround- 
ing islands, especially from Java, Celebes, and the 
Philippines, whose blood and culture have still 
further diversified the population and culture of 
the tribes of Borneo and complicated the ethno- 
graphical problems of the island. 

Of the three principal invasions, that of the 
Kayans has been of most effect in spreading 

VOL. II Q 

232 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

a higher culture among the indigenous popula- 
tion. 

There is good reason to believe that the Kayans 
have spread across Borneo from the south and 
south-eastern parts, following up the course of the 
large rivers until they reached Usun Apo, the 
central highlands, in which (see vol. i. p. 2) all 
the large rivers have their sources. The tradition 
of such north - westward migration is preserved 
among the Kayans of the Baram, who, according 
to their own account, crossed the watershed into 
the basins of the western rivers only a few 
generations ago. This tradition is in accordance 
with the fact that, within the memory of men still 
living, they have spread their villages farther 
westward along the banks of the Baram and the 
Rejang rivers, driving back the Muruts northwards 
from the Baram. It is borne out by the accounts 
of the Bruni Malays to the effect that the Brunis 
first became acquainted with the Kayans some few 
generations ago, and had known the Muruts long 
before the advent of the Kayans ; and further, by 
the fact that the Kayans have left their name 
attached to many rivers both in the south and east, 
where the name Batang Kayan (or Kayan River) 
is the common appellation of several rivers on 
which Kayan villages are now very few. 

The Kayans seem to have entered Borneo by 
way of the rivers opening on the south coast, and 
gradually to have penetrated to the central high- 
lands by following up these rivers, pushing out 
communities every few years to build new villages 
higher up the river in the course of their unceasing 
search for new areas adapted to their wasteful 
farming operations. 

There can, we think, be little doubt that the 
Kayans are the descendants of emigrants from the 
mainland, and that they brought with them thence 

ETHNOLOGY OF BORNEO 233 

all or most of the characteristic culture that we 
have described. But from what part exactly 
of the mainland, and by what route, they have 
come, and how long a time was occupied by the 
migration, are questions in answer to which we 
cannot do more than throw out some vague 
suggestions. 

We believe that the Kayans migrated to Borneo 
from the basin of the Irrawadi by way of Tenas- 
serim, the Malay Peninsula, and Sumatra ; and that 
they represent a part of the Indonesian stock which 
had remained in the basin of the Irrawadi and 
adjacent rivers from the time of the separation of 
Borneo, there, through contact with the southward 
drift of peoples from China, receiving fresh infusions 
of Mongol blood; a part, therefore, of the Indo- 
nesians which is more Mongoloid in character than 
that part which at a remote period was shut up in 
Borneo by its separation from the mainland. During 
this long period the Kayans acquired or developed 
the type of culture characterised by the cultiva- 
tion of padi on land newly cleared of jungle by 
burning, the building of long houses on the banks 
of rivers, the use of boats, and the working of 
iron. 

The way in which in Borneo the Kayans hang 
together and keep touch with one another, even 
though scattered through districts in which numerous 
communities of other tribes are settled, preserving 
their characteristic culture with extreme faithfulness, 
lends colour to the supposition that the whole tribe 
may thus have been displaced step by step, passing 
on from one region and from one island to another 
without leaving behind any part of the tribe. The 
passage of the straits between the Peninsula and 
Sumatra, and between Sumatra and Borneo, are 
the parts of this tribal migration that are the most 
difficult to imagine. But we know that Kayans do 

234 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

not fear to put out to sea in their long war-boats. 
We have known Kayan boats to descend the Baram 
River and to follow the coast up to Bruni ; and we 
have trustworthy accounts of such expeditions 
having been made in former days by large war 
parties in order to fight in the service of the Sultan 
of Bruni. The distance from the Baram mouth to 
Bruni (about ioo miles) is nearly equal to the width 
of the broadest stretch of water they must have 
crossed in order to have reached Borneo from the 
mainland by way of Sumatra. This hypothetical 
history of the immigration of the Kayans receives 
some support from the fact that a vague tradition 
of having crossed the sea still persists among them. 
We attach some importance to this Kayan tra- 
dition of their having come over the sea, as 
evidence that they are comparatively recent im- 
migrants to Borneo ; but the principal grounds on 
which we venture to suggest this history of the 
Kayans and of their invasion of Borneo are three : 
first, the affinities of the Kayans in respect of 
physical character and culture to certain tribes still 
existing in the area from which we believe them to 
have come ; secondly, historical facts which go far 
to explain such a migration ; thirdly, their relations 
to other tribes of Borneo. We add a few words 
under each of these heads. 

I. As long ago as the year 1850, J. R. Logan, 
writing of highland tribes of the basins of the 
Koladan and Irrawadi and the south-eastern part 
of the Brahmaputra, asserted that "the habits of 
these tribes have a wonderful resemblance to those 
of the inland lank-haired races of Indonesia. . . . 
There is hardly a minute trait in the legends, 
superstitions, customs, habits, and arts of these 
tribes, and the adjacent highlanders of the remainder 
of the Brahmaputra basin, that is not also charac- 
teristic of some of the ruder lank-haired tribes of 

Plate 189. LONG POKUNS (KLEMANTANS) OF DAPOI RIVER 
BARAM DISTRICT. 

ETHNOLOGY OF BORNEO 235 

Sumatra, Borneo, the Philippines, Celebes, Ceram, 
and the trans-Javan islands." 1 

This assertion, though, no doubt, rather too 
sweeping, seems to have a large basis in fact, so 
far as it concerns the tribes of Borneo. 

We have not been able to find that any one 
tribe of this part of the mainland agrees closely with 
the Kayans in respect of physical characters and all 
important cultural featu res. N evertheless, very many 
of the features of the Kayan culture are described 
as occurring amongst one or another tribe, though 
commonly with some considerable differences in 
detail. In attempting to identify the nearest 
relatives of the Kayans among the mainland tribes, 
it has to be remembered that all these have been 
subjected to much disturbance, in some cases, no 
doubt, involving changes of habitat, since the date 
at which, as we suppose, the Kayans left the 
continent. And since the Kayans, from the time 
of their arrival in Borneo, have played the part of a 
dominating and conquering people among tribes of 
lower culture, and have imposed their customs upon 
these other tribes, without blending with them or 
accepting from them any important cultural elements, 
it follows that we must regard the Kayans as having 
preserved, more faithfully than their relatives of the 
mainland, the culture which presumably they had 
in common with them a thousand years or more 
ago. 

Of all the peoples of the south-eastern corner of 
the continent, the one which seems to us most closely 
akin to the Kayans is that which comprises the 
several tribes of the Karens.2 These have been 
regarded by many authors (3) as the indigenous 
people of Burma. Their own traditions tell of their 

1 " The Ethnology of Eastern Asia ," Journ. of Indian Archipelago, vol. iv. 
p. 478. 

2 We have not been able to find any full and satisfactory description of the 
Karens, but we have brought together whatever statements about them and the 

236 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

coming from the north across a great river of sand 
and of having been driven out of the basin of the 
Irrawadi at a later date (i). At present the Karens 
are found chiefly in the Karen hills of Lower Burma 
between the Irrawadi and the Salween and in 
the basin of the Sittang River, which runs south- 
wards midway between those two greater rivers to 
open into the head of the Gulf of Martaban. But 
they have been much oppressed by their more 
civilised neighbours, the Burmese and the Shans, 
and their communities are widely scattered in the 
remoter parts of the country and are said to extend 
into Tenasserim far down the Malay Peninsula. 
By the Burmese they are called also Kay ens or 
Kyensy the y and r sounds being interchangeable in 
Burmese (i and 3). 

Peoples generally recognised as closely akin to 
the Karens are the Chins (who are also known as 
Khyens) (14) of the basin of the Chindwin, the 
large western tributary of the Irrawadi ; and the 
Kakhyens (also called Kachings and Singphd), who 
occupy the hills east of Bhamo and the basin of the 
river Tapang in the borderlands of Burma and 
Yunnan (7). The Nagas of Manipur and of the 
Naga Hills of Assam also seem to belong to the 

tribes most nearly related to them seem significant for our purpose from the 
following sources. The figures in brackets in the text refer to this list. 

(1) J. R. Logan, " The Ethnology of Eastern Asia," he cit. 

(2) Lieut. -Col. James Low on " The Karean Tribes of Martaban and Javai," 

Journ. of Indian Arch. , vol. iv. 

(3) A. R. McMahon, The Karens of the Golden Chersonese, London, 1876. 

(4) E. B. Cross, "The Karens," Journ. of the Amer. Oriental Soc., 1854. 

(5) T. Mason, "The Karens," Journ. of the Asiatic Soc, 1866, part ii. 

(6) D. M. Smeaton, The Loyal Karens of Burma, London, 1887. 

(7) J. Anderson, From Mandalay to Momien. 

(8) Lieut. -Col. Waddell, "Tribes of the Brahmaputra Valley, "Journ. of the 

Royal Asiatic Soc, 1900. 

(9) A. R. Colquhoun, Among the Shans, London, 1885. 

(10) T. C. Hodson, Naga Tribes of Manipur, London, 191 1. 

(11) T. C. Hodson, "The Assam Hills," a paper read before the Geogra- 

phical Society of Liverpool in 1905. 

(12) Sir J. G. Scott, Burma. 

(13) A. H. Keane, Man, Past and Present, London, 1899. 

(14) J. Deniker, The Races of Man, London, 1900. 

ETHNOLOGY OF BORNEO 237 

same group of peoples, though less closely akin to 
the Karens than the Chins and the Kakhyens. 

It seems highly probable that all these, together 
with the Kayans, are surviving branches of a people 
which occupied a large area of south-eastern Asia, 
more especially the basin of the Irrawadi, for a 
considerable period before the first of the success- 
ive invasions which have given rise to the existing 
Burmese and Shan nations. The physical characters 
of all of them are consistent with the view taken 
above, namely, that they represent the original 
Indonesian population of which the Klemantans of 
Borneo are the pure type, modified by later infusions 
of Mongol blood. In all these occur individuals 
who are described as being of almost purely Caucasic 
type and very light in colour. 

Three principal tribesof Karens are distinguished, 
the Sgan, Pwo, and Bwe. Of these the Bwe are 
also known as the Hill-Karens and seem to have 
preserved their own culture more completely than 
the others, though the Sgan are said to be the 
purest in blood, the lightest in colour, and more dis- 
tinctive in type than any other of the tribes of south- 
eastern Asia (4). Of the Hill-Karens, Mason said, 
" Some would be pronounced European. Indeed, if 
not exposed to the sun, some of them would be as 
fair, I think, as many of the inhabitants of northern 
Europe." Yet the commoner type of Karen is said 
to show distinctly Mongoloid facial characters. Of 
those Karens who have been least affected by their 
more cultured neighbours, we are told that they live 
in small communities, each of which is governed by a 
patriarch who is at once high priest and judge, and 
who punishes chiefly by the infliction of fines. He 
raises no regular tax, but receives contributions in 
kind towards the expenses of entertainment (3). 
Several communities join together, sometimes under 
a leading chief, in order to meet a common foe (3). 

238 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

They build long houses in which a whole com- 
munity of as many as 400 persons dwell together 
(4). These houses are described as of H imalayic type. 
" It (the house) is made by sinking posts of large size 
firmly in the ground and inserting beams or joists 
through the posts eight feet from the ground, and 
on these laying the floor with slats of bamboo." 
The walls and partitions are mats of woven bamboo, 
and the roof is thatched with palm leaves (4). This 
very incomplete description leaves it open to suppose 
that the Karen house is very similar to that built 
by the Kayans when for any reason the latter build 
in hasty and temporary fashion. But the still more 
scanty description of another writer (3) implies that 
the arrangement of the interior of the house is 
unlike that characteristic of the Kayans. They 
frequently migrate to new sites. 

The Karens cultivate fiadi and prepare the jungle 
land for cultivation by burning down the forest. 
They prepare from rice a spirit to which they 
are much addicted. The hill tribes are truculent 
warriors and head-hunters. Captives are made 
slaves. They use and make spears and axes, and a 
cross-bow1 with poisoned arrows. They rear pigs 
and poultry, and train dogs to the chase. The men 
eradicate their beards. They wear many small rings 
on the forearms and legs. The lobes of the ear are 
perforated and often enormously distended (3). 

They address prayers and supplications for pro- 
tection and prosperity to a Supreme Being whom 
they address as " Lord of the heavens and earth " (5). 
They believe also in a multitude of nature spirits, 
most of whom are harmful. The fear of them 
occasions many ceremonial acts. The taking of 
heads is said to be a means of propitiating these 
spirits (3). They believe that during sickness the 
soul departs from the body ; and the medicine-man 

1 The cross-bow is used as a toy by Kayan boys only. 

■■ 

Plate 190. LIRONG (KLEMANTAN) YOUTHS OF TINJAR RIVER. 

ETHNOLOGY OF BORNEO 239 

attempts to arrest it and to bring it back to the body 
of the patient. In this and other rites the blood of 
fowls (which they are said to venerate) (2) is smeared 
on the participants. Divination by means of the 
bones of fowls and the viscera, especially the liver of 
the pig, is in common use (5). The souls of the dead 
go to a place in which they live much as in this 
world. It is called Apu Lagan1 (3). In this 
abode of shades everything is upside down and all 
directions are inverted (5). There are no rewards 
and punishments after death (3). Parents take the 
names of father and mother of So-and-so — the 
name of their first child. The knife with which the 
navel cord is cut at birth is carefully preserved (5). 
Finally, the Karens are said to be distinguished by 
a lack of humour, a trait which is well marked also 
in the Kayans. 

In respect of all the characters and culture 
elements mentioned above, the Karens resemble the 
Kayans very closely. Against these we have to 
set off a few customs mentioned by our authorities 
in which they differ from the Kayans. 

The Karens eat everything except members of 
the cat tribe. They bury the bodies of the dead 
after they have lain in state some three or four 
days ; and they hold an annual feast for the dead 
at the August new moon. They ascribe two souls 
to man, one of a kind which is possessed also by 
animals, tools, weapons, the rice, and one which is the 
responsible soul peculiar to man.2 

The bride is taken to the house of the bride- 
groom's father. Only one tribe, namely, the Red 
Karens, practises tatu, and among them a figure 
which seems to represent the rising sun is tatued 
on the back of the men only (5). They weave a 
coarse cloth. 

1 Cp. the Kayan Apo Leggan^ vol. ii. p. 40. 

2 This, however, is a statement which perhaps might loosely be made of the 
Kayans. Cp. vol. ii. p. 34. 

240 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

These differences are not very great, and their 
significance is diminished by the following con- 
siderations. The Kayans may have acquired their 
aversion to killing the dog through contact with 
Malays. They bury the dead in the ground in the 
case of poor persons or those dead of epidemic 
disease. And they have a tradition that they 
formerly practised the weaving of cloth. They may 
also have acquired the art of making and using the 
solid wooden blow-pipe from Malays ; and this 
would account for their having given up the use 
of the bow and arrow as a serious weapon. On 
the other hand, the inferior houses of the Karens, 
the lack of restrictions among them upon animal 
foods, their earth burial — all these may well be due 
to decay of custom among an oppressed people ; 
and the fact that they seem to make but little use 
of boats may well be due to their having been driven 
away from the main rivers and pushed into the hills. 
We have little doubt that many more points of 
resemblance would be discoverable, if we had any 
full account of the Karens as they were before their 
culture was largely affected by contact with Burmese 
and Shans and by the influence of the missionaries 
who have taught so successfully among them for 
more than sixty years. 

Among the elements of Kayan culture which 
are lacking or but feebly represented among the 
Karens, some are reported among the tribes most 
nearly allied to the Karens, and others among other 
peoples of the same area. 

Thus the peculiar Kayan custom of tatuing the 
thighs of women has a close parallel in the tatuing 
of the thighs of men among all Burmese and Shans ; 
and the Kayans may well have adopted the practice 
from them. Among the Shans there obtains the 
custom of placing the coffin on upright timbers at 
some height above the ground (9). Among the 

xxi ETHNOLOGY OF BORNEO 241 

Nagas, and especially the Kuki Nagas, who are said 
to be most nearly allied to the Karens, beside a 
number of the culture elements which we have 
noticed above as common to Karens and Kayans, 
other noteworthy points of resemblance to the 
Kayans are the following : A system of tabu ox genua 
which may affect individuals or whole villages, and 
is very similar to the malan of the Kayans ; the 
practice of ornamenting houses with heads of 
enemies, the motive of taking the head being to 
provide a slave in Hades for a deceased chief; 
the use of human and other hair in decorating 
weapons.1 

Their method of attacking a village is like that of 
the Kayans, namely, to surround it in the night and 
to rush it at dawn ; they obstruct the approach of an 
enemy to their village by planting in the ground 
short pieces of bamboo sharpened and fire-hardened 
at both ends ; they use an oblong wooden shield or 
a rounded shield of plaited cane ; their blacksmiths 
use a bellows very like that of the Kayan smiths ; 
they husk their padi in a solid wooden mortar with 
a big pestle a la Kayan ; they floor their houses 
with similar massive planks ; they catch fish in nets 
and traps, and by poisoning the water ; men pierce 
the shell of the ear in various ways ; omens are read 
from the viscera of pigs, and the cries of some birds 
are unlucky ; they worship a Supreme Deity and a 
number of minor gods, e.g. gods of rain and of 
harvest ; they often sacrifice pigs and fowls to 

1 It is worthy of note that the Kayans have long used and highly prize 
for the decoration of their swords the hair of the Tibetan goat dyed a dark red, 
and have continued to obtain this hair at a great price from Malay and Chinese 
traders. The wild tribes of the Chin hills, said to be closely akin to the Kukis, 
adorn their shields with tassels of goat's hair dyed red (see The Chin Hills, 
by B. S. Carey and H. N. Tuck, Rangoon, 1896). According to the same 
authorities, these Chins are inveterate head-hunters. They read omens in the 
livers of pigs and other beasts, and in the cries of birds ; they wear a loin- 
cloth like the Kayan Bah ; they scare pests from their padi fields by means 
of an apparatus like that used by Kayans (vol. i. p. 102) ; they floor their houses 
with huge planks hewn out with an adze very similar to the Kayan adze. 

242 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

the gods, and omens are always read from the 
slaughtered animals ; those who die in battle and in 
childbirth are assigned to special regions of the 
other world ; the women are tatued (on chest) to 
facilitate recognition in Hades ; in felling the jungle 
preparatory to burning it to make zftadi farm, they 
always leave at least one tree standing for the 
accommodation of the spirits of the place. 

Other of the instruments, arts, and customs of the 
Kayans are found widely spread in south-eastern 
Asia. Such are the small axe or adze with lashed 
head ; the musical instrument of gourd and bamboo 
pipes with reeds ; the bamboo guitar ; the use of old 
beads and of hornbill feathers for personal adorn- 
ment ; the making of fire by friction of a strip of 
rattan across a block of wood. 

II. Whether this people, of whom the Kayans, 
Karens, Chins, Kakhyens, and Nagas, seem to be 
the principal surviving branches, came into the 
Irrawadi basin and adjacent areas by migration 
from Central Asia by way of the Brahmaputra valley, 
as Cross and McMahon (accepting the tradition of 
the Karens) believe, or came, as Logan suggested, 
eastward from Bengal, it seems certain that it has 
been divided into fragments, driven away from the 
main rivers, and in the main pushed southwards by 
successive swarms of migration from the north. 
This pressure from the north seems to have driven 
some of the Karens down into the Malay Peninsula, 
where they are still found ; and it may well be that, 
before the rise of the Malays as an aggressive people 
under Arab leadership, the ancestors of the Kayans 
occupied parts of the peninsula farther south than 
the Karens now extend, and possibly also parts of 
Sumatra. If this was the case, it was inevitable 
that, with the rise to dominance of the Mohammedan 
Malays in this region, the Kayans must have been 
either driven out, exterminated, or converted to 

ETHNOLOGY OF BORNEO 243 

Islam and absorbed. It seems probable that 
different communities of them suffered these three 
different fates. 

The supposition that the Kayans represent a part 
of such a population, which was driven on by the 
pressure of Malays to seek a new country in which 
to practise its extravagant system of padi culture, is 
in harmony with the probability as to the date of 
their immigration to the southern rivers of Borneo ; 
for the rise and expansion of the Menangkabau 
Malays began in the middle of the twelfth century 
a.d. ; and the Kayans may well have entered Borneo 
some 700 years ago. 

III. We have now to summarise the evidence in 
favour of the view that the Kayans have imparted 
to the Kenyahs and many of the Klemantan tribes 
the principal elements of the peculiar culture which 
they now have in common. 

We have shown that the culture of the Kenyah 
and Klemantan tribes is in the main very similar to 
that of the Kayans, and that it differs chiefly in 
lacking some of its more advanced features, in having 
less sharply defined outlines, in its greater variability 
from one community to another, and in the less 
strict observance of custom. Thus the Kayans in 
general live in larger communities, each of their 
villages generally consisting of several long houses ; 
whereas a single long house generally constitutes 
the whole of a Kenyah or Klemantan village. The 
Kayans excel in iron-working, in padi culture, in 
boat-making, and in house-building. Their customs 
and beliefs are more elaborated, more definite, 
more uniform, and more strictly observed. Their 
social grades are more clearly marked. They hang 
together more strongly, with a stronger tribal 
sentiment, and, while the distinction between them 
and other tribes is everywhere clearly marked and 
recognised both by themselves and others, the 

244 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

Klemantans and Kenyahs everywhere shade off 
into one another and into Punans. 

The process of conversion of Punans into settled 
communities that assimilate more or less fully the 
Kayan culture is still going on. We are acquainted 
with settled communities which still admit their 
Punan origin ; and these exhibit very various grades 
of assimilation of the Kayan culture. Some, which 
in the lives of the older men were still nomadic, 
still build very poor houses and boats, cultivate padi 
very imperfectly, and generally exhibit the Kayan 
culture in a very imperfect state. 

On the other hand, the Kenyahs have assimilated 
the Kayan culture more perfectly than any other of 
the aborigines, and in some respects, such as the 
building of houses, they perhaps equal the Kayans ; 
but even they have not learnt to cultivate padi in 
so thorough a manner as to keep themselves supplied 
with rice all through the year, as the Kayans do ; 
and, like the various Klemantan tribes,1 they suffer 
almost every year periods of scarcity during which 
they rely chiefly on cultivated and wild sago and on 
tapioca. The Kayans, on the other hand, grow 
sufficient padi to last through the year, except in 
very bad seasons, and they never collect or cultivate 
sago. The view that this relative imperfection of 
the agriculture of the Kenyahs and Klemantans is 
due to the recency of their adoption of the practice, 
is confirmed by the fact that many of them still 
preserve the tradition of the time when they 
cultivated no padi. It seems that most of the 
present Kenyahs first began to faxitpadi not more 
than two, or at most three, centuries ago. Some of 
the Kenyahs also preserve the tradition of a time 
when they constructed their houses mainly of 

1 Some communities of Malanaus never plant rice, but rely for their 
principal food supply upon the numerous sago-palms which they have planted 
round about their villages. It is doubtful whether these have ever cultivated 
padi on any considerable scale. 

ETHNOLOGY OF BORNEO 245 

bamboo ; this was probably their practice for some 
few generations after they began to acquire the 
Kayan culture. At the present day those Punans 
who have only recently taken to the settled mode 
of life generally make large use of the bamboo in 
building their small and relatively fragile houses. 

The view that the Kayans have played this 
large civilising role is supported by the fact that 
Kayan is the language most widely understood in 
the interior, and that it is largely used for inter- 
communication, even between members of widely 
separated Kenyah communities whose dialects have 
diverged so widely that their own language no 
longer forms a medium of communication between 
them ; whereas the Kayans themselves do not 
trouble to acquire familiarity with the Kenyah or 
Klemantan languages. 

If both Kenyahs and Klemantans represent 
sections of the aboriginal population of nomadic 
hunters who have absorbed Kayan culture, it remains 
to account for the existence of those peculiarities 
of the Kenyahs that have led us to separate them 
from the tribes which we have classed together 
as Klemantans. The peculiarities that distinguish 
Kenyahs from Klemantans are chiefly personal 
characteristics, notably the bodily build (relatively 
short limbs and massive trunks), the more lively 
and energetic temperament, the more generous 
and expansive and pugnacious disposition. These 
peculiarities may, we think, be accounted for by the 
supposition that the aborigines from whom the 
Kenyahs descend had long occupied the central 
highlands where most of the Kenyah communities 
still dwell and which they all regard as the home- 
land and headquarters of their race. 

Of the Klemantan tribes some, e.g. the Aki, the 
Long Patas, and the Long Akars, resemble more 
nearly the Kayans; others, e.g. the Muriks, the 

246 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

Sebops, the Lirongs, the Uma Longs, the Pengs 
or Pinihings, show more affinity with the Kenyahs. 
It seems probable that these diversities have 
resulted from the assimilation of culture directly 
from the Kayans by the one group and from the 
Kenyahs by the other. A third group of Klemantan 
tribes such as the Long Kiputs, the Batu Blah, 
and the Trings, scattered through the northern part 
of the island, resemble more nearly the Muruts ; 
and among these are found communities whose 
culture marks them as descendants of nomads who 
have assimilated the Murut culture in various 
degrees. 

The Muruts 

The Muruts differ somewhat as regards physical 
features from all the other tribes, especially in 
having coarser but less Mongoloid features, a 
longer skull, and a more lanky build of body and 
limbs. Their intonation is nasal, and the colour 
of the skin slightly darker and ruddier than that of 
the Klemantans. 

Their culture differs so much as to lead us to 
suppose that it had a somewhat different origin 
from that of the Kayans. They build long houses ; 
but these are comparatively flimsy structures, and 
they are often situated at a distance from any 
navigable stream. Even those Muruts who live 
on the river-banks make much less use of boats 
than the other tribes, and all of them are great 
walkers. They have very little skill in boat-making. 
Their most distinctive peculiarity is their system of 
agriculture (see vol. i. p. 97), which involves irriga- 
tion, the use of buffalo, the raising of two crops a 
year, and the repeated use in successive years of 
the same land. Other distinctive features are their 
peculiar long sword and short spear ; the absence 
of any axe and blow-pipe ; the custom according to 

ETHNOLOGY OF BORNEO 247 

which the women propose marriage to the men 
(Kalabits). 

In the Philippine Islands a system of agriculture 
similar to that of the Muruts is widely practised ; 
and some of the tribes, though their culture has 
been largely influenced by Spanish civilisation, 
seem to be of the same stock as the Muruts ; thus 
the Tagals of Borneo are not improbably a section 
of the people known as Tagalas in the Philippines, 
and the Bisayas of Borneo probably bear the same 
relation to the Visayas of the Philippines. 

It seems probable, therefore, that this type of 
culture has been carried into the north of Borneo 
by immigrants from the Philippines, whither it was 
introduced at a remote period, possibly from Annam, 
the nearest part of the mainland ; or possibly it came 
to Borneo directly from Annam.1 It is probable 
that many of the tribes which we have classed with 
the Muruts, on account of their possession of the 
Murut culture, are, like the Klemantans and 
Kenyahs, descendants of the ancient Indonesian 
population who have adopted the culture of more 
advanced immigrants. The descendants of the 
immigrants who introduced this type of culture 
are, we think, the Muruts proper, who claim that 
name and dwell chiefly in the Trusan, the Padas, 
the Sembakong, the Kerayan rivers, and in the 
head of the Kinabatangan ; also the Kalabits in 
the northern part of the upper basin of the Baram. 
It is these which display most decidedly the physical 
peculiarities noted above. 

As examples of Klemantan tribes that have 
partially adopted the Murut culture we would 
mention the Long Kiputs, the Batu Blahs, the 
Trings, and the Adangs in the head of the Limbang 
River ; to the same group belong the Kadayans in 

1 Deniker {Races of Man, p. 392) describes, under the name Mois, an 
aboriginal tribe of Annam in terms which show that they present many points 
of similarity with the Muruts. 

VOL. II R 

248 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

the neighbourhood of Bruni, who, from contact with 
their Malay neighbours, have become in large part 
Mohammedans of Malay culture. 

The Ibans (Sea Dayaks) 

The Ibans stand distinctly apart from all the 
other tribes, both by reason of their physical and 
mental peculiarities and of the many differences of 
their culture ; we have little doubt that they are 
the descendants of immigrants who came into the 
south-western corner of Borneo at no distant date. 
We regard them as Proto- Malays, that is to say, 
as of the stock from which the true Malays of 
Sumatra and the Peninsula were differentiated by 
the influence of Arab culture. A large number of 
the ancestors of the present Ibans were probably 
brought to Borneo from Sumatra less than two 
hundred years ago. Some two centuries ago, a 
number of Malay nobles were authorised by the 
Sultan of Bruni to govern the five rivers of Sarawak 
proper, namely, the Samarahan, the Sadong, the 
Batang Lupar, the Saribas, and the Klaka rivers. 
These Malays were pirate leaders, and they were 
glad to enrol large numbers of pagan fighting men 
among their followers ; for the latter were glad to 
do most of the hard work, claiming the heads of the 
pirates' victims as their principal remuneration, 
while the Malays retained that part of the booty 
which had a marketable value. These Malay 
leaders found, no doubt, that their pagan relatives 
of Sumatra lent themselves more readily to this 
service than the less warlike Klemantans of Borneo, 
and therefore, as we suppose, they brought over con- 
siderable numbers of them and settled them about 
the mouths of these rivers. The co-operation 
between the piratical Malay Tuankus and the 
descendants of their imported protdgds continued 

ETHNOLOGY OF BORNEO 249 

up to the time of the suppression of piracy by the 
British and Dutch half a century ago. It was from 
this association with the sea and with coast-pirates 
that the I bans became known as the Sea Dayaks 
by Sir James Brooke ; and to this encouragement 
of their head-hunting proclivity by the Malays is 
no doubt due their peculiarly ruthless and blood- 
thirsty devotion to it as to a pastime, rather than 
(as with the Kayans and other tribes) as to a 
ceremonial duty occasionally imposed upon them 
by the death of a chief. 

It seems to us probable that the greater part of 
the ancestors of the Ibans entered Borneo in this 
way. But there is reason to think that some of 
them had settled at an earlier date in this part of 
Borneo and rather farther southward on the Kapuas 
River. The Bugaus, Kantus, and Daus, who dwell 
along the southern border of Sarawak, and some 
other I ban tribes in the northern basin of the Kapuas 
River, are probably descendants of these earlier 
immigrants of Proto-Malay stock. In most respects 
they closely resemble the other Iban tribes, but they 
are distinguished by some peculiarities of language 
and accent ; their manners are gentler, their bearing 
less swaggering ; they are less given to wandering, 
and they have little skill in the making and handling 
of boats. These are recognised by themselves and 
by other Ibans as belonging to the same people ; 
but they are a little looked down upon by Ibans 
of the other tribes as any home -staying rural 
population is looked down upon by travelled 
cosmopolitans. 

This conjectural history of the immigration of 
the Ibans explains the peculiar fact that, although all 
the Ibans of all parts are easily distinguishable from 
all the other peoples, and although they all recognise 
one another as belonging to the same people, they 
have no common name for the whole group. They 

250 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

commonly speak of Kami Menoa (i.e. " we of this 
country") when they refer to their people as a 
whole ; and the Kayan designation of them as Ivan 
(immigrant or wanderer) has been adopted by large 
numbers of them in recent years and modified into 
I ban, so that the expression Kami I ban is now 
frequently used by them. 

The identification of the I ban with a Proto-Malay 
stock is justified by their language and physical char- 
acteristics. The former seems to be the language 
from which Malay has been formed under Arab in- 
fluence and culture. It employs many words which 
are no longer current in Malay, but which, as is 
shown by Marsden's Malay Dictionary, were in use 
among Sumatran Malays in the eighteenth century. 

Since the Mohammedan populations which now 
are called Malay are of mixed origin, they present 
no very well-defined or uniform physical type. But 
of all Malays those of Sumatra and of the Peninsula 
are generally recognised as presenting the type in 
its greatest purity ; and it is this type which the 
Ibans most closely reproduce. The near resem- 
blance of facial type between the Malays and the 
Ibans is apt to be obscured for the casual visitor by 
the fact that the I ban puts little or no restraint upon 
his expressions and is constantly chattering, laugh- 
ing, and smiling ; whereas the Malay is taught from 
childhood to restrain his expressions and to preserve 
a severe and grave demeanour in the presence of 
strangers. But in private the Malay relaxes, and 
then the resemblance appears more clearly. 

The principal features of the Iban's culture which 
distinguish it from that of the other tribes may be 
enumerated here. The I ban closely resembles the 
Kayan in his method of cultivating ftadi, but he is 
even more careful and skilful, and generally secures 
a surplus. His house differs characteristically from 
those of the Kayan type, and resembles the long 

Plate 193. LAND DAYAK MEN (KLEMANTANS) FROM 
UPPER SARAWAK. 

xxi ETHNOLOGY OF BORNEO 251 

houses still inhabited by some Sumatran Malays, in 
being comparatively small, and in having a frame- 
work of many light poles rather than of heavy hard- 
wood timbers, and a floor of split bamboo in place 
of huge planks. In methods of weaving and dyeing 
cloth and in the character of the cloths produced ; 1 
in the wearing of ornamental head-cloths ; in the 
weaving of mats and baskets with the Pandanus leaf 
and a large rush known as bumban rather than with 
strips of split rattan ; in their methods of trapping 
and netting fish ; in the character of the sword and 
axe and shield as formerly used ; 2 in the use of the 
fire-piston ; 3 in musical instruments and methods ; 
in the custom of earth burial ; in the visiting and 
making of offerings at the graves of noted men in 
the hope of supernatural aid, — in all these respects 
the I ban culture differs from that of the Kayans, and 
closely resembles that of the Malays. 

The I ban culture presents also certain features 
not common to other peoples of Borneo and not 
found among the Malays ; and all or most are such 
as must have been exterminated among the Malays 
on their conversion to Islam, if they had formed 
part of their culture in their pre-Islamic period. 
Such are the religious beliefs and customs of the 
Ibans with the cult of the Petara ; the Ngarong ; the 
rite with the clay crocodile for getting rid of farm pests 
(vol. ii. p. %%) ; the use in weaving of a number of 
designs of animal origin ; the adornment of the 
edge of the ear with many brass rings ; the lack of 
any strict avoidance of killing dogs. 

Thirdly, of the features of I ban culture which 

* The Malay does not, like the Iban, make use of the various animal 
designs, but confines himself to simple geometrical patterns — but this difference 
is probably a result of the adoption of the Moslem religion. 

2 Most Ibans now procure the parang Hang of the Kayans and copy their 
wooden shields. 

3 The fire-piston is found also in North Borneo, but with this exception is 
peculiar to the Ibans among the pagan tribes. It has been widely used by 
the Malays of the peninsula and those of Menangkaban in Sumatra (see H. 
Balfour, " The Fire Piston," in volume of essays in honour of E. B. Tylor). 

252 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

are common to them and to the other tribes of 
Borneo, many seem to have been borrowed by them 
from their neighbours, and often in an incomplete 
or imperfect manner ; such are the system of omen- 
reading, the ritual slaughter of fowls and pigs, much 
of their dancing and tatuing, the parang Hang and 
wooden shield, the feathered war-coat of skin, the 
keluri or small bag-pipe, and the fashion of wearing 
their hair, — all these seem to have been borrowed 
from the Kayans ; the woman's corset of brass- 
bound hoops, from the Malohs ; the mat worn 
posteriorly for sitting upon, from the Kenyans.1 

Besides the three great invasions of foreign 
blood and foreign culture, those borne by the 
Kayans, the Muruts, and the Ibans respectively, 
there have been numerous minor invasions on all 
sides. In the following paragraphs we make 
mention of those that seem to have been of most 
importance in modifying the population and the 
culture of Borneo. 

In the south there are traces of Javanese culture 
with its Hindu elements among many of the tribes, 
but especially among the Land Dayaks who occupy 
the southern extremity of Sarawak. These cremate 
their dead ; they set apart a separate round house 
for the trophies of human heads, and in this the 
bachelors are expected to pass the nights. The 
Malawis of South-East Borneo seem to be similar 
in many respects to the Land Dayaks of Sarawak. 
The Land Dayaks have a reputation in Upper 
Sarawak for quicker intelligence and more adapt- 
ability than the other tribes, and hence are in much 
request for services of the most various kinds. It 
is an interesting question whether this may be due 

1 The general use of this mat is common to the Kenyahs, Punans, and most 
of the Klemantans, but it is comparatively rare among the Kayans ; this is a 
significant fact, for such a mat is more needed by a jungle dweller than by one 
whose home is a well-built house. We have not met with any mention of such 
a mat among the tribes of the mainland. 

•v - ' > 

l|£V ^ ,-^» j^« >> -Ji 

LAND DAYAK GIRLS OF THE SADONG DISTRICT. 

i 1? 

M>* -,.1 

55" 

LL 2>H*»ly# A 

Plate i94. LAND DAYAKS OF UPPER SARAWAK. 

XXI 

ETHNOLOGY OF BORNEO 253 

to a dash of Hindu blood ; the facial type and the 
more abundant growth of hair on the face would 
support an affirmative answer. 

The Malohs are a well-marked tribe found on 
the Kalis and Mandai rivers, tributaries of the 
Kapuas River. Physically they are marked by 
exceptionally long narrow heads (index about 76). 
They speak a language very different from those 
of the central and northern parts of the island, but 
speak also the I ban language with a peculiar accent. 
The Malohs alone of all the peoples of Borneo eat 
the flesh of the crocodile. The most distinctive 
feature of their culture is their skill and industry 
in brass working. Malohs supply a large propor- 
tion of all the brass -ware to be found in the 
interior. This addiction to brass-working suggests 
that they represent an immigration from Java, 
which has long enjoyed a great reputation for its 
brass-ware and an extensive market throughout the 
islands. 

On the east coast are many communities of 
Bugis, who are mostly Mohammedans and seem to 
have come from Celebes, where they are a numerous 
people. 

In the north and extreme north-west the 
Dusuns seem to be of Murut stock with an infusion 
of Chinese blood and culture. They use a plough 
drawn by buffalo in the padi fields, which they 
irrigate systematically. 

Round about the northern coasts are to be found 
many small bands of Lanuns and Bajaus, living 
largely in boats. They are mostly Mohammedans, 
and descend from the notorious piratical communities 
whose headquarters were in the Sulu Islands and 
other islands off the north-east coast. 

In the foregoing pages we have said very little 
about the languages spoken by the tribes of Borneo. 
Although one of us has a practical command of the 

254 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

Kayan, Kenyah, Sea Dayak, and Malay languages, 
and a tolerably intimate acquaintance with a number 
of the Klemantan dialects, we do not venture upon 
the task of discussing their systematic positions and 
relations to languages of other areas. For this 
would be a task of extreme difficulty and complexity 
which only an accomplished linguistic scholar could 
profitably undertake. Nevertheless, we think it 
worth while to add a few words regarding the 
bearing of the languages on the foregoing ethno- 
logical discussion. It seems clear that in the 
main the differences and affinities between the 
many languages and dialects spoken by the pagan 
tribes bear out, so far as they are known to us, 
the principal conclusions of our argument. The 
Sea Dayak or I ban tongue stands distinctly apart 
from all the rest, and is indisputably very closely 
allied to the Malay. The Kenyahs, Klemantans, 
and Punans speak a great variety of tongues, which 
are, however, so closely similar, and the extreme 
members of which are connected by so many inter- 
mediate forms, that it would seem they may properly 
be regarded as but dialects of one language. The 
Kayan language, on the other hand, stands apart 
from both the I ban and the Klemantan languages, 
but is much nearer to the latter than the former. 
The Kenyah dialects especially contain many words 
or roots that appear also in the Kayan, and seem to be 
more closely allied to it than is any of the Klemantan 
tongues. This may well be due to the more 
intimate contact with the Kayans enjoyed by the 
Kenyahs, who, as we have seen, have assimilated 
the Kayan culture more completely than any other 
of the indigenous tribes, and who may well have 
taken up many Kayan words together with other 
culture elements. 

The Murut languages again seem to stand apart 
from the Iban, Kayan, and Kenyah-Klemantan, as 

ETHNOLOGY OF BORNEO S55 

a distinct group whose vocabulary has little in 
common with those others.1 

In conclusion, we venture to make a suggestion 
which we admit to be widely speculative and by 
which we wish only to draw attention to a remote 
possibility which, if further evidence in its favour 
should be discovered, would be one of great interest. 
We have throughout maintained the view, now 
adopted by many others, of which Professor Keane 
has been the principal exponent, namely, the view 
that the Indonesian stock was largely, probably 
predominantly, of Caucasic origin. In our chapter 
on animistic beliefs concerning animals and plants, 
and in the chapter on religion, we have shown that 
the Kayans believe in a multiplicity of anthropo- 
morphic deities which, with Lake Tenangan at the 
head of a galaxy of subordinate gods and goddesses 
presiding over special departments of nature, 
strangely resembles the group of divine beings who, 
in the imagination of the fathers of European culture, 
dwelt in Olympus. And we have shown that the 
system of divination practised by the Kayans (the 
taking of omens from the flight and cries of birds, 
and the system of augury by the entrails of sacrificial 
victims) strangely resembles, even in many details, 
the corresponding system practised by the early 
Romans. Our suggestion is, then, that these 
two systems may have had a common root ; that, 
while the Aryans carried the system westward into 
Europe, the Indonesians, or some Caucasic people 
which has been merged in the Indonesian stock, 
carried it eastward ; and that the Kayans, with their 
strongly conservative tendencies, their serious 
religious temperament, and strong tribal organisa- 
tion, have, of all the Indonesians, preserved most 
faithfully this ancient religious system and have 

1 See the vocabularies of the Kayan, Kenyah, and Kalabit (Murut) 
languages recently published by Mr. R. S. Douglas, Resident of the Baram 
district, in the Journal of 'the Sarawak Museum, Feb. 191 1. 

256 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

imparted it in a more or less partial manner to the 
tribes to whom they have given so much else of 
culture, custom, and belief. 

It is perhaps not without significance in this 
connection that the Karens, whom we regard as 
the nearest relatives of the Kayans, were found 
to worship a Supreme Being, and have proved 
peculiarly apt pupils of the Christian missionaries 
who have long laboured among them. 

By way of crowning the indiscretion of the 
foregoing paragraphs, we point out that there are 
certain faint indications of linguistic support for 
this speculative suggestion. Bali, which, as we 
have explained, is used by Kayans and Kenyahs to 
denote whatever is sacred or is connected with 
religious practices, is undoubtedly a word of Sanskrit 
derivation.1 Flaki, the name of the bird of most im- 
portance in augury, bears a suggestive resemblance 
to the German Falke and the Latin falco. The 
Kayan word for omen is amany the resemblance 
of which to the Latin word is striking. Are these 
resemblances merely accidental? If more of the 
words connected with the religious beliefs and 
practices could be shown to exhibit equally close 
resemblances, we should be justified in saying — No. 

1 This is clearly shown in the article " Bali" of Monier Williams's Sanskrit 
Dictionary. 

CHAPTER XXII 

GOVERNMENT 

In an earlier chapter we have sketched the history 
of government in Borneo from the earliest times of 
which any record remains, up to the time at which 
the whole island was brought under European 
control. In this chapter we propose to describe the 
way in which the European governments have 
extended their spheres of influence and have secured 
the co-operation of the natives in the maintenance 
of peace and order and freedom. 

For some years after Mr. James Brooke became 
Rajah of Sarawak (1841), his rule was confined to 
the territory then known as Sarawak. This area, 
still known as Sarawak proper, is some 7000 
square miles in extent and comprises the basins of 
the following rivers : the Sarawak, the Samarahan, 
the Sadong, and the Lundu. The Batang Lupar 
and Saribas rivers, which enter the sea to the north 
of this area, were infested by pirate bands under the 
leadership of Malay Serifs who, though they 
professed allegiance to the Sultan of Bruni, were 
but little controlled by him. The depredations of 
these unruly neighbours led Sir James Brooke to 
undertake several expeditions against them. In 
the year 1849, Captain Sir Harry Keppel of H.M.S. 
Dido lent his aid (not for the first time), and the 
combined forces finally swept out those hornets' 
nests and put an end to piracy in those regions. 
With the approval of the Sultan of Bruni, Rajah 

257 

258 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

Brooke established stations in the lower waters of 
the Saribas and Skarang rivers, and a little later at 
Kanowit on the Rejang River. This was the first 
of a series of similar steps by which the area of the 
Raj has been successively extended, until now it 
comprises about 60,000 square miles, more than 
eight times its original extent. In each of these 
out-stations one or two English officers were 
appointed to represent the Rajah's government. In 
each station a small wooden fort was built, and in 
some cases the fort was surrounded with a stockade. 
This served as residence for the officer, or officers, 
and their small band of native police, generally 
some ten or twelve Malays armed with rifles and 
a small cannon. The prime duty of these officers, 
entitled Governors (or later, Residents), was to 
protect the local population from the oppression 
and depredations of the Serifs, and generally to 
discourage and punish bloodshed and disorder. 
The general policy followed in all these new 
districts was to elicit the co-operation of the 
local chiefs and headmen, and, when the people 
had begun to appreciate the benefits of peace, 
including the opening of the rivers to Malay and 
Chinese traders, to impose a small poll-tax to defray 
the expenses of administration. The area of 
control was then gradually extended farther into 
the interior by securing the voluntary adhesion of 
communities and tribes settled in the tributaries 
and higher waters of each river. This policy, 
steadily pursued in one district after another, has 
invariably succeeded, although the time required for 
complete pacification has, of course, varied con- 
siderably ; and it was only during the early years 
of this century that the process seemed to reach 
its final stage among the Sea Dayaks in the interiors 
of the Batang Lupar and Rejang districts. 

The stability of the Rajah's government was 

XXII 

GOVERNMENT 259 

seriously threatened in 1857 by the insurrection of 
Chinese gold-workers at Bau in Sarawak proper. 
But this rebellion, in the course of which Sir James 
Brooke narrowly escaped death at the hands of the 
rebels, was soon suppressed, largely by the energy 
of the Tuan Muda (the present Rajah), who came to 
the aid of Sir James with a strong force of Sea 
Dayaks and Malays. 

The process of establishing order and good 
government in the new territory was complicated by 
the intrigues of the Bruni nobles or pangirans and 
of the independent Malay chiefs, who, seeing their 
power to oppress and misrule the coast districts 
seriously curtailed, and indeed threatened with 
extinction, by the growing influence of the 
Europeans in Borneo, conspired with others of 
similar status in Dutch Borneo to rid the island of 
these unwelcome innovators. In the year 1859 two 
English officers of the Sarawak government at 
Kanowit on the lower Rejang (Messrs. Fox and 
Steele) were murdered by a gang of Malanaus. 
There was good reason to believe that this incident, 
together with several murders of Europeans in 
Dutch Borneo, was the result of a loosely concerted 
action of the Malay chiefs, and that the Kanowit 
murders were directly instigated by Serif Masahor 
and Pangiran Dipa ; the latter a Bruni noble who 
misruled Muka and the surrounding area. Rajah 
Brooke visited the Sultan of Bruni and secured his 
authorisation for the punishment of these and others 
concerned in the murders ; and in i860 an expedi- 
tion, led by his two nephews, captured Muka and 
would have expelled the Serif and the Pangiran but 
for the untimely interference of the British Consul 
at Bruni, who seems to have been misinformed of 
the nature of the situation.1 In the following year 

1 For a full account of these transactions and for the later history of Sarawak 
in general the reader may be referred to the recently published Sarawak under 
two White Rajahs, by Messrs. Bampfylde and Baring-Gould, London, 1909. 

260 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

the Rajah, visiting the Sultan at Bruni, found him 
willing to cede Muka and the basins of the adjoin- 
ing rivers, the Oya, Tatau, and Bintulu, in return 
for a perpetual annual payment of 16,000 dollars, 
an arrangement which was accepted and which 
still holds good. Thus the intrigues of the Malay 
nobles, which for a time had seriously threatened 
the stability of the Rajah's government, resulted 
in the addition of an area of some 7000 square 
miles to the Sarawak territory. 

The basin of the Rejang, the largest river of 
Sarawak, was the next region to be added to the 
Raj. Here Sir James Brooke's government first 
came into contact with the Kayans (in the year 
1863). The reputation of the Kayans as a dominant 
tribe of warriors, whose raids were feared even as 
far as Bruni, had rendered them proud and self- 
confident and unready to appreciate the benefits of 
the Rajah's government. Their continued hostility 
rendered advisable a demonstration of force. Accord- 
ingly in the year 1863 the Tuan Muda (the present 
Rajah, H. H. Sir Charles Brooke) led an expedition of 
some 10,000 or more native levies, consisting chiefly 
of Sea Dayaks and Malays, up the Rejang as far 
as the mouth of the Baloi Peh, a spot some 250 
miles from the mouth of the Rejang and in the edge 
of the Kayan country. The Kayans could not 
withstand so large a force and retreated farther up 
river after but little show of resistance. Several 
of their long houses were destroyed, and a message 
demanding their submission to the Rajah's govern- 
ment was sent by a captive to Oyong Hang, the 
most influential of the Kayan chiefs. The messenger 
carried a cannon-ball and the Sarawak flag, and 
was instructed to ask Oyang Hang which he would 
choose ; to which question the chief is said to 
have returned the answer that he wanted neither. 
Although the expedition failed to secure the submis- 

XXII 

GOVERNMENT 261 

sion of any large number of the Kayans and Kenyahs, 
it established the Rajah's authority as far as it had 
penetrated ; for a number of Klemantan villages 
settled in the middle reaches of the Rejang accepted 
the offer of peace, and a number of their chiefs 
brought the Sarawak flag down river and celebrated 
the traditional peace-making rites with the Rajah's 
representative. The Kayans have never since 
attempted to raid the lower reaches of the river ; but 
it was not until the early eighties, during the Resi- 
dency of the late Mr. H. B. Low, that the bulk of the 
Kayans of the Rejang acknowledged the Rajah's 
authority and began to co-operate in his administra- 
tion, a result achieved without any repetition of the 
large expedition of 1863. From that time (about 
1885) the Baloi or Upper Rejang may be regarded 
as having formed part of Sarawak. 

In the year 1882 the northern boundary of 
Sarawak was again pushed forward by the cession to 
the Rajah by the Sultan of Bruni of the basin of the 
Baram, an area of some 10,000 square miles, on con- 
dition of a perpetual annual payment of 6000 dollars. 
This was an area in which, except along the coast, 
the Sultan's authority had never been exercised, and 
which had been kept closed to trade and the depreda- 
tions of the Malays, by the fear of the Kayans. For 
the Kayans, who dominated all the middle waters 
of the Baram, had in the past threatened even 
Bruni. The Sultan was no doubt glad to see the 
Rajah undertake the task of controlling his formid- 
able neighbours, who, dwelling within striking 
distance of his capital, were a perpetual menace 
to his power and even to his personal safety. The 
Baram district has been brought completely under 
the Rajah's rule without the introduction of any 
armed force from outside ; and as the process of 
establishing peace and order has there followed a 
normal and undisturbed course, and is familiarly 

262 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

known to us, we propose to describe it in some 
detail on a later page. Since the date of the 
inclusion of the Baram, the Raj of Sarawak has 
been again extended towards the north on three 
occasions. The first of these additions was the 
basin of the Trusan River. In this case the Sultan 
offered to sell the territory for a lump sum, and his 
offer was accepted by the Rajah, whose officers 
occupied it in the year 1885. In 1890, the people 
living on the Limbang River, whose basin adjoins 
that of the Baram on its northern border, were in 
a state of rebellion against the Sultan, and the 
region had for several years been in a very disturbed 
state. The present Rajah therefore proposed to 
annex the country in return for an annual payment. 
The British Government was asked to approve 
this step and to fix the amount of the sum to be 
paid to the Sultan. A favourable reply having 
been given by the Foreign Office, and the annual 
sum of 6000 dollars having been awarded as a 
fair return for the cession, the administration of 
the country was peacefully entered upon by the 
Rajah's officers, who where warmly welcomed by 
the greater part of the inhabitants. 

The latest and presumably the final extension of 
the boundaries of Sarawak was effected in 1905, 
when the basin of the small river Lawas was bought 
from the British North Borneo Company. 

In the opening year of this century a small part 
of Borneo still remained under purely native 
control, namely, the town of Bruni and an area 
about it of 1 700 square miles, comprising the basins 
of the small rivers Balait and Tutong. By agree- 
ment with the Sultan this area was placed under 
the administration of a Resident representing the 
British Government in the year 1906. Thus 
the European occupation of Borneo was completed. 

The history of the establishment of Dutch rule 

xxii GOVERNMENT 263 

throughout the larger part of Borneo has been 
similar to that of the acquisition of Sarawak by its 
two English Rajahs. Dutch trading stations were 
established in the south-west corner of Borneo as 
early as 1604. ^n the seventeenth century stations 
were established in southern Borneo by both 
British and Dutch traders ; but the Dutch traders 
extended their influence more rapidly than their 
rivals, and by the middle of the eighteenth century 
had secured a practically exclusive influence in 
those parts. The British held possession of all 
the Dutch East Indies during the brief period (18 11- 
1816) which was terminated by the Congress of 
Vienna. On the retirement of the British, the Dutch 
Government took over all the rights acquired by the 
Dutch traders; and since that time it has continued to 
consolidate its control and to extend the area of its 
administration farther into the interior along the 
courses of the great rivers. There were in the 
area that is now Dutch Borneo several independent 
Malay Sultans, of which the principal had their 
capitals at Pontianak, Banjermasin, and Kotei. 
In 1823 the Sultan of Banjermasin ceded a large 
part of his territory to the Dutch government ; in 
1844 tne Sultan of Kotei accepted its protection; 
and by similar steps by far the larger part of the 
island has been marked out as the Dutch sphere 
of influence. The water parting from which the 
principal rivers flow east and west has been agreed 
upon by the Dutch and the Sarawak governments 
as the boundary between their territories ; and 
though the upper waters of the great rivers which 
flow west and south through Dutch Borneo have 
up to the present time hardly been explored, 
the authority of the Dutch Government is well 
established over all the tribes of the coastal regions 
and, especially in the south, extends far into the 
interior, but is still little more than nominal 
vol. 11 s 

264 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

in the head waters of the rivers. The system of 
administration now practised by the Dutch closely 
resembles in most essential respects that obtain- 
ing in Sarawak, and it has brought to the natives of 
the greater part of Dutch Borneo the same great 
benefits, peace, freedom, justice, and trade. 

The northern extremity of Borneo, an area com- 
prising some 31,000 square miles and 200,000 in- 
habitants, is now administered by the British North 
Borneo Company (chartered by the British Govern- 
ment in 1892), which acquired it by purchase in 
successive instalments from the Sultans of Bruni 
and Sulu. The Company has followed in the main an 
administrative policy similar to that of Sarawak, and 
has appointed as governors officers of large East 
Indian experience placed at their disposal by the 
British Government. The Company has attempted 
to achieve in a brief period a degree of commercial 
development which in Sarawak and Dutch Borneo 
has been reached only gradually in the course of 
several generations ; and to this circumstance must 
be attributed many of the difficulties which for a 
time caused it "to get into the newspapers." But 
these difficulties have now been overcome, and the 
whole territory placed in a condition of prosperity 
and orderly progress. 

It has been widely recognised that Sarawak 
provides a most notable example of beneficent 
administration of the affairs of a population in a 
lowly state of culture by representatives of our 
Western civilisation. Among all such administrative 
systems that of Sarawak has been distinguished not 
only by the rapid establishment of peace, order, 
and a modest prosperity, with a minimum output 
of armed force, but especially by reason of the 
careful way in which the interests of the native 
population have constantly been made the prime 

GOVERNMENT 265 

object of the government's solicitude. The story 
of the success of the two white Rajahs of Sarawak 
has several times been told in whole or in part. 
But we think it is worth while to try to give 
some intimate glimpses of the working of the 
system as it affects the daily lives of the pagan 
tribes, taking our illustrations in the main from in- 
cidents in which one of us has been personally 
concerned. 

From the very inception of his rule, Sir James 
Brooke laid down and strictly adhered to the 
principle of associating the natives with himself 
and his European assistants in the government of 
the country, and of respecting and maintaining what- 
ever was not positively objectionable in the laws and 
customs of the people. And this policy has been as 
faithfully followed by the present Rajah.1 The Raj of 
which Sir James Brooke became the absolute ruler in 
the way described in Chapter II. was a country in which 
the supreme authority had been exercised for many 
generations by Malay rulers, and in which the only 
generally recognised system of law was the Moham- 
medan law administered by them. The two white 
Rajahs, instead of imposing any system of European- 
made laws upon the people, as in their position of 
benevolent despot they might have been tempted to 
do, have accepted the Mohammedan law and custom 
in all matters affecting the population of the Moham- 
medan religion ; and they have gradually introduced 

1 The principles according to which the government has been conducted 
cannot be better expressed than in the following words of H.H. Sir Charles 
Brooke, the present Rajah. Writing in the Sarawak Gazette of September 2, 
1872, he observed that a government such as that of Sarawak may "start from 
things as we find them, putting its veto on what is dangerous or unjust and 
supporting whatis fair and equitable in the usages of the natives, and letting 
system and legislation wait upon occasion. When new wants are felt it 
examines and provides for them by measures rather made on the spot than 
imported from abroad ; and, to ensure that these shall not be contrary to 
native customs, the consent of the people is gained for them before they are 
put in force. The white man's so-called privilege of class is made little of and 
the rules of government are framed with greater care for the interests of the 
majority who are not European than for those of the minority of superior race." 

266 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

improvements when and where the defects and in- 
justices of the system revealed themselves. In 
the work both of administration and legislation the 
Rajahs have always sought and enjoyed the advice 
and co-operation of Malays. They have maintained 
the principal ministries of State, and have continued 
the tenure of those offices by the Malay nobles who 
occupied them at the time of Sir James Brooke's 
accession to power ; and, as these have died or 
retired in the natural course, they have chosen 
leading Malays of the aristocratic class to fill the 
vacancies. Three of these Malay officers, namely, 
the Datu Bandar, Datu Imaum,and the Datu Hakim, 
have been members of the Supreme Council since its 
institution in 1855. The first of these offices may 
be best defined by likening it to that of a Lord 
Mayor ; or better, perhaps, to that of the salaried 
Burgomaster of a German city ; its occupant is 
understood to be the leading citizen of the Malay 
community of Kuching, the capital town of Sarawak. 
The Datu Imaum is the religious head of the 
Mohammedan community, and the Datu Hakim 
the principal of the Malay judges. 

The Supreme Council consists of the three 
Malay officers named above together with three or 
four of the principal European officers, and the 
Rajah, who presides over its deliberations. It 
meets at least once a month to consider all matters 
referred to it by lower tribunals. It embodies the 
absolute authority of the Rajah ; from its decrees 
there is no appeal. It decides questions of justice, 
administration, and legislation ; and it continually 
enriches and improves the law by creating pre- 
cedents, which serve to guide the local courts, by 
deliberately revising and repealing laws, and by 
adding new laws to the Statute Book. It is the 
sole legislative authority. The presence of the 
Malay members at the meetings of the Council is 

GOVERNMENT 267 

by no means a mere formality ; they take an active 
part in its deliberations and decisions. 

Beside the Supreme Council there exists a 
larger body whose functions are purely advisory. 
It is called the Council Negri or State Council, and 
consists of the Rajah and the members of the 
Supreme Council, the Residents in charge of the 
more important districts, and the principal " Native 
Officers" and Penghulus, some seventy members 
in all. This Council meets at Kuching once in 
every three years under the presidency of the 
Rajah, who provides the members with suitable 
lodgings and entertains them at dinner. At the 
meeting of this council topics of general interest are 
discussed, and the Rajah makes some general review 
of the state of public affairs and the progress achieved 
since the previous meeting. But the principal 
purpose of the institution is the bringing together, 
under conditions favourable for friendly intercourse, 
of the leading men of the whole country. Each 
new member is formally sworn in, taking an oath 
of loyalty to the Rajah and his government. The 
native chiefs return from these meetings with an 
enhanced sense of the importance and dignity of 
their office and with clearer notions of the whole 
system of government and of their places in it. 

Though Mohammedan law remains as the basis 
of the law administered among the Malays, notable 
improvements have been introduced, e.g. the death 
penalty for incest and corporal punishment for 
conjugal infidelity have been abolished ; slave- 
holding, though not made illegal, has been dis- 
couraged throughout the country by rendering it 
easy for slaves to secure their freedom ; and the 
power of the master over his slave has been greatly 
restricted. A man is not allowed to marry a second 
or third wife, unless he can prove himself able to 
provide for each of the women and her offspring ; 

268 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

wilful murder is always punished by death or long 
imprisonment, not merely by imposition of a fine as 
in former times. 

The development of commerce and industries 
has, of course, given rise to legal questions for 
which the Mohammedan law provides no answers ; 
and to meet these necessities, laws modelled on 
the Indian code and on English law have been 
enacted. 

The presence of a large Chinese community 
(now comprising some 50,000 persons) has always 
been a source of legal and administrative difficulties. 
These difficulties have been met in the past by 
securing the presence of leading Chinese merchants 
on the judicial bench, as assessors familiar with the 
language, customs, and circumstances of their 
countrymen, whenever the latter have been involved 
in legal proceedings. In the present year a special 
court for the trial of Chinese civil cases has been 
instituted, consisting of seven of the leading Chinese 
merchants, of whom all, save the president, who is 
nominated by the Rajah, are elected by the Chinese 
community. 

The government of the pagan population, com- 
prising as it does so many tribes of diverse customs, 
languages, and circumstances, has presented a more 
varied and in many respects a more difficult problem. 
But the same principles have been everywhere 
applied in their case also. The backbone of the 
administrative and judicial system has been consti- 
tuted by the small staff of English officers carefully 
chosen by the Rajah, and increased from time to 
time as the extension of the boundaries of Sarawak 
opened new fields for their activities. During 
recent years this administrative staff has counted 
some fifty to sixty English members. Of these 
about a dozen are quartered in Kuching, namely, 
the Resident of the first division, his assistant, 

GOVERNMENT 269 

a second - class Resident, and the heads of the 
principal departments, the post office, police and 
prisons, the treasury, the department of lands and 
surveys, public works, education, and the rangers. 

The Sarawak rangers are a body of some 400 
men trained to the use of fire-arms and under 
military discipline. The majority are Sea Dayaks, 
the remainder Malays and Sikhs. Two white 
officers, the commandant and the gunnery instructor, 
are supported by native non-commissioned officers. 
The force is recruited by voluntary enlistment, the 
men joining in the first place for five years' service. 
This force supplies the garrisons of the small forts, 
one or more of which are maintained in each district ; 
and from it a small body of riflemen has commonly 
been drawn to form the nucleus of any expeditionary 
force required for punitive operations. 

The whole territory of Sarawak is divided into 
four divisions, each of which is again divided into 
two or more districts. The first division coincides 
with Sarawak proper ; the second includes the 
Batang Lupar,Saribas,and Kelaka districts ; the third 
comprises the Rejang, Oya, Muka, Bintulu, and 
Matu districts ; the fourth consists of the Baram, 
Limbang, Trusan, and Lawas. The first, third, and 
fourth divisions are administered by divisional Resi- 
dents, which three officers rank next to the Rajah in 
the official hierarchy. Each district is under the 
immediate charge of an officer. These district 
officers are of two ranks, namely Residents of the 
second class, and Assistant Residents. In each 
district, with the exception of the smallest, the 
Resident is assisted in his multifarious duties by a 
second white officer of the rank of cadet or extra- 
officer, and has under his direction a squad of ten to 
twenty-five rangers under the charge of a sergeant ; 
a sergeant of police in charge of about twelve 
policemen, who are generally drawn from the 

270 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

locality ; several Malay or Chinese clerks ; and 
generally some two or three " native officers." The 
last are Malays of the aristocratic class resident in 
the district ; they are appointed by the Rajah on 
the recommendation of the Resident and receive a 
regular salary. Their duties are to assist the 
Resident in his police-court work, to hold special 
courts for the settlement of purely Malay cases of 
a domestic nature, and to take charge of the station 
in the absence of the Resident and his assistant. 

The prime duty of the Resident is to preserve 
order in his district and to punish crimes of violence. 
But he is responsible also for every detail of 
administration, including the collection of taxes and 
customs duties, the settlement of disputes, and the 
hearing of complaints of all kinds, the furnishing of 
reports to the central government on all matters of 
moment, the development of trade and the protec- 
tion of traders, especially the inoffensive Chinese ; 
and above all, in the newer districts, it is his duty 
to gain the confidence of the chiefs of the wilder 
tribes, and to lead them to accept the Sarawak flag 
and the benefits of the Rajah's government, in 
return for the small poll-tax required of them. It is 
well recognised by the Rajah and his officers that 
the success of a Resident depends primarily upon 
his acquiring intimate knowledge of the people and 
establishing and maintaining good relations with 
them ; and with this end in view every Resident is 
expected to be familiar not only with the Malay 
language, which is the official language of the 
country, as well as in some measure a common 
medium of communication between the chiefs of the 
various tribes, but also with one or more of the 
other languages spoken in his district. The head- 
quarters of the Resident are usually the fort, or a 
small residency built not far from it in the lower 
reaches of the chief river of his district. Here a 

GOVERNMENT 271 

Chinese bazaar, i.e. a compact village of Chinese 
traders and shopkeepers, and a Malay Kampong, 
generally spring up under the shelter of the fort ; 
and thus the station becomes the headquarters of 
trade as well as of administration. To this centre 
the workers of jungle produce bring their stuff, 
floating down river on rafts of rattans or in their 
canoes ; from it the Malay and Chinese traders or 
pedlars set out in their boats for long journeys 
among the up-river people ; and to it come 
occasional parties of the up-river tribesmen, to 
consult with the Resident, to seek redress for 
wrongs, to report the movements of tribes in the 
adjacent territories, or to obtain permission to go on 
the war-path in order to punish offences committed 
against them. 

Since the river is the one great high road, and 
since the Resident and his assistants are seated 
generally near the point where it leaves the district, 
the coming and going of all visitors can hardly 
escape their observation. And, since the station 
sees every few days the arrival of visitors or the 
return of parties of its own people from up river, the 
Resident can keep himself pretty well informed of 
the state of the country, and all news of importance 
will reach him after no long delay, if only he is 
always accessible and willing to turn a sympathetic 
ear to all comers. 

But the successful administration of one of the 
larger and wilder districts, such as the Rejang or 
the Baram, requires that the Resident shall not be 
content with the zealous discharge of his many duties 
at his headquarters. He can only establish intimate 
relations of reciprocal knowledge and confidence 
with the chiefs of the many scattered communities 
of his district by making long journeys up river 
several times a year. And situations not in- 
frequently arise which urgently demand his presence 

272 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

in some outlying part of his district and which serve 
as the occasions of such journeys. 

Before describing such a journey, something 
must be said of the place in the scheme of govern- 
ment occupied by the chiefs and headmen of the 
various communities. Each of the Malay Kampongs 
and other similar villages of the Malanaus and other 
coastwise peoples is under the immediate charge of 
one of its more influential elders, who bears the 
title of Tuah Kampong. He is appointed by the 
Rajah on the recommendation of the Resident and 
receives a small salary. His duties are to settle the 
minor disputes of his village, to collect the tax, to 
keep order, and to report all breaches of the peace 
to the Resident. He has authority to call in the 
police and to order the arrest of any villager ; in 
cases of dispute between villages he represents his 
village in the Resident's court, and, where his own 
people are concerned, he may sit on the bench with 
the Resident to hear and advise upon the case. 
The Sarawak flag is the badge of his office, and his 
position and duties are defined in a document bear- 
ing the Rajah's signature. 

From among the more influential chiefs of the 
up-river communities the Rajah appoints, on the 
recommendation of the Resident, a certain number 
in each district to the office of Penghulu. In a 
district of mixed population such as the Baram, one 
Penghulu (sometimes two) is usually appointed for 
each of the principal tribes of the district, e.g. 
in the Baram are, or recently were, two Kayans, 
one Kenyah, one Sebop, and one Barawan holding 
the office. The principal Penghulus are made 
members of the Council of State, and they are 
expected to attend its triennial meetings. The 
status of the Penghulus is similar to that of the 
Tuah Kampong, and he also is given the Sarawak 
flag, which he will display on his boat on official 

xxii GOVERNMENT 273 

journeys, and a document signed by the Rajah 
recording his appointment and the duties of his 
office ; but many of them derive a considerably 
greater importance than their fellows from the 
numerical strength and the warlike character of 
their followings. The Penghulu has authority not 
only over his own house or village, but also over the 
chiefs or headmen of other communities of the same 
tribe and region. He is expected to keep the 
Resident informed of any local incident requiring 
his attention, and to be present in the Resident's 
court when any of his people are tried for any 
serious offence ; he has authority to try minor cases, 
both civil and criminal, among his own people. 
Perhaps his most important service is the following. 
When an up-river man has been charged with a 
serious offence, the summons of the Resident's court 
is forwarded to the Penghulu of his tribe and district 
with the instruction that he shall send the man down 
river to headquarters. It is generally possible 
for the Penghulu to call the man to him, and, by 
explaining to him the situation and the order of 
the Resident, to secure his peaceful surrender. 
But in case of refusal to come, or of active 
resistance, the Penghulu is expected to apply such 
force as may be necessary for effecting the arrest 
and the conveyance to headquarters. In this 
way in a well-governed district the arrest of evil- 
doers is effected with remarkable sureness and with 
far less risk of violence, bloodshed, and the arousal 
of angry passions, than if the Resident should 
send his police or rangers to do the work. The 
Penghulu is in a much better position than the 
Resident for obtaining accurate information upon, 
and a full understanding of, the circumstances of 
any such up-river incidents ; and his help is thus 
often of the greatest value to the Resident. If he 
judges that the accused man is innocent, and 

274 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

especially if the charge against him has been made 
by a Chinaman, a Malay, or a member of any other 
than his own tribe, he will usually accompany the 
prisoner to headquarters, in order to see that no 
injustice is done him. Another important function 
of the Penghulu is the preliminary investigation of 
breaches of the peace among his people (see vol. ii. 
p. 219). 

The Penghulu is responsible also for the 
collection of the door-tax from the chief of each 
house or village of his people and for its delivery to 
the Resident. He is allowed to exercise a certain 
discretion in the matter of remission of taxes to 
elderly or infirm householders. He is responsible 
also for the transmission to the Resident of all sums 
in payment of fines of more than five dollars, 
imposed by himself or by his subordinate chiefs. 
On the happily infrequent occasions on which it 
becomes necessary to organise a punitive expedition, 
the Penghulus are expected to help in the raising of 
the required force, and to accompany the expedition 
as commanders of their own group of warriors, acting 
under the orders of the Resident. 

A Penghulu is punished for neglect of his duties 
by suspension from his office for a definite period, or 
in more serious cases by dismissal and the appoint- 
ment of another chief. Since the dignity and 
prestige of the office are high, this punishment is 
deeply felt. 

Among the Kayans and Kenyahs and most of 
the Klemantans, the Penghulus exercise a very 
effective authority, and, since with few exceptions 
the chiefs chosen to fill the office have been loyal, 
zealous, and capable, they have rendered great 
services to the government. Among the Sea 
Dayaks the lack of authority of the chiefs, which is 
a characteristic feature of their social system, has 
rendered it impossible to secure for their Penghulus 

GOVERNMENT 275 

the same high standing and large influence ; the 
result of which has been the creation of an unduly 
large number of these officers and the consequent 
further depreciation of the dignity of the office. 

The Pengkulu is the link between the native 
system of government as it obtained before the 
coming of the white man, and that established and 
maintained by the Rajah and his white officers. 
The former consisted of the exercise of authority by 
the several chiefs, each over the people of his own 
village only, except in so far as a chief might 
acquire some special prestige and influence over 
others through his own reputation for wisdom and 
that of his people for success in war. Among the 
Kayans and Kenyahs especially, the principal chiefs 
have long aimed at extending their influence by 
marrying their relatives to those of other powerful 
chiefs. In this way chiefs of exceptional capacity, 
aided by good fortune, have achieved in certain 
instances a very extended influence. Such a chief 
was Laki Avit, a Kenyah, who, some twenty years 
before the Rajah's officers first entered upon the 
task of administering the Baram, was recognised 
throughout all the interior of the district as the 
leading chief, a position which could only have 
been achieved by the consistent pursuit of a wise 
policy of conciliation and just dealing between 
Kenyahs and Kayans. But the order and peace 
maintained by the influence of such a chief depended 
wholly on his continued vigour, and they seldom or 
never survived his death by more than a few years. 
In the case of Laki Avit, for example, the Bruni 
Malays, jealous and afraid of the allied Kayans and 
Kenyahs, soon succeeded by means of murderous 
intrigues in bringing back the more normal condi- 
tion of suspicious hostility and frequent warfare. 
Thus, although several chiefs had endeavoured to 
establish peace throughout wide areas, no one of them 

276 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

had achieved any enduring success. For this end the 
unifying influence of a central authority and superior 
power was necessary, and this was supplied by the 
Rajah. We may liken the whole system of society 
as now established to a conical structure consisting 
of a common apex from which lines of authority 
descend to the base, branching as they go at three 
principal levels. If we imagine the upper part of 
this structure cut away at a horizontal plane just 
above the lowest level of branching, we have a 
diagrammatic representation of the state of affairs 
preceding the Rajah's advent — a large number of 
small cones each representing a village unified by 
the subordination of its members to its chief, but 
each one remaining isolated without any bond of 
union with its neighbours. At the present time the 
base of the cone remains almost unchanged, but the 
Rajah's government binds together all its isolated 
groups to form one harmonious whole, by means of 
the hierarchy of officers whose authority proceeds 
from the Rajah himself, the apex of the system. 

The establishment of the Rajah's government has 
thus involved no breaking up of the old forms of 
society, no attempt to recast it after any foreign 
model, but has merely supplied the elements that 
were lacking to the system, if it was to enable men 
to live at peace, to prosper and multiply, and to 
enjoy the fruits of their labours. But though we 
describe the society of Sarawak as being now a 
completed structure, the simile is inadequate and 
might mislead. The structure is not that of a rigid 
building, but of a living organisation ; and its 
efficiencyand permanence depend upon theunceasing 
activities of all its parts, each conscious of the whole 
and of its own essential role in the life of the whole, 
and each animated by a common spirit of unswerv- 
ing devotion to, and untiring effort in the cause of, 
the whole. The Rajah's power rests upon the broad 

s 

< 

& 

< 

PQ 

W 

I 

H 

5? 

O 

o 

w 

O 

Lh 

fc 

X 

c 

ffi 

pq 

o 

H 

PL, 

a; 

<J 

W 

z 

£ 

Q 

D 

£ 

<J 

O 

H 

en 

g 

<J 

fr 

W 

5 

w 

H 

u 

W 

00 

PQ 

w 

Q 

Q 

< 

g 

O 

W 

&< 

> 

2 

X 

a 

H 

s 

<; 

J 

72 

H 

W 

K 

Lh 

o 

O 

w 

W 

H 

<J 

i-l 

- 

GOVERNMENT 277 

base of the people's willing co-operation ; he in turn 
is for them the symbol of the whole, by the aid of 
which they are enabled to think of the state as their 
common country and common object of devotion ; 
and from him there descends through his officers 
the spirit which animates the whole, a spirit of re- 
ciprocal confidence, justice, goodwill, and devotion 
to duty. The system is in fact the realisation of 
the ideal of monarchy or personal government ; its 
successful working depends above all on the char- 
acter and intellect of the man who stands at the 
head of the state ; and the steady progress of all 
better aspects of civilisation in Sarawak, a progress 
which has evoked the warm praise of many ex- 
perienced and independent observers,1 has been due 
to the fact that the resolution, the tact and sympathy, 
the wisdom and high ideals which enabled the first 
of its English Rajahs to establish his authority, have 
been unfailingly displayed in no less degree by his 
successor throughout his long reign. 

It is obvious that this permeation of the whole 
system of government by the spirit of its head can 
only be perpetuated by constant personal intercourse 
between him and his officers and between the 
officers of the various grades. This has been a 
main principle observed by the Rajah. He has 
frequently visited the district stations, to spend a 
few days in consultation with his white officers, and 
to renew his personal acquaintance with the local 
chiefs, who spontaneously assemble to await his 
arrival. Such visits to any station have seldom 
been made at greater intervals than one year ; and 
these annual meetings at the district stations between 
the Rajah and his officers of all grades have been 
of the utmost value in preserving the profound and 
personal respect with which he is regarded through- 

1 See pp. 417-420 of Messrs. Bampfylde and Baring Gould's Two White 
Rajahs. 

278 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

out the land and which is in due measure reflected 
to his representatives, both white and native. The 
Rajah has also kept himself in close touch with the 
Residents and the affairs even of the remotest 
districts by encouraging the Residents to write to 
him personally and fully on all important matters, 
and by writing with his own hand full and prompt 
replies. 

The foregoing brief account of the system of 
government will have accentuated its essentially 
personal character ; and it will have made clear the 
necessity for constant personal intercourse between 
the officers of various grades, and for the long 
excursions of the Residents into the interior parts 
of their districts, one of which we propose to 
describe as an illustration of the intimate working 
of the administrative system. For in the larger 
and wilder districts the Resident's station may be 
separated from populous villages by a tract of wild 
jungle country, the return journey over which 
cannot be accomplished in less than a month or 
even more. 

The journey we are about to describe, as 
illustrative of the administrative labours of the 
Resident of one of the wilder districts, was made 
in the Baram in the year 1898 by one of us 
(C. H.) in the course of his official duties and in 
part only by the joint -author of this book. A 
slight sketch of the political history and condition 
of the Baram is required to render intelligible the 
objects of the journey and the course of events. 
The Baram was added to Sarawak territory, under 
the circumstances described above (vol. ii. p. 261), 
in the year 1882. At that time it enjoyed the 
reputation of a wild and dangerous region, owing 
to the strength of the Kayans, who, dwelling in all 
the middle parts of the rivers, had made a number 
of bold raids as far as the coast and even to the 

GOVERNMENT 279 

neighbourhood of Bruni. The Sea Dayaks had 
obtained no footing in the river, and the Klemantans, 
who dwelt in the lower reaches, had proved quite 
incapable of withstanding their formidable neigh- 
bours. The latter had driven them out of the more 
desirable parts of the river, had made many slaves, 
and had appropriated many of the valuable caves 
in which they had gathered the edible nests of the 
swift. But considerable numbers of the Klemantans 
remained in the lower reaches and in some of the 
tributary rivers. The upper waters of the Baram 
were occupied mainly by Kenyah communities ; 
and about the watershed in which the Baram, the 
Rejang, and the Batang Kayan have their sources 
(a mountainous highland, geographically the very 
centre of the island, known as Usun Apo), were 
the Madangs, a powerful subtribe of the Kenyans, 
whose reputation as warriors was second to none. 
In 1883 a fort was built at Marudi (now officially 
known as Claudetown), a spot on the river-bank 
some sixty miles from the sea, the first spot at 
which in ascending the river a high bank suitable 
for a settlement is encountered. Here Mr. Claude 
de Crespigny, assisted by two junior officers, a 
squad of some thirty rangers, and a few native 
police, began the task of introducing law and order 
into these 10,000 square miles of dense jungles, 
rushing rivers, and high mountains, the scene for 
unknown ages of the hard perpetual struggle of 
savage man with nature, and of the fierce conflict 
of man with man. At first the interior tribes 
remained aloof, and the little outpost of civilisation 
was frequently threatened by them with extermina- 
tion. But after some few years the Kayans of the 
lower villages became reconciled to the new state of 
affairs, recognised the authority of the Rajah and of 
the Resident, and consented to pay the small annual 
door-tax amounting to two dollars per family or door. 

VOL. II T 

28o PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

These were the Kayans of villages that were 
readily accessible because seated on reaches of the 
river navigable by the Resident's steam-launch, 
that is, not more than seventy miles above Claude- 
town. It was soon realised that the people of the 
remoter parts were only to be brought under the 
Rajah's government by means of friendly visits of 
the Resident to their villages. This policy was 
actively pursued by Mr. Charles Hose, who had 
become assistant to the Resident in 1884, officer in 
charge in 1888, and Resident in 1890; some four 
or five long journeys were made each year, each 
occupying several weeks. During these journeys, 
which were necessarily made in the native boats, 
the Resident would spend the nights, whenever 
possible, in the native houses, sometimes whiling 
away several days in friendly intercourse with his 
hosts, and thus acquiring much useful information 
as well as more intimate understanding of their 
characters, languages, and customs. In this way 
the area of government control was extended step 
by step, until about the year 1891 practically all the 
inhabitants of the Baram had accepted the Rajah's 
government and acknowledged it by the payment 
of some tax, however small. The chiefs of the 
Klemantans and their people were for the most 
part very glad to place themselves under the 
protection of this new government ; but the Kayans 
and Kenyahs, not feeling themselves to be in need 
of any such protection, were less ready to accept 
the Resident's proposals. Two considerations 
mainly induced them to take this course : first, they 
desired peace, or at any rate less warfare, and it 
was possible to convince them that this result might 
be achieved by pointing to other districts such as 
the Rejang, with whose affairs they had some 
acquaintance. Secondly, they found that a Chinese 
bazaar had sprung up at Claudetown, and that, as 

XXII 

GOVERNMENT 281 

soon as they accepted the Rajah's government, they 
would obtain greatly increased facilities for driving 
the highly profitable trade in jungle produce ; for, 
before they had come under the government, the 
Chinese and Malay traders had hardly ventured 
to penetrate to their remote villages with their 
cloths and lucifer matches, hardware, steel bars, and 
other much-coveted goods. 

Several of the most influential chiefs who had 
early showed themselves staunch friends of the 
government were made Penghuhis, and have long 
continued by their example and influence energetic- 
ally to support the Resident, notably the Kayan, 
Tama Usong, and the Kenyah, Tama Bulan (see 
Pis. 49, 27). The latter especially, though not one 
of the first to come in, exercised his great influence 
consistently, wisely, and energetically, in support 
of the Resident and in the establishment of 
peace and order throughout the district and even 
beyond its boundaries. But he was only one of 
several chiefs who have displayed a high degree 
of enlightenment and moral qualities of a very 
high order. 

The hostility of the Kalabits on the north-eastern 
border, who persistently raided those villages of 
their fellow- tribesmen that had come under the 
government, had necessitated an expedition against 
them in 1893. And Sea Dayak parties of jungle 
workers had on more than one occasion stirred up 
serious trouble. But, in spite of these difficulties, 
by the year 1898 all the inhabitants of the district 
were paying the regular door-tax, crimes of violence 
had been almost abolished, trade was everywhere 
increasing, and peace was assured, save for the 
threat to it from one quarter, namely, the Madangs 
of Usun Apo and the neighbouring powerful 
settlements of Kenyahs across the water-parting 
in the head-waters of the Batang Kayan. It had 

282 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

always been a weakness of the Rajah's government 
that it could assure to the Baram people no pro- 
tection against attack from those regions, the latter 
of which, though nominally Dutch territory, was 
not yet controlled by the Dutch government. In 
the year 1897 a numerous band of Madangs had 
migrated into the extreme head of the Baram from 
the corresponding and closely adjoining part of the 
Rejang, largely owing to the pressure put upon 
them by the ever roving and meddlesome Sea 
Dayaks. Neither these Madangs nor the Kenyahs 
of the Batang Kayan had entered into friendly 
relations with the Sarawak government, and they 
had preserved a hostile attitude towards the Baram 
tribes. The Resident therefore determined to 
visit the Madangs, and to invite Kenyah chiefs 
from the Batang Kayan to meet him on the 
extreme edge of the Sarawak territory, in order 
to open friendly intercourse with them, and to 
persuade them if possible to attend a general 
peace-meeting at Claudetown, at which the out- 
standing feuds between them and the Baram folk 
might be ceremonially washed out in the blood of 
pigs. For, if this attempt could be carried to a 
successful issue, it would go far to assure the peace 
of the whole district, and would add considerably 
to the volume of trade descending the Baram River. 
An additional feature of the programme was that 
the Resident should take with him on his visit a 
number of the Baram chiefs, and should in the 
course of the journey make arrangements with the 
largest possible number of chiefs for their attend- 
ance at the proposed peace-making. 

Accordingly, on the 9th of October 1898, we 
started from Claudetown in the Resident's launch 
with a retinue of half a dozen Sea Dayak rangers 
and two policemen, and towing some half a dozen 
boats, including one for our own use up-river. 

GOVERNMENT 283 

After spending a day in visiting villages in the 
lower Tinjar, the largest tributary of the Baram, 
we resumed the journey up-river and reached the 
village of Long Tamala. There we were joined 
by the chiefs of the two houses Tama Aping Nipa 
and Tama Aping Kuleh, and were most hospitably 
entertained by the former. On the following 
morning we again steamed up-river, having added 
to our train these two Kenyah chiefs, each with a 
boat's crew of fighting men, they having agreed 
to make the whole journey with us. After stopping 
at several villages at which the Resident's services 
were in request for the settlement of disputed 
questions, in the afternoon we reached Long Tajin, 
a big Kayan village, and were welcomed by Juman, 
the chief, and his wife Sulau, a woman of strikingly 
handsome and refined features and graceful aristo- 
cratic manner (PI. 31). She is the daughter of the 
late Aban Jau, who was for many years the most 
powerful chief of the Tinjar Sebops. He had long 
resisted the advances of the Resident, and had 
submitted to the Rajah's government only after a 
long course of patient persuasion. He had regarded 
himself as the up-river Rajah, and had never ceased 
to regret the old state of affairs. " I'm an old man 
now," he told the Resident, " but if I were as salt as 
I used to be, the Rajah would not have taken 
possession of the Baram without a struggle." 
Another of his many picturesque sayings seems 
worth recording : " Your Rajah may govern the 
down-river people ; they are inside the Sultan's 
fence and he had the right to hand them over. But 
over us he had no authority ; we are the tigers of 
the jungle and have never been tamed." He had 
frequently threatened to attack the fort ; and when 
he had sent to the Resident a message to that 
effect in the usual symbolic language, the latter's 
only reply had been to go up to his house with two 

284 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

or three men only, and to spend five days there as 
Aban Jau's guest, and to persuade him to come 
down to Claudetown to meet the Rajah. 

The evening was spent in discussing the pro- 
spects of the expedition with Juman and other 
chiefs, some of whom took a gloomy view. The 
following morning the steam-launch was sent down- 
river, and we took to the boats and paddled a short 
stage to Bawang Takun, another large Kayan village, 
where we stayed over-night to give the people time 
to prepare their boats and the Resident the oppor- 
tunity for some judicial inquiries. There was heavy 
rain throughout the night, and in the morning the 
river, which in this part of its course runs between 
limestone cliffs, was rushing so rapidly that we could 
only make progress by repeatedly crossing the river 
to seek the slack- water side of each reach. Failing 
to reach any village, we passed the night in rude 
shelters on the bank. On the following day the 
river was still in flood, but we reached Long Lawa, 
a Kayan village, and decided to wait there until the 
river should subside to a more normal condition. 
Here a party of Kenyahs met us, sent by Tama 
Bulan to conduct us to his house some two or three 
days' journey up the Pata tributary. On the morn- 
ing of the 1 6th the river had fallen ten feet, and 
starting at daybreak we reached the mouth of the 
Pata, and camped on a kerangan or pebble-bed beauti- 
fully situated among the forest-clad slopes a little 
way up the Pata. In the course of the day a boat- 
ful of Kayans from the Apoh had joined us. On 
the 17th we had an exciting day working up the 
rapids and waterfalls of the Pata, and reached Long 
Lutin, a very large Kayan village of many long 
houses, most pleasantly situated and surrounded by 
hills clothed with the rich green of the young padi 
crop. Here we spent the night in the house of the 
principal chief, Laki Lah, a quaint old bachelor, whom 

Plate 202. KLEMANTAN MASK. 

GOVERNMENT 285 

we greatly astonished by eating plum-pudding with 
burning brandy upon it. 

Another day's journey over a long series of rapids 
brought us to the house of Tama Bulan, at that time 
the most influential chief of the Baram. . We found 
there a number of Kenyan chiefs from the upper 
reaches of the Pata awaiting our arrival. Tama 
Bulan, who was strongly in favour of carrying 
through the Resident's plan, eloquently supported it 
during the hospitable procedures of the evening, 
assuring the assembled chiefs that the journey would 
finally resolve the troubles of the Baram. As usual 
there was no lack of enterprise and " go " among the 
Kenyahs, and they were all keen to make the 
venture ; while the Kayans on the other hand were, 
as always, more cautious, more inclined to dwell on 
the possibilities of failure, and slower to take up the 
plan and make it their own. The Kenyahs had not 
yet completed the taking of omens for the expedition, 
and the following days were devoted to this process 
(see vol. ii. p. 52), Tama Bulan and his people taking 
omens for the whole of the Kenyah contingent, while 
Juman went on to prepare the people of the Akar. 
In the course of the day Tama Bulan accompanied 
us on visits to several neighbouring Kenyah villages 
situated a little farther up the river. In the evening 
we had another convivial meeting with great flow of 
oratory and rice-spirit. On the third day, favourable 
omens having been observed, sacrifices of pigs and 
fowls were offered before the altar-posts of the war- 
god, and the various rites needful to complete the 
preparation for a long journey were performed (see 
PI. 157). In the afternoon the Resident inspected 
the site for a bungalow or block -house which the 
Kenyahs proposed to make (and have since erected) 
for the use of the government's officers. 

On October 23rd we left Tama Bulan's house 
with a party of about one hundred all told, in several 

286 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

boats. We were joined at Long Lutin by Laki Lah 
and a boatful of his Kayans, made a rapid passage 
to Long Pata (the spot where the Pata joins the 
Baram), and resumed the toilsome ascent of the main 
river to reach the Akar. That evening we reached 
a Kenyah village at Long Lawan, and as usual we 
were hospitably entertained with the fatted pig and 
brimming cups of rice-spirit. The weather was now 
brilliantly fine and the river of only normal swift- 
ness, and we passed the night in a Kenyah house 
in the Akar. Here we spent two days awaiting the 
arrival of a party of Kayans from the upper Akar. 
The Kayans having arrived, another general dis- 
cussion of the plan of operations was held ; and on 
the third day the expedition returned to the Baram, 
and after surmounting the difficulties presented by 
many rapids and a narrow gorge at Batu Pita, 
entered the Silat on the 28th. The Silat is the 
uppermost of the large tributaries of the Baram 
(PI. 200). It descends from the Madang country, 
winding round the foot of the Batu Tujoh, a lime- 
stone mountain of 5000 feet. All this country is at 
a considerable height above sea-level (1000 feet and 
more), and the climate is much cooler and more 
bracing than that of the lower levels. It is a land 
of many streams and hills. All the lower slopes have 
been cleared and cultivated by the Kenyahs, so that 
it presents a more open and smiling aspect than 
the lower country, where the clearings are but tiny 
islands in the vast ocean of gloomy forest. The 
river itself is even more beautiful than the other 
tributaries of the Baram, lovely as all these are in 
their upper reaches. This was not the first explora- 
tion of the Silat, for the Resident had twice before 
journeyed up its lower reaches ; but on this occasion 
it was necessary to penetrate to its very head, in 
order to reach the villages of the principal Madang 
chiefs, Saba Irang and Tama Usun Tasi. So for 

GOVERNMENT 287 

five days the expedition toiled up the Silat, and 
during these days Juman, Laki Lah, and most of the 
Kayans turned back, their confidence being shaken by 
the unfamiliar aspect of the country, by the neighbour- 
hood of the hitherto hostile Madangs, and by the 
bad dream of one of their chiefs and the illness of 
another. On the fifth day the diminished fleet of 
boats entered the Lata, a tributary coming down 
from the Mudong Alan and Saat mountains, from the 
slopes of which the water runs also to the Rejang 
River and the Batang Kayan. Here the boats were 
left behind and the expedition went forward on foot, 
making but slow progress in the rocky river-bed. 

Near the mouth of the Lata the expedition was 
met by a large party of Kenyahs — men, women, and 
children — the whole population of a Kenyah village 
of the Batang Kayan, Lepu Agas by name, who had 
just arrived with the intention of making their home 
in that neighbourhood. These people had been the 
greatest enemies of Tama Bulan, and the feud had 
only been healed in the previous year. 

A curious custom, which seems at the present 
time to be peculiar to the Kenyahs and rapidly 
dying out among them, was observed by the Lepu 
Aga people on this occasion. As the Resident's 
party approached the spot where they awaited its 
arrival, they sent out three men to establish the first 
contact. It was the function of these three men to 
make sure of the friendly intentions of the approach- 
ing party (Pis. 201, 202). They wore large wooden 
masks elaborately carved, and bearing great lateral 
projections like horns or antlers, in addition to full 
war dress.1 They advanced down a long pebble- 
bank, keeping step and making grotesque movements 
with heads and arms, which seemed to imply a mix- 
ture of caution and curiosity. After dodging about 

1 These three masks were afterwards given to the Resident, and are now in 
the British Museum. 

288 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

for some time, they came near and inquired : " Who 
are you ? Whence do you come ? What is your 
business ? " H aving obtained satisfactory assurances, 
they retreated, stepping backwards with the same 
grotesque gestures, and returned to report the results 
of their investigations to their chief. 

Before friendly intercourse between the parties 
could begin it was still necessary, in view of the 
recent feud between them, that they should engage 
in a sham fight (jawa). When this boisterous 
ceremony had been accomplished, the Resident pre- 
sented to the Lepu Agas a number of presents, 
calculated to whet their appetite for the products of 
civilised industry to be found in the Baram bazaar. 
Very soon all suspicion and reserve were overcome, 
and all the men of the Resident's party turned to 
with hearty goodwill to help build a house for their 
former enemies. So well did they work that between 
sunrise and sunset a house of forty doors was hewn 
out of the forest, solidly constructed, and roofed ; so 
that when night fell the new-comers were able to 
move in and to invite their helpers to a convivial 
meeting in its long gallery. The Resident made a 
speech in native fashion, saying that his party had 
ventured to build a rude hut in order to provide a 
night's shelter for their new friends, and hoped that 
they would find it sufficient for the moment. Tama 
Bulan also spoke, saying how now the old troubles 
were over, never to come again. Aban J along, the 
old chief of the Batang Kayan people, was so 
touched by these unwonted demonstrations of good- 
will, that he wept and could with difficulty find words 
in which to express the gratitude of himself and his 
people. Through these people messages of good- 
will and invitations to the proposed peace-making at 
Claudetown were sent to their former neighbours in 
the Batang Kayan, and these in due time bore 
good fruit. For in the course of the next few years 

Plate 203. TAMA KULING {ALIAS BOI JALONG), PRINCIPAL 
KENYAH CHIEF OF THE BATANG KAYAN DISTRICT. 

GOVERNMENT 289 

several communities followed the example of the 
Lepu Agas, and moved over from the Batang Kayan 
to the Baram. It may be of interest to add that the 
Lepu Agas still inhabit the house built under these 
extraordinary circumstances. After some few more 
days of travelling up-river, we were met by a party 
of Madangs who had been sent down to meet the 
Resident ; while awaiting his arrival they had 
hewed out a small boat, and in this, which served 
almost as much the purposes of a sledge as of a boat, 
they hauled him over rocks and rapids and still 
pools until, having outpaced the rest of the party, 
they brought him, on the eighth day from leaving the 
Silat, to their village at the foot of Mudong Alan. 
It was a large village comprising nine long houses 
disposed in a circle and containing probably not less 
than 2000 persons. Here he was received on the 
bank of the stream by a large body of Madangs 
headed by Tama Usun Tasi, who at once offered 
him the hospitality of his roof. The incidents of 
the visit have been described by the Resident, and 
passages from his account may here be transcribed : — 

My Kenyah friends had not arrived yet, but I thought 
it best to go with him (Tama Usun Tasi) at once ; afterwards 
I congratulated myself on my decision, when I found 
that, according to custom, Tama Bulan and his followers 
(being unable to enter the house until all cases of blood- 
money between his people and the Madangs had been 
settled) were obliged to camp near the river for one night. 
The Madangs assisted in making huts for my followers, 
gave them several pigs, and sent down their women laden 
with baskets full of rice ; so no want of hospitality marred 
our reception. In the evening I took a walk round the 
village, followed by a crowd of women and children, 
who appeared greatly pleased to find that the white man 
was able to converse with them in the Kenyah tongue. 
Then, as the crowd increased, I sat down on a log and 
produced a few pounds of tobacco, and the whole party 
was soon chatting and laughing as if they had known 
me for years. I have often noticed that the women of the 

29o PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

Kenyah tribe in the interior are far more genial and less 
shy than those of other communities, and I believe that 
the surest sign of the good faith of natives such as these 
is that the women and children come out to greet one 
unattended by the men. The sounds of our merriment 
soon attracted the attention of the men, and as they 
strolled over and joined us in gradually increasing numbers, 
the possibility of any disturbance taking place between these 
people and mine quickly vanished from my mind. 

On the following morning several parties of Madangs 
from other villages came in, numbering in all about 600, 
and exchanged presents of weapons with my people. It 
was necessary that the gods should be consulted as to 
whether the meeting was really in the interests of peace 
or not. So a pig was caught and tied by the legs, and 
when all the Madangs were assembled in Tama Usun 
Tasi's house, the pig was brought in and placed in front 
of the chiefs. Then one of the head men from a neighbour- 
ing village took a lighted piece of wood and singed a few 
of the bristles of the pig, giving it a poke with his hand 
at the same time, as if to attract its attention, and calling in 
a loud voice to the supreme being, " Bali Penyalong." Then, 
talking at a great rate and hardly stopping for a moment to 
take breath, he asked that, if any one had evil intentions, 
the truth might be revealed before the evilly disposed one 
was allowed to enter the Madang houses, and that, if any 
Madang, whether related to him or not, wished to disturb the 
peace which was about to be made with the Baram people, 
his designs should be revealed. The old man stood waving 
his hands as if to sweep within the circle of his influence 
the whole of the assembled crowd, and then, jumping into 
the air with great violence, brought both feet down on the 
plank floor with a resounding thump ; then, spinning round 
on one foot with his arm extended, he quickly altered the 
tone of his voice to a more gentle pitch, and, quivering 
with excitement, quietly sank down into his place amid a 
dead silence. The speech was a stirring one, and created 
an impression. Others spoke a few words to the pig, and it 
was then taken to one side and stabbed in the throat with a 
spear, after which the liver was taken out and examined. 
I should mention that a pig intended to serve the same 
purpose was provided by the Madangs for our people, who 
were still waiting to be invited to the house. 

Having years before studied the beliefs of the natives 

GOVERNMENT 291 

with regard to divination by pigs' livers, and knowing the 
great importance attached to it, I was as anxious as any one 
to see the liver. I saw at a glance that the omen was 
good, and seized the opportunity to make the most of it. I 
quickly called the chiefs' attention to all the good points 
before they had given their own opinion, and at once saw 
that their interpretation was the same as my own, and 
that they were somewhat surprised to find it so. 

Thereupon two messengers were sent backwards and 
forwards to discuss the number of people killed on either 
side from time to time, and big gongs, shields, and weapons 
of all kinds changed hands as blood-money. When all 
had been settled, notice was given to our people that the 
Madangs were ready to receive them into their houses, and 
the Baram people sent a message back that they were 
prepared to accept the invitation. When Kayans and 
Kenyahs who have been at feud desire to meet peaceably, 
it is necessary to go through a sort of sham fight, called 
jawa, so that both parties can, as it were, blow off steam. 
As this ceremony is generally executed with much vigour 
by fully armed parties, it often happens that some people are 
badly hurt ; and I was half afraid that such an accident 
might check the progress of our negotiations. But the 
omens had been favourable, and the implicit belief in such 
omens goes far to prevent bad feeling. About midday Tama 
Bulan and his followers, in full war costume, announced 
their intention of moving by bursting into the war-cry, 
a tremendous roar which was immediately answered by 
the people in the houses. The noise and excitement 
increased as the Baram people neared the house of Tama 
Usun Tasi, and guns with blank charges were fired. On 
came the Baram people, stamping, shouting, and waving 
their weapons in defiance, the Madangs in the houses 
keeping up a continuous roar. When the Baram people 
first attempted to enter the house, they were driven back, 
and a tremendous clashing of shields and weapons took 
place ; then the Madangs retreated from the entrance in 
order to allow their visitors to come in, stamping and 
making the most deafening noise. When the Baram 
people had all entered, the Madangs once more rushed at 
them, and for some two minutes a rough-and-tumble fight 
continued, in which many hard blows were given. No one 
received a cut, however, except one man who, running 
against a spear, was wounded in the thigh ; but the affair 

292 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

was quickly settled by the payment of a pig and a small 
spear to the wounded person ; so the ceremony may be 
said to have ended without a mishap. When quiet had 
been restored, we all sat down and rice-spirit was produced, 
healths drunk, and speeches made ; food was brought out 
and given to the visitors in the long verandah, as, on first 
being received, visitors are not allowed to enter the rooms ; 
and the convivialities were prolonged far into the night. 

In the evening of the following day the Madangs prepared 
a feast for all present, and afterwards a great deal of rice- 
spirit was drunk and some very good speeches made, 
former troubles and difficulties being explained and dis- 
cussed in the most open manner. Each chief spoke in 
turn, and concluded his speech by offering drink to another 
and singing a few phrases in his praise, the whole assembly 
joining in a very impressive chorus after each phrase and 
ending up with a tremendous roar as the bamboo cup was 
emptied. 

The following day the Madangs collected a quantity of 
rubber for their first payment of tribute to the government, 
namely, $2.00 per family, and as we had no means of 
weighing it except by guesswork, it was decided that 
Tama Bulan and two Madang headmen should act as 
assessors, and decide whether the piece of rubber brought 
by each person was sufficiently large to produce $2.00. 
It took these men the whole day to receive it all, and much 
counting was done on the fingers and toes. 

On taking our departure from the Madang country, 
most of the women presented us with a small quantity of 
rice for food on our homeward journey, but as each little 
lot was emptied into a large basket, the giver took back a few 
grains so as not to offend the omen-birds, who had bestowed 
on them a bounteous harvest, by giving the whole away to 
strangers. Presents of considerable value were given on both 
sides, and all parted the best of friends. The two principal 
Madang chiefs accompanied us for a day's journey, their 
followers carrying the whole of our baggage. On parting I 
promised to arrange a similar peace-making at Claudetown, 
at which most of the Baram chiefs would be present. 

We add an account of the peace-making previ- 
ously published by one of us.1 

1 "A Savage Peace- Conference," by W. McDougall, The Eagle, the 
magazine of St. John's College, Cambridge, 1900. 

GOVERNMENT 293 

The peace-making that I am going to describe was 
organised in order to bring together on neutral ground, 
and in presence of an overwhelming force of the tribes 
loyal to the government, all those tribes whose allegiance 
was still doubtful, and all those that were still actively 
hostile to one another, and to induce them to swear to 
support the government in keeping the peace, and to go 
through the formalities necessary to put an end to old 
blood-feuds. At the same time the Resident had suggested 
to the tribes that they should all compete in a grand race 
of war canoes, as well as in other races on land and water. 
For he wisely held that in order to suppress righting and 
head-hunting, hitherto the natural avenues to fame for 
restless tribes and ambitious young men, it is necessary to 
replace them by some other form of violent competition 
that may in some degree serve as a vent for high spirits 
and superfluous energy ; and he hoped to establish an 
annual gathering for boat racing and other sports, in which 
all the tribes should take part, a gathering on the lines of 
the Olympic games in fact. The idea was taken up eagerly 
by the people, and months before the appointed day they 
were felling the giants of the forest and carving out from 
them the great war canoes that were to be put to this novel 
use, and reports were passing from village to village of the 
many fathoms length of this or that canoe, and the fineness 
of the timber and workmanship of another. 

In order to make clear the course of events, I must 
explain that two large rivers, the Baram and the Tinjar, 
meet about one hundred miles from the sea to form the 
main Baram river. Between the peoples living on the 
banks of these two rivers and their tributaries there is a 
traditional hostility which just at this time had been raised 
to a high pitch by the occurrence of a blood-feud between 
the Kenyahs, a leading tribe of the Baram, and the Lirongs, 
an equally powerful tribe of the Tinjar. In addition to 
these two groups we expected a large party of Madangs, a 
famous tribe of fighting men of the central highlands whose 
hand had hitherto been against every other tribe, and a 
large number of Sea Dayaks, who, more than all the rest, 
are always spoiling for a fight, and who are so passionately 
devoted to head-hunting that often they do not scruple 
to pursue it in an unsportsmanlike fashion. So it will be 
understood that the bringing together in one place of large 
parties of fully armed warriors of all these different groups 

294 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

was a distinctly interesting and speculative experiment in 
peace-making. 

The place of meeting was Marudi (Claudetown), the 
headquarters of the government of the district. There the 
river, still nearly a hundred miles from the sea, winds round 
the foot of a low flat-topped hill, on which stand the small 
wooden fort and court-house and the Resident's bungalow. 
Some days before that fixed for the great meeting by the 
tokens we had sent out, parties of men began to arrive, 
floating down in the long war canoes roofed with palm 
leaves for the journey. On the appointed day some five 
thousand of the Baram people and the Madangs were 
encamped very comfortably in leaf and mat shelters on the 
open ground between our bungalow and the fort, while the 
Sea Dayaks had taken up their quarters in the long row 
of Chinamen's shops that form the Marudi bazaar, the 
commercial centre of the district. But as yet no Tinjar 
folk had put in an appearance, and men began to wonder 
what had kept them — Were the tokens sent them at fault ? 
Or had they received friendly warnings of danger from 
some of the many sacred birds, without whose favourable 
omens no journey can be undertaken ? Or had they, 
perhaps, taken the opportunity to ascend the Baram and 
sack and burn the Kenyah houses now well nigh empty of 
defenders ? We spent the time in foot-racing, preliminary 
boat-racing, and in seeing the wonders of the white man. 
For many of these people had not travelled so far down- 
river before, and their delight in the piano was only 
equalled by their admiration for that most wonderful of all 
things, the big boat that goes up stream without paddles, 
the Resident's fast steam-launch. 

At last one evening, while we were all looking on at a 
most exciting practice-race between three of the canoes, 
the Lirongs, with the main mass of the Tinjar people, 
came down the broad straight reach. It was that most 
beautiful half-hour of the tropical day, between the setting 
of the sun and the fall of darkness — the great forest stood 
black and formless, while the sky and the smooth river 
were luminous with delicate green and golden light. The 
Lirongs were in full war dress, with feathered coats of 
leopard skin and plumed caps plaited of tough rattan, and 
very effective they were as they came swiftly on over 
the shining water, sixty to seventy warriors in each canoe 
raising their tremendous battle-cry, a deep-chested chorus 

GOVERNMENT 295 

of rising and falling cadences. The mass of men on the 
bank and on the hill took up the cry, answering shout for 
shout ; and the forest across the river echoed it, until the 
whole place was filled with a hoarse roar. The Kenyahs ran 
hastily to their huts for their weapons, and by the time they 
had grouped themselves on the crest of the hill, armed with 
sword and shield and spear and deadly blowpipe, the 
Lirongs had landed on the bank below and were rushing up 
the hill to the attack. A few seconds more and they met 
with clash of sword and shield and a great shouting, and 
in the semi-darkness a noisy battle raged. After some 
minutes the Lirongs drew off and rushed back to their 
boats as wildly as they had come ; and, strange to say, no 
blood was flowing, no heads were rolling on the ground, no 
ghastly wounds were gaping, in fact no one seemed any the 
worse. For it seems that this attack was merely a well 
understood formality, a put-up job, so to say. When two 
tribes, between whom there is a blood-feud not formally 
settled, meet together to make peace, it is the custom for 
the injured party, that is the tribe which has last suffered a 
loss of heads, to make an attack on the other party but 
using only the butt ends of their spears and the blunt 
edges of their swords. This achieves two useful ends — it 
lets off superabundant high spirits, which, if too much 
bottled up, would be dangerous ; and it " saves the face " of 
the injured party by showing how properly wrathful and 
bellicose its feelings are. So when this formality had been 
duly observed everybody seemed to feel that matters were 
going on well ; they all settled down quietly enough 
for the night, the Resident taking the precaution to 
send the Lirongs to camp below the fort ; and the great 
peace-conference was announced to be held the following 
morning. 

Soon after daybreak the people began to assemble 
beneath the great roof of palm-leaf mats that we had built 
for a conference hall. The Baram chiefs sat on a low 
platform along one side of the hall, and in their midst was 
Tama Bulan, the most famous of them all, a really great 
man who has made his name and influence felt throughout 
a very large part of Borneo. When all except the Tinjar 
men were assembled, of course without arms, the latter, also 
unarmed, came up the hill in a compact mass, to take their 
places in the hall. As they entered, the sight of their old 
enemies, the chiefs of the Baram, all sitting quietly 
VOL. II U 

296 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

together, was too much for their self-control ; with one 
accord they made a mad rush at them and attempted to 
drag them from the platform. Fortunately we white men 
had placed ourselves with a few of the more reliable Dayak 
fortmen between the two parties, and partly by force and 
partly by eloquence we succeeded in beating off the attack, 
which seemed to be made in the spirit of a school " rag " 
rather than with bloody intent. But just as peace seemed 
restored, a great shout went up from the Baram men, " Tama 
Bulan is wounded " ; and sure enough there he stood with 
blood flowing freely over his face. The sight of blood 
seemed to send them all mad together ; the Tinjar people 
turned as one man and tore furiously down the hill to seize 
their weapons, while the Baram men ran to their huts and 
in a few seconds were prancing madly to and fro on the 
crest of the hill, thirsting for the onset of the bloody battle 
that now seemed a matter of a few seconds only. At the 
same time the Dayaks were swarming out of the bazaar 
seeking something to kill, like the typical Englishman, 
though not knowing which side to take. The Resident 
hastened after the Tin jars, threw himself before them, 
and appealed and threatened, pointing to the two guns 
at the fort now trained upon them ; and Tama Bulan 
showed his true greatness by haranguing his people, saying 
his wound was purely accidental and unintended, that it was 
a mere scratch, and commanding them to stand their ground. 
Several of the older and steadier chiefs followed his example 
and ran to and fro holding back their men, exhorting them 
to be quiet. 

The crisis passed, the sudden gust of passion slowly died 
away, and peace was patched up with interchange of 
messages and presents between the two camps. The great 
boat race was announced to take place on the morrow, and 
the rest of the day was spent in making ready the war 
canoes, stripping them of their leaf roofs and all other 
superfluous gear. 

At daybreak the racing-boats set off for the starting- 
post four miles up river. The Resident had given strict 
orders that no spears or other weapons were to be carried in 
the racing-boats, and as they started up river we inspected 
the boats in turn, and in one or two cases relieved them of 
a full complement of spears ; and then we followed them to 
the post in the steam-launch. There was a score of entries, 
and since each boat carried from sixty to seventy men 

xxii GOVERNMENT 297 

sitting two abreast, more than a thousand men were taking 
part in the race. The getting the boats into line across the 
broad river was a noisy and exciting piece of work. We 
carried on the launch a large party of elderly chiefs, most 
of whom were obviously suffering from " the needle," and 
during the working of the boats into line they hurled 
commands at them in language that was terrific in both 
quality and volume. At last something like a line was 
assumed, and on the sound of the gun the twenty boats 
leaped through the water, almost lost to sight in a cloud of 
spray as every one of those twelve hundred men struck the 
water for all he was worth. There was no saving of them- 
selves ; the rate of striking was about ninety to the minute, 
and tended constantly to increase. Very soon two boats 
drew out in front, and the rest of them, drawing together 
as they neared the first bend, followed hotly after like a 
pack of hounds. This order was kept all over the course. 
During the first burst our fast launch could not keep up 
with the boats, but we drew up in time to see the finish. 
It was a grand neck-and-neck race all through between the 
two leading boats, and all of them rowed it out to the end. 
The winners were a crew of the peaceful down-river folk, 
who have learnt the art of boat-making from the Malays of 
the coast ; and they owed their victory to their superior skill 
in fashioning their boat, rather than to superior strength. 
When they passed the post we had an anxious moment — 
How would the losers take their beating? Would the 
winners play the fool, openly exulting and swaggering? 
If so, they would probably get their heads broken, or 
perhaps lose them. But they behaved with modesty and 
discretion, and we diverted attention from them by swing- 
ing the steamer round and driving her through the main 
mass of the boats. Allowing as accurately as possible for 
the rate of the current as compared with the rate of the tide 
at Putney, we reckoned the pace of the winning boat to be 
a little better than that of the 'Varsity eights in racing over 
the full course. 

The excitement of the crowds on the bank was great, 
but it was entirely good-humoured — they seemed to have 
forgotten their feuds in the interest of the racing. So the 
Resident seized the opportunity to summon every one to 
the conference hall once more. This time we settled down 
comfortably enough and with great decorum, the chiefs all 
in one group at one side of a central space, and the common 

298 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

people in serried ranks all round about it. In the centre 
was a huge, gaily painted effigy of a hornbill, one of the birds 
sacred to all the tribes, and on it were hung thousands of 
cigarettes of home-grown tobacco wrapped in dried banana 
leaf. Three enormous pigs were now brought in and laid, 
bound as to their feet, before the chiefs, one for each of 
the main divisions of the people, the Barams, the Tinjars, 
and the hill-country folk. The greatest chiefs of each of 
these parties then approached the pigs, and each in turn, 
standing beside the pig assigned to his party, addressed 
the attentive multitude with great flow of words and 
much violent and expressive action ; for many of these 
people are great orators. The purport of their speeches 
was their desire for peace, their devotion to the Resident 
(" If harm come to him, then may I fall too," said Tama 
Bulan), and their appreciation of the trade and general 
intercourse and safety of life and property brought them 
by the Rajah's government ; and they hurled threats and 
exhortations against unlicensed warfare and bloodshed. 

As each chief ended his speech to the people he turned 
to the pig at his feet, and, stooping over it, kept gently 
prodding it with a smouldering fire-brand, while he 
addressed to it a prayer for protection and guidance — a 
prayer that the spirit of the pig, soon to be set free by a 
skilful thrust of a spear into the beast's heart, should carry 
up to the Supreme Being. The answer to these prayers 
might then be read in the form and markings of the under- 
side of the livers. So the pigs were despatched, and their 
livers hastily dragged forth and placed on platters before 
the group of chiefs. Then was there much anxious peer- 
ing over shoulders, and much shaking of wise old heads, 
as the learned elders discussed the omens ; until at last 
the Resident was called upon to give his opinion, for he is 
an acknowledged expert in augury. He was soon able to 
show that the only true and rational reading of the livers 
was a guarantee of peace and prosperity to all the tribes of 
the district ; and the people, accepting his learned inter- 
pretation, rejoiced with one accord. Then the Resident 
made a telling speech, in which he dwelt upon the 
advantages of peace and trade, and how it is good that a 
man should sleep without fear that his house be burnt or 
his people slain ; and he ended by seizing the nearest chief 
by the hair of his head, as is their own fashion, to show 
how, if a man break the peace, he shall lose his head. 

oo > 
3 Q 

% < 

co o 

< M 

u 5 

xxii GOVERNMENT 299 

This concluded the serious part of the conference, and 
it only remained to smoke the cigarettes of good fellow- 
ship, taken from the hornbill-effigy, and to drink long life 
and happiness to one another. So great jars of " arack " 
were brought in and drinking vessels, and each chief in turn, 
standing before some whilom enemy, sang his praises in 
musical recitative before giving him the cup ; and after 
each phrase of the song the multitude joined in with a 
long-drawn sonorous shout, which, while the drink flowed 
down, rose to a mighty roar. This is a most effective way 
of drinking a man's health, and combines the advantages of 
making a speech over him and singing " For he's a jolly good 
fellow " ; moreover, the drink goes to the right party, as it 
does not with us. It should be adopted in this country, I 
think. By many repetitions of this process we were soon 
reduced to a state of boisterous conviviality ; and many a 
hard-faced old warrior, who but the day before had drawn 
his weapons against his enemy, now sat with his arms 
lovingly thrown about that same enemy. When this state 
of affairs was reached, our work seemed to be accomplished, 
and we white men retired to lunch, leaving one chief in the 
midst of a long-winded speech. As soon as the restraint 
of the Resident's presence was removed, the orator began to 
utter remarks of a nature to stir up the dying embers of 
resentment ; at least so it seemed to one wily old chief, a 
firm supporter of the government, who bethought him to 
send one of his men to pull away the palm-leaf mats from 
above the indiscreet orator, and so leave his verbosity 
exposed to the rays of the mid-day sun. No sooner said than 
done, and this was the beginning of the end ; for others 
following suit made a rush for the mats that would be so 
useful in making their camps and boats more rain-proof. 
There was a mighty uproar that brought us headlong to 
the scene, only to see the big hall melt away like a snow- 
flake as hundreds of hands seized upon the mats and bore 
them away in triumph. So the great peace conference 
was brought to an end amid much laughter and fun. 

It only remained for the chiefs to pay in the taxes for 
the year — the two dollars per family which it is their business 
to collect from their people, and which is the only tax or 
tribute claimed by the Rajah. This business was got 
through on the following morning ; and then we said many 
kind farewells, as the various parties set out one after 
another in the great war canoes on their long up-stream 

300 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

journey ; some of them to battle for many days against the 
swiftly flowing river, and after that again for many days to 
pole their boats through the flashing rapids and over the 
lovely quiet reaches, where the rare gleams of sunlight 
break through the overarching forest ; until, coming to their 
own upland country, where anxious wives and children 
are waiting, they will spread even in the remotest highlands 
the news of the white man's big boat that goes of itself 
against the stream, of the great boat-race, and of how they 
came wellnigh to a fearful slaughtering, and how they 
swore peace and goodwill to all men, and how there should 
be now peace and prosperity through all the land, for the 
great white man who had come to rule them had said 
it should be so, and the gods had approved his words. 

The foregoing account of the journey to the 
Madang country and of the subsequent events 
would constitute the last chapter of any history of 
the pacification of the Baram. Since the time of 
those incidents, there has been no serious disturbance 
of the peace ; and there seems to be good reason 
to hope that, so long as the Rajah's government 
continues to be conducted along the same lines, 
there will be no recrudescence of savagery. The last 
case of fighting on any considerable scale occurred 
in 1894, when Tama Bulan's people, resenting the 
offensive conduct of bands of Sea Dayaks who had 
penetrated to their neighbourhood in search of 
jungle-products, turned out and took the heads of 
thirteen of the Dayaks. It was only after prolonged 
negotiation that the Dayaks were persuaded to 
resign their hopes of a bloody revenge and to 
accept a compensation of 3000 dollars, which was 
paid by the Kenyahs at the Rajah's order. 

It has not always been possible to make peace 
prevail by wholly peaceable procedures. The Baram 
was fortunate in that the Sea Dayaks had not 
established themselves anywhere within its borders. 
In the Rejang, on the other hand, large numbers of 
them were allowed to settle, coming in from the 

^^M'iH&me** 

%. 

Plate 207. RACING OF WAR-BOATS AT, MARUDI DURING 
THE PEACE-MEETING (1800). 

GOVERNMENT 301 

Saribas and the Batang Lupar in the early days of 
the Rajah's government. And since the Kayans and 
Kenyahs were already in possession of the upper river 
and considered themselves the dominant tribes and 
lords of the land, it was inevitable that there should 
grow up a keen rivalry which could hardly fail to 
lead occasionally to armed conflict. For the Sea 
Dayaks had been accustomed to adopt a somewhat 
swaggering and domineering attitude towards the 
Klemantan tribes, and could not easily learn to 
modify it when they came in contact with the prouder 
and less submissive Kayans and Kenyahs. This 
rivalry has been the source of most of the troubles 
of the Rejang, where, since the big expedition of 
1863, the Rajah and his officers have on several 
occasions found it necessary to subdue recalcitrant 
tribes or communities by leading armed forces 
against them. 

As an illustration of these sterner methods we 
add a brief account of one such expedition led by 
one of us (C. H.) in the year 1904, in his capacity of 
Divisional Resident of the several Rejang districts ; 
an expedition which, there is reason to hope, may 
prove to be the last of the series. The purpose of 
this expedition was to reduce to order a small 
community of Sea Dayaks that was established 
upon Bukit Batu, an almost impregnable mountain 
which rises up almost perpendicularly on all sides 
at the head of the Bali, one of the eastern tributaries 
of the Rejang. This community had been formed 
in the manner to which legend assigns the foundation 
of ancient Rome, namely, by the gathering together 
in this strong place of various outlaws and violent 
characters who for one reason or another had 
quarrelled with and defied the government. The 
same spot had been similarly occupied many years 
before ; and though it had been forcibly cleared of its 
defenders, its natural advantages had, in the course 

302 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

of years, led to the growth of a new community of 
the same kind. 

This band had raided the surrounding country, 
slaying and robbing people of several tribes, and 
generally had been having a " gorgeous time." They 
had repeatedly refused to yield even when threatened 
by armed force. And when the Resident sent them 
a peremptory message, commanding them to appear 
to surrender themselves at the nearest government 
station within one month, they returned an impudent 
answer, saying that they had so far accepted orders 
from no one, and asking — Who was he that they 
should obey him? Steps were at once taken to 
enforce obedience. Since to storm the hill might 
well cost many lives, it seemed preferable to try 
to lure its defenders from their stronghold. The 
Resident, without giving the brigands further warn- 
ing, went up the Rejang with a single boat's crew to 
a point about 150 miles above the mouth of the Bali, 
the tributary that flows past Bukit Batu. At this 
point another tributary, the Bukau, coming from 
near the opposite side of Bukit Batu, joins the 
Rejang. Here he collected a force of some 200 
Kayans and Klemantans, and led them up to the 
head of the Bukau and then on foot through the jungle 
to the neighbourhood of Bukit Batu. The route 
by which the brigands usually passed to and from 
their fastness was at a spot near the river, where 
rude ladders of wood and rattan had been fixed to 
facilitate the ascent and descent of the precipitous 
foot of the hill. Near this spot the force was 
divided into two parties, which were stationed in 
the jungle at some little distance from the ladders, 
right and left of the path to the river ; and a party 
of ten active men was detached, with instructions to 
hang about the foot of the ladders and to retreat 
along the path to the river if they were attacked. 
On the second day the I bans on the mountain 

^ £ 

£ < 
< w 

C-H 

C/3 O 
ft £ 

xxii GOVERNMENT 303 

snapped at the bait. About forty of them descended 
stealthily and then rushed upon the small party, 
hoping to hunt down in the jungle all whom they could 
not strike down on the spot, and thus to secure ten 
heads and enjoy the frenzy of slaughter. The ten 
decoys fled swiftly down the path, and the supporting 
parties, guided by the yells of the I bans, closed 
in from both sides and fell upon them. A few of 
the rebels were killed, without any fatal casualties 
to the Resident's party. The rest fled through 
the jungle and many of them were afterwards 
arrested. Those who remained on the hill promptly 
drew up the ladders and hurled down rocks. To 
have carried the hill by storm would still have 
been most difficult and costly, and, as it proved, a 
needless feat. The Resident therefore contented 
himself with destroying all the property of the 
brigands that was within reach, including a number 
of valuable jars and gongs which they had secreted 
in a cave at the foot of the hill, and the fields of 
young padi on which they were largely dependent 
for their food-supply. For he well knew that this 
procedure would render the spot hateful to the 
I bans ; for the scene of a disaster, especially one 
where they have been worsted in fight, becomes an 
object of superstitious dread. The Resident there- 
fore led back his party by the way they had come, 
dismissed them to their homes, and returned down 
river to Sibu, after sending a command to those 
remaining on the hill that they should present them- 
selves forthwith at Kapit. The order was obeyed ; 
fines, pledges, and compensations to relatives of their 
victims were paid in ; and the principal men were 
ordered to reside for a year in the neighbourhood of 
Sibu Fort and afterwards to return to their native 
districts. 

It should be added that these I bans frankly 
acknowledged that the Resident had been too clever 

304 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

for them, and that they bore him no ill-will ; and that 
some of them, accompanying him on later excursions, 
proved themselves willing helpers and agreeable 
companions. 

Other and larger expeditions of armed forces 
have in the past been led against tribes or villages, 
generally on account of their having refused to 
surrender to the government members guilty of 
taking heads or of attacking other villages wantonly 
and without permission. In all cases the govern- 
ment officers have relied almost exclusively upon the 
services of bodies of natives under the immediate 
charge of their own chiefs and armed only with their 
native weapons. In some cases the offending 
parties have fled from their villages without offering 
active resistance ; and in these cases the government 
force has usually been content to inflict punishment 
by burning down their houses and taking what 
property was left in them. 

It is perhaps too much to hope that no cases of 
taking heads or of wanton attack on jungle parties 
or on weak villages will ever again occur. But such 
incidents have become very infrequent and the 
offenders have seldom escaped punishment ; for, 
unlike our own population, many thousands of whom 
live detached from all local bonds as isolated floating 
units unknown to the government and to those 
among whom they dwell, every man in Sarawak, with 
the partial exception of the nomad jungle-dwellers, 
is a member of some local group which is held re- 
sponsible by the government for his good behaviour ; 
thus in every district every man is known, if not as 
an individual, at least as a member of some com- 
munity ; and every stranger (or party of strangers) 
is expected to be able to give a satisfying account 
of himself; and any who wish to work in the jungle 
of any district other than their own are required to 
have government permission. It is thus impossible 

9g 

5 « 

GOVERNMENT 305 

for any criminal to conceal himself for any length of 
time from the government ; and so sure is it of 
effecting arrest, when necessary, that accused persons 
are frequently allowed to attend to their farms and 
follow their ordinary occupations pending the time 
of their trial. Even when a man accused of a 
serious offence flees across the border to Dutch 
territory, he is generally apprehended by the Dutch 
officers sooner or later and sent round to Kuching 
by sea. 

The raising of the taxes from the people to 
defray the expenses of government has raised no 
difficulties. The door-tax of two dollars 1 per door 
(i.e. per family or household) is the only direct tax 
laid on the tribes. When once the initial reluctance 
has been overcome, this has been collected and 
regularly paid in by chiefs and Penghulus, including 
the headmen of the nomad groups. In times of 
misfortune, whether individual or collective, such as 
the loss of crops or of a house by fire, the tax is 
remitted ; and no tax is expected from men over 
sixty years of age, from cripples or invalids, or from 
widows. 

The Sea Dayaks alone pay a door-tax of one 
dollar only, it having been understood from the 
early days, when they were the only fighting tribe 
with which the Rajah was intimately acquainted, 
that they are liable at any time to be called upon 
by the government to render assistance in punitive 
expeditions or in other public works, such as 
procuring timber for government buildings. But 
this holds good only for those who remain in the 
districts in which they have long been settled. 

The sum raised by direct taxation forms now but 
a small part of the total revenue of the State of 
Sarawak; for the development of trade and agri- 

1 The dollar is the Straits Settlements dollar ; its value in English money is 
two shillings and fourpence. 

306 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

culture, especially the cultivation of pepper and sago 
and rubber, and the growing capacity and facilities 
for the purchase of imported goods by the people 
even of the remotest parts, enable the government 
to raise a considerable revenue by indirect taxation 
in the form of customs duties. 

The minerals, worked in the main by the Borneo 
Company,1 principally gold, antimony, and mercury, 
have also been an important source of revenue. 
The recent discovery of supplies of petroleum 
promises to result in an important addition to the 
wealth of the country.2 But these various commercial 
and industrial developments affect hardly at all 
the lives of the pagan tribes. So far as they are 
concerned, the work of the government may be 
summed up by saying that it has suppressed the 
chronic warfare which kept them all in a state of 
armed hostility and uneasy distrust of one another ; 
that it has suppressed head-hunting and crimes of 

1 This Company has enjoyed, for more than half a century, the right to work 
minerals in Sarawak, paying royalty to the government ; it has been and is 
the principal channel through which the natural products of the country have 
been brought into the world's markets. It has always worked in harmony 
with the government, and to the judicious conduct of its affairs the present 
material prosperity of the country is largely due. An important development 
of the Company's activity in recent years has been the planting of large areas 
with the Para rubber-plant. 

2 The beneficent and active interest taken by the Rajah in the prosperity of 
the natives, and the paternal character of his government, are well illustrated 
by a recently issued order. It is within the memory of all that in the years 
1910 and 191 1 occurred the great rubber "boom " in the markets of Europe. 
With the hope of vast profits, speculators hurried to every region where rubber 
was known to grow. The seeds of the Para rubber-plant had been introduced 
to Sarawak many years before ; the suitability of the soil and climate for the 
production of the best quality of Para rubber had been abundantly demonstrated ; 
and the natives had been encouraged to plant for their own profit the seeds and 
young plants which were distributed to them from the government stations, 
so that when the boom came many of them possessed small plantations of 
the trees that " lay the golden eggs." The speculators were everywhere 
seeking to buy these plantations at prices which, though they seemed handsome 
to the natives, were low enough to provide a very large profit to the buyers. 
The Rajah caused warnings to be published and brought to the notice of the 
natives, and informed them that they were at full liberty to appropriate jungle- 
land for the formation of rubber plantations, and that their tenure of such lands 
would be secured to them so long as they cared for the trees and worked the 
rubber properly. He further ordered that no sales of rubber plantations should 
be effected without the knowledge and approval of the government. 

GOVERNMENT 307 

violence, has rendered life and property secure, and 
has administered justice with a firm hand and a strict 
regard to the customs and traditional sentiments 
of the people ; that it has wellnigh extinguished 
slavery ; that it has opened the whole country to 
trade, and, by thus improving the facilities for sale 
of the jungle produce, has increased the purchasing 
power of the people, while bringing within the reach 
of all of them the products of civilised industry that 
they most value ; and that while it has strictly regu- 
lated the sale of those products, such as fire-arms and 
strong liquor, which have proved detrimental to so 
many other peoples of the lower culture, it has en- 
couraged the people to cultivate a greater variety of 
vegetable products, especially sago, coconuts, pepper, 
and rubber, and to improve the methods of cultiva- 
tion of padi. Lastly, the government has rendered 
possible the establishment of a number of excellent 
mission schools in older stations, where considerable 
numbers of children of the pagan tribes have been 
made Christians and trained to fill subordinate posts 
in the administrative service, or to return to leaven 
the native villages with a wider knowledge and a 
better understanding of the principles which underlie 
the white man's conduct and culture. The mis- 
sionaries have exerted also among the Sea Dayaks 
a strong influence making for peace and order ; 
but they have hardly yet come into contact with 
Kayans or Kenyahs. Mention must also be made 
of the Malay schools which the government has 
instituted and supported in the principal stations, 
and in which many young Malays receive the 
elements of a useful education. 

In all its undertakings the success of the govern- 
ment has only been rendered possible by the high 
prestige that the white man everywhere enjoys ; 
and this in turn has been acquired and maintained, 
not so much by his command of the mechanical 

3o8 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

resources of western civilisation, as by the fact that, 
with very few exceptions, the white men with whom 
the natives have had intercourse have been English 
gentlemen, animated by the spirit and example of 
the two white Rajahs, and keenly conscious of their 
individual and collective responsibility as repre- 
sentatives of their race and country in a foreign 
land.1 

We have dwelt at some length on the govern- 
ment of the Rajah of Sarawak in its relation with 
the pagan tribes, and, if we dismiss in a few words 
the administrative labours of the Dutch and of the 
British North Borneo Company in their respective 
territories, it is not because we regard those labours 
as of less interest and importance or as less success- 
ful, but because in the main they have run on 
similar lines and have achieved similar results to 
those of the government of Sarawak, of which 
alone we have intimate knowledge. Dutch Borneo 
comprises roughly two-thirds of the whole island, a 
very large territory which comprises the basins of 
the largest rivers and hence, the rivers being the 
only highways, the most inaccessible parts of the 
island. The Kapuas River, for example, is estimated 
to be nearly 700 miles in length ; and the necessity 
of ascending these hundreds of miles of river-way, 
much of it difficult and dangerous, has rendered the 
process of establishing control over the tribes of the 
interior slow and laborious. For this reason the 
process is not yet completed ; although the Dutch 
have had stations in Borneo since the early years of 
the seventeenth century, when they expelled the 

1 The Rajahs of Sarawak have personally chosen and appointed their white 
officers with the greatest care ; and their good judgment has secured for 
their country the services of a number of Englishmen of high abilities and 
sterling moral quality. Of those members of the Sarawak service who have 
passed away, the following have pre-eminent claims to be gratefully remembered 
by the people of the country : James Brooke Brooke (nephew of the first 
Rajah), W. Brereton, A. C. Crookshank, J. B. Cruickshank, C. C. de 
Crespigny, A. H. Everett, H. Brooke Low, C. S. Pearse, and, above all, 
F. R. O. Maxwell. 

w 

, ^ ** 

p» * 

_t _Af 

D :i ^*£~ 

,v 

to 

W 
< 

h 

O 
H 

Q . 
° 3 

CO 

W Oh 

C* < 

Q U 

M 0 

GOVERNMENT 309 

Portuguese from Bruni and Sambas. But it was not 
until 1785 that they came into possession of any 
considerable territory, namely, the Sultanate of 
Banjermasin, and not till after the return to them of 
their East Indian rights in 18 16 that they extended 
their territorial possessions to their present large 
proportions. 

The Dutch settlement and possessions in Borneo 
were for many years administered by traders and a 
trading company whose prime object was, of course, 
profitable trade. The problems of native administra- 
tion no doubt seemed to them at first of minor 
importance and interest, and they made many 
mistakes.1 But, as with our own great company in 
India, it became increasingly necessary, if only for 
the sake of trade, to study the art and policy of 
administering the affairs of the native population. 
This has now been done to good effect, and, 
stimulated possibly by the example of wise paternal 
government afforded by the Rajahs of Sarawak, the 
Dutch have established a system of Residents or 
district officers who have successfully invoked the 
co-operation of the native chiefs in a manner very 
similar to that practised in the neighbouring state. 
And the Dutch officers have of late years shown 
themselves willing and able effectively to co-operate 
with those of Sarawak in all matters of common 
interest, especially in the settlement of troubles 
on the boundary between their territories. The 
enlightened interest of the Dutch Government in the 
welfare of the tribes of the far interior and in the 
promotion of ethnographical knowledge has been 

1 Crawford, a leading authority on the history of the East Indian Islands, 
wrote of the Dutch in Borneo of the early times — " Their sole object, according 
to the commercial principles of the time, was to obtain, through arrangements 
with the native prince, the staple products of the country at prices below their 
natural cost, and to sell them above it. . . . The result of these (arrangements) 
was the decline of the trade of Banjermasin ; its staple product, pepper, which 
had at one time been considerable, having become nearly extinct " (Dictionary 
of the Indian Islands ; Lond., 1865, p. 65). 

310 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO ch.xxh 

strikingly manifested in the opening years of this 
century by the despatch of two successive expeditions, 
under the leadership of Dr. Nieuwenhuis, to study 
the people, their customs and conditions, and by its 
generous expenditure upon the publication of the 
handsome volumes in which he has embodied his 
valuable reports.1 On the second journey this 
intrepid traveller penetrated to the head of the 
Batang Kayan, and there made the acquaintance of 
the same Kenyans who had recently visited the 
Resident of the Baram. In this way the spheres of 
Dutch and of British influence have been made to 
overlap in these central highlands. 

1 ' Quer durch Borneo' by A. W. Nieuwenhuis. 

APPENDIX 

THE PHYSICAL CHARACTERS OF THE 
RACES AND PEOPLES OF BORNEO 

A. C. Haddon 

Introduction 

The following sketch of the races and peoples of Borneo 
is based upon the observations of the Cambridge Expedition 
to Sarawak in 1899 and those of Dr. A. W. Nieuwenhuis 
in his expeditions to Netherlands Borneo in 1894, 1896- 
1897, and 1 898-1 900 (Quer durch Borneo », Leiden, vol. i., 
1904, vol. ii., 1907). 

It is generally acknowledged that in Borneo, as in other 
islands of the East Indian Archipelago, the Malays inhabit 
the coasts and the aborigines the interior, though in some 
these reach the coast while Malayised tribes have pushed 
inland up the rivers, a sharp distinction between the two 
being frequently obliterated where they overlap. The 
condition, however, is much more complicated as we can 
now distinguish at least two main races among the 
aborigines. 

We have no evidence as to who were the primitive 
inhabitants of Borneo. One would expect to find Negritos 
in the interior, as these black, woolly -haired pygmies 
inhabit the Andamans, parts of the Malay Peninsula, 
Sumatra, the Philippines, New Guinea, and possibly 
Melanesia. No authoritative evidence of their occurrence 
in Borneo is forthcoming, and one can confidently assert 
that there are no Negritos in Sarawak. Nor are there any 
traces of Melanesians. It is generally admitted that, 
assuming the Australians to be mainly of that race, a 
Pre-Dravidian element should occur in the Archipelago, 
VOL. II 311 x 

312 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

and the cousins Sarasin have noted this strain among the 
Toalas of Celebes and Moszkowski among the Batins of 
Sumatra ; in this connection it is of interest that Nieu- 
wenhuis discovered ten Ulu Ayars and two Punans with 
straight hair and a "black or blue -black" skin colour; 
Kohlbrugge,1 who records this observation, offers no 
explanation. 

Dr. E. T. Hamy in 1877 recognised a primitive element 
in the Malay Archipelago, for which he adopted the term 
Indonesian, a name previously invented by Logan for the 
non- Malay population of the East Indian Archipelago. 
De Quatrefages and Hamy further established this stock 
in their Crania Ethnica (1882), and de Quatrefages in his 
Histoire gtnfrale des races humaines (1889) boldly states 
that these high- and narrow-headed peoples are "un des 
rameaux de la branche blanche allophyle" {I.e. pp. 515, 
521). Keane terms the Indonesians "the pre -Malay 
Caucasic element in Oceania " {Man Past and Present^ 
1899, p. 231). Various investigators2 have studied skulls 
obtained from this region which prove the wide extension 
of dolichocephaly. Kohlbrugge (1898), who investigated 
the Tenggerese, Indonesian mountaineers of Java, says : 
" Les Indonesiens sont dolichocephales, les Malais brachy- 
cephales ou hyperbrachycephales. Le sang indonesien 
se decele done par la longueur de la tete : plus celle-ci se 
rapproche du type dolichocephale, plus pur est le sang 
indonesien." Volz confirms Hagen's observations of the 
existence among the Battak of North Sumatra of two types, 
a dolichocephalic Indonesian and a brachycephalic type. 
The term Indonesian may now be regarded as definitely 

1 Dr. A. W. Nieuwenhuis, " Anthropometrische Untersuchungen bei den 
Dajak." Bearbeitet durch Dr. J. H. F. Kohlbrugge, Mitt, aus dem Niederl. 
Reichsmus. fur V'dlkerk. ser. ii. No. 5, Haarlem, 1903. Owing to the 
inaccessibility of this memoir, I have incorporated his more important observa- 
tions in this essay. 

2 S waving, G., Natuurk. Tijdschr. v. Ned. Ind., xxiii., 1861, xxiv., 1862. 

Hoeven, J. van der, Catalogus craniorum diversarum gentium. 

Virchow, R., Z.f.E., xvii., 1885, p. (270), in which he states that of 
47 "Dayak" skulls in the museums of Paris, Amsterdam, and the Royal 
College of Surgeons, London, 20 were dolichocephalic, 12 mesaticephalic, and 
15 brachycephalic. Cf. also Z.f.E., xxiv., 1892, p. (435). 

Hagen, B., Verh. d. Kon. Akad. d. Wetensch. Natuurkund, xxviii., 
Amsterdam, 1890. 

Waldeyer, W., Z.f.E., xxvi., 1894, p. (383). 

Zuckerkandl, E., Mitt. d. Anthrop. Gesell. Wien, xxiv., 1894, p. 254. 

Kohlbrugge, J. H. F., V Anthropologic, ix., 1898, p. 1. 

Volz, W., Arch. f. Anthrop., xxvi., 1900, p. 719. 

Haddon, A. C, Archiv. per V Ant. e /' Etnol., xxxi. , 1901, p. 341. 

APPENDIX 313 

restricted to a dolichocephalic, and the term Proto-Malay 
to a brachycephalic race, of which the true Malays (Orang 
Malayu) are a specialised branch. 

The next point to discuss is the presence of these two 
races in Borneo. The Dutch Expedition found three 
distinct types in the interior of Netherlands Borneo, the 
Ulu Ayars (Ulu Ajar) 1 or Ot Danum of the upper Kapuas, 
the Bahau - Kenyahs (Bahau - Kenja) of the middle or 
upper Mahakam (or Kotei) and the upper waters of the 
rivers to the north, and the Punans, nomadic hunters 
living in the highlands about the head-waters of the great 
rivers. The first of these may be classed as predominantly 
Indonesian and the others as mainly Proto - Malay in 
origin. According to Nieuwenhuis the Bahaus and 
Kenyahs both remember that they came from Apo Kayan 
at the headwaters of the Kayan river ; they were formerly 
known as the Pari tribes. In all the tribes of this group 
the social organisation is in the main similar, and this 
affinity is borne out by their material culture, thus they 
may be regarded as originally one people. Tribes calling 
themselves Bahau now live along the Mahakam above 
Mujub and include one Kayan group ; on the upper Rejang 
are Bahau tribes under the name of Kayan, and a small 
section has advanced into the Kapuas area and settled on 
the Mendalam which again includes Kayans and kindred 
tribes. All the tribes still in Apo Kayan call themselves 
Kenyah, as also those of the eastward flowing Tawang, 
Berau and Kayan (or Bulungan) rivers and those of the 
upper Limbang and Baram flowing northwards. The 
Kenyahs of Apo Kayan live along the I wan, a tributary 
of the Kayan river (or Bulungan); to the north-east is 
another tributary called the Bahau which seems to have 
been the original home of the Bahau people since the tribes 
of Borneo habitually take their names from the rivers along 
which they live.2 

1 Nieuwenhuis usually speaks of these as Ulu Ajar Dajak. I have more 
than once deprecated this use of the term " Dayak " as it has simply come to 
mean a non-Malayan inhabitant of Borneo, for example, we find " Kenjah 
Dajak " on his map. In Sarawak this term is confined to the Sea Dayaks 
and Land Dayaks, for the former I have suggested that the native name Iban 
be adopted, but I have not been able to find a suitable native name for the 
Land Dayaks of Sarawak who are probably allied to the Ulu Ayars. 

3 The foregoing statement is taken from Nieuwenhuis, but Dr. Hose sends 
me the following remarks : 

" Pari is the word for padi in both Kayan and Kenyah language. 

"The Uma Timi and Uma Klap of the Upper Rejang are possibly Bahau 

314 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

Nieuwenhuis came to the conclusion that the three chief 
tribes measured by him represented three main groups of 
the population of Central Borneo, physically and culturally. 
Mr. E. B. Haddon drew attention (Man, 1905, No. 13, 
p. 22) to the close similarity of the results published by 
Kohlbrugge (1903) with those published by me (1901). 
I recognised five main groups of peoples in Sarawak : 
Punan, Klemantan (or, as Dr. Hose and I then spelled it, 
Kalamantan), Kenyan -Kayan, Iban or Sea Dayak, and 
Malay. The I bans are not referred to by either of the 
Dutch ethnologists, who, like myself, merely alluded to 
the Malay element. Kohlbrugge and I included the 
Bakatan or Beketan and the Ukit or Bukat in the Punan 
group, and also bracketed together the Kayans and 
Kenyahs. In Sarawak there are numerous and often small 
tribes which it is frequently very difficult or quite impossible 
to differentiate from one another, although the extremes 
of the series can be distinguished ; we therefore decided 
to comprehend them under the non-committal term of 
Klemantan (p. 42). I showed that they were of mixed 
origin, and stated that, " It is possible that the Kalamantans 
were originally a dolichocephalic people who mixed first 
with the indigenous brachycephals (Punan group) and later 
with the immigrant brachycephals (Kenyah-Kayan group) 
or the Kalamantans may have been a mixed people when 
they first arrived in Borneo and subsequently increased 
their complexity by mixing with these two groups" 
(I.e. p. 352). I also made it clear that I regarded the 
dolichocephalic element as of Indonesian stock and the 
brachycephalic of Proto - Malayan origin. It was with 
great satisfaction that I found Kohlbrugge had come to 
similar conclusions and that the Ulu Ayars exhibit such 
strong traces of an Indonesian origin, stronger perhaps 
than those of any tribe in Sarawak, with the possible 
exception of the scarcely studied Muruts and allied tribes. 

tribes but the four Kayan tribes of the Upper Rejang, the Uma Bawang, Uma 
Naving, Uma Daro and Uma Lesong say that they came from Usun Apo or 
Apo Kayan as Nieuwenhuis calls it. 

"The Kayans in the Kapuas are the Uma Ging, and the only Kayans that 
I know of in the Bulungan river are the Uma Lekans : there are no Kayans or 
Kenyahs in the Limbang river. 

"Apo Kayan or Usun Apo is the country from which the Batang Kayan 
river or Bulungan, the Kotei, and their great tributaries rise on the one side, 
and the tributaries of the Rejang and Baram on the other. It extends from 
the Bahau river in the north to the Mahakam in the south. The Kenyahs of 
the Baram are spoken of by the people of the Batang Kayan as Kenyah Bau." 

APPENDIX 315 

Kohlbrugge states (1903, p. 2) that he has shown for 
the interior of Sumatra, Java, and Celebes that there are 
mesaticephalic peoples distinct in other respects from the 
coast peoples, but not dolichocephalic. He concludes that 
the (Ulu Ayar) Dayaks, being the only dolichocephals, are 
the only pure Indonesians, and the rest (Kayans and 
Punans) are more or less mixed with Malays. The mean 
cephalic index of 130 Tenggerese of the interior of Java is 
79.7, but the Ulu Ayars constitute a uniform group which 
ranges from 71 to 81.4, of which 9 are 74 or under and 9 
are between 74.1 and 76 inclusive, the median of 26 adult 
males being 74. 7.1 [Although the median Kalabit index 
in the living subject is somewhat higher, that of the skulls, 
as well as the cranial index of Muruts and Trings 
(Table C), is very similar in this respect to that of the Ulu 
Ayars.] 

According to Nieuwenhuis' statistics, as given by 
Kohlbrugge, there is in the brachycephalic group (Kayans 
and Punans) a greater range (75 to 93.3, and I Kayan 
woman reaches 97) than in the Ulu Ayars ; most fall 
between 78 and 85, the medians of both being just over 81. 
There are 8 dolichocephals 2 out of his 43 Kayan men and 
4 out of his 25 women, but only 1 Punan out of 14. In 
his curve of the Kayan indices there is a drop at 82 [a 
curve of my data shows a similar drop]. " I leave it an 
open question," he says (p. 13), "whether this break 
indicates mixture of a dolichocephalic and brachycephalic 
group ; this can only be decided by the study of more 
abundant material, and requires confirmation from the 
geographical and ethnographical standpoint. At all events 
it may be assumed a priori that if long-headed and broad- 
headed peoples occur in the interior of Borneo, then mixed 
peoples will also be met with, and the Kayans might be 
such." [An examination of my data will show that there 
is practically no difference between the Kayans and 
Kenyahs in this respect.] 

A comparison is also possible between the bi-zygomatic 
breadths made by Nieuwenhuis and ourselves. The figures 
are those of the minimum, median, and maximum. Kayans 
(43 <?, N) 126, 139, 153 ; (25 ?., N) 125, 132, 141 ; (21 <J, H) 
132, 141,150. Punans (14 £,N) 132,138, 145; (19^, H) 

1 In order to make Kohlbrugge's data comparable with ours I have in all 
cases grouped his youths and girls over 16 with the adults, and have left those 
younger out of reckoning. 

2 I.e. having an index of 77.9 and under. 

316 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

130, 142, 154. Ulu Ayars (26 £ , N) 125, 136, 145. Land 
Dayaks (42 <£, S) 122, 136, 145. 

Kohlbrugge points out that there seems to be no ground 
for dividing the " Indonesians" into a taller and shorter 
group since the differences are slight. If this distinction 
were drawn, the Ulu Ayars (av. 1.57 1 m., med. 1.55 1 m.) 
would belong to the shorter group as would the Enganese 
(av. 1.570 m.). His 34 Kayan men (av. 1.584 m., med. 
1.582 m.) and 14 Punan men (av. 1.583 m., med. 1.569 m.) 
and the Gorontalese (1.584 m.) are intermediate between 
these and the Tenggerese (1.604 m.) and Battak (1.605). 
I also find this distinction untenable, as our Kayans 
(av. 1.559 m., med. 1.550 m.) and Punans (av. 1.555 m., 
med. 1.550 m.) are of the same stature or even possibly 
shorter than his Ulu Ayars, whereas our 16 Kenyah men 
(av. 1.597 m., med. 1.608) are taller than his Kayans. He 
adds that the shorter " Indonesians " live in the plains, 
the taller in the mountains, but he cannot say for certain 
whether a mountain climate affects stature as many believe. 
It is to be regretted that Kohlbrugge extends in this 
instance the term Indonesian to the Kayans and Punans. 
Taking our measurements I find that the Kenyahs and the 
Muruts (av. 1.601 m., med. 1.590 m.) are the tallest groups, 
then come the Iban (av. 1.590 m., med. 1.585 m.), the 
Kayan and Punan medians come about half-way between 
the tallest Klemantans (Long Pokun, med. 1.590 m.) and 
the shortest (Lerong, med. 1.520 m.). The above figures 
refer to men only, the women are markedly shorter. 

Kohlbrugge gives the following information with regard 
to body measurements : the Kayan women are 14 cm. 
shorter than the men, usually the difference is 10-12 cm. 
The span is greater than the stature, the proportion is 
105.2 : 100 in Kayans, 103.4 : 100 in Ulu Ayars and 
106.5 : 100 in Punans and Tenggerese. In youths it is 
rather higher than in men. The difference between 
Tenggerese and Ulu Ayars is due to the latter having 
shorter arms, especially the upper arms, and the chest of 
the Bornean peoples is 2 cm. narrower. Other Indonesian 
peoples have a longer upper arm than the Ulu Ayars, 
who also have the tibia shorter in proportion to the femur. 
Kayan and Ulu Ayar men have a comparatively shorter 
femur than the Punan. The latter thus resemble the 
Tenggerese, the others have the same relative length as 
many other peoples of the Archipelago ; there is no 

APPENDIX 317 

difference between the Malays and Indonesians in this 
respect. The Kayan women have relatively a much longer 
femur than the men. The shorter tibia makes the whole 
leg of the Bornean peoples shorter than in others — 
except that the Punans make it up with a longer femur. 
Women and young people have longer legs than men. 
The Punans have the fattest calves approximating to 
the Tenggerese, the other Bornean tribes are more 
like the Gorontalese. The chest girth of Ulu Ayars 
and Tenggerese is jalmost the same, despite the difference 
in the breadth of the chest, in which the Ulu Ayars 
resemble the inhabitants of Atchin measured by Lubbers. 
The proportion of the length of the foot to the stature 
is 16:100 in Kayans of both sexes, 15.4:100 in Ulu 
Ayars, and 15.2 in Punans. But the Kayan feet are 
shorter than those of the Gorontalese, who have the longest 
feet in the Archipelago. The other Bornean peoples are 
the same as Indonesians who resemble the Malays in this 
respect. The pelvic breadth of the Kayan men and women 
is equal (26 cm.), though men have the wider chest ; the 
Punan pelvis is narrower than in the other two tribes ; but 
in all three the pelvis is broader than in the Tenggerese. 

We must now turn to the evidence of the crania, of 
which only a very brief account need be presented here. 
Owing to the fact that the people are head-hunters the 
skulls obtained by a traveller in any house are necessarily 
those of another community, group, or tribe than that to 
which the occupants of the house belong. Consequently 
it is necessary for a traveller to learn from the inhabitants 
the provenience of each cranium, and every one in the 
house knows it. It is useless for analytical purposes to 
deal with skulls of which the tribe is not accurately known ; 
the information that a skull was obtained in a certain 
village or on a particular river is, as a rule, of very little 
value. 

In Table C I give particulars of three head indices 
of 83 crania, of which the history is known in each case. 
Fifty-eight of these have been presented by Dr. Hose to 
the University of Cambridge. I have added to these 
5 Murut, 1 Lepu Potong, 1 Kalabit, 1 Tring, 1 Bisaya, 
and 1 Orang Bukit, which Dr. Hose presented to the 
Royal College of Surgeons, London, 1 Ukit skull in the 
same museum, 3 Dusun in the British Museum, and 5 Murut, 
3 Maloh, and 3 Kayan, which I measured in Sarawak. I 

318 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

have chosen the cranial length-breadth, length-height, and 
breadth-height indices, as these are more directly com- 
parable with the corresponding cephalic indices of Table A. 
A detailed account of these crania must await a more 
suitable occasion. 

The dolichocephalic crania are, as a rule, distinctly 
akrocephalic, that is, the length-height index is superior to 
the length-breadth index, but this is not the case with the 
brachycephals. I find the average length-height index in 
the living subject of a dozen inland tribes is 72.5 for 131 
males and 78.2 for 40 females. That is, so far as our 
measurements go, the women are more akrocephalic than 
the men, which is unusual. 

The conclusions to be drawn from a somatological 
investigation are necessarily limited. In my introductory 
remarks I stated that one could distinguish two main races 
among the principal groups of the peoples of Sarawak, a 
dolichocephalic and a brachycephalic, and that the former 
might be termed Indonesian and the latter Proto- Malay ; 
further, no one group is probably of pure race, though it 
appears that some may be predominantly Indonesian and 
others Proto-Malay. I do not for a moment suggest that 
there was one migration of pure Indonesians and another 
of pure Proto- Malays which flooded Borneo and by various 
minglings produced the numerous tribes of that island, 
though I do suggest that there have been throughout the 
whole Archipelago various movements of peoples, some of 
which may have been relatively pure communities of these 
two races. There can be little doubt that we must look to 
the neighbouring regions of the mainland of Asia for their 
immediate point of departure southwards, for we now 
know that two similar races have inhabited this area from 
a remote antiquity. The light- (or light -brown) skinned 
dolichocephals of south-east Asia, assuming for the 
present that they are all of one race, have frequently been 
termed Caucasians — for the present I prefer to speak of 
them as Indonesians — and of these there are doubtless 
several strains. The light- (or light -brown) skinned 
brachycephals are usually grouped as Southern Mongols. 
In the south-east corner of Asia there are probably several 
strains of these brachycephals which hitherto have been 
insufficiently studied. Even when an Indonesian element 
has been recognised in the population of the Archipelago 
there has been too persistent a practice of terming the 

APPENDIX 319 

brachycephalic element " Malay." The true Malay, 
Orang Malayu, is merely a specialised branch of a stock 
for which I prefer the non-committal name of Proto-Malay, 
even " Southern-Mongol " is preferable to " Malay." The 
Proto-Malay race has its roots on the mainland. It has 
yet to be shown how far the brachycephals of this region 
belong to what is here termed the Proto-Malay race or to 
what extent other, and doubtless allied, stocks are impli- 
cated. If, as is very probable, there have been migrations 
of differentiated peoples from the mainland into the islands, 
the Bornean peoples may be of more complex origin than 
the earlier generalisations might suggest. The dissecting 
out and the tracing of the migrations of these peoples is 
the work of ethnography, somatology can be of little 
assistance ; all that I have done is to provide a certain 
amount of material for the use of students in the future. 
It must also be remembered that the immigrants from the 
mainland may have had at one time infusions of Negrito 
or Pre-Dravidian (Sakai) blood, not to speak of Tibetan, 
Chinese, or other mixtures. Similarly when the first 
migrations from the mainland took place the fairer-skinned 
immigrants probably found an indigenous population of 
Negritos, Pre- Dra vidians, and possibly to some extent of 
Papuans in various parts of the Archipelago. We know 
that many of the islands, including Borneo, have been 
subject to direct migrations from India and China, and 
there has doubtless been a certain amount of movement 
of peoples from island to island. The racial history of this 
region is therefore extremely complex. 

Dr. Hose has suggested the following classification1 of 
the peoples of Sarawak (exclusive of the Malays), which 
I have followed in arranging the descriptions given below. 
For the sake of comparison I have recast the data published 
by Kohlbrugge concerning the three types studied by 
Nieuwenhuis ; it is unfortunate that our several results 
cannot be more closely correlated. 

1 This was drawn up by Dr. Hose from his general knowledge of the 
people of Sarawak, and it will be found to agree very closely with the anthropo- 
metric data, thus we may regard it as expressing the present state of our 
knowledge of the affinities of the several tribes. 

320 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

A CLASSIFICATION OF THE PEOPLES OF 
SARAWAK 

I. Murut Group : 

Murut, Pandaruan, Tagal, Dusun ; 
Kalabit, Lepu Potong ; 
Adang, Tring. 
II. Klemantan Group : 

i. South-western Group : 
Land Dayaks ; 

[Certain ^tribes of Netherlands Borneo] ; 
Maloh. 

2. Central Group : 

a. Baram sub-group : Bisaya, Tabun, Orang 

Bukit, Kadayan, Pliet, Long Pata, Long 
Akar. 

b. Barawan sub-group : Murik, Long Julan, 

Long Ulai, Batu Blah, Long Kiput, 
Lelak, Barawan, Sakapan, Kajaman. 

c. Bakatan sub - group : Seping, Tanjong, 

Kanawit, Bakatan, Lugat. 

3. Sebop Group : 

Malang, Tabalo, Long Pokun, Sebop, Lerong ; 
Milanau (including Narom and Miri). 

III. Punan Group : 

Punan, Ukit, Siduan, Sigalang. 

IV. Kenyah Group : 

Madang, Long Dallo, Apoh, Long Sinong, 
Long Lika Bulu, Long Tikan. 
V. Kayan Group. 
VI. Iban Group : Iban (Sea Dayaks) and Sibuyau. 

DESCRIPTIONS OF PEOPLES 

General Remarks on the Methods of taking Observations 

The physical characters and measurements of each individual 
were noted on a separate card, and the bulk of them have been 
embodied in the following synopses. As my object has been 
to give a general impression of each group, I have not burdened 
the descriptions with superfluous scattered observations. The 
original records are available in Cambridge for any desirous of 
consulting them. The statistics given refer to the several re- 
corded observations ; where these fall short of the total number 
it may be taken for granted that as a rule the remainder did not 
depart markedly from the normal standard of the group in 
question — the presence of salient characters would be noted, not 
their absence. 

In Table A certain measurements and indices are given of 
the more important groups in order to facilitate comparisons. 
Very small groups and half-breeds have been omitted, the object 
being to summarise the characters of the adults of the larger 
groups. The median in most cases is practically identical with 
the average, but where a difference occurs, the median more 
nearly represents the central type. The indices are based on a 
calculation to two decimal places ; where the second decimal 
place is under five it is left out of account, and where five or over 
the first decimal place is augmented by one. This table should 
be compared with Table C. 

In the other tables all the measurements and indices are given. 

Head : Length, from glabella to most prominent point of 
occiput; breadth, maximum at right angles to above; bi-auric 
breadth, from base of the tragus, pressing firmly; circumference, 
greatest circumference immediately above the glabella ; auricular 
vertical arc, from base of tragus over the vertex ; auricular radii 
taken with a Cunningham's radiometer from the ear-hole. Face : 
Total length, from nasion to chin ; upper length, from nasion to 
alveolus ; bi-zygomatic breadth, from greatest prominence of cheek 
arches, pressing firmly ; inter-ocular width, between inner angles 
of the eyes ; bi-gonial breadth, from the angle of the lower jaw, 
pressing firmly. Nose : Length, from nasion to angle with lip ; 

321 

322 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

breadth^ between outer curvature of alae, without pressure ; bi- 
malar breadth, from the outer upper corner of the margin of the 
orbit, pressing firmly (this was usually marked with a soft pencil) ; 
naso-malar line, between these points over the bridge of the 
nose. 

The term dolichocephalic is used to designate a cephalic index 
of 77.9 and under, and br achy cephalic one of 78 and over. Heads 
with a length-height index of 66.9 and under are platycephalic, 
those of 67-69.9 are mesocephalic, and those of 70 and over are 
hypsicephalic. The breadth-height limits are 82.9, 83-84.9, and 
85. The term chamoeprosopic is used where the total facial index 
is 89.9 and under, and leptoprosopic where it is 90 and over, the 
corresponding limit for the upper facial index is - 49.9 and 50 + . 
Owing to the character of the nose it was not easy in most cases 
to ascertain the exact upper limit of the length, and it is probably 
owing to this that the indices show such marked platyrhiny. 
Unfortunately these indices cannot be compared with those 
obtained by Nieuwenhuis, as he measured to the tip of the nose 
and not to its angle with the lip as we did. The term leptorhine 
is used for noses with an index of 69.9 and under, mesorhine for 
70-84.9, platyrhine for 85-99.9, and hyper-platyrhine for 100 and 
over. The profiles of the nose were compared with the figures 
in Notes and Queries (1892). In speaking of the eye, by fold is 
meant the Mongolian fold which covers the caruncle. All the irises 
have a brown colour, being either light, medium, or dark. The 
observations on the ears were made by means of MS. notes and 
diagrams drawn up for me by Prof. A. Keith. He recommended 
that persons under fifteen years of age or over sixty should not 
be noted, and that as there is a very marked sexual difference, 
observations on men and women should be kept quite separate. 
Variations in every race are, within certain limits, so numerous 
that he suggested that at least a hundred of each sex should be 
observed ; although the numbers examined of the several tribes 
is usually very small, their total number will probably be found 
sufficient to give a fair idea of the more common types of ears. 
The types of ears suggested by Dr. Keith are (1) "European": 
this applies only to the general shape; the folding, etc., varies 
enormously. (2) "Negroid": this resembles the "Orang type," 
but differs in being two-thirds of a circle ; that is to say, the 
Negroid ear has a much greater breadth relative to its height than 
the ears of Europeans. (3) "Orang": this is the smallest and 
most degenerate form of ear, seen in its most typical form in the 
orang utan ; it is the common female type. (4) " Chimpanzee " : 
this is the largest and most primitive form of ear, and is found 
in its typical condition in the chimpanzee ; it is commonly, but 
not always, set at a considerable angle to the head. Angle-. 
The ear may be appressed (o), or it may stand out from 

APPENDIX 323 

the head at an angle of less than 30* (1), between 300 and 
6o° (2), or over 6o° (3). Lobule: This is never totally absent, 
but when it is 3 mm. or less from the middle of the curved base 
of the anti-tragus it may be called approximately so (o), when 
3-10 mm. it is small (1), 10-15 mm. medium (2), over 15 mm. 
long (3). The lobule may be free or adhere partially or totally 
to the side of the face. Descending helix : The degree of folding 
varies; there may be none (o), under 2 mm. (1), between 2 and 4 
mm. (2), between 4 and 6 mm. (3). Darwin 's poi?it ': It may be 
absent (o), or present as a distinct tip (1), as an infolded tip (2), 
as an inrolled knob (3), or as a slight thickening of the infolded 
part of the helix (4) ; the position is constant in the upper 
posterior segment. Tragus : This may be absent (o), otherwise 
it varies in size measured from base to apex, under 3 mm. (1), 
between 3 and 5 mm. (2), or 5 to 7 mm. (3). Sometimes it has 
two apices. Anti-tragus : This also may be absent (o), or if 
present the size from base to apex measures as in the tragus 
under 3 mm. (1), between 3 and 5 mm. (2), or 5-7 mm. (3). 
Anti-helix : It is bent into an angle slightly or not at all (o), the 
angle does not reach the level of the helix (1), the angle is a 
little within or a little beyond the level of the helix (2), it is very 
prominent, distinctly beyond the level of the helix (3). Its pro- 
minence is a human feature. 

As regards the hair, in all cases where there were a number 
of observations one or two of the oldest men had grizzled or 
even grey hair. The hair of the head is usually worn long and 
often attains a length of about two feet, but it is sometimes cut 
shorter and is occasionally very short. It is usually fairly 
abundant, but in all groups a few persons have scanty hair. The 
hair of the face is in all groups either absent or very scanty; 
the same applies to the body hair. The only scale of skin colours 
we had was that given in the Notes and Queries on Anthropology 
(2nd ed., 1892), but as this was obviously inadequate for the 
purpose, Dr. Hose prepared a scale for our use in the field, 
the shades of which have subsequently been as far as possible 
equated with those of Prof, von Luschan's Hautfarben-Tafel (Puhl 
and Wagner, Rixdorf) ; it is these numbers which appear in 
brackets in the following descriptions, and I have also attempted 
to describe them in English ; the term cinamon is based on the 
colour of the stick cinnamon of commerce. The colours were 
usually matched from the inner aspect of the upper arm so as 
to avoid the darkening caused by the burning of the sun. 
Besides the information recorded on the cards, a number of 
additional data on skin colour collected by Dr. Hose are included 
in the synopses. As regards stature the subject is described 
as short when he measures less than 1.625 m- (5 ft- 4 m-)j 
medium 1. 625-1. 724 m. (5 ft. 4 in. to 5 ft. 8 in.), and tall 

324 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

1.725 m. and over; the subject had his eyes looking towards 
the horizon. 

With the exception of the observations by Mr. R. Shelford, 
mainly on the Land Dayaks and Iban, which are duly noted, 
all the data on the living were collected by Dr. W. McDougall 
and myself, either separately or conjointly, and I have to thank 
him for permitting me to work up the results. Our thanks are 
due to Dr. Hose, at whose invitation we went to Sarawak, and 
without whose zeal, knowledge of the country, and wonderful 
influence over the natives this work could not have been 
accomplished. Mr. S. H. Ray also assisted us as amanuensis. 
Most of the figures were tabulated for me by Miss Barbara 
Friere-Marreco and the remainder by Miss Lilian Whitehouse, 
who also has greatly assisted me in drawing up this memoir. 

I. Murut Group 

Seven Kalabit men and 3 women and 4 Murut men were 
measured. No descriptive details of the Muruts are available. 

Head -form : The cephalic indices show 7 to be dolicho- 
cephalic and 7 brachycephalic ; the 3 women are slightly more 
dolichocephalic than the men, for whom the median is 78.5. 
One Kalabit is platycephalic, 1 mesocephalic, and 8 hypsicephalic 
as regards length-height, and all are hypsicephalic as regards 
breadth-height. Four Kalabits were noted as having oval heads, 
in 1 the occiput was prominent, 1 ovoid, and 1 woman ellipsoidal. 

Face: Five Kalabits have pentagonal faces, being rather 
broad in 3, 2 were long and rather narrow, the jaws are narrow 
in 2. They show a marked tendency to prognathism, especially 
dental prognathism. The Kalabits are chamaeprosopic as regards 
both the total facial and the upper facial indices, with one 
exception in both respects. The forehead has a slight tendency 
to be narrow and high. The cheek-bones are moderately 
prominent in 5 men and 1 woman and not prominent in 2 men 
and 1 woman. The lips are moderately full. The chin is 
rather small, and retreating in 3. Nose : One Murut is leptorhine, 2 
Kalabit men are mesorhine, 6 are platyrhine, and 5 hyper-platyrhine. 
The root is high in 4 Kalabit men, narrow in 3, broad in 4 and 

1 woman, and flat in 3 and 1 woman ; the base is reflected in 3 
of each sex, and straight in 2 men ; the alae are small in 4 men 
and 3 women, moderate in 3 men, and round in 1 of each sex ; 
the nostrils are rounded in 5 men and 3 women, and wide in 

2 men. Eyes : The aperture is narrow in 1 man, moderately open 
in 5 men and 1 woman, wide in 1 man and 2 women ; it is 
straight with no fold in 5 men, straight with slight fold in 1 man, 
more or less oblique with slight fold in 1 man and 2 women, 
in 1 woman it is straight and the fold is more developed in the 

APPENDIX 325 

right eye than in the left ; the colour is medium in 1 man, dark 
brown in 5 men and 3 women. Ears : Type European in 3 of 
each sex, Negroid in 1 man, and intermediate in 2 men; angle 
prominent in 5 men and 3 women, slightly prominent in 2 men ; 
lobule always distended, in 2 men it is adherent; descending 
helix infolded under 2 mm. in all but 1 man in whom it is under 
4 mm. ; Darwin's point absent in 3 men and 1 woman, doubtful 
in 2 men, infolded in 1 man, inrolled in 2 women ; tragus under 
3 mm. in 2 men, 3-5 mm. in the rest; anti-tragus absent in 4 
men, and 1 woman, under 3 mm. in 3 men and 2 women; anti- 
helix below level of helix in 2 of each sex, about at the same 
level in 5 men and 1 woman. 

Hair : It is straight to wavy in 1 of each sex, wavy in 3 men 
and 1 woman, wavy-curly in 1 man. The colour is rusty black 
in 7 men and 3 women. It is moderately abundant and long. 

Skin\ Four are lightest cinamon (12), 1 light cinamon (14), 
1 cinamon (6), 2 pale fawn (pale 17), 2 dull fawn (17). 

Stature : All but 1 Murut man are of short stature, 1 Kalabit 
man being only 1.485 m. (4 ft. 10J in.), the 3 women are still 
shorter, 1 being 1.4 10 m. (4 ft. 7 J in.), the median for the 
Kalabits is 1.565 (5 ft \\ in.). 

II. Klemantan Group 

1. South-western Group 

(a) Forty -two Land Dayak men were measured by Mr. 
Shelford. 

Head-form : The cephalic indices range fairly evenly from 
73.5 to 86.9, 19 men being dolichocephalic; the median is 78.4. 

Face-. One is noted as very broad and 2 as prognathous. 
All but 1 are chamseprosopic as regards the total facial index and 
all but 6 as regards the upper facial. Nose : Nineteen are meso- 
rhine, 17 platyrhine, and 6 hyper-platyrhine ; 1 is noted as 
aquiline, 3 as straight but flat, and 2 have a low bridge ; 2 have 
broad alse, 1 having a very concave nose, broader than long with 
an index of 116.2, and wide nostrils, it is evidently abnormal. 
Eyes: A fold is mentioned in 18, of which 3 are slight and 2 
pronounced, its absence is noted in 3 ; 5 have medium brown 
irises. 

Hair : It is noted as straight in 6 and wavy in 2 ; it is black 
in 8, and 24 have abundant hair ; the hair of the face is absent 
in 7 and sparse in 8, 1 had a stubbly beard. 

Skin: The colour of the skin is darker than that of other 
inland tribes, 19 being of a very dark warm cinamon (25) and 
4 cinamon (6). It is noted in 1 as much darker when uncovered. 

326 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

Stature : None are tall, 7 are medium, the rest short, 4 being 
under 1.5 m. (4 ft. 11 in.), the median is 1.577 m. (5 ft. 2 in.). 

[Thirty-one male and 4 female Ulu Ayar Dayaks were measured 
by Nieuwenhuis, of these 5 were boys under 1 7, and all 4 females 
were girls of 17 and under. See vol. ii., p. 315, note 1. 

Head-form : The cephalic indices range fairly evenly between 
71 and 81.4, all but 5 are dolichocephalic, the median being 74.7. 

Face : It is usually of medium breadth ; 2 {i.e. 6 per cent) have 
broad faces. The bi-zygomatic breadth ranges from 125 to 145 
mm., the median being 136 mm. Nose\ The breadth-measure- 
ments range from 36 to 46 mm., the length-measurements being 
taken from root to tip are therefore not comparable. Eighteen 
males and 3 females are noted as having concave noses, 13 and 

1 as having broad flat noses, none as straight or narrow, i.e. 
60 per cent of the Ulu Ayars have concave (" depressed," " sunken," 
or " hollow ") noses. Eyes : The Mongolian fold does not occur. 
The colour is dark. 

Hair : All had straight hair except 1 man ; it is generally 
rather scanty. The colour is black. 

Skin : The colour is noted as black or blue-black in 10, brown 
and yellow in 5, light brown in 20. 

Stature : None are tall, 3 are medium, and the rest short, 

2 being under 1.5 m. (4 ft. 11 in.) ; the median is 1.55 1 (5 ft. 1 in.).] 

(b) Seven Maloh men were measured by us. 

Head-form : The cephalic index is essentially dolichocephalic, 

3 being low brachycephals, the median 76.8. Two are meso- 
cephalic in the length -height index and none in the breadth- 
height, all the remainder are hypsicephalic in both respects; 

4 are pyriform, 2 oval, and 1 ellipsoidal in shape. 

Face: Two are pentagonal, 2 rather broad, and 2 long; 
alveolar prognathism is noted in 3, 1 of which has also general 
prognathism. Two only are leptoprosopic in their total and upper 
facial indices. The forehead is somewhat narrow and high, the 
cheek-bones more or less prominent, the lips are usually moder- 
ately full, and the chin fairly well developed. Nose: One is 
mesorhine, 4 platyrhine, and 2 hyper-platyrhine ; the profile is 
equally divided between straight and concave; the base is 
reflected in 5, deflected in 2 ; the alae are rather small and the 
nostrils wide and rounded. Ears: Type European in 5 (1 
doubtful), Negroid in 2 ; angle prominent in 5, slightly prominent 
in 2 ; lobule distended in all ; descending helix infolded under 
2 mm. in 5, 2-4 mm. in 2 ; Darwin's point absent in 5, inrolled 
in 2 (1 doubtful) ; tragus 3-5 mm. in 5 (2 doubtful), rather less 
in 2 ; anti-tragus absent in 1, doubtful in 1, under 3 mm. in 5 ; 
anti-helix below level of helix in 4, about at the same level in 3. 

Hair : The hair is distinctly wavy and long ; it is rusty black 

APPENDIX 327 

in 5 and black in 2. There is a moderate amount on the face 
and none on the body. 

Skin : Six are dull fawn (17). 

Stature: All are short, 1 being 1.47 m. (4 ft. 9! in.); the 
median is 1.585 m. (5 ft. 2\ in.). 

2. Central Group 

Barawan Sub-group. — This consists of 1 Murik man, 1 Long 
Ulai man and 1 woman, 8 Long Kiput men, 3 Lelak men, 12 
Barawan men and 5 women, 2 Sakapan men, 1 Kajaman, and 

4 mixed breeds {i.e. mixed with other Klemantan blood). 

Head-form : Of the longer series the Barawans are the more 
dolichocephalic, 6 men and 3 women have an index below 78, 

1 Long Kiput man and only 4 others being dolichocephalic ; the 
median of the whole series, excluding women, is 79. Most of the 
men and all the women are hypsicephalic ; but 2 Barawans are 
platycephalic, and 1 Barawan and 2 mixed breeds are mesocephalic 
in length-height ; 1 Long Kiput is platycephalic in length-height 
and breadth-height, 2 are mesocephalic in both respects, and 1 in 
length-height only ; 1 Lelak is platycephalic in length-height and 
mesocephalic in breadth-height. The shape is noted as oval in 

5 men and 3 women, ovoid in 1 of each sex, round in 3 men. 

Face : Nine men and 3 women have a pentagonal face ; it is 
oval in 1 man and 2 women, rather long in 5 men, square in 

2 men, broad in 1 of each sex. All are chamseprosopic in both 
respects except 1 Barawan man as regards total facial index and 
2 in the upper. The forehead is rounded or prominent in 8 men 
and 6 women, upright in 4 men and 1 woman, more or less 
sloping in 4 men, broad and low in 5 men, narrow in 4 men. 
The cheek-bones are large in 6 men and 1 woman, more or less 
prominent in 10 men and 3 women, moderate in n men and 
2 women. The lips vary in thickness, 10 being thin and 7 more 
or less thick. The chin is fairly well developed except in 6 men. 
Nose : One Lelak is leptorhine, 2 Long Kiputs, 3 Barawan men 
and 2 women and 2 Barawan mixed breeds are mesorhine; 5 
Long Kiputs, 2 Lelaks, 6 Barawan men and 1 woman and 1 
mixed breed, 1 Long Ulai man and woman and 2 Sakapan s are 
platyrhine ; 1 Long Kiput, 3 Barawan men and 2 women, 1 
Murik and 1 Kajaman are hyper-platyrhine. The profile is 
straight in 10 men and 1 woman, more or less concave in 13 
men and 5 women, slightly aquiline in 4 men ; blunt tips were 
noted in 2 cases. The root is more or less depressed in 12 men 
and 4 women, not depressed in 7 men, broad and high in 3, 
high in 3, narrow in 3. The base is reflected or slightly so in 
16 men and 4 women, straight in 9 and 1, slightly deflected in 

VOL. II Y 

328 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

i woman ; the alae are small in 3 men and 4 women, moderate 
in 4 men, and wide in 5 ; the nostrils are round in 7 men and 
5 women, oval in 10 and 1, and transversely oval in 2 men. 
Eyes-. Aperture is moderate in 11 men and 2 women, small in 
10 men, large in 1 man. It is straight with no fold in 3 men 
and 2 women, straight with a slight fold in 1 woman, slightly 
oblique with no fold in 8 men and 1 woman, slightly oblique 
with slight fold in 8 men and 2 women, in 1 Barawan man it 
is slightly oblique with a very marked fold, 11 Barawans have 
more or less oblique eyes of which 7 have a fold, 4 are straight, 

1 of which has -a slight fold. Four men have light brown irises, 

2 of each sex dark brown, the remainder are medium. Ears-. 
Type European in 5 Long Kiputs, 2 Lelaks, 8 Barawans and 
2 mixed breeds, 1 Kajaman ; Negroid in 1 Barawan mixed breed ; 
orang in 2 Barawans. Angle slightly prominent in 1 Long 
Kiput, 2 mixed breeds and 1 Kajaman, rather more so in 1 
Long Kiput, prominent in 1 Lelak, 5 Barawans. Lobule distended 
throughout, perforated in 2 Barawans, adherent in 1 mixed breed. 
Descending helix absent in 1 Long Kiput, infolded less than 

2 mm. in 4 Long Kiputs, 1 Lelak, n Barawans and 2 mixed 
breeds, 1 Kajaman ; 2-4 mm. in 1 Lelak, 1 Barawan mixed breed. 
Darwin's point absent in all except 1 Barawan and 1 mixed 
breed where it is an infolded tip. Tragus under 3 mm. in 4 Long 
Kiputs, 1 Lelak, 1 Barawan and 1 mixed breed, slightly more 
in 1 Lelak, 1 Barawan; 3-5 mm. in 1 Long Kiput, 9 Barawans 
and 2 mixed breeds, 1 Kajaman. Anti-tragus absent in 1 Long 
Kiput, 3 Barawans ; under 3 mm. in 3 Long Kiputs, 2 Lelaks, 
7 Barawans and 3 mixed breeds, 1 Kajaman ; 3-5 mm. in 1 Long 
Kiput, 1 Barawan. Anti-helix below level of helix in 2 Long 
Kiputs, 5 Barawans and 1 mixed breed ; about at same level in 

3 Long Kiputs, 2 Lelak, 6 Barawans and 2 mixed breeds, 1 
Kajaman. The 5 Barawan women have ears of European type ; 
angle slightly prominent in 2, prominent in 3 ; lobule distended 
in all ; descending helix infolded less than 2 mm. in 4, 2-4 mm. 
in 1 ; Darwin's point absent in all ; tragus 3-5 mm. in all ; anti- 
tragus absent in 2, under 3 mm. in 3 ; anti-helix below level of 
helix in 2, about at same level in 3. 

Hair: Seven men and 2 women have straight hair, 17 and 3 
wavy, and 2 men curly hair; the colour is rusty black in 13 men 
and 3 women, black in 12 and 3, brown in 1 man. It is generally 
abundant and long. 

Skin : Three are cinamon (6), 6 light cinamon (14), 15 
lighter still (12), 3 dull fawn (17), 3 pale fawn (pale 17), 4 pale 
pinkish buff (11). 

Stature : Four men are of medium stature, 30, are short, 
of whom 2 men and all 6 women are below 1.5 m., 1 Barawan 
woman being only 1.395 m- (4 ft- 7 m-) > tne Barawans as a 

APPENDIX 329 

whole are shorter than the others. The median for the whole 
series of men is 1.54 m. (5 ft. \ in.). 

3. Sebop Group 
Sixteen Malang men and 4 women were measured. 

Head-form: The indices show 10 men and 3 women to be 
dolichocephalic, 6 men and 1 woman brachycephalic ; the median 
is 76.9 for the men. All are hypsicephalic, except 2 men in 
respect to length-height. The shape is described as ovoid in 

7 men, oval in 2, round oval in 1 of each sex, and ellipsoidal 
in 4 men. 

Face: It is pentagonal in 10 men and 3 women, ovoid in 

I woman, and lozenge-shaped in 1 man ; 6 men have long 
faces and 2 broad. Alveolar prognathism is noted in 3 men, 
and superciliary ridges in 3. All are chamaeprosopic except 1 
of each sex in regard to the upper facial index. The forehead 
is full in 9 men and 1 woman, broad in 3 men and 1 woman, 
narrow in 4 and 1, low in 4 and 2, high in 4. The cheek-bones 
are more or less prominent in 12 men and 2 women, moderate 
in 2 men, and not prominent in 2 of each sex. The lips are 
moderately thin. The chin is rather small in 6 men ; it is fairly 
well developed in 7 men and 4 women. Nose : 2 men and 1 
woman are mesorhine, the rest platyrhine, 2 men being hyper- 
platyrhine. The profile is straight in 8 men and 1 woman, more 
or less concave in 4 men and 3 women, slightly aquiline in 2 
men, high -bridged in 1, and slightly sinuous in 1 ; blunt tips 
are noted in 4 men and 3 women. The root is moderately high 
in 10 men and 1 woman, low in 6 and 3 ; it is narrow in 3 men 
and broad in 9 men and 3 women. The base is reflected in 
12 men and 4 women, straight in 3 men; the alse are small in 

I I men and 4 women, and moderate in the remaining men ; the 
nostrils are round in 9 men and 1 woman, wide in 4 and 1, long 
oval in 2 men and round oval in 1, narrow and elongated in 
1 woman, large in 1 man, they are nearly or quite horizontal 
in 3 men. Eyes: The aperture is small or narrow in 7 men 
and 2 women, moderately open in 5 men and 1 woman ; it is 
straight with no fold in 8 men and 1 woman, straight with a 
slight fold in 4 men, slightly oblique with no fold in 2 men and 
1 woman, slightly oblique with fold in 2 of each sex, the fold 
being slight in 1 man. The colour of the iris is dark brown in 

8 men and 4 women, medium in 7 men and light in 1. Ears: 
Type European in 13 men and 4 women (1 doubtful), approxi- 
mately Negroid in 2 men, chimpanzee in 1 man; angle prominent 
in 1 1 men and 3 women, rather less in 3 men, slightly prominent 
in 2 men ; lobule distended in all but 1 man ; descending helix 

330 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

absent in 2 women, infolded less than 2 mm. in 12 men and 
1 woman (doubtful), 2-4 mm. in 4 men and 1 woman ; Darwin's 
point absent in 15 men and 3 women, doubtful in 1 man, 
infolded in 1 woman (?) ; tragus under 3 mm. in 2 men, 3-5 mm. 
in 14 men and 4 women (1 doubtful), double in 3 men and 
1 woman of these latter ; anti-tragus absent in 6 men and 1 
woman, trace in 2 men, under 3 mm. in 7 men and 2 women 
(1 doubtful), 3-5 mm. in 1 of each sex; anti-helix below level 
of helix in 11 men and 3 women (1 doubtful), about at the same 
level in 5 men and 1 woman. 

Hair\ It is wavy in character; the colour is rusty black in 
14 men and 4 women, black in 2 men. It is usually long and 
abundant on the head ; 4 men have slight moustaches. 

Skin: Fourteen are lightest cinamon (12), 2 light cinamon 
(14), 9 pale fawn (pale 17), 2 light brown (near 17), 5 pale 
pinkish buff (11). 

Stature : One man is tall, the rest are short, 2 men and 
all the women being under 1.5 m. ; the median for the men 
is 1.535 m. (5 ft. J in.). 

Eight Long Pokun men and 10 women were measured. 

Head-form : The cephalic indices show 5 men and 4 women 
to be dolichocephalic, 3 men and 6 women brachycephalic ; the 
median for the men is 76.9, for the women 79.4. One man is 
platycephalic, 3 men and 1 woman mesocephalic and the rest 
hypsicephalic as regards length -height, all are hypsicephalic as 
regards breadth-height, in each respect the women being markedly 
more hypsicephalic than the men. The shape is noted as oval 
in 1 man and 9 women, round oval in 1 of each sex, ellipsoidal 
in 1 man and pyriform in 4 men. 

Face : In 5 men and 6 women it is more or less pentagonal, 
in 1 man and 2 women lozenge - shaped. All are markedly 
chamaeprosopic both in total facial and upper facial indices. 
The forehead is narrow in 3 men and 1 woman, broad in 2 and 
1, small in 2 women, high or moderate in 2 men and 6 women, 
fairly prominent in 1 and 2, low in 3 men. The cheek-bones are 
moderately prominent in 8 of each sex, very prominent in 1 
woman, and not prominent in 1 woman. The lips are moderately 
thin in most cases, but are rather thick in 2 men and 1 woman. 
The chin is small in 3 men and 6 women (noted as not retreating 
in 2 women), but is fairly well formed. Nose: Four men and 
5 women are mesorhine, the rest platyrhine, 1 of each sex having 
an index of 100. The profile is straight in 7 men and 4 women 
(the tip being blunt in 4 men and 2 women, and depressed in 
3 men), concave in 4 women, "Chinese" in 1 man and 2 women. 
The root is broad in 4 men and 9 women (flat in 4 of the women), 
low in 3 men and 2 women, moderately high in 4 of each sex, 

APPENDIX 331 

moderately narrow in 2 men ; the base is more or less reflected in 
8 men and 6 women, very much reflected in 1 woman, and nearly 
straight in 3 ; the alse are small in 6 men and 8 women, moderate 
in 1 of each sex and wide in 1 of each sex; the nostrils are 
round in 3 men and 7 women, more or less widely open in 6 men 
and 5 women and small in 3 women. Eyes-. The aperture is 
moderately open in 6 men and 7 women, wide in 1 of each sex 
and rather narrow in 1 man and 2 women ; it is straight with no 
fold in 4 men and 6 women, straight with fold more or less 
developed in 2 men and 1 woman, slightly oblique with no fold 
in 2 men, slightly oblique with slight fold in 2 [women, and 
oblique with a trace of fold in 1 woman. The colour is light 
brown in 1 man, medium in 6 men and 7 women, dark in 1 and 
3. Ear-. Type European in 7 men (2 doubtful) and 3 women, 
intermediate between European and Negroid in 1 man ; angle 
prominent in 6 men and 1 woman ; lobule distended, right 
adherent in 1 woman ; descending helix infolded less than 2 mm. 
in 7 men and 1 woman, 2-4 mm. in 1 of each sex ; Darwin's 
point absent in 2 men and 1 woman, doubtful in 2 men, distinct 
tip in one man ; tragus under 3 mm. in 3 of each sex, being 
double in 1 man and 3 women, slightly larger in 2 men, being 
double in 1, 3-5 mm. in 3 men and 7 women, being double in 

4 women ; anti-tragus absent in 2 men and 5 women (1 doubtful), 
trace in 2 men and 1 woman, under 3 mm. in 4 men and 1 
woman ; anti-helix below level of helix in 6 men and 1 woman, 
about at the same level in 2 men (1 doubtful) and 1 woman. 

Hair : It is straight in 1 man, straight to wavy in 1 man and 

5 women, wavy in 5 and 3, wavy to curly in 1 man. The colour 
is rusty black in 7 of each sex and dark brown in 3 women. It 
is long and fairly abundant on the head; 2 men have beards, 
one only on the right side. 

Skin: Seven are lightest cinamon (12), 1 with a trace of 
green, 5 are dull fawn (17), 2 pale fawn (pale 17), 3 pale pinkish 
buff (11). 

Stature : Two men are of medium height, the rest short, the 
median being 1.59 m. (5 ft. 2^ in.); only 2 women are over 
1.5 m. and 2 are under 1.4 m. (4 ft. 7 in.), the median being 
1.47 m. (4 ft. 10 in.). 

Five Sebop men were measured. 

Head-form : All but 1 are dolichocephalic, the median, being 
75.3, 1 is platycephalic in regard to length -height, and 1 meso- 
cephalic, the rest are hypsicephalic in both respects. The shape 
is pyriform in 2, oval to roundish in the remainder. 

Face : It is pentagonal in 4, and narrow with rather prominent 
brow -ridge in 1. All are chamaeprosopic in both respects. 
The forehead is full in 2 and low in 2. The cheek-bones are 

332 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

more or less prominent in 4, 1 is not prominent. The lips are 
thin in 3 and moderate in 2. The chin is fairly well developed. 
Nose : Three are mesorhine, 1 platyrhine, and 1 hyper-platyrhine. 
The profile is concave in 2, straight in 1, and intermediate in 2 ; 
a blunt tip is noted in 1. The root is narrow and moderately 
high in 2, moderately broad in 2, moderately high in 1, and 2 are 
fairly broad and flat. The base is reflected in 3 and straight in 
2 ; the alse are small in 3, moderately large and rounded in 1, 
and wide and horizontal in 1. Eyes : The aperture is fairly open 
in 4, rather narrow in 1 ; it is straight with no fold in 3, and 
slightly oblique with a slight fold in 2. The colour is medium 
brown. Ears : Type European in 2, European to Negroid in 1 ; 
angle prominent in 2 ; lobule distended in 1, trace in 1, 3-10 mm. 
in 2, 10-15 mm. in 1 ; descending helix infolded less than 2 mm. 
in 2, 2-4 mm. in 3 ; Darwin's point absent in 2 ; tragus under 
3 mm. in 1, rather larger in 1, 3-5 mm. in 3 ; anti-tragus under 
3 mm. in 4, 3-5 mm. in 1 ; anti-helix below level of helix in 2, 
about at the same level in 3. 

Hair : It is wavy in 3, straight to wavy in r, curly in 1 ; the 
colour is rusty black in 4, dark brown in 1. It is fairly long and 
moderately abundant on the head ; 1 man has a small moustache 
at angles of mouth, and 1 has a fairly good moustache and beard. 

Skin : Two are lightest cinamon (12), 1 light brown (near 17). 

Stature: All are short, 1 being under 1.5 m. ; the median is 
1.54 m. (5 ft. \ in.). 

Ten Lerong men and 5 women were measured. 

Head-form : The cephalic indices show 4 men and 1 woman 
to be dolichocephalic, 6 men and 4 women brachycephalic, the 
median being 78.5 for the men and 81 for the women. Three 
men are mesocephalic as regards length-height, otherwise both 
sexes are hypsicephalic both in length-height and breadth-height, 
the women being more so than the men. The shape is noted as 
ovoid in 5 men, pyriform in 3 men, oval in 3 of each sex, and 
round oval in 2 women (1 with vertical occiput). 

Face : It is more or less pentagonal in 8 men and 1 woman, 
oval or ovoid in 4 women, broad in 1 woman, and long in 2 men ; 
alveolar prognathism is noted in 1 of each sex and sunken 
temples and cheeks in 1 man. All are chamaeprosopic as regards 
both total facial and upper facial indices, one man only being an 
exception in both respects. The forehead is good in 3 of each 
sex, fair in 3 men, rather narrow in 2 men and 1 woman. The 
cheek-bones are prominent in 8 men and 2 women, not prominent 
in 2 and 3. The lips are moderately thin in 4, men but tend to 
be thick in 2 men and 4 women. The chin is usually well 
developed, but is small in 2 women. Nose: Three men and 
1 woman are mesorhine, the rest platyrhine, 1 woman being 

APPENDIX 333 

hyper-platyrhine. The profile is straight in 4 men and 1 woman, 
straight to slightly sinuous in two men, " Chinese " in 1 woman, 
concave in 4 men and 3 women ; blunt tips are noted in 6 cases 
and depressed tips in 3 ; the root is moderately high in 7 men, 
narrow in 2, more or less broad in 4 men and 1 woman, rather 
low in 2 and 1, broad and flat in 4 women. The base is more or 
less reflected in 6 men and 4 women, straight in 4 men ; the alse 
are small in 4 of each sex, moderate in 4 men, wide in 1 of each 
sex ; the nostrils are rounded in 5 of each sex, and more or less 
widely open in 6 men, distended in 1 man. Eyes : The aperture 
is moderately wide in 9 men and 4 women, and rather narrow in 
1 woman ; it is straight with no fold in 4 men and 1 woman, 
straight with slight fold in 2 women (in one case trace of fold in 
right eye only), slightly oblique with trace of fold in 2 men and 
1 woman and with fairly developed fold in 1 woman, slightly 
oblique with no fold in 1 of each sex, quite oblique with slight 
fold in 1 man. The colour is medium brown in 8 men and 5 
women and dark brown in 1 man. Ears-. Type European in 9 men 
and 4 women (3 doubtful), Negroid in one man ; angle prominent 
in 8 men (1 doubtful), slightly prominent in 1 man; lobule 
distended in all but 1 man in whom it is medium ; descending 
helix infolded less than 2 mm. in 9 men and 1 woman (doubtful), 
2-4 mm. in 1 man; Darwin's point absent in 6 men, inrolled 
knob in 1 man ; tragus under 3 mm. in 4 men, being double in 
3, slightly larger in 1 of each sex being double in both, 3-5 mm. 
in 6 men and 4 women being double in 1 man ; anti-tragus absent 
in 3 men and 4 women, under 3 mm. in 8 men ; anti-helix below 
level of helix in 5 men, about at the same level in 5 men and 
1 woman. 

Hair : It is straight in 2 women, straight to wavy in 6 men 
and 3 women, wavy in 3 men. The colour is rusty black in 
7 men and 3 women, light rusty black in 1 man, dark brown in 

1 man and 2 women. It is nearly always abundant on the head, 
and is rather long, especially in the women. 

Skin: Eight are lightest cinamon (12), 1 light cinamon (14), 

2 cinamon (6), 4 pale fawn (pale 17). 

Stature-. One man is of medium height, the rest are short, 
2 being under 1.5 m., the median is 1.52 (4 ft. nf in.). Four 
women are under 1.5 m., one being only 1.39 m. (4 ft. 6£ in.). 

Seven Milanau men, consisting of 6 Narom and 1 Miri, were 
measured. 

Head-form : All are brachycephalic, but it should be remembered 
that deformation of the head is practised by these people (vol. i., 
p. 48), and it is probable that the cephalic index is very rarely 
normal, consequently the head indices may be neglected. Three 

334 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

are flat behind and broad in the parietal region, of whom 2 are 
narrow in front and 1 broad, 3 are more or less ovoid. 

Face : It is pentagonal in 4, the angle of the jaws is prominent 
in 1 ; the Miri man has an oval face pointed below, with small 
jaws and alveolar prognathism. All are chamseprosopic in regard 
both to total facial and upper facial indices. The forehead is low 
and broad in 1, high and broad in 1, low in 1, high in 2, and 
rather sloping in 1. The cheek-bones are prominent in 3 and 
moderately large in 4. The lips are moderately thin as a rule, in 
1 they are fairly large. The chin is rather small in 4, and fairly 
well formed in 3. Nose : Four men are mesorhine and 3 platy- 
rhine, the highest index being 89.1. The profile is straight in 4, 
with blunt tip in 2, slightly concave in 2, and sinuous with blunt 
tip in 1 ; the root is high in 1, narrow and moderately high in 2, 
broad and moderately high in 3 ; the base is straight in 5, reflected 
in 1, and slightly concave in 1 ; the alae are moderate in 3, and 
small in 1 ; the nostrils are rounded in 1, broad in 1, moderately 
oval in 1. Eyes-. The aperture is moderately wide; it is straight 
with no fold in 1, slightly oblique with no fold in 3, more or less 
oblique with slight fold in 3. The colour of the iris is medium 
brown in 4 and light in 2. Ears : Type European in 2, European 
to Negroid in 1, European to chimpanzee in 1, chimpanzee in 1, 
orang in 1 ; angle prominent in 6, slightly prominent in 1 ; 
lobule absent in 1, trace in 3, being adherent in 1, small in 2, 
medium in 1 ; descending helix infolded less than 2 mm. in 6, 
2-4 mm. in 1 ; Darwin's point absent in all ; tragus under 3 mm. 
in 1, slightly larger in 1, 3 - 5 mm. in 5, being double in 2 ; 
anti-tragus under 3 mm. in 5, 3-5 mm. in 2 ; anti-helix below level 
of helix in 3, slightly below in 1, about at the same level in 2, 
distinctly beyond in 1. 

Hair: One man had curly hair, 1 wavy, 1 straight to wavy, 
and 1 straight, but the character was difficult to determine as in 
all cases but one the hair was cut, being more or less closely 
cropped in 2 men. The colour is noted as black in 6, and rusty 
black in 1, and as fairly abundant on the head in 3 ; several 
had hair on the face, 2 had small moustaches, 2 had moustaches 
and short beards, 1 had small beard and moustache and thick 
eyebrows. 

Skin: Three are cinamon (6), 1 light cinamon (14), 1 lightest 
cinamon (12), and 1 pale fawn (pale 17). 

Stature: One is of medium height, the rest are short but 
none are under 1.5 m. ; the median is 1.562 m. (5 ft. ij in.). 

III. Punan Group 

Eighteen Punan men and four women were measured by us 
and one man by Mr. Shelford. 

APPENDIX 335 

Head-form : The cephalic indices show 3 men to be dolicho- 
cephalic, the rest of the men and all the women are brachycephalic, 
the median being 80.9 for the men and 81.2 for the women. Two 
men are platycephalic both in length-height and breadth-height, 
1 is platycephalic in length-height but mesocephalic in breadth- 
height, 1 is platycephalic in length-height but hypsicephalic in 
breadth - height, 1 is mesocephalic in length - height but platy- 
cephalic in breadth-height, 1 of each sex is mesocephalic in both 
respects, 1 of each sex is mesocephalic in length - height but 
hypsicephalic in breadth - height, 1 woman is hypsicephalic in 
length - height and platycephalic in breadth - height, the rest are 
hypsicephalic in both respects. The shape is usually ovoid in 
the men, 2 are noted as pyriform ; 3 women have round heads. 

Face : The shape varies ; it is oval in 4 men and 2 women, but 
owing to the general moderate prominence of the cheek-bones 
and the smallness of the chin, it becomes pentagonal (3 men) or 
even lozenge-shaped or triangular (2 men) ; 1 woman has a broad 
face and 1 man a somewhat square, while 2 men have long 
faces. Alveolar prognathism is noted in 1 case and superciliary 
ridges in 2. All are chamaeprosopic except 2 men, 1 being 
leptoprosopic in regard to both total facial and upper facial 
indices, the other as to upper facial only. The forehead is 
upright in 3 of each sex, full in 5 men and 1 woman. The 
cheek-bones are prominent in 9 men, moderate in 6 men and 2 
women, broad in 1 of each sex. The lips are moderately thin 
except in 2 men and 1 woman. The chin is usually fairly well 
formed ; though small it is not retreating in 5 men. Nose : Eight 
men are mesorhine, 7 men and 3 women platyrhine, 4 men and 
1 woman hyper-platyrhine. The profile is straight in 10 men and 
1 woman, slightly concave in 6 and 1 ; the root is more or less 
depressed in 9 men and 2 women, fairly high and narrow in 4 
men ; the base is slightly reflected in 9 men and 4 women, 
straight in 7 men, and slightly deflected in 2 men ; the alse are 
usually moderately developed, rather thin in 4; the nostrils are 
oval in 13 or rounded in 4. Eyes : The aperture is moderate in 11 
men and 1 woman, small in 5 and 2 ; it is straight with no fold 
in 5 men, slightly oblique with no fold in 3 men, slightly oblique 
with a slight fold in 6 men and 3 women and with a more 
developed fold in 1 woman, moderately oblique with moderate 
fold in 3 men and with slight fold in 1 man. The colour is 
light brown in 2 men, medium in 8, dark in 6 and 1 woman. 
Ear: Type European in 8, European to Negroid in 4; angle 
prominent in 6, more so in 2 ; lobule distended in 9, absent in 
1, adherent in 2, being small in 1 ; descending helix absent in 3, 
infolded less than 2 mm. in 6, rather more in 1, 2-4 mm. in 2 ; 
Darwin's point a distinct tip in 2, doubtful in 1, absent in the rest ; 
tragus under 3 mm. in 5, being double in 1, rather larger in 1, 

336 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

3-5 mm. in 7, being double in 1 ; anti-tragus absent in 2, trace 
in 1, under 3 mm. in 10; anti-helix below level of helix in 5, 
about at the same level in 8. 

Hair : It is straight in 6 men and 3 women, straight to wavy 
in 2 men, wavy in 8 men and 1 woman, wavy to curly in 1 man. 
The colour is rusty black in 12 men and 1 woman, black in 5 
men, and dark brown in 1 man. It is usually fairly long and 
abundant on the head, but in 6 men it is noted as thin ; 7 have 
a slight amount of hair on the face and 1 a moderate amount on 
the legs. 

Skin : Fifteen are light cinamon (14), 15 lightest cinamon (12), 
11 pale fawn (pale 17), and 6 dull fawn or light brown (17). 

Stature: Two are of medium height, the rest short, 4 men 
being under 1.5 m. ; the median is 1.55 m. (5 ft. 1 in.). 

Three Ukit men were measured by Mr. Shelford. They are 
more brachycephalic than the Punan, their median index being 
83.3, but are slightly less chamaeprosopic, 2 being leptoprosopic 
in regard to the upper facial index. All 3 are mesorhine. 

The Mongolian fold is very slight in 2. All have straight 
black hair. One is tall, measuring 1.735 m- (5 ft- %i m-)> tne 
other 2 are short. 

[Fourteen Punan men were measured by Nieuwenhuis. 

Head-form : The cephalic indices range evenly between 77.5 
and 86.1, the median being 81.3 ; all except 1 are brachycephalic. 

Face : It is broad in 5 and medium in the rest. The bi- 
zygomatic breadth ranges from 132 to 145 mm., which is rather 
narrower than the range obtained by us, 130-154 mm. Nose: 
the breadth varies between 37 and 43 mm., whereas in the 
Punans measured by us the range was between 34 and 44 mm. 
The shape is noted as concave in 4, broad and flat in 10, i.e. 29 
per cent have " depressed," " sunken," or " hollow " noses. Eyes : 
the Mongolian fold does not occur. The iris is dark. 

Hair: It is uniformly straight and tends to be scanty. The 
colour is black. 

Skin : The colour is light brown in 10, brown and yellow in 2, 
black or blue-black in 2. 

Stature : None are tall, 4 are of medium height, the rest are 
short 1 being under 1.5 m.; the median is 1.569 m. (5 ft. if in.).] 

IV. Kenyah Group 

Twenty-six Kenyah men and 6 women were measured, consist- 
ing of 6 Madang men, 9 Long Dallo men and 2 women, 9 Apoh 
men, 4 Long Sinong women, and two other men. All these 
may be taken as pure Kenyahs, and the following data are based 
thereon. 

APPENDIX 337 

Head-form : The cephalic indices of the three groups given 
on Table A range from dolichocephaly to brachycephaly, and 
it is interesting to note that the Madangs, with a median of 78.1, 
have distinctly the narrowest heads, intermediate are the Long 
Dallo men, median 80.5, while the Apoh men, with a median of 
84, have distinctly the broadest heads. The head in all is 
markedly hypsicephalic both as regards the length - height and 
the breadth-height indices. The shape is described as round in 8 
men, oval in 2, ovoid in 3, square in 1, pyriform in 3, and long in 
2. The 4 Long Sinong women are distinctly brachycephalic, the 
mean being 83.2, but the average is 85.1, owing to one having an 
index 93.8. They also are very hypsicephalic. 

Face : Six men are recorded as having pentagonal faces, 3 
broad and 3 long ; alveolar prognathism is noted in 2. All are 
chamaeprosopic as regards the total facial index, and all except 1 
Madang and 2 Long Dallo men as regards the upper facial index. 
The forehead is upright in 10 men, 1 is noted as bulging and 1 as 
sloping. The cheek-bones are moderate in 1 2 men, prominent in 
6 men (1 very marked) and 2 women, and broad in 1 of each 
sex. The lips are, as a rule, moderately full, but are thin in 3. 
The chin is fairly well developed. Nose : One man is leptorhine, 6 
are mesorhine, 13 platyrhine, 6 hyper-platyrhine. The 2 Long Dallo 
women are mesorhine, the 4 Long Sinong women are strongly 
platyrhine. The profile is straight in 14 men, a few others varied. 
The base is slightly reflected in 14 men, straight in 2 ; the alae are 
broad in 5 men, small in 2, and the septum is disclosed in 2 ; the 
nostrils are wide in 8 men, elongated in 1. Eyes : The aperture is 
moderate in 10 men, wide in 6 men and 3 women, narrow in 7 
men ; it is straight with no fold in 6 men and 1 woman and with 
a slight fold in 5 men, slightly oblique with no fold in 5, and 
with a slight fold in 4 and 2 women, oblique with no fold in 1. 
The colour is light in 2 men and 1 woman, medium in 15 
men and 1 woman, and dark in 7 men and 4 women. Ears : 
Data were obtained only for the Madang. Type European 
in 3 (2 doubtful), Negroid 1 (?) ; angle prominent 2 (?) ; lobule 
distended in 4, of medium size in 1 (?) ; descending helix infolded 
less than 2 mm. in 2, rather more in 1 ; tragus 3-5 mm. in 5, 
being double in 1, 5-7 mm. in 1 ; anti-tragus absent in 1, trace in 
1, under 3 mm. in 3, 3-5 mm. in 1 ; anti- helix below level of 
helix in 2, about at the same level in 1. 

Hair: It is straight in 7 men and 1 woman, wavy in 14 men 
and 2 women, curly in 2 men. The colour is dark brown in 3 
men, rusty black in 15 men and 5 women, black in 5 men and 1 
woman. It is usually long and moderately abundant on the 
head ; face hair was observed in 2 men, and a small amount on 
the body in 5. 

Skin : The average skin colour is various shades of cinamon ; 

338 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

ii are cinamon (6), 16 are light cinamon (14), 14 are lightest 
cinamon (12), 9 pale fawn (pale 17), 3 dull fawn or light brown 
(17), 6 pale pinkish buff (11). 

Stature-. 7 men (3 Madangs, 3 Long Dallos, 1 Long Tikan) 
are of medium height; the rest are short ; the median is 1.61 m. 
(5 ^ z\ m-)- The stature of the 6 women ranges from 1.42 m. 
(4 ft. 8 in.) to 1.57 m. (5 ft. if in.). 

V. Kayan Group 
Twenty-one Kayan men and 1 woman were measured. 

Head-form: The cephalic index forms a gradual series with 
a median of 79.8, all except 5 being brachycephalic. The 
head is distinctly hypsicephalic, only 5 being mesocephalic as 
regards length-height. Five were noted as oval, 2 ovoid, 1 square 
ovoid, 3 round. 

Face : The form varies, 3 being more or less pentagonal, 
2 squarish, 2 round, and 5 oval. All are chamseprosopic except 
1 man in the total facial and upper facial indices, and 1 of each 
sex in the upper facial index. The forehead is upright in 6, and 
rounded and full in 6. The cheek-bones are moderate in 14, and 
prominent in 3. The lips are moderately full, being noted as 
thick in 2 men. The chin is fairly well developed, with 3 ex- 
ceptions. Nose : Ten are mesorhine and the remainder platy- 
rhine, of whom 5 are hyper-platyrhine, 2 of these latter are boys 
(aged 15); the excessive platyrhiny is due mainly to the shortness 
of the nose in the three adults. The profile is straight in 16 and 
moderately concave in 3 ; the root is slightly depressed in 1 1 and 
high in 6 ; the base is reflected in 1 1 and straight in 4 ; the 
nostrils are transversely oval in 2, oval in 5, and round in 5. 
Eyes: The aperture is narrow in 12 and medium in 4; it is 
straight with no fold in 8 and with a slight fold in 2, slightly 
oblique with no fold in 2 and with a slight fold in 6 ; 1 man with 
a straight eye and no fold is noted as having a lash fold which is 
the character of a Mongolian upper eyelid. The colour is light 
in 6, medium in 10, and dark in 3. Ears: Type European in 2, 
European to Negroid in 3, orang in 3 ; angle slightly prominent 
in 2 ; lobule distended in 5, perforated in 2 ; descending helix 
absent in 1, infolded less than 2 mm. in 8 ; Darwin's point 
absent; tragus under 3 mm. in 5, 3-5 mm. in 4; anti-tragus 
under 3 mm. in 8, 3-5 mm. in 1 ; anti-helix below level of helix 
in 4, about at the same level in 4, distinctly beyond in 1. 

Hair: It is straight in 6, wavy in 12, wavy to curly in 1, and 
curly in 1 (PL 22) ; the colour is rusty black in 12, black in 6, and 
dark brown in 1. 

Skin: The average skin colour is a light cinamon (14) or 
pale fawn (pale 17). 

APPENDIX 339 

Stature: All but 3 of the men are of short stature, the 
median being 1.550 m. (5 ft. 1 in.). 

[Forty -eight male and 30 female Kayans were measured by 
Nieuwenhuis, also 1 Mahakam Kayan of each sex. Of these 

5 were boys under 16 and 5 girls under 16, who will be omitted 
from the description where it is possible to distinguish them. 

Head-form : The cephalic index of the men forms a gradual 
series from 75 to 85.4 with 6 higher indices ; 8 are dolichocephalic, 
the median of the whole series of adult men being 81.1 ; that of 
the women ranges from 75 to 93.2, with a slight weakening in the 
series about where the median 82.5 occurs; one index, 97, falls 
considerably outside ; 4 are dolichocephalic. The Mahakam man 
has an index of 78.3, the woman 74.1. 

Face-. One Kayan had a long face, 14 per cent (including 
children) had broad faces, the rest were medium. In our and 
his Kayans the bi-zygomatic breadth ranges from 132 to 150 mm., 
except that two of his are narrower, 126 and 129 mm. Nose-. 
Breadth-measurements agree with ours. Two males and 1 female 
are noted as having concave noses, 35 and 20 as broad and flat, 
9 and 8 as straight, 1 of each sex as narrow and straight. These 
characterisations are of course not mutually exclusive. No 
convex noses were observed ; 4 per cent are concave (" depressed," 
"sunken," or "hollow"). Eyes: The Mongolian fold does not 
occur. The iris is always dark. 

Hair: 28 per cent of the males and 17 per cent of the 
females had wavy hair, 1 man had curly hair, the rest straight. 
As a rule it is rather scanty, but 30 per cent of the Kayans had 
a moderate amount. The colour is black. 

Skin : The colour is brown or yellow. 

Stature: Two men are tall, 6 medium and the rest short, 

6 being below 1.5 m., of whom 2 are under 18 years old; the 
median is 1.572 (5 ft. 2 in.). The women over 23 average 14 cm. 
shorter than the men ; this is a large difference, as it is usually 
10-12 cm., as in our Sarawak figures.] 

VI. Iban (or Sea Dayaks) Group 
Fifty-six Iban men were measured by us. 

Head-form : The cephalic index forms a gradual series, the 
median being 83, and therefore shows brachycephaly. The 
head is usually hypsicephalic, but 1 is platycephalic as regards 
breadth - height, 2 are mesocephalic both in length - height and 
breadth - height, 5 are mesocephalic in length - height and 3 in 
breadth-height. Thirteen are noted as round, 7 as ovoid, 4 as 
oval, several had broad parietal and narrow frontal regions 
producing a pyriform norma verticalis. 

34Q PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

Face : The form is noted as pentagonal in 10, oval in 5, broad 
oval in 4, the narrowness of the jaw producing the pentagonal 
shape. The majority are chamseprosopic, but 1 is leptoprosopic 
in total facial and upper facial indices, and 7 are leptoprosopic in 
upper facial index. The forehead is generally full or slightly 
bulging, but may be straight and vertical ; 3 are noted as being 
sloped. The cheek-bones are prominent in 20, and moderately 
so in 24. The lips are moderately full. The chin is small and 
moderately prominent. Nose: Sixteen are mesorhine, 21 platy- 
rhine, and 19 hyper - platyrhine. The profile is concave in 23, 
straight in 18 and nearly so in 4; the root is more or less high in 
19, more or less depressed in 20, in most cases it is broad or 
moderately so ; the base is straight in 24, reflected in 25, deflected 
in 3 ; the alae are wide in 8, moderate in 6, small in 9 ; the 
nostrils are oval in 10, transversely oval in 8, round in 13, wide 
in 9. Eyes\ The aperture is narrow in 13, medium in 18, wide 
in 3 ; it is straight with no fold in 10 and with a slight fold in 11, 
slightly oblique with no fold in 10 and with a moderate fold in 
21. The majority are normal as regards the eyelashes, but 3 
have a distinct Mongolian character and 5 have it slightly. The 
colour is intermediate in 25, dark in 22, light in 5, 4 cases were 
noted with a bluish margin to the iris. Ears : Type European in 
31, European to Negroid in 2, Negroid in 2, orang flattened 
above in 1 ; angle slightly prominent in 22, rather more so in 1, 
prominent in 8, more so in 1, very prominent in 1 ; lobule 
distended in 10 and perforated in 5, very small in 1, small in 13, 
being adherent in 4, rather small in 1, medium in 10, 1 being 
adherent, 2 perforated, and 1 doubtful; descending helix absent 
in 2, infolded less than 2 mm. in 23, 2-4 mm. in 13 ; Darwin's 
point an infolded tip in 1, an inrolled knob in 2, absent in the 
rest; tragus under 3 mm. in 11, being double in 1, slightly larger 
in 1, 3-5 mm. in 25, being double in 3, 5-7 mm. in 1 ; anti-tragus 
absent in 4, under 3 mm. in 24, 3-5 mm. in 8, 5-7 mm. in 1 ; 
anti-helix below level of helix in 23, about at the same level 
in 15. 

Hair: It is straight in 16, wavy in 26, curly in 2, 1 being 
described as crisp. The colour is rusty black in 26, black in 17, 
and dark brown in 1. Eight men had a slight amount of hair on 
the face ; the body hair is absent or very scanty, but one had a 
quantity on his legs. 

Skin: Five are dark warm cinamon, 27 cinamon (6), 5 light 
cinamon (14), 11 dull fawn (17), n light brown (near 17), 5 
various shades of a light greenish sepia (light 31), 3 a still lighter 
greenish sepia. 

Stature : One man is tall, 1 1 are of medium stature, and the 
remainder short, 2 being under 1.5 m. ; the median is 1.585 m. 
(5 ft. 2\m). 

APPENDIX 341 

Thirteen Sibuyau men were measured by Mr. Shelford and 
1 by us. 

Head-form : All but two are brachycephalic, the median being 
83. Mr. Shelford did not measure the radii and so the height 
indices cannot be given. 

Face: All are chamseprosopic with regard to the total facial 
index and all except 3 in the upper facial index. 

Nose : Two are leptorhine, 7 mesorhine, and 5 platyrhine. 

Statu7'e\ All the men are short, 3 being under 1.5 m. ; the 
median is 1.535 m. (5 ft. \ in.). 

Indices. 

Stature. 

Head 

Head 
Breadth. 

L.-br. 

L.-ht. 

Br.-ht. 

Tot. Fac. 

Up. Fac. 

Alv. 

Nasal. 

Nas.-mal. 

Murut(4<5). 

min. 

1558 

■ 86 

136 

72 

80 

45.2 

67.3 

in 1 

1590 

'45 

77-5 

87.8 

49.1 

99 

1669 

191 

94.4 

55-2 

125 

Kalabit(7(5) 

min. 

.485 

180 

'44 

72.7 

62.2 

88.4 

75 

42.4 

TOO 

76.2 

105.3 

1565 

186 

146 

78.5 

91.8 

78.8 

46 

I06.4 

91.5 

110.5 

199 

150 

83-3 

96.6 

90.4 

53-7 

in. 9 

115-8 

Land Dayak (42 £ ) 

min. 

.465 

175 

136 

73-5 

72.5 

39-7 

71.4 

IOI. 1 

1577 

183 

'43 

78-4 

80 

46 

86.3 

max. 

1695 

194 

'53 

86.9 

9' 

54-7 

1 16. 2 

1.8.3 

Ulu Ayars (A".) (26 {) 

ma* 

147 1 
'551 
1690 

■78 

186 

140 
150 

7' 
81I4 

Maloh(7c5). 

min. 

• H70 

177 

'37 

70.3 

69.' 

89 

70.5 

4' 

80.4 

'04 

max". 

1585 
1610 

185 
'95 

'43 
'45 

76.8 

7°-5 

79.1 

93-7 
98.5 

80.1 

45 
53 

108 

97-4 

109 

Long Kiput (8 <5 ) 

min. 

1505 

179 

142 

75-0 

65.6 

80 

71.6 

39.6 

95-9 

80.4 

103 

1505 

186 

150 

80.6 

69.7 

86.5 

76.3 

45.6 

107.4 

92.5 

108.5 

max. 

1630 

194 

'53 

82.7 

76.8 

97-3 

50 

111.7 

Barawan(i2c5) . 

min. 

1500 

'77 

136 

72 

64.8 

86.8 

73.1 

40.4 

92.6 

83.3 

104 

max. 

1540 

190.5 
199 

■55 

III 

W 

93-8 

77.8 
90.2 

46.2 
51.8 

107.3 

89.1 

107.8 
in. 7 

Barawan(59) . 

min. 

1395 

'74 

'34 

75.6 

73.2 

88.9 

71.7 

4'-3 

96.8 

74-5 

104. 1 

1440 

77.6 

78.7 

76-3 
78.8 

99 

89.2 

105 

1465 

187 

toS.i 

45.6 

1 10. 7 

106. 1 

Malang(i6d"> 

min. 

1465 

'74 

r42 

71.8 

62'r 

87.1 

67.' 

37-9 

95.8 

76.7 

106 

max. 

1535 

'93 

'47 
.56 

76.9 
82.2 

94.8 

79.6 

51.1 

111^8 

88.2 

108.4 

Long Pokun (8(5) 

min. 

1505 

184 

'45 

74-7 

65.5 

86.1 

71. 1 

42.4 

IOI 

79.2 

101. 9 

il'o 

'93-5 

152 

76.9 

89. 2 

78.2 

45-6 

103 

206 

165 

89.7 

77.2 

95-3 

81.9 

46.5 

109.7 

LongPokundo?) 

min. 

1340 

'77 

141 

76.3 

67.9 
76.8 

89 

75-2 

42.3 

94-7 

72.5 

105 

1473 

184 

148 

79-4 

95-6 

78.1 

44-9 

98.5 

83 

1590 

'95 

'54 

85.6 

47-4 

1 10. 3 

Sebop(5(J) . . 

min. 

1460 

■83 

141 

73-' 

65.8 

89.7 

73-' 

40.4 

99 

79-5 

105 

1540 

'93 

146 

75-3 

71.6 

90.6 

76.9 

83-3 

in. 8 

1590 

199 

149 

79.8 

72.7 

96.6 

8r.4 

107. 1 

Lerong(iorf) 

min. 

1470 

176 

140 

73-5 

68.4 

88 

75-3 

44. t 

95.1 

81.3 

IOI 

1520 

188 

146 

78-5 

80.7 

45.2 

107.3 

max. 

1625 

196 

'55 

85.2 

77-5 

99-3 

89.1 

50.7 

108. 1 

97-7 

Lerong (5 ? ) 

min. 

1390 

'74 

138 

77.1 

72.1 

93-5 

75 

42.1 

96.7 

80 

102 

1440 

III 

95-9 

76.3 

94-7 

106. 1 

max. 

1520 

'54 

88.5 

87.9 

103- 5 

81.6 

45-7 

108 

102.7 

107.3 

Milanau (7 cO 

min. 

1514 

X 

'5' 

80.7 

66.8 

79-4 

74.8 

42.4 

102. 1 

78 

103 

1562 

'54 

84.2 

83.1 

77 

46.5 

106.7 

83 

107.8 

max. 

1675 

187 

165 

90.7 

80.1 

96 

86.6 

49-3 

89.' 

in. 9 

Punan(iO(J) 

min. 

1450 

!72 

138 

76-5 

63.8 

77-9 

69.7 

37-5 

96.9 

ui 

101. 9 

1550 

183 

'49 

80.9 

72 

88.5 

76.3 

104.3 

107.7 

max. 

1662 

'93 

'59 

90.1 

88.6 

50.7 

in. 2 

1 10. 8 

Punan (/f.) (14 S) 

il 

1498 
1569 
1698 

'76 

1S6 

'39 
'57 

El 

86.1 

Madang(6(5) 

min. 

1520 

'85 

'45 

74-7 

69 

87.6 

71.9 

41.8 

103. 1 

84.4 

107.6 

1615 

'92-5 

152 

III 

69.9 

90.7 

78.3 

44.9 

105.2 

93 

108.9 

max. 

1655 

203 

'53 

74.6 

93' 

84.1 

5' 

106.8 

105 

no 

Long Dallo (9 (J ) • 

min. 

1550 

182 

140 

74-5 

74-3 

86.7 

73 

37-7 

92.8 

66.1 

105.7 

1605 

"f5 

80.5 

77-3 

96. S 

77-5 

43-2 

109.2 

max. 

1650 

'95 

163 

87.2 

109.3 

83-3 

51.6 

112.1 

102.6 

115.7 

Apohfoo") ■ 

min. 

'73 

146 

75.6 

68.4 

81.3 

65.3 

36-7 

97-9 

80.4 

104 

'87 

'53 

84 

73-4 

72.4 

95.2 

max. 

'95 

160 

79-4 

97-9 

82.1 

47.1 

116.5 

107.9 

117.8 

Kenyah(26(5)l . 

min. 

1520 

'73 

140 

74-5 

68.4 

81.3 

65.3 

36.7 

92.8 

66.1 

104 

190 

'53 

79-9 

90.8 

43.6 

103. 1 

92.7 

1655 

203 

163 

109.3 

84.6 

51.fi 

116.5 

.17.8 

Kayan(2ii) . 

min. 

1480 

176 

140 

75 

67.4 

86.1 

67.7 

39-3 

92 

75-6 

103.9 

1550 

187 

'49 

m 

73 

76.9 

44.8 

104.7 

91.6 

108.2 

1630 

196 

.64 

78.7 

96.7 

92 

53-2 

107.9 

121. 7 

K-aya«(K.)U3 6) 

El 

1572 
1765 

'97 

134 3 
■47 

75 
. 81.1 

A-^a«(A-.)(259) 

S: 

1440 
1552 

162 
176 
188 

'45 
162 

75 
82.5 
97 

Iban(56c!) . 

min. 

1475 

'70 

'39 

75-8 

67.4 

82.2 

66.4 

36.6 

95.1 

69.2 

97.2 

'79-5 

83 

75-' 

88.6 

78 

45-5 

105.2 

1.9.7 

1734 

'93 

162 

94.1 

84.4 

94.6 

56.2 

..6.3 

Sibuyau (14 £) 

min. 

'487 

170 

138 

77-5 

74-8 

44 

HI 

103. 1 

1543 

"77 

83.1 

81.4 

109.2 

max. 

1570 

■87 

157 

90.2 

98.4 

59.2 

90.8 

119.4 

1 Consisting of the Madang, Long Dallo, Apoh, 
8 Youth of 17, shortest man over 23 measures 14E 
a Youth of 1 

TABLE B 
Murut Group 

Jangin . 

T.im.-i I.ui-n 
Alan J... k" 
Alan A | xji 

^S0 

-i-.i'iT,.':' 

%r 

IjihK r.inah, Tinpr Dial. 

lA'nnui tribi, 
{Euzkiv t,il>i) 
(JA'//;,;;*',;/ Iribi 

4 

£": 

I 

Ngopo] 

sar: ■ 

Njratem . 

1- 

Maras 

ICinyan 

;ji 

>7 

Gareng 

Naiyem 

Tul 

Bagar . 

Yalin . 

28 

Nyauir 

30 

mI8' ' 

Daun 

$ 

Jar . 

1» 

Barit . 

40 

a- 

42 

Bam . 

J 

3 

Pinyang 

Sauong 

I 

Dayat . 

Anding 

7 

Jmdan. 

TABLE B {continued) 
Klemantan Group : 1. South-Western Group 

S3 

tl 

Facial Imxcks. 

767 

39-9 

786 

45-2 

8V2 

47-4 

80- 1 

87-1 

46-2 

7W 

44-8 

807 

4"-7 

S2 

46 

78-7 

7V6 

87 

50-4 

50-8 

81-7 

46-1 

79-6 

47'7 

Upper Sarawak. 
rk, Serambu, Upper Sa 

IL". Up]»-| 

S, DlllL'll li 
1g, l-PI' "I 

I.ilu Uhiil;. Upp'-i- S,hIuiil; K. 

I'lchini.: 

TABLE B (continued) 
Klamantan Group (continued). 2. Central Group : (a) Baram Sub-group ; (b) Barawan Sub-group ; (c) Bakatan Sub-group 

;th- Length- Breadth- 

ffis: 

A. Bakam SiTf-i 
Pliet 

Long ] 'at a 

Orang Kaya Tumongong (inrong 

Tina Peng 
Tama Kulat Linh 

Long Ulai 

Uning Ipi . 

Tama Aping Kuleh 

Wang . 
Sidi Jaat . 

Tama Laliing 

ss 

zt 

Long Ttilau. 

Lobol, Nihong, Haram River. 

Kivcr, Tinjar (Lung Kipul { 1 
Long Tisam (chief). 

Tin, Tinjar River. 
Jigan. 

I.nng Tisam (Selinp :■ liaratvan i Harawan y ). 
,, ,, (Barawan J Sebop 9 ), 

107.fi II „ ,, (Sepeng £ Barawan 9 J. 

TABLE B {continued) 
II. Klemantan Group {continued): 3. Sebop Group 

J-M&5— 

— ■ 

*g«. 

H„.. 

FAC, 

No.. 

^ii™„. 

Height 
Silting. 

- 

c„ 

— 

■c 

FA 

CHS. 

te^ 

— 

— 

Breadth. 

Km:; 

LI,. .„„- 

Alicia, 

Au 

,cu.„R, 

J5£ 

SSL 

BrrSfc°' 

s 

1*~'"m 

<- 

Breadth 

2=& 

SaV 

B* 

*S£ 

bright. 

racial 

Upner 

— 

- 

2s. 

VaT' 

*- 

Nasion. 

*■"— 

Maiang 0 6 

:: I 

Wan . 

22 

.96 ' 

■ 42 

■23 

552 

362 

■3° 

93 

104 

in 

t3 

■36 

3, 

ii. 

41 

36 

98 

I.O 

15.9 

822 

'575 

72-4 

69-4 

95-S 

8i-6 

46-3 

1 1 1-8 

87-8 

1 12-2 

LongSimi.,,,, 

Tisi 

128 

543 

357 

146 

93 

109 

64 

'35 

107 

36 

96 

IO4 

■530 

820 

'540 

737 

75-3 

S07 

98-9 

S7-S 

■07-3 

ioSS 

Oyong Sui 

3° 

197 

148 
■53 

S 

564 

555 

375 

I4S 

■53 

'98 

■03 

114 
98 

66 

■45 
146 

38 

'■3 

43 

33 
37 

96 

IO3 

■58s 
■495 

805 
800 

III 

El 

Im 

78.6 
67-1 

45-5 

76.7 

92-5 

Jama Ai Anie 

3° 

1,8 

■55 

577 

364 

"3§ 

104 

I18 

58 

■53 

38 

■■9 

39 

40 

"5 

■ 540 

l6S 

1650 

7S-3 

68-2 

87.1 

67-3 

37-9 

1085 

(high class). 

", \° 

Tama Owing Bilong 
Paran Ngo 

3° 

192 

■51 

■37 

350 

136 

98 

69 

■47 

44 

40 

1580 

810 

■ 570 

7S6 

70S 

90-1 

So-3 

46.9 

■31 

569 

■43 

96 

92 

■ 42 

■03 

40 

il 

97 

.465 

1490 

76 « 

94-1 

78.9 

43 

95-8 

88-4 

iu-8 

109.3 

jjjru: Ar.n i 

25 

■45 

l 

5<S7 

365 

I4I 

99 

105 

43 

38 

■ 580 

805 

71-8 

703 

97-9 

" " (high class). 

188 

547 

364 

138 

96 

■45 

34 

3! 

■5'5 

790 

Sol 

79-3 

73-4 

92-6 

731 

iis 

185 

546 

365 

98 

98 

"4 

P 

■36 

36 

42 

36 

98 

106 

■565 

825 

77-8 

757 

97-2 

S3-S 

46-3 

85-7 

108-2 

35 

.87 

523 

35« 

.36 

114 

6? 

43 

40 

96 

103 

840 

1SS5 

76.5 

727 

951 

Sj-S 

46.3 

107-4 

■°7'3 

liar 

45 

186 

146 

540 

359 

■37 

103 

43 

37 

■525 

780 

78-5 

71 

9o-4 

44I 

S6 

108 

" iS 

Piit 

185 

132 

546 

35o 

■39 

97 

108 

65 

'45 

37 

4" 

36 

7P 

■575 

751 

97-2 

S07 

87S 

]', .! (low class). 

.. 19 

123 

520 

342 

■35 

96 

■ 06 

64 

'35 

39 

36 

1500 

780 

■575 

82-2 

77.6 

94-4 
93-6 

785 

■04-3 

1098 

Ipoi 

40 

207 

■ 56 

562 

388 

146 

96 

95 

70 

'37 

36 

45 

U 

95 

■515 

■565 

75-4 

7o-5 

87-6 

99 

77-8 

■32 

570 

367 

60 

"i 

■ S05 

75 

705 

IU 

73-6 

417 

'03 

92-7 

108 

Tina Winy Bunyan 

23 

| 

514 

129 

99 

39 

34 

97 

725 

■435 

74-9 

72-1 

76.9 

87-2 

1 10-3 

„ 23 

Pwembang 

5° 

136 

52 5 

356 

■35 

97 

[c. 88] 

105 

'35 

■04 

"I 

37 

98 

1460 

740 

73-5 

99-3 

77S 

43 

S2-2 

» ,", (high class). 
,, ,1 (middle class). 

Utan Urai 

25 

181 

53° 

366 

54 

'35 

36 

35 

98 

730 

1440 

77-9 

75-6 

40 

97-2 

',', 25 

Mujan . 

1 82 

■43 

120 

357 

■ 44 

95 

98 

IOI 

64 

128 

31 

■07 

40 

35 

94 

99 

■455 

755 

1460 

78-6 

79-' 

1007 

78.9 

50 

103-2 

87-s 

l°5-3 

Tabalo 1 I 

Surang 

23 

204 

152 

■35 

577 

369 

■44 

98 

98 

113 

65 

■47 

36 

104 

40 

42 

100 

105 

■475 

780 

■ 465 

74-5 

706 

947 

76.9 

486 

100 

105 

■05 

Long Lobang, Upper Tinjar. 

Sadi Lajau 

45 

■83 

534 

345 

95 

104 

70 

■44 

3S 

104 

45 

38 

98 

107 

15S5 

S15 

69.9 

85-9 

70-S 

1095 

84-4 

109-2 

',', 3 

Oyong Chen . 

35 

,85 

■43 

■27 

534 

35° 

128 

92 

93 

102 

55 

140 

30 

118 

40 

38 

9' 

98 

■ 530 

779 

■ 610 

77-3 

69-2 

89.5 

729 

39-3 

95 

'07-7 

Long Pokhn <5 25 

Matu . 

30 

'93 

■55 

■32 

574 

3P 

■34 

■ 00 

103 

118 

69 

■ 50 

44 

■ ■6 

45 

37 

■ 03 

"3 

'5'5 

800 

■570 

So-3 

69-4 

86.5 

787 

46 

103 

82-2 

m,j.7 

Long Sulan. 

Sidi Jok . 

45 

■93 

■39 

569 

384 

■42 

99 

c.64 

■51 

4I 

$ 

ios 

'590 

830 

1720 

77-2 

73-6 

9sU 

So- 1 

424 

■o.i 

97-7 

Langat 

195 

■55 

565 

376 

'39 

99 

118 

67 

106 

■03 

ios 

IP 

■680 

79-5 

71-3 

S1.9 

46-5 

III 

ioi-9 

Mawing . 

32 

■54 

59o 

356 

■35 

118 

70 

3 

46 

39 

105 

880 

74'7 

65-5 

877 

77-1 

45-8 

25 

184 

■65 

■35 

565 

378 

142 

93 

IS 

63 

36 

'■5 

40 

40 

104 

■605 

830 

89-7 

77-2 

777 

42.6 

1097 

93 

3? 

Tama Ukat Lian . 

35 

194 

■45 

1 28 

3°5 

'35 

104 

67 

■ 04 

39 

1590 

840 

74-7 

696 

93' ■ 

78-9 

45-6 

84-8 

Dari 

196 

.50 

■37 

564 

360 

-I 

109 

64 

148 

36 

■07 

41 

1565 

840 

76-5 

67-9 

887 

73-6 

43-2 

108 

Tama Ukal Wang . 

■93 

■35 

570 

361 

■05 

■ oS 

'52 

38 

■ IS 

48 

[750] 

75'' 

7I-S 

'& 

'09-3 

Balu Tebo . . 

5.8 

358 

.36 

93 

63 

29 

105 

1340 

'365 

797 

768 

77-4 

97-9 

72-5 

Dapoi Kivi. Tinjar (limklk- t lass). 

Tinan Ukat Lavang 

146 

■23 

521 

3*>3 

■36 

105 

62 

38 

40 

32 

795 

■ 625 

82-5 

76.8 

93-2 

44.9 

So 

" 35 

Tina hang Sawei . 

184 

■43 

"5 

526 

339 

'30 

96 

■ 05 

59 

'37 

H 

40' 

34 

■05 

1380 

745 

HI 

90.9 

76.6 

£7 

85 

105 

,, ,, (low class). 

,. 36 

Tina Ukat Lauong . 

179 

152 

■25 

541 

144 

64 

'37 

45 

35 

■03 

720 

.425 

804 

947 

82-5 

947 

,, ,, (niidilk class). 

:: 338 

150 

118 

552 

372 

'47 

97 

■°3 

'37 

38 

■05 

37 

37 

98 

■475 

770 

1635 

77-7 

76-2 

98 

75.2 

42-3 

1066 

,, ,, (high class) 

Sulan '. .' ! 

26 

188 

"5° 

564 

t 

146 

95 

93 

62 

140 

40 

107 

1470 

7l° 

'530 

79-8 

777 

97-3 

80 

97-9 

85 

uo-3 

Long Sulan. 

Bungan . 

■95 

126 

567 

's° 

95 

64 

142 

39 

34 

.03 

109 

785 

1540 

76-9 

72.8 

It' 

79-6 

45-1 

95 

81 

105-8 

„ 4° 

Lasong . 

■45 

■25 

542 

360 

92 

59 

'37 

36 

105 

3' 

96 

■03 

1505 

% 

1565 

76-3 

67.9 

75-2 

43'l 

77-5 

'07-3 

Kapangan 

1S2 

■44 

125 

552 

390 

■44 

99 

■ oS 

'37 

99 

37 

14S0 

1515 

791 

79.1 

7S.8 

SS. , 

1078 

„ 42 

Tina Balan . 

40 

1 So 

■54 

549 

■49 

■03 

102 

"3 

64 

140 

34 

100 

44 

39 

■ 00 

no 

1460 

780 

'475 

S5-6 

S2-8 

96.8 

807 

457 

99 

88-6 

no 

Seboi- i 1 

Sigam 

21 

193 

141 

■ 2S 

55° 

334 

■27 

98 

■05 

l°3 

57 

141 

42 

108 

41 

40 

IOI 

108 

.460 

IS 

■5'5 

73-1 

65.8 

90.1 

73' 

40-4 

107-1 

97-6 

106.9 

Long Puah. 

Tama Ukat Usat '. 

146 

■ 26 

548 

365 

■4" 

96 

95 

63 

119 

35 

■ 05 

'590 

1655 

75-3 

96-6 

769 

44-1 

90 

79-5 

■05 

.. 3 

Tama Lanyau 

!S3 

527 

35° 

96 

67 

42 

3I 

96 

1540 

780 

79-8 

716 

89.7 

789 

47-2 

106.3 

83-3 

106.3 

Aban Lagan . 

45 

190 

.46 

552 

'37 

98 

99 

107 

35 

47 

38 

1550 

lol 

76-S 

93-8 

75-4 

43 

809 

108 

,', 5 

Jangan . 

■99 

■ 49 

■30 

558 

36? 

■35 

97 

■°3 

62 

140 

35 

no 

42 

47 

102 

"4 

1500 

'515 

74-9 

67.8; 

90.6 

8l-4 

44-3 

106-2 

1 11.9 

in-8 

II i; (head-man) (MaloM).1 

Lerono i 43 

Aban Jangin . 

35 

1S6 

'51 

IS 

545 

359 

140 

93 

96 

11S 

66 

■44 

32 

"3 

48 

39 

96 

■08 

SS 

810 

■595 

812 

75-3 

927 

81.9 

45-8 

1032 

8i-3 

1 125 

Tilip 

191 

538 

375 

96 

97 

114 

'3S 

108 

36 

98 

105 

S20 

■ 675 

81.8 

91-3 

84.4 

48.9 

857 

107-1 

;:i 

■ 76 

130 

525 

336 

'3' 

g 

98 

64 

142 

"5 

43 

95 

■ 520 

810 

75-5 

45.1 

'05-4 

837 

107-4 

Nipa 

185 

5l8 

62 

97 

107 

■470 

800 

75-7 

68-6 

907 

79-1 

44.6 

1052 

90s 

1 103 

Kuleh - 

181 

126 

519 

■ 32 

62 

■37 

108 

45 

37 

98 

103 

1510 

■585 

79-6 

72-9 

917 

81 

45-3 

82-2 

IS! 

"48 

1 82 

■55 

126 

542 

363 

141 

65 

146 

45 

1520 

775 

■575 

852 

77-5 

91 

75-3 

445 

■o.i-3 

86-7 

Long Dapoi, Upper Tinjar R. 

,, 49 

196 

■44 

12S 

547 

356 

99 

107 

■23 

70 

37 

42 

770 

73-5 

6S-4 

11" 

507 

95-4 

150 

■33 

547 

34S 

t3l 

95 

97 

C.6S 

■45 

34 

116 

t 

■475 

'535 

78-9 

69-5 

97-8 

" S> 

'45 

■31 

538 

354 

'38 

98 

c. 99 

117 

■45 

42 

830 

75'9 

72'3 

95-2 

807 

469? 

91-3 

107 

,. 53 

Tama Aping Buling 

45 

■95 

564 

372 

.46 

65 

■45 

36 

"5 

5' 

44 

1625 

850 

1695 

m 

74-9 

99-3 

786 

44.8 

86-3 

1088 

,, ' ,. „ „ (high class). 

? 54 

24 

■54 

123 

53» 

365 

'53 

105 

no 

■40 

32 

40 

■4'5 

III 

14SS 

S7'9 

99-3 

80 

Long Pala. 

"3 

Tina ltang Oring . 

■ 79 

■38 

530 

362 

129 

SS 

95 

105 

'38 

35 

37 

98 

■ 04 

1520 

'545 

72-1 

93-5 

76-1 

43-5 

108 

102-7 

Ulam . 

180 

■07 

52S 

372 

90 

105 

59 

■29 

94 

42 

36 

96 

73o 

'435 

80 

S2-S 

■03-5 

81-4 

457 

857 

- 57 

■77 

524 

373 

'36 

S6 

'3I 

3t 

36 

'03 

710 

.465 

Sl-4 

76-8 

94.4 

763 

44-3 

947 

■07-3 

.. 58 

■ 79 

■45 

■ ■7 

527 

368 

139 

136 

108 

3! 

36 

95 

1485 

745 

1565 

Si 

959 

S!-6 

44.1 

96-7 

947 

■05-3 

;; ;; ;; ;; (Narom^). 

1 52 

Oyong Wan . 

55 

■ 90 

■39 

■ 28 

526 

344 

'3' 

100 

ICO 

116 

70 

140 

38 

'■3 

46 

42 

in 

1565 

-7S0 

73-2 

68-9 

829 

50 

100 

91-3 

109.9 

Milanau, N'aroni I 

Taiar 

22 

■ 76 

■54 

■33 

533 

III 

128 

92 

97 

114 

70 

148 

36 

107 

45 

39 

102 

no 

1562 

820 

■633 

87-5 

727 

83-1 

77 

47'3 

1054 

86-7 

107 .8 

Mani'li i'Claucletown). 

i 2 

Ijing 

37 

182 

■ 65 

555 

'35 

96 

ios 

72 

■ 49 

-',' 

47 

159S 

797 

'73o 

74-2 

8l-8 

805 

48.4 

109-4 

87-2 

103 

■. 3 

184 

■55 

■3' 

550 

35S 

66 

39 

98 

109 

1614 

803 

1S10 

S42 

El 

46.5 

106-5 

83 

■ 83 

■53 

540 

370 

125 

89 

104 

59 

■39 

46 

98 

106 

1514 

775 

!& 

836 

42-4 

101-7 

89.1 

108-2 

Sagun . 

40 

1S7 

■5" 

545 

370 

135 

94 

96 

106 

3 

ji 

97 

s2 

39 

103 

i|5o 

842 

807 

K 

89.4 

75-2 

447 

78 

1062 

„ 6 

Nasia 

181 

'5' 

■32 

546 

265? 

■45 

97 

104 

112 

■49 

106 

48 

.11 

IOI 

"3 

1675 

840 

1800 

83-4 

96 

752 

45-6 

1072 

8i-3 

m-9 

Mind 7 

Nasir . 

28 

181 

■ 64 

129 

565 

385 

■39 

9' 

.02 

123 

-0 

■42 

38 

no 

48 

,8 

99 

.03 

'545 

807 

,6oS 

90.6 

76-8 

848 

866 

49-3 

79-2 J .04 

TABLE B {continued) 
III. Punan Group 

Age 

,eai, 

Face. 

Nose. 

Hoein 

Hciil.i 

Span. 

«-»•— 

Fa 

Nasal Indices. 

Locality of Subject. 

« 

Auricular Rad 

■ 

Si 

* 

L<„e>, 

Broadrh. 

Hi-.,,,, it 

£Z£ 

Tulal 

lYnTh 

si 

EKES? 

Lc„gt„. 

Bread,., 

B:,Ta" 

£3fc 

hSS,t 

1,1','j.,'. 

as 

37-5 

Alveola, 

Nasal. 

ac 

Verre, 

Nasion. 

Al™.,u, 

PUNAN i 2 

San5""'! : 

40 

176 

■38 

123 

5'2 

347 

■33 

9. 

96 

IOO 

51 

■36 

32 

102 

37 

41 

92 

■03 

78-4 

75-6 

96-4 

73-5 

1089 

1 108 

112 

Tutau River, Bnrain Dist. 

:: 1 

183 

53S 

353 

■34 

90 

98 

I05 

138 

34 

109 

35 

105 

S03 

I}2 

76-1 

43'5 

85-4 

108-2 

Tama Wan 

25 

'I6 

I49 

129 

536 

3 

IS6 

107 

142 

35 

'■3 

9l 

8.5 

847 

88-6 

1047 

75-4 

42-3 

105.2 

., 7 

Taman Kutan . 

32 

189 

1 48 

■33 

131 

97 

66 

36 

46 

96 

I5S5 

810 

7«-3 

693 

88.5 

81.9 

45-S 

109.3 

82.6 

106.3 

Nibong „ Tinjar Dist. 

„ s 

TamaLutong . 

40 

'53 

■25 

3=3 

13S 

98 

c. 97 

61 

■36 

32 

■05 

48 

35 

■5SO 

S23 

742 

90-2 

S6-8 

44.9 

99 

729 

■083 

.. 9 

30 

■75 

■45 

5'7 

131 

95 

95 

114 

66 

■35 

29 

48 

96 

106 

■565 

785 

1570 

S29 

74-9 

90-3 

84.4 

48-9 

70S 

110.4 

Tingang . 

30 

187 

■43 

118 

¥ 

97 

94 

65 

■3° 

29 

■03 

37 

1460 

770 

1470 

76-5 

74-9 

97-9 
S66 

go-8 

96.9 

35 

182 

■57 

545 

365 

'36 

97 

114 

60 

■54 

34 

116 

45 

104 

116 

■635 

S6-3 

104- 1 

, 9I-I 

m-5 

40 

185 

■43 

124 

535 

334 

s 

93 

62 

34 

45 

37 

99 

to5 

1475 

735 

■565 

66.5 

44.9 

104.3 

S2.2 

Tama Tari 

40 

III 

142 

■32 

533 

353 

93 

107 

& 

35 

■'3 

37 

37 

96 

162 

■45° 

775 

77-6 

75'4 

E 

74-3 

39'6 

10*3 

35 

149 

'23 

545 

352 

95 

99 

141 

31 

47 

36 

■07 

■515 

775 

■535 

So- 1 

83 

46-8 

76-6 

Demina . 

5° 

■ 59 

■33 

57o 

375 

98 

96 

■23 

73 

1J4 

37 

54 

39 

109 

■635 

I72S 

82.4 

67-4 

85.4 

98 

72-2 

1048 

link 

Tama Tungan . 

35 

1 88 

'49 

'35 

537 

34s 

90 

65 

*l 

3i 

49 

41 

1522 

63-8 

80.5 

-S-3 

45-5 

S37 

105 

20 

176 

■ 49 

125 

III 

340 

116 

89 

99 

59 

37 

104 

39 

36 

107 

■455 

1522 

84-7 

m 

77-9 

71S 

45-1 

92-3 

'07 

Tama I'fljiriug . 

1S9 

■ 49 

127 

362 

99 

107 

IO7 

66 

144 

34 

45 

38 

'03 

114 

1560 

1705 

78-8 

846 

74-3 

ioS-i 

S4.4 

Entiwai . 

3« 

189 

■54 

552 

370 

99 

105 

M° 

42 

43 

1662 

1760 

8.-5 

68-8 

84-4 

807 

91.5 

1. An 

Oiau (Tabanau) 

45 

183. 

■ 49 

54° 

130 

95 

■49 

43 

'03 

■05 

c. 1665 

7' 

872 

758 

106.3 

■02-3 

(•deformed) ,, 22 

Saran 

160* 

538 

370 

148 

95 

'96 

63 

39 

40 

104 

■530 

I6IO 

93 

86 

92-5 

697 

1077 

Baloi ,, Rcjang „ 

., 5° 

Apoh 

■ 7 

172 

■ 55 

III 

57 

■35 

15.S 

■590 

76-3 

88- 1 

109.9 

Rej.-nnj ] >isl. (Kenyah 9 ) 

35 

"47, 

76 

NJ 

48 

97 

3° 

90 

SS-.5 

723 

!f 

35S 

■03-5 

10; ; 

Tutau River, Haram Dist. 

.. 3 

Biingan Urai 

.1 

■74 

I3I 

"7 

342 

56 

87 

93 

79-3 

695 

877 

46-3 

J°5-8 

S72 

167 

138 

329 

75 

36 

29 

9" 

826 

76.6 

928 

40-2 

85-3 

.. IS 

Lijan . . 

30 

188 

150 

125 

543 

370 

f 126 

88 

■03 

■■5 

64 

■42 

32 

no 

41 

3S 

■ 00 

10S 

■ 542 

I5SS 

79S 

67 

84 

81 

45-1 

"7 

927 

108 

Bok ,, Tinjar ,, 

Ukit i 47 

Nonyeng . 
Eerahang . 

35 

\li 

■45 

■30 

524 

327 

■■4 

68 

■36 

32 

no 

46 

37 

9, 

■05 

15S5 

I620 

83-3 

83-8 

50 

80.4 

115.4 

Near Kapit, Rejang Dist. 

„ 48 

150 

530 

340 

186 

73 

142 

37 

■■3 

9S 

\H\ 

I6S2 

747 

51.4 

74- ■ 

Ujan 

35 

■75 

'51 

■30 

540 

340 

'" 

109 

67 

■]s 

32 

50 

40 

no 

1590 

863 

79 

48-5 

80 

no 

(I'unan Half-breeds) $ 23 

Tatua Nim>a [an 

5° 

■99 

'57 

'32 

572 

391 

16, 

■°3 

I02 

106 

62 

if 

39 

■ 07 

40 

4. 

102 

109 

1550 

Sio 

■63O 

7S.9 

80.9 

102-5 

746 

437 

99 

102.5 

106.9 

Ilalni, Rt-jaiiL; Dist. (Kenyan. 9 ) 

Matu 

35 

187 

■57 

54S 

146 

109 

62 

37 

108. 

43 

■ 590 

S55 

84 

78.1 

73-6 

41.9 

104.9 

IMH, 

„ ,, ,, (Kenyah 9) 

Bugong 

■83 

■49 

127 

543 

95 

98 

62 

35 

109 

37 

105 

■ 530 

81-4 

75-4 

926 

S3.7 

78 

84 

105 0 

181 

■53 

534 

367 

■■3 

68 

■43 

36 

107 

104 

1501 

'578 

84-5 

707 

79 

47-6 

106.3 : 

lOS-8 

liok R., Tinj:ir 1 U-L ( Lelak '■ ) 

176 

146 

525 

37o 

9' 

95 

65 

■j* 

37 

116 

48 

IS 

83 

75 

90-4 

76 

44-5 

.044 

79'l 

„ (Lelak $ ) 

.. 29 

Tama Dimong . 

187 

■53 

'30 

545 

$ 

126 

99 

■03 

■24 

69 

■S4 

37 

11S 

37 

1615 

1663 

81S 

til 

82-4 

805 

104 

77-' 

,, (Lelak ■', \ 'chief] 

Dimong . 

27 

190 

■55 

553 

130 

97 

65 

36 

116 

39 

■■5 

■571 

'.'.'. 

1643 

8l-6 

839 ! 

74-5 

1 04- 1 

95-' 

I08.5 

I Malaga Punan x Milanau 9 
H«.k R., Tinjar Dist. (! Milanau <J ) 

.. 31 

Tama Anjang 

25 

200 

150 

127 

563 

365 

128 

97 

99 

119 

67 

144 

37 

■■7 

45 

43 

104 

■570 

1675? 

75 

64 

85-3 

82-6 

46.5 

102- 1 

95-5 

IO67 

.1 32 

25 

■ 56 

5<i3 

37° 

66 

■47 
■i2 

37 

46 

40 

I08 

1612 

... 

82-1 

6*2 

78.2 

769 

44.9 

87 

IO49 

9 2S 

Laan . . 

■57 

■53 

127 

524 

150 

90 

« j 

109 

64 

■07 

34 

101 

,08 

14S0 

7.5 

1490 

97'5 

95-5 

98 1 

826 

4S.5 

■03-3 

79.1 

.06.9 

I,.mg J (alio (Kenyah 8 ) 

TABLE B 

continued) 

IV. Kenyah Group 

HB„. 

Face. 

N 

„:. 

Mi'iui". 

Sitting! 

| C. 

HAL1C IBDICES. 

NasAU !»■>,«., 

Locality of Subject. 

Al 

ricular Radii. 

Length. 

Breadth 

lii-auri.- 

Circum- 

""' 

Tolal 
Length. 

Upper 

s 

Ii 

Length. 

llrc.i-llb 

Sr'eadl?, 

Lii" 

££ 

J3fi 

" 

Tolal 

raual 

Upper 

Ab,„la, 

Nasal. 

SE 

Vert.,. 

A.«*» 

MADASG 

S 4 

Udau . . . . 

26 

185 

152 

■33 

564 

380 

■38 

97 

100 

"5 

67 

■ 47 

37 

43 

39 

IOO 

no 

.630 

Sos 

1770 

82-2 

74-6 

90S 

78-2 

45-6 

■ 03-1 

90.7 

no 

l.-'iig 1'uro, Baram. 

.. 5 

Balan Sigo . 

199 

■53 

■34 

567 

363 

96 

■ 05 

146 

37 

us 

40 

I03 

■ '3 

I520 

790 

. 1660 

st? 

693 

90.2 

71-9 

■ 05-2 

1 05 

Dapoi R., Tinjar Dist. 

,. 6 

26 

191 

■53 

130 

550 

363 
% 

■34 

96 

62 

■43 

42 

41 

98 

106 

loo? 

795 

■595 

70-2 

87-6 

76-9 

43-4 

104.; 

"J 

Tama Sigo Odoh . 

194 

■45 

127 

550 

■35 

94 

109 

■39 

37 

40 

106 

820 

1655 

747 

69.6 

931 

78-4 

44-6 \ 106-4 

"5-2 

Boi Sigo 

203 

■34 

578 

140 

103 

OO 

■45 

34 

127 

45 

3S 

IO5 

■655 

■73" 

74-9 

6.8 

92. 1 

84. 1 

51 | io6-8 

84-4 

107.6 

Kfvv 

„ 9 

Tama Kajan Odoh 

38 

188 

■49 

■3° 

552 

356 

■35 

99 

104 

116 

.46 

38 

l.u 

45 

40 

105 

■■5 

■ 62J 

845 

■675 

79'5 

45-2 J 105.. 

88-9 

109.5 

,, (Lanan Kenyah 9 ). 

Long Hallo 

i 68 

Imoh 

30 

193 

■54 

141 

564 

362 

■47 

104 

■■5 

■ 08 

64 

.48 

36 

uS 

46 

43 

105 

in 

1600 

800 

■635 

79'S 

76.2 

95-5 

73 

43-2 

110-6 

93 5 

1057 

Long Dallu, Baram Dist. 

„ 67 

Tama Sinan Matan 

62 

182 

■58 

% 

3"7 

■37 

92 

68 

39 

"7 

I06 

850 

1655 

86-S 

75-3 

86.7 

77-5 

45 

93'9 

7.11. 

■"5-7 

„ 66 

Wan . 

>7 

195 

■57 

148 

375 

71 

■52 

40 

■■5 

5i 

107 

134? 

So-s 

7S-3 

S0-4 

„ 6o 

Aban Lawai . 

If 

192 

■57 

■4" 

577 

384 

■54 

99 

■-5 

74 

■ 50 

29 

"3 

5° 

43 

845 

'635 

80-2 

98-I 

S3-3 

49-3 

ira'l 

■■57 

.. 59 

Tarn Aping Lalan. 

182 

140 

% 

362 

140 

93 

98 

■°3 

58 

32 

95 

105 

76-9 

76.9 

73-6 

41-4 

""J 

I 

„ 65 

Tama Bulan Wang 

.87 

■63 

150 

383 

105 

■25 

79 

■53 

56 

37 

S40 

87-2 

E 

SS-3 

817 

51-6 

66-1 

(upper class). 

" A4 

AbanTingan 

52 

■ 94 

■55 

■37 

570 

375 

■ 59? 

109 

3s 

43 

II 

■592 

S60 

■59° 

79- 0 

102-6 

74.2 

92-S 

1 iS-3 

„ 63 

28 

!3 

152 

■43 

555 

357 

■36 

57 

37 

45 

39 

119 

■550 

83-1 

89-5 

79-5 

377 

86-7 

Ilun Jaya 

140 

■33 

542 

373 

III 

98 

■39 

34 

42 

37 

99 

106 

■560 

1615 

74-5 

81.4 

■ 09.3 

734 

99 

88 1 

SI 

» 69 

\% 

146 

'■7 

552 

386 

93 

89 

66 

■34 

37 

■ 07 

34 

9I 

■ 03 

1495 

■475 

85.7 

79'9 

49-3 

957 

77-3 

,. 70 

Sara 

28 

■45 

124 

525 

370 

■ 52 

107 

56 

'33 

33 

■ 05 

46 

33 

98 

■■7 

1570 

810 

■ 570 

8i-5 

85-4 

104.8 

80-5 

42-1 

92-. 

7'7 

1 19-4 

t 76 

Oyong Kajan 

35 

193 

■5" 

■33 

560 

362 

■37 

98 

l 

'■5 

67 

14S 

35 

117 

46 

37 

98 

■07 

78-2 

7, 

90.7 

777 

Ml 

99 

80-4 

1092 

Apoli 

is? 

553 

■37 

98 

98 

105 

■45 

33 

108 

43 

90 

84 

73-3 

S7-3 

n 7-8 

,. [up] er class). 

.. 79 Abanjing . 

50 

■75 

■54 

.36 

544 

368 

■35 

97 

55 

■ 50 

34 

104 

38 

104 

SS 

771 

87.7 

65-3 

36-7 

13 

is4 

■ 25 

535 

362 

■38 

90 

57 

■ 42 

38 

lo! 

38 

105 

79-9 

.vs.., 

75 | 93-9 

40. ■ 

■■3'3 

84-2 

,t>5o 

. 71 Silong . 

■53 

■25 

548 

365 

127 

90 

■05 

■ 40 

36 

38 

73-4 83 

75 

97-4 

1078 

„ 74 Mawa Obat . 

■95 

■32 

362 

97 

■■3 

60 

38 

41 

97 

107 

72-8 1 94-7 

69.4 

41-7 

■ 16-s 

■079 

no.; 

„ (upper class). 

lam Usan Long . 

55 

■25 

371 

96 

94 

■■5 

140 

40 

40 

I5 

79-4 93 5 

82- 1 

47.1 

97-9 

30 

■37 

558 

358 

91 

107 

148 

39 

96 

■ 07 

S42 

6S.4 1 S1.3 

72-3 

92-3 

in-5 j 

.. 75 

Balan . 

■93 

.46 

■34 

547 

370 

■43 

103 

103 

66 

37 

HO 

40 

74-1 [ 97-9 

75-2 

46.8 

ICO 

95-2 

1049 

,, (upper class), 

Long Titan 

i 10 

Tama Kuleb Jail 

25 

■99 

■59 

■34 

554 

3S2 

■44 

96 

95 

.21 

64 

■43 

37 

III 

45 

38 

106 

■ 2., 

■634 

885 

.633 

799 

72-4 

90-6 

S4.6 

44.8 

99 

844 

1132 

LongDallo. 

Long Lika B 

''" I " 

Tama Awing Kiriu 

40 

■ 77? 

i46 

■25 

542 

35S 

■34 

102 

■05 

"3 

62 

.42 

36 

■■3 

43 

4. 

101 

112 

■535 

770 

■ 590 

82.5.P 

757? 

918 

79-6 

437 

102.9 

95-3 

1 10-9 

Lfipu T6pu, Batang ICayan 

(upper class). 
Long Sinong. 

LongSinong 

9 Si 
„ 82 

„s3 
„ s4 

Luai . 

21 

187 

150 

■34 

558 

363 

■ 44 

94 

96 

99 

57 

144 

36 

114 

34 

34 

100 

103 

1420 

735 

1430 

80.2 

11 

96 

68-8 

39-6 

102- 1 

100 

103 

25 

■5' 

522 

372 

■42 

95 

ii 

138 

30 

34 

34 

97 

1525 

800 

1520 

93S 

88-2 

94 

73-9 

39-9 

97'9 

1052 

1S0 

149 

525 

372 

■54 

96 

■34 

37 

98 

107 

■450 

754 

■ 450 

85-6 

■034 

71.6 

43- ,i 

971 

% 

Sinan . 

20 

176 

■47 

■21 

525 

374 

140 

93 

89 

55 

■32 

34 

99 

36 32 

95 

10; 

1500 

745 

■ 530 

83'5 

79-5 

95-2 

74.2 

4'7 

957 

10(1-4 

KtsVMI M1XE 

1 WITH Kl 

BMANTAN 

Ufn Fun 

6 16 

Ilei . 

22 

205 

■54 

■36 

570 

364 

■43 

95 

101 

■05 

61 

■43 

40 

108 

3S 39 

102 

108 

1640 

800 

1705 

Z5'1 

698 929 

73'4 

42-7 

106-3 

102-6 

[°5;9 I 

I);ipoi K., Tinjar Dist. 

.. >5 

Tingang 

40 

.85 

■53 

544 

364 

■37 

103 

■05 

■ 27 

73 

150 

3° 

11S 

51 J 42 

104 

114 

.580 

825 

.635 

82-7 

74-1 

S9-5 

847 

48-7 

I0I-9 

82-4 

Up,, Aoong 

<S 80 

Tina Usun Abu . 

3° 

.85 

■44 

■23 

538 

367 

■05 

56 

'33 

35 

94 

43 ! 35 

100 

108 

■ 480 

750 

1530 

77-S 

78-9 

42-1 

Si-4 

108 

l.u n^ ] i:\l\a (Murut 6 ). 

" 6l 

Oyong Jou . 

187 

■49 

■42 

545 

3S5 

68 

33 

49 39 

68? 

■ 13 

1690 

860 

79-7 

787 

48-2 

79-6 

s 17 

Aban Mato . 

49 

190 

■5" 

■39 

557 

365 

150 

97 

■ Ol 

nS 

70 

■44 

39 

11S 

■°5 

■ 12 

1565 

850 

■ 590 

795 

78-91 

99-3 

S1.9 

48-6 

104- 1 

S5-7 ! 1067 

Lung Silin (Kayan 9 }. 

TABLE B {continued) 
V. Kayan Group 

«*££— 

Kaate. 

Age. 

" 

„ 

to 

Nosn. 

Height 

.-1 Inl3. 

Height 

- 

c™.<:.»„ 

c, 

h 

NAS/ll 

„» 

'— 

„„,„ 

Breaa,, 

l'.i-aun, 

2= 

^p 

Au 

iclarRa 

I engll,. 

WPP" 

I'.r'.lll.. 

«i;. 

!'■; -. it 

Length. 

Bre„h. 

S5£ 

Naso- 

U 

5g 

"SSSr 

Total 

Upper 

AMar. 

Nasal. 

:-;. 

V„rK, 

N- 

AM. 

ICAVANS ,J I 

Bui Mong . 

45 

18S 

146 

■32 

| 

346 

■33 

99 

IOI 

116 

c.65 

■45 

34 

no 

46 

38 

IOI 

■23 

'495 

795 

■595 

777 

707 

912 

So 

44.8 

102 

82-6 

1217 

Long Lama. 

(Uma Pliau) „ 2 

lining Iviin . 

33 

191 

153 

'30 

374 

■38 

99 

104 

108 

64 

■43 

40 

109 

44 

_ I540 

IS 

'575 

8o-l 

72-3 

r 

m 

105. 1 

931 

1058 

„ 3 

Oyong Anye 
Akam Waan 

54 

189 

■31 

368 

132 

96 

■39 

32 

107 

48 

38 

98 

.685 

794 

69-8 

53-2 

1052 

187 

152 

130 

547 

378 

98 

32 

49 

96 

I550 

1600 

8'-3 

78.6 

967 

859 

493 

796 

.. 5 

Semaring . 

176 

■ 49 

125 

527 

■37 

92 

58 

■35 

34 

lol 

42 

40 

95 

I62S 

795 

847 

919 

43 

95.2 

29 

186 

z 

III 

353 

■ 29 

85 

94 

IO4 

42 

33 

89 

94 

1515 

750 

'595 

75-3 

69.4 

92- 1 

45'5 

1 106 

7S6 

105-6 

" 7 

■35 

■48 

92 

88 

61 

33 

46 

103 

S30 

S7-2 

787 

902 

767 

418 

957 

804 

■039 

Ala . 

g 

196 

147 

125 

'$ 

98 

,11 

3; 

40 

10S 

775 

1660 

75 

679 

90-5 

77 

1 03. 1 

Oyong Bring Ajan 

190 

I5o 

130 

545 

368 

99 

127 

36 

106 

48 

105 

c. 1480 

c-745 

c. 1670 

83.2 

716 

861 

92 

5° 

1082 

Long Lapan. 

Kawit . 

"4 

193 

148 

549 

■32 

97 

n 

■38 

29 

10S 

106 

IS80 

795 

1700 

76-7 

68-4 

892 

717 

1062 

114 

Akam Deng 

4s 

■93 

146 

550 

$ 

130 

98 

■'5 

97 

879 

15S5 

7S-6 

67.4 

89 

Si-6 

46.1 

104-2 

79.6 

1 144 

,, (upper class), 

43 

187 

■54 

142 

554 

98 

59 

3S 

99 

I07 

1550 

800 

82.4 

73-8 

89 

6 

74 

39-3 

107-9 

ioS-l 

..'3 

Nipa . 

IS 

1 So 

142 

130 

5.6 

86 

91 

90 

56 

38 

105 

35 

36 

95 

'525| 

75o 

1550 

789 

88 

677 

42-1 

105.8 

1029 

1063 

., 14 

Mering 

15 

1S7 

148 

127 

534 

358 

■37 

93 

95 

if- 

32 

35 

35 

93 

97 

750 

1425 

79-1 

73'3 

92 

1057 

1043 

Long Apoh. 

:;3 

Ngau Aran . 

3° 

1 85 

■37 

534 

■37 

S9 

98 

32 

"7 

37 

104 

820 

1530 

79-5 

93 

902 

104 

Bawang Takun (Imv class). 
Luiil; Sinung (tnitlilk' class) 

1S7 

156 

■38 

55o 

382 

■35 

98 

107 

67 

■47 

34 

106 

47 

45 

98 

1540 

Soo 

83-4 

86 

5 

456 

103. 1 

"4-3 

„ '7 

Aniej„k . 

1 86 

146 

542 

■36 

"98 

107 

62 

'35 

P 

39 

93 

15S0 

780 

731 

9: 

79-3 

45'9 

1077 

92-9 

„ IS 

Anie Lah . 

150 

■33 

557 

■42 

92 

64 

45 

840 

1680 

787 

%i 

75.6 

1087 

,. '9 

Oyong Luhal 

2S 

186 

■54 

■39 

558 

■37 

■■3 

69 

38 

105 

47 

3S? 

i°3 

1675 

89 

764 

808 

.08-7 

Long Tejin. 

Aban Batu . 

55 

189 

■52 

■34 

555 

368 

■38 

95 

116 

63 

■43 

35 

108 

45 

38 

"3 

S30 

1670 

80.4 

11, 

908 

81-1 

844 

1 10 8 

„2I 

Akam Anie . 

55 

185 

14S 

'33 

543 

355 

94 

104 

no 

35 

in 

43 

41 

102 

1500 

750 

1590 

So 

953 

769 

43'4 

. I0-6 

954 

107-8 

Bawang Takuwi (mi'lille class). 

9 22 

Wan Deng . 

45 

180 

■ So 

■ ■9 

535 

365 

150 

107 

94 

116 

70 

'37 

4' 

112 

5i 

39 

108 

ill 

1465 

737 

833 

833 

■ 00 

847 

511 

879 

76.5 

102-8 

Long Tejin. 

'0 

nit-din™. A 1* 

ngab.y. 

To face p. 34a. 

TABLE B {continued) 
VI. Iban Group 

Tribe, Sex, Number of Card. 

- 

Head. 

r» 

N 

asa. 

1592 
1663 

"mi!" 

820 
899 

Span. 

1 Cephalic Indices. 

W 

o.lice.. 

Locality of Subject. 

Name. 

Leu,, 

— 

&= 

fc. 

rs- 

Auricu 

or Radii. 

at 

Upper 

s 

Isi 

]:,■■.,.!:) 

,., 

— 

aar 

Lire' 

iVS'iiV. 

S3 

1,'. ','bi1,;' 

Breadth 

heiabl. 

Total 

be 

A,,eo,ar 

«. 

1 

Vertex. N 

AiveoW 

IBAN ( I ) 

; 

Manchu 

■77 
180 

£ 

III 

522 

547 

% 

125 
'35 

99 

I03 

130 

'A 

143 

150 

33 

I 

51 

50 

38 

94 

£ 

169S 

70.5 
75 

822 
85.4 

83'2 

! 867 

517 

5''3 

IO4 

5! 

11S6 

Batang Lupar R. 

Ulu Ai Iban 

28 

146 

129 

529 

% 

371 

127 

93 

98 

105 

60 

32 

39 

38 

1625 

810 

'695 

8m 

87 

" 

IO5.4 

1 

s.-nRahn,; 

3 

185 

170 

.00 

132 
'34 

55' 
533 

:3i 

95 
95 

98 

93 

[07 

59 

'45 

'45 

39 
33 

108 

39 

H 

95 

108 

£3 

860 

Si-6 
941 

78.4 

H, 

7110 
78-8 

407 

IO3.2 

97-9 

927 

1I2.Ii 

7 

181 

105 

5.6 

339 

125 

86 

64 

132 

.30 

98 

37 

40 

99 

1485 

.485 

77-9 

69.1 

887 

1 163 

8 

Sunioli 

1 78 

538 

35S 

'37 

106 

II3 

$ 

37 

43 

99 

105 

1580 

804 

I6I0 

Sou 

77 

" 951 

1 79 

106 

1023 

174 

■55 

'35 

537 

384 

'34 

98 

106 

66 

38 

114 

105 

119 

840 

I705 

89.. 

77 

86-5 

78-S 

452 

10S2 

05.3 

"33 

II 

Unjup 
Bala . 

15 

193 
176 

"57 
146 

'34 
131 

567 
527 

369 
345 

'33 
'3' 

99 
91 

IS 

105 

t? 

'43 

35 

1 10 

37 

42 

105 

106 

1570 

835 

790 

,655 

S.-3 

Ik 

68-9 
74-4 

SB 

73-4 
72-9 

43-6 

1099 

nil 

1067 

176 

151 

■ 3' 

526 
528 

*\ 

'37 
142 

99 

99 

n6 

65 

138 
137 

37 
35 

"3 
105 

46 
46 

38 

'9 

107 

'575 
1615 

815 

.655 

1710 

85-8 
lie 

78.1 

77-8 

78.5 

IS 

88-5 

84.1 
S5.4 

Si 

82-1, 

848 

1 10-3 
107-1 

13 

Antong 

", ',', ','. (Balau 9) 

■5 

Dalu . 

3« 

.78 

149 

'33 

524 

356 

3§2 

'3' 
123 

87 

92 

105 

58 

'39 
140 

38 

40 

40 

96 

98 

,04 

1570 
1520 

835 
832 

ll 

76-2 
69.1 

75-5 
757 

4'7 

105.7 

I™ 

1063 

S'Krang R. " ,, 

179 

149 

125 

368 

91 

98 

117 

70 

34 

47 

104 

117 

1616 

855 

S3.2 

87.9 

s-,.6 

83 

1 12-5 

174 

147 

'33 

353 

60 

'43 

35 

53 

107 

775 

1500 

S4.5 

796 
SS-7 

73-6 
785 

87.1 

76.9 

75-5 

1 103 

181 

530 

361 

9' 

94 

II 

64 

'37 

36 

103 

43 

97 

'03 

.580 

810 

1630 

98.6 

75-2 

46.7 

losV, 

86 

Abun . 

'77 

157 

'33 

539 

363 

64 

'45 

36 

38 

42 

& 

S25 

75-' 

847 

74-5 

Bal'a'u |) 

'75 

148 

125 

520 

354 

127 

"98 

66 

'37 

109 

42 

34 

93 

855 

I656 

S46 

72.6 

85.8 

85-4 

48-1 

.06-5 

81 

Enchana 

!S 

150 

136 

S5o 

350 

95 

59 

'45 

30 

40 

36 

96 

103 

.630 

830 

1585 

78-9 

689 

%i 

407 

1042 

90 

107-3 

25 

148 

'35 

538 

340 

130 

99 

64 

36 

3 

42 

99 

825 

809 

711.6 

$ 

1051 

23 

'79 

'55 

543 

360 

136 

97 

106 

It 

'53 

38 

3s 

38 

107 

.657 

885 

86-6 

76 

877 

70'6 

109.3 

s|s; • 

;s 

136 

ill 

340 

132 

95 

'"1 

35 

42 

4' 

.630 

850 

1670 

83-7 

74'2 

88.6 

69.4 

42- 1 

108.4 

976 

1069 

Undup ,, 

2| 

Bijl . 

'77 

129 

377 

134 

90 

98 

65 

'45 

33 

8 

43 

1570 

830 

1630 

836 

757 

90-5 

70.5 

44.8 

108.9 

Undup R. ", " 

182 

124 

52i 

129 

94 

'37 

105 

39 

1634 

840 

1672 

80-2 

70-9 

88.3 

S7.5 

56.2 

1117 

848 

27 

Layai. 

186 

125 

53§ 

357 

99 

70 

'43 

47 

38 

107 

1596 

857 

1659 

75-8 

90-8 

49 

109.1 

So-S 

N).in,l.m^ 

'77 

155 

132 

376 

'35 

113 

67 

108 

39 

99 

109 

1540 

'545 

876 

76-3 

871 

801 

47-5 

29 

JU 

189 

127 

360 

95 

"3 

ii 

I36 

32 

107 

46 

99 

106 

815 

.615 
1856 

76-2 

72.5 

95-' 

S3' 

46-3 

11 16 

1 07- 1 

Balati |1 

III 

161 

■35 

538 

380 

98 

'5' 

35 

119 

'734 

870 

91 

76-3 

83-9 

437 

Saribas R, 

Saribas ,, 

Bulik . 

143 

'32 

529 

350 

94 

98 

108 

59 

32 

106 

39 

95 

■03 

1550 

79 

67-4 

85-3 

75'5 

4l'3 

897 

108.4 

32 

Ug.ip. 

55 

162 

'45 

552 

385 

c.I°ol 

57 

38 

123 

106 

'595 

85. 

1650 

89.5 

76.8 

85.8 

67-1 

37-5 

104-9 

1047 

33 

Jeragum 

N^a'.imi^ 

143 

521 

364 

c 137 c. 

98 

71 

32 

46 

98 

104 

1625 

c- 757 

c. 95'8 

84-2 

lit 

826 

34 

IS 

183 

I3„ 

540 

346 

132 

98 

66 

136 

35 

105 

99 

109 

I570 

8'5 

1675 

82 

88 

80-9 

98 

8S4 

35 

40 

150 

128 

5'9 

363 

'37 

98 

c.65 

136 

45 

99 

109 

1510 

780 

847 

77-4 

9' '3 

82-4 

:. 47.S 

108.9 

36 

Lanyun 

183 

149 

130 

543 

372 

'45 

74 

37 

50 

39 

103 

'563 

814 

79-2 

97 '3 

842 

532 

78 

IS! 

37 

Unibang 

'7 

■74 

125 

527 

358 

129 

95 

62 

33 

36 

37 

99 

107 

1580 

!lg 

S7-4 

74-1 

S4.9 

77-9 

44-3 

105-3 

\u..i<laiii; 

5° 

166 > 

i7s 

'5' 

549 

380 

'45 

97 

"5 

64 

152 

34 

42 

"3 1 

1650 

850 

757 

421 

95-1 

95' 

106-6 

Manggil 

>73 

152 

535 

360 

I3I 

)5 

ti 

32 

34 

4' 

38 

96 

106 

850 

1693 

87'-9 

80.3 

91.4 

762 

441 

1095 

92-7 

Kalaka „ 

40 

Ulol< . 

19 0 

149 

127 

55' 

374 

34 

49 

36-5 

96 

104 

'557 

814 

72-3 

g 

81.9 

72.5 

108.3 
115.6 

Kalaka R. 

Rejang ,. 

Smiting 

25 

178 

149 

135 

530 

370 

in 

107 

U 

31 

108 

43 

38 

96 

1710 

895 

1S22 

83-7 

7'-3 

Itl 

45" 

88-4 

Rejang R. 

42 

Lanka 

'73 

126 

l 

36s 

'33 

SI, 

97 

108 

'34 

33 

104 

46 

11 

1560 

83-2 

76,9 

92-4 

1128 

892 

43 

isi 

1 28 

381 

99 

t 

■34 

34 

108 

40 

40 

103 

850 

1660 

70-5 

75-8 

95'4 

81.3 

485 

107.3 

44 

35 

180 

148 

'3' 

367 

152 

>; 

'98 

116 

46 

96 

'575 

810 

84.4 

1027 

847 

423 

1054 

9"3 

'07-3 

% 

Uuaii . 

'76 

152 

125 

530 

345 

95 

98 

lc6 

57 

'35 

33 

106 

3S 

40 

96 

■ 580 

820 

1660 

Kb-4 

74-4 

86.2 

7S5 

422 

103-2 

,06.3 

Gorang 

'75 

522 

350 

.36 

94 

58 

133 

106 

40 

41 

'475 

' 7'o 

84 

777 

92.5 

75.2 

436 

1025 

47 

40 

186 

559 

'43 

61 

152 

36 

105 

106 

117 

86 

76.9 

89.4 

401 

97-6 

1 104 

48 

Saliong 

184 

147 

542 

350 

'37 ' 

109 

140 

37 

48 

,675 

74-5 

93-2 

75 

109 

Undup „ (Bugau 9 ) 
Dau 

49 

3° 

1S7 

157 

564 

379 

142 

104 

45 

40 

96 

!o9 

1580 

1675 

84 

75'9 

90.4 

8m 

46'2 

96 

iu-5 

50 

Bulang 

192 

149 

136 

554 

364 

97 

107 

64 

■5' 

36 

107 

40 

825 

776 

708 

9'3 

70-9 

42-4 

105.2 

1099 

Kapuas R. 

51 

Sajai . 

3° 

'33 

529 

302 

■33 

97 

36 

42 

40 

112 

8oS 

1725 

81-4 

75' 1 

78 

48-2 

1072 

IJau R. Batang Lupar R. 

52 

23 

181 

149 

'34 

54' 

$ 

HI 

94 

103 

61 

'5'5 

810 

82-3 

691 

83-9 

42.1 

1074 

95-2 

111.5 

Balan „ 

53 

Bunda 

183 

152 

535 

99 

67 

38 

1572 

828 

1590 

S3.. 

75-4 

908 

80.3 

48.9 

103 

82-6 

1137 

Gttnoligo. ? 

60 

'74 

130 

5'7 

3'5 

66 

36 

98 

150S 

1595 

83-9 

El 

827 

69.2 

Sili.iii.r, Sarawak R. 

Rejang ,., 

69 

I.ii^iIm 1>. 
Tavum 

m N 

unau 

45 
30 

185 

'45 

132 
'33 

525 
53" 

345 

::: ' 

118 

67 

'43 

35 

■ 10 

49 

97 

1730 

77-3 
797 

469 
46 

89.4 
857 

loll 

Krian R. 
Rejang R. 

?' 

Jamal. 

I7S 

'38 

5'o 

325 

'98 

53 

'34 

11? 

40 

39 

96 

108 

1550 

1585 

77-5 

73-1 

39'6 

97-5 

1125 

Lema R., Rejang R. 

SranYAu (j) 

55 

Jalil '. 

19 

45 

172 

.48 
'5' 

I35 

523 

359 
310 

■3' 

85 

9' 

105 

62 
63 

[30 

31 

:i 

39 

37 

93 

1570 
1495 

840 

I M5 
1632 

86 
85-3 

76.2 

88.5 

fit, 

477 
45-3 

107 

907 
77-1 

109-7 
107.5 

Telman, Sarawak R. 

56 

Daud . 

15 

146 

530 

64 

45 

. 37 

92 

1567 

82.5 

813 

47-8 

82-2 

M.S.; 

57 

Kadil . 

"5 

181 

527 

325 

"3 

67 

'35 

48 

39 

96 

'03 

I5'5 

.526 

82-9 

837 

49.6 

8i-3 

107-3 

59 

Knggat 

10 

184 

535 

320 

138 

n6 

40 

97 

1565 

.655 

777 

K 

85;' 

"3-4 

"S 

3|i 

32-5 

105 

45 

39 

97 

1487 

'549 

847 

48-4 

103-1 

Merdang ,, 

178 

138 

5'o 

106 

56 f 

■3o 

36 

99 

47 

37 

96 

103 

'535 

1653 

81.5 

|4.1 ' '] 

78.7 

0] 
"•1 
65 

llabar 

51 

182 

'57 
149 

132 

544 
536 

325 
340 

104 

77 
65 

130 

'39 

11 

114 

55 
43 

37 
39 

93 
97 

108 

'559 
1559 

:& 

819 

923 
If 
98.4 

33 

67.3 
76.9 

ill 

109-7 
11 13 

Merdang Gayani, Sarawak R. 

Maya"8 

5 5 

171 
'79 

■43 

"9 
130 

5'5 
535 

33o 
322 

3 

35 
29 

103 

52 
52 

3o-5 

£ 

105 
93 

H95 
1523 
'558 

X 

83.6 
832 

45-2 
548 

108-1 
no-8 

67 

OS 

7° 

'45 

130 

3°5 

104 

11 

30 

48 

103 

1675 

848 

77" 

'7 

187 

149 

542 

340 

119 

125 

35 

108 

38 

105 

1522 

'585 

797 

H-3 

50-4 

107- 1 

Tapu . 

5s 

'75 

'43 

129 

520 

325 

107 

63 

.30 

31 

109 

45 

35 

93 

155' 

1611 

817 

48.5 

77-8 

1 19-4 

TABLE C 
Table of Indices of 83 Crania from Sarawak 

69 

Length-breadth. 

Length-height. 

Breadth-height. 

No. 

Min. 

Med. 

Max. 

Min. 

Med. 

Max. 

Min. 

Med. 

Max. 

Murut . 

27 

689 

73 

78-9 

| 
697 

747 

78-9 

927 

ioo-8 

I08.4 

Pandaruan 

1 

75 

- \77-S 

1037 

Tagal . 

1 

82-1 

- 73-2 

89- 1 

Dusiin 

3 

74 

76-5 

78-9 

77-1 77.3 

77-5 

97-8 

101.3 

IO47 

Kalabit 

3 

72-8 

75-8 

78-8 

73-5 757 

77-8 

97-8 

1016 

I053 

Lepu Potong. 

9 

7* 

74-4 

78 

74-2 

75-i 

79-4 

95-4 

104 

I055 

Tring . 

4 

72-8 

73-9 

8l-2 

72-4 

767 

78-9 

96-5 

102-5 

108-4 

Land Dayak . 

1 

7i-3 

75-9 

106-5 

Maloh . 

4 

757 

793 

83-4 

75-i 

787 

80.5 

90-1 

I02-I 

I02-I 

Bisaya . 

4 

75-5 

78 

78-8 

77-9 

79 

80 

993 

101-5 

I037 

Tabun . 

1 

76-1 

77-8 

102-2 

Orang Bukit . 

4 

73-5 

75-9 

77-9 

72 

74-4 

773 

98-9 

101-5 

I053 

Kadayan 

2 

75-3 

76-4 

88-5 

76.4 

77 

77-5 

89-4 

962 

IO3 

Kanauit 

1 

74-6 

77-4 

100 

Punan . 

2 

757 

76.3 

76S 

78-6 

79-4 

82-1 

103-8 

1054 

I07 

Ukit . 

1 

78 

78-6 

1007 

Madang 

2 

74-3 

77* 

8r-3 

72-9 

77-3 

817 

896 

99-8 

no 

Kenyan 

3 

8o-8 

84 

87.1 

74-1 

78-6 

83 

85.2 

94 

102-8 

Kayan . 

6 

74-6 

77 

94-3 

71-9 

75-i 

847 

89 

957 

1007 

Iban 

4 

79-5 

82 

847 

739 

77.6 

8i-8 

90-1 

947 

985 

To face p. 342. 

INDEX 

Aban Jalong, Chief, Batang Kayans, 

ii. 288 
Aban Jau, Chief, Tinjar Sebops, and 

his sayings, ii. 283-4 
Abdul Mubin, usurper, i. 23 
Abscesses, treatment of, ii. 208 
Abuse, in Warfare, i. 18 1-2 
Adangs, locale and culture of, i. 35, 

ii. 247 
Adelphic Marriage of Adopted Kin, 

Kenyah, ii. 197 

Adoption of Children, various tribes, 

i. 77-9 

Ceremony, Symbolic at, i. 78 

Incest in relation to, ii. igj&n.i 

Adults, Naming among, i. 79 et seq. , 

85 el seq., ii. 161, 239 
Afterworld ideas, various tribes, ii. 40 
et seq., 187, 239 
Karen, ii. 239 
Age, Kayan difficulty in stating, ii. 175-6 
Agriculture (see also Harvest, and Rice), 
i. 97 et seq. 
Animal sacrifices in, i. 109 
Dusun, i. 97, ii. 253 
Immature grain used as food, i. 104 
Improvement in Sarawak, ii. 307 
Karen, ii. 238 
Murut, i. 97, ii. 246, 247 
Omens observed for, i. 109-10 
Preparation of Land, i. 97 et seq. 
versus Totemism, ii. 97 
Akar river, people of, ii. 285, 286 
Aki tribe, Ethnic affinities of, ii. 245 
Akmad, Sultan, i. 19 
Alak ber Tata, and introduction of 

Islam, i. 18 <£■ nn. 19 
Alas vases, i. 62 
Aldebaran, ii. 139 
Alluvial belt, i. 2, 3 
Altars in Post form, adjuncts of, ii. 7, 

15, 16, 184 
Ambushes, i. 171-2, 181 

America, Dreams and Totemism in, 

ii. ii2<ft«.i 
Amok, devil causing, in Malanau belief, 

ii. 130 
Ancestors, deified, Kayan minor gods 
as, ii. 10-12 
Names for, i. 81 
Angka Wijaya, king of Mahajahit, 

triumphs of, i. 15, 16 
Animal Cults, Kayan, ii. 74 et seq., 
Kenyah, ii. 51 et seq. 
Forms in Kayan Decoration, i. 234-40 
Sacrifice, ii. 6, et alibi 

Explanation, ii. 103 et seq. 
Occasions for, i. 109, ii. 154, 161, 
173, 176 
Animals, Animistic beliefs connected 
with, ii. 51 et seq., 128-9 
Divination by, i. 168 et seq. 
in Fables, Sea Dayak, ii. 90 
Human relationship claimed with, 
see Bear-cat, Crocodiles, 
Deer, Sea Dayak, &c. 
Human Souls reincarnated in, 

ii. 47-8 
Imitated in Dances, i. 1 13-14 
Mentality of, in Savage ideas, ii. 100 

et seq. , 107 
Omens from, Sea Dayak, ii. 87 
Souls of, as Toh, ii. 4, 19 
Animism of Pagan tribes, i. 41, ii. 51 

et seq. 
Animistic beliefs connected with Animals 
and Plants, ii. 51 et seq. ; 
Conclusions, ii. 96 et seq. 
Ant-Eater, Scaly, Asiatic, i. 4 
Anthropometric Measurements taken 
by Haddon, ii. 324 et seq. 
Methods employed, ii. 321 et seq. 
Terms defined, ii. 322 
Anthropomorphic ideas, Kayan, ii. 1, 
2<& n. 4 
Sea Dayak, ii. 85 et seq. 

VOL. II 

343 

344 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

Antimony in Sarawak, ii. 306 
Antu, in Sea Dayak belief, ii. 27 
Apes, see also Monkey 

Anthropoid, Asiatic, i. 4 

Hunted for food, i. 143, 145 

Indigenous, i. 7 

Sacred, in Art, i. 242 
Apo Kayan group of tribes, ii. 313 
Apo Leggan and counterparts of, Land 
of the Dead, various tribes, 
ii. 40 et seq. 

Map of, ii. 44-5 
Apoh river, ii. 284 

Apoh sub-tribe, Anthropological Mea- 
surements, see Kenyah do. 
Appendix, 31 1-4 1 

Apu Lagan, Karen Afterworld, ii. 239 
Arab element in population, i. 8, 29 
Area, i. 1 
Areca Palm, ceremonial uses of, ii. 131, 

175 
Argument, Kayan methods of, ii. 215- 

216 
Argus pheasants, Sea Dayak mode of 

catching, i. 148 
Arithmetic, Kayan, &c. , ii. 193, 

209-11, 292 
Aroh wood for Boat-making, i. 199 
Arrows {see also Bows), poisoned, 

Karen, ii. 238 
Art, Decorative, i. 224 et seq. 
Bibliography, i. 280 
Explanation of Plates, i. 280-3 
Arts, Kayan, found in S. E. Asia, 

ii. 242 
Aryan origin postulated for Kayans, 

ii. 255-6 
Asi, bird, Omens from, ii. 59 
Asiatic Mammals in Borneo and 

Sumatra, i. 3-4, 24 
Aso do, pole for determining Season, 

i. 106-7 
Astronomical myths, ideas, and prac- 
tices, Kayan, i. 108, 

ii. 213-14 
Kenyah, ii. 105 et seq. 
Klemantan, ii. 139, 214 n.i 
Attack, see War 

Aunts, Sea Dayak, numbers of, diffi- 
culties caused by, ii. 199 
Uncles, Nephews, Nieces, Cousins, 

names for, i. 81 
Australian Natives, race of, ii. 311 
Axe, Sea Dayak, ii. 251 

Babes, new-born, exposed by Sea 

Dayaks, ii. 24 
Bahau-Kenyah, locale of, ii. 313 
Bajaus, origin of, ii. 253 

Bakatan sub-group, ii. 320 

Tatu of, i. 247, 269-73 
Bakongs, Animal relationships claimed 

by, ii. 81 
Balambangan, English monopoly at, of 

Pepper trade, i. 23 
Bali, derivation, use and force of term, 
ii. 11, 29, i20<fc«.-i, 121, 
256 & n. 1 
Bali A tap, Kenyah minor god, func- 
tions, &c. , of, ii. 13-4, 16-7 
Bali Flaki, the Hawk Omen Bird, 
various tribes, evolution of, 
ii. 18 
Iban parallel to, ii. 85-6 
Kenyah cult of, ii. 14, 15, 51 et seq. 
Klemantan ideas on, ii. 79 et seq. 
in Sebop Magic, ii. 118-9 
Bali Penylong, or Penyalong, high god 
of the Kenyahs, ii. 6, 13, 
15 et seq., 290 
Crocodile so called, by Punans, ii. 84 
Images of, ii. 53, 66 
in Madang Afterworld, ii. 44 
Punan cult of, ii. 186 
Bali Su?igei in Kayan beliefs, ii. 14 
et seq. 
in Kenyah art, i. 242 
Bali Urip, Kenyah god, ii. 14 
Bali Utong, Kenyah god, ii. 14 

Supreme Being of Klemantan tribes, 
ii. 79 
Balingo, Kenyah Thunder-god, ii. 16,17 
Descent claimed from, and special 
relations with, ii. n<fc«.3 
"Teeth" of, ib. 
Balungan river, see Batang Kayan 
Bamboo, in Sea Dayak legends, ii. 146, 

i47 

Uses, i. 6, 13 
Bamboo Altars, ii. 7 

Collecting, i. 117 

Decorations, i. 228-30, 243 

Floors, ii. 251 

Harp, Kayan and Punan, ii. 167, 
192 

Houses, ii. 245 

Pipes (musical), Punan, ii. 191 

Shields, old style, Sea Dayak, i. 166 
Bananas, i. 6 ; in Sea Dayak legends, 
ii. 146, 147 

Leaves of, in Ritual, ii. 162 
Bangat, Carved, in Kenyah house, 

ii- 73 
Banjermasin, and its Sultan, i. 9 

Cession of, to the Dutch, ii. 263, 309 
Dutch and English rivalry at, i. 22 
Banjermasin river, trend of, i. 2 
Bantiks, of Northern Celebes, ii. 225 

INDEX 

345 

Baram river — 

Basin, ceded to Sarawak, ii. 261, 269, 
271, 278 et seq. 
Mixed population, ii. 272 
Official journeys in, ii. 271, 278 

et seq. 
Penghulus in, ii. 272 
Navigable length, i. 5 
Peace along, i. 183 
Source, i. 2, ii. 279 
Trend, i. 2 

Tributaries, ii. 286, 287 
Baram tribes, Hose's Classification, 

ii. 320 
Barawan sub-group, Klemantan (Cen- 
tral Group) — 
Anthropological measurements, 

ii. 327-8 
Ears, ii. 328 
Eyes, ii. 328 
Face, ii. 327 
Hair, ii. 328 
Head-form, ii. 327 
Nose, ii. 327 
Skin, ii. 328 
Stature, ii. 328 
Art, Human figure in, i. 242 

Painting, i. 231 
Bead-work of, i. 224 
Hose's Classification, ii. 320 
Story on, with a Moral, ii. 151-2 
Tatu, designs, i. 264 
Bark, letters, &c. , written on, i. 13 
Bark-cloth, i. 43, 47, 220 
Bark-shields, Land Dayak, i. 66 
Barns, &c. , for Rice Storage, i. 53-4, 

105, 111-2, ii. 139 
Baskets and Basket-work, various tribes, 
various uses, i. 56-9, 178, 
211-4, ii. 134, 190, 191, 
224, 242, 251 
Batang Kayan river, ii. 287 
Course and Source, i. 2, ii. 279 
Kenyahs of, Tatu of, i. 262 
Batang, Lupar River and District, 
ii. 257, 269 
Sea Dayaks of, i. 31-2 
Bathing, frequent, i. 116, 118, 120, 

ii. 169 
Batins of Sumatra, Melanesian strain 

in, ii. 312 
Battaks of North Sumatra, Indonesians 

of two types in, ii. 312 
Battas, Magic-books of, i. 13 
Bats, i. 4 

Batu Blah tribe, Ethnic affinities of, 
ii. 246 
Murut culture among, ii. 247 
Rice-crocodile ceremony of, ii. 83 

Batu Pita gorge, ii. 286 

Batu Tujoh Mountain, ii. 286 

Batu tuloi, Household and Altar Stones, 

ii. 15, 16 
Bawang Takun, Kayan village, ii. 284 
Bayoh ceremonies [see also Exorcism), 

». 45 
Beads, sources, uses, ritual and other, 
and value of, i. 173, 226-8, 
ii. 9, 24, 32cfc?z.i, 37, 171-2 
Bead-work, i. 226-8 
Kayan, i. 44, 47 
Tribes excelling in, ii. 224 
Beam-ends, &c, Animals carved on 
[see also Crocodiles, Dog, 
&c. ), Kayan, ii. 73, 77, 78-9 
Bear, hunted for Food and Medicine, 
i. 144 
Small Black, Asiatic, i. 4 
Bear-cat, Asiatic, i. 4 
Hunted for food, i. 143 
Relationship claimed with by 
Bakongs, ii. 81 
Bee- grubs, as delicacies, i. 154 
Bee-trees, Honey from, i. 154 

Inheritance of, i. 83 
Beeswax, collection and sale, i. 154 
Belira Fish, Kenyah Story of, ii. 149 
Benaga vases, i. 62 
Bergiau vases, i. 62 
Berkat, Sultan, works of, i. 20 
Betel Blossom, in Punan rites, ii. 85 
Betel-chewing, Sea Dayak, i. 30, 32, 60 
Betrothal, i. 73-6 
Bezoar Stone, source and use of, i. 155 

Analogous substance, i. 155-6 
Biadju tribes, Tatu of, i. 247, 267-8 
Bibliography of Decorative Art, 

i. 280 
Bintulu District, Sarawak, ii. 369 
Bird-lime, i. 149 

Birds, see also Bali Flaki, and Omen 
Divination by, i. 7, 168 et seq., ii. 3, 

8, 9, 15. 5i. 74-5 etseq. 
Indigenous and other, i. 7 
Birds' - nest Caves, Property and 
Inheritance in, i. 83, 156-7 
Birds'-nests, Edible, collection and uses 

of, i. 155-6, ii. 106 
Birth customs — 
Karen, ii. 239 
Kayan, ii. 114, 154. et seq. 
Punan, ii. 185 
Bisaya tribe, Ethnic affinities, ii. 247 
Magic of, and its aims, ii. 123-4 
Tatu not used by, i. 246 
Black Magic, Sebop, ii. 117 et seq. 
Blacking men's faces, in Harvest-frolics, 
i. 113 

346 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

Blood of Fowls, &c. , in Ritual, ii. 31, 
52-4, 60, 66 et alibi ; ex- 
planation, ii. 107 - 8 ; in 
Karen rites, ii. 239 
Blood-brotherhood Ceremony, Animal 
Sacrifice at, ii. 67 
Blood-sprinkling and, ii. 107-8 
Kayan, i. 180 

Man and Crocodile, Kayan belief, 
ii. 76-7, no 
Blood -feuds (see also Sham fights), 
ii. 293, rite at Extinction of, 
ii. 66 
Blood-money, ii. 291, 300 
Blow-pipe or Sumpitan, i. 175 n.i 
Kayan, i. 181, ii. 240 
Klemantan, &c. , i. 34, 46 
Punan, i. 144-5, 160-1, ii. 99, 126, 
182, 191, 220 
Manufacture of, i. 215 
Blua, or Soul, nature of, ii. 34 ; recall 
of, by Dayong, ii. 29 et seq. 
Boas, Dr., cited on Totemism, ii. 112 n. 1 
Boat, in Malanau Exorcism, ii. 131 
Boat-race atClaudetown Peace-making, 

ii. 293 et seq. 
Boat-songs, i. 132 
Boats, see also War-boats — 
Kenyah, i. 166 
Storage of, i. 53 
Uses of, i. 55-6 
Management of, in Rapids, i. 132-4 
Paddles of, 132 

Speed of, Magic to spoil, ii. 124 
Books of Magic, Batta, i. 13 
Borak, rice-spirit, uses of, i. 113-4, 

126, ii. 2i, 292 et alibi 
Bornean tribes, Animals avoided by, 
ii. 71, 72, 128-9 
Classification of, ii. 223-4 
Borneo Company, Minerals worked by, 

ii. 306 (few. 1 
Borneo Races, Anthropometric Mea- 
surements, relative, of, 
ii. 316 et seq. 
Bows and Arrows, Toy, in Ritual 
(see also Cross-bow), i. 175 
&n. 1, ii. 163, 240 
Boy, Stupid, Klemantan Story of, 

ii. 149 et seq. 
Boyhood, Kayan, ii. 163 
Boys, River rites connected with, ii. 25 
War-initiation of, i. 174-5, n- I68, 
169 
Bracelets, i. 46 

Brachycephaly, Proto-Malay, ii. 312-3 
Brass-ware, as Loot, i. 173 

Maloh, i. 197, ii. 253 
Brereton, W., ii. 308 n.\ 

Bride-gifts, Kayan, ii. 171 et seq. ; 

Punan, ii. 184 

Bridge in Afterworld, Kayan, &c. , 

guardians of, ii. 41, 44, 45 

British North Borneo Company, area 

and administration of, 

ii. 264 

Lawas river basin sold by, to Sarawak, 

ii. 262 
Origin and operations of, i. 26-7 
British rule in Borneo begun, i. 27, 

history of, ii. 257 et seq. 
Broken limbs, repair of, ii. 208 
Brooke, Sir Charles, present Rajah of 
Sarawak, rule of, i. 183, 
ii. 259, 260, 2.65 &n. 1 
Brooke, Sir James, first Rajah of 
Sarawak, territory, tribes, 
and rule of, i. 8, 24 et seq. , 
ii. 249, 257 etseq., 265, 308 
n. 1 
Bruni, or Brunei State, i. 9, ii. 106 
Chinese Embassy to (1405), &c. , 

i. 16, 17, 21, 23 
Chinese names for, and accounts of, 

i. 10-13 
Early Buddhist rule in, i. 11, 12 
Former overlords of, i. 14, 15 
Iron currency of, ancient, i. 193 n. 1 
Pigafetta's visit to, i. 21 
Piracy at, and end of English 

commerce, i. 24 
Pirates of, and Rajah Brooke, 

ii. 257-8 
Placed under British Resident, 

ii. 262 
Portuguese expulsion from, ii. 309 
Rise and fall of, i. 21, 22 
Royal house, triple descent, i. 20 
Sultan of, i. 9 

relations with British, i. 27 ; with 
Rajah Brooke, ii. 257 et seq. 
Town, builder of, i. 21 
Buang Tawa, Bulkiah's capital, i. 21 
Bubu, fish-trap, i. 137 
Buddhism, ii. 230 

Buffalo (see also Water-Buffalo), agri- 
cultural use of, ii. 246, 253 
Sacrificed by Malanaus, ii. 106 
Buffalo-hide shields, Dusun, i. 66 
Bugis, origin of, ii. 253 
Bukit Batu, Mount, Sea Dayak Alsatia, 
operations against, i. 183-4, 
ii. 301 
Bukitan tribe, Nomad hunters, i. 177, 

locale of, ii. 178 
Bulkiah, Sultan, or Nakoda Ragam, 

prowess of, i. 20-1 
Bull-roarer, use of, ii. 23 

INDEX 

347 

Burma, &c. , Caucasic type in, Keane 

on, ii. 229 n. 1 
Indigens of, see Karens 
Burning of Jungle, before cultivating 

land, i. 97, 101 et alibi 
Burning-out, in Warfare, i. 172 
Burning test, for Courage, scars of, not 

keloids, i. 246 
Bwe, see Hill Karens 

Cabbage Palms, i. 6 

Calamities, suspected cause of, ii. 198 

&n. 1 
Calling back the Dying, ii. 28, 32, 85 
Cambridge Expedition to Sarawak, 

ii. 311 
Camphor-tree, i. 6 

Collection of Camphor, i. 152-3, 

ii. 190 
Camping in Hunting and War, 

i. 135, 150, 171 
Cane, Rattan {q.v. ), collection of, 

Cannibalism, ceremonial, Jingkang, ii. 9 
n. 1 ; otherwise not practised 
in Borneo, i. 175^^.2 
Canoes {see also Boats), Klemantan 

sub-tribes, i. 203 
Cap {see also War Cap), i. 161-2 
Carving, see Horn, and Wood-carving 
Cat-tribe, Asiatic species of, i. 3 ; not 

eaten by Karens, ii. 239 
Cattle, attitude to, of Kayans, ii. 77 ; 
Kenyahs, ii. 71-2 ; Kleman- 
tans, ii. 80 ; Sea Dayaks, 
ii. 90 
Cattle, wild, Asiatic, i. 3, 143, 144-5, 

ii. 102 
Caucasic element in Bornean peoples, 
ii. 226 et seq. 
in Burma, &c. , Keane on, ii. 229 n. 1 
Caul, Kayan custom as to, ii. 155 
Causation, Mechanical, Kayan under- 
standing of, ii. 2-4 
Cave-dwellers, Punan, ii. 182 n.x 
Caves, drawings in, i. 232 
Celebes, Bantiks of Northern, ii. 225 

Melanesian strain in, ii. 312 
Charms, against Crocodiles, Lelak, 
ii. 83 
Connected with Weapons, ii. 126 
Kayan, ii. 124 et seq. 
Love Charms, ii. 127 
Padi, i. no 
Punan, ii. 190 
Sea Dayak, ii. 91 & n. 1 
of Specialised function, ii. 126 
Cheng Ho, Chinese ambassador to 
Bruni, i. 16 

Chief of Lelak people, Crocodile- 
immunity of, ii. 83 
Chiefs, see also Penghulu 

Baram district, met on journey 

ii. 285 
Deceased, cult of, Klemantan and 

Iban, ii. 10 
Death and Burial customs concern- 
ing, i. 176, 189-90, ii. 10, 
20, 32, 33, 38, 65 
Slaves slain at funerals of, ii. 46, 

104-5 
Tombs, i. 240, ii. 35-6, 50 
Rarong graves, ii. 10 
Functions of, various tribes, i. 64 

et seq., ii. 12, 182, 217 
and Headmen, village and District 
administration by, Sarawak, 
vii. 272 et seq. 
Kayan and Kenyah, enlightened 

character of, ii. 205-6 
Rooms of, i. 69 
War coats of, i. 163 
Child-bed, Death in, home of Souls, 

ii. 40 
Child-birth, see Birth 
Childhood, Kayan, ii. 57 et seq. ; 

Punan, ii. 185 
Children {see also Boys), god of, 
ii. 160, 161 
Kayan, loss of, grief of, ii. 156 ; 

Training of, i. 163, 165 
Naming of {see also Names), i. 79-80 
Prohibitions and Tabus affecting, 
ii. 14, 23, 33, 71, 113 <?/ alibi 
Punan, ii. 184, 185 
of Slave and free, and slave and 
slave, position of, Kayan 
and Kenyah, i. 72 
Young, Toh specially dangerous to, 
ii. 24 
China, Intercourse with, of Buddhist 
rulers, i. 10 et seq., 16, 17, 
ii. 231 
Chinese, Immigrants, colonists, and 
traders, in Borneo, i. 17, 
28-9, ii. 231 
Estimated numbers, i. 3 
Prices for edible Birds'-nests, i. 157 
Rice cultural method, i. 97-8 
in Sarawak — 

Goldworkers' insurrection, ii. 259 
Justice among, ii. 268 
Traders, ii. 271, 280-1 
Use of Bezoar stones, &c. , i. 155-6 
Cholera in Borneo, ravages of, ii. 206 
Cigarettes, ceremonial uses of, i. 74, 
124, ii. 5, 32-3, 39, 58-9, 
67, 88, 131, 298, 299 

348 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

Civet cat, and congeners, Asiatic, i. 3 
Hunted for food, i. 143 
Indigenous, i. 7 
Omens from, ii. 73, 186 
Classes, Social, Kayan and Kenyah, 

i. 68 et seq., ii. 196 
Classification of Races, Hose's, ii. 319, 

320 
Claudetown, fort at, ii. 279 et seq. 

Peacemaking at, ii. 292 et seq. 
Climate, i. 4-5 

Cloth, Spinning, Dyeing, and Weaving, 
i. 221 et seq. 
Sea Dayak designs in, i. 243-4 
Clothes, &c. , Funeral uses of, i. 176, 

ii. 3 & n. , 50 
Clothing (see also Coats), Male and Fe- 
male, various tribes, i. 32, 
43, 46-7, ii. 164, 190, 202 
Mourning, i. 176, ii. 36-7 
War, i. 59, 161-3 
Coast population (see a/ro Sea Dayaks), 
i. 8-9, ii. 311 
Therapeutic magic of, ii. 122-3 
Coats, Sea Dayaks, Male and Female, 
i. 43 n. , 46, 47 ; shell 
work on, i. 223 
Used in War, i. 161, 163 
Cockfight substituted for Slave-killing 

at Chiefs' funerals, ii. 46 
Cocoa-nut, Charm made from, Sea 
Dayak, ii. 127 
Severing of, and of Jars, ii. 49, n.x 
Coffin - tombs, Bakong Malanaus, 

ii. 81 
Coffins, Kayan, ii. 32, 34 

Klemantan, ii. 48, 49 
Colic cure, Kayan, ii. 208 
Conduct, Influence on, of Religious 

beliefs, ii. 187, 204 
Constellations, Klemantan names for, 

ii. 139 
Cooking utensils, i. 60, x^x&n.-z 
Coronation ceremony, Bruni, i. 20 
Corpses, how protected from Toh, 

»• 33 
Corsets, Brass, i. 46-7, 197, ii. 252 
Cosmological and Geographical 

Notions, ii. 213 et seq. 
Cotton, Chinese accounts of, i. 11, 

12 
Spinning, Dyeing, and Weaving of, 

i. 221 et seq. 
Cotton-seed test of presence of Ghost, 

ii. 39 
Coucal, bird, in legendary origin of 

Kayan Tatu, i. 247-8 
Council of State, Sarawak, composition 

of, ii. 267, 272 

Courtship, see Marriage customs 
Cousin, wide sense of term, i. 81 
Cradles, Kayan, ii. 159; Punan, ii. 184 
Cranial index, Kenyah (and see Ap- 
pendix), i. 38 
Measurements, Borneo races, i. 317 
et seq. 
Crawford cited on the early Dutch in 

Borneo, ii. 309 n. 1 
Creation Myths, Kayan, ii. 7, 137-8 
Cremation among Klemantans, South 
Borneo, and Land Dayaks, 
ii. 50, 230 
Crime, see Homicide, and Incest 
Crocodile-patterned Rice, in Malanau 

Exorcism, ii. 131, 134 
Crocodiles and congeners, i. 7 
in Art, i. 244, ii. 78 
Attitude to, of various tribes, ii. 4, 
68, 70, 76-7, 84, 102, 
189-90, 253 
Fowls' eggs sacrificed to, ii. 67-8 
Images of, ii. 83, 84, 87-9, 186 
Malay hunting methods, i. 140-2 
Relationship claimed with, by 
Klemantans, ii. 81-2 ; by 
Sea Dayaks, ii. 89 
Rice culture, connected with, ii. 83, 

88-9 
in Tatu, i. 265 
Crookshank, A. C. , ii. 308 n. 1 
Crossbow (see also Bow), and Poisoned 
Arrows, Karen, ii. 238 
Toy, i. 46 & n. 2 
Cruickshank, J. B., ii. 308 n.x 
Culture, effect on, of Invasions, ii. 231 
Cupping, Kayan methods, ii. 209 
Curses, Sebop, ii. n8-9<fc«.i, 120 
Custom, sanction of, Kayan, ii. 194-5 

Daily Life, routine of, i. 116 et seq. 
Dances, Harvest, i. 11 3-5 

Head-suspension ceremonies, i. 177 
Kayan, Birth, ii. 156-7 
Dok, i. 1 13-4, ii. 78 
Lads' and Girls', ii. 167 
Kenyah, Hornbill, ii. 60 
Malanau, Exorcism, ii. 132-3 
Punan, ii. 193 
Dart Poison, Medicinal uses of, Punan, 

ii. 208 & n.o. 
Darts, Poisoned, i. 46, 160- 1 ; making 

of, i. 218-9 
Datus, the, in Sarawak, ii. 266 
Dayak, limitation of the term in 

Sarawak, ii. 313 n.x 
Dayaks, see Land Dayaks, and Sea 

Dayaks 
Dayong janoi ceremony, ii. 38-9 

INDEX 

349 

Dayongs, or Soul - catchers, ii. 29 ; 
functions of, ii. 115, 120 
etseq., 173 
Punan, skill of, ii. 190 
Dead, the, and Death [see also Corpses), 
Kayan speculations on, ii. 
206, 215 
Death, Coming to Life after, Kayan and 
Murut Stories of, ii. 42-3 
Land of, see Afterworld 
Death and Burial Customs, see also 
under Chiefs 
Bakong Malanaus, ii. 81 
Clothing, &c. , for, i. 176, ii. 3<fc n. , 50 
Karen, ii. 239 

Kayan, ii. 3, 32 et seq. , 155, 240 
Kenyah, ii. 48 
Klemantan, ii. 10, 48-9 
Land Dayak, ii. 50 
Punan, i. 36 
Sea Dayak, ii. io, 50 
Sebop, ii. 118 
Shan, ii. 240 
Decoration of Shields, i. 163-5 
Decorative Art, i. 224 et seq. 
Bibliography, i. 280 
Explanation of Plates, i. 280-3 
Karen, Sun design in Tatu, ii. 239 
Kayan, i. 233-41 
Punan, ii. 191 
de Crespigny, Claude C. , ii. 308 n. 1 

Work of, among the Madangs, ii. 279 
Deer, Asiatic, i. 3 

Attitude to, of Kayans, ii. 72, 77, 157 
of Kenyahs, ii. 71-2 
of Klemantans, ii. 80 
of Sea Dayaks, ii. 90 
Hunted for food, i. 143, 144 
Indigenous, i. 7 
Omens from, i. 75, ii. 72 
Deer-traps, i. 144, 145 
Defence, see War 
Deformation of the Head, Malanau 

custom, i. 48-50 
Deniker, on the Indonesians, ii. 227-8 
Dent, Alfred, and the British North 

Borneo Co. , i. 26 
De Quatrefages, cited, ii. 312 
Descriptions of Peoples, A. C. Haddon, 

ii. 321 et seq. 
Designs, Decorative, Kayan, i. 233-4 
Diamonds, early mining for, i. 17 
Dido, H.M.S. , at Borneo, ii. 257 
Discus-knife, i. 11 

Disease, see Cholera, Fever, Small- 
pox, Yaws 
Exorcism of, Malanau, ii. 46 
Kayan attitude to, ii. 206 et seq. 
Disguise against the Toh, ii. 24-5 

Dishes and Platters of Hardwood, 

i. 59. 211 
Distances, Kayan reckoning of, ii. 212 
Divination, see also Magic, and Omens 
by Areca palm seed, at Sea Dayak 

Marriages, ii. 175 
by Bali Flaki, Kenyah, ii. 51 et seq. 
by Birds, ii. 8, 9, 15, 51 et seq. 
by Entrails, ii. 8, 9, 62 et seq., 68, 

90, 173, 290-1, 298-9 
Karen, ii. 239 
Kayan, ii. 252 
Kenyah, ii. 298-9 
Private, ii. 56 

Roman parallels to, see Notes at 
foot of Chapter XV. 
Madang, ii. 290-1 
Divorce, Sea Dayak, 182-3 
Dog, two-headed Bridge-guardian, in 

After-life, ii. 45 
Dog-pattern, in Decorations, i. 229, 

234 etseq., ii. 71, 78-9 
Dogs, attitude to, of Kayans, i. 249, 
ii. 4 ; of Kenyahs, ii. 70-1, 
101 
Hunting with, i. 144 
Doh Tenangan, wife of the Kayan high 

god, ii. 6-7, 15, 74, 154 
Dok, or Macaque monkey, Dances 
imitating, i. 113-4, ii. 78 
Kayan attitude to, ii. 77-8 
Dolichocephaly, Indonesian, ii. 312-3 
Dollar, in Sarawak, value of, ii. 305 

&n. 1 
Domestic animals, i. 53, 61, 116-7 
Douglas, R. S. , cited, ii. 42 et alibi 

Vocabularies published by, ii. 255 n. 1 
Draccena leaves in Ritual, ii. 15, 70, 

82, 114 
Dragon's blood, source of, i. 154 
Drawings, i. 232 

Dreams, importance of, various tribes, 
ii. 91 et seq., no, 111-2 
in relation to — 
Charms, ii. 125 
Dead people (Kayan), ii. 215 
Magic (Sebop), ii. xxq&n. 1 
and Totemism in America, ii. 112 
&n. 1 
Drowned men, Souls of, home of, ii. 40 
Drums, various uses of, i. 61, ii. 32, 

33, 54, 156, 166-7 
Drunkenness and Disorder among 
Muruts and Sea Dayaks, 
ii. 195 
Durian, fruit, i. 6, 117 
Dusun-tribe — 

Agriculture of, ii. 253 
Plough used by, i. 97 

35Q PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

Dusun - tr ibe — con tin ued 

in Hose's Classification, ii. 320 
Locale of, i. 35 
Origin of, ii. 253 

Chinese strain in, i. 28 
Shields of, i. 166 
Tatu of, male, i. 265 
Dutch Borneo, area, ii. 262, 308 
Dutch early connection with, i. 22-3 
Ethnological types in, ii. 313 et seq. 
Government of, ii. 308-10 dsn.x 
Co-operation of, with Sarawak, 
ii. 305, 309 
Nieuwenhuis's expeditions in, ii. 311 
Rivers draining, i. 2 
Stone Axes in native houses in, 

ii. 11 n. 2 
Tribes of, in Hose's Classification, 
ii. 320 
of the Interior, Ethnological 
Studies on, ii. 309-10 
Incomplete subjection of, ii. 309 
Dutch East India Co. in Borneo, i. 23 
Dutch rule in Borneo, history of, 

i. 23, ii. 262 et seq. 
Dwellings, see Houses 
Dyeing of — 

Basket ware, i. 213-4 
Cloth, i. 221-2, 243-4 
Dying, Calling back the, ii. 32, 85 
Dyak, or Dayak {see also Land and 
Sea Dayaks), generic name 
for Pagan tribes, i. 30 

Ear-adornment, various tribes, i. 10, 
12, 45-6, 47-8, 148, 197, ii. 
60, 166, 239 
Ear-form, Haddon's observations on, 
and how taken, ii. 322-3 

Barawan, ii. 328 

Kalabit, ii. 325 

Kayan, ii. 338 

Kenyah, ii. 337 

Lerong, ii. 333 

Long Pokun, ii. 331 

Malang, ii. 329 

Maloh, ii. 326 

Milanau, ii. 334 

Murut, ii. 325 

Punan, ii. 335 

Sea Dayak, ii. 340 

Sebops, ii. 332 
Earth - eating by Pregnant Kayan 

Women, ii. 153 
Earthenware Jars, native and Chinese, 

i. 59 

East India Company in Borneo, i. 23 
East Indian Rights of the Dutch, 
ii. 309 

Edible Birds'-nests, see Birds'-nests 

Roots, i. 6 
Eggs, see Fowls and Eggs 
Elephant, Asiatic (Indian), i. 3 
Engkabong tree, Vegetable tallow 

from, i. 155 
English and Dutch rivalry in Borneo, 

i. 22^ seq. 
Entrails, Divination by, ii. 8, 9,62 et seq., 
68, 90, 173, 290-1, 298-9 
Epidemics, Sanitary cordons against, 

ii. 206, 207 &n. 1 
Eschatology, Kayan, ii. 40 et seq. 

Sceptics, and discussion of, ii. 48 
Ethnic affinities of Borneo tribes, 

discussed, ii. 224 et seq. 
Ethnological types in Borneo, ii. 311 

et seq. 
Ethnology {see also Appendix), ii. 223 

et seq. 
European Governments in Borneo, 

history of, ii. 257 et seq. 
Europeans in Borneo, estimated 

numbers, i. 31 
Everett, A. H., ii. 308 «. 1 
Exorcisms, for Madness, ii. 31 
Malanau, ii. 46, 129, 134-5 
Punan, ii. 131 
Expeditions — 

Cambridge, to Sarawak, ii. 311 
Dr. Nieuwenhuis, to Dutch Borneo, 
ii. 311 
Eyes, Pagan tribes in general, ii. 226, 
227 n. 1 
Haddon's observations on, ii. 322 
Barawan, ii. 328 
Kayan, ii. 338, 339 
Kenyah, ii. 337 
Lerong, ii. 333 
Long Pokun, ii. 331 
Malang, ii. 329 
Milanau, ii. 334 
Murut, ii. 324-5 
Punan, ii. 335, 336 
Sea Dayak, ii. 340 
Sebops, ii. 332 

Fables, Animals in, ii. 90, 147 et seq. 
Face-form, Haddon's observations on, 
ii. 321 

Barawan, ii. 327 

Kalabit, ii. 324 

Kayan, ii. 338, 339 

Kenyah, ii. 337 

Land Dayak, ii. 325 

Lerong, ii. 332 

Long Pokun, ii. 330 

Malang, ii. 329 

Maloh, ii. 326 

INDEX 

35i 

Face-form — continued 
Milanau, ii. 334 
Murut, ii. 324 
Punan, ii. 335, 336 
Sea Dayak, ii. 340 
Sebop, ii. 331 
Sibuyan, ii. 341 
Facial aspect and form, Pagan tribes 
in general, i. 37, ii. 226 
Marking, to avert Toh, ii. 24, 25 
Resemblance of Malays and Sea 
Dayaks, ii. 250 
Family Cultivation of Land, i. 99 
Family, the, and Family Life, Kayan 
and Kenyah, i. 73 et seq., 
ii. 183 et seq. 
Punan, ii. 185 
Fat put into Mouth, significance of, 
ii. 21, 118, 119 et alibi 
Snakes' and Pigs', in Kayan medicine, 
ii. 207 
Fear, Kayan god of, ii. 5, 6 

of Toh of Heads, ii. 4, 20 et seq. , 22-3 
Feasts and Festivals — 
For Guests, i. 125 
Harvest, i. 76, 104-5, llI-5 
Head-taking, ii. 20-2 
Madang, ii. 292 
Marriage, Punan, ii. 183-4 
Naming, Kayan, ii. 160 et seq. 
Feathers, Hornbill's, i. 162, 163, ii. 18, 

59. 242 
Fertility, of Rice and of Women, 

i. in, 112 
Fever, Quinine used for, by Kayans, 

ii. 206 
Figures, replacing Slaves in Kayan 

Tombs, ii. 34, 105 
Fines, Animal, &c. , substituted for 
Human Sacrifice, ii. 106 
for Homicide, ii. 200 
Kayan, i. 65, ii. 195, 196 
Kenyah, ii. 196 

Sebop, for Black magic, ii. 119 
Fire-arms, i. 46, 161 
Charm against, ii. 126 
Sale of, regulation of , Sarawak, ii. 307 
Fire and Frayed Stick in ritual, &c. , 

"• 52. 54. 55- 59- 75. 79- 

186, 242 
and Smoke in Kayan rites, ii. 5, 6 
from Stick - rubbing, Sea Dayak 

Legend of, ii. 144 
Fire-game, Kayan, ii. 164 
Fire-god, Kayan, ii. 5, 6 
Fire-making, Kayan method, in S. E. 

Asia, ii. 242 
Fire-Piston, Sea Dayak, i. 197-9, ii. 25x 

&n.3 

Fire-places, Kayan, i. 51 

First cousins, opinion on Marriage of, 

i- 173-4 
Fish, i. 7 

Belira, Kenyah, story of, ii. 149 
as Second Death, Kayan, ii. 41 
Fish-traps, i. 137-9 
Fishing methods, i. 135 et seq., ii. 149 
Flaki, linguistic analogies of, ii. 256 
Flesh, Human, ceremonial use, i. 175 

& n.2, ii. 9 n. 1 
Fletcher, Miss A. C. , cited onTotemism, 

ii. 112 n.x 
Flood, Sea Dayak legend of, ii. 144 
Floors, i. 207-8 

Food, Karen, sole exception, ii. 239 
Kenyah, restrictions on, ii. 128-9 
Punan, ii. 182 
Forbidden Act, Kayan words for, 

ii. x^&n. 1 
Forests, i. 5-6 

Forging, Kayan process, i. 195 
Fowls, attitude to, of — 
Kayans, ii. 4, 77 
Klemantans, ii. 80 
Sea Dayaks, ii. 90 
Blood of, in Ritual, ii. 65-7, 239 
Ceremonial use of, &c. , ii. 8, 23, 

67-8 
Eggs, sacrifice of, ii. 8, 25, 67-8 
Feather of, symbolic sacrifice of, 

ii. 25 
Live, at Sea Dayak weddings, 

ii- i75 
Forts, British (early) in Sarawak, 

ii. 258 
Frames of Houses, 205 et seq. 
Frayed Sticks or Poles (see also Fire 

and), ceremonial uses, 

ii. 52-5, 69 
Frazer, J. G. , cited on Totemism, 

ii. 112 
Fretwork, designs and applications, 

i. 234, 240 
Friendship, Names used in, i. 81-2 
Frog, initiator of Head - hunting, 

ii. 138-9 
Fruits, Jungle, i. 6, 153-4 ; collecting, 

i. 1 17-8 

Galleries, Equipment and Decoration 

of, i. 52-3 
Gangetic peoples in Indo - Malaya, 

Logan on, ii. 229 n. 1 
Games of Kayan boys, ii. 163, 164 
Gavial, long-snouted, i. 7 
Geography, Kayan skill in, ii. 44, 

213 
Geological structure and history, i. 1-3 

352 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

Ghosts, belief in, of Kayans, ii. 3, 4, 

35, 37 
Enquiring of, as to division of 
Property, ii. 38-9 &nn. 1, 2 
Gibbon, Asiatic, i. 4 

in Art, i. 242, ii. 73, 11 1 
as Ngarong, ii. 92-3 
Ginger plant, Medicinal uses of, ii. 207 
Girls, Kayan, Dances of, ii. 167 
Decorations of, at Puberty, ii. 166 
Dress of, ii. 164 
Jew's harp played by, i. 74 
Gods, the, ii. 5 et seq. ; see also under 
Names 
Anthropomorphic, Kayan attitude 

to, ii. 4 
Communications between, and Men, 
see also Bali Flaki, Divina- 
tion, Omens, &c. 
Gods to men, ii. 9, 15, 57 
Men to gods, ii. 5, 6, 7, 9, 10, 
55, 61, 65, 67, 75.79-8o, 
103, 107, 298 et alibi 
Dwelling-places of, Kayan ideas on, 

ii- 5 
Kayan, ii. 5 el seq. 
Minor, ii. 7, 10 
Kenyah, ii. 13 et seq. 
High god, ii. 13 
Minor gods, ii. 13 
Gold in Borneo, i. 17, 28-9, ii. 306 
Gongs, ceremonial uses of, &c. , i. 20, 
60-1, 173, ii. 30, 33, 35 & 
n.i, 39, 106, 129, 172-3, 302 
Government, European, in Borneo, 
history of, ii. 257 et seq. , 
308-10 &n. 1 
Pre-European, ii. 275 
Grandfathers, name for, i. 80, ii. 47 
Grasshoppers, Omens from, Punan, 

ii. 186 
Grey, Sir G. , cited, ii. 109-10 
Ground pigeon, traps for, Kenyah, &c, 

i. 149 
Guardians of the Bridge in the After- 
world, ii. 41, 44, 45 
Guests, Accommodation for, i. 52 

Entertainment of, i. 123 el seq. 
Guitars, i. 121 
Guns (see also Fire-arms), Swivel, 

Kayan, i. 61 
Gusi vases, i. 62 

Gutta-percha, i. 6, varieties of, i. 150, 
151 

H addon, A. C. , ii. 11 rc.3; Physical 
Characters of the Races and 
Peoples of Borneo, ii. 311-41 

Hades, see Afterworld 

Hair, general character of, i. 37, ii. 226; 
exceptions, ii. 312 
Haddon's observations on, ii. 323 
Barawan, ii. 328 
Kalabit, ii. 325 
Kayan, ii. 338, 339 
Kenyah, i. 38, ii. 337 
Land Dayak, ii. 325 
Lerong, ii. 333 
Long Pokun, ii. 331 
Malang, ii. 330 
Maloh, ii. 326-7 
Milanau, ii. 334 
Murut, ii. 325 
Punan, ii. 336 
Sea Dayak, ii. 340 
Sebop, ii. 332 
Ulu Ayar Dayaks, ii. 326 
Cut off, as Votive sacrifice, ii. 9 
Disposal of, ii. 123 
in Klemantan Mourning, ii. 38 n. 1 
Decorative uses of, i. 163, ii. 241 &n. 1 
Grown in Kayan Mourning, ii. 38 
Hair-dressing — 
Female, i. 47 
Male, i. 41 
Hair-extraction, Karen, ii. 338 ; Ken- 
yah, &c. , i. 38, 74, 176 
Hairpins, Murut, i. 44 
Hamy, Dr. E. T. , and others, cited 
on the Indonesian and 
Proto-Malayan races of the 
Malay Archipelago, ii. 312 
Handicrafts, i. 193 et seq. 
Bark cloth, i. 220 
Basket work, i. 214-5 
Blow-pipes, i. 215-9 
Hats, i. 212-4 
Pottery, i. 219-20 
Smith's gear, i. 195-8 
Weaving and dyeing, i. 221-3 
Wood working, i. 199-21 1 
Hardwood dishes, &c. , i. 59, 211 
Harmonica, Punan, ii. 192 
Harvest, Festivities at, and Social im- 
portance of, i. 76, 104-5, 
111-5, ii. 38, 170-1 
Harvest gods, Kayan, ii. 5, 6 
Hats, male, i. 43, female, 47 

Making of, i. 214-5 

Hawk (see also Bali Flaki, and Laki 

Neho), Divination by,i. 169, 

ii. 14, i$et seq. ,74-5, 118-9 

Head (see also Cranial), Deformation 

of, i. 48-50 
Headache cures, Kayan, 209 
Head -form, Haddon's observations 
on, ii. 317 
Barawan, ii. 327 

INDEX 

353 

Head-form — continued 

Kalabit, ii. 324 

Kayan, ii. 338, 339 

Kenyah, ii. 337 

Land Dayak, ii. 325 

Lerong, ii. 332 

Long Pokun, ii. 330 

Malang, ii. 329 

Maloh, ii. 253, 326 

Milanau, ii. 333 

Murut, ii. 324 

Punan, i. 179, ii. 335, 336 

Sea Dayak, ii. 339 

Sebop, ii. 331 

Sibuyan, ii. 341 

Ulu Ayar Dayak, ii. 326 
Head-hunting, and taking, Cranial in- 
vestigation complicated by, 
ii. 317 

Festivals connected with, ii. 20-2 

Infrequency of, at present, ii. 304 

Karen, ii. 238 

Kayan, object of, i. 159, ii. 41, 47, 
241 &n. 1 

Origin and history of custom, i. 187 
et seq. 
Legend of (Sebop), ii. 138-9 

Sea Dayak, i. 150, 185-7, ii. 249, 

293 
Suppression of, Sarawak, ii. 306 
versus Totemism, ii. 98 
Headmen, see Chiefs and Penghuhis 
Heads, Dried — 

Begged or borrowed, ii. 22, 23, 169 
Ceremonial uses of, i. 114, ii. 38, 

160, 169 
Hung up — 

Risk in Touching, ii. 14 n.x, 21-2 
Spirits attached to, ii. 4, 20 et seq. 
Leaves put about, ii. 113 
Not merely Trophies, ii. 22 
Preparation of, 174-8 
Superfluous, disposal of, ii. 22 
Suspension of, i. $2&n. 1, 176-8 
Height (see also Stature), average — 
Kenyah, i. 38 
Murut, i. 39 

Relative, of Borneo races, 316 
Heroes, Graves of, ii. 10 

Honoured by Sea Dayaks, ii. 26 
Hiantza, King of Puni (Bruni), em- 
bassy of, to China, i. 13, 14 
Hiawang, King of Puni, and the 

Chinese, i. 17 
High god, the — 
Kayan, ii. 5 et seq. 

Wife of, see Doh Tenangan 
Kenyah, ii. 6, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18 
Klemantan, ii. 6 

Hill Karens, Aspect of, ii. 237 

Hill zone, i. 3 

Hills, Toh of, ii. 25 

Hindu influence on Sea Dayak beliefs, 
ii. 26 

Hindu-Javanese (Buddhist) rule and 
influence in Bruni, i. 11, 12, 
17, 18, 20, ii. 230 &n. 1, 

252-3 
History — 

under Asiatic rulers, i. 8-27 
under British, Dutch, &c. , ii. 257 
et seq. , 308 et seq. 
Hoes, mode of using, i. 104 
Homicide, Kayan views on, ii. 199-200, 

201 
Honey, collection and uses of, i. 154 
Hook-pattern, i. 229, 234, 240, 242 
Hooks for Charm-bundles, ii. 126 
Horn, carved, Sword Handles, &c, 
of, Kayan, i. 224, 225, 
238-40, ii. \yj &n. 1 
Hornbill motif in Tatu, i. 256-7, 263 
Hornbills, Dances imitating, i. 11 3-4, 
ii. 78 
Effigy of, ii. 298, 299 
Feathers of, ii. 242 
Toh Bulu and, ii. 18 
in War gear, i. 162, 163, ii. 59 
Sacred to Sea Dayaks, ii. 88 
Three species of, Omens from, 
ii. 59-60 
Hose, Dr. C. , Classification by, of 
Peoples of Sarawak, ii. 319, 
320 
Official journeys of, ii. 281 
Presentation of Skulls by, to Cam- 
bridge University, ii. 317 
House-building, Animal sacrifice at, 
ii. 105-6 &n. 1 
Extraordinary, ii. 289 
Kayan, i. 203 et seq. 
Kenyah, Divination before, ii. 56 
House-god, Kenyah, ii. 13, 14 
Household Implements, Kayan, i. 53 

Property, i. 52 et seq. 
Households, Kayan, Bonds uniting, 

i. 84-5 
Houses — 

Change in Material of, ii. 206 11.2. 
Defensive methods, i. 160, 178-9 
Karen, ii. 238 
Kayan, i. $oetseq., 64, 204 

New, Leaves used at, ii. 113 
Kenyah, 204 

Klemantan, i. 54, 204, 210 
Madang, ii. 289 
Punan, i. 210, ii. 182^71.1 
Sea Dayak, i. 54, ii. 250-1 

354 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

Human figure, and details, in Kayan 

Decorative Art, i. 234 etseq. 

Flesh, ceremonial use, i. 175 <fc n. 2, 

ii. 9<fc n. 1 
Hair, see Hair 

Relationship claimed with Animals, see 
Bear-Cat, Crocodile, Deer, 
&c. 
Soul, Two kinds of, Karen ideas on, 

ii. 239 
Sacrifice, propitiatory, of the Jing- 
kangs, ii. 9 n. 1 
Rites once including, ii. 46, 104 
et seq. 
Hunter Nomad tribes, ii. 177 et seq. 
Hunting, i. 117, 161 

Objects, and methods, i. 143 et seq. 
Punan, i. 144-5, n- 99j 191-2 
Traps, i. 145-9 
Huts, temporary, i. 134 

Iban, origin of name, i. 32 

Group, in Hose's Classification, ii. 320 
I bans, see Sea Dayaks 
Idayans, legends of, on Chinese colony, 

i. 17 
Illness, Kayan theory of, and treat- 
ment (see also Exorcism), 

ii. 28 et seq. 
Recovery from, Kayan rites at, ii. 7, 8 
Images (not precisely Idols), various 

tribes, ii. 7, 8, 13, i4<fc«.i, 

19- 53. 83, 84, 117-8, 161 
Impotence, cures, &c. , of, ii. 207-8 

tfc n. 1 
Incense, in Malanau Exorcism, ii. 131 
Incest, views on, i. 73, 83, ii. 196, 

197 <kn. 1, 198-9 
Indo- Malaya, Gangetic peoples in, 

Logan on, ii. 229 & n. 1 
Indonesian, meaning and application 

of term, ii. 227-8, 312 etseq. 
Infancy, Kayan, ii. 156-60 
Infants, Feeding of, Kayan, ii. 159 ; 

Punan, ii. 185 
Head-deformation of, Malanau tribe, 

i. 48-50 
Touching of, objected to, ii. 24 
Initiation, see Boys 
Injuries, Magic for, various Tribes, 

ii. 123 
Insects, i. 7, 54 
Instruments for the determination of 

Seasons, i. 106-9 
Intercession, invoked by Kayans, 

ii. 10, 11 
Inter-class Clansmen, origin, i. 71 

Marriages, i. 70-2 
Interior, tribes of, ii. 311 

Intestines, Divination by, see Divina- 
tion, Liver, &c. 
Invasions, Effects of, on Culture, 

ii. 231 
Ipoh tree, Dart-poison from, i. 218, 

ii. 2o8tfcra.2 
Iron, Currency of, former, of Bruni, 
i. 193 n.i 
given at Kayan births, ii. 156 
Implements, Kayan, i. 197 
Iron-wood (Bilian), i. 6 

Bars, as Weapons, i. 161, 181 
Dishes of, i. 59, 211 
Roofing, i. 50 
Iron-working, Kayan, i. 193-7 
Irrigation, Dusun, ii. 253 ; Kalabit, 

i. 97-8 
I sang, see Silat 

Islands surrounding Borneo, influx of 
Peoples from, ii. 231 

Jack fruit, i. 6 

Jaga?ig wood, for Blow-pipes, i. 215 

Jar-burial, Klemantan and Murut, 

ii. 48, 49, 50 
Jaring, or Deer-trap, i. 144, 145 
Jars {see also Vases), and Cocoanuts, 

severing of, ii. 49 & n. 1 , 

302 
Chinese, and Native, i. 59 
Java, Camphor tribute to, from Puni, 

. l I? 
Indonesian element in, ii. 312 

Javanese influence on Sea Dayak 

beliefs, ii. 26 
Supremacy, i. 14-7 
Javelins, i. 160-1 
Jaw bones of Pigs in Purification and 

other Ceremonies, ii. 37, 65 
Jerat, trap for Small Animals, i. 146-8 
Jevons, cited on Totemism, ii. 97, 

103 
Jew's harp, i. 74, 121 
Jingkang, use of Human Flesh, i. 175 

n. 2, ii. 9 n.\ 
Jolo (Sulu Island), Sultan of, i. 9 
Johore, conversion at, of Alak ber 

Tata, i. \<^& n. 1 
Journeys, Divination before, Kenyah, 

ii. 52-5, 64, 66 
Official, described, ii. 278 et seq. 
Judicial duties of Kayan chiefs, i. 65 
Juman, Kayan Chief, ii. 283, 284, 

285, 287 
Jungle, Life in, i. 143 

Paths and tree-bridges, i. 131 
Products, i. 40, 117-8, 149 et seq., 

ii. 178 
Jungle fever, Kayan remedy, ii. 208 

INDEX 

355 

Kadayans, Magic of, ii. 115, 123-4 

Non-tatuing, i. 246 

Origin ascribed to, i. 21 

Sacrificial periods of, i. 11 
Kahayan river races, Tatu designs of, 

i. 269 
Kakhyens, Caucasic element in, 

ii. 229 n.x 
Kalabits, Baskets of, i. 214 

Buffaloes sacrificed by, ii. 107 

Courtship, ii. 176, 247 

Decorative Arts of, i. 224, 233 

Ears, Eyes, and Noses of, ii. 324-5 

Expedition against, ii. 281 

Face-form, &c. , ii. 324-5 

Hair, ii. 325 

Head-form, ii. 324 

in Hose's Classification, ii. 320 

Locale of, i. 35 

Rice cultural methods, i. 97-8 

Skin colour, ii. 325 

Stature, ii. 325 

Tatu, i. 266 
Kalang-asu, see Dog Pattern 
Kanowits, Baskets and Basket Work 

of, i. 214, 224 
Kapuas river Basin, Ibans of, ii. 249 

Length of, ii. 308 

Trend of, i. 2 
Karens, affinities and analogies of, 
with Kayans, &c. , ii. 235 
et seq. , 256 

Agriculture of, ii. 238 

Beliefs, ii. 238, 256 

Birth customs, ii. 239 

Blood of Fowl, in Rites of, ii. 239 

Characteristics of, ii. 239 

Cross-bow and Poisoned Arrows of, 
ii. 238 

Death and Burial Customs of, ii. 239 

Ear-lobe distention of, ii. 238 

Ethnic affinities of, ii. 229 & n. , 235 
et seq. , 256 

Hair-extraction by, ii. 238 

Houses of, ii. 238 

Locale of, ii. 236 

Marriage customs of, ii. 239 

Prayers of, ii. 238 

Social Organisation of, ii. 237 et seq. 

Soul-catching among, ii. 238-9 

Tatu of, ii. 239 

Three chief tribes of, ii. 237 
Kayans, i. 30 

Ages, difficulty of ascertaining, 
ii. 175-6 

Altars, ii. 7, 15, 16, 184 

Animal Cults of, ii. 74 et seq. 

Animals carved on Beam-ends by, 
ii. 78 

Kayans — continued 

Argument, methods of, ii. 215-6 
Arithmetic of, ii. 209-11, 292 
Arrival in Borneo, tradition of, 

i. 15 (l-n.i, 16 
Arts, i. 224 

Bamboo decorations, i. 229 
Baskets and Basket Work, i. 56-9, 

178, 211-4 
Decorative Designs and their ap- 
plication, i. 233-41 
Dog pattern in, i. 248, 249, ii. 78-9 
Public character of, i. 241 
Steel-chasing, i. 196, 224 
Sword blades and handles, making, 
i. 194, 195-6, and decora- 
tion, i. 234, 238, 240 
Attitude to Cattle, ii. 77 

to Crocodile, i. 141-2, ii. 76-7 
to Deer, ii. 72, 77, 157 
to Dok, ii. 77-8 
to Monkey, ii. 77 
to Orang-utan, ii. 77 
to Pig, ii. 77 
to Tiger, ii. 77 
Augurs, note on, i. 170 n. 
of Batang Kayan, difficulties with, 

ii. 282 
Birth customs, ii. 114, 154 et seq. 
Blood - brotherhood, Human and 

Animal, ii. 76-7, 107-8 
Blow-pipes, ii. 240 

Making of, i. 215-9 
Boats, i. 55-6, 166, 199, ii. 2, %etseq. 
War-boats, i. 166-7 

Construction, i. 199 et seq., 
202-3 
Boys and Youths, Mutilation practised 

by, ii. 170 
Bride gifts, ii. 171 et seq. 
Characteristics, i. 33, 129, ii. 204-6, 

216, 217-8, 233, 283 
Charms, ii. 124 et seq. 
Chiefs, Ambitions of, ii. 275 

Duties and position of, i. 64 et seq. 
on Laki Neho, ii. 74-5 
Tombs of, ii. 35-6 
Childhood, ii. 157 et seq. 
Children, Training of, ii. 160-3 
Clothing, Women's, ii. 202 
Coffins, ii. 32, 34 
Conduct, how conditioned, ii. 194-5, 

204 
Courtship, ii. 170-2 
Creation myths, ii. 7, 137-8 
Culture, imparted to Kenyahs and 
Klemantans, ii. 234, 243 
et seq. 
Dances, ii. 78, 156-7, 167-8 

356 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

Kay ans — con tin ued 

Death as viewed by, ii. 40 et seq.t 

206 
Coming to life after, stories of, 

ii. 42-3 
Death and Burial Customs, ii. 3, 

32 et seq. , 240 
Defeat of, by Sarawak troops, 

ii. 260-1 
Deified Ancestors, as minor gods of, 

ii. 10-12 
Distribution of, i. 33, 63-4 
Divination of {see also Omens, 

infra), ii. 252 
Domestic animals of, i. 53, 61 
Drums of, i. 61 
Earrings, female, i. 47-8 
Ears, ii. 338 

Entertainment of guests, i. 123-9 
Estimated number of, i. 31 
Ethnic affinities of, ii. 235 et seq., 

241 et seq., 256 
Eyes, ii. 338, 339 
Face-form, ii. 338, 339 
Family and relationships, i. 73 et 

seq. 
Adoption of Children, i. 77-9 
Divorce, i. 76-7 
Marriage customs, i. 70-4 

Monogamy the rule, i. 73 
Slaves, position and treatment in, 

i. 70-2 
Fear of the Toh, ii. 4 
Feast (see Harvest), ii. 160 et seq. 
Fighting qualities, Weapons, and 

methods, i. 158-63 
Fines, ii. 195 
Fires, in Ritual, ii. 75 
Fish-hooks, i. 137 
Founder of the race, ii. 10-11, 138 
Gods, ii. 4, 5 et seq. 
Gongs, i. 60-1 
Group, in Hose's Classification, 

ii. 320 
Anthropological Measurements, 

». 338 
Gutta, collection and preparation of, 

i, iSi 

Hair, ii. 338, 339 
Head-form, ii. 338, 339 
Head-taking, i. 173 

and Hanging, i. 177 
High God, ii. 5, 7 
Wife of, ii. 6, 7 
Homicide, views on, ii. 199-200, 

201 
Households (see also Family, supra), 

bonds uniting, i. 84-5 
Houses, i. 50-4, 55, ii. 2, 3, 113 

Kayans — continued 

Human flesh, as used by, i. 175 n., 

ii. 105 
in Baram district at annexation, 

ii. 279 
Infancy, ii. 156-7, 158-60 
Initiation of Boys, ii. 168, 169 
Instruments, art, and customs of, 

found in S. E. Asia, ii. 242 
Invasion by, ii. 231 et seq. 
Iron-working by, i. 193-7 
Language, i. 33, 63 

Wide use of, i. 42, ii. 245 
Leaves in cults of, ii. 20 et alibi 
Madmen caged by, ii. 31, 4672.1 
Considered as possessed, ii. 28, 

46, 129 
Magic, views on, ii. 115 

Therapeutic, ii. 28 et seq. ,i2oet seq. 
Map-making, ii. 213 
Marriage customs, i. 64, 70-2, 74-6, 
170-2 
Chiefs', i. 71, 74-6, ii. 171 et seq. 
Massage, ii. 209 
Mats and Mat-making, i. 56, 59 

Communal, story about, ii. 217 
Measurements used by, ii. 212 
Mechanical Causation understood 

by, ii. 2-4 
Migrations, reasons for, i. 55 
Mode of taking Solar Altitude, 

i. 108-9 
Mourning, ii. 37-8 
Naming among, ii. 12 n. 1 
Noses of, ii. 338, 339 
Numerals, ii. 209-10 
Omen birds of, ii. 74-5 
Origin of, ii. 234, 255-6 
Ornaments, male, 44-5 
Peaceable under Sarawak rule, 

i. 183 
Penghulus of, ii. 274 et alibi 
Prisoners of, i. 173 

Alleged Torture of, i. 190-2 
Property, personal, in and on 

Tombs, ii. 50 
Religious beliefs, Rites, &c. (see also 
Afterworld and Gods, 
supra), ii. 1, 3, 4 et sqq., 

47, 48, 113, 255 
Eschatological, ii. 40 et seq. , 48 

Ghosts in, ii. 3 
Soul in, ii. 3-4 

Reincarnation of, ii. 47-8 
Soul-catcher, or Dayong, ii. 3, 29 

et seq. 
Soul-conducting gods, ii. 41 
Spiritual beings in, ii. 1 et seq. 
Tohs, ii. i8«/ seq. 

INDEX 

357 

Kayans — contimied 

Rubber collecting, i. 151 

Sayings of, ii. 165 

Shields of, i. 163 

Sickness, treatment of, see Magic, 

Therapeutic, supra 
Skin colour, i. 38, ii. 338, 339 
Social organisation, i. 63 et seq., 
11-12, 194 et seq. 

Classes in, i. 69-72, ii. 196 
Intermarriage of, i. 71-2 
Story-telling, ii. 218-9 
Stature, ii. 339 
Sub-tribes, i. 6"$&n.T., 64 
Suicide, rare among, ii. 40 n. 1 
Surgery, ii. 28 
Swivel guns, i. 61 
Tabus, Pre-Natal and Natal, i. 252, 

ii- 153-7 
Tatu among, i. 246 et seq. 
in relation to the After Life, 

ii. 47 n. 1 
Localities for, and significance of, 

i. 248 et seq. , ii. 240 
Origin, legend of, i. 247-8 
Therapeutics, see tinder Magic, 

supra 
Tobacco cultivation and Smoking, 

i. 54, 60 
Tombs, ii. 35-6 

Contents of, ii. 105 
Toy Bow of, ii. 238 n.x, 240 
Trances of, belief based on, ii. 42 
Twins, customs as to, ii. 156 
Villages, i. 54, 64, ii. 283, 284 
War-dance, ii. 167-8 
War-god, ii. 5, 6 
War tactics, i. 180 et seq. 
Wrestling of, ii. 164 
Women, bead-experts, i. 226 
Tatu of, i. 251 et seq. 
Tabus on, i. 252 
Kayo dance, i. 114 

Keane, A. H., on Caucasic type in 
Burma, &c. , ii. 229 n.x 
on the Indonesians, ii. 228, 312 
Kelaka district, Sarawak, ii. 269 
Keluri, i. 114, 121, 177 
Kenyahs, i. 30 

Arithmetic of, ii. 292 
Arts, i. 224, 241-2 

Bamboo decorations, i. 229 
Dog pattern in, ii. 78-9 
Paintings, i. 231 
Attitude of, to certain Animals, 

ii. 68, 70, 71, 72-3, jj 
Bali Flaki as regarded by, ii. 57-8 
of Baram district at annexation, 
ii. 279 

Kenyahs — continued 

Belief as to Animal reasoning, ii. 101 
Blood - brotherhood ceremonies, 

ii. 107-8 
Blow-pipe making, i. 215-9 
Boys, Crocodile-propitiation by, ii. 60 
Caps and head-bands of, i. 215 
Characteristics, i. 34, 129, 283, 

ii. 17, 204-6, 222 
Chiefs, see Tama Aping Nipa, 

Tama Aping Kuleh, Tama 

Bulan, Tama Killing 
Ambitions of, ii. 275 
Funerals of, ii. 65 
Conduct among, ii. 195 et seq. 
Culture, source of, ii. 234, 243 et seq. 
Dances, ii. 60 

Death and Burial Customs, ii. 48 
Deer-hunting methods, i. 144 
Distribution, i. 33 
Divination of, by Birds, &c. (see 

also Bali Flaki), ii. 51 et 

seq. , 56, 68, 298-9 
Private, ii. 56 
Roman parallels to, see notes at 

foot of Chapter XV. 
Draccena leaves in Ritual of, ii. 70 
Drums, uses of, ii. 54 et alibi 
Ears of, ii. 337 

Entertainment of Guests, i. 123-9 
Estimated number of, i. 31 
Ethnology of, ii. 313 
Eyes of, ii. 337 
Fable, of Mouse- Deer, and Tortoise, 

ii. 147 et seq. 
Face-form, ii. 337 
Family, see Family under Kayan 
Fish-hook, i. 137 
Fishing customs, ii. 149 
Founder of the Race, ii. 10, 11, 138 
Frayed Stick, in Ritual of, ii. 52-5 
Gods, beliefs and rites, ii. 13 et seq. 
High god, ii. 13 

Development of, belief in, 

ii. 16 et seq. 
Group, in Hose's Classification, 

ii. 320 
Anthropological measurements, 

ii. 336 et seq. 
Hair, ii. 337 
Head-form, ii. 337 
Hornbill effigy of, ii. 298-9 
Houses, i. 204 

Animals, carved on Beams of, 

ii- 73 

Galleries of, Heads, Stone Axes, 
&c. , in, ii. 11 n.3 
Hunting and Trapping by, i. 149, 
ii. 65 

358 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

Kenyahs — continued 

Journeys, Divination before, ii. 52-5 
Languages or dialects, i. 34, ii. 254-5 

& n. 1 
Life after Death idea, ii. 43 et seq. 
Madness beliefs, ii. 71 
Marriage customs, ii. 175 
Masks used by, ii. 287 
Mode of taking Solar altitude, 

i. 106-8 
Naming among, ii. 12 n.x 
Noses, i. 37-8, ii. 337 
Omens consulted by (see also Divina- 
tion, supra), ii. 51, 57-8,72 

etseq., 285 
Origin, ii. 244 
Ornaments, i. 10, 12, & see 45 

Earrings, i. 48 
Peculiarities differentiating, ii. 245 
Penghulus of, ii. 274 
Physique, i. 33-4 
Property, personal, in, andonTombs, 

ii. 50 
Restrictions on Food, animals, &c. , 

ii. 128-9 
Rice-winnowing, i. 119-20 
Shields, i. 165 

Decoration of, i. 188-9 
Skin colour, i. 34, 38, ii. 337 
Social organisation, i. 67-8, ii. 194 

et seq. 
Stature, ii. 338 
Story of Belira Fish, ii. 149 
Sub-tribes, i. 67 & n. 1 
Tatu among, i. 246-7, ii. 71 

Shelford on, i. 261-2 
Villages, i. 54, ii. 283, 286 
War, offensive, Divination before, 

»• 55 
War-coats, ii. 72-3 
Warfare, i. 184-5 
Women, of the interior, ii. 289-90 
Keppel, Captain Sir Harry, and the 

Bruni pirates, ii. 257 
Kerayans, locale of, i. 35 
Kieng, the Woodpecker, Omen-bird, 

ii- 59 
Kilong, Fish Trap, i. 138 
Kina Balangan (river), meaning, i. 17 
Kina Balu, meaning, i. 17 
Kinabalu, Mount, elevation, &c. , i. 1 
Kindred, names for, i. 79 et seq., 85 

et seq. , et alibi 
Kinship, Forbidden Degrees of, Kayan, 

i. 73-4, Sea Dayak, i. 83 
Kites, Kayan, ii. 163 
Klemantans or Kalamantans, i. 30 
Adoption ceremony of, i. 78 
Animistic Beliefs, ii. 79 et seq. 

Klemantans — continued 
Arithmetic of, ii. 211 
Art and designs of, i. 241-2 
Painting, i. 231 
Wood-carving, i. 224, ii. 19 
Articles hung on Tombs, spoilt by, 

ii. 36 n.i 
Astronomical lore and myths, 

ii. 139, 214 &n. 
Attitude to various Animals, ii. 80-1 
Beads, use of, i. 228 
Beliefs- 
Reincarnation in Animal forms, 

ii. 81 
Relationship claimed by, with 

Crocodiles, ii. 81 et seq. 
Shape-shifting, ii. 81-2 
Canoes, i. 203 

Caps and Head bands of, i. 215 
Characteristics, i. 34-5, 129, ii. 195, 

218 
Coffins, ii. 48, 49 
Cremation among, in the South, 

ii. 50 
Cult of Deceased Chiefs, ii. 10 
Culture, source of, ii. 234, 243 et 

seq., 247-8 
Death and Burial customs, ii. 10, 

48, 49- 50 
Distribution, i. 34-5 
Earrings, female, i. 48 
Entertainment of guests, i. 123-9 
Estimated number, i. 31 
Exorcism, rites of, ii. 129 et seq. 
Fires, ritual of, ii. 79 
Founder of the race, ii. 10, 11, 138 
Gods, images, rites, &c. , ii. 19 
Land of the Dead, ii. 42-3 
Supreme Being of, and substitutes, 
ii. 79 
Group, Hose's Classification, ii. 320 
Anthropological measurements, 

ii- 325-7 
Head-suspension by, i. 177, 178 
Houses, i. 54, 204, 210 
Hunters, i. 34, 144 
Jar-burial among, ii. 48, 49 
Language, i. 34, ii. 254-5 &n.\ 
Love charms, ii. 127 
Magic, ii. 115, 123-4 
Marriage customs, ii. 175 
Mode of determining time for Sowing, 

i. 109 
Mourning, ii. 38 n. 1 
Names for young children, i. 79-80 
Noses, i. 39 
Paddles, i. 203 

Peculiarities differentiating, ii. 245 
Penghulus of, ii. 274 

INDEX 

359 

Klemantans — continued 

Physique of, i. 134, 139, ii. 237 

Pigeon trap, ii. 149 

Property, personal at Tombs, ii. 50 

Pure type of Indonesian, ii. 237 

Raids, i. 182 

Religion, see Beliefs, Gods, &c. 

Shields, i. 165 

Slave-killing at Chiefs' funerals by, 

last recorded case, ii. 46 
Slave-torture by, i. 19 1-2 
Social organisation, ii. 1 95 
Story of Stupid Boy, ii. 149 et seq. 
Sub- tribes, ii. 314 

Ethnic affinities of, ii. 245-6 
Mats made by, i. 214 
Tatu of, i. 247 
Tapang tree, beliefs on, ii. 114 
Tatu among, i. 246-7, 261,264 ^.k^. 
Term, explanation, i. 42 n. 
Tombs, ii. 48-9, 50 
Use of Human flesh, i. 175 n.z 
Villages, accepting peace with Sara- 
wak, ii. 261 
War-canoes, Crocodile prows of, 

ii. 83 
Weapon, i. 34 

Women, Ear discs and Ear plugs of, 
i. 148 
Klieng, demi-god of Sea-Dayaks, 
ii. 85, 86 
Animal shapes of, ii. 89 
Klings, Coastal settlements of, i. 29 
Early visits to Borneo, i. 9 
Estimated number, i. 31 
Knots, decorative, i. 231 
Kobong, West Australian parallel to 

Ngarong, ii. 109-10 
Kohlbnigge, J. H. F., cited on Ethno- 
logy of Borneo, ii. 312 
et seq. 
Kotei, Dutch protection accepted by, 

ii. 263 
Kotei river, trend of, i. 2 
Kublai Khan, expedition of, against 

Java, i. 16 
Kuching, rainfall and temperature at, 

i- 4-5 
Residents at, ii. 268-9 

Labuan, Kadayans of, i. 21 
Laconism, Kayan, ii. 219 
Ladders, Kayan, i. 53 
Lafaang (Orion), Long Kiput story of, 

ii. 139 et seq. 
Lakekut dance, i. 114 
Lakes and rivers, Kayan god of, ii. 5 
Laki, use of title for men, and gods, 

ii. 6, 10, 13, 47 

Laki Avit, Chief, influence of, ii. 275 

Statesmanlike qualities of, ii. 206 
Laki Ivong, invocation of, i. 113 
Laki J up Urip, functions of, ii. 5, 41 
Laki Lah, Kayan chief, ii. 284-5, 286, 

287 
Laki Neho, i. 169 

Functions of, ii. 74-5 

Iban analogies, ii. 85-6 

Laki Pesong, god of children, in Kayan 

Namingof ceremonies, ii. 161 

Laki Tenangan, high god of the 

Kayans, \\.$etseq., 74"5»255 

Evolution of, as high god, ii. 12, 16 
et seq. 

Wife of, see Doh Tenangan 
Lali {see Malan, and Tabu), defined, 

ii. 14 n. 1 
Lampit (sleeping mat), i. 213 
Land for Agriculture, preparation of, 

i. 97 et seq. 
Land Dayaks, Death and Burial 
customs of, ii. 230 

Ethnic affinities of, ii. 252-3 

Face-form, ii. 325 

Hair, ii. 325 

Hat-making by, i. 215 

Head-form, ii. 325 

Hindu-Javanese blend in, i. 28 

in Hose's Classification, ii. 320 

Non-tatuing of, i. 245 

Shields, i. 166 

Skin colour, &c, ii. 325 

Stature, ii. 326 
Land of the Dead, see also Afterworld 

Kayan, ii. 40 et seq. 

Kenyah, ii. 43 

Klemantan, ii. 42-3 

Madang, map of, ii. 44-5 

Malanau, ii. 45-6 

Punan, ii. 44-5 
Land-tortoise, in Sea Dayak Fables, 

ii. 90 
Languages in relation to Ethnology of 
Borneo, ii. 253 et seq. 

Kayan, i. 33, ii. 245, 254 ^^.i 

Kenyah, i. 34, ii. o.^&n.T. 

Klemantan, i. 34, ii. 254 & ?i. 1 

Maloh, ii. 253 

Murut, ii. 254 <fc «. 1 

Punan, i. 36-7, ii. 254 & n.x 

Sea Dayak, i. 33, ii. 250, 253 
Lansat fruit, i. 6, 117 
Lanuns, origin of, ii. 253 
Lashing, decorative, of Rattan, &c. , 

i. 230-1 
Lata river, ii. 287 
Law, in Sarawak, ii. 268-9 
Lawas District, ii. 262, 269 

2 A 

36o PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

Leaves, Ritual and other uses of , various 

tribes, ii. 8, 15, 20, 31, 38, 

70, 82, 113-4, 162, 169, 

182, 251 

Left - handed men as Ambush men, 

i. 171 
Legends, ii. 136 et seg. 
Legitimacy, Kayan, ii. 171 
Legs, Kayan, i. 38 
Kenyah, i. 38 
Murut, i. 39 
Lelah chief, Crocodile-immune, ii. 83 
Lemawa rite, Kenyah, ii. 129 
Lemurs, Asiatic, i. 4 
Length, Kayan standards of, ii. 212 
Lepu Agas, curious custom observed 

by, ii. 287-8 
Lepu Asings, locale of, i. 35 
Lepu Tau, or Uma Tow, Women, 

Tatu of, i. 262 
Lerong - Kenyah Blood feud, ii. 293 

et seg. 
Lerongs, Ears, ii. 333 
Eyes, ii. 333 
Face-form, ii. 332 
Hair, ii. 333 
Head-form, ii. 332 
Nose, ii. 332 
Skin, ii. 333 
Stature, ii. 333 
Libuns, locale of, i. 35 
Life after Death, see Afterworld, and 

Land of the Dead 
Life, gods of, Kayan, ii. 5, 6 

Kenyah, ii. 4 
Limb measurements (see also Legs), 
Borneo races, ii. 316-7 
et seg. 
Limbang District, ii. 262, 269 
Liquor sale, regulation of, Sarawak, 

ii. 307 
Lisums, Nomad hunters, ii. 177 

Locale of, ii. 178 
Liver, Pig's, Divination by, ii. 8, 9, 
62 et seg. , 77 
Karen, ii. 239 
Kenyah, ii. 298-9 
Madang, ii. 290-1 
Lizards, and flying Lizards, i. 7 

in Decorative designs, Kayan, i. 234 

et seg. 
Hunted for Food, i. 143 
Omens from, Punan, ii. 85, 186 
Tabu to Kenyahs, ii. 73 
Logan, J. R., on Gangetic peoples in 

Indo-Malaya, ii. 229 n. 1 
Log-boats, see Boats 
Long, Leaves of, Ritual use of, ii. 8, 
II3-4 

Long Dallos, Anthropological Measure- 
ments of, see under Kenyah 
do. 
Long Glats, Tatu among, i. 256-7 

Women's, i. 262-3 
Long Kiputs, Astronomical lore of, 
ii. 139, 142 
Culture of, source of, ii. 247 
Ethnic affinities of, i. 246 
Stories of — 

Lafaang, ii. 139 et seg. 
Usai, ii. 142 et seg. 
Long Lawa, Kayan village, ii. 284 
Long Lawan, Kenyah village ii. 286 
Long Lutin, Kayan village, ii. 284, 

286 
Long Pata, ii. 286 

Long Patas, Bali Flaki as Omen bird 
of, ii. 79-90 
Crocodiles claimed by, as relatives, 

ii. 81-2 
Ethnic affinities of, ii. 245 
Long Pokuns, Decorative art of, 
i. 242 
Ears, ii. 331 
Eyes, ii. 331 
Face-form, ii. 330 
Hair, ii. 331 
Head-form, ii. 330 
Nose, ii. 330 
Skin, ii. 331 
Stature, ii. 331 
Long Sinong, Anthropological Measure- 
ments, see Kenyah do. 
Long Tajin, Kayan village, ii. 283 
Long Tamala, Kenyah village, chiefs 

of, ii. 283 
Long Tepai Tatu, i. 263 
Long Utan, Tatu, i. 266-7 
" Looking for Tobacco," meaning of, 

ii. 170, 176 
Looms, i. 223 
Loot, i. 173 

Love Charms, Klemantan, ii. 127 
Low, H. B. , ii. 308 n. 1 ; and the Rejang 

Kayans, ii. 261 
Lower classes, Kayan and Kenyah, 

i. 70-2 
Lugats, Nomad hunters, ii. 177 

Locale of, ii. 178 
Lullabies, Kayan, ii. \$^&n.x 
Lundu River, ii. 257 
Lupa dance, i. 114 
Lupak dance, i. 115 
Lying, Inaccuracy, and Liars — 
Kayan attitude to, ii. 202, 219 
Sea Dayak custom re, ii. 123 

Macaque Monkey, see Dok 

INDEX 

361 

Madangs, ii. 279, 289 

Anthropological measurements of, 

see Kenyah do. 
Arithmetic of, ii. 292 
Belief in Supreme Being, slightness 

of, ii. 16 
Chiefs, see Saba Irang, Tama 

Bulan, Tama Usa Tasi 
Difficulties with, ii. 281-2 ; peace 

made with, ii. 289 et seq. 
Divination of, by Pig's Liver, ii. 290-1 
Houses, ii. 289 
Migration of, ii. 282 
Warrior tribe, ii. 279 
Work of Charles Hose among, 
ii. 289-292 
Madmen, caged by Kayans, ii. 31, 

46 n. 1 
Madness, attributed to Toh- possession, 
ii. 28, 46, 129 
Exorcism for, ii. 31 
From touching dried Heads, ii. 22 
God of, Kayan, ii. 5, 6 
Kenyah beliefs on, ii. 13, 71 
Malanau view of, ii. 130 
Magic, attitude to, of various tribes, 
ii. 115 
Klemantan, aims of, ii. 123-4 
Sea Dayak, instance of, ii. 120 
Black, Sebop, ii. 117 et seq. 
Books of, Batta, on Bark, i. 13 
Mahajapit, destruction of, i. 18 
Overlordship of, i. 14, 15 
Princess of, story of, i. 15 n. 1 
Maias, see Orang-utan 
Maiwang, two - headed Dog, Bridge- 
guardian in Malanau belief, 

"• 45 
Malacca, overlordship of, i. 14, 15 
Malan, or Lali, see also Tabu 

Agricultural, i. 109-10, in 

Defined, ii. 14 n. 1 

When operative, i. 123, 152-3 £/ a/zfo' 
Malanaus, or Milanaus, Animal rela- 
tions claimed by, ii. 81 

Art achievements of, i. 224 

Chief god of, ii. 1 30 

Cock-fight, substituted for Slave- 
killing, Chiefs funeral, ii. 46 

Drawings, i. 232 

Ears, ii. 334 

Exorcisms, ii. 46, 129, 130, 134-5 

Eyes, ii. 334 

Face-form, ii. 334 

Good looks of, i. 50 

Hair, ii. 334 

Hat-making by, i. 215 

Head-deformation among, i. 48-50 

Head-form, ii. 333 

Malanaus — continued 

Ideas of After-life, ii. 45-6 
Magic, ii. 115 ; aims of, ii. 123-4 
Medicine Women among, ii. i^oetseq. 
Murder by, of Sarawak English 

Officers, ii. 259 
Nose, ii. 334 
Oath, Dog used in, ii. 80 
Sacrifices, Animal and Human, 

i. 11, ii. 106 
Skin colour, ii. 334 
Souls, Two, belief in, ii. 45-6 
Spirits believed in by, ii. 130 
Stature, ii. 334 

Tatuing not practised by, i. 246 
Malangs, Ears, ii. 329 
Eyes, ii. 329 
Face-form, ii. 329 
Hair, ii. 330 
Head-form, ii. 329 
Nose, ii. 329 
Skin, ii. 330 
Stature, ii. 330 
Malat Blades, Kayan workmanship in, 

i. 194, 195-6 
Malay Archipelago, Ethnology of, 

ii. 311 et seq. 
Art, Design in, i. 244, ii. 251 n. 1 
Co-operation in Government, Sara- 
wak, ii. 265 n. 1 et seq. 
Culture, analogies of, with Sea 

Dayak, ii. 250-1 
Elders, associated in Sarawak 

administration, ii. 272 
Encouragement of Head - taking, 

i. 188 
Language, form of Lingua franca 

of Borneo, i. 42 
Schools, of Sarawak, ii. 307 
Sultans, and their capitals, i. 9 
"Malays" of the Coast regions, i. 

et seq., 30, 31 
Estimated number, i. 31 
Pigs and Reincarnation, ii. 48 
Malayised tribes of the Interior, ii. 34 
Malaysia, Dravidian element in, tribes 

representing, ii. 229 
Maligang, Guardian of the Bridge in 

the Afterworld, ii. 41, 42 
Punan version of, ii. 44 
Malohs, Brass- working of, i. 197 
Crocodile, eaten by, ii. 253 
Culture of, ii. 253 
Ears, ii. 326 

Ethnology of, i. 28, ii. 253 
Face-form, ii. 326 
Hair, ii. 326-7 
Head- form, ii. 253, 326 
in Hose's Classification, ii. 320 

362 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

Malohs — contin ued 
Language, ii. 253 
Nose, ii. 326 
Skin, ii. 327 
Stature, ii. 327 
Tatu not used by, i. 245 
Mammals, Asiatic, i. 24 
Bornean, i. 7 
Hunted for food, i. 143-4 
Manangs, see Medicine Men 
Mango, i. 6, 117 
Mangosteen, i. 6, 117 
Manhood, beginning of, Kayan, ii. 166 
Mansur Shah, i. 16 
Map of the Afterworld, by a Madang 

chief, ii. 43-4 
Map-making, ii. 43, 213 
Maraja Kuli, king of Puni, and the 

Chinese, i. 16, 17, 26 
Marriage by Capture, Kayan simulation 

of, ii. 172-4 
Marriage customs — 
Kalabit, ii. 176, 247 
Karen, ii. 239 
Kayan, i. 64, 70-2, ii. 170-1 

Chiefs and upper classes, i. 71, 

74-6, ii. 171 et seq. 
Feasts, i. 76 
Gifts, i. 76&/1.2 
Interclass marriages, i. 70-2 
Kenyah, see Kayan, supra 
Punan, ii. 183-4 
Sea Dayak, i. 82, 83 
Married life, i. 76 et seq. 
Marudi, see Claudetown 
Masks used by — 
Dayongs, ii. 115 

Lepu Aga people (Kenyahs), ii. 287 
& n. 1 
Massage, Kayan, ii. 209 
Matriarchy, survivals of, i. 29, ii. 175 
Mats and Mat-making — 

Kayan, i. 56, 59, 212,217, ii. 252 &n. 
Kenyah, ii. 252 
Punan, i. 224, ii. 252 
Matu district, ii. 269 
Maxwell, F. R. O. , ii. 308 n. 1 
May, Susanna, and Commerce, loss of, 
and murder of crews at 
Bruni, i. 24 
M'Dougall, Dr. W. , and other colla- 
borators, Haddon's ac- 
knowledgments to, ii. 324 
Measurements, Kayan, ii. 212 

Relative, of Borneo races, ii. 316 
et seq. 
Medicine, Bear's gall-bladder as, i. 144 
Chinese, Bezoar stones, &c. , in, 
i. 155-6 

Medicine — continued 

Human flesh in, i. 175 n. 2, ii. 9 n. 1 
Tobacco plant in, ii. 208 
Medicine Man, of Sea Dayaks, ii. 115-6 

Women, Malanau, ii. 130 et seq. 
Medicines, Kayan use of, ii. 206 et seq. 
Melanesians, in Sumatra, &c. , ii. 312 

None in Borneo, ii. 34 
Men, Domestic Life and Occupations, 
i. 116 et seq. 
Spirits or souls of, as Toh, ii. 4, 19 
et seq. 
Mental life of Savage peoples, ii. 221-2 
Power ascribed to Animals, basis of 
beliefs on, ii. 100-2 
Mercury, in Sarawak, ii. 306 
Metal pot for cooking Rice, i. 60 
Mice, Asiatic, i. 4 
Middle classes, Kayan and Kenyah, 

i. 70-2 
Migratory habits, and reasons for, 
various tribes, i. 41, 42, 
55, 98-9, 203 et seq., 210, 
ii. 16 
Karen, ii. 238 
Milanau, see Malanau 
Military use made of Sea Dayaks, 

ii- 305 
Minerals in Sarawak, ii. 306 &n. 1 
Ming Dynasty, influence of, i. 16 
Mingris tree, Bee-nests in, i. 154 
Mining, Gold and Diamond, early 
Chinese, i. 17 ; present 
day, i. 28-9 
Miri people, Animal relations claimed 
by, ii. 81 
in story of Usai, ii. 143 
Modesty, Kayan, &c. , ii. 202-3 
Mohammed, Sultan, and his successors, 

i. 19 et seq. 
Mohammedanism in Borneo, i. 8 
Introduction of, i. 18 
Arab influence in, i. 29 
Mongol drift into Indo-Chinese area, 

ii. 230 
Mongoloid element in Bornean peoples, 

ii. 226 et seq. 
Monkeys, Asiatic, i. 4 

Cocoa-nut or Dok, Kayan attitude to, 

ii. 77-8 
Hunted for food, i. 143, 145 
Indigenous, i. 7 
in Kenyah Decoration, i. 241-2 
Long-nosed, Indigenous, i. 7 

Avoided by Pregnant women, 

ii- 153 
Kenyah attitude to, ii. 73, 77, 101 
Long- tailed, Bezoar stones from, 
i- 155 

INDEX 

363 

Monkey and Toad, in Barawan story, 

ii. 151-2 
Moral and Intellectual Peculiarities, 
ii. 194 et seq. 

Qualities, Kayan word for, ii. 203-4 
Morgan, Prof. Lloyd, cited, ii. 100 
Moskowski, — , cited, ii. 313 
Mosquitoes, in legend and in fact, 

ii. 143-4 
Motifs, in Kayan, Decorative Art, 

i. 234 et seq. 
Mountains, i. 1, 2, ii. 279, 287 
Mourners, Purification of, ii. 36-7 
Mourning, for Chiefs after War, i. 176 

Kayan, ii. 37-8 
Mouse-deer, hunted for food, i. 143 

Klemantan attitude to, ii. 81 

Omens from, ii. 72 

in Sea Dayak Fables, ii. 90 

and Tortoise in Kenyah Fable, 
ii. 147 et seq. 
Muda Hasim, and Rajah Brooke, 

i. 25-6 
Mudong Alan Mountain, ii. 289 
Muka District, i. 269 
Muntjac, hunted for food, i. 143 

Klemantan attitude to, ii. 80-1 

Omens from, ii. 72 
Murders of English officers of Sara- 
wak government, ii. 259 
Muriks, Ethnic affinities of, ii. 245 

Trance beliefs of, ii. 42-3 
Muruts, i. 30 

Agriculture of, i. 35 

Clay-Crocodiles of, ii. 84 

Culture, source, &c. , of, ii. 2^6 et seq. 

Distribution, i. 35 

Drunkenness, &c. , of, i. 35, 130, 
ii. 195 

Ear, ii. 325 

Earlier in Borneo than Kayans, 
ii. 232 

Estimated number, i. 31 

Ethnic affinities, i. 35, ii. 246 et seq. 

Eye, ii. 324-5 

Face-form, ii. 324 

Group, Anthropometrical Observa- 
tions on, ii. 324-5 
Hose's Classification, 320 

Hair, ii, 325 

Hairpins, i. 44 

Head-form, ii. 324 

Invasion by, ii. 231 

Jar-burial of, ii. 49-50 

Language, ii. 254-5 &n.\ 

Nose, ii. 324 

Physique, i. 35 

Shields, i. 165-6 

Skin colour, i. 35, 39, ii. 325 

Muruts — continued 

Social organisation, i. 35 
Stature, ii. 325 
Subdued by Bruni, i. 19 
Tatu among, i. 265 et seq. 
Weapons, ii. 246 
Music and Song, see also Lullabies 
Kayan, ii. 166 
Punan, ii. 192 
Musical Instruments, see Bamboo Pipes, 
Drums, Gongs, Guitars, 
Harmonica, Jew's Harp, 
Keluri, Nose Flute, Pipe 
Kayan, found in S.E. Asia, ii. 242 
Myths, Legends, and Stories, ii. 136 
et seq. 
in relation to Religion, ii. 136-7 

Nagas, resemblances to Kayans, 

ii. 241 et seq. 
Names, Proper, Children's, and Adults' 
at various ages and stages, 
i. 79 et seq. , <fc Appendix, 
i. 85 et seq., ii. 24, 160-3, 
239 
" Native officers," in Sarawak govern- 
ment, ii. 270 
Nature Spirits, Karen beliefs in, 

ii. 238 
Necklaces, Kayan, Men's, i. 44 ; 

Women's, i. 47 

Negrito aspect met with, in N. Borneo, 

i. 28 

Race, no traces of, ii. 225-6, 311 

Negroid features, how accounted for, 

ii. 225 &n. 1 
Netherlands Borneo, see Dutch Borneo 
Netting of Fish, i. 135-6 
Ngarong, or Secret Helper, Sea Dayak, 
ii. 90 et seq. 
Supplementary note on, ii. 114 
and Totemism, ii. 109 et seq. 
Ngelai wood, for Boat-building, i. 199 
Nieuwenhuis, Dr. A. W. , cited on 
Kayan Tatu, i. 247 et seq. , 
passim. 
Ethnological expeditions of, in Dutch 
Borneo, ii. 3io<&«. 1 
Night in a Bornean guest-place, i. 121 
Ningka vases, i. 62 
Nomad Hunter tribes, ii. 177 et seq. 
Nose-flute, i. 121 

Noses, Observations on, Haddon's 
Method of taking, ii. 321-2 
Barawan, i. 327 
Kalabit, ii. 324 
Kayan, ii. 338, 339 
Kenyah, ii. 337 
Klemantan, i. 39 

364 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

Noses — continued 

Lerong, ii. 332 

Long Pokun, ii. 330 

Malang, ii. 329 

Maloh, ii. 326 

Milanau, ii. 334 

Murut, ii. 324 

Pagan tribes in general, i. 37-9 

Punan, ii. 179, 335, 336 

Sea Dayak, ii. 340 

Sebop, ii. 332 

Sibuyan, ii. 341 
Numerals, Kayan, ii. 209-10 

Oath, Malanau, Dog used in, ii. 80 
Oding Lahang, Founder of Kayan, 
Kenyan and Klemantan 
races, ii. 11, 138 

Kayans claiming descent from, ii. 10 

Invoking intercession of, ii. 10 
'Odour," Kayan idea on, ii. 24, 157 

&n.x 
Oko Perbungan, wife of Supreme 
Being, in Madang belief, 
ii. 44 
Omen- Animals, &c, 'Kayan, ii. 4, 79 ; 
Kenyah, ii. 73, 79, 101 ; 
Punan, ii. 84, 85, 186 

Spirits of, ii. 4, 19 et seq. 
Omen -Birds, see also Birds, Divina- 
tion by, Bali Flaki, & 
under Names 

Cult of, explanation, ii. 103 

Kayan, ii. 74-5 

Kenyah, ii. 51 et seq. 

Punan, ii. 84 

Sea Dayak, ii. 86-7 

Sebop, ii. 1 18-9 
Omens (see also Divination, and Magic), 
i. 65, 71 

Agricultural, i. 109-10, 11 1 

Concerned with Boat Construction, 
i. 202 

Consulted as to the Dead, Kayan, 
ii. 215 

and House-building, i. 209 

Kayan word for, suggestive resem- 
blance of, ii. 256 

Kenyah view on, ii. 57-8 

and Marriage, i. 75, ii. 171, 184 

Note on, i. 170 n. 

Sea Dayak, ii. 90 

of War, i. 168-70 
Omen-taking, by Tama Bulan, ii. 52, 

54. 55- 285 
Orang Bukits, Slave - killing by, at 
Chiefs' funerals, last re- 
corded case, ii. 46 

Slave torture by, i. 192 

Orang Kubu, of Sumatra, ii. 225 
Orang Malayu, i. 30 
Orang-utan, Asiatic, i. 4 

Attitude to, of Kayans and Kenyahs, 

»• 73. 77> i°i 

Avoided by Pregnant Women, ii. 152 
Orchids, i. 6 
Orion, see Lafaang 

Ornaments, discarded in Mourning, 
ii. 38 

Karen, ii. 238 

Kayan, male, i. 44-5 

Kenyah, i. 10, 12, & see i. 45 

Klemantan, i. 45 

Tatuing as, i. 247 
Orobong Plant, uses of, ii. 114, 207 
Ot-Danum, see Ulu Ayar 
Otter, clawless, Asiatic, i. 4 
Otters, hunted for food, i. 143 
Oya District, ii. 269 

Paddles, Kayan, &c, i. 132, 203 

Klemantan, i. 224 
Pagan tribes, see also under separate 
Names 

Animism among, i. 41 

Features common to all, i. 37 et seq. 

Linguistic diversity among, i. 42 

Political organisation of, 40-1 

Six principal groups of, i. 30 et seq. 

Social life of, i. 39 
Pain, caused by Toh, treatment of, 

ii. 28, 120 et sqq. 
Painting, i. 230, 231-2 

of Carved Woodwork, i. 226 
Palm Leaves in Ritual, see Leaves 

Punan Houses made of, ii. 182 
Palms (see also Areca, Rattan, Sago, 

and Silat), i. 6 
Pandanus Leaves in Iban Basketwork, 

&c. , ii. 251 
Pantar vases, i. 62 
Paper charms, ii. 127 
Para rubber, see Rubber culture 
Parang (sword), features and uses of, 

i. 159-60 
Parents, Names of, i. 80, ii. 239 

Tabus observed by pre-natal and 
post-natal, ii. 153 et seq. 
Pari tribes, ii. 313 
'■'Parity' defined, ii. 14 n. 1 
Parrots caught with Bird-lime, i. 149 
Pa Silong, high god of the Klemantans, 

ii. 6 
Pasir, and its Sultan, i. 9 
Pata river, ii. 284 
Peace, Chiefs promoting, ii. 206 
Peacemakings, ii. 282 et seq., 289 et seq. 
Pearse, C. S. , ii. 308 n. 1 

INDEX 

365 

Pegasus, square of, Long Kiput name 

for, ii. 139 
Peng or Pinhing of Koti Basin, Tatu 

of, Shelford on, i. 261 
Penghulus, office and duties of, 
ii. 219-20, 272 et seq. 
Some notable, ii. 281 
of Sarawak, ii. 267 
of Various tribes, ii. 274-5 
Peoples (see also Races, and Tribes, 
under Names), i. 8 et seq., 
28 et seq. 
Descriptions of, A. H. Haddon, 

ii. 321 et seq. 
of Sarawak, Classification of, by 

Hose, ii. 319, 320 
Subdued by Alak ber Tata, i. 18 
& n.x, 19 
Pepper trade of Banjermasin, ii. 309 
n.x 
Dutch and English attempts to secure, 
i. 22 
Perham, Archdeacon, cited, ii. 16, 85, 

87 
Pest-scaring methods, i. 102-3, n- 89 
Petara, Sea Dayak cult of, ii. 26, 85, 

86 
Petroleum, in Sarawak, ii. 306 
Pets, Kayan, ii. 164 
Philippine Islands, Agriculture in, 

similar to Murut, ii. 247 
Physical Characters of the Races and 
Peoples of Borneo, A. C. 
Haddon, ii. 311-41 
Pigs, Asiatic, i. 3 

Bearded, Indigenous, i. 7 
Domestic, attitude to and beliefs on 
of Borneans, ii. 4, J7, 80, 
84, 90 
Differences between, and Wild Pigs, 

ii. 104 
Malays, and Kayan Reincarnation 

beliefs, ii. 48 
Sacrifices of, ii. 8, 9, 52, 60 et seq. 
et alibi 
Divination from Entrails of, ii. 8, 
9, 62 et seq., jj, 239, 
290-1, 298-9 
Substituted for Slaves, ii. 106 et 
seq. 
Traps for, i. 145 
Wild, ii. 104 

Hunted for food, i. 143 & n. 1, 
144, ii. 65 
Pigafetta, in Bruni, i. 18 
Pigeon, see Ground Pigeon 
Pigeon's Eye Pattern, i. 242 
Pigment (see also Dyeing), Decorative 
use of, i. 231, 232 

Piles, under Houses, i. 203-6 

Pipe used in Bird-trapping, Kenyah, 

&c. , i. 149 
Piracy, external and native, i. 23, 24 
Pitcher-plants, i. 6 
Plandok, see Mouse-deer 
Plant-motifs, in Sea Dayak design, 

i. 243, 244 
Plants, Animistic beliefs connected with, 
ii. 51 et seq., 113-4 
in Ritual, see also Leaves 
Areca palm, ii. 131 
Draccena, ii. 15, 70, 82, 114 
Ginger plant, ii. 120, 121 
Orobong, ii. 114 
Plates of Decorative Art subjects, Ex- 
planation of, i. 280-3 
Pleiades, Long Kiput name for, 
ii. 139 
Sea Dayak Sowing-time determined 
by, i. 109 
Plough, Dusun use of, i. 97 
Poison for Darts, i. 218-9 
Poisoned Darts, ii. 180-3 
Poisoning Rivers, ii. 149 
Pokun - Punan feud, and the result, 

ii. 180-1 
Poli (Bruni), Chinese accounts of, 

i. 10, 11 &n.x, 12 
Polyandry, Punan, ii. 183 
Polynesians and Indonesians, relations 

between, ii. 228-9 dbn.x 
Pontianak, Sultan of, ii. 263 
Population, Existing, Derivation of, 
ii. 225 
Immigrant and Indigenous, i. 28-9 

Main divisions of, i. 29-30 
Numbers, estimated, i. 31 
Pagan tribes, i. 30 et seq. 
Porcupines, Asiatic, i. 4 
Bezoar stones from, i. 155 
Hunted for Food, i. 143 
as Ngarong, ii. 94-5 
Pork, Fat, put into mouths of dried 

Heads, ii. 21 
Portages, i. 133 
Portuguese expulsion from Borneo, 

ii. 309 
Possession, Madness ascribed to, 
ii. 28, 46, 129 
Exorcism for, ii. 31 
Posts or Poles as Altars, ii. 7, 8 

Funeral uses of, Kayan, ii. 35-7 ; 

Sea Dayak, ii. 50 
in Magic, Sebop, ii. 117 
Pottery, i. 219-20 
Pounding the Rice, i. 118-9 
Practical jokes, Kayan love of, 
ii. 217-8 

366 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

Prawn design in Tatu, Kenyan, ii. 71 

Trap, i. 138-9 
Prayers, Bornean, ii. 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 

25. 75 
Karen, ii. 238 
Pre-Dravidian element in the Archi- 
pelago, ii. 31 1-2 
Pre-Marital Irregular Unions, i. 71 
Prohibition, see also Tabu 

Affecting children, ii. 33, 71, 113 
Proper names, see Names 
Property, Inheritance of, i. 83 
Household, i. 52 et seq. 
Inquiring of Ghost as to division of, 

ii. 38-9 &nn. 1, 2 
Personal, Funeral use of — 

Kayan, ii. 3<fc#. 1, ii. 36 &nn. 1,2, 

So 
Kenyah, ii. 50 
Klemantan, ii. 50 
Proto-Dravidian blend in Proto- Malay, 

ii. 229 
Proto-Malays, see also Sea Dayak 
Blend in stock of, ii. 229 
in Borneo, ii. 313 et seq. 
Brachycephalic heads of, ii. 312-3 
Pulang Gana, Rice-culture spirit of 

Sea Dayaks, ii. 88 
Pulo Klemantan, Malay name of 

Borneo, i. 6, 42 n. 
Pulut rubber, i. 151 
Punans, i. 30 

Allied tribes, i. 35, 177, 193, 244 
Animal names given to Children, 

ii. 84 
Animistic beliefs of, ii. 84 
Arithmetical limit, ii. 209, 211 
Aspect of, ii. 178-9, 185, 312 
Assimilation of, into settled com- 
munities, ii. 244 
Attitude to Crocodiles, ii. 84, 189-90 
Belongings of, ii. 190-1 
Birth customs, ii. 184-5 
Blow-pipes of, ii. 99, 182, 191, 226 
Charm attached to, ii. 126 
Manufacture of, i. 215-9 
Burial customs, i. 36 
Characteristics, i. 36, ii. 180-3, z%7-9 

et seq. 
Charms, ii. 126, 190 
Chiefs, functions of, ii. 182 
Childhood among, ii. 185 
Dances of, ii. 193 
Distribution of, i. 35-6, ii. 177-8, 

3i3 
Divine Ancestor of, ii. 138 
Dress of, ii. 190 
Dyeing by, i. 214 
Ears, ii. 335, 336 

Punans — continued 

Estimated number, i. 31 

Exorcisms of, ii. 131 

Expertise in Camphor collection, 

i- 152-3 

Eyes, ii. 335, 336 

Face-form, ii. 335, 336 

Food, i. 155, ii. 182 

Group, in Hose's Classification, 

ii. 320 
Hair, ii. 312, 336 
Handicrafts, i. 36, 214-6, 224 
Head-form, ii. 179, 335, 336 
Houses, i. 210, & see 232, ii. 182 
Hunting of, i. 143, ii. 99, 182 

Love of, i. 35 

Skill in, ii. 191-2 
Ideas on After-life, ii. 44-5 
Inter-group relations, ii. 187 
Language, i. 36-7, ii. 254-5 & n. 1 
Mat-work of, decoration of, i. 224 
Noses, ii. 179, 335, 336 
Omen creatures, ii. 84, 88, 186 
Physique, i. 36 

Pig, domestic, not eaten by, ii. 84 
Races resembling elsewhere, ii. 225 
Religious beliefs, ii. 138, 185 et seq. 
Rites, Betel-nut blossom in, ii. 85 
Rubber-growing by, i. 151 
Scars, non-Keloid, i. 246 
Scouting skill of, ii. 192 
Sketches, i. 232 
Skin-colour, i. 39, ii. 178, 179, 227, 

312- 339 
Social organisation, i. 36, ii. 179, 

182 et seq., 187-8 
Stature, ii. 178-9, 336 
Sub-groups, ii. 177 
Tatuing not used by, i. 245 
Totemism absent among, ii. 99 
Vengeance, ii. 180-1 
Weapons (see also Blow-pipe, supra), 
ii. 19, 180, 181, 182, 190, 
191 
Puni (Bruni), Chinese accounts of, 

i. 12, 13 
Punishments, i. 65, ii. 196, 197 

dsn.T, 198 
Punitive expeditions, i. 183-4 
Purification ceremonies, ii. 36-7, 128-9 
Pythons, as Ngarong, ii. 93-4 
in Sea Dayak story, ii. 144 
Sizes of, i. 7 

Quiver for Poisoned Darts, i. 219 

Races, Bornean, Classification of, 
drawn up by Dr. Hose, 
ii. 319, 320 

INDEX 

367 

Races and Peoples of Borneo, The 
Physical Characters of, 
A. C. Haddon, ii. 311-41 
Rafflesia, i. 6 

Ragam, Nakoda, see Bulkiah, Sultan 
Raid, wanton, tribes guilty of, i. 182-3 
Rainfall, i. 4, 5 

Rain-bird, Crested, omens from, ii. 59 
Rain - making, in Kenyah Story, 

ii. i49<£». 1 
Rajahs of Sarawak, see Brooke, Sir 

Charles, and Sir James 
Rakshas, land of, i. xx&n.x 
Rambutan, i. 6, 117 
Rats, Asiatic, i. 4 

Why they eat Rice, Sea Dayak 
Legend, ii. 145 
Rattan Palm, varieties, collection, and 
uses of, i. 6, 44, 46-7, 117, 
I37. 153-4. 161-2, 231 
Re-incarnation, belief in, ii. 47-8 

in Animal form, ii. 81, 102, 114 
Rejang District, ii. 269, 271 
River, ii. 287 

Navigable length, i. 5 
Trend, i. 2 
Religion, ii. 4 et seg., 65, 185 et seq. 
as affecting Conduct, ii. 204-5 
Myths in relation to, ii. 136-7 
Reptiles, i. 7 

Residents, Dutch, system of, estab- 
lished, ii. 309 
Sarawak, ii. 268-9 » 

Administrative duties, ii. 269 et 

seq. 
Dwellings of, ii. 270-1 
Official journeys of, ii. 272, 281 
Described, ii. 278 et seq. 
Resin-collecting, i. 155 
Revenue, Sarawak, Sources of, 

ii. 305-6 
Rhinoceros, African, Horn of, ii. 221 
Asiatic, i. 3 

Bornean, Horn of, used for Sword 
hilts, ii. 221 n.x 
Hunted, i. 143, 145 
Ribai, Sea Dayak River-god, Crocodile 

shape of, ii. 89 
Rice (padi), Kayan and Kenyah word 
for, ii. 313 n. 2 
Baskets for carrying, i. 56-7, 105, 

212 
Culture — 

Crocodile and Spirit connected 

with, Sea Dayak, ii. 88-9 
Divination during, ii. 56 
Drying, Pounding, Winnowing, 
&c. , and appliances for, 
i- 53- 99-io5> 118-20 

105-15 
Ritual, 

1 1 3-4 

II2<fc«.2 

11-12 

Rice culture — continued 

Introduction of, in relation to de- 
cay of Totemism, ii. 97 
Karen, ii. 238 

Kayan, extravagance of, ii. 243 
Pagan tribes, i. 35, 36, 40 
Reaping {see also Harvest), 

i. 104-5 

Ritual associated with, 

Crocodile - patterned, h 

ii. 83, 131 
Drink from (see Borak), i, 
and Fertility in Women, i 
Food-staple, i. 97 
Magic to Spoil, ii. 123-4 
Selection of Seed grain, i. 
Soul of, Bornean and Karen beliet 

in, ii. 113, 239 
Storage, i. 53-4, 55, 105, 111-12, 

ii. 139 
in relation to Toh, ii. 23 
Rice-sparrows, i. 104 
Rites, Leaves used in, see Leaves 
River Toh, rites concerning, ii. 25 
River-turtle as Ngarong, ii. 94 
Rivers, i. 2 

as Highways, i. 131, ii. 271 
Courses, features of, i. 5 
Guardians, in after-life (see Fish, 

Horn bill, <hc), ii. 187 
Life on, and beside, i. 131 et 

seq. 
Navigable lengths, i. 5 
Rite on Boys entering, ii. 25 
in Sarawak proper, ii. 257 
Rod and Line fishing, i. 137 
Rollick at Harvest time, i. 113 et seq. 
Roman parallels to Kenyah divining 
methods, see Notes, at foot 
of Chapter XV 
Roofs, i. 206-7 
Roots, Edible, i. 6 
Roth, H. Ling, Iban legends collected 

by, ii. 137 
Rubber, i. 6 

Collecting, &c, i. 117, 151-2 
Cultivation of, in Sarawak, ii. 306 

nn. 1,2 
as Tribute, Madang, ii. 292 
Rubber-producing trees, &c. , i. 151 
Rusa vases, i. 62 

Saat, Mountain, ii. 287 
Saba Irang, Madang Chief, ii. 286 
Sabans, locale of, i. 35 
Sacrifice, see Animal, Human, and 
Votive 
Past and present, i. 10, 11 
Sadong river, ii. 257 

368 

PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

Sago Palms, i. 6 

Pith as Food, i. 97, ii. 182, tools 

for dealing with, ii. 190-1 

&n.x 
Sakai race, Dravidian element in, 

ii. 229 
Salt, given at Ka.yan Births, ii. 156 
Samarahan river, ii. 257 
Sambas, Dutch and English competi- 
tion at, i. 22 
Portuguese expulsion from, ii. 309 
and its Sultan, i. 9 
Sanitary precautions, Kayan, ii. 206-7 
Santubong, Hindu ornaments found 

at, i. 12 
Sarawak, see also Tama Bulan 

Administrative service in, notable 

members of, ii. 308 n. 1 
Agriculture, improvement in, ii. 307 
Alcohol regulations, ii. 307 
Area, i. 26, ii. 237-9 
Cambridge expedition to, ii. 311 
Council, Supreme, composition of, 

ii. 266 
Datus, the, in, ii. 266 
Defence, ii. 269 
Divisions, ii. 269 
Fire-arms, Sales of, regulation of, 

ii. 307 
Five main groups of Peoples in, 

Haddon on, ii. 314 
Government in, Methods and prin- 
ciples of, ii. 264 et seq., 

275 et seq., 306 &n. 2, 

307-8 
Kadayans in, i. 21 
Law, ii. 268-9 
Minerals in, ii. 3o6<fcra. 1 
Penghulus of, ii. 267 
Peoples of, Classification of, by 

Hose, ii. 319, 320 
Raj of, i. 8 
Rajah Brooke's rule over, story 

of, i. 25, 26, 27, ii. 257 

et seq. 
Rajahs of, see Brooke, Sir James 

and Sir Charles 
Residents, administrative duties of, 

ii. 269 et seq. 
Revenue, Sources of, ii. 305-6 
Rivers draining, i. 2, ii. 257 
Rubber, culture in, ii. ^o6&nn. 1,2 
Schools and Education in, ii. 307 
State Council, composition of, 

ii. 267 
Suppression in, of Head-hunting, 

ii. 306 
Taxation, ii. 270, 274, 279-81, 299, 

3°5 

Sarawak — con tin ued 

Trade, Development of, ii. 271, 281, 

3°7 
Sarawak Rangers, composition of, 

ii. 269 
Sarawak river, ii. 257 
Saribas District, ii. 269 
River, ii. 257 
Sea Dayaks on, i. 31-2 
Sarrasin, MM., cited, ii. 312 
Sayings, Kayan, ii. 165 
Scalp-massage, i. 74 
Scent, in Klemantan Love Charms, 

ii. 127 
Schools and Education, Sarawak, 

ii. 307 
Scouts, Punans as, ii. 192 
Sea Dayaks, or Ibans, i. 30 

Animals used by, in Sacrifice, ii. 90 
Arithmetical ideas of, ii. 211 
Aunts, number of, and difficulties 

caused by, ii. 199 
Axes of, ii. 251 

Bamboo Decorations of, i. 229, 243 
in Baram district, troubles with, ii. 28 
Beliefs, cults, &c. , of, ii. 10, 16, 19, 

26-7, 85 et seq. 
Birth customs, ii. 24 
Characteristics, i. 32, 184, ii. 89, 

222, 250, 293 
Charms, ii. 126-7 
Clothing, dressy taste in, i. 32, 46 
Coats, Male and Female, i. 43 n. , 

46, 47 
Corsets, Brass, i. 46-7, 197, ii. 252 
Crocodile Images of, ii. 88-9 
Culture, ii. 250-1 
Death and Burial customs, ii. 10 
Cult of Deceased Chiefs, ii. 10 
Decorative Arts of, i. 224 

Designs, &c. , i. 242 et seq. 
Distribution and spread of, i. 31-2 
Distrusted by Kayans &c. , i. 184 
Divorce, i. 82-3 
Drunkenness and disorder among, 

i. 130, ii. 195 
Ears, ii. 340 

Entertainment of Guests, i. 129-30 
Estimated number, i. 31 
Ethnology of, ii. 248 et seq. 
Eyes, ii. 340 
Face-form, ii. 340 
Feast of, ii. 86 
Fire-piston of, i. 197-9 
Fish-trap, i. 137-8 
Gods of, ii. 13 

Group, Anthropological Measure- 
ments, ii. 339 
Hair, ii. 340 

INDEX 

369 

Sea Dayaks — continued 
Head-form, ii. 339 
Head-hunting &c. , i. 32-3, 83, 159, 

186-7, n- 249> 273 
Mode of Suspending Heads, i. 178 
Origin and history of custom, 

i. 187 et seq. 
Hornbill, sacred to, ii. 88 
in Hose's Classification, ii. 320 
Houses, i. 54-5, 204, 210 
Hunting Traps, i. 148-9 

Measuring of, i. 145 
Ideas on Europe, ii. 213 
Incest and its punishment among, 

ii. 199 
Invasion by, ii. 231 
Klieng, demi-god of, ii. 85 
Language, i. 33, 42, ii. 250, 253 
Liars' Cairns of Stick, ii. 123 
Magic, instance of, ii. 120 
Marriage customs, i. 76 n.i, ii. 175 
Medicine Man of, ii. 11 5-6 
Mission work among, ii. 307 
Mode of determining Sowing time, 

i. 109 
Murders by, ii. 202 
Name for little Child, i. 79 
Ngarong, or Secret Helper, ii. 90 

et seq. 
Nose, ii. 340 

Omens consulted by, ii. 86-7, 90 
Operations against, i. 183-4, ii. 300, 

301 et seq. 
Origin of, ii. 248-9 
Penghulus of, ii. 274-5 
Petara of, ii. 26, 85, 86 
Physique of, i. 32 
Piracies of, i. 25 
Raids, i. 182 

Religious beliefs, ii. 13, 251 
Rice-culture, rites of, ii. 88-9 
Rivalry with other tribes, 300-1 
Shell-work, i. 233 
Shield, i. 166, ii. 251 
Skin colour, i. 32, ii. 340 
Social organisation, i. 82-3, ii. 195 
Sorcerers and Sorcery, ii. 1 16-7 & n. 1 
Stature, ii. 340 
Story of Simpang Impang, ii. 144 

et seq. 
Sword, ii. 251 

Tapang tree, beliefs on, ii. 114 
Tatu, i. 273-7 
Taxation of, ii. 305 
Tribe best known tribe to Europeans, 

i- 3i 
Uni-lingual, i. 42 
Untrustworthy tales of, as to 

Kayans, i. 190-1 

Sea Dayaks — continued 
Vases treasured by, i. 62 

Inheritance of, i. 84 
Village, i. 40, 54 
Warfare, i. 185 
War-god, ii. 85 
Weaving, Decorated, i. 233 
Seasons, for Agricultural work, deter- 
mination of, i. 105-9, ii. 139 
for Tatuing of Girls, ii. 255 
Wet and Dry, range of, i. 106 
Sebops, Beadwork of, i. 224 
Black Magic of, ii. 117 et seq. 
Curses, ii. 118-9 <£«. 1, 120 
Divination by Bali Flaki, ii. 118-9 
Divine Ancestor of, ii. 138 
Ears, ii. 332 

Ethnic affinities of, ii. 246 
Eyes, ii. 332 
Face-form, ii. 331 

Group, Anthropological observations 
on, ii. 329 et seq. 
in Hose's Classification, ii. 320 
Hair, ii. 332 
Head-form, ii. 331 
Head-hunting, legendary origin of, 

ii. 138-9 
Human figure in Art of, i. 242 
Nose, ii. 332 
Skin colour, ii. 332 
Stature, ii. 332 
Secret Helper or Ngarong, Sea Dayak, 

ii. 90 et seq. 
Seed-sowing, i. 101 et seq. 
Sega lupar evolution, the, at Head- 
hanging, ii. 21 
Selambo, netting method, i. 136 
Serenades, i. 121 
Serpent god, river -dwelling, Kenyah, 

ii. 15 
Seven, in Malanau Exorcism, ii. 134-5 
Sexual perversion, rarity of, ii. 199 
Shade, visible, of Men and Thing, differ- 
ence between, Kayan.ii. 3-4 
Sham fights, ii. 288, 291, 295 
Shans, and allied peoples, Caucasic 
type in, Keane on, ii. 229 
n. 1 
Shape-shifting — 

Animal to Man, ii. 89 
Man to Animal, ii. 81-2, 93 
Shelford, R. , Paper by, on Tatu, in- 
corporated by permission, 
i. 245 et seq. 
Shell-work, i. 233 
Shields, i. 161, 210 
Dusun, i. 166 
Kayan, i. 163 
Kenyah, i. 165 

37Q PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

Shields — continued 
Klemantan, i. 165 
Land Dyaks, i. 166 
Murut, i. 165-6 
Sea Dayak, i. 166, ii. 251 
Ship, to carry off Sickness, Coastal 

tribes, ii. 122-3 
Shrew, big, Asiatic, i. 4 

Feather-tailed, Indigenous, i. 7 
Pattern named after, Sea Dayak, 
i. 244 
Sians or Sihans, Nomad hunters, 
ii. 177 
Locale of, ii. 178 
Tatu of, i. 268-9 
Siap aioh, see Kenyah Charms 
Sibu Fort, ii. 303 
Sibuyans, Face-form of, ii. 341 
Head-form, ii. 341 
Stature, ii. 341 
Sickness (see also Pain), Treatment 
and Tabus of, ii. 8, 28 
et seq., 31 
Silat river, ii. 286-7 
Silat palm, in Kayan rites, ii. 113 
Simpang Impang, Sea Dayak story of, 

ii. 144 et seq. 
Singalang, Family and relatives of, 

ii. 86-7 
Singalang Burong, War-god of Sea 

Dayaks, ii. 85-6 
Singapore, Javanese invasion of, i. 14 
Sit, see Spider-hunter 
Sitting Mat, wearing of, i. 212, ii. 252 

<kn. 1 
Size, reckoning of, Kayan, ii. 212 
Skapans, Paintings of, i. 231 
Skin affections, prevalence of, i. 39, 
ii. 116 
Punans free from, ii. 179 
Skin colour, Pagan tribes in general, 
i. 37, ii. 226, 227 
Observations on, Haddon's method 
of taking, ii. 323 
Barawan, ii. 328 
Kalabit, ii. 325 
Kayan, i. 38, ii. 338, 339 
Kenyah, i. 38, ii. 337 
Land Dayak, ii. 325 
Lerong, ii. 333 
Long Pokun, ii. 331 
Malang, ii. 330 
Maloh, ii. 327 
Milanau, ii. 334 
Murut, i. 39, ii. 325 
Punan, i. 39, ii. 227, 312, 336 
Sea Dayak, ii. 340 
Sebop, ii. 332 
Ulu Ayar Dayak, ii. 325 

I Skirts, female, i. 47 
Sky, Kayan ideas on, ii. 214, 215 
Slave-killing at Funerals, &c.,i. 189-90, 

ii. 34-5, 46, 104-5 
Slaves, Karen, ii. 238 

Kayan and Kenyah, i. 70-2, 191, 
ii. 107 
Intermarriage of with other 
classes, i. 70-2 
Smallpox, Kayan precautions, ii. 206-7 
Smelting, Kayan process, i. 194-5 
Smith, Robertson, cited, ii. 103 
Smoke, see Fire and Smoke 
Snakes (see also Pythons), i. 7 

Fat of, in Kayan Medicine, ii. 207 
Omens from, and attitude to, Kayan, 
ii. 79 
Kenyah, ii. 73, 79, 101 
Sobriety, general, i. 129, 130 
Social organisation — 
Karen, ii. 237 et seq. 
Kayan, Kenyah, &c. , i. 63 et seq., 

ii. 194 et sqq. 
Klemantan, i. 82 
Murut, i. 82 

Punan, Totemism absent from, ii. 99 
Sea Dayak, i. 82-3 
Solar altitude, taking of, i. 106-9 

Eclipses in Borneo, ii. 214^^.2 
Solid Carved designs, characters of, 

i. 234, 236-8 
Somatological investigation, conclu- 
sions from, Haddon on, 
ii. 318-9 
Songs, Boating, i. 132 
Sorcerers, Sea Dayak, ii. 116-7 cbn.i 
Soul of the Rice, i. 105, 112 
Soul-catcher (see also Dayong), Kayan, 
ii. 3, 4 ; Ceremonial of, 
ii. 29 et seq. 
Soul-conducting gods, Kayan, ii. 5, 

4i 
Souls (see also Afterworld), Animal, 
Human and Plant, Karen 
belief in, ii. 239 
Human, see Blua, and Urip 

Beliefs on, ii. 3-4, 34, 45-6 et alibi 
Calling back of, ii. 28, 32, 85 
Catching, general, in Borneo, 

ii. 31.. JI5 

Karen, ii. 238-9 
Conducting to other worlds, 

ii- 5. 33-4. 41-2 
Reincarnation ideas, ii. 47-8, 
81 
Spears, various tribes, i. 46, 141, 160-1, 

ii. 246 
Spider-hunter Omen-bird, i. 75, 168, 
169, ii. 58, 59, 128-9 

INDEX 

37i 

Spinning of Cotton, i. 221 
Spirits, Embodied, and Disembodied, 
Kayan belief on, ii. 4, 5 
et seq. 
Libations to, i. 126 
Minor, Generic term for, ii. 18 
of Nature, Karen belief in, ii. 238 
Tribes claiming Descent from, and 
invoking in Prayer, ii. 10-11 
Spoor-reading, Punan skill in, ii. 192 
Squirrels, Asiatic, i. 4 
Indigenous, i. 7 

Flying, i. 7 
Testicles of, in Kayan Medicine, 
ii. 207-8 & n. 1 
Sri Maja, King of Puni, embassy of, 

to China, i. 14 
Sri Tuan Buana, Bruni rulers' descent 

from, i. 20 
Stake-defences, i. 160, 178-9 
Stars, Kayan idea of, ii. 214 
State Council, Sarawak, composition 

of, ii. 267 
Stature, Observations on, Haddon's 
method of taking, ii. 323-4 
Barawan, ii. 328 
Kalabit, ii. 325 
Kayan, ii. 339 
Kenyah, ii. 338 
Land Dayak, ii. 326 
Lerong, ii. 333 
Long Pokun, ii. 331 
Malang, ii. 330 
Maloh, ii. 327 
Milanau, ii. 334 
Murut, ii. 335 
Punan, ii. 178-9, 336 
Sea Dayak, ii. 340 
Sebop, ii. 332 
Sibuyan, ii. 341 
Ulu Ayar Dayak, ii. 326 
Steel-working, Kayan, i. 196, 224 
Sterility, consequences of, i. 77, 78 
Still-born children, home of Souls of, 

ii. 40 
Stone Axes, in Kenyah galleries, 
"Balingo's teeth," ii. 117Z.3 
Stones, round, associated with Altar 
Posts and Dwellings, Ken- 
yah, ii. 15, 16 
Stories, ii. 136 et seq. 
Storytelling, Kayan, ii. 218-9 
Sub-tribes of the Kayans, i. 63 & n. 
Sucker-fish, i. 135 

Suicides, Home of Souls of, ii. 40, 47 
Sulau, wife of Juman, Kayan chief, 

ii. 283 
Suleiman, Sultan, i. 20 
Sulu Islands, Sultan of, see Jolo 

Sumatra, Melanesian strain in, ii. 312 
North, Battak of, Indonesians of 

two types, ii. 312 
Orang Kubu of, ii. 225 
Zoological resemblances to Borneo, 

i- 3- 4 

Sumpita7i, see Blow- pipe 

Supreme Being, belief on, 

Karen, ii. 238, 256 

Kayan, ii. 6 et seq. 

Kenyah, ii. 13, 84 

Development of, ii. 16 et seq. 
Klemantan and subtribes, ii. 79 
Supreme Council, Sarawak, composi- 
tion of, ii. 266 
Surgery, ii. 28, 208 
Swamps, "cord-roads" in, i. 131 
Swifts, Edible Nests of, Collection of, 

156-7 
Swinging in Malanau Exorcism, ii. 130, 

134 
Sword-blades, Chased designs on, 
i. 234, 240-1 
Kayan forging of, i. 193, 195-6 
Old, as presents, ii. 66 
Sword - hilts or handles, Wood and 
Horn, Kayan, ii. 137 <£•;?. 1, 

22I(t«.I, 234, 238-4O 

Sword-sheaths, i. 2 10- 11 
Swords, i. 46, 159-60 

as Fee, to Dayong, ii. 121 

as Hypnotic agent, ii. 30 <& «. 1, 

120 
Murut, ii. 246 
Sea Dayak, ii. 251 
Symbolic gifts in Friendship-making, 

ii. 220-1 
Symbolism in Speech, &c. , Kayan, 
ii. 216-7 

Tabu (Lali, or Malan) {see also Pro- 
hibitions), i. 65 
Fishing, i. 139-40 
Infraction punished by Tok, ii. 26 
on Kayan Images, ii. iq&n.i. 
Plant used in, ii. 114 
Pre-natal and Natal, Kayan, ii. 133-7 
Sickness, ii. 8, 31 
War, i. 1 70- 1 
Tagals, Ethnic affinities of, ii. 247 
in Hose's Classification, ii. 320 
Locale of, i. 35 
Tallies for Weddings, Kayan, ii. 172 
Tallow, Vegetable, source and uses of, 

i. 155, ii. 182 
Tama Aping Kuleh, Kenyah Chief, 

ii. 283 
Tama Aping Nipa, Kenyah Chief, 
ii. 283 

372 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

Tama Bulan, Kenyah Chief, i. 40-1, 
ii. 284, 289 ; Arithmetical 
skill of, ii. 211 ; and the 
Feast of extinction of a 
Blood-feud, ii. 66 ; Great- 
ness of, ii. 206, 295, 296 ; 
Head-hunting raid of his 
people, ii. 300 ; Name of, 
at different times, i. 79, 
80 ; Omen - taking by, 
ii. 52, 54, 55, 285 ; Pen- 
ghuluship of, ii. 281 ; and 
the Sham-fight, ii. 291 ; 
speculations of, on the 
Earth's motion, ii. 215 
Tama Kajan Odoh, Madang chief, 
Descent claimed from Bal- 
ingo, ii. xx&n. 3, 12 & n.x ; 
Map of the Afterworld by, 
ii. 43-4 ; Teeth of Balingo 
owned by, ii. 11 n.3 
Tama Kuling, Kenyah Chief, Symbolic 
gifts exchanged with, 
ii. 220-1 ; peace policy of, 
ii. 206 
Tama Usong, Kayan chief, Penghulu- 

ship of, ii. 281 
Tama Usun Tasi, Madang Chief, 
ii. 286 ; official visit to, 
ii. 289 et seq. 
Tanjongs, Baskets of, i. 214, 224 

Tatu of, i. 264 
Tapang tree, Bee-nests in, i. 154 
Klemantan and Iban beliefs on, 
ii. 114 
Tatu, Kayan, i. 224, 233, 264, ii. 166 
Women, i. 251-2, 255, 262, 
ii. /tf&n.x 
Kenyah Klemantan, i. 261 et seq. 
Long Utan, i. 266-7 
Long Wai, i. 264 

Murut, and Klemantan, i. 264 et seq. 
Ot-Danum, Ulu Ayar, and Siang, 

i. 268 et seq. 
Process, i. 253 

Regulations concerning, i. 247 
Sea Dayak, i. 273-7 
Uma Luhat, i. 263-4 
Upper class women, i. 69 
Tatuer, office of, and fees, i. 252-3 
Tau tepang, Sorcery, inherited powers 
of, Sea Dayak, ii. 116-7 
&n.x 
Tawak, ceremonial uses of, i. 172, 

180, ii. 156 et alibi 
Taxation, Sarawak, ii. 270, 274, 

279-80, 281, 299, 305 
Telang Ading streamlet, Legend of, 
ii. 25-6 

Temperature, range of, i. 4-5 
Tenggerese, Indonesians in Java, 

ii. 312 
" Terminological inexactitude, " ii. 249 
Testicles of Squirrel in Kayan 

Medicine, ii. 207-8 <£• n. 1 
Therapeutics and Magic, Kayan, 

ii. 28 et sqq., 120 et sqq. 
Thomas, Oldfield, cited, ii. 104 
Thunder, Kenyah ideas on, ii. n 

<$sn. 3, 14 
Thunder and Storm god — 
Kayan, ii. 5, 6, xx&n.^ 
Kenyah, ii. xx&n.*$ 

Descent claimed from, ii. 11-12 
Klemantan relation to, ii. 11 
Thunderstorms, i. 5 
Tibang-Iran Mountains, i. 1 
Tickling of Fish, i. 140 
Tiger, Kayan and Kenyah attitude to, 

ii. 4, 72-3, tj 
Tiger-cat, Asiatic, i. 3 

Hunted for Skin, &c. , i. 144 
Kenyah attitude to, ii. 72, jj 
Skins, Chiefs' War-coats of, i. 163 

Tabu to Parents, ii. 157 
Spirits embodied in, Kayan belief 

on, ii. 4 
Teeth as ornaments, i, 10, 12, 45 
Timber trees {see also Iron- wood), 
i. 6 
for Boat-making, i. 199 
Tinjar river, ii. 284 
Toad, in Barawan Story, ii. 15 1-7 
Toala race, Dravidian element in, 
ii. 229 ; Melanesian strain 
in, ii. 312 
Tobacco, as Bride-gift, Punan, ii. 
184 
Chewing, Sea Dayaks, i. 60 
Cultivation, Kayan, i. 54, 60 
in Medicine, ii. 208 
Smoking, Kayan, i. 60 
Toh, meaning of word, ii. 4, 18, 19 
All-pervadingness of, ii. 23 
Benign and Malign, ii. 22-5 
Conduct as affected by belief in, 

ii. 23 et seq. , 204 
of Death, &c. , Precautions against, 

ii- 33. 37 
of Hills, ii. 25 
Kayan attitude to and cult of, ii. 4, 

20 et seq. , 194 
Pain caused by, Treatment of, 

ii. 28, 120 
Possession by, see Madness 
Propitiation of, ii. 23-6 
in relation to Rice, ii. 23 
Toilet operations, i. 116 

INDEX 

373 

Tokong, Divine ancestor of, Punans 
and Sebops, ii. 138-9 
Legend of, bearing on Head-taking, 
i. 189 
Tombs, Kayan (see also Chiefs under 
that head), ii. 3, 35-6, 240 
Klemantan, i. 242, ii. 48-9, 50 
Malanau, ii. 81 
Top-spinning, Kayan boys, ii. 163 
Tortoise and Mouse-deer in Kenyah 

Fable, ii. 147 et seq. 
Tortoises, i. 7 ; not eaten by Kayans, 

ii. 79 
Totemism, in relation to Animal beliefs 
in Borneo, discussed, ii. 96 
et seq. 
Decay of, Rice culture in relation to, 

ii. 97 
and Dreams, in America, ii. 112 

& n. 1 
Origin of, suggested theory of, 
ii. 109 et seq. 
Trade, development of, in Sarawak, 
ii. 271, 281, 307 
of Early Dutch in Borneo, ii. 139 
&n.x 
Traders, travelling, treatment by 

Kayans, &c. , ii. 202 
Trance, beliefs occasioned by, Kayan 

and Murik, ii. 42-3 
Trap fruit, ii. 6 

Trappers' Charms, Sea Dayak, ii. 127 
Traps, Defensive, i. 179 
Fishing, ii. 137-9 
Hunting, i. 144, 145-9 
Tree, upturned, in Kayan rites, ii. 5 
Tree-felling, i. 99-100 
Trees, i. 6 

Furnishing Bark for Cloth, i. 230 
left for Toh, Bull-roarer hung in, 
ii. 23 
Tribes, claiming descent from Spirits, 
ii. 10, 11 
Coastal, see Sea Dayaks, &c. 
Interior, ii. 311 

Names derived from Rivers, ii. 313 
Which do not Tatu, i. 245-6 
Trings, Culture of, ii. 247 
Ethnic affinities of, ii. 248 
Locale of, i. 35 
Women, Tatu of, i. 264 
Trogan, as Omen-bird, i. 75, 169, 

ii- 59 
Trusan District, ii. 262, 269 
Tua, or Ngarong (q.v.), in Nyuak's 

papers, ii. 114 
Tuah Kampong, office and duties of, 

Sarawak, ii. 272 
Tulah defined, ii. 14 n. 1 

Turtle, not eaten by Kayans, ii. 79 
Twins, Kayan customs as to, ii. 156 

Ukang Bird, Omens from, ii. 59 
Ukits, Nomad Hunters, i. 35, ii. 177 
Anthropological measurements of, 

ii- 336 
Locale of, ii. 178 
Tatu of, i. 247, 269-73 
Uku Pundah, a Murik Lazarus, 

ii. 42-3 
Ula Gemilang, chief god of the Mala- 
nau, ii. 130, Exorcism by 

ii- 134-5 
Ulu Ai Dayaks, Ngarong cult of, 

ii- 93 

Ulu Ajars, or Ayars, or Ot-Danuns 

Ethnology of, ii. 313 

Face-form, ii. 326 

Hair, ii. 312, 326 

Head-form, ii. 326 

Locale of, ii, 313 

Skin colour, ii. 312, 326 

Stature, ii. 326 

Tatu, i. 268-9 
Uma Long women, Tatu of, i. 264-5 
Uma Tow, see Lepu Tau 
Upper classes, Kayan and Kenyah, 

i. 69-70 
Urip, use and force of word, ii. 11, 

34 
Usai, Long Kiput Stories of, ii. 142 

et seq. 
Usun Apoh, Central Mountain, rivers 

rising in, i. 2, ii. 232, 279 

Vases (see also Jars), Chinese, Sea 

Dayaks' treasures, i. 62 ; 

inheritance of, i. 84 
Vegetable Tallow, source and uses of, 

i. 155, ii. 182 
Verbosity and Oratory, i. 127-8, 

ii. 216, 285, 290 
Villages, arrangement of, Kayan, and 

other tribes, i. 40, 54, 64, 

83 
and Districts, administration by 
Chiefs, Sarawak, ii. 272 
et seq. 
Average population, i. 39-40 
Life in, Events of, i. 123 
Violent Death, home of Souls after, 

ii. 40, 47 
Visits and Visitors, i. 123 et sqq. 
Votive Sacrifice, ii. 91 & n. 1 

Wailing for the Dead, Kayan, ii. 33 
Waist-cloths, arrangement of, i. 43 
Wallace's line, i. 3 

374 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

Walls, partition, i. 208 
War-alarm, by Tawak, i. 180 
War-boats, or Canoes, capacity of, i. 56 
Construction, i. igg et seq. 
Kayan, i. 166-7 
Klemantan, Crocodile prows of, 

ii. 83 
Racing with, at Claudetown peace- 
making, ii. 293 et seq. 
War-Chief, Supreme, Kayan, ii. 12 
War-caps, i. 161-2 
Construction, i. 215 
Hornbill feathers in, ii. 59 
War-coats, i. 161, 163 
Hornbill feathers in, ii. 59 
Skins used for, ii. 72, 73, jy 
War-clothing, i. 161-3 
War-dance, Kayan, ii. 167-8 
Warfare, Kayan and Kenyah, i. 158 
et seq., 184-5; Sea Dayak 
i. 184, 185 
Attack, i. 1, 59-60, 168, 171 et seq. 
Ritual preliminaries, i. 168-9, 170, 

"■ 55 
Defence, i. 178 et seq., 183 
Initiation into, of Boys, i. 174-5 
Loot, and Prisoners, i. 173 
Successful return, triumph after, 
i. 174 
Heads, ceremonies connected with, 
i. 176-8 
Tactics, i. 171-2, 180 et seq. 
War-god, Kayan, ii. 5, 6, 18, 19 
Kenyah, ii. 6, 13, 15 et seq. 
Sea Dayak, ii. 85 

Supreme Being evolved from, 
speculations on, ii. 16 et 
seq. 
War-omens and tabus (see also Bali 
Flaki, &c.),"\. 168-71, ii. 15 
War-songs, of Mourning, i. 176 
Water Beetles, Divination by, i. 11 2-3 
Water-buffalo, Kalabit uses of, ii. 107 
Watersheds, i. 2, ii. 279 
Wave-offerings, Fowls as, ii. 67 
Weapons (see Iron-wood Bar, Javelins, 
Spears, Swords, <kc. ), i. 46, 
159 et seq. 
Charms connected with, ii. 127 
Karen, ii. 238 
Murut, ii. 246 
Punan, ii. 190 
Sea Dayak, ii. 251^.2 
Weaving, i. 221^ seq. 
Weight, Kenyah, i. 38 

Whistling, in Malanau Exorcism, 

ii. 132 
Widows, name for, i. 80 
Wild Cattle, see Cattle 
Wind-spirit, in Sea Dayak legend, 

"• 145-7 
Winnowing the Rice, i. 119 
Woman goddesses of Kayans, ii. 6, 
7, 15, and Kenyahs, ii. 15 
Women, see also Childbirth and 
Medicine Women 
Clothing, head-dresses and orna- 
ments of, i. 46-8 
in relation to the cult of Bali Flaki, 

ii- 52, 57 
Corset of, Sea Dayak, i. 46-7, 197, 

ii. 252 
as Dayongs, ii. 29 

Domestic life and duties of, i. 1 16-21 
Dress of, worn by Sea Dayak, 

Manang, ii. 116 
Fishing-net peculiar to, i. 135-6 
Kayan, Pregnant, Tabus of, ii. 153 
et seq. 
Tatu among, i. 251-2, 255, 262, 
ii. 47 & n. 1 
Lepu Tau, Tatu of, i. 262 
Part of, in Agriculture — 

Actual, i. 103-4, and Ritual, 

i- 110-3 

Part of, in Head-suspension, i. 177 

Upper class, aspect, and duties, 

i. 69 

Wood, Kayan Sword - handles of, 

ii. i37<fc«.i 
Wood-carving, technique, tools, &c. , 
i. 224-6 
Klemantan skill in, i. 224, ii. 19 
Woodpecker (Kieng), as Omen-bird, 

ii- 59 

Woodworking, see Boats, Dishes, 
Houses, Shields, Sword- 
sheaths, Wood - carving, 
<hc, &c. 

Wounds, Kayan treatment of, ii. 209 

Wrestling, Kayan, ii. 164 

Writing, introduced by Klings, i. 9 
&?t. 2 

Yam-leaf in art, i. 243 

Yaws, of Kayan children, ii. 159 

Kayan medicine for, ii. 206 
Yellow, in Kayan mourning, ii. 37 

Zoology, geological indications from, 
i- 3"4 

Printed by R. & R. Clark, Limited, Edinburgh. 

THE EASTERN ARCHIPELAGO 

SOUTH 
CHINA SEA 

BaramPt. 

t^f" Maris m. 
DatuSagingVil.l/ haj""^R. 

V L L '"Imbang's til. 

..., .._ -jnbai > 

Pukut j*'-'Z"s,. 

rs u a N A 

•^ ABuWt*Chaivit 

A Mt.Lambir ^, 

SKETCH MAP 

OF THE 

BARAM DISTRICT 
SARAWAK 

Eng. Miles 

JAALANAU 

Lake Poppy 

Jaeger Hill y3 ^ 

KLEMANTAN 
***S£A DAYAK t,Amokt 

KHaudetown d^%*%. 

» & TujoHs m*. 

,',-„,!/,/ SEA DAYAK 

** "&""»■ Edith Lakeb-* 

KLEMANTAN 

Baiong Hills 
N A U . I J' ^ 

Karap Hills ra 

KLEMANTAN 
. T „ Af0^ , Kadayan til. 

Long Tutau ° , 

Breaker 

KLEMANTAN 

Tra" Hai-me 
Hills 

'./": ..., .. £^ s^ 

1^ iApoK j,/ ^ ^J»* Foakss.Jach.on tafUL j B A R 

^ W " ^ 

\r*JP '• n ^BatuSong™^ 

-i, a a v-'., n .,*., «. Douglas Hills ,. r' ,.-„„,,- 

tf /I \Y A- N a,lA ,BF<mny Rapid Kv A £ A B I T 

KLEMANTAN 
MURUT 

Tama Llbuts Vil. 

A. 

Barong Saga&'til. J 
KLEMANTAN1 

I N T U L U 

PUNAN 

* ?i nice? vf****, KLEMANTAN 
Skiwa J MtDulitA*foJL* 

A BauuyrM,^ K £ « v/ A H ^BodoV{hM hbam^T^r^lLepu MautiM 

tea Baitan^"' 
UMhkmm.* .'UmiBduboM — ^— t,- « t /v r /I rt "7/Bodok".Tudui>Sibak.» \Lepu tout* fll. 

<> t^r^S »&**. Alc»/ J* Mt.Mrd>BodokU/ -fa,aK( '^ W'- 

>tJjlraAMt.Tep 

PUNAN 

ShipleyBapid\ 

[tPas 

MA DANG 

..Tepai- 

SKETCH MAP 

OF 

SARAWAK 

Scale 

English Miles 

LABUAN $.. 

Baraiu Pt. 

SOUTH 

CHINA 

SEA 

Lightho 

Igan 

Lighthouse^ 

"Oya 

O Balinian 
'Ft.Burdett iUGATS 

Bruih r°Matu J MALANAUS buixiiAi^ 

oDalat BUKITANS 

-I ^ 

'Claudetowh' tj^ ^*- J 

Lighthouse 
Bintuffo Bivi^' 

T$\ SABANS 
J KARAYANS 
LEPU MAUTS 

Segalang 

B»l'*ga0 KENYANS y 

^KLEMANTANS y /§> 

C.Datu 

DATU 
^t»n C.Sipan 

Rejani 

B. 

.s Lighthouse 

Kano*it 

sV*^ 7AyA^s 

PoPt. . „ 

PUNANS 

' f I BANS-,/ 

|^5 KLEMANTANS U J SLA DAYAKSy^ 

1 Tea DAYAKs^y^ (m°V\ 

.'^V/V 

^ ^1 

* si! * MALAY* '■> , , / I 

DUTCH ^"BORNEO 

j. i 

S£4 

so™ ^ 

£>>? v>i /C5 or /ems 

KENYAHS- 

fQ Nanga Badau 

MALOHS 

KENYAHS 

BORNEO 

14 KLEMANTANS
