The Pagan Tribes of Borneo, Vol. 1 (Charles Hose and William McDougall, 1912)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (archive.org/details/pagantribesofbor01hose). Vol. 1 of Hose and McDougall's Borneo ethnography - the Kayans, Kenyahs and Klemantans: longhouse life, omen-birds and social order.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE LIBRARY 

OF 

THE UNIVERSITY 

OF CALIFORNIA 

LOS ANGELES 

zrj 

^smhin 

Plate I. YOUNG KAYAN CHIEF WITH MIDDLE-CLASS COMPANION. 

THE PAGAN TRIBES 
OF BORNEO 

A DESCRIPTION OF THEIR PHYSICAL 

MORAL AND INTELLECTUAL CONDITION 

WITH SOME DISCUSSION OF THEIR 

ETHNIC RELATIONS 

BY 

CHARLES HOSE, D.Sc. 

FORMERLY DIVISIONAL RESIDENT AND MEMBER OF THE SUPREME COUNCIL OF SARAWAK 
AUTHOR OF ' A DESCRIPTIVE ACCOUNT OF THE MAMMALS OF BORNEO ' 

AND 

WILLIAM McDOUGALL, M.B., F.R.S. 

FELLOW OF CORPUS CHRISTI COLLEGE 
AND READER IN MENTAL PHILOSOPHY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD 

WITH AN APPENDIX ON THE PHYSICAL CHARACTERS 
OF THE RACES OF BORNEO 

BY 

A. C. HADDON, D.Sc, F.R.S. 

IN TWO VOLUMES 
VOL. I 

MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED 
ST. MARTIN'S STREET, LONDON 

191 2 

COPYRIGHT 

I \l 

PREFACE 

In writing this book we have aimed at presenting 
a clear picture of the pagan tribes of Borneo as they 
existed at the close of the nineteenth century. We 
have not attempted to embody in it the observa- 
tions recorded by other writers, although we have 
profited by them and have been guided and aided 
by them in making our own observations. We 
have rather been content to put on record as much 
information as we have been able to obtain at first 
hand, both by direct observation of the people and 
of their possessions, customs, and manners, and by 
means of innumerable conversations with men and 
women of many tribes. 

The reader has a right to be informed as to the 
nature of the opportunities we have enjoyed for 
collecting our material, and we therefore make the 
following personal statement. One of us (C. H.) 
has spent twenty-four years as a Civil Officer in the 
service of the Rajah of Sarawak ; and of this time 
twenty-one years were spent actually in Sarawak, 
while periods of some months were spent from time 
to time in visiting neighbouring lands — Celebes, 
Sulu Islands, Ternate, Malay Peninsula, British 
North Borneo, and Dutch Borneo. Of the twenty- 
one years spent in Sarawak, about eighteen were 
passed in the Baram district, and the remainder 
mostly in the Rejang district. In both these 
districts, but especially in the Baram, settlements 
and representatives of nearly all the principal 

/IQ-I cr^Q 

vi PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

peoples are to be found ; and the nature of his 
duties as Resident Magistrate necessitated a constant 
and intimate intercourse with all the tribes of the 
districts, and many long and leisurely journeys into 
the far interior, often into regions which had not 
previously been explored. Such journeys, during 
which the tribesmen are the magistrate's only com- 
panions for many weeks or months, and during 
which his nights and many of his days are spent in 
the houses of the people, afford unequalled oppor- 
tunities for obtaining intimate knowledge of them 
and their ways. These opportunities have not 
been neglected ; notes have been written, special 
questions followed up, photographs taken, and 
sketches made, throughout all this period. 

In the years 1898-9 the second collaborator 
(W. McD.) spent the greater part of a year in the 
Baram district as a member of the Cambridge 
Anthropological Expedition, which, under the 
leadership of Dr. A. C. Haddon, went out to the 
Torres Straits in the year 1897. During this visit 
we co-operated in collecting material for a joint- 
paper on the animal cults of Sarawak ; ^ and this 
co-operation, having proved itself profitable, sug- 
gested to us an extension of our joint program to 
the form of a book embodying all the information 
already to hand and whatever additional information 
might be obtainable during the years that one of us 
was still to spend in Borneo. The book therefore 
may be said to have been begun in the year 1898 
and to have been in progress since that time ; but 
it has been put into shape only during the last few 
years, when we have been able to come together 
for the actual writing of it. 

During the year 1899 Dr. A. C. Haddon spent 
some months in the Baram district, together with 
other members of the Cambridge Expedition (Drs. 

^ Published in the Journal of the Anthropological Institute, vol. xxxi. 

PREFACE vii 

C. G. Seligmann, C. S. Myers, and Mr. S. Ray); and 
we wish to express our obligation to him for the 
friendly encouragement in, and stimulating example 
of, anthropological field work which he afforded us 
during that time, as well as for later encouragement 
and help which he has given us, especially in reading 
the proofs of the book and in making many helpful 
suggestions. We are indebted to him also for the 
Appendix to this book, in which he has stated and 
discussed the results of the extensive series of phy- 
sical measurements of the natives that he made, 
with our assistance, during his visit to Sarawak. 

We have pleasure in expressing here our thanks 
to several other gentlemen to whom we are indebted 
for help of various kinds — for permission to repro- 
duce several photographs, to Dr. A. W. Nieuwen- 
huis, the intrepid explorer of the interior of Dutch 
Borneo, who in his two fine volumes [Quer durch 
Borneo) has embodied the observations recorded 
during two long journeys in the interior ; to Mr. 
H. Ling Roth for the gift of the blocks used in the 
preparation of his well-known work. The Natives oj 
Sarawak and British North Borneo, many of which 
we have made use of; to Dr. W. H. Furness, 
author of The Home Life of Borneo Head-Htinters 
(1902), for several photographic plates made by him 
during his visits to the Baram in the years 1897 
and 1898 ; to Drs. C. G. Seligmann and C. S. Myers 
for permission to reproduce several photographs ; 
to Mr. R. Shelford, formerly Curator of the Sarawak 
Museum, for his permission to incorporate a large 
part of a paper published jointly with one of us 
(C. H.) on tatu in Borneo, and for measurements of 
Land Dayaks made by him ; to Mr. R. S. Douglas, 
formerly Assistant Officer in the Baram district and 
now Resident of the Fourth Division of Sarawak, for 
practical help genially afforded on many occasions. 

Finally, it is our agreeable duty to acknowledge 

viii PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

our obligation to H.H. the Rajah of Sarawak, 
who welcomed to his country the members of the 
Cambridge Anthropological Expedition, and without 
whose enlightened encouragement of scientific work 
on the part of his officers this book would never 
have been written. 

C. H. 

W. McD. 

July 1912. 

SUPPLEMENTARY PREFACE BY ONE 
OF THE AUTHORS 

I FEEL that it is necessary to supplement our 
joint-preface with some few words of apology for, 
and explanation of, the appearance of my name on 
the title - page of this book. For the book is 
essentially an attempt to set forth in condensed 
form the mass of knowledge of the tribes of Borneo 
acquired by Dr. Hose in the course of a quarter of 
a century's intimate study of, and sympathetic com- 
panionship with, the people of the interior. My 
own part in its production has been merely that of 
a midwife, though I may perhaps claim to have 
helped in the washing and dressing of the infant as 
well as in its delivery, and even to have offered 
some useful advice during the long years of 
pregnancy. And, since it is more difficult to present 
a brief and popular account of any complex subject 
the more intimate is one's knowledge of it, I may 
fairly hope that my superficial acquaintance with 
the pagan tribes of Borneo has been a useful ally 
to Dr. Hose's profound and extensive knowledge of 
them ; I have therefore gladly accepted my friend's 
generous invitation to place my name beside his as 
joint-author of this work. 

W. McD. 

CONTENTS OF VOLUME I 

CHAPTER I 

PAGE 

Geography of Borneo ..... i 

CHAPTER II 
History of Borneo . . . . .8 

CHAPTER III 

General Sketch of the Peoples of Borneo . . 28 

CHAPTER IV 

Material Conditions of the Pagan Tribes of Borneo 43 

CHAPTER V 

The Social System . . . . -63 

CHAPTER VI 
Agriculture . . . . . -97 

CHAPTER VII 
The Daily Life of a Kayan Long House . .116 

X PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

CHAPTER VIII 

T PAGE 

Life on the Rivers . . . ^ .131 

CHAPTER IX 

Life in the Jungle . . . , .143 

CHAPTER X 

W-^^ 158 

CHAPTER XI 
Handicrafts . . . _ ^ 

CHAPTER XII 

Decorative Art . . . _ 2-74 

LIST OF PLATES 

FACE PAGE 

1. Young Kayan Chief with middle- class Companion (in 

Colour) ....... . Frontispiece 

2. Bruni, the pile-built Capital of the Sultans of Bruni 

3. A Jungle Path near Marudi, Baram District . 

4. A Limestone Hill at Panga in Upper Sarawak 

5. Mount Dulit from the Tinjar River 

6. {a) Keltie Falls, Mount Dulit, Sarawak, {p) Kenyahs 

stopping to camp for the Night on the Baram River 

7. The Rejang River emerging from the central mountain 

Region ...... 

8. Gorge in the Rejang River above the entrance of Baloi 

Peh 

9. The Rejang River winding through the Hill Country 

10. The Rejang River about 300 Miles above its Mouth 

11. Jungle enveloped in thick Moss on Summit of Mount 

Duht 

12. Head of the Rejang River .... 

13. In the Headwaters of the Baram River 

14. Lioh Matu (the Place of a Hundred Islands), at the 

of the Baram River .... 

15. Fanny Rapid in the Pata River, Baram District 

16. A Sea Dayak or Iban .... 

17. Profile of Sea Dayak of Plate 16 . 

18. A Sea Dayak Woman .... 

19. Kayan Family of the Upper Rejang 

20. An Uma Pliau (Kayan) Girl of the Baram District 

21. BuHng, the Son of a Kenyah Chief of the Baram District 

22. {a) A curly-haired Kayan of the Baram. {b) Aban Tingan, 

a famous Kenyah Warrior, ydunger Brother of Tama 
Bulan ......... 

23. Klemantans of the Tinjar District, and one old Kayan Chief 

of Baloi, Laki Bo, wearing black Head-dress (back 
row, second figure, left) ...... 

24. Long Pokuns (Klemantans) of Tinjar River . 

25. Kalabit (Murut) Chief (in centre) with Followers, from 

the Source of the Baram River .... 

26. Punans of Tinjar River ...... 

xi 

Head 

6 
8 

10 

12 

14 
16 
16 

18 
20 
22 

24 
26 
28 
28 
30 
32 
32 
34 

36 

38 
38 

40 
40 

Xll 

PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

FACE PAGE 

27. Tama Bulan Wang, the Kenyah Penghulu of the Baram 

District ....... 

28. Kayan Girl from the Upper Kotei District . 

29. Youthful Sea Dayaks in gala Dress 

30. Sea Dayak Woman wearing Coat and Petticoat orna 

mented with Shells ..... 

3 1 . Sulau, the Wife of a Kayan Chief, displaying her Collection 

of valuable old Beads .... 

32. A Barawan Woman (Klemantan) of the Tinjar 

33. Malanau Infant wearing Apparatus for moulding of the 

Head 

34. A Long House in the Baram District . 

35. Murik Village of Long Tamala, Baram District 

36. Gallery of a Kayan House at Long Lama, Baram 

District 

37. Interior of a Kayan Dwelling-room 

38. Heads hanging in the Gallery of a Kayan House 

39. Beneath a Kayan House. To the left the Altar-posts for 

Offerings can be seen 

40. Large Barn in which Padi is stored 

41. Iban House .... 

42. Gallery of Iban House 

43. Iban Seat-mats. Iban Seed-baskets 

44. {b) Tobacco - boxes ; {c) Wooden Plate for rolling 

Cigarettes ; {g) Gourd for Pith-heads of Darts ; (/>) 
Tobacco-pipes ; {fp) Fire-piston ; (/) Nose-flute 

45. Kenyah Woman's Hat. Kayan Tawak and Gongs 

46. Ningka, a valuable old Sea Dayak Jar 

47. Old earthenware Vessels much prized by all the 

Tribes ..... 

48. Ibans bargaining over old Jars 

49. Tama Usong, leading Kayan Chief of the Baram 

District .... 

50. Aban Deng, the Chief of the Long Wats (Klemantan) of 

the Baram District ..... 

51. Sebop (Klemantan) Chief haranguing his Followers 

52. Kenyahs of the Pata River. The Men wearing Caps and 

the one squatting on the left are of the upper Class 
the others are of the middle Class . 

53. A Kayan making Fire by Friction with a Pusa 

54. A Corpse in a Barawan (Klemantan) House. Party in the 

unfinished House of Jangan, Chief of the Sebops, on 

the occasion of the naming of his Child . . . 82 

55. Ibans felling a Tree ....... 98 

56. A Lirong Farm in the Tinjar River . . . .100 

57. Kayans of Baloi in the /'rt^/- field. The Tatu on the 

Thighs is perceptible . . . . . .102 

LIST OF PLATES 

xui 

FACE I'AGE 

58. Kenyah Women resting from Weeding in the Padi- 

field 104 

59. Kenyah Women at their Farm . .106 

60. Kenyahs measuring the Length of the Shadow of the 

Aso Do at Noon to determine the Time for sowing 

Padi 108 

6 1 . Klemantan Women dressed as Men at the harvest Festival 1 1 4 

62. The Garden of a Kayan House, i.e. the Area between the 

House and the River, with Fruit-trees and Padi 
Barns . . . . . . . . .116 

63. Elderly Kayan Woman ascending the House-ladder with 

Basketful of Water-vessels . . . . .118 

64. The Gallery of a Klemantan (Sebop) House, Tinjar 

District 120 

65. Jungle Fruits .122 

66. A Klemantan Village, showing the Balawing Pole . . 124 

67. Kayans splitting Rattans for Mat-making . . .126 

68. A Kayan Party sitting in the Gallery of a Long House . 126 

69. Entertaining Guests in the Gallery of a Klemantan 

(Barawan) House . . . . . . .128 

70. Lepu Pohuns (Klemantans) of the Tinjar River . . 130 

71. {a) Ibans preparing a Boat for a long Journey, {b) Kayan 

W^ar-boat on the Lower Baram . . . .132 

72. A Halt at Batu Pita on the Baram . . . .132 

73. Cooking the mid-day Meal on a gravel Bed, Baram 

River . . .134 

74. Boat proceeding up the Rejang River below the Palagus 

Falls 134 

75. Poling up the Palagus Falls, Rejang River . . .136 

76. {a) Kenyahs hauHng a Boat over Rapids, {b) Hut built 

on River-bank for a night's Shelter . . . .136 

77. A Boat about to descend the Falls at Long Bukau, 

Rejang River . . . . . . .138 

78. Boat roofed with Leaf-mats on the Dapoi River, Baram 

District 138 

79. Kayans fishing with Cast-net in the Upper Baram River 140 

80. Fishing with Rod and Line at the Tipang Falls of the 

Baram 140 

81. Typical Scene in the uppermost Reaches of a River . 142 

82. Kenyah Hunters at Work with the Blow-pipp . . 144 

83. Kenyah Hunter returning Home with young Pig . . 146 

84. Kayan Hunting-party camping for the Night . . 146 

85. Ibans setting Traps for Pheasants and small Mammals. 

Punans at Home . . . . . . .148 

86. Kayans working Gutta-percha . . .150 

87. {a) Gathering the Ipoh Dart-poison, {b) Usong, a Kayan 

Youth of upper ClafspSon^f Tama Usong (Plate 49) 152 

xiv PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

FACE PAGE 

88. Kenyah collecting Ipoh Poison . . . . . 

89. Klemantans making Fire in the Jungle by sawing one 

Piece of Bamboo across another 

90. Instructing Kayan Youths in the Jungle 

91. Kenyah and Kayan Swords and Sheaths 

92. Spears and Paddles (Kayan and Klemantan) 

93. Kayan and Kenyah War-caps .... 

94. Coat and Cap, Sword, Knife, and Shield of Kenyah 

Warrior (in Colour) ..... 

95. A Murik (Klemantan) Youth in War-dress . 

96. Klemantan War-boat ascending a Reach of the Baram 

near Marudi ....... 

97. Pole set up in River by Kayans to mark the Spot where 

a favourable Omen was observed 

98. Scouts watching a Boat in Trouble at the Mouth of the 

Akar River, Baram District .... 

99. Iban War-party in the Jungle .... 
100. Kayan House fenced in for Protection against Enemies 
loi. Kenyah Mode of Attack ..... 

102. Kayan Woman dancing, and carrying in right Hand 

Head dressed in Leaves ..... 

103. Iban War-boats on the Rejang River . 

104. Iban Scouts on the alert ..... 

105. Punan Heads taken by Ibans .... 

106. Iban Women dancing with human Heads . 

107. Kalabit Smiths using stone Hammers. The Bellows 

are simpler than those described in text . 

108. Iban making Fire-pistons ..... 

109. Iban House in course of Construction 
no. Kanowit (Klemantan) Baskets and Bead work 

111. Kayan Knife and Axes ..... 

112. Kenyah hewing out Shaft of Blow-pipe before boring it 

1 1 3. Kenyahs drilling a Blow-pipe .... 

114. Kenyah lashing Spear-blade to Blow-pipe . 

115. Kenyah making Dart for Blow-pipe . 

116. Kenyah making Dart-poison .... 

117. Kenyahs making Bark-cloth .... 

118. Iban Woman extracting Cotton-seeds . 

119. Iban Woman with Spinning-wheel 

120. Iban Woman preparing the Web for dyeing 

121. Iban Woman weaving ..... 

122. Carved Door to the Room of Aban Jau, a Chief of the 

Sebops (Klemantans), Tinjar River 

123. Door of Room in Sebop (Klemantan) House. The two 

Figures near the Top probably represent Gibbons 
J 24. Carvings on the Wall of the Gallery in a Long Ula 
(Klemantan) House, Baram District 

52 

230 

LIST OF PLATES 

XV 

125. 
126. 
127. 

128. 

129. 
130. 

131. 
132. 

133- 
134. 
135- 
136. 
137. 
138. 
139- 
140. 
141. 
142. 
143. 

Prow of Klemantan War-boat (the Man is an I ban) 

A Kenyah Pattern carved on a bamboo Tobacco-box . 

Annular Design worked on bamboo Tobacco - box 
(Kenyah) ........ 

Charcoal Drawings. The first depicts Women at Work 
on Padi Mortars ; the second the feeding of Pigs and 
Fowls ; the third the laying of a Corpse in the Tomb 

Kenyah Sword-handle carved from a Deer's Horn 

Old Beads worn by Kayans (in Colour) 

Blanket (Pua) woven by I ban Woman 

Blanket (Pua) woven by I ban Woman 

Tatu Patterns on Thighs of Kayan Women 

Tatu Patterns on a Kalabit Woman 

Kalabit Tatu (Woman) 

Tatu designs 

PAGE 
232 
234 

236 

238 
242 
244 
246 
248 
250 
252 
254 
258 
260 
262 
264 
266 
268 
270 
274 

MAPS AT END OF VOLUME II 

The Eastern Archipelago. 

Borneo. 

Sketch Map of the Baram District, Sarawak. 

Sketch Map of Sarawak. 

CHAPTER I 

GEOGRAPHY OF BORNEO 

Borneo is one of the largest islands of the world. 
Its area is roughly 290,000 square miles, or about 
five times that of England and Wales. Its greatest 
length from north-east to south-west is 830 miles, 
and its greatest breadth is about 600 miles. It is 
crossed by the equator a little below its centre, so 
that about two-thirds of its area lie in the northern 
and one-third lies in the southern hemisphere. 
Although surrounded on all sides by islands of 
volcanic origin, Borneo differs from them in pre- 
senting but small traces of volcanic activity, and in 
consisting of ancient masses of igneous rock and 
of sedimentary strata. 

The highest mountain is Kinabalu, an isolated 
mass of granite in the extreme north, nearly 14,000 
feet in height. With this exception the principal 
mountains are grouped in several massive chains, 
which rise here and there to peaks about 10,000 feet 
above the sea. The principal of these chains, the 
Tibang-Iran range, runs south-westward through the 
midst of the northern half of the island and is 
prolonged south of the equator by the Schwaner 
chain. This median south-westerly trending range 
forms the backbone of the island. A second much- 
broken chain runs across the island from east to 
west about i"" north of the equator. Besides these 

VOL. I B 

2 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

two principal mountain chains which determine the 
main features of the river-system, there are several 
isolated peaks of considerable height, and a minor 
ridge of hills runs from the centre towards the 
south-east corner. With the exception of the 
northern extremity, which geographically as well as 
politically stands apart from the rest of the island, 
the whole of Borneo may be described as divided 
by the two principal mountain chains into four large 
watersheds. Of these, the north-western basin, 
the territory of Sarawak, is drained by the Rejang 
and Baram, as well as by numerous smaller rivers. 
Of the other three, which constitute Dutch Borneo, 
the north-eastern is drained by the Batang Kayan 
or Balungan river ; the south-eastern by the Kotei 
and Banjermasin rivers ; and the south-western by 
the Kapuas, the largest of all the rivers, whose 
course from the centre of the island to its south- 
west corner is estimated at 700 miles. Although 
the point of intersection of the two principal moun- 
tain chains lies almost exactly midway between the 
northern and southern and the eastern and western 
extremities of the island, the greater width of the 
southern half of the island gives a longer course to 
the rivers of that part, in spite of the fact that all 
the six principal rivers mentioned above have their 
sources not far from this central point. The prin- 
cipal rivers thus radiate from a common centre, the 
Batang Kayan flowing east-north-east, the Kotei 
south-east by east, the Banjermasin south, the 
Kapuas a little south of west, the Rejang west, and 
the Baram north-west. This radiation of the rivers 
from a common centre is a fact of great importance 
for the understanding of the ethnography of the 
island, since the rivers are the great highways which 
movements of the population chiefly follow. 

In almost all parts of the island, the land adjoin- 
ing the coast is a low-lying swampy belt consisting 

GEOGRAPHY OF BORNEO 3 

of the alluvium brought down by the many rivers 
from the central highlands. This belt of alluvium 
extends inland in many parts for fifty miles or more, 
and is especially extensive in the south and south- 
east of the island. 

Between the swampy coast belt and the mountains 
intervenes a zone of very irregular hill country, of 
which the average height above the sea- level is 
about one thousand feet, with occasional peaks rising 
to five or six thousand feet or more. 

There seems good reason to believe that at a 
comparatively recent date Borneo was continuous 
with the mainland of Asia, forming its south-eastern 
extremity. Together with Sumatra and Java it 
stands upon a submarine bank, which is nowhere 
more than one hundred fathoms below the surface, 
but which plunges down to a much greater depth 
along a line a little east of Borneo (Wallace's line). 
The abundance of volcanic activity in the archi- 
pelago marks it as a part of the earth's crust liable to 
changes of elevation, and the accumulation of volcanic 
matter would tend to make it an area of subsidence ; 
while the north-east monsoon, which blows with 
considerable violence down the China Sea for about 
four months of each year, may have hastened the 
separation of Borneo from the mainland. That this 
separation was effected in a very recent geological 
period is shown by the presence in Borneo of many 
species of Asiatic mammals both large and small, 
notably the rhinoceros {R. borniensis, closely allied 
to R. sumatranus) ; the elephant {^E. indicus, which, 
however, may have been imported by man); the wild 
cattle {Bos sondiacuSy which occurs also in Sumatra) ; 
several species of deer and pig (some of which are 
found in Sumatra and the mainland); several species 
of the cat tribe, of which the tiger-cat {Felts nebulosa) 
is the largest ; the civet-cat ( Viverrd) and its con- 
geners Hemigale, Paradoxurus, and Arctogale ; the 

4 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

small black bear ( Ursus malayanus) ; the clawless 
otter [Lutra cinered) ; the bear - cat {ArcticHs 
binturong) ; the scaly ant-eater [Mants javanicus) ; 
the lemurs {Tarsius spectrum and Nycticebus tardi- 
gradus) ; the flying lemur (Galeopithecus volans) ; 
the porcupine {Hystrix crassispinis)\ numerous bats, 
squirrels, rats and mice ; the big shrew (Gymnurd) ; 
several species of monkeys, and two of the anthro- 
poid apes. The last are of peculiar significance, 
since they are incapable of crossing even narrow 
channels of water, and must be regarded as products 
of a very late stage of biological evolution. Of 
these two anthropoid species, the gibbon [Hylobates 
Millleri) is closely allied to species found in the 
mainland and in Sumatra, while the maias or orang- 
utan (Simla satyrus) is found also in Sumatra and, 
though not now surviving on the continent, must be 
regarded as related to anthropoids whose fossil 
remains have been discovered there.^ 

The zoological evidence thus indicates a recent 
separation of Borneo and Sumatra from the continent, 
and a still more recent separation between the two 

^ islands. 

[ The climate of the whole island is warm and 

/ moist and very equable. The rainfall is copious at 

1 ( all times of the year, but is rather heavier during the 

\ prevalence of the north-east monsoon in the months 

y j\ from October to February, and least during the 

' I months of April and May. At Kuching, during the 

/ last thirty years, the average yearly rainfall has been 
\ 1 60 inches, the maximum 225, and the minimum 
102 inches ; the maximum monthly fall recorded 
was 69 inches, and the minimum '66, and the 
greatest rainfall recorded in one day was 15 inches. 
The temperature hardly, if ever, reaches 100" F. ; 
it ranges normally between 70° and 90° F. ; the 

^ Within Borneo the distribution of the maias seems to be largely determined 
\ by his incapacity to cross a river, there being several instances in which he 
occurs on the one but not on the other bank of a river. 

Plate 3. A JUNGLE PATH NEAR MARUDI. BARAM DISTRICT. 

I GEOGRAPHY OF BORNEO 5 

highest reading of one year {1906) at Kuching was 
94°, the lowest 69°. Snow and frost are unknown, 
except occasionally on the summits of the highest 
mountains. Thunder - storms are frequent and 
severe, but wind -storms are not commonly of any 
great violence. 

The abundant rainfall maintains a copious flow 
of water down the many rivers at all times of the 
year ; but the rivers are liable to rise rapidly many 
feet above their normal level during days of ex- 
ceptionally heavy rain. In their lower reaches, 
where they traverse the alluvial plains and swamps, 
the rivers wind slowly to the sea with many great 
bends, and all the larger ones are navigable by 
small steamers for many miles above their mouths : 
thus a large steam launch can ascend the Rejang 
for 160 miles, the Baram for 120, and some of 
the rivers on the Dutch side for still greater 
distances. The limit of such navigation is set 
by beds of rock over which the rivers run shallow, 
and which mark the beginnings of the middle 
reaches. In these middle reaches, where the rivers 
wind between the feet of the hills, long stretches 
of deep smooth water alternate with others in 
which the water runs with greater violence between 
confining walls of rock, or spreads out in wide 
rapids over stony bottoms. The upper reaches of 
the rivers, where they descend rapidly from the 
slopes of the mountains, are composed of long series 
of shallow rapids and low waterfalls, alternating 
at short intervals with still pools and calm shallows, 
bounded by rock walls and great beds of water- 
worn stones, which during the frequent freshets 
are submerged by a boiling flood. The whole 
river in these upper reaches is for the most part 
roofed in by the overarching forest. 

Practically the whole of Borneo, from the sea- 
coast to the summits of the highest mountains, is 

6 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

covered with a dense forest. On the summits this 
consists of comparatively stunted trees, of which 
every part is thickly coated with moss. In all 
other parts the forest consists of great trees rising 
to a height of 150 feet, and even 200 feet, and of 
a dense undergrowth of younger and smaller trees, 
and of a great variety of creepers, palms, and 
ferns. Trees of many species (nearly 500) yield 
excellent timber, ranging from the hardest iron- 
wood or biliauy and other hard woods (many of 
them so close-grained that they will not float in 
water), to soft, easily worked kinds. A considerable 
number bear edible fruits, notably the mango (from 
which the island derives its Malay name, Pulu 
Klemantari), the durian, mangosteen, rambutan, 
jack fruit, trap, lansat, banana of many varieties, 
both wild and cultivated, and numerous sour less 
nutritious kinds. Wild sago is abundant in some 
localities. Various palms supply in their unfolding 
leaves a cabbage-like edible. Among edible roots 
the caladium is the chief Rubber is obtained as 
the sap of a wild creeper ; gutta-percha from trees 
of several varieties ; camphor from pockets in the 
stem of the camphor tree {Dryobalanops aromatica). 
But of all the jungle plants those which play the 
most important parts in the life of the people are 
the many species of the rattan and the bamboo ; 
without them more than half the crafts and most 
of the more important material possessions of the 
natives would be impossible, and their lives would 
perhaps nearly conform to the conventional notion 
of savage existence as something ' nasty, dull, and 
brutish.' The jungle of Borneo is, of course, 
famous for its wealth of orchids, and can claim 
the distinction of producing the largest flower of 
the world {Rafflesia)^ and many beautiful varieties 
of the pitcher plant. 

The forests of Borneo harbour more than 450 

Plate 4. A LIMESTONE HILL AT PANGA IN UPPER SARA^^'AK. 

GEOGRAPHY OF BORNEO 7 

species of birds, many of them being of gorgeous 
colouring or strange and beautiful forms ; especially- 
noteworthy are many hawks, owls, and eagles, fly- 
catchers, spider-hunters, sun-birds, broad-bills, night- 
jars, orioles, miners, pigeons, kingfishers, hornbills, 
trojans, magpies, jays, crows, partridges, pheasants, 
herons, bitterns, snipes, plovers, curlews, and sand- 
pipers. Amongst these are many species peculiar 
to Borneo ; while on the mountains above the 
4000- feet level are found several species which 
outside Borneo are known only in the Himalayas. 

Besides the mammals mentioned above, Borneo 
claims several species of mammal peculiar to itself, 
notably the long-nosed monkey [Nasa/is larvatus) ; 
two species of ape [Semnopitkecus Hosei and S. 
cruciger) ; many shrews and squirrels, including 
several flying species ; a civet-cat i^Hemigale Hosei) ; 
a deer (Cervus Brookii)) the bearded pig {Sus 
barbatus) ; the curious feather-tailed shrew [Ptylo- 
cercus Lowii). 

Reptiles are well represented by the crocodile, 
which abounds in all the rivers, a long-snouted 
gavial, numerous tortoises and lizards with several 
flying species, and more than seventy species of 
snakes, of which some are poisonous, while the 
biggest, the python, attains a length of thirty feet. 
The rivers abound in edible fish of many species ; 
insects are of course numerous and varied, and, aided 
by the multitude of frogs, they fill the island each 
evening at sunset with one vast chorus of sound. 

CHAPTER II 

HISTORY OF BORNEO 

The Pagan tribes of Borneo have no written records 
of their history and only very vague traditions con- 
cerning events in the Hves of their ancestors of 
more than five or six generations ago. But the 
written records of more cultured peoples of the Far 
East contain references to Borneo which throw 
some small rays of light upon the past history and 
present condition of its population. It has seemed 
to us worth while to bring together in these pages 
these few historical notes. The later history of 
Borneo, which is in the main the story of its occupa- 
tion by and division between the Dutch and English, 
and especially the romantic history of the acquisition 
of the raj of Sarawak by its first English rajah, 
Sir James Brooke, has often been told,^ and for this 
reason may be dismissed by us in a very few words. 
The coasts of Borneo have long been occupied 
by a Mohammedan population of Malay culture ; 
this population is partly descended from Malay 
and Arab immigrants, and partly from indigenous 
individuals and communities that have adopted the 
Malay faith and culture in recent centuries. When 
Europeans first visited the island, this population, 
dwelling for the most part, as it still does, in villages 
and small towns upon the coast and in or near the 

1 See especially the recently published History of Sa7-awak under its Two 
White Rajahs, by S. Baring-Gould and C. A. Bampfylde, London, 1910. 

CHAP. , I HISTORY OF BORNEO 9 

mouths of the rivers, owed allegiance to several 
Malay sultans and a number of subordinate rulers, 
the local rajahs and pangirans. The principal 
sultans had as their capitals, from which they took 
their titles, Bruni on the north-west, Sambas in the 
west, Pontianak at the mouth of the Kapuas river, 
Banjermasin in the south at the mouth of the river 
of the same name, Pasir at the south-east corner, 
Kotei and Balungan on the east at the mouths of 
the rivers of those names ; while the Sultan of Jolo, 
the capital of the Sulu islands, which lie off the north 
coast, claimed sovereignty over the northern end of 
Borneo. But these Malay sultans were not the 
first representatives in the island of culture and of 
civilised or semi-civilised rule ; for history preserves 
some faint records of still earlier times, of which 
some slight confirmation is afforded by surviving 
traces of the culture then introduced. 

In spite of all the work done on the history of the 
East Indies, most of what occurred before and much 
that followed the arrival of Europeans remains 
obscure. There are several Asiatic nations whose 
records might be expected to contain valuable 
information, but all are disappointing. The Klings, 
still the principal Hindu traders in the Far East, 
visited the Malay Archipelago in the first or at any 
rate the second century after Christ,^ and intro- 
duced their writing^ and chronology. But their 
early histories are meagre and unsatisfactory in the 
extreme. The Arab culture of the Malays, which 
took root in Sumatra in the twelfth century, is of 
course of no assistance in regard to events of earlier 
date, and does not give trustworthy and detailed 

^ Crawfurd, Descriptive Dictionary, p. 140. 

^ Despite Crawfurd's opinion this is now an accepted fact. Raffles's History 
of Java contains much interesting information on the point, and there is a 
remarkable statement which has not obtained the attention that it deserves, 
showing that the Chinese recognised the similarity between the Java and Soli 
(Nagpur) alphabets. — Groeneveldt, Notes on Malay Ai^chipelago and Malcuca ; 
TxxOontx's Essays Relating to Indo-China, vol. i. p. 166. 

lo PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

accounts until the fifteenth century. The Chinese, 
on the other hand, always a literary people, carefully 
preserved in their archives all that could be gathered 
with regard to the "southern seas." But China 
was far away, and many local events would possess 
no interest for her subjects. Under the circum- 
stances, the official historians deserve our gratitude 
for their geographical descriptions and for the 
particulars of tribute-bearing missions to the Son of 
Heaven, though they have little else to tell. 

The first account we have been able to find 
referring to Borneo is a description of the kingdom 
of Poli from the Chinese annals of the sixth century. 
Poli was said to be on an island in the sea south- 
east of Camboja, and two months south-east of 
Canton. The journey thither was made by way 
of the Malay Peninsula, a devious route still 
followed by Chinese junks. Envoys were sent 
to the Imperial court in a.d. 518, 523, and 616. 
'* The people of this country," our authority says, 
"are skilled in throwing a discus - knife, and the 
edge is like a saw ; when they throw it at a man, 
they never fail to hit him. Their other arms 
are about the same as in China. Their customs 
resemble those of Camboja, and the productions 
of the country are the same as of Siam. When 
one commits a murder or theft they cut off his 
hands, ^ and when adultery has been committed, 
the culprit has his legs chained for the period of 
a year. For their sacrifice they choose the time 
when there is no moon'; they fill a bowl with wine 
and eatables and let it float away on the surface 
of the water ; in the eleventh month they have 
a great sacrifice. They get corals from the sea, 
and they have a bird called s'ari, which can talk." 
A later reference to the same place says: "They 
carry the teeth of wild beasts in their ears, and 

^ There is a Bruni still alive whose hands have been cut off for theft. 

KELTIE FALLS, MOUNT DULIT. SARAWAK. 

Plate 6. KENYAHS STOPPING TO CAMP FOR THE NIGHT 
ON THE BARAM RIVER. 

HISTORY OF BORNEO ii 

wrap a piece of cotton round their loins ; cotton 
is a plant of which they collect the flowers to make 
cloth of them ; the coarser kind is called kupa^ 
and the finer cloth Heh. They hold their markets 
at night, and cover their faces. ... At the east 
of this country is situated the land of the Rakshas, 
which has the same customs as Poli." ^ 

This is an interesting account in many ways, 
and tallies very closely with what other evidence 
would lead one to suspect. For there is reason 
to think that Bruni, before it became Mohammedan, 
was a Bisaya kingdom under Buddhist sovereigns 
and Hindu influence ; and nearly all the particulars 
given with regard to the people of Borneo are 
true of one or other of the races allied to Bisayas 
and living near Bruni to-day. The discus- knife, 
a wooden weapon, is not now in use, but is known 
to have been used formerly. The wild Kadayans 
sacrifice after every new moon, and are forbidden to 
eat a number of things until they have done so. The 
Malanaus set laden rafts afloat on the rivers to 
propitiate the spirits of the sea. The very names 
of the two kinds of cotton, then evidently a novelty 
to the Chinese, are found in Borneo : kapok is 
a well-known Malay word ; but taya is the common 

^ This account is taken from Groeneveldt {loc. cit.) who, however, supposes 
Poli to be on the north coast of Sumatra. In this he follows "all Chinese 
geographers," adding "that its neighbourhood to the Nicobar Islands is a 
sufficient proof that they are right." But Rakshas, which may have been " for 
a long time the name of the Nicobar Islands, probably on account of the 
wildness and bad reputation of their inhabitants," is merely Rakshasa, a term 
applied by the Hindu colonists in Java and the Malay Peninsula to any wild 
people, so that the statement that to the east of Poli is situated the land of the 
Rakshas is hardly sufficient support for even "all Chinese geographers." 
Trusting to " modern Chinese geographers," Groeneveldt makes Kaling, 
where an eight-foot gnomon casts a shadow of 2.4 feet at noon on the summer 
solstice, to be Java, that is to say, to be nearly 5° south of the equator. Having 
unwittingly demonstrated how untrustworthy are the modern geographers, 
he must excuse others if they prefer the original authority, who states that Poli 
is south-^aj^ of Camboja, the land of the Rakshas east of Poli, to "all" 
geographers who state on the contrary that Poli is south-7w^/ of Camboja, 
the Rakshas' country west of Poli. The name Poli appears to be a more 
accurate form of Polo, the name by which Bruni is said to have been known 
to the Chinese in early times. 

12 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

name for cotton among the Sea Dayaks, though it 
is doubtful whether it is found in Sumatra at all, and 
is not given in Marsden's great Dictionary. The 
use of teeth as ear-ornaments may refer to Kenyahs. 
If these identities are sufficient to show that Poli 
was old Bruni, we have an almost unique illustration 
here of the antiquity of savage customs. That an 
experience of fourteen hundred years should have 
failed to convince people of the futility of feeding salt 
waves is a striking demonstration of the widespread 
fallacy, that what is old must needs be good. 

Poli had already attained a certain measure of 
civilisation, and even of luxury. The kingly 
dignity was hereditary, and the Buddhist monarch 
was served with much ceremony. He was clad 
in flowered silk or cotton, adorned with pearls, 
and sat on a golden throne attended by servants 
with white dusters and fans of peacock feathers. 
When he went out of his palace, his chariot, canopied 
with feathers and embroidered curtains, was drawn 
by elephants, whilst gongs, drums, and conches 
made inspiriting music. As Hindu ornaments have 
been found at Santubong together with Chinese 
coins of great antiquity, as the names of many 
offices of state in Bruni are derived from Sanskrit, 
and the people of Sarawak have only lately ceased 
to speak of "the days of the Hindus,"^ there is 
nothing startling in the statement that the kings 
of Poli were Buddhist. 

Whatever Poli may or may not have been, there 
is little question that Puni, 45 days from Java, 
40 from Palembang, 30 from Champa, in each 
case taking the wind to be fair, was Bruni. The 
Chinese, who have neither b nor double consonants 
in their impoverished language, still call the Bornean 
capital Puni. Groeneveldt says that the Chinese 

^ Rajah Charles Brooke, Ten Years in Sarawak, quoted in Ling Roth's 
valuable work, The Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo, vol. ii. 
p. 279. 

HISTORY OF BORNEO 13 

consider Puni to have been on the west coast of 
Borneo. This state is mentioned several times 
in the annals of the Sung dynasty, which, though 
only ruling over Southern China, had a complete 
monopoly ^ of the ocean trade for three centuries 
(960 to 1279 A.D.). Puni was at that time a 
town of some 10,000 inhabitants, protected by a 
stockade of timber. The king's palace, like the 
houses of modern Bruni, was thatched with palm 
leaves, the cottages of the people with grass. 
Warriors carried spears and protected themselves 
with copper armour. When any native died, his 
corpse was exposed in the jungle, and once a year 
for seven years sacrifices were made to the departed 
spirit. Bamboos and palm leaves, thrown away after 
every meal, sufficed for crockery. The products of 
the country, or at least such as were sent as tribute, 
were camphor, tortoiseshell, and ivory.' 

In the year 977, we are told, Hianzta, king of 
Puni, sent envoys to China, who presented tribute 
with the following words : *' May the emperor live 
thousands and tens of thousands of years, and may 
he not disapprove of the poor civilities of my little 
country." The envoys presented a letter from the 
king. This was written on what looked like the 
very thin bark of a tree ; it was glossy, slightly 
green, several feet long, and somewhat broader 
than one inch ; the characters in which it was 
written were small, and had to be read horizontally. 
In all these particulars the letter resembled the 
books of magic which are still written by the Battas 
of inland Sumatra.^ The message ran : "The king 
of Puni, called Hianzta, prostrates himself before the 
most august emperor, and hopes that the emperor 
may live ten thousands of years. I have now sent 
envoys to carry tribute ; I knew before that there 

^ E. H. Parker, Chinas p. 33. ^ Groeneveldt, loc. cit. 

^ Marsden, History of Sumatra, p. 383. 

14 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

was an emperor, but I had no means of communica- 
tion. Recently there was a merchant called Pu Lu, 
whose ship arrived at the mouth of my river ; I 
sent a man to invite him to my place, and he told 
me that he came from China. The people of my 
country were much delighted at this, and preparing 
a ship, asked this stranger to guide them to the 
court. The envoys I have sent only wish to see 
Your Majesty in peace, and I intend to send people 
with tribute every year. But when I do so I fear 
that my ships may occasionally be blown to Champa, 
and I therefore hope Your Majesty will send an 
edict to that country with orders that, if a ship of 
Hianzta arrives there, it must not be detained. 
My country has no other articles,^ and I pray Your 
Majesty not to be angry with me." The envoys 
were entertained and sent home with presents. In 
1082 A.D., a hundred years later, Sri Maja, king of 
Puni, sent tribute again, but the promise of yearly 
homage was not kept. Gradually the Sung dynasty 
declined in power, and East Indian potentates 
became less humble. 

In the thirteenth and the early part of the four- 
teenth centuries Bruni owed allegiance alternately to 
two powers much younger than herself, Majapahit 
in Java, and Malacca on the west coast of the Malay 
Peninsula. Both these states were founded in the 
thirteenth century."^ Majapahit, originally only one 
of several Javan kingdoms, rapidly acquired strength 
and subjugated her neighbours and the nearest 
portions of the islands around. Malacca, formed 
when the Malay colony of Singapore was over- 
whelmed by Javanese, became the great commercial 
depot of the Straits and the chief centre of 
Mohammedanism in the Archipelago. The two 
powers therefore stood for two faiths and two 

^ Than camphor, tortoiseshell, ivory, and sandal woods. 
2 There is some doubt as to the date of the foundation of Majapahit. 

*^., 

HISTORY OF BORNEO 15 

cultures: Majapahit for Brahminism and Hindu 
influence, Malacca for Islam and the more practical 
civilisation of Arabia. 

In the earliest years of the fourteenth century 
Bruni was a dependency of Majapahit, but seems 
to have recovered its independence during the 
minority of the Javan king. It is to this time that 
the tradition of the Kapuas Malays ascribes the 
arrival of the Kayans in Borneo.^ Then Angka 
Wijaya extended the power of Majapahit over 
Palembang in Sumatra, Timor, Ternate, Luzon, and 
the coasts of Borneo. Over Banjermasin he set his 
natural son. In 1368 Javanese soldiers drove from 

^ According to a Malay manuscript of some antiquity lent to us by the late 
Tuanku Mudah, one of the kings {batara) of Majapahit had a beautiful daughter, 
Radin Galo Chindra Kirana. This lady was much admired by Laiang Sitir 
and Laiang Kemitir, the two sons of one Pati Legindir. On the death of the 
king, Pati Legindir ruled the land and the beautiful princess became his ward. 
He, to satisfy the rival claims of his two sons, promised that whoever should 
kill the raja of Balambangan (an island off the north coast of Borneo), known 
by the nickname of Manok Jingga, should marry the princess. Now at the 
court there happened to be Damar Clan, one of the sons of Raja Matarem, 
who had disguised his high descent and induced Pati Legindir to adopt him as 
his son. This young man found favour in the princess's eyes, and she tried to 
persuade her guardian to let her marry him. Pati Legindir, however, declared 
that he would keep to his arrangement, and roughly told the lover to bring 
Manok Jingga's head before thinking of marrying the princess. So Damar 
Clan set out with two followers on the dangerous mission, which he carried 
out with complete success. On his return he met his two rivals, who induced 
him to part with the head of the royal victim, and then buried him alive in a 
deep trap previously prepared. Pati Legindir, suspecting nothing, ordered his 
ward to marry Laiang Sitir, who brought the trophy to the palace ; but the 
princess had learned of the treachery from one of the spectators, and asked for 
a week's delay. Before it was too late, Damar Clan, who had managed to 
find a way out of what nearly proved a grave, reached the court and told his 
tale, now no longer concealing his rank. He married the princess and after- 
wards was entrusted by Pati Legindir with all the affairs of state. Having 
obtained supreme power, Damar Olan sent his treacherous rivals to southern 
Borneo, with a retinue of criminals mutilated in their ear-lobes and elsewhere 
as a penalty for incest. These transported convicts, the ancestors of the 
Kayans, landed near Sikudana and spread into the country between the 
Kapuas and Banjermasin. It is interesting to see how this tale agrees with 
other traditions. The Kayans state that they came across the sea at no distant 
date. Javan history relates that Majapahit was ruled during the minority of 
Angka Wijaya by his elder sister, the princess Babu Kanya Kanchana Wungu. 
A neighbouring prince, known as Manok Jengga, took advantage of this 
arrangement by seizing large portions of the young king's domains. One, 
Daram Wulan, however, son of a Buddhist devotee, overthrew him and was 
rewarded by the hand of the princess regent. When Angka Wijaya came of 
age he entrusted the care of a large part of his kingdom to his sister and 
brother-in-law. 

i6 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

Bruni the Sulu marauders who had sacked the town. 
A few years later the ungrateful king transferred his 
allegiance to China, and not long afterwards, with 
calculating humility, paid tribute ^ to Mansur Shah, 
who had succeeded to the throne of Malacca in 

1374 A.D. 

An extraordinary incident occurred at the be- 
ginning of the fifteenth century, which again — and 
for the last time — draws our attention to the Chinese 
court. The great Mongol conquerors, Genghis and 
Kublai Khan, had little to do with the Malay 
Archipelago, though the latter sent an unsuccessful 
expedition against Java in 1292. But the Ming 
emperors, who were of Chinese blood, came to 
power in 1368 and soon developed the maritime 
influence of the empire. For a few years there 
was a continual stream of East Indian embassies. 
During the last twenty years of the century, 
however, these became more rare, and in 1405 the 
Chinese emperor found it necessary to send a 
trusted eunuch, by name Cheng Ho, to visit the 
vassal states in the south. This man made several 
journeys, travelling as far as the shores of Africa, 
and his mission bore immediate fruit. Among 
others, Maraja Kali, king of Puni, although Cheng 
Ho does not appear to have called on him in person, 
sent tribute in 1405 ; and so pleased was he with the 
embroidered silk presented to him and his wife in 
return, that he visited the Son of Heaven three 
years later. Landing in Fukien, he was escorted 
by a eunuch to the Chinese capital amid scenes of 
great rejoicing. The emperor received him in 
audience, allowing him the honours of a noble of 
the first rank, and loaded him with gifts. The same 
year, having accomplished his one great ambition of 
'* seeing the face of the Son of Heaven," this 
humbled monarch died in the imperial city, leaving 

^ Sejarah Malaya, edited by Shellabear, Singapore, 1896, p. 106. 

^^, ''■■■■'•%: 

r -^s* 'it*'' -*■•'■ 

# 

iM^i. 

c 

HISTORY OF BORNEO 17 

his son Hiawang to succeed to the throne of Puni. 
Having induced the emperor to stop the yearly- 
tribute of forty katties of camphor paid by Puni to 
Java, and having agreed to send tribute to China 
every three years, Hiawang returned home to take 
up the reins of government. Between 14 10 and 
1425 he paid tribute six times, besides revisiting the 
Chinese Court ; but afterwards little Puni seems to 
have again ignored her powerful suzerain. 

It is probable that the Chinese colony in North 
Borneo which gave its name to the lofty mountain 
KinaBalu(Chinesewidow)andtotheKina Batangan, 
the chief river which flows from it, was founded 
about this time. Several old writers seem to refer 
to this event, and local traditions of the settlement 
still survive. The Brunis and Idaans (a people in 
the north not unlike the Bisayas) have legends 
differing in detail to the effect that the Chinese 
came to seize the great jewel of the Kina Balu 
dragon, but afterwards quarrelled about the booty 
and separated, some remaining behind. The Idaans 
consider themselves the descendants of these settlers, 
but that can only be true in a very limited sense. 
Both country and people, however, show traces of 
Chinese influence. 

There is good evidence that the Chinese influence 
and immigration were not confined to Bruni and the 
northern end of the island. In south-west Borneo 
there are traces of very extensive washings of 
alluvial gravels for gold and diamonds. These 
operations were being conducted by Chinese when 
Europeans first came to the country ; and the 
extent of the old workings implies that they had 
been continued through many centuries. Hindu- 
Javan influence also was not confined to the court 
of Bruni, for in many parts of the southern half 
of Borneo traces of it survive in the custom of 
burning the dead, in low relief carvings of bulls 

VOL. I c 

i8 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

on stone, and in various gold ornaments of Hindu 
character. 

The faith of Islam and the arrival of Europeans 
have profoundly affected the manners and politics 
of the East Indies, and now it is difficult to picture 
the state of affairs when King Hiawang revisited 
China to pay homage to the Emperor. In 152 1, 
within a hundred years of that event, Pigafetta, 
the chronicler of Magellan's great exploit, was 
calling on the '* Moorish " king of Bruni, in the 
course of the first voyage round the world. The 
change had come. Of the two new influences, so 
potent for good and evil, Mohammedanism made 
its appearance first. The struggle for religious 
supremacy ended in the complete victory of the 
Prophet's followers in 1478, when Majapahit was 
utterly destroyed, thirty years before the capture 
of Malacca by the Portuguese. 

How early the Arab doctrines were taught in 
Bruni it is impossible to state with any precision. 
Local tradition ascribes their introduction to the 
renowned Alak ber Tata, afterwards known as 
Sultan Mohammed. Like most of his subjects 
this warrior was a Bisaya, and in early life he was 
not a Mohammedan, not indeed a civilised potentate 
at all, to judge by conventional standards ; for the 
chief mark of his royal dignity was an immense 
chawat, or loin-cloth, carried as he walked by eighty 
men, forty in front and forty behind. He is the 
earliest monarch of whom the present Brunis have 
any knowledge, a fact to be accounted for partly 
by the brilliance of his exploits, partly by the 
introduction about that time of Arabic writing. 
After much fighting he subdued the people of 
Igan,^ Kalaka, Seribas, Sadong, Semarahan, and 
Sarawak,^ and compelled them to pay tribute. He 

^ Whose descendants are the Malanaus. 

^ Cf. Low, Journal Straits Bratich Royal Asiatic Society^ voh v. p. I, 
from whose article we have obtained much interesting material. 

HISTORY OF BORNEO 19 

stopped the annual payment to Majapahit of one 
jar of pinang juice, a useless commodity though 
troublesome to collect. During his reign the 
Muruts were brought under Bruni rule by peaceful 
measures,^ and the Chinese colony was kept in 
good humour by the marriage of the Bruni king's 
brother and successor to the daughter of one of 
the principal Chinamen. 

Alak ber Tata is said to have gone to Johore,^ 
where he was converted^ to Islam, given ^ the 
daughter of Sultan Bakhei and the title of Sultan, 
and was confirmed in his claim to rule over Sarawak 
and his other conquests.^ 

Sultan Mohammed was succeeded by his brother 
Akhmad, son-in-law of the Chinese chief, and he was 
in turn succeeded by an Arab from Taif who had 

^ This is said to have been accomplished by Alak ber Tata's brother, 
Awang Jerambok, the story of whose dealings with the Muruts is well known 
both to Brunis and Muruts. He set out one day for the head of the river 
Manjilin, but lost his way after crossing the mountains. After wandering for 
three days he came upon a Murut village, whose inhabitants wished to kill 
him. He naturally told them not to do so, and they desisted. After some 
time, which he spent with these rude folk, then not so far advanced into the 
interior, he so far won their affections that they followed him to Bruni, where 
they were entertained by the sovereign and generously treated. These Muruts 
then induced their friends to submit. 

^ Founded after the capture of Malacca by the Portuguese, 1 5 12 A.D. 
(Crawfurd, Descriptive Dictionary). Sultan Abdul Krahar, great-great-grandson 
of Sultan Mohammed's younger brother, died about 1575 A.D. From this 
fact and the statement that Mohammed stopped the Majapahit tribute, we may 
infer that the latter sat on the throne of Bruni in the middle of the fifteenth 
century ; if this inference is correct, the story of his visit to Johore must be 
unfounded. 

^ Some say he was never converted, others that he was summoned to Johore 
expressly to be initiated into Islam. 

* He is also alleged to have seized the lady in a drunken freak. It is stated 
that the Sultan was so much enraged at this that he proposed to make war 
on Bruni. His minister, however, suggested that enquiries should be made 
into the strength of that kingdom before commencing operations. He was 
accordingly sent to Bruni, where he was so well received that he married and 
remained there, with a number of followers. Word was sent to Johore that 
the princess was treated as queen and was quite happy with her husband. 
This appeased the Sultan's wrath. An old friend of ours belonging to the 
Burong Pingai section of Bruni, that is to say, the old commercial class, says 
that his people are all descended from this Pengiran Bandahara of Johore, and 
that the name Burong Pingai is derived from the circumstance that their 
ancestor had a pigeon of remarkable tameness. 

^ Cf. with Dalrymple's account of the origin of the Sulu Sultanate, /<?Mr«a/ 
Indian Archipelago, iii. 545 and 564. See also Lady Brassey's Last Voyage, 
p. 165. 

20 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

married his daughter. Thus the present royal 
house of Bruni is derived from three sources — Arab, 
Bisaya, and Chinese. The coronation ceremony as 
still maintained affords an interesting confirmation 
of this account. On that occasion the principal 
minister wears a turban and Haji outfit, the two next 
in rank are dressed in Chinese and Hindu fashion, 
while the fourth wears a chawat over his trousers 
to represent the Bisayas; and each of these ministers 
declares the Sultan to be divinely appointed. Then 
after the demonstration of loyalty the two gongs — 
one from Menangkabau, the other from Johore — 
are beaten, and the Moslem high priest proclaims 
the Sultan and preaches a sermon, declaring him to 
be a descendant of Sri Turi Buana, the Palembang 
chief who founded the early kingdom of Singapore 
in 1160 A.D., who reigned in that island for forty- 
eight years, and whose descendants became the royal 
family of Malacca. 

The Arab Sultan who succeeded Akhmed as- 
sumed the name Berkat and ruled the country with 
vigour. He built a mosque and converted many 
of his subjects, so that from his reign Bruni may 
be considered a Mohammedan town. To defend 
the capital he sank forty junks filled with stone in 
the river, and thus formed the breakwater which 
still bars the entrance to large ships. This work 
rose above the water level, and in former times 
bristled with cannon. Sultan Berkat was succeeded 
by his son Suleiman, whose reign was of little 
consequence. 

Neglecting Suleiman, we come now to the most 
heroic figure in Bruni history. Sultan Bulkiah, better 
known by his earlier name, Nakoda Ragam. The 
prowess of this prince has been celebrated in prose 
and verse. He journeyed to distant lands, and 
conquered the Sulu islands and eastern Borneo. 
Over the throne of Sambas he set a weak-minded 

HISTORY OF BORNEO 21 

brother of his own. He even sent an expedition 
to Manila, and on the second attempt seized that 
place. Tribute poured into his coffers from all 
sides. His wife was a Javanese princess, who 
brought many people to Bruni. These intermarried 
with the Bisayas, and from them it is said are 
sprung the Kadayans, a quiet agricultural folk, 
skilled in various arts, but rendered timid by con- 
tinual oppression. Some have settled recently in 
the British colony of Labuan, and others in Sarawak 
round the river Sibuti, where they have become 
loyal subjects of the Rajah of Sarawak. 

Nakoda Ragam's capital at Buang Tawa was on 
dry land, but when he died, killed accidentally by 
his wife's bodkin, the nobles quarrelled among 
themselves, and some of them founded the present 
pile-built town of Bruni. It was to this Malay 
capital and court that Pigafetta paid his visit in 
152 1 with the surviving companions of Magellan. 
His is the first good account from European sources 
of the place which he called Bornei, and whose 
latitude he estimated with an error of less than ten 
miles.^ 

It is easy to see from Pigafetta's narrative ^ that at 
the date of his visit the effects of Nakoda Ragam's 
exploits had not evaporated. The splendour of the 
Court and the large population the city is said to 
have contained were presumably the result of the 
conquests he had made in neighbouring islands. 
The king, like the princes of Malacca before 
the conquest, had his elephants, and he and his 
courtiers were clothed in Chinese satins and Indian 
brocades. He was in possession of artillery, and 
the appearance and ceremonial of his court was 
imposing. 

^ He puts the longitude 30° too far east ; but in his day, of course, there were 
no chronometers. 

2 Cited in full by Crawfurd, Descriptive Dictionary of the Indian Islands. 
Article, " Brunai." 

22 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

From this time onwards the power of Bruni has 
continuously declined. Recurrent civil wars invited 
the occasional interventions of the Portuguese and 
of the Spanish governors of the Philippines, which, 
although they did not result in the subjugation of 
the Malay power, nevertheless sapped its strength. 

The interest of the later history of Borneo lies 
in the successive attempts,^ many of them fruitless, 
made by Dutch and English to gain a footing on 
the island. The Dutch arrived off Bruni in the 
year 1600, and ten days afterwards were glad to 
leave with what pepper they had obtained in the 
interval, the commander judging the place nothing 
better than a nest of rogues. The Dutch did not 
press the acquaintance, but started factories at 
Sambas, where they monopolised the trade. In 
1685 an English captain named Cowley arrived 
in Bruni ; but the English showed as little inclina- 
tion as the Dutch to take up the commerce which 
the Portuguese had abandoned. 

At Banjermasin, on the southern coast, more 
progress was made. The Dutch arrived there 
before their English rivals, but were soon compelled 
by intrigues to withdraw. In 1704^ the English 
factors on the Chinese island of Chusan, expelled 
by the imperial authorities and subsequently driven 
from Pulo Condar off the Cochin China coast by 
a mutiny, arrived at Banjermasin. They had every 
reason to be gratified with the prospects at that 
port ; for they could sell the native pepper to the 
Chinese at three times the cost price. But their 
bitter experiences in the China seas had not taught 
them wisdom ; they soon fell out with the Javanese 
Sultan, whose hospitality they were enjoying, and 
after some bloody struggles were obliged to with- 
draw from this part of the island. 

^ Much of the following information is extracted from an article by J. R. 
Logan on European intercourse with Borneo, Joui-nal Vidian Archipelago, vol. 
ii. p. 505. '^ The article in \hQ Journal Indian Archipelago says 1702. 

Plate 13. IN THE HEADWATERS OF THE BARAM RIVER. 

HISTORY OF BORNEO 23 

In 1747 the Dutch East India Company, which 
in 1705 had obtained a firm footing in Java, and in 
1 745 had established its authority over all the north- 
eastern coast of that island, extorted a monopoly 
of trade at Banjermasin and set up a factory. 
Nearly forty years later ^ (17S5), the reigning prince" 
having rendered himself odious to his subjects, the 
country was invaded by 3000 natives of Celebes. 
These were expelled by the Dutch, who dethroned 
the Sultan, placing his younger brother on the 
throne ; and he, in reward for their services, ceded 
to them his entire dominions, consenting to hold 
them as a vassal. This is the treaty under which 
the Dutch claim the sovereignty of Banjermasin 
and whatever was once dependent on it. In this 
way the Dutch got a hold on the country which 
they have never relaxed ; and, after the interval 
during which their possessions in the East Indies 
were administered by England,^ they strengthened 
that hold gradually, year by year, till now two- 
thirds or more of the island is under their flag and 
feels the benefits of their rule. If there are still 
any districts of this large area where Dutch influence 
has even now barely made itself felt, they will not 
long remain in their isolation ; for the Controleurs 
are extending their influence even into the most 
remote corners of the territory. 

To turn again to the north-western coast and 
the doings of Englishmen, in 1763 the Sultan of 
Sulu ceded to the East India Company the territory 
in Borneo which had been given him when he 
killed the usurper Abdul Mubin in Bruni. In 1773 
a small settlement was formed on the island of 
Balambangan, north of Bruni ; and in the following 
year the Sultan of Bruni agreed to give this 
settlement a monopoly of the pepper trade in 
return for protection from piracy. In the next 

^ Crawfurd, Descriptive Dictionary^ P- 37* ^ l8ii to 1S15. 

24 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

year, however, Balambangan was surprised and 
captured by the Sulus. It was reoccupied for a 
few months in 1803, ^^^ then finally forsaken. 

Towards the end of the eighteenth century the 
Malays of Bruni, Sulu, and Mindanao, with native 
followers and allies, inspired we may suppose by 
the example of their European visitors, took to 
piracy — not that they had not engaged in such 
business before, but that they now prosecuted an 
old trade with renewed vigour. English traders 
still tried to pay occasional visits, but after the loss 
of the May in 1788, the Susanna in 1803, and the 
Commerce in 1806, with the murder of the crews, 
the Admiralty warned merchants that it was certain 
destruction to go up river to Bruni. For forty 
years this intimation was left on British charts, and 
British seamen followed the humiliating counsel. 
Not until the early forties was peace restored, after 
an event of the most romantic and improbable kind, 
the accession of an English gentleman to the throne 
of Sarawak. 

Of this incident, so fateful for the future of the 
western side of Borneo, it must suffice to say here 
that James Brooke, a young Englishman, having 
resigned his commission in the army of the British 
East India Company, invested his fortune in a 
yacht of 140 tons, with which he set sail in 1838 
for the eastern Archipelago. His bold but vague 
design was to establish peace, prosperity, and just 
government in some part of that troubled area, 
whose beauties he had admired and whose mis- 
fortunes he had deplored on the occasion of an 
earlier voyage to the China seas. When at 
Singapore, he heard that the Malays of Sarawak, 
a district forming the southern extremity of the 
Sultanate of Bruni, had rebelled against the Bruni 
nobles, and had in vain appealed to the Dutch 
Governor-general at Batavia for deliverance from 

Plate 14. LIOH MATU (THE PLACE OF A HUNDRED ISLANDS), 
AT THE HEAD OF THE BARAM RIVER. 

HISTORY OF BORNEO 25 

their oppressors. Under the nominal authority of 
the Sultan, these Bruni nobles, many of whom were 
of Arab descent, had brought all the north-western 
part of Borneo to a state of chronic rebellion. They 
had taught the Sea Dayaks of the Batang Lupar and 
neighbouring rivers to join them in their piratical 
excursions, and, being to some extent dependent 
upon their aid, were compelled to treat them with 
some consideration ; but all other communities were 
treated by them with a rapacity and cruelty which 
was causing a rapid depopulation and the return to 
jungle of much cultivated land. 

Brooke sailed for Sarawak in August 1839, and 
found the country torn by internal conflicts. The 
Sultan had recently sent Muda Hasim, his uncle 
and heir-presumptive to the throne of Bruni, to 
restore order ; but this weak though amiable noble 
had found himself quite incapable of coping with 
the situation. Brooke spent some time surveying 
the coast and studying the people and country, and 
gained the confidence of Muda Hasim. After an 
excursion to Celebes, Brooke sailed for a second 
visit to Sarawak just a year after the first, and 
found the state of the country going from bad to 
worse. Muda Hasim besought him to take com- 
mand of his forces and to suppress the rebellion. 
Brooke consented, and soon secured the submission 
of the rebel leaders on the condition that he 
(Brooke), and not any Bruni noble, should be the 
governor and Rajah of Sarawak. Muda Hasim had 
offered to secure his appointment to this office as 
an inducement to him to undertake the operations 
against the rebels; Brooke therefore felt himself justi- 
fied in granting these terms. And when later Muda 
Hasim, no longer threatened with disgrace and 
failure, showed himself disinclined to carry out this 
arrangement, Brooke, feeling himself bound by his 
agreement with the rebel leaders, whose lives he 

T^ 

26 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

had with difficulty preserved from the vengeance 
of the Bruni nobles, insisted upon it with some 
show of force ; and on September 24, 1841, he was 
proclaimed Rajah and governor of Sarawak amid 
the rejoicings of the populace. Muda Hasim, as 
representative of the Sultan, signed the document 
which conferred this title and authority ; but since 
he was not in any proper sense Rajah of Sarawak, 
which in fact was not a raj, but a district hitherto 
ruled or misruled by Bruni governors not bearing 
the title of Rajah, this transaction cannot properly 
be described as an abdication by Muda Hasim in 
favour of Brooke. Brooke accordingly felt that it 
was desirable to secure from the Sultan himself a 
formal recognition of his authority and title. To 
this end he visited the Sultan in the year 1842, and 
obtained from him the desired confirmation of the 
action of his agent Muda Hasim. The way in 
which the raj of Sarawak has since been extended, 
until it now comprises a territory of nearly 60,000 
square miles (approximately equal to the area of 
England and Wales), will be briefly described in a 
later chapter (XXH.). 

The northern end of Borneo had long been a 
hunting-ground for slaves for the nobles of Bruni 
and Sulu, whose Sultans claimed but did not 
exercise the right to rule over it. In 1877 Mr. 
Alfred Dent, a Shanghai merchant, induced the 
two Sultans to resign to him their sovereign 
rights over this territory in return for a money 
payment. The British North Borneo Company, 
which was formed for the commercial development 
of it, necessarily undertook the task of pacifica- 
tion and administration. In 1881 the company 
was granted a royal charter by the British Govern- 
ment ; and it now administers with success and 
a fair prospect of continued commercial profit a 
territory which, with the exception of a small 

mi- 

Plate 15. FANNY RAPID IN THE PATA RIVER, BARAM DISTRICT. 

HISTORY OF BORNEO 27 

area about the town of Bruni, includes all of the 
island that had not been brought under the Dutch 
or Sarawak flag. In 1888 Sarawak and British 
North Borneo were formally brought under the 
protection of the British Government ; but the 
territories remained under the rule of the Rajah 
and of the company respectively, except in regard 
to their foreign relations. In the year 1906 the 
Sultan of Bruni placed himself and his capital, 
together with the small territory over which he 
still retained undivided authority, under the protec- 
tion of the British Government ; and thus was 
completed the passing of the island of Borneo 
under European control. 

CHAPTER III 

GENERAL SKETCH OF THE PEOPLES OF BORNEO 

It is not improbable that at one time Borneo was 
inhabited by people of the negrito race, small 
remnants of which race are still to be found in 
islands adjacent to all the coasts of Borneo as 
well as in the Malay Peninsula. No communities 
of this race exist in the island at the present time ; 
but among the people of the northern districts 
individuals may be occasionally met with whose 
hair and facial characters strongly suggest an in- 
fusion of negrito or negroid blood. 

It is probable that the mixed race of Hindu- 
Javanese invaders, who occupied the southern coasts 
of Borneo some centuries ago, became blended with 
the indigenous population, and that a considerable 
proportion of their blood still runs in the veins of 
some of the tribes of the southern districts {e.g. 
the Land Dayaks and Malohs). 

There can be no doubt that of the Chinese 
traders who have been attracted to Borneo by its 
camphor, edible birds' nests, and spices, some have 
settled in the island and have become blended with 
and absorbed by the tribes of the north-west {e.g. 
the Dusuns) ; and it seems probable that some of 
the elements of their culture have spread widely 
and been adopted throughout a large part of Borneo. 
For several centuries also Chinese settlers have 
been attracted to the south-western district by the 

28 

1 

m 

] w 

Plate i6. A SEA DAYAK OR IBAN. 

Plate 17. PROFILE OF SEA DAYAK OF PLATE 16. 

CHAP. Ill THE PEOPLES OF BORNEO 29 

gold which they found in the river gravel and 
alluvium. These also have intermarried with the 
people of the country ; but they have retained their 
national characteristics, and have been continually 
recruited by considerable numbers of their fellow- 
countrymen. Since the establishment of peace and 
order and security for life and property by the 
European administrations, and with the consequent 
development of trade during the last half-century, 
the influx of Chinese has been very rapid ; until 
at the present time they form large communities 
in and about all the chief centres of trade. A 
certain number of Chinese traders continue to 
penetrate far into the interior, and some of these 
take wives of the people of the country ; in many 
cases their children become members of their 
mothers' tribes and so are blended with the native 
stocks. 

Among the Mohammedans, who are found in all 
the coast regions of Borneo, there is a considerable 
number of persons who claim Arab forefathers ; and 
there can be no doubt that the introduction of the 
Mohammedan religion was largely due to Arab 
traders, and that many Arabs and their half-bred 
descendants have held official positions under the 
Sultans of Bruni. 

During the last half-century, natives of India, most 
of whom are Klings from Madras, have established 
themselves in the small trades of the towns ; and 
of others who came as coolies, some have settled 
in the towns with their wives and families. These 
people do not penetrate into the interior or inter- 
marry with the natives. 

With the exception of the above - mentioned 
immigrants and their descendants, the population 
of Borneo may be described as falling naturally 
into two great classes ; namely, on the one hand 
those who have accepted, nominally at least, the 

30 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

Mohammedan religion and civilisation, and on the 
other hand the pagan peoples. In Bruni and in 
all the coast regions the majority of the people are 
Mohammedan, have no tribal organisation, and call 
themselves Malays (Orang Malayu). This name has 
usually been accorded them by European authors ; 
but when so used the name denotes a social, politi- 
cal, and religious status rather than membership 
in an ethnic group. With the exception of these 
partially civilised *' Malays" of the coast regions 
and the imported elements mentioned above, all 
the natives of Borneo live under tribal organisation, 
their cultures ranging from the extreme simplicity 
of the nomadic Punans to a moderately developed 
barbarism. All these pagan tribes have often been 
classed together indiscriminately under the name 
Dyaks or Dayaks, though many groups may be 
clearly distinguished from one another by differences 
of culture, belief, and custom, and peculiarities of 
their physical and mental constitutions. 

The Mohammedan population, being of very 
heterogeneous ethnic composition, and having 
adopted a culture of foreign origin, which may be 
better studied in other regions of the earth where 
the Malay type and culture is more truly indigenous, 
seems to us to be of secondary interest to the 
anthropologist as compared with the less cultured 
pagan tribes. We shall therefore confine our atten- 
tion to the less known pagan tribes of the interior ; 
and when we speak of the people of Borneo in 
general terms it is to the latter only that we refer 
(except where the *' Malays " are specifically men- 
tioned). Of these we distinguish six principal 
groups: (i) Sea Dayaks or Ibans, (2) the Kayans, 
(3) Kenyahs, (4) Klemantans, (5) Muruts, (6) Punans. 

A census of the population has been made in 
most of the principal districts of Sarawak and of 
Dutch Borneo ; but as no census of the whole 

Ill 

THE PEOPLES OF BORNEO 31 

country has hitherto been made, it is impossible to 
state with any pretence to accuracy the number of 
the inhabitants of the island. Basing our estimate 
on such partial and local enumerations as have been 
made, we believe the total population to be about 
3,000,000. Of these the Chinese immigrants and 
their descendants, who are rapidly increasing in 
number, probably exceed 100,000. The Malays 
and the native converts to Islam, who constitute 
with the Chinese the population of the towns 
and settled villages of the coast districts, probably 
number between three and four hundred thousand ; 
the Indian immigrants are probably not more than 
10,000; the Europeans number perhaps 3000; the 
rest of the population is made up of the six groups 
of barbarians named in the foregoing paragraph. 

Any estimate of the numbers of the people 
of each of these six divisions is necessarily a 
very rough one, but it is perhaps worth while 
to state our opinion on this question as follows : 
Klemantans, rather more than 1,000,000 ; Kenyahs, 
about 300,000 ; Muruts, 250,000 ; Sea Dayaks, 
200,000 ; Kayans, 150,000 ; Punans and other 
peoples of similar nomadic habits, 100,000 — i.e. a 
total of 2,000,000. 

(i) Of all these six peoples the Sea Dayaks have 
become best known to Europeans, largely owing 
to their restless truculent disposition, and to the 
fact that they are more numerous in Sarawak than 
any of the others. They have spread northwards 
over Sarawak during the latter half of the last 
century, chiefly from the region of the Batang 
Lupar, where they are still numerous. They are 
still spreading northward, encroaching upon the 
more peaceful Klemantan tribes. They are most 
densely distributed in the lower reaches of the 
main rivers of Sarawak, especially the Batang Lupar 
and Saribas rivers, which are now exclusively 

32 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

occupied by them ; but they are found also in 
scattered communities throughout almost all parts 
of Sarawak, and even in British North Borneo, and 
they extend from their centre in Sarawak into the 
adjacent regions of Dutch Borneo, which are drained 
by the northern tributaries of the Great Kapuas 
River. 

The Sea Dayak is of a well-marked and fairly 
uniform physical type. His skin is distinctly darker 
than that of the other peoples of the interior, though 
not quite so dark as that of most of the true Malays. 
The hair of his head is more abundant and longer 
than that of other peoples. His figure is well 
proportioned, neat, and generally somewhat boyish. 
His expression is bright and mobile, his lips and 
teeth are generally distorted and discoloured by 
the constant chewing of betel nut. They are a 
vain, dressy, boastful, excitable, not to say frivol- 
ous people — cheerful, talkative, sociable, fond of 
fun and jokes and lively stories ; though given to 
exaggeration, their statements can generally be 
accepted as founded on fact ; they are industrious 
and energetic, and are great wanderers ; to the last 
peculiarity they owe the name of I ban, which has 
been given them by the Kayans, and which has 
now been generally adopted even by the Sea Dayaks 
themselves. 

The good qualities enumerated above render 
the I ban an agreeable companion and a useful 
servant. But there is another side to the picture : 
they have little respect for their chiefs, a peculiarity 
which renders their social organisation very defective 
and chaotic ; they are quarrelsome, treacherous, 
and litigious, and the most inveterate head-hunters 
of the country ; unlike most of the other peoples, 
they will take heads for the sake of the glory 
the act brings them and for the enjoyment of 
the killing ; in the pursuit of human victims they 

Ill 

THE PEOPLES OF BORNEO 33 

become possessed by a furious excitement that drives 
them on to acts of the most heartless treachery and 
the most brutal ferocity. 

All the Sea Dayaks speak one language, with 
but slight local diversities of dialect. It is ex- 
tremely simple, being almost devoid of inflections, 
and of very simple grammatical structure, relying 
largely on intonation. It is closely allied to Malay. 

(2) The Kayans are widely distributed throughout 
central Borneo, and are to be found in large villages 
situated on the middle reaches of all the principal 
rivers with the exception of those that run to the 
north coast. They occupy in the main a zone 
dividing the districts of the lower reaches of the 
rivers from the central highlands from which all 
the rivers flow. 

They are a warlike people, but less truculent 
than the Sea Dayaks, more staid and conservative 
and religious, and less sociable. They do not 
wantonly enter into quarrels ; they respect and obey 
their chiefs. They are equally industrious with 
the Sea Dayaks, and though somewhat slow and 
heavy in both mind and body, they are more skilled 
in the handicrafts than any of the other peoples. 
They also speak one language, which presents even 
less local diversity than the Sea Dayak language. 

(3) The Kenyahs predominate greatly in the 
highlands a little north of the centre of Borneo 
where all the large rivers have their sources ; but 
they are found also in widely scattered villages 
throughout the Kayan areas. In all respects they 
show closer affinities with the Kayans than with 
the Sea Dayaks ; as regards custom and mode of 
life they closely resemble the Kayans, with whom 
they are generally on friendly terms ; but they are 
easily distinguished from the Kayans by well-marked 
differences of bodily and mental characters, as 
well as by language. Physically they are without 

VOL. I D 

34 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

question the finest people of the country. Their 
skin - colour is decidedly fairer than that of Sea 
Dayaks or Kayans. They are of medium stature, 
with long backs and short, muscular, well-rounded 
limbs ; a little stumpy in build, but of graceful and 
vigorous bearing. They are perhaps the most 
courageous and intelligent of the peoples ; pug- 
nacious, but less quarrelsome than the Sea Dayak ; 
more energetic and excitable than the Kayan ; 
hospitable and somewhat improvident, sociable and 
of pleasant manners ; less reserved and of more 
buoyant temperament than the Kayan ; very loyal 
and obedient to their chiefs ; more truthful and 
more to be depended upon under all circumstances 
than any of the other peoples, except possibly the 
Kayans. 

The Kenyahs speak a number of dialects of the 
same language, and these differ so widely that 
Kenyahs of widely separated districts cannot con- 
verse freely with one another ; but, as with all the 
peoples, except the Sea Dayaks, nearly every man 
has the command of several dialects as well as of the 
Kayan language. 

(4) The Klemantans. Under this name we group 
together a number of tribes which, though in our 
opinion closely allied, are widely scattered in all 
parts of Borneo, and present considerable diversities 
of language and custom. In physical and mental 
characters they show affinities to the Kenyahs on 
the one hand and to the Muruts on the other. 
They are less bellicose than the peoples mentioned 
above, and have suffered much at their hands. 
They are careful, intelligent, and sociable, though 
somewhat timid, people ; skilful in handicrafts, but 
less energetic than the Kayans and Kenyahs, and 
inferior to them in metal work and the making of 
swords and spears and boats. The blow-pipe is 
their characteristic weapon, and they are more 

.^ fl^ 

/ 

f 

^ 

Plate 21. BULING, THE SON OF A KENYAH CHIEF OF THE 
BARAM DISTRICT. 

THE PEOPLES OF BORNEO 35 

devoted to hunting than any others, except the 
Punans. 

Klemantans are to be found in every part of the 
island, but most of their villages are situated on 
the lower reaches of the rivers. They are most 
abundant in the south, constituting the greater part 
of the population of Dutch Borneo ; in the north 
they are few, their place being filled by their near 
relatives, the Muruts. The latter constitute the 
principal part of the population of the northern 
end of the island, predominating over all the other 
peoples in British North Borneo, and in the northern 
extremities of Sarawak and of Dutch Borneo. 

(5) The Muruts are confined to the northern 
part of Borneo. They resemble the Klemantans 
more closely than the other peoples. They are 
comparatively tall and slender, have less regular 
and pleasing features than the Klemantans, and 
their skin is generally darker and more ruddy in 
colour. Their agriculture is superior to that of 
the other peoples, but they are addicted to much 
drinking of rice-spirit. Their social organisation 
is very loose, their chiefs having but little authority. 
Besides those who call themselves Muruts, we class 
under the same general name several tribes which 
we regard as closely allied to them ; namely, the 
Adangs in the head of the Limbang ; the Kalabits 
about the head of the Baram ; the Sabans and 
Kerayans at the head of the Kerayan river ; the 
Libuns ; the Lepu Asings at the head of the Bahau; 
Tagals and Dusuns in the most northerly part ; the 
Trings of the Barau and Balungan rivers on the 
east. 

(6) The Punans, among whom we include, beside 
the Punans proper, the Ukits and a few other 
closely allied but widely scattered small groups, 
are the only people who do not dwell in villages 
established on the banks of the rivers. They live 

36 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

in small groups of twenty or thirty persons, which 
wander in the jungle. Each such group is generally 
made up of a chief and his descendants. The 
group will spend a few weeks or months at a time 
in one spot (to which generally they are attracted 
by the presence of wild sago), dwelling in rude 
shelters of sticks and leaves, aud then moving on, 
but generally remaining within some one area, 
such as the basin of one of the upper tributaries 
of a large river. They are found throughout the 
interior of Borneo, but are difficult to meet with, 
as they remain hidden in the depths of the forests. 
Unlike all the other peoples, they cultivate no padi 
(rice), and they do not make boats or travel on the 
rivers. They support themselves by hunting with 
the blow-pipe, by gathering the wild jungle fruits, 
and by collecting the jungle products and bartering 
them with the more settled peoples. In physical 
characters they closely resemble the Kenyahs, being 
well-built and vigorous ; their skin is of very light 
yellow colour, and their features are regular and 
well shaped. Mentally they are characterised by 
extreme shyness and timidity and reserve. They 
are quite inoffensive and never engage in open 
warfare; though they will avenge injuries by stealthy 
attacks on individuals with the blow-pipe and 
poisoned darts. Their only handicrafts are the 
making of baskets, mats, blow-pipes, and the 
implements used for working the wild sago ; but 
in these and in the use of the blow-pipe they are 
very expert. All other manufactured articles used 
by them — cloths, swords, spears — are obtained by 
barter from the other peoples. Unlike all the other 
peoples, they have no form of sepulture, but simply 
leave the corpse of a comrade in the rude shelter 
in which he died. They sing and declaim rude 
melancholy songs or dirges with peculiar skill and 
striking effect. Their language is distinctive, but 

Ill 

THE PEOPLES OF BORNEO z^ 

is apparently allied to the Kenyah and Klemantan 
tongues. 

We propose to deal with the topics of each of 
our descriptive chapters by giving as full as possible 
an^account-of -the Kayans, and adding to this some 
observations as to the principal diversities of custom 
and culture presented by the other peoples. For, 
if we should attempt to describe in detail each of 
these peoples with all their local diversities, this 
book would attain an inordinate length. The 
Kayans are in most respects the most homogeneous 
of these peoples, the most conservative and dis- 
tinctive, and present perhaps the richest and most 
interesting body of belief and custom and art ; while 
many of their customs and arts have been adopted 
by their neighbours, or are indigenous with them. 

We may conclude this chapter by describing 
briefly in general terms the physical characters, and 
the habits and customs that are common to all or 
most of these pagan tribes. 

These peoples present no very great differences 
of physical character. All are of medium height ; 
their skin-colour ranges from a rich medium brown 
to a very pale cafd-au-lait, hardly deeper than the 
colour of cream. Their hair is nearly black or 
very dark brown, and generally quite lank, but in 
some cases wavy or even almost curly. Their 
faces show in nearly all cases, though in very 
diverse degrees, some of the well-known mongoloid 
characters, the wide cheek-bones, the small oblique 
eyes, the peculiar fold of the upper eyelid at its nasal 
end, and the scanty beard. In some individuals 
these traces are very slight and in fact not certainly 
perceptible. The nose varies greatly in shape, but 
is usually rather wide at the nostrils, and in very 
many cases the plane of the nostrils is tilted a little 
upwards and forwards. On the other hand some 
individuals, especially among the Kenyahs, have 

SS PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

distinctly aquiline and well-formed noses. Amongst 
all these peoples, especially the Kenyahs, Punans, 
and Klemantans, there are to be seen a few in- 
dividuals of very regular well -shaped features of 
European type. 

Although as regards physical characters all these 
peoples have much in common, yet each of them 
presents peculiarities which are obvious to the eye 
of an experienced observer, and enable him without 
hesitation to assign to their proper groups the 
majority of individuals ; and such recognition on 
mere inspection is of course rendered easier by the 
relatively slight peculiarities of dress and ornament 
proper to each group. 

The pure-bred Kenyah presents, perhaps, the 
most clearly marked as well as the finest physical 
type. His skin is the colour of rich cream with a 
very small dash of coffee. The hair of his head 
varies from slightly wavy to curly, and is never 
very abundant or long in the men. The rest of 
his body is almost free from hair, and what little 
grows upon the face is carefully plucked out (not 
leaving even the eyebrows and eyelashes). This 
practice is common to all the peoples of the interior 
except the Sea Dayaks. His stature is about 
1600 mm. ; his weight about 136 pounds. His 
limbs are distinctly short in proportion to his body ; 
his trunk is well developed and square, and both 
limbs and trunk are well covered with rounded 
muscles. His movements are quick and vigorous, 
and he is hardy and capable of sustaining prolonged 
toil and hardship. His head is moderately round 
(Index 79), his face broad but well shaped. The 
expression of his face is bold and open. 

The Kayan has a rather darker skin of a redder 
tone. His legs are not so disproportionately short, 
but in all other respects his body is less well pro- 
portioned, graceful, and active than the Kenyah's. 

o 

< 
oa 

fa 
o 

fa 
fa 

s 

o 
< 

Q 
J 
O 

fa 

o 

Q 

< 

P Q 

H 

fa 
fa 

W 
oi 

O 
fa 

Q 
O 

o 

CQ 

Plate 24. LONG POKUxNS (KLEMANTANS) OF TINJAR RIVER. 

Ill 

THE PEOPLES OF BORNEO 39 

His features are less regular and rather coarser and 
heavier ; his expression is serious, reserved, and 
cautious. 

The Murut is nearly as fair skinned as the 
Kenyah, perhaps a little ruddier in tone. His most 
characteristic feature is the length of his leg and 
lack of calf, in both of which respects he contrasts 
strongly with the Kenyah. The length of his leg 
raises his stature above the average. His intona- 
tion is characteristic, namely, somewhat whining ; 
whereas the Kenyah's speech is crisp and staccato. 

The Klemantans present a greater variety of 
physical types, being a less homogeneous group. 
Roughly they may be said to present all transitions 
from the Kenyah to the Murut type. In the main 
they are less muscular and active than the Kenyah. 
It is amongst them that the upward and forward 
direction of the plane of the nostrils is most marked. 

The Punan presents, again, a well-marked type. 
His skin is even fairer than the Kenyah's, and is 
distinguished by a distinctly greenish tinge. He 
is well proportioned, graceful, and muscular, and 
his features are in many cases very regular and 
pleasing. His expression is habitually melancholy 
and strikingly wary and timid. In spite of his 
homeless nomadic life he generally appears well 
nourished and clean, and he seems less subject 
to sores and to the skin diseases which so often 
disfigure the other peoples, especially the Muruts, 
Kayans, and Sea Dayaks.^ 

All these peoples, with the exception of the 
Punans and similar nomads, live in village com- 
munities situated with few exceptions on the banks 
of the rivers. The populations of these villages 
vary from 20 or 30 persons only in the smallest, to 

^ It seems not unreasonable to conjecture that the uniformly high physical 
standard of the Punans and their seemingly exceptional immunity from disease 
are due to their exposed mode of life, and to the consequently severe selection 
exercised upon them by their environment. 

40 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

1500 or even more in a few of the largest; while 
the average village comprises about 30 families 
which, with a few slaves and dependants, make a 
community of some 200 to 300 persons. Each 
such community is presided over by a chief A 
number of villages of one people are commonly 
grouped within easy reach of one another on the 
banks of a river. But no people exclusively occupies 
or claims exclusive possession of any one territory or 
waterway. With the exception of the Sea Dayaks, 
all these different peoples may here and there be 
found in closely adjoining villages ; and in some 
rivers the villages of the different peoples are freely 
intermingled over considerable areas. The segrega- 
tion of the Sea Dayak villages seems to be due to 
the truculent treacherous nature of the Sea Dayak, 
which renders him obnoxious as a neighbour to 
the other peoples, and leads him to feel the need 
of the support of his own people in large numbers. 
All find their principal support and occupation 
in the cultivation of padi (rice), and all supplement 
this with the breeding of a few pigs and fowls and, 
in the north of the island, buffalo, with hunting and 
fishing, and with the collection of jungle produce — 
gutta-percha, rubber, rattan canes, camphor, sago. 
These jungle products they barter or sell for cash 
to the Malay and Chinese traders. 

They have no written records, and but vague 
traditions of their past history and migrations. 
There is no political organisation beyond a loose 
coherence and alliance for defence and offence of the 
village communities of any one people in neighbour- 
ing parts of the country — a coherence which at 
times is greatly strengthened by the personal 
ascendency of the chief of some one village over 
neighbouring chiefs. One of the most notable 
examples of such personal ascendency exercised in 
recent times was that of Tama Bulan (PL 27), a 

(mn^ 

Plate 26. PUNANS OF TINJAR RIVER. 

THE PEOPLES OF BORNEO 41 

Kenyah chief whose village was situated on one of 
the tributaries of the Baram river, and who by his 
loyal co-operation with the government of the Rajah 
of Sarawak greatly facilitated the rapid establish- 
ment of law and order in this district. 

Except for these informal alliances obtaining 
between neighbouring villages of the people 
of any one stock, each village forms an inde- 
pendent community, ruled by its chief, making war 
and peace and alliances, and selecting patches 
of land for cultivation at its own pleasure. No 
village community remains on the same spot for 
any long period ; but after fifteen, ten, or even 
fewer years, a new site is sought, often at a con- 
siderable distance, and a new village is built. The 
principal reasons for this habit of frequent migration, 
which has produced the intimate mingling throughout 
large areas of the peoples of different stocks, are 
two : first, the necessity of finding virgin soil for 
cultivation ; secondly, the occurrence of epidemics 
or other calamities; these lead them to believe. that 
the place of their aBode^^supplies in insufficient 
degree the favouring spiritual influences which they 
Tegard as essential to their welfare. For among 
all these peoples animistic beliefs abound ; they 
Kbid themselves to be surrounded on every hand 
by spiritual forces both good and bad, some of 
^^3H£h_M§-^J^ko4i^4 in the wild creatures, especially 
the birds, while some are manifested in such natural 
processes as the growth of the corn, the rising of 
the river in flood, the rolling of thunder, the 
incidence of disease. And they are constantly 
concerned to keep at a distance, by the observ- 
ance of many rigidly prescribed customs, the evil 
influences, and, to a less degree, to secure by 
propitiatory acts the protection and the friendly 
warnings of the beneficent powers. 
y One of the most peculiar features of the people 

42 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap, m 

of Borneo is the great diversity of language ob- 
taining among them. The migratory habits of the 
people and the consequent mingling of communities 
of different stocks within the same areas, far from 
having resulted in the genesis by fusion of a 
common language, have resulted in the formation 
of a great number of very distinct dialects ; so 
that in following the course of a river, one may 
sometimes find in a day's journey of a score of 
miles half a dozen or more villages, the people of 
each of which speak a dialect almost, or in some 
cases quite, unintelligible to their neighbours. A 
necessary consequence of this state of affairs is 
that, with the exception of the Sea Dayaks, almost 
all adults speak or at least understand two or more 
dialects or languages, while most of the chiefs and 
leading men speak several dialects fluently and 
partially understand a larger number. The language 
most widely understood by those to whom it is not 
native is the Kayan ; but since the recent spread 
of trade through large areas under the protection 
of the European governments, a simplified form 
of the Malay language has been rapidly establishing 
itself as the lingua franca of the whole country. 
In Sarawak, where, during the last fifty years, the 
Sea Dayaks have spread from the Batang Lupar 
district and have established villages on all the 
principal rivers, their language, which seems to be 
a bastard and very simple branch of the Malay 
tongue, is very widely understood and is largely 
used as a common medium. 

Note on the use of the term Klemantan. The Malay name for Borneo is 
Pulu Klemantan, and we have adopted this name to denote the large group 
of allied tribes which in our opinion have the best claim to be regarded as 
representing the indigenous population of the island. 

Plate 27. 

TAMA BULAN WANG, THE KENYAH PEXGHULU OF 
THE BAR AM DISTRICT. 

CHAPTER IV 

MATERIAL CONDITIONS OF THE PAGAN 
TRIBES OF BORNEO 

With few exceptions, the main features of the 
dress, adornment, and weapons of all the peoples 
are similar, showing only minor differences from 
tribe to tribe and from place to place. The essential 
and universal article of male attire is the waist-cloth, 
a strip of cloth about one yard wide and four to eight 
yards in length (see Frontispiece). Formerly this 
was made of bark-cloth ; but now the cotton-cloth 
obtained from the Chinese and Malay traders has 
largely superseded the native bark-cloth, except in 
the remoter regions; and here and there a well-to-do 
man may be seen wearing a cloth of more expensive 
stuff, sometimes even of silk. One end of such 
a cloth is passed between the legs from behind 
forwards, about eighteen inches being left dependent; 
the rest of it is then passed several times round 
the waist, over the end brought up on to the belly, 
and the other end is tucked in at the back. The 
man wears in addition when out of doors a coat 
of bark- cloth or white cotton stuff,^ and a wide 
sun-hat of palm leaves, in shape like a mushroom- 
top or an inverted and very shallow basin, which 
shelters him from both sun and rain ; many wear 
also a small oblong mat plaited of rattan-strips 

^ The Sea Dayak is exceptional in this respect ; he wears a coat of coloured 
cotton fibre woven in various patterns by the women. 

43 

44 

PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

hanging behind from a cord passed round the waist, 
and serving as a seat when the wearer sits down. 
At home the man wears nothing more than the 
waist-cloth, save some narrow plaited bands of palm 
fibre below the knee, and, in most cases, some 
adornment in the ears or about the neck and on 
the arms.^ The man's hair is allowed to grow long 
on the crown of the scalp, and to 
hang freely over the back of the neck, 
in some cases reaching as far as the 
middle of the back. This long hair 
is never plaited, but is sometimes 
screwed up in a knot on the top of 
the head and fastened with a skewer. 
The latter mode of wearing the hair is 
the rule among the Muruts, who use 
elaborately carved and decorated hair- 
pins of bone (the shin bone of the 
deer. Fig. i). That part of the hair 
of the crown which naturally falls 
forwards is cut to form a straight 
fringe across the forehead. All the 
rest of the head is kept shaven, except 
at times of mourning for the death of 
relatives. 

When in the house the man com- 
monly wears on his head a band of 
Fig. I plaited rattan, which varies from a 

mere band around the brows to a com- 
pleted skull-cap. The free ends of the rattan strips 
are generally allowed to project, forming a dependent 
tassel or fringe (PI. 21). A well-to-do Kayan 
man usually wears a necklace consisting of a single 
string of beads, which in many cases >re old and of 
considerable value (Pis. 19 and 28). j Every Kayan 
has the shell of the ear perforated, and when fully 
dressed wears, thrust forward through the hole 

1 See Chap. XII. 

*^f<: 

Plate 29. YOUTHFUL SEA DAYAKS IN GALA DRESS. 

MATERIAL CONDITIONS 

45 

in each shell, the big upper canine tooth of the 
tiger-cat ; but he is not entitled to wear these 
until he has been on 
the warpath. Those 
who have taken a 
head or otherwise 
distinguished them- 
selves in war may- 
wear, instead of the 
teeth, pieces of simi- 
lar shape carved from 
the solid beak of the 
helmeted hornbill. 
The youths who 
have not qualified 
themselves for these 
adornments, and 
warriors during 
mourning, usually 
wear a disc of wood 
orwax in their places 
(Pis. 19 and 2i)r1 

The lobe ofdhe 
ear is perforated and 
distended to a loop 
some two inches in 
length, in which a 
brass ring is worn. 
Just above this loop 
a small hole through 
the shell is usually 
made, and from this 
a small skein of beads 
depends. Similar ear 
ornaments are worn 

by Kenyahs and some of the Klemantans, but not 
by Muruts, and by few individuals only among 
Punans and Sea Dayaks. Many of the latter wear 

Fig. 2. 

46 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

a row of small brass rings inserted round the margin 
of the shell of each ear (Fig. 2). 

Many of the men wear also bracelets of shell or 
hard wood. 

'Although the dress of the men is so uniform 
in essentials throughout the country, it gives con- 
siderable scope for the display of personal tastes, 
and the Sea Dayak especially delights in winding 
many yards of brilliantly coloured cloth about his 
waist, in brilliant coats and gorgeous turbans ^ 
and feathers, and other ornaments ; by means of 
these he manages to make himself appear as a 
very dressy person in comparison with the sober 
Kayan and with most of the people of the remoter 
inland regions, who have little but scanty strips of 
bark-cloth about the loins. ' 

The universal weapons of the country are sword 
and spear, and no man travels far from home 
without these and his oblong wooden shield. Some 
of the peoples are expert in the use of the blowpipe 
and poisoned dart. The blow-pipe and the recently 
introduced firearms are the only missile weapons ; 
the bow is unknown save as a plaything for children,^ 
and possibly in a few localities in the extreme 
north.^ 

The dress of the women is less uniform than that 
of the men. The Sea Dayak woman (Pis. 29 and 30) 
wears a short skirt of cotton thread woven in curious 
patterns of several colours, reaching from the waist 
almost to the knee ; a long-sleeved jacket of the 
same material, and a corset consisting of many 
rings of rattan built up one above another to enclose 
the body from breast to thigh. Each rattan ring 
is sheathed in small rings of beaten brass. The 

^ The turban is a head-dress which is copied from the Malays and is rapidly 
spreading inland. 

2 This toy cross-bow is found among Kayans. Both it and the arrow used 
are very crudely made. 

' The war dress and accoutrements will be more fully described in 
Chap. X. 

Plate 30. SEA-DAYAK WOMAN WEARING COAT AND PETTICOAT 
ORNAMENTED WITH SHELLS. 

< 

Oh 

Q Q 

MATERIAL CONDITIONS 47 

corset is made to open partially or completely down 
the front, but is often worn continuously for long 
periods. She wears her hair tied in a knot at the 
back of her head. 

The principal garment of the women of all the 
other peoples is a skirt of bark or cotton cloth, 
which is tied by a string a little below the level of 
the crest of the hip bone ; it reaches almost to the 
ankle, but is open at the left side along its whole 
depth. It is thus a large apron rather than a skirt. 
When the woman is at work in the house or 
elsewhere, she tucks up the apron by drawing the 
front flap backwards between her legs, and tucking 
it tightly into the band behind, thus reducing it to 
the proportions and appearance of a small pair of 
bathing-drawers. Each woman possesses also a 
long-sleeved, long- bodied jacket of white cotton 
similar to that worn by the men ; this coat is 
generally worn by both sexes when working in the 
fields or travelling in boats, chiefly as a protection 
against the rays of the sun. The women wear also 
a large mushroom-shaped hat similar to that worn 
by the men. With few exceptions all the women 
allow the hair to grow uncut and to fall naturally 
from the ridge of the cranium, confined only by a 
circular band of rattan or beadwork passing over 
the occiput and just above the eyebrows. 

The principal ornaments of the women are neck- 
laces and girdles of beads, earrings, and bracelets. 
A well-to-do Kayan woman may wear a large 
number of valuable beads (see Pis. 28 and 31). The 
bracelets are of ivory, and both forearms are some- 
times completely sheathed in series of such bracelets. 
jThe ear-rings are the most distinctive feature of the 
Kayan woman's adornment. The perforated lobes of 
the ears are gradually drawn down during childhood 
and youth, until each lobe forms a slender loop 
which reaches to the collar-bone, or lower. Each 

48 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

loop bears several massive rings of copper (PI. 20), 
whose combined weight is in some cases as much 
as two pounds/ Most of the Kenyah women also 
wear similar earrings, but these are usually lighter 
and more numerous, and the lobe is not so much 
distended. The women of many of the Klemantan 
tribes wear a large wooden disc in the distended 
lobe of each ear, and those of other Klemantan 
tribes wear a smaller wooden plug with a boss (PL 
32). The children run naked up to the age of 
six or seven years, when they are dressed in the 
fashion of their parents. 

On festive occasions both men and women put 
on as many of their ornaments as can be conveniently 
worn. 

Deformation of the Head 

Some of the Malanaus, a partially Mohammedan 
tribe of Klemantans, seated about the mouths of 
the Muka, Oya, and Bintulu rivers of Sarawak, 
have the curious custom of flattening the heads 
of the infants, chiefly the females. The flattening 
is effected at an early age, the process beginning 
generally within the first month after birth. It 
consists in applying pressure to the head by means 
of a simple apparatus for some fifteen minutes, more 
or less, on successive days, or at rather longer 
intervals. The application of the pressure for this 
brief space of time, on some ten to twenty occasions, 
seems to suffice to bring about the desired effect. 
The pressure is applied while the child sleeps, and 
is at once relaxed if the child wakes or cries. The 
apparatus, known as tadal (see Fig. 3), consists 
of a stout flat bar of wood, some nine inches in 
length and three wide in its middle part. This 

^ Accidental tearing of the lobe inevitably occurs occasionally ; and if this 
is attributed to the carelessness of any other person a brass tawak or gong must 
be paid in compensation. Repair of a torn lobe is sometimes effected by 
overlapping the raw ends and keeping them tied in this position for some weeks. 

MATERIAL CONDITIONS 

49 

wider middle part bears on one surface a soft pad 
for application to the infant's forehead. A ± strap 
of soft cloth is attached by its upper extremity to 
the middle of the upper edge of the wooden bar ; 
and each end of its horizontal strip is continued by 
a pair of strings which pass through holes in the 
ends of the bar. The strings are brought together 
on the front of the bar at its middle and passed 
through the centre of a copper coin ^ or other hard 

disc. The bar is applied transversely to the fore- 
head of the infant ; the vertical strap runs back 
over the sagittal suture ; the transverse strap is 
drawn tightly across the occiput, and the required 
degree of pressure is gradually applied by twisting 
the coin round and round on the front of the bar, 
and so pulling upon the strings which connect the 
ends of the bar on the forehead with the ends of 
the strap across the occiput (PI. ^^). 

^ Some of the copper coins of Sarawak are perforated at the centre. 
VOL. I E 

50 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

The effect produced is of course a flattening of 
brow and occiput and a broadening of the whole 
head. The motive seems to be the desire to enhance 
the beauty of the child by ensuring to it a moon-like 
face, which is the most admired form. The Malanaus 
seem to be by nature peculiarly round-headed ; the 
question whether this is due to the effects of head- 
flattening practised for many generations, must be 
left to the investigations of the Neo-Lamarckians. 
They are also a peculiarly handsome people, and 
it seems more likely that, taking a pride in their 
good looks, they have, like so many other peoples, 
sought to enhance the beauty of their children by 
accentuating a racial peculiarity. 

Houses 

All the tribes except the Punans build houses of 
one type ; but the size and proportions, the strength 
of the materials used, and the skill and care displayed 
in the work of construction, show wide differences. 
The houses of the Kayans are perhaps better and 
more solidly built than any others and may be 
taken as the type. Each house is built to accom- 
modate many families ; an average house may 
contain some forty to fifty, making up with children 
and slaves some two or three hundred persons ; 
while some of the larger houses are built for as 
many as a hundred and twenty families, or some 
five to six hundred persons. The house is always 
close to a river, and it usually stands on the bank 
at a distance of 20 to 50 yards from the water, 
its length lying parallel to the course of the river. 
The plan of the house is a rectangle, of which the 
length generally much exceeds the width (PL 34). 

Its roof is always a simple ridge extending the 
whole length of the house, and is made of shingles 
of bilian (ironwood) or other hard and durable kind 

MATERIAL CONDITIONS 51 

of wood. The framework of the roof is supported 
at a height of some 25 to 30 feet from the ground 
on massive piles of ironwood, and the floor is 
supported by the same piles at a level some 7 or 
8 feet below the cross-beams of the roof. The 
floor consists of cross-beams morticed to the piles, 
and of very large planks of hard wood laid upon 
them parallel to the length of the house. The 
projecting eaves of the roof come down to a level 
midway between that of the roof- beams and that 
of the floor, and the interval of some 4 to 5 feet 
between the eaves and the floor remains open 
along the whole length of the front of the house 
{i.e. the side facing the river), save for a low parapet 
which bounds the floor along its outer edge. This 
space serves to admit both light and air, and affords 
an easy view over the river to those sitting in the 
house. The length of the house is in some cases 
as much as 400 yards, but the average length is 
probably about 200 yards. The width of the floor 
varies from about 30 to 60 feet ; the whole space 
between roof and floor is divided into two parts 
by a longitudinal wall of vertical planks, which 
runs the whole length of the house. This wall lies 
not quite in the middle line, but a little to the river 
side of it. Of the two longitudinal divisions of the 
house, that which adjoins the river is thus some- 
what narrower than the other ; it remains undivided 
in its whole length. The other and wider part is 
divided by transverse walls at intervals of some 25 
or 30 feet, so as to form a single row of spacious 
chambers of approximately equal size. Each such 
chamber is the private apartment of one family ; in 
it father, mother, daughters, young sons and female 
slaves, sleep and eat (PI. :^j). Within each chamber 
are usually several sleeping-places or alcoves more 
or less completely screened or walled off from the 
central space. The chamber contains a fireplace. 

52 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

generally merely a slab of clay in a wooden frame- 
work placed near the centre. The outside wall of 
this side of the house is carried up to meet the 
roof The entrance of light and air and the egress 
of smoke are provided for by the elevation on a 
prop of one corner of a square section of the roof, 
marked out by a right-angled cut, of which one limb 
runs parallel to the outer wall, the other upwards 
from one extremity of the former. This aperture 
can be easily closed, e.g, during heavy rain, by re- 
moving the prop and allowing the flap to fall into 
its original position. 

The front part of the house, which remains 
undivided, forms a single long gallery serving as a 
common antechamber to all the private rooms, each 
of which opens to it by a wooden door (Pis. 36, 38). 
It is in a sense, though roofed and raised some 20 
feet above the ground, the village street, as well as a 
common living and reception room. Along the outer 
border of the floor runs a low platform on which the 
inmates sit on mats. One part of this, usually that 
opposite the chiefs apartment in the middle of the 
house, is formed of several large slabs of hardwood 
{Tapang or Koompassia), and is specially reserved 
for the reception of guests and for formal meetings. 
The platform is interrupted here and there by 
smaller platforms raised some 3 or 4 feet from the 
floor, which are the sleeping quarters assigned to 
the bachelors and male visitors. At intervals of 
some 30 or 40 feet throughout the gallery are fire- 
places similar to those in the private chambers ; on 
some of these fire constantly smoulders. 

Over one of these fireplaces, generally one near 
the middle of the great gallery, is hung a row of 
human heads (PI. 38), trophies obtained in war, 
together with a number of charms and objects used 
in various rites.^ 

^ By the Kayans the heads are suspended in a single long row from the 

MATERIAL CONDITIONS 53 

Alongside the inner wall of the gallery stand 
the large wooden mortars used by the women in 
husking th^ padi. Above these hang the winnowing 
trays and mats, and on this wall hang also various 
implements of common use — hats, paddles, fish- 
traps, and so forth. 

The gallery is reached from the ground by 
several ladders, each of which consists of a notched 
beam sloping at an angle of about 45°, and furnished 
with a slender hand-rail. The more carefully made 
ladder is fashioned from a single log, but the wood 
is so cut as to leave a hand-rail projecting forwards 
a few inches on either side of the notched gully or 
trough in which the feet are placed. From the 
foot of each ladder a row of logs, notched and 
roughly squared, and laid end to end, forms a foot- 
way to the water's edge. In wet weather such a 
footway is a necessity, because pigs, fowls, and 
dogs, and in some cases goats, run freely beneath 
and around the house, and churn the surface of the 
ground into a thick layer of slippery mire. 

Here and there along the front of the house 
are open platforms raised to the level of the floor, 
on which the padi is exposed to the sun to be dried 
before being husked. 

Under the house, among the piles on which it 
is raised, such boats as are not in daily use are 
stored. Round about the house, and especially on 
the space between it and the brink of the river, are 
numerous padi barns (PI. 40). Each of these, the 
storehouse of the grain harvested by one family, is 
a large wooden bin about 10 feet square, raised on 
piles some 7 feet from the ground. Each pile carries 
just below the level of the floor of the bin a large 
disc of wood horizontally disposed, and perforated at 

lower edge of a long plank, each being attached by a rattan passed through a 
hole in the vertex. Many of the Klemantans hang them in a similar way to a 
circular framework, and the Sea Dayaks suspend them in a conical basket 
hung by its apex from the rafters. 

54 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

its centre by the pile ; this serves to prevent rats 
and mice gaining access to the bin. The shingle 
roof of the bin is like that of the house, but the two 
ends are filled by sloping surfaces running up under 
the gables. There are generally also a few fruit 
trees and tobacco plants in the space cleared round 
about the house ; and in the space between it and 
the river are usually some rudely carved wooden 
figures, around which rites and ceremonies are per- 
formed from time to time. 

Kayan villages generally consist of several, in 
some cases as many as seven or eight, such houses 
of various lengths, grouped closely together. The 
favourite situation for such a village is a peninsula 
formed by a sharp bend of the river. 

Of the houses built by the other peoples, those 
of the Kenyahs very closely resemble those of the 
Kayans. The Kenyah village frequently consists 
of a single long house (and with the Sea Dayaks 
this is invariably the case), and it is in many cases 
perched on a high steep bank immediately above 
the river. Some of the Klemantans also build 
houses little if at all inferior to those of the Kayans, 
and very similar to them in general plan. But 
in this as in all other respects the Klemantans 
exhibit great diversities, some of their houses being 
built in a comparatively flimsy manner, light timber 
and even bamboos being used, and the roof being 
made of leaves. The houses of the Muruts are 
small and low, and of poor construction. 

The Sea Dayak's house differs from that of the 
Kayan more than any of the others. The general 
plan is the same ; but the place of the few massive 
piles is taken by a much larger number of slender 
piles, which pass up to the roof through the gallery 
and chambers. Of the gallery only a narrow passage- 
way alongside the main partition-wall is kept clear 
of piles and other obstructions. The floor is of 

MATERIAL CONDITIONS 55 

split bamboo covered with coarse mats. An open 
platform at the level of the floor runs along the 
whole length of the open side of the house. 
There are no padi barns about the house, the padi 
being kept in bins in the roofs. The roof itself is 
low, giving little head space. The gallery of the 
house makes an impression of lack of space, very 
different to that made by the long wide gallery of 
a Kayan or Kenyah house. 

Although the more solidly built houses, such as 
those of the Kayans, would be habitable for many 
generations, few of them are inhabited for more 
than fifteen or twenty years, and some are used 
for much shorter periods only. For one reason 
or another the village community decides to build 
itself a new house on a different and sometimes 
distant site, though the new site is usually in the 
same tributary river, or, if on the main river, within 
a few miles of the old one. The most frequent 
causes of removal are, first, using up of the soil 
in the immediate neighbourhood of the village, for 
they do not cultivate the same patch more than 
three or four times at intervals of several years ; 
secondly, the occurrence of a fatal epidemic ; thirdly, 
any run of bad luck or succession of evil omens ; 
fourthly, the burning of the house, whether acci- 
dentally or in the course of an attack by enemies. 

On removing to a new site the planks and the 
best of the timber of a well-built house are usually 
towed along the river to the spot chosen, and used 
in the construction of the new house. 

After the houses the most important of the 
material possessions of the people are their boats. 
Each family possesses at least one small boat 
capable of carrying seven or eight persons, and used 
chiefly for going to and from the padi fields, but 
also for fishing and short journeys of all kinds. In 
addition to these the community possesses several 

56 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO ch.p. 

larger boats used for longer journeys, and generally 
at least one long war-boat, capable of carrying 50 
to 100 men. Each boat, even one of the largest 
size, is hollowed from a single log, the freeboard 
being raised by lashing narrow planks to the edge 
of the hollowed log. In the middle of a large boat 
is a section, the freeboard of which is raised still 
higher, and which is covered by an arched roof of 
palm leaves. The boat is crossed at intervals of 
some three feet by seats formed of short planks, each 
supported at both ends by projections of the main 
timber, to which they are lashed with rattan. In 
travelling on the lower reaches of the rivers, the 
rowers sit two on each bench, side by side and 
facing the bow. On the upper reaches, where rapids 
abound, a deck is made by laying split bamboos 
along the length of the boat upon the benches, 
and the crew sits upon this deck in paddling, or 
stands upon it when poling the boat over rapids. 

In addition to the clothes, houses, and boats, 
and the domestic animals mentioned above, and to 
the personal ornaments and weapons to be described 
in later chapters, the material possessions of the 
Kayans consist chiefly of baskets and mats. 

The baskets are of various shapes and sizes, 
adapted to a variety of uses. The largest size 
holds about two bushels of padi, and is chiefly used 
for transporting grain from the fields to the house 
(Fig. 4). It is almost cylindrical in shape, but rather 
wider at the upper end. Four strips of wood run- 
ning down from near the upper edge project slightly 
below, forming short legs on which the basket 
stands. The upper end is closed by a detachable 
cap, which fits inside the upper lip of the basket. 
It is provided with a pair of shoulder straps, and a 
strap which is passed over the crown of the head. 
These straps are made of a single strip of tough 
beaten bark. One end of it is attached to the foot of 

]'X^.f\,'^^' 

IV 

MATERIAL CONDITIONS 

57 

the basket ; a second attachment is made at the 
middle of the height, forming a loop for the one 
shoulder ; the strip is then looped over to the 

Fig. 4. — Padi basket with charms. 

corresponding point on the other side, forming the 
loop for the head, and then carried down to the foot 
of the basket on that side to form the loop for the 
other shoulder. 

58 

PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

A smaller cylindrical basket, very neatly plaited 
of thin and very pliable strips of rattan, is used 
for carrying the few articles which a man takes 

with him in travel- 
ling— a little rice 
and tobacco, a spare 
waist cloth, a sleep- 
ing mat, perhaps a 
second mat of palm 
leaves used as a 
protection against 
rain, a roll of dried 
banana leaves for 
making cigarettes, 
perhaps a cap for 
wear in the house, 
and, not infre- 
quently nowadays, 
a bright coloured 
handkerchief of 
Chinese silk. The 
lip of the basket is 
surrounded by a 
close set row of 
eyes through which 
a cord is passed. 
To this cord a net 
is attached, and is 
drawn together in 
the centre of the 
opening of the 
basket by a second 
cord, in order to 
This basket is provided with 

Fig. 5. 

confine its contents, 
shoulder straps only. 

In addition to these two principal baskets, each 
family has a number of smaller baskets of vari- 
ous shapes for storing their personal belongings. 

IBAN SEAT-MATS. 

Plate 43. IBAN SEED -BASKETS. 

Plate 44, 

h. Tobacco boxes. 
fp. Fire piston. 

/. Tobacco pipes. 
f. Nose flute. 

c. Wooden plate for rolling cigarettes. 
g. Gourd for pith-heads of darts. 

MATERIAL CONDITIONS 

59 

and for containing food in course of preparation 

(Fig. 5). 

The mats are of many shapes and sizes. The 
largest are spread on the raised part of the floor, 
both of the gallery and of the private chambers, 
when a party sits down to eat or converse. Each 
individual has his own sleeping mat, and each 
family has a number of mats used for drying, husk- 
ing, winnowing, and sieving xh^ padi. 

The bamboo water- vessel consists of a section 
of the stem of the bamboo, closed at the lower end 
by the natural septum, the upper end having a lip 

Fig. 6. 

or spout formed at the level of the succeeding 
septum. A short length of a branch remains 
projecting downwards to form a handle, by means 
of which the vessel can be conveniently suspended. 
These vessels are used also for carrying rice-spirit 
or borak ; but this is stored in large jars of earthen- 
ware or china. The native jar of earthenware is 
ovoid in shape and holds about one gallon, but 
these are now largely superseded by jars made 
by the Chinese. 

Each family possesses some dishes and platters 
of hardwood (Figs. 6 and 7), and generally a few 
china plates bought from traders ; but a large leaf 
is the plate most commonly used. 

6o 

PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

Rice, the principal food, which forms the bulk of 
every meal, is boiled in an iron or brass pot with 
lip, handle, and lid, not unlike the old English 

cauldron ; it has no legs, 
and is placed on a tripod 
of stones or suspended 
over the fire. This metal 
pot, which is obtained 
from the Chinese traders, 
has superseded the 
home-made pot of clay 
(Fig. 8) and the bamboo 
vessels in which the rice 
was cooked in former 
times. A larger wide 
stewpan is also used for cooking pork, vegetables, 
and fish. The Kayans smoke tobacco, which they 
cultivate in small quantities. It is generally smoked 
in the form of large cigar- 
ettes, the finely cut leaf 
being rolled in sheets of 
dried banana leaf. But it 
is also smoked in pipes, 
which are made in a 
variety of shapes, the 
bowl of hardwood, the 
stem of slender bamboo 
(Fig. 9). Sea Dayaks 
chew tobacco, but smoke 
little, being devoted to 
the chewing of betel nut. 
Jin every house is a 
number of large brass gongs [tawak), which are 
used in various ceremonies and for signalling, and 
constitute also one of the best recognised standards 
of value and the most important form of currency. 
Besides these largest gongs, smaller ones of various 
shapes and sizes are kept and used on festive 

Fig. 8. 

KENYAH WOMAN'S HAT. 

Plate 45. KAYAN TAWAK AND GONGS. 

I 

Plate 46. NINGKA, A VALUABLE OLD SEA-DAYAK JAR. 

IV 

MATERIAL CONDITIONS 

6i 

occasions (PL 45). All these gongs are obtained 
through traders from Bruni, China, and Java^J' 

Beside the gongs a Kayan house generally con- 
tains, as the common property of the whole house- 
hold, several long narrow drums (Fig. 10). Each 
is a hollow cylinder of wood, constricted about its 
middle, open at one end, and closed at the other 
with a sheet of deer- skin. This is stretched 
by means of slips of rattan attached to its edges, 
and carried back to a stout rattan ring woven 
about the constricted middle of the drum ; the 
skin is tightened by inserting wedges under 
this ring. 

w 

^ 

J^ 

Fig. 9. 

In most houses two or three small brass swivel 
guns may be seen in the gallery, and a small stock 
of powder for their service is usually kept by the 
chief. They are sometimes discharged to salute 
a distinguished visitor, and formerly played some 

Fig. 10. 

small part in repelling attacks. The domestic 
animals of the Kayans are fowls, goats, pigs, and 
dogs. The latter live in the house, the others run 
free beneath and around the house. 

The material possessions of the other peoples 
differ little from those of the Kayans. Almost 

62 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap, iv 

every Sea Dayak possesses, and keeps stored at 
the back of his private chamber, one or more large 
vases. These were formerly imported from China, 
but are now made by the Chinese of the towns in 
Borneo. The commonest of the highly prized jars 
are of plain brown brightly glazed earthenware, 
standing about three feet in height on a flat bottom 
(PI. 48) ; each is ornamented with a Chinese dragon 
moulded in relief {benaga), or some scroll designs 
which, though very varied, go by the name of rusa 
( = deer) and ningka. A Dayak will give from 200 
to 400 dollars for such a jar. Rarer and still more 
highly prized is a jar similar to these, but wider, 
very highly glazed, and bare of all ornament save 
some obscure markings. Eight perforated ''ears" 
project just below the lip, and serve for the attach- 
ment of a wooden or cloth cover. This jar occurs 
in two varieties, a dark green and a very dark 
brown, which are known respectively as gusi and 
bergiau, the latter being the more valuable. Other 
smaller and less valued jars are the pantar and 
the alas. The jars of the kinds mentioned above 
are valued largely on account of their age ; probably 
all of them were imported from China and Siam, 
some of them no doubt centuries ago. Besides 
these old jars there are now to be found in most 
of the Sea Dayak houses many jars of modern 
Chinese manufacture, some of which are very skilful 
imitations of the old types ; and though the Dayak 
is a connoisseur in these matters, and can usually 
distinguish the new from the old, he purchases 
willingly the cheap modern imitations of the old, 
because they are readily mistaken by the casual 
observer for the more valuable varieties (PI. 47). 

A few large vases of Chinese porcelain, usually 
covered with elaborate designs in colour, are to be 
found in most of the houses of the other peoples 
(PI- 47). 

CHAPTER V 

THE SOCIAL SYSTEM 

The Kayans constitute a well-defined and homo- 
geneous tribe or people. Although their villages 
are scattered over a wide area, the Kayan people 
everywhere speak the same language and follow 
the same customs, have the same traditions, beliefs, 
rites, and ceremonies. Such small differences as 
they present from place to place are hardly greater 
than those obtaining between the villagers of ad- 
joining English counties. Although communication 
between the widely separated branches of the 
people is very slight and infrequent, yet all are 
bound together by a common sentiment for the 
tribal name, reputation, tradition, and customs. 
The chiefs keep in mind and hand down from 
generation to generation the history of the migra- 
tions of the principal branches of the tribe, the 
names and genealogies of the principal chiefs, and 
important incidents affecting any one branch. At 
least fifteen sub-tribes of Kayans, each bearing a 
distinctive name, are recognised.^ The word Umay 
which appears in the names of each group, means 
village or settlement, and it seems probable that 

^ The sub-tribes are the following: — Uma Pliau, Uma Poh, Uma Semuka, 
Uma Paku, and Uma Bawang, chiefly in the basin of the Baram ; in the 
Rejang basin — the Uma Naving, Uma Lesong, Uma Daro ; in the Bintulu 
basin — the Uma Juman ; in the Batang Kayan — the Uma Lekan ; in the 
Kapuas — the Uma Ging ; the Uma Belun, the Uma Blubo scattered in 
several river-basins ; and one other group in the Madalam river, and one in 
the Koti. 

63 

64 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

these fifteen sub-tribes represent fifteen original 
Kayan villages which at some remote period, before 
the tribe became so widely scattered, may have 
contained the whole Kayan population. At the 
present time the people of each sub-tribe occupy 
several villages, which in most cases, but not in all, 
are within the basin of one river. 

In spite of the community of tribal sentiment, 
which leads Kayans always to take the part of 
Kayans, and prevents the outbreak of any serious 
quarrels between Kayan villages, there exist no 
formal bonds between the various sub-tribes and 
villages. Each village is absolutely independent 
of all others, save in so far as custom and caution 
prescribe that, before undertaking any important 
affair (such as a removal of the village or a 
warlike expedition), the chief will seek the advice, 
and, if necessary, the co - operation of the chiefs 
of neighbouring Kayan villages. The people of 
neighbouring villages, especially the families of 
the chiefs, are also bound together by many ties 
of kinship ; for intermarriage is frequent. 

As was said above, a Kayan village almost 
invariably consists of several long houses. Each 
house is ruled by a chief; but one such chief is 
recognised as the head-chief of the village. 

The minor and purely domestic affairs of each 
house are settled by the house-chief, but all im- 
portant matters of general interest are brought 
before the village-chief. In the former category 
fall disputes as to ownership of domestic animals 
and plants, questions of compensation for injury 
or loss of borrowed boats, nets, or other articles, of 
marriage and divorce, and minor personal injuries, 
moral or physical. The matters to be settled by the 
head-chief sitting in council with the subordinate 
chiefs are those affecting the whole village, ques- 
tions of war and peace and of removal, disputes 

Plate 49. TAMA USONG, LEADING KAYAN CHIEF OF 
THE BAR AM DISTRICT. 

THE SOCIAL SYSTEM 65 

between houses, trials for murder or serious personal 
injuries. 

The degree of authority of the chiefs and the 
nature and degree of the penalties imposed by them 
are prescribed in a general way by custom, though 
as regards the former much depends upon the 
personal qualities of each chief, and as regards 
the latter much is left to his discretion. The 
punishments imposed are generally fines, so many 
tawaks (gongs), parangs (swords) or spears, or other 
articles of personal property. On the whole the 
chief plays the part of an arbitrator and mediator, 
awarding compensation to the injured party, rather 
than that of a judge. In the case of offences 
against the whole house, a fine is imposed ; and the 
articles of the required value are placed under the 
charge of the chief, who holds them on behalf of the 
community, and uses them in the making of pay- 
ments or presents in return for services rendered to 
the whole community. 

The chief also is responsible for the proper 
observation of the omens and for the regulation of 
malan (tabu) affecting the whole house ; and, as 
we shall see, he takes the leading part in social 
ceremonies and in most of the religious rites 
collectively performed by the village. He is re- 
garded by other chiefs as responsible for the 
behaviour of his people, and above all, in war he is 
responsible for both strategy and tactics and the 
general conduct of operations. 

For the maintenance of his authority and the 
enforcement of his commands the chief relies upon 
the force of public opinion, which, so long as he is 
capable and just, will always support him, and will 
bring severe moral pressure to bear upon any 
member of the household who hesitates to submit. 

In return for his labours on behalf of the house- 
hold or village the Kayan chief gains little or 
VOL. I F 

66 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

nothing in the shape of material reward. He may- 
receive a Httle voluntary assistance in the cultivation 
of his field ; in travelling by boat he is accorded the 
place of honour and ease in the middle of the boat, 
and he is not expected to help in its propulsion. 
His principal rewards are the social precedence and 
deference accorded him and the satisfaction found 
in the exercise of authority. 

If the people of a house or village are gravely 
dissatisfied with the conduct of their chief, they will 
retire to their /^^/-fields, building temporary houses 
there. If many take this course, a new long house 
will be built and a new chief elected to rule over it, 
while the old chief remains in the old house with 
a reduced following, sometimes consisting only of 
his near relatives. 

The office of chief is rather elective than heredi- 
tary, but the operation of the elective principle is 
affected by a strong bias in favour of the most 
capable son of the late chief; so in practice a chief 
is generally succeeded by one of his sons. An 
elderly chief will sometimes voluntarily abdicate in 
favour of a son. If a chief dies, leaving no son of 
mature age, some elderly man of good standing 
and capacity will be elected to the chieftainship, 
generally by agreement arrived at by many informal 
discussions during the weeks following the death. 
If thereafter a son of the old chief showed himself a 
capable man as he grew up, he would be held to 
have a strong claim on the chieftainship at the next 
vacancy. If the new chief at his death left also 
a mature and capable son, there might be two 
claimants, each supported by a strong party ; the 
issue of such a state of affairs would probably be 
the division of the house or village, by the departure 
of one claimant with his party to build a new 
village. In such a case the seceding party would 
carry away with them their share of the timbers 

Plate 50. ABAN DENG, THE CHIEF OF THE LONG WAT 
(KLEMANTANS) OF THE BARAM DISTRICT. 

THE SOCIAL SYSTEM 6^ 

of the old house, together with all their personal 
property. 

The Kenyahs form a less homogeneous and 
clearly defined tribe than the Kayans ; yet in the 
main their social organisation is very similar to 
that of the Kayans, although, as regards physical 
characters and language as well as some customs, 
they present closer affinities with other peoples than 
with the Kayans, especially with the Klemantans. 
The Kenyah tribe also comprises a number of 
named branches, though these are less clearly 
defined than the sub-tribes of the Kayan people. 
Each branch is generally named after the river on 
the banks of which its villages are situated, or were 
situated at some comparatively recent time of which 
the memory is preserved. In many cases a single 
village adopts the name of some tributary stream 
near the mouth of which it is situated, and the 
people speak of themselves by this name. Thus it 
seems clear that the named branches of the Kenyah 
tribe are nothing more than local groups formed in 
the course of the periodical migrations, and named 
after the localities they have occupied.^ 

The foregoing description of the relations of 
a Kayan chief to his people applies in the main to 
the Kenyah chief. But among the Kenyahs the 
position of the chief is one of greater authority and 
consideration than among the Kayans. The people 
voluntarily work for their chief both in his private 
and public capacities, obeying his commands cheer- 

^ All the Kenyahs of the Baram are known as Kenyah Bauh. On the 
watershed between the Batang Kayan and the Baram are the Lepu Payah and 
the Madang. In the Batang Kayan basin are the Lepu Tau, the Uma Kulit, 
Uma Lim, Uma Baka, Uma Jalan, Lepu Tepu. In the Koti basin are the 
Peng or Pnihing ; in the Rejang the Uma Klap. These are the principal 
branches of the pure Kenyahs ; each of them comprises a number of scattered 
villages, the people of each of which have adopted some local name. In 
addition to these there is a number of groups, such as the Uma Pawa and the 
Murik in the Baram, and the Lepu Tokong and the Uma Long in the Batang 
Kayan, the people of which seem to us to be intermediate as regards all 
important characters between the Kenyahs and the Klemantans. (For dis- 
cussion of these relations see Chap. XXI.) 

68 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

fully, and accepting his decisions with more deference 
than is accorded by the Kayans. The chief in 
return shows himself more generous and paternal 
towards his people, interesting himself more 
intimately in their individual affairs. Hence the 
Kenyah chief stands out more prominently as 
leader and representative of his people, and the 
cohesion of the whole community is stronger. The 
chief owes his great influence over his people in 
large measure to his training, for, while still a 
youth, the son or the nephew of a chief is accustomed 
to responsibility by being sent in charge of small 
bodies of followers upon missions to distant villages, 
to gather or convey information, or to investigate 
disturbing rumours. He is also frequently called 
upon to speak on public occasions, and thus early 
becomes a practised orator. 

Among Klemantans, Muruts, and Sea Dayaks 
each house recognises a headman or chief; but he 
has little authority (more perhaps among the first 
of these peoples than among the other two). He 
acts as arbitrator in household disputes, but in too 
many cases his impartiality is not above suspicion, 
save where custom rigidly limits his preference. 

Among both Kayans and Kenyahs three social 
strata are clearly distinguishable and are recognised 
by the people themselves in each village. The upper 
class is constituted by the family of the chief and 
his near relatives, his aunts and uncles, brothers, 
sisters, and cousins, and their children. These 
upper-class families are generally in easier circum- 
stances than the others, thanks to the possession of 
property such as brass ware, valuable beads, caves 
in which the swift builds its edible nest, slaves, and 
a supply of all the other material possessions larger 
in quantity and superior in quality to those of the 
middle- and lower-class families. 

The man of the upper class can generally be 

THE SOCIAL SYSTEM 69 

' distinguished at a glance by his superior bearing 
and manners, by the neatness and cleanliness of his 
person, his more valuable weapons, and personal 
ornaments, as well as by greater regularity of 
features. The woman of the upper class also 
exhibits to the eye similar marks of her superior 
birth and breeding. The tatuing of her skin is 
more finely executed, greater care is taken with the 
elongation of the lobe of the ear, so that the social 
status of the woman is indicated by the length of 
the lobe. Her dress and person are cleaner, and 
generally better cared for, and her skin is fairer 
than that of other women, owing no doubt to her 
having been less exposed to the sun. 

The men of the upper class work in the padi- 
fields and bear their share of all the labours of the 
village ; but they are able to cultivate larger areas 
than others owing to their possession of slaves, who, 
although they are expected to grow a supply of 
padi for their own use, assist in the cultivation of 
their master's fields. For the upper-class women, 
also, the labours of the field and the house are 
rendered less severe by the assistance of female 
slaves, although they bear a part both in the weed- 
ing of the fields, in the harvesting, and in the 
preparation of food in the house. 

The chiefs room, which is usually about twice 
as long as others, is usually in the middle of the 
house ; and those of the other upper-class families, 
which also may be larger than the other rooms, 
adjoin it on either side. 

In all social gatherings, and in the performance 
of public rites and ceremonies, the men of the upper 
class are accorded leading parts, and they usually 
group themselves about the chief. Social intercourse 
is freer and more intimate among the people of the 
upper class than between them and the rest of the 
household. 

/ 

70 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

The upper class is relatively more numerous 
in the Kenyah than in the Kayan houses, and 
more clearly distinguishable by address and bear- 
ing. 

The middle class comprises the majority of the 
people of a house in most cases. They may enjoy 
all the forms of property, though generally their 
possessions are of smaller extent and value, and 
they seldom possess slaves. Their voices carry 
less weight in public affairs ; but among this class 
are generally a few men of exceptional capacity 
or experience whose advice and co-operation are 
specially valued by the chief Among this class, 
too, are usually a few men in each house on whom 
devolve, often hereditarily, special duties implying 
special skill or knowledge, e.g. the working of iron 
at the forge, the making of boats, the catching of 
souls, the finding of camphor, the observation and 
determination of the seasons. All such special 
occupations are sources of profit, though only the 
last of these enables a man to dispense with the 
cultivation oi padi. 

The lower class is made up of slaves captured in 
war and of their descendants, and for this reason its 
members are of very varied physical type. An 
unmarried slave of either sex lives with, and is 
treated almost as a member of, the family of his 
or her master, eating and in some cases sleeping 
in the family room. Slaves are allowed to marry, 
their children becoming the property of their 
masters. Some slave - families are allowed to 
acquire a room in the house, and they then begin 
to acquire a less dependent position ; and though 
they still retain the status of slaves, and are spoken 
of as **slaves-outside-the-room," the master generally 
finds it impossible to command their services beyond 
a very limited extent, and in some cases will volun- 
tarily resign his rights over the family. But in this 

THE SOCIAL SYSTEM 71 

case the family continues to belong to the lower 
class. 

The members of each of these classes marry 
in nearly all cases within their own class. The 
marriages of the young people of the upper class 
are carefully regulated. Although they are allowed 
to choose their partners according to the inscrutable 
dictates of personal affinities, their choice is limited 
by their elders and the authority of the chief. Many 
of them marry members of neighbouring villages, 
while the other classes marry within their own 
village. 

A youth of the upper class, becoming fond of 
some girl of the middle class, and not being allowed 
to marry her (although this is occasionally per- 
mitted), will live with her for a year or two. Then, 
when the time for his marriage arrives (it having 
perhaps been postponed for some years after being 
arranged, owing to evil omens, or to lack of means or 
of house accommodation), he may separate from his 
mistress, leaving in her care any children born of 
their union, and perhaps making over to her some 
property — as public opinion demands in such cases. 
She may and usually will marry subsequently a 
man of her own class, but the children born of her 
irregular union may claim and may be accorded 
some of the privileges of their father's class. In 
this way there is formed in most villages a class of 
persons of ambiguous status, debarred from full 
membership in the upper class by the bar-sinister. 
Such persons tend to become wholly identified with 
the upper or middle class according to the degrees 
of their personal merits. 

Marriages are sometimes contracted between 
persons of the middle and slave classes. In the 
case of a young man marrying a slave woman, the 
owners of the woman will endeavour to persuade 
him to live with her in their room, when he becomes 

72 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

a subordinate member of their household. If they 
succeed in this they will claim as their property 
half the children born to the couple. On the other 
hand, if the man insists on establishing himself in 
possession of a room, he may succeed in practically 
emancipating his wife, perhaps making some com- 
pensation to her owners in the shape of personal 
services or brass ware. In this case the children 
of the couple would be regarded as freeborn. It is 
generally possible for an energetic slave to buy his 
freedom. 

Less frequent is the marriage of a slave man 
with a free woman of the middle class. In this 
case the man will generally manage to secure his 
emancipation and to establish himself as master of 
a room, and to merge himself in the middle class. 
In the case of marriage between two slaves, they 
continue to live in the rooms of their owners, 
spending by arrangement periods of two or three 
years alternately as members of the two house- 
holds. The children born of such a slave-couple 
are divided as they grow up between the owners of 
their parents. 

On the whole the slaves are treated with so much 
kindness and consideration that they have little to 
complain of, and most of them seem to have little 
desire to be freed. A capable slave may become 
the confidant and companion of his master, and in 
this way may attain a position of considerable influ- 
ence in the village. A young slave is commonly 
addressed by his master and mistress as *'My Child." 
A slave is seldom beaten or subjected to any 
punishment save scolding, and he bears his part 
freely in the life of the family, sharing in its labours 
and its recreations, its ill or its good fortunes. 
Nothing in the dress or appearance of the slave 
distinguishes him from the other members of the 
village. 

THE SOCIAL SYSTEM yz 

The Family 

Very few men have more than one wife. 
Occasionally a chief whose wife has borne him 
no children during some years of married life, or 
has found the labours of entertaining his guests 
beyond her strength, will with her consent, or even 
at her request, take a second younger wife. In 
such a case each wife has her own sleeping apart- 
ment within the chiefs large chamber, and the 
younger wife is expected to defer to the older one, 
and to help her in the work of the house and of the 
field. The second wife would be chosen of rather 
lower social standing than the first wife, who in 
virtue of this fact maintains her ascendancy more 
easily. A third wife is probably unknown ; public 
opinion does not easily condone a second wife, and 
would hardly tolerate a third. In spite of the 
presence of slave women in the houses, concubinage 
is not recognised or tolerated. 

The choice of a wife is not restricted by the 
existence of any law or custom prescribing marriage 
without or within any defined group ; that is to say, 
exogamous and endogamous groups do not exist. 
Incest is regarded very seriously, and the forbidden 
degrees of kinship are clearly defined. They are 
very similar to those recognised among ourselves. 
A man may under no circumstances marry or have 
sexual relations with his sister, mother, daughter, 
father's or mother's sister or half sister, his brother's 
or sister's daughter ; and in the case of those 
women who stand to him in any of these relations 
in virtue of adoption, the prohibitions and severe 
penalties are if possible even more strictly enforced. 
First cousins may marry, but such marriages are 
not regarded with favour, and certain special 
ceremonies are necessitated ; and it seems to be 
the general opinion that such marriages are not 

74 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

likely to prove happy. Many young men of the 
upper class marry girls of the same class belonging 
to neighbouring villages of their own people, and 
in some cases this choice falls on a girl of a village 
of some other tribe. A marriage of the latter kind 
is often encouraged by the chiefs and elder people, 
in order to strengthen or to restore friendly relations 
between the villages. 

The initiative is taken in nearly all cases by the 
youth. He begins by paying attentions somewhat 
furtively to the girl who attracts his fancy. He 
will often be found passing the evening in her 
company in her parents' room. There he will 
display his skill with the keluri, or the Jew's harp, 
or sing the favourite love-song of the people, 
varying the words to suit the occasion. If the girl 
looks with favour on his advances, she manages to 
make the fact known to him. Politeness demands 
that in any case he shall be supplied by the women 
with lighted cigarettes. If the girl wishes him to 
stay, she gives him a cigarette tied in a peculiar 
manner, namely by winding the strip which confines 
its sheath of dried banana leaf close to the narrow 
mouth-piece ; whereas on all other occasions this 
strip is wound about the middle of the cigarette. 
The young man thus encouraged will repeat his 
visits. If his suit makes progress, he may hope 
that the fair one will draw out with a pair of brass 
tweezers the hairs of his eyebrows and lashes, while 
he reclines on his back with his head in her lap. 
If these hairs are very few, the girl will remark that 
some one else has been pulling them out, an 
imputation which he repudiates. Or he complains 
of a headache, and she administers scalp-massage by 
winding tufts of hair about her knuckles and sharply 
tugging them. When the courtship has advanced 
to this stage, the girl may attract her suitor to the 
room by playing on the Jew's harp, with which she 

? :-%^"^&^,^ m 

THE SOCIAL SYSTEM 75 

claims to be able to speak to him — presumably the 
language of the heart. The youth thus encouraged 
may presume to remain beside his sweetheart till 
early morning, or to return to her side when the 
old people have retired. When the affair has 
reached this stage, it becomes necessary to secure 
the public recognition which constitutes the relation 
a formal betrothal. The man charges some elderly 
friend of either sex, in many cases his father or 
mother, to inform the chief of his desire. The 
latter expresses a surprise which is not always 
genuine ; and, if the match is a suitable one, he 
contents himself with giving a little friendly advice. 
But if he is aware of any objections to the match 
he will point them out, and though he will seldom 
forbid it in direct terms, he will know how to cause 
the marriage to be postponed. 

If the chief and parents favour the match, the 
young man presents a brass gong or a valuable 
bead to the girl's family as pledge of his sincerity. 
This is returned to him if for any reason beyond 
his control the match is broken off. The marriage 
may take place with very little delay ; but during 
the interval between betrothal and marriage the 
omens are anxiously observed and consulted. All 
accidents affecting any members of the village are 
regarded as of evil omen, the more so the more 
nearly the betrothed parties are concerned in them. 
The cries of birds and deer are important ; those 
heard about the house are likely to be bad omens, 
and it is sought to compensate for these by sending 
a man skilled in augury to seek good omens in the 
jungle, such as the whistle of the Trogan and of 
the spider-hunter, and the flight of the hawk from 
right to left high up in the sky. If the omens are 
persistently and predominantly bad, the marriage 
is put off for a year, and after the next harvest 
fresh omens are sought. The man is encouraged 

76 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

in the meantime to absent himself from the village, 
in the hope that he may form some other attach- 
ment. But if he remains true and favourable omens 
are obtained, the marriage is celebrated if possible 
at the close of the harvest. If the marriage takes 
place at any other time, the feast will be postponed 
to the end of the following harvest.^ After the 
marriage the man lives with his wife in the room of 
his father-in-law for one, two, or at most three 
years. During this time he works in the fields of 
his father-in-law and generally helps in the support 
of the household, showing great deference towards 
his wife's parents. Before the end of the third 
year of marriage, the young couple will acquire for 
themselves a room in the house and village of the 
husband, in which they set up housekeeping on 
their own account. In addition to these personal 
services rendered to the parents of the bride, the 
man or his father and other relatives give to the 
girl's parents at the time of the marriage various 
articles which are valuable in proportion to the 
social standing of the parties, and which are gener- 
ally appropriated by the girl's parents.^ 

Divorce is rare but not unknown among the 
Kayans. The principal grounds of divorce are 

^ For the marriage ceremony see Chap. XVIII, 

2 We take this opportunity of contradicting in the most emphatic manner 
a very misleading statement which of all the many misleading statements about 
the peoples of Borneo that are in circulation is perhaps the most frequently re- 
peated in print. The statement makes its most recent reappearance in Professor 
Keane's book The World's Peoples (published in 1908). There it is written of 
the " Borneans" that "No girl will look at a wooer before he has laid a head 
or two at her feet." To us it seems obvious that this state of affairs could only 
obtain among a hydra-headed race. The statement is not true of any one tribe, 
and as regards most of the ' ' Borneans " has no foundation in fact. Applied to the 
Sea Dayaks alone has the statement an element of truth. Among them to have 
taken a head does commonly enhance a wooer's chances of success, and many 
Sea Dayak girls and their mothers will taunt a suitor with having taken no 
head, but few of them will make the taking of a head an essential condition of 
the bestowal of their favour or of marriage. A mother will remark to a youth 
who is hanging about her daughter, Bisi dalafji, bisi deluar bull di tanya 
anak ahi (When you have the wherewithal to adorn both the interior and the 
exterior of a room {i.e. jars within the room and heads without in the gallery) 
you can then ask for my child). 

THE SOCIAL SYSTEM ^^ 

misconduct, desertion, incompatibility of temper 
and family quarrels ; or a couple may terminate 
their state of wedlock by mutual consent on pay- 
ment of a moderate fine to the chief. Such separa- 
tion by mutual consent is occasioned not infrequently 
by the sterility of the marriage, especially if the 
couple fails to obtain a child for adoption ; the 
parties hope to procure offspring by taking new 
partners ; for the desire for children and pride and 
joy in the possession of them are strongly felt by 
all. The husband of a sterile wife may leave the 
house for a long period, living in the jungle and 
visiting other houses, in the hope that his wife 
may divorce him on the ground of desertion, or 
give him ground for divorcing her. On discovery 
of misconduct on the woman's part the husband 
will usually divorce her ; the man then retains all 
property accumulated since the marriage, and the 
children are divided between the parents. The 
co-respondent and respondent are fined by the 
chief, and half the amount of the fine goes to the 
injured husband. Misconduct on the part of the 
man must be flagrant before it constitutes a sufficient 
ground for his divorce by his wife. In this case the 
same rules are followed. Among the Kayans the 
divorce is not infrequently followed by a reconcilia- 
tion brought about by the intervention of friends ; 
the parties then come together again without further 
ceremony. There is little formality about the 
divorce procedure. In the main it takes the form 
of separation by mutual consent and the condona- 
tion of the irregularity by the community on the 
payment of a fine to the chief. 

Adoption 

Adoption is by no means uncommon. The 
desire for children, especially male children, is 

78 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

general and strong ; but sterile marriages seem to 
be known among all the peoples and are common 
among the Kenyahs. When a woman has remained 
infertile for some years after her marriage, the couple 
usually seek to adopt one or more children. They 
generally prefer the child of a relative, but may take 
any child, even a captive or a slave child, whose 
parents are willing to resign all rights in it. A child 
is often taken over from parents oppressed by 
poverty, in many cases some article of value or a 
supply oi padi being given in exchange. Not in- 
frequently the parents wish to have the child returned 
to them when their affairs take a turn for the better, 
owing to a good harvest or some stroke of luck, and 
this is a frequent cause of dissensions. Usually the 
adopted child takes in every way the position of a 
child born to the parents. 

Some of the Klemantans (Barawans and Lelaks 
in the Baram) practise a curious symbolic ceremony 
on the adoption of a child. When a couple has 
arranged to adopt a child, both man and wife 
observe for some weeks before the ceremony all 
the prohibitions usually observed during the later 
months of pregnancy. Many of these prohibitions 
may be described in general terms by saying that 
they imply abstention from every action that may 
suggest difficulty or delay in delivery ; e.g. the hand 
must not be thrust into any narrow hole to pull 
anything out of it ; no fixing of things with wooden 
pegs must be done ; there must be no lingering on 
the threshold on entering or leaving a room. When 
the appointed day arrives, the woman sits in her 
room propped up and with a cloth round her, in the 
attitude commonly adopted during delivery. The 
child is pushed forward from behind between the 
woman's legs, and, if it is a young child, it is put 
to the breast and encouraged to suck. Later it 
receives a new name. 

THE SOCIAL SYSTEM 79 

It is very difficult to obtain admission that a 
particular child has been adopted and is not the 
actual offspring of the parents ; and this seems to 
be due, not so much to any desire to conceal the 
facts as to the completeness of the adoption, the 
parents coming to regard the child as so entirely 
their own that it is difficult to find words which will 
express the difference between the adopted child 
and the offspring. This is especially the case if 
the woman has actually suckled the child. 

Proper Names 

The child remains nameless during the first few 
years, and is spoken of as Ukat if a boy, Owing if a 
girl, both of which seem to be best translated as 
Thingumybob ; among the Sea Dayaks Ulat (the 
little grub) is the name commonly used. It is 
felt that to give the child a name while its hold 
of life is still feeble is undesirable, because the 
name would tend to draw the attention of evil 
spirits to it. During its third or fourth year it 
is given a name at the same time as a number of 
other children of the house.^ The name is chosen 
with much deliberation, the eldest son and daughter 
usually receiving the names of a grandfather and 
grandmother respectively. Male and female names 
are distinct. The name first given to any person 
is rarely carried through life ; it is usually changed 
after any severe illness or serious accident, in order 
that the evil influences that have pursued him may 
fail to recognise him under the new name ; thus 
the first or infant name of Tama Bulan was Lujah. 
After bearing it a few years he went through a 
serious illness, on account of which his name was 
changed to Wang. Among the Klemantans it is 
usual under these circumstances to name the child 

^ For the naming ceremony see Chap. XVIII. 

8o PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

after some offensive object, e.g. tai (dung), in order 
to render it inconspicuous, and thus withdraw it 
from the attention of malign powers. After the 
naming of a couple's first child, the parents are 
always addressed as father and mother of the child ; 
e.g. if the child's name is Obong, her father becomes 
known as Tama Obong, her mother as Inai Obongy 
and their original names are disused and almost 
forgotten,^ unless needed to distinguish the parents 
from other persons of the same name, when the old 
names are appended to the new ; thus, Tama Obong 
Jau, if Jau was the original name of Tama Obong ; 
and thus Tama Bulan received this name on 
the naming of his first child, Bulan (the moon), and 
when it is wished to distinguish him in conversation 
from other fathers of the moon he is called Tama 
Bulan Wang. If the eldest child Obong dies, the 
father, Tama Obong Jau, becomes Oyong Jau ; if 
one of his younger children dies, he becomes 
Akam Jau ; if his wife dies, he becomes Aban 
Jau ; if his brother died, he would be called Yat 
Jau ; and if his sister, Hawan Jau ; and if two 
of these relatives are dead, these titles are used 
indifferently ; but the deaths of wife and children 
are predominant over other occasions for the 
change of name. An elderly man who has no 
children receives the title Lingo, and a woman, 
the title Apa prefixed to his or her former name. 
A widow is called Balu. The names of father and 
mother are never assumed by the children, and 
their deaths do not occasion any change of name, 
except the adoption of the title Oyati on the loss 
of the father, and Ihm on the loss of the mother. 
These titles would be used only until the man 
became a father. When a man becomes a grand- 
father his title is Laki {e.g. Laki Jau), and this 

^ It is not rare to find that a child does not know the original names of his 
parents, and even husbands may be found to have forgotten the original names 
of their wives. 

THE SOCIAL SYSTEM 8i 

title supersedes all others. A child addresses, and 
speaks of, his father as Taman, and his mother as 
Inai or Tinan, and all four grandparents as Poi. 
The parent commonly addresses the child, even 
when adult, as Anak, or uses his proper name. 
A father's brother is addressed as Amai, but this 
title is used also as a term of respect in addressing 
any older man not related in any degree, even 
though he be of a different tribe or race. They use 
the word Inai for aunt as well as for mother, and 
some have adopted the Malay term Ma manakan 
for aunt proper. The same is true of the words for 
nephew and niece — the Malay term Anak manakan 
being used for both. 

The terms used to denote degrees of kinship are 
few, and are used in a very elastic manner. The 
term of widest connotation is Parin Igat, which is 
equivalent to our cousin used in the wider or 
Scotch sense ; it is applied to all blood relatives of 
the same generation, and is sometimes used in a 
metaphorical sense much as we use the term 
brother. There are no words corresponding to our 
words son and daughter, anak meaning merely child 
of either sex. There are no words corresponding 
to brother and sister ; both are spoken of as Parin, 
but this word is often used as a title of endearment 
in addressing or speaking of a friend of either sex 
of the same social standing and age as the speaker. 
The children of the same parents speak of them- 
selves collectively as Panak ; this term also is some- 
times used loosely and metaphorically. A step- 
father is Taman Dong] father-in-law is Taman 
Divan ; forefather is Sipun, a term used of any male 
or female ancestor more remote than the grand- 
parents ; but these are merely descriptive and not 
terms of address. A man of the upper class not 
uncommonly has a favourite companion of the 
middle class, who accompanies him everywhere and 

VOL. I G 

82 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

renders him assistance and service, and shares his 
fortunes [Fidus Achates in short) ; him he addresses 
as Bakis, and the title is used reciprocally. A title 
reciprocally used by those who are very dear friends, 
especially by those who have enjoyed the favours of 
the same fair one, is Toyong (or among the Sea 
Dayaks — Imprian). 

This list includes all the important Kayan terms 
used to denote personal relations and kinship, so far 
as we know ; and we think it very improbable that 
any have escaped us. There seem to be no secret 
names, except in so far as names discarded on 
account of misfortune are not willingly recalled or 
communicated ; but a child's name is seldom used, 
and adults also seem to avoid calling on one another 
by their proper names, especially when in the 
jungle, the title alone, such as Oyong or Aban being 
commonly used ; apparently owing to some vaguely 
conceived risk of directing to the individual named 
the attentions of malevolent powers.^ 

The foregoing account of the social organisation 
of the Kayans applies equally well to the Kenyahs, 
except that some of the titles used are different. 
The Klemantans and Muruts, too, present few 
important differences except that the power of the 
chiefs is decidedly less, and the distinction of the 
social strata less clearly marked, and slaves are less 
numerous. The Sea Dayak social organisation is 
also similar in most of its features. The most 
important of the differences presented by it are the 
following : — Polygamy is not allowed, and occurs 
only illicitly. Both parties are fined when the facts 
are discovered. Divorce is very common and 

^ We append to this chapter a table showing the names and degrees of 
kinship of all the inhabitants of one Kenyah long house. At the suggestion of 
Dr. W. H. R. Rivers, who has found this method of great value in disentangl- 
ing the complicated kinship systems of some Melanesian and Papuan and other 
peoples, we have collected similar information regarding Kayan, Sea Dayak, 
Klemantan, and Murut villages. But in no case does the table discover any 
trace of any elaborate kinship system. 

A CORPSE IN A BARAWAN KLEMANTAN HOUSE. 

Plate 54. PARTY IN THE UNFINISHED HOUSE OF JANGAN, 
CHIEF OF THE SEBOPS, ON THE OCCASION OF THE NAMING OF 
HIS CHILD. 

THE SOCIAL SYSTEM 83 

easily obtained ; the marriage relation, being sur- 
rounded with much less solemnity, is more easily 
entered into and dissolved. Infidelity and mutual 
agreement are the common occasions of divorce. 
Either party can readily secure his or her freedom 
by payment of a small fine. There are both men 
and women who have married many times ; a tenth 
husband or wife is not unknown ; and a marriage may 
be dissolved within a week of its consummation. 

The Sea Dayak, like all the other peoples, regards 
incest very seriously, and the forbidden degrees of 
kinship are well understood and very similar to 
those of Kayans. 

A Sea Dayak village consists in almost every 
case of a single house, bat such houses are generally 
grouped within easy reach of one another. Very 
few slaves are to be found in their houses, since the 
I bans usually take the heads of all their conquered 
enemies rather than make slaves of them. 

Inheritance of Property 

At a man's death his property is divided between 
his widow and children. But in order to prevent 
the disputes, which often arise over the division of 
inheritance, an old man may divide his property 
before his death. The widow becomes the head of 
the room, though a married son or daughter or 
several unmarried children may share it with her. 
She inherits all or most of the household utensils. 
Such things as gongs and other brass ware, 
weapons, war-coats, and boats, are divided equally 
among the sons, the eldest perhaps getting a little 
more than the others. The girls divide the old 
beads, cloth, bead-boxes, and various trifles. The 
male slaves go to the sons, the female slaves to the 
daughters. Bird's nest caves and bee trees might 
be divided or shared among all the children. 

84 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

It happens not infrequently that one son or 
daughter, remaining unmarried, continues to live in 
the household of the parents and to look after them 
in their old age. To such a one some valuable 
article, such as a string of old beads or costly jar, is 
usually bequeathed. 

Among the Sea Dayaks the old jars, which 
constitute the chief part of a man's wealth, are 
distributed among both sons and daughters ; if the 
jars are too few for equal distribution, they are 
jointly owned until one can buy out the shares of 
his co-owners. 

The members of a Kayan household are bound 
together, not merely by their material circumstances, 
such as their shelter under a common roof and their 
participation in common labours, and not merely by 
the moral bonds such as kinship and their allegiance 
to one chief and loyalty to one another, but also by 
more subtle ties, of which the most important is their 
sharing in the protection and warning afforded to 
the whole house by the omen-birds or by the higher 
powers served by these. For omens are observed 
for the whole household, and hold good only for those 
who live under the one roof. This spiritual unity 
of the household is jealously guarded. Occasionally 
one family may wish for some reason, such as bad 
dreams or much sickness, to withdraw from the 
house. If the rest of the household is unwilling to 
remove to a new house, they will oppose such with- 
drawal, and, if the man insists on separating, a fine 
is imposed on him, and he is compelled to leave 
undisturbed the roof and all the main structure of his 
section of the house ; though the room would be left 
unoccupied. Conversely Kayans are very unwilling 
to admit any family to become members of the 
household. They never or seldom add sections to 
a house which has once been completed ; and young 
married couples must live in their parents' rooms, 

THE SOCIAL SYSTEM 85 

until the whole household removes and builds a 
new house. Occasionally a remnant of a household 
which has been broken up by the attack of enemies 
is sheltered by a friendly house ; but the newcomers 
are lodged in the gallery only until the time comes 
for building a new house, when they may be 
allowed to build rooms for themselves, and to 
become incorporated in the household. Another 
plan sometimes adopted is to build a small house 
for the newcomers closely adjoining the main house, 
but joined to it only by an open platform. 

APPENDIX TO CHAPTER V 

Tables showing Kinship of the Kenyahs of Long Tikan {Tama 
Bulan^s house) in the Baram District of Sarawak. 

We have made out tables showing the kinship of the inhabit- 
ants of several Kenyah long houses and of one Sea Dayak house, 
following the example and method of Dr. W. H. R. Rivers. 
These tables have not revealed to us indications of any peculiar 
system of kinship ; but we think it worth while to reproduce one 
of them as an appendix to the foregoing chapter. The table 
includes all the inhabitants of the house living in the year 1899, 
as well as those deceased members of whom we are able to 
obtain trustworthy information. The arrangement is by door or 
room, but since on marriage some shifting from one room to an- 
other takes place, some individuals appear under two doors. 

In these tables the names of males are printed in ordinary 
type, those of females in italics ; and the following signs are 
used : — 
= for married to. 

I indicates the children of a married couple. 

1 i 

I implies that the individual below whose name it occurs reached 

° adult life, but died without issue. 

I implies a child dead at early age, sex and name unknown. 

X 

$ implies male child not yet named, 
$ implies female child not yet named 
"i individual of unknown name. 

86 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

(i) SiDi Karang's Door. 
Sidi Karang = Sidi Peng (a Long Paku Kenyah). 

Baiai Gau = Ulau. 

Other Members of the Room. 
Tama Aping Layong = Ba/u Buon. 

1 

Lutang (neph( 

iw of Sidi Karang). 

Sukun. 

Mang 

= Bom Tellun. 
1 

1 

Luat= ? 

1 

i 
Ukang. 

\ 

Lesun = 

--Balu Ulan 

1 

Lim. 

1 

o 

i 

II II 

Usun. Luyok = Oyong Turing. Linjau. Itang lVzng= Lara Wan. 
(See Door 6.) | 

(2) AjoNG's Door. 

Mawa Ontong =? (Long Belukun Kenyah woman). 

(Long Belukun Kenyah) 

I I I 

Balu Lara. Ajong = A^z;?^ (Long Tikan). Wan. 

(3) Mawa Jungan's Door. 
Mawa Jungan (see Imoh's door) = Mawa Ujong. 

\ 

I I I II I I I I I 

X X X X X X X Weak- Kading. $ 

minded. 

THE SOCIAL SYSTEM 87 

(4) iMOH's Door. 
Jilo= ? 

I 

Imoh= Tina Aping Poyong^ formerly = Tama Aping Lalo. 

(sister of Ngino^ see I (see Door 5). 

Door 2) I 

f Li rim. 

(5) Pallavo's Door. 

Maga= ? Pallavo Tugan 

(unmarried at 60). (weak-minded slave). 

I 

o 

Tama Aping Lalo = ( i st wife) Tina Aping Poyong= (2nd wife) Usun 

(see Door 4) (Likan Kenyah). 

Anie Tapa (weak-minded) = ? 

I 

Tigiling (weak-minded). 

(6) Oyong Turing's Door. 
Seling= ? 

I 

^lP>7U'H' Sidi Ontong= ? 

>-*^ 

Oyong Lujok — Oyong Turing. Maga. 

I 

X 

Balu A ting = ? 

I 

Laro Libo (Long Palutan Kenyah) = Z«r<2 Ulau. 

. \ 

I I I I I i I 

Asong. Sapo. Lalo. Lunga. Usun. Singiin. ^ 

XXX 

88 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

(7) Balu Kran's Door. 
Lingan (a Likan Kenyah)= ? 

I 

Tama Aping Mawa = ^«//^ Kran (see Door 8). 

! 

I I I I 

Lauong. Siggau. Oyu Apa. ? 

weak-minded. 

(8) Balu Uding's Door. 
Sawa Taja= ? 

i 

.11 I 

Balu Kran. Balu Uding=yi2i\v2i Imang. Luat. 

I I 

Oyu Sue. ° 
Kening (unmarried sister of Mawa Imang). 

(9) Aban Moun's Door. 
Kamang. 

I 

Aban Moun = Telu?i. 

I I i 

Tama Sook = Tina Sook Tama Aping = ? (Long Belu- Tina Apin^ 
Bilong Bunga?t. Salo kun Kenyah). Oding. 

Sook X X X X 

(weak- un- un- un- un- 

minded). named. named. named. named. 

(lo) Aban Magi's Door. 
Aban Magi (see Door 13)= Tina Aping Kran. 

I 

Anie Liran. 

THE SOCIAL SYSTEM 

89 

(11) Lara Wan's Door. 
Mawa Liva = (ist wife) Tina lVan = (2nd wife) U/an Uring. 

I I I 

Lara Wan = Lara Lanan Kuleh. Balu Mening. 

(Long Paku). | 

I I I I 

Jalong. Katan. Julut. Jawing. 

(12) Tama An Lahing's Door. 

Batang = Tina Lahing. 

1 

1 

Tama An Lahing = 

1 1 

= Tina An Piko. x Balu Tatan = 

= Wan Tula 
(son of 
Balaban). 

1 

(9^/«^=Balari. 

1 

II III 
Uiau. Silalang. Tago. Ballan. ^ 

1 1 

X X 

Kening. Tama Owing Laang = Nowing Ubong (daughter 

of Aban Imang, an 
Uma Poh Kayan). 

Mening. Mujan. 

(13) Oyu Irang's Door. 

Sorang (Long X\\:2iXi) = Sinjai (Long Tikan) (sister of Aban Magi, 
see Door 10 ; and Lara Libo, see Door 6). 

I I I 

^ ^ Oyu I rang. 

Pakat. Kupit. 

Other Members in the Room. 

Balu Tubong (sister of Sorang) = ? (a Long Tikan man). 
Abing Urai (sister of Balu Tubong) = Aban Madang (Long Paku). 

90 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

(14) Balu U sun's Door. 
Balu Usan (Long Palutan) = Aban Siliwa (Long Palutan). 

I I 

^ Oyu Sijau. 

Balu Meno (niece of Balu Usan) = Aban Meggang (Long Paku). 

I 
.1 I I 

Lirong. Ulan, 9 

I 

(15) Balu Buah's Door. 
Tegging = ^«/« Mujan. 

I 

Balu Buah = Lara Lalu (Long Belukun Kenyah). 

I 

I I I I I . I . I 

X X X X Utan Urtng. Abing \ax2^\% = Loong Laking. Utat Usun. 

I I I I I 

Bayin. Apa. Baja. $ $ 

(16) Oyong Kalang's Door. 
Oyong Kalang (Long Palutan = Qy^w^ Nong (Long Palutan 

Kenyah) 

Kenyah). 

Ill I I I I 

X X Sago= .? Ino. Angin. Ngau. Uya. 

THE SOCIAL SYSTEM 

91 

(17) SiDi jAu's Door. 
Tama Owing Lawai = Tiita Owing Kling (sister 

(Lepu Tau) 

of Tama Bulan Wang). 

Sidi 'IdM^Payah Lah 

(Uma Poh Kayan). 

Balari = Uding. 

Kuleh. 

Libut. 

Other People in the Room. 
Tina Aping Uding = Tama, Aping Toloi 

(Long Palutan) 

(Long Tikan). 

I I 

Poyong, Ulau. Logan. 

Bala Keyong= Xhan Batu. 

I 

Oyu Baung. 
Oyu Lalu= ? 

I 

Lujok. 
Aban J ok (Murut x Kayan). 
Kangin (sister to Mang, see Door i). 
Aban Oyu {^\ix\x\.)=^Balu Mong. 

92 

PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

(1 8) Aban Tingan's Door. 
Aban Langat (Punan)= Tina Oyu (Punan). 

Aban Tingan = Be/vmn (2nd wife). 

I 

Kalang. 

I I 

Paran. Mujan. 

Brothers. 

.1 

Tama Lim Balari = "i 

Balari. 

I 

Laki Ludop = Oan Bimgan 
(see Door 1 9) (Long Belukun). 

Livang, 

I I I 

Tama Bulan Aban Tingan = /'a;j/(2 (ist wife, Tina Owing Kling 

(see Door 19). daughter of (see Door 17). 

Paran Libut, 

his 1st cousin). 

Wan. 

Lan = Balan (Long Belukun Julan. 

Kenyah). 

Aping. 

I 
o 

Slaves. 
Aban Muda {^mut) = Nuing Labai. 

Madang. 

I 

Nawan. 

U7'ai. 

Suai. 

Abo = Balu Vang. 

I 

Oyu Biti. 

Nurang. 

Jipong. 
I 

6 

Oan Igan, child of Mapit (Long Palutan), brother of Jilo (see 
Imoh's room). 

r ■ 1 > brothers. 
Lujah j 

U/au (Kalabit). 

Padan. 

THE SOCIAL SYSTEM 

(19) Tama Bulan's Door. 
Laki Ludop = Bungan (see Door 1 8). 

I 

Tama Bulan Wang = (ist wife) Fe7tg-= {2nd wife) Payah Wan 

(Uma Poh Kayan). 

Bulan — \^\i]2L(^v£i2i Plian Kayan). 

Balari and Livang Obong=V^7in (son of Aban Tingan 

(ist cousins of Tama Bulan, her ist cousin), 

adopted by him as sons). 

1 . 1 

Levan. Linjau. 

Slaves. 
Segilah (Long Tikan x Lirong) = (ist wife) Vang (Long 

Tikan x Murut). 

Balu Tivan = (ist wife) Oyong Wflmg (Leppu Sang Kenyah). 
] (2nd wife) Layang (a Murut). 

I i 

Tillun. Vang. 

Tama Lesun (Punan) = Oyong Baun (Long Utan) = (2nd wife) Sitdait. 

I I 

I \. 

Lesun. Avai. 

Aban Tadan (Kalabit) = ^«/« Tatan (Long Utan Kenyah). 

I \ \ I 

Oyu Jalong. Marang. Tiigang, Juhit. 

Balu Salalang (Long Utan Kenyah) = Jalie (Long Tikan Kenyah). 

I 
I I 

ilium. Lugok. 

Balu Babu = Laso Panan. 

I 

Taja. Sugalah. 

I 

o 
Balu Ulau^ stepmother of Balu Baba^ married Aban Grang. 

94 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

(20) Tama Poyong Langat's Door. 

(This is room of freedman of Tama Bulan). 

Laang (Lepu Sang) = Udang (Uma Pawa). 

\]\.on% — Buah (Lepu Sang). 

Langat = Tinggi. Silo = Imang. 

I I 

I I I III ^'''''- 

Usang. Obong. Poyang. x x x 

(21) Siga's Door. 

Aban Lian = Lara Mening. 

\ 

1 

Siga = Livan. 

Aban Bilong = ^a/« Ann. 

\ 

1 
Deng. 

\ \ 

Ulau. Balawing= ? 

1 

Apmg. 

Slaves. 
Sadi Lian = ? Sabit = ? 

I \ 

I. I 

Sui = Le?mL 

I 
I I 

Utong. Sijau. 

THE SOCIAL SYSTEM 95 

(22) Aban Lawai's Door. 

Kalala, father of Laki Jau, father of Kalang, grandfather 
of Aban Lawai. 

Kalang = Bulan (daughter of Avit, a Lepu Laang Kenyah). 

.1 
Tama Lim Balari = Balu Livan (a Long Wat, sister of Aban Deng). 

1 I.I 

Tina Bulan = Tama Utan — Aban Liah Lalang = Kalang. 

Peng" Bulan. Ongyong (Sebop). 

o 
Bulan (see Room 19). 

Laki Ludop = Bungan (a Long Belukun). 

\ 

I I I 

Tama Bulan Wang Aban Tingan Kling 

(see Room 19). (see Room 18). (see Room 17). 

I . 
Paran Libut = Balu Peng (Long Akar Klemantan). 

\ 

I.I. II 

Bala wing. Ajang (weak-minded) = Suling. Pay a. Sara. 

I I I 

00 o 

Labong = Pixy^/^ (an Uma Poh Kayan). 

I 

. I I 

Blingang. Aban Lawai = (ist wife) Tellun (a Lepu Jingan Kenyah). 

I I (2nd wife) Balu Suling (Long Tikan). 

o I 

. I I 

Anie Lean. Obong. 

I 
Balu Bun — Avit. 
I 
Tama Sinan = Tina Liri. 

I 

I I 

Tellun. Liri =Linja.u (a Lepu Laang Kenyah). 

Peng=Nga.u Deng. 

I 
Ilun Lawai. 

I 
A vie. 

I 
o 

96 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO ch. v 

(22) Aban Lawai's Door {continued). 

Slaves. 

Lara (Pabauan Murut). 

Balu Lunau (Kalabit)= Igi. 

Oa?t U'/auz=lga.u (in Aban Tingan's room). 

I 
I I 

Taj a. Supu. 

Lahing (married). 

I 

CHAPTER VI 

AGRICULTURE 

For all the peoples of the interior of Borneo, the 
Panans and Malanaus excepted, the rice grown by 
themselves is the principal food-stuff. Throughout 
the year, except during the few weeks when the 
jungle fruit is most abundant, rice forms the bulk 
of every meal. In years of bad harvests, when the 
supply is deficient, the place of rice has to be filled 
as well as may be with wild sago, cultivated maize, 
tapioca, and sweet potatoes. All these are used, 
and the last three, as well as pumpkins, bananas, 
cucumbers, millet, pineapples, chilis, are regularly 
grown in small quantities by most of the peoples. 
But all these together are regarded as making but 
a poor substitute for rice. The cultivator has to 
contend with many difficulties, for in the moist hot 
climate weeds grow apace, and the fields, being 
closely surrounded by virgin forest, are liable to the 
attacks of pests of many kinds. Hence the pro- 
cesses by which the annual crop oi padi is obtained 
demand the best efforts and care of all the people 
of each village. The plough is unknown save to' 
the Dusuns, a branch of the Murut people in North 
Borneo, who have learnt its use from Chinese 
immigrants. The Kalabits and some of the coast- 
wise Klemantans who live in alluvial areas have 
learnt, probably through intercourse with the 
Philippine Islanders or the inhabitants of Indo- 
VOL. I 97 H 

L 

98 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

China, to prepare the land for the padi seed by- 
leading buffaloes to and fro across it while it lies 
covered with water. The Kalabits lead the water 
into their fields from the streams descending from 
the hills. 

With these exceptions the preparation of the 
land is everywhere very crude, consisting in 
the felling of the timber and undergrowth, and in 
burning it as completely as possible, so that its 
ashes enrich the soil. After a single crop has 
been grown and gathered on land so cleared, the 
weeds grow up very thickly, and there is, of course, 
in the following year no possibility of repeating the 
dressing of wood ashes in the same way. Hence 
it is the universal practice to allow the land to lie 
fallow for at least two years, after a single crop has 
been raised, while crops are raised from other lands. 
During the fallow period the jungle grows up so 
rapidly and thickly that by the third year the weeds 
have almost died out, choked by the larger growths. 
The same land is then prepared again by felling the 
young jungle and burning it as before, and a crop 
is again raised from it. When a piece of land has 
been prepared and cropped in this way some three 
or four times, at intervals of two, three, or four 
years, the crop obtainable from it is so inferior 
in quantity that the people usually undertake 
the severe labour of felling and burning a patch 
of virgin forest, rather than continue to make 
use of the old areas. In this way a large village 
uses up in the course of some twelve or fifteen 
years all the land suitable for cultivation within a 
convenient distance, i,e. within a radius of some 
three miles. When this state of affairs results, the 
village is moved to a new site, chosen chiefly with 
an eye to the abundance of land suitable for the 
cultivation of the padi crop. After ten or more 
years the villagers will return, and the house or 

Plate 55. IBANS FELLING A TREE. 

AGRICULTURE 99 

houses will be reconstructed on the old site or one 
adjacent to it, if no circumstances arise to tempt 
them to migrate to a more distant country, and if the 
course of their life on the old site has run smoothly, 
without misfortunes such as much sickness, con- 
flagrations, or serious attacks by other villages. 
After this interval the land is regarded as being 
almost as good as the virgin forest land, and has 
the advantage that the jungle on it can be more 
easily felled. But since no crop equals that obtain- 
able from virgin soil, it is customary to include at 
least a small area of it in the operations of each 
year. 

Each family cultivates its own patch of land, 
selecting it by arrangement with other families, and 
works as large an area as the strength and number 
of the roomhold permits. A hillside sloping down 
to the bank of a river or navigable stream is con- 
sidered the choicest area for cultivation, partly 
because of the efficient drainage, partly because the 
felling is easier on the slope, and because the 
stream affords easy access to the field. 

When an area has been chosen, the men of the 
roomhold first cut down the undergrowth of a 
V-shaped area, whose apex points up the hill, and 
whose base lies on the river bank. This done, 
they call in the help of other men of the house, 
usually relatives who are engaged in preparing 
adjacent areas, and all set to work to fell the large 
trees. In the clearing of virgin forest, when very 
large trees, many of which have at their bases 
immense buttresses, have to be felled, a platform 
of light poles is built around each of these giants 
to the height of about 15 feet. Two men standing 
upon this rude platform on opposite sides of the 
stem attack it with their small springy-hafted axes 
(Fig. 11) above the level of the buttresses (PI. 
55). One man cuts a deep notch on the side 

loo PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

facing up the hill, the other cuts a similar notch 
about a foot lower down 
on the opposite side, each 
cutting almost to the 
centre of the stem. This 
operation is accomplished 
in a surprisingly short time, perhaps 
thirty minutes in the case of a stem 
two to three feet in diameter. When 
all the large trees within the V- 
shaped area have been cut in this 
way, all the workers and any women, 
children, or dogs who may be pre- 
sent are called out of the patch, 
and one or two big trees, carefully 
selected to form the apex of the 
phalanx, are then cut so as to fall 
down the hill/ In their fall these 
giants throw down the trees stand- 
ing immediately below them on the 
hillside ; these, falling in turn against 
their neighbours, bring them down. 
And so, like an avalanche of widening 
sweep, the huge disturbance pro- 
pagates itself with a thunderous roar 
and increasing momentum down- 
wards over the whole of the pre- 
pared area ; while puny man looks 
on at the awful work of his hand 
and brain not unmoved, but dancing 
and shouting in wild triumphant 
delight. 

The fallen timber must now lie 
some weeks before it can be burnt. 
This period is mainly devoted to 

^ They are skilled woodmen, and know how to cut 
a tree so as to ensure its falling in any desired manner ; FiG. II. 

the final strokes cut away the ends of the narrow 
portion of the stem remaining between the upper and lower notches. 

Plate 56. A LIRONG FARM IN THE TINJAR RIVER. 

AGRICULTURE loi 

making and repairing the implements to be used 
in cultivating, harvesting, and storing the crop, 
and also in sowing at the earliest possible moment 
small patches of early or rapidly growing padi 
together with a little maize, sugar - cane, some 
sweet potatoes, and tapioca. The patches thus 
sown generally lie adjacent to one another. If the 
weather is fine, the fallen timber becomes dry enough 
to burn well after one month. If much rain falls it 
is necessary to wait longer in the hope of drier 
weather. Choosing a windy day, they set fire to 
all the adjacent patches after shouting ^^ 
out warnings to all persons in the fields. ^^^^S| 
While the burning goes on, the men |flpt^^ffl| 
'' whistle for the wind," or rather blow ^^g^^g 
for it, rattling their tongues in their ^^^m^ 
mouths. Some of the older men make ^^^^ 
lengthy orations shouted into the air, ^^^8 
adjuring the wind to blow strongly and ^^M^m 
so fan the fire. The fire, if successful, i^^^^l_^ 
burns furiously for a few hours and then f^^^^^^ 
smoulders for some days, after which f^^^^^H 
little of the timber remains but ashes ^ v v ^ 
and the charred stumps of the bigger fig. 12. — Sea 
trees. ^ If the burning is very incom- fo^^j^^S.' 
plete, it is necessary to make stacks 
of the lighter timbers that remain, and to fire 
these again. As soon as the ashes are cool, sow- 
ing begins. Men and women work together ; 
the men go in front making holes with wooden 
dibbles about six inches apart ; the women follow, 
carrying hung round the neck small baskets of 
padi seed (Fig. 12), which they throw into the 
holes, three or four seeds to each hole. No care 
is taken to fill in the holes with earth. By this 
time the relatively dry season, which lasts only 
some two months, is at an end, and copious rains 
cause the seed to shoot above the ground a few 

I02 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO ch.p. 

days after the sowing. Several varieties of padi 
are in common use, some more suitable for the 
hillsides, some for the marshy lands. On any one 
patch three or four kinds are usually sown according 
to the elevation and slope of the part of the area. 
Since the rates of growth of the several kinds are 
different, the sowings are so timed that the whole 
area ripens as nearly as possible at the same moment, 
in order that the birds and other pests may not 
have the opportunity of turning their whole force 
upon the several parts in turn. The men now 
build on each patch a small hut, which is occupied 
by most of the able-bodied members of the room- 
hold until harvest is completed, some fourteen to 
twenty weeks after the sowing of the padi, according 
to the variety of grain sown. They erect contriv- 
ances for scaring away the birds ; they stick bamboos 
about eight feet in length upright in the ground 
every 20 to 30 yards. Between the upper ends 
of these, rattans are tied, connecting together all 
the bamboos on each area of about one acre. The 
field of one roomhold is generally about four acres 
in extent; there will thus be four groups of bamboos, 
each of which can be agitated by pulling on a single 
rattan. From each such group a rattan passes to 
the hut, and some person, generally a woman or 
child, is told off to tug at these rattans in turn 
at short intervals. Upon the rattans between the 
bamboos are hung various articles calculated to 
make a noise or to flap to and fro when the system 
is set in motion. Sometimes the rattan by which 
the system of poles is set in movement is tied to 
the upper end of a tall sapling, one end of which 
is thrust deeply into the mud of the floor of the 
river. The current then keeps the sapling and 
with it the system of bamboos swaying and jerking 
to and fro. The Kayans admit that they have 
learnt this last " dodge " from the Klemantans. The 

% 

f ''^m^r:^ 

Plate 57. KAYANS OF BALOI IN THE PADl FIELD. THE TATU 
ON THE THIGHS IS PERCEPTIBLE. 

VI 

AGRICULTURE 103 

watcher remains in the hut all day long, while his 
companions are at work in the field ; he varies the 
monotony of his task by shouting and beating with 
a pair of mallets on a hollow wooden cylinder. The 
watcher is relieved from time to time, but the watch 
is maintained continuously day and night from the 
time that the corn is about two feet above the ground 
until it is all gathered in. In this way they strive 
with partial success to keep off the wild pigs, 
monkeys, deer, and, as the corn ripens, the rice- 
sparrow [Mu7zta). 

When the hut and the pest-scaring system have 
been erected, the men proceed to provide further 
protection against wild pig and deer by running a 
rude fence round a number of closely adjacent 
patches of growing corn. The fence, some three to 
four feet high, is made by lashing to poles thrust 
vertically into the ground and to convenient trees 
and stumps, bamboos or saplings as horizontal bars, 
five or six in vertical row. When this is completed 
the men take no further part until the harvest, 
except perhaps to lend a hand occasionally with the 
weeding. This is the time generally chosen by 
them for long excursions into the jungle in search 
of rattans, rubber, camphor, and for warlike ex- 
peditions or the paying of distant visits. 

It is the duty of the women to prevent th& p adz 
being choked by weeds. The women of each room 
will go over each patch completely at least twice, at 
an interval of about one month, hoeing down the 
weeds with a short-handled hoe ; the hoe consists 
of a fiat blade projecting at right angles from the 
iron haft (Fig. 13). The latter is bent downwards 
at a right angle just above the blade, in a plane per- 
pendicular to that of the blade, and its other end is 
prolonged by a short wooden handle, into the end of 
which it is thrust. The woman stoops to the work, 
hoeing carefully round each padi plant, by holding 

I04 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

the hoe in the right hand and striking the blade 
downwards and towards her toes with a dragging 
action. In working over the patch in this careful 
fashion some three weeks are consumed. In the 
intervals the women gather the small crops of early 
padi, pumpkin, cucumbers, and so forth, spending 
several weeks together on the farm, sleeping in the 
hut. In a good season this is the happiest time of 
the year ; both men and women take 
the keenest interest and pleasure in 
the growth of the crop. 

During the time when the grain is 
formed but not yet ripe, the people 
'^-^.^.^^^ I live upon the green corn, which they 
^^ I prepare by gathering the heads and 
beating them flat. These are not 
cooked, but merely dried in the sun, 
and though they need much mastica- 
tion they are considered a delicacy. 

During the time of the ripening of 
the corn a spirit of gaiety and joyful 
anticipation prevails. It is a favourite 
time for courtship, and many marriages 
are arranged. 

The harvest is the most important 
event of the year. Men, women, and 
children, all take part. The rice- 
sparrows congregate in thousands as 
the grain begins to ripen, and the noisy 
efforts of the people fail to keep them at a distance. 
Therefore the people walk through the crop gather- 
ing all ripe ears. The operation is performed with a 
small rude knife-blade mounted in a wooden handle 
along its whole length (Figs. 14, 15). This is held in 
the hollow of the right hand, the ends of a short cross 
bar projecting between the first and second fingers 
and between thumb and first finger. The thumb 
seizes and presses the head of each blade of corn 

Fig. 13. 

Plate 58. KENYAH WOMEN RESTING FROM WEEDING IN 
THE PADI FIELD. 

AGRICULTURE 

105 

against the edge of the knife. The ears thus 
cropped are thrown into a basket slung round the 
neck. As soon as a large basket has been filled by 
the reapers, its contents are spread out on mats on a 
platform before the hut. After an exposure of two 
or three days, the grain is separated from the ears by 
stamping upon them with bare feet. The separated 
grain passes through the meshes of the coarse mat 
on to a finer mat beneath. The grain is then 
further dried by exposure to the sun. When the 
whole crop has been gathered, threshed, and dried 
in this way, it is transported in the large shoulder 
baskets amid much rejoicing and merry-making to 

Fig. 14. 

Fig. 15. 

the padi barns adjoining the house, and the harvest 
festival begins. 

The elaborate operations on the padi farm that 
we have described might seem to a materialist to 
be sufficient to secure a good harvest ; but this is 
not the view taken by the Kayans, or any other 
of the cultivators of Borneo. In their opinion all 
these material labours would be of little avail if not 
supplemented at every stage by the minute observ- 
ance of a variety of rites. T\i^ padi has life or soul, 
or vitality, and is subject to sickness and to many 
vaguely conceived influences, both good and bad. 

Determination of the Seasons 

The determination of the time for sowing the 
seed is a matter of so great importance that in each 

io6 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

village this duty is entrusted to a man who makes 
it his profession to observe the signs of the seasons. 
This work is so exacting that he is not expected to 
cultivate a crop of padi for himself and family, but 
is furnished with all the padi he needs by con- 
tributions from all the other members of the 
village. 

It is essential to determine the approach of the 
short dry season, in order that in the course of it 
the timber may be felled and burned. In Borneo, 
lying as it does upon the equator, the revolution of 
the year is marked by no very striking changes of 
weather, temperature, or of vegetation. In fact, 
the only constant and striking evidences of the pass- 
age of the months are the alternations of the north- 
east and the south-west monsoons. The former blows 
from October to March, the latter from April to 
September, the transitions being marked by variable 
winds. The relatively dry season sets in with the 
south-west monsoon, and lasts about two months ; 
but in some years the rainfall during this season is 
hardly less abundant than during the rest of the 
year. 

The ** clerk of the weather" (he has no official 
title, though the great importance of his function 
secures him general respect) has no knowledge of 
the number of days in the year, and does not count 
their passage. He is aware that the lunar month 
has twenty-eight days, but he knows that the dry 
season does not recur after any given number of 
completed months, and therefore keeps no record 
of the lunar months. He relies almost entirely 
upon observation of the slight changes of the sun's 
altitude. His observations are made by the help 
of an instrument closely resembling the ancient 
Greek gnomon, known as tukar do or aso do 
(PI. 60). 

A straight cylindrical pole of hardwood is fixed 

AGRICULTURE 107 

vertically in the ground ; It is carefully adjusted 
with the aid of plumb lines, and the possibility of its 
sinking deeper into the earth is prevented by pass- 
ing its lower end through a hole in a board laid 
horizontally on the ground, its surface flush with 
the surface of the ground which is carefully smoothed. 
The pole is provided with a shoulder which rests 
upon this board. The upper end of the pole is 
generally carved in the form of a human figure. 
The carving may be very elaborate, or the figure 
may be indicated only by a few notches. The 
length of the pole from the collar to its upper 
extremity is made equal to the span from tip to tip 
of outstretched arms of its maker, plus the length of 
his span from tip of the thumb to that of the first 
finger. This pole {aso do) stands on a cleared space 
before or behind the house, and is surrounded by 
a strong fence ; the area within the fence, some 
three or four yards in diameter, being made as level 
and smooth as possible. The clerk of the weather 
has a neatly worked flat stick, on which lengths are 
marked off by notches ; these lengths are measured 
by laying the stick along the radial side of the left 
arm, the butt end against the anterior fold of the 
armpit. A notch is then cut at each of the follow- 
ing positions : one notch about one inch from the 
butt end, a second opposite the middle of the upper 
arm, one opposite the elbow, one opposite the bend 
of the wrist, one at the first interphalangeal joint, 
one at the finger-tip. The other side of the rod 
bears a larger number of notches, of which the most 
distal marks the greatest length of the mid-day 
shadow, the next one the length of the mid-day 
shadow three days after it has begun to shorten, 
the next the length of the shadow after three more 
days' shortening, and so on. The mid-day shadow 
is, of course, the minimal length reached in the course 
of the day, and the marks denoting the changes in 

io8 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

length of the shadow are arrived at, purely em- 
pirically, by marking off the length of the mid-day 
shadow every three days. 

The clerk of the weather measures the shadow of 
the pole at mid-day whenever the sun is unclouded. 
As the shadow grows shorter after reaching its 
maximal length, he observes it with special care, and 
announces to the village that the time for preparing 
the land is near at hand. When the shadow reaches 
the notch made opposite the middle of the arm, the 
best time for sowing the grain is considered to have 
arrived ; the land is therefore cleared, and made 
ready before this time arrives. Sowing at times 
when the shadow reaches other notches is held to 
involve various disadvantages, such as liability to 
more than the usual number of pests — monkeys, 
insects, rats, or sparrows. In the case of each 
successful harvest, the date of the sowing is recorded 
by driving a peg of ironwood into the ground at the 
point denoting the length of the mid-day shadow at 
that date. The weather prophet has other marks 
and notches whose meaning is known only to him- 
self; his procedures are surrounded with mystery 
and kept something of a secret, even from the chief 
as well as from all the rest of the village, and his 
advice is always followed. 

The method of observing the sun described above 
is universal among the Kenyahs, but some of the 
Kayans practise a different method. A hole is 
made in the roof of the weather-prophet's chamber 
in the long-house, and the altitude of the mid-day 
sun and its direction, north or south of the meridian, 
are observed by measuring along a plank fixed on 
the floor the distance of the patch of sunlight (falling 
through the hole on to the plank) from the point 
vertically below the hole. The horizontal position 
of the plank is secured by placing upon it smooth 
spherical stones and noting any inclination to roll. 

Plate 6o. KENYAHS MEASURING THE LENGTH OF THE SHADOW 
OF THE ASO DO AT NOON TO DETERMINE THE TIME FOR SOWING 
PAD/. 

VI 

AGRICULTURE 109 

The sunbeam which enters this hole is called klepiU 
toll ( = the blow-pipe of the spirit). 

Some of the Klemantans practise a third method 
to determine when the time for sowing is at hand, 
using a bamboo some feet in length which bears a 
mark at a level which is empirically determined. 
The bamboo is filled with water while in the vertical 
position. It is then tilted till it points towards a 
certain star, when of course some water escapes. 
After it has been restored to the vertical, the level 
of the surface of the remaining water is 'noted. 
The coincidence of this level with the mark 
mentioned above indicates that the time for sowing 
is come. 

The Sea Dayaks are guided by the observation 
of the position of the Pleiades. 

The appropriate season having been determined, 
it is necessary to secure good omens before the 
preparation of the land can be begun. A pig and 
a fowl having been sacrificed in the usual way, and 
their blood sprinkled upon the wooden figures 
before the house, ^ two men are sent out in a boat, 
and where they first see a spider-hunter they land 
on the bank and go through the customary pro- 
cedures. The calls and appearances of various birds 
and of the muntjac are of chief importance. Some 
of these are good, some bad in various degrees. 
When a preponderance of favourable omens has 
been observed, the men return to the house to 
announce their success. They will wait two whole 
days if necessary to secure a favourable result. 
During their absence a strict malan or lali (tabu) 
lies upon the house ; no stranger may enter it, and 
the people sit quietly in the house performing only 
the most necessary tasks. The announcement of 
the nature of the omens observed is made to the 
chief in the presence of a deeply interested throng 

1 See Chap. X. 

no PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

of both sexes. If the omens observed are considered 
to be bad, or of doubtful import, the men go out for 
a second period ; but if they are favourable, the 
women of each room perform the private rites over 
their stores of seed padi, which are kept in their 
rooms. After the pros and cons have been fully- 
discussed, the chief names the day for the be- 
ginning of the clearing operations. 

At the beginning of the sowing the house is 
again subject to malan for one day. During the 
growth of the padi various charms and superstitious 
practices are brought into use to promote its 
growth and health, and to keep the pests from it. 
The padi charms are a miscellaneous collection or 
bundle of small articles, such as curious pebbles 
and bits of wood, pigs' tusks of unusual size or 
shape, beads, feathers, crystals of quartz. Kayans 
as a rule object to pebbles and stones as charms. 
Such charms are generally acquired in the first 
instance through indications afforded by dreams, 
and are handed down from mother to daughter. 
Such charms contained in a basket are usually kept 
in 2ipadi barn, from which they are taken to the field 
by the woman and waved over it, usually with a 
live fowl in the hand, while she addresses th^ padi 
seed in some such terms as the following : " May 
you have a good stem and a good top, let all parts 
of you grow in harmony, etc. etc." Then she 
rapidly repeats a long customary formula of 
exhortation to the pests, saying, " O rats, run 
away down river, don't trouble us ; O sparrows and 
noxious insects, go feed on the padi of the people 
down river." If the pests are very persistent, the 
woman may kill a fowl and scatter its blood over 
the growing padi, while she charges the pests to 
disappear, and calls upon Laki Ivong (the god of 
harvests) to drive them out. 

Women alone will gather the first ears of the 

AGRICULTURE in 

crop. If they encounter on their way to the fields 
any one of the following creatures, they must at 
once return home, and stay there a day and a night, 
on pain of illness or early death : certain snakes, 
spiders, centipedes, millipedes, and birds of two 
speciQS, j'erml and dudzc^ (a cuckoo). Or again, if the 
shoulder straps of their large baskets should break 
on the way, if a stump should fall against them, or 
the note of the spider-hunter be heard, or if a 
woman strikes her foot by accident against any 
object, the party must return as before. 

It will be clear from the foregoing account that 
the women play the principal part in the rites and 
actual operations of the padz culture; the men only 
being called in to clear the ground and to assist in 
some of the later stages. The women select and 
keep the seed grain, and they are the repositories 
of most of the lore connected with it. It seems to 
be felt that they have a natural affinity to the 
fruitful grain, which they speak of as becoming 
pregnant. Women sometimes sleep out in the 
padz fields while the crop is growing, probably for 
the purpose of increasing their own fertility or that 
of the padi\ but they are very reticent on this 
matter. 

The Harvest Festival 

When the crop is all gathered in, the house is 
malan to all outsiders for some ten days, during 
which the grain is transported from the fields to the 
village and stored in the padi barns. When this 
process is completed or well advanced, the festival 
begins with the preparation of the seed grain for 
the following season. Some of the best of the new 
grain is carefully selected by the women of each 
room, enough for the sowing of the next season. 
This is mixed with a small quantity of the seed 
grain of the foregoing seasons which has been care- 

112 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

fully preserved for this purpose in a special basket. 
The basket contains grains of padi from good 
harvests of many previous years. This is supposed 
to have been done from the earliest time ol padi 
planting, so that the basket contains some of the 
original stock of seed, or at least the virtue of it 
leavening the whole. This basket is never emptied, 
but a pinch of the old padi is mixed in with the 
new, and then a handful of the mixture added to 
the old stock. The idea here seems to be that the 

old grain, preserving continu- 
ity generation after generation 
with the original seed padi of 
mythical origin,^ ensures the 
presence in the grain of the 
soul or spirit or vital principle 
Pjg j5 oipadi. While mixing the old 

with the new seed grain, the 
woman calls on the soul of the padi to cause the seed 
to be fruitful and to grow vigorously, and to favour 
her own fertility. For the whole festival is a celebra- 
tion or cult of the principle of fertility and vitality 
— that of the women no less than that of the padir 
The women who have been delivered of children 
during the past year will make a number of toys, 
consisting of plaited work, in the shapes of various 
animals filled with boiled rice (Fig. i6). These 
they throw to the children of the house, who 
scramble for them in the gallery. This seems to 
be of the nature of a thank-offering. 

At this time also another curious custom is 
observed. Four water beetles, of the kind that 
skates on the surface of the still water, are caught 
on the river and placed on water in a large gong. 
Some old man specially wise in this matter watches 

1 See Chap. XVII. 

- The same connexion of ideas is illustrated by the practice of sterile 
women who desire children sleeping upon the freshly gathered ears in the huts 
in the fields. 

VI 

AGRICULTURE 113 

the beetles, calling to them to direct their move- 
ments. The people crowd round deeply interested, 
while the old man interprets the movements of the 
beetles as forecasting good or ill luck with the crops 
of the following season, and invokes the good-will 
of Laki Ivong. Laki Ivong is asked to bring the 
soul of xh^ padi to their homes. Juice from a sugar- 
cane is poured upon the water, and the women 
drink the water, while the beetles are carefully- 
returned to the river. The beetles carry the 
messages to Laki Ivong. 

When these observances have been duly 
honoured, there begins a scene of boisterous fun. 
The women make pads of the boiled sticky new 
rice, and cover it with soot from their cooking 
vessels. With these they approach the men and 
dab the pads upon their faces and bodies, leaving 
sooty marks that are not easily removed. The 
men thus challenged give chase, and attempt to get 
possession of the rice pads and to return the polite 
attention. For a short space of time a certain 
license prevails among the young people ; and 
irregularities, even on the part of married people, 
which would be gravely reprobated at all other 
times, are looked upon very much less seriously. 
It is, in fact, the annual carnival. Each roomhold 
has prepared a stock of burak from the new rice, 
and this now circulates freely among both men and 
women, and large meals of rice and pork are usually 
eaten. All join in dancing, some of the women 
dressed like men, some carrying /^^afz-pestles ; at 
one moment all form a long line marching up and 
down the gallery in step to the strains of the keluri ; 
some young men dance in realistic imitation of 
monkeys (dok\ or hornbills, or other animals, singly 
or in couples. Others mimic the peculiarities of 
their acquaintances. The women also dance 
together in a long line, each resting her hands on 

VOL. I I 

114 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

the shoulders of the one going before her, and all 
keeping time to the music of the keluries as they 
dance up and down the long gallery. All this is kept 
up with good humour the whole day long. In the 
evening more btirak is drunk and songs are sung, 
the women mingling with the men, instead of re- 
maining in their rooms as on other festive occasions. 
Before midnight a good many of the men are more 
or less intoxicated, some deeply so ; but most are 
able to find their way to bed about midnight, and 
few or none become offensive or quarrelsome, even 
though the men indulge in wrestling and rough 
horseplay with one another. After an exceptionally 
good harvest the boisterous merrymaking is renewed 
on a second or even a third day. 

The harvest festival is the time at which dancing 
is most practised. The dances fall into two chief 
classes, namely, solo dances and those in which 
many persons take part. Most of the solo dances 
take the form of comic imitations of the movements 
of animals, especially the big macaque monkey 
{dok), the hornbill, and big fish. These dances 
seem to have no connection with magic or religion, 
but to be purely aesthetic entertainments. The 
animals that are regarded with most awe are never 
mimicked in this way. There are at least four 
distinct group dances popular among the Kayans. 
Both men and women take part, the women often 
dressing themselves as men for the occasion (PL 
6i). The movements and evolutions are very 
simple. The hipa resembles the dance on return 
from war described in Chap. X. In the kayo, 
a similar dance, the dancers are led by a woman 
holding one of the dried heads which is taken down 
for the purpose ; the women, dressed in warcoats, 
pretending to take the head from an enemy. The 
lakekut is a musical drill in which the dancers stamp 
on the planks of the floor in time to the music. 

AGRICULTURE 115 

The hipak is a kind of slow polka. In none of 
these do the dancers fall into couples. A fifth 
dance, the dance of the departure of the spirit, is a 
dramatic representation by three persons of the 
death of one of them, and of his restoration to life 
by means of the water of life (this is supposed to 
be brought from the country which is traversed on 
the journey to the land of shades). This dance is 
sometimes given with so much dramatic effect as 
to move the onlookers to tears. 

CHAPTER VII 

THE DAILY LIFE OF A KAYAN LONG HOUSE 

A LITTLE before dawn the cocks roosting beneath 
the house awaken the household by their crowing 
and the flapping of their wings. The pigs begin to 
grunt and squeal, and the dogs begin to trot to and 
fro in the gallery. Before the first streaks of day- 
light appear, the women light the fires in the private 
rooms or blow up the smouldering embers ; then 
most of them descend from the house, each carrying 
in a basket slung on her back several bamboo water- 
vessels to be filled from the river. Many of them 
bathe at this time in the shallow water beside the 
bank, while the toilet of others consists in dashing 
water over their faces, washing their mouths with 
water, and rubbing their teeth with the forefinger. 
Returning to the house with their loads of water (PL 
63), they boil rice for the household breakfasts and 
for the dinner of those who are to spend the day in 
xh^padi field or the jungle. The boiled rice intended 
for the latter use is made up in packets wrapped in 
green leaves, each containing sufficient for a meal 
for one person. About half-past six, when the day- 
light is fully come, the pigs expectant of their meal 
are clamouring loudly for it. The women descend 
to them by ladders leading from the private rooms, 
and each gives to the pigs of her household the 
leavings of the meals of the previous day. About 
the same time the men begin to bestir themselves 

116 

CHAP. VII 

DAILY LIFE 117 

sluggishly ; some descend to bathe, while others 
smoke the fag ends of the cigarettes that were un- 
finished when they fell asleep. Then the men 
breakfast in their rooms, and not until they are satis- 
fied do the women and children sit down to their 
meal. During all this time the chronically hungry 
dogs, attracted by the odours of food, make persistent 
efforts to get into their owner's rooms. Success in 
this manoeuvre is almostly always followed by their 
sudden and noisy reappearance in the gallery, 
caused by a smart blow with a stick. In the busy 
farming season parties of men, women, and children 
will set off in boats for the padi fields taking their 
breakfasts with them. 

After breakfast the men disperse to their various 
tasks. During some three or four months of the 
year all able-bodied persons repair daily to xh^ padi 
fields, but during the rest of the year their employ- 
ments are more varied. The old women and 
invalids remain all day long in the rooms ; the old 
men lounge all day in the gallery, smoking many 
home-made cigarettes, and perhaps doing a bit of 
carving or other light work and keeping an eye 
on the children. The young children play in and 
out and about the house, chasing the animals, and 
dabbling among the boats moored at the bank. 

A few of the able-bodied men employ themselves 
in or about the house, making boats, forging swords, 
spear-heads, iron hoes, and axes, repairing weapons 
or implements. Others go in small parties to the 
jungle to hunt deer and pig, or to gather jungle 
produce — fruits, rubber, rattans, or bamboos — or 
spend the day in fishing in the river. During the 
months of December and January the jungle fruits 
— the durian, rambutan, mangosteen, lansat, mango, 
and numerous small sour fruits (PL 65) — are much 
more abundant than at other times ; and during 
these months all other work is neglected, while the 

ii8 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

people devote themselves to gathering the fruit 
which forms for a time almost their only food. 

Except during the busy padi season the work 
of the women is wholly within the house. The 
heaviest part of their household labour is the pre- 
paration of the rice. After breakfast they proceed 
to spread out padi on mats on the open platforms 
adjoining the gallery. While the padi is being 
dried by the exposure to sun and wind on these 
platforms, it must be protected from the domestic 
fowls by a guardian who, sitting in the gallery, 
drives them away by means of a long bamboo slung 
by a cord above the platform. Others fill the time 
between breakfast and the noonday dinner by 
bathing themselves and the children in the river, 
making and repairing clothing, mats, and baskets, 
fetching more water, cleaning the rooms and pre- 
paring dinner. This meal consists of boiled rice 
with perhaps a piece of fish, pork, or fowl, and, 
like breakfast and supper, is eaten in the private 
rooms. 

As soon as dinner is over the pounding oi\h^padi 
begins (Frontispiece, Vol. II.). Each mortar usually 
consists of a massive log of timber roughly shaped, 
and having sunk in its upper surface, which is a 
little hollowed, a pit about five inches in diameter 
and nine inches in depth. Into this pit about a 
quarter of a bushel of padi is put. Two women 
stand on the mortar facing one another on either 
side of the pit, each holding by the middle a large 
wooden pestle. This is a solid bar of hardwood 
about seven feet long, about two inches in diameter 
in the middle third, and some three or four inches 
in diameter in the rest of its length. The two 
ends are rounded and polished by use. Each 
woman raises her pestle to the full height of her 
reach, and brings it smartly down upon the grain in 
the pit, the two women striking alternately with a 

Plate 63. ELDERLY KAVAN WOMAN ASCENDING THE HOUSE- 
LADDER WITH BASKETFUL OF \\V\TER VESSELS. 

DAILY LIFE 119 

regular rhythm. As each one lifts her pestle, she 
deftly sweeps back into the pit with her foot the 
grain scattered by her stroke. 

After pounding the padi for some minutes with- 
out interruption, one woman takes a winnowing pan, 
a mat made in the shape of an English housemaid's 
dustpan, but rather larger than this article, and 
receives in it the pounded grain which the other 
throws out of the pit with her foot. 

Both women then kneel upon a large mat laid 
beside the mortar ; the one holding the winnowing 
pan keeps throwing the grain into the air with a 
movement which causes the heavier grain to fall to 
the back of the pan, while the chaff and dust is 
thrown forward on to the mat. Her companion 
separates the rice dust from the chaff by sifting it 
through a sieve. A considerable quantity of the 
dust or finely broken rice is formed by the pounding 
in the mortar, and this is the principal food given to 
the pigs. The winnowed grain is usually returned 
to the mortar to be put through the whole process a 
second time. The clean rice thus prepared is ready 
for the cooking-pot. 

The winnowing and sifting is often done by old 
women, while the younger women continue the 
severer task of plying the pestle. In the Kayan 
houses the mortars are in many cases double, that 
is to say, there are two pits in the one block of 
timber, and twopairsof women work simultaneously. 
In the middle of the afternoon the whole house re- 
sounds with the vigorous blows of the pestles, for 
throughout the length of the gallery two or more 
women are at work beside each room, husking the 
day's supply of rice for each family. 

For the women of all the peoples, except the 
Punans, the husking of ih&padi is a principal feature 
of the day's work, and is performed in much the 
same fashion by all. The Kenyahs alone do their 

I20 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

work out of doors beside the padi barns, sometimes 
under rude lean-to shelters. 

When this task is completed the women are 
covered with dust ; they descend again to the river, 
and bathe themselves and the children once more. 
They may gather some of the scanty vegetables 
grown in small enclosures near most of the 
houses, and then proceed to prepare supper with 
their rice and whatever food the men may have 
brought home from the jungle. For now, about an 
hour before sundown, the men return from expedi- 
tions in the jungle, often bringing a wild pig, a 
monkey, a porcupine, or some jungle fruit, or young 
shoots of bamboo, as their contribution to the supper 
table ; others return from fishing or from the padi 
fields, and during the sunset hour at a large village 
a constant stream of boats arrives at the landing- 
place before the house. Most of the home-comers 
bathe in the river before ascending to the house. 
This evening bath is taken in more leisurely fashion 
than the morning dip. A man will strip off his 
waist-cloth and rush into the water, falling fiat on his 
chest with a great splash. Then standing with the 
water up to his waist he will souse his head and face, 
then perhaps swim a few double overhand strokes, 
his head going under at each stroke. After rubbing 
himself down with a smooth pebble, he returns to 
the bank, and having resumed his waist-cloth, he 
squeezes the water from his hair, picks up his 
paddle, spear, hat, and other belongings, and ascends 
to the gallery. There he hangs up his spear by 
jabbing its point into a roof-beam beside the door of 
his chamber, and sits down to smoke a cigarette and 
to relate the events of his day while supper is prepar- 
ing. As darkness falls, he goes to his room to sup. 
By the time the women also have supped, the 
tropical night has fallen, and the house is lit by the 
fires and by resin torches, and nowadays by a few 

VII 

DAILY LIFE 121 

kerosene lamps. The men gather round the fire- 
places in the gallery and discuss politics, the events 
of the day, the state of the crops and weather, the 
news obtained by meetings with the people of 
neighbouring houses, and relate myths and legends, 
folk-tales and animal stories. The women, having 
put the children to bed, visit one another's rooms 
for friendly gossip ; and young men drop in to join 
their parties, accept the proffered cigarette, and 
discourse the sweet music of the keluri} the nose- 
flute, and the Jew's harp (Figs. 17, 18, 19). Or 
Romeo first strikes up his plaintive tune outside 
the room in which Juliet sits with the women folk. 
Juliet may respond with a few notes of her guitar" 
(Fig. 20), thus encouraging Romeo to enter and 
to take his place in the group beside her, where 
he joins in the conversation or renews his musical 
efforts. About nine o'clock all retire to bed, save 
a few old men who sit smoking over the fires 
far into the night. The dogs, after some final 
skirmishes and yelpings, subside among the warm 
ashes of the fireplaces ; the pigs emit a final squeal 
and grunt ; and within the house quietness reigns. 
Now the rushing of the river makes itself heard in 
the house, mingled with the chirping of innumer- 
able insects and the croaking of a myriad frogs 
borne in from the surrounding forest. The villagers 
sleep soundly till cock-crow ; but the European 
guest, lying in the place of honour almost beneath 
the row of human heads which adorns the gallery, is, 
if unused to sleeping in a Bornean long house, apt 
to be wakened from time to time throughout the 
night by an outburst of dreadful yelpings from the 
dogs squabbling for the best places among the ashes, 
by the prolonged fit of coughing of an old man, by 
an old crone making up the fire, by the goats squeal- 
ing and scampering over the boats beneath the 

1 See Chap. XVIH. 2 See Chap. V, 

Fig. 17. 

Fig. 20. 

Plate 65. JUNGLE FRUITS. 

CHAP. VII DAILY LIFE 123 

house, or by some weird cry from the depths of the 
jungle. 

In the old days the peace of the night was 
occasionally broken an hour before the dawn by the 
yells of an attacking force, and by the flames roar- 
ing up from bundles of shavings thrown beneath 
the house. But happily attacks of this kind are no 
longer made, save in some few remoter parts of 
the interior where the European governments have 
not yet fully established their authority. 

The even tenor of the life of a village is inter- 
rupted from time to time by certain festivals or 
other incidents — the harvest festival ; the marriage 
or the naming of a chiefs son or daughter ; the 
arrival of important guests (one or more chiefs 
with bands of followers coming to make peace, or 
nowadays the resident magistrate of the district) ; 
the funeral of a chief; the preparations for war or 
for a long journey to the distant bazaar of Chinese 
traders in the lower part of the river ; the necessity 
of removing to a new site ; an epidemic of disease ; 
the rites of formally consulting the omens, or other- 
wise communicating with and propitiating the gods; 
the operations of the soul-catcher. The more im- 
portant of these incidents will be described in later 
chapters. Here we need only give a brief account 
of the way in which some of them affect the daily 
round of life in the long house. 

A visiting chief will remain seated In his boat, 
while a follower announces his arrival and ascertains 
that there is no nialan (tabu) upon the house which 
would make the presence of visitors unwelcome. 
Such malan affecting the whole house or village 
obtains during the storing of the padi for ten 
consecutive days, during epidemics of sickness in 
neighbouring villages, and at the time when the 
preparation of the farm land begins. If a favourable 
answer is returned, the visitor remains seated in his 

124 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

boat some few minutes longer, and then makes his 
way into the gallery, followed by most of his men, 
who leave their spears and shields in the boats. If 
the visitor is an intimate friend, the chief of the 
house will send a son or brother to welcome him, 
or will even go himself. Arrived in the gallery,' 
the visitor advances to the central platform where 
the chief of the house awaits him, unstrings his 
sword from his waist, hangs it upon any convenient 
hook, and sits down beside his host; while his 
men, following his example, seat themselves with 
the men of the house in a semicircle facing the 
two chiefs. The followers may greet, and even 
embrace, or grasp by the forearm, their personal 
friends ; but the demeanour of the chiefs is more 
formal. Neither one utters a word or glances at 
the other for some few minutes ; the host remains 
seated, fidgeting with a cigarette and gazing upon 
the ^ floor ; the visitor sitting beside him looks 
stolidly over the heads of his followers, and perhaps 
clears his throat or coughs. Presently a woman 
thrusts into the semicircle a tray of freshly made 
cigarettes. One of the men of the house pushes 
it forward towards the principal visitor, who makes 
a sign of acceptance by lightly touching the tray ; 
the other, crouching on his heels, lights a cigarette 
with an ember from the fire, blowing it into a glow 
as he waddles up to present it to the visiting chief. 
The latter takes it, but usually allows it to go out. 
By this time the chief of the house is ready to open 
the conversation, and, after clearing his throat, 
suddenly throws out a question, usually, ''Where 
did you start from to-day.^" The embarrassing 
silence thus broken, question and answer are freely 
exchanged, the cigarette of the visitor is again 
lighted at the fire by a member of the household, 
and conversation becomes general. Not infre- 
quently the host, becoming more and more friendly, 

VII 

DAILY LIFE 125 

throws an arm across his guest's shoulders or 
strokes him endearingly with the palm of his hand. 
In the meantime the women are busy preparing 
a meal, a pig having been killed and hastily cut up. 
When it is ready, the visitors, if old friends, are 
invited to partake of it in the chief's room. But 
if they are not familiar acquaintances, the meal is 
spread for them in the gallery on platters placed 
in a long row, one for each guest ; each platter 
containing many cubes of hot boiled pork and two 
packets of hot boiled rice wrapped in leaves. The 
space is surrounded with a slight bamboo fence 
to keep away the dogs. In either case the visitors 
eat alone, their hosts retiring until the meal is 
finished. As the chief's wife retires, she says, " Eat 
slowly, my children, our food is poor stuff. There is 
no pork, no fish, nothing that is good." Before 
withdrawing, one of the people of the house pours 
a little water from a bamboo vessel on the right 
hand of the visiting chief, who then passes on the 
vessel to his followers. With the hand thus cleansed 
each guest conveys the food to his mouth, dipping 
his pieces of pork in coarse salt placed in a leaf 
beside his platter ; and when he has finished eating, 
he drinks water from a bamboo vessel. The chief, 
and perhaps also one or more of his upper-class 
companions, leaves a little of the pork and a little 
rice on the platter to show that he is not greedy 
or ravenous ; and his good breeding prompts him 
to prove his satisfaction with the meal by belching 
up a quantity of wind with a loud and prolonged 
noise, which is echoed by his followers to the best 
of their ability. After thus publicly expressing 
his appreciation of his host's hospitality, he rinses 
out his mouth, squirting out the water towards the 
nearest gap between the fioor boards, rubs his 
teeth with his forefinger, again rinses his mouth, 
and washes his hand. Then relighting his cigarette, 

126 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

which he has kept behind his ear or thrust through 
the hole in its shell, he rejoins his host, who awaits 
him on the dais. 

On such an occasion, and in fact on any other 
occasion suggestive of festivity, the evening is 
enlivened with oratory, song, and drink. After 
supper the men gather together about the chiefs, 
sitting in close-set ranks on and before the dais. 
At a hint from the chief a jar of burak (rice-spirit) 
is brought into the circle. This may be the property 
of the chief or of any one of the principal men, who, 
by voluntarily contributing in this way towards the 
entertainment of the guests, maintains the honour 
of the house and of its chief A little is poured 
into a cup and handed to the house-chief, who first 
makes a libation to the omen-birds and to all the 
other friendly spiritual powers, by pouring a little 
on to the ground through some crevice of the floor, 
or by throwing a few drops out under the eaves, 
saying, as he does so, *' Ho, all you friendly spirits." 
Then he drinks a little and hands back the cup to 
the young man who has taken charge of the jar 
of spirit. The latter, remaining crouched upon his 
heels, ladles out another cupful of spirit and offers 
it in both hands to the principal guest, who drinks 
it off, and expresses by a grunt and a smack of the 
lips, and perhaps a shiver, his appreciation of its 
quality. The cup is handed in similar formal fashion 
to each of the principal guests in turn ; and then 
more cups are brought into use, and the circulation 
of the drink becomes more rapid and informal. 
As soon as each man has had a drink, the house- 
chief rises to his feet and, addressing himself to 
his guest, expatiates upon his admirable qualities, 
and expresses eloquently the pleasure felt by him- 
self and his people at this visit. Then speaking in 
parables and in indirect fashion, claiming perhaps 
indulgence on the ground that he is merely talking 

\ 

Platk 68. A KAYAN PARTY SITTING IN THP: GALLERY OF A LONG 

HOUSE. 

DAILY LIFE 127 

in his sleep, he touches upon local politics at first 
delicately; then warming up he speaks more directly 
and plainly. He may become much excited and 
gesticulate freely, even leaping into the air and 
twirling round on one foot with outstretched right 
arm in a fashion that directs his remarks to each 
and all of the listening circle ; but, even though 
he may find occasion to admonish or reproach, or 
even hint at a threat, his speech never transgresses 
the strictest bounds of courtesy. Having thus 
unburdened himself of whatever thoughts and 
emotions are evoked by the occasion, he takes from 
the attendant Ganymede a bumper cup of spirit 
and breaks into song. Standing before his guest 
and swinging the cup repeatedly almost to his (the 
guest's) lips, he exhorts him in complimentary and 
rhyming phrases to accept his remarks in a friendly 
spirit, and reminds him of the age and strength of 
their family and tribal relations, referring to their 
ancestral glories and the proud position in the world 
of their common race. At the end of each sentence 
all the men of both parties break out into a loud 
chorus, repeating the last word or two in deep 
long-drawn-out musical cadence. Then, with the 
last words of his extemporised song, the chief yields 
up the cup to the expectant guest, who, having sat 
rigidly and with fixed gaze throughout the address, 
takes it in one long draught, while the chorus 
swells to a deep musical roar. At this moment 
the circle of auditors, if much excited, will spring 
to their feet and swell the noise by stamping and 
jumping on the resounding planks. The house- 
chief smilingly strokes his guest from the shoulder 
downwards and resumes his seat. The chorus and 
commotion die away, and are followed by a moment 
of silence, during which the guest prepares to make 
his reply in similar fashion. He rises and begins 
by naming and lightly touching or pointing to his 

128 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

host and other of the principal men present. Then 
he makes acknowledgment of the kind and flattering 
reception accorded him, and his pleasure at finding 
this opportunity of improving the understanding 
between himself and his hosts. " The views so 
eloquently expressed by my friend (naming him 
and using some complimentary title, e.g, brother or 
father) are no doubt correct. Indeed, how could 
it be otherwise ? But I have been told so and so, 
and perhaps it may be, . . ." and so he goes on 
to state his own views, taking care to shift the 
responsibility for any remaining dissension on to the 
shoulders of some distant third party. He con- 
gratulates all parties on this free discussion of 
matters of common interest, and with free gesticula- 
tion exhorts them to turn a deaf ear to vague 
rumours and to maintain friendly relations. Then, 
dropping down beside his host, he says " Take no 
notice of what I have said, I am drunk." Ganymede 
again approaches him with a bumper cup, and then 
rising to his feet and calling on his men, he addresses 
his host in complimentary song and chorus, using 
the gestures and expressions peculiar to his own 
people. The song culminates as before in a general 
chorus, long drawn out, while the house-chief drains 
the cup. 

The cups then circulate freely, and the smoking 
of cigarettes is general ; other shorter speeches 
may be made, perhaps by the sons or brothers of 
the chiefs. As the evening wears away, both guests 
and hosts become increasingly boisterous and 
affectionate ; but few or none on an occasion of this 
sort become intoxicated or quarrelsome. If a man 
becomes a little too boisterous, he is led away to 
one of the sleeping platforms in the gallery, and 
kept there until he falls asleep. 

During an evening of this sort the women con- 
gregate in the adjacent rooms, where they can 

LATE 69. ENTERTAINING GUESTS IN THE GALLERY OF A KLEMANTAN 

(BARAWAN) HOUSE. 

VII 

DAILY LIFE 129 

overhear the proceedings ; and if they find these 
exceptionally interesting, they will congregate about 
the doors, but will strictly abstain from interfering 
with them in any way. The flow of speech and 
song and conversation goes on uninterruptedly, 
except when the occasional intrusion into the circle 
of some irrepressible dog necessitates its violent 
expulsion ; until, as midnight approaches, the men 
drop away from the circle by twos and threes, the 
circle being finally broken up when the visiting 
chief expresses a desire to sleep. Each guest 
spreads his own mat on the platform assigned to 
the party, and the men of the house retire to their 
rooms. 

We will not conclude this chapter without stating 
that among the Kayans, Kenyahs, and most of the 
Klemantans, alcoholic intoxication is by no means 
common. At great feasts, such as are made at the 
close of the harvest or on the return of a successful 
war-party, much borak is drunk, the women joining 
in, and a few of the men will usually become quite 
drunk ; but most of them will hardly go further 
than a state of boisterous jollity. 

Although in a year of good padi harvest each 
family constantly renews its supply of borak, yet the 
spirit is never drunk in private, but only on festive 
occasions of the kind described above, or when a 
man entertains a small party of friends in his own 
chamber. 

The account given above of the reception and 
entertainment of guests would apply with but little 
modification to the houses of the Kenyahs and 
Klemantans. In the Sea Dayak house the reception 
and entertainment of guests is less ceremonious, 
and is carried out by the unorganised efforts of 
individuals, rather than by the household as a 
whole with the chief at its head. On the arrival 
of a party of visitors, the people of each room 

VOL. I K 

I30 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap.v:, 

clamorously invite the guests to sit down before 
their chamber. The guests thus become scattered 
through the house. First they are offered betel 
nut and sirih leaf smeared with lime to chew, for 
among the Sea Dayaks this chewing takes the 
place of the smoking of cigarettes which is common 
to all the others; and they are then fed and enter- 
tained individually, or by twos and threes, in various 
rooms. No pig is killed or rice-spirit offered, though 
possibly a toasted bat or bit of salted wild pig will 
be served as a relish. 

At great feasts the Sea Dayaks drink more 
freely than the other peoples, except the Muruts. 
Men and women alike drink deeply, and many 
become intoxicated. The men take pride in drink- 
ing the largest possible quantity; and when the 
stomach is filled, will vomit up large quantities, and 
then at once drink more, the women pressing it 
upon them. The Dayaks and Muruts alone thus 
sink in the matter of drink to the level of those 
highly cultured Europeans among whom a similar 
habit obtains: while among all the other tribes 
strong drink is seldom or never abused, but rather 
is put only to its proper use, the promotion of good 
fellowship and social gaiety. 

< 

H 

Uj 
X 

O 
< 

< 

w 
J 

CHAPTER VIII 

LIFE ON THE RIVERS 

With the exception of the Punans and some of the 
Muruts who inhabit the few regions devoid of 
navigable streams, all the peoples of Borneo make 
great use of the rivers. The main rivers and their 
principal branches are their great highways, and 
even the smallest tributary streams are used for 
gaining access to their /a^^ fields. It is only when 
hunting or gathering jungle produce that they leave 
the rivers. Occasionally padi is cultivated at a 
distance of a mile or more from the nearest navi- 
gable stream, and a rough pathway is then made 
between the field and the nearest point of the 
river. Here and there also jungle paths are made 
connecting points where neighbouring rivers or 
their navigable tributaries approach closely to one 
another. In the fiat country near the coast, where 
waterways are less abundant than in the interior, 
jungle tracks are more used for communication 
between villages. Where a route crosses a jungle 
swamp, large trees are felled in such a way that 
their stems lie as nearly as possible end to end. 
Their ends are connected if necessary by laying 
smaller logs from one to the other. In this way 
is formed a rude slippery viaduct on which it is 
possible for an agile and bare-footed man to walk 
in safety across swamps many miles in extent. 

But the jungle paths are only used when it is 

131 

132 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

impossible to reach the desired point by boat, or 
if the waterway is very circuitous. On the lower 
and deeper reaches of the rivers the paddle is the 
universal instrument of propulsion. It is used 
without any kind of rowlock — the one hand, grasp- 
ing the handle a little above the blade, draws the 
blade backwards through the water ; the other hand, 
grasping the T-shaped upper end, thrusts it forward. 
The lower hand thus serves as a fulcrum for the 
other. 

A small boat may be propelled by a single rower, 
who, sitting at the stern, uses the paddle on one 
side only, and keeps the boat straight by turning 
the paddle as he finishes his stroke. In a boat of 
medium size one man seated at the stern devotes 
himself to steering with his paddle, although here 
and there among the coast-people a fixed rudder is 
used. In a war boat of the largest size, the two 
men occupying the bow-bench and the four men on 
the two sternmost benches are responsible for the 
steering ; the former pull the bow over, or lever it 
in the opposite direction. 

During a day's journey the crew of a boat will 
from time to time lighten their labour with song, 
one man singing, the others joining in the chorus ; 
and if several boats are travelling in company the 
crews will from time to time spurt and strive to 
pass one another in good-humoured rivalry. At 
such times each crew may break out into a deep- 
pitched and musical roar, the triumphal chorus of a 
victorious war party. 

In the upper reaches of the rivers there are 
numerous rapids, and here and there actual falls. 
The boat is usually propelled up a rapid by poling. 
Each member of the crew has beside him a stout 
pole some eight or nine feet long ; and when the 
boat approaches a rapid, the crew at a shout from 
the captain, usually the steersman, spring to their 

IBANS PREPARING A BOAT FOR A LONG JOURNEY. 

f 

Plate 71. KAYAN WAR-BOAT ON THE LOWER BARAM. 

vm LIFE ON THE RIVERS 133 

feet, dropping their paddles and seizing their poles. 
Thrusting these against the stony bottom in perfect 
unison, the crew swings the boat up through the 
rushing water with a very pleasant motion. If the 
current proves too strong and the boat makes no 
progress, or if the water is too shallow, three or 
four men, or, if necessary, the whole crew, spring 
into the water and, seizing the boat by the gunwale, 
drag it upstream till quieter water is reached. It 
is necessary for a man or boy to bale out the water 
that constantly enters over the gunwale while the 
boat makes the passage of a rapid. All through 
these exciting operations the captain directs and 
admonishes his men unremittingly, hurling at them 
expressions of a strength that would astonish a crew 
on the waters of the Cam or Isis : *' Matei tadjin 
selin " (may you die the most awful death) is one 
of the favourite phrases. These provoke no 
resentment, but merely stimulate the crew to greater 
exertions. 

Sometimes, when much water is coming down 
after heavy rains, the current is so swift in deep 
places that neither paddling, poling, nor wading is 
possible. Then three or four men are landed on 
the bank, or on the boughs of the trees, and haul on 
the boat with long rattans, scrambling over rocks 
and through the jungle as best they can. 

The passage down stream in the upper reaches 
of a river is even more exciting and pleasurable. 
The crew paddles sufficiently to keep good steerage 
way on the boat, as it glides swiftly between the 
rocks and shallows ; as it shoots over the rapids, 
the steersman stands up to choose his path, the 
water splashes and gurgles and leaps over the 
gunwale, and the men break out into song. The 
smaller waterfalls do not check its onward rush ; 
as the boat approaches a fall, several men near the 
bow stand up to see if there is sufficient water ; then, 

134 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

as they resume their seats, all paddle with might 
and main until the boat takes the leap. Occasionally 
a boat is upset during such an attempt, and rarely 
one or two of the crew are lost through being hurled 
against rocks and drowned while stunned. 

In making a long journey the nights are passed 
if possible in friendly villages. When no such 
village can be reached, the night is passed either in 
the boats moored to the bank or on the river-bank. 
In the former case the leaf mats, of which each man 
carries at least one in his basket, are used to roof 
the boat ; in the latter case a rude hut is quickly 
built, a framework of saplings lashed together, roofed 
with the mats, and floored at a level of some feet 
above the ground with bamboos or slender saplings. 
On camping in the evening and before starting in 
the morning, rice is cooked and eaten ; and about 
mid-day the journey is interrupted for about an hour 
while the party lands on the bank, or, if possible, on 
a bed of pebbles, to rest and to cook and eat the mid- 
day meal. 

Fishing 

Fish are caught in the rivers in several ways, 
and form an important part of the diet of most of 
the peoples. Perhaps the cast net is most commonly 
used. This is a net which, when fully extended in 
the water, covers a circular patch about six yards in 
diameter, while its central part rises in a steep cone, 
to the peak of which a strong cord is tied. The 
main strands run radially from this central point, 
increasing in number towards the periphery. They 
are crossed by concentric strands. The periphery 
is weighted with bits of metal or stone. This net is 
used both in deep and in shallow water. In the 
former case one man steers and paddles a boat, 
while the other stands at the prow with the cord of 
the net wound about the right hand. The bulk of 

^ 

LIFE ON THE RIVERS 135 

the net is gathered up on his right arm, the free end 
is held in the left hand. Choosing a still pool some 
two fathoms in depth, he throws a stone into the 
water a little ahead of the boat, in the expectation 
that the fish will congregate about the spot as they 
do when fruit falls from the trees on the banks. 
Then, as the boat approaches the spot he deftly 
flings the net so that it falls spread out upon the 
surface ; its weighted edge then sinks rapidly to the 
bottom, enclosing any fish that may be beneath the 
net. If only small fish are enclosed, the net is 
twisted as it is drawn up, the fish becoming entangled 
in its meshes, and in pockets formed about its lower 
border. If a large fish is enclosed, the steersman 
will dive overboard and seize the lower part of the 
net so as to secure the fish. 

Or the boat is paddled to the foot of a small 
rapid ; the fisherman springs out and runs to the 
head of the rapid, and casts his net in the still water 
immediately above it where fish frequently congre- 
gate. 

Or a party takes the same net to the mouth of a 
small tributary, and, while some hold the net so as 
to block the mouth almost completely, others run 
through the jungle to a point some hundred yards 
up the stream, and then drive down the fish by wad- 
ing down stream splashing and shouting. As soon 
as a number of fish come down against the net its 
upper border is thrown down so as to enclose them. 

Another net, made quite flat and some fifteen 
yards long by four feet wide, is suspended by wooden 
floats across a small river so that the fish may 
become entangled in its meshes. 

Another net is used only by the women. In 
shape it is like a deep basin ; its wide mouth is 
attached to a stout circle of rattan, and a wooden bar 
is tied across the mouth to serve as handle. With 
this the women catch the sucker fish in the shallow 

136 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

rapids, one turning up stones, the other catching in 
the net the fish that dart from beneath them. 

Yet another mode of netting fish is to suspend a 
square of net attached by its corners to the ends of 
two crossed and downward bending sticks. The 
net is suspended by cords from its corners to the end 
of a long bamboo, which rests upon a post about its 
middle. The fisherman lowers the net into the 
water by raising the landward end of the bamboo 
lever, and when he sees fish swimming above it, 
attracted by a bait, he suddenly depresses his end 
of the bamboo, so as to bring the net quickly above 
the surface. On the coast drag nets are used. 

The selambo is used in small streams where fish 
are abundant. A fence of upright bamboos is built 
out from either bank, starting at opposite points 
and converging down stream to two points near the 
middle of the stream and about seven feet apart ; 
where each terminates a stout pole is driven firmly 
into the bed of the river. These two poles are con- 
nected by a stout cross-piece lashed to them a little 
above the level of the water. The cross-piece forms 
a fulcrum for a pair of long poles joined together 
with cross-pieces, in such a way that their down- 
stream ends almost meet, while up stream they 
diverge widely. They rest upon the fulcrum at a 
point about one-third of their length from their down- 
stream ends. Between the widely divergent parts 
up stream from the fulcrum a net is loosely stretched. 
The net lies submerged until fish coming down 
stream are directed on to the net by the convergent 
fences. The fisherman stands on a rude platform 
grasping the handle-end, and, feeling the contacts of 
the fishes with the net, throws his weight upon the 
handle, so bringing the net quickly above the surface. 
Beside him he has a large cage of bamboo standing 
in the water, into which the fish are allowed to slide 
from the elevated net. 

rt:^- 

f 

I 

KENYAHS HAULING A BOAT OVER RAPIDS. 

Plate 76. HUT BUILT ON RIVER BANK FOR A NIGHT'S SHELTER. 

VIII LIFE ON THE RIVERS 137 

A rod and line and baited hook are also in 
common use. The Kayans make a hook of stout 
brass wire, cutting a single barb. The Kenyahs 
use a hook made of rattan thorns. A strip is cut 
from the surface of a rattan bearing two thorns 
about an inch apart ; this is bent at its middle so 
that the cut surfaces of the two halves are brought 
into opposition, and the thorns, facing outward 
opposite one another, form the barbs. The line 
is tied to the bend, and the bait is placed over the 
tip projecting beyond the thorns. When the fish 
takes the hook into his mouth and swallows the 
bait, the barbs being released spring outward and 
secure the fish. 

A rough kind of spoon bait is also used with rod 
and line. 

Fish are taken also in traps. The most generally 
used is the bubu. This varies in length from 
eighteen inches to eight feet or even more. The 
body of the trap is a conical cage of bamboo. From 
the wide mouth of the cone a second smaller flatter 
cone passes upwards within the outer one ; the 
slender bamboo strips of which it is made come 
almost together in the centre, their inner ends being 
free and pliable. This is fixed beside the bank, its 
mouth turned down stream, and a few stakes are 
driven into the bed of the river to guide the fish 
into the mouth ; or it may be laid in shallow water, 
two barriers of stones converging to its mouth. 
The fish working up stream pass in at the mouth, 
and, when they have passed the inner lips, cannot 
easily pass out again. 

A still simpler trap consists merely of a long 
slender cone of bamboo strips. The fish entering 
the mouth and passing up to the confined space of 
the other end become wedged fast in it. 

A Sea Dayak trap found in the south-west of 
Borneo is a cylindrical cage of bamboo attached to 

138 PAGAN TRIBES ON BORNEO chap. 

a pole driven vertically into the bed of the river. 
(Fig. 2i). At one side of the cage is a circular 
aperture. Into this fits a section of bamboo, the 
end of which within the cage is cut into longitudinal 
strips that are made to converge, forming a cone, 
through the apex of which the fish can push his 
way into the cage, but which prevents his return. 
It is an application of the same valve principle as 

that used in the trap 
first described above. 

A larger trap is the 
kilongy which is used in 
the lower reaches of the 
rivers and also on the 
coast. It consists of a 
fence of stakes running 
out from the bank or 
shore into water some 
two fathoms in depth. 
The free end of the 
fence is wound in a 
spiral of about two 
turns. One or two 
gates are made between 
the outer and the inner 
chambers of the spiral 
on the side nearest to 
the bank or shore, and 
are left open when the trap is set. The fish, 
finding themselves confined by the fence, make 
for deeper water, and, entering the central chamber, 
do not readily return. The fisherman then closes 
the gate and takes out the fish with a landing net. 

A prawn trap consists of a cylinder of heavy 
bark. One end is closed with a conical valve of 
bamboo strips like that of the two traps described 
above ; the other flattened end is hinged to open 
for the extraction of the catch. The trap is baited 

Fig. 21. 

> 

o 
< 

oi 

< 

o 
o 

en 

< 

X 
H 

Q 

:2; 

w 
u 

Q 

O 

H 

H 
D 
O 

OQ 
< 

h 

<; 

O 

VIII LIFE ON THE RIVERS 139 

with decaying cocoanut and thrown into the river 
with a long rattan attached to it and tied to a pole ; 
the trap sinks to the bottom and is examined from 
time to time. 

Tuba Fishing 

Fish are caught on the largest scale by poisoning 
the water with the juice of the root of the tuba 
plant. This is usually practised in the smaller rivers 
at times of slack water, all the people of a village 
co-operating. The tuba plant is cultivated in 
patches on \h^ padi fields. Pieces of the roots are 
cut off without destroying the plants. When a 
large quantity has been gathered, a fence is built 
across the river at the spot chosen, and big bubu 
traps are let into it facing up stream. Then all the 
available small boats are manned and brought into 
the reaches of the river extending about a mile 
above the fence. Each boat carries a supply of 
tuba root, which the people bruise by pounding it 
with wooden clubs against stumps and rocks on the 
bank or against the side of the boat. Water is 
thrown into the bottom of the boat and the pounded 
root is rinsed in the water, pounded again, and 
again rinsed, until all its poisonous juice is extracted. 
The water in all the boats, become milky with the 
juice, is poured at a given signal into the river, 
either by baling or by overturning the boats. 
After some twenty minutes the fish begin to rise to 
the surface and rush wildly to and fro. In the 
meantime the boats have been put to rights, and 
now begin to pursue the fish, the men armed with 
fish- spears, the women with landing-nets. The 
sport goes on for several hours. Some men armed 
with clubs stand upon a platform which slopes up 
at a low angle out of the water and rests upon the 
fence. Big fish come leaping upon this platform 
and are clubbed by the men, who have to exert 

I40 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

their agility to avoid the spikes with which some of 
the fish are armed. Large quantities of fish are 
sometimes taken in this way ; what cannot be eaten 
fresh are dried and smoked over the fires in the 
house. 

While the tuba fishing is being arranged and the 
preparations are going forward, great care is taken 
to avoid mentioning the word tuba, and all references 
to the fish are made in oblique phrases, such as 
'' The leaves {i.e. the fishes) can't float over this 
fence." This precaution is observed because it is 
believed that the birds and the bats can understand 
human speech, and may, if they overhear remarks 
about the preparations, give warning to their friends 
the fish, whose magician ^ (a bony fish called belira), 
will then make rain, and, by thus swelling the 
river, prevent the successful poisoning of the water. 

Tickling is also practised with success, the men 
standing in the edge of a lake among the grass and 
sedges, where the fish seek cooler water in the heat 
of the day. 

All the methods of taking fish described above 
are practised by most of the peoples, except of 
course the use of the drag-net in the sea. 

The crocodiles, which are numerous in the 
lower reaches of the rivers, are not hunted or 
attacked, save on provocation, by any of the peoples 
of Borneo except the Malays.^ Occasionally a 
bather is seized by one of them while in the 
water or standing on a log floating in deep water ; 
and more rarely a person is dragged out of a 
small boat, while drifting quietly on deep water 
at evening. If men and boats are at hand they 
turn out promptly to attack the crocodile, if it 
rises to the surface ; but there is small chance 
of rescue. If the victim has sufficient presence 
of mind and strength to thrust his thumbs against 

1 See Chap. XVII. 2 gee Chap. XV. 

k»..ii 

VIII 

LIFE ON THE RIVERS 141 

the eyes of the reptile it may release him, escape 
in this way is not unknown. In the case of 
a fatal issue, the men of the village turn out to 
avenge the outrage, and, in the case of the seizure 
of an important person, those of neighbouring 
villages will join them. All available boats are 
manned by men armed with spears, some of which 
are lashed to the ends of long poles. Congregating 
in their boats near the scene of the disaster, the 
men prod the bed of the river with their spears, 
working systematically up and down river and up 
the small side streams. In this way they succeed 
in stabbing some of the reptiles ; and in this case, 
though they usually do not rise to the surface, their 
bodies are found after some days in the creeks, 
death having ensued from the inflammation set up in 
the wounds. The wound caused by a spear-thrust 
would seldom be fatal to the crocodile, but that the 
wound is liable to the perpetual assaults of smaller 
creatures — fish while he is in the water, flies when 
he lies on the bank. These irritate and extend the 
wound. The stomachs of those crocodiles that are 
captured are opened in search of traces of the person 
taken, traces which usually remain there for some 
time in the shape of hair or ornaments. If no trace 
is found the people s vengeance is not satisfied, and 
they set baited hooks, or pay Malays to do so, 
partly because the Malays are experts and claim to 
have potent charms to bring the offender to the 
hook, partly because a Kayan does not care to 
take upon himself the individual responsibility of 
catching a crocodile, though he does not shrink 
from the collective pursuit. The decaying body of 
a fowl, monkey, or other animal (Malays sometimes 
use a living dog) is bound to a strong bar of hard- 
wood, sharpened at both ends and some fifteen inches 
in length. A number of small rattans are tied to 
the bar about its middle, their other ends being 

142 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap, vm 

made fast to a log. This arrangement is allowed 
to float down river ; if it does not float freely, the 
crocodile will not take the bait. When a crocodile 
rises to the bait and swallows it, the bar gets fixed 
cross-wise in his gullet as he pulls on the rattans. 
The hunters, having kept the log in sight, then 
attach the ends of the rattans to the boat, tow the 
reptile to the bank, and haul him up on dry land. 
They secure his tail and feet with nooses, which 
they lash to a pole laid along his back, and lash his 
jaws together. Throughout these operations the 
crocodile is addressed deferentially as Laki (grand- 
father). He is then left exposed to the sun, when 
he soon dies ; in this way the people avoid the 
risks attaching to slaying the crocodile with their 
own hands. 

CHAPTER IX 

LIFE IN THE JUNGLE 

All the peoples of Borneo support themselves in 
part by hunting and trapping the wild creatures of 
the jungle, but for the Punans alone is the chase 
the principal source of food-supply ; the various 
natural products of the jungle are, with the excep- 
tion of cultivated sago in some few regions, their 
only marketable commodities. 

Hunting 

The wild pig {Sus barbatus^) is the principal 
object of the chase, but deer of several species are 
also hunted and trapped. The largest of these 
(Cervus equinus) is rather bigger than the English 
fallow deer ; the smallest is plandok, or mouse deer 
[Tragulus napu and T. Javanicus), standing only 
about eight inches at the shoulder ; intermediate 
in size is the muntjac (Cervulus muntjac). There 
are also small herds of wild cattle {Bos sondaicus), 
a small rhinoceros {R, sumatranus), large lizards 
( Varanus)y various apes and monkeys, and a large 
porcupine {Hestrix Crassispinus), and several small 
mammals, such as otters {Lutra), bear- cats 
{Arctidis), and civet cats [Paradoaurus) of various 
species, all of which are hunted for their flesh, as 

^ There are said to be two other less common species of wild pig, but 
probably there is only one other. 

143 

144 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

well as several birds. The tiger-cat {Felts nebulosa) 
and the bear {Ursus Malayanus) are hunted for 
their skins and teeth, and the dried gall-bladder of 
the bear is sold for medicine. 

The pig and deer are most commonly hunted on 
foot by a party of several men with a pack of four 
or five dogs. The dogs, having found the trail, 
chase the pig until he turns on them. The dogs 
then surround the pig, barking and yelping, and 
keep it at bay till the men run up and despatch it 
with their spears. Both men and dogs sometimes 
get severely bitten and torn by the tusks. During 
the fruit season the pigs migrate in large herds and 
cross the rivers at certain places well known to the 
hunters. The people lie in wait for them in little 
huts built on the banks, and kill them from their 
boats as they swim across. 

Kenyahs and Klemantans sometimes catch deer 
by driving them into a jaring. This consists of a 
strong rope of plaited rattans stretched in a straight 
line across the jungle, from tree to tree, some five 
feet above the ground. It is generally laid so as 
to complete the enclosure of an area that is almost 
surrounded by the river. Dependent from the 
whole length of the rattan rope is a series of running 
nooses also of rattan, each of which, overlapping its 
neighbours on both sides, forms a loop about two 
feet in diameter. Men armed with spears are 
stationed along the jaring at short intervals, and 
the rest of the party with the dogs beat the jungle, 
driving any deer in the enclosed space headlong 
towards th^ jaring. Some of the deer may escape, 
but some will usually run their heads into the 
nooses and fall victims to the spears of the watchers. 
Both pig and deer are sometimes brought down 
with the blow-pipe, especially by the Punans, whose 
favourite weapon it is. 

The wild cattle are very wary and dangerous to 

IX 

LIFE IN THE JUNGLE 145 

attack. They sometimes take to the water and are 
then easily secured. Punans, who hunt without 
dogs (which in fact they do not possess) will lie in 
wait for the rhinoceros beside the track by which 
he comes to his daily mud-bath, and drive a spear 
into his flank or shoulder ; then, after hastily 
retiring, they track him through the jungle, until 
they come upon him again, and find an opportunity 
of driving in another spear or a poisoned dart 
through some weak spot of his armour. 

Birds and monkeys are chiefly killed with the 
blow-pipe. 

Traps 

Traps of many varieties are made. For pig and 
deer a trap is laid at a gap in the fence about the 
padi field. It consists of a bamboo spear of which 
the end is sharpened and hardened in the fire. 
This is laid horizontally about two feet from the 
ground, resting on guides. Its butt end is lashed 
to one end of a springy green pole at right angles 
to its length ; the pole is laid horizontally, one end 
of it being firmly fixed to a tree, and the other 
(that carrying the spear) bent forcibly backwards 
and held back by a loop of rattan. This spring is 
set by means of an ingenious trigger, in such a way 
that an animal passing through the gap must push 
against a string attached to the trigger, and so 
release the spring, which then drives the bamboo 
spear across the gap with great force. (The 
drawing (Fig. 22) will make clear the nature of 
the trigger.) 

In one variety of this trap the spring is set 
vertically. The trap is varied in other ways. A 
curious practice of the I bans on setting such a trap 
is to measure the appropriate height of the spear by 
means of a rod surmounted with a carving of a 
human figure (Fig. 23). 

VOL. I L 

146 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

Of many ingenious traps for 
small animals the jerat is the 
most widely used (see Fig. 24 
and PI. 85). A rude fence some 
hundreds of yards, in some 
cases as much as a mile, in 

length, is made by filling up 
with sticks and brushwood the 
spaces between the trees and 
undergrowth of the jungle. At 
intervals of ten or twenty yards 
narrow gaps are left, and in each 
of these a jerat is set to catch 
the small creatures that, in 

i# 

Fig. 23. 

Platk 83. KENYAII HUNTER RETURNING HOME WITH YOUNG PIG. 

Plate 84. KAYAN HUNTING-PARTV CAMPING FOR THE NIGHT. 

S'.^* 

LIFE IN THE JUNGLE 

147 

wandering through the jungle and finding their 
course obstructed by the fence, seek to pass 
through the gaps. The gap is floored with a 
small platform of light sticks, six to eight inches 
long, laid across it parallel to one another in the 
line of the fence. The ends of these are supported 
at one side of the gap, about two inches above 
the ground, by a cross-stick lying at right angles 
to them. This stick in turn is supported about 
one inch above the ground in the following way : 
the two ends of a green stick are thrust firmly 

Fig. 24.— The Jerat. 

into the ground forming an arch over the end 
of the platform, and the extremities of the cross- 
stick are in contact with the pillars of the arch, 
and kept a little above the ground by being 
pulled against them by the spring trigger. This 
consists of a short stick attached by a cord to a 
strong springy pole thrust vertically into the 
ground. To set the trigger it is pulled down, 
bending the pole, and passed under the arch from 
the platform side outwards ; the upper end of the 
trigger is then kept by the pull of the cord against 
the curve of the arch, and its lower end is pulled 
against the middle of the cross-stick. The pressure 
being maintained by the tension of the cord, this 
end of the platform is supported by the friction 

148 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

between the trigger and the cross-stick. The cord 
is prolonged beyond the trigger in a slip noose 
which lies open on the platform completely across 
the gap, so that any small animal entering the gap, 
and stepping upon the platform, necessarily places 
its feet within the noose. A few leaves are laid 
on the platform and cord to disguise them. When, 
then, a pheasant or other creature of appropriate 
size and weight steps on the platform, its weight 
causes the cross-stick to slip down from the hold 
of the trigger, and this, being released, is violently 
jerked with the noose into the air by the elastic 
reaction of the bent pole ; in a large proportion of 
cases the noose catches the victim's feet and jerks 
him into the air, where he dangles by the feet till 
the arrival of the trapper, who visits his traps twice 
a day. 

Another very curious and strikingly simple plan 
is employed by the Sea Dayaks for catching the 
Argus pheasant, whose beautiful wing feathers are 
highly valued. The cock - birds congregate at 
certain spots in the jungle, where they display their 
feathers and fight together. These spots they 
clear of all obstacles, pulling and pushing away 
sticks and leaves with their heads and necks, as 
well as scratching with their feet. The Dayaks, 
taking advantage of this habit, thrust vertically 
into the ground slips of bamboo, the edges of 
which are hardened in the fire and rendered very 
sharp. In the course of their efforts to remove 
these obstructions, the birds not infrequently 
inflict serious wounds about their necks, and 
weakened by loss of blood, are found by the 
Dayaks at no great distance from the fighting 
ground. 

Traps of many other kinds are made for animals 
both large and small, especially by the Sea Dayaks, 
who use traps more frequently than the other 

IBANS SETTING TRAPS FOR PHEASANTS AND SMALL MAMMALS. 

Plate 85. PWNANS AT HOME. 

LIFE IN THE JUNGLE 149 

peoples. Our few descriptions will serve to 
illustrate the ingenuity displayed, the 
complexity of the mechanical principles 
involved in some of them, and the ex- 
treme simplicity of others. Previous 
writers have described many of these in 
detail, and we content ourselves with re- 
ferring the curious reader to their ac- 
counts.^ 

The Klemantans and some of the 
Kenyahs catch a small ground pigeon 
(Chalcophaps indica) in large numbers by 
the aid of a pipe or whistle, by blowing 
softly on which the cooing notes of the 
bird are closely imitated. The instrument 
consists of a piece of large bamboo 
closed at one end and having a small hole 
about its middle (Fig. 25). The hunter, 
concealed behind a screen of leafy branches, 
blows across this hole through a long 
slender tube of bamboo ; and when a bird 
approaches the whistle, he slips over its 
head a fine noose attached to the end of 
a light bamboo and, drawing it behind 
the screen, puts it alive into a cage. 

Small parrots are sometimes caught 
with bird-lime, made with the juice of a 
rubber-tree. 

The Gathering of Jungle 
Produce 

The principal natural pro- 
ducts gathered by the people 

^ A good account, taken mainly from /^ FiG. 25. 
Skertchly, of many traps may be found in Mr. 
Ling Roth's well-known work. The Natives of 
Sarawak and British North Borneo, London, 1896 ; and also in McPherson's 
work on Fowling. 

I50 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

in addition to the edible fruits are, gutta-percha, 
rubber, camphor, various rattans, beeswax and 
honey, vegetable tallow, wild sago, damar- resin 
from various trees, and the edible birds' nests. 

Small parties of men and boys go out into the 
jungle in search of these things, sometimes travel- 
ling many days up river before striking into the 
jungle ; for it is only in the drier upland forests that 
such expeditions can be undertaken with advantage. 
The party may remain several weeks or months 
from home. They carry with them a supply of rice, 
salt, and tobacco, cooking -pots and matches, a 
change of raiment, spears, swords, shields, blow- 
pipes, and perhaps two or three dogs. On striking 
into the jungle, they drag their boat on to the bank 
and leave it hidden in thick undergrowth. While 
in the jungle they camp in rude shelters roofed with 
their leaf mats and with palm leaves, moving camp 
from time to time. They vary their labours and 
supplement their food-supply by hunting and trap- 
ping. Such an expedition is generally regarded as 
highly enjoyable as well as profitable. As in camp- 
ing-parties in other parts of the world, the cooking 
is generally regarded as a nuisance to be shirked 
if possible. The Sea Dayaks indulge in these 
expeditions more frequently than others, and such 
parties of them may often be found at great 
distances from their homes. In the course of such 
long excursions they not infrequently penetrate 
into the regions inhabited by other tribes, and 
many troubles have had their origin in the truculent 
behaviour of such parties. Such parties of Sea 
Dayaks have been known to accept the hospitality 
of unsuspecting and inoffensive Klemantans, and 
to outrage every law of decency by taking the 
heads of old men, women, and children during the 
absence of their natural defenders. 

Valuable varieties of gutta-percha are obtained 

IX LIFE IN THE JUNGLE 151 

from trees of more than a score of species. The 
best is known as Kayan gutta, because it is gathered 
and sent to the bazaars by the Kayans in a pure 
form. The trees are felled and the stem and 
branches are ringed at intervals of about eighteen 
inches, a narrow strip of bark being removed at each 
ring. The milky viscid sap drips out into leaf-cups, 
which are then emptied into a cylindrical vessel of 
bark. Water is then boiled in a large pan beside 
the tree, a little common salt is added to the water, 
and the gutta is poured into the boiling water, when 
it rapidly congeals. Then, while still in a semi- 
viscid state, it is kneaded with the feet and pressed 
into a shallow wooden frame, which in turn is com- 
pressed between two planks. In this way it is 
moulded into a slab about one and a half inches 
thick, about a foot long, and about six inches across 
at one end, two inches across at the other. While 
it is still warm a hole is pierced through the 
narrower end ; and the slab is then thrown into 
cold water, where it sets hard. In this form it 
reaches the market at Singapore, where it is valued 
at about five hundred dollars (;^5o) the hundred- 
weight. 

Gutta of an inferior quality is obtained in large 
quantities by tapping a large tree {Jelutong) which 
grows abundantly in the low-lying jungles. 

The best rubber, known 2.^ ptilut by the Kayans, 
is obtained by them from a creeper, the stem of 
which grows to a length of fifty to a hundred feet 
and a diameter of six inches or more. It bears 
a brilliant red luscious fruit which is eaten by 
the people ; its seeds being swallowed become 
distributed in this way. The Punans carefully 
sow the seed they have swallowed, and transplant 
the young seedlings to the most suitable positions. 
The milky juice of the creeper is gathered and 
treated in much the same way as the gutta. It 

152 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

is rolled up while hot into spherical lumps, each 
of which is pierced with a hole for convenient 
transportation. 

Camphor is formed in the crevices of the stems 
of old trees of the species Dryobalanops aromatica, 
when the heart is decayed leaving a central hollow. 
The tree is cut down, the stem split up, and the 
crystalline scales of pure camphor are shaken out 
on to mats. It is then made up in little bundles 
wrapped in palm leaves. The large-flaked camphor 
fetches as much as £6 a pound in the Chinese 
bazaar. Special precautions are observed by men 
in search of camphor. A party of Kayans, setting 
out to seek camphor, commonly gets the help of 
Punans, who are acknowledged experts in this 
business. Omens are taken before setting out, and 
the party will not start until favourable omens have 
been observed. The party is lali from the time 
of beginning these operations. They will speak 
to no one outside the party, and will speak no word 
of Malay to one another ; and it is considered that 
they are more likely to be successful if they confine 
themselves to the use of a peculiar language which 
seems to be a conventional perversion of the Punan 
speech. 

On entering a small river the party stretches 
a rattan across its mouth ; and, where they leave 
the river, they erect on the bank a pole or frayed 
stick.^ Other persons seeing such sticks set up will 
understand and respect the party's desire for privacy. 
They then march through the jungle to the place 
where they expect to find a group of camphor trees, 
marking their path by bending the ends of twigs 
at certain intervals in the direction in which the 
party is moving. Having found a likely tree they 

^ A stick of this kind is used in many rites. It is prepared by whittling 
shavings from a stick and leaving them attached at one end ; so that a series 
of the shavings projects along one side of the stick. 

t^j :^ O 

Plate 88. KENYAH COLLECTING IPOH POISON. 

LIFE IN THE JUNGLE 153 

cut into the stem with a small long-bladed axe, 
making a deep small hole. An expert, generally 
a Punan, then smells the hole and gives an opinion 
as to the chances of finding camphor within it. If 
he gives a favourable opinion, the tree is cut down 
and broken in pieces as described above. On 
cutting down the tree, an oil which smells strongly 
of camphor sometimes pours out and is collected. 
The party remains lali until the collection of the 
camphor is completed ; no stranger may enter their 
hut or speak with them. The practice of collecting 
camphor in this way is probably a very ancient one,^ 
whereas the collection of gutta and rubber has been 
undertaken only in recent years in response to the 
demands of the European market. 

Many varieties of the rattan palm grow luxuriantly 
in the forests of Borneo, some attaining a length 
of 150 to 200 feet. It is a creeper which makes 
its way towards the light, suspending itself to 
branches and twigs by means of the curved spines 
which prolong the midribs of the leaves. The cane 
is collected by cutting through the stem near its 
root, and hauling on it, several men combining 
their efforts. The piece cut down is dragged 
through the jungle to the river-bank. There it 
is cut into lengths of fifteen feet, i.e. two and a half 
spans, and dried in the sun. If the sap is thoroughly 
dried out, the cane assumes a permanent yellow 
colour ; but if any is left, the cane darkens when 
soaked in water. When a large number of bundles 
has been collected, they are bound together to form 
a raft. On this a hut is erected, and two or three 
men will navigate the raft down river to the Chinese 
bazaar, which is to be found in the lower part of 
every large river. 

The small yellow fruit of the rattan is gathered 
in large quantities and subjected to prolonged boiling. 

^ A similar practice prevails in the Malay Peninsula. 

154 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

The fluid becomes of a bright crimson colour ; this, 
boiled down till it has the consistency of beeswax, 
is known as dragon's blood, and is used by the 
people as a colouring matter and also exported 
for the same purpose. 

Honey and beeswax are found in nests which 
are suspended by the wild bee from high branches 
of the mingris {Coompassid) and tapang {Arbouria) 
trees, sometimes many nests on one tree. To reach 
the nest the men climb the tree by the aid of a 
ladder somewhat in the fashion of a steeple-jack. 
A large number of sharpened pegs of ironwood are 
driven into the softer outer layers of the stem in 
a vertical row about two feet apart, and bamboos 
are lashed in a single vertical row to the pegs and 
to one another and to the lower branches. The 
ladder is built up until at some sixty or eighty feet 
from the ground it reaches a branch bearing a nest. 
The taking of the nests is usually accomplished 
after nightfall. A man ascends the ladder carrying 
in one hand a burning torch of bark, which gives 
off a pungent smoke, and on his back a large hollow 
cone of bark. Straddling out along the bough, he 
hangs his cone of bark beneath the nest, smokes 
out the bees, and cuts away the nest from the 
bough with his sword, so that it falls into the cone 
of bark. Then, choosing a piece of comb containing 
grubs, he munches it with gusto, describing from 
his position of advantage to his envious friends the 
delicious quality of the grubs. After thus gathering 
two or three nests he lets down the cone with a 
cord to his eagerly expectant comrades, who then 
feast upon the remaining grubs and squeeze out 
the honey into jars. The tree having been cleared 
of nests in this way, the wax is melted in an iron 
pot and moulded in balls. The honey is eaten 
in the houses ; the wax is sold to the Chinese 
traders at about a shilling a pound. 

JL: 

^r4 

9 
if* 

1 ^ 

I'LATE 89. KLEMANTANS MAKING FIRE IN THE JUNGLE BY SAWING 
ONE PIECE OF BAMBOO ACROSS ANOTHER. 

LIFE IN THE JUNGLE 155 

Vegetable tallow is procured from the seeds 
of the engkabong tree {Skorea). The seeds are 
crushed and the tallow melted out and gathered 
in bamboos. It is used as a food, generally 
smeared on hot rice. It is sometimes a principal 
feature of the Punan's diet for considerable periods. 

Wild sago is abundant and is much used by 
Punans, and occasionally by most of the other 
peoples when their supply oi padi is short. The 
sago tree is cut down and its stem is split into 
several pieces with wedges. The pith is knocked 
out with a bamboo mallet. The sago is prepared 
from the pith by the women, who stamp it 
on coarse mats, pouring water upon it. The 
fine grains of sago are carried through on to a 
trough below. It is then washed and boiled in 
water, when it forms a viscid mass ; this is eaten 
with a spoon or with a strip of bamboo bent double, 
the two ends of which are turned round in the 
sago and withdrawn with a sticky mass adherent ; 
this is plunged in the gravy of pork and carried to 
the mouth. It is generally considered a delicacy. 

Many varieties of the forest trees exude resins, 
which are collected and used for torches and for 
repairing boats, as well as brought to the bazaars, 
where the best kinds fetch very good prices. 
Sometimes the resin is found in large masses on 
the ground where it has dripped from the trees. 

A curious and valuable natural product is the 
bezoar stone. These stones are found in the gall- 
bladder and intestines of the long-tailed monkey 
Semnopithecus (most frequently of S, Hosei and S, 
rubicundMs). They are formed of concentric layers 
of a hard, brittle, olive-green substance, very bitter 
to the taste. A soft brown variety is found in the 
porcupine. Both kinds are highly valued by the 
Chinese as medicine. The monkeys and porcupines 
are hunted for the sake of these stones. A similar 

156 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

substance, also highly valued as a medicine by the 
Chinese, is sometimes found as an accretion formed 
about the end of a dart which has been broken off in 
the flesh of 5. Hosei and has remained there for 
some long period. 

The most important of the natural products 
gathered by the people are the edible nests of three 
species of swift : Collocalia fuciphaga^ whose nest is 
white ; C. Lowii, whose nest is blackish ; and C, 
Linchii, whose nest contains straw and moss as 
well as gelatine. All three kinds are collected, but 
those of the first kind are much more valuable than 
the others. The nest, which is shaped like that of 
our swallow, consists wholly of a tough, gelatinous, 
translucent substance, which exudes from the bill 
of the bird as it builds. We do not understand the 
physiology of this process. The people generally 
believe that the substance of the nest is dried sea- 
foam which the birds bring from the sea on return- 
ing from their annual migration. 

The nests are built always on the roofs and 
walls of large caves : the white nests in low-roofed 
caves, generally in sandstone rock ; the black in the 
immense lofty caves formed in the limestone rocks. 
The latter are reached by means of tall scaffoldings 
of strong poles of bamboo, often more than a hundred 
feet in height. The nests are swept from the rock 
with a pole terminating in a small iron spatula, and 
carrying near the extremity a wax candle ; falling 
to the ground, which is floored with guano several 
feet thick, they are gathered up in baskets. The 
white nests are gathered three times in the year 
at intervals of about a month, the black nests usually 
only twice ; as many as three tons of black nests 
are sometimes taken from one big cave in the course 
of the annual gathering. Each cave, or, in the case 
of large caves, each natural subdivision of it, is 
claimed as the property of some individual, who 

LIFE IN THE JUNGLE 157 

holds it during his lifetime and transmits it to his 
heirs. During the gathering of the nests of a large 
cave, the people live in roofless huts built inside it. 
The nests are sold to Chinese traders — the black 
nests for about a hundred dollars a hundredweight, 
and the white nests for as much as thirty or forty 
shillings per pound. 

CHAPTER X 

WAR 

The Kayans are perhaps less aggressive than any- 
other of the interior peoples with the exception of 
the Punans. Nevertheless prowess in war has made 
them respected or feared by all the peoples; and 
during the last century they established themselves 
in the middle parts of the basins of all the great 
rivers, driving out many of the Klemantan com- 
munities, partly by actual warfare, partly by the 
equally effective method of appropriating to their 
own use the tracts of jungle most suitable for the 
cultivation oi padi. 

The fighting quality of the individual Kayan, the 
loyalty and obedience of each household to its 
chief, the custom of congregating several long 
houses to form a populous village upon some spot 
carefully chosen for its tactical advantages (generally 
a peninsula formed by a deep bend of the river), 
and the strong cohesion between the Kayans of 
different and even widely separated villages, — all 
these factors combine to render the Kayans com- 
paratively secure and their villages immune from 
attack. But though a Kayan village is seldom 
attacked, and though the Kayans do not wantonly 
engage in bloodshed, yet they will always stoutly 
assert their rights, and will not allow any injury 
done to any member of the tribe to go unavenged. 
The avenging of injuries and the necessity of 

158 

pLAm 91. KEN YAH AND KAYAN SWORDS AND SHEATHS. 

CHAP. X WAR 159 

possessing heads for use in the funeral rites are for 
them the principal grounds of warfare ; and these 
are generally combined, the avenging of injuries 
being generally postponed, sometimes for many 
years, until the need for new heads arises. Though 
an old dried head will serve all the purposes of the 
rites performed to terminate a period of mourning, 
yet it is felt that a fresh head (or heads) is more 
desirable, especially in the case of mourning for an 
important chief. 

When an old head is used in these rites, it is 
customary to borrow it from another house or 
village, and it is brought to the house by a party of 
warriors in the full panoply of war, who behave 
both on setting out and returning as though actually 
on the war-path. 

It may be said generally that Kayans seldom or 
never wage war on Kayans, and seldom attack 
others merely to secure heads or in sheer vain- 
glory, as the I bans not infrequently do. Nor do 
they attack others merely in order to sustain their 
prestige, as is sometimes done by the Kenyahs, 
who in this respect carry to an extreme the principle 
that attack is the most effective mode of defence. 

War is generally undertaken by the Kayans 
very deliberately, after much preparation and in 
large well- organised parties, ranging in numbers 
from fifty to a thousand or more warriors, made up 
in many cases from several neighbouring villages, 
and under the supreme command of one chief of 
acknowledged eminence. 

The weapons and war-dress are similar among all 
the peoples. The principal weapon is the sword known 
as parang Hang, or malat, a heavy blade (PI. 91) 
of steel mounted in a handle of horn or hardwood. 
The blade, about twenty-two inches in length, has 
the cutting edge slightly bowed and the blunt back 
edge slightly hollowed. The edges diverge slightly 

i6o PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

from the handle up to a point about five inches 
from the tip, where the blade attains its maximum 
width of nearly two inches. At this point the back 
edge bends sharply forward to meet the cutting 
edge at the tip. A very peculiar feature of the 
blade is that it is slightly hollowed on the inner 
surface {i.e. the thumb side or left side in the case 
oi xhe: parang of a right-handed man, the right side 
in case of one made for a left-handed man), and is 
convex in transverse section to a corresponding 
degree on the other surface. This peculiar shape 
of the blade is said to render the parang more 
efficient in sinking into or through either limbs or 
wood, and is more easily withdrawn after a successful 
blow. This weapon is carried in a wooden sheath 
suspended by a plaited waist-strap, and is the 
constant companion of every man ; for it is used not 
only in warfare, but also for a variety of purposes, 
such as the hewing down of jungle undergrowth, 
cutting rattans and bamboos, the rough shaping of 
wooden implements. 

The weapon second in importance is the spear 
(PI. 92). It consists of a flat steel blade, about one 
foot in length, of which the widest part (between one 
and two inches) is about four inches from the tip. 
The tip and lateral edges of the blade are sharp, and 
its haft is lashed with strips of rattan to the end of 
a wooden shaft. The extremity of the haft is bent 
outwards from the shaft, to prevent its being 
dragged off from the latter. The shaft is of tough 
wood and about seven feet in length ; its butt end 
is usually shod with iron. The spear is used not 
only for thrusting, but also as a javelin and as a 
parrying stick for warding off the spears hurled by 
the foe. It is always carried in the boat when 
travelling on the river, or in the hand during 
excursions in the jungle. 

The blow-pipe, which projects a poisoned dart. 

•m :W I III 

Plate 92. SPEARS AND PADDLES (KAYAN AND KLEMANTAN). 

WAR i6i 

is used by many of the Kayans in hunting, but is 
hardly regarded as a weapon for serious use in 
warfare. 

Beside the principal spear, two or three short 
spears or javelins, sometimes merely pointed bars 
of hardwood, are usually carried in the left hand 
when an attack is being made. 

Beside the sword and the spears the only 
weapons commonly used are heavy bars of iron- 
wood, sharpened at both ends and flung so as to 
twirl rapidly in the air. They are chiefly used in 
defending houses from attack, a store of them being 
kept in the house. For the defence of a house 
against an expected attack, short sharp stakes of 
split bamboo are thrust slantingly into the ground, 
so as to present the fire-hardened tip towards the 
feet of the oncoming foe. 

The interior peoples have long possessed a 
certain number of European-made muskets (mostly 
flint-locks) and small Bruni-made brass cannon, 
obtained from the Malay and Chinese traders. 
The latter were chiefly valued for the defence of 
the house, but were sometimes mounted in the 
bows of the war-boats. The difficulty of obtaining 
supplies of gunpowder has always restricted greatly 
the use of firearms, and in recent years the 
European governments have strictly limited the 
sale of gunpowder and firearms ; and even at the 
present day any war-party commissioned by one of 
the governments to execute any police measure, 
such as apprehending, or burning the house of, 
people who have wantonly killed others, has to 
rely in the main on its native weapons. 

The equipment of the fighting-man consists, in 
addition to his weapons, of a war-cap and war-coat 
and shield (PL 93 and Fig. 26). The former is a 
round closely-fitting cap woven of stout rattans split 
in halves longitudinally. It affords good protection 

VOL. I M 

i62 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

to the skull against the stroke of the sword. It 
is adorned with two of the long black-and-white 

Fig. 26. 

barred feathers of the hornbill's tail in the case of 
any man who has earned this distinction by taking 
part in successful expeditions. 

Plate 93. KAYAN AND KENYAH WAR-CAPS. 

X WAR 163 

The war-coat is made of the skin of the goat, the 
bear, or (in case of distinguished chiefs) of the tiger- 
cat. The whole of the skin in one piece is used, 
except that the skin of the belly and of the lower 
parts of the forelimbs are cut away. A hole for the 
warrior's head is made in the mid-dorsal line a little 
behind the skin of the head, which is flattened out 
and hangs over the chest, descending to the level of 
the navel ; while the skin of the back, flanks, and 
hind limbs in one large flap, covers the back and 
hind parts of the warrior as far as the bend of the 
knees. A large pearly shell usually adorns the 
lower end of the anterior flap. The warrior's arms 
are thus left free, but unprotected. In the finest 
coats there is a patch of brightly coloured bead- 
work at the nape of the neck, and the back-flap is 
adorned with rows of loosely dangling hornbills' 
feathers ; but these again are considered appropri- 
ate only to the coats of warriors of proved valour. 

The Kayan shield is an oblong plate cut from a 
single piece of soft wood. Its ends are pointed 
more or less acutely ; the length between the points 
is about four feet. The inner surface forms a flat 
hollow ; the outer is formed by two flat surfaces 
meeting in a flat obtuse angle or ridge extending 
from point to point. The grain of the wood runs 
longitudinally, and a downward falling parang is 
liable to split the wood and become wedged fast in 
it. In order to prevent the shield becoming divided 
in this way, and to hold fast the blade of the sword, 
it is bound across with several stout strips of rattan 
which are laced closely to the wood with finer strips. 
The handle, carved out of the same solid block of 
wood as the body of the shield, is in the middle of 
the concave surface ; it is a simple vertical bar for 
the grasp of the left hand. The Kayan shield is 
commonly stained red with iron oxide, and touched 
up with black pigment, but not otherwise decorated. 

i64 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 
Wooden shields of this kind are used by almost 

all the tribes, but some of them decorate their 

PLATE 94. COAT AND CAP, SWORD, KNIFE, AND SHIELD OF 

KENYAH WARRIOR. 

X WAR 165 

shields elaborately. The two surfaces of almost all 
Kenyah shields (Fig. 27) are covered with elaborate 
designs picked out in colours, chiefly red and black. 
The designs are sketched out on the wood with the 
point of a knife, and the pigment is applied with the 
finger and a chisel-edged stick. The principal feature 
of the designs on the outer surface is in all cases a 
large conventionalised outline of a face with large 
eyes, indicated by concentric circles in red and black, 
and a double row of teeth with two pairs of canines 
projecting like huge tusks. This face seems to be 
human, for, although in some shields there is nothing 
to indicate this interpretation, in others the large 
face surmounts the highly conventionalised out- 
line of a diminutive human body, the limbs of which 
are distorted and woven into a more or less intri- 
cate design. Each extremity of the outer surface is 
covered by a similarly conventionalised face-pattern 
on a smaller scale. On the inner side each longi- 
tudinal half is covered with an elaborate scroll- 
pattern, generally symmetrical in the two halves ; 
the centre of this pattern is generally a human 
figure more or less easily recognisable ; the two 
halves sometimes bear male and female figures 
respectively. 

The shields most prized by the Kenyahs are 
further decorated with tufts of human hair taken 
from the heads of slain enemies. It is put on in 
many rows which roughly frame the large face with 
locks three or four inches in length on scalp, cheeks, 
chin, and upper lip ; and the smaller faces at the 
ends are similarly surrounded with shorter hair. 
The hair is attached by forcing the ends of the tufts 
into narrow slits in the soft wood and securing it 
with fresh resin. 

The Klemantan shields are, in the main, varia- 
tions on the Kenyah patterns. The Murut shields 
closely resemble those of the Kayans, though the 

i66 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

Dusuns, who have the domesticated buffalo, use a 
shield of buffalo-hide attached to the forearm by a 
strap — a feature unknown in all the other types, 
which are borne by the handle only. The Sea 
Dayaks nowadays make a greater variety of shields, 
copying those of the other tribes with variations of 

their own. The shield 
originally used by them 
before coming into con- 
tact with many other 
tribes, but now dis- 
carded, was made of 
strips of bamboo plaited 
together and stiffened 
with a longitudinal strip 
of wood (Fig. 28). It 
was of two shapes, both 
oblong, one with 
rounded, the other with 
pointed ends. 

The Land Dayaks still 
use a shield of tough 
bark (Fig. 29), and it is 
not improbable that these 
were used by other tribes 
at no distant date. 

Every Kayan house- 
hold possesses, beside the 
many smaller boats, one 
or more boats especially 
designed for use in war. A typical war- boat is 
about 100 feet in length, from six to seven feet 
wide in its middle part, and tapers to a width of 
about three and a half feet at bow and stern. In 
some cases the length of the war-boat, which is 
always made from a single log, is as much as 
145 feet in length (PI. 96), but so large a boat is 
unwieldy in use, and its construction costs an exces- 

FiG. 28. 

Plate 95. 

A MURIK (KLEMANTAN) YOUTH IN WAR DRESS. 

WAR 

167 

slve amount of labour. The ordinary war-boat 
carries from sixty to seventy men seated two abreast 
on the cross-benches. It is steered by the paddles 
of the two bow-men and the four next the stern. 

Fig. 29, 

One of these war-boats, manned by sixty or seventy 
paddlers, can maintain a pace about equal to that of 
our University racing eights.^ 

1 On one occasion on which a race between twenty-two of these war-boats 
was rowed at Marudi on the Baram river, we timed the winning-boat over 
the down-stream course of four and half miles. The time was twenty-two 
minutes thirteen seconds. 

i68 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

War is only undertaken after formal consultation 
and many discussions between the chief or chiefs 
and all the leading men. If the village primarily 
concerned does not feel itself strong enough to 
achieve its ends, it will seek the help of some 
neighbouring village, usually, but not always one 
of its own tribe. The discussion may be renewed 
day after day for some little time, before the 
decision to fight is taken and the time for the 
expedition is fixed. 

The next step is to seek favourable omens, and 
two men are told ofif for this work. They repair 
to some spot in the jungle, or more commonly on 
the bank of the river, where they build a small 
hut ; they adorn it by fraying the poles of its frame- 
work, and so secure themselves against interruptions 
by passing acquaintances. The sight or sound of 
certain birds and beasts is favourable, of others 
unfavourable ; but the favourable creatures must 
be observed in a certain order, if the omens are 
to be entirely satisfactory. If very bad omens are 
observed, the men return home to report the fact, 
and will make another attempt after a few days. 
If the omens are of mixed character, they will 
persist for some time, hoping to get a sufficient 
number of good omens to counteract or nullify the 
bad. When seeking for their place of observation, 
their choice is determined by seeing a spider- 
hunter {^Arac knot herd) fiying across the river, chirp- 
ing as it flies. When this is seen they stop the 
boat, calling out to the bird, "■ O friend Isit, protect 
us and give us success." One of the men lands on 
the bank, hews out a pole about eight feet long, 
cuts upon it bunches of shavings without detaching 
(PI. 97) them from the pole, and thrusts one end 
of it into the ground so that it remains sloping 
towards the abode of the foe. While this is being 
done on the bank, fire of some sort (if only a 

^ 

'n 

Q 
D 
ad 
< 

X WAR 169 

cigarette) is lighted in the boat, and the position is 
explained more fully to the bird, but without any 
mention of the name of the enemy. The observers 
then erect a hut near the omen-pole for their 
shelter, and pass the night there before looking 
out for the omen-bird next desired. This is the 
trogan {Harpades Duvaucelii), which has a peculiar 
soft trilling note and a brilliant red chest. When 
this bird appears, it is addressed in the same way 
as the spider-hunter ; and this second step of the 
process is also marked by a feathered stick thrust into 
the ground before the hut. Then they spend 
another night in the hut hoping for significant 
dreams. To dream of abundance of fruit (which 
symbolises heads) is favourable ; any dream of a 
disagreeable or fearful situation is unfavourable. 
After a favourable dream comes the most important 
stage of the business, the observation of the hawks. 
They look for Laki Neho from the door of their 
hut about nine o'clock in the morning. As soon as 
a hawk is seen, they light a fire and call on him to 
go to the left, waving a feathered stick in that 
direction, and, shouting at the top of his voice, one 
of them pours out a torrent of words addressed to 
the hawk. If he goes out of sight towards the 
right, they console themselves by remarking that 
he is one of low degree, and they sit down to wait 
for another. If two hawks are seen to fight in the 
air, that foretells much bloodshed. They are not 
satisfied until they see a hawk sail far away out of 
sight towards the left. Then a break is made ; after 
which they observe the hawks again, until they see 
one sail out of sight towards the right. If all 
this is accomplished without the intervention of 
unfavourable omens, they return home to report 
progress ; but immediately return to the hut and 
remain there. Then for one, two, or even three 
days, all the men of the house stay at home quietly, 

I70 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

busying themselves in preparing boats and weapons. 
The chief, or some deputy, then performs the rites 
before the altar-post of the war-god that stands 
before the house in the way described in Chap. XV. 
The omens given by the hawks on this occasion 
are guarantees for the safety of the house and those 
left in it, and against accidents and sickness 
incidental to the journey ; they have no reference 
to the actual fighting.^ All the men of the war- 
party then proceed in their war-boats to the spot 
where the war - omens have been observed, and 
camp round about it in roughly built huts. Here 
they will remain at least two days, establishing 
their connection with the favourable omen -birds. 
From this encampment they may not return to the 
house, and, if they are expecting a party of allies^ 
they may await them here. By this time the war- 
fever is raging among them, and rumours of the 
preparations of the enemy are circulating. Spies 
or scouts may be sent out to seek information 
about the enemy ; but usually such information is 
sought from the liver of a pig with the customary 
ceremony. A sharp ridge on the liver dividing 
their own region from that of the enemy is 
unfavourable, a low soft ridge is favourable. 

From the moment of leaving the village the men 
of the war-party must observe many tabus until 
their return home. They may not eat the head of 
a fish ; they must use only their home-made earthen 

^ There is no reason to suppose that the Kayan augurs have not complete 
faith in the significance of the omens, and in the reality of the protection 
afforded by the favourable omen-birds, which they speak of as upholding 
them. Nevertheless, there can be no doubt that the strong faith of the people 
in the omen-birds, and the awe inspired by them, is very favourable to the 
maintenance of discipline and obedience to the chiefs, and that this fact is 
appreciated by the chiefs. The cult of the omen-birds, which hampers the 
undertakings of these peoples at almost every turn, and which might seem to 
be wholly foolish and detrimental, thus brings two great practical advantages : 
namely, it inspires confidence, and it promotes discipline and a strong sense 
of collective unity and responsibility. It is not improbable, then, that the 
advantages of this seemingly senseless cult outweigh its drawbacks, which in 
the shape of endless delays and changes of plans are by no means small. 

X WAR 171 

pots ; fire must be made only by friction (see PI. 
89) ; they must not smoke ; boys may not lie down, 
but must sleep sitting. The people who remain 
at home are not expected to observe these tabus ; 
they may go to the farms, but must keep quiet, and 
undertake nothing outside the ordinary routine. 

If the object of the attack is a village in their 
own river, the expedition paddles steadily day after 
day until it reaches the mouth of some small 
stream at a distance of some miles from the enemy's 
village. Forcing their boats some two or three 
miles up this stream they make a camp. Here 
two solid platforms are built about twenty feet 
apart, and a large beam is laid from one to the 
other. The chiefs and principal men take their 
seats on the platforms, and then every man of the 
party in turn approaches this beam, the fighting 
leader, who is usually not one of the chiefs, coming 
first. If he is willing to go through with the business, 
i.e. to take part in the attack, he slashes a chip 
from the beam with his, parang and passes under it. 
On the far side of the beam stands a chief holding 
a large frond of fern, and, as each man passes under, 
he gives him a bit of the leaf, while an assistant cuts 
a notch on a tally-stick for each volunteer. If for 
any reason any man is reluctant to go farther, he 
states his excuse, perhaps a bad dream or illness, 
or sore feet, and returns to the boats, amid the 
jeers of those who have passed the ordeal, to form 
one of a party to be left in charge of the camp and 
boats. 

Next, all the left-handed men are sorted out to 
form a party whose special duty is to ambush the 
enemy, if possible, at some favourable spot. These 
are known as the hornets [singat). I f any swampy 
ground or other obstruction intervenes between 
their camp and the enemy's village, a path is 
made through or over it to facilitate retreat to the 

CHAP. 

172 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

boats. A password is agreed upon, which serves 
as a means of making members of the party known 
to one another upon any chance meeting in the 
dark. 

Scouts are sent out at dusk and, if their reports 
are favourable, the attack is made just before 
dawn. About half the warriors are provided with 
large bundles of dry shavings, and some will carry 
torches. When the attacking party has quietly 
surrounded the house or houses, the bundles of 
shavings are ignited, and their bearers run in and 
throw them under the house among the timbers on 
which it is supported. Then ensues a scene of wild 
confusion. The calm stillness of the tropical dawn 
is broken by the deep war-chorus of the attacking 
party, by the shouts and screams of the people of 
the house suddenly roused from sleep, by the cries 
and squeals of the frightened animals beneath the 
house, and the beating of the alarm signal on the 
tawak. If the house is ignited, the encircling 
assailants strive to intercept the fleeing inhabitants. 
These, if the flames do not drive them out before 
they have time to take any concerted measures, 
will hurl their javelins and discharge their firearms 
(if they have any) at their assailants ; then they will 
descend, bringing the women and children with 
them, and make a desperate attempt to cut their 
way through and escape to the jungle or, sometimes, 
to their boats. Kayans conducting a successful 
attack of this kind will make as many prisoners 
as possible, and will as a rule kill only those men 
who make desperate resistance, though occasionally 
others, even women and children, may be wantonly 
killed in the excitement of the moment. It is not 
unusual in the case of an able-bodied man who has 
surrendered, but shown signs of attempting to 
escape or of renewing his resistance, to deal him 
a heavy blow on the knee-cap, and so render him 

WAR 

^72, 

lame for some time. It usually happens that the 
greater part of the fugitives escape into the jungle ; 
and they are not pursued far, if the victors have 
secured a few heads and a few prisoners. The 
head is hacked off at once from the body of any one 
of the foe who falls in the fight ; the trunk is left 
lying where it fell. If any of the assailants are 
killed in the course of the fray, their heads are not 
taken by their friends, and their corpses are left 
upon the field covered with boughs, or at most, in 
the case of chiefs, are dragged into the jungle and 
covered up with boughs and twigs, in order to 
prevent their heads being taken by the enemy. If 
any of the enemy remain so badly wounded that 
they are not likely to recover, their heads are taken ; 
and if no other heads have been secured, the head 
of one of the more seriously wounded captives is 
taken, or of one who is deformed or incapacitated 
in any way. If a captive dies of his wounds his 
head is taken ; but it is a rare exception for Kayans 
to kill any of their captives after the short excite- 
ment of the battle is over. The attacking party, 
even though it has gained a decisive victory, usually 
returns with all speed, but in good order, to its 
boats, carrying with it through the jungle all the 
loot that is not too cumbersome for rapid portage, 
especially old beads, gongs, and brass- ware ; for 
they are always in danger of being cut off by a 
party of their enemies, rallied and reinforced by 
parties from neighbouring friendly villages. Still 
more are they liable to be pursued and cut off, if 
the attack on the village has failed through the 
defenders having been warned ; for an attack upon 
a strong house or village has little chance of 
success if the defenders are prepared for and 
expecting it. The pursuit of the retreating party 
may be kept up throughout one or two days, and, 
if the pursuers come up with them, a brisk and 

174 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

bloody battle is the natural outcome ; and it is 
under these circumstances that the most severe 
fighting takes place. But here again it is seldom 
that any large proportion of either party is slain ; 
for the dense jungle everywhere offers abundant 
opportunities of concealment to those who con- 
descend to seek its shelter, and there are few, even 
among the Kayans and Kenyahs, who will fight to 
the bitter end, if the alternative of flight is open to 
them. 

A successful war-party returning home makes 
no secret of its success. The boats are decorated 
with palm leaves {daun isang), and a triumphal 
chorus is raised from time to time, especially on 
passing villages. As the villagers come out to 
gaze on them, those who have taken heads stand 
up in the boats. The heads, slightly roasted, are 
wrapped up in palm leaves and placed in baskets 
in the stern of the boat. If the return home involves 
a journey of several days, the victors will, if possible, 
pass the nights in the houses of friendly villages, 
where they are made much of, especially those 
who have taken heads ; and on these occasions the 
glamour of victory is apt to turn the heads of some 
of the women and to break down the reserve that 
modesty normally imposes upon them. 

On approaching their own village, whither the 
rumour of their success usually precedes them, 
the war-party is received with loud acclamations, 
the people coming down to the riverside to receive 
them. Before they ascend to the house, the heads 
have to be safely lodged in a small hut specially 
built for their reception ; and the young boys are 
brought down to go through their first initiation 
in the arts of war. Each child is made to hold 
a sword and, with the assistance of some aged 
warrior, to strike a blow at one of the newly captured 
heads. The older boys, some nine or ten years 

WAR 

175 

of age, who are ripe for their second participation 
in mock warfare, also strike at a head in a similar 
way, but engage also in mimic battles with one 
another, using wooden swords and spears, and, 
curiously enough, small roughly made bows and 
arrows/ It is customary for the victorious warriors 
to spend the first night after their return encamped 
before the house. A strip of green damt isang 
is tied about the left wrist of each man who has 
taken part in the expedition, and also of each of the 
young boys. Those who have taken heads adorn 
also their war - caps with the same leaf and with 
feathered sticks. On the following day a tall post of 
bamboo (balawing) is erected near the figure of the 
war-god. It is covered with frayed palm leaves {daun 
isang), and from its tip a single head, also wrapped 
in leaves, is suspended by a long cord (PL 66). 
Before the altar-post of the war-god several shorter 
thicker posts are erected, and to each of these two 
or three small pieces of human flesh, brought home 
from the corpses of the slain enemies for this 
purpose, are fastened with skewers. These pieces 
of flesh seem to be thank-offerings to the hawks 
to whom the success is largely attributed. These 
bits of flesh are dried over a fire at the first oppor- 
tunity on the return journey, in order to preserve 
them.2 

^ So far as we know this is the only way in which the bow and arrow 
is used in Borneo, although the principle of the bow is frequently applied 
in making traps. It is perhaps worthy of remark that the dense character of 
the jungle is probably more favourable to use of the blow-pipe than to that 
of the bow and arrow. 

^ It is probable that the observation of this practice by Europeans has 
given rise to the frequently published statements that the tribes of the interior 
are cannibals. We affirm with some confidence that none of the peoples of 
Borneo ever consume human flesh as food. It is true that Kayans, Kenyahs, 
and Klemantans will occasionally consume on the spot a tiny piece of the 
flesh of a slain enemy for the purpose of curing disorders, especially chronic 
cough and dysentery ; and that Ibans, men or women, during the mad 
rejoicings over captured heads will occasionally bite a head, or even bite a 
piece of flesh from it. A third practice involving the consumption of human 
flesh was formerly observed among the Jingkangs (Klemantans of Dutch 
Borneo) ; when a son was seriously ill and the efforts of the medicine-men 

176 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

As soon as the news of the taking of heads 
reaches the house, the people go out of mourning, 
i.e. they shave the parts of the scalp surrounding 
the crown and pull out eyebrows and eyelashes 
(which have been allowed to grow during mourning) ; 
they put off their bark-cloth garments and resume 
their cotton-cloths and ornaments. 

If, as is usually the case on the return of a war- 
party, mourning for a chief is to be terminated, one 
of the heads is carried down river to his tomb, 
followed by most of the men, while the women wail 
in the house. The head is first brought before the 
house, but not into it. An old man shoots a dart 
into the air in the direction of the enemy, and then, 
pattering out a long formula in the usual way, he 
slaughters a fowl and puts a part of the carcase upon 
a short stick thrust into the earth. The men of the 
party then march past, each touching the carcase with 
his knee, and saying as he does so, " Cast out sickness, 
make me strong and healthy, exalt me above my 
enemies, etc. etc." Beside the tomb a tall pole is 
set up, and the head dressed in leaves is suspended 
by a cord from its upper end. A number of pigs 
will already have been slain in preparation for the 
feast, and their lower jaws are hung about the 
tomb on poles. The deep war-chorus is shouted 
by the party as it travels to and from the tomb. 
In returning the whole party bathes in the river, 
and while they are in the water an old man waves 
over them some of the isang leaves with which the 
head has been decorated, wishing them health and 
long life. 

A few days (not less than four) after the return 
of the war-party, the heads are brought into the 
house with much rejoicing and ceremony. Every 

proved ineffective, an infant sister of the patient was killed and a small piece 
of the flesh given to the patient to eat. It would, we think, be grossly unfair 
to describe any of these peoples as cannibals on account of these practices. 

li 

■■ 

■x.r^ 

EB^^^^^^ 

^-ii 

L ^ 

-m 

tei 

^-"i'.'i ',' , r 

"5 \.ll 

X WAR 177 

family kills a pig and roasts its flesh, ^ brings out 
stores of rice-spirit, and prepares cakes of rice-flour. 
The pigs' livers are examined, and their blood is 
smeared upon the altar-post of the war-god with a 
sort of brush {pla) made by fraying the end of a 
stick in a more than usually elaborate manner. 
Each head, adorned with a large bunch of daun 
isang, is carried by an elderly man or woman into 
the house, followed by all the people of the house — 
men, women, and children — in long procession. The 
procession marches up and down the whole length 
of the gallery many times, the people shouting, sing- 
ing, stamping, and pounding on the floor with padi 
pestles, or playing the keluri. This is followed by 
a general feast and drinking bout, each family pre- 
paring its feast in its own chamber, and entertaining 
friends and neighbours who come to take part in 
the general rejoicing. In the course of the feasting 
the women usually take temporary possession of 
the heads, and perform with them a wild, uncouth 
dance, waving the heads to and fro, and chanting 
in imitation of the men's war-song (PI. 102). The 
procession may be resumed at intervals until the 
heads are finally suspended beside the old ones over 
the principal hearth of the gallery. The heads 
have usually been prepared by removal of the brain 
through the great foramen, by drying over a fire, 
and by lashing on the lower jaw with strips of 
rattan. The suspension of the head is effected by 
piercing a round hole in the crown, and passing 
through it from below, by way of the great foramen, 
a rattan knotted at the end. The free end of the 
rattan is passed through and tied in a hole in the 
lower edge of a long beam suspended parallel to 
the length of the gallery from the beams of the 
roof (PI. 68). The Kenyahs suspend the heads 
in the same way as the Kayans, but most of the 

* At one such feast eighty- five pigs and fifty-six fowls were slaughtered. 
VOL. I N 

lyS PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

Klemantans and I bans use in place of the long 
beam a strong basket-work in the shape of a cone, 
the apex being attached to the roof beams, and the 
heads tied in two or three tiers in the wall of the 
cone. In either case the heads hang some five or 
six feet above the floor, where they are out of 
reach of the dogs. 

Defence 

Since every Bornean long - house is, or until 
recently was, liable at almost any time to a night 
attack of the kind described above, the situation of 
the house is chosen with an eye to defence. The 
site chosen is in nearly all cases on the bank of a 
river or stream large enough for the navigation of 
small boats; a high and steep river-bank is commonly 
preferred ; and spits of land between two converging 
streams or peninsulas formed by sharp bends of the 
rivers are favoured spots. 

Beside the natural situation, the prime defence 
of the house is its elevation some lo to 30 feet 
above the level of the ground, joined with the diffi- 
culty of access to the house by means of narrow 
ladders easily drawn up or thrown down. This 
elevation of the house serves also to secure its 
contents against sudden risings of the river, and 
also against the invasion of evil odours from the 
refuse which accumulates below it ; but its primary 
purpose is undoubtedly defence against human 
enemies. The interval between the low outer wall 
of the gallery and the lower edge of the roof is 
the only aperture through which missiles can be 
hurled into the house, and this is so narrow as to 
render the entry of any missiles well-nigh impossible. 

When a household gets wind of an intended 
attack, they generally put the house into a state 
of defence by erecting a fence of vertical stakes 
around it, some three yards outside the posts on which 

X WAR 179 

it is supported and some six to eight feet in height. 
This fence is rendered unclimbable by a frieze 
consisting of a multitude of slips of bamboo ; each 
of these is sharpened at both ends, bent upon itself, 
and thrust between the poles of the palisade so 
that its sharp points (PI. 100) are directed out- 
wards. This dense jungle of loosely attached spikes 
constitutes an obstacle not easily overcome by the 
enemy ; for the loosely fitting bamboo slips can 
neither be hacked away nor removed individually 
without considerable expenditure of time, during 
which the attackers are exposed to a shower of 
missiles from the house. A double ladder in the 
form of a stile is placed across the fence to permit 
the passage of the people of the house. If there 
is any definite pathway leading to the house, a log 
is sometimes suspended above it by a rattan passing 
over a branch of a tree and carried to the house. 
This can be allowed to fall upon the approaching 
enemy by severing the rattan where it is tied within 
the house (Klemantan). 

A further precaution is to stick into the ground 
round about the house a large number of slips of 
bamboo. Each slip is some six inches in length, 
and its sharp, fire-hardened point projects upwards 
and a little outwards. 

If the attacking party is likely to approach by 
the river, a trap may be arranged at some point 
where, by reason of rapids or rocks, the boats are 
likely to be delayed. Here a large tree overhanging 
the river is chosen for the trap. Stout rattans are 
made fast to its branches, brought over the branches 
of a neighbouring tree, and made fast in some spot 
within reach of a hidden watcher. The stem of 
the overhanging tree is then cut almost through, so 
that a few blows of a sword, severing the supporting 
rattans, may cause the tree to fall upon the passing 
boat. 

i8o PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

When a hostile war-party enters a section of a 
river in which there is a number of villages of one 
tribe or of friendly tribes, its approach may be 
signalled throughout the district by the beating 
of the tawak. The same peculiar rhythm is used 
for this purpose by all the tribes, though it probably 
has been copied from the Kayans by all the others. 
It consists in a rapid series of strokes of increasing 
rate upon the boss, followed by one long deep note, 
and two shorter ones struck upon the body and 
once repeated. Whenever this war-alarm is heard 
in a village, it is repeated, and so passed on from 
village to village. The people working in the 
farms or in the jungle, or travelling on the river, 
return at once to their villages on hearing the alarm, 
and the houses are prepared for defence.^ When 
the news of the approach of a hostile party has 
been spread in this way throughout the river, it 
has little chance of successfully attacking a house 
or village, and it will, unless very numerous, content 
itself with attempting to cut off some of the people 
returning home from the farms. If the invading 
party is very strong, it may surround a house whose 
defenders have been warned of their coming, and 
attempt to starve them into submission. In the 
old days it was not uncommon for a strong party 
of Kayans to descend upon a settlement of the 
more peaceable coastwise people, and to extort from 
them a large payment of brass-ware as the price 
of their safety. If the unfortunate household 
submitted to this extortion, the Kayans would keep 
faith with them, and would ratify a treaty of peace 
by making the headman of the village blood-brother 
of their chief. 

Some features of the tactics adopted by the 
Kayans are worthy of more detailed description. 
If a strong party determines to attack a house in 
face of an alert defence, they may attempt to storm 

PLATE ro2. KAYAN WOMAN DANCING, AND CARRYING IN RIGHT 
HAND A HEAD DRESSED IN LEAVES. 

X WAR i8i 

it in broad daylight by forming several compact 
bodies of about twenty -five men. Each body 
protects itself with a roof of shields held closely 
together, and the several parties move quickly in 
upon the house simultaneously from different points, 
and attempt to carry it by assault. The defenders 
of the house would attempt to repel such an attack 
by hurling heavy bars of iron-wood, sharpened at 
both ends, in such a way that the bar twirls in the 
air as it hurtles through it ; and this is one of the 
few occasions on which the blow-pipe is used as a 
weapon of defence. 

A village that has been warned of the approach 
of the foe may send out a party to attempt to 
ambush the attackers at some difficult passage of 
the river or the jungle. Scouts are sent out to 
locate the enemy. Some climb to the tops of tall 
trees to look for the smoke of the enemy's fires. 
Having located the enemy, the scouts approach so 
closely as to be able to count their numbers and 
observe all their movements ; and, keeping in touch 
with the party, they send messages to their chief. 
If the defenders succeed in ambushing the attackers 
and in killing several of them, the latter usually 
withdraw discouraged, and may for the time give up 
the attempt. If the defending party should come 
upon the enemy struggling against a rapid, and 
especially if the enemy is in difficulties through the 
upsetting of some of their boats, or in any other 
way, they may fall upon them in the open bed of 
the river, and then ensues the comparatively rare 
event, a stand-up fight in the open. This resolves 
itself in the main into hand-to-hand duels between 
pairs of combatants, as in the heroic age. The 
warriors select their opponents and approach warily ; 
they call upon one another by name, hurling taunts 
and swaggering boastfully in the heroic style. 
Each abuses the other's parents, and threatens to 

i82 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

use his opponent's skin as a war-coat, or his scrotum 
as a tobacco-pouch, to take his head and to use his 
hair as an ornament for a parang'-hs.ndlQ ; or doubt 
as to the opponent's sex may be insinuated. While 
this exchange of compliments goes on, the warriors 
are manoeuvring for favourable positions ; each 
crouches, thrusting forward his left leg, covering 
himself as completely as possible with his long 
shield, and dodging to and fro continually. The 
short javelins and spears are first hurled, and skil- 
fully parried with spear and shield. When a man 
has expended his stock of javelins and has hurled 
his spear, he closes in with his parang: His enemy 
seeks to receive the blow of thQ parang- on his shield 
in such a way that the point, entering the wood, 
may be held fast by it. Feinting and dodging are 
practised ; one man thrusts out his left leg to tempt 
the other to strike at it and to expose his head in 
doing so. If one succeeds in catching his enemy's 
parang in his shield, he throws down the shield and 
dashes upon his now weaponless foe, who takes to 
his heels, throwing away his shield and relying 
merely on his swiftness of foot. When one of a 
pair of combatants is struck down, the other springs 
upon him and, seizing the long hair of the scalp 
and yelling in triumph, severs the neck with one or 
two blows of the parang. The warrior who has 
drawn first blood of the slain foe claims the credit 
of having taken his head. Such a free fight seldom 
lasts more than a few minutes. Unless one party 
quite overwhelms the other in the first few minutes, 
both draw off, and the fight is seldom renewed. 

Since the establishment of the European govern- 
ments in Borneo, punitive expeditions have been 
necessary from time to time in order to put a stop 
to wanton raiding and killing. In this respect 
the Ibans and some of the Klemantans have been 
the chief offenders ; while the Kayans and Kenyahs 

R^ 

?^r 

'-til 

X WAR 183 

have seldom given trouble, after once placing 
themselves under the established governments. In 
the Baram river, in which the Kayans form prob- 
ably a larger proportion of the population than in 
any other, no such expedition against them has 
been necessary since they accepted the government 
of H.H. the Rajah of Sarawak nearly twenty-five 
years ago. 

In organising such an expedition, the European 
governments, especially that of Sarawak, have 
usually relied in the main on the services of loyal 
chiefs and their followers, acting under the control 
of a European magistrate, and supported usually by 
a small body of native police or soldiers armed with 
rifles. There is usually no difficulty in securing 
the co-operation of any desired number of native 
allies or volunteers ; for in this way alone can the 
people now find a legitimate outlet for their innate 
and traditional pugnacity. Sometimes the people 
to be punished desert their village, hiding them- 
selves in the jungle ; and in such cases the burning 
of their houses is usually deemed sufficient punish- 
ment. In cases of more serious crime, such as 
repeated wanton bloodshed and refusal to yield to 
the demands of the government, it becomes necessary 
to apprehend the persons primarily responsible, and, 
for this purpose, to pursue the fugitives. These 
sometimes establish themselves on a hill-top sur- 
rounded by precipices which can be scaled only 
by the aid of ladders, and there defy the govern- 
ment forces until the hill is carried by assault, or 
by siege, or the defenders are enticed to descend. 
One such hill in the basin of the Rejang (Sarawak), 
Bukit Batu by name, consists of a mass of porphyry 
some 1500 feet in height, and several miles in 
diameter, with very precipitous sides. This has 
been used again and again as a place of refuge by 
recalcitrant offenders, being so strong a natural 

i84 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

fortress that it has never been possible to carry it 
by assault. On the last occasion on which Bukit 
Batu was used in this way, two I ban chiefs 
established themselves on the hill and defied the 
government of Sarawak for a period of four years, 
during which the hill became a place of refuge for 
all evil-doers and outlaws among the I bans of the 
Rejang and neighbouring districts, who built their 
houses on ledges of the mountain some four hundred 
feet above the level of the river. 

The punitive expedition that we briefly describe 
in Chapter XXII. was but a small affair compared 
with some, in which as many as 10,000 or 12,000 
men have mustered under the government flag. 
So large a number is seldom necessary or desired 
by the government ; but when contingents from all 
the loyal communities of a large district eagerly 
offer their services, it is difficult to deny any of 
them permission to take part. Kenyahs and 
Kayans will co-operate harmoniously, and also 
Klemantans ; but the former distrust the Sea 
Dayaks and will not join forces with any large 
number of them. 

The modes of warfare of the other tribes are 
similar in most respects to that of the Kayans 
described above ; but some peculiarities are worthy 
of note. 

Kenyah warfare is very similar to Kayan, save 
in so far as their more impetuous temper renders 
their tactics more dashing. While the Kayans 
endeavour to make as many captives as possible, 
the Kenyahs attach little value to them. While 
Kayans never attack communities of their own 
tribe, such *' civil war " is not unknown among the 
Kenyahs, whose tribal cohesion is less intimate in 
many respects. From these two differences it 
results that the Kenyah war-parties are generally 
smaller than those of the Kayans, more quick- 

w 
< 

H 

o 

CO 

H 
D 
O 

O 

c/2 

WAR 185 

moving, and more prone to attack groups of the 
enemy encountered on farms or on the river. Like 
the I bans, the Kenyahs make peace more readily 
than the Kayans, who nurse their grievances and 
seek redress after long intervals of time. 

The I bans conduct their warfare less systematic- 
ally, and with far less discipline than the Kayans 
and Kenyahs. An attack upon a house or village by 
Ibans is usually made in very large force ; the party 
is more of the nature of a rabble than of an army ; 
each man acts independently. They seek above 
all things to take heads, to which they attach an 
extravagant value, unlike the Kayans and Kenyahs 
who seek heads primarily for the service of their 
funeral rites ; and they not infrequently attack a 
house and kill a large number of its inmates in a 
perfectly wanton manner, and for no other motive 
that the desire to obtain heads. This passion for 
heads leads them sometimes into acts of gross 
treachery and brutality. The Ibans being great 
wanderers, small parties of them, engaged perhaps 
in working jungle produce, will settle for some 
weeks in a household of Klemantans, and, after 
being received hospitably, and sometimes even after 
contracting marriages with members of the house- 
hold, will seize an opportunity, when most of the 
men of the house are from home, to take the heads 
of all the men, women, and children who remain, 
and to flee with them to their own distant homes. 

So strong is this morbid desire of the Ibans to 
obtain human heads, that a war-party will sometimes 
rob the tombs of the villages of other tribes and, 
after smoking the stolen heads of the corpses, will 
bring them home in triumph with glowing accounts 
of the stout resistance offered by the victims. 
Their attitude in this matter is well expressed by a 
saying current among them, namely, ** Why should 
we eat the hard caked rice from the edge of the 

i86 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

pot when there's plenty of soft rice in the centre? " 
The I ban women urge on the men to the taking of 

Fig. 30. — Iban war-coat and war-cap covered with fish scales ; 
mail of this kind is becoming rare. 

heads ; they make much of those who bring them 
home, and sometimes a girl will taunt her suitor by 
saying that he has not been brave enough to take 

^ 

WAR 187 

a head ; and in some cases of murder by Sea Dayaks, 
the murderer has no doubt been egged on in this 
way. 

Nevertheless, we repeat that there is no ground 
for the oft-reprinted assertion that the taking of a 
head is a necessary prelude to marriage/ Like 
other tribesmen I bans do not bring home the heads 
of their companions who have fallen in battle ; but 
while men of other tribes are content to drag the 
corpses of their fallen friends into some obscure spot 
and to cover them with branches, Ibans frequently 
cut off the heads and bury them at a distance from 
the scene of battle, in order to prevent their being 
taken by the enemy. 

The Ibans use a rather greater variety of weapons 
than the Kayans, in that they have spears whose 
blades bear barbs which prevent the withdrawal of 
the blade from the body of the enemy without great 
violence. 

The Klemantan tribes are on the whole far less 
warlike than Kayans, Kenyahs, and Ibans. Their 
offensive warfare is usually on a small scale, and 
is undertaken primarily for revenge. Their warlike 
ambition is easily satisfied by the taking of a single 
head, or even by a mere hostile demonstration 
against the enemy's house. Nevertheless, like all 
the other tribes, except the Punans, the Klemantans 
need a human head to terminate a period of mourning. 

We venture to append to this chapter a few specu- 
lations on the origin and history of head-hunting. 
From what we have said above it is clear that the 
Ibans are the only tribe to which one can apply the 
epithet head-hunters with the usual connotation of 
the word, namely, that head-hunting is pursued as 
a form of sport. But although the Ibans are the 
most inveterate head-hunters, it is probable that 
they adopted the practice some few generations 

^ See footnote, vol. i., p. 76. 

i88 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

ago only (perhaps a century and a half or even less) 
in imitation of Kayans or other tribes among whom 
it had been established for a longer period. The 
rapid growth of the practice among the I bans was 
no doubt largely due to the influence of the Malays, 
who had been taught by Arabs and others the arts 
of piracy, and with whom the I bans were associated 
in the piratical enterprises that gave the waters 
around Borneo a sinister notoriety during the 
eighteenth and first half of the nineteenth centuries. 
Until the middle of the nineteenth century, the 
settlements of Ibans were practically confined to the 
rivers of the southern part of Sarawak ; and there 
the Malays of Bruni and of other coast settlements 
enlisted them as crews for their pirate ships. In 
these piratical expeditions the Malays assigned the 
heads of their victims as the booty of their Iban 
allies, while they kept for themselves the forms of 
property of greater cash value. The Malays were 
thus interested in encouraging in the Ibans the 
passion for head-hunting which, since the suppres- 
sion of piracy, has found vent in the irregular 
warfare and treacherous acts described above. It 
was through their association with the Malays in 
these piratical expeditions that the Ibans became 
known to Europeans as the Sea Dayaks. 

It seems not impossible that the practice of 
taking the heads of fallen enemies arose by 
extension of the custom of taking the hair for the 
ornamentation of the shield and sword-hilt. It 
seems possible that human hair was first applied to 
shields in order to complete the representation of 
a terrible human face, which, as we have seen, is 
commonly painted on the shield, and which is said 
to be valued as an aid to confusing and terrifying 
the foe. It is perhaps a difficulty in the way of 
this view that the use of human hair to ornament 
the shield is peculiar to the Kenyahs and some of 

X WAR 189 

the Klemantans (the latter probably having imitated 
the former in this), and does not occur among the 
Kayans. The Kenyahs themselves preserve the 
tradition of the origin of the taking of heads ; and 
the suggestion is further borne out by the legend 
of Tokong, which is widely known, but is probably 
of Kenyah origin (see Chapter XVII.), accord- 
ing to which the frog admonished a great Kenyah 
chief that he should cease to take only the hair of 
the fallen foe, but should take their heads also. 

A second plausible view of the origin of head- 
taking is that it arose out of the custom of slaying 
slaves on the death of a chief, in order that they 
might accompany and serve him on his journey to 
the other world. We have pointed out several 
reasons for believing that this practice was formerly 
general, and that it has fallen into desuetude, 
but is hardly yet quite extinct. It is obvious that 
since the soul of the dead man is regarded as 
hovering in the neighbourhood of the body for 
some little time after its death, it would be felt that 
the despatch of a companion soul was not a matter 
of immediate urgency ; and considerations of 
economy might well lead the mourners to prefer 
capturing and killing members of some hostile 
community to slaying one or more of their slaves, 
highly valued and sometimes affectionately regarded 
as they are. It would then be felt that the relatives 
of the deceased should continue to display signs of 
mourning until they should have discharged this 
last duty to their departed friend. The next step 
would be to supplant the practice of capturing a 
member of a hostile community, and bringing him 
home to be slain, by the simpler, less troublesome, 
and more merciful one of slaying the enemy on the 
field of combat and bringing home only his head. 
In this way we may, with some plausibility, seek to 
account for the origin of the practice of taking 

I90 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

heads, and of the tradition that the taking of a head 
is necessary for the termination of a period of 
mourning. This second suggestion is strongly- 
supported by the fact that Kayans, Kenyahs, and 
Klemantans occasionally, on returning home from a 
successful raid, will carry one of the newly taken 
heads to the tomb of the chief for whom they are 
mourning, and will hang it upon, or deposit it within, 
the tomb beside the coffin. The head used for this 
purpose is thickly covered with leaves (daun isang) 
tied tightly about it. It is possible that this thick 
covering was first applied in order to disguise the 
fact that the head is that of an enemy, and that the 
sacrifice of the life of a domestic slave, originally 
demanded by custom and piety, has been avoided 
by this process of substitution. 

We have suggested above two different origins 
of the custom of taking the heads of enemies. These 
two possibilities are by no means mutually exclusive, 
and we are inclined to think that both substitutive 
processes may have co-operated in bringing about 
this custom. 

It seems probable that the taking of heads was 
introduced to Borneo by Kayans when they entered 
the island, probably some few centuries ago, and 
that the Klemantans and other tribes, like the Ibans, 
have adopted the custom from their example. 

We will conclude this chapter by questioning 
yet another of the stories, the frequent repetition 
of which has given the tribes of the interior the 
reputation of being savages of the worst type, 
namely, the story that it is the practice of Kayans 
to torture the captives taken in battle. This evil 
repute is, we have no doubt, largely due to the 
fact that very few Europeans have acquired any 
intimate first-hand acquaintance with the Kayans 
or Kenyahs ; and that too often the stories told by 
Sea Dayaks have been uncritically accepted ; for 

X WAR 191 

the Sea Dayaks have been bitterly hostile to the 
Kayans ever since the tribes have been in contact ; 
and the I ban is a great romancer. It will be found 
that many of the alleged instances of torture by 
Kayans have been described by Sea Dayaks ; and 
we think there is good reason for hesitating to 
accept any of these. But we would point out that, 
if some of these accounts have been founded on 
fact, the Sea Dayak victims, or their companions, 
have in all probability provoked the Kayans to 
severe reprisals by their atrocious behaviour, and 
may be fairly said to have deserved their fate. 

It is true that Kayans have been guilty of leaving 
a slave or captive bound upon a tomb until he has 
died from exposure to the sun. We know also 
of one instance in which a Murut slave, having 
treacherously murdered the only son of a great 
Kayan chief in the Baram, at the instigation of 
Bruni Malays, was killed by a multitude of small 
stabs by the infuriated Kayan women, on being 
brought captive to the house. 

But such occurrences as these by no means 
justify the statement that it is the practice of Kayans 
to torture their captives ; and we have heard of 
no well-attested instances that give any colour to 
it. As we have said above, Kayans commonly 
treat their captives so kindly that they soon become 
content to remain in the households of their captors. 
The Kayan feeling about torture is well illustrated 
by the fact that the Kayan village responsible for 
the exposure of the slave mentioned above was 
looked at askance by other Kayans. The spot 
was regarded with horror by them, and they regard 
as a consequence of this act the failure of the line 
of the chief of that village to perpetuate itself. 

We have to admit that some of the Klemantans 
cannot be so whole-heartedly defended against the 
charge of torturing their captives. But we believe 

192 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap, x 

that it is not regularly practised by any Klemantan 
tribe, but rather only on occasions which in some 
way evoke an exceptional degree of emotional 
excitement. Thus, in one instance known to us, 
the Orang Bukit of the Bruni territory, having 
lost the most highly respected of their chiefs, 
purchased a slave in Bruni to serve as the funereal 
victim, and, having shut him in a wicker cage, 
killed him with a multitude of stabs, some eight 
hundred persons taking part in the act. But even 
this act was, it must be observed, of the nature of 
a pious and religious rite rather than an act of 
wanton cruelty. 

We cannot leave this subject without this last 
word. If we are quite frank, we shall have to 
admit that, even though the worst accounts of 
Kayan cruelty were substantially true, such be- 
haviour would not in the least justify the belief 
that the Kayans are innately more cruel than 
ourselves. If we are tempted to take this view, 
let us remember that, after our own race had 
professed Christianity for many generations, the 
authority of Church and State publicly decreed 
and systematically inflicted in cold blood tortures 
far more hideous and atrocious than any the Kayan 
imagination has ever conceived. 

CHAPTER XI 

HANDICRAFTS 

In any account of the arts and crafts of the Kayans, 
the working of iron claims the first place by reason 
of its high importance to them and of the skill and 
knowledge displayed by them in the difficult opera- 
tions by which they produce their fine swords. 
The origin of their knowledge of iron and of the 
processes of smelting and forging remains hidden 
in mystery ; but there can be little doubt that the 
Kayans were familiar with these processes before 
they entered Borneo, and it is probable that the 
Kayans were the first ironworkers in Borneo, and 
that from them the other tribes have learnt the 
craft with various measures of success/ However 
this may be, the Kayans remain the most skilful 
ironworkers of the country, rivalled only in the 
production of serviceable sword - blades by the 
Kenyahs. 

At the present day the Kayans, like all the other 
peoples, obtain their iron in the form of bars of iron 
and steel imported from Europe and distributed 
by the Chinese and Malay traders. But thirty 
years ago nearly all the iron worked by the tribes 

^ The Malays of Bruni and the other coast settlements have, of course, used 
iron, and perhaps to some small extent forged it, since the time when they 
adopted Arab civilisation ; but they have not at any time practised the smelting 
of iron ore. Between three and five hundred years ago the principal currency 
of the people of Bruni consisted of small oblong flattened pieces of iron 
known as sapanggal (about 2 x i x ^ inches) bearing the Sultan's stamp. This 
iron was probably obtained from Chinese and other foreign traders, and was 
worked up into implements. 

VOL. I 193 O 

194 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

of the interior was from ore found in the river beds, 
and possibly from masses of meteoric iron ; and even 
at the present day the native ore is still smelted in 
the far interior, and swords made from it by the 
Kenyahs are still valued above all others. 

Smelting and forging demand a specialised skill 
which is attained by relatively few. But in each 
Kayan village are to be found two or three or more 
skilled smiths, who work up for a small fee the metal 
brought them by their friends, the finishing touches 
being generally given by the owner of the implement 
according to his own fancy. 

The smelting is performed by mixing the ore 
with charcoal in a clay crucible, which is embedded 
in a pile of charcoal. The charcoal being ignited is 
blown to a white heat by the aid of four piston- 
bellows. Each of the bellows consists of a wooden 
cylinder (generally made from the stem of a wild 
sago palm) about four feet in length and six 
inches in diameter, fixed vertically in a framework 
carrying a platform, on which two men sit to work 
the pistons (see PI. 107). The lower end of each 
cylinder is embedded in clay, and into it near its 
lower end is inserted a tube of bamboo, which, 
lying horizontally on the ground, converges upon 
and joins with a similar tube of a second cylinder. 
The common tube formed by this junction in turn 
converges with the tube common to the other 
pair of cylinders, and with it opens by a clay 
junction into a final common tube of clay, which 
leads to the base of the fire. The piston con- 
sists of a stout stick bearing at its lower end a 
bunch of feathers large enough to fill the bore of 
the cylinder. When the piston is thrust downwards, 
it drives the air before it to the furnace ; as it is 
drawn upwards, the feathers collapsing allow the 
entrance of air from above. The upper extremity 
of each of the piston-rods is attached by a cord to 

k 

/i 

*A <y* 

i 

^ 

w 
o 

H 
O 

H 

HANDICRAFTS 

195 

one end of a stout pliable stick, which is firmly fixed 
at its other end in a horizontal position, the cord 
being of such a length that the piston-head is sup- 
ported by it near the upper end of the cylinder. 
Two men squat upon the platform and each works 
one pair of the cylinders, grasping a piston-rod in 
each hand, thrusting them down alternately, and 
allowing the elastic reaction of the supporting rods 
above to draw them 
up again. The 
crucible, having been 
brought to white heat 
in the furnace, is 
allowed to cool, when 
a mass of metallic 
iron or steel is found 
within it. 

The forging of im- 
plements from the 
metal obtained is 
effected by the aid of 
a charcoal furnace to 
which a blast is sup- 
plied by the bellows 
described above, or 
sometimes by one con- 
sisting of two cylinders only. Stone anvils and 
hammers were formerly used, and may still be seen 
in use in the far interior (Fig. 31) ; but the Kayans 
make iron hammers and an anvil consisting of a 
short thick bar of iron, the lower end of which is 
fixed vertically in a large block of wood. 

The peculiarly shaped and finely tempered sword- 
blade, malat, is the highest product of the Kayan 
blacksmith. The smith begins his operations on a 
bar of steel some eight inches in length. One end 
is either grasped with pincers, or thrust firmly into 
a block of wood that serves for a handle. The 

Fig. 31. — Stone Hammers. 

196 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

other end is heated in the furnace and gradually 
beaten out until the peculiar shape of the blade is 
achieved, with the characteristic hollow on the one 
side and convexity on the other. If the blade is to 
be a simple and unadorned weapon, there follow 
only the tempering, grinding, and polishing. But 
many blades are ornamented with curled ridges 
projecting from the back edge. These are cut and 
turned up with an iron chisel while the metal is hot 
and before tempering. 

Two methods of tempering are in use. One is 
to heat the blade in the fire and to plunge it at a 
dull heat into water. The other is to lay the cold 
blade upon a flat bar of red-hot iron. This has the 
advantage that the degree of the effect upon the 
blade can be judged from the change of its colour 
as it absorbs the heat. The Kayan smiths are 
expert in judging by the colours of the surface the 
degree and kind of temper produced. They aim at 
producing a very tough steel, for the malat has to 
serve not only in battle, but also for hacking a path 
through the jungle, and for many other purposes. 

Many sword-blades are elaborately decorated 
with scroll designs along the posterior border and 
inlaid with brass. The inlaid brass commonly takes 
the form of a number of small discs let into the metal 
near the thick edge ; small holes are punched through 
the hot metal, and brass wire is passed through each 
hole, cut off flush with the surface and hammered 
flat. The designs are chased on the cold metal with 
a chisel and hammer supplemented by a file. The 
polishing and sharpening are done in several stages: 
the first stage usually by rubbing the blade upon a 
block of sandstone ; the second stage by the use of 
a hone of finer grain ; and the highest polish is 
attained by rubbing with a leaf whose surface is 
hard and probably contains silicious particles. At 
the present time imported files are much used. 

HANDICRAFTS 197 

Other implements fashioned by the smiths are 
the small knives, spear-heads, hoes, small adzes, rods 
for boring the sumpitan, the anvil, and the various 
hammers, and chisels, and rough files used by the 
smiths. 

Brass-work 

Although brass-ware is so highly valued by all 
the peoples of the interior, the only brazen articles 
made by them (with one exception presently to be 
noticed) are the heavy ear-rings of the women. The 
common form is a simple ring of solid metal in- 
terrupted at one point by a gap about an eighth of 
an inch wide, through which is pulled the thin band 
of skin formed by stretching the lobule of the ear. 
Other rings form about one and a half turns of a 
corkscrew spiral. These rings are cast in moulds 
of clay, or in some cases in moulds hollowed in two 
blocks of stone which are nicely opposed. 

The Malohs, a Klemantan sub-tribe in the upper 
basin of the Kapuas river, are well known as brass- 
workers ; their wares are bartered throughout the 
country, and a few Maloh brass-workers may be 
found temporarily settled in many of the larger 
villages of all tribes. They make the brass corsets 
of the Iban women, tweezers for pulling out the hair 
of the face, brass ear-rings, and a variety of small 
articles, and they make use of the larger brass-ware 
of Malay and Chinese origin as the source of their 
material. 

Fire Piston 

This very ingenious instrument for the making 
of fire is cast in metal by the Ibans. (See Fig. 36 
and PI. 108.) It consists of a hollow brass or leaden 
cylinder about five inches in length and one inch in 
diameter, the bore being about one-quarter of an 
inch in diameter and closed at one end. A wooden 

Fig. 35.— Old 
Brass Ear-ring. 

P\J 

^v, 

u 

Fig. 33. 
Brass Tweezers. 

Fig. 32. 
Fish Spear. 

Fig. 34. 

cHAP.xr HANDICRAFTS 199 

piston, which closely fits the bore, bears a rounded 
knob ; it is driven down the cylinder by a sharp 
blow of the palm upon the knob and is quickly 
withdrawn. The heat generated by the compres- 
sion of the air ignites a bit of tinder (made by scrap- 
ing the fibrous surface of the leaf stem of the 
Arenga palm) at the bottom of the cylinder. The 
cylinder is cast by pouring the molten metal into a 
section of bamboo, while a polished iron rod is held 
vertically in the centre to form the bore. When 
the cylinder is cold the iron rod is extracted, and 
the outer surface is trimmed and shaped with knife 
or file. 

BOAT-BUILDING 

The Kayans make much use of boats, as 
described in Chapter VIII., and are skilful boat- 
makers. The forest offers them an abundant variety 
of timbers suitable for the different types of boat 
used by them. 

The most ambitious efforts of this kind are 
devoted to the construction of the great war-boats, 
fine specimens of which are as much as 100 feet 
in length, or even, in exceptional instances, nearly 
150 feet. The foundation of every boat is a single 
piece of timber shaped and hollowed by fire and 
adze. Several kinds of timber are used, the best 
being the kinds known as^ aroh {Skorea) and ngelai 
{Afzeliapalambanica). Sometimes a suitable stem 
is found floating down river and brought to the 
bank before the house. But such good fortune is 
exceptional, and commonly a tree is selected in the 
forest as near as possible to the river bank. The 
tree is felled in the way described in Chapter VL 
(PI. 55), its branches are hewed away, and the 
stem is cut to the required length and roughly 
hewn into shape. About one-fourth of the circum- 
ference of the stem is cut away along the whole 

200 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

length, and from this side the stem is hollowed. 
When, by chopping out the centre, the thickness 
of this shell has been reduced to a thickness 
of some five inches, it is brought down to the 
river. This is effected by laying through the jungle 
a track consisting of smooth poles laid across the 
direction of progress ; the hollowed stem is pulled 
endwise over this track with the aid of rattans, 
perhaps a hundred or more men combining their 
strength. If the stem proves too heavy to be 
moved at any part of the journey by their direct 
pull and push, a rough windlass is constructed by 
fixing the stem of a small tree across two standing 
trees and winding the rattans upon this, the trimmed 
branches of the tree serving as the arms of the 
windlass. The Kayans are skilled in this kind of 
transport of heavy timber ; for the building of their 
houses and of the larger tombs involves similar 
difficulties, though the timbers required for these 
purposes are not so huge as those used for the 
war-boats. Arrived at the river bank, the hollowed 
stem is launched upon the water and towed down 
stream to the village at a time when the water is 
high. It is made fast to the bank before the village 
at as high a point as the water will allow, so that 
when the river subsides it is left high and dry. A 
leaf shelter is then built over it to protect it and 
the workers from the sun. The shell is then further 
hollowed, partly by firing it with shavings inside 
and out, and by scraping away the charred surfaces. 
The inside is fired first ; then the hollow is filled 
with water, and the outside is fired. 

When in this way the shell has been reduced to 
a thickness of a few inches, it is opened out, while 
hot from firing and still filled with water, by wedg- 
ing stout sticks some six to seven feet in length 
between the lateral walls, so that the hollow stem 
(which hitherto has had the form of a hollow cylinder 

XI 

HANDICRAFTS 201 

some three to four feet in diameter, lacking along 
its whole length a strip about the fourth of its cir- 
cumference) becomes a shallow trough some six to 
seven feet wide in the middle of its length. During 
the hollowing, small buttresses are left along each 
side at intervals of about two feet to form supports 
for benches. After the opening, the shell is left 
lying covered with branches for some days, while 
the wood sets in its new form. The outer surface 
is then shaved approximately to the required degree, 
all irregularities are removed, and holes about 
half-an-inch in diameter are bored through all parts 
of the shell at intervals of some twenty inches. 
Wooden pegs are then hammered into these holes, 
each peg bearing two marks or grooves at an inter- 
val equal to the thickness of the shell desired at 
each part ; the peg is driven in from the outside 
until the outer groove is flush with the outer sur- 
face of the shell, and the projecting part is cut 
away ; the inner surface is then further chipped 
and scraped in each area until it becomes level 
with the inner groove on the peg. In this way 
the workers are enabled to give to each part its 
appropriate thickness. The outer surface is then 
finally smoothed to form about one - third of a 
cylinder, and the foundation is complete. It only 
remains to lash the cross-benches to their supports, 
to raise the sides by lashing on a gunwale, and 
to fit in wedge-shaped blocks at bow and stern. 
The gunwale consists of a tough plank some 
ten inches wide overlapping the outer edge of 
the shell, and lashed firmly to it by rattan strips 
piercing both shell and planks at intervals of 
about six inches. In some cases the gunwale is 
further raised in its middle part by lashing on a 
second smaller plank to the upper edge of the first. 
The block fitted in at the prow presents to the 
water a flat surface inclined at a low angle ; and a 

202 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

similar block completes the shell at the stern. The 
prow is often ornamented with the head of a croco- 
dile or the conventional dog's head carved in hard 
wood and painted in red and black. 

The whole operation, like every other important 
undertaking, is preceded by the finding of omens, 
and it is liable to be postponed by the observation 
of ill omens, by bad dreams, or by any misfortune 
such as a death in the house. In each house are 
certain men who are specially skilled in boat- 
making, and by them the work is directed and all 
the finer part of the work executed. In the case 
of a war-boat which is to be the property of the 
household, these special workers are paid a fee out 
of the store of valuables accumulated under the 
care of the chief by way of fines and confiscations. 

The smaller boats, ranging from a small canoe 
suitable for one or two paddlers only, to one cap- 
able of carrying a score or more, are generally 
private property. These, like the war-boats, are 
made from a single stem. The larger ones are 
made in just the same way as the war-boats. In 
the smaller ones the bow is shaped from the solid 
block and is not opened out, as is the rest of the 
boat. The craftsman who makes a boat for another 
is helped by his customer, and is paid by him a fee 
in brass-ware or dollars, the usual fee being a tawak 
varying in size according to the size of the boat. 

If Kayans find themselves for any reason in 
immediate need of a boat when none is at hand, 
they sometimes fashion one very rapidly by stripping 
the bark from a big tree. The two ends of the sheet 
of bark are folded and lashed with rattan to form 
bow and stern ; the middle part is wedged open with 
cross-pieces which serve as benches, and the shell 
is strengthened with transverse ribs and longitudinal 
strips. A serviceable boat capable of carrying several 
men and their baggage may be completed in the 

Plate m. KAYAN KNIFE AND AXES. 

HANDICRAFTS 203 

course of two hours. Such a makeshift boat is more 
commonly made by Sea Dayaks. 

Of all the interior tribes the Kayans are probably 
the best boat-makers ; but most of them make their 
own boats in the same way as the Kayans. There 
are, however, a few of the Klemantan sub-tribes who 
never attempt to make anything more than a very 
rough small canoe of soft wood, and who buy from 
others what boats they need. This is a curious 
instance of the persistent lack of the tradition of a 
specialised craft among communities that might 
have been expected to acquire it easily from their 
neighbours. 

For ordinary work a rough paddle made from 
iron-wood is generally used ; the blade and shaft 
are of one piece ; the flat blade, nearly two feet in 
length, is widest about six inches below its junction 
with the shaft, and from this point tapers slightly to 
its square extremity ; the shaft is about three feet 
in length and carries, morticed to its upper end, a 
cross-piece for the grip of the upper hand. 

A few paddles, especially those made for women, 
are very finely shaped and finished, and have their 
shafts ornamented with carving of a variety of 
designs, generally one band of carving immediately 
above the blade and a second below the cross-piece. 
Some of the Klemantans excel the Kayans in this 
work, producing very beautiful women's paddles, 
sometimes with designs of inlaid lead (PI. 92). 

House-building 

A Kayan community seldom continues to inhabit 
the same spot for more than about a dozen years ; 
though in exceptional instances houses are continu- 
ously inhabited for thirty or even forty years. 
House-building is thus a craft of great importance, 
and the Kayans are seldom content to build their 

204 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

houses in the comparatively flimsy style adopted by 
the Ibans and some of the Klemantans, and even 
occasionally by Kenyahs. The main features of the 
structure of a Kayan long -house have been de- 
scribed in Chapter IV. Here it remains only to 
describe some of the more peculiar and important 
processes of construction. 

The great piles that support the house may be 
floated down river from the old house to be used in 
the construction of the new ; ^ they are not dug 
from the ground, but are felled by cutting close to 
the surface of the ground. The great planks of the 
floor, the main cross-beams, and the wooden shingles 
of the roof, are also commonly carried from the old 
house to the new. If a house has been partially 
destroyed by fire, no part of the materials of the old 
house is used in the construction of the new ; for it 
is felt that in some indefinable way the use of the 
old material would render the new house very liable 
to the same fate, as though the new house would be 
infected by the materials with the ill-luck attaching 
to the old house. '^ In such cases, or upon migration 
to a different river, the whole of the timbers for the 
house have to be procured from the jungle, and 
shaped, and erected ; and the process of construction 
is extremely laborious. But once the timber has 
been brought together upon the chosen site, the 
building goes on rapidly, and the whole of a house 
some hundreds of yards in length may be sub- 
stantially completed within a fortnight. The main 
supports of the structure are four rows of massive 

^ The convenience of thus floating the timber is one reason for the general 
tendency shown by Kayans to migrate gradually down river, 

^ This is an example of a very common type of practice which implies the 
belief that the attributes of any object will attach themselves to any whole into 
which the object may be incorporated as a part ; thus a hunter who has shot 
dead a pig or deer with a single bullet will cut out the bullet to melt it down 
with other lead, and will make a fresh batch of bullets or slugs from the 
mixture, believing that the lucky bullet will leaven the whole lump, or impart 
to all of it something of that to which its success was due. Compare also the 
similar practice in regard to the seed grain (vol. i., p. 112). 

xr 

HANDICRAFTS 

205 

in 

columns of iron-wood. Holes about four feet 
depth are dug for the reception of the butt ends of 
these. They are disposed in the manner indicated 
in the diagrams (Figs. 2,7 j 2>^y 39), so that a single row 
supports the front of the house, another the back, and 
a double row the middle.^ The intervals between 
the columns of each row are about twenty feet, or 
rather more. Each pile is erected by raising the 
one end until the other slips into the hole. Rattans 

Fig. 37. 

are tied round it a little above its middle and 
passed over a tall tripod of stout poles. A number 
of men haul on these while others shove up the 
top end with their shoulders. The pile is thus sus- 
pended with its butt end resting so lightly on the 
ground that it can easily be guided into the hole 
prepared for its reception. Smaller accessory piles, 
to serve as additional supports, are put under the 
main cross beams of the floor when these have 

^ The pair of centre columns and the main columns supporting the roof 
back and front should have been drawn thicker than the accessoiy columns 
supporting the floor, and the width of the roof-plates is much greater than is 
indicated in the diagrams. 

2o6 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

been laid. The columns of the double row in the 
middle line are about six feet taller than those of 
the front and back rows. For the support of the 
floor a massive squared transverse tie is morticed 
through each set of four columns at a height of 
some fifteen to twenty feet from the ground, and 
secured by a pin through each extremity. A squared 
roof-plate, still more massive than the floor ties, is 
then laid upon the crowns of the columns of the front 

Ridge Timber 

'Floor-tie 

Main Column 

Accessory Centre Accessory Main Column 
Columns Columns Columns 

Fig. 38. 

row, along its whole length, and a second one upon 
the back row. This is dowelled upon the columns 
(i.e. the top of the column is cut to form a pin which 
is let into the longitudinal beam) ; and the beams 
which make up the roof-plate are spliced, generally 
in such a way that the top of a column serves as 
the pin of the splice. Each of these heavy beams 
is generally lifted into its place by tiers of men 
standing on poles lashed at different heights across 
the columns, their efforts being seconded by others 
pulling on rattans which run from the beam over the 

Plate 113. KENYAHS DRILLING A BLOW-PIPE. 

HANDICRAFTS 207 

topmost cross-pole. The framework of the roof is 
then completed by laying stout roof-ties across the 
crowns of the double row of columns of the middle 
line, and lashing their extremities to stout purlins 
(longitudinal beams for the support of the rafters in 
the middle of their length), and by laying the ridge- 
timber upon a line of perpendicular struts. The 
ridge-timber and purlins, though less heavy than 
the roof-plates, consist also of stout squared timbers, 
spliced to form beams continuous throughout the 
whole length of the house. The rafters are laid at 
an angle of about forty degrees and at intervals of 
eighteen inches ; they are lashed to the ridge-timber 
and to the purlins, and lipped on to the roof-plates, 
beyond which they project about four feet to form an 
eave. Strong flat strips or laths are laid along the 
rafters parallel to the length of the house at in- 
tervals of about sixteen inches. On these are laid 
the shingles or slats of iron-wood in regular rows, 
in just the way in which roof tiles are laid in this 
country. Each slat is a slab about i x 30 x 1 2 inches, 
and is lashed by a strip of rattan, which pierces its 
upper end, to one of the laths. The floor is com- 
pleted by laying longitudinal joists of stout poles 
across the main floor-ties ; the poles are notched to 
grip the ties. Upon these joists, transversely to 
them, are laid a number of flat strips which immedi- 
ately support the floor planks ; these are kept in 
place by their own weight. 

In a well-built house these planks are between 
thirty and forty feet in length, or even more, two to 
three feet in breadth, and three to four inches thick. 
They are made from tough strong timber, but usually 
not from the iron-wood trees. They are moved 
from house to house, and some of those in use are 
probably hundreds of years old. A single tree is 
generally made to yield two such planks. After 
being felled it is split into halves longitudinally in 

2o8 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

the following way. A deep groove is cut along one 
side, and wedges of hard tough wood are driven 
in with rough heavy mallets. Deep transverse 
grooves are then cut in the rounded surface of each 
half at intervals of three or four feet ; and the inter- 
vening masses of wood are split off. In this way 
it is whittled down until it is only some six 
inches thick. The plank is then trimmed down to 
the desired thickness by blows of the adze struck 
across the direction of the grain. The two ends are 
generally left untrimmed until the plank has been 
transported to the site of the house and has lain 
there for some time. This prevents its splitting 
during the journey to the house and the period of 
seasoning. 

When the floor has been laid, it only remains to 
make the main partition wall which separates the 
gallery from the rooms along the whole length 
of the house, and the walls between the several 
rooms. These walls are made only some eight or 
nine feet in height. The wall of the gallery is 
made of vertical planks lashed to horizontal rails 
whose extremities are let into the columns of the 
anterior set of the double median row. The wall 
thus divides the house into a narrower front part, 
the gallery, and a broader back part ; the latter is 
subdivided by the transverse walls into the series of 
rooms each of which accommodates one family. 

The work of construction is carried on by all the 
men of the house ; the women and children lend 
what aid they can in the way of fetching and carry- 
ing, and in preparing rattans. The ownership of 
each section is arranged beforehand ; the section of 
the chief being generally in the middle, and those of 
his near relatives on either side of it. Each man 
pays special attention to the construction of his own 
section, and carries out the lighter work of that 
part, such as laying the shingles, with the help of 

XI 

HANDICRAFTS 

209 

his own household. If any widow is the head of a 
household, her section is constructed by her male 
neighbours or relatives without payment. 

Before beginning the building of a new house 
favourable omens must be obtained ; and the 
Kayans would be much troubled if bad omens 
were observed during the building, especially dur- 
ing the first few days. At this time, therefore, 
children are told off to beat upon gongs hung about 

Bed 

— ' 

r- 

f 

Bed 

' 

Room 

Room 

Room 

Bed 

Bed 

Bed 

* Fire-place 

Fiije -place ' 

. Fire-pl^ce 

a 

Gallery 

Fig. 39. 

the new site, and so, by scaring away the birds and 
obscuring the sound of their cries, to prevent the 
appearance of bad omens from their side. Bad 
omens combined with ill-luck, such as death, bad 
dreams, or an attack by enemies during building 
(even if this were successfully repelled), would lead 
to the desertion of a partially built house and the 
choice of another site. 

All the interior peoples construct their houses on 
principles similar to those described above, but with 
considerable diversity in detail. The greatest 

VOL. I p 

2IO PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

diversity of plan is exhibited by the houses of Ibans. 
An Iban community seldom remains in the same 
house more than three or four years ; it is, no 
doubt, partly on this account that their houses are 
built in a less solid style than those of most other 
tribes. The timbers used are lighter ; the house is 
not raised so high above the ground, and the floor 
is usually made of split bamboo in place of the 
heavy planks used by Kayans and others. The 
plan of construction is less regular. The numerous 
slight supporting piles pass through the floor of 
the gallery in all sorts of odd positions ; the only 
part that is kept clear of them being a narrow 
gangway that runs from end to end of the house ; 
it adjoins the private chambers, and is about four 
feet in width ; it is called tempuan. 

Some of the Klemantans make houses very 
inferior to those of the Kayans in respect to size, 
solidity, and regularity of construction ; lashed 
bamboos largely replace the strongly morticed tim- 
ber-work of the better houses ; but the worst 
houses of all are made by those Punans who have 
recently adopted the agriculture and settled habits 
of the other peoples. 

Other Kinds of Wood-working 

The building of houses and the shaping of boats 
are by far the most important kinds of wood- work- 
ing ; but there are many small articles of wood in 
the making of which much skill and ingenuity are 
displayed. Among these the shields and parang- 
sheaths deserve special mention. The former have 
been described in Chapter X. 

The sword-sheath is made from two slips of 
hard wood, cut to fit together exactly, leaving a 
space accurately shaped for the lodgment of the 
sword-blade. The two slips are neatly lashed 

HANDICRAFTS 

211 

together with rattan, and in many cases are elabor- 
ately carved with varieties of a peculiar conven- 
tional design in relief (see vol. i., p. 240). 

Dishes of iron-wood, now almost superseded by 
European earthenware, were formerly in general use 
(Figs. 6 and 7). Their shapes are very good ; the 
dish is generally provided with one or two '' ears " 
or flanges for the grip of the hands, and these are 
cunningly decorated with carved designs or inlaid 
pieces of shell or pottery. Some have a spout 
opposite the single handle. The hollowing and 

Fig. 40. — Sea-Dayak Armlet {simpai). 

general shaping of such dishes is done with a 
small adze, and they are finished with the knife. 

Basket-work, etc. 

The weaving of baskets, mats, and caps is one 
of the most important handicrafts of the Kayans. 
It is chiefly practised by the women, though the 
men help in collecting and preparing the materials. 
The material chiefly used is strips of rattan. A 
rattan about one-third of an inch in diameter is 
split into f\v& strips, and the inner surface of each 
strip is smoothed with a knife ; but the stems of 
several other jungle-plants are also used. 

212 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

The most important of the baskets (PI. 43), 
are the following : The large one used for carry- 
ing padi from the farms to the house ; the small 
basket hung on the back by a pair of shoulder- 
straps, and always carried by the men on going 
far from home; the fish - baskets ; large baskets 

Fig. 41. — Kayan Tool-basket. 

provided with lids and kept in the rooms for 
storing clothing and other personal valuables ; the 
winnowing trays, and the large rough basket used 
for carrying on the back water-vessels or any other 
heavy objects (Fig. 41). 

Of the mats (see PI. 43), the principal are 
the mat worn round the waist for sitting upon ; 
the large mats spread for seating several persons 

Plate ii6. KENYAH MAKING DART POISON. 

XI HANDICRAFTS 213 

in the gallery or private chambers ; those spread 
on the floor for catching the winnowed rice, or on 
the platforms outside the gallery for exposing and 
drying the /^<^/ before pounding it; the mat which 
every person spreads to sleep upon. 

Most of these baskets and mats are made from 
narrow strips of rattan varying from y^r to ^ of an 
inch according to the size and use of the article ; the 
strips are closely woven with great regularity. The 
commonest arrangement is for two sets of strips to 
cross one another at right angles, each strip passing 
over and under two of the opposed set. The 
basket-work so made is very pliable, tough, and 
durable. The standard shapes are worked out with 
great precision. The Kayans are generally content 
to make strong serviceable basket-ware without 
ornamentation ; but in a large proportion of basket- 
ware of this kind made by the other peoples, strips 
of rattan dyed black are combined with those of the 
natural pale yellow colour, and very effective 
patterns are thus worked in. The dyeing of the 
strips is effected by soaking them in a dye obtained 
by beating out in water the soft stem and leaves of 
a plant known as tarum. The dark stain is rendered 
still blacker by subsequently burying the strips in 
the mud of the river for some ten days, or by wash- 
ing them in lime. The dyed strips are then jet 
black with a fine polished surface, and the dye is 
quite permanent. 

A form of mat-work deserving special notice is 
the lampit, the mat used largely for sleeping and 
sitting upon. It is made of stout strips of rattan 
lying parallel to one another, and held together by 
strings threaded through the strips at right angles 
to their length at intervals of four or five inches. 
This mat has an extremely neat appearance and 
allows itself to be neatly rolled up. The piercing 
of the rattan strips at suitable intervals is facilitated 

214 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

by the use of a block of wood grooved for the recep- 
tion of the strip and pierced with holes opening into 
the groove at the required intervals. 

The most elaborately decorated and finely plaited 
basket-ware is made by some of the Klemantan sub- 
tribes, especially the Kanowits and the Tanjongs, 
and the Kalabits, who use, as well as the black dye, 
a red dye (PI. no). The last is made by boiling 
the seeds of the rattan in water and evaporating 
the product until it has the consistency of a thick 
paste. The Punans also excel in this craft. These 
adepts barter much of their handiwork in this kind 
with the people of communities less skilled in it. 
This affords yet another illustration of the fact that 
the various specialised handicrafts are traditional in 
certain tribes and sub-tribes, and are practised 
hardly at all or in an inferior manner only by the 
other tribes, who seem to find it impossible to 
achieve an equal degree of mastery of these crafts. 

Hat-making 

The large flat circular hat worn by the Kayans 
for protection against sun and rain is made by the 
women from the large leaves of a palm. It is the 
only important handicraft practised by the women 
only. The hard tough fluted leaves are pressed 
flat and dried, when the flutes form ribs diverging 
from the stem. Triangular pieces of the length of 
the radius of the hat {i.e, from twelve to eighteen 
inches) are cut and then sewn together in a double 
layer ; those of the upper layer radiate from the 
centre ; those of the under layer are disposed in the 
reverse direction, so that their ribs diverge from 
the periphery, crossing those of the upper layer at an 
acute angle. This arrangement gives great rigidity 
to the whole structure. The two layers are stitched 
together by threads carried round the hat in con- 

t. 

XI 

HANDICRAFTS 215 

centric circles at intervals of about one inch. The 
peripheral edges are sewn to a slender strip of rattan 
bent to form a circle, the two ends overlapping. The 
centre is generally finished with a disc of metal or 
strong cloth on the outer surface (PI. 45). The hats 
hung upon the tombs are decorated on the upper 
surface with bold designs painted in black and red. 

Most of the other tribes make similar hats, and the 
Malanaus and Land Dayaks are especially skilled 
in this craft. The former make very large hats of 
similar shape, the upper surface being of strips of 
rattan dyed red and black, and woven to form 
elaborate patterns. 

Besides these sun-hats, the Kayans and Kenyahs 
and some of the Klemantans weave with fine strips 
of rattan close-fitting skull-caps and head-bands. 
The ends of the strips, some three or four inches 
in length, are sometimes left projecting from the 
centre or forming a fringe round the lower edge. 

The close-fitting hemispherical war-cap is made 
of rattans about half an inch thick split in halves. 

The Making of the Blow-pipe 

The blow-pipe or stmtpitan is perhaps the finest 
product of native Bornean craftmanship. It is made 
by Kayans, Kenyahs, and Punans, and rarely by 
Ibans and Klemantans. 

The best sumpitans are made from the hard 
straight-grained wood of ih^ jagang tree. Having 
chosen and felled the tree, often one of large size, 
the craftsman splits from it long pieces about eight 
feet in length. Such a piece is shaved with the adze 
until it is roughly cylindrical and three to four inches 
in diameter (PI. 112). The piece may be carried 
home to be worked at leisure, or the boring may be 
done upon the spot. A platform is erected about 
seven feet above the ground ; and the prepared rod 

2i6 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

is fixed vertically with the upper end projecting 
through the platform, its lower end resting on the 
ground (PL 113). Its upper end is lashed to the 
platform, its lower end to a pair of stout poles lashed 
horizontally to trees, and its middle to another pair 
of poles similarly fixed. 

The next operation, the boring of the wood, is 
accomplished by the aid of a straight rod of iron 
about nine feet long, of slightly smaller diameter 
than the bore desired for the pipe, and having one 
end chisel-shaped and sharpened. One man stand- 
ing on the platform holds the iron rod vertically 
above the end of the wood, and brings its sharp 
chisel edge down upon the centre of the flat surface. 
Lifting the rod with both hands he repeats his blow 
again and again, slightly turning the rod at each 
blow. He is aided in keeping the rod truly verti- 
cal by two or three forked sticks fixed horizontally 
at different levels above the platform in such a way 
that the vertical rod slides up and down in the forks, 
which thus serve as guides. The rod soon bites its 
way into the wood. An assistant, squatting on the 
platform with a bark-bucket of water beside him, ladles 
water into the hole after every two or three strokes, 
and thus causes the chips to float out. This operation 
steadily pursued for about six hours completes the 
boring. In boring the lower part, the craftsman 
aims at producing a slight curvature of the tube by 
very slightly bending the pole and lashing it in the 
bent position ; the pole on being released then 
straightens itself, and at the same time produces the 
desired slight curvature of the bore. This curvature 
is necessary in order to allow for the bending of the 
blow-pipe, when in use, by the weight of the spear- 
blade which is lashed on bayonet -fashion. If the 
desired degree of curvature is not produced in this 
way, the wooden pipe, still in the rough state as 
regards its outer surface, is suspended horizontally 

XI 

HANDICRAFTS 

217 

on loops, and weights are hung upon the muzzle 
end until, on sighting through the bore, only a half 
circle of daylight is visible — this being 
the degree of curvature of the bore 
desired. The wood is then heated 
with torches, and on cooling retains the 
curvature thus impressed on it. 

It only remains to whittle down the 
rough surface to a smooth cylinder 
slightly tapering towards the muzzle 
(PI. 114), to polish the pipe inside and 

I'i 

Fig. 42. — Kay an Gauge 
used in making Pith- 
cone for dart. 

Fig. 43. — Kayan Wooden Plate for 
working up tpoh poison for darts. 

out, to lash on the spear-blade to the muzzle end 
with strips of rattan, and to attach a small wooden 
sight to the muzzle end opposite the spear-blade. 
The polishing of the bore is effected by working to 

2i8 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

and fro within it a long piece of closely fitting 
rattan ; that of the outer surface, by rubbing it first 
with the skin of a stingray (which, although a 
marine fish, sometimes ascends to the upper reaches 
of the rivers), and afterwards with the leaf (emplas) 
which is the local substitute for emery paper. 

The shaft of the poisoned dart is made from the 
wood of the nibong and wild sago palms. It is 
about nine inches in length and one-sixteenth to 
one-eighth of an inch in diameter (PI. 115). On to 
one end of this is fitted a small tapering cylinder 
of tough pith, about one inch in length, its greatest 
diameter at its butt end being exactly equal to the 
bore of the pipe. The pith is shaved to the 
required diameter by the aid of a small wooden 
cylinder of the standard size (Fig. 42); this is pro- 
longed in a pin of the same diameter as the shaft 
of the dart. A piece of pith transfixed by the pin 
is shaved with a sharp knife until its surface is flush 
with that of the wooden gauge. 

The poison is prepared from the sap of the Ipoh 
tree, Antiaris Toxicaria. The milky sap runs out 
when the bark is incised, and is collected in a 
bamboo cup (PL 88). It is then heated slowly 
over a fire in a trough made from the leaf stem 
of a palm, until it becomes a thick paste of dark 
purple brown colour (PI. 116). When the poison 
is to be applied to the darts, it is worked into 
a thinner paste on a palette with a spatula. A 
circular groove is cut round the shaft of the dart 
about two inches from its tip, and the part so 
marked off is rolled in the paste and then dried 
before a fire. For use against large game, pig, 
deer, or human beings, a larger dose of poison 
is required than can be carried on the tip of the 
shaft. x\ small triangular piece of metal is affixed 
by splitting the tip of the shaft, thrusting in the base 
of the triangular plate, and securing it with a fine 

XI 

HANDICRAFTS 

219 

thread of rattan or fern-stem. The poison is then 
applied to the surface of this metal. The metal is 
obtained nowadays from imported tin or brass 
ware, but formerly a slip of hard wood was used, 
and, possibly, in some 
cases stone. 

The quiver for carry- 
ing the darts is a section 
of bamboo about four 
inches in diameter and 
ten inches in length, 
fitted with a cap of the 
same which fits over the 
shaved lip of the main 
piece (Fig. 44). A 
wooden hook lashed to 
the quiver enables it to 
be hung from the belt. 
The darts, mostly with- 
out piths, are wrapped 
in a squirrel skin and 
thrust tip downwards 
into the quiver. A small 
gourd tied to the quiver 
carries a supply of piths 
all ready to be placed on 
the darts. 

Pottery 

Fig. 44. 

The importation of 
earthenware and of cook- 
ing pots of brass and iron 

has now almost put an end to the native manufac- 
ture of pottery ; but in former times simple earthen- 
ware vessels for boiling rice were made by Kayans, 
Kenyahs, Ibans, and some of the Klemantans. 
Those who made no pots boiled their rice and sago 

220 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

in bamboos. The earthenware cooking pot is a 
simple egg-shaped vessel, one end of which is open 
and surrounded by a low everted lip or collar 
(Fig. 8, p. 60). 

The clay is kneaded with water on a board until 
it has the desired consistency. The vessel is then 
built up on a hollowed base by squeezing the clay 
between a smooth rounded stone held by one hand 
within the vessel and a flat piece of wood, with 
which the clay is beaten from without. The roughly 
shaped vessel is allowed to dry in the sun and baked 
in the fire. In some cases the surface is smoothed 
and glazed by rubbing resin over its surface while hot. 

Pots of this one shape only are made, but of 
several sizes. The commonest size holds about a 
quart ; the largest about two gallons. A pot of this 
sort is carried in a basket made of fine unsplit rattans 
loosely woven in the form of interlacing rings. 

The Manufacture of Bark-Cloth 

The native cloth, which was in universal use 
among the tribes of the interior until largely sup- 
planted in recent years by imported cloth, is made 
from the bark of trees of several species (principally 
the Kttmut, the ipoh, and the wild fig). The material 
used is the fibrous layer beneath the outer bark. 
A large sheet of it is laid on a wooden block and 
beaten with a heavy wooden club in order to render 
it soft and pliable. A piece of the required size and 
shape is cut from the sheet, and sewn across the 
direction of the fibres with needle and thread at 
intervals of about an inch. This prevents the 
material splitting along the direction of the fibres. 
Before European needles were introduced, the stitch- 
ing was done by piercing holes with a small awl and 
pushing the thread through the hole after withdraw- 
ing the awl (PI. 1 17). 

HANDICRAFTS 221 

Spinning and Weaving and Dyeing of Cloth 

The Kayans, Kenyahs, and most of the 
Klemantans weave no cloth ; but the Kayans 
claim, probably with truth, that they formerly wove 
a coarse cloth. In recent years the I bans, Muruts, 
and a few of the Klemantan tribes have been the 
only weavers. It may be said, we think, without 
fear of contradiction, that this is the only craft in 
which the Ibans excel all the other peoples. Their 
methods are similar to those of the Malays, and 
have probably been learnt from them. The weaving 
is done only by the women, though the men make 
the machinery employed by them. 

The fibre used by the Ibans is cotton, which is 
obtained from shrubs planted and cultivated for 
the purpose. The seed is extracted from the 
mass of fibre by squeezing the mass between a 
pair of rollers arranged like a rude mangle, while 
the fibre is pulled away by hand (PI. 118). Next 
the thread is spun from the mass of fibre by the aid 
of a simple wheel, turned by the right hand while 
the left hand twists the fibres (PI. 119). The 
dyeing precedes the weaving if a pattern is to 
be produced. The web is stretched on a wooden 
frame about six feet long and twenty inches in 
width, by winding a long thread round it from end 
to end. The parts of the web corresponding to 
the parts of the cloth that are to remain undyed 
and of the natural pale brown colour of the 
thread are tied round with dried strips of a 
fibrous leaf [lemba), the upper and lower set of 
threads being wrapped up together in the same 
bundles (PI. 120). If only one colour is to be 
applied, the web is then slipped off the frame. The 
threads are held in their relative positions by the 
wrappings, but are further secured by tying a string 

222 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

tightly about the whole bundle at each end. The 
web thus prepared is soaked in the dye for some 
two or three days, and then dried in a shady spot. 
The wrappings upon the threads are waterproof 
and protect the wrapped parts from the dye. When, 
after the dyeing, the web is stretched upon the 
loom, it presents the desired pattern in colour upon 
the undyed ground. The undyed weft is then 
woven across the web in the usual way. And since 
the threads of the weft do not appear on the 
surface, the dyed parts of the web present a 
uniformly coloured surface (PI. 121). 

In most cloths two colours, as well as the 
natural colour of the thread, appear on the surface 
— the commonest colour being a warm brick 
red (obtained from the bark of the samak tree) 
and a dark purple (obtained from the leaves of 
the tarum plant). Lime and gypsum are some- 
times mixed with the watery extracts as mor- 
daunts, but these are probably modern refinements. 
When two colours are to appear, those parts of 
the web which are to be of one colour (say purple) 
are wrapped up during the immersion in the red 
dye together with the parts that are to appear un- 
coloured. When this first dyeing is completed 
the web is prepared for the purple dye, by uncover- 
ing the undyed parts which are to be purple, and 
wrapping up in bundles the threads which have 
already been dyed red. After being soaked in the 
purple dye and dried, all the wrappings are removed 
from the web, and the desired pattern in three 
colours appears upon it when it is stretched. 
Perhaps the most noteworthy feature of the opera- 
tion of dyeing is that the woman generally wraps 
up the threads in the way required to produce the 
pattern without any guidance, judging the length 
and number of the threads to be included in each 
bundle purely by memory of the design aimed at. 

IS;!^ 

HANDICRAFTS 223 

The only striking peculiarity of the loom is its 
extreme simplicity. The upper ends of the web 
are looped over a stout bar which is fixed to a pair 
of uprights about a yard above the floor. The 
lower ends of the web are looped over a stout rod, 
to the ends of which a loop of cord is tied. The 
woman sits on the ground (see PI. 121) with this 
loop around her waist, and thus stretches the web 
and maintains the necessary tension of it. The 
manipulation of the shuttle and of the threads of 
the web is accomplished without other mechanical 
aids than the rods to which the one set of web- 
threads is tied by short threads. 

CHAPTER XII 

DECORATIVE ART 

All the tribes of Borneo practise a number of 
decorative arts. Some of the Klemantans, notably 
the Malanaus, excel all other tribes, in that they 
attain a high level of achievement in a great variety 
of such arts ; but each tribe and sub-tribe preserves 
the tradition of some one or two decorative arts 
in which they are especially skilled. Thus some of 
the Klemantan tribes specially excel in the finer 
kinds of wood-carving (e.g. the decoration of paddles); 
the Kayans in tatuing and in chasing designs on 
steel ; the Kenyahs in the painting of shields and 
in the production of large designs carved in low 
relief on wood and used for adorning houses and 
tombs ; both Kayans and Kenyahs excel in the 
carving of sword - handles in deer's horn ; the 
Barawans and Sebops in beadwork ; the Kalabits 
and I bans in tracing designs on the surface of 
bamboo ; Punans in the decorative mat - work ; 
Kanowits and Tanjongs in basket-work. 

Wood-carving is the most generally practised 
and on the whole the most important of the decora- 
tive arts. Much of it is done on very hard wood ; 
and the principal tools are the sword, the small 
knife carried in the sword -sheath, and adzes and 
axes of various sizes. The blade of the knife is some 
three inches in length, resembling in general shape 
the blade of the sword ; it is wider in proportion, 

224 

CHAP. XII 

DECORATIVE ART 

225 

Fig. 45. — Figure-head of Kayan War- 
boat carved in hard wood. 

but has the same peculiar convexity of the one 
side and concavity of the other in transverse section. 
The shaft is sunk into the end of a rod of hard 
wood and secured with gutta and fine rattan lashing. 
The handle of hard wood is about a foot in length, 
half an inch in diameter, 
and slightly bowed in the 
plane of the blade, the 
convexity being in the 
direction of the cutting 
edge of the blade. The 
butt end of the handle is 
cunningly carved in the 

shape of a crocodile's head, or prolonged in a piece 
of carved deer's horn. The blade of the knife is 
held between the thumb and finger of the right 
hand, the cutting edge directed forwards, and the 
long handle is gripped between the forearm and the 
lower ribs ; the weight of the body can thus be 
brought to the assistance of the 
arm in cutting hard material. With 
this knife most of the finer carving 
is done, the adze and sword being 
used chiefly for rough shaping. 

The adze consists of a flat blade 
of steel in the shape of a highly 
acute -angled triangle (PI. in). 
The slightly convex base is the 
. T. T" ^ cutting edge. The upper half of 

Fig. 46.— Kayan Button , » 1 / i • 1 

for Sword-belt carved the triangle (which may or may 
in hard wood or sub- ^^^ ]^q marked by a shoulder) is 

stance of the horn- , . , . 1 1 1 • 1 1 • 1 v • 

bill's beak. buried in the lashings by which it is 

attached to the wooden haft. The 
haft is a small bough of tough, springy wood, cut 
from a tree, together with a small block of the wood 
of the stem ; the latter is shaved down until It forms 
an oblong block continuous with the haft and at 
an angle to it of yo°'So\ The upper half of the 
VOL. I Q 

226 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

metal blade is laid upon the distal surface of this 
block and lashed firmly to it with fine strips of rattan. 
A piece of skin is often placed between the metal 
and the lashings ; this facilitates the removal of the 
blade, and enables the craftsman to alter the angle 
between the cutting edge and the haft. Commonly 
the blade is laid in the plane of the haft, and the 
implement is then what we should call a small axe ; 
on turning the blade through 90°, it is converted 
to a small adze ; and not infrequently the blade 
is turned through a smaller angle, so that its plane 
forms an acute angle with that of the haft. 

Carved woodwork is commonly painted with 
black and red paint, prepared respectively from 
soot and iron oxide mixed with sugar-cane juice 
or with lime ; the moist pigment is applied with the 
finger on larger surfaces, and the finer lines and 
edges are marked out with the aid of a chiseU 
edged stick of wood. 

Be AD WORK 

Old beads are much valued and sought after by 
all the tribes except I bans, especially by the 
Kayans. There are few families of the upper class 
that do not possess a certain number of them. 

Many varieties are well known, and some of the 
Kayan women are very expert in recognising the 
genuine old specimens, and in distinguishing these 
varieties from one another and from modern 
imitations. 

Formerly these old beads were one of the 
principal forms of currency, and they still constitute 
an important part of the wealth of many families. 

Most of these valuable old beads are of foreign 
manufacture, though a few made from shell and 
agate are of the country. The old foreign -made 
beads were probably imported by Arab and 

n 

^'^'^^^^^^.^ 

Plate 122. CARVED DOOR TO THE ROOM OF ABAN JAU, A CHIEF OF 
THE SEBOPS (KLEMANTANS), TINJAR RIVER. 

DECORATIVE ART 227 

Chinese traders at various dates. Some of them 
are probably of Chinese manufacture, others prob- 
ably came from the near East and even from Venice. 
Some are of glass curiously marked and coloured, 
others of stone inlaid with bits of different colours, 
others of some hard substance whose composition 
defies description. Certain rare kinds are especially 
valued and can hardly be bought at any price ; 
they are reckoned to be worth at least 100 dollars 
apiece. The most valuable of all is known as 
the lukut sekala ; the ownership of each such bead 
is as accurately known throughout a large district 
as the ownership of the masterpieces of ancient art 
in our own country. The wife of a rich chief may 
possess old beads to the value of thousands of 
pounds, and will wear a large part of them on any 
occasion of display (PI. 130). These old beads are 
worn threaded together to form necklaces and 
girdles, being arranged with some reference to 
harmony of size and colour and to value, the most 
valuable being placed in the middle where they will 
be shown to best advantage. A single rare bead 
is sometimes worn on the wrist. 

A woman who possesses a good stock of such 
beads will seldom be seen without some of them on 
her person. She will occasionally exchange a few 
for other varieties, and is generally eager to add to 
her collection ; she may occasionally make a present 
of one or two to some highly esteemed friend or 
relative, and will generally assign them, but without 
handing them over, to various female relatives 
before her death. 

Besides these valuable old beads there are in 
use among all the tribes many small glass beads of 
modern European manufacture. These are threaded 
to form a variety of designs, generally in two 
colours, the combination of black and yellow being 
the most commonly preferred. These strips of bead- 

228 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

work are put to many decorative uses : they are 
applied to the women's head-bands, to the centre of 
the sun-hat, to sword sheaths, to cigarette boxes, 
to the war-coat at the nape of the neck, and, by 
some Klemantans, to the jackets of the women. 

The designs worked in this way are but few, and 
most of them are common to all the tribes. The 
thread used is prepared by rolling on the thigh 
fibres drawn from the leaf of the pine-apple ; it is 
very strong and durable. The design to be repro- 
duced is drawn or carved in low relief on a board. 
A thread is fixed across the end of the board and 
others are tied to it at short intervals ; on these the 
beads are threaded, neighbouring threads being 
tied together at short intervals ; and the colours of 
the beads are selected according to the demands of 
the pattern over which they are worked. 

Besides these designs on the flat, tassels, girdles, 
necklaces, ear-rings, and cigarette rings are also 
made of these beads. The modern imported beads 
used for these purposes are sometimes improved 
by being ground flat on the two surfaces that 
adjoin their neighbours ; this is done by fixing a 
number of them into the cut end of a piece of 
sugar-cane and rubbing this against a smooth stone. 
This treatment of the beads gives to the articles 
made of them a very neat and highly finished 
appearance. 

Bamboo Decorations 

The working of designs on the surface of pieces 
of bamboo is done very simply, but none the less 
effectively. Among the bamboo articles generally 
decorated in the way to be described are the native 
drinking-cup, the tobacco-box, and tubes for carrying 
flint and steel and all sorts of odds and ends. 

The pattern to be produced is outlined with the 

Plate 123. DOOR OF ROOM IN SEBOP (KLEMANTAN) HOUSE. 
The two figures near the top probably represent gibbons. 

DECORATIVE ART 

229 

point of the knife upon the surface of the bamboo, 
the artist working from memory of the desired 
pattern and adapting it to 
the proportions of the surface 
to be covered. The Iban 
works more freely than 
others, working out the 
pattern and modifying it to 
meet the exigencies of his 
material, section by section, 
as he goes along. Others 
plan out the design for the 
whole surface before work- 
ing out any part in detail. 
It is probable that in no 
case does a man sit down 
and produce a new pattern ; 
but the freer mode of work- 
ing of the Iban leads him 
on to greater modifications 
of the traditional designs ; 
and it is probably partly for 
this reason that a much 
larger variety of designs is 
applied in this way by them 
than by the other tribes, 
among whom they are very 
limited in number. But the 
greater variety of designs 
worked by the Ibans is due 
also to the readiness with 
which he copies and adopts 
as his own the patterns used 
by other tribes. The Kayans 
and Kenyahs use almost ex- 
clusively varieties of the dog pattern and of the 
hook and circle (see Fig. 47). 

The design outlined by the point of the knife 

Fig. 47. 

CHAP. 

230 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO 

is made to stand out boldly from the ground by 
darkening the latter. This is achieved in two ways : 
(i) the ground is covered with parallel close -set 
scratches, not running continuously throughout the 
larger areas of the ground, but grouped in sets 
of parallel lines some few millimetres in length, the 
various sets meeting at angles of all degrees; (2) 
the hard surface of the bamboo is wholly scraped 
away from the ground areas to a depth of about 
half a^ millimetre. In either case the black or red 
paint is then smeared over the whole surface with 
the finger, and when it has become dried the 
surface is rubbed with a piece of cloth (Kayan), or 
scraped lightly with a knife (Iban). The pigment 
is thus removed from the intact parts and remains 
adherent to the lines and areas from which the 
hard surface layer has been removed. The design 
is thus left in very low relief, and is of the natural 
colour of the bamboo upon a black or dark -red 
ground, or on a ground merely darkened by the 
parallel scratches (Pis. 126, 127). 

Lashing 

Lashing with strips of rattan and with coarse 
fibres from the leaf-stem of some of the palms and 
ferns is applied to a great variety of purposes, and 
largely takes the place of our nailing and screwing 
and riveting. It is carried out extremely neatly 
and commonly has a decorative effect. This 
effect is in some cases enhanced by combining 
blackened threads with those of the natural pale 
yellow colour ; and the finer varieties of this work 
deserve to be classed with the decorative arts. 
The finest lashing-work is done by the Kalabits, 
who cover small bamboo boxes with a layer of 
close -set lashing, producing pleasing geometrical 
designs by the combination of yellow and black 

XII 

DECORATIVE ART 231 

threads. The surface of the bamboo to which the 
lashing is applied is generally scraped away to a 
depth of about one-sixteenth of an inch ; it is thus 
rendered less slippery than the natural surface, and 
is therefore gripped more firmly by the lashing, 
and the surface of the lashing is brought flush with 
the unlashed natural surface. The effect is not 
only a highly ornamental appearance, but also a 
greatly increased durability of the box, the natural 
tendency of the bamboo to split longitudinally being 
very effectively counteracted. 

Similar fine decorative lashing is used by all 
the tribes for binding together the two halves of 
the sword sheath, and for binding the haft of knife 
or sword where it grips the metal blade, though 
brass wire is sometimes used for this purpose. 

Closely allied to this lashing is the production 
of decorative knots. A considerable variety of 
knots are in common use ; they are always well 
tied and practically effective, but some are elaborated 
for decorative purposes to form rosettes, especially 
by Kayans in making their sword sheaths. 

Painting 

We have stated above that the carved woodwork 
is often painted with black, red, and white pigments. 
It must be added that wooden surfaces are often 
painted on the flat, especially shields, the outer 
surfaces of walls oi padi huts, and tombs, also grave 
hats and the gunwales of boats, and decorative 
planks in the inner walls of the long gallery of the 
house. The Kenyahs and some of the Klemantans, 
especially the Skapans and Barawans, are most 
skilled in, and make most use of, this form of 
decoration ; but it is probably practised in some 
degree by all the peoples. 

The three pigments mentioned above — black, red, 

232 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

and white, made respectively from soot, iron oxide, 
and lime — are, so far as we know, the only native 
varieties ; but at the present day these are sometimes 
supplemented with indigo and yellow pigments 
obtained from the bazaars. The pigment is gener- 
ally laid on free-hand with the finger-tip, a few 
guiding points only being put in. 

It may be mentioned here that individuals of all 
the tribes will occasionally amuse themselves by 
making rude drawings with charcoal on the plank 
wall of the gallery. The drawings usually depict 
human and animal figures, and scenes from the 
life of the people, and they generally illustrate the 

particular form of occu- 
pation in which the 
household is employed 
at the time, e.g. scenes 
from the padi fields, a 
group of people weed- 
ing, the return of a war- 
party, the collection of 
honey, the capture of a 
large fish. These draw- 
ings are invariably very crude ; their nature is 
sufficiently indicated by PI. 128. There seem to 
be no noteworthy differences in this respect between 
the different peoples. 

The Punans, having no houses and therefore no 
walls on which to draw pictures, have little oppor- 
tunity to indulge any such tendency ; but we have 
seen rude hunting scenes depicted by them on the 
walls of shallow caves ; the technique consisted in 
scratching away the soft rotted surface of the lime- 
stone rock to produce outlines of the figures depicted. 
The Malanaus, who live in the large limestone 
caves during the time of harvesting the edible nests 
of the swift, sometimes make rude drawings with 
charcoal on the walls of the cave. 

Fig. 48. — Kayan Cradle ornamented 
with flat tops of cone shells. 

DECORATIVE ART 

233 

The weaving of decorative 
designs on cloth is almost 
confined to the Sea Dayaks. 
Some account of the designs 
will be given below. 

Shell-work 

Shells (chiefly nassas and 
the flat bases of cone-shells) 
are sometimes applied by the 
I ban women to decorate their 
woven coats, by Kalabits (in 
concentric circles on their 
sunhats), and more rarely by 
other tribes in the decoration 
of baskets (Fig. 48). Fig. 
49 represents a garment de- 
corated in this fashion by 
I ban women, and worn by 
them when dancing with the 
heads of enemies in their 
hands. 

The Decorative Designs 

The Kayans make use in 
their decorative art of a large 
number of conventional de- 
signs. The principal appli- 
cations of these designs are 
in tatu, beadwork, the pro- 
duction of panels of wood for 
the adornment of houses, 
tombs, boats, dind padi barns, 
the decoration of bamboo 
boxes, and the painting of 
hats, and the carving of highly 

Fig. 49. 

234 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

ornate doors to the rooms. All these applications 
involve the covering of flat or curved surfaces with 
patterns either in low relief only or without relief; 
and many of the designs are applied in all these 
different ways, and all of them together form a natural 
group. Besides these surface designs, a consider- 
able variety of designs is used in giving decorative 
form to solid objects such as the handles of swords 
and paddles, the ends of main roof- beams in the 
houses, posts used in various rites and in the con- 
struction of tombs, the figure-heads of war-boats. 
These, with the exception of those used in carving 
the sword handles, which are highly peculiar, form 
another group of relatives. The designs chased 
upon the blades of the swords constitute a fourth 
natural group distinct from the other two groups. 
A fifth small group of designs is carved in the form 
of fretwork. We propose to say a few words about 
the designs of each of these five groups. 

(i) The designs of the first group are the most 
numerous and most widely applied. A large pro- 
portion of them obviously are conventionalised 
derivatives from animal forms. Of these animal 
forms the human figure, the dog, and the prawn 
have been the originals of the largest number of 
patterns ; the macaque monkey and the large lizard 
( Varanus) are also traceable. Some designs 
vaguely suggest a derivation from some animal 
form, but cannot confidently be assigned to any one 
origin. 

A few seemed to be derived from vegetable 
forms ; while some few, for example the hook- 
pattern, seem to be derived from no animal or 
vegetable form. The hook- pattern seems to be 
symbolical of conjunction and acquisition in various 
spheres. 

Of all the designs the derivatives from or variants 
of the dog are the most numerous and the most 

Plate 126. A KENYAH PATTERN CARVED ON A BAMBOO TOBACCO 

BOX. 

XII DECORATIVE ART 235 

frequently applied. The name dog-pattern (kalang 
asu) is given to a very large number ; and of these 
some obviously reproduce the form of the dog, 
while the derivation of the others from the same 
original can generally be made clear by the inspec- 
tion of a number of intermediate forms, although 
some of them retain but very slight indications of 
the form or features of the dog. The unmistakable 
dog-patterns are illustrated by one of the panels 
shown in PI. 124 ; and in Pis. 134 et seq. we repro- 
duce a number of dog-patterns of more or less con- 
ventionalised characters. It will be noticed that the 
eye is the most constant feature about which the 
rest of the pattern is commonly centred ; but that 
the eye also disappears from some of the most con- 
ventionalised. It seems probable that, although the 
name kalang asu continues to be commonly used to 
denote all this group of allies, many of those who 
use the term, and even of those who carve or work 
the patterns, are not explicitly aware in doing so 
that the name and the patterns refer to the dog, or 
are in any way connected with it ; that is to say, 
both the words and the pattern have ceased to 
suggest to their minds the meaning of the word 
dog, and mean to them simply the pattern appro- 
priate to certain uses. 

We have questioned men who have been 
accustomed to apply the dog -pattern as to the 
significance of the parts of the pattern, and have 
led them to recognise that the parts of the dog, 
eye, teeth, jaws, and so on, are represented ; and 
this recognition has commonly been accompanied by 
expressions of enlightenment, as of one making an 
interesting discovery.^ This ignorance of the origin 
of the pattern is naturally true only of the more 
conventionalised examples, whether of the dog or 

^ Some Kayans habitually speak of most of the dog-patterns by the term 
usang orang (which means the prawn's head). This indicates possibly some 
gradual substitution of designs of the one origin for those of the other. 

236 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

other natural forms. Probably a few who have 
specially interested themselves in the designs have 
traced out their connections pretty fully, but this is 
certainly quite exceptional. Most of the craftsmen 
simply copy the current forms, introducing perhaps 
now and then an additional scroll, or some other 
slight modification. 

Some men are well known as experts in the 
production of designs, and such a man can produce 
a wonderful variety, all or most being well-known 
conventions. Their mode of working frequently 
implies that the artist is working to a pattern, 
mentally fixed and clearly visualised, rather than 
working out any new design. For he will work 
first on one part of the surface, then on another, 
producing disconnected fragments of the pattern, 
and uniting them later. Although the women use 
these patterns in beadwork and in tatuing, they 
rely in the main on the men for the patterns which 
they copy ; these being drawn on wood or cloth 
for beadwork, or carved in low relief for tatuing. 
A Kayan expert may carry in mind a great variety 
of designs. One such expert produced for our 
benefit, during a ten days' halt of an expedition, 
forty-one patterns, drawn with pencil on paper ; 
most of these are of considerable complexity and 
elaboration. 

(2) The designs carved in the solid or in high 
relief are for the most part conventionalised copies 
of human and animal forms ; but the conventionalis- 
ing is not carried so far as in those of the first class, 
so that the carving generally constitutes an un- 
mistakable representation of the original. The 
posts set up as altars to the gods are generally 
carved in the human form, and the degree of 
elaboration varies widely from the rudest possible 
indication of the head and limbs to a complete 
representation of all the parts. But in no case 

I 

DECORATIVE ART 

237 

(with the possible exception of some of the figures 
carved by Malanaus) is the human form reproduced 
with any high degree of accuracy or artistic merit 
(Figs. 50-53). 

Fig. 54. 

Fig. 55. 

Fig. 57. 

The animal forms are used chiefly as the figure- 
heads of war - boats and at the ends of the main 
roof-beams of the houses ; and some of these are 
executed with a degree of artistry that must win 
our admiration, especially when we reflect that the 
timber used is generally one of the harder kinds 
(but not iron-wood) such as the mirabo [Afzelia 

238 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

palembanica), and that the only tools used are the 
axe, sword, and knife. The animals most frequently 
represented are the dog, crocodile, monkey, horn- 
bill, and bear (Pis. 122, 125, Figs. 45, 46, 54-57). 
Carved dogs, comparatively little conventionalised, 
are sometimes used as the supports of low plat- 
forms upon which the chiefs may sit on ceremonious 
occasions. 

(3) The handles of the swords, generally of deer's 
antlers, but sometimes of wood, exhibit a group 
of highly peculiar closely allied designs. All these 
seem to be derived from the human form, although 
in many cases this can only be traced in the 
light of forms intermediate between the less and 
the more highly conventionalised (Pis. 129, 184). 
In examples in which the human form is most 
obvious, it has the following position and character : — 
The butt end of the blade is sunk in a piece 
(about six inches in length) of the main shaft of 
the antler at its distal or upper end. This piece 
constitutes the grip of the handle or hilt. The 
proximal or lowest point of the antler projecting 
at an angle of some 70° from the grip is cut down 
to a length of some four inches, forming a spur 
standing in the plane of the blade and towards 
its cutting edge. The grip is lashed with fine 
strips of rattan. The spur and the thick end in 
which the spur and the grip unite are elaborately 
carved. If the sword is held horizontally, its 
point directed forwards and its cutting edge upwards, 
the butt end is presented with the spur vertically 
before the face of the observer. It will then be 
seen that the surface turned to the observer presents 
the principal features of the human figure, stand- 
ing with arms akimbo face to face with the ob- 
server. The key to the puzzle is the double row 
of teeth. Above this are the two eyes. Below the 
level of the mouth the elbows project laterally, and 

f^Witm 

f. 

yT7\ 

Plate 128. CHARCOAL DRAWINGS. 

The first depicts women at work on padi mortars ; the second the feechng of pigs and 
fowls ; the third the laying of a corpse in the tomb. 

DECORATIVE ART 239 

a little below these and nearer the middle line are 
the two hands ; and below these again the two legs 
stand out, carved not merely in relief, but in the 
solid, and bent a little at the knee. The feet are 
indicated below and more laterally. From the 
crown of the head projects a ring of short hair made 
up of tufts white, black, and red in colour. Another 
short tuft projects from the region of the navel 
(? pubis), and a pair of tufts project laterally 
a little below the level of the mouth. The 
extremity of the main shaft of the antler projects 
a little beyond the feet of the human figure, and is 
carved in a form which is clearly an animal 
derivative — probably from the dog or possibly the 
crocodile. From its open jaws projects a long tuft 
of hair, and a pair of short tufts project laterally 
from the region of its ears. The whole of the 
carved part of the hilt thus represents a man stand- 
ing upon the head of a dog (or crocodile). The 
interpretation of the whole is much obscured by 
the fact that the parts of the human figure named 
above are separated from one another by areas 
which are covered with a continuous scroll design 
in low relief, and by the fact that all the lateral parts 
of the carved area bear, scattered irregularly in 
relief, reduplications of the various features of the 
human figure, e.g, of the hands, elbows, knees, and 
even of the teeth, as well as many pairs of inter- 
locking hooks. These last, which recur in other 
decorative designs, and which (as was said above) 
seem to symbolise the taking of heads, form an 
important and constant feature of the whole scheme 
of decoration. In the more elaborate examples 
they are carved out of the solid ; and usually one 
hole (or more) about 5 mm. in diameter perforates 
the thickest part of the hilt, and contains in the 
middle plane a pair of these interlocking hooks. 
In the most elaborate examples of these carved 

240 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

sword hilts all obvious trace of the human figure is 
lost in a profusion of detail, which, however, is of 
the same general character as that of the examples 
described above, and seems to consist of the various 
features of the human and animal pattern combined 
in wild profusion with regard only to decorative 
effect, and not at all to the reproduction of the 
parent forms. 

With the decorative designs of the hilt of the 
sword must be classed those of its sheath. The 
sheath consists of two slips of tapang wood firmly 
lashed together with finely plaited rattan strips, 
both strips being hollowed so that they fit closely to 
the blade. It is provided with a plaited cord, 
which buckles about the waist. The inner piece 
of the sheath is smooth inside and out. The outer 
surface of the outer piece is often elaborately 
decorated. The decoration consists in the main 
of designs carved in relief; and these are composed 
of the same elements as the design upon the sword 
hilt, namely, hooks, single and interlocking, elbows, 
teeth, etc., all woven about with a scroll design of 
relieved lines. 

(4) The designs reproduced in fretwork are in 
the main adaptations of some of those used in 
decorating surfaces, especially of the dog pattern ; 
but they are always conventionalised in a high 
degree (see PI. 130). The hook pattern is fre- 
quently introduced to fill up odd corners. The 
human form is seldom or never traceable in work 
of this kind. Fretwork is chiefly used to adorn the 
tombs of chiefs. 

{5) The designs chased on the surfaces of the 
blades of swords and knives and spear-heads form 
a distinctive group. They are flowing scroll patterns 
containing many spiral and S -shaped curves in 
which no animal or plant forms can be certainly 
traced, though suggestions of the kalang asu may 

DECORATIVE ART 241 

be found. The lack of affinity between these 
patterns and those applied to other surfaces suggests 
that they may have been taken over from some 
other people together vi^ith the craft of the smith ; 
but possibly the distinctive character is due only 
to the exigencies of the material. Some of the 
designs painted on hats and shields exhibit perhaps 
some affinity with these. This work is almost 
confined to the Kayans. 

It is worthy of remark that the art work of the 
Kayans is in the main of a public character ; for 
example, the decorative carving about the house 
is done by voluntary and co-operative effort in the 
public gallery and hardly at all in the private 
rooms ; and ornamented hats and shields are hung 
in the gallery rather than in the private rooms ; 
again, the war-boats, which are the common property 
of the household, are decorated more elaborately 
than those which are private property. 

All these forms of art work are the products of 
distinctly amateur effort; that is to say that, although 
certain individuals attain special skill and reputation 
in particular forms of art, they do not make their 
living by the practice of them, but rather, like every 
one else, rely in the main upon the cultivation of 
padi for the family support ; they will exchange 
services of this kind, and definite payments are 
sometimes agreed upon, but a large amount of such 
work is done for one another without any material 
reward. 

The Kenyahs, Klemantans, and I bans 

The Kenyahs make use of all, or most, of the 
patterns found among the Kayans, and there is 
little or nothing that distinguishes the decorative 
art of the one tribe from that of the other. They 
use the patterns based on the monkey rather more 

VOL. I R 

242 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

than the Kayans ; and a decoration commonly found 
in their houses is a frieze running along the top 
of the main partition wall of the house, bearing 
in low relief an animal design, painted in red and 
black, which is called Bali Sungei (i.e. water-spirit) 
or Naga. The latter name is known to all the 
tribes, and is probably of foreign origin ; and it 
seems possible that the design and this name are 
derived from the dragon forms so commonly used 
in Chinese decorative art. 

The various Klemantan tribes make use of 
many decorative designs very similar to those of 
the Kayans. Different animal forms predominant 
among the different tribes, e.g. among the Long 

Fig. 58. Fig. 59. Fig. 60. 

Pokuns the form of the gibbon and of the sacred ape 
{Seminopitkecus Hosei) are chiefly used in house 
decoration. Among the Sebops and Barawans the 
human figure predominates ; the Malanaus make 
especially elaborate crocodile images in solid wood. 
The tombs of some of the Klemantans are very 
massive and elaborately decorated. The Tanjongs 
and Kanowits and Kalabits, who excel in basket- 
work, introduce a variety of patterns in black, red, 
and white. The majority of these are simple 
geometrical designs which arise naturally out of the 
nature of the material ; of more elaborate designs 
specially common are the hook-pattern (Fig. 58), 
the pigeon's eye (Fig. 59), and the caterpillar 
(Fig. 60). 

In wealth of decorative designs the I bans 

Plate 129. 

KENYAH SWORD-HANDLE CARVED FROM A DEER'S HORN. 

XII 

DECORATIVE ART 

243 

surpass all the other tribes. These designs are 
displayed most abundantly in the decoration of 
bamboo surfaces and in the dyeing of cloths. The 

mm — unnn — nmii — luCTf ibb)) — im — iwir Bfflii '• inui" 838' tt^iy "iwn " wu—ivw '"i 

1 — wm — rmi — mnn — wr^ — mi — \m — im m'M um~wm'\m Ritt — me m\\ wt 

-«m«i imu* " fmw »mn liiiiif 

" ' " ■ - I 

^^>^^^^&^ 

r.f» )nu »» l»)« Difl* 

<iiiio nhn itw lutni imiii juiui .luiui uuii itr» 

Fig. 61. 

designs on bamboo surfaces are largely foliate 
scrolls, especially the yam-leaf, but also occasionally 
animal derivatives. 

The designs dyed upon the cloths (Fig. 6t) 

244 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

are largely animal derivatives ; but the artists 
themselves seldom are aware of the derivation, 
even when the pattern bears the name of its animal 
origin ; and as to the names of all, except the most 
obvious animal derivatives, even experts will differ. 
The frog, the young bird, the human form, and the 
lizard are the originals most frequently claimed. 
Parts of the animal, such as the head or eye, are 
commonly repeated in serial fashion detached from 
the rest of its form. And in many cases it is, of 
course, impossible to identify the parts of the pattern, 
although it may show a general affinity with un- 
mistakable animal patterns. One such pattern very 
commonly used in dyeing is named after Agi bulaUy 
the large shrew {Gymnura) ; but we have not been 
able to trace the slightest resemblance to the 
animal in any of the various examples we have 
seen (Pis. 131, 132). 

We are inclined to suppose that the I bans have 
copied many of their cloth-patterns from the Malays 
together with the crafts of dyeing and weaving. 
For their technique is similar to that of the Malays 
all over the peninsula, and the same is true of some 
of their designs. Only in this way, we think, can 
we account for their possession of these crafts, 
which are practised by but very few of the other 
inland peoples. The fact that plant derivatives 
predominate greatly over animals in their designs, 
whereas the reverse is true of almost all other 
tribes, bears out this supposition, for the Malays 
are forbidden by their religion to represent animal 
forms, and make use largely of plant forms. 

Tatu 

Tatuing is extensively practised among the 
tribes of Borneo. A great variety of patterns are 
used, and they are applied to many different parts of 

Plate 130. OLD BEADS WORN BY KAYANS 

A. LUKUT Sekala. — Value formerly one healthy adult male slave ; 

present value, from £10 to ^15. 

B. Labang Pagang. — Value 5s. to 15s. Used chiefly at marriage 

ceremony. Kayan value in brassvvare, one gong. 

C. JEKOKOK. — Value 15s. to 25s. ; or in brassware, a small tawak. 

D. Kelam Wit. — Value 15s. to 30s.; or in brassware, a tawak 

which measures from the base of the boss to the outer edge 
a span between the first finger and the thumb. Also much 
used in marriage ceremony. 

E. Kelam Buang. — Value about 15s.; much sought after and worn 

on a girdle by Kayan girls. The bear bead. 

F. Kelam Buang Butit Telawa. — The name means the bear 

bead with spider's belly. Value about 15 s. 

G. Kaja Obing. — Value 15 s. to 25 s. 

H. Kelam Song. — Value from £4 to £6 ; or one adult female slave. 

I. Kelam. — Kenyah. Value about 15s. 

J. LUKUT. — Kenyah. Value about los., or a gong ; value about 
ten to fifteen ingans of padi, or about 7 bushels. 

K. LUKUT MURIK. — A bead used by the Murik tribe. Value 
about I OS. 

L. I NO Kalabit. — A Kalabit necklace. Value about ^5 ; or an 
adult bufifalo. 

M. A single blue bead from the necklace " L." 

The yellow beads in the necklace are known as Labang, and the 
blue ones as BUNAU. The beads in the necklace are all very old ones. 
The beads A to H are chiefly, though not exclusively, found among 
Kayans ; I and J among Kenyahs ; K among Muriks (Klemantans) ; 
and the necklace L among Kalabits (Murut). 

Plate 130. OLD BEADS WORN BY KAYANS. 

DECORATIVE ART 245 

the body. A paper embodying most of the facts 
hitherto ascertained has been published by one of 
us (C. H.) in conjunction with Mr. R. Shelford, 
formerly curator of the Sarawak Museum, who has 
paid special attention to the subject ; we therefore 
reproduce here the greater part of the substance of 
that paper/ with some slight modifications, and we 
desire to express our thanks to Mr. Shelford^ for 
his kind permission to make use of the paper in 
this way. 

The great diversity of tribes in Borneo involves, in a 
study of their tatu and tatuing methods, a good deal of 
research and much travel, if first-hand information on the 
subject is to be obtained. Between us we have covered 
a considerable area in Borneo and have closely cross- 
questioned members of nearly every tribe inhabiting 
Sarawak on their tatu, but we cannot claim to have 
exhausted the subject by any means ; there are tribes in 
the interior of Dutch Borneo and in British North Borneo 
whom we have not visited, and concerning whom our 
knowledge is of the scantiest. 

The practice of tatu is so widely spread throughout 
Borneo that it seems simpler to give a list of the tribes 
that do not tatu, than of those who do. We can divide 
such a list into two sections : the first including those tribes 
that originally did not tatu, though nowadays many 
individuals are met with whose bodies are decorated with 
designs copied from neighbouring tribes ; the second 
including the tribes (mostly Klemantan) that have given 
up the practice of tatu owing to contact with Mohammedan 
and other influences. 

A. I. Punan. 

2. Maloh. 

3. Land Dyak. 

^ "Materials for a Study of Tatu in Borneo," by Charles Hose and R. 
vShelford, J. R.A.I, vol. xxxvi. Here also we have to thank the Council 
of the Royal Anthropological Institute for permission to republish part of 
this paper, and to reproduce the plates and figures accompanying it. The 
reference figures of this section refer to the bibliographical list at the end of 
this chapter. 

^ Since these pages were printed we have had to mourn tlie loss of our 
friend and fellow-worker, cut off in the early summer of a life strenuously 
devoted to scientific research. 

246 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

B. 4. Malanau. 

5. Miri. 

6. Dali. 

7. Narom. 

8. Sigalang ] /^Q^n-rlver tribes of Ukit stock). 

9. biduan ) ^ ^ 

10. Tutong. 

11. Balait. 

12. Bekiau (traces of a former practice of tatu 

occasionally found). 

13. Bisaya. 

14. Kadayans. 

The patterns once employed by the tribes included in 
the second section of this list, most of which have adopted 
Malay dress and to some extent Malay customs, are lost 
beyond recall. The Land Dayaks display absolute 
ignorance of tatu, and aver that they never indulged in 
the practice. Maloh and Punan men ornamented with 
Kayan tatu designs we have often encountered ; but they 
have no designs of their own, and attach no special 
significance to their borrowed designs.^ 

We may note here that the ornamentation of the body 
by means of raised scars and keloids is not known in 
Borneo. Both men and women of several tribes will test 
their bravery and indifference to pain by setting fire to a 
row of small pieces of tinder placed along the forearm, and 
the scars caused by these burns are often permanent, but 
should not be mistaken for decorative designs. Carl Bock 
(2, PI. 1 6) 2 figures some Punan women with rows of 
keloids on the forearms, but states (p. 71) that these are 
due to a form of vaccination practised by these people. 

The Kayans are, with one or two exceptions, the most 
tatued race in Borneo, and perhaps the best tatued from an 
artistic point of view ; the designs used in the tatu of the 
men have been widely imitated, and much ceremonial is 
connected with the tatu of the women, an account of which 
we give below. Generally speaking, the true Klemantan 
designs are quite simple, and it is noteworthy that 
although theKenyah tribes most nearly akin to Kayans have 

^ Nieuwenhuis also notes (9, p. 451) that men in the course of their travels 
amongst other tribes permit themselves to be tatued with the patterns in vogue 
with their hosts. 

^ These figures refer- to the bibliography printed at the end of this chapter, 
vol. i., p. 280. 

Plate 131. BLANKET (PUA) WOVEN BY IBAN WOMAN, 

DECORATIVE ART 247 

borrowed the Kayan tatu patterns, the majority of Kenyah 
and Klemantan tribes employ quite simple designs, whilst 
the primitive Kenyahs of the Batang Kayan river hardly 
tatu at all. A remarkable exception to the general 
simplicity of the Klemantan patterns is furnished by the 
Ukits, Bakatan, and Biadjau, who tatu very extensively in 
the most complex designs ; the Long Utan, an extinct 
tribe, probably of Klemantan stock, also used highly 
decorative and complex designs. Since so many tribes 
owe much of their knowledge of tatu and the majority 
of their designs to the Kayans, it will be well to commence 
with an account of the art of tatu as practised by these 
people. 

i. Kayan Tatu. 

Dr. Nieuwenhuis [9, p. 450] agrees with us in stating 
that amongst these people the men tatu chiefly for 
ornament, and that no special significance is attached to the 
majority of designs employed ; nor is there any particular 
ceremonial or tabu connected with the process of tatuing 
the male sex. There is no fixed time of life at which a 
man can be tatued, but in most cases the practice is begun 
early in boyhood. Nieuwenhuis [9, p. 456] remarks that 
the chiefs of the Mendalam Kayans scarcely tatu at all. 

Amongst the Sarawak Kayans, if a man has taken the 
head of an enemy he can have the backs of his hands and 
fingers covered with tatu (PI. 141, Fig. i), but, if he has 
only had a share in the slaughter, one finger only, and that 
generally the thumb, can be tatued. On the Mendalam 
river, the Kayan braves are tatued on the left thumb only, 
not on the carpals and backs of the fingers, and the thigh 
pattern is also reserved for head-taking heroes [9, p. 456]. 
Of the origin of tatu the Kayans relate the following 
story : — Long ago when the plumage of birds was dull and 
sober, the coucal {Centropus sinensis) and the argus 
pheasant {Argusianus grayi) agreed to tatu each other ; 
the coucal began on the pheasant first, and succeeded 
admirably, as the plumage of the pheasant bears witness at 
the present day ; the pheasant then tried his hand on the 
coucal, but being a stupid bird he was soon in difficulties ; 
fearing that he would fail miserably to complete the task, 
he told the coucal to sit in a bowl of saniak tan, and then 
poured the black dye over him, and flew off, remarking 
that the country was full of enemies and he could not 

248 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

stop ; that is why the coucal to this day has a black head 
and neck with a tan-coloured body. Nieuwenhuis 
[9, p. 456] relates substantially the same story, the crow 
\Corone macrorhyndyus), however, being substituted for the 
coucal and the incident of the bowl of samak tan omitted. 

Among Kayans isolated designs are found on the 
following parts of the bodies of the men : — The outside 
of the wrist, the flexor surface of the forearm, high up 
on the outside of the thigh, on the breasts and on the 
points of the shoulders, and, as already stated, in the case 
of warriors on the backs of the hands and fingers. But 
not all the men are tatued on all these parts of the body. 
The design tatued on the wrist (PI. 139, Figs. 8-10) is 
termed lukut^ the name of an antique bead much valued 
by Kayans ; the significance of this design is of some 
interest. When a man is ill, it is supposed that his soul 
has escaped from his body ; and when he recovers it is 
supposed that his soul has returned to him ; to prevent 
its departure on some future occasion the man will '' tie it 
in " by fastening round his wrist a piece of string on which 
is threaded a lukut ^ or antique bead, some magic apparently 
being considered to reside in the bead. However, the 
string can get broken and the bead lost, wherefore it seems 
safer to tatu a representation of the bead on the part of the 
wrist which it would cover if actually worn. It is of 
interest also to note that the lukut^ from having been a 
charm to prevent the second escape of the soul, has come 
to be regarded as a charm to ward off all disease ; and the 
same applies to its tatued representation. 

A design just below the biceps of a Punan tatued in the 
Kayan manner is shown on PL 142, Fig. 10, and we 
were informed by the Punan that this also was a lukut^ an 
excellent example of the indifference paid to the signi- 
ficance of design by people with whom such design is not 
indigenous. 

On the forearm and thigh the udoh asu or dog pattern 
is tatued, and four typical examples are shown on PI. 
136, Figs. I, 2, 5, 6. Nieuwenhuis has figured a series of 
these designs [9, PL 82] ^ showing a transition from a 

^ The Sea Dayaks often employ for the same reason a carpal bone of the 
mouse-deer ( Tragulus). 

^ See also Haddon (4, Fig. 2), and Nieuwenhuis (8, Pis. XXV. and 
XXVI. ) ; the designs figured in the latter work are not very easy to 
interpret, the lower of the two rosette figures looks as if it was derived from 
four heads of dogs fused together. See also Ling Roth (7, p. 85). 

i_ .^., 

MM 

Plate 132. BLANKET (PUA) WOVEN BY IBAN WOMAN. 

XII 

DECORATIVE ART 249 

very elongate animal form to a rosette form ; we have 
occasionally met with the former amongst Sarawak Kayans, 
but it is a common thigh design amongst the Mendalam 
Kayans ; the forms numbered b and c are unusual in 
Sarawak. Of the four examples given in PI. 136 — and 
it may be noted that these met with the high approval of 
expert tatu artists — Figs, i, 2, and 5 may be considered as 
intermediate between Nieuwenhuis' very elongate example 
/ and the truncated form e which is supposed to represent 
the head only of a dog. Fig. 2 is characteristic of the 
Uma Balubo Kayans, and is remarkable in that teeth are 
shown in both jaws ; whilst, both in this example and in 
Fig. 5, the eye is represented as a disc, in Figs, i and 6 the 
eye is assuming a rosette-like appearance, which rosette, as 
Nieuwenhuis' series shows, is destined in some cases to 

Fig. 62. 

increase in size until it swallows up the rest of the design. 
Fig. 6 may be compared with Nieuwenhuis, Fig. ^, as it 
evidently represents little more than the head of a dog. 
Although a single figure of the dog is the most usual form 
of tatu, we have met with an example of a double figure ; 
it is shown in Fig. 7 ; it will be observed that one of the 
dogs is reversed and the tails of the two figures interlock. 
Fig. 8 represents a dog with pups, tuang nganak ; A is 
supposed to be the young one. 

The dog design figures very prominently in Kayan art, 
and the fact that the dog is regarded by these people and 
also by the Kenyahs with a certain degree of veneration 
may account for its general representation. The design 
has been copied by a whole host of tribes, with degradation 
and change of name (Fig. 62). 

On the deltoid region of the shoulders and on the 
breast, a rosette or a star design is found (text. Figs. 63 and 
64). As already stated, it seems in the highest degree 

250 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

probable that the rosette is derived from the eye in the 
dog pattern, and it is consequently of some interest to find 
that the name now given to the rosette pattern is that of 
the fruit of a plant which was introduced into Borneo 
certainly within the last fifty or sixty years. The plant is 
Plukenetia corniculata^ one of the Euphorbiaceae, and it is 
cultivated as a vegetable ; its Kayan name is jalaut. We 
have here a good example of the gradual degradation of a 
design leading to a loss of its original significance and even 
of its name, another name, which originated probably from 
some fancied resemblance between pattern and object, 
being applied at a subsequent date. Ipa olim, i.e., open 
fruit of a species of Mangifera, is another name occasion- 
ally applied to the rosette pattern, but jalaut is in more 

Fig. 63. Fig. 64. 

general use (cf PL 140, Fig. 4, PI. 141, Fig. 7, and PI. 142, 
Fig. 9). 

On PI. 141, Fig. I, is shown a hand tatued in the 
Kayan manner ; the figures on the phalanges are known 
as tegulun} representations of human figures or as silongy 
faces, and they are evidently anthropomorphic derivatives. 
The triangles on the carpal knuckles are termed song 
irang, shoots of bamboo, and the zig-zag lines are ikor^ 
lines. 

^ In ancient days when a great Kayan or Klemantan chief built a new 
house, the first post of it was driven through the body of a slave ; this sacrifice 
to a tutelary deity is no longer offered, but a human figure is frequently carved 
on the post of a house and may be a relic of the old custom ; the figure is 
called tegulun. Sea Dayak anthropomorphs are termed engkramba and 
appear in cloths and bead-work designs, also in carvings on boundary marks, 
witch-doctor's baskets, etc. 

Plate 133. TATU PATTERNS ON THIGHS OF KAYAN WOMEN. 

DECORATIVE ART 

251 

Kayan women are tatued in complicated serial ^ designs 
over the whole forearm, the backs of the hands, over the 
whole of the thighs and to below the knees, and on the 
metatarsal surfaces of the feet. The tatuing of a Kayan 
girl is a serious operation, not only because of the consider- 
able amount of pain caused, but also on account of the 
elaborate ceremonial attached to this form of body orna- 
mentation. The process is a long one, lasting sometimes 
as much as four years, since only a small piece can be done 
at a sitting, and several long intervals elapse between the 
various stages of the work. A girl when about ten years 
old will probably have had her fingers and the upper part 

Fig. 65. 

Fig. 66. 

Fig. 67. 

of her feet tatued, and about a year later her forearms 
should have been completed ; the thighs are partially 
tatued during the next year, and in the third or fourth 
year from the commencement, i.e. about puberty, the 
whole operation should have been accomplished. 

A woman endeavours to have her tatu finished before 
she becomes pregnant, as it is considered immodest to be 
tatued after she has become a mother. If a woman has a 
severe illness after any portion of her body has been tatued, 
the work is not continued for some little time ; moreover, 

1 We apply the term serial to those designs in which the units of the 
pattern are repeated, or in which the units follow each other in serial order ; 
the udoh asu on a Kayan man's thigh is an isolated design, but the design 
on his hands is a serial design. 

252 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

according to Nieuwenhuis (9, p. 453), a woman cannot be 
tatued during seed time nor if a dead person is lying 
unburied in the house, since it is lali to let blood at such 
times ; bad dreams, such as a dream of floods, foretelling 
much blood-letting, will also interrupt the work. A tatued 
woman may not eat the flesh of the monitor lizard 
( Varanus) or of the scaly manis {Manis javanicd)^ and 
her husband also is included in the tabu until the pair 
have a male and a female child. If they have a daughter 
only they may not eat the flesh of the monitor until their 
child has been tatued ; if they have a son only they cannot 
eat the monitor until they become grandparents. Should 
a girl have brothers, but no sisters, some of her tatu lines 
must not be joined together, but if she has brothers and 
sisters, or sisters only, all the lines can be joined. 

Tatu amongst Kayan women is universal ; they believe 
that the designs act as torches in the next world, and that 
without these to light them they would remain for ever in 
total darkness ; one woman told Dr. Nieuwenhuis that after 
death she would be recognised by the impregnation of her 
bones with the tatu pigment. The operation of tatuing 
amongst Kayans is performed by women, never by men, and 
it is always the women who are the experts on the signifi- 
cance and quality of tatu designs, though the men actually 
carve the designs on the tatu blocks. Nieuwenhuis states 
(9, p. 452) that the office of tatuer is to a certain extent 
hereditary, and that the artists, like smiths and carvers, are 
under the protection of a tutelary spirit, who must be pro- 
pitiated with sacrifices before each operation. As long as 
the children of the artist are of tender age she is debarred 
from the practice of her profession. The greater the 
number of sacrifices offered, or in other words, the greater 
the experience of the artist, the higher is the fee demanded. 
She is also debarred from eating certain food. It is 
supposed that if an artist disregards the prohibitions 
imposed upon her profession, the designs that she tatus 
will not appear clearly, and she herself may sicken and 
die. 

The tools used by a tatu artist are simple,^ consisting of 
two or three prickers, ulang or ulang bra7ig^ and an iron 
striker, tukun or pepak^ which are kept in a wooden case, 
bungan. The pricker is a wooden rod with a short pointed 
head projecting at right angles at one end ; to the point of 

^ Cf. Ling Roth (7, p. 34) and Nieuwenhuis (9, PI. 32). 

i ^ 

Plate 134. TATU PATTERNS ON A KALABIT WOAJAN. 

XII 

DECORATIVE ART 

253 

the head is attached a lump of resin in which are embedded 
three or four short steel needles, their points alone project- 
ing from the resinous mass (Fig. 68). The striker is merely 
a short iron rod, half of which is covered with a string 
lashing. The pigment is a mixture of soot, water, and 
sugar-cane juice, and it is kept in a double shallow cup 
of wood, uit ulang\ it is supposed that the best soot is 
obtained from the bottom of a metal cooking-pot, but that 
derived from burning resin or dammar is also used. The 
tatu designs are carved in high relief on blocks of wood, 
kelinge^ (Fig- 62), which are smeared with the ink and then 
pressed on the part to be tatued, leaving an impression of 
the designs. As will be seen later, the designs 
tatued on women are in longitudinal rows or 

1^3- 

transverse bands, and the divisions between the 
rows or bands are marked by one or more zigzag 
lines termed ikor. 

The subject who is to be tatued lies on the 
floor, the artist and an assistant squatting on 
either side of her ; the artist first dips a piece of 
fibre from the sugar-palm {Arenga sacchariferd) 
into the pigment and, pressing this on to the 
limb to be tatued, plots out the arrangement of 
the rows or bands of the design ; along these 
straight lines the artist tatus the ikor^ then 
taking a tatu block carved with the required 
design, she smears it with pigment and presses 
it on to the limb between two lines. The 
tatuer or her assistant stretches with her feet 
the skin of the part to be tatued, and, dipping y\g. 68. 
a pricker into the pigment, taps its handle with 
the striker, driving the needle points into the skin at 
each tap. The operation is painful, and the subject 
can rarely restrain her cries of anguish ; but the artist is 
quite unmoved by such demonstrations of woe, and proceeds 
methodically with her task. As no antiseptic precautions 
are taken, a newly tatued part often ulcerates, much to the 
detriment of the tatu ; but taking all things into considera- 
tion, it is wonderful how seldom one meets with a tatu 
pattern spoilt by scar tissues. 

It is against custom to draw the blood of a friend {pesu 
daha), and therefore, when first blood is drawn in tatuing, it 
is customary to give a small present to the artist. The 

^ The Sea Dayak word telingai or kelingai has the same meaning. 

254 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

present takes the form of four antique beads, or of some 
other object worth about one dollar ; it is termed lasat mata, 
for it is supposed that if it were omitted the artist would go 
blind, and some misfortune would happen to the parents 
and relations of the girl undergoing the operation of tatu. 

When the half of one ikor has been completed the tatuer 
stops and asks for selivit ; this is a present of a few beads, 
well-to-do people paying eight yellow beads of the variety 
known as lavang, valued at one dollar apiece, whilst poor 
people give two beads. It is supposed that if selivit was 
not paid the artist would be worried by the dogs and fowls 
that always roam about a Kayan house, so that the work 
would not be satisfactorily done ; however, to make assur- 
ance doubly sure, a curtain is hung round the operator and 
her subject to keep off unwelcome intruders. After selivit 
has been paid a cigarette is smoked, and then work recom- 
mences in earnest, there being no further interruptions for 
the rest of the day except for the purpose of taking food. 
The food of the artist must be cooked and brought to her, 
as she must not stop to do other work than tatuing, and 
her tools are only laid aside for a few minutes while she 
consumes a hurried meal. Fowls or a pig are killed for the 
artist by the parents of the girl who is being tatued. The 
fees paid to the artist are more or less fixed ; for the fore- 
arms a gong, worth from eight to twenty dollars, according 
to the workmanship required ; for the thighs a large tawak, 
worth as much as sixty dollars if the very best workman- 
ship is demanded, from six to twenty dollars if only inferior 
workmanship is required.^ For tatuing the fingers the 
operator receives a nialat or short sword. Nieuwenhuis 
(8, p. 236) states that it is supposed that the artist will die 
within a year if her charges are excessive ; but we have not 
met with this belief amongst the Kayans of the Rejang and 
Baram rivers. 

The knee-cap is the last part to be tatued, and before 
this is touched the artist must be paid ; as this part of the 
design is the keystone, as it were, of the whole, the required 
fee is always forthcoming. A narrow strip down the back 
of the thigh is always left untatued ; it is supposed that 
mortification of the legs would ensue if this strip was not 
left open. 

1 The prices in the Baram river are much higher than in the Mendalam, 
where a gong can only be demanded by an artist of twenty years' experience ; 
less experienced artists have to be content with beads and cloth (9, p. 452). 

Plate 135. KALABIT TATU (WOMAN). 

DECORATIVE ART 255 

The time at which to begin tatuing a girl is about the 
ninth day after new moon, this lunar phase being known as 
butit halap^ the belly of the halap fish {Bai'bus brmnoides)\ 
as the skin of the girl being tatued quickly becomes very 
tender, it is often necessary to stop work for a few days, 
but it is a matter of indifference at what lunar phase work 
recommences, so long as it was originally begun at butit 
halap. 

A Kayan chief of the Mendalam river informed Dr. 
Nieuwenhuis [9, p. 455] that in his youth only the wives 
and daughters of chiefs were permitted the thigh tatu, 
women of lower rank had to be content with tatu of the lower 
part of the shin and of the ankles and feet. The designs 
were in the form of quadrangular blotches divided by narrow 
untatued lines, and were known as tedak danau^ lake tatu. 
The quadrangles were twelve in number, divided from each 
other by four longitudinal and two transverse untatued lines, 
6 millimetres broad, two of the longitudinal lines running 
down each side of the front of the leg, and two down each 
side of the calf, approximately equidistant ; the forearm 
was tatued in the same style. This manner of tatu is obso- 
lete now, but Dr. Nieuwenhuis was fortunate in finding 
one very old woman so tatued. 

Nowadays the class restrictions as regards tatu are not 
so closely observed, but it is always possible to distinguish 
between the designs of a chiefs daughter, an ordinary free- 
woman, and a slave, by the number of lines composing 
the figures of the designs, — the fewer these lines, the lower 
being the rank of the woman. Moreover, the designs of the 
lower-class women are not nearly so complex as those of 
the higher class, and they are generally tatued free-hand. 

A very typical design for the forearm of a woman of 
high rank is shown on PI. 140, Fig. 3 ; it is taken from a 
Kayan of the Uma Pliau sub-tribe dwelling on the Baram 
river, and may be compared with the somewhat similar 
designs of the Mendalam river Kayans figured by 
Nieuwenhuis [9, PI. 85], one of which is a design for a 
chiefs daughter, the other for a slave. The zigzag lines 
bounding the pattern on both surfaces of the forearm are 
the ikor^ and these, as already stated, are marked out with 
a piece of fibre dipped in the tatu ink before the rest of the 
pattern is impressed by a wood-block or klinge. Taking 
the flexor surface of the forearm first, the units of the 
designs are : three bands of concentric circles (AAA) 

256 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

termed beliling bulan or full moons ; a triangle (b) each, 
limb formed by several parallel lines, dulang harok, the 
bows of a boat ; spirals (cc) ulu tinggang, the head of the 
hornbill. On the supinator surface beliling bulan and ulu 
tinggang occur again, but instead of dulang harok, there are 
two other elements, a bold transverse zigzag known as 
daun wi (d), rattan leaves, and at the proximal end of the 
pattern an interlacing design, tushun tuva (e), bundles of 
tuba root {Derris ellipticd). The fingers are very simply 
tatued with a zigzag on the carpal knuckles and transverse 
lines across the joints ; the thumb is decorated in a slightly 
different way. In Dr. Nieuwenhuis' designs cited above, 
we find much the same elements ; in one of them the 
beliling bulan are more numerous and more closely set 
together, so that the concentric circles of one set have run 
into those of the next adjoining ; the tushun tuva pattern 
is termed poesoeng, evidently the same as tushun ; the 
spirals are much degraded in one example and are called 
krowit, or hooks, whilst in the more elaborate example 
they are known as manok wak, or eyes of the Scops owl ; 
the pedjako pattern is an addition, but the meaning of the 
word is not known ; the pattern on the fingers is much 
more complex than in the Uma Pliau example, and is 
perhaps a degraded hornbill design. 

Nieuwenhuis [8, PI. XXIV.] figures the hand of a 
low-class woman tatued with triangular and quadrangular 
blotches, and with some rude designs that appear to have 
been worked in free-hand. 

On PI. 140, Fig. I, is shown the design on the forearm 
of a high-class woman of the Uma Lekan Kayans of the 
Batang Kayan river, Dutch Borneo ; in our opinion these 
elegant designs are quite in the front rank of the tatu 
designs of the world. In spite of the elaboration, it is 
quite possible to distinguish in these the same elements 
as in the Uma Pliau specimen, viz. : beliling bulan ulu 
tinggang daun wi and tushun tuva ; but the dulang harok 
is absent, and the silong or face pattern appears. 

Nieuwenhuis [9, PI. 93, b] figures the arm-tatu (supi- 
nator surface only) of a Kayan woman of the Blu-u river, 
a tributary of the Upper Mahakkam ; the main design 
is evidently a hornbill derivative, the knuckles are tatued 
with quadrangular and rectangular blotches. The horn- 
bill plays an important part in the decorative art of the 
Long Glat, a Klemantan tribe of the Mahakkam river, 

DECORATIVE ART 257 

and we suspect that, if these Blu-u Kayans are of true 
Kayan stock, they have borrowed the hornbill design from 
their neighbours. 

With regard to the thigh patterns, it is usual to find the 
back of the thigh occupied with two strips of an inter- 
secting line design, or some modification thereof; the 
simplest form is shown on PI. 138, Fig. i ; it is known 
as ida telo^ the three-line pattern, and is used by slaves ; a 
more elaborate example from the Rejang river is shown in 
Fig. 3, and is used both by slaves and free-women. PL 
138, Fig. 2, and PI. 139, Fig. 6, are termed ida pat, the 
four-line pattern, and are for free-women, not for slaves. 
The latter figure is a combination of ida pat and ida telo. 
The wives and daughters of chiefs would employ similar 
designs with the addition of another line, when they are 
termed ida lima, the five-line pattern, or else a design, 
known as ida tuang, the underside pattern, two examples 
of which are given on PI. 139, Figs, i and 2. If these 
two latter designs are compared with the hornbill design of 
the Long Glat, a figure of which, taken from Nieuwenhuis 
[9, PI. 86] is given (PL 139, Fig. 3) a certain similarity 
in the motif oi the designs can be recognised. It must be 
remembered that the Long Glat design is tatued in rows 
down the front and sides of the thigh, whilst these Kayan 
designs have been modified to form more or less of a 
sinuous line design for the back of the thigh ; or, in other 
words, the hornbill elements in the Long Glat design, 
though they are serially repeated, are quite separate and 
distinct one from the other, whilst in the Kayan designs 
the hornbill elements are fused and modified to produce 
the sinuous line pattern that in one form or another is 
generally employed for the decoration of the back of the 
thigh. In this connection PL 139, Fig. 5, is instructive; 
it is taken from a tatu block which, together with those 
from which Figs, i and 2 are taken, was collected many 
years ago by Mr. Brooke Low, amongst the Kayans of the 
Upper Rejang ; it also appears to be a dog derivative, and 
no doubt was used for the tatu of the front of a woman's 
thigh,^ being serially repeated in three or four rows as with 

^ The wooden block is carefully cut square, and the design occupies the 
whole of one surface ; this is characteristic of the blocks of female designs, 
whereas designs for male tatu are carved on very roughly shaped blocks and 
do not always occupy the whole of one surface. Since the female designs have 
to be serially repeated it is important that the blocks should be of the exact 
required size, otherwise the projecting parts of the uncarved wood would 

VOL. I S 

258 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

the Long Glat. Yet it was unknown as a tatu design to 
some Kayans of the Baram river to whom it was shown 
recently ; they informed us that the name of the design 

Fig. 69. 

Fig. 70. 

'c,^\ 

Fig. 72. 
Fig. 71. 

was tuang buvong asu, pattern of dog without tail, and they 

render the exact juxtaposition of the serially repeated impressions very difficult, 
whilst the isolated male designs can be impressed on the skin in a more or 
less haphazard way. 

Plate 136. 

XII 

DECORATIVE ART 259 

stated that a somewhat similar design was engraved by 
them on sword blades. PI. 139, Fig. 4, is taken from a 
tatu-block of uncertain origin, and the same name was also 
applied to this by the Baram Kayans, though with some 
hesitation and uncertainty ; the hornbill motif is here quite 
obvious. 

We have stated that an interlacing line design is 
generally employed for the back of the thigh ; we figure, 
however, a remarkable exception from the Baloi river 
(PI. 140, Fig. 5) ; this is known as kalong kowit, hook 
pattern ; A is a representation of an antique bead, balalat 
lukuty B is known as kowit^ hooks. Between the two strips 
of line design at the back of the thigh runs a narrow line of 
untatued skin, the supposed object of which has been 
described above. The front and sides of the thigh in high- 
class women will be covered with three or more strips of 
pattern such as are shown on PI. 138, Figs. 4 and 5 ; 
in the latter tushun tuva, dulang harok, ulu tinggang and 
beliling bulan can again be recognised ; the ulu tinggang in 
this example are less conventionalised than in the spirals of 
the forearm pattern, and a spiral form of tushun tuva is 
shown in addition to the angular form. The other example 
exhibits ida limuy tushun tuvajalaut, kowit (the interlocking 
spirals) and ulu tinggang. All these strips of pattern are 
separated by the ikor. The knee-cap is the last part of the 
leg to be tatued, and the design covering it is called the 
kalong nangy the important pattern, good examples of 
which are shown in Figs. 70, 71 ; Fig. 72 represents the 
design on the front and sides of the thigh of an Uma 
Semuka Kayan of the slave class, which also is termed 
tushun tuva. 

The admirable Uma Lekan patterns (PI. 140, Fig. 2) 
represent on the back of the thigh (AA) beliling bulan^ on 
the front and sides (BB) silong^ faces or silong lejau^ tigers' 
faces ; the latter is evidently an anthropomorph ; the knee- 
cap design is particularly worthy of notice.^ Nieuwenhuis 
[9, PI. 83, and 8, PI. XXVI I.] figures the thigh tatu of 
a Mendalam woman of the panjin or free-woman class ; 
the back of the thigh is occupied by two strips of the four- 

^ The drawing is taken from a rubbing of a model carved by an Uma 
Lekan ; this will account for the asymmetry noticeable every here and there 
throughout the design. A print from an actual tatu-block is shown in PL 
139, Fig. 7 ; this would be repeated serially in rows down the front and sides 
of the thigh, so that absolute uniformity would be attained ; the carver of the 
model, which was about one-sixth life size, has not been able to keep the 
elements of his design quite uniform. 

26o PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

line pattern, here termed ketong pat, and a somewhat crude 
anthropomorphic design, known as kohong kelunan, human 
head, covers the front and sides of the thigh (text Fig. 69) ; 
the centre of the knee-cap is occupied by a very similar 
anthropomorph, known however as nang klinge, the 
important design, and extending in a semicircle round the 
upper part of it is a design made up of intersecting zigzags 
and known as kalang ngipa, the snake design ; below the 
knee-cap is a transverse band of hour-glass shaped figures 
termed pedjako. Nieuwenhuis also figures [9, PI. 84] the 
thigh pattern of a chiefs daughter from the same river ; 
this only differs from the preceding example in the greater 
elaboration of the kohong kelunan ; the back of the thigh is 
covered by a form of the ida pat pattern not by the ida 
lima pattern. Some of the tatu-blocks employed by the 
Mendalam Kayan women are figured in the same works 
[9, PI. 82, and 8, PI. XXVIII.]. 

A comparison of the figures here given lends strong 
support to the supposition that the tuba-root pattern is 
merely a degraded anthropomorph. Fig. 69 is a recognisable 
anthropomorph such as is tatued in rows on the thigh, and 
some such name as tegulun, silong, or kohong is applied to 
it. Fig. 70 is a knee-cap design, evidently anthropomorphic 
in nature, but termed nang klinge, the important design, 
since it is the last part of all to be tatued. Fig. 71 is termed 
tushun tuva, but a distinct face is visible in the centre of 
the pattern ; the general similarity between this last design 
and the examples of tushun tuva shown in the designs 
on PL 138, Figs. 4 and 5, is quite obvious; the lower of 
the two tushun tuva designs in Fig. 5, PL 138, is com- 
posed of angular lines, thus reverting to the angularity 
of the lines in text. Fig. 69 ; at E, Fig. 3, PL 140, the lines 
are partly angular, partly curved, and the bilateral symmetry 
is entirely lost ; finally, in Fig. 72, the relationship of the 
tushun tuva design to an anthropomorph is entirely lost. 

A typical form of tatu on the foot of a low-class woman 
is shown on PL 138, Fig. 6; a chiefs daughter would 
have some modification of the principal element of the 
thigh design tatued on this part. 

ii. Kenyah Tatu. 

The culture of the Sarawak Kenyahs is closely allied to 
that of the Kayans, and their tatu may be considered 

Platk 137. 

XII DECORATIVE ART 261 

separately from that of the Kenyah-Klemantan tribes 
whose tatu is much more original in design. 

The men of such Kenyah tribes as the Lepu Jalan, 
Lepu Tau, Lepu Apong, etc., if tatued at all, are tatued 
in the Kayan manner, that is, with some form of dog design 
on the forearms and thighs, and with rosettes or stars on the 
shoulders and breasts. The dog design is usually known 
as usang orange the prawn pattern ; the teeth of the dog 
are held to represent the notched border of the prominent 
rostrum characteristic of the prawns of the genus Palceman^ 
that occur so plentifully in the fresh -water streams of 
Borneo. An extreme modification of the dog design to 
form a prawn is shown in PI. 137, Fig. 9; PI. 136, Fig. 4, 
is a dog design, and is so termed. PL 136, Fig. 10, is 
known as toyu, a crab ; A is the mouth, ba ; B the claw, 
katip ; C the back, likut ; D the tail, zkong. PI. 136, Fig. 9, 
is termed Izpan katip^ jaws of the centipede. All these 
are tatued on the flexor surface of the forearm or on 
the outside of the thigh.^ An example of a star design 
termed usong dian^ durian pattern, is shown in PI. 141, 
Fig. 7. The women of these tribes tatu in the same way, 
and employ the same designs as the Kayans, except that 
they never tatu on the thighs. Amongst the Baram 
Kenyahs there appears to be very little ceremonial con- 
nected with the process of tatuing. 

iii. Kenyah-Klemantan'^ Tatu. 

Amongst this rather heterogeneous assemblage of tribes 
considerable diversity of tatu design is found. The men 
are seldom tatued, but when they are it is in the Kayan 
manner. The Peng or Pnihing of the Koti basin have an 
elaborate system of male tatu, but it seems to be dying out ; 
the only examples that we have met are shown on PI. 141, 
Figs. 2 and 3. These represent the arms of Peng men; 
unfortunately we have no information as to the significance 
of the designs. The only other Peng design that we are 
acquainted with is a large disc tatued on the calf of the leg. 
Dr. Nieuwenhuis states that Peng women are tatued with 
isolated dog designs on the arms and legs like the men of 
Kayan tribes [9, p. 461]. 

^ For other examples of modified asii designs employed by Kenyah tribes, 
see E, B. Haddon (4, pp. 117, 118), 

'^ By this name we denote those Kenyah tribes which stand nearest to the 
Klemantans and furthest from the Kayans in respect of customs. Cf. 
Chap. XXI. 

262 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

The Kenyah women of the Baram district exhibit a 
very primitive style of tatu on the arms and hands (PI. 
141, Fig. 4); a broad band encircles the middle of the 
forearm, and a narrow band an inch or so distant of this 
also surrounds the arm ; from this narrow band there run 
over the metacarpals to the base of the fingers eight narrow 
lines, the outermost on the radial side bifurcating ; the 
design is known as betik alle or line tatu. No other part 
of the body is tatued. 

Nieuwenhuis figures [9, PI. 95] a somewhat similar 
design employed by the Lepu Tau women of the Batang 
Kayan ; but in this case, instead of eight longitudinal lines 
stopping short at the knuckles, there are five broad bands 
running to the finger nails, interrupted at the knuckles by 
a 2 cm. -broad strip of untatued skin. Moreover, with these 
people the front and sides of the thigh and the shin are 
tatued with primitive-looking designs made up of series 
of short transverse lines, curved lines, and broad bands ; 
the names of the designs are not given ; these designs are 
said to be characteristic of the slave-class, the higher-class 
women copying the more elaborate designs of the Uma 
Lekan. 

Amongst the Batang Kayan Kenyahs tatuing cannot 
be executed in the communal house, but only in a hut 
built for the purpose. The males of the family, to which 
the girl undergoing the operation belongs, must dress in 
bark-cloth, and are confined to the house until the tatu is 
completed ; should any of the male members be travelling 
in other parts of the island tatu cannot be commenced 
until they return. Amongst the Uma Tow (or Lepu 
Tau) the daughter of a chief must be tatued before any 
of the other females of the house ; should the chiefs 
daughter (or daughters) die before she has been tatued, all 
the other women of the house are debarred from this em- 
bellishment (Nieuwenhuis [9, pp. 453, 454]). 

Nieuwenhuis, in his great work on Borneo, which we 
have cited so often, gives a good account of the tatu of the ' 
Long Glat. According to this authority, girls when only 
eight years old have the backs of the fingers tatued, at the 
commencement of menstruation the tatu of the fingers is 
completed, and in the course of the following year the tatu 
is carried over the backs of the hand to the wrist ; the feet 
are tatued synchronously with the hands. At the age of 
eighteen to twenty the front of the thigh is tatued, and 

Plate 138. 

xn 

DECORATIVE ART 263 

later on in life the back of the thigh ; unlike the Kayans 
it is not necessary that the tatu of the thighs should be 
finished before child-bearing. A Long Glat woman on 
each day that she is tatued must kill a black fowl as food 
for the artist. They believe that after death the completely 
tatued women will be allowed to bathe in the mythical 
river Telang Julan, and that consequently they will be able 
to pick up the pearls that are found in its bed ; incompletely 
tatued women can only stand on the river bank, whilst the 
untatued will not be allowed to approach its shores at all. 
This belief appears to be universal amongst the Kenyah- 
Klemantan of the Upper Mahakam and Batang Kayan. 
On PL 86 of Nieuwenhuis' book [9] is figured the thigh 
tatu of a Long Glat woman ; the front of the thigh is 
occupied with two rows of the hornbill motif to which 
reference has already been made. The sides of the thigh 
are tatued with a beautiful design of circles and scrolls 
termed kerip kwe, flight feathers of the Argus pheasant, 
and on the back of the thigh is a scroll design borrowed 
from the decoration of a grave and known as kalang song 
sepit} The knee is left untatued. Some other examples 
of the kerip kwe design are given on PI. 90, and of the 
song sepit on PL 91 ; some of the song sepit designs recall 
the kalang kowit designs of the Baloi Kayans. Instead of 
a hornbill motif y a dog's head motif is sometimes tatued 
on the thigh, an example of which is figured on PL 87, 
Fig. a ; it appears to be a composition of four heads, and 
in appearance is not unlike silong lejau of the Uma Lekan, 
figured by us. In the Long Glat thigh-tatu the bands of 
pattern are not separated by lines of ikor^ as with the 
Kayans. Round the ankles the Long Glat tatu sixteen 
lines, 3 mm. broad, known as tedak aking ; the foot is tatued 
much after the manner shown in our Fig. 6, PL 143. The 
supinator surface of the forearm and the backs of the hands 
are also tatued, but the design does not extend so far up 
the arm as with the Kayans [9, PL 92] ; the forearm design 
is made up of a hornbill motif but that shown in Fig. a 
of the plate is termed betik kule^ leopard pattern, and is 
supposed to be a representation of the spots on the leopard's 
skin ; it is stated to be taken from a Long Tepai tatu-block ; 
the knuckles are tatued with a double row of wedges, the 
finger joints with quadrangles. 

The Uma Luhat seem to have borrowed their tatu and 

^ The names of the designs are given in Kayan. 

264 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

designs very largely if not entirely from the Long Glat ; 
with them the back of the thigh is tatued before the front, 
which is exceptional. Half of the knee is tatued. Their 
designs are modifications of the hornbill and dog's head 
designs of the Long Glat. Nieuwenhuis figures several 
examples [9, PI. 87, Fig. b, Plate 88, PL 89, PI. 93, 
Fig. a^ PI. 94], which should be consulted, as they are 
of the greatest interest. 

The Long Wai seem to tatu in much the same way as 
the Uma Luhat [2, PI., p. 189 and 7, p. 91]. 

iv. Tatu of Muruts and Klemantans. 

A number of tribes have adopted more or less the tatu 
of the Kayans. Thus the men of the following Sarawak 
tribes, Sibops, Lirongs, Tanjongs, Long Kiputs, Barawans, 
and Kanowits, are often, though not universally, tatued like 
Kayans. The shoulder pattern of the Barawans is distinc- 
tive, in that the rosette nearly always bears a scroll attached 
to it, a relic of the dog motifs from which the design is 
derived (PI. 138, Fig. 6). E. B. Haddon [4, Fig. 17] 
figures another form of the dog motif, which is tatued on 
the thigh or forearm, and Ling Roth [7, p. 86] figures three 
rosette designs for the breast ; we figure two modifications 
of the dog design on PI. 137, Figs. 7 and 8. The women 
of these tribes very rarely tatu ; we have seen a Tanjong 
woman with a circle of star-shaped figures round her wrist 
and one on the thumb. The Tring women of Dutch Borneo 
are tatued on the hands and thighs like Kayans ; Carl Bock 
[2, PI., p. 187] gives some figures of them. In our opinion 
all of these tribes owe their tatu entirely to foreign influ- 
ences ; for we have failed to find a single example of an 
original design ; the practice is by no means universal, and 
great catholicity of taste is shown by those who do tatu. 
The men, moreover, do not tatu as a sign of bravery in 
battle or adventure, but merely from a desire to copy the 
more warlike Kayan. 

We shall now treat of those tribes that have a distinctive 
and original tatu, but it is well to bear in mind, that 
amongst many of these people also the Kayan designs are 
coming into vogue more and more, ousting the old designs. 
No tatu-blocks are employed for the indigenous patterns, 
all the work being done free-hand. 

{a) Uma Long, — The Uma Long women of the Batang 

Plate 139. 

DECORATIVE ART 265 

Kayan exhibit the most primitive form of tatu known in 
Borneo. It differs from every other form in that the tatued 
surface of the skin is not covered uniformly with the ink, 
but the design, such as it is, is merely stippled into the 
skin, producing an appearance of close-set irregular dots. 
Two aspects of the forearm of an Uma Long woman are 
shown on PL 142, Fig. 5. No other part of the body is 
tatued, and the practice is confined to the female sex. 

{b) Dusun. — The men only tatu. The design is simple, 
consisting of a band, two inches broad, curving from each 
shoulder and meeting its fellow on the abdomen, thence 
each band diverges to the hip and there ends ; from the 
shoulder each band runs down the upper arm on its exterior 
aspect ; the flexor surface of the forearm is decorated with 
short transverse stripes, and, according to one authority, 
each stripe marks an enemy slain [7, p. 90]. This form of 
tatu is found chiefly amongst the Idaan group of Dusuns ; 
according to Whitehead [ii, p. 106] the Dusuns living on 
the slopes of Mount Kina Balu tatu no more than the 
parallel transverse stripes on the forearm, but in this case 
no reference is made to the significance of the stripes as a 
head-tally. The Dusun women apparently do not tatu. 

{c) Murut. — The Muruts of the Trusan river, North 
Sarawak, tatu very little ; the men occasionally have a 
small scroll design just above the knee-cap and a simple 
circle on the breast ; the women have fine lines tatued from 
the knuckles to the elbows [7, p. 93]. The Muruts of 
British North Borneo appear to be more generally tatued ; 
the men are tatued like Dusuns, though, according to 
Hatton, they have three parallel stripes running from the 
shoulders to the wrists and no transverse lines on the fore- 
arm.^ Whitehead [11, p. ^6^ figures a Murut woman of 
the Lawas river tatued on the arms from the biceps to the 
knuckles with numerous fine longitudinal lines ; a band of 
zigzag design encircles the arm just above the commence- 
ment of the longitudinal lines. The design on a man of 
the same tribe is given on page 73 [11], it resembles "a 
three-legged dog with a crocodile's head, one leg being 
turned over the back as if the animal was going to scratch 
its ear." The part of the body on which the design was 
tatued, is not specified and the sketch is rather inadequate, 

^ The same author states that " a sometime headman of Senendan had two 
square tattoo marks on his back. This was because he ran away in a fight, 
and showed his back to the enemy." This explanation seems to us most 
improbable. 

266 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

so that it is impossible to tell for certain whether the design 
was tatued in outline only or whether the outline was filled 
in uniformly ; our impression is that the outline only was 
tatued on this individual, and that it was employed either 
as an experiment or from idle amusement. Zoomorphs are 
conspicuous by their absence from all forms of decorative 
art amongst the Lawas Muruts, and the particular zoomorph 
noted here gives every evidence of an unpractised hand. 

St. John states [7, p. 92] that the Muruts of the Adang 
river, a tributary of the Limbang, are tatued about the 
arms and legs, but he gives no details. 

{d) Kalabit. — This tribe, dwelling in the watershed of the 
Limbang and Baram rivers, is closely akin to Muruts, 
but its tatu is very different. The men tatu but rarely, 
and then with stripes down the arms. The women, how- 
ever, are decorated with most striking geometrical designs, 
shown on PI. 142, Figs. 1-4. On the forearm are tatued 
eight bold zigzag bands, one-eighth of an inch broad, which 
do not completely encircle the arm, but stop short of join- 
ing at points on the ulnar side of the middle line on the 
flexor surface. The series of lines is known as betik tisu^ 
the hand pattern. In some cases two short transverse lines, 
called tipalang, cross -lines, spring from the most distal 
zigzag at the point where it touches the back of the wrist 
on the radial side ; in other cases these lines are tatued 
across the middle of the back of the wrist and two lozenges 
are tatued on the metacarpals ; these are known as teparat 
(PI. 142, Fig. i). The legs are tatued on the back of 
the thigh, on the shin, and sometimes on the knee-cap. 
The designs can best be explained by a reference to PL 
142, Figs. 2-4 ; the part of the design marked A is termed 
betik buah, fruit pattern ; B, betik lawa, trunk pattern ; and 
C, betik Mud, shin pattern. In Fig. 4, A and C are as 
before ; D is betik karawin ; E, ujat batu, hill-tops ; F, 
betik kalang (Fig. 3). 

Kalabit women are tatued when they are sixteen years 
old, whether they are married or unmarried, and the 
operation does not extend over a number of years as with 
the Long Glat and Kayans, nor is any elaborate ceremonial 
connected with the process. 

{e) Long Utan, — An extinct Klemantan tribe, once dwell- 
ing on the Tinjar river, an affluent of the Baram. We owe 
our knowledge of their tatu to an aged Klemantan, who was 
well acquainted with the tribe before their disappearance ; 

Plate 140. 

XII 

DECORATIVE ART 267 

at our behest he carved on some wooden models of arms 
and legs the tatu designs of these people, but he was 
unable to supply any information of the names or signi- 
ficance of the designs. The men of the tribe apparently 
were not tatued, and the designs reproduced on PL 141, 
Figs. 5, 6, are those of the women. The essential features 
of the designs are spirals and portions of intersecting circles ; 
the intersecting circles are frequently to be met with in the 
decorative art of Kenyahs, e.g. on the back of sword-handles, 
round the top of posts, on carved bamboos, etc., and in these 
cases the design is supposed to be a representation of the 
open fruit of a species of mango, Mangifera sp. It is not 
improbable that the design had the same significance 
amongst the Long Utan, for we have met with one or 
two representations of the same fruit amongst other 
Klemantan tribes. 

(/) Biajau. — The Dutch author C. den Hamer [5, 
p. 451] includes under this heading the tribes living in the 
districts watered by the rivers Murung, Kahayan, Katingan, 
and Mentaja of South-west Borneo. Under this very 
elastic heading he would include the Ot-Danum, Siang, 
and Ulu Ajar of Nieuwenhuis, but we treat of these in the 
next section. The ethnology of the Barito, Kahayan, and 
Katingan river-basins sadly needs further investigation ; 
nothing of importance has been published on this region 
since the appearance of Schwaner's book on Borneo more 
than fifty years ago. We know really very little of the 
distribution or constitution of the tribes dwelling in these 
districts, and Schwaner's account of their tatu is very 
meagre. Such as it is, it is given here, extracted from 
Ling Roth's Translation of Schwaners Ethnographical 
Notes [7, pp. cxci. cxciv.] : The men of Pulu Petak, the 
right-hand lower branch of the Barito or Banjermasin 
river, tatu the upper part of the body, the arms and calves 
of legs, with elegant interlacing designs and scrolls. The 
people of the Murung river are said to be most beautifully 
tatued, both men and women ; this river is really the 
upper part of the Barito, and according to Hamer is 
inhabited by the Biajau {vide postea), who appear to be 
distinct from the Ngaju of Schwaner, inhabiting the lower 
courses of the [ Barito and Kapuas rivers. The men of 
the lower left-hand branch of the Barito and of the mid- 
course of that river are often not tatued at all, but such 
tatu as was extant in 1850 was highly significant according 

268 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

to Schwaner's account ; thus, a figure composed of two 
spiral lines interlacing each other and with stars at the 
extremities tatued on the shoulder signified that the man 
had taken several heads ; two lines meeting each other 
at an acute angle behind the finger nails signified dexterity 
in wood-carving ; a star on the temple was a sign of 
happiness in love. We have no reason to consider this 
information inaccurate, but we do consider it lamentable 
that more details concerning the most interesting forms of 
tatu in Borneo were not obtained, for it is only too 
probable that such information cannot be acquired now. 
The women of this tribe do not tatu. In the upper Teweh 
river, an upper tributary of the Barito the men are tatued a 
good deal, especially on parts of the face, such as the fore- 
head, the cheeks, the upper lip. The only figures that 
Schwaner gives are reproduced by Ling Roth [7, p. 93], 
they represent two Ngajus ; the tatu designs are drawn on 
too small a scale to be of much interest, and in any case we 
have no information concerning them. The two figures of 
* Tatued Dyaks ' (? Kayans) (after Professor Veth), on p. 95 
of the above-cited work cannot be referred to any tribe 
known to us. 

Hamer in his paper [5] gives a detailed account of 
Biajau tatu, but, unfortunately, without any illustrations ; 
as abstracts of the paper have already been given by Ling 
Roth [7, pp. 93, 94] and by Hein [6, pp. 143-147], we will 
pass on to the next section. 

(g) Ot-Danum^ Ulu AjaVy and Siang (Kapuas river, 
tributaries). — Concerning these tribes Nieuwenhuis says but 
little [9, p. 452], merely noting that the men are first tatued 
with discs on the calf and in the hollow of the knee and 
later over the arms, torso, and throat, whilst the women 
tatu the hands, knees, and shins. Two colours, red and 
blue, are used, and the designs are tatued free-hand, the 
instrument employed being a piece of copper or brass 
about four inches long and half an inch broad, with one 
end bent down at a right angle and sharpened to a point. 
Sometimes thread is wound round the end of the instru- 
ment just above the point, to regulate the depth of its 
penetration. Two specimens in the Leyden Museum are 
figured by Ling Roth [7, p. 85]. Hamer [5] says that the 
Ot-Danum women are tatued down the shin to the tarsus 
with two parallel lines, joined by numerous cross-lines, a 
modification of the Uma Tow design for the same part of 

Plate 141. 

XII 

DECORATIVE ART 269 

the limb. On the thigh is tatued a design termed soewroe, 
said to resemble a neck ornament. A disc tatued on the calf 
of the leg is termed boentoer^ and from it to the heel runs 
a barbed line called ikoeh bajan, tail of the monitor lizard ; 
curiously enough, though this is the general name of the 
design, it is on the right leg also termed barareky on the 
left dandoe tjatjah. Warriors are tatued on the elbow- 
joint with a dandoe tjatjah and a cross called sarapang 
mata andau. 

A Maloh who had lived for many years amongst these 
people gave us the following information about their tatu : 
— There is with these people a great difference between the 
tatu of the high-class and that of the low-class individuals : 
amongst the former the designs are both extensive and 
complicated, too complicated for our informant to describe 
with any degree of accuracy, but they seem to be much 
the same as those described by Hamer. The low-class 
people have to be content with simpler designs ; the men 
are tatued on the breast and stomach with two curved lines 
ending in curls, and on the outside of each arm with 
two lines also ending in curls (PI. 142, Fig. 6) ; on the 
outside of the thigh a rather remarkable design, shown on 
PI. 142, Fig. 7, is tatued ; it is termed linsat, the flying 
squirrel, Pteromys nitidus, and on the back of the calf is 
tatued a disc termed kalang baboi, the wild pig pattern. The 
women are tatued as described by Hamer down the front 
of the shin with two parallel lines connected by trans- 
verse cross-bars ; according to our informant the design 
was supposed to represent a flat fish, such as a sole. 
(PL 142, Fig. 8.) 

Of these people, as of so many others, the melancholy 
tale of disappearance of tatu amongst the present generation 
and replacement of indigenous by Kayan designs was told, 
and it seems only too likely that within the next decade or 
two none will be left to illustrate a once flourishing and 
beautiful art. 

Schwaner can add nothing to the facts that we 
have collected, except the statement that "the bilians 
(priestesses) have brought the art of tatuing to the present 
degree of perfection through learning the description of 
the pretty tatued bodies of the [mythical] Sangsangs." 

(Ji) Kahayan. — Our figure (PI. 141, Fig. 3), and PI. 
81 of Dr. Nieuwenhuis' book [9], is the extent of our 
knowledge of the tatu of the inhabitants of the Kahayan 

270 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

river. The latter illustration shows a man tatued with a 
characteristic check pattern over the torso, stomach, and 
arms, but there is no reference to the plate in the text. 
Our figure is copied from a drawing by Dr. H. Hiller, of 
Philadelphia. 

{{) Bakatan and Ukit. — As Nieuwenhuis has pointed 
out [9, p. 451], the tatu of these tribes is distinctive, 
inasmuch as most of the designs are left in the natural 
colour of the skin against a background of tatu ; that is to 
say in the phraseology of the photographer, whilst the tatu 
designs of Kayans, Kenyahs, etc., are positives^ those of 
the Bakatans are negatives. The men were formerly most 

extensively tatued, and 
we figure the principal 
designs (PL 143), most 
of which were drawn 
from a Bakatan of 
the Rejang river. The 
chest is covered with a 
bold scroll design known 
as gerowit, hooks 
(Kay an, kowif) (Figs, i, 
2) ; across the back and 
shoulder blades stretches 
a double row of circles, 
kanak, with small hooks 
interposed (Fig. 9) ; on 
the side of the shoulder 
a pattern known as akih^ 
the lizard, Ptychozoon 
honialocephaluni (Fam. 
Geckonidae), is tatued (Figs. 3, 4) ; this lizard is used as a 
haruspex by the Bakatan. Circles are tatued on the biceps, 
on the back of the thigh, and on the calf of the leg ; a modi- 
fication of the scroll design of the chest occurs on the flexor 
surface of the forearm. Another form of pattern for the 
calf of the leg is shown in Fig. 73, it is termed selong 
bowang, the horse-mango, Mangifera sp., the same fruit 
as that termed by Kayans ipa olim, and of which a 
representation forms the chief element in the Long Utan 
tatu. A series of short lines is tatued on the jaw, and is 
termed ja, lines, or kilang^ sword-pattern, and a gerowit 
design occurs under the jaw ; the pattern on the throat is 
known also as gerowit (Fig. 10). On the forehead is 

Plate 142. 

XII DECORATIVE ART 271 

sometimes tatued a star or rosette pattern called lukut, 
antique bead, and it appears that this is of the nature of a 
recognition mark. In jungle warfare, where a stealthy 
descent on an unprepared enemy constitutes the main 
principle of tactics, it not unfrequently happens that one 
body of the attacking force unwittingly stalks another, 
and the results might be disastrous if there was not some 
means of distinguishing friend from foe when at close 
quarters.! Kenyahs when on the warpath frequently tie a 
band of plaited palm fibre round the wrist for the same 
object. The tatu of the backs of the hands is avowedly 
copied from the Kayans, but has a different name applied 
to it — kukum. The metatarsus is tatued with broad bars, 
zwa^ very like the foot tatu of Kayan women of the slave 
or of the middle class ; lines known as jango encircle 
the ankle. 

Tatuing is forbidden in the house ; it can only be 
performed on the warpath, and consequently men only are 
the tatu artists. The covering of the body with designs 
is a gradual process, and it is only the most seasoned and 
experienced warriors who exhibit on their persons all the 
different designs that we have just detailed. The tatu of 
the legs and feet is the last to be completed, and the lines 
round the ankles are denied to all but the bravest veterans. 

All that has been written above applies equally well to 
the Ukits, or at least once did apply, for now the Ukits 
have to a great extent adopted the tatu of the Kayan, and 
it is only occasionally that an old man tatued in the 
original Ukit manner is met. We give a figure of a design 
on the back of the thigh of such a relic of better days. 
(PL 143, Fig. 5). 

The Bakatan and Ukit women tatu very little, only the 
forearm, on the metacarpals, and on the back of the wrist ; 
characteristic designs for these parts are shown in Fig. 

1 As an instance of a quite opposite effect produced by a mark on the 
forehead, we may note here, that some Madangs who had crossed over from 
the Baram to the Rejang on a visit, appeared each with a cross marked in 
charcoal on his forehead ; they supposed that by this means they were 
disguised beyond all recognition by evil spirits. The belief that such a 
trivial alteration of appearance is sufficient disguise is probably held by most 
tribes ; Tama Bulan, a Kenyah chief, when on a visit to Kuching, discarded 
the leopard's teeth, which when at home he wore through the upper part of 
his ears, and the reason that he alleged was the same as that given by the 
Madang. These people believe not only that evil spirits may do them harm 
whilst they are on their travels, but also that, being encountered far from 
their homes, the spirits will take advantage of their absence to work some 
harm to their wives, children, or property. 

272 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

74, and PI. 143, Figs. 7, 8. The central part of the 
forearm design is an anthropomorphic derivative, judging 
by the name tegulun ; the lines are termed kilang^ and 
kanak and gerowit are also conspicuous ; gerowit is also the 
name of the design for the metacarpals ; the two stars 
joined by a line on the wrist are termed lukut^ and it is 
possible that their significance is the same as that of the 
Kayan lukut tatued in the same place by men, but we 
have no evidence that this is the case. 

Nieuwenhuis figures [9, PI. 80] a Bakatan tatued on 
the chest in the typical manner. 

The only other designs, apparently of Kalamantan 

— __— ___^.i_.^_«__^ origin, are those figured 

— by Ling Roth [7, p. Zj\ 
Three of these are after 
drawings by Rev. W. 
Crossland, and are 
labelled "tatu marks on 
arm of Kapuas Kayan 
captive woman." The 
designs are certainly 
not of Kayan origin ; 
the woman had in all 
probability been brought 
captive to Sarawak, 
where Mr. Crossland saw 
her, and it is unfortun- 
ate that exact informa- 
tion concerning the tribe 
to which she belonged 
was not obtained. The 
designs, if accurately 
copied, are so extremely unlike all that are known to 
us that we are not able to hazard even a guess at their 
provenance or meaning. The other design figured on 
the same page is copied from Carl Bock ; it occurred on 
the shoulder of a Punan, and is said by Mr. Crossland 
to be commonly used by the Sea Dayaks of the Undup. 
We met with a similar example of it (PI. 138, Fig. 7) 
on an Ukit tatued in the Kayan manner, but could get 
no information concerning it, and suppose that it is not 
an Ukit design. Hein [6, Fig. 90] figures the same 
design, and Nieuwenhuis [8, p. 240] alludes to a similar. 
We may note here that the designs figured on page 89 

Fig. 74. 

XII 

DECORATIVE ART 273 

of Ling Roth's book [7] as tatu designs are in our 
opinion very probably not tatu designs. They were 
collected by Dr. Wienecke in Dutch Borneo, and appear 
to be nothing but drawings by a native artist of such 
objects in daily use as hats, seat-mats, baby-slings, and 
so on. We communicated with Dr. J. D. E. Schmeltz of 
the Leyden Museum, where these "tatu" marks are 
deposited, and learnt from him that they are indeed actual 
drawings on paper; there are ninety-two of them, apparently 
all are different isolated designs, and they are evidently 
the work of one artist.^ There is not a tribe in Borneo 
which can show such a variety of tatu design, and indeed 
we doubt if ninety-two distinct isolated tatu designs could 
be found throughout all the length and breadth of the 
island. Moreover, as can be seen by reference to the cited 
work, the designs are of a most complicated nature, not 
figures with the outlines merely filled in, as in all tatu 
designs known to us, but with the details drawn in fine 
lines and cross-hatching, which in tatu would be utterly 
lost unless executed on a very large scale. 

V. Sea Dayak Tatu, 

The Sea Dayaks at the present day are, as far as the 
men are concerned, the most extensively tatued tribe in 
Borneo, with the exception of the Bakatans, Ukits, 
Kahayans, and Biajau ; nevertheless, from a long-continued 
and close study of their tatu, we are forced to the conclusion 
that the practice and the designs have been entirely borrowed 
from other tribes, but chiefly from the Kayans. For some 
time we believed that there were two characteristically 
Sea Dayak designs, namely, that which is tatued on the 
throat (Figs. 75 and jG) and that on the wrist (PL 143, 
Fig. 7), but when later we studied Bakatan tatu we met 
with the former in the gerowit pattern on the throat of 
men, and the latter in the lukut design on the wrist of the 
women. A Sea Dayak youth will simply plaster himself, 
so to speak, with numerous isolated designs ; we have 
counted as many as five of the asu design on one thigh 

^ Dr. Schmeltz has kindly furnished us with an advance sheet of his forth- 
coming catalogue of the Borneo collection in the Leyden Museum ; he 
catalogues these drawings as tatu marks, but in a footnote records our opinion 
of them made by letter. Dr. Nieuwenhuis apparently adheres to the belief 
that they really are tatu marks. 

VOL L T 

274 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

alone. The same design appears two or three times on the 
arms, and even on the breast, though this part of the body 
as well as the shoulders is more usually decorated with 
several stars and rosettes. The backs of the hands are 
tatued, quite irrespective of bravery or experience in 
warfare ; in fact we have frequently had occasion to note 
that a man with tatued hands is a wastrel or a conceited 
braggart, of no account with Europeans or with his own 
people. This wild and irresponsible system of tatu has 
been accompanied by an inevitable degradation of the 
designs. There is a considerable body of evidence to 
show that the Sea Dayaks have borrowed much in their 

Fig. 75. 

Fig. 76. 

arts and crafts from tribes who have been longer established 
in Borneo ; but it must be confessed that in their decorative 
art they have often improved upon their models ; their 
bamboo carvings and their woven cloth are indeed " things 
of beauty." But their tatu involves, not an intelligent 
elaboration of the models, but a simplification and degrada- 
tion, or at best an elaboration without significance. Figs. 1-6, 
PI. 137, are examples of the Sea Dayaks tuang asu or 
dog design. The figures show the dog design run mad, 
and it is idle to attempt to interpret them, since in every 
case the artists have given their individual fancies free 
play. When the profession of the tatu-artist is heredi- 
tary, and when the practice has for its object the 

o\jo 

10 

Plate 143. 

DECORATIVE ART 275 

embellishment of definite parts of the body for definite 
reasons, we naturally find a constancy of design ; or, 
if there are varieties, there is a purpose in them, in the 
sense that the variations can be traced to pre-existing 
forms, and do not depart from the original so widely that 
their significance is altogether lost. With the borrowing 
of exogenous designs arises such an alteration in their 
forms that the original names and significance are lost. 
But when the very practice of tatu has no special meaning, 
when the tatu-artist may be any member of the tribe, and 
where no original tatu design is to be found in the tribe, 
then the borrowed practice and the borrowed designs, 
unbound by any sort of tradition, run complete riot, and 
any sort of fanciful name is applied to the degraded designs. 
Amongst the Kenyah tribes the modification and degrada- 
tion of the dog design has not proceeded so far as amongst 
the Sea Dayaks, and this may be explained by their 
more restrained practice of tatu and by the constant 
intercourse between them and the Kayans, for they 
always have good models before them. PI. 137, Fig. 3, 
illustrates the extreme limit of degradation of the dog 
design amongst Sea Dayaks ; it is sometimes termed kala^ 
scorpion,^ and it is noteworthy that the representation of the 
chelae and anterior end of the scorpion (A) was originally 
the posterior end of the dog, and the hooked ends of the 
posterior processes of this scorpion design (B), instead of 
facing one another as they did when they represented the 
open jaws of the dog, now look the same way ; the rosette- 
like eye of the dog still persists, but of course it has no 
significance in the scorpion. A curious modification of 
this eye is seen in another Sea Dayak scorpion design 
figured by E. B. Haddon [4, Fig. 19]. Furness [3, p. 142] 
figures a couple of scorpion designs, but neither are quite 
as debased as that which we figure here. Furness also 
figures a scroll design, not unlike a Bakatan design, tatued 
on the forearm, and termed taia gasieng^ the thread of the 
spinning wheel ; a similar one figured by Ling Roth [7, 

1 Mr. E. B. Haddon (4, p. 124) writes : *' The tattoo design used by the 
Kayans and Kenyahs . . . has been copied and adopted by the Ibans in the 
same way as the Kalamantans have done, the main difference being, that 
the Ibans call the design a scorpion. For this reason the pattern tends to 
become more and more like the scorpion. ..." The italics are ours. Is 
not this "putting the cart before the horse"? It is only when the design 
resembles a scorpion that the term scorpion is applied to it ; all other modifi- 
cations, even though tending towards the scorpion, are called dog, prawn, or 
crab. 

276 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

p. 88] is termed trong, the ^%% plant. On the breast and 
shoulders some forms of rosette or star design are tatued in 
considerable profusion ; they are known variously as 
bunga trough the ^%% plant flower, tandan buahy bunches 
of fruit, lukut, an antique bead, and ringgit salilang. A 
four-pointed star, such as that shown in Fig. 64, is termed 
buah andu^ fruit of Plukenetia corniculata ; since this fruit 
is quadrate in shape with pointed angles, it is evident that 
the name has been applied to the pattern because of its 
resemblance to the fruit. Furness figures examples of 
these designs and also Ling Roth [7, p. 88]. We figure 
(Figs. 75, ^6, yy) three designs for the 
throat known sometimes as katak^ frogs, 
sometimes as tali gasieng, thread of the 
spinning wheel, and no doubt other mean- 
ingless names are applied to them. Two 
of the figures (Figs. 75, yy) are evidently 
modifications of the Bakatan gerowit 
design, but here they are represented 
with the tatu pigment, whilst with the 
Fig 77 Bakatans the design is in the natural 

colour of the skin against a background 
of pigment, i.e. the Dayak design is the positive of the 
Bakatan negative. Furness figures two examples of the 
throat design, one with a transverse row of stars cutting 
across it; the same authority also figures a design for the 
ribs known as tali sabit, waist chains, consisting of two 
stars joined by a double zigzag line. The same design is 
sometimes tatued on the wrist, when it is known as lukut^ 
antique bead ; it is also tatued on the throat [7, p. 88], 
and attention has already been drawn to the probable 
derivation of this design also from a Bakatan model. 

It is only very seldom that Sea Dayak women tatu, and 
then only in small circles on the breasts [7, p. 83] and on 
the calves of the legs. 

As a conclusion to the foregoing account of Bornean 
tatu we add a table which summarises in the briefest 
possible manner all our information ; its chief use perhaps 
will lie in showing in a graphic manner the blanks in our 
knowledge that still remain. 

We do not consider that tatu can ever be of much value 
in clearing up racial problems, seeing how much evidence 
there is of interchange of designs and rejection of indigenous 

DECORATIVE ART 277 

designs in favour of something newer; consequently we 
refrain from drawing up another scheme of classification 
of tatu in Borneo ; at best it would be little more than a 
re-enumeration of the forms that we have already described 
in more or less detail. 

^ 
P 

9 

.Hie 

y 

o 

H 

^1 

•a 

o 

^2 

2 

1- i^ ,« 
^1.1 

^a 

c 

•hS-o 

en 

O 

ca o 
c rt.H 

*j ti D 
o O.S 

£ S 9 

rt rt w 

> J3 

^t- 

H 

^ J 
1^.^ 

T3 4> 

ui 

u It 

Si's- 

3 o 

c o 

ba 

c . 

X N 

Q 

S 5 

-a-s 

^ '" 

o 

^1 

sr 

ii 

»~ 2 

2 

J3 

G 
c3 

u 

-So 

C 

o 

V p3 

'a - 

-o.a 

II 

Pn 

"rt 4> 

II 

l^.w 

S S 

O Q 

.£?</. 
■J) tn tA 
C <U (d 

f1 S ") 
_ o 

— 4)- 

3l 

•UBlUBmB|B^-q'BiCu3^ 

J3 ^ rt 

« 

« S «rfi 

g 

Sk 

''Ith SOI 
signify 
and lo 
terity, 

c uw. 

M CXO 

= o 

li 

.!S in 

<«-0 
- V M 

<U > (/I 

a o cj 
c/5 

0.2, 
O 

•uviUvuiB\iz-yi 

28o PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chm 

BIBLIOGRAPHY. 

1. Beccari, Dr. O., Nelleforeste di Borneo (1902). 

2. Bock, Carl, The Head-htmters of Borneo {\%%2). 

3. Furness, W. H., The Home Life of Borneo Head-hunters (1902). 

4. Haddon, E. B., "The Dog-motive in Bornean Art" {/own. Anth. Inst.y 

1905)- 

5. Hamer, C. den, lets over het Tatoueeren of Toetang bij de Biadjoe- 

Stammen. 

6. Hein, A. R., Die bildenden Kiinste bei den Dayaks auf Borneo (1890). 

7. Ling Roth, H., The Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo (1896), 

vol. ii. 

8. Nieuwenhuis, Dr. A. W., In Central Borneo (1900), vol. i. 

9. Nieuwenhuis, Dr. A. W., Quer durch Borneo (1904), vol. i. 

io. Schwaner, Dr. C. A. L. M., Borneo (1853-54); cf. Ling Roth, vol. ii. 

pp. cxci to cxcv. 
II. Whitehead, J., Exploration of Mount Kina Balu, North Borneo (1893). 

Brief references to tatu will also be found in the writings of Burns, Brooke 
Low, MacDougall, De Crespigny, Hatton, St. John, Witti, and others, but 
notices of all these will be found in Mr. Ling Roth's volumes. 

EXPLANATION OF PLATES. 

Plate 136. 

Fig. I. — Kayan dog design {udoh asu) for thighs of men. From a tatu-block 

in the Sarawak Museum. (No. 1054.104.) 
Fig. 2. — Uma Balubo Kayan dog design. From a tatu-block in the Sarawak 

Museum. (No. 1054.90.) 
Fig. 3. — Sea Dayak scorpion design {Kelingai Kala) for thigh, arm, or 

breast of men. From a tatu-block in the Sarawak Museum. 

(No. 1054.99.) 
Fig. 4. — Kenyah dog design, copied from a Kayan model. From a tatu- 
block in the Sarawak Museum. (No. 1054.108.) 
Fig. 5. — Kayan dog design. From a tatu-block in the Sarawak Museum. 

(No. 1054.106.) 
Fig. 6. — Kayan dog design. From a tatu-block in the Sarawak Museum. 

(No. 1054.88.) 
Fig. 7. — Kayan double dog design for outside of thigh of man. From a 

tatu-block in the Sarawak Museum. (No. 1054.31.) 
Fig. 8. — Kayan designs of dog with pups (tuang nganak). A = pup. For 

thigh of man. From a tatu-block in Sarawak Museum. 

(No. 1054.57.) 
Fig. 9. — Kenyah jaws of centipede design {lipan katip), for breast or 

shoulder of man. From a tatu-block in the Sarawak Museum. 

(No. 1054.20.) 
Fig. 10. — Kenyah crab design {toyzc). A = mouth {ba), B = claw {katip)^ 

C = back {likut), Detail {ikong). From a tatu-block in the 

Sarawak Museum. (No. 1054.71.) 

DECORATIVE ART 281 

Plate 137. 

Fig. I. — Sea Dayak modification of the dog design. From a tatu-block in the 

Sarawak Museum. (No. 1054. 102.) 
Fig. 2.— ,, „ (No. 1054.101.) 

Fig. 3.— „ „ (No. 1054.67.) 

Fig. 4.— „ „ (No. 1054.109.) 

Fig. 5.— „ „ (No. 1054.70.) 

Fig. 6. — ,, ,, But known as " scorpion " (/^a/a) pattern. From 

a tatu-block in the Sarawak Museum. (No. 1054.69.) 
Fig. 7. — Barawan and Kenyah modification of the dog design, known as 

"hook" [kowit) pattern. From a tatu-block in the Sarawak 

Museum. (No. 1054.63.) 
Fig. 8.— „ „ _ (No. 1054.75;) 

Fig. 9. — Kenyah modification of the dog design, but known as the "prawn" 

{orang) pattern. From a tatu-block in the Sarawak Museum. 

(No. 1054-89.) 

Plate 138. 

Fig. I. — Kayan three-line pattern {ida tdo) for back of thigh of woman of 

slave class. From a tatu-block in the Sarawak Museum. 

(No. 1 66a Brooke Low Coll.) 
Fig. 2. — Kayan four-hne pattern {ida pat) for back of thigh of woman of 

middle class. From a tatu-block in the Sarawak Museum. 

(No. 1434.) 
Fig. 3. — Kayan (Rejang R.) three-hne pattern {ida teld) for back of thigh of 

women of upper and middle classes. From a tatu-block in the 

Sarawak Museum. (No. 1054.2.) 
Fig. 4. — Kayan (Uma Pliau) design for front and sides of thigh of high' class 

women. A = tushun ttiva, tuba root ; B =jalaut, fruit of Plukenetia 

cornictdata ; V> = kowit ^ interlocking hooks. From a tatu-block in 

coll. C. Hose. 
Fig. 5. — Kayan design for front of thigh of woman of high class. X = tushun 

tuva ; B = dulang harok, bows of a boat ; C = ulu tinggang, hornbill's 

head; 'D = beHling bulan, full moons. From a tatu-block in the 

Sarawak Museum. (No. 1432.) 
Fig. 6. — Barawan design for the shoulder or breast of men. From a drawing. 
Fig. 7. — Design of uncertain origin, on the calf of the leg of an Ukit man. 

Plate 139. 

Fig. I. — Kayan (Rejang R.) design known as ida tuang or ida lima for back 

of thigh of women of high rank. Note the hornbill heads at the 

top of the design. From a tatu-block in the Sarawak Museum. 

(No. 166^ Brooke Low Coll.) 
Fig. 2 — Kayan (Rejang R.) design ; compare with Figs. 5 and 11. From a 

tatu-block in the Sarawak Museum. (No. 166^: Brooke Low Coll.) 
Fig. 3. — Long Glat hornbill design (after Nieuwenhuis). This is tatued in 

rows down the front and sides of the thigh. 
Fig. 4. — Kayan (?) hornbill design, known, however, as the "dog without a 

tail" {tuang buvong asu). From a tatu-block in the Sarawak 

Museum. (No. 1054,8.) 
Fig. 5.— Kayan (Rejang R.) tatu design known as "dog without a tail" 

{tuang buvong asti) pattern, for front and sides of thigh of women of 

high rank. From a tatu-block in the Sarawak Museum. (No. 166^ 

Brooke Low Coll.) 

282 PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO chap. 

Fig. 6. — Kay an three-line and four-line design {ida telo and ida pat) for back 

of thigh of women of low class. From a tatu-block in the Sarawak 

Museum. (No. 1435.) 
Fig. 7. — Uma Lekan Kayan anthropomorphic design {silong)^ tatued in rows 

down front and sides of thigh. 
Fig. 8. — Kayan bead {lukut) design, tatued on the wrist of men. 
Fig. 9- — 
Fig. 10. — ,, ,, ,, From a tatu-block in 

the Sarawak Museum. (No. 1054,62.) 
Fig. II. — Portion of Uma Lekan Kayan design for back of thigh of women of 

high rank (after Nieuwenhuis). 

Plate 140. 

Fig. I. Tatu design on the forearm of an Uma Lekan Kayan woman of high 

rank. From a rubbing of a carved wooden model in the Sarawak 

Museum. (No. 1398.) 
Fig. 2. — Tatu design on the thigh of an Uma Lekan Kayan woman of high 

rank. From a rubbing of a carved wooden model in the Sarawak 

Museum. (No. 1398.) 
Fig. 3. — Tatu design on the forearm of an Uma Pliau Kayan woman of high 

rank. P^ = beliling bulan, ^\\ xwoons', 'B = dulang harok, hows oi 2l 

boat; Q — kowit, hooks; 'D = daun wi, leaves of rattan; E = 

tushun tuva, bundles of tuba root. From a carved wooden model 

in the Sarawak Museum. (No. 143 1.) 
Fig. 4. — Kenyah design, representing the open fruit of a species of mango 

{ipa olim), tatued on breasts or shoulders of men. From a tatu-block 

in the Sarawak Museum. (No. 1054.14.) 
Fig. 5. Kayan (Baloi R. ) kalang kowit or hook design for back of thigh of 

woman of high rank. From a tatu-block in the Sarawak Museum. 

(No. 1054.54.) 

^ Plate 141. 

Fig. I. Design on the hand of a Skapan chief tatued in the Kayan manner. 

From a drawing. 
Fig. 2. — Design on the arm of a Peng man. From a drawing by Dr. H. Hiller 

of Philadelphia. 
Fig. 3. — Design on the arm of a Kahayan man. From a drawing by Dr. H. 

Hiller of Philadelphia. 
Fig. 4. — Design on the forearm of a Lepu Lutong woman. From a drawing. 
Fig. 5. — Design on the forearm of a Long Utan woman. From a rubbing of 

a carved model in the Sarawak Museum. (No. 1430.) 
Fig. 6. — Design on the thigh of a Long Utan woman. From a rubbing of a 

carved model in the Sarawak Museum. (No. 1426.) 
Fig. 7. — Kenyah design, representing the durian fruit {usoitg dian), tatued on 

the breasts or shoulders of men. From a tatu-block in the Sarawak 

Museum. (No. 1054.17.) 

Plate 142. 

Fig. I. — Tatu design on the forearm of a Kalabit woman. From a drawing. 
Fig. 2. — Tatu design on front of leg of a Kalabit woman. C = betik lulud, shin 

pattern. From a photograph. 
Fig. 3. — Tatu design on back of leg of a Kalabit woman. A = beHk buah, fruit 

pattern ; 'R — betik lawa, trunk pattern. From a drawing. 
Fig. 4. — Tatu design on front of leg of the same Kalabit woman. V> = betik 

karawin ; 'Ej = ujat batu^ hill-tops. From a drawing. 

DECORATIVE ART 283 

Fig. 5. — Tatu design on the forearm of an Uma Long woman. From a 

drawing. 
Fig. 6. — Tatu design on arms and torso of a Biajau man of low class. From 

a drawing by a Maloh. 
Fig. 7. — Tatu design on leg of Biajau man of low class. From a drawing by 

a Maloh. 
Fig. 8. — Tatu design on shin of Biajau woman of low class. From a drawing 

by a Maloh. 
Fig. 9. — Kajaman design representing the fruit of Plukeneiia corniculata 

{jalaut), tatued on the breasts or shoulders of men. From a tatu- 

block in the Sarawak Museum. (No. 1054.21.) 
Fig. 10. — Tatu design on the biceps of an Ukit man, said to represent a bead 

{lukut). From a drawing. 

Plate 143. 

Fig. I. — Design [gerowit, hooks) tatued on the breast of a Bakatan man. 

From a tatu-block in the collection of H.H. the Rajah of Sarawak. 
Fig. 2.— „ 

Fig. 3. — Design {akih, tree gecko) tatued on the shoulder of a Bakatan man. 

From a drawing. 
Fig. 4- — 

Fig. 5. — Design tatued on the calf of the leg of an Ukit. From a photograph. 
Fig. 6. — Tatu design on the foot of a Kayan woman of low class. From a 

drawing. 
Fig. 7. — Design representing an antique bead {lukut), tatued on the wrist of a 

Bakatan girl. From a drawing. 
Fig. 8. — Design {gerowit) tatued on the metacarpals of a Bakatan girl. From 

a drawing. 
Fig. 9. — Design {kanak, circles) on the back of a Bakatan man. From a tatu- 
block. 
Fig. 10. — Design {gerowit) tatued on the throat of a Bakatan man. From a 

photograph. 

END OF VOL. I 

Printed by R. & R. Clark, Limited, Edinburgh. 

The following pages contain advertise- 
ments of Works on Anthropology 
published by 
MACMILLAN AND CO., Limited. 

WORKS ON ANTHROPOLOGY 

By Prof. J. G. FRAZER, D.C.L., LL.D., Litt.D. 

THE GOLDEN BOUGH 

A STUDY IN MAGIC AND RELIGION 

Third Edition, Revised and Enlarged. 8vo. 

Part I. The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings. 

Two volumes. 20s. net. 
„ II. Taboo and the Perils of the Soul. One volume. 

I OS. net. 
„ III. The Dying God. One volume. Second Edition, ios.net. 
„ IV. Adonis, Attis, Osiris. One volume. Second Edition. 

I OS. net. 
„ V. Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild. Two volumes. 

20s. net. 
„ VI. The Scapegoat. [Autumn 191 2. 

„VII. Balder the Beautiful. [Autumn 191 2. 

TOTEMISM AND EXOGAMY. A Treatise on Certain Early 
Forms of Superstition and Society. With Maps. Four vols. 8vo. 
50S. net. 

LECTURES ON THE EARLY HISTORY OF THE 
KINGSHIP. 8vo. 8s. 6d. net. 

PSYCHE'S TASK. A Discourse concerning the Influence of 
Superstition on the Growth of Institutions. 8vo. 2s. 6d. net. 

THE SCOPE OF SOCIAL ANTHROPOLOGY. 8vo. 
Sewed. 6d. net. 

ANCIENT HUNTERS AND THEIR MODERN REPRE- 
SENTATIVES. By Prof. W.J. Sollas, D.Sc, F.R.S. Illustrated. 
8vo. I2S. net. 

THE HISTORY OF HUMAN MARRIAGE. By Edward 
Westermarck, Ph.D. With Preface by Dr. A. R. Wallace, O.M. 
Third Edition. 8vo. 14s. net. 

THE ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE MORAL 

IDEAS. By Edward Westermarck, Ph.D. Two vols. 8vo. 
14s. net each. 

MARRIAGE CEREMONIES IN MOROCCO. By Edward 
Westermarck, Ph.D. 8vo. [Autumn 19 12. 

ANTHROPOLOGY. An Introduction to the Study of Man and 
Civilisation. By Sir Edward B. Tylor, D.C.L., F.R.S. With 
Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d. 

MACMILLAN AND CO., Ltd., LONDON. 

WORKS ON ANTHROPOLOGY 

THE BAGANDA. An Account of their Native Customs 
and Beliefs. By Rev. John Roscoe, M.A. Illustrated. 8vo. 
15 s. net. 

MAN AND BEAST IN EASTERN ETHIOPIA. By 
J. Bland-Sutton, F.R.C.S. Illustrated. 8vo. 12s. net. 

AT THE BACK OF THE BLACK MAN'S MIND, 
OR Notes on the Kingly Office in West Africa. By 
R. E. Dennett. Illustrated. 8vo. los. net. 

NIGERIAN STUDIES, OR the Religious and Politi- 
cal System of the Yoruba. By R. E. Dennett. 
Illustrated. Svo. 8s. 6d. net. 

NOTES ON WEST AFRICAN CATEGORIES. By 
R. E Dennett. 8vo. Sewed, is. net. 

THE LOWER NIGER AND ITS TRIBES. By Major 
Arthur Glyn Leonard. With Map. 8vo. 12 s. 6d. net. 

TRAVELS IN WEST AFRICA. By Mary H. 
KiNGSLEY. Abridged Edition. Extra Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d. 

WEST AFRICAN STUDIES. By Mary H. KiNGSLEY- 

With an Appendix on the Niger Delta by the Vicomte de 
Cardl Illustrated. 8vo. 21s.net. Cheaper Edition with 
additional chapters, but excluding de Cardi's appendix. 
Extra Crown 8vo. 7 s. 6d. 

MELANESIANS and POLYNESIANS. Their Life- 
Histories Described and Compared. By George Brown, 
D.D. Illustrated. 8vo. 12 s. net. 

NATIVE TRIBES OF SOUTH-EAST AUSTRALIA. 
By A. W. HowiTT, D.Sc. Illustrated. 8vo. 21s. net. 

THE NORTHERN TRIBES OF CENTRAL AUS- 
TRALIA. By Prof. Baldwin Spencer, C.M.G., F.R.S., 
and F. J. Gillen. Illustrated. 8vo. 21s. net. 

ACROSS AUSTRALIA. By Prof. Baldwin Spencer, 
C.M.G., F.R.S., and F. J. Gillen. With Coloured and 
other Illustrations. Two vols. 8vo. 21s. net. 

THE MAFULU MOUNTAIN PEOPLE OF BRITISH 
NEW GUINEA. By Robert W. Williamson. With an 
Introduction by A. C. Haddon, F.R.S. Illustrated. 8vo. 
14s. net. 

MACMILLAN AND CO., Ltd., LONDON. 

WORKS ON ANTHROPOLOGY 

THE PAGAN TRIBES OF BORNEO. A Description 
of their Physical, Moral, and Intellectual Condition, with 
some Discussion of their Ethnic Relations. By Charles 
Hose, Sc.D., and William McDougall, M.B., F.R.S. With 
4 Illustrations in Colour, over 200 full-page Collotypes, and 
many Illustrations in the text. Two vols. 8vo. 

MALAY MAGIC. Being an Introduction to the 
Folklore and Popular Religions of the Malay Peninsula. 
By W. W. Skeat, M. A. With a Preface by C. O. Blagden, 
M.A. Illustrated. 8vo. 21s. net. 

PAGAN RACES OF THE MALAY PENINSULA. 
By W. W. Skeat, M.A., and C. O. Blagden, M.A. 
Illustrated. Two vols. 8vo. 42 s. net. 

THE KACHARIS. By the Rev. Sidney Endle. With 
an Introduction by J. D. Anderson, I.C.S. Illustrated. 8vo. 
8s. 6d. net. 

THE NAGA TRIBES OF MANIPUR. By T. C. 

HoDSON. Illustrated. 8vo. 8s. 6d. net. 

THE LUSHEI KUKI CLANS. By Lt.-Col. J. Shake- 
spear, CLE., D.S.O. Illustrated. 8vo. los. net. 

THE TODAS. By W. H. R. Rivers. With Illustrations 

and Map. 8vo. 21s. net. 

THE SOUL OF A PEOPLE. An Account of the Life 
and Behef of the Burmese. By H. Fielding Hall. Fourth 
Edition. Extra Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d. net. 

THE INWARD LIGHT. By H. Fielding Hall. Svo. 

I OS. net. 

THE BURMAN: His Life AND NOTIONS. By Shway 
YoE. Third Edition. 8vo. los. net. 

THE OLD NORTH TRAIL: OR Life, Legends, AND 
Religion of the Blackfeet Indians. By Walter 
McClintock. Illustrated. 8vo. 15s. net. 

THE SOUL OF THE FAR EAST. By Percival 
Lowell. Illustrated. Crown 8vo. 7s. net. 

MACMILLAN AND CO., Ltd., LONDON. 

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LIBRARY 

Los Angeles 

-»-- 1--^ J„< 

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LIBRARY 

Los Angeles 

This book is DUE on the last date stamped below. 

iRU 

RECO LO-llRi 

HAY 1 4 ISSTi 

BFC'D LDIJIB 

MAY 06 

AC NOV 07 1994 

DEC 1 8 1996 
m 1^1938 1997 

is 
19 

m^'"'' 

4 1375 
31977 

Ill 

mi. 

■lb.
