Mormonism Unvailed (E.D. Howe, 1834)
==========================================================
Howe's 1834 Mormonism Unvailed — the first book-length attack on Mormonism, with the Spalding theory of the Book of Mormon's origin. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

p


r:

A


•*


4


‘f


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL


IN


CENTRAL AMERICA, CHIAPAS,


AND


YUCATAN.


J


\of

BY JOHN L. STEPHENS,

4 *

AUTHOR OP “INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL IN EGYPT, ARABIA PETR^A, AND THB
HOLY LAND,’’ ETC.


ILLUSTRATED BY NUMEROUS ENGRAVINGS.


IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOL. I.


N E W.Y 0 R K:

HARPER &, BROTHERS, 82 CLIFF-STREET.


0 ^'


1841,


Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1841, by
Harper & Brothers,

In the Clerk’s Office of the Southern District of New-York.


{ 7 ?

i7HI


ENGRAVINGS OF VOLUME I.


Map. Page

Stone Statue, front View.. Frontispiece.

Wall of Copan______-. 96

Plan of Copan.-... 133

Death’s Head. 135

Portrait... 136

Stone Idol. 138

Portrait. 139

Stone Idol. 140

Tablet of Hieroglyphics. 141

No. 1, Sides of Altar.— 142

No. 2, Sides of Altar. 142

Gigantic Head.-. 143

No. 1, Stone Idol, front View. 149

No. 2, Stone Idol, back View. 150

Idol half buried. 151

No. 1, Idol. 152

No. 2, Idol. 152

No. 1, Idol. 153

No. 2, Idol. 153

Idol and Altar......... 154

Fallen Idol. 155

No. 1, Idol, front View.. 156

No. 2, Idol, back View........... 156

No. 3, Idol, side View.. 156

Fallen Idol. 157

Circular Altar. 157

No. 1, Stone Idol, front View .. 158

No. 2, Stone Idol, back View. 158

No. 3, Stone Idol, side View. 158

Great Square of Antigua Guatimala. 266

Profile of Nicaragua Canal.. 312


I


PREFACE.


The author is indebted to Mr. Van Buren, late Pres¬
ident of the United States, for the opportunity of pre¬
senting to the public the following pages. He considers
it proper to say, that his diplomatic appointment was for
a specific purpose, not requiring a residence at the cap¬
ital! the object of his mission being fulfilled or fail¬
ing, he was at liberty to travel. At the time of his
arrival in Central America, that country was distracted
by a sanguinary civil war, which resulted, during his
sojourn there, in the entire prostration of the Federal
Government. By the protection and facilities afforded
by his official character, he was enabled to accomplish
what otherwise would have been impossible. His work
embraces a journey of nearly three thousand miles in
the interior of Central America, Chiapas, and Yucatan,
including visits to eight ruined cities, with full illustra¬
tions from drawings taken on the spot by Mr. Cather-
wood. Its publication has been delayed on account of
the engravings; but on one consideration the author does
not regret the delay. Late intelligence from Central
America enables him to express the belief that the state
of anarchy in which he has represented that beautiful


iV PREFACE.

country no longer exists ; the dark clouds which hung
over it have passed away, civil war has ceased, and
Central America may be welcomed back among re¬
publics.

New- York, May^ 1841.


CONTENTS


OP

THE FIRST VOLUME.


CHAPTEE, L

Departure.—The Voyage.—Arrival at Balize.—Mixing of Colours.—Government
House.—Colonel M‘Donald.—Origin of Balize.—Negro Schools.—Scene in a
Court-room.—Law without Lawyers.—The Barracks.—Excursion in a Pit-
pan.—A Beginning of Honours.—Honours accumulating.— Departure from
Balize.—Sweets of Office . ..Page 9


CHAPTER II.

Every one for himself.—Travellers’ Tricks.—Puenta Gorda.—A Visit to the Ca-
rib Indians.—A Carib Crone.—A Baptism.—Rio Dolce. — Beautiful Scenery.—
Yzabal.—Reception of the Padre.—A Barber in Office.—A Band of “Invinci-
bles.”—Parties in Central America.—A Compatriot. —A Grave in a Foreign
Land.—Preparations for the Passage of “the Mountain.” — A Road not Macad¬
amized.—Perils by the Way.—A well-spiced Lunch. — The Mountain passed

25

CHAPTER III.

A Canonigo.—How to roast a Fowl.—Extempore Shoemaking. — Motagua River.
—Beautiful Scene.—Crossing the River. — The Luxury of Water. —Primitive
Costumes. — How to make Tortillas.—Costly Timber. — Gualan. — Oppressive
Heat.—Shock of an Earthquake.—A stroll through the Town. —A troublesome
Muleteer.—A Lawsuit.—Important Negotiations.—A Modern Bona Dea.—How
to gain a Husband.—A Kingdom of Flora.—Zacapa.— Making free with a
Host .51


chapter IV.

Purchasing a Bridle.—A School and its Regulations.—Conversation with an In¬
dian.—Spanish Translation of the “ Spy.”—Chiquimula.—A Church in Ruins.
—A Veteran of the French Empire.—St. Stephanos.—A Land of Mountains.—
An Affair with a Muleteer.—A deserted Village.—A rude Assault.— Arrest.—
Imprisonment.—Release . . . . . .70


CHAPTER V.

An Indian Funeral.—Copan River.—Woman’s Kindness.—Hacienda of San An¬
tonio.—Strange Customs.—A Mountain of Aloes.—The State of Honduras.
—Village of Copan.—An ungracious Host.—Wall of Copaii.— History of Co¬
pan.—First View of the Ruins.—Vain Speculations.—Applications for Medi¬
cine. —Search for an Abode.—A Sick Woman.—Plagues of a Muleteer.—An
unpleasant Situation.—A Thunder Storm. —Thoughts of buying Copan . 86


VI


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER VI.

How to begin. — Commencement of Explorations. — Interest created by these
Ruins.—Visit from the Alcalde.—Vexatious Suspicions.—A welcome Visiter.
—Letter from General Cascara.—Buying a City.—Visit from Don Gregorio’s
Family .—Distribution of Medicines.Page 117

CHAPTER VII.

Survey of the Ruins.—Account of them by Huarros and by Colonel Galindo.
—Their Situation.—Their Extent.—Plan of Survey.—Pyramidal Structures.—
Rows of Death’s Heads.—Remarkable Portrait.—“ Idols.”—Character of the
Engravings.—Ranges of Terraces.—A Portrait.—Courtyards.—Curious Altar.
—Tablets of Hieroglyphics.—Gigantic Head.—Stone Quarries.—More Appli¬
cants for Medicine.—“Idols” and Altars.—Buried Image.—Material of the
Statues.—Idols originally painted.—Circular Altar.—Antiquity of Copan . 130

CHAPTER VIIL

Separation.—An Adventure.—Copan River.—Don Clementino.—A Wedding.—
A Supper,—A Wedding Ball.—Buying a Mule.—The Sierra.—View from the
Top.—Esquipulas.—The Cura.—Hospitable Reception.—Church of Esquipu-
las.—Responsibility of the Cura.—Mountain of Quezaltapeque.—A narrow Es¬
cape.—San Jacinto.—Reception by the Padre.—A Village FMe.—An Ambus¬
cade.—Motagua River.—Village of San Rosalie.—A Death Scene . . 161

CHAPTER IX.

Chimalapa.—The Cabildo.—A Scene of Revelry.—Gustatoya.—A Hunt for Rob¬
bers.—Approach to Guatimala.—Beautiful Scenery.—Volcanoes of Agua and
Fuego.—First View of the City.—Entry into the City.—First Impressions.—
The Diplomatic Residence.—Parties in Central America.—Murder of Vice-
president Flores.—Political State of Guatimala.—An embarrassing Situation.
—The Constituent Assembly.—Military Police.183

CHAPTER X.

Hacienda of Narengo.—Lazoing.— Diplomatic Correspondence. — Formulas.—
Fdte of La Concepcion. — Taking the Black Veil. — A Countrywoman. — Re¬
nouncing the World.—Fireworks, &c.—Procession in honour of the Virgin.—
Another Exhibition of Fireworks.—A fiery Bull.—Insolent Soldiery . . 206

CHAPTER XI.

The Provesor.^NeWs of the Day, how published in Guatimala.—Visit to the
Convent of La Concepcion.—The Farewell of the Nun.—Carrera.—Sketch
of his Life.—The Cholera.—Insurrections.—Carrera heads the Insurgents.—
His Appearance in Guatimala.—Capture of the City.—Carrera Triumphant.—
Arrival of Morazan.—Hostilities.—Pursuit of Carrera.—His Defeat.—He is
again uppermost.—Interview with Carrera.—His Character , . . 221


CONTENTS.


vii


CHAPTER XII.

Party to Mixco.—A Scene of Pleasure.—Procession in Honour of the Patron
Saint of Mixco.—Fireworks.—A Bombardment.—Smoking Segars.—A Night-
brawl.—Suffering and Sorrow.—A Cockfight.—A Walk in the Suburbs.—Sun¬
day Amusements.—Return to the City.Page 251

CHAPTER XIII.

Excursion to La Antigua and the Pacific Ocean.—San Pablo.—Mountain Scene¬
ry.—El Rio Pensativo.—La Antigua.—Account of its Destruction.—An Octo¬
genarian.— The Cathedral. — San Juan Obispo.—Santa Maria.—Volcano de
Agua.—Ascent of the Mountain.—The Crater.—A lofty Meeting-place.—Tho
Descent.—Return to La Antigua.—Cultivation of Cochineal.—Classic Ground.
—Ciudad Vieja.—Its Foundation.—Visit from Indians.—Departure from Ciudad
Vieja.—First Sight of the Pacific.—Alotenango.—Volcan del Fuega.—Escuint-
la.—Sunset Scene.—Masagua.—Port of Istapa.—Arrival at the Pacific . 264

CHAPTER XIV.

The Return.—Hunt for a Mule.—Overo.—Masagua.—Escuintla.—Falls of San
Pedro Martyr.—Michetoya River.—Village of San Pedro.—A Major-domo.—
San Cristoval.—Amatitan.—A roving American.—Entry into Guatimala.—Let¬
ter from Mr. Catherwood.—Christmas Eve.—Arrival of Mr. Catherwood.—
Plaza de Toros.—A Bullfight.—The Theatre.—Official Business.—The Aris¬
tocracy of Guatimala.—State of the Country.—Newyear’s Day.—Ferocity of
Party.290


CHAPTER XV.

Hunt for a Government.—Diplomatic Difficulties.—Departure from Guatimala.
—Lake of Amatitan.—Attack of Fever and Ague.—Overo.—Istapa.—A French
Merchant Ship.—Port of Acajutla.—Illness.—Zonzonate.—The Government
found.—Visit to the Volcano of Izalco.—Course of the Eruptions.—Descent
from the Volcano.310


CHAPTER XVI.

Sickness and Mutiny.—Illness of Captain Jay.—Critical Situation.—Rough
Nursing.—A Countryman in Trouble.—Dolphins.—Succession of Volcanoes.
—Gulf of Nicoya.—Harbour of Caldera.—Another Countryman.—Another
Patient. —Hacienda of San Felippe.—Mountain of Aguacate. — “Zillenthal
Patent Self-acting Cold Amalgamation Machine.’—Gold Mines.—View from
the Mountain Top.331


CHAPTER XVII.

La Garita.—Alihuela.—A friendly People.—Heredia,—Rio Segondo.—Coffee-
plantations of San Jos6.—The Sacrament for the Dying.—A happy Meeting.—
Travelling Embarrassments.—Quarters in a Convent.—Senor Carillo, Chief of


Vlll


CONTENTS.


State.—Vicissitudes of Fortune.—Visit, to Cartago.—Tres Rios.—An unex¬
pected Meeting.—Ascent of the Volcano of Cartago.—The Crater.—View of
the two Seas.—Descent.—Stroll through Cartago.—A Burial.—^Another at¬
tack of Fever and Ague.—A Vagabond.—Cultivation of Coffee . Page 349

CHAPTEE XVIII.

Departure for Guatimala.—Esparza.—Town of Costa Rica.—The Barranca.—
History of a Countryman.—^Wild Scenery.—Hacienda of Aranjuez.—River
Lagartos.—Cerros of Collito.—Herds of Deer.—Santa Rosa.—Don Juan Jose
Bonilla. — An Earthquake. — A Cattle Farm. — Bagases. — Guanacaste. — An
agreeable Welcome.—Belle of Guanacaste.—Pleasant Lodgings.—Cordilleras.
—Volcanoes of Rincon and Orosi.—Hacienda of San Teresa.—Sunset View.
—The Pacific again.374


CHAPTER XIX.

The Flores.—The San Juan.—Nature’s Solitude.—Primitive Cookery.—Harbour
of San Juan.—Route of the Great Canal to connect the Atlantic and Pacific
Oceans.—^Nicaragua.—Survey for the Canal.—Lake of Nicaragua.—Plan of
the Canal.—Lockage.—Estimate of Cost.—Former Efforts to construct the
Canal.—Its Advantages.—Central American Hospitality.—Tierra Caliente.—
Horrors of Civil War. 396


1


• %


%


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL


IN

CENTRAL AMERICA, CHIAPAS, AND YUCATAN.


CHAPTER L

Departure.—The Voyage.—Arrival at Balize.—Mixing of Colours.—Government
House.—Colonel M‘DonaId.—Origin of Balize.—Negro Schools.—Scene in a
Court-room.—Law without Lawyers.—The Barracks.—Excursion in a Pit-
pan.—A Beginning of Honours.—Honours accumulating.—Departure from
Balize.—Sweets of Office.

Being intrusted by the President with a Special
Confidential Mission to Central America, on Wednes¬
day, the third of October, 1839, I embarked on board
the British brig Mary Ann, Hampton, master, for the
Bay of Honduras. The brig was lying in the North
River, with her anchor apeak and sails loose, and in
a few minutes, in company with a large whaling-ship
bound for the Pacific, we 'were under way. It was
before seven o’clock in the morning: the streets and
wharves were still; the Battery was desolate ; and, at
the moment of leaving it on a voyage of uncertain du¬
ration, seemed more beautiful than I had ever known
it before.

Opposite the Quarantine Ground, a few friends who
had accompanied me on board left riie ; in an hour the
pilot followed; at dusk the dark outline of the high¬
lands of Neversink was barely visible, and the next
morning we were fairly at sea.

My only fellow-passenger was Mr. Catherwood, an

VoL. I.—B


10


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


experienced traveller and personal friend, vv^ho had
passed more than ten years of his life in diligently
studying the antiquities of the Old World ; and whom,,
as one familiar with the remains of ancient architec¬
tural greatness, I engaged, immediately on receiving
my appointment, to accompany me in exploring the
ruins of Central America.

Hurried on by a strong northeaster, on the ninth
we were within the region of the trade-winds, on
the tenth within the tropics, and on the eleventh,
with the thermometer at 80 °, but a refreshing breeze,
we were moving gently between Cuba and St. Domin¬
go, with both in full sight. For the rest, after eigh¬
teen days of boisterous weather, drenched with tropi¬
cal rains, on the twenty-ninth we were driven inside
the Lighthouse reef, and, avoiding altogether the reg¬
ular pilot-ground, at midnight reached St. George’s
Bay, about twenty miles from Balize. A large brig,
loaded with mahogany, was lying at anchor, with a
pilot on board, waiting for favourable weather to put
to sea. The pilot had with him his son, a lad about
sixteen, cradled on the water, whom Captain Hampton
knew, and determined to take on board.

It was full moonlight when the boy mounted the
deck and gave us the pilot’s welcome. I could not
distinguish his features, but I could see that he was not
white; and his voice was as soft as a woman’s. He
took his place at the wheel, and, loading the brig with
canvass, told us of the severe gales on the coast, of
the fears entertained for our safety, of disasters and
shipwrecks, and of a pilot who, on a night which we
well remembered, had driven his vessel over a sunken
reef.

At seven o’clock the next morning we saw Balize,


B ALIZE.


11


appearing, if there be no sin in comparing it with cities
consecrated by time and venerable associations, like
Venice and Alexandrea, to rise out of the water. A
range of white houses extended a mile along the shore,
terminated at one end by the Government House, and
at the other by the barracks, and intersected by the
river Balize, the bridge across which formed a pictu¬
resque object; while the fort on a little island at the
mouth of the river, the spire of a Gothic church behind
the Government House, and groves of cocoanut-trees,
which at that distance reminded us of the palm-trees
of Egypt, gave it an appearance of actual beauty. Four
ships, three brigs, sundry schooners, bungoes, canoes,
and a steamboat, were riding at anchor in the harbour ;
alongside the vessels were rafts of mahogany ; far out,
a negro was paddling a log of the same costly timber ;
and the government dory which boarded us when we
came to anchor was made of the trunk of a mahogany-
tree.

We landed in front of the warehouse of Mr. Coffin,
the consignee of the vessel. There was no hotel in the
place, but Mr. Coffin undertook to conduct us to a lady
who, he thought, could accommodate us with lodgings.

The heavy rain from which we had suffered at sea
had reached Balize. The streets were flooded, and in
places there were large puddles, which it was difficult
to cross. At the extreme end of the principal street

we met the “ lady^^'^ Miss --, a mulatto woman, who

could only give us board. Mr. Coffin kindly offered
the use of an unoccupied house on the other side of the
river to sleep in, and we returned.

By this time I had twice passed the whole length of
the principal street, and the town seemed in the entire
possession of blacks. The bridge, the market-place,


12


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


the streets and stores were thronged with them, and I
might have fancied myself in the capital of a negro re¬
public. They were a fine-looking race, tall, straight,
and athletic, with skins black, smooth, and glossy as
velvet, and well dressed, the men in white cotton shirts
and trousers, with straw hats, and the women in white
frocks with short sleeves and broad red borders, and
adorned with large red earrings and necklaces; and I
could not help remarking that the frock was their only
article of dress, and that it was the fashion of these
sable ladies to drop this considerably from off the right
shoulder, and to carry the skirt in the left hand, and
raise it to any height necessary for crossing puddles.

On my way back I stopped at the house of a mer¬
chant, whom I found at what is called a second break¬
fast. The gentleman sat on one side of the table and
his lady on the other. At the head was a British offi¬
cer, and opposite him a mulatto ; on his left was an¬
other officer, and opposite him also a mulatto. By
chance a place was made for me between the two col¬
oured gentlemen. Some of my countrymen, perhaps,
would have hesitated about taking it, but I did not;
both were well dressed, well educated, and polite.
They talked of their mahogany works, of England,
hunting, horses, ladies, and wine ; and before I had
been an hour in Balize I learned that the great work
of practical amalgamation, the subject of so much an¬
gry controversy at home, had been going on quietly
for generations ; that colour was considered mere mat¬
ter of taste ; and that some of the most respectable in¬
habitants had black wives and mongrel children, whom
they educated with as much care, and made money
for with as much zeal, as if their skins were perfectly
white.


A SAMPLE OP THE PICTURESQUE,


13


I hardly knew whether to be shocked or amused at
this condition of society ; and, in the mean time, joined
Mr. Catherwood, to visit the house offered by Mr. Cof¬
fin. It was situated on the opposite side of the river,
and the road to it was ankle deep in mud. At the
gate was a large puddle, which we cleared by a jump ;
the house was built on piles about two feet high, and
underneath was water nearly a foot deep. We as¬
cended on a plank to the sill of the door, and entered
a large room occupying the whole of the first floor, and
perfectly empty. The upper story was tenanted by a
family of negroes; in the yard was a house swarming
with negroes; and all over, in the yard and in front,
were picturesque groups of little negroes of both sexes,
and naked as they were born. We directed the room
to be swept and our luggage brought there; and, as
we left the house, we remembered Captain Hampton’s
description before our arrival, and felt the point of his
concluding remark, that Balize was the last place
made.

We returned; and, while longing for the comfort of
a good hotel, received through Mr. Goff, the consul of
the United States, an invitation from his excellency.
Colonel McDonald, to the Government House, and in¬
formation that he would send the government dory to
the brig for our luggage. As this was the first ap¬
pointment I had ever held from government, and I was
not sure of ever holding another, I determined to make
the most of it, and accepted at once his excellency’s
invitation.

There was a steamboat for Yzabal, the port of Guati-
mala, lying at Balize; and, on my way to the Gov¬
ernment House, I called upon Senor Comyano, the
agent, who told me that she was to go up the next day;

2


14


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


but added, with great courtesy, that, if I wished it, he
would detain her a few days for my convenience.
Used to submitting to the despotic regulations of steam¬
boat agents at home, this seemed a higher honour than
the invitation of his excellency; but, not wishing to
push my fortune too far, I asked a delay of one day
only.

The Government House stands in a handsome situ¬
ation at the extreme end of the town, with a lawn ex¬
tending to the water, and ornamented with cocoanut-
trees. Colonel McDonald, a veteran six feet high, and
one of the most military-looking men I ever saw, re¬
ceived me at the gate. In an hour the dory arrived
with our luggage, and at five o’clock we sat down to
dinner. We had at table Mr. Newport, chaplain, and
for fifteen years parish clergyman at Balize ; Mr. Walk¬
er, secretary of the government, and holding, besides,
such a list of offices as would make the greatest plu¬
ralist among us feel insignificant; and several other
gentlemen of Balize, office-holders, civil and rnilitary,
in whose agreeable society we sat till eleven o’clock.

The next day we had to make preparations for our
journey into the interior, besides which we had an
opportunity of seeing a little of Balize. The Hon¬
duras Almanac, which assumes to be the chronicler of
this settlement, throws a romance around its early
history by ascribing its origin to a. Scotch bucanier
nam'ed Wallace. The fame of the wealth of the New
World, and the return of the Spanish galleons laden
with the riches of Mexico and Peru, brought upon
the coast of America hordes of adventurers—to call
them by no harsher name—^from England and France,
of whom Wallace, one of the most noted and daring,
found refuge and security behind the keys and reefs


ORIGIN OF BALIZE.


15


which protect the harbour of Balize. The place where
he built his log huts and fortalice is still pointed out;
but their site is now occupied by warehouses. Strength¬
ened by a close alliance with the Indians of the Mos-
cheto shore, and by the adhesion of numerous British
adventurers, who descended upon the coast of Honduras
for the purpose of cutting mahogany, he set the Span¬
iards at defiance. Ever since, the territory of Balize
has been the subject of negotiation and contest, and to
this day the people of Central America claim it as their
own. It has grown by the exportation of mahogany;
but, as the trees in the neighbourhood have been almost
all cut down, and Central America is so impoverished
by wars that it offers but a poor market for British
goods, the place is languishing, and will probably con¬
tinue to dwindle away until the enterprise of her mer-
^ chants discovers other channels of trade.

At this day it contains a population of six thousand,
of which four thousand are blacks, who are employed by
the merchants in gangs as mahogany cutters. Their
condition was always better than that of plantation
slaves; even before the act for the general abolition of
slavery throughout the British dominions, they were
actually free ; and, on the thirty-first of August, 1839,
a year before the time appointed by the act, by a gen¬
eral meeting and agreement of proprietors, even the
nominal yoke of bondage was removed.

The event was celebrated, says the Honduras Alma¬
nac, by religious ceremonies, processions, bands of
music, and banners with devices : The sons of Ham
respect the memory of Wilberforce The Queen,
God bless her;” “McDonald forever;” Civil and
religious liberty all over the world.” Nelson Schaw,

a snowdrop of the first water,” continues the Alma-


16


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


nac, advanced to his excellency. Colonel McDonald,
and spoke as follows : ‘ On the part of my emancipa¬
ted brothers and sisters, I venture to approach your ex-
> cellency, to entreat you to thank our most gracious
Queen for all that she has done for us. We will pray
for her ; we will fight for her ; and, if it is necessary,
we will die for her. We thank your excellency for all
you have done for us. God bless your excellency !
God bless her excellency, Mrs. McDonald, and all the
royal family! Come, my countymen, hurrah ! Dance,
ye black rascals ; the flag of England flies over your
heads, and every rustle of its folds knocks the fetters
off the limbs of the poor slave. Hubbabboo Cochalo-
rum Gee !’ ”

The negro schools stand in the rear of the Govern¬
ment House, and the boys’ department consisted of
about two hundred, from three to fifteen years of age,
and of every degree of tinge, from nearly white down
to two little native Africans beaying on their cheeks the
scars of cuts made by their parents at home. These
last were taken from on board a slave-ship captured by
an English cruiser, brought into Balize, and, as provi¬
ded for by the laws, on a drawing by lot, fell to the
share of a citizen, who, entering into certain covenants
for good treatment, is entitled to their services until
they are twenty-one years old. Unfortunately, the
master was not present, and I had no opportunity of
learning the result of his experience in teaching ; but
in this school, I was told, the brightest boys, and those
who had improved most, were those who had in them
the most white blood.

The mistress of the female department had had great
experience in teaching; and she told us that, though
she had had many clever black girls under her charge,


SCENE IN A COURTROOM.


17


her white scholars were always the most quick and
capable.

From the negro school we went to the Grand Court.
It had been open about half an hour when I entered.
On the back wall, in a massive mahogany tablet, were
the arms of England ; on a high platform beneath was
a large circular table, around which were heavy ma¬
hogany chairs with high backs and cushions. The
court consists of seven judges, five of whom were in
their places. One of them, Mr. Walker, invited me to
one of the vacant seats. I objected, on the ground
that my costume was not becoming so dignified a po¬
sition ; he insisted, and I took my seat, in a rounda¬
bout jacket, upon a chair exceedingly comfortable for
the administration of justice.

As before remarked, five of the judges were in their
places ; one of them was a mulatto. The jury was
empannelled, and two of the jurors were mulattoes;
one of them, as the judge who sat next me said, was a
Sambo, or of the descending line, being the son of a
mulatto woman and a black man. I was at a loss to
determine the caste of a third, and inquired of the
judge, who answered that he was his, the judge’s,
brother, and that his mother was a mulatto woman.
The judge was aware of the feeling existing in the
United States with regard to colour, and said that in
Balize there was, in political life, no distinction what¬
ever, except on the ground of qualifications and char¬
acter ; and hardly any in social life, even in contract¬
ing marriages.

I had noticed the judges and jurors, but I missed an
important part of an English court. Where were the
gentlemen of the bar ? Some of my readers will per¬
haps concur with Captain Hampton, that Balize was

VoL. I.—C


18


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


the last place made, when I tell them that there was
not a single lawyer in the place, and never had been;
but, lest some of my enterprising professional brethren
should forthwith be tempted to pack their trunks for a
descent upon the exempt city, I consider it my duty to
add that I do not believe there is the least chance for
one.

As there is no bar to prepare men for the bench, the
judges, of course, are not lawyers. Of the five then
sitting, two were merchants, one a mahogany cutter,
and the mulatto, second to none of the others in char¬
acter or qualifications, a doctor. This court is the
highest tribunal for the trial of civil causes, and has
jurisdiction of all amounts above £15, Balize is a
place of large commercial transactions; contracts are
daily made and broken, or misunderstood, which re¬
quire the intervention of some proper tribunal to inter¬
pret and compel their fulfilment. And there was no
absence of litigation; the calendar was large, and the
courtroom crowded. The first cause called was upon
an account, when the defendant did not appear, and a
verdict was taken by default. In the next, the plain¬
tiff stated his case, and^wore to it; the defendant an¬
swered, called witnesses, and the cause was submitted
to the jury. There was no case of particular interest.
In one the parties became excited, and the defendant
interrupted the plaintiff repeatedly, on which the latter,
putting his hand upon the shoulder of his antagonist,
said, in a coaxing way, Now don’t, George; wait a
little, you shall have your turn. Don’t interrupt me,
and I won’t you.” All was done in a familiar and
colloquial way; the parties were more or less known
to each other, and judges and jurors were greatly in¬
fluenced by knowledge of general character. I re-


A RIDE TO THE BARRACKS.


19


marked that regularly the merits of the case were so
clearly brought out, that, when it was committed to
the jury, there was no question about the verdict; and
so satisfactory has this system proved, that, though an
appeal lies to the Queen in Council, as Mr. Evans, the
foreman, told me, but one cause has been carried up
in twenty-two years. Still it stands as an anomaly in
the history of English jurisprudence ; for, I believe, in
every other place where the principles of the common
law govern, the learning of the bench and the ingenui¬
ty of the bar are considered necessary to elicit the truth.

At daylight the next morning I was roused by Mr.
Walker for a ride to the barracks. Immediately be¬
yond the suburbs we entered upon an uncultivated
country, low and flat, but very rich. We passed a
racecourse, now disused and grown over. This is the
only road opened, and there are no wheel-carriages in
Balize. Between it and the inhabited part of Central
America is a wilderness, unbroken even by an Indian
path. There is no communication with the interior
except by the Golfo Dolce or the Balize River; and,
from the want of roads, a residence there is more con¬
fining than living on an island.

In half an hour we reached the barracks, situated on
the opposite side of a small bay. The soldiers are all
black, and are part of an old Jamaica regiment, most
of them having been enlisted at the English recruiting
stations in Africa. Tall and athletic, with red coats,
and, on a line, bristling with steel, their ebony faces
gave them a peculiarly warlike appearance. They
carry themselves proudly, call themselves the Queen’s
Gentlemen,” and look down with contempt upon the

niggers.”

We returned to breakfast, and immediately after


20


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


made an excursion in the government pit-pan. This
is the same fashion of boat in 'which the Indians navi¬
gated the rivers of America before the Spaniards dis¬
covered it. European ingenuity has not contrived a
better, though it has, perhaps, beautified the Indian
model. Ours was about forty feet long, and six wide
in the centre, running to a point at both ends, and
made of the trunk of a mahogany-tree. Ten feet from
the stern, and running forward, was a light wooden
top, supported by fanciful stancheons, with curtains
for protection against sun and rain ; it had large cush¬
ioned seats, and was fitted up almost as neatly as the
gondolas of Venice. It was manned by eight negro
soldiers, who sat two on a seat, with paddles six feet
long, and two stood up behind with paddles as steers¬
men. A few touches of the paddles gave brisk way to
the pit-pan, and we passed rapidly the whole length
of the town. It was an unusual thing for his excellen¬
cy’s pit-pan to be upon the water ; citizens stopped to
gaze at us, and all the idle negroes hurried to the
bridge to cheer us. This excited our African boat¬
men, who, with a wild chant that reminded us of the
songs of the Nubian boatmen on the Nile, swept under
the bridge, and hurried us into the still expanse of a
majestic river. Before the cheering of the negroes
died away we were in as perfect a solitude as if re¬
moved thousands of miles from human habitations.
The Balize River, coming from sources even yet but
little known to civilized man, was then in its fulness.
On each side was a dense, unbroken forest; the banks
were overflowed ; the trees seemed to grow out of the
water, their branches spreading across so as almost to
shut out the light of the sun, and reflected in the water
as in a mirror. The sources of the river were occu-


A BEGINNING OF HONOURS.


21


pied by the aboriginal owners, wild and free as Cortes
found them. We had an eager desire to penetrate by
it to the famous Lake of Peten, where the skeleton of
the conquering Spaniard’s horse was erected into a god
by the astonished Indians ; but the toil of our boatmen
reminded us that they were paddling against a rapid
current. We turned the pit-pan, and with the full
power of the stream, a pull stronger, and a chant loud¬
er than before, amid the increased cheering of the ne¬
groes, swept under the bridge, and in a few minutes
were landed at the Government House.

In order that we might embark at the hour appoint¬
ed, Colonel McDonald had ordered dinner at two
o’clock, and, as on the two preceding days, had invi¬
ted a small party to meet us. Perhaps I am wrong,
but I should do violence to my feelings did I fail to ex¬
press here my sense of the colonel’s kindness. My in¬
vitation to the Government House was the fruit of my
official character ; but I cannot help flattering myself
that some portion of the kindness shown me was the
result of personal acquaintance. Colonel McDonald is
a soldier of the twenty years’ war,” the brother of
Sir John McDonald, adjutant-general of England, and
cousin of Marshal Macdonald of France. All his
connexions and associations are military. At eighteen
he entered Spain as an ensign, one of an army of ten
thousand men, of whom, in less than six months, but
four thousand were left. After being actively engaged
in all the trying service of the Peninsular War, at
Waterloo he commanded a regiment, and on the field
of battle received the order of Companion of the Mil¬
itary Order of the Bath from the King of England,
and that of Knight of the Order of St. Anne from the
Emperor of Russia. Rich in recollections of a long


22


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


military life, personally acquainted with the public and
private characters of the most distinguished military
men of the age, his conversation was like reading a
page of history. He is one of a race that is fast pass¬
ing away, and with whom an American seldom meets.

But to return. The large window of the dining¬
room opened upon the harbour; the steamboat lay in
front of the Government House, and the black smoke,
rising in columns from her pipe, gave notice that it was
time to embark. Before rising. Colonel McDonald,
like a loyal subject, proposed the health of the Queen ;
after which he ordered the glasses to be filled to the
brim, and, standing up, he gave, The health of Mr.
Van Buren, President of the United States,” accom¬
panying it with a warm and generous sentiment, and
the earnest hope of strong and perpetual friendship be¬
tween England and America. I felt at the moment,

Cursed be the hand that attempts to break itand
albeit unused to taking the President and the people
upon my shoulders, I answered as well as I could*
Another toast followed to the health and successful
journey of Mr. Catherwood and myself, and we rose
from table. The government dory lay at the foot of
the lawn. Colonel McDonald put his arm through
mine, and, walking away, told me that I was going
into a distracted country; that Mr. Savage, the Amer¬
ican consul in Guatimala, had, on a previous occasion,
protected the property and lives of British subjects;
and, if danger threatened me, I must assemble the Eu¬
ropeans, hang out my flag, and send word to him. I
knew that these were not mere words of courtesy, and,
in the state of the country to which I was going, felt
the value of such a friend at hand'. With the warmest
feelings of gratitude I bade him farewell, and stepped


HONOURS ACCUMULATING.


23


into the dory. At the moment flags were run up at
the government staff, the fort, the courthouse, and the
government schooner, and a gun was fired from the
fort. As I crossed the bay, a salute of thirteen guns
was fired ; passing the fort, the soldiers presented arms,
the government schooner lowered and raised her en¬
sign, and when I mounted the deck of the steam-
boatj the captain, with hat in hand, told me that he
had instructions to place her under my orders, and to
stop wherever I pleased.

The reader will perhaps ask how I bore all these
honours, I had visited many cities, but it was the first
time that flags and cannon announced to the world that
I was going away. I was a novice, but I endeavoured
to behave as if I had been brought up to it; and, to
tell the truth, my heart beat, and I felt proud; for
these were honours paid to my country, and not to
me.

To crown the glory of the parting scene, my good
friend Captain Hampton had charged his two four-
pounders, and when the steamboat got under way he
fired one, but the other would not go off. The cap¬
tain of the steamboat had on board one puny gun, with
which he would have returned all their civilities; but,
as he told me, to his great mortification, he had no
powder.

The steamboat in which we embarked was the last
remnant of the stock in trade of a great Central Amer¬
ican agricultural association, formed for building cities,
raising the price of land, accommodating emigrants,
and improvement generally. On the rich plains of the
province of Vera Paz they had established the site of
New Liverpool, which only wanted houses and a pop¬
ulation to become a city. On the wheel of the boat


24


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL*


was a brass circular plate, on which, in strange juxta¬
position, were the words “ Vera Paz,’’ London.’’
The captain was a small, weather-beaten, dried-up
old Spaniard, with courtesy enough for a Don of old.
The engineer was an Englishman, and the crew were
Spaniards, Mestitzoes, and mulattoes, not particularly
at home in the management of a steamboat.

Our only fellow-passenger was a Roman Catholic
priest, a young Irishman, who had been eight months
at Balize, and was now on his way to Guatimala by in¬
vitation of the provesor, by the exile of the archbishop
the head of the church. The cabin was very com¬
fortable, but the evening was so mild that we took our
tea on deck. At ten o’clock the captain came to me
for orders. I have had my aspirations, but never ex¬
pected to be able to dictate to the captain of a steam¬
boat. Nevertheless, again as coolly as if I had been
brought up to it, I designated the places I wished to
visit, and retired. Verily, thought I, if these are the
fruits of official appointments, it is not strange that men
are found willing to accept them.


EVERY ONE FOR HIMSELF.


25


CHAPTER 11.

Every one for himself.—Travellers’ Tricks.—Puenta Gorda.—A Visit to the Ca-
rib Indians.—A Carib Crone.—A Baptism.—Rio Dolce.—Beautiful Scenery.—
Yzabal.—Reception of the Padre.—A Barber in Office.—A Band of “ Invinci-
bles.”—Parties in Central America.—A Compatriot.—A Grave in a Foreign
Land.—Preparations for the Passage of “ the Mountain.”—A Road not Macad¬
amized.—Perils by the Way.—A well-spiced Lunch.—The Mountain passed.

We had engaged a servant, a French Spaniard, St.
Domingo born and Omoa bred, bearing the name of
Augustin; young, and, as we at first thought, not very
sharp. Early in the morning he asked us what we
would have for breakfast, naming eggs, chickens, &c.
We gave him directions, and in due time sat down to
breakfast. During the meal something occurred to put
us on inquiry, and we learned that everything on the
table, excepting the tea and coffee, belonged to the
padre. Without asking any questions, or thinking of
the subject at all, we had taken for granted that the
steamboat made all necessary provisions for passen¬
gers ; but, to our surprise, learned that the boat fur¬
nished nothing, and that passengers were expected to
take care of themselves. The padre had been as ig¬
norant and as improvident as we; but some good Cath¬
olic friends, whom he had married or whose children
he had baptized, had sent on board contributions of
various kinds, and, among other things—odd luggage
for a traveller—a coop full of chickens. We congrat¬
ulated the padre upon his good fortune in having us
with him, and ourselves upon such a treasure as Au¬
gustin. ‘ I may mention, by-the-way, that, in the midst
of Colonel McDonald’s hospitalities, Mr. Catherwood
and I exhibited rather too much of the old traveller.
When at dinner the last day, Mr. C. was called from.

VoL. I.— D 3


26


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


table to superintend the removal of some luggage, and
shortly after I was called out; and, fortunately for
Colonel McDonald and the credit of my country, I
found Mr. C. quietly rolling up, to send back to New-
York, a large blue cloak belonging to the colonel, sup¬
posing it to be mine. I returned to the table and
mentioned to our host his narrow escape, adding that
I had some doubt about a large canvass sack for bed¬
ding which I had found in my room, and, presuming
it was one that had been promised me by Captain
Hampton, had put on board the steamboat; but this
too, it appeared, belonged to Colonel McDonald, and
for many years had carried his camp bed. The result
was, that the colonel insisted upon our taking it, and I
am afraid it was pretty well worn out before he receiv¬
ed it again. The reader will infer from all this that
Mr. C. and I, with the help of Augustin, were fit to
travel in any country.

But to return. It was a beautiful day. Our course
lay nearly south, directly along the coast of Honduras.
In his last voyage Columbus discovered this part of the
Continent of America, but its verdant beauties could
not win him to the shore. Without landing, he con¬
tinued on to the Isthmus of Darien, in search of that
passage to India which was the aim of all his hopes,
but which it was destined he should never see.

Steamboats have destroyed some of the most pleas¬
ing illusions of my life. I was hurried up the Helles¬
pont, past Sestos and Abydos, and the Plain of Troy,
under the clatter of a steam-engine ; and it struck at
the root of all the romance connected with the adven¬
tures of Columbus to follow in his track, accompanied
by the clamour of the same panting monster. Never¬
theless, it was very pleasant. We sat down under an


VISIT TO THE CARIB INDIANS.


27


awning; the sun was intensely hot, but we were shel¬
tered, and had a refreshing breeze. The coast assu¬
med an appearance of grandeur and beauty that real¬
ized my ideas of tropical regions. There was a dense
forest to the water’s edge. Beyond were lofty mount¬
ains, covered to their tops with perpetual green, some
isolated, and others running off in ranges, higher and
higher, till they were lost in the clouds.

At eleven o’clock we came in sight of Puenta Gor-
da, a settlement of Carib Indians, about a hundred and
fifty miles down the coast, and the first place at which
I had directed the captain to stop. As we approached
we saw an opening on the water’s edge, with a range
of low houses, reminding me of a clearing in our for¬
ests at home. It was but a speck on the great line of
coast; on both sides were primeval trees. Behind
towered an extraordinary mountain, apparently broken
into two, like the back of a two-humped camel. As
the steamboat turned in, where steamboat had never
been before, the whole village was in commotion :
women and children were running on the bank, and
four men descended to the water and came off in a
canoe to meet us.

Our fellow-passenger, the padre, during his residence
at Balize, had become acquainted with many of the
Caribs, and, upon one occasion, by invitation from its
chief, had visited a settlement for the purpose of mar¬
rying and baptizing the inhabitants. He asked wheth¬
er we had any objection to his taking advantage of the
opportunity to do the same here ; and, as we had none,
at the moment of disembarking he appeared on deck
with a large wash-hand basin in one hand, and a well-
filled pocket-handkerchief in the other, containing his
priestly vestments.


28


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


We anchored a short distance from the beach, and
went ashore in the small boat. We landed at the foot
of a bank about twenty feet high, and, ascending to
the top, came at once, under a burning sun, into all
the richness of tropical vegetation. Besides cotton
and rice, the cahoon, banana, cocoanut, pineapple, or¬
ange, lemon, and plantain, with many other fruits
which we did not know even by name, were growing
with such luxuriance that at first their very fragrance
was oppressive. Under the shade of these trees most
of the inhabitants were gathered, and the padre imme¬
diately gave notice, in a wholesale way, that he had
come to marry and baptize them. After a short con¬
sultation, a house was selected for the performance
of the ceremonies, and Mr. Gather wood and I, under
the guidance of a Carib, who had picked up a little
English in his canoe expeditions to Balize, walked
through the settlement.

It consisted of about five hundred inhabitants. Their
native place was on the seacoast, below Truxillo, with¬
in the government of Central America; and having
taken an active part against Morazan, when his party
became dominant they fled to this place, being within
the limits of the British authority. Though living
apart, as a tribe of Caribs, not mingling their blood
with that of their conquerors, they were completely
civilized ; retaining, however, the Indian passion for
beads and ornaments. The houses or huts were
built of poles about an inch thick, set upright in the
ground, tied together with bark strings, and thatched
Avith coroon leaves. Some had partitions and bed¬
steads made of the same materials ; in every house
were a grass hammock and a figure of the Virgin or
of some tutelary saint ; and we were exceedingly


A CARIB CRONE.


29


struck with the great progress made in civilization by
these descendants of cannibals, the fiercest of all the
Indian tribes whom the Spaniards encountered.

The houses extended along the bank, at some dis¬
tance apart; and the heat was so oppressive that, be¬
fore reaching the last, we were about to turn back ; but
our guide urged us to go on and see one old woman,’’
his grandmother. We followed and saw her. She
was very old ; no one knew her age, but it was consid¬
erably over a hundred; and, what gave her more in¬
terest in our eyes than the circumstance of her being
the grandmother of our guide, she came from the isl¬
and of St. Vincent, the residence of the most indomi¬
table portion of her race ; and she had never been bap¬
tized. She received us with an idiotic laugh ; her fig¬
ure was shrunken ; her face shrivelled, weazened, and
wicked ; and she looked as though, in her youth, she
had gloried in dancing at a feast of human flesh.

We returned, and found our friend, the padre, dress¬
ed in the contents of his pocket-handkerchief, quite a
respectable-looking priest. By his side was our steam¬
boat washbowl, filled with holy water, and in his hand
a prayer-book. Augustin stood up, holding the stump
of a tallow candle.

The Caribs, like most of the other Indians of Cen¬
tral America, have received the doctrines of Christian¬
ity as presented to them by the priests and monks of
Spain, and are, in all things, strict observers of the
forms prescribed. In this settlement, the visit of a
padre was a rare but welcome occurrence. At first
they seemed to have a suspicion that our friend was
not orthodox, because he did not speak Spanish ; but
when they saw him in his gown and surplice, with the
burning incense, all distrust vanished.


30


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


There was little to be done in the way of marrying,
there being a scarcity of men for that purpose, as most
of them were away fishing or at work; but a long file
of women presented themselves, each with a child in
her arms, for baptism. They were arranged a]|found
the wall in a circle, and the padre began. Of the
first he asked a question which I believe is not to be
found in the book, and which, in some places, it would
be considered impertinent to put to a mother who of¬
fered her child for initiation into the Church, viz.,
whether she was married. She hesitated, smiled,
laughed, and answered no. The padre told her that
this was very wrong and unbecoming a good Christian
Avoman, and advised her .to take advantage of the pres¬
ent opportunity to marry the child’s father. She an¬
swered that she would like to do so, but that he was
away cutting mahogany ; and here, as his questions and
her answers had to pass through an interpreter, the
affair began to be complicated ; indeed, so many of
the women interposed, all speaking at once, that the
padre became aware he had touched upon delicate
ground, and so passed on to the next.

In fact, even with the regular business our friend had
enough to do. He understood but little Spanish; his
book was in Latin ; and not being able to translate
as readily as the occasion required, he had employed
the interval of our absence in copying on a slip of pa¬
per, from a Spanish Protestant prayer-book, the formal
part of the baptismal service. In the confusion this
was lost, and the padre was thrown back upon his Lat¬
in, to be translated into Spanish as required. After
labouring a while, he turned to Augustin, and gave him
in English the questions to put to the women. Augus¬
tin was a good Catholic, and listened to him with as


A BAPTISM.


31


much respect as if he had been the pope, but did not
understand a word he said. I explained to Augustin
in French, who explained to one of the men in Span¬
ish, who explained to the women. This, of course, led
to confusion ; but all were so devout and respectful,
that, in spite of these tribulations, the ceremony was
solemn. When he came to the Latin parts, our friend
rattled it off as fast as if fresh from the Propaganda at
Rome, and the Caribs were not much behindhand.

- The padre had told us of the passion of the Caribs
for a multiplicity of names ; and one of the women,
after giving her child three or four, pointed to me, and
told him to add mine. I am not very strict, but I did
not care to assume wantonly the obligations of a god¬
father ; and, stopping the ceremony, begged the padre
to get me released with the best grace he could. He
promised to do so ; but it was an excessively hot day;
the room was crowded, the doors choked up, and by
this time the padre, with his Latin, and English, and
French, and Spanish, was in a profuse perspiration,
and somewhat confused. I thought myself clear, till,
a few moments afterward, a child was passed along
for me to take in my arms ; but I was relieved on one
point: I thought that it was the lady who had become
a mother without being a wife, that wished her child
to bear my name, but it was another ; still I most un-
gallantly avoided receiving the baby. On going away,
however, the woman intercepted me, and, thrusting
forward the child, called me compadre ; so that, with¬
out knowing it, I became godfather to a Carib child;
fortunately, its mother was an honest woman, and the
father stood by at the time. In all probability I shall
never have much to do with its training; and I can only


32


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


hope that in due season it will multiply the name and
make it respectable among the Caribs.

We returned to the steamboat, and in a few minutes
were again under way, steering for the Rio Dolce. An
amphitheatre of lofty mountains stretches for many
miles along the coast, and back till they are lost to the
sight. In one small place this lofty range opens for
the passage of a gentle river. On the right bank of
the coast was one of the places I intended to visit. It
was called by the familiar name of Livingston, in hon¬
our of the distinguished citizen of Louisiana whose
criminal code was at that time introduced into Guati-
mala; and it was supposed, so advantageous was its
position, that it would become the port of entry of
Central America; but these expectations were not re¬
alized.

It was four o’clock in the afternoon, and, in steering
toward it, the captain told me that, if we cast anchor,
it would be necessary to lie there till morning. I was
loth to lose the only opportunity I shall probably ever
have of stopping a steamboat; but I had an eager, al¬
most a burning curiosity to see the Golfo Dolce, and
we all agreed that it would be wanton to lose such an
opportunity of seeing it to advantage. I therefore di¬
rected the captain to move close to the bank and pass on.

The bank was elevated about thirty feet above the
water, and rich and luxuriant as at Puenta Gorda.
The site of the intended city was occupied by another
tribe of Caribs, who, like the first, driven from their
home by war, had followed up the coast, and, with
that eye for the picturesque and beautiful in natural
scenery which distinguishes the Indians everywhere,
had fixed themselves upon this spot. Their leaf-
thatched huts were ranged along the bank, shaded by


BEAUTIFUL SCENERY.


33 '

groves of plantain and cocoanut trees; canoes with
sails set were lying on the water, and men and women
were sitting under the trees gazing at us. It was a
soft and sunny scene, speaking peace and freedom
from the tumults of a busy world.

But, beautiful as it was, we soon forgot it; for a
narrow opening in a rampart of mountains wooed us
on, and in a few moments we entered the Rio Dolce.
On each side, rising perpendicularly from three to four
hundred feet, was a wall of living green. Trees grew
from the water’s edge, with dense, unbroken foliage,
to the top ; not a spot of barrenness was to be seen ;
and on both sides, from the tops of the highest trees,
long tendrils descended to the water, as if to drink and
carry life to the trunks that bore them. It was, as its
name imports, a Rio Dolce, a fairy scene of Titan
land, combining exquisite beauty with colossal gran¬
deur. As we advanced the passage turned, and in a
few minutes we' lost sight of the sea, and were enclosed
on all sides by a forest wall; but the river, although
showing us no passage, still invited us onward. Could
this be the portal to a land of volcanoes and earth¬
quakes, torn and distracted by civil war ? For some
time we looked in vain for a single barren spot; at
length we saw a naked wall of perpendicular rock, but
out of the crevices, and apparently out of the rock it¬
self, grew shrubs and trees. Sometimes we were so
enclosed that it seemed as if the boat must drive in
among the trees. Occasionally, in an angle of the
turns, the wall sunk, and the sun struck in with scorch¬
ing force, but in a moment we were again in the deep¬
est shade. From the fanciful accounts we had heard,
we expected to see monkeys gambolling among the
trees, and parrots flying over our heads ; but all was as
VoL. I.—E


34


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


quiet as if man had never been there before. The pel¬
ican, the stillest of birds, was the only living thing we
saw, and the only sound was the unnatural bluster
of our steam-engine. The wild defile that leads to
the excavated city of Petra is not more noiseless or
more extraordinary, but strangely contrasting in its ster-
il desolation, while here all is luxuriant, romantic, and
beautiful.

For nine miles the passage continued thus one scene
of unvarying beauty, when suddenly the narrow river
expanded into a large lake, encompassed by mountains
and studded with islands, which the setting sun illumi¬
nated with gorgeous splendour. We remained on
deck till a late hour, and awoke the next morning in
the harbour of Yzabal. A single schooner of about
forty tons showed the low state of her commerce.
We landed before seven o’clock in the morning, and
even then it was hot. There were no idlers on the
bank, and the custom-house officer was the only person
to receive us.

The town stands on a gentle elevation on the banks
of the Golfo Dolce, with mountains piled upon mount¬
ains behind. We walked up the street to the square,
on one side of which was the house of Messrs. Ampu-
dia and Purroy, the largest and, except one they were
then engaged in building, the only frame house in the
place. The rest were all huts, built of poles and reeds,
and thatched with leaves of the cahoon-tree. Oppo¬
site their door was a large shed, under which were
bales of merchandise, and mules, muleteers, and In¬
dians, for transporting goods across the Mico Mountain.

The arrival of the padre created a great sensation.
It was announced by a joyful ringing of the church
bells, and in an hour after he was dressed in his sur-


A BARBER IN OFFICE.


35


plice and saying mass. The church stood at the head
of the square, and, like the houses, was built of poles
and thatched with leaves. In front, at a distance of
ten or fifteen feet, was a large wooden cross. The
floor was of bare earth, but swept clean and strewed
with pine-leaves ; the sides were trimmed with branch¬
es and festoons of flowers, and the altar was ornament¬
ed with figures of the Virgin and saints, and wreaths
of flowers. It was a long time since the people had
had the privilege of hearing mass, and the whole pop¬
ulation, Spaniards, Mestitzoes, and Indians, answered
the unexpected but welcome call of the matin bell.
The floor was covered with kneeling women having
white shawls over their heads, and behind, leaning
against the rude pillars, were the men; and their ear¬
nestness and humility, the earthen floor and the thatch¬
ed roof, were more imposing than the pomp of worship
in the rich cathedrals of Europe or under the dome of
St. Peter’s.

After breakfast we inquired for a barber, and were
referred to the collector of the port, who, we were
told, was the best hair-cutter in the place. His house
was no bigger than his neighbours’, but inside hung a
military saddle, with holsters and pistols, and a huge
sword, the accoutrements of the collector when he sal¬
lied out at the head of his deputy to strike terror into
the heart of a smuggler. Unfortunately, the honest
Democrat was not at home ; but the deputy offered his
own services. Mr. C. and I submitted ; but the padre,
who wanted his crown shaved, according to the rules of
his order, determined to wait the return of the collector.

I next called upon the commandant with my pass¬
port. His house was on the opposite side of the square.
A soldier about fourteen years old, with a bell-crown-


36


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


ed Straw hat falling over his eyes like an extinguisher
upon a candle, was standing at the door as sentinel.
The troops, consisting of about thirty men and boys,
were drawn up in front, and a sergeant was smoking a
cigar and drilling them. The uniform purported to
be a white straw hat, cotton trousers and shirt outside,
musket, and cartridge-box. In one particular uniform¬
ity was strictly observed, viz., all were barefooted.
The first process of calling off rank and file was omit¬
ted ; and, as it happened, a long-legged fellow, six feet
high, stood next to a boy twelve or thirteen years old.
The custom-house officer was with the sergeant, advi¬
sing him ; and, after a manoeuvre and a consultation,
the sergeant walked up to the line, and with the palm
of his hand struck a soldier on that part of the body
which, in my younger days, was considered by the
schoolmaster the channel of knowledge into a boy’s
brain.

The commandant of this hopeful band was Don Juan
Pehol, a gentleman by birth and education, who, with
others of his family, had been banished by General
Morazan, and sought refuge in the United States. His
predecessor, who was an officer of Morazan, had been
just driven out by the Carrera party, and he was but
twenty days in his place.

Three great parties at that time distracted Central
America : that of Morazan, the former president of the
Republic, in San Salvador, of Ferrera in Honduras,
and of Carrera in Guatimala. Ferrera was a mulatto,
and Carrera an Indian; and, though not fighting for
any common purpose, they sympathized in opposition
to Morazan. When Mr. Montgomery visited Guati-
mala, it was just thrown into a ferment by the rising
of Carrera, who was then regarded as the head of a


A COMPATRIOT.


37


troop of banditti, a robber and assassin; his follow¬
ers were called Cachurecos (meaning false coin), and
Mr. Montgomery told me that against him an official
passport would be no protection whatever. Now he
was the head of the party that ruled Guatimala. Se-
iior Penol gave us a melancholy picture of the state of
the country. A battle had just been fought near San
Salvador, between General Morazan and Ferrera, in
which the former was wounded, but Ferrera was rout¬
ed, and his troops were cut to pieces, and he feared
Morazan was about to march upon Guatimala. He
could only give us a passport to Guatimala, which he
3aid would not be respected by General Morazan.

We felt interested in the position of Senor Penol;
young, but with a face bearing the marks of care and
anxiety, a consciousness of the miserable condition of
the present, and fearful forebodings for the future.
To our great regret, the intelligence we received indu¬
ced our friend the padre to abandon, for the present,
his intention of going to Guatimala. He had heard
all the terrible stories of Morazan’s persecution and
proscription of the priests, and thought it dangerous to
fall into his hands; and I have reason to believe it
was the apprehension of this which ultimately drove
him from the country.

Toward evening I strolled through the town. The
population consists of about fifteen hundred Indians,
negroes, mulattoes, Mestizoes, and mixed blood of
every degree, with a few Spaniards. Very soon I was
accosted by a man who called himself my countryman,
a mulatto from Baltimore, and his name was Philip.
He had been eight years in the country, and said that
he had once thought of returning home as a servant by
way of New-Orleans, but he had left home in such a

4


38


INCIDENTS or TRAVEL.


hurry that he forgot to bring with him his Christian
papers from which I inferred that he was what would
be called in Maryland a runaway slave. He was a
man of considerable standing, being fireman on board
the steamboat at $23 a month; besides which, he did
odd jobs at carpentering, and was, in fact, the princi¬
pal architect in Yzabal, having then on his hands a
contract for $3500 for building the new house of Messrs.
Ampudia and Purroy. In other things, I am sorry to
say, Philip was not quite so respectable ; and I can only
hope that it was not his American education that led
him into some irregularities in which he seemed to
think there was no harm. He asked me to go to his
house and see his wife, but on the way I learned from
him that he was not married ; and he said, what I hope
is a slander upon the good people of Yzabal, that he
only did as all the rest did. He owned the house in
which he lived, and for which, with the ground, he had
paid twelve dollars; and being a householder and an
American, I tried to induce him to take advantage of
the opportunity of the padre’s visit, and set a good ex¬
ample by getting married; but he was obstinate,
and said that he did not like to be trammelled, and that
he might go elsewhere and see another girl whom he
liked better.

While standing at his door, Mr. Catherwood passed
on his way to visit Mr. Rush, the engineer of the steam¬
boat, who had been ill on board. We found him in
one of the huts of the town, in a hammock, with all
his clothes on. He was a man of Herculean frame,
six feet three or four inches high, and stout in propor¬
tion ; but he lay helpless as a child. A single candle
stuck upon the dirt floor gave a miserable light, and a
group of men of different races and colour, from the


A GRAVE IN A FOREIGN LAND.


39


white-faced Saxon to the Indian and African, stood
round him: rude nurses for one used to the comforts
of an English home. I recollected that Yzabal was
noted as a sickly place ; Mr. Montgomery, who pub¬
lished an interesting account of his visit to Guatimala
in 1838, had told me that it was running the gauntlet
for life even to pass through it, and I trembled for the
poor Englishman. I remembered, too, what it is
strange that I had before forgotten, that here Mr. Shan¬
non, our charge to Central America, died. Philip was
with me, and knew where Mr. Shannon was buried,
but in the dark he could not point out the spot. I in¬
tended to set out early in the morning ; and afraid that,
in the hurry of departure, I might neglect altogether
the sacred duty of visiting, in this distant place, the
grave of an American, I returned to the house and
requested Senor Ampudia to accompany me. We
crossed the square, passed through the suburbs, and in
a few minutes were outside of the town. It was so
dark that I could scarcely see my way. Crossing a
deep gulley on a plank, we reached a rising ground,
open on the right, stretching away to the Golfo Dolce,
and in front bounded by a gloomy forest. On the
top was a rude fence of rough upright poles, enclo¬
sing the grave of some relative of Senor Ampudia;
and by the side of this was the grave of Mr. Shannon.
There was no stone or fence, or hardly any elevation,
to distinguish it from the soil around. It was a gloomy
burial-place for a countryman, and I felt an involun¬
tary depression of spirit. A fatality had hung over
our diplomatic appointment to Central America: Mr.
Williams, Mr. Shannon, Mr. Dewitt, Mr. Leggett, all
who had ever held it, were dead. I recollected an ex¬
pression in a letter from a near relative of Mr. Dewitt:


40


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


May you be more fortunate than either of your pred¬
ecessors has been.’’ It was melancholy, that one who
had died abroad in the service of his country was thus
left on a wild mountain, without any stone to mark
his grave. I returned to the house, directed a fence
to be built around the grave of Mr. Shannon, and my
friend the padre promised to plant at its head a cocoa-
nut-tree.

At daylight the muleteers commenced loading for
the passage of the Mountain.” At seven o’clock the
whole caravan, consisting of nearly a hundred mules
and twenty or thirty muleteers, was fairly under way.
Our immediate party consisted of five mules; two for
Mr. Catherwood and myself, one for Augustin, and
two for luggage; besides which, we had four Indian
carriers. If we had been consulted, perhaps at that
time we should have scrupled to use men as beasts of
burden ; but Senor Ampudia had made all the arrange¬
ments for us. The Indians were naked, except a small
piece of cotton cloth around the loins, and crossing in
front between the legs. The loads were arranged
so as to have on one side a flat surface. The Indians
sat on the ground with their backs against the surface ;
passed a strap across the forehead, which supported
the load ; and, adjusting it on their shoulders, with the
aid of a staff or the hand of a by-stander rose upon
their feet. It seemed cruel; but, before much sympa¬
thy could be expended upon them, they were out of
sight.

At eight o’clock Mr. C. and I mounted, each armed
with a brace of pistols and a large hunting-knife, which
we carried in a belt around the body; besides which,
afraid to trust it in other hands, I had a mountain ba¬
rometer slung over my shoulder. Augustin carried


A ROAD NOT MACADAMIZED.


41


pistols and sword ; our principal muleteer, who was
mounted, carried a machete and a pair of murderous
spurs, with rowels two inches long, on his naked heels ;
and two other muleteers accompanied us on foot, each
carrying a gun.

A group of friendly by-standers gave us their adieus
and good wishes ; and, passing a few straggling houses
which constituted the suburbs, we entered upon a
marshy plain sprinkled with shrubs and small trees,
and in a few minutes were in an unbroken forest. At
every step the mules sank to their fetlocks in mud, and
very soon we came to great puddles and mudholes,
which reminded me of the breaking up of winter and
the solitary horsepath in one of our primeval forests
at home. As we advanced, the shade of the trees be¬
came thicker, the holes larger and deeper, and roots,
rising two or three feet above the -ground, crossed the
path in every direction. I gave the barometer to the
muleteer, and had as much as I could do to keep my¬
self in the saddle. All conversation was at an end,
and we kept as close as we could to the track of the
muleteer ; when he descended into a mudhole, and
crawled out, the entire legs of his mule blue with mud,
we followed, and came out as blue as he.

The caravan of mules, which had started before us,
was but a short distance ahead, and in a little while
we heard ringing through the woods the loud shout of
the muleteers and the sharp crack of the whip. We
overtook them at the bank of a stream which broke
rapidly over a stony bed. The whole caravan was
moving up the bed of the stream ; the water was dark¬
ened by the shade of the overhanging trees ; the mule¬
teers, without shirts, and with their large trousers rolled
up to the thighs and down from the waistband, were
VoL, L—F


42


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


scattered among the mules: one was chasing a stray
beast; a second darting at one whose load was slip¬
ping off; a third lifting up one that had fallen ; an¬
other, with his foot braced against a mule’s side,
straining at the girth ; all shouting, cursing, and lash¬
ing : the whole a mass of inextricable confusion, and
presenting a scene almost terrific.

We held up to let them pass; and, crossing the
stream, rode a short distance on a level road, but over
fetlock deep in mud ; and,’ cutting off a bend, fell into
the stream ourselves in the middle of the caravan.
The branches of the trees met over our heads, and the
bed of the stream was so broken and stony that the
mules constantly stumbled and fell. Leaving this, and
continuing on a road the same as before, in an hour
we reached the foot of the mountain. The ascent
began precipitously,- and by an extraordinary passage.
It was a narrow gulley, worn by the tracks of mules
and the washing of mountain torrents so deep that the
sides were higher than our heads, and so narrow that
we could barely pass through without touching. Our
whole caravan moved singly through these muddy de¬
files, the muleteers scattered among them and on the
bank above, extricating the mules as they stuck fast,
raising them-as they fell, arranging their cargoes, curs¬
ing, shouting, and lashing them on. If one stopped,
all behind were blocked up, unable to turn. Any sud¬
den start pressed us against the sides of the gulley, and
there was no small danger of getting a leg crushed.
Emerging from this defile, we came again among deep
mudholes and projecting roots of trees, with the addi¬
tional difficulty of a steep ascent. The trees, too, were
larger, and their roots higher and extending farther;
and, above all, the mahogany-tree threw out its giant


PERILS BY THE WAY.


43


roots, high at the trunk and tapering, not round, like
the roots of other trees, but straight, with sharp edges,
traversing rocks and the roots of other trees. It was
the last of the rainy season; the heavy rains from
which we had suffered at sea had deluged the mount¬
ain, and it was in the worst state, to be passable; for
sometimes it is not passable at all. For the last few
days there had been no rain; but we had hardly con¬
gratulated ourselves upon our good fortune in having a
clear day, when the forest became darker and the rain
poured. The woods were of impenetrable thickness;
and there was no view except that of the detestable
path before us. For five long hours we were dragged
through mudholes, squeezed in gulleys, knocked against
trees, and tumbled over roots ; every step required care
and great physical exertion; and, withal, I felt that
our inglorious epitaph might be, tossed over the head
of a mule, brained by the trunk of a mahogany-tree,
and buried in the mud of the Mico Mountain.” We
attempted-to walk, but the rocks and roots were so
slippery, the mudholes so deep, and the ascents and
descents so steep, that it was impossible to continue.

The mules were only half loaded, and even then
several broke down; the lash could not move them;
and scarcely one passed over without a fall. Of our
immediate party, mine fell first. Finding that I could
not save her with the rein, by an exertion that strained
every nerve I lifted myself from off her back, and
flung clear of roots and trees, but not of mud; and I
had an escape from a worse danger: my dagger fell
from its sheath and stood upright, with the handle in
the mud, a foot of naked blade. Mr. Catherwood was
throwm with such violence, that for a few moments,
feeling the helplessness of our condition, I was horror-


44


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


Struck. Long before this he had broken silence to ut¬
ter an exclamation which seemed to come from the
bottom of his heart, that, if he had known of this
‘^mountain,” I might have come to Central America
alone ; if I had had any tendency to be a little uplifted
by the honours I received at Balize, I was brought
down by this high way to my capital. Shortly after
Augustin’s mule fell backward; he kicked his feet out
of the stirrups, and attempted to slide off behind ; but
the mule rolled, and caught him with his left leg under,
and, but for his kicking, I should have thought that
every bone in his body was broken. The mule kick¬
ed worse than he ; but they rose together, and with¬
out any damage except that the mud, which before lay
upon them in spots, was now formed into a regular
plaster.

We were toiling on toward the top of the mountain,
when, at a sudden turn, we met a solitary traveller.
He was a tall, dark-complexioned man, with a broad-
brimmed Panama hat, rolled up at the sides ; a striped
woollen Guatimala jacket, with fringe at the bottom;
plaid pantaloons, leather spatterdashes, spurs, and
sword; he was mounted on a noble mule with a
high-peaked saddle, and the butts of a pair of horse¬
man’s pistols peeped out of the holsters. His face
was covered with sweat and mud; his breast and
legs were spattered, and his right side was a complete
incrustation; altogether, his appearance was fearful.
It seemed strange to meet any one on such a road;
and, to our surprise, he accosted us in English. He
had set out with muleteers and Indians, but had lost
them in some of the windings of the woods, and was
seeking his way alone. He had crossed the mount¬
ain twice before, but had never known it so bad; he


A CAPITALIST.


45


had been thrown twice; once his mule rolled over
him, and nearly crushed him ; and now she was so
frightened that he could hardly urge her along. He
dismounted, and the trembling beast and his own ex¬
hausted state confirmed all that he had said. He ask¬
ed us for brandy, wine, or water, anything to revive
him; but, unfortunately, our stores were ahead, and
for him to go back one step was out of the question.
Imagine our surprise, when, with his feet buried in the
mud, he told us that he had been two years in Guati-
mala negotiating” for a bank charter. Fresh as I
was from the land of banks, I almost thought he intend¬
ed a fling at me ; but he did not look like one in a hu¬
mour for jesting ; and, for the benefit of those who will
regard it as an evidence of incipient improvement, I
am able to state that he had the charter secured when
he rolled over in the mud, and was then on his way to
England to sell the stock. He told us, too, what seem¬
ed in better keeping with the scene, that Carrera had
marched toward St. Salvador, and a battle was daily
expected between him and Morazan.

But neither of us had time to lose ; and parting,
though with some reluctance, almost as abruptly as we
had met, we continued our ascent. At one o’clock, to
our inexpressible satisfaction, we reached the top of the
mountain. Here we found a clearing of about two
hundred feet in diameter, made for the benefit of be¬
nighted muleteers; in different places were heaps of
ashes and burned stumps of wood, the remains of their
fires. It was the only place on the mountain which
the sun could reach, and here the ground was dry; but
the view was bounded by the clearing.

We dismounted, and would have lunched, but had
no water to drink ; and, after a few minutes’ rest, re-


46


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


sumed our journey. The descent was as bad as the
ascent; and, instead of stopping to let the mules
breathe, as they had done in ascending, the muleteers
seemed anxious to determine in how short a time they
could tumble them down the mountain. In one of the
muddiest defiles we were shut up by the falling of a
mule before, and the crowding upon us of all behind;
and, at the first convenient place, we stopped until the
whole caravan had passed. The carefulness of the
mules was extraordinary. For an hour I watched the
movements of the one before me. At times he put one
of his fore feet on a root or stone, and tried it as a man
would; sometimes he drew his fore legs out of a bed
of mud from the shoulders, and sometimes it was one
continued alternation of sinking and pulling out.

This is the great high road to the city of Guatimala,
which has always been a place of distinction in Span¬
ish America. Almost all the travel and merchandise
from Europe passes over it; and our guide said that
the reason it was so bad was because it was traversed
by so many mules. In some countries this would be a
reason for making it better ; but it was pleasant to find
that the people to whom I was accredited were relieved
from one of the sources of contention at home, and did
not trouble themselves with the complicated questions
attendant upon internal improvements.*

In two hours we reached a wild river or mountain
torrent, foaming and breaking over its rocky bed, and
shaded by large trees. It was called El Arroyo del
Muerto, or Stream of the Dead. The muleteers were
already distributed on the rocks or under the shade of

* Since that time the Constituent Assembly of Guatimala has imposed a tax
of one dollar upon every bale of merchandise that passes over the mountain, for
the improvement of the road.


A DISASTER IN THE COMMISSARIAT. 47

the trees, eating their frugal meal of corn^cakes; the
mules were in the river, or scattered along the bank;
and we selected a large tree, which spread its branches
over us like a roof, and so near the stream that we
could dip our drinking-cups into the water.

All the anxiety which I had been able to spare du¬
ring the day from myself I had bestowed upon the ba¬
rometer on the back of the guide. He carried, besides,
a small white pitcher, with a red rim, on the belt of his
machete, of which he was very proud and very care¬
ful ; and several times, after a stumble and a narrow
escape, he turned round and held up the pitcher with
a smile, which gave me hopes of the barometer; and,
in fact, he had carried it through without its being
broken ; but, unfortunately, the quicksilver was not well
secured, and the whole had escaped. It was impossi¬
ble to repair it in Guatimala, and the loss of this ba¬
rometer was a source of regret during our whole jour¬
ney ; for we ascended many mountains, the heights of
which have never been ascertained.

But we had another misadventure, which, at the
moment, touched us more nearly. We sat on the
ground, Turkish fashion, with a vacant space between
us. Augustin placed before us a well-filled napkin;
and, as we dipped water from the clear stream by our
side, a spirit of other days came over us, and we spoke
in contempt of railroads, cities, and hotels; but oh,
publicans, you were avenged. We unrolled the nap¬
kin, and the scene that presented itself was too shock¬
ing, even for the strongest nerves. We had provided
bread for three days, eggs boiled hard, and two roasted
fowls for as long as they might last. Augustin had
forgotten salt, but he had placed in the napkin a large
paper of gunpowder as an adventure of his own. The


48


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


paper was broken, and the bread, fowls, and eggs were
thoroughly seasoned with this new,condiment. All the
beauty of the scene, all our equanimity, everything
except our tremendous appetites, left us in a moment.
Country taverns rose up before us ; and we, who had
been so amiable, abused Augustin, and wished him the
whole murderous seasoning in his own body. We
could not pick out enough to satisfy hunger. It was
perhaps the most innocent way of tasting gunpowder,
but even so it was a bitter pill. We picked and made
excavations for immediate use, but the rest of our
stores was lost.

This over, we mounted, and, fording the stream,
continued our descent. Passing off by a spur of the
mountain, we came out upon an open ridge, command¬
ing a view of an extensive savannah. Very soon we
reached a fine table of land, where a large party of
muleteers on their way to Yzabal were encamped for
the night. Bales of indigo, which formed their car¬
goes, were piled up like a wall; their mules were pas¬
turing quietly near them, and fires were burning to
cook their suppers. It was a great satisfaction to be
once more in an open country, and to see the mount¬
ain, with its dense forest, lighted up by the setting sun,
grand and gloomy, and ourselves fairly out of it. With
ten hours of the hardest riding I ever went through, we
had made only twelve miles.

Descending from this table, we entered a plain thick¬
ly wooded, and in a few minutes reached a grove of
wild palm-trees of singular beauty. From the top of
a tall naked stem grew branches twenty or thirty feet
long, spreading from the trunk, and falling outward
with a graceful bend, like enormous plumes of feath¬
ers ; the trees stood so close that the bending branches


A PLEASANT ENCOUNTER.


49


met, and formed arches, in some places as regular as
if constructed by art; and as we rode among them, there
was a solemn stillness, an air of desolation, that re¬
minded us of the columns of an Egyptian temple.

Toward dark we reached the rancho of Mico. It
was a small house, built of poles and plastered with
mud. Near it, and connected by a shed thatched with
branches, was a larger house, built of the same mate¬
rial, expressly for the use of travellers. This was al¬
ready occupied by two parties from Guatimala, one of
which consisted of the Canonigo Castillo, his clerical
companion, or secretary, and two young Pavons. The
other was a French merchant on his way to Paris.
Mr. C. and I were picturesque-looking objects, not
spattered, but plastered with mud from head to foot;
but we were soon known, and received from the whole
company a cordial welcome to Central America.

Their appearance was such as gave me a highly
favourable opinion of the description of persons I
should meet at Guatimala. The canonigo was one of
the first men in the country in position and character,
and was then on his way to Havana on a delicate po¬
litical mission, being sent by the Constituent Assem¬
bly to invite back the archbishop, who had been ban¬
ished by General Morazan ten years before. He un¬
dertook to do the honours, and set before us choco¬
late and what he called the national dish,’’ fregoles,
or black beans fried, which, fortunately for our subse¬
quent travels, we cottoned” to at once. We were
very tired, but agreeable company was better than
sleep. The canonigo had been educated at Rome,
and passed the early part of his life in Europe; the
Frenchman was from Paris ; the young Pavons were
educated in New-York; and we sat till a late hour,

VoL. I.— G 5


50 INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.

our clothes stiff with mud, talking of France, Italy,
and home. At length we hung up our hammocks.
We had been so much occupied that we had paid no
attention to our luggage ; and, when we wanted to pro¬
cure a change of raiment, could not find our men, and
were obliged to turn in as we were ; but, with the sat¬
isfactory feeling that we had passed the mountain,’’
we soon fell asleep.


A CANONIGO.


51


CHAPTER HI.

A Canonigo.—How to roast a Fowl.—Extempore Shoemaking.—Motagua River.
—Beautiful Scene.—Crossing the River.—The Luxury of Water.—Primitive
■ Costumes.—How to make Tortillas.—Costly Timber.—Gualan.—Oppressive
Heat.—Shock of an Earthquake.—A stroll through the Town.—A troublesome
Muleteer.—A Lawsuit.—Important Negotiations.—A Modern Bona Dea.—How
to gain a Husband.—A Kingdom of Flora.—Zacapa.—Making free with a Host.

Before daylight I was out of doors. Twenty or
thirty men, muleteers and servants, were asleep on the
ground, each lying on his back, with his black chamar
wound round him, covering his head and feet. As the
day broke they arose. Very soon the Frenchman got
up, took chocolate, and, after an hour’s preparation,
started. The canonigo set off next. He had crossed
the mountain twenty years before, on his first arrival
in the country, and still retained a full recollection of
its horrors. He set off on the back of an Indian, in a
silla^ or chair with a high back and top to protect him
from the sun. Three other Indians followed as relay
carriers, and a noble mule for his relief if he should be¬
come tired of the chair. The Indian was bent almost
double, but the canonigo was in high spirits, smoking
his cigar, and waving his hand till he was out of sight.
The Pavons started last, and we were left alone.

Still none of our men came. At about eight o’clock
two made their appearance ; they had slept at a rancho
near by, and the others had gone on with the luggage.
We were excessively provoked; but, enduring as we
might the discomfort of our clothes stiff with mud, sad¬
dled and set off.

We saw no more of our caravan of mules, and our
muleteer of the barometer had disappeared without


52


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


notice, and left us in the hands of two understrap¬
pers.

Our road lay over a mountainous country, but gen¬
erally clear of wood ; and in about two hours we reach¬
ed a collection of ranchos, called El Posos. One of
our men rode up to a hut and dismounted, as if he
were at home. The woman of the house chided him
for not having come the night before, which he gruffly
ascribed to us; and it was evident that we stood a
chance of losing him too. But we had a subject of
more immediate interest in the want of a breakfast.
Our tea and coffee, all that we had left after the de¬
struction of our stores by gunpowder, were gone for¬
ward, and for some time we could get nothing. And
here, in the beginning of our journey, we found a scar¬
city of provant greater than we had ever met with be¬
fore in any inhabited country. The people lived ex¬
clusively upon tortillas—flat cakes made of crushed
Indian corn, and baked on a clay griddle—and black
beans. Augustin bought some of these last, but they
required several hours’ soaking before they could be
eaten. At length he succeeded in buying a fowl,
through which he ran a stick, and smoked it over a
fire, without dressing of any kind, and which, with tor¬
tillas, made a good meal for a penitentiary system of
diet. As we had expected, our principal muleteer was
unable to tear himself away ; but, like a dutiful hus¬
band, he sent, by the only one that was now left, a
loving message to his wife at Gualan.

At the moment of starting, our remaining attendant
said he could not go until he had made a pair of shoes,
and we were obliged to wait; but it did not take long.
Standing on an untanned cowhide, he marked the size
of his feet with a piece of coal, cut them out with his


EXTEMPORE SHOEMAKING.


53


machete, made proper holes, and, passing a leather
string under the instep, around the heel, and between
the great doigt du pied and the one next to it, was
shod.

Again our road lay on the ridge of a high mountain,
with a valley on each side. At a distance were beau¬
tiful hillsides, green, and ornamented with pine-trees
and cattle grazing upon them, that reminded us of park
scenery in England. Often points presented them¬
selves, which at home would have been selected as
sites for dwellings, and embellished by art and taste.
And it was a land of perpetual summer ; the blasts
of winter never reach it; but, with all its softness and
beauty, it was dreary and desolate.

At two o’clock it began to rain; in an hour it clear¬
ed off, and from the high mountain ridge we saw the
Motagua River, one of the noblest in Central America,
rolling majestically through the valley on our left.
Descending by a wild, precipitous path, at four o’clock
we reached the bank directly opposite Encuentros. It
was one of the most beautiful scenes I ever beheld:
all around were giant mountains, and the river, broad
and deep, rolled through them with the force of a
mighty torrent.

On the opposite bank were a few houses, and two
or three canoes lay in the water, but not a person was
in sight. By loud shouting we brought a man to the
bank, who entered one of the canoes and set her adrift;
he was immediately carried far down the stream ; but,
taking advantage of an eddy, he brought her across to
the place where we stood. Our luggage, the saddles,
bridles, and other trappings of the mules, were put on
board, and we embarked. Augustin sat in. the stern,
holding the halter of one of the mules, and leading her


I


54


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


f


like a decoy duck ; but the rest had no disposition to
follow. The muleteer drove them in up to their necks,
but they ran back to the shore. Several times, by pelt¬
ing them with sticks and stones, he drove them in as
before. At length he stripped himself; and, wading
to the depth of his breast, with a stick ten or twelve
feet long, succeeded in getting them all afloat, and on a
line within the reach of his stick. Any one that turn¬
ed toward the shore received a blow on his nose, and
at length they all set their faces for the opposite bank;
their little heads were all that we could see, aimed di¬
rectly across, but carried down by the current. One
was carried below the rest; and, when she saw her
companions landing, she raised a frightened cry, and
almost drowned herself in struggling to reach them.

During all this time we sat in the canoe, with the
hot sun beating upon our heads. For the last two
hours we had suffered excessively from heat; our
clothes were saturated with perspiration and stiff with
mud, and we looked forward almost with rapture to a
bath in the Motagua and a change of linen. We land¬
ed, and walked up to the house in which we were to
pass the night. It was plastered and whitewashed,
and adorned with streaks of red in the shape of fes¬
toons ; and in front was a fence made of long reeds,
six inches in diameter, split into two ; altogether the
appearance was favourable. To our great vexation,
our luggage had gone on to a rancho three leagues be¬
yond. Our muleteers refused to go any farther. We
were unpleasantly situated, but we did not care to leave
so soon the Motagua river. Our host told us that his
house and all that he had were at our disposal; but he
could give us nothing to eat; and, telling Augustin to
ransack the village, we returned to the river. Every-


THE LUXURY OF WATER.


55


where the current was too rapid for a quiet bath. Call¬
ing our canoe man, we returned to the opposite side,
and in a few minutes were enjoying an ablution, the
luxury of which can only be appreciated by those who,
like us, had crossed the Mico Mountain without throw¬
ing away their clothes.

There was an enjoyment in this bath greater even
than that of cooling our heated bodies. It was the
moment of a golden sunset. We stood up to our necks
in water clear as crystal, and calm as that of some
diminutive lake, at the margin of a channel along
which the stream was rushing with arrowy speed. On
each side were mountains several thousand feet high,
with their tops illuminated by the setting sun; on a
point above us was a palm-leafed hut, and before it a
naked Indian sat looking at us; while flocks of parrots,
with brilliant plumage, almost in thousands, were flying
over our heads, catching up our words, and filling the
air with their noisy mockings. It was one of those
beautiful scenes that so rarely occur in human life, al¬
most realizing dreams. Old as we were, we might
have become poetic, but that Augustin came down to
the opposite bank, and, with a cry that rose above the
chattering of parrots and the loud murmur of the river,
called us to supper.

We had one moment of agony when we returned to
our clothes. They lay extended upon the bank, em¬
blems of men who had seen better days. The setting
sun, which shed over all a soft and mellow lustre, laid
bare the seams of mud and dirt, and made them hide¬
ous. We had but one alternative, and that was to go
without them. But, as this seemed to be trenching
upon the proprieties of life, we picked them up and
put them on reluctant. I am not sure, however, but


56


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


that we made an unnecessary sacrifice of personal com¬
fort. The proprieties of life are matters of convention¬
al usage. Our host was a don ; and when we present¬
ed our letter he received us with great dignity in a sin¬
gle garment, loose, white, and very laconic, not quite
reaching his knees. The dress of his wife was no less
easy ; somewhat in the style of the oldfashioned short-
gown and petticoat, only the shortgown and whatever
else is usually worn under it were wanting, and their
place supplied by a string of beads, with a large cross
at the end. A dozen men and half-grown boys, naked
except the small covering formed by rolling the trousers
up and down in the manner I have mentioned, were
lounging about the house; and women and girls in
such extremes of undress, that a string of beads seem¬
ed quite a covering for modesty.

Mr. C. and I were in a rather awkward predicament
for the night. The general reception-room contained
three beds, made of strips of cowhide interlaced. The
don occupied one ; he had not much undressing to do,
but what little he had, he did by pulling off his shirt.
Another bed was at the foot of my hammock. I was
dozing, when I opened my eyes, and saw a girl about
seventeen sitting sideway upon it, smoking a cigar.
She had a piece of striped cotton cloth tied around her
waist, and falling below her knees ; the rest of her
dress was the same which Nature bestows alike upon
the belle of fashionable life and the poorest girl; in
other words, it was the same as that of the don’s wife,
with the exception of the string of beads. At .first I
thought it was something I had conjured up in a dream;
and as I waked up perhaps I raised my head, for she
gave a few quick puffs of her cigar, drew a cotton
sheet over her head and shoulders, and lay down to


PRIMITIVE COSTUMES.


57


sleep. I endeavoured to do the same. I called to
mind the proverb, that travelling makes strange bed¬
fellows.’’ I had slept pellmell with Greeks, Turks,
and Arabs. I was beginning a journey in a new coun¬
try ; it was my duty to conform to the customs of the
people; to be prepared for the worst, and submit with
resignation to whatever might befall me.

As guests, it was pleasant to feel that the family made
no strangers of us. The wife of the don retired with the
same ceremonies. Several times during the night we
were waked by the clicking of flint and steel, and saw
one of our neighbours lighting a cigar. At daylight
the wife of the don was enjoying her morning slumber.
While I was dressing she bade me good-morning, re¬
moved the cotton covering from her shoulders, and
arose dressed for the day.

We started early, and for some distance our road
lay along the banks of the Motagua, almost as beauti¬
ful by morning as by evening light. In an hour we
commenced ascending the spur of a mountain; and,
reaching the top, followed the ridge. It was high and
narrow, commanding on both sides an almost bound¬
less view, and seemed selected for picturesque effect.
The scenery was grand, but the land wild and unculti¬
vated, without fences, enclosures, or habitations. A
few cattle were wandering wild over the great expanse,
but without imparting that domestic aspect which in
other countries attends the presence of cattle. We met
a few Indians, with their machetes, going to their morn¬
ing’s work, and a man riding a mule, with a woman
before him, his arm encircling her waist.

I was riding ahead of my companions, and on the
summit of the ridge, a little aside from the road, saw
a little white girl, perfectly naked, playing before a
VoL. I.—H


68


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


rancho. As most of the people we met were Indians
or Ladinos, I was attracted by her appearance, and
rode up to the rancho. The proprietor, in the easy
costume of our host of Encuentros, was swinging in a
hammock under the portico, and smoking a cigar. At
a little distance was a shed thatched with stalks and
leaves of Indian corn, and called the cucinera^ or kitch¬
en. As usual, while the don was lolling in his ham¬
mock, the women were at work.

I rode on to the cucinera^ and dismounted. The
party consisted of the mother and a pretty daughter-
in-law of about nineteen, and two daughters of about
fifteen and seventeen. The reader is perhaps curious
about costumes; but having given him an insight into
those of this country, he will not require any far¬
ther descriptions. In honour of my visit, the mother
snatched up the little girl who had attracted me to the
rancho, carried her inside, and slipped over her head
a garment which, I believe, is generally worn by little
girls; but in a few minutes my young friend disen¬
cumbered herself of her finery, and was toddling about
with it under her arm.

The whole family was engaged in making tortillas.
This is the bread of Central and of all Spanish Ameri¬
ca, and the only species to be found except in the prin¬
cipal towns. At one end of the cucinera was an eleva¬
tion, on which stood a comal or griddle, resting on
three stones, with a fire blazing under it. The daugh-
ter-in-law had before her an earthen vessel containing
Indian corn soaked in lime-water to remove the husk;
and, placing a handful on an oblong stone curving in¬
ward, mashed it with a stone roller into a thick paste.
The girls took it as it was mashed, and patting it with
their hands into flat cakes, laid them on the griddle to


COSTLY TIMBER.


69


bake. This is repeated for every meal, and a great
part of the business of the women consists in making
tortillas.

When Mr. Catherwood arrived the tortillas were
smoking, and we stopped to breakfast. They gave us
the only luxury they had, coffee made of parched corn,
which, in compliment to their kindness, we drank.
Like me, Mr. C. was struck with the personal beauty
of* this family group. With the advantages of dress
and education, they might be ornaments in cultivated
society; but it is decreed otherwise, and these young
girls will go through life making tortillas.

For an hour longer we continued on the ridge of the
mountain, then entered a more woody country, and in
half an hour came to a large gate, which stood directly
across the road like a tollbar. It was the first token
we had seen of individual or territorial boundary, and
in other countries would have formed a fitting entrance
to a princely estate ; for the massive frame, with all its
posts and supporters, was of solid mahogany. The
heat w-as now intense. We entered a thick wood and
forded a wild stream, across which pigs were swim¬
ming. Soon after we came to a cochineal plantation,
and passed through a long lane thickly bordered and
overshaded with shrubs and trees, close to suffocation.
We emerged into an open plain, on which the sun beat
with almost intolerable power ; and, crossing the plain,
at about three o’clock entered Gualan. There was not
a breath of air ; the houses and the earth seemed to
throw out heat. I was confused, my head swam, and
I felt in danger of a stroke of the sun. At that mo¬
ment there was a slight shock of earthquake. I was
unconscious of it, but was almost overpowered by the


60


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


excessive heat and closeness of atmosphere which ac¬
companied it.

We rode up to the house of Donna Bartola, to whom
we had a letter of recommendation, and I cannot de¬
scribe the satisfaction with which I threw myself into
a hammock. Shade and quiet restored me. For the
first time since we left Yzabal we changed our clothes ;
for the first time, too, we dined.

Toward evening we strolled through the town. It
stands on a table of breccia rock, at the junction of two
noble rivers, and is encircled by a belt of mountains.
One principal street, the houses of one story, with piaz¬
zas in front, terminates in a plaza or public square, at
the head of which stands a large church with a Gothic
door; and before it, at a distance of ten or twelve
yards, was a cross about twenty feet high. The popu¬
lation is about ten thousand, chiefly Mestitzoes. Leav¬
ing the plaza, we walked down to the Motagua. On
the bank a boat was in process of construction, about
fifty feet long and ten wide, entirely of mahogany.
Near it a party of men and women were fording the
stream, carrying their clothes above their heads; and
around a point three women were bathing. There are
no ancient associations connected with this place ; but
the wildness of the scene, the clouds, the tints of the
sky, and the setting sun reflected upon the mountains,
were beautiful. At dark we returned to the house.
Except for the companionship of some thousands of
ants, which blackened the candles and covered every¬
thing perishable, we had a room to ourselves. «

Early in the morning we were served with chocolate
and a small roll of sweet bread. While at breakfast
our muleteer came, reiterating a demand for settle¬
ment, and claiming three dollars more than was due.


A LAWSUIT.


61


We refused to pay him, and he went away furious.
In half an hour an alguazil came to me with a sum¬
mons to the alcalde. Mr. Gather wood, who was, at the
moment, cleaning his pistols, cheered me by threaten¬
ing, if they put me in prison, to bombard the town.
The cabildo, or house of the municipality, was at one
side of the plaza. We entered a large room, one end
of which was partitioned off by a wooden railing. In¬
side sat the alcalde and his clerk, and outside was the
muleteer, with a group of half-naked fellows as his
backers. He had reduced his claim to one dollar,
doubtless supposing that I would pay that rather than
have any trouble. It was not very respectable to be
sued for a dollar ; but I looked in his face on entering,
and resolved not to pay a cent. I did not, however,
claim my privilege under the law of nations, but de¬
fended the action on the merits, and the alcalde deci¬
ded in my favour ; after which I showed him my pass¬
port, and he asked me inside the bar and offered me a
cigar.

This over, I had more important business. The first
was to hire mules, which could not be procured till the
day but one after. Next I negotiated for washing
clothes, which was a complicated business, for it was
necessary to specify which articles were to be washed,
which ironed, and which starched, and to pay separ¬
ately for washing, ironing, soap, and starch ; and, last¬
ly, I negotiated with a tailor for a pair of pantaloons,
purchasing separately stuff, lining, buttons, and thread,
the tailor finding needles and thimble himself.

Toward evening we again walked to the river, re¬
turned, and taught Donna Bartola how to make tea.
By this time the whole town was in commotion pre¬
paratory to the great ceremony of praying to the Santa

6


62


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


Lucia. Early in the morning, the firing of muskets,
petards, and rockets had announced the arrival of this
unexpected but welcome visiter, one of the holiest saints
of the calendar, and, next to San Antonio, the most
celebrated for the power of working miracles. Mora-
zan’s rise into power was signalized by a persecution of
the clergy: his friends say that it was the purification
of a corrupt body; his enemies, that it was a war against
morality and religion. The country was at that time
overrun with priests, friars, and monks of different or¬
ders. Everywhere the largest buildings, the best culti¬
vated lands, and a great portion of the wealth of the
country were in their hands. Many, no doubt, were
good men; but some used their sacred robes as a cloak
for rascality and vice, and most were drones, reaping
where they did not sow, and" living luxuriously by the
sweat of other men’s brows. At all events, and what¬
ever was the cause, the early part of Morazan’s admin¬
istration was signalized by hostility to them as a class;
and, from the Archbishop of Guatimala down to the
poorest friar, they were in danger; some fled, others
were banished, and many were torn by rude soldiers
from their convents and churches, hurried to the sea¬
ports, and shipped for Cuba and old Spain, under sen¬
tence of death if they returned. The country was left
comparatively destitute ; many of the churches fell to
ruins ; others stood, but their doors were seldom open¬
ed ; and the practice and memory of their religious rites
were fading away. Carrera and his Indians, with the
mystic rites of Catholicism ingrafted upon the supersti¬
tions of their fathers, had acquired a strong hold upon
the feelings of the people by endeavouring to bring back
the exiled clergy and to restore the influence of the
church. The tour of the Santa Lucia was regarded as


A MODERN BONA BE A.


63


an indication of a change of feeling and government;
as a prelude to the restoration of the influence of the
church and the revival of ceremonies dear to the heart
of the Indian. such, it v^as hailed by all the villages
through which she had passed ; and that night she would
receive the prayers of the Christians of Gualan.

The Santa Lucia enjoyed a peculiar popularity from
her miraculous power over the affections of the young ;•
for any young man who prayed to her for a wife, or any
young woman who prayed for a husband, was sure to
receive the object of such prayer ; and if the person
praying indicated to the saint the individual wished for,
the prayer would be granted, provided such individual
was not already married. It was not surprising that a
saint with such extraordinary powers, touching so di¬
rectly the tenderest sensibilities, created a sensation in
a place where the feelings, or, rather, the passions, are
particularly turned to love.

Donna Bartola invited us to accompany her, and,
setting out, we called upon a friend of hers ; during the
whole visit, a servant girl sat with her lap full of to¬
bacco, making straw cigars for immediate use. It was
the first time we had smoked with ladies, and, at first,
it was rather awkward to ask one for a light; but we
were so thoroughly broken in that night that we never
had any delicacy afterward. The conversation turned
upon the saint and her miraculous powers; and when
we avowed ourselves somewhat skeptical, the servant
girl, with that familiarity, though not want of respect,
which exists throughout Central America, said that it
was wicked to doubt; that she had prayed to the saint
herself, and two months afterward she was married, and
to the very man she prayed for, though at the time he
had no idea of her, and, in fact, wanted another girl.


64


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


With this encouragement, locking the house, and ac¬
companied by children and servants, we set out to pay
our homage to the saint. The sound of a violin and the
firing of rockets indicated the direction of her temporary
domicil. She had taken up her residence in the hut of
a poor Indian in the suburbs ; and, for some time before
reaching it, we encountered crowds of both sexes, and
all ages and colours, and in every degree of dress and
undress, smoking and talking, and sitting or lying on
the ground in every variety of attitude. Room was
made for our party, and we entered the hut.

It was about twenty feet square, thatched on the top
and sides with leaves of Indian corn, and filled with a
dense mass of kneeling men and women. On one side
was an altar, about four feet high, covered with a clean
white cotton cloth. On the top of the altar was a frame,
with three elevations, like a flower-stand, and on the
top of that a case, containing a large wax doll, dressed
in blue silk, and ornamented with gold leaf, spangles,
and artificial flowers. This was the Santa Lucia. Over
her head was a canopy of red cotton cloth, on which
was emblazoned a cross in gold. On the right was a
sedan chair, trimmed with red cotton and gold leaf,
being the travelling equipage of the saint; and near it
were Indians in half-sacerdotal dress, on whose shoul¬
ders she travelled; festoons of oranges hung from the
roof, and the rough posts were inwrapped with leaves
of the sugar-cane. At the foot of the altar was a mat,
on which girls and boys were playing; and a little fel¬
low about six years old, habited in the picturesque cos¬
tume of a straw hat, and that only, was coolly surveying
the crowd.

The ceremony of praying had already begun, and the
music of a drum, a violin, and a flageolet, under the di-


HOW TO GAIN A HUSBAND.


65


rection of the Indian master of ceremonies, drowned
the noise of voices. Donna Bartola, who was a widow,
and the other ladies of our party, fell on their knees; and,
recommending myself to their prayers, I looked on with¬
out doing anything for myself, but I studied attentive¬
ly the faces of those around me. There were some of
both sexes who could not strictly be called young; but
they did not, on that account, pray less earnestly. In
some places people would repel the imputation of being
desirous to procure husband or wife; not so in Gualan:
they prayed publicly for what they considered a bless¬
ing, Some of the men were so much in earnest that
perspiration stood in large drops upon their faces; and
none thought that praying for a husband need tinge the
cheek of a modest maiden. I watched the countenance
of a young Indian girl, beaming with enthusiasm and
hope ; and, while her eyes rested upon the image of the
saint and her lips moved in prayer, I could not but im-»
agine that her heart was full of some truant, and per¬
haps unworthy lover.

Outside the hut was an entirely different scene. Near
by were rows of kneeling men and women, but beyond
were wild groups of half-naked men and boys, setting
off rockets and fireworks. As I moved through, a
flash rose from under my feet, and a petard exploded
so near that the powder singed me ; and, turning round,
I saw hurrying away my rascally muleteer. Beyond
were parties of young men and women dancing by the
light of blazing pine sticks. In a hut at some little dis¬
tance were two haggard old women, with large caldrons
over blazing fires, stirring up and serving out the con¬
tents with long wooden ladles, and looking like witches
dealing out poison instead of love-potions.

At ten o’clock the prayers to the saint died away, and

VoL, L—I


66


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


the crowd separated into groups and couples, and many
fell into what in English would be called flirtations. A
mat was spread for our party against the side of the hut,
and we all lighted cigars and sat down upon it. Cups
made of small gourds, and filled from the caldrons with
a preparation of boiled Indian corn sweetened with va¬
rious dolceSj were passed from mouth to mouth, each
one sipping and passing it on to the next; and this con¬
tinued, without any interruption, for more than an hour.
We remained on the ground till after midnight, and then
were among the first to leave. On the whole, we con¬
cluded that praying to the Santa Lucia must lead to
matrimony; and I could not but remark that, in the
way of getting husbands and wives, most seemed dis¬
posed to do something for themselves, and not leave
all to the grace of the saint.

The next day it was excessively hot, and we remain¬
ed within doors. In the evening we visited the padre,
who had just returned from a neighbouring village. He
was a short, fat man, and had on a white nightcap, a
blue striped jacket, and white pantaloons, and we found
him swinging in a hammock and smoking a cigar. He
had a large household of women and children ; but as
to the relation in which they stood to him, people differ¬
ed. He gave us more information in regard to the
country than we had yet been able to obtain, and par¬
ticularly in regard to Copan, a ruined city which we
wished to visit. He was familiar with the history of the
Indians, and understood thoroughly the character of the
present race ; and, in answer to our question if they
were all Christians, said that they were devout and re¬
ligious, and had a great respect for the priests and
saints. With this he hitched up his bursting pantaloons,
and lighted another cigar. We might have smiled at


A KINGDOM OF FLORA.


67


the idea of his confounding his comfortable figure with
the saints; but he had so much good sense and good
feeling that we were not disposed to be captious.

The next morning our muleteer came, but, through
some misunderstanding, he had not mules enough to
carry all our luggage. Rather than wait, we started
without him, and left part of the baggage for him to
bring on to Zacapa the next day.

Leaving Gualan, we had on our right the Motagua
River, which had now become to us a friend, and be¬
yond it the great range of the mountains of Vera Paz,
six or eight thousand feet high. In an hour we com¬
menced ascending. Soon we were in a wilderness of
flowers ; shrubs and bushes were clothed in purple and
red; and on the sides of the mountain, and in the ra¬
vines leading down to the river, in the wildest posi¬
tions, were large trees so covered with red that they
seemed a single flower. In three hours we descended
from our mountain height, and came once more to the
river side, where it was rolling swiftly, and in some
places breaking into rapids. We followed for about
an hour, and rose again several thousand feet. At two
o’clock we reached the village of San Pablo, situated
on a lofty table of land, looking down upon the river,
and having its view bounded by the mountains of Vera
Paz. The church stood at the entrance of the village.
We turned our mules loose to graze, and took our meal
in the porch. It was a beautiful position, and two wa¬
terfalls, shining like streaks of silver on the distant
mountain side, reminded us of cascades in Switzerland.

We procured a guide from the alcalde to conduct us
to Zacapa; and, resuming our journey, for two hours
more had the same great range upon our right. The
sun was obscured, but . occasionally it broke through


68


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


and lighted up the sides of the mountains, while the
tops were covered with clouds. At four o’clock we
had a distant view of the great plain of Zacapa, bound¬
ed on the opposite side by a triangular belt of mount¬
ains, at the foot of which stood the town. We de¬
scended and crossed the plain, which was green and
well cultivated; and, fording a stream, ascended a rug¬
ged bank and entered the town.

It was by far the finest we had seen. The streets
were regular, and the houses plastered and whitewash¬
ed, with large balconied windows and piazzas. The
church was two hundred and fifty feet long, with walls
ten feet thick, and a facade rich with Moorish devices.
It was built in the form of a Latin cross. In one end
of the cross was a tailor’s shop, and the other was roof¬
less. At one corner was a belfry, consisting of four
rough trunks of trees supporting a peaked roof covered
with tiles. Two bells were suspended from a rude
beam; and, as we passed, a half-naked Indian was
standing on a platform underneath, ringing for vespers.

We rode up to the house of Don Mariano Durante,
one of the largest and best in the place, being about a
hundred feet front, and having a corridor extending the
whole length, paved with square stones. The door was
opened by a respectable-looking St. Domingo negro,
who told us, in French, that Senor Durante was not at
home, but that the house was at our service ; and, going
round to a porte cochere alongside, admitted us into a
large courtyard ornamented with trees and flowers, at
one side of which was a cabelleria or stable. We left
our mules in the hands of the servants, and entered a
sala or reception-room covering nearly the whole front,
with large windows reaching down to the floor and iron
balconies, and furnished with tables, a European bu-


MAKING FREE WITH A HOST.


69


reau, and chairs. In the centre of the room and in the
windows hung cages, handsomely made and gilded,
containing beautiful singing-birds of the country, and
two fine canary birds from Havana. This was the resi¬
dence of two bachelor brothers, who, feeling for the
wants of travellers in a country entirely destitute of ho¬
tels, kept a door always open for their accommodation.
We had candles lighted, and made ourselves at home.
I was sitting at a table writing, when we heard the
tramp of mules outside, and a gentleman entered, took
off his sword and spurs, and laid his pistols upon the
table. Supposing him to be a traveller like ourselves,
we asked him to take a seat; and, when supper was
served, invited him to join us. It was not till bedtime
that we found we were doing the honours to one of the
masters of the house. He must have thought us cool,
but I flatter myself he had no reason to complain of any
want of attention.


70


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


CHAPTER IV.

Purchasing a Bridle.—A School and its Regulations.—Conversation with an In¬
dian.— Spanish Translation of the “ Spy.”—Chiquimula.—• A Church in Ruins.
—A Veteran of the French Empire.—St. Stephanos.—A Land of Mountains.—
An Affair with a Muleteer.—A deserted Village.—A rude Assault.—Arrest.-—
Imprisonment.—Release. ^

The next day we were obliged to wait for our mule¬
teer. Our guide of the night before had stolen one of
our bridles; and here we found the beginning of an
annoyance which attended us throughout Central Amer¬
ica, in the difficulty of buying anything ready made.
There was a blacksmith who had a bit partly made, but
had not charcoal enough to finish it. Fortunately, du¬
ring the day an Indian arrived with a backload, and the
bridle was completed. The headstall we bought of a
saddler, and the reins, which were of platted leather like
the lash of a whip, we were lucky enough to obtain
ready made. The arrival of the charcoal enabled the
blacksmith to fit us out with one pair of spurs.

At Zacapa, for the first time, we saw a schoolhouse.
It was a respectable-looking building, with columns in
front, and against the wall hung a large card, headed,

“ 1st Decurion (a student who has the care of ten other students). 2d Decurion.

MONITOR, &c.

“ Interior regulation for the good government of the school of first letters of this
town, which ought to be observed strictly by all the boys composing it,” &c.,

with a long list of complicated articles, declaring the
rewards and punishments. The school, for the govern¬
ment of which these regulations were intended, consist¬
ed of five boys, two besides the decurions and monitor.
It was nearly noon, and the master, who was the clerk
of the alcalde, had not yet made his appearance. The


CONVERSATION WITH AN INDIAN.


71


only books I saw were a Catholic prayer-book and a
translation of Montesquieu’s Spirit of the Laws. The
boys were fine little fellows, half white; and with one
of them I had a trial of sums in addition, and then of
exercises in handwriting, in which he showed himself
very proficient, writing in Spanish, in a hand which I
could not mistake, “ Give me sixpence.”

"We were rather at a loss what to do with ourselves,
but in the afternoon our host called in an Indian for the
purpose of enabling us to make a vocabulary of Indian
words. The first question I asked him was the name
of God, to which he answered, Santissima Trinidad.
Through our host I explained to him that I did not wish
the Spanish, but the Indian name, and he answered as
before, Santissima Trinidad, or Dios. I shaped my
question in a variety of ways, but could get no other
answer. He was of a tribe called Chinaute, and the
inference was, either that they had never known any
Great Spirit who governed and directed the universe,
or that they had undergone such an entire change in
matters of religion that they had lost their own appella¬
tion for the Deity.

In the evening the town was thrown into excitement
by the entry of a detachment of Carrera’s soldiers, on
their way to Yzabal to receive and escort a purchase of
muskets. The house of our friend was a gathering-
place of residents, and, as usual, the conversation turn¬
ed upon the revolutionary state of the country. Some
of them, as soon as they knew my official character, were
anxious for me to go directly to San Salvador, the head¬
quarters of the Morazan or Federal party, and assured
me that the road to Guatimala was occupied by the
troops of Carrera, and dangerous to travel over. I
knew too much of the effect of party spirit to put im-


72


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


plicit faith in what partisans told me, and endeavoured
to change the subject. Our host asked me whether
we had any wars in my country, and said he knew that
we had had one revolution, for he had read La Histo-
ria de la Revolution de los Estados Unidos del Norte,
in four volumes, in which General Washington appear¬
ed under the name of Harper, and Jack Lawton and Dr.
Sitgreaves were two of the principal characters; from
which I learned, what will perhaps be new to some of my
readers, that in the Spanish translation the tale of the

Spy’’ is called a History of the American Revolution.

Our muleteer did not make his appearance till late
the next day. In the mean time, I had had an oppor¬
tunity of acquiring much information about the roads
and the state of the country; and, being satisfied that,
so far as regarded the purpose of my mission, it was
not necessary to proceed immediately to Guatimala,
and, in fact, that it was better to wait a little while and
see the result of the convulsions that then distracted the
country, we determined to visit Copan. It was com¬
pletely out of the line of travel, and, though distant only
a few days’ journey, in a region of country but little
known, even at Zacapa; but our muleteer said that he
knew the road, and made a contract to conduct us thith¬
er in three days, arranging the different stages before¬
hand, and from thence direct to Guatimala.

At seven o’clock the next morning we started. Al¬
though both my companion and myself were old trav¬
ellers, our luggage was in bad packages for travelling
with mules over a mountainous country—^hard to put on
and easy to fall off; and, in keeping with this, we had
but one pair of spurs between us. In an hour we ford¬
ed the Motagua, still a broad stream, deep, and with a
rapid current; and coming out with our feet and legs


CHIQUIMULA.


73


wet diminished somewhat the regret with which we
bjEtde farewell for a while to the beautiful river. For an
hour longer we continued on the plain of Zacapa, culti¬
vated for corn and cochineal, and divided by fences of
brush and cactus. Beyond this the country became
broken, arid, and barren, and very soon we commenced
ascending a steep mountain. In two hours we reached
the top, three or four thousand feet high, and, looking
back, had a fine view of the plain and town of Zacapa.
Crossing the ridge, we reached a bold precipitous spur,
and very soon saw before us another extensive plain,
and, afar olF, the town of Chiquimula, with its giant
church. On each side were immense ravines, and the
opposite heights were covered with pale and rose-col¬
oured mimosa. We descended by a long and zigzag
path, and reached the plain, on which were growing
corn, cochineal, and plantain. Once more fording a
stream, we ascended a bank, and at two o’clock enter¬
ed Chiquimula, the head of the department of that name.
In.the centre of the plaza was a fine fountain, shaded
by palm-trees, at which women were filling their water-
jars, and on the sides were the church and cabildo.
On one corner was a house, to which we were attracted
by the appearance of a woman at the door. I may call
her a lady, for she wore a frock not open behind, and
shoes and stockings, and had a face of uncommon in¬
terest, dark, and with finely-pencilled eyebrows. To
heighten the effect of her appearance, she gave us a
gracious welcome to her house, and in a few minutes
the shed was lumbered with our multifarious luggage.

After a slight lunch we took our guns, and, walking
down to the edge of the table of land, saw, what had
attracted our attention at a great distance, a gigantic
church in ruins. It was seventy-five feet front and two
VoL. I.—K 7


74


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


hundred and fifty feet deep, and the walls were ten feet
thick* The fa 9 ade was adorned with ornaments and
figures of the saints, larger than life. The roof had
fallen, and inside were huge masses of stone and mor¬
tar, and a thick growth of trees. It was built by the
Spaniards on the site of the old Indian willage ; but,
having been twice shattered by earthquakes, the inhab¬
itants had deserted it, and built the town where it now
stands. The ruined village was now occupied as a
campo santo, or burial-place; inside the church were
the graves of the principal inhabitants, and in the niches
of the wall were the bones of priests and monks, with
their names written under them. Outside were the
graves of the common people, untended and uncared
for, with the barrow of laced sticks which had carried
the body to the grave laid upon the top, and slightly
covered with earth. The bodies had decayed, the dirt
fallen in, and the ^graves were yawning. Around this
scene of desolation and death nature was rioting in
beauty; the ground was covered with flowers, and par¬
rots on every bush and tree, and flying in flocks over
our heads, wanton in gayety of colours, with senseless
chattering disturbed the stillness of the grave.

We returned to the town, and found about twelve
hundred soldiers drawn up in the plaza for evening
parade. Their aspect was ferocious and banditti-like,
and it was refreshing to see convicts peeping through
the gratings of the prison, and walking in chains on
the plaza, as it gave an idea that sometimes crimes
were punished. With all their ferocity of appearance,
the officers, mounted on prancing mules or very small
horses, almost hidden in saddle-cloth and armour, wore
an air bordering upon the mock heroic. While we
were looking at them. General Cascara, the command-


A VETERAN OF THE FRENCH EMPIRE. 75


ant of the department, attended by a servant, rode up
to the line. He was an Italian, upward of sixty,
who had served under Napoleon in Italy, and on the
downfall of the emperor had fled to Central America.
Banished by Morazan, and eight years in exile, he had
just returned to the country, and six months before had
been appointed to this command. He was ghastly pale,
and evidently in feeble health; and I could not but
think that, if recollections of the pomp of war under the
emperor ever crossed his mind, he must needs blush at
his barefooted detachment.

He returned to his house, whither we followed and
presented our passport. Like the commandant at Yza-
bal, he seemed ill at ease, and spoke much of the dis¬
tracted state of the country. He was dissatisfied, too,
with the route I proposed taking; and though I told
him it Avas merely to visit the ruins of Copan, he was
evidently apprehensive that I intended going to San
Salvador to present my credentials to the Federal gov¬
ernment. He vised the passport, however, as I requi¬
red ; though, after we left, he called Augustin back, and
questioned him very closely as to our purposes. I Avas
indignant, but smothered my feelings in consideration
of the distracted state of the country, and the game of
life and death that was then playing throughout the
land.

We returned to the house and the interesting lady
who had welcomed us to it. As yet we did not knoAV
whether she was senora or senorita ; but, unhappily, we
found that a man whom we supposed her father was her
husband. When we inquired of her about a fine boy
ten years old, whom we supposed to be her brother, she
answered, “ es mio,” he is mine ; and, as if it was fated
that the charm of her appearance should be broken,


76


INCIDENTS OF TKAVEL.


when, according to the rules of comtesy, I offered for
her choice a cigar and a puro, she took the latter. But
it was so long since I had seen a woman who was at all
attractive, and her face was so interesting, her manners
were so good, her voice so sweet, the Spanish words
rolled so beautifully from her lips, and her frock was
tied so close behind, that, in spite of ten-year-old boy
and puro, I clung to my first impressions.

The next morning we rose early. Our interesting
hostess and her fatherly husband were up betimes to as¬
sist us. It would have been an offence to the laws of
hospitality to offer them money; but Mr. C. gave the
boy a penknife, and I put on the finger of the sehora a
gold ring, with the motto, Souvenir d’amitie.” It
was in French, and her husband could not understand
it, nor, unfortunately, could she.

At seven o’clock we started. Passing the ruined
church and the old village, we rode over a rich valley,
so well cultivated with Indian corn that it gave a key
to the boy’s question. Whether we had come to Chiqui-
mula to buy maize ? At a league’s distance we came ta
the village of St. Stephanos, where, amid a miserable col¬
lection of thatched huts, stood a gigantic church, like
that at Chiquimula, roofless, and falling to ruins. We
were now in a region which had been scourged by civil
war. A year before the village had been laid waste by
the troops of Morazan.

Passing the village, we came upon the bank of a
stream, in some places diverted into water-courses for
irrigating the land; and on the other side of the stream
was a range of high mountains. Continuing along it,
we met an Indian, who advised our muleteer that the
camino real for Copan was on the opposite side of the
river, and across the range of mountains. We returned


A LAND OF MOUNTAINS.


77


and forded the river ; a great part of the bed was dry,
and we rode along it for some distance, but could find
no path that led up the mountain. At length we struck
one, but it proved to be a cattle-path, and we wandered
for more than an hour before we found the camino real;
and this royal road was barely a track by^which a sin¬
gle mule could climb. It was evident that our mule¬
teer did not know the road, and the region we were en¬
tering was so wild that we had some doubts about fol¬
lowing him. At eleven we reached the top of the
mountain, and, looking back, saw at a great distance,
and far below us, the town of Chiquimula ; on the right,
up the valley, the village of St. Helena; and, rising
above a few thatched huts, another gigantic and roof¬
less church. On each side were mountains still higher
than ours, some grand and gloomy, with their summits
buried in the clouds ; others in the form of cones and
pyramids, so wild and fantastic that they seemed sport¬
ing with the heavens, and I almost wished for wings to fly
and light upon their tops. Here, on heights apparently
inaccessible, we saw the wild hut of an Indian, with his
milpa or patch of Indian corn. Clouds gathered around
the mountains, and for an hour we rode in the rain;
when the sun broke through we saw the mountain tops
still towering above us, and on our right, far below
us, a deep valley. We descended, and found it nar¬
rower and more beautiful than any we had yet seen,
bounded by ranges of mountains several thousand feet
high, and having on its left a range of extraordinary
beauty, with a red soil of sandstone, without any brush
or underwood, and covered with gigantic pines. In
front, rising above the miserable huts of the village,
and seeming to bestride the valley, was the gigantic
church of St. John the Hermit, reminding me of the


78


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


Church of St. John in the wilderness of Judea, but the
situation was even more beautiful. At two o’clock we
crossed the stream and entered the village. Opposite
the church the muleteer told us that the day’s work was
over, but, with all our toils, we had made only fifteen
miles, and were unwilling to stop so soon. The ex¬
ceeding beauty of the place might have tempted us,
but the only good plastered hut was occupied by a band
of ruffianly soldiers, and we rode on. The muleteer
followed with curses, and vented his spite in lashing the
mules. Again we crossed the stream, and, continuing
up the valley along the dry bed, which bore marks of
the flood that washed it in the rainy season, in an hour
we crossed it half a dozen times. Heavy clouds rested
on the mountains, and again we had rain. At four
o’clock we saw on a high table on the left the village of
Hocotan, with another gigantic church. According to
the route agreed upon with the muleteer, this should
have been the end of our first day’s journey. We had
been advised that the cura could give us much informa¬
tion about the ruins of Copan, and told him to cross
over and stop there; but he refused, and, hurrying on
the mules, added that we had refused to stop when he
wished, and now he would not stop for us. I could not
spur my mule beyond her own gait, and, unable to over¬
take him, jumped off and ran after him on foot. Acci¬
dentally I put my hand on my pistols, to steady them
in my belt, and he fell back and drew his machete.
We came to a parley. He said that if we went there
we could not reach Copan the next day; whereupon,
willing to make a retreat, and wishing to leave him no
excuse for failing, we continued.

At six o’clock we rose upon a beautiful table of land,
on which stood another gigantic church. It was the


A DESERTED VILLAGE.


79


seventh we had seen that day, and, coming upon them
in a region of desolation, and by mountain paths which
human hands had never attempted to improve, their co¬
lossal grandeur and costliness were startling, and gave
evidence of a retrograding and expiring people. This
stood in a more desolate place than any we had yet
seen. The grass was green, the sod unbroken even by
a mule path, not a human being was in sight, and even
the gratings of the prison had no one looking through
them. It was, in fact, a picture of a deserted village.
We rode up to the cabildo, the door of which was fast¬
ened and the shed barricaded, probably to prevent the
entrance of straggling cattle. We tore away the fast¬
enings, broke open the door, and, unloading the mules,
sent Augustin on a foraging expedition. In half an
hour he returned with one egg, being all that he was
able to procure; but he had waked up the village, and
the alcalde, an Indian with a silver-headed cane, and
several alguazils with long thin rods or wands of office,
came down to examine us. We showed them our pass¬
port, and told them where we were going, at which,
with their characteristic indifference of manner, they
expressed no surprise. They could not read the pass¬
port, but they examined the seal and returned it. We
asked them for eggs, fowls, milk, &c., to all of which
they answered, what afterward became but too familiar,
no hay,” there is none,” and in a few minutes they
retired and left u^ to ourselves.

The cabildo was about forty feet long and twenty
broad, with plastered walls; its furniture consisted of
a large table and two benches with high backs, and the
alcalde sent us a jar of water. We abused the mule¬
teer for stopping at a place where we could get nothing
to eat, and made our dinner and supper upon bread and


80


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


chocolate, taking care not to give him any. There were
pins in the walls for swinging hammocks, and in the
evening we prepared for sleep. Mr. C. was in his ham¬
mock, and I was half undressed, when the door was
suddenly burst open, and twenty-five or thirty men
rushed in, the alcalde, alguazils, soldiers, Indians, and
Mestitzoes, ragged and ferocious-looking fellows, and
armed with staves of ofiice, swords, clubs, muskets, and
machetes, and carrying blazing pine sticks. At the
head of them was a young officer of about twenty-eight
or thirty, with a glazed hat and sword, and a knowing
and wicked expression, whom we afterward understood
to be a captain of one of Carrera’s companies. The
alcalde was evidently intoxicated, and said that he
wished to see my passport again. I delivered it to him,
and he handed it over to the young officer, who exam¬
ined it, and said that it was not valid. In the mean
time, Mr. Catherwood and I dressed ourselves. I was
not very familiar with the Spanish language, and,
through Augustin, explained my official character, and
directed him particularly to the endorsements of Com¬
mandant Penol and General Cascara. He paid no re¬
gard to my explanations; the alcalde said that he had
seen a passport once before, and that it was printed,
and on a small piece of paper not bigger than his hand ;
whereas mine was the one given by government on a
quarto sheet. Besides this, they said that the seal of
i General Cascara was only that of the department of
' Chiquimula, and it ought to be that of the state of Gua-
timala. I did all in my power to show the insufficiency
of these objections; but, after a warm altercation, the
young man said that we should not proceed on our jour¬
ney, but must remain at Comotan until information
eould be sent to Chiquimula, and orders received from


ARREST.


81


that place. We had no disposition to remain in such
hands ; threatened them with the consequences of throw¬
ing any obstructions in our way; and I at length said
that, rather than be detained there and lose time, I
would abandon my journey to Copan altogether, and
return by the road on which I came ; but both the officer
and the alcalde said peremptorily that we should not
leave Comotan.

The young man then told me to give up my passport.
I answered that the passport was given me by my own
government; that it was the evidence of my official
character, necessary for my personal security, and I
would not give it up. Mr. Catherwood made a learned
exposition of the law of nations, the right of an ambas¬
sador, and the danger of bringing down upon them the
vengeance of the government del Norte, which I sus¬
tained with some warmth, but it was of no use. At
length I told him again that I would not give up the
passport, but offered to go with it myself, under a guard
of soldiers, to Chiquimula, or wherever else they chose
to send it; he answered insultingly that we should not
go ■ to Chiquimula or anywhere else; neither forward
nor backward; that we must stay where we were, and
must give up the passport. Finding arguments and re¬
monstrances of no use, I placed the paper inside my
vest, buttoned my coat tight across my breast, and told
him he must get it by force; and the officer, with a
gleam of satisfaction crossing his villanous face, re¬
sponded that he would, I added that, whatever might
be the immediate result, it would ultimately be fatal to
them; to which he answered, with a sneer, that they
would run the risk. During the whole time, the band
of cowardly ruffians stood with their hands on their
swords and machetes, and two assassin-looking scoun-

VoL, I.—L


82


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


drels sat on a bench with muskets against their shoul¬
ders, and the muzzles pointed within three feet of my
breast. If we had been longer in the country we
should have been more alarmed ; but as yet we did not
know the sanguinary character of the people, and the
whole proceeding was so outrageous and insulting that it
roused our indignation more than our fears. Augustin,
who, from having had a cut across the head with a
machete, which did not kill him, was always bellicose,
begged me in French to give the order to fire, and
said that one round would scatter them all. We had
eleven charges, all sure; we were excited, and, if the
young man himself had laid his hands upon me, I think
I should have knocked him down at least; but, most
fortunately, before he had time to give his order to fall
upon us, a man, who entered after the rest, of a better
class, wearing a glazed hat and round-about jacket,
stepped forward and asked to see the passport. I was
determined not to trust it out of my hands, and held it
up before a blazing pine stick while he read it, and, at
Mr. Catherwood’s request, aloud.

I have since doubted whether even the officer had
read it, or, if so, whether he had communicated its con¬
tents, for it produced an effect upon the alcalde and his
alguazils ; and, after some moments of anxious suspense
to us, they forbore to execute their threat, but said that
we must remain in custody. I demanded a courier, to
carry a letter immediately to General Cascara, which
they refused; but, on my offering to pay the expense
of the courier, the alcalde promised to send it. Know¬
ing General Cascara to be an Italian, and afraid to
trust my Spanish, I wrote a note, which Mr. C. trans¬
lated into Italian, informing him of our arrest and im¬
prisonment ; that we had exhibited to the alcalde and


IMPRISONMENT.


83


soldiers who arrested us my special passport from my
own government, with the endorsements of Command¬
ant Peiiol and himself, certifying my official character,
which were not deemed sufficient; demanding to be set
at liberty immediately, and allowed to proceed on our
journey without farther molestation; and adding that
we should, of course, represent to the government at
Guatimala, and also to my own, the manner in which
we had been treated. Not to mince matters, Mr. Gath¬
er wood signed the note as Secretary; and, having no
official seal with me, we sealed it, unobserved by any¬
body, with a new American half dollar, and gave it to
the alcalde. The eagle spread his wings, and the stars
glittered in the torchlight. All gathered round to ex¬
amine it, and retired, locking us up in the cabildo, sta¬
tioning twelve men at the door with swords, muskets,
and machetes; and, at parting, the officer told the al¬
calde that, if we escaped during the night, his head
should answer for it.

The excitement over, Mr. C. and I were exhausted.
We had made a beautiful beginning of our travels ; but
a month from home, and in the hands of men who would
have been turned out of any decent state prison lest
they should contaminate the boarders. A peep at our
beautiful keepers did not reassure us. They were sit¬
ting under the shed, directly before the door, around a
fire, their arms in reach, and smoking cigars. Their
whole stock of wearing apparel was not worth a pair of
old boots; and with their rags, their arms, their dark
faces reddened by the firelight, their appearance was
ferocious; and, doubtless, if we had attempted to escape,
they would have been glad of the excuse for murder.
We opened a basket of wine with which Col. McDon¬
ald had provided us, and drank his health. We were


84


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


relieved from immediate apprehensions, but our pros¬
pects were not pleasant; and, fastening the door as well
as we could inside, we again betook ourselves to our
hammocks.

During the night the door was again burst open, and
the whole ruffianly band entered, as before, with swords,
muskets, machetes, and blazing pine sticks. In an in¬
stant we were on our feet, and my hurried impression
was, that they had come to take the passport; but, to
our surprise, the alcalde handed me back the letter with
the big seal, said there was no use in sending it, and
that we were at liberty to proceed on our journey when
we chose.

We were too well pleased to ask any questions, and
to this day do not know why we were arrested. My
belief is, that if we had quailed at all, and had not kept
up a high, threatening tone to the last, we should not have
been set free ; and I have no doubt that the big seal did
much in our behalf. Our indignation, however, was not
the less strong that we considered ourselves safe in
pouring it out. We insisted that the matter should not
end here, and that the letter should go to General Cas-
cara. The alcalde objected; but we told him that, if not
sent, it would be the worse for him ; and, after some de¬
lay, he thrust it into the hands of an Indian, and beat
him out of doors with his staff; and in a few minutes
the guard was withdrawn, and they all left us.

It was now nearly daylight, and we did not know
what to do ; to continue was to expose ourselves to a
repetition of the same treatment, and perhaps, as we
advanced farther into the interior, with a worse result.
Undetermined, for the third time we turned into our
hammocks. At broad daylight we were again roused
by the alcalde and his alguazils, but this time they came


THE RELEASE.


85


to pay us a visit of ceremony. The soldiers, w'ho had
accidentally passed through the village, and had made
all the disturbance, had left. After some deliberation
we determined to continue ; and, charging the alcalde
again about the letter to General Cascara, turned our
backs upon him and his alguazils. In a few minutes
they all withdrew. We took a cup of chocolate, loaded
our mules, and, when we left, the place was as desolate
as when we entered. Not a person had been there to
welcome us, and there was not one to bid us farewell,

8


86


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


CHAPTER V.

An Indian Funeral.—Copan River.—Woman’s Kindness.—Hacienda of San An¬
tonio.—Strange Customs.—A Mountain of Aloes.—The State of Honduras.
—Village of Copan.—An ungracious Host.—Wall of Copan.—History of Co¬
pan.—First View of the Ruins.—Vain Speculations.—Applications for Medi¬
cine.—Search for an Abode.—A Sick Woman.—Plagues of a Muleteer.—An
unpleasant Situation.—A Thunder Storm.—Thoughts of buying Copan.

Turning away from the church, we passed the brow
of a hill, behind which was a collection of huts almost
concealed from sight, and occupied by our friends of the
night before. Very soon we commenced ascending a
mountain. At a short distance we met a corpse borne
on a rude bier of sticks, upon the shoulders of Indians,
naked except a piece of cotton cloth over the loins, and
shaking awfully under the movements of its carriers.
Soon after we met another, borne in the same way, but
wrapped in matting, and accompanied by three or four
men and a young woman. Both were on their way to
the graveyard of the village church. Ascending, we
reached the top of a mountain, and saw behind us a
beautiful valley extending toward Hocotan, but all
waste, and suggesting a feeling of regret that so beauti¬
ful a country should be in such miserable hands.

At half past twelve we descended to the banks of the
Copan River. It was broad and rapid, and in the mid¬
dle was a large sandbar. We had diflS.culty in fording
it; and some of the baggage, particularly the beds and
bedding, got wet. From the opposite side we again
commenced ascending another ridge, and from the top
saw the river winding through the valley. As we cross¬
ed, by a sudden turn it flowed along the base, and we
looked directly down upon it. Descending this mount-


87


woman’s kindness.

ain, we came to a beautiful stream, where a gray-haired
Indian woman and a pretty little girl, pictures of youth
and old age, were washing clothes. We dismounted,
and sat down on the bank to wait for the muleteer. I
forgot to mention that he had with him a boy about thir*
teen or fourteen years old, a fine little fellow, upon whom
he imposed the worst part of the burden, that of chasing
the mules, and who really seemed, like Baron Munchau¬
sen’s dog, in danger of running his legs off.

Our breach with the muleteer had not been healed,
and at first we ascribed to him some agency in our trou¬
bles at Comotan. At all events, if it had not been for
him, we should not have stopped there. All day he had
been particularly furious with the mules, and they had
been particularly perverse, and now they had gone
astray; and it was an hour before we heard his spiteful
voice, loading them with curses. We mounted again^
and at four o’clock saw at a distance a hacienda, on
the opposite side of a valley. It stood alone, and prom¬
ised a quiet resting-place for the night. We turned off
from the camino real into a wild path, stony, and over¬
grown with bushes, and so steep that we were obliged
to dismount, let the mules go ahead, and hold on our¬
selves by the bushes to descend. At the foot of the hill
we mounted and crossed a stream, where a little boy,
playing in the water, saluted me by crossing his arms
upon his breast, and then passed on to Mr. Catherwood.
This was a favourable omen; and, as we climbed up a
steep hill, I felt that here, in this lonely spot, away from
the gathering-places of men, we must meet kindness.
On the top of the hill a woman, with a naked child in
her arms and a smile on her face, stood watching our
toilsome ascent; and when we asked her if we could
make posada there, she answered, in the kindest phrase


88


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


of the country, with a face that spoke even a warmer
welcome than her words, ‘‘ como non ?” why not
and when she saw that our servant had pineapples in
his alforgas, she asked why he brought them, and if he
did not know that she had plenty.

The situation of the hacienda of San Antonio was
wildly beautiful. It had a clearing for a cowyard,
a plantation of corn, tobacco, and plantains, and the
opening gave a view of the high mountains by which it
was surrounded. The house was built of poles plas¬
tered with mud, and against the wall in front of the
door was a figure of the Saviour on the cross, on a
white cotton cloth hung round with votive offerings.
The naked child which the mother carried in her arms
was called Maria de los Angelos. While supper was
in preparation the master of the house arrived, a swar¬
thy, grim-looking fellow, with a broad-brimmed som¬
brero and huge whiskers, and mounted on a powerful
young horse, which he was just breaking to the mount¬
ain-roads ; when he knew that we were strangers ask¬
ing hospitality, his harsh features relaxed, and he re¬
peated the welcome the woman had given us.

Unfortunately, the boy of the muleteer was taken
very ill; his master paid no attention to him, and, while
the poor little fellow was groaning under a violent fe¬
ver, ate on with perfect indifference. We made him a
comfortable bed on the piazza, and Mr. Catherwood
gave him a dose of medicine. Our evening passed
very differently from the last. Our host and hostess
were a kind-hearted and simple couple. It was the
first time they had ever met with men from another
country, and they asked many questions, and examined
our little travelling apparatus, particularly our plated
cups, knives, forks, and spoons; we showed them our


STRANGE CUSTOMS.


89


watches, compass, sextant, chronometer, thermometer,
telescope, &c., and the woman, with great discernment,
said that we must be very rich, and had ‘^muchos idees,”

many ideas.” They asked us about our wives, and we
learned that our simple-minded host had two, one of
whom lived at Hocotan, and that he passed a week al¬
ternately with each. We told him that in England he
would be transported, and in the North imprisoned for
life for such indulgences, to which he responded that
they were barbarous countries; and the woman, al¬
though she thought a man ought to be content with
one, said that it was no peccato or crime to have two ;
but I heard them say, sotto voce, that we were “ mas
Christianos,” or better Christians than they. He assisted
us in swinging our hammocks, and about nine o’clock
we drove out the dogs and pigs, lighted cigars, and went
to bed. Including servants, women, and children, we
numbered eleven in the room. All around were little
balls of fire, shining and disappearing with the puffs of
the cigars. One by one these went out, and we fell
asleep.

In the morning we all rose together. The boy was
much better, but we did not think him in a condition to
travel. His brutal master, however, insisted upon his
going. For all that our kind friends had done for us,
they would have charged us nothing ; but, besides com¬
pensating them in money, we distributed among them
various trifles, and, when bidding them farewell, I saw
with regret a ring which I had given her sparkling on
his finger. After we had mounted, the little boy whom
we had met at the stream came staggering under a
load of six freshly-cut pineapples ; and even when we
had started, the woman ran after me with a piece of
fresh sugarcane.

VoL. I.—M


90


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


All parted at the hacienda of San Antonio with kind
feelings except our surly muleteer, who was indignant,
as he said, that we made presents to everybody except to
him. The poor boy was most grateful, and, unfortu¬
nately for him, we had given him a knife, which made
the muleteer jealous.

Almost immediately from the hacienda we entered
a thick wood, dense as that of the Mico Mountain, and
almost as muddy. The ascent was toilsome, but the
top was open, and so covered with that beautiful plant
that we called it the Mountain of Aloes. Some were
just peeping out of the ground, others were twenty or
thirty feet high, and some gigantic stalks were dead ;
flowers which would have kindled rapture in the breast
of beauty had bloomed and died on this desolate mount¬
ain, unseen except by a passing Indian.

In descending we lost the path, and wandered for
some time before we recovered it. Almost immediate¬
ly we commenced ascending another mountain, and
from its top looked completely over a third, and, at a
great distance, saw a large hacienda. Our road lay di¬
rectly along the edge of a precipice, from which we
looked down upon the tops of gigantic pines at a great
distance beneath us. Very soon the path became so
broken, and ran so near the edge of a precipice, that I
called to Mr. Catherwood to dismount. The precipice
was on the left side, and I had advanced so far that,
on the back of a perverse mule, I did not venture to
make any irregular movement, and rode for some mo¬
ments in great anxiety. Somewhere on this road, but
unmarked by any visible sign, we crossed the bounda¬
ry-line of the state of Guatimala and entered Hon¬
duras.

At two o’clock we reached the village of Copan,


C 0 P AN.


91


which consisted of half a dozen miserable huts thatch¬
ed with corn. Our appearance created a great sensa¬
tion. All the men and women gathered around us to
gaze. We inquired immediately for the ruins, but none
of the villagers could direct us to them, and all advised
us to go to .the hacienda of Don Gregorio. We had no
wish to stop at a village, and told the muleteer to go on,
but he refused, and said that his engagement was to
conduct us to Copan. After a long wrangle we pre¬
vailed, and, riding through a piece of woods, forded
once more the Copan River, and came out upon a clear¬
ing, on one side of which was a hacienda, with a tile
roof, and having cucinera and other outbuildings, evi¬
dently the residence of a rich proprietor. We were
greeted by a pack of barking dogs, and all the door¬
ways were filled with women and children, who seem¬
ed in no small degree surprised at our appearance.
There was not a man in sight; but the women receiv¬
ed us kindly, and told us that Don Gregorio would
return soon, and would conduct us to the ruins. Im¬
mediately the fire was rekindled in the cucinera, the
sound of the patting of hands gave notice of the ma¬
king of tortillas, and in half an hour dinner was ready.
It was served up on a massive silver plate, with water
in a silver tankard, but without knife, fork, or spoon ;
soup or caldo was served in cups to be drunk. Never¬
theless, we congratulated ourselves upon having fallen
into such good quarters.

In a L.hort time a young man arrived on horseback,
gayly dressed, with an embroidered shirt, and accompa¬
nied by several men driving a herd of cattle. An ox
was selected, a rope thrown around its horns, and the
an\mal was drawn up to the side of the house, and,
by another rope around its legs, thrown down. Its feet


92


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


were tied together, its head drawn back by a rope tied
from its horns to its tail, and with one thrust of the ma¬
chete the artery of life was severed. The pack of hun¬
gry dogs stood ready, and, with a horrible clicking,
lapped up the blood with their tongues. All the wom¬
en were looking on, and a young girl took a puppy
dog and rubbed its nose in the crimson stream, to give
it early a taste for blood. The ox was skinned, the
meat separated from the bones, and, to the entire
destruction of steaks, sirloins, and roasting-pieces, in an
hour the whole animal was hanging in long strings on a
line before the door.

During this operation Don Gregorio arrived. He
was about fifty, had large black whiskers, and a beard
of several days’ growth ; and, from the behaviour of all
around, it was easy to see that he was a domestic ty¬
rant. The glance which he threw at us before dis¬
mounting seemed to say, ‘‘ Who are you but, without
a word, he entered the house. We waited until he had
finished his dinner, when, supposing that to be the fa¬
vourable moment, I entered the house. In my inter¬
course with the world I have more than once found my
overtures to an acquaintance received coldly, but I nev¬
er experienced anything quite so cool as the don’s re¬
ception of me. I told him that we had come into that
neighbourhood to visit the ruins of Copan, and his man¬
ner said. What’s that to me ? but he answered that they
were on the other side of the river. I asked him wheth¬
er we could procure a guide, and again he said that the
only man who knew anything about them lived on the
other side of the river. As yet we did not make suffi¬
cient allowance for the distracted state of the country,
nor the circumstance that a man might incur danger to
himself by giving shelter to suspected persons; but, re-


AN UNGRACIOUS HOST.


93


lying on the reputation of the country for hospitality,
and the proof of it which we had already met with, I
was rather slow in coming to the disagreeable conclu¬
sion that we were not welcome. This conclusion, how¬
ever, was irresistible. The don was not pleased with
our looks. I ordered the muleteer to saddle the mules ;
but the rascal enjoyed our confusion, and positively re¬
fused to saddle his beasts again that day. We applied
to Don Gregorio himself, offering to pay him; and, as
Augustin said, in the hope of getting rid of us, he lent
us two, on which to ride back to the village. Unfortu¬
nately, the guide we sought was away; a brisk cock¬
fight was then pending, and we received no encourage¬
ment, either from the appearance of the people or from
invitation, to bring back our luggage to that place. And
we learned, what was very provoking, that Don Grego¬
rio was the great man of Copan; the richest man, and
the petty tyrant; and that it would be most unfortunate
to have a rupture with him, or even to let it be known
at the village that we were not well received at his
house. Reluctantly, but in the hope of making a more
favourable impression, we returned to the hacienda.
Mr. C. dismounted on the steps, and took a seat on the
piazza. I happened to dismount outside; and, before
moving, took a survey of the party. The don sat on a
chair, with our detestable muleteer by his side, and a
half-concealed smile of derision on his face, talking of
idols,’’ and looking at me. By this time eight or ten
men, sons, servants, and labourers, had come in from
their day’s work, but not one offered to take my mule,
or made any of those demonstrations of civility which
are always shown to a welcome guest. The women
turned away their heads, as if they had been reproved
for receiving us ; and all the men, taking their cue from


94


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


the don, looked so insulting, that I told Mr. Catherwood
we would tumble our luggage into the road, and curse
him for an inhospitable churl; but Mr. Catherwood
warned me against it, urging that, if we had an open
quarrel with him, after all our trouble we would be pre¬
vented seeing the ruins. The don probably suspected
something of what passed; and, fearing that he might
push things too far, and bring a stain upon his name,
pointed to a chair, and asked me to take a seat. With
a great effort, I resolved to smother my indignation un¬
til I could pour it out with safety. Augustin was very
indignant at the treatment we received; on the road he
had sometimes swelled his own importance by telling
of the flags hoisted and cannon fired when we left Ba-
lize; and here he hoisted more flags and fired more
guns than usual, beginning with forty guns, and after¬
ward going on to a cannonade ; but it would not dOr
The don did not like us, and probably was willing to
hoist flags, and fire cannons too, as at Balize, when we
should go away.

Toward evening the skin of an ox was spread upon
the piazza, corn in ears thrown upon it, and all the men,
with the don at their head, sat down to shell it. The
cobs were carried to the kitchen to burn, the corn taken
up in baskets, and three pet hogs, which had been grunt¬
ing outside in expectation of the feast, were let in to
pick up the scattered grains. During the evening no
notice was taken of us, except that the wife of the don
sent a message by Augustin that supper was preparing;
and our wounded pride was relieved, and our discontent
somewhat removed, by an additional message that they
had an oven and flour, and would bake us some bread
if we wished to buy it.

After supper all prepared for sleep. The don’s house


had two sides, an inside and an out. The don and his
family occupied the former, and we the latter; but we
had not even this to ourselves. All along the wall
were frames made of sticks about an inch thick, tied
together with bark strings, over which the workmen
spread an untanned oxhide for a bed. There were
three hammocks besides ours, and I had so little room
for mine that my body described an inverted parabola,
with my heels as high as my head. It was vexatious
and ridiculous; or, in the words of the English tourist
in Fra Diavolo, it was shocking! positively shocking

In the morning Don Gregorio was in the same hu¬
mour. We took no notice of him, but made our toilet
under the shed with as much respect as possible to the
presence of the female members of the family, who were
constantly passing and repassing. We had made up
our minds to hold on and see the ruins ; and, fortunate¬
ly, early in the morning, one of the crusty don’s sons, a
civil young man, brought over from the village Jose, the
guide of whom we stood in need.

By reason of many vexatious delays, growing out of
difficulties between Jose and the muleteer, we did not
get away until nine o’clock. Very soon we left the
path or road, and entered a large field, partially culti¬
vated with corn, belonging to Don Gregorio. Riding
some distance through this, we reached a hut, thatched
with corn-leaves, on the edge of the woods, at which
some workmen were preparing their breakfast. Here
we dismounted, and, tying our mules to trees near by,
entered the woods, Jose clearing a path before us with
a machete ; soon we came to the bank of a river, and saw
directly opposite a stone wall, perhaps a hundred feet
high, with furze growing out of the top, running north
and south along the river, in some places fallen, but in


96


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


Others entire. It had more the character of a structure
than any we had ever seen, ascribed to the aborigines
of America, and formed part of the wall of Copan, an
ancient city, on whose history books throw but little
light.

I am entering abruptly upon new ground. Volumes
without number have been written to account for the
first peopling of America. By some the inhabitants of
this continent have been regarded as a separate race,
not descended from the same common father with the
rest of mankind; others have ascribed their origin
to some remnant of the antediluvian inhabitants of the
earth, who survived the deluge which swept away the
greatest part of the human species in the days of Noah,
and hence have considered them the most ancient race
of people on the earth. Under the broad range allow¬
ed by a descent from the sons of Noah, the Jews, the
Canaanites, the Phoenicians, the Carthaginians, the
Greeks, the Scythians in ancient times ; the Chinese,
the Swedes, the Norwegians, the Welsh, and the Span¬
iards in modern, have had ascribed to them the honour


V


Robertson’s account faulty.


97


of peopling America, The two continents have been
joined together and rent asunder by the shock of an
earthquake ; the fabled island of Atlantis has been lift¬
ed out of the ocean; and, not to be behindhand, an
enterprising American has turned the tables on the Old
World, and planted the ark itself within the State of
New-York,

The monuments and architectural remains of the
aborigines have heretofore formed but little part of the
groundwork for these speculations. Dr, Robertson, in
his History of America, lays it down as a certain prin¬
ciple, that America was not peopled by any nation of
the ancient continent which had made considerable
progress in civilization,” The inhabitants of the
New World,” he says, were in a state of society so
extremely rude as to be unacquainted with those arts
which are the first essays of human ingenuity in its ad¬
vance toward improvement,” Discrediting the glow¬
ing accounts of Cortez and his companions, of soldiers,
priests, and civilians, all concurring in representations
of the splendour exhibited in the buildings of Mexico,
he says that the houses of the people were mere huts,
built with turf, or mud, or the branches of trees, like
those of the rudest Indians,” The temple of Cholula
was nothing more than a mound of earth, without any
steps or any facing of stone, covered with grass and
shrubs;” and, on the authority of persons long resident
in New Spain, and who professed to have visited every
part of it, he says that there is not, in all the extent of
that vast empire, a single monument or vestige of any
building more ancient than the conquest,” At that
time, distrust was perhaps the safer side for the histo¬
rian ; but since Dr, Robertson wrote a new flood of light

VoL, I,— N 9


98


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


has poured upon the world, and the field of American
antiquities has been opened.

The ignorance, carelessness, and indifference of the
inhabitants of Spanish America on this subject are mat¬
ter of wonder. In our own country, the opening of for¬
ests and the discovery of tumuli or mounds and fortifi¬
cations, extending in ranges from the lakes through the
valleys of the Ohio and Mississippi, mummies in a cave
in Kentucky, the inscription on the rock at Dighton,
supposed to be in Phoenician characters, and the ruins
of walls and a great city in Arkansas and Wisconsin
Territory, had suggested wild and wandering ideas in
regard to the first peopling of this country, and the
strong belief that powerful and populous nations had
occupied it and had passed away, whose histories are
entirely unknown. The same evidences continue in
Texas, and in Mexico they assume a still more definite
form.

The first new light thrown upon this subject as re¬
gards Mexico was by the great Humboldt, who visited
that country at a time when, by the jealous policy of
the government, it was almost as much closed against
strangers as China is now. No man could have better
deserved such fortune. At that time the monuments
of the country were not a leading object of research;
but Humboldt collected from various sources informa¬
tion and drawings, particularly of Mitla, or the Vale of
the Dead; Xoxichalco, a mountain hewed down and
terraced, and called the Hill of Flowers ; and the great
pyramid or Temple of Cholula he visited himself, of
all which his own eloquent account is within reach of
the reader. Unfortunately, of the great cities beyond
the Vale of Mexico, buried in forests, ruined, desolate,
and without a name, Humboldt never heard, or, at least,


HISTORY OF COPAN.


99


he never visited them. It is but lately that accounts of
their existence reached Europe and our own country.
These accounts, however vague and unsatisfactory, had
roused our curiosity; though I ought perhaps to say
that both Mr. C. and I were somewhat skeptical, and
when we arrived at Copan, it was with the hope, rather
than the expectation, of finding wonders.

Since the discovery of these ruined cities the prevail¬
ing theory has been, that they belonged to a race long
anterior to that which inhabited the country at the time
of the Spanish conquest. With regard to Copan, men¬
tion is made by the early Spanish historians of a place
of that name, situated in the same region of country in
which these ruins are found, which then existed as an
inhabited city, and offered a formidable resistance to the
Spanish arms, though there are circumstances which
seem to indicate that the city referred to was inferior in
strength and solidity of construction, and of more mod¬
ern origin.

It stood in the old province of Chiquimula de Sierras,
which was conquered by the officers of Pedro de Alvara¬
do, but not one of the Spanish historians has given any
particulars of this conquest. In 1530 the Indians of the
province revolted, and attempted to throw off the yoke
of Spain. Hernando de Chaves was sent to subdue
them, and, after many sanguinary battles, he encamped
before Esquipulas, a place of arms belonging to a pow¬
erful cacique, which, on the fourth day, to use the words
of the cacique himself, more out of respect to the pub¬
lic tranquillity than from fear of the Spanish arms, de¬
termined to surrender,’’ and, with the capital, the whole
province submitted again to the Spanish dominion.

The cacique of Copan, whose name was Copan Calel,
had been active in exciting the revolt and assisting the


100


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


insurgents. Hernando de Chaves determined to pun¬
ish him, and marched against Copan, then one of the
largest, most opulent, and most populous places of the
kingdom. The camp of the cacique, with his auxil¬
iaries, consisted of thirty thousand men, well disci¬
plined, and veterans in war, armed with wooden swords
having stone edges, arrows, and slings. On one side,
says the historian, it was defended by the ranges of
mountains of Chiquimula and Gracios a Dios, and on
the opposite side by a deep fosse, and an intrenchment
formed of strong beams of timberhaving the interstices
filled with earth, with embrasures, and loopholes for
the discharge of arrows. Chaves, accompanied by
some horsemen, well armed, rode to the fosse, and
made sign that he wished to hold conference. The
cacique answered with an arrow. A shower of arrows,
stones, and darts followed, which compelled the Span¬
iards to retreat. The next day Chaves made an attack
upon the intrenchment. The infantry wore loose coats
stuffed with cotton ; swords and shields ; the horsemen
wore breastplates and helmets, and their horses were
covered. The Copanes had each a shield covered with
the skin of the danta on his arm, and his head guarded
by bunches of feathers. The attack lasted the whole
day. The Indians, with their arrows, javelins, and
pikes, the heads of which were hardened by fire, main¬
tained their ground. The Spaniards were obliged to
retreat. Chaves, who had fought in the thickest of the
battle, was alarmed at the difficulties of the enterprise
and the danger to the credit of the Spanish arms, but
received information that in one place the depth of the
ditch which defended Copan was but trifling, and the
next day he proceeded to the spot to make an attack
there. The Copanes had watched his movements, and


THIS ACCOUNT UNSATISFACTORY. 101


manned the intrenchment with their bravest soldiers.
The infantry were unable to make a lodgment. The
cavalry came to their assistance. The Indians brought
up their whole force, and the Spaniards stood like
rocks, impassable to pikes, arrows, and stones. Sev¬
eral times they attempted to scale the intrenchments,
and were driven back into the fosse. Many were killed
on both sides, but the battle continued without advan¬
tage to either until a brave horseman leaped the ditch,
and, his horse being carried violently with his breast
against the barrier, the earth and palisadoes gave way,
and the frightened horse plunged among the Indians.
Other horsemen followed, and spread such terror among
the Copanes, that their lines were broken and they fled.
Copan Calel rallied at a place where he had posted a
body of reserve; but, unable to resist long, retreated,
and left Copan to its fate.

This is the account which the Spanish historians have
given of Copan; and, as applied to the city, the wall of
which we saw from the opposite side of the river, it ap¬
peared to us most meager and unsatisfactory; for the
massive stone structures before us had little the air of
belonging to a city, the intrenchment of which could be
broken down by the charge of a single horseman. At
this place the river was not fordable ; we returned to
our mules, mounted, and rode to another part of the
bank, a short distance above. The stream was wide,
and in some places deep, rapid, and with a broken and
stony bottom. Fording it, we rode along the bank by
a footpath encumbered with undergrowth, which Jose
opened by cutting away the branches, until we came to
the foot of the wall, where we again dismounted and
tied our mules.

The wall was of cut stone, well laid, and in a good


102


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


State of preservation. We ascended by large stone
steps, in some places perfect, and in others thrown down
by trees which had grown up between the crevices, and
reached a terrace, the form of which it was impossible
to make out, from the density of the forest in which it
was enveloped. Our guide cleared a way with his ma¬
chete, and we passed, as it lay half buried in the earth,
a large fragment of stone elaborately sculptured, and
came to the angle of a structure with steps on the sides,
in form and appearance, so far as the trees would ena¬
ble us to make it out, like the sides of a pyramid. Di¬
verging from the base, and working our way through
the thick woods, we came upon a square stone col¬
umn, about fourteen feet high and three feet on each
side, sculptured in very bold relief, and on all four of
the sides, from the base to the top. The front was the
figure of a man curiously and richly dressed, and the
face, evidently a portrait, solemn, stern, and well fitted
to excite terror. The back was of a different design,
unlike anything we had ever seen before, and the sides
were covered with hieroglyphics. This our guide called
an Idoland before it, at a distance of three feet, was
a large block of stone, also sculptured with figures and
emblematical devices, which he called an altar. The
sight of this unexpected monument put at rest at once
and forever, in our minds, all uncertainty in regard to
the character of American antiquities, and gave us the
assurance that the objects we were in search of were in¬
teresting, not only as the remains of an unknown peo¬
ple, but as works of art, proving, like newly-discovered
historical records, that the people who once occupied
the Continent of America were not savages. With an
interest perhaps stronger than we had ever felt in wan¬
dering among the ruins of Egypt, we followed our


THE RUINS.


103


guide, who, sometimes missing his way, with a constant
and vigorous use of his machete, conducted us through
the thick forest, among half-buried fragments, to four¬
teen monuments of the same character and appearance,
some with more elegant designs, and some in workman¬
ship equal to the finest monuments of the Egyptians ;
one displaced from its pedestal by enormous roots ; an¬
other locked in the close embrace of branches of trees,
and almost lifted out of the earth; another hurled to
the ground, and bound down by huge vines and creep¬
ers ; and one standing, with its altar before it, in a
grove of trees which grew around it, seemingly to
shade and shroud it as a sacred thing; in the solemn
stillness of the woods, it seemed a divinity mourning
over a fallen people. The only sounds that disturbed
the quiet of this buried city were the noise of monkeys
moving among the tops of the trees, and the cracking
of dry branches broken by their weight. They moved
over our heads in long and swift processions, forty or
fifty at a time, some with little ones wound in their
long arms, walking out to the end of boughs, and
holding on with their hind feet or a curl of the tail,
sprang to a branch of the next tree, and, with a noise
like a current of wind, passed on into the depths of the
forest. It was the first time we had seen these mock¬
eries of humanity, and, with the strange monuments
around us, they seemed like wandering spirits of the
departed race guarding the ruins of their former habi¬
tations.

We returned to the base of the pyramidal structure,
and ascended by, regular stone steps, in some places
forced apart by bushes and saplings, and in others
thrown down by the growth of large trees, while some
remained entire. In parts they were ornamented witii


104


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


sculptured figures and rows of death’s heads. Climbing
over the ruined top, we reached a terrace overgrown
with trees, and, crossing it, descended by stone steps
into an area so covered with trees that at first we could
not make out its form, but which, on clearing the way
with the machete, we ascertained to be a square, and
with steps on all the sides almost as perfect as those of
the Roman amphitheatre. The steps were ornamented
with sculpture, and on the south side, about half way
up, forced out of its place by roots, was a colossal
head, evidently a portrait. We ascended these steps,
and reached a broad terrace a hundred feet high, over¬
looking the river, and supported by the wall which we
had seen from the opposite bank. The whole terrace
was covered with trees, and even at this height from
the ground were two gigantic Ceibas, or wild cotton-
trees of India, above twenty feet in circumference, ex¬
tending their half-naked roots fifty or a hundred feet
around, binding down the ruins, and shading them with
their wide-spreading branches. We sat down on the
very edge of the wall, and strove in vain to penetrate
the mystery by which we were surrounded. Who
were the people that built this city ? In the ruin¬
ed cities of Egypt, even in the long-lost Petra, the
stranger knows the story of the people whose vesti¬
ges are around him. America, say historians, was
peopled by savages ; but savages never reared these
structures, savages never carved these stones. We
asked the Indians who made them, and their dull an¬
swer was “ Quien sabe ?” who knows ?”

\

There were no associations connected with the
place ; none of those stirring recollections which hal¬
low Rome, Athens, and

The world’s great mistress on the Egyptian plain


VAIN SPECULATIONS.


105


but architecture, sculpture, and painting, all the arts
which embellish life, had flourished in this overgrown
forest; orators, warriors, and statesmen, beauty, ambi¬
tion, and glory, had lived and passed away, and none
knew that such things had been, or could tell of their
past existence. Books, the records of knowledge, are
silent on this theme. The city was desolate. No rem¬
nant of this race hangs round the ruins, with traditions
handed down from father to son, and from generation
to generation. It lay before us like a shattered bark in
the midst of the ocean, her masts gone, her name ef¬
faced, her crew perished, and none to tell whence she
came, to whom she belonged, how long on her voyage,
or what caused her destruction ; her lost people to be
traced only by some fancied resemblance in the con¬
struction of the vessel, and, perhaps, never to be known
at all. The place where we sat, was it a citadel from
which an unknown people had sounded the trumpet of
war ? or a temple for the worship of the God of peace ?
or did the inhabitants worship the idols made with
their own hands, and offer sacrifices on the stones be¬
fore them ? All was mystery, dark, impenetrable mys¬
tery, and every circumstance increased it. In Egypt
the colossal skeletons of gigantic temples stand in the
unwatered sands in all the nakedness of desolation ;
here an immense forest shrouded the ruins, hiding
them from sight, heightening the impression and moral
effect, and giving an intensity and almost wildness to
the interest.

Late in the afternoon we worked our way back to the
mules, bathed in the clear river at the foot of the wall,
and returned to the hacienda. Our grateful muleteer-
boy had told of his dreadful illness, and the extraordi¬
nary cure effected by Mr. Gather wood; and we found

VoL. I.—O


106


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


at the hacienda a ghastly-looking man, worn down by
fever and ague, who begged us for “remedios.’’ An
old lady on a visit to the family, who had intended to
go home that day, was waiting to be cured of a malady
from which she had suffered twenty years. Our medi¬
cine-chest was brought out, and this converted the wife
of the don into a patient also. Mr, C.’s reputation rose
with the medicines he distributed ; and in the course of
the evening he had under his hands four or five women
and as many men. We wanted very much to practice
on the don, but he was cautious. The percussion caps
of our pistols attracted the attention of the men; and
we showed them the compass and other things, which
made our friend at San Antonio suppose we were “very
rich,’’ and “ had many ideas.” By degrees we became
on social terms with all the house except the master,
who found a congenial spirit in the muleteer. He had
taken his ground, and was too dignified and obstinate
to unbend. Our new friends made more room for our
hammocks, and we had a better swing for the night.

In the morning we continued to astonish the people
by our strange ways, particularly by brushing our teeth,
an operation which, probably, they saw then for the first
time. While engaged in this, the door of the house
opened, and Don Gregorio appeared, turning his head
away to avoid giving us a buenos dios. We resolved
not to sleep another night under his shed, but to take
our hammocks to the ruins, and, if there was no build¬
ing to shelter us, to hang them up under a tree. My
contract with the muleteer was to stop three days at
Copan; but there was no bargain for the use of the mules
during that time, and he hoped that the vexations we
met with would make us go on immediately. When he
found us bent on remaining, he swore he would not


A NEW BIFFICULTY.


107


carry the hammocks, and would not regain one day
over, but at length consented to hire the mules for that
day.

Before we started a new party, who had been con¬
versing some time with Don Gregorio, stepped forward,
and said that he was the owner of the idolsthat no
one could go on the land without his permission; and
handed me his title papers. This was a new difficulty.
I was not disposed to dispute his title, but read his pa¬
pers as attentively as if I meditated an action in eject¬
ment ; and he seemed relieved when I told him his title
was good, and that, if not disturbed, I would make him
a compliment at parting. Fortunately, he had a favour
to ask. Our fame as physicians had reached the vil¬
lage, and he wished remedies for a sick wife. It was
important to make him our friend ; and, after some con¬
versation, it was arranged that Mr. C., with several
workmen whom we had hired, should go on to the ru¬
ins, as we intended, to make a lodgment there, while I
would go to the village and visit his wife.

Our new acquaintance, Don Jose Maria Asebedo, was
about fifty, tall, and well dressed; that is, his cotton
shirt and pantaloons were clean ; inoffensive, though ig¬
norant ; and one of the most respectable inhabitants of
Copan. He lived in one of the best huts of the village,
made of poles thatched with corn-leaves, with a wooden
frame on one side for a bed, and furnished with a few
pieces of pottery for cooking. A heavy rain had fallen
during the night, and the ground inside the hut was
wet. His wife seemed as old as he, and, fortunately,
was suffering from a rheumatism of several years’ stand¬
ing. I say fortunately, but I speak only in reference to
ourselves as medical men, and the honour of the pro¬
fession accidentally confided to our hands. I told her


108


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


that if it had been a recent affection, it would be more
within the reach of art; but, as it was a case of old
standing, it required time, skill, watching of symptoms,
and the effect of medicine from day to day; and, for
the present, I advised her to take her feet out of a pud¬
dle of water in which she was standing, and promised
to consult Mr. Catherwood, who was even a better
medico than I, and to send her a liniment with which
to bathe her neck.

This over, Don Jose Maria accompanied me to the
ruins, where I found Mr. Catherwood with the Indian
workmen. Again we wandered over the whole ground
in search of some ruined building in which we could
take up our abode, but there was none. To hang up
our hammocks under the trees was madness; the
branches were still wet, the ground muddy, and again
there was a prospect of early rain; but we were deter¬
mined not to go back to Don Gregorio’s. Don Mari¬
ano said that there was a hut near by, and conducted
me to it. As we approached, we heard the screams of a
woman inside, and, entering, saw her rolling and toss¬
ing on a bulFs-hide bed, wild with fever and pain ; and,
starting to her knees at the sight of me, with her hands
pressed against her temples, and tears bursting from
her eyes, she begged me, for the love of God, to give
her some remedies. Her skin was hot, her pulse very
high ; she had a violent intermitting fever. While in¬
quiring into her symptoms, her husband entered the hut,
a white man, about forty, dressed in a pair of dirty cot¬
ton drawers, with a nether garment hanging outside, a
handkerchief tied around his head, and barefooted; and
his name was Don Miguel. I told him that we wished to
pass a few days among the ruins, and asked permission
to stop at his hut. The woman, most happy at having


!5o^f


I


DESCRIPTION OP A HUT. 109

a skilful physician near her, answered for him, and I re¬
turned to relieve Mr. Catherwood, and add another to
his list of patients. The whole party escorted us to the
hut, bringing along only the mule that carried the ham¬
mocks ; and by the addition of Mr. C. to the medical
corps, and a mysterious display of drawing materials
and measuring rods, the poor woman’s fever seemed
frightened away.

The hut stood on the edge of a clearing, on the
ground once covered by the city, with a stone frag¬
ment, • hollowed out and used as a drinking-vessel
for cattle, almost at the very door. The clearing was
planted with corn and tobacco, and bounded on each
side by the forest. The hut was about sixteen feet
square, with a peaked roof, thatched with husks of In¬
dian corn, made by setting in the ground two upright
poles with crotches, in which another pole was laid to
support the peak of the roof, and similar supports on
each side, but only about four feet high. The gable
end was the front, and one half of it was thatched
with corn-leaves, while the other remained open. The
baek part was thatched, and piled up against it was
Indian corn three ears deep. On one side the pile
was unbroken, but on the other it was used down to
within three or four feet of the ground. In the corner
in front was the bed of Don Miguel and his wife, pro¬
tected by a bull’s hide fastened at the head and side.
The furniture consisted of a stone roller for mashing
corn, and a comal or earthen griddle for baking tortil¬
las ; and on a rude shelf over the bed were two boxes,
which contained the wardrobe and all the property of
Don Miguel and his wife, except Bartalo, their son and
heir, an overgrown lad of twenty, whose naked body
seemed to have burst up out of a pair of boy’s trou-

10


110


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


sers, disdaining a shirt, his stomach swollen by a dis¬
tressing liver complaint, and that, and his livid face
clouded with dirt. There was only room enough for
one hammock, and, in fact, the cross-sticks were not
strong enough to support two men. The pile of corn
which had been used down was just high and broad
enough for a bed ; by consent, I took this for my sleep¬
ing-place, and Mr. Catherwood hung up his hammock ;
we were so glad at being relieved from the churlish
hospitality of Don Gregorio, and so near the ruins, that
all seemed snug and comfortable.

After a noonday meal I mounted the luggage-mule,
with only a halter to hold her, and, accompanied by
Augustin on foot, set out for Don Gregorio^s, for the
purpose of bringing over the luggage. The heavy rains
had swollen the river, and Augustin was obliged to strip
himself in order to ford it. Don Gregorio was not at
home; and the muleteer, as usual, glad of a difficulty,
said that it was impossible to cross the river with a car¬
go that day. Regularly, instead of helping us in our
little difficulties, he did all that he could to increase
them. He knew that, if we discharged him, we could
get no mules in Copan except by sending off two days’
journey; that we had no one on whom we could rely
to send; and that the delay would be at least a week.
Uncertain at what moment it might be advisable to
leave, and not wishing to be left destitute, I was com¬
pelled to hire him to remain, at a price which was con¬
sidered so exorbitant that it gave me a reputation for
having ^‘mucha plata,” which, though it might be useful
at home, I did not covet at Copan ; and, afraid to trust
me, the rascal stipulated for daily payments. At that
time I was not acquainted with the cash system of busi¬
ness prevailing in the country. The barbarians are not


AN ADVENTURE.


Ill


satisfied with your custom unless you pay them besides;
and the whole, or a large portion, must be in advance.
I was accidentally in arrears to the muleteer; and, while
I was congratulating myself on this only security for his
good behaviour, he was torturing himself with the ap¬
prehension that I did not mean to pay at all.

In the mean time it began to rain; and, settling my
accounts with the seiiora, thanking her for her kind¬
ness, leaving an order to have some bread baked for
the next day, and taking with me an umbrella and a
blue bag, contents unknown, belonging to Mr. Cather-
wood, which he had particularly requested me to bring,
I set out on my return. Augustin followed with a tin
teapot, and some other articles for immediate use.
Entering the woods, the umbrella struck against the
branches of the trees, and frightened the mule ; and,
while I was endeavouring to close it, she fairly ran
away with me. Having only a halter, I could not hold
her ; and, knocking me against the branches, she ran
through the woods, splashed into the river, missing the
fording-place, and never stopped till she was breast-
deep. The river was swollen and angry, and the rain
pouring down. Rapids were foaming a short distance
below. In the effort to restrain her, I lost Mr. Cather-
wood’s blue bag, caught at it with the handle of the
umbrella, and would have saved it if the beast had
stood still; but as it floated under her nose she snort¬
ed and started back. I broke the umbrella in driving
her across; and, just as I touched the shore, saw the
bag floating toward the rapids, and Augustin, with his
clothes in one hand and the teapot in the other, both
above his head, steering down the river after it. Sup¬
posing it to contain some indispensjable drawing mate¬
rials, I dashed among the thickets on the bank in the


112


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


hope of intercepting it, but became entangled among
branches and vines. I dismounted and tied my mule,
and was two or three minutes working my way to the
river, where I saw Augustin’s clothes and the teapot,
but nothing of him, and, with the rapids roaring below,
had horrible apprehensions. It was impossible to con¬
tinue along the bank ; so, with a violent effort, I jump¬
ed across a rapid channel to a ragged island of sand
covered with scrub bushes, and, running down to the
end of it, saw the whole face of the river and the rap¬
ids, but nothing of Augustin. I shouted with all my
strength, and, to my inexpressible relief, heard an an¬
swer, but, in the noise of the rapids, very faint; pres¬
ently he appeared in the water, working himself around
a point, and hauling upon the bushes. Relieved about
him, I now found myself in a quandary. The jump
back was to higher ground, the stream a torrent, and,
the excitement over, I was afraid to attempt it. It would
have been exceedingly inconvenient for me if Augustin
had been drowned. Making his way through the
bushes and down to the bank opposite with his drip¬
ping body, he stretched a pole across the stream, by
springing upon which I touched the edge of the bank,
slipped, but hauled myself up by the bushes with the
aid of a lift from Augustin. All this time it was rain¬
ing very hard; and now I had forgotten where I tied
my mule. We were several minutes looking for her ;
and wishing everything but good luck to the old bag,
I mounted. Augustin, principally because he could
carry them more conveniently on his back, put on his
clothes.

Reaching the village, I took shelter in the hut of Don
Jose Maria, while Augustin, being in that happy state
that cannot be made worse, continued through the rain.


A THUNDER STORM.


113


There was no one in the hut but a little girl, and the
moment the rain abated I followed. I had another
stream to cross, which was also much swollen, and the
road was flooded. The road lay through a thick for¬
est ; very soon the clouds became blacker than ever ;
on the left was a range of naked mountains, the old
stone quarries of Copan, along which the thunder roll¬
ed fearfully, and the lightning wrote angry inscriptions
on its sides. An English tourist in the United States
admits the superiority of our thunder and lightning. I
am pertinacious on all points of national honour, but
concede this in favour of the tropics. The rain fell
as if floodgates were opened from above ; and while
my mule was slipping and sliding through the mud I
lost my road. I returned some distance, and was again
retracing my steps, when I met a woman, barefooted,
and holding her dress above her knees, who proved to
be my rheumatic patient, the wife of Don Jose Maria.
While inquiring the road, I told her that she was set¬
ting at naught the skill of the physician, and added,
what I believed to be very true, that she need not ex¬
pect to get well under our treatment, I rode on some
distance, and again lost my way. It was necessary to
enter the woods on the right. I had come out by a
footpath which I had not noticed particularly. There
were cattle-paths in every direction, and within the line
of a mile I kept going in and out, without hitting the
right one. Several times I saw the print of Augus¬
tin’s feet, but soon lost them in puddles of water, and
they only confused me more ; at length I came to a
complete stand-still. It was nearly dark; I did not
know which way to turn ; and as Mr. Henry Pelham
did when in danger of drowning in one of the gutters
of Paris, I stood still and hallooed. To my great joy,
VoL. L—P


114 INCIDENTS OT TRAVEL.

I was answered by a roar from Augustin, who had
been lost longer than I, and was in even greater trib¬
ulation. He had the teapot in his hand, the stump
of an unlighted cigar in his mouth, was plastered
with mud from his head to his heels, and altogether
a most distressful object. We compared notes, and,
selecting a path, shouting as we went, our united voi¬
ces were answered by barking dogs and Mr. Cather-
wood, who, alarmed at our absence, and apprehend¬
ing what had happened, was coming out with Don Mi¬
guel to look for us. I had no change of clothes, and
therefore stripped and rolled myself up in a blanket in
the style of a North American Indian. All the even¬
ing peals of thunder crashed over our heads, lightning
illuminated the dark forest and flashed through the
open hut, the rain fell in torrents, and Don Miguel
said that there was a prospect of being cut off for sev¬
eral days from all communication with the opposite
side of the river and from our luggage. Nevertheless,
we passed the evening with great satisfaction, smoking
cigars of Copan tobacco, the most famed in Central
America, of Don MiguePs own growing and his wife’s
own making.

Don Miguel, like myself that evening, had but little
wearing apparel; but he was an intelligent and educa¬
ted man, could read and write, bleed, and draw teeth
or a law paper ; literary in his tastes, for he asked Au¬
gustin if we had any books: he said their being in
English made no difference—books were good things ;
and it was delightful to hear him express his con¬
tempt for the understanding of Don Gregorio. He
was a sub-tenant on the estate, at a rent of four dollars
a year, and was generally behindhand in his payments :
he said he had not much to offer us ; but we felt, what


AN OPERATION IN PROSPECT.


115


was better than a canopied bed, that we were welcome
guests. In fact, all were pleased. His wife expected
us to drive away her fever and ague; Bartalo made
sure that we would reduce the protuberance of his
stomach ; and Don Miguel liked our society. In these
happy circumstances, the raging of the elements with¬
out did not disturb us.

All day I had been brooding over the title-deeds of
Don Jose Maria, and, drawing my blanket around me,
suggested to Mr. Catherwood an operation.” (Hide
your heads, ye speculators in up-town lots !) To buy
Copan! remove the monuments of a by-gone people
from the desolate region in which they were buried,
set them up in the “ great commercial emporium,”
and found an institution to be the nucleus of a great
national museum of American antiquities ! But quere.
Could thB idols” be removed ? They were on the
banks of a river that emptied into the same ocean by
which the docks of New-York are washed, but there
were rapids below ; and, in answer to my inquiry, Don
Miguel said these were impassable. Nevertheless, I
should have been unworthy of having passed through
the times “ that tried men’s souls” if I had not had an
alternative ; and this was to exhibit by sample : to cut
one up and remove it in pieces, and make casts of the
others. The casts of the Parthenon are regarded as
precious memorials in the British Museum, and casts of
Copan would be the same in New-York. Other ruins
might be discovered even more interesting and more
accessible. Very soon their existence would become
known and their value appreciated, and the friends of
science and the arts in Europe would get possession of
them. They belonged of right to us, and, though we
did not know how soon we might be kicked out our-


116


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


selves, I resolved that ours they should be ; with visions
of glory and indistinct fancies of receiving the thanks
of the corporation flitting before my eyes, I drew my
blanket around me, and fell asleep.


HOW TO BEGIN.


117


CllAFTER VI.


How to begin. — Commencement of Explorations. — Interest created by these
Ruins.—Visit from the Alcalde.—Vexatious Suspicions.—A welcome Visiter.
—Letter from General Cascara.—Buying a City.—Visit from Don Gregorio’s
Family.—Distribution of Medicines.

At daylight the clouds still hung over the forest;
as the sun rose they cleared away; our workmen
made their appearance, and at nine o’clock we left the
hut. The branches of the trees were dripping wet,
and the ground very muddy. Trudging once more
over the district which contained the principal monu¬
ments, we were startled by the immensity of the work
before us, and very soon we concluded that to explore
the whole extent would be impossible. Our guides
knew only of this district; but having seen columns
beyond the village, a league distant, we had reason to
believe that others were strewed in different directions,
completely buried in the woods, and entirely unknown.
The woods were so dense that it was almost hopeless
to think of penetrating them. The only way to make
a thorough exploration would be to cut down the whole
forest and burn the trees. This was incompatible with
our immediate purposes, might be considered taking
liberties, and could only be done in the dry season.
After deliberation, we resolved first to obtain drawings
of the sculptured columns. Even in this there was
great difficulty. The designs were very complicated,
and so different from anything Mr. Catherwood had
ever seen before as to be perfectly unintelligible. The
cutting was in very high relief, and required a strong


118


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


body of light to bring up the figures; and the foliage
was so thick, and the shade so deep, that drawing was
impossible.

After much consultation, we selected one of the
idols,” and determined to cut down the trees around
it, and thus lay it open to the rays of the sun. Here
again was difficulty. There was no axe ; and the only
instrument which the Indians possessed was the ma¬
chete, or chopping-knife, which varies in form in differ¬
ent sections of the country; wielded with one hand, it
was useful in clearing away shrubs and branches, but
almost harmless upon large trees ; and the Indians, as
in the days when the Spaniards discovered them, ap¬
plied to work without ardour, carried it on with little
activity, and, like children, were easily diverted from
it. One hacked into a tree, and, when tired, which
happened very soon, sat down to rest, and another re¬
lieved him. While one worked there were always
several looking on. I remembered the ring of the
woodman’s axe in the forests at home, and wished for
a few long-sided Green Mountain boys. But we had
been buffeted into patience, and watched the Indians
while they hacked with their machetes, and even won¬
dered that they succeeded so well. At length the trees
were felled and dragged aside, a space cleared around
the base, Mr. C.’s frame set up, and he set to work. I
took two Mestitzoes, Bruno and Francisco, and, offer¬
ing them a reward for every new discovery, with a
compass in my hand set out on a tour of exploration.
Neither had seen ‘4he idols” until the morning of our
first visit, when they followed in our train to laugh at los
Ingieses ; but very soon they exhibited such an interest
that I hired them. Bruno attracted my attention by his
admiration, as I supposed, of my person; but I found it


INTERESTING EXPLORATIONS.


119


was of my coat, which was a long shooting-frock, with
many pockets; and he said that he could make one
just like it except the skirts. He was a tailor by pro¬
fession, and in the intervals of a great job upon a
roundabout jacket, worked with his machete. But he
had an inborn taste for the arts. As we passed through
the woods, nothing escaped his eye, and he was profes¬
sionally curious touching the costumes of the sculptured
figures. I was struck with the first development of
their antiquarian taste. Francisco found the feet and
legs of a statue, and Bruno a part of the body to match,
and the effect was electric upon both. They searched
and raked up the ground with their machetes till they
found the shoulders, and set it up entire except the
head; and they were both eager for the possession of
instruments with which to dig and find this remaining
fragment.

It is impossible to describe the interest with which T
explored these ruins. The ground was entirely new;
there were no guide-books or guides ; the whole was
a virgin soil. We could not see ten yards before us,
and never knew what we should stumble upon next.
At one time we stopped to cut away branches and vines
which concealed the face of a monument, and then to
dig around and bring to light a fragment, a sculptured
corner of which protruded from the earth. I leaned
over with breathless anxiety while the Indians worked,
and an eye, an ear, a foot, or a hand was disentombed ;
and when the machete rang against the chiselled stone,
I pushed the Indians away, and cleared out the loose
earth with my hands. The beauty of the sculpture, the
solemn stillness of the woods, disturbed only by the
scrambling of monkeys and the chattering of parrots,
the desolation of the city, and the mystery that hung


120 INCIDENTS OP TIIAV:^L.

over it, all created an interest higher, if possible, than I
had ever felt among the ruins of the Old World. After
several hours’ absence I returned to Mr. Catherwood,
and reported upward of fifty objects to be copied.

I found him not so well pleased as I expected with
my report. He was standing with his feet in the mud,
and was drawing with his gloves on, to protect his
hands from the moschetoes. As we feared, the designs
were so intricate and complicated, the subjects so en¬
tirely new and unintelligible, that he had great diffi¬
culty in drawing. He had made several attempts, both
with the camera lucida and without, but failed to sat¬
isfy himself or even me, who was less severe in criti¬
cism. The idol” seemed to defy his art; two mon¬
keys on a tree on one side appeared to be laughing at
him, and I felt discouraged and despondent. In fact,
I made up my mind, with a pang of regret, that we
must abandon the idea of carrying away any materials
for antiquarian speculation, and must be content with
having seen them ourselves. Of that satisfaction no¬
thing could deprive us. We returned to the hut with
our interest undiminished, but sadly out of heart as to
the result of our labours.

Our luggage had not been able to cross the river, but
the blue bag which had caused me so many troubles
was recovered. I had offered a dollar reward, and
Bartalo, the heir-apparent of the lesseeship of our hut,
had passed the day in the river, and found it entangled
in a bush upon the bank. His naked body seemed glad
of its accidental washing, and the bag, which we sup¬
posed to contain some of Mr. C.’s drawing materials,
being shaken, gave out a pair of old boots, which, how¬
ever, were at that time worth their weight in gold, be¬
ing water-proof, and cheered Mr. Catherwood’s droop-


VIS'IT FROM THE ALCALDE.


121


ing spirits, who was ill with a prospective attack of fe¬
ver and ague or rheumatism, from standing all day in
the mud. Our men went home, and Frederico had or¬
ders, before coming to work in the morning, to go to
Don Gregorio’s and buy bread, milk, candles, lard, and
a few yards of beef. The door of the hut looked to¬
ward the west, and the sun set over the dark forest in
front with a gorgeousness I have never seen surpassed.
Again, during the night, we had rain, with thunder and
lightning, but not so violent as the night before, and in
the morning it was again clear.

That day Mr. Gather wood was much more success¬
ful in his drawings; indeed, at the beginning the light
fell exactly as he wished, and he mastered the difficulty.
His preparations, too, were much more comfortable, as
he had his water-proofs, and stood on a piece of oiled
canvass, used for covering luggage on the road. I
passed the morning in selecting another monument,
clearing away the trees, and preparing it for him to
copy. At one o’clock Augustin came to call us to din¬
ner. Don Miguel had a patch of beans, from which
Augustin gathered as many as he pleased, and, with the
fruits of a standing order for all the eggs in the village,
being three or four a day, strings of beef, and bread and
milk from the hacienda, we did very well. In the af¬
ternoon we were again called off by Augustin, with a
message that the alcalde had come to pay us a visit.
As it was growing late, we broke up for the day, and
went back to the hut. We shook hands with the al¬
calde, and gave him and his attendants cigars, and were
disposed to be sociable; but the dignitary was so tipsy
he could hardly speak. His attendants sat crouching
on the ground, swinging themselves on their knee-
joints, and, though the positions were different, re-
VoL. I.—Q 11


122


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


minding us of the Arabs. In a few minutes the alcalde
started up suddenly, made a staggering bow, and left
us, and they all followed, Don Miguel with them.
While we were at supper he returned, and it was easy
to see that he, and his wife, and Bartalo were in trou¬
ble, and, as we feared, the matter concerned us.

While we were busy with our own affairs, we had but
little idea what a sensation we were creating in the vil¬
lage. Not satisfied with getting us out of his house,
Don Gregorio wanted to get us out of the neighbour¬
hood. Unluckily, besides his instinctive dislike, we had
offended him in drawing off some of his workmen by the
high prices which, as strangers, we were obliged to pay,
and he began to look upon us as rivals, and said every¬
where that we were suspicious characters; that we
should be the cause of disturbing the peace of Copan,
and introducing soldiers and war into the neighbour¬
hood. In confirmation of this, two Indians passed
through the village, who reported that we had escaped
from iniprisonment, had been chased to the borders of
Honduras by a detachment of twenty-five soldiers under
Landaveri, the officer who arrested us, and that, if we
had been taken, we would have been shot. The alcalde,
who had been drunk ever since our arrival, resolved to
visit us, to solve the doubts of the village, and take
those measures which the presence of such dangerous
persons and the safety of the country might require.
But this doughty purpose was frustrated by a ludicrous
circumstance. We made it a rule to carry our arms
with us to the ruins, and when we returned to the hut
to receive his visit, as usual, each of us had a brace
of pistols in his belt and a gun in hand; and our ap¬
pearance was so formidable that the alcalde was fright¬
ened at his own audacity in having thought of catechi-


VEXATIOUS SUSPICIONS.


123


sing us, and fairly sneaked off. As soon as he reached
the woods, his attendants reproached him for not ex¬
ecuting his purpose, and he said, doggedly, that he was
not going to have anything to say to men armed as we
were. Roused at the idea of our terrible appearance,
we told Don Miguel to advise the alcalde and the peo¬
ple of the village that they had better keep out of our
way and let us alone. Don Miguel gave a ghastly
smile; but all was not finished. He said that he had
no doubt himself of our being good men, but we were
suspected; the country was in a state of excitement;
and he was warned that he ought not to harbour us, and
would get into difficulty by doing so. The poor wom¬
an could not conceal her distress. Her head was full
of assassinations and murders, and though alarmed for
their safety, she was not unmindful of ours ; she said
that, if any soldiers came into the village, we would be
murdered, and begged us to go away.

We were exceedingly vexed and disturbed by these
communications, but we had too much at stake to con¬
sent to be driven away by apprehensions. We assured
Don Miguel that no harm could happen to him ; that it
was all false and a mistake, and that we were above
suspicion. At the same time, in order to convince him,
I opened my trunk, and showed him a large bundle of
papers, sealed credentials to the government and pri¬
vate letters of introduction in Spanish to prominent men
in Guatimala, describing me as Encargado de los
Negocios de los Estados Unidos del Norte,” and one
very special from Don Antonio Aycinena, now in this
city, formerly colonel in the Central army, and banish¬
ed by Morazan, to his brother the Marquis Aycinena,
the leader of the Central party, which was dominant
in that district in the civil war then raging, recom-


124


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


mending me very highly, and stating my purpose of
travelling through the country. This last letter was
more important than anything else ; and if it had been
directed to one of the opposite party in politics, it would
have been against us, as confirming the suspicion of
our being ennemigos.’.’ Never was greatness so
much under a shade. Though vexatious, it was almost
amusing to be obliged to clear up our character to such
a miserable party as Don Miguel, his wife, and Barta-
lo; but it was indispensable to relieve them from
doubts and anxieties, enabling us to remain quietly in
their wretched hut; and the relief they experienced, and
the joy of the woman in learning that we were tolerably
respectable people, not enemies, and not in danger of
being put up and shot at, were most grateful to us.

Nevertheless, Don Miguel advised us to go to Guati-
mala or to General Cascara, procure an order to visit
the ruins, and then return. We had made a false step
in one particular ; we should have gone direct to Guati-
mala, and returned with a passport and letters from the
government; but, as we had no time to spare, and did
not know what there was at Copan, probably if we had
not taken it on the way we should have missed it alto¬
gether. And we did not know that the country was so
completely secluded ; the people are less accustomed to
the sight of strangers than the Arabs about Mount Sinai,
and they are much more suspicious. Colonel Galindo
was the only stranger who had been there before us,
and he could hardly be called a stranger, for he was a
colonql in the Central American service, and visited the
ruins under a commission from the government. Our
visit has perhaps had some influence upon the feelings
of the people; it has, at all events, taught Don Gre¬
gorio that strangers are not easily got rid of; but 1


A. WELCOME VISITER.


125


advise any one who wishes to visit these ruins in peace,
to go to Guatimala first, and apply to the government
for all the protection it can give. As to us, it was too
late to think of this, and all we had to do was to main¬
tain our ground as quietly as we could. We had no
apprehension of soldiers coming from any other place
merely to molest us. Don Miguel told us, what we
had before observed, that there was not a musket in the
village; the quality and excellence of our arms were
well known; the muleteer had reported that we were
outrageous fellows, and had threatened to shoot him;
and the alcalde was an excessive coward. We formed
an alliance, offensive and defensive, with Don Miguel,
his wife, and Bartalo, and went to sleep. Don Miguel
and his wife, by-the-way, were curious people ; they
slept with their heads at different ends of the bed, so
that, in the unavoidable accompaniment of smoking,
they could clear each other.

In the morning we were relieved from our difficulty,
and put in a position to hurl defiance at the traducers
of our character. While the workmen were gathering
outside the hut, an Indian courier came trotting through
the cornfield up to the door, who inquired for Sehor
Ministro; and pulling off his petate, took out of the
crown a letter, which he said he was ordered by Gen¬
eral Cascara to deliver into the right hands. It was di¬
rected to Sehor Catherwood, a Comotan 6 donde se
halle,’’ conveying the expression of General Cascara’s
regret for the arrest at Comotan, ascribing it to the ig¬
norance or mistake of the alcalde and soldiers, and
enclosing, besides, a separate passport for Mr. Cather¬
wood. I have great satisfaction in acknowledging the
receipt of this letter; and the promptness with which
General Cascara despatched it to ^‘Comotan, or wher-


126


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


ever he may be found/’ was no less than I expected
from his character and station. I requested Don Mi¬
guel to read it aloud, told the Indian to deliver our com¬
pliments to General Cascara, and sent him to the vil¬
lage to breakfast, with a donation which I knew would
make him publish the story with right emphasis and
discretion. Don Miguel smiled, his wife laughed, and
a few spots of white flashed along Bartalo’s dirty skin.
Stocks rose, and I resolved to ride to the village,
strengthen the cords of friendship with Don Jose Maria,
visit our patients, defy Don Gregorio, and get up a
party in Copan.

Mr, Gather wood went to the ruins to continue his
drawings, and I to the village, taking Augustin with me
to fire the Balize guns, and buy up eatables for a little
more than they were worth. My first visit was to Don
Jose Maria. After clearing up our character, I broached
* the subject of a purchase of the ruins ; told him that, on
account of my public business, I could not remain as
long as I desired, but wished to return with spades,
pickaxes, ladders, crowbars, and men, build a hut to
live in, and make a thorough exploration; that I could
not incur the expense at the risk of being refused per¬
mission to do so; and, in short, in plain English, asked
him. What will you take for the ruins ? I think he was
not more surprised than if I had asked to buy his poor
old wife, our rheumatic patient, to practice medicine
upon. He seemed to doubt which of us was out of his
senses. The property was so utterly worthless that
my wanting to buy it seemed very suspicious. On ex¬
amining the paper, I found that he did not own the fee,
but held under a lease from Don Bernardo de Aguila,
of which three years were unexpired. The tract con¬
sisted of about six thousand acres, for which he paid


BUYING A CITY.


127


eighty dollars a year; he was at a loss what to do, but
told me that he would reflect upon it, consult his wife,
and give me an answer at the hut the next day. I then
visited the alcalde, but he was too tipsy to be suscepti¬
ble of any impression ; prescribed for several patients ;
and instead of going to Don Gregorio’s, sent him a
polite request by Don Jose Maria to mind his own busi¬
ness and let us alone; returned, and passed the rest of
the day among the ruins. It rained during the night,
but again cleared off in the morning, and we were on
the ground early. My business was to go around with
workmen to clear away trees and bushes, dig, and ex¬
cavate, and prepare monuments for Mr. Catherwood to
copy. While so engaged, I was called off by a visit
from Don Jose Maria, who was still undecided what to
do ; and not wishing to appear too anxious, told him to
take more time, and come again the next morning.

The next morning he came, and his condition was
truly pitiable. He was anxious to convert unproduc¬
tive property into money, but afraid, and said that I
was a stranger, and it might bring him into difficulty
with the government. I again went into proof of char¬
acter, and engaged to save him harmless with the gov¬
ernment or release him. Don Miguel read my letters
of recommendation, and re-read the letter of General
Cascara. He was convinced, but these papers did not
give him a right to sell me his land; the shade of sus¬
picion still lingered; for a finale, I opened my trunk,
and put on a diplomatic coat, with a profusion of large
eagle buttons. I had on a Panama hat, soaked with
rain and spotted with mud, a check shirt, white panta¬
loons, yellow up to the knees with mud, and was about
as outre as the negro king who received a company of
British officers on the coast of Africa in a cocked hat


128


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


and military coat, without any inexpressibles ; but Don
Jose Maria could not withstand the buttons on my coat;
the cloth was the finest he had ever seen; and Don
Miguel, and his wife, and Bartalo realized fully that
they had in their hut an illustrious incognito. The only
question was who should find paper on which to draw
the contract. I did not stand upon trifles, and gave
Don Miguel some paper, who took our mutual instruc¬
tions, and appointed the next day for the execution of
the deed.

The reader is perhaps curious to know how old
cities sell in Central America. Like other articles of
trade, they are regulated by the quantity in market,
and the demand; but, not being staple articles, like
cotton and indigo, they were held at fancy prices, and
at that time were dull of sale. I paid fifty dollars for
Copan. There was never any difficulty about price.
I offered that sum, for which Don Jose Maria thought
me only a fool; if I had offered more, he would prob¬
ably have considered me something worse.

We had regular communications with the hacienda
by means of Francisco, who brought thence every morn¬
ing a large waccal of milk, carrying it a distance of
three miles, and fording the river twice. The ladies
of the hacienda had sent us word that they intended
paying us a visit, and this morning Don Gregorio’s
wife appeared, leading a procession of all the women
of the house, servants, and children, with two of her
sons. We received them among the ruins, seated them
as well as we could, and, as the first act of civility, gave
them cigars all around. It can hardly be believed, but
not one of them, not even Don Gregorio’s sons, had
ever seen the idols” before, and now they were much
more curious to see Mr. C.’s drawings. In fact, I be-


DISTRIBUTION OF MEDICINES,


129


lieve it was the fame of these drawings that procured
us the honour of their visit. In his heart Mr. C. was
not much happier to see them than the old don was to
see us, as his work was stopped, and every day was
precious. As I considered myself in a manner the pro¬
prietor of the city, I was bound to do the honours; and,
having cleared paths, led them around, showing off all
the lions as the cicerone does in the Vatican or the
Pitti Palace; but I could not keep them away, and, to
the distress of Mr. C., brought them all back upon him.

Obliged to give up work, we invited them down to
the hut to see our accommodations. Some of them
were our patients, and reminded us that we had not
sent the medicines we promised. The fact is, we avoid¬
ed giving medicines w^hen we could, among other rea¬
sons, from an apprehension that if any one happened
to die on our hands we should be held responsible;
but our reputation was established ; honours were buck¬
led on our backs, and we were obliged to wear them.
These ladies, in spite of Don Gregorio’s crustiness,
had always treated us kindly, and we would fain have
shown our sense of it in some other mode than by giv¬
ing them physic ; but, to gratify them in their own way,
we distributed among them powders and pills, with
written directions for use; and when they went away
escorted them some distance, and had the satisfaction
of hearing that they avenged us on Don Gregorio by
praises of our gallantry and attentions.

VoL. I.—R


130


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


CHAPTER VII.

Survey of the Ruins.—Account of them by Huarros and by Colonel Galindo.
—Their Situation.—Their Extent.—Plan of Survey.—Pyramidal Structures.—
Rows of Death’s Heads.—Remarkable Portrait.—** Idols.”—Character of the
Engravings.—Ranges of Terraces.—A Portrait.—Courtyards.—Curious Altar.
—Tablets of Hieroglyphics.—Gigantic Head.—Stone Quarries.—More Appli*
cants for Medicine.—“Idols” and Altars.—Buried Image.—Material of the
Statues.—Idols originally painted.—Circular Altar.—Antiquity of Copan.

That night there was no rain, and the next day, as
the ground was somewhat dry, we commenced a regu¬
lar survey of the ruins. It was my first essay in engi¬
neering. Our surveying apparatus was not very exten¬
sive. We had a good surveying compass, and the rest
consisted of a reel of tape which Mr. C. had used in
a survey of the ruins of Thebes and Jerusalem. My
part of the business was very scientific. I had to direct
the Indians in cutting straight lines through the woods,
make Bruno and Frederico stick their hats on poles to
mark the stations, and measure up to them. The sec¬
ond day we were thoroughly in the spirit of it.

That day Don Jose Maria refused to execute the con¬
tract. Don Gregorio was the cause. He had ceased to
interfere with us, but at the idea of our actually taking
root in the neighbourhood he could not contain himself,
and persuaded Don Jose Maria that he would get into
difficulty by having anything to do with us ; he even
told him that General Cascara’s passport was worth¬
less, and that General Cascara himself had gone over
to Morazan. He carried his point for the moment, but
in the end we beat him, and the contract was executed.

After three days of very hard but very interesting la¬
bour, we finished the survey, the particulars of which I
intend to inflict upon the reader; but before doing so


account of the ruins.


131


I will mention the little that was previously known of
these ruins.

Huarros, the historian of Guatimala, says, “ Fran¬
cisco de Fuentes, who wrote the Chronicles of the King¬
dom of Guatimala, assures us that in his time, that is,
in the year 1700, the great circus of Copan still re¬
mained entire. This was a circular space surrounded
by stone pyramids about six yards high, and very well
constructed. At the bases of these pyramids were fig¬
ures, both male and female, of very excellent sculpture,
which then retained the colours they had been enam¬
elled with, and, what was not less remarkable, the
whole of them were habited in the Castilian costume.
In the middle of this area, elevated above a flight of
steps, was the place of sacrifice. The same author af¬
firms that at a short distance from the circus there was
a portal constructed of stone, on the columns of which
were the figures of men, likewise represented in Span¬
ish habitSj with hose, and ruff around the neck, sword,
cap, and short cloak. On entering the gateway there
are two fine stone pyramids, moderately large and
lofty, from which is suspended a hammock that con¬
tains two human figures, one of each sex, clothed in the
Indian style. Astonishment is forcibly excited on view¬
ing this structure, because, large as it is, there is no ap¬
pearance of the component parts being joined together ;
and though entirely of one stone, and of an enormous
weight, it may be put in motion by the slightest im¬
pulse of the hand.’^

From this time, that is, from the year 1700, there is
no account of these ruins until the visit of Colonel Ga¬
lindo in 1836, before referred to, who examined them
under a commission from the Central American gov¬
ernment, and whose communications on the subject


132


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


were published in the proceedings of the Royal Geo¬
graphical Society of Paris, and in the Literary Gazette
of London. He is the only man in that country who
has given any attention at all to the subject of antiqui¬
ties, or who has ever presented Copan to the consider¬
ation of Europe and our own country. Not being
an artist, his account is necessarily unsatisfactory and
imperfect, but it is not exaggerated. Indeed, it falls
short of the marvellous account given by Fuentes one
hundred and thirty-five years before, and makes no
mention of the moveable stone hammock, with the sit¬
ting figures, which were our great inducement to visit
the ruins. No plans or drawings have ever been pub¬
lished, nor anything that can give even an idea of that
valley of romance and wonder, where, as has been re¬
marked, the genii who attended on King Solomon seem
to have been the artists.

It lies in the district of country now known as the
State of Honduras, one of the most fertile valleys in
Central America, and to this day famed for the supe¬
riority of its tobacco. Mr. Catherwood made several
attempts to determine the longitude, but the artificial
horizon which we took with us expressly for such pur¬
poses had become bent, and, like the barometer, was
useless. The ruins are on the left bank of the Copan
River, which empties into the Motagua, and so passes
into the Bay of Honduras near Omoa, distant perhaps
three hundred miles from the sea. The Copan River
is not navigable, even for canoes, except for a short
time in the rainy season. Falls interrupt its course be¬
fore it empties into the Motagua. Cortez, in his terri¬
ble journey from Mexico to Honduras, of the hardships
of which, even now, when the country is comparatively
open, and free from masses of enemies, it is difficult to


35


th//Iff face ft f33


EXTENT OF THE RUINS.


133


form a conception, must have passed within two days’
march of this city.

The extent along the river, as ascertained by monu¬
ments still found, is more than two miles. There is
one monument on the opposite side of the river, at the
distance of a mile, on the top of a mountain two thou¬
sand feet high. Whether the city ever crossed the
river, and extended to that monument, it is impossible
to say. I believe not. At the rear is an unexplored
forest, in which there may be ruins. There are no re¬
mains of palaces or private buildings, and the principal
part is that which stands on the bank of the river, and
may, perhaps, with propriety be called the Temple.

This temple is an oblong enclosure. The front or
river wall extends on a right line north and south six
hundred and twenty-four feet, and it is from sixty to
ninety feet in height. It is made of cut stones, from
three to six feet in length, and a foot and a half in
breadth. In many places the stones have been thrown
down by bushes growing out of the crevices, and in
one place there is a small opening, from which the ruins
are sometimes called by the Indians Las Ventanas, or
the windows. The other three sides consist of ranges
of steps and pyramidal structures, rising from thirty to
one hundred and forty feet in height on the slope. The
whole line of survey is two thousand, eight hundred and
sixty-six feet, which, though gigantic and extraordinary
for a ruined structure of the aborigines, that the read¬
er’s imagination may not mislead him, I consider it ne¬
cessary to say, is not so large as the base of the great
Pyramid of Ghizeh.

The engraving opposite gives the plan according to
our survey, a reference to which will assist the reader
to understand the description.

12


134


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


To begin on the right: Near the southwest corner of
the river wall and the south wall is a recess, which was
probably once occupied by a colossal monument front¬
ing the water, no part of which is now visible; proba¬
bly it has fallen and been broken, and the fragments
have been buried or washed away by the floods of the
rainy season. Beyond are the remains of two small
pyramidal structures, to the largest of which is attached
a wall running along the west bank of the river; this
appears to have been one of the principal walls of the
city; and between the two pyramids there seems to
have been a gateway or principal entrance from the
water.

The south wall runs at right angles to the river, be¬
ginning with a range of steps about thirty feet high, and
each step about eighteen inches square. At the south¬
east corner is a massive pyramidal structure one hun¬
dred and twenty feet high on the slope. On the right
are other remains of terraces and pyramidal buildings;
and here also was probably a gateway, by a passage
about twenty feet wide, into a quadrangular area two
hundred and fifty feet square, tvro sides of which are
massive pyramids one hundred and twenty feet high on
the slope.

At the foot of these structures, and in different parts
of the quadrangular area, are numerous remains of
sculpture. At the point marked E is a colossal monu¬
ment richly sculptured, fallen, and ruined. Behind it
fragments of sculpture, thrown from their places by
trees, are strewed and lying loose on the side of the
pyramid, from the base to the top; and among them our
attention was forcibly arrested by rows of death’s heads
of gigantic proportions, still standing in their places
about half way up the side of the pyramid; the effect


ROWS OF death’s HEADS.


135


was extraordinary. The engraving which follows rep¬
resents one of them.


At the time of our visit, we had no doubt that these
were death’s heads; but it has been suggested to me
that the drawing is more like the scull of a monkey
than that of a man. And, in connexion with this re¬
mark, I add what attracted our attention, though not
so forcibly at the time. Among the fragments on this
side were the remains of a colossal ape or baboon^
strongly resembling in outline and appearance the four
monstrous animals which once stood in front attached
to the base of the obelisk of Luxor, now in Paris,and
which, under the name of Cynocephali, were worship¬
ped at Thebes. This fragment was about six feet high*
The head was wanting ; the trunk lay on the side of the
pyramid, and we rolled it down several steps, when it
fell among a mass of stones, from which we could not
disengage it. We had no such idea at the time, but
it is not absurd to suppose the sculptured sculls to be
intended for the heads of monkeys, and that these ani-

* As it stands in Paris, these figures are wanting to make it complete as it
stood at Thebes, the obelisk alone having been removed.


136


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


mals were worshipped as deities by the people who
bjiilt Copan.

Among the fragments lying on the ground, near this
place, is a remarkable portrait, of which the following
engraving is a representation. It is probably the por¬


trait of some king, chieftain, or sage. The mouth is
injured, and part of the ornament over the wreath that
crowns the head. The expression is noble and severe,
and the whole character shows a close imitation of na¬
ture.

At the point marked D stands one of the columns or

idols” which give the peculiar character to the ruins
of Copan, the front of which forms the frontispiece to
this volume, and to which I particularly request the at¬
tention of the reader. It stands with its face to the


CHARACTER OF THE ENGRAVINGS. 137


east, about six feet from the base of the pyramidal wall.
It is thirteen feet in height, four feet in front, and three
deep, sculptured on all four of its sides from the base
to the top, and one of the richest and most elaborate
specimens in the whole extent of the ruins. Originally
it was painted, the marks of red colour being still dis¬
tinctly visible. Before it, at a distance of about eight
feet, is a large block of sculptured stone, which the In¬
dians call an altar. The subject of the front is a full-
length figure, the face wanting beard, and of a feminine
cast, though the dress seems that of a man. On the
two sides are rows of hieroglyphics, which probably
recite the history of this mysterious personage.

As the monuments speak for themselves, I shall ab¬
stain from any verbal description ; and I have so many
to present to the reader, all differing very greatly in
detail, that it will be impossible, within reasonable lim¬
its, to present our own speculations as to their charac¬
ter. I will only remark that, from the beginning, our
great object and effort was to procure true copies of the
originals, adding nothing for effect as pictures. Mr.
Catherwpod made the outline of all the drawings with
the camera lucida, and divided his paper into sections,
so as to preserve the utmost accuracy of proportion.
The engravings were made with the same regard to
truth, from drawings reduced by Mr. Catherwood him¬
self, the originals being also in the hands of the engra¬
ver ; and I consider it proper to mention that a portion
of them, of which the frontispiece was one, were sent
to London, and executed by engravers on wood whose
names stand among the very first in England; yet,
though done with exquisite skill, and most effective as
pictures, they failed in giving the true character and
expression of the originals ; and, at some considerable
VoL. I.—S


138


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


loss both of time and money, were all thrown aside,
and re-engraved on steel. Proofs of every plate were
given to Mr. Catherwood, who made such corrections
as were necessary; and, in my opinion, they are as
true copies as can be presented; and, except the stones
themselves, the reader cannot have better materials for
speculation and study.

Following the wall, at the place marked C is anoth¬
er monument or idol of the same size, and in many re¬
spects similar. The engraving opposite represents the
back. The character of this image, as it stands at the
foot of the pyramidal wall, with masses of fallen stone
resting against its base, is grand, and it would be diffi¬
cult to exceed the richness of the ornament and sharp¬
ness of the sculpture. This, too, was painted, and the
red is still distinctly visible.

The whole quadrangle is overgrown with trees, and
interspersed with fragments of fine sculpture, partic¬
ularly on the east side, and at the northeast corner is a
narrow passage, which was probably a third gateway.

On the right is a confused range of terraces running
off into the forest, ornamented with death^s heads, some
of which are still in position, and others lying about as
they have fallen or been thrown down. Turning north¬
ward, the range on the left hand continues a high,
massive pyramidal structure, with trees growing out of
it to the very top. At a short distance is a detached
pyramid, tolerably perfect, marked on the plan Z, about
fifty feet square and thirty feet high. The range con¬
tinues for a distance of about four hundred feet, de¬
creasing somewhat in height, and along this there are
but few remains of sculpture.

The range of structures turns at right angles to the
Meft, and runs to the river, joining the other extremity


- 'athc?~wood


A PORTRAIT.


139


of the wall, at which we began our survey. The bank
was elevated about thirty feet above the river, and had
been protected by a wall of stone, most of which had
fallen down. Among the fragments lying on the ground
on this side is the portrait here given.


The plan was complicated, and, the whole ground
being overgrown with trees, difficult to make out.
There was no entire pyramid, but, at most, two or
three pyramidal sides, and these joined on to terraces
or other structures of the same kind. Beyond the
wall of enclosure were walls, terraces, and pyramidal
elevations running off into the forest, which some¬
times confused us. Probably the whole was not erect¬
ed at the same time, but additions were made and
statues erected by different kings, or, perhaps, in com¬
memoration of important events in the history of the
city. Along the whole line were ranges of steps with
pyramidal elevations, probably crowned on the top with
buildings or altars now ruined. All these steps and the
pyramidal sides were painted, and the reader may ima¬
gine the effect when the whole country was clear of
forest, and priest and people were ascending from the


140


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


outside to the terraces, and thence to the holy places
within to pay their adoration in the temple.

Within this enclosure are two rectangular court¬
yards, having ranges of steps ascending to terraces.
The area of each is about forty feet above the river.
Of the larger and most distant from the river the steps
have all fallen, and constitute mere mounds. On one
side, at the foot of the pyramidal wall, is the monument
or idol” marked B, of which the engraving repre¬
sents the front. It is about the same height with the
others, but differs in shape, being larger at the top
than below. Its appearance and character are tasteful
and pleasing, but the sculpture is in much lower relief;
the expression of the hands is good, though somewhat
formal. The figure of a man shows the relative height.
The back and sides are covered with hieroglyphics.

Near this, at the point marked A, is a remarkable
altar, which perhaps presents as curious a subject of
speculation as any monument in Copan. The altars,
like the idols, are all of a single block of stone. In
general they are not so richly ornamented, and are
more faded and worn, or covered with moss; some
were completely bmded, and of others it was difficult to
make out more than the form. All differed in fashion,
and doubtless had some distinct and peculiar reference
to the idols before which they stood. This stands on
four globes cut out of the same stone ; the sculpture is
in bas-relief, and it is the only specimen of that kind
of sculpture found at Copan, all the rest being in bold
alto-relievo. It is six feet square and four feet high,
and the top is divided into thirty-six tablets of hiero^
glyphics, which beyond doubt record some event in the
history of the mysterious people who once inhabited the


4


1 pl.l . face P.154,


/


A CURIOUS ALTAR.


141


city. The lines are still distinctly visible, and a faithful
copy appears in the following cut.


The next two engravings exhibit the four sides of this
altar. Each side represents four individuals. On the
west side are the two principal personages, chiefs or
warriors, with their faces opposite each other, and ap¬
parently engaged in argument or negotiation. The
other fourteen are divided into two equal parties, and
seem to be following their leaders. Each of the two
principal figures is seated cross-legged, in the Oriental
fashion, on a hieroglyphic which probably designates
his name and office, or character, and on three of which


142


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


the serpent forms part. Between the two principal per¬
sonages is a remarkable cartouche, containing two hie-
roglyphics well preserved, which reminded us strong¬
ly of the Egyptian method of giving the names of the
kings or heroes in whose honour monuments were erect¬
ed. The headdresses are remarkable for their curious
and complicated form; the figures have all breastplates,
and one of the two principal characters holds in his
hand an instrument, which may, perhaps, be considered
a sceptre ; each of the others holds an object which can
be only a subject for speculation and conjecture. It
may be a weapon of war, and, if so, it is the only thing
of the kind found represented at Copan. In other
countries, battle-scenes, warriors, and weapons of war
are among the most prominent subjects of sculpture;
and from the entire absence of them here there is rea¬
son to believe that the people were not warlike, but
peaceable, and easily subdued.

The other courtyard is near the river. By cutting
down the trees, we discovered the entrance to be on
the north side, by a passage thirty feet wide and about
three hundred feet long. On the right is a high range
of steps rising to the terrace of the river wall. At the
foot of this are six circular stones, from eighteen inches
to three feet in diameter, perhaps once the pedestals of
columns or monuments now fallen and buried. On the
left side of the passage is a high pyramidal structure,
with steps six feet high and nine feet broad, like the
side of one of the pyramids at Saccara, and one hun¬
dred and twenty-two feet high on the slope. The top
is fallen, and has two immense Ceiba trees growing out
of it, the roots of which have thrown down the stones,
and now bind the top of the pyramid. At the end of
the passage is the area or courtyard, probably the great


9


w

»


*s

/


w


Ij


GIGANTIC HEAD.


143


circus of Fuentes, but which, instead of being circular,
is rectangular, one hundred and forty feet long and nine¬
ty broad, with steps on all the sides* This was proba¬
bly the most holy place in the temple. Beyond doubt
it had been the theatre of great events and of imposing
religious ceremonies ; but what those ceremonies were,
or who were the actors in them, or what had brought
them to such a fearful close, were mysteries which it was
impossible to fathom. There was no idol or altar, nor
were there any vestiges of them. On the left, standing
alone, two thirds of the way up the steps, is the gigan¬
tic head opposite. It is moved a little from its place,
and a portion of the ornament on one side has been
thrown down some distance by the expansion of the
trunk of a large tree, as shown by the drawing. The
head is about six feet high, and the style good. Like
many of the others, with the great expansion of the
eyes it seems intended to inspire awe. On either side
of it, distant about thirty or forty feet, and rather lower
down, are other fragments of sculpture of colossal di¬
mensions and good design, and at the foot are two co¬
lossal heads turned over and partly buried, well worthy
the attention of future travellers and artists. The
whole area is overgrown with trees and encumbered
with decayed vegetable matter, with fragments of curi¬
ous sculpture protruding above the surface, which, prob¬
ably with many others completely buried, would be
brought to light by digging.

On the opposite side, parallel with the river, is a
range of fifteen steps to a terrace twelve feet wide, and
then fifteen steps more to another terrace twenty feet
wide, extending to the river wall. On each side of the
centre of the steps is a mound of ruins, apparently of
a circular tower. About half way up the steps on this


144


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


side is a pit five feet square and seventeen feet deep,
cased with stone. At the bottom is an opening two
feet four inches high, with a wall one foot nine inches
thick, which leads into a chamber ten feet long, five
feet eight inches wide, and four feet high. At each end
is a niche one foot nine inches high, one foot eight inch¬
es deep, and two feet five inches long. Colonel Galin¬
do first broke into this sepulchral vault, and found the
niches and the ground full of red earthenware dishes
and pots, more than fifty of which, he says, were full
of human bones, packed in lime. Also several sharp-
edged and pointed knives of chaya, a small death’s
head carved in a fine green stone, its eyes nearly closed,
the lower features distorted, and the back symmetrical¬
ly perforated by holes, the whole of exquisite work¬
manship. Immediately abote the pit which leads to
this vault is a passage leading through the terrace to
the river wall, from which, as before mentioned, the
ruins are sometimes called Las Ventanas, or the win¬
dows. It is one foot eleven inches at the bottom, and

J“L

one foot at the top, in I | this form, and barely

iz

large enough for a man to crawl through on his face.

There were no remains of buildings. In regard to
the stone hammock mentioned by Fuentes, and which,
in fact, was our great inducement to visit these ruins,
we made special inquiry and search for it, but saw no¬
thing of it. Colonel Galindo does not mention it.
Still it may have existed, and may be there still, broken
and buried. The padre of Gualan told us that he had
seen it, and in our inquiries among the Indians we met
with one who told us that he had heard his father say
that his father, two generations back, had spoken of such
a monument.


MINOR MISERIES.


145


I have omitted the particulars of our survey; the dif¬
ficulty and labour of opening lines through the trees;
climbing up the sides of the ruined pyramids; meas¬
uring steps, and the aggravation of all these from our
want of materials and help, and our imperfect knowl¬
edge of the language. The people of Copan could not
comprehend what we were about, and thought we were
practising some black art to discover hidden treasure.
Bruno and Francisco, our principal coadjutors, were
completely mystified, and even the monkeys seemed
embarrassed and confused; these counterfeit present¬
ments of ourselves aided not a little in keeping alive the
strange interest that hung over the place. They had
no monkey tricks,” but were grave and solemn as if
officiating as the guardians of consecrated ground. In
the morning they were quiet, but in the afternoon they
came out for a promenade on the tops of the trees ; arid
sometimes, as they looked steadfastly at us, they seemed
on the point of asking us why we disturbed the repose
of the ruins. I have omitted, too, what aggravated our
hardships and disturbed our sentiment, apprehensions
from scorpions, and bites of moschetoes and garrapatas
or ticks, the latter of which, in spite of precautions (pan¬
taloons tied tight over our boots and coats buttoned
close in the throat), got under our clothes, and buried
themselves in the flesh; at night, moreover, the hut of
Don Miguel was alive with fleas, to protect ourselves
against which, on the third night of our arrival we
sewed up the sides and one end of our sheets, and
thrust ourselves into them "as we would into a sack.
And while in the way of mentioning our troubles I may
add, that during this time the flour of the hacienda gave
out, we were cut off from bread, and brought down to
tortillas.

VoL. L—T


13


146


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


The day after our survey was finished, as a relief we
set out for a walk to the old stone quarries of Copan.
Very soon we abandoned the path along the river, and
turned off to the left. The ground was broken, the
forest thick, and all the way we had an Indian before
us with his machete, cutting down branches and sap¬
lings. The range lies about two miles north from the
river, and runs east and west. At the foot of it we
crossed a wild stream. The side of the mount¬
ain was overgrown with bushes and trees. The top
was bare, and commanded a magnificent view of a
dense forest, broken only by the winding of the Copan
River, and the clearings for the haciendas of Don Gre¬
gorio and Don Miguel. The city was buried in forest
and entirely hidden from sight. Imagination peopled
the quarry with workmen, and laid bare the city to their
view. Here, as the sculptor worked, he turned to the
theatre of his glory, as the Greek did to the Acropolis
of Athens, and dreamed of immortal fame. Little did
he imagine that the time would come when his works
would perish, his race be extinct, his city a desolation
and abode for reptiles, for strangers to gaze at and won¬
der by what race it had once been inhabited.

The stone is of a soft grit. The range extended a
long distance, seemingly unconscious that stone enough
had been taken from its sides to build a city. How the
huge masses were transported over the irregular and
broken surface we had crossed, and particularly how
one of them was set up on the top of a mountain two
thousand feet high, it was impossible to conjecture. In
many places were blocks which had been quarried out
and rejected for some defect; and at one spot, midway
in a ravine leading toward the river, was a gigantic
block, much larger than any we saw in the city, which


MORE APPLICANTS FOR MEEICINE. 147


was probably on its way thither, to be carved and set
up as an ornament, when the labours of the workmen
were arrested. Like the unfinished blocks in the quar¬
ries at Assouan and on the Pentelican Mountain, it re¬
mains as a memorial of baffled human plans.

We remained all day on the top of the range. The
close forest in which we had been labouring made us
feel more sensibly the beauty of the extended view. On
the top of the range was a quarried block. With the
chay stone found among the ruins, and supposed to be
the instrument of sculpture, we wrote our names upon
it. They stand alone, and few will ever see them.
Late in the afternoon we returned, and struck the river
about a mile above the ruins, near a stone wall Avith a
circular building and a pit, apparently for a reservoir.

As we approached our hut we saw two horses with
side-saddles tied outside, and heard the cry of a child
within. A party had arrived, consisting of an old
woman and her daughter, son, and his wife and child,
and their visit was to the medicos. We had had so
many applications for remedios, our list of patients had
increased so rapidly, and Ave had been so much annoy¬
ed every evening with weighing and measuring medi¬
cines, that, influenced also by the apprehensions before
referred to, we had given out our intention to discon¬
tinue practice; but our fame had extended so far that
these people had actually come from beyond San An¬
tonio, more than thirty miles distant, to be cured, and
it was hard to send them away without doing something
for them. As Mr. C. was the medico in whom the
public had most confidence, I scarcely paid any atten¬
tion to them, unless to observe that they were much
more respectable in dress and appearance than any pa¬
tients we had had except the members of Don Grego-


148


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


rio’s family; but during the evening I was attracted
by the tone in which the mother spoke of the daughter,
and for the first time noticed in the latter an extreme
delicacy of figure and a pretty foot, with a neat shoe
and clean stocking. She had a shawl drawn over her
head, and on speaking to her she removed the shawl,
and turned up a pair of the most soft and dovelike eyes
that mine ever met. She was the first of our patients
in whom I took any interest, and I could not deny my¬
self the physician’s privilege of taking her hand in
mine. While she thought we were consulting in re¬
gard to her malady, we were speaking of her interesting
face ; but the interest whiph we took in her was melan¬
choly and painful, for we felt that she was a delicate
flower, born to bloom but for a season, and, even at the
moment of unfolding its beauties, doomed to die.

The reader is aware that our hut had no partition
walls. Don Miguel and his wife gave up their bed to
two of the women; she herself slept on a mat on the
ground with the other. Mr. C. slept in his hammock,
I on my bed of Indian corn, and Don Miguel and the
young men under a shed out of doors.

I passed two or three days more in making the clear¬
ings and preparations, and then Mr. Catherwood had
occupation for at least a month. When we turned off
to visit these ruins, we did not expect to find employ¬
ment for more than two or three days, and I did not
consider myself at liberty to remain longer. I appre¬
hended a desperate chase after a government; and fear¬
ing that among these ruins I might wreck my own po¬
litical fortunes, and bring reproach upon my political
friends, I thought it safer to set out in pursuit. A
council was called at the base of an idol, at which Mr.
C. and I were both present. It was resumed in Don


149


“idols”

MiguePs hut. The subject was discussed in all its
bearings. All the excitement in the village had died
away; we were alone and undisturbed ; Mr. C. had un¬
der his dominion Bruno and Francisco, Don Miguel,
his wife, and Bartalo. We were very reluctant to sep¬
arate, but it was agreed, nem. con., for me to go on to
Guatimala, and for Mr. Catherwood to remain and fin¬
ish his drawings. Mr. Catherwood did remain, and,
after many privations and difficulties, was compelled to
leave on account of illness. He returned a second
time and completed them, and I give the result of the
whole.

At a short distance from the Temple, within ter¬
raced walls, probably once connected with the main
building, are the “ idols’’ which give the distinctive
character to the ruins of Copan ; and if the reader will
look on the map, and follow the line marked “path¬
way to Don Miguel’s house,” toward the end on the
right he will see the place where they stand. Near as
they are, the forest was so dense that one could not be
seen from the other. In order to ascertain their juxta¬
position, we cut vistas through the trees, and took the
bearings and distances ; and I introduce them in the or¬
der in which they stand. The first is on the left of the
pathway, at the point marked K. This statue is fallen
and the face destroyed. It is twelve feet high, three
feet three inches on one side, and four feet on the other.
The altar is sunk in the earth, and we give no drawing
of either.

• At a distance of two hundred feet stands the one
marked S. It is eleven feet eight inches high, three
feet four inches on each side, and stands with its front
to the east on a pedestal six feet square, the whole rest¬
ing on a circular stone foundation sixteen feet in diam-


150


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


eter. Before it, at a distance of eight feet ten inches,
is an altar, partly buried, three feet three inches above
the ground, seven feet square, and standing diagonally
to the idol.’’ It is in high relief, boldly sculptured,
and in a good state of preservation.

The engravings which follow represent the front and
back view. The front, from the absence of a beard
and from the dress, we supposed to be the figure of a
woman, and the countenance presents traits of individ¬
uality, leading to the supposition that it is a portrait.

The back is a different subject. The head is in the
centre, with complicated ornaments over it, the face
broken, the border gracefully disposed, and at the foot
are tablets of hieroglyphics. The altar is introduced
on one side, and consists of four large heads strangely
grouped together, so as not to be easily made out. It
could not be introduced in its proper place without
hiding the lower part of the ‘^idol.” In drawing the
front, Mr. Catherwood always stood between the altar
and the ‘‘ idol.”


f


1 “


C5


f


«


1


0


A


A BURIED IMAGE.


151


A little behind this is the monument marked T. It
IS one of the most beautiful in Copan, and in work¬
manship is equal to the finest Egyptian sculpture.
Indeed, it would be impossible, with the best instru¬
ments of modern times, to cut stones more perfectly.
It stands at the foot of a wall of steps, with only the
head and part of the breast rising above the earth.
The rest is buried, and probably as perfect as the por¬
tion which is now visible. When we first discovered
it, it was buried up to the eyes. Arrested by the beau¬
ty of the sculpture, and by its solemn and mournful
position, we commenced excavating. As the ground
was level up to that mark, the excavation was made
by loosening the earth with the machete, and scoop¬
ing it out with the hands. As we proceeded, the earth
formed a wall around and increased the labour. The
Indians struck so carelessly with their machetes, that,
afraid to let them work near the stone, we cleared it
with our own hands. It was impossible, however,
to continue; the earth was matted together by roots
which entwined and bound the monument. It requi¬
red a complete throwing out of the earth for ten or
twelve feet around ; and without any proper instru¬
ments, and afraid of injuring the sculpture, we prefer¬
red to let it remain, to be excavated by ourselves at
some future time or by some future traveller. Who¬
ever he may be, I almost envy him the satisfaction of
doing it. The outline of the trees growing around it
is given in the engraving.


152


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.

Toward the south, at a distance of fifty feet, is a
mass of fallen sculpture, with an altar, marked R on
the map; and at ninety feet distance is the statue
marked Q, standing with its front to the east, twelve
feet high and three feet square, on an oblong pedestal
seven feet in front and six feet two inches on the sides.
Before it, at a distance of eight feet three inches, is an
altar five feet eight inches long, three feet eight inches
broad, and four feet high.

The face of this idol” is decidedly that of a man.
The beard is of a curious fashion, and joined to the
mustache and hair. The ears are large, though not
resembling nature ; the expression is grand, the mouth
partly open, and the eyeballs seem starting from the
sockets ; the intention of the sculptor seems to have
been to excite terror. The feet are ornamented with
sandals, probably of the skins of some wild animals, in
the fashion of that day.

The back of this monument contrasts remarkably
with the horrible portrait in front. It has nothing gro¬
tesque or pertaining to the rude conceits of Indians, but
is noticeable for its extreme grace and beauty. In our
daily walks we often stopped to gaze at it, and the more
we gazed the more it grew upon us. Others seemed
intended to inspire terror, and, with their altars before
them, sometimes suggested the idea of a blind, bigoted,
and superstitious people, and sacrifices of human vic¬
tims. This always left a pleasing impression; and there
was a higher interest, for we considered that in its me¬
dallion tablets the people who reared it had published
a record of themselves, through which we might one
day hold conference with a perished race, and unveil
the mystery that hung over the city.


1


4


F. Ca^thc-rwcad


1


MATERIAL OF THE STATUES.


153


At a distance of one hundred and forty-two feet in a
southeasterly direction is the idol marked P. It stands
at the foot of a wall rising in steps to the height of thirty
or forty feet; originally much higher, but the rest fallen
and in ruins. Its face is to the north ; its height eleven
feet nine inches, the breadth of its sides three feet, and
the pedestal is seven feet square. Before it, at a dis¬
tance of twelve feet, is a colossal altar. It is of good
workmanship, and has been painted red, though scarce¬
ly any vestige of the paint remains, and the surface is
time-worn. The two engravings given opposite repre¬
sent the front and back view. The former appears to
represent the portrait of a kftig or hero, perhaps erected
into a deity. It is judged to be a portrait, from certain
marks of individuality in the features, also observable in
most of the others, and its sex is ascertained by the
beard, as in the Egyptian monuments, though this has
a mustache, which is not found in Egyptian portraits.

The back of this idol, again, presents an entirely dif¬
ferent subject, consisting of tablets, each containing
two figures oddly grouped together, ill-formed, in some
cases with hideous heads, while in others the natural
countenance is preserved. The ornaments, diadems,
and dresses are interesting, but what these personages
are doing or suffering it is impossible to make out.
This statue had suffered so much from the action of
time and weather, that it was not always easy to make
out the characters, the light being in all cases very bad,
and coming through irregular openings among the
branches of trees.

The stone of which all these altars and statues are
made is a soft grit-stone from the quarries before re¬
ferred to. At the quarries we observed many blocks
with hard flint-stones distributed through them, which

VoL. I.—U *


154


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


had been rejected by the workmen after they were
quarried out. The back of this monument had con¬
tained two. Between the second and third tablets the
flint has been picked out, and the sculpture is blurred;
the other, in the last row but one from the bottom, re¬
mains untouched. An inference from this is, that the
sculptor had no instruments with which he could cut
so hard a stone, and, consequently, that iron was un¬
known. We had, of course, directed our searches and
inquiries particularly to this point, but did not find any
pieces of iron or other metal, nor could we hear of any
having ever been found there. Don Miguel had a col¬
lection of chay or flint stones, cut in the shape of ar¬
row-heads, which he thought, and Don Miguel was no
fool, were the instruments employed. They were suf¬
ficiently hard to scratch into the stone. Perhaps by
men accustomed to the use of them, the whole of these
deep relief ornaments might have been scratched, but
the chay stones themselves looked as if they had been
cut by metal.

The engraving opposite represents the altar as it
stands before the last monument. It is seven feet
square and four feet high, richly sculptured on all its
sides. The front represents a death’s head. The top
is sculptured, and contains grooves, perhaps for the
passage of the blood of victims, animal or human, offer¬
ed in sacrifice. The trees in the engraving give an
idea of the forest in which these monuments are buried.


IDOLS ORIGINALLY PAINTED.


155


At the distance of one hundred and twenty feet north
is the monument marked O, which, unhappily, is fallen
and broken. In sculpture it is the same with the beau¬
tiful half-buried monument before given, and, I repeat
it, in workmanship equal to the best remains of Egyp¬
tian art. The fallen part was completely bound to the
earth by vines and creepers, and before it could be
drawn it was necessary to unlace them, and tear the
fibres out of the crevices. The paint is very perfect,
and has preserved the stone, which makes it more to
be regretted that it is broken. The altar is buried,
with the top barely visible, which, by excavating, we
made out to represent the back of a tortoise.


156


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


The next engravings exhibit the front,, back, and one
of the sides of monument N, distant twenty feet from
the last. It is twelve feet high, four feet on one side,
three feet four inches on the other, and stands on a ped¬
estal seven feet square, with its front to the west.
There is no altar visible; probably it is broken and
buried. The front view seems a portrait, probably of
some deified king or hero. The two ornaments at the
top appear like the trunk of an elephant, an animal un¬
known in that country. The crocodile’s head is seven
feet from it, but appears to have no connexion with it.
This is four feet out of the ground, and is given in the
plate as one of the many fragments found among the
ruins.

The back presents an entirely different subject from
the front. At the top is a figure sitting cross-legged,
almost buried under an enormous headdress, and three
of the compartments contain tablets of hieroglyphics.

Not to multiply engravings, I have omitted side
views, as they are, in general, less interesting. This is
particularly beautiful. The tablets of hieroglyphics are
very distinct.


f


SZ.OimJba'-
Toly 1 Xdoce. T136 Jsfp


A CIRCULAR XLTAR.


157


At the distance of twenty-eight feet in the same di¬
rection is the statue marked which is fallen, and
lies on its back, with a tree across it nearly lengthwise,
leaving visible only the outline, feet, and sandals, both
of which are well sculptured. The following engraving
is a representation of it.


Opposite is a circular altar with two grooves on the
top, three feet high, and five feet six inches in diame¬
ter, an engraving of which is here given.


t


158


INuIDENTS OF TRAVEL.

The next three engravings are the front, back, and
side view* of the monument marked L, distant seventy-
two feet north from the last, w;ith its front toward the
west, twelve feet high, three feet in front, two feet eight
inches on the side, and the pedestal is six feet square.
Before it, at a distance of eleven feet, is an altar very
much defaced, and buried in the earth.

The front view is a portrait. The back is entirely
made up of hieroglyphics, and each tablet has two
hieroglyphics joined together, an arrangement which
afterward we observed occasionally at Palenque, The
side presents a single row of hieroglyphics, joined in
the same manner. The tablets probably contain the
history of the king or hero delineated, and the particu¬
lar circumstances or actions which constituted his great¬
ness.


I have now given engravings of all the most interest¬
ing monuments of Copan, and I repeat, they are accu¬
rate and faithful representations. I have purposely ab¬
stained from all comment. If the reader can derive
from them but a small portion of the interest that we
did, he will be repaid for whatever he may find unprof¬
itable in these pages.

Of the moral effect of the monuments themselves,
standing as they do in the depths of a tropical forest, si¬
lent and solemn, strange in design, excellent in sculp¬
ture, rich in ornament, different from the works of any
other people, their uses and purposes, their whole histo¬
ry so entirely unknown, with hieroglyphics explaining
all, but perfectly unintelligible, I shall not pretend to
convey any idea. Often the imagination was pained in
gazing at them. The tone which pervades the ruins is
that of deep solemnity. An imaginative mind might


r


A


ITS" I


Wr^


ANTIQUITY OF COPAN.


159


be infected with superstitious feelings. From constant¬
ly calling them by that name in our intercourse with the
Indians, we regarded these solemn memorials as idols’’
—deified kings and heroes—objects of adoration and
ceremonial worship. We did not find on either of the
monuments or sculptured fragments any delineations of
human, or, in fact, any other kind of sacrifice, but had
no doubt that the large sculptured stone invariably
found before each ^Mdol” was employed as a sacrificial
altar. The form of sculpture most frequently met with
was a death’s head, sometimes the principal ornament,
and sometimes only accessory ; whole rows of them on
the outer wall, adding gloom to the mystery of the
place, keeping before the eyes of the living death and
the grave, presenting the idea of a holy city—the Mec¬
ca or Jerusalem of an unknown people.

In regard to the age of this desolate city I shall not
at present offer any conjecture. Some idea might per¬
haps be formed from the accumulations of earth and the
gigantic trees growing on the top of the ruined struc¬
tures, but it would be uncertain and unsatisfactory.
Nor shall I at this moment offer any conjecture in re¬
gard to the people who built it, or to the time when or
the means by which it was depopulated, and became
a desolation and ruin; whether it fell by the sword, or
famine, or pestilence. The trees which shroud it may
have sprung from the blood of its slaughtered inhabi¬
tants ; they may have perished howling with hunger ;
or pestilence, like the cholera, may have piled its streets
with dead, and driven forever the feeble remnants from
their homes; of which dire calamities to other cities we
have authentic accounts, in eras both prior and subse¬
quent to the discovery of the country by the Span¬
iards. One thing I believe, that its history is graven


160


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


on its monuments. No Champollion has yet brought
to them the energies of his inquiring mind. Who shall
read them ?

“ Chaos of ruins! who shall trace the void,

O’er the dim fragments cast a lunar light,

And say ‘ here was or is,’ where all is doubly night

In conclusion, I will barely remark, that if this is the
place referred to by the Spanish historian as conquered
by Hernando de Chaves, which I almost doubt, at that
time its broken monuments, terraces, pyramidal struc¬
tures, portals, walls, and sculptured figures were entire,
and all were painted; the Spanish soldiers must have
gazed at them with astonishment and wonder; and it
seems strange that a European army could have en¬
tered it without spreading its fame through official re¬
ports of generals and exaggerated stories of soldiers.
At least, no European army could enter such a city now
without this result following; but the silence of the
Spaniards may be accounted for by the fact that these
conquerors of America were illiterate and ignorant ad¬
venturers, eager in pursuit of gold, and blind to every¬
thing else; or, if reports were made, the Spanish gov¬
ernment, with a jealous policy observed down to the
last moment of her dominion, suppressed everything
that might attract the attention of rival nations to her
American possessions.


SEPARATION.


161


CHAPTER VIII.

Separation.—An Adventure.—Copan River.—Don Clementino.—A Wedding.—
A Supper.—A Wedding Ball.—Buying a Mule.—The Sierra.—View from the
Top.—Esquipulas.—The Cura.—Hospitable Reception.—Church of Esquipu-
las.—Responsibility of the Cura.—Mountain of Quezaltapeque.—A narrow Es¬
cape.—San Jacinto.—Reception by the Padre.—A Village Fete.—An Ambus¬
cade.—Motagua River.—Village of San Rosalie.—A Death Scene.

Having decided that, under the circumstances, it was
best to separate, we lost no time in acting upon the con¬
clusion. I had difficulty in coming to a right under¬
standing with my muleteer, but at length a treaty was
established. The mules were loaded, and at tv^o
o’clock I mounted. Mr. C. accompanied me to the
edge of the woods, where I bade him farewell, and
left him to difficulties worse than we had apprehended.
I passed through the village, crossed the river, and,
leaving the muleteer on the bank, rode to the hacienda
of Don Gregorio ; but I was deprived of the satisfac¬
tion Avhich I had promised myself at parting, of pour¬
ing upon him my indignation and contempt, by the con¬
sideration that Mr. Catherwood was still within the
reach of his influence; and even now my hand is stay¬
ed by the reflection that when Mr. C., in great distress,
robbed by his servant, and broken down by fever, took
refuge in his house, the don received him as kindly as
his bearish nature would permit. My only comfort
was in making the lordly churl foot up an account of
sixpences and shillings for eggs, milk, meat, &c., to the
amount of two dollars, which I put into his hands. I
afterward learned that I had elevated myself very much
in his estimation, and in that of the neighbourhood
VoL. I.—X


162 INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.

generally, by my handsome conduct in not going off
without paying.*

My good understanding with the muleteer was of
short duration. At parting, Mr. C. and I had divided
our stock of plates, knives and forks, spoons, &c., and
Augustin had put my share in the basket which had
carried the whole, and these, being loose, made such a
clattering that it frightened the mule. The beast ran
away, setting us all off together with a crashing noise,
till she threw herself among the bushes. We had a
scene of terrible confusion, and I escaped as fast as I
could from the hoarse and croaking curses of the mule¬
teer.

For some distance the road lay along the river. The
Copan has no storied associations, but the Guadalquiv-
er cannot be more beautiful. On each side were mount¬
ains, and at every turn a new view. We crossed a
high range, and at four o’clock again came down upon
the river, which was here the boundary-line of the State
of Honduras. It was broad and rapid, deep, and bro¬
ken by banks of sand and gravel. Fording it, I again
entered the State of Guatimala. There was no vil¬
lage, not even a house in sight, and no difficulty about
passport. Late in the afternoon, ascending a little em¬
inence, I saw a large field with stone fences, and bars,
and cattle-yard, that looked like a Westchester farm.
We entered a gate, and rode up through a fine park to
a long, low, substantial-looking hacienda. It was the
house of Don Clementino, whom I knew to be the kins¬
man of Don Gregorio, and the one of all others I would

* On Mr. Catherwood’s second visit, finding the rancho of Don Miguel desert¬
ed, he rode to Don Gregorio’s. The don had in the mean time been to Esqui-
pulas, and learned our character from the cura; and it is due to him to say, that he
received Mr. C. kindly, and made many inquiries after me. The rest of the fam¬
ily were as cordial as before.


A WEDDING.


163


have avoided, but also the very one at which the mule¬
teer had determined to contrive a halt. The family
consisted of a widow with a large family of children,
the principal of whom were Don Clementino, a young
man of twenty-one, and a sister of about sixteen or
seventeen, a beautiful fair-haired girl. Under the shed
was a party of young people in holyday dresses, and
five or six mules, with fanciful saddles, were tied to the
posts of the piazza. Don Clementino was jauntily
dressed in white jacket and trousers, braided and em¬
broidered, a white cotton cap, and over it a steeple-
crowned glazed hat, with a silver cord twisted round as
a band, a silver ball with a sharp piece of steel as a
cockade, and red and yellow stripes under the brim.
He had the consequential air and feelings of a boy who
had suddenly become the head of an establishment, and
asked me, rather superciliously, if I had finished my vis¬
it to the idols and then, without waiting for an an¬
swer, if I could mend an accordion ; then, if I could
play on the guitar ; then to sell him a pair of pocket-
pistols which had been the admiration of Don Grego¬
rio’s household ; and, finally, if I had anything to sell.
With this young gentleman I should have been more
welcome as a pedler than an ambassador from any
court in Europe, though it must be admitted that I
was not travelling in a very imposing way. Finding
I had nothing to make a bargain for, he picked up a
guitar, danced off to his own music, and sat down on
the earthen floor of the piazza to play cards.

Within, preparations were going on for a wedding at
the house of a neighbour, two leagues distant, and a
little before dark the young men and girls appeared
dressed for the journey. All were mounted, and, for
the first time, I admired exceedingly the fashion of the


164


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


country in riding. My admiration was called forth by
the sister of Don Clementino and the happy young gal¬
lant who escorted her. Both rode the same mule and
on the same saddle. She sat sidewise before him ; his
right arm encircled her waist; at starting, the mule was
restiff, and he was obliged, from necessity, to support
her in her seat, to draw her close to himself; her ear
invited a whisper ; and when she turned her face to¬
ward him her lips almost touched his. I would have
given all the honours of diplomacy for his place.

Don Clementino was too much of a coxcomb to set
off in this way; he had a fine mule gayly caparisoned,
swung a large basket-hilted sword through a strap in
the saddle, buckled on a pair of enormous spurs, and,
mounting, wound his poncha around his waist, so that
the hilt of the sword appeared about six inches above it;
giving the animal a sharp thrust with his spurs, he drove
her up the steps, through the piazza, and down the other
side, and asked me if I wanted to buy her. I declined;
and, to my great satisfaction, he started to overtake the
others, and left me alone with his mother, a respecta¬
ble-looking, gray-haired old lady, who called together
all the servants and Indian children for vesper prayers.
I am sorry to say it, but for the first time I was remind¬
ed that it was Sunday. I stood in the door, and it was
interesting to see them all kneeling before the figure of
the Virgin. An old gray-nosed mule walked up the
piazza, and, stopping by my side, put his head in the
door, when, more forward than I, he walked in, gazed
a moment at the figure of the Virgin, and, without dis¬
turbing anybody, walked out again.

Soon after I was called in to supper, which consisted
of fried beans, fried eggs, and tortillas. Th-e beans and
eggs were served on heavy silver dishes, and the tor til-


A WEDDING BALL.


165


las were laid in a pile by my side. There was no plate,
knife, fork, or spoon. Fingers were made before forks ;
but bad habits make the latter, to a certain degree^ ne¬
cessary. Poultry, mutton, beef, and the like, do not
come amiss to fingers, but beans and fried eggs were
puzzling. How I managed I will not publish; but,
from appearances afterward, the old lady could not have
supposed that I had been at all at a loss. I slept in an
outbuilding constructed of small poles and thatched,
and for the whole paid eighteen and three quarter cents.
J gave a pair of earrings to a woman whom I supposed
to be a servant, but who, I found, was only a visiter,
and who went away at the same time that I did.

At a distance of two leagues from the hacienda we
passed the house of the wedding-party. The dancing
was not yet over, and I had a strong fancy to see again
the fair-haired sister of Don Clementino. Having no
better excuse, I determined to call him out and talk
mule.” As I rode up, the doorway and the space
thence to the middle of the room were filled with girls,
all dressed in white, with the roses in their hair faded,
and the brightness of their eyes somewhat dimmed by
a night’s dissipation. The sister of Don Clementino
was modest and retiring, and, as if she suspected my
object, shrank back from observation, while he made
all open a way for him and his guitar. I had no idea
of buying his mule, but made him an offer, which, to
my surprise and regret at the time, he accepted ; but
virtue is its own reward, and the mule proved a most
faithful animal.

Mounted on my new purchase, we commenced as¬
cending the great Sierra, which divides the streams of the
Atlantic from those that empty into the Pacific Ocean.
The ascent was rugged and toilsome, but in two hours


166


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


we reached the top. The scenery was wild and grand,
I have no doubt; but the fact is, it rained very hard all
the time; and while I was floundering among mud-
holes I would have given the chance of the sublime for
a good Macadamized road. Mr. Gather wood, who
crossed on a clear day, says that the view from the top,
both ways, was the most magnificent he saw in the
country. Descending, the clouds were lifted, and I
looked down upon an almost boundless plain, running
from the foot of the Sierra, and afar off saw, standing
alone in the wilderness, the great church of Esquipulas,
like the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem,
and the Caaba in Mecca, the holiest of temples. My
muleteer was very anxious to stop at a collection of
huts on this side of the town, and told me first that the
place was occupied by Carrera^s soldiers, and then that
he was ill. I had a long and magnificent descent .to
the foot of the Sierra. The plain reminded me of the
great waste-places of Turkey and Asia Minor, but was
more beautiful, being bounded by immense mountains.
For three hours the church was our guide. As we ap¬
proached, it stood out more clearly defined against
mountains whose tops were buried in the clouds.

Late in the afternoon we entered the town and rode
up to the convent. I was a little nervous, and pre¬
sented my passport as a letter of introduction; but
could I have doubted the hospitality of a padre ? Don
Gregorio’s reception made me feel more deeply the
welcome of the cura of Esquipulas. None can know
the value of hospitality but those who have felt the want
of it, and they can never forget the welcome of stran¬
gers in a strange land.

The whole household of the cura turned out to assist,
and in a few minutes the mules were munching corn in


CURA OF ESQUIPULAS.


167


the yard, while I was installed in the seat of honour in
the convent. It was by far the largest and best build¬
ing in the place. The walls were three or four feet
thick ; a large portico extended in front; the entrance
was by a wide hall, used as a sleeping-place for ser¬
vants, and communicating with a courtyard in the rear ;
on the left was a large sala or reception-room, with
lofty windows and deep recesses ; on one side of the
wall was a long wooden settee, with a high back, and
arms at each end; before it was a massive unpolished
mahogany table, and above hung a painting of our Sav¬
iour ; against the wall were large antiquated chairs, the
backs and seats covered with leather, and studded with
nails having large brass heads.

The cura was a young man, under thirty, of delicate
frame, and his face beamed with intelligence and re¬
finement of thought and feeling. He was dressed in a
long black bombazet gown, drawn tight around the
body, with a blue border around the neck, and a cross
was suspended to his rosary. His name was Jesus Ma¬
ria Guttierrez. It was the first time I had ever heard
that name applied to a human being, and even in him
it seemed a profanation.

On a visit to him, and breaking the monotony of his
secluded life, was an old schoolfellow and friend, Col¬
onel San Martin, of Honduras, who had been wounded
in the last battle against Morazan, and was staying at
the convent to recover his health and strength. His
case showed the distracted state of the country. His
father was of the same politics with himself, and his
brother was fighting on the other side in the battle in
which he was wounded.

They gave me disagreeable information in regard to
my road to Guatimala. Carrera’s troops had fallen


168


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


back from the frontiers of San Salvador, and occupied
the whole line of villages to the capital. They were
mostly Indians, ignorant, intemperate, and fanatic, who
could not comprehend my official character, could not
read my passport, and, in the excited state of the coun¬
try, would suspect me as a stranger. They had ah
ready committed great atrocities; there was not a cu¬
rate on the whole road; and to attempt traversing it
would be to expose myself to robbery and murder. I
was very loth to protract my journey, but it would have
been madness to proceed; in fact, no muleteer would
undertake to go on with me, and I was obliged to turn
my eyes to Chiquimula and the road I had left. The
cura said I must be guided by him. I put myself in his
hands, and at a late hour lay down to rest with the
strange consciousness of being a welcome guest.

I was awaked by the sound of the matin bell, and ac¬
companied the cura to mass. The church for every¬
day use was directly opposite the convent, spacious and
gloomy, and the floor was paved with large square
bricks or tiles. Rows of Indian women were kneeling
around the altar, cleanly dressed, with white mantillas
over their heads, but without shoes or stockings. A
few men stood up behind or leaned against the walls.

We returned to breakfast, and afterward set out to
visit the only object of interest, the great church of
the pilgrimage, the Holy Place of Central America,
Every year, on the fifteenth of January, pilgrims visit
it, even from Peru and Mexico ; the latter being a jour¬
ney not exceeded in hardship by the pilgrimage to Mec¬
ca. As in the East, it is not forbidden to trade du¬
ring the pilgrimage and when there are no wars to
make the roads unsafe, eighty thousand people have as-


CHURCH OF ESQUIPULAS.


169


sembled among the mountains to barter and pay hom¬
age to our Lord of Esquipulas.’’

The town contains a population of about fifteen hun¬
dred Indians. There was one street nearly a mile long,
with mud houses on each side ; but most of the houses
were shut, being occupied only during the time of the
fair. At the head of this street, on elevated ground,
stood the great church. About half way to it we cross¬
ed a bridge over a small stream, one of the sources of
the great Lempa. It was the first stream I had seen
that emptied into the Pacific Ocean, and I saluted it with
reverence. Ascending by a flight of massive stone
steps in front of the church, we reached a noble plat¬
form a hundred and fifty feet broad, and paved with
bricks a foot square. The view from this platform of
the great plain and the high mountains around was
magnificent; and the church, rising in solitary gran¬
deur in a region of wildness and desolation, seemed al¬
most the work of enchantment. The facade was rich
with stucco ornaments and figures of saints larger than
life ; at each angle was a high tower, and over the dome
a spire, rearing aloft in the air the crown of that once
proud power which wrested the greatest part of Amer¬
ica from its rightful owners, ruled it for three centuries
with a rod of iron, and now has not within it a foot of
land or a subject to boast of.

We entered the church by a lofty portal, rich in
sculptured ornaments. Inside was a nave with two
aisles, separated by rows of pilasters nine feet square,
and a lofty dome, guarded by angels with expanded
wings. On the walls were pictures, some drawn by ar¬
tists of Guatimala, and others that had been brought
from Spain ; and the recesses were filled with statues,
some of which were admirably well executed. The
VoL. I.—Y 15


170


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


pulpit was covered with gold leaf, and the altar protected
by an iron railing with a silver balustrade, ornamented
with six silver pillars about two feet high, and two an¬
gels standing as guardians on the steps. In front of the
altar, in a rich shrine, is an image of the Saviour on the
cross, “ our Lord of Esquipulas,’’ to whom the church
is consecrated, famed for its power of working mira¬
cles. Every year thousands of devotees ascend the
steps of his temple on their knees, or laden with a
heavy cross, who are not permitted to touch the sacred
image, but go away contented in obtaining a piece of
riband stamped with the words Dulce nombre de Je¬
sus.”

We returned to the convent, and while I was sit¬
ting with Colonel San Martin the curate entered, and,
closing the door, asked me if my servant was faithful.
Augustin’s face was an unfortunate letter of recom¬
mendation. Colonel McDonald, Don Francisco, and,
as I afterward heard, General Cascara, distrusted him.
I told the cura all I knew of him, and mentioned his
conduct at Comotan; but he still cautioned me to be¬
ware of him. Soon after, Augustin, who seemed to
suspect that he had not made a very favourable impres¬
sion, asked me for a dollar to pay for a confession. My
intelligent friend was not free from the prejudices of
education; and though he could not at once change his
opinion so warmly expressed, he said that Augustin had
been well brought up.

In the course of the day I had an opportunity of see¬
ing what I afterward observed throughout all Central
America: the life of labour and responsibility passed
by the cura in an Indian village, who devotes himself
faithfully to the people under his charge. Besides offi¬
ciating in all the services of the church, visiting the


RESPONSIBILITY OP THE CURA.


171


sick, and burying the dead, my worthy host was looked
up to by every Indian in the village as a counsellor,
friend, and father. The door of the convent was al¬
ways open, and Indians were constantly resorting to
him : a man who had quarrelled with his neighbour ; a
wife who had been badly treated by her husband; a
father whose son had been carried off as a soldier; a
young girl deserted by her lover : all who were in trou¬
ble or affliction, came to him for advice and consolation,
and none went away without it. And, besides this, he
was principal director of all the public business of the
town; the right hand of the alcalde; and had been
consulted whether or not I ought to be considered a
dangerous person. But the performance of these mul¬
tifarious duties, and the excitement and danger of the
times, were wearing away his frame. Four years be¬
fore he gave up the capital, and took upon himself this
curacy, and during that time he had lived a life of la¬
bour, anxiety, and peril; cut off from all the delights
of social intercourse that make labour welcome, be¬
loved by the Indians, but without any to sympathize
with him in his thoughts and feelings. Once the troops
of Morazan invaded the town, and for six months he
lay concealed in a cave of the mountains, supported by
Indians. Lately the difficulties of the country had in¬
creased, and the cloud of civil war was darker than
ever. He mourned, but, as he said, he had not long to
mourn; and the whole tone of his thoughts and con¬
versation was so good and pure, that it seemed like a
green spot in a sandy desert. We sat in the embrasure
of a large window; within, the room was already dark.
He took a pistol from the window-sill, and, looking at
it, said, with a faint smile, that the cross was his pro¬
tection ; and then he put his thin hand in mine, and


172


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


told me to feel his pulse. It was slow and feeble, and
seemed as if every beat would be the last; but he said
it was always so ; and, rising suddenly, added that this
was the hour of his private devotions, and retired to
his room. I felt as if a good spirit had flitted away.

My anxiety to reach Guatimala would not permit me
long to enjoy the cura’s hospitality. I intended to dis¬
charge my muleteer ; but, unable to replace him imme¬
diately, and unwilling to lose another day, I was obliged
to retain him. The usual course was to leave Esqui-
pulas in the afternoon, and ride four leagues ; but, hav¬
ing seven mules and only four cargoes, I determined to
make these four leagues and the next day’s journey also
in one. Early in the morning I started. When I bade
farewell, the priest and the soldier stood side by side,
pictures of Christian humility and man’s pride, and both
recommended me to God at parting.

We crossed the plain; the mountains of Esquipulas
seemed to have gained in grandeur; in half an hour
commenced ascending the Mountain of Quezaltepeque,
thickly wooded, and, like that of Mico, muddy and full
of gullies and deep holes. Heavy clouds were hang¬
ing over it, and as we ascended it rained hard; but be¬
fore reaching the top the clouds were lifted, the sun
shone, and the plain of Esquipulas, with the great
Sierra behind, covered with lofty pines, and clouds
chasing each other over its sides, all blended together,
made one of the grandest spectacles I ever beheld; and
the great church still presented itself for the farewell
view of the pilgrim. But the gleam of sunshine did not
last long, and again the rain poured; for a while I had
great satisfaction in seeing the muleteer drenched and
hearing him grumble ; but an unaccountable fit of good-
humour came over me, and I lent him my bear’s skin


A NARROW ESCAPE.


173


greatcoat. At intervals the sun shone, and we saw at
a great distance below us the village of Quezaltepeque.
The descent was very precipitous, and the mud-holes
and gullies were very deep; and the clouds which
hung over the mountain were typical of my fortune.
Mr. Catherwood, who followed on this road about
three weeks afterward, heard from the Padre of Quez-
altepeque that a plan had been formed to murder and
rob me, on the supposition that I had a large amount of
money about my person, which laudable project was
defeated by my crossing in the morning instead of the
afternoon, as is usually done.

We passed through Quezaltepeque without dismount¬
ing. It is usual, in dividing the stages to Guatimala,
to make an afternoon’s journey to this place and sleep.
It was now but eleven o’clock, clear and bright as a
September day at home. Leaving the village, we cross¬
ed a beautiful stream, at which some women were wash¬
ing. Very soon we ascended again, and on the top of
the mountain came to an abrupt precipice, forming the
side of a deep ravine. We descended by a narrow
path on the very edge of the precipice, part of the way
on a narrow protruding ledge, and in other places by a
path built against the rock to the bottom of the ravine.
On the other side rose another precipitous wall. The
ravine was deep and narrow, and wild to sublimity.
The stream ran through it over a rocky bed, and for
some distance the road lay in this bed. We ascended
by a steep and difficult path to the top of the other side
of the ravine, and rode for some distance along its edge.
The opposite side was a perpendicular mass of lime¬
stone rock, black with exposure, and in some places
were patches of grass on a brown ground, lighted up
occasionally by brief gleams of sunshine. We de-


174


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


scended again to the very bottom of the ravine, and,
crossing the stream, ascended almost immediately a
narrow path built along the side of the precipice to the
top, being on the same side from which we started. It
is impossible to give any idea of the wildness of this
double crossing of the ravine. It terminated abruptly,
and at the extreme end, on a point, was a small hacien¬
da, on one side looking directly up this awful opening,
and on the other upon a soft valley.

At three o’clock we struck the rituello of San Jacin¬
to. On the opposite side was a fine table of land, with
mountains rising beyond, and covered to the top with
noble pines. There was no cultivation, and the whole
country was in primeval wildness. At five o’clock we
crossed the stream and entered the village of San Ja¬
cinto. It consisted of a collection of huts, some made
of poles and some plastered with mud. The church
was of the same simple construction. On each side
was an arbour thatched with leaves of Indian corn, and
at the corners were belfries, with three bells each. In
front were two gigantic Ceiba trees, the roots of which
ran along even with the ground more than a hundred
feet, and the branches spread to an equal extent.

The village was under the care of the cura of Quez-
altepeque, who was then at San Jacinto. I rode up to
his house and presented the letter of the cura of Es-
quipulas. My muleteer, without unloading the mules,
threw himself down on the piazza, and, with my great¬
coat on his unthankful body, began abusing me for kill¬
ing him with long marches. I retorted ; and before the
padre had time to recover from his surprise at our vis¬
it, he was confounded by our clamour.

But he was a man who could bear a great deal, being
above six feet, broad shouldered, and with a protuber-


PADRE OF SAN JACINTO.


175


ance in front that required support to keep it from fall¬
ing. His dress consisted of a shirt and pair of panta¬
loons, with button-holes begging for employment; but
he had a heart as big as his body, and as open as his
wearing apparel; and when I told him I had ridden
from Esquipulas that day, he said I must remain a week
to recruit. As to going the next day, he would not
hear of it; and, in fact, very soon I found that it was
impossible without other aid, for my abominable mule¬
teer filled up the measure of his iniquities by falling ill
with a violent fever.

At my earnest solicitation, the padre endeavoured to
procure me mules for the next day, and during the even¬
ing we had a levee of villagers. The man upon whom
he principally relied said that it was dangerous travel¬
ling ; that two Ingleses had been arrested in Honduras,
and had escaped, but their muleteers and servants were
murdered. I could perhaps have thrown some light
upon this story, but did not think it worth while to
know anything about such suspicious characters. The
padre was distressed that he could not serve me, but at
length said that a man of my rank and character (I had
shown him my passport, and Augustin had fired the Ba-
lize guns) ought to have every facility, and he would
provide for me himself; and he ordered a man to go
early in the morning to his hacienda for mules ; after
which, fatigued with such unusual efforts, he threw his
gigantic body into a hammock, and swung himself to
sleep.

The household of the padre consisted of two young
men, one deaf and dumb, and the other a fool. The
former possessed extraordinary vivacity and muscular
powers, and entertained the padre by his gesticulations,
stories, and sleight-of-hand tricks, and particularly with


176


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


a steel puzzle. There was something intensely inter¬
esting in the kindness with which the padre played with
him, and the earnestness with which he hung around his
gigantic master. At times the young man became so
excited that it seemed as if he would burst in the effort
to give utterance to his thoughts; but all ended in a
feeble sound, which grated upon my nerves, and seem¬
ed to knit him more closely to the good-hearted padre.
The latter was continually changing the puzzle, but the
ingenuity of the lad could not be defeated. The poor
simpleton meanwhile looked on with admiration. The
padre offered him half a dollar if he could open it, and
both he and the deaf and dumb lad laughed at the awk¬
ward attempts of the simpleton. The padre finished
with a warm panegyric upon the worth of both, which
the deaf and dumb boy seemed to understand and
thank him for, but which he that had ears seemed not
to hear.

The padre insisted on my taking his own cartaret,
which was unusually neat, and had a moscheto-netting.
It was my best bed since I left Colonel McDonald’s at
Balize. Before I was up he stood over me with a flask
of agua ardiente. Soon after came chocolate, with a
roll of sweet bread ; and finding that it was impossible
to get awaj* that day, I became a willing victim to his
hospitality. At nine o’clock we had breakfast; at
twelve, fruit; at two, dinner; at five, chocolate and
sweet bread ; and at eight, supper, with constant inter¬
mediate invitations to agua ardiente, which the padre,
with his hand on that prominent part of his own body,
said was good for the stomach. In everything except
good feeling he was the complete antipodes of the cura
of Esquipulas. I had had some suspicion that my
muleteer was not as unwell as he pretended; but his


A VILLAGE FETE.


177


neglect of the padre’s good fare convinced me that he
was really in a bad way. I gave him some medicine,
but I believe he suspected me, and was afraid to take it.

A.t twelve o’clock the mules sent for by the padre ar¬
rived, with a strapping young ladino as muleteer ; but
they were not in a condition to set off that day. In the
afternoon I took a long walk on the bank of the river,
and, returning, stopped under one of the Ceiba trees,
where a travelling merchant was displaying his wares,
consisting of two trunks of striped cottons, beads, horn
combs, scissors, &c. His mule was tied by a long
rope, and a pair of pistols lay on one of the boxes.

Passing on, I met a party of women, dressed in white,
with red shawls over the tops of their heads. I have
seen enough of fancy colours in women to remove some
prejudices, but retain an oldfashioned predilection for
white faces; and here I remarked that the whitest
women were the prettiest, though the padre did not
agree with me entirely. Under the shed of a deserted
house near by was an old Indian with ten or twelve In¬
dian girls, teaching them the catechism. They were
dressed in red plaid cotton, drawn round the waist and
tied in a knot on the left side, and a white handker¬
chief over the shoulders. Other parties were out in
different places, organizing for a village fete in honour
of some saint; and toward evening, while sitting with
the padre, now dressed in his long black gown, a pro¬
cession advanced, headed by the oldest man in the vil¬
lage, with white hair and beard, and a lame man and
two or three associates playing on violins. Before
reaching the house they set off five or six rockets, and
then all went up and saluted the padre, kissing the
back of his hand; the women went inside, carrying
bundles wrapped in clean white napkins ; and when I

VoL. I.—Z


178


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


went In to take my chocolate, I found the table piled
up with cakes and confectionary. Afterward all went
to the church for vesper prayers. I could but think,
what afterward impressed itself upon me more and
more in every step of my journey in that country, bless¬
ed is the village that has a padre.

During the day, the deaf and dumb boy had con¬
trived several times to make me understand that he
wished to accompany me, and in the evening the padre
concluded to make him happy by giving him a journey
to Guatimala. Early in the morning the convent was
in commotion. The good padre was unused to fitting
out an expedition for Guatimala. Many things were
wanting besides the mules, and the village was laid
under contribution. During the bustle, a single soldier
entered the village, and created an alarm that he was
the pioneer of others come to quarter upon them. The
padre told him who I was, and that the guard must not
molest me. At length all was ready; a large concourse
of people, roused by the requisitions of the padre, were
at the door, and among them two men with violins.
The padre directed his own gigantic energies particu¬
larly to the eatables ; he had put up chocolate, bread,
sausages, and fowl; a box of cakes and confectionary;
and, as the finale, the deaf and dumb lad came out of
the house, holding at arm’s length above his head the
whole side of an ox, with merely the skin taken off and
the ribs cracked, which was spread, as a wrapper over
one of the cargoes, and secured by a netting. A large
pot, with the bottom upward, was secured on the top
of another cargo. The padre took a kind leave of me,
and a most affectionate one of the deaf and dumb lad;
and at nine o’clock, with violins playing, and a turn¬
out that would have astonished my city friends, I made


AN AMBUSCADE.


179


another start for the capitol. A low groan from the
piazza reminded me of my muleteer. I dismounted,
and, at the moment of parting, exchanged a few words
of kindness. His brawny figure was prostrated by fe-
^ ver; at times he had vexed me almost beyond endu¬
rance ; but, with all my malice against him, I could not
have wished him in a worse condition. The boy sat
by his side, apparently softened by the illness of his
master, and indifferent as to my going.

For the first time in a long while we had a level
road. The land was rich and productive ; brown sugar
sold for three cents a pound, and white lump, even un¬
der their slow process of making it, for eight cents,
and indigo could be raised for two shillings a pound.
I was riding quietly, when four soldiers sprang into the
road almost at my mule’s head. They were perfectly
concealed until I approached, and their sudden appear¬
ance was rather footpad-like. They could not read my
passport, and said that they must conduct me to Chi-
quimula. My road lay a little off from that town ; and,
fortunately, while under escort, the soldier whom I had
seen in San Jacinto overtook us, satisfied them, and re¬
leased me. A short distance beyond I recognised the
path by which we turned off to go to Copan. Three
weeks had not elapsed, and it seemed an age. We
passed by the old church of Chiquimula, and, winding
up the same zigzag path by which we had descended,
crossed the mountain, and descended to the plain of
Zacapa and the Motagua River, which I hailed as an
old acquaintance. It was growing late, and we saw
no signs of habitation. A little before dark, on the top
of a small eminence on the right, we saw a little boy,
who conducted us to the village of San Rosalie, beauti¬
fully situated on a point formed by the bend of the river.


180


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


The village consisted of a miserable collection of huts;
before the door of the best was a crowd of people, who
did not ask us to stop, and we rode up to one of the
poorest. All we wanted was sacate* for the mules.
The stores of the padre were abundant for me, and the
deaf and dumb lad cut a few ribs from the side of the
ox, and prepared supper for himself and the muleteer.

While supping we heard a voice of lamentation from
the house before which the crowd was assembled. Af¬
ter dark I walked over, and found that they were mourn¬
ing over the dead. Inside were several women; one
was wringing her hands, and the first words I distin¬
guished were, Oh, our Lord of Esquipulas, why have
you taken him away ?” She was interrupted by the
tramp of horses’ hoofs, and a man rode up, whose figure
in the dark I could not see, but who, without dismount¬
ing, in a hoarse voice said that the priest asked six dol¬
lars to bury the corpse. One of the crowd cried out,

Shame ! shame !” and others said they would bury it
in el campo, the field. The horseman, in the same
hoarse voice, said that it was the same if buried in th6
road, the mountain, or the river, the priest must have
his fee. There was a great outcry; but the widow, in a
weeping tone, declared that the money must be paid,
and then renewed her exclamations: “My only help,
my consolation, my head, my heart; you who was so
strong, who could lift a ceroon of indigo“ you said
you would go and buy cattle “I said, ^ yes ; bring me
fine linen and jewelry.’ ” The words, and the piercing
tone of distress, reminded me of a similar scene I had
once beheld on the banks of the Nile. By invitation
of one of the friends I entered the house. The corpse

* Sacate means any kind of grass or leaves for mules. The best is sacate
de maize, or the stalks and leaves of Indian corn.


i


A DEATH SCENE.


181


lay on the ground, in a white cotton dress extending
from the neck to the feet. It was that of a young man,
not more than twenty-two, with the mustache just bud¬
ding on his upper lip, tall, and but a month before so
strong that he could ^Uift a ceropn of indigo.” He
had left home to buy cattle, returned with a fever,
and in a week was dead. A bandage was tied under
his chin to hold up his jaw; his thin wrists were se¬
cured across his breast; and his taper fingers held a
small crucifix made of corn-husks stitched together.
On each side of his head was a lighted candle, and ants,
which burden the ground, were swarming over his face.
The widow did not notice me, but the mother and two
young sisters asked me if I had no remedios ; if I could
not cure him; if I could have cured him if I had seen
him before.

I left the bereaved family and withdrew. The
man who had asked me to enter met me at the door,
and gave me a seat among the friends. He inquired
about my country, where it was, and whether the cus¬
toms were like theirs; and very soon, but for the lam¬
entations of the widow, many would have forgotten
that a few yards from them lay a dead friend.

I remained with them an hour, and then returned to
my hut. The piazza was full of hogs ; the interior was
a perfect piggery, full of fleas and children; and the
woman, with a cigar in her mouth, and the harshest
voice I ever heard, still brought in child after child, and
piled them up on the floor. My men were already
asleep outside ; and borrowing an undressed ox-hide, I
spread it on the floor at the end of the house; upon
this I laid my pellon, and upon that I laid myself. The
night before I had slept under a moscheto netting ! Oh,
padre of San Jacinto, that a man of my ‘‘rank and

16


182


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


character” should come to this! The woman was
sleepless ; a dozen times she came out to smoke a cigar
or to drive away the hogs; and her harsh voice, and
the screams from the house of mourning, made me re¬
joice when the cocks crew for morning.


CHIMALAPA.


183


CHAPTER IX.

Chimalapa.—The Cabildo.—A Scene of Revelry.—Gustatoya.—A Hunt for Rob¬
bers.—Approach to Guatimala.—Beautiful Scenery.—Volcanoes of Agua and
Fuego.—First View of the City.—Entry into the City.—First Impressions.—
The Diplomatic Residence.—Parties in Central America.—Murder of Vice-
president Flores.—Political State of Guatimala.—An embarrassing Situation.
—The Constituent Assembly.—Military Police.

At peep of day I bathed in the Motagua. In the
mean time the deaf and dumb boy prepared chocolate,
and the corpse of the young man was borne to its final
resting-place. I went over to the desolate house, bade
farewell to the mourners, and resumed my journey.
Again we had on our right the Motagua River and the
mountains of Vera Paz. The road was level; it was
excessively hot, and we suffered from thirst. At noon
we stopped two hours at the village of Fisioli. Late
in the afternoon we came upon a table of land covered
with trees bearing a flower, looking like apple-trees in
blossom, and cactus or tunos, with branches from three
to fifteen feet long. I was in advance ; and having
been in the saddle all day, and wishing to relieve my
mule, I dismounted and walked. A man overtook me
on horseback, who touched me by telling me that my
mule was tired. The mule, unused to being led, pulled
back, and my new acquaintance followed, whipping her;
and remembering the fable, and that I could not please
everybody, I mounted, and we rode into Chimalapa to¬
gether.

It was a long, straggling village, with a large church,
but there was no cura, and I rode to the cabildo. This,
besides being the town-house, is a sort of caravansary
or stopping-place for travellers, being a remnant of Ori-


184


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


ental usages still existing in Spain, and introduced into
her former American possessions. It was a large build¬
ing, situated on the plaza, plastered and whitewashed.
At one end the alcalde was holding a sort of court, and
at the other were the gratings of a prison. Between
them was a room about thirty feet by twenty, with na¬
ked walls, and destitute of chair, bench, or table. The
luggage was brought in, the hammock hung up, and the
alcalde sent me my supper. Hearing the sound of a
drum and violin, I walked to the house whence it is¬
sued, which was crowded with men and women smo¬
king, lounging in hammocks, dancing, and drinking
agua ardiente, in celebration of a marriage. The night
before I had been present at a death-scene. This was
an exhibition of disgusting revelry, and the prominent
vagabond was disposed to pick a quarrel with me; see¬
ing which, I quietly walked back to the cabildo, shut
the door, and betook myself to my hammock.

We started early. Leaving the town, for some dis¬
tance on each side was a fence made of a rail upon
crotches four feet high, and filled with long pieces of
tunos. The road was the same as we had found it on
the preceding day, level, and abounding with the cac¬
tus. Again it was desperately hot, and in the after¬
noon we saw at the foot of a high mountain a cluster
of cocoanut-trees, glittering in the sunbeams like plates
of silver, and concealing the town of Gustatoya. At
four o’clock we entered the town, beautifully situated,
overlooking a valley in the rear of the square waving
with Indian corn, and rode up to the house of the broth¬
er of Donna Bartola, our hostess of Gualan, to whom I
was recommended by her.

I had a good supper of eggs, frigoles, chocolate, tortil¬
las, and was lying in a hammock with my boots olF when


A HUNT FOR ROBBERS.


185


the alcalde entered with a sword under his arm, follow¬
ed by my host and several other persons, and told me
that a party of robbers was out after me; that he had
men on their traces, and wished to borrow my arms
and servants. The latter I was willing enough to lend,
for I knew they would find their way back; but the for¬
mer, I thought, were more secure under my own eye.
Being on the main road, I considered it so safe that I
had that day taken off the caps of my pistols and gun;
but, drawing on my boots, recapping and distributing
my surplus arms, we sallied forth. The muleteer would
not go, but the deaf and dumb lad, with a face of fire,
drew his machete and followed.

It was pitchy dark, and on first going out from the
light I could not see at all, but stumbled along after my
companions, who moved swiftly and without noise
through the plaza, and along the whole length of the
town. In the suburbs we approached a hut which
Stood alone, with the side toward us, closed, but the
light of a fire issued from both ends ; and here it was
supposed the robbers were, unconscious of pursuit or
suspicion. After a brief consultation, it was agreed
that the party should separate, and one half enter at
each end; and the alcalde’s charge was to shoot the
villains rather than let them escape. Stealing toward
the hut, we rushed in at the same time from the oppo¬
site sides, and captured an old woman, who sat on the
ground replenishing the fire. She was not surprised at
our visit, and, with a bitter laugh, said the birds had
flown. At that moment we heard the report of a mus¬
ket, which was recognised as the signal of the men
who had been stationed to watch them. All.rushed
out; another report hurried us on faster, and very soon
we reached the foot of a mountain. As we ascended,

VoL I.—A A


186


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


the alcalde said that he saw a man crawling on his
hands and feet up the side of the mountain, and,
snatching my double-barrelled gun, fired at him as
coolly as he would have done at a woodcock ; all scat¬
tered in pursuit, and I was left with Augustin and the
deaf and dumb boy.

Moving on, but not very fast, and looking back occa¬
sionally to the distant lights in the village, with an un¬
known mountain before me and a dark night, I began
to think that it was about enough for me to defend my¬
self when attacked; although the affair was got up on
my account, it was straining a point for me to pass the
night in helping to rid the town of its robbers. Next I
reflected that, if the gentlemen we were in pursuit of
should take it into their heads to double, my cap and
white dress made me conspicuous, and it might be awk¬
ward to meet them at this place ; and, in order to gain
time for consideration what it was best to do, I walked
back toward the town, and had not fully made up my
mind when I reached the plaza.

Here I stopped, and in a few minutes a man passed,
who said that he had met two of the robbers on the
main road, and that they had told him they would catch
me in the morning. They had got it into their heads
that I was an aiddecamp of Carrera, returning from
Balize with a large amount of money to pay the troops.
In about an hour the alcalde and his posse comitatus
returned. I had no idea of being robbed by mistake ;
and,^ knowing the facility with which the robbers might
go ahead and take a long shot at me, I asked the al¬
calde to furnish me with two men to go in advance and
keep a lookout; but I was heartily sick of the country
and the excitement of its petty alarms.

Daylight dispelled the gloom which night had cast


APPROACH TO GUATIMALA.


187


over my spirits. Leaving Gustatoya, for some distance
I rode through a cultivated country, and the fields were
divided by fences. Very soon I forgot all apprehen¬
sions of robbers, and, tired of the slow pace of the car¬
go-mules, rode on, leaving them far behind. At eleven
o’clock I entered a ravine so wild that I thought it could
not be the main road to Guatimala ; there were no
mule-tracks visible ; and, returning, I took another
road, the result of which was that I lost my way, and
rode the whole day alone. I could gain no certain
intelligence of Augustin and the muleteer, but contin¬
ued on in the belief that they were before me. Push¬
ing on rapidly, at dark I rode up to a hacienda on one
side of the road, at which I was very kindly received
by the proprietor, who was a mulatto, and, to my great
surprise, I learned that I had advanced to within one
long day’s journey of Guatimala. He made me anx¬
ious, however, about the safety of my luggage; but for
that night I could do nothing. I lay down opposite
a large household altar, over which was a figure of the
Virgin. At about ten o’clock I was roused by the ar¬
rival of Augustin and the muleteer. Besides their ap¬
prehensions about me, they had had their own difficul¬
ties ; two of the mules broke down, and they were
obliged to stop and let them rest, and feed them.

Early the next morning, leaving the luggage with
the muleteer (which, by-the-way, was at that time a
very imprudent proceeding), and taking merely a
change of apparel, I set out with Augustin. Almost
immediately we commenced ascending a rugged mount¬
ain, very steep, and commanding at every step a wild
and magnificent view ; and from the top saw, at a great
distance below us, in the hollow of an amphitheatre of
mountains, the village of El Puente, the ground around


188


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL,


which was white, and trodden hard by caravans of
mules. We descended to the village, and crossed the
bridge, which was laid on a stone arch, thrown across
a ravine with a cataract foaming through it; at this
point we were completely encircled by mountains, wild
to sublimity, and reminding me of some of the finest
parts of Switzerland. On the other side of the bridge
we commenced ascending another mountain. The
road was winding, and, when very high up, the view of
the village and bridge at the immense distance below
was surpassingly fine. Descending a short distance,
we passed a village of huts, situated on the ridge of the
mountain, commanding on both sides a view of an ex¬
tensive valley four or five thousand feet below us.
Continuing on this magnificent ridge, we descended
upon a table of rich land, and saw a gate opening into
grounds which reminded me of park scenery in Eng¬
land, undulating, and ornamented with trees. In the
midst of this stood the hacienda of San Jose, a long,
low stone building, with a corridor in front; it was one
of those situations which, when least expected, touch a
tender chord, call up cherished associations, make a
traveller feel as though he could linger around it for¬
ever, and particularly welcome to us, as we had not
breakfasted.

It was a hacienda de ganados, or cattle-hacienda,
and had hundreds of cattle roaming over it; but all
that it could give us to eat was eggs, tortillas, and
beans softened in hot water ; the last being about equal
to a basket of fresh chips. This over, we made a last
push for Guatimala. The road lay over a table of land,
green and rich as a European lawn, ornamented with
trees, and with features of scenery peculiarly English;
muleteers who had left the city at midnight, and had al-


FIRST VIEW OF THE CITY.


189


ready finished their day’s work, were lying under the
shade of the trees, with their saddles and cargoes piled
up like walls, and their mules pasturing near. Along
the table was a line of huts, and if adorned instead of
being deformed by the hand of man, this would be a
region of poetic beauty, Indians, men and women,
with loads on their backs, every party with a bundle of
rockets, were returning from the Capitol,” as they
proudly called it, to their villages among the mounts
ains. All told us that two days before Carrera had re¬
entered the city with his soldiers.

When we were yet two leagues from the city Augus¬
tin’s horse gave out. I was anxious to have a view of the
city before dark, and rode on. Late in the afternoon,
as I was ascending a small eminence, two immense vol¬
canoes stood up before me, seeming to scorn the earth,
and towering to the heavens. They were the great
volcanoes of Agua and Fuego, forty miles distant, and
nearly fifteen thousand feet high, wonderfully grand and
beautiful. In a few moments the great plain of Guati-
mala appeared in view, surrounded by mountains, and
in the centre of it the city, a mere speck on the vast ex¬
panse, with churches, and convents, and numerous tur¬
rets, cupolas, and steeples, and still as if the spirit of
peace rested upon it; with no storied associations, but
by its own beauty creating an impression on the mind
of a traveller which can never be effaced. I dismount¬
ed and tied my mule. As yet the sun lighted up the
roofs and domes of the city, giving a reflection so daz¬
zling that I could only look at them by stealth. By de¬
grees, its disk touched the top of the Volcano del Agua;
slowly the whole orb sank behind it, illuminating the
background with an atmosphere fiery red. A rich gold¬
en cloud rolled up its side and rested on the top, and


190


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


while I gazed the golden hues disappeared, and the
glory of the scene was gone.

Augustin came along with his poor horse hobbling
after him, and a pistol in his hand. He had been told
on the way that Carrera’s soldiers were riotous, and
that there were many ladrones about the suburbs of the
city, and he was in the humour to fire upon any one
who asked a question. I made him put up his pistols,
and we both mounted. An immense ravine was still
between us and the city. It was very dark when we
reached the bottom of this ravine, and we were almost
trodden down by a caravan of loaded mules coming out.
Rising on the other side to the top, we entered the out¬
er gate, still a mile and a half from Guatimala. Inside
were miserable huts, with large fires before them, sur¬
rounded by groups of drunken Indians and vagabond
soldiers, firing their muskets at random in the air. Au¬
gustin told me to spur; but his poor horse could not
keep up, and we were obliged to move on at a walk.
As yet I did not know where to stop ; there was no ho- *
tel in Guatimala. What’s the use of a hotel in Guati¬
mala ? Who ever goes to Guatimala ? was the answer
of a gentleman of that place to my inquiries on this sub¬
ject. I had several letters of introduction, and one
was to Mr. Hall, the English vice-consul; and, fortu¬
nately, resolved to throw myself upon his hospitality.

We picked up a ragged Indian, who undertook to
conduct us to his house, and under his guidance enter¬
ed the city at the foot of a long straight street. My
country-bred mule seemed astonished at the sight of so
many houses, and would not cross the gutters, which
were wide, and in the middle of the street. In spurring
her over one, she gave a leap that, after her hard jour¬
ney, made me proud of her; but she broke her bridle,


ENTRY INTO THE CITY.


191


and I was obliged to dismount and lead her. Augus¬
tin’s poor beast was really past carrying him, and he
followed on foot, whipping mine, the guide lending a
hand before and behind. In this way we traversed the
streets of Guatimala. Perhaps no diplomatist ever
rriade a more unpretending entry into a capitol. Our
stupid Indian did not know where Mr. Hall lived ;
there were hardly any people in the streets to inquire
of, and I was an hour hauling my mule over the gutters
and grumbling at the guide before I found the house.
I knocked some time without receiving any answer.
At length a young man opened the shutter of a balco¬
nied window, and told me that Mr. Hall was not at
home. This would not serve my turn. I gave my
name, and he retired; and in a few minutes the large
door was unlocked, and Mr. Hall himself received me.
He gave me as a reason for not opening sooner, that
the soldiers had mutinied that day for want of pay, and
threatened to sack the city. Carrera had exerted him¬
self in trying to pacify them, and had borrowed fifty
dollars from his (Mr. Hall’s) neighbour, a French mer¬
chant ; but the inhabitants were greatly alarmed ; and
when I knocked at his door he was afraid that the sol¬
diers were beginning to put their threat in execution.
Mr. H. had taken down his staff, because on their last
entry, when he had his flag flying, the soldiers had fired
upon it, calling it a bandera de guerra. They were
mostly Indians from the villages, ignorant and insolent,
and a few days before he had his hat knocked off by a
sentinel because he did not raise it in passing, for which
his complaint was then before the government.* The
whole city was kept in a state of awe. No one ven-

* It is due to Carrera to say, that by his orders the soldier received two hun¬
dred lashes.


192


INCll)ENTS OF TRAVEL.


tured out at night, and Mr. Hall wondered how I had
been able to wander through the streets without being
molested. All this was not very agreeable, but it could
not destroy my satisfaction in reaching Guatimala.
For the first time since I entered the country, I had a
good bed and a pair of clean sheets. It was two
months that day since I embarked from New-York, and
only one since I entered the country, but it seemed at
least a year.

The luxury of my rest that night still lingers in my
recollections, and the morning air was the most pure
and invigorating I ever breathed. Situated in the Ti-
erras templadas,” or temperate regions, on a table-land
five thousand feet above the sea, the climate of Guati¬
mala is that of perpetual spring, and the general aspect
reminded me of the best class of Italian cities. It is
laid out in blocks of from three to four hundred feet
square, the streets parallel and crossing each other at
right angles. The houses, made to resist the action of
earthquakes, are of only one story, but very spacious,
with large doors and windows, protected by iron bal¬
conies. In the centre of the city stands the Plaza, a
square of one hundred and fifty yards on each side, paved
with stone, with a colonnade on three sides; on one of
these stands the old vice-regal palace and hall of the
Audiencia; on another are the cabildo and other city
buildings; on the third the custom-house and palace
of the ci-devant Marquisate of Aycinena; and on the
fourth side is the Cathedral, a beautiful edifice, in the
best style of modern architecture, with the archiepisco-
pal palace on one side, and the College de Infantes oii '
the other. In the centre is a large stone fountain, of
imposing workmanship, supplied with pipes from the
mountains about two leagues distant; and the area is


THE DIPLOMATIC RESIDENCE.


193


used as a market-place. The churches and convents
correspond with the beauty of the Plaza, and their cost¬
liness and grandeur would attract the attention of tour¬
ists in Italy or old Spain,

The foundation of the city was laid in 1776, a year
memorable in our own annals, and when our ancestors
thought but little of the troubles of their neighbours.
At that time the old capital, twenty-five miles distant,
shattered and destroyed by earthquakes, was aban¬
doned by its inhabitants, and the present was built in
the rich valley of Las Vaccas, in a style commensurate
with the dignity of a captain-generalship of Spain. I
have seldom been more favourably impressed with the
first appearance of any city, and the only thing that
pained me in a two hours’ stroll through the streets was
the sight of Carrera’s ragged and insolent-looking sol¬
diers ; and my first idea was, that in any city in Eu¬
rope or the United States, the citizens, instead of sub¬
mitting to be lorded over by such barbarians, would
rise en masse and pitch them out of the gates.

In the course of the morning I took possession of the
house that had been occupied by Mr. De Witt, our late
charg6 d’affaires. If I had been favourably impressed
with the external appearance of the houses, I was
charmed with the interior. The entrance was by a
large double door, through a passage paved with Small
black and white stones, into a handsome patio or court¬
yard paved in like manner. On the sides were broad
corridors paved with square red bricks, and along the
foot of the corridors were borders of flowers. In front,
on the street, and adjoining the entrance, was an ante¬
room with one large balconied window, and next to it
a sala or parlour, with two windows. At the farther
end a door opened from the side into the comedor or

VoL. I.—B B 17


194


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


dining-room, which had a door and two windows open¬
ing upon the corridor. At the end of the dining-room
was a door leading to a sleeping-room, with door and
one window, and then another room of the same size,
all with doors and windows opening upon the corridor.
The building and corridor were continued across the
foot of the lot; in the centre were rooms for servants,
and in the corners were a kitchen and stable, com¬
pletely hidden from sight, and each furnished with a
separate fountain. This is the plan of all the houses in
Guatimala ; others are much larger ; that of the Ayci-
nena family, for instance, covered a square of two hun¬
dred feet; but mine combined more beauty and com¬
fort than any habitation I ever saw.

At two o’clock my luggage arrived, and I was most
comfortably installed in my new domicil. The sala or
reception-room was furnished with a large bookcase,
containing rows of books with yellow bindings, which
gave me twinging recollections of a law-office at home ;
the archives of the legation had quite an imposing as¬
pect ; and over Mr. De Witt’s writing-table hung an¬
other memorial of home: a fac-simile of the Declaration
of Independence.

My first business was to make arrangements for send¬
ing a trusty escort for Mr. Catherwood, and, this over,
it was incumbent upon me to look around for the gov¬
ernment to which I was accredited.

From the time of the conquest Guatimala had re¬
mained in a state of profound tranquillity as a colony
of Spain. The Indians submitted quietly to the author¬
ity of the whites, and all bowed to the divine right of
the Romish Church. In the beginning of the present
century a few scattering rays of light penetrated to the
heart of the American Continent • and in 1823 the


PARTIES IN CENTRAL AMERICA. 195


Kingdom of Guatimala, as it was then called, declared
its independence of Spain, and, after a short union with
Mexico, constituted itself a republic under the name
of the United States of Central America. By the arti¬
cles of agreement the confederacy was composed of five
states, viz., Guatimala, San Salvador, Honduras, Nica¬
ragua, and Costa Rica. Chiapas had the privilege of
entering if it should think proper, but it never did.
Quezaltenango, a district of Guatimala, was afterward
erected into a separate state, and added.

The monster party-spirit was rocked in the very cra¬
dle of their independence, and a line of demarcation
was at once drawn between the Aristocratic and Demo¬
cratic parties. The local names of these at first confu¬
sed me, the former being called the Central or Servile,
and the latter the Federal or Liberal, or Democratic
party. Substantially they were the same with our own
Federal and Democratic parties. The reader will per¬
haps find it difficult to understand that in any country,
in a political sense. Federal and Democratic can mean
the same thing, or that when I speak of a Federalist I
mean a Democrat; and, to prevent confusion in refer¬
ring to them hereafter, I shall call the Aristocratic the
Central, and the Democratic the Liberal party. The
former, like our own Federal party, was for consolida¬
ting and centralizing the powers of the general gov¬
ernment, and the latter contended for the sovereignty
of the states. The Central party consisted of a few
leading families, which, by reason of certain privileges
of monopoly for importations under the old Spanish
government, assumed the tone of nobles, sustained by
the priests and friars, and the religious feeling of the
country. The latter was composed of men of intel¬
lect and energy, who threw off the yoke of the Romish


196


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


Church, and, in the first enthusiasm of emancipated
minds, tore away at once the black mantle of supersti¬
tion, thrown, like a funeral pall, over the genius of the
people. The Centralists wished to preserve the usages
of the colonial system, and resisted every innovation and
every attack, direct or iiidirect, upon the privileges of
the Church, and their own prejudices or interests. The
Liberals, ardent, and cherishing brilliant schemes of
reform, aimed at an instantaneous change in popular
feelings and customs, and considered every moment
lost that did not establish some new theory or sweep
away some old abuse. The Centralists forgot that civ¬
ilization is a jealous divinity, which does not admit of
partition, and cannot remain stationary. The Liberals
forgot that civilization requires a harmony of intelli¬
gence, of customs, and of laws. The example of the
United States and of their free institutions was held up
by the Liberals; and the Centralists contended that,
with their ignorant and heterogeneous population, scat¬
tered over a vast territory, without facilities of commu¬
nication, it was a hallucination to take our country as a
model. At the third session of Congress the parties
came to an open rupture, and the deputies of San Sal¬
vador, always the most Liberal state in the confedera¬
cy, withdrew.

Flores, the vice-chief of the State of Guatimala, a
Liberal, had made himself odious to the priests and fri¬
ars by laying a contribution upon the convent at Quez-
altenango; and while on a visit to that place the fri¬
ars of the convent excited the populace against him, as
an enemy to religion. A mob gathered before his house,
with cries of Death to the heretic !” Flores fled to
the church ; but as he was entering the door a mob of
women seized him, wrested a stick from his hands, beat


MURDER OP VICE-PRESIDENT FLORES. 197


him with it, tore off his cap, and dragged him by the
hair. He escaped from these furies and ran up into
the pulpit. The alarm-bell was sounded, and all the
rabble of the town poured into the plaza. A few sol¬
diers endeavoured to cover the entrance to the church,
but were assailed with stones and clubs; and the mob,
bearing down all opposition, forced its way into the
church, making the roof ring with cries of Death to
the heretic!” Rushing toward the pulpit, some tried
to unhinge it, others to scale it; others struck at the
unhappy vice-chief with knives tied to the ends of long
poles ; while a young fiend, with one foot on the mould¬
ings of the pulpit and the other elevated in the air,
leaned over and seized him by the hair. The curate,
who was in the pulpit with him, frightened at the tem¬
pest he had assisted to raise, held up the Holy of Ho¬
lies, and begged the mob to spare him, promising that
he should leave the city immediately. The unhappy
Flores, on his knees, confirmed these promises ; but the
friars urged on the mob, who became so excited with
religious phrensy, that, after kneeling before the figure
of the Saviour, exclaiming, We adore thee, oh Lord,
we venerate thee,” they rose up with the ferocious cry,
^^but for thy honour and glory this blasphemer, this
heretic, must die !” They dragged him from the pulpit
across the floor of the church, and in the cloisters threw
him into the hands of the fanatic and furious horde,
when the women, like unchained furies, with their fists,
sticks, and stones, beat him to death. His murderers
stripped his body, leaving it, disfigured and an object
of horror, exposed to the insults of the populace, and
then dispersed throughout the city, demanding the
heads of Liberals, and crying Viva la Religion, y mu-
eran los heregos del Congresso.” About the same time


198


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


religious fanaticism swept the state, and the Liberal
party was crushed in Guatimala.

But the state of San Salvador, from the beginning
the leader in Liberal principles, was prompt in its ef¬
forts of vengeance, and on the sixteenth of March, 1827,
its army appeared within the outer gates of Guatima¬
la, threatening the destruction of the capital; but reli¬
gious fanaticism was too strong ; the priests ran through
the streets exhorting the people to take up arms, the
friars headed mobs of women, who, with drawn knives,
swore destruction to all who attempted to overturn
their religion, and the San Salvadoreans were defeat¬
ed and driven back. For two years the parties were
at open war. In 1829 the troops of San Salvador, un¬
der General Morazan, who had now become the head
of the Liberal party, again marched upon Guatimala,
and, after three days’ fighting, entered it in triumph.
All the leaders of the Central party, the Aycinenas,
the Pavons, and Penoles, were banished or fled, the
convents were broken up, the institution of friars abol¬
ished, the friars themselves put on board vessels and
shipped out of the country, and the archbishop, antici¬
pating banishment, or perhaps fearing a worse fate,
sought safety in flight.

In 1831 General Morazan was elected president of
the republic; at the expiration of the term he was re¬
elected ; and for eight years the Liberal party had the
complete ascendancy. During the latter part of his
term, however, there was great discontent, particularly
on account of forced loans and exactions for the sup¬
port of government, or, as the Centralists said, to grat¬
ify the rapacity of unscrupulous and profligate office¬
holders. The Church party was always on the alert.
The exiles in the United States and Mexico, and on the


POLITICAL STATE OP GUATIMALA. 199


frontier, with their eyes always fixed upon home, kept
up constant communications, and fostered the growing •
discontents. Some of them, in a state of penury
abroad, ventured to return, and these not being molest¬
ed, others soon followed. At this time came on the
rising of Carrera, which was at first more dreaded by
the Centralists than the Liberals, but suddenly, and to
their own utter astonishment, placed the former nomi¬
nally at the head of government.

In May preceding my arrival the term of the presi¬
dent, senators, and deputies had expired, and no elec¬
tions had been held to supply their places. The vice-
president, who had been elected during an unexpired
term, was the only existing officer of the Federal Gov¬
ernment. The states of Guatimala, Honduras, Nica¬
ragua, and Costa Rica had declared themselves inde¬
pendent of the Federal Government. The states of
San Salvador and Quezaltenango sustained the Federal
Government, and Morazan, as commander-in-chief of
the Federal forces, had defeated Ferrera, and estab¬
lished troops in Honduras, which gave the Liberal party
the actual control of three states.

Virtually, then, the states stood three and three,
Where was my government ? The last Congress, be¬
fore its dissolution, had recommended that panacea for
political ills, a convention to amend the Constitution.
The governments of England and France were repre¬
sented near that of Central America by consuls general.
Neither had any treaty; England could not procure
one except upon a surrender of all claim to the Isl¬
and of Roatan, in the Bay of Honduras, and to Ba-
lize. One had been drawn up with France, but,
though pressed with great earnestness by the consul
general of that country, the senate refused to ratify it.


200


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


Ours was the only government that had any treaty with
Central America, and, up to the time of Mr. De Witt’s
departure from the country, we were represented by a
charge d’affaires. The British consul-general had pub¬
lished a circular denying the existence of the general
government; the French consul was not on good
terms with either party; and my arrival, and the course
I might take, were a subject of some interest to poli¬
ticians.

There was but one side to politics in Guatimala.
Both parties have a beautiful way of producing unanim¬
ity of opinion, by driving out of the country all who do
not agree with them. If there were any Liberals, I did
not meet them, or they did not dare to open their lips.
The Central party, only six months in power, and still
surprised at being there, was fluttering between arro¬
gance and fear. The old families, whose principal
members had been banished or politically ostracized,
and the clergy, were elated at the expulsion of the
Liberal party, and their return to what they considered
their natural right to rule^ the state; they talked of re¬
calling the banished archbishop and friars, restoring the
privileges of the Church, repairing the convents, revi¬
ving monastic institutions, and making Guatimala what
it had once been, the jewel of Spanish America.

One of my first visits of ceremony was to Sehor Ri¬
vera Paz, the chief of the state. I was presented by
Mr. Henry Savage, who had formerly acted as United
States consul at Guatimala, and was the only Ameri¬
can resident, to whom I am under many obligations for
his constant attentions. The State of Guatimala, hav¬
ing declared its independence of the Federal govern¬
ment, was at that time governed by a temporary body
called a Constituent Assembly. On the last entry of


AN EMBARRASSING SITUATION.


201


Carrera into the city, in March preceding my arrival,
Salazar, the chief of the state, fled, and Carrera, on
horseback, knocked at the door of Senor Rivera Paz
before daylight, and, by his individual pleasure, installed
him as chief. It was a fortunate choice for the people
of Guatimala. He was about thirty-eight, gentleman¬
ly in his appearance and manners, and, in all the trying
positions in which he was afterward placed, exhibited
more than ordinary prudence and judgment.

I had been advised that it would be agreeable to the
government of Guatimala for me to present my creden¬
tials to the chief of that state, and afterward to the
chiefs of the other states, and that the states separately
would treat of the matters for which I was accredited
to the general government. The object of this was to
preclude a recognition on my part of the power which
was, or claimed to be, the general government. The
suggestion was of course preposterous, but it showed
the dominion of. party-spirit with men who knew bet¬
ter. Senor Rivera Paz expressed his regret at my hap¬
pening to visit the country at such an unfortunate pe¬
riod, and assured me of the friendly disposition of that
state, and that it would do all in its power to serve me.
During my visit I was introduced to several of the lead¬
ing members of the administration, and I left with a
favourable opinion of Rivera Paz, which was never sha¬
ken in regard to him personally.

In the evening, in company with Mr. Hall, I attend¬
ed the last meeting of the Constituent Assembly. It
was held in the old Hall of Congress ; the room was
large, hung with portraits of old Spaniards distinguish¬
ed in the history of the country, and dimly lighted.
The deputies sat on a platform at one end, elevated
about six feet, and the president on an elevation in a

VoL. I.— C c


202


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


large chair, two secretaries at a table beneath, and on
the wall were the arms of the republic, the groundwork
of which was three volcanoes, emblematic, I suppose,
of the combustible state of the country. The deputies
sat on each side, about thirty being present, nearly half
of whom were priests, with black gowns and caps ; and
by the dull light the scene carried me back to the dark
ages, and seemed a meeting of inquisitors.

The subject under discussion was a motion to revive
the old law of tithes, which had been abolished by the
Liberal party. The law was passed unanimously; but
there was a discussion upon a motion to appropriate a
small part of the proceeds for the support of hospitals
for the poor. The priests took part in the discussion,
and with liberal sentiments; a lay member, with big
black whiskers, opposed it, saying that the Church
stood like a light in darkness; and the Marquis Ayci-
nena, a priest and the leading member of the party,
said that what was raised for God should be given
to God alone.’’ There was another discussion upon the
point whether the law should operate upon cattle then
in being or to be born thereafter ; and, finally, as to the
means of enforcing it. One gentleman contended that
coercive measures should not be used, and, with a fine
burst of eloquence, said that reliance might be placed
upon the religious feelings of the people, and that the
poorest Indian would come forward and contribute his
mite ; but the Assembly decided that the law should be
enforced by Las leyes antiguas de los Espagnoles, the
old laws of the Spaniards, the severities of which had
been one of the great causes of revolution in all Span¬
ish countries. There was something horrible in this
retrograde legislation. I could hardly realize that, in
the nineteenth century, men of sense, and in a country


A STATE BREAKFAST.


203


through the length and breadth of which free principles
were struggling for the ascendancy, would dare fasten
on the people a yoke which, even in the dark ages, was
too galling to be borne. The tone of debate was re¬
spectable, but calm and unimpassioned, from the entire
absence of any opposition party. The Assembly pur¬
ported to be a popular body, representing the voice of
the people. It was a time of great excitement, and the
last night of its session; and Mr. Hall and I, four men
and three boys, were the only listeners.

As it was not safe to be in the streets after eight
o’clock, the Assembly was adjourned, and, after a short
session the next morning, assembled at a state break¬
fast. The place of meeting was in the old library, a
venerable room, containing a valuable collection of rare
old Spanish books and manuscripts, among which had
lately been discovered the two missing volumes of Fu-
entes, and where I promised myself much satisfaction.
The only guests were Mr. Hall, the French consul gen¬
eral, Colonel Monte Rosa, an aid of Carrera, and my¬
self. Carrera was invited, but did not come. The ta¬
ble was profusely ornamented with flowers and fruits.
There was very little wine drunk, no toasts, and no gay-
ety. There was not a gray-haired man at table ; all were
young, and so connected that it seemed a large family
party; more than half had been in exile, and if Mora-
zan returned to power they would all be scattered
again.

I had been but three days in Guatimala, and already
the place was dull. The clouds which hung over the
political horizon weighed upon the spirits of the inhabi¬
tants, and in the evening I was obliged to shut myself
up in my house alone. In the uncertainty which hung
over my movements, and to avoid the trouble of


204


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


housekeeping for perhaps but a few weeks, I dined and
supped at the house of the senora, an interesting young
widow who owned mine (her husband had been shot in
a private revolution of his own getting up), and lived
nearly opposite. The first evening I remained there till
nine o’clock ; but as I was crossing on my return home a
fierce Quien vive ?” who goes ?” came booming up
the street. In the dark I could not see the sentinel, and
did not know the password. Fortunately, and what
was very unusual, he repeated the challenge two or
three times, but so fiercely that the tones of his voice
went through me like a musket-ball, and probably in a
moment more the ball itself would have followed, but
an old lady rushed out of the house I had left, and,
with a lantern in her hand, screamed Patria Libra.”

Though silent, I was not idle; and when in a safe
place thanked her from across the street, hugging close
the inside of my doorway. Since Carrera’s entry, he
had placed sentinels to preserve the peace of the city,
which was very quiet before he came, and his peace-
officers kept it in a constant state of alarm. These sen¬
tinels were Indians, ignorant, undisciplined, and inso¬
lent, and fond of firing their muskets. They were or¬
dered to challenge ‘‘Quien Vive?” “Who goes?”
“ Que gente ?” “ What people ?” “ Quel Eegimento ?”
“ What regiment ?” and then fire. One fellow had al¬
ready obeyed his orders literally, and, hurrying through
the three questions, without waiting for answers, fired,
and shot a woman. The answers were, Patria Li¬
bra,” “ Country free Paisano,” “ Countryman
and “ Paz,” “ Peace,”

This was a subject of annoyance all the time I was
in Guatimala. The streets were not lighted; and hear¬
ing the challenge, sometimes at the distance of a square,


MILITARY POLICE.


205


in a ferocious voice, without being able to see the sen¬
tinel, I always imagined him with his musket at his
shoulder, peering through the darkness to take aim. I
felt less safe by reason of my foreign pronunciation;
but I never met any one, native or stranger, who was
not nervous when within reach of the sentineFs chal¬
lenge, or who would not go two squares out of the way
to avoid it.


18


206


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


CHAPTER X.

Hacienda of Narengo.—Lazoing. — Diplomatic Correspondence. — Formulas.—
F4te of La Concepcion.— Taking the Black Veil. — A Countr)rwoman.—'Re¬
nouncing the World.—Fireworks, &c.—Procession in honour of the Virgin.—
Another Exhibition of Fireworks.—A fiery Bull.—Insolent Soldiery.

The next day, in company with Mr. Savage, I rode
to Narengo, a small hacienda of the Aycinena family,
about seven miles from the city. Beyond the walls all
was beautiful, and in the palmy days of Guatimala the
Aycinenas rolled to the Narengo in an enormous car¬
riage, full of carving and gilding, in the style of the
grandees of Spain, which now stands in the courtyard
of the family-house as a memorial of better days. We
entered by a large gate into a road upon their land,
undulating and ornamented with trees, and by a large
artificial lake, made by damming up several streams.
We rode around the borders of the lake, and entered a
large cattle-yard, in the centre of which, on the side of
a declivity, stood the house, a strong stone structure,
with a broad piazza in front, and commanding a beau¬
tiful view of the volcanoes of the Antigua.

The hacienda was only valuable from its vicinity to
Guatimala, being what would be called at home a
country-seat; and contained only seven thousand acres
of land, about seventy mules, and seven hundred head
of cattle. It was the season for marking and number¬
ing the cattle, and two of the Senores Aycinena were
at the hacienda to superintend the operations. The
cattle had been caught and brought in; but, as I had
never seen the process of lazoing, after dinner a hun-


LAZOING.


207


died head, which had been kept up two days without
food, were let loose into a field two or three miles in
circumference. Eight men were mounted, with iron
spurs an inch long on their naked heels, and each with
a lazo in hand, which consisted of an entire cow’s hide
cut into a single cord about twenty yards long; one
end was fastened to the horse’s tail, which was first
wrapped in leaves to prevent its being lacerated, and
the rest was wound into a coil, and held by the rider in
his right hand, resting on the pommel of the saddle.
The cattle had all dispersed ; we placed ourselves on an
elevation commanding a partial view of the field, and
the riders scattered in search of them. In a little while
thirty or forty rushed past, followed by the riders at
full speed, and very soon were out of sight. We must
either lose the sport or follow ; and in one of the doub¬
lings, taking particularly good care to avoid the throng
of furious cattle and headlong riders, I drew up to the
side of two men who were chasing a single ox, and fol¬
lowed over hill, through bush, brush, and underwood;
one rider threw his lazo beautifully over the horns of
the ox, and then turned his horse, while the ox bound¬
ed to the length of the lazo, and, without shaking horse
or rider, pitched headlong to the ground.

At this moment a herd swept by, with the whole com^-
pany in full pursuit. A large yellow ox separated from
the rest, and all followed him. For a mile he kept
ahead, doubled, and dodged, but the horsemen crowded
him down toward the lake ; and, after an ineffectual at¬
tempt to bolt, he rushed into the water. Two horsemen
followed and drove him out, and gave him a start, but
in a few moments the lazo whizzed over his head, and,
while horse and rider stood like marble, the ox again
came with a plunge to the ground. The riders scat-


208


INCIDENTS' OP TRAVEL.


tered, and one horse and rider rolled over in such a
way that I thought every bone in his body was broken ;
but the sport was so exciting that I, who at the begin¬
ning was particularly careful to keep out of harm’s way,
felt very much disposed to have my own horse’s tail tied
up and take a lazo in my hand. The effect of the sport
was heightened by the beauty of the scene, with the
great volcanoes of Agua and Fuego towering above us,
and toward evening throwing a deep shade over the
plain. It was nearly dark when we returned to the
house. With that refinement of politeness, which I
believe is exclusively Spanish, the gentlemen escorted
us some distance on our road. At dark we reached
Guatimala, and, to our great satisfaction, learned at the
gate that the soldiers were confined to the barracks.

The news of my arrest and imprisonment, with great
exaggeration of circumstance, had reached Guatimala
before me, and I was advised that the state govern¬
ment intended making me a communication on the sub¬
ject. I waited several days, and, not receiving any,
made a formal complaint, setting forth the facts, and
concluding that I did not attempt to suggest what
ought to be done, but felt satisfied that the government
would do what was consistent with its own honour and
the rights of a friendly nation. In a few days I re¬
ceived an answer from the secretary of state, convey¬
ing the regrets of the president for the occurrence, and
stating that, before receiving my note, the government
had taken the measures which it deemed proper in the
premises. As this was very indefinite, and as I bore
considerable anger against the parties, and, moreover,
as I heard out of doors something about these meas¬
ures,” and considered it necessary, for the protection
of Americans who were or might be in that country.


DIPLOMATIC CORRESPONDENCE. 209

not to suffer an outrage that had become notorious to
be treated lightly, I addressed a farther note to the sec¬
retary, asking specifically whether the officer and al¬
calde referred to had been punished, and if so, in what
way. To this I received for answer that, in the cir¬
cumstances in which the country was placed by means
of an extraordinary popular revolution, and the dis¬
trust prevailing in the frontier villages, the local au¬
thorities were more suspicious than usual in the matter
of passports, and that the outrage, el atropellamento,”
which I had suffered, had its origin in the orders of a
military officer, un official who suspected

that I and my companion were ‘‘enemies,” and that
General Cascara, as soon as he was informed of the cir¬
cumstances, had removed him from his command; the
reply went on to say that the government, much to its
regret, from the difficult circumstances in which the
country was placed, had not the power to give that se¬
curity to travellers which it desired, but would issue
preventive orders to the local authorities to secure me
in my farther travels.

I had understood that General Cascara had removed
the officer, but the intelligence was hardly received in
Guatimala before Carrera ordered him to be restored;
and I afterward saw in a San Salvador paper that he
had threatened to shoot General Cascara if his degra¬
dation was not revoked. In farther communications
with the secretary and the chief of the state, they con¬
fessed their inability to do anything; and being sat¬
isfied that they desired it even more than myself, I did
not consider it worth while to press the subject; as in¬
deed, in strictness, I had no right to call upon the state
government. The general government had not the least
particle of power in the state, and I mention the cir-

VoL. L—Dd


210


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


cumstance to show the utter feebleness of the admin-

/

istration, and the wretched condition of the country
generally. It troubled me on one account, as it showed
the difficulty and danger of prosecuting the travels I
had contemplated.

From the moment of my arrival I was struck with
the devout character of the city of Guatimala. At
matins and vespers the churches were all open, and the
people, particularly the women, went regularly to
prayers. Every house had its figure of the Virgin,
the Saviour, or some tutelary saint, and on the door
were billets of paper with prayers. ‘‘ La verdadera
sangre de Cristo, nuestro redentor que solo represen-
tada en Egipto libro a los Israelitas de un brazo fuerte
y poderoso, fibre nos de la peste, guerra, y muerte re-
pentina. Amen.’’ ‘‘ The true blood of Christ our Re¬
deemer, which alone, exhibited in Egypt, freed the Is¬
raelites from a strong and powerful arm, deliver us from
pestilence, war, and sudden death. Amen.”

O Maria, concebida sin pecado, rogad por noso-
tros, que recurrimos a vos.” O Virgin, conceived
without sin, pray for us, that we may have recourse to
thee.”

“ Ave Maria, gracia plena, y la santissima Trinidad
nos favorezca.” Hail Mary, full of grace, and may
the Holy Spirit favour us.”

“ El dolce nombre de Jesus,

Sea con nosotros. Amen.”

On the first Sunday after my arrival was celebrated
the fete of La Concepcion, a fete always honoured in
the observances of the Catholic Church, and this day
more important from the circumstance that a probation¬
er in the convent of La Concepcion intended to take
the black veil. At break of day the church bells rang


TAKING THE BLACK VEIL.


211


throughout the city, cannon were fired in the plaza,
and rockets and fireworks set off at the corners of the
streets. At nine o^clock crowds of people were hurry¬
ing to the Church of La Concepcion. Before the door,
and extending across the streets, were arches decorated
with evergreens and flowers. The broad steps of the
church were strewed with pine leaves, and on the plat¬
form were men firing rockets. The church was one of
the handsomest in Guatimala, rich with gold and silver
ornaments, pictures, and figures of saints, and adorned
with arches and flowers. The Padre Aycinena, the
vice-president of the state, and the leading member of
the Constituent Assembly, was the preacher of the day,
and his high reputation attracted a large concourse of
people. The pulpit was at one end of the church, and
the great mass of the people were anxious to hear the
sermon. This left the other end comparatively va¬
cant, and I placed myself on a step of the nearest
altar, directly in front of the grating of the convent.
At the close of the sermon there was a discharge of
rockets and crackers from the steps of the church, the
smoke of which clouded the interior, and the smell of
powder was stronger than that of the burning incense.
The floor was strewed with pine leaves, and covered
with kneeling women, with black mantas drawn close
over the top of the head, and held together under the
chin. I never saw a more beautiful spectacle than
these rows of kneeling women, with faces pure and
lofty in expression, lighted up by the enthusiasm of re¬
ligion ; and among them, fairer than most and lovely as
any, was one from my own land ; not more than twen¬
ty-two, married to a gentleman belonging to one of the
first families of Guatimala, once an exile in the United
States. In a new land and among a new people, she


212


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


had embraced a new faith; and, with the enthusiasm
of a youthful convert, no lady in Guatimala was more
devout, more regular at mass, or more strict in all the
discipline of the Catholic Church than the Sister Su¬
sannah,

After the fireworks there was a long ceremony at the
altar, and then a general rush toward the other ex¬
tremity of the church. The convent was directly ad¬
joining, and in the partition wall, about six feet from
the floor, was a high iron grating, and about four feet
beyond it another, at which the nuns attended the ser¬
vices of the church. Above the iron grating was a
wooden one, and from this in a few minutes issued a
low strain of wild Indian music, and presently a figure
in white, with a long white veil and a candle in her
right hand, and both arms extended, walked slowly to
within a few feet of the grating, and then as slowly re¬
tired. Presently the same low note issued from the
grating below, and we saw advancing a procession of
white nuns, with long white veils, each holding in her
hand a long lighted candle. The music ceased, and a
chant arose, so low that it required intent listening to
catch the sound. Advancing two and two with this
low chant to within a few feet of the grating, the sis¬
ters turned off different ways. At the end of the pro¬
cession were two black nuns, leading between them the
prob^^tioner, dressed in white, with a white veil and a
wreath of roses round her head. The white nuns ar¬
ranged themselves on each side, their chant ceased, and
the voice of the probationer was heard alone, but so
faint that it seemed the breathing of a spirit of air.
The white nuns strewed flowers before her, and she
advanced between the two black ones. Three times
she stopped and kneeled, continuing the same low


RENOUNCING THE WORLD.


213


chant, and the last time the white nuns gathered
around her, strewing flowers upon her head and in her
path. Slowly they led her to the back part of the chap¬
el, and all kneeled before the altar.

At this time a strain of music was heard at the other
end of the church; a way was cleared through the
crowd, and a procession advanced, consisting of the
principal priests, clothed in their richest robes, and
headed by the venerable provesor, an octogenarian
with white hair, and tottering on the verge of the grave,
as remarkable for the piety of his life as for his venera¬
ble appearance. A layman bore on a rich frame a gold
crown and sceptre studded with jewels. The proces¬
sion advanced to a small door on the right of the gra¬
ting, and the two black nuns and the probationer ap¬
peared in the doorway. Some words passed between
her and the provesor, which I understood to be an ex¬
amination by him whether her proposed abandonment
of the world was voluntary or not. This over, the pro¬
vesor removed the wreath of roses and the white veil,
and put on her head the crown and in her hand the
sceptre. The music sounded loud notes of triumph,
and in a few moments she reappeared at the grating
with the crown and sceptre, and a dress sparkling with
jewels. The sisters embraced her, and again threw
roses upon her. It seemed horrible to heap upon her
the pomp and pleasures of the world, at the moment
when she was about to bid farewell to them forever.
Again she kneeled before the altar; and when she rose
the jewels and precious stones, the rich ornaments with
which she was decorated, were taken from her, and she
returned to the bishop, who took away the- crown and
sceptre, and put on her head the black veil. Again she
appeared before the grating; the last, the fatal step was


214


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


not yet taken; the black veil was not drawn. Again
the nuns pressed round, and this time they almost de¬
voured her with kisses.

I knew nothing of her story. I had not heard that
the ceremony was to take place till late in the evening
before, and I had made up my mind that she was old
and ugly; but she was not, nor was she faded and worn
with sorrow, the picture of a broken heart; nor yet a
young and beautiful enthusiast; she was not more than
twenty-three, and had one of those good faces which,
without setting men wild by their beauty, bear the im¬
press of a nature well qualified for the performance of
all duties belonging to daughter, and wife, and mother,
speaking the kindliness and warmth of a woman’s heart.
It was pale, and she seemed conscious of the important
step and the solemn vows she was taking, and to have
no pangs; and yet who can read what is passing in the
human breast ?

She returned to the provesor, who drew over her
face a black veil; and music rose in bursts of rejoicing,
that one who was given to the world to take a share in
its burdens had withdrawn herself from it. Imme¬
diately commenced the hum of restrained voices; and
working my way through the crowd, I joined a party of
ladies, one of whom was my fair countrywoman. She
was from a small country town in Pennsylvania, and
the romance of her feelings toward convents and nuns
had not yet worn off. On Carrera’s first invasion she
had taken refuge in the convent of La Concepcion, and
spoke with enthusiasm of the purity and piety of the
nuns, describing some as surpassing in all the attributes
of woman. She knew particularly the one who had
just taken the veil, and told me that in a few days she
would appear at the grating of the convent to embrace


FIREWORKS, ETC.


215


her friends and bid them farewell, and promised to take
me and procure me a share in the distribution.

During this time rockets were fired from the steps,
and in the street, immediately in front, was a frame of
fireworks thirty feet high, which the whole crowd wait¬
ed on the steps and in the street to see set off. Every¬
body spoke of the absurdity of such an exhibition by
daylight, but they said it was the custom. The piece
was complicated in its structure, and in the centre was
a large box. There was a whizzing of wheels, a great
smoke, and occasionally a red flash; and as the ex¬
tremities burned out, for the finale, with a smart crack¬
ing, the Box flew open, and when the smoke cleared
away, discovered the figure of a little black nun, at
which all laughed and went away.

In the afternoon was the procession in honour of the
Virgin. Although Guatimala was dull, and, by the
convulsions of the times, debarred all kinds of gayety,
religious processions went on as usual, and it would
have been an evidence of an expiring state to neglect
them. All the streets through which the procession
was to pass were strewed with pine leaves, and cross¬
ing them were arches decorated with evergreens and
flowers ; the long balconied windows were ornamented
with curtains of crimson silk, and flags with fanciful
devices. At the corners of the streets were altars, un¬
der arbours of evergreens as high as the tops of the
houses, adorned with pictures and silver ornaments
from the churches, and the whole covered with flowers.
Rich as the whole of Central America is in natural
productions, the valley of Guatimala is distinguished
for the beauty and variety of its flowers; and for one
day the fields were stripped of their clothing to beauti¬
fy the city. I have seen great fetes in Europe, got up


216


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


with lavish expenditure of money, but never anything
so simply beautiful. My stroll through the streets be¬
fore the procession was the most interesting part of the
day. All the inhabitants, in their best dresses, were
there : the men standing at the corners, and the women,
in black mantillas, seated in long rows on each side ; the
flags and curtains in the balconied windows, the green
of the streets, the profusion of flowers, the vistas through
the arches, and the simplicity of manners which per¬
mitted ladies of the first class to mingle freely in the
crowd and sit along the street, formed a picture of
beauty that even now relieves the stamp of dulness
with which Guatimala is impressed upon my^nind.

The procession for which all these beautiful prepara¬
tions were made opened with a single Indian, old,
wrinkled, dirty, and ragged, bareheaded, and stagger¬
ing under the load of an enormous bass-drum, which he
carried on his back, seeming as old as the conquest,
with every cord and the head on one side broken; an¬
other Indian followed in the same ragged costume, with
one ponderous drumstick, from time to time striking the
old drum. Then came an Indian with a large whistle,
corresponding in venerableness of aspect with the
drum, on which, from time to time, he gave a fierce
blast, and looked around with a comical air of satisfac¬
tion for applause. Next followed a little boy about ten
years old, wearing a cocked hat, boots above his knees,
a drawn sword, and the mask of a hideous African.
He was marshalling twenty or thirty persons, not inapt¬
ly called the Devils, all wearing grotesque and hideous
masks, and ragged, fantastic dresses; some with reed
whistles, some knocking sticks together; and the prin¬
cipal actors were two pseudo-women, with broad-brim¬
med European hats, frocks high in the necks, waists


AN ODD PROCESSION.


217


across the breast, large boots, and each with an old gui¬
tar, waltzing and dancing an occasional fandango.
How it happened that these devils, who, of course, ex¬
cited laughter in the crowd, came to form part of a re¬
ligious procession, I could not learn. The boys follow¬
ed them, just as they do the military with us on a fourth
of July ; and, in fact, with the Guatimala boys, there is
no good procession without good Devils.

Next, and in striking contrast, came four beautiful
boys, six or eight years old, dressed in white frocks and
pantalettes, with white gauze veils over wreaths of roses,
perfect emblems of purity; then four young priests,
bearing golden candlesticks, with wax candles lighted;
and then four Indians, carrying on their shoulders the
figure of an angel larger than life, with expanded wings
made of gauze, puffed out like a cloud, and intended to
appear to float in air, but dressed more after the fashion
of this world, with the frock rather short, and the sus*
penders of the stockings of pink riband. Then, borne
as before, on the shoulders of Indians, larger than life,
the figure of Judith, with a drawn sword in one hand,
and in the other the gory head of Holofernes. Then
another angel, with a cloud of silk over her head, and
then the great object of veneration. La Virgina de la
Concepcion, on a low hand-barrow, richly decorated
with gold and silver and a profusion of flowers, and
protected by a rich silken canopy, upborne on the ends
of four gilded poles. Priests followed in their costly
dresses, one under a silken canopy, holding up the
Host, before the imaginary splendour of which all fell
on their knees. The whole concluded with a worse
set of devils than those which led the procession, being
about five hundred of Carrera’s soldiers, dirty and rag¬
ged, with fanaticism added to their usual expression of
VoL. I.—E E 19


218


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


ferocity, and carrying their muskets without any order ;
the officers dressed in any costume they could com¬
mand ; a few, with black hat and silver or gold band,
like footmen, carried their heads very high. Many
were lame from gunshot wounds badly cured; and a
gentleman who was with me pointed out several who
were known to have committed assassinations and
murders, for which, in a country that had any govern¬
ment, they would have been hung. The city was at
their mercy, and Carrera was the only man living who
had any control over them.

At the head of the street the procession filed off in
the cross streets, and the figure of the Virgin was taken
from its place and set up on the altar. The priests kneel¬
ed before it and prayed, and the whole crowd fell on
their knees. I was at the corner near the altar, which
commanded a view of four streets, and rising a little on
one knee, saw in all the streets a dense mass of kneel¬
ing figures, rich men and beggars, lovely women and
stupid-looking Indians, fluttering banners and curtains
in balconied windows, and the figures of angels in their
light gauze drapery seeming to float in air; while the
loud chant of the crowd, swollen by the deep chorus of
the soldiers’ voices, produced a scene of mingled beauty
and deformity at once captivating and repulsive. This
over, all rose, the Virgin was replaced on her throne,
and the procession again moved. At the next altar I
turned aside and went to the square in front of the
Church of San Francisco, the place fixed for the grand
finale of the honours to the Virgin, the exhibition of
fireworks!

At dark the procession entered the foot of a street
leading to the square. It approached with a loud
chant, and at a distance nothing was visible but a long


A FIERY BULL.


219


train of burning candles, making the street light as day.
The devils were still at its head, and its arrival in the
square was announced by a discharge of rockets. In
a few minutes the first piece of fireworks was set off
from the balustrade of the church ; the figures on the
roof were lighted by the glare, and, though not built
expressly for that purpose, the church answered ex¬
ceedingly well for the exhibition.

The next piece was on the ground of the square, a
national one, and as much a favourite in the exhibition
of fireworks as the devils in a religious procession, call¬
ed the Toros, or Bull, being a frame covered with paste¬
board, in the form of a bull, covered on the outside with
fireworks; into this figure a man thrust his head and
shoulders, and, with nothing but his legs visible, rushed
into the thickest of the crowd, scattering on all sides
streams of fire. I was standing with a party of ladies
and several members of the Constituent Assembly, the
latter of whom were speaking of an invasion of troops
from Quezaltenango, and the sally of Carrera to repel
them. As the toros came at us, we retreated till we
could go no farther; the ladies screamed, and we
bravely turned our backs ; and holding down our
heads, sheltered them from the shower of fire. All
said it was dangerous, but it was the custom. There
was more cheerfulness and gayety than I had yet seen
in Guatimala, and I felt sorry when the exhibition was
over.

All day I had felt particularly the influence of the
beautiful climate; the mere breathing of the air was a
luxury, and the evening was worthy of such a day.
The moonbeams were lighting up the fa9ade of the
venerable church, and showing in sadness a rent made
by an earthquake from top to bottom. As we walked


220


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


home, the streets were lighted with a brilliancy almost
unearthly; and the ladies, proud of their moonlight, al¬
most persuaded me that it was a land to love.

Continuing on our way, we passed a guardhouse,
where a group of soldiers were lying at full length, so as
to make everybody pass off the walk and go round
them. Perhaps three or four thousand people, a large
portion ladies, were turned off. All felt the insolence
of these fellows, and I have no doubt some felt a strong
disposition to kick them out of the way; but, though
young men enough passed to drive the whole troop out
of the city, no complaint was made, and no notice
whatever taken of it. In one of the corridors of the
plaza another soldier lay on his back crosswise, with his
musket by his side, and muttering to everybody that
passed, Tread on me if you dare, and you’ll see !”
and we all took good care not to tread on him. I re¬
turned to my house, to pass the evening in solitude;
and it was melancholy to reflect that, with the elements
of so much happiness, Guatimala was made so misery-
able. .


THE PROVESOR.


221


CHAPTER XL

The Provesor.—News of the Day, how published in Guatimala.—Visit to the
Convent of La Concepcion.—The Farewell of the Nun.—Carrera.—Sketch
of his Life.—The Cholera.—Insurrections.—Carrera heads the Insurgents.—
His Appearance in Guatimala.—Capture of the City.—Carrera Triumphant.—**
Arrival of Morazan.—Hostilities.—Pursuit of Carrera.—His Defeat.—He is
again uppermost.—Interview with Carrera.—His Character.

The next three or four days I passed in receiving and
paying visits, and in making myself acquainted with
the condition of the country. Among the most inter¬
esting visiters was the venerable provesor, since the
banishment of the archbishop the head of the church,
who, by a late bull of the pope, had been appointed
bishop; but, owing to the troubled times, had not yet
been ordained. A friend in Baltimore had procured
for me a letter from the archbishop in that city, to
whom I here acknowledge my obligations, recommend¬
ing me to all his brother ecclesiastics in Central Amer¬
ica. The venerable provesor received this letter as
from a brother in the Church, and upon the strength of
it, afterward, when I set out for Palenque, gave me a
letter of recommendation to all the curas under his
charge. During the day my time passed agreeably
enough; but the evenings, in which I was obliged to
keep within doors, were long and lonely. My house
was so near the plaza that I could hear the sentinels’
challenge, and from time to time the report of a mus¬
ket. These reports, in the stillness of night, were al¬
ways startling. For some time I did not know the
cause; but at length learned that cows and mules


222


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


Straggled about the city, which, heard moving at a
distance and not answering the challenge, were fired
upon without ceremony.

There was but one paper in Guatimala, and that a
^ weekly, and a mere chronicler of decrees and political
movements. City news passed by word of mouth.
Every morning everybody asked his neighbour what
was the news. One day it was that an old deaf woman,
who could not hear the sentinel’s challenge, had been
shot; another, that Asturias, a rich old citizen, had
been stabbed; and another morning the report circu¬
lated that thirty-three nuns in the convent of Santa
Teresa had been poisoned. This was a subject of ex¬
citement for several days, when the nuns all recovered,
and it was ascertained that they had suffered from the
unsentimental circumstance of eating food that did not
agree with them.

On Friday, in company with my fair countrywoman,
I visited the convent of La Concepcion for the pur¬
pose of embracing a nun, or rather the nun, who had
taken the black veil. The room adjoining the parlato-
ria of the convent was crowded, and she was standing
in the doorway with the crown on her head and a doll
in her hand. It was the last time her friends could see
her face ; but this puerile exhibition of the doll detract¬
ed from the sentiment^ It was an occasion that ad¬
dressed itself particularly to ladies; some wondered
that one so young should abandon a world to them
beaming with bright and beautiful prospects; others,
with whom the dreams of life had passed, looked upon
her retirement as the part of wisdom. They embraced
her, and retired to make room for others. Before our
turn came there was an irruption of those objects of
my detestation, the eternal soldiers, who, leaving their


THE FAREWELL OF THE NUN. 223

muskets at the door, forced their way through the
crowd, and presenting themselves, though respectfully,
for an embrace, retired. By her side was a black nun,
with a veil so thick that not a lineament of her face
could be seen, whom my countrywoman had known du¬
ring her seclusion in the convent, and described as
young, of exceeding beauty and loveliness, and around
whom she threw a charm which almost awakened a
spirit of romance. I would have made some sacrifice
for one glimpse of her face. At length our tiu*n came ;
my fair companion embraced her, and, after many fare¬
well words, recommended me as her countryman. I
never had much practice in embracing nuns; in fact, it
was the first time I ever attempted such a thing; but
it came as natural as if I had been brought up to it.
My right arm encircled her neck, her right arm mine;
I rested my head upon her shoulder, and she hers upon
mine; but a friend’s grandmother never received a
more respectful embrace. ‘‘Stolen joys are always
dearest;” there were too many looking on. The gra¬
ting closed, and the face of the nun will never be seen
again.

That afternoon Carrera returned to the city. I was
extremely desirous to know him, and made an arrange¬
ment with Mr. Pavon to call upon him the next day.
At ten o’clock the next morning Mr. Pavon called for
me. I was advised that this formidable chief was taken
by external show, and put on the diplomatic coat, with
a great profusion of buttons, which had produced such
an effect at Copan, and which, by-the-way, owing to
the abominable state of the country, I never had an
opportunity of wearing afterward, and the cost of which
was a dead loss.

Carrera was living in a small house in a retired street.


224


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


Sentinels v^ere at the door, and eight or ten soldiers
basking in the sun outside, part of a body-guard, v^ho
had been fitted out v^ith red bombazet jackets and tar¬
tan plaid caps, and made a much better appearance
than any of his soldiers I had before seen. Along the
corridor v^as a row of muskets, bright and in good or¬
der. We entered a small room adjoining the sala, and
saw Carrera sitting at a table counting money.

Ever since my arrival in the country this name of
terror had been ringing in my ears. Mr. Montgomery,
to whom I have before referred, and who arrived in
Central America about a year before me, says, An in¬
surrection, I was told, had taken place among the In¬
dians, who, under the directions of a man called Car¬
rera, were ravaging the country and committing all
kinds of excesses. Along the coast, and in some of
the departments, tranquillity had not been disturbed;
but in the interior there was no safety for the traveller,
and every avenue to the capital was beset by parties of
brigands, who showed no mercy to their victims, espe¬
cially if they were foreigners and in referring to the
posture of affairs at his departure he adds, It is proba¬
ble, however, that while this is being written, the active
measures of General Morazan for putting down the in¬
surrection have been successful, and that the career of
this rebel hero has been brought to a close.” But the
career of the rebel hero” was not brought to a close;
the man called Carrera” was now absolute master of
Guatimala; and, if I am not deceived, he is destined
to become more conspicuous than any other leader who
has yet risen in the convulsions of Spanish America.

He is a native of one of the wards of Guatimala.
His friends, in compliment, call him a mulatto; I, for
the same reason, call him an Indian, considering that


THE CHOLERA.


225


the better blood of the two. In 1829 he was a drum¬
mer-boy in Colonel Aycinena’s regiment. When the
Liberal or Democratic party prevailed, and General
Morazan entered the city, Carrera broke his drum and
retired to the village of Matasquintla. Here he enter¬
ed into business as a pig-driver, and for several years
continued in this respectable occupation, probably as
free as one of his own pigs from any dreams of future
greatness. The excesses of political parties, severe ex¬
actions for the support of government, encroachments
upon the property of the Church, and innovations, par¬
ticularly the introduction of the Livingston Code, es¬
tablishing trial by jury, and making marriage a civil
contract, created discontent throughout the country.
The last gave great offence to the clergy, who exercised
an unbounded influence over the minds of the Indians.
In 1837 the cholera, which, in its destructive march
over the habitable world, had hitherto spared this por¬
tion of the American continent, made its terrible ap¬
pearance, and, besides strewing it with dead, proved
the immediate cause of political convulsions. The
priests persuaded the Indians that the foreigners had
poisoned the waters. Galvez, who was at that time the
chief of the state, sent medicines into all the villages,
which, being ignorantly administered, sometimes pro¬
duced fatal consequences ; and the priests, always oppo¬
sed to the Liberal party, persuaded the Indians that the
government was endeavouring to poison and destroy
their race. The Indians became excited all over the
country; and in Matasquintla they rose in mass, with
Carrera at their head, crying Viva la Religion, y
muerte a los Etr anger os !” The first blow was struck
by murdering the judges appointed lAider the Living-
ston Code. Galvez sent a commission, with detach-
VoL. I—F F


226


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


ments of cavalry and a white flag, to hear their com¬
plaints ; but while conferring with the insurgents they
were surrounded, and almost all of them cut to pieces.
The number of the disaffected increased to more than a
thousand, and Galvez sent against them six hundred
troops, who routed them, plundered and burned their
villages, and, among other excesses, the last outrage
was perpetrated upon Carrera’s wife. Roused to fury
by this personal wrong, he joined with several chiefs of
villages, vowing never to lay down his arms while an
officer of Morazan remained in the state. With a few
infuriated followers he went from village to village,
killing the judges and government officers, when pur¬
sued escaping to the mountains, begging tortillas at the
haciendas for his men, and sparing and protecting all
who assisted him. At this time he could neither read
nor write ; but, urged on and assisted by some priests,
particularly one Padre Lobo, a notorious profligate, he
issued a proclamation, having his name stamped at the
foot of it, against strangers and the government, for at¬
tempting to poison the Indians, demanding the destruc¬
tion of all foreigners excepting the Spaniards, the abo¬
lition of the Livingston Code, a recall of the archbishop
and friars, the expulsion of heretics, and a restora¬
tion of the privileges of the Church and old usages
and customs. His fame spread as a highwayman and
murderer ; the roads about Guatimala were unsafe ; all
travelling was broken up ; the merchants were thrown
into consternation by intelligence that the whole of the
goods sent to the fair at Esquipulas had fallen into his
hands (which, however, proved untrue) ; and very soon
he became so strong that he attacked villages and even
towns. «

The reader will bear in mind that this was in the


DISSENSIONS IN CENTRAL AMERICA. 227


State of Guatimala. The Liberal party was dominant,
but at this critical moment a fatal division took place
among its members; Barundia, a leading member, dis¬
appointed of a high office for a profligate relative, de¬
serted the administration, and appeared in the Assembly
at the head of the opposition. Party distraction and
the rising of Carrera stirred up all who were dissatisfied
with the government; and the citizens of the Antigua,
about twenty-five miles distant, sent in a petition for a
decree of amnesty for political offences, allowing exiles
to return, and a redress of other grievances. A depu¬
tation of the Assembly was sent to confer with them,
which returned unsuccessful, and the Antiguans threat¬
ened to march against Guatimala.

On Sunday, the twentieth of February (1838), proc¬
lamations of the Antiguanos were found strewed in the
streets, and there was a general alarm that the Antigua¬
nos were on their march to attack the city. The troops
of the general government (less than five hundred in
nurhber) and the militia were mustered; cannon placed
at the corners of the square, and sentinels in the streets;
and General Prem published a bando, calling upon all
citizens to take up arms. Galvez, the chief of the state,
mounted his horse, and rode through the streets, en¬
deavouring to rouse the citizens, and giving out that
Morazan was on his march, and had defeated three
hundred of Carrera’s gang. On Monday all business
was suspended. Galvez, in great perplexity, reinstated
some officers who had been dismissed, and appointed
Mexia, a Spaniard, lieutenant-colonel; which gave such
disgust that Prem and all the officers sent in their res¬
ignations. Galvez begged and implored them to con¬
tinue, reconciling himself to each individually; and at
length, on his revoking the commission of Mexia, they


228


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


consented. At two o’clock it was rumoured that Car¬
rera had joined the Antiguanos. Prem published a de¬
cree that all males from fourteen to sixty, except priests
and persons labouring under physical imbecility, should
take up arms. At nine o’clock at night there was an
alarm that a party of Carrera’s gang was at the Ayce-
tuna. The square was garrisoned, and sentinels and
cannons placed at the corners of the streets. To add
to the excitement, during the night the provesor died,
and news was received that the Livingston Code had
been publicly burned at Chiquimula, and that the town
had declared against Galvez. On Wednesday morn¬
ing fosses were commenced at the corners of the pub¬
lic square ; but on Thursday the Marquis of Aycinena,
the leader of the Central party, by a conference with
the divided Liberals, succeeded in inducing a majority
of deputies to sign a convention of amnesty, which gave
general satisfaction, and the next day the city was per¬
fectly quiet.

At midday this calm proved the forerunner of a
dreadful storm. The troops of the Federal govern¬
ment, the only reliable force, revolted, and with bayo¬
nets fixed, colours flying, and cannon in front, left the
barracks and marched into the plaza. They refused to
ratify the convention by which, it was represented to
them, Galvez was to be deposed, and Valenzuela, the
vice-chief, and a tool of Barundia, appointed in his
stead. They refused to serve under any of the opposi¬
tion, and said they could give protection, and had no
occasion to ask it. Deputies were cited to attend a
meeting of the Assembly, but they were afraid to con¬
vene. The officers had a conference with the soldiers;
and Merino, a sergeant, drew up a document requiring
the President Morazan to be sent for, and Galvez to


CIVIL WAR.


229


remain chief until his arrival. This was assented to.
Deputies were sent requesting Morazan to come to Gua-
timala, and also to the Antigua, to explain the circum¬
stances of violating the convention; but they were un¬
successful, and the same night the alarm-bell announced
the approach of eight hundred men to attack the city.
The militia were called to arms, but only about forty
appeared. At half past five Galvez formed the gov¬
ernment troops, and, accompanied by Prem, marched
from the plaza to meet the rebels; but before he reach¬
ed the gate a conspiracy broke out among the troops,
and with the cry ‘‘ Viva el General Merino, y muera el
Gefe del Estado, qui nos ha vendido—fuego, mucha-
chos !” Live General Merino, and die the chief of
the state, who has sold us—fire, boys,” the infantry fired
upon the etat major. A ball passed through Prem’s
hat; Galvez was thrown from his horse, but escaped,
and took refuge behind the altar of the Church of La
Concepcion. Yariez succeeded in dispersing the troops
with his cavalry, and returned to the square, leaving
fifteen dead in the street. Merino, with about a hun¬
dred and twenty men, took possession of the small field-
piece of the battalion, and stationed himself in the square
of Guadaloupe, Parties of the dispersed troops re¬
mained out all night, firing their muskets, and keeping
the city in a state of alarm; but Yanez saved it from
plunder by patrolling with his cavalry. In the morning
Merino asked permission to march into the plaza. His
number had increased by the return of straggling par¬
ties ; and on forming in the plaza he and three or four
of the ringleaders were ordered to leave the ranks, and
sent to prison in the convent of San Domingo, where,
on Monday afternoon, he was tied to a stake in his cell
and shot. His grave at the foot of the stake, and blood

20


230


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


spattered on the wall, were among the curiosities shown
to me in Guatimala,

On Sunday morning the bells again sounded the
alarm ; the rebels were at the old gate, and commis¬
sioners were sent out to treat with them. They de¬
manded an evacuation of the plaza by the soldiers ; but
the soldiers answered, indignantly, that the rebels
might come and take the square. Prem softened this
into an answer that they could not surrender to rebels,
and at about half past twelve at night the attack com¬
menced. The rebels scattered in the suburbs, wasting
powder and bullets, and in the morning Yanez, with
seventy cavalry, made a sally, and, routing three hun¬
dred of them, returned into the plaza with lances reek¬
ing with blood. Probably, if he had been seconded by
the citizens, he would have driven them all back to the
Antigua.

On Wednesday Carrera joined the rebels. He had
sent his emissaries to the villages, rousing the Indians,
and promising them the plunder of Guatimala ; and on
Thursday, with a tumultuous mass of half-naked sava¬
ges, men, women, and children, estimated at ten or
twelve thousand, presented himself at the gate of the
city. The Antiguanos themselves were struck with con¬
sternation, and the citizens of Guatimala were thrown
into a state bordering on distraction. Commissioners
were again sent out to treat with him, from whom he
demanded the deposition of Galvez, the chief of the
state, the evacuation of the plaza by the Federal troops,
and a free passage into the city. Probably, even at this
time, if the Federal troops had been supported by the
citizens they could have resisted the entry ; but the
consternation, and the fear of exasperating the rebel¬
lious hordes, were so great, that nothing was thought of


APPEARANCE OF CARRERA.


231


but submission. The Assembly met in terror and dis¬
traction, and the result was an assent to all that was
demanded.

At five o’clock the small band of government troops
evacuated the plaza. The infantry, amounting to three
hundred, marched out by the Calle Real, or Royal-
street. The cavalry, seventy in number, exclusive of
officers, on their march through another street, met an
aiddecamp of Carrera, who ordered them to lay down
their arms. Yanez answered that he must first see his
general; but the dragoons, suspecting some treachery
on the part of Valenzuela, became panic-struck, and
fled. Yanez, with thirty-five men, galloped through
the city, and escaped by the road to Mixco ; the rest
rushed back into the plaza, threw down their lances in
disgust, dismounted and disappeared, when not a single
man was left under arms.

In the mean time Carrera’s hordes were advancing.
The commandant of the Antiguans asked him if he had
his masses divided into squares or companies ; he an¬
swered, ^^No entiendo nada de eso. Todo es uno.”

I don’t understand anything of that. It is all the
same.” Among his leaders were Monreal and other
known outlaws, criminals, robbers, and murderers.
He himself was on horseback, with a green bush in his
hat, and hung round with pieces of dirty cotton cloth,
covered with pictures of the saints. A gentleman who
saw them from the roof of his house, and who was fa¬
miliar with all the scenes of terror which had taken
place in that unhappy city, told me that he never felt
such consternation and horror as when he saw the entry
of this immense mass of barbarians; choking up the
streets, all with green bushes in their hats, seeming at
a distance like a moving forest; armed with rusty mus-


232


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


kets, old pistols, fowling-pieces, some with locks and
some without; sticks formed into the shape of muskets,
with tin-plate locks; clubs, machetes, and knives tied
to the ends of long poles; and swelling the multitude
were two or three thousand women, with sacks and al-
forgas for carrying away the plunder. Many, who had
never left their villages before, looked wild at the sight
of the houses and churches, and the magnificence of
the city. They entered the plaza, vociferating Viva
la religion, y muerte a los etrangeros Carrera him¬
self, amazed at the immense ball he had set in motion,
was so embarrassed that he could not guide his horse.
He afterward said that he was frightened at the diffi¬
culty of controlling this huge and disorderly mass.
The traitor Barundia, the leader of the opposition, the
Catiline of this rebellion, rode by his side on his entry
into the plaza.

At sundown the whole multitude set up the Salve, or
Hymn to the Virgin. The swell of human voices filled
the air, and made the hearts of the inhabitants quake
with fear. Carrera entered the Cathedral; the Indians,
in mute astonishment at its magnificence, thronged in
after him, and set up around the beautiful altar the un¬
couth images of their village saints. Monreal broke
into the house of General Prem, and seized a uniform
coat, richly embroidered with gold, into which Carrera
slipped his arms, still wearing his straw hat with its
green bush. A watch was brought him, but he did not
know the use of it. Probably, since the invasion of
Rome by Alaric and the Goths, no civilized city was
ever visited by such an inundation of barba,rians.

And Carrera alone had power to control the wild ele¬
ments around him. As soon as possible some of the
authorities sought him out, and in the most abject terms


CAPTURE OF GUATIMALA.


233


begged him to state on what conditions he would evac¬
uate the city. He demanded the deposition of Galvez^
the chief of the state, all the money, and all the arms
the government could command. The priests were the
only people who had any influence with him, and words
^ cannot convey any idea of the awful state of suspense
which the city suflered, dreading every moment to hear
the signal given for general pillage and massacre. The
inhabitants shut themselves up in their houses, which,
being built of stone, with iron balconies to the win¬
dows, and doors several inches thick, resisted the as¬
saults of straggling parties; but atrocities more than
enough were committed, as it seemed, preliminary to a
general sacking. The vice-president of the republic
was murdered ; the house of Flores, a deputy, sacked,
his mother knocked down by a villain with the butt of
a musket, and one of his daughters shot in the arm with
two balls.

The house of Messrs. Klee, Skinner, & Co., the
principal foreign merchants in Guatimala, which was
reported to contain ammunition and arms, was several
times attacked with great ferocity; having strong bal¬
conied windows, and the door being secured by bales
of merchandise piled up within, it resisted the assaults
of an undisciplined mob, armed only with clubs, mus¬
kets, knives, and machetes. The priests ran through
the streets bearing the crucifix, in the name of the Vir¬
gin and saints restraining the lawless Indians, stilling
the wildness of passion, and saving the terrified inhab¬
itants. And I cannot help mentioning one whose name
was in everybody’s mouth, Mr. Charles Savage, at that
time United States consul, who, in the midst of the
most furious assault upon Mr. Klee’s house, rushed
down the street under a shower of bullets, knocking up

VoL. I.—G G


234


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


bayonets and machetes, drove the mob back from the
door, and, btranding them as robbers and murderers,
with his white hair streaming in the wind, poured out
such a torrent of indignation and contempt, that the In¬
dians, amazed at his audacity, desisted. After this,
with an almost wanton exposure of life, he was seen
in the midst of every mob. To the astonishment of
everybody, he was not killed ; and the foreign residents
presented him a unanimous letter of thanks for his fear¬
less and successful exertions in the protection of life
and property.

Pending the negotiation, Carrera, dressed in Prem’s
uniform, endeavoured to restrain his tumultuous follow¬
ers ; but several times he said that he could not himself
resist the temptation to sack Klee’s house, and those of
the other Ingleses. There was a strange dash of fanat¬
icism in the character of this lawless chieftain. The
battle-cry of his hordes was “ Viva la religion !” The
palace of the archbishop had been suffered to be used
as a theatre by the Liberals; Carrera demanded the
keys, and, putting them in his pocket, declared that, to
prevent any future pollution, it should not be opened
again until the banished archbishop returned to occu¬
py it.

At length the terms upon which he consented to with¬
draw were agreed upon, viz., eleven thousand dollars
in silver, ten thousand to be distributed among his fol¬
lowers, and one thousand for his own share ; a thou¬
sand muskets, and a commission as lieutenant-colonel
for himself. The amount of money was small as the
price of relief from such imminent danger, but it was
an immense sum in the eyes of Carrera and his follow¬
ers, few of whom were worth more than the rags on
their backs and the stolen arms in their hands ; and it


CARRERA TRIUMPHANT.


235


was not easily raised; the treasury was bankrupt, and
the money was not very cheerfully contributed by the
citizens. The madness of consenting to put in the
hands of Carrera a thousand muskets was only equalled
by the absurdity of making him a lieutenant-colonel.

On the afternoon of the third day the money was
paid, the muskets delivered, and Carrera was invested
with the command of the province of Mita, a district
near Guatimala. The joy of the inhabitants at the
prospect of his immediate departure was without
bounds; but at the last moment an awful rumour
spread, that the wild bands had evinced an uncontrol¬
lable eagerness, before leaving, to sack the city. A
random discharge of muskets in the plaza confirmed
this rumour, and the effect was dreadful. An hour of
terrible suspense followed, but at five o’clock they filed
off in straggling crowds from the plaza. At the Plaza
de Toros they halted, and, firing their muskets in the
air, created another panic. A rumour was revived that
Carrera had demanded four thousand dollars more, and
that, unless he received it, he would return and take it
by force. Carrera himself did actually return, and de¬
manded a fieldpiece, which was given him; and at*
length, leaving behind him a document requiring the
redress of certain grievances, to the unspeakable joy
of all the inhabitants he left the city.

The delight of the citizens at being relieved from
the pressure of immediate danger was indeed great,
but there was no return of confidence, and, unhappily,
no healing of political animosities. Valenzuela was
appointed chief of the state ; the Assembly renewed its
distracted sessions; Barundia, as the head of the now
ministerial party, proposed to abolish all the unconsti¬
tutional decrees of Galvez; money was wanted, and


236


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


recourse had to the old system of forced loans. This
exasperated the moneyed men ; and in the midst of dis¬
cord and confusion news was received that Quezalte-
nango, one of the departments of Guatimala, had se¬
ceded, and declared itself a separate state. At this
time, too, the government received a letter from Car¬
rera, stating that he had been informed, since his ar¬
rival at Matasquintla, that people spoke ill of him in
the capital, and if they continued to do so he had four
thousand men, and would return and put things right.
From time to time he sent a message to the same effect
by some straggling Indian who happened to pass
through his village. Afterward it was reported that
his followers had renounced his authority and com¬
menced operations on their own account, threatening
the city with another invasion, determined, according
to their proclamations, to exterminate the whites and es¬
tablish a government of pardos libres, free tigers,’’ and
enjoy in their own right the lands which had devolved
upon them by their emancipation from the dominion of
the whites. To the honour of Guatimala, a single
spark of spirit broke forth, and men of all classes took
up arms ; but it was a single flash, and soon died away.
Again intelligence arrived that Carrera himself had sent
out his emissaries to summon his hordes for another
march upon the city. Several families received pri¬
vate information and advice to seek safety in flight.
Hundreds of people did so, and the roads were crowd¬
ed with processions of mules, horses, and Indians
loaded with luggage. On Sunday everybody was go¬
ing, and early on Monday morning guards were placed
at the barriers. Hundreds of passports were applied
for and refused. Again a decree was published that
all should take up arms. The militia were again mus-


ARRIVAL OF MORAZAN.


237


tered. At ten o’clock on Tuesday night it was said
that Carrera was at Palencia, at eleven that he had
gone to suppress an insurrection of his own bandits,
and on Wednesday night that he was at a place called
Canales. On Sunday, the fourth of March, a review
took place of about seven hundred men. The Anti¬
gua sent three hundred and fifty muskets, and ammuni¬
tion, which they did not consider it prudent to keep, as
there had been cries of “ muera Guatimala, y viva Car¬
rera !” and placards bearing the same ominous words
had been posted on the walls. At this time a letter
was received from Carrera by the government, advi¬
sing them to disband their troops, and assuring them
that he was collecting forces only to destroy a party of
four hundred rebels, headed by one Galvez (the for*
mer chief of the state, whom he had deposed), and re¬
questing two cannon and more ammunition. At an¬
other time, probably supposing that the government
must be interested in his fortunes, he sent word that he
had narrowly escaped being assassinated. Monreal
had taken advantage of an opportunity, seduced his
men, tied him to a tree, and was in the very act of
having him shot, when his brother Sotero Carrera
rushed in, and ran Monreal through with his bayonet.
The government now conceived the project of inducing
his followers, by the influence of the priests, to surren¬
der their arms on paying them five dollars apiece; but
very soon he was heard of stronger than ever, occupy¬
ing all the roads, sending in imperious proclamations to
the government, and at length the news came that he
was actually marching upon the city.

At this time, to the unspeakable joy of the inhabi¬
tants, General Morazan, the president of the republic,
arrived from San Salvador, with fifteen hundred men.


238


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


But even yet party spirit was dominant. General Mo-
razan encamped a few leagues from the city, hesitating
to enter it or to employ the forces of the general gov¬
ernment in putting down a revolution in the state ex¬
cept with the consent of the state government. The
state government was jealous of the federal govern¬
ment, tenacious of prerogatives it had not the cour¬
age to defend, and demanded from the president a plan
of his campaign ; passed a decree offering Carrera and
his followers fifteen days to lay down their arms, which
General Morazan would not permit to be published at
his headquarters; two days afterward annulled it, and
authorized the president of the republic to act as cir¬
cumstances might require.

During this time one of Morazan’s piquets had been
cut off and the officers murdered, which created a great
excitement among his soldiers ; but, anxious to avoid
shedding more blood, he sent into the city for the Ca-
nonigo Castillo and Barundia, deputing them as com¬
missioners to persuade the bandits to surrender their
arms, even offering to pay fifteen dollars a head rather
than come to extremities. The commissioners found
Carrera at one of his old haunts among the mountains
of Matasquintla, surrounded by hordes of Indians liv¬
ing upon tortillas. The traitor Barundia had been re¬
ceived by Morazan’s soldiers with groans ; his poor
jaded horse was tied up at Morazan’.s camp a day and
a half without a blade of grass ; and, as a farther reward
of his treason, Carrera refused to meet him under a roof,
because, as he said, he did not wish to plunge his new
lance, a present from a priest, into Barundia’s breast.

The meeting took place in the open air, and on the
top of a mountain. Carrera refused to lay down his
arms unless all his former demands were complied


HOSTILITIES.


289


with, and unless also the Indian capitation tax was
reduced to one third of its amount; but he softened
his asperity against foreigners to the demand that
only those not married should be expelled the coun¬
try, and that thereafter they should be permitted to
traffic only, and not to radicate in it. The atrocious
priest Padre Lobo, his constant friend and adviser, was
with him. The arguments of the Canonigo Castillo,
particularly in regard to the folly of charging the gov¬
ernment with an attempt to poison the Indians, were
listened to with much attention by them, but Carrera
broke up the conference by asserting vehemently that
the government had offered him twenty dollars a head
for every Indian he poisoned.

All hope of compromise was now at an end, and
General Morazan marched immediately to Matasquint-
la ; but before he reached it Carrera’s bands had disap¬
peared among the mountains. He heard of them in
another place, devastating the coimtry, desolating vil¬
lages and towns, and again, before his troops could
reach them, the muskets were concealed, and the In¬
dians either in the mountains or quietly working in the
fields. Mr. Hall, the British vice-consul, received a
letter from eleven British subjects at Salama, a dis¬
tance of three days’ journey, stating that they had been
seized at night by a party of Carrera’s troops, stripped
of everything, confined two nights and a day without
food, and sentenced to be shot, but finally ordered to
leave the country, which they were then doing, destitute
of everything, and begging their way to the port. A
few nights after, at ten o’clock, the cannon of alarm
was sounded in the city, and it was reported that
Carrera was again at the gates. All this time party
strife was as violent as ever ; the Centralists trembling


240


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


with apprehension, but in their hearts rejoicing at the
distraction of the country under the administration of
the Liberals, and that one had risen up capable of in¬
spiring them with terror ; and the divided'Liberals ha¬
ting each other with a more intense hate even than the
Centralists bore to them ; but the excitement became so
great that all the parties drew up separate petitions to
General Morazan, representing the deplorable state of
insecurity in the city, and begging him to enter and
provide for its safety. Separate sets of deputies hur¬
ried to anticipate each other at General Morazan’s
headquarters, and pay court to him by being the first to
ask his protection. General Morazan had become ac¬
quainted with the distracted condition of the city, and
was in the act of mounting his horse when the deputies
arrived. On Sunday he entered with an escort of two
hundred soldiers, amid the ringing of bells, firing of
cannon, and other demonstrations of joy. The same
day the merchants, with the Marquis of Aycinena and
others of the Central party, presented a petition repre¬
senting the dreadful state of public feeling, and request-^
ing Morazan to depose the state authorities and assume
the reins of government, and to convoke a Constituent
Assembly, as the only means of saving Guatimala from
utter ruin. In the evening deputies from the different
branches of the Liberal party had long conferences
with the president. Morazan answered all that he
wished to act legally, would communicate with the As¬
sembly the next day, and be governed by their deci¬
sion. The proceedings in the Assembly are too afflict¬
ing and disgraceful to dwell upon. So far as I can un¬
derstand the party strife of that time, after wading
through papers and pamphlets emanating from both
sides, General Morazan conducted himself with probi-


PURSUIT OP CARRERA.


241


ty and honour. The Centralists made a desperate ef¬
fort to attach him to them, but he would not accept the
offered embrace, nor the sycophantic service of men
who had always opposed him; nor would he sustain
what he believed to be wrong in his own partisans.

In the mean time Carrera was gaining ground; he
had routed several detachments of the Federal troops,
massacred men, and increased his stock of ammunition
and arms. At length all agreed that something must
be done ; and at a final meeting of the Assembly, with
a feeling of desperation, it was decreed without debate,

1. That the state government should retire to the
Antigua.

2. That the president, in person or by delegate,
should govern the district according to article 176 of
the Constitution.

Amid these scenes within the city, and rumours of
worse from without, oh Sunday night a ball was given
to Morazan; but the Centralists, displeased at his not
acceding to their overtures, did not attend. Galvez,
the chief deposed by Carrera, made his first appearance
since his .deposition, and danced the whole time.

Though Morazan was irresolute in the cabinet, he
was all energy in the field; and being now invested
with full power, sustained his high reputation as a skil¬
ful soldier. The bulletin of the army for May and
June exhibits the track of Carrera, devastating villages
and towns, and the close pursuit of the government
troops, beating him wherever they found him, but never
able to secure his person. In the mean time, party
jealousies continued, and the state government was in
a state of anarchy. The Assembly could not meet, be¬
cause, the state party not attending, it was incumbent on
the vice-chief to retire, and the oldest counsellor to take
VoL. I.—H H 21


242


IKCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


his place. But there was no such person ; the term of
the council had expired, and no hew elections had been
held; and while Morazan was dispersing the wild bands
of Carrera, and relieving the Guatimalians from the
danger which had brought them to their knees before
him, the old jealousies revived, and incendiary publica¬
tions were issued, charging him with exhausting the
country in supporting idle soldiers, and keeping the city
in subjection by bayonets.

About the first of July General Morazan considered
Guatimala relieved from all external danger, and re¬
turned to San Salvador, leaving troops in different
towns under the command of Carvallo, and appointing
Carlos Salazar commandant in the city. Carrera was
supposed to be completely put down; and to bring
things to a close, Carvallo published the following

“NOTICE.

“ The person or persons who may deliver the criminal Rafael Carrera, dead or
alive (if he does not present himself voluntarily under the last pardon), shall re¬
ceive a reward of fifteen hundred dollars and two cabellerias of land, and pardon
for any crime he has committed.

“ The general-in-chief,

“ Guatimala^ July 20, 1838. J. N. Carvallo.”

But the “criminal” Carrera, the proscribed outlaw,
was not yet put down. One by one, he surprised the
detachments of Federal troops ; and while the city ex¬
hibited the fierceness of party spirit, forced loans, com¬
plaints of the expense of maintaining idle soldiers, plans
to abolish the state government and form a provisional
junta, its actual prostration, and the organizing of a
Constituent Assembly with M. Rivera Paz at the head,
Carrera, with still increasing numbers, attacked Amati-
tan, took the Antigua, and, barely waiting to sack a few
houses, stripped it of cannon, muskets, and ammuni-


DEFEAT OF CARRERA.


243


tioiij and again marched against Guatimala, proclaim¬
ing his intention to raze every house to the ground, and
murder every vrhite inhabitant.

The consternation in the city cannot be conceived.
General Morazan was again solicited to come. A line
in pencil was received from him by a man who carried
it sewed up in the sleeve of his coat, urging the city to
defend itself and hold out for a few days ; but the dan¬
ger was too imminent; Salazar, at the head of the
Federal troops (the idle soldiers complained of), march¬
ed out at two o’clock in the morning, and, aided by a
thick fog, came upon Carrera suddenly at Villa Nueva,
killed four hundred and fifty of his men, and complete¬
ly routed him, Carrera himself being badly wounded
in the thigh. The city was saved from destruction,
and the day after Morazan entered with a thousand
men. The shock of the immense danger they had es¬
caped was not yet over ; on the morrow it might re¬
turn ; party jealousies were scared away; all looked to
General Morazan as the only man who could effectually
save them from Carrera, and, in turn, begged him to
accept the office of dictator.

About the same time Guzman, the general of Quez-
altenango, arrived, with seven hundred men, and Gen¬
eral Morazan made formidable arrangements to enclose
and crush the Cachurecos. The result was the same
as before : Carrera was constantly beaten, but as con¬
stantly escaped. His followers were scattered, his best
men taken and shot, and he himself was penned up and
almost starved on the top of a mountain, with a cordon
of soldiers around its base, and only escaped by the re¬
missness of the guard. In three months, chased from
place to place, his old haunts broken up, and hemmed
in on every side, he entered into a treaty with Guzman,


244


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


by which he agreed to deliver up one thousand mus¬
kets, and disband his remaining followers. In execu¬
ting the treaty, however, he delivered only four hundred
muskets, and those old and worthless ; and this breach
of the convention was winked at by Guzman, little
dreaming of the terrible fate reserved for himself at
Carrera’s hands.

This over, Morazan deposed Rivera Paz, restored
Salazar, and returned to San Salvador, first laying
heavy contributions on the city to support the expense
of the war, and taking with him all the soldiers of the
Federal Government, belying one of the party cries
against him, that he was attempting to retain an influ¬
ence in the city by bayonets. Guzman returned to
Quezaltenango, and the garrison consisted only of sev¬
enty men.

The contributions and the withdrawal of the troops
from the city created great dissatisfaction with Morazan,
and at this time the political horizon became cloudy
throughout the republic. The Marquis of Aycinena,
who had been banished by Morazan, and had resided
several years in the United States, studying our institu¬
tions, by a series of articles which were widely circu¬
lated, purporting to illustrate our constitution and laws,
hurried on the crisis ; Honduras and Costa Rica de¬
clared their independence of the general government:
all this came back upon Guatimala, and added fuel to
the already flaming fire of dissension.

On the 24th of March, 1839, Carrera issued a bulle¬
tin from his old quarters in Matasquintla, in which,
referring to the declaration of independence by the
States, he says : When those laws came to my hands,
I read them and returned to them very often ; as a
loving mother clasps in her arms an only son whom she


CARRERA AGAIN UPPERMOST.


245


believed lost, and presses him against her heart, so did
I with the pamphlet that contained the declaration; for
in it I found the principles that I sustain and the reforms
I desire.” This was rather figurative, as Carrera could
not at that time read; but it must have been quite
- new to him, and a satisfaction to find out what princi¬
ples he sustained. Again he threatened to enter the
city. All was anarchy and distraction in the councils,
and on the twelfth of April his hordes appeared before
the gates. All were aghast, but there was no rising to
repel him. Morazan was beyond the reach of their
voice, and they who had been loudest in denouncing
him for attempting to control the city by bayonets now
denounced him for leaving them to the mercy of Car¬
rera. All who could hid away their treasures and fled ;
the rest shut themselves up in their houses, barring
their doors and windows, and at two o’clock in the
morning, routing the guard, he entered with fifteen hun¬
dred men. Salazar, the commandant, fled, and Car¬
rera, riding up to the house of Rivera Paz, knocked at
the door, and reinstalled him chief of the state. His
soldiers took up their quarters in the barracks, and
Carrera established himself as the guardian of the city;
and it is due to him to say that he acknowledged his
own incompetency to govern, and placed men at the
disposition of the municipality to , preserve the peace.
The Central party was thus restored to power. Car¬
rera’s fanaticism bound him to the Church party; he
was flattered by his association and connexion with the
aristocracy, was made brigadier-general, and present¬
ed with a handsome uniform ; and, besides empty hon¬
ours, he, had the city barracks and pay for his men,
which was better than Indian huts and foraging expe¬
ditions ; the last, too, being a resource for pastime. The


^46


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


league had continued since the April preceding my ar¬
rival. The great bond of union was hatred of Mora-
zan and the Liberals. The Centralists had their Con*
stituent Assembly, abolished the laws made by the Lib-
* erals, revived old Spanish laws and old names for the
courts of justice and officers of government, and passed
any laws they pleased so that they did not interfere
with him. Their great difficulty was to keep him
quiet. Unable to remain inactive in the city, he march¬
ed toward San Salvador, for the ostensible purpose of
attacking General Morazan. The Centralists were in
a state of great anxiety; Carrera’s success or his de¬
feat was alike dangerous to them. If defeated, Mora¬
zan might march directly upon the city, and take sig¬
nal vengeance upon them; if successful, he might re¬
turn with his barbarians so intoxicated by victory as to
be utterly uncontrollable. A little circumstance shows
the position of things. Carrera’s mother, an old wom¬
an well-known, as a huckster on the plaza, died.
Formerly it was the custom with the higher classes to
bury in vaults constructed within the churches; but from
the time of the cholera, all burials, without distinction,
were forbidden in the churches, and even within the
city, and a campo santo was established outside the
town, in which all the principal families had vaults.
Carrera signified his pleasure that his mother should
be buried in the Cathedral! The government char¬
ged itself with the funeral, issued cards of invitation,
and all the principal inhabitants followed in the pro¬
cession. No efforts were spared to conciliate and
keep him in good temper ; but he was subject to violent-
bursts of passion, and, it was said, had cautioned the
members of the government at such moments not to
attempt to argue with him, but to let him have his own


INTERVIEW WITH CARRERA. 247

way. Such was Carrera, at the time of my visit more
absolute master of Guatimala than any king in Europe
of his dominions, and by the fanatic Indians called el
Hico de Dios, the Son of God, and nuestro Senor, our
Lord.

. When I entered the room he was sitting at a table
counting sixpenny and shilling pieces. Colonel Monte
Rosa, a dark Mestitzo, in a dashing uniform, was sitting
by his side, and several other persons were in the room. ,
He was about five feet six inches in height, with
straight black hair, an Indian complexion and expres¬
sion, without beard, and did not seem to be more than
twenty-one years old. He wore a black bombazet
roundabout jacket and pantaloons. He rose as we en¬
tered, pushed the money on one side of the table, and,
prob^ibly out of respect to my coat, received me with
courtesy, and gave me a chair at his side. My first
remark was an expression of surprise at his extreme
youth ; he answered that he was but twenty-three years
old ; certainly he was not more than twenty-five ; and
then, as a man conscious that he was something extra¬
ordinary, and that I knew it, without waiting for any
leading questions, he continued, that he had begun (he
did not say what) with thirteen men armed with old
muskets, which they were obliged to fire with cigars ;
pointed to eight places in whiclj he had been wounded,
and said that he had three balls then in his body. At
this time he could hardly be recognised as the same
man who, less than two years before, had entered Gua¬
timala with a horde of wild Indians, proclaiming death
to strangers. Indeed, in no particular had he changed
more than in his opinion of foreigners, a happy illustra¬
tion of the effect of personal intercourse in breaking
down prejudices against individuals or classes. He


248


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


had become personally acquainted with several, one of
whom, an English doctor, had extracted a ball from
his side; and his intercourse with all had been so sat¬
isfactory, that his feelings had undergone an entire re¬
vulsion; and he said that they were the only people
who never deceived him. He had done, too, what .1
consider extraordinary; in the intervals of his hurried
life he had learned to write his name, and had thrown
aside his stamp. I never had the fortune to be pre¬
sented to any legitimate king, nor to any usurper of
the prerogatives of royalty except Mohammed Ali.
Old as he was, I gave him some good advice; and it
grieves me that the old lion is now shorn of his mane#
Considering Carrera a promising young man, I told
him that he had a long career before him, and might
do much good to his country; and he laid his hand
upon his heart, and with a burst of feeling that I did
not expect, said he was determined to sacrifice his life
for his country. With all his faults and his crimes,
none ever accused him of duplicity, or of saying what
he did not mean; and, perhaps, as many self-deceiving
men have done before him, he believes himself a pa¬
triot.

I considered that he was destined to exercise an im¬
portant, if not a controlling influence on the affairs of
Central America; and trusting that hopes of honoura¬
ble and extended fame might have some effect upon his
character, I told him that his name had already reached
my country, and that I had seen in the newspapers an
account of his last entry into Guatimala, with praises
of his moderation and exertions to prevent atrocities.
He expressed himself pleased that his name was known,
and such mention made of him among strangers; and
said he was not a robber and murderer, as he was called


CHARACTER OF CARRERA.


249


by his enemies. He seemed intelligent and capable
of improvement, and I told him that he ought to trav¬
el into other countries, and particularly, from its con¬
tiguity, into mine. He had a very indefinite notion as
to where my country was ; he knew it only as El
Norte, or the North; inquired about the distance and
facility for getting there, and said that, when the wars
were over, he would endeavour to make El Norte
a visit. But he could not fix his thoughts upon any¬
thing except the wars and Morazan ; in fact, he knew
of nothing else. He was boyish in his manners and
manner of speaking, but very grave ; he never smiled,
and, conscious of power, was unostentatious in the ex¬
hibition of it, though he always spoke in the first per¬
son of what he had done and what he intended to do.
One of the hangers-on, evidently to pay court to him,
looked for a paper bearing his signature to show me as
a specimen of his handwriting, but did not find one.
My interview with him was much more interesting
than I had expected ; so young, so humble in his ori¬
gin, so destitute of early advantages, with honest im¬
pulses, perhaps, but ignorant, fanatic, sanguinary, and
the slave of violent passions, wielding absolutely the
physical force of the country, and that force entertain¬
ing a natural hatred to the whites. At parting he ac¬
companied me to the door, and in the presence of his
villanous soldiers made me a free offer of his services.
I understood that I had the good fortune to make a fa¬
vourable impression; and afterward, but, unluckily,
during my absence, he called upon me in full dress
and in state, which for him was an unusual thing.

At that time, as Don Manuel Pavon told me, he pro¬
fessed to consider himself a brigadier-general, subject
to the orders of the government. He had no regular

VoL. I.--I I


250


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


allowance for the maintenance of himself and troops;
he did not like keeping accounts, and called for money
when he wanted it; and, with this understanding, in
eight months he had not required more than Morazan
did in two. He really did not want money for himself,
and as a matter of policy he paid the Indians but little.
This operated powerfully with the aristocracy, upon
whom the whole burden of raising money devolved.
It may be a satisfaction to some of my friends to know
that this lawless chief is under ’ a dominion to which
meeker men are loth to submit; his wife accompa¬
nies him on horseback in all his expeditions, influenced
by a feeling which is said to proceed sometimes from
excess of affection ; and I have heard that it is no un¬
important part of the business of the chief of the state
to settle family jars.

As we were returning to my house, we met a gen¬
tleman who told Mr. Pavon that a party of soldiers
was searching for a member of the Assembly who was
lying under the displeasure of Carrera, but a personal
friend of theirs; and as we passed on we saw a file
of soldiers drawn up before his door, while others were
inside searching the house. This was done by Car¬
rera’s orders, without any knowledge on the part of the
government.


f


PARTY TO MIXCO.


251


CHAPTER XIL

Party to Mixco.—A Scene of Pleasure.—Procession in Honour of the Patron
Saint of Mixco.—Fireworks.—A Bombardment.—Smoking Cigars.—A Night-
brawl.—Suffering and Sorrow.—A Cockfight.—A Walk in the Suburbs.—Sun¬
day Amusements.—Return to the City.

In consequence of the convulsions and danger of the
times, the city was dull, and there was no gayety in
private circles; but an effort had been made by some
enterprising ladies to break the monotony, and a party,
to which I was invited, was formed for that afternoon
to Mixco, an Indian village about three leagues distant,
at which the festival of its patron saint was to be cele¬
brated the next day with Indian rites.

At four o’clock in the afternoon I left my door on
horseback, to call on Don Manuel Pavon. His house
was next to that of the proscribed deputy, and a line of
soldiers was drawn around the whole block, with the
purpose of preventing an escape, while every house
was searched. I always gave these gentlemen a wide
berth when I could, but it was necessary to ride along
the whole line; and as I passed the house of the dep¬
uty, with the door closed and sentinels before it, I could
but think of his distressed family, in agony lest his hi¬
ding-place should be discovered.

Don Manuel was waiting for me, and we rode to the
house of one of the ladies of the party, a young widow
whom I had not seen before, and who, in her riding-
dress, made a fine appearance. Her horse was ready,
and when she had kissed the old people good-by we
carried her off. The women-servants, with familiarity


252


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


and affection, followed to the door, and continued fare¬
well greetings and cautions to take good care of her¬
self, which the lady answered as long as we were
within hearing. We called at two or three other
houses, and then all assembled at the place of rendez¬
vous. The courtyard was full of horses, with every va¬
riety of fanciful mountings. Although we were going
only nine miles, and to a large Indian village, it was
necessary to carry beds, bedding, and provisions. A
train of servants large enough to carry stores for a small
military expedition was sent ahead, and we all started.
Outside the gate all the anxieties and perils which
slumbered in the city were forgotten. Our road lay
over an extensive plain, seeming, as the sun went down
behind the volcanoes of Agua and Fuego, a beautiful
bowling-green, in which our party, preceded by a long
file of Indians with loads on their backs, formed a
picture. I was surprised to find that the ladies were
not good horsewomen. They never ride for pleasure,
and, on account of the want of accommodation on the
road, seldom travel.

It was after dark when we reached the borders of
a deep ravine separating the plain from Mixeo. We
descended, and, rising on the other side, emerged from /
the darkness of the ravine into an illuminated street,
and, at two or three horses’ lengths, into a plaza bla¬
zing with lights and crowded with people, nearly all
Indians in holyday costume. In the centre of the plaza
was a fine fountain, and at the head of it a gigantic
church. We rode up to the house that had been pro¬
vided for the ladies, and, leaving them there, the gen¬
tlemen scattered to find lodgings for themselves. The
door of every house was open, and the only question
asked was whether there was room. Some of the


A SCENE OP PLEASURE.


253


young men did not give themselves this trouble, as
they were disposed to make a night of it; and Mr. P.
and I, having secured a place, returned to the house oc¬
cupied by the ladies. In one corner was a tienda about
ten feet square, partitioned off and shelved, which served
as a place for their hats and shawls. The rest of the
room contained merely a long table and benches. In a
few moments the ladies were ready, and we all sallied
out for a walk. All the streets and passages were brill¬
iantly illuminated, and across some were arches decora¬
ted with evergreens and lighted, and at the corners were
altars under arbours of branches adorned with flowers.
The spirit of frolic seemed to take possession of our file-
leaders, who, as the humour prompted them, entered
any house, and after a lively chat left it, contriving to
come out just as the last of the party were going in. In
one house they found a poncha rolled up very carefully,
with the end of a guitar sticking out. The proprietor
of the house only knew that it belonged to a young man
from Guatimala, who had left it as an indication of his
intention to pass the night there. One of the young
men unrolled the poncha, and some loaves of bread
fell out, which he distributed, and with half a loaf in
his mouth struck up a waltz, which was followed by a
quadrille; the good people of the house seemed pleas¬
ed at this free use of their roof, and shaking hands all
around, with many expressions of good-will on both
sides, we left as unceremoniously as we had entered.
We made the tour of all the principal streets, and as
we returned to the plaza the procession was coming out
of the church.

The village procession in honour of its patron saint
is the great pride of the Indian, and the touchstone of
his religious character. Every Indian contributes his

22


254


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


labour and money toward getting it up, and he is most
honoured who is allowed the most important part in it.
This was a rich village, at which all the muleteers of
Guatimala lived; and nowhere had I seen an Indian
procession so imposing. The church stood on an ele¬
vation at the head of the plaza, its whole fa 9 ade rich in
ornaments illuminated by the light of torches ; and the
large platform and the steps were thronged with women
in white. A space was cleared in the middle before
the great door, and with a loud chant the procession
passed out of the doorway. Fii'st came the alcalde and
his alguazils, all Indians, with rods of office in one hand
and lighted wax candles, six or eight feet long, in the
other; then a set of devils, not as playful as the devils
of Guatimala, but more hideous, and probably better
likenesses, according to the notions of the Indians; then
came, borne aloft by Indians, a large silver cross, richly
chased and ornamented, and followed by the curate,
with a silken canopy held over his head on the ends of
long poles borne by Indians. As the cross advanced
all fell on their knees, and a stranger would have been
thought guilty of an insult upon their holy religion who
omitted conforming to this ceremony. Then came fig¬
ures of saints larger than life, borne on the shoulders
of Indians; and then a figure of the Virgin, gorgeously
dressed, her gown glittering with spangles. Then fol¬
lowed a long procession of Indian women dressed in
costume, with a thick red cord twisted in the hair, so as
to look like a turban, all carrying lighted candles. The
procession passed through the illuminated streets, under
the arches, and stopping from time to time before the
altars, made the tour of the village, and in about an
hour, with a loud chant, ascended the steps of the
church. Its re-entry was announced by a discharge of


A BOMBARDMENT.


255


rockets, after which all gathered in the plaza for the ex¬
hibition of fireworks.

It was some time before these were ready, for those
who had figured in the procession, particularly the dev¬
ils, were to be the principal managers. Our party was
well known in Mixco ; and though the steps of the
church were crowded, one of the best places was im¬
mediately vacated for us. From their nearness to Gua-
timala, the people of Mixco knew all the principal fam¬
ilies of the former place, and were glad to see so dis¬
tinguished a party at their festa; and the familiar but
respectful way in which they were everywhere treat¬
ed, manifested a simplicity of manners, and a kindliness
of feeling between the rich and the poor, which to me
was one of the most interesting parts of the whole fete.

The exhibition began with the Toros; the man who
played the bull gave universal satisfaction; scattering
and putting to flight the crowd in the plaza, he rushed
up the steps of the church, and, amid laughing and
screaming, went out. Flying pigeons and other pieces
followed ; and the whole concluded with the grand
national piece of the Castle of San Felippe, which was
a representation of the repulse of an English fleet.
A tall structure represented the castle, and a little brig
perched on the end of a stick, like a weathercock, the
fleet. The brig fired a broadside, and then, by a sud¬
den jerk, turned on a pivot and fired another ; and long
after, until she had riddled herself to pieces, the castle
continued pouring on all sides a magnanimous stream
of fire.

When all was over we returned to the posada. A
cloth was spread over the long table, and in a few
minutes, under the direction of the ladies, covered
with the pic-nic materials brought from Guatimala.


256


INCIDENTS OP TRATEL.


The benches were drawn up to the table, and as many
as could find seats sat down. Before supper was over
there was an irruption of young men from Guatimala,
with glazed hats, ponchas, and swords, and presenting
a rather disorderly appearance ; but they were mostly
juveniles, brothers and cousins of the ladies. With
their hats on, they seated themselves at the vacated ta¬
bles, and, as soon as they had finished eating, hurried
off the plates, piled the tables away in a corner, one on
the top of the other, and the candles on the top of all,
the violins struck up, and gentlemen and ladies, lighting
cigars and cigarillos, commenced dancing. I am sorry
to say that generally the ladies of Central America, not
excepting Guatimala, smoke, married ladies pur os, or
all tobacco, and unmarried cigars, or tobacco wrapped in
paper or straw. Every gentleman carries in his pock¬
et a silver case, with a long string of cotton, steel and
flint, taking up nearly as much space as a handker¬
chief, and one of the offices of gallantry is to strike a
light; by doing it well, he may help to kindle a flame
in a lady’s heart; at all events, to do it bunglingly
would be ill-bred. I will not express my sentiments
on smoking as a custom for the sex. I have recollec¬
tions of beauteous lips profaned. Nevertheless, even
in this I have seen a lady show her prettiness and re¬
finement, barely touching the straw to her lips, as it
were kissing it gently and taking it away. When a gen¬
tleman asks a lady for a light, she always removes the
cigar from her lips. Happily, the dangerous proximity
which sometimes occurs between gentlemen in the street
is not in vogue. The dancing continued till two o’clock,
and the breaking up was like the separation of a gay


A NIGHT-BRAWL.


257


family party. The young men dispersed to sleep or to
finish the night with merriment elsewhere, and Don
Manuel and I retired to the house he had secured for us.

We were in our hammocks, talking over the affairs
of the night, when we heard a noise in the street, a
^ loud tramping past the door, and a clash of swords.
Presently Mr. P.’s servant knocked for admission, and
told us that a man had been killed a few doors off by a
sword-cut across the head. Instead of going out to
gratify an idle curiosity, like prudent men we secured
the door. The tramping passed up the street, and
presently we heard reports of firearms. The whole
place seemed to be in an uproar. We had hardly lain
down again before there was another knock at the door.
Our host, a respectable old man, with his wife, slept in
a back room, and, afraid of rioters, they had a consul¬
tation about opening it. The former was unwilling to
do so, but the latter, with a mother’s apprehensions,
said that she was afraid some accident had happened to
Chico. The knocking continued, and Raffael, a known
companion of their son, cried out that Chico was
wounded. The old man rose for a light, and, appre¬
hending the worst, the mother and a young sister burst
into tears. The old man sternly checked them, said
that he had always cautioned Chico against going out at
night, and that he deserved to be punished. The sis¬
ter ran and opened the door, and two young men enter¬
ed. We could see the glitter of their swords, and that
one was supporting the other ; and, just as the old man
procured a light, the wounded man fell on the ground.
His face was ghastly pale, and spotted with blood; his
hat cut through the crown and rim as smoothly as if done
with a razor, and his right hand and arm were wound
VoL. I.—K K


258


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


in a pocket-handerchief, which was stained with blood.
The old man looked at him with the sternness of a Ro¬
man, and told him that he knew this would be the con¬
sequence of his running out at night; the mother and
sister cried, and the young man, with a feeble voice,
begged his father to spare him. His companion car¬
ried him into the back room; but before they could ^
lay him on the bed he fell again and fainted. The
father was alarmed, and when he recovered, asked
him whether he wished to confess. Chico, with a
faint voice, answered. As you please. The old man
told his daughter to go for the padre, but the uproar
was so great in the street that she was afraid to venture
out. In the mean time we examined his head, which,
notwithstanding the cut through his hat, was barely
touched; and he said himself that he had received the
blow on his hand, and that it was cut off. There was no
physician nearer than Guatimala, and not a person who
was able to do anything for him. I had had some
practice in medicine, but none in surgery ; I knew,
however, that it was at all events proper to wash and
cleanse the wound, and with the assistance of Don
Manuel’s servant, a young Englishman whom Don
Manuel had brought from the United States, laid him
on a bed. This servant had had some experience in
the brawls of the country, having killed a young man in
a quarrel growing out of a love affair, and been con¬
fined to the house seven months by wounds received in
the same encounter. With his assistance I unwound
the bloody handkerchief; as I proceeded I found my
courage failing me, and as, with the last coil, a dead
hand fell in mine, a shudder and a deep groan ran
through the spectators, and I almost let the hand drop.


SUFFERING AND SORROW.


259


It was cut off through the back above the knuckles, and
the four fingers hung merely by the fleshy part of the
thumb. The skin was drawn back, and showed on
each side four bones protruding like the teeth of a skel*
eton. I joined them together, and as he drew up his
arm they jarred like the grating of teeth. I saw that
the case was beyond my art. Possibly the hand might
have been restored by sewing the skin together ; but I
believed that the only thing to be done was to cut it off
entirely, and this I was not willing to do. Unable to
give any farther assistance, I wound it up again in the
handkerchief. The young man had a mild and pleasing
countenance ; and as thankful for my ineffectual attempt
as if I had really served him, told me not to give my¬
self any more trouble, but return to bed ; his mother
and sister, with stifled sobs, hung over his head ; his
father retained the sternness of his manner, but it was
easy to see that his heart was bleeding ; and to me, a
stranger, it was horrible to see a fine young man muti¬
lated for life in a street-brawl.

As he told the story himself, he was walking with
some of his friends, when he met one of the Spinosas
from Guatimala, also with a party of friends. The lat¬
ter, who was known as a bully, approached them with
an expression in Spanish about equivalent to the Eng¬
lish one, Pll give it to you.” Ghico answered, No
you won’t,” and immediately they drew their swords.
Chico, in attempting to ward off a stroke, received it
on the edge of his right hand. In passing through all
the bones, its force was so much broken that it only cut
the crown and rim of his hat. The loss of his hand had
no doubt saved his life; for, if the whole force of the
stroke had fallen on his head, it must have killed him ;
but the unfortunate young man, instead of being thank-


260


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.

ful for his escape, swore vengeance against Spinosa.
The latter, as I afterward learned, swore that the next
time Chico should not escape with the loss of his hand;
and, in all probability, when they meet again one of them
will be killed.

All this time the uproar continued, shifting its loca¬
tion, with occasional reports of firearms ; an aunt was
wringing her hands because her son was out, and we
had reason to fear a tragical night. We went to bed,
but for a long time the noise in the street, the groans of
poor Chico, and the sobbing of his mother and sister
kept us from sleeping.

We did not wake till nearly ten o’clock. It was
Sunday; the morning was bright and beautiful, the
arches and flowers still adorned the streets, and the
Indians, in their clean clothes, were going to Sunday
mass. None except the immediate parties knew or
cared for the events of the night. Crossing the plaza,
we met a tall, dashing fellow on horseback, with a long
sword by his side, who bowed to Mr. Pavon, and rode
on past the house of Chico. This was Spinosa. No
one attempted to molest him, and no notice whatever
was taken of the circumstance by the authorities.

The door of the church was so crowded that we could
not enter; and passing through the curate’s house, we
stood in a doorway on one side of the altar. The cu¬
rate, in his richest vestments, with young Indian as¬
sistants in sacerdotal dresses, their long black hair and
sluggish features contrasting strangely with their garb
and occupations, was officiating at the altar. On the
front steps, with their black mantons drawn over their
heads, and their eyes bent on the ground, were the dan¬
cers of our party the preceding night; kneeling along
the whole floor of the immense church was a dense


A COCK FIGHT.


261


mass of Indian women, with red headdresses ; and lean¬
ing against the pillars, and standing up in the back¬
ground, were Indians wrapped in black chamars.

We waited till mass was over, and then accompanied
the ladies to the house and breakfasted. Sunday though
it was, the occupations for the day were a cockfight in
the morning and bullfight in the afternoon. Our party
was increased by the arrival of a distinguished family
from Guatimala, and we all set out for the former. It
was in the yard of an unoccupied house, which was al¬
ready crowded ; and I noticed, to the honour of the In¬
dians and the shame of the better classes, that they
were all Mestitzoes or white men, and, always except¬
ing Carrera’s soldiers, I never saw a worse looking or
more assassin-like set of men. All along the walls of
the yard were cocks tied by one leg, and men running
about with other cocks under their arms, putting them
on the ground to compare size and weight, regulating
bets, and trying to cheat each other. At length a match
was made ; the ladies of our party had seats in the cor¬
ridor of the house, and a space was cleared before them.
The gaffs were murderous instruments, more than two
inches long, thick, and sharp as needles, and the birds
were hardly on the ground before the feathers of the
neck were ruffled and they flew at each other. In less
time than had been taken to gaff them, one was lying
on the ground with its tongue hanging out, and the
blood running from its mouth, dead. The eagerness
and vehemence, noise and uproar, wrangling, betting,
swearing, and scuffling of the crowd, exhibited a dark
picture of human nature and a sanguinary people. I
owe it to the ladies to say, that in the city they never
are present at such scenes. Here they went for no
other reason that I could see than because they were


262


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


away from home, and it was part of the fete. We
must make allowances for an education and state of
society every way different from our own. They were
not wanting in sensibility or refinement; and though
they did not turn away with disgust, they seemed to
take no interest in the fight, and were not disposed to
wait for a second.

Leaving the disgusting scene, we walked around the
suburbs, one point of which commands a noble view of
the plain and city of Guatimala, with the surrounding
mountains, and suggests a wonder that, amid objects
so grand and glorious, men can grow up with tastes so
grovelling. Crossing the plaza, we heard music in a
large house belonging to a rich muleteer; and entering,
we found a young harpist, and two mendicant friars
with shaved crowns, dressed in white, with long white
mantles and hoods, of an order newly revived in Gua¬
timala, and drinking agua ardiente. Mantas and hats
were thrown off, tables and seats placed against the
wall, and in a few moments my friends were waltzing;
two or three cotillons followed, and we returned to the
posada, where, after fruit of various kinds had been
served, all took seats on the back piazza. A horse hap¬
pened to be loose in the yard, and a young man, putting
his hands on the hind quarters, jumped on his back.
The rest of the young men followed suit, and then one
lifted the horse up by his fore legs ; when he dropped
him another took him up, and all followed, very much
to the astonishment of the poor animal. Then followed
standing on the piazza and jumping over each other’s
heads; then one leaned down with his hands resting on
the piazza, and another mounted on his back, and the
former tried to shake him off without letting go his ^
hands. Other feats followed, all impromptu, and each


SUNDAY AMUSEMENTS.


263


more absurd than the one before it; and the whole
concluded with a bullfight, in which two young men
mounted on the backs of other two as matadors, and
one, with his head between his shoulders, ran at them
like a bull. Though these amusements were not very
elegant, all were so intimate with each other, and there
was such a perfect abandonment, that the whole went
off with shouts of laughter.

This over, the young men brought out the ladies’
mantas, a^d again we sallied for a walk ; but, reaching
the plaza, the young men changed their minds; and
seating the ladies, to whom I attached myself, in the
shade, commenced prisoner’s base. All who passed
stopped, and the villagers seemed delighted with the
gayety of our party. The players tumbled each other
in the dust, to the great amusement of the lookers-on;
and this continued till we saw trays coming across the
plaza, which was a sign of dinner. This over, and
thinking that I had seen enough for one Sunday, I de¬
termined to forego the bullfight; and in company with
Don Manuel and another prominent member of the As¬
sembly, and his family, I set out on my return to the
city. Their mode of travelling was primitive. All
were on horseback, he himself with a little son behind
him; his daughter alone; his wife on a pillion, with a
servant to support her; a servant-maid with a child in
her arms, and a servant on the top of the luggage. It
>vas a beautiful afternoon, and the plain of Guatimala,
with its green grass and dark mountains, was a lovely
scene. As we entered the city we encountered a reli¬
gious procession, with priests and monks all bearing
lighted candles, and preceded by nien throwing rock¬
ets. We avoided the plaza on account of the soldiers,
and in a few minutes I was in my house, alone.


264


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


CHAPTER XIII.

Excursion to La Antigua and the Pacific Ocean.—-San Pablo.—Mountain Scene
ry.—El Rio Pensativo.—La Antigua.—Account of its Destruction.—An Octo¬
genarian.— The Cathedral. — San Juan Obispo.—Santa Maria.—Volcano de
Agua.—Ascent of the Mountain.—The Crater.—A lofty Meeting-place.—^The
Descent.—Return to La Antigua.—Cultivation of Cochineal.—Classic Ground.
—Ciudad Vieja.—Its Foundation.—Visit from Indians.—Departure from Ciudad
Vieja.—First Sight of the Pacific.—Alotenango.—VolcandelFuega.—Escuint-
la.—Sunset Scene.—Masagua.—Port of Istapa.—Arrival at the Pacific.

On Tuesday, the seventeenth of December, I set out
on an excursion to La Antigua Guatimala and the Pa¬
cific Ocean. I was accompanied by a young man who
lived opposite, and wished to ascend the Volcano de
Agua. I had discharged Augustin, and with great dif¬
ficulty had procured a man who knew the route. Ro-
maldi had but one fault: he was married ; like some
other married men, he had a fancy for roving; but his
wife set her face against this propensity ; she said that
I was going to El Mar, the sea, and might carry him
off, and she would never see him again, and the affection¬
ate woman wept at the bare idea ; but upon my paying
the money into her hands before going, she consented.
My only luggage was a hammock and pair of sheets,
which Romaldi carried on his mule, and each had a
pair of alforgas. At the gate we met Don Jose Vidau-
ry, whom I had first seen in the president’s chair of the
Constituent Assembly, and who was going to visit his
hacienda at the Antigua. Though it was only five or
six hours’ distant, Seiior Vidaury, being a very heavy
man, had two led horses, one of which he insisted on
my mounting ; and when I expressed my admiration of
the animal, he told me, in the usual phrase of Spanish
courtesy, that the horse was mine. It was done in the


VISIT TO LA ANTIGUA.


265


same spirit in which a Frenchman, who had been en¬
tertained hospitably in a country house in England, of¬
fered himself to seven of the daughters, merely for the
compliment. And my worthy friend would have been
very much astonished if I had accepted his offer.

The road to Mixco I have already described. In
the village I stopped to see Chico. His hand had
been cut off, and he was doing well. Leaving the vil¬
lage, we ascended a steep mountain, from the top of
which we had a fine view of the village at its foot, the
plain and city of Guatimala, and the Lake of Amati-
tan, enclosed by a belt of mountains. Descending by
a wild and rugged road, we reached a plain, and saw
on the left the village of San Pablo, and on the right, at
some distance, another village. We then entered a
piece of woodland, and first ascending, then again de¬
scended by the precipitous side of a mountain, with a
magnificent ravine on our right, to a beautiful stream.
At this place mountains rose all around us; but the
banks of the stream were covered with delicate flowers,
and parrots with gay plumage were perched on the
trees and flying over our heads, making, in the midst
of gigantic scenery, a fairy spot. The stream passed
between two ranges of mountains so close together that
there was barely room for a single horsepath by its side.
As we continued the mountains turned to the left, and
on the other side of the stream were a few openings,
cultivated with cochineal, into the very hollow of the
base. Again the road turned and then ran straight,
making a vista of more than a mile between the mount¬
ains, at the end of which was the Antigua, standing in
a delightful valley, shut in by mountains and hills that
always retain their verdure, watered by two rivers that
supply numerous fountains, with a climate in which heat
VoL. I.—L L 23


266


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


or cold never predominates ; yet this city, surrounded
by more natural beauty than any location I ever saw,
has perhaps undergone more calamities than any city
that was ever built. We passed the gate and rode
through the suburbs, in the opening of the valley, on
one side of which was a new house that reminded me
of an Italian villa, with a large cochineal plantation ex¬
tending to the base of the mountain. We crossed a
stream bearing the poetical name of El Rio Pensativo;
on the other side was a fine fountain, and at the corner
of the street was the ruined church of San Domingo, a
monument of the dreadful earthquakes which had pros¬
trated the old capital, and driven the inhabitants from
their home.

On each side were the ruins of churches, convents,
and private residences, large and costly, some lying in
masses, some with fronts still standing, richly orna¬
mented with stucco, cracked and yawning, roofless,
without doors or windows, and trees growing inside
above the walls. Many of the houses have been re¬
paired, the city is repeopled, and presents a strange ap¬
pearance of ruin and recovery. The inhabitants, like
the dwellers over the buried Herculaneum, seemed to
entertain no fears of renewed disaster. I rode up
to the house of Don Miguel Manrique, which was oc¬
cupied by his family at the time of the destruction of
the city, and, after receiving a kind welcome, in com¬
pany with Senor Vidaury walked to the plaza. The
print opposite will give an idea, which I cannot, of
the beauty of this scene. The great volcanoes of
Agua and Fuego look down upon it; in the centre is
a noble stone fountain, and the buildings which face it,
especially the palace of the captain general, displaying
on its front the armorial bearings granted by the Em-


ACCOUNT OF LA ANTIGUA.


267


peror Charles the Fifth to the loyal and noble city, and
surmounted by the Apostle St. James on horseback,
armed, and brandishing a sword ; and the majestic but
roofless and ruined cathedral, three hundred feet long,
one hundred and twenty broad, nearly seventy high,
and lighted by fifty windows, show at this day that La
Antigua was once one of the finest cities of the New
World, deserving the proud name which Alvarado gave
it, the city of St. James of Gentlemen.

This was the second capital of Guatimala, founded
in 1542 on account of the destruction of the first by a
water volcano. Its history is one of uninterrupted dis¬
asters. In 1558 an epidemic disorder, attended with
a violent bleeding at the nose, swept away great num¬
bers of people ; nor could the faculty devise any meth¬
od to arrest the progress of the distemper. Many se¬
vere shocks of earthquake were felt at different periods;
the one in 1505 seriously damaged many of the prin¬
cipal buildings ; those of 1575, 76, and 77 were not
less ruinous. On the 27th of December, 1581, the pop¬
ulation was again alarmed by the volcano, which began
to emit fire ; and so great was the quantity of ashes
thrown out and spread in the air, that the sun was en¬
tirely obscured, and artificial light was necessary in
the city at midday.’’

‘‘The years 1585 and 6 were dreadful in the ex¬
treme. On January 16th of the former, earthquakes
were felt, and they continued through that and the fol¬
lowing year so frequently, that not an interval of eight
days elapsed during the whole period without a shock
more or less violent. Fire issued incessantly, for
months together, from the mountain, and greatly in¬
creased the general consternation. The greatest dam¬
age of this series took place on the 23d of December,


268


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


1586, when the major part of the city again became a
heap of ruins, burying under them many of the unfor¬
tunate inhabitants ; the earth shook with such violence
that the tops of the high ridges were torn off, and deep
chasms formed in various parts of the level ground.

In 1601 a pestilential distemper carried off great
numbers. It raged with so much malignity that three
days generally terminated the existence of such as were
affected by it.”

On the 18th of February, 1651, about one o’clock,
afternoon, a most extraordinary subterranean noise
was heard, and immediately followed by three violent
shocks, at very short intervals from each other, which
threw down many buildings and damaged others; the
tiles from the roofs of the houses were dispersed in all
directions, like light straws by a gust of wind ; the
bells of the churches were rung by the vibrations ; mass¬
es of rock were detached from the mountains; and
even the wild beasts were so terrified, that, losing their
natural instinct, they quitted their retreats, and sought
shelter from the habitations of men.”

The year 1686 brought with it another dreadful ep¬
idemic, which in three months swept away a tenth
part of the inhabitants.” ... ‘‘ From the capital the pes¬
tilence spread to the neighbouring villages, and thence
to the more remote ones, causing dreadful havoc, par¬
ticularly among the most robust of the inhabitants.”

The year 1717 was memorable ; on the night of
August 27th the mountain began to emit flames, at¬
tended by a continued * subterranean rumbling noise.
On the night of the 28th the eruption increased to
great violence, and very much alarmed the inhabitants.
The images of saints were carried in procession, public
prayers were put up, day after day; but the terrifying


ACCOUNT OF LA ANTIGUA.


269


eruption still continued, and was followed by frequent
shocks, at intervals, for more than four months. At
last, on the night of September 29th, the fate of Gua-
timala appeared to be decided, and inevitable destruc¬
tion seemed to be at hand. Great was the ruin among
^ the public edifices ; many of the houses were thrown
down, and nearly all that remained were dreadfully in»
jured; but the greatest devastation was seen in the
churches.”

The year 1773 was the most melancholy epoch in the
annals of this metropolis ; it was then destroyed, and, as
the capital, rose no more from its ruins.” ... About four
o’clock, on the afternoon of July 29, a tremendous vibra¬
tion was felt, and shortly after began the dreadful con¬
vulsion that decided the fate of the unfortunate city.” ,.,

On the 7th September there was another, which threw
down most of the buildings that were damaged on the
29th of July; and on the 13th December, one still
more violent terminated the work of destruction.” • . .

The people had not well recovered from the conster¬
nation inflicted by the events of the fatal 29th of July,
when a meeting Avas convoked for the purpose of col¬
lecting the sense of the inhabitants on the subject of the
removal.” . . . In this meeting it Avas determined all
the public authorities should remove provisionally to
the little village of La Hermita, until the valleys of Ja-
lapa and Las Vacas could be surveyed, and until the
king’s pleasure could be ascertained on the subject.” . . .

On the 6th of September the governor and all the
tribunals withdrew to La Hermita ; the surveys of the
last-mentioned places being completed, the inhabitants
were again convoked, to decide upon the transfer.
This congress was held in the temporary capital, and
lasted from the 12th to the 16th of January, 1774: the


270


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


report of the commissioners was read, and, by a plu¬
rality of votes, it was resolved to make a formal trans¬
lation of the city of Guatimala to the Valley of Las
Vacas. The king gave his assent to this resolution on
the 21st of July, 1775; and, by a decree of the 21st of
September following, approved most of the plans that
were proposed for carrying the determination into ef¬
fect ; granting very liberally the whole revenue arising
from the customs, for the space of ten years, toward
the charges of building, &c. Tn virtue of this decree,
the ayuntamiento was in due form established in the
new situation on the 1st of January, 1776; and on the
29th of July, 1777, a proclamation was issued in Old
Guatimala, commanding the population to remove to
the new city within one year, and totally abandon the
remains of the old one,”

Such is the account given by the historian of Guati¬
mala concerning the destruction of this city; besides
which, I saw on the spot Padre Antonio Croques, an
octogenarian, and the oldest canonigo in Guatimala,
who was living in the city during the earthquake which
completed its destruction. He was still vigorous in
frame and intellect, wrote his name with a free hand
in my memorandum-book, and had vivid recollections
of the splendour of the city in his boyhood, when, as he
said, carriages rolled through it as in the streets of Ma¬
drid. On the fatal day he was in the Church of San
Francisco with two padres, one of whom, at the mo¬
ment of the shock, took him by the hand and hurried
him into the patio ; the other was buried under the ru¬
ins of the church. He remembered that the tiles flew
from the roofs of the houses in every direction ; the
clouds of dust were suffocating, and the people ran to
the fountains to quench their thirst. The fountains


CATHEDRAL OF LA ANTIGUA.


271


were broken, and one man snatched off his hat to dip
for water. The archbishop slept that night in his car¬
riage in the plaza. He described to me the ruins of in¬
dividual buildings, the dead who were dug from under
them, and the confusion and terror of the inhabitants ;
and though his recollections were only those of a boy,
he had material enough for hours of conversation.

In company with the cura we visited the interior of
the Cathedral. The gigantic walls were standing, but
roofless; the interior was occupied as a burying-
ground, and the graves were shaded by a forest of
dahlias and trees seventy or eighty feet high, rising
above the walls. The grand altar stood under a cupo¬
la supported by sixteen columns faced with tortoise¬
shell, and adorned with bronze medallions of exquisite
workmanship. On the cornice were once placed stat¬
ues of the Virgin and the twelve apostles in ivory;
but all these are gone ; and more interesting than the
recollections of its ancient splendour or its mournful
ruins was the empty vault where once reposed the
ashes of Alvarado the Conqueror.

Toward evening my young companion joined me,
and we set out for Santa Maria, an Indian village at
two leagues’ distance, situated on the side of the Vol¬
cano de Agua, with the intention of ascending the
next day to the summit. As we entered the valley, the
scene was so beautiful I did not wonder that even earth¬
quakes could not make it desolate. At the distance of
a league we reached the village of San Juan Obispo,
the church and convent of which are conspicuous from
below, and command a magnificent view of the valley
and city of the Antigua. At dark we reached the vil¬
lage of Santa Maria, perched at a height of two thou¬
sand feet above the Antigua, and seven thousand feet


272


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


above the level of the Pacific. The church stands in a
noble court with several gates, and before it is a gi¬
gantic white cross. We rode up to the convent, which
is under the charge of the cura of San Juan Obispo,
but it was unoccupied, and there was no one to receive
us except a little talkative old man, who had only ar¬
rived that morning. Very soon there was an irruption
of Indians, with the alcalde and his alguazils, who
came to offer their services as guides up the mountain.
They were the first Indians I had met who did not speak
Spanish, and their eagerness and clamour reminded me
of my old friends the Arabs. They represented the
ascent as very steep, with dangerous precipices, and the
path extremely difficult to find, and said it was neces¬
sary for each of us to have sixteen men with ropes to
haul us up, and to pay twelve dollars for each man.
They seemed a little astonished when I told them that
we wanted two men each, and would give them half a
dollar apiece, but fell immediately to eight men for
each, and a dollar apiece; and, after a noisy wran¬
gling, we picked out six from forty, and they all retired.
In a few minutes we heard a violin out of doors, which
we thought was in honour of us ; but it was for the little
old man, who was a titritero or puppet-player, and in¬
tended giving an exhibition that night. The music
entered the room, and a man stationed himself at the
door to admit visiters. The price of admission was
three cents, and there were frequent wranglings to have
one cent taken off, or two admitted for three cents.
The high price preventing the entrance of common
people, the company was very select, and all sat on
the floor. The receipts, as I learned from the door¬
keeper, were upward of five shillings. Romaldi, who
was a skilful amateur, led the orchestra, that is, the


VOLCANO OF EL AGUA.


273


other fiddler. The puppet was in an adjoining room,
and when the door opened it disclosed a black chamar
hanging as a curtain, the rising of which discovered the
puppet-^player sitting at a table with his little figures
before him. The sports of the puppets were carried
on with ventriloquial conversations, in the midst of
which I fell asleep.

We did not get off till seven o’clock the next morn¬
ing. The day was very unpromising, and the whole
mountain was covered with clouds. As yet the side
of the volcano was cultivated. In half an hour the road
became so steep and slippery that we dismounted, and
commenced the ascent on foot. The Indians went on
before, carrying water and provisions, and each of us
was equipped with a strong staff. At a quarter before
eight we entered the middle region, which is covered
with a broad belt of thick forest; the path was steep
and muddy, and every three or four minutes we were
obliged to stop and rest. At a quarter before nine we
reached a clearing, in which stood a large wooden cross.
This was the first resting-place, and we sat down at the
foot of the cross and lunched. A drizzling rain had
commenced, but, in the hope of a change, at half past
nine we resumed our ascent. The path became steeper
and muddier, the trees so thickly crowded together that
the sun never found its way through them, and their
branches and trunks covered with green excrescences.
The path was made and kept open by Indians, who go
up in the winter-time to procure snow and ice for Gua-
timala. The labour of toiling up this muddy acclivity
was excessive, and very soon my young companion be¬
came fatigued, and was unable to continue without
help. The Indians were provided with ropes, one of
which was tied around his waist, and two Indians went

VoL, L—M M


274


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


before with the rope over the shoulders. At half past
ten we were above the region of forest, and came out
upon the open side of the volcano. There were still
scattering trees, long grass, and a great variety of cu¬
rious plants and flowers, furnishing rich materials for
the botanist. Among them was a plant with a red
flower, called the arbol de las manitas, or hand-plant,
but more like a monkey’s paw, growing to the height
of thirty or forty feet, the inside a light vermilion col¬
our, and outside vermilion with stripes of yellow. My
companion, tired with the toil of ascending, even with
the aid of the rope, at length mounted an Indian’s
shoulders. I was obliged to stop every two or three
minutes, and my rests were about equal to the actual
time of walking. The great difficulty was on account
of the wet and mud, which, in ascending, made us lose
part of every step. It was so slippery that, even with
the staff, and the assistance of branches of trees and
bushes, it was difficult to keep from falling. About
half an hour before reaching the top, and perhaps one
thousand or fifteen hundred feet from it, the trees be¬
came scarce, and seemed blasted by lightning or with¬
ered by cold. The clouds gathered thicker than before,
and I lost all hope of a clear day. At half an hour be¬
fore twelve we reached the top and descended into the
crater. A whirlwind of cloud and vapour was sweep¬
ing around it. We were in a perspiration ; our clothes
were saturated with rain and mud; and in a few mo¬
ments the cold penetrated our very bones. We attempt¬
ed to build a fire, but the sticks and leaves were wet,
and would not burn. For a few moments we raised a
feeble flame, and all crouched around it; but a sprink¬
ling of rain came down, just enough to put it out. We
could see nothing, and the shivering Indians begged me


A LOFTY MEETING-PLACE.


275


to return. On rocks near us were inscriptions, one of
which bore date in 1548; and on a cut stone were the
words,

Alexandro Ldvert,

De San Petersbrgo ;

Edvardo Legh Page,

De Inglaterra j
Sose Croskeyy
De Fyladelfye,

Bibymos aqui unas Boteas
De Champana, el dia 26
de Agosto de 1834.

It seemed strange that three men from such distant
and different parts of the world, St. Petersburgh, Eng¬
land, and Philadelphia^ had met to drink Champagne
on the top of this volcano. While I was blowing my
fingers and copying the inscription, the vapour cleared
away a little, and gave me a view of the interior of the
crater. It was a large oval basin, the area level and
covered with grass. The sides were sloping, about one
hundred or one hundred and fifty feet high, and all
around were masses of rock piled up in magnificent
confusion, and rising to inaccessible peaks. There is no
tradition of this mountain having ever emitted fire, and
there is no calcined matter or other mark of volcanic
eruption anywhere in its vicinity. The historical account
is, that in 1541 an immense torrent, not of fire, but of
water and stones, was vomited from the crater, by which
the old city was destroyed. Father Remesal relates
that on this occasion the crown of the mountain fell
down. The height of this detached part was one league,
and from the remaining summit to the plain was a dis¬
tance of three leagues, which he affirms he measured in
1615. The area, by my measurement, is eighty-three
paces long and sixty wide. According to Torquemada
(and such is the tradition according to Padre Alcantra,


276


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


of Ciudad Vieja), this immense basin, probably the cra¬
ter of an extinct volcano, with sides much higher than
they are now, became filled with water by accumulations
of snow and rain. There never was any eruption of wa¬
ter, but one of the sides gave way, and the immense body
of fluid rushed out with horrific force, carrying with it
rocks and trees, inundating and destroying all that op¬
posed its progress. The immense barranca or ravine
by which it descended was still fearfully visible on the
side of the mountain. The height of this mountain has
been ascertained by barometrical observation to be four¬
teen thousand four hundred and fifty feet above the level
of the sea. The edge of the crater commands a beau¬
tiful view of the old city of Guatimala, thirty-two sur¬
rounding villages, and the Pacific Ocean; at least so
I am told, but I saw nothing of it. Nevertheless, I did
not regret my labour; and though drenched with rain
and plastered with mud, I promised myself in the month
of February, when the weather is fine, to ascend again,
prepared for the purpose, and pass two or three days in
the crater.

At one o’clock we began our descent. It was rapid, and
sometimes dangerous, from the excessive steepness and
slipperiness, and the chance of pitching head foremost
against the trunk of a tree. At two o’clock we reach¬
ed the cross; and I mention, as a hint for others, that,
from the pressure of heavy water-proof boots upon the
doigts du pied, I was obliged to stop frequently; and,
after changing the pressure by descending sidewise
and backward, catching at the branches of trees, I was
obliged to pull off my boots and go down barefooted,
ankle deep in mud. My feet were severely bruised by
the stones, and I could hardly walk at all, when I met
one of the Indians pulling my horse up the mountain


cultivation of cochineal.


277


to meet me. At four o’clock we reached Santa Maria,
at five the Antigua, and at a quarter past I was in bed.

The next morning I was still asleep when Seiior
Vidaury rode into the courtyard to escort me on my
journey. Leaving Romaldi to follow, I was soon
mounted; and emerging from the city, we entered the
open plain, shut in by mountains, and cultivated to their
base with cochineal. At about a mile’s distance we
turned in to the hacienda of Senor Vidaury. In the
yard were four oxen grinding sugarcane, and behind
was his nopal, or cochineal plantation, one of the largest
in the Antigua. The plant is a species of cactus, set out
in rows like Indian corn, and, at the time I speak of it,
was about four feet high. On every leaf was pinned
with a thorn a piece of cane, in the hollow of which
were thirty or forty insects. These insects cannot
move, but breed, and the young crawl out and fasten
upon the leaf; when they have once fixed they never
move ; a light film gathers over them, and as they
feed the leaves become mildewed and white. At the
end of the dry season some of the leaves are cut off
and hung up in a storehouse for seed, the insects are
brushed off from the rest and dried, and are then sent
abroad to minister to the luxuries and elegances of
civilized life, and enliven with their bright colours the
salons of London, Paris, and St. Louis in Missouri.
The crop is valuable, but uncertain, as an early rain
may destroy it; and sometimes all the workmen of a
hacienda are taken away for soldiers at the moment
when they are most needed for its culture. The sit¬
uation was ravishingly beautiful, at the base and under
the shade of the Volcano de Agua, and the view was
bounded on all sides by mountains of perpetual green;
the morning air was soft and balmy, but pure and

24


278


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


refreshing. With good government and laws, and
one’s friends around, I never saw a more beautiful spot
on which man could desire to pass his allotted time on
earth.

Resuming our ride, we came out upon a rich plain
covered with grass, on which cattle and horses were
pasturing, between the bases of the two great volca¬
noes ; and on the left, at a distance, on the side of the
Volcano de Agua, saw the Church of Ciudad Vieja,
the first capital of Guatimala, founded by Alvarado the
Conqueror. I was now on classic ground. The fame
of Cortez and his exploits in Mexico spread among the
Indian tribes to the south, and the Kachiquel kings
sent an embassy offering to acknowledge themselves
vassals of Spain. Cortez received the ambassadors
with distinction, and sent Pedro de Alvarado, an oJSi-
cer distinguished in the conquest of New Spain, to re¬
ceive the submission of the native kings, and take pos¬
session of Guatimala. On the thirteenth of Novem¬
ber, 1523, Alvarado left the city of Mexico with three
hundred Spaniards, and a large body of Tlascaltecas,
Cholotecas, Chinapas, and other auxiliary Mexican In¬
dians, fought his way through the populous provinces
of Soconusco and Tonala, and on the fourteenth of
May, by a decisive victory over the Quiche Indians, he
arrived at the capital of the Kachiquel kingdom, now
known as the village of Tecpan Guatimala. After re¬
maining a few days to recover from their fatigues, the
conquering army continued their route by the villages
on the coast, overcoming all that disputed their prog¬
ress ; and on the 24th of July, 1524, arrived at a place
called by the Indians Almolonga, meaning, in their
language, a spring of water (or the mountain from
which water flows), situated at the base of the Volcano


FOUNDATION OF CIUDAD VIEJA.


279


de Agua. The situation, says Remesal, pleased them
so much by its fine climate, the beauty of the meadows,
delightfully watered by running streams, and particu¬
larly from its lying between two lofty mountains, from
one of which descended runs of water in every direc¬
tion, and from the summit of the other issued volumes
of smoke and fire, that they determined to build a city
which should be the capital of Guatimala.

On the twenty-fifth of July, the festival of St. James,
the patron of Spain, the soldiers, with martial music,
splendid armour, waving plumes, horses superbly - ca¬
parisoned in trappings glittering with jewels and plates
of gold, proceeded to the humble church which had
been constructed for that purpose, where Juan Godines,
the chaplain to the army, said mass. The whole body
invoked the protection of the apostle, and called by his
name the city they had founded. On the same day Al¬
varado appointed alcaldes, regidors, and the chief al-
guazil. The appearance of the country harmonized
with the romantic scenes of which it had been the thea¬
tre ; and as I rode over the plain I could almost ima¬
gine the sides of the mountains covered with Indians,
and Alvarado and his small band of daring Spaniards,
soldiers and priests, with martial pride and religious
humility, unfurling the banners of Spain and setting
up the standard of the cross.

As we approached the town its situation appeared
more beautiful; but very early in its history dreadful
calamities befell it. In 1532 the vicinity of the city
was ravaged, and the inhabitants thrown into conster¬
nation by a lion of uncommon magnitude and ferocity,
that descended from the forests on the mountain called
the Volcan de Agua, and committed great devastation
among the herds of cattle. A reward of twenty-five


280


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


gold dollars, or one hundred bushels of wheat, was of¬
fered by the town council to any person that could kill
it; but the animal escaped, even from a general hunt¬
ing-party of the whole city, with Alvarado at the head
of it. After five or six months’ continual depredations,
he was killed on the thirtieth of July by a herdsman,
who received the promised reward. The next great
disaster was a fire that happened in February, 1536,
and caused great injury ; as the houses were at that
time nearly all thatched with straw, a large portion of
them was destroyed before it could be extinguished.
The accident originated in a blacksmith’s shop ; and, to
prevent similar misfortunes in future, the council pro¬
hibited the employment of forges within the city.

The most dreadful calamity that had as yet afflict¬
ed this unfortunate place occurred on the morning of
September 11, 1541. It had rained incessantly, and
with great violence, on the three preceding days, par¬
ticularly on the night of the tenth, when the water de¬
scended more like the torrent of a cataract than rain;
the fury of the wind, the incessant appalling lightning,
and the dreadful thunder, were indescribable.” . . .-^‘At
two o’clock on the morning of the eleventh, the vibra¬
tions of the earth were so violent that the people were
unable to stand; the shocks were accompanied by a
terrible subterranean noise, which spread universal dis¬
may ; shortly afterward, an immense torrent of water
rushed down from the summit of the mountain, forcing
away with it enormous fragments of rocks and large
trees, which, descending upon the ill-fated town, over¬
whelmed and destroyed almost all the houses, and bu¬
ried a great number of the inhabitants under the ruins;
among the many. Dona Beatrice de la Cueba, the widow
of Pedro Alvarado, lost her life.”


CONVENT OF CIUDAD VI E J A.


281


All the way down the side of the volcano we saw the
seams and gullies made by the torrents of water which
had inundated the city. Again we crossed the beauti¬
ful stream of El Rio Pensativo, and rode up to the con¬
vent. It stands adjoining the gigantic and venerable
V church of the Virgin. In front was a high stone wall;
a large gate opened into a courtyard, at the extremity
and along the side of which were the spacious corridors
of the convent, and on the left the gigantic wall of the
church, with a door of entry from one end of the corri¬
dor. The patio was sunk about four feet below the
level of the corridor, and divided into parterres, with
beds of flowers, and in the centre was a large white
circular fountain, with goldfish swimming in it, and ri¬
sing out of it, above a jet d’eau, an angel with a trumpet
and flag.

Senor Vidaury had advised Padre Alcantra of my in¬
tended visit, and he was waiting to receive us. He
was about thirty-three, intelligent, educated, and ener¬
getic, with a passion for flowers, as was shown by the
beautiful arrangements of the courtyard. He had been
banished by Morazan, and only returned to his curacy
about a year before. On a visit to him was his friend
and neighbour Don Pepe Astegueta, proprietor of a
cochineal hacienda, and a man of the same stamp and
character. They were among the few whom I met who
took any interest in the romantic events connected
with the early history of the country. After a brief
rest in the convent, with a feeling more highly wrought
than any that had been awakened in me except by the
ruins of Copan, we visited a tree standing before the
church and extending wide its branches, under whose
shade, tradition says, Alvarado and his soldiers first en¬
camped ; the fountain of Almolonga, or, in the Indian'

VoL. I.—N N


282


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


language, the mountain from which water flows, which
first induced him to select this spot as the site for the
capital; and the ruined cathedral, on the spot where
Juan Godines first said mass. The fountain is a large
natural basin of clear and beautiful water, shaded by
trees, under which thirty or forty Indian women were
washing. The walls of the cathedral were standing,
and in one corner was a chamber filled with the sculls
and bones of those destroyed by the inundation from the
volcano.

After breakfast we visited the church, which was
very large, and more than two hundred years old; its
altar is rich in ornaments of gold and silver, among
which is a magnificent crown of gold, studded with dia¬
monds and emeralds, presented by one of the Philips to
the Virgin, to whom the church was consecrated. Re¬
turning to the house, I found that Padre Alcantra had
prepared for me a visit from a deputation of Indians,
consisting of the principal chiefs and women, descend¬
ants of caciques of the Mexican auxiliaries of Alvara¬
do, calling themselves, like the Spaniards, Conquista-
dores, or Conquerors ; they entered, wearing the same
costumes which their ancestors had worn in the time
of Cortez, and bearing on a salver covered with vel¬
vet a precious book bound in red velvet, with silver
corners and clasp, containing the written evidence
of their rank and rights. It was written on parch¬
ment, dated in 1639, and contained the order of
Philip the First, acknowledging them as conquerors,
and exempting them, as such, from the tribute paid by
the native Indians. This exemption continued until
the revolution of 1825, and even yet they call them¬
selves descendants of the conquerors, and the head of
the Indian aristocracy. The interest which I felt in


FIRST SIGHT OP THE PACIFIC.


283


these memorials of the conquerors was increased in no
small degree by the beauty and comfort of the convent,
and Padre Alcantra’s kindness. In the afternoon we
walked down to the bridge across the Rio Pensativo.
The plain on which the Spanish soldiers had glittered
in armour was shaded by the high volcanoes, and the
spirit of romance rested upon it.

The day which I passed at the old city” is one of
those upon which I look back with pleasure. Senor
Vidaury and Don Pepe remained with us all day. Af¬
terward, when Padre Alcantra had again been obliged
to fly from the convent at the approach of an invading
army, and we had all passed through the crash of the
revolution, on leaving Guatimala to return home I di¬
verged from my road to pay them a visit, and they were
the last friends to whom I said farewell.

In the morning, with great regret, I left Ciudad Vie-
ja. Padre Alcantra and Don Pepe accompanied me,
and, to help me on my journey, the latter lent me a
noble mule, and the padre an excellent servant. The
exit from this mountain-girt valley was between the two
great volcanoes of Agua and Fuego, rising on each side
nearly fifteen thousand feet high ; and from between the
two, so unexpectedly to me as almost to induce a burst
of enthusiasm, we overlooked an immense plain, and
saw the Pacific Ocean. At a league’s distance we
reached the village of Alotenango, where, among In¬
dian huts, stood another gigantic church, roofless, and
ruined by an earthquake, and where, with the hope, in
which I was not disappointed, of seeing them again, I
took leave of the cura and Don Pepe. The road be¬
tween the two great volcanoes was singularly interest¬
ing ; one with its base cultivated, girt by a belt of thick
forests, and verdant to the very summit; the other with


284


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


three bare and rugged peaks, covered with dried lava
and ashes, shaken by the strife of the elements within,
the working of internal fires, and emitting constantly a
pale blue smoke. The road bears marks of the violent
convulsions to which it has been subject. In one place
the horse-path lies through an immense chasm, rent
asunder by a natural convulsion, over which huge stones,
hurled in every direction, lay in the wildest confusion;
in another it crosses a deep bed of ashes, and cinders,
and scorified lava; and a little farther on strata of de¬
composed vegetable matter cover the volcanic substan¬
ces, and high shrubs and bushes have grown up, form¬
ing a thick shady arbour, fragrant as the fields of Araby
the Blessed. At every step there was a strange contrast
of the horrible and beautiful. The last eruption of the
Volcan del Fuego took place about twelve years ago,
when flames issued from the crater and ascended to a
great height; immense quantities of stones and ashes
were cast out, and the race of monkeys inhabiting the
neighbouring woods was almost extirpated; but it can
never burst forth again ; its crater is no longer el Boca
del Infierno, or the Mouth of the-Infernal Regions, for,
as a very respectable individual told me, it has been
blessed by a priest.

After a beautiful ride under a hot sun, but shaded
nearly all the way, at three o’clock we reached Es-
cuintla, where was another magnificent church, roofless,
and again with its rich facade cracked by an earthquake.
Before it were two venerable Ceiba trees, and the plat¬
form commanded a splendid panoramic view of the vol¬
canoes and mountains of the Antigua.

In the streets were soldiers and drunken Indians. I
rode to the house of the corregidor, Don Juan Dios de
Guerra, and, with Romaldi for a guide, I walked down


SUNSET SCENE.


285


to the banks of a beautiful stream, which makes Es-
cuintla, in the summer months of January and Febru¬
ary, the great watering-place of Guatimala. The bank
was high and beautifully shaded, and, descending to
the river through a narrow passage between perpendic¬
ular rocks, in a romantic spot, where many a Guatimala
lover has been hurried, by the charming influences
around, into a premature outpouring of his hopes and
fears, I sat down on a stone and washed my feet.

Returning, I stopped at the church. The front was
cracked from top to bottom by an earthquake, and the
divided portions stood apart, but the towers were en¬
tire, I ascended to the top, and looked down into the
roofless area. On the east the dark line of forest was
broken by the curling smoke of a few scattered huts,
and backed by verdant mountains, by the cones of vol¬
canoes, with their tops buried in the clouds, and by the
Rock of Mirandilla, an immense block of bare granite
held up among the mountain tops, riven and blasted by
lightning. On the west the setting sun illuminated a
forest of sixty miles, and beyond shed its dying glories
over the whole Pacific Ocean.

At two o’clock, under a brilliant moonlight, and with
a single guide, we started for the Pacific. The road
was level and wooded. We passed a trapiche or su¬
gar-mill, worked by oxen, and before daylight reached
the village of Masagua, four leagues distant, built in a
clearing cut out of the woods, at the entrance of which
we stopped under a grove of orange-trees, and by the
light of the moon filled our pockets and alforgas with
the shining fruit. Daylight broke upon us in a forest
of gigantic trees, from seventy-five to a hundred feet
high, and from twenty to twenty-five feet in circumfer¬
ence, with creepers winding around their trunks and


286


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


hanging from the branches. The road was merely a
path through the forest, formed by cutting away shrubs
and branches. The freshness of the morning was de¬
lightful. We had descended from the table of land
called the tierras templadas, and were now in the tier-
ras callientes ; but at nine o’clock the glare and heat of
the sun did not penetrate the thick shade of the woods.
In some places the branches of the trees, trimmed by
the machete of a passing muleteer, and hung with a
drapery of vines and creepers, bearing red and purple
flowers, formed for a long distance natural arches more
beautiful than any ever fashioned by man; and there
were parrots and other birds of beautiful plumage flying
among the trees; among them Guacamayas, or great
macaws, large, clothed in red, yellow, and green, and
when on the wing displaying a splendid plumage. But
there were also vultures and scorpions, and, running
across the road and up the trees, innumerable iguanas
or lizards, from an inch to three feet long. The road
was a mere track among the trees, perfectly desolate,
though twice we met muleteers bringing up goods from
the port. At the distance of twelve miles we reached
the hacienda of Narango, occupied by a major-domo,
who looked after the cattle of the proprietor, roaming
wild in the woods ; the house stood alone in the midst
of a clearing, built of poles, with a cattle-yard in front;
and I spied a cow with a calf, which was a sign of milk.
But you must catch a cow before you can milk her.
The major-domo went out with a lazo, and, playing
upon the chord of nature, caught the calf first, and then
the cow, and hauled her up by the horns to a post.
The hut had but one waccal, or drinking-shell, made
of a gourd, and it was so small that we sat down by the
cow so as not to lose much time. We had bread, choc-'


ARRIVAL AT THE PACIFIC.


287


olate, and sausages, and, after a ride of twenty-four
miles, made a glorious breakfast; but we exhausted the
poor eow, and I was ashamed to look the calf in the
face.

Resuming our journey, at a distance of nine miles we
reached the solitary hacienda of Overo. The whole of
this great plain was densely wooded and entirely um
cultivated, but the soil was rich, and capable of main¬
taining, with very little labour, thousands of people.
Beyond Overo the country was open in places, and the
sun beat down with scorching force. At one o’clock
we crossed a rustic bridge, and through the opening in
the trees saw the river Michetoya. We followed along
its bank, and very soon heard breaking on the shore the
waves of the great Southern Ocean. The sound was
grand and solemn, giving a strong impression of the
immensity of those waters, which had been rolling from
the creation, for more than five thousand years, unknown
to civilized man. I was loth to disturb the impression,
and rode slowly through the woods, listening in pro¬
found silence to the grandest music that ever fell upon
my ear. The road terminated on the bank of the river,
and I had crossed the Continent of America.

On the opposite side was a long sandbar, with a
flagstaff, two huts built of poles and thatched with
leaves, and three sheds of the same rude construction;
and over the bar were seen the masts of a ship, riding
on the Pacific. This was the port of Istapa. We
shouted above the roar of the waves, and a man came
down to the bank, and loosing a canoe, came over for
us. In the mean time, the interest of the scene was
somewhat broken by a severe assault of moschetoes and
sandflies. The mules suffered as much as we; but I
could not take them across, and was obliged to tie them


288


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


under the trees. ^ Neither Romaldi nor my guide could
be prevailed upon to remain and watch them; they said
it would be death to sleep there. The river is the out¬
let of the Lake of Amatitan, and is said to be navigable
from the Falls of San Pedro Martyr, seventy miles from
its mouth ; but there are no boats upon it, and its banks
are in the wildness of primeval nature. The crossing-
place was at the old mouth of the river. The sandbar
extends about a mile farther, and has been formed since
the conquest. Landing, I walked across the sand to
the house or hut of the captain of the port, and a few
steps beyond saw the object of my journey, the bound¬
less waters of the Pacific. When Nunez de Balboa,
after crossing swamps and rivers, mountains and woods,
which had never been passed but by straggling Indians,
came down upon the shores of this newly-discovered
sea, he rushed up to the middle in the waves with his
buckler and sword, and took possession of it in the
name of the king his master, vowing to defend it in
arms against all his enemies. But Nunez had the as¬
surance that beyond that sea ‘‘ he would find immense
stores of gold, out of which people did eat and drink.’’
I had only to go back again. I had ridden nearly sixty
miles ; the sun was intensely hot, the sand burning, and
very soon I entered the hut and threw myself into a
hammock. The hut was built of poles set up in the
sand, thatched with the branches of trees; furnished
with a wooden table, a bench, and some boxes of mer¬
chandise, and swarming with moschetoes. The captain
of the port, as he brushed them away, complained of
the desolation and dreariness of the place, its isolation
and separation from the world, its unhealthiness, and
the misery of a man doomed to live there; and yet he


PORT OF ISTAPA.


289


feared the result of the war, a change of administra¬
tion, and being turned out of office !

Toward evening, rested and refreshed, I walked out
upon the shore. The port is an open roadstead, with¬
out bay, headland, rock, or reef, or anything whatever
to distinguish it from the line of the coast. There is
no light at night, and vessels at sea take their bearings
from the great volcanoes of the Antigua, more than six¬
ty .miles inland. A buoy was anchored outside of the
breakers, with a cable attached, and under the sheds
were three large launches for embarking and disem¬
barking cargoes. The ship, which was from Bordeaux,
lay off more than a mile from the shore. Her boat had
landed the supercargo and passengers, since which she
had had no communication with the land, and seemed
proudly independent of so desolate a place. Behind
the sandbar were a few Indian huts, and Indians nearly
naked were sitting by me on the shore. Yet this deso¬
late place was once the focus of ambitious hopes, high
aspirations, lust of power and gold, and romantic ad¬
venture. Here Alvarado fitted out his armament, and
embarked with his followers to dispute with Pizarro
the^riches of Peru. The sun was sinking, and the red
globe touched the ocean; clouds were visible on its
face^ and when it disappeared, ocean and land were il¬
luminated with a ruddy haze. I returned to the hut
and threw myself into my hammock. Could it be that
I was again so far from home, and that these were the
waves of the great Southern Ocean breaking on my
ears?

VoL. L—O o


25


290


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


CHAPTER XIV.

The Return.—Hunt for a Mule.—Overo.—Masagua.—Escuintla.—Falls of San
Pedro Martyr.—Michetoya River.—Village of San Pedro.—A Major-domo.—
San Cristoval.—Amatitan.—A roving American.—Entry into Guatimala.—Let¬
ter from Mr. Catherwood.—Christmas Eve.—Arrival of Mr. Catherwood.—
Plaza de Toros.—A Bullfight.—The Theatre.—Official Business.—The Aris¬
tocracy of Guatimala.—State of the Country.—Newyear’s Day.—Ferocity of
Party.

At three o’clock Romaldi woke me to set out on my
return. The moonbeams were glancing over the wa-
tefr, and the canoe was ready. I bade farewell to my
host as he lay in his hammock, and crossed the river.
Here I found an unexpected difiGiculty. My spare mule
had broken her halter, and was nowhere to be seen.
We beat about among the woods till daylight, and
concluding that she must have taken the only path open,
and set out for home on her own account, we saddled
and rode on to Overo, a distance of twenty miles.
But no stray mule had passed the hacienda, and I stop¬
ped and sent Romaldi back to the port.

Very soon I became tired of waiting at the miserable
hacienda, saddled my mule, and started alone. The
road was so shaded that I did not stop for the noonday
heat. For twenty-one miles farther the road was per¬
fectly desolate, the only sound being occasionally the
crash of a falling tree. At the village of Masagua I
rode up to a house, at which I saw a woman under the
shed, and, unsaddling my mule, got her to send a man
out to cut sacate, and to make me some chocolate. I
was so pleased with my independence that I almost re¬
solved to travel altogether by myself, without servant
or change of apparel. In half an hour I resumed my


FALLS OP SAN PEDRO.


291


journey. Toward sundown I met drunken Indians
coming out from Escuintla, and, looking back over the
great plain, saw the sun fast sinking into the Pacific.
Some time after dark I rode up to the house of the cor-
regidor, having performed in the two days a hundred
and ten miles. Unfortunately, there was no sacate for
my mule. This article is brought into the towns by
the Indians daily, and every person buys just enough
for the night, and no more. There was not a spare
lock of grass in the place. With a servant of the cor-
regidor’s I made an exploring expedition through the
town, and by an affecting appeal to an old woman, en¬
forced by treble price, bought from under their very
noses the portion of two mules, and left them supper less.

I waited till two o’clock the next day for Romaldi
and the mule, and, after a vain endeavour to procure a
guide to the falls of San Pedro Martyr, set out alone
direct for Guatimala. At the distance of two leagues,
ascending a steep hill, I passed a trapiche or sugar-
mill, in a magnificent situation, commanding a full
view of the plain I had crossed and the ocean beyond.
Two oxen were grinding sugarcane, and under a shed
was a large boiling caldron for making panela, a brown
sugar, in lumps of about two pounds each, an enor¬
mous quantity of which is consumed in the country.
Here the humour seized me to make some inquiries
about the falls of San Pedro Martyr. A man out at el¬
bows, and every other mentionable and unmentionable
part of his body, glad to get rid of regular work, offered
to conduct me. I had passed, a league back, the place
where I ought to have turned off; and proceeding on¬
ward to the village of San Pedro, he turned off to the
right, and went back almost in the same direction by a
narrow path descending through thick woods choked


292


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


with bushes, and in. a ravine reached the Michetoya
River, which I had crossed at Istapa. It was narrow
and rapid, breaking wildly over a stony bed, with a
high mountain on the opposite side. Following it, we
reached the cataract, consisting of four streams sep¬
arated by granite rock, partly concealed by bushes,
and precipated from a height of about two hundred feet,
forming with the wild scenery around a striking and ro¬
mantic view. A little below it were a sugar-mill work¬
ed by water, and an uncommonly fine hacienda, which
commanded a view of the falls, and at which I was
very much disposed to pass the night. The major-do-
mo, a black man, was somewhat surprised at my visit;
but when he learned that I did not come to see the mill,
but only the falls, he seemed to suspect that I was no
better than I should be ; and Avhen I asked him if I ^
could reach San Cristoval before dark, he answered
that I could if I started immediately. This was not
exactly an invitation to stay, and I left him. It shows
the want of curiosity and indolence of the people, that,
though these falls are# but a pleasant afternoon’s ride
from Escuintla, which for two months is thronged with
visiters from Guatimala, nobody ever visits them.

Hurrying back by the same wild path, we reached
the main road, and, as it was late, I hired my guide to
go on with me to San Cristoval. We passed through
the village of San Pedro, which was a collection of
miserable huts, with an estanco or place for the sale of
agua ardiente, and thronged with half-intoxicated In¬
dians. As we advanced, clouds began to gather around
the mountains, and there was every appearance of heavy
rain. I had no cloak or greatcoat, and, being particu¬
larly apprehensive of fevers and rheumatisms, after ri¬
ding about a mile I returned to San Pedro. The most


A MAJOR-DOMO.


293


respectable citizens of the place were reeling round the
estanco, and urged me to stop ; but my guide said they
were a bad set, and advised me to return and pass the
night at the sugar-mill. Presuming that he knew the
people of whom he spoke better than I did, I was no
way inclined to disregard his caution. It was after
dark when we reached the trapiche ; some of the work¬
men were sitting around a fire smoking; others were
lying asleep under a shed, and I had but to

Look around and choose my ground,

And take my rest.”

I inquired for the major-domo, and was escorted to
a mud house, where in the dark I heard a harsh voice,
and presently, by the light of a pine stick, saw an old
and forbidding face corresponding, and by its side
that of a young woman, so soft and sweet that it seem¬
ed to appear expressly for the sake of contrast; and
these two were one. I was disposed to pity her ; but
the old major-domo was a noble fellow in heart, and
she managed him so beautifully that he never suspect¬
ed it. He was about going to bed, but sent men out
to cut sacate, and both he and his wife were pleased
that accident had brought me to their hut. The work¬
men sympathized in their humour, and we sat for two
hours around a large table under the shed, with two
candles sticking up in their own tallow. They could
not comprehend that I had been to the top of the Vol¬
cano de Agua, and then ridden down to the coast mere¬
ly to see the Pacific. A fine, open-faced young man
had a great desire to travel, only he did not like to go
away from home. I offered to take him with me and
give him good wages. The subject was discussed
aloud. It was an awful thing to go away from home,


294


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


and among strangers, where no one would care for
him. His house was the outside of the major-domo’s
hut, but his home was in the hearts of his friends, and
perhaps some of them would be dead before he return¬
ed. The wife of the major-domo seemed a good spirit
in tempering the hearts and conduct of these wild and
half-naked men. I promised to give him money to pay
his expenses home when he should wish to return, and
he agreed to go with me. At three o’clock the old ma¬
jor-domo was shouting in my ears. I was not familiar
with my own name with the don prefixed, and thought
he had waked up the wrong passenger.” The courage
of the young man who wished to travel failed him, and
he did not make his appearance ; in the expectation of
his going my guide did not come, and I set out alone.
Before daylight I passed for the third time through the
village of San Pedro, and a little beyond overtook a
bundle on horseback, which proved to be a boy and a
woman, with one poncha over both.

The River Michetoya was foaming and breaking in
a long succession of rapids on our right, and we rode
on together to San Cristoval. I rode up to the convent,
pounced upon the cura at the witching hour of break¬
fast, mounted again, and rode around the base of the
Volcano de Agua, with its cultivated fields and belt of
forest and verdure to the top. Opposite was another
volcano, its sides covered with immense forests. Be¬
tween the two I passed a single trapiche belonging to
a convent of Dominican friars, entered a large and
beautiful valley, passed hot springs, smoking for more
than a mile along the road, and entered among the no¬
pals or cochineal plantations of Amatitan. On both
sides were high clay fences, and the nopals were more
extensive than those of the Antigua, and more valuable,


A ROVING AMERICAN.


295


as, though only twenty-five miles from it, the climate is
so different that they produce two crops in each season.

Approaching the town, I remembered that Mr. Han¬
dy, who had travelled from the United States through
Texas and Mexico with a caravan of wild animals, had
told me in New-York of an American in his employ,
who had left him at this place to take charge of a cochi¬
neal plantation, and I was curious to see how he looked
and flourished in such employment. I had forgotten
his name, but, inquiring on the road for an American
del Norte, was directed to the nopal of which he had
charge. It was one of the largest in the place, and con¬
tained four thousand plants. I rode up to a small build¬
ing in the middle of the plantation, which looked like a
summer-house, and was surrounded by workmen, one of
whom announced me as a Spaniard,” as the Indians
generally call foreigners. Dismounting and giving
my mule to an Indian, I entered and found Don Hen-
riques sitting at a table with an account-book before him,
settling accounts with the workmen. He was dressed
in the coton or jacket of the country, and had a very
long beard; but I should have recognised him any¬
where as an American. I addressed him in English,
and he stared at me, as if startled by a familiar sound,
and answered in Spanish. By degrees he comprehend¬
ed the matter. He was under thirty, from Ehinebeck
Landing, on the Hudson River, where his father keeps
a store, and his name was Henry Pawling; had been a
clerk in New-York, and then in Mexico. Induced by
a large offer and a strong disposition to ramble and see
the country, he accepted a proposal from Mr. Handy.
His business was to go on before the caravan, hire a
place, give notice, and make preparations for the exhi¬
bition of the animals. In this capacity he had travelled


296


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


all over Mexico, and from thence to Guatimala. It was
seven years since he left home, and since parting with
Mr. Handy he had not spoken a word of his own lan¬
guage ; and as he spoke it now it was more than half
Spanish. I need not say that he was glad to see me.
He conducted me over the plantation, and explained the
details of the curious process of making cochineal. He
was somewhat disappointed in his expectations, and
spoke with great feeling of home ; but when I offered-to
forward letters, said he had resolved never to write to
his parents again, nor to inform them of his existence
until he retrieved his fortunes, and saw a prospect of re¬
turning rich. He accompanied me into the town of
Amatitan ; and as it was late, and I expected to return
to that place, I did not visit the lake, but continued di¬
rect for Guatimala.

The road lay across a plain, with a high, precipitous,
and verdant wall on the left. At a distance of a league
we ascended a steep hill to the table-land of Guatimala.
I regret that I cannot communicate to the reader the
highest pleasure of my journey in Central America, that
derived from the extraordinary beauty of scenery con¬
stantly changing. At the time I thought this the most
delightful ride I had had in the country. On the way I
overtook a man and his wife on horseback, he with a
game-cock under his arm, and she with a guitar ; a little
boy was hidden away among bedding on a luggage-
mule, and four lads were with them on foot, each with
a game-cock wrapped in matting, with the head and tail
only visible. They were going to Guatimala to pass
the Christmas holydays, and with this respectable party
I entered the gate of the city, on the eighth day. after
my departure. I found a letter from Mr. Catherwood,
dated at Esquipulas, advising me that he had been rob-


CHRISTMAS EVE.


297


bed by his servant, taken ill, had left the ruins, gone to
Don Gregorio’s, and was then on his journey to Guati-
mala. My messenger had passed through Copan, and
gone on he did not know where. I was in great dis¬
tress, and resolved, after a day’s rest, to set off in search
of him.

I dressed myself and went to a party at Senor Zeba-
dours, formerly minister to England, where I surprised
the Guatimaltecos by the tour I had made, and particu¬
larly by having come alone from Istapa. Here I met
Mr. Chatfield, her Britannic majesty’s consul general,
and Mr. Skinner, who had arrived during my absence.
It was Christmas Eve, the night of El Nascimiento, or
birth of Christ. At one end of the sala was a raised
platform, with a green floor, and decorated with branch¬
es of pine and cypress, having birds sitting upon them,
and looking-glass, and sandpaper, and figures of men
and animals, representing a rural scene, with an arbour,
and a wax doll in a cradle ; in short, the grotto of Beth¬
lehem and the infant Saviour. Always, at this season
of the year, every house in Guatimala has its nascimi¬
ento, according to the wealth and taste of the proprietor,
and in time of peace the figure of the Saviour is adorned
with family jewels, pearls, and precious stones, and at
night every house is open, and the citizens, without ac¬
quaintance or invitation, or distinction of rank or per¬
sons, go from house to house visiting ; and the week of
El Nascimiento is the gayest in the year ; but, unfortu¬
nately, at this time it was observed only in form; the
state of the city was too uncertain to permit general
opening of houses and running in the streets at night.
Carrera’s soldiers might enter.

The party was small, but consisted of the elite of
Guatimala, and commenced with supper, after which
VoL. I.—P p


298


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


followed dancing, and, I am obliged to add, smoking.
The room was badly lighted, and the company, from
the precarious state of the country, not gay; but the
dancing was kept up till twelve o’clock, when the ladies
put on their mantas, and we all went to the Cathedral,
where were to be performed the imposing ceremonies of
the Christmas Eve. The floor of the church was crowd¬
ed with citizens, and a large concourse from the villages
around. Mr. Savage accompanied me home, and we
did not get to bed till three o’clock in the morning.

The bells had done ringing, and Christmas mass had
been said in all the churches before I awoke. In the
afternoon was the first bullfight of the season. My
friend Vidaury had called for me, and I was in the act
of going to the Plaza de Toros, when there was a loud
knock at the porte cochere, and in rode Mr. Cather-
wood, armed to the teeth, pale and thin, most happy at
reaching Guatimala, but not half so happy as I was to
see him. He was in advance of his luggage, but I
dressed him up and carried him immediately, to the
Plaza de Toros.

It stands near the church of El Calvario, at the end
of the Calle Real, in shape and form like the Roman
amphitheatre, about three hundred and fifty feet long
and two hundred and fifty broad, capable of contain¬
ing, as we supposed, about eight thousand people, at
least one fourth of the population of Guatimala, and
was then crowded with spectators of both sexes and all
classes, the best and the vilest in the city, sitting to¬
gether indiscriminately; and among them were con¬
spicuous the broad-brimmed, turned-up, and sharp-point¬
ed hat and black gown of the priest.

The seats commenced about ten feet above the area,
with a corridor and open wooden fence in front to pro-


A BULLFIGHT.


299


tect the spectators, astride which sat Carrera’s disor¬
derly soldiers to keep order. At one end, underneath
the corridor, was a large door, through which the bull
was to be let in. At the other end, separated by a par¬
tition from the part occupied by the rest of the specta¬
tors, was a large box, empty, formerly intended for the
captain general and other principal officers of govern¬
ment, and now reserved for Carrera. Underneath was
a military band, composed mostly of Indians. Notwith¬
standing the collection of people, and the expectation
of an animating sport, there was no clapping or stamp¬
ing, or other expression of impatience and anxiety for
the performange to begin. At length Carrera entered
the captain general’s box, dressed in a badly-fitting
blue military frock-coat, embroidered with gold, and at¬
tended by Monte Rosa and other officers, richly dressed,
the alcalde and members of the municipality. All eyes
were turned toward him, as when a king or emperor
enters his box at the theatre in Europe. A year before
he was hunted among the mountains, under a reward
for his body, dead or alive,” and nine tenths of those
who now looked upon him would then have shut the
city against him as a robber, murderer, and outcast.

Soon after the matadores entered, eight in number,
mounted, and each carrying a lance and a red poncha ;
they galloped round the area, and stopped with their
lances opposite the door at which the bull was to enter.
The door was pulled open by a padre, a great cattle-
proprietor, who owned the bulls of the day, and the an¬
imal rushed out into the area, kicking up fiis heels as if
in play, but at sight of the line of horsemen and lances
turned about and ran back quicker than he entered.
The padre’s bull was an. ox, and, like a sensible beast,
would rather run than fight; but the door was closed


300


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


upon him, and perforce he Van round the area, looking
up to the spectators for mercy, and below for. an outlet
of escape. The horsemen followed, “ prodding” him
with their lances ; and all around the area, men and boys
on the fence threw barbed darts with ignited fireworks
attached, which, sticking in his flesh and exploding on
every part of his body, irritated him, and sometimes
made him turn on his pursuers. The matadores led
him on by flaring ponchas before him, and as he press¬
ed them, the skill of the matadore consisted in throw¬
ing the poncha over his horns so as to blind him, and
then fixing in his neck, just behind his jaw, a sort of
balloon of fireworks; when this was done successfully
it created shouts of applause. The government, in an
excess of humanity, had forbidden the killing of bulls,
and restricted the fight to worrying and torturing, Con¬
sequently, it was entirely different from the bullfight in
Spain, and wanted even the exciting interest of a fierce
struggle for life, and the chance of the matadore being
gored to death or tossed over among the spectators.
But, watching the earnest gaze of thousands, it was
easy to imagine the intense excitement in a martial age,
when gladiators fought in the arena before the nobility
and beauty of Rome. Our poor ox, after being tired
out, was allowed to withdraw. Others followed, and
went through the same round. All the padre’s bulls
were oxen. Sometimes a matador on foot was chased
to the fence under a general laugh of the spectators.
After the last ox had run his rounds, the matadores
withdrew, and men and boys jumped over into the are¬
na in such numbers that they fairly hustled the ox.
The noise and confusion, the flaring of coloured pon¬
chas, the running and tumbling, attacking and retreat¬
ing, and clouds of dust, made this the most stirring


THE THEATRE.


301


scene of any; but altogether it was a puerile exhibi¬
tion, and the better classes, among whom was my fair
countrywoman, regarded it merely as an occasion for
meeting acquaintances.

In the evening we went to the theatre, which opened
for the first time. A large building had been com¬
menced in the city, but in one of the revolutions it had
been demolished, and the work was abandoned. The
performance was in the courtyard of a house. The
stage was erected across one of the corners ; the patio
was the pit, and the corridor was divided by temporary
partitions into boxes; the audience sent beforehand, or
servants brought with them, their own seats. We had
invitations to the box of Sehor Vidaury. Carrera was
there, sitting on a bench a little elevated against the
wall of the house, and at the right hand of Rivera Paz,
the chief of the state. Some of his officers were with
him in their showy uniforms, but he had laid his aside,
and had on his black bombazet jacket and pantaloons,
and was very unpretending in his deportment. I con¬
sidered him the greatest man in Guatimala, and made
it a point to shake hands with him in passing. The
first piece was Saide, a tragedy. The company con¬
sisted entirely of Guatimaltecos, and their performance
was very good. There was no change of scenery;
when the curtain fell, all lighted cigars, ladies included,
and, fortunately, there was an open courtyard for the
escape of the smoke. When the performance was over,
the boxes waited till the pit was emptied. Special care
had been taken in placing sentinels, and all went home
quietly.

During the week there was an attempt at gayety, but
all was more or less blended with religious solemnities.
One was that of the Novena, or term of nine days’

26


302


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


praying to the Virgin. One lady, who was distinguish¬
ed for the observance of this term, had an altar built
across the whole end of the sala, with three steps, deco¬
rated with flowers, and a platform adorned with look¬
ing-glasses, pictures, and figures, in the centre of which
was an image of the Virgin richly dressed, the whole
ornamented in a way impossible for me to describe, but
that may be imagined in a place where natural flowers
are in the greatest profusion, and artificial ones made
more perfect than in Europe, and where the ladies have
extraordinary taste in the disposition of them. When
I entered the gentlemen were in an anteroom, with
hats, canes, and small swords; and in the sala the la¬
dies, with female servants cleanly dressed, were on
their knees praying; in front of the fairy altar was one
who seemed a fairy herself; and while her lips moved,
her bright eye was roving, and she looked more worthy
of being kneeled to than the pretty image before her,
and as if she thought so too.

In regard to my official business I was perfectly at a
loss what to do. In Guatimala all were on one side ;
all said that there was no Federal Government; and
Mr. Chatfield, the British consul general, whose opin¬
ion I respected more, concurred, and had published a
circular, denying its existence. But the Federal Gov¬
ernment claimed to be in existence ; and the bare sug¬
gestion of General Morazan’s marching against Guati¬
mala excited consternation. Several times there were
rumours to that effect, and one that he had actually de¬
termined to do so ; that not a single priest would be
spared, and that the streets would run with blood.
The boldest partisans trembled for their lives. Mora-
zan had never been beaten; Carrera had always run
before him ; they had no faith in his being able to de-


OFFICIAL BUSINESS.


303


fend them, and could not defend themselves. At all
events, I had as yet heard only one side, and did not
consider myself justified in assuming that there was no
government. I was bound to make diligent search,’’
and then I might return, in legal phrase, “ cepi corpus,”
or ‘‘non est inventus,” according to circumstances.

For this purpose I determined to go to San Salvador,
which was formerly, and still claimed to be, the capital
of the Confederation and the seat of the Federal Gov¬
ernment, or, rather, to Cojutepeque, to which place the
government had been then lately transferred, on account
of earthquakes at San Salvador. This proj ect was not
without its difficulties. One Rascon, with an insurgent
and predatory band, occupied an intervening district of
country, acknowledging neither party, and fighting un¬
der his own flag. Mr. Chatfield and Mr. Skinner had
come by sea, a circuitous route, to avoid him, and Cap¬
tain De Nouvelle, master of a French ship lying at the
port of San Salvador, arrived in Guatimala almost on
a run, having ridden sixty miles the last day over a
mountainous country, who reported horrible atrocities,
and three men murdered near San Vicente, on their
way to the fair at Esquipulas, and their faces so disfig¬
ured that they could not be recognised. Immediately
on his arrival he sent a courier to order his ship up to
Istapa, merely to take him back, and save him from re¬
turning by land. I had signified my intention to the
state government, which was dissatisfied with my going
to San Salvador at all, but offered me an escort of sol¬
diers, suggesting, however, that if we met any of Mora-
zan’s there would certainly be a fight. This was not
at all pleasant. I was loth to travel a third time the
road to Istapa, but, under the circumstances, accepted


304


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


Captain De Nouvelle’s invitation to take a passage in
his ship.

Meanwhile I passed my time in social visiting. In
our own city the aristocracy is called by the diplomatic
corps at Washington the aristocracy of streets. In
Guatimala it is the aristocracy of houses, as certain
families live in the houses built by their fathers at the
foundation of the city, and they are really aristocratic
old mansions. These families, by reason of certain mo¬
nopolies of importation, acquired under the Spanish do¬
minion immense wealth and rank as merchant prin¬
ces.’’ Still they were excluded from all offices and all
part in the government. At the time of the revolution
one of these families was noble, with the rank of mar-
quisate, and its head tore off the insignia of his rank,
and joined the revolutionary party. Next in position
to the officers of the crown, they thought that, emanci¬
pated from the yoke of Spain, they would have the
government in their own hands; and so they had,
but it was only for a short time. The principles of
equal rights began to be understood, and they were
put aside. For ten years they had been in obscurity,
but accidentally they were again in power, and at the
time of my visit ruled in social as well as political
life. I do not wish to speak harshly of them, for they
were the only people who constituted society ; my in¬
tercourse was almost exclusively with them; my fair
countrywoman was one of them; I am indebted to
them for much kindness ; and, besides, they are person¬
ally amiable ; but I speak of them as public men. I
did not sympathize with them in politics.

To me the position of the country seemed most crit¬
ical, and from a cause which in all Spanish America had
never operated before. At the time of the first invasion


STATE OF THE COUNTRY.


305


a few hundred Spaniards, by superior bravery and skill,
and with more formidable arms, had conquered the
whole Indian population. Naturally peaceable, and
kept without arms, the conquered people had remained
quiet and submissive during the three centuries of Span¬
ish dominion. In the civil wars following the independ¬
ence they had borne but a subordinate part; and down
to the time of Carrera’s rising they were entirely igno¬
rant of their own physical strength. But this fearful
discovery had now been made. The Indians constitu¬
ted three fourths of the inhabitants of Guatimala ; yvere
the hereditary owners of the soil • for the first time sinco
they fell under the dominion of the whites, were organ¬
ized and armed under a chief of their own, who chose
for the moment to sustain the Central party. I did
not sympathize with that party, for I believed that
in their hatred of the Liberals they were courting a
third power that might destroy them both; consorting
with a wild animal which might at any moment turn
and rend them in pieces. I believed that they were
playing upon the ignorance and prejudices of the In¬
dians, and, through the priests, upon their religious
■fanaticism; amusing them with fttes and Church cere¬
monies, persuading them that the Liberals aimed at a
demolition of churches, destruction of the priests, and
hurrying back the country into darkness ; and in the
general heaving of the elements there was not a man
of nerve enough among them, with the influence of
name and station, to rally round him the strong and
honest men of the country, reorganize the shattered re¬
public, and save them from the disgrace and danger of
truckling to an ignorant uneducated Indian boy.

Such were my sentiments ; of course I avoided ex¬
pressing them; but because I did not denounce their
Voi.. I.—Qq


306


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


opponents, some looked coldly upon me. With them
political differences severed all ties. Our worst party
abuse is moderate and mild compared with the terms in
which they speak of each other. We seldom do more
than call men ignorant, incompetent, dishonest, dishon¬
ourable, false, corrupt, subverters of the Constitution,
and bought with British gold; there a political oppo¬
nent is a robber, an assassin; it is praise to admit that
he is not a bloodthirsty cutthroat. We complain that
our ears are constantly offended and our passions rous¬
ed by angry political discussions. There it would have
been delightful to hear a good, honest, hot, and angry
political dispute. I travelled in every state, and I nev¬
er heard one ; for I never met two men together who
differed in political opinions. Defeated partisans are
shot, banished, run away, or get a moral lockjaw, and
never dare express their opinions before one of the dom¬
inant party. We have just passed through a violent
political struggle ; twenty millions of people have been
divided almost man to man, friend against friend,
neighbour against neighbour, brother against brother,
and son against father ; besides honest differences of
opinion, ambition, want, and lust of power and office
have roused passions sometimes to fierceness. Two
millions of men highly excited have spoken out their
thoughts and sentiments fearlessly and openly. They
have all been counted, and the first rule in arithme¬
tic has decided between them; and the defeated party
are still permitted to live in the country; their wives
and children are spared; nay, more, they may grum¬
ble in the streets, and hang out their banners of de¬
fiance, of continued and determined opposition: and,
more than all, the pillars of the republic are not sha¬
ken ! Among a million of disappointed men, never,


4


307


newyear’s day.

with all the infirmities of human passion, has one breath¬
ed resistance to the Constitution and laws. The world
has never presented such a spectacle, such a proof of
the capacity of the people for self-government. Long
may it continue ! May the tongue wither that dares
preach resistance to the ballot-boxes; and may the
moral influence of our example reach our distracted
sister republics, staying the sword of persecution in the
hands of victors, and crushing the spirit of revolution
in a defeated party.

January 1, 1840. This day, so full of home asso¬
ciations—snow, and red noses, and blue lips out of
doors, and blazing fires and beauteous faces within—
opened in Guatimala like a morning in spring. The
sun seemed rejoicing in the beauty of the land it shone
upon. The flowers were blooming in the courtyards,
and the mountains, visible above the tops of the houses,
were smiling in verdure. The bells of thirty-eight
churches and convents proclaimed the coming of an¬
other year. The shops were shut as on a Sunday;
there was no market in the plaza. Gentlemen well
dressed, and ladies in black mantas, were crossing it to
attend grand mass in the Cathedral. Mozart’s music
swelled through the aisles. A priest in a strange tongue
proclaimed morality, religion, and love of country. The
floor of the church was thronged with whites, Mestit-
zoes, and Indians. On a high bench opposite the pul¬
pit sat the chief of the state, and by his side Carrera,
again dressed in his rich uniform. I leaned against a pil¬
lar opposite and watched his face ; and if I read him
right, he had forgotten war and the stains of blood upon
his hands, and his very soul w’as filled with fanatic en¬
thusiasm; exactly as the priests would have him. I did
verily believe that he was honest in his impulses, and


308


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


would do right if he knew how. They who undertake
to guide him have a fearful responsibility. The service
ended, a way was cleared through the crowd. Carrera,
accompanied by the priests and the chief of the state,
awkward in his movements, with his eyes fixed on the
ground, or with furtive glances, as if ill at ease in being
an object of so much attention, walked down the aisle.
A thousand ferocious-looking soldiers were drawn up
before the door. A wild burst of music greeted him,,
and the faces of the men glowed with devotion to their
chief. A broad banner was unfurled, with stripes of
black and red, a device of a death’s head and legs in
the centre, and on one side the words Viva la reli¬
gion !” and on the other ^^Paz o muerte a los Liber-
ales !” Carrera placed himself at their head, and with
Rivera Paz by his side, and the fearful banner float¬
ing in the air, and wild and thrilling music, and the
stillness of death around, they escorted the chief of the
state to his house. How different from Newyear’s Day
at home!

Fanatic as I knew the people to be in religion, and
violent in political animosities, I did not believe that such
an outrage would be countenanced as flaunting in the
plaza of the capital a banner linking together the support
of religion and the death or submission of the Liberal
party. Afterward, in a conversation with the chief of
the state, I referred to this banner. He had not noticed
it, but thought that the last clause was Paz o muerte
a los qui no lo quieron^'^ “to those who do not wish it.’^
This does not alter its atrocious character, and only
adds to fanaticism what it takes from party spirit. I
think, however, that I am right; for on the return of the
soldiers to the plaza, Mr. C. and I followed it, till, as
we thought, the standard-bearer contracted its folds ex-


FEROCITY OF PARTY-


309


pressly to hide it, and some of the officers looked at us
so suspiciously that we withdrew.

For the sake of home associations, I called on my fair
countrywoman; dined at Mr. Hall’s, and in the afternoon
went to the cockpit, a large circular building handsomely
proportioned, with a high seat for the judges, who rang
a bell as a signal for the fight, when commenced a clam¬
our : I offer five dollars!” I offer twenty,” &c.;
and I am happy to say that in this crowded den I saw
but one man whom I had ever seen before ; from there
I went to the bullfight, and then to the theatre. The
reader will admit that I made a brilliant beginning to
the year 1840.


310


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


CHAPTER XV.

Hunt for a Government.—Diplomatic Difficulties.—Departure from Guatimala.
—Lake of Amatitan.—Attack of Fever and Ague.—Overo.—Istapa.—A French
Merchant Ship.—Port of Acajutla.—Illness.—Zonzonate.—The Government
found.—Visit to the Volcano of Izalco.—Course of the Eruptions.—Descent
from the Volcano.

On Sunday, the fifth of January, I rose to set out in
search of a government. Don Manuel Pavon, with his
usual kindness, brought me a packet of letters of intro¬
duction to his friends in San Salvador. Mr. Catherwood
intended to accompany me to the Pacific. We had not
packed up, the muleteer had not made his appearance,
and my passport had not been sent. Captain De Nou-
velle waited till nine o’clock, and then went on in ad¬
vance. In the midst of my confusion I received a visit
from a distinguished canonigo. The reverend prelate
was surprised at my setting out on that day. I was about
pleading my necessities as an excuse for travelling on
the Sabbath; but he relieved me by adding that there
was to be a dinner-party, a bullfight, and a play, and
he wondered that I could resist such temptations. At
eleven o’clock the muleteer came, with his mules, his
wife, and a ragged little son ; and Mr. Savage, who was
always my help through the little vexations attendant
upon doing anything in that country, as well as in more
important matters, returned from the Government House
with word that my passport had been sent to me. I
knew that the government was displeased with my pur¬
pose of going to the capitol. The night before it had
been currently reported that I intended to present my
credentials at San Salvador, and recognise the exist¬
ence of the Federal Government; newspapers received


DIPLOMATIC DIFFICULTIES.


311


the same night by the courier from Mexico were bur¬
dened with accounts of an invasion of that country by
the Texans. I had before received a piece of infor¬
mation that was new to me, and of which it was con¬
sidered diplomatic that I should profess ignorance, viz.,
that, though not so avowed, the Texans were support¬
ed and urged on by the government of the United
States. We were considered as bent upon the con¬
quest of Mexico; and, of course, Guatimala would
come next. The odium of our ambitious pretensions
increased the feeling of coldness and distrust toward
me, arising from my not having attached myself to the
dominant party. In general I was considered as the
successor of Mr. De Witt. It was known among poli¬
ticians that proceedings were pending for the renewal
of a treaty, and that our government had a claim for
the destruction of property of our citizens in one of the
revolutions of the country; but some imagined that the
special object of my mission was very deep, and in fa¬
vour of the party at San Salvador. When Mr. Savage
returned without any passport, suspecting that there
was an intention to embarrass me and make me lose
the opportunity of going by sea, I went immediately to
the Government House, where I received the same an¬
swer that had been given to Mr. Savage. I requested
another, but the secretary of state objected, on the
ground that none could be made out on that day.
There were several clerks in the office, and I urged
my pressing necessity, the actual departure of Captain
De Nouvelle, my seasonable application, and the prom¬
ise that it should be sent to my house. After an un¬
pleasant parley, one was given me, but without assign¬
ing me any official character. I pointed out the omis¬
sion, and the secretary said that I had not presented


312


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


my credentials. I answered that my credentials were
to the general government, and not to that of the State
of Guatimala, which alone he represented; but he per¬
sisted that it was not the custom of his government to
recognise an official character unless he presented his
credentials. His government had been in existence
about six months, and during that time no person
claiming to be official had been near the country. I
put into his hands my passport from my own govern¬
ment, reminded him that I had been arrested and im¬
prisoned once, assured him that I should at all events
set out for San Salvador, and wished to know definitive¬
ly whether he would give me such a passport as I had
a right to ask for. After much hesitation, and with a
very bad grace, he interlined before the official title the
words con el caracter. I make great allowance for party
feeling in a country where political divisions are matters
of life and death, more particularly for Don Joaquim
Durand, whose brother, a priest, was shot a short time
before by the Morazan party ; but this attempt to embar¬
rass my movements, by depriving me of the benefit of of¬
ficial character, excited a feeling of indignation which I
did not attempt to conceal. To refuse accepting the pass¬
port altogether, or to wait a day for remonstrance, would
cause me to lose my passage by sea, and make it ne¬
cessary to undertake a dangerous journey by land, or
abandon going to the capitol; which, I believe, was
precisely what was wished. I was resolved not to be
prevented by any indirect means. I only needed a
passport to the port—the best they could give I did not
value very highly—in San Salvador it would be utter¬
ly worthless; and with the uncourteous paper thus un¬
graciously bestowed, I returned to the house, and at


LAKE OF AMATITAN.


313


two o’clock we started. It was the hottest hour of the
day, and when we passed the gate the sun was scorch¬
ing. Late as it was, our muleteer had not finished his
leave-taking. His wife and little son accompanied him;
and at some distance outside we were obliged to stop
in the hot sun and wait till they came up. We were
extremely glad when they exchanged their last em¬
braces, and the wife and son turned off for their home
in Mixco.

Notwithstanding the lateness of the hour, we diver¬
ged from the regular road for the purpose of passing
by the Lake of Amatitan, but it was dark when we
reached the top of the high range of mountains which
bounds that beautiful water. Looking down, it seem¬
ed like a gathering of fog in the bottom of a deep val¬
ley. The descent was by a rough zigzag path on the
side of the mountain, very steep, and, in the extreme
darkness, difficult and dangerous. We felt happy when
we reached the bank of the lake, though still a little
above- it. The mountains rose round it like a wall, and
cast over it a gloom deeper than the shade of night.
We rode for some distance with the lake on our left,
and a high and perpendicular mountain-side on our
right. A cold wind had succeeded the intense heat of
the day, and when we reached Amatitan I was perfectly
chilled. We found the captain in the house he had in¬
dicated. It was nine o’clock, and, not having touched
anything since seven in the morning, we were prepared
to do justice to the supper he had provided for us.

To avoid the steep descent to the lake with the car¬
go-mules, our muleteer had picked up a guide for us
on the road, and gone on himself direct; but, to our
surprise, he had not yet arrived. While at supper we
VoL. I.—R R 27


314


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


heard an uproar in the street, and a man ran in to tell
us that a mob was murdering our muleteer. The cap¬
tain, a frequent visiter to the country, said it was prob-X
ably a general machete fight, and cautioned us against
going out. While in the corridor, hesitating, the up¬
roar Avas hurrying toward us; the gate bxa?^ open, and
a crowd rushed in, dragging with them our muleteer,
that respectable husband and father, with his machete
drawn, and so tipsy that he could hardly stand, but
wanted to fight all the world. With difficulty we got
him entangled among some saddle-gear, when he drop¬
ped down, and, after vain efforts to rise, fell asleep,

I woke the next morning with violent headache and
pain in all my bones. Nevertheless, we started at day¬
light, and rode till five o’clock. The sun and heat in¬
creased the pain in my head, and for three hours before
reaching Escuintla I was in great suffering. I avoid¬
ed going to the corregidor’s, for I knew that his sleep¬
ing apartment Avas open to all who came, and I wanted
quiet; but I made a great mistake in stopping at the
house of the captain’s friend. He was the proprietor
of an estanco or distillery for making agua ardiente,
and gave us a large room directly back of a store, and
separated from it by a low board partition open over
the top ; and this store was constantly filled with noisy,
wrangling, and drinking men and women. My bed
was next to the partition, and we had eight or ten men
in our room. All night I had a violent fever, and in
the morning I was unable to move. Captain De Nou-
velle regretted it, but he could not wait, as his ship was
ready to lie off and on without coming to anchor. Mr.
Catherwood had me removed to a storeroom filled with
casks and demijohns, where, except from occasional


FEVER AND AGUE.


315


entries to draw off liquor, I was quiet; but the odour
was sickening.

In the afternoon the fever left me, and we rode to
Masaya, a level and shady road of four leagues, and,
to our surprise and great satisfaction, found the cap¬
tain at the house at which I had stopped on my return
from Istapa. He had advanced two leagues beyond,
when he heard of a band of robbers at some distance
farther on, and returned to wait for company, sending,
in the mean time, to Escuintla for a guard of soldiers.
We afterward learned that they were a body of exiles
who had been expelled from Guatimala, and were cross¬
ing from Quezaltenango to San Salvador; but, being
in desperate circumstances, they were dangerous per¬
sons to meet on the road.

The hut at which we stopped was hardly large
enough for the family that occupied it, and our luggage,
with two hammocks and a cartaret, drove them into a
very small space. Crying children are said to be
healthy; if so, the good woman of the house was bless¬
ed : besides this, a hen was hatching a brood of chick¬
ens under my head. During the night a party of sol¬
diers entered the village, in pursuance of the captain’s
requisition, and passed on to clear the road. We start¬
ed before daylight; but as the sun rose my fever re¬
turned, and at eleven o’clock, when we reached Overo,
I could go no farther.

I have before remarked that this hacienda is a great
stopping-place from Istapa and the salt-works; and un¬
fortunately for me, several parties of muleteers, in ap¬
prehension of the robbers, had joined together, and
starting at midnight, had already finished their day’s
labour. In the afternoon a wild boar was hunted,
which our muleteer, with my gun, killed. There was


316


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


a great feast in cooking and eating him, and the noise
racked my brain. Night brought no relief. Quiet was
all I wanted, but that it seemed impossible to have ; be¬
sides which, the rancho was more than usually abundant
in fleas. All night I had violent fever. Mr. Cather-
wood, who, from not killing any one at Copan, had con¬
ceived a great opinion of his medical skill, gave me a
powerful dose of medicine, and toward morning I fell
asleep.

At daylight we started, and arrived at Istapa at nine
o’clock. Captain De Nouvelle had not yet gone on
board. Two French ships were then lying off the port:
the Belle Poule and the Melanie, both from Bordeaux,
the latter being the vessel of Captain De Nouvelle. He
had accounts to arrange with the captain of the Belle
Poule, and we started first for his vessel.

I have before remarked that Istapa is an open road¬
stead, without bay, headland, rock, reef, or any protec¬
tion whatever from the open sea. Generally the sea is,
as its name imports, pacific, and the waves roll calmly
to the shore; but in the smoothest times there is a
breaker, and to pass this, as a part of the fixtures of the
port, an anchor is dropped outside, with a buoy attach¬
ed, and a long cable passing from the buoy is secured
on shore. The longboat of the Melanie lay hard
ashore, stern first, with a cable run through a groove in
the bows, and passing through the sculling-hole in the
stern. She was filled with goods, and among them we
took our seats. The mate sat in the stern, and, taking
advantage of a wave that raised the bows, gave the
order to haul. The wet rope whizzed past, and the
boat moved till, with the receding wave, it struck heav¬
ily on the sand. Another wave and another haul, and
she swung clear of the bottom ; and meeting the coming,


317


\


A FRENCH MERCHANT SHIP.

and hauling fast on the receding wave, in a few min¬
utes we passed the breakers, the rope was. thrown out
of the groove, and the sailors took to their oars.

It was one of the most beautiful of those beautiful
days on the Pacific. The great ocean was as calm as
a lake; the freshness of the morning still rested upon
the water, and already I felt revived. In a few min¬
utes we reached the Belle Poule, one of the most beau¬
tiful ships that ever floated, and considered a model in
the French commercial marine. The whole deck was '
covered with an awning, having a border trimmed with
scarlet, and fluttering in the wind. The quarter-deck
was raised, protected by a fanciful awning, furnished
with settees, couches, and chairs, and on a brass railing
in front sat two beautiful Peruvian parrots. The door
of the cabin was high enough to admit a tall man with¬
out stooping. On each side were four staterooms, and
the stern was divided into two chambers for the captain
and supercargo, each with a window in it, and furnish¬
ed with a bed (not a berth), a sofa, books, drawers,
writing-desk, everything necessary for luxurious living
on shipboard ; just the comforts with which one would
like to circumnavigate the world. She was on a tra¬
ding voyage from Bordeaux, with an assorted cargo of
French goods; had touched at the ports in Peru, Chili,
Panama, and Central America, and left at each place
merchandise to be sold, and the proceeds to be invested
in the products of the country; and was then bound to
Mazatlan, on the coast of Mexico, whence she would
return and pick up her cargo, and in two years return
to Bordeaux. We had a dejeuner a la fourchette,
abounding in Paris luxuries, with wines and cafe, as
in Paris, to which, fortunately for the ship’s stores, I did
not bring my accustomed vigour ; and there was style in


318


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


everything, even to the name of the steward, who was
called the maitre d’hotel.

At two o’clock we went on board the Melanie. She
was about the same size, and if we had not seen the
Belle Poule first, we should have been delighted with
her. The comfort and luxury of these homes on the
sea” were in striking contrast with the poverty and
misery of the desolate shore. The captain of the Belle
Poule came on board to dine. It was a pleasure to us
to see the delight with which these two Bordeaux men
and their crews met on this distant shore. Cape Horn,
Peru, and Chili were the subjects of conversation, and
we found on board a file of papers, which gave us the
latest news from our friends in the Sandwich Islands.
Mr. C. and the captain of the Belle Poule remained on
board till we got under way. We bade them good-by
over the railing ; the evening breeze filled our sails ;
for a few moments we saw them, a dark spot on the
water ; the wave sank, and we lost sight of them en¬
tirely.

I remained on deck but a short time. I was the
only passenger, and the maitre d’hotel made me a bed
with settees directly under the stern windows, but I
could not sleep. Even with windows and doors wide
open the cabin was excessively warm ; the air was
heated, and it was full of moschetoes. The captain
and mates slept on deck. I was advised not to do so,
but at twelve o’clock I went out. It was bright star¬
light ; the sails were flapping against the mast; the
ocean was like a sheet of glass, and the coast dark and
irregular, gloomy, and portentous with volcanoes. The
great bear was almost upon me, the north star was
lower than I had ever seen it before, and, like myself,
seemed waning. A young sailor of the watch on deck


PORT OF ACAJUTLA.


319


spoke to me of the deceitfulness of the sea, of ship¬
wrecks, of the wreck of an American vessel which he
had fallen in with on his first cruise in the Pacific, and
of his beautiful and beloved France. The freshness of
the air was grateful; and while he was entertaining me,
I stretched myself on a settee and fell asleep.

The next day I had a recurrence of fever, which
continued upon me all day, and the captain put me un¬
der ship’s discipline. In the morning the maitre d’hotel
stood by me with cup and spoon, ‘‘ Monsieur, un vom-
itif,” and in the afternoon, Monsieur, une purge.”
When we arrived at Acajutla I was unable to go
ashore. As soon as we cast anchor the captain land¬
ed, and before leaving for Zonzonate engaged mules
and men for me. The port of Acajutla is not quite so
open as that of Istapa, having on the south a slight
projecting headland of rock. In the offing were a
goelette brig for a port in Peru, a Danish schooner for
Guayaquil, and an English brig from London. All the
afternoon I sat on the upper deck. Some of the sailors
were asleep and others playing cards. In sight were
six volcanoes; one constantly emitting smoke, and an¬
other flames. At night the Volcano of Izalco seemed a
steady ball of fire.

The next morning the mate took me ashore in the
launch. The process was the same as at Istapa, and
we were detained some time by the boat of the English
vessel occupying the cable. As soon as we struck, a
crowd of Indians, naked except a band of cotton cloth
around the loins and passing between the legs, backed
up against the side of the boat. I mounted the shoul¬
ders of one of them; as the wave receded he carried
me several paces onward, then stopped and braced
himself against the coming wave. I clung to his neck,


320


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


but was fast sliding down his slippery sides, when he
deposited me on the shore of San Salvador, called by
the Indians Cuscatlan,’’ or the land of riches. Alva¬
rado, on his voyage to Peru, was the first Spaniard
who ever set foot upon this shore, and as I took special
care to keep my feet from getting wet, I could but think
of the hardy frames as well as iron nerves of the con¬
querors of America.

The mate and sailors took leave of me and returned
to the ship. I walked along the shore and up a steep
hill. It was only eight o’clock, and already excessively
hot. On the bank fronting the sea were the ruins of
large warehouses, occupied as receptacles for merchan¬
dise under the Spanish dominion, when all the ports of
America were closed against foreign vessels. In one
corner of the ruined building was a sort of guardroom,
where a few soldiers were eating tortillas, and one was
cleaning his musket. Another apartment was occupied
by the captain of the port, who told me that the mules
engaged for me had got loose, and the muleteers were
looking for them. Here I had the pleasure to meet Dr.
Drivin, a gentleman from the Island of St. Lucia, who
had a large sugar hacienda a few leagues distant, and
was at the port to superintend the disembarcation of
machinery for a mill from the English brig. While
waiting for the mules he conducted me to a hut where
he had two Guayaquil hammocks hung, and feeling al¬
ready the effect of my exertions, I took possession of
one of them.

The woman of the rancho was a sort of ship’s hus¬
band ; and there being three vessels in port, the rancho
was encumbered with vegetables, fruit, eggs, fowls, and
ship’s stores. It was close and hot, but very soon I re¬
quired all the covering I could get. I had a violent


ILLNESS.


321


ague, followed by a fever, in comparison with which
all I had suffered before was nothing. I called for
water till the old woman was tired of giving it to me,
and went out and left me alone. I became lighthead¬
ed, wild with pain, and wandered among the miserable
huts with only the consciousness that my brain was
scorching. I have an indistinct recollection of speak¬
ing English to some Indian women, begging them to
get me a horse to ride to Zonzonate ; of some laughing,
others looking at me with pity, and others leading me
out of the sun, and making me lie down under the
shade of a tree. At three o’clock in the afternoon the
mate came ashore again. I had changed my position,
and he found me lying on my face asleep, and almost
withered by the sun. He wanted to take me back on
board the ship, but I begged him to procure mules and
take me to Zonzonate, within the reach of medical as¬
sistance. It is hard to feel worse than I did when I
mounted. I passed three hours of agony, scorched by
the intense heat, and a little before dark arrived at Zon¬
zonate, fortunate, as Dr. Drivin afterward told me, in
not having suffered a stroke of the sun. Before en¬
tering the town and crossing the bridge over the Rio
Grande, I met a gentleman well mounted, having a scar¬
let Peruvian pellon over his saddle, with whose appear¬
ance I was struck, and we exchanged low bows. This
gentleman, as I afterward learned, was the government
I was looking after.

I rode to the house of Captain De Nouvelle’s broth¬
er, one of the largest in the place, where I had that
comfort, seldom known in Central America, a room to
myself, and everything else necessary. For several
days I remained within doors. The first afternoon I

VoL. I.—S s


322


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


went out I called upon Don Manuel de Aguila, formerly
chief of the State of Costa Rica, but about a year be¬
fore driven out by a revolution and banished for life.
At his house I met Don Diego Vigil, the vice-president
of the republic,-the same gentleman whom I had met
on the bridge, and the only existing officer of the Fed¬
eral Government. From observation and experience
in my own country, I had learned never to take the
character of a public man from his political enemy;
and I will not soil this page with the foul aspersions
which men of veracity, but blinded by party prejudice,
threw upon the character of Seiior Vigil. He was
about forty-five, six feet high, thin, and suffering from
a paralytic affection, which almost deprived him of the
use of both legs ; in dress, conversation, and manners,
eminently a gentleman. He had travelled more ex¬
tensively in his own country than most of his country¬
men, and knew all the objects of interest; and with a
politeness which I appreciated, made no reference to my
position or my official character.

His business at Zonzonate showed the wretched state
of the country. He had come expressly to treat with
Rascon, the head of the band which had prevented my
coming from Guatimala by land. Chico Rascon, as he
was familiarly called in Zonzonate, was of an old and
respectable family, who had spent a large fortune in
dissipation in Paris, and returning in desperate circum¬
stances, had turned patriot. About six months before
he had made a descent upon Zonzonate, killed the
garrison to a man, robbed the custom-house, and re¬
treated to his hacienda. He was then on a visit in the
town, publicly, by appointment with Seiior Vigil, and
demanded, as the price of disbanding his troops, a
colonel’s commission for himself, other commissions for


THE GOVERNMENT FOUND.


323


some of his followers, and four thousand dollars in
money. Vigil assented to all except the four thousand
dollars in money, but offered instead the credit of the
State of San Salvador, which Rascon agreed to accept.
Papers were drawn up, and that afternoon was appoint¬
ed for their execution; but, while Vigil was waiting for
him, Rascon and his friends, without a word of notice,
mounted their horses and rode out of town. The place
was thrown into great excitement, and in the evening I
saw the garrison busily engaged in barricading the plaza,
in apprehension of another attack.

The next day I made a formal call upon Sehor Vigil.
I was in a rather awkward position. When I left Gua-
timala in search of a government, I did not expect to
meet it on the road. In that state I had heard but one
side ; I was just beginning to hear the other. If there
was any government, I had treed it. Was it the real
thing or was it not ? In Guatimala they said it was not;
here they said it was. It was a knotty question. I was
in no great favour in Guatimala, and in endeavouring to
play a safe game I ran the risk of being hustled by all
parties. In Guatimala they had no right to ask for my
credentials, and took offence because I did not present
them; here, if I refused, they had a right to consider it an
insult. In this predicament I opened my business with
the vice-president, and told him that I was on my way
to the capital, with credentials from the United States;
but that, in the state of anarchy in which I found the
country, was at a loss what to do; I was desirous to
avoid making a false step, and anxious to know whether
the Federal Government really existed, or whether the
Republic was dissolved. Our interview was long and
interesting, and the purport of his answer was, that the
government did exist de facto and de jure; he himself


324


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


was legally elected vice-president; the act of the four
states in declaring themselves independent was uncon¬
stitutional and rebellious; the union could not be dis¬
solved except by a convention of deputies from all the
states; the government had the actual control in three
states, one had been reduced to subjection by arms, and
very soon the Federal party would have the ascendancy
in the others. He was familiar with the case, of South
Carolina, and said that our Congress had sustained the
right of the general government to coerce states into
subjection, and they were in the same position. I re¬
ferred to the shattered condition of the government; its
absolute impotence in other states ; the non-existence of
senate and other co-ordinate branches, or even of a sec¬
retary of state, the officer to whom my credentials were
addressed ; and he answered that he had in his suite an
acting secretary of state, confirming what had been told
me before, that the Government’^ would, at a mo¬
ment’s notice, make any officer I wanted; but I owe it
to Seiior Vigil to say, that, after going over fully the
whole ground of the unhappy contest, and although at
that critical juncture the recognition of the Federal Gov¬
ernment by that of the United States would have been
of moment to his party, and not to recognise it was dis¬
respectful and favoured the cause of the rebellious or in¬
dependent states, he did not ask me to present my cre¬
dentials. The Convention, which was expected to com¬
pose the difficulties of the Republic, was then about as¬
sembling in Honduras. The deputies from St. Salvador
had gone to take their seats, and it was understood that
I should await the decision of this body. The result of
my interview with the vice-president was much more
agreeable than I expected. I am sure that I left him
without the least feeling of ill-will on his part; but my


VISIT TO A VOLCANO.


325


great perplexity whether I had any government was not
yet brought to a close.

In the mean time, while the political repairs were go¬
ing on, I remained in Zonzonate recruiting. The town
is situated on the banks of the Rio Grande, which is
formed by almost innumerable springs, and in the In¬
dian language its name means four hundred springs of
water. It stands in one of the richest districts of the rich
State of San Salvador, and has its plaza, with streets at
right angles, and white houses of one story, some of
them very large ; but it has borne its share of the calam¬
ities which have visited the unfortunate Republic. The
best houses are deserted, and their owners in exile.
There are seven costly churches and but one cura.

I was unable to undertake any journey by land, and
feeling the enervating effect of the climate, swung all
day in a hammock. Fortunately, the proprietors of the
brig which I had seen at Acajutla, bound for Peru,
changed her destination, and determined to send her to
Costa Rica, the southernmost state of the Confederacy.
At the same time, a man offered as a servant, very highly
recommended, and whose appearance I liked ; and I re¬
solved to have the benefit of the sea voyage, and, in re¬
turning by land, explore the canal route between the At¬
lantic and Pacific by the Lake of Nicaragua, a thing
which I had desired much, but despaired of being able
to accomplish.

Before leaving I roused myself for an excursion.
The window of my room opened upon the Volcano of
Izalco. All day I heard at short intervals the eruptions
of the burning mountain, and at night saw the column
of flame bursting from the crater, and streams of fire
rolling down its side. Fortunately, Mr. Blackburn, a
Scotch merchant, for many years resident in Peru, ar-

28


326


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


.rived, and agreed to accompany me. The next morn¬
ing before five o’clock we were in the saddle. At the
distance of a mile we forded the Rio Grande, here a
wild river, and riding through a rich country, in half an
hour reached the Indian village of Naguisal, a lovely
spot, and literally a forest of fruits and flowers. Large
trees were perfectly covered with red, and at every step
we could pluck fruit. Interspersed among these beau¬
tiful trees were the miserable huts of Indians, and lying
on the ground, or at some lazy work, were the misera¬
ble Indians themselves. Continuing another league
through the same rich country, we rose upon a table of
land, from which, looking back, we saw an immense
plain, wooded, and extending to the shore, and beyond,
the boundless waters of the Pacific. Before us, at the
extreme end of a long street, was the church of Izalco,
standing out in strong relief against the base of the vol¬
cano, which at that moment, with a loud report like the
rolling of thunder, threw in the air a column of black
smoke and ashes, lighted by a single flash of flame.

With difficulty we obtained a guide, but he was so
tipsy that he could scarcely guide himself along a
straight street; and he would not go till the next day,
as he said it was so late that we should be caught on
the mountain at night, and that it was full of tigers. In
the mean time the daughter of our host found another,
and, stowing four green cocoanuts in his alforgas, we
set out. Soon we came out upon an open plain, and
without a bush to obstruct the view, saw on oiir left the
whole volcano from its base to its top. It rose from
near the foot of a mountain, to a height perhaps of three
thousand feet, its sides brown and barren, and all
around for miles the earth was covered with lava. ^ Be¬
ing in a state of eruption, it was impossible to ascend


i


COURSE OF THE ERUPTIONS.


327


it, but behind it is a higher mountain, which commands
a view of the burning crater. The whole volcano was
in full sight, spouting into the air a column of black
smoke and an immense body of stones, while the earth
shook under our feet. Crossing the plain, we com¬
menced ascending the mountain. At eleven o’clock we
sat down by the bank of a beautiful stream to break¬
fast. My companion had made abundant provision, and
for the first time since I left Guatimala I felt the keen¬
ness of returning appetite. In half an hour we mount¬
ed, and soon after twelve o’clock entered the woods,
having a very steep ascent by a faint path, which we
soon lost altogether. Our guide changed his direction
several times, and at length got lost, tied his horse, and
left us to wait while he searched the way. We knew
that we were near the volcano, for the explosions sound¬
ed like the deep mutterings of dreadful thunder. Shut
up as we were in the woods, these reports were awful.
Our horses snorted with terror, and the mountain quaked
beneath our feet. Our guide returned, and in a few
minutes we came out suddenly upon an open point,
higher than the top of the volcano, commanding a view
of the interior of the crater, and so near it that we saw
the huge stones as they separated in the air, and fell pat¬
tering around the sides of the volcano. In a few min¬
utes our clothes were white with ashes, which fell around
us with a noise like the sprinkling of rain.

The crater had three orifices, one of which was in¬
active ; another emitted constantly a rich blue smoke ;
and after a report, deep in the huge throat of the third
appeared a light blue vapour, and then a mass of thick
black smoke, whirling and struggling out in enormous
wreaths, and rising in a dark majestic column, lighted
for a moment by a sheet of flame ; and when the smoke


328


INCIDENT OF TRAVELS.


dispersed, the atmosphere was darkened by a shower
of stones and ashes. This over, a moment of stillness
followed, and then another report and eruption, and
these continued regularly, at intervals, as our guide said,
of exactly five minutes, and really he was not much out
of the way. The sight was fearfully grand. We re¬
freshed ourselves with a draught of cocoanut milk,
thought how this grandeur would be heightened when
the stillness and darkness of night were interrupted by
the noise and flame, and forthwith resolved to sleep
upon the mountain.

The cur a of Zonzonate, still in the vigour of life, told
me that he remembered when the ground on which this
volcano stands had nothing to distinguish it from any
other spot around. In 1798 a small orifice was discov¬
ered puffing out small quantities of dust and pebbles.
He was then living at Izalco, and, as a boy, was in the
habit of going to look at it; and he had watched it, and
marked its increase from year to year, until it had grown
into what it is now. Captain De Nouvelle told me he
could observe from the sea that it had grown greatly
within the last two years. Two years before its light
could not be seen at night on the other side of the
mountain on which I stood. Night and day it forces
up stones from the bowels of the earth, spouts them into
the air, and receives them upon its sides. Every day
it is increasing, and probably it will continue to do so
until the inward fires die, or by some violent convul¬
sion the whole is rent to atoms.

Old travellers are not precluded occasional bursts of
enthusiasm, but they cannot keep it up long. In about
an hour we began to be critical and even captious.
Some eruptions were better than others, and some
were comparatively small affairs. In this frame of


DESCENT FROM THE VOLCANO.


329


mind we summed up our want of comforts for passing
the night on the mountain, and determined to return.
Mr. Blackburn and I thought that we could avoid the
circuit of the mountain by descending directly to the
base of the volcano, and crossing it, reach the camino
real; but our guide said it was a tempting of Provi¬
dence, and refused to accompany us. We had a very
steep descent on foot, and in some places our horses
slid down on their haunches. An immense bed of lava,
stopped in its rolling course by the side of the mountain,
filled up the wide space between us and the base of the
volcano. We stepped directly upon this black and
frightful bed, but we had great difficulty in making our
horses follow. The lava lay in rolls as irregular as the
waves of the sea, sharp, rough, and with huge chasms,
difficult for us and dangerous for the horses. With
great labour we dragged them to the base and around
the side of the volcano. Massive stones, hurled into the
air, fell and rolled down the sides, so near that we dared
not venture farther. We were afraid of breaking our
horses’ legs in the holes into which they were constantly
falling, and turned back. On the lofty point from which
we had looked down into the crater of the volcano sat
our guide, gazing, and, as we could imagine, laughing
at us. We toiled back across the bed of lava and up
the side of the mountain, and when we reached the top
both my horse and I were almost exhausted. Fortu¬
nately, the road home was down hill. It was long after
dark when we passed the foot of the mountain and came
out upon the plain. Every burst of the volcano sent
forth a pillar of fire; in four places were steady fires,
and in one a stream of fire was rolling down its side.
At eleven o’clock we reached Zonzonate, besides toil¬
ing around the base of the volcano, having ridden up-
VOL. I.— T T


330


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


ward of fifty miles; and such had been the interest of
the day’s work, that, though my first effort, I never suf¬
fered from it.

The arrangements for my voyage down the Pacific
were soon made. The servant to whom I referred was
a native of Costa Rica, then on his way home, after a
long absence, with a cargo of merchandise belonging to
himself. He was a tall, good-looking fellow, dressed
in a Guatimala jacket or coton, a pair of Mexican leath¬
er trousers, with buttons down the sides, and a steeple-
crowned, broad-brimmed, drab wool hat, altogether far
superior to any servant I saw in the country; and I
think if it had not been for him I should pot have un¬
dertaken the journey. The reader will perhaps be
shocked to hear that his name was Jesus^ pronounced
in Spanish'Hezoos, by which latter appellation, to avoid
what might be considered profanity, I shall hereafter
call him.


SICKNESS AND MUTINY.


8ai


CHAPTER XVI.

Sickness and Mutiny.—Illness of Captain Jay.—Critical Situation.—Rough
Nursing.—A Countryman in Trouble.—Dolphins.—Succession of Volcanoes.
—Gulf of Nicoya.—Harbour of Caldera.—Another Countryman.—Another
Patient. — Hacienda of San Felippe. — Mountain of Aguacate.—“Zillenthal
Patent Self-acting Cold Amalgamation Machine.”—Gold Mines.—View from
the Mountain Top.

On Monday, the twenty-second of January, two
hours before daylight, we started for the port. 'Hezoos
led the way, carrying before him all my luggage, rolled
up in a baquette, being simply a cowhide, after the
fashion of the country. At daylight we heard behind
us the clattering of horses’ hoofs, and Don Manuel
de Aguila, with his two sons, overtook us. Before the
freshness of the morning was past we reached the port,
and rode up to the old hut which I had hoped never to
see again. The hammock was swinging in the same
place. The miserable rancho seemed destined to be the
abode of sickness. In one corner lay Senor D’Yriarte,
my captain, exhausted by a night of fever, and unable
to sail that day.

Dr. Drivin was again at the port. He had not yet
disembarked his machinery; in fact, the work was sus¬
pended by a mutiny on board the English brig, the
ringleader of which, as the doctor complained to me,
was an American. I passed the day on the seashore.
In one place, a little above high-water mark, almost
washed by the waves, were rude wooden crosses, mark¬
ing the graves of unhappy sailors who had died far from
their homes. Returning, I found at the hut Captain
Jay, of the English brig, who also complained to me
of the American sailor. The captain was a young


332


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


man, making his first voyage as master ; his wife, whom
he had married a week before sailing, accompanied
him. He had had a disastrous voyage of eight months
from London ; in doubling Cape Horn his crew were
all frostbitten and his spars carried away. With only
one man on deck he had worked up to Guayaquil, where
he incurred great loss of time and money in making re¬
pairs, and shipped an entirely new crew. At Acajutla
he found that his boats were not sufficient to land the
doctor’s machinery, and was obliged to wait until a
raft could be constructed. In the mean time his crew
mutinied, and part of them refused to work. His wife
was then at the doctor’s hacienda; and I noticed that,
while writing her a note with pencil, his sunburned face
was pale, and large drops of perspiration stood on his
forehead. Soon after he threw himself into the ham¬
mock, and, as I thought, fell asleep ; but in a few min¬
utes I saw the hammock shake, and, remembering my
own shaking there, thought it was at its old tricks of
giving people the fever and ague ; but very soon I saw
that the poor captain was in convulsions. Excepting
Captain D’Yriarte, who was lying against the wall per¬
fectly helpless, I was the only man in the hut; and as
there was danger of his throwing himself out of the
hammock, I endeavoured to hold him in ; but with one
convulsive’ effort he threw me to the other side of the
hut, and hung over the side of the hammock, with one
hand entangled in the cords, and his head almost touch¬
ing the ground. The old woman said that the devil had
taken possession of him, and ran out of doors screaming.
Fortunately, this brought in a man whom I had not seen
before, Mr. Warburton, an engineer who had come out
to set up the machinery, and who was himself a machine
of many horse-power, having a pair of shoulders that


A CRITICAL SITUATION.


333


seemed constructed expressly for holding men in con¬
vulsions. At first he was so shocked that he did not
know what to do. I told him that the captain was to be
held, whereupon, opening his powerful arms, he closed
them around the captain’s with the force of a hydraulic
press, turning the legs over to me. These legs were a
pair of the sturdiest that ever supported a human body;
and I verily believe that if the feet had once touched
my ribs, they would have sent me through the wall of
the hut. Watching my opportunity, I wound the ham¬
mock around his legs, and my arms around the ham¬
mock. In the mean time he broke loose from Mr. War-
burton’s hug, who, taking the hint from me, doubled his
part in with the folds of the hammock, and gave his
clinch from the outside. The captain struggled, and,
worming like a gigantic snake, slipped his head out of
the top of the hammock, and twisted the cords around his
neck, so that we were afraid of his strangling himself.
We were in utter despair, when two of his sailors rush¬
ed in, who, being at home with ropes, extricated his
head, shoved him back into the hammock, wrapped it
around him as before, and I withdrew completely ex¬
hausted.

The two recruits were Tom, a regular tar of about
forty, and the cook, a black man, and particular friend
of Tom, who called him Darkey. Tom undertook the
whole direction of securing the captain; and although Dr.
Drivin and several Indians came in, Tom’s voice was
the only one heard, and addressed only to Darkey.”

Stand by his legs. Darkey !” Hold fast. Darkey !”

Steady, Darkey!” but all together could not hold
him. Turning on his face and doubling himself inside,
he braced his back, and drove both legs through the
hammock, striking his feet violently against the ground ;


334


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


his whole body passed through. His struggles were
dreadful. Suddenly the mass of bodies on the floor
rolled against Captain D’Yriarte’s bed, which broke
down with a crash, and with a fever upon him, he was
obliged to scramble out of the way. In the interval of
one of the most violent struggles we heard a strange id¬
iotic noise, which seemed like an attempt to crow. The
Indians who crowded the hut laughed, and Dr. Drivin
was so indignant at their heartlessness that he seized a
club and drove them all out of doors. An old naked
African, who had been a slave at Balize, and had lost
his language without acquiring much of any other, re¬
turned with a bunch of feathers, which he wished to
stick in the captain’s nose and set fire to, saying it was
the remedy of his country; but the doctor showed him
his stick, and he retreated.

The convulsions continued for three hours, during
which time the doctor considered the captain’s situation
very critical. The old woman persisted that the devil
was in him, and would not give him up, and that he
must die; and I could not but think of his young wife,
who was sleeping a few miles off, unconscious of the
calamity that threatened her. The fit was brought on,
as the doctor sqid, by anxiety and distress of mind oc¬
casioned by his unfortunate voyage, and particularly by
the mutiny of his crew. At eleven o’clock he fell
asleep, and now we learned the cause of the strange
noise which had affected us so unpleasantly. Tom was
just preparing to go on board the vessel, when the Af¬
rican ran down to the shore and told him that the cap¬
tain was at the hut drunk. Tom, being himself in that
state, felt that it was his duty to look after the captain;
but he had just bought a parrot, for which he had paid
a dollar, and, afraid to trust him in other hands, hauled


ROUGH NURSING.


335


his baggy shirt a foot more out of his trousers, and thrust
the parrot into his bosom, almost smothering it with his
neckcloth. The parrot, indignant at this confinement,
was driving his beak constantly into Tom’s breast,
which was scarified and covered with blood ; and once,
when Tom thought it was going too far, he put his hand
inside and pinched it, which produced the extraordina¬
ry sounds we had heardw

In a little while Tom and Darkey got the Indians to
relieve them, and went out to drink the captain’s health.
On their return they took their places on the ground,
one on each side of their commander. I threw myself
into the broken hammock; and Dr. Drivin, charging
them, if the captain awoke, not to say anything that
could agitate him, went off to another hut.

It was not long before the captain, raising his head,
called out, What the devil are you doing with my
legs ?” which was answered by Tom’s steady cry,

Hold on. Darkey!” Darkey and an Indian were
holding the captain’s legs, two Indians his arms, and
Tom was spread over his body. The captain looked
perfectly sensible, and utterly amazed at being pinned
to the ground. Where am I ?” said he. Tom and
Darkey had agreed not to tell him what had happened;
but, after the most extraordinary lying on the part of
Tom, while the captain was looking at him and us in
utter amazement, the poor fellow became so entangled,
that, swearing the doctor might stay and tell his own
stories, he began where he and Darkey came in, and
found the captain kicking in the hammock; and the
captain was given to understand that if it had not been
for him and Darkey he would have kicked his own
brains out. I relieved Tom’s story from some obscu¬
rity, and a general and noisy conversation followed,


/


336 INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.

which was cut short by poor Captain D’Yriarte, who
had not had a wink of sleep all night, and begged us to
give him a chance.

In the morning, while I was taking chocolate with
Doctor Drivin, the mate came to the hut with the mu¬
tinous American sailor in the custody of four soldiers,
to make a complaint to me. The sailor was a young
man of twenty-eight, short, well-made, and very good-
looking, and his name was Jemmy. He, too, com¬
plained to me; wanted to leave the brig, and said that
he would stop on a barren rock in the midst of the
ocean rather than remain on board. I told him I was
sorry to find an American sailor a ringleader in muti¬
ny, and represented to him the distress and danger in
which it had placed the captain. Doctor Drivin had
had some sharp passages with him on board the brig,
and, after a few words, started up and struck him.
Jemmy fell back in time to avoid the full blow, and, as
if by no means unused to such things, continued to fall
back and ward off; but when pressed too hard, he broke
loose from the soldiers, and tore off his jacket for a reg¬
ular fight. I had no idea of favouring a mutinous sail¬
or, but still less of suffering an American to be mal¬
treated by odds, and hauled off the soldiers. In a
moment the doctor’s passion was over, and he discon¬
tinued his attack, whereupon Jemmy surrendered him¬
self to the soldiers, who carried him, as I supposed, to
the guardhouse. I waited a little while, and, going
down, saw Jemmy sitting on the ground in front of the
quartel, with both legs in the stocks above the knees.
He was keenly alive to the disgrace of his situation,
and my blood boiled. I hurried to the captain of the
port, and complained warmly of his conduct as high¬
handed and insufferable, and insisted that Jemmy must


A COUNTRYMAN IN TROUBLE.


337


be released, or I would ride to San Salvador on the
instant, and make a complaint against him. Doctor
Drivin joined me, and Jemmy was released from the
stocks, but put under guard in the quartel. This will
probably never reach the eyes of any of his friends, but
I will not mention his name. He was from the little
town of Esopus, on the Hudson. In 1834 he sailed
from New-York in the sloop-of-war Peacock for the
Pacific station; was transferred to the North Carolina,
and regularly discharged at Valparaiso ; entered the
Chilian naval service, and after plenty of fighting and
no prize-money, shipped on board this brig. I repre¬
sented that he was liable to be tried for mutiny, and
had only escaped the stocks by my happening to be at
the port; that I could do nothing more for him; and
he might be kept on shore till the vessel sailed, and
carried on board in irons. It was a critical moment in
the young man’s life; and, as one destitute of early op¬
portunities, and whom necessity had probably doomed
to a wayward life, and, moreover, as a countryman, I
was anxious to save him from the effects of headstrong
passion. The captain said he was the best sailor on
board; and as he was short of hands, I procured from
him a promise that, if Jemmy would return to his duty,
he would take no notice of what had passed, and would
give him his discharge at the first port where he could

It'

procure a substitute.

Fortunately, in the afternoon Captain D’Yriarte was
sufficiently recovered to sail, and before, going on board
my vessel I took Jemmy to his. She was the dirtiest
vessel I ever saw, and her crew a fair sample of the
villanous sailors picked up in the ports of the Pacific.
Among them, and as bad as any in appearance, was
another countryman, Jemmy’s American accomplice.

VoL. L—U u 29


338


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


I did not wonder that Jemmy was discontented ; I left
him on board in a bad condition, but, unfortunately, I
afterward heard of him in a worse.

A few strokes of the oar brought me on board our ves¬
sel, and, as before, with the evening breeze we got under
way. The vessel in which I embarked was called La
Cosmopolita. She was a goelette brig, and the only
vessel that bore on the Pacific the Central American
flag. She was built in England for a collier, and call¬
ed the Britannia. By some accident she reached the
Pacific Ocean, was bought by the State of San Salva¬
dor when at war with Guatimala, and called by that
state’s Indian name of Cuscatlan. Afterward she was
sold to an Englishman, who called her Eugenia; and
by him to Captain D’Yriarte, who called her La Cos¬
mopolita.

My first night on board was not particularly agreea¬
ble. I was the only cabin passenger; but, besides the
bugs that always infest an old vessel, I had in my
berth moschetoes, spiders, ants, and cockroaches. Yet
there is no part of my tour upon which I look back
with so much quiet satisfaction as this voyage on the
Pacific, I had on board Gil Bias and Don Quixote in
the original, and all day I sat under an awning, my at¬
tention divided between them and the great range of
gigantic volcanoes which stud the coast. Before this
became tedious we reached the Gulf of Papajayo, the
only outlet by which the winds of the Atlantic pass
over to the Pacific. The dolphin, the most beautiful
fish that swims, played under our bows and stern, and
accompanied us slowly alongside. But the sailors had
no respect for his golden back. The mate, a murder¬
ous young Frenchman, stood for hours with a harpoon
in his hand, drove it into several, and at length brought


SUCCESSION OF VOLCANOES.


339


one on board. The king of the sea seemed conscious
of his fallen state ; his beautiful colours faded, and he
became spotted, and at last heavy and lustreless, like
any other dead fish.

We passed in regular succession the volcanoes of San
Salvador, San Vicente, San Miguel, Telega, Momotom-
bo, Managua, Nindiri, Masaya, and Nicaragua, each
one a noble spectacle, and all together forming a chain
vrith which no other in the world can be compared;
indeed, this coast has well been described as “bristling
with volcanic cones.’’ For two days we lay with sails
flapping in sight of Cape Blanco, the upper headland
of the Gulf of Nicoya. On the afternoon of the thirty-
first we entered the gulf. On a line with the point of
the cape was an island of rock, with high, bare, and
precipitous sides, and the top covered with verdure.
It was about sunset; for nearly an hour the sky and sea
seemed blazing with the reflection of the departing lu¬
minary, and the island of rocks seemed like a fortress
with turrets. It was a glorious farewell view. I had
passed my last night on the Pacific, and the highlands
of the Gulf of Nicoya closed around us.

I Early in the morning we had the tide in our favour,
and very soon leaving the main body of the gulf, turn¬
ed off to the right, and entered a beautiful little cove,
forming the harbour of Caldera. In front was the range
of mountains of Aguacata, on the left the old port of
Pont Arenas, and on the right the Volcano of San Pablo.
On the shore was a long low house set upon piles, with
a tile roof, and near it were three or four thatched huts
and two canoes. We anchored in front of the houses,
and apparently without exciting the attention of a soul
on sbore.

All the ports of Central America on the Pacific are


340


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


unhealthy, but this was considered deadly. I had en¬
tered without apprehension cities where the plague was
raging, but here, as I looked ashore, there was a death¬
like stillness that was startling. To spare me the ne¬
cessity of sleeping at the port, the captain sent the boat
ashore with my servant, to procure mules with which I
could proceed immediately to a hacienda two leagues
beyond.

Our boat had hardly started before we saw three men
coming down to the shore, who presently put off in a
canoe, met our boat, turned her back, and boarded us
themselves. They were two paddles and a soldier, the
latter of whom informed the captain that, by a late de¬
cree, no passenger was permitted to land without the
special permission of the government, for which it was
necessary to send an application to the capital, and wait
on board for an answer. He added that the last vessel
was full of passengers, who were obliged to remain
twelve days before the permission was received. I was
used to vexations in travelling, but I could not bear this
quietly. The captain made a bold attempt in my^ fa¬
vour by saying that he had no passengers ; that he had
on board the Minister of the United States, who was
making the tour of Central America, and who'had been
treated with courtesy in Guatimala and San Salvador,
and that it would be an indignity for the government of
Costa Rica not to permit his landing. He wrote to the
same effect to the captain of the port, who, on the return
of the soldier, came off himself. I was almost sick with
vexation, and the captain of the port finished two glasses
of wine before I had courage to introduce the subject.
He answered with great courtesy, regretting that the
law was imperative, and that he had no discretion. I
replied that the law was intended to prevent the en-


ANOTHER COUNTRYMAN. 341

trance of seditious persons, emigres, and expulsados
from other states, who might disturb the peace of Costa
Bica, but that it could not contemplate a case like mine,
at the same time laying great stress upon my official
character. Fortunately for me, he had a high sense of
^ the respect due to that character, and, though holding a
petty office, had a feeling of pride that his state should
not be considered wanting in courtesy to an accredited
stranger. For a long time he was at a loss what to do ;
but finally, after much deliberation, he requested me to
wait till morning, when he would despatch a courier to
advise the government of the circumstances, and would
take upon himself the responsibility of permitting me to
land. Fearful of some accident or some change of pur¬
pose, and anxious to get my feet on shore, I suggested
that, in order to avoid travelling in the heat of the day,
it^would be better to sleep on shore, to be ready for an
early start, to which he assented.

In the afternoon the captain took me ashore. At the
first house we saw two candles lighted to burn at the
body of a dead man. All whom we saw were ill, and
all complained that the place was fatal to human life.
In fact, it was almost deserted; and, notwithstanding
its advantages as a port, government, a few days after¬
ward, issued an order for breaking it up, and removing
back to the old port of Pont Arenas. The captain was
still suffering from fever and ague, and would not on any
account remain after dark. I was so rejoiced to find
myself on shore, that if I had met a death’s head at every
step it would hardly have turned me back.

The last stranger at the port was a distinguished
American. His name was Handy; I had first heard of
him at the Cape of Good Hope, hunting giraffes, after¬
ward met him in New-York, and regretted exceedingly


342


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


to miss him here. He had travelled from the United
States through Texas, Mexico, and Central America,
with an elephant and two dromedaries as his file lead¬
ers ! The elephant was the first ever seen in Central
America, and I often heard of him in the Pueblos under
the name of El Demonio. Six days before, Mr. Handy,
with his interesting family, had embarked for Peru, and
perhaps he is at this moment crossing the pampas to
Brazil.

Determined not to lose sight of my friend the captain
of the port, with my luggage at my heels I walked
down the beach for the custom-house. It was a frame
building, about forty feet long, and stood at a little dis¬
tance above high-water mark, on piles about six feet
above ground. It was the gathering-place of different
persons in the employ of the government, civil and mil¬
itary, and of two or three women employed by them.
The military force consisted of the captain of the port
and the soldier who boarded us, so that I had not much
fear of being sent back at the point of the bayonet.
During the evening a new difficulty arose about my ser¬
vant ; but, considering myself tolerably secure, I insisted
that he was my suite, and obtained permission for him to
accompany me. My host gave me a bedstead, with a
bull’s hide for a bed. It was a warm night, and I placed
it opposite an open door, and looked out upon the wa¬
ter of the gulf. The waves were breaking gently upon
the shore, and it was beautiful to see the Cosmopolita
riding quietly at her anchor, without even *Hezoos or the
luggage in her.

At two o’clock in the morning we rose, and before
three we started. The tide was low, and for some dis¬
tance we rode along the shore by moonlight. At day¬
light we overtook the courier sent to give advice of my


ANOTHER PATIENT.


343


coming; in an hour crossed the river of Jesus Maria,
and at seven o’clock stopped to breakfast at the hacien¬
da of the same name.

It was a miserable shell, with an arbour of branches
around it, but had an appearance of cleanliness and com¬
fort ; and'Hezoos told me that the proprietor had on it
two thousand head of cattle, and owned all the land
over which we had ridden from the sea. 'Hezoos was
quite at home; and, as he afterward told me, he had
once wanted to marry one of the daughters ; but the fa¬
ther and mother objected, because he was not good
enough. He added that they were surprised at seeing
him return in such prosperous circumstances, and that
the daughter told him she had always refused to marry
any one else on account of her affection for him.

While breakfasting, the mother told me of a sick
daughter, asked me for remedios, and finally requested
me to go in and see her. The door opened from the
shed, and all the apertures in the room were carefully
closed, so as to exclude even a breath of air. The in¬
valid lay in a bed in one corner, with a cotton covering
over it like a moscheto-netting, but lower, and pinned
close all around; and when the mother raised the cov¬
ering, I encountered a body of hot and unwholesome
air that almost overcame me. The poor girl lay on her
back, with a cotton sheet wound tightly around her
body; and already she seemed like one laid out for
burial. She was not more than eighteen; the fever
had just left her, her eye still sparkled, but her face
was pale, and covered with spots, seams, and creases
of dirt. She was suffering from intermitting fever, that
scourge which breaks down the constitution and carries
to the grave thousands of the inhabitants of Central
America; and, according to the obstinate prejudice of


344


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


the country, her face had not been washed for more
than two months! I had often been disgusted with the
long beards and unwashed faces of fever and ague sub¬
jects, and the ignorance and prejudice of the people
on medical subjects ; in illustration of which, Dr. Drivin
told me of a case of practice by an old quack woman,
who directed her patient, a rich cattle proprietor, to be
extended on the ground naked every morning, and a
bullock to be slaughtered over him, so that the blood
could run warm upon his body. The man submitted
to the operation more than a hundred times, and was
bathed with the blood of more than a hundred bullocks;
afterward he underwent a much more disgusting pro¬
cess, and, strange to say, he lived.

But to return: in general my medical practice was
confined to men, and with them I considered myself a
powerful practitioner. I did not like prescribing for
women; and in this case I struck at all the prejudices
of the country, and cheapened my medical skill by di¬
recting, first, that the poor girl’s face should be washed;
but I saved myself somewhat by making a strong point
that it should be washed with warm water. Whether
they thanked me or not I do not know, but I had my
reward, for I saw a lovely face, and long afterward I
remembered the touching expression of her eyes, as she
turned toward me, and listened to the advice I gave her
mother.

At ten we resumed our journey. The land was level
and rich, but uncultivated. We passed several misera¬
ble cattle haciendas, the proprietors of which lived in
the towns, and kept men on the estate, from time to
time, to gather and number the cattle, which roamed
wild in the woods. At eleven we passed the hacienda
of San Felippe, belonging to a Welshman engaged in


A MINING ESTABLISHMENT.


345


mining. It was in a large clearing, and a fine situation,
and its cleanliness, neatness, and good fences showed
that the Welshman had not forgotten what he had
learned at home.

We crossed the river Surubris and the Rio Grande
or Machuca, and reached the hacienda of San Mateo,
situated in the Boca of the mountain of Aguacate, and
from this place we began to ascend. The road had
been much improved lately, but the ascent was steep,
wild, and rugged. As we toiled up the ravine, we
heard before us a loud noise, that sounded like distant
thunder, but regular and continued, and becoming loud¬
er as we advanced; and at length we came out on a
small clearing, and saw on the side of the mountain a
neat frame building of two stories, with a light and
graceful balcony in front; and alongside was the thun¬
dering machine which had startled us by its noise.
Strangers from the other side of the Atlantic were pier¬
cing the sides of the mountain, and pounding its stones
into dust to search for gold. The whole range, the
very ground which our horses spurned with their hoofs,
contained that treasure for which man forsakes kindred
and country.

I rode up to the house and introduced myself to Don
Juan Bardh, the superintendent, a German from Fries-
burg. It was about two o’clock, and excessively hot.
The house was furnished with chairs, sofa, and books,
and had in my eye.s a delightful appearance; but the
view without was more so. The stream which turned
the immense pounding-machine had made the spot, from
time immemorial, a descansadera, or resting-place for
muleteers. All around were mountains, and directly
in front one rose to a great height, receding, and cov¬
ered to the top with trees.

VoL. I.--X X


346


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


Don Juan Bardh had been superintendent of the Que-
brada del Ingenio for about three years. The Company
which he represented was called the Anglo Costa Rican
Economical Mining Company. It had been in opera¬
tion these three years without losing anything, which
was considered doing so well that it had increased its
capital, and was about continuing on a larger scale.
The machine, which had just been set up, was a new
German patent, called a Machine for extracting Gold
by the Zillenthal Patent Self-acting Cold Amalgamation
Process (I believe that I have omitted nothing), and its
great value was that it required no preliminary process,
but by one continued and simple operation extracted
the gold from the stone. It was an immense wheel of
cast iron, by which the stone, as it came from the mount¬
ain, was pounded into powder ; this passed into troughs
filled with water, and from them into a reservoir con¬
taining vases, where the gold detached itself from the
other particles, and combined with the quicksilver with
.. which the vases were provided.

There were several mines under Don Juan’s charge,
and after dinner he accompanied me to that of Cor-
rallio, which was the largest, and, fortunately, lay on
my road. After a hot ride of half an hour, ascending
through thick woods, we reached the spot.

• According to the opinion of the few geologists who
have visited that country, immense wealth lies buried
in the mountain of Aguacate; and so far from being
hidden, the proprietors say, its places are so well mark¬
ed that all who search may find. The lodes or min¬
eral veins run regularly north and south, in ranges of
greenstone porphyry with strata of basaltic porphyry, and
average about three feet in width. In some places side-
cuts or lateral excavations are made from east to west,


VISIT TO A GOLD MINE.


347


«and in others shafts are sunk until they strike the vein*
The first opening we visited was a side-cut four feet
wide, and penetrating two hundred and forty feet be*
fore it struck the lode; but it was so full of water that
we did not enter. Above it was another cut, and
higher still a shaft was sunk. We descended the shaft
by a ladder made of the trunk of a tree, with notches
cut in it, until we reached the vein, and followed it with
a candle as far as it was worked. It was about a yard
wide, and the sides glittered—but it was not with gold;
they were of quartz and feldspar, impregnated with sul-
phuret of iron, and gold in such small particles as to be
invisible to the naked eye. The most prominent ob¬
jects in these repositories of wealth were naked work¬
men with pickaxes, bending and sweating under heavy
sacks of stones.

It was late in the afternoon when I came out of the
shaft. Don Juan conducted me by a steep path up the
side of the mountain, to a small table of land, on which
was a large building occupied by miners. The view
was magnificent: below was an immense ravine ; above,
perched on a point, like an eagle’s nest, the house of
another superintendent; and on the opposite side the
great range of the mountains of Candelaria. I waited
till my mules came up, and with many thanks for his
kindness, bade Don Juan farewell.

As we continued ascending, every moment the view
became more grand and beautiful; and suddenly, from
a height of six thousand feet, I looked down upon the
Pacific, the Gulf of Nicoya, and, sitting like a bird
upon the water, our brig. La Cosmopolita. And here,
on the very highest points, in the wildest and most beau¬
tiful spots that ever men chose for their abodes, were
the huts of the miners. The sun touched the sea, light-


348


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


ed up the surface of the water, and softened the rugged
mountains; it was the most beautiful scene I ever saw,
and this loveliest view was the last; for suddenly it be¬
came dark, and very soon the darkest night I ever knew
came on. As we descended, the woods were so thick
that even in the daytime they shut out the light, and in
some places the road was cut through steep hills higher
than our heads, and roofed over by the dense foliage.
'Hezoos was before me, with a white hat and jacket,
and had a white dog running by his side, but I could
not see the outline of his figure. The road was steep
but good, and I did not pretend to direct the mule. In
one of the darkest passages 'Hezoos stopped, and, with
a voice that made the woods ring, cried out “ a lion,’’
“ a lion.” I was startled, but he dismounted and lighted
a cigar. This was cool, I thought; he relieved me by
telling me that the lion was a different animal from the
roarer of the African desert, small, frightened by a
shout, and only ate children. Long as it seemed, our
whole descent did not occupy three hours, and at ten
o’clock we reached the house in the Boca de la Mon¬
tagna. It was shut, and all were asleep; but we knocked
hard, and a man opened the door, and, before we could
ask any questions, disappeared. Once inside, how¬
ever, we made noise enough to wake everybody, and
got corn for the mules and a light. There was a large
room open to^all comers, with three bedsteads, all oc¬
cupied, and two men were sleeping on the floor. The
occupant of one of the beds, after eying me a few mo¬
ments, vacated it, and I took his place. The reader
must not suppose that I am perfectly unscrupulous; he
took all his bedclothes, viz., his chamar, with him.
The bed and all its furniture consisted of an untanned
bull’s hide.


LA GARITA.


349


CHAPTER XVIL

La Garita. — Alihuela.— k friendly People.—Heredia.—Rio Segondo.—Coffee-
plantations of San Jose.—The Sacrament for the Dying.—A happy Meeting.—
Travelling Embarrassments.—Quarters in a Convent.—Senor Carillo, Chief of
State.—Vicissitudes of Fortune.—Visit to Carta go.—Tres Rios.—An unex¬
pected Meeting.—Ascent of the Volcano of Cartago.—The Crater.—View of
the two Seas.—Descent.—Stroll through Cartago.—A Burial.—Another at¬
tack of Fever and Ague.—A Vagabond.—Cultivation of Coffee.

The next morning we entered an open, rolling, and
undulating country, which reminded me of scenes at
home. At nine o’clock we came to the brink of a mag¬
nificent ravine, and winding down by a steep descent
of more than fifteen hundred feet, the mountains closed
around us and formed an amphitheatre. At the bottom
of the ravine was a rough wooden bridge crossing a
narrow stream running between perpendicular rocks a
hundred and fifty feet high, very picturesque, and re¬
minding me of Trenton Falls.

We ascended by a steep road to the top of the ra¬
vine, where a long house stood across the road, so as
to prevent all passing except directly through it. It is
called La Garita, and commands the road from the
port to the capital." Officers are stationed here to take
an account of merchandise and to examine passports.
The one then in command had lost an arm in the ser¬
vice of his country, i. e., in a battle between his own
town and another fifteen miles off, and the place was
given to him as a reward for his patriotic services.

As we advanced the country improved, and for a
league before entering Alihuela it was lined on both
sides with houses three or four hundred yards apart,
built of sundried bricks, whitewashed, and the fronts of


350


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


some were ornamented with paintings. Several had
chalked in red on each side of the door the figure of a
soldier, with his musket shouldered and bayonet fixed,
large as life and stiff as a martinet. But all imperfec¬
tions were hidden by rows of trees on both sides of the
road, many of them bearing beautiful flowers, which in
some places completely imbowered the houses. The
fields were cultivated with sugarcane, and every house
had its little trapiche or sugarmill; and there were
marks of carriage-wheels, and very soon we heard a ve¬
hicle approaching. The creaking of its wheels made al¬
most as much noise as the Zillenthal Patent Cold Amal¬
gamating Machine in the mountain of Aguacate. They
were made of a cut, about ten or twelve inches thick,
from the trunk of a Guanacaste tree, with a hole in the
centre, which played upon the axle almost ad libitum,
and made the most mournful noise that can be conceiv¬
ed. The body was constructed of sugarcane; it was
about four feet high, and drawn by oxen fastened by
the horns instead of the neck.

At the entry of Alihuela I stopped to inquire for one
bearing a name immortal in the history of the Spanish
conquest. It was the name of Alvarado. Whether he
was a descendant or not I do not know, nor did he ; and
strange to say, though I met several bearing that name,
not one attempted to trace his lineage to the conqueror.
Don Bamon Alvarado, however, was recommended to me
for qualities which allied him in character with his great
namesake. He was the courier of the English Mining
Company for Serapequea and the River St. Juan, one
of the wildest roads in all Central America.

Next to the advantage of the sea voyage, my princi¬
pal object in leaving Zonzonate was to acquire some
information in regard to the canal route between the


ALIHUELA.


351


Atlantic and Pacific by means of the Lake of Nicara¬
gua and the River San Juan, and my business with Al¬
varado was to secure him as a guide to the port of San
Juan. In half an hour all these arrangements were
made, the day fixed, and half the contract-money paid.
In the mean time 'Hezoos was busily engaged in draw¬
ing a black glazed covering over my hat, and fixing in
it an American eagle which I had taken off on ship¬
board.

There are four cities in Costa Rica, all of which lie
within the space of fifteen leagues; yet each has a dif¬
ferent climate and different productions. Including the
suburbs, Alihuela contains a population of about 10,000.
The plaza was beautifully situated, and the church, the
cabildo, and the houses fronting it were handsome. The
latter were long and low, with broad piazzas and large
windows, having balconies made of wooden bars. It
was Sunday, and the inhabitants, cleanly dressed, were
sitting on the piazzas, or, with doors wide open, recli¬
ning in hammocks, or on high-backed wooden settees
inside. The women were dressed like ladies, and some
were handsome, and all white. A respectable-looking
old man, standing in the door of one of the best houses,
called out “Amigo,’’ “friend,” and asked us who we
were, whence we came, and whither we were going,
recommending us to God at parting ; and all along the
street we were accosted in the same friendly spirit.

At a distance of three leagues we passed through
Heredia without dismounting. I had ridden all day
with a feeling of extraordinary satisfaction; and if
such were my feelings, what must have been those of
'Hezoos ? He was returning to his country, with his
love for it increased by absence and hardship away
from home. All the way he met old acquaintances


352


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


and friends. He was a good-looking fellow, dashing¬
ly dressed, and wore a basket-hilted Peruvian sword
more than six feet long. Behind him was strapped a
valise of scarlet cloth, with black borders, part of the
uniform of a Peruvian soldier. It would have been cu¬
rious to remember how many times he told his story:
of military service and two battles in Peru ; of impress¬
ment for the navy and desertion ; a voyage to Mexico,
and his return to Guatimala by land; and always con¬
cluded by inquiring about his wife, from whom he had
not heard since he left home, ‘‘ la povera” being regu¬
larly his last words. As we approached his home his
tenderness for la povera increased. He could not pro¬
cure any direct intelligence of her; but one good-na¬
tured friend suggested that she had probably married
some one else, and that he would only disturb the
peace of the family by his return.

A league beyond Heredia we came to another great
ravine. We descended, and crossed a bridge over
the Rio Segondo. A few months before, this river
had risen suddenly and without any apparent cause,
swept away a house and family near the bridge, and
carried with it consternation and death. But little is
known of the geography of the interior of the country,
and it is supposed that a lake had burst its bounds.
Rising upon the other side,*Hezoos pointed out the scene
of the battle in which the officer at La Garita had lost
his arm, and in which he himself had taken part, and,
being a San Jose man, he spoke of the people of the
other town as an Englishman in Lord Nelson’s time
would of a Frenchman.

On the top of the ravine we came upon a large table
of land covered with the rich coffee-plantations of San
Jose. It was laid out into squares of two hundred feet,


TH’E SACRAMENT FOR THE DYING. 353


enclosed by living fences of trees bearing flowers, with
roads sixty feet wide ; and, except the small horsepath,
the roads had a sod of unbroken green. The deep
green of the coffee-plantations, the sward of the roads,
and the vistas through the trees at all the crossroads
V. were lovely; at a distance on each side were mount¬
ains, and in front, rising above all, was the great Vol¬
cano of Cartago. It was about the same hour as when,
the day before, from the top of the mountain of Agua-
cate, I had looked down into great ravines and over
the tops of high mountains, and seen the Pacific Ocean.
This was as soft as that was wild; and it addressed it¬
self to other senses than the sight, for it was not, like
the rest of Central America, retrograding and going to
ruin, but smiling as the reward of industry. Seven
years before the whole plain was an open waste.

At the end of this table of land we saw San .Jose on
a plain below us. On the top of the hill we passed a
house with an arch of flowers before the door, indica¬
ting that within lay one waiting to receive the last sac¬
rament before going to his final account in another
world. Descending, we saw at a distance a long pro¬
cession, headed by a cross with the figure of the Sa¬
viour crucified. It approached with the music of vio¬
lins and a loud chorus of voices, and was escorting the
priest to the house of the dying man. As it approach¬
ed, horsemen pulled off their hats and pedestrians fell
on their knees. We met it near a narrow bridge at the
foot of the hill. The sun was low, but its last rays
were scorching to the naked head. The priest was
carried in a sedan chair. We waited till he passed,
and taking advantage of a break in the procession,
crossed the bridge, passed a long file of men and long¬
er of women, and being some distance ahead, I put on

VoL. L— Yy


354


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


my hat. A fanatic fellow, with a scowl on his face,
cried out, quittez el sombrero,” “take off your hat.”
I answered by spurring my horse, and at the same mo¬
ment the whole procession was thrown into confusion.
A woman darted from the line, and 'Hezoos sprang from
his horse and caught her in his arms, and hugged and
kissed her as much as decency in the public streets
would allow. To my great surprise, the woman was
only his cousin, and she told him that his wife, who was
the principal milliner in the place, was on before in the
procession. 'Hezoos was beside himself; ran back, re¬
turned, caught his horse, and dragged the beast after
him; then mounting and spurring, begged me to hurry
on and let him go back to his wife. Entering the town,
we passed a respectable-looking house, where four or
five well-dressed women were sitting on the piazza.
They screamed, 'Hezoos drove his mule up the steps,
and throwing himself off, embraced them all around.
After a few hurried words, he embraced them all over
again. Some male friends attempted to haul him off,
but he returned to the women. In fact, the poor fellow
seemed besfde himself, though I could not but observe
that there was method in his madness; for, after two
rounds with the very respectable old ladies," he aban¬
doned them, and dragging forward a very pretty young
girl with his arms around her waist, and kissing her
every moment, told me she was the apprentice of his
wife ; and though at every kiss he asked her questions
about his wife, he did not wait for answers, ^and the
kisses were repeated faster than the questions. During
all this time I sat on my horse looking on. Doubtless
it was very pleasant for him, but I began to be impa¬
tient ; seeing which, he tore himself away, mounted,
and, accompanied by half a dozen of his friends, he


TRAVELLING EMBARRASSMENTS. 355


again led the way. As we advanced his friends in¬
creased. It was rather vexatious, but I could not dis¬
turb him in the sweetest pleasures in life, the welcome
of friends after a long absence. Crossing the plaza,
two or three soldiers of his old company, leaning on the
railing of the quartel, cried out companero, and, with
the sergeant at their head, passed over and joined us-
We crossed the plaza with fifteen or twenty in our
suite, or, rather, in his suite, some of whom, particu¬
larly the sergeant, in compliment to him, were civil to
me.

While he had so many friends to welcome him, I had
none. In fact, I did not know where I should sleep
that night. In the large towns of Central America I
was always at a loss where to stop. Throughout the
country the traveller finds no public accommodation
save the cabildo and a jar of water. Everything else he
must carry with him, or purchase on the spot—if he can.
But in the large towns he has not this resource, for it is
not considered respectable to stop at the cabildo. I
had letters of recommendation, but it was excessively
disagreeable to present one from the back of a mule
with my luggage at my heels, as it was, in fact, a
draught at sight for board and lodging.

'Hezoos had told me that there was an old chapiton,
i. e., a person from Spain, in whose house I could have
a room to myself, and pay for it; but, unfortunately,
time had made its changes, and the old Spaniard had
been gone so long that the occupants of his house did
not know what had become of him. I had counted
upon him with so much certainty that I had not taken
out my letters of recommendation, and did not even
know the names of the persons to whom they were ad¬
dressed. The cura was at his hacienda, and his house


356


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


shut up; a padre who had been in the United States
was sick, and could not receive any one ; my servant’s
friends all recommended different persons, as if I had
the whole town at my disposal; and principally they
urged me to honour with my company the chief of the
state. In the midst of this street consultation, I longed .
for a hotel at a hundred dollars a day, and the govern¬
ment for paymaster. 'Hezoos, who was all the time in
a terrible hurry, after an animated interlude with some
of his friends, spurred his mule and hurried me back,
crossed a corner of the plaza, turned down a street to
the right, stopped opposite a small house, where he dis¬
mounted, and begging me to do the same, in a mo¬
ment the saddles were whipped off and carried inside,

I was ushered into the house, and seated on a low chair
in a small room where a dozen women, friends of ^He-
zoos and his wife, were waiting to welcome him to his
home. He told me that he did not know where his
house was, or that it had an extra room, till he learn¬
ed it from his friends; and carrying my luggage into
a little dark apartment, said that I could have that to
myself, and that he, and his wife, and all his friends
would wait upon me, and that I could be more comfort¬
able than in any house in San Jose. I was excessively
tired, having made three days’ journey in two, worn
out with the worry of searching for a resting-place, and
if I had been younger, and had no character to lose, I
should not have given myself any farther trouble ; but,
unfortunately, the dignity of office might have been
touched by remaining in the house of my servant; and,
besides, I could not move without running against a
woman; and, more than all, 'Hezoos threw his arms
around any one he chose, and kissed her as much as
he pleased. In the midst of my irresolution la pove-


QUARTERS IN A CONVENT.


357


ra’’ herself arrived, and half the women in the proces¬
sion, amateurs of tender scenes, followed. I shall not
attempt to describe the meeting. 'Hezoos, as in duty
bound, forsook all the rest, and notwithstanding all
that he had done, wrapped her little figure in his arms
as tightly as if he had not looked at a woman for a
month; and la povera lay in his arms as happy as
if there were no pretty cousins or apprentices in the
world.

All this was too much for me : I worked my way out
of doors, and after a consultation with the sergeant,
ordered my horse to be saddled, and riding a third
time across the plaza, stopped before the convent of
Don Antonio Castro. The woman who opened the
door said that the padre was not at home. I answered
that I would walk in and wait, and ordered my luggage
to be set down on the portico. She invited me inside,
and I ordered the luggage in after me. The room oc-.
cupied nearly the whole front of the convent, and be¬
sides some pictures of saints, its only furniture was a
large wooden table, and a long, high-backed, wooden-
bottomed settee. I laid my pistols and spurs upon the
table, and stretching myself upon the settee, waited to
welcome the padre to his house.

It was some time after dark when he returned. He
was surprised, and evidently did not know what to do
with me, but seemed to recognise the principle that
possession is nine points of the law. 1 saw, however,
that his embarrassment was not from want of hospital¬
ity, but from a belief that he could not make me com¬
fortable. In Costa Rica the padres are poor, and I af¬
terward learned that there it is unusual for a stranger to
plant himself upon one. I have since thought that the
Padre Castro must have considered me particularly


358


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


cool; but, at all events, his nephew coming in soon
after, they forthwith procured me chocolate. At each
end of the long room was a small one, one occupied by
the padre and the other by his nephew. The latter va¬
cated his ; and with a few pieces from the padre’s, they
fitted me up so well, that when I lay down I congratu¬
lated myself upon my forcible entry ; and probably be¬
fore they had recovered from their surprise I was asleep.

My arrival was soon known, and the next morning I
received several invitations to the houses of residents—
one from the lady of Don Manuel de Aguila; but I was
so well pleased with the convent that I was not dispo¬
sed to leave it. As a matter of course, I soon became
known to all the foreign residents, who, however, were
but four; Messrs. Steiples and Squire, a German and
an Englishman, associated in business; Mr. Wallen¬
stein, German; and the fourth was a countryman, Mr.
Lawrence, from Middletown, Connecticut. All lived
with Mr. Steiples; and I had immediately a general
invitation to make his house my home.

San Jose is, I believe, the only city that has grown
up or even improved since the independence of Central
America. Under the Spanish dominion Cartago was
the royal capital; but, on the breaking out of the revo¬
lution, the fervour of patriotism was so hot, that it was
resolved to abolish this memorial of colonial servitude,
and establish the capital at San Jose. Their local ad¬
vantages are perhaps equal. Cartago is nearer the At¬
lantic, and San Jose the Pacific ; but they are only six
leagues apart. The buildings in San Jose are all
republican; there is not one of any grandeur or archi¬
tectural beauty; and the churches are inferior to many
erected by the Spaniards in the smallest villages. Nev¬
ertheless, it exhibited a development of resources and,


THE CHIEF OP THE STATE.


359


an appearance of business unusual in this lethargic
country; and there was one house in the plaza which
showed that the owner had been abroad, and had re¬
turned with his mind so liberalized as to adopt the im¬
provements of other countries, and build differently
from the custom of his fathers and the taste of his
neighbours.

My first visit of ceremony was to Senor Carillo, the
Gefe del Estado. The State of Costa Rica enjoy¬
ed at that time a degree of prosperity unequalled by
any in the disjointed confederacy. At a safe distance,
without wealth enough to excite cupidity, and with a
large tract of wilderness to protect it against the march
of an invading army, it had escaped the tumults and
wars which desolated and devastated the other states.
And yet, but two years before, it had had its own rev¬
olution : a tumultuous soldiery entered the plaza, and
shouting A bas De Aguila, Viva Carillo, my friend Don
Manuel was driven out by bayonets and banished from
the state, and Carillo installed in his place ; he appoint¬
ed his father-in-law, a quiet, respectable old man, vice¬
chief ; called the soldiery, officers, civil and military,
into the plaza, and all went through the solemn farce
of swearing fealty to the Constitution. The time fixed
by the Constitution for holding new elections came, but
they were not permitted to be held; having tried this
once and failed, he does not mean to run the risk of an¬
other ; and probably he will hold on till he is turned out
by the same force that put him in. In the mean time,
he uses prudent precautions : does not permit emigres,
nor revolutionists, nor suspected persons from other
states to enter his dominions; has sealed up the press,
and imprisons or banishes, under pain of death if they
return, all who speak loud against the government.


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


360 ^

He was about fifty, short and stout, plain, but careful
in his dress, and with an appearance of dogged resolu¬
tion in his face. His house was republican enough,
and had nothing to distinguish it from that of any other
citizen ; in one part his wife had a little store, and
in the other was his office for government business.
It was not larger than the counting-room of a third-rate
merchant, and he had three clerks, who at the mo¬
ment of my entering were engaged writing, while he,
with his coat off, was looking over papers. He had
heard of my coming, and welcomed me to Costa Rica.
Though the law under which I came near being detain¬
ed at the port was uppermost in my mind, and I am
sure was not forgotten by him, neither of us referred to
it. He inquired particularly about Guatimala; and,
though sympathizing in the policy of that state, had no
good opinion of Carrera. He was uncompromising in
his hostility to General Morazan and the Federal Gov¬
ernment, and, in fact, it seemed to me that he was
against any general government, and strongly impressed
with the idea that Costa Rica could stand alone;
doubtless believing that the state, or, which is the same
thing, he himself, could disburse the revenues better
than any other authority. Indeed, this is the rock on
which all the politicians of Central America split: there
is no such thing as national feeling. Every state would
be an empire; the officers of state cannot brook supe¬
riors ; a chief of the state cannot brook a president.
He had not sent deputies to the Convention, and did
not intend to do so ; but said that Costa Rica would
remain neutral until the other states had settled their
difficulties. He spoke with much interest of the im¬
provement of the roads, particularly to the ports on the
Atlantic and Pacific, and expressed great satisfaction at


VICISSITUDES OF FORTUNE.


361


the project of the British government, which I mention¬
ed to him, of sending steamboats to connect the West
India Islands with the American coast, which, by touch¬
ing at the port of San Juan, could bring his secluded
capital within eighteen or twenty days of New-York.
In fact, usurper and despot as he is, Carillo works hard
for the good of the state, and for twelve hundred dol¬
lars a year, with perquisites, and leave to be his own
paymaster. In the mean time, all who do not interfere
with him are protected. A few who cannot submit to
despotism talk of leaving the country; but the great
mass are contented, and the state prospers. As for
myself, I admire him. In that country the alternative
is a strong government or none at alL Throughout his
state I felt a sense of personal security, which I did not
enjoy in any other. For the benefit of travellers, may
he live a thousand years !

In the afternoon I dined with the foreign residents at
the house of Mr. Steiples. This gentleman is an in¬
stance of the vicissitudes of fortune. He is a native of
Hanover. At fifteen he left college and entered the
Prussian army; fought at Dresden and Leipsic ; and at
the battle of Waterloo received a ball in his brain, from
which, unfortunately, only within the month preceding,
he lost the use of one eye. Disabled for three years by
his wound, on his recovery, with three companions, he
sailed for South America, and entered the Peruvian
army, married a Hica del Sol, Daughter of the Sun,
turned merchant, and came to San Jose, where he was
then living in a style of European hospitality. I shall
lose all reputation as a sentimental traveller, but I can¬
not help mentioning honourably every man who gave
me a good dinner; and with this determination I shall
offend the reader but once more.

VoL. I.—Z z 31


362


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


Early the next morning, accompanied by my coun¬
tryman Mr. Lawrence, and mounted on a noble mule
lent me by Mr. Steiples, I set off for Cartago. We left
the city by a long, well-paved street, and a little beyond
the suburbs passed a neat coffee-plantation, which re¬
minded me of a Continental villa. It was the property
of a Frenchman, who died just as he completed it; but
his widow had provided another master for his house
and father for his children. On both sides were mount¬
ains, and in front was the great Volcano of Cartago.
The fields were cultivated with corn, plantains, and po¬
tatoes. The latter, though indigenous, and now scatter¬
ed all over Europe, is no longer the food of the natives,
and but rarely found in Spanish America. The Cartago
potatoes are of good flavour, but not larger than a hick¬
ory nut, doubtless from the want of care in cultivating
them. We passed a Campo Santo, a square enclosure
of mud-walls whitewashed, and came to an Indian vil¬
lage, the first I had seen in Costa Rica, and much better
than any in the other states, the houses being of tejas,
more substantial, and the inhabitants having clothes on.

Half way between San Jose and Cartago we reached
the village of Tres Rios. From this place the road was
more broken, without fences, and the land but little cul¬
tivated.

Entries have been found in the records of Cartago
dated in 1598, which show it to be the oldest city in
Central America. Coming from San Jose, its appear¬
ance was that of an ancient city. The churches were
large and imposing; the houses had yard-walls as high
as themselves; and its quiet was extraordinary.' We
rode up a very long street without seeing a single per¬
son, and the cross-streets, extending to a great distance


AN UNEXPECTED MEETING.


363


both ways, were desolate. A single horseman crossing
at some distance was an object to fix our attention.

The day before we had met at San Jose Dr. Brayley,
the only foreign resident in Cartago, who had promised
to procure a guide, and make arrangements for ascend¬
ing the Volcano of Cartago ; and we found that, besides
doing all that he had promised, he was himself prepared
to go with us. While dinner was preparing, Mr. L. and
I visited another countryman, Mr. Lovel, a gentleman
whom I knew in New-York. He had brought with him
a newly-married wife, a young lady from New-York,
whom, to my surprise and with great pleasure, I recog¬
nised as an acquaintance : very slight, it is true ; but the
merest personal knowledge, so far from home, was al¬
most enough to constitute an intimacy. She had en¬
countered many hardships, and her home was indeed in
a strange land; but she bore all with the spirit of a
woman who had given up all for one, and was content
with the exchange. Their house was situated on one
side of the plaza, commanding a view of the volcano
almost from its base to its top, and, though one of the
best in the place, the rent was only six dollars per
month.

Immediately after dinner we set out to ascend the
volcano. It was necessary to sleep en route, and Mr.
Lovel furnished me with a poncha from Mexico for a
covering, and a bear’s skin from the Eocky Mountains
for a bed.

Passing down the principal street, we crossed in
front of the Cathedral, and immediately began to as¬
cend. Very soon we reached a height which com¬
manded a view of a river, a village, and an extensive
valley not visible from the plain below. The sides of
the volcano are particularly favourable for cattle; and


364


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


while the plains below were unappropriated, all the way
up were potreros or pasture-grounds, and huts occu¬
pied by persons who had charge of the cattle.

Our only anxiety was lest we should lose our way.
A few months before my companions had attempted to
ascend with Mr. Handy, but, by the ignorance of their
guide, got lost; and after wandering the whole night
on the sides of the volcano, returned without reaching
the top. As we ascended the temperature became
colder. I put on my poncha; before we reached our
stopping-place my teeth were chattering, and before
dismounting I had an ague. The situation was most
wild and romantic, hanging on the side of an immense
ravine; but I would have exchanged its beauties for a
blazing coal fire. The hut was the highest on the
mountain, built of mud, with no opening but the door
and the cracks in the wall. Opposite the door was a
figure of the Virgin, and on each side was a frame for
a bed; on one of them my friends spread the bear’s
skin, and tumbling me upon it, wrapped me up in the
poncha. I had promised myself a social evening; but
who can be sure of an hour of pleasure ? I was en¬
tirely unfit for use ; but my friends made me some hot
tea ; the place was perfectly quiet; and, upon the whole,
I had as comfortable a chill and fever as I ever expe¬
rienced.

Before daylight we resumed our journey; the ro^d
was rough and precipitous ; in one place a tornado had
swept the mountain, and the trees lay across the road
so thickly as to make it almost impassable; we were
obliged to dismount, and climb over some and creep un¬
der others. Beyond this we came into an open region,
where nothing but cedar and thorns grew; and here I
saw whortleberries for the first time in Central America.


VOLCANO OF CARTAGO.


365


In that wild region there was a charm in seeing any¬
thing that was familiar to me at home, and I should
perhaps have become sentimental, but they were hard
and tasteless. As we rose we entered a region of
clouds ; very soon they became so thick that we could
see nothing ; the figures of our own party were barely
distinguishable, and we lost all hope of any view from
the top of the volcano. Grass still grew, and we as¬
cended till we reached a belt of barren sand and lava ;
and here, to our great joy, we emerged from the region
of clouds, and saw the top of the volcano, without a
vapour upon it, seeming to mingle with the clear blue
sky; and at that early hour the sun was not high enough
to play upon its top.

Mr. Lawrence, who had exerted himself in walking,
lay down to rest, and the doctor and I walked on. The
crater was about two miles in circumference, rent and
broken by time or some great convulsion; the frag¬
ments stood high, bare, and grand as mountains, and
within were three or four smaller craters. We ascend¬
ed on the south side by a ridge running east and west
till we reached a high point, at which there was an im¬
mense gap in the crater impossible to cross. The lofty
point on which we stood was perfectly clear, the atmo¬
sphere was of transparent purity, and looking beyond
the region of desolation, below us, at a distance of per¬
haps two thousand feet, the whole country was covered
with clouds, and the city at the foot of the volcano was
invisible. By degrees the more distant clouds were
lifted, and over the immense bed we saw at the same
moment the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. This was
the grand spectacle we had hoped, but scarcely expect¬
ed to behold. My companions had ascended the vol¬
cano several times, but on account of the clouds had


366


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


only seen the two seas once before. The points at
which they were visible were the Gulf of Nicoya and
the harbour of San Juan, not directly opposite, but
nearly at right angles to each other, so that we saw
them without turning the body. In a right line over
the tops of the mountains neither was more than twen¬
ty miles distant, and from the great height at which we
stood they seemed almost at our feet. It is the only
point in the world which commands a view of the two
seas ; and I ranked the sight with those most interest¬
ing occasions, when from the top of Mount Sinai I look¬
ed out upon the Desert of Arabia, and from Mount Hor
I saw the Dead Sea.*

There is no history or tradition of the eruption of this
volcano ; probably it took place l6ng before the country
was discovered by Europeans. This was one of the
occasions in which I regretted the loss of my barome¬
ter, as th6 height of the mountain has never been meas¬
ured, but is believed to be about eleven thousand feet.

We returned to our horses, and found Mr. Lawrence
and the guide asleep. We woke them, kindled a fire,
made chocolate, and descended. In an hour we reach¬
ed the hut at which we had slept, and at two o’clock
Cartago.

Toward evening I set out with Mr. Lovel for a stroll.
The streets were all alike, long and straight, and there
was nobody in them. We fell into one which seemed
to have no end, and at some distance were intercepted
by a procession coming down a cross street. It was
headed by boys playing on violins; and then came a
small barrow tastefully decorated, and strewed with

♦ I have understood from several persons who have crossed the isthmus from
Chagres to Panama, that there is no point on the road from which the two seas
are visible.


GRAVE OF A COUNTRYMAN.


367


flowers. It was a bier carrying the body of a child to
the cemetery. We followed, and passing it at the gate,
entered through a chapel, at the door of which sat three
or four men selling lottery-tickets, one of whom asked
us if we wished to see the grave of our countryman.
We assented, and he conducted us to the grave of a
young American whom I had known by sight, and sev¬
eral members of whose family I knew personally. He
died about a year before my visit, and his funeral was
attended with mournful circumstances. The vicar re¬
fused him burial in consecrated ground. Dr. Brayley,
who was the only European resident in Cartago, and at
whose house he died, rode over to San Jose, and ma¬
king a strong point of the treaty existing between the
United States and Central America, obtained an order
from the government for his burial in the cemetery.
Still the fanatic vicar, acting, as he said, under a higher
power, refused. A messenger was sent to San Jose,
and two companies of soldiers were ordered to the doc¬
tor’s house to escort the body to the grave. At night
men were stationed at its side to watch that it was not
dug up and thrown out. The next day the vicar, with
the cross and images of saints, and all the emblems of
the church, and a large concourse of citizens, moved in
solemn procession to the cemetery, and formally recon¬
secrated the ground which had been polluted by the
burial of a heretic. The grave is the third from the
corridor.

In the corridor, and in an honoured place among the
principal dead of Cartago, lay the body of another
stranger, an Englishman named Bailey. The day be¬
fore his death the alcalde was called in to draw his will,
who, according to the customary form, asked him if he
was a Christian. Mr. Bailey answered yes ; and the


368


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


alcalde wrote him Catolico Romano Apostolico Chris-
tiano. Mr. Bailey himself did not contemplate this; he
knew the difficulty in the case of my countryman about
six months before; and wishing to spare his friends a
disagreeable and, perhaps, unsuccessful controversy, had
already indicated a particular tree under which he wish¬
ed to be buried. Before the will was read to him he
died. His answer to the alcalde was considered evi¬
dence of his orthodoxy ; his friends did not interfere,
and he was buried under the special direction of the
priests, with all the holiest ceremonies of the Church.
It was the greatest day ever known in Cartago. The
funeral was attended by all the citizens. The proces¬
sion started from the door of the church, headed by vi¬
olins and drums ; priests followed, with all the crosses,
figures of saints, and banners that had been accumula¬
ting from the foundation of the city. At the corners of
the plaza and of all the principal streets, the procession
stopped to sing hallelujahs, to represent the joy in
Heaven over a sinner that repents.

While standing in the corridor we saw pass the man
who had accompanied the bier, with the child in his
arms. He was its father, and with a smile on his face
was carrying it to its grave. He was followed by two
boys playing on violins, and others were laughing around.
The child was dressed in white, with a wreath of roses
around its head; and as it lay in its father’s arms it
did not seem dead, but sleeping. The grave was not
quite ready, and the boys sat on the heap of dirt thrown
out, and played the violin till it was finished. The fa¬
ther then laid the child carefully in its final resting-
place, with its head to the rising sun ; folded its little
hands across its breast, and closed its fingers around a
small wooden crucifix; and it seemed, as they thought


MANAGING A SERVANT.


369


it was, happy at escaping the troubles of an uncertain
world. There were no tears shed ; on the contrary, all
were cheerful; and though it appeared heartless, it was
not because the father did not love his child, but be¬
cause he and all his friends had been taught to believe,
and were firm in the conviction, that, taken away so
young, it was transferred immediately to a better world.
The father sprinkled a handful of dirt over its face, the
grave-digger took his shovel, in a few moments the lit¬
tle grave was filled up, and preceded by the boy playing
on his violin, we all went away together.

The next morning, with great regret, I took leave of
my kind friends and returned to San Jos6.

It is my misfortune to be the sport of other men’s
wives. I lost the best servant I had in Guatimala be¬
cause his wife was afraid to trust him with me, and on
my return I found 'Hezoos at the convent Avaiting for
me. While putting my things in order, without looking
me in the face, he told me of the hardships his wife, la
povera,” had suffered during his absence, and how diffi¬
cult it was for a married woman to get along without
her husband. I saw to what he was tending ; and feel¬
ing, particularly since the recurrence of my fever and
ague, the importance of having a good servant in the
long journey I had before me, with the selfishness of a
traveller I encouraged his vagabond propensities, by tell¬
ing him that in a few weeks he would be tired of home,
and would not have so good an opportunity of getting
away. This seemed so sensible that he discontinued
his hints and went off contented.

At three o’clock I felt uncertain in regard to my chill,
but, determined not to give way, dressed myself, and
went to dine with Mr. Steiples. Before sitting down,
the blueness of my lips, and a tendency to use superflu-
VoL. I.—3 A


370


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


ous syllables, betrayed me ; and my old enemy shook
me all the way back to the convent, and into bed. Fe¬
ver followed, and I lay in bed all next day, receiving
many visits at the door, and a few inside. One of the
latter was from 'Hezoos, who returned stronger than be¬
fore, and coming to the point, said that he himself was
anxious to go with me, but his wife would not consent.
I felt that if she had fairly taken the field against me it
was all over, but told him that he had made a contract,
and was already overpaid; and sent her a pair of gold
earrings to keep her quiet.

For four days in succession I had a recurrence of chill
and fever. Every kindness was shown me in the con¬
vent, friends visited me, and Dr. Brayley came over
from Cartago to attend me, but withal I was despond¬
ing. The day fixed for setting out with Alvarado ar¬
rived. It was impossible to go; Dr. Brayley advised
me that it would be unwise, while any tendency to the
disease remained, to undertake it. There were six days
of desert travelling to the port of San Juan, without a
house on the road, but mountains to cross and rivers to
ford. The whole party was to go on foot except myself;
four extra men would be needed to pass my mule over
some difficult places, and there was always more or less
rain. San Juan was a collection of miserable shanties,
and from that place it was necessary to embark in a
bungo for ten or fifteen days on an unhealthy river.
Besides all this, I had the alternative to return by the
Cosmopolita to Zonzonate, or to go to Guatimala by
land, a journey of twelve hundred miles, through a coun¬
try destitute of accommodations for travellers, and dan¬
gerous from the convulsions of civil war. At night, as
I lay alone in the convent, and by the light of a small


AN ACCOMPLISHED VAGABOND.


371


candle saw the bats flying along the roof, I felt gloomy,
and would have been glad to be at home.

Still I could not bear the idea of losing all.I came for.
The land-route lay along the coast of the Pacific, and
for three days was the same as to the port. I deter¬
mined to go by land, but, by the advice of Dr. Brayley,
to start in time for the vessel; and in the hope that I
would not have another chill, I bought two of the best
mules in San Jose, one being that on which I had as¬
cended the Volcano of Cartago, and the other a macho,
not more than half broke, but the finest animal I ever
mounted.

To return to 'Hezoos. The morning after I gave him
the earrings he had not come, but sent word that he had
the fever and ague. The next day he had it much
worse, and satisfied that I must lose him, I sent him
word that if he would procure me a good substitute I
would release him. This raised him from bed, and
in the afternoon he came with his substitute, who had
very much the air of being the first man he had pick¬
ed up in the street. His dress was a pair of cotton
trousers, with a shirt outside, and a high, bell-crowned,
narrow-brimmed black straw hat; and all that he had
in the world was on his back. His hair was cut very
close except in front, where it hung in long locks over
his face; in short, he was the heau ideal of a Cen¬
tral American loafer. I did not like his looks, but I was
at the time under the influence of fever, and told him I
could give him no answer. He came again the next
day at a moment when I wanted some service ; and by
degrees, though I never hired him, he quietly engaged
me as his master.

The morning before I left, Don Augustin Gutierres
called upon me, and ^seeing this man at the door, ex-


372


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


pressed his surprise, telling me that he was the town
blackguard, a drunkard, gambler, robber, and assassin ;
that the first night on the road he would rob, and perhaps
murder me. Shortly after Mr. Lawrence entered, who
told me that he had just heard the same thing. I dis¬
charged him at once, and apparently not much to his
surprise, though he still continued round the convent, as
he said, in my employ. It was very important for me
to set out in time for the vessel, and I had but that day
to look out for another. 'Hezoos was astonished at the
changes time had made in the character of his friend.
He said that he had known him when a boy, and had
not seen him in many years till the day he brought him
to me, when he had stumbled upon him in the street.
Not feeling perfectly released, after a great deal of run¬
ning he brought me another, whose name was Nicolas.
In any other country I should have called him a mulat¬
to ; but in Central America there are so many different
shades that I am at a loss how to designate him. He
was by trade a mason. 'Hezoos had encountered him
at his work, and talked him into a desire to see Guati-
mala and Mexico, and come back as rich as himself.
He presented himself just as he left his work, with his
shirt-sleeves rolled up above his elbows, and his trou¬
sers above his knees : a rough diamond for a valet; but
he was honest, could take care of mules, and make
chocolate. I did not ask more. He was married, too ;
and as his wife did not interfere with me, I liked him
the better for it.

In the afternoon, being the last before I started, in
company with Mr. Lawrence I visited the coffee-plan¬
tations of Don Mariano Montealegre. It was a lovely
situation, and with great good taste, Don Mariano lived
there a great part of the year. He was at his factory,


CULTIVATION OF COFFEE.


373


and his son mounted his horse and accompanied us. It
was a beautiful walk, but in that country gentlemen
never walk.

The cultivation of coffee on the plains of San Jose
has increased rapidly within a few years. Seven years
before the whole crop was not more than five hundred
quintals, and this year it was supposed that it would
amount to more than ninety thousand. Don Mariano
was one of the largest planters, and had three cafetals
in that neighbourhood; that which we visited contained
twenty-seven thousand trees, and he was preparing to
make great additions the next year. He had expended
a large sum of money in buildings and machinery;
and though his countrymen said he would ruin himself,
every year he planted more trees. His wife. La Seno-
ra, was busily engaged in superintending the details of
husking and drying the grains. In San Jose, by-the-
way, all the ladies were what might be called good
business-men, kept stores, bought and sold goods, look¬
ed out for bargains, and were particularly knowing in
the article of coffee.


32


374


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


CHAPTER XVIII.

Peparture for Guatimala.—Esparza.—Town of Costa Rica.—The Barranca.—
History of a Countryman.—Wild Scenery.—Hacienda of Aranjuez.—River
Lagartos,—Cerros of Collito.—Herds of Deer.—Santa Rosa.—Don Juan Jos6
Bonilla. — An Earthquake. — A Cattle Farm. — Bagases. — Guanacaste.—An
agreeable Welcome.—Belle of Guanacaste.—Pleasant Lodgings.—Cordilleras.
—Volcanoes of Rincon and Orosi.—Hacienda of San Teresa.—Sunset View.
—The Pacific again.

On the thirteenth day of February I mounted for
my journey to Guatimala. My equipage was reduced
to articles of the last necessity: a hammock of striped
cotton cloth laid over my pellon, a pair of alforgas,
and a poncha strapped on behind. Nicolas had strung
across his alvarda behind a pair of leather cohines, in
shape like buckets, with the inner side flat, containing
biscuit, chocolate, sausages, and dolces, and in front,
on the pommel, my wearing apparel rolled up in an ox¬
hide, after the fashion of the country. During my
whole stay at the convent - the attentions of the padre
were unremitted. Besides the services he actually ren¬
dered me, I have no doubt he considers that he saved
my life; for during my sickness he entered my room
while I was preparing to shave, and made me desist
from so dangerous an operation. I washed my face by
stealth, but his kindness added another to the list of ob¬
ligations I was already under to the padres of Centra]
America.

I felt great satisfaction at being able once more to re¬
sume my journey, pleased with the lightness of my
equipage, the spirit of my mules, and looked my jour¬
ney of twelve hundred miles boldly in the face. All at
once I heard a clattering behind, and Nicolas swept by
me on a full run. My macho was what was called es-


DEPARTURE FOR GUATIMALA.


375


pantosa, or scary, and started. I had very little strength,
and was fairly run away with. If I had bought my
beasts for racing I should have had no reason to com¬
plain ; but, unluckily, my saddle turned, and I came to
the ground, fortunately clearing the stirrups, and the
beast ran, scattering on the road pistols, holsters, sad¬
dle-cloths, and saddle, and continued on bare-backed
toward the town. To my great relief, some muleteers
intercepted him, and saved my credit as a horseman ia
San Jose. We were more than an hour in recovering
scattered articles and repairing broken trappings.

For three days my road was the same that I had
travelled in entering Costa Rica. The fourth morning
I rose without any recurrence of fever. Mr. Law¬
rence had kindly borne me company from San Jose, and
was still with me ; he had relieved me from all trouble,
and had made my journey so easy and comfortable
that, instead of being wearied, I was recruited, and
abandoned all idea of returning by sea.

At seven o’clock we started, and in half an hour
reached Esparza. From this place to Nicaragua, a
distance of three hundred miles, the road lay through a
wilderness ; except the frontier town of Costa Rica,
there were only a few straggling haciendas, twenty,
thirty, and forty miles apart. I replenished my stock
of provisions, and my last purchase was a yard and a
half of American cotton from a Massachusetts factory,
called by the imposing name of Manta del Norte.

In half an hour we crossed the Barranca, a broad,
rapid, and beautiful river, but which lost in my eyes all
its beauty, for here Mr. Lawrence left me. Since the
day of my arrival at San Jose he had been almost con¬
stantly with me, had accompanied me in every excur¬
sion, and during my sickness had attended me constant-


376


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


ly. He was a native of Middletown in Connecticut,
about fifty years old, and by trade a silversmith, and
with the exception of a single return visit, had been
nineteen years from home. In 1822 he went to Peru,
where, besides carrying on his legitimate business upon
a large scale, his science and knowledge of the pre¬
cious metals brought him into prominent public po¬
sitions. In 1830 he sold a mint to the government
of Costa Rica, and was offered the place of its direc¬
tor. Business connected with the mint brought him
to Costa Rica, and during his absence he left his af¬
fairs in the hands of a partner, who mismanaged them
and died. Mr. L. returned to Peru, but without en¬
gaging in active business, and in the mean time the
mint purchased of him was worn out, and another im¬
ported from Europe, so complicated that no one in
Costa Rica could work it. Offers were made to Mr.
L. of such a nature, that, connected with mining pur¬
poses of his own, they induced him to return. Don
Manuel de Aguila was then Gefe del Estado, and on
Mr. L.’s arrival at the port he met Don Manuel ban¬
ished and flying from the state. The whole policy of
the government was changed. Mr. L. remained quiet¬
ly in San Jose, and when I left intended to establish
himself at Pont Arenas, to traffic with the pearl fisher¬
men. Such is, in brief, the history of one of our many
countrymen scattered in different parts of the world,
and it would be a proud thing for the country if all sus¬
tained as honourable a reputation as his. We ex¬
changed adieus from the backs of our mules, and, not
to be sentimental, lighted our cigars. Whether we
shall ever meet again or not is uncertain.

I was again setting out alone. I had travelled so
long with companions or in ships, that when the mo-


WILD SCENERY.


377


merit for plunging into the wilderness came, my cour¬
age almost failed me. And it was a moment that re¬
quired some energy ; for we struck off immediately into
one of the wildest paths that I met on the whole of that
desolate journey. The trees were so close as to darken
it, and the branches so low that it was necessary to
keep the head constantly bent to avoid hitting them.
The noise of the locusts, which had accompanied us
since we reached the mountain of Aguacate, here be¬
came startling. Very soon families of monkeys, walk¬
ing heavily on the tops of the trees, disturbed these
noisy tenants of the woods, and sent them flying around
us in such swarms that we were obliged to beat them
off with our hats. My macho snorted and pulled vio¬
lently on the bit, dragging me against the trees; and
I could not help thinking, if this is the outset, what will
be the end ?

Parting with Mr. Lawrence advanced the position of
Nicolas. Man is a talking animal; Nicolas was par¬
ticularly so, and very soon I knew the history of his
life. His father was a muleteer, and he seemed con¬
structed for the same rough business; but after a few
journeys to Nicaragua he retired in disgust, married,
and had two children. The trying moment of his life
was when compelled to serve as a soldier. His great
regret was that he could not read or write, and his as¬
tonishment that he worked hard and yet could not get
on. He wanted to go with me to Mexico, to go to my
country, to be away two years, and to return with a
sum of money in hand, as 'Hezoos had done. He knew
that General Morazto was a great man, for when he
visited Costa Rica there was a great firing of cannons
and a ball. He was a poor man himself, and did not
know what the wars were about; and supposed that

VoL. I.—3 B


378


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


Don Manuel de Aguila was expelled because Carillo
wanted to be chief.

We continued in the woods till about two o’clock,
when, turning off by a path to the right, we reached a
clearing, on one side of which was the hacienda of
Aranjuez. The entrance to the house was by a ladder
from the outside, and underneath was a sort of store¬
house. It was occupied by a major-domo, a Mestitzo,.
and his wife. Near it was the cucinera, where the wife
and another woman were at work. The major-domo
was sitting on the ground doing nothing, and two able-
bodied men were helping him.

The major-domo told us that he had a good potrero
for the mules, and the house promised a good resting-
place for me. Outside, and extending all around, was
a rough board piazza, one side of which commanded a
view of the ocean. I seated myself on this side, and
very soon Nicolas brought me my dinner. It consisted
of tortillas, rice cooked with lard, which he brought in
a shell, and salt in his hands. I finished with a cup of
chocolate, and could not but think of the blessings
wasted by this major-domo. In the same situation,
one of our backwoodsmen, with his axe, his wife, and
two pairs of twins, would in a few years surround him¬
self with all the luxuries that good land can give.

After dinner I led the mules to a stream, on the banks
of which were tufts of young grass, and while I was
sitting here two wild turkeys flew over my head and
lighted on a tree near by. I sent Nicolas for my gun,
and soon had a bird large enough for a household din¬
ner, which I sent immediately to the house to be con¬
verted into provender. At sundown I returned, and
then discovered a deficiency in my preparations which
I felt during the whole journey, viz., of candles. A


RIVER LAGARTOS.


379


light was manufactured by filling a broken clay vessel
with grease, and coiling in it some twisted cotton, with
one end sticking out about an inch. The workmen on
the hacienda took advantage of the light,* and brought
out a pack of cards. The wife of the major-domo
joined them, and seeing no chance of a speedy termina¬
tion of the game, I undressed myself and went to bed.
When they finished the woman got into a bed directly
opposite mine, and before lying down lighted another
cigar. The men did the same on the floor, and till the
cigars went out continued discussing the game. The
major-domo was already asleep in the hammock. All
night the wife of the major-domo smoked, and the men
snuffled and snored. At two o’clock I rose and went
out of doors. The moon was shining, and the fresh¬
ness of the morning air was grateful. I woke Nicolas,
and paying the major-domo as he lay in his hammock,
at three o’clock we resumed our journey. I was charm¬
ed with this, place when we reached it, and disgusted
when we left. The people were kind and of as good
disposition as the expectation of pay could make them,
but their habits were intolerable.

The freshness of the morning air restored my equa¬
nimity ; the moon shed a glorious light over the clear¬
ing, and lighted up the darkness of the forest. We
heard only the surge of monkeys, as, disturbed by our
noise, they moved on the tops of the trees.

At eight o’clock we reached the River Lagartos,
breaking rapidly over a bed of white sand and gravel,
clear as crystal, and shaded by trees, the branches of
which met at the for ding-place, and formed a complete
arbour. We dismounted, took off the saddles from our
mules and tied them to a tree, kindled a fire on the
bank, and breakfasted. Wild scenes had long lost the


380


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


charm of novelty, but this I would not have exchanged
for a dejeuner a la fourchette at the best restaurant of
Paris. The wild turkey was not more than enough for
my household, which consisted of Nicolas.

Resuming our journey, in two hours we emerged
from the woods, and came into an open country in
sight of the Cerros of Collito, a fine bare peak, stand¬
ing alone, conical, and covered with grass to the top.
At twelve o’clock we reached the rancho of an Indian.
On one side was a group of orange-trees loaded Avith
fruit, and in front a shed thatched with leaves of Indian
corn. An old Indian Avoman was sitting in the door,
and a sick Indian was lying asleep under the shed. It
was excessively hot, and riding under the shed, I dis¬
mounted, threw myself into a ragged hammock, and
while quenching my thirst with an orange fell asleep.
The last that I remembered was seeing Nicolas drive
into the hut a miserable half-starved chicken. At two
o’clock he woke me, and set before me the unfortunate
little bird, nearly burned up, the expense of which,
with oranges ad libitum, Avas six and a quarter cents,
Avhich the old woman Avished to commute for a charge
of gunpowder. I Avas very poor in this, and Avould
rather have given her a dollar, but could not help add¬
ing the charge of gunpowder to the coin.

At two o’clock Ave set off again. We had already
made a day’s journey, but I had a good resting-place
for the night in vieAV. It was excessively hot, but very
soon we reached the woods again. We had not gone
far before a deer crossed our path. It Avas the first I
had seen in the country, which was almost^destitute of
all kinds of game. Indeed, during my whole journey,
except at the wild turkey, I had fired but twice, and then
merely to procure curious birds; and most unfortunate-


HERDS OF DEER.


381


ly, in pursuance of my plan of encumbering myself as
little as possible, I had with me but a few charges of
duck-shot and half a dozen pistol balls. Very soon I
saw two deer together, and within reach of a ball. Both
barrels of my gun were loaded with duck. I dismount¬
ed and followed them into the woods, endeavouring to
get within reach. In the course of an hour I saw per¬
haps a dozen, and in that hour fired away my last duck-
shot. I was resolved not to use my pistol balls, and as
both barrels were empty, kept quiet. As the evening
approached the deer increased, and I am safe in saying
I saw fifty or sixty, and many within rifle-shot. Occa¬
sionally cattle peeped at us through the trees as wild as
the deer. The sun was getting low when we came out
into a large clearing, on one side of which stood the ha¬
cienda of Santa Rosa. - The house stood on the right,
and directly in front, against the side of a hill, was a
large cattle-yard, enclosed by a hard clay wall, divided
into three parts, and filled with cows and calves. On
the left was an almost boundless plain, interspersed
with groves of trees; and as we rode up a gentleman
in the yard sent a servant to open the gate. Don Juan
Jose Bonilla met me at the porch, and before I had
time to present my letter, welcomed me to Santa Rosa.

Don Juan was a native of Cartago, a gentleman by
birth and education, and of one of the oldest families in
Costa Rica. He had travelled over his own country,
and what was very unusual in that region, had visited
the United States, and though labouring under the dis¬
advantage of not speaking the language, spoke with
great interest of our institutions. He had been an ac¬
tive member of the Liberal party; had laboured to car¬
ry out its principles in the administration of the govern¬
ment, and to save his country from the disgrace of


382


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


falling back into despotism. He had been persecuted,
heavy contributions had been laid upon his property,
and four years before he had withdrawn from Cartago
and retired to this hacienda. But political animosity
never dies. A detachment of soldiers was sent to ar¬
rest him, and, that no suspicion might be excited, they
were sent by sea, and landed at a port on the Pacific
within the bounds of his own estate. Don Juan re¬
ceived an intimation of their approach, and sent a ser¬
vant to reconnoitre, who returned with intelligence that
they were within half a day’s march. He mounted his
horse to escape, but near his own gate was thrown, and
his leg badly broken. He was carried back insensible,
and when the soldiers arrived they found him in bed;
but they made him rise, put him on horseback, hurried
him to the frontiers of the state, and left him, commu¬
nicating to him his sentence of banishment, and death
if he returned. The boundary-line of the State of
Costa Rica is a river in the midst of a wilderness, and
he was obliged to travel on horseback to Nicaragua, a
journey of four days. He had never recovered the
use of his leg, which was two or three inches shorter
than the other. He remained two years in exile ; and
on the election of Don Manuel de Aguila as chief of
the state, returned. On the expulsion of Don Manuel
he retired again to his hacienda, and was then busily
engaged in making repairs for the reception of his fam¬
ily ; but he did not know at what moment another or¬
der might come to expel him from his home.

While sitting at the supper-table we heard a noise
over our heads, which seemed to me like the opening
of the roof. Don Juan threw his eyes to the ceiling,
and suddenly started from his chair, threw his arms
around the neck of a servant, and with the fearful


AN EARTHQUAKE.


383


words ‘Memblor ‘‘temblor!’’ “an earthquake!”
“ an earthquake !” all rushed for the doors. I sprang
from my chair, made one bound across the room, and
cleared the piazza. The earth rolled like the pitching
of a ship in a heavy sea. My step was high, my feet
barely touched the ground, and my arms were thrown
up involuntarily to save myself from falling. I was the
last to start, but, once under way, I was the last to stop.
Half way across the yard I stumbled over a man on his
knees, and fell. I never felt myself so feeble a thing
before. At this moment I heard Don Juan calling to
me. He was leaning on the shoulder of his servant,
with his face to the door, crying to me to come out of
the house. It was pitchy dark ; within was the table at
which we had sat, with a single candle, the light of
which extended far enough to show a few of the kneel¬
ing figures, with their faces to the door. We looked
anxiously in, and waited for the shock which should
prostrate the strong walls and lay the roof on the ground.
There was something awful in our position, with our
faces to the door, shunning the place which at all other
times offers shelter to man. The shocks were contin¬
ued perhaps two minutes, during which time it required
an effort to stand firm. The return of the earth to
steadiness was almost as violent as the shock. We
waited a few minutes after the last vibration, when Don
Juan said it was over, and, assisted by his servant, en¬
tered the house. I had been the last to leave it, but I
was the last to return; and my chair lying with its back
on the floor, gave an intimation of the haste with which
I had decamped. The houses in Costa Eica are the
best in the country for resisting these shocks, being,
like the others, long and low, and built of adobes, or
undried bricks, two feet long and one broad, made of


384


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


clay mixed with straw to give adhesion, and laid when
soft, with upright posts between, so that they are dried
by the sun into one mass, which moves with the surface
of the earth.

Before the evening was over I forgot the earthquake
in a minor trouble. The uncultivated grounds of Cen¬
tral America teem with noxious insects. Riding all
day in the woods, and striking my head against the
branches of trees, had brought ticks down upon me in
such numbers that I brushed them off with my hand. I
had suffered so much during the day, that twice I was
obliged to strip at a stream and tear them out of my
flesh; but this gave me only temporary relief; lumps
of irritation were left; and in the midst of serious dis¬
quisitions with Don Juan, it was not polite, but I was
obliged to use my nails violently and constantly. I
was fain to entreat of him that he would go out and
give me the room to myself. He retired, and in a mo¬
ment all my clothes were out of doors, and I tore the
vipers out by the teeth ; but Don Juan sent to my re¬
lief a deaf and dumb boy, who, by touching them with
a ball of black wax, drew them from their burrowing-
places without any pain; yet they left behind wounds
from which I did not recover in a long time.

Early in the morning two horses were at the door,
and two servants in attendance for a ride. Don Juan
mounted the same horse which he had ridden in his
exile, and was attended by the same servants. Here¬
tofore I had always heard constant complaints of ser¬
vants, and to do them justice, I think they are the worst
I ever knew; but Don Juan’s were the best in the
world, and it was evident that they thought he was the
best master.

The estate of Don Juan covered as much ground as


A CATTLE FARM.


385


a German principality, containing two hundred thou¬
sand acres, and was bounded on one side, for a long
distance, by the Pacific Ocean. But a small portion of
it was cultivated, not more than enough to raise maize
for the workmen, and the rest was a roaming-ground
for cattle. More than ten thousand were wandering
over it, almost as wild as the deer, and never seen ex¬
cept as they crossed a path in the woods, or at the sea¬
son of lazoing them for the purpose of taking an ac¬
count of the increase.

We had not gone far before we saw three deer all
close together, and not far from us. It was exceeding¬
ly vexatious, the first time I was in a country where
there was anything to shoot at, to be so wholly unpro¬
vided, and I had no chance of supplying myself till I
was out of that region. Don Juan was incapacitated
for sporting by his lameness ; in fact, deer-shooting Avas
not considered sporting, and venison not fit to eat. In
the course of an hour we saw more than twenty.

I had set out on this long journey without any cargo-
mule, from the difficulty of procuring one that could
keep pace with the riding-beasts ; but we had felt the
inconvenience of being encumbered with luggage ; and,
besides Don Juan’s kindness to me at his house, he fur¬
nished me with one which he had broken expressly for
his own use in rapid journeys between Cartago and the
haciendaj and which he warranted me, with a light load,
would trot and keep up with mine.

Late in the afternoon I left his hospitable dwelling.
Don Juan, with his deaf and dumb boy, accompanied
me a league on the way, when we dismounted and took
leave of each other. My new mule, like myself, was
very reluctant to leave Don Juan, and seemed to have
a sentiment that she should never see her old master
VoL. I.—3 C 33


386


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


again. Indeed, it was so difficult to get her along, that
Nicolas tied her by the halter to his mule’s tail, after a
manner common in the country, and thus leading her
along, I followed at her heels. The deer were more
numerous than I had yet seen them, and I now looked
at them only as animating a beautiful landscape. At
dark we began to have apprehensions about the road.
There was a difficult mountain-pass before us, and Nic¬
olas wanted to stop and wait till the moon rose ; but as
that would derange the journey for the next day, I push¬
ed on for more than an hour through the woods. The
mules stumbled along in the dark, and very soon we
lost all traces of a path; while trying to find it, we
heard the crash of a falling tree, which in the darkness
sounded appalling, and made us hesitate to enter the
woods. I determined to wait for the moon, and dis¬
mounted. Peering into the darkness, I saw a glimmer¬
ing light on the left. We shouted with all our strength,
and were answered by a pack of barking dogs, and
moving in that direction, reached a hut where three or
four workmen were lying on the ground, who were at
first disposed to be merry and impertinent when we
asked for a guide to the next hacienda; but one of them
recognised my cargo-mule, said that he had known it
since he was a child (rather doubtful praise of my new
purchase), and was at length induced to make us an
offer of his services. A horse was brought, large, wild,
and furious, as if never bitted; snorting, rearing, and
almost making the ground shake at every tread; and
before the rider was fairly on his back he was tearing
in the dark across the plain. Making a wide sweep,
he returned, and the guide, releasing the cargo-mule
from that of Nicolas, tied her to the tail of his horse,
and then led the way. Even with the drag of the car-


B AG ASE S.


387


go-mule it was impossible for him to moderate his pace,
and we were obliged to follow at a most unhappy rate.
It was the first piece of bad road we had met with, hav¬
ing many sharp turns, and ascents and descents, broken
and stony. Fortunately, while we were in the woods,
the moon rose, touched with a silvery light the tops of
the trees, and when we reached the bank of the river it
was almost as light as day. Here my guide left me,
and I lost all confidence in the moon, for by her deceit¬
ful light I slipped into his hand a gold piece instead of
a silver one, without either of us knowing it.

As we ascended the bank after crossing the stream,
the hacienda was in full sight. The occupants were in
bed, but Don Manuel, to whom I was recommended by
Don Juan, rose to receive me. . On the bank of the
river, near the house, was a large sawmill, the first I
had seen in the country, built, as Don Manuel told me,
by an American, who afterward straggled to Guati-
mala, and was killed in some popular insurrection.

At daylight the next morning, as the workmen on
the hacienda were about going to work, we set off
again. In an hour we heard the sound of a horn, giv¬
ing notice of the approach of a drove of cattle. We
drew up into the woods to let them pass, and they
came with a cloud of dust, the faces of the drivers cov¬
ered, and would have trampled to death anything that
impeded their progress.

At eleven o’clock we entered the village of Bagases.
We had made tremendous journeys, and it was the first
time in four days we had seen anything but single ha¬
ciendas, but we rode through without stopping, except
to ask for a cup of water.

Late in the afternoon we came into a broad avenue
and saw marks of wheels. At dusk we reached the riv-


388


INCIDENTS UF TRAVEL.


er which runs by the suburbs of Guanacaste, the fron¬
tier town of Costa Rica. The pass was occupied by an
ox-cart, with four stubborn oxen, which would not go
ahead and could not go back. We were detained half
an hour, and it was dark when we entered. We pass¬
ed through the plaza, before the door of the church,
which was lighted up for vespers, and rode to a house
at which I had been directed to stop. Nicolas went
in to make preliminary inquiries, and returning, told
me to dismount, and unloaded the luggage-mule. I
went in, took off my spurs, and stretched' myself on
a bench. Soon it struck me that my host was not
particularly glad to see me. Several children came
in and stared, and then ran back into another room;
and in a few minutes I received the compliments of
the lady of the house, and her regret that she could
not accommodate me. I was indignant at Nicolas,
who had merely asked whether such a person lived
there, and without more ado had sent me in. I left
the house, and with the halter of my macho in one
hand and spurs in the other, and Nicolas following with
the mules, sought the house of the commandant. I
found him standing on the piazza, with the key in his
hand, and all his household stuff packed up outside,
only waiting till the moon rose to set out for another
post. I believe he regretted that he could not accom¬
modate me, nor could he refer me to any other house;
but he sent his servant to look for one, and I waited
nearly an hour, up for a bidder.

In the mean time I made inquiries about my road.

I did not wish to continue on the direct route to Nic¬
aragua, but to go first to the port of San Juan on the
Pacific, the proposed termination of the canal to con¬
nect the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. The command-


A PLEASANT WELCOME.


389


ant regretted that I had not come one day sooner. He
mentioned a fact of which I was aware before, that Mr..
Bailey, an English gentleman, had been employed by
the government to survey the canal route, and had re¬
sided some time at the post, .and added that since his
departure it was perfectly desolate; no one ever vis¬
ited it, not a person in the place knew the road to it^
and, unluckily, a man who had been in Mr. Bailey’s
employ had left that morning for Nicaragua. Most
fortunately, on inquiry, the man was found to be still in
the place, and he, too, intended setting out as soon as
the moon rose. I had no inducement to remain ; no¬
body seemed very anxious for the honour of my com¬
pany, and I would have gone on immediately if the
mules had been able to continue; but I made an ar¬
rangement with him and his son to wait till three in the
morning, then to conduct me to the port, and thence to
Nicaragua. At length the commandant’s servant re¬
turned and conducted me to a house with a little shop
in front, where I was received by an old lady with a
buenos noces that almost surprised me into an idea that
I was welcome. I entered through the shop, and pass¬
ed into a parlour which contained a hammock, an in¬
terlaced bedstead, and a very neat cartaret with a gauze
moscheto-netting, and pink bows at the corners. I was
agreeably disappointed with my posada, and while con¬
versing with the old lady, was dozing over a cup of
chocolate, when I heard a lively voice at the door, and
a young lady entered, with two or three young men in
attendance, who came up to the table in front of me,
and throwing back a black mantilla, bade me buenos
noces, put out her hand, said that she had heard in
church that I was at her house, and was so glad of it;
no strangers eyer came there ; the place was complete-*


390


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


ly out of the world, very dull, &c., &c. I was so sur¬
prised that I must have looked very stupid. She was
not regularly handsome, but her mouth and eyes were
beautiful; and her manner was so different from the
cold, awkward, and bashful air of her countrywomen,
so much like the frank and fascinating welcome which
a young lady at home might extend to a friend after a
long absence, that if the table had not been between
us I could have taken her in my arms and kissed her.
I pulled up my check collar, and forgot all my troubles
and perplexities. Though living in that little remote
town, like young ladies in large cities, she had a fancy
for strangers, which at the time I regarded as a delight¬
ful trait of character in a woman. Her every-day
beaux had no chance. At first they were very civil to
me, but they became short and crusty, and, very much
to my satisfaction, took themselves off. It was so long
since I had felt the least interest in a woman, that I
gave myself a benefit. The simplest stories of other
countries and other people were to her romance, and
her eye kindled as she listened; soon the transition
came from facts to feelings, and then that highest earth¬
ly pleasure, of being lifted above every-day thoughts
by the enthusiasm of a high-minded girl.

We sat up till twelve o’clock. The mother, who at
first had wearied me, I found exceedingly agreeable ;
indeed, I had seldom known a more interesting old
lady; for she pressed me to remain two or three days
and rest; said the place was dull, but that her daughter
would try to make it agreeable ; and her daughter said
nothing, but looked unutterable things.

All pleasure is fleeting. Twelve o’clock came, an
unprecedented hour for that country. My ordinary
prudence in looking out for a sleeping-place had not


PLEASANT LODGINGS.


391


deserted me. Two little boys had taken possession of
the leather bed; the old lady had retired; the beautiful
little cartaret remained unoccupied, and the young lady
withdrew, telling me that this was to be my bed. I
do not know why, but I felt uneasy. I opened the mos-
cheto-net. In that country beds are not used, and an
oxhide or mat, often not so clean as it might be, is the
substitute. This was a mat, very fine, and clean as if
perfectly new. At the head was a lovely pillow with
a pink muslin covering, and over it a thin white pillow¬
case with a bewitching ruffle. Whose cheek had rested
on that pillow ? I pulled off my coat, walked up and
down the room, and waked up one of the boys. It
was as I supposed. I lay down, but could not sleep,
and determined not to continue my journey the next
day.

At three o’clock the guide knocked at the door. The
mules were already saddled, and Nicolas was putting
on the luggage. I had often clung to my pillow, but
never as I did to that pink one with its ruffled border.
I told Nicolas that the guide must go home and wait
another day. The guide refused. It was the young
man ; his father had already gone, and had ordered
him to follow. Very soon I heard a light footstep, and
a soft voice expostulating with the guide. Indignant at
his obstinacy, I ordered him away ; but very soon I
reflected that I could not procure another, and might
lose the great object I had in view in making this long
journey. I called him back, and attempted to bribe him;
but his only answer was, that his father had started at
the rising of the moon, and ordered him to follow. At
length it was arranged that he should go and overtake
his father and bring him back ; but perhaps his father
would not come. I was pertinacious until I carried the


392


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


pointy and then I was more indifferent. After all, why
should I wait ? Nicolas said we could get our clothes
washed in Nicaragua. I walked out of doors, and
resolved that it was folly to lose the chance of ex¬
amining a canal route for the belle of Guanacaste. I
hurried through my preparations, and bade her, I may
say, an affectionate farewell. There is not the least
chance that I shall ever see her again. Living in a se¬
cluded town, unknown beyond the borders of its own
unknown state, between the Andes and Pacific Ocean,
probably she is already the happy wife of some worthy
townsman, and has forgotten the stranger who owes to
her some of the happiest moments he passed in Central
America.

It was now broad daylight. It was very rare that I
had left a place with so much regret; but I turned my
sorrow into anger, and wreaked it upon Nicolas and the
guide. The wind Avas very high, and, sAveeping over
the great plain, raised such clouds of dust as made ri¬
ding both disagreeable and difficult. This ought to
have had some effect in restoring my equanimity, but it
did not. All day we had on our right the grand range
of Cordilleras, and crowning it at this point the great
volcanoes of Rincon and Orosi. From thence a vast
plain, over Avhich the wind swept furiously, extended to
the sea. At one o’clock Ave came in sight of the haci¬
enda of Santa Teresa, standing on a great elevation,
and still a long Avay before us. The hacienda Avas the
property of Don Augustin Gutierres of San Jose, and,
with two others, Avas under the charge of his son Don
Manuel. A letter from his father had advised him of
my coming, and he received me as an old acquaintance.
The situation of the house Avas finer than that of any I
had seen. It was high, and commanded a vieAV of an


A GRAZING HACIENDA.


393


immense plain, studded with trees in groups and in
forest. The ocean was not visible, but we could see
the opposite coast of the Gulf of Nicoya, and the point
of the port of Colubre, the finest on the Pacific, only
three and a half leagues distant. The hacienda con¬
tained a thousand mares and four hundred horses,
more than a hundred of which were in sight from
the door. It was grand enough to give the owner
ideas of empire. Toward evening I counted from the
door of the house seventeen deer, and Don Manuel
told me that he had a contract for furnishing two
thousand skins. In the season a good hunter gets
twenty-five a day. Even the Tvorkmen will not eat
them, and they are only shot for the hide and horns.
He had forty workmen, and an ox was killed every
day. Near the house was an artificial lake, more than
a mile in circumference, built as a drinking-place for
cattle. And yet the proprietors of these haciendas are
not rich; the ground is worth absolutely nothing. The
whole value is in the stock; and allowing ten dollars a
head for the horses and mares would probably give the
full value of this apparently magnificent estate.

Here, too, I could have passed a week with great sat¬
isfaction, but the next morning I resumed my journey.
Though early in the dry season, the ground was parch¬
ed and the streams were dried up. We carried a large
calabash with water, and stopping under the shade of
a tree, turned our mules out on the plain and break¬
fasted. I was riding in advance, with my poncha flying-
in the wind, when I saw a drove of cattle stop and look
wildly at me, and then rush furiously toward me. I at¬
tempted to run, but, remembering the bullfights at
Guatimala, I tore off my poncha, and had just time to
get behind a high rock as the whole herd darted by at
VoL.—I. 3 D


394 .


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


their full speed. We continued our route, from time to
time catching glimpses of the Pacific, till we reached
a clear, open place, completely protected from the wind,
and called the Boca of the Mountain of Nicaragua. A
large caravan had already encamped, and among the
muleteers Nicolas found acquaintances from San Jose.
Their cargoes consisted of potatoes, sweet bread, and
dolces for Nicaragua.

Toward evening I climbed to the top of one of the
hills, and had a magnificent sunset view. On the top
the wind blew so fiercely that I was obliged to shelter
myself under the lee. Behind me was the great range
of Cordilleras, along which we had ridden all day, with
their volcanoes ; on the left the headlands of the bays
of Tortugas and Salina, and in front the great body
of the Pacific Ocean; and what was quite as agreeable
a spectacle to a traveller, my mules were up to their
knees in grass. I returned to the encampment, and
found that my guide had made me a casita, or small
house to sleep in. It was formed by cutting two sticks
about four feet high, and as thick as a man’s arm, and
driving them into the ground, with a crotch in the top.
Another stick was laid in the crotches, and against this
other sticks were laid slanting, with leaves and branch¬
es wound in between them, so as to protect me from
the dew, and tolerably well from the wind.

I never had a servant in Central America who was
not a brute with mules. I was obliged to look out my¬
self for their food, and also to examine that their backs
were not hurt by the saddles. My macho I always sad¬
dled myself. Nicolas had saddled the cargo-mule so bad¬
ly the day before, that when he took off the apparecho
(a huge saddle covering half the beast) the shoulder was
raw, and in the morning even pointing at it made her


THE PACIFIC AGAIN.


395


shrink as if touched vwith a hot iron. I was unwilling
to put the apparecho upon her back, and tried to hire a
mule from one of the muleteers, but could not, and,
putting the cargo upon the other mule, made Nicolas
walk, and the cargo-mule go loose. I left the appare¬
cho in the boca of the mountain : a great piece of
profligacy, as Nicolas and the guide considered it.

We wound for a short distance among the hills that
enclosed us, ascended a slight range, and came down
directly upon the shore of the sea. I always had a
high feeling when I touched the shore of the Pacific,
and never more so than at this desolate place. The
waves rolled grandly, and broke with a solemn roar.
The mules were startled, and my macho shrank from
the heaving water. I spurred him into it, and at a mo¬
ment when I was putting in my pocket some shells
which Nicolas had picked up, he ran away. He had
attempted it several times before in the woods; and
now, having a fair chance, I gave him the full sweep
of the coast. We continued nearly an hour on the
shore, when we crossed a high, rough headland, and
again came down upon the sea. Four times we mount¬
ed headlands and again descended to the shore, and the
heat became almost intolerable. The fifth ascent was
steep, but we came upon a table covered with a thick
forest, through which we proceeded until we came to a
small clearing with two huts. We stopped at the first,
which was occupied by a black man and his Avife. He
had plenty of corn; there was a fine pasture-ground
near, so hemmed in by the woods that there was no
danger of the mules escaping, and I hired the man and
woman to sleep out of doors, and give me the hovel to
myself.


396


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


CHAPTER XIX.

The Flores.—The San Juan.—Nature’s Solitude.—Primitive Cookery.—Harbour
of San Juan.—Route of the Great Canal to connect the Atlantic and Pacific
Oceans.—Nicaragua.—Survey for the Canal.—Lake of Nicaragua.—Plan of
the Canal.—Lockage.—Estimate of Cost.—Former Efforts to construct the
Canal.—Its Advantages.—Central American Hospitality.—Tierra Caliente.—
Horrors of Civil War.

I ROSE about an hour before daylight, and was in my
saddle by break of day. We watered our mules at the
River Flores, the boundary-line of the states of Costa
Rica and Nicaragua. In an hour we reached Skamaika,
the name given to a single hut occupied by a negro,
sick and alone. He was lying on a bedstead made of
sticks, the very picture of wretchedness and desolation,
worn to a skeleton by fever and ague. Soon after we
came to another hut, where two women were sick with
fever. Nothing could be more wretched than these huts
along the Pacific. They asked me for remedies, and I
gave them some quinine, but with little hope of their
ever benefiting by it. Probably both the negro and
they are now in their graves.

At twelve o’clock we reached the River St. John, the
mouth of which was the terminating point of the great
canal. The road to Nicaragua crossed the stream,
and ours followed it to the sea, the port being situated
at its mouth. Our whole road had been desolate enough,
but this far surpassed anything I had seen; and as I
looked at the little path that led to Nicaragua, I felt as
if we were leaving a great highway. The valley of the
river is about a hundred yards broad, and in the season
of rain the whole is covered with water; but at this
time the stream was small, and a great part of its bed


nature’s solitude.


397


dry. The stones were bleached by the sun, and there
was no track or impression which gave the slightest in¬
dication of a path. Very soon this stony bed became
contracted and lost; the stream ran through a different
soil, and high grass, shrubs, and bushes grew luxuriant¬
ly up to its bank. We searched for the track on both
sides of the river, and it was evident that since the last
wet season no person had passed. Leaving the river,
the bushes were higher than our heads, and so thick
that at every two or three paces I became entangled and
held fast; at length I dismounted, and my guide clear¬
ed a way for me on foot with his machete. Soon we
reached the stream again, crossed it, and entered the
same dense mass on the opposite side. In this way we
continued nearly two hours, with the river for our line.
We crossed it more than twenty times, and when it
was shallow rode in its bed. Farther down the valley
was open, stony, and barren, and the sun beat upon it
with prodigious force ; flocks of sopilotes or turkey-buz¬
zards, hardly disturbed by our approach, moved away
on a slow walk, or, with a lazy flap of the wings, rose
to a low branch of the nearest tree. In one place a
swarm of the ugly birds were feasting on the carcass of
an alligator. Wild turkeys were more numerous than
we had seen them before, and so tame that I shot one
with a pistol. Deer looked at us without alarm, and on
each side of the valley large black apes walked on the
tops of the trees,, or sat quietly in the branches, looking
at us. Crossing the river for the last time, which be¬
came broader and deeper until it emptied into the Pa¬
cific, we entered the woods on the right, and reached
the first station of Mr. Bailey ; but it was covered with
young trees and bushes; the woods were thicker than
before, and the path entirely undistinguishable. I had

34


398 INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.

read reports, papers, and pamphlets on the subject of
the great canal, and expected at least to find a road to
the port; but the desert of Arabia is not more desolate,
and the track of the Children of Israel to the Red Sea
a turnpike compared with it.

My beautiful gray, degraded into a cargo-mule,
chafed under her burden; and here obstructed, and
jerked first one way and then the other, the girths of
the saddle became loose, the load turned on her side,
and she rushed blindly forward, kicking, and threw her¬
self among the bushes. Her back was badly hurt, and
she was desperately frightened; but we were obliged to
reload her, and, fortunately, we were near the end of
our day’s journey.

On the border of the woods we reached a stream, the
last at which fresh water was procurable, and filling
our calabash, entered a plain covered with high grass.
In front was another piece of woodland, and on the left
the River San Juan, now a large stream, emptying into
the Pacific. In a few minutes we reached a small clear¬
ing, so near the shore that the waves seemed breaking
at our feet. We tied our mules under the shade of a
large tree on the edge of the clearing. The site of Mr.
Bailey’s rancho was on an eminence near, but hardly a
vestige remained; and though it commanded a fine
view of the port and the sea, it was so hot under the af¬
ternoon sun that I fixed our encampment under the large
tree. We hung our saddles, saddlecloths, and arms
upon its branches, and while Nicolas and Jose gathered
wood and made a fire, I found, what was always the
most important and satisfactory part of the day’s jour¬
ney, excellent pasture for the mules.

The next thing was to take care of ourselves. We
had no trouble in deciding what to have for dinner.


PRIMITIVE COOKERY.


399


We had made provision, as we supposed, for three days ;
but, as usual, it always happened that, however abun¬
dant, it did not last more than one. At this time all was
eaten up by ourselves or by vermin; and, but for the
wild turkey, we should have been obliged to dine upon
chocolate. It was a matter of deeply-interesting con¬
sideration how the turkey should be cooked. Boiling it
was the best way; but we had nothing to boil it in except
a small coffee-pot. We attempted to make a gridiron
of our stirrups, and broil it; but those of Nicolas were
wooden, and mine alone were not large enough. Roast¬
ing was a long and tedious process ; but our guide had
often been in such straits ; and fixing in the ground two
sticks with crotches, he laid another across, split open
the turkey, and securing it by sticks crosswise, hung it
like a spread eagle before a blazing fire. When one
side was burned, he turned the other. In an hour it
was cooked, and in less than ten minutes eaten up. A
cup of chocolate, heavy enough to keep it from rising if
it had been eaten with its wings on, followed, and I had
dined.

Rested and refreshed, I walked down to the shore.
Our encampment was about in the centre of the harbour,

* which was the finest I saw on the Pacific. It is not
large, but beautifully protected, being almost in the form
of the letter U. The arms are high and parallel, run¬
ning nearly north and south, and terminating in high
perpendicular bluffs. As I afterward learned from Mr.
Bailey, the water is deep, and under either bluff, ac¬
cording to the wind, vessels of the largest class can ride
with perfect safety. Supposing this to be correct, there
is but one objection to this harbour, which I derive from
Captain D’Yriarte, with whom I made the voyage from
Zonzonate to Caldera. He has been nine years navi-


400


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


gating the coast of the Pacific, from Peru to the Gulf of
California, and has made valuable notes, which he in¬
tends publishing in France ; and he told me that during
the summer months, from November to May, the strong
north winds which sweep over the Lake of Nicaragua
pass with such violence through the Gulf of Papajayo,
that, during the prevalence of these winds, it is almost
impossible for a vessel to enter the port of San Juan.
Whether this is true to the extent that Captain D’Yriarte
supposes, and if true, how far steam tugs would answer
to bring vessels in against such a wind, is for others to
determine. But at the moment there seemed more pal¬
pable difficulties.

I walked along the shore down to the estuary of the
river, which was here broad and deep. This was the
proposed termination of the great canal to connect the
Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. I had read and examined
all that had been published on this subject in England
or this country; had conferred with individuals ; and I
had.been sanguine, almost enthusiastic, in regard to this
gigantic enterprise ; but on the spot the scales fell from
my eyes. The harbour was perfectly desolate; for
years not a vessel had entered it; primeval trees grew
around it; for miles there was not a habitation. I walk¬
ed the shore alone. Since Mr. Bailey left not a person
had visited it; and probably the only thing that keeps
it alive even in memory is the theorizing of scientific
men, or the occasional visit of some Nicaragua fisher¬
man, who, too lazy to work, seeks his food in the sea.
It seemed preposterous to consider it the focus of a great
commercial enterprise; to imagine that a city was to
rise up out of the forest, the desolate harbour to be filled
with ships, and become a great portal for the thorough¬
fare of nations. But the scene was magnificent. The


ROUTE OF THE GREAT CANAL.


401


sun was setting, and the high western headland threw a
deep shade over the water. It was perhaps the last
time in my life that I should see the Pacific; and in
spite of fever and ague tendencies, I bathed once more
in the great ocean.

It was after dark when I returned to my encamp¬
ment. My attendants had not been idle; blazing logs
of wood, piled three or four feet high, lighted up the
darkness of the forest. We heard the barking of wolves,
the scream of the mountain-cat, and other wild beasts
of the forest. I wrapped myself in my poncha and lay
down to sleep. Nicolas threw more wood upon the
burning pile; and, as he stretched himself on the ground,
hoped we would not be obliged to pass another night in
this desolate place.

In the morning I had more trouble. My gray mule
running loose, and drinking at every stream, with her
girths tight, had raised a swelling eight or ten inches.
I attempted to put the cargo on my macho, with the in¬
tention of walking myself; but it was utterly impossible
to manage him, and I was obliged to transfer it to the
raw back of the cargo-mule.

At seven o’clock we started, recrossed the stream at
which we had procured water, and returned to the first
station of Mr. Bailey. It was on the River San Juan, a
mile and a half from the sea. The river here had suffi¬
cient depth of water for large vessels, and from this
point Mr. Bailey commenced his survey to the Lake of
Nicaragua. I sent Nicolas with the mules by the di¬
rect road, and set out with my guide to follow, as far as
practicable, his line of survey. I did not know, until I
found myself in this wilderness, how fortunate I had
been in securing this guide.* He had been Mr. Bailey’s
pioneer in the whole of his exploration. He was a dark

VoL. I.—3 E


402


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


Mestitzo, and gained his living by hunting bee-trees,
and cutting them dov^n for the wild honey, which made
him familiar with all the water-courses and secret depths
of almost impenetrable forests. He had been selected
by Mr. Bailey out of all Nicaragua; and for the bene¬
fit of any traveller who may feel an interest in this sub¬
ject, I mention his name, which is Jose Dionisio de
Lerda, and he lives at Nicaragua.

It was two years since Mr. Bailey had taken his ob¬
servations, and already, in that rank soil, the clearings
were overgrown with trees twelve or fifteen feet high.
My guide cleared a path for me with his machete ; and
working our way across the plain, we entered a valley
which ran in a great ravine called Quebrada Grande,
between the mountain ranges of Zebadea and El Plati-
na. By a vigorous use of the machete I was enabled
to follow the line of Mr. Bailey up the ravfne to the sta¬
tion of Panama, so called from a large Panama-tree
near which Mr.’ Bailey built his rancho. Up to this
place manifestly there could be no difficulty in cutting
a canal; beyond, the line of survey follows the small
stream of El Cacao for another league, when it crosses
the mountain; but there was such a rank growth of
young trees that it was impossible to continue without
sending men forward to clear the way. We therefore
left the line of the canal, and crossing the valley to the
right, reached the foot of the mountain over which the
road to Nicaragua passes. A path had been opened
for carrying Mr. Bailey supplies to that station, but it
was difficult to find it. We took a long draught at a
beautiful stream called Loco de Agua, and my guide
pulled off his shirt and commenced with his machete.
It was astonishing how he found anything to guide him,
hut he knew a tree as the face of a man. The side of


FIRE ON THE PLAINS.


403


the mountain was very steep, and besides large trees,
was full of brambles, thorn-bushes, and ticks, I was
obliged to dismount and lead my macho ; the dark skin
of my guide glistened with perspiration, and it was al¬
most a climb till we reached the top.

Coming out into the road, the change was beautiful.
It was about ten feet wide, straight, and shaded by the
noblest trees in the Nicaragua forests. In an hour we
reached the boca of the mountain, where Nicolas was
waiting with the mules under the shade of a large tree,
which threw its branches fifty feet from its trunk, and
seemed reared by a beneficent hand for the shelter of a
weary traveller. Soon we reached another station of
Mr. Bailey. Looking back, I saw the two great mount¬
ain ranges, standing like giant portals, and could but
think what a magnificent spectacle it would be to see a
ship, with all its spars and rigging, cross the plain, pass
through the great door, and move on to the Pacific.
Beyond, the whole plain was on fire; the long grass,
scorched by the summer’s sun, crackled, flashed, and
burned like powder. The road was a sheet of flame,
and when the fire had passed the earth was black and
hot. We rode some distance on the smoking ground
along the line of flame, and finding a favourable place,
spurred the mules through ; but part of the luggage took
fire, my face and hands were scorched, and my whole
body heated.

Off from the road, on the edge of the woods, and
near the River Las Lahas, was another station of Mr.
Bailey. From that place the line runs direct over a
plain till it strikes the same river near the Lake of Nic¬
aragua. I attempted to follow the lines again, but
. was prevented by the growth of underwood.

It was late in the afternoon, and I hurried on to


404


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


reach the Camino Real. Beautiful as the whole coun¬
try had been, I found nothing equal to this two hours
before entering Nicaragua. The fields were covered
with high grass, studded with noble trees, and border¬
ed at a distance by a dark forest, while in front, high
and towering, of a conical form, rose the beautiful vol¬
cano of the island. Herds of cattle gave it a home-like
appearance.

Toward dark we again entered the woods, and for
an hour saw nothing, but at length heard the distant
sound of the vesper bell, and very soon were greeted by
the barking of dogs in the suburbs of Nicaragua. Fires
were burning in the streets, which served as kitchens
for the miserable inhabitants, and at which they were
cooking their suppers. We passed round a miserable
plaza, and stopped at the house of the Licenciado Pine¬
da. A large door was wide open; the licenciado was
swinging in one hammock, his wife and a mulatto
woman in another. I dismounted and entered his
house, and told him that I had a letter to him from Don
Manuel de Aguila. He asked me what I wished, and
when I told him a night’s lodging, said that he could
accommodate me, but had no room for the mules. I
told him that I would go to the cura, and he said that
the cura could do no better than he. In a word, his
reception of me was very cool. I was indignant, and
went to the door, but without it was dark as Erebus,
I had made a long and tiresome journey through a des¬
olate country, and that day had been one of extreme
labour. The first words of kindness came from the
lady of the licenciado. I was so tired that I was almost
ready to fall; I had left San Jose with the fever and
ague, had been twelve days in the saddle, and the last
two nights I had slept in the open fields. I owe it to


NICARAGUA.


405


both, however, to say, that, the ice once broken, they
did all they could for my comfort; and, in fact, treated
me with distinguished attention. A traveller never
forgets the kindness shown him in a strange land, and
I never felt so sensible of it as in Central America; in
other countries, with money, a man can command com¬
forts ; there, whatever his means may be, he is entirely
dependant upon individual hospitality.

The whole of the next morning I devoted to making
inquiries on the subject of the canal route. More is
known of it in the United States than at Nicaragua. I
did not find one man who had been to the port of San
Juan, or even who knew Mr. Bailey’s terminating point
on the Lake of Nicaragua. I was obliged to send for
my old guide, and after a noonday dinner started for
the lake. The town consisted of a large collection of
straggling houses, without a single object of interest.
Though the richest state in the confederacy in natural
gifts, the population is the most miserable.

Passing through the suburbs, very soon we entered
the woods and rode under a beautiful shade. We met
no one. Before reaching the lake we heard the waves
breaking upon the shore like the waves of the sea, and
when we emerged from the woods the view before us
was grand. On one side no land was visible ; a strong
north wind was sweeping over the lake, and its surface
was violently agitated; the waves rolled and broke
upon the shore with solemn majesty, and opposite, in
the centre of the lake, were the islands of Isola and
Madeira, with giant volcanoes rising, as if to scale the
heavens. The great Volcano of Omotepeque reminded
me of Mount Etna, rising, like the pride of Sicily, from
the water’s edge, a smooth unbroken cone, to the height
of nearly six thousand feet.


406


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


We rode for an hour along the shore, and so near
the water that we were wetted by the spray. The
bank was all wooded; and in one place, on a little
clearing by the side of a stream, was a hut occupied by
a mulatto, the view from which princes might envy.,
Farther on we passed some women washing, and at a
distance of a league and a half reached the River Las
Lahas, according to Mr. Bailey’s survey the termina¬
ting-point on the lake. A flock of wild-fowl were sit¬
ting on the water, and long-legged birds, with wings
outstretched, were walking on the shore.

I had now examined, as well as circumstances would
permit, the canal route from the Pacific to the Lake of
Nicaragua. A direction had been given to my investi¬
gations by getting on the track of Mr. Bailey’s survey;
but I should be able to communicate nothing if it were
not for Mr. Bailey himself, whom I afterward met at
Grenada. This gentleman is a half-pay officer in the
British navy. Two years before he was employed by
the government of Central America to make a survey
of this canal route, and he had completed all except the
survey of an unimportant part of the River San Juan
when the revolution broke out. The states declared
their independence of the general government, and dis¬
claimed all liability for its debts. Mr. Bailey had giv¬
en his time and labour, and when I saw him had sent
his son to make a last' appeal to the shadow of the Fed¬
eral Government; but before he reached the capital this
government was utterly annihilated, and Mr. Bailey re¬
mains with no reward for his arduous services but the
satisfaction of having been a pioneer in a noble work.
On my arrival at Grenada he laid before me all his maps
and drawings, with liberty to make what use of them I
pleased. I passed an entire day in taking notes and


SURVEY FOR THE CANAL. 407

memoranda, and receiving explanations, and the result
of the Avhole is as follows :

The measurements began on the side of the Pacific
Ocean, and were carried over to the Lake of Nicaragua.
^ The chain was twenty-five varas in length, each vara
being thirty-two and a half inches English, and I give
the levels as taken from Mr. Bailey’s survey.

At a distance of


Chains, Elevation in Eng. feet.

17.50. 8.93

34.37 . 12.04

52.38 . 7.99

€7.50. 1 . 16.82

80.95 . 26.90

103.06 . 38.12

120.07 .'. 52.62

134.94 La Desperansedera de la Quebrada la Palma. Bo¬
ring 3i- feet, loose sand; 66 feet, clay, not very

firm. 66.12

149.61 . 76.12

164.71 . 94.66

185.34 . 132.95

201.50 Panama, water on the surface. Boring 11 feet,

gravel; 24 feet 5 inches, slate-stone.201.50

221.87 . 223.00

226.14 . 214.235

235.48 . 241.35

253.63 First limestone rock .-. 284.20

264.28 . 356.770

273.18 . 389.700

280.26 ... 425.95

287.01 .*. 461.525

288.97 . 519.391

292.99 Top of the Palma, and summit-level. Boring 5

feet, yellow clay; 59 feet, stone, soft and loose.

No water._.............. 615.673

299.05 . 570.157

300.53 Second limestone rock. 506.300

314.11 . 460.891

317.05. 442.858

319.27 . 443.899


408


INCIDENTS OP TRAVEL.


Chains. Elevation in Eng. feet,

332.25 . 410.624

336.92 To this point national lands. 393.216

840.28 Third limestone rock. Boring 31i^ feet, water ;

49 feet, limestone, soft and loose.350.776

358.50 . 311.162

361.40 . 318.235

370.55 . 291.419

373.85 . 295.160

382.86 . 283.352

401.04 . 269.236

409.30 . 258.378

413.51 . 261.486

423.75 Water on the surface. Boring 3 feet, sand ; 12

feet, earth. 247.780

437.55 .. 237.570

448.90 . 2.50.370

464.78 . 228.237

477.76 . 214.695

489.29 . 200.630

Between this and next, boring 5 feet, earth; 10

feet, white clay; 11 feet, water; 38 feet,
soft stone.

606.22 . 184.511

510.53 . 186.869

519.47 . 180.244

533.04 . 170.161

643.25 : . 159.311

545.98 . 160.411

553.85 . 158.736

In the next six stations the elevations do not differ

one foot.

604.82 .. 153.461

612.62 . 160.077

622.54 Water on the surface. Boring 12 feet, sand and

hard stone. This station is in a hole of the

Quebrada, very deep. 149.553

627.27 . 150.052

630.32 . 149.336

634.20 . 157.102

638.86 . 147.044

643.31 . 154.785

685.55 ................i.... 143.343


661,35 .jt ..a... a.... 155.076


/

SURVEY FOR THE CANAL. 409

Chains. Elevation in Eng. feel.

664.47 . 140.243

671.22 . 151.185

675.86 . 139.352

685.93 . 150.927

692.55 . 146.977

696.91 . 148.569

712.85 . 144.436

716.17 . 149.152

723.29 . 142.994

728.29 . 148.552

739.95 .'. 139.702

749.10 . 164.360

756.40 . 142.560

760.80 . 144.830

766.80 . 141.177

770.61 Water at 8 feet. Boring 12 feet, black earth ; 22

feet, white clay; 4 feet, stone. 142.718

774.73 . 140.560

779.49 . 142.743

805.50 . 138.485

808.31 Water on the surface. Boring 5 feet, sand ; 15

feet, stone. 124.310

812.01 . 139.152

828.77 . 133.802

832.24 . 134.377

837.43 . 130.994

841.76 . 129.486

846.45 . 129.994

In six stations there is a difference of but from
one to two feet.

880.12 Water on the surface. Boring 9 feet, loose sand ;

18 feet, soft stone. 126.569

887.23 . 107.553

891.96 . 123.903

901.22 . 118 112

910.80 . 120.628

In four stations there is a difference of but one

foot.

933.74 Boring 8 feet, black earth ; 10 feet, white mud ;

18 feet, soft stone.

957.62 . 117.178

971.48 . 108.802

976.30 .. 135.168

VoL. I.—3 F 35


410


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


Chains. Elevation in Eng. feet.

986.06 ...- 107.643

992.93 .-. 119.176

1001.03 . 108.576

1006.65 . 118.592

1014.28 . 108.692

1033.51 . 124.808

1036.44 . 126.663

1043.06 . 141.416 '

1047.39 . 157.583

1062.87 . 118.042

1068.43 . 131.942

1077.69 . 120.584

1083.96 . 125.784

1100.19 . 135.709

1113.35 . 152.176

1128.97 . 127.201

1133.79 . 163.276

1140.94 . 129.776

1145.18 . 151.401

1156.44 . 129.335

1176.61 . 140.835

1190.87 .. 129.396

1193.77 . 132.801

1203.21 . 128.093

1210.14 . 140.985

1223.50 . 128.243


The result of the whole is as follows : The length from the Pacific to the
Lake of Nicaragua is 28,365| yards, or 15| miles.


Feet. in. dec

The sum of the ascents is. 1047 5.45

The sum of the descents is. 919 2.4

The difference is the height of the lake above the Pacific

Ocean at low water. 128 3.05


We now come to the communication with the At¬
lantic by means of the Lake of Nicaragua and the
River San Juan. The lake is ninety-five miles long, in
its broadest part about thirty, and averages, according


ROUTE OF THE CANAL.


411


to Mr. Bailey’s soundings, fifteen fathoms of water.
The length of the river, by measurement, with all its
windings, from the mouth of the lake to the sea, is
seventy-nine miles. There are no cataracts or falls ;
all the obstructions are from rapids, and it is at all
times navigable, both up and down, for piraguas draw¬
ing from three to four feet of water.

From the lake to the river of Los Savalos, about
eighteen miles, the depth is from two to four fathoms.
Here commence the rapids of Toros, which extend one
mile, with water from one and a half to two fathoms.
The river is then clear for four miles, with an average
depth of from two to four fathoms. Then come the
rapids of the Old Castle, but little more than half a mile
in extent, with water from two to four fathoms. The
river is clear again for about two miles, with water from
two and a half to five fathoms, where begin the rapids
of Mico and Las Balas, connected and running into
each other, and both together not more than a mile,
with water from one to three fathoms. Then the river
is clear one mile and a half to the rapids of Machuca,
which extend a mile, and are the worst of all, the water
being more broken, from running over a broken rocky
bottom. The river then runs clear, and without any
obstruction for ten miles, with water from two to seven
fathoms, to the River San Carlos, and then eleven miles,
with some islands interspersed, with water from one to
six fathoms, to the River Serapequea, the measurements
of one fathom being about the points or bends, where
there is an accumulation of sand and mud. It then
continues seven miles clear, with water from two to five
fathoms, to the Rio Colorado. The River Colorado
runs out of the San Juan in another direction into the
Atlantic. The loss to the latter, according to measure-


412


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


ment taken in the month of May, 1839, was twenty-
eight thousand one hundred and seventy-eight cubic
yards of water per minute, and in the month of July of
the same year, during the rising of the waters, it was
eighty-five thousand eight hundred and forty yards per
minute, which immense body might be saved to the
San Juan by damming up the mouth of the River Colo¬
rado. From this point there are thirteen miles, with
soundings of from three to eight fathoms. The bottom
is of sand and mud, and there are many small islands
and aggregations of sand without trees, very easily
cleared away. The last thirteen miles might be re¬
duced to ten by restoring the river to its old channel,
which has been filled up by collections, at points, of
drifted matter. An old master of a piragua told Mr.
B. that within his memory trees grew half a mile
back. The soundings were all taken with the plotting-
scale when the river was low, and the port of San Juan,
though small, Mr. Bailey considers unexceptionable.

The foregoing memoranda were placed in the hands
of my friend Mr. Horatio Allen (now engaged as en¬
gineer on our Croton Aqueduct), who has kindly pre¬
pared from them the plan opposite.

I ought perhaps to remark, for the benefit of those
who are not familiar with such plans, that in order to
bring the profile of the country within a small compass,
the vertical lines, which represent elevations and de¬
pressions, are on a scale many times greater than the
base lines or horizontal distances. Of the former, the
scale is one thousand feet, and of the latter it is twen¬
ty miles to the inch. This, of course, gives a distorted
view of the country; but, to preserve the relative pro¬
portions, it would be necessary for the base line in the
plan to be one thousand times longer.

The whole length of the canal from the Lake of Nic-


Pacific Ocean


%


Oi

UlM


r

p

trr


o


LOCKAGE OF THE CANAL.


413


aragua to the Pacific is fifteen and two third miles.
According to the plan, in the first eight miles from the
lake but one lock is necessary. In the next mile sixty-
four feet of lockage are required. In the next three
miles there are about two of deep cutting and one of
tunnel, and then a descent of two hundred feet in three
miles by lockage, to the Pacific.

Thus far of the canal across the isthmus. The Lake
of Nicaragua is navigable for ships of the largest class
down to the mouth of the River San Juan. This river
has an average fall of one and six sevenths feet per
mile to the Atlantic. If the bed of the river cannot be
cleared out, a communication can be made either by
lock and dam, or by a canal along the bank of the riv¬
er. The latter would be more expensive, but, on ac¬
count of the heavy floods of the rainy season, it is pref¬
erable.

I am authorized to state that the physical obstruc¬
tions of the country present no impediment to the ac¬
complishment of this work. A canal large enough
for the passage of boats of the usual size could be
made at a trifling expense. A tunnel of the length
required is not considered a great work in the United
States. According to the plan of the Chesapeake and
Ohio Canal, a tunnel is contemplated upward of four
miles in length. The sole difficulty is the same which
would exist in any route in any other region of coun¬
try, viz., the great dimensions of the excavation re¬
quired for a ship canal.

The data here given are, of course, insufficient for
great accuracy; but I present a rough estimate of the
cost of this work, furnished me with the plan. It is
predicated upon the usual contract prices in the United
States, and I think I am safe in saying that the cheap-


414


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


ness of labour in Nicaragua will equalize any advanta¬
ges and facilities that exist here.

The estimate is,

From the lake to the east end of the tunnel, from. $8,000,000 to 10,000,000

Descent to the Pacific. i . 2,000,000 to 3,000,000

From the lake to the Atlantic, by canal along the

bank of the river.. 10,000,000 to 12,000,000

$20,000,000 to 25,000,000

which is but about the sum contemplated as the cost of
our enlarged Erie Canal.

The idea of a communication between the Atlantic
and Pacific is not new. Columbus wore out the last
days of his checkered life in searching for a natural pas¬
sage, and the vastness and sublimity of the enterprise
suited the daring imagination of the early Spaniards.

From the formation of the continent and the falling
off in height of the range of the Andes, it has ever since
engaged the attention of reflecting men. Even during
the deathlike sleep of Spanish dominion a survey was
made imder the direction of the captain-general; but the
documents remained buried in the archives of Guati-
mala until the emancipation of the colonies, when they
were procured and published by Mr. Thomson, who
visited that country under a commission from the British
government.^

In 1825 an envoy extraordinary from the new repub¬
lic of Central America called to it the special attention
of our government, requesting our co-operation in pref¬
erence to that of any other nation, and proposed, by


* Thomson’s Guatimala. By this survey the wofk appears much more easy
than by Mr. Bailey’s, but it purports to have been taken by the water level. Mr.
Bailey knew of its existence, and had been the means of procuring it for Mr.
Thomson.


EFFORTS TO MAKE THE CANAL.


415


means of a treaty, effectually to secure its advantages
to the two nations.”

A charge d’affaires was appointed by our government,
who was specially instructed to assure the government
of Central America of the deep interest taken by that
of the United States in the execution of an undertaking

so highly calculated to diffuse an extensive influence
on the affairs of mankind,” and to investigate with the
greatest care the facilities offered by the route, and to
remit the information to the United States.

Unfortunately, being far removed from the capital,
none of our diplomatic agents ever visited the spot; but
in 1826, as appears by documents accompanying the
report of a committee of the House of Representatives
on a memorial praying the aid of the government of
the United States in procuring the construction of a ship
channel or navigable canal across the isthmus between
North and South America,” a contract was made by
the government of Central America with the agent of a
New-York company, under the name, style, and des¬
ignation of the Central American and United States’
Atlantic and Pacific Canal Company.” The names of
Dewitt Clinton and others of the most distinguished men
of that day appear as associates, but the scheme fell
through.

In 1830 the government of Central America made
another contract with a society of the Netherlands, un¬
der the special patronage of the King of Holland, who
embarked in it a large amount of his private fortune;
but, owing to the difficulties between Holland and Bel¬
gium, and the separation of the two countries, this also
fell through.

On the third of March, 1835, a resolution passed the
Senate of the United States, that th6 president be re-


416


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


quested to consider the expediency of opening negotia¬
tions with the governments of other nations, and partic¬
ularly with the governments of Central America and
Grenada, for the purpose of effectually protecting, by
suitable treaty stipulations with them, such individuals
or companies as may undertake to open a communica¬
tion between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, by the
construction of a ship canal across the isthmus which
connects North and South America, and of securing
forever, by such stipulations, the free and equal right of
navigating such canal to all nations, on the payment of
such reasonable tolls as may be established, to compen¬
sate the capitalists who may engage in such undertaking
and complete the work.”

Under this resolution a special agent was appointed
by General Jackson, who was instructed to proceed
without delay by the most direct route to Port San
Juan, ascend the River San Juan to the Lake of Nica¬
ragua, and thence by the contemplated route of com¬
munication, by canal or railroad, to the Pacific Ocean.
After having completed an examination of the route
of the canal, he was directed to repair to Guatimala,
the capital of that republic, and, with the aid of Mr.
De Witt, the charge d’affaires of the United States,
procure all such public documents connected with the
subject as might be had, and especially copies of all
such laws as may have been passed to incorporate com¬
panies to carry into effect the undertaking of any con¬
vention or conventions that may have been entered into
with a foreign power upon the subject, and of any plans,
surveys, or estimates in relation to it. From Guatima¬
la he was directed to proceed to Panama, and make
observations and inquiries relative to the proposed
connexion of the two oceans at that point. Unfor-


PROBABLE COST OP THE CANAL. 417


tiinately, from the difficulty of procuring a conveyance
to the River San Juan, the agent went to Panama
first, from adverse circumstances never reached Nica¬
ragua, and died on his return to this country, before he
reached Washington ; but, from his imperfect report, it
appears to be the result of his observations that a ship
canal was not practicable across the Isthmus of Pana¬
ma. It is therefore valuable as turning attention, which
was before divided between the two routes, exclusively
to that by the Lake of Nicaragua. In regard to this
route much has been written, many speculations and
even estimates of the cost of constructing the canal
have been .made, but the actual knowledge on the sub¬
ject has been very limited. In fact, the foregoing notes
from Mr. Bailey’s survey are the most reliable data
that have ever been published. I can but hope that the
same liberal spirit which prompted the sending out of an
agent may induce our government to procure from Mr.
Bailey and give to the world the whole of his maps and
drawings.

As yet the subject of this communication has not
taken any strong hold upon the public mind. It will be
discussed, frowned upon, sneered at, and condemned as
visionary and impracticable. Many in established bu¬
siness will oppose it as deranging the course of their
trade. Capitalists will not risk their money in an unset-,
tied and revolutionary country. The pioneers will be
denounced and ridiculed as Clinton was when he staked
his political fortunes upon the big ditch” that was to
connect the Hudson with Lake Erie ; but, if the peace
of Europe be not disturbed, I am persuaded that the time
is not far distant when the attention of the whole civil¬
ized and mercantile world will be directed toward it;
and steamboats will give the first impulse. In less than

VoL. I.—3 G


418


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


a year, English mailboats will be steaming to Cuba,
Jamaica, and the principal ports of Spanish America,
touching once a month at San Juan and Panama; To
men of leisure and fortune, jaded with rambling over
the ruins of the Old World, a new country will be open¬
ed. After a journey on the Nile, a day in Petra, and a
bath in the Euphrates, English and American travellers
will be bitten by moschetoes on the Lake of Nicaragua,
and drink Champagne and Burton ale on the desolate
shores of San Juan on the Pacific. The random re¬
marks of the traveller for amusement, and the observa¬
tions of careful and scientific men, will be brought to¬
gether, a mass of knowledge will be accumulated and
made public, and in my opinion the two oceans will be
united.

In regard to the advantages of this'work I shall
not go into any details; I will remark, however, that
on one point there exists a great and very general er¬
ror. In the documents submitted to Congress before
referred to, it is stated that ^‘the trade of the United
States and of Europe with China, Japan, and the In¬
dian Archipelago would be facilitated and increased by
reason of shortening the distance above four thousand
miles;” and in that usually correct work, the Modern
Traveller, it is stated that from Europe ‘‘the distance to
India and China would be shortened more than 10,000
miles !” but by measurement on the globe the distance
from Europe to India and China will not be shortened
at all. This is so contrary to the general impression
that I have some hesitation in making the assertion,
but it is a point on which the reader may satisfy himself
by referring to the globe. The trade of Europe with
India and Canton, then, will not necessarily pass through
this channel from any saving of distance ; but, from con-


ADVANTAGES OF THE CANAL.


41 ^


versations with masters of vessels and other practical
men, I am induced to believe that, by reason of more
favourable latitudes for winds and currents, it will be
considered preferable to \iie passage by the Cape of
Good Hope. At all events, all the trade of Europe
with the western coast of the Pacific and the Polyne¬
sian Islands, and all ^ler whale-fishing; and all the trade
of the United States with the Pacific, without the ex¬
ception of a single vessel, would pass through it; the
amount of saving on which, in time, interest of money,
navigating expenses and insurance, by avoiding the
stormy passage around Cape Horn, I have no data for
calculating.

On broad grounds, this work has been well charac¬
terized as the mightiest event in favour of the peace¬
ful intercourse of nations which the physical circum¬
stances of the globe present to the enterprise of man.”
It will compose the distracted country of Central
America; turn the sword, which is now drenching it
with blood, into a pruning-hook; remove the prejudi¬
ces of the inhabitants by bringing them into close con¬
nexion with people of every nation; furnish them with a
motive and a reward for industry, and inspire them with
a taste for making money, which, after all, opprobrious
as it is sometimes considered, does more to civilize and
keep the world at peace than any other influence what¬
ever. A great city will grow up in the heart of the
country, with streams issuing from it, fertilizing as
they roll into the interior; her magnificent mountains,
and valleys now weeping in desolation and waste, will
smile and be glad. The commerce of the world will
be changed, the barren region of Terra del Fuego
be forgotten, Patagonia become a land of fable, and
Cape Horn live only in the recollection of sailors and

36


420


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


insurers. Steamboats will go smoking along the rich
coasts of Chili, Peru, Equador, Grenada, Guatimala,
California, our own Oregon Territory, and the Russian
possessions on the borders of Behring’s Straits. New
markets will be opened for products of agriculture and
manufactures, and the intercourse and communion of
numerous and immense bodies of ^the human race will
assimilate and improve the character of nations. The
whole world is interested in this work. I would not
speak of it with sectional or even national feeling; but
if Europe is indifferent, it would be glory surpassing
the conquest of kingdoms to make this greatest enter¬
prise ever attempted by human force entirely our own
work ; nay, more, to make it, as it was once attempted,
entirely the work of our city; for it is to furnish a new
field for the action of that tremendous power which,
first brought into being under our own eyes, is now
changing the face of the whole moral, social, and po¬
litical world. Is it too much to hope that, in honour
of services poorly paid but never to be forgotten, a
steamboat, bearing the glorious name of Fulton, may
start from the spot where he made his first experiment,
and open the great highway of nations” to the Pa¬
cific Ocean?

Thursday, February 27. At three o’clock in the
morning we left the yard of the licenciado. The in¬
habitants of the town were still sleeping. At daylight
we passed a village, where, before the door of one
of the houses, a traveller was making preparation to
set out on a journey. We accosted him, and he said
that he would overtake us on the road. At eight
o’clock we reached a house, where we stopped to
breakfast. The hospitality of Central America is in
the country and in the villages; here I never knew


CENTRAL AMERICAN HOSPITALITY. 421


it to fail. The traveller may stop where he pleases,
and have house, fire, and water free, paying only for
the articles which he consumes. We had milk in
abundance, and the charge was six cents. Before
we resumed our journey the traveller whom we had
passed at the last village arrived, and, after he had
taken chocolate, we all started together. He was a
merchant, on his way to Leon, accoutred in the style
of the country, with pistols, sword, spatterdashes, and
spurs; and as he was then suffering from fever and
ague, wore a heavy woollen poncha, a striped cotton
pocket-handkerchief around his head, and over it two
straw hats, one inside of the other. A young man,
mounted, and armed with a gun, was driving a cargo-
mule, and three mozos with machetes followed on foot.

The whole of this region along the coast of the Pa¬
cific is called the Tierra Caliente. At half past two,
after a desperately hot and dusty ride, without any wa¬
ter, we reached a hacienda, the name of which I have
lost. It was built of poles and plastered with mud.
The major-domo was a white man, in bad health, but
very obliging, who lived by selling occasionally a fowl
or a few eggs to a traveller, and corn and water for
mules. There were no more of those beautiful streams
which had given such a charm to my journey in Costa
Rica, The earth was parched ; water was a luxury sold
for money. There was a well on the hacienda, and I
paid two cents apiece for our mules to drink. There
was a bedstead in the hut; at four o’clock I lay down
for a few moments’ rest, and did not wake till five the
next morning. On a line with the head of my bed was
a long log, squared and hollowed out, with a broad lid
on the top, and secured by a lock and key, containing
the corn and household valuables, and on the top of it


422


INCIDENTS OF.TRAVEL.


were sleeping a woman, rather yellow, and a little girL
I took chocolate, and in a few minutes was in the sad¬
dle. Very soon we came in sight of the highlands of
Buombacho, a high, dark range of mountains, behind
which stood Grenada, which in half an hour we en¬
tered. Built by those hardy adventurers who con¬
quered x4.merica, even yet it is a monument worthy of
their fame. The houses are of stone, large and spa¬
cious, with balconies to the windows of turned wood,
and projecting roofs, with pendent ornaments of wood
curiously carved.

I rode to the house of Don Frederico Derbyshire, to
whom I had a letter from friends in New-York. He
had gone to the United States; but his clerk, a young
Englishman, offered me the house, gave me a room,
and in a few moments my travelling clothes were off
and I was in the street. My first visit was to Mr. Bai¬
ley, who lived nearly opposite, with an English lady,
whose husband had died two years before, and who,
besides carrying on his business, received into her house
the few Englishmen or foreigners whom chance brought
to that place. My appearance at Grenada created sur¬
prise, and I was congratulated upon my liberation or
escape from prison. News had reached there that I
had been arrested (I do not know for what), and was in
prison in San Salvador; and as all news had a party
bias, it was told as another of the outrages of General
Morazan. The house of this lady was a comfort to a
battered traveller. I could have remained there a
month ; but, unfortunately, I heard news which did not
allow me much time for rest. The black clouds which
hung over the political horizon had burst, and civil war
had broken out anew. The troops of Nicaragua, four¬
teen hundred strong, had marched into Honduras, and


HORRORS OF CIVIL WAR.


423


uniting with those of the latter state, had routed, with
great slaughter, the troops of Morazan stationed at Ta-
guzegalpa. The latter consisted of but four hundred
and fifty men, under the command of General Cabanes,
and the records of civil wars among Christian people
nowhere present a bloodier page. No quarter was giv¬
en or asked. After the battle, fourteen officers were
shot in cold blood, and not a single prisoner lived as a
monument of mercy. Cabanes, fighting desperately,
escaped. Colonel Galindo, to whom I have before re¬
ferred as having visited the ruins of Copan, known both
in this country and in Europe for his investigation of
the antiquities of that country, and to whom I had a let¬
ter of introduction from Mr. Forsyth, was murdered.
After the battle, in attempting to escape, with two dra¬
goons and a servant-boy, he passed through an Indian
village, was recognised, and they were all murdered
with machetes. A disgraceful quarrel ensued between
Quejanos and Ferrera, the leaders of the Nicaragua
and Honduras troops, for the paltry spoils; and the for¬
mer got Ferrera into his power, and for twenty-four
hours had him under sentence to be shot. Afterward
the matter was accommodated, and the Nicaraguans
returned to Leon in triumph, with three hundred and
fifty muskets, several stands of colours, and as a proof
of the way in which they had done their work, without
a single prisoner.

At San Salvador there had been an ominous move¬
ment. General Morazan had resigned his office of chief
of the state, retaining command of the army, and sent
his wife and family to Chili. The crisis was at hand;
the notes of war sounded fearfully, and it was all im¬
portant for the prosecution of my ultimate designs and


424


INCIDENTS OF TRAVEL.


for my personal safety to reach Guatimala while yet
the road was open,

I would have gone on immediately, but felt that I might
exert myself too far, and break down at an awkward
place. In the afternoon, in company with Mr. Bailey
and Mr. Wood, I walked down to the lake. At the
foot of the street by which we entered, built out into the
lake, was an old fort, dismantled, and overgrown with
bushes and trees, a relic of the daring Spaniards who
first drove the Indians from the lake ; probably the verj
fortress that Cordova built, and in its ruins beautifully
picturesque. Under the walls, and within the shade of
the fort and trees growing near it, the Indian women
of Grenada were washing; garments of every colour
were hanging on the bushes to dry and waving in the
wind; women were wading out with their water-jars,
passing beyond the breakers to obtain it clear of sand;
men were swimming, and servants were bringing horses
and mules to drink, all together presenting a beautifully
animated picture. There were no boats on the water;
but about half a dozen piraguas, the largest of which
was forty feet long, and drew three feet of water, were
lying on the shore.


END OF VOL. I.


i/G "I


11 4


li


I


1


p
