NUNC  COCNOSCO  EX  PARTE


TRENT  UNIVERSITY
LIBRARY


ST.  CATHARiNES
ONTARIO

->UCAT  £


p  U  V--


3  1968


Kahle/Austin  Foundation


SMITHSONIAN  INSTITUTION

BEK  K  A  I  OK  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY

BULLETIN  33


SKELETAL  REMAINS


SI  OOKSTINO  OH  A  TT  HI  lit' TE1)  TO  KAKLY  MAN


IN  NORTH  AMERICA


BY


ALES  HRDLICKA


W  A  S  H I N  G  T  O  N

(I  O  A'  E  R  N  M  E  XT  PRINTING  OFFICE

1 9  0  T


PREFATORY  NOTE


Hie  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology  from  its  foundation  has  taken
a  deep  interest  in  all  researches  relating  to  the  antiquity  of  man  in
America,  and  its  attitude  in  considering  the  various  questions  that
have  arisen  has  been  conservative.  In  the  earlier  years  of  the  investi¬
gation  there  existed  a  rather  marked  tendency  on  the  part  of  students,
and  especially  on  the  part  of  amateurs  and  the  general  public,  hastily
to  accept  any  testimony  that  seemed  to  favor  antiquity,  and  the  con¬
servative  attitude  of  the  Bureau  was  emphasized  by  a  desire  to  coun¬
teract  and  correct  this  tendency.  Evidence  of  the  great  antiquity  of
man  in  the  Old  World  is  abundant  and  convincing,  and  the  assump¬
tion  that  like  conditions  exist  in  America  seemed  reasonable  and  was
perhaps  justifiable,  although  it  led  to  the  general  acceptance  of  much
that  was  without  satisfactory  verification.

It  has  been  the  practice  of  the  Bureau  when  discoveries  believed  to
have  an  important  bearing  on  the  question  of  human  antiquity  in
North  America  have  been  announced  to  seek  to  determine  their  just
value.  In  pursuance  of  this  plan  its  representatives  have  been  sent
on  occasion  to  New  Jersey,  to  the  Ohio  valley,  to  sites  on  the  Potomac,
to  Minnesota,  to  California,  to  Florida,  and  to  Kansas,  to  make  the
necessary  investigations.  On  receipt  of  reports  of  the  discovery  in
Nebraska  of  human  crania  of  low  type  and  possibly  of  great  geolog¬
ical  antiquity,  prompt  action  was  taken.  Doctor  Hrdlicka,  an  accom¬
plished  student  of  human  osseous  remains,  Avas  sent  to  Lincoln  to  ex¬
amine  the  peculiar  remains  and  to  make  such  investigations  regarding
the  conditions  under  which  they  were  discovered  as  he  might  find
possible  at  that  season  of  the  year.  When  this  discovery  Avas  an¬
nounced,  the  Bureau  AATas  about  to  send  to  press  a  paper  by  Doctor
Hrdlicka  embodying  descriptions  of  all  the  known  American  human
remains  for  which  geological  antiquity  had  been  claimed.  •  This
paper  was  withheld  from  publication,  however,  until  the  Nebraska
specimens  could  be  examined,  so  that  the  present  bulletin  includes
descriptions  of  these  as  well  as  of  all  kindred  remains  brought  to
light  in  North  America  up  to  the  present  time.

W.  II.  Holmes,  Chief.

3


85154


CONTENTS

rage

•  I.  Introduction . . .  9

II.  List  of  the  skeletal  remains .  14

III.  The  New  Orleans  skeleton .  15

IV.  The  Quebec  skeleton . 16

V.  The  Natchez  pelvic  bone . .  16

VI.  The  Lake  Monroe  (Florida)  bones  . . . _ .  19

VII.  The  Soda  Creek  skeleton . . 20

VIII.  The  Charleston  bones . 20

IX.  The  Calaveras  skull . 21

History .  21

Physical  characters.  . 22

Comparisons . 25

X.  The  Rock  Bluff  cranium . 28

XI.  The  Man  of  Penon . 32

XII.  The  crania  of  Trenton . 35

The  Burlington  County  skull .  36

The  Riverview  Cemetery  skull .  36

Racial  affinities  of  the  Burlington  County  and  Riverview  Ceme¬
tery  skulls . 41

XIII.  The  Trenton  femur . 46

XIV.  The  Lansing  skeleton . 47

Somatological  characters . 48

Conclusion . 52

XV.  The  fossil  man  of  western  Florida . . 53

The  Osprey  skull .  53

The  North  Osprey  bones . 54

The  Hanson  Landing  remains . 55

The  South  Osprey  remains . -  - .  55

Examination  of  the  specimens . 56

Physical  characters . 57

Resume . - . ---  60

Report  of  Dr.  T.  Wayland  Vaughan . . . .  64

XVI.  Mound  crania  (Florida) . . 66

XVII.  The  Nebraska  “  loess  man  ” . - .  66

History  of  finds .  67

Description  of  the  mound .  74

Examination  of  the  bones .  76

Discussion .  6/

XVIII.  General  conclusion . . . - . - .

XIX.  Appendix:  Recent  Indian  skulls  of  low  type  in  the  II.  S.  National

Museum . - .  ™

Index .  — -  10^

5


ILLUSTRATIONS


Page

Plate  I.  The  Calaveras  (California)  skull  as  it  was  in  1902  .  22

II.  Skulls  from  Illinois .  30

III.  Skull  from  Burlington  county,  New  Jersey . 37

IV.  Skull  from  River  view  cemetery,  Trenton,  New  Jersey . . .  37

V.  The  Lansing  (Kansas)  skull . 49

VI.  Skulls  from  Florida .  57

VII.  The  North  Osprey  (Florida)  femur  and  tibia .  59

VIII.  The  South  Osprey  (Florida)  skeleton . 59

IX.  Osseous  remains  in  process  of  silicification,  found  at  South  Osprey,

Florida .  64

X.  Skulls  from  Gilder  mound . . . .  80

XI.  Skulls  from  Gilder  mound . : . . .  80

XII.  Skulls  with  low  foreheads  (Davenport  Academy  of  Sciences) .  95

XIII.  Mound-builder  skulls  (Davenport  Academy  of  Sciences) .  95

XIV.  Skull  from  mound  in  North  Dakota  (U.  S.  National  Museum  no.

228876) .  99

XV.  Skull  of  Piegan  from  Montana  (U.  S.  National  Museum  no.  243673).  99

XVI.  Skull  from  mound  near  Browning,  Schuyler  county,  Illinois  (U.  S.

National  Museum  no.  136778) . 99

XVII.  Skulls  with  low  foreheads,  from  Illinois  and  Nevada .  99

XVIII.  Skulls  with  low  foreheads,  from  California . .  . . .  99

XIX.  Skull  from  Santa  Cruz  island,  California  (U.  S.  National  Museum

no.  241927) . - .  99

XX.  Skulls  with  low  foreheads,  from  California  and  Wisconsin . . . .  99

XXL  Skull  from  mound  in  Orange  county,  Indiana  (U.  S.  National  Mu¬
seum  no.  243855) .. . .  99

Fig.  1.  Geological  formations  concerned  in  human  history . 9

2.  The  Natchez  pelvic  bone  (after  Leidy) .  18

3.  Cave  skull,  Calaveras  county,  California;  side  view.. .  26

4.  Remnant  of  the  skull  of  the  “Hombre  del  Penon”  (after  Barcena,  in

La  Naturaleza,  vii,  no.  16) .  34

5.  Front  view  of  two  of  the  Bremen  chamsecephals .  44

6.  Side  and  top  views  of  one  of  the  Bremen  chamsecephals.  . .  45

7.  Comparison  of  the  nasion-opisthion  arcs,  geometrically  constructed,

of  the  Lansing  skull  and  three  modern  Indian  crania .  53

8.  Sketch  map  of  Osprey  and  vicinity .  54

9.  Section  of  deposits  showing  position  of  the  Osprey  skull .  61

10.  Shore  line  at  South  Osprey  . .  62

11.  Section  of  the  layers  at  the  locality  of  the  South  Osprey  find .  63

12.  Antero-posterior  arcs  of  skulls  no.  8  and  no.  6 .  79

13.  Antero-posterior  arcs  of  skulls  no.  4402,  Davenport  Academy  of

Sciences,  and  no.  6,  Gilder  mound .  94

14.  Antero-posterior  arcs  of  skulls  no.  4402,  Davenport  Academy  of

Sciences,  and  no.  8,  Gilder  mound .  94

15.  Antero-posterior  arcs  of  skulls  no.  242982,  L.  S.  National  Museum,

and  no.  6,  Gilder  mound .  95

16.  Antero-posterior  arcs  of  skulls  no.  242982,  U.  S.  National  Museum,

and  no.  8,  Gilder  mound .  95

7


SKELETAL  REMAINS  SUGGESTING  OR  ATTRIBUTED
TO  EARLY  MAN  IN  NORTH  AMERICA

By  A  les  TIrdlicka
I.— INTRODUCTION

According  to  current  classification  of  geological  time,  the  Ceno-
zoic  era  (the  era  of  modern  life)  is  divided  into  two  periods,  the
Tertiary  and  the  Quaternary.  The  former,  which  is  the  older,
comprises  three  subdivisions,  Eocene,  Miocene,  and  Pliocene,  and
the  latter  two  subdivisions,  Pleistocene  and  Recent.  These  periods
are  indicated  in  figure  1  in  the  order  of  the  formations  representing
them.

Man  made  his  appearance  in  the.  Old  World  probably  during  the
Tertiary  period  through  differentiation  from  the  primates,  the  class
of  animals  to  which  he  presents
the  closest  structural  analogies.

Primates  of  the  higher  forms  were
not  found  in  America ;  they  ex¬
isted  only  in  the  warmer  parts  of
Asia.  Africa,  and  Europe,  and  it
is  there  that  we  must  look  for  the
first  traces  of  man’s  appearance.

Accepting  this  view,  it  follows
that  America  was  peopled  by  im¬
migration  from  the  Old  World,
which  could  not  have  taken  place  until  after  great  multiplication  and
wide  distribution  of  the  human  species  and  the  development  of  some
degree  of  culture.  This  implies  a  vastly  later  date  than  that  which
must  be  assigned  to  man’s  origin.  A  wide  dispersion  of  the  race  over
the  earth  could  hardly  have  taken  place  before  the  later  stages  of  the
Cenozoic  era.

In  considering  the  question  of  the  appearance  of  man  in  America,
special  interest  attaches  to  the  Pleistocene,  during  several  phases  of
which  period  man  is  known  to  have  existed  in  central  and  western
Europe;  there  is  absolutely  no  indication  that  he  reached  the  Ameri¬
can  continent  before  that  time.  The  American  Pleistocene,  which  is
synchronous  with  the  Glacial  period,  is  marked  by  certain  well-known
geological  deposits,  which  are  particularly  abundant  and  character-

9


(QUATERNARY


Nn

G

$


TEPT/DRY


PECEN  T

PLEISTOCENE-  GLL)C/L)L

PLIOCENE


MIOCENE

EOCENE


Fig.  1. — Geological  formations  concerned  in
human  history.


10


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


istic  in  the  regions  over  which  the  glaciers  extended.  These  forma¬
tions  include  especially  the  so-called  glacial  gravels  which  have
received  particular  attention  at  the  hands  of  students  of  early0
man  in  this  country.

The  several  irregular  ice  invasions  extended  at  their  maximum  as
far  south  on  the  Atlantic  coast  as  Long  Island.  In  the  Delaware
Aralley  they  reached  Easton,  Pennsylvania;  in  the  Ohio  valley,  Cin¬
cinnati,  Ohio;  and  in  the  Missouri  valley,  the  vicinity  of  St.  Louis.
Beginning  with  the  earliest  subdivision,  the  several  successive  stages
of  this  period,  with  the  few  and  uncertain  chronological  approxima¬
tions  that  have  been  made,  are  thus  given  by  leading  American
geologists : h

Time  in  years  since  cli¬
max  was  reached

I.  The  Sub-Aftonian,  or  Jerseyan,  the  earliest  known


invasion _  (?)

II.  The  Aftonian,  the  first  known  interglacial  interval.  (?)

III.  The  Kansan,  or  second  invasion  now  recognized _  300,  000  to  1,  020,  000

IY.  The  Yarmouth,  or  Buchanan,  the  second  interglacial

interval _  (?)

Y.  The  Illinoian,  the  third  invasion _  140, 000  to  540,  000

VI.  The  Sangamon,  the  third  interglacial  interval _  (?)

VII.  The  Iowan,  the  fourth  invasion _  60,  000  to  300,  000

VIII.  The  reorian,  the  fourth  interglacial  interval _  (?)

IX.  The  Earlier  Wisconsin,  the  fifth  invasion _ _  40,  000  to  150,  000

X.  The  fifth  interval  of  deglaciation,  as  yet  unnamed _  (?)

XI.  The  Later  Wisconsin,  the  sixth  advance _  20,  000  to  60,  000

XII.  The  Glacio-Lacustrine  substage.

XIII.  The  Champlain  substage.


The  glacial  invasion  closed  apparently  with  a  gradual  recession  of
the  ice,  and  thus  terminated  considerably  earlier  in  southern  than  in
northern  latitudes;  this  should  be  kept  in  mind  in  considering  the
date  of  the  ultimate  disappearance  of  the  ice  in  any  limited  region.
The  precise  date  of  the  final  recession  of  ice  in  any  locality  must
always  remain  in  a  large  degree  conjectural.  The  climax  of  the
final,  or  Champlain  substage,  in  the  latitude  of  the  St.  Lawrence
river,  was  apparently  reached  considerably  more  than  ten  thousand
years  ago.0

Should  it  be  assumed  that  man  existed  on  the  North  American
continent  before  the  present  geological  period,  and  taking  into  account
his  osseous  remains  only,  two  important  questions  arise,  namely,  where

“The  term  early,  as  employed  in  this  paper,  applies  only  to  the  Pleistocene  and  older
geological  periods.

6  After  Thomas  C.  Chamberlin  and  R.  D.  Salisbury's  Geology,  hi,  383,  420,  New  York,
1900  ;  reversed  in  arrangement.  See  also  Salisbury’s  The  Glacial  Geology  of  New  Jersey,
Geological  Survey  of  New  Jersey,  v,  Trenton,  1902.  It  should  not  be  understood  that  all
of  the  given  divisions  apply  to  the  entire  vast  glaciated  area  ;  some  of  the  terms  relate
only  to  somewhat  localized  phases  of  the  period.

0  A  summary  of  the  whole  question  of  estimates  by  years  is  given  in  the  chapter  on
the  Glacial  period  in  volume  in  of  Chamberlin  and  Salisbury’s  Geology.


hrdliCka]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


11


are  such  remains  likely  to  occur  and  how  is  their  antiquity  to  he
determined.  The  first  of  these  queries  is  answered  with  compara¬
tive  ease.  Man’s  greatest  necessities  are  food  and  water,  and  unre¬
strained  settlement  of  primitive  peoples  was  guided  everywhere  to  a
large  extent  by  facilities  for  obtaining  these  requisites.  The  only
other  strong  motives  which  generally  influenced  the  choice  of  dwell¬
ing  sites  were  the  requirements  of  comfort  (including  primarily  a
favorable  climate)  and  of  safety.  It  may  be  assumed,  therefore,
that  the  habitations  of  the  earliest  Americans  were  established  on
defensible  sites  along  the  seashore  and  larger  streams  where  the  food
supply,  consisting  of  mollusks,  fish,  and  game  animals,  as  well  as  of
fruits,  was  particularly  abundant,  and  in  regions  free  from  the  ex¬
tremes  of  climate.  Thus  it  is  mainly  on  and  about  elevated  sites
along  the  sea  coasts  and  in  the  valleys  of  the  temperate  zones  of  the
periods  of  occupation  that  bones  of  early  man  should  first  be  looked
for.  If  there  are  contemporaneous  rock  recesses,  especially  caves,
these  should  receive  attention,  for  such  shelters  were  utilized  by  all
primitive  peoples  for  both  dwelling  and  burial.  Bog  deposits,  which
naturally  offer  favorable  conditions  for  the  preservation  of  the  bones
of  those  who  perished  in  such  places,  also  deserve  examination.

Proper  identification  of  human  bones  as  those  of  early  man  is  of
the  first  importance,  and  at  the  same  time  is  fraught  with  exceptional
difficulties.  Finds  of  osseous  remains  suggesting  man  of  other  than
the  recent  period  should  be  photographed  in  situ,  and  should  be
examined  by  more  than  one  man  of  science,  including  especially  a
geologist  familiar  with  the  particular  formations  involved;  and  the
chemical  and  somatological  characters  of  the  bones  should  receive  the
closest  attention  with  the  view  of  determining  their  bearing  on  ques¬
tions  involving  the  antiquity  of  the  remains.  The  history  of  a  ma¬
jority  of  archeological  finds  suggestive  of  early  man  in  this  country  is
particularly  instructive  in  this  connection,®  illustrating  as  it  does
many  of  the  difficulties  attending  efforts  at  chronological  identifi¬
cation.

A  point  requiring  especial  attention  is  that  of  the  possibility  of
intrusive  burials.  Men  of  recent  times  have  inhabited  many  of  the
sites  that  may  have  been  occupied  by  early  man,  and  it  will  be  readily
appreciated  that  human  remains  of  different  periods  might  often
be  closely  associated  or  even  intermingled.  Where  such  an  occurrence
is  suspected,  chemical  and  somatological  tests  are  of  particular  value,

°  See  especially  the  papers  of  W.  H.  Holmes  on  Traces  of  Glacial  Man  in  Ohio,  Journal
of  Geology,  i,  147-163,  February-March,  1893;  Vestiges  of  Early  Man  in  Minnesota,
American  Geologist,  xi,  219-240,  April,  1893;  Are  there  Traces  of  Man  in  the  Trenton
Gravels?  Journal  of  Geology,  i,  15—37,  January— February,  1893  ;  Primitive  Man  in  the
Delaware  Valley,  Science,  n.  s.,  vi.  824-829,  1897;  and  Review  of  the  Evidence  relating
to  Auriferous  Gravel  Man  in  California,  Smithsonian  Report  for  1899,  419-472,  Wash¬
ington.  1901.


12


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


although  their  application  may  prove  arduous  and  is  not  certain  of
affording  satisfactory  results.

A  geologically  ancient  bone  may  be  safely  expected  to  show  some
degree  of  infiltration  and  replacement  of  its  constituents  by  mineral
matter,  while  modern  bones  are  generally  little  changed;  yet  there
exist  in  some  localities  conditions  which  greatly  retard  or  facilitate
the  processes  of  mineralization,  so  that  ancient  bones  may  show  but
little  evidence  of  fossilization,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  undoubtedly
recent  bones  may  have  undergone  decided  change.  The  latter  con¬
dition  is  far  more  frequent.  There  is  a  possibility  that  the  kind  or
(he  degree  of  the  change  may  make,  it  practicable  to  distinguish
between  recent  and  ancient  fossilization ;  but  there  are  as  yet  no
satisfactory  means  of  testing  this  matter.

Somatologically,  the  bones,  and  particularly  the  skull,  of  early  man
may  be  confidently  expected  to  show  some  differences  from  those  of
modern  man,  especially  in  the  direction*  of  lesser  differentiation.
Unfortunately  the  knowledge  of  the  osseous  structures  of  early  man
in  other  parts  of  the  world  is  still  meager,  and  this  lack  of  informa¬
tion  is  felt  very  keenly.  We  do  not  know  as  yet  whether  the  human
beings  of  the  geological  period  just  before  the  recent  differed  so
from  the  present  man  that  even  the  extreme  individual  variations
in  the  two  periods  (the  most  advanced  evolutionallv  in  the  old  and
the  least  advanced  among  modern  individuals)  would  stand  appre¬
ciably  apart.  A  ery  likely  they  overlap  and  dovetail  considerably.

Yet  the  difficulties  which  may  attend  the  separation  on  the  morpho¬
logical  basis  of  ancient  from  recent  man  should  not  be  insuperable.
If  a  find  should  consist  of  a  series  of  well-preserved  skulls  or  skeletons
geologically  ancient  and  of  a  similarly  well-preserved  series  of  skulls
or  skeletons  of  recent  man,  it  is  the  firm  conviction  of  the  writer  that
in  a  large  majority,  if  not  in  all,  of  the  cases,  their  separation  would
be  practicable.  The  greater  the  number  of  male  adult  normal,  and
in  no  way  deformed,  crania  in  each  find,  the  easier  it  would  become  to
make  the  necessary  distinctions;  and  it  may  be  safely  assumed  also
that  the  greater  the  separation  of  the  two  groups  in  time  the  more
distinct  would  be  the  somatological  differences.

There  is  no  such  thing  as  absolute  stability  in  any  human  struc¬
ture.  Every  organic  feature,  of  whatever  consistency  or  importance,
is  the  result  of  all  the  factors  by  which  it  was  affected.  AATth  the
skeletal  parts  by  far  the  strongest  of  these  factors,  in  itself  a  very  com¬
posite  one,  is  the  potentiality  of  heredity,  next  to  which  in  impor¬
tance  comes  habitual  muscular  action,  particularly  muscular  use  due
to  long-established  habits  of  whole  groups  of  people.  Heredity,  how¬
ever,  especially  in  so  far  as  it  applies  to  the  latest  acquired  charac¬
teristics  of  (he  skeleton,  is  subject  to  incidental  irregularities  as  well
as  to  gradual  modifications.  Habits  of  muscle  action,  on  the  other


HRDLICK  A]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


13


hand,  change  with  environment  and  culture;  such  changes  in  activities
may  take  place  much  more  slowly  in  some  localities  than  in  others,  yet
they  are  bound  to  manifest  themselves  everywhere  in  the  course  of
ages  and  to  be  followed  by  corresponding  and  recurring  structural
alterations.  The  great  skeletal  diversity  of  mankind  to-day  can  be
accounted  for  in  no  other  manner.  The  alterations  in  the  skull  or
bones  need  not  be  general  or  even  of  prime  importance,  and  may  re¬
quire  for  their  discovery  detailed  study  and  extended  comparisons;
but  in  the  case  of  an  individual  from  the  earlier  stages  of  the  period
immediately  preceding  the  recent  they  should  be  pronounced  enough
to  be  easily  apprehended.®  The  geologically  ancient  crania  of  Europe
may  be  cited  in  support  of  this  statement.  In  the  case  of  single  fea¬
tures.  however,  or  with  scanty  material,  all  far-reaching  conclusions
must  be  avoided,  for  in  such  cases  we  can  not  be  certain  that  we  are
outside  of  the  territory  of  semipathological  occurrences,  and  features
of  reversion,  degeneration,  or  purely  accidental  variation  limited  to
individuals  or  small  numbers  of  persons.

In  this  connection  it  is  necessary  to  bear  in  mind  also  human
migrations,  resulting  in  a  replacement  of  physical  types.  While
the  stability  of  the  same  stock  of  people  is  much  greater  in  some
localities  than  is  generally  appreciated,  it  is  probable  that  in  a  large
majority  of  places  one  or  more  replacements  of  population  have
occurred  even  during  recent  geological  time.  On  this  account  alone
the  explorer  is  very  likely  to  find  in  recent  burials  racial  types  dis¬
tinct  from  those  found  in  older  burials.  The  greater  the  differ¬
ence  in  age  between  two  sets  of  osseous  human  remains  the  greater
the  improbability,  for  the  reason  just  given  above,  that  they  belong
to  one  physical  variety.

To  summarize,  identification  of  human  bones  as  those  of  early
man — that  is,  man  of  geological  antiquity — demands  indisputable
srratigraphical  evidence,  some  degree  of  fossilization  of  the  bones,
and  marked  serial  somatological  distinctions  in  the  more  important
osseous  parts.  A  skeleton  or  a  skull  not  fossilized  or  one  (whether
fossilized  or  not)  agreeing  in  most  of  the  more  essential  features

°  It  has  been  stated  on  good  authority  (A.  Thompson  and  I).  Randall-Maelver,  The
Ancient  Races  of  the  Thebaid,  Oxford,  1905 ;  and  Chas.  S.  Myers,  Contributions  to
Egyptian  Anthropometry,  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute,  xxxv,  80-91,  1905)
that  the  most  ancient  known  inhabitants  of  Egypt,  dating  from  about  seven  thousand  to
eight  thousand  years  ago,  show  no  important  difference  of  type  from  certain  Egyptian
natives  of  the  present  day.  If  definitely  settled,  the  fact  would  be  of  much  importance  ;
it  does  not  appear,  however,  that  much  attention  was  paid  to  numerous  features  of  the.
skulls  such  as  do  not  enter  ordinarily  into  anthropometric  determinations,  but  which  may
play  a  large  part  in  making  distinctions.  It  is  often  possible  to  detect  just  such  second¬
ary  or  less  commonly  studied  characteristics  in  different  localities  among  the  Indians,  even
though  these  belong  to  the  same  general  type,  and  it  may  be  confidently  asserted  that
they  would  be  found  to  differentiate  recent  from  ancient  man  in  any  locality.  It  should
be  borne  in  mind  also  in  connection  with  the  Egyptian  crania  that  seven  thousand  or
eight  thousand  years  is  really  but  a  short  period  geologically,  equaling  probably  less  than
half  of  the  recent  era.  See  on  this  subject  also  E.  Schmidt,  in  the  Arch.  f.  Ant  hr  op.,  xvii,
189  et  seq.,  1888.


14


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


with  a  skeleton  or  a  skull  of  recent,  or  not  very  ancient,  man  in  the
same  locality,  can  not  be  accepted  as  geologically  ancient,  unless  the
geological  evidence  should  be  absolutely  decisive.  Features  charac¬
teristic  of  inferior  stages  of  human  development,  though  to  be  ex¬
pected  in  all  geologically  ancient  skeletal  parts  of  man,  are  not  of
themselves  necessarily  proofs  of  antiquity;  their  presence  only
strengthens  the  case  if  associated  with  other  evidence  of  great  age  of
the  specimens.

II. — LIST  OF  THE  SKELETAL  REMAINS


Interest  in  man’s  antiquity  in  this  country  began  to  manifest  itself
at  about  the  same  time  as  the  growth  of  interest  in  man’s  natural
history  in  general,  and  with  the  rise  of  the  science  of  anthropology
during  the  earlier  part  of  the  nineteenth  century.  The  work  of
Morton  in  this  country  and  of  Prichard  in  England  doubtless  had
great  influence  in  this  direction ;  Morton’s  Crania  Americana  a  par¬
ticularly  drew  attention  to  the  remains  of  the  human  skeleton.  The
first  find  of  importance  of  bones  that  seemed  to  indicate  the  pres¬
ence  of  early  man  was  made  in  1844,  and  similar  discoveries  followed
from  time  to  time.  The  finds  so  far  made  include  fourteen  speci¬
mens  or  groups  of  specimens,  the  majority  of  which  call  for  careful
consideration.  They  are  as  follows:


A.  The  New  Orleans  (Louisiana)  bones,  discovered  in _

I>.  The  Quebec  (Canada)  skeleton,  discovered  in _

0.  The  Natchez  (Mississippi)  pelvic  bone,  discovered  in _

D.  The  Lake  Monroe  (Florida)  hones,  discovered  in _

E.  The  Soda  Creek  (Colorado)  skeleton,  discovered  in _

F.  The  Charleston  (South  Carolina)  remains,  discovered  in

G.  The  Calaveras  (California)  skull,  discovered  in _  _

II.  The  Rock  Bluff  (Illinois)  skull,  discovered  in _

I.  The  Penon  (Mexico)  skeleton,  discovered  in _

J.  The  Trenton  (New  Jersey)  skulls,  discovered  in _

K.  The  Western  Florida  skull  and  hones,  discovered  in _

L.  The  Trenton  (New  Jersey)  femur,  discovered  in _ _

M.  The  Lansing  (Kansas)  skeleton,  discovered  in _

N.  The  Nebraska  “  loess  man,”  discovered  in _


_  1844

_  (?)

_  1840

1852  or  1853
_  1800

_  (?)

_  1800

_  1860

_  1S84

_  1870-1887
_  1871-1888

_  1899

_  1902

_  1894-1900


A  majority  of  these  specimens  have  been  previously  examined  and
reported  upon,6  and  within  the  last  few  years  the  writer  has  reex¬
amined  and  compared  all  the  more  important  available  material
and  besides  has  been  able  to  visit  the  localities  of  the  heretofore  unde¬
scribed  western  Florida  skeletons.  The  crania  and  other  remains  are
dealt  with  according  to  chronological  sequence  of  discovery,  with  the
exception  of  those  from  Florida,  which  are  placed  near  the  last  for
the  reason  that,  although  brought  to  light  some  years  ago,  they  had


“Philadelphia,  1830.

^  For  bibliographical  references,  see  the  reports  in  this  paper  on  the  several  fluds.


HRDLICKA]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


15


not  been  studied  until  the  last  year.  The  whole  investigation  has
been  carried  on  without  preconceived  opinions  in  regard  to  either  the
presence  in  or  the  absence  from  northern  America  of  early  man  and  is
in  the  main  a  simple  anatomical  comparison.

III.— THE  NEW  ORLEANS  SKELETON

In  a  number  of  the  older  writings  touching  on  the  subject  of  man’s
antiquity  in  North  America,  particularly  in  Nott  and  Gliddon,“  are
found  references  to  the  discovery  of  an  apparently  ancient  skeleton
at  New  Orleans,  Louisiana.  The  original  report  on  this  find,  usually
credited  to  D.  Ik  Howler,6  is  by  Prof.  D.  Drake, c  and  reads  as
follows :

In  1844  I  visited  two  gas  tanks,  each  00  feet  in  diameter  and  1G  feet  deep,
recently  sunk  in  the  back  part  of  the  city  [i.  e.,  New  Orleans],  and  received
from  the  intelligent  superintendent,  Doctor  Rogers,  an  account  of  what  was
met  with  in  excavating  them.  At  first  they  encountered  soil  and  soft  river
mud,  then  harder  laminated  blue  alluvion,  then  deep  black  mold  resting  on
wet  bluish  quicksand.  .  .  .  The  roots  and  the  basis  or  stumps  of  no  fewer

than  four  successive  growths  of  trees,  apparently  cypress,  were  found  standing
at  different  elevations.  The  first  had  a  diameter  of  2  feet  G  inches,  the  second
of  G  feet,  tlie  third  of  4  feet,  and  the  fourth  of  12  feet,  at  a  short  distance
up,  with  a  base  of  28  feet  for  the  roots.  It  is  embedded  in  a  soft  deep-black
mold.  When  cut  with  the  spade  much  of  this  wood  resembled  cheese  in  tex¬
ture,  but  hardened  on  drying.  ...  At  the  depth  of  7  and  16  feet  burnt  wood
was  met  with.  No  shells  or  bones  of  land  animals  or  fish  were  observed,  but
in  a  tank  previously  excavated,  at  the  depth  of  1G  feet  the  skeleton  of  a  man
was  found.  The  cranium  lay  between  the  roots  of  a  tree  and  was  in  a  tolerable
state  of  preservation,  but  most  of  the  other  bones  crumbled  on  pressure.  A
small  os  ilium,  which  I  saw,  indicated  the  female  sex.  A  low  and  narrow  fore¬
head,  moderate  facial  angle,  and  prominent  widely  separated  cheek  bones
seemed  to  prove  the  skull  of  the  same  race  with  our  present  Indians.  No
charcoal,  ashes,  or  ornaments,  of  any  kind  were  found  around  it.

On  the  basis  of  the  foregoing  rather  defective  data  and  calcula¬
tions  as  to  the  probable  age  of  the  stumps,  Doctor  Dowler  con¬
cluded  (page  IT)  that  the  “human  race  existed  in  the  delta  more
than  fifty-seven  thousand  years  ago.”  On  a  little  reflection  this
estimate  shows  so  many  weak  points  that  it  can  not  be  accepted
for  anything  more  than  an  individual  opinion.  The  notes  concern¬
ing  the  skull,  so  far  as  they  go,  indicate  that  the  specimen  resembled
in  the  main  the  skull  of  an  ordinary  Indian,  but  this  conclusion
has  little  value.  It  is  nowhere  stated  what  became  of  the  skeleton.
Drake’s  remark  that  “  most  of  the  other  bones  crumbled  on  pressure  ”
makes  it  probable  that  few,  if  any,  parts  of  it  have  been  preserved,
and  also  clearly  indicates  that  the  bones  were  in  no  degree  fossilized.

a  Types  of  Mankind,  cliap.  xi,  numerous  editions,  Philadelphia.

b  Tableaux  of  New  Orleans,  8-0,  New  Orleans,  no  date  (published  in  the  early  fifties).

C  A  Systematic  Treatise  on  the  Principal  Diseases  of  the  Interior  Valley  of  North
America,  etc.,  76-77,  Cincinnati,  1850.


It)


BUREAU  OE  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[BULL.  38


IV. — THE  QUEBEC  SKELETON

According  to  Doctor  Usher  a  a  fossil  human  skeleton,  “  which  was
dug  out  of  the  solid  schist-rock  on  which  the  citadel  stands,”  was
preserved  in  the  museum  at  Quebec.  There  are  no  particulars  in
print  concerning  the  find ;  the  skeleton  is  not  preserved  in  the  Laval
University  Museum,  the  only  museum  in  the  city  containing  objects
of  natural  history,  and  nothing  could  be  learned  concerning  it
during  the  writer’s  recent  visit  to  Quebec.  The  absurdity  of  the
statement  that  a  human  skeleton  was  “  dug  out  of  the  solid  schist-
rock  ”  will  be  apparent  when  it  is  remembered  that  the  rock  is
Silurian.


V. — THE  NATCHEZ  PELVIC  BONE

In  1846  Dr.  M.  IV.  Dickeson  exhibited  at  the  Academy  of  Natural
Sciences  at  Philadelphia  a  collection  of  fossil  bones  obtained  bv  him
in  the  vicinity  of  Natchez,  Mississippi,  among  which  was  a  piece  of  a
human  pelvis.  An  account  of  this  specimen,  which  appeared  in  the
Proceedings  of  the  Academy  in  1846  (page  107),  reads  as  follows:

This  ancient  relic  of  our  species  is  that  of  a  young  man  of  about  16  years
of  age,  as  determined  by  its  size  and  form,  and  by  the  fact  that  the  epiphyses
have  separated  from  the  tuberosity  of  the  ischium  and  from  the  crista  of  the
ilium.  Nearly  all  the  os  pubis  is  wanting,  the  upper  posterior  part  of  the
ilium  is  broken  away,  and  but  half  the  acetabidum  remains.  That  this  bone
is  strictly  in  the  fossil  state  is  manifest  from  its  physical  characters,  in  which
it  accords  in  every  respect  of  color,  density,  etc.,  with  those  of  the  Megalonyx
and  other  associated  bones.  That  it  could  not  have  drifted  into  the  position
in  which  it  was  found  is  manifest  from  several  facts :  1.  That  the  plateau  of
blue  clay  &  is  not  appreciably  acted  on  by  those. causes  that  produce  ravines  in
the  superincumbent  diluvial;  2.  That  the  human  bone  was  found  at  least  2. feet
below  three  associated  skeletons  cf  the  Megalonyx,  all  of  which,  judging  irom
the  apposition  or  proximity  of  their  several  parts,  had  been  quietly  deposited  in
this  locality,  independently  of  any  active  current  or  other  displacing  power ;
and  lastly,  because  there  was  no  admixture  of  diluvial  drift  with  the  blue  clay,
wMcli  latter  retains  its  homogeneous  character  equally  in  the  higher  part  that
furnished  the  extiuet  quadrupeds,  and  its  lower  part  that  contained  the  remains
of  man.

The  find  obtained  a  wide  publicity  and  received  the  particular
attention  of  Sir  Charles  Lyell  on  the  occasion  of  his  visit  to  this
country  in  1846.  Lyell  examined  the  locality  and  in  his  report c
thereon  took  a  rather  skeptical  view  as  to  the  antiquity  of  the

“  W.  Usher,  Geology  and  Paleontology  in  Connection  with  Human  Origins,  chap,  xi,  in
Nott  and  Gliddon’s  Types  of  Mankind.

^  The  stratum  that  contained  this  and  the  megalonyx  bones  “  is  a  tenacious  blue  elav
that  underlies  the  diluvial  drift  of  Natchez,  and  which  diluvial  deposit  abounds  in  bone's
and  teeth  of  the  Mastodon  (jiganteum  ”  (p.  106).

0  Second  Visit  to  America,  n,  101  et  seq.,  1846.


hrdliCka]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


17


remains.  In  a  subsequent  work  a  he  states  that  the  pelvic  bone  was
taken  from  a  comparatively  recent  channel  known  as  the  Mammoth
ravine,  at  the  base  of  a  high  cliff.

I  lie  cliff  consists  of  a  Cretaceous  base,  a  layer  of  Eocene  material,  and  a  sur¬
face  deposit  of  loam  or  loess.

From  a  clayey  deposit  immediately  below  the  yellow  loam,  bones  of  the
Mastodon  ohiuticus ,  a  species  of  Megalonyx,  bones  of  the  genera  Equus,  Bos,
and  others,  some  of  extinct  and  other  presumed  to  be  of  living  species,  had
been  detached,  falling  to  the  base  of  the  cliff.  Mingled  with  the  rest,  the
pelvic  bone  of  man — os  innominatum — was  obtained  by  Doctor  Dickeson,  of
Natchez,  in  whose  collection  I  saw  it.  It  appeared  to  he  quite  in  the  same
state  of  preservation,  and  was  of  the  same  black  color  as  the  other  fossils,
and  was  believed  to  have  come,  like  them,  from  a  depth  of  about  30  feet
from  the  surface  [of  the  cliff].

In  my  Second  I  isit  to  America  (u,  107,  1840)  I  suggested,  as  a  possible
explanation  of  this  association  of  a  human  bone  with  remains  of  a  Mastodon
and  Megalonyx,  that  the  former  may  possibly  have  been  derived  from  the
vegetable  soil  at  the  top  of  the  cliff,  whereas  the  remains  of  extinct  mammalia
were  dislodged  from  a  lower  position,  and  both  may  have  fallen  into  the  same
heap  or  talus  at  the  bottom  of  the  ravine.  The  pelvic  bone  might,  I  conceived,
have  acquired  its  black  color  by  having  lain  for  years  or  centuries  in  a  dark,
superficial,  peaty  soil,  common  in  that  region.  I  was  informed  that  there
were  many  human  bones,  in  old  Indian  graves  in  the  same  district,  stained  of
as  black  a  dye.  .  .  .  No  doubt,  had  the  pelvic  bone  belonged  to  any  recent

mammifer  other  than  man,  such  a  theory  would  never  have  been  resorted  to ;
but  so  long  as  we  have  only  one  isolated  case,  and  are  without  the  testimony
of  a  geologist  who  was  present  to  behold  the  bone  when  still  engaged  in  the
matrix,  and  to  extract  it  with  his  own  hands,  it  is  allowable  to  suspend  our
judgment  as  to  the  high  antiquity  of  the  fossil.

The  Natchez  pelvic  bone  was  described  in  detail  and  illustrated  by
II.  Schmidt  in  1872. h  This  author  takes  issue  with  Doctor  Dickeson’s
statement  that  the  bone  belonged  to  a  young  individual ;  he  con¬
siders  it  that  of  an  adult,  but  damaged  in  such  a  way  that  it  resem¬
bles  an  immature  specimen.  Tie  takes  issue  also  with  Sir  Charles
Lyell  regarding  the  antiquity  of  the  bone,  declaring  his  belief  that
it  is  not  recent,  but  dates  from  the  Champlain  epoch.0  Schmidt
does  not  furnish  any  new  important  facts  concerning  the  find,  but
attempts  to  substantiate  his  view  by  a  different  interpretation  of  the
known  conditions.  Lyell  apparently  did  not  accept  Schmidt’s  con¬
clusions,  for  the  last  edition  of  the  former’s  Geological  Evidences  of
the  Antiquity  of  Man  contains  exactly  the  same  statement  concerning
the  Natchez  bone  as  those  published  previously;  and,  as  he  was  a
geologist  and  visited  the  locality  a  short  time  after  the  find  had

°  The  Geological  Evidences  of  the  Antiquity  of  Man,  3d  ed.,  200  et  seq.,  London,  1863  ;
4th  ed.,  236  et  seq.,  London,  1873.

6  Zur  Urgeschichte  Nordamerikas,  Arch.  f.  Anthrop.,  v,  244  et  seq.,  1871-72.

«  The  references  of  Schmidt  to  the  “Champlain  epoch”  indicate  a  different  notion  of
this  period  and  a  greater  antiquity  than  that  now  accepted  by  American  geologists.  See
particularly  pave  233  of  his  paper.


3453— No.  33-07-


18


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[BULL.  33


been  made,  it  seems  that  his  opinion  should  carry  more  weight  than
that  of  Doctor  Dickeson.

Examination  and  measurements  of  the  specimen  gave  Schmidt
nothing  extraordinary,  and  racial  identification  of  the  bone  was
justly  declared  by  him  to  be  wholly  impossible.

The  Natchez  pelvic  bone  came  eventually  to  the  attention  of  Prof.
Joseph  Leidy,  and  lie  reported  on  it  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Wagner
Free  Institute  of  Science ,  1889  (ii,  9-10).  According  to  this
authority — -


the  collection  of  fossils,  yet  contained  in  the  museum  of  the  academy,  are
well  preserved,  firm  in  texture,  and  stained  chocolate  brown  from  ferruginous
infiltration.  The  fossils  consist  of  a  nearly  entire  skull  and  other  bones  of
Megalonyx  Jeffersoni,  teeth  of  Megalonyx  dissimilis  and  Ereptodon  prisons,
bones  of  Mylodon  Harlani,  bones  and  teeth  of  Mastodon  amcrieanus,  and  teeth
of  Equus  major  and  of  Bison  iatifrons.  The  human  innominatum,  somewhat
mutilated,  presents  the  same  condition  of  preservation  and  color  as  the  other
fossils  with  which  it  was  found  associated.  ...  It  differs  in  no  respect

from  an  ordinary  aver¬
age  specimen  of  the  cor¬
responding  recent  bone
of  man.


Fig.  2. — 'the  Natchez  pelvic  hone.  (After  Leidy.)


Sir  Charles  Lyell,
in  an  interview  with
Professor  Leidy —
expressed  the  opinion
that,  although  the  hu¬
man  bone  may  have
b  e  e  n  contemporaneous
with  those  of  the  ex¬
tinct  a  n  i  m  a  1  s  with
w  h  i  e  h  it  ha  d  been
found,  he  thought  it
more  probable  it  had
fallen  from  one  of  the
Indian  graves  and  had
become  mingled  with
the  older  fossils  which
were  dislodged  from  the
deeper  part  of  the  cliff.

.  .  .  At  the  time  of

making  his  communica¬
tion  Doctor  Dickeson
intimated  that  the  hu¬
man  bone  was  found  at


a  lower  level,  beneath  bones  of  the  Megalonyx,  etc.,  but  this  would  not  prove  its
age  to  be  greater  than  or  contemporaneous  with  the  latter.  In  the  wear  of  the
cliff  the  upper  portion,  with  the  Indian  graves  and  human  bones,  would  be
likely  to  fall  first  and  the  deeper  portion  with  the  older  fossils  subsequently  on
the  latter.


HRDLICKA]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


19


Professor  Leidy  gave  the  accompanying  illustration  (figure  2)  of
the  pelvic  bone  in  question.  It  is  seen  to  be  a  defective  right  os
innominatum,  which,  on  comparison  with  a  similar  recent  Indian
bone,  shows  nothing  peculiar.  This  is  really  all  that  can  he  said
regarding  it,  and  it  would  be  quite  useless  to  speculate  as  to  its
antiquity.  TIad  the  geological  evidence  been  conclusive  in  referring
the  find  to  the  Champlain  or  another  late  geological  period,  the  soina-
tological  features  of  the  hone  would  not  form  an  insuperable  objec¬
tion  to  this  disposition  of  it.

VI.— THE  LAKE  MONROE  (FLORIDA)  BONES

In  IV.  Usher's  chapter  on  Geology  and  Paleontology  in  connection
with  human  origins,  in  Nott  and  Gliddon’s  Types  of  Mankind,®  we
find  an  account  by  Professor  Agassiz  of  fossilized  and  supposedly
ancient  human  “jaws  with  perfect  teeth  and  portions  of  a  foot,”
discovered  apparently  about  1852  or  1853  by  Count  F.  de  Pourtales
“  in  a  bluff  upon  the  shores  of  Lake  Monroe,”  Florida.  “  The  mass  in
which  they  were  found  is  a  conglomerate  of  rotten  coral-reef  lime¬
stone  and  shells,  mostly  ampularias  of  the  same  species  now  found  in
the  St.  John  River,  which  drains  Lake  Monroe.”  The  deposit  is  of
lacustrine  origin  and  contains  remains  of  animal  forms  that  are  still
in  existence.  Its  age  Agassiz  could  not  give  with  precision ;  it  was
considered  certain  by  him,  however,  that  “  the  whole  of  the  southern
extremity  of  Florida,  with  the  Everglades,  has  been  added  to  that
part  of  the  continent  since  the  basin  has  been  in  existence,  in  which
the  conglomerate  with  human  bones  has  been  accumulating.”  Cal¬
culations  based  on  the  growth  of  the  peninsula  and  its  duration  in
a  desert  state  left  Professor  Agassiz  still  “  ten  thousand  years,  dur¬
ing  which  it  should  be  admitted  that  the  mainland  was  inhabited

O

by  man.”

The  foregoing,  unfortunately,  seems  to  be  the  only  account  of  the
specimen.  It  is  mentioned  by  Lyell 6  without  any  further  particu¬
lars.  It  is  not  stated  at  what  depth  the  human  bones  were  discov¬
ered  or  in  what  association.  There  is,  finally,  nothing  known  as  to
the  physical  characteristics  of  the  specimens  beyond  the  fact  that
“the  teeth  were  perfect,”  and  nothing  as  to  their  fate.  On  the
whole,  the  claim  to  antiquity  of  this  particular  find  is  not  a  strong
one.  Fossilization  itself  means  in  Florida  but  little,  as  the  process
is  even  now  going  on  in  many  portions  of  the  peninsula.  There  is  but
one  possible  conclusion  regarding  the  Lake  Monroe  bones,  which  is
that  they  can  not,  on  the  existing  evidence,  be  accepted  as  proofs  of
the  presence  of  early  man  on  this  continent.


“Excerpts  here  given  are  from  10th  ed.,  352-353,  1871.

1  The  Geological  Evidences  of  the  Antiquity  of  Man,  3d  ed.,  44-45,  London,  1863.


20


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


V II.— THE  SODA  CREEK  SKELETON

Soda  creek  is  situated  in  Colorado,  in  longitude  105°  40',  latitude
39°  35',  at  an  altitude  of  about  G,570  feet.  There  are  numerous
springs  in  the  locality,  some  hot  and  some  cold,  the  water  of  which
deposits  mineral  substances.  In  September,  1860,  according  to  a
report  by  E.  L.  Berthoud,  C.  E.a —

Two  miners,  who  had  been  for  two  months  and  a  half  opening  a  mining  claim
about  200  yards  southwest  of  the  springs  and  at  the  foot  of  the  hill  marked
on  the  map  of  Soda  hill,  reached  at  last  in  the  gravel,  bowlders,  and  rocky
deposits  of  Soda  bar  a  depth  of  22  feet ;  here  at  this  depth  and  about  3  yards
from  the  foot  of  the  hill  slope  they  found  a  human  skeleton  lying  on  its  face
and  embedded  in  a  deposit  of  gravel,  sand,  small  bowlders,  and  fragments  of
the  adjacent  rock  in  situ.  .  .  .  The  skeleton,  all  whose  larger  bones,

though  very  light  and  porous,  were  yet  intact,  and  whose  skull  was  also  entire,
was  in  a  very  tolerable  state  of  preservation.  Under  the  skeleton  and  about  2
feet  lower  down  they  found  upon  the  surface  of  what  the  miners  call  “  red
rock,”  the  trunk,  limbs,  and  roots  of  a  small  [line  tree,  identical  in  all  respects
with  the  red  pine  (P.  variabilis)  of  the  adjacent  slopes.  The  bark  appeared
charred  and  blackened,  the  wood  was  light,  yellow,  and  apparently  sound.
.  .  .  On  exposure  to  air,  however,  it  soon  became  soft  and  crumbled,  more

like  rotten  or  Water-soaked  wood.  The  roots  and  limbs  appeared  as  if  vio¬
lently  compressed  or  forced  in  the  seams  of  the  underlying  rock.  There,  then,
was  a  point  conclusively  shown — namely,  that  prior  to  the  cause  which  covered
Soda  hill,  Soda  bar,  and  Dry  Diggings  hill  with  its  enormous  beds  of  gravel,
sand,  and  bowlders,  and  its  native  gold  .  .  .  man  roved  and  dwelt  in  this
region.  .  .  .  Whatever  cataclysm  buried  this  member  of  the  human  family,

be  he  Aztec,  Indian,  Esquimaux,  or  Mound-builder,  he  is  for  the  region  above
mentioned  “  homo  diluvii  testis.’'

Berthoud’s  account  leaves  much  to  be  desired  from  the  standpoint
of  geology.  It  gives  the  impression  that  the  material  covering  the
human  remains  and  the  pine  may  have  been  talus  of  no  great  antiq¬
uity.  The  skeleton  represented  undoubtedly  an  intentional  burial,
otherwise  the  bones  would  have  been  crushed.  It  did  not  seem  to
present  anything  very  extraordinary  and  was  not  fossilized.  There
is  no  report  of  a  scientific  examination  of  the  bones,  and  no  clew  is
given  as  to  what  became  of  them.  Under  these  circumstances  it  is
impossible  to  arrive  at  any  definite  conclusion  regarding  the  antiquity
of  the  find.  What  evidence  there  is  speaks  more  against  than  for  any
considerable  geological  age  of  the  skeleton.

VIII.— THE  CHARLESTON  BONES

Emil  Schmidt,  in  his  Zur  Urgeschichte  Nordamerikas,6  gives  nearly
all  that  is  known  concerning  these  specimens.  It  appears  that  Prof.
F.  S.  Holmes,  geologist  and  paleontologist,  of  Charleston,  while  ex-

“  Description  of  the  Hot  Springs  of  Soda  Creek  .  .  .  together  with  the  remarkable

discovery  of  a  human  skeleton  and  a  fossil  pine  tree  in  the  bowlder  and  gravel  formation
of  Soda  bar,  Oct.  13,  1860,  Proceedings  of  Academy  of  Natural  Sciences,  Philadelphia,
xvm,  342-345,  1866.

bAreli.  f.  Anthrop.,  v,  250  et  seq.,  1871-72.


hrdliCka]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


21


ploring  the  banks  of  the  Ashley  river  about  10  miles  above  the
city,  discovered  human  bones,  fragments  of  pottery,  etc.,  together
with  the  bones  of  the  mastodon.  Professor  Leidy,  who  was  sent  by
the  Philadelphia  Academy  of  Sciences  to  examine  the  locality,  actu¬
ally  found  human  bones  associated  with  those  of  the  mastodon,  but
there  appeared  in  the  same  connection  also  a  fragment  of  porcelain.

Later,  in  following  his  investigations  in  the  same  region,  Pro¬
fessor  Holmes  discovered  further  evidences  of  (he  coexistence  of
man  with  extinct  animals;  these  were  particularly  a  human  lower
jaw,  a  tibia,  a  femur,  some  stone  implements,  and  potsherds,  which
were  dug  out  personally  from  an  undisturbed  old  deposit.  The  lower
jaw  was  that  of  rn  adolescent,  and  showed  a  prominent  chin  and
strong  muscular  impressions;  the  teeth  were  normal.  The  femur  also
showed  strong  development.

It  seems  that  Professor  Holmes  has  never  published  his  account  of
the  finds  just  mentioned,  and  there  is  consequently  but  little  to  aid
us  in  the  effort  to  reach  a  conclusion.  Schmidt  was  inclined  to  accede

to  the  opinion  that  the  bones  were  geologically  ancient,  and  sug¬

gested  that  they  belonged  to  a  man  of  the  Champlain  period.  This
view  can  not  be  sustained  in  the  absence  of  more  definite  information.
Chemical  and  detailed  physical  characteristics  of  the  skeletal  parts
are  wanting,  and  the  fate  of  the  bones  is  unknown.  They  are  not  in
the  Charleston  Museum.

IX. — THE  CALAVERAS  SKULL

The  specimen  known  as  the  Calaveras  skull  is  a  portion  of  a  some¬
what  fossilized  human  cranium  preserved  in  the  Peabody  Museum

at  Cambridge.  Prof.  F.  W.  Putnam,  director  of  this  museum,

kindly  permitted  the  writer  to  examine  the  specimen  thoroughly  and
furnished  the  two  photographs  which  accompany  this  section.

I  Iistory

It  is  not  necessary  to  review  in  this  place  all  that  has  been  written
about  the  skull  in  question;  the  original  detailed  account  of  it  will
be  found  in  J.  I).  Whitney’s  Auriferous  Gravels  of  the  Sierra  Nevada
of  California,®  and  a  resume  of  this,  with  additional  information  and
critical  remarks,  is  contained  in  W.  H.  Holmes’s  thorough  Review
of  the  Evidence  relating  to  Auriferous  Gravel  Man  in  California,
published  in  the  Report  of  the  Smithsonian  Institution  for  1899. 6
It  suffices  to  say  that  the  skull  was  reported  as  having  been  found
in  1866,  in  Bald  hill,  near  Altaville,  Calaveras  county,  California,
by  a  mine  operator,  in  a  shaft  which  he  had  sunk,  at  the  depth  of


“  Page  207  et  se<|.  :  Cambridge,  Mass.,  1879.


6  Page  419-472;  Washington,  1901.


92


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


about  130  feet  from  the  surface,  where  there  was  a  layer  of  gravel."
This  gravel  lay  beneath  seven  alternate  layers  of  lava  and  gravel,
and  dates  from  about  the  middle  Tertiary  period.  The  skull  had
adhering  to  it,  or  at  least  to  the  lower  part  of  its  face  and  to  its  base,
a  “  conglomerate  mass  of  ferruginous  earth,  water-worn  pebbles  of
much  altered  volcanic  rock,  calcareous  tufa,  and  fragments  of  bones,"
and  “  a  thin  calcareous  incrustation  appears  to  have  covered  the
whole  skull  when  found.”  (Whitney,  page  208.)  On  chemical  exam¬
ination  by  Mr.  Sharpies,  the  specimen  was  found  to  “  have  lost  nearly
all  its  organic  matter,”  and  “  a  large  portion  of  the  phosphate  of
lime  had  been  replaced  by  the  carbonate  (phosphate  of  lime  33.79,
carbonate  of  lime  62.03  parts  in  100).  In  other  words,  it  was  in  a
fossilized  condition.”

After  the  lapse  of  more  than  two  years  from  the  date  of  its  dis¬
covery  the  skull  came  indirectly  into  the  possession  of  Professor
Whitney,  at  that  time  State  Geologist  of  California,  and  was  finally
placed  in  the  Peabody  Museum.  The  specimen  has  received  much
attention  in  the  press.  The  archeological  aspect  of  the  find  has  been
dealt  with  by  Prof.  W.  IT.  Holmes  in  two  reports,6  which  give  ac¬
counts  not  only  of  the  skull,  but  of  all  the  reported  California  gravel
finds  indicating  the  presence  of  early  man,  and  their  Avell-substan-
tiated  conclusions  should  be  consulted  in  this  connection.  As  to  the
physical  characteristics  of  the  skull,  the  only  original  data  extant  are
those  of  Professor  Wyman,  included  in  the  report  of  J.  I).  Whitney.
There  are  three  subsequent  accounts,  b}^  E.  Schmidt,0  J.  Kollmann,'?
and  George  A.  Dorsey, e  respect ively ;  but  all  of  these  are  based  on
Wyman’s  measurements  and  on  study  of  the  illustrations  of  the  skull,
not  on  personal  examination  of  the  specimen.  This  deficiency  will  be
remedied  in  this  paper  so  far  as  possible.

Physical  Ciiarac  ters

The  specimen  (plate  i)  is  rather  heavy  (lof  ounces— 446  grams),
though  its  weight  is  due  mainly  to  adhering  mineral  matter.  It  is  a
very  defective  skull,  lacking  nearly  the  whole  occipital,  both  parietals,
the  right  temporal,  parts  of  the  left  temporal,  sphenoid,  and  superior

“  It  is  nowhere  stated  on  the  authority  of  the  finder  or  of  Professor  Whitney  that  the
skull  was  actually  dug  out  from  t lie  gravel.  Air.  Mattison.  who  found  it  in  the  mine,
states  simply  (Whitney,  p.  208)  that  "he  took  the  skull  from  his  shaft,  in  February,
1800,  with  some  pieces  of  wood  found  near  it."

11  Preliminary  Revision  of  the  Evidence  relating  to  Auriferous  Gravel  Man  in  Califor¬
nia,  American  Anthropologist,  n.  s.,  i,  107-121,  614-645,  1890;  Review  of  the  Evidence
relating  to  Auriferous  Gravel  Man  in  California,  Smithsonian  Iicport  for  1800,  410-472,
Washington,  1001.

0  Zur  TJrgesehichte  Nordamerikas,  Arch.  f.  Anthrop.,  v,  253-250,  1871-72  ;  also  in  Die
iiltesten  Spuren  des  Menschen  in  Nordamerika,  43  et  seq..  Hamburg,  1887.

d  Holies  Alter  der  Menscbenrassen,  Zritschr.  f.  Ethnol.,  xvi,  185-101,  1884.

*  In  Holmes’s  Review  of  the  Evidence  relating  to  Auriferous  Gravel  Alan  in  California,
465-466.


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY  BULLETIN  33  PLATE  I


a


THE  CALAVERAS  (CALIFORNIA)  SKULL  AS  IT  WAS  IN  1902
a  Front  view;  b  side  view


hrdlicka]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


28


maxilla,  and  the  lower  jaw.  The  basilar  process  and  the  antra  of
Highmore  show  some  firmly  adhering  material  referred  to  as  gravel,
and  in  many  places  the  specimen  has  remnants  of  a  coating  (0.25  to
1.5  mm.  thick)  of  apparently  calcareous  stalagmite.

The  general  somatological  aspect  of  the  skull  is  in  no  way  extraor¬
dinary.  It  is  plainly  a  male  skull  and  belonged  to  an  individual  of
advanced  years,  but  not  of  extreme  age.  In  form  it  was  in  all  prob¬
ability  mesocephalic,  and  of  medium  height.  The  face  was  only  mod¬
erately  broad  for  a  male;  its  height  can  not  be  ascertained  on  account
of  an  advanced  absorption  of  the  upper  alveolar  process,  but  was
apparently  in  no  respect  unusual.  The  nose  is  very  slightly  plat-
yrhynic  (nasal  index  53.5),  a  form  that  occurs  quite  commonly
among  Indian  crania;  and  the  orbits  (with  breadth  measured  from
dacryon)  are  megaseme  (index  of  right  95,  of  left  91),  a  condition
not  infrequent  among  Indians.  Facial  prognathism  was  insignifi¬
cant;  aveolar  prognathism  can  not  be  determined.

The  forehead  is  of  medium  height  and  prominence,  showing  no
sloping  such  as  might  he  expected  in  a  male  skull  of  a  low  form.  The
temporal  ridges  are  not  pronounced  or  high.  The  supraorbital
ridges  are  strong,  but  not  more  so  than  in  some  modern  masculine
Indian  crania ;  they  extend,  however,  along  the  whole  superior
border  of  the  orbits,  a  much  less  common  form.  The  glabella  is  a
little  less  prominent  than  the  ridges;  as  a  result  of  this  formation
there  is  between  the  latter  a  shallow  depression.

The  face  is  somewhat  damaged,  but  permits  of  a  number  of  desir¬
able  determinations.  The  nasion  depression  is  pronounced;  there  is
nothing  peculiar  about  the  nasal  bridge  or  bones;  the  nasal  aperture
is  pyriform,  with  the  left  notch  somewhat  lower  than  the  right;
there  are  shallow  nasal  gutters  (not  rare  in  the  Indian)  ;  and  the
spine  was  well  developed.  The  orbits  are  slightly  ovoid  in  shape,
their  distal  part  being  higher  than  the  proximal,  and  deep;  their
borders  are  not  sharp.  The  malars  are  of  ordinary  form  and  mod¬
erate  size,  not  unusually  protruding;  the  marginal  process  is  not
large;  the  zygoma;  are  strong;  the  submalar  (“canine”)  fossa?  are
fairly  well  hollowed.  The  upper  alveolar  border  shows  a  loss  of  all
the  teeth  and  in  front  an  advanced  alveolar  absorption  (to  within
11  mm.  of  the  nasal  notch  on  the  right,  and  to  within  even  a  shorter
distance  on  the  left,  side)  ;  but  as  an  indication  of  age  these  condi¬
tions  do  not  agree  with  the  state  of  the  sutures,  and  are  there¬
fore  probably  of  pathological  origin.  The  palate  offers  nothing
exceptional.

What  remains  of  the  temporal  hones  presents  ordinary  features,
with  a  medium-sized  masculine  mastoid.

As  for  the  base,  the  glenoid  cavities  are  deep  and  rather  narrow
antero-posteriorly ;  there  are  high  spinous,  and  quite  high  vaginal,


24


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


processes,  but  the  styloids  were  apparently  not  much  developed,  a
condition  often  observed  in  the  Indian.  The  petrous  portions  are
seen  in  a  moderate  depression  between  the  basilar  process  and  the
sphenoid,  about  as  in  the  average  Indian.0

Ventrally  may  be  seen  a  moderately  high  metopic  crest;  impressions
of  brain  convolutions  are  perceptible,  especially  over  the  orbital  roof,
but  are  not  pronounced;  the  sella  turcica  is  normal,  the  clinoids  are
rather  stout,  (lie  anterior  and  posterior  being  united  on  the  left :  the
dorsum  sella;  shows  in  its  superior  border  a  deep  (4  mm.)  median
notch.

The  thickness  of  the  frontal  bone  is  not  greater  than  in  many
Indian  crania  (see  measurements).

There  are  traces  of  the  nasal  suture,  but  its  exact  state  can  not  be
determined;  the  naso-maxillary  and  the  naso-frontal  articulations
seem  to  be  patent  on  both  sides;  the  malo-frontals  show  no  oblitera¬
tion  ;  there  is  no  trace  of  metopic  separation ;  the  spheno-frontal,
which  can  be  seen  on  the  left,  seems  to  show  some  synostosis,  but  the
spheno-malar-'  and  the  spheno-temporal  Sutures  appear  open;  there
are  no  signs  of  obliteration  in  the  coronal  and  in  the  right  spheno¬
parietal  suture,  and  the  same  statement  applies  to  what  remains  of
the  right  temporo-parietal  and  the  temporo-occipital  articulations.

Irrespective  of  its  large  defects,  the  specimen  shows  remarkably
few  injuries,  and  it  is  wholly  inconceivable  that  it  should  have  been
rolled  about  in  a  stream  bed  or  subjected  to  pressure  in  gravel  deposits.

The  measurements  permitted  by  the  condition  of  the  skull  are  as
follows:


Diameter  frontal  minimum _ centimeters _

Diameter  frontal  maximum,  about _ do _

Nasion-bregma  arc  _ ;__do _

Nose :

Height  (nasion  to  lowest  point  of  notch  border)  —

Right  side _ ; _ do _

Left  side _ do _

Breadth,  maximum _ do _

Orbits :


Height-

Right  _ do _

Left - , _ l_do _

Breadth  (from  dacryon)  —

Right - do _

Left - do _

Interorbital  diameter _  do _

Greatest  surface  length  of  (he  left  temporal  (measured  with  a  tape)  _do _

Thickness  of  hone  at  frontal  eminences _ millimeters _

Maximum  thickness  of  frontal  bone,  near  bregma _ do _

Diameter  bizygomatic  maximum,  about _ centimeters..


10.  1
12.  0

18.  1


4.  0

5.  05


Q

o


.  s


4.  0
3.9
2.5
9.  95
5  to  G
8

14.3


11  In  undeveloped  and  low-form  crania  the  inferior  surface  of  the  petrous  bones  is  on  a
level  with  the  neighboring  surfaces,  while  in  the  best  developed  skulls  of  whites  and
other  i  nces  the  petrous  portions  appear  deep  in  a  depression.


hrduCka]


SK F.LETM .  REMAINS


25


Comparisons

A  study  of  the  Calaveras  skull  as  compared  with  other  crania,
particularly  with  those  of  California  Indians,  has  been  made  by
Dr.  Jeffreys  Wyman  and  Dr.  George  A.  Dorsey.  Doctor  Wyman’s
conclusions  are  that — 0

(1)  The  skull  presents  no  signs  of  having  belonged  to  an  inferior  race.  In
its  breadth  it  agrees  with  the  other  crania  from  California,  except  those  of  the
Diggers,  hut  surpasses  them  in  (he  other  particulars  in  which  comparisons  have
been  made.  This  is  especially  obvious  in  the  greater  prominence  of  the  fore¬
head  and  the  capacity  of  its  chamber.  (2)  In  so  far  as  it  differs  in  dimensions
from  the  other  crania  from  California,  it  approaches  the  Esquimaux.

In  this  report  there  are  two  points  to  which  exception  must  be
taken.  The  skull  lacks  both  parietals  and  one  whole  temporal ;  there¬
fore  a  measurement  of  its  breadth  (given  by  Wyman  as  15  cm.)
is  impossible,  and  even  an  approximation  to  it  must  remain  uncertain;
and  there  is  absolutely  nothing  about  the  specimen  which  approaches
the  high  and  narrow-nosed,  broad  and  flat-faced,  and  narrow,  keel-
vaulted  Eskimo.  Doctor  Dorsey’s  account h  is  more  circumstantial,
but  unfortunately  is  based  on  a  comparison  of  the  Calaveras  skull  as
known  from  Whitney’s  account  and  measurements,  including  the
slightly  misleading  illustrations,  and  not  from  the  specimen  itself,
with  a  skull  of  a  Digger  Indian  from  Calaveras  county.  Doctor
Dorsey  recognizes  the  skull  as  that  of  a  male,  and  in  summarizing
states  that- —

While  the  comparison  of  an  actual  skull  with  the  drawings  of  a  fragment
of  another  must  be  unsatisfactory,  yet  the  conclusion  is  necessary  that  the
two  skulls  have  the  same  general  features  and  may  easily  he  pronounced  of
one  and  the  same  type.

The  National  Museum  collection  includes  two  crania  and  some
fragments  of  skulls  from  caves  in  Calaveras  county,  collected  and
donated  in  1857  by  J.  S.  Hittell,  of  San  Francisco.  All  these  speci¬
mens  had,  and  most  of  them  still  retain,  inside  and  outside,  a  coating
of  grayish  calcareous,  stalagmitic  deposit,  much  like  that  which
partially  covers  the  Calaveras  skull;  in  fact,  on  fracture,  the  deposit
in  the  two  cases,  so  far  as  the  unaided  eye  can  perceive,  is  identical  in
character.  None  of  the  cave  skulls  or  fragments  show  any  adhesion
of  gravel.  Both  the  entire  specimens  are  male  adult  skulls,  but  one
(cat.  no.  225171)  does  not  appear  entirely  normal,  and  its  orbits  are
affected  in  form  and  size  by  very  heavy  supraorbital  ridges,  so  that
only  one  of  the  specimens  (cat.  no.  225172)  appears  fit  for  comparison
with  the  Calaveras  skull.  It  is  a  mesocephalic  cranium  (cephalic
index  75.5)  of  moderate  height  (basion-bregma  13.6  cm.)  and  general
good  development;  it  belonged  to  a  person  of  about  fifty-five  years  of

“  J.  D.  Whitney,  Auriferous  Gravels  of  the  Sierra  Nevada,  273.  Cambridge,  Mass.,  1879.

"In  William  II.  Holmes's  Review  of  the  Evidence  relating  to  Auriferous  Gravel  Man  in
California,  Smithsonian  Report  for  1899,  405-406,  Washington,  1901.


26


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[boll.  33


age.  It  is  not  a  fresh  skull ;  the  bones  are  quite  brittle  and  seem  to  be
largely  devoid  of  animal  matter,  but  no  claim  is  made  that  it  is  verj^
ancient,  and  there  is  no  probability  that  it  is  so.

This  cave  skull  (figure  3)  is  in  all  essential  features  closely  related
to  the  Calaveras  specimen.  It  has  similarly  strongly  developed
supraorbital  ridges,  extending  along  the  entire  superior  border  of  the
orbits;  similar  depression  between  the  ridges,  over  the  glabella;  simi¬
larly  marked  nasal  depression  below  the  glabella,  and  about  the  same
development  of  the  marginal  process  of  the  malar,  of  this  bone  itself,
of  the  zygoma,  and  of  the  nasal  spine.  There  seem  to  have  been  pres-


Fig.  3. — Cave  skull,  Calaveras  county,  California  ;  side  view.

ent  also  slight  nasal  gutters.  The  orbits  in  the  specimen  catalogued
as  no.  225172  are  slightly  more  quadrangular,  but  otherwise  are  nearly
like  those  in  the  Calaveras  skull.  The  alveolar  process  in  no.  225172
has  suffered  no  absorption ;  owing  to  this  fact  and  to  the  absence  from
the  cave  skull  of  injuries,  the  lower  parts  of  the  faces  of  the  two  speci¬
mens  differ  in  appearance,  but  this  dissimilarity  is  not  morphological.
The  forehead  in  no.  225172,  though  slightly  narrower  than  that  in  the
Calaveras  skull,  is  very  nearly  as  well  arched.  On  the  whole,  the
structural  resemblance  between  this  cave  skull  and  the  Calaveras
cranium  are  close  enough  not  only  for  racial,  but  even  for  tribal,
relationship.


hrdliCka]  SKELETAL  REMAINS  27


'1'he  measurements  of  both  specimens  which  could  be  secured  e:  sactly
or  with  a  close  degree  of  approximation  are  as  follows:


Calaveras

skull.

Cave  skull
(no.
225172).

Diameter  frontal  minimum . .

cm.

10.1

cm.

9.4

11.8

Diameter  frontal  maximum .

a  12.  0

Nasion-bregma  arc .

13. 1

12.3

5. 35

Nose:

Height,  maximum . .

5. 06

Breadth,  maximum .  .

2.7

2.7

Index,  maximum .

53.5

50.5

Orbits:

Mean  height .

3. 67

3. 67

Mean  breadth .

3.  95

3.90

93. 0

9U.2

2.7

Interorbital  diameter .  .

2.5

Greatest  surface  length  of  left  temporal  (measured  with  a  tape) .

9. 95

9.9

Diameter  bizvgomatic  maximum . .

a  14.  3

ol4.3

Approximate.


The  thickness  of  the  frontal  bone  could  not  be  measured  in  the  cave
skull  on  account  of  the  stalagmitic  deposit  inside,  but  it  is  apparently
very  nearly  the  same  as  that  in  the  Calaveras  specimen.

The  measurements  show  a  somewhat  smaller  frontal  bone  in  no.
225172,  which  probably  indicates  that  the  Calaveras  skull  as  a  whole
was  larger.  At  all  events  such  differences  are  not  outside  of  the  scope
of  individual  variation  within  a  single  people.  The  remaining  meas¬
urements,  particularly  the  important  nasal  and  orbital  indexes,  are  so
much  alike  that  on  the  basis  of  these  and  of  the  other  resemblances  it
is  impossible  to  do  otherwise  than  to  pronounce  the  two  specimens  of
the  same  type,  which  necessarily  leads  to  the  implication  that  the
Calaveras  skull  is  geologically  recent.

There  is  one  feature  connected  with  the  Calaveras  skull  besides  the
scarcity  of  secondary  injuries  which  may  not  have  received  the  con¬
sideration  it  deserves;  this  is  its  calcareous  coating,  which,  though  col¬
ored  on  the  surface,  is  white  and  crystalline  on  fracture,  exactly  like
that  of  the  cave  skulls.  How  could  such  a  coating  have  been  formed,
and  formed  with  much  uniformity,  over  the  surfaces  of  a  skull  packed
in  sand  or  mud  and  gravel  of  an  ancient  river?  It  is  probable  that,
under  special  circumstances,  bones  manifest  some  affinity  for  calcare¬
ous  matter  in  solution,  and  it  is  known  that  animal  fossils  with  some¬
what  similar  coating  have  been  recovered  from  ancient  sands  or  grav¬
els.  This  phenomenon  is  most  commonly  observed  in  caves  or  crevices
into  which  water  percolates,  carrying  lime  in  solution,  and,  in  view  of
the  presence  of  numerous  such  caves  and  crevices  in  the  Calaveras
region,  the  occurrence  of  typical  cavern  deposits  on  the  surfaces  of  the


28


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


Calaveras  specimen  must  have  great  weight  in  favor  of  its  cavern
origin.  A  mass  of  gravel,  bones,  etc.,  adhered  to  the  base  of  the  skull
when  discovered,  but  this  was  not  firmly  solidified  and  could  be
removed  without  injury  to  the  bone.  It  had  very  much  the  appear¬
ance  of  debris  from  some  cave  or  crevice,  cemented  to  the  specimen
while  the  latter  was  being  coated  with  stalagmitic  deposit.  The  infil¬
tration  or  fossilization  of  (he  Calaveras  skull  furnishes  no  reliable
test  of  its  antiquity.  It  will  be  shown  later  in  this  paper  that  even
siliceous  fossilization  of  bones  can  take  place  near  the  surface  of  the
ground,  and  in  all  probability  has  taken  place  within  a  geologically
insignificant  period.  The  process  is  regulated  wholly  by  the  local
mineralogical  conditions  and  the  results  are  of  little  or  no  value  as
chronological  criteria.


X. — THE  ROCK  BLUFF  CRANIUM

The  specimen  known  as  the  Rock  Blutf  skull  was  reported  on  by
Meigs, a  Schmidt,6  and  Ivol lmanny  and  its  claim  to  geological  antiq¬
uity  is  based  mainly  on  certain  remarks  found  in  Schmidt’s  account.
According  to  Meigs,  the  skull  was  found,  with  a  lower  jaw —

...  in  June,  1800,  in  a  fissure  of  the  rock,  at  Rock  Bluff,  on  the  Illinois  river
where  it  is  crossed  by  the  fortieth  parallel.  The  fissure,  which  is  ?>  feet  wide,
was  filled  with  the  drift  material  of  this  region,  consisting  of  clay,  sand,  and
broken  stone,  the  whole  being  covered  with  a  stratum  of  surface  soil.  In  this
bed,  which  apparently  had  been  undisturbed  since*  the  deposit,  was  found  the
skull  under  consideration,  at  the  depth  of  8  feet.

After  giving  a  description  of  the  specimen,  which  contains  several
inaccuracies,  Meigs  speaks  of  a  number  of  Indian  crania  which  show
resemblances  to  that  from  Rock  Bluff,  and  concludes  as  follows:

Bearing  in  mind  the  locality  in  which  «it  was  found,  the  skull  under  considera¬
tion  is  so  far  unique  in  its  ethnical  character,  that  I  do  not  feel  authorized  to
refer  it  to  any  of  the  aboriginal  American  cranial  forms  with  which  I  am
acquainted.  If  the  position  in  which  it  was  discovered  be  any  evidence  of  its
age,  it  belongs,  in  all  probability,  to  an  earlier  inhabitant  of  the  American  con¬
tinent  than  the  present  race  of  Indians.

At  the  time  of  Doctor  Meigs’s  writing  there  was  apparently  extant
no  important  evidence  of  the  geological  antiquity  of  the  find,  and  had
not  (he  skull  been  of  rather  inferior  type,  it  would  hardly  have
attracted  particular  attention.  Four  years  later,  however,  Schmidt
gave  a  detailed  description  and  measurements  of  the  skull  accom¬
panied  by  the  statement  that  he  was  in  possession  of  a  letter  from

0  J.  Aitken  Meigs,  Description  of  a  Human  Skull  in  the  Collection  of  the  Smithsonian
Institution,  Rmitlixonian  Report  for  18(57,  412-415,  Washington,  1868.

6  E.  Schmidt,  Zur  I 'dgeschichte  Nordamevlkas,  An  h  f.  Anthrop.,  v.  237-244.  1871-72,

c  .1.  Kollmann,  Holies  Alter  der  Menschenrassen,  Zeitschr.  f.  Ethnol.,  xvi,  101-193,
1884.


HRDLlfcKA]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


29


Professor  Baird,  at  that  time  Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Smithsonian
Institution,  to  the  effect  that  the  locality  at  which  the  Rook  Bluff
skull  was  discovered  had  been  examined  by  u  McConnell,”  who  found
that  the  drift  in  which  the  specimen  lay  was  in  no  way  disturbed  and
that,  therefore,  the  skull  was  not  intrusive,  but  coincided  in  age  with
the  formation  of  the  deposit.  Schmidt  ends  his  account  with  the
opinion  that  the  age  of  the  two  specimens  (skull  and  lower  jaw,  the
latter  of  which  he  considered  as  belonging  to  a  different  body),  pro¬
vided  it  is  established  that  they  were  found  in  undisturbed  drift,  is
very  considerable  and  referable  to  “  the  Champlain,  or  even  to  the
glacial,  epoch.”

A  search  in  the  archives  of  the  Smithsonian  Institution  resulted
in  finding  two  letters  from  Mr.  McConnell,  of  Jacksonville,  Illinois,
the  donor  of  the  skull.  It  is  not  disclosed  who  Mr.  McConnell  was;
there  appear  to  be  no  contributions  under  that  name  to  the  literature
of  either  geology  or  anthropology.  In  his  letter  of  June  4,  18GG,
addressed  to  Prof.  Joseph  Henry,  is  the  following:

I  have  sent  to  you  by  express  a  small  box  containing  a  human  skull  of  an
unusual  shape  and  formation.  It  is  evidently  not  deformed,  but  a  natural
skull,  and  from  its  shape  and  the  place  where  it  was  found  it  is  believed  not  to
have  belonged  to  any  race  of  men  now  known  to  exist,  and  it  is  conjectured
it  may  have  belonged  to  a  preadamite  race,  if  there  was  any  such  race.  .  .  .

I  have  never  met  with  such  a  formed  head,  either  living  or  dead,  as  this,  and
for  this  reason  I  send  it  to  you,  supposing  from  your  opportunities  in  this
branch  of  science  you  might  determine  if  I  am  right  in  supposing  this  specimen
not  to  have  belonged  to  any  one  of  the  present  races  now  extant.  I  now  will
refer  particularly  to  the  place  where  this  skull  was  found.  The  Illinois  river
.  .  .  has  cut  through  the  various  stratas  down  to  a  level,  and  in  many  cases

below  the  upper  coal-deposits.  Along  the  Illinois  bluff  the  strata  of  rock  cover¬
ing  this  coal  deposit  crop  out.  and  this  rock  is  quarried  for  building  purposes.
In  one  of  these  quarries  a  few  miles  south  of  the  fortieth  degree  of  north  lati¬
tude  this  skull  was  found,  several  feet  of  clay,  sand,  and  broken  stone  were
taken  off  of  the  strata,  and,  in  quarrying,  a  rift  or  seam  in  the  rock  was  found,
about  3  feet  wide,  filled  with  the  same  material  that  covered  the  quarry,  and
in  this  rift  or  seam  in  the  rock,  firmly  embedded  in  this  clay,  sand,  and  broken
material,  this  skull  was  found.  Examination  showed  that  it  had  evidently  been
thrown,  or  washed,  into  that  opening  in  the  rock  with  the  material  that  sur¬
rounded  it.

In  the  neighborhood  of  this  quarry  and  indeed  all  along  the  Illinois  river
are  found  many  mounds,  called  in  this  country  Indian  mounds,  but  evidently
(they)  have  no  connection  with  the  present  race  of  Indians.

In  an  additional  note  to  Professor  Henry,  of  June  11,  1866,  Mr.
McConnell,  besides  enumerating  various  persons  who  would  vouch
for  his  character,  says :

I  have  been  a  long  time  in  the  valley  of  the  Mississippi  and  have  traveled
over  most  of  it  and  have  always  had  a  passion  for  hunting  up  old  relics  and
studying  this  and  geology  by  actual  personal  examination.


30


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[BULL.  33


He  remarks  in  closing  that —

The  only  apparent  doubt  about  the  great  antiquity  of  this  skull  is  its  perfect
preservation,  but  this  is  owing  to  the  material  in  which  it  was  found.  There  are
other  instances  in  this  same  locality  of  like  preservation  not  petrified.

The  foregoing  excerpts  constitute  the  total  of  extant  records  con¬
cerning  the  find.  It  is  plain  that  Mr.  McConnell  was  an  amateur
collector  and  geologist  and  that  the  Rock  Bluff  skull  attracted  his
attention  mainly  by  its  unusual  shape.  Ilis  notes  concerning  the
geology  of  the  find  are  so  meager  that  no  important  conclusion  can  be
based  on  them.  That  Schmidt,  and  after  him  Kollmann,  were  in¬
clined  to  class  the  skull  as  geologically  ancient  could  have  been  due
only  to  an  imperfect  acquaintance  with  these  records  and  to  the  low
forehead  of  the  cranium.  At  the  time  of  Schmidt’s  and  Kollmann’s
writings  sufficient  osteological  material  from  the  valley  of  the  Illi¬
nois  river  did  not  exist  to  enable  them  to  determine  the  range  of
cranial  variation  in  that  region.

The  skull  itself  (plate  n,  a)  is  now  part  of  the  National  Museum
collections.  Though  somewhat  injured,  especially  about  the  face,  it  is
remarkably  well  preserved,  in  no  way  deformed  or  affected  by  disease,
and  not  at  all  fossilized.  It  is  dirty  yellowish-white  in  color  and
shows  on  the  left  side  superficial  injuries,  which  appear  as  if  due
partially  to  cutting  with  an  edged  implement  and  partially  to  the
gnawing  of  rodents,  but  these  are  of  little  significance.  Morpho¬
logically,  the  skull  is  quite  remarkable.  Its  most  noteworthy  fea¬
ture,  and  that  which  gives  it  the  appearance  of  a  specimen  of  a  low
type,  is  its  greatly  developed  supraorbital  ridges.  These  are  not  in
the  form  of  arcs,  however,  as  in  anthropoids  and  in  the  human  skulls
of  Spy,  Neanderthal,  and,  to  a  less  extent,  in  the  two  Calaveras  speci¬
mens,  but  involve,  as  general  among  Indians,  only  about  the  median
three-fifths  of  the  supranasal  and  supraorbital  portions  of  the  frontal
bone.  They  project  greatly  forward,  however.  The  extent  of  pro¬
jection  amounts  to  1.1  cm.  on  the  right  and  1  cm.  on  the  left  side  in
front  of  a  plane  passing  through  points  situated  on  the  dorsal  side  of
the  middle  of  the  supraorbital  borders,  or  2.5  cm.  on  the  right  and  2.4
cm.  on  the  left  side,  in  front  of  a  vertical  plane  touching  on  each
side  the  anterior  extremity  of  the  malo-frontal  suture.  This  great
prominence  of  the  ridges  brings  forward  the  whole  supranasal  region,
making  the  forehead,  naturally  quite  low,  appear  still  lower  and
unusually  sloping.  It  is  this  extraordinary  development  of  the
median  part  of  the  supraorbital  ridges  more  than  deficient  develop¬
ment  of  the  frontal  part  of  the  cranial  cavity  that  gives  this  skull
its  aspect  of  inferiority.  There  is  still  another  feature  which  points
to  mediocre  development  of  the  cranium,  and  that  is  the  position
of  the  petrous  wedges0  in  relation  to  the  neighboring  parts  of  the


°  Both  unusually  broad  in  this  specimen.


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


BULLETIN  33


PLATE  II


c


SKULLS  FROM  ILLINOIS

a  The  Rock  Bluff  skull,  side  view;  b  skull  from  mound
near  Alton,  side  view;  c  skull  from  mound  near  Albany,
side  view


HRDLICKA]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


31


base.  When  the  base  of  the  skull  is  viewed  from  above,  it  is  seen
that  the  inferior  surface  of  the  right  petrous  portion  is  but  slightly
depressed,  while  that  of  the  left  is  on  the  level,  and  anteriorly  even
slightly  above  the  level,  of  the  neighboring  parts — always  a  sign  of
rather  deficient  expansion  of  the  cranial  cavity,  for  in  a  well-expanded
specimen  the  petrous  portions  are  seen  in  a  decided  hollow.  The
skull  shows  large  mastoids  and  a  well-developed  superior  occipital
crest,  indicating  a  powerful  musculature;  but  the  temporal  ridges
are  not  pronounced  and  their  nearest  approach  to  the  sagittal  suture
amounts  on  each  side  to  nearly  6  cm.  The  face  was  apparently  but
moderately  prognathic,  as  is  general  in  Indians,  and  the  malars  and
the  zygoma1  were  not  above  medium  in  strength.  The  nasal  spine
is  low  and  not  very  prominent,  but  this  feature  constitutes  no  great
exception  among  Indian  crania.  The  palate,  the  dental  arches,  and
the  teeth  were  of  only  ordinary  dimensions;  the  injured  condition
of  the  arches  and  absence  of  the  teeth  prevent  the  giving  of  meas¬
urements.  The  foramen  magnum  is  large,  indicating  probably  tall
stature.  The  glenoid  cavities  are  deep  and  spacious.  The  lower
jaw,  which  was  originally  with  the  specimen,  is  wanting,  but  accord¬
ing  to  Meigs's  illustration  and  Schmidt’s  account,  it  showed  nothing
that  would  be  uncommon  in  the  lower  jaw  of  a  modern  Indian.

The  National  Museum  collection  contains  a  good  series  of  Indian
crania  obtained  from  mounds  along  the  Illinois  river,  with  which  the
Rock  Bluff  skull  can  be  compared;  and  there  are  several  skulls
from  the  Albany  mounds,  Illinois,  in  the  Davenport  Academy  of
Sciences,  which  can  also  be  utilized  in  this  connection.  These  mound
crania  are  certainly  not  geologically  ancient,  though  they  probably
antedate  the  advent  of  whites  into  the  valley.  They  show  some  variety,
due  possibly  to  tribal  mixture,  but  the  predominating  type  is  dolicho¬
cephalic,  having  rather  low  orbits  and,  in  males,  strongly  developed
supraorbital  ridges,  with  narrow,  low,  and  occasionally  very  sloping,
forehead.  Mesocephalic  forms  appear  occasionally.  With  most  of
these  skulls  the  Rock  Bluff  specimen  agrees  fairly  in  every  essential
particular  that  goes  to  form  a  cranial  type.  Its  supraorbital  ridges
alone  are  cpiite  equaled  by  those  of  no.  4101,  Davenport  Academy
(plate  xiii,  «),  and  in  several  other  specimens  they  are  closely  ap¬
proached.  Were  the  Rock  Bluff  skull  mingled  with  the  rest  of  the
Illinois  River  male  crania  no  observer  would  be  likely  to  single  it  out
as  especially  remarkable.  It  agrees  with  most  of  them  even  in  color.
The  peculiarities  it  presents  are  well  within  the  scope  of  individual
variation.  The  following  table  and  illustrations  (plate  ii,  &,  c)  show
the  resemblances,  which  are  still  further  strengthened  by  an  exami¬
nation  of  the  whole  series  of  specimens  from  the  Illinois  valley.

In  view  of  the  above  facts,  and  irrespective  of  the  wholly  unsatis¬
factory  geological  evidence,  the  Rock  Bluff  skull,  though  regarded


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


•I  9

O  L

as  of  a  low  type,  must  be  classed  with  crania  from  the  Illinois  River
mounds,  with  which  it  has  much  in  common.  The  differences  are  not
sufficient  to  indicate  any  distinct  cranial  variety,  and  the  specimen
can  not  properly  be  regarded  as  evidence  of  a  geologically  early  man
in  North  America.


Measurement s  of  the  Rod;  Bluff  skull,  and  of  four  masculine  Indian  crania  from  mounds

along  the  Illinois  river/1


Rock

Bluff

skull.

Cat.  no.
242966.

Cat.  no.
136773.

Cat.  no.
242982.

Cat.  no.
4401  ("no.
3,”  Albany
mounds),
Davenport
Academy
of  Sciences.

Diameter  antero-posterior  maximum,  centime-

v

ters .

19.5

19.1

20.3

17.8

17.45

19.0

19.0

20.0

17.4

Diameter  lateral  maximum

. do -

13.7

13.6

13.1

13.6

13.4

Cephalic  index .

70.3

71.3

64.5

76. 4

76.  8

Basion-bregma  height _ _

. centimeters..

13.3

13.9

(?)

13.4

13.4

Height  of  nose .

. do....

5. 25

5.10

5.25

5. 25

5.55

Maximum  breadth  of  nose.

. do _

'2. 65

2.80

2.80

2.50

2.40

Nasal  index .

50.5

54. 9

53.3

4  7.6

4  S.S

Height  of  right  orbit .

. centimeters. .

3.3

3.3

3.2

3.4

( b )

4.0

3.9

3.9

82.5

90.  If

82. 1

87. 2

Diameter  frontal  minimum

. centimeters. .

9.7

9.2

9.0

9.7

8.7

Thickness  of  left  parietal . . .

. millimeters. .

5-6

6-8

5-7

5-6

6-8

Circumference  maximum,

above  ridges,  centi-

52.5

52. 1

52.3

49.5

Cranial  capacity .

..cubic  centimeters..

1,430

1, 425

(?)

1,260

a  Several  of  Schmidt’s  measurements  of  the  Rock  Bluff  skull,  particularly  that  of  the  breadth  of  the
specimen,  are  inaccurate,  in  all  probability  on  account  of  a  defective  instrument.
b  Damaged.


XI.— THE  MAN  OF  PENON

The  remains  of  the  so-called  man  of  Pehon  consist  of  a  portion  of
the  skull  and  of  fragments  of  other  parts  of  a  skeleton,  embedded
in  a  variety  of  limestone,  discovered  accidentally  in  1881  in  the
Valley  of  Mexico.  It  was  reported  on  in  the  following  year  by
Mariano  Barcena,0  and  in  1886  the  find  was  described  by  Barcena
and  Antonio  del  Castillo  in  Let  Naturaleza ,  in  Mexico.  The  essential

0  Mariano  Barcena,  Notice  of  Some  Human  Remains  Found  near  the  City  of  Mexico,
The  American  Naturalist,  xtx,  739-744,  August,  1S85  ;  also,  by  same  author,  The
Fossil  Man  of  Tenon,  Mexico,  ibid.,  xx,  633-635,  July,  1886  ;  Noticia  acerca  del  hallazgo
de  restos  humanos  prehistoricos  eu  el  Valle  de  Mexico,  por  Mariano  Barcena  y  Antonio
del  Castillo,  La  Naturaleza ,  vn,  256-264,  entrega  16,  Mexico,  1866;  Nuevos  datos  acerca
de  la  antiguedad  del  hombre,  en  el  Valle  de  Mexico,  por  Mariano  Barcena,  ibid.,  17,
265-270,  Mexico,  1886  ;  Discusiones  acerca  del  hombre  del  reiion  :  Carta  del  Prof.  New¬
berry  al  editor  de  La  Tribuna,  ibid.,  18,  284-285,  Mexico,  1886;  Contestacion  a  las
observaclones  de  la  carta  anterior,  por  Mariano  Barcena,  ibid.,  286-288.


hrdliCka]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


33


points  concerning  the  specimen,  according  to  these  reports,  are  as
follows  :

In  the  month  of  January,  1884,  some  quarrying  was  being  done
by  means  of  dynamite  at  the  foot  of  the  small  hill  known  as  “  Penon
de  los  Banos,’'  about  24  miles  east  of  the  City  of  Mexico,  and  in  the
rocks  of  the  uppermost  layer  loosened  by  the  explosions  a  number
of  human  bones  were  found.  These  were  collected  by  Col.  A.  Obre-
gon,  who  supervised  the  work,  and  were  delivered  by  him  to  the
minister  of  public  works,  who  appointed  Barcena  to  make  a  study
of  them.  Several  days  afterwards  Barcena  and  Castillo,  the  latter
a  professor  of  geology,  explored  the  locality  of  the  find.  It  was
seen  that  the  human  bones  came  from  the  uppermost  layer  of  cal¬
careous  tufa  (in  another  place  called  silicified  calcareous  rock),
covered  with  a  “  recent  formation  of  vegetable  earth  and  marl,”
containing  numerous  fragments  of  pottery  of  Aztec  and  of  modern
origin.  The  calcareous  rock  was  found  not  to  constitute  an  uninter¬
rupted  layer  and  yielded  no  bones  of  animals  or  pieces  of  pottery.
Some  shells  discovered  in  it  belong  to  the  Quaternary  as  well  as  to
the  present-day  waters.  Softer  calcareous  rocks  were  found  in  the
neighborhood  where  were  also  remains  of  pottery  and  roots  of  plants
clearly  modern.  In  the  eastern  part  of  the  hill  there  is  a  hot-water
spring,  which  forms  sediments  somewhat  similar  to  those  containing
the  bones;  but  the  formation  of  the  rock  from  this  source  is  very
slow  and  not  extensive.  The  conclusions  of  Barcena  and  Castillo
were  that  the  deposit:  containing  the  human  bones  tvas  of  lake  origin
and  belonged  to  the  “  Upper  Quaternary,  or  at  least  to  the  base  of
the  present  geological  age.”  Professor  Newberry’s  opinion,  expressed
in  the  Tribune  (see  bibliography,  page  32),  was  that  the  rock  is  a
comparatively  recent  travertine  or  sediment  from  the  thermal  waters
of  that  locality.

The  human  bones  are  firmly  embedded  in  and  their  cavities  are
filled  with  the. rock,  which  is  brownish  gray  in  color  and  very  hard.
The  exposed  parts  are  portions  of  the  skull,  clavicle,  vertebrae,  ribs,
and  the  bones  from  the  upper  and  the  loAver  limbs.  They  lie  in  dis¬
order,  but  are  apparently  parts  of  the  same  skeleton.  The  bones  are
yellowish  in  color  and  present  aspects  of  fossilization.

As  to  the  anthropological  characteristics  of  the  bones,  Barcena
writes  as  follows :  0

The  greater  part  of  the  cranium  having  been  destroyed,  it  was  not  possible
to  determine  its  diameter  and  thus  classify  it.  The  odontological  char¬

acteristics  indicate  that  this  man  belonged  to  an  unmixed  race,  the  teeth  being
set  with  regularity  and  corresponding  perfectly  the  upper  with  the  lower.  They
present  the  peculiarity,  besides,  that  the  canine  teeth  are  not  conical,  but  liuATe

“  The  American  Naturalist,  xix,  743,  1885.


3453— No.  33—07


34


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


the  same  shape  as  the  incisors.  .  .  .  The  size  and  shape  of  the  bones  of  the

limbs  correspond  to  those  of  a  man  of  ordinary  stature,  and  from  the  appear¬
ance  of  the  teeth  the  man  must  have  been  about  40  years  old.

The  writer  saw  the  specimens  in  1902.  The  illustrations  in  La
Naturaleza  (vn,  no.  16)  and  in  The  American  Naturalist  (xix,  no.  8,


Fig.  4. — Remnant  of  the  skull  of  the  “  Ilombre  del  Pefion.”  (After  Barcena,
in  La  Naturaleza ,  vii,  no.  16.)


1885),  particularly  the  former,  give  a  fair  view  of  the  mass  containing
the  skull  (figure  4).  Altogether,  there  is  not  enough  of  the  material
to  warrant  any  conclusion  as  to  the  race  of  the  individual;  what
there  is  suggests  the  Indian.  There  is  no  excessive  prognathism  or


hrdliCka]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


35


receding  lower  jaw,  such  as  might  be  expected  in  geologically  ancient
man.  The  teeth  are  of  ordinary  size;  they  are  worn  off  to  a  quite
marked  extent,  a  condition  which  points  to  rather  coarse  vegetable
diet,  and  is  general  among  Indians  after  early  middle  age.  The  canines
are  in  no  way  morphologically  peculiar,  but  their  points  have  been
worn  off  to  the  level  of  the  incisors;  this  happens  invariably,  unless
the  teeth  are  displaced,  as  the  process  of  attrition  advances.

There  is,  on  the  whole,  nothing  connected  with  the  remnants  of  the
Pehon  skeleton  which  would  indicate  man  of  a  type  earlier  than,  or
radically  different  from,  the  Indian.

XII.— THE  CRANIA  OF  TRENTON

There  is  no  other  region  on  this  continent  that  has  been  brought  as
conspicuously  to  the  attention  of  archeologists  and  students  of  man’s
antiquity  as  that  along  the  Delaware  river  in  and  about  Trenton,  New
Jersey.  This  district  is  rich  in  deposits  of  glacial  gravels,  and  for
nearly  thirty  years  these  have  been  searched  wherever  exposed  for  the
remains  of  early  man  and  his  art.  For  nearly  twenty  years,  with  a
few  intermissions,  Prof.  F.  AY.  Putnam,  of  the  Peabody  Museum,
Cambridge,  Massachusetts,  has  carried  on,  principally  through  Mr.
E.  Yolk,  careful  explorations  of  these  gravels,  with  the  view  of  deter¬
mining  the  question  of  man’s  presence  in  the  Delaware  valley  before
the  advent  there  of  the  Indian.  The  deposits  in  the  valley  have
yielded  many  remains  and  relics  of  the  Lenape  (Delawares),  who
occupied  it  up  to  and  even  for  some  time  after  the  appearance  of  the
whites.  They  have  yielded  also  implements  which  were  thought  to
belong  to  an  earlier  culture,  and  parts  of  human  skeletons  of  a  seem¬
ingly  earlier  people.  Unfortunately,  the  geological  evidence  of  the
presence  of  early  man  in  the  region  is  not  conclusive,  and  the  age  of
many  of  the  remains  is  still  unsettled.  The  idea  that  during  post-
Glacial  time  or  even  before  the  close  of  the  Glacial  period  man  lived
where  Trenton  now  stands  has  found  adherents,  but  the  best-qualified
students  of  the  question,  including  Professor  Putnam  himself,  main¬
tain  a  careful  reserve.

It  was  under  these  circumstances  that  the  writer  was  invited
by  Professor  Putnam,  in  1898,  to  examine  all  the  osteological
material  recovered  in  the  Delaware  valley  and  to  determine  what
the  anatomical  features  of  the  remains  indicate  as  to  the  antiquity  of
the  Trenton  man.  A  detailed  account  of  this  examination  was  pub¬
lished  in  the  Bulletin  of  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History ,
in  1902,  and  the  essentials  are  here  given,  with  additional  observations
based  on  the  writer’s  more  recent  knowledge  of  certain  reports  on
European  crania.


36


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


Most  of  the  skulls  and  other  bones  examined  were  readily  recog¬
nized  as  those  of  Indians,  and  the  so-called  “  gasometer  ”  skull  could
be  referred  to  no  other  people.  There  were  also  a  few  morphologi¬
cally  insignificant  fragments,  the  identity  of  which  remained  doubt¬
ful,0  but  there  were,  in  addition,  two  crania  which,  on  account  of  their
peculiar  features,  could  not  possibly  be  referred  to  the  Delawares
(Lenape)  or  to  any  other  known  American  aborigines.  These  were
the  so-called  Burlington  County  skull  and  another  skull  found  on
the  site  of  the  Riverview  cemetery.  These  specimens  proved  to  be
of  so  much  interest  that  the  writer  feels  justified  in  repeating  here
their  full  history  and  the  results  of  his  examination.

The  Burlington  County  Skull

This  specimen  was  presented  to  the  Peabody  Museum,  Cambridge,
in  1879,  by  Dr.  Charles  C.  Abbott,  of  Trenton,  who  at  that  time  was
actively  interested  in  the  archeology  of  the  valley.  The  skull  was
discovered  accidentally  in  a  field  near  a  small  settlement  known  as
Sykesville.  It  had  rolled  out  of  the  bank  of  a  brook  running
through  a  field.  The  geology  of  the  locality  is  cretaceous,  and  here
the  green  sand  marls  and  stratified  clay  and  sand  are  overlaid  by
the  “  southern-drift,”  as  the  white  pebbles  and  yellow  sand  are  called.
Above  is  a  rich  alluvial  deposit,  but  this  is  not  a  uniform  covering,
the  drift  often  being  exposed  over  considerable  areas.  It  was  in  this
drift,  unassociated  with  other  bones,  that  the  skull  lay.

The  Riverview  Cemetery  Skull

This  specimen,  now  also  in  the  Peabody  Museum,  was  procured  in
1887  by  Mr.  Volk,  whose  account  of  the  find  is  as  follows:

A  man  with  whom  I  was  acquainted,  employed  in  digging  graves  in  the
Riverview  cemetery,  told  me  of  a  skull  he  had  found  in  a  new  plot  in  which
no  burials  had  been  made  before.  On  my  arrival  at  the  cemetery  he  showed
me  the  place ;  it  was  an  elevated  part  of  the  ground,  and  now  there  is  one  grave
there.  The  man  told  me  that  when  he  dug  that  grave  he  struck  with  his
spade,  at  the  depth  of  about  3  feet,  a  human  skull.  There  were  no  other  hones
there,  but  he  noticed  a  few  black  lines  in  the  soil.

The  workman  gave  the  skull  to  Mr.  Volk,  who  in  turn  gave  it  to
the  Peabody  Museum.  On  examining  the  deposits  as  disclosed  in
the  grave,  Mr.  Volk  found  from  “  G  to  10  inches  of  black  soil,  about
18  inches  of  yellow  drift,  and  then  stratified  sand  and  gravel.  This
skull,  according  to  the  information  of  the  man  who  found  it,  was
in  the  apparently  undisturbed  sand  and  gravel.”

"See  original  publication  in  Bulletin  of  American  Museum  of  Natural  History,  xvi,
23-62,  1902.  See  the  same  paper  for  bibliography.


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


BULLETIN  33  PLATE  III


SKULL  FROM  BURLINGTON  COUNTY,  NEW  JERSEY

a  Front  view;  b  side  view;  e  top  view


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


BULLETIN  33  PLATE  IV


SKULL  FROM  RIVERVIEW  CEMETERY,  TRENTON,  NEW  JERSEY
a  Front  view;  b  side  view;  c  top  view


HltDLICKA]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


37


The  Burlington  County  skull  (no.  19513,  Peabody  Museum)  is
that  of  a  female,  fully  adult  but  not  of  advanced  age.  This  skull
is  symmetrical  and  not  deformed  or  diseased.  (Plate  in.)  The  bones
are  thin,  but  of  considerable  hardness.  A  slight  warping  causes  a
partial  opening  of  the  right  coronal  and  temporo-sphenoidal  sutures.
The  bones  apparently  retain  some  animal  matter.  Their  surface  has
suffered  a  considerable!  scaling  off,  but  as  yet  the  diploe  is  not  visible.
The  facial  parts  are  much  damaged,  the  superior  maxilla  being
almost  entirely  absent.  The  mastoids  are  broken,  and  the  bone  above
them,  particularly  on  the  left  side,  shows  numerous  perforations;
there  is,  however,  no  indication  that  these  latter  are  the  result  of
disease.  The  lower  part  of  the  occiput  is  damaged,  and  the  sphenoid
body  is  broken  across  in  front  of  the  basi-sphenoid  articulation,  but
these  injuries  have  not  affected  the  form  of  the  skull.  There  is  no
unnatural  depression  of  the  region  about  the  foramen  magnum.
The  right  squama  shows  a  small  perforation,  probably  a  recent
injury;  the  bone  exposed  is  scaly  almost  throughout.  There  are  no
scratches  now  visible  on  the  surface  of  the  skull,  but  such  may  have
existed  and  disappeared  with  the  outermost  layer  of  the  bones.
There  are  no  discolorations  with  the  exception  of  a  peculiar  narrow,
regular  band,  lighter  than  the  neighboring  bone,  that  obliquely
encircles  the  whole  cranium.  It  seems  that  a  narrow  firm  band,  or
some  contrivance  provided  with  such  a  band,  was  applied  to  the  head
or  skull  and  left  its  impression  thereon.  There  is  no  metallic  dis¬
coloration.

The  skull  has  very  marked  peculiarities  of  form,  visible  at  a  glance.
It  is  unusually  low  throughout  its  whole  extent  ;  the  outlines  of  its
planes  are  rounded,  not  angular,  and  the  portion  of  the  specimen
behind  a  vertical  plane  passing  through  the  auditory  meati  is  quite
markedly  larger  than  the  portion  anterior  to  the  plane.

Enough  of  the  face  is  left  to  show  that  it  was  very  narrow,  and
the  malars,  both  preserved,  are  even  less  prominent  than  those  which
we  find  in  an  average  white  female  skull.  The  orbits  are  megaseme,
their  borders  quite  sharp,  their  angles  rounded;  depth  4  cm.  The
nasal  bridge,  well  preserved,  is  of  fair  height,  slightly  concave  in  its
upper  half,  and  not  very  broad.  Nasion  depression  moderate.  Gla¬
bella  large,  of  medium  convexity.  There  are  no  supraorbital  ridges
proper,  but  an  elevation  appears  on  each  side  of  and  adjoining  the
glabella.  The  interorbital  septum  measures  2.4  cm.  (24.G  per  cent
of  the  line  between  the  orbital  ends  of  the  malo-frontal  sutures).

The  forehead  is  very  low,  though  not  sloping.  Diameter:  Frontal
minimum  9.3,  frontal  maximum  11. G;  nasion-bregma  arc  11. G  cm.
(33.2  per  cent  of  the  total  arc  from  nasion  to  opisthion).

The  parietals  show  considerable  quite  uniform  convexity  from
above  downward  and  slightly  less  so  from  before  backward.  The


38


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull  33


sagittal  region  is  but  very  slightly  elevated.  The  bregma-lambda
arc  measures  11.8  cm.  (33.8  per  cent  of  the  arc  from  nasion  to
opisthion).  There  is  only  one  parietal  foramen  (right),  of  moderate
size.  Temporal  ridges  were  not  high  in  position  and  are  barely  per¬
ceptible.

The  occipital  region  is  quite  full,  not  protruding;  the  right  side  is
very  little  more  prominent  than  the  left.  Occipital  ridges  and
depressions  are  very  faint.  The  temporal  regions  show  moderate
bulging.  The  squamae  are  low.  The  zygomae  are  quite  slender.
Pterions  are  of  H  form,  rather  narrow.

The  sutures  show  as  yet  no  traces  of  ossification.  Their  serration
is  superior  to  that  in  any  of  the  Lenape  skulls.  A  distinct  serration
is  seen  in  the  posterior  third  of  the  temporo-parietal  sutures,  a  condi¬
tion  which  is  uncommon.  There  are  no  Wormian  bones.

The  base  of  the  skull  is  rather  flat.  The  foramen  magnum  is
quite  large,  measuring  3.8  cm.  in  its  antero-posterior  and  about  2.9
cm.  in  its  maximum  lateral  diameter.  The  plane  of  the  opening,  if
extended  forward,  would  pass  only  about  1  cm.  beneath  the  nasion.
The  processes  are  low,  the  foramina  of  moderate  size  except  the  fo¬
ramina  ovale,  which  are  smaller  than  the  average  in  female  crania.
The  styloids  are  broken;  they  were,  particularly  the  left,  very  slen¬
der.  The  glenoid  fossae  are  of  fair  depth,  the  right  being  slightly
more  spacious  than  the  left.

The  ventral  surface  of  the  skull  shows  but  few  and  shallow  impres¬
sions  of  the  convolutions ;  it  is  scaling  off  similarly  to  the  outer  sur¬
face.  Thickness  of  the  left  parietal  3  to  4  mm.

The  differences  between  this  specimen  and  the  various  Lenape  and
eastern  crania,  as  shown  by  the  inspection,  are  even  more  plainly
indicated  by  the  principal  measurements  and  indices  (see  tables,
page  41).  The  most  characteristic  features  of  the  specimen  are  its
considerable  breadth  coupled  with  extreme  narrowness  of  the  face;  its
extremely  small  height,  which  is  noticeable  even  if  we  compare  the
auriculo-bregmatic  instead  of  the  basi-bregmatic  heights,  and  which
gives  rise  to  very  low  height-length  and  height-breadth  indices,  and
the  megaseme  character  of  its  orbits.  Differences  of  such  nature  and
so  great  in  number  are  entirely  beyond  the  scope  of  individual  varia¬
tion.  When  found  in  a  normal  skull,  as  this  is,  they  can  represent
only  racial  characters.  In  this  case  they  effectually  differentiate
the  Burlington  County  cranium  from  all  those  crania  recognized  as
Indian..

The  Eiverview  Cemetery  cranium  (no.  44280,  Peabody  Museum)
is  that  of  a  male  about  fifty  years  of  age.  It  is  somewhat  damaged,
but  enough  of  the  face  as  well  as  of  the  vault  is  preserved  for  almost
all  of  the  more  important  measurements.  (Plate  iv.)  The  skull


tofiLl&KA]


SKELETAL  k E MAIN 8


89


is  normal  with  the  following  exceptions:  There  is  a  slight  depres¬
sion  behind  the  left  lower  portion  of  the  face,  and  the  angle  between
the  plane  of  the  posterior  nares  and  (he  basilar  process  is  somewhat
more  acute  than  usual ;  the  left  border  of  the  foramen  magnum  is
slightly  irregular,  and  on  the  left  side  the  upper  half  of  the  border
of  the  occipital  is  situated  somewhat  higher  than  that  of  the  parietal
bone.  The  left  mastoid  also  is  situated  a  little  more  posteriorly  than
the  right.  All  of  the  features  indicate  some  disturbance  in  the  devel¬
opment  of  the  inferior  portion  of  the  left  side  of  the  skull.  These
defects  were  not  of  a  serious  enough  character,  however,  to  affect  the
general  conformation  of  the  skull,  and  the  vault  together  with  other
parts  is  symmetrical.

I  he  surface  of  the  skull  shows  a  large  abrasion  on  the  left  parietal,
and  several  cuts,  such  as  could  be  made  with  the  edge  of  a  not  very
sharp  shovel,  on  the  left  parietal  bone;  considerable  and  deep  scaling,
particularly  over  the  frontal  and  left  parietal  regions;  and  two  dark-
greenish  (copper  or  brass)  discolorations  of  oval  shape  about  2  cm.
in  the  longer  diameter,  situated  one  on  the  left  squama  behind  the
pterion,  the  other  near  the  middle  of  the  right  squama,  on  the  parietal
bone  adjoining.  Both  squamae  and  the  occipital  bone  give  evidence
of  defects  caused  by  injuries.

Inspection  as  well  as  measurements  show  the  Riverview  skull  to
be  very  closely  allied  to  that  from  Burlington  county  and  in  common
with  the  latter  to  differ  radically  from  all  other  crania  described  in
this  paper.  The  Riverview  skull  presents  similar  rounded  outlines
of  its  planes,  similar  small  height,  narrow  face,  and  megaseme  orbits,
in  comparison  with  that  from  Burlington  county.  The  differences
between  the  two  are  only  slight,  such  as  are  commonly  met  with  in
the  two  sexes.3

The  face  in  the  Riverview  skull  is  orthognathic,  but  this  character
is  undoubtedly  due  in  part  to  the  previously  mentioned  backward
depression  of  the  facial  parts.  The  alveolar  process,  fairly  well
preserved,  presents  also  but  little  slanting.  The  alveolar  arch  is
regular  and  massive;  it  is  rather  low  (alveolar  point  to  nasal
border  1.85  cm.),  but  not  very  narrow  (maximum  external  width

°  The  peculiar  features  of  these  crania  were  well  recognized  by  Prof.  F.  W.  Futnam
as  early  as  1888,  and  are  also  acknowledged  by  Doctor  Russell  in  his  paper  on  the  Human
Remains  from  the  Trenton  Gravels  (148-150).  Doctor  Russell  wrote  under  the  difficulty
of  lacking  sufficient  material,  a  circumstance  which  undoubtedly  influenced  his  incorrect
final  conclusions.  Professor  Putnam’s  remarks,  made  after  the  presentation  by  Mr.  Volk
of  the  Riverview  Cemetery  specimen  to  the  Peabody  Museum,  are  as  follows  (Peabody
Museum  Report,  iv,  no.  2,  35,  1888)  :  “This  human  skull  (the  Riverview  specimen)  is
small  and  of  a  remarkable  form,  and  agrees  with  two  others  (Burlington  County  and
‘  Gasometer  ’  skulls)  which  we  have  from  New  Jersey,  one  of  which  was  certainly  from
the  gravel.  These  three  skulls  are  not  of  the  Delaware  Indian  type,”  etc.  The  only
error  in  these  remarks  relates  to  the  gasometer  skull  which,  after  all,  wus  shown  to  be
closely  similar  to  the  crania  of  the  Lenape  (see  The  Crania  of  Trenton,  Bulletin  of
American  Museum  of  Natural  History,  xvi,  23,  New  York,  1902).


40


BUREAU  OP  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


5.G  cm.).  The  alveoli  of  the  second  incisors  and  those  of  all  the
molars  are  largely  obliterated.  Judging  from  the  size  of  the  remain¬
ing  alveoli,  the  teeth  must  have  been  of  somewhat  submedium  size;
their  number  and  position  were  normal.  The  palate  is  symmetrical
and  presents  nothing  extraordinary;  its  length,  from  the  alveolar
point  to  the  end  of  the  spine  (which  is  small)  is  4.8  cm.,  its  maximum
width  4.1  cm.,  height,  in  front  of  the  first  molars,  where  the  bone
has  suffered  but  little  change,  1.45  cm.  Posterior  nares  regular,
slightly  wider  near  the  palate  than  above;  height  in  middle  2.9,
width  in  middle  2.6  cm.

The  nasal  aperture  is  regular,  of  pyriform  shape,  with  sharp  bor¬
ders;  there  are  two  small  subnasal  fossae.  The  nasal  index  shows  a
low  mesorhyny.

The  submalar  fossae  are  well  marked.  The  malars  are  not  massive
and  show  no  prominence  except  directly  above  the  fossae  just  named.

The  orbits  are  of  moderate  size  and  megaseme  index ;  they  approach
the  quadrangular  shape ;  borders  quite  sharp,  depth  4.4  cm.,  inter-
orbital  septum  2. 65  cm.  (27.5  per  cent  of  the  line  between  the  orbital
ends  of  the  malo-frontal  sutures).

Nasal  bridge  slightly  submedium  in  height,  moderately  wide.  Gla¬
bella  quite  prominent ;  the  same  is  true  of  the  ridges  which  extend
above  the  median  halves  of  the  orbits.

The  forehead  is  low,  but  not  sloping.  Above  the  supraorbital
ridges  the  frontal  bone  shows  a  moderate  depression  which,  in  the
present  state  of  the  specimen,  is  accentuated  by  the  scaling  of  the
outer  table  of  the  bone.  Frontal  eminences  ordinary.  There  is  a
persistence  of  the  metopic  suture.  Diameter  frontal  minimum  9.6,
diameter  frontal  maximum  12.6  cm. ;  nasion-bregma  arc  12.1  cm.
(32.1  per  cent  of  the  total  nasion-opisthion  arc).

The  parietal  bones  show  nothing  unusual.  The  eminences  are  not
prominent.  Temporal  ridges  low,  scarcely  traceable.  No  parietal
foramen.  Bregma-lambda  arc  14  cm.  (36.8  per  cent  of  the  nasion-
opisthion  arc) ,  showing  considerable  antero-posterior  development  of
the  bones.

The  occipital  bone  shows  on  the  left  side  above  the  superior  ridge  a
moderate  bulging,  which  produces  the  before-mentioned  somewhat
greater  elevation  of  the  superior  half  of  the  occipital  over  the  adjoin¬
ing  parietal  border  on  that  side.  The  superior  occipital  ridge  and
inion  elevation  are  well  marked.

The  temporal  regions  show_  moderate  bulging.  The  squamae  are
quite  low.  The  zygomae  were  apparently  of  only  moderate  strength.
Styloids  masculine,  not  very  massive.

Base  of  the  skull :  The  foramen  magnum  is,  as  already  stated,
slightly  irregular;  its  size  is  moderate  (diameter  antero-posterior
3.65,  diameter  lateral  maximum  3.2  cm.).  There  is  no  depression  of


hrdli^ka]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


41


the  bones  about  the  foramen.  The  plane  of  the  foramen,  prolonged
forward,  passes  1.2  cm.  beneath  the  nasion.  The  posterior  condyloid
foramina  are  obliterated;  the  remaining  openings  in  the  base  present
nothing  unusual.  The  processes,  including  the  styloids,  are  all  well
developed.  The  petrous  portions  are  but  slightly  sunken  below  the
level  of  the  surrounding  parts;  the  middle  lacerated  foramina  are
smaller  than  in  average  whites.  Glenoid  fossae  fairly  deep.

The  sutures  of  the  skull  show  a  fine,  not  very  deep  serration.
Obliteration  is  noticeable  only  in  the  sagittal  suture,  at  vertex  and
about  obelion,  and  at  a  point  in  front  of  the  pterion,  on  the  left  side
in  the  coronal  suture.  The  pterions  are  of  the  H  form,  but  quite
narrow.  There  are  no  ’Wormian  bones.


Measurements  of  the  Burlington  County  and  Riverview  Cemetery  skulls,  with
minima  and  maxima  of  measurements  of  Lenape  ancl  other  eastern  Indian
crania  of  the  same  general  type.


The  Burling¬
ton  County
skull  (no.
19513,  Pea¬
body  Muse¬
um) — fe¬
male.

The  River¬
view  Ceme¬
tery  skull
(no.  44280,
Peabody  Mu¬
seum) —
male.

Minima  and
maxima  of  47
eastern  In¬
dian  skulls —
females.

Minima  and
maximaof21
eastern  In¬
dian  skulls —
males.

cm.

cm.

cm.

cm.

(«)

(b)

(?)

Diameter  antero-posterior  (glabella-occipital )

17.7

18.4

16.9  -  18.5

17.1  -  19.7

Diameter  lateral  maximum .

14.5

14.6

12. 1  -  13.  9

13.0  -  14.6

Height  (basion-bregma) .

11.5

11.6

12.45-  13.5

13.7  -  14.6

Cephalic  index .

81.9

79.3

66. 1  -  80.8

67.  4  -  83.8

Height-length  index .

65.0

63.0

68.9  -  79.5

71.5  -  83.8

Height-breadth  index .

79.3

79.5

89.  9  -108.  0

98.  6  -109. 8

Nasion-alveon  height .

(?)

6.9

6.2  -  7.2

7.1  -  8.4

Diameter  byzigomatic  maximum .

<02.0

c  12.1

11.9  -  13.75

13.5  -  14.7

Facial  index .

(?)

C57.0

48. 8  -  56.3

50. 0  -  57.9

Orbital  height,  average .

3.5

3.25

2.87-  3.7

3.2-  3.5

Orbital  breadth,  average .

3.7

3.55

3. 6  -  4. 25

3.85-  4.15

Orbital  index,  average .

9h.  6

91.6

79. 7-93.5

79. 5  -  88.6

Height  of  nasal  aperture .

(?)

5.0

4.5  -  5.2

4.7  -  6.1

Breadth  of  nasal  aperture . .

(?)

2.4

2. 2  -  2. 65

2.  2  -  3. 0

Nasal  index .

(?)

4  8.0

45. 1  -  56.7

4 3.9  -  63.8

Basion-alveon  line .

(?)

7.9

9.2  -  10.5

10.1  -  11.0

Basion-nasion  line .

9.5

7.0

9.26-  10.5

10.35-  11.45

Gnathic  index  (Flower) .

(?)

93.9

95.3  -105.0

93. 6  -101,.  4

“Approximately  1,275  cubic  centimeters.  b  Between  1,300  and  1,400  cubic  centimeters.

°  Approximate.


Racial  Affinities  of  the  Burlington  County  and  Riverview

Cemetery  Skulls

The  inevitable  conclusions  are  that  the  Burlington  County  skull
and  that  from  the  Riverview  cemetery  at  Trenton  are  of  a  type  totally
different  from  that  of  the  Lenape,  or  of  any  other  Indian  crania
from  the  East  or  elsewhere  of  which  we  have  thus  far  any  knowledge.


42


[bull.  33


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY

They  are  skulls  of  people  of  a  different  race  with  which  no  further
acquaintance  has  yet  been  made  in  this  country.  What  this  race  was,
the  writer  was  not  able  to  show  at  the  time  of  the  publication  of  the
report  in  1902.  Two  possibilities  suggested  themselves  at  that  time:
One,  that  the  crania  represented  some  non-Indian  people  who  pre¬
ceded  the  Lenape  about  Trenton;  the  other,  that  they  might  be  crania
of  later  intruders- — or  immigrants — into  that  region.  The  former
theory  could  not  be  accepted  without  further  proof,  and  the  immigrant
idea  seemed  hardly  plausible,  for  the  Delaware  valley  had  been  settled
largely  by  Swedes,  whose  cranial  type  is  radically  different.  On  the
whole,  there  are  very  few  localities  known,  in  Europe  or  elsewhere,
where  normally  very  low  skulls  had  been  observed.

The  problem  was  slowly  followed  up,  a  search  being  made  in  the
American  collections  for  examples  and  in  European  literature  for
reports  of  crania  similar  to  the  two  skulls  under  consideration.  As
to  other  specimens  on  this  continent,  it  was  found  that  in  very  rare
instances  a  low  skull  occurs  normally  among  the  Indians,  but  none  of
the  few  examples  seen  were  of  the  type  of  the  twTo  Trenton  crania,
the  faces  especially  differing  therefrom.  The  ivhole  research  strength¬
ened  the  conclusion  that  the  Burlington  County  and  Riverview  Ceme¬
tery  skulls  are  not  Indian.  The  quest  in  literature,  however,  had  a
result  which  may  come  very  near  a  definite  explanation  of  the  enigma.
In  1874  Virchow0  reported  a  number  of  extraordinarily  low  skulls
mainly  from  northwestern  Germany,  from  the  Elbe  to  the  coast  of
Holland,  drawing  attention  at  the  same  time  to  several  “  Batavian  ”
specimens  and  others  of  the  same  nature  from  the  islands  in  the  Zuy-
der  Zee  that  had  been’pictured  or  described  previously.6  All  of  these
skulls  were  comparatively  recent,  the  oldest  not  dating  beyond  about
the  ninth  century  of  our  era.  The  majority  ranged  in  form  from
mesocephaly  to  brachycephaly ;  in  capacity,  from  1,215  to  1,700
c.  c. ;  and  in  vertical  height,0  from  12  to  12.85  cm.  Several  of  the
skulls  showed  a  depression  of  the  base;  the  majority  were  free  from
any  indication  of  a  pathological  condition.  Virchow  recognized
these  skulls  as  constituting  a  distinct  cranial  form  and  called  the  tvpe
ehamcecephaly .  He  thought  he  recognized  it  in  some  Dutch  paint¬
ings.  As  to  its  significance,  he  was  undecided.

A  year  later  J.  IV.  Sprengel  published  an  account d  of  some  Zuyder

a  It.  Virchow,  fiber  eine  niedrige  Schadelform  in  Norddeutsehland,  Zeitschr.  f.  Eth-
nol.,  vi,  239-251,  taf.  xvii,  1874.  See  also  Zeitschr.  f.  Ethnol.,  ix,  41,  1877,  and  consult
in  this  connection  Ilis  and  Rutimeyer’s  Crania  Helvetica.

6  Particularly  in  Blumenbach’s  Decades  craniorum,  pi.  lxiil,  and  in  v.  d.  Iloeven’s  Cata¬
logue  craniorum.

c  Virchow  measured  this  height  from  basion  to  the  highest  point  of  the  skulls  anterior
to  the  middle  of  the  sagittal  suture.  This  measurement  exceeds  that  of  basion-bregma
by  from  1  to  5  mm.

d  Schadel  von  Neanderthal  Typos,  Arch.  f.  Anthrop.,  viii,  49-66,  pi.  v-viii,  1875.


hrdlicka]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


43


Zee  Islands  0  skulls,  in  lowness  and  in  other  features  approximating
to  the  type  of  the  Neanderthal  cranium.  One  of  these  specimens,  a
female  skull  from  the  Marken  island,  showed  a  height  (German
method)  of  only  12  cm.

Finally,  toward  the  end  of  1875  J.  Gildemeister  published  a  very
interesting  account  of  a  series  of  remarkably  low  skulls,  from  burials
in  the  dune  under  the  Bremen  cathedral.* * * * 6  The  burials,  about  30
in  number,  were  all  of  comparatively  modern  date,  the  oldest  being
from  the  ninth  or  tenth  century  of  the  present  era.  The  majority
of  the  crania  belonged  to  the  ordinary  type,  showing  a  fair  height;
thirteen  of  the  skulls,  however,  presented  chamseceplialy,  six  of  them
to  a  most  extraordinary  degree  (see  appended  measurements).  Gilde¬
meister  regards  these  specimens  as  representative  of  a  distinct  phys¬
ical  and  hence  ethnic  type,  persisting  along  parts  of  the  northwestern
coast  of  Europe  to  modern  times.  The  resemblance  of  this  type  to
that  of  the  Neanderthal  skull  is  striking,  though  the  lowness  of  the
forehead  of  the  latter  and  its  great  supraorbital  ridges  are  not
approached.

Gildemeister’s  measurements  of  the  six  most  pronounced  of  the
Bremen  low  skulls  follow  :


Characters.

No.  1.

No.  2.

No.  3.

No.  4.

No.  5.

No.  6.

Sex .

Male.

Male.

Male.

Male.

Female.

Female.

Capacity .

--C.C..

1,480

1,350

2, 050

1,340

1,290

1,270

Length .

.  .cm..

20.0

19.0

21.0

18.5

18.0

18.6

Breadth  . . .

..cm. .

15.0

14.5

16.3

13.0

14.0

13.7

Height  (vertically  above  basion)  .

..cm..

11.9

(11.9)

13.2

12.0

11.0

11.5

Cephalic  index .

75. 0

76.3

77.6

70.3

73.0

73.7

Height-length  index .

69.5

(62. 7)

62.8

64.8

61.0

61.8

Height-breadth  index- . .

79.1

(82.  0)

81.0

92.0

78.0

83.9

The  specimens,  it  is  seen,  are  dolichocephalic  to  mesoceplialic,  differ
greatly  in  size,  and  are  extremely  low.  The  height-length  indices
are  the  lowest  recorded  from  any  part  of  the  world. c  None  of  the
skulls  is  reported  as  in  any  way  pathological.

The  foregoing  accounts,  which  do  not  seem  to  have  been  followed
by  any  additional  observations  of  importance  on  similar  material,


“  That  is,  Marken,  Schokiand,  TJrk.  The  account  includes  reexamination  and  illustra¬

tion  of  Blumenbach’s  “  Batavus  genuinus ,”  Decades  craniorum,  pi.  lxiii.  See  also  H.

Welcker,  Craniologische  Mittheilungen,  Arch.  f.  Antlirop.,  i,  153,  1806,  footnote  ;  reports

on  15  skulls  from  Urk  and  Marken,  with  the  average  height  of  12.7  cm.

6  Ueber  einige  niedrige  Schadel  aus  der  Domsdiine  zu  Bremen,  Abhandl.  naturw.
Yereine  Bremen,  iv,  513-524,  taf.  xii-xiv,  1875.  Also  Neue  Schadelfunde  am  Domberge
zu  Bremen,  Verhandl.  der  Berliner  Gesellsch.  f.  Anthrop.,  Ethnol.,  and  Urgesch.,  120,
Berlin,  1875.

c  The  height-length  index,  based  on  the  vertical,  or  maximum,  height,  averages  in  whites
near  75  and  is  generally  above  70.


44


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


establish  the  presence  in  parts  of  northwestern  Germany  and  Holland
in  or  up  to  recent  times  of  a  cranial  type  characterized  by  precisely
the  feature  which  renders  so  extraordinary  the  skulls  from  Burlington
coilnty  and  River  view  cemetery,  namely,  very  low  height.  The
cephalic  index  and  the  capacity  of  the  European  chamsecephals
show  a  wide  range,  which  easily  includes  the  same  characteristics  of
the  Trenton  specimens.  The  facial  measurements  are  lacking  in  the
German  reports,  but  Gildemeister  speaks  of  a  narrow  face,  a  feature

marked  also  in  the  two  skulls
from  New  Jersey;  and  one  of  the
latter,  it  will  be  remembered,
shows  a  trace  of  basal  depression,
such  as  noticed  in  a  more  pro¬
nounced  degree  in  some  of  Vir¬
chow’s  low  crania.  The  illustra¬
tions  of  the  European  chamse-
cephals  (see  figures  5  and  6)
show  remarkable  general  resem-
b  lances  to  the  two  Trenton
skulls — there  are  the  same
rounded  outline,  without  sagit¬
tal  elevation,  of  the  anterior  and
the  posterior  plane,  similar  shape
of  the  superior  plane,  and  simi¬
lar  aspect  of  the  face.  There
can  be  no  doubt  of  the  relation¬
ship  of  the  two  forms,  and  it  now
remains  to  account  for  the  occur¬
rence  of  identical  forms  in  re¬
gions  so  remote  from  each  other.

That  such  marked  similarity
of  any  two  normal,  important,
extreme,  and  repeated  forms
in  cranial  morphology  could  be
of  accidental  origin  has  never
been  demonstrated,  and,  in  fact,
is  not  conceivable.

Similarity  of  skull  form  due  to  pathological  conditions  is  rather
common;  furthermore,  the  same  pathological  agency,  such  as  prema¬
ture  closure  of  a  suture,  affects  all  skulls  in  similar  manner,  giving
rise  to  typical  forms,  the  best  known  of  which  are  plagiocephaly  and
scaphocephaly.  A  depression  of  the  base,  such  as  was  noticed  by
Virchow  in  several  of  his  low  crania  and  is  present  to  a  slight  degree
in  the  Riverview  Cemetery  skull,  is  due  to  abnormal  softness  of  the
bones  at  some  period  during  development,  and  causes  a  diminution


Pig.  5. — Front  view  of  two  of  the  Bremen  ohamee-
cephals.


HRDLICKA]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


45


in  height.  But  this  condition,  easily  perceivable,  affects  the  rest  of
the  skull  irregularly  and  can  not  possibly  account  for  the  large  number
of  the  low  crania,  including  that  from  Burlington  county,  in  which
there  is  nothing  abnormal,  and  for  the  chamsecephalic  type  as  a  whole.
This  type,  though  not  as  yet  known  with  all  the  detail  desirable,


pi(}-  6. _ Side  and  top  views  of  one  of  the  Bremen  chameecephals.


appears  to  represent  a  racial  or  tribal  form,  which  in  some  instances
may  naturally  be  modified,  or  enhanced  in  some  particular,  by  patho¬
logical  conditions.

There  remains,  then,  only  the  question  of  racial  affinity,  and  this
narrows  down  to  the  following  limits:  The  European  and  the  Dela¬
ware  Valley  chamsecephals  are  palpably  alike,  and  both  differ  greatly


46


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


in  at  least  one  important  character,  from  the  rest  of  the  whites  on
one  side,  and  in  all  features  from  all  the  Indians  of  whom  there  is
any  knowledge,  on  the  other.  In  view  of  these  facts,  the  conclusion
is  unavoidable  that  close  kinship  exists  between  the  European  and  the
New  Jersey  specimens.

Granted  that  the  western  European  and  the  Trenton  skulls  referred
to  proceed  from  practically  the  same  people,  we  have  not  yet  solved
their  chronological  relation.  A  type  of  so  pronounced  character¬
istics  is  probably  old,  and  may  be  very  ancient;  and  as  its  repre¬
sentatives  have  been  found  on  opposite  sides  of  the  Atlantic  ocean,
which  might  have  been  traversed  accidentally  or  otherwise  thou¬
sands  of  years  ago,  the  possibility  that  the  American  representatives
of  that  type  may  be  much  more  ancient  than  those  found  in  European
burials  can  not  be  excluded.  However,  the  probabilities  are  against
the  ancient  origin  of  the  crania.  The  detailed  records  of  New  Jer¬
sey  show  that,  while  the  Delaware  valley  was  settled  to  a  large
extent  by  Swedes,  there  were  also  some  immigrants  from  Holland,
among  whom  were  very  likely  individuals  of  the  Ioav  cranial  type.
The  deposits  in  which  the  Burlington  County  and  the  River-
view  Cemetery  skulls  were  found  do  not  preclude  comparatively
recent  burials.  On  the  whole,  it  seems  safer  and  more  in  line  with
the  known  evidence  to  regard  the  two  Ioav  Trenton  crania  as  of  rela-
tiArely  modern  and  European  origin  than  as  representatAes  of  Qua¬
ternary  Americans.

XIII.— THE  TRENTON  FEMUR

The  specimen  known  as  the  Trenton  femur  is  a  portion  of  a  human
thigh  bone  disco A7ered  in  December,  1899,  by  Mr.  E.  Yolk,  under  the
employ  of  Prof.  F.  W.  Putnam,  in  a  railroad  cut  within  the  limits  of
the  city  of  Trenton.  The  bone  lay  Id  feet  (2.286  meters)  below  the
surface,  in  sand,  under  an  apparently  undisturbed  deposit  of  glacial
gravel,  and  was  photographed  in  situ.  Shortly  after  its  discovery
Professor  Putnam  kindly  submitted  the  specimen  to  the  writer  for
examination,  and  soon  thereafter  reported  on  it  in  a  preliminary  way
before  section  H  of  the  American  Association  for  the  Advancement  of
Science.®  The  detailed  account  of  the  find,  which  Professor  Putnam
has  been  preparing,  has  not  jet  been  published.  The  antiquity  of
this  specimen  must  rest  on  the  geological  evidence  alone.  The  bone
is  undoubtedly  part  of  a  human  femur,  from  a  little  below  the  tro¬
chanters.  It  shows  ordinary  dimensions,  with  a  flattening  at  its
upper  end  such  as  occurs  with  especial  frequency  in  Indians,  but

a  Winter  meeting  of  the  section,  at  New  Haven  ;  there  is  no  published  report  of  this
meeting.


hrdi.iCka]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


47


there  is  no  possibility  of  definite  racial  determination.  The  specimen
bears  evidence  of  what  appear  to  be  traces  of  human  workmanship ;
the  details  of  these,  however,  as  well  as  the  details  of  the  physical
examination  and  the  archeology  of  the  find,  will  be  dealt-  with  by
Professor  Putnam.

XIV.— THE  LANSING  SKELETON

The  skeleton  of  an  adult  and  a  portion  of  the  lower  jaw  of  an  infant
were  discovered  in  February,  1902,  by  the  sons  of  Mr.  M.  Concannon,
a  farmer  near  Lansing,  Kansas,  in  digging  a  tunnel  which  was  to
serve  for  storing  apples  and  other  farm  products.  This  tunnel  enters
horizontally  into  a  low  bench  or  terrace  situated  at  the  base  of  the
Missouri  river  bluffs  at  the  entrance  to  a  small  side  valley.  The
child’s  jaw  lay  about  GO  feet,  the  adult  skeleton  about  70  feet,  from
the  entrance  of  the  tunnel  and  20  feet  below  the  surface.  The  deposit
in  which  the  bones  were  embedded  and  which  forms  the  bulk  qf  the
bench  is  an  undisturbed  loess-like  silt,  through  which  at  all  levels  are
scattered  fragments  of  limestone  and  shale,  the  whole  presenting  great
variety  of  composition  and  considerable  irregularity  of  accumulation.

The  find  became  known  to  men  of  science  through  Mr.  M.  C.  Long,
curator  of  the  museum  of  Kansas  City,  who,  on  reading  of  the  discov¬
ery  in  a  local  paper,  immediately  visited  the  locality  in  company  with
Mr.  E.  Butts,  a  civil  engineer.  Before  the  end  of  1902  the  locality
had  been  visited  and  examined  by  many  prominent  geologists,  and  a
deep  exploratory  trench  was  sunk  near  the  tunnel  by  Mr.  G.  Fowke,
under  the  direction  of  Professor  Holmes  of  the  Bureau  of  American
Ethnology.  Scientific  reports  concerning  the  find  were  published  by
Williston,a  Upham,* * * * * 6 *  Winched,0  Chamberlin,1 3  Holmes, e  and  Fowked
It  appears  that  no  question  has  been  raised  as  to  the  correctness  of  the
accounts  regarding  the  location  of  the  human  bones;  but  there  are
important  differences  of  opinion  concerning  the  geological  age  of  the
deposits  and  consequently  the  antiquity  of  the  skeleton.  Without
going  into  details,  it  may  be  said  that  Professors  Williston,  Upham,
and  Winchell  favored  a  considerable  antiquity  for  both  the  deposits
and  the  specimens,  regarding  the  former  as  true  loess,  while  Profes¬
sors  Chamberlin,  Calvin,  Salisbury,  and  Holmes,  with  Fowke,  judged
the  deposits  to  be  not  true  loess  but  of  a  much  more  recent  formation.

“  Science,  August  1,  1902.

6  Science,  August  29,  1902;  American  Geologist,  September,  1902;  American  Anthro¬
pologist,  n.  s.,  IV,  no.  3,  566,  1902.

«  American  Geologist,  September,  1902.

« Journal  of  Geology,  October-November,  1902;  also  notes  by  Calvin  and  Salisbury  in

ibid.

6  American  Anthropologist,  n.  s.,  iv,  no.  4,  743-752,  1902.

l  Bulletin  SO  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  pt.  1,  1907.


48


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


Iii  the  words  of  Professor  Holmes,®  whose  opinion  agrees  closely  with
that  of  the  other  opponents  of  the  geological  antiquity  of  the  find — -

The  preferred  interpretation  of  the  phenomena  is  that  the  relic-bearing
deposits  of  the  C'oncannon  bench  were  not  laid  down  in  glacial  times  by  the
silt-charged  waters  of  the  Missouri,  but  that  they  are  a  remnant  of  delta-like  ac¬
cumulations  formed  in  comparatively  recent  times  within  and  about  the  mouth
of  the  tributary  valley  by  local  subaerial  agencies,  all  save  the  more  protected
portions  having  been  removed  by  late  encroachments  of  the  ever-changing  river.

The  importance  of  ’the  find  made  it  very  desirable  to  consult  the
testimony  of  the  bones  themselves.  In  October,  1902,  the  writer
therefore  visited  the  locality  of  the  find6  and  by  the ’courtesy  of  Mr.
Long;  and  Prof.  E.  Haworth  c  Avas  enabled  to  examine  all  of  the
bones  recovered.  A  report  of  the  results  of  this  examination  and  of
a  subsequent  study  of  the  skull  at  the  National  Museum  Avas  read
before  the  International  Congress  of  Americanists  at  its  New  York
meeting  in  the  fall  of  1902  and  Avas  subsequently  published.^  In
order  to  avoid  double  reference,  the  essential  portions  of  the  report
are  herein  reprinted  with  a  few  minor  modifications  in  the  text.

SoMATO LOGICAL  CHARACTERS

The  skeleton  is  fairly  complete,  but  many  of  the  constituent  parts
are  damaged  and  many  fragments  are  wanting.

All  the  parts  of  the  skeleton  sIioav  a  nearly  uniform  yellowish  -
Avliite  color  and  all  are  of  similar  consistency.  Portions  of  the  bones
show  adhering  soil,  which  now,  in  its  dry  state,  is  uniformly  gray.
In  addition  there  are  spots  at  which  is  a  closely  adhering,  hard,
brittle,  grayish,  apparently  calcareous  concretion.®

The  bones  are  quite  hard  and  not  very  brittle;  they  are  not  suffi¬
ciently  chalky  to  mark  a  blackboard.  They  fully  preserve  their
structure  and  exhibit  no  perceptible  traces  of  fossilization.

The  skeletal  parts  are  all  entirely  normal — that  is,  free  from  anom¬
alies  or  disease — with  one  exception ;  a  feAV  of  the  articular  surfaces
are  surrounded  by  moderate  marginal  exostoses,  such  as  occur  fre¬
quently  in  older  individuals  or  in  certain  forms  of  arthritis.

The  skeleton  is  distinctly  that  of  a  male  of  about  fifty-five  years
of  age.  The  man  was  of  medium  stature  (about  1.65  m.)  and  of
ordinary  strength.  The  bones  of  the  loAver  extremities  indicate  better
development  than  those  of  the  upper,  showing  relatively  greater  use
of  the  former.


“  American  Anthropologist,  n.  s.,  iv,  no.  4,  751,  1002.

b  In  examining  the  site  where  the  skeleton  was  said  to  have  lain,  a  piece  of  hone,  in
all  probability  a  portion  of  a  human  phalanx,  was  found  in  situ  in  the  wall  of  the  tunnel.

0  I?y  this  time  the  skull  only  was  in  Mr.  Long's  keeping,  the  rest  of  the  bones  being  in
the  care  of  Professor  Haworth  at  the  State  University,  Lawrence,  Kansas.  Since  then  the
skull  has  been  deposited  in  the  National  Museum.

a American  Anthropologist,  n.  s.,  v,  no.  2,  1903.

e  Some  of  this  concretion  covers  the  edges  of  breaks,  as  in  the  humerus  and  femur,
showing  these  breaks  to  he  ancient,  while  more  adheres  to  the  occipital  and  parietals
within  the  cranium.


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


BULLETIN  33  PLATE  V


b


THE  LANSING  I  KANSAS)  SKULL

a  Front  view  of  skull,  with  femur  and  tibia;  h  side  view  of  skull,  with  right  femur


hrdliCka]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


49


Considered  anthropologically,  all  the  parts  of  the  skeleton,  and  the
skull  in  particular,  approach  closely  in  every  character  of  impor¬
tance  the  average  skeleton  of  the  present-day  Indian  of  the  Central
states.  Zoologically,  as  well  as  in  growth,  the  Lansing  skeleton  and
the  skeleton  of  the  typical  present-day  Indian  of  the  upper  Mississippi
region  are  of  the  same  degree  and  quality.

There  is  no  resemblance  whatever  between  the  Lansing  skull  and
the  low  skulls  from  Trenton.0

As  to  the  skull,  the  vault  is  fairly  well  preserved,  but  the  facial
parts  and  the  base  are  to  a  large  extent  destroyed.  When  recovered
by  Mr.  Long  the  specimen  was  in  pieces,  but  it  has  been  well  repaired
and  is  suitable  for  measurement.  (Plate  v,  «,  b.)  The  skull  shows
good  development  and  is  in  no  way  artificially  deformed.  It  exhibits
slight  asymmetry,  the  left  part  of  the  frontal  bone  protruding
somewhat  more  than  the  right ;  such  asymmetry  is  quite  common  and
is  not  due  to  any  detectable  abnormal  condition.  Viewed  from  side,
top,  or  base,  the  skull  is  ovoid  in  shape,  the  smaller  end  forward;
from  front  and  back,  particularly  the  latter,  it  appears  pentagonal,
with  the  summit  of  the  figure  upward.  The  forehead  is  somewhat
low  and  sloping  when  compared  with  that  of  a  well-developed  skull
of  a  white  man,  but  appears  normal  in  comparison  with  the  forehead
of  undeformed  skulls  of  Indians.

The  temporo-parietal  region  shows  but  moderate  convexity;  the
parietal  bosses,  however,  are  well  defined,  though  not  unduly  prom¬
inent.  The  sagittal  region  is  somewhat  elevated,  forming  a  moderate
sagittal  ridge,  which  extends  from  about  the  obelion  to  bregma ;  a
slight  ridge  is  also  seen  along  the  metopic  line  over  the  middle  third
of  the  frontal  bone.  These  ridges  which,  separated  or  more  often
joined,  are  common  in  Indian  skulls,  give  the  cranium,  when  viewed
from  the  front  or  from  the  back,  its  pentagonal  appearance.  About
midway  between  the  bregma  and  lambda  the  ridge,  which  from  this
point  backward  rapidly  diminishes,  forms  a  quite  marked  but  in  no
way  abnormal  summit.

The  occiput  is  rather  bulging,  as  common  in  dolichocephaly.  The
base  is  much  damaged,  but  so  far  as  can  be  determined  it  agrees
in  its  general  features  with  that  of  an  average  skull  of  the  modern
Indian.  The  lower  jaw  also  is  somewhat  damaged;  it  agrees  in
sexual  character  with  the  rest  of  the  skeleton;  it  may  be  described
as  about  medium  in  all  its  features  and  in  no  way  peculiar;  the  chin
shows  fair  prominence.  There  are  nine  teeth  remaining  in  the  lower
jaw,  all  of  about  average  male  size  and  all  considerably  worn  down;
such  attrition  is  the  rule  with  older  individuals  among  the  Indians.

The  thickness  of  the  cranial  vault  and  the  weight  of  the  skull  are

a  See  p.  35  et  seq.


3453— No.  33—07 - 4


50


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


in  no  way  extraordinary;  the  thickness  of  the  left  parietal  below
the  temporal  ridge  ranges  from  4  to  5  mm.

The  supraorbital  ridges  are  quite  pronounced,  but  not  unusual
for  a  male;  they  are  restricted,  as  is  the  case  in  many  Indian  crania,
to  the  median  half  of  the  supraorbital  distance.  The  glabella  is
not  very  prominent.  The  temporal  ridges  are  moderate ;  nearest
approach  to  sagittal  suture  4.5  cm.  Occipital  ridges,  except  the
superior,  quite  indistinct.  The  zygomse  and  mastoids  are  broken;
the  remnants  show  nothing  unusual.

The  nasion  depression  is  well  marked ;  the  interorbital  distance  is
moderate  (at  level  of  nasion,  2.0  cm.).  Nasal  bones  show  fair  breadth
(8  mm.  beneath  nasion,  right  7  mm.,  left  5  mm.,  broad).  The  walls
of  the  orbits  are  rounded,  not  unduly  heavy;  orbital  depth  ordinary.

Parietal  foramina  absent,  mastoidal  moderate.  The  situation  and
inclination  of  the  foramen  magnum  (so  far  as  it  is  possible  to  judge)
and  the  depth  of  the  glenoid  fossae  are  as  in  an  ordinary  Indian  skull.

The  sutures  show  medium  complexity  and  are  considerably  in¬
volved  by  synostosis  (senile).  This  is  most  marked  in  the  coronal
and  the  anterior  part  of  the  sagittal  suture,  but  extends  in  lesser
degree  through  the  rest  of  the  sagittal  and  the  whole  lambdoicl.  All
the  sutures  about  the  temporal  bone,  and  the  fronto-sphenoidal,
fronto-malar,  fronto-nasal,  and  internasal  articulations  are  still  free.

Ventrally  the  skull  shows  but  few  brain  impressions,  except  on  the
temporals,  as  among  modern  Indians.  The  metopic  crest  is  low.
The  capacity  must  have  exceeded  1,500  c.  c.

The  skull  is  dolichocephalic  (cephalic  index,  73.75)  and  quite  high
(basion-bregma  very  nearly  14.0  cm.).  The  nasal  index  can  not  be
determined.  The  orbits  were  probably  mesoseme.


Detail  meas u remen ts

Diameter  antero-posterior  (glabello-occipital) _ centimeters _ IS.  9

Diameter  antero-posterior  from  ophryon _ do _ 18.8

Diameter  lateral  maximum _ do _ 13.  9

Diameter  bregma-basion,  near _ do _ 14.  0

Diameter  bregma-opistbion _ do _ 15.  0

Diameter  bregma-biauricular  line _ do _ 12.0

Diameter  frontal  minimum _ do _  9.  4

Diameter  frontal  maximum  (along  coronal  suture) _ do _ 11.3

Nasion-bregma  arc _ do _ 12.  8

Bregma-lambda  arc _ _ do _ 12.  1

Lambda-opisthion  arc _ do _ 12.  9

Circumference  maximum  (above  supraorbital  ridges) _ do _ 52.0

Thickness  of  left  parietal,  below  temporal  ridge _ millimeters _ 4—5

Thickness  of  left  parietal,  above  temporal  ridge _ do _  6-8

Estimated  capacity _ cubic  centimeters _  1,525-1,550


The  remaining  parts  of  the  skeleton  have  the  following  character¬
istics:

Femora.  Maximum  length  of  right,  44.0  cm.;  left,  broken.


hbdliCka]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


51


Torsion  and  inclination  of  neck  moderate.  Linea  aspera  rather
pronounced  but  not  abnormal.  The  bones  are  quite  strong.  The
shaft  presents  a  well-marked  upper  subtrochanteric  flattening,  as  is
common  in  the  femora  of  Indians.  There  is  on  each  femur  a  rough,
long,  low  elevation  in  the  location  where  the  so-called  third  trochan¬
ter  is  sometimes  found.  This  low  ridge  represents  a  muscular  inser¬
tion  (gluteus  max.),  and  its  marked  development  is  a  sign  of  mus¬
cular  activity.

Tibia1.  Maximum  length  of  left  tibia,  minus  spine,  about  35.7  cm.
Right  tibia,  broken.  Bones  of  medium  masculine  strength,  showing
neither  in  form  nor  in  inclination  of  head  anything  abnormal.

Fibulae  in  fragments,  no  unusual  features.

TIumeri.  Length  (maximum)  of  right,  nearly  32.0  cm.;  left,
defective  (part  lost).  No  unusual  torsion.  There  was  apparently  a
bilateral  moderate  perforation  of  the  fossa.

Radii.  Length  (maximum)  of  left,  25.4  cm. ;  right,  broken.  The
length  of  the  radius  as  compared  with  the  humerus  is  somewhat
greater  than  in  whites,  but  such  proportion  is  not  rare  in  Indians.

Ulna  in  fragments,  no  special  features.

All  the  bones  of  the  upper  extremity  are  somewhat  slender.

Pelvis  much  damaged,  but  enough  remains  to  indicate  that  it  was
rather  small  and  masculine.  The  superior  semicircular  lines  are
represented  by  a  marked  elevation.

Measurements


Right.

Left.

Femora:

cm.

cm.

Diameter  antero-posterior  maximum  at  middle .

2. 75

2.8

Diameter  lateral  maximum  at  middle . .

2.75

2.6

Diameter  antero-posterior  at  upper  flattening .

2.45

2.3

Diameter  lateral  maximum  at  upper  flattening .

3.25

3.35

Shape  of  shaft,  right,  approaching  1  a.

Shape  of  shaft,  left,  4.

Tibiae:

3. 1

2.0

6 It.  5

1.55

Shape  of  shaft,  both,  3  and  somewhat  4.

Humeri:

Diameter  antero-posterior  at  middle .

1.5

Diameter  lateral  maximum  at  middle .

2.  2

1.85

a  See  Hrdlifka,  Typical  Forms  of  Shaft  of  Long  Bones,  Proceedings  of  the  Association
of  American  Anatomists,  14th  Annual  Session,  55,  1900.


As  these  measurements  show,  the  shaft  of  the  tibia  as  well  as  the
humerus  is  somewhat  flattened.

The  height  of  the  individual,  judging  from  the  long  bones,  by
Manouvrier’s  tables,6  was  about  1.G5  m.

bAIfm.  de  la  Soc.  d’Anthrop.  de  Paris ,  2  ser.,  iv,  1892.  See  also  Revue  Mens,  de  VEcole
d’Anthrop.  de  Paris,  ii,  227,


52


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[BULL.  33


Conclusion

The  inevitable  conclusion  from  the  above  examination,  which  was
conducted  with  a  hope  that  the  specimen  might  prove  beyond  doubt
an  ancient  one,  since  such  a  discovery  would  be  of  the  greatest  impor¬
tance  to  American  and  even  to  general  anthropology,  is,  as  expressed
before,  that  the  Lansing  skeleton  is  practically  identical  with  the
typical  male  skeleton  of  a  large  majority  of  the  present  Indians  of
the  Middle  and  the  Eastern  states.  Any  assumption  that  it  is  many
thousands  of  years  old,  dating  from  a  past  geological  period,  would
carry  with  it  not  only  the  comparatively  easily  acceptable  assump¬
tion  of  so  early  an  existence  of  man  on  this  continent,  but  also  the
very  far-reaching  and  far  more  difficult  conclusions  that  this  man  was
physically  identical  with  the  Indian  of  the  present  time,  and  that
his  physical  characteristics  during  all  the  thousands  of  years  assumed
to  have  passed  have  undergone  absolutely  no  important  modification.

In  order  to  present  further  evidence  in  support  of  the  view  here
taken  the  writer  has  selected  from  the  collection  in  the  National
Museum  several  modern  male  adult  crania  of  individuals  belonging  to
tribes  that  occupy  or  occupied  sections  not  far  distant  from  that  in
which  the  Lansing  skeleton  was  found.  The  measurements  of  these
skulls,  contrasted  with  those  of  the  Lansing  cranium,  are  appended,
with  an  illustration  (figure  7).  The  similarities  are  very  apparent.
If  the  Lansing  skull  differs  in  any  way  from  the  others,  it  is  in  its
somewhat  better  development,  particularly  over  the  frontal  region.
But  the  type  of  the  skulls  is  the  same.  It  would  have  been  well  to
include  some  Potawatomi  and  Kickapoo  crania,  but  these  tribes  are
poorly  represented  in  our  cranial  collections.


Comparative  measurements  of  the  Lansing  skull  and  the  skulls  of  other  Plains

Indians


Lansing

skull.

Ponca
skull  (796,
National
Museum).

Kaw

skull  (152,
National
Museum).

Pawnee
skull  (550,
National
Museum).

Pawnee
skull  (531,
National
Museum).

Diameter  antero-posterior  maximum
(glabella-occipital) . centimeters..

18.9

18. 85

18.4

18.9

18.7

Diameter  lateral  maximum . do _

13.9

14.2

13.6

14. 05

13.9

Basion-bregma  height . do _

a  14.0

14.0

13.75

13.4

13.7

Cephalic  index .

7S.B

76.  S

7S.9

74 .3

74.  S

Diameterfrontal  minimum,  centimeters. .

9.4

9.0

9.2

9.0

8.9

Diameter  frontal  maximum  (along  coro¬
nal  suture) . centimeters..

11.3

11.5

11.6

11.7

11.1

Nasion-opisthion  arc . centimeters. .

37.8

37.7

36.6

38.1

35.2

Circumference  maximum  (above  the
ridges) . centimeters..

52.0

52.0

51.2

52.3

51.8

Thickness  of  left  parietal  below  tem¬
poral  ridge . millimeters..

4-6

4-6

4-5

4-4.5

3. 5-4. 5

Cranial  capacity . cubic  centimeters..

(6)

1,530

1,445

1, 530

1,480

“Approximate.  ''Between  1,525  and  1,550  cubic  centimeters  (calculated).


hrdli&ka]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


53


Near  the  Lansing  skeleton  was  found  a  portion  of  the  upper  jaw
of  a  child  six  or  seven  years  of  age.  The  bone  shows  nothinir  ex-
traoijdinary.  Three  of  the  teeth  (first  dentition  premolars  and  a  per-
manent  first  molar)  are  still  preserved;  their  size  is  moderate;  the


Fig.  7. — Comparison  of  ttie  nasion-opisthion  arcs,  geometrically  constructed,  of  the  Lan¬
sing  skull  and  three  modern  Indian  crania.  -  Lansing  skull  ; _ Kavv  skull

(152,  N.  M.)  ;  .  Pawnee  skull  (550,  N.  M.)  ;  —  Ponca  skull  (796,  N.  M.).

enamel  is  white,  quite  bright,  and  without  any  cracks.  The  first  per¬
manent  molar  shows  three  roots  and  four  cusps.

XV.— THE  FOSSIL  MAN  OF  WESTERN  FLORIDA

Several  lots  of  human  bones,  more  or  less  thoroughly  fossilized  in
various  ways,  were  discovered  on  different  occasions  during  the  latter
part  of  the  last  century  along  the  western  coast  of  Florida,  south  of
Sarasota.

Tiie  Osprey  Skull

This  find  dates  from  1871.  On  June  4  of  that  year  Mr.  J.  G.  Webb,
of  Osprey,  Manatee  county  (see  figure  8),  wrote  to  Prof.  Joseph
Henry,  Secretary  of  the  Smithsonian  Institution,  as  follows:

I  discovered  in  ditching  in  my  hammock  a  perfect  skull.  It  was  unfortunately
broken  in  digging  it  out,  but  I  shall  send  all  the  pieces  and  you  will  find  no
difficulty  in  gluing  it  into  perfect  shape.  It  was  intentionally  buried  (without
doubt)  face  up,  lying  on  its  back,  about  3  to  4  feet  below  the  surface,  but  had
become  surrounded  by  a  soft,  ferruginous  rock,  which  is  constantly  forming
wherever  a  spring  comes  to  the  surface.  I  live  on  a  shell  mouiul  adjoining  the
hammock.


54


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


The  specimen  was  sent  by  Mr.  Webb  as  a  gift  to  the  Smithsonian
Institution,  and  what  remains  of  it  is  now  in  the  collections  of  the
division  of  physical  anthropology  of  the  National  Museum.  A  short
account  of  it  was  published  in  1889  by  Prof.  Joseph  Leicly.®  On

continuing  the  excavation
in  the  same  place  some  ad¬
ditional  pieces  of  human
bones  were  found,  but  Mr.
Webb  does  not  now  know
in  what  condition  they  were
or  what  became  of  them.

The  North  Osprey  Bones

About  1872,  in  digging
another  ditch  in  a  shallow
dry  pond  bed  on  the  north¬
ern  part  of  his  property,
about  ten  minutes’  walk
from  the  location  of  the
above-mentioned  skull,  Mr.
Webb  and  his  son,  J.  W.
Webb,  discovered,  “  less
than  3  feet  deep,”  another
lot  of  fossilized  human
bones,  and  these  also  were
sent  to  the  Smithsonian
Institution.* * 6  There  was  no  ferruginous  or  other  rock  in  the  neigh¬
borhood  of  these  bones,  and  their  fossilization  is  of  a  different  nature
from  that  of  the  Osprey  skull.  Most  of  these  specimens,  which  are
in  very  good  condition  for  study,  are  preserved  in  the  National
Museum,  a  few  pieces  are  in  the  Peabody  Museum,  Cambridge  (men¬
tioned  in  the  Seventh  Annual  Report  of  that  institution,  1874,
page  26),  and  a  few  other  portions  are  in  the  Army  Medical  Museum.

“  Notice  of  Some  Fossil  Human  Bones,  Transactions  of  the  Wagner  Free  Institute  of

Science,  n,  9-12,  Philadelphia,  1889.

6  The  exact  location  is  described  by  J.  W.  Webb,  in  a  recent  letter,  as  follows:  “North
of  the  old  sugar  mill,  on  the  road  to  Grptrel,  is  a  ditch  running  east  and  west,  which
drains  the  ‘  Banana  ’  pond  ;  the  ditch  which  now  runs  on  line  between  the  lowland  on
the  south  and  the  sandy  land  on  the  north  used  to  run  through  the  lowland.  If  a
point  is  taken  in  a  line  of  the  second  row  of  orange  trees  east  of  the  road  a  little  more
than  halfway  from  the  northernmost  tree  to  the  ditch,  it  will  about  correspond  to  the  site
of  the  old  ditch  where  the  bones  were  taken  out.  In  this  lot  there  were  arm  and  leg
bones  and  parts  of  skull  and  part  of  a  jaw.  They  were  less  than  3  feet  deep.'


hrdliCka]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


55


The  Hanson  Landing  Remains

About  8  miles  north  of  Osprey  and  on  the  same  line  of  shore  is  a
locality  called,  after  its  owner,  Hanson’s  landing,  and  here  also  some
fossil  human  bones,  consisting  of  a  skull  and  several  other  parts  of
the  skeleton,  were  discovered.  Early  in  1886  this  locality  was  visited
by  Prof.  Angelo  Heilprin  and  Mr.  Joseph  Wilcox,  and  several  parts
of  a  fossilized  human  skeleton  were  actually  found  in  situ.  Pro¬
fessor  Heilprin  described  the  find  a  as  follows :

I  was  conducted  to  a  spot  where  it  had  been  reported  a  human  skeleton  lay
embedded  in  the  rock.  The  rock  I  found  to  he  a  partially  indurated  ferrugi¬
nous  sandstone,  removed  but  a  short  distance  from  the  sea  and  but  barely  ele¬
vated  above  it ;  the  condition  of  its  exposure  was  doubtless  the  result  of  recent
sea  waste.  I  was  much  surprised  to  find  actually  embedded  in  this  rock
and  more  or  less  firmly  united  with  it  the  skeletal  remains  of  a  mammalian
which  I  had  little  difficulty  in  determining  to  be  the  genus  homo.  Most  of  the
parts,  iucluding  the  entire  head,  had  at  various  times  been  removed  by  the
curiosity  seekers  of  the  neighborhood,  but  enough  remained  to  indicate  the
position  occupied  by  the  body  in  the  matrix.  The  depression  which  received
the  head  was  still  very  plainly  marked,  but  unfortunately  the  outline  had
been  too  much  disturbed  to  permit  of  any  satisfactory  impression  being  taken
from  it.  I  was  able  to  disengage  from  a  confused  mass  of  stone  and  skeleton
two  of  the  vertebrae,  which  Doctor  Leidy  has  kindly  determined  for  me  to  be
in  all  probability  the  last  dorsal  and  first  lumbar.  The  distinctive  cancellated
structure  of  bone  is  still  plainly  visible,  but  the  bone  itself  has  been  completely
replaced  by  limonite.

The  same  locality  was  visited  again  the  following  spring  by  Mr.
Wilcox,  who  obtained  several  specimens  of  fossilized  human  bones,
among  which  was  a  fairly  well-preserved  calcaneum.  Finally,  on
still  another  occasion,  Mr.  Wilcox  secured  at  Hanson’s  landing  “  a
piece  of  the  rock  containing  the  end  of  a  human  thigh  bone,  also
altered  into  limonite,”  which  specimen  he  gave  to  the  University  of
Pennsylvania.

The  South  Osprey  Remains

About  1888  Mr.  J.  G.  Webb  and  his  son-in-law,  Mr.  Griffith,  in
looking  for  “  phosphate  rocks  ”  6  along  the  shore,  discovered  about
a  mile  and  a  half  south  of  Osprey  the  remains  of  a  human  skeleton
embedded  in  and  partly  projecting  from  the  exposed  rock.  The
following  interesting  notes  concerning  this  find  were  furnished  by
Mr.  J.  G.  Webb  in  a  letter  addressed  to  Dr.  W.  H.  Dali,  dated  October
29, 1890:

[The  human  bones  embedded  in  rock]  were  found  on  the  shore  washed  by
every  tide,  but  not  so  always  or  very  long.  The  mainland  shores  of  the  bay

a  Transactions  of  the  Wagner  Free  Institute  of  Science,  i,  14-15,  Philadelphia,  1887.

b  The  so-called  phosphate  rocks  in  this  region  consist  of  ancient  water-worn  fossil
bones,  particularly  ribs  of  large  cetaceans.  These  fossils  are  found,  already  in  their
water-worn  condition,  cemented  in  the  shore  rocks  and  are  now  being  washed  out  wherever
the  rocks  are  exposed  to  the  action  of  the  waves.


56


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[boll.  33


are  wearing  away  very  rapidly — in  places  a  score  of  feet  since  I  first  knew
the  bay.  Not  so  much  in  this  place,  but  some.  The  rock  in  which  this  speci¬
men  is  embedded  was  not  long  ago  covered  by  the  soil  and  subsoil,  which  has
been  washed  away.  Now  all  along  tlie  shore  in  places,  not  continuously,  are
beds  or  masses  of  a  conglomerate  rock,  ferruginous,  varying  in  color  from  red
to  black,  and  which  (lie  late  Professor  Meek  said  was  bog  iron  ore,  and  con¬
taining  pebbles,  many  of  them  phosphate  of  lime.  It  was  in  this  hard  rock
that  I  found  and  sent  Professor  Wilcox  pieces  of  Indian  pottery,  though  he
discovered  some  himself  before  that.  These  beds  of  conglomerate  rest  upon
sand,  and  so  did  this  other  kind  of  rock  I  sent  you,  and  you  will  see  projec¬
tions  on  the  bottom  of  it  where  the  mud  of  which  it  was  made  was  cast  into
holes  and  inequalities  in  the  sand.  This  same  rock,  containing  occasionally
an  oyster  shell,  lies  in  places  on  top  of  the  hard  conglomerate,  which  would
seem  to  show  that  the  skeleton  was  embedded  subsequent  to  the  formation  of
the  hard  conglomerate,  but  by  an  agency  similar  or  identical.

The  bones  consisted  of  the  larger  part  of  the  thorax,  lying,  particu¬
larly  as  regards  the  vertebrae,  fairly  well  in  situ.  Two  pieces  of  the
rock  in  which  the  bones  were  included  were  chiseled  out  and  sent  to
the  Smithsonian  Institution  and  are  now  preserved  in  the  National
Museum.  Both  Mr.  Webb  (J.  G.)  and  Mr.  Wilcox  found  small
fragments  of  pottery  in  the  rock  in  several  places  along  the  shore  of
the  bay  adjoining  Mr.  Webb’s  property  on  the  south;  one  of  these
potsherds,  apparently  a  piece  of  a  simple  Indian  cooking  pot,  is  also
preserved  in  the  National  Museum.

Examination  of  the  Specimens

With  the  exception  of  a  brief  report  on  the  Osprey  skull  and  the
Hanson  Landing  calcaneum  by  Leidy,  the  western  Florida  fossil  human
bones  until  now  have  not  been  described.  In  undertaking  the  de-
scription  of  the  more  important  of  the  specimens,  it  was  recognized
that  the  first  desideratum  was  a  competent  chemical  analysis.  This
was  kindly  made  at  the  Museum  chemical  laboratory  by  Mr.  IV.  C.
Phalen.  Four  different  specimens  were  analyzed  at  the  same  time
by  exactly  the  same  method,  and  the  results  were  as  follows:


Constituents.

Osprev

skull.

North  Os¬
prey  bones.

Indian
bones  from
a  Florida
mound.

Fossil  mas¬
todon.

Oxide  of  silica  (Si02) .

5. 87

5.83

1.08

2.03

Phosphoric  acid  (P2Os) .

23.07

31 . 66

34.02

35. 72

Oxide  of  iron  (Fe»03) .  .

24.19

10.16

.80

1.52

Oxide  of  aluminum  (A1203)  .

None.

3.44

.12

5.46

Oxide  of  manganese  (MnO) .

None.

Trace.

Trace.

Trace.

Oxide  of  lime  (CaO) .

30.02

32. 60

46. 77

45.72

Oxide  of  magnesium  (MgO) .

.64

.09

Trace.

.34

Water  (H»0) .  .

Carbonic-acid  gas  (C02) .

« 12.61

61.75

J  «16.22

f  a  12. 09

1  6  5.12

«  6.  49

6  2.72

a  Calculated  by  dillerence.

6  Calculated  theoretically.

58


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


nium,  in  no  way  deformed  or  diseased.  The  nasal  bones  are  not
above  medium  in  size  or  prominence,  and  Leidy  must  have  compared
them  with  unusually  small  specimens  to  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that
they  are  “  large  and  prominent.”  The  glabella  and  supraorbital
ridges  are  of  moderate  masculine  dimensions,  and  remind  the  observer
in  no  way  of  primitive  cranial  forms.  There  is  but  little  left  of  the
forehead,  but  what  is  present  shows  a  fair  degree  of  arching.  The
orbits  are  not  massive  and  were  mesoseme  or  slightly  megaseme  in
form.  The  mastoids  are  well  developed,  masculine.  The  walls  of
the  skull  are  of  moderate  thickness  only.  The  maximum  antero¬
posterior  diameter  (from  glabella  to  most  prominent  point  of  occi¬
put)  measured  accurately  amounts  to  16.9  cm.,  but  it  must  have
been  a  little  greater  before  the  specimen  was  damaged ;  the  greatest
breadth  can  not  be  measured,  but  must  have  been  near  14  cm. ;  in  all
probability  the  skull  was  mesocephalic.  The  sutures,  so  far  as  shown,
are  all  patent,  or  were  so  before  the  fossil ization  took  place.  There
is  nothing  unusual  about  the  remaining  visible  parts.

As  to  the  geological  age  of  the  skull,  it  is  safe  to  say  that  from  the
somatological  standpoint  there  is  absolutely  nothing  about  the  speci¬
men  which  could  not  be  found  in  recent  crania  of  Florida  Indians.
All  anatomical  indications  of  great  antiquity  are  wholly  lacking.
The  small  size  of  the  skull  as  well  as  its  form  is  very  nearly  dupli¬
cated  by  nos.  228451  and  228452,  two  comparatively  modern  Indian
skulls  in  the  National  Museum  collection,  from  south  of  Lake  Okee¬
chobee,  Florida.

The  North  Osprey  bones  in  the  Museum  collection  consist  of  about
twenty  pieces  of  one  or  two  adult  skulls,  parts  of  two  left  ossa
innominata,  a  femur,  a  tibia,  parts  of  an  ulna  and  of  two  fibula?,
several  vertebrae,  portions  of  ribs,  a  patella,  and  a  number  of  tarsal
bones  and  phalanges.

The  skull  pieces  are  rather  above  medium  (Indian)  in  thickness
(the  right  jiarietal  6  to  9  mm.),  but  show  no  compression  or  any
abnormality.  It  is  not  possible  to  reconstruct  enough  of  either
cranium  to  show  its  size  and  form,  but  the  size  can  be  judged  of  as
quite  ordinary,  and  as  to  the  form  the  uniform  convexity  of  the
occipital  bone  speaks  against  any  higher  grade  of  dolieliocephaly.
The  upper  jaw  (plate  vi),  which  is  left  almost  entire,  shows  a  2.6
cm.  wide  nasal  aperture,  a  high  and  strong  nasal  spine,  and  quite  a
marked  grade  of  alveolar  prognathism — less  than  in  the  negro  and
about  equal  to  that  of  the  present-day  Indian.  There  were  16
second  dentition  teeth  of  moderate  size,  the  canines  and  the  incisors
being  rather  submedium.  All  the  teeth  that  are  still  present  show
a  moderately  advanced  degree  of  wear.  The  palate  measures,  ex¬
ternally,  about  5.4  cm.  in  length  and  6.2  cm.  in  greatest  breadth,
and  is  quite  deep  and  parabolic  in  form.  The  lower  jaw  is  appar-


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


BULLETIN  33  PLATE  VII


THE  NORTH  OSPREY  (FLORIDA)  FEMUR  AND  TIBIA


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY  BULLETIN  33  PLATE  VIII


THE  SOUTH  OSPREY  (FLORIDA)  SKELETON


HRDLlfiKA]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


59


ently  that  of  a  male  (as  are  in  all  probability  all  the  other  skull
fragments)  ;  it  shows  a  fairly  well-developed  chin  and  alveolar  pro¬
trusion  in  a  moderate  degree.  Horizontal  length  of  the  lower  ramus
is  about  9.8  cm. ;  height  at  symphisis  is  3.5  cm.  There  were  16
lower  second  dentition  teeth;  the  molars  of  moderate  size,  the  others
rather  submedium ;  the  remaining  teeth  are  normal  in  form,  but  are
somewhat  worn  down.  The  upper  and  lower  jaws  fit  well  together
and  undoubtedly  belong  to  the  same  cranium.

The  two  ossa  innominata  indicate  medium  masculine  size  and
massiveness  and  are  in  no  way  peculiar  in  form.  One  measured
about  19.5  cm.  in  greatest  height  and  14.2  cm.  in  greatest  breadth
(between  the  anterior-superior  and  the  posterior-superior  spines).
The  femur  (plate  vii)  measures  40.5  cm.  in  the  bicondylar  and  40.7
cm.  in  maximum  length;  the  neck  shows  an  angle  of  130°;  the  shaft
approaches  type  1,  or  the  prismatic,  in  form  “  and  is  of  moderate
strength;  the  index  of  the  subtrochanteric  flattening  is  75.8;  and
there  is  present  a  quite  pronounced  third  trochanter.  The  tibia
(plate  vii),  measured  without  the  spine  but  with  the  malleolus,  is
34  cm.  long  and  moderately  platycruemic  (index  at  middle  64.9,  at
nutritive  foramen  63.8).  The  inclination  of  the  head  is  such  as
would  be  considered  about  medium  in  an  Indian ;  traces  of  some
slight  superficial  inflammatory  process  are  apparent  on  the  lower
third  of  the  bone.  The  remaining  bones  and  fragments  are  all  char¬
acterized  by  moderate  dimensions,  and  none  show  any  disease  or
abnormality.

When  compared  with  ordinary  recent  Indian  skeletons,  it  is  found
that  not  a  single  piece  of  the  North  Osprey  bones  exhibits  any  charac¬
teristic  that  is  beyond  the  range  of  normal  variation  of  modern
specimens.  As  with  the  Osprey  skull,  there  is  again  possible  only
one  conclusion,  namely,  that  there  is  absolutely  nothing  in  these  bones
which  would  suggest  great  or  even  considerable  antiquity,  geologic¬
ally  speaking.

As  to  the  Hanson  Landing  finds,  all  seem  to  have  belonged  to  one
skeleton,  buried  in  the  ground,  before  its  consolidation  took  place.
About  all  that  can  be  said  of  the  bones  from  the  somatological  stand¬
point  is  contained  in  the  report  of  Professor  Leidy,6  who  states,  with
special  reference  to  the  better-preserved  specimens  of  Mr.  Wilcox,
“  They  do  not  differ  in  any  respect  from  corresponding  recent  human
bones.”

The  South  Osprey  fossils  (plate  vm,  a,  l>)  in  the  hands  of  the
writer,  are  so  defective  and  so  embedded  in  the  rock  that  but  little
can  be  said  regarding  them  anatomically.  There  are  visible  parts

o  gee  Typical  Forms  of  Shaft  of  Long  Bones,  Proceedings  of  the  Association  of  Ameri¬
can  Anatomists,  14th  session,  55  et  seq.,  1900.

b  Transactions  of  the  Wagner  Free  Institute  of  Science,  ii,  10,  Philadelphia,  1889.


60


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


of  eight  dorsal  vertebrae,  a  number  of  ribs,  and  a  remnant  of  the
sternum.  All  of  these  bones  are  plainly  parts  of  a  single  adult,
apparently  male  skeleton,  and  their  relative  positions,  with  the  ver¬
tebra)  still  in  situ,  indicate  burial,  intentional  or  accidental,  of  the
whole  body.  They  show  no  unusual  features.

Resume


Summarizing  briefly,  it  may  be  said  that  the  fossil  human  bones
from  the  west  coast  of  Florida  show,  somatologically,  marked  like¬
ness  to  recent  Indian  bones,  and  not  a  single  feature  indicative  of
a  zoologically  lower  or  otherwise  substantially  different  type  of
humanity.  The  anthropological  evidence  of  these  bones  as  to  any
considerable  geological  antiquity  must  be  regarded,  therefore,  as
wholly  negative.

The  above  decisive  results  of  somatological  examination  when  con¬
trasted  with  the  fossilized  condition  of  the  Osprey  bones  suggested
the  desirability  of  an  exploratory  visit  to  the  locality,  and  such  a
visit  was  made  by  the  writer,  under  the  auspices  of  the  Bureau  of
American  Ethnology,  in  February,  1906.  As  it  Avas  apparent  that
the  problems  involved  were  largely  geological,  the  Director  of  the
U.  S.  Geological  Survey  was  requested  to  detail  a  geologist  familiar
with  the  Florida  formations  to  accompany  the  writer  in  the  explora¬
tion.  The  request  >vas  kindly  granted  and  Dr.  T.  Wayland  Vaughan
Avas  assigned  to  this  duty.  His  interesting  report  is  embodied  in  sub¬
sequent  pages.

Osprey  Avas  found  to  be  a  ATery  small  settlement  on  the  little  Sara¬
sota  bay,  about  12  miles  south  of  the  tOAvn  of  Sarasota  and  about  TO
miles  south  of  Tampa.  Mr.  Webb’s  property  lies  on  and  at  the  base  of
a  promontory  which  projects  westward  nearly  half  a  mile  into  the  bay.
For  about  one-third  of  a  mile  along  the  southern  shore  of  this  prom¬
ontory  runs  a  well-preserved  artificial  shell  mound.  This  mound  com¬
mences  near  the  point  and  reaches  an  elevation  of  from  15  to  16  feet,
with  a  maximum  breadth  of  about  125  feet.  Mr.  Webb’s  main  house
stands  in  the  middle  of  the  widest  and  highest  part  of  the  mound,
which  is  truncated  or  platform-like.  From  this  point  the  mound
diminishes  in  width  toward  the  mainland  and  eventually  tapers  off  to
a  point.  Before  the  shell  heap  was  erected  the  promontory  was  very
Ioav,  and  it  seems  that  the  pile  may  have  been  raised  gradually  by  the
aborigines  for  the  purpose  of  giving  a  high  and  dry  location  for  their
dwellings.  The  structure  consists  entirely  of  closely  packed  shells  of
different  sizes,  all  of  existing  species.  Many  of  the  inner  shells  of  the
mound  show  but  slight  traces  of  decay  and  not  a  feAV  still  preserve  in
large  part  their  color.  In  the  course  of  earlier  excavations  in  this
mound,  undertaken  by  Mr.  Norman  Spang,  it  Avas  found  that  old  fire-


HRDLf&KA|


SKELETAL  REMAINS


61


places  are  irregularly  scattered  throughout  the  mass  of  shells  at  dif¬
ferent  levels.  Shell  implements  and  some  fragments  of  culinary  pot¬
tery  were  encountered,  but  no  burials.

Situated  near  the  base  of  the  promontory  and  not  covered  by  the
shell  mound  is  the  so-called  hammock  land,  a  layer  of  black  soil  com¬
posed  largely  of  decayed  organic  matter  mixed  with  sand.  There  are
several  depressions  in  this  piece  of  land,  which  to-day  is  covered  by
an  orange  orchard.  One  such  depression  is  situated  between  the
shell  mound,  near  its  southeastern  end,  and  a  low  burial  mound  over
which  passes  a  wagon  road  leading  to  Mr.  Webb’s  residence.  It  was
in  this  hollow,  less  than  30  feet  from  the  base  of  the  burial  mound,
that  Mr.  TV  ebb  discovered  in  1871  his  first  human  fossil,  the  specimen
now  known  as  the  Osprey  skull.  Mr.  Webb,  who  is  still  alive  and
in  good  health,  conducted  the  writer  to  the  locality,  and  there,  with
the  assistance  of  a  laborer,  a  trench  was  dug  15  feet  long,  0  feet  wide,
and  a  little  more  than  3  feet  deep.  No  bones  were  found,  but  the
character  and  condition  of
the  deposits  was  seen  to  ad¬
vantage  (figure  9).  Imme¬
diately  below  the  surface  were
from  15  to  20  cm.  (6  to  8
inches)  of  black  soil,  somewhat
mixed  with  white  sand,  under
which  was  a  layer  of  white
sand.  Two  feet  below  the  sur¬
face  this  layer  showed  patches
of  yellowish  to  rusty  discolora¬
tion,  due  without  doubt  to  dep^
osition  of  iron.  Some  shells
were  found  in  this  sand,  but  no  concretions.  Seventy-four  cm.  (29
inches)  below  the  surface  was  encountered  a  more  compact,  greenish
layer,  consisting  of  sand,  clay,  and  fine  gravel;  this  extended  to  the
full  depths  of  the  excavation.  The  limonite  skull  was  recovered  from
the  middle  of  the  sandy  layer,  and  presumably,  from  the  description,
near  its  base.

The  exact  location  of  the  North  Osprey  find  was  not  remembered
by  Mr.  Webb  (the  information  given  was  obtained  subsequently
from  his  son)  and  in  consequence  the  spot  could  not  be  located,  but  it
also  was  in  the  dry  bed  of  a  small  pond.

It  remained  to  explore  the  locality  where  the  South  Osprey  skeleton
was  found.  Mr.  Webb  led  the  party  to  the  spot.  Since  the  date  of
the  find  the  shore  has  suffered  some  loss  by  erosion,  but  the  general
conditions  remain  unchanged  (figure  10).  The  shore  is  low,  the
elevation  averaging  perhaps  2  feet  above  high  tide.  Beginning  at  the
surface  the  soil  consists  (figure  11)  of  a  layer  of  varying  depth  much


Fig.  9. — Section  of  deposits  showing  position  of  the
Osprey  skull,  a,  Black  soil  mixed  with  sand,  15  to
20  cm.  (6  to  8  in.);  b,  White  sand,  showing  in  lower
parts  yellow  patches  due  to  ferruginous  deposits,  50
to  60  cm.  (20  to  24  in.);  c,  About  where  Osprey  skull
lay;  d,  Greenish  clayey,  sandy,  and  gravelly  layer,
74  cm.  (29  in.)  below'  surface.  Extent  unknown.


62


BUREAU  OE  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[BULL.  33


mixed  with  white  sand,  and  of  sand,  which  is  more  or  less  replaced  over
large  areas  by  flat,  irregular  masses  of  fine  or  coarse  fossil-bearing
conglomerate  of  widely  differing  consistency,  ranging  in  color  from
gray  to  dark  brown  or  blackish.  These  masses,  which  in  spots  reach
20  inches  and  even  more  in  thickness,  rest  upon  the  irregular  surface
of  a  more  clayey  deposit,  allied  to  the  greenish  basal  layer  of  the
Osprey  skull  locality  and  less  permeable  by  water  than  the  sand  and
soil  above  it.  In  this  deposit  were  seen  small  waterworn  pebbles,
but  no  larger  rocks  or  consolidations.  As  to  the  conglomerate,  that
found  at  the  surface,  which  forms  in  places  a  detachable  layer  look¬
ing  not  unlike  a  lava  flow,  is  finer  grained,  more  grayish  in  color,  and


Fig.  10. — Shore  line  at  South  Osprey.

contains  but  few  fossils.  In  places  it  is  as  hard  as  flint,  while  in
others,  sometimes  in  close  proximity,  it  lacks  firmness  and  crumbles
to  pieces  readily,  hardening  somewhat,  however,  on  exposure  in  dry
places.  Below  this  layer,  which  is  very  variable  in  thickness,  and
sometimes  in  places  where  it  is  absent,  is  found  the  coarser  conglom¬
erate,  of  a  darker  color,  in  places  visibly  ferruginous,  also  differing  in
consistency  from  spot  to  spot  and  containing  fossil  sharks’  teeth  and
many  waterworn  fossils  of  cetaceans.  These  fossils,  jasper-like  in
appearance  and  hardness  and  plainly  not  contemporaneous  with  the
rock  that  holds  them,  are  being  slowly  washed  out  by  the  waves  to  lie
along  the  beach.  The  human  skeleton  was  found  in  a  grayish-black
portion  of  the  upper,  finer  conglomerate.


hrdliCka]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


63


A  closer  examination  of  the  land  along  the  shore  northward,  as
Avell  as  southward,  revealed  many  interesting  conditions.  Beginning
with.  Mr.  Webb’s  house,  it  was  found  that  a  short  distance  eastward
from  the  spot  where  the  Osprey  skull  was  discovered  and  near  the
end  of  the  shell  mound  a  small  stream  of  brownish  water  flows  into
the  bay  ;  at  the  mouth  of  the  stream  is  a  bed  of  irregular,  ferru¬
ginous  limonite  concretions,  mostly  connected,  but  easily  detachable.
The  concretions  appear  to  be  at  about  the  level  of  the  sand  which  is
marked  by  ferruginous  discolorations  at  the  locality  of  the  Osprey
skull.  They  rest  on  a  clayey  and  sandy  deposit  containing  no  solid
rock,  probably  an  ancient  bed  of  the  bay.  The  surface  of  the  con¬
cretions  nearest  the  mound  was  seen  to  include  some  shells  of  recent
species,  which  may  have  formed  part  of  the  great  shell  heap.  In


I'ig.  11. — Section  of  the  layers  at  the  locality  of  the  South  Osprey  find.  a.  Soil  mixed
with  sand,  b.  Light  fine-grained  rock  in  which  the  human  bones  were  found,  c.  Darker
coarser-grained  conglomerate  containing  ancient  fossils,  d.  Greenish  sandy  and  clayey
layer.

these  concretions,  which  resemble  those  in  which  the  Osprey  skull
is  held,  were  found  also  small  pieces  of  ordinary  Indian  pottery.
For  a  considerable  distance  east  and  south  of  this  locality  no  rock  is
exposed,  but  about  half  a  mile  to  the  south  ferruginous  concretions
and  also  some  washed-out  “  phosphate  rocks,”  consisting  of  cetacean
fossils,  appear  on  the  beach  and  in  the  shore;  thence  they  increase
southward  until  near  the  place  of  the  South  Osprey  find,  where  they
form  a  substantial  part  of  the  shore.  They  are  covered  with  the  gray¬
ish  finer  conglomerate  above  described.  They  extend  for  an  unknown
distance  south  of  this  locality,  and  wherever  they  exist  the  beach  is
lined  with  pieces  of  rock,  undermined  by  the  waves  and  broken  down
by  their  own  weight,  as  well  as  with  remnants  of  old  fossils  washed
out  from  this  rock.  A  careful  and  repeated  search  failed  to  bring  to


64


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


light,  any  human  bones,  but  there  were  found  in  different  places,  em¬
bedded  in  the  grayish  rock  of  varying  degrees  of  hardness,  many
recent  shells,  including,  especially,  numerous  oyster  shells,  a  few
pieces  of  partially  mineralized  animal  bones  (deer  astralagus  and  cal-
caneum)  that  showed  no  attrition,  as  do  the  old  fossils,  a  conch  shell
of  a  living  species  with  ferruginous  concretionary  matter  adhering  to
it  much  like  that  in  the  case  of  the  Osprey  skull,  and,  finally,  roots  of
a  burnt  pine,  still  lying  on  the  beach,  about  which  the  concretion  was
in  process  of  formation.  (Plate  ix.)  Everything  seen  strengthened
the  impression  that  the  solid  deposits  visible  are  largely  if  not
wholly  of  recent  formation.  While  these  rocks  where  exposed  are
being  slowly  disintegrated  by  the  action  of  the  waves,  in  all  proba¬
bility  they  are  actually  forming  in  other  localities,  as  about  the
above-mentioned  pine  roots.  All  the  waters  in  the  district,  even
those  of  artesian  origin,  are  more  or  less  mineralized;  they  sink
readily  through  the  surface  soil  into  the  underlying  sand,  but  can  not
penetrate  so  easily  into  the  clayey  layer  beneath.  The  result,  pos¬
sibly  furthered  by  some  chemical  affinity  of  the  sand,  is  a  gradual
deposition  of  mineral,  principally  ferruginous,  matter,  which  in  the
course  of  time  becomes  sufficient  in  some  places  to  cement  into  hard
rock  the  sand  and  whatever  the  latter  contains.  The  mineralogical
conditions  seem  to  favor  also  in  an  extraordinary  way  the  infiltra¬
tion  of  the  bones  and  even  replacement  of  their  normal  constituents,
the  latter  process  constituting  fossilization.  This  is,  at  least,  the  sum
of  the  unbiased  impressions  carried  away  by  the  writer  as  a  result
of  the  examination  of  the  Osprey  and  South  Osprey  formations  from
which  fossil  human  bones  have  been  obtained.  These  impressions,
the  result  of  independent  personal  observations,  are  fortunately  sup¬
plemented  by  the  more  expert  observations  embodied  in  the  report  of
Doctor  Vaughan,  transmitted  to  the  Chief  of  the  Bureau  of  American
Ethnology  by  the  Director  of  the  United  States  Geological  Survey.
The  essential  portion  of  Doctor  Vaughan’s  report  follows :

REPORT  OF  DR.  T.  WATLANI)  VAUGHAN

Osprey  is  situated  on  a  narrow  tongue  of  land  rising  some  15  to  20  feet  above
sea  level,  about  one-tliird  of  a  mile  long  and  from  100  to  150  feet  wide.  The
ridge  of  the  tongue  is  formed  by  an  Indian  shell  mound.  There  is  an  Indian
burial  mound  at  its  base,  on  its  northeast  side,  and  about  one-fourth  of  a  mile
east  of  Osprey.  Portions  of  a  skeleton  enveloped  and  partly  replaced  by  limon-
ite  were  found  at  this  locality.  Doctor  HrdliCka  had  a  pit  about  3 1  feet  deep
dug  at  tins  place,  and  exposed  the  following  section:

4.  Black  soil,  about _ 1  foot.

3.  Grayish  or  white  sand,  about _ 2  feet.

2.  Irregular  bed  of  yellowish  sand,  continuous  with  the

above - A  few  inches.

1.  Greenish,  argillaceous,  and  sandy  layer _ Thickness  unknown.

The  yellowish  sand  is  the  layer  in  which  the  skeleton  was  found.


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


BULLETIN  33  PLATE  IX


OSSEOUS  REMAINS  IN  PROCESS  OF  SILICIFICATION,  FOUND  AT  SOUTH  OSPREY,  FLORIDA


hrdlicka]  SKELETAL  REMAINS  65

A  study  of  the  lower  end  of  the  shell  mound  on  its  side  next  to  the  bay  gave
the  following  section :

4.  Black  soil - Several  inches.

3.  Shells,  numerous  species,  all  of  which  are  recent,

about - - - 4  feet.

2.  The  base  of  the  mound  contains  shells,  many  of
which  are  cemented  together  and  tilled  with  ferru¬
ginous  sandstone;  others  are  filled  with  greenish
sand.  All  stages  from  the  green  sand  to  the  fer-
.  ruginous  sandstone  are  represented.  The  layer  is
not  uniformly  developed,  occurring  only  in  places_  <i  inches.

1.  Green  sand  to  the  water  level  in  the  bay _ L_  Thickness  undetermined.

A  collection  of  shells  was  made  from  numbers  2  and  3  of  the  section  and  were
determined  by  Dr.  Wm.  IL  Dali.

All  the  species  found  in  no.  2  were  also  found  in  no.  3,  and  all  of  them  are
recent.

The  geologic  age  of  2  and  3  is  post-Pleistocene.  Both  from  the  contained
fossils  and  stratigraphic  relations  they  are  younger  than  the  Pleistocene  of
North  creek.  The  material  in  which  the  fossil  human  remains  were  found
in  the  old  burial  mound  seems  to  correspond  to  the  ferruginous  layer  at  the
base  of  the  shell  mound,  and  can  scarcely  be  older — that  is,  the  human  remains
are  post-Pleistocene  in  age.

The  fossilized  condition  of  the  human  skeleton  was  considered  cf  particular
importance.  A  study  of  the  processes  at  present  going  on  at  the  base  of  the
shell  mound  clearly  shows  that  no  importance  can  be  attached  to  the  ferruginous
replacement  of  the  bones.  All  stages  in  the  transformation  of  the  unconsoli¬
dated  greenish  sand  filling  the  shells  to  a  filling  with  sand  cemented  by  limonite
and  the  cementation  of  the  whole  by  limonitic  material  can  be  seen.  Numerous
seepages  or  springs  occur  along  the  upper  surface  of  the  green  sand  bed.  It
is  evident  that  this  water  contains  considerable  quantities  of  oxygen,  and  that  it
is  transforming  the  green  colored  ferrous  silicate  into  red  or  brown  ferric  oxide
and  silica.  Ideal  conditions  are  here  realized  for  this  transformation  of  one
form  of  iron  into  another.

The  conclusions  regarding  the  skeleton  found  at  Osprey  are:  First,  no
importance  can  be  attached  to  its  state  of  fossilization ;  second,  the  strati¬
graphic  relations  of  the  skeleton  are  such  as  to  indicate  a  post-Pleistocene,  or,
expressed  in  other  words,  a  geologically  recent  age.

The  human  bones  found  along  the  shore  between  1  and  2  miles  south  of
Osprey  were  calcareous  but  impregnated  with  minerals.  The  ferruginous
material  which  has  been  described  as  from  the  lower  end  of  the  shell  mound
at  Osprey  is  found  southward,  occurring  discontinuously  for  several  miles.
The  upper  part  of  the  bank  along  the  beach  is  a  sandy,  often  hummocky,  soil.
The  iron  near  the  water’s  edge  cements  together  pebbles,  shells,  or  whatever
happens  to  be  there.  The  material  whence  the  human  bones  were  obtained  is  a
lighter  colored,  more  sandy  incrustation  over  the  ferruginous  layer.  There  is
nothing  in  the  geological  conditions  under  which  they  were  found  to  indicate
other  than  a  geologically  recent  age.

Between  twenty-four  and  twenty- five  years  ago  a  skull  was  found  in  ferru¬
ginous  material  a  short  distance  above  the  pier,  at  Hanson’s  landing.  The
skull  was,  at  least  partially,  replaced  by  ferruginous  matter.  The  locality
was  studied  geologically.  The  ferruginous  material  there  is  similar  to  that
at  Osprey.  It  underlies  surface  soil  and  sand,  consists  of  sand  bound  together


3453— No.  33—07


o


66


BUREAU  OE  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


(bull.  83


by  the  brown  oxide  of  iron,  and  occurs  noncontinuously  just  above  the  water’s
edge.  There  is  no  evidence  to  suggest  its  not  being  a  recent  formation.  All
the  conditions  under  which  this  skull  was  found  seem  to  be  identical  with  those
under  which  the  one  at  Osprey  occurred.  Therefore  I  am  of  the  opinion  that
the  Ilanson  skull  occurs  in  a  geologically  recent  formation.

Conclusions  as  to  the  Age  of  the  Human  Remains

1.  No  importance  can  be  attached  to  the  fossilized  condition  of^  the  human
remains  found  at  any  one  of  the  three  localities  studied.

2.  At  Osprey,  where  paleontologic  and  stratigraphic  evidence  is  available,  the
evidence  is  in  favor  of  the  human  remains  being  geologically  recent.

:>.  Positive  paleontologic  and  stratigraphic  evidence  is  absent  at  the  locality
between  1  and  2  miles  south  of  Osprey  and  at  Hanson’s  landing.  In  each
locality,  however,  there  is  no  evidence  to  favor  the  remains  being  geologically
as  old  even  as  Pleistocene.

4,  All  of  the  positive  evidence  and  the  conditions  under  which  these  fossilized
human  bones  were  found  in  Florida  favor  the  opinion  that  man  geologically  is  a
recent  immigrant  into  that  area.

XVI.— MOUND  CRANIA  (FLORIDA)

On  further  exploration  of  die  Osprey  region  it  was  found  that  it
had  been  well  peopled  by  the  Indian  tribes  up  to  comparatively  recent
times.  A  large  artificial  shell  mound  (see  figure  8)  occurs  near  the
shore  just  north  of  Mr,  Webb’s  property,  not  very  far  from  the  North
Osprey  find  of  fossil  human  bones.  On  the  mainland  near  the  South
Osprey  find  was  a  small  earth-and-sand  mound  containing  ashes.  On
Caseys  key,  which  lies  opposite  the  Osprey  promontory  and  about
three-quarters  of  a  mile  distant,  is  another  large  artificial  platform¬
like  shell  heap,  and  a  little  south  of  this  were  discovered  on  digging
many  pieces  of  human  bones  and  even  entire  bones,  apparently  quite
recent,  representing  probably  a  secondary  multiple  Indian  burial.
Finally,  G  or  7  miles  south  of  Osprey,  near  Laurel,  occurs  a  large  sand
mound  which  contained  many  Indian  burials;  similar  mounds  north
of  Osprey  were  learned  of,  especially  about  Sarasota  and  on  a  key
opposite  Sarasota.  A  skull  which  the  writer  recovered  from  the
Laurel  mound  is  in  form  much  like  the  Osprey  skull;  and  the  bones
from  the  Casey  Key  burial  are  in  general  much  similar  to  the  fossils
of  North  Osprey.


XVII.— THE  NEBRASKA  “ LOESS  MAN


After  having  concluded  the  above  review  of  the  older  discoveries
of  human  remains  in  North  America  to  which  considerable  antiquity
has  been  attributed,  the  writer  was  fortunately  afforded  the  oppor¬
tunity  of  making  detailed  studies  of  the  most  recent  example  of  finds
of  that  class — the  so-called  Nebraska  “loess  man.”  The  following
pages  embody  the  results  of  these  investigations.


hrdliCka]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


(>7


History  of  F inds

In  June,  1894,  during  a  search  for  the  buried  remains  of  the
famous  Indian  chief  Black  Hawk,  Messrs.  F.  T.  Parker,  William
Morris,  and  Charles  S.  Huntington,  all  of  Omaha,  Nebraska,  du<r
into  a  low  eminence  on  the  crest  of  a  wooded  ridge  known  as  Long’s
hill,  situated  near  and  running  parallel  with  the  Missouri,  about  3
miles  north  of  Florence  and  10  miles  north  of  Omaha.  According
to  Mr.  Huntington,  the  only  survivor  of  the  three,  they  made  a
moderate-sized  excavation  in  the  elevation.  When  the  work  had
progressed  to  a  depth  at  which  Mr.  Huntington’s  head  was,  as  he
expresses  it,  “  about  on  a  level  with  the  surface  of  the  ground  ”  (his
height  is  o  feet  7  inches),  he  uncovered  on  one  side,  in  the  wall  of

yellow  dirt,  a  about  20  inches * *  6  above  the  floor  of  the  pit  or  trench,
a  skull  which  fell  out  with  the  earth  surrounding  it,  and  on  coming
in  contact  with  the  ground  separated  into  a  number  of  pieces.0  Mr.
Huntington  says  that  he  was  impressed  at  once  with  the  unusual
forehead  of  the  specimen,  a  feature  which  induced  him  to  carry  the
fragments  home  with  him.  No  other  skulls  or  large  bones  were
uncovered,  and  as  the  mound  yielded  no  archeological  objects,  the
work  of  excavation  was  soon  abandoned.  The  fragments  of  the
skull  were  placed  in  the  garret,  and  there  lay  unnoticed  until  the
latter  part  of  1906,  when,  reading  of  the  Gilder  discoveries,  Mr.
Huntington  recalled  his  own  find;  thereupon  he  gathered  the  pieces
and  sent  them,  through  Mr.  Gilder,  to  the  University  of  Nebraska.
This  specimen,  which  is  truly  remarkable,  has  been  skillfully  recon¬
structed  in  the  geological  laboratory  of  the  university,  and  is  now
known  as  skull  no.  8  of  the  Gilder  Mound  series.

A  second  episode  in  the  exploration  of  the  mound  is  best  told  in
the  words  of  one  of  the  explorers.  The  following  account,  prepared
for  the  writer  by  Mr.  P.  F.  Gilder,  a  journalist  and  amateur  arche¬
ologist,  residing  in  Omaha,  was  received  February  15,  1907 :

During  the  early  summer  of  1906,  in  looking  for  flint  implements,  I  came
accidentally  across  the  mound  in  the  summit  of  Long's  hill,  dug  into  twelve
years  before  by  Messrs.  Parker,  Morris,  and  Huntington.  The  excavation  was
about  4  feet  square  and  2  feet  deep,  and  was  tilled  with  leaves  from  the  adja¬
cent  trees  and  refuse  mold  from  the  ground  about  the  opening.

Early  in  September  I  revisited  Long’s  hill  and  found  that  in  the  interval
some  one  had  been  digging  in  the  old  excavation.  A  few  pieces  of  human  bones
lay  on  the  comparatively  fresh  earth,  and  I  found  later  that  Mr.  Bankey,  a
neighboring  farmer,  had  picked  up  on  the  mound  portions  of  the  upper  and  lower
jaws  from  the  right  side  of  a  skull.

“  Mr.  Huntington  makes  no  distinctions  in  the  deposits  beneath  the  10  or  12  inches  of

dark  surface  earth,  referring  to  them  in  general  as  “  yellow  dirt.”

6  Mr.  Huntington  indicated  about  this  height  from  the  floor,  on  the  side  of  his  safe.

c  According  to  a  later  recollection  of  Mr.  Huntington,  the  skull  was  taken  from  the
earth  in  one  piece ;  it  was  filled  with  clay  and  later  separated  into  fragments.


68


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


Three  days  thereafter  I  started  my  first  ditch  through  the  old  excavation,
beginning  on  the  east  side  of  the  hole  and  running  eastward.  The  bottom  of
the  hole  was  tilled  with  loose  earth,  which  had  been  recently  moved.  I  did
not  find  anything  that  day  and  only  made  fair  progress  through  the  mound,
as  1  worked  from  top  to  bottom,  a  depth  of  about  5  feet.

The  Sunday  following,  accompanied  by  Omer  Butler,  an  artist  on  the  World-
Herald,  I  continued  my  work  at  the  hill.  .  .  .  The  very  first  shovelful  of
earth  brought  out  a  large  femur  and  then  immediately  a  mass  of  bones  were
brought  to  light,  many  of  which  were  broken.

I  then  cleared  off  the  surface  and  worked  down  from  above.  The  upper  part
of  the  mound  consisted  of  earth  which  I  knew  had  been  moved.  ...  At
24  feet  .  .  .  small  pieces  of  charcoal,  hits  of  mussel  shell  as  large  as  my

finger-nail,  and  quartzite  spalls  were  found  in  the  earth.  I  judged  the  burial
to  be  similar  to  other  (fire)  burials  in  that  and  other  sections  which  I  had
previously  encountered.  Beneath  the  blackened  mass  I  found  fragments  of
calcined  clay,  bits  of  which  I  have  retained,  while  beneath  this  again,  at  a
depth  of  44  feet  from  the  surface,  the  ground  was  so  hard  and  compact  that  it
was  removed  with  the  greatest  difficulty  in  my  rather  cramped  quarters  in  the
trench.  Four  inches  beneath  this  compact  earth — which  at  the  time  I  believed
to  have  been  hardened  by  fire — and  nearly  5  feet  from  the  surface,  I  brought
out  skull  no.  5.  There  was  no  other  bone  near  it.  I  was  obliged  to  return  to
the  city,  but  before  the  skull  was  removed  Mr.  Butler  made  a  sketch  of  it  as  it
lay  iii  the  ground  and  of  the  trench  and  its  surroundings.  I  held  my  tape
measure  from  the  surface  to  the  skull  so  that  it  would  be  accurate,  and  the
tape  was  sketched  in  the  picture.

I  have  unearthed  many  skulls  in  this  vicinity  of  what  I  term  ancient  and
modern  Indian  types,  and  I  at  once  noted  the  vast  difference  between  them
and  the  one  I  held  in  my  hand.

After  securing  the  first  skull  I  worked  in  the  hill  at  every  available  moment,
but  I  was  accompanied  by  personal  friends  whom  I  requested  to  memorize
everything  pertaining  to  the  bones,  skulls,  and  environment.

With  my  stepson,  George  C.  Clark,  I  began  on  the  south  side  of  a  20-foot
circle  from  what  I  took  to  be  the  mound’s  center  and  drifted  in  toward  the
point  whence  I  had  taken  the  skull,  expecting  to  strike  the  skeletal  parts.  Our
trench  was  wider  than  my  first.  We  were  compelled  to  build  smudge  fires  to
keep  the  mosquitoes  away,  but  we  worked  several  hours  and  found  the  larger
bones  of  a  skeleton  at  a  level  12  inches  (tape  measure)  above  the  level  of  no.  5
skull.  No  other  skull  was  found;  the  femurs  and  shin  bones  were  in  good  con¬
dition.  Skulls  nos.  3  and  4  were  also  taken  at  this  point,  but  several  inches
lower  than  the  femur  hones.  The  earth  was  as  hard  as  plaster,  and  digging
was  exceedingly  difficult.  Whatever  bones  were  found  near  the  skulls  were
combined  with  them  as  if  belonging  to  the  crania.

The  following  day  Mr.  Clinton  A.  Case  accompanied  me.  We  widened  the
ditch  I  had  first  dug  and  carried  it  8  feet  to  the  west.  We  then  cut  off  the
intersecting  corner  of  the  first  ditch  and  that  which  I  had  run  with  my  stepson.
At  3  feet  deep  we  secured  skulls  nos.  1  and  2  and  some  of  the  upper

parts  of  the  skeleton  bones.  They  lay  with  their  heads  toward  the  center,  skele¬
tons  radiating  from  the  center.  We  also  took  a  skeleton  without  skull  lying  at
same  level.

The  following  day  I  worked  alone.  I  sunk  a  ditch  from  the  surface,  5  feet
long  and  3  feet  wide,  2  feet  south  of  the  ditch  running  east  and  west,  and
secured  the  lower  leg  and  foot  bone  of  the  skeletons  recovered  with  Mr.  Case.
In  the  south  corner  of  this  ditch  I  sunk  a  shaft  41  feet  and  brought  out  the
mandible  of  a  skull.  No  other  bones  were  within  15  inches  of  it.  I  tunneled


Hrdlicka]


SKELETAL  R E  MAINS


69

under  the  north  and  south  ditch  dug  with  my  stepson  and  found  a  jumhle  of
what  I  believe  are  the  skeletal  parts  of  a  youth.

The  next  operations  were  made  with  Mr.  Banliey.  We  took  from  a  .‘1-foot
level  on  the  northeast  corner  of  the  intersection  of  both  ditches,  or  at  the  north
end  of  the  north  and  south  ditch,  a  badly  mashed  skull  in  some  score  or  more
of  pieces.  I  believe  this  is  no.  x  in  the  collection.  The  skull  is  very  thin,  and
when  taken  out  it  was  hard  to  tell  which  way  it  lay.  There  were  also  two
femur  bones  reposing  vertically,  which  led  to  the  belief  that  the  body  had  been
buried  squatting.

I  had  determined  when  at  work  with  my  stepson  and  again  verified  in  my
own  mind  when  working  with  Air.  Case  that  an  intrusive  burial  had  taken
place.

I  first  showed  the  crania  of  nos.  3,  4,  and  5  to  people  in  the  office  of  the  World-
Herald,  then  to  Dr.  E.  C.  Henry,  demonstrator  of  anatomy  at  Creighton  Medical
College  in  Omaha,  and  Doctor  Henry  wrote  a  description  of  them,  which  we
published.  I  took  the  three  skulls  to  Lincoln  and  showed  them  to  Doctor  Ward
and  Professor  Barbour.  .  .  .  When  the  featured  article  in  the  World-

Herald  of  October  21  reached  my  brothers  and  sisters  in  New  York,  they  noti¬
fied  Prof.  Henry  Fairchild  Osborn,  who  came  at  once  to  Omaha,  examined  the
material  and  gave  me  a  statement  for  publication.  Skulls  nos.  1  and  2  had
been  added  since  Doctor  Ward  and  Professor  Barbour  had  seen  the  collection,
and  Professor  Osborn  immediately  noted  a  variation  and  called  on  me  for  an
explanation,  which  was  given  him  as  I  give  it  to  you.

A  week  after  my  story  was  figured  in  the  World-Herald  of  October  21,  Joseph’s
father  called  me  by  telephone  and  told  me  that  his  son  had  a  skull  similar  to
the  ones  figured.  I  visited  his  house  and  saw  the  similarity  to  my  own  crania.
His  mother  told  me  to  take  it,  that  her  son  was  at  the  university,  and  that  she
knew  he  would  be  glad  to  have  it  go  with  the  others.

The  lad  came  to  see  me  a  month  afterwards,  lie  said  he  had  been  looking  for
Indian  turnips  in  the  neighborhood  of  Long’s  hill  and  had  come  onto  the  old
excavation  made  by  the  three  men  twelve  years  ago.  He  said  he  had,  with  the
aid  of  his  knife  and  sticks,  penetrated  into  the  old  loose  earth  and  run  onto
skull  no.  6  when  he  had  gotten  down  to  a  level  of  his  shoulders.  He  is  nearly
0  feet  tall.  It  took  him  a  half  day  to  get  it  out  with  a  large  pocketknife,  and
he  also  found  a  portion  of  another.  He  thought  it  was  an  Indian  skull  and
took  it  home.  With  the  skull  was  a  piece  of  a  jaw  (lower),  and  this  fitted
exactly  with  the  one  found  by  Air.  Bankey.

I  have  said  little  about  this  skull.  Joseph  thinks  he  can  get  a  fortune
for  it.  .  .  .

With  or  near  the  bones  discovered  by  Mr.  Gilder  were  several
stone  implements,  among  them  two  flint  blades  of  ordinary  form.
There  was  no  trace  of  pottery.  The  better-preserved  bones  were
collected  and  kept  about  Mr.  Gilder’s  house  until  the  question  of
possible  geological  antiquity  of  the  deeper  burials  arose,  when  they
were  transferred  to  the  University  of  Nebraska,  at  Lincoln.

On  November  16  Prof.  E.  TI.  Barbour,  geologist  and  paleontologist
of  the  University  of  Nebraska,  by  arrangement  with  Mr.  Gilder,  took
charge  of  the  further  excavations.  As  the  work  progressed  he  became
convinced  that  the  bones  of  the  lower  levels — that  is,  those  more  than
feet,  approximately,  from  the  surface,  were  contemporaneous  with
the  original  (lacustrine)  loess  deposits;  and  thenceforth  the  excava-


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


1 0

tions,  in  wliat  came  to  be  known  as  the  “  Gilder  mound,'  were  prose¬
cuted  with  particular  care.  Shafts  were  sunk  in  several  localities,
and  one  of  these  was  carried  down  12  feet.  The  results  of  this  work,
which  continued  with  the  assistance  of  Doctor  Condra  and  several
others  as  long  as  the  weather  permitted,  were  not  very  striking;
the  finds,  however,  consisted  of  about  200  fragments  of  bones,  which
were  attributed  to  the  ancient  and  undisturbed  loess  deposits.  They
were  found  very  much  scattered,  there  being  only  about  “  five  or  six
bits  to  the  cubic  yard.”  These  showed  no  regularity  of  distribution,
and  grew  scarcer  with  increasing  depth.  The  piece  of  what  is  prob¬
ably  human  bone  found  at  the  greatest  depth  was  Ilf  feet  below
the  surface.  Some  of  the  fragments  lay  apparently  outside  of  the
mound  proper.  There  were  no  animal  bones,  implements,  or  pottery.

The  first  notice  of  the  discovery  in  a  scientific  journal  was  pub
lished  by  Professors  Ward  and  Barbour  in  Science  of  November  16,
1906,  and  since  then  there  have  appeared  a  number  of  other  papers
dealing  with  the  subject."  In  Science  of  January  18,  1907,  Professor
Barbour  expressed  definitely  his  belief  in  the  antiquity  of  the  deeper-
lying  bones  and  proposed  to  designate  the  “  primitive  type  ”  which
he  was  convinced  they  represented,  as  the  “  Nebraska  loess  man."

Extracts  from  several  of  the  papers  referred  to,  embodying  the  con¬
clusions  of  the  writers  regarding  the  “  loess  man."  are  given  in
the  following  pages.  As  the  matter  thus  presented  is  necessarily
incomplete,  however,  and  may  possibly  do  injustice  to  the  authors,
the  student  of  the  subject  is  advised  to  consult  the  original  pub¬
lications.

Barbour  and  Ward,  Science,  November  l(i.  1000.  “  The  skulls  of  the  Nebraska
man  seem  to  be  inferior  to  those  of  the  mound  builder,  but  for  the  present  at
least  will  be  viewed  as  early  representatives  of  that  tribe.  In  corroboration-

“  Bibliography  :  Gilder,  It.  F.  First  notice,  World-Herald,  Omaha,  October  21,  1000.

Barbour.  E.  IT.,  and  II.  IT.  Ward.  Preliminary  Report  on  the  Primitive  Man  of
Nebraska  (October  26,  1906),  Xchraska  Geological  Survey,  1 1 ,  pt.  5,  219-327.  4  iiss.

Barbour,  E.  II.,  and  II.  B.  Ward.  Discovery  of  an  Early  Type  of  Man  in  Nebraska
(October  24),  Science,  November  10,  1906.

Gilder,  II.  F.  A  Primitive  Ilnman  Type  in  America;  the  Finding  of  the  "Nebraska
Man,"  Putnam’s  Magazine,  407-409,  2  tiffs.,  January.  1907.

Ward,  II.  B.  Peculiarities  of  the  “Nebraska  Man."  Putnam's  Magazine,  410-413.
3  figs.,  January,  1907.

Barbour,  E.  II.  Prehistoric  Man  in  Nebraska,  Putnam's  Magazine,  113-415,  502—503,
3  tiffs.,  January,  1907.

Osborn,  II.  F.  Discovery  of  a  Supposed  Primitive  Race  in  Nebraska,  Century,  371-375,
7  tiffs.,  January,  1907.

Barbour,  E.  II.  Evidence  of  Man  in  the  Loess  of  Nebraska,  Science,  1 10— 1 12, .January
18,  1907.

Gilder,  I!.  F.  The  Nebraska  Loess  Man,  Records  of  the  Past,  vi,  pt.  2,  36—39,  5  tigs.,
February,  1907.

Barbour,  E.  II.  Ancient  Inhabitants  of  Nebraska,  Records  of  the  Past,  vr,  pt.  2,
40—46,  5  figs.,  February,  1907.

Barbour,  IT.  II.  Evidence  of  Loess  Man  in  Nebraska,  Xchraska  Geological  Survey,  n,
329-345,  with  figures,  1907.

Blackman,  E.  E.  Prehistoric  Man  in  Nebraska,  Records  of  the  Past,  vi,  pt.  3,  76-79,
March,  1907.


hrdlicka]  SKELETAL  REMAINS  71

are  the  Hint  implements  or  chips  found  associated  with  the  skulls  and  bones,
and  the  mode  of  burial.”

Osborn,  Century  M (if/nziiie,  January,  1007.  Page  373.  “  The  parts  of  the  older
four  crania  found  beneath  the  clay  layer  are  of  the  same  type,  it  being  proba¬
ble  that  difference  in  age  may  account  for  the  slight  differences  in  the  develop¬
ment  of  the  supraorbital  ridges.  In  each  the  facial  profile  is  almost  the
same.  .  .  .  This  profile  is  seen  to  he  of  a  much  more  primitive  character,  sur¬
rounding  a  hone  with  a  more  depressed  frontal  area  than  that  of  the  skulls
found  above  the  clay.  Unfortunately  the  hack  part  of  each  of  these  four  crania
is  wanting,  and  until  this  can  he  secured  through  subsequent  discoveries  it  is
impossible  to  give  an  exact  estimate  of  the  cranial  capacity  or  brain  weight  of
this  primitive  man.  Estimating  the  back  of  the  skull  as  of  the  same  height  as
that  of  the  normal  Indian  skull.  .  .  .  we  still  have  a  very  low  cranial  capacity
and  a  type  of  skull  resembling  that  of  the  Australian  negro,  which  is  virtually
the  lowest  existing  type  known  at  present.  While  the  supraorbital  ridges  are
not  more  pronounced  than  that  of  the  Australian  negro,"  the  forehead  is  even
more  receding  and  flattened.  In  other  words,  the  portions  of  the  cranium  pre¬
served  indicate,  so  far  as  they  go,  a  man  of  small  cerebral  capacity,  having  a
brain  inferior  to  that  either  of  the  Indian  or  the  typical  mound  builder.”

Page  375.  “To  return  to  the  recent  discovery  in  Nebraska,  the  comparisons
which  we  are  able  to  make  now  prove  that  this  cranium  is  of  a  more  recent
type  by  far  than  that  of  the  Neanderthal  man.  It  may  prove  to  be  of  more
recent  type,  even,  than  that  typified  by  the  early  Neolithic  man  of  Europe.
Even  if  not  of  great  antiquity  it  is  certainly  of  very  primitive  type  and  tends
to  increase  rather  than  diminish  the  probability  of  the  early  advent  of  man  in
America.”

Gilder,  Putnam's  M ayazinc,  January.  1007.  In  commencing  the  excavations
in  the  mound  I  came.  “  at  4  feet  beneath  the  surrounding  level,  upon  what  ap¬
peared  to  be  a  compact  clay  bed,  differing  from  the  loess  covering  in  which  1
had  been  working.  There  were  visible  evidences  of  ancient  tire.  What  I  took
to  he  a  clay  bed  burned  into  a  semblance  of  brick  proved  to  be  the  original  top
of  the  loess  hill.  Fire  had  been  built  upon  it.  and  on  the  ashes  an  upper  layer
of  bones  was  laid.  It  was  so  hard  as  to  resist  the  spade.  I  managed,  however,
to  make  a  considerable  hole  through  the  surface,  and  few  inches  down  I  found
the  upper  portion  of  a  human  cranium.

“  In  drifting  in  another  ditch,  from  the  south  side,  I  encountered  the  same
stratum  of  baked  earth.  Fifteen  feet  from  the  beginning  of  the  ditch  I  cross-
sectioned  the  mound  from  west  to  east  and  then  cleared  a  circle  8  feet  in  diam¬
eter.  .  .  .  This  gave  me  a  much  better  opportunity  to  work  from  above  the

bones.  Evidence  of  fire  above  the  bones  was  very  marked.  The  earth  beneath
the  ash  bed  was  very  dry  and  extremely  hard,  and  I  was  puzzled  not  a  little  as
to  how  the  burial  had  been  made.  Nor  was  1  able  to  tell  precisely  how  the
skeletons  had  been  laid,  but  appearances  indicated  that  the  heads  lay  toward
the  center  and  that  the  feet  radiated  therefrom.  Two  seemed  to  have  been  placed
in  a  squatting  position — the  femurs  and  spinal  vertebra*  being  in  a  vertical
position  close  together.

“The  manner  of  burial  differed  radically  from  that  observed  in  other  mounds
I  had  opened  in  this  vicinity  and  elsewhere.  If  seemed  that  a  lower  stratum  of
skeletons  had  been  placed  in  the  mound,  and  that  earth  had  then  been  piled
on  top  and  burned  to  the  consistency  of  a  plaster  wall.  In  another  part  of  the

*  “  it  will  be  understood  that  some  of  the  existing  types  of  savages  and  aborigines  have,
through  survival  or  degeneration,  a  smaller  cranial  capacity  than  the  ancestors  of  the
European  types.  For  example,  die  Botoeudo  Indians  of  Brazil  are  described  as  having  a
very  low  type  of  cranium.”


72


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


mound,  some  5  feet  distant,  lay  the  upper  layer  of  skeletons;  but  with  three
exceptions  these  skeletons  had  been  disarticulated  and  more  or  less  scattered
about.  Over  the  bones  bad  been  laid  a  covering  of  loess,  scraped  up  and  carried
to  the  mound  for  the  purpose.  Through  this  covering  were  scattered  small
pieces  of  shells  of  a  kind  very  different  from  the  bivalves  of  the  streams  in  this
vicinity  at  the  present  day.”

Gilder,  Records  of  the  Past,  February,  1907.  Skull  no.  5  “  lay  in  what  I  took
to  be  a  baked  clay  matrix.  Before  1  reached  the  skull  1  had  worked  through
earth  similar  to  other  coverings  of  remains  in  the  neighborhood  and  through
several  inches  of  what  appeared  to  be  earth  and  ashes,  beneath  which  was  the
stratum  which  looked  as  if  it  had  been  burned.  I  had  not  at  that  time  learned
that  an  intrusive  burial  had  taken  place,  and  naturally  concluded  that  the  earth
had  been  baked  over  (he  skull  in  order  to  prevent  the  leaching  of  the  bones  by
rains.”

Ward  in  Barbour  and  Ward,  Nebraska  Geological  Surrey,  n,  part  5,  1906.
Page  321.  “The  limb  bones  are  massive  and  large,  indicating  a  stature  of  6
feet,  and  uncommonly  rough,  indicating  a  people  who  were  very  muscular,
particularly  in  the  lower  extremities.  The  strikingly  large  protuberances  sup¬
port  this  view.  The  crania  are  low  browed,  with  heavy,  protruding  supercil¬
iary  ridges,  and  receding  foreheads,  which  lack  frontal  eminences.  In  life
these  people  had  flat  heads,  protruding  muzzles,  large  chins,  and  heavy  brows,
shading  eyes  deep  se't  and  close  together.  The  low-browed  crania  are  not  the
result  of  head-binding,  nor  are  they  those  of  idiots,  nor  are  they  malformed.
Instead  they  are  normal  and  represent  the  cranial  development  of  the  time.
Though  showing  many  points  of  similarity  as  well  as  differences,  on  the  whole
they  seem  inferior  to  the  mound  builder,  and  we  may  for  the  present  at
least  consider  the  Nebraska  man  as  a  very  early  or  degenerate  mound  builder.
In  corroboration  are  the  crude  flint  implements  or  chips,  whichever  they  are,
associated  with  the  bones,  and  the  mode  of  burial  in  mounds.”

Page  325.  “  The  writers  have  frequently  seen  examples  equally  ancient,  but
these  are  the  first  authentically  located.”

Page  327.  “  The  bones  of  the  lower  layer  seem  synchronous  with  the  loess  for¬
mation  and  antedate  the  hill  itself,  while  those  of  the  upper  layer  are  younger
than  the  loess  and  subsequent  to  the  hill.”

Ward,  Putnam's  Magazine.  January,  1907.  “  The  skeletons  collected  by  Mr.

Robert  F.  Gilder  all  present  such  striking  characteristics  that  even  at  first
glance  one  is  compelled  to  recognize  their  peculiar  type.  Idle  individual  bones
are  well  preserved,  but  heavy,  brittle,  and  without  the  spongy  character  of  such
as  have  been  exposed  to  the  leaching  of  water  in  the  soil.

“All  the  long  bones  of  the  skeleton  are  massive,  of  more  than  average  length,
and  distinguished  by  the  very  unusual  prominence  of  the  rough  areas  for  muscle
attachment  and  also  of  the  protuberances  which  subserve  the  same  function.
In  these  particulars  the  leg  bones  are  the  most  striking.  Their  development
indicates  clearly  (he  platycnemic  condition  usually  regarded  as  characteristic
of  primitive  people.  The  femur  has  a  strong  curve  forward,  which  is  not  lack¬
ing  in  modern  skeletons  but  has  been  noted  by  many  as  peculiarly  characteristic
of  ancient  femora.

“  Judging  from  the  location  of  the  glenoid  cavity  and  the  length  of  the  lower
jaw,  the  latter  probably  did  not  project  very  conspicuously.  This  lower  jaw
is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  parts  of  the  skeleton.  It  is  relatively  short,  very
massive,  and  double  the  thickness  of  a  modern  mandible.”

The  skulls  show  that  “the  bone  is  on  the  whole  massive  beyond  the  usual
limits  in  modern  skulls.”

“rPhe  sutures  are  usually  distinct,  sometimes  simple,  sometimes  complicated,


HRDufiKA]  SKELETAL  REMAINS  73

marked  by  numerous  Wormian  ossicles,  and  in  one  case  with  a  large  triangular
interparietal  between  the  occipital  and  parietal  hones.

“  In  the  calvaria,  the  two  most  conspicuous  elements  are  the  enormously  de¬
veloped  superciliary  ridges  and  the  low  arch  of  the  crown.

"The  parietal  diameter  or  maximum  breadth  of  the  skull  reached  140  to  150
mm.  The  cephalic  index  could  not  be  calculated  with  full  accuracy  on  account
of  the  imperfections  of  the  specimens,  but  in  one  case  was  estimated  as  79  and
in  a  second  was  somewhat  less.  In  two  of  the  skulls  from  the  higher  level  of
the  mound,  the  cephalic  index  was  71  and  78,  while  their  maximum  breadth  was
1RR  and  141  mm.,  which  serves  to  indicate  the  prominent  differences  in  form
between  the  two  groups  of  calvaria.  In  the  skulls  of  the  upper  layer,  more¬
over,  the  bone  is  very  much  thinner  and  has  an  entirely  different  appearance
and  texture.

“All  in  all  the  skeletons  of  the  lower  layer  show  many  points  in  common  with
primitive  types  of  the  human  race.  In  some  particulars  these  primitive  char¬
acters  agree  with  those  of  the  mound-builders,  and  yet  points  of  difference  are
also  observable.  Compared  with  the  tribes  of  Indians  which  inhabited  this
region  immediately  before  the  coming  of  the  Caucasian,  these  remains  show
radical  differences.”

Barbour,  Science,  January  18,  1907.  “  Long’s  hill  .  .  .  is  a  hill  of  erosion,
and  no  discoverable  land  slip  has  complicated  its  simple  geology.  On  its  sum¬
mit  is  Gilder's  mound,  in  the  superficial  layer  of  which  were  found  mound-
builder  remains  and  in  the  deeper  layer  eight  skulls  and  many  bones  of  a  still
more  primitive  type.”

The  upper  layer,  in  which  the  two  “  mound-builders’  ”  skulls  were  discovered,
“  lias  a  thickness  of  24  feet.  Below  it  was  an  undisturbed  layer  of  unmistak¬
able  loess  and  in  it  numberless  fragments  of  human  bones  and  an  occasional
animal  bone,  loess  shells,  and  stray  angular  pebbles.

“  In  brief,  the  conclusion  is  that  in  the  case  of  the  upper  bone  layer  there  was
a  burial ;  in  the  lower,  deposition.  Those  in  the  loess  doubtless  antedate
the  hill  itself,  while  those  in  the  upper  layer  are  subsequent  to  it.  That  archaic
burial  could  have  taken  place  in  loess  without  detection  is  altogether  improb¬
able.  Of  necessity  there  would  result  a  mixture  of  black  with  light  soil  and  a
breaking  up  of  the  lithologic  structure.  Where  these  bones  occur,  the  loess
structure  and  color  is  perfectly  preserved,  and  it  contains  characteristic  vertical
lime-tubes,  concretions,  and  shells,  precisely  as  is  customary.  Out  of  the  evi¬
dence  at  hand  the  writer  concludes  that  bones  of  this  layer  were  strictly  syn¬
chronous  with  the  loess  formation  in  which  they  were  found,  in  substantiation
of  which  comes  the  fragmental  nature  of  all  of  the  bones,  their  waterworn  condi¬
tion,  their  range  of  distribution,  and  disassociation  of  parts.

“  One  would  scarcely  think  of  such  conditions  being  possible  in  the  case  of
human  burial ;  besides,  it  is  improbable  that  a  primitive  people  would  dig  graves
to  a  depth  of  12  feet.”

As  to  the  age  of  the  supposed  loess  man,  Professor  Barbour  says :  “  The  chief
point  is  the  evidence  that  human  remains  have  been  found  in  the  loess,  and
whether  this  is  the  very  oldest  or  newest  loess  seems  a  secondary  considera¬
tion.  The  loess  here  is  not  leached  of  lime  salts,  but  is  actively  effervescent  at
all  levels,  arguing  for  recency  of  deposition.  All  recognize  the  chronological
diversity  in  the  loess  formation,  and  whether  Long’s  hill  is  in  the  main  loess
body,  as  we  believe  it  to  be,  or  in  a  much  more  recent  one  does  not  materially
affect  the  relation  of  the  bones  to  some  stage  of  glaciation,  the  precise  glacial
or  interglacial  age  being  as  yet  undetermined.

“  The  loess  in  question  rests  on  Kansan  drift,  and  though  as  young  as  the  later
Wisconsin  sheet  or  younger,  it  is  nevertheless  old.”


74


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


Barbour.  Nebraska  Geological  Purvey,  n.  part  (i,  1907.  For  the  most  part  the
same  words  as  in  Science,  January  IS.

Additions.  Page  330.  “  Respecting  the  antiquity  of  the  remains,  the  chief  evi¬
dence'  paleontologically  must,  he  derived  from  the  skulls,  which  seem  to  he  of
the  Neanderthal  type.  Evidences  from  other  skeletal  parts  are  subject  to  error,
owing  to  the  wide  range  of  variation  in  human  bones.  The  association  of
loess  fossils  is  significant,  and  when  even  a  remnant  of  any  extinct  species  is
found  it  will  he  final.  No  sign  of  stratification,  which  would  be  valuable  evi¬
dence,  can  he  reported.”

Page  346.  “  The  skulls  are  of  the  Neanderthal  type,  with  thick  protruding
brows,  low  forehead  devoid  of  frontal  eminences,  large  parietal  eminences,  nar¬
row  temples,  thick  skull  walls,  and  small  brain  capacity.”  “  They  are  higher
in  the  human  scale  than  Neanderthal  man,  but  lower  than  the  mound  builder.
They  resemble  the  man  of  Spy.”

Page  347.  “Skull  8  scarcely  varies  in  size  and  shape  from  Pithecanthropus
erectus.”

As  to  the  age  of  the  man  in  the  Nebraska  loess,  Professor  Barbour  repeats,
with  hut  slight  modifications,  his  conclusions  on  the  subject  published  in  Science
of  January  IS.  The  discovery  is  believed  to  carry  “  man  in  America  back  to
Glacial  times.”  But  he  adds  that  “  In  several  places  adjacent  to  Gilder’s
mound  exposures  of  human  hones  in  supposed  loess  are  already  known,  and
investigation  promises  to  extend  the  present  known  limits  of  the  supposed
human  bone  bed.”

Blackman,  Records  of  the  Past,  March,  1907.  No  personal  observations  on
Gilder  mound  or  specimens  from  the  same.  Quotes  Professor  Barbour  as  fol¬
lows :  “From  a  geologist’s  standpoint  there  is  scarcely  a  possibility  that  these
bone  fragments  were  ever  buried  by  human  hands.  Instead,  the  bones  were
doubtless  deposited  with  the  loess,  the  age  of  which  may  he  safely  reckoned  at
ten  thousand  to  twenty  thousand  years  or  more.”

Further  on  (page  77)  Professor  Blackman  records  the  following  interesting
observation:  “I  suggested  to  Doctor  Barbour  the  possibility  that  gophers  may
have  worked  the  hones  from  the  higher  to  the  lower  level.  I  have  found  buf¬
falo  bones  10  feet  deep  in  gopher  holes.  It  was  very  difficult  to  observe  the
moved  loess  which  filled  the  hole,  as  all  the  hill  was  the  same  kind  of  deposit.
But  the  Doctor  assured  me  that  this  could  not  possibly  be  the  case.”

Professor  Blackman  finishes  by  giving  brief  notes  on  several  other  finds  which,
may  have  bearing  on  the  question  of  man’s  antiquity  in  Nebraska  and  tin'
neighboring  States.

Toward  the  end  of  January,  1907,  the  writer1  was  directed  by  the
Chief  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology  to  visit  the  University
of  Nebraska  and  examine  the  Gilder  Mound  bones.  The  specimens
were  placed  at  the  writer’s  disposal  in  the  most  liberal  manner  by
Professors  Barbour  and  Ward,  and  every  needed  assistance  was
accorded.  When  the  examination  was  completed  these  gentlemen,  as
well  as  Mr.  Gilder,  accompanied  him  to  the  mound,  which,  fortu¬
nately,  was  almost  wholly  free  of  snow  and  could  be  fairly  well
observed.  In  the  following  pages  is  given  a  brief  account  of  the
mound  and  its  examination.

Description  of  the  Mound

North  of  the  small  town  of  Florence,  and  to  the  west  of  the  Mis¬
souri,  the  country  presents  some  rather  bold  elevations,  composed  of


MRDLtfiKA]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


75


accumulations  of  fine  loess,  modified  in  contour  l>y  the  action  of
wind  and  rain.  The  southern  portion  of  one  of  the  most  prominent
of  these  elevations,  known  as  Long’s  hill,  consists  (in  the  part  nearer
to  Florence)  of  a  ridge  about  (>00  yards  long,  running  parallel
with  the  Missouri.  This  ridge  is  covered  with  timber  of  recent
growth,  the  original  forest  having  been  cut  by  contractors  for  the
Union  Pacific  railroad.  Geologically  the  ridge  is  composed  of  car¬
boniferous  strata  forming  the  base,  on  which  rest  from  10  to  15  feet
of  glacial  drift  containing  Sioux  quartzite  and  granitic  bowlders;
above  this  is  about  150  feet  of  fine  light-buff  loess  (Barbour).  A
wagon  road,  which  has  been  washed  out  until  it  forms  quite  a  deep
ravine,  runs  along  the  whole  length  of  the  ridge,  rising  gradually  to
its  crest.  Near  the  southern  end  of  this  crest  is  seen  a  small  eleva¬
tion,  which  might  easily  pass  for  a  natural  feature  of  the  hill;  its
center  originally  could  not  have  been  more  than  2  or  3  feet  above  the
line  of  the  crest,  and,  while  its  circular  form  is  appreciable,  its  outer
boundaries  are  so  indistinct  that  measurements  of  its  diameter  can
not  be  more  than  approximations.  This  is  the  Gilder  mound.  A
few  yards  to  the  north  is  visible  another  low  dune-like  swell,  pos¬
sibly  also  an  artificial  mound;  some  years  ago  another  low  elevation,
about  250  yards  north  of  this,  was  dug  into  and  yielded  human  bones,
and  about  the  same  distance  still  farther  in  the  same  direction,  three
imperfect  human  skulls  were  found  by  Mr.  Gilder  in  the  west  bank
of  the  road,  within  less  than  2  feet  of  the  surface.

The  structure  of  the  Gilder  mound,  which  was  examined  so  far
as  the  partially  frozen  condition  of  the  ground  permitted,  is  as  fol¬
lows:  The  whole  knoll  is  covered  to  a  depth  of  10  inches  with  dark
surface  soil,  which  contains  roots  and  other  vegetable  matter.
Beneath  this  is  the  loess,  apparently  entirely  free  from  coarse  mate¬
rial.  The  color  of  this  deposit  is  deeper  in  its  upper  portion,  fading
out  gradually  to  the  characteristic  yellowish  hue  of  the  dry  loess
beneath.  The  darker  color  above  is  due  in  part  to  moisture,  in  part
to  a  thin  admixture  of  ashes  and  occasional  minute  bits  of  charcoal.
The  signs  of  fire  are  most  noticeable  toward  tin'  center  of  the  mound,
where  they  extend  to  a  depth  of  nearly  3  feet.  An  effort  was  made
to  ascertain  whether  there  is  a  bed  of  baked  earth  beneath  the  super¬
ficial  layer,  as  reported  bv  Mi'.  Gilder,  but  without  success,  on  account
of  the  frozen  condition  of  the  ground.  It  was  plain,  however,  that
r.t  no  point  had  the  baking  progressed  so  far  as  to  render  the  earth
impervious  to  water.  Xo  definite  line  of  separation  between  the  supe¬
rior  and  the  inferior  levels  in  the  mound  was  observed,  and  there
is  no  perceptible  difference  in  the  density  or  structure  of  the  loess  at
different  levels;  in  fact,  the  exposed  surfaces,  being  everywhere
smoothed  by  the  shovel  or  trowel,  showed  no  trace  of  structure  vdiat-
ever.  Two  large  rodent  burrows,  one  running  very  deep,  uTere


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.


76


exposed  during’ the  little  digging  that  was  done.  There  were  found
also  several  channels,  left  by  the  decay  of  roots,  which  passed  deep
down  into  the  loess.  One  small  phalanx  and  two  slivers  of  bone
were  discovered  in  situ  in  the  exposure  previously  made  by  Barbour,
one  of  the  slivers  occurring  at  a  depth  of  5,  the  phalanx  at  nearly
(>,  and  the  other  sliver  at  a  depth  of  7f  feet  from  the  surface.  What
were  pointed  to  as  excavations  outside  of  the  mound  were  difficult
to  distinguish  as  such,  there  being  no  lines  of  demarkation  to  indicate
the  limits  of  the  mound.


Examination  or  the  Bones

SKULL  NO.  1

A  past-middle  age.  masculine,  moderate  sized,  slightly  asymmetric,  but  not
pathological  cranium,  found  by  R.  F.  Gilder,  about  it  feet  deep  in  the  Gilder
mound.  Large  portions  of  the  right  side  and  of  the  base  are  wanting;  part  of
the  left  side  has  been  repaired,  but  warping  prevented  a  good  restoration.

Color  pale  yellowish,  agreeing  with  that  of  other  specimens  from  the  mound;
there  are  a  few  spots  of  slight  black  discoloration,  such  as  are  met  with  on
many  of  the  other  specimens  from  this  locality.  There  is  no  trace  of  fossiliza-
tion,  in  fact  the  bones  appear  quite  recent.

The  skull  is  nearly  dolichocephalic.  The  angles  of  all  the  planes  are
rounded.  The  antero-posterior  surface-arc  is  elliptical  and  shows  no  distinct
summit.  The  supraorbital  ridges  are  of  approximately  medium  masculine  pro¬
portions,  and  extend  over  but  little  more  than  the  median  half  of  each  supra¬
orbital  space.  The  forehead  is  not  high,  but  presents  a  fairly  well-marked
vaulting;  the  left  side  is  slightly  more  anterior  than- the  right.  There  is  but
little  sagittal  elevation.  The  temporal  regions  present  no  special  features;
the  temporal  ridges  are  not  prominent,  and  their  nearest  approach  to  the
median  line  is  5.5  cm.  on  the  right  and  G.l  cm.  on  the  left  side.  The  occiput,
moderately  convex,  shows  a  pronounced,  but  not  excessive,  superior  crest,
and  marked  depressions  for  the  attachment  of  the  smaller  recti  muscles ;  the
right  side  is  slightly  more  prominent  than  the  left.  The  right  mastoid  (left
mastoid  wanting)  is  of  moderate  masculine  size.  The  glenoid  fossae,  which
ai-e  well  preserved,  are  of  ordinary  form  and  good  depth.  The  serration  of
the  sutures  approaches,  especially  in  the  lambdoid,  about  the  medium  form,
as  observed  in  whites.  In  the  right  half  of  the  lambdoid  are  two  small  and
two  larger  sutural  bones.  Obliteration  has  advanced  externally  in  the  coronal
below  the  temporal  ridges,  and  in  the  posterior  half  of  the  sagittal,  with  traces
in  the  lambdoid ;  ventrally  the  three  sutures  are  wholly  occluded,  with  the
exception  of  small  end  portions  of  the  lambdoid.  The  thickness  of  the  left
parietal  ranges  from  4  to  (i  mm.

A  portion  of  the  face,  separated,  shows  an  apparently  mesorhynic  nose,
moderate  alveolar  prognathism,  somewhat  prominent  malars,  and  well-marked
suhmalar  fossa1.  The  lower  jaw  (somewhat  damaged)  is  of  moderate  mascu¬
line  size  and  massiveness,  with  chin  slightly  squarish  and  well  protruding;
diameter  bigonial  10.5,  vertical  height  at  symphisis  3.3  cm.;  the  angles  show
rather  strong  effects  of  muscular  attachment.  The  teeth  in  both  jaws  are  of
medium  size  and,  so  far  as  can  be  seen,  of  ordinary  form ;  they  are  all  much
worn  off.  The  enamel  is  everywhere  of  good  luster  and  uncracked.  On  the


hrdli(5ka]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


77


right  side  in  the  lower  jaw  may  he  noted  the  absence  of  one  incisor,  due
apparently  to  nondevelopment;  on  the  left  there  are  two  incisors,  both  small.
The  third  molars,  now  absent,  must  have  been  small ;  their  cavities  show  a
single  root  of  rather  submedium  proportions.


Measurements  of  skull  no.  t

cm.

Diameter  antero-posterior  maximum- _  _  _ 18. 9

Breadth  maximum,  approximately--  _  _ 14.4

Cephalic  index,  about _  70

Basion-bregma  height,  approximately _ _  13.9

Diameter  bizygomatic  maximum,  approximately _  _____  14.  3

Circumference  maximum,  above  supraorbital  ridges _ 52.  3

Arc  nasion-bregma,  13.2;  bregma-lambda,  12.0;  lambda-opisthion,  12.5;
total  antero-posterior  arc _ 37.  7


SKULL  NO.  2

A  very  defective  adult  specimen,  found  in  Gilder  mound,  by  Mr.  Gilder,  at  a
depth  of  about  3  feet;  sex  uncertain,  though  probably  female;  color  dirty
yellowish,  neutrally  and  to  a  slight  extent  dorsally  with  spots  of  blackish  dis¬
coloration ;  no  fossilization,  no  aspect  of  great  antiquity;  cranium  of  good  size,
normal ;  shape  oblong,  contours  rounded,  outline  of  posterior  plane  approaching
pentagonal ;  supraorbital  ridges  above  medium  feminine,  or  submedium  mascu¬
line,  limited  to  median  half  of  each  supraorbital  space.  Forehead  low  but
vault-bend  distinct  (above  the  bend  the  bone  slopes  backward)  ;  diameter
maximum  (along  coronal  suture),  approximately  11.6  cm.,  nasion-bregma  arc
12.7  cm.  Xo  sagittal  ridge.  Thickness  of  left  parietal  3  to  5  mm.  Sutures
(coronal,  sagittal)  patent,  serration  fair.  Xo  brain  impressions  ventrally.

•skull  no.  3

A  good-sized  adult  female  cranium  (defective)  showing  a  slight  asymmetry,
otherwise  normal.  Discovered  by  Dir.  Gilder  in  the  mound  now  named  after
him  ;  exact  depth  of  find  uncertain,  but  probably  not  more  than  4  feet.  Color
pale  dirty  yellowish ;  no  fossilization — has  the  appearance  of  a  fairly  recent
specimen.  Was  apparently  dolichocephalic ;  greatest  length  18.9  or  19  cm.

The  contours  of  the  skull  are  but  little  angular.  The  supraorbital  ridges  are
of  about  medium  feminine  size.  The  forehead  is  of  moderate  height  and  fairly
good  vaulting ;  the  right  side  is  somewhat  more  prominent  than  the  left.
Diameter  frontal  minimum  8.0,  frontal  maximum  11.1  cm.,  nasion-bregma  arc
12.1.  There  is  scarcely  any  sagittal  elevation.  The  temporal  ridges  are  but
slightly  marked  and  are  distant  from  the  median  line.  The  glenoid  fosste  are
deep.  A  slight  dehiscence,  such  as  occurs  quite  frequently  in  the  Indian,  is
seen  in  the  floor  of  the  left  auditory  meatus.  All  the  remaining  sutures  are
patent,  serration  suhmedium.  Thickness  of  left  parietal  4  to  5  mm.

SKULL  NO.  4

Only  the  frontal  and  parts  of  the  parietals  remain.  Found  “deep”  (though
less  than  0  feet  from  the  surface)  in  the  mound  by  Mr.  Gilder.  It  is  appar¬
ently  a  good-sized  adult  normal  male  skull.  Color  dirty  yellowish,  with  some


78


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


dark  discolorations,  as  on  other  specimens  from  this  locality ;  there  is  no
perceptible  fossilization,  the  bones  appearing  quite  recent.  The  skull  is  rather
broad  though  not  brachyceplialic.  The  supraorbital  ridges  are  of  submedium
masculine  size.  The  forehead  is  low  and  rather  sloping,  but  the  vault-bend  is
quite  marked ;  diameter  frontal  minimum  9.7.  frontal  maximum  12.1  cm.,
nasion-bregma  arc  near  13  cm.  Temporal  ridges  not  pronounced;  nearest
approach  to  median  line  on  t lie  right  5,  on  the  left  4.8  cm.  There  is  a  slight
sagittal  elevation.  The  remaining  sutures  are  ail  patent;  serration  of  coronal
submedium,  of  sagittal  about  medium;  a  moderate-sized  accessory  bone  exists
on  each  side  in  the  coronal,  in  the  locality  of  the  fetal  antero-median  fontanel.
Ventrally  the  frontal  bone  everywhere  shows  good  impressions  of  brain-convo¬
lutions.  Thickness  of  left  parietal  (as  far  as  preserved),  4  to  G  mm.

This  specimen  bears  on  its  surface  marks  of  cutting — an  interesting  feature
which  occurs  on  many  other  bones  from  this  mound.  The  incisions  extend  along
the  whole  border  of  what  remains  of  the  right  parietal  and  over  4  of  that
of  the  left  parietal,  running  nearly  parallel  with  the  coronal  suture.  Numerous
vertical  cuts  or  markings  on  the  left  resemble  very  closely  imitations  of  the
articular  surface  of  the  frontal  bone.  Another  evidence  of  cutting  is  seen  on
the  anterior  part  of  the  specimen,  where  a  portion  of  the  right  supraorbital
ridge  was  thus  removed.  The  incisions  were  all  made  with  some  sharp  instru¬
ment,  and  the  clear-cut  edges  and  ridges  produced  are  not  perceptibly  worn  off.


SKULL  no.  ;>


Frontal  part  only.  The  forehead,  which  is  quite  low,  shows  two  well-defined
depressions  which  mark  it  as  abnormal,  and  on  this  account  the  specimen  can
not  well  be  utilized  for  comparisons.

SKULL  no.  6

This  specimen  (plates  x,  b,  xi,  h;  figures  12,  13,  15),  which  was  dug  out  from
the  Gilder  mound,  at  an  estimated  depth  of  5  feet,  by  a  farmer's  boy  named
Joseph,  is  the  cranium  pictured  in  Professor  Osborn’s  account  and  in  the  Bar-
bour-Ward  papers.  It  is  a  moderate-sized  defective  adult  male  normal  cranium.
Color  pale  yellowish,  with  black  discoloration  on  the  dorsal  surface  of  the  vault.
No  perceptible  fossilization ;  all  the  parts  look  quite  recent  and  still  retain  con¬
siderable  animal  matter.

The  skull  was  apparently  mesocephalic,  with  a  cephalic  index  of  about  79.
The  anterior  plane  shows  a  moderate  sagittal  elevation,  the  lateral  and  superior
planes  are  ovoid  with  the  smaller  extremity  anteriorly,  and  the  posterior  plane
is  pentagonal — forms  all  quite  common  among  Indians.  The  supraorbital  ridges
are  pronounced,  about  as  in  the  Rock  Bluff  and  the  Albany  Mound  crania
described  in  another  part  of  this  paper  (see  page  28  et  seq.),  and  their  distal
extension  aids  in  the  formation  of  a  complete,  though  not  very  heavy,  supra¬
orbital  arch.  The  forehead  is  quite  low  and  sloping,  yet  some  vaulting  and
frontal  bend  are  distinctly  noticeable.  The  temporo-parietal  region  is  somewhat
fuller  than  in  the  other  skulls  from  the  mound,  showing  otherwise  nothing
unusual ;  the  temporal  ridges  are  moderately  marked  and  their  nearest  approach
to  the  median  line  is  5  cm.  on  t  lie  right  and  4  cm.  on  the  left  side.  The  occiput
is  not  protruding;  it  shows  a  prominent  superior  ridge  and  a  separation  of  the
supraoccipital  part  (epactal  bone).  The  right  mastoid  is  of  about  average  mas¬
culine  size.  The  ventral  surface  shows  nothing  peculiar.  Thickness  of  left
parietal  4  to  G.5  mm.


hrdlicka]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


79


Above  the  foramen  magnum,  on  the  right  side,  the  bone  has  been  cut  away
to  some  extent  with  a  sharp  implement;  on  the  left  the  occipital  squama  in
this  locality  is  so  damaged  that  t lie  original  presence  or  absence  of  incised
marks  can  not  be  determined.

A  portion  of  the  upper  face  and  a  lower  jaw  are  said  to  have  been  found
with  this  skull,  but  on  account  of  the  defects  they  can  not  be  fitted.  They
agree  with  the  skull  in  color  and  both  look  quite  fresh.  They  show  the
Presence  of  alveolar  prognathism  of  a  medium  grade,  such  as  occurs  in  general
in  the  Indian.  The  nasal  aperture  was  apparently  mesorhynic ;  its  maximum
breadth  is  2.55  cm.  The  nasal  spine  is  now  but  of  fair  length ;  the  borders
of  the  nasal  apertures  are  sliarp.  The  submalar  fossa'  were  of  good  depth.
The  height  of  the  upper  alveolar  process  in  the  median  lint1  is  very  moderate,
amounting  to  only  1.7  cm.,  without  perceptible  atrophy.  The  palate  was  well
formed;  maximum  external  breadth  <U  cm.  A  bluish-black  discoloration


is  seen  on  the  left  side  of  the  maxilla.  The  lower  jaw «  has  been  recon¬
structed  from  several  pieces,  and  unintentionally  the  separation  of  the  rami
has  been  increased.  It  is  a  normal  specimen  of  moderate  strength,  and  is  a
part  of  the  same  face  to  which  belongs  the  above-described  upper  jaw;  it
shows  a  square  chin  and  quite  prominent  and  pronounced  effects  of  muscular
attachment  on  the  external  surface  of  the  angles.  The  vertical  rami  with
their  processes  and  notch  present  nothing  unusual.  The  teeth  of  both  jaws
are  of  moderate  size;  all  are  much  worn  off;  only  two  molars  exist  on  the
left  side  in  the  upper  jaw  (right  side  broken),  and  on  the  right  side  in  the
lower  one.  The  dentine  and  enamel  of  all  tin1  remaining  teeth  are  in  perfect
condition,  the  latter  preserving  its  normal  luster.  There  is  absolutely  no  feature
of  inferior  development  about  these  specimens.

“The  lower  jaw  depicted  in  Professor  Ward’s  paper,  in  Putnam’s  Magazine  for  Jan¬
uary,  1007  (page  413),  and  marked  “lower  jaw  of  Nebraska  skull  no.  6,"  is  a  specimen
different  from  the  one  here  described  ;  it  would  seem  that  there  must  have  been  an
error  in  assigning  the  Ward  specimen  to  this  skull.


80


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[BULL.  33


Measurements  of  skull  no.  6,  with  accompanying  lower  jaw


Vault :  cm.

Diameter  antero-posterior  maximum _  18.  6

Diameter  lateral  maximum,  about _ 14.7

Height  medium.

Diameter  frontal  minimum  _  8.8

Diameter  frontal  maximum _  11.65

Nasion-bregma  arc _ _ _ 11.  5

Bregma-lambda  arc _  11.8

Lower  jaw :

Vertical  height  in  middle _  3.4

Length  of  right  horizontal  ramus _ _ _  _ 10.  8

Length  of  left  horizontal  ramus _  _  _  _ _  _  10.  5

Height  of  right  vertical  ramus _ 6.8

Least  breadth  of  right  vertical  ramus _  3.  75


skull  no.  8  (plates  x,  a,  xi,  a;  figures  12,  14,  16)

Discovered  in  1894,  at  a  depth  of  less  than  5  feet,  in  Gilder  mound,  by  Charles
S.  Huntington.  A  moderate-sized  imperfect  adult  masculine  cranium,  recon¬
structed  in  the  proper  way  and  without  distortion,  from  about  a  dozen  frag¬
ments.  The  specimen  shows  a  most  interesting  conformation  but  is  in  no  way
diseased  or  deformed.  Color  pale-yellowish  to  grayish,*  with  some  dark  dis¬
coloration  similar  to  that  shown  in  patches  by  almost  all  the  crania  and  many
other  bones  from  the  same  source.  The  dorsal  surface  of  the  vault  shows  a
tendency  to  scaling,  but  there  is  no  chalkiness  of  the  bone,  which  has  a  firm
structure  and  no  perceptible  trace  of  fossilization.

The  skull  is  mesocephalic,  with  length-breadth  index  of  approximately  78.
It  is  ovoid  in  shape,  with  the  smaller  end  anteriorly,  when  viewed  from  the  side
or  the  top,  while  the  outline  of  its  posterior  plane  approaches  the  pentagonal.
Its  most  striking  and  anthropologically  interesting  characteristics  are  a  very
deficient  vaulting  of  the  forehead  and  a  large  forestructure  to  the  same,  con¬
sisting  of  a  pronounced  supraorbital  crest  and  ridges.  In  this  respect  it  can
best  be  described  as  neanderthaloid.  It  does  not  equal  the  well-known  Neander¬
thal  skull  in  its  crest,  ridges,  and  flat  forehead,  but  approximates  it  quite  closely.
The  supraorbital  ridges  and  crest  are  so  pronounced  that  along  their  whole
length  a  well-marked  depression  exists  between  them  and  the  forehead.  There
is  no  trace  of  frontal  bosses  and  but  little  vaulting.  The  glabella  lies  in  a
depression  2.5  mm.  deep  between  the  excessive  ridges.  There  are  a  slight
metopic  ridge  and  a  little  more  pronounced  sagittal  elevation,  terminating  at
the  middle  of  the  sagittal  suture  in  a  well-marked  summit.  The  temporo¬
parietal  regions,  moderately  convex,  show  nothing  unusual.  The  temporal
ridges,  nowhere  pronounced,  are  marked  over  the  anterior  half  of  the  parietals
by  a  depression;  their  nearest  approach  to  the  median  line  on  the  right  is  4.5
cm.  (left?).  The  occiput  shows  medium  convexity  and  a  pronounced  superior
crest.  The  right  mastoid  is  of  rather  submedium  male  proportions.  The
sutures  show  submedium  serration ;  obliteration  is  visible  externally  in  the
posterior  four-fifths  of  the  sagittal,  and  in  small  spots  along  the  lambdoid.
The  base  is  wholly  lacking.  Ventrally  there  is  no  special  feature.  Thickness
of  left  parietal,  5  to  7  mm.


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


BULLETIN  33  PLATE  X


SKULLS  FROM  GILDER  MOUND

a  Side  view  of  skull  no.  8;  b  side  view  of  skull  no.  6


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


BULLETIN  33  PLATE  XI


SKULLS  FROM  GILDER  MOUND

a  Top  view  of  skull  no.  8;  b  top  view  of  skull  no  6


hrdliCka]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


81


Measurements  of  skull  no.  S

cm.

Diameter  antero-posterior  maximum _  18.4

Diameter  lateral  maximum _ 14.  3  to  14.  4

Height,  medium.

Nasion-opisthion  diameter _ 13.  .3

Diameter  frontal  minimum _  __ _  0.0

Diameter  frontal  maximum _  1 1. 3

Circumference  maximum,  above  supraorbital  ridges,  about _ 00.  2

Arc  nasion-bregma.  12.7;  bregma-lambda,  12.7;  lambda-opisthion,  11.8;
totftl  nasion-opisthion _ 37.2


SKULL  NO.  X

This  is  the  skull  of  an  approximately  6-year-old  child,  found  by  Mr.  Gilder
buried  rather  superficially  in  the  Gilder  mound.  It  is  apparently  quite  recent,
well  developed,  thin,  and  decidedly  brachycephalie.  A  small  portion  of  the
occipital  bone  above  the  foramen  magnum  lias  been  cut  away  in  nearly  a  straight
line,  with  some  sharp  instrument.  The  color  of  this  specimen  is  brownish  yellow,
not  radically  different  from  that  of  other  bones  in  the  mound.

FRONTAL  BONE

This  specimen  was  recovered  in  two  widely  separated  pieces  from  the  Gil¬
der  mound  by  Professor  Barbour.  It  lay  4  feet  below  the  surface.  It  is  a  por¬
tion  of  an  adult,  and  apparently  normal,  male  skull,  of  medium  thickness.  It
shows  moderate  masculine  ridges  and  glabella,  and  a  quite  well  vaulted  foi'e-
head.  Diameter  frontal  minimum,  9.6  cm.  Color  agrees  with  that  of  other
specimens  from  the  mound.  No  fossilization.


LOWER  JAW  a

Found  in  Gilder  mound  by  Professor  Barbour,  at  the  depth  of  4  feet.  It  is
the  jaw  of  a  young  subject  (posterior  molars  not  yet  erupted)  and  shows  in
every  way  an  ordinary  Indian  form.  The  chin  is  square,  fairly  prominent.
The  dental  arch  indicates  moderate  prognathism.  The  teeth  were  all  lost  after
death  except  three  of  the  molars,  which  are  of  moderate  size  and  normal  form;
the  anterior  molars  show  each  five  cusps ;  the  one  median  molar  presents  four,
as  usual  in  modern  skulls.  The  enamel  looks  fresh.  The  bone  shows  no  trace
of  fossilization.

The  point  of  the  left  coronoid  process  had  been  cut  off  with  some  sharp
instrument.


PORTION  or  LOWER  JAW

Found  “  deep  ”  in  the  Gilder  mound  by  Professor  Barbour.  The  fragment
consists  of  about  two-thirds  of  the  left  horizontal  ramus,  without  the  chin  or
angle.  The  jaw  was  apparently  masculine  and  rather  strong,  but,  so  far  as

“Pictured  in  Professor  Barbour's  paper  in  the  Records  of  the  Past,  11,  pt.  2,  43,  Feb¬
ruary,  1907.

3453— No.  33—07


-6*


82


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[BULL.  33


can  be  seen,  in  no  way  extraordinary.  The  teeth  are  of  moderate  size,  much
worn ;  the  molars  show  diminishing  size  from  front  to  rear,  as  in  recent  skulls.
The  enamel  is  lusterless  and  cracked ;  the  dentine  is  also  cracked.  The  bone
is  not  fossilized,  but  has  the  appearance  of  greater  age  than  any  of  the  other
specimens.

PORTION  OF  LOWER  JAW  0

Found  in  the  Gilder  mound  by  Professor  Barbour  at  a  depth  of  5  feet.  The
only  part  remaining  is  the  left  vertical  ramus.  This  is  5.7  cm.,  high,  3.55  cm.
broad  at  its  narrowest  part,  and  but  moderately  thick ;  it  shows  a  notch  of
good  depth  and  a  feminine  angle.  There  is  no  perceptible  fossilization.

About  200  yards  north  of  the  eminence  from  which  skulls  nos.  1-8
ivere  recovered,  another  similar  elevation  on  the  ridge  was  dug  into
in  1894  by  the  Parker,  Morris,  and  Huntington  party;  some  human
skulls  and  other  bones  Avere  found  here,  but  nothing  was  preserved.
Still  farther  north,  in  the  Avest  bank  of  the  wagon  road  that  runs
along  the  ridge,  toward  the  end  of  1906  Mr.  Gilder  found,  not  more
than  2  feet  beloAV  the  surface,  three  defective  female  skulls.  Tavo  of
these  are  apparently  dolichocephalic,  Avhile  one — the  best  preserved —
is  mesocephalic  (cephalic  index  79.3).  These  crania  are  all  darker
in  color  than  the  specimens  from  the  Gilder  mound — a  fact  which
may  be  due  to  their  more  superficial  position ;  the  surfaces  of  all
three  show  many  minute  pits  and  furrows,  root-erosions.  In  skull
no.  x,  the  occipital  squama  above  the  foramen  magnum  has  been  cut
aAvay  on  each  side  of  the  median  line,  leaving  two  quite  symmet¬
rical  curved  defective  portions.  This  suggests  the  cutting  in  the
Joseph  skull  (no.  G,  Gilder  mound)  in  the  same  location.

HUMERI

Five  entire  bones  (of  which  two  form  a  pair)  and  12  pieces  of  distinct
humeri,  recovered  from  the  mound  by  Mr.  Gilder  at  various  depths  not  ascer¬
tained.  All  show  good,  but  not  extraordinary,  sizes  and  dimensions,  and  in
flatness  of  the  shaft,  its  shape,  and  in  the  frequency  of  perforation  of  the
septum  betAveen  the  coronoid  and  the  olecranon  fosste,  approximate  closely
the  humeri  of  Indians.  A  rare  feature  in  two  of  the  specimens,  although  one
not  unknown  in  Indians,  is  the  presence  of  ridges  3  and  4  mm.  high,  respec¬
tively,  at  the  highest  point,  in  the  locality  of  the  supracondyloid  process.  None
of  the  bones  show  any  trace  of  fossilization.  On  three  of  them  are  seen  border
scratches,  cut-marks,  or  marks  resulting  from  the  gnawing  of  rodents — the
scratches,  smaller  cuts,  and  teeth  marks  can  not  well  be  distinguished  one  from
another.


“  Pictured  iu  Professor  Barbour's  paper  iu  the  Records  of  the  Past ,  n,  pt.  2,  45,  Feb¬
ruary,  1907.


HRDLICKA]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


83'


Details


Specimens.

Length.

Diameter
lateral  at
middle
( = A) .

Diameter
antero¬
posterior  at
middle
(  =  B).

Index  at
middle
(BxlOO).

A

a,  a  right .

cm.

34.8

cm.

2.50

cm.

1.60

04.0

6,  left .

34.3

2. 25

1.05

73.3

c,  right .

34.5

2.50

1.80

72.0

d.  left .

35.0

2.15

1.55

72.1

e,  left .

33.2

2.35

1.35

57.4

/ .

(?)

2.25

1.45

64.4

9 .

(?)

2.55

1.75

68.6

h .

(?)

2.05

1.50

73.2

j .

(?)

2. 30

1.70

73.9

0 .

(?)

2.25

1.50

66.7

p .

t?)

2.25

1.70

75.6

a .

(?)

2.35

1.65

70.2

n  Provisional  designations;  a  and  b  belong  to  the  same  skeleton.


Shapes  of  shaft.  Specimens  a,  b,  and  </=near  prismatic  (type  1). 6  Specimens
C  and  e=near  lateral  prism  (type  2).  Specimens  d,  g,  j,  o,  p=near  plano¬
convex,  or  plano-convex  (type  pc.).  In  a,  l),  c,  and  e  there  is  also  a  tendency
toward  the  replacement  of  the  anterior  border  by  a  fourth  surface  (type  4).

Perforations  between  coronoid  and  olecranon  fossce  (in  specimens  where  the
lower  end  of  the  bone  is  preserved)  :

Humerus  a=none.  Humerus  i=two  small  and  one  pin-

Humerus  b=none.  point.

Humerus  c=none.  Humerus  fc=large.

Humerus  d=large.  Humerus  Z=none.

Humerus  e=large.  Humerus  to = none.

Humerus  7t=small.

Total,  five  (50  per  cent)  with  and  five  without  perforation.

FRAGMENT  OF  A  HUMERUS

Found  “  deep  ”  in  the  mound  by  Professor  Barbour.  Shape  of  shaft  at  mid¬
dle,  nearly  plano-convex ;  diameter  of  antero-posterior  at  middle,  1.8  cm. ;
diameter  lateral,  2.5  cm. ;  index,  72.  Lower  end  lacking.  No  fossilization.

FRAGMENT  OF  A  RIGHT  ULNA

Found  “  deep  ”.  in  the  mound  by  Professor  Barbour.  An  adult  female  bone,
with  prismatic  shaft  (type  no.  1),  in  no  way  peculiar.  No  fossilization.  Cuts
on  the  interosseous  border  and  anterior  surface.

&  See  Typical  Forms  of  Shaft  of  Long  Bones,  Proceedings  of  the  Association  of  Ameri¬
can  Anatomists,  14th  session,  55-60,  Dec.,  1900.


84


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bi  ll.  33


RADII

Three  whole  good-sized  adult  normal  radii  (among  which  two  are  from  one
subject),  recovered  from  the  mound  at  unrecorded  depths,  by  Mr.  Gilder;
these  show  no  unusual  features.  Lengths:  a1,  right,  27.8;  a2,  left,  27.4;  b,  left,
23.3  cm.


FEMORA

Eight  entire  adult  bones  (in  which  there  are  three  pairs),  with  nine  pieces
and  three  femora  of  small  children,  obtained  from  the  mound  by  Mr.  Gilder
at  various  depths,  not  ascertained.  Two  of  the  whole  bones  (a  pair  c\  <?)
show  an  abnormal  curvature  forward ;  the  rest  are  normal  and  indicate  good
stature  and  strength  of  the  people.  The  general  shape  and  the  subtrochanteric
flattening  (platymery)  of  most  of  the  bones  indicate  a  close  approximation  to
Indian  femora.-  There  is  no  fossilization.


J)  eta  Us — Measurements


Subtrochanteric  flattening.

Index
(B  x  100).

A

Specimens.

Length  (bi-
condylar).

Greatest
breadth  (A).

Smallest
antero-poste-
rior  dimen¬
sion  (B).

a1,  right .

cm.

48.5

cm.

3. 55

cm.

2. 55

71.8

a2,  left .

48.4

3. 65

2.50

68. 5

61,  right .

48.0

3. 70

2. 65

71.6

62,  left .

48.3

3.50

2.70

77.1

c1,  right .

47.8

3.20

2. 60

81.2

c=,  left .

48.4

3.  20

2. 80

87. 5

d,  left,  about .

47.3

3. 20

2. 55

79.7

e,  right . . .

(?)

3.05

2.50

82.0

g,  right .

(?)

3.20

2. 25

70.3

7t,  left .

(?)

3. 10

2.20

71.0

j,  left  .

(?)

3.20

2.40

75.0

k,  left  .

(?)

3.40

2.45

72.1

1,  left  a .

46.1

3. 70

2.30

62.2

m,  left .

(?)

3.55

2.40

67. 6

“In  two  pieces;  one  found  by  Gilder,  November  1.  1906;  the  other,  at  a  deeper  level,
November  7,  1906.


SHAPES  OF  SHAFT

In  seven  instances  (a1,  a2,  Jr,  c",  a,  j,  1)  the  shape  is  indeterminate;  in  six
(ft1,  c\  d,  e,  f,  m)  it  is  the  prismatic  (type  no.  1)  or  approximate  thereto;  and
in  two  (/(,  i)  the  shaft  is  nearly  cylindrical.  In  c1  and  c2  is  shown,  as  a  com¬
pensation  for  the  curvature,  excessive  linea  aspera.

TIBI2E

Two  entire  adult  bones  (a  pair)  and  ten  pieces,  obtained  by  Mr.  Gilder
from  various  levels  (unnoted)  in  the  mound.  The  hones  are  of  good  length
and  strong;  they  show  ordinary  forms  and  only  moderate  inclination  backward
of  the  head.  They  approximate  in  general  the  tibite  of  Indians  without  showing


HRDLICKA]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


85


the  excessive  flattening  met  with  in  some  parts  of  the  country.  Three  of  the
bones  (two  of  which  belong  to  one  skeleton)  are  diseased  (probably  syphilitic),
and  on  three  pieces  with  the  head  lacking  are  seen  in  the  superior  border
(twice  in  the  posterior  part  thereof)  what  are  apparently  cuts;  some  of  these
marks,  however,  resemble  marks  made  by  rodents’  teeth.  None  of  the  specimens
show  any  trace  of  fossilization  and  a  few  look  quite  fresh.

Details — Measurements


Specimen.

Length

(minus

spine).

Diameter.

Index  at
middle
(BxlOO)

A

Anteropos¬
terior  at
middle  (A).

Lateral  at
middle  ;B).

cm.

cm.

cm.

a1,  right .

40.7

3.50

2. 30

65.7

a2,  left .

41.0

3.35

2.20

65.7

b,  left  .

(?)

3.50

2.50

71.4

e,  right .

(?)

3.55

2.90

8L7

<h,  right .

(?)

3.50

2.50

71.4

e,  right .

(?)

3.20

2.60

81.2

f,  right .

(?)

3.50

2.45

70.0

<7,  right . .

(?)

3. 10

2.25

72.6

i,  left .

(?)

3. 00

2. 10

70.0

j,  left . . .

(?)

3.30

2. 30

69.7

k,  left .

(?)

3.40

2.25

66.2

ha  ires  of  the  shaft.  Six  of  the  specimens  (a1,  a2,  h,  c,  f,  i)  are  of,  or  closely
approximate  to,  the  prismatic  (type  no.  1)  ;  three  (d1,  j,  k)  show  a  tendency
to  rhomboidal  form  (type  no.  4)  ;  in  c  the  internal  surface  is  hollowed  out
(type  no.  3),  and  <j  shows  a  lack  of  differentiation  of  the  external  border.


FIBULA


One  adult  specimen,  about  39.5  cm.  long,  of  normal  form  and  good  strength,
found  in  the  mound  by  Mr.  Gilder  at  a  depth  unnoted.  No  fossilization.

A  fragment  of  a  fibula,  dug  out  of  the  mound  at  an  unknown  depth,  and
given  by  Mr.  Gilder  to  the  writer,  bears  plain  marks  of  cutting  with  both  some
sharp  instrument  and  small  rodents’  teeth.

SCAPULA

Found  by  Professor  Barbour  in  the  Gilder  mound  at  a  depth  of  4i  to  5  feet.
A  defective  left  shoulder  blade  of  moderate  size  and  not  unusual  form.  The
thin  body  of  the  bone  looks  fresh,  and  no  part  shows  any  fossilization.  The
superior  border  has  been  cleanly  cut  off  along  nearly  its  whole  length  close  to
the  spine.

RIBS

Three  pieces  of  ribs,  found  “  deep  ”  in  the  mound,  of  moderate  proportions  and
ordinary  form.  No  fossilization.  On  one  of  the  specimens  are  seen  marks
which  may  have  been  made  with  a  knife  or  by  the  teeth  of  rodents.


86


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


VERTEBRAE

Several  dorsal  and  lumbar  vertebrae  belonging,  apparently,  to  one  body,  found
“  deep  ”  in  the  mound  by  Professor  Barbour.  The  bones  are  of  moderate  dimen¬
sions.  The  bodies  of  several  of  the  vertebrae  show  asymmetry,  while  the  twelfth
dorsal  presents,  in  addition,  somewhat  peculiar  lateral  processes,  a  deviation  of
the  spinous  process  to  the  left,  and  a  plain  trace  of  a  formerly  existing  separa¬
tion  of  the  left  lamella  from  the  base  of  this  process,  conditions  all  pointing  to
disturbance  in  ossification  of  this  spine.  None  of  the  bones  show  any
fossilization.

SACRUM

Found  “deep”  in  the  mound  by  Professor  Barbour.  The  bone  is  composed
of  five  segments  and  shows  normal  size  and  form,  with  moderate  curvature.
Height,  11.5  cm.;  maximum  breadth,  about  11.4  cm.  No  fossilization.

PELVES


Two  adult  male  pelves,  found  in  the  mound  by  Mr.  Gilder;  depth  not  recorded.
The  specimens  in  every  respect  are  normally  developed,  and  approximate  in  form
the  pelvis  of  the  Indian.  One,*  accompanied  by  several  of  the  lumbar  vertebrie,
shows  some  senile  marginal  exostoses,,  such  as  are  common  in  aged  whites  and
occur  also  in  old  Indians.

Telvis  a,  somewhat  defective  ;  is  strongly  built.  Diameter  external  maximum
(bi-iliac),  31.4  cm.;  height  maximum,  about  22.7  cm.;  greatest  breadth  of  right
ilium,  17.1  cm. ;  of  left  ilium,  17  cm. ;  greatest  transverse  diameter  of  the
superior  strait,  1G.S  cm.  The  sacrum  consists  of  five  segments,  but  the  last
lumbar  shows  on  the  left  side  a  tendency  to  assimilation;  curvature  medium;
height,  11.1  cm.;  greatest  breadth,  12.9  cm.

Pelvis  1),  defective ;  shows  bones  of  moderate  strength.  Greatest  height  of
right  os  innominatum,  22.9  cm. ;  greatest  breadth,  10.7  cm.  Sacrum  damaged ;
curvature  moderate;  was  composed,  apparently,  of  six  segments.  Neural  canal
shows  posteriorly  throughout  its  height  a  defect,  due  to  imperfection  of  the
neural  arches  of  the  vertebrae  composing  the  bone.

OS  CALCIS

Found  “deep”  in  the  mound.  Form  quite  ordinary.  No  fossilization.
Greatest  length,  7.S  cm. ;  height  at  middle,  4.25  cm. ;  smallest  breadth  at  middle.
3.15  cm.

PHALANGES


Several  phalanges  and  pieces  thereof  from  “  deep  ”  in  the  mound.  The
bones  are  of  moderate  size  and  show  no  special  features.  Some  of  the  slivers
look  very  fresh.

LONG  BONES  OF  A  CHILD  LESS  THAN  A  YEAR  OLD

Found  “deep”  in  the  mound  by  Professor  Barbour.  The  bones  are  slender,
but  normal ;  the  right  femur  measures,  minus  epiphyses,  10.7  cm.  The  bones
look  quite  fresh,  and  certainly  retain  a  good  proportion  of  animal  matter.  The
ends  of  the  apophyses,  except  where  broken  off,  show  the  delicate  cancellous
tissue  in  a  perfect  state  of  preservation.


hrdliCka]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


87


Discussion

The  examination  of  the  human  remains  from  the  Gilder  mound
being  concluded  and  their  somatological  characters  described,  in
detail,  it  is  now  necessary  to  consider  the  question  of  their  probable
relations  to  the  geological  formation  with  which  they  were  associated
and  the  bearing  of  these  relations  on  the  question  of  antiquity.

It  is  not  questioned  that  the  various  explorations  have  been  intel¬
ligently  conducted  and  that  sincere  effort  has  been  made  to  ascertain
and  promulgate  the  entire  truth  regarding  the  finds,  but  if  the  pres¬
ent  knowledge  concerning  these  specimens  is  impartially  considered,
it  is  apparent  that  the  theory  of  a  more  than  recent  geological  origin
of  any  of  them  meets  with  serious  objections,  while,  on  the  other
hand,  no  insurmountable  obstacle  appears  in  connection  with  the
assumption  that  all  are  comparatively  recent.  If  the  existence  of
geologically  ancient  man  in  any  part  of  this  country  is  to  be  generally
accepted,  the  evidence  should  be  free  from  serious  doubts  and  uncer¬
tainties.  That  this  condition  is  not  fulfilled  in  the  present  case  will
become  manifest  when  due  weight  is  given  to  the  following  consid¬
erations  :

(u)AVithin  a  depth  of  5  feet  or  less,  the  Gilder  mound  contained
the  remains  of  apparently  about  a  dozen  bodies.  There  were  male
and  female  skeletons,  ranging  in  age  from  the  infant  to  the  senile
subject.  Two  or  three  of  the  skulls,  with  some  accompanying  bones,
lay  within  2^  feet  or  less  of  the  surface.  Below  this,  according  to
the  explicit  statements  of  Mr.  Gilder,  was  a  layer  of  clay  of  undeter¬
mined  area,  hardened  by  fire.®  This  is  an  occasional  feature  in
burial  mounds  of  this  general  region,6  the  purpose  of  the  baking  being
possibly  to  protect  the  bodies  from  animals  which  otherwise  might
prey  on  them.  Beneath  this  cover  of  hardened  earth  lay  in  some  pro¬
miscuity,  but  in  numerous  instances  in  partial  natural  association,  the
skeletal  remains  of  eight  or  nine  bodies.®  At  still  lower  levels,
down  to  the  depth  of  1 1|  feet,  were  found  here  and  there  pieces  of
human  bones.  Instances  of  anatomical  association  extended  to  the

"  A  small  piece  of  clay  secured  by  Mr.  Gilder  and  recently  sent  for  examination  to
the  writer  by  Professor  Barbour,  shows  unmistakable  signs  of  partial  burning.  Portions
of  the  piece  are  of  the  color  and  nearly  of  (he  consistency  of  a  light-burned  brick.  A
sample  of  this  nature,  while  not  conclusive  proof  of  an  extended  fire-hardened  layer,  is
nevertheless  confirmatory  of  Mr.  Gilder’s  earlier  statements  as  to  the  existence  of  such  a
layer.

b  See  Cyrus  Thomas,  Report  on  the  Mound  Exploration  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnology,
Twelfth  Annual  Report  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  Washington,  1894  ;  and
Frederick  Starr,  Summary  of  the  Archeology  of  Iowa  (with  Bibliography  of  Iowan
Antiquities),  Proceedings  of  the  Davenport  Academy  of  Sciences,  vi,  1895.

c  According  to  information  received  from  Professor  Barbour  March  5,  a  block  of  loess
which  was  taken  to  the  laboratory  in  its  entirety,  showed  parts  of  another  skeleton.
The  bones  began  at  4  feet  9  inches  from  the  surface  and  extended  down  to  6  feet,  several
of  them  plainly  showing  anatomical  association.


88


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


depth  of  6  or  6-}-  feet.  Below  this  everything  was  disconnected  and
fragmentary.

Now,  ordinarily,  the  interpretation  of  these  facts  would  be  quite
simple,  as  the  conditions  observed  are  in  general  characteristic  of  the
ordinary  low  mound  of  the  region.  Some  of  the  bodies  seem  to  have
been  buried  immediately  after  death;  others,  after  having  been  ex¬
posed  to  the  elements  on  scaffolds,  or  otherwise  treated.  Later
burials  by  the  same  or  other  peoples  appear  to  have  been  made  about
the  margins  of  the  mound  and  also  above  the  hardened  clay.  In  the
writer’s  view  it  is  impossible  that  the  nine  or  more  bodies  beneath
the  fire-hardened  clay  should  have  drifted  into  that  position  at  any
time  or  that  they  should  have  come  there  in  any  manner  other  than
as  direct  burials;  and  it  is  highly  probable  that,  were  it  not  for  the
large  supraorbital  ridges  and  low  foreheads  of  some  of  the  crania,
the  question  of  geological  antiquity  would  never  have  been  raised
with  respect  to  any  of  these  remains.

There  is  nothing  in  the  conditions  connected  with  the  bones  which
came  from  the  levels  between  21  and  G  feet  to  suggest  particular
antiquity.  The  depth  at  which  they  were  found  is  in  no  way  excep¬
tional  ;  in  fact,  this  depth  is  quite  the  rule  in  low  mounds.  The
absence  of  surface  soil  of  darker  color  is  not  remarkable,  since,
except  where  charcoal  is  present,  the  color  resulting  from  decay  of
vegetal  matter  soon  disappears  through  chemical  changes  and  leach¬
ing.  The  presence  in  the  neighborhood  of  the  bones  of  small  pebbles
and  fossil  shells  would  be  natural,  if  these  objects  existed  originally  in
the  loess  of  the  locality,  for  no  one  burying  a  body  would  sift  the  earth
with  which  to  cover  it.  The  baking  of  the  earth  over  the  bodies  was
not  accidental,  for  the  signs  of  fire  diminished  toward  the  periphery  of
the  mound,  and,  besides,  as  already  stated,  it  was  not  a  rare  practice
of  the  aborigines  of  the  Missouri  valley  to  bake  the  surface  of
burial  mounds.  It  is  likewise  evident  that  this  baking  can  not  be
attributed  to  the  people  who  buried  the  two  or  three  bodies  above  it;
they  would  hardly  have  chosen  a  spot  over  a  deposit  of  human  bones
belonging  to  a  previous  geological  age  and  then,  after  baking  the
earth  immediately  covering  the  deposit,  have  buried  their  own  dead
on  this  floor,  carrying  to  the  place  21  feet  of  earth  for  the  purpose
of  covering  the  bodies.  It  is  more  reasonable  to  suppose  that  these
people  resorted  to  a  regular  burial  mound  of  their  own  or  of  another
comparatively  recent  tribe.

Besides  the  skeletal  parts,  which  maintained  more  or  less  their
natural  relation,  there  were  found  at  deeper  levels  in  the  mound,
and  possibly  a  little  outside  of  it,  human  bones  in  small  pieces.
I  hese  fragments  were  scattered  and  comparatively  few  in  number — ■
not  more  than  “  one  bit  of  bone  ”  to  5  or  6  cubic  feet  of  earth.  The
fragmentary  character  of  these  bones  and  their  wide  dispersal


hrdlicka]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


89


through  the  formation  have  been  regarded  as  evidence  that  they
were  deposited  contemporaneously  with  that  formation  (loess)  and,
hence,  that  they  are  of  great  age,  antedating  the  shaping  of  (he  hill
itself.  Right  here,  however,  we  are  confronted  with  a  perplexing
dilemma.  If  these  fragments  found  more  than  6  feet  below  the
surface  are  admitted  to  proceed  from  the  remains  deposited  above
the  6-foot  level  and  just  below  the  baked  earth — the  remains  of
people  of  the  low  foreheads,  we  must  then  abandon  the  assumption
that  they  are  as  ancient  as  the  deposits  of  loess  immediately  about
them,  and  also  the  idea  that  these  deposits  have  remained  undisturbed
since  their  formation.  On  the  other  hand,  should  the  fragments  he
regarded  as  distinct  in  origin  from  the  skeletons  found  between  the
2 foot  and  6-foot  levels,  as  they  must  be  if  the  formations  have  re¬
mained  undisturbed,  the  problem  takes  on  a  new  phase,  and  we  must
account  for  several  distinct  deposits  of  human  remains  within  or
beneath  the  mound.  In  that  case  the  inferior  type  of  some  of  the
skulls  from  the  layer  just  below  the  baked  earth  can  have  no  bearing-
on  the  antiquity  of  the  fragments  deeper  down.  Furthermore,  the
higher  fragments  found  beneath  the  6-foot  level  could  scarcely  then
he  regarded  as  of  the  same  origin  as  the  lower  ones,  for  the  reason
that  the  distance  between  these  two  groups  of  pieces  is  far  greater
than  that  between  the  higher-lying  fragments  and  the  superimposed
skeletons.

The  fact  that  the  bones  between  the  2^-foot  and  6- foot  levels  were
mixed  and  broken  and  parts  were  missing  may  be  difficult  to  explain,
but  similar  conditions  are  common  in  mound  burials  as  well  as  in  other
burials,  and  are  especially  to  be  expected  where  the  excavation  has
not  been  conducted  from  the  beginning  with  the  utmost  care.  Inequal¬
ities  in  decay,  natural  movements  of  the  earth,  the  burrowing  and
direct  dragging  by  rodents,  the  penetration  of  roots,  and  occasional
unrecorded  disturbances  of  the  soil  produce  remarkable  results  of
this  nature.  Whole  limbs,  or  the  entire  head,  and  sometimes  a  large
part  of  the  body,  may  thus  disappear,  or  the  remains  may  he
broken,  teeth  lost,  and  the  hones  scattered.  There  must  have  been  a
similar  occurrence  even  with  the  uppermost  or  intrusive  burials,  for  of
one  of  the  bodies,  that  of  a  child,  which  is  regarded  as  the  most  recent,
there  is  only  the  incomplete  skull,  while  but  little  more  was  found  of
the  other  two  bodies  inhumed  above  the  fire-hardened  earth.  The
fact  that  there  is  no  break  or  horizon  of  separation  in  the  deposits
between  the  bones  of  the  principal  deposit  and  those  below,  and  that
larger  fragments  were  discovered  only  in  the  proximity  of  these
main  burials,  speaks  much  for  the  common  origin  of  all  the  specimens
under  consideration.  That  some  slivers  could  have  been  so  displaced
as  to  lie  actually  beyond  the  limits  of  the  mound  does  not  seem
improbable.


90


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[BULL.  33


(b)  Observing  the  condition  of  the  bones,  it  is  noted  that  the  color,
surface  markings,  consistency,  discolorations,  and  other  characteris¬
tics  are  much  the  same  at  all  levels;  the  differences  are  no  greater
than  those  observed  in  the  different  parts  of  a  single  skull  or  in
specimens  in  immediate  proximity  to  one  another.  Such  could
hardly  be  the  case  if  some  of  the  bones  were  thousands  of  years  more
ancient  than  others.  The  chemical  action  of  the  soil,  coupled  with
that  of  organic  elements  within  it,  on  human  bones  in  some  instances
may  be  very  slight,  yet  it  is  incredible  that  no  marked  differences
should  be  perceptible  in  the  effects  of  these  agencies  on  bones  of  the
Glacial  or  the  immediately  post-Glacial  period  and  those  of  recent
centuries.

This  brings  us  directly  to  the  very  important  concurrent  fact  of
the  total  absence  from  any  of  the  bones  of  perceptible  fossilization.
Such  a  condition  would  be  hard  to  explain  in  bones  dating  from  the
period  of  the  original  loess  deposit  and  under  the  circumstances  in
which  the  specimens  in  question  Avere  found.  It  is  true  that  minor
grades  of  mineralization,  which  may  be  difficult  of  detection,  occur  in
rare  instances  in  certain  pleistocene  sands  or  in  perpetually  dry  caATe
deposits,  but  the  fine  Nebraska  loess  presents  different  conditions.
The  fire-hardening  at  one  of  the  higher  levels  in  the  mound  was  not
sufficient  to  keep  out  moisture  and  air,  whose  presence  facilitates
physical  and  chemical  changes  in  inclosed  bones.  At  the  time  of  our
visit  to  the  locality  in  January  the  earth  Avas  found  to  be  frozen  at  a
level  loAver  than  the  baked  layer.  To  overcome  this  difficulty  of
absence  of  perceptible  mineral  replacement,  and  even  of  infiltration
of  the  specimens,  those  who  would  prove  that  the  deeper-lying  bones
from  the  Gilder  mound  are  geologically  ancient  should  produce  satis¬
factory  specimens  of  bones,  unquestionably  ancient  vet  nonfossilized,
from  deposits  of  the  same  nature  and  existing  under  the  same  con¬
ditions.

Only  one  -piece,  the  fragment  of  a  lower  jaw,  sIioavs  changes  such
as  could  have  been  produced  by  exposure  to  the  elements,  even  for
a  moderate  length  of  time.  On  none  of  the  other  bones  do  we  find
the  easily  recognizable  results  of  bleaching  or  cracking  caused  by
exposure  to  the  sun,  or  of  superficial  abrasion  that  could  be  attrib¬
uted  to  water  action.  The  etching  or  pitting  of  the  surface  obserwd
in  some  of  the  bones  is  due  to  the  action  of  minute  roots  or  to  corro¬
sion  by  chemical  agencies  in  the  soil  or  in  percolating  waters.
These  features  are  common  to  bones  embedded  for  even  short  periods
in  various  soils.

( c )  Numerous  bones  from  the  different  levels  show  marks  due  to
the  gnawing  of  rodents  and  also  cuts  made  by  some  sharp  implement
Avielded  by  human  hands.  The  tooth  marks,  indicate  that  at  some


HRDLICKA]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


91


time  rodents  did  have  access  to  these  pieces,  and  as  none  of  the  speci¬
mens  thus  marked  show  weathering,  they  must  have  been  reached  by
animals  burrowing  in  the  mound.®  The  smaller  fragments  of  bones
would  thus  certainly  be  dragged  and  displaced,  and  it  is  very  likely
that  some  of  them  would  eventually  come  to  rest  at  much  lower
levels  than  before.  The  results  of  the  caving  in  of  the  burrows,
especially  of  the  spacious  chambers  characteristic  of  the  dwellings
of  certain  rodents,  must  also  be  considered  in  this  connection.  The
depth  the  bits  of  bone  could  thus  reach  would  be  limited  only  by  the
depth  of  the  burrowing,  and  that  this  may  have  reached  in  the  fine
loess  111  feet,  or  even  more,  will  not  be  denied.  It  is  apparent  that
this  agency  is  sufficient  to  account  for  the  presence  of  some,  if  not
of  all,  of  the  smaller  bones  at  the  lower  levels.

(d)  The  presence  of  knife  marks  on  a  number  of  the  bones  has  an
important  bearing  on  the  question  of  relationship  of  the  bones  of
different  layers  to  one  another.  These  marks  are  seen,  as  has  been
noted,  on  bones  from  the  more  superficial  as  well  as  on  some  from
the  deeper  layers.  They  are  of  similar  character,  occurring  mostly
on  the  edges  or  margins  of  the  bones  and  in  nearly  all  cases  are
restricted  to  the  long  bones  and  to  the  skull.  Their  similar  location
on  the  skull — namely,  in  the  rear  of  the  foramen  magnum — indicates
an  identity  of  custom  such  as  might  develop,  for  instance,  in  the
not  unusual  practice  of  cleaning  the  bones  before  secondary  burial.
This  peculiar  cutting  is  seen  on  skull  no.  G,  which  is  described  as
representing  the  ancient  loess  man,  as  well  as  on  the  child’s  skull,
which  is  regarded  as  the  most  recent,  belonging  to  the  topmost  layers
above  the  baked  earth,  and  also  on  one  of  the  female  skulls  taken  out
near  the  surface  in  the  bank  of  the  road.  The  advocates  of  great
antiquity  will  need  to  explain  these  coincidences.  It  is  difficult  to
imagine  peoples,  ages  apart  and  in  a  locality  subject,  doubtless,  to
changes  of  population,  engaging  in  exactly  the  same  very  peculiar
and  unusual  practice  of  whittling  away  a  particular  portion  of  the
occipital.6

°  On  March  14  the  writer  received  from  Professor  Barbour  several  teeth,  found  with
a  crushed  skull  in  one  of  the  blocks  of  “  undisturbed  ”  loess  containing  pieces  of  human
hones,  at  the  depth  of  5 J  feet.  All  these  teeth  were  identified,  with  the  aid  of  Dr.  M.  W.
Lyon,  of  the  division  of  mammals,  U.  S.  National  Museum,  as  those  of  Gcomys  bursarius,
or  the  common  modern  pocket  gopher.  See  in  this  connection  Professor  Blackman’s
statement  on  p.  74.

b  Superficial  cutting  is  present  also,  as  described  in  another  part  of  this  paper,  on  the
left  side  of  the  vault  of  the  Rock  Bluff  skull,  from  Illinois.  Besides  this  instance,  the
writer  found  practically  identical  cuttings  in  the  occipital,  back  of  the  foramen  magnum,
in  the  National  Museum  skull  no.  243017,  from  a  mound  at  the  mouth  of  the  Illinois  river
(shows  also  cuts  about  the  orbits)  ;  and  in  nos.  225252,  228876,  228877,  228878,  228880,
228881,  228882,  243223,  and  243238,  parts  of  Professor  Montgomery’s  collection,  from
mounds  in  North  Dakota.  None  of  these  specimens  have  any  claim  to  geological
antiquity.  Some  of  the  mounds  explored  by  Professor  Montgomery  and  from  which  the
above  skulls  are  derived  showed  also  the  peculiarity  of  baked  earth  above  the  remains  of
the  skeletons.


92


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


No  animal  bones  of  any  kind  have  been  found  in  the  excavation,
unless  they  are  represented  by  one  specimen  which  does  not  resemble
a  normal  human  bone,  but  may  be  the  proximal  half  of  a  human
clavicle,®  pathologically  altered.  What  were  mentioned  in  one  of  the
recent  publications  relating  to  these  finds  as  “  presumably  the  bones
of  a  young  wolf,  with  epiphyses  wanting,”  are  the  long  bones  of  a
very  young  child.

( e )  The  principal  support  for  the  notion  of  the  great  antiquity
of  the  deeper-lying  remains  from  the  Gilder  mound  is  the  low  type
of  several  of  the  skulls,  especially  those  numbered  0  and  8.  The
particular  features  indicative  of  low  type  are  a  remarkably  low
forehead  and  pronounced  supraorbital  ridges.  The  size  of  the  crania,
as  indicated  by  their  external  measurements,  their  form  in  general,
as  well  as  in  particular  parts,  and  the  thickness  of  their  walls,  show
considerable  uniformity  among  themselves  and  present  no  excep¬
tional  features  when  compared  with  those  of  Indians.  Notwithstand¬
ing  the  low  foreheads,  the  skulls  do  not  impress  one  as  those  of
idiots  or  imbeciles,  although  the  possibility  that  one  or  more  of  them
are  remains  of  such  defectives  can  not  be  excluded.  Imbecility  occurs
among  probably  all  peoples.  The  writer  is  inclined  to  regard  these
low-browed  crania  as  examples  of  individual  peculiarities.  Their
special  features,  which  are  really  exaggerations  of  definite  sexual
characters,  may  indicate  degeneration  or  they  may  possibly  be  rever¬
sions.  The  fact  that  several  of  the  same  t}qie  are  found  in  one
locality  will  be  readily  understood  by  those  acquainted  with  the
principles  of  heredity;  besides,  it  will  be  remembered  that  only  one
of  the  skulls  shows  the  inferior  features  in  a  very  pronounced  form.
Exceptional  cases  of  this  nature  are  known  to  occur  among  all
peoples  with  which  we  are  acquainted ;  they  are  met  with  even
among  civilized  whites.  Skulls  with  low  foreheads  and  pronounced
ridges  certainly  do  occur  among  the  Indians,  and  it  is  very  suggest¬
ive  that  the  majority  of  the  crania  of  this  type  thus  far  observed
have  been  discovered  in  mounds  of  the  general  region  in  which  are
located  the  present  finds.  This  region  extends,  so  far  as  we  may
now  judge,  over  portions  of  Illinois,  Iowa,  and  Wisconsin,  reaching
the  Dakotas,  and  the  burials  from  which  they  are  derived  have  no
claim  to  geological  antiquity.  The  better-known  instances  of  these
finds  are  as  follows:

In  The  American  Naturalist  (xxm,  185-188,  1889),  Clement  L.
Webster  reports  in  brief  on  the  exploration  of  ancient  mounds  at
Floyd,  Iowa.1  The  mounds  were  three  in  number  and  were  sit-

a  Another  exception  is  tlie  pocket-gopher  teeth  mentioned  in  the  footnote  on  p.  91.

6  Abstracts  of  tills,  ns  well  as  of  the  following  Webster  paper,  may  be  found  in
F.  Starr’s  Summary  of  the  Archeology  of  Iowa,  Proceedings  of  the  Davenport  Academy
of  Sciences,  vi,  GI,  78,  1895.


hrdlicka]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


(J8


uated  on  the  west  side  of  Cedar  river.  In  the  largest  of  these  mounds
(circular  in  form  and  about  30  feet  in  diameter,  but  only  2  feet  high)
were  found,  at  a  depth  of  a  little  more  than  5  feet  from  the  surface,
the  well-preserved  remains  of  five  bodies.  This  mound  showed
several  peculiarities,  among  which  were  a  layer  of  earth  mixed  with
ashes,  some  distance  above  the  bodies,  and  a  baking  of  the  remaining
earth  above  these  ashes.  One  of  the  skeletons  was  that  of  an
u  average-sized  woman  in  middle  life,”  one  of  an  infant,  one  of  a
large  aged  man,  and  two  of  young  adults,  sex  undetermined.  The
bones  of  the  woman  (?)  “indicated  a  person  of  low  grade,  the
evidences  of  unusual  muscular  development  being  strongly  marked.®
d  he  skull  of  this  personage,  was  a  wonder  to  behold,  equaling,  if
not  rivaling  in  some  respects,  in  inferiority  of  grade,  the  famous
k  Neanderthal  skull.’  The  forehead  (if  forehead  it  could  be  called)
is  very  low,  lower  and  more  animal-like  than  in  the  ‘  Neanderthal  ’
specimen.  This  skull  is  quite  small  for  an  adult  individual.”

.  Later  in  the  same  year  and  in  the  same  journal  (pages  650-655)  Mr.
Webster  reports  on  excavations  in  the  mounds  near  Old  Chickasaw,
Iowa,  on  the  Avest  side  of  Little  Cedar  river.  All  these  mounds  were
“  circular,  with  oval  tops,  and  with  a  diameter  varying  from  22  to
51  feet,  and  a  height  of  from  1|  to  5  feet.”  In  the  center  of  the
first  mound  examined  three  human  skeletons  were  found.  Above
them  were  11  feet  of  mixture  of  earth  and  ashes,  made  very  hard,
with  a  few  small  pieces  of  charcoal  scattered  through  it.  The
remaining  31  feet  of  material  composing  the  mound  was  a  yellow,
clayey  soil,  unlike  anything  found  on  the  surface  in  the  vicinity.
“  The  crania  of  all  three  individuals  showed  an  extremely  low  grade
of  mental  development ;  the  foreheads  being,  in  one  case,  even  lower
than  in  the  specimen  found  in  the  Floyd  mound.”  “  The  upper
anterior  portion  (back  of  the  eyes)  of  one  of  the  crania  under  con¬
sideration  was  quite  narrow,  but  expanded  rather  rapidly  postero-
laterally.”  The  frontal  bone  “  sloped  abruptly  backward,  forming
a  slightly  concave  area  back  of  and  above  the  eyes.”  The  largest  of
the  three  skulls  measured  6|  by  5  inches  (15.8  by  12.7  cm.).s  “No
relics  of  any  description  were  found  with  the  bodies  exhumed,”
including  those  from  neighboring  mounds.0

Another  group  of  low-browed,  inferior-type  crania  was  dealt  with
in  a  previous  chapter  of  this  paper.  They  are  the  specimens  from
along  Illinois  river,  including  the  Rock  Bluff'  skull  (plate  n,  a ),  the

“  It  is  quite  evident  that  an  error  has  been  made  in  the  sex  identification,  and  that  the
skeleton  was  that  of  a  man.

6  Nothing  is  stated  as  to  how  these  measurements  were  taken.

c  The  illustrations  accompanying  the  two  accounts  of  Mi'.  Webster  can  scarcely  be
regarded  otherwise  than  as  overdrawn,  but  the  description  points  clearly  to  low-type
crania.  The  specimens  are  still  in  the  possession  of  Mr.  Webster,  at  Charles  City,  Iowa,
but  a  personal  request  that  they  be  sent  to  the  writer  for  examination,  or  that  they  be
photographed  for  his  use,  brought  no  answer.


94


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


Albany  (Illinois)  Mound  skull,  no.  3,  in  the  Davenport  Academy  of
Sciences,  which  the  writer  was  able  to  examine  on  his  return  from
Nebraska,  and  the  other  Albany  Mound  skull,  no.  242982,  of  the  U.  S.


Fig.  13. — Antero-posterior  arcs  of  skulls  no.  4402,  Davenport  Academy  of  Sciences,  and
no.  6,  Gilder  mound.  No.  4402,  - ;  no.  6, _


Fig.  14. — Antero-posterior  arcs  of  skulls  no.  4402,  Davenport  Academy  of  Sciences,  and
no.  8,  Gilder  mound.  No.  4402, - ;  no.  8,

-N  ational  Museum.  1  o  the  foregoing  may  be  added  another  remarkable
low-order  specimen,  namely,  no.  4402,  in  the  Davenport  Academy  of
Sciences,  from  mound  1,  near  Albany,  Illinois.  The  accompanying


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


BULLETIN  33  PLATE  XII


1)

SKULLS  WITH  LOW  FOREHEADS

ci  Side  view  of  Illinois  mound-builder  skull  ( no.  4402,  Davenport  Academy  of  Sciences) ,
b  side  view  of  modern  Sioux  skull  (Davenport  Academy  of  Sciences)


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


BULLETIN  33  PLATE  XIII


MOUND-BUILDER  SKULLS  (DAVENPORT  ACADEMY  OF  SCIENCES)

a  Side  view  of  skull  from  Illinois  (no.  4401,  Davenport  Academy);  5  side  view  of

southern  skull


hrdliCka]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


95


illustrations  (plates  xii,  a,  xiii,  a;  figures  13-16)  will  show  better
than  additional  words  could  the  type  of  these  crania  and  their  rela¬
tion  to  the  specimens  from  the  mound  in  Nebraska.


Fig.  15. — Anteroposterior  arcs  of  skulls  no.  242982,  U.  S.  National  Museum,  and  no.  6,
Gilder  mound.  No.  242982,  - ;  no.  6, _


Gilder  mound.  No.  242982, - ;  no.  8, _

Still  other  specimens  of  low-type  Indian  crania  may  be  adduced
in  this  connection.  Low  forehead,  or  the  absence  of  the  frontal
vaulting,  occurs  in  rare  instances — 'mainly  in  consequence  of  an  appar¬
ently  natural  increase  in  volume  of  such  sexual  characteristics  as  the
supraorbital  ridges — in  males  among  even  the  other  class  of  mound


96


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[BULL.  33


skulls,  namely,  the  brachycephals  of  Arkansas  and  farther  south,
and  also  among  the  skulls  of  recent  Indians.  Two  such  speci¬
mens,  both  from  the  Davenport  Academy  collection,  are,  the
first,  a  normal,  undeformed,  Arkansas  mound  skull  (plate  xiii,  b)
and  the  other  a  skull  of  a  modern  Sioux  (plate  xn,  b) ,  who  died  as  a
captive  near  Davenport.  A  recent  examination  of  the  great  cranial
collection  in  the  U.  S.  National  Museum  showed  the  presence  of  the
following  additional  skulls  with  remarkably  low  foreheads:

Catalogue

numbers


From  Indian  burials  in  California _  225170,241111,

241912,  241916,  241927,  241939,  241998,  242009,  242014,  242148,  242200


From  mounds  in  North  Dakota _

From  a  mound  in  Florida _  _

From  a  mound  in  Illinois _

From  a  mound  in  Illinois _

From  a  mound  near  Alton,  Illinois _

From  a  mound  in  Orange  county,  Indiana

From  a  mound  near  Sculleyville,  Iowa _

From  a  mound  at  Eagle  Point,  Iowa _

From  a  mound  at  Albany,  Iowa _

A  Raw,  Kansas _

From  a  burial  at  Choptank,  Maryland _

From  a  burial  in  Missouri _

A  Piegan,  Montana _

From  a  burial  at  Durango,  New  Mexico--

From  a  burial  at  Pistol  river,  Oregon _

From  a  burial  at  Pistol  river,  Oregon _

A  Paiute,  Nevada _

A  Pawnee,  Kansas _

A  Ponca,  Kansas _

A  Sioux,  Dakota _

A  Sioux,  Dakota _ .

A  Ute,  Utah _

From  a  burial  at  Bagley,  Wisconsin _

From  a  burial  in  Wisconsin _


10333

136778

242989

243007

243855

225290

243845

243S47

243544

243933

21S993

243073

243275

243602

243003

243817

243531

225097

225238

243710

220084

207874

243290


In  most  of  these  cases  the  lowness  of  the  forehead  and  often  also
the  volume  of  the  ridges  equal  those  of  skull  no.  G  from  Long's  hill,
and  in  several  instances  they  exceed  this  specimen  in  these  particular
characters;  no.  136778  shows  even  a  lower  forehead  than  the  Gilder
Mound  skull,  known  as  no.  8  (plates  x,  a,  xi,  a;  figures  12,  II,  16).

It  is  thus  seen  that  the  Gilder  mound  skulls  are  by  no  means  unique
in  their  low-order  form,  and  that  no  definite  conclusion  as  to  their
antiquity  can  be  based  on  this  inferiority  or  peculiarity  of  type
alone.  The  occasional  and  apparently  nonpathological  occurrence
of  such  forms  in  the  males,  particularly  among  the  mesocephalic  to
dolichocephalic  ethnic  element  a  of  the  upper  Missouri  and  Missis-


“  Suggesting  in  many  ways  the  Californians;  compare  the  writer's  Contribution  to
the  Physical  Anthropology  of  California,  University  of  California  Publications,  American
Archeology  and  Ethnology,  iv,  no.  2,  Berkeley,  190G.


hrduCka]


SKELETAL  REMAINS


97


sippi,  burying  its  dead  in  low  circular  mounds,  the  upper  layers  of
which  in  numerous  cases  were  hardened  by  lire,  offers  one  of  the  most
interesting  problems  to  American  anthropologists,  largely  because
everything  points  to  the  fact  that  these  low  cranial  shapes  are  com¬
paratively  recent  phenomena  and  not  occurrences  of  geological  antiq¬
uity.  Additional  systematic  exploration  on  a  large  scale  of  the
mounds  in  the  Central  states  is  very  much  to  be  desired  in  this
connection.

if)  The  size  of  the  Nebraska  skulls  and  the  thickness  of  bone  (sec
detailed  examination)  are  in  no  way  exceptional  when  compared
with  similar  dimensions  in  skulls  of  Indians.  The  thickness  of  the
parietal  bone  exceeded  in  no  case  at  its  maximum  7  mm.  and  wras
mostly  a  little  below  this.  Professor  Barbour  in  his  paper  in  the
Records  of  the  Past  mentions  that  the  wall  of  one  of  the  broken
skulls  measured  0  mm.  in  thickness,  but  this  measurement  must  have
been  taken  on  a  bone  other  than  the  parietal.  None  of  the  fragments
of  the  latter  bone  that  passed  under  the  writer’s  observation  approxi¬
mated  such  a  dimension:  but  even  if  a  very  thick  skull  had  coexisted
with  the  others,  the  fact  would  justify  no  conclusion  concerning  the
antiquity  of  the  specimen.  Thick  Indian  crania  of  a  very  moderate
antiquity  are  very  common  in  Florida  and  certain  parts  of  Mexico,
and  occur  also  in  other  parts  of  the  country.

(g)  The  long  bones  recovered  from  the  mound  show  absolutely
no  type  differences  or  racial  distinction  at  the  different  levels,  and
in  many  of  their  characteristics  approximate  so  closely  to  the  cor¬
responding  bones  in  the  Indian  that  their  identification  as  Indian
is  permissible.  Of  particular  value  for  this  identification  are  the
thickness  and  shape  at  the  middle  of  the  humeri,®  and  here  is  found
the  slight  relative  thickness  of  the  bone  as  well  as  the  predomi¬
nance  of  the  plano-convex  shape,  both  characteristic  of  the  Indian.
The  platymery  of  the  femora  points  in  the  same  direction.  The
tibiae  are  stronger  and  less  platycnemic  than  on  an  average  in  the
Indian,  but  were  by  no  means  unequaled  among  the  Plains  Indians
who  lived  largely  by  the  chase.  The  stature  of  the  group  of  people
represented  in  the  Gilder  mound,  estimated  from  the  long  bones,
was  nearly  6  feet  in  the  males,  which  is  not  uncommon  also  among
the  Sioux  and  other  of  the  Plains  hunters.  Examination  of  the  parts
of  the  skeleton  besides  the  skull  furnishes  substantial  evidence  that
the  bones  have  in  general  much  more  affinity  with  those  of  the  Indian
than  with  those  of  any  other  people.  Speculation  as  to  what  par¬
ticular  tribe  of  Indians  this  group  belonged  would  probably  be
fruitless,  and  is  really  not  of  great  importance.  The  Omaha,  it  is

“A  monograph  showing  in  detail  the  pronounced  differences  in  these  hones  between  the
white,  negro,  and  Indian  races  is  under  preparation  by  the  writer.

3453— No,  33 — 07— — 7


98


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[BULL.  33


well  known,  were  a  comparatively  recent  arrival  in  that  country.
They  may  have  been  preceded  in  the  region  along  the  Missouri  north
of  Omaha  by  the  Mandan,  the  Pawnee,  or  the  Ankara,  or  possibly
by  some  offshoot  of  the  Sioux.  East-  of  this  region  were  the  Oto  and
the  Iowa,  while  little-known  tribes  of  the  Algonquian  confederacy
were  settled  in  what  is  now  the  state  of  Illinois.0

(h)  Besides  all  preceding  considerations,  it  should  be  remembered
that  the  ridge  of  Long’s  hill  contained  also  at  least  one  other  mound
which  yielded  human  bones,  and  still  another  aboriginal  burial.
Such  high  places  were  the  favorite  locations  for  burials  with  the
Indians  on  both  sides  of  the  Missouri,  anil  it  appears  probable  that
the  Gilder  mound  belongs  simply  to  this  category  of  Indian  mortuary
structures.

XVIII.— GENERAL  CONCLUSION

The  various  finds  of  human  remains  in  North  America  for  which
geological  antiquity  has  been  claimed  have  been  thus  briefly  passed
under  review.  It  is  seen  that,  irrespective  of  other  considerations,  in
every  instance  where  enough  of  the  bones  is  preserved  for  compari¬
son  the  somatological  evidence  bears  witness  against  the  geological
antiquity  of  the  remains  and  for  their  close  affinity  to  or  identity
with  those  of  the  modern  Indian.  Under  these  circumstances  but
one  conclusion  is  justified,  which  is  that  thus  far  on  this  continent
no  human  bones  of  undisputed  geological  antiquity  are  known.  This
must  not  be  regarded  as  equivalent  to  a  declaration  that  there  was
no  early  man  in  this  country;  it  means  only  that  if  early  man  did
exist  in  North  America,  convincing  proof  of  the  fact  from  the  stand¬
point  of  physical  anthropology  still  remains  to  be  produced.

Referring  particularly  to  the  Nebraska  u  loess  man,”  the  mind
searches  in  vain  for  solid  ground  on  which  to  base  an  estimate  of
more  than  moderate  antiquity  for  the  Gilder  Mound  specimens.  The
evidence  as  a  whole  only  strengthens  the  above  conclusion  that  the
existence  on  this  continent  of  a  man  of  distinctly  primitive  type  and
of  exceptional  geological  antiquity  has  not  as  yet  been  proved.

There  may  be  discouragement  in  these  repeated  failures  to  obtain
satisfactory  evidence  of  man’s  antiquity  in  America,  but  there  is  in
this  also  a  stimulus  to  renewed,  patient,  careful,  scientifically  con¬
ducted  and  checked  exploration;  and,  as  Professor  Barbour  says  in
one  of  his  papers  on  the  Nebraska  find,  “  the  end  to  be  attained  is
worth  the  energy  to  be  expended.”  A  satisfactory  demonstration
of  the  presence  of  a  geologically  ancient  man  on  this  continent
would  form  an  important  link  in  the  history  of  the  American  race,
and  of  mankind  in  general.  The  Missouri  and  Mississippi  drainage
areas  offer  exceptional  opportunities  for  the  discovery  of  this  link  of
humanity  if  such  really  exists.


See  Bulletin  30  of  the  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  pt.  1,  1907.


b

SKULL  FROM  MOUND  IN  NORTH  DAKOTA  (U.  S.  NATIONAL  MUSEUM  NO.  228876)

a  Side  view;  b  top  view


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


BULLETIN  33  PLATE  XIV


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


BULLETIN  33  PLATE  XV


SKULL  OF  PIEGAN  FROM  MONTANA  (U.  S.  NATIONAL  MUSEUM  NO.  243673)

a  Side  view:  b  top  view


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


BULLETIN  33  PLATE  XVI


SKULL  FROM  MOUND  NEAR  BROWNING,  SCHUYLER  COUNTY,  ILLINOIS  (U.  S.  NATIONAL

MUSEUM  NO.  136778)


a  Side  view;  b  top  view


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


BULLETIN  33  PLATE  XVII


SKULLS  WITH  LOW  FOREHEADS

a  Side  view  of  skull  from  mound  near  Alton,  Illinois  (U.  S.  National  Museum  no.  242982);
b  side  view  of  skull  of  Paiute,  Nevada  (U.  S.  National  Museum  no.  24381/)


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


BULLETIN  33  PLATE  XVIll


SKULLS  WITH  LOW  FOREHEADS,  FROM  CALIFORNIA

a  Side  view  of  skull  from  Calaveras  county  (U.  S.  National  Museum  no. 225173);  b  side
view  of  skull  from  Santa  Barbara  county  (U.  S.  National  Museum  no.  211912)


'  --  ■  <•


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


BULLETIN  33  PLATE  XIX


b

SKULL  FROM  SANTA  CRUZ  ISLAND,  CALIFORNIA  (U.  S.  NATIONAL  MUSEUM  NO.  241927)


a  Side  view;  b  top  view


'  I


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


BULLETIN  33  PLATE  XX


SKULLS  WITH  LOW  FOREHEADS


ci  Side  view  of  skull  from  Santa  Cruz  island,  California  ( U.
6  side  view  of  skull  from  mound  near  Bagley,  Wisconsin  (U.


S.  National  Museum  no.  241916);
S.  National  Museum  no.  207874)


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


BULLETIN  33  PLATE  XXI


SKULL  FROM  MOUND  IN  ORANGE  COUNTY,  INDIANA  (U.  S.  NATIONAL  MUSEUM  NO.  243855)

a  Side  view;  b  top  view


XIX.— APPENDIX


Recent  Indian  Ski  les  of  Low  Type  in  the  IT.  S.  National

Museum

I  he  preceding  paper  shows  that  in  numerous  cases  great  weight  has
been  given  to  the  low  and  sloping  forehead,  especially  when  accom¬
panied  by  heavy  brows,  as  an  index  of  low  type  and  on  occasion  as
evidence  of  antiquity.

The  notion  that  the  low  forehead  signifies  low  intelligence  gained
wide  acceptance  in  the  early  part  of  the  last  century  through  the
teachings  of  phrenology,  while  the  connection  of  heavy  supraorbital
arches  and  low  front  with  human  antiquity  is  principally  due  to  the
fact  that  these  features  in  an  exaggerated  form  characterize  the
crania  of  Neanderthal  and  Spy  (no.  1),  the  latter  specimen,  at  least,
being  of  undoubted  geological  antiquity.  Subsequent  to  the  discovery
of  these  crania  it  became  customary,  even  among  men  of  science,  to
regard  massive  supraorbital  ridges  and  low  foreheads  as  necessary
somatological  accompaniments  of  antiquity  in  the  human  skull.  This
led  to  the  rather  premature  acceptance  of  the  view  that  early  men  in
general  were  characterized  by  these  features,  that,  in  other  words,
these  anatomical  characters  represent  a  developmental  stage  of  man;
and  from  this  it  was  but  a  step  to  the  acceptance  of  the  notion  that
all  occurrences  not  clearly  pathological  of  similar  formation  are
reversions — an  impression  which  is  prevalent  to  this  day.

Following  the  intense  interest  produced  in  scientific  circles  by  the
discovery  of  the  Neanderthal.  Spy,  Most  (Bruex),  Podbaba,  and  other
skulls  referred  to  the  Quaternary  period  in  Europe,  there  came  in  the
course  of  time  a  number  of  reports  by  Busk,  Davis,  Blake,  Pruner-
Bey.  Turner,  Goclron,  and  others,  of  more  or  less  recent  crania  with

neanderthaloid  “  features — that  is,  heavy  brows  and  low  fore¬
head — from  different  parts  of  Europe  as  well  as  from  Asia  and  Aus¬
tralia.  An  account  of  most  of  these  specimens  will  be  found  in  Qua-
trefages  and  Hamy’s  Crania  Ethnica  (i  livraison,  27  et  seq.,  Paris,
1870-77),  and  should  be  perused  in  this  connection.  The  anomaly
was  unreservedly  ascribed  to  atavism.

Xonpathological  recent  American  crania  with  pronounced  supra¬
orbital  ridges  and  low  foreheads  thus  far  have  not  been  made  the
subject  of  a  special  report,  yet  such  specimens  are  not  very  rare  in
our  collections.  The  National  Museum  alone  possesses  a  consider-

99


100


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


able  number  (enumerated  on  page  9G),  and  the  writer  will  utilize  this
occasion  to  give  a  brief  description,  with  illustrations,  of  the  more
remarkable  of  these  specimens,  without  attempting  to  explain  the
exact  nature  and  cause  of  their  peculiar  features.

The  whole  subject  of  exceptionally  large  supraorbital  arches  and
low  foreheads  deserves  exhaustive  anatomical  study.  A  low  sloping
forehead  does  not  occur  or  has  not  yet  been  observed  in  the  fetus
and  in  infants  and  is  extremely  rare  in  the  female  sex.  The  same  is
true  also  of  heavy  supraorbital  ridges.  Hence  both  of  these  characters
must  be  regarded  as  primarily  adult  and  sexual.  Their  relation  is  not
constant.  Most  frequently  heavy  ridges  and  low  forehead  coexist
and  accentuate  each  other,  but  low  front  can  be  found,  as  will  be
seen  in  some  of  the  specimens  to  be  described,  associated  with  only
moderate  ridges,  and  prominent  brows  are  occasionally  observed  in
skulls  with  good  frontal  arching.  The  ridges  themselves  offer  sev¬
eral  points  for  study.  Ordinarily  they  form  elevations  which  extend
over  from  one-half  to  two-thirds  of  the  median  part  of  the  supra¬
orbital  space,  but  in  rare  cases  they  extend  along  the  whole  supra¬
orbital  border,  constituting  an  uninterrupted  arch  which  may  have
a  significance  different  from  that  possessed  by  the  ridges  of  the  more
usual  character.  They  are  affected  in  volume  by  the  frontal  sinuses,
but  large  ridges  may  coexist  with  relatively  small  sinuses  and  vice
versa,  showing  that  some  range  of  variation  is  inherent  in  the  bony
elevations  themselves.  The  corrugator  supercilii  muscle  attached
to  the  glabella  may  also  have  some  influence  on  the  development  of
the  parts  of  the  ridges  nearest  to  this  attachment.  A  closer  compara¬
tive  anatomical  study  is  necessary  in  this  connection.  Heavy  supra¬
orbital  arches  and  sloping  forehead  are  found  in  the  adult  male
gorilla,  but  these  •  features  are  much  less  apparent  in  the  orang,
chimpanzee,  or  gibbon,  where  we  usually  find  a  fairly  well  arched
front,  as  well  as  in  most  of  the  lower  primates.

The  following  descriptions  and  measurements  of  individual  skulls
show  that  in  American  crania  low  forehead  and  prominent  supra¬
orbital  ridges  are  generally  not  associated  with  pathological  con¬
ditions  of  the  skull,  (»•  with  premature  occlusion  of  any  of  the
sutures;  where  synostosis  was  observed,  it  was  plainly  senile  in
character.  A  number  of  the  skulls  show  small  size  and  according  to
the  ordinary  classification  would  be  ranged  as  mieroeephals,  but
Indian  skulls  of  these  dimensions  are  not  rare,  and  it  is  impos¬
sible  to  say  that  the  small  size  of  the  brain  of  the  individual  is
causally  connected  with  the  character  of  the  front  of  any  of  the
specimens.  In  two  of  the  cases  it  will  be  seen  that  the  cranial
capacity  is  very  fair  for  Indians.  It  is  an  interesting  fact  that,
with  one  not  very  pronounced  exception,  all  the  low-front  crania
in  the  National  Museum  collection  are  dolichocephalic  or  mesoeephalic,


hrdlicka]


APPENDIX


101


although  the  number  of  brachycephalic  skulls  examined  was  quite
large.  I  he  writer  is  acquainted  with  only  a  single  brachycephalic
skull  that  shows  a  low  sloping  forehead.  This  is  the  Indian  cranium
pictured  in  plate  xm,  of  the  preceding  paper.

The  antiquity  of  the  specimens  here  described  in  no  case  is  great,
and  several  of  the  skulls  are  quite  modern.

The  cranial  capacity  was  measured  by  the  writer’s  method,  ex¬
plained  in  Science ,  1903  (page  1011  et  seq.).

Fhe  illustrated  skulls  are  placed  in  the  alveolo-condylian  plane.


A. - SKUU,  FROM  MOUND  IN  NORTH  DAKOTA  (NO.  228876)

(Plate  xiv )

A  symmetrical  and  not  diseased  cranium  of  a  man  of  about  55  years  of  age.
The  sagittal  and  coronal  sutures  show  advanced,  the  lambdoid  slight,  occlusion,
which  appears  in  no  way  premature.

The  specimen  is  rather  heavy.  Its  low  forehead  is  very  striking.  The  supra¬
orbital  ridges  and  glabella  are  very  pronounced.  The  ridges  are  restricted  to
the  median  three-fifths  of  the  supraorbital  space;  the  remaining  portion  of  the
border  above  each  orbit  projects  also  forward,  but  is  not  massive,  and  is  distinct
from  the  ridge  proper.

The  slope  of  the  forehead  is  uniform  and  the  moderate  convexity  of  the  frontal
hone  presents  no  trace  of  the  frontal  eminences.  From  near  the  glabella  to  the
vertex  of  the  skull  runs  a  median  elevation,  which  is  especially  well  marked
back  of  the  bregma  and  gives  the  transverse  plane  of  the  skull  in  this  region
the  outline  of  a  pointed  arch.  The  temporal  ridges  are  well  marked  and  reach
on  the  right  to  within  2.2  cm.,  on  the  left  to  within  1.0  cm.,  of  sagittal  suture.

The  face  shows  moderate  prognathism,  well-marked  nasal  gutters,  and  strong
malars  as  well  as  zygoma*.  The  skull  as  a  whole  bears  evidence  of  a  strong
musculature.

The  teeth  are  of  ordinary  size  aud  present  no  abnormality.

The  base  shows  an  anomalous  fenestrum,  formed  by  a  process  of  bone  passing
from  near  the  base  of  the  external  pterygoid  plate  to  the  sphenoid  just  outside
of  the  foramen  ovale.

Cuts  in  the  rear  of  the  foramen  magnum  and  on  tin*  face  indicate  in  all  proba¬
bility  cleaning  before  a  secondary  burial.

Measurements


Diameter  antero-posterior  maximum _  _  _ centimeters —

Diameter  antero-posterior  from  ophryon -  -  - - do -

Diameter  lateral  maximum _  _ _ do -

Cephalic  index _  69.!)

Basion-bregma  height _ _ _ -  - centimeters —

Cranial  module  (mean  diameter) -  - - 15.53

Circumference  above  the  ridges - - -  - centimeters —

Capacity  _ _ _ cubic  centimeters _

Thickness  of  left  parietal  above  the  squamous  suture - millimeters__

Diameter  frontal  minimum -  -  - centimeters —

Diameter  frontal  maximum  (along  coronal).  - — - do -

Basion-nasion  length _ — - - do -

Facial  height _ i -

Facial  breadth  (diameter  bizygomatic  max.) - centimeters__


19.  d
19.  0
13.  7


13.  3

52.  0
1.  475
5-6
9.  1
11.  4
10.  G
(?)
13.  8


102


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bdll.  33


B. - ITEGAN  SKULL  FROM  MONTANA  (NO.  243673)


(Plate  xv)

Skull  of  an  aged  male,  without  any  sign  of  disease  or  deformation.  The
coronal,  sagittal,  and  lambdoid  sutures  are,  with  most  of  the  facial  articulations,
almost  wholly  occluded,  but  it  does  not  appear  that  the  shape  of  the  skull  on
this  account  is  in  any  way  altered.

The  supraorbital  ridges  and  the  glabella  are  voluminous  (particularly  the  left
ridge)  ;  the  former  are  restricted  to  a  little  more  than  the  median  half  of  the
supraorbital  space.  Above  the  ridges  and  along  nearly  the  whole  breadth  of
the  frontal  is  a  well-marked  depression.  The  forehead  is  low  and  sloping,
nevertheless  it  shows  a  distinct  bend  and  small  frontal  eminences.  There  is  a
moderate,  broad,  median  elevation  of  the  region  in  front  of  the  bregma  and
of  a  narrower  ridge  along  the  anterior  fourth  of  the  sagittal  suture,  giving  to
the  anterior  and  posterior  planes  of  the  skull  a  pentagonal  appearance.  The
parietal  bosses  are  quite  prominent.

The  face  is  but  slightly  prognathic.  The  lower  jaw  is  high ;  the  chin  promi¬
nent.

There  is  no  indication  of  an  extraordinary  musculature.

The  teeth  are  of  average  size.  The  denture  shows  the  following  anomalies:
Congenital  lack  of  all  the  third  molars,  and  of  the  left  lateral  upper  incisor:
submedian  size  of  the  right  upper  lateral  incisor  and  an  anomaly  of  the  median
tooth ;  and  a  small  supernumerary  tooth  between  the  right  upper  canine  and  the
first  bicuspid.

Measurements


Diameter  antero-posterior  maximum _

Diameter  antero-posterior  from  ophr.von_

Diameter  lateral  maximum _ __

Cephalic  index _ _  __

Basion-bregma  height _

Cranial  module _

Circumference _ _

Capacity _

Thickness  of  the  left  parietal.

Diameter  frontal  minimum..

Diameter  frontal  maximum _

Basion-nasion  length _

Facial  height,  total  (teeth  slightly  worn)
Facial  height,  upper..

Facial  breadth _  _


_ centimeters _ 19.  4

_ do _ 18.  9

_ do _ 14.  15

_ 72.9

.  _ _ centimeters _ 12.9

_ 15.48  -

_ centimeters _ 52.  2

_ cubic  centimeters _ 1,  470

_ millimeters _  3-5

_ centimeters _ 9.  0

_  _ do _ 11. 1

_ do _ 10.  6

_ do _ 13.2

_ _ do _  S.  1

-.  do _ 14.3


('. - SKULL  FROM  MOUND  NEAR  BROWNING,  SCHPYLER  COUNTY,

Illinois  (no.  136778)

(Plate  xvi)

This  cranium  shows  the  lowest  natural  forehead  of  any  American  skull  with
which  the  writer  is  acquainted.

It  is  regrettable  that  the  specimen  is  very  imperfect;  the  whole  face  and
everything  below  the  parietals,  with  a  small  portion  of  the  occipital,  are  lacking.
Further,  this  skull  is  not  absolutely  normal,  for  the  surface  of  the  upper  part
of  the  frontal  and  of  the  parietals  shows  several  irregular  depressions,  which
may  be  senile,  or  due  to  some  old  weakness  or  lesions  of  the  bones.  These


hrdliCka]


APPENDIX


103


depressions  are  not  extensive;  they  do  not  extend  to  the  inner  table  of  the
bones,  and  had  only  local  effect  on  the  shape  of  the  skull  and  none  perceptible
on  the  lowness  of  the  forehead.  The  extreme  front  of  the  skull  is  somewhat
asymmetrical,  the  right  side  protruding  forward  more  than  the  left.  This
asymmetry  is  also  marked  centrally,  but  does  not  affect  the  rest  of  the  skull.

The  glabella  is  very  prominent,  and  the  same  statement  applies  to  the  median
extremities  of  the  supraorbital  ridges.  The  latter  are  limited  to  the  median
three-fifths  of  the  supraorbital  space,  but  owing  to  the  small  forward  extension
of  the  forehead,  the  remainder  of  the  border  on  each  side  shows  also  a  con¬
spicuous  projection.  Above  the  glabella  and  ridges  is  a  depression,  behind
winch  rises  the  very  limited  arch  of  the  forehead.  The  sagittal  region  is
somewhat  elevated.  Between  the  vertex  and  iuion  the  skull  shows  slight  com¬
pression.  due  probably  to  cradle-board  pressure.

The  specimen  is  rather  small  (.the  greatest  length  measures  about  18.4  cm.),
but  as  the  bones  are  not  thick  the  capacity  was  probably  in  excess  of  1,300  c.  c.

Ventrally  the  sutures  are  wholly  obliterated,  while  dorsally  most  of  the
coronal,  a  part  of  the  sagittal,  and  most  of  what  is  present  of  the  lambdoid
appear  still  open.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  state  of  the  sutures  has
influenced  in  any  way  the  shape  of  the  skull.

The  temporal  ridges  are  only  partially  traceable,  indicating  no  strong  mus¬
culature.

The  minimum  frontal  diameter  in  this  skull  amounts  to  only  8.7  cm.;  the
frontal  maximum  to  10.7  cm.

D. - SKULL  FROM  MOUND  NEAR  ALTON,  ILLINOIS  (NO.  242982)

(Plate  xvi t,  a)

The  specimen  is  not  deformed  and,  except  in  a  part  of  the  alveolar  process,
shows  nothing  pathological.  It  is  plainly  a  masculine  skull  and  belonged  to
an  aging  individual.  The  sagittal,  median  one-third  of  the  lambdoid,  and  the
coronal  suture  below  the  temporal  ridges  show,  with  some  of  the  facial  articu¬
lations,  advanced  senile  occlusion.

It  presents  pronounced  supraorbital  ridges  (restricted  to  the  median  three-
fifths  of  the  supraorbital  border),  somewhat  less  voluminous  glabella,  and  very
low  forehead,  with  but  feeble  frontal  bend  and  but  a  trace  of  the  eminences.
The  sagittal  region  is  only  slightly  elevated.  The  ridges  and  other  features
indicate  moderately  strong  musculature.

The  face  shows  average  (Indian)  alveolar  prognathism.  The  teeth  are  of
ordinary  size;  third  molars  have  never  erupted  (the  skull  is  that  of  an  indi¬
vidual  at  least  50  years  of  age;  the  lower  jaw  is  missing).

The  base  shows  the  same  anomaly  as  no.  228876  (page  101) — a  fenestruni
formed  by  a  narrow  bony  septum,  reaching  from  the  lower  part  of  the  external
pterygoid  plate  to  the  sphenoid,  externally  to  the  foramen  ovale.

Measurements


Diameter  antero-posterior  maximum _  ..  —  - centimeters —  17.8

Diameter  antero-posterior  from  ophryon —  -  -  -------  -do -  17.4

Diameter  lateral  maximum-  __  -  -  -do -  13.5

Cephalic  index _  — - - 75.  8

Basion-bregma  height-.  _  -  - centimeters —  13.4

Cephalic  module _  14.  90


104


BUREAC  OP  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


Circumference _

Capacity _

Thickness  of  the  left  parietal
Diameter  frontal  minimum  __
Diameter  frontal  maximum..

Basiou-nasion  length _

Facial  height,  upper _

Facial  breadth _


[BULL.  33

_ centimeters _ 40.  3

cubic  centimeters _ 1.255

_ millimeters..  4-6

_ centimeters _  0.  6

_ do _  11.4

_ do _  10.  4

_ do _  7.  5

_ do _  14.  4


E. - PAIUTE  SKLfLL  FROM  NEVADA  ( NO.  243817)

(  Plate  xvit,  h  )

An  undeformed  and  in  no  way  diseased  skull  of  an  adult  male.  No  trace
remains  of  the  basilar  suture,  but  the  remaining  cranial  and  facial  sutures  are
all  open.

The  specimen  is  quite  heavy  and  bears  evidence  of  strong,  though  not  exces¬
sive,  musculature.  It  shows  a  prominent  glabella;  moderate  masculine  supra¬
orbital  ridges  (limited  to  the  median  two-thirds  of  the  supraorbital  space)  ;
a  gradually  sloping,  low  forehead  with  only  a  trace  of  frontal  bend  and  no
sign  of  frontal  eminences;  and  a  median  elevation  which  extends  over  the  upper
four-fifths  of  the  frontal  squama  and  up  to  obelion  along  the  sagittal  suture,
giving  the  top  of  the  skull  a  scaphoid  appearance.

The  face  presents  a  rather  marked  alveolar  prognathism.  The  lower  jaw
shows  no  special  features.  The  teeth  were  of  ordinary  size  (all  are  now  broken
owing  to  exposure).  The  denture  in  the  upper  jaw  is  anomalous,  there  being
three  supernumerary  teeth  ;  one  of  these  existed  between  the  median  incisors,
and  the  second  between  the  left  lateral  incisors  and  somewhat  anterior  thereto,
while  there  is  a  socket  on  the  left  also  for  a  somewhat  diminutive  extra  tooth  in
the  rear  of  the  three  molars.  Notwithstanding  the  presence  of  19  teeth  in  the
upper  jaw,  the  dental  arch  and  palate  are  quite  symmetrical,  and  there  is
nothing  to  correspond  with  the  anomalies  in  the  lower  maxilla.


Measurements

Diameter  antero-posterior  maximum _

Diameter  antero-posterior  from  ophryon..

Diameter  lateral  maximum _ _

Cephalic  index _ _

Basion-bregma  height. _

Cranial  module _  _

Circumference _  ..

Capacity _ _ _

Thickness  of  the  left  parietal
Diameter  frontal  minimum...

Diameter  frontal  maximum

Basion-nasion  length... _

Facial  height,  total  (about)

Facial  height,  upper _

Facial  breadth _  _ _  _


_ centimeters _

18.  3

_ do _

17.  8

...do _

13.4

_ 73.2

_ centimeters _

13.  0

_  14. 90

centimeters

50.  7

cubic  centimeters _

1,  290

_ millimeters _

4—6

-centimeters _

8.  9

...do _

10.  9

.do _

10.2

.  _  do

12.0

.  .do _

7.  5

- do _

14.  0

HRDLiCka]


APPENDIX


105


F- - SKULL  FROM  CALAVERAS  COUNTY,  CALIFORNIA  (NO.  225173)

4 Plate  xviii,  a)


The  specimen,  a  skull  of  an  aging  male,  is  not  deformed,  and  with  the  excep¬
tion  of  an  exostosis  between  the  right  mastoid  and  vaginal  processes  shows
nothing  pathological.  The  various  ridges  and  other  features  indicate  strong
though  not  excessive  musculature.  The  sagittal  suture  is  occluded,  and  the
coronal,  lambdoid,  and  several  of  the  facial  articulations  show  advanced  physio¬
logical  synostosis.

The  supraorbital  ridges  are  pronounced,  without  exceeding  the  normal  varia¬
tion  in  this  respect  among  male  Indians;  they  extend  .over  the  median  three-
fifths  of  the  supraorbital  space.  The  forehead  is  quite  low  and  gradually  slopes,
presenting  subaverage  frontal  bend  and  eminences.  There  is  but  a  slight
external  metopic  and  sagittal  crest,  so  that  the  outline  of  the  transverse  plane
of  the  skull  superiorly  is  but  little  pointed.

There  is  a  moderate  alveolar  prognathism.  The  base  presents  several  minor
anomalies,  and  the  exostosis  above  referred  to,  which  is  probably  the  result  of
a  small  tumor.  The  teeth  are  considerably  worn  off,  but  present  nothing
abnormal  in  size  or  number.

Measurements


Diameter  antero-posterior  maximum _

Diameter  antero-posterior  from  ophryon

Diameter  lateral  maximum _  __

Cephalic  index _

Basion-bregma  height _

Cranial  module _

Circumference _ _

Capacity _

Thickness  of  the  left  parietal _

Diameter  frontal  minimum _ _ _

Diameter  frontal  maximum _

Basion-nasion  length _

Facial  height,  total  (teeth  worn).

Faeial  height,  upper - - -

Facial  breadth  _  -------


_ centimeters _ 17.  7

_ do _  17.  5

-  _ do _  14.2

_ 80.2

_ centimeters _ 12.  .3

_ 14.73

_ centimeters _ 50.  5

_ cubic  centimeters _ 1,  265

_  _ millimeters _ 5-7

_ _ _ -centimeters _  9.2

_ do _  11.  3

_ do _  10.  0

_ _ do _  11.8

_ do _  7.  3

_ do _  14.  2


G. - SKULL  FROM  SANTA  BARBARA  COUNTY,  CALIFORNIA  ( NO.  241912)

(Plate  xviii,  b)

A  small,  but  plainly  masculine,  skull,  from  an  aging,  not  very  muscular  indi¬
vidual.  It  is  damaged,  but  in  no  way  deformed  or  diseased.  The  sagittal
suture  is  wholly  occluded,  a  condition  apparently  somewhat  premature,  as  the
rest  of  the  cranial  and  facial  articulations  are  still  patent ;  but  this  condition  has
not  affected  the  shape  of  the  skull.

The  supraorbital  ridges  are  pronounced,  though  not  excessive  for  a  male ;
they  are  limited  to  the  median  two-thirds  of  the  supraorbital  space.  The  fore¬
head  is  very  low  and  sloping,  without  distinct  frontal  bend  or  eminences.  The
upper  part  of  the  frontal  squama  shows  a  quite  prominent  median  ridge,  which
broadens  out  as  it  proceeds  backward  and  for  a  short  distance  is  continuous


106


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[bull.  33


along  the  sagittal  suture.  On  account  of  this  ridge  the  arch  of  the  transverse
plane  of  the  skull  is  moderately  pointed.

The  temporal  ridges  are  fairly  well  marked,  but  the  muscular  impressions  and
ridges  on  the  occiput  are  weak.

The  face  shows  a  moderate  grade  of  alveolar  prognathism.  The  teeth  are  not
large  and  present  no  anomaly.

The  base  shows  on  the  left  side  one  complete  (proximal)  and  one  slightly  in¬
complete  (distal)  ptery go-spinous  foramen  or  fenestrum,  both  formed  on  the
median  side  of  the  foramen  ovale.


Measurement s

Diameter  antero-posterior  maximum _

Diameter  antero-posterior  from  ophryon

Diameter  lateral  maximum  __  _

Cephalic  index _  .  _____  __  _

Basion-bregma  height  ____  _  __  _

Cranial  module _

Circumference  _ _ _

Capacity _

Thickness  of  the  left  parietal

Diameter  frontal  minimum _

Diameter  frontal  maximum

Basion-nasion  length  .  _  ______

Facial  height,  total _  _  _ _ _

Facial  height,  upper _

Facial  breadth,  approximately _


.centimeters _

_ do _

_ do _

_ 78.4

.centimeters _

_ 14.27

.centimeters _


.millimeters _

centimeters _

_ do _

_ do _

_ do _

_ do _

_ do _


17. 1
16.  6
13.4

12.3

47.2

(?)

3-4

8.  75
10.  4

9.  7

11.8

7.2
13.  3


H. - SKULL  FROM  SANTA  CRUZ  ISLAND,  CALIFORNIA  (NO.  241927)

(Plate  xix )

A  symmetrical,  nonpathological  skull  of  a  male  of  about  50  years  of  age.
There  is  advanced  occlusion  in  the  sagittal,  and  some  synostosis  in  the  lamb-
doid  suture,  but  all  the  other  articulations  are  still  patent.  The  condition
of  the  teeth,  which  are  somewhat  worn,  corresponds  well  to  the  state  of  the
sutures,  so  that  any  premature  ossification  of  the  latter  may  be  excluded.

The  supraorbital  ridges  (limited  to  the  median  half  of  the  supraorbital
space)  are  of  average  masculine  proportions  and  the  same  statement  applies
to  the  glabella,  yet  the  forehead  is  low  and  sloping,  presenting  only  a  very
moderate  arching  and  no  eminences.  The  region  just  anterior  to  the  bregma
and  along  the  proximal  half  of  the  sagittal  suture  shows  a  well-marked  eleva¬
tion,  which  gives  the  skull  a  scaphoid  appearance.

The  face  shows  a  medium  grade  of  prognathism,  and  somewhat  atypical,
not  very  large  nasal  gutters.  The  zygomae,  with  other  features  of  the  skull,
Indicate  strong  musculature.  The  teeth  present  nothing  special.  The  base  is
free  from  anomalies  of  any  importance.

Measurements


Diameter  antero-posterior  maximum _ centimeters _  18.  2

Diameter  antero-posterior  from  ophryon _ do _  17.  6

Diameter  lateral  maximum  _ _ _ do _  13.8

Cephalic  index _ _  __  __  _  75.  §


hrdlicka]


APPENDIX


Basion-bregma  height _

Cranial  module.  _
Circumference  _

Capacity _

Thickness  'of  the  left  parietal
Diameter  frontal  minimum  __
Diameter  frontal  maximum
Rasion-nasion  length.

Facial  height,  total _

Facial  height,  upper
Facial  breadth _


107

.centimeters _ 13.  5

_ 15.  17

- centimeters _ 50.  3

cubic  centimeters _ 1,365

- millimeters _  5-0

centimeters _  9.  1

__do _  11.4

do _  10.  1

.do _  11.9

.do _  7.6

.do _  13.6


I. - SKULL  FROM  SANTA  CRUZ  ISLAND,  CALIFORNIA  ( NO.  241916)


(Plate  xx,  a)

An  undeformed  masculine  skull.  The  sutures  and  teeth  indicate  a  person
50  or  somewhat  more  than  50  years  of  age.  There  is  no  trace  of  premature
synostosis  in  any  of  the  articulations.

The  supraorbital  ridges  extend  over  the  median  three-fifths  of  the  supra¬
orbital  space  and,  while  prominent,  are  not  excessive.  The  glabella  lies  in  a
small  depression  between  the  ridges.  The  forehead,  low  and  sloping,  presents
but  moderate  arching  and  mere  traces  of  frontal  eminences.  The  sagittal
region  anteriorly  is  slightly  elevated.

The  face  shows  a  marked  alveolar  prognathism.  The  teeth  are  considerably
worn  off  and  several  have  been  lost  through  disease,  which  affected  to  some
extent  also  the  left  alveolar  process,  but  there  was  apparently’ no  anomaly  of
number  or  conformation.

Measurements


Diameter  antero-posterior  maximum _

Diameter  antero-posterior  from  ophryon.

Diameter  lateral  maximum _

Cephalic  index _ _

Basion-bregma  height

Cranial  module  _  _

Circumference -

Capacity _

Thickness  of  the  left  parietal..

Diameter  frontal  minimum -

Diameter  frontal  maximum  —

Basion-nasion  length _

Facial  height,  upper  (lower  jaw  missing)
Facial  breadth _


_ centimeters _

do

18.4
18.  1

13.  7

do

.  ___  74.5

..centimeters _

12.  9

15.  00

..1  ..centimeters _

50.  9

.cubic  centimeters _

1,340

_ millimeters _

4-6

centimeters

9.2

_ _ do _

11.2

..do _

9.  9

__do _

7.5

.  .  do _

13.  6

,J. - SKULL  FROM  MOUND  NEAR  BAGLEY,  WISCONSIN  ( NO.  207874)

(Plate  xx,  b)

The  only  portions  remaining  of  this  specimen  are  the  frontal  bone  and  a  small
piece  of  each  parietal.  It  was  an  adult  masculine  cranium.  The  sutures
are  patent  dorsally  but  obliterated  ventrally,  pointing  to  an  individual  of  more
than  40  years  of  age.


108


BUREAU  OF  AMERICAN  ETHNOLOGY


[Bull.  33


The  supraorbital  ridges  show  good  but  not  extraordinary  masculine  develop¬
ment  ;  they  extend  along  the  median  three-fifths  of  the  supraorbital  space.

The  forehead  is  low  and  very  sloping.  Its  slight  arching  is  gradual,  show¬
ing  no  distinct  frontal  bend  or  eminences.  A  well-marked  elevation  is  observed
in  the  median  line  from  above  the  ophryon  to  near  the  bregma.  Sagittal  eleva¬
tion  was  not  pronounced.

The  skull  was  apparently  of  good  size.  The  diameter  frontal  minimum
measures  0.3  cm.


tv. - SKULL  FROM  MOUND  IN  ORANGE  COUNTY,  INDIANA  (  NO.  243855)

(Plate  xxi )

This  specimen  is  reconstructed  on  a  plaster  base  from  pieces,  and  while  in
point  of  repair  not  perfect  the  main  features  of  the  vault  are  easily  discerni¬
ble.  It  is  a  long  and  narrow  but  not  in  any  degree  scaphocephalic  or  otherwise
deformed  skull,  with  a  low,  sloping,  and  but  moderately  arched  forehead.

The  supraorbital  ridges  and  glabella  are  quite  pronounced,  but  their  extent  and
volume  are  not  clearly  appreciable  owing  to  the  defective  condition  of  the
fragments.  These  features  and  the  good-sized  mastoids  indicate  a  masculine
cranium.

The  sagittal  region  is  quite  elevated,  giving  the  transverse  plane  above  the
shape  of  a  pointed  arch.  The  temporal  ridges  and  occipital  crests  suggest
strong  musculature.

Occlusion  is  advanced  in  the  sagittal  and  lambdoid  sutures,  and  extends  in
some  measure  into  the  coronal,  but  there  is  no  sign  that  the  process  in  any  place
was  premature.

The  thickness  of  the  skull  is  moderate  and  its  capacity  must  have  been  good.


INI)  E  X


Page

Abbott.  Dr.  Charles  C..  donor  of

Burlington  County  skull.  36

Africa,  advent  of  man  in _ 0

Agassiz,  Professor,  on  Lake  Mon¬
roe  bones _  10

Albany  mounds,  crania  from  31.78,93-95
American  Pleistocene.  (Spc  Gla¬
cial  period.)

America,  peopled  from  Old  World-.  9

Anthropoid  skcli.s - - 31,  100

Antiquity  of  man —

general  discussion  __  -  _  9-1-1

in  Delaware  valley _  35

in  Florida _  19

in  North  America _  98

Arikaka,  arrival  of  in  Gilder

Mound  region _  98

Arkansas  mound  skull _  96

Asia,  advent  of  man  in _  9

Australian  negro  cranial  type _  71

Baird.  Prof.  S.  K..  cited  on  locality

of  Itock  Bluff  skull _  29

Bankey,  Mr..  Gilder  Mound  remains

discovered  by _ 67,  69

Barbour  and  Ward.  Professors,  on

Nebraska  “loess  man" —  70-71,


72,  78

Barbour,  Prof.  E.  II. —

acknowledgments  to _  74

Gilder  Mound  material  fur¬
nished  by -  91

on  geological  formation  of

Long’s  hill -  75

on  human  remains  from  Gilder

mound _  78.  87,  97

on  Nebraska  “  loess  man  ” - 69—71,

72.  73-74

quoted  on  antiquity  of  man  in

North  America _  98

somatological  description  of

finds  made  b.v_  81-82,  83,  85,  86
Barcena,  Mariano,  on  Man  of

I’enon _  32,  33—34

Batavian  crania - 42.  43

Berthoud,  E.  L.,  quoted  on  Soda

Creek  skeleton -  20

Blackman,  Prof.  E.  E.,  cited  on
prehistoric  man  in  Ne¬
braska  _  70

Blake,  cited  on  recent  low-browed

crania _  99


Page


Blu  menbach -

cited  on  European  chamie-
cephals  and  Zuyder  Zee

Islands  skulls _  42.  43

Bog  deposits,  examination  of _  11

Botocudo  Indians,  cranial  type  of_  71

Bremen  ciiam.ecephals _ 43-46

Bruex  (Most)  skull _  99

Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,
connection  with —

Gilder  Mound  remains _  74

western  Florida  fossil  man _  60

Burials,  intrusive _  _.  11-12

Burlington  County  skull —

history _  36

physical  characters  _  .  37-38,  39,  41

racial  affinities _  41-46

Busk,  cited  on  recent,  low-browed

craDia _  99


Butler,  Omer,  connection  of  with
Gilder  Mound  explora¬
tion _ 68

Butts,  E.,  locality  of  Lansing  skele¬
ton  visited  by _  47

Calaveras  County  low-browed

skull _ _  105

Calaveras  skull —

comparisons  with  other  crania-  25-28

history _ 21-22

physical  characters -  22-24,  30

preserved  in  Peabody  Museum__  21
Calcareous  coating  of  osseous  re¬


mains


27-28


California  Indian  crania  compared

with  Calaveras  skull _  25

California  low-browed  skulls.  105—107
Calvin,  Professor,  cited  on  Lan¬
sing  skeleton _  47

Case,  Clinton  A.,  connection  of
with  Gilder  Mound  ex¬
ploration _  68

Casey  Key  burial _  66

Caves,  use  of  by  primitive  man —  11

Cenozoic  era.  divisions  of _  9

Cham.ecephals,  as  a  cranial  type —  42-46
Chamberlin  and  Salisbury,  cited

on  Glacial  period. -  10

Champlain  epoch  defined.  ...  17

Champlain  substage -  10

Charleston  bones - 20-21

Chickasaw  mounds -  ...  ..  93


109


110


INDEX


Page

Clark,  George  C.,  connection  of
with  Gilder  Mound  explo¬
ration _  68


Concannon,  M.,  owner  of  site  of

Lansing  skeleton _  47

Condka,  Doctor,  connection  of  with

Gilder  Mound  exploration-  70
Crania,  comparison  of  undeveloped

and  developed _  24

Dall,  Dr.  Wm.  II. —

description  of  South  Osprey  re¬
mains  received  by _  55

Osprey  shells  determined  by _  65

Davis,  cited  on  recent  low-browed

crania _  09

Delawares,  remains  of  in  Delaware

valley _  35.  36,  41-42

Delaware  valley —

remains  found  in _  35-36,  41-42

settlement _  46

(See  also  Trenton  crania,  Trenton
femur,  Trenton  gravels.)
del  Castillo,  Antonio,  on  Man  of

Pefion _ 32,  33

Dickeson,  Dr.  M.  W.,  connection  of

with  Natchez  pelvic  bone-  16—19

Diggers,  crania  of _  25

Dorsey,  Dr.  George  A. —

cited  by  \Y.  H.  Holmes  on  Cal¬
averas  skull _  22


quoted  on  Calaveras  skull _  25

Dowler,  Dr.  D.  It.,  quoted  on  antiq¬
uity  of  man  in  Missis¬
sippi  delta _  15

Drake,  Prof.  D.,  quoted  on  New

Orleans  skeleton _  15

Early  man,  definition  of  term _  10

Egyptian  crania,  ancient  and

modern _  13

Eocene  period  defined _  9

Eskimo  crania _  25

Europe,  advent  of  man  in _  9

European  ancient  crania _  13.  71

chamsecephals _ 42-46

Fire,  use  of  in  mortuary  mounds _ S7-S9,


00,  91,  07


Florida —

antiquity  of  man  in _  19

bones  of  fossil  mastodon  in _ 56,  57

mound  crania _ 56,  66

(See  also  Hanson  Landing  re¬
mains,  Lake  Monroe
hones,  North  Osprey
hones,  Osprey  skull.  South
Osprey  remains.)

Floyd  mounds _  92-93

Fossilization-  -

absent  from  Gilder  Mound

bones _  90

character _  12,  57

conditions _  .  28

in  Florida _  19

Fowice,  G.,  cited  on  Lansing  skele¬
ton  _  47

“  Gasometer  ”  skull _  36


Page

Geological  time,  classification  of _  9-10

Gildemeister,  .L,  cited  on  Bremen

chamiecephals _ 43,  44

Gilder  mound —

an  Indian  mortuary  structure—  98

condition  of  hones  in^ _  90

crania  from,  compared  with  In¬
dian  skulls _  97

description _ 67-76

description  of  remains  from _ 76-82

distribution  of  remains  in _ 87-89

human  remains  from  vicinity _ 82-86

low-browed  crania  from _ 92-97

marks  on  bones  from _ 90-92

type  of  long  bones  from _ 97-98

(See  also  Nebraska  “  loess  man.”)
Gilder,  K.  F. —

acknowledgment  to _  74

cited  on  Nebraska  “  loess  man  ”  70,

71-72

linds  made  by,  near  Gilder

mound _  75,  82-83,  84—85,  86

on  use  of  fire  in  Gilder  mound--  87
quoted  on  exploration  of  Gilder

mound _ 67—69

results  of  examination  of  finds

made  by _ _  76—78,

81,  82,  84-85.  86

Glacial  gravels _  10

Glacial  period  in  North  America—  9—10
Glidden,  quoting  Usher  on  Lake

Monroe  bones _  19

Godron,  cited  on  recent  low-browed

crania _  99

Griffith,  Mr.,  South  Osprey  re¬
mains  discovered  by _  55

I-Ianson  Landing  remains —

geological  report  of  Doctor

Vaughan  _ 65-66

history  _  55

physical  characters _ , _  59

IIawortii,  Prof.  E.,  acknowledg¬
ments  to _  48

IIeilprin,  Prof.  Angelo,  on  Hanson

Landing  remains _  55

Henry,  Dr.  E.  C.,  cited  on  crania

from  Gilder  mound _  69

IIenry,  Prof.  Joseph,  report  on  Os¬
prey  skull  received  by _  53

Heredity,  influence  of  on  skeletal

parts  _  12

IDs  and  Rutimeyer,  cited  on  Euro¬
pean  chamsecephals _  42

Hittell,  .1.  S.,  donations  by  to  Na¬
tional  Museum _ 25-28

IIoeven,  v.  d.,  cited  on  European

chamiecephals  _  42

Holmes,  Prof.  F.  S.,  Charleston

bones  discovered  by _ 20—21

Holmes,  Prof.  Wm.  II. —

on  Calaveras  skull _ 21,  22

on  early  man _  11

on  Lansing  skeleton _ 47.  48

Human  remains,  general  discussion

of -  11-15


INDEX


111


Page

Huntington,  Charles  S. —

excavations  near  Gilder  mound

by  -  82

skulls  found  in  Gilder  mound

by  - 67,  80

Ice  invasions  in  North  America _  10

Illinois  low -  browed  mound

skulls _ 102-104

Illinois  River  valley —

crania  from _  31,  32,  03-94

geology  of - 28,  20

Indiana  low-browed  mound  skull  108

Indian  crania —

compared  with  Burlington
County  and  Riverview

Cemetery  skulls _ 41

from  southern  Florida _ _  .IS

low-browed  type —

general  discussion _ 00—101

specimens  described _  05-97,

101-103

of  Plains  tribes _  __  52

secondary  characteristics _  13

thick  types  of  moderate  an

tiquity _  07

Indian  mounds —

along  Illinois  river _ _  29,  31

use  of  fire  in _  87-89,  90,  01,  07

Indians,  North  American —

physical  characteristics _  40

present  skeletal  structure _  40,  50

Infiltration —

absent  from  Gilder  Mound  bones  00

as  a  process  in  fossilization _  12

conditions  of _  23

Intrusive  burials _ 11-12

Iowa,  arrival  of  in  region  east  of

Gilder  mound _  08

Kollman,  ,T„  cited  on —

Calaveras  skull _  22

Rock  Bluff  cranium _ 28,  30

Lake  Monroe  bones -  19

Lansing  skeleton-

accompanying  remains _  53

compared  with  Trenton  crania —  49

conclusion -  52

history  _ - 47-48

somatological  characters -  48-51

Leidy,  Prof.  Joseph —

on  Charleston  bones _  21

on  Hanson  Landing  remains - 56,  59

on  Naichez  pelvic  bone -  18-19

on  Osprey  skull -  54,57,58

Lenape,  remains  of  in  Delaware  val¬
ley  _  35,  36,  41—42

Long,  M.  C.,  cited  in  connection  with

Lansing  skeleton _  _  47,  48

Long's  hill.  (See  Gilder  mound.)

Lyell,  Sir  Charles —

Lake  Monroe  bones  mentioned  by  10

on  Natchez  pelvic  bone - 16-18

Lyon,  Dr.  M.  W.,  identification  of
gopher’s  teeth  by


Page

McConnell,  Mr.,  quoted  on  Rock

Bluff  skull _ 20-30

Mandan,  arrival  of  in  Gilder  Mound

region' - 2 _  98

Man  OF  I’ENON _ _ 32-35

Man  of  Spy-  -

compared  with  Nebraska  “loess

man  ”  _  74

physical  characters _ 30,  99

Marken  island,  skull  from _  43

Mastodon,  bones  of _ 16, 17,  18,  21

Mattison,  Mr.,  quoted  by  Whitney

on  Calaveras  skull _  22

Meualonyx  skeletons  associated

with  human  bones _ 10,  17,  18

Meigs,  .1.  Aitken,  on  Rock  Bluff

cranium  _  28

Migrations,  human _  13

Miocene  period  defined _  9

Montana  low-browed  l'iegan  skull__  102
Montgomery,  Professor,  cited  in
connection  with  North

Dakota  mounds -  91

Morris,  William,  excavations  by  in

and  near  Gilder  mound__  67,  82
Morton,  work  of  regarding  antiq¬
uity  of  man _  14

Most  (Bruex)  skull _  99

Mound  crania —

artificial  markings  on _  91

specimens  described _ 101-104

with  low  foreheads - , -  92

Muscular  action,  influence  of  on

skeletal  parts _  12

Myers,  Chas.  S.,  cited  on  ancient

Egyptians  _  13

Natchez  pelvic  bone _ 16-19

Neanderthal  skull —

compared  with  Bremen  chamie-

cephals _  43

compared  with  Iowa  mound

cranium  _  93

compared  with  Nebraska  “  loess

man  ”  _ 71,  74,  80

physical  characters _ 30,  99

Nebraska  “loess  man” —

bibliography  -  70

conclusion  as  to  antiquity -  98

history  of  finds _ 67-70

somatological  description  of  re¬
mains —

from  Gilder  mound - 76-82

from  vicinity  of  Gilder

mound _  82-86

'views  of  men  of  science  on _ 70-74

( Sec  also  Gilder  mound.)

Neolithic  man  of  Europe _  71

Nevada  low-browed  I’aiute  skull-  104
Newberry,  Professor,  cited  on  Man

of  Peiion _ 32,  33

New  Orleans  skeleton - 14,  15

North  Dakota  low-browed  mound


91


SKULL


101


112


INDEX


Page

North  Osprey  bones —

chemical  analysis _ 56—57

history _  54

physical  characters _ 58-50

site  of  find _ 61

Xott  and  Glidden,  quoting  Usher  on

Lake  Monroe  bones _  10

(•Brecon,  Col.  A.,  connection  of  with

Man  of  I’eiion _  88

Old  World,  as  place  of  man’s  origin.  0

Omaha,  arrival  of  in  Gilder  Mound

region _ 97-98

Osborn,  Prop.  Henry  Fairchild —


cited  in  connection  with  Ne¬
braska  “  loess  man  69,  70,  78
quoted  on  Nebraska  “  loess


man  ” _  71

Osprey  skull —

chemical  analysis _ 56-57

geological  report  of  Doctor

Vaughan _  64—65,  66

history _  58-54

locality  of  find _  60-61,  68,  64,  66

physical  characters _ 57-58

Oto,  arrival  of  in  region  east  of

Gilder  mound _  98

Paicte  low-browed  skull  prom

Nevada _  104

Parker,  F.  T.,  excavations  by  in

and  near  Gilder  mound  _  67,  82
Pawnee,  arrival  of  in  Gilder  Mound

region _  98

Penon,  man  op _ 32-35

Phalen,  W.  C.,  chemical  analysis  by
of  western  Florida  fossil

man  _ 56-57

Phosphate  rocks,  description  of _  66

Pi  EGAN  LOW-BROWED  SKULL  FROM

Montana _  102

Pithecanthropus  ercctus _  '  74

Plains  Indians,  physical  characters

of _ 1 _  52,  97-98

Pleistocene  period  defined _  9

Pliocene  period  defined _  0

I’ODBABA  SKULL _  90

Pouetales,  Count  F.  de,  Lake  Mon¬
roe  bones  discovered  by _  19

Prichard,  work  of  on  antiquity  of

man  _  14

Primates,  descent  of  man  from _  0

Pruner-Bioy,  cited  on  recent  low¬
browed  crania  _  _  00

Putnam,  Prop.  F.  W. —

acknowledgments  to _  _  21

cited  on  Trenton  femur _ 46-47

explorations  in  Trenton  gravels

by  _  35

(See  also  Volk,  E.)

Quaternary  period  defined _  0

Quatrefages  and  1 1  amy,  cited  on

recent  low  browed  crania.  00

Quebec  skeleton _  16

Uandall-MacIveu,  cited  on  ancient

Egyptians  -  13

Recent  geological  time  defined _  9


Page

Riverview  (Cemetery  skull —

history  _  36

physical  characters - 38-41

racial  affinities _ 41—46

Rock  Bluff  skull —

compared  with  Gilder  Mound

skull  no.  6 _  78

history  _ 28-30

physical  characters _  30-32,  93

superficial  cutting  evidenced  by_  91
Rutimeyer,  cited  on  European

chamaecephals _  42

Salisbury,  Prof.  R.  D.,  cited  on —

glacial  period _  10

Lansing  skeleton _  47

Santa  Barbara  County  low-browed

skull _ 105-106

Santa  Cruz  Island  low-browed

skulls  _  106-107

Schmidt,  Emil —

on  Calaveras  skull _  22

on  Charleston  bones _ 20,  21

on  Natchez  pelvic  bone _ 17-18

on  Rock  Bluff  cranium.  28-29, 30, 31, 32

on  variations  between  ancient

and  modern  crania _  13

Schokland  island,  skulls  from _  43

Sharples,  Mr.,  quoted  on  Calaveras

skull _  22

Sioux —

arrival  of  in  Gilder  Mound  re¬


gion  _  98

stature  of _  97

Sioux  skull,  modern _  96

Skull,  human,  variations  in _ 12-14

Soda  Creek  skeleton _  20

South  Osprey  remains —

geological  report  of  Dr.  Vaughan  65,  66

history _  55—56

locality  of  find _  61—62,  63,  64,  66

physical  characters _ 59-60

Spang,  Norman,  excavations  by  in

Osprey  mound _ 60—61

Sprf.ngel,  J.  W.,  cited  on  Zuyder

Zee  Islands  skulls _  43

Spy,  man  op.  (See  Man  of  Spy.)

Starr,  Prof.  Frederick,  cited  on

archeology  of  Iowa _ 87,  92

Swedes  in  Delaware  valley _ 42,  46

Tertiary  period  defined _  9

Thomas,  Dr.  Cyrus,  cited  on  mound

exploration _  87

Thompson  and  Randall-MacIver,
cited  on  ancient  Egyp¬
tians  _  13

Trenton  crania  _  35-36,  49

(See  also  Burlington  County
skull,  Riverview  Cemetery
skull.)

Trenton  femur _ 46-47

Trenton  gravels _  35

(See  also  Trenton  crania,  Tren¬
ton  femur.)

Turner,  cited  on  recent  low-browed

crania _  99


INDEX


113


Page

Fpha m .  Professor.  cited  on  Lansing

skeleton  __  — - -  47

T'kk  island,  skulls  from  —  ------  43

TTsher,  Pr.  W. —

quoted  on  Quebec  skeleton -  16

quoting  Agassiz  on  Lake  Mon¬
roe  bones _  11*

Vaughan,  1)r.  T.  Wayland,  connec¬
tion  of  with  western

Florida  fossil  man _  60,  64-60

Virchow,  cited  on  certain  European

low  skulls -  42,  44  |

Voi.k.  E. —

exploration  of  Trenton  gravels

by  -  6  b

Trenton  femur  discovered  by -  46

Ward,  Prof.  H.  B. —

acknowledgments  to -  74

cited  in  connection  with  Gilder


Mound  skull  no.  6 - 78,  79

on  Nebraska  “loess  man".  70V71,  72-73
Webb,  J.  G. —

home  site  described - 60-61

North  Osprey  bones  discovered

by  -  __  54

on  Osprey  skull - 53-54

on  South  Osprey  remains - 55-56


Page

Webb,  .1.

W.,  connection  of

with

North  Osprey  bones

54

Webster,

Clement  L.,  on  explore

tion  of  ancient

Iowa

mounds

92-93

Welcker,

H„  cited  on  Zuyder

•  Zee

Islands  skulls

43

Western

Florida  fossil  man.

(Src

Hanson  Landing  remains,

North  Osprey  bones,  Os¬
prey  skull,  South  Osprey
remains. )

Whitney,  J.  O..  on  Calaveras  skull-  21,  22
Wilcox,  Joseph —

connection  of  with  Hanson

Landing  remains -  55

finds  made  by  at  South  Osprey.  56

Williston,  Professor,  cited  on

Lansing  skeleton -  47

Winchell,  Professor,  cited  on  Lan¬
sing  skeleton -  47

Wisconsin  low-browed  skull - 107-108

Wyman,  Pr.  Jeffreys,  on  Calaveras
and  California  Indian

crania - -’5

Zuyder  Zee  Islands  skulls - 42-43


3453— Bull.  33—07 - 8


O


«


,T>


Date  Due


tVJ  imTj

k

MAIt  JtsD  13

71

r.

MAR  3  P  ^

a

|

£F#CTI  <

t  Wr

DEC  *

3  1994

JAM  0

51995

1  Jo

'  1*  V

CL,  I  *  ?'  M,eSV  IODy*

Skeletal  remains  sugaestin


uiuiui  uuu


63  0221034  3

TRENT  UNIVERSITY


E51  .U6  no.  33


Hrdlicka,  Ales

Skeletal  remains  suggesting


85154
