A Manual of Pharmacodynamics
Richard Hughes
A Manual of Pharmacodynamics. London: Henry Turner, 1867 (first edition).
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/manualofpharmaco00hughiala).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

u  i\n  i\  i


A

MANUAL  OF  HOMCEOPATHIC  PRACTICE


PAET  I.
PHARMACODYNAMICS.


A


MANUAL


PHARMACODYNAMICS.


RICHARD HUGHES,

L.B.C.P.  ED.  (EXAM.),  M.B.C.S.  ENGL.


LONDON:

HKXRY TURNER & CO., 77, FLEET STREET, B.C.,
AND  74,  NEW  BOND  STREET,  W.

MANCHESTER:
41,  PICCADILLY,  AND  15,  MARKET  STREET.

1867.


J.  E. A»LABD,  PEINTBE, BARTHOLOMEW CLOSE, E.G.


TO

HENBY  B.  MADDEN,  ESQ.,  M.D.

MY  DEAE  DR.  MADDEN,

I  am  discharging  a  duty,  no  less  than  indulging  a
pleasure,  in  dedicating  this  volume  to  you.  It  was  from
your  conversation  and  writings  that  I  first  learned  the
reasonableness  of  Homoeopathy :  it  was  under  your  guidance
that  I  began  to  study  and  practise  it.  You  will  recognise
in  the  following  pages  much  that  I  have  leamt  directly
from  you,  and  much  that  we  have  worked  out  together.
Even  that  in  them  which  I  may  call  mine  would  not  have
been  without  the  inspiration  first  caught  from  you.  So  I
am  but  giving  you  of  your  own :  and  am  proud  to  head  my
pages  with  the  grace  and  sanction  of  your  name.

That  you  may  long  enjoy  and  fruitfully  use  the  health
you  have  travelled  so  many  miles  to  re-establish,  is  the
earnest  prayer  of

Your  aifectionate  friend,

RICHAED  HUGHES.


Vlll  PREFACE.

furnish  to  students  and  beginners  in  Homoeopathy
a  full  digest  of  the  knowledge  peculiar  to  our  school
of  medicine.

Leaving  the  Therapeutical  part  for  the  present,  I
would  say  a  few  words  upon  the  manner  in  which  I
have  treated  the  subject  of  Pharmacodynamics.

1.  My  work  in  no  way  professes  to  be  a  substi-
tute for  the  '  Materia  Medica.' It  is  rather  a  guide
and  companion to  it. The  pathogeneses of  the
medicines,  given  in  detail  there,  are  presented  here
in  the  way  of  descriptive outline,  of  analysis,  or
(wherever possible) of physiological expression.
But reference is always made to the Materia
Medica  itself  as  the  mine  where  the  treasure,  how-
ever rough  its form,  really  lies. To  indicate  the
vein  where  each  mineral  may  be  worked,  to  estimate
the  value  of  its  yield,  to  exhibit  such  of  its  products
as  have  been  obtained  and  smelted,  and  especially
such  as have  been  applied to  use — this has  been
my  work. If  there  are  any  who  cannot  or  will  not
work  the  mine  for  themselves,  that  which  they  learn
from  what  I  show  them  out  of  it  is  at  any  rate  better
for  them  than  total  ignorance. To most of  my
readers  I hope that the  specimens  I  exhibit will
excite a thirst  for  farther research  of  their  own,
rather  than  a  less worthy  content  with  the results
of  the  labour  of  others.

2.  My  main  object  has been to  set  forth the


PREFACE.  IX

sphere  of  action  of  each  medicine.  Putting  out  of
sight  those  great  polychrests  which  embrace  nearly
the  whole  organism  within  the  circle  of  their  influ-
ence, every  medicine  has  one  or  more  centres  of
action.  What  these  centres  are  we  learn,  some-
times by  the  study  of  the  pathogenesis,  sometimes
by  the  result  of  clinical  experience.  When  we  have
learnt  them,  they  become  all-important  stand-points
for  the  understanding  and  the  remembrance  of  the
medicine.  Jhese  centres  I  have  endeavoured
wherever  practicable  to  reach :  and  around  them  to
group  the  several  actions  and  uses  of  the  drugs.
There  will  always  be  residuary  phenomena  in  such  a
process  :  but  these  I  have  not  failed  to  note  when
their  importance  demanded  it.

3.  One  word  about  the  unusual  form  of  my
work,  viz.,  that  of  letters.  I  was  driven  to  adopt
it  by  the  object  I  had  in  view.  I  write  especially
for  practitioners  of  the  old  school,  who  desire  to
acquaint  themselves  with  and  furnish  themselves
for  our  practice.  I  felt  accordingly  the  need  of
some  mode  of  communication  which  should  be
colloquial  rather  than  didactic.  And  moreover
I  wanted  to  have  always  before  me  the  mind
of  our  confreres,  wedded  to  old  notions,  bristling
with  objections  to  anything  new,  and  requiring
explanations  to  the  fullest  degree.  By  erecting
the  friend  whose  wants  evoked  my  book  into  an


X  PREFACE.

imaginary  correspondent,  and  writing  what  I  had
to  say  in  the  shape  of  letters  to  him,  I  found  the
form  of  composition  I  required.

For  all  that  remains,  I  leave  my  pages  to  speak
for  themselves.  They  have  employed  for  many
months  all  the  leisure  left  me  by  a  laborious  prac-
tice. Since  they  aim  at  supplying  a  general  want,
I  ask  for  them  the  indulgent  consideration  of  my
colleagues.


CONTENTS.


LETTER  PAGE

I.  Introductory 1

II.  Nomenclature  and  Pharmaceutics 10

III.  The  Acids 19

IV.  The  Acids  (continued)  29

V.  Aconite 37

VI.  Actsea,  JSsculus,  ^thusa,  Agaricus 49

VII.  Agnus  ca*stus,  Allium  cepa  and  sativum,  Aloes,  Alu-
mina, Ambra,  Ammonium  carbonicum  and  muri-

aticum 59

VIII.  Anacardium,  Angustura,  Antimonium  crudum,  and

Tartaricum 71

IX.  Apis,  Apocynum,  Argentum  metallicum  and  Nitri-

cum,  Arnica 86

X.  Arsenic 105

XI.  Artemisia, Asafcetida, Asarum, Asterias, Aururn,

Baptisia,  Baryta  carbonica  123

XII.  Belladonna 136

XIII.  Berberis, Bismuthum,  Borax, Bovista,  Bromium,

Kali  bromidum 153

XIV.  Bryonia 160

XV.  Cactus grandiflorus, Calcarea acetica,  carbonica,

muriatica  and  phosphorica,  Calendula,  Camphora 176
XVI.  Cannabis sativa  and  indica, Cantharis,  Capsicum,

Carbo  animalis  and  vegetabilis 190

XVII.  Caulophyllum, Causticum, Cedron, Chamomilla,

Chelidonium,  Chiinaphila 202

XVIII.  Cicuta,  Cina,  Cinchona  and  Quinine 214

XIX.  Cistus, Clematis, Cocculus,  Coccus cacti,  CofFea,

Colchicum,  Collinsonia 225

XX.  Colocynth,  Conium,  Copaiba,  Corallia,  Crocus,  Cro-

talus .  , 241


Ill  CONTENTS,

LETTEE  PAGE

XXI.  Croton,  Cuprum,  Curare,  Cyclamen,  Digitalis 253

XXII.  Drosera,  Dulcamara,  Elaterium,  Eupatorium,  Eu-

phorbium,  Euphrasia,  Ferruia  269

XXIII.  Gelseminum,  Glonoine,  Graphites,  Gratiola,  Guia-

cum,  Gummi  guttse,  Hamamelis 284

XXIV.  Helleborus,  Helonias,  Hepar  sulphuris,  Hydrastis,

Hyoscyamus,  Hy  peri  cum  298

XXV.  Ignatia,  Indigo,  lodium,  Kali  hydriodicum 313

XXVI.  Ipecacuanha,  Iris,  Kali  bichromicum 335

XXVII.  Kali  carbonicum,  chloricum,  nitricum,  and  per-

manganicum,  Kalmia,  Kreasote,  Lachesis 351

XXVIII.  Laurocerasus,  Ledum,  Leptandria,  Lobelia,  Lyco-
podium, Magnesia carbonica and muriatica,

Manganum,  Menyantbes 366

XXIX.  Mercurius 381

XXX.  Mezereum, Millefolium,  Moscbus,  Murex,  Naja,
Natrum  carbonicum  and  muriaticum,  Nuphar,

Nux  juglans,  Nux  moscbata 403

XXXI.  Nux  vomica 414

XXXII.  Oleander, Oleum animale, Opium, Origanum,

Petroleum 427

XXXIII.  Phosphorus  436

XXXIV.  Phytolacca,  Platina,  Plumbum,  Podophyllum 450

XXXV.  Pulsatilla 462

XXXVI.  Ranunculus, Ratanhia, Rheum, Rhododendron,

Rhus 471

XXXVII.  Rumex, Ruta, Sabadilla, Sabina, Sambucus,

Sanguinaria,  Sarsaparilla,  Scilla 482

XXXVIII.  Secale,  Selenium,  Senega,  Sepia,  Silicea  492

XXXIX.  Spigelia,  Spongia,  Stannum,  Staphysagria,  Stra-
monium 503

XL.  Sulphur 514

XLI.  Tabacum, Taraxacum, Tellurium, Terebintbina,

Teucrium,  Thea 525

XLII.  Thuja,  Uranium,  Urtica,  Uva  ursi,  Valerian,  Vera-

trura  album  and  viride 534

XLIII.  Verbascum,  Vinca  minor,  Viola  odorata  and  tri-
color, Xanthoxyllum,  Zincum 544


ALPHABETICAL  LIST

OP THE

MATERIA  MEDICA  HOMGEOPATHICA.


N.B. — The  different  sizes  of  type  indicate  the  relative  importance
of  the  medicines  :  and  may  afford  useful  hints  as  to  order  of
study.


PAGE

Acidum  benzoicum 19

Acidum  fluoricura 21

Acidum  hydrocyanicum ...  22

Acidum  muriaticum 25

ACIDUM  NITEICUM  29

Acidum  oxalicum 31

ACIDUM  PHOSPHORICTTM  ...  33

Acidum  sulphuricum 35

ACONITUM  NAPELLUS  37

Actasa  racemosa 49

^Esculus  hippocastanum  ...  52

^Ethusa  cynapium 54

Agaricus  rauscarius 55

Agnus  castus 59

Allium  cepa  60

Allium  sativum 61

Aloes  62

Alumina 64

Ambra  grisea 66

Ammonium  carbonicum  ...  67

Ammonium  muriaticum  ...  69

Anacardium  71

Angustura  vera 73

Antimonium  crudum 74

AKTIMONIUM  TARTAEICTJM  76

APIS  MELLIFICA 87

Apocynum  cannabinum ...  93

Argentum  94

Argentum  nitricum  96

ARNICA  MONTANA... .  99


PAGE

ARSENICUM  ALBUM  ...  105

Artemisia 123

Asafoetida 124

Asarum  126

Asterias  rubens 127

Atropia  151

AtTETTM 128

Saptisia  tinctoria 131

BARYTA  GARBONICA 134

BELLADONNA 136

Berberis 153

Bismuthuin 154

Borax 155

Bovista  156

Bromium 157

BKYONIAALBA 160

Cactus  grandiftorus 176

Calcarea  acetica 180

CALCAREA  CARBONICA 181

Calcarea  muriatica 184

Calcarea  phosphorica 184

Calendula 184

CA>MPHORA 185

Cannabis  indica 192

Cannabis  sativa 190

Cantharis  193

Capsicum 198

Carbo  animalis  .,...,  ,.  199


XIV


ALPHABETICAL LIST.


PAGE

C AEBO  VEGETABILIS 200

Caulophyllum 203

Causticum 204

Cedron  206

CHAMOMILLA 207

Chelidonium  majus 210

Chimaphila 213

Cicuta  virosa 214

Cina 215

CINCHONA 217

Cistus  canadensis 225

Clematis 226

Cocculus  indicus 227

Coccus  cacti  230

Coffea 232

Colchicum 234

Collinsonia 239

Colocynth  241

Conium  244

Copaiba 248

Corallia  rubra 249

Crocus 250

Crotalus 251

Croton  iiglium  253

CFPBTJM 255

Curare 257

Cyclamen  258

DIGITALIS 259

Digitaline 268

Drosera 269

Dulcamara 271

Elaterium 274

Eupatorium  perfoliatum  ...  275

Euphorbium 277

Eupkrasia 278

Ferrum  280

Gelseminum  284

Qlonoine 287

Graphites 291

Gratiola..., 292

Guiacum 293

Gummi  guttse 293

Hamamelis 294

Helleborus  niger  298


PAGE

Helonias  dioica 300

HEPAB  SULPHUBIS  302

Hydrastis 305

HYOSCYAMTTS 309

Hypericum  perfoliatum ...  312

IGNATIA  AMAEA  313

Indigo .; 316

IODIUM 316

IPECACUANHA  335

Iris  versicolor 341

KALI  BICHEOMICUM 343

Kali  bromidum 158

Kali  carbonicum 351

Kali  chloricuni 352

Kali  hydriodicum 330

Kali  nitricum 354

Kali  permanganicum 356

Kalmia  latifolia 357

Kreasotum 358

LACHESIS  362

Laurocerasus 366

Ledum  palustre 367

Leptandria  virginica 368

Lobelia  inflata  369

LTCOPODIUM 371

Magnesia  carbonica 376

Magnesia  muriatica 376

Manganum 377

Menyanthes  379

MERCURIUS  381

Mezereum  403

Millefolium 404

Moschus 405

Murex  purpurea 406

Naja 407

Natrum  carbonicura 409

Natrum  muriaticum 409

Nuphar  luteum 411

Nuxjuglans  412

Nux  moschata  412

NUXVOMICA 414

Oleander 427

Oleum  animale  ...  ..  428


ALPHABETICAL LIST.


XV


PAGE

Oleum  j  ecoris  aselli 333

Opium 428

Origanum  434

Petroleum 434

PHOSPHORUS  436

Phytolacca 450

Platina  455

Plumbum 456

Podophyllum 459

PULSATILLA 462


Quina .


221


Ranunculus 471

Ratanhia 473

Rheum  474

Rhododendron  474

RHTJS  TOXICODENDBON ...  476

Rumex  crispus  482

Euta 483

Sabadilla 485

Sabina 486

Sambucus  488

Sanguinaria  489

Sarsaparilla 490

Scilla 490

Secale  comutum  492

Selenium 494

Senega 495

Sepia 496


PAGE

SILICEA 499

Spiff elia 503

SPONGIA 505

Stannum 507

Staphysagria 509

STRAMONIUM 510

Strychnia  425

SULPHUR  514

Tabacum 525

Taraxacum 527

Tellurium 528

Terebinthina 529

Teucrium  533

Thea  533

Thuja  occidentalis 534

Uranium  nitricum 537

Urtica  urens 538

Uva  ursi 538

Valeriana  539

Veratrum  album 540

Veratrum  viride 543

Verbascum  thapeus 544

Vinca  minor  545

Viola  odorata 545

Viola  tricolor 546

Xanthoxyllum  fraxineum ...  547
ZlNCTTM...  .. 548


LETTER  I.

INTRODUCTORY.
MY  DEAR

You  tell  me  that  you  have  become  a  convert  to
Homoeopathy.  I  need  hardly  say  how  gladdened
I  am  by  the  intelligence.  It  is  always  a  satis-
faction to  hear  that  any  of  the  priests  are  obedient
to  the  faith.  And  one's  gratification  is  great
indeed,  when  it  is  an  old  frieud  and  fellow-student
who  comes  forward  to  give  in  his  adhesion  to  a
truth,  which  it  is  the  object  of  one's  own  life  to
maintain  and  put  in  practice.

You  now  write  to  me  for  advice.  Your  con-
victions, you  say,  have  been  attained  in  a  great
measure  by  the  study  of  our  apologetic  writings.
They  have  satisfied  you  of  the  reasonableness  of
our  doctrine  and  of  the  positive  efficacy  of  our
remedies.  In  the  few  cases  in  which  you  have
tried  Homoeopathic  medicines  your  experience  has
been  confirmatory  of  the  reports  of  others.  You
have  obtained  curative  results,  not  only  most  satis-
factory as  to  rapidity  and  thoroughness,  but  of  a
character  quite  new  to  you,  or,  at  least,  resembling
only  that  of  those  medicines  you  have  hitherto
known  as  "  specifics."  You  feel  certain  that  in
this  law  of  similars  a  new  vein  has  been  struck,

1


2  INTRODUCTORY.

pregnant  with  remedial  wealth  ;  and  you  ask  how
you  are  to  furnish  yourself  so  as  to  work  the  vein
to  its  utmost.

Now,  if  you  have  thoroughly  mastered  the  law
in  question,  it  will  be  obvious  to  you  that  the  first
requisite  for  its  application  is  a  knowledge  of  the
pathogenetic  influence  of  drugs,  i.  e.  of  the  effects
they  are  capable  of  producing  on  the  healthy  body.
Some  of  these  effects  are  already  familiar  to  you —
they  are  part  of  the  body  of  knowledge  comprised
under  the  heads  of  Toxicology  and  Materia  Medica.
But  you  will  feel  at  once  that  if  your  acquaintance
with  pathogenetics  were  limited  to  this  range,  you
would  be  poorly  furnished  for  the  application  of  the
law  of  similars.  It  is  but  a  small  number  of  drugs
whose  physiological  action  is  at  all  well  known,  and
of  these  only  the  more  violent  effects  have  been
noted.  A  few  typical  and  severe  diseases  are
pictured  therein ;  but  for  the  "  covering"  of  the
vast  majority  of  the  morbid  conditions  which  come
before  us  in  daily  practice,  Toxicology  and  Materia
Medica  give  little,  if  any,  aid.  You  will  see,  there-
fore, the  necessity  of  becoming  acquainted  with
those  more  refined  and  thorough  investigations  into
pathogenesy  which,  as  you  know,  have  been  con-
ducted by  Hahnemann  and  his  followers.

These  investigations  have  extended  over  many
years,  and  their  records  are  scattered  throughout
our  literature.  The  well-known  'Manual'  of  Jahr  is
an  attempt  to  bring  together  in  a  condensed  form
all  these  "  provings/'  as  we  call  them — all,  that  is,
that  were  extant  at  the  time  of  its  publication,  now
many  years  ago.  You  must  have  it,  I  suppose,  for


INTRODUCTORY.  3

those  medicines  the  original  sources  of  whose
pathogenesy  are  difficult  to  get  at.  But  I  would
recommend  you  to  obtain,  wherever  practicable,  the
primary  records  themselves,  which  have  a  life  and
freshness  quite  unfelt  in  the  second-hand  compila-
tions. The  greater  part  of  these  are  readily  acces-
sible in  an  English  dress.  There  are  the  provings
contained  in  the  '  Materia  Medica  Pura '  and  the
'  Chronic  Diseases '  of  Hahnemann,  and  the  'Addi-
tions to  the  Materia  Medica'  of  Stapf,  all  of  which
have  been  translated  by  Dr.  Hempel.  Many
others,  both  of  home  and  foreign  origin,  are  con-
tained in  the  volumes  of  the  '  British  Journal  of
Homoeopathy/  From  America  we  have  the  '  Mate-
ria Medica  of  American  Provings/  compiled  by  Dr.
Esrey  from  the  '  Transactions '  of  the  American
Institute ;  the  '  Homoeopathic  Provings '  of  Dr.
Metcalfe,  being?  those  contained  in  the  appendix  to
the  '  North  American  Journal  of  Homoeopathy  ;'
and  the  '  New  Remedies  in  Homoeopathic  Practice'
of  Dr.  E.  M.  Hale.  Last,  in  the  '  American  Ho-
moeopathic Review*  of  1864-6,  Dr.  Constantine
Hering  has  been  publishing  the  results  of  the  ex-
periments in  pathogenesy  carried  out  under  his
superintendence.

By  furnishing  yourself  with  these  works  you
will  be  possessed  of  the  original  records  of  the
provings  of  at  least  five  sixths  of  our  Materia
Medica.  But  I  fear  that  when  you  come  to  in-
spect your  treasures  you  will  be  at  a  loss  what  to
do  with  them.  A  few  of  the  provings,  such  as  the
Colocynth,  Sulphur,  and  Thuja  of  the  Austrian
Society,  are  everything  that  can  be  desired.  Each


4  INTRODUCTORY.

experimenter  records  day  by  day  the  quantity  of
the  drug  taken,  and  the  phenomena — objective  and
subjective — which  occur  in  his  body  in  their  time,
place,  and  order.  But  such  provings  are  the  ex-
ception rather  than  the  rule.  Following  the  un-
fortunate example  of  Hahnemann,  those  who  have
undertaken  to  publish  the  pathogenetic  experiments
have  done  so  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  them  as
uninteresting  and  uninstructive  as  possible.  They
have  thrown  together  the  whole  mass  of  symptoms
observed  by  the  various  provers,  and  have  re-
arranged these  under  regional  headings,  and  accord-
ing to  an  anatomico-physiological  "schema."  The
result  of  unknown  doses  of  the  drug,  often  without
note  of  their  time  of  appearing  relative  to  its  in-
gestion,  and  divorced  from  their  natural  grouping
and  connections,  these  symptoms  present  to  the
student  a  maze  for  Theseus,  a  riddle  for  (Edipus.
It  is  as  though  the  features  of  some  half-a-dozen
English  landscapes  were  brought  together  within
one  frame,  all  the  trees  being  put  into  one  panel,
all  the  clouds  into  another,  all  the  pieces  of  water
into  another,  and  so  on ;  and  that  the  spectator
were  then  called  upon  to  identify  the  particular
bits  of  scenery  which  the  original  paintings  were
intended  to  represent.  From  such  disjecta  membra
of  pathogenesy  hints  for  practice  may  be  and  have
been  drawn :  but  the  attempt  to  trace  in  them  veri-
table pictures  of  disease  is  well-nigh  hopeless.

I  have  written  strongly  on  this  subject,  not  only
because  I  feel  bitterly  the  injury  inflicted  upon
Homo3opathy  by  this  senseless  arrangement,  but
because  I  am  anxious  to  anticipate  the  disappoint-


INTRODUCTORY.  5

ment  and  even  disgust  you  will  almost  inevitably
feel  when  it  comes  before  you.  Do  not  let  it  dis-
courage you.  In  spite  of  all  the  obstacles  this
grouping  presents,  our  catalogues  of  symptoms  have
led  to  much  successful  practice.  And  there  are
certain  clues  in  our  hands  which  are  of  no  little
assistance  to  us  in  attempting  to  thread  the  laby-
rinth.

1st.  We  have  those  very  facts  of  Toxicology  and
Materia  Medica  which  I  have  hitherto  spoken  of  as
insufficient  for  our  purposes.  Insufficient  they
indeed  are,  but,  nevertheless,  in  their  measure  ex-
tremely helpful.  To  know  that  a  poison  is  narco-
tic, narcotico-irritant,  or  irritant  only,  is  knowledge
sufficiently  vague ;  but  it  is  a  clue.  It  supplies  a
framework  in  which  the  symptoms  may  be  arranged
in  some  order ;  it  indicates  the  class  of  diseases  to
which  the  drug  corresponds.  The  revelations  of
morbid  anatomy  carry  us  a  step  onward — they  in-
dicate the  organs  and  tissues  upon  which  the  poison
exerts  its  influence,  and  in  a  broad  way  the  cha-
racter of  that  influence.  The  teachings  of  our
treatises  on  Materia  Medica  crown  this  body  of
information.  By  their  classifications  of  drugs  as
cathartics,  diuretics,  expectorants,  and  so  on,  they
help  us  still  further  to  localise  the  sphere  of  the
influence  of  each  :  and  from  their  summary  of  the
uses  of  medicines  in  disease  many  a  hint  may  be
drawn  in  regard  of  the  same  object,

2nd.  In  addition  to  the  above,  we  derive  great
help  in  our  studies  of  pathogenesy  from  the  usus  in
morbis.  A  great  mass  of  clinical  experience  with
Homoeopathic  remedies  has  now  been  accumulated,


6  INTRODUCTORY.

and  may  be  read  in  the  volumes  of  our  journals  and
in  the  collections  of  Riickert  and  Beauvais  (Roth).
In  a  paper  on  Ipecacuanha  in  the  twenty-third
volume  of  the  '  British  Journal  of  Homoeopathy/
p.  35,  I  have  endeavoured  to  point  out  the  bearing
of  such  clinical  experience  upon  the  science  of  phar-
macology. I  venture  to  cite  what  I  have  there
said.  "  If  it  be  observed  that  a  certain  drug  uni-
formly exerts  a  curative  influence  upon  a  well-
defined  type  of  disease,  and  if  that  influence  is  not
to  be  accounted  for  by  any  indirect  action,  or  any
physical  or  chemical  properties  of  the  drug,  we
say  that  the  remedy  is  '  specific/  T.o  a  phar-
macologist of  the  old  school,  '  specific'  means
incomprehensible ;  and  his  use  of  the  term  indicates
that  his  knowledge  has  at  this  point  terminated  in
ignorance.  But  we  find  him  also  using  the  term
*  specific'  to  express  that  special  affinity  for  certain
parts  and  special  action  upon  certain  processes  of
the  organism  which  is  manifested  by  all  medicines,
however  introduced  into  the  system.  He  might
fairly  extend  this  meaning  of  the  term  into  the
province  of  therapeutics,  and,  when  a  remedy  acts
'  specifically/  infer  that  the  cure  depends  upon
the  affinity  of  the  drug  for  the  organ  whose  struc-
ture or  function  is  affected.  To  such  an  inference
Homoeopathy  adds  another,  viz.  that  the  kind  of
morbid  action  present  in  the  disease  cured  is  that
which  is  characteristic  of  the  pathogenetic  influence
of  the  medicine.

"  If,  then,  we  know  that  a  definite  morbid  condi-
tion has  been  over  and  over  again  removed  by  a
given  drug,  incapable  of  exerting  any  mechanical  or


INTRODUCTORY.  7

chemical  influence  upon  it,  we  are  justified  in  infer-
ring that  the  drug  in  question  acts  by  special  affi-
nity upon  the  parts  involved  in  the  disease,  and  in  a
similar  manner.  Thus,  we  know  that  Belladonna
causes  heat,  dryness,  and  redness  of  the  throat ;  and
we  infer  that  it  acts  specifically  upon  the  mucous  mem-
brane of  the  fauces,  and  after  the  manner  known  as
inflammatory  irritation.  But  if,  prior  to  this
knowledge,  a  number  of  cases  had  been  put  on
record  in  which  Belladonna  had  cured  an  inflamed
throat  so  characterised,  we  should  have  been
justified  in  drawing  precisely  the  same  inference  as
that  which  now  results  from  our  pathogenetic  ex-
perience."

These  aids  being  so  indispensable  to  the  study
of  the  Materia  Medica  Homoeopathica,  it  may  fairly
be  asked  of  us  by  inquirers  and  converts  that  we
should  supply  them  in  some  convenient  form.  The
only  complete  attempt  in  this  direction  which  I
know  of  is  the  '  New  and  Comprehensive  System  of
Materia  Medica  and  Therapeutics'  of  our  indefati-
gable colleague,  Dr.  Hempel.  It  is  a  book  you
ought  to  have.  But  if  you  will  read  a  review  of  it
in  the  twenty-third  volume  of  the  '  British  Journal
of  Homoeopathy/  you  will  see  why  I  cannot  recom-
mend it  to  you  as  supplying  all  your  wants.

I  set  myself  accordingly  to  embody,  for  your  help,
the  materials  which  I  have  been  amassing  these  six
years  past  in  aid  of  my  own  study  of  the  Materia
Medica.  If  they  prove  useful  to  you,  they  may
perhaps  assume  a  more  permanent  form  for  the
benefit  of  others  in  like  case.  At  any  rate,  I  am
sure  the  task  will  be  advantageous  to  myself,  and


8  INTRODUCTORY.

will  lead  to  firmer  grip  of  what  I  have  learnt,  and
greater  precision  in  applying  it.  I  propose,  then,  as
T  have  leisure,  writing  you  a  series  of  '  Letters  on
the  Materia  Medica.'  After  defining  what  it  is  that
we  are  administering  under  the  common  names  of
the  drugs — Aconite,  Arsenicum,  and  so  on — I
shall  refer  you  to  the  authorities  for  our  knowledge
of  each.  Under  this  head  will  be  mentioned  the
original  provings,  where  accessible,  and  any  special
sources  of  information  which  may  exist.  Then  I
of  the  drug,  illustrating  this  from  our  clinical  expe-
rience with  it,  wherever  such  has  been  obtained.
A  list  of  "Allied  Medicines"  will  then  be  given,
with  which  the  drug  under  study  may  be  profitably
compared.  Lastly,  under  the  heading  <e  Dose"  I
shall  state  whether  the  higher  or  lower  dilutions
seem  to  have  been  most  efficacious  in  the  treatment
of  disease.

In  all  this  I  shall  make  copious  reference  to
Homo3opathic  literature,  so  that  my  necessarily
brief  statements  may  be  followed  out  in  full  at  your
leisure.  I  ought,  therefore,  to  tell  you  what  books
you  should  obtain  for  this  purpose.  The  following
is  a  pretty  complete  list ;  you  can  get  the  books
through  any  Homoeopathic  chemist.

1.  Hahnemann's  Materia  Medica  Pura.

2.  „  Chronic  Diseases.

3.  Stapf  s  Additions  to  the  Materia  Medica.

4.  Esrey's  Materia  Medica  of  American  Provings.

5.  Testers  Materia  Medica.

6.  Hale's  New  Remedies  in  Homoeopathic  Practice.
2nd  ed.


INTRODUCTORY.

7.  Hempel's  Materia  Medlca. 2nd  ed. 2  vols.

8.  The  Hahnemann  Materia  Medica. Part  I.

9.  The  British  Journal  of  Homoeopathy  (from  the
commencement).

10.  The  Neiv  Materia  Medica,  appended  to The
North  American  Journal  of  Homoeopathy.

11.  Metcalfe's  Homoeopathic  Provings.

12.  The  American  Homoeopathic  Review  (from  the
commencement) .

13.  The  Annals  of  the  British  Homoeopathic  Society
(from  the  commencement).

You  should  also  have  one  or  two  good  Allceopathic
treatises  on  Materia  Medica ;  I  can  advise  the
English  Pereira  and  the  American  Wood.  The  last
edition  of  Christison  '  On  Poisons'  will  complete  your
pathogenetic  library.

So  now  we  adventure  upon  the  ocean  of  Materia
Medica,  of  which  the  prefixed  list  indicates  the  wide
extent.  I  only  hope  we  shall  not  founder  irre-
trievably upon  any  of  its  numerous  quicksands.

Ever  yours,

R.  H.


LETTER  II.

NOMENCLATURE AND PHARMACEUTICS.

IF  you  have  run  your  eye  through  the  list  of
medicines  prefixed  to  my  first  letter,  still  more  if
you  have  read  much  of  Homoeopathic  treatises,  you
must  have  been  surprised  at  our  many  singularities
in  the  matter  of  nomenclature.  That  the  liquid  which
you  know  as  Hydrochloric  Acid  we  style  Muriatic,
might  be  passed  over  as  of  little  importance.  But
it  seems  strange  that  we  should  talk  of  China  and
Chininum  sulphuricum  instead  of  Cinchona  and
Sulphate  of  Quinine,  and  of  Mercurius  instead  of
Hydrargyrum.  Still  more  strange  is  our  retention
of  the  old  names  Kali  and  Natrura,  so  long  (as  it
seems  to  you)  superseded  by  Potassa  and  Soda.
And  the  apparent  uncouthness  is  crowned  by  the
phraseology  used  to  designate  the  chemical  salts  ;
e.g.  Ammonium  carbonicum,  Antimonium  tar-
taricum,  Argentum  nitricum,  Calcarea  acetica  and
phosphorica,  Magnesia  muriatica,  and  Natrum
sulphuricum.  Perhaps,  at  a  first  glance,  you  may
not  have  recognised  your  old  acquaintances  Car-
bonate of  Ammonia,  Tartar  Emetic,  Nitrate  of
Silver,  Acetate  and  Phosphate  of  Lime,  Chloride  of
Magnesium,  and  Sulphate  of  Soda.

The  explanation  of  this  singularity  is  easy  to  find.


NOMENCLATURE AND PHARMACEUTICS.  11

At  the  time  when  Homoeopathy  first  arose,  our
present  nomenclature  prevailed  throughout  Europe.
The  medicines  were  proved,  and  took  their  place  in
the  Materia  Medica  under  their  ancient  names.  In
this  form  the  converts  to  the  new  doctrine  received
them ;  under  these  titles  they  thought  and  spoke  of
them.  It  would  have  seemed  little  less  than  sacri-
lege to  alter  the  familiar  names  because  modern
chemistry  had  rechristened  its  compounds.  Per-
haps if  Germany,  the  mother-land  of  our  science,
had  revised  the  nomenclature  of  her  drugs,  other
countries  might  have  followed  in  her  wake.  But  the
German  Pharmacopoeia,  whether  Alloeopathic  or
Homoeopathic,  still  retains  the  ancient  names.
And  so  we  also  have  them  unaltered ;  and  even  name
our  newly  proved  medicines — e.  g.  Kali  bichromi-
cum — according  to  their  analogy.

But  the  explanation  does  not  in  this  case  contain
in  itself  the  justification  of  the  usage.  If  you
should  feel  disposed  to  protest  against  the  retention
of  such  obsolete  and  often  cacophonous  forms,  I
cannot  but  sympathise  with  you  :  for  I  myself  felt
of  much  the  same  mind  in  my  early  days  of
Homoeopathy,  and  retain  my  sentiment  still.  I  have
contented  myself,  however,  with  things  as  they  are,
for  the  following  reasons  :

1st.  Our  nomenclature  is  of  historical  value  ;  it
tells  of  the  place  of  our  origin,  of  the  rock  whence
we  were  hewn  and  the  pit  from  which  we  were  dug.
The  preservation  of  names  involving  history  is  much
thought  of  elsewhere ;  one  must  attach  some  little
importance  to  it  here.'

2nd.  It  affords  a  bond  of  union  to  Homoeopaths


12  NOMENCLATURE AND PHARMACEUTICS.

in  all  parts  of  the  world.  It  is  like  the  Latin
language  to  the  learned  in  the  middle  ages.  Each
country  is  free  to  revise  its  pharmacological  nomen-
clature independently;  and, to  a  great  extent, has  done
so.  If  a  German  or  French  book  is  translated  into
English,  many  of  the  names  of  the  drugs  have  to  be
explained.  It  is  not  so  in  Homoeopathic  literature
— we  speak  a  language  universally  intelligible.

3rd.  It  is  like  the  Latin  tongue,  not  to  the
learned  only,  but  to  the  Church.  While  the  Roman
Empire  was  one,  the  public  Offices  were,  as  a  matter
of  course,  recited  in  Latin.  When  it  fell  to  pieces ;
and  separate  nations,  each  with  its  own  language,
began  to  arise  out  of  the  ruins,  some  may  have
desired  that  the  Service  books  should  be  rendered
everywhere  into  the  vernacular.  But  such  a  step
would  have  been  most  unwise.  The  Church  held
on  to  her  original  and  unalterable  tongue,  and
would  not  commit  her  prayers  to  the  ever-changing
and  endlessly  varying  dialects  of  the  nations  in  her
communion.  The  wisdom  of  her  course  is  obvious ;
and  the  retention  of  our  ancient  nomenclature  rests
on  the  same  grounds.  Chemistry  is  perpetually
and  necessarily  changing  her  names,  and  the  adop-
tion of  her  suggestions  is  not  simultaneous  in  all
countries.  So,  while  each  national  Pharmacopoeia
speaks  a  drug-dialect  of  its  own,  Homoeopathy  holds
on  to  the  changeless  mother-tongue,  and  her  words
are  comprehensible  by  all  alike.

You  will  have  anticipated  me  in  suggesting  that
this  parallel  must  ultimately  tell  the  other  way — that
a  time  did  come  at  last  when  the  demand  for  ver-
nacular offices  of  worship  was  no  longer  unwise,  but


NOMENCLATURE AND PHARMACEUTICS.  13

most  just  and  righteous ;  and  that  so  it  must  be
here.  I  grant  it  fully.  When  chemistry  has
finally  made  up  her  mind  as  to  the  nature  of  the
compounds  she  studies,  and  when  the  nomenclature
she  suggests  has  met  with  general  acceptance,  and
has  stood  firm  for  many  years,  then  it  will  be  our
duty  to  translate  our  present  language  into  one
understanded  of  the  people.  To  do  so  earlier
would  just  be  to  quit  our  vantage-ground,  and
commit  ourselves  to  the  waves  of  change  and  con-
fusion.

That  this  time  has  now  come  has  been  maintained
with  great  ability  by  my  friend  Dr.  Hutchinson,  in
a  paper  on  "  Our  Nomenclature,"  in  vol.  xxiv  of
the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.'  I  cannot,  however,
assent  to  his  conclusions.  When  the  new  edition
of  the  '  British  Pharmacopoeia '  converts  Calomel
and  Corrosive  sublimate  into  the  subchloride  and
perchloric] e  of  Mercury,  after  they  had  so  long  been
known  as  the  chloride  and  bichloride  respectively,
I  see  no  permanence  yet  in  chemical  nomenclature.
For  practical  purposes,  I  think  it  better  to  go  on
calling  them  Mercurius  dulcis  and  Mercurius
corrosivus,  as  we  have  done  from  the  beginning.

Some  changes,  of  course,  must  be  made  as  time
goes  on — one  has  already  met  with  general  accept-
ance. In  Hahnemann  and  Jahr  the  mineral  acids
are  named  and  placed  after  their  supposed  base,  as
Nitri  acidum,  Sulphuris  acidum,  and  so  on.  This
is  now  known  to  be  false,  not  only  in  name,  but  in
fact.  Nitric  acid,  for  instance,  is  not  an  oxide  of
Nitre,  but  of  Hydrogen ;  and  there  is  no  such
thing,  ideal  or  actual,  as  "Murias,"  from  which  to


14  NOMENCLATURE AND PHARMACEUTICS.

form  "  Muriatis  acidum."  And  although  "Phosphor!
acidura "  expresses  a  dynamic  truth,  "  Sulphuris
acidum"  does  not.  Hence,  I  believe  myself  fully
justified  in  classing  all  the  acids  together.

The  principles  of  our  nomenclature  of  the  chemi-
cal salts  are  very  simple.  Instead  of  making  two
substantives  of  the  base  and  the  acid,  putting  the
former  into  the  genitive  and  the  latter  into  the
nominative  case,  we  throw  the  acid  into  an  adjec-
tival form,  with  an  ending  in  "  ic-."  Thus,  instead
of  Magnesise  carbonas,  we  have  Magnesia  carbonica  ;
instead  of  Antimonii  tartras,  Antimoirium  tartaricum.

So  much  for  our  nomenclature  ;  and  now  a  few
words  upon  Pharmaceutics.  I  have  no  intention  of
entering  into  the  minute  details  which  belong  rather
to  the  chemist  than  to  the  physician.  I  just  want
you  to  know  what  it  is  you  are  prescribing  when
you  order  this  attenuation  of  a  vegetable  or  that  of  a
mineral  substance.

The  object  of  Homoeopathic  pharmacy  is  so  to
prepare  each  substance  that  the  whole  of  its  active
virtues  shall  be  present  in  a  form  suitable  for  ad-
ministration. In  the  case  of  vegetable  substances
this  is  always  done,  when  practicable,  by  expressing
the  juice  of  the  whole  plant,  and  mixing  it  with  an
equal  part  of  alcohol  in  which  the  residue  has  been
steeped  for  some  hours.  When  the  plant  can  only
be  procured  in  the  dry  state,  or  when  but  little
juice  is  obtainable  by  pressure,  it  is  macerated  for  a
fortnight  in  double  its  weight  of  alcohol.*  The  re-

*  Sometimes  a  larger  quantity  of  alcohol  is  required,  and  must
be  allowed  for  accordingly  in  making  the  dilutions.


NOMENCLATURE AND PHARMACEUTICS.  15

suiting  tincture  in  each  case  contains  the  medi-
cinal substance  in  the  proportion  of  one  to  two.
This  is  what  is  dispensed  as  the  "  mother-tincture/'
and  is  ordinarily  represented  by  the  Greek  0  or  0.
From  it  are  prepared  the  "  dilutions"  or  "  potencies."
In  order  that  these  may  represent  the  true  propor-
tion of  the  original  substance,  the  1st  is  made  by
adding  two  parts  of  the  mother-tincture  to  eight  of
alcohol ;  the  2nd  by  mixing  one  part  of  the  1st  with
nine  of  alcohol,  and  so  on  up  to  the  6th.  These
dilutions  are  on  what  is  called  the  "  decimal  scale  ;"
and  the  2nd,  4th,  and  6th  decimal  obviously  corre-
spond with  the  1st,  2nd,  and  3rd  of  a  centesimal
scale,  i.  e.  in  which  the  dilutions  are  prepared  in
the  proportion  of  one  to  ninety-nine.  This  latter
being  the  method  originally  in  use,  its  nomencla-
ture is  preferred  when  practicable.  So  that  through-
out these  letters,  when  a  potency  is  mentioned,  you
will  understand  that  the  centesimal  scale  is  intended.
When  I  mean  the  decimal,  I  will  say  so.  The
usefulness  of  this  latter  scale  is  that  it  gives  us  di-
lutions intermediate  between  <f>  and  1,  and  between
1  and  2.  After  3  such  intermediate  stages  are
unnecessary,  and  the  further  dilution  may  always
be  proceeded  with  upon  the  centesimal  scale.

Before  leaving  the  vegetable  drugs,  I  must  notice
the  "  concentrated  organic  medicines"  lately  intro-
duced from  America.  They  purport  to  consist  of
all  the  active  ingredients  of  the  drugs,  recotnbined
in  their  original  proportions,  but  divested  of  such
inert  matters  as  woody  fibre,  &c.  They  are  tdis-
tinguished  by  the  termination  "  in,"  as  Atropin,
Caulophyllin,  Irisin.  Potencies  are  prepared  from


16  NOMENCLATURE AND PHARMACEUTICS.

them  by  trituration.  So  far  as  my  experience  goes,
I  must  agree  with  Dr.  E.  M.  Hale  in  thinking
these  preparations  inferior  to  the  tinctures — pre-
pared, as  these  may  nearly  always  be,  from  the
fresh  plant.

The  mineral  substances  used  in  our  practice  are
differently  prepared  according  as  they  are  soluble  or
not.  In  the  former  case  the  dilutions  are  made
with  water,  which  is  (or  should  be)  also  the  vehicle
of  the  mineral  acids.  The  metals  themselves,  and
their  insoluble  salts,  are  prepared  by  the  Hahne-
mannic  process  of  trituration.  This  consists  in
rubbing  up  a  grain  of  the  substance  with  nine
grains  of  sugar  of  milk  to  form  the  first  trituration,
a  grain  of  this  with  nine  grains  more  of  sugar  of
milk  for  the  2nd,  and  so  on  to  the  6th.  After  the
6th  decimal  the  further  dilution  is  carried  on  accord-
ing to  the  centesimal  scale,  and  is  commonly
effected  by  solution.  A  grain  of  the  3rd  tritura-
tion is  dissolved  in  fifty  drops  of  water,  and  to  this
are  added  fifty  drops  of  alcohol.  A  drop  of  this
fourth  dilution  is  mixed  with  ninety-nine  drops  of
alcohol  for  the  fifth  potency,  and  so  on.  Long  ago,
however,  my  friend  Dr.  Madden  advised*  that  all
the  potencies  of  insoluble  substances  should  be  pre-
pared by  trituration ;  and  the  recommendation  has
recently  been  carried  into  effect  in  Germany.  I
have  not  yet  tried  these  preparations,  but  intend  to
take  an  early  opportunity  of  so  doing.

Struck  by  the  remarkable  development  of  medi-
cinal power  obtained  by  this  process  of  trituration,
— even  such  inert  bodies  as  the  metals  becoming  ac-

*  '  British  Journal  of  Homoeopathy,'  vol.  v,  p.  372-3.


NOMENCLATURE AND PHARMACEUTICS.  17

lively  pathogenetic  and  curative, — Hahnemann  was
led  to  employ  it  in  the  preparation  of  several  vege-
table substances,  as  Lycopodium  and  Charcoal,  with
the  result  of  elevating  them  to  a  high  rank  as  medi-
cines. The  process  of  trituration  is  also  resorted
to  in  the  case  of  such  products  as  Coral  and  Sponge,
and  (as  an  alternative  to  maceration  in  alcohol)  of
such  dry  plants  or  portions  of  plants  as  Ipecacuanha
and  Nux  vomica.

You  may,  perhaps,  be  surprised  that  I  have
hitherto  said  nothing  about  what  has  appeared  to
many  the  distinctive  feature  of  Homoeopathic  phar-
maceutics,— the  globule.  I  have  said  nothing
about  it,  because  I  cannot  recommend  its  use.  I
look  upon  its  adoption  by  Hahnemann  and  his  im-
mediate followers  as  a  mistake.  Not  merely  from
its  ridicule-exciting  smallness,  for  the  modern  pilule
removes  that  reproach  ;  but  from  the  objectionable
nature  of  the  preparation.  The  globules  or  pilules
are  medicated  (as  you  are  probably  aware)  by  being
immersed  for  some  days  in  the  tincture  of  the  drug
they  are  intended  to  represent : — such  tincture  being
of  course  in  the  case  of  insoluble  substances  of  the
fifth  potency  or  higher.  To  say  nothing  of  the  un-
certainty of  this  mode  of  preparation,  the  globules
and  pilules  have  the  fatal  defect  of  coming  at  second
hand.  Tinctures  and  triturations  are  nearly  as
convenient  of  administration  ;  and  have  the  great
advantage  of  being  the  original  preparations  of  the
drug.

In  advising  you  thus  to  discard  the  globule  and
(save  in  rare  instances)  the  pilule,  I  am  saying
nothing  about  the  question  of  dose,  with  which  this

2


18  NOMENCLATURE AND PHARMACEUTICS.

form  has  been  unaccountably  mixed  up.  A  globule
of  tbe  3rd  is  stronger  than  a  drop  of  the  6th  attenua-
tion. The  question  of  dose  is  one  which  for  the
present  I  must  leave  open.


LETTER  III.

THE ACIDS.

HAVING  disposed  of  introductory  matter,  we  may
now  begin  our  studies  of  the  long  list  of  medicines
which  lies  before  us.  Our  alphabetical  arrangement
gives  us,  in  the  first  instance,  the  group  of  acids.
Of  these,  the  Benzoic,  Fluoric,  Hydrocyanic,  Muri-
atic, Nitric,  Oxalic,  Phosphoric,  and  Sulphuric,  are
known  to  possess  dynamic  over  and  above  their
chemical  properties.  We  will  take  first  the

Acidum  benzoicum.

The  pure  acid  in  trituration  or  (better)  alcoholic
solution  is  used.

Our  sole  Homoeopathic  authority  for  this  medi-
cine is  the  original  proving  by  Dr.  Jeanes,  of  Phila-
delphia, published  in  Esrey's  '  Materia  Medica  of
American  Provings.'

Irritability  of  the  bladder,  shifting  rheumatoid
pains  in  the  joints,  and  a  recurring  attack  of
pulsation  of  the  heart  and  temporal  arteries  at
about  two  in  the  morning,  forbidding  further  sleep
(comp.  with  Nux  vomica),  are  the  most  prominent
symptoms  produced  by  small  doses  of  the  drug.
Taken  in  quantity,  Benzoic  acid  causes  the  urine  to


I
20  ACIDUM BENZO1CUM.

become  highly  coloured  and  strongly  scented.  This
seems  to  depend  upon  the  existence  in  the  urine  of
hippuric  acid,  which  was  formerly  supposed  to  result
from  the  conversion  of  uric  acid,  but  is  now  considered
to  be  the  Benzoic  acid  itself  in  an  altered  form.  How-
ever this  may  be,  the  highly  coloured  and  strongly
scented  urine  caused  by  Benzoic  acid  is  stated  by  Dr.
Jeanes  to  be,  when  occurring  in  disease,  a  character-
istic indication  for  the  remedy.  He  cites  cases  of
condyloma,  of  rheumatism,  and  of  irritative  cough,
coming  on  after  suppression  of  chancre  or  gonorrhoea ;
also  of  recurring  quinsy,  of  nephritic  colic,  of  ulcera-
tion  of  the  mouth,  and  of  rheumatico-gouty  arthritis
cause of  the  presence  of  the  characteristic  urine,
relieved  greatly  or  cured.  It  has  occasionally  proved
curative  in  enuresis*  My  own  experience  with  the
medicine  is  confined  to  this  disease.  I  have  found
it  very  serviceable  in  old  people,  when  a  high-
coloured  and  strong-smelling  urine  dribbles  away,
partly  from  the  irritation  it  causes,  and  partly  from
want  of  power  on  the  part  of  the  bladder  to  retain
it.  I  see  that  Benzoic  acid  is  now  used  in  the
Leopoldstadt  Hospital  in  Vienna  in  acute  articular
rheumatism ;  the  physicians  compare  its  action  to
that  of  Bryonia.

I  know  of  no  medicine  whose  general  action
resembles  that  of  Benzoic  acid  sufficiently  to  make
a  comparison  profitable.

As  to  dose,  Benzoic  acid  has  usually  been  given
in  the  potencies  from  the  3rd  upwards.  I  myself,

*  See cases in '  North American Journal of  Homoeopathy,'
vol.  iii,  p.  334.


ACIDUM FLUORICUM.  21

in  the  cases  I  have  mentioned,  have  given  the  2nd
and  3rd  decimal.

The  acid  next  in  order  is —

Acidum  fluoricum.

More  strictly,  Hydrofluoric.  The  primary  dilu-
tions are  made  with  water.

Esrey's  '  Materia  Medica  of  American  Provings'
contains  an  exhaustive  proving  of  Fluoric  acid,
conducted  by  Dr.  Hering.

In  this  proving  we  notice,  among  other  symp-
toms, a  tendency  to  determination  of  blood  to  the
head  and  to  falling  off  of  the  hair,  much  irritation
of  the  faucial  and  pharyngeal  mucous  membrane,
sharp  pains  in  the  left  side  of  the  chest  and  abdo-
men, great  excitement  of  the  sexual  instinct  and
premature  appearance  of  the  catamenia,  purple
deposit  in  the  urine,  pains  in  the  bones  generally,
numbness  and  powerlessness  of  the  hands,  and  itch-
ing of  the  skin.  The  curative  sphere  of  Fluoric
acid  closely  resembles  that  of  Silicea  (which  is
really  Silicic  acid).  Under  its  use  whitlows  have
been  blighted,  fistulse — lachrymal  and  dental — have
healed,  varicose  veins  have  shrunk  to  half  their  size,
fresh  hair  has  grown  on  a  bald  head,  and  moist
palms  have  regained  their  healthy  dryness.  In
Laurie's  '  Elements  of  Homoeopathic  Practice  of
Physic'  two  cases  of  caries  are  cited — one  follow-
ing scarlatina,  the  other  resulting  from  whitlow,
in  both  of  which  Fluoric  acid  30  proved  curative.
Lately,  Dr.  Laurie  himself  has  put  on  record  some
cases  of  secondary  syphilis  of  the  tongue  and  throat,


22  ACIDUM HYDROCYANICUM.

and  of  chronic  diarrhoea,  in  which  Fluoric  acid  6
was  of  essential  service.*  Still  more  recently  it
has  been  attempted  to  establish  a  relation  between
the  presence  of  fluorides  in  drinking  water  and
bronchocele.  It  is  stated  that  a  true  and  perma-
nent goitre  was  induced  in  a  dog  to  whom  the  acid
had  been  steadily  administered. f  I  have  myself
had  little  personal  experience  with  this  medicine.

Silicea  is  the  only  really  analogous  drug.

The  dilutions  from  6  to  30  have  been  used  in
the  recorded  cases  of  cure  by  Fluoric  Acid ;  and  as
the  proving  was  carried  on  by  means  of  the  3rd  and
higher  potencies,  it  would  seem  best  that  the  same
should  be  chosen  for  fulfilling  the  therapeutic  indi-
cations afforded  by  the  symptoms  obtained.

Hitherto  I  have  been  speaking  of  substances
almost  if  not  quite  unknown  to  you  as  medicines.
I  am  entering,  however,  upon  more  familiar  ground,
which  I  take  as  the  third  of  my  group  of  acids

Acidum  hydrocyanicum.

The  Pharmacopoeial  acid  (containing  2  per  cent,
of  the  anhydrous  acid)  mixed  with  equal  parts  of
alcohol,  or  Scheele's  acid  (4  per  cent.)  with  three
parts,  will  make  a  preparation  equivalent  to  our
1st  centesimal  dilution.

There  exists  no  regular  Homoeopathic  proving  of
Hydrocyanic  acid.  Some  experiments,  however,
have  been  made  with  it  by  Professor  Jorg  and  his
pupils.  These,  with  the  records  of  toxicology,

*  '  British  Journal  of  Homoeopathy,'  vol.  xxiv,  p.  154.
t  Ibid.,  p.  518.


ACIDUM HYDROCYANICUM.  23

have  been  collated,  and  their  bearing  on  Homoeo-
pathic practice  analysed,  by  Dr.  Madden  and
myself  in  the  20th  volume  of  the  '  British  Journal
of  Homoeopathy/  I  would  refer  you  to  that  paper
for  more  details  than  can  here  find  place.

You  know  Prussic  acid  as  an  occasional  remedy
for  hooping-cough,  for  vomiting,  and  for  gastro-
and  entero-dynia.  You  will  notice  that  the  cha-
racter common  to  all  these  affections  is  the  spas-
modic ;  they  are  all  instances  of  morbidly  excited
muscular  action.  The  theory  of  antipathy  being
dominant,  it  is  hence  concluded  that  Hydrocyanic
acid  is  a  "  sedative,"  and  it  is  classed  accordingly.
But  read  over  a  few  cases  of  poisoning  by  this  sub-
stance. You  will  find  that  convulsions  and  spasms,
generally  of  tetanic  character,  are  amongst  the  most
prominent  and  constant  symptoms  observed.  If,
therefore,  Hydrocyanic  acid  be  sedative  as  a  remedy,
it  is  certainly  excitant  as  a  poison ;  i.  e.  its  curative
action  is  Homoeopathic.  It  seems  to  excite  the
whole  motor  tract  of  the  cranio-spinal  axis.  An
influence  of  this  kind  upon  the  medulla  oblongata
will  explain  the  cerebral  symptoms,  which  are — from
small  doses — dizziness  and  headache,  and  from
poisonous  quantities  sudden  loss  of  consciousness
with  falling.  Each  and  all  of  these  would  result
from  contraction  of  the  arteries  of  the  brain,
brought  about  by  excitation  of  their  nerves,  which
(according  to  Schiff)  are  under  the  influence  of  the
medulla  oblongata.  The  loss  of  consciousness,
with  falling,  caused  by  Hydrocyanic  acid,  with
its  convulsions  and  other  concomitant  symptoms,
closely  resemble  an  epileptic  paroxysm,  to  which


24  ACIDUM HYDROCYANICUM.

they  have  been  likened  by  Pereira,  Christison,
and  Taylor.  The  same  excitation  of  the  me-
dulla oblongata,  aided  by  that  of  the  upper  part
of  the  cord,  will  account  for  the  disturbance  of  the
respiration,  ranging  from  laboured  breathing  to
complete  asphyxia,  and  for  that  of  the  circulation.
The  sudden  death  which  often  results  from  poison-
ing by  this  acid  seems  analogous  to  that  caused  by
"  pithing,"  and  this  operation  has  been  shown  by
Dr.  Brown- Sequard  to  kill  by  stopping  the  heart's
action  through  the  medium  of  the  vagi.  The
tetanic  spasms  are,  of  course,  due  to  an  excitation
of  the  whole  length  of  the  cord.

These  physiological  properties  of  Hydrocyanic
acid  obviously  render  it  Homoeopathic  to  spasmodic
affections  of  very  many  kinds.  There  is  a  form  of
vertigo,  resembling  that  experienced  by  epileptics,
in  which  I  have  found  it  very  useful.  In  epilepsy
itself  I  have  much  confidence  in  it  in  recent  cases  ;
but  the  evanescent  character  of  its  action  has  dis-
appointed my  hopes  of  curing  the  disease  when  con-
firmed. The  same  remark  applies,  for  good  and  for
ill,  to  its  action  in  asthma.  I  have  never  used  it
in  spasmodic  coughs ;  but  Dr.  Marcy  states  that
the  12th  dilution  often  gives  much  relief  to  the
cough  of  phthisis.  With  the  same  potency  he  pro-
fesses to  have  cured  cardialgia.  I  have  no  ex-
perience of  Hydrocyanic  acid  in  the  vomitings  and
pains  of  the  stomach  for  which  it  is  recommended
in  the  old  practice ;  but  I  have  frequently  removed
by  it  the  distressing  feeling  known  as  "  sinking  at
the  stomach,"  when  this  has  been  unconnected  with
the  climacteric  age.  From  what  I  have  seen  of  its


ACIDUM MURIATICUM.  25

action  in  cases  of  this  kind,  I  am  inclined  to  credit  it
with  a  special  influence  on  the  solar  plexus.  Hempel
cites  several  cases  of  tetanus  cured  by  Hydrocyanic
acid  :  and  Dr.  George  Moore  has  lately  contributed
to  the  '  British  Journal  of  Homoeopathy'  a  capital
case  of  the  traumatic  form  of  this  disease,  in  which
a  rapid  and  complete  cure  was  effected  by  drop  doses
of  Scheele's  preparation  of  the  acid.*

For  its  action  on  the  spinal  cord  Hydrocyanic
acid  may  be  compared  with  Aconite  and  Strychnia.
As  an  epileptifacient,  its  only  analogues  are  the
Ilmbelliferae,  &thusa  cynapium,  Cicuta  virosa,  and
(Enanthe  crocata,

I  have  generally  used  Hydrocyanic  acid  in  the
dilutions  from  the  3rd  to  the  6th  decimal.  The
experience  of  the  old  school  would  seem  to  show
that  in  such  affections  as  hooping'cough,  vomiting,
and  gastrodynia,  the  1st  dilution  may  be  used  with
advantage.

We  have  next  for  our  consideration  the

Acidum  muriaticum,

or,  as  modern  chemistry  styles  it,  Hydrochloricum.
The  lower  potencies  are,  of  course,  prepared  with
water  •  above  the  3rd  the  use  of  alcohol  seems
uninjurious.

There  is  a  pathogenesis  of  Muriatic  acid  (then
called  Muriatis  acidum)  in  Ilahneraann's  '  Chronic
Diseases.'  Having  referred  you  thereto,  I  must
leave  you  to  ascertain  by  analysis  of  the  symptoms
(if  you  can)  the  physiological  action  of  the  drug.

*  '  British  Journal  of  Homoeopathy,'  vol.  xxiv,  p.  506.


26  ACIDUM MURIATICUM.

I  am  quite  unable  to  do  so  for  you,  or,  indeed,  for
myself.  Happily,  our  clinical  experience  with
Muriatic  acid  is  sufficiently  extensive  to  enable  us
to  define  pretty  closely  its  sphere  of  action.

Apart  from  its  local  uses,  Muriatic  acid  is  known
to  you  as  a  remedy  of  much  value  in  low  fevers.
power  of  modifying  a  supposed  putrescence  of  the
fluids :  and  the  medicine  was  given  also  in  malig-
nant scarlatina  and  putrescent  sore  throat.  Now-a-
days,  I  believe,  its  use  is  pretty  well  confined  to  true
"  fever,"  and  it  is  considered  to  act  by  neutralising
superabundant  alkali  (Eichardson),  or  by  supplying
deficient  acid  (Chambers).  I  am  myself  disposed
to  believe  that  its  action  in  these  cases  is,  after  all,
dynamic;  for  it  is  certain  that  Muriatic  acid,  in  doses
too  small  to  exert  any  chemical  action,  has  a  very
high  reputation  in  our  school  as  a  remedy  for  these
morbid  conditions.  Teste  ranks  it  as  "  the  leading
remedy  in  typhus."  I  myself  esteem  it  very
highly,  though  I  think  it  indicated  less  often  than
Arsenic.  I  would  say  the  same  as  regards  malig-
nant scarlatina,  although  I  know  no  remedy  like  it
for  some  of  the  sequelae  of  this  disorder,  especially
the  affections  of  the  ears  and  nose.  In  ulcerative
angina  of  a  low  type  Muriatic  acid  is  often  the
best  medicine,*  but  I  can  say  nothing  of  it  in  the

*  The  following  case  by  Dr.  Russell  illustrates  the  statement  in
the  text : — "  The  case  was  that  of  a  lady  about  sixty  years  of  age,
who  had  been  ill  for  two  days.  He  found  the  pulse  very  small  and
quick,  as  high  as  130.  There  was  great  prostration  ;  the  expression
of  the  countenance  almost  like  that  of  cholera,  from  the  sunken,
exhausted  look — very  remarkable,  considering  the  shortness  of  the
illness,  and  indicating  the  action  of  some  poison.  There  was  great


ACIDUM MURIATICUM.  27

treatment  of  true  diphtheria,  save  as  a  local  appli-
cation.— These  uses  of  the  acid  seem  to  depend  upon
an  influence  exerted,  primarily  at  least,  upon  the
blood.  It  has  also,  however,  certain  local  actions.
By  its  elective  affinity  for  the  mucous  membrane  of
the  mouth  it  controls  aphthous,  mercurial,  and
other  forms  of  ulceration  occurring  therein.  It  is
one  of  the  few  medicines  which  have  a  specific
action  on  the  tongue  ;  it  has  been  used  successfully
for  many  affections  of  this  organ.  And,  acting  on
the  skin,  it  is  sometimes  of  much  value  in  burning
itching  eruptions,  as  eczema  of  the  ear.

Nitric  acid  is  the  only  medicine  with  which,  as  it
seems  to  me,  Muriatic  acid  can  be  advantageously
compared,  though  it  has  some  points  of  contact
with  Arsenicum,  Baptisia,  Lachesis,  and  Rhus.

There  seems  no  advantage  in  raising  Muriatic
acid  above  the  third  potency,  and  the  first  is,
perhaps,  most  commonly  used.

You  will  have  noticed  the  wide  difference  of
action  between  these  medicines  we  have  been  con-
sidering. The  sphere  of  Fluoric  acid  is  as  undoubt-
edly the  vegetative  functions  and  less  highly  organ-
ized tissues,  as  that  of  Hydrocyanic  acid  is  the  nervous
system  and  that  of  Muriatic  acid  the  blood.  If

fetor  of  the  breath,  and  on  examining  the  fauces  the  whole  surface
was  of  a  dark  red,  approaching  violet  hue,  and  spotted  over  with
white  membranous  deposit.  He  gave  a  drop  of  the  1st  dilution  of
Muriatic  acid  every  hour,  and  next  day  found  great  improvement.
From  the  first  dose  the  patient  was  sensible  of  benefit,  which  con-
tinued till  she  got  well.  The  disease  had  been  increasing  up  to  the
time  of  the  administration  of  the  medicine,  and  from  that  time
declined."  ('  Annals,'  vol.  i,  p.  231.)


28  ACIDUM MURIATICUM.

Homoeopathic  treatment  were  the  imaginary  thing
it  is  represented,  these  distinctions  would  never  have
been  established,  for  all  our  remedies  would  act
alike.


LETTER  IV.

THE  ACIDS  (continued).

I  AM  coming  now  upon  one  of  the  most  im-
portant medicines  in  the  group  of  acids,  namely —

Acidum  nitricum.

The  preparation  of  the  acid  is  similar  to  that  of
Muriatic  acid.

Like  that  acid,  moreover,  our  only  authority  for
its  physiological  action  is  the  pathogenesis  given  in
Hahnemann's  '  Chronic  Diseases.'  I  must  confess
myself  at  a  loss  what  to  make  of  the  provings  con-
tained in  that  remarkable  work.  Until  the  day-
books of  the  provers  are  published,  and  the  quan-
tity and  frequency  of  the  doses  taken  are  ascertained,
I  feel  the  utmost  uncertainty  as  to  the  reality  of
to  the  "  antipsoric"  medicines.  With  Nitric  as  with
Muriatic  acid,  I  must  direct  you  for  the  present  to
clinical  experience  as  the  only  available  means  of
ascertaining  its  sphere  and  mode  of  action.

That  Nitric  acid  has  a  dynamic  over  and  above
its  chemical  influence  you  will  be  ready  to  admit,
knowing  as  you  do  its  reputation  in  chronic  hepa-
titis, in  some  forms  of  syphilis,  and  recently  in


30  AC1DUM NITRICUM.

hooping-cough.  Homoeopathic  experience  has  con-
firmed these  actions  of  the  drug,  while  adding  many
others.  Its  specific  influence  seems  exerted  mainly
on  the  mncous  outlets,  i.  e.  the  parts  at  which
mucous  membrane  merges  into  skin.  Thus,  it  is  a
prime  remedy  in  affections  of  the  mouth,  and  only
less  so  in  those  of  the  throat,  these  being  of  an
ulcerative  character,  syphilitic  or  otherwise ;  it  is
also  curative  of  mercurial  sore  mouth  and  ptyalism.
Leaping  over  the  intermediate  tract,  proving  occa-
sionally serviceable  in  chronic  dysentery,  it  concen-
trates its  influence  upon  the  rectum  and  anus  ;  it
has  cured  prolapsus,  fistula,  and  several  times  fissure.
In  the  respiratory  tract  it  controls  the  nasal  and
laryngeal  mucous  membranes,  being  curative  of  the
affection  of  the  nose  which  obtains  in  malignant  scar-
latina, of  dry  and  violent  laryngeal  coughs,  and  even
(so  it  is  said)  of  syphilitic  ozaena  andlaryngeal  phthisis.
Acting  on  the  genito-urinary  mucous  membrane,  it
is  a  valuable  remedy  against  chronic  vaginal  leucor-
rhoea  in  cachectic  subjects.  Its  choice  of  these
mucous  outlets,  and  the  kind  of  mischief  it  there
meets  and  controls,  would  of  itself  suggest  it  as  a
remedy  for  some  syphilitic  conditions,  even  had  not
experience  plainly  pointed  that  way.  We  use  it
much  as  you  do, — in  the  soft  chancre  occurring  in
weakly  or  scrofulous  subjects,  and  in  the  secondary
ulcerations  of  the  mucous  membranes.  We  also
think  very  highly  of  it — placing  it  second  only  to
Thuja — in  that  curious  offset  or  ally  of  syphilis
which  Hahnemann  distinguished  as  sycosis,  whose
local  manifestations  are  condylomata.  It  seems
probable  that  Nitric  acid  also,  like  its  congener,


ACIDUM OXALICUM.  31

Muriatic  acid,  affects  the  blood,  and  may  find  an
occasional  place  in  the  treatment  of  the  toxsemic
fevers.  It  has  been  spoken  of  in  typhoid
fever,  scarlatina  maligna,  and  diphtheria.  I  have
no  experience  of  it  in  hooping-cough,  for  which  I
see  it  is  highly  recommended  by  some  physicians  of
the  old  school.  Nor  can  I  define  its  action  in
hepatic  disease,  though  there  seems  little  doubt  of
its  exerting  a  specific  influence  upon  the  liver.  I
have  lately  treated  a  case  of  chronic  hepatitis  with
ascites  by  drop  doses  of  Nitric  acid,  1st  dec.,  with
very  gratifying  results.

Nitric  acid  may  be  compared  with  Muriatic  and
Sulphuric  acid,  with  Mercury,  and  with  Thuja.

High  dilutions  (the  30th)  have  been  used  with
advantage  only  in  affections  of  the  anus;  in  other
the  1st  to  the  4th  dec.

For  our  next  acid  we  have  once  more  the  advan-
tage of  a  good  pathogenesis.  This  is —

Acidum  oxalicum.

Tt  is  prepared  by  trituration  or  aqueous  solution.

Oxalic  acid  is  one  of  the  medicines  chosen  for
experiment  by  the  American  Institute;  an  account
of  the  proving  is  given  in  Esrey's  '  Materia  Medica
of  American  Provings.'  The  toxicological  experiments
of  Drs.  Christison  and  Coindet,  which  first  appeared
in  the  '  Edinburgh  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,
vol.  xix,  are  also  narrated  in  considerable  detail  as
a  preface  to  the  proving.

Oxalic  acid  is  a  specific  emetic,  and irritant  of


32  ACIDUM OXALICUM.

the  gastric  mucous  membrane.  It  also  inflames  the
trachea  and  the  pulmonary  tissue.  But  its  main
action,  when  absorbed,  is  on  the  nervous  centres,
which  it  paralyses  from  below  upwards.  The  loss
of  power  in  the  lower  extremities — which  is  very
characteristic — is  accompanied  with  numbness  and
neuralgic  pain  in  the  back  and  legs.  As  the  poi-
soning advances  up  the  spinal  cord  paroxysms  of
spasmodically  suspended  respiration  and  palpitation
of  the  heart  manifest  its  influence.  In  the  small
doses  used  in  the  proving  (1st  and  2nd  triturations)
Oxalic  acid  produced  few  marked  symptoms — much
flatulent  colic  about  the  navel,  excitement  of  the
genito-urinary  organs,  and  sharp  shooting  pains  in
the  heart  and  left  lung,  being  all  that  I  can  particu-
larise.

It  has  been  but  little  used  in  practice.  Dr.
Marcy,  in  the  '  New  Materia  Medica,'  speaks  favor-
ably of  it  in  some  chronic  inflammations  of  the
mucous  membranes,  in  glossitis,  and  as  moderating
hectic  and  drying  up  cavities  in  tubercular  phthisis.
I  am  myself  giving  it  with  much  benefit  in  a  long-
standing case  of  inflammation  of  the  alimentary
mucous  membrane.  It  ought  to  be  serviceable  in
some  forms  of  paraplegia,  and  to  relieve  neuralgic
pain  and  disturbed  respiration  in  cases  of  incurable
softening  of  the  cord.

Oxalic  acid  has  some  points  of  analogy  with
Argentum  nitricum  and  Arsenicum.

It  has  been  given  in  the  dilutions  from  2  to  12.

The  acid  I  am  now  coming  upon  is  a  special
favorite  of  mine.  This  is —


ACIDUM PHOSPHORICUM.  33

Acidum  phosphoricum.

The  preparation  is  like  that  of  the  other  acids.

The  pathogenesis  of  Phosphoric  acid  is  in  the
•'Chronic  Diseases.'  It  impresses  one,  however,  with
a  much  greater  sense  of  reality  than  most  of  those
contained  in  this  series.  Perhaps,  as  the  original
proving  appeared  in  the  '  Materia  Medica  Pura/
many  of  the  symptoms  were  obtained  from  material
doses.

We  observe  in  this  proving  depression  of  the
mental  powers ;  much  disorder  of  the  sight  and
hearing;  whitish-gray  diarrhoea;  cl  pale  urine,  forming
thick  whitish  flocculi ;"  swelling  and  uneasiness  in
the  testicles  and  spermatic  cord  ;  violent  cough,  with
expectoration  ;  tendency  to  arrest  of  circulation  in
the  extremities  (especially  the  hands) ;  "  intense
pain  in  the  periosteum  of  all  the  bones,  as  if  scraped
with  a  knife/'  and  fever  with  profuse  sweat.  Many
valuable  applications  of  the  drug  have  resulted  from
the  study  of  these  symptoms.  But  its  therapeutic
sphere  has  been  still  more  widely  extended  by  its
use  as  an  ally  of  its  base,  Phosphorus,  to  which
great  medicine  it  bears  many  striking  analogies.

The  chief  sphere  of  the  curative  action  of  Phos-
phoric acid  is  the  nervous  system,  and  in  this  it
influences  less  the  functional  than  the  organic  dis-
orders, when  these  latter  are  not  very  grave  and
deep.  Thus  it  is  of  great  service  in  cases  of  cere-
bral weakness  dependent  upon  brain-fag  (cump.
Nux  vomica)  or  upon  sexual  excesses  (comp.
Anacardium).  In  these  patients  I  have  always
noticed  a  very  slow  pulse.  It  has  cured  amblyopia

3


34  ACIDUM PHOSPHORICUM.

and  deafness,  probably  resulting  from  similar  causes.
It  is  also  valuable  for  mental  weakness  remaining
after  typhoid  fever,  here  also  comparing  with  Aua-
cardium.*  It  is  probably  through  the  nervous  cen-
tres that  it  affects  the  male  sexual  organs,  on  which
its  influence  is  very  powerful.  The  condition  of  irri-
table weakness  left  in  these  organs  after  previous
excess,  without  inflammation,  is  strikingly  benefited
by  the  acid,  as  is  also  the  general  debility  and
especially  the  cardiac  distress  resulting  from  the
same  cause.  Phosphoric  acid  affects  the  blood  less
than  the  other  mineral  acids  ;  but  it  has  proved  very
curative  in  purpura  and  passive  hemorrhages,  and  is
used  generally  in  the  Leopoldstadt  Hospital  in  the
slighter  forms  of  typhoid  fever.  In  the  sphere  of
the  renal  organs  Phosphoric  acid  has  a  remarkable
control  over  those  changes  in  the  composition  of
the  urine  which  arise  further  back  than  the  kidney
itself.  Thus,  it  is  the  best  remedy  for  phosphatic
deposits,  when  these  depend  upon  excess  of  phos-
phoric acid  from  waste  of  nervous  tissue,  or  upon
alkalinity  of  the  urine  from  nervous  depression.  It
cures  those  derangements  of  nutrition  in  children
connected  with  a  milky  state  of  the  urine  ;f  and
would  probably  help  in  the  West  Indian  "  chylous
urine,"  whose  constitutional  symptoms  are  very
characteristic  of  the  drug.  Even  in  true  diabetes
mellitus  Phosphoric  acid  must  be  credited  with
more  than  one  cure.J  The  acid  competes  with  the

*  See  '  Monthly  Homoeopathic  Review,'  September,  1866.
f  '  British  Journal  of  Homoeopathy,'  vol.  vii,  p.  391.
J  Ibid.,  vol.  xxiv,  p.  260. Since  a  lesion  of  the  nervous  centre
may  also  cause  albuminuria  (as  in  Claude  Bernard's  experiments),


ACIDUM SULPHURICUM.  35

base  in  the  treatment  of  diseases  of  the  bones ;  it
has  a  high  reputation  on  the  Continent  as  a  remedy
for  caries.  It  is  specially  valuable  in  the  hectic
fever  which  accompanies  these  maladies,  as  in  scro-
fulous hip-disease.  It  has  been  found  useful  in
cholerine :  there  is  a  gluey  matter  on  the  tongue,
the  stools  are  yellowish,  and  the  evacuations  painless.
Dr.  Marcy  commends  it  in  thin,  acrid  leucorrhoea :
and  has  cured  with  the  1st  dilution  a  chronic  puru-
lent and  fetid  discharge  from  the  nostrils.  I  have
omitted  to  state  that  Phosphoric  acid  is  a  good  medi-
cine for  falling  of  the  hair  in  convalescence  or
debility :  and  has  cured  an  obstinate  intermittent
characterised  by  blueness  of  the  hands  during  the
chill,  and  very  profuse  sweat  subsequently.*

Phosphoric  acid  works  side  by  side  with  Phos-
phorus throughout  its  action.  Besides  this,  it
touches  at  some  points  Fluoric  acid  and  Silicea ;
China ;  Anacardium ;  and  the  mineral  acids  in
general.

In  the  nervous  affections,  in  milky  urine,  and  in
cholerine,  Phosphoric  acid  acts  well  in  the  potencies
from  3  to  12.  But  as  a  sexual  tonic  :  in  purpura,
phosphatic  diathesis,  diabetes,  and  caries,  it  acts
best  in  doses  of  several  drops  of  the  1st  decimal
dilution.

The  last  of  our  group  of  acids  is —

Acidum  sulphuricum.

there  may  be  cases  of  this  malady  in  which  Phosphoric  acid  may  be
indicated. Two  cures  by  it  are  on  record  (  Hempel,  vol.  ii,  p.  46,
and  '  Monthly  Homeopathic  Review,'  September,  1866).
*  '  Annals,'  vol.  i,  p.  457.


36  ACIDUM SULPHTJRICUM.

The  preparation  is  that  of  the  other  mineral  acids,
and  the  pathogenesis,  of  which  I  cannot  say  much,
is  in  the  '  Chronic  Diseases.'

Sulphuric  acid  seems  to  have,  beyond  its  chemi-
cal properties,  a  more  limited  dynamic  action  than
any  of  the  mineral  acids.  If  it  be  as  valuable  as
Pereira  states  in  relieving  the  itching  of  many
cutaneous  eruptions,  this  is  an  effect  of  a  specific
character :  we  have  no  experience  with  it.  It  is
probably  also  homoeopathic  to  the  forms  of  diarrhoea
which  it  undoubtedly  (meipso  dum  Allosoputhico  teste)
cures ;  for  its  physiological  action  is  to  purge  rather
than  to  bind.  It  is  recommended  in  chronic  head-
aches in  cachectic  women  subject  to  leucorrhoea,
in  persistent  hiccough,  in  scarlatina  when  diarrhoea
is  troublesome,  and  in  scrofulous  suppuration  of  the
joints  (?).  It  has  been  very  little  used  in  Homoeo-
pathic practice.

Sulphuric  acid  may  be  compared  with  the  other
mineral  acids.

The  1st  dilution  is  used  in  diarrhoea;  in  other
affections  the  6th  or  12th.


LETTER  V.

ACONITE.

THE  survey  which  we  have  now  completed  of  the
acids  used  in  our  practice,  will  have  shown  you  the
weakness  as  well  as  the  strength  of  Homoeopathy  as
it  at  present  exists.  But  in  the  medicine  we  have
now  to  study  the  strength  is  seen  alone,  and  that
at  its  very  fullest.  If  Homoeopathy  had  done  no-
thing for  therapeutics  but  reveal  the  virtues  of

Aconitum  napellus,

it  might  even  die  content.

The  tincture  prepared  upon  the  Hahnemannian
method  from  the  whole  fresh  plant  has  hitherto
been  used  in  Homoeopathic  practice.  I  myself
however  agree  with  Dr.  Hempel  in  preferring
"  Fleming's  Tincture  "  obtained  from  the  dried  root,
from  which  the  1st  decimal  dilution  may  be  made
in  the  proportion  of  two  to  eight.

Aconite  is  the  subject  of  the  first  proving  in
Hahnemann's  '  Materia  Medica  Pura/  It  was  re-
proved in  a  most  thorough  manner  by  the  Austrian
Provers'  Society,  and  the  result  published  in  the
first  volume  of  the  '  CEst.  Zeitsch.  f.  Horn/  The
two  provings  are  collated,  with  some  additional
matter,  by  Dr.  Dudgeon  in  the  first  (and  only)  part


38  ACONITUM NAPELLUS.

of  the  r  Hahnemann  Materia  Medica.'  There  are
also  monographs  upon  the  drug  by  Dr.  V.  Meyer
in  the  'North  Amer.  Journ.  of  Horn./  and  by
Dr.  Carroll  Dunham  in  the  'American  Homoeopathic
Review'  for  July  and  August,  1865.  Collections
of  cases  of  poisoning  have  been  made  by  Dr.
Hempel  in  his  '  Materia  Medica/  and  by  Drs.
Marcy  and  Peters  in  the  '  New  Materia  Medica/

Your  interest  in  Aconite  has  probably  been
hitherto  toxicological  only.  You  have  learnt  from
your  Pereira  that  it  causes,  both  locally  and  gene-
rally, numbness  with  pricking  and  tingling  going
on  to  complete  anaesthesia.  And  you  have  used  it
accordingly  to  deaden  sensibility  in  parts  where  that
function  is  morbidly  increased.  But  when  you  have
gone  through  the  cases  of  poisoning  and  the  groups
of  pathogenetic  effects  to  which  I  have  referred  you,
you  will  have  had  your  notions  of  the  physiological
effects  of  the  drug  very  widely  extended.

First,  you  will  have  observed  that  the  motor
functions  are  very  far  from  being  affected  similarly
with  the  sensory.  Not  paralysis,  but  spasm  is
excited,  and  that  nearly  always  of  a  tonic  character.
Trismus  is  a  common  symptom  of  Aconite  poison-
ing :  the  sufferers  frequently  complain  of  constric-
tion at  the  throat,  and  of  local  cramps  and  spasms  :
and  there  are  several  cases  on  record  in  which
complete  opisthotonos  existed,  and  the  pseudo-
tetanic  state  was  induced  as  completely  as  by
Strychnia.

Secondly,  some  very  striking  phenomena  are
observed  in  the  sphere  of  the  circulation.  In  acute
poisoning  the  dilated  pupils,  the  pale  face,  the


ACONITUM NAPELLUS.  39

quick  and  contracted  pulse,  and  the  general  coldness
within  and  without  speak  of  an  excitation  of  the
vaso-motor  nerves  throughout  the  body,  analogous
to  that  of  the  musculo-motor  centres  which  results
in  tetanus.  In  other  words,  we  have  a  condition
answering  to  the  chill  of  fever,  the  cold  stage  of
ague,  the  collapse  of  cholera.  That  this  is  the  true
explanation  of  the  symptoms  appears  from  what
follows.  Whfiii  reaction  takes  place,  the  condition
of  febrile  heat  succeeds  that  of  chill ;  as  Dr.  Wood
states,  "  the  circulation,  respiration,  and  general
temperature  are  somewhat  increased."*  This  is
seen  in  such  a  case  of  poisoning  as  No.  10  of  Dr.
HempeFs  series :  but  it  is  still  more  marked  in  the
'Austrian  Provings'  (see  symptoms  777  to  782  in
Dr.  Dudgeon's  arrangement).  One  prover  was  so
distressed  by  the  febrile  heat  induced,  that,  not
knowingwhatdrughe  had  been  trying,he  commenced
taking  Aconite  to  obtain  relief.  The  fever  is  accom-
panied by  signs  of  arterial  congestion  of  the  head
and  chest.  Further  evidence,  if  such  were  needed,
of  the  action  of  Aconite  upon  the  vascular  nerves
is  afforded  by  the  effects  of  its  local  application.
Drop  (as  Prevostf  and  myself  have  done)  some  of  the
diluted  tincture  upon  the  web  of  a  frog's  foot,  and
you  will  see  under  the  microscope  the  primary  con-
traction and  secondary  dilatation  of  the  arteries
which  are  just  the  febrile  chill  and  heat  upon  a
small  scale.

Thirdly,  besides  these  general  effects  of  Aconite,
both  poisonings  and  provings  present  certain  pretty

*  '  Materia  Medica,'  vol.  ii,  p.  142.

f  '  British  Journal  of  Homoeopathy,'  vol.  ix,  p.  134.


40  ACONITUM NAFELLUS.

constant  symptoms,  showing  its  power  to  influence
particular  organs  and  tissues.  The  heart  is  much
affected.  In  small  doses,  its  action  is  simply  quick-
ened, as  observed  by  Schroen  and  Arnold.*  But
when,  as  I  myself  have  ascertained,  equal  parts  of
the  tincture  and  water  are  dropped  upon  the  organ,
the  pulsations  are  fewer,  but  much  stronger,  so  that
the  heart  seems  lifted  out  of  its  place  at  each  beat.
Hence  Aconite  is  primarily  excitant  of  the  heart's
action.  That  it  is  also  irritant  of  its  tissue  seems
probable  from  the  painful  palpitation  and  prsecordial
anxiety,  alternating  with  pains  in  the  joints,  which
one  of  the  Austrian  provers  experienced  from  large
and  repeated  doses  of  the  tincture.  These  pains  in
the  joints,  muscles,  and  fibrous  tissues  generally, —
of  a  tearing  and  shooting  character — are  very
frequent  in  the  subjects  of  the  influence  of  Aconite.
Again,  very  painful  hyperaemia  of  the  eyes  has  been
more  than  once  observed  ;f  and  looks  like  inflam-
matory irritation  of  the  sclerotica.  Lastly,  in
post-mortem  examinations,  decided  evidences  of
inflammation  of  the  pleura  and  peritoneum  have
been  found  :  and  the  symptoms  elicited  by  some
of  the  provers  are  at  least  in  harmony  therewith
(see  symptoms  319,  and  449  to  463  of  Dr.  Dud-
geon's schema).

There  are  many  other  pathogenetic  effects  of  this
potent  poison  recorded  in  its  provings,  which  may
direct  us  to  its  choice  in  doubtful  cases.  But  those
whose  outline  I  have  now  drawn  will  enable  you  to

*  Dudgeon,  section  on  "  Heart."

f  See  case  7  in  '  New  Materia  Medica,'  and  cases  xv  and  xvii  in
the  Appendix  to  Fleming's  '  Monograph  on  Aconite.5


ACONITUM NAPELLUS.  41

see  the  rationale of  its curative effects,  which  I

To  enumerate  all  the  morbid  conditions  in  which
Aconite  has  proved  useful  would  be  tedious  and
hardly  profitable.  Dr.  Dudgeon  has  given  numerous
references  to  its  therapeutic  literature  at  the  end  of
his  article  in  the  '  Hahnemann  Materia  Medica.'
I  think  I  shall  help  you  more  effectually  if  I  suggest
those  general  principles  which  seem  to  govern  its
whole  remedial  action.

The  remarkable  action  of  Aconite  upon  the
circulation  at  once  gives  it  a  high  place  among  the
remedies  for  the  condition  we  know  as  fever.  Ex-
perience has  confirmed  this  indication :  and  has
shown  that  in  its  own  sphere  it  is  quite  unrivalled
as  an  "antiphlogistic."  But  it  is  of  great  impor-
tance to  define  this  sphere  of  its  action,  lest  an  in-
discriminate use  should  cause  disappointment.  Thus,
Aconite  has  no  influence  upon  the  blood  itself;  and
has  hence  little  control  over  such  fevers  as  depend
upon  a  poisoned  state  of  that  fluid.  Its  use  in
gastric,  typhoid,  typhus,  and  yellow  fevers  is  mere
waste  of  precious  time :  and  even  in  scarlatina,
variola,  and  measles  it  will  not  lower  the  circulation
until  the  eruption  comes  out.  If,  indeed,  after  this
the  fever  keep  up  it  may  be  most  useful.  Nor  will
it  avail  to  prevent  the  return  of  the  paroxysms  of
hectic  and  intermittent  fevers  :  though  in  the  latter
it  may  relieve  distress  when  administered  during  the
chill  and  heat.  Again,  Aconite  will  do  little  for  a
fever  which  is  symptomatic  of  an  acute  local  inflam-
mation. Read  Tessier's  cases  of  pneumonia,  and


42  ACONITUM NAPELLUS.

observe  how  the  pulse  defied  Aconite,  but  went
down  rapidly  when  Bryonia  or  Phosphorus  touched
the  local  mischief.  I  have  frequently  verified  this
rule,  which  is  a  very  important  one,  and  often  un-
perceived.  It  is  well  expounded  by  Dr.  Carroll
Durham,  in  the  article  to  which  I  have  referred :
and  shown  by  him  to  accord  perfectly  with  the
symptomatic  indications  for  the  medicine  originally
laid  down  by  Hahnemann  himself.  It  follows  also
from  the  physiological  effects,  which  show  general
fever,  but  without  (save  in  rare  instances)  local
inflammation.  When  we  say,  after  Hahnemann,
that  Aconite  quickly  cures  "  pure  inflammatory
fever,"  we  mean  before  such  fever  has  so  localised
itself  as  to  develop  organic  change.  Let  the
morbid  impression  known  as  "a  chill "  be  made
upon  the  vascular  nerves  :  let  them  first  contract
to  produce  the  cold  stage,  and  then  dilate  for  the
hot  stage  of  simple  fever;  and  we  have  the  every-
day occurrence  for  which  Aconite  is  the  specific
remedy.  Whether  the  chill  or  the  heat  be  present,
the  medicine  is  no  less  indicated.  Let  the  storm
of  arterial  excitement  be  ever  so  high,  a  dose  or  two
will  quiet  its  fury.  "In  as  short  a  time  as  four
hours  after  the  administration  of  Aconite  in  the
morbid  states  in  question,  all  danger  to  life  is  past,
and  the  excited  circulation  returns  from  hour  to
hour  to  its  more  tranquil  course."  So  truly  wrote
Hahnemann,  in  pointing  out  to  us  this  most  im-
portant use  of  our  medicine.  Indeed  it  may  be
laid  down  that  unless  a  fever  (not  being  rheumatic)
has  greatly  abated  within  twenty- four  hours  of  com-
mencing Aconite,  it  is  one  for  which  the  remedy  is


ACONITUM NAPELLUS.  43

uusuited.  But  it  should  not  be  supposed  that  the
time  for  administering  Aconite  has  gone  by  because
individual  parts  have  begun  to  show  signals  of
distress.  The  provings  have  shown  us  that  the
Aconite  fever  is  not  without  symptoms  of  arterial
congestion  in  more  than  one  part  of  the  body.  And
so  it  will  often  happen  that  a  commencing  coryza
or  angina,  and  even  a  pneumonia,  may  disappear
under  Aconite  with  the  fever  for  which  the  medicine
was  given.  In  some  inflammations,  even,  Aconite
may  alone  effect  a  cure,  as  being  itself  a  specific
irritant  of  the  part  affected.  This  is  especially  the
case  in  the  rheumatic  inflammations :  but  even
non-rheumatic  pleurisy,  in  its  plastic  form,  is  often
under  the  control  of  Aconite.  It  is  only  when  in
a  part  to  which  Aconite  is  not  specifically  irritant
true  inflammatory  changes  have  actually  begun,  that
it  ceases  to  exert  remedial  influence  :  and  a  medicine
Homoeopathic  to  the  local  mischief  must  take  its
place.  It  is  a  very  general  custom  under  these
circumstances  to  continue  the  Aconite  in  alternation
with  the  local  remedy.  I  myself  do  this  sometimes  :
but  it  is  inaccurate  practice.  It  is  only  justified  by
to  the  exact  point  to  which  the  morbid  process  has
advanced :  and  such  uncertainty  is  a  fault,  and
should  be  remedied.*

*  You  may  have  noticed  how  exactly  all  this  corresponds  with
last  generation.  Fleming,  in  his  '  Treatise  on  Aconite,'  frequently
remarks  upon  the  great  similarity  between  its  effects  and  those  of
venesection :  and  two  patients,  to  whom  thirty  drops  of  his  strong
tincture  had  been  given,  stated  that  they  felt  as  if  dying  from
excessive  loss  of  blood.  The  lancet  has  been  abandoned,  in  wise


44  ACONITUM NAPELLUS.

If  you  have  got  these  thoughts  about  Aconite
clearly  before  your  mind,  you  will  at  once  see  a
large  class  of  acute  febrile  affections  in  which  its  use
must  be  most  advantageous.  In  active  haemorrhage,
especially  haemoptysis ;  in  acute  congestions  of
almost  any  part ;  in  recent  febrile  dropsy ;  in  acute
heemorrhoidal  attacks;  and  in  erysipelas,  Aconite
will  always  commence  and  often  complete  a  cure.
Its  power  of  rectifying  the  disordered  balance  of  the
circulation  is  also  shown  in  many  morbid  conditions
not  strictly  febrile.  In  apoplexy  and  in  puerperal
convulsions,  where  there  is  much  arterial  excitement,
Aconite  will  do  everything  for  which  the  lancet  used
to  be  thought  indispensable.  In  suppression  of  the
menses  from  a  chill,  and  in  the  circulatory  disturb-
ance which  often  attends  the  commencement  of
menstrual  life,  it  is  the  best  medicine :  though,
strangely  enough,  it  has  little  or  no  influence  over
the  similar  disturbances,  known  as  flushings,  which
occur  at  the  menopausic  age.  Nor  is  it  less  valuable
when  the  circulatory  disorder,  short  of  inflammation,
is  local :  as  when  neuralgia  or  stiff-neck  has  resulted
from  a  draught.  Lastly,  in  the  collapse  of  Asiatic
cholera,  where  the  chill  is  so  deadly  that  were  it  not
for  the  "  consecutive  fever "  its  true  nature  would
be  hardly  recognisable,  Aconite  will  still  assert  its
power.  I  venture  to  predict  that  it  will  some  day

abhorrence  of  the  spoliation  of  vital  fluid  resulting  from  its  use.
But  in  the  utter  absence  of  any  efficient  substitute,  it  is  almost
certain  that  bleeding  will  one  day  regain  its  place  in  old-school
therapeutics  :  and  there  are  not  wanting  even  already  indications  of
its  return  to  power.  In  Aconite,  however,  we  possess  a  remedy
which  has  all  the  energy  without  the  inconveniences  of  venesec-
tion :  and  by  it  the  place  of  the  lancet  is  irrevocably  taken.


ACON1TUM NAPELLUS.  45

be  recognised  as  superior  even  to  Arsenic  in  those
terrible  cases  where  vomiting  and  purging  are  well-
nigh  absent,  and  death  seems  imminent  from  arrest
of  the  circulation.

Another  large  class  of  curative  actions — its  power
over  spasmodic  affections — belongs  to  Aconite  in
virtue  of  its  influence  on  the  musculo-motor  centres.
In  the  spasm  of  the  glottis  known. as  laryngismus
stridulus  its  curative  powers  are  very  marked.  In
hooping-cough  it  greatly  aids  Ipecacuanha  in  the
treatment  of  the  early  stage,  in  which  also  there  is
generally  a  tendency  to  febrile  excitement.  In  the
"  neuro-phlogosis "  we  call  croup  it  seems  indis-
pensable in  alternation  with  Iodine  or  Spongia  :
and  probably  acts  by  modifying  the  tendency  to
spasm  so  characteristic  of  this  disease.  In  spas-
modic asthma  it  often  gives  great  relief  during  the
paroxysm.  In  simple  trismus,  in  spasmodic  gastro-
dynia  and  colic,  and  many  other  local  cramps  and
spasms,  especially  when  excited  by  a  chill,  Aconite
should  be  thought  of.  But  above  all,  it  bids  fail-
to  be  a  valuable  remedy  for  true  tetanus.  There  are
seven  cases  of  the  traumatic  form  of  the  disease  now
on  record  in  which  Aconite  was  the  main  remedy :
and  in  six  recovery  was  the  result.  It  would  be
still  more  suitable,  however,  to  the  idiopathic  form
of  the  disease,  from  exposure  to  cold  and  wet.

A  survey  of  the  more  localised  effects  of
Aconite — its  action  upon  the  heart,  the  joints  and
muscles,  the  sclerotica,  and  the  serous  membranes —
suggests  at  once  its  close  analogy  with  the  rheu-
matic poison.  In  acute  rheumatism  it  is  our  main
remedy.  The  fever  is  one  element  in  the  Homoso-


46  ACONITUM NAPELLUS.

pathic  relation  between  the  disease  and  the  drug;
but,  being  of  the  toxsemic  type,  it  must  not  be  ex-
pected to  disappear  under  the  Aconite  in  a  few
hours.  Nevertheless,  when  occurring  in  persons
of  fairly  good  constitution,  and  not  presenting
asthenic  symptoms,  acute  rheumatism  will  yield  to
Aconite  perhaps  more  rapidly  than  to  any  other
drug  or  mode  of  treatment.  Our  experience  quite  co-
incides with  that  of  your  own  Fleming,  who  states
that  under  its  use  the  average  time  required  for
cure  is  from  five  to  six  days;  that  the  drug  seems
to  protect  the  patient  from  cardiac  complications ;
that  the  convalescence  is  very  short;  and  that  much
less  stiffness  of  the  joints  is  left  than  under  the  or-
dinary treatment.  Tt  is  obvious  that  the  superven-
tion of  any  of  the  common  complications  would  not
render  Aconite  less  truly  indicated  in  acute  rheuma-
tism. Sometimes  it  may  be  that  it  is  aided  or  even
superseded  in  such  cases  by  medicines  acting  more
powerfully  upon  the  tissues  affected,  as  Bryonia  in
pleurisy,  Colchicum  in  pericarditis,  Arsenicum  or
Spigelia  in  endocarditis,  and  so  on.  In  acute
local  effects  of  the  rheumatic  poison  not  occurring
during  rheumatic  fever,  Aconite  is  often  most  effec-
tual :  such  are  lumbago  (comp.  with  Bryonia,  Khus,
and  Actsea  racemosa),  sclerotitis  (with  Spigelia),
pleurodynia  (with  Ranunculus  btilbosus),  and
sciatica  and  the  other  rheumatic  neuralgias.  Nor  is
it  in  rheumatic  affections  only  of  the  parts  which
it  specifically  influences  that  Aconite  proves  effec-
tual. It  is  very  useful  in  all  diseases  of  the  heart
characterised  by  increased  action,  especially  where
the  left  side  is  chiefly  involved  (comp.  Cactus).  Its


ACOXITUM XAPELLUS.  47

continued  use  gives  much  relief  to  the  distress  occa-
sioned by  cardiac  hypertrophy.  In  spasm  of  the
heart,  I  have  seen  almost  instantaneous  relief  follow
its  administration.  In  angina  pectoris,  it  is  the
best  palliative  at  the  time  of  attack.  It  is,  I  think,
inferior  to  Moschus  in  pure  nervous  palpitation.
Of  its  action  in  pleurisy  I  have  already  spoken  :
and  the  same  remarks  will  apply  to  peritonitis.

I  have  now,  I  think,  put  you  in  possession  of
the  main  principles  of  the  action  of  Aconite.  As
you  use  it  in  your  daily  practice,  its  applications
will  be  ever  multiplying,  and  its  virtues  will  be  to
you  a  continual  source  of  delight  and  thankfulness.

When  I  come  to  think  of  allied  medicines,  it
seems  to  me  that  Aconite  is  perfectly  unique  as  to
its  action  in  the  sphere  of  the  circulation.  The
influence  of  Arsenic,  Quinine,  and  Veratrum  album
over  the  vaso-motor  nerves  presents  points  of  con-
trast rather  than  of  comparison.  And  the  action  of
Aconite  is  quite  different  from  that  of  the  so-called
"  arterial  sedatives,"  as  Veratrum  viride  and  Gel-
seminum,  which  in  large  doses  knock  down  fever  by
prostrating  the  heart's  energy.  In  the  musculo-
motor  sphere,  Aconite  may  be  compared  with
Strychnia  (and  therefore  of  course  with  Nux
vomica  and  Ignatia),  with  Cicuta,  and  with
Hydrocyanic  acid.  Its  relation  to  rheumatism
classes  it  with  Bryonia,  Colchicum,  Acttsa  race-
mosa,  and  Spiyelia  :  and  in  its  influence  upon  the
heart,  it  resembles  somewhat  Cactus  grandiflorus,
Naja,  and  once  again  Spigelia.

And  now  as  to  dose.  I  cannot  deny  that
Hahnemann's  immediate  successors  seem  to  have


48  ACONITUM NAPELLUS.  ,

found  success  from  the  plan  recommended  (more  or
less  theoretically)  by  him,  of  administering  in  fever
a  single  dose  of  a  high  dilution  of  Aconite  (18th
to  30th),  and  allowing  it  to  act.  But  it  is  no  less
certain  that  the  Homoeopathic  practice  of  the
present  day  in  all  countries  is  to  give  frequently  re-
peated doses  of  a  low  dilution  until  the  fever  departs
in  perspiration.  I  have  myself  never  adopted  any
other  practice  than  this :  so  that  I  have  no  other
to  recommend  to  you.  The  dilutions  I  use  are  the  1st,
3rd,  and  6th  of  the  decimal  scale.  The  first  in  high
fever,  in  acute  rheumatism  and  rheumatic  or  other
inflammations,  in  cholera,  croup,  laryngismus  stri-
dulus,  cardiac  spasm  or  angina,  and  tetanus.  The
3rd  in  less  violent  febrile  conditions,  in  hooping-
cough  and  asthma  ;  and  when  the  symptoms  requir-
ing the  drug  occur  in  young  children.  The  6th  in
the  febrile  chill,  in  sub-acute  circulatory  disturbance
connected  with  menstruation,  in  chronic  heart  disease,
and  generally  where  the  medicine  has  to  be  taken
continuously  for  some  time.


LETTER  VI.

ACT^EA, ^SCULUS, .ETHUSA,  AND  AGARIC  US.

WE  have  devoted  much,  though  I  think  not  too
much  space  to  Aconite.  We  must  now  pass  more
rapidly  along  a  list  of  less  important  medicines,  be-
ginning with —

Actsea  racemosa,

or,  as  it  is  now  more  frequently  called,  Cimicifuga
racemosa.

A  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  dried  root  by
maceration.  The  "  concentrated"  preparation,
Macrotin,  seems  to  contain  most  if  not  all  of  the
virtues  of  the  plant  :  it  is  triturated  or  dissolved  in
alcohol.

Our  knowledge  concerning  Actsea,  which  has  been
fairly  proved,  has  been  gathered  together  by  Dr.
Hale  in  his  '  New  Remedies/  Dr.  Hempel,  in  the
article  on  the  drug  in  his  'Materia  Medica/  adds
an  account  of  some  experiments  made  by  a  pupil
of  his.

The  influence  of  Actsea  is  rather  extensive,  but
not  very  intense.  In  the  sphere  of  the  nervous
system  it  causes  irritability  and  restlessness,  which
as  manifested  by  the  brain  closely  resemble  deli-
rium tremens,  and  by  the  spinal  cord  have  led  to  its

4


50  ACT^EA BACEMOSA.

successful  use  in  chorea,  especially  when  of  rheu-
matic or  uterine  origin.  It  uniformly  causes,  and
has  often  cured,  headaches  accompanied  with  severe
aching  pains  in  the  eyeballs.  The  sense  of  "  faint-
ness  in  the  epigastrium  "  so  generally  provoked  by
it  is  one  of  the  many  symptoms  which  have  led  to
its  use  in  menopausia :  I  find  this  symptom  a
pretty  unfailing  indication  for  the  medicine.  Again,
the  sufferings  referred  by  the  provers  to  the  back
have  suggested  the  trial  of  Actsea  in  "  spinal  irri-
tation ;"  and  with  reported  good  results.

You  will  have  noticed  already  the  close  relation  of
all  these  nervous  conditions  —  chorea,  headaches,
"  sinking  at  the  stomach/'  and  spinal  irritation — to
the  functions  of  the  uterus.  This  organ,  indeed,
seems  the  principal  centre  of  the  sphere  of  the
operations  of  Actsea.  Itself  is  influenced  by  the  drug
in  various  ways.  In  default  of  female  provers,  we
know  little  of  its  physiological  action  upon  the
ovario-uterine  system,  save  that  it  is  a  specific
abortifacient  and  ecbolic ;  producing  abortion  with-
out irritation  (as  by  Sabina),  and  exciting  in  labour
less  unremitting  contractions  than  those  of  Ergot.
But  its  therapeutic  virtues  in  this  region  are  well
established.  It  gives  great  relief  to  dysmenorrhoea
and  after-pains,  especially  in  nervous  and  rheumatic
subjects.  In  similar  patients,  it  checks  the  tendency
to  abortion,  and,  administered  for  some  weeks
before  parturition,  facilitates  that  process.  In  the
"  irritable  uterus,"  at  least  when  occurring  at  the
change  of  life,  Actsea  is  very  valuable.  Moreover,  it
effectually  meets  many  of  the  sympathetic  affections
resulting  from  this  and  other  morbid  conditions  of


ACT^A RACEMOSA.  51

the  uterus,  as  uterine  epilepsy  and  hysteria.  It
cures  puerperal  melancholia;  and  the  restless  and
unhappy  state  of  mind  which  is  often  associated
with  uterine  disturbance.  It  dissipates  the  infra-
mammary  pain  in  unmarried  females  which  Simp-
son tells  us  is  to  the  uterus  what  pain  in  the
shoulder  is  to  the  liver  :  also  pains  in  the  mammse
and  other  parts  sympathetic  with  the  uterus.  It  is
above  all  useful  in  the  sufferings  of  menopausia;
relieving  the  sinking  at  the  stomach,  the  pain  at  the
vertex,  and  the  irritability  of  disposition  better  than
any  other  medicine.

Actaea  has  one  other  great  sphere  of  action  also
pointed  to  by  its  pathogenetic  effects :  viz.  the
whole  range  of  rheumatic  affections.  It  controls
only  the  milder  cases  of  rheumatic  fever,  being  far
less  potent  here  than  Aconite.  But  in  the  acute
local  rheumatisms,  as  pleurodynia,  lumbago,  and
torticollis,  it  is  very  effectual.  The  experiments  of
Dr.  HempeFs  pupil,  moreover,  make  it  evident  that
Actsea  affects  the  heart  very  powerfully,  and  in  a
manner  closely  resembling  that  of  the  rheumatic
poison.  Dr.  Hale  cured  with  it  a  case  which  may

The  influence  of  Actsea  over  pulmonary  affections
does  not  fall  within  either  of  these  categories.  It  is
said  to  cure  pseudo-,  and  even  real  non-hereditary
phthisis.  We  need  more  information  upon  this
point :  I  have  no  experience  to  offer  regarding  it.

The  more  closely  one  studies  a  medicine,  the  less
easy  does  it  become  to  select  medicines  truly
"  allied/'  I  can  only  suggest  a  comparison  with
Arsenicum,  Hyoscyamus,  and  Ignatia  as  regards


52  ^ESCULUS HIPPOCASTANUM.

tlie  effects  of  Actsea  racemosa  upon  the  nervous
system ;  with  Caulophyllum  and  Secale  cornutum  in
its  uterine  relations ;  and  with  Aconite,  Bryonia,
and  Colchicum  in  its  influence  upon  rheumatic
disorders.

Actsea  is  used  by  Homoeopathic  physicians  mainly
in  the  2nd  and  3rd  decimal  dilutions  of  the  tinc-
ture, or  triturations  of  Macrotin.  But  as  in  most
of  our  uses  of  it  we  are  on  common  ground  with  our
Alloeopathic  brethren,  we  shall  probably  gain  in  many
cases  by  using  more  material  doses.

Another  minor  medicine  which  has  been  very
fairly  proved  is  the  horse-chestnut,

JEsculus  hippocastanum.

A  tincture  is  prepared  by  macerating  the  nut,  and
is  certainly  efficacious.  Pharmaceutically,  however,
it  would  seem  better  to  make  triturations  :  which
indeed  were  mainly  used  in  the  provings.

Dr.  Hale's  article,  in  the  second  edition  of  his
'  New  Remedies/  gives  a  detailed  account  of  all  the
provings  of  j93sculus,  and  collects  the  many  reports
of  its  clinical  use  which  have  appeared  in  our
journals.

^Esculus  has  produced  many  symptoms  in  its
various  provers ;  but  no  part  of  the  body  is  so
strongly  affected  as  the  rectum  and  anus.  There  is
no  form  of  distress  belonging  to  this  region  which
does  not  find  its  reflection  in  the  pathogenesis  of
^Esculus :  and  in  one  prover,  not  previously  sub-
ject to  piles,  these  morbid  growths  were  produced.
Correspondingly,  ^Esculus  is  acquiring  a  high  repu-


jESCULUS HIPPOCASTANUM.  53

tation  amongst  us  as  an  anti-hsemorrhoidal  medicine.
In  putting  on  record  in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.'
(vol.  xxiii,  p.  485)  some  cases  illustrative  of  its
efficacy,  I  made  the  following  remarks  as  to  the
precise  form  of  the  disease  to  which  it  is  specific.
"  When  the  piles  are  only  secondary  to  existing
portal-  or  other  intra-abdominal  congestion,  ^Esculus
will  probably  be  inferior  to  Nux  and  Sulphur.  When
they  are  associated  with  symptoms  of  varicosis  else-
where, and  bleed  much,  Hamamelis  will  be  a  better
remedy.  But  when  the  only  connected  symptom  or
appreciable  cause  is  constipation,  and  there  is  much
pain  but  little  bleeding,  ^Esculus  seems  pretty  likely
to  effect  a  cure."  I  have  also  cured  with  this
medicine  a  case  of  severe  pain  at  the  anus  after
stool,  resembling  that  of  fissure.  (See  '  Brit.  Journ.
of  Horn./  vol.  xxiv,  p.  165.  The  case  is  not  in
Dr.  Hale's  article.)  It  must  certainly  be  ranked
among  the  remedies  for  constipation  also.

The  action  of  J5sculus  in  the  sphere  of  the
rectum  and  anus  may  be  compared  with  that  of
Acidum  nitricum,  Aloes,  Collinsonia,  Ignatia,  Nux
vomica,  and  Sulphur.

JEsculus  seems  the  better  for  dilution.  I  have
always  used  the  3rd  potency  for  acute,  and  the
2nd  for  chronic  cases.  Dr.  Hale  says  "We  find  it
to  act  well  in  almost  any  potency."

In  our  next  medicine,  we  come  again  within
the  range  of  Toxicology.  The  "  garden-hemlock/'
"  fool's  parsley,"  or —


54  ^THUSA  ,CYNAPICM.

-flDthusa  cynapium,

has  been  used  as  a  medicine  for  the  first  time  by
Homoeopathic  physicians.  The  tincture  is  prepared
from  the  whole  fresh  plant.

A  schema,  embodying  the  two  provings  by
Hartlaub  and  Trinks  and  by  Petroz  respectively,  is
contained  in  Dr.  Roth's  '  Materia  Medica/  and
translated  in  MetcalPs  '  American  Provings/  Some
good  cases  of  poisoning  are  related  by  Dr.  Hempel
in  his  article  on  the  drug.

.ZEthusa  is  one  of  the  "  narcotico-acrids"  of
Toxicology.*  The  nervous  symptoms  induced  in
cases  of  poisoning  are  somewhat  epileptiform  in
character,  or  the  lower  extremities  become  numb

*  The  following  case  of  poisoning  by  Jilthusa  is  suggestive  of
wider  and  more  marked  effects  than  it  has  yet  been  credited  with.
It  is  translated  from  '  Frank's  Magazine'  in  the  '  New  Materia
Medica :'

"  A  scrofulous  girl,  set.  12,  partook  of  some  of  the  fresh  herb.
Towards  evening  she  complained  of  general  malaise  and  anorexia,
which  continued  during  the  whole  of  the  next  day.  Towards  noon
of  the  second  day,  she  was  taken  with  violent  headache,  frequent
vomiting  of  greenish  substances,  vertigo,  dry  heat,  confusion  of  and
inability  to  raise  the  head,  or  keep  an  erect  posture.  Pulse  full  and
quick,  face  periodically  cedematous,  and  mottled  with  red  spots.
Her  treatment  consisted  of  the  frequent  application  of  cold  water  to
the  head  and  face,  and  injections  (?)  of  dilute  Acetic  acid,  Lemonade,
Aqua  oxymuriatis,  with  Syr.  cinnainoini.  On  the  third  day,  how-
ever, there  was  no  change  for  the  better.  She  then  had  leeches
applied  for  the  relief  of  violent  stitches  in  the  left  side,  but  without
avail.  On  the  fourth  day,  she  also  had  stitches  in  the  chest,  dys-
pnoea, and  great  prostration  of  the  whole  system.  On  the  fifth  day,
after  having  had  a  few  stools  she  began  to  improve.  During  the
whole  attack  there  was  a  constant  dry  heat  of  the  skin,  but  attended
with  a  total  aversion  to  all  kinds  of  drink."


AGARICUS MUSCARIUS.  55

and  weak  :  there  is  nothing  very  distinctive  about
them  in  the  provings.  We  have  no  means  of
knowing  whether  the  irritation  of  the  stomach  and
bowels  set  up  by  ^Ethusa  is  specific  or  not  :  but
this  quality  must  obviously  be  assigned  to  the
severe  cedematous  inflammation  of  the  eyes  which
occurred  in  one  of  Dr.  Hempel's  cases.  It  is
mainly  in  affections  of  these  organs  that  .^Ethusa
has  been  used  as  a  medicine.  From  Dr.  Petroz's
experience,  it  would  seem  most  useful  in  subacute
inflammations  of  the  ocular  and  palpebral  conjunc-
tiva, associated  with  swelling  of  the  glands  and
cutaneous  eruptions, — in  a  word,  in  mild  cases  of
strumous  ophthalmia.  It  is  also  recommended  for
vomiting  of  milk  by  infants ;  and  deserves  attention
in  the  convulsive  and  paralytic  affections  of  this
period  of  life.

As  a  poison,  ^Ethusa  ranks  with  Cicuta  virosa
and  (Enanthe  crocata.  both  Umbelliferae.  Its
remedial  virtues,  such  as  they  are,  seem  to  justify
Teste  in  classing  it  as  an  analogue  of  Sulphur.
Artemisia  also  resembles  it  closely.

I  can  say  nothing  about  dose,  having  no  ex-
perience of  the  medicine  myself,  and  not  knowing  in
what  dilutions  it  has  been  found  curative  by  others.

The  last  medicine  I  shall  mention  in  my  present
letter  is  the  poisonous  mushroom  known  as  Amanita,
Fly-agaric,  or —

Agaricus  muscarius.

A  tincture  is  made  of  the  fresh,  or  triturations  of
the  dry  fungus.


56  AGARICUS MUSCARIUS.

The  Homoeopathic  literature  of  Agaricus  is  rather
extensive.  A  pathogenesis  of  the  drug  commences
the  'Chronic  Diseases/  It  has  been  re-proved  by  the
Austrian  Society,  in  its  usual  exhaustive  manner,
under  the  auspices  of  Professor  Zlatarowich :  the
results  are  given  by  Dr.  Hempel  in  the  second  edi-
tion of  his  '  Materia  Medica/  The  '  New  Materia
Medica'  contains  a  good  account  of  the  toxicological
effects  of  the  fungus  :  and  these  are  again  summed
up  in  a  study  of  Agaricus  by  Dr.  Roth  in  the
eighteenth  volume  of  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Homoeo-
pathy.'

Agaricus  appears  to  exert  its  chief  influence  upon
the  nervous  centres.  Upon  the  brain  it  acts  as  an
intoxicating  agent,  like  Alcohol,  Opium,  and  Has-
chisch  :  it  is  used  for  this  purpose  by  the  Kam-
schatkans.  The  exaggeration  with  disorder  of
function  ending  in  suspension,  which  intoxication
implies  in  the  cerebral  centres,  are  also  manifested
in  the  other  divisions  of  the  nervous  system.  The
sensory  nerves  lose  their  elasticity  and  power  of  re-
sistance :  when  even  feeble  pressure  is  applied  to
any  spot,  it  pains  still  a  long  while  after.  But  the
motor  centres  suffer  most  severely.  Very  marked
chorea-like  twitchings  are  produced  by  it ;  and  in
several  of  the  provers  were  developed  symptoms  of
a  profound  affection  of  the  spinal  cord.  Thus,
Baumgartner  experienced  from  small  doses  an  ex-
traordinary heaviness  and  languor  in  the  lower  ex-
tremities :  from  larger  quantities,  pain  in  the  first
and  second  lumbar  vertebrae,  with  sense  of  coldness
in  the  glutei  muscles  and  formication  in  the  feet ;
then  the  coolness  spread  down  the  legs,  accompanied


AGARICvTg MUSCAIUUS.  57

•with  numbness  and  twitches,  and  the  urine  began
to  dribble  away  ;  the  paralysis  extended  to  the
sphincter  ani,  and  lasted  some  time.  Other  provers
experienced  similar  symptoms  :  in  one  there  was
pain  all  along  the  spine,  which  in  several  places  was
tender  to  touch.  Besides  these  important  actions,
Agaricus  appears  to  poison  the  blood,  which  in  post-
mortem examinations  is  everywhere  fluid,  the  veins
of  the  brain,  lungs,  and  liver  being  gorged  with  it :
and  the  bodies  are  very  livid.  During  life,  too,
there  are  many  symptoms  of  septic  change  in  the
subjects  of  its  poisonous  influence  :  the  face  is  blue,
the  body  swells,  the  breath,  flatus,  and  stools  are
fetid.  There  are  many  other  characteristic  symp-
toms induced  by  Agaricus,  which  as  yet  defy  classi-
fication. Thus  the  mucous  membranes  are  found
coated  with  yellow  mucus ;  on  the  skin  a  lichenous
eruption  (lichen  pilaris  urticatus)  has  been  developed,
with  crawling,  stinging,  and  burning ;  the  liver  is
found  greatly  enlarged  on  autopsy  ;  pains  as  though
innumerable  splinters  were  in  them  are  felt  in  the
muscles,  especially  in  the  deltoid,  where  a  small
abscess  even  developed  itself.  Neuralgic  pains  also
are  experienced,  as  though  sharp  ice  touched  the
parts,  or  cold  needles  ran  through  the  nerves  (comp.
with  the  Arsenic  neuralgia,  in  which  the  imaginary
needles  are  red  hot).

The  use  of  Agaricus  has  by  no  means  been  com-
mensurate with  its  physiological  importance.  It
has  cured  chorea :  to  the  idiopathic  form  of  which
it  is  eminently  Homoeopathic.  It  has  proved  effec-
tive in  Dr.  Drysdale's  hands  in  two  cases  of  ataxic


58  AGARICUS MUSCARIUS.

typhus,  with  much  delirium  and  restlessness.*  It
has  cured  a  recurring  congestive  headache ;  and  a
cardialgia  where  "  daily,  about  three  hours  after  a
meal,  there  was  a  burning  at  the  stomach,  changing
into  a  dull  pressure,  like  a  foreign  body,  with
nausea/'  But  it  should  find  a  place  in  the  treat-
ment of  many  important  affections  :  as  delirium
tremens,  and  the  nervous  tremors  and  other  affec-
tions of  drunkards ;  venous  congestions  of  the
brain  ;  "  nervousness"  in  general,  where  physical
rather  than  psychical ;  paraplegia  from  congestion
of  the  lumbar  portion  of  the  cord  ;  congestive  en-
largement of  the  liver;  and  many  unclassified  ner-
vous affections.

The  medicines  most  allied  to  Agaricus  seem  to
be  Cannabis  indica,  Hyoscyamus,  Ignatia,  Opium,
and  Stramonium.

The  lower  dilutions,  and  even  the  mother-tinc-
ture, appear  to  give  the  most  suitable  dose.

*  '  British  Journal  of  Homoeopathy,'  vol.  xxi,  p.  401.


LETTER  VII.

AGNUS  CASTUS,  ALL1UM  CEPA  AND  SAT1VUM,  ALOES,
ALUMINA,  AMBRA,  AMMONIUM  CABBONICUM  AND
MURIAT1CUM.

I  HAVE  now  to  introduce  to  you  a  new  acquaint-
ance in  the

Agnus  castus,

from  whose  berries  we  make  a  tincture  in  the  usual
way.

The  pathogenesis  of  Agnus  castus  is  in  Stapf's
'  Additional  Provings  :'  and  it  is  prefaced  by  a  sum-
mary of  all  that  is  known  concerning  the  drug.
Dr.  Roth's  recommendations  of  Agnus,  cited  in  the
'  New  Materia  Medica/  need  confirmation.

The  name  of  this  plant  hints  at  its  special  action  :
and  its  history  points  the  same  way.  It  was  used
by  Athenian  women  during  religious  solemnities,
and  by  mediaeval  monks,  to  repress  carnal  desire.
Its  provings  show  that  it  really  has  this  property,
depressing  sexual  instinct  and  energy  without  pre-
vious excitation.  It  is  even  reported  to  have  caused
in  one  case  permanent  extinction  of  virility.  Its
therapeutic  use  has  accordingly  been  directed  against
atonic  conditions  of  the  sexual  organs.  In  the
hands  of  Drs.  Stapf  and  Marcy  it  has  cured  simple


60  ALLIUM CEPA.

impotence  in  males  :  and  old  Dioscorides  states  that
it  promotes  menstruation  and  the  secretion  of  milk.
Its  elective  affinity  for  the  sexual  organs  seems
even  to  render  it  effectual  against  their  local  dis-
eases :  for  it  is  said  to  have  been  occasionally  cura-
tive of  gonorrhoea,  gleet,  induration  of  the  testes,
and  leucorrhoea.

Baryta  carbonica  and  muriatica,  Camphora,
Conium>  Nuphar  lutea,  Phosphorus  and  Phosphoric
acid  are  the  medicines  which  in  the  sexual  sphere
invite  comparison  with  Agnus  castus.

Drs.  Marcy  and  Stapf  both  report  the  6th
dilution  as  that  with  which  their  success  was  ob-
tained.

You  may  be  amused  when  as  my  next  medicine
I  mention  the  common  onion.  You  will  find,  how-
ever, if  you  read  Dr.  Bering's  preface  to  its  proving,
that  this  vegetable  was  highly  esteemed  as  a  remedy
by  the  ancients,  and  was  credited  with  considerable
pathogenetic  power.  We  prepare  the

Allium  cepa

by  making  a  tincture  in  the  usual  way  from  the
juice  of  the  long  red  onion,  freshly  gathered.

The  pathogenesis  of  Allium  cepa  is  translated
fromDr.  Bering's "Amerikanische  Arzneiprufungen"
in  the  sixth  volume  of  the  '  American  Homoeopathic
Review/

With  the  discontinuance  of  the  journal  in  ques-
tion the  record  of  this  proving  comes  to  an  un-
timely end,  before  even  the  all-important  catarrhal
symptoms  have  been  chronicled.  Enough,  how-


ALLIUM SAT1VUM.  61

ever,  has  been  said  to  show  that  the  well-known
irritation  of  the  eyes  and  nose  produced  by  the  ema-
nations from  the  onion  are  specific  effects, — as  they
also  result  from  the  internal  use  of  the  tincture.
It  is  hence  recommended  for  fluent  coryza,  which  it
seemed  to  have  occasionally  cured.  "Whether  it  is
needed  to  occupy  a  place  in  the  treatment  of  this
malady  which  Euphrasia,  Arsenicum,  Mercurius,  or
Kali  iodidum  do  not  fill,  experience  alone  can  decide.
I  have  only  tried  it  twice ;  but  neither  time  success-
fully.

In  these  medicines  I  have  named  the  analogues
of  Allium  cepa  in  its  relation  to  the  conjunctival
and  nasal  mucous  membrane.  Dr.  Hering  thinks
it  occupies  a  middle  place  between  Aconite  and  Ipe-
cacuanha.

The  higher  dilutions  seem  most  in  favour.

The  transition  from  onions  to  garlic  is  as  natural
as  it  is  alphabetical.  As

Allium  sativum,

we  use  a  tincture  prepared  by  maceration  from  the
cloves.

A  pathogenesis  of  garlic,  with  clinical  remarks,
was  presented  by  the  late  Dr.  Petroz  to  the  Societe
Gallicane  in  1852,  and  published  in  the  third  volume
of  its  journal.  It  is  translated,  with  additional
symptoms  and  therapeutic  notes,  by  Teste  in  his
•'  Materia  Medica.'

Eructations  with  salivation ;  profuse  whitish
urine,  which  becomes  cloudy  on  the  addition  of
nitric  acid  ;  much  cough,  with  glutinous  mucus  and


62  ALOES.

pains  beneath  the  ribs ;  swelling  and  tenderness  of
the  mammae ;  and  severe  pain  in  the  conjoined  psoas
and  iliacus  muscles  when  put  in  action  seem  the
most  characteristic  symptoms  of  Allium  sativum.
It  has  cured  chronic  cough,  with  profuse  mucous
expectoration  :  and  morbid  sensibility  to  the  influence
of  cold  air.  Petroz  wrote  of  it — "  Allium  sativum
has  been  of  remarkable  service  in  cases  where  the
herpetic  diathesis  has  manifested  itself  in  the
respiratory  or  digestive  mucous  membranes."  He
considered  a  pale  red  appearance  of  the  tongue,  with
effaced  papillae,  pathognomonic  of  this  affection.
The  old  authors  consider  garlic  an  excellent  remedy
for  "phlegm."

I  do  not  perceive  any  medicine  in  my  list  which
bears  a  real  resemblance  to  Allium  sativum.

The  6th  dilution  was  most  probably  that  used  by
Petroz  and  Teste.

My  next  medicine  is  one  familiar  to  you  as  a
purgative,  though  new  as  a  specific  remedy.  I
speak  of

Aloes.

Of  the  best  Socotrine  Aloes  we  make  triturations,
or  (which  is  less  certain)  an  alcoholic  tincture.

A  copious  pathogenesis  of  Aloes  is  translated  from
Dr.  Bering's  "  Amerikanische  Arzneiprufungen  "  in
the  '  American  Homoeopathic  Review/  vols.  iv — vi.

Although,  as  I  say,  you  have  hardly  thought  of
Aloes  as  a  specific  remedy,  yet  you  know  a  good
deal  about  its  specific  action.  You  know  that  it  is
no  mere  aperient,  but  has  peculiar  properties.  That


ALOES.  63

it  purges  however  introduced  into  the  system ;  that
it  affects  the  large  intestine  only,  especially  the
rectum ;  that  here  also  it  excites  the  action  of  the
muscular  coat  rather  than  the  secretions  of  the
mucous  membrane,  being  thus  (as  Dr.  Druitt  calls
it)  "  eccoprotic;"  that  it  not  unfrequently  irritates
the  rectum  and  anus,  causing  heat,  tenesmus,  and
even  hemorrhoids ;  and  that  the  determination  of
blood  it  induces  towards  the  lower  bowel  extends
itself  also  to  the  other  pelvic  viscera,  so  that  the
bladder  becomes  irritated,  and  menstruation  excited,
— these  are  the  teachings  of  every  work  on  Materia
Medica.  Our  provings  confirm  them  in  every
particular.  They  add  evidence  that  the  sexual
instinct  also  is  excited :  that  the  whole  abdomen
shares  though  to  a  less  degree  in  the  congestion  of
the  pelvis,  becoming  distended  and  tender;  that
there  is  (as  Wedekiud  long  ago  taught)  a  decided
action  on  the  liver,  shown  mainly  by  dull  pain  there  ;
and  that,  probably  in  sympathy  with  these  affections,
a  heavy  headache  is  caused  by  the  drug.

The  use  of  Aloes  in  the  Homoeopathic  school  has
hitherto  been  pretty  well  confined  to  dysentery.  It
is  especially  indicated  where  the  rectum  is  much
affected,  where  the  tenesmus  is  severe,*  and  where
there  is  faintness  after  each  stool.  It  should  be
useful  in  some  cases  of  piles,  where  the  characteristic
symptoms  exist;  also  in  pelvic  congestions  in
general.  Dr.  P.  P.  Wells  recommends  it  for  "  a

*  "  Aloes  3rd,  a  single  pellet,  once  cured  for  me  almost  instanta-
neously a  tenesmus  which  had  endured  for  a  week  or  ten  days
after  recovery  from  dysentery."  (Dr.  Holcombe,  in  'United  States
Medical  and  Surgical  Journal,'  vol.  i,  p.  228.)


64  ALUMINA.

peculiar  heavy,  dull,  pressing  pain  in  the  forehead,
of  no  great  severity,  but  which  indisposes  to  or  even
incapacitates  for  all  exertion,  especially  for  intel-
lectual labour."  Also  for  a  sense  of  insecurity  in  the
bowels,  as  if  diarrhoea  might  occur  at  any  minute, —
which  is  especially  prevalent  during  an  epidemic  of
Asiatic  cholera.  Dr.  Peters  suggests  Aloes  as  the
specific  remedy  for  the  "  hsemorrhoidal  congestions  "
be  anything  more  than  pathological  abstractions.
Aloes  is  said  to  have  cured  falling  of  the  hair.  Teste
promulgates  some  curious  experience  on  this  subject.
"  Aloes,  in  the  6th  dilution,  produces  and  cures  fall-
ing of  the  hair  in  adults.  Upon  one  of  the  persons
who  lent  himself  to  my  experimentation,  this  pheno-
menon was  so  marked,  that  a  lock  of  white  hair
which  this  person  had  on  the  top  of  his  head,  in
consequence  of  a  blow  received  on  this  part  twenty
years  before,  completely  recovered  its  black  hue,
like  the  rest  of  his  hair.  But,  in  compensation,  the
temples  were  garnished  with  white  hair,  which,  how-
ever, disappeared  the  following  month."

^Esculus,  Collinsonia,  Nux  vomica,  and  Sulphur
compare  with  Aloes.

In  dysentery,  the  potencies  from  the  1st  to  the
3rd  have  been  used.  Teste,  as  he  mentions,  gives
the  6th ;  and  Dr.  Wells  prefers  the  200th.

My  next  medicine  is  as  strange  as  Aloes  is
familiar ;  it  is —

Alumina,

by  which  we  mean  the  genuine  Oxide  of  Aluminium  :
not  Alum. It  is  prepared  by  trituration.


ALUMINA.  65

The  original  proving  of  Alumina  is  in  Hahne-
niann's  'Chronic  Diseases/  You  may  occasionally
find  an  exceptional  case  of  disease  pictured  in  this
extensive  pathogenesis :  but  I  think  you  will  learn
more  of  the  drug's  sphere  of  action  by  reading  the
clinical  remarks  of  Teste  and  of  Peters  and  Marcy
in  their  articles  upon  it.

Alumina  seems  to  affect  chiefly  the  sexual  system
and  the  mucous  membranes.  Teste  says  "I  have
often  derived  the  greatest  advantages  from  the  use
of  this  drug  in  the  case  of  aged  females,  against
diseases  that  had  been  apparently  seated  in  the
sexual  system,  but  whose  primary  symptoms  had
disappeared  with  the  complete  cessation  of  the
menstrual  periods/'  It  has  cured  chronic  gonorrhoea
and  leucorrhosa,  chronic  post-gonorrhoeal  induration
of  the  testicles,  and  raised  itching  spots  in  the  vulva
and  vagina.  In  the  mucous  membranes,  the  cha-
racteristic feature  indicating  Alumina  seems  to  be
dryness  with  more  or  less  irritation.  Thus  it  has
proved  curative  in  morbid  sensitiveness  of  the  nasal
mucous  membrane  to  cold ;  in  chronic  pharyngitis
where  the  membrane  looks  dry,  glazed,  and  red ;  in
dry  hacking  coughs  from  pharyngeal  or  laryngeal
irritation ;  in  dyspepsia  from  deficiency  of  gastric
juice;  andin  constipation  fromlack  of  intestinal  secre-
tion. It  has  also  cured  a  frequent  desire  to  urinate
during  the  night,  occurring  in  an  old  paralytic. — All
the  affections  to  which  Alumina  is  suitable  are  of  a
chronic  character,  and  occur  in  old  people,  or  in  dry
and  thin  subjects.  I  have  no  experience  of  the
drug  myself:  it  is  very  rarely  used.

Its  analogues  are  Baryta,  Conium,  and  Plumbum.

5


66  AMBRA GRISEA.

What  curative  virtues  Alumina  has  are  probably
obtainable  from  the  30th  dilution  or  thereabouts.

I  shall  not  trouble  you  with  a  discussion  as  to  the
exact  nature  of  Ambergris —

Ambra  grisea.

Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  substance,  as  met  with  in
commerce,  is  triturated  for  Homoeopathic  uses.

The  proving  of  Ambra  is  in  Hahnemann's
'  Materia  Medica  Pura/  Dr.  Marcy,  in  the  '  New
Materia  Medica/  contributes  some  therapeutic  in-
formation concerning  the  drug.

Ambergris  is  one  of  those  strongly  scented  sub-
stances, like  Musk,  Castor,  and  Valerian,  which
disturb  sharply  but  superficially  the  functions  of  the
nervous  system.  The  symptoms  of  its  pathogenesis
all  answer  to  this  description.  "  Choking  and
vomiting  can  hardly  be  avoided  when  hawking  up
phlegm  fromthe  fauces;"  frequent  tenesmus,  whatever
be  the  character  of  the  stool ;  frequent  micturition  of
pale  and  copious  urine;  some  sexual  excitement  (it
was  esteemed  of  old  as  an  aphrodisiac) — are  symp-
toms of  this  kind.  Ambra  is  obviously  what  the
therapeutists  of  the  old  school  call  "  a  nervine :"
it  finds  its  place  in  the  treatment  of  nervous  and
hysterical  affections.  Depression  with  anxiety,
sleeplessness,  diminished  sight  and  hearing  from
mental  trouble,  spasmodic  choking  and  convulsive
cough  iii  hysterical  subjects, — are  some  maladies  of
this  kind  which  Ambra  is  reported  to  have  cured.
It  is  little  used.

As  I have  already  suggested,  Ambra  is  closely


AMMONIUM CARBONICUM.  67

allied  with  such  medicines  as  Asafcetida,  Castoreum,
Moschus,  and  Valerian.

Hahnemann  recommends  the  3rd ;  but  Dr.
Marcy  seems  to  have  been  successful  with  the  12th
and  30th.

I  shall  conclude  this  letter  by  giving  you  some
account  of  the  Homoeopathic  uses  of  Ammonia  and
its  salts.  The  specific  properties  of  these  substances
are  few  compared  with  those  of  a  chemical  nature  :
hence  they  play  a  far  less  important  part  in  Ho-
moeopathic therapeutics  than  in  those  of  the  old
school.  Nevertheless,  they  exert  some  dynamic
action,  of  which  we  must  take  cognisance.

The  Acetate  of  Ammonia  (Ammonium  aceticum)
has  not  been  proved  :  but  I  would  suggest  that  its
remarkable  power  of  relieving  dysmenorrhoea  (see
'  New  Materia  Medica/  p.  254)  is  of  a  specific  cha-
racter. The  plain  solution  of  Ammonia  (Liquor
ammonise,  Ammonium  causticum)  is  rarely  used  but
in  veterinary  practice.  Mr.  Moore  seems  to  esteem  it
highly  in  acute  bronchial  and  pulmonary  affections
of  a  severe  type  occurring  in  animals.  But  there
are  two  salts  of  Ammonia  which  have  been  proved,
and  of  which  we  have  some  slight  clinical  know-
ledge. The  first  is  the  Carbonate,  or  (as  it  is  in-
correctly called) —

Ammonium  carbonicum,

of  which  we  make  triturations  or  watery  dilutions.

There  is  a  pathogenesis  of  this  substance  in
Hahnemann's  '  Chronic  Diseases  :'  a  short  proving
by  Professor  Martin  of  Jena  in  the  '  Brit.  Jour.


68  AMMONIUM CARBONICUM.

of  Horn./  vol.  xviii,  p.  207 ;  and  a  full  account
of  its  clinical  uses  in  the  '  New  Materia  Medical

That  Ammonia  liquefies  the  blood,  causing
haemorrhages  and  exhaustion,  you  know  well :  but
the  action  seems  too  purely  chemical  to  allow  of  the
inference  that  it  is  Homoeopathic  to  scurvy  and
other  spausemic  disorders.  You  know  it  also  as  a
"  stimulant :"  and  I  hope  you  will  not  cease  to  use  it
to  produce  this  effect  in  cases  where  the  respiration
needs  assistance.  Especially  where  dyspnoea  results
from  the  retrocession  of  an  eruption,  as  in  measles,
or  from  impending  death  from  phthisis  pulmonalis,
Ammonium  carbonicum  in  the  1st  or  2nd  dec.  dilu-
tion will  generally  relieve.  I  do  not  know  whether
also,  in  common  with  many  of  your  brethren,  you
regard  the  Carbonate  of  Ammonia  as  a  true  specific
in  scarlatina.  If  so,  its  virtues  must  be  dynamic,
as  its  chemical  action  would  favour  rather  than
oppose  the  scarlatinal  condition  of  the  blood.
Homoeopathic  physicians  have  not  unfrequently
used  it  with  advantage  in  this  disease,  especially
when  the  throat  symptoms  are  prominent.  la
Homoeopathic  practice,  it  has  cured  (3rd  trit.)  epis-
taxis,  the  flushes  of  menopausia,  and  some  chronic
coughs  with  bronchial  irritation  and  tendency  to
asthma.  It  is  also  very  useful  in  incessant  cough
excited  by  a  sensation  as  of  down  in  the  larynx.

Acidum  muriaticum  curiously  enough  has  strong
analogies  with  Carbonate  of  Ammonia  :  and  I  know
of  no  other  medicine  of  which  the  same  can  be
said.

The  lowest  dilutions  have  generally  been  em-
ployed.


AMMONIUM  MURIATICUM.  69

The  other  salt  of  Ammonia  which  takes  rank  in
the  Homoeopathic  Materia  Medica  is  the  Hydro-
chlorate,  Sal  ammoniac,  or —

Ammonium  muriaticum.

A  trituration  of  the  crystals  is  used  in  our  practice.

Ammonium  muriaticum  has  a  pathogenesis  in  the
'  Chronic  Diseases/  Some  interesting  experiments
with  it  by  one  Gumpert  are  translated  from  '  Frank's
Magazine'  in  the  '  New  Materia  Medica/

From  these  experiments  it  would  appear  that
Sal  ammoniac  has  the  property  in  large  and  long-
continued  doses  of  causing  a  morbid  increase  in  the
secretions  of  all  the  mucous  membranes  in  the  body,
a  "  status  pituitosus,"  as  the  Germans  call  it.  This
is  accompanied  with  chilliness ;  lassitude,  sluggish-
ness, and  prostration ;  loss  of  appetite ;  and  profuse
sweating  and  urination.  Later  on,  a  true  inter-
mittent fever  was  induced,  having  the  curious
character  of  recurrence  every  seventh  day.  From
other  experiments  it  would  appear  that  Ammonium
muriaticum  diminishes  the  plasticity  of  the  blood,
and  specifically  inflames  the  stomach  and  stimulates
the  spinal  cord.  The  only  case  of  cure  by  this  drug
when  potentised  that  I  know  of  is  one  of  spas-
modic cough,  recurring  daily  at  about  6  p.m.  The
30th  dilution  was  used.  But  many  of  the  uses  of
Ammonium  muriaticum,  though  in  large  doses,  are
certainly  dynamic.  It  exerts  great  power  over  the
chronic  catarrhs  (mucous  flux  of  Chambers)  which
its  pathogenetic  effects  so  much  resemble.  It  often
acts  in  an  almost  magical  manner,  as  you  are
doubtless  aware,  in  relieving  inflammatory  face-ache.


70  AMMONIUM MURIATICUM.

And  if  the  German  physicians  are  not  mistaken,  it
exerts  an  influence  upon  the  liver  which  is  doubt-
less of  a  specific  character.  It  may  be  worth
noting,  moreover,  that  it  seems  to  give  much  pal-
liative relief  in  stricture  of  the  oesophagus  and
scirrhus  of  the  stomach.  It  should  be  useful  in
those  seven-day  agues  which  are  sometimes  left
after  the  suppression  of  quotidians  by  Quinine.

In  its  action  on  the  mucous  membranes,  Ammo-
nium muriaticum  closely  resembles  Antimonium
crudum  and  Pulsatilla.

As  I  have  said,  we  know  the  drug  at  present  as  a
remedy  only  in  material  doses.


LETTER  VIII.

ANACARDIUM, ANGUSTURA,  ANTIMONIUM CRUDUM
AND TARTARICUM.

THE  drug  I  am  now  to  introduce  to  you  is  one
of  the  many  of  high  repute  of  yore  which  had
fallen  into  disuse,  but  which  the  Hahnemannian
method  has  restored  to  its  due  place  in  medicine.
It  is  the  Malacca  bean,  cashew  nut,  or —

Anacardium  orientale.

A  tincture  may  be  prepared  from  the  whole  seed  ;
or  the  oily  dark  substance  which  separates  the  husk
from  the  kernel,  and  in  which  the  active  virtues  of
Anacardium  seem  to  reside,  may  be  triturated  with
sugar  of  milk.

The  proving  of  Anacardium  is  in  the  '  Chronic
Diseases/  Some  very  interesting  facts  relative  to  its
action  on  the  skin  are  contained  in  the  '  New
Materia  Medica'  of  Drs.  Marcy  and  Peters.

The  ancient  reputation  of  Anacardium  was  as  a
remedy  for  weakness  of  the  mind,  memory,  and
senses  :  a  preparation  of  it  was  known  as  the  "  con-
fectio  sapientium."  Noack  and  Trinks  mention  that
Caspar  Hoffmann  called  it  rather  "confectio  stul-
torum,"  because  many  had  lost  their  memory  and
become  mad  on  account  of  using  it  too  often  and
inconsiderately.  They  therefore  fairly  claim  its


72  ANACARDITTM  ORIENTALE.

remedial  powers  for  Homoeopathy.  Our  provings
and  therapeutic  records  confirm  these  observations
of  the  old  physicians.  Anacardium  appears  from
its  pathogenesis  in  the  '  Chronic  Diseases'  to  depress
the  cerebral  centres  and  the  organs  of  special  sense  :
and  it  has  frequently  proved  curative  in  weakness  of
the  brain  caused  by  onauism  or  remaining  after
acute  diseases.  It  is  an  important  remedy  in
dementia,  and  in  too  rapid  loss  of  memory  and
mental  vigour  in  old  persons ;  also  in  amblyopia
and  nervous  deafness.  It  has  removed  an  hallucina-
tion of  a  dyspeptic  which  took  the  form  of  a  belief
that  a  demon  was  pursuing  him.  It  has  also  cured
paralysis  of  the  tongue.  Later  researches  have
shown  that  Anacardium  has  a  remarkable  influence
upon  the  skin.  In  its  slightest  degree  of  action
it  causes  the  appearance  of  wheals  like  those  of
urticaria  tuberosa,  with  itching,  burning,  and  swell-
ing, terminating  in  desquamation.  When  operating
more  intensely  it  developes  eczematous  vesicles,  and
even  bulla3.  I  am  not  aware  that  it  has  been  used
as  yet  as  a  cutaneous  remedy ;  but  it  deserves  atten-
tion in  some  forms  of  nettle-rash,  eczema,  and
pemphigus,  and  even  in  vesicular  erysipelas.  It
would  probably  help  in  cases  of  nervous  disorder
induced  by  repelled  cutaneous  eruptions.

In  the  cerebral  sphere,  Anacardium  resembles
Phosphoric  acid  and  Zinc ;  in  its  action  on  the
skin,  Cantharis,  Apis,  and  Rhus.

Anacardium  seems  generally  to  have  been  used
in  the  1st  and  2nd  dilutions.

In some Homoeopathic treatises on Materia


ANGUSTURA  VERA.  73

Medica,  a  section  on  the  Angustura  spuria  is  intro-
duced in  this  place.  I  have  decided  to  omit  it
altogether,  from  the  extreme  uncertainty  of  its
nature.  If,  as  Christison  and  Pereira  believe,  it  is
the  Strychnos  Nux  vomica  itself,  we  have  it  already
under  another  name.  If  it  be  an  allied  species,
there  is  nothing  in  the  symptoms  of  poisoning  by  it
to  distinguish  it  from  Nux  vomica.  So  I  pass  at
once  to  the  bark  of  the  Galipea  officinalis,  the

Angustura  vera,

or  Cusparia. It  is  prepared  in  tincture.

A  proving  of  Angustura  vera  is  contained  in  the
(  Materia  Medica  Pura.'  It  presents  nothing  charac-
teristic.

Were  it  not  that  Angustura  is  one  of  Hahne-
mann's  medicines,  I  should  not  have  burdened  your
memory  by  inserting  it  here.  You  know  that  it  is
used  in  its  native  marshes  as  a  substitute  for  Cin-
chona in  the  treatment  of  remittent  and  intermit-
tent fevers.  Homoeopathy  has  nothing  to  add  to
this,  save  one  case  of  prosopalgia  cured  with  it  by
Dr.  Marcy.  That  he  used  the  1st  dilution  is  all  I
can  say  about  the  dose  :  and  I  cannot  choose  analo-
gous medicines  to  one  itself  so  little  understood.

You  must  have  become  pretty  well  tired  of  minor
medicines :  for  we  have  not  come  upon  a  polychrest
since  we  left  Aconite.  Nevertheless  I  cannot  think
the  space  I  have  devoted  to  these  medicines  other-
wise than  well  bestowed.  You  have  learned  the
remedial  action  of  Actsea  racemosa  in  uterine  and
rheumatic  affections,  of  ^Esculus  in  haemorrhoids,  of


74  ANTIMONIUM  CRTJDUM.

Agaricus  in  hypermobility  of  the  nervous  system,
of  Agnus  castus  in  sexual  atony,  of  Aloes  in  rectal
irritation  and  pelvic  congestion,  of  Alumina  in
chronic  unhealthy  conditions  of  raucous  membrane,
of  Ambra  in  hysteria,  of  Ammonium  muriaticum  in
gastric  flux,  and  of  Anacardium  in  cerebral  weak-
ness. The  very  limitation  of  their  action  makes  it
easier  to  grasp  and  remember.  It  is  well  that  you
should  do  so  :  for  we  are  just  coming  upon  a  succes-
sion of  important  medicines  which  will  require  all
your  attention  to  apprehend.  The  first  of  these,
Antimony,  I  will  endeavour  to  Homosopathise  for
you  in  my  present  letter.

Two  salts  of  Antimony  take  rank  in  our  Materia
Medica,  the  black  sulphuret,  Antimonium  crudum,
now,  I  believe,  recognised  by  chemists  as  a  ter-
sulphide ;  and  the  potassio-tartrate,  the  well-known
tartarised  Antimony  or  Tartar  emetic  (Antimonium
tartaricum).  I  will  speak  first  of  the

Antimonium  crudum,

which,  for  our  purposes,  is  prepared  by  trituration.

The  proving  of  Antimonium  crudum  is  in  the
'  Chronic  Diseases/  There  is  an  excellent  article
upon  it  by  Dr.  Hempel  in  his  '  Materia  Medica/

To  Dr.  HempePs  remarks  I  own  myself  indebted
for  all  the  knowledge  I  possess  of  the  sphere  of
action  of  this  medicine.  He  points  out  its  essen-
tial relation  to  a  state  of  depressed  vitality  of  the
mucous  membranes  and  the  skin.  The  action
hardly  goes  on  to  inflammation.  The  mucous  mem-
branes are  loaded  with  mucus,  giving  rise  to  slow
digestion  with  fermentation  of  the  food,  nausea,


ANTIMONIUM  CRUDUM.  75

arid  occasional  vomiting  ;  alternate  constipation  and
diarrhoea,  with  mucous  discharge  from  the  anus ;
much  hawking  and  expectoration  of  phlegm ;  and
irritability  of  the  bladder,  with  mucous  sediment.
The  secretions  and  the  flatulence  are  of  a  foul
odour ;  and  there  is  drowsiness,  and  loss  of  flesh  and
strength.  This  is  the  "  mucous  flux"  I  have  already
spoken  of  while  upon  Ammonium  muriaticum  :  but
here  there  is  no  tendency  to  fever.  The  condition
the  cutaneous  disorder  caused  by  Antimonium
crudum.  Parts  readily  become  sore ;  chilblains
appear  on  the  feet ;  and  tuberculous  and  pustular
eruptions  are  developed.  When  these  gastric  and
cutaneous  affections  are  met  with  in  practice,  Anti-
monium crudum  will  prove  an  excellent  remedy.
The  coating  of  the  tongue  indicating  it  I  have
always  seen  as  a  milky-white,  very  different  from
the  no  less  thick  coats  of  Pulsatilla  and  Kali
bichromicum.  It  is  indicated  in  that  "  diseased
condition  of  the  intestinal  lining  in  children  which
favours  the  development  of  worms"  (Hempel).
Among  skin  affections,  it  has  cured  nettle-rash  when
dependent  on  gastric  disorder ;  the  sore  eyelids,
ears,  and  nose  of  scrofulous  children ;  and  even
eczema  impetiginoides.*  It  is  worthy  of  trial  (as
suggested  by  Dr.  Hempel)  in  the  tuberculse, — mol-
luscum,  acne,  and  mentagra.

The  analogues  of  Antimonium  crudum  are
Ammonium  muriaticum,  Kali  bichromicum,  Petro-
leum (?),  and  Pulsatilla.

*  See  a  good  case  in  the  '  British  Journal  of  Homoeopathy,'  vol.
xxiv,  p.  312.


76  ANTIMONIUM TARTARICUM.

The  6th  and  12th  dilutions  appear  the  most
suitable.

The  other  salt  of  Antimony  which  we  use  is
common  to  both  old  medicine  and  new.  The  cor-
respondences and  divergences  of  its  application  in
the  two  schools  respectively  are  very  instructive.
I  shall  detain  you  some  time  in  the  study  of

Antimonium  tartaricum,

or  Tartar  emetic.  We  prepare  it  by  trituration,  or
(after  the  pattern  of  Autimonial  wine)  by  solution  in
diluted  alcohol.

Strangely  enough,  though  Tartar  emetic  is  so
freely  used  among  us,  it  has  never  been  "  proved."
We  have  obtained  our  knowledge  of  its  physiological
action  mainly  from  the  records  of  the  effect  of  large
doses  contained  in  the  ordinary  treatises  on  Materia
Medica.  The  largest  collection  of  such  facts  with
which  I  am  acquainted  is  that  of  the  '  New  Materia
Medica.'  The  action  of  Tartar  emetic  on  the  skin
has  been  specially  studied  by  M.  Imbert-Gourbeyre,
whose  article  on  the  subject  you  will  find  translated
in  vol.  xix  of  the  'Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn/  In  the
number  of  that  same  Journal  for  April,  1867,  is  a
study  of  the  medicine  by  Dr.  Madden  and  myself,
in  which  an  attempt  is  made  to  reduce  the  materials
above  enumerated  to  order,  and  to  give  the  phe-
nomena of  antimonial  action  their  physiological
expression.  I  refer  you  to  that  study  for  an  ampli-
fication of  the  remarks  I  propose  to  make  here.

Let  me  begin  by  citing  what  we  there  say  con-
cerning the  nausea  and  vomiting  so  characteristic  of


ANTIMONITJM TARTARICUM.  77

our  drug.  "  The  emetic  influence  of  tartarised
Antimony  appears  to  be  purely  neurotic  in  its
modus  operandi.  The  numerous  muscular  move-
ments, whose  harmonious  play  produces  the  com-
plex act  called  vomiting,  are  under  the  control  of
the  nervous  centres  at  the  base  of  the  brain  and  in
the  medulla  oblongata,  and  are  especially  effected
through  the  medium  of  the  pneumogastric  nerves.
That  Tartar  emetic  acts  directly  on  these  centres
and  through  these  nerves  is  shown  positively  by  the
fact  that  it  causes  vomiting  when  injected  into  the
veins  or  rectum,  or  rubbed  into  the  skin,  as  well  as
when  introduced  into  the  stomach,  and  in  the
latter  mode  of  administration  is  emetic  in  doses  too
small  to  irritate  the  mucous  membrane  ;  negatively,
by  the  experiment  of  dividing  the  vagi  on  both
sides,  when  neither  Antimony  nor  any  other  emetic
will  act."

We  then  go  on  to  speak  of  the  remarkable
effects  on  the  circulation  and  respiration  produced
by  large  doses  of  Tartar  emetic,  totally  independent
of  and  unlike  nausea :  and  show  that  they  are
accounted  for  by  the  same  action  on  the  pneumo-
gastric centres  upon  which  depends  the  antimonial
vomiting.  I  do  not  wish  to  dwell  here  upon  these
phenomena,  which  are  familiar  to  you,  and  which
have  a  physiological  rather  than  a  practical  inter-
est. You  will  rarely  meet  with  cases  of  nausea  or
vomiting  to  which  Tartar  emetic  is  more  suitable
than  other  medicines  :  although  the  presence  of  these
symptoms  in  acute  affections  to  which  it  is  other-
wise related  must  always  be  an  additional  indication
for  its  use.  You  will  observe  that  the  vomiting  to


78  ANTIMONIUM TARTARICUM.

which  it  is  Homoeopathic  is  nervous  and  sym-
pathetic rather  than  gastric.  Nor  do  we  ever  need
the  "  contra-stimulant"  action  of  Tartar  emetic  with
which  Rasori  has  familiarised  us.  Its  most  im-
portant sphere  of  action  for  Homosopathists  lies
in  the  mucous  membranes  and  the  skin  (herein
resembling  Antimonium  crudum,  but  acting  much
more  sharply),  and  in  the  lungs.

1.  There  are  two  forms  of  morbid  action  set  up
by  Tartar  emetic  in  the  mucous  membranes.  The
first  is  that  peculiar  kind  of  inflammation  we  call
catarrhal.  In  the  second  we  have  on  the  mucous
membranes  the  same  pustular  eruption  on  an  ery-
thematous  base  with  which  you  are  well  acquainted
as  the  specific  effect  of  the  drug  upon  the  cutaneous
tissues.

Thus,  in  the  alimentary  canal  a  catarrhal  gastritis
and  enteritis  are  set  up  ;  it  is  found  after  death
lined  with  a  whitish  yellow  viscid  secretion.  In
two  cases  of  poisoning  observed  by  Dr.  Wood,  the
matters  vomited  and  purged  were  white  and  liquid,
without  a  trace  of  bile,  resembling  opaque  rice-
water.  Post-mortem  appearances  show  the  stomach
and  small  intestines  to  be  most  affected  ;  the  glands
of  the  latter,  especially  those  of  the  ileum,  have
not  uncommonly  been  found  enlarged.  On  the
other  hand,  the  pustular  eruption  characteristic  of
Antimony  has  been  seen  in  the  jejunum,  the
stomach,  and  the  lower  third  of  the  oesophagus :
but  is  most  severe  and  constant  about  the  mouth
and  throat.  In  this  latter  region  it  begins  with
a  feeling  of  tension,  and  other  disagreeable  sensa-
tions, and  a  metallic  taste ;  patches  of  erythematous


ANTIMONIUM TARTARICUM.  79

inflammation  then  appear,  upon  which  come  aphthse,
vesicles  soon  going  on  to  pustules,  and  even  false
membranes.  Upon  the  respiratory  mucous  mem-
brane the  influence  of  Tartar  emetic  is  almost
purely  of  the  catarrhal  character,  though  pustules
are  said  to  have  been  seen  in  the  larynx.  The
nares  escape  untouched;  but  the  inflammation,
beginning  in  the  larynx,  becomes  intense  in  the
trachea  and  bronchi.  The  production  of  this  in-
flammation under  the  influence  of  Tartar  emetic
has  been  established  not  only  by  post-mortem  ap-
pearances in  animals,  but  by  the  symptoms  of  the
living,  as  in  the  experiments  of  Dr.  Molin,  to
which  I  shall  hereafter  advert.

And  now  what  about  the  lungs  ?  Does  the
irritant  influence  of  Tartar  emetic  upon  the  respira-
tory mucous  membrane  extend  to  the  pulmonary
tissue  itself?  You  know  probably  that  Magendie
affirmed  this,  as  the  result  of  his  experiments  upon
animals.  Lepelletier  also,  as  quoted  by  Christison,
testifies  independently  to  the  same  fact,  and  naively
expresses  his  surprise  that  the  drug  is  not  per-
nicious instead  of  useful  in  pneumonia.  On  the
other  hand,  you  have  doubtless  read  that  counter-
experiments  have  been  performed  by  Rayer  in
France  and  Campbell  in  England  in  which  no
pneumonia  was  set  up  by  Tartar  emetic.  Let  me
then  recommend  you,  in  this  conflict  of  authorities,
to  read  the  account  of  Dr.  Molin's  experiments
which  in  our  study  of  Tartar  emetic  we  have  cited.
They  can  hardly  fail,  I  think,  to  carry  conviction
to  your  mind  on  this  question.  He  accounts  most
satisfactorily  for  the  discrepancy  existing  between


80  ANTIMONIUM TARTARICUM.

Magendie  and  Rayer,  by  showing  that  the  latter  ex-
perimented with  such  large  doses  that  the  animals
died  before  the  inflammation  had  time  to  be  pro-
duced ;  whereas  the  former,  by  using  smaller  doses,
enabled  the  poison  to  produce  its  specific  effects  on
the  lungs.  When  you  have  satisfied  your  mind
from  these  experiments  on  the  general  question,  I
beg  you  to  notice  the  special  points  about  them.
Observe  that  the  pneumonia  induced  never  goes
beyond  the  second  stage  (i.  e.  that  of  red  hepatiza-
tion) ;  that  it  is  always  accompanied  by  bronchitis  ;
and  that  the  inflammation  of  the  bronchial  tubes
is  observed  in  cases  where  the  animals  die  before
the  pneumonia  has  time  to  be  developed.

You  will  already  have  drawn  the  obvious  moral
of  these  facts.  The  well-known  curative  action  of
Tartar  emetic  in  bronchitis  and  pneumonia  is  after
all  an  instance  of  the  law  of  similars.  You  have
hitherto  in  all  probability  acquiesced  in  the  common
belief  that  it  acts  in  these  cases  by  its  general  anti-
phlogistic power,  in  virtue  of  its  depressing  influence
upon  the  circulation,  and  liquefacient  action  on  the
blood.  But  were  this  its  only  or  even  chief  modus
operandi,  it  ought  to  be  beneficial  alike  in  all  in-
flammations, wherever  occurring.  That  it  is  not  so,
your  own  therapeutists  freely  admit.  In  inflamma-
tions of  the  respiratory  mucous  membrane,  it  is  in-
valuable; when  other  parts,  as  the  serous  mem-
branes, are  affected,  it  does  little  or  nothing.  Even
from  this  alone  it  would  appear  that  the  drug  has
some  specific  relation  to  this  part  of  the  organism  :
and  we  have  already  seen  it  acting  as  a  specific
irritant  of  the  trachea,  the  bronchi,  and  the  lungs.


ANTIMONIUM TARTAR1CUM.  81

We  conclude,  therefore,  that  Tartar  emetic  must  be  a
true  Homoeopathic  remedy  against  certain  kinds  of
tracheal,  bronchial,  and  pulmonary  inflammation.
The  experience  of  our  school  has  verified  its  value
in  catarrhal  (not  membranous)  croup :  in  the
second  stage  of  bronchitis  in  infants  and  aged  per-
sons, when  the  mucus  is  profuse  and  the  expulsive
power  feeble  :  and  in  the  second  stage  of  the  pneu-
monia of  the  same  subjects,  where  there  is  little
pain  but  much  dyspnoea.  It  is  obviously  broncho-
pneumonia  (comp.  Phosphorus)  rather  than  pleuro-
pneumonia  (Bryonia)  to  which  Tartar  emetic  is  ho-
moeopathic.* The  drug  has  also  several  times  proved
curative,  in  the  hands  of  Drs.  Wurmb  and  Caspar
of  Vienna,  of  acute  oedema  of  the  lungs.  I  have
myself  seen  this  condition,  occurring  in  the  course
of  general  dropsy,  subside  entirely  under  the  use  of
Tartar  emetic.  It  is  also  very  useful  in  chronic
coughs,  where  the  expectoration  is  profuse  and  easy,
and  of  a  mucous  nature.

We  have  little  experience  of  Tartar  emetic  in  af-
fections of  the  alimentary  canal.  It  should  be  ser-
viceable in  aphthous,  pustular,  and  other  eruptive
diseases  of  the  mucous  membrane  ; — perhaps  in  the
aphthous  mouth  and  throat  of  those  dying  from  ex-
hausting diseases,  as  phthisis.  I  intend  trying  it
next  summer  in  cholera  infantum,  to  which  it  seems
strikingly  homoeopathic,  and  for  which  we  sadly
want  a  perfect  remedy.

2.  I  have  yet  to speak  of  the  action  of  Tartar

*  You  will  find  the  place  of  Tartar  emetic  in  pneumonia  very
fully  discussed  by  Dr.  Cl.  Miiller,  in  Laurie's  '  Horn.  Practice  of
Physic/  p.  282.

6


82  ANTIMONIUM TARTARICUltf.

emetic  upon  tlie  skin.  You  know  well  the  peculiar
pustular  inflammation  which  is  excited  by  the  local
application  of  the  drug.  If  your  memory  needs
refreshing  as  to  its  characters,  you  will  find  them
new  idea  to  you,  that  this  effect  of  Tartar  emetic
belongs  to  it,  not  as  a  mere  local  irritant,  but  as  a
dynamic  agent.  Nothing,  however,  can  be  more
clearly  demonstrated  than  is  this  thesis  by  Dr.
Imbert-Gourbeyre,  in  the  paper  I  have  already
referred  to.  He  first  quotes  nineteen  observations
to  show,  that  when  Tartar  emetic  is  used  locally,
pustular  eruptions  are  apt  to  occur  on  other  parts
of  the  body,  especially  about  the  scrotum  and  labia,
and  the  anus  : — and  this  without  the  possibility  of
the  mechanical  transference  of  the  ointment.  He
then  cites  five  instances  in  which  eruptions,  closely
resembling  those  produced  by  Tartar  emetic  oint-
ment (and  those  also  which  characterise  variola),
have  appeared  during  the  internal  administration  of
the  drug.*  Lastly,  he  adduces  evidence  to  prove
that  the  local  effect  of  the  drug  is  not  pro-
duced till  after  a  day  or  two,  and  sometimes  does
not  appear  at  all  at  the  spot  of  application,  but  on
some  other  part  of  the  body.  Coupling  these  facts
with  the  peculiar  and  specific  character  of  the  erup-
tion, and  with  the  frequent  occurrence  of  similar
pustules  on  the  internal  mucous  surfaces  under  the
use  of  the  drug,  he  comes  to  the  fair  conclusion
that  Antimony  is  a  specific  and  dynamic  "  exanthe-

*  Two  additional  cases  of  this  kind  are  cited  in  the  '  New  Materia
Medica'  (see  our  article).


ANTIMONIUM TARTARICUM.  83

matogenic/' — its  characteristic  eruption  being  pus-
tular.

The  precise  form  of  cutaneous  eruption  to  which
Tartar  emetic  corresponds  is  ecthyma.  "  The  pus-
tules/' says  Erasmus  Wilson,  "  following  the  irri-
tation of  tartarized  antimony  are  ecthymatous."  A
case  of  this  disease  cured  by  Tartar  emetic  is  given
in  the  '  New  Materia  Medica/  It  is  less  suitable  or
serviceable  in  impetigo,,  save  in  one  form  of  the
disease,  the  impetigo  erysipelatodes.  Here  I  have
found  it  as  curative  as  it  is  homoeopathic.  But  the
deepest  interest  of  Tartar  emetic  in  this  sphere  lies
in  its  relation  to  variola.  Not  only  does  it  cause
a  specific  pustular  eruption  closely  resembling  that
of  smallpox,  but  it  has  also  the  vomiting,  the  pus-
tules of  mouth  and  throat,  the  viscid  mucus  clog-
ging the  air-passages,  and  the  hypinosis  of  the
blood  which  no  less  characterise  the  disease.  Still
further,  the  inoculation  of  the  lymph  of  Tartar
emetic  pustules  appears  to  effect  results  analogous
to  those  of  vaccination.  The  pustules  produced  are
precisely  similar  in  appearance  to  those  of  cow-pock  ;
they  in  their  turn  can  excite  fresh  pustules  by
inoculation;  and  they  are  said  (though  this  re-
quires confirmation)  to  confer  the  same  protection
from  smallpox.  Correspondingly  with  this  close
homceopathicity,  the  power  of  Tartar  emetic  as  a
remedy  for  variola  is  very  great.  Testimonies  to
its  value  are  collected  in  the  '  New  Materia  Medica  :'
it  is  said  to  be  especially  useful  in  cases  where  the
respiratory  mucous  membrane  is  much  affected.  I
myself  have  invariably  used  Tartar  emetic  (in  the
1st  trit.)  as  the  medicine  for  smallpox,  and


84  ANTIMONIUM TARTARICUM.

have  rarely  had  occasion  to  substitute  any  other.
I  cannot  say  that  it  cuts  short  the  disease ;  it  is
doubtful  if  any  medicine  can.  But  it  seems  to  me
to  conduct  the  cases  through  in  a  very  satisfactory
manner,  decidedly  mitigating  all  the  incidental
troubles,  and  leaving  very  little  pitting  behind.

the  action  of  Tartar  emetic, — the  pneumogastric
nerve,  the  respiratory  mucous  membrane,  and  the
skin.  There  are  other  forms  of  disease  in  which  it
is  occasionally  useful,  notably  delirium  tremens.
For  these  collateral  phenomena  I  must  refer  you  to
the  admirable  collection  of  the  '  New  Materia
Medica/  to  which  I  have  so  often  referred.

Ipecacuanha  is  the  medicine  most  closely  allied
to  Tartar  emetic.  Then  we  have,  as  acting  like  it
on  the  pneumogastric,  Digitalis,  Lobelia,  Tabacum,
and  Veratrum  viride  ,-  on  the  respiratory  organs,
Phosphorus ;  on  the  skin,  Antimonium  crudum  and
Clematis.

The  success  of  old-school  practice  with  Tartar
emetic  in  croup,  bronchitis,  and  pneumonia  shows
that  these  diseases  do  not  need  very  infinitesimal
doses  of  the  drug.  In  these,  and  in  variola,  I  have
generally  used  the  2nd,  rarely  the  3rd  decimal
potency.  Higher  dilutions  (12 — 15)  seem  to
answer  well  in  oedema  pulmonum.

I  said  at  the  outset  that  the  correspondences  and
divergences  of  the  application  of  Tartar  emetic  in
the  two  schools  respectively  are  very  instructive.
These  have  now  appeared.  You  know  the  drug  as
an  emetic,  a  depressant  of  the  circulation,  and  a


ANTIMONIUM TARTARICUM.  85

specific  remedy  in  acute  pulmonary  affections.  We
directly  oppose  the  first  of  these  three  uses  :  the
second  we  reject  utterly  :  the  third  we  claim  for
Homoeopathy,  define  its  range,,  proportion  its  quan-
tities, and  add  to  the  diseases  it  includes  others
bearing  to  the  pathogenetic  effects  of  the  drug  the
same  relation  of  similitude.


LETTER  IX.

APIS,  APOCYNUM,  ARGENTUM METALLICUM AND
NITRICUM,  ARNICA.

THE  medicine  I  am  now  about  to  introduce  to
you  under  the  name  of  Apis  mellifica  differs  iu
important  respects  from  the  substances  you  have
been  accustomed  to  regard  as  drugs.  I  shall  have
to  ask  you  to  believe  that  the  symptoms  which  you
know  to  result  from  the  sting  of  a  bee  are  also
produced  when  the  virus  of  the  insect,  in  a  diluted
form,  is  taken  into  the  stomach.  Moreover,  in
noting  indications  for  the  remedial  use  of  the  virus,
I  shall  depend  much  upon  the  phenomena  of  bee-
stinging  :  and  shall  take  it  for  granted  that  similar
phenomena  occurring  in  disease  are  Homoeopathically
curable  by  the  internal  administration  of  the  poison.
I  am  bound  to  consider  the  difficulties  which  such
assumptions  must  inevitably  raise  in  your  mind.

There  is  nothing  a  priori  improbable  in  the
statement  that  the  virus  of  a  bee,  when  taken  into
the  stomach,  should  produce  symptoms  similar  in
kind  to  those  of  a  bee-sting.  In  each  case  the
poison  is  introduced  into  the  blood,  and  therefrom
produces  its  effects.  The  difference  of  the  point  of
entrance  should  cause  no  variation  in  the  results,
any  more  than  it  does  in  the  case  of  other  specifically


APIS MELL1PICA.  87

acting  poisons.  But  you  are  probably  thinking  'of
Fontana's  experiments,  and  of  the  well-known
inuocuousness  of  serpent-poisons  when  introduced
into  the  stomach  or  sucked  from  a  bite.  Of  this
there  is  no  question  :  and  we  admit  that  here  the
secretions  of  the  alimentary  canal  decompose  or
otherwise  neutralize  the  virus.  But  on  the  other
hand,  it  no  less  appears  that  the  same  serpent-poison,
when  taken  in  a  diluted  form,  does  cause  decided
disturbance,  and  that  of  a  kind  similar  to  the  effects
of  the  reptile's  bite.  Read  the  admirable  provings
of  the  cobra  poison  (Naja  tripudians)  by  Dr.  Russell
in  vols.  xi  and  xii  of  the  '  British  Journal  of
Homreopathy.'  These  positives  are  surely  as  good
as  Fontana's  negatives.  And  if  we  assume,  to
explain  his  observations,  that  the  digestive  secretions
destroy  the  virus;  we  are  no  less  compelled  by  the
other  experiments  to  suppose  that  dilution  enables
it  to  escape  that  destruction.  What  is  true  of  the
virus  of  serpents  must  be  true  also  of  that  of  bees.
Hence  the  question  is  one  merely  of  fact.  And  if
the  effects  of  bee-stings,  and  of  bee-virus  taken
internally  be  the  same  in  kind,  however  different
in  degree,  it  follows  that  they  must  all  be  classed
together  as  pathogenetic  symptoms  of  the  substance  :
and  may  one  and  all  furnish  indications  for  its  thera-
peutic use.

With  this  preface,  we  will  proceed  at  once  to  the
consideration  of

Apis  mellifica,

the  poison  of  the  honey  bee. It  is  prepared  for  use


88  APIS MELLIFICA.

in 'more  than  one  way.  A  trituration  of  the  whole
bees,  dried ;  or  a  tincture  prepared  by  macerating
their  hinder  parts,  after  killing  them  while  in  a  state
of  excitement, — have  been  used,  and  seem  to  contain
the  virtues  of  the  medicine.  But  a  better  prepara-
tion would  be  a  solution  of  the  virus  itself  dissolved
in  alcohol.  It  can  be  obtained,  as  Dr.  Hering
suggests,  by  seizing  the  bee  by  its  wings  and  causing
it  to  eject  its  poison  upon  a  piece  of  sugar,  or  by
grasping  the  sting  of  a  stupefied  bee  with  a  small
pair  of  nippers,  and  gradually  drawing  out  the  sting
and  poison-bags  together.

The  original  proving  of  Apis  is  in  Dr.  Hering's
'Amerikanische  Arzneiprufungen/  A  summary  of
the  symptoms  is  given  in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./
vol.  xi,  p.  392;  in  Metcalf's  'Homoeopathic  Provings/
and  in  the  'American  HomoBopathic  Review*  for  July
1865.  Numerous  clinical  cases  are  appended  to
the  two  former ;  and  are  contained  also  in  the  '  New
Materia  Medica/  and  in  an  article  by  Dr.  Yeldham
in  the  '  Brit.  Journ,  of  Horn./  vol.  xii,  p.  394.

Let  us  consider  the  local  effects  of  a  bee-sting.
The  part  rapidly  swells  up,  becomes  more  or  less
hot  and  red,  with  a  tense  pain,  and  often  considerable
burning,  tingling,  and  itching.  This  is  the  simplest
and  most  characteristic  form  of  the  pathogenetic
influence  of  Apis.  It  is  an  acute  oedema,  the  cellular
tissue  being  more  affected  than  the  skin.  Whenever
a  similar  condition  occurs  idiopathically,  whether  on
cutaneous  or  mucous  surfaces,  Apis  is  Homoeo-
pathically  indicated.  Acute  cedema  occurring  on
the  skin  is  a  form  of  erysipelas :  and  in  this  disease
Apis  is  a  prime  remedy.  It  stands  between  Bella-


APIS MELLIFICA.  89

donna  and  Rhus,  not  controlling  intense  cutaneous
inflammation  like  the  former,  or  the  tendency  to
form  vesicles  like  the  latter;  but  acting  most
efficiently  in  its  own  sphere.  Then  there  is  a
species  of  sore-throat  in  which  Apis  is  specific.
There  is  no  very  great  redness  or  pain  (Belladonna),
nor  is  the  parenchyma  of  the  tonsils  inflamed  (Baryta
carhonica)  ;  but  there  is  general  oedema  of  the  sub-
mucous  cellular  tissue  covering  the  tonsils,  uvula,
soft  palate,  and  even  the  posterior  portion  of  the
hard  palate.  When  you  look  at  the  throat  it  seems
as  if  a  bee  had  flown  in  and  stung  the  patient  there.
If  you  will  study  the  numerous  cases  of  angina
cured  by  Apis  which  have  been  recorded  in  our
journals  (as  in  Dr.  Yeldham's  paper)  you  will
find  this  to  have  been  their  character.  Such  a  sore-
throat  is  not  uncommonly  an  extension  of  erysipelas,
It  is  often,  also,  the  beginning  of  oedema  glottidis :
in  which  Apis  should  be  the  great  remedy.  Other
forms  of  acute  oedema  are  inflammations  of  the
tongue  and  of  the  labia :  in  both  of  which  Apis  has
been  actually  found  curative.  Indeed,  if  you  bear
in  mind  this  pathological  condition  as  the  main
indication  for  the  medicine,  you  will  rarely  go  wrong
in  using  it.

We  have  still  remaining  the  burning,  itching,  and
tingling  of  our  bee-sting, — features  by  no  means
common  in  idiopathic  oedema.  They  rather  point
to  cutaneous  hypersesthesia  and  eruptions :  into
which  indeed  in  the  provers  they  are  seen  developed.
The  exanthem  induced  generally  resembles  urticaria;
in  which  disorder  Apis  is  our  great  remedy.  It  has


90  APIS MELLIFICA.

also  cured  cases  of  lichen,  and  of  erythema  nodosum  :
and  is  generally  indicated  in  skin  affections  not
going  on  to  destruction  of  tissue,  but  accompanied
with  excessive  itching,  especially  of  a  burning  and
stinging  character.

Urticaria,  like  erysipelas,  may  manifest  itself
internally.  Here  also  we  have  acute  oedema,  but
without  the  tendency  to  suppuration  belonging  to
the  erysipelatous  form.  The  distressing  and  some-
times even  dangerous  symptoms  arising  from  this
cause  have  several  times  been  successfully  encountered
by  Apis.*

In  acute  oedema,  erysipelatous  and  urticarious,
we  have  the  pathological  condition  most  character-
istic of  Apis :  and  upon  this  I  am  desirous  of  fixing
your  attention.  But  both  provings  and  therapeutic
records  credit  the  medicine  with  a  range  far  wider
than  this,  as  will  appear  from  what  follows.

1.  The  mucous  membranes  are  not  influenced  in
their  general  extent  by  Apis  :  but  at  certain  spots
it  manifests  great  power.  It  inflames  the  conjunc-
tiva :  and  has  frequently  proved  curative  in
catarrhal  and  scrofulous  ophthalmia.  It  is  where
the  cornea  is  much  involved  that  its  most  striking
curative  results  are  seen.  It  causes  hoarseness  and
dry  cough :  and  is  often  useful  in  subacute  and
chronic  laryngo-tracheal  irritation,  of  a  mild  type
(comp.  Rumex  crispus  and  Carbo  vegetabilis).  It
irritates  the  stomach,  and  somewhat  the  bowels  ;
it  is  one  of  the  best  remedies  for  diarrhoea  recurring
every  morning,  the  motions  greenish-yellow  and

*  See  Erasmus  Wilson  on  '  Diseases  of  the  Skin/  article  "  Urti-
caria," and  cases  14,  16,  28  in  Dr.  Metcalf's  paper.


APIS MELLIFICA.  91

painless  (comp.  again  with  Ruraex  crispus).  It  is
very  decidedly  irritant  to  the  kidneys  and  neck  of
the  bladder  (as  Cantharis).  Dr.  Marcy  recom-
mends it  in  incipient  Bright's  disease,  in  inflam-
mation of  the  neck  of  the  bladder,  and  in  "  irritable
bladder."

2.  Apis acts rather  powerfully in the ovario-
uterine sphere. Few medicines cause so many
ovarian symptoms : and  it  has not uncommonly
provoked miscarriage when given to pregnant
women. It has proved curative  in  amenorrhcea,
dysmenorrhcea, and menorrhagia when resulting
from  acute  congestion  of  the ovaries  : and  even  in
chronic  affections  of  the  latter  organs. I  know  of
no  certain  evidence,  however,  to  sustain  the  vague
notion  which  seems  to  obtain  of  its  power  of  curing
ovarian  dropsy.

3.  I  come  now  to  the  important  question, — what
power has Apis  over dropsy,  general and  local  ?
It is credited with almost unbounded curative
virtues  in  this  disease :  but  I  think  discrimination
is needed. Its action  on  the  kidneys  is  sufficient
to  make  it  a most useful  remedy  in  acute  febrile
dropsy  from a chill,  in  post-scarlatinal dropsy,  in
that  of  incipient  Bright's  disease,  and  in  that  which
sometimes  appears  in  the  later  months  of  pregnancy
and lays the  foundation  of  future  puerperal  con-
vulsions. In all these forms  of  dropsy  Apis  has
been used successfully  :  its curative action being
generally announced by a great  increase  in  the
secretion  of  urine. By  the same  influence  on  the
kidneys, as I suppose, it will  sometimes remove
for a time the oedema of  the  lower extremities


92  APIS MELLIFICA.

symptomatic  of  disease  of  the  thoracic  organs :
but  this  action  is  uncertain,  and  at  best  pallia-
tive and  temporary.  Then  there  are  the  serous
dropsies, — ascites,  hydrothorax,  hydrocephalus.
These  may  be  mechanical,  from  obstruction  of
the  circulation ;  as  when  ascites  results  from
cirrhosis  of  the  liver.  In  such  cases,  I  cannot  con-
ceive of  Apis  dispersing  the  effusion ;  nor  do  I  see
sufficient  evidence  that  it  has  ever  done  so.  It  is
otherwise  when  the  dropsy  is  the  unabsorbed
effusion  remaining  after  serous  inflammations.
There  seems  little  doubt  but  that  Apis  acts  specifi-
cally upon  the  serous  membranes.  I  do  not  know
that  it  has  ever  been  used  in  their  acute  inflamma-
tions :  but  in  ascites  and  hydrothorax  remaining
behind  after  peritonitis  and  pleurisy  it  has  over  and
over  again  proved  curative,  and  there  is  some  reason
to  suppose  that  it  has  removed  the  effusion  in  cere-
bral meningitis  (probably  non-tubercular).

In  conclusion,  I  would  mention  that  Apis  has
considerable  repute  in  America  as  a  remedy  for
ague;  and  that  Dr.  Nankivell  has  lately  recom-
mended it  in  scarlatina.  He  was  led  to  use  it  in
this  disease  by  noticing  in  a  patient  affected  by  it
that  a  patch  of  skin  of  the  arm  remained  white
amidst  the  surrounding  redness ;  and  being  in-
formed that  this  spot  had  been  a  short  time  pre-
viously the  seat  of  the  inflammation  resulting  from
the  sting  of  a  bee.

I  have  indicated  many  of  the  medicines  which  in
particular  spheres  of  action  correspond  with  that  of
Apis.  Thus,  Cantharis  and  Terebinthina  in  the
urinary  organs,  Sabina  in  the  ovario-uterine  system,


APOCYNUM CANNABINUM.  93

Rumex  in  the  morning  diarrhoea  and  laryngeal
symptoms,  and  Euphrasia  in  the  action  on  the  con-
junctiva closely  resemble  the  present  medicine.  For
the  cutaneous  symptoms,  Anacardium,  Belladonna,
Croton,  Rhus,  and  Urtica  may  be  compared ;  and
for  the  affections  of  the  serous  membranes,  Apocy-
num,  Mercurius  corrosivus,  and  Bryonia.  As  a
whole,  the  action  of  Apis  more  nearly  resembles
that  of  Arsenic  than  of  any  other  drug.

The  3rd  dec.  dilution  is  that  which  I  always
employ  in  acute  oedema.  In  dropsies,  Dr.  Marcy
prefers  the  lower  dilutions,  from  the  3rd  downwards ;
in  cutaneous  affections,  from  the  3rd  upwards ;  in
irritation  of  the  bladder  he  says  we  ought  never  to
go  lower  than  the  6th.  The  most  striking
cures  of  chronic  ophthalmia  have  been  made  with
the  30th :  and  this  and  even  higher  dilutions  are
preferred  in  the  treatment  of  intermittents.

I  have  next  to  bring  before  you  the

Apocynum  cannabinum,

called  in  America  "  Indian  Hemp."  It  must  not
be  confounded,  however,  with  Cannabis  Indica.

The  article  in  Dr.  Hale's  'New  Remedies'  contains
all  that  is  known  concerning  this  drug.

And  "all  that  is  known"  is  just  this,  that  Apo-
cynum has  virtues  of  a  remarkable  kind  in  the
treatment  of  all  kinds  of  dropsy.  Anasarca,  hydro-
cephalus,  hydrothorax,  and  especially  ascites,  of  all
kinds  and  from  all  causes,  are  among  the  diseases
cured  by  it  in  the  cases  collected  by  Dr.  Hale.  I
am  quite  unable  at  present  to  distinguish  the


94  ARGENTUM METALL1CUM.

precise  form  of  action  of  Apocynum  in  this  sphere :
and  still  less  to  suggest  its  rationale.  It  seems
nearly  always  to  require  to  be  given  in  largish  doses,
yet  it  is  not  a  diuretic  :  for  when  proved  by  Drs.
Peters  and  Marcy,  it  diminished  in  both  the  urinary
secretion.  I  have  tried  it  fairly  myself  in  two
otherwise  unreachable  cases  : — acute  hydrocephalus,
and  ascites  from  hepatic  cirrhosis.  In  neither
case  was  any  effect  produced.  Nevertheless,  one
cannot  read  Dr.  Hale's  cases  without  feeling  assured
that  Apocynum  has  a  true  place  as  a  specific  remedy
for  some  forms  of  dropsy.  You  will  probably  feel,
with  myself,  that  it  should  be  held  in  readiness  for
cases  which  our  ordinary  remedies  fail  to  relieve.
Apocynum  has  also  cured  menorrhagia,  to  which  it
seems  homoeopathic ;  and  I  have  removed  with  it
in  a  case  of  dyspepsia  the  sensation  of  sinking  at  the
stomach,  which  it  caused  verymarkedly  in  Dr.  Marcy.

Apis  and  Helleborm  are  the  only  medicines
analogous  to  Apocynum.

No  effect  seems  to  be  obtainable  in  dropsy  from
the  usual  dilutions.  The  mother-tincture,  in  doses
of  from  one  to  five  drops,  has  sometimes  proved
effectual :  but  more  frequently  it  has  been  neces-
sary to  resort  to  a  decoction  of  the  fresh  root.  I
would  suggest  triturations  of  the  dried  root.

To  obtain  the  specific  effects  of  Silver,  we  use  in
our  practice  two  preparations,  Argentum  metallicum
and  Argentum  nitricum.

Argentum  metallicum

is  prepared  by  triturating with sugar  of  milk  the


ARGENTUM METALLICUM.  95

finest  silver  foil. It  probably  becomes  an  oxide  in
the  process.

Metallic  silver  was  proved  by  Hahnemann,  and
subsequently  by  Dr.  Huber  of  Vienna.  The  pa-
thogenesis  obtained  by  the  former  is  in  the  '  Materia
Medica  Pura :'  Huberts  experiments  I  know  only
through  the  medium  of  Hempel.  Teste's  article
should  be  read.

The  said  Huber  sums  up  his  proving  by  suggest-
ing that  Argentum  acts  specifically  upon  the  articu-
lations and  their  component  elements, — bones,  car-
tilages, ligaments,  &c.  It  seems  to  correspond  to
arthralgia  rather  than  arthritis.  I  know  of  no
clinical  experience  with  it  in  this  direction.  It
seems  also  to  irritate  the  genito-urinary  organs  :  it
is  homoeopathic  to  diuresis,  and  has  cured  chronic
gonorrhoea  and  atonic  spermatorrhoea  from  onanism,
and  greatly  relieved  for  a  time  the  symptoms  of
cancer  of  the  uterus.  It  is  also  recommended
for  chronic  laryngitis  in  public  speakers.  I  see
that  your  own  Pereira  recommends  it  in  painful
affections  of  the  stomach  and  bowels,  with  increased
secretion  ;  in  similar  conditions  of  the  uterus  ;  and
occasionally  in  epilepsy  and  syphilis.  It  is  probably
destined  to  take  a  higher  place  than  that  which  it
now  enjoys.

Aurum,  Platinum,  and  Selenium  are  analogous
of  Argeutuin  :  less  so  Zincum.

I  know  of  no  clinical  experience  by  which  to  fix
the  dose  :  but  the  potencies  from  the  3rd  to  the
6th  would  probably  answer  every  purpose.


96  ARGENTUM NITRICUM.

Argentum  nitricum

is  prepared  in  aqueous  solution,  and  preserved  with
the  usual  precautions.  It  is  sometimes  triturated  :
but  the  preparation  must  be  uncertain.

An  exhaustive  proving  of  Nitrate  of  silver  has
been  made  under  the  direction  of  Dr.  J.  O.  Miiller,
of  Vienna  :  and  may  be  found  in  Stapf's  '  Additions
to  the  Materia  Medica/  Some  physiological  ex-
periments by  Krahmer,  and  clinical  experience  by
Kopp  are  related  in  Dr.  HempePs  article  on  the
drug.

I  suppose  I  may  sum  up  your  old-school  know-
ledge of  the  internal  action  of  Nitrate  of  silver  in
the  following  quotations  from  Pereira.  "  If  the
dose  be  too  large,  it  occasions  gastrodynia,  some-
times nausea  and  vomiting,  and  occasionally  purging."
"  In  chronic  affections  of  the  stomach  (especially
morbid  sensibility  of  the  gastric  and  intestinal
nerves)  it  has  been  favorably  spoken  of  by  Auten-
reith,  Dr.  Jas.  Johnson,  and  Kneff.  It  has  been
employed  to  allay  chronic  vomiting  connected  with
disordered  innervation,  as  well  as  with  disease  of  the
stomach  (scirrhus  and  cancer),  and  to  relieve  gastro-
dynia." Again  he  writes  "  It  exercises  a  specific
influence  over  the  nervous  system ;  at  least  I  infer
this,  partly  from  the  convulsions  observed  by  Orfila
when  it  was  injected  into  the  veins  of  animals,  and
partly  from  its  occasional  curative  powers  in  affec-
tions of  this  system,  as  epilepsy  and  chorea/5

To  this  knowledge  (singularly  Homoeopathic  in  its
appearance)  Dr.  Muller's  admirable  proving  has
added  considerably.  It  has  shown  that  the  specific


ARGENTUM NITRICUM.  97

action  on  the  nervous  system  which  Pereira  recog-
nises is  indeed  very  extensive.  On  the  cerebro-
spinal  centres  Argentum  nitricum  acts  as  a  depress-
ant. It  causes  headache  deep  in  the  substance  of
the  brain,  with  low  spirits ;  want  of  mental  power ;
restless,  dreamful  sleep ;  weakness  of  the  spine,
with  pain  at  the  small  of  the  back  ;  weakness  even
to  paralysis  of  the  legs  ;  vertigo;  blindness.  There
is  also  a  very  characteristic  infra-orbital  neuralgia.
Dr.  Mu'ller  considers  that  it  specially  affects  the
ganglionic  centres  of  the  chest  and  abdomen  ;  and
to  this  action  refers  the  spasms  of  the  stomach,
gullet,  and  intestines ;  the  cardialgia  with  heartburn
and  water-brash  ;  the  bulimia  or  anorexia  ;  the  con-
stipation; the  irregularity  and  palpitation  of  the
heart ;  and  the  dyspnoea,  observed  in  its  provers.
Next,  the  Nitrate  is  shown  to  affect  the  mucous
membranes.  Locally,  it  may  of  course  inflame  the
whole  digestive  canal :  but  it  specifically  irritates
the  mouth,  throat,  cardia,  and  duodenum.  The
throat  looks  dark  red,  and  feels  dry,  and  as  if  a
splinter  or  ulcer  were  there ;  the  tongue  is  sore,
and  the  papillae  elevated.  The  conjunctiva  is  much
inflamed,  even  to  chemosis ;  there  is  also  fluent
coryza,  and  titillation  of  the  larynx.  From  this
last  cause,  and  from  the  irritation  of  the  throat,  a
dry  spasmodic  cough  is  set  up.  Urethritis  is  in-
duced; and  flat  pseudo-chancres  have  appeared  on
the  glans  penis.  The  skin  follows  here,  as  elsewhere,
the  mucous  membrane  :  there  is  prurigo,  followed  by
a  small  rash.  Even  the  glands  are  influenced  by
this  powerful  drug.  Its  long-continued  use  is  said
to  have  caused  disease  of  the  liver  and  dropsy  :

7


98  AROENTUM NITRICUM.

diuresis  is  induced  ;  the  right  testis  has  become
enlarged  and  hard,  the  sexual  desire  suppressed,
and  the  penis  shrivelled ;  the  axillary  glands  have
been  affected  with  tension  and  swelling.

From  this  extensive  range  of  pathogenetic  influ-
ence, one  would  infer  the  possession  by  Nitrate  of
silver  of  a  corresponding  therapeutic  efficacy.  I  am
sorry  to  say,  however,  that  my  use  of  it  hitherto
has  been  a  series  of  disappointments.  There  are
only  two  disorders  in  which  I  have  found  it  of  service.
The  first  is  ophthalmia  neonatorum,  where  it  is  a
true  specific,  and  cures  rapidly,  without  the  need  of
any  external  application.  We  owe  the  suggestion
of  this  remedial  use  of  the  drug  to  Dr.  Dudgeon.
The  second  is  commencing  paraplegia,  from  debili-
tating causes.  Recent  French  experience  makes  it
probable  that  Argentum  nitricum  will  take  the
highest  place  in  the  treatment  of  this  affection,  when
arising  from  tabes  dorsalis  or  any  other  form  of
spinal  exhaustion.

A  word  before  we  close  upon  the  local  application
of  Nitrate  of  silver.  You  are  probably  accustomed
to  use  it  in  this  manner ;  and  would  be  loth  to  lose
the  advantages  of  the  practice.  I  too  should  be
loth  to  urge  its  discontinuance.  There  is  a  rough
Homceopathicity  about  most  of  it,  which  is  grati-
fying enough :  you  are  subduing  inflammation  of
skin  and  mucous  membrane  with  a  substance  which
certainly  inflames  them  when  applied  in  health.
But  however  this  may  be,  Homoeopathy  is  affirma-
tive, not  negative.  She  forbids  nothing, — not  even
bleeding  and  blistering :  she  ousts  them  merely
by  curing  without  their  aid.  So  by  all  means  if


ARNICA MONTANA.  99

you  have  an  ulcer  or  a  local  inflammation  which
you  cannot  cure  by  specific  remedies,  apply  your
lunar  caustic.  But  try  the  specific  treatment
first.  I  venture  to  predict  that  as  that  becomes
perfected,  the  local  treatment  will  cease  to  be  re-
quired :  and  the  porte-caustique  will  take  its  place
with  the  phlebotomy  lancet  among  the  disused  in-
struments of  torture.

Argentum  nitricum  has  obvious  points  of  analogy
with  Arsenic  and  Mercury  ;  with  Phosphorus ;  and
with  Hydrocyanic  acid.

I  always  employ  the  3rd  potency.  In  my  fruit-
less trials  of  the  drug,  I  used  all  dilutions,  from
the  1st  to  the  30th.

Arnica  montana

is  another  of  the  precious  gifts  made  by  Homoeo-
pathy to  therapeutic  art.

A  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  entire  fresh
plant,  or  from  the  root,  recent  or  dried.

The  original  proving  of  Arnica  is  in  the  '  Materia
Medica  Pura/  An  account  of  Jorg's  experiments
with  it  is  given  by  Dr.  Hempel ;  and  Testers  article
on  the  drug  is  worth  reading.

I  have  said  that  Arnica  is  a  precious  gift  made
by  Homoeopathy  to  therapeutic  art.  In  thus
speaking  I  am  making  no  allusion  to  its  external
application.  This  was  a  common  practice  in  Ger-
many before  Hahnemann  was  born ;  and  although
as  a  matter  of  fact  it  was  introduced  into  England
by  Homosopathists,  our  system  cannot  take  credit
for  it,  any  more  than  it  can  for  the  use  of  Calendula
as  a  vulnerary.  I  say  this  the  more  earnestly,


100  ARNICA MONTANA.

because  some  experiments  have  lately  been  made
by  Dr.  Garrod,  which  go  to  disprove  the  action
of  Arnica  in  dispersing  sanguineous  effusions.
Whether  his  results  are  confirmed  or,  by  further
experience,  rejected,  it  matters  not  to  Homoeo-
pathy. It  is  the  internal  use  of  Arnica  concerning
which  the  law  of  similars  gives  the  fullest  and
almost  indeed  the  only  information.

Our  experience,  pathogenetic  and  therapeutic,
has  thoroughly  established  the  ancient  reputation  of
Arnica  as  an  internal  remedy  against  the  effects  of
falls,  blows,  strains,  and  other  mechanical  injuries;
whence  its  common  names  Fallkraut  and  Panacea
lapsorum.  I  would  say  that  it  is  to  an  injury  what
Aconite  is  to  a  chill :  it  will  infallibly  neutralise
the  ill  affects  if  given  before  organic  mischief  has
been  set  up.  With  Arnica  as  with  Aconite,  how-
ever, we  must  not  be  too  ready  to  assume  that  the
time  for  giving  it  has  gone  by.  I  have  seen  suf-
ferers from  injuries — as  from  railway  accidents — of
very  distant  date  immensely  benefited  by  Arnica.*
Indeed,  I  can  hardly  conceive  of  a  case  where
mechanical  violence  was  the  primum  mobile,  and
where  Arnica  would  be  of  no  advantage  whatever.

But  even  here  we  must  discriminate.  Thus — I
have  no  reason  to  suppose  that  Arnica  influences
directly  the  nervous  centres,  or  would  be  curative
of  the  consequences  of  concussion  of  the  brain  or
spinal  cord.  Hahnemann  seems  to  me  right  in

*  I  may  refer  you  for  some  illustrations  of  the  good  effects  of
Arnica  in  remote  results  of  mechanical  injury  to  a  paper  by  Mr.
Nankivell  in  vol.  xxiii  of  the  'British  Journal  of  Homroopathy,'
p.  177,  "  On  the  Thoracic  Affections  of  the  Cornish  Miners."


ARNICA MONTANA.  101

limiting  its  effects  to  "  the  pernicious  consequences
which  often  attend  falls,  contusions,  blows,  thrusts,
straining,  twisting  or  tearing  the  solid  parts  of  our
organism."  I  may  be  wrong  in  this :  and  there
can  be  no  objection  to  giving  Arnica  in  such  cases,
unless  some  other  medicine  is  better  indicated.
But  you  should  watch  whether  your  case  differs  in
its  progress  from  the  course  of  spontaneous  recovery.
Again,  we  have  many  morbid  conditions  to  which
the  term  "traumatic"  is  prefixed, — as  tetanus,  cer-
tain inflammations,  surgical  fever,  &c.  You  would
be  using  Arnica  very  ill  if  you  relied  upon  it  in
such  disorders  as  these.  They  cannot  be  classified
among  the  consequences  of  mechanical  violence;
and  are  in  themselves  quite  out  of  the  sphere  of
action  of  the  plant.

The  parts  specially  involved  in  mechanical
injuries  are  the  muscles ;  and  upon  these  Arnica
specially  acts.  It  is  above  all  things  a  myotic.
It  thus  becomes  the  main  remedy  for  those  nu-
merous affections  which  Dr.  Inman  has  so  well
healthy  muscles,  or  the  normal  use  of  weak  muscles
will  bring  on  these  .pains :  and  Arnica  will  almost
infallibly  relieve  them.  As  their  occurrence  is  very
common,  it  is  a  medicine  in  daily  use.  I  need
only  specify  two  of  them.  One  is  the  form  of
pleurodynia  known  as  spurious  pleurisy.  This  may
readily  be  induced  by  over-exertion,  as  in  the  fol-
lowing case  reported  by  Dr.  Inman.  "A  party  of
gentlemen  on  a  severe  pedestrian  excursion  were
all  tired  on  the  first  day,  and  that  was  all ;  on  the
second  day  some  began  to  have  frequent  stitches  in


102  ARNICA MONTANA.

the  side,  could  not  sleep  on  the  side,  but  only  on
the  back  ;  on  the  third  day  the  pains  in  the  side
were  terribly  increased,  with  so  much  tenderness
that  they  could  not  bear  the  weight  of  the  clothes."
In  this  not  uncommon  form  of  pleurodynia  Arnica
gives  rapid  relief.  It  must  be  distinguished  from
the  muscular  rheumatism  so  called,  which  yields
much  more  satisfactorily  to  Bryonia  or  Actsea  race-
mosa.  Another  myalgia  which  I  would  specify  is
one  of  the  forms  of  pain  after  food.  The  pain
comes  on  immediately,  even  during  the  act  of  swal-
lowing ;  the  patients  are  weak,  and  of  lax  fibre ;
and  they  often  have  or  have  had  myalgise  else-
where. Here  too  Arnica  is  an  admirable  medi-
cine.*

With  Arnica,  as  with  other  medicines,  my  main
endeavour  has  been  to  indicate  to  you  the  prin-
cipal and  most  characteristic  sphere  of  its  operations.
But  there  are,  as  with  other  medicines,  so  with
Arnica,  certain  residuary  phenomena  which  do  not
come  under  the  primary  law  of  its  working.  These
also  I  must,  however  briefly,  indicate.

1.  There  is  the  well-known  eruption  of  Arnica,
which  in  some  susceptible  persons  results  from  its
external  application.  I  have  even  known  it  follow
the  internal  use  of  the  1st  dilution.  It  consists  of

*  I  had  written  this  article  before  the  appearance  of  Dr.  Madden's
paper  on  "  Myalgia  "  in  the  '  British  Journal  of  Homoeopathy/  and
of  Dr.  Bayes'  remarks  on  "  Arnica,"  in  the  '  Monthly  Homoeopathic
Review.'  The  experience  of  both  these  excellent  physicians  is  quite
in  accordance  with  the  statements  here  made.  They  concur,  more-
over, in  stating  that  the  my  otic  action  of  Arnica  reaches  even  the
heart,  so  that  it  is  frequently  curative  of  the  hypertrophy  and  dila-
tation of  this  organ  brought  on  by  violent  exercise,  as  rowing.


ARNICA MONTANA.  103

a.  number  of  very  fine  vesicles  on  an  erythematous
base,  with  much  heat  and  itching.  I  am  not,
however,  aware  of  Arnica  having  been  used  in
cutaneous  disorders,  except  for  boils.  Hahnemann
recommends  it  (apparently  from  theory  only)  for
the  diathesis  which  leads  to  the  formation"  of  boils  :
and  Teste  has  cured  with  it  an  angina  which  seemed
to  result  from  their  retrocession.  For  myself,  I  find
no  need  of  any  other  medicine  for  boils  beside  Bella-
donna and  Sulphur.

2.  Arnica "  determines to the surface," and
tends  to  produce  haemorrhages. For  their  idiopathic
occurrence it  is  often  a  useful  remedy ; especially,
as  one  would  suppose,  when  resulting  from  mechani-
cal violence,  as  in  epistaxis  from  a  blow, and hae-
moptysis from  violent  coughing.

3.  Partly  from  its  relations  to  haemorrhage,  and
partly from its influence on muscular fibre,
Arnica  finds  a  place  in  the  treatment  of  dysentery.
It  gives  marked  relief  to  the  tormina.

4.  Arnica  may  occasionally  be  given  with  advan-
tage in  dry,  spasmodic  coughs ;  and  in  gastric  head-
aches. It  is  said  to  have  caused  the  reabsorption
of  cerebral  effusion.

In  its  antidotal  power  against  mechanical  vio-
lence, Arnica  stands  quite  alone.  In  its  action  on
the  muscles  Bryonia  and  Act&a  racemosa  resemble
it  somewhat :  as  a  cutaneous  irritant,  it  is  allied  to
Rhus  and  Croton.

Arnica  is  one  of  those  singular  medicines  which,
though  by  no  means  actively  poisonous,  manifests
its  full  remedial  powers  only  in  very  infinitesimal
doses.  I  used  to  care  very  little  for  the  remedy


104  ARNICA MONTANA.

when  I  gave  it  from  the  1st  dil.  to  the  mother- tinc-
ture ;  but  since  I  have  used  the  dilutions  from  2
to  12  I  have  obtained  from  it  the  most  unfailing
and  satisfactory  results.  Our  general  experience
•with  Arnica  seems  to  have  been  gained  from  about
the  3rd  potency.


LETTER  X.

ARSENIC.

WE  have  now  to  gird  up  our  loins,  and  summon
all  our  strength,  that  we  may  master  the  greatest
of  medicines,  because  the  greatest  of  poisons,

Arsenicum.

By  this  name,  a  Homoeopathist  means  Arsenious
acid,  the  Arsenicum  album  of  the  old  nomenclature.
This  salt  is  triturated  up  to  the  3rd  dec.  potency,
and  then  prepared  by  solution.

Our  sources  of  information  concerning  Arsenic  are
very  numerous.  Hahnemann  published  a  proving  of
it  in  the  '  Materia  Medica  Pura;'  and  subsequently
another  in  the  '  Chronic  Diseases/  I  would  recom-
mend you  to  study  these  pathogeneses  in  Dr.  Black's
able  article  in  the ' Hahnemann  Materia  Medica/  Part
I,  where  unreliable  symptoms  are  omitted,  new  ones
added  from  later  cases  of  poisoning,  and  many
clinical  notes  appended.  It  is  prefaced,  moreover,
by  seventeen  cases  of  poisoning,  some  of  which  are
not  met  with  in  other  compendiums.  There  is  a
"  Study"  of  Arsenic  by  the  late  Dr.  Wurmb  trans-
lated in  the  3rd  and  4th  vols.  of  the  '  Brit.  Journ.
of  Homoeopathy/  M.  Imbert-Gourbeyre,  who  has
been  working  at  Arsenic  for  many  years,  has


106  ARSENICUM.

published  papers  on  "Arsenical  Eruptions  "  (l  North
Amer.  Journ.  of  Homoeopathy/  vol.  vii,  p.  512),  on
"Arsenical  Epistaxis"  ('  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  vol.
xxii,  p.  519),  on  "The  Action  of  Arsenic  upon  the
External  Genitals  "  (ibid.,  vol.  xxiii,  p.  77),  and  on
"  The  Febrigenic  Properties  of  Arsenic  "  (ibid.,  vol.
xxiv,  p.  72).  If  to  these  you  will  add  the  articles
on  this  substance  in  your  Christison  and  Pereira,
and  in  our  Hempel  and  Teste  :  and  will  also  wade
through  the  copious  but  undigested  material  which
is  heaped  around  it  in  the  '  New  Materia  Medica/
you  will  have  before  you  most  of  the  facts  on  which
my  remarks  now  following  are  based.  I  shall  make
reference  to  other  information  regarding  Arsenic  as
we  proceed.

It  would  be  an  affront  to  your  knowledge  were  I
to  detail  in  any  elaborate  manner  the  phenomena
of  poisoning  by  Arsenic.  We  will,  however,  pass
them  rapidly  in  review,  that  we  may  inquire  into
their  physiological  expression,  and  ascertain  their
precise  pathological  similes.

I.  There  are  certain  actions  of  Arsenic  which  we
must  (provisionally  at  least)  call  general,  as  we  are
as  yet  unable  to  localise  them.  Thus,  there  are
cases  of  Arsenical  poisoning  in  which  the  sufferer
dies  simply  prostrated,  without  special  symptoms  or
discoverable  lesion.  The  same  profound  adynamia
is  seen  to  characterise  the  influence  of  the  drug  in
the  provers.  It  must  be  reckoned  as  a  part  of  its
general  action.  Again,  a  tendency  to  exacerbations
and  remissions,  and  sometimes  even  to  intermissions,
is  noticed  in  the  symptoms  produced  by  Arsenic  :


ARSENICUM.  107

and  not  uncommonly  in  these  instances  there  is
well-marked  periodicity  of  return.

II.  A  certain  number  of  the  symptoms  of  Arseni-
cal poisoning  seem  referable  to  a  direct  action  upon
the  nervous  tissue.  This  action  is  not  one  of  pure
depression,  like  that  of  Curare ;  still  less  of  pure
excitation,  like  that  of  Strychnia.  It  is  a  curious
mixture  of  depression  with  irritation ;  the  paralysis
is  accompanied  by  cramps,  and  the  anaesthesia  with
neuralgia.  These  last-named  phenomena  are  seen
only  in  chronic  poisoning  :  they  are  worth  consider-
ing, and  comparing  with  the  effects  of  Lead,  Copper,
Mercury,  and  Zinc.  You  will  observe  that  both
paralysis  and  anaesthesia  mount  periphero-centrad,
and  are  hence  often  partial ;  and  that  they  some-
times affect  one  side  only.*  The  mental  and  moral
symptoms,  moreover,  which  characterise  the  suffer-
ings from  Arsenic  are  so  uniform,  that  I  cannot  but
refer  them  to  a  direct  action  upon  the  ideational
and  emotional  centres.  There  too  there  is  the
mingling  of  irritation  and  depression ;  there  is
melancholy,  but  also  restlessness,  irritability,  anxiety,
and  anguish.  I  would  add,  without  at  present  at-
tempting explanation,  that  Arsenic  has  occasionally
caused  epileptiform  and  choreiform  convulsions.

There  is  yet  remaining  another  division  of  the
nervous  system,  whose  importance  we  are  just
learning  to  recognise — the  sympathetic  or  ganglionic.

*  In  a  case  of  hemiplegia  produced  by  Arsenic,  where  there  was
also  aphonia,  the  laryngoscope  detected  paralysis  of  the  vocal  cord
of  the  affected  side.  In  the  Arsenical  anaesthesia  there  is  sometimes
manifested  an  acute  sensibility  to  cold :  by  which  also  the  neuralgia
is  aggravated.


108  ARSENICUM.

Arsenic  powerfully  affects  the  vaso-motor  nerves,
and  somewhat  similarly  to  Aconite.  Hahnemann
long  ago  remarked  this,  and  expressed  it  thus
in  the  language  of  his  time.  "  This  much  I  have
myself  ascertained,  that  Arsenic  is  well  capable  of
producing  that  spasm  in  the  blood-vessels  and  that
commotion  in  the  stomach  called  the  febrile  rigor.
If  it  be  used  in  a  strong  dose — the  fifth  or  sixth  of
a  grain  for  an  adult — this  rigor  is  very  observable."
The  febrile  reaction,  when  it  takes  place,  sometimes
assumes  a  typhoid  type.  More  commonly  chill,  heat,
and  sweat  recur  periodically,  in  somewhat  irregular
rotation.

III.  You  will  be  more  prepared  to  admit  that
Arsenic  is  an  haematic  than  that  it  is  a  neurotic.
The  researches  of  Schmidt  and  Sturzwage  appear  to
have  established  this  action :  and  Dr.  Harley's
experiments  have  led  him  to  the  same  conclusion.
In  small  doses,  frequently  repeated,  the  only  result
of  this  influence  of  the  drug  is  a  diminution  of  the
metamorphosis  of  the  tissues,  leading  to  obesity.
This  the  experimenters  referred  to  suppose  to  account
for  the  peculiar  effects  of  Arsenic  eating  upon  the
Styrian  peasants  and  the  Vienna  horses.  The
poison  acts  directly  on  the  red  corpuscles,  diminish-
ing their  power  of  taking  up  the  oxygen  supplied  to
them  in  the  lungs ;  and  the  carbonaceous  compounds
thus  unconsumed  deposit  themselves  in  the  form  of
fat.  If  this  direct  action  on  the  corpuscles  be
granted,  many  of  the  phenomena  of  Arsenical
poisoning  become  explicable.  No  wonder  that  the
blood  is  black  and  non-coagulable,  resembling  that
of  malignant  fever  and  cholera ;  that  petechial  effu-


ARSEMCUM.  109

sion  frequently  occurs; and  that  chronic  poisoning
takes  the  form  of  a  profound  cachexia.

IV.  I  cannot  but  think  that  Arsenic  acts
directly  upon  muscular  tissue  also.  Hahnemann
(who  while  yet  an  old-school  practitioner  wrote  an
exhaustive  treatise  on  Arsenical  poisoning)  calls
special  attention  to  the  myotic  influence  of  the
poison.  "The  constricting  power  of  Arsenic"  he
writes  "  shows  itself  after  death  by  many  phenomena.
We  usually  find  after  poisoning  by  Arsenic  the
cardiac  and  pyloric  orifices  of  the  stomach  in  such
a  state  of  contraction,  that  not  the  least  quantity  of
air  can  be  passed  through  them.  The  pharynx  is
also  contracted,  the  breast  (Qy  ?  diaphragm)  con-
stricted, the  muscles  of  the  abdomen  strongly  con-
tracted ;  almost  all  the  sphincter  muscles,  especially
those  of  the  anus  and  bladder,  are  closed ;  the
mouth  of  the  ducture  communis  choledochus  in  the
duodenum  appears  to  be  often  so  much  narrowed,
that  no  bile  can  be  passed  through  it.  Also
some  have  found  the  stomach,  after  Arsenic  has
been  taken,  strongly  contracted  on  itself.  There
appears  likewise  to  be  produced  in  the  limbs  a  visible
contraction  or  spasm  of  the  muscular  fibres."  To
such  a  myotic  influence  I  would  refer  the  cramps  so
characteristic  of  Arsenic  poisoning.  They  can  hardly
be  produced  through  the  motor  nerves,  as  these  are
more  or  less  paralysed.  We  have  a  parallel  instance
of  the  opposite  kind  in  Plumbum  and  Digitalis,  which
paralyse  the  muscles  directly,  and  not  through  the
medium  of  the  nervous  system.  A  lesser  but  more
diffused  degree  of  the  same  muscular  irritation,
combined  with  the  neurotic  effects  of  the  poison,


110  ARSENICUM.

seems  the  cause  of  the  chorea-like  restlessness,
trembling,  and  twitching  so  frequently  observed.
To  the  same  action  also  I  would  refer  the  cardiac
symptoms, — prsecordial  pain  and  anxiety,  violent
palpitations,  quick  and  irregular  pulse,  &c.

V.  The  most  important  action  of  Arsenic,  how-
ever, is  its  power  of  setting  up  inflammatory  irrita-
tion of  the  tissues.  Hardly  any  part  of  the  body
escapes  this  influence  of  the  poison  :  but  we  know
its  effects  mainly  in  the  mucous  and  serous  mem-
branes, and  the  skin.

a.  Arsenic  is  a  specific  irritant  to  mucous  mem-
brane, wherever  found.  The  "  burning  pains  "  so
common  in  its  pathogenesis  are  regarded  by  Dr.
Wurmb  as  dependent  upon  this  action.  The  cha-
racter of  the  inflammations  here  produced  is  not
(as  with  Tartar  emetic)  muco-purulent,  but  the
membrane  is  dry,  or  exudes  a  thin,  ichorous  dis-
charge :  and  the  further  progress  of  the  disease  is
towards  ulceration  rather  than  suppuration.  The
alimentary  canal  is  affected  throughout,  but  more
especially  in  the  mouth,  throat,  stomach,  duodenum,
and  rectum.  The  inflammation  is  severe,  and
causes  vomiting,  diarrhoea,  and  dysentery,  aphthae
in  the  mouth,  ulceration  of  the  stomach  and  intes-
tine, and  even  gangrene  at  the  anus.  In  one  case,
there  was  found  enlargement  of  Peyer's  glands  at
the  lower  part  of  the  jejunum,  with  tendency  to
ulceration.  On  the  respiratory  tract  the  influence
of  Arsenic  is  less  potent,  save  on  the  upper  portion.
Tight  frontal  headache  from  irritation  of  the  lining
membrane  of  the  ethmoid  cells  and  frontal  sinus;
and  coryza,  with  profuse  ichorous  discharge,  are


ARSEN1CUM.  Ill

commonly  produced.  The  Arsenical  conjuncti-
vitis, moreover,  which  is  as  well  known  as  the
Mercurial  stomatitis,  belongs  to  this  category.  The
irritation  diminishes  as  it  descends,  but  takes  a
fresh  start  in  the  lungs.  The  genito-urinary
mucous  membrane  is  inflamed  throughout  :  in  the
penis,  scrotum,  and  vulva  (as  in  the  anus)  gangrene
not  infrequently  takes  place.

The  renal  structure  shares  in  the  general  irrita-
tion. In  acute  poisoning  the  secretion  of  urine  is
nearly  always  diminished  or  suppressed :  if  any
urine  is  obtained,  it  is  found  to  contain  albumen.
The  chronic  effects  of  Arsenic  upon  the  kidneys
have  been  ascertained  by  Dr.  Quaglio.  He  slowly
poisoned  four  cats  by  the  Arsenite  of  potash;  and
in  the  description  he  gives  of  the  post-mortem  ap-
pearances of  the  kidneys  you  will  recognise  plainly
the  essentials  of  the  most  common  form  of  Bright's
disease, — the  "chronic  non-desquamative  nephritis"
of  Dr.  George  Johnson, — the  large  white  kidney,
•with  scanty  urine,  albuminuria  and  dropsy.

b.  Arsenic  affects  the  serous  no  less  powerfully
than  the mucous membranes. The  inflammations
here  caused  by  it  are  of  a  subacute  character,  with
speedy  and  copious  serous  (less  often  purulent)  effu-
sion. The pleura are most frequently affected ;
then the pericardium : less often the peritoneum
and  arachnoid. I  must  refer  you  to  the  authorities
mentioned  at  the  beginning  for  instances  of  these
effects  of  Arsenic.

c.  The  powerful  irritant  action  of  Arsenic  upon
the mucous membranes makes it almost certain
that  it  must  exercise  a  similar  influence  upon  their


112  ARSENICUM.

external  continatiou,  the  skin.  Should  it  do  so,
however,  it  convicts  of  unconscious  Homoeopathy
the  almost  universal  use  of  this  drug  in  the  treat-
ment of  cutaneous  diseases.  I  must  accordingly
cite  old-school  authority  for  the  fact.  Mr.  Hun-t
(than  whom  no  better  man  could  be  named)  bears
witness  to  a  pityriasis  being  almost  always,  and  a
lichen  occasionally  induced  by  the  continued  use  of
Arsenic.  Dr.  Inman  writes  "  Arsenic,  when  taken
in  excess,  produces  a  sort  of  chronic  inflammation
of  the  skin,  accompanied  with  oedema,  harshness,
and  dryuess,  and  followed  by  desquamation  of  the
cuticle  and  shedding  of  the  hair,  and  sometimes  of
the  nails."*  Lastly,  M.  Imbert-Gourbeyre,  Pro-
fessor of  Materia  Medica  at  the  School  of  Clermont
Ferrand,  has  collected  a  vast  number  of  cases  in
which  Arsenic  has  produced  eruptions  on  the  skin.
Every  form  of  cutaneous  irritation  is  shown  by  him
to  have  been  caused  by  it,  from  simple  erythema  to
malignant  erysipelas,  pustular  inflammation,  and
gangrene.  The  vesicular  and  squamous  forms,
however,  are  the  most  common.

Pardon  me  if,  after  all,  I  have  fallen  into  too
didactic  a  tone  in  describing  the  pathogenetic
effects  of  Arsenic.  It  was  necessary  to  set  these
forth  in  a  somewhat  systematic  way,  that  you
might  have  before  you  the  basis  on  which  the
application  of  the  law  of  similars  has  enabled  us
to  raise  so  imposing  a  superstructure.

I  shall  now  pass  in  review  the  curative  powers  of
*  '  New  Theory  and  Practice  of  Medicine,'  p.  269.


AIISENICUM.  113

Arsenic,  tracing  as  I  proceed  their  relation  to  its
pathogenetic  effects.

I.  The  action  of  Arsenic  on  the  cerebro-spinal
centres  would  lead  us to use  it  in  some  cases  of
general  paralysis  and  of  melancholia. Less  intelli-
gible, but  unquestionable,  is  its  power  over  chorea,
and  occasionally  over  epilepsy  (especially  when  the
paroxysms  recur  periodically). I  can  only  say  that
its  use  in  these  affections  is  Homoeopathic,  because
it  has  caused  them  in  the  healthy. But  the  capital
instance of  the pure neurotic  influence  of  Arsenic
is its curative power  in  neuralgia. It  is  one of
the  very  few  medicines  which causes  genuine  neu-
ralgia : and  it  far  excels  all  others  in  the  treatment
of  the  idiopathic  disorder. The  Arsenical  neuralgia
is pure, i.  e. neither inflammatory, toxsemic, nor
reflex. The  pain  is  burning  and  agonising,  accom-
panied  with great  restlessness and anguish ; it  is
often  intermittent,  with  tendency  to  periodic  return  ;
is generally  made  worse  (even  though at first  re-
lieved) by  the  application  of  cold ;  is  worse  at  rest,
and  diminished  during  exercise  ;  and  usually  affects
(at  least  in  the  first  instance)  the  left  side. Such
a  neuralgia  you  often  meet  with  as  a  consequence
of  malaria  or  influenza, — still  more  frequently  as  a
symptom of  pure debility. If  you will  read  the
cases  published  by  Dr.  Quin  in  the  fourth  volume,
and  by  myself  in the twenty-second  volume  of  the
'  British  Journal  of  Homoeopathy/  you  will  see  evi-
dence that  Arsenic  exerts a  magical  influence  over
pure  neuralgise,  whenever  occurring.

II.  The  action of  Arsenic  on the vaso-motor
nerves,  coupled  with  the  tendency  to  intermittency

8


114  ARSENICUM.

and  periodicity  observable  in  its  symptoms,  at  once
suggests  Arsenic  as  a  remedy  for  ague.  Indeed,
Hahuemann,*  Bonding  and  ClarusJ  have  each
observed  an  instance  of  true  intermittent  fever  re-
sulting from  its  use.  You  of  the  old  school  I
believe  place  it  only  second  to  Quinine  ;  but  use  it
only  as  an  alternative  remedy  to  that  drug.  We
rather  endeavour  to  discriminate.  Giving  Quinine
in  recent,  typical,  and  uncomplicated  cases,  we
should  prefer  Arsenic  in  the  severer  and  more
malignant  forms  of  the  disease;  in  the  tertian  and
quartan  types  ;  and  in  long-standing  cases,  where
the  phenomena  of  the  paroxysms  have  lost  their
integrity  and  rhythm.  Dr.  Wurmb — who  made
Arsenic  the  prime  remedy  for  intermittents  at  the
Leopoldstadt  Hospital  in  Vienna — thus  epitomises
the  special  indications  for  its  preference.  "  One  stage
absent ;  heat  burning ;  rapid  prostration  ;  torpid
weakness  ;  dropsical  swellings ;  cachexia ;  abuse  of
Quinine."  As  the  last  phrase  suggests,  Arsenic  is
a  capital  antidote  to  the  ill-effects  of  Quinine,  when
(as  so  often  happens)  it  has  been  abused  in  chronic
cases  of  ague.

III.  In  the  twenty-fourth  volume  of  the  '  British
Journal  of  Homoeopathy'  (p.  485)  I  have  endea-
voured to  prove  the  essential  resemblance  between
ague  and  Asiatic  cholera.  The  common  ground
which  these  two  diseases  occupy, — viz.  the  in-
tense excitation  of  the  vaso-motor  nerves,  causing
temporary  arrest  of  the  circulation — is  just  the

*  '  Lesser  Writings,'  translated  by  Dudgeon,  p.  336.
f  '  Traite  des  Fievres  Intermittentes.'

British  Journal  of  Homoeopathy,'  vol.  xi,  p.  334.


ARSENICUM.  115

sphere  of  the  action  of  Arsenic.  Add  thereto  the
general  prostration,  the  cramps,  and  the  suppression
of  urine  induced  by  the  drug,  and  you  have  the
really  alarming  features  of  the  collapse  of  cholera,
compared  with  which  the  vomiting  and  purging  are
quite  secondary  matters.  Were  the  latter — as  was
at  first  supposed — the  essential  elements  of  cholera,
Arsenic  would  not  be  homoeopathic  to  the  disease,
nor  curative  of  it ;  as  these  symptoms  in  Arsenical
poisoning  depend  upon  the  gastro-enteritis  set  up,
which  is  entirely  absent  in  cholera.  It  was  pro-
bably for  this  reason  that  Hahnemann,  on  first
hearing  an  account  of  the  disease  when  it  invaded
Europe  in  1830,  in  naming  the  drugs  most  likely
from  their  homoeopathicity  to  be  its  antidotes
(Camphor,  Veratrum,  Cuprum)  omitted  Arsenic.
Further  knowledge  of  the  disease  has  shown  that
the  vomiting  and  purging  are  not  necessary  elements
of  cholera,  and  that  in  some  of  the  worst  cases  they
are  altogether  absent.  Arsenic  has  accordingly  been
added  to  the  three  Hahnemannian  medicines.
Being  perfectly  homoeopathic  to  the  general  con-
dition set  up  by  the  cholera  poison,  and  vieing  with  it
in  energy,  it  has  become  our  sheet-anchor  in  the
most  desperate  cases.  In  the  epidemic  of  1849,
Dr.  Russell  at  Edinburgh,  and  Dr.  Drysdale  at
Liverpool  concur  in  assigning  to  Arsenic  the  chief
place  in  the  treatment  of  cholera,  when  the  time  for
curing  with  Camphor  has  gone  by.  I  would  sug-
gest that  in  this  rapidly  destructive  disease,  the
medicine  should  be  used  in  the  more  soluble  form
of  the  Liquor  Potassse  Arsenitis,  and  given  in
appreciable  doses.


116  ARSENICUM.

IV.  Another  epidemic  disease,  characterised  by
vaso-motor disturbance,  prostration,  and local  dis-
charge, is  influenza. To the  typical  form  of  this
malady Arsenic precisely corresponds, being
homo3opathic  here  to the  local  affection also. In
my  hands  it  has always  proved  rapidly  curative  of
the  disorder,  unquestionably  cutting short  its pro-
gress. The only symptom  it does not cover  are
the  pains  in  the  bones : and  these,  when  excessive,
require  a  few  doses  of  Eupatorium  perfoliatum.

V.  If  Arsenic  be  homoeopathic  to  the  collapse  or
chill  of  cholera,  it  is  no  less  so  to  the  "  consecutive
fever." And when to this  we add  its poisonous
influence  upon  the  blood,  we  can  hardly  fail  to  re-
cognise in  it  a  probable  remedy  for  the  true  toxsemic
fevers,  and for typhoid  conditions in  general. So
close is  the correspondence, indeed,  that cases  of
poisoning  by Arsenic  have  more  than once been
compared  to,  and  once  even  mistaken  for  an  attack
of  typhoid fever. Let me urge you  to  get this
thought well  into  your  mind,  that  what  Aconite  is
to simple fever,  that  Arsenic  is to  the malignant
and  typhoid forms. Whenever the well-known
"  typhoid" symptoms occur — especially the dry
tongue  and  the involuntary  diarrhoea — whether  in
continued fevers, in  the  exanthemata, as  sympto-
matic  of  local  gangrene,  or  as  results  of  poisoning,
always  put  in  your  Arsenic,  and use  it freely  and
persistently. I  have  seen  many  an  apparently  des-
perate case  cured  by  it.

VI.  The  frequency  of  petechial effusion  in  Ar-
senical poisoning,  while  forming  one  element  of  its
homoeopathicity to  typhus, suggests  it also  as a


ARSENICUM.  117

remedy  for  purpura  hseraorrhagica.  But  before
leaving  the  haematic  action  of  Arsenic,  I  must  dwell
upon  its  antidotal  power  against  one  of  the  worst  of
the  dyscrasise,  cancer.  Homoeopathic  experience
quite  coincides  with  that  of  your  own  Walshe  and
Hunt,  in  ascribing  to  Arsenic  a  real  specific  influ-
ence over  this  fatal  disease.  In  epithelial  cancer  of
the  lip  and  face,  and  in  cancer  of  the  tongue,  it  has
even  proved  curative  ;  its  local  being  conjoined  with
its  internal  use.  It  is  only  less  efficacious  in  cancer
of  the  stomach ;  and  has  some  power  over  the  dis-
ease when  affecting  the  breast  and  uterus.  In  the
last-named  locality,  it  is  said  to  act  best  in  the  form
of  the  Iodide.

VII.  The  myotic  influence  of  Arsenic — with
possibly  some  elective  affinity  for  the  organ — makes
it  a  most  valuable  medicine  in  cardiac  diseases.  Of
pericarditis  I  shall  speak  under  the  head  of  its
action  on  serous  membranes.  In  endocarditis  it
should  be  the  prime  remedy  :  though  I  know  of  no
recorded  cases  of  its  use.  But  in  chronic  organic
disease  of  the  heart — especially  dilatation  and  val-
vular mischief — the  testimony  to  its  value  is  loud
and  unanimous.  It  relieves  pain,  palpitation,  and
dyspnoea ;  and  above  all,  has  a  very  marked  influ-
ence over  the  anasarca  in  which  these  cases  usually
end.  It  is  also  of  considerable  efficacy  in  keeping
at  bay  the  paroxysms  of  angina  pectoris.

Hitherto  we  have  been  dwelling  in  the  sphere  of
the  neurotic,  haematic,  and  myotic  action  of  Arsenic.
Neuralgia,  ague,  cholera,  influenza,  typhoid  con-
ditions, cancerous  growths,  and  cardiac  diseases,
crown  it  with  a  goodly  wreath  of  therapeutic  triumph.


118  ARSENICUM.

But  we  have  yet  to  follow  it  through  the  tissues  it
irritates,  noting  as  we  go  what  it  has  done  to  modify
their  inflammations  when  otherwise  induced.

1.  There are  few inflammatory diseases  of  the
alimentary canal  in which  Arsenic  is  not  of  great
service ;  though  in  some  it  is  eclipsed  in  value  by
other remedies. Thus,  in  the mouth  and throat,
Mercury,  the  mineral  acids,  Chlorate  of  potash,  and
Belladonna, supersede it on ordinary occasions.
But  in  "  cancrum  oris,"  in  aphthse  occurring  in  the
course  of exhausting diseases, and generally in
malignant  inflammations  and  phagedsenic  ulcerations
of  these  parts,  Arsenic  is  indispensable. It  appears
to  have  no  influence  over  true  diphtheria. In  gas-
tritis, acute  and  chronic,  it  is  the  chief  remedy. I
have  often  cured  with  it  pain  after  food,  vomiting,
and  other  dyspeptic  symptoms  dependent  on  chronic
inflammation  of  the stomach and duodenum. It
deserves a  trial  in  ulcer of the stomach  :  though
here  it may be excelled by Kali bichromicum.
Arsenic  would generally  yield to Mercurius  corro-
sivus  in dysentery  : but  is very  useful  when the
rectum is most  affected,  or  when  there is  great
prostration. As  the  purging  caused  by  it  depends
upon  intestinal  inflammation,  it  is  not  homoeopathic
_to simple  "  functional" diarrhoea,  however severe.
But  in  the  various  forms  of  chronic  diarrhoea,  where
there  is  generally  inflammation,  ulceration,  or  some
other  kind  of  disorganisation,  Arsenic  is  a  glorious
remedy.

2.  Arsenic  holds  an  important  place  in  the  treat-
ment  of  the  disorders  of  the  upper  portion  of  the
respiratory mucous membrane. Of  its  action in


ARSENICUM.  119

influenza  I  have  already  spoken  :  it  is  no  less  valu-
able in  coryzas  approaching  this  type.  It  is  also
about  the  best  medicine  we  have  (which  is  after  all
not  saying  much)  for  hay-fever  and  -asthma.  The
conjunctiva  being  an  offset  of  this  mucous  tract.
Arsenic  is  a  remedy  for  several  kinds  of  ophthalmia.
In  chronic  conjunctivitis  I  place  great  reliance  upon
it ;  and  in  strumous  ophthalmia  my  experience  co-
incides with  that  of  many  others,  that  it  will  often
cure  obstinate  cases  where  every  other  medicine  has
failed.  In  affections  of  the  larynx  and  trachea
Arsenic  is  seldom  if  ever  required.  In  bronchitis
and  pneumonia  it  is  indicated  only  when  the  in-
flammations occur  in  aged  people,  are  of  a  low
type,  and  are  accompanied  with  much  suffocation
(capillary  bronchitis,  pneumonia  notha).  Even
here  I  greatly  prefer  Tartar  emetic.  Arsenic  has
much  reputation  in  our  school  in  the  treatment  of
asthma.  I  must  confess,  however,  that  I  myself
prefer  other  remedies.  Dr.  Wurmb  gives  the  fol-
lowing special  indications  for  its  choice.  "  When  the
paroxysms  of  suffocation  come  on  especially  towards
evening  or  at  night,  or  are  brought  on  by  walking,
going  up  hill,  deep  inspiration,  coughing,  or  anger;
and  are  accompanied  by  great  feelings  of  weakness,
fretfulness  and  anxiety,  rawness  in  the  pit  of  the
stomach  and  chest,  and  dry  hacking  cough/'

3.  In  inflammations  of  the  urinary  tract,  and  in
acute  renal  affections,  Arsenic  is  more  than  rivalled  by
other  medicines,  notably  Terebinthina  and  Cantharis.
But  in  chronic  Bright's  disease  it  is  probably  the
very  best  medicine,  and  has  effected  some  brilliant


120  ARSENICUM.

cures,  as  the  references  will  show.*  It  is  probably
the  large  white  kidney  only  to  which  it  is  curative,
as  it  is  to  this  form  only  that  it  is  homoeopathic.
In  affections  of  the  generative  organs  its  use  is  known
at  present  only  in  chronic  raenorrhagia  (for  which
it  is  extolled  by  your  own  Locock  and  Hunt),  and
where  the  soft  chancre  runs  into  phagedsena.  It
will  probably  be  found  curative  in  noma  pudendi,
in  cancer  scroti,  and  other  malignant  and  gangrenous
affections  of  the  external  genitals.  Dr.  Black  sug-
gests the  use  of  Arsenic  in  chronic  uterine  disease  :
a  thin,  corrosive,  burning  leucorrhoea  would  indicate
it  in  such  cases.

4.  In inflammations of the serous membranes
Arsenic  is  called for  whenever  very  copious serous
effusion  is  present. No  remedy  equals  it  here. It
has  most  influence  on  the  pleura,  least  on  the  peri-
toneum. In  chronic  serous  dropsies  the  persevering
use  of  Arsenicum  is  sometimes attended  with  good
results. f In  idiopathic  cases  it  is  probably  inferior
to  Apis,  perhaps  also  to  Apocynum  ;  in  ascites  from
disease  of  the  liver,  it  can  do  little ;  but  in  dropsy
secondary  to  cardiac  or  renal disease its  powerful
action  upon  the  organs  primarily  affected  makes  it  a
most  valuable  medicine.

5.  I need hardly  tell  you  that Arsenic has a
curative  range  in  cutaneous  diseases  not  less  extensive
than  its  pathogenetic  influence  in  the  same  sphere.

*  See  '  Lancet,'  January  18,  1862 :  Black,  p.  17,  note  l :  and
'  British  Journal  of  Homoeopathy,'  vol.  xii,  p.  485 ;  vol.  xiii,  p.  566  ;
vol.  xiv,  p.  20;  vol.  xvi,  p.  219;  vol.  xvii,  p.  545,  573.

t  See  some  capital  cases  by  Dr.  Yeldham  in  vols.  iii  and  iv  of  the
'  Annals.'


ARSENICUM.  121

I  suppose  that  Mr.  Hunt  fairly  expresses  your  own
experience  and  that  of  old-school  practitioners
generally.  If  you  will  read  through  a  review  of  his
book  which  I  wrote  in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Homoeo-
pathy/ vol.  xxi,  p.  660,  you  will  see  the  Homoeo-
pathicity  of  his  treatment  argued  out.  It  extends
even  to  dose,  when  he  gives  (as  in  one  case)  the
4oth  of  a  grain  only  at  a  time.  We  have  many
other  remedies  for  skin  diseases  besides  Arsenic,  and
hence  do  not  use  it  so  indiscriminately  as  in  the  old
school.  But  in  chronic  cases  of  urticaria,  eczema,
pemphigus,  rupia  simplex,  lichen,  prurigo,  pityriasis,
psoriasis  and  lepra  we  esteem  it  as  highly  as  you  do,
and  use  it  as  the  leading  remedy.

And  so  we  come  to  the  end  of  the  therapeutic
virtues  of  Arsenic,  having  added  to  its  conquests
formerly  enumerated  (among  other  diseases)  cancrum
oris,  gastritis,  diarrhoea  chronica,  ophthalmia  chronica
and  scrofulosa,  asthma,  Bright's  disease,  menor-
rhagia  chrouica,  serous  effusions  and  dropsies,  and
chronic  diseases  of  the  skin.  Truly  a  goodly  list ;
and  it  might  be  yet  extended.  For  myself  I  can
say  this,  that  were  I  reduced  to  two  medicines  only
out  of  the  whole  Pharmacopoeia,  the  two  I  should
choose  would  be  Aconite  and  Arsenic.

The  action  of  Arsenic  is  so  extensive,  that  it  has
points  of  analogy  with  nearly  every  medicine  in  the
'  Materia  Medica/  Those  which  resemble  it  most
closely  are  Mercurius  corrosivus,  Kali  bichromicum,
and  Iodine.

Like  all  polychrests,  Arsenic  must  be  given  in
various  dilutions  to  obtain  its  full  efficacv.  In


122  ARSENICUM.

cholera,  typhoid  conditions,  cancer,  chronic  menor-
rhagia,  and  cutaneous  diseases  you  may  use  the  1st
trituration  of  Arsenious  acid,  or  (which  I  prefer),  the
Liquor  Potasses  Arsenitis,  which  contains  gr.  j  of
Arsenious  acid  in  TT^CXX.  The  3rd  dec.  trituration
is  a  very  useful  potency  for  chronic  diarrhoea,  and
for  chronic  inflammation  of  those  tissues  to  which
Arsenic  is  irritant.  The  6th  dilution  answers
admirably  for  influenza,  coryza,  acute  serous  effusion,
and  other  acute  inflammations  to  which  the  drug  is
homoeopathic.  The  potencies  from  the  6th  upward
have  proved  most  serviceable  in  neuralgia,  in  chronic
intermittents,  and  in  asthma.


LETTER  XI.

ARTEMISIA, ASAFffiTIDA, ASARUM, ASTERIAS, AURUM,
BAPTISIA, BARYTA  CARBON1CA  AND  MURIATICA.

THE  alphabetical  arrangement  we.  are  following
brings  us  now  to  a  series  of  minor  medicines, —
each  of  these,  nevertheless,  having  its.  own  place  in
the  treatment  of  disease,  which  place  cannot  be
filled  by  any  other  without  loss.  The  first  in  order
is  the  common  Mug-wort,  the

Artemisia  vulgaris.

A  tincture  or  (better)  trituration&r  may  be  made
from  the  inner  part  of  the  root.

There  is  no  proving, .of  Artemisia  extant.  Our
knowledge  concerning  it  (mainly  contributed  by
Dr.  Burdach)  is  set  down  in  .Hempel  and  in  the
'New  Materia  Medica/:«z/6  voce.

From  the  facts  there  narrated,  it  would  appear
that  Artemisia  exerts  a  decided  influence  over  the
nervous  system,  enabling  it  to  modify  such  disorders
as  epilepsy,  chorea,  somnambulism,  &c.  It  has  quite
a  reputation  among  the  common  people  as  an  anti-
epileptic.  The  eases  in. which  it  is  of- -most  value,
according  to  Burdach,  are  those  in-  which  the
paroxysms  recur,  several  times  daily.  I  have  lately
nearly  cured  a  long- standing  case  in  which  the  petit


124  ASAFtETIDA.

mal  occurred  five  or  six  times  daily  with  Artemisia,
after  the  failure  of  the  more  usual  remedies.  The
curative  effect  is  generally  accompanied  by  profuse
and  foetid  perspirations.  Burdach  considers  it  also
quite  a  specific  for  the  epileptiform  convulsions  of
children,  as  from  dentition.

Artemisia  closely  resembles  JEthusa,  and  hence
also  Cicuta  and  (Enanthe  crocata.

doses.  In  the  case  I  have  referred  to  I  gave  the  1st
dec.  trit.  of  the  dried  root.

The  next  drug  in  order  is  the  familiar

Asafoetida,

for  so,  and  not  "  Assafoetida,"  it  is  correctly  spelt.
I  need  hardly  tell  you  that  the  drug  known  by  this
name  is  the  dried  juice  of  the  root  of  the  Indian
plant  which  yields  it.  From  the  Asafoetida  of  com-
merce we  prepare  a  tincture  in  the  usual  manner.

Asafoetida  has  been  proved  only  by  Professor
Jorg  and  his  pupils.  An  account  of  their  experi-
ments is  given  in  Hempel.

Pereira  thus  sums  up  Jo'rg's  results.  "  Doses  of
Asafostida,  not  exceeding  a  scruple,  caused  uneasi-
ness and  pain  in  the  stomach,  increased  secretion  of
the  gastro-intestinal  mucous  membrane,  and  alvine
evacuations.  The  pulse  was  increased  in  frequency,
the  animal  heat  augmented,  the  respiration  quick-
ened, and  the  secretions  from  the  bronchial  mem-
brane and  skin  promoted.  A  very  constant  effect
was  headache  and  giddiness.  The  urino-genital
apparatus  appeared  to  be  specifically  affected,  for  in


ASAFCETIDA.  125

the  males  there  was  an  increase  of  the  venereal
feelings,  with  irritation  about  the  glans  penis,  while
in  the  females  the  catamenial  discharge  appeared
before  its  time,  and  uterine  pain  was  experienced."

Our  main  use  of  Asafostida  is  that  with  which
you  are  well  acquainted,  viz.  as  a  remedy  for  hys-
terical troubles.  A  symptom  repeatedly  observed
by  two  of  the  provers  strikingly  resembles  the  glo-
bus  hystericus  ;  and  hysterical  cough,  tympanitis,
and  asthma  come  within  its  range  of  influence.  I
confess  that  I  myself  rarely  use  it,  preferring  the
more  agreeable  Moschus,  whose  action  seems  so
precisely  similar.  Quite  another,  and  a  very  inex-
plicable action  of  Asafostida,  is  its  influence  upon
diseases  of  bone.  Dr.  Holcombe  writes,  "  I  have
twice  verified  the  value  of  this  remedy  in  scrofulous
caries  of  the  bones.  I  used  the  12th  dilution.  It
is  singular  that  a  remedy,  whose  principal  applications
are  to  the  most  fugitive  and  sympathetic  distur-
bances of  the  nervous  system,  should  extend  its
curative  power  to  the  most  deep-seated  and  chronic
organic  lesions."  It  is  also  highly  commended  in
acute  necrosis.  I  give  you  these  facts  as  they
stand.  For  myself,  I  have  given  Asafoetida  very
persistently  in  several  cases  of  chronic  caries,  without
being  able  to  discern  the  slightest  result  from  its
use.

The  relations  of  Asafostida  as  a  nervine  are  with
Ambra,  Castoreum,  Moschus,  and  Valerian.  Its
influence  upon  bone  (if  a  fact)  ranks  it  with  the
metals  and  metalloids  Aurum,  Mercurius,  Phos-
phorus, and  Silicea.

In  hysteric disorders,  the dose should  probably


126  ASARUM EUROPIUM.

be  from  the  2nd  downwards.  In  diseases  of  bone,
Asafoetida  has  gained  its  repute  in  the  dilutions  from
12  to  30.

I  am  entering  a  region  unknown  to  you  when  I
proceed  to  speak  of

Asarum  Europseum,

or  Asarabacca.  We  prepare  a  tincture  from  the
dried  root.

Asarum  was  proved  under  Hahnemann's  super-
intendence, and  the  pathogenesis  is  in  the  '  Materia
Medica  Pura.'  There  is  a  good  article  upon  it
(the  last  published,  I  am  sorry  to  say)  in  the  '  New
Materia  Medica/

That  Asarum  is  a  local  irritant,  of  the  Elaterium
and  Veratrum  type,  to  the  mucous  membranes
generally,  acting  as  errhine,  emetic,  and  purgative,
is  pretty  well  known  :  but  the  fact  has  little  bear-
ing on  practice.  In  Hahnemann's  provings  we  are
most  struck  by, — as  general  symptoms,  excessive
sensibility  and  general  chilliness  without  thirst ;  in
particular  regions,  depression  of  the  cerebral  func-
tions with  heavy  headache ;  weak  sight  and  twitch-
ing of  the  eyelids  ;  still  more  striking  dulness  of
hearing,  as  though  a  pellicle  were  stretched  over  the
meatus  auditorius;  passing  of  much  mucus  from
the  bowels ;  marked  stitching  in  the  lungs  ;  a  great
deal  of  myalgia  in  the  back  and  lower  extremities.
Asarum  has  hardly  ever  been  used  in  disease :  the
above  symptoms  may  occasionally  help  you  to  its
phenomenal  application.  It  has  a  great  reputation


ASTERIAS RUBENS.  127

in  Russia  as  a  remedy  for  the  effects  of  excessive
drinking.

I  can  say  nothing  as  to  the  analogous  medicines
or  the  dose  of  Asarum.

Still  more  novel  is  the  next  medicine  I  have  to
introduce  to  you.  It  is  made  from  the  star-fish,

Asterias  rubens,

by  bruising  (as  I  suppose)  the  dried  fish  in  a  mortar
and  triturating  with  milk-sugar.

Our  sole  knowledge  concerning  Asterias  is  de-
rived from  the  proving  and  clinical  cases  furnished
by  the  late  Dr.  Petroz.  They  may  be  found  in
his  collected  writings  or  translated  in  Metcalfs
'  American  Provings/

Dr.  Petroz  makes  the  following  remark.  "  Experi-
mentation on  the  healthy  gives  readily,  and  often
in  profusion,  symptoms  indicating  disturbance  of
function  ;  but  it  never  goes  on  to  alteration  of  tissue,
rarely  even  to  the  earliest  indications  thereof.  We
must  therefore  have  recourse  to  clinical  experience.
Its  teaching  is  sure,  when  time  has  confirmed
it."  To  no  medicine  does  this  statement  apply
better  than  to  Asterias  rubens.  The  skin  symp-
toms alone  are  well-marked :  and  these  have  led
to  its  employment  in  chronic  ulceration,  even  when
of  a  cancerous  nature,  with  success.  Its  action
seems  limited  to  the  left  side  of  the  body.  It  has
also  cured  a  case  of  cerebral  congestion  with  obsti-
nate constipation  in  an  old  officer.*  Asterias  had
a  reputation  among  the  ancients  in  epilepsy  :  and

*  I  have  myself  found  it  of  great  use  in  a  similar  case.


128  AURUM.

Petroz  cites  two  cases  in  which  much  benefit  re-
sulted from  its  use  in  infinitesimal  doses.  I  have
little  personal  experience  with  this  remedy.

Teste  classes  Asterias  (with  Petroz'  assent)  in
his  group  headed  by  Sulphur,  and  including  Bovista,
Mthusa,  and  Cicuta.

The  higher  dilutions  (12  to  24)  were  employed
in  all  cases  on  record  of  relief  or  cure  by  As-
terias.

We  now  come  to  a  medicine  which  Homoeopathy
has  done  much  to  rescue  from  unmerited  neglect,
and  to  restore  to  a  high  place  in  therapeutics.  I
speak  of  gold.  There  is  so  little  difference  between
the  action  of  the  metal  and  its  salts  that  I  shall
speak  of  them  generally  as

Aurum.

We  prepare  the  metal  by  triturating  the  finest
gold-leaf  with  milk-sugar.  The  terchloride  (Aurum
muriaticum)  is  dissolved  in  water  or  alcohol  to  make
the  dilutions.

Metallic  gold  and  its  muriate  were  proved  by
Hahnemann :  their  pathogeneses  were  published
first  in  the  '  Materia  Medica  Pura/  and  then  in  the
'  Chronic  Diseases/

It  seems  that  pulverised  gold  was  in  repute
among  the  Arabian  physicians  for  several  forms  of
disease,  notably  melancholia,  palpitation,  and  dys-
pnoea. Abandoned  by  modern  physicians  from
theoretical  objections,  based  on  its  supposed  insolu-
bility, its  use  was  revived  by  Hahnemanu.  His
process  of  trituration  developed  its  medicinal  powers,


AURUM.  129

and  his  method  of  experimentation  revealed  their
range  and  character.  Now,  as  you  probably  know,
a  "  Pulvis  auri"  finds  a  place  in  some  foreign
Pharmacopoeias  ;  and  the  introduction  of  the  ter-
chloride  gives  us  an  agent  bearing  the  same  relation
to  the  metal  as  Corrosive  sublimate  bears  to  Mer-
cury.

Hahnemann's  provings  make  it  evident  that  three
at  least  of  the  ancient  uses  of  gold  were  instances
of  the  operation  of  the  law  of  similars.  No  medi-
cine causes  such  marked  depression,  anguish,  loath-
ing of  life,  and  impulse  towards  self-destruction  :
and  for  melancholia,  especially  with  this  suicidal
tendency,  Aurum  in  minute  doses  (1st  trit.)  has
proved  an  effectual  remedy.  Again,  the  symptoms  of
dyspnoea  are  very  prominent :  so  that  we  understand
why  Avicenna  commends  it  as  "  extremely  useful
in  difficulty  of  breathing."  I  cannot,  however,
tell  you  what  is  the  precise  kind  of  dyspnoea  of  which
Aurum  is  curative  :  from  the  proving  it  would  seem
to  be  spasmodic  asthma.  Thirdly,  Gold  was  known
of  old  as  a  remedy  for  the  bad  effects  of  mineral
poisons,  especially  of  Arsenic  and  Mercury.  Observe
then  the  exostoses,  the  ulceration  and  swelling  of  the
nose  of  the  provings:  and  read  the  account  in  Pereira
of  the  salivation  and  erethistic  fever  induced  by  the
ter-chloride,  and  you  will  see  that  Aurum  antidotes
Mercury  by  virtue  of  the  similarity  in  their  effects.
Hahnemann  mentions  a  case  of  mercurial  caries  of
the  nasal  and  palatine  bones  cured  by  the  2nd
trituration  of  Aurum.

The  proving  also  shows  us  the  following  as  effects
of  Aurum.  Determination  of  blood  to  the  brain,

9


130  All  RUM.

with  turmoil  and  roaring  in  the  head  (compare
with  Glonoine)  ;  hemi-opia,  so  that  only  the  lower
half  of  objects  is  visible  (contrast  with  Muriatic
acid,  which  cuts  off  a  lateral  half  by  a  perpendicular
line) ;  crusts  in  the  nostrils  (especially  from  Aurum
muriaticum)  ;  very  marked  sexual  excitement ;
swelling  and  tenderness  of  the  right  testicle  ;  and
palpitation  of  the  heart.  You  will  probably  find
these  symptoms  good  indications  for  the  use  of
Aurum  in  your  practice.  Hitherto,  its  main
employment  has  been  (besides  the  melancholia  and
hydrargyrosis  of  which  I  have  already  spoken)  in
tertiary  syphilis,  and  in  sarcocele  of  long-standing.
It  is  an  admirable  medicine  for  those  constitutions
broken  down  by  the  combined  influence  of  syphilis
and  Mercury,  which  sometimes  come  before  us  for
treatment.*  I  once  gave  to  a  poor  fellow  thus
afflicted  the  1st  trituration  of  gold :  he  came  back
to  me  in  a  week's  time,  looking  quite  another  man,
and  exclaimed,  "  Surely  you  have  given  me  the
elixir  of  life."  The  syphilitic  form  of  sarcocele
would  of  course  be  that  for  which  it  is  best  suited  :
but  I  have  seen  it  act  well  in  the  simple  disease.
It  is  recommended  in  ozcena,  and  should  be  the  best
remedy  for  exostosis.  At  the  Leopoldstadt  Hospital
at  Vienna,  Aurum  muriaticum,  15th  dec.,  is  the
favorite  remedy  for  periostitis;  and,  in  the  6th
dec.  dilution,  cured  one  severe  case  of  albuminuria
with  general  and  local  dropsy .f  In  vol.  viii  of  the
'  North  American  Journal  of  Homoeopathy '  you

*  Dr.  Chapman  has  narrated  a  good  case  of  this  kind  in  the
'  British  Journal  of  Homoeopathy,'  vol.  vii,  p.  396.

t  See  '  British  Journal  of  Homoeopathy,'  vol.  xvi,  p.  314,  198.


BAPTISIA TINCTORTA.  131

may  read  some  cases  showing  its  power  over  chroiiic
ophthalmia.  Altogether,  Gold  is  a  very  important
medicine  :  and  its  use  will  probably  become  more
and  more  extensive.

After  Mercury,  the  most  striking  analogue  of
Aurum  is  Platina,  which  is  to  the  female  sex  much
what  Gold  is  to  the  male.  In  its  action  on  the
testicles  it  is  associated  with  Pulsatilla,  Clematis,
and  Spongia.

I  find  that  I  have  mentioned  the  potencies  in
which  Aurum  has  proved  efficacious :  you  will  see
that  they  have  generally  been  the  lower  ones.

One  of  the  most  valuable  among  the  contributions
which  America  has  recently  made  to  our  Materia
Medica  is  the

Baptisia  tinctoria

or  wild  Indigo. We  make  a  tincture  of  the  root.

Fragmentary  provings  of  Baptisia  may  be  found
in  the  '  North  American  Journal  of  Homoeopathy/
vols.  v  and  vii.  These,  with  further  pathogenetic
and  clinical  facts,  are  collated  by  Dr.  Hale  in  his
article  on  the  drug  in  the  "  New  Remedies. "

I  can  hardly  say  whether  the  provings  of  Baptisia
would  have  led  us  a  priori  to  its  use  in  gastric
fever.  But,  knowing  its  high  reputation  as  a
remedy  for  this  disease,  we  see  in  its  pathogenetic
effects  much  resemblance  thereto.  The  weak  and
tremulous  feeling ;  the  quick  (90),  full,  and  soft
pulse ;  the  internal  and  external  heat,  with  thirst ;
the  headache  and  tendency  to  delirium ;  the  tongue
yellowish-brown  in  the  centre  and  red  at  the  edges ;


132  BAPTISIA TINCTORIA.

the  constipation  alternating  with  diarrhoea, — all
contribute  to  make  up  the  morbid  picture.  As
regards  its  curative  virtues  I  will  repeat  here  some
remarks  which  I  made  in  vol.  xxiii  of  the  '  Brit.
Journ.  of  Homoeopathy.'

"  The  special  interest  of  this  remedy  lies  in  its
power  over  certain  kinds  of  fever.  The  authorities
quoted  by  Dr.  Hale  consider  it  the  great  specific
for  all  idiopathic  fevers  of  whatever  kind.  We
cannot  but  agree  with  him  when  he  says,  '  It  is
doubtful  if  Baptisia  is  indicated  in  all  fevers.  It  is
one  of  the  misfortunes  of  all  schools  of  medicine,
that  when  a  new  remedy  comes  up,  it  is  seized  upon
by  certain  enthusiastic  members  of  the  profession ;
and  they,  losing  sight  of  its  specific  indications,
proceed  to  laud  it  in  the  most  extravagant  terms,  as
a  panacea  in  all  diseases/

tf  In  a  former  No.  of  this  Journal  (that  for  July,
1863),  I  have  endeavoured  to  indicate  the  special
form  of  fever  to  which  the  pathogenesy  of  Baptisia,
aided  by  clinical  experience,  points  as  its  sphere  of
influence.  It  is  the  first  stage  of  the  ordinary
endemic  fever  of  this  country,  known  popularly  as
'  gastric/  and  medically  as  '  typhoid'  or  '  enteric/
In  the  first  stage  of  this  disease  the  patient  has  a
hot  dry  skin  and  a  quick  full  pulse  ;  the  tongue  is
thickly  covered  with  a  f  whitey-brown'  fur  ;  the
head  aches,  and  there  is  at  least  nocturnal  delirium  ;
the  appetite  is  absent,  and  thirst  great ;  the  urine
is  high-coloured,  and  the  bowels  generally  consti-
pated. Unless  the  disease  is  checked  in  this  stage,
the  true  typhoid  symptoms  supervene,  which  I  need


BAPTISIA TIXCTORIA.  133

"  Now  there  is  nothing  improbable  in  the  supposi-
tion that  if  we  could  find  a  remedy  perfectly  homoeo-
pathic to  the  first  stage  of  this  malady,  we  might
cure  it  there  and  then  before  the  typhoid  symptoms
supervened.  None  of  our  ordinary  remedies  seem
applicable.  Aconite  is  powerless  against  such
fevers;  it  never  reduces  the  pulse  one  beat,  or
relieves  the  skin  by  a  drop  of  moisture.  Arsenic  is
suitable  only  to  the  later  stage  of  the  disorder.
Bryonia  is  the  remedy  generally  administered  ;  but,
though  better  than  nothing,  it  is  difficult  to  see
anything  curative  in  its  action.  On  the  other
hand,  the  pathogenesis  of  Baptisia,  brief  as  it  is,
exhibits  it  as  properly  homoeopathic  to  the  condition
experience  in  its  use  has  been,  that  in  the  great
majority  of  cases  it  cuts  short  the  fever  in  this  its
first  stage,  freeing  the  patient  from  all  the  dangers  of
the  second.  I  have  never  yet  been  disappointed  in
it  :  and  its  curative  action  is  often  exceedingly
rapid. "

I  have  little  to  add  to  the  above  remarks.  My
own  confidence  in  the  power  of  the  drug  is  un-
abated :  and  testimonies  to  its  value  continue  to
accumulate.  I  refer  you  to  cases  by  Mr.  Harmar
Smith*  and  Dr.  Bayes  ;f  and  to  accounts  of
epidemics  in  England, J  America,  §  and  Australia, ||
by  Mr.  Freeman,  Dr.  Hale,  and  Dr.  Madden

*  '  British  Journal  of  Homoeopathy,'  vol.  xxiii,  p.  400.
f  '  Monthly  Homoeopathic  Review,'  October,  1866.
J  Ibid.,  May,  1866.

§  '  British  Journal  of  Homoeopathy,'  vol.  xxiv,  p.  6G4.
||  Ibid.,  vol.  xxiv,  p.  302.


134  BARYTA CARBONICA.

respectively.  The  facts  adduced  by  the  last-
named  physician  relative  to  the  power  of  Baptisia
to  shorten  the  duration  of  the  "  colonial  fever "
observed  by  him  at  Melbourne  are  very  striking.

Baptisia  is  also  occasionally  used  with  advantage
in  ulcerative  conditions  of  the  mucous  membrane
attended  by  tendency  to  putrescence.

Baptisia  is  a  very  unique  drug.  I  can  hardly
liken  it  to  any  other,  unless  it  be  Gelseminum.

Material  doses  have  always  been  given.  In
fever,  I  give  a  drop  or  two  of  the  1st  dec.  dilution
every  two  hours.

Of  the  salts  of  Barium  we  use  two  in  our
practice,  the  Carbonate  of  Baryta  (Baryta  carbonica),
and  the  Chloride  of  Barium  (Baryta  muriatica).
The  latter  has  not  been  proved  :  we  use  it  much  as
do  the  old  school  practitioners  of  the  continent,  in
strumous  enlargements  of  the  glands.  A  much
more  important  medicine  is  the

Baryta  carbonica.

It  is  of  course  potentized  by  trituration.
The  proving  is  in  the  '  Chronic  Diseases/
Among  the  numerous  symptoms  contained  in
this  pathogeuesis  two  groups  only  have  led  to
practical  results.  These  are,  the  symptoms  of
inflammation  of  the  throat  and  of  depression  of  the
sexual  functions.  Clinical  experience  has  inter-
preted the  former  of  these  to  mean  an  acute
affection  of  the  parenchyma  of  the  tonsils.  I  know
not  who  first  recommended  Baryta  carbonica  in
true  quinsy  (tonsillitis) ;  but  it  is  one  of  the


BARYTA CARBONICA.  135

prettiest  bits  of  practice  I  know.  I  have  never
failed  to  check  by  its  means  the  progress  of  the
disease,  when  taken  in  time  :  so  that  the  engorgement
subsides  without  going  on  to  suppuration.  As
regards  the  sexual  functions,  my  friend  Dr.  Madden
has  communicated  to  me  several  cases  in  which
impotence  has  been  removed  by  this  drug.  Baryta
is  considered  very  suitable  for  affections  of  aged
people,  especially  old  men  (Conium  takes  its  place
for  old  women).

Baryta,  too,  has  hardly  any  really  analogous
medicine.  As  a  sexual  depressant,  however,  it
ranks  with  Agnus  castus,  Camphor,  Conium,  Lyco-
podium,  Naja,  Plumbum,  Selenium,  and  Zincum.

The  higher  dilutions  are  probably  the  best.  In
quinsy  I  always  use  the  6th :  in  impotence  Dr.
Madden  gave  the  12th.


LETTER  XII.

BELLADONNA.

AGAIN  we  come  upon  one  of  our  great  medicines,
our  "  polychrests."  I  shall  devote  this  letter  to  a
consideration  of  the  Atropa

Belladonna.

We  prepare  a  tincture  from  the  fresh  plant  in  the
usual  manner.

The  original  proving  of  Belladonna  is  in  the
'  Materia  Medica  Pura/  prefaced  by  some  of  Hahne-
mann's  characteristic  remarks.  There  is  another
proving  by  some  Vienna  physicians  (alloeopathic),  of
•which  an  account  is  given  in  vol.  vi  of  the  '  British
Journal  of  Homoeopathy/  In  vol.  xx  of  the
same  Journal  I  have  published  a  number  of  cases
of  poisoning  by  the  plant,  with  commentaries.
Lastly,  the  therapeutic  virtues  of  Belladonna  are
detailed  at  much  length  in  Hartmann's  '  Practical
Observations  on  some  of  the  chief  Homoeopathic
Remedies/'  2nd  series,  trausl.  by  Dr.  Okie.

You  doubtless  consider  Belladonna  to  be  in  the
main  a  neurotic  poison  and  medicine.  That  it  does
influence  nervous  function  directly  and  extensively,
I  fully  grant :  but  I  submit  that  the  great  body  of
its  action  is  not  to  be  thus  explained.

Let  us  see  how  it  affects  the  nerves, — sensory,


BELLADONNA.  ( 137

motor,  and  sympathetic.  Locally  applied,  it  is  a
depressant  to  the  two  former,  causing  anaesthesia
and  paralysis :  but,  with  a  not  uncommon  antago-
nism, excites  the  latter,  causing  contraction  instead
of  dilatation  (as  with  Opium)  of  the  minute  arteries.
Similar  effects  might  be  expected  from  its  internal
administration :  but  as  a  fact  they  are  very  rarely
seen,  except  in  those  parts  of  the  body  for  which
Belladonna  has  an  elective  affinity.  Thus,  anaesthesia
is  produced  hardly  anywhere  but  in  the  eye,  where
a  true  amaurosis  is  set  up.  Paralysis  is  seen  only
in  the  sphincters, — incontinence  of  urine  and  in-
voluntary defsecation  resulting  from  full  doses  of
Atropine.  And  the  characteristic  dilatation  of  the
pupil,  with  open,  brilliant,  staring  eyes,  is  the  sole
witness  to  excitation  of  the  sympathetic  system.

You  will  notice  how  different  all  this  is  from  the
generally  diffused  action  of  Aconite.  But  you  will
also,  I  think,  agree  with  me  that  such  an  influence
as  this  in  no  way  accounts  for  the  remarkable
disturbance  of  the  cerebral  functions  so  characteristic
of  Belladonna  poisoning :  still  less  for  the  red  face,
the  dry  throat,  the  scarlet  skin,  and  the  urinary
irritation  which  rarely  fail  to  appear.  Everything
here  points  to  excitement  rather  than  depression  of  the
nervous  centres,  and  to  dilatation  rather  than  contrac-
tion of  the  blood-vessels.  We  must  inquire  whether
Belladonna  does  not  possess  properties  of  another
kind  which  may  account  for  these  phenomena.

Now  although  writers  on  Materia  Medica  treat
of  Belladonna  as  a  pure  narcotic,  a  toxicologist  like
Christison  does  not  hesitate  to  class  it  among  the
narcotico-acrids,  adducing  several  instances  in  which


138  BELLADONNA.

inflammatory  irritation — as  of  the  throat  and  bladder
— resulted  from  its  use.  We  have  only  to  suppose
that  it  exerts  this  influence  upon  the  cerebro-spinal
centres  also ;  that  it  irritates  nervous  tissue  as  well
as  affects  nervous  function,  and  the  whole  difficulty
disappears.  According  as  one  or  other  action  pre-
dominates in  any  part  of  the  body,  so  the  symptoms
will  be  those  of  excitement  and  vascular  fulness,  or
of  depression  and  arterial  contraction.

Upon  such  principles  we  will  now  pass  in  review
the  action  of  Belladonna,  pathogenetic  and  thera-
peutic, in  the  chief  spheres  of  its  operation.  These
are  the  intra-cranial  nervous  centres,  the  eye,  the
throat,  the  bladder,  and  the  skin.

I.  The  whole  encephalic  mass  seems  irritated  by
Belladonna;  and  each  of  the  nervous  centres  of
which  it  is  made  up  manifests  this  in  its  own
peculiar  way.  In  all  we  have  excitement  with
perversion  of  function,  followed  by  or  accompanied
with  more  or  less  hypersemia  of  an  active  character.
Upon  the  cerebrum  the  earliest  effects  are  insomnia,
delirium,  and  even  mania.  These  symptoms  are
generally  accompanied  with  or  followed  by  the  signs
of  active  determination  of  blood, — flushing  of  the
face,  headache,  intolerance  of  light  and  sound,  &c.
When  the  poisonous  influence  is  severe  or  prolonged,
this  stage  of  excitement  is  often  succeeded  by  one
of  sopor  and  exhaustion,  as  it  is  in  idiopathic
inflammations  of  the  brain.  A  similar  derangement
of  the  motor  centres,  the  corpora  striata  and  perhaps
the  cerebellum,  appears  in  the  disorder  of  standing
and  walking  observed  in  many  cases  of  Belladonna
poisoning.  This  does  not  appear  to  be  a  true


BELLADONNA.  139

paraplegia  :  it  resembles  rather  that  want  of  control
of  the  lower  limbs  which  is  induced  by  alcohol.
Other  evidences  of  excited  but  perverted  muscular
action  are  seen  in  the  twitchings,  jactitations,  and
chorea-like  movements  which  occur  in  various  parts
of  the  body.  As  for  the  sensory  ganglia,  we  have
as  yet  no  evidence  of  the  action  of  Belladonna  upon
the  optic  thalami  or  the  olfactory  lobes.  Upon  the
centres  of  vision  and  hearing  its  influence  is  very
decided.  Auditory  illusions,  as  roaring  in  thejears,
occasionally  though  not  frequently  occur  :  and  visual
hallucinations  are  exceedingly  common.  Lusanna
says,  "Various  phantasms  are  observed,  gigantic
forms,  and  appearances  sometimes  laughable,  some-
times terrifying  ;  also  quick  rotation  and  duplication
of  objects."  The  excited  and  perverted  functions
of  the  medulla  oblongata  are  seen  in  the  abnormal
actions  of  the  parts  supplied  by  the  nerves — pneumo-
gastric,  hypoglossal,  &c. — which  originate  in  it.
Such  are  spasms  of  the  larynx  and  pharynx,  difficult
articulation  and  deglutition,  spasmodic  cough,  and
stridulous  respiration.  Post-mortem  examination
almost  invariably  discloses  considerable  cerebral
congestion,  involving  also  the  cerebellum  and  medulla
oblongata.

The  physiological  actions  I  have  now  enumerated
at  once  lead  us  to  a  wide  range  of  therapeutic
influence  on  the  part  of  Belladonna.  In  all  active
hypersemise  and  perversions  of  function  of  any  of  the
encephalic  centres,  Belladonna  is  the  first  medicine
to  be  thought  of.  In  delirium  and  mania  the
choice  nearly  always  lies  between  it  and  Hyoscyamus
or  Stramonium.  When  we  come  to  the  study  of


140  BELLADONNA.

these  medicines,  we  shall  find  that  Stramonium  is
best  suited  to  very  acute  maniacal  delirium ;  and
Hyoscyamus  to  cerebral  disturbance  unconnected
with  hypersemia,  or  resulting  from  toxaemia,  as  in
low  fevers.  Sometimes,  however,  the  cerebral
complication  of  fever  is  sufficiently  active  to  require
Belladonna.  In  delirium  tremens  the  presence  or
absence  of  hyperaemia  of  the  brain  determines  the
choice  between  Belladonna  and  Hyoscyamus.  If  the
distinction  between  delirium  ebriosorum  (mania  a
potu]  and  true  delirium  tremens  be  valid,  it  is  to  the
former  that  Belladonna  is  best  suited.  Belladonna
rarely  fails  to  relieve  the  ordinary  nervo-congestive
headache :  but  is  of  no  value  in  that  which  depends
on  gastric  derangement.  It  yields  to  Nux  vomica
as  a  remedy  for  apoplexy,  and  for  the  chronic
cerebral  congestion  of  apoplectic  subjects  :  in  these
cases  there  is  no  tendency  to  perversion  of  function.
It  is  the  all-important  remedy  (generally  in  conjunc-
tion with  Aconite)  in  the  first  stages  of  phrenitis
and  acute  hydrocephalus ;  but  obviously  becomes
inapplicable  when  collapse  or  effusion  has  set  in.
In  puerperal  convulsions,  when  a  hyperaemic  state  of
the  brain  is  present,  it  is  our  best  remedy.  Alto-
gether, Belladonna  stands  facile  princeps  among  our
brain-medicines;  and  daily  affords  us  unbounded
satisfaction.

I  pass  by  the  action  of  Belladonna  on  the
motor  and  sensory  ganglia  with  two  remarks.
muscles,"  and  is  to  the  motor  centres  what  delirium
is  to  the  cerebrum.  Belladonna,  thus  essentially
homo3opathic  to  it,  may  find  (as  it  has  found)  a


BELLADONNA.  141

place  in  its  treatment.  2nd.  The  curative  action  of
Belladonna  with  regard  to  visual  hallucinations  is
most  frequently  called  into  play  when  these  arise  as
a  part  of  the  delirium  of  drunkards  or  fever
patients.  It  should  be  thought  of,  however,  in  any
subjective  derangement  of  vision — chromatopsia,
diplopia,  &c. — of  intra-cranial  origin.  But  next  to
the  cerebrum,  the  medulla  oblongata  is  the  great
sphere  of  the  therapeutic  operation  of  Belladonna,
since  upon  irritation  of  this  centre  so  many
important  diseases  depend.  You  are  probably
acquainted  with  the  recent  researches  (inaugurated
by  Schroeder  Van  der  Kolk)  on  the  nature  of
epilepsy,  which  point  to  irritation  of  the  medulla
oblongata  as  the  starting-point  of  the  paroxysms.
Hence,  probably,  the  great  value  of  Belladonna  in
the  treatment  of  this  disease,  which  both  old  and
new  schools  attest.  It  is  the  favorite  remedy
alike  at  the  London  Homoeopathic  Hospital  and  at
the  Hospital  for  the  Paralysed  and  Epileptic.
Infantile  convulsions  also,  when  active  and  epilepti-
form,  probably  start  from  the  medulla  oblongata,
and  find  in  Belladonna  their  best  medicine.  If  the
irritation  fall  upon  the  laryngeal  nerves,  we  may
have  laryngismus  or  spasmodic  cough.  Belladonna
should  do  (I  believe  it  has  done)  good  service  in
preventing  the  recurrence  of  laryngismus  stridulus
in  florid  and  excitable  children.  In  hooping-cough
it  frequently  becomes  useful :  especially  in  the
second  stage,  when  the  laryngismus  is  severe,  the
determination  of  blood  to  the  head  very  great,  and
convulsions  are  supervening.  Again,  the  poison  of
hydrophobia  falls  most  upon  the  medulla  oblongata


142  BELLADONNA.

and  its  issuing  nerves  :  and  if  this  disease  ever  has
been  cured  or  prevented,  the  credit  is  due  to  Bella-
donna. Since  irritation  of  the  medulla  oblongata
may  through  the  vagi  cause  true  asthma,  Belladonna
may  occasionally  be  serviceable  in  this  disease.
There  is  a  case  by  Mr.  Nankivell  in  the  '  Monthly
Horn.  Review'  which  well  illustrates  the  form  of
the  disease  to  which  it  is  suitable.

If  you  have  followed  me  in  this  sketch  of  the
main  sphere  of  the  operation  of  Belladonna,  you
will  concur  with  Teste  when  he  lays  down  that  "  the
subjects  to  whose  diseases  it  corresponds  most
exactly  are  those  whose  cerebral  functions  are  most
liable  to  become  irritated ;  or  whose  brains,  and
consequently  heads,  have  the  greatest  development,
i.  e.  children."  You  will  also  appreciate  Pereira's
naive  remark,  "  In  the  first  degree  of  its  operation,
Belladonna  diminishes  sensibility  and  irritability.
This  effect  (called  by  some  sedative)  is  scarcely
obvious  in  the  healthy  organism,  but  is  well  seen  in
morbid  states, when  these  proper  ties  are  preternaturally
increased."

II.  We  come  now  to  the  action  of  Belladonna
upon  the  eye,  which  presents  a  most  complicated
problem.  The  conjunctiva  exhibits  the  tissue-
irritation  of  the  drug :  it  is  generally  injected,  and
in  two  of  the  cases  of  poisoning  I  have  collected
actual  inflammation  was  set  up.  Then  comes  the
dilated  pupil  so  characteristic  of  Belladonna.  On
what  does  this  phenomenon  depend  ?  I  was
always  greatly  interested  in  the  question,  and  wrote
upon  it  before  I  knew  anything  of  Homoeopathy.
My  most  matured  views  on  the  subject  you  may


BELLADONNA.  143

read  in  a  paper  entitled  "  Observations  on  the  Pupil,
as  affected  by  Disease  and  Drugs,"  in  vol.  xxii  of
the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn/  I  still  adhere  to  the
opinion  there  expressed  and  reasoned  out,  that  the
dilated  pupil  of  Belladonna  results  from  excitation
by  it  of  the  cervical  sympathetic.  I  know  that  the
general  tide  of  opinion  is  now  setting  in  the
direction  of  supposing  the  phenomenon  to  depend
upon  paralysis  of  the  circular  fibres  of  the  iris.  If
this  be  so,  it  would  correspond  with  the  action  of
the  poison  on  the  other  sphincters  :  and  would  be
an  instance  of  its  depression  of  the  cerebro-spinal
nerves  rather  than  of  its  excitation  of  the  sympa-
thetic.— The  presbyopia  of  Belladonna  poisoning  is
undoubtedly  the  result  of  the  dilatation  of  the  pupil.
Not  so,  however,  the  impairment  of  vision  going  on
to  complete  amaurosis  which  is  so  often  observed.
The  two  phenomena  are  not  always  co-existent ;  and
the  one  may  decline  while  the  other  continues  in
force.  I  believe  the  amaurosis  to  depend  upon  an
exertion  of  the  anaesthetic  influence  of  the  drug
upon  the  retina,  which  obtains  also  in  the  ophthalmic
branch  of  the  fifth  nerve.  In  Belladonna  poisoning
there  is  insensibility  to  the  stimuli  which  ordinarily
give  rise  to  the  act  of  winking.  And  as  reflex
winking  may  be  excited  through  the  medium  of
either  the  fifth  or  the  optic  nerve,  it  follows  that
when  it  is  entirely  absent  both  these  must  be
paralysed.  It  is  most  interesting  to  notice  that  the
phantasms  and  visual  hallucinations,  which  result
from  the  irritation  exerted  by  Belladonna  upon  the
tubercula  quadrigemina — the  intra-cranial  centres  of
vision — are  present  when,  by  the  anesthetic  in-


144  BELLADONNA.

fluence  of  the  drug  upon  the  retina,  all  real  objects
are  invisible.

These  actions  of  Belladonna,  and  the  special
affinity  for  the  eye  which  they  exhibit,  render  it  an
important  medicine  in  maladies  affecting  this  organ.
In  severe  cases  of  catarrhal  ophthalmia,  and  in  the
inflammatory  aggravations  of  the  strumous  form,  it
is  very  useful.  How  frequently  its  power  of  dilating
the  pupil  may  be  turned  to  advantage  you  know
better  than  I  can  tell  you.  Homoeopathy  does  not
exclude  pieces  of  practice  such  as  this  :  and  now
that  you  do  it  with  the  hundred-thousandth  of  a
grain  of  Atropine,  you  will  feel  yourself  still  in  the
region  of  infinitesimals.  Do  not,  on  the  other  hand,
make  a  dilated  pupil  an  indication  for  the  Homoeo-
pathic use  of  Belladonna,  at  least  in  cerebral  affec-
tions. Let  me  cite  what  I  have  said  upon  this
point  in  the  article  already  referred  to.

"  It  is  generally  taken  for  granted,  that  the  di-
lated pupil  of  Belladonna  poisoning  is  but  a  part  of
the  general  influence  of  the  drug  upon  the  brain.
But  this  is  exceedingly  improbable.  No  fact  is
better  ascertained  about  Belladonna  than  that  it  is
an  irritant  to  the  intra-cranial  nervous  centres,  ex-
citing  and  deranging  their  functions,  and  causing
them  to  attract  a  larger  supply  of  blood  than  is
natural.  In  a  word,  it  sets  up  the  first  stage  of
inflammation  of  the  brain.  Now  this  condition  of
the  brain,  when  occurring  idiopathically,  is  always
accompanied  by'a  contracted  pupil;  and  it  is  not
until  the  stage  of  exhaustion  or  effusion  sets  in  that
the  pupils  dilate.  If,  then,  the  dilated  pupil  of  Bella-
donna were  a  symptom  of  the  state  of  the  braiu


BELLADONNA.  145

induced  by  it,  that  state  should  be  precisely  the
opposite  of  what  it  really  is.  We  conclude,  there-
fore, that  the  influence  of  Belladonna  upon  the
pupil  is  wholly  independent  of  its  action  upon  the
brain."

I  go  on  to  support  this  view  by  a  case  of  com-
pound poisoning  by  Opium  and  Belladonna.  In
this  case  "  the  cerebral  influence  of  Belladonna  was
entirely  neutralized  by  the  superior  power  of
the  Opium :  while  the  dilatation  of  the  pupil
was  as  marked  as  ever,  and  this  in  spite  of  the
tendency  of  Opium  to  cause  its  contraction.  If,
now,  the  dilated  pupil  of  Belladonna  were  sympto-
matic of  the  condition  of  the  brain  induced  by  the
drug,  we  should  have  in  this  instance  a  contradiction
of  the  axiomatic  law  '  causa  sublata  tollitur  effectus/

(e  An  important  practical  conclusion  follows,  viz.,
that  a  dilated  pupil  is  no  indication  for  the  exhibi-
tion of  Belladonna  in  cerebral  disorder.  Here,  as
elsewhere,  true  physiology  and  pathology  are  indis-
pensable addenda  to  symptomatic  indications  as  our
guide  to  the  choice  of  the  remedy.  Were  we  to
follow,  upon  the  rule  '  similia  similibus/  the  invaria-
ble symptom  of  the  dilated  pupil  as  an  indication
for  Belladonna,  we  should  be  giving  it  in  those  very
cerebral  conditions  to  which  it  is  not  homoeopathic,
and  upon  which  it  can  exercise  no  curative  influence.
And,  on  the  other  hand,  when  Dr.  Graves  recom-
mended the  administration  of  Belladonna  in  the
head  affections  of  fever,  when  the  pupils  were  con-
tracted, although  he  thought  himself  acting  upon
the  old  principle  of  antipathy,  his  remedy  was  really
homoeopathic  to  the  disease."

10


146  BELLADONNA.

I  have  only  to  say  farther  as  regards  the  eye  that
Belladonna  ought  to  find  a  place  in  the  treatment
of  amaurosis,  though  I  am  not  aware  of  any  records
of  its  use.

III.  Dryness  of  the  throat  is  an  almost  con-
stant symptom  of  overdoses  of  Belladonna.  It  is
to  this  drug  what  salivation  is  to  Mercury,  and
conjunctivitis  to  Arsenic.  In  two  of  the  cases  in
my  collection  it  is  said  to  have  been  hot  as  well  as
dry ;  but  in  neither  does  any  visual  examination
appear  to  have  been  made  to  ascertain  the  physical
condition  of  the  parts.  From  other  sources,  however,
which  I  have  cited  in  the  same  paper  we  derive
farther  information  on  this  head.  In  one  case  the
patient  complained  of  "  sore-throat."  In  another
it  is  said  "  he  felt  great  soreness  in  the  throat,
which  looked  very  red  about  the  tonsils  and  palate.
The  soreness  extended  to  the  ears."  In  another
"  the  mucous  membrane,  from  the  posterior  third
of  the  palate  as  far  down  as  could  be  seen,  was  of  a
deep  crimson  colour,  and  the  tonsils  were  much
enlarged/'  Lastly,  Christison  speaks  of  "  redness  of
the  throat"  in  one  instance,  and  of  "  aphthous  in-
flammation" of  this  part  in  two  others.  I  think  that
from  these  facts  it  is  evident,  that  the  dry  mouth
and  throat  of  Belladonna  do  not  result  from  an
anaemic  condition  of  these  parts,  as  from  sympa-
thetic excitation ;  but  result  from  the  arrest  of
secretion  which  accompanies  congestion  and  in-
flammation. Belladonna  is  hence  tissue-irritant  to
this  portion  of  the  alimentary  mucous  mem-
brane.

Correspondingly, for  ordinary  acute  sore-throat


BELLADONNA.  147

Belladonna  is  as  complete  a  specific  as  medicine  can
present.  It  is  specially  indicated  where  there  are
much  heat  and  pain  on  swallowing,  bright  redness
of  the  affected  parts,  flushed  face,  and  headache.
When  the  sub-mucous  infiltration  is  great,  Bella-
donna yields  in  value  to  Apis  ;  when  the  parenchyma
of  the  tonsils  is  specially  affected,  Baryta  carbonica
is  a  better  medicine.  But  do  not  be  led  away  to
other  remedies  (as  Mercurius)  because  ulcers  form,
or  diphtheritic  patches  appear.  In  both  these
forms  of  sore-throat,  if  you  cut  away  the  inflamed
basis  with  your  Belladonna,  the  ulcers  or  patches
will  soon  follow.  It  is  only  when  the  angina  is
ulcerative  from  the  commencement,  with  little  red-
ness, or  when  true  constitutional  diphtheria  appears,
that  Belladonna  ceases  to  be  efficacious.

IV.  Belladonna  has  a  decided  affinity  for  the
bladder.  Its  paralytic  influence  over  the  sphincter
I  have  already  noted.  In  smaller  doses,  it  causes
frequent,  difficult,  and  scanty  micturition  of  nearly
colourless  urine.  That  these  phenomena,  like  those
of  the  throat,  depend  upon  an  irritation  of  the
urinary  mucous  membrane,  appears  when  we  inves-
tigate the  ultimate  effects  of  the  drug  in  this  sphere.
Christison  quotes  one  case  from  Wibmer,  in  which  the
patient  had  "  violent  strangury  towards  the  close ;"
and  another  from  M.  Jolly,  where  there  was  "  vio-
lent strangury  with  suppression  of  urine  and  bloody
micturition."

There  are  two  affections  of  the  bladder  in  which
Belladonna  is  extremely  useful.  The  one  is  noc-
turnal enuresis,  as  it  occurs  in  delicate  and  sensi-
tive children,  without  any  irritating  quality  in  the


148  BELLADONNA.

urine.  It  has  also  been  found  useful  where  in-
voluntary defsecation  reveals  a  similar  state  of  the
rectal  sphincter.  The  other  is  an  irritable  state  of
the  urinary  apparatus,  short  of  actual  inflammation.
When  true  inflammation  occurs,  Belladonna  yields
to  Cantharis,  Cannabis,  &c.

V.  Heat,  dryness,  and  redness  of  the  skin  are
very  constant  symptoms  of  Belladonna  poisoning.
That  here  again  we  have  a  tissue-irritation  appears
from  the  more  advanced  effects  of  the  drug.  In
one  of  my  cases  the  symptoms  closely  resembled
those  of  erysipelas  of  the  face.  Far  more  com-
monly, however,  a  scarlatinoid  eruption,  very  like
that  of  the  idiopathic  disease,  is  observed.  In  one
case,  the  local  application  of  Belladonna,  twenty
drops  of  the  mother-tincture  to  four  ounces  of
water,  caused  intense  redness,  with  fine  vesicular
eruption,  exactly  co-extensive  with  the  lint  with
which  it  was  applied.*

The  curative  power  of  Belladonna  in  inflammatory
affections  of  the  skin  is  very  marked.  In  erythema,
especially  from  insolation,  it  readily  effects  a  cure.
In  the  ordinary  non-vesicular  erysipelas,  its  use  is
one  of  the  most  triumphant  things  in  Homoeopathy.
Listou  has  recorded  his  testimony  to  its  great  value  :
and  he  could  speak  comparatively  better  than  most
men.  A  moderate  amount  of  swelling  does  not
contra-indicate  it :  but  if  this  symptom  be  exces-
sive, Apis  becomes  preferable.  When  vesicles
form,  it  is  usual  to  change  to  Rhus  :  and  I  have
seen  such  capital  results  from  this  medicine  that  I
cannot  but  approve  the  practice.  Boils  and  car-
*  '  Annals,'  vol.  iv,  p.  83.


BELLADONNA.  149

buncles,  which  bear  so  close  a  relation  to  erysipelas,
may  generally  be  helped — the  former  often  blighted
— by  Belladonna.  Again,  Belladonna  so  obviously
covers  the  symptoms  of  ordinary  scarlatina — the
rash,  the  angina,  and  the  delirium — that  it  has
become  our  leading  medicine  for  the  disease.  That
it  shortens  its  duration,  I  cannot  say  :  that  it  does
not  diminish  the  fever,  I  can  testify,  finding  that
cases  never  do  so  well  without  Aconite.  Nor  will
it  touch  the  renal  affection,  or  (as  far  as  I  know)
any  other  of  the  sequelse  of  scarlatina  :  and  it  is
confessedly  inadequate  to  eope  with  the  more  ma-
lignant forms  of  the  disease.  What  then,  you  will
ask,  does  Belladonna  do  for  us  in  scarlatina?  I  can.
only  say,  that  I  suppose  it  moderates  the  angina
and  delirium,  and  helps  the  case  to  a  successful
issue.  It  is  somewhat  a  matter  of  faith,  resting  on
analogy  :  but  the  probability  is  sufficient  to  make
me  use  it  in  every  instance.  A  more  valuable  pro-
perty of  the  drug  would  be  that  claimed  for  it  by
Hahnemann,  that  it  acts  as  a  prophylactic  against
the  scarlatinal  contagion.  Much  controversy  has
raged  upon  this  subject,  and  very  different  results
have  been  obtained  by  different  experimenters.
You  will  find  a  good  summary  of  the  facts  of  the
case  in  Dr.  Dudgeon's  '  Lectures  on  Homoeopathy.'
On  the  whole,  the  balance  is  in  favour  of  its  pro-
phylactic virtues  :  and  we  do  well  to  administer  it
for  this  purpose  whenever  scarlatina  breaks  out  in  a
household.

I  have  said  nothing  about  the  relation  of  Bella-
donna to  the  uterus  and  its  disorders.  It  is  a  good
deal  used  as  a  uterine  remedy  :  and  there  are  a  few


150  BELLADONNA.

symptoms  in  Hahnemann's  proving  which  suggest
its  action  in  this  region,  especially  increased  and  pre-
mature menstruation,  and  a  feeling  of  pressing  down-
wards, as  if  all  the  contents  of  the  abdomen  would
issue  from  the  genitals.  I  have  myself  removed
this  symptom  by  a  high  dilution  of  Belladonna.  But
I  cannot  help  thinking  that  if  Belladonna  had  an
affinity  for  the  uterus  like  that  it  manifests  for  the
brain,  the  eye,  the  throat,  the  bladder,  and  the  skin,
we  should  have  seen  some  evidence  of  it  in  the  cases
of  poisoning  I  have  collected,  of  whose  subjects
several  were  women.  However,  do  not  be  deterred
from  using  it  by  my  scepticism.  You  will  see  that
Hempel  recommends  it  to  correct  foul  states  of  the
uterine  discharges,  in  puerperal  fever,  and  in  chronic
uterine  congestion.  Mr.  Leadam  speaks  highly
of  its  power  to  relax  rigidity  of  the  os  occurring
during  labour.

This  is  all  I  have  to  say  about  Belladonna.  We
are  fully  justified  in  placing  it  with  Aconite  and
Arsenic  in  the  very  first  rank  of  our  remedies.

There  are  only  two  medicines  which  I  can  call
truly  analogous  to  Belladonna;  and  these  are
Hyoscyamus  and  Stramonium.  If,  as  is  now  be-
lieved, the  three  contain  a  common  active  principle,
their  similarity  of  action  is  explained.  At  the  same
time,  their  well-recognised  diversities  afford  another
instance  of  the  fallacy  of  supposing  that  in  these
"active  principles" resides  the  whole  virtue  of  a  plant.

With  Belladonna,  like  Arsenic,  we  must  avail
ourselves  of  the  whole  scale  of  potencies.  In
cerebral  affections,  the  higher  dilutions  (12  to  30)
are  best  when  perversion  of  function,  the  lower


ATROPIA.  151

(3  to  1)  when  hypersemia  predominates.  In  recurring
convulsive  affections  (except  infantile  eclampsia),  in
strumous  ophthalmia,  in  acutely  inflamed  throats,  in
irritable  bladder,  and  in  erysipelas  I  use  the  1st  and
2nd  dec.  dilutions  :  in  enuresis,  and  in  recent  head-
ache or  neuralgia,  the  6th  and  12th.  As  a  prophy-
lactic, I  think  Belladonna  should  be  given  in  doses
of  from  half  a  drop  to  two  drops  of  the  mother-
tincture  twice  daily.  I  must  tell  you,  however,  that
Hahnemann  used  the  dilutions  for  this  purpose  :  and
that  Dr.  Bayes  has  recently  advised  the  12th  as
most  suitable.

Before  leaving  Belladonna,  I  must  say  something
of  its  chief  alkaloid,

Atropia.

Our  information  concerning  its  therapeutical
virtues  is  contained  in  an  article  by  Dr.  Caspar  of
Vienna,  which  you  will  find  translated  in  vol.  vi  of
the  '  North  Amer.  Journ.  of  Horn./  p.  457.

Dr.  Caspar  gives  therein  the  results  of  the  treat-
ment of  above  a  hundred  cases,  in  which,  having
given  Belladonna  without  effect,  although  well
indicated,  he  substituted  Atropine  :  and  afterwards,
as  his  knowledge  of  the  drug  grew,  gave  Atropia  in
the  first  instance,  followed,  if  ineffectual,  by  Bella-
donna. His  main  conclusion  is,  that  Atropia
occupies  the  purely  neurotic  sphere  of  Belladonna,
having  no  place  in  its  tissue  irritations  and  vascular
excitements.  He  has  cured  with  Atropia  idiopathic
and  post-febrile  headaches,  hallucinations,  epilepsy
(in  three  cases),  irritable  throat  and  larynx,  hooping-
cough  in  the  convulsive  stage,  and  asthma.  He


152  ATROPIA.

thinks  that  it  has  little  or  no  action  below  the
diaphragm.  But  Dr.  Kafka,  of  Prague,  having
made  a  proving  of  Sulphate  of  Atropia  upon  himself,
and  experienced  marked  gastric  symptoms,  was  led
to  give  it  in  chronic  affections  of  the  stomach
characterised  by  much  pain  and  vomiting,  and  with
very  satisfactory  results.  You  will  find  his  remarks
in  the  '  British  Journal/  vol.  xv,  p.  238.  Of  late,
Atropia  has  gained  much  repute  in  the  treatment
of  epidemic  cerebro-spinal  meningitis.

The  4th  dec.  trit.  has  generally  been  employed.


LETTER  XIII.

BERBERIS,  BISMUTHUM, BORAX, BOVISTA, BROMIUM,
AND KALI BROMIDUM.

I  shall  begin  this  letter  by  a  sketch  of  the  action
of  the  Barberry,

Berberis  vulgaris.

We  make  a  tincture  from  the  delicate  rootlets
and  the  bark  of  the  larger  roots, — at  least  so  says
Hempel.

Berberis  was  proved  in  Germany,  under  the
superintendence  of  Dr.  Hesse.  For  the  pathogenesis
I  must  refer  you  to  Jahr's  'Manual/  There  are
some  notices  of  cures  effected  by  it  in  an  article  by
Dr.  Hering  in  the  'American  Homoeopathic  Review'
for  August,  1865.

From  these  sources  it  would  appear  that  Berberis
has  an  irritant  influence  of  a  not  very  intense  kind
upon  most  of  the  mucous  membranes.  It  has  been
used  successfully  in  some  sub-acute  urinary  irrita-
tions, in  which  it  is  said  to  be  indicated  by  a  burn-
ing along  the  mucous  tract,  and  by  pains  in  the
hips  (comp.  Cannabis  sat.)  It  is  reported  to  have
twice  effected  a  cure  of  fistula  ani,  complicated  with
chest  symptoms  (comp.  Calcarea  phosphorica).


154  BISMUTHUM.

The  two  medicines  named  for  comparison  are
the  only  ones  I  know  which  at  all  resemble  Berberis.

Those  who  have  used  it  have  done  so  in  the  higher
dilutions  (6 — 18).

The  next  medicine  is  one  well-known  to  you,
viz.

Bismuthum.

So  Hahnemann  called  his  preparation,  supposing
it  to  be  an  oxide.  But  I  think  that  if  you  read  his
directions  for  its  preparation,  you  will  agree  with
me  that  the  resulting  salt  is  identical  with  that
which  the  London  Pharmacopoeia  styles  Nitrate  of
Bismuth.  By  Bismuth,  therefore,  is  meant  that
preparation  of  the  metal  which  is  used  in  ordinary
practice.  We  prepare  it  by  trituration.

The  proving  of  Bismuth  is  in  the  '  Materia
Medica  Pura/  Some  additional  physiological  effects
are  related  in  Hempel's  article.

Pereira's  account  of  Bismuth  is,  as  usual,  un-
consciously founded  upon  the  law  of  similars.  "  In
large  doses,"  he  says,  "  it  disorders  the  digestive
organs,  causing  pain,  vomiting,  and  purging."  And
its  chief  uses  are,  according  to  him,  the  relieving
painful  affections  of  the  stomacb,  allaying  nausea
and  vomiting,  and  checking  pyrosis  and  the  diarrhoea
of  phthisis.  I  have  little  to  add  to  this,*  except  to
call  your  attention  to  the  remarkable  action  of
Bismuth  upon  the  heart,  especially  the  endocardium.
"  Violent  beating  of  the  heart "  appears  iu  the

*  Dr.  Chapman  has  mentioned  some  cases  in  which  Bismuth  has
acted  well  in  the  3rd  trituration  against  dyspepsia.  ('  Brit.  Journ.
of  Horn.,'  vol.  vii,  p.  504.)


BORAX.  155

pathogenesis :  and  in  the  post-mortem  examination
of  the  only  case  of  poisoning  on  record,  the  inner
surface  of  both  ventricles  of  the  heart  was  very  red.
Bismuth  deserves  a  trial  in  endocarditis.  Teste
states  that  he  has  used  it  with  brilliant  success  in
phlegmasia  alba  dolens.

Bismuth  is  one  of  the  analogues  of  Arsenic ;
indeed  Arsenic  is  so  frequently  present  in  the
specimens  of  Bismuth  we  obtain  from  the  shops,
of  the  more  powerful  poison.  It  resembles  also
Argentum,  Hydrocyanic  acid,  and  Zinc.

Hahnemann  recommends  the  2nd  trituration  to
be  used  for  medicinal  purposes.

Another  familiar  drug  is  the  Biborate  of  Soda,

Borax.

It  is  prepared  by  trituration.

There  is  a  proving  of  Borax  in  the  '  Chronic
Diseases/  of  the  real  value  of  which  I  can  say
nothing.

I  need  not  recount  to  you  the  external  uses  of
Borax :  they  are  common  to  both  schools.  But
there  is  something  in  its  power  over  aphthse  which
looks  specific,  especially  considering  the  essential
nature  of  the  aphthous  process.  So  far  as  Hahne-
mann's  proving  goes,  it  would  appear  that  Borax  can
cause  as  well  cure  aphthse  in  the  mouth.  But  the
best  evidence  of  its  specific  power  over  this  complaint
is  the  fact,  which  you  may  verify  for  yourself,  that
it  will  cure  aphthse  nearly  if  not  quite  as  rapidly
when  given  internally, — say  in  the  1st  trituration.


156  BOVISTA.

Besides  this,  Borax  has  long  been  credited  with  a
special  influence  upon  the  uterus  :  and  is  said  to
have  removed  sterility,  when  connected  with  a  chronic
acrid  leucorrhoea.

In  its  relation  to  aphthae,  Borax  compares  with
Mercurius  and  the  mineral  acids :  in  its  influence
on  the  womb,  with  Conium.

Borax  is  used  in  the  lowest  potencies  against
thrush,  as  a  uterine  remedy  in  the  higher.

My  next  medicine  is  probably  known  to  you  by
its  poisonous  effects  only.  It  is  the  "  puff-ball/'
Lycoperdon

Bovista.

It  is  prepared  by  trituration.

For  information  concerning  Bovista  I  can  only
refer  you  to  some  remarks  by  Petroz  on  the  drug  in
his  '  Collected  Writings/  and  to  the  article  in  Teste.

Bovista  is  said  to  be  indicated,  and  to  have  proved
curative  in  head  affections  characterised  by  a  sensa-
tion as  if  the  head  were  enormously  increased  in
size;  also  in  leucorrhoea  when  the  same  symptom
was  complained  of.  Its  poisonous  effects  resemble
asphyxia,  which  is  a  fact  worth  remembering.  Dr.
Madden  tells  me  that  he  has  more  than  once  cured
with  Bovista  3rd  dec.  an  itching  of  the  skin  coming
on  after  washing.

Bovista  is  classed  by  Teste  with  Sulphur,  ^thusa,
and  Asterias.

The  12th  dilution  was  used  by  Petroz  and  Teste.

I  have  now  to  speak  of  the  well-known —


BROMIUM.  157

Bromium.

Dilutions  may  be  prepared  with  alcohol :  but  as
Bromic  acid  soon  forms  in  such  a  solution,  it  is
better  to  keep  the  Bromine  pure,  and  dilute  it  with
distilled  water  when  required  for  use.

There  is  a  proving  of  Bromine  by  Dr.  Hering,  for
which  I  must  refer  you  to  Jahr's  '  Manual/
HempeFs  article  should  be  consulted.

Both  the  physiological  and  the  therapeutical
actions  of  Bromine  show  that  its  influence  is  nearly
if  not  quite  limited  to  the  respiratory  organs.  It
has  frequently  proved  curative  in  severe  cases  of
membranous  croup,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  authorities
cited  below.*  The  last  of  these  cases  is  put  on
record  by  Dr.  Meyhoffer  of  Nice,  who  in  a  very  able
way  discusses  the  precise  place  of  Bromine  in  the
therapeutics  of  this  disease.  He  decides  that  it  is
in  extension  of  diphtheria  to  the  air-passages  that
Bromine  is  indicated,  while  Iodine  or  Spongia  is
better  suited  to  the  more  local  and  sporadic  "  croup."
His  own  case  is  certainly  of  the  kind  first  named  :
and  so  are  others  that  I  have  read.  But  I  confess
that  I  have  hitherto  been  utterly  disappointed  in
Bromine,  as  in  all  other  medicines,  for  true  croupal
diphtheria.  In  the  absence  of  any  other  more
promising  remedy,  I  should  probably  try  it  again  in
the  next  case  I  might  see  :  but  I  should  have  little
hope  of  a  favourable  result. — Bromine  deserves  to
be  used  more  than  it  is  in  bronchial  and  pulmonary

*  '  North  Amer.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  x,  p.  296.  '  Philadelphia
Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  i,  p.  529 ;  vol.  ii,  p.  74,  565.  '  Brit.  Journ
of  Horn.,'  vol.  xxiv,  p.  625.


158  KALI BROMIDUM.

affections.  It  caused  in  one  prover  "  difficult  and
painful  inspirations,  violent  stitches  in  the  lungs,
and  cough  on  attempting  to  draw  a  long  breath."
It  also  appeared  to  excite  the  development  of  a  crop
of  boils.

The  chief  analogue  of  Bromine  is  Iodine.  The
action  of  the  Bromides  of  course  resembles  that  of
Bromine  itself:  but  is  sufficiently  distinct  to  warrant
separate  notice.

Bromine  does  not  bear  dilution  well.  I  should
never  give  it  higher  than  the  3rd  decimal  potency.

I  will  discuss  the  Bromide  of  potassium  in  this
place,  as  having  a  closer  affinity  to  its  Bromine  than
to  its  Potassium.

Kali  bromidum

is  prepared  by  trituration  or  aqueous  solution.

There  is  a  short  pathogenesis  of  it  in  '  Jahr's
Manual/  taken  from  Noack  and  Trinks  :  but  the
best  account  of  its  physiological  effects  is  an  article
by  Dr.  E.  M.  Hale  in  the  thirteenth  volume  of  the
1  North  Amer.  Journ.  of  Horn./  p.  205.

So  far  as  Bromide  of  Potassium  affects  the  air-
passages,  it  resembles  Bromine,  while  inferior  in
activity.  But  it  manifests  an  altogether  peculiar
influence  of  its  own  upon  the  nervous  centres.  In
the  brain  it  causes  dull  giddy  headache,  diminished
sight  and  hearing,  impaired  mental  power,  drowsi-
ness, and  stupor.  Passing  down  the  spinal  cord,
it  develops  ansesthesia  of  the  whole  surface,  and
loss  of  power  of  the  lower  extremities.  Its  de-
pressing neurotic  influence  is  especially  seen  in  the


KALI BROMIDUM.  159

throat  and  its  neighbourhood  on  the  one  hand,  and
in  the  generative  organs  on  the  other.  In  the
former  the  insensibility  is  so  perfect  that  "  the  finger
can  be  carried  to  the  base  of  the  tongue,  touch  the
amygdalae  or  posterior  nares,  and  even  tickle  the
uvula  without  inducing  any  effort  at  vomiting  or
deglutition  whatever/'  You  are  aware  that  this
property  of  the  drug  has  been  turned  to  good  pur-
pose for  facilitating  the  use  of  the  laryngoscope.
Not  less  powerfully  does  the  Bromide  lower  the
sensibility  and  activity  of  the  generative  organs.  I
agree  with  Dr.  Hale  that  this  effect  coincides  with
the  temporary  loss  of  power  brought  about  in  the
lower  extremities,  and  that  both  are  due  to  a  de-
pressing influence  of  the  drug  on  the  lower  part  of
the  spinal  cord.

Our  clinical  use  of  Bromide  of  potassium  has
hitherto  been  very  limited.  It  has  been  used  by
some  instead  of  Bromine  in  croup  and  laryngeal
diphtheria,  but  not,  I  think,  with  advantage.  Your
application  of  it  to  check  epileptic  fits,  where  the
irritation  starts  from  the  generative  organs,  is  a
very  pretty  one,  and  I  should  not  hesitate  to  adopt
it  were  I  at  a  nonplus  :  but  it  is  not  Homoeopathy.
We  shall  probably  find  the  drug  useful  in  some
cases  of  conjoined  sexual  atony  and  cerebral  de-
pression.

Phosphorus  is  the  only  medicine  which  essentially
resembles  Kali  bromidum.

This  is  a  very  short  letter :  but  I  must  begin
another,  that  I  may  devote  it  to  one  of  Hahnemann's
great  gifts  to  therapeutics,  Bryonia.


LETTER  XIV.

BRYONIA.

I  shall  devote,  as  I  said,  this  whole  letter  to
another  of  our  polychrests,

Bryonia.

A  tincture  of  the  root  of  the  Bryonia  alba  is  the
proper  Homoeopathic  preparation.

Bryonia  is  one  of  the  medicines  whose  provings
are  contained  in  the  '  Materia  Medica  Pura.'  It
has  been  re-proved  by  the  Austrian  Society  :  but
their  experiments  have  not  been  thought  worthy  of
translation.  You  will  find  them,  if  you  read  Ger-
man, in  the  third  volume  of  the  '  Oesterreichische
Zeitschrift  fur  Homoeopathic/  The  experiments  on
animals,  which  are  very  interesting,  have  been
translated  by  my  friend  Dr.  Hutchinson  in  the
'  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.'  for  Jan.  1867.  There  is  a
study  of  Bryonia  in  HirschePs  Pharmaco-dynamics,
translated  by  Dr.  Hayle  :  and  another  by  Dr.
Carroll  Dunham  in  the  '  American  Homoeopathic
Review/  vol.  vi.

As  Bryonia  is  quite  a  new  medicine  to  you,  1
must  detail  its  pathogeuetic  effects  with  some  mi-
nuteness.

The  action  of  Bryonia  is that  of  a  pure  tissue-


BRYOXIA.  161

irritant,  with  possibly  some  direct  influence  on  the
blood.  It  has  no  neurotic  or  myotic  power  :  and
my  only  reasons  for  calling  it  haematic  are — 1st,  that
in  some  animals  poisoned  by  M.  Curie  the  heart
was  full  of  decolorised  clots,  which  must  have  been
formed  during  life,  and  were  pretty  certainly  the
cause  of  death  ;  and  2nd,  that  Bryonia  has  high  repute
for  some  fevers  (as  typhus  and  rheumatism)  which
have  their  primary  seat  in  the  blood.  As  an  irri-
tant, it  affects  the  serous  membranes  and  their  con-
tained viscera,  the  mucous  membranes,  and  the
muscles.

I.  No  poison  (not  even  Aconite  or  Arsenic)
affects  the  serous  membranes  so  certainly  and  power-
fully as  Bryonia.  If  you  will  read  the  autopsies  of
the  animals  poisoned  at  Vienna,  this  fact  will
abundantly  appear.  In  the  first  the  pleura  were
injected  and  full  of  serum,  and  the  peritoneum  and
arachnoid  injected  ;  in  the  second,  third  and  fifth
the  arachnoid  only  was  reddened  ;  but  in  the
sixth  the  pleura  were  as  in  the  first,  and  the  peri-
cardial  vessels  were  injected.  Correspondingly,
the  provers  have  the  characteristic  pleuritic  pains
with  fever :  and  although  the  symptoms  of  the
head,  heart,  and  abdomen  are  undecisive,  they  at
least  do  not  forbid  the  supposition  of  an  affection  of
their  respective  serous  membranes.  Moreover,
those  close  allies  of  the  serous  sacs — the  synovial
membranes — which  are  more  easily  affected  by  drug
action,  give  plain  indication  of  suffering  from
Bryony.  The  joints  swell  and  become  tender,  es-
pecially those  of  the  fingers.

Since  all  the  parenchymatous  organs  influenced

11


162  BRYONIA.

by  Bryonia  are  enclosed  in  serous  membrane,  I  have
often  tried  to  account  for  their  symptoms  by  the
primary  action  of  the  drug  on  the  investing  tissue.
I  cannot,  however,  ask  you  to  accept  this  doctrine
viscera  as  they  exist,  and  leave  their  relation  to
the  disorder  of  their  envelopes  for  further  investi-
gation.

1.  It  is  curious,  nevertheless,  that as  of  all  the
serous  membranes  the  pleura  are  those  most  readily
influenced  by  Bryonia,  so  of  all  the  viscera  the  lungs
are  those  which  suffer most  from  its  action. The
short,  quick,  and  oppressed  breathing,  with  heat  and
pain  in  the chest,  experienced  by  the  provers  finds
its  interpretation in  the  phenomena presented  by
the  poisoned  animals. In  these,  with  similar  symp-
toms during  life,  the lungs  were  always  of  deeper
colour  and  diminished  crepitation,  while  in  two  the
lower  lobes  were  hepatized.

2.  Next  to  the lungs, the brain  is the  organ
which  shows  most  signs  of  being  affected  by  Bryonia.
There  is no  perversion  of  the sensorial  functions,
as with Belladonna : and the determination of
blood  does  not  pass  beyond  the  stage  of  congestion.
But  up  to this  point  it is  very well  marked  ; and
the  provers  get  a  hot  and  red  face,  with  headache
(generally  frontal),  sense  of  weight  and  fulness,  and
vertigo. Epistaxis  also  is  frequent.

3.  Of  the  two  chief  viscera  enfolded  by  the  peri-
toneum, the  liver  is  much  more  affected  by  Bryonia
than  the  kidneys. It  causes tensive  and  burning
pain  in  the  hepatic  region,  which  is  sometimes  also
sensitive  to  pressure. In  one  prover,  the  skin  over


BRYONIA.  163

the  whole  body  became  yellowish.  In  the  animals
the  liver  was  always  found  gorged,  and  sometimes
friable. — In  two  animals  the  kidneys  also  were
found  congested  :  but  I  think  the  scanty,  hot,  and
high-coloured  urine  so  often  passed  by  the  Austrian
provers  a  symptom  of  general  fever  rather  than  of
renal  implication.

II.  I  come  now  to  the  action  of  Bryonia  on  the
mucous  membranes.  It  is  interesting  to  observe
(in  connection  with  its  relation  to  the  rheumatic
poison)  how  much  less  powerfully  it  influences  these
than  it  does  the  serous  and  synovial  membranes.  It
is  an  acrid,  and  hence  large  doses  cannot  but  irritate
the  alimentary  membrane  as  they  go  down.  Ac-
cordingly, we  have  in  the  provers  sore-throat,  vomit-
ing, and  diarrhoea  with  colic  and  flatulence ;  and  in
the  animals  an  aphthous  mouth  and  ulcers  in  the
stomach  and  intestines.  But  the  essential  phe-
nomena of  Bryony  in  the  gastro-intestinal  sphere
do  not  seem  to  depend  upon  irritation  of  the  mu-
cous membrane.  They  are  water-brash  (with  this
there  is  the  characteristic  contractive  pain  at  the
lower  end  of  the  oesophagus),  bitter  risings  and
vomitings,  pressure  on  the  stomach,  feeling  of  load
as  if  a  stone  were  there,  and  constipation.  These
await  their  physiological  expression  :  but  they  have
received,  as  we  shall  see,  their  full  therapeutic
application.

The  respiratory  mucous  membrane  is  unques-
tionably affected  by  Bryonia,  though  I  doubt  whe-
ther the  irritation  extends  lower  than  the  first
division  of  the  bronchi.  The  symptoms  of  the
provers  (pain,  cough,  &c.),  whenever  localised,  are


164  BRYONIA.

referred  to  the  trachea  and  its  bifurcation ;  and
these  parts  only  were  found  injected  in  the  poisoned
animals.  The  pneumonia  set  up  by  Bryony  -was
never  associated  with  bronchitis,  in  this  strikingly
different  from  that  of  Tartar  emetic  and  Phosphorus.
If  Bryonia  causes  any  nasal  catarrh,  it  is  dry  :  and
the  cough  also  has  little  expectoration,  and  is  con-
tinuous, irritating,  and  violent,  often  causing  retching
and  pains  in  the  walls  of  the  chest  (comp.  Senega).
Of  late,  our  knowledge  of  the  action  of  Bryony  on
the  air- tubes  has  received  a  novel  extension  from
an  experiment  of  M.  Curie's.*  By  administering
to  a  rabbit  gradually  increasing  doses  of  Bryonia
during  eight  months  till  he  came  to  250  drops  of
the  mother-tincture  daily,  he  developed  in  the  ani-
mal a  firm  pseudo-membranous  tube,  extending
from  the  larynx  to  the  third  ramifications  of  the
bronchise.  While  this  fact  is  of  great  interest,  I
do  not  think  it  proves  that  the  action  of  Bryonia
on  the  air-passages  is  either  profound  or  extensive.
Pseudo-membranous  formation  on  their  surface  is  a
pathological  fact  per  se :  and  has  no  necessary  rela-
tion to  the  amount  of  affection  of  the  subjacent
mucous  membrane.

Upon  the  urinary  mucous  membrane  I  should
have  said  that  Bryony  had  little  or  no  action,  but
that  several  of  the  provers  experienced  considerable
vesical  tenesmus,  with  a  feeling  after  micturition
as  though  all  the  urine  had  not  been  expelled.

III.  In  one  of  the  animals  poisoned  with  Bryony
at  Vienna,  where  a  very  minute  autopsy  was  made
by  a  practised  pathologist,  it  is  noted  that  the  sub-

*  '  Brit.  Joum.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  xix,  p.  455.


BRYONIA.  165

stance  of  the  heart  and  the  muscles  of  the  neck
were  intensely  red.  Putting  this  together  with  the
soreness  and  pain  on  motion  experienced  by  the
provers  in  so  many  parts  of  the  body,  I  venture  to
set  down  our  drug  as  a  specific  irritant  of  muscular
fibre.  As  we  have  no  other  medicine  with  such  an
action,  we  must  not  lose  even  the  hint  of  it  supplied
by  these  facts.

Under  these  headings  I  have  given  you  nearly
all  the  pathogenetic  effects  of  Bryonia.  There  are
certain  residuary  phenomena,  however,  which  must
be  noted :  though  at  present  they  defy  classifi-
cation.

1st.  In  the  female  provers,  the  menstruation  was
premature  and  excessive.

2nd.  One  of  the  Vienna  provers  had  inflamma-
tion of  the  external  ear,  which  he  at  any  rate

3rd.  One  of  the  toothache  symptoms  in  Hahne-
mann's  pathogenesis  deserves  citing,  as  it  once  led
to  a  very  pretty  cure.  "  Darting  toothache  in  the
evening  when  in  bed,  at  times  in  the  upper,  at  times
in  the  lower  molar  teeth ;  when  the  pain  was  in  a
tooth  of  the  upper  row,  and  the  tooth  was  touched
with  the  tip  of  the  finger,  the  pain  suddenly  ceased,
and  affected  the  opposite  tooth  of  the  lower  row"

Let  us  now  inquire  what  have  been  the  clinical
results  of  these  very  extensive  provings.

To  Bryonia,  as  to  all  the  great  Hahnemannian
medicines,  a  special  constitution  and  disposition  has
been  assigned  as  that  to  which  it  is  most  suitable.
It  is  said  to  act  best  in  persons  of  firm  and  fleshy


166  BRYONIA.

fibre,  of  dark  hair  and  complexion,  of  "bilious"
tendency  and  choleric  temperament,  and  where  much
irritability  is  present.  You  must  not  lay  too  much
stress  on  such  indications ;  nevertheless,  they  some-
times guide  us  to  the  true  remedy.

The  hypothetical  haematic  action  of  Bryonia  will
serve  as  my  text  for  discoursing  on  its  relation  to
the  two  great  types  of  fever,  the  rheumatic  and  the
typhous.

I.  After  Aconite,  Bryonia  is  incomparably  the
best  remedy  for  acute  rheumatism.  In  its  whole
pathogenetic  action  it  reminds  one  of  the  rheumatic
poison.  Its  feeble  affinity  for  skin  and  mucous
membrane,  and  its  powerful  influence  over  serous
and  synovial  membrane  and  muscular  fibre,  with  its
fever  and  sour  sweats,  point  unmistakably  to  this
disease.  Accordingly,  most  of  us  employ  it  through-
out rheumatic  fever,  generally  in  alternation  with
Aconite,  unless  the  symptoms  call  urgently  for  some
other  medicine.  But  we  need  a  series  of  compara-
tive experiments  which  shall  demonstrate  what  part
the  Aconite  and  what  the  Bryonia  takes  in  con-
trolling the  disease.  Bryonia  appears  equally  suit-
able for  articular  and  for  muscular  rheumatism  :  it
is  least  fitted  for  affection  of  the  fibrous  tissues
proper.  It  continues,  of  course,  to  be  a  homoeo-
pathic remedy  when  any  of  the  serous  membranes
are  inflamed  in  the  course  of  rheumatic  fever :
though  it  may  yield  in  importance  to  some  other
medicines.  It  is  a  capital  remedy  for  rheumatism
attacking  particular  muscles,  as  those  of  the  loins
or  neck,  or  the  diaphragm.  In  chronic  rheumatism  it
is  specially  indicated  when  the  pain  is  increased  by


BRYONIA.  167

motion,  i.  e.  when  the  affection  is  sub-inflammatory
in  character.

II.  Hahnemann  used  Bryonia  with  great  success
in  many  cases  of  the  typhus  which  ravaged  Germany
while  it  was  the  seat  of  war  in  1813. The  medi-
cine has  hence  acquired  in  the  treatment  of  the
essential  fevers  a  reputation  greater,  I think,  than
it  deserves. Nevertheless  there can  be  no  doubt
that  it  has  its  place  here. The  head  symptoms  and
the bilious  disturbance  of  Bryonia frequently  find
their  antitypes  in  cases  of  fever  :  and  Hahnemann's
pathogenesis  adds  the  dry  mouth and  tongue  and
the nocturnal delirium. One of his symptoms,
indeed,  if  well  authenticated,  is  a  perfect  picture  of
low fever : "  she sleeps  the  whole  day,  with dry
great  heat,  without  eating  or  drinking,  with  twitch-
ings  in  the  face ; she  has  six  involuntary  passages,
the stools being  brown and smelling badly." —
Nosologically, Bryonia is especially suitable for
relapsing  fever (for  which  Dr. Kidd,  who  saw  so
much  of  it  in  Ireland  in  1847,  considers  it  the  best
medicine*) ; for particular epidemics of typhus,
where  the symptoms  point  to  it,  and  the  adynamia
is  not  too  profound ; and  for  the  bilious  remittent  of
the  western  hemisphere. It  used  to  be  employed
in  the  first  stage  of  typhoid  fever :  but as  it  has
none  of  the abortive  influence  of  Baptisia  (q.  v.),
I  for  one  have  abandoned  it  in  favour  of  the  latter
medicine. You  will  find  the  indications  for  Bryony
in  fever  well  given  by  Dr.  Wolf  in  vol.  viii  of  the
'  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  p.  439.

III.  I  will  now  speak  of  the  power  of  Bryonia  in

*  '  Annals,'  vol.  iv,  p.  131.


168  BRYONIA.

affections of  the serous membranes, and of  the
viscera  which  they  enclose.

Dr.  Trinks,  than  whom  we  have  no  hetter  prac-
tical physician  among  us,  thus  characterises  the
place  of  Bryonia  in  serous  inflammations.  "  From
no  small  number  of  cases  which  I  have  carefully
marked  down,  the  fact  comes  out  that  Bryonia  is
the  sovereign  remedy  in  all  inflammations  of  the
serous  membrane  which  have  advanced  to  the  stage
of  serous  effusion.  This  action  of  Bryonia  extends
over  all  the  serous  membranes  which  cover  the
thorax  and  abdomen,  and  the  organs  situated  in
these  cavities,  and  which  are  so  often  attacked  by
inflammation.

"  As  long  as  the  local  inflammatory  condition  had
not  reached  this  stage,  the  fever  being  still  of  a
sharp,  well-pronounced  synochal  character,  the
Bryonia  was  of  no  use,  but  at  this  time  Aconite  and
Belladonna  were  the  specific  medicines  which  ar-
rested the  inflammation  before  it  had  been  developed
to  the  stage  just  specified.  But  when  on  the  other
hand  the  inflammation  had  advanced  to  the  stage  of
serous  exudation,  then  in  all  cases  Bryonia  showed
itself  a  medicine  of  quick  and  certain  operation,
which  not  only  removed  the  still-existing  local  in-
flammation, but  also  with  the  least  possible  delay
effected  the  absorption  of  the  serous  effusion  which
had  already  taken  place.

"  I  find  in  my  journal  many  cases  of  inflamma-
tion of  the  pleura,  as  they  occur  very  frequently
in  Dresden  in  the  beginning  and  end  of  winter,
during  the  prevalence  of  strong  east  and  north-east
winds,  in  persons  disposed  to  tubercular  phthisis ;


BRYONIA.  169

then  two  cases  of  inflammation  of  the  pericardium
with  serous  exudation ;  and  two  very  noteworthy
cases  of  inflammation  of  the  peritoneum,  with  very
copious  effusion  of  serum  into  the  abdominal
cavity."

These  doctrines  of  Dr.  Trinks'  about  the  place  of
Bryonia  in  inflammations  of  serous  membranes
have  been  confirmed  by  all  subsequent  observers.
Aconite  should  be  given  at  first,  and  continued
should  the  exudation  be  plastic :  but  if  serous
effusion  occur,  its  place  must  be  taken  by  Bryonia.
It  is  especially  in  pleurisy  that  this  treatment  has
become  classical.  You  will  find  some  good  cases
illustrative  of  it  by  the  late  Dr.  Beilby  of  Glasgow
in  the  '  British  Journal/  vol.  x,  p.  283.  For  peri-
carditis you  should  read  our  lamented  Russell's
'  Clinical  Lectures/  I  myself  greatly  prefer  in  this
disease  Aconite  or  Colchicum.  In  peritonitis  from
exposure  to  cold  I  have  seen  Bryonia  act  exceedingly
well  after  Aconite :  there  are  two  capital  cases  in
Trinks'  paper.  It  is  recommended  also  for  the
puerperal  form  of  this  disease.  Arachnitis  is  the
only  form  of  serous  inflammation  in  which  Bryonia
has  not  proved  curative  :  but  since  this  malady  is
generally  tubercular,  the  failure  of  any  given  medi-
cine to  cure  it  reflects  no  discredit  on  the  remedy.
In  non-tubercular  cases  it  would  probably  act  well.
Of  the  viscera  enveloped  by  the  serous  mem-
branes I  shall  only  speak  here  of  the  brain,  as  the
lungs  and  liver  will  come  in  under  the  head  of  the
respiratory  and  digestive  organs  respectively.  Bry-
onia is  of  supreme  value  in  cases  of  simple  non-
inflammatory congestion  of  this  organ.  Cases  are


170  BRYONIA.

on  record  in  which  such  a  condition  arising  from
suppressed  menstruation,  from  exposure  to  intense
cold,  and  from  sea-sickness  with  long-lasting  consti-
pation was  promptly  dissipated  by  the  medicine.  It
is  also  frequently  useful  in  congestive  headaches,
which  are  seated  in  the  forehead,  relieved  by
pressure,  and  much  increased  by  stooping  which
causes  a  sensation  as  if  the  brain  would  fall  out.
If — as  it  often  is  —  giddiness  is  present,  the
patient  feels  as  though  he  would  pitch  forwards.
Another  kind  of  headache  for  which  Bryonia  is
useful  is  a  form  of  hemicrania :  the  pain  is  generally
on  the  right  side,  and  is  accompanied  by  retching
and  bilious  vomiting.

Before  leaving  the  serous  membranes,  I  must
refer  to  their  synovial  analogues  ;  only  to  say,  how-
ever, that  Bryonia  has  proved  as  useful  in  idio-
pathic  synovitis — when  caused  by  cold  or  injury —
as  when  the  affection  is  the  local  manifestation  of
rheumatism.

IV.  I  have  now  to  speak  of  the  power  of  Bry-
onia over  affections  of  the  digestive  organs.  The
form  of  dyspepsia  for  which  it  is  suitable  is  again
pressure  on  the  stomach,  a  much  more  frequent
affection  in  the  female  than  in  the  male,  generally
caused  by  irregularity  in  diet,  eating  indigestible
food,  bread  not  enough  baked,  coffee,  brandy,  or
bad  beer,  finds  for  the  most  part  its  radical  cure  in
Bryonia.  It  comes  on  when  the  stomach  is  empty
as  well  as  when  it  is  full,  but  more  frequently
immediately  after  it  has  been  emptied  of  its  con-
tents :  the  patients  complain  of  a  pressure  at  the  pit


BRYONIA.  171

of  the  stomach,  as  if  they  felt  a  heavy  annoying
stone  there ;  it  lasts  from  two  to  four  hours,  some-
times longer,  and  goes  off  with  much  eructation.
In  worse  cases,  the  so-called  water-brash  is  an
accompaniment,  or  there  is  a  great  deal  of  acidity
generated,  which  shows  itself  by  sour  risings,  heart-
burn, and  vomiting  of  a  very  sour  and  acrid  mucus.
In  the  severer  degrees  of  this  pain  of  stomach,  the
epigastrium  becomes  extremely  sensitive  to  external
touch  and  pressure,  and  the  patient  cannot  bear  the
clothes  to  be  firmly  put  on/'  Teste  notes  also  of
the  Bryony  dyspepsia,  that  beer  disagrees  or  gives
no  satisfaction  to  thirst,  and  that  water  is  absolutely
required  as  a  dissolvent.  As  with  Nux  vomica  and
Lycopodium,  gastric  derangement  requiring  Bryony
is  generally  accompanied  by  constipation.  But
whether  for  this  malady  occurring  independently  it
is  ever  better  than  the  other  more  important  medi-
cines we  have,  I  cannot  say.  Dr.  C.  Dunham
considers  that  Bryonia  is  specially  adapted  to  torpor
of  the  bowels,  as  distinguished  from  the  ineffectual
urging  of  Nux  vomica.

In  affections  of  the  liver  Bryonia  frequently  comes
into  play,  often  in  association  with  Mercurius.  It
hardly  reaches  to  true  hepatitis  ;  but  in  congestive
states  of  the  organ,  with  pain  in  the  right
shoulder,  giddiness,  and  slight  yellowness  of  the
skin  and  eyes,  it  is  very  useful.

V.  We  come  now  to  the  action  of  Bryonia  in
affections  of  the  respiratory  organs,  which  from  its
pathogenesis  should  be  rather  extensive.  It  is  the
best  medicine — after  Aconite — for  what  is  known
as  a  "  cold  on  the  chest,"  i.  e.  where  a  nasal


172  BRYON1A.

catarrh  has  run  down  the  air-passages,  as  far  as  the
first  or  even  second  divisions  of  the  bronchi.
Heat,  soreness,  and  pain  behind  the  sternum,
and  an  irritative  shaking  cough  with  scanty  expec-
toration make  up  the  Bryony  picture.  Or,  in  Dr.
Trinks'  words,  there  is  "  dry,  more  or  less  severe
cough,  often  rising  to  the  point  of  retching,  which  is
excited  and  maintained  by  a  constant  '  tickle'  in
the  lower  part  of  the  trachea  or  under  the  breast-
bone, which  is  more  severe  by  day  than  by  night,
and  forces  up  only  a  very  small  quantity  of  clear,
sometimes  blood-streaked,  expectoration ;  gives  rise
to  pain  of  being  shaken  in  the  abdomen,  or  in  the
chest  and  head,  and  makes  the  patients  often  com-
plain of  an  extremely  annoying  pressure  under  the
sternum,  which  confines  the  breathing.  These
states  occur  frequently  in  elderly  persons  with  stuf-
fing of  the  nose,  running  from  the  eyes,  and
derangement  of  the  stomach,  at  the  beginning
and  end  of  winter.  For  this  condition  Bryonia
effects  all  that  can  be  expected  from  a  medicine,
and  that  very  speedily."  Another  of  our  veterans,
Dr.  Schron,  has  some  valuable  remarks  on  the  action
of  Bryony  in  the  respiratory  sphere  in  the  '  Brit.
Jour,  of  Horn./  vol.  xvi,  p.  439.  Among  other
things,  he  says,  "  In  chronic  cough,  which  becomes
very  violent  at  the  least  excitation  of  the  lungs,  as
speaking,  which  is  worst  morning  and  evening,  and
which  is  accompanied  by  very  little  expectoration,
as  we  observe  in  individuals  whose  lungs  have  suf-
fered from  previous  inflammation  and  frequent
attacks  of  haemoptysis,  I  have  seen  Bryonia  admin-
istered with  the  best  effects.  I  had  such  a  case  in


BRYONIA.  173

which  the  patient  coughed  for  whole  nights  together.
Bryonia  6,  given  for  some  length  of  time,  not  only
produced  perfect  night-rest,  but  favoured  the  pro-
cess of  nourishment  in  such  a  manner,  that  the
patient,  who  was  formerly  quite  emaciated,  picked  up
flesh,  and  her  appetite  improved. ''

But  besides  conditions  such  as  these  Bryonia  has
obtained  reputation  in  the  treatment  of  the  three
great  affections  of  the  respiratory  organs,  croup,
bronchitis,  and  pneumonia.

1.  For  croup  Bryonia  had  been  recommended  by
M. Teste (in alternation with Ipecacuanha) long
before  M.  Curie  ascertained  its  powers  of  develop-
ing false membranes. He  speaks  very  confidently
of  the certainty  of  this treatment : and in the
'  British Journal/ vol. xix, you will find some
good  cases  showing  its  efficacy. M.  Curie  himself
relies  upon Bryonia  in  the  treatment  of  croup  and
laryngo-tracheal  diphtheria. While  I  see  no  reason
to oust Iodine, Bromine,  and  Kali  bichromicum
from  their  place  in  croup  in  favour  of  Bryony,  yet  I
think  the  latter  medicine  worthy  of  full  trial  in  the
hitherto  incurable  diphtheria  of  the  air-passages.

2.  In  most  of  our  text-books  and  domestic  trea-
tises, Bryonia  occupies the first place among  the
remedies  for  acute  bronchitis. I  myself  am  quite
unable to  see its  homceopathicity  to  this  disease,
when  the  smaller  bronchiae  are  involved  ; and  I  have
never  been  able  to  trace  any  good  effects  from  it  in
practice. I  said  so  much  in  a  paper  which  I  read
on  bronchitis  before  the  Brit.  Horn. Society ; and
found that my  colleagues generally  had  met  with
the  same  disappointment  in  the use  of  the  drug.


174  BRYONIA.

Bryonia,  therefore,  must  no  longer  stand  at  the
head  of  the  medicines  curative  of  bronchitis.

3.  It  is  otherwise  with  pneumonia.  From  what
has  been  said,  indeed,  Bryony  can  obviously  do  no
good  in  the  broncho-pneumonia  of  children  and
aged  persons,  where  the  inflammation  begins  in  the
bronchial  tubes.  But  in  pleuro-pneumonia  Bryonia
is  specific  ;  and  in  pneumonia  simplex  it  yields  only
to  Phosphorus.  To  convince  yourself  of  its  action
here  you  have  only  to  read  Tessier's  cases  treated
in  the  Hopital  S.  Marguerite;  in  which  Bryonia
was  the  chief  remedy  employed.*  It  has  also  been
found  curative  of  the  epidemic  pleuro-pueumonia  of
horned  cattle.

Lastly,  in  the  curative  as  well  as  the  pathoge-
netic  effects  of  Bryonia,  after  the  fullest  analysis
has  been  made,  there  are  certain  residuary  pheno-
mena to  be  noted.  Of  these  the  most  remarkable  is
the  power  which  it  exerts  over  the  mammary  glands.
Whenever,  from  the  first  coming  in  of  the  milk,
from  catching  cold  while  nursing,  or  from  abrupt
weaning,  the  breast  becomes  swollen,  tender,  knotty,
and  painful,  Bryonia  will  almost  certainly  resolve
the  inflammation  and  prevent  the  formation  of
abscess.

From  its  extensive  range,  Bryonia  cannot  but
have  many  analogues.  In  its  relation  to  rheumatism,
it  compares  with  Aconite,  Rhus,  and  Pulsatilla :  in
fever  it  acts  like  Baptisia  and  Eupatorium.  It
affects  the  serous  membranes  like  Aconite,  Arsenic,
and  Mercurius  corrosivus  ;  the  synovial  membranes
like  Pulsatilla;  the  alimentary  canal  like  Nux  and

*  Tessier  '  On  Pneumonia,'  translated  by  Hempel. (Turner.)


BRYONIA.  175

Lycopodium ;  the  liver  like  Mercurius  and  Cheli-
donium ;  the  air- passages  like  Nux  and  Senega  ;
the  lungs  like  Phosphorus,  Chelidonium,  and  Tartar
emetic.

The  dose  of  Bryonia,  like  that  of  all  the  poly-
chrests,  varies  widely.  As  a  rule  it  may  be  said
that  the  lowest  potencies  act  best  in  rheumatism
and  dyspepsia,  and  medium  and  higher  in  pneu-
monia. But  even  to  this  rule  there  are  exceptions :
and  in  its  other  applications  it  is  equally  in  favour
with  those  who  use  the  high  as  with  those  who  use  the
low  dilutions.  That  is,  as  I  believe,  its  action  is
qualitative  rather  than  quantitative,


LETTER  XV.

CACTUS  GRANDIFLORA,  CALCAREA  ACETICA,  CARBONICA,
MURIATICA  AND  PHOSPHORICA,  CALENDULA,  CAM-
PHORA.

THERE  are,  I  doubt  not,  many  excellent  Homoeo-
pathists  in  Italy ;  but  hitherto  they  have  contributed
little  to  our  literature  or  our  Materia  Medica.
Dr.  Rubini,  of  Naples,  has  come  forward  to  redeem
the  credit  of  his  countrymen  in  this  matter,  and  has
given  us  a  new  and  valuable  medicine  in  the

Cactus  grandiflorus.

A  tincture  is  prepared  by  maceration  from  the
youog  and  tender  branches  and  the  flowers.

Our  chief  information  concerning  Cactus  is  at
present  derived  from  Dr.  Rubini's  proving,  which  is
translated  by  Dr.  Dudgeon  in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of
Homoeopathy/  vol.  xxii.  Dr.  Hale,  in  the  article  on
the  drug  in  the  second  edition  of  his  '  New  Reme-
dies/ has  collected  all  the  clinical  experience  with  it
which  has  been  published  since  the  appearance  of  the
proving.

From  the  proving  it  would  appear  that  Cactus  has
a  most  powerful  influence  upon  the  heart  and  arteries,
closely  resembling  that  of  Aconite.  General  rigor,


CACTUS GRANDIFLORUS.  177

followed  by  much  heat  and  sweat,  eveti  recurring
daily  at  the  same  hour,  and  symptoms  (pain  and
haemorrhage)  of  acute  congestion  in  the  head  and
chest  attest  its  action  on  the  arterial  system  :  while
the  heart  gives  evidence  in  pain,  palpitation,  oppressed
breathing,  and  constriction  about  the  chest  of  being
unusually  affected.  The  pulsation  in  the  scrobiculus
cordis  so  characteristic  of  cardiac  disorder  is  markedly
produced  by  Cactus.  It  causes  also  acid  risings
from  the  stomach,  with  sense  of  weight  there ;  severe
twisting  colic,  with  heat  (external  and  internal)  of
the  abdomen;  bilious  diarrhoaa,  with  pain  before
the  stools;  inflammatory  strangury,  followed  by
copious  urine  loaded  with  lithates ;  and  painful
menstruation.  There  is  great  prostration ;  and  the
mental  condition  is  one  of  profound  melancholy.

From  such  a  pathogenesis  as  this  brilliant  results
might  be  anticipated.  Dr.  Rubini — who  has  been
observing  the  effects  of  the  Cactus  since  1848 — as-
signs to  it  a  wide  range  of  curative  power.  "  The
characteristic  feature  of  the  Cactus  consists  in  this,
that  while  it  develops  its  action  specially  in  the
heart  and  its  blood-vessels,  dissipating  their  conges-
tions, and  removing  their  irritations,  it  does  not
weaken  the  nervous  system  like  Aconite."  So  he
writes  in  the  preface  to  his  proving.  I  must  differ
from  him  about  Aconite  weakening  the  nervous
system.  It  need  never  do  so,  if  the  dose  be  uot
too  large.  But  if  Cactus  acts  in  this  manner,  it
may  be  a  formidable  rival  to  Aconite,  as  it  would
obviously  be  used  in  the  same  class  of  cases.  It  is
said  to  have  cured  with  striking  rapidity  acute  otitis,
acute  and  even  chronic  bronchitis,  pleurisy,  pneu-


178  CACTUS GRANDIFLORUS.

monia,  haemoptysis,  hsematemesis,  gastro-enteritis,
hepatitis,  haematuria,  and  a  quotidian  ague.  These
experiences  have  yet  to  be  confirmed.  For  my  own
part,  when  I  meet  with  these  acute  fevers,  conges-
tions, and  haemorrhages,  I  seem  quite  content  with
my  tried  and  valued  Aconite,  and  am  loth  to  experi-
ment with  any  other  medicine.  It  is  otherwise  in
affections  of  the  heart,  where  Cactus  appears  to
exert  a  power  beyond  that  of  Aconite,  and  to  fill  a
place  hitherto  vacant.  It  seems  beneficial  in  all
over-actions  of  this  organ,  from  nervous  palpitations
to  acute  carditis.  In  the  distress  arising  from
hypertrophy ;  in  the  severe  sufferings  incident  to
valvular  disease  (perhaps  also  in  angina  pectoris) ;
and  in  chronic  palpitation,  it  generally  gives  rapid
and  lasting  relief.*  In  the  cardiac  complication  of
acute  rheumatism  it  suits  myo-carditis  rather  than
peri-  or  endo-carditis.  It  would  probably  be  bene-
ficial (at  least  to  relieve  pain)  in  internal  aneurisms.
English  experience,  as  far  as  it  has  gone,  has
confirmed  Dr.  Rubini's  statements  as  to  the  value
of  Cactus  in  heart  disease.  The  following  admirably
narrated  case  from  the  *  Monthly  Homoeopathic
Review  'f  illustrates  its  sphere  and  capability  of  ac-
tion. It  is  contributed  by  Dr.  O'Brien,  of  South
Shields.

"  John  E — ,  set.  30,  had  rheumatic  fever  in  the  latter  part  of  the
year  1858 ;  suffered  from  that  time  from  the  distress  consequent
upon  disease  of  the  heart  up  to  the  time  he  first  called  on  me,

*  The  feeling  as  if  the  heart  were  grasped  and  coinpressed  as
with  an  iron  hand  (i.  e.  spasm)  is  very  characteristic  of  Cactus  in
these  cases.

t  May,  1866.


CACTUS GRANDIFLORUS.  179

which  was  on  the  21st  April,  1865.  I  remarked  the  expression  of
his  face  was  anxious,  the  colour  pale  and  ashy ;  he  complained  of
great  difficulty  of  breathing ;  fixed  pain  in  the  region  of  the  heart ;
violent  palpitation,  aggravated  by  the  least  exercise ;  unrefreshing
sleep  disturbed  by  sudden  startings ;  lassitude  and  languor ;  oedema
of  the  feet  (most  marked  in  the  evening)  and  back  of  the  hands ;
and  there  was  an  indolent  ulcer  situated  on  the  large  toe  of  the
right  foot,  which  had  resisted,  under  allopathic  care,  a  stimulating
course  of  treatment  for  eighteen  months.  Pulse  75,  weak  and
intermitting  every  ten  pulsations ;  tongue  clean ;  bowels  regular.
On  auscultation,  I  discovered  a  distinct  endocardial  bruit,  clearly
audible  along  the  line  of  the  great  vessels;  increased  prsecordial
dulness;  excessive  impulse  of  heart's  action  and  evident  enlarge-
Cac.  grand.,  2nd  dec.  dil.,  gutt.  ij,  ter  in  die ;  the  toe  to  be  dressed
with  water  dressing.

"27th. — Expresses  himself  better ;  sleep  less  disturbed ;  breathing
less  oppressed;  heart's  action  more  rhythmical;  the  bruit  less
distinct  along  the  great  vessels;  pulse  intermitting  every  fifteen
pulsations ;  a  most  marked  improvement  in  the  oedema  of  feet  and
hands ;  the  ulcer  much  improved ;  no  very  distinct  improvement
in  the  colour  of  his  face ;  ulcer  of  the  toe  nearly  healed.  Continue
Cac.  grand,  and  water  dressing  to  toe.

"  May  2nd. — Cardiac  murmur  less  distinct ;  breathing  more  easily
performed ;  oedema  absent  in  the  early  part  of  the  day,  and  only
troublesome  in  the  evening  in  the  feet ;  the  anxious  ashy  expres-
sion of  countenance  is  most  decidedly  better ;  pulse  has  ceased  to
intermit ;  ulcer  on  toe  healed.  Continue  Cac.  grand.

"  8th. — Expresses  himself  free  from  any  pain,  and  states  that  he
can  go  about  with  activity,  without  inducing  any  difficulty  of
breathing ;  oedema  absent ;  sleep  refreshing  and  undisturbed ;
heart's  action  more  regular;  prsecordial  dulness  diminished  and
bruit  scarcely  audible ;  colour  of  the  urine  much  improved;  com-
plains only  of  a  sense  of  languor,  most  distressing  in  the  afternoon.
Cao.  grand.,  3rd  dec.  dil.,  nocte  maneque.

"  Feb.  25th,  1866. — After  a  careful  examination  of  his  chest  to-day,
I  cannot  detect  the  slightest  valvular  defect ;  the  cardiac  dulness,
which  was  so  marked  when  first  under  treatment,  is  barely  dis-
cernible, and  the  muscular  activity  of  the  heart  seems  to  be  per-
fectly restored,  performing  its  functions  with  regularity  and  ease.


180  CALCAREA ACETICA.

He  has  never  altogether  given  up  the  use  of  the  drug,  taking  it
twice  a  week  for  the  last  four  months."

Dr.  Lippe  states  that  he  has  frequently  cured
with  Cactus  the  pressive  headache  in  the  vertex  so
often  met  with  as  a  result  of  menorrhagia.  I  have
myself  cured  with  it  the  similar  headache  of  meno-
pausia.

As  I  have  said,  the  great  analogue  of  Cactus  is
Aconite.  Its  influence  on  the  heart  resembles  that
of  Naja.

Dr.  Rubini  recommends  the  mother-tincture  in
acute  disorders  and  in  organic  diseases  of  the  heart.
In  nervous  affections  of  the  heart  he  states  that  the
higher  dilutions  act  well.

Of  the  salts  of  Lime  we  use  in  our  practice  four,
the  Acetate,  the  Carbonate,  the  Phosphate,  and  the
Hydrochlorate.

Calcarea  acetica

is  prepared  by  solution,  first  in  water,  and  then  in
alcohol.

Certain  of  the  symptoms  in  the  proving  of
Calcarea  carbonica  are  said  to  have  been  produced
by  the  Acetate.  They  do  not  seem  to  differ  in
kind  from  those  of  the  Carbonate  among  which
they  appear.

Calcarea  acetica  is  sometimes  used  with  ad-
vantage in  the  acute  bowel  affections  of  children  to

O

whose  general  diathesis  Lime  is  suited  (see  Calcarea
carbonica).  Beyond  this,  I  know  not  that  it  has
any  uses.

Its  analogues  are,  of  course,  those  of  the  Car-
bonate, q.  v.


CALCAREA CARBONICA.  181

It  has  generally  been  given  in  about  the  2nd
dilution.

Calcarea  carbonica,

on  the  other  hand,  is  one  of  our  polychrests,  and  is
possessed  of  many  and  great  virtues.  The  form  in
which  we  use  the  salt  is  not  chalk  or  marble,  but
the  soft  white  substance  which  is  found  between  the
external  and  internal  hard  layers  of  the  oyster-shell.
This  is  triturated  in  the  usual  way.

The  proving  of  Calcarea  (so  called  par  excellence]
is  in  the  '  Chronic  Diseases.'  Noack  and  Trinks'
prefatory  remarks  there  cited ;  a  paper  by  Dr.
Croserio,  translated  in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./
vol.  v;  and  another  by  Mr.  Nankivell,  with  the
discussion  following,  in  the  '  Annals  of  the  Brit.
Horn.  Society/  vol.  ii — will  give  you  further  infor-
mation concerning  the  action  of  the  drug.

The  physiological  action  of  Calcarea,  like  that
of  most  of  the  medicines  whose  provings  appear
only  in  the  '  Chronic  Diseases,'  is  not  well  under-
stood. Happily,  our  clinical  experience  with  it  is
so  extensive,  that  we  have  little  difficulty  in  denning
its  sphere  of  action.

It  is  in  the  large  class  of  diseases  due  to  disorder
of  the  secondary  assimilation  that  Calcarea  finds  its
curative  place.  I  cannot  see  that  it  influences  the
primary  gastric  digestion,  or  the  results  of  its
derangement —  as  gout  and  the  lithic  diathesis.
Nor  is  it  of  any  value  where  a  true  animal  poison
exists  in  the  blood,  as  in  syphilis  and  the  exanthe-
mata. But  when  the  assimilation  of  the  digested
food  to  blood  and  tissue  does  not  proceed  as  it


182  CALCAREA CARBONICA.

should do, there are few agents more powerful
than  Calcarea  for  restoring  healthy  function. The
three  great forms  of  assimilative  derangement  are
scrofula, tuberculosis,  and  rachitis : and  in all  of
these Calcarea is a principal remedy. In the
various  forms  in  which  rachitis  shows  itself — difficult
dentition,  imperfect  ossification,  delay  of  the  power
of  walking,  &c.,  this  medicine  is  invaluable. It  is
only  when  the bones  are very  much affected  that
Silicea becomes preferable. No less useful  is it
when  tendency  to  glandular  swellings  makes  evident
the  presence  of  the  scrofulous  diathesis. It  is  the
constitutional  tendency  that  it  controls  rather  than
the local manifestations ; so  that when  these  are
severe — as in the glands, eyes, and ears — other
remedies  are  needed. Nevertheless  ulcers,  chronic
diarrho3a,  and  incipient  mesenteric  disease  occurring
in  such  subjects  have  been  cured  by  the  sole  use  of
Calcarea. I  cannot  speak  with  the  same  certainty
of the power of our medicine over tuberculosis.
Nevertheless,  the  high  esteem  in  which  it  is  held  by
some  of  our  best  practitioners  in  the  treatment  of
pulmonary  phthisis  would  indicate  an  influence  over
this diathesis also. There are many  unclassified
affections  of  nutrition,  especially  in  children,  where
you  will  see  from  the  remarks  I  have  made  that
Calcarea  is  likely  to  prove  useful. Its  powers  even
extend to the  new products which result from
disorders  in growth ;  and it has caused the  dis-
appearance of  warts,  condylomata,  polypi,  and  even
(so  it  is  said)  of  benignant  tumours  and  of  lupus.

This  is  the  great  sphere  of  the  action  of  Calcarea.
It  has  other  uses,  which  seem  independent  of  its


CALCAREA CARBONICA.  183

influence  over  assimilation.  Thus,  it  seems  capable
of  curing  some  chronic  headaches  depending  upon
brain-fag :  the  pain  is  dull,  worst  in  the  morning ;
the  head  is  often  cold.  It  has  removed  a  long-
standing supra-orbital  neuralgia.  It  appears  to  in-
fluence the  female  genital  organs  in  a  special
manner.  Hahnemann  considers  its  action  here
quite  characteristic.  "  Calcarea,"  he  says,  "  is  in-
dispensable and  curative  when  the  catamenia  appear
a  few  days  before  the  period,  especially  when  the
flow  of  blood  is  considerable.  But  if  the  catameuia
appear  at  the  regular  period  or  a  little  later,
Calcarea  almost  never  is  useful,  even  if  the  cata-
menia should  be  rather  profuse."  It  may  be  that
other  uses  of  Calcarea  may  come  from  the  hints
afforded  by  the  ancient  applications  of  lime-water.
But  I  should  prefer  in  such  cases  using  the  lime-
water  itself.

Finally,  it  may  be  laid  down  that  Calcarea  is
best  adapted  to  the  disorders  of  women  and  child-
ren, and  to  persons  of  leuco-phlegmatic  tempera-
ment, with  tendency  to  obesity.

The  analogues  of  Calcarea  are  Baryta,  lodium,
Phosphorus  and  Silicea.

The  higher  dilutions,  from  12  to  30,  appear  to
be  most  in  favour,  and  are  those  which  I  myself
always  use.  Calcarea  seems  seldom  or  never
employed  by  the  exclusive  adherents  of  low  dilu-
tions.


184  CALENDULA.

Calcarea  muriatica,

and

Calcarea  phosphorica,

have  never  been  proved.  The  latter  is  occasionally
\ised  as  a  substitute  for  the  Carbonate.  Dr.
Hering,  on  the  strength  of  some  unpublished
experiments,  recommends  it  for  those  cases  in
which  fistula  ani  alternates  with  chest  symptoms.
The  Calcarea  muriatica  I  find  extremely  useful  in
the  moist  porrigo  capitis  of  infants  and  children.  I
give  it  in  the  1st  dilution  (aqueous).

Calendula,

the  common  marigold,  owes  its  place  in  the  Homoeo-
pathic Materia  Medica  to  its  power  as  a  vulnerary.
It  has  been  proved  by  Dr.  Franz,  but  the  symptoms
produced  are  few  and  insignificant,  and  it  is  rarely
if  ever  given  internally.  But  one  of  our  German
practitioners,  Dr.  Thorer,  becoming  acquainted  with
the  common  people,  endeavoured  to  ascertain  by
experiment  its  exact  place  in  the  treatment  of  in-
juries. You  will  find  his  paper  translated  in  the
'  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  vol.  v.  His  cases  show
that  Calendula  has  a  most  beneficial  influence  over
wounds,  promoting  favourable  cicatrization  with  the
least  possible  amount  of  suppuration.  From  that
time  to  this,  Calendula  has  always  been  employed
by  Homoeopathic  physicians  to  promote  the  healing
process  in  wounds,  ulcers,  &c.  You  will  find  com-
ments on  its  virtues  in  various  papers  by  Dr.  Yeld-
ham  in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn/  and  the  'Annals


CAMPHORA.  185

of  the  British  Homoeopathic  Society/  Of  late,  it
has  been  used  on  a  large  scale  by  our  American
colleagues  in  the  treatment  of  the  injuries  occurring
in  the  course  of  their  civil  war  :  and  it  has  obtained
their  warmest  commendations.

Of  course  there  is  nothing  Homoeopathic  in
Calendula ;  i.  e.  it  is  no  instance — so  far  as  we
know — of  the  working  of  the  law  of  similars.  Never-
theless it  is  Homoeopaths  only — at  least  in  England
and  America — who  give  to  their  patients  the  benefit
of  this  precious  vulnerary.  You  will  find  it  in-
valuable in  surgical  practice.

I  shall  now  speak  of

Camphora,

of  Avhich  we  make  two  tinctures  with  alcohol,  the
one  saturated,  the  other  in  the  proportion  of  one
to  six,  eight,  or  ten.

There  is  a  proving  of  Camphor  in  the  '  Materia
Medica  Pura/  You  will  do  well  to  supplement  its
information,  however,  with  the  additional  material
supplied  by  Hempel  and  Pereira  in  their  respective
articles  on  the  drug.  There  are  recent  articles  on
Camphor  worth  reading  in  the  (  Monthly  Homoeo-
pathic  Review'  and  the  '  United  States  Med.  and
Surg.  Journal/'

I  shall  have  little  or  no  difficulty  in  expounding
to  you  the  curative  virtues  of  Camphor.  But  to
connect  these  with  its  physiological  action  is  not
easy;  and  for  this  reason,  that  (in  Pereira's  words)
"  there  are  few  remedies  whose  action  on  the  animal
economy  is  so  variable  as  that  of  Camphor."


186  CAMPHORA.

Hahnemaun  notices  the  same  fact,  and  endeavours
to  explain  it.  "The  action/'  he  says  "of  this
substance  on  the  healthy  body  is  extremely  proble-
matic and  difficult  to  define,  for  this  reason,  that
the  primary  action  of  Camphor  alternates  too
suddenly  and  is  too  easily  confounded  with  the  re-
action of  the  vital  principle."  That  is,  he  agrees
with  those  who  consider  chill  and  depression  to  be
the  first  effects  of  Camphor,  and  refer  the  symptoms
of  stimulation  so  often  observed  to  a  secondary  re-
action. I  am  myself  disposed  to  assent  to  the  view,
confirmed  as  it  is  by  many  other  names  of  weight.
At  the  same  time,  I  could  not  complain  if  an  oppo-
site interpretation  were  assigned  to  phenomena  of
such  perplexing  variability.

However  this  may  be,  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  Camphor  exerts  upon  the  functions  of  circu-
lation and  calorification,  probably  through  the  vas-
cular nerves,  a  most  potent  and  rapid,  although
evanescent  influence.  From  hence  we  get  its  main
use  in  practice, — its  power  of  arresting  such  dis-
eases as  influenza  and  cholera  in  the  stage  of  in-
vasion. Every  Homoeopathic  patient  knows  how
Camphor,  taken  in  repeated  doses  in  the  chill  of  a
commencing  "  cold/'  will  check  the  progress  of  the
disorder  then  and  there.  It  is  inferior  to  Aconite,
however,  when  the  true  febrile  rigor  has  set  in.  Of
still  greater  interest  and  value  is  the  power  of
Camphor  over  Asiatic  Cholera.  When  this  epidemic
first  appeared  in  Europe,  Homoeopathists  sought
diligently  for  its  simillimum,  that  they  might  be
ready  to  encounter  it.  Several  medicines  were
suggested :  but  at  last  Hahnemann  himself  spoke


CAMPHORA.  187

out.  The  one  great  remedy,  he  said,  was  Camphor.
Every  one  must  be  provided  with  it,  and  take  it  as
soon  as  the  first  symptoms  appear,  so  that  no  time
may  be  lost  while  waiting  for  a  physician.  He
also  suggested  Veratrum  or  Cuprum  in  later  stages
and  peculiar  forms  of  the  disease.  In  the  epidemic
of  1849  English  physicians  had  an  opportunity  of
testing  this  recommendation ;  and  Dr.  Drysdale  in
Liverpool  and  Dr.  Russell  in  Edinburgh  vie  in  their
praise  of  Camphor.  The  latter  says  "  It  is  our
firm  belief  that  Camphor  is  an  almost  infallible
remedy  for  Cholera,  if  given  from  the  very  outset."
In  1854  the  same  testimony  was  given  to  its  value ;
and  Dr.  Rubini,  of  Naples,  states  that  he  treated,
together  with  his  colleagues,  592  cases  with  Camphor
alone  without  a  single  death.*  Much  exception
has  been  taken  to  this  statement,  as  exaggerated :
but  I  think  without  just  cause.  Dr.  Rubini  does
not  mean  to  say  that  all  his  cases  were  in  collapse.
On  the  contrary,  of  a  set  of  200  treated  in  one
institution,  it  is  expressly  mentioned  that  collapse
occurred  in  fifteen  only.  What  our  colleague  means
us  to  understand  is,  that  in  an  epidemic  of  cholera
in  which  377  cases  came  under  his  own  treatment,
some  of  which  must  have  been  severe,  he  gave  no-
thing but  Camphor  in  a  saturated  tincture,  and  lost  no
case.  I  see  nothing  incredible  in  this  statement.
His  success  must  increase  our  confidence  in  the
antidotal  power  of  Camphor  against  cholera ;  though
whether  Dr.  Rubini  is  right  in  urging  us  to  per-
severe with  it  in  every  stage  of  the  disease  and  to

*  A  full  account  of  Dr.  Rubini's  observations  is  given  in  the
'  Monthly  Homoeopathic  Review,5  June,  1866.


188  CAMPHORA.

the  exclusion  of  every  other  medicine,  must  be  left
to  further  experience.  At  present,  the  weight  of
evidence  is  against  him.

Besides  this  general  influence  of  Camphor,  it  has
a  pretty  strong  local  action  on  the  head  and  the
genito-urinary  organs.  It  causes  acute  cerebral
congestion,  with  delirium,  somewhat  like  the  effects
of  alcohol  :  and  will  be  found  curative  when  such
symptoms  occur  from  the  retrocession  of  an  acute
exanthem,  as  measles.  It  also  causes  strangury ;
which  is  all  the  more  interesting,  as  it  does  not
pass  off  by  the  urine*  In  the  presence  of  this  fact,
Pereira  is  much  astonished  at  a  power  of  diminish-
ing irritation  of  the  urinary  organs  being  assigned
to  Camphor.  But  that  it  has  this  power,  especially
when  the  strangury  is  the  effect  of  Cantharides,  is
undoubted.  I  was  called  once  to  a  case  of  acute
strangury,  where  the  pain  was  so  intense  as  to
cause  collapse.  I  gave  Camphor  every  quarter  of
an  hour ;  and  in  less  than  an  hour  the  spasm  was
relieved,  and  the  urine  passed  freely  and  without
pain.  The  attack  proved  to  be  the  commencement
of  peritonitis.  As  with  Cantharis,  the  urinary  irri-
tation sometimes  extends  to  the  genitals,  causing
priapism,  &c.  But  the  ordinary  and  permanent
effect  upon  these  organs  is  of  a  depressing  character.
"  Camphora  per  nares  castrat  odore  mares"  is  quoted
in  all  Materia  Medicas ;  and  Trousseau  and  Pidoux
have  verified  the  fact  by  experiment.  It  ought  to
prove  useful  in  some  cases  of  sexual  weakness  com-
bined with  irritability  of  the  bladder.

Besides  these  uses  in  disease,  Camphor  is  reputed
by  Hahnemann  an  antidote  to  most  vegetable  and


CAMPHORA.  189

some  animal  and  mineral  poisons.  Against  the
majority  of  these  it  probably  has  no  true  anti-
dotal power,  and  it  would  hardly  neutralise  their
effects  in  poisonous  quantities.  But  for  the  more
delicate  disturbances  produced  by  minute  doses
Camphor  may  be  a  capital  remedy,  by  substituting
a  more  potent  impression  than  theirs  upon  the
nervous  centres.

Dr.  Holcombe  thus  sums  up  the  action  of  Cam-
phor. "  It  is  antidotal  to  almost  all  the  drastic
vegetable  poisons — relieves  strangury — procures  re-
action from  cold,  congested  conditions — is  the  great
anti-choleraic — and  quiets  nervous  irritability  some-
times better  than  Coffea,  Ignatia,  or  Hyoscyamus.
This  is  its  whole  clinical  value — and  a  great  one  it
is — in  a  nutshell."

Camphor  resembles  in  its  influence  over  the
circulation  Aconite,  Cactus,  and  Veratrum  album ;
upon  the  brain  it  acts  somewhat  like  Agaricus,
Opium,  Cannabis  Indica,  and  the  triad  of  Bella-
donna, Hyoscyamus,  and  Stramonium ;  its  power
of  causing  strangury  is  like  that  of  Cantharis  and
Terebinthina,  less  so  that  of  Belladonna.

Camphor  does  not  seem  to  bear  dilution.  Hahne-
mann  himself  and  his  most  exclusive  followers  have
always  used  the  primary  solution,  i.  e.  one  part
of  Camphor  to  from  six  to  twelve  parts  of  Alcohol.
Dr.  Rubini  recommends  the  saturated  tincture  for
cholera.


LETTER  XVI.

CANNABIS INDICA  AND SATIVA, CANTHARIS, CAPSICUM,
CARBO ANIMALIS AND VEGETABIHS.

WE  use  in  our  practice  both  kinds  of  hemp, — the
Cannabis  Indica  and  that  which  grows  in  colder
climates.  The  difference  seems  to  be  that  in  the
former  is  developed  a  resin  which  has  powerful
neurotic  properties.  I  shall  take  the  latter  first,

Cannabis  sativa.

A  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  flowering  tops  and
upper  leaflets.

Hemp  was  proved  by  Hahnemarm,  and  its  patho-
genesis  appears  in  the  '  Materia  Medica  Pura/
See  also  an  account  of  its  morbid  anatomy  from
Morgagni  in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  vi,
p.  507.

From  the  symptoms  produced  three  groups  have
led  to  practical  results — those  of  the  urinary  organs,
the  eye,  and  the  lungs.

1.  Cannabis  appears  to  produce  excessive  irrita-
tion of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  bladder  and
urethra,  including  the  prepuce.  The  latter  is  dark
red,  hot,  and  inflamed ;  there  is  much  burning  in
the  urethra,  painful  and  difficult  micturition,
chordee,  and  mucous  discharge.  In  one  often  cited


CANNABIS SATIVA.  191

instance  observed  by  Morgagni,  the  urine  had  to  be
drawn  off  by  the  catheter ;  but  afterwards  could  not
even  thus  be  evacuated,  on  account  of  the  instru-
ments becoming  clogged  with  mucus  and  pus.
These  effects  have  led  to  the  successful  employment
of  Cannabis  in  many  similar  urinary  disorders,  but
especially  in  gonorrhoea.  I  have  the  highest  opinion
of  it  as  a  remedy  for  this  disease,  after  acute
inflammatory  symptoms  (if  present)  have  been  sub-
dued by  Aconite.

2.  Cannabis  is  credited  by  Hahnemann  with  the
production  of  a  pellicle  upon  the  cornea. Whether
this  symptom  be a  true  one,  or  not,  it  is  certain
that  the  medicine  has  some  effect  in  removing  such
specks  when  left  behind  by  strumous  ophthalmia.

3.  Another somewhat questionable effect of
Cannabis is "inflammation of the lungs," with
delirium  and  vomiting  of  green  bile. It  is  recom-
mended  by Dr. P.  P.  Wells  in cases presenting
these  complications,  to  promote  absorption  of  exuda-
tion limited  to  the  lower  portion  of  either  or  both
lungs. The  cough  is  frequent,  teasing,  hard,  some-
times dry,  sometimes  even  incessant.

Besides  these  affections,  Dr.  Quin  once  cured
with  Cannabis  a  neuralgia  of  long-standing,  sympa-
thetic of  uterine  disorder  showing  itself  in  menor-
rhagia.  Taking  the  hint,  I  have  lately  given  it
with  much  relief  in  a  case  of  menstrual  headache.

The  first-named  action  of  Cannabis  assimilates  it
to  Apis,  Cantharis,  Copaiba,  and  Terebinthina :  the
second  to  Euphrasia  :  the  third  to  Sulphur,  Phos-
phorus, and  perhaps  Lachesis.

It is  generally  agreed  that  for  gonorrhoea  the


192  CANNABIS INDICA.

mother-tincture  of  Cannabis  is  required,  in  frequent
doses  of  from  one  to  ten  drops.  In  other  affections
the  high  dilutions  seem  efficacious.

Cannabis  indica.

This  drug  is  not  officinal  in  the  Homoeopathic
Pharmacopoeia.  The  ordinary  tincture  is  prepared
by  dissolving  one  part  of  the  resin  in  twenty  parts
of  rectified  spirit.  One  part  of  this  tincture,  there-
fore, to  four  of  alcohol  will  make  our  first  centesimal
potency.

There  is  no  proving  extant  of  Indian  hemp,
except  a  short  one  on  himself  by  Dr.  Norton  in  the
'  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  vol.  xvii,  p.  465.  But  its
physiological  effects  may  readily  be  collected  from
the  various  works  on  Materia  Medica.

It  is  thus  a  substance  whose  working  is  well
known  to  you,  and  whose  effects  I  need  hardly
it  produces  seem  to  be  exaggeration  of  all  percep-
tions and  conceptions,  aphrodisia,  and  tendency  to
catalepsy.*  It  is  not  at  all  improbable  that  cases  of

native  of  India: — "At  8  p.m.  we  found  him  insensible,  but  breath-
ing with  perfect  regularity,  his  pulse  and  skin  natural,  and  the
pupils  freely  contractile  at  the  approach  of  light.  Happening  by
chance  to  lift  up  the  patient's  arm,  the  professional  reader  will  judge
of  my  astonishment,  when  I  found  that  it  remained  in  the  posture
in  which  I  had  placed  it.  It  required  but  a  very  brief  examination
of  the  limbs  to  find  that  the  patient  had  by  the  influence  of  this
narcotic  been  thrown  into  that  most  strange  and  most  extraordinary
of  all  nervous  conditions, — into  that  state  which  so  few  have  seen,
and  the  existence  of  which  so  many  still  discredit — the  genuine
catalepsy  of  the  nosologist."  (Pereira's  '  Mat.  Med.,'  sub  voce.)


CANTHARIS.  193

mania  may  come  before  us  in  which  the  symptoms
resemble  those  of  the  Haschisch  inebriety.  In
such  cases,  in  satyriasis  or  nymphomania,  and  in
catalepsy,  the  use  of  Cannabis  indica  would  be  a  new
but  most  legitimate  application  of  the  Homoeopathic
principle.  I  myself  have  met  with  one  case,  pro-
bably hysterical  at  bottom,  but  in  which  the  attacks
assumed  a  cataleptic  character ;  and  where  Cannabis
indica  proved  rapidly  curative.*

The  effects  of  Cannabis  indica  on  the  brain  may
be  advantageously  compared  with  those  of  Agaricus,
Belladonna,  Camphor,  Crocus,  Hyoscyamus,  Opium,
and  Stramonium.  In  its  power  of  causing  catalepsy,
it  is  rivalled  only  by  the  Chloride  of  Tin  (Stannum
muriaticum] .

In  the  case  mentioned  I  gave  the  2nd  dilution.

I  have  now  once  more  to  introduce  to  you  an
old  acquaintance  in

Cantharis.

The  tincture  we  use  is  prepared  by  digesting  the
powdered  fly  in  twenty  parts  of  alcohol.

There  is  no  proving,  in  the  strict  Hahnemannian
sense  of  the  word,  of  Cantharis.  This  is  of  little
consequence,  as  its  pathogenetic  effects  are  well
known  and  may  be  read  anywhere.

In  studying  the  action  of  Cantharis,  I  think  it
best  to  concentrate  our  attention  on  the  urinary
organs.  There  is  no  doubt  of  the  specific  influence

*  In  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  xxiii,  p.  446,  is  a  case  in
which  Cannabis  (it  is  not  said  which)  in  the  15th  dilution  effected
a  speedy  cure  of  puerperal  mania.

13


194  CANTHARIS.

of  Cantharis  upon  these  parts.  It  inflames  the
whole  mucous  tract,  from  the  kidneys  to  the
urethra,  causing  pain  in  the  loins ;  scanty,  high-
coloured,  bloody,  and  generally  albuminous  urine,
often  loaded  with  tube-casts ;  and  burning  pain  and
tenderness  in  the  hypogastrium,  with  severe  stran-
gury.* Sometimes  the  urine  is  even  suppressed.
With  this  there  is  fever  and  great  restlessness.
That  the  genital  organs  often  share  in  the  irrita-
tion, there  is  no  doubt.  Priapism,  inflammation
of  the  external  parts,  and  even  of  the  uterus,
causing  abortion,  have  been  seen :  and  with  this
the  sexual  passions  are  often  painfully  excited.
But  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  Cantharis,
like  Cannabis  indica  or  Stramonium,  is  a  true
aphrodisiac.

I  see  nothing  specific  in  the  gastro-enteritis
produced  by  Cantharis  when  swallowed.  It  is  but
another  instance  of  its  local  irritant  action,  such  as
is  seen  on  the  skin  when  the  drug  is  applied  in  the
form  of  a  blister  or  in  the  respiratory  passages
when  its  powder  is  inhaled.  But  its  secondary
effects  upon  the  nervous  system  can  hardly  be
doubted.  These  come  on  usually  some  days  at
least  after  the  ingestion  of  the  poison,  and  take
various  forms — delirium,  tetanic  or  epileptic  con-
vulsions, and  subsequently  coma.  It  would  seem,
moreover,  that  under  favourable  circumstances  Can-
tharis can  specifically  irritate  the  skin  :  for  Pereira
mentions  a  case  in  which  the  application  of  a  blister
to  the  pectoral  region  caused  the  development  of

*  See  Clotar  Miiller  in  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  xvii,  548.


CANTHARIS.  195

ecthymatous  pustules  not  ouly  there,  but  all  over
the  body.

Correspondingly  with  these  physiological  effects,
Cautharis  has  little  or  no  curative  influence  beyond
the  urinary  organs :  but  in  their  inflammatory
disorders  it  is  a  prime  remedy.  In  simple  acute
nephritis  or  cystitis  we  should  rarely  think  of  using
any  other  medicine.  In  inflammatory  strangury,
Cantharis  is  generally  indicated :  though  when
nervous  symptoms  predominate  Belladonna  is  pre-
ferable. In  suppression  of  urine  from  acute  con-
gestion, Cantharis  vies  with  Terebinthina ;  and
hsematuria  also,  when  depending  upon  active
determination  of  blood  to  the  urinary  surface,  will
find  in  it  a  potent  styptic.  I  am  not  sure  whether
Cantharis  affects  the  terminal  portions  of  this
tract, — the  secreting  cells  of  the  kidneys  and  the
lower  end  of  the  urethra.  That  it  cures  post-
scarlatinal  dropsy  or  Bright' s  disease  has  yet  to  be
proved,  though  I  am  far  from  denying  its  possi-
bility. And  it  has  not  hitherto  been  thought
much  of  in  gonorrhoea,  save  when  the  inflammation
extends  so  high  as  to  cause  irritability  of  the
bladder.

Lallemand,  which  depend  upon  the  spread  of
gonorrhosal  irritation  through  the  ejaculatory  ducts
along  the  spermatic  passages,  Cantharis  is  one  of
the  most  homoeopathic  medicines :  and  Dr.  Kidd
speaks  well  of  its  efficacy  in  their  treatment
('Annals/  vol.  v,  p.  131).

The  neurotic  action  of  Cantharis  has  not  yet
been  made  use  of  for  therapeutic  purposes.  I


196  CANTHARIS.

cannot  assent  to  the  views  of  some  that  it  is
homoeopathic  to  hydrophobia.  The  dysphagia  of
poisoning  by  Cantharis  obviously  results  from  its
local  influence  on  the  throat :  and  is  quite  different
from  that  of  true  hydrophobia.  The  reputation
which  Cantharis  enjoys  in  France  as  a  remedy  for
skin  disease  may  depend  upon  its  power  of  specifi-
cally irritating  this  tissue.  We  have  no  homoeo-
pathic experience  of  its  use.  But  before  leaving
this  medicine,  I  must  say  something  about  its
action,  so  familiar  to  you,  when  applied  locally  as  a
blister.

I  do  not  know  what  theory  you  have  held  about
"  counter-irritation."  For  ourselves,  we  seek  here
also  to  pathogen etics  to  explain  and  guide  our
therapeutics.  We  find  (to  quote  Dr.  Inman)
"  that  blisters  applied  to  the  thorax  and  abdomen
of  dogs  and  rabbits  will  produce  redness  and
absolute  inflammation  of  the  pleura  and  peritonaeum,
in  patches  distinctly  corresponding  to  the  vesicated
surface  of  the  skin."*  Hence  blisters  when  used
(as  they  principally  are)  for  chronic  inflammations
are  homoeopathic  agents,  though  acting  by  local
absorption  instead  of  by  elective  affinity.  But  al-
though we  thus  claim  for  Homoeopathy  whatever
benefit  blisters  may  effect  in  these  cases,  we  do  not
use  them.  We  have  medicines  which,  given  in-
ternally, seek  out,  under  the  guidance  of  elective
affinity,  the  part  that  may  be  inflamed,  and  there
more  pleasantly  and  at  least  as  effectually  ex-
tinguish the  fire.  We  do,  however,  use  Cantharis
externally, — but  to  disperse  blisters  and  not  to
*  '  New  Theory  and  Practice,'  p.  322.


CAXTHARIS.  197

cause  them.  In  burns  and  scalds  causing  vesica-
tion,  in  vesicular  erysipelas,  and  in  herpes  zoster
we  have  conditions  of  the  surface  more  or  less
resembling  the  local  effects  of  Cantharis :  and  in
all  these  affections  the  external  application  of  the
diluted  tincture  has  been  attended  with  great
advantage.

In  its  action  on  the  urinary  organs  Cantharis  is
only  paralleled  by  Terebinthina  :  but  Arsenic,  Mer-
curius  corrosivus,  Kali  bichromicum,  Apis,  Cemnabis
saliva,  and  Copaiba  coincide  with  it  at  some  points
of  the  tract.  Its  action  on  the  skin  should  be
compared  with  that  of  Apis,  Antimonium  tartari-
cum,  Arnica,  Croton  tiglium,  Rhus,  and  Urtica
urens.

The  dilutions  from  the  3rd  dec.  upwards  have
been  used  in  urinary  inflammations.  For  external
use,  also,  the  strength  of  the  lotion  has  varied
much  in  the  hands  of  different  physicians.  I
should  not  make  it  stronger  than  one  part  of  the
tincture  to  fifty  of  water.

[NOTE.  In  a  paper  on  Diphtheria  in  the  '  Brit.
Journ.  of  Homoeopathy/  vol.  xvii,  Dr.  Black  calls
attention  to  the  resemblance  between  poisoning  by
neau.  After  alluding  to  the  albuminuria  present  in
both,  as  completing  the  resemblance,  he  suggests
the  trial  of  the  drug  as  a  remedy  for  the  disease.
I  have  never  used  it  myself:  but  I  believe  that  it
has  disappointed  expectations.  Dr.  Ludlam,  how-
ever, in  his  "  Clinical  Lectures  on  Diphtheria,"
speaks  highly  of  it  for  the  prostration  which  often


198  CAPSICUM.

continues  after  the  acuteness  of  the  mischief  has
subsided.]

I  give  a  place  to  the  medicine  next  on  my  list,
only  because  it  has  been  proved  by  Hahnemann
himself.

Capsicum

is  prepared  by  pulverizing  the  ripe  capsules  of  the
Capsicum  annuum  together  with  the  seed,  and
digesting  the  powder  with  twenty  parts  of  Alcohol.

The  pathogenesis  is  in  the  '  Materia  Medica
Pura.'

Capsicum  produces  its  well-known  burning  in  the
mouth,  throat,  gullet,  and  stomach  along  which  it
passes,  and  in  the  urinary  passages  by  which  it  is
eliminated.  It  has  been  occasionally  used  with
benefit  iu  heart-burn  and  tcnesmus  of  the  bladder.
Dr.  Drysdale  has  recorded  a  case  of  chronic  loose-
ness of  the  bowels  remaining  after  cholera  cured  by
this  medicine  in  the  1st  dec.  dilution.*  Dr.  Chap-
man recommends  it  in  hiccough.

I  know  of  no  analogous  medicines  :  and  can  say
nothing  about  dose.

I  have  next  to  speak  of  Charcoal,  animal  and
vegetable.  I  find  that  even  so  late  as  the  last
edition  of  Pereira  Charcoal  is  regarded  as  utterly
inert,  and  Hahnemann  is  laughed  at  for  filling
thirty-five  pages  with  the  symptoms  produced  by
the  millionth  of  a  grain.  The  learned  writer  has
omitted  to  notice  that  this  millionth  of  a  grain,  in

*  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  xxii,  p.  694.


CARBO AN1MALIS.  199

which  Charcoal  was  taken  by  our  provers,  was  ob-
tained by  trituration  :  and  that  it  is  to  this  process
powers  in  a  substance  inert  in  its  crude  state.  This
is  a  question  of  fact,  and  cannot  be  decided  a  priori.
We  will  take  first  in  order

Carbo  animalis.

i  v

Hahnemann  directs  this  to  be  prepared  from  ox-
leather.  Noack  and  Trinks  recommend  in  preference
meat — beef,  veal,  or  mutton — as  the  substance  to
be  carbonized.  It  probably  matters  little.  The
potencies  are  of  course  prepared  by  trituratiou.

The  pathogenesis  of  Carbo  animalis  is  in  the
'  Chronic  Diseases.'  Some  additional  information
of  interest  is  contained  in  Hempel's  article.

That  animal  charcoal,  even  in  its  crude  state,  is
inert,  can  hardly  be  affirmed  in  the  face  of  the  ex-
periments recorded  by  Dr.  Hempel.  Daily  doses
of  from  four  to  twenty-four  grains  have  not  only
disordered  the  stomach  and  bowels,  but  have  caused
the  breaking  out  of  copper-coloured  eruptions,  of
acne,  and  of  boils;  and  have  developed  painful
swellings  and  indurations  of  the  parotid  and  mam-
mary glands.  It  is  in  these  glandular  enlarge-
ments, occurring  in  cancerous  rather  than  scrofulous
subjects,  that  Carbo  animalis  has  chiefly  been  used.
With  this  exception,  its  whole  sphere  of  action
coincides  so  closely  with  that  of  its  vegetable
brother,  that  I  shall  mention  any  other  applications
of  it  when  speaking  of  the  latter  more  important
drug.


200  CARBO VEGETABILIS.

The action of  Carbo  animalis  on  the  glands  is
somewhat  like  that  of  Conium  and  Hydrastis.
The  lower  potencies  have  generally  been  used.

Carbo  vegetabilis

is  generally  made  from  poplar,  beech,  or  birch  wood  ;
and  raised  to  the  3rd  at  least  by  trituration.

The  proving  is  in  the  '  Chronic  Diseases.'  For
the  reasons  I  have  before  alleged,  I  am  unable  to
make  much  use  of  this  proving  for  physiological
inductions.  I  must  content  myself  with  expounding
to  you  the  therapeutical  sphere  of  Carbo  vegetabilis,
as  we  understand  it.

It  is  singular  that  in  two  conditions  for  which
you  use  charcoal  chemically,  we  find  it  curative
dynamically.  These  are  flatulence  and  foulness  of
the  secretions.  It  is  my  favourite  remedy  for
excessive  flatulence.  I  think  it  is  most  suitable  for
cases  where  the  gas  is  generated  by  the  walls  of  the
viscera  rather  than  from  fermentation  of  the  ingesta ;
where  it  distends  the  stomach  rather  than  the
intestines ;  and  where  the  tendency  is  to  diarrhoea
rather  than  constipation  (comp.  Lycopodium).  Where
flatulence  is  associated  with  acidity  or  heart-burn,
Carbo  will  often  relieve  these  latter  affections  also.
Again,  foulness  of  the  secretions  or  discharges  is
always  an  indication  with  us,  when  other  symptoms
correspond,  for  charcoal.  Carbo  animalis  in  a  high
dilution  is  said  to  be  very  effectual  in  offensive
lochia.  Chronic  hoarseness  is  another  affection  in
which  Carbo  vegetabilis  is  powerfully  curative.  The
affection  is  probably  catarrhaj^  only :  and  does  not
amount  to  laryngitis.  Carbo  also  occasionally  re-


CARBO VEGETABILIS.  201

moves  chronic  diarrhoea,  but  generally  when  this  is
incidental  to  other  disorders  calling  for  it.  In  all
conditions  calling  for  charcoal,  especially  the  vege-
table form,  the  presence  of  adynamia  of  a  non-febrile
character  greatly  strengthens  the  indications  for  its
use  (contrast  with  Arsenic).  But  I  cannot  agree  with
those  who  see  a  Carbo  adynamia  in  the  collapse  of
cholera,  and  recommend  it  to  be  given  therein.

Arsenicum  and  Lycopodium  are  the  only  two
medicines  I  know  of  which  may  be  advantageously
compared  with  Carbo.

I  find  the  potencies  from  3  to  12  answer  every
purpose.  The  3rd  trituration  acts  capitally  in  the
dyspepsia  of  old  people.


LETTER  XVII.

CAULOPHYLLUM, CAUSTICUM, CEDRON, CHAMOMILLA,
CHELIDONIUM, CHIMAPH1LA.

I  BEGIN  this  letter  with  an  account  of  one  of  the
many  indigenous  medicines  with  which  our  American
brethren  have  lately  enriched  the  f  Materia  Medica/
the

Caulophyllum  thalictroides,

popularly  called  "Blue  cohosh"  or  "Squaw  root/'
The  former  name  hints  at  its  similarity  to  Actsea
racemosa  (black  cohosh) ;  the  latter  points  to  its
main  sphere  of  action.

We  prepare  a  tincture  from  the  root.  Caulo-
phyllin  is  also  much  used.

There  is  a  proving  of  Caulophyllin  by  the  inde-
fatigable Dr.  Burt  in  Hale's  'New  Remedies/
together  with  all  that  is  known  regarding  the  drug.

The  "  Squaw  root,"  as  may  be  supposed,  acts
chiefly  on  the  uterus.  No  woman  having  proved  it,
I  am  unable  to  state  what  are  its  physiological
effects  upon  the  organ.  Dr.  Hale  thinks  that  it  is
primarily  excitant ;  and  that  it  is  homoeopathic  to
dysmenorrhcea,  uterine  cramps,  spurious  labour-
pains,  abortion,  and  after-pains.  It  seems  especially
suitable  to  affections  of  the  motor  nerves  sympathetic


CAULOPHYLLUM THALICTROIDES.  203

with  uterine  irritation  (Actsea  includes  also  reflex
hyperaesthesise).  It  has  been  found  useful  in  chorea,
in  spasms  from  suppression  of  the  menses,  and  in
uterine  paraplegia.  Cases  are  also  on  record  in
which  it  has  strengthened  labour-pains,  where  Ergot
could  not  be  given  on  account  of  the  rigidity  of  the
os  uteri  :  and  in  which  flooding  after  abortion,  and
long-continuing  lochia  after  parturition  have  been
checked  by  its  use.*  It  will  probably  continue  to
be  given  indiscriminately  as  a  uterine  remedy,  until
a  proving  on  a  woman  or  the  accumulation  of
clinical  experience  enables  its  precise  place  to  be  fixed.
I  have  myself  had  no  experience  with  it.  The  prov-
ing of  Dr.  Burt  reveals  a  marked  power  on  the
part  of  Caulophyllum  of  causing  acute  rheumatoid
affections  of  the  small  joints,  especially  those  of  the
fingers.  Putting  this  and  its  uterine  action  together,
it  becomes  probable  that  Caulophyllum  will  rank
with  Pulsatilla  and  Sabina  as  a  remedy  for  that
Dr.  Fuller  as  secondary  to  uterine  disorder.  It  has
made  some  brilliant  cures  of  inflammatory  rheuma-
tism of  the  hands  and  fingers,  and  is  said  by  Dr.
Ludlam  to  be  more  effectual  in  females  than  in
males  thus  affected.

I  have  already  pointed  out  the  close  relations  of
Caulophyllum  with  Actcea  racemosa,  Pulsatilla,  and

*  "  For  the  prevention  of  premature  labour,"  writes  Dr.  Hale,
"  no  remedy  in  the  Materia  Medica  equals  Caulophyllum."  And
again,  "  Dr.  Helmuth  informs  me  that  he  has  used  the  Caulophyllin
successfully  for  the  removal  of  those  discolorations  of  the  skin  of
the  face,  common  in  women  with  menstrual  irregularities  or  uterine
disease."


204  CAUSTICUM.

Sabina.  It  has  some  points  of  analogy  also  with
Secale.

The  Caulophyllin,  in  the  triturations  from  the
1st  to  the  6th  decimal,  has  been  most  frequently
used.

My  next  medicine  is

Oausticum.

What  is  Causticum  ?  Hahnemann  imagined  that
quick-lime  owed  its  causticity  and  solubility  to  the
presence  of  a  substance  which  he  called  by  this
name.  He  thought  that  he  could  separate  it  by
distillation,  by  adding  to  the  quick-lime  a  solution
of  some  previously  fused  Bisulphate  of  Potash.
The  liquid  distilled  from  this  mixture  he  styles
hydrated  causticum.  The  chemical  nature  of  this
substance  has  always  remained  uncertain.  Dr.
Black  has  lately  had  it  analysed,  with  the  result  of
considering  it  a  weak  solution  of  caustic  potash.  He
recommends  that  the  dilutions  should  in  future  be
prepared  from  the  Liquor  potassse  of  the  ( British
Pharmacopoeia/  as  of  more  certain  strength.  Twenty
parts  of  Liquor  potassse  with  eighty  of  distilled  water
constitute,  according  to  him,  the  1st  centesimal
dilution  of  what  we  might  now  more  correctly  style
Kali  causticum.

The  proving  of  Causticum  is  in  the  '  Chronic
Diseases/  Testers  article  upon  it  should  be  con-
sulted ;  as  also  Dr.  Black's  "  Notes  on  Causticum  "
in  the  'Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  vol.  xxiv,  p.  470,
and  a  paper  on  "  Calcarea  and  Causticum,"  by  Dr.
Nankivell,  with  the  discussion  following,  in  the


CAUSTICUM.  205

'  Annals of the Brit. Horn. Society/ vol. ii.
Hempel  omits  the  medicine  altogether.

The  pathogenesis  of  Causticum,  though  too  confused
for  physiological  inductions,  presents  nevertheless
certain  well-defined  groups  of  symptoms  which  have
led  to  successful  applications  of  the  remedy.  It  is
the  best  medicine  I  know  of  for  catarrhal  aphonia  :
and  it  is  said  by  Dr.  Meyhoffer  to  benefit  weakness
of  voice  from  over-exertion.  The  action  on  the
larynx  thus  indicated  has  given  Causticum  an
important  place  among  cough  medicines  :  for  in-
stances of  its  efficacy  here  you  should  read  Dr.
Black's  "  Notes"  above  mentioned.  A  well-verified
indication  for  its  use  in  coughs  is  the  involuntary
emission  of  urine  during  the  paroxysm.  We  are
thus  led  to  give  it  for  weakness  of  the  neck  of  the
bladder,  even  irrespective  of  cough :  as  in  the
enuresis  of  children  and  old  persons.  Other
urinary  symptoms  of  Causticum  induced  Mr.
Freeman,  of  Kendal,  to  select  it  in  some  cases
where  convalescence  from  typhoid  fever  was  re-
tarded by  the  passing  of  large  quantities  of  urine
loaded  with  lithic  acid  and  lithates.*  The  ex-
cessive tissue- waste  revealed  by  this  symptom  was
checked  by  Causticum,  and  the  recovery  went
rapidly  on.  In  a  similar  case  occurring  in  my  own
practice,  where  after  pregnancy  this  state  of  the
urine  was  associated  with  debility,  low  spirits,
anorexia,  copious  sour  perspirations,  and  persistent
aching  of  the  mammae  (all,  except  perhaps  the  last,
Causticum  symptoms),  speedy  recovery  ensued  upon
the  administration  of  this  remedy.  It  should  be
*  •  Monthly  Horn.  Rev.,'  May,  1866.


206  CEDRON.

thought  of  for  that  rare  disease  known  as  baruria.
Causticum  has  also  more  than  once  accelerated  the
departure  of  facial  paralysis :  and  is  recommended
as  the  best  external  application  to  burns  of  the
third  degree.  It  has  cured  once  at  least  epilepsy
and  chronic  eczema :  and  is  lauded  by  Teste  in
alternation  with  Mercurius  corrosivus  as  capable  of
even  checking  the  progress  of  variola  in  children.

I  know  of  no  medicine  whose  range  of  action
points  to  any  real  similarity  between  it  and
Causticum.

The  higher  potencies — about  the  12th — have
been  most  commonly  used.  But  Dr.  Black's
experience  shows  that  in  coughs  at  least  the  dilu-
tions from  the  1st  to  the  6th  dec.  are  very
efficacious.

I  have  now  to  speak  of  a  drug  which  we  know
as

Cedron.

It  is  the  fruit  of  a  South  American  tree  (Simaruba
Cedron — supposed  to  be  a  kind  of  Cedar),  whose
exact  description  is  not  yet  ascertained.  It  should
be  prepared  by  trituratiou.

Our  information  concerning  Cedron  is  derived
from  the  proving  and  clinical  remarks  contained  in
Testers  '  Materia  Medica/  and  from  Dr.  Casanova's
articles  in  vols.  v  and  vi  of  the  '  Monthly  Horn.
Review.'

In  Panama,  Cedron  is  considered  a  specific  for
the  bites  of  the  venomous  serpents  of  the  country,
and  for  its  endemic  iutermittents.  Teste's  three


CHAMOMILLA.  207

provers  each  experienced  a  daily  paroxysm  closely
simulating  ague.  The  chills  came  on  towards
evening  :  there  was  little  or  no  sweat,  but  much
cerebral  congestion.  Teste  reports  brilliant  results
from  Cedron  in  the  intermittents  of  Martinique
and  of  Wallachia.  Dr.  Casanova's  experiments,
pathogenetic  and  clinical,  point  in  the  same  direc-
tion. He  considers  Cedron  a  true  anti-periodic,
like  Quinine  and  Arsenic ;  and  gives  it  in  neuralgia
and  other  disorders,  as  well  as  in  ague,  when
appearing  in  regularly  recurring  paroxysms.  In
simple  intermittents,  he  considers  it  infallible.  I
have  myself  given  Cedron  only  in  a  single  case,
and  that  of  quotidian  ague  of  a  month's  standing ;
the  chills  beginning  towards  evening.  The  2nd
dilution  caused  almost  immediate  cessation  of  the
attacks.

I  have  already  indicated  the  resemblance  of
Cedron  to  Quinine  and  Arsenic.

Testers  cures  were  obtained  with  the  6th  dilu-
tion. Dr.  Casanova  appears  to  use  all  potencies,
from  the  1st  dec.  upwards.

And  now  we  come  once  more  upon  a  polychrest
in

Chamomilla.

The  juice  of  the  recent  plant  (Matricaria  chamomilla)
is  mixed  with  equal  parts  of  Alcohol  for  the  mother-
tincture.

The  proving  of  Chamomilla  is  in  the  '  Materia
Medica  Pura.'  Some  additional  experiments  by  the
Vienna  Provers'  Union  are  related  in  HempeFs
article.


208  CHAMOMILLA.

"With  one  of  these  provers  (Dr.  Schneller)  I  fully
agree  that  "  Chamomilla  affects  primarily  the
nervous  system."  Its  pathogenetic  effects  are  faint
and  obscure :  but  its  curative  power  is  well-defined.
It  is  when  the  sensory  and  excito-motor  nerves  are
morbidly  impressionable  that  Chamomilla  is  so
valuable  a  medicine.  Thus  Hahnemann  says
"  Chamomilla  seems  to  moderate  excessive  sensitive-
ness to  pain,  or  the  disturbing  influence  which  pain
exercises  in  some  persons  upon  the  mind :  for  this
reason  it  relieves  many  of  the  morbid  symptoms
produced  by  the  excessive  use  of  Coffee  and  narcotic
substances,  and  is,  on  the  other  hand,  less  beneficial
to  those  who  remain  patient  and  composed  during
their  sufferings.  I  consider  this  observation  of
great  importance."  It  has  even  cured  neuralgia  of
the  limbs  where  this  great  "nervousness"  was
present :  the  pains  are  much  worse  at  night  than
by  day.  The  impressionability  of  the  excito-motor
nerves  which  Chamomilla  so  powerfully  modifies
shows  itself  in  spasms  and  convulsions,  as  in  pregnant
women  and  young  children.  In  the  former  Chamo-
milla effectually  relieves  the  false  pains,  and  the
cramps  and  painful  twitches  of  the  legs,  which  trouble
the  later  months  of  pregnancy.  In  the  latter  it
plays  a  most  important  part  during  the  process  of
dentition.  It  probably  has  some  specific  action  on
the  pulp  of  the  teeth  itself  in  the  gums,  for  it  gives
great  relief  in  ordinary  inflammatory  face-ache.  But
when  in  dentition  the  nervous  system  becomes
irritated,  then  for  restlessness,  fretfulness,  and  spasms
there  is  no  medicine  like  Chamomilla.  Even  the
diarrhoea  of  teething  will  sometimes  yield  to  this


CHAMOMILLA.  209

medicine ;  and  when  other  remedies  are  strongly
indicated,  Chamomilla  in  alternation  will  help  them.
The  influence  of  Chamomilla  extends  to  the  emo-
tional nerve-centres  also :  and  the  effects  of  anger
and  active  vexation — even  when  these  go  beyond
the  nervous  system,  and  show  themselves  in  bilious
disturbance  and  jaundice — are  under  its  control.
The  ideational  centres — the  cerebral  hemispheres
themselves — Chamomilla  does  not  reach.  Hence
when  true  brain  symptoms  and  epileptiform  convul-
sions occur  during  dentition,  Chamomilla  must
yield  to  Belladonna.

In  this  wide  though  superficial  action  on  the
Chamomilla.  It  has  certain  local  influences  also,
making  it  useful  in  nervous  sore-throat,  colic,
nodosities  in  the  mammae,  strophulusand  inter trigo  in
infants,  uterine  excitement  (as  in  threatened  miscar-
riage, especially  from  mental  disturbance),  and
spasmodic  coughs.  But  even  irrespective  of  these
applications  of  the  drug,  it  is  so  frequently  called
for  in  the  treatment  of  the  disorders  of  women  and
children  that  it  is  in  daily  use  by  most  Homoeo-
paths.

The  analogues  of  Chamomilla  are  Agaricus,  Bella-
donna, Coffea,  Hyoscyamus,  Ignatia,  and  Stra-
monium.

The  facts  about  the  dose  of  Chamomilla  are  among
the  most  curious  that  Homoeopathy  presents.  Of
very  little  pathogenetic  activity  in  its  crude  state,
"  the  low  dilutions "  as  Dr.  Holcombe  truly  says
"  of  certainly  no  more  value  in  disease  than  catnep
or  mint  teas,"  Chamomilla  begins  at  the  6th  potency

14


210  CHELIDONIUM.

to  manifest  its  great  curative  powers,  and  may  often
be  given  with  advantage  as  high  as  the  18th.  The
12th  is  my  own  favourite  dilution.  These  facts  are
vouched  for  by  Homoeopaths  generally  :  their  sig-
nificance is  at  present  doubtful.

I  have  now  to  give  you  an  account  of  a  drug,
whose  recent  exhaustive  proving  will  probably  give
it  a  prominent  place  among  our  remedies.  I  refer
to  the  greater  celandine,

Chelidonium  majus.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  juice  in  the
usual  manner.

The  proving  to  which  I  refer  is  by  Dr.  Buchmaun
of  Alvensleben,  and  is  translated  in  the  '  Brit.
Journ.  of  Horn/ vols.  xxiii — xxv.  The  two  previous
provings  by  Hahnemann  ('  Mat.  Med.  Pura.')  and
Teste  ('  Mat.  Med/)  have  their  symptoms  incor-
porated into  Dr.  Buchmann's  schema.

Our  knowledge  of  Chelidonium,  which  has  been
gradually  building,  is  perfected  by  what  Dr.  Buch-
mann  has  now  done.  Led  by  the  doctrine  of
signatures,  the  middle-age  physicians  supposed  that
this  bitter  yellow  juice,  so  nearly  resembling  bile,
must  be  beneficial  in  disorders  of  the  liver.  The
disciples  of  Rademacher  have  shown  that  here  at
least  the  signature  has  proved  a  true  guide,  by  ad-
ducing numerous  cases  of  jaundice,  gall-stones,  and
acute  and  chronic  hepatitis  cured  by  this  medicine.
Then  comes  Dr.  Buehmann's  proving  to  show  that
this  remedial  power  obeys  the  law  of  similars.  The
action  on  the  liver  is  very  strongly  marked  in  his


CHELIDOXIUM.  211

proving.  Pain,  both  acute  and  dull,  and  tenderness
of  the  organ ;  pain  in  the  right  shoulder ;  stools
either  soft  arid  bright  yellow,  or  whitish  and  costive ;
and  deeply  tinged  urine,  appeared  in  nearly  every
prover.  In  three  the  skin  became  yellow  or  dark  ;
and  in  one  regular  jaundice  was  set  up.  Corre-
spondingly, Chelidonium  bids  fair  to  take  high  rank
in  our  school  as  an  hepatic  medicine.  You  will
find  a  number  of  cases  illustrative  of  its  value  at
the  end  of  the  proving.  Farther  experience,  how-
ever, is  required  to  enable  us  to  define  its  exact
place  here,  in  relation  to  other  hepatic  remedies,  as
Mercurius,  Bryonia,  Phosphorus,  and  Podophyllum.
Next,  the  experiments  instituted  by  Teste  led  him
to  credit  Chelidonium  with  a  specific  affinity  for  the
respiratory  organs.  The  two  disorders  to  which
he  thought  its  symptoms  specially  pointed  were
pertussis  and  pneumonia.  Subsequent  experience
has  confirmed  his  predictions  of  its  value.  In
hoopiny-cough  it  has  been  found  to  act  specially
well  after  Corallia,  as  indeed  he  recommends.  And
it  really  seems  a  most  valuable  accession  to  our
remedies  for  pneumonia.  It  is  especially  useful
where  the  right  lung  is  affected,  and  the  liver  in-
volved. Teste  thinks  it  is  better  than  Bryonia
in  those  cases  where  the  patient  is  of  blond  com-
plexion and  placid  temperament.  All  this  you  will,
find  confirmed  and  made  clear  by  Dr.  Buchmann's
experiments  and  observations.  He  shows  that  in
animals  poisoned  by  the  drug  the  lungs  are  found
generally  engorged,  sometimes  hepatized.  He  deve-
Jopes  in  several  of  his  provers  all  the  symptoms  of
an  incipient  pneumonia.  And  he  contributes  from


212  CHELIDONIUM.

his  own  practice  several  cases  of  the  disease,  in
which  the  beneficial  action  of  Chelidonium  was
most  manifest.  He  corroborates  also  the  value  of
Chelidonium  in  hooping-cough,  and  points  to  the
spasmodic  cough  induced  by  it  as  showing  its  ho-
rn oeopathicity.

Lastly,  the  new  proving  of  Chelidonium  reveals
a  hitherto  unknown  influence  exerted  by  it  on  the
kidneys.  Besides  the  general  symptoms  of  renal
irritation,  an  examination  of  the  urine  in  one  case
shewed  the  presence  of  tube-casts,  of  increased  uric
acid,  and  diminished  chloride  of  sodium.  The  mis-
chief in  this  case  was  so  considerable  that  cedematous
swellings  of  the  extremities  occurred.  We  have  as
yet  had  little  or  no  experience  with  Chelidonium  as-
a  renal  remedy.

Besides  the  facts  embraced  under  the  above  head-
ings, I  would  note  in  the  proving  the  severe  pains
in  the  knee-joints,  and  the  itching  hemorrhoids
developed  in  one  prover  (both  occasionally  symptom^
of  hepatic  disorder) ;  'the  dark  redness  so  often  ap-
pearing on  the  cheeks,  hinting  embarrassment  of  the
pulmonary  circulation;  the  chills  and  fever;  the
inflamed  scrotum  and  eyelids ;  the  itching  of  the
skin,  generally  in  patches  ;  and  the  periodical  tooth-
ache. Dr.  Buchmann  also  points  out  a  group  of
symptoms  which  show  an  action  on  the  diaphragm,
He  esteems  it  very  highly  in  all  external  neuralgias  :
and  gives  a  good  case  of  prosopalgia  cured  by  it.  In
the  'Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  vol.  xx,  you  will  find
some  cases  of  supra-orbital  neuralgia  cured  by  Che-
lidonium, in  which  also  its  curious  affinity  for  the
right  side  of  the  body  appears. — I  have  only  to  add,


CHIMAPHILA.  213

that  cases  are  appended  to  Dr.  Buchmann's  proving
which  hint  at  other  fields  of  action  for  Chelidonium
as  yet  unexplored.  Dr.  Madden  tells  me  that  he
has  verified  Dr.  Buchmanu's  recommendation  of  it
in  eczema.

Bryonia,  Phosphorus,  and  Eupatorium  are  the
analogues  of  Chelidonium.

The  dose  for  adults  seems  to  range  from  the  1st
to  the  6th  dec. ;  from  the  6th  to  the  12th  for  infants.

Before  concluding  this  letter,  I  must  briefly
mention  one  of  the  American  indigenous  remedies,
the  "  Pipsissiwa,"  or

Chimaphila.

A  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  leaves,
bruised.

Chimaphila  has  not  been  proved  :  all  our  infor-
mation concerning  it  is  derived  from  Dr.  Male's
^article  in  his  '  New  Remedies/

There  is  one  and  one  only  point  of  interest  about
this  plant.  It  appears  to  have  a  specific  influence
upon  the  urinary  passages,  like  that  of  the  Pareira
brava  and  the  Buchu,  which  you  know  well,  but
which  we  have  not  hitherto  used.  Dr.  Hale  has
found  it  a  valuable  medicine  in  cases  of  dysuria
with  mucous  sediment  in  the  urine;  and  has  cured
gleet  with  it.

Besides  Pareira  and  Buchu,  Chimaphila  may  be
compared  with  Cannabis  saliva,  Cantharis,  Copaiba,
Eupatorium  Purpureum,  and  Uva  ursi.

One  or  two  drops  of  the  mother-tincture  appear
to  be  the  most  suitable  dpse.


LETTER  XVIII.

CICUTA, CINA, CINCHONA, AND QUININE.

OF  the  three  very  similarly  acting  Umbelliferse,  we
have  already  discussed  the  JSthusa  cyuapium.  The
(Enanthe  crocata  is  not  at  present  used  in  our
practice :  but  we  have  some  knowledge  of  the
third,  the  water-hemlock,  or

Cicuta  virosa.

The  expressed  juice  of  the  root,  before  the  flowering
time  arrives,  mixed  with  equal  parts  of  Alcohol,
constitutes  the  mother-tincture.

Cicuta  was  proved  by  Hahnemann  :  the  patho-
genesis  is  in  the  '  Materia  Medica  Pura/  The
Hempel  in  his  article.

From  these  cases  of  poisoning  it  appears  that
Cicuta  causes  tetanus  as  manifestly  as  does  Strych-
nine. But  it  has  this  difference,  that  it  affects  the
brain  no  less  than  the  spinal  cord.  The  cerebral
symptoms  are  various  :  but  in  their  intensest  form
they  approximate  to  those  of  epilepsy,  which  indeed
in  poisoning  by  CEnanthe  crocata  is  exactly  simu-
lated. The  proving  adds  little  to  the  knowledge  of
Cicuta  we  thus  derive  from  toxicology,  save  that  it
shows  its  power  of  causing  local  tonic  spasms,  as  of


CI\A.  215

the  neck  and  jaw,  and  of  developing  pustular
inflammation  on  the  face  and  hands.

Cicuta  has  not  been  much  used  in  Homoeopathic
practice,  chiefly  in  epilepsy  and  pustular  eruptions.
Teste  calls  attention  to  its  double  action  on  the
nervous  system  and  the  skin  :  and  suggests  it  as  a
remedy  for  cerebral  and  other  nervous  affections
resulting  from  re-percussion  of  eruptions.  It  is
good  for  hiccough  and  belching,  when  these  are  of
a  spasmodic  character  :  it  has  relieved  these  symp-
toms when  occurring  in  cholera.

Teste  puts  Cicuta  into  his  Sulphur  group,  classing
it  especially  with  Bovista,  dEthusa,  and  Asterias.
Its  neurotic  symptoms  resemble  most  closely  those
of  jEthusa  and  Hydrocyanic  acid :  next,  those  of
Strychnine  and  Aconite.

It  seems  to  have  acted  well  in  all  dilutions.

I  have  next  to  speak  of  the  medicine  we  call

Cina.

The  Cina  or  "semen  contra"  (Qy. ?  vermes  under-
stood) of  commerce  (vulgo,  worm-seed)  is  said  to
be  the  seeds,  stalks,  &c.,  of  one  or  two  eastern
varieties  of  Artemisia.  You  know  it  best  by  its
alkaloid,  Santonine.  We  triturate  the  latter,  and
make  a  tincture  from  the  former.

The  proving  of  Cina  is  in  the  '  Materia  Medica
Pura/

Cina  has  derived  its  reputation  and  its  names
from  its  activity  as  a  vermifuge.  That  it  does,
especially  in  the  form  of  Santonine,  kill  and  expel
the  round-worm  and  occasionally  the  thread-worm,


216  CINA.

there  can  be  little  doubt.  When  morbid  symptoms
are  distinctly  traceable  to  the  presence  of  lumbrici,  I
for  one  have  no  hesitation  in  poisoning  the  para-
sites by  sufficient  doses  of  Santonine.  But  the
experiments  of  Hahnemanu  have  revealed  this
curious  fact,  that  Cina  produces  on  the  healthy
body  nearly  if  not  quite  all  those  symptoms  whose
presence  leads  us  to  suspect  the  existence  of  worms.
There  are  the  dilated  pupils,  with  dimness  of  sight
and  twitching  of  the  eyelids,  the  ravenous  appetite,
the  pinchings  in  the  abdomen,  the  itching  at  the
nose  and  anus,  the  frequent  micturition,  the  spas-
modic cough  with  vomiting,  the  restless  sleep,  the
fever,  and  the  twitchings  in  various  parts  of  the
body.  General  convulsions  also  have  frequently
resulted  from  the  large  doses  of  Cina  or  Santonine
given  as  a  vermifuge.  From  these  facts,  Homoeo-
pathic physicians  have  come  to  use  this  drug  as  a
dynamic  remedy  for  worm-affections.  Covering,  as
it  does,  the  great  mass  of  the  reflex  disorders
produced  by  the  worms,  it  is  calculated  on  the
principle  similia  similibus  to  extinguish  the  morbid
results  of  their  presence,  even  though  they  still
remain  in  situ.  But  this  benefit  would  obviously
be  but  palliative  and  temporary,  were  it  not  that
our  minute  doses  of  Cina  and  Santonine  promote
also  in  some  mysterious  way  the  expulsion  of  the
worms.  They  may  be  most  efficacious  against
lumbrici :  but  I  have  seen  them  over  and  over  again
act  most  satisfactorily  against  ascarides.  I  cannot
better  illustrate  their  action  than  by  referring  you
to  a  case  of  chorea  treated  by  Dr.  Hamilton.*

*  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Homoeopathy,'  vol.  xiii,  p.  254.


CINCHONA.  217

.It  must  not  be  supposed  that  Cina  is  the  one
specific  for  worms.  When  the  local  irritation  is
very  great,  I  prefer  Teucrium,  and  in  obstinate
cases  have  used  with  frequent  success  Teste's  course
of  Lycopodium,  Veratrum,  and  Ipecacuanha  in
succession.

The  chromatopsia  caused  by  Santonine  is  well
known,  but  appears  to  be  a  physical  rather  than  a
dynamic  property  of  the  drug,  as  the  urine  is
similarly  coloured.  Nevertheless,  it  has  been  used
with  some  benefit  in  amaurosis.

Cina  occupies  so  unique  a  place  in  relation  to
helminthiasis  that  I  am  quite  unable  to  find  medi-
cines analogous  to  it.

The  12th  dil.  answered  marvellously  well  in  the
case  I  have  cited.  I  am  very  well  pleased,  how-
ever, with  the  action  of  the  1st,  both  of  Cina  and
Santonine.

And  now  we  must  devote  some  time  and  space
to  the  study  of  your  old  friend  and  trusty  ally,

Cinchona.

In  our  school,  this  drug  is  commonly  called  China  :
and  as  far  as  derivation  goes,  the  one  name  is  as
good  as  the  other.  But  as  Hahnemanu  proved  it,
and  you  of  the  old  school  use  it,  under  the  title
Cinchona,  I  see  no  advantage  in  persisting  in  the
use  of  a  name  peculiar  to  ourselves.  We  prepare
our  tincture  from  the  bark  of  Cinchona  flava  or
C.  loxa.

Cinchona  has  been  most  thoroughly  proved  by
Hahnemann  :  and  the  pathogenesis,  with  valuable


218  CINCHONA.

prefatory  remarks,  appears  in  the  '  Materia  Medica
Pura.'

I  have  no  difficulty  in  assenting  to  the  usual
division  of  the  curative  powers  of  Cinchona  :  it  is
tonic  and  anti-periodic.  The  latter  property  we
will  discuss  presently,  under  the  head  of  Quina.
For  the  present,  let  us  direct  our  attention  to  the
former.

Cinchona  is  tonic,  i.  e.  it  strengthens  the  body
when  weak.  But  is  it  equally  good  for  all  kinds  of
weakness?  Reason  and  experience  alike  reply  in
the  negative.  Were  it  otherwise,  there  would  be
no  need  to  seek  for  other  tonics :  and  Cinchona
might  stand  alone  in  the  list,  instead  of  as  now
being  supplemented  by  a  score  of  other  drugs.
What,  then,  is  the  special  kind  of  weakness  to
which  it  is  suitable  ?  Hahnemann  has  wrought
out  this  problem  for  us.  He  points  out  that  the
temporary  excitement  caused  by  bark  in  the  healthy
is  soon  followed  by  the  opposite  condition  of
depression.  Studying,  then,  the  symptoms  of  this
depression  as  manifested  in  his  provers,  he  con-
cludes that  they  closely  resemble  those  of  the
debility  which  results  from  exhausting  discharge  or
other  loss  of  fluids.  To  this  condition,  where  the
weakness  is  itself  the  disease,  China  is  curative,
because  homoeopathic.  Hahnemann  reprobates  in  a
most  forcible  manner  the  pernicious  practice  of
giving  bark  as  a  tonic  in  cases  where  the  disease
which  causes  the  weakness  is  still  present.  For
this  I  refer  you  to  his  preface  to  the  proving :
where  he  also  points  out  that  the  benefit  obtained  from
bark  in  convalescence  from  acute  disease  is  just


CINCHONA.  219

correlative  to  the  super-added  debility  caused  by
the  depleting  treatment  pursued.

This  brilliant  thought  of  Hahnemann's  has  opened
out  to  us  a  wide  yet  well-defined  range  of  action  for
Cinchona  as  a  tonic.  In  the  debility  occasioned  by
loss  of  blood ;  by  diarrhoea,  diuresis,  or  excessive
sweating ;  by  over-lactation ;  and  perhaps  by  too
great  expenditure  of  semen, — it  is  a  most  effectual
remedy.  Nor  does  it  fail  us  when  the  discharge  is
a  morbid  one  ab  initio,  as  in  excessive  suppuration.
Here  the  relation  of  Cinchona  to  the  series  of  chill,
heat,  and  sweat  (of  which  we  shall  speak  while  upon
Quinine)  makes  it  also  helpful  to  the  sufferer  from
hectic.  This  is  the  grand  sphere  of  the  action  of
Cinchona :  and  within  it  it  manifests  some  of  the
most  beautiful  curative  powers  known  to  the  art  of
medicine.

But  over  and  above  all  this  Cinchona  does  good
service  to  us  in  several  ways, — most  of  which
Hahnemann  himself  has  pointed  out.  1st.  "  Its
primary  effect "  he  writes  "  is  to  open  the  bowels :
hence  it  will  cure  certain  kinds  of  diarrhcea,  provided
the  other  symptoms  correspond."  For  the  last  four
years  I  have  invariably  treated  simple  summer
diarrhoea  with  China  :  and  regard  it  as  well-nigh
infallible.  "  Absence  of  pain  "  is  often  mentioned
in  the  books  as  a  special  indication  for  this  medicine  :
but  I  cannot  confirm  it.  In  the  cases  to  which  I
refer  severe  griping  pain  was  nearly  always  present :
and  one  of  the  earliest  effects  of  the  China  was  its
relief.  China  is  also  recommended  for  lienteria :  I
myself  have  cured  a  case  with  it.  2nd.  "The  fre-
quent and  morbid  excitement  of  the  sexual  organs,


220  CINCHONA.

resulting  in  an  involuntary  emission  of  semen,  and
caused  even  by  slight  abdominal  irritations,  is
permanently  relieved  by  Cinchona."  I  give  you
this  as  Hahnemann  has  written  it ;  I  have  not
verified  the  statement.  3rd.  "  Pain  which  is  excited
by  merely  moving  the  affected  parts,  and  which
gradually  rises  to  the  most  fearful  height,  has
frequently  been  cured  by  a  single  drop  of  the  I2th
dilution  of  Cinchona,  even  when  the  attack  has
returned  frequently."  The  "  pain  "  here  spoken  of
is  probably  neuralgic  in  character.  In  another
place  Hahnemann  notes  of  the  Cinchona  neuralgia,
that  it  is  "increased  by  motion  and  especially  by
touching  the  affected  parts;  but  it  is  likewise
characterised  by  this,  that  the  pain,  although  it  may
have  disappeared  for  the  moment,  may  be  excited
again  by  simply  touching  the  parts,  when  it  frequently
becomes  horrid  and  intolerable."  4th.  "  Certain
forms  of  jaundice  may  likewise  be  cured  by  Cinchona
as  their  homoeopathic  type."  Hahnemann  also
suggests  that  China  is  homoeopathic  to  the  humid
gangrene  of  the  outer  parts  and  the  suppuration  of
the  lungs  in  which  it  has  occasionally  been  useful :
but  I  cannot  see  anything  in  its  power  over  these
affections  but  instances  of  its  roborant  influence.
Lastly,  he  lays  down  that  "  bark  will  scarcely  ever
be  found  useful  except  when  the  nightly  rest  of  the
patient  is  disturbed  similarly  to  the  disturbance
which  characterises  Cinchona."  And  of  this  dis-
turbance he  says  "  Cinchona  is  characterised  by
restless  night-sleep  with  dreams  causing  anxiety  and
starting ;  when  waking  from  those  dreams  one  finds


QUINA.  221

it  difficult  to  come  to  one's  senses,  or  the  anxiety
continues."

I  have  cited  these  remarks  of  Hahnemann's  at
length,  as  he  has  evidently  studied  Cinchona  very
closely.  In  fact,  there  is  little  to  add  to  his
enumeration  of  the  curative  powers  of  the  drug.  I
may  say,  however,  that  it  seems  to  excite  the  ovario-
uterine  functions  so  as  to  convert  the  existing  cata-
menia  into  a  hsemorrhage, — the  blood  coming  off  in
black  lumps.  It  is  thus  homoeopathic  to  menor-
rhagia,  as  well  as  to  the  debility  it  occasions  and
for  which  we  so  often  give  it.

Hahnemann  recommends  the  12th  dilution.  I
almost  invariably  use  the  1st :  and  in  hectic  caused
by  suppuration  the  mother-tincture  seems  preferable.

Before  leaving  Cinchona,  I  must  dwell  for  a  short
time  upon  its  well-known  alkaloid,

Quina.

We  use,  like  yourselves,  the  disulphate  (Quinine),
making  either  triturations  or  aqueous  dilutions.

Quinine  was  proved  by  Dr.  Noack  :  but  the  only
record  of  his  experiments  of  which  I  am  aware  is
the  pathogenesis  in  Jahr's  '  Manual/  The  best
account  of  the  physiological  effects  of  Quinine  I
have  met  with  is  in  Wood's  '  Materia  Medica/  where
the  substance  of  Briquet's  experiments  is  given.

The  chief  interest  attaching  to  Quinine  is  un-
doubtedly its  power  over  periodic  affections,  especially
intermittent  fever.  And  first,  as  to  the  rationale  of
its  action  in  curing  such  affections.  Is  it  antipathic,
alloaopathic,  or  homoeopathic  ?  As  we  cannot  con-


222  QUINA.

ceive  the  opposite  of  ague,  the  first  of  these  alterna-
tives is  impossible.  Of  the  second  we  prove  the  nega-
tive if  we  establish  the  affirmative  of  the  third.  Now
you  are  well  aware  that  the  power  which  Hahne-
niann  discovered  (or  thought  he  had  discovered)  in
Cinchona  to  excite  the  intermittent  paroxysm  was
the  Newton's  apple  which  led  him  to  the  law
"  similia  similibus."  The  worth  of  his  experiments
has  indeed  been  questioned,  even  among  our  own
ranks.  But  there  is  now  plenty  of  evidence  from
other  quarters  to  show  that  both  occasionally  in
individuals  arid  regularly  on  a  large  scale  among
those  who  work  in  its  manufacture,  Quinine  produces
the  genuine  simile  of  ague.  The  facts  bearing  on
this  point  are  so  well  put  together  in  the  '  Monthly
Horn.  Review'  for  Dec.  1866,  that  I  need  not
repeat  them  here.  But  secondly,  what  is  the  place
of  Quinine  in  the  therapeutics  of  intermittent s  ?
Dr.  Wood  writes  "  Anti-periodic  treatment  is  in  its
nature  essentially  temporary ;  its  only  effect  being
to  guard  the  system  against  the  recurring  paroxysms,
not  to  secure  further  immunity,  when  its  direct
influence  has  ceased."  Upon  this  showing,  we  can
only  expect  Quinine  to  be  permanently  curative
when  the  ague  is  recent :  and  this  all  experience
confirms.  In  recent  uncomplicated  agues,  showing
the  regular  series  of  chill,  heat,  and  sweat,  and
unmarked  by  any  special  phenomena,  Quinine  is
pretty  well  infallible.  But  in  cases  of  long  standing
its  use  is  mere  waste  of  time.  If  it  "  breaks  up  "
the  paroxysms  for  a  while,  they  always  return  :  and
if  the  Quinine  is  pushed,  a  medicinal  cachexia  is
added  to  that  already  induced  bv  the  disease.


QUINA.  223

The  same  remarks  apply  to  the  other  maladies —
brow-ague,  dysentery,  &c. — capable  of  being  in-
duced by  malaria,  and  characterised  by  periodical
recurrence.  If  of  recent  origin,  Quinine  may  ex-
tinguish them.  But  when  they  have  taken  anything
like  deep  root  in  the  system,  it  is  powerless.  And
here  comes  in  the  great  advantage  of  Homoeopathy,
that  it  has  not  one  or  even  two  "  anti-periodics"
only,  but  a  score ;  and  in  one  or  other  of  these  the
specific  remedy  for  the  individual  case  may  nearly
always  be  found.

Before  leaving  the  sphere  of  periodical  affections,
I  may  mention  that  I  have  much  faith  in  Cinchona
and  its  alkaloid  as  remedies  where  natural  perio-
dicity is  disordered,  as  in  irregular  menstruation  in
young  girls,  and  where  the  pains  of  labour  are  re-
curring in  a  fitful  and  worrying  manner.

There  is  another  property  of  Quinine  which  Alloeo-
pathy  knows  only  as  a  nuisance,  but  which  Homoeo-
pathy has  utilized  for  the  benefit  of  its  patients.  It
is  its  action  on  the  head.  Dr.  Wood  gives  an  ad-
mirable description  of  the  symptoms  caused  by  the
drug  in  this  region, — the  abnormal  subjective
sounds  (buzzing,  singing.,  roaring.,  hissing),  with
deafness;  then  the  weight,  fulness,  tension,  and
pain  in  the  head  ;  while  from  larger  doses  we  have
vertigo,  disturbed  visual  function,  even  to  blindness,
flushing  of  the  face,  headache,  and  epistaxis, — these
congestive  phenomena  being  followed  by  depression,
tremblings,  sighing  and  yawning,  and  wandering.
I  have  been  led  by  these  facts  to  give  Quinine  with
much  benefit  in  long-lasting,  continuous  headaches,
of  a  congestive  character,  affecting  the  whole  brain  ;


224  QUINA.

and  in  deafness  with  noises  in  the  ears  when  of
nervous  rather  than  catarrhal  origin. — Of  Noack's
proving  I  can  only  note  that  there  was  a  very
marked  increase  of  lithic  acid  and  lithates  in  the
urine,  and  that  I  have  seen  some  reason  to  believe
that  this  symptom  may  serve  as  a  valuable  indica-
tion for  the  medicine  in  obscure  cases.

As  a  causer  and  curer  of  ague,  the  chief  analogues
of  Quina  are  Arsenic  and  Cedron.  Its  peculiar
influence  on  the  brain  is  unique.

Pro  dosi,  I  find  two  or  three  grains  of  the  1st
dec.  trituration,  frequently  repeated,  amply  sufficient
for  the  cure  of  ague  :  while  the  1st  centesimal  cures
without  aggravation  the  affections  of  the  head.


LETTER  XIX.

CISTUS, CLEMATIS, COCCULUS, COCCUS CACTI, COFFEA,
COLCHICUM, COLLINSONIA.

I  must  begin  this  letter  by  giving  you  a  short
account  of  the  Rock-rose,  or

Cistus  canadensis.

The  tincture  is  probably  prepared  from  the  whole
plant.

The  Cistus  has  been  proved  under  the  superin-
tendence of  Dr.  Hering.  His  pathogenesis,  with
the  medical  history  of  the  plant,  is  given  entire  by
Dr.  Hale  in  his  '  New  Remedies/

It  was  the  great  popular  reputation  of  the  Rock-
rose  in  scrofula  which  led  to  its  being  proved.  The
symptoms  (which  we  have  only  in  schema-form)
shadow  forth,  faintly  indeed,  the  manifestations  of
the  diathesis  in  the  eyes,  ears,  nose,  and  lymphatic
glands ;  and  in  such  affections  it  has  been  used
successfully  by  Homoeopathic  physicians.  I  am
myself  much  more  impressed  with  its  effects  upon
the  throat.  The  sense  of  dryness  there  is  more
marked  in  the  pathogenesis  of  Cistus  than  in  that
of  any  other  medicine  I  know, — except  perhaps
Belladonna.  The  following  symptom,  too,  looks
very  like  shingles.  "Below  the  right  shoulder-

15


226  CLEMATIS.

blade,  extending  round  to  the  front  of  the  body,
was  a  very  much  inflamed  spot  about  the  size  of  the
palm  of  the  hand,  painfully  sore  to  the  touch ;  soon
after  pimples  began  to  appear  on  this  spot  in  a  large
group,  they  caused  violent  burning.  Later,  a  pain
went  from  this  belt-like  spot  to  the  left  hip,  and
into  the  groin  ;  the  pain  was  like  rheumatism,  mo-
tion increased  it."

Cistus  is  said  to  require  a  Magnesian  soil ;  and
Dr.  Hering  suggests  that  it  may  be  related  to  that
mineral  as  (for  similar  reasons)  Belladonna  is  to
Lime  and  Pulsatilla  to  Iron.

The  first  dilution  has  been  used  in  scrofula.

If  the  next  name  on  my  list  were  as  valuable  as
a  medicine  as  its  sister  is  beautiful  as  a  flower,  it
would  be  precious  indeed.

Clematis

is  prepared  by  mixing  the  juice  of  the  fresh  leaves
of  the  Clematis  erecta  with  equal  parts  of  Alcohol.
The  pathogenesis  is  in  the  '  Chronic  Diseases.'
by  side  with  its  therapeutic  virtues,  it  would  seem
to  influence  specifically  the  genito-urinary  mucous
membrane,  the  skin,  the  lymphatic  glands,  and  the
eyes.  It  has  some  reputation  as  a  remedy  for  or-
chitis ;  but  I  can  hardly  recommend  its  use  save  in
the  failure  of  such  medicines  as  Pulsatilla,  Spongia,
and  Aurum.  Hempel,  too,  adduces  arguments
against  its  real  curative  action  in  the  cases  recorded.
On  the  other  hand,  there  seems  little  doubt  of  its
efficacy  in  organic  urethral  stricture,  which  one


COCCULUS INDICUS.  227

would  hardly  expect  to  be  influenced  by  medicine
at  all.  This  experience  deserves,  if  it  does  not  need,,
confirmation.  I  have  certainly  seen  Clematis  act
with  rapid  curative  power  in  symptoms  of  commencing
stricture  supervening  upon  chronic  gleet.  Impetigo
appears  to  be  the  type  of  exanthem  in  which  Cle-
matis acts  curatively :  but  it  is  not  a  very  potent
remedy.  It  seems  a  favourite  medicine  in  the
Leopoldstadt  Hospital  at  Vienna  for  enlargement  of
the  lymphatic  glands;  and  my  friend  Dr.  Madden
esteems  it  highly  in  the  treatment  of  iritis.  You
will  see  that  I  have  little  personal  experience  with
Clematis.  I  have  also  taken  repeated  doses  of  from
10  to  20  drops  of  the  1st  decimal  dilution  without
obtaining  any  symptoms.

I  know  of  no  medicine  presenting  much  analogy
with  Clematis :  nor  has  its  use  been  extensive
enough  to  enable  us  to  fix  its  most  suitable  dose.

I  have  now  to  bring  before  you  a  drug  better
known  to  you  as  a  poison  than  as  a  medicine,

Cocculus  Indicus.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  pulverised
seeds.

Cocculus  was  proved  by  Hahnemann,  and  the
pathogenesis  appears  in  the  '  Materia  Medica
Pura.'

You  know  Cocculus,  I  say,  as  a  poison  only.
Whether  used  to  kill  fishes,  for  the  adulteration  of
beer,  or  in  experiments  on  animals,  it  is  evident
that  it  acts  mainly  upon  the  nervous  system.  The
testimony  of  those  who  have  experienced  its  effects


228  COCCULUS INDICUS.

on  their  own  persons  is  that  it  influences  the  vo-
luntary muscles  rather  than  the  intellectual  powers.
With  this  Hahnemann's  provings  entirely  agree.  I
think  that  the  whole  range  of  the  curative  action  of
Cocculus  becomes  intelligible,  if  we  suppose  it  to
influence  the  motor  tract  of  the  cranio-spinal  axis,
from  the  corpora  striata  to  the  cauda  equina.  It
is  of  great  service  in  certain  kinds  of  vomiting.
These  are  not  of  gastric  origin  :  but  seem  explicable
by  the  excitement  of  the  peristaltic  action  of  the
stomach  and  intestines  which  takes  place  when  the
corpora  striata  are  irritated.  "  Sea-sickness"  is
the  type  of  the  Cocculus  vomiting :  and  there  is
little  doubt  that  the  seat  of  this  affection  is  prima-
rily cerebral.  Cocculus  will  often  relieve  even  this
obstinate  affection  :  and  is  powerfully  curative  of
nausea  and  vomiting  induced  by  riding  in  a  car-
riage or  any  similar  motion.  It  is  also  one  of  the
best  palliatives  for  the  cerebral  form  of  "  sick-head-
ache," where  the  vomiting  is  plainly  secondary.  The
presence  of  giddiness  (and  perhaps  also  of  salivation,
which  is  readily  induced  by  the  "  active  principle"
of  Cocculus,  picrotoxin)  is  an  additional  indication
for  the  medicine  in  such  cases  :  and  may  sometimes
call  for  it  when  occurring  separately.  The  abdomi-
nal spasms  in  which  Cocculus  is  so  frequently  ser-
viceable appear  always  to  spring  from  the  nervous
centres  either  directly  or  from  reflex  irritation.  It
is  especially  valuable  in  menstrual  colic  :  though  it
has  no  power  over  true  dj  smenorrhoea.  The  con-
dition of  the  nervous  system  set  up  by  menstruation
and  pregnancy  appears  specially  favourable  to  the
action  of  Cocculus,  which  herein  resembles  Chamo-


COCCULUS INDICUS.  229

milla.  Menstrual  headache  as  well  as  colic,  and
flatulent  "  spasms"  in  pregnant  women  often  yield
to  its  use.  From  the  pathogenesis,  I  would  sug-
gest its  trial  in  that  troublesome  form  of  flatulence
where  the  wind  collects  in  the  small  intestines,  and
disturbs  the  sleep.  The  ultimate  effect  of  Cocculus
upon  the  spinal  cord  appears  to  be  to  diminish  its
irritability  :  so  that  while  convulsions  are  produced
in  acute  poisoning  by  the  drug,  paralytic  symptoms
abound  in  the  continued  experiments  of  the  provers.
Cocculus  has  considerable  reputation  in  our  school
as  a  remedy  for  paraplegia.  It  is  probably  suitable
to  functional  disorder  only  of  the  cord,  as  in  the
post-diptheritic  paralysis,  of  which  Dr.  Trinks  has
given  a  beautiful  instance.*  It  has  also  proved
curative  in  hemiplegia  following  apoplexy  :  in  these
cases  the  effusion  had  probably  taken  place  in  one
of  the  corpora  striata.

The  following  case  by Dr.  Black  will  illustrate
the  kind  of  headache  for  which  Cocculus  is  suitable. f

Miss  H — ,  set.  35,  of  a  full  plethoric  habit,  has  suffered  from
her  present  headaches  for  now  fifteen  years ;  they  came  on  shortly
after  the  catamenia  appeared,  and  have  ever  since  regularly
pain  affecting  the  whole  head :  the  patient  has  a  difficulty  in
describing  it  minutely  ;  is  unable  to  lie  for  a  moment  on  the  back
of  the  head  j  is  forced  to  lie  on  the  side ;  unable  to  bear  the  least
light;  any  noise  excites  nausea  and  vomiting.  During  the  head-
ache she  feels  as  if  suffering  from  sea-sickness,  and  on  sitting  up
the  objects  around  seem  to  move  up  and  down.  The  headache  lasts
from  thirty-six  to  forty-eight  hours,  and  comes  on  on  the  third  or


*  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Homoeopathy,'  vol.  xix,  p.  312.
t  Ibid.,  vol.  v,  p.  429.


230  COCCUS CACTI.

fourth  day  of  the  catamenial  period.  The  catamenia  are  abundant,
but  unattended  by  local  pain.  General  health  good.

March  16th.— Cocc.  18,  M.  et  N.

April  4th. — The  headache  has  occurred  at  the  usual  time,  but
not  so  severe  as  usual,  for  she  was  able  to  move  about,  and  was  not
confined  to  bed  as  she  always  was  before.  A  dessert-spoonful  of  the
tincture  of  Cocculus  as  above,  only  of  the  6th  dilution,  was  given
from  every  half-hour  to  every  six  hours  during  the  third  and  fourth
day  of  her  period  with  great  advantage.  Cont.  Cocc.

April  20th.— Kept.  Cocc.  18,  as  on  March  16th.

May  1st. — Has  had  a  very  slight  headache  at  the  usual  period,
which  was  again  much  relieved  by  frequently-repeated  doses  of
Cocc.  18 ;  she  was  now  ordered  Bell.  6,  alternately  with  Cocc.  18,
M.  et  N.  This  was  the  last  prescription ;  for  one  headache  occur-
ring after  that  she  took  the  Cocc.  Since  October,  1844,  to  July,
1846,  she  has  continued  free  from  these  headaches.

Remarks. — The  principal  indication  in  this  case  for  the  selection
of  Cocculus,  was  the  marked  tendency  to  nausea  resembling  sea-
sickness, as  if  the  stomach  heaved  up  and  down.  So  great  was  this
idiosyncracy  that  she  told  me  that  travelling  in  a  carriage  made
her  feel  ill,  and  that  sickness  has  often  been  brought  on  by  looking
at  a  vessel  pitching  up.

Cocculus  reminds  me  of  no  other  medicine,  save
at  the  point  where  it  touches  Chamomilla  (which  I
have  noted  above).  Teste,  however,  associates  it
with  Causticum,  Coffea,  and  Staphysagria.

The  dilutions  from  6  to  12  have  been  most  fre-
quently used.

We  have  next  to  consider  the  place  aud  action
of  Cochineal,

Coccus  cacti.

The  dried  insect,  powdered,  is  digested  in  alcohol
for  a  tincture,  or  (better)  triturated  with  milk-
sugar.


COCCUS CACTI.  231

Cochineal  has  been  proved  by  the  Austrian  So-
ciety in  their  wonted  exhaustive  manner.  The  ex-
periments are  related  in  detail  in  the  fourth  volume
of  the  '  Austrian  Journal:'  and  the  schema  of  the
symptoms  may  be  found  translated  in  Metcalfe's
'  Homoeopathic  Provirigs.'  HempePs  article,  also,
should  be  consulted.

The  Austrian  proving  makes  it  evident  that  the
cough  spring  from  its  homoeopathic  relation  to  the
disease.  Few  of  the  provers  escaped  a  cough  :  and
with  Dr.  Wurmb  it  was  "  so  violent  that  it  caused
vomiting,  and  the  expectoration  of  a  great  quantity
of  thick,  viscous,  and  albuminous  mucus."  I  am
not  aware,  however,  that  the  medicine  has  been  used
by  Homoeopaths  against  this  disease.  Again,  this
proving  amply  accounts  for  the  reputation  of  Cochi-
neal in  the  school  of  Rademacher  as  a  "  kidney
remedy/'  The  urinary  symptoms  are  very  nume-
rous and  of  a  high  grade  of  intensity.  Nephritic
colic  and  vesical  and  urethral  tenesmus  are  plainly
pictured  therein  : — you  will  read  in  Hempel  cases
where  affections  of  this  kind  and  also  acute  renal
dropsies  have  been  cured  by  Cochineal.  I  have
little  doubt  but  that  the  study  of  this  beautiful
proving  will  lead  to  a  more  extensive  use  of  the
medicine,  especially  in  sore  throat  with  great  dry-
ness  (comp.  Belladonna),  in  inflammation  of  the
labia  (comp.  Apis)  and  in  laryngeal  irritation  and
hoarseness  (comp.  Hepar  Sulphuris.)

Cochineal  has  hitherto  proved  curative  only  in
material  doses.


232  COFFEA.

We  come  now  to  one  of  those  substances  which
stand  on  the  boundary  line  between  food  and
medicine,

Coffea.

"We  use  the  raw,  not  the  roasted  bean,  preparing  it
either  as  a  tincture  or  by  trituration.  If  Pereira
be  right,  however,  we  should  try  if  the  roasted  bean
be  not  more  efficacious,  as  he  states  that  its
neurotic  properties  are  further  developed  by  this
process.

The  proving  of  Coffea  is  in  StapPs  *  Additions/
Teste's  article  is  an  important  one  :  and  the  ordi-
nary uses  of  the  drug  are  given  by  Hempel,  and  in
an  article  by  Dr.  Weitenweber  in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.
of  Horn./  vol.  v.  You  may  also,  if  you  like,  read
Hahnemann's  somewhat  exaggerated  picture  of  the
evil  effects  of  coffee-drinking  contained  in  his  'Lesser
Writings/

Stapf  well  characterises  the  primary  effect  of
Coffee  as  "  a  pathological  excitation  of  all  the  organic
functions.  When  Coffee  acts  moderately  upon  the
healthy  organism  the  irritability  of  the  organs  of
sense  is  morbidly  increased,  the  visual  power
becomes  more  acute,  the  hearing  more  sensitive,
the  taste  is  finer,  the  seusorium  is  more  vivid  (hence
increased  susceptibility  to  pain),  the  mobility  of  the
muscles  is  increased,  the  sexual  desire  is  more
excited,  even  the  nervous  activity  of  the  digestive
and  secretive  organs  is  increased  ;  hence  a  morbid
sensation  of  excessive  hunger,  increased  desire  and
facility  of  the  alvine  evacuations  and  of  the  emissions
of  urine.  To  what  an  extent  the  nervous  and


COFFEA.  233

animal  activity  of  the  organism  is  increased  by
Coffee,  appears  from  the  sleeplessness  which  it
excites  in  various  shades  and  degrees,  from  the
peculiar  pathological  excitation  of  the  mind  and
soul,  and  from  the  febrile  warmth  which  it  excites
to  a  considerable  degree."  This  primary  effect  of
Coffee  is  made  use  of  in  many  ways,  as  you  well
know  ; — to  arrest  the  paroxysm  of  ague  and  asthma,
to  relieve  headache,  and  to  antidote  the  depressing
effects  of  vegetable  poisons,  such  as  Opium.  But  it
also  points  to  several  conditions  in  which  the  drug
may  become  homceopathically  curative,  as  when
pain  is  felt  excessively  (in  labour,  for  instance),  in
nervous  excitement,  and  especially  in  sleeplessness.
One  of  the  pains  often  cured  by  Coffea  is  toothache  :
the  sufferer  is  restless  and  complains  much,  and  the
pain  is  temporarily  relieved  by  cold.  The  more
potent  toxicological  effects  of  Coffea  and  its  "  active
principle"  Caffeine  have  yet  to  receive  their  applica-
tion to  practice.  In  a  case  of  poisoning  related  by
Hempel,  strangury  was  well-marked  :  and  according
to  Lehman n,  Caffeine,  in  doses  of  from  2  to  10
grains,  causes  violent  excitement  of  the  vascular
and  nervous  systems, — palpitations  of  the  heart,
extraordinary  frequency,  irregularity,  and  often
intermission  of  the  pulse,  oppression  of  the  chest,
pains  in  the  head,  confusion  of  the  senses,  singing
in  the  ears,  scintillations  before  the  eyes,  sleepless-
ness, erections,  and  delirium.  Another  important
class  of  disorders  produced  by  Coffea  are  those
which  result  from  its  excessive  use  as  a  beverage.
These  are  sketched  clearly  and  without  exaggera-
tion by  Teste.  The  chief  practical  result  to  which


234  COLCHICUM.

they  have  led  is  its  successful  use  in  some  forms  of
hemicrania ;  the  attack  comes  on  in  the  morning,
and  lasts  all  day :  there  is  increased  sensibility,
chilliness,  and  nausea.

Coffea  admits  of  close  and  profitable  comparison
with  Chamomilla  and  Ignatia.

It  seems  to  be  one  of  those  medicines  which  act
in  almost  any  dilution.  Thus  of  Dr.  Hale's  cases
of  toothache  to  which  I  have  referred,  two  were
relieved  by  the  3rd  dilution,  and  the  remaining  one
by  the  200th.

My  next  medicine  is  your  old  acquaintance

Colchicum.

We  prepare  the  tincture  from  the  root,  by  ex-
pressing the  juice,  and  treating  the  residue  with
alcohol.

There  is  a  short  pathogenesis  of  Colchicum  in
Jahr's  '  Manual,'  taken  from  the  Archiv. ;  and  a
full  (though  not  very  fruitful)  proving  by  Dr.  Reil
in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  vol.  xix.  You  will
need  to  supplement  the  information  derived  from
these  sources  with  that  afforded  by  Pereira,  Teste,
and  Hempel.

The  physiological  effects  of  Colchicum,  though
tion. The  vomiting  and  purging  which  always
prominently  appear  are  usually  set  down  as  the
result  of  an  inflammatory  irritation  :  but  without,
as  I  think,  sufficient  evidence.  Colchicum  is
undoubtedly  a  local  irritant,  when  applied  in
substance.  But  when  introduced  into  a  vein,  the


COLCH1CTTM.  235

stomach  only  is  found  inflamed  :  and  there  have
been  several  instances  of  poisoning  by  the  tincture
or  wine,  in  which  the  autopsy  has  revealed  no
gastro-enteric  inflammation  whatever,  although
there  had  been  constant  and  profuse  evacuations.
The  clue  to  these  phenomena  seems  afforded  by  a
case  cited  by  Hempel,  in  which  the  vomiting  and
purging,  with  the  other  symptoms,  closely  resembled
those  of  Asiatic  cholera.  It  would  appear  from
this  that  Colchicum  (like  Veratrum,  q.  v.)  vomits
and  purges  not  by  local  irritation,  but  by  an
influence  upon  the  vaso-motor  nerves  of  the  ali-
mentary canal  similar  to  that  exerted  by  the
choleraic  poison.  Next  to  the  stomach  and  in-
testines, Colchicum  acts  most  powerfully  upon  the
kidneys.  It  is  supposed  to  be  diuretic :  but  I
apprehend  that  the  notion  has  arisen  from  observa-
tion of  its  action  in  disease.  In  a  short  proving  of
it  which  I  made  some  years  ago  upon  my  own
person  the  quantity  of  urine  was  very  notably
decreased  ;  and  suppression  often  occurs  in  cases
of  poisoning.  Again,  Colchicum  was  supposed
to  increase  the  proportion  of  uric  acid  in  the  urine,
and  thus  to  benefit  gout.  But  Bocker  has  ascer-
tained that  it  actually  diminishes  the  quantity  of
organic  solids  in  this  excretion,  leaving  the  salts
and  earthy  phosphates  unaffected  :  and  Dr.  Garrod
has  demonstrated  the  same  thing  as  regards  uric
acid  in  particular.  These  seem  to  be  the  main
points  worthy  of  note  about  the  physiological  action
of  Colchicum.  It  appears  also  to  increase  the
biliary  and  salivary  secretions,  and  to  depress  the
circulation.  In  one  case  the  pleura  were  found


236  COLCHICUM.

inflamed.  Dr.  Reil's  proving,  though  very  thoroughly
carried  out,  adds  little  to  our  knowledge  of  Colchi-
cura.  A  good  many  rheumatoid  pains  were  caused,
more  in  the  muscles  than  in  the  joints :  and
Teste's  statement  seemed  confirmed,  that  the  neck
is  specially  influenced  by  the  drug.  Several  provers,
moreover,  had  decided  pleurodynia :  and  one  a  very
severe  occipital  headache.

And  now  what  shall  we  say  of  the  therapeutic
virtues  of  Colchicum  ?  In  Asiatic  cholera,  to  which
it  is  strikingly  homoeopathic,  it  has  never  been
used ;  while  you  know  it  as  a  specifically  acting
remedy  for  gout,  no  symptoms  of  which  disease  (at
least  of  its  typical  paroxysm)  appear  in  its  patho-
genesis.  You  will  say  that  Colchicum  is  no  good
instance  of  the  operation  of  the  law  of  similars.
The  aspect  of  the  matter  is,  however,  somewhat
changed  when  we  remember  how  important  a  place
Veratrum  holds  in  the  treatment  of  cholera ;  and
that  Colchicura  is  just  Veratrum  with  a  difference,
the  two  having  Veratria  for  their  common  alkaloid.
I  would  even  suggest  the  use  of  Colchicum  in  pre-
ference in  some  cases,  should  much  nausea  be  pre-
sent, and  the  cramps  attack  especially  the  soles  of
the  feet.  I  once  effected  a  rapid  cure  of  an  obsti-
nate case  of  diarrhoea  with  Colchicum,  guided  to
this  medicine  by  the  deathly  nausea  and  prostration
which  were  present.  As  to  gout,  the  question  is
more  difficult.  Although  Colchicum  undoubtedly
has  a  specific  power  of  allaying  the  pain,  and  even
shortening  the  paroxysm  of  acute  gout,  it  cannot
be  said  to  exert  any  curative  influence  over  the
morbid  diathesis.  Pereira  writes — "That  Colchicum


COLCH1CUM.  237

alleviates  a  paroxysm  of  gout  I  have  before  men-
tioned ;  but  that  alleviation  is  palliative,  not  cura-
tive. It  has  no  tendency  to  prevent  a  speedy
recurrence  of  the  attack  ;  nay,  according  to  Sir  C.
Scudamore,  it  renders  the  disposition  to  the  disease
much  stronger  in  the  system.  Furthermore,  by
repetition  its  power  over  gouty  paroxysms  becomes
diminished."  If  this  be  a  fair  statement  of  the
case,  Colchicum  would  seem  to  act  upon  the  part
affected  only ;  and  as  a  specific,  indeed,  but  anti-
pathic remedy,  just  as  Gelseminum  influences  a
painful  uterus.  Our  treatment  of  gout  is  not  so
satisfactory  as  to  enable  us  always  to  dispense  with
its  aid  ;  but  it  is  well  that  we  should  know  on  what
principle  and  with  what  prospect  we  are  acting  in
using  it.

So  far  as  that  the  action  of  Colchicum  in  gout
is  local  instead  of  general,  I  have  little  doubt  of
these  views  being  correct.  But  I  am  not  so  sure
about  the  antipathic  nature  of  its  influence,  for  this
reason.  You  know  that  the  gouty  poison  attacks
many  other  parts  besides  the  small  joints — the
head,  the  heart,  the  stomach,  and  so  on ;  that  we
have  gouty  neuralgia,  pleurodynia,  urethritis,  oph-
thalmia, orchitis,  and  angina.  Now  Colchicum
does  simulate  pretty  closely  some  of  these  maladies ;
and  in  very  small  doses  relieves  or  cures  them.  I
have  put  in  a  note  a  reference  to  a  case  of  pleuro-
dynia to  illustrate  this  statement.*  On  the  whole,
then,  I  think  we  may  conclude  that  Colchicum  acts
upon  the  tissues  so  far  similarly  to  the  gouty  poison
as  to  be  capable  of  relieving  many  of  its  local  mani-
*  '  Annals,'  vol.  ii.


238  COLCHICUM.

festations ;  but  has  no  power  over  the  primary  source
of  the  production  of  the  poison.

Rheumatism  is  so  similar,  also  in  its  local  mani-
festations, to  gout  that  it  is  not  surprising  that
Colchicum  should  be  one  of  its  remedial  antidotes.
It  is  homoeopathic  mainly  to  muscular  rheumatism ;
but  in  one  case  of  Dr.  Kidd's*  and  one  of  Dr.
Laurie's f  showed  such  remarkable  power  of  con-
trolling rheumatic  pericarditis,  that  it  ought  to  be
more  frequently  used  in  the  treatment  of  this  affec-
tion. Teste  recommends  it  in  rheumatic  torticollis  ;
and  says  that  "  the  arthritic  pains  to  which  it  corre-
sponds are  generally  tearing.  In  warm  weather
they  are  principally  felt  at  the  surface  of  the  body ;
as  the  air  grows  cooler  they  seem  to  penetrate  the
deeper  tissues  and  bones/'

This  is  all  I  have  to  say  about  the  therapeutic
power  of  Colchicum.  But  I  know  of  no  drug  which
seems  to  promise  more  extensive  applications  in  the
future.

Actaea  racemosa,  Arnica,  Bryonia,  and  Veratrum
seem  to  me  the  closest  analogues  of  Colchicum.

The  mother-tincture  and  the  lowest  dilutions
appear  to  be  its  most  successful  form  of  adminis-
tration.

Another  valuable  contribution  to  our  Materia
Medica  from  the  indigenous  plants  of  the  American
continent  is  the —

*  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Homoeopathy,'  vol.  xiii,  p.  198.
t  Ibid,  vol.  v,  p.  314.


COLLINSONIA CANADENSIS.  239

Collinsonia  canadensis.

The  tincture  should  be  prepared  from  the  whole
plant.

In  Dr.  Male's  '  New  Remedies'  may  be  found  a
short  proving  of  Collinsonia,  together  with  all  that
is  known  about  the  drug.

From  this  proving,  and  from  the  considerable
clinical  experience  now  accumulated,  we  are  able  to
define  pretty  clearly  the  sphere  of  action  of  Collin-
sonia. It  affects  the  whole  gastro-intestinal  canal,
but  especially  the  rectum.  The  presence  of  flatu-
lence, spasm,  and  colic  in  the  parts  above  confirm
the  indications  for  the  remedy  drawn  from  the  con-
dition of  the  rectum  itself;  but  these  last  alone  are
decisive.  From  Dr.  Burt's  proving  it  appears  that
Collinsouia  in  small  doses  causes  constipation,  with
straining  and  dull  pain  in  the  anus  after  stool.
Here  is  shadowed  forth  the  most  important  action
of  the  drug.  It  is  in  constipation  and  haemorrhoids
from  congestive  inertia  of  the  lower  bowel  that  Col-
linsonia proves  such  a  precious  remedy.  We  fre-
quently meet  with  such  a  condition  in  the  middle
and  latter  months  of  pregnancy ;  and  here  I  have
the  greatest  confidence  in  the  drug.  Nor,  though
acting  primarily  on  the  rectum,  does  it  confine  its
curative  influence  to  that  one  only  of  the  pelvic
viscera.  In  many  uterine  affections  connected  with
constipation  it  is  of  great  value.  Cases  are  collected
by  Dr.  Hale  in  which  dysmenorrhcea,  pruritus,  and
even  prolapsus  uteri  have  under  such  circumstances
yielded  to  its  use.  One  of  the  cases  of  pruritus  was
a  woman  in  the  eighth  month  of  pregnancy  :  so


240  COLLINSONIA CANADENSIS.

that  Collinsonia  should  be  remembered  when  we
meet  with  that  distressing  form  of  the  affection.
In  larger  doses,  Collinsonia  irritates  the  rectum  so
much  as  to  set  up  diarrhoea,  soon  running  on  into
dysentery :  there  are  severe  colicky  pains  in  the
hypogastric  region  before  and  after  the  stools,  and
much  tenesmus.  It  has  not  been  used  to  any
extent  in  complaints  of  this  kind  ;  but  in  proctitis
and  rectal  dysentery  it  should  rival  Aloes.

The  rectum  is  thus  the  main  field  of  action  of
Collinsonia;  but  you  will  see  from  Dr.  Hale's
article  that  it  is  gaining  considerable  reputation
as  a  cardiac  remedy.  Time  will  show  its  real
place  and  value  here.

I  have  already  hinted  that  Aloes  is  a  close  ana-
logue of  Collinsonia.  So  also  is  JEsculus,  and —
more  remotely — Hydrastis,  Nux  vomica,  and
Sulphur.

I  have  nearly  always  used  the  2nd  dilution ;  but
others  seem  to  have  done  as  well  with  the  3rd,  and
others  with  more  material  doses.  Herein  also
Collinsonia  resembles  JSsculus.


LETTER  XX.

COLOCYNTH, CONIUM, COPAIBA, CORALLIA, CROCUS,
CROTALUS.

THE  medicine  of  which  I  now  have  to  speak  is  a
crucial  instance  of  the  fruitful  results  attainable  by
our  process  of  "  proving."  Here  is  a  drug  which
you  of  the  old  school  know  simply  as  a  purgative.
A  few  physicians  agree  to  test  its  effects  upon  their
own  bodies ;  and  lo !  a  range  of  action  is  revealed
which  at  once  puts  it  in  a  high  place  among  specific
remedies.

Colocynth.

The  dry  pulp  of  the  fruit  may  be  either  triturated,
or  macerated  in  alcohol  to  make  a  tincture.

There  is  a  short  pathogenesis  of  Colocynth  in
'  Hahnemann's  Chronic  Diseases/  But  our  know-
ledge of  the  drug  has  been  immensely  increased,
and  indeed  pretty  well  perfected,  by  the  exhaustive
proving  of  the  Austrian  Society.  The  account  of
this  proving,  with  introduction  and  clinical  cases,
by  Dr.  Watzke,  is  translated  from  the  '  Austrian
Journal'  in  MetcalPs  '  American  Provings.'

As  I  have  said,  you  know  Colocynth  only  as  a
purgative.  You  are  probably  aware,  however,  that
this  action  is  specific,  and  not  merely  local ;  being

1C)


242  COLOCYNTH.

induced  by  its  external  application  as  well  as  by  its
introduction  into  the  stomach.  It  seems  most  pro-
bable that  it  purges  the  lower  bowel  only,  as  the
rectum  is  the  only  part  of  the  alimentary  tract
found  inflamed  when  a  poisonous  dose  is  injected
into  a  vein.  As  under  such  circumstances  there  is
no  manifest  irritation  of  the  stomach,  the  vomiting
which  has  been  observed  as  a  consequence  of  its
external  application  would  appear  to  result  from  an
influence  upon  the  (gastric)  nerves.  Still  more
certain  evidence  of  such  an  influence  is  the  severe
colic  which  always  accompanies  the  purgative  action
of  Colocynth,  and  which  is  more  marked  with  it
than  with  any  other  cathartic.  The  pain  is  generally
about  the  umbilicus,  is  increased  by  food,  and
relieved  by  the  accompanying  diarrhoeic  evacuations.
I  have  only  to  add  to  this  part  of  the  subject,  that
in  one  case  of  poisoning  by  Colocynth  the  intes-
tines were  glued  together  by  recent  lymph,  showing
its  power  to  inflame  the  peritoneum.

The  colic  and  diarrhoea  so  characteristic  of  Colo-
cynth were  experienced  by  all  the  provers.  But  in
most  of  them  other  symptoms  appeared,  showing
the  power  of  the  drug  to  act  upon  the  nervous
trunks  on  the  surface  as  vigorously  as  we  have
already  found  it  to  act  upon  the  abdominal  plexuses.
The  trigeminus  is  not  uncommonly  affected,  causing
toothache  and  hemicrania.  But  the  nerves  about
the  hip-joint  suffer  most  severely,  the  pain  darting
sometimes  down  the  anterior  crural  and  sometimes
down  the  sciatic  trunks,  even  to  the  foot.  This
local  affinity  of  Colocynth  is  so  strong,  that  it
seems  to  aft'ect  the  ovaries : — the  only  two  provers


COLOCYNTH.  243

of  the  female  sex  complaining  of  deep  stitches  as
from  a  needle  in  these  organs.  Once  or  twice,  too,
Colocynth  has  shown  signs  of  affecting  the  testicles
and  spermatic  cord.

The  therapeutical  virtues  of  Colocynth  are  a
true  reflection  of  the  pathogenetic  powers  now  de-
rarely  indicated  in  dysentery.  It  is  homoeopathic
to  this  disease  only  when  the  morbid  process  is
confined  to  the  rectum,  when  the  evacuations
consist  chiefly  of  blood,  and  when  severe  colic
is  present.  So  also  it  may  now  and  then  be  of
service  in  peritonitis  :  Dr.  Ludlam  recommends
it  especially  when  that  portion  of  the  membrane
which  envelops  the  ovaries  is  affected.  In  both
these  inflammations,  however,  I  prefer  Mercurius
corrosivus  as  a  rule.  The  grand  sphere  of  Colo-
cynth lies  among  the  neuroses,  especially  where
pain  is  the  most  prominent  feature.  In  Dr.
Watzke's  article  you  will  find  collected  a  number  of
cases  in  which  neuralgia  of  the  fifth  nerve,  of  the
solar  and  other  abdominal  plexuses,  and  of  the
lumbar  and  femoral  nerves  have  been  cured  in  a
brilliant  manner  by  this  medicine.  It  is  in  colic
and  sciatica  that  its  greatest  triumphs  have  been
achieved.  I  have  myself  been  disappointed  with  it
in  the  latter  disease,  greatly  preferring  Arsenic.
But  for  colic  I  rarely  require  any  other  remedy,
save  in  those  cases  for  which  Plumbum  is  the
obvious  similimum.  I  have  only  to  add  a  case
mentioned  by  Dr.  Carroll  Dunham,*  in  which
Colocynth,  given  because  of  the  presence  of  its  cha-
*  '  Amer.  Horn.  Review,'  vol.  vi,  p.  84.


244  CONIUM MACULATUM.

racteristic  symptoms  in  the  abdomen  and  about  the
hip  caused  the  permanent  disappearance  of  an  en-
larged ovary.  In  one  of  the  provers,  too,  it
removed  neuralgic  pain  and  swelling  of  the  right
testicle  and  spermatic  cord — the  result,  as  he
believes,  of  his  previous  provings  of  Natrum  muria-
ticum.

The  medicine  which  seems  to  me  most  closely
allied  to  Colocynth  is  Bryonia.  It  has  some  points
of  analogy,  moreover,  with  Arsenicum,  Chamomilla,
Chelidonium,  Cocculus,  Gamboge,  and  Nux  vomica.

In  colic  and  the  other  neuralgias  the  higher  dilu-
tions (6 — 30)  have  made  the  most  brilliant  cures.
The  lower  potencies  would  be  preferable  where
inflammation  is  present.

We  have  next  to  study  the  action  of  the  true
hemlock,

Conium  maculatum.

Our  tincture  is  made  from  the  expressed  juice  of
the  whole  plant,  and  is  hence  a  far  more  certain
preparation  than  the  tincture  and  extract  in  common
use.  This  your  own  Harley  has  lately  discovered
('  Lancet/  March  23,  1867).

There  is  a  proving  of  Couium  (to  me  a  very  un-
satisfactory one)  in  the  '  Chronic  Diseases/  Teste
gives  a  good  account  of  Storck's  cases  said  to  have
been  cured  by  the  medicine.

Much  has  been  written  about  the  action  of  hem-
lock upon  the  nervous  centres.  After  all  it  seems
to  me  that  we  have  no  better  description  of  the
phenomena  of  poisoning  by  it,  than  in  Plato's  ac-


CONIUM MACULATUM.  245

count  of  the  death  of  Socrates.*  I  make  no  apology
for  gracing  these  pages  with  the  passage  from  the
Phsedo  which  contains  it.

"  Socrates,  having  walked  about,  when  he  said
that  his  legs  were  growing  heavy,  lay  down  on  his
back;  for  the  man  so  directed  him.  And  at  the
same  time  he  who  gave  him  the  poison,  taking  hold
of  him,  after  a  short  interval  examined  his  feet  and
legs;  and  then  having  pressed  his  foot  hard,  he
asked  if  he  felt  it.  He  said  that  he  did  not.  After
this  he  pressed  his  thighs ;  and  thus  going  higher,
he  showed  us  that  he  was  growing  cold  and  stiff.
Then  Socrates  touched  himself,  and  said  that  when
the  poison  reached  his  heart  he  should  then  depart.
But  now  the  parts  around  the  lower  belly  were
almost  cold ;  when,  uncovering  himself,  for  he  had
been  covered  over,  he  said  (and  they  were  his  last
words)  "  Crito,  we  owe  a  cock  to  JEsculapius ;  pay
it  therefore,  and  do  not  neglect  it/'  "  It  shall  be
done,"  said  Crito,  "  but  consider  whether  you  have
anything  else  to  say."  To  this  question  he  gave  no
reply ;  but  shortly  after  he  gave  a  convulsive  move-
ment, and  the  man  covered  him,  and  his  eyes  were
fixed  :  and  Crito,  perceiving  it,  closed  his  mouth  and
eyes."

case  of  hemlock-poisoning,  which  Dr.  Hughes  Ben-
nett has  given  us  in  his  '  Clinical  Lectures/ f  the

*  It  is  now  well -established  that  the  KMVIIOV  with  which  the
Athenians  poisoned  their  criminals  is  identical  with  our  spotted
hemlock  (Conium  maculatum).

f  Dr.  Harley  obtained  the  same  results  from  his  recent  experi-
ments.


216  CONIUM MACULATUM.

identity  of  the  phenomena  will  need  no  demonstra-
tion. During  the  2000  years  which  separate  the
two  cases  much  has  been  observed  and  written
relative  to  Conium.  But  I  cannot  doubt  but  that
we  see  in  them  the  essential  phenomena  of  its
poisonous  influence :  that  it  directly  paralyses  the
spinal  cord  from  below  upwards,  killing  at  last  by
gradual  asphyxia.  Cases  indeed  are  mentioned  by
Pereira  in  which  coma,  delirium,  or  convulsions  were
the  predominant  features.  But  there  has  always
been  so  much  confusion  between  Conium  maculatum
and  the  other  Umbelliferse,  that  until  these  symp-
toms are  confirmed  by  experiment  as  truly  belonging
to  it,  I  feel  compelled  to  refer  them  to  the  action  of
other  plants  of  the  same  order.

While  this  is  the  main  action  of  Conium,  there
is  no  doubt  of  its  exercising  an  influence  also  in  the
vegetative  sphere,  as  shown  by  its  action  on  the
glands  and  the  skin.  Wasting  of  the  mammse  and
the  testicles,  with  agalactia  and  amenorrhoea,  have
not  uncommonly  resulted  from  its  use :  and  the
provings  confirm  Pereira' s  statement  that  it  "  oc-
casionally causes  an  eruption  on  the  skin."  The
provings  also  reveal  an  action  on  the  larynx  or
laryngeal  nerves  which  has  been  so  often  confirmed
in  practice  as  to  be  no  longer  doubtful  :  it  shows
itself  in  a  dry,  hacking,  almost  continual  cough,
worse  on  lying  down  and  at  night.

When  we  turn  to  therapeutics,  we  cannot  but
feel  that  the  neurotic  action  of  Conium  has  not  yet
been  utilized  in  practice.  Given  on  the  antipathic
principle,  it  has  (as  Pereira  admits)  utterly  failed  :
and  Homoeopathy  has  not  yet  applied  it  to  the  treat-


CONIUM MACULATUM.  247

ment  of  that  paraplegia  to  which  it  so  characteris-
tically corresponds.  In  our  school,  indeed,  Conium
has  been  used  as  a  vegetative  remedy  only.  It  is
considered  a  specific  for  engorgements  of  the  mam-
mary and  other  glands  resulting  from  mechanical
causes.  It  is  of  some  repute  in  the  treatment  of
cutaneous  diseases,  especially  of  the  scaly  and  tuber-
cular orders :  it  frequently  relieves  irritative  coughs
having  the  characteristics  I  have  mentioned  above :
it  is  considered  beneficial  where  presbyopia  comes  on
prematurely  :  and  is  said  to  be  a  capital  medicine
for  old  people,  especially  old  womeu.  So  far  as  I
have  used  Conium,  I  can  confirm  these  recommenda-
tions. But  a  perusal  of  the  remarkable  cases  which
Storck  has  published  leaves  on  the  mind,  after  all
deductions,  an  impression  that  the  virtues  of  Conium
are  more  extensive  than  we  yet  suppose.  I  would
especially  suggest  its  freer  use  in  ovarian  depression,
showing  itself  in  scanty  menstruation  and  unready
conception,  as  well  as  in  chronic  passive  inflamma-
tions of  the  organs  themselves.*

In  its  action  on  the  spinal  cord  Conium  resembles
Rhus  and  Argentum  nitricum ;  in  the  vegetative
sphere  its  analogues  are  Iodine,  Mercury,  and
Baryta.

The  Homoeopathic  uses  of  which  I  have  spoken

*  I  have  said  nothing  about  the  action  of  Conium  in  cancer.
There  is  no  evidence  that  it  exerts  any  influence  over  the  carcino-
matous  diathesis.  And  as  to  the  disappearance  of  local  cancers
under  its  use,  the  word  "  scirrhus"  was  used  so  vaguely  in  the  last
century,  that  we  cannot  depend  upon  its  clinical  records  in  this
particular.  Neither  Alloaopathy  nor  HomcEopathy  has  produced
for  the  last  thirty  years  a  case  cured  by  Conium,  which  our
improved  diagnosis  has  warranted  to  be  true  cancer.


248  COPAIBA.

have  been  obtained  with  dilutions  such  as  the  12th.
It  remains  to  be  seen  whether  lower  potencies  will
not  be  needed  for  its  more  extended  application.

The  medicine  next  on  our  list  is

Copaiba.

Our  tincture  is  a  solution  of  the  balsam  in  strong
alcohol.

There  is  a  pathogenesis  of  Copaiba  in  Jahr's
'  Manual/  which  seems  made  up  of  the  symptoms
observed  as  a  result  of  excessive  medicinal  doses.
Teste  gives  us  a  proving  made  on  himself  and
several  others,  but  only  with  the  6th  dilution.

The  interest  of  Copaiba  centres  in  its  action  on
the  urinary  mucous  membrane.  It  is  generally
acknowledged  that  it  acts  here  as  an  irritant, — the
influence  being  strongest  in  the  urethra  and  becom-
ing weaker  as  it  ascends  towards  the  kidney.  Some-
times indeed  the  irritation  travels  along  the  seminal
tracts,  and  the  testicle  swells  and  is  tender.  Even
to  the  use  of  the  balsam.  But  without  building
upon  this  latter  statement,  enough  has  been  said
to  show  the  perfect  homosopathicity  of  Copaiba  to
gonorrhoea,  in  the  treatment  of  which  disease  it  has
so  high  a  reputation.  I  must  refer  you  to  Dr.
Yeldham's  book  for  the  indications  of  choice  of
Cannabis  and  Copaiba  respectively.  You  will  bear
Copaiba  in  mind  in  other  non-specific  disorders  of
the  urinary  mucous  membrane.  I  have  found  it
especially  valuable  in  irritation  of  the  urethra  and
neck  of  the  bladder  occurring  in  old  women. — I  am


CORALLIA RUBRA.  249

unaware  that  the  eruption — now  measle-like,  now
urticarioid,  now  erythematoid — which  so  often  ac-
companies the  action  of  Copaiba  has  ever  been
utilized  in  practice.  Nor  am  I  able  to  affirm  that
its  reputation  in  bronchial  affections  depends  upon
its  power  of  specifically  affecting  that  membrane ;
though  Testers  proviugs  would  point  in  this  direc-
tion.

Cannabis  sativa,  Cantharis,  and  Terebinthina  are
the  nearest  analogues  of  Copaiba.

There  seems  nothing  gained  by  raising  Copaiba
above  the  1st  dilution :  and  in  gonorrhoea  Dr.
Yeldham  advises  several  drops  of  the  1st  dec.  for  a
dose.

I  have  but  a  few  words  to  say  of  the  next  name
on  my  list,

Corallia  rubra.

It  is  prepared  by  trituration.

There  is  a  short  pathogenesis  of  coral  in  Jahr's
'  Manual  :'  but  our  only  real  knowledge  about  it  is
derived  from  Teste.  "  In  the  provings,"  he  writes,
"  which  I  made  with  this  drug  on  my  own  person,
some  years  ago,  I  elicited  a  few  exceedingly  cha-
it,  sometimes  with  striking  success,  for  nervous
cough,  asthma  Millari,  and  endemic  hooping-
cough."  In  his  '  Treatise  on  Diseases  of  Children/
M.  Teste  places  Corallia  first  among  the  remedies
for  laryngismus  stridulus  and  the  spasmodic  stage
of  pertussis,  and  says  that  a  patient  to  whom  he
had  given  this  medicine  for  a  chronic  convulsive


250  CROCUS SATIVUS.

cough,  said  to  him,  "  it  is  like  water  thrown  upon
fire."  I  have  myself  once  or  twice  given  Corallia
in  hooping-cough  with  very  satisfactory  results.
More  recently,  I  have  made  a  striking  cure  of  a
hysteric  cough  with  Corallia  :  you  will  find  the  case
in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.'  for  July,  1867.

If  the  laryngeal  nerves  be  the  seat  of  the  action
of  Corallia,  its  analogues  will  be  Nitric  acid,  Bella-
donna, Drosera,  Hyoscyamus,  Ipecacuanha,  and  Nux
Vomica.

For  dose,  M.  Teste  recommends  for  children  the
30th  dilution.

I  come  now  to  a  medicine  which  Homoeopathy
has  revived  out  of  long  neglect  and  disuse,  the
saffron,

Crocus  sativus.

We  prepare  a  tincture  by  maceration  from  the
saffron  of  commerce.

There  is  a  very  fair  proving  of  Crocus  in  StapFs
'  Additions  to  the  Materia  Medica.'  Hempel  and
Teste  should  also  be  consulted.

The  ancient  reputation  of  Crocus  as  an  emmena-
gogue,  though  ignored  by  modern  therapeutists,  has
been  confirmed  by  our  provings.  We  of  course  use  the
drug  medicinally  for  precisely  the  opposite  purpose,
viz.,  to  restrain  menorrhagia.  It  is  specially  recom-
mended where  the  menstrual  blood  is  blackish  and
clotted.  I  have  cured  with  Crocus  many  a  case  of
menorrhagia  so  characterised,  giving  this  drug
during  the  period,  and  China  in  the  intervals.
Crocus  has  some  power  of  affecting  the  brain,


CROTALUS HORRIDUS.  251

causing  determination  of  blood  thereto,  with  epis-
taxis  ;  and  exciting  in  some  persons  immoderate
fits  of  laughter.  It  might  be  useful  in  hysteria  or
even  in  recent  insanity  in  which  this  symptom  was
prominent.  I  am  myself  most  struck,  in  reading
the  pathogenesis  of  Crocus,  with  the  eye-symptoms.
It  ought  to  be  very  useful  in  that  form  of  weak
vision  in  which  the  patient  feels  as  if  there  were  a
gauze  before  the  eyes,  and  tries  to  wink  or  wipe  it
away.

The  analogues  of  Crocus  are  Belladonna,  Platina,
Sabina,  and  (most  complete  of  all)  Ruta.

I  have  always  given  the  2nd  dilution :  and
should  prefer  descending  to  ascending  the  scale.

With  a  few  words  upon  the  medicine  we  know
as

Crotalus  horridus

I  will  conclude  this  letter.

In  this  case  it  is  fortunately  unnecessary  that  we
should  use  the  creature  which  yields  the  venom  as
the  subject  of  our  trituration  or  maceration  ;  which
would  indeed  be  rather  inconvenient.  The  virus
only  is  prepared,  —  preferably  by  trituratioc.

There  is  a  pathogenesis  of  Crotalus,  taken  from
Hering  on  the  Poison  of  Serpents,  in  Jahr's  'Manual.'
Dr.  Neidhard's  Monograph  on  the  use  of  Crotalus
in  yellow  fever  should  above  all  be  consulted.

For  the  general  principle  of  the  use  of  animal
poisons  as  medicines  I  must  refer  you  to  my  pre-
vious remarks  introductory  to  Apis.  The  virus  of
the  rattlesnake  has  many  effects  in  common  with


252  CROTALUS HORRIDUS.

that  of  other  venomous  serpents.  Of  these  I  shall
speak  more  fully  when  I  come  to  Lachesis  and
Naja.  Crotalus  is  so  much  less  used  than  these
other  two  that  I  shall  content  myself  with  men-
tioning Dr.  Neidhard's  observations  regarding  it.
He  calls  attention  to  the  general  resemblance
between  the  effects  of  snake-bites  and  the  pheno-
mena of  yellow-fever.  He  then  relates  how  Dr.
William  Humboldt  conceived  the  idea  of  preserving
the  body  against  the  contagion  of  yellow-fever  by
inoculating  it  with  snake  poison :  and  this  on  the
ground  of  the  close  resemblance  between  the  effects
of  viper-bites  and  the  symptoms  of  this  malady.
He  carried  out  his  idea  on  a  large  scale  in  New
Orleans  and  Cuba,  and  with  considerable  success.
The  symptoms  produced  by  the  inoculation,  and
closely  watched,  made  the  resemblance  to  yellow-
fever  still  more  striking.  Finally,  Dr.  Neidhard
gives  his  own  experience  with  the  triturated  virus
in  the  curative  treatment  of  the  disease,  which
seems  to  have  been  very  satisfactory.  He  has  also
found  it  very  useful  in  the  severe  bilious  remittents
from  which  we  are  happily  free.  I  have  only  to
add  that  my  friend  Dr.  Hilbers  has  much  confi-
dence in  Crotalus  as  alleviating  the  symptoms
(especially  the  cough)  of  phthisis.

I  have  already  mentioned  Lachesis  and  Naja  as
the  analogues  of  Crotalus.

Dr.  Neidhard  used  the  triturations  1 — 3.


LETTER  XXI.

CROTON, CUPRUM, CURARE, CYCLAMEN, DIGITALIS.

I  commence  my  present  letter  with  an  account
of  the  Homoeopathic  uses  of

Croton  tiglium.

The  expressed  oil  is  triturated  with  milk-sugar,  or
dissolved  in  alcohol.

There  is  a  short  pathogenesis  of  Croton  in
Jahr's  '  Manual/  Its  physiological  effects  are
better  studied,  however,  in  the  articles  upon  it  in
Pereira,  Hempel,  and  Teste.

Croton  is  another  of  those  drugs  whose  use  well
illustrates  the  difference  between  the  old  Medicine
and  Homoeopathy.  It  is  found  to  have  drastic  and
rubefacient  properties.  Hence,  says  Old  Medicine,
we  will  use  it  to  purge  and  to  counter-irritate
whenever  we  think  such  processes  likely  to  be
beneficial.  Nay,  replies  Homoeopathy  :  Croton  will
rather  be  a  remedy  for  certain  forms  of  diarrhosa
and  of  cutaneous  inflammation,  resembling  those
which  it  causes.  And  this  we  have  indeed  found  it
to  be.

The  purgation  produced  by  Croton  seems  not  the
result  of  inflammatory  irritation,  but  rather  of  such
a  transudation  of  the  watery  part  of  the  blood  as  is


254  CROTON TIGLIUM.

caused  by  Elaterium  and  Veratrum  album,  and
obtains  in  Asiatic  cholera.  The  accompanying
symptoms  in  severe  cases,  indeed,  are  strikingly
choleraic  in  character :  and  Croton  might  fairly
take  rank  among  the  remedies  for  choleraic  diarrhoea.
It  has  not,  however,  been  so  much  used  in  this
sphere  as  in  that  of  cutaneous  disease.  Teste  was
the  first  to  call  attention  to  the  specific  nature  of
its  action  on  the  skin,  and  to  recommend  it  as  a
cutaneous  remedy.  Later,  Dr.  Bahr  of  Hanover
has  followed  in  the  same  track  :  you  will  find  his
observations  translated  in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of
Horn.,'  vol.  xvi.  It  is  agreed  that  eczema  is  the
special  form  of  exanthem  developed  by  Croton  :  and
that  the  face  and  the  external  genitals  are  its
favourite  habitats.  It  is  precisely  in  such  eczematous
rashes  that  both  Teste  and  Bahr  have  found  it
curative  :  and  I  can  add  my  mite  of  confirmation
to  their  statements.  The  rapid  and  permanent
manner  in  which  Croton  relieves  the  itching
attendant  upon  eczema  is  one  of  the  prettiest
things  in  medicine.

The  analogues  of  Croton  as  a  drastic  are  Elaterium,
Veratrum  and  Colchicum  ;  as  a  cutaneous  irritant  it
ranks  with  Rhus,  Apis,  and  Anacardiurn.

The  dilutions  from  the  3rd  decimal  to  the  6th
centesimal  have  been  successfully  used.  I  myself
nearly  always  employ  the  latter  potency.

I  come  now  to  one  of  the  great  mineral
medicines —


CUPRUM.  255

Cuprum.

Triturations  are  made  of  the  precipitated  metallic
copper,  or  aqueous  dilutions  of  the  Acetate.

The  proving  of  Cuprum  is  in  the  '  Chronic
Diseases.'  A  good  collection  of  cases  of  poisoning
by  the  metal  and  its  salts  may  be  found  in  HempeFs
article.

The  poisonous  action  of  Copper,  like  that  of
most  metals,  seems  exerted  primarily  upon  the
alimentary  canal,  and  secondarily,  after  absorption,
upon  the  nervous  centres.  The  primary  action  has
led  to  little  practical  use :  but  you  are  surely
prescribing  homceopathically  when  you  give  sul-
phate of  copper  for  chronic  diarrhoea.  The  neurotic
influence  of  Copper  is  very  decided.  Pereira  puts
its  homoeopathic  relationship  to  nervous  disorders
very  plainly.  "  The  effects  produced  by  the  long-
continued  use  of  small  doses  of  the  preparations  of
copper  have  not  been  satisfactorily  determined ;
they  are  said  to  be  various  affections  of  the  nervous
system,  such  as  cramps  and  paralysis,"  and  so  on.
Then  he  writes  "  If  the  cupreous  preparations  be
used  in  very  small  doses,  they  sometimes  give
relief  in  certain  diseases  principally  of  the  nervous
system,  without  obviously  disordering  the  functions ;
in  other  words,  in  these  instances  the  only  apparent
effect  is  the  modification  observed  in  the  morbid
condition."  This  is  pretty  well :  but  we  must
individualise  rather  more  closely.  The  cramps
mentioned  by  Pereira  are  especially  characteristic  of
the  action  of  Copper.  They  may  be  either  tonic  or
clonic,  local  or  general ;  and  sometimes  they  are


256  CUPRUM.

exchanged  for  spasmodic  cough  or  difficulty  of
breathing.  Here  is  the  first  great  homeopathic
use  of  Cuprum, — to  relieve  cramp  or  spasm.  Its
applications  in  this  direction  are  numerous.  The
chief  of  these  are  to  spasmodic  affections  of  the
respiratory  organs,  as  laryngismus  stridulus,
hooping-cough,  and  asthma,  in  all  of  which  it  has
been  found  beneficial,*  and  in  Asiatic  cholera.  It  is
of  course  the  tendency  to  cramp  which  obtains  in
the  latter  affection  which  gives  Cuprum  a  place
among  its  remedies.  The  alvine  evacuations  of
cholera  are  altogether  different  from  those  produced
by  Copper :  and  I  see  no  evidence  that  the  latter
has  the  power  of  causing  anything  like  the  choleraic
collapse.  .But  there  is  testimony  from  many
quartersf  that  it  is  the  best  medicine  we  have  for
checking  the  cramps  and  also  the  vomiting  of
Asiatic  cholera.  We  give  Cuprum  also  occasionally
for  chorea  and  epilepsy  ;  but  less  frequently  than
you  do.J  Another  noticeable  point  in  the  neurotic
action  of  Cuprum  is  its  powerful  influence  upon  the
brain.  Almost  every  form  of  cerebral  disorder  has
been  induced  by  its  poisonous  action  :  at  the  same
time  autopsy  shows  no  sign  of  organic  mischief.
The  power  of  Cuprum  in  this  sphere  has  received
special  study  from  Dr.  George  Schmid  of  Vienna.
You  will  find  his  paper  on  the  subject  translated  in
the  •'  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  vol.  i.  He  strongly

*  For  laryngismus  see  a  case  in  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.
xxiii,  p.  675  :  for  asthma  read  Dr.  Russell's  '  Clinical  Lectures.'

t  See  especially  Dr.  Drysdale  in  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  vol.  viii,
p.  158,  and  Mr.  Proctor  in  ibid.,  January,  1867,  p.  94.

J  For  epilepsy  see  Dr.  Bayes  in  '  Monthly  Horn.  Rev.'  for  March,
1867.


CURARE.  257

recommends  the  use  of  Copper  (in  the  form  of  the
Acetate)  in  the  cerebral  symptoms  which  result
from  the  retrocession  of  any  of  the  acute  exanthe-
mata, or  from  difficult  dentition  in  children  when
the  condition  is  scarcely  active  enough  to  require
Belladonna.  These  suggestions  have  been  con-
firmed by  the  after-experience  of  most  Homoeopaths,
and  this  use  of  Cuprum  may  be  considered  esta-
blished. Less  certain  is  its  value  in  the  other
affections  for  which  Dr.  Schmid  recommends  it,  as
in  the  delirium  which  supervenes  in  the  last  stage
of  chronic  diseases  (as  phthisis),  in  cerebral  distress
from  over-study,  in  puerperal  mania,  in  mania  from
repelled  erysipelas,  and  in  nervous  apoplexy.  But
his  whole  paper  is  well  worth  studying.

The  natural  analogues  of  Cuprum  are  the  other
metals,  Argentum,  Arsenicum,  and  Zincum.  It  has
points  of  resemblance,  moreover,  to  Nux  vomica  and
Secale.

The  higher  potencies  of  metallic  Copper,  the
lower  of  Cuprum  aceticum,  have  been  most
frequently  given  with  success.

My  next  medicine  is  one  of  almost  purely  physio-
logical interest  to  you,  but  which  Homoeopathy  has
lately  begun  to  employ  in  practice.  It  is  the
Indian  arrow-poison,  variously  called  wourali,
woorara,  or  (as  we  have  it)

Curare.

It  is  prepared  for  our  use  by  solution  in  water.
After  the  third  potency,  the  higher  dilutions  may  be
made  with  alcohol.

17


258  CYCLAMEN EUROPIUM.

Our  knowledge  of  the  poisonous  action  of  Curare
is  well  put  together  by  Dr.  Carfrae  in  the  'Annals,'
vol.  iv,  p.  97.  Cases  illustrating  its  curative  power
have  been  given  us  by  Mr.  Freeman  in  the  '  Monthly
Homoeopathic  Review'  for  September,  1865.

The  poisonous  effects  of  Curare  are  very  well
ascertained.  It  seems  to  act  purely  and  simply
upon  the  motor  portion  of  the  nervous  system,
paralysing  it,  and  doing  so  from  the  periphery
towards  the  centre.  You  have  very  naturally  tried
it  in  tetanus :  but  without  success.  We  on  the
other  hand  have  as  naturally  endeavoured  to  put  it  to
use  in  the  treatment  of  paralysis.  Mr.  Freeman's
observations  are  the  only  records  of  its  use  which
we  have  at  present.  He  specifies  his  cases  as —
].  Paralysis  of  the  parts  supplied  by  all  the  motor
cranial  nerves,  pain  being  absent.  2.  Lateral
paralysis  after  apoplexy.  3.  Paralysis  from  me-
chanical injury.  4.  The  class  of  cases  known  as
nervous  debility.  5.  The  debility  of  aged  persons.
6.  Debility  after  exhausting  illness.  In  all  these
forms  of  nervous  depression  Curare  seems  to  have
been  more  or  less  useful.  But  we  need  further
experience  to  enable  us  to  fix  its  precise  place  in  our
therapeutics.

The  dilutions  from  3  to  12  were  used  in  Mr.
Freeman's  cases.

The  next  medicine  on  my  list  is  the  common  sow-
bread,

Cyclamen  europseum.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  plant,  by


DIGITALIS PURPUREA.  259

cutting  it  in  pieces  and  macerating  it  in  double  its
weight  of  alcohol.

The  original  proving  is  in  the  '  Mat.  Med.  Pura.'
There  is  an  additional  proving  by  the  Vienna  provers
in  the  '  Austrian  Horn.  Journal':  and  some  remarks
and  cases  illustrative  of  its  therapeutic  virtues  by
Dr.  Eidherr  may  be  read  in  the  '  North  Amer.
Journ.  of  Horn./  vol.  x,  p.  113.

The  only  constant  and  remarkable  actions  of
Cyclamen  are  upon  the  head  and  eyes,  and  upon
the  female  sexual  organs.  Headache  with  dizziness,
and  obscuration  of  sight  are  the  symptoms  of  the
former  parts.  When  these  have  been  present  in
cases  of  chlorosis  from  checked  menstruation,  Cycla-
men has  proved  in  Dr.  Eidherr's  hands  a  most
valuable  remedy,  restoring  the  menses  and  with
them  the  general  health.

The  resemblance  to  Pulsatilla  is  most  obvious.

In  Dr.  Eidherr's  cases  the  15th  dec.  dilution  was
that  used.

We  come  now  to  a  medicine  which  is  deservedly
a  favourite,  both  with  yourselves  and  with  us,  the
purple  foxglove,

Digitalis  purpurea.

A  tincture  is  prepared  by  expressing  the  juice  of
the  fresh  leaves.  The  dried  leaves  also  may  supply
us  an  alternative  form,  being  triturated  :  and  tritura-
tions  should  be  made  of  Digitaline.

Our  literature  bearing  on  Digitalis  is  rather
extensive.  There  is  the  original  proving  in  the
1  Chronic  Diseases/  which  is  not  worth  much,  being


260  DIGITALIS PURPUREA.

little  more  than  a  badly  arranged  collection  of  symp-
toms produced  by  Digitalis  upon  sick  persons.  Then
Dr.  Bahr,  of  Hanover,  has  contributed  a  prize  essay
on  the  drug,  a  full  account  of  which  is  given  in  the
'  North  Amer.  Journ.  of  Homoeopathy/  vol.  vii.
Our  own  Dr.  Black  has  written  a  no  less  valuable
monograph  on  Digitalis,  which  you  will  find  in  the
'  Brit.  Journ.  of  Homoeopathy/  vol.  iv.  In  this
paper  Jorg's  experiments  are  detailed.  Dr.  Black^s
conclusions  with  respect  to  the  nature  of  the  action
of  Digitalis  upon  the  heart  have  been  reviewed  in
the  light  of  more  recent  investigations  by  Dr.  Madden
and  myself,  in  a  paper  on  this  subject  in  the  same
Journal,  vol.  xxi.  If  to  this  you  will  add  what
Hempel  and  Teste  on  our  side,  and  what  Christison
and  Taylor,  Pereira  and  Wood  on  yours  have  written
about  Digitalis,  you  will  have  before  you  all  that  is
known  regarding  the  drug.  In  the  following  re-
marks, I  will  endeavour  to  put  this  mass  of  material
into  some  intelligible  expression.

I.  The  most  interesting  and  important  action  of
Digitalis  is  that  which  it  exerts  upon  the  heart.  In
the  paper  above  referred  to,  after  bringing  together
all  available  evidence  upon  the  subject,  we  conclude
that  Digitalis  acts  directly  upon  the  muscular  tissue
of  the  heart,  which  it  weakens  even  to  the  extent  of
paralysis ;  that  the  increased  frequency  of  the  pulse
which  results  from  small  doses  depends  mainly  upon
cardiac  debility, — nature  endeavouring  to  make  up
by  greater  frequency  for  decreasing  power ;  and
that  the  retardation  of  the  heart's  action  which  is
caused  by  large  doses  is  due  to  an  influence  trans-
mitted through  the  vagi.  The  irregularity  and


DIGITALIS PURPUREA.  261

intermission  of  the  pulse  so  characteristic  of  the
We  then  consider  the  grounds  on  which  Dr.  Hand-
field  Jones  and  others  have  lately  impugned  these
generally  received  doctrines  about  Digitalis.  They
are  struck  with  its  remarkable  curative  virtues  in
cases  of  enfeebled  heart.  To  admit  the  ordinary
view  of  its  pathogenetic  action  is  to  grant  the  truth
of  the  Homoeopathic  law  in  this  instance.  Such  a
conclusion  would  be  very  unpalatable :  and  so  Dr.
Jones  inquires  whether  it  is  not  possible  that  the
action  of  Digitalis  is,  after  all,  stimulating  rather
than  depressing.  He  performs  some  experiments
on  animals,  and  finds  the  heart,  after  poisoning  by
Digitalis,  contracted  and  empty.  He  argues  that
this  implies  tonic  contraction  rather  than  paralysis
of  the  muscular  tissue  :  and  therefore  that  Digitalis
acts  (probably  through  the  nerves)  as  a  cardiac  tonic
and  excitant.  Upon  this  apparent  contradiction  we
bring  to  bear  the  researches  of  M.  Claude  Bernard.
He  shows  that  Digitalis  is  one  of  the  poisons  which
act  directly  upon  the  muscular  tissue,  paralysing
and  killing  it.  It  affects  that  portion  of  muscular
tissue  which  constitutes  the  heart  earlier  than  any
other ;  so  that  in  cold-blooded  animals  (as  frogs)
the  heart's  action  may  cease  for  four  hours  before
general  death  ensues, — there  is,  as  Dr.  Harley
expresses  it,  a  dead  heart  in  a  living  body.  Rigor
mortis  sets  in  exceedingly  early ;  and  on  opening
the  thorax  immediately  after  death,  the  heart  is
found  contracted,  rigid,  motionless,  and  totally
empty.  A  farther  examination  discloses  remarkable
chemical  and  electrical  changes  in  the  heart  and


262  DIGITALIS PURPUREA.

other  muscles.  The  muscular  juice  is  acid  instead
of  alkaline ;  and  the  external  surface  is  electrically
negative  to  the  cut  surface,  instead  of  (as  normally)
positive.  These  results  we  consider  to  establish
beyond  doubt  that  pathogenetic  influence  of  Digitalis
which  has  been  inferred  from  the  symptoms  it
occasions.  By  them  also  Dr.  Handfield  Jones'
experiments  obtain  their  elucidation.  The  heart
poisoned  by  Digitalis  is  indeed  contracted,  and  not
dilated  :  but  the  contraction  is  the  rigor  mortis.  The
immediate  cause  of  this  phenomenon  has  been  shown
to  be  the  change  of  the  muscular  juice  from  alkaline
to  acid  :  and  this  very  change  is  involved  in  the
destructive  action  of  the  drug  upon  the  integrity  of
the  muscular  tissue.

II.  Digitalis  has thus  far  shown  itself  to  be  a
very important myotic  poison  : and,  so far  as  the
pneumogastrics are concerned, to act also as a
neurotic. Farther observation shows that its
neurotic  influence — like  that  of  Tartar  emetic  and
some other drugs — is confined to these nerves.
Upon disturbance of their function depend the
nausea  and vomiting so  readily  induced by  Digi-
talis.

III.  Tissue  irritation  is  not  a  prominent  feature
in  the pathogenesy  of  Digitalis. It  exerts, how-
ever, a  considerable  influence  of  this  kind  upon  the
kidneys; and shows some signs of  affecting the
brain  and special  senses,  the  genital  organs,  and
some  mucous  and  serous  membranes.

1.  To  call  Digitalis  a  diuretic  is  a  very  imperfect
way  of  expressing  its  action  upon  the  kidneys.  It
by  no  means  invariably  increases  the  secretion  of


DIGITALTS PURPUREA,  263

urine  in  healthy  persons  ;  and  in  poisoning  by  large
doses  suppression  is  often  noticed.  It  is  in  all  pro-
bability a  specific  irritant  of  the  renal  tissue,  like
Arsenic,  Terebinthina,  and  Kali  bichromicum.

2.  The  influence  of Digitalis  upon  the  brain  is
evidenced  by  various cerebral symptoms, and  by
consentaneous  subjective  disorders  of  the  sight  and
hearing. Headache, chiefly frontal, heavy and
throbbing  in character,  has often been  observed :
there  is  buzzing  in  the  ears ; and  the  sight  is  dim,
with  sparks  and  frequently  colours  before  the  eyes.
The only  clue  to  the meaning  of  these symptoms
(which remind  one  of  those  of  Quinine)  is  that  in
post-mortem  examinations  the  cerebral  meuinges  are
found highly injected. Vertigo and  restlessness,
when  induced  by  Digitalis,  are  due,  I  think,  rather
to  its  cardiac  than  its  cerebral  influence.

3.  The genital organs were pretty uniformly
excited in Jorg's provers. I am unable  to  say
upon  what  part  of  the  sexual  apparatus,  or  in  what
manner  Digitalis  here  acts.

4.  Of  the  mucous  membranes,  the stomach  and
descending colon are specifically inflamed by
Digitalis. It causes  ash-coloured  stools  : but  not,
I think,  through any  influence  on  the  liver. Dr.
Inman has  shown  that  the  faeces  do not become
brown until they  reach the  colon, and  that  the
green  stools  of  infants  assume  their  peculiar  colour
at  this  point  also. It  would  appear  therefore  that
the  secretion  from  the  follicles  of  the  colon  has  an
inportant  influence  upon  the  colour  of  the  faeces. It
is  in  this  way  I  conceive  that  Digitalis  whitens  the
stools  :  for  it  causes  no  other  element  of  jaundice


264  DIGITALIS FURPUREA.

or  sign  of  hepatic  disorder. — Upon  the  respiratory
organs  the  influence  of  Digitalis  is  more  problem-
atical. Dr.  Bahr,  however,  states  that  in  his  ex-
periments nasal  catarrh  and  hoarseness  were  very
common ;  while  one  prover  experienced  slight  pain
and  oppression  in  the  chest,  with  a  dry  cough,  and
afterwards  ending  in  lumpy  expectoration,  and
shortness  of  breath  at  first  continuous  and  later  in
paroxysms.

I  will  now  discuss  the  therapeutical  uses  of
Digitalis,  following  the  same  categorical  order  as
that  in  which  I  have  arranged  its  pathogenetic  effects.

I.  From  our  considerations  relative  to  the  action
of  Digitalis  upon  the  heart  it  follows  that  this
medicine  is  homceopathic  to  every  form  and  stage
of  cardiac  weakness  up  to  complete  dilatation  and
paralysis.  Simple  enfeeblement  of  the  muscular
walls  of  the  heart  I  apprehend  to  be  a  very  common
morbid  condition.  Vertigo,  tendency  to  syncope,
breathlessness  on  exertion,  and  palpitation — some
or  all  of  these  are  its  symptoms  :  and  it  finds  in
Digitalis  a  potent  and  rarely-failing  remedy.  The
physicians  of  the  old  school  are  beginning  to  find
this  out :  and  Dr.  Handfield  Jones  proclaims  that
Digitalis  is  "  our  cardiac  tonic  /car'  t^o^rjv,  spe-
cially to  be  resorted  to  in  cases  of  asthenia  and
peril  from  failing  circulation."*  But  if,  according
to  his  theory,  Digitalis  acts  upon  the  heart  only
through  its  nerves,  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  it  can

*  I  would  add  my  mite  of  confirmation  to  Dr.  Jones's  estimate
of  the  value  of  Digitalis  in  these  cases.  It  is  one  of  those  few
medicines  with  which  one  can  fight  the  king  of  terrors  face  to  face,
and  overcome  him.


DIGITALIS PURPUREA.  265

exercise  more  than  a  temporary  stimulant  influence
upon  it.  A  drug  can  surely  give  strength  to  a
tissue  only  by  acting  directly  upon  the  tissue  itself,
or  upon  the  blood  which  nourishes  it.  The  result
and  organic  form  of  enfeebled  heart  is  dilatation  of
the  right  ventricle,  leading  sooner  or  later  to  drop-
sical effusion.  In  these  cases,  though  cure  is
hardly  to  be  hoped  for,  Digitalis  is  of  immense
service  in  prolonging  life,  keeping  off  dropsy,  and
quieting  distressing  symptoms.  These  virtues  of
the  medicine  are  known  to  our  alloeopathic
brethren,  who  are  somewhat  puzzled  thereby.
"  The  enlarged  and  flaccid  heart,"  observes  Sir  H.
Holland,  "  though,  on  first  view,  it  might  seem  the
least  favourable  for  the  use  of  the  medicine,  is,
perhaps,  not  so.  At  least,  we  have  reason  to
believe  that  in  the  dropsical  affections  so  often  con-
nected with  this  organic  change,  the  action  of  Digi-
talis as  a  diuretic  is  peculiarly  of  avail."  And
Pereira,  who  has  previously  stated  that  "  in  a  consi-
derable number  of  instances  the  pulse  becomes  irre-
gular or  intermittent  under  the  use  of  foxglove,"
writes  farther  on — "  In  patients  affected  with  an
intermittent  or  otherwise  irregular  pulse,  I  have
several  times  observed  this  medicine  produce  regu-
larity of  pulsation, — a  circumstance  also  noticed  by
Dr.  Holland."

II.  The  neurotic  influence  of  Digitalis,  which  (as
we  have  seen)  is  limited  to  the  pneumogastric
nerves,  has  hitherto  been  unused  in  practice.  It
might  sometimes  help  us  in  cases  of  nausea  and
vomiting  such  as  those  for  which  we  think  of  Tartar
emetic,  Lobelia,  and  Tabacum.


266  DIGITALIS PURPUREA.

III.  1.  The  so-called  "  diuretic"  influence  of
Digitalis  has  led  to  its  being  extensively  used  in
ordinary  practice  in  the  treatment  of  dropsy.  From
what  we  have  said  I  think  you  will  agree  with  me
that  when  it  has  proved  curative  of  this  disease  it
must  have  been  in  virtue  of  its  homoeopathicity.
Cardiac  dropsy  it  would  benefit  by  toning  the  heart :
and  in  the  renal  form  its  specific  influence  on  the
kidneys  would  render  it  well-calculated  to  restore
these  organs  to  a  healthy  state.  It  has  occa-
sionally been  used  successfully  in  dropsy  in  our  own
school.

2.  The  indications  for  Digitalis  in  certain  forms
of  headache  and  certain  functional  derangements  of
the  retina  and  auditory  nerve  are  well-marked,  but
have  as yet received no  therapeutical  application.
Hahnemann writes "  Hardness of hearing, with
hissing as of  boiling water, has been frequently
cured by Digitalis, when the other symptoms
corresponded  likewise  to  that  drug." It  has  some
repute,  I believe,  in  your  school as a remedy  for
acute hydrocephalus  : but  I  do  not  see  my  way  to
its  action  here. There  is  a  case,  however,  in  the
'  Brit. Journ. of Horn./ vol. vii, in which Dr.
Watzke  apparently  cured  this  disease  with  Digitalis
and Veratrum, given in alternation.* When
delirium  depends  (as  it  sometimes  does)  on failing
power  of  the  heart,  Digitalis  will  quiet  it. Hence,
I  apprehend,  its  occasional  value  in  delirium  tremens.

3.  Of  the genital organs  I can only  say  that

*  There  is  another  case  in  which  Digitalis  seems  to  have  been
curative,  in  the  same  Journal,  vol.  xii,  p.  496.


DIGITALIS PURPTJREA.  267

Digitalis  has  been  given  with  reported  advantage  as
an  anti-aphrodisiac,  and  in  spermatorrhoea.

4.  It  is  no  uncommon  thing  to  be  consulted
about  children  whose  liver  is  said  to  be  locked  up,
because  they  are  passing  white  chalky  stools.
There  is  no  jaundice  or  other  hepatic  symptom  :
and  I  do  not  believe  that  the  liver  is  here  at  fault
at  all.  I  believe  it  is  just  such  an  affection  of  the
colon  as  we  have  found  Digitalis  to  cause  :  and
this  drug  has  proved  a  capital  remedy  for  it.  I
must  tell  you,  however,  that  true  jaundice  is  said  to
have  been  occasionally  cured  by  Digitalis. — The
interest  of  the  action  of  Digitalis  in  the  respiratory
sphere  lies  in  its  reputed  power  over  pulmonary
phthisis.  It  is,  I  suppose,  pretty  well  abandoned
now  :  but  Teste,  after  considering  the  eighty  three
cases  of  reported  cure  of  this  disease  by  Digitalis
collected  by  Bayle,  concludes  that  some  at  least
must  have  been  true  phthisis.  I  have  no  experience
with  it  here.

Digitalis  finds  a  good  many  parallel  medicines  in
its  many  sided  action.  As  a  myotic,  its  only
fellows  are  Arnica,  Arsenic,  and  Phosphorus :
myalgia,  cramp,  and  fatty  degeneration  being  to
these  drugs  respectively  what  paralysis  is  to  Digi-
talis. In  its  influence  on  the  pneumogastric,
Digitalis  resembles  Tartar  emetic,  Lobelia,  and
Tabacum ;  as  a  renal  poison  its  analogues  are
Colchicum  and  perhaps  Scilla.  In  its  action  on  the
heart  it  stands  quite  alone — Arsenic  and  Kalmia
alone  approaching  it  at  all  in  character.

The  question  of  dose  as  regards  Digitalis  has
some  interesting  points  about  it.  It  seems  strange


268  DIGITALINE.

that  a  drug  so  perfectly  and  primarily  homoeopathic
to  weakness  of  the  heart  should  not  aggravate
rather  than  improve  this  condition  in  the  full  doses
obtain  none  but  beneficial  results  from  doses  of  the
tincture  varying  from  5  to  15  minims.  Lately,  a
still  more  surprising  administration  of  the  drug  has
taken  place.  The  tincture  has  been  given  in  half-
ounce  doses,  several  times  repeated,  as  a  remedy  for
delirium  tremens  ;  and  does  not  seem  to  have  done
any  harm.  Any  attempt,  however,  to  give  the
same  quantity  of  the  infusion  will  bring  on  distress-
ing and  sometimes  alarming  symptoms, — while  yet
the  tincture  is  eight  times  stronger.  It  is  a  fair
inference  from  these  facts,  that  the  presence  of
alcohol — as  in  the  tincture — directly  opposes  the
action  of  the  drug :  which  in  its  turn  may  be
antidotal  to  alcohol,  and  perhaps  in  this  way  be
beneficial  in  delirium  tremens.  If,  then,  the  tinc-
ture be  used  for  Homoeopathic  purposes,  the
counteracting  influence  of  the  alcohol  must  be
borne  in  mind,  and  the  lowest  potencies  selected.
I  have  never  seen  any  benefit  from  the  dilutions
above  the  1st  centesimal :  and  generally  use  the  1st
decimal  or  mother  tincture.
A  word  in  conclusion  about

Digitaline,

which  appears  to  possess  at  least  the  cardiac  and
renal  influence  of  the  mother-drug.  It  has  occasion-
ally been  used  in  heart-disease  with  dropsy  instead
of  Digitalis,  in  the  2nd  and  3rd  decimal  tritura-
tions.*  I  have  rather  a  partiality  for  it  myself.
*  See  '  North.  Amer.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  vii,  p.  401.


LETTER  XXII.

DROSERA, DULCAMARA, ELATERIUM,  EUPATORIUM,
EUPHORBIUM, EUPHRASIA, FERRUM.

I  have  before  me  in  this  letter  a  group  of  minor
medicines,  which  we  shall  soon  get  through.  The
first  is  the  sun-dew,

Drosera  rotundifolia.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  juice  of  the
whole  plant.

The  proving  of  Drosera  is  in  the  '  Materia
Medica  Pura/  Dr.  Curie's  observations  and  ex-
periments may  be  found  in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of
Horn./  vol.  xx,  p.  39.

The  only  significant  fact  in  the  pathogenesis  of
Drosera  is  the  spasmodic  cough  it  produces.  Hah-
nemann's  wonted  sagacity  led  him  to  perceive  this  •
and  recommended  the  medicine  accordingly  in
pertussis.  If  after  experience  has  not  quite  verified
his  statement  that  a  single  dose  of  Drosera  30  will
cure  hooping-cough  in  a  week,  it  has  nevertheless
sustained  the  drug  in  the  first  rank  of  remedies  for
this  disease.  I  myself  nearly  always  give  it  in  the
second  stage  of  ordinary  cases,  where  no  peculiar
symptoms  exist  :  and  Dr.  Bayes  has  lately  added
his  testimony  in  the  same  direction.  Nor  is  it


270  DROSERA ROTUNDIFOLIA.

essential  that  a  spasmodic  cough  should  be  true
pertussis  for  Drosera  to  cure  it  :  in  sympathetic  and
nervous  coughs  of  this  kind  it  often  acts  admirably.
Dr.  Curie's  most  valuable  experiments,  however,
Drosera.  Struck  by  the  statements  of  the  herbals
and  of  the  country  people  that  Drosera  causes  in
sheep  a  cough  under  which  they  waste  away,  and
finding  that  it  had  a  popular  reputation  as  a  cough
medicine,  he  determined  to  ascertain  by  experiment
its  real  action.  He  reports  to  the  French  Academy
of  Sciences  that  he  has  slowly  poisoned  three  cats
with  daily  doses  of  Drosera.  Diarrhoea  at  the
commencement,  and  weakness  of  voice  about  six
weeks  later,  are  the  only  symptoms  mentioned  as
observed  during  life.  But  on  post-mortem  ex-
amination, the  trachea  was  found  unchanged,  but
the  pleural  surface  of  both  lungs  was  studded  with
what  the  microscope  decided  to  be  true  tubercle.
In  one  cat  the  mesenteric  glands  were  much
enlarged ;  in  another  the  sub-maxillary  glands,
with  the  solitary  glands  of  the  large  intestine  and
Peyer's  patches.  Now  as  cats  are  not  at  all  liable
to  tubercle,  I  think  it  cannot  be  doubted  that
Drosera  here  caused  the  deposit,  with  the  con-
sentaneous enlargement  of  the  lymphatic  glands.
in  sheep,  it  looks  very  much  as  if  Drosera  would
turn  out  a  true  simile  for  phthisis  pulmonalis.  Dr.
Curie,  indeed,  asserts  that  in  the  incipient  stage  of
this  disease  a  cure  may  nearly  always  be  brought
about  by  Drosera,  given  in  doses  of  from  four  to
twenty  drops  of  the  mother-tincture  in  the  twenty-


SOLANUM DULCAMARA.  271

four  hours.  I  can  only  say  that  I  once  gave  drop
doses  four  times  a  day,  with  the  effect  of  setting  up
a  most  violent  spasmodic  cough,  which  subsided  to
the  ordinary  cough  of  phthisis  when  the  medicine
was  discontinued.

Acidum  hydrocyanicum,  Acidum  nitricum,  Bella-
donna, Chelidonium,  Cina,  Corallia,  Cuprum,  Hyos-
cyamus,  Ipecacuanha,  Nux  vomica,  and  Sambucus
should  be  compared  with  Drosera  in  their  relation
to  spasmodic  cough.

I  suspect  that  Dr.  Curie's  mother- tincture  will
have  to  be  modified  no  less  than  Hahnemann's  30th.
I  myself  am  very  well  satisfied  with  the  1st  and  2nd
dilutions.

My  next  minor  medicine  is  the  bitter-sweet,
woody  nightshade,

Solanum  dulcamara.

The  tincture  is  prepared  by  maceration  from  the
green  stems.

Hahnemann's  proving  of  Dulcamara  is  in  the
'  Chronic  Diseases.'  I  must  also  refer  you  to
Professor  darns' s  experiments,  which  you  will  find
translated  in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  vol.  xviii.

One  of  those  happy  generalizations  which  abound
in  Homoeopathic  therapeutics  has  been  arrived  at
regarding  Dulcamara.  Its  general  effect  upon  the
body  has  been  compared  to  that  of  damp ;  and  for
the  result  of  exposure  to  damp  it  is  certainly  a
capital  remedy.  I  am  myself  very  liable  to  catch
cold  if  I  get  at  all  wet :  but  since  I  have  (acting  on
a  suggestion  of  Dr.  Chapman's)  taken  Dulcamara  on


272  SOLANUM DULCAMARA.

such  occasions  as  a  prophylactic,  I  have  hardly  ever
suffered.  Twice,  too,  I  have  arrested  in  myself
incipient  results  of  moist  air  by  Dulcamara ;  the
first  time  it  was  angina,  the  second  time  stiff-neck.
This  medicine  is  also  useful  in  diarrhoea  resulting
from  a  chill  in  damp  weather;  in  catarrh  of  the
bladder  from  the  same  cause ;  and  indeed  in  almost
any  mild  catarrhal  irritation  of  the  mucous  mem-
branes owning  this  origin.  Its  influence  extends
also  to  sub-acute  rheumatism  in  this  way  set  up  :
as  you  may  see  in  a  case  of  the  late  Dr.  Petroz'  in
the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  xxiii,  p.  642.
Besides  the  effects  of  damp,  Dulcamara  exerts  a
good  deal  of  influence  over  cutaneous  eruptions  of  a
moist  character,  i.  e.  impetigo,  ecthyma,  &c.  Its
specific  action  upon  the  skin  is  undoubted  :  some
of  the  symptoms  produced  by  it  have  led  to  its  use
in  urticaria,  where,  however,  I  think  it  very  inferior
to  other  remedies,  especially  Apis.  We  have  no
knowledge  of  the  power  over  lepra  with  which  it  has
been  credited  by  some  of  the  older  physicians.

So  far  extended  our  knowledge  of  Dulcamara
before  the  experiments  of  Professor  Clarus.  These
were  made  upon  himself  and  upon  rabbits :  and
some  with  the  extract  of  Dulcamara,  some  with  the
acetate  of  Solania,  its  "  active  principle."  Two
very  important  phenomena  were  observed.  1st.
The  respiration  became  much  slower,  the  heart's
action  much  quicker  (though  at  the  same  time
feebler).  Since  this  curious  antagonism  is  also
caused  by  division  of  the  vagi  in  the  neck,  Professor
Clarus  fairly  infers  that  Dulcamara  acts  by  depressing
these  very  nerves.  Such  depression  is  also  indicated


DULCAMARA.  273

by  the  filling  of  the  pulmonary  tissue  with  a  serous
exudation,  and  the  emphysematous  distension  of
isolated  portions  of  the  lung,  which  were  observed  in
the  rabbits  killed  by  Solanine  : — these  phenomena
having  resulted  also  from  division  of  the  vagi.  Other
symptoms  also  indicate  an  action  on  the  medulla
oblongata,  as  vomiting,  spasms  of  the  thoracic
muscles  extending  to  those  of  the  extremities,  snap-
ping of  the  jaws,  and  a  pendulum-like  motion  of  the
head.  After  death,  the  membranes  of  the  medulla
oblongata,  and  of  the  parts  just  above  and  below
it,  were  found  highly  injected,  but  the  nervous
substance  healthy.  2nd.  The  kidneys  were  nearly
always  found  hypersemic,  and  the  urine,  whenever
examined,  was  highly  albuminous.

No  application  of  these  facts  to  practice  has  as
yet  been  made,  though  their  bearing  is  pretty  obvious.
On  the  one  hand,  they  perhaps  add  Dulcamara  to
the  remedies  we  have  for  the  first  stage  of  Bright's
disease.  On  the  other,  they  give  us  a  homoeopathic
medicine  for  that  threatened  paralysis  of  the  lungs
which  we  meet  with  in  old  people  at  the  first  setting
in  of  cold  weather.  It  may  also  be  helpful  to  the
same  subjects  when  from  weakness  they  have  to
cough  a  long  time  to  expel  phlegm.*  For  these
latter  purposes  I  should  suggest  that  Solania  be
administered.

Dulcamara  has  so  very  unique  an  action  that  I
hardly  see  my  way  to  putting  down  any  other
medicines  as  true  analogues  to  it.

•  Since  writing  the  above,  I  have  used  Solania  2  with  the  utmost
benefit  in  one  case  of  this  kind ;  and  Solania  6  with  equally  good
results  in  a  case  of  threatened  paralysis  of  the  vagi  in  an  infant.

18


274  ELATERIUM.

The  sources  of  the  reputation  of  Dulcamara
would  lead  us  to  expect  the  higher  dilutions  to  be
most  suitable  for  the  effects  of  damp,  the  lower  in
cutaneous  disease.

Next  we  have  an  old  acquaintance  of  yours,

Elaterium.

An  alcoholic  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh
fruit,  so  as  to  secure  the  active  portion.

There  is  a  short  proving  of  Elaterium,  with  a
number  of  clinical  cases,  in  the  '  Materia  Medica  of
American  Provings/

action  of  Elaterium.  Nevertheless,  it  has  been  so
graphically  put  by  Dr.  T.  K.  Chambers,  that  I
cannot  refrain  from  quoting  his  account  of  the  drug.
"  It  causes/'  he  says,  "  an  enormous  flow  of  watery
serum  from  the  first  mucous  membrane  that  absorbs
it.  If  its  vapour  be  drawn  up  into  the  nostrils  for
a  short  time,  it  is  a  powerful  errhine,  and  is  followed
by  the  secretion  of  floods  of  water  from  the  Schnei-
derian  membrane : —  if  it  is  dissolved  in  the
oesophagus  it  causes  such  a  deluge  of  the  gastric
fluids,  that  the  stomach  cannot  contain  them,  and
they  are  rejected  by  vomiting  : — if  it  succeeds  in
passing  the  pylorus,  a  choleraic  diarrhoea  gushes
forth,  stripping  the  membrane  of  its  epithelium  just
like  its  morbid  prototype."  Elaterium  would  thus
seem  homo30pathic  to  choleraic  diarrhoea  and  vomit-
ing. There  is  this  difference,  however,  that  the
prolonged  action  of  Elaterium  sets  up  gastro- enteritis,
which  the  cholera  poison  never  does.  I  think  that


EUPATORIUM PERFOLIATUM.  275

nevertheless  I  should  be  disposed  to  try  it  where
the  excessive  quantity  of  the  evacuations  was  espe-
cially noticeable.  There  are  several  cases  of  endemic
cholera  reported  at  the  end  of  the  proving,  in  which
Elateriura  was  successful  after  Veratrum  had  failed.
— Some  well-marked  rheumatico-neuralgic  pains,
also,  appear  in  the  proving,  amd  have  led  to  a  cure
of  one  case  of  rheumatic  sciatica.  Intermittent
fever,  too,  counts  Elaterium  among  the  numerous
medicines  which  at  various  times  have  cured  or
seemed  to  cure  it.

Elaterium  forms  a  group  with  Colchicum,  Croton,
and  Veratrum.

The  2nd  dilution  was  given  in  nearly  all  the
cases  reported  in  the  proving.

We  now  come  to  an  American  medicine,  the
thorough-wort,  bone-set,  ague-weed,

Eupatorium  perfoliatum.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  whole  plant.

The  proving  of  Eupatorium,  also,  is  in  the
'  Materia  Medica  of  American  Provings.'  Cases  of
cure  with  it  are  there  given  :  but  the  most  com-
plete collection  of  all  pathogenetic  and  clinical
records  of  the  action  of  Eupatorium  is  to  be  found
in  the  second  edition  of  Dr.  Male's  New  Remedies.

Eupatorium  has  long  been  highly  esteemed  on
the  American  continent  as  a  remedy  against  ague  ;
hence  its  popular  name  among  the  Indians,  "  ague-
weed."  Its  other  appellation,  "  bone-set,"  is  ob-
tained from  the  remarkable  power  it  showed  in
relieving  the  bone-pains  of  influenza  in  an  epidemic


276  EUPATORIUM PERFOLIATUM.

of  this  disease.  The  pains  were  so  severe  that  the
malady  was  spoken  of  as  the  "  break-bone  fever."
The  provings  of  Homoeopathy  have  enabled  us  to
define  the  precise  sphere  of  Eupatorium  in  the
treatment  of  these  maladies.  In  intermittents  the
setting  in  of  thirst  before  the  chill,  which  usually
occurs  in  the  morning,  bilious  vomiting  during  the
paroxysms,  and  scanty  perspiration  at  the  close,  are
characteristic  symptoms  calling  for  its  use.  If,
also,  the  peculiar  bone-pains  are  present,  the  medi-
cine is  doubly  indicated  :  you  may  read  a  case  of
this  kind  by  Dr.  Bayes  in  the  1st  vol.  of  the
'  Annals'  of  the  Society.  I  have  no  experience  of
Eupatorium  in  intermittents :  but  can  add  my
testimony  to  its  extreme  value  in  relieving  the
bone-pains  of  influenza.  Dr.  Carroll  Dunham  has
lately  directed  attention  to  the  marked  hepatic
action  of  Eupatorium,  which  he  compares  with  that
of  Bryonia.*  The  group  of  symptoms  to  which  he
refers  are — intense  headache,  with  soreness  of  the
scalp,  soreness  of  the  eyes,  redness  of  the  face,
nausea  and  prostration,  soreness  in  the  region  of
the  liver,  constipation,  and  high-coloured  urine.
He  gives  a  capital  case  of  "  bilious  fever,"  in  which
these  symptoms,  with  violent  bone-pains,  were
present,  and  which  was  broken  up  by  Eupatorium
3  with  marvellous  rapidity.

Besides  the  Bryonia  already  referred  to,  I  do  not
know  of  any  true  analogue  of  Eupatorium.  Dr.
Dunham  points  out  as  elements  of  distinction
between  these  two — 1st,  that  the  perspiration  is
free  in  Bryonia,  deficient  in  Eupatorium ;  2nd,  that
*  '  Amer.  Horn.  Rev.,'  vol.  vi,  p.  229.


EUPHORBIUM.  277

Eupatorium  pains  make  the  patient  restless,  those
of  Bryonia  make  him  keep  very  still.

The  range  of  recorded  use  has  been  from  the  3rd
dil.  to  the  mother-tincture.

My  next  medicine,

Euphorbium,

is,  as  you  are  probably  aware,  the  milky  juice  of  the
Euphorbia  canariensis  or  officinarum.  Of  late,  the
American  Euphorbia  corollata  has  been  introduced
into  practice :  it  is  prepared  by  triturating  the
dried  root.

Euphorbium  was  proved  by  Hahnemann  :  its
pathogenesis  is  in  the  '  Chronic  Diseases/  There
is  an  Article  on  Euphorbia  corollata  in  Hale's
'  New  Remedies/

Euphorbium,  belonging  as  it  does  to  the  family
which  includes  Croton,  Ricinus,  and  Jatropha,  is
another  instance  of  the  drastic  purgative,  and  gives
us  another  remedy  for  endemic  cholera  and
choleraic  diarrhoea.  The  E.  corollata  has  been  a
good  deal  used  in  America  in  cholera  infantum.
It  is  much  less  liable  to  cause  inflammation  than
the  other  Euphorbia,  and  is  accordingly  better
suited  to  these  non-inflammatory  disorders.  When
applied  to  the  skin,  Euphorbium,  like  Croton,  causes
an  eczematous  inflammation  :  but  it  is  not  known
whether  this  is  a  specific  effect  of  its  action.

Besides  the  members  of  its  own  family  already
mentioned,  Euphorbium  is  closely  allied  with
Veratrum  and  Colchicum ;  with  Elaterium ;  and
with  Tartar  emetic.


278  EUPHRASIA.

We  have  no  records  in  any  degree  fixing  its
dose.

We  come  now  to  a  medicine  which  is  an  especial
favourite  of  mine,  the  eye-bright,

Euphrasia.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  whole  plant.

There  is  a  pathogenesis  of  Euphrasia  in  the
'  Mat.  Med.  Pura/  Some  additional  experiments
with  it  may  be  found  in  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./
vol.  xvi,  p.  671.

The  great  charm  of  Euphrasia  as  a  medicine  is
that  it  has  a  distinct  and  limited  sphere  of  action,
beyond  which  it  advances  no  pretensions,  but  within
which  it  manifests  virtues  which  are  as  unvarying  as
they  are  potent.  It  acts  upon  the  upper  portion  of  the
respiratory  mucous  membrane,  i.  e.,  upon  its  con-
junctival  and  nasal  portions,  hardly  reaching  the
larynx.  It  developes  in  this  region  a  catarrh al
inflammation,  generally  characterised  by  profuse
secretion.  Hence  it  takes  a  first  place  among  the
remedies  for  fluent  coryza,  when  this  is  a  local
affection,  and  not  a  symptom  of  general  influenza,
in  which  case  Arsenic  is  preferable.  The  involve-
ment of  the  conjunctiva  in  the  catarrh  is  a  special
indication  for  Euphrasia  ;  and  sometimes  the  secre-
tion from  the  eyes  is  acrid,  while  that  from  the  iiares
is  bland, — the  opposite  condition  obtaining  with
Arsenic.  The  coryza  which  accompanies  the  com-
mencement of  measles  is  one  to  which  Euphrasia  is
well  suited  :  and  I  nearly  always  give  it  in  this
stage  in  alternation  with  Aconite,  and  have  reason


EUPHRASIA.  279

to  believe  that  the  eyes  are  the  better  for  it  at  the
time  and  afterwards.  The  eyes  themselves,  indeed,
are  the  special  seat  of  the  influence  of  Euphrasia.
Its  name  in  most  languages  refers  to  its  healing
power  over  these  organs  (as  Engl.  eye-bright,  Germ.
Augen-trost,  Fr.  casse-lunettes)  ;  and  you  know  how
the  Archangel  in  Milton,  when  he  would  clear
the  vision  of  our  first  parent,

"  purged  with  euphrasy  and  rue
The  visual  nerve,  for  he  had  much  to  see."

This  is  one  of  the  many  instances  in  which  Homoeo-
pathy has  revived  and  confirmed,  while  defining,  the
old  traditions  about  herbs.  Conjunctivitis  is  very
marked  in  the  provings,  and  there  are  even  indica-
tions of  affection  of  the  deeper  tissues.  Correspond-
ingly, Euphrasia  is  among  the  chief  of  our  eye-
medicines.  In  simple  acute  conjunctivitis  it  is  rare
that  any  other  remedy  is  required  :  and  in  the
chronic  stage  it  has  often  effected  cures.  Given  at
the  commencement  of  strumous  ophthalmia,  it  will
nearly  always  check  incipient  liberation  :  but  its
action  needs  sustaining  by  constitutional  medicines,
especially  Sulphur.  It  comes  in  again  later  to  re-
move specks  on  the  cornea,  for  which  it  is  very  effi-
cacious. Lately  Dr.  Dudgeon  has  communicated
two  cases  to  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn/*  in  which
a  rapid  cure  of  rheumatic  ophthalmia  (sclerotitis  and
iritis)  was  effected  by  Euphrasia,  after  other  reme-
dies had  failed.  Used  in  this  manner,  I  know  of
no  medicine  which  will  less  frequently  disappoint
expectation  than  the  little  eye-bright.

*  Vol.  xxii,  p.  355.


280  FERRUM.

The  analogues  of  Euphrasia  are  AZthusa,  Allium
cepa,  Apis,  Argentum  nitricum,  Arsenicum,  Bella-
donna, Hepar  sulphuris,  Kali  bichromicum,  Kali
iodidum,  Mercurius  solubilis  and  corrosivus,  Pulsa-
tilla,  and  Sulphur.

The  higher  dilutions  have  sometimes  been  used  :
but  the  lower  potencies  and  the  mother-tincture
appear  to  answer  all  purposes  sufficiently  well.

I  shall  conclude  this  letter  with  an  account  of
the  Homoeopathic  doctrine  and  practice  concerning
one  of  your  most  valued  medicines,

Ferrum.

Several  of  the  preparations  of  Iron  have  been
used  in  Homoeopathic  practice  :  the  Acetate  most
frequently,  as  with  this  the  provings  were  made.
I  myself  prefer  the  perchloride,  as  a  more  certain
preparation  from  which  to  obtain  the  specific  effects
of  Iron.  As  a  chalybeate,  I  know  of  nothing  equal
to  the  Ferrum  redactum  of  the  British  Pharma-
copoeia.

Iron  was  proved  by  Hahnemann,  and  its  patho-
genesis  is  in  the  '  Mat.  Med.  Pura,'  vol.  ii.  It  is
very  unaccountably  omitted  by  Hempel  in  his  trans-
lation. Another  proving  made  by  the  followers  of
Rademacher,  with  examinations  of  the  blood,  may
be  read  in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  vol  ix,  p.  243.

I  suppose  that  you  consider  the  treatment  of
anamia  by  Iron  as  one  of  the  most  satisfactory
things  in  your  therapeutics.  I  do  not  think  you
would  be  at  all  pleased  if  Homoeopathy  required  you
to  give  it  up.  Let  me  say  at  once  that  if  Homoeo-


FERRUM.  281

pathy  did  require  its  renunciation,  I  myself  should
have  to  renounce  Homoeopathy.  I  always  give  Iron
as  some  part  of  the  treatment  of  anaemic  patients.
And  yet  I  am  far  from  claiming  its  action  as  an  ex-
ample of  the  operation  of  the  law  of  similars.  Per-
mit me  to  cite  what  I  said  upon  this  subject  in  a
paper  on  the '  Chemical  Treatment  of  Disease/  read
before  the  British  Homoeopathic  Society.*

"  Who  of  us  that  has  known  anything  of  old-
school  practice  does  not  feel  that  the  treatment  of
anaemia  by  full  doses  of  Iron  is  one  of  the  brightest
spots  in  its  field  ?  And  who  has  treated  such  cases
by  Homoeopathic  remedies  alone  without  profound
impatience  and  dissatisfaction  ?  I  confess  that  were
I  limited  to  dynamic  agents  in  my  practice,  I  should
feel  bound  to  advise  an  anaemic  patient  to  go  to  the
most  ignorant  country  Allopath  rather  than  to  come
to  me.  I  know  that  my  friend  Dr.  Russell  will
bring  forward  his  case,  in  which  anaemic  symptoms
rapidly  gave  way  to  drop-doses  of  the  1st  dilution
of  the  Ferrum  aceticum.  But  let  me  ask  Dr.  Rus-
sell, and  the  rest  of  my  colleagues,  whether  such  a
case  is  not  quite  exceptional  ?  Upon  Homoeopathic
principles,  indeed,  it  must  be  so :  for  Ferrum  is
homoeopathic,  not  to  anaemia,  but  to  plethora.  In
Rademacher's  provings,  Iron  in  all  cases  increased
the  number  of  the  red-corpuscles,  and  induced
symptoms  of  commencing  plethora ;  and  it  was  not
till  its  continued  use  had  upset  the  stomach,  and
impaired  digestion,  that  the  opposite  condition  began
to  obtain.  If,  therefore,  Iron  is  to  do  good  in

*  Printed  in  '  Annals,'  vol.  iv.


282  FERRUM.

ansemia,  it  would  seem  to  be  on  chemical  principles,
and  therefore  in  chemical  doses.

"  I  think  it  is  time  that  we  all  spoke  out  plainly
on  this  matter.  Ansemia  is  a  condition  of  very  fre-
quent occurrence,  both  as  a  substantive  malady,
and  as  a  concomitant  of  other  disorders.  Our  bre-
thren profess  to  obtain  the  utmost  benefit  from  Iron
in  this  condition,  and  regard  it  indeed  as  well-nigh
infallible.  Do  we  treat  it  better  with  Homoeopathic
remedies,  or  with  Iron  itself  in  infinitesimal  doses  ?
And  if  general  experience  accords  with  my  own  in
saying  '  No,'  then  must  we  not  avowedly  admit
Iron  among  our  dietetic  agents,  and  administer  it  in
suitable  quantities  ?  For  my  own  part,  I  have  long
been  in  the  habit  of  giving  Iron  as  food  in  all  cases
of  ansemia.  I  believe  natural  Chalybeate  waters  the
best  mode  of  its  administration.  But  when  these
are  not  to  be  had,  I  am  well  satisfied  with  giving
two  or  three  grains  of  the  Ferrum  redactum  of  the
British  Pharmacopoeia,  once  daily,  at  meal  time."

You  will  see  from  this  that  I  regard  Iron  as  a
food  rather  than  as  a  medicine,  and  administer  it
accordingly.  I  know  there  are  difficulties  in  the
way  of  this  view.  In  ansemia  from  haemorrhage,
indeed,  the  dietetic  theory  would  be  plausible  enough;
but  in  its  two  most  common  forms — that  induced  by
deficiency  of  air,  light,  and  suitable  food,  and  that
which  supervenes  upon  checked  menstruation — it
seems  as  if  the  malady  lies  farther  back, — in  the
blood-making  organs  rather  than  the  blood  itself.
Still  the  fact  remains,  that  in  all  cases  of  ansemia
Iron,  and  the  red  corpuscles  of  which  it  is  an
essential  element,  are  deficient  in  the  blood  :  and


FERRUM.  283

that  the  administration  of  Iron  as  food  goes  very
far  at  least  to  supply  the  want.*  I  say,  as  food  :
for  it  acts  best  when  given  with  meals,  and  is  not
eliminated  (so  far  as  I  know)  by  the  emunctory
organs.  Given  in  the  quantity  I  have  mentioned,
it  does  not  even  blacken  the  stools ;  and  so  may  be
considered  as  wholly  absorbed  by  the  stomach.

The  uses  of  Iron  as  a  dynamic  agent,  given  upon
the  law  of  similars,  are  not  numerous.  It  is  occa-
sionally beneficial  in  vomiting  of  the  ingesta  and  in
lienteria.  It  certainly  exerts  (especially  in  the
form  of  the  chloride)  a  specific  action  upon  the
urinary  organs,  and  is  often  very  useful  in  chronic
catarrh  of  the  bladder,  and  in  gleet.  Lately,  Dr.
Clotar  Miiller  has  commended  it  to  our  notice  as  a
homoeopathic  remedy  in  phthisis  florida.  You  will
find  his  paper  translated  in  vol.  xviii.  of  the  '  Brit.
Journ.  of  Horn/

As  a  haematic,  Iron  has  no  true  analogue,  unless
it  be  Manganese.

Of  the  dose  of  Iron  as  a  chalybeate  I  have
already  spoken.  The  tincture  of  the  perchloride  of
the  British  Pharmacopoeia  contains  about  a  twentieth
part  of  the  salt,  and  may  be  used  in  one  or  two
drop  doses  for  urinary  affections  and  phthisis.

*  The  influence  of  the  non-irritant  salts  of  Iron  upon  plants  illus-
trates still  farther  its  character  as  a  food.  They  have  no  poisonous
influence  upon  vegetation  :  while,  if  the  plants  are  sickly,  watering
them  with  a  solution  of  one  of  these  salts  will  improve  their  colour
and  aid  their  growth.


LETTER XXIII.

GELSEMINUM, GLONOINE, GRAPHITES, GRAT10LA,
GUIACUM, GUMMI GUTTLE, HAMAMELIS.

The  medicine  with  which  I  begin  my  present
letter  is  one  of  the  most  valuable  of  the  American
contributions  to  our  Materia  Medica.  It  is  the
yellow  jessamine,

Gelseminum sempervirens.

The  tincture  of  the  root  is  that  used  in  our
practice.

So  exhaustive  an  account  of  the  virtues  of  Gelse-
minum is  contained  in  the  2nd  ed.  of  Dr.  Hale's
'  New  Remedies/  that  you  need  not  go  any  further  to
possess  yourself  of  all  available  knowledge  regarding  it.

The  most  striking  thing  about  Gelseminum  is  its
power  of  extinguishing  muscular  activity.  Here  are
the  symptoms  of  a  case  of  accidental  poisoning,
"  Complete  loss  of  muscular  power ;  was  unable  to
move  a  limb,  or  even  to  raise  his  eyelids,  although
he  could  hear  and  was  cognisant  of  circumstances
transpiring  around  him.  His  friends,  greatly
alarmed,  collected  around  him,  watching  the  result
with  much  anxiety,  and  expecting  every  minute  to
see  him  breathe  his  last.  After  some  hours  he
gradually  recovered."  I  cannot  say  whether  it


GELSEMINUM SEMPERVIRENS.  285

produces  this  effect,  like  Curare,  through  the  nerves,
or,  like the Upas aiitiar,  by  direct  action  on the
muscular substance. Post-mortem investigations
on  animals poisoned by  the  drug  can  alone  solve
this  question. In  the mean  time,  we  must  use  it
in this sphere phenomenally only. To one to
whom "  contraria contrariis curantur" seems an
axiom, Gelseminum at once suggests itself as a
remedy  for  muscular  cramp  and  spasm. I  do  not
deny  that  there  are  certain  ephemeral  conditions  of
this  kind,  in  which  we  may,  with  advantage,  avail  our-
selves of  the  antipathic  action  of  the  drug. Thus  it  has
effected speedy  relaxation  of  hysterical  trismus,  of
laryngismus  stridulus,  and  of  rigidity  of  the  os  uteri
during parturition. I have myself the highest
opinion of its efficacy in relieving simple dys-
menorrhosa  and  after-pains,  both  of  which  I  suppose
to  be essentially  spasmodic  in their  nature. But
for  spasm  of  any  long  standing  or  frequent  occur-
rence, I should greatly  prefer  a homosopathically
acting remedy : and on the other hand, should
recommend  the  trial  of  Gelseminum  rather  in  local
paralysis. Of  this  nature  are  the  enuresis  of  old
persons,  from  weakness  of  the  sphincter  vesicae,  and
the  post-diphtheritic paralysis  of  the  parts about
the  throat,  both  of  which  have yielded  to  its use.
I  should  not  have  supposed  that  Gelseminum  had
any  special  action  on the sensational  centres,  but
for the fact that blindness is a pathognomonic
symptom  of  its  full  constitutional  action,  as  much
so as salivation is of  mercurialization. It has
been  given  with  success  in  the  araaurosis  caused  by
Quinine. "While I am  speaking  of  the eyes, I


286  GELSEMINUM SEMPERV1RENS.

must  notice  the  very  marked  disorder  of  the  accom-
modating power  experienced  by  one  of  the  provers.
Whether  this  depended  upon  serai-paralysis  of  the
muscles  of  the  eye-ball,  or  upon  the  cerebral  con-
gestion which  (as  we  shall  see  directly)  is  caused  by
the  drug,  I  cannot  say.  At  any  rate,  Gelseminutn
must  be  borne  in  mind  in  cases  of  ptosis,  diplopia,
and  strabismus.

I  turn  now  to  the  action  of  Gelseminum  in  the
sphere  of  the  circulation.  It  is  said  to  have
caused  in  highly-sensitive  persons  a  decided  febrile
chill,  with  subsequent  reaction.  But  this  effect  is
very  rarely  produced,  and  Gelseminum  has  no  pre-
tensions to  rival  Aconite.  From  clinical  experience,
I  am  disposed  to  consider  the  remittent  type  of
fever  as  that  to  which  Gelseminum  is  specifically
applicable.  Whether  this  would  hold  good  with
malarious  remittents,  1  cannot  say ;  but  Gelse-
minum is  one  of  the  many  medicines  which  have
repute  in  the  treatment  of  ague.  I  have  especially
in  my  mind  the  remittent  fever  of  childhood,  for
which,  acting  on  a  suggestion  of  Dr.  Ludlam's,  I
began  to  use  Gelseminum  instead  of  Aconite  five
years  ago.  I  have  continued  it  ever  since,  and
can  assert  that  it  as  certainly  breaks  up  and  cuts
short  this  fever  as  Baptisia  does  with  the  gastric,
and  Aconite  itself  with  the  simple  fever.  Even  in
adults  having  febrile  symptoms  of  this  type, — i.  e.
marked  exacerbation  towards  night,  and  decline  of
the  heat  without  perspiration  towards  morning,  I
vantage.— Still  within  the  sphere  of  the  circulation
is  the  cerebral  congestion  caused  by  Gelseminum.


GLONOINE.  287

It  is  of  a  passive  venous  character :  showing  itself
mainly  by  dull  headache  and  vertigo.  A  case  of
Dr.  Madden's,  in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  vol.
xxiii,  p.  256,  illustrates  the  kind  of  headache  for
which  Gelseminum  is  likely  to  prove  serviceable.
Dr.  Hale  also  recommends  it  for  the  drowsy  stupor
(not  hepatic)  which  some  persons  complain  of  in
hot  weather.

These  are  the  leading  forms  of  disorder  in  which
Gelseminum  plays  a  curative  part.  It  has  also
been  recommended  or  successfully  used  in  the
epidemic  cerebro-spinal  meningitis  of  America ;  in
acute  myalgia,  as  from  long-continued  exertion  ;  in
the  distressing  sensations  about  the  head  caused  by
cardiac  disease ;  in  scarlatina ;  in  Eustachian  deaf-
ness ;  in  nasal  catarrh ;  and  in  sleeplessness  from
mental  excitement.  For  these  and  all  other  points
about  this  valuable  medicine,  I  once  more  refer  you
to  Dr.  Hale's  exhaustive  article.

The  nearest  analogues  of  Gelseminum  areAgaricus,
Baptisia,  Cannabis  indica,  Conium  and  Opium.

The  1st  dilution  is  that  which  I  have  always
given  for  remittent  fever.  The  2nd  and  higher
potencies  have  been  used  for  paralytic  and  amau-
rotic  affections  ;  and  the  1st  dec.  or  mother  tincture
for  antipathic  purposes.

I  come  now  to  the  curious  substance  which  its
introducer  into  practice  has  called  by  the  fanciful
name  of

Glonoine.

It  is,  as  you  probably  know,  prepared  by  dissolving


288  GLON01NE.

glycerine  in  nitric  and  sulphuric  acids.  It  is  some-
times called  nitro-glyceriue :  and  is  becoming  well-
known  and  dreaded  for  its  explosive  properties.  We
dissolve  it  in  alcohol  for  the  dilutions.

Provings  and  clinical  reports  of  Glonoine  abound
in  our  journals.  If  you  will  look  it  out  in  the  index
of  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Homoeopathy/  vols.  vii,  x,
xvi,  xviii,  xix,  and  xxiii,  you  will  find  about  as  much
information  concerning  it  as  you  can  desire.

The  action  of  Glonoine  lies  within  a  very  small
compass.  If  you  will  touch  your  tongue  with  a
five  per  cent,  solution  you  will  find  that  in  a  few
minutes  your  pulse  will  have  increased  by  from  20
to  40  beats,  and  your  head  will  begin  to  throb  and
beat  until  a  pretty  violent  bursting  headache  deve-
lopes  itself.  With  this  there  will  be  some  giddiness,
and  a  sense  of  constriction  about  the  throat.  If
you  are  sensitive  to  the  drug,  nausea  and  faintness
may  supervene,  and  even  complete  insensibility
ensue.  This  is  the  nearly  uniform  action  of  Glonoine
upon  every  one  who  has  taken  it :  as  you  may  best
read  in  Dr.  Dudgeon's  paper  in  the  Journal,  vol.  x.

What  is  the  rationale  of  these  striking  symptoms  ?
The  sudden  increase  in  the  frequency  of  the  heart's
action  may  be  caused  either  by  direct  stimulation
of  its  substance  or  ganglionic  nerves,  or  by  depres-
sion of  the  influence  of  the  pneumogastrics  (comp.
Dulcamara).  The  rapidity  with  which  it  supervenes,
of  action.  On  what,  then,  depend  the  head  symp-
toms? At  first  sight  they  would  seem  secondary
to  the  increased  action  of  the  heart.  But  if  this
were  so,  the  whole  body  should  be  similarly  affected,


GLONOINE.  289

which  it  is  not.  And  what  entirely  excludes  this
theory  is  that,  in  one  of  Dr.  Dudgeon's  provers,  the
head  was  not  affected  at  all,  although  the  pulse  rose
very  high  indeed.  We  need  a  special  action  upon
the  cerebral  blood-vessels  to  account  for  the  promi-
nence of  the  head-symptoms.  I  think  that  the
phenomena  of  both  head  and  heart  can  be  accounted
for  by  supposing  that  Glonoine  acts  as  a  direct
sedative  upon  the  medulla  oblongata.  From  this
centre  come  off  the  vagi,  to  whose  depression  we
have  referred  the  cardiac  symptoms  of  the  drug.
Through  the  medulla  oblongata  also  (according  to
SchifFs  observations)  the  vaso-motor  nerves  of  the
brain  proper  can  be  excited  or  paralysed.  The  same
sedative  influence  of  Glonoine,  therefore,  upon  this
nervous  centre,  would  through  the  vagi  set  the  heart
off  palpitating,  and  through  the  vascular  nerves
would  dilate  the  cerebral  arteries,  so  as  to  give  us
made  use  of  this  bit  of  physiology  to  explain  the
action  of  Hydrocyanic  acid,  which  through  the
medulla  oblongata  contracts  the  cerebral  arteries
and  stops  the  heart.  Glonoine  is  thus  its  precise
opposite,  and  might  be  used  as  an  antipathic  anti-
dote for  its  poisonous  effects.  As  the  medulla
oblongata  is  also  in  all  probability  the  starting-point
of  the  epileptic  paroxysms,  it  would  be  worth  trying
if  it  could  stop  their  access  in  cases  where  there  are
premonitory  signs.  The  extreme  rapidity  of  its
action  (only  paralleled  by  that  of  Prussic  acid  itself)
would  help  to  render  it  efficient  for  these  purposes.

Glonoine  was  first  introduced  into  medical  practice
by Dr. Hering of Philadelphia in 1850. Its

19


290  GLONOINE.

pathogenetic  action  obviously  recommended  it  in
active  disturbances  of  the  cerebral  circulation :  and
in  many  of  these  it  has  been  used  with  the  utmost
success.  In  Dr.  Dudgeon's  paper  (published  in
1853)  you  will  find  some  capital  cases  of  congestive
headache,  in  which  Glonoine  gave  relief  with  magical
rapidity.  It  has  proved  the  great  remedy  for  sun-
stroke : — I  have  myself  obtained  striking  benefit
from  it  in  the  distressing  after-effects  of  this  casualty.
It  has  checked  puerperal  convulsions,  where  cerebral
hypersemia  was  prominent.  It  is  a  capital  medicine
for  the  disturbance  of  the  intra-cranial  circulation
which  obtains  in  menopausia,  and  for  that  which
often  results  from  menstrual  suppression.  Glonoine
has  been  suggested  for  apoplexy ;  but  I  am  not
aware  of  its  having  been  used,  and  am  unable  to  see
its  true  homceopathicity  to  this  disease.  It  should
be,  however,  and  has  been,  of  great  service  in  nervous
palpitation,  of  emotional  origin.

So  far  extended  our  knowledge  of  Glonoine  until
1858,  when  its  powers  became  accidentally  known  to
my  friend  Mr.  Field,  a  surgeon  in  this  town,  who
communicated  it  to  his  brethren  in  the  pages  of  the
Medical  Times  and  Gazette.  Some  contradictory
experimentation  followed :  but  on  the  whole  the
effects  of  Glonoine  were  admitted  to  be  identical
with  those  observed  by  the  Homoeopathic  provers.
It  was  not  of  course  to  be  expected  that  the  drug
should  be  used  therapeutically  on  our  principle :  it
was  given  rather  as  a  "  sedative."  In  this  capacity
it  exhibited  in  many  hands  a  striking  power  of
relieving  the  paroxysms  of  neuralgia :  and  we  have
occasionally  availed  ourselves  of  its  power  in  this


GRAPHITES.  291

direction.  Whether  it  has  any  specific  action  in
neuralgia  I  cannot  say:  but  certainly  cases  have
been  relieved  by  the  3rd  attenuation,  and  some
permanently  cured.

Glonoine  is  another  of  those  medicines  which  has
no  true  analogues.  Hamamelis  (q.  v.)  has  once  at
least  acted  on  the  head  like  it:  and  our  choice  at
the  bed-side  often  lies  between  Glonoine  and  Bella-
donna.

It  has  acted  beneficially  in  all  dilutions,  from  the
3rd  dec.  to  the  12th  centesimal.  The  1st  and  2nd
dec.  have  been  used,  but  are  liable  to  aggravate.

The  drug  which  follows  owes  its  place  in  the
Materia  Medica  to  the  Hahnemannian  process  of
trituration,  by  which  its  virtues  have  been  developed.
It  is  the  black-lead  of  our  pencils,  plumbago,  or

Graphites.

It  is  prepared  by  trituration,  after  careful  washing.

The  proving  is  in  the  '  Chronic  Diseases:'  and
the  prefatory  remarks  from  Noack  and  Trinks'
'  Handbook '  in  Hempel's  translation  give  a  fair
outline  of  its  therapeutical  virtues.

It  seems  probable  that  the  primary  action  of
Graphites  is  on  the  skin.  At  any  rate,  it  is  as
a  remedy  for  cutaneous  affections  that  it  first  be-
came known  to  medicine :  and  although  it  has
been  lost  sight  of  in  this  capacity  in  the  old  school,
it  retains  its  place  among  ourselves.  It  is  perhaps
rather  to  unhealthy  states  of  the  skin,  leading  to
rhagades,  excoriations,  and  ulcers,  that  Graphites  is
suitable,  than  to  fully  formed  eruptions.  I  would


292  GRATIOLA.

not,  however,  have  you  limit  its  efficacy  on  my
word  :  for  you  may  find  it  more  successful  than  I
have  done  in  psoriasis,  herpes,  &c.  Graphites  more-
over produces,  and  has  frequently  cured  an  obstinate
constipation ;  the  stools  being  large  and  knotty,
and  requiring  much  straining  for  their  expulsion.
Lastly,  it  has  a  decided  action  on  the  ovaries  and
testes,  causing  delaying  and  scanty  menses,  and
having  several  times  proved  curative  of  hydrocele.

It  is  especially  where  these  affections  co-exist
that  Graphites  is  efficacious :  as  when  retarded  and
deficient  menstruation  accompanies  costiveness,  or
the  latter  condition  complicates  a  cutaneous  erup-
tion.

Graphites  is  pretty  closely  allied  with  Pulsatilla,
Lycopodium,  and  Plumbum.

The  potencies  from  6  to  30  have  been  most
used.

Concerning  the  hedge-hyssop,

Gratiola,

I  will  content  myself  with  the  following  quotation
from  Taylor  on  '  Poisons/  1st  Ed.,  p.  515.  "  A
series  of  cases  observed  by  M.  Bouvier  are  reported
by  Orfila,  in  four  of  which  the  plant  was  used,
under  the  form  of  a  decoction,  as  an  enema.  The
result  was  that  in  one  instance  violent  vomiting  and
purging,  with  syncope,  were  induced,  and  in  all  a
strong  attack  of  nymphomania.  In  other  cases
there  was  constriction  of  the  throat,  with  hydro-
phobic  symptoms  and  convulsions."  There  is  a
proving  of  Gratiola  by  Hartlaub  and  Trinks,  the


GUMMI GUTTLE.  293

schema  of  which  you  will  find  in  Jahr's  '  Manual.'
I  have  no  knowledge  of  its  therapeutic  use.

I  can  devote  but  little  more  space  to  my  next
medicine,  which  is  your  old  acquaintance,

Guiacum.

Our  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  resin.

There  is  a  short  pathogenesis  of  Guiacum  in  the
*  Chronic  Diseases.'

This  proving,  so  far  as  it  goes,  makes  it  probable
that  Guiaeum  is  really  homeopathic  to  some  of
those  syphilitic,  gouty,  and  rheumatic  pains  for
which  it  has  so  long  been  employed,  Pearson's
statement  that  its  continued  use  causes  heart-burn,
flatulence,  and  costiveness  points  also  to  its  useful-
ness in  gout,  for  which  it  has  some  repute  as  a
prophylactic.  It  is  probably  also  a  remedy  like
Mezereum  and  Phytolacca  for  periosteal  and  syphi-
litic rheumatism.  Of  late  there  has  appeared  some
evidence  that  Guiacum  specifically  affects  the
throat.  It  has  been  recommended  by  some  of  your
writers  as  abortive  of  quinsy :  and  one  of  our
American  colleagues  speaks  highly  of  it  in  diph-
theria. Here  again  it  resembles  Phytolacca.

The  mother-tincture  will  probably  have  to  be
given  in  most  cases.  In  diphtheria  it  may  be  ad-
ministered in  warm  milk.

Gummi  guttse

i

is the name  by  which,  in the German '  Materia
Medica,'  Gamboge  is  designated. There  is  a  patho-


294  HAMAMELIS VIRGIN ICA.

genesis  of  it  in  Jahr's  '  Manual/  taken  from  an
unpublished  monograph  by  Dr.  Cajetan  Nenning,
the  "  Ng."  of  Hahnemann's  provings.  Gamboge
is,  however,  only  used  in  cases  of  acute  diarrhcea,
where  the  symptoms  resemble  those  of  its  well-
known  purgative  action.

It  ranks  of  course  with  such  medicines  as  Jalap
and  Senna.  It  has  no  pretensions  to  such  a  range
of  action  as  that  of  Colocynth.

I  now  come  with  great  pleasure  to  another
precious  American  contribution,  the  witch-hazel,

Hamamelis  virginica.

We  prepare  a  tincture  from  the  bark.

All  known  pathogenetic  and  curative  actions  of
Hamamelis  are  collated  by  Dr.  Hale  in  his  article
on  the  medicine  in  the  2nd  edition  of  his  '  New
Remedies/

Hamamelis  is  a  remedy  whose  use  illustrates  a
principle  I  referred  to  in  my  first  letter :  viz.,
that  the  true  specific  sphere  of  a  drug  may  be  de-
termined ex  usu  in  morbis  alone.  Until  lately
Hamamelis  had  never  been  properly  proved,  nor
had  it  poisoned  anybody.  Yet  we  knew  with  great
accuracy  that  its  remedial  sphere  lay  in  affections
of  the  venous  system.  Dr.  Preston,  in  some
valuable  papers  in  the  '  North  American  Journal  of
Homoeopathy/  first  established  this  fact ;  and  his
reasonings  were  based  almost  entirely  upon  clinical
experience.  So  far  as  subsequent  pathogenetic
results  go,  indeed,  they  point  in  the  same  direction


HAMAMELIS VIRGINICA.  295

(see  especially  those  of  Dr.  Davidson  and  myself).
But  the  usus  in  morbis  gave  us  the  truth.

The  three  leading  affections  of  the  venous  system
in  which  Hamamelis  has  proved  curative  are  phlebitis,
varicosis,  and  haemorrhage.  In  phlebitis  I  hardly
know  whether  to  give  the  palm  to  this  medicine  or
to  Pulsatilla.  They  are  both  exceedingly  effica-
cious. But  in  the  various  forms  of  varicosis  I  have
no  doubt  of  the  superiority  of  Hamamelis.  In
varicose  veins  of  the  leg,  you  will  be  delighted  with
the  way  in  which  the  1st  or  2nd  potency  will  ease
the  pain,  while  the  external  application  of  the
diluted  tincture  will  cause  the  dilated  vessels  to
shrink  up.  In  varicose  ulcer  of  the  leg,  and  in
varicocele,  the  same  treatment  has  frequently  proved
curative.  It  is  good  for  varicosis  of  the  throat,
where  the  parts  look  bluish  from  distended  veins,
and  there  is  more  or  less  discomfort,  with  pain  on
swallowing,  and  hawking  of  mucus  with  blood.
But  it  is  in  this  same  condition  at  the  other  end  of
the  digestive  tube,  viz.,  h&morrhoids,  that  Hama-
melis has  won  its  greatest  triumphs.  I  have  cured
case  after  case  of  "  bleeding  piles"  by  the  internal
use  of  this  medicine,  and  indeed  do  not  remember
to  have  ever  failed  with  it.  Numerous  testimonies
to  the  same  effect  are  to  be  found  in  Dr.  Hale's
article.  We  are  thus  led  to  the  use  of  Hamamelis
in  hfsmorrhage,  for  which  mischance  it  is  indicated
perhaps  more  frequently  than  any  other  medicine.
The  general  evidence  of  those  who  have  used  it
agrees  with  that  of  Dr.  Preston  that  it  is  in  venous
hsemorrhage,  where  the  blood  flows  steadily  and
without  much  expulsive  effort,  that  Hamamelis  is


296  HAMAMELIS VIRGINICA.

likely  to  cure.  I  have  myself  farther  suggested
that  it  is  more  suitable  when  the  state  of  the
vessels  leads  to  the  haemorrhage,  than  where  this  is
dependent  upon  altered  composition  of  the  blood
itself.  Obeying  these  laws,  Hamamelis  has  been
given  with  most  satisfactory  results  in  epistaxis,
haemorrhage  after  tooth- drawing,  hsematemesis,
melaana,  haematuria  (qy.  ?),  haemoptysis,  and  even
purpura.  It  has  also  cured  vicarious  menstruation  ;
and  helped  much  in  the  treatment  of  dysentery.
I  have  myself  used  it  in  most  of  these  affections,
and  have  so  much  confidence  in  its  power  that  I
would  never  be  without  it  in  my  pocket-case.

If  you  ask  me  what  is  the  rationale  of  this
haemostatic  power  of  Hamamelis  and  some  others
of  our  medicines,  I  have  no  answer  to  give  you.  It
certainly  does  not  depend  on  the  astringent  action
of  the  Tannin  which  Hamamelis,  like  many  other
barks,  contains  :  for  the  medicine  acts  well  as  high
as  the  2nd  and  3rd  dilutions.  I  can  only  say  that,
phenomenally  at  least,  the  process  is  a  homoeopathic
one :  for  Hamamelis  has  caused  haemorrhage  from
parts  which  readily  allow  of  it, — as  the  nares  and
the  uterus.

I  have  only  to  add  that  our  indefatigable  prover,
Dr.  Burt,  has  lately  experimented  on  himself  with
Hamamelis,  and  has  developed  a  marked  action  on
the  testicles,  characterised  especially  by  neuralgic
pains,  which  were  at  last  so  severe  that  he  was
compelled  to  discontinue  the  proving.  Sometimes
the  pains  migrated  suddenly  to  the  stomach  (qy.
solar  plexus  ?),  causing  nausea  and  faintness.  He
has  added  some  capital  cases  of  ovarian  neuralgia,


HAMAMELIS VIRG1NICA.  297

in  which,  guided  by  the  above  pathogenetic  effects,

The  nearest  analogue  of  Hamamelis  is  Pulsatilla.
In  haemostatic  virtue  it  has  associates  in  Ipecacu-
anha and  Millefolium.

I  have  generally  used  the  1st  dec.  in  acute
haemorrhage :  the  1st  and  2nd  centes.  in  other
cases.


LETTER  XXIV.

HELLEBORTJS, HELONIAS, HEPAR SULPHURIS, HY-
DRASTIS, HYOSCYAMUS, HYPERICUM.

I  begin  this  letter  with  an  account  of  a  medicine
which  I  think  very  unworthy  of  the  position  Dr.
Hempel  has  assigned  it  among  the  polychrests  :  yet
one  which  has  its  own  place  among  our  therapeutic
agents.  I  speak  of  the  Christmas  rose,

Helleborus  niger.

The  tincture  is  prepared  either  from  the  juice  of
the  recent  plant,  or  from  the  dry  root.

The  proving  is  in  the  '  Materia  Medica  Pura/
It  was  either  the  black  Hellebore,  or  some  closely
allied  species,  which  was  used  by  the  Greek  phy-
sicians for  the  treatment  of  mental  disorders.  They
supposed  it  to  act  by  its  evacuant  properties :  but
it  is  probable  that  it  had  some  specific  influence.
Hahnemann  makes  the  following  remark  in  point :
"  I  infer  from  various  observations  that  stupor,  an
obtusion  of  the  sensitive  nervous  system, — imperfect
and  heedless  sight,  although  the  eyes  are  perfectly
good,  imperfect  hearing,  although  the  organ  of  hear-
ing is  perfectly  sound,  imperfect  or  no  taste,  although
the  organ  of  taste  is  in  a  good  condition,  constant
or  frequent  absence  of  thought,  want  of  recollection


HELLEBORUS NIGER.  299

of  the  things  which  had  just  taken  place,  indiffer-
ence, light  slumber  without  the  sleep  being  re-
freshing, desire  to  work  without  having  the  power
or  attention  necessary  to  do  something, — is  a
primary  effect  of  Hellebore."  Teste  recommends
it  in  eclampsia  infantum,  when  occurring  before
dentition  has  commenced. — But  the  chief  use  of
Hellebore  is  in  the  various  forms  of  dropsy.  All  I
know  of  its  physiological  action  in  this  sphere  is
the  symptom  of  Hahnemann's  proving,  "  Sudden
dropsical  swelling  of  the  skin,"  upon  which  he
remarks,  c<  This  symptom,  with  others  belonging  to
the  kidneys,  appears  to  show  that  Hellebore  will  be
a  great  remedy  in  certain  swellings."  The  renal
symptoms  referred  to  are,  "  Frequent  micturition.
Frequent  desire  to  urinate,  emitting  but  a  slight
quantity.  Emits  a  quantity  of  watery  urine."  In
poisonous  doses,  Hellebore  acts  simply  as  a  drastic
purgative  and  gastro-intestinal  irritant,  and  shows
no  sign  of  influencing  the  kidneys.  Nevertheless,
Hahnemann's  prediction  has  been  realised,  and
Hellebore  has  taken  a  high  rank  among  our  reme-
dies for  dropsy.  It  has  cured  hydrothorax,  auasarca,
and  ascites  following  upon  scarlatina,  and  dropsy
consequent  upon  intermittent  fever.  Its  chief  re-
putation, however,  is  in  hydrocephalus.  I  see  no
evidence  that  it  has  ever  removed  the  effusion  of
true  tubercular  meningitis.  But  in  cerebral  effu-
sion from  other  causes,  as  from  insolation,  from
typhus,  from  the  retrocession  of  mumps  or  the
exanthemata,  Helleborus  may  be  given  with  every
prospect  of  benefit.  Even  in  chronic  hydrocephalus
it  may  powerfully  aid  the  constitutional  remedies


300  HELONIAS DIOICA.

(Sulphur,  Calcarea,  &c.)  on  which  we  rely  for  the
main  treatment  of  the  disease.

The  medicines  most  allied  to  Helleborus  are
Apis,  Apocynum,  Arsenicum,  Bryonia,  Kali  lodidum,
and  Veratrum.

The  medium  and  higher  dilutions  have  been
most  frequently  used.

I  insert  the  next  medicine  on  my  list  solely  on
the  authority  of  Dr.  Hale.  It  is  the

Helonias  dioica,

a  plant  indigenous  to  the  United  States.  A  tinc-
ture is  prepared  from  the  root ;  and  the  concentrated
preparation,  Helonin,  is  triturated  for  our  use.

Dr.  Hale's  article,  in  the  2nd  edition  of  his
'  New  Remedies/  contains  all  that  is  known  of  the
medicinal  action  of  Helonias.

From  some  fragmentary  provings,  it  would
appear  that  Helonias  is  a  specific  irritant  of  the
genito-urinary  mucous  membrane.  It  causes  pain
and  weight  in  the  kidneys,  frequent  and  copious
urination,  and  burning  in  the  urethra :  drawing
pain  from  the  back  through  the  womb,  metror-
rhagia,  and  swelling  and  tenderness  of  the  mammae.
Correspondingly,  its  chief  use  has  been  in  affections
of  the  kidneys  and  the  uterus.  I  am  disinclined,
however,  to  claim  these  uses  of  the  medicine  for
Homoeopathy  :  as  it  is  for  atonic  conditions  of  the
parts  (to  say  nothing  of  the  semi-material  doses)
that  it  has  proved  so  successful.  Nevertheless,
the  action  is  certainly  of  a  dynamic  and  specific
nature :  and  we  know  too  little  of  the  essential


HELONIAS DIOICA.  301

nature  of  the  phenomenally  homoeopathic  operation
to  justify  us  in  rejecting  a  remedy  for  its  seeming
want  of  conformity  thereto.  You  will  accordingly
read  and  appropriate  the  cases  of  phosphatic  urine,
of  urinary  irritation  with  impotence,  of  diabetes,
and  of  albuminuria  cured  by  Helonin  which  are
given  by  Dr.  Hale.  It  reminds  one  in  this  sphere
very  much  of  Phosphoric  acid,  plus  irritation  of  the
mucous  membrane.  From  its  power  over  affections
of  the  womb,  Helonin  has  obtained  the  appellation
of  "uterine  tonic."  In  prolapsus,  menorrhagia,
leucorrhcea,  and  other  atonic  states  of  this  organ,  it
seems  really  possessed  of  very  great  curative  virtues.
And  an  interesting  point  is  this,  that  in  all  these
disorders  it  markedly  improves  the  co-existing  de-
bility and  even  anaemia.  Its  action  is  compared,  by
all  who  have  used  it,  to  that  of  Iron.  As  it  cannot
directly  nourish  the  blood,  like  that  metal,  it  pro-
bably acts  by  improving  the  digestive  and  assimila-
tive powers.  It  is  possible  that  it  specially  promotes
the  assimilation  of  Iron  :  and  hence  might  be  help-
ful in  chlorosis.

I  have  already  mentioned  the  analogy  between
the  virtues  of  Helonias  and  some  of  the  effects
of  Phosphoric  acid  and  Ferrum.  As  a  uterine
remedy,  it  most  resembles  Stannum.

The  mother-tincture  of  Helonias,  and  the  1st
dec.  trit.  of  Helonin,  have  generally  been  used.

My  next  medicine  is  one  of  the  old  Hahne-
mannian  stock,  the  sulphide  of  calcium —


302  HEPAR SULPHURIS CALCAREUM.


Hepar  sulphuris  Calcareum.

We  prepare  the  salt  specially  for  homoeopathic
purposes,  by  "  mixing  equal  portions  of  finely-
powdered  clean  oyster-shell  and  quite  pure  flowers
of  sulphur,  and  keeping  the  mixture  for  ten  minutes
heated  to  a  white  heat  in  a  crucible  hermetically
closed.  The  resulting  salt  must  be  kept  in  a  well-
closed  bottle"  (Hahnemann).  The  potencies  are
made  by  trituration.

The  proving  of  Hepar  sulphuris  (so  we  commonly
call  it)  is  in  the  '  Chronic  Diseases/  and  is  unusually
precise  in  its  indications.

Hepar  sulphuris,  being  a  compound  of  the  two
great  constitutional  remedies,  Sulphur  and  Calcarea,
is  itself  a  medicine  of  the  same  character.  It  has
points  of  resemblance  to  each  of  its  elements — like
Sulphur  influencing  the  skin,  and  like  Calcarea
affecting  the  glands.  But  like  many  other  com-
pounds it  is  something  over  and  above  its  con-
stituent parts ;  and  strikes  out  (so  to  speak)  an
action  of  its  own.  I  think  that  Hahnemann  hit
upon  the  nature  of  this  action  when  he  recom-
mended Hepar  as  a  dynamic  antidote  to  the  effects
of  Mercury.  This  recommendation  has  been  so
frequently  acted  upon  with  success  that  there  seems
little  doubt  of  its  being  well  founded.  Hepar
accordingly  finds  a  place  in  the  treatment  of  three
great  dyscrasise — the  syphilitic,  the  scrofulous,  and
the  psoric.  It  has  very  little  relation  to  primary
syphilis,  except  to  the  suppurating  bubo  of  soft
chancre :  but  in  ulcers  and  scaly  eruptions  which


HEPAR SULPHURIS CALCAREUM.  303

can  be  traced  to  a  far  back  syphilitic  infection  it  is
often  very  useful.  It  is  frequently  the  most
important  medicine  in  strumous  enlargements  of
the  glands,  especially  when  these  can  only  be  cured
through  suppuration.  It  is  good  for  the  enlarged
tonsils  of  scrofulous  children,  and  in  acute  quinsy
stands  second  only  to  Baryta  carbonica.  I  cannot
diagnose  between  it  and  Sulphur  in  those  eruptions
which  we  refer  to  a  psoric  taint  (do  not  be  fright-
ened at  the  word  "  psoric/'  but  wait  till  we  get  to
Sulphur  itself)  :  I  can  only  say  that  it  has  frequently
cured  them.

Hepar  sulphuris,  having  this  relation  to  certain
diatheses  or  dyscrasise,  manifests  a  special  elective
affinity  for  the  respiratory  mucous  membrane.  You
will  find  every  part  of  this  tract  giving  out  signs  of
distress  if  you  read  the  symptoms  of  the  patho-
genesis.  Hepar  has  accordingly  been  used  with
considerable  success  in  many  of  its  affections.  In
blepharophthalmia,  where  the  meibomian  glands  are
much  involved ;  in  recurring  ulcers  of  the  con-
junctiva,  in  strumous  constitutions ;  and  in  head-
ache at  the  root  of  the  nose  (ethmoid  cells),  it  has
frequently  been  given  with  success.  I  find  it
remove  very  speedily  the  hoarse,  rough,  laryngeal
cough  which  follows  measles.  I  have  never  had
occasion  to  use  it  in  membranous  croup ;  but  it
had  considerable  reputation  in  this  disease  among
the  older  Homoeopaths.  In  acute  and  chronic
laryngo-tracheal  catarrh,  with  much  hoarseness,  it
may  often  prove  the  best  remedy.  I  have  no
knowledge  of  its  action  in  bronchitis,  nor  do  I
know  of  its  having  cured  pulmonary  phthisis ;  but


304  HEPAR SULPHURIS CALCAREUM.

the  testimonies  to  its  power  of  giving  relief  in  this
disease  are  so  numerous  that  I  cannot  regard  them
lightly.  Hepar  is  also  credited  with  the  power  of
removing  the  exudation  of  pleurisy,  when  this  is
plastic  rather  than  serous.

Besides  the  glands,  the  skin,  and  the  respiratory
mucous  membrane,  Hepar  shows  a  good  deal  of
power  of  affecting  the  joints ;  and  stands  high  among
our  remedies  for  scrofulous  disease  of  these  parts.
It  is  supposed  in  all  these  cases  to  be  specially
indicated  when  we  wish  to  influence  suppuration —
to  promote  it  when  desirable^  or  to  check  it  when
excessive.  I  have  not,  however,  seen  any  reason  to
suppose  that  Hepar  has  that  direct  control  over  the
suppurative  process  as  such  which  we  shall  see  to  be
exercised  by  Silicea.  It  is  rather,  I  apprehend,
that  it  excites  a  healthy  action  in  those  parts  and  in
those  forms  of  diseases  where  pus  is  readily  pro-
duced ;  and  so  seems  sometimes  to  further  and
sometimes  to  hinder  its  formation,  as  the  curative
process  requires.

I  have  drawn  this  account  of  the  therapeutic
powers  of  Hepar  sulphuris  mainly  from  the  testimony
of  others.  I  must  confess  that  it  is  not  a  favourite
medicine  of  mine :  but  perhaps  I  do  not  use  it
rightly.  I  hope  you  will  be  more  fortunate.  It
is  given  so  high  a  place  by  most  practitioners  of  our
school  that  it  cannot  but  be  possessed  of  many  and
great  virtues.*

*  Some  of  these  virtues,  additional  to  those  noticed  above,  are
mentioned  by  Dr.  Bayes  in  the  '  Monthly  Horn.  Review/  June,
1867.  His  remarks  on  its  power  over  hepatic  engorgement  are
especially  valuable.


HYDRASTIS CANADENSIS.  305

Besides  Sulphur,  Calcarea,  and  Mercurius,  Hepar
has  a  close  analogue  (especially  in  the  respiratory
sphere)  in  Kali  bichromicum.

The  higher  dilutions  have  generally  been  used.
In  laryngo-tracheal  affections,  however,  I  am  very
well  pleased  with  the  3rd  dec.  trituration.

I  have  now  to  introduce  to  you  another  American
contribution  to  our  Materia  Medica  in  the  shape  of
the  Golden  Seal,

Hydrastis  canadensis.

The  tincture  of  the  fresh,  or  the  triturations  of  the
dried  root  are  used  in  our  practice.

Dr.  Hale's  article  contains  as  usual  all  that  is
known  concerning  the  drug.

Hydrastis  has  been  very  fairly  proved  by  Dr.
Burt  and  some  other  physicians.  Catarrh  of  the
eyes  and  nose,  with  profuse  thick  white  secretion,
was  Dr.  Burt's  most  prominent  symptom  :  another
had  sticky  mucus  about  the  fauces,  with  a  broad
yellow  stripe  down  his  tongue :  a  third  had  the
catarrhal  symptoms,  with  hoarseness,  headache,  and
great  prostration.  A  patient  of  Dr.  Bayes,  who
took  twenty  drops  of  the  tincture  in  mistake,  had
sinking  at  the  epigastrium  and  violent  palpitation
next  morning,  and  later  an  erysipelatoid  rash,  with
burning  heat  and  intense  irritation.  The  local
application  of  an  infusion  has  produced  a  crop  of
varioloid  pustules,  with  swelling  of  the  parts.

I  cannot  say  that  these  physiological  results
throw  much  light  upon  the  therapeutic  action  of

20


306  HYDRASTIS CANADENSIS.

Hydrastis.  It  has  indeed  been  applied  to  the  eyes
in  catarrhal  ophthalmia  and  to  the  face  in  small-pox
with  reported  advantage.  But  the  three  morbid
conditions  in  which  it  has  won  its  spurs  are  con-
stipation, ulcers,  and  cancer.

1.  lu  simple  constipation  I  know  no  medicine  so
generally  beneficial  as  Hydrastis. In  very  chronic
cases a short preliminary course of Sulphur is
advisable. As  Hydrastis  has  a  decided  action  upon
the liver, and  has cured  jaundice,  it is possible
that through  this  organ much of  its power  over
constipation  is  exerted. You  will  find  a  number  of
cases illustrative of  its influence in Dr. Hale's
article.

2.  As  an  application  to  ulcers,  not  varicose,  and
not simple enough for Calendula, there is no
medicine  like  Hydrastis. Of  this  power  also  Dr.
Hale  gives us many  instances. He recommends
its  application  to  ulceration  of  the  mucous  outlets,
as the  mouth and throat,  the  nose  and  eyes,  the
rectum,  and the  vagina and  uterine  cervix. Dr.
Yeldham also commends it as an injection for
gleet.

3.  By  far  the  most  interesting  aspect  of  Hydrastis
is  its  relation  to  cancer. It  was  first  used  by  Dr.
Pattison,  as  an  ingredient  in  the  caustic  paste  with
which he  was accustomed  to enucleate scirrhous
tumours. Drs.  Marston  and  McLimont,  taking  up
Dr.  Pattison's practice,  also gave the Hydrastis
internally,  and  were  astonished  at  its  good  results.*
Relief  of  pain and  improvement  in  general  health
nearly  always  followed  its  administration :  and  in

*  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  xxi,  p.  611.


HYDRASTIS CANADENSIS.  307

some  cases  its  conjoined  external  application  as  a
lotion  so  improved  or  even  removed  the  symptoms
that  a  contemplated  operation  was  abandoned.  To
Dr.  Bayes,  however,  we  owe  the  best  knowledge  we
possess  of  the  power  of  Hydrastis  over  cancer.  He,
too,  learnt  its  value  from  Dr.  Pattison,  as  he
acknowledges.  In  papers  in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of
Horn./  vol.  xix,  p.  150,  and  vol.  xx,  p.  i,  and  in
the  '  Annals  of  the  Brit.  Horn.  Society/  for  Dec.
1864,  Dr.  Bayes  gives  us  a  number  of  cases  treated
by  Hydrastis  externally  and  internally.  His  final
conclusion  is  that  it  has  no  influence  over  the
cancerous  dyscrasia  as  such  ;  is  of  little  or  no  us
in  cancer  of  the  womb;  but  in  scirrhous  tumour
developed  in  glandular  structure  is  of  great  value,
through  a  specific  influence  upon  the  gland  itself.
What  makes  it  probable  that  Dr.  Bayes  is  right  is
that  Hydrastis  has  great  power  of  dispersing  simple
glandular  tumours,  as  in  the  breast.  But  however
this  may  be,  it  is  certain  that  in  every  suspected
mammary  scirrhus  we  are  bound  to  give  our  patients
the  benefit  of  the  local  and  internal  use  of  Hydrastis:
and  that  we  may  do  this  with  a  very  fair  prospect  of
success.

As  you  may  think  this  a  somewhat  bold  statement,
I  shall  cite  two  cases  showing  what  Hydrastis  can
do  in  these  cases.  The  first  is  from  Dr.  Bayes,  the
second  from  Drs.  Marston  and  McLimont.

1.  "  Miss  G— ,  set.  38,  consulted  me  on  February  26,  1861.  She
had  two  extremely  hard  knotty  tumours  in  the  right  breast,  about
the  size  of  eggs,  and  one  in  the  left,  rather  smaller ;  they  gave  a
feeling  of  metallic  hardness  to  the  touch ;  the  axillary  glands  on
both  sides  were  also  enlarged  and  painful,  and  hard  strings  appeared


308  HYDRASTIS CANADENSIS.

to  lead  from  each  breast  to  the  glands  in  the  axillae.  This  patient
had  been  for  some  long  time  under  allopathic  care.  She  suffered
great  pain  at  times,  and  her  general  health  was  much  broken  down ;
she  was  highly  nervous,  her  tongue  loaded,  her  whole  health
disordered,  and  she  looked  dark  and  almost  dusky.  Ordered
Hydrastis,  in  increasing  doses,  and  Hydrastis  lotion.

"  I  saw  her  again  in  March,  when  her  general  health  was  greatly
improved  ;  the  pains  had  almost  entirely  subsided,  and  the  tumours
were  less.

"In  April  there  was  a  still  farther  improvement.

"  On  May  4  she  came,  considering  herself  quite  well,  but  the
tumours  in  the  right  breast  are  still  the  size  of  a  walnut,  and  that
in  the  left  breast  is  but  little  diminished;  the  mammae  have
enlarged,  and  she  is  very 'much  stouter.  She  is  still  under  treat-
ment, and  improving  steadily."

2  "  Mrs.  F —  had  suffered  for  six  months  from  a  swelling  in  her
left  breast,  for  which  she  sought  relief.  The  pain,  which  was  com-
pared to  knives  being  thrust  into  the  part,  had  become  almost
unbearable,  and  the  patient  was  already  beginning  to  assume  that
worn  appearance  so  characteristic  of  the  cancerous  diathesis.  The
tumour,  which  had  attained  a  considerable  size,  was  hard,  heavy,
and  adherent  to  the  skin,  which  was  dark,  mottled,  and  very  much
puckered,  the  nipple  being  also  deeply  retracted.  The  patient  was
at  once  advised  to  come  into  town  in  order  to  the  enucleation  of  the
tumour.  This,  however,  her  circumstances  prevented ;  and  without
any  expectation  of  affording  much  relief,  a  lotion  of  Hydrastis  was
ordered  with  the  internal  use  of  the  same  medicine.  The  pain
almost  immediately  ceased,  and  the  tumour  so  speedily  decreased  in
size  that  at  the  end  of  two  months  it  had  altogether  disappeared,
leaving  but  the  puckered  skin,  which  had  otherwise  regained  its
natural  appearance.  When  we  last  heard  of  this  patient  she  con-
tinued perfectly  well.  It  is  needful  to  state  that  her  health
rapidly  improved  during  the  treatment,  and  that  her  countenance
regained  the  aspect  of  health."

I  know  of  no  true  analogues  to  Hydrastis.

The  lowest  potencies  have  been  of  most  service
in  constipation.  As  an  external  application  the
tincture  largely  diluted,  or  a  weak  infusion,  has  been


HYOSCYAMUS NIGER.  309

used.  Dr.  Hale  now  recommends  the  Muriate  of
Hydrastia  (the  latter  being  an  alkaloid  of  Hydrastia)
for  this  purpose,  in  the  proportion  of  gr.  j. — x  to
eight  ounces  of  water.  In  cancer,  Dr.  Bayes  recom-
mends a  gradual  descent  from  the  30th  dil.  to  half-
drop  doses  of  the  mother-tincture.  Drs.  Marston
and  McLimont's  doses  range  from  the  6th  dil.  down-
wards.

My  next  medicine  is  as  familiar  to  you  as  the
last  was  novel.  It  is  the  henbane,

Hyoscyamus  niger.

The  tincture  is  made  from  the  expressed  juice  of
the  whole  plant.

The  proving  of  Hyoscyamus  is  in  the  '  Mat.
Med.  Pura/  It  adds  little,  however,  to  the  know-
ledge of  the  drug  which  you  already  have  in  your
treatises  on  '  Toxicology '  and  c  Materia  Medical

If  I  wanted  to  illustrate  how  often  you  of  the  old
school  are  unconsciously  Homoeopathizing,  I  should
take  Hyoscyamus  as  my  example.  You  use  it
medicinally  as  a  "calmative":  and  you  do  well.
But  what  is  its  physiological  action, — its  effect  upon
the  healthy  body  ?  You  know  that  it  is  a  blood-
relation  of  Belladonna  and  Stramonium ;  that  Pereira
classes  it  with  these  among  his  "  deliriafacients ";
that,  in  a  word,  it  excites  as  a  poison  that  very
nervous  system  on  which  as  a  medicine  it  "  has  a
calming,  soothing,  and  tranquillisiug  effect.  This
is  especially  observed/'  Pereira  goes  on  to  say,  "  in
persons  suffering  from  great  nervous  irritability,
and  from  a  too  active  condition  of  the  sensorial  func-


310  HYOSCYAMUS NIGER.

tions."  He  would  have  been  more  correct  had  he
said  that  it  is  in  these  only  that  it  is  observed.

Since,  then,  you  know  the  physiological  action
of  Hyoscyamus,  and  already  use  it  homoeopathically,
you  may  think  that  I  need  say  no  more  about  it
here.  But  it  is  not  so.  Does  your  knowledge  of
the  medicine  teach  you  what  are  the  forms  and
shades  of  nervous  irritability  to  which  Hyoscyamus
specifically  corresponds  ?  If  you  look  for  informa-
tion to  Toxicology,  it  tells  you  that  the  virtues  of
Belladonna,  Hyoscyamus,  and  Stramonium  depend
upon  a  common  "  active  principle,"  and  that  their
action  is  therefore  essentially  identical.  If,  disap-
pointed with  this  most  untenable  generalization,
you  turn  to  your  writers  on  Therapeutics,  you  hear
nothing  more  about  the  relation  of  Hyoscyamus  to
Belladonna  or  Stramonium ;  but  find  it  classified
as  a  substitute  for  Opium  in  cases  where  the  cerebral
or  intestinal  influence  of  the  latter  drug  is  unde-
sirable !  So  you  must  come  to  Homoeopathy  after
all,  if  you  wish  to  learn  how  to  use  henbane  as  a
specific.

We  lay  down,  then,  as  the  result  of  our  patho-
geuetic  experiments  and  clinical  observations,  that
Hyoscyamus  does  act — whether  as  poison  or  as
medicine — like  Belladonna  and  Stramonium  :  but
with  a  difference.  The  cerebral  condition  which  it
produces  is  equally  one  of  excited  and  perverted
function,  i.  e.  delirium  with  hallucinations  :  but  there
is  little  or  no  determination  of  blood.  Hyoscyamus
hence  takes  no  place  in  the  treatment  of  those
cerebral  hypersemiae  for  which  we  rank  Belladonna
so  high.  Nor  does  it  reach  that  height  of  maniacal


HYOSCYAMUS NIGER.  311

disturbance  to  which  Stramonium  is  applicable.
But  in  delirium  of  a  less  violent  and  inflammatory
type, — as  in  many  cases  of  delirium  tremens ;  in
the  milder  forms  of  mental  disorders,  especially
when  occurring  in  children ;  and  where  sleep  is
restless  or  too  dreamful  from  simple  cerebral  excite-
ment, Hyoscyamus  is  a  most  valuable  remedy.  It
is  often  useful,  moreover,  in  what  may  be  called
"  local  chorea"  in  children,  as  squinting,  stammering,
twitching  of  the  face,  &c.  There  is  some  reason,
ab  usu  in  morbis,  for  supposing  Hyoscyamus  to  have
an  h&matic  action.  At  any  rate,  it  is  more  fre-
quently indicated  for  the  cerebral  complication  of
fever  than  either  Belladonna  or  Opium :  and  in  the
less  sthenic  forms  of  puerperal  fever,  is  sufficient
single-handed  to  accomplish  a  cure.  For  painless
diarrhoea  occurring  in  this  same  puerperal  state
Hyoscyamus  is  accounted  a  specific  in  our  school.
Lastly,  we  use  Hyoscyamus  a  good  deal  in  nervous
coughs,  especially  when  the  irritation  begins  or  is
aggravated  as  soon  as  the  patient  lies  down.

In  Belladonna  and  Stramonium  I  have  already
named  the  only  true  analogues  of  Hyoscyamus.

The  largeness  of  the  doses  of  Hyoscyamus  you  use
depends,  I  believe,  very  much  upon  the  inertness  of
your  tincture  and  extract.  I  once  gave  drop  doses
of  our  tincture  to  a  phthisical  patient  to  ease  her
cough  :  but  it  caused  her  to  dream  so  deliriously
that  I  had  to  suspend  it.  I  commonly  use  the
dilutions  from  the  1st  to  the  4th  dec. :  but  in
children  have  seen  capital  results  from  the  6th  and
12th.


312  HYPERICUM PERFOLIATUM.

Of

Hypericum  perfoliatum.

I  have  only  to  say  that  I  find  it  even  more  useful
than  Arnica  where  an  injury  has  affected  an  indi-
vidual nerve,  as  of  the  arm.  Dr.  Ludlam  of  Chicago
has  published  two  good  cases  of  injury  to  the  spinal
cord  with  a  view  of  showing  that  Hypericum  is  to
injuries  of  the  nervous  what  Arnica  is  to  injuries  of
the  muscular  system.*  Its  pathogenesis,  which  is
in  Jahr's  '  Manual/  ought  to  lead  to  other  applica-
tions :  which,  however,  it  has  not  yet  received.
I  use,  as  did  Dr.  Ludlam,  the  1st  dilution.

*  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  xvii,  p.  523.


LETTER XXV.

IGNAT1A, INDIGO, IODIUM, KALI HYDRIODICTTM.

THE  first  medicine  of  to-day's  letter  is  one  whose
use  is  almost  peculiar  to  the  school  of  Hahnemann.
It  is  the  seed  of  the  Strychnos  S.  Ignatii,  S.
Ignatius'  Bean,

Ignatia  amara.

It  is  either  triturated,  or  macerated  to  form  a
tincture.

The  original  proving  is  in  the  (  Mat.  Med.  Pura/
Experiments  have  been  made  with  it  by  Jorg  also,  an
account  of  which  you  will  find  in  Hempel.

Ignatia  contains,  as  you  probably  know,  a  con-
siderable amount  of  Strychnia.  It  is  doubtless  to
this  alkaloid  that  it  owes  much  of  its  energy.  But
this  is  quite  another  thing  from  assuming  that
Ignatia — and  therefore  Nux  vomica — are  merely
vehicles  for  the  administration  of  Strychnia,  and
might  well  be  abandoned  in  favour  of  the  pure
alkaloid.  Yet  to  this  the  one-sidedness  of  Toxi-
cology seems  to  be  leading  the  therapeutists  of  the
old  school.  On  the  contrary,  our  pathogenetic  ex-
periments and  therapeutic  observations  teach  us
that  Ignatia  and  Nux  vomica  differ  essentially  both
from  Strychnia  and  from  one  another,  however


314  IGNATIA AMARA.

great  be  the  family  resemblances.  I  have  already
had  occasion  to  combat  this  error  in  reference  to
Belladonna,  Hyoscyamus,  and  Stramonium.

In  poisonous  quantities  Ignatia  simply  produces
tetanic  spasms,  and  death  by  dyspnoea.  But  these
phenomena  are  resolved  into  their  elements  by  the
symptoms  resulting  from  smaller  doses.  Ignatia
exalts  the  impressionability  of  the  incident  nerves  all
over  the  body.  We  have  hence  pains  and  other
morbid  sensations  well-nigh  everywhere ;  increased
susceptibility  of  the  special  senses  ;  emotional  sen-
sitiveness ;  and — probably  from  reflex  excitation —
twitchings,  constrictions,  and  spasms.  This  action
of  the  drug,  however,  is  not  deep  and  lasting.  An
alternating  series  of  symptoms — numbness,  torpor,
depression — soon  appear,  which  are  themselves  as
superficial  as  their  predecessors.  The  febrile
symptoms  of  the  drug  have  the  same  characteristics.
Its  chill  is  readily  removed  by  external  warmth ;
and  its  heat  is  unaccompanied  by  thirst.  The
symptoms  of  particular  parts  are  just  instances  of
this  general  action  :  Ignatia  seems  to  have  few
local  affinities.  I  will  only  note  that  it  causes
excessive  flatulence  and  premature  menstruation :
and  will  then  refer  you  for  farther  information  to
Hahnemann's  exhaustive  proving.  I  turn  to  its
therapeutic  properties.

The  general  hyperaesthesia,  the  rapid  alternations
of  mood,  and  many  of  the  local  phenomena  pro-
duced by  Ignatia  point  to  it  as  a  remedy  for
hysteria :  in  the  treatment  of  which  malady  it  has
ever  been  the  most  potent  of  our  drugs.  It  is
rapidly  curative  of  such  local  symptoms  as  the


IGNATIA AMARA.  315

clavus  and  globus  hystericus,  while  its  continued
use  will  greatly  improve  the  fundamental  perversion
of  the  nervous  functions.  It  is  also  valuable  for
some  of  the  manifestations  of  hypochondriasis  in
the  male  sex.  It  comes  pretty  frequently  into
play  against  convulsive  affections  of  children,  when
these  are  not  cerebral  so  as  to  require  Belladonna.
The  reflex  convulsions  caused  by  worms  are  in-
stances of  what  I  mean.  Ignatia  could  hardly  but
be  of  value  in  some  forms  of  neuralgia,  for  which
accordingly  it  ranks  high  as  a  remedy.  The  indi-
cations for  its  choice  in  prosopalgia  are  well  given
by  Dr.  Gerson  in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  vol.
xx,  p.  415.  They  correspond  with  the  general
character  of  the  drug's  action  which  I  have  here
sketched.  In  proctalgia  it  has  more  than  once
effected  a  cure,  sometimes  alone,  sometimes  aided
by  Nitric  acid.  Finally,  Ignatia  is  the  best  medi-
cine for  the  effects  of  disturbing  emotions,  especially
those  of  fright  and  of  grief.

Besides  Nux  vomica,  the  allies  of  Ignatia  are
Chamomilla,  China,  Coffea,  Hyoscyamus,  Lachesis,
Platina,  Stramonium,  and  Valerian  :  the  first  only,
however,  being  a  near  relative  to  it.

Hahnemann  recommends  the  9th  or  12th  po-
tency. The  cures  of  proctalgia  were  made  by  the
30th.  But  Ignatia  seems  to  be  in  favour  alike
with  those  who  use  high  and  with  those  who  use
low  potencies :  and  is  probably  one  of  those  reme-
dies whose  quantitative  action  has  little  to  do  with
the  result.  I  am  myself  very  well  satisfied  with
the  dilutions  from  the  2nd  to  the  6th.


010  IODIUM.

I  have  now  a  few  words  to  say  about

Indigo.

The  dye  of  commerce  is  triturated  for  medicinal
use.

Our  authorities  for  Indigo  are  a  pathogenesis
translated  in  Teste's  '  Materia  Medica '  from  Dr.
Roth's  collections ;  and  a  proving  by  Lembke,  of
which  an  account  is  given  by  Hempel.

I  am  unable  to  see  in  the  disturbance  of  the
system  produced  by  Indigo  anything  that  is  charac-
teristic. The  urinary  organs  seem  most  irritated.
As  a  remedy,  it  has  been  used  in  the  old  school
with  occasional  success  in  epilepsy  and  chorea.
Teste  states  that  he  has  cured  with  it  some  worm
fevers  in  children  :  and  has  found  it  of  service  in
chronic  catarrh  of  the  bladder,  and  in  urethral
stricture  following  gonorrhoea.  It  is  a  drug  I  have
never  myself  used.

I  can  give  you  no  information  about  analogous
medicines  or  dose.

And  now  for  the  remainder  of  this  letter  I  shall
dwell  upon  a  medicine  which  though  not  taking
quite  the  first  rank  is  a  very  especial  favourite  of
mine,  Iodine  or

lodium.

Our  mother-tincture  is  a  saturated  alcoholic  solu-
tion, and  therefore  contains  about  one-tenth  part  of
Iodine.  For  the  other  potencies  it  should  be
treated  as  the  1st  dec.  dilution.

Hahnemann  has  left  us  a  pathogenesis  of  Iodine


IODIUM.  317

in  his  '  Chronic  Diseases/  which  (according  to
Teste)  is  in  great  measure  composed  of  the  poisonous
effects  of  the  drug  observed  by  alloeopathic  authors
as  results  of  over-dosing.  There  is  a  valuable
monograph  by  Dr.  Cogswell,  "  Prize  Essay  on  Iodine
and  its  Compounds"  (Edinburgh,  1837)  :  and  a
useful  collection  of  "  Observations  on  the  curative
and  noxious  effects  of  Iodine/'  by  Dr.  Wilcox,  in
the  first  vol.  of  the  'Annals  of  the  Brit.  Horn.
Society/  A  "  Study  of  Iodine/'  by  Dr.  Madden
and  myself,  founded  on  these  and  other  materials,  is
contained  in  vol.  xxi.  of  the  'Brit.  Jouru.  of  Horn/
To  that  paper  I  must  refer  you  for  the  filling  in  of
the  details  of  my  present  sketch;  and  for  the
authorities  for  the  statements  I  make.

The  pathogeuetic  action  of  Iodine  is  rather  ex-
tensive. Of  most  interest  and  importance  are  its
effects  upon  the  various  glands  ;  but  it  sets  up  a
good  deal  of  tissue-irritation,  and  manifests  some
neurotic  and  haematic  properties.

I.  Let  me  first  call  your  attention  to  the  in-
fluence of  Iodine  upon  the  nutritive  functions.
Its  continued  use  has  not  unfrequently  brought
about  general  emaciation,  with  colliquative  sweats  and
diarrhoea,  and  with  fever  of  the  hectic  type.  In  our
paper  we  have  discussed  at  length  the  probable
rationale  of  this  remarkable  effect.  After  rejecting
the  theories  which  make  Iodine  stimulate  the  ab-
sorbents, impair  primary  digestion  by  setting  up
gastro-enteritis,  and  cause  liquefaction  of  the
tissues,  we  conclude  that  its  true  action  is  one  of  a
depressant  character  exerted  upon  the  lacteal
vessels  and  mesenteric  glands.  Given  a  sluggish


318  IODIUM.

taking  up  of  the  fatty  elements  of  the  food  by  the
lacteals,  and  an  insufficient  elaboration  of  their  con-
tents by  the  mesenteric  glands  ;  and  we  have  at
once  a  most  important  channel  of  nutrition  choked
up  and  rendered  useless.  The  fatty  aliments  being
those  taken  up  by  the  lacteals,  the  emaciation
becomes  more  rapidly  apparent  than  if  it  had  been
the  albuminous  constituents  of  the  diet  whose
supply  was  cut  off.  But  Dr.  Hughes  Bennett  has
shown  that  the  presence  of  oil  is  essential  to  the
assimilation  of  albumen;  and  infers  that  if  the
fatty  elements  of  food  be  insufficiently  supplied,
the  albumen,  remaining  unassimilated  in  the  blood,
will  be  deposited  in  the  tissues  as  tubercle.  Accord-
ingly, in  more  than  one  instance  there  has  been  a
development  of  phthisis  pulmonalis  in  iodized
subjects,  in  whom  no  previous  tendency  to  tubercle
had  existed.

The  action  on  the  glands  of  which  the  emaciation
of  Iodine  is  thus  a  prominent  instance,  displays
itself  also  in  the  salivary  glands,  the  liver,  the
glands  of  the  generative  system,  and  the  thyroid.
Salivation  is  produced  by  Iodine  more  frequently
than  by  any  other  drug  save  Mercury.  From  two
cases  of  poisoning  with  their  autopsies  Christison
concludes  that  Iodine  has  the  power  of  inflaming
the  liver.  In  one  "  after  the  emaciation  had  far
advanced  a  hardened  liver  could  be  felt;"  in  the
other  there  was,  post-mortem,  "  enlargement  and
pale  rose-red  colouration  of  the  organ."  Upon  the
glands  of  the  generative  system  it  exerts  a  depress-
ing and  atonizing  influence.  The  mamrnse  and
testes  have  more  than  once  wasted  and  disappeared


IODIUM.  319

under  its  use  ;  and  a  diminution  of  the  functional
energy  of  the  ovaries  makes  it  probable  that  these
are  similarly  affected.  It  has  caused  barrenness  in
young  females  previously  prolific,  and  in  full
iodism  the  menses  are  commonly  suppressed,  less
often  becoming  profuse  and  watery.  But  the
pathogenetic  action  on  the  thyroid  has  so  important
a  bearing  on  the  general  question  of  Homreopathy,
that  I  must  state  it  at  length.

I  infer  that  Iodine  is  a  specific  irritant  of  the
thyroid  gland  on  the  following  grounds.

1st.  Coiudet,  Graefe,  and  others  bear  witness  to
a  primary  aggravation  of  bronchocele  as  frequently
produced  by  Iodine.  Dr.  Wood  states  that  "  some-
times the  tumour,  instead  of  yielding  immediately,
seems  to  be  stimulated  into  inflammation, — swell-
ing, and  becoming  somewhat  painful."  And  I
myself  have  seen  a  case  in  which  this  phenomenon
occurred  during  the  first  week  of  the  administration
of  the  hundredth  part  of  a  grain  each  of  Iodine  and
Iodide  of  Potassium  three  times  a  day.

2nd.  In  the  eleventh  vol.  of  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of
Horn/  you  will  find  the  following  observation  by
Dr.  Goullon.  "A  man  62  years  of  age,  very
bilious,  and  from  his  youth  affected  with  gout,  got
from  an  allopathic  doctor  for  sciatica  two  scruples
of  Iodide  of  Potassium  in  four  ounces  of  water,  with
directions  to  take  morning  and  night  a  tablespoon-
ful  (i.e.  gr.  v.  of  the  salt).  After  about  eight
days  there  came  on  an  extremely  rapidly  growing
swelling  of  the  thyroid  gland,  with  some  sensitive-
ness to  the  touch  and  feeling  of  oppression."  I
wish  that  the  account  of  this  case  had  been  given  in


320  IODIUM.

more  detail :  but,  putting  it  together  with  the
before-noted  aggravations  caused  by  Iodine,  I  think
that  it  establishes  my  point.

II.  The  tissue-irritant  influence  of  Iodine  is
nearly  as  extensive  as  that  of  Arsenic ;  but,  except
in  the  upper  part  of  the  respiratory  mucous  mem-
brane, is  by  no  means  so  intense.  It  affects  the
mucous  and  serous  membranes,  and  the  skin.

1.  When taken internally, Iodine acts  as an
irritant  of  the  wb  le  alimentary  canal. The  only
part  of  this  tract, .owever,  in  which  we  have  proof
of  specific  action  is  the  stomach,  which  has  become
inflamed by  the external  use of  the  drug. The
bulimia often caused by  Iodine  is probably  not
gastric,  but  a  symptom  of  the  disappointment  of  the
tissues whose supply is inadequately furnished
through the depressed mesenteric glands. The
respiratory  mucous  membrane  feels  the  irritation  of
Iodine in its whole extent,  but  especially  in  the
upper  portion. Catarrh al symptoms in the  nose
and  frontal  sinus  are  frequently  produced  in  a  very
severe form  by  Iodide of Potassium :  and from
Iodine itself the larynx and trachea  experience
various sufferings,  running  on  from dry  cough  to
hoarseness, aphonia, chronic inflammation, and
even  phthisis  trachealis. The  irritation  extends  to
the lungs. There  is  frequently  congestive  oppres-
sion  and hemoptysis : and once at least actual
inflammation has occurred, ending in death.
The  genito-urinary  mucous  membrane  seems un-
affected.

2.  Our  knowledge of the specific  influence of
Iodine  upon  the  serous  membranes  is  derived  from


IODIUM.  321

therapeutical  rather  than  physiological  evidence.
Nevertheless  Dr.  Hempel  tells  us  that  Wallace
states  pleurisy  to  have  been  three  times  occasioned
by  his  large  doses  of  Iodide  of  Potassium ;  and  in
Zink's  autopsy,  recorded  by  Christison,  there  was
found  serous  effusion  into  the  pleura  and  perito-
neum.

3.  Like  most  irritants  of  mucous  membrane,
Iodine  has  a  corresponding  influence  upon  its  ex-
ternal continuation,  the  skin.  The  forms  of  erup-
tion most  commonly  caused  by  it  are  erythematous,
papular  and  pustular.  Dr.  Vogel  saw  it  produce  a
dingy  appearance  of  the  surface  similar  to  that
Arsenic.

III.  The  influence  of  Iodine  upon  the  nervous
system  is  only  seen  in  very  severe  cases  of  poison-
ing, or  when  the  system  is  saturated  with  it
("iodism").  It  has  most  power  in  the  motor
sphere,  causing  here  a  trembling  of  the  extremities
resembling  the  tremor  mercurialis,  which  sometimes
goes  on  to  twitchings  and  other  convulsive  move-
ments, and  sometimes  shows  its  essentially  asthenic
character  by  terminating  in  paralysis.  In  the  sen-
sory sphere  there  are  manifested  in  some  suscep-
tible persons  various  derangements  of  sensation,  as
obscuration  of  vision,  partial  deafness,  illusions  of
the  sense  of  touch,  &c.  In  the  ideational  and  emo-
tional sphere  Iodine  acts  much  like  Arsenic.
There  is  great  and  lasting  anxiety  and  despondency
which  "  differs  from  hypochondriasis  in  this
respect,  that  the  patients  occupy  themselves  with
the  present  instead  of  with  the  future.  Patients

21


322  IODIUM.

and  dispiritedness,  which  is  particularly  depressing :
and  they  have  been  heard  to  complain  of  this  even
when  suffering  violent  pain."

IV.  The  haematic  influence  of  Iodine  is  still
rarer  and  more  remote  than  the  neurotic.  It  is,
like  Mercury,  an  antiplastic  :  and  tinder  its  long-
continued  influence  the  blood  and  the  secretions
become  thin  and  watery.

There  are  two  organs  upon  which  Iodine  acts
with  some  intensity,  which  have  found  no  place  in
the  foregoing  analysis.  These  are  the  head  and  the
heart.  Iodine  nearly  always  sets  up  more  or  less
determination  of  blood  to  the  head,  causing  head-
ache with  sense  of  fulness,  giddiness,  drowsiness,
epistaxis,  and  even  a  kind  of  intoxication.  And  for
the  heart — palpitation,  with  corresponding  frequency
of  pulse,  is  a  constant  feature  of  iodism.  In  Dr.
Goullon's  very  susceptible  patient,  after  the  develop-
ment of  goitre,  there  appeared  "  all  the  symptoms  of
an  acute  endocarditis  (qy.  ?)  :  oppression  of  the
chest;  weakness  to  fainting;  intermitting,  heavy,
and  tumultuous  pulsation  of  the  heart,  and  inter-
mittent pulse  ;  tense  pain  across  the  chest ;  loss  of
appetite,  and  vomiting."  A  peculiar  symptom
mentioned  by  Hahnemann  is  sensation  as  if  the
heart  were  squeezed  or  compressed  (comp.  Cactus).

minutely  the  physiological  effects  of  Iodine.  They
are  set  down  in  your  ordinary  books  of  reference  :
and  Homoeopathy  has  added  little  to  our  knowledge
of  them.  Of  its  therapeutic  power,  however,  I  must
write  with  some  detail.


IODIUM.  323

I.  The  peculiar  influence  of  Iodine  over  the
nutritive  functions,  and  its  special  affinities  for  the
glands  and  the  lungs,  make  evident  its  homoeopathic
relationship  to  those  tuberculous  and  scrofulous
affections  in  which  it  has  so  high  a  reputation.  In
this  light  you  will  continue  to  use  it  as  experience
has  taught  you  in  the  torpid  inflammations  of  the
lymphatic  glands,  and  in  the  ulcerations,  the
ophthalmia?,  and  the  caries  which  depend  upon
these  constitutional  taints.  But  I  would  call  your
especial  attention  to  its  value  in  two  of  the  most
important  of  these  local  manifestations,  tabes  meseu-
terica  and  phthisis  pulmonalis.

1.  In  the  fully  developed  form  of  tabes  mesen-
terica — the  marasmus  of  children — we  have  an  exact
picture  of  the  morbid  effects  of  Iodine. There  is
rapid  emaciation,  with  dry  laryngeal  cough,  profuse
night-sweats,  and  slow  fever;  the  appetite  is  some-
times ravenous/  sometimes lost ; and the bowels
tend  towards  diarrhoea. I  have  already  suggested
that  Iodine  produces  its  nutritive disorder  mainly
through  these  very  mesenteric  glands. Its  power
over  the  idiopathic  disease  is  very  great. Under  its
use,  the night-sweats usually  disappear  in a few
days ; and  the  remaining  symptoms,  if  proper  diet
and  hygiene  can  be secured,  steadily  subside. I
consider  the  action  of  Iodine  in this  disease one
of  the  most  satisfactory  bits  of  treatment  we  have.

2.  Not  less  striking  is  the  resemblance  between
the  effects  of  Iodine  and  the  symptoms  of  phthisis
pulmonalis. Locally, it has the pneumonia and
haemoptysis;  constitutionally, the emaciation and
night- sweats,  the  wasting  fever  and  rapid  pulse,  the


324  IODIUM.

cough,  the  diarrhoea  and  vomiting,  and  (in  females)
the  amenorrhoea.  I  wish  I  could  go  on  to  say  that
Iodine  was  as  curative  of  pulmonary  consumption  as
it  is  of  mesenteric  atrophy.  I  cannot  credit  it  with
this  power ;  but  you  must  remember  that  the  virtues
of  cod-liver  oil  depend  in  part,  so  many  think,  upon
the  Iodine  it  contains.  I  shall  discuss  this  question
presently :  but  in  the  mean  time  let  me  say  that
from  Iodine  itself  I  have  seen  more  benefit  than
from  any  other  drug  in  the  treatment  of  this  terrible
disease.  It  appears  capable  of  doing  everything
but  checking  the  deposition  of  fresh  tubercle.  A
fatal  "  but/'  you  will  say  ;  and  so  it  is,  as  far  as
cure  is  concerned.  But  palliation  of  symptoms  and
prolongation  of  life  are  no  slight  boons ;  and  these
may  often  be  procured  for  a  time  by  Iodine.  It  is
most  interesting  to  observe  how  non-tubercular
cases  of  this  kind,  however  severe,  get  well  under
the  use  of  this  agent.  Many  a  suspicious  cough
with  haemoptysis,  wasting  and  night-sweats  ;  many
a  chronic  pneumonia  where  abscesses  form  and
discharge  have  I  seen  cured  by  Iodine.  Whereas,
when  tubercle  is  actually  present,  temporary  improve-
ment is  always  followed  by  a  fresh  outburst  of  the
disorder.

Having  thus  ascertained  the  diathetic  relationships
of  Iodine,  we  can  proceed  to  study  its  curative  power
in  disorders  of  those  organs  and  tissues  which  it
specifically  influences.

1.  You  are  as  well  acquainted  as  we  with  the
virtues  of  Iodine  in  mercurial  stomatitis  and  saliva-
tion. It  is  one  of  the  many  instances  of  unconscious
homoeopathy  in  old  school  practice.  In  idiopathic


IODITJM.  325

salivation,  as  from  pregnancy,  it  will  sometimes
effect  a  cure  where  Mercury  fails.  A  striking
case  of  this  kind  is  recorded  by  Dr.  Wilcox.

The  pancreas  is  a  gland  so  nearly  identical,  both
in  structure  and  in  function,  with  the  salivary  glands,
that  a  drug  which  acts  upon  the  latter  may  be  fairly
expected  also  to  influence  the  former.  Iodine
accordingly  appears  as  the  leading  pancreatic
medicine  in  the  organology  of  Rademacher  :  and
several  cases  of  acute  and  chronic  disease  of  this
gland  are  cited  by  Wilcox  in  which  Iodine  effected
a  cure.  I  must  refer  you  to  his  paper,  or  to  our
own,  for  the  details.  I  would  only  add  that  the
rare  disease  known  as  diarrhoea  adiposa  has  several
times  been  ascertained  to  exist  in  connection  with
pancreatic  disease.  This  may  serve  as  a  hint  for
the  trial  of  Iodine  as  its  remedy.

2.  After  what we  have  seen of  the  effects  of
Iodine  on  the  liver,  I  think  I  may  claim  for  homoeo-
pathic action  any  benefit  obtained  from  it  in  hepatic
disease. I  know  nothing  of  it  here,  save  that  Dr.
Dudgeon once cured  with  it  an  obstinate  case  of
jaundice  in  which  he  suspected organic disease  of
the  liver.*

3.  The specific influence of Iodine upon the
(/lands  of  the  generative  system  would  suggest  its
frequent employment in morbid states of these
glands,  especially  when  occurring  in  scrofulous  and
tubercular  subjects. In  such  patients  amenorrhcea,
galactorrhoea,  and  leucorrhcea  have  been  cured  by  it.
I  speak  with  more  diffidence  when  I  suggest  that  to
such an  influence  is  due  the  dispersion  of  mam-

*  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  xxii,  p.  357.


326  IODIUM.

mary,  ovarian,  and  uterine  tumours  which  has
sometimes  been  accomplished  by  Iodine.  It  is
worth  noting,  however,  that  the  tumours  of  the
uterus  which  have — in  Dr.  Ash  well's  words —
"  melted  down  "  under  the  action  of  Iodine  appear
invariably  to  have  originated  in  the  cervix,  i.  e.  in
the  glandular  and  secreting  portion  of  the  organ.
In  inflammations  and  indurations  of  this  part,
moreover,  Iodine  is  a  remedy  of  tried  value.  It
should  be  borne  in  mind,  I  think,  in  cases  of
sterility  where  the  strumous  diathesis  exists.

4.  I  come  now  to  the  power  of  Iodine  over
bronchocele.  I  need  not  here  give  any  account  of
the  history  of  this  practice,  or  of  the  testimony
borne  to  its  success.  I  would  only  say  that  I  am
by  no  means  satisfied  that  the  virtues  of  the  original
burnt  sponge  were  due  entirely  to  the  Iodine  it
contained :  and  think  that  we  may  often  with
advantage  give  Spongia  instead  of  Iodine  in  the
treatment  of  the  disease.  The  pathogenetic  action
of  Iodine  on  the  thyroid  clearly  points  to  the  kind
of  goitre  in  which  we  may  expect  it  to  prove
curative.  It  certainly  will  not  cure  the  exophthalmic
form  ;  nor  that  which  results  from  cysts  developed
in  the  gland ;  still  less  its  carcinomatous  enlarge-
ment. But  "  in  all  cases  of  pure  hypertrophy,  or
resulting  from  an  obscure  chronic  irritation  or  sub-
inflammation  in  the  tissue, — in  other  words,  all
cases  of  pure  goitre,  as  distinguished  from  other
special  diseases  which  may  be  seated  in  that  as  well
as  in  any  other  tissue — a  cure  may  be  reasonably
hoped  for."*  It  is  unnecessary  to  give  Iodine
*  Wood,  '  Mat.  Med.,'  vol.  ii,  p.  334.


IODIUM.  327

in  large  doses,  or  to  apply  it  externally,  for  the
cure  of  bronchocele.  If  you  will  read  the  three
admirable  cases  reported  by  my  friend  Dr.  Kidd  in
the  number  of  the  '  British  Journal '  for  April,  1867,
you  will,  I  think,  be  satisfied  as  to  these  points.

So  much  for  the  place  and  value  of  Iodine  in
glandular  affections.  I  come  now  to  the  uses  of
this  medicine  which  are  based  upon  its  tissue  irri-
tant influence.

1.  Iodine  is  not  a  leading  remedy  in  affections  of
the  mucous  membrane  of  the  alimentary  canal.
The  few  uses  to  which  it  has  been  put  in  this  region
are  mentioned  in  our  "  Study."  Anatomically,
catarrhal  deafness  must  be  placed  in  this  category,
as  it  appears  to  be  an  extension  of  a  sore-throat
along  the  Eustachian  tubes.  Iodine  is  perhaps
inferior  to  Pulsatilla  when  this  affection  is  recent :
but  in  chronic  cases  it  is  unequalled  as  a  remedy.
I  have  cured  several  with  it.  But  upon  some
morbid  conditions  of  the  respiratory  tract  it  exerts
a  curative  power  of  a  very  high  order.  I  prefer  it
in  the  form  of  Iodide  of  Patassium  (of  wbich  I  shall
speak  directly)  when  the  nasal  passages  are  affected,
and  of  Spongia  when  the  mischief  is  in  the  larynx.
Iodine  itself  has  become  our  chief  remedy  in  true
croup.  The  history  of  its  use  in  this  disease  is
parallel  with  that  of  its  employment  in  goitre.
Hahnemann,  led  by  one  of  the  symptoms  in  the
pathogenesis  of  Spongia,  suggested  its  trial  in  mem-
branous croup.  The  result  was  extremely  satis-
factory. But  in  1841  Dr.  Koch  communicated  to
the  '  Hygea'  the  results  of  his  expedience  in  the
treatment  of  croup,  which  led  him  to  believe  that


328  IODIUM.

Iodine  was  a  more  potent  remedy  therein  than
Spongia ;  and  indeed  that  the  virtues  of  the  latter
medicine  depended  mainly  if  not  entirely  upon  the
Iodine  it  contains.  Since  that  time  the  use  of
Iodine  in  croup  has  become  very  general,  and  its
only  rivals  are  Bromine  and  the  Bichromate  of
Potash.  I  would  refer  you  to  the  admirable  mono-
graph on  this  disease  by  Dr.  Elb  of  Dresden,  which
you  will  find  translated  in  vol.  x.  of  the  '  Brit.
Journ.  of  Horn/  More  recently,  the  advantage  of
conjoining  inhalation  to  internal  admiuistration  in
croup  has  been  enforced  and  illustrated  by  Drs.
Arnold*  and  Drake. f  Dr.  Meyhoffer,  moreover,
has  attempted  the  differential  diagnosis  of  Iodine
and  Bromine,  by  calling  attention  to  the  general
influence  of  the  former  as  excitant,  of  the  latter  as
depressant.  Hence  he  infers  that  Iodine  is  most
suitable  for  sporadic  croup  occurring  in  previously
healthy  subjects  :  while  Bromine  is  preferable  when
the  false  membranes  in  the  air-passages  are  pro-
duced by  the  diphtheritic  poison.

2.  Of  most  of  the  uses  of  Iodine  in  affections  of
the  serous  membranes  I  shall  speak  under  Iodine  of
Potassium.  I  will  only  mention  here  its  curative
power  when  injected  into  the  sac  of  a  hydrocele.
You  may  be  surprised  at  my  referring  this  action
to  any  specific  influence  :  you  will  say  that  it  rather
consists  in  the  setting  up  of  an  adhesive  inflamma-
tion in  the  walls  of  the  sac,  and  that  the  Iodine  is
merely  a  more  manageable  substitute  for  the  port-
wine  of  our  predecessors.  But  M.  Jousset  of

*  '  North  Amer.  Journ.  of  Horn./  vol.  vii,  p  236.
f  Ibid.,  vol.  x,  p.  296.


TODIUM.  329

Paris,  in  an  able  article  which  you  will  find  trans-
lated in  vol.  xvi.  of  our  Journal,  has  adduced
numerous  facts  to  prove — 1st,  that  the  production
of  inflammation  is  not  essential  to  the  success  of
this  operation ;  but,  2ndly,  that  it  rather  prejudices
that  result  than  otherwise  :  3rd,  that  a  cure  has
several  times  been  effected  by  the  injection  of  a
watery  solution  of  Iodine,  water  being  incapable  of
taking  up  more  than  its  7000th  part.  To  this
I  may  add  that  the  first  successes  with  Iodine  in
hydrocele  were  obtained  by  M.  Ricord  from  the
topical  use  of  compresses  dipped  in  the  diluted
tincture,  and  (in  one  case)  from  the  Iodide  of
Potassium  given  internally.  I  cannot,  therefore,
but  assent  to  M.  Jousset's  conclusion,  that  Iodine
cures  in  these  cases  by  a  specific  alterative  influence
exerted  upon  the  serous  walls  of  the  sac.

3.  The  use  of  Iodine — as  distinct  from  Iodide  of
Potassium  and  cod-liver  oil — in  cutaneous  disease
has  been  limited  to  chronic  eruptions  occurring  in
scrofulous  children.  A  remarkable  improvement  in
the  beauty  of  the  hair  and  cleanness  of  the  scalp
has  been  observed  to  follow  its  use  in  these
subjects.

The  neurotic  and  haematic  conditions  characteristic
of  Iodine  rarely,  if  ever,  come  before  us  as  substan-
tive maladies.  They  concur  in  strengthening  the
indications  for  its  choice  in  the  diseases  we  have
already  considered.  Nor  can  I  mentidn  any  affec-
tions of  the  heart  in  which  it  has  been,  or  is  likely
to  be,  useful.  I  have,  however,  found  it  of  great
value  in  chronic  congestive  headaches  and  vertigoes,
especially  in  old  people.


330  KALI HYDRIODICUM.

As  regards  other  medicines,  Iodine  stands  about
midway  between  Mercury  and  Arsenic,  overlapping
the  sphere  of  either  with  its  own.  Its  action  on
the  air-passages  compares  with  that  of  Bromine  and
of  Kali  bichromicum.

I  have  always  used  the  3rd  dec.  dilution  of
Iodine  in  the  mesenteric  and  pulmonary  affections,
the  deafness,  the  croup,  and  the  cerebral  congestions
for  which  I  esteem  it  so  highly.  In  bronchocele
the  1st  or  2nd  dec.  seems  required  :  and  I  should
think  that  these  latter  would  be  more  useful  than
higher  potencies  in  strumous  affections.  I  confess
that  I  have  rarely  used  Iodine  myself  in  these  latter
conditions.

Of  the  compounds  of  Iodine  we  use  in  our
practice  the  Iodides  of  Mercury  and  of  Potassium.
Of  the  former  I  shall  speak  when  treating  of  their
base :  the  latter  will  more  appropriately  be  con-
sidered here.  We  call  it  by  the  old  name,  which
is  unfortunately  based  upon  an  incorrect  theory  of
its  composition,

Kali  hydriodicum.

It  is  prepared  by  trituration  or  (better)  aqueous
solution.

There  is  a  pathogenesis  in  Jahr's  '  Manual/  taken
from  Noack  and  Trinks.  It  is  merely,  however,  a
collection  of  symptoms  which  have  been  observed
as  a  result  of  too  large  doses  or  too  long-continued
use  of  the  drug,  and  which  you  may  read  as  well  or
better  in  Pereira.

The  physiological  action  of  Iodide  of  Potassium,


KALI HYDR1ODICUM.  331

so  far  as  we  know  it,  is  very  much  that  of  Iodine,
becoming  intensified  at  certain  points.  The  coryza
of  the  Iodide  is  very  marked,  involving  the  con-
junctival  and  nasal  mucous  membranes  and  that
of  the  frontal  sinus.  I  have  collected  in  vol.  xxiii
of  the  '  Brit.  Journ.'  some  notices  of  this  affection.
It  is  noted  of  the  watery  nasal  discharge  that  it
feels  cool,  and  causes  no  excoriation,  herein
differing  from  the  coryza  of  Arsenic.  In  vol.  xi  of
the  Journal  you  will  find  some  observations  by  Pro-
fessor Langston  Parker  as  to  the  effects  of  the  long-
continued  use  of  Iodide  of  Potassium  upon  the  tongue.
The  organ  became  in  four  cases  tender,  swollen,
lobulated,  and  fissured.  Purpura,  too,  has  been
more  than  once  caused  by  it,  which  coincides  with
the  hsematic  influence  of  Iodine  :  and  erythema  and
pustular  eruptions  have  evidenced  its  action  upon  the
skin.  I  have  already  mentioned  the  effects  on  the

Certain  of  the  therapeutic  uses  of  Iodide  of
Potassium  are  undoubtedly  based  upon  its  known
physiological  effects.  Thus  it  is  very  useful  in
severe  local  coryza,  especially  where  the  nose  is  red
and  swollen.  In  a  case  of  profuse  dark  discharge
from  the  nose,  without  constitutional  symptoms,
occurring  in  a  child  after  exposure  to  the  contagion
of  diphtheria  ;  when  Kali  bichromicum,  Biniodide  of
Mercury,  Muriatic  acid,  and  Arsenic  had  failed,
immediate  improvement  and  rapid  cure  took  place
under  the  1st  dilution  of  Iodide  of  Potassium.
Then  it  is  stated  by  your  own  men  to  have  cured
some  desperate  cases  of  acute  hydrocephalus  in  the
stage  of  effusion ;  to  have  reduced  a  chronic  hydro-


332  KALI HYDRIODICUM.

cephalus  to  normal  dimensions ;  and  more  than
once  to  have  dispersed  the  fluid  of  hydrothorax.
Moreover,  Dr.  Neligan  considers  it  superior  to  any
other  drug  in  cutaneous  diseases  :  he  names  psoriasis,
lepra,  icthyosis,  and  lupus  as  the  forms  in  which  he
has  found  it  most  useful.  But  you  know  well  that
the  therapeutic  virtues  of  Iodide  of  Potassium  are
much  more  extensive  than  these.  When  we  step
out  into  its  great  field  of  action  as  a  remedy  for
secondary  and  tertiary  syphilis  and  chronic  rheu-
matism, pathogenesy  fails  us  as  a  guide.  It  is  one
of  the  weakest  points  in  our  theory  that  we  cannot
account  upon  the  law  of  similars  for  the  power  of
this  remedy.  Nevertheless,  I  cannot  doubt  that  it
is  specific  in  its  nature,  and  depends  upon  the
elective  affinity  of  the  medicine  for  the  tissues
affected  by  the  morbid  poisons.  Thus,  it  is  as
beneficial  in  simple  periostitis  from  an  injury,  as
when  this  membrane  is  attacked  by  syphilis  or
rheumatism.  The  affection  of  the  tongue,  moreover,
like  in  appearance.  For  myself,  I  use  Iodide  of
Potassium  very  much  as  you  do  in  syphilis, — for  its
ulcers  on  tonsils  and  soft  palate,  for  its  nodes,  and
so  forth.  And  I  do  not  see  how  we  can  do  better
than  follow  your  practice — so  often  crowned  with
success — of  treating  with  this  remedy  those  paralyses
and  epilepsies  which  seeni  to  own  a  syphilitic
origin.  In  chronic  rheumatism  I  have  less  ex-
perience with  it :  and  we  have  many  similarly  acting
medicines  here.

The  dose  of  Iodide  of  Potassium  need  not,  as
your  experience  proves,  be  infinitesimal. I  doubt


OLEUM JECOR1S ASELLI.  333

whether  it  is  ever  used  by  our  high  dilutionists.
All  of  our  school  who  have  mentioned  it — Drysdale,
Hempel,  Yeldham,  and  Cl.  Miiller — advise  it  to  be
given  in  material  doses.  I  generally  give  my
patients  a  bottle  of  the  1st  dec.  dilution,  which
they  take  in  increasing  doses  till  improvement
begins.

Before  leaving  Iodine,  I  must  say  a  few  words
upon

Oleum  jecoris  aselli.

When  this  potent  therapeutic  agent  was  first
introduced  into  practice,  it  was  a  common  opinion
that  its  peculiar  virtues  were  due  to  the  Iodine  it
contained.  To  the  homoeopathic  physician,  the
infinitesimal  proportion  (one  part  in  40,000)  in
which  the  drug  existed  occasioned  no  difficulty  ;
and  he  could  point  triumphantly  to  the  perfect
homoeopathicity  of  Iodine  to  most  of  the  maladies
in  which  cod-liver  oil  was  found  beneficial.  Of
late  years,  however,  so  much  evidence  has  accumu-
lated as  to  the  importance  of  oily  matters  in  the
nutritive  operations,  that  it  has  become  usual  among
ourselves  as  well  as  in  your  ranks  to  regard  cod
oil  as  a  purely  dietetic  agent.  I  cannot  myself
for  a  moment  the  great  value  of  an  easily-digested
animal  oil  as  an  article  of  diet  in  badly  nourished
frames,  I  do  strongly  doubt  whether  the  whole
of  action.  When  we  remember  that  in  a  teaspoon-
ful  of  this  oil  we  are  administering  a  dose  of  Iodine


334  OLEUM JECORIS ASELLI.

equal  to  a  drop  and  a  half  of  its  3rd  dec.  dilution,
and  that  we  are  generally  giving  it  in  cases  to
which  the  drug  is  thoroughly  homoeopathic — can
we  doubt  that  it  exerts  a  curative  action  ?  If  we
disbelieve  this,  we  have  no  reason  for  believing  in
the  action  of  infinitesimals  anywhere.  Moreover,
were  it  the  oleaginous  matter  per  se  which  cures,
why  should  all  attempts  to  find  a  substitute  for  the
oil  of  fishes  be  so  unsuccessful  ?  I  conclude,  then,
that  the  virtues  of  cod-liver  oil  are  due,  in  a  great
measure,  to  the  Iodine  which  it  contains,  and  that
the  pathogenesy  of  this  drug  should  always  be  borne
in  mind  in  our  prescription  of  the  oil.  Iodine  will
obviously  be  given  best  in  the  form  of  cod-liver  oil
where  there  is  much  wasting,  as  we  then  introduce
at  one  and  the  same  time  both  the  specific  to  cure
the  pathological  tendency,  and  the  most  suitable
pabulum  wherewith  to  repair  the  material  injury
done  to  the  organism  by  the  ravages  of  disease.


LETTER  XXVI.

IPECACUANHA, IRIS, KALI B1CHROMICUM.

THE  first  medicine  I  shall  consider  to-day  is  one
deservedly  a  favourite  in  both  schools,

Ipecacuanha.

We  make  a  tincture  or  trituration  of  the  dry  root.

There  is  a  short  but  characteristic  proving  in  the
'  Mat.  Med.  Pura/  and  Testers  remarks  sub  voce  are
worth  consulting.  Much  of  what  I  shall  now  say
is  contained  in  a  paper  of  mine  on  the  drug,  which
you  will  find  in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Homoeopathy/
vol.  xxiii.

The  emetic  action  of  Ipecacuanha  is  that  by
which  it  is  best  known.  Let  us  study  this  for  a
minute.  The  vomiting  is  "  specific,"  for  it  is  set
up  when  the  drug  is  introduced  into  the  system  in
other  ways  than  by  iugestion.  Nevertheless,  it
would  seem  that  the  primary  emetic  impression  is
made  upon  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  stomach,
for  some  irritation  of  this  tissue  is  always  present
when  a  large  quantity  of  the  drug  has  been  intro-
duced into  the  organism.  Furthermore,  the  excita-
tion which  results  in  the  complex  process  we  call
vomiting  is  conveyed  to  the  nervous  centre  through
the  vagi,  for,  when  these  nerves  are  divided,  no


336  IPECACUANHA.

gastric  irritation  produced  by  Ipecacuanha  or  other-
wise will  have  an  emetic  effect.

The  action  of  Ipecacuanha  in  this  sphere  may
accordingly  be  thus  defined  :  "  a  moderate  inflam-
matory irritation  of  a  mucous  surface,  resulting,
through  a  reflex  excitation  conveyed  by  the  incident
nerves  of  the  part,  in  vigorous  expulsive  muscular
movement."  Its  curative  action  in  the  same  sphere
is  a  capital  illustration  of  the  law  of  similars.  It
cures  the  same  kind  of  vomiting  that  it  causes.
It  is  of  little  value  when  the  mucous  membrane
itself  is  solely  at  fault,  and  the  persistent  nausea  is
a  more  prominent  symptom  than  the  occasional
vomiting  (Pulsatilla,  Antimonium  crudum).  It  does
nothingfor  the  vomiting  of  true  gastritis  (Arsenicum),
or  for  the  sympathetic  sickness  of  cancer,  phthisis,
diphtheria,  and  such  like  diseases  (Kreasote),  where
the  stomach  is  not  primarily  affected.  But  it  is
almost  certainly  curative  in  gastric  cases  where,
without  any  serious  affection  of  the  mucous  mem-
brane, there  is  frequent  retching  and  vomiting.
Let  me  give  you  two  brief  cases  in  point.  I  have
already  recorded  them  in  our  Journal.

1.  "  August  19th,  1864. — Mrs.  F — ,  set.  39.  Lost  her  appetite
nine  months  ago,  without  assignable  cause ;  then  followed  vomiting
of  all  food,  with  great  debility.  The  bowels  are  much  relaxed ;  the
catamenia  regular.  Finding  also  some  smarting  of  the  eyes,  I  sus-
pected that  arsenical  influence  might  be  at  work  here,  and  desired
her  to  bring  me  some  of  her  wall-paper,  which  was  green.  In  the

"  Ipecacuanha,  1st  dilution,  a  drop  three  times  a  day  for  six
days.

"  26th. — The  vomiting  has  ceased,  and  she  feels  much  better.
(I  had  examined  the  green  paper,  and  found  it  non- arsenical.)
Repeat.


IPECACUANHA.  337

"  September  2nd. — No  vomiting ;  gaining  strength. Continue.

"  She  took  the  Ipecacuanha  for  a  fortnight  more ;  and  then
Sacch.  lact.  for  three  weeks,  that  I  might  keep  her  under  observa-
tion. The  symptoms  all  subsided  :  and  she  became  quite  well."

2.  "  August  1st,  1865. — Frederick  G — ,  eat.  54.  Has  vomited
everything  he  has  taken  for  three  months  past.  The  food  causes
pain  during  the  short  time  it  remains  in  the  stomach ;  the  tongue
is  coated  brown,  and  is  cleft ;  the  bowels  are  regular ;  the  urine
thick.

"  Ipecacuanha  1,  a  drop  three  times  a  day.

"  8th. — There  has  been  no  vomiting  after  the  first  two  or  three
days.  The  feeling  of  nausea  persists,  and  there  is  some  pain  after
food.  Repeat.

"  15th. — Continues  to  improve. Repeat.

"  22nd. — Nothing  now  but  slight  nausea  and  a  little  foulness  of
tongue.  Pulsatilla  3,  a  drop  three  times  a  day.

"  He  came  to  the  dispensary  on  September  14th  to  get  some
medicine  for  his  wife,  .and  reported  himself  as  continuing  quite
well."

Turning  now  to  the  respiratory  organs,  we  find  a
group  of  symptoms  produced  by  Ipecacuanha  which,
though  somewhat  idiosyncratic,  are  yet  sufficiently
common  to  be  regarded  as  characteristic  of  the  drug.
You  know  that  there  are  many  persons  who  cannot
remain  in  a  room  where  Ipecacuanha  is  being
powdered  without  feeling  its  influence  upon  their
respiratory  organs.  Sometimes  the  conjunctival
and  nasal  membranes  are  most  affected ;  the  eyes
are  reddened,  smart,  and  water,  and  there  is  copious
defluxion  from  the  nose,  with  incessant  sneezing.
More  commonly  the  influence  is  felt  lower  down  :
there  is  dyspnoea,  wheezing,  and  cough,  ending  in
profuse  mucous  expectoration.

It  is  evident  that  our  former  definition  of  the
action  of  Ipecacuanha  will  hold  good  here  also.
Again  we  have  a  moderate  inflammatory  irritation

22


338  IPECACUANHA.

of  a  mucous  surface  connected  with  expulsive
muscular  efforts ;  and  these  latter  quite  dispropor-
tionate to  the  amount  of  mucous  irritation,  and
pointing  to  an  involvement  of  the  extremities  of  the
incident  nerves  in  the  morbid  process.  Once  again,
moreover,  clinical  experience  points  in  the  same
direction.  The  respiratory  affections  in  which
Ipecacuanha  is  curative  are  hay-fever,  hooping-cough,
croup,  and  certain  forms  of  bronchitis  and  asthma.
The  sneezing  of  hay-fever;  the  violent  expulsive
cough  of  pertussis ;  and  the  spasmodic  paroxysms
of  croup  bring  these  respective  diseases  under  the
definition  I  have  given  of  the  action  of  Ipecacuanha.
And  there  are  cases,  half-bronchitis  and  half-asthma,
as  much  neuroses  as  phlogoses,  in  which  Ipecacuanha
supersedes  all  other  medicines.  You  will  find  one
such  case  of  my  own  in  No.  xxvii  of  the  '  Annals  of
the  Brit.  Horn.  Society/

I  have  written  this  down  much  as  it  stands  in
my  paper  in  the  Journal.  My  aim  was  to  show
that  the  usus  in  morbis  often  concurred  with  patho-
genetic  experiment  to  help  us  to  the  precise  sphere
and  mode  of  action  of  our  medicines.  Ipecacuanha
was  a  good  instance  in  point.  I  have  nothing  new
to  add  as  to  its  gastric  uses.  But  the  application
we  make  of  it  to  affections  of  the  respiratory  organs
must  be  interesting  to  you,  as  it  is  in  many  respects
common  to  both  schools.  You  must,  however,
admit  that  it  is  strictly  homoeopathic.  In  hooping-
cough  and  croup,  too,  where  you  have  given  it  only
as  an  emetic,  you  see  now  its  specific  operation.
Let  me  say  as  regards  the  former  disorder,  that  it
is  during  the  first  fortnight  after  the  hooping  has


IPECACUANHA.  339

commenced,  when  there  is  much  mucous  expectora-
tion and  vomiting,  that  Ipecacuanha  (generally  in
alternation  with  Aconite)  is  so  beneficial.  After
this  Drosera  in  most  instances  becomes  more  ap-
propriate. In  simple  spasmodic  coughs  resembling
pertussis,  with  much  retching  and  mucous  expectora-
tion, Ipecacuanha  is  rapidly  curative.  Of  croup  I
speak  only  on  Testers  authority,  who  regards  Ipeca-
cuanha in  alternation  with  Bryonia  as  its  almost
unfailing  remedy.  Dr.  Elb,  in  the  excellent  paper
I  have  already  referred  to,  shows  that  croup  is
truly  a  "  neuro-phlogosis," — that  there  is  a  spas-
modic as  well  as  an  inflammatory  element  in  it.
Hence  he  gives  Aconite  alternately  with  his  Iodine.
Of  similar  character  is  this  prescription  of  Testers.
As  Bryonia  (q.  v.)  is  capable  of  setting  up  mem-
branous inflammation  of  the  respiratory  tracts,  its
share  must  be  the  extinguishing  of  the  phlogosis,
leaving  to  Ipecacuanha  the  dealing  with  the  ac-
companying neurosis.  I  have  never  hitherto  tried
this  treatment.

I  do  not  know  whether  you  have  ever  verified  the
former  reputation  of  Ipecacuanha  in  dysentery.
Hahnemann  objects  to  its  being  considered  a  remedy
for  this  disease,  since  its  pathogenetic  action  is
limited  to  the  production  of  simple  diarrhoea.  But
it  is  impossible  to  suppose  that  the  "radix  anti-
dysenterica"  has  gained  this  name  from  no  cause
whatsoever  ;  while  its  mode  of  action,  where  curative,
can  hardly  be  chemical  or  physical,  or  other  than
dynamic.  And  when  we  consider  the  phenomena
of  dysentery,  we  find  that  one  of  its  most  character-
istic symptoms  is  identical  with  that  which  in  other


340  IPECACUANHA.

parts  of  the  body  we  have  seen  to  call  for  Ipeca-
cuanha. I  speak  of  the  tenesmus.  This  is  a  violent
and  recurring  expulsive  action,  not  necessarily
proportionate  to  the  amount  of  irritation  present  on
the  raucous  surface.  When  such  muscular  actions
are  known  as  cough  or  vomiting,  the  indication  for
Ipecacuanha  is  plain.  It  is  no  less  so,  even  in  the
absence  of  pathogenetic  analogy,  when  it  is  called
tenesmus,  and  takes  place  at  the  lower  bowel.
Only  here,  as  in  croup,  the  amount  of  mucous
irritation  is  generally  too  great  to  be  overcome  by
Ipecacuanha  alone.  As  there  Teste  alternates  it  with
Bryonia,  so  here  it  usually  requires  to  be  supple-
mented by  Mercurius  corrosivus.

There  is  another  element  in  dysentery  which
Hahnemann  himself  admits  may  be  overcome  by
Ipecacuanha.  "  It  is  capable,"  he  says,  "  of
diminishing  the  quantity  of  blood/'  The  power  of
Ipecacuanha  over  haemorrhage  is  very  curious,  but
undoubted.  In  intestinal  haemorrhage  (not  from
ulceration)  I  have  seldom  known  it  fail :  and  in
haemoptysis,  menorrhagia,,  and  hsematemesis  it  holds
high  rank  as  a  remedy.  There  are  some  faint
hints  in  the  pathogenesis  that  it  is  homoeopathic  to
these  maladies :  but  neither  pathogenetic  nor  cura-
tive action  seem  to  bear  any  relation  to  that
that,  while  the  practical  fact  remains  for  our  edifica-
tion, the  theoretical  explanation  is  at  present
impossible.

The  analogues  of  Ipecacuanha  are  Antimonium
tartaricum,  and  perhaps  Lobelia  and  Tabacum ;  also
Iris.


IRIS VERSICOLOR.  341

For  dose  I  rarely  go  higher  than  the  1st  or  at
the  utmost  the  2nd  dec.  dilution.

I  come  next  to  a  plant  which,  though  not  peculiar
to  the  American  continent,  has  been  made  known  as
a  medicine  by  American  practitioners.  It  is  the
common  blue-flag,

Iris  versicolor.

A  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  root.

In  Dr.  Hale's  article  on  Iris  in  his  '  New
Remedies }  you  will  find  several  provings  made
with  it,  and  a  collection  of  all  known  records  of  its
clinical  use.

Iris  is  known  in  America  as  a  very  active  emetic
and  purgative,  and  as  an  excitant  of  the  salivary  and
biliary  secretions.  Our  provings,  while  they  agree
with  this  description,  both  enlarge  and  precisionise
it.  Enlarge, — for  they  show  that  the  pancreas  is
irritated  as  much  as  or  more  than  the  salivary
glands  and  liver.  This  is  shown  by  the  continual
burning  felt  in  this  region  by  one  of  the  provers,
who  at  the  same  time  was  passing  frequent  watery
evacuations ;  and  by  the  highly  congested  state  of
the  organ  in  animals  poisoned  by  Iris.  And
precisionise, — for  they  indicate  the  vomiting  and
diarrhoea  of  Iris  to  be  the  result  of  hypersecretion
along  the  alimentary  tract,  and  that  the  morbid
condition  set  up  has  little  tendency  to  run  on  to
inflammation.

closely  the  pathological  condition  which  obtains  in
what  we  call  English  cholera,  which,  however,  I


342  IRIS VERS1COLOR.

suppose  exists  in  all  parts  of  the  globe.  The  acute
vomiting  and  purging,  predominantly  bilious,  which
characterise  this  autumnal  scourge  are  checked  in
the  promptest  manner  by  Iris.  I  mentioned  this
at  the  meeting  of  the  Brit.  Horn.  Society,  in  Oct.
1865,  and  was  pleased  to  read  in  the  '  Monthly
Horn.  Review'  of  the  following  January  that  Dr.
Lade  of  King's  Lynn  had  met  with  a  similar  ex-
perience. It  is  occasionally  of  use  in  other  forms
of  acute  vomiting  and  purging.  It  is  the  prince  of
remedies  for  "sick-headache"  rapidly  relieving  the
vomiting  even  in  the  cerebral  form  of  the  disease ;
and  in  the  gastro-hepatic  variety  by  its  continued
use  preventing  the  recurrence  of  the  paroxysms.  I
was  at  one  time  in  hopes  that  it  would  prove  a
specific  for  cholera  infanlum ;  but  I  fear  that,
although  it  promptly  arrests  the  vomiting,  it  does
not  strike  at  the  root  of  the  disease,  for  the  purging
continues  unabated.  It  has  cured  idiopathic  and
mercurial  salivation,  and  should  be  thought  of  in
acute  affections  of  the  pancreas.

This  is  the  main  sphere  of  action  of  our  medicine  :
but  I  must  add  that  it  has  caused  and  cured
vesiculo-pustular  eruptions,  neuralgia  of  the  right
side  of  the  face,  and  sthenic  seminal  emissions.
The  provings  indicate  a  still  wider  range  of  utility,
for  which  we  must  look  to  the  future.

The  analogues  of  Iris  are  Aniimonium  tartaricum,
Colchicum,  Ipecacuanha,  Mercurius,  Podophyllum,
Stannum.

The  low  dilutions  only  have  been  used  :  I  always
carry  about  with  me  the  1st.


KALI B1CHROMICUM.  343

Of  the  compounds  of  Chromic  acid  with  Potash
we  use  two,  the  Chromate  and  the  Bichromate.
The  former  we  know  only  as  a  remedy,  and  can
hardly  distinguish  between  its  action  and  that  of  the
Bichromate.  The  latter,  under  the  name  of

Kali  bichromicum,

is  the  best  proved,  and  among  the  most  valuable  of
all  the  medicines  we  possess.

Exhaustive  provings  of  Kali  bichromicum  were
made  almost  simultaneously  in  England  and  iu
Vienna.  The  English  proving  may  be  read  in  the
appendix  to  the  '  British  Journal  of  Homoeopathy'
for  1844  ;  the  Vienna  experiments  are  recorded  in
the  '  Austrian  Journal'  for  1847.  The  two  are
collated  in  a  very  thorough  manner  by  Dr.  Drysdale
in  the  Hahnemann  'Materia  Medica/  Part  I.
Numerous  clinical  cases  are  appended ;  and  ad-
ditional ones  are  given — also  by  Dr.  Drysdale — in
the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  vol.  xv.

Kali  bichromicum  is  a  drug  of  which  the  old-
school  Materia  Medica  knows  nothing.  I  must
therefore  expound  it  to  you  ab  initio.

Dr.  Drysdale  well  characterises  it  as  "  a  pure
irritant  to  the  organic  tissues/'  Comparing  it  with
Arsenic,  we  observe  that  neurotic,  haematic,  and
myotic  influences  are  altogether  wanting :  but  its
sphere  of  tissue  irritation  is  wider,  omitting  indeed
the  serous  membranes,  but  extending  beyond  the
mucous  membranes  and  the  skin  to  the  fibrous  tis-
sues on  the  one  hand,  and  to  many  of  the  glands
physiological  actions  under  these  headings.


344  KALI BICHROMICUM.

1.  The action of Kali  bichromicum on  the
mucous  membranes  should  be  compared  with  that  of
Arsenic, of  Mercury, and of  Tartar  emetic. It
causes  a  marked  increase  in  the  quantity  of  mucus
formed, which mucus is sometimes tough and
stringy, and sometimes degenerates into pus.
Higher grades of the inflammatory process are
seen in the respiratory mucous membrane, and
(when the  poison has been swallowed) along  the
alimentary tract. In the former region, false
membranes  have  been formed  ;  in the  latter, the
tendency is  towards  ulceration. The portions of
the  mucous  tracts  chiefly affected  are  the mouth,
throat,  cardiac  portion  of  the  stomach,  duodenum
and jejunum,  and rectum ; the whole  respiratory
membrane, including the conjunctiva ; and the
ureters. These  toxicological  actions  are  well pic-
tured in  the physiological provings. The  provers
have  sore  and  injected  fauces;  sour  eructations  and
heartburn,  slow  digestion,  bitter  taste,  nausea and
vomiting,  with  thickly coated tongue  ; dysenteric
purging  ;  coryza,  hoarseness,  and  cough.

2.  The  action  of  Kali  bichromicum  on  the  skin,
like  that  of  Croton  and  of  Tartar  emetic,  is  most
fully  displayed  as  the  result  of  its  external  applica-
tion ; although, as also with them, the effect is
specific,  and  may  appear  under  other  circumstances.
In  the  account  of  the  English  proving  given  in  the
'  British Journal of Homoeopathy/ you will find
some  coloured  engravings  of  the  effects  of  the  poison
upon  the  skin. Papules,  pustules,  and  ulcers  are
the  most  characteristic  forms  :  the  ulcers  have  hard
bases  and  overhanging  edges,  are  deep  and  generally
dry.


KALI BICHROMICUM.  345

3.  The  glands  chiefly  affected  by  Kali  bichromicum
are  the  liver  and  the  kidneys. On  the  former  its
action  is  very  marked. Here  is  a  group  of  symptoms
occurring  in  one prover. "  Aching  for  some  days
in the right hypochondrium  ; scanty, pale, clay-
coloured stools,  sometimes  twice a  day  ; metallic
taste, foetid breath,  and confusion in the head."
In  animals  poisoned  by  it,  the  liver  is found  con-
gested, enlarged, friable, of  a  dark  reddish-brown
colour,  but  presenting  on  its  surface  whitish-yellow
spots  extending  into  its  substance,  of  soft  consistence,
and  slightly  depressed. The  kidneys  are  also  found
intensely congested, the tubular  portion softened
and  undistinguishable  from the  rest,  and  the  urine
either  purulent  or  altogether  suppressed.

4.  The fibrous tissues are much irritated, as
shown  by  the  marked  tearing  pains  experienced  by
the  provers,  especially  about  the  joints. Still  more
striking  is the effect  upon  the periosteum,  which
manifests not only pain at  certain spots, but  its
characteristic  hard  swellings. These  symptoms  are
observed especially in the parietal, malar, and
maxillary  bones,  and  in  the  tibia. I  see  no  evidence
that  Kali  bichromicum  influences  the  bones  them-
selves : but its curious effects upon the nasal
septum show a decided power  of  destroying the
happens  to  the  workers  in  chrome. "  For  the  first
days there  is discharge of  clear water from the
nose,  with  sneezing,  chiefly  on  going  into  the  open
air; then soreness and redness  of  the  nose,  with
sensation  of  a  foetid  smell. Then  they  have  great
pain  and  tenderness,  most  at  the  junction  of  the


346  KALI BICHROMICUM.

cartilage,  and  the  septum  ulcerates  quite  through,
while  the  nose  becomes  obstructed  by  the  repeated
formation  of  hard  elastic  plugs  (called  by  the  work-
men clinkers).  Finally,  the  membrane  loses  its
sensibility  and  remains  dry,  and  with  the  septum
gone,  and  frequently  loss  of  smell  for  years  (sic}."

faithfully  represented  in  the  clinical  use  of  the
drug,  of  which  we  have  large  experience  and  exten-
sive record.  Kali  bichromicum  is  of  no  service  in
idiopathic  nervous  affections,  or  in  toxsemic  fevers.
The  apparent  exception  of  supra-orbital  neuralgia,
which  it  has  often  cured,  is  probably  not  a  real  one  :
as  this  is  the  neuralgia  most  frequently  induced  by
gastric  derangement.  Two  leading  forms  of  ca-
chexia,  however,  are  prominently  pictured  in  its
pathogenesis,  viz.,  syphilis  and  chronic  rheumatism.

I.  Of  syphilis,  Dr.  Drysdale  writes,  "  The  resem-
blance in  many  respects  between  the  action  of  this
medicine  and  that  of  the  syphilitic  virus,  and  also
its  analogy  to  Mercury,  would  lead  us  to  hope  that
we  may  find  in  it  another  remedy  for  that  disease.
Though  we  would  not  place  any  weight  on  such  a
merely  superficial  resemblance,  yet  we  cannot  refrain
from  noticing  the  likeness  that  the  chronic  ulcer
when  healed  presents  to  the  indurated  chancre.  A
more  correct  way  of  judging  of  the  resemblance  is
iu  the  further  development  of  the  constitutional
symptoms.  We  have  in  this  remedy  the  rash  on
the  skin ;  then  the  sore-throat,  which  has  been
mistaken  for  syphilitic ;  then  the  periosteal  pains  ;
then  the  rheumatism  ;  and  lastly  the  diseases  of  the
skin,  chiefly  of  the  pustular  character,  which  have


KALI BICHROMICUM.  347

the  hard  dark  scab,  and  leave  the  depressed
cicatrix."  Experience  has  confirmed  the  hope  here
expressed,  as  will  be  seen  in  the  remarks  I  shall
make  upon  its  curative  power  over  affections  of  the
throat,  eye,  skin,  and  periosteum.

IT.  The  rheumatoid  pains  induced  by  Kali
bichromicum  are  so  numerous  and  characteristic,
that  it  can  hardly  fail  to  take  its  place  as  a  remedy
for  rheumatic  affections.  Experience  has  here  also
confirmed  the  indications  of  pathogenesy.  It  is  espe-
cially on  the  middle  ground  between  rheumatism
and  syphilis — in  periosteal  and  syphilitic  rheuma-
tism— that  Kali  bichromicum  plays  so  distin-
guished a  part.  It  will  be  seen,  however,  that  its
action  is  by  no  means  limited  to  cases  such  as  this.
The  rheumatism  calling  for  Kali  bichromicum  is
chronic,  and  of  the  "  cold"  variety.

Let  us  now  follow  the  curative  action  of  the  drug
along  the  road  we  have  already  traversed  in  describ-
ing its  pathogenetic  effects.

1.  In  chronic  catarrhs  and  ulcerations  of  the  ali-
mentary mucous  membrane  Kali  bichromicum  is
often  our  very  best  medicine.  The  common
chronic  ulcer  of  the  pharynx  rapidly  heals  under  its
action.  I  agree  also  with  Drs.  Watzke  and  Russell
in  rating  it  very  high  as  a  remedy  for  syphilitic
sore-throat.  It  will  not,  I  believe,  arrest  the  de-
structive ulceration  sometimes  set  up  (requiring
Mercurius  or  Kali  iodidum) ;  but  will  subdue
chronic  inflammation  and  heal  up  superficial
ulcers  very  effectually.  In  dyspepsia  and  vomiting
from  chronic  gastric  catarrh,  where  the  tongue  has
a  thick  yellowish  coat  (a  white  coat  indicates  Anti-


348  KALI BICHROMICUM.

monium  crudum  in  preference),  Kali  bichromicum
is  very  successful.  It  should  be  the  best  medicine
for  ulcer  of  the  stomach,  as  it  has  proved  to  be
for  ulcers  of  the  duodenum  resulting  from  burns.
In  chronic  duodenitis  our  choice  lies  between  our
present  drug  and  Arsenic.  In  chronic  intestinal
ulcer ation  it  vies  with  Mercurius  corrosivus,  and  has
effected  some  brilliant  cures.  Still  more  striking  is
the  power  of  the  Bichromate  in  affections  of  the  re-
spiratory mucous  membrane.  In  acute  coryza,
influenza,  catarrhal  laryngitis,  tracheitis,  and  bron-
chitis it  is  often  rapidly  curative ;  especially  (as  I
think)  when  the  digestive  mucous  membrane  is
simultaneously  involved.  There  is  also  a  large
accumulation  of  evidence  tending  to  show  that  it  is
a  potent  remedy  for  true  membranous  croup.  I
have  never  used  it  in  this  disease  :  but  have  been
disappointed  with  it  in  laryngeal  diphtheria.  It  is,
however,  more  especially  in  the  chronic  affections
of  the  respiratory  mucous  membrane  that  Kali
bichromicum  is  efficacious.  For  a  chronic  "  cold  in
the  head"  there  is  no  medicine  like  it.  It  has
cured  polypus  narium,  and  is  recommended  in
ozsena;  but  this  disease  I  have  found  it  as  little
able  to  cure  as  indeed,  are  all  other  remedies  I
know.  In  chronic  hoarseness,  laryngitis,  and  tra-
cheitis it  has  proved  curative ;  and  should  be  useful
in  ulceration  of  the  nose  and  larynx,  syphilitic  or
simple.  But  it  is  especially  in  chronic  bronchitis
that  Kali  bichromicum  has  gained  its  great  reputa-
tion. It  is  indicated  when  the  sputa  are  tough,
difficult  to  detach,  and  come  up  in  strings  rather
than  in  lumps. — Before  leaving  the  mucous  mem-


KALI B1CHROMICUM.  349

branes,  I  must  tell  you  what  Kali  bichromicum  can
do  for  the  eyes.  It  stands  high  among  our  reme-
dies for  catarrhal  and  strumous  ophthalmia ;  and
has  even  cured  rheumatic  and  syphilitic  affections
of  the  sclerotica  and  iris.

2.  The Bichromate has often been used with
great  advantage  in  pustular  eruptions ; and  is  one
of  the  best  remedies,  externally  as  well  as  internally
used, for ulcers of  the legs. A syphilitic  origin
would  specially  indicate  it in  these  cases. I  have
cured  with  it  an  obstinate  case  of  acne  faciei.

3.  Kali bichromicum is  a  decided  hepatic  medi-
cine, much resembling  Mercurius. Dull pain  in
the  right  hypochondrium,  especially  when  limited  to
a  small  spot,  and  whitish  stools  are  indications  for
its  use. Its  action  on  the  kidneys  has  led  to  its
use in the suppression  of  urine which sometimes
follows  upon  Asiatic  cholera  : and  so  far  with  appa-
rent success.

4.  The  action  of  Kali  bichromicum  upon  fibrous
tissue  has  led  to  its  successful  use  in  a  number  of
local  rheumatisms,  and  such-like  maladies. In  Dr.
Drysdale's  article  you will  find  cases  of  rheumatic
headache,  of  lumbago  and  sciatica,  and  of  perios-
titis which have been very satisfactorily cured
by  it.

The  chief  medicines  whose  general  action  is
similar  to  that  of  Kali  bichromicum  are  Kali
iodidum,  Hepar  sulphuris,  and  the  salts  of  Mercury.
In  its  influence  on  the  mucous  membranes  and
skin  it  resembles  also  Arsenic  and  Tartar  emetic.
Spongia,  Iodine,  and  Bromine  act  like  it  upon  the


350  KALI B1CHROMICUM.

larynx  and  trachea ;  Mercurius  on  the liver ;  and
Mezereum  and  Phytolacca  on  the  periosteum.

I  recommend  by  way  of  dose  the  first  six  dilu-
tions. The  3rd  is  most  commonly  used,  except  in
syphilis,  where  the  lower  potencies  of  this  salt  and
of  the  neutral  chromate  have  been  used  with  most
benefit.  In  acute  affections,  however,  I  nearly
always  prefer  the  6th.  For  external  use,  as  to
ulcers,  one  grain  of  the  pure  salt  to  six  or  eight
ounces  of  water  will  be  found  quite  strong  enough.


LETTER  XXVII.

KALI CARBONICUM, CHLORICUM, NITRICTTM, AND
PERMANGANICUM, KALMIA, KREASOTE,  LACHESIS.

OF  the  compounds  of  Potassium  and  salts  of
Potash  we  have  already  studied  the  Bromide  and
Iodide  of  potassium,  and  the  Bichromate  of  potash  ;
and  Potash  itself  has  come  before  us  under  the
name  of  Causticum.  We  have  now  to  consider  the
remaining  drugs  of  this  order  which  we  use  in  our
practice.

The  first  of  these  is  the  Carbonate  of  potash,

Kali  carbonicum.

It  is  prepared  by  solution,  at  first  in  water,  later  in
alcohol.

The  proving  is  in  the  '  Chronic  Diseases/
If  we  are  to  believe  the  pathogenesis  there  detailed,
we  must  credit  Kali  carbonicum  with  being  homoeo-
pathic to  most  of  the  ills  that  flesh  is  heir  to.  As
a  matter  of  fact,  its  sphere  is  very  limited.  It  is
best  known  in  affections  of  the  respiratory  organs.
It  has  occasionally  proved  curative  in  those  pulmo-
nary affections  which  were  called  "phthisis"  before
physical  exploration  was  known  :  and  it  is  strongly
recommended  in  Noack  and  Trinks'  '  Handbuch/  I


352  KALI CHLORICUM.

know  not  on  what  grounds,  in  pleurisy.  It  appears,
also,  to  have  some  influence  over  the  ovario -uterine
system.  Hahnemann  commends  it  in  suppression
of  the  menses,  or  when  these  delay  making  their
first  appearance  at  the  time  of  puberty.  It  is
spoken  of  so  highly  for  aching  in  the  back  in
pregnant  women,*  and  for  the  effects  of  want  of  care
after  miscarriage  that  I  suspect  it  has  some  power
over  uterine  congestion.

It  will  be  seen  from  this  that  Causticum  is  not
so  close  an  analogue  of  Kali  carbonicum  as  their
chemical  relationship  would  suggest,  Natrum  muri-
aticum  is  perhaps  the  medicine  which  most  resembles
it.

As  Kali  carbonicum  was  used  by  the  earlier
Hahnemannians  much  more  than  it  is  now,  I
should  have  supposed  that  the  higher  dilutions  were
the  most  efficacious.  Dr.  Clotar  Miiller,  however,
writes  "As  long  as  I  employed  this  medicine  in  6
or  30,  I  saw  little  or  no  benefit.  But  since  I  have
for  many  years  by  Dr.  Gruber's  advice,  given  it  in
1  and  2,  I  have  seen  better  results,  especially  in
some  cases  of  pulmonary  tuberculosis."

We  come  next  to  the  Chlorate  of  potash,

Kali  chloricum,

which  is  prepared  as  the  Carbonate,  or  by  tritura-
tion.

There  is  a  short  pathogenesis  of  Kali  chloricum
in  Jahr's  '  Manual.'  A  paper  on  its  external  use

*  I  have  just  lately  given  it  (6th  dil.)  in  a  case  of  this  kind  with
most  satisfactory  results.


KALI CHLORICUM.  353

by  Mr.  Evan  Frazer  in  the  'Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./
vol.  xviii,  should  also  be  consulted.

From  what  I  read  in  your  journals  I  fancy  that
no  medicine  is  in  more  general  favour  among  your
practitioners  just  now  than  Chlorate  of  Potash.
You  seem  to  believe  in  its  power  of  improving
cachectic  states  of  the  system,  and  give  it  accordingly
in  such  diseases  as  syphilis,  cancer,  and  phthisis
where  the  general  condition  is  of  this  character.
Of  the  same  nature  appears  to  be  its  deodorizing
influence  when  applied  in  solution,  which  you  know
well,  but  which  I  have  never  seen  better  illustrated
than  in  Mr.  Frazer's  cases  in  the  paper  referred  to.
There  is  a  growing  tendency  to  revive  the  old  notion
that  Chlorate  of  Potash  produces  these  effects  in
virtue  of  the  large  proportion  of  oxygen  it  contains.
At  one  time  this  theory  was  supposed  invalid,
because  the  salt  was  found  unchanged  in  the  urine.
I  cannot  pronounce  upon  this  question.  If  the
theory  be  true  (and  I  must  say  that  the  parallel
action  of  the  Permanganate  gives  countenance  to  it)
the  internal  use  of  Chlorate  of  Potash  is  as  open  to
us  as  its  external  application.  It  stands  on  the
same  footing  as  the  inhalation  of  oxygen.

I  must  claim,  however,  for  dynamism  and  for
Homoeopathy  one  of  the  best  established  uses  of
Chlorate  of  Potash,  its  power  over  stomatitis.  Let
me  refer  you  to  a  case  reported  in  the  '  Med.  Times
and  Gazette '  for  May  22nd,  1858.  A  child  had
been  taking  from  March  16th  to  May  18th  three
times  daily  at  first  ten  and  then  five  grains  of  the
salt  for  strumous  ophthalmia.  "  On  May  18th,  she
came  with  a  very  sore  mouth.  The  saliva  dripped

23


354  KALI NITRICUM.

from  her  lips,  there  were  numerous  follicular  ulcers
on  the  tongue  and  inside  of  lips,  and  one  large  one
occupied  a  surface  the  size  of  a  shilling  on  the  back
part  of  the  dorsum  of  the  tongue.  The  salivary
glands  were  enlarged  and  tender,  and  the  mouth
full  of  saliva,  although  the  ptyalism  was  not  extreme,
nor  were  the  gums  sore.  In  this  latter  respect  and
in  the  existence  of  the  larger  ulcers  on  the  tongue,
the  stomatitis  differed  from  that  caused  by  mercury."
Mr.  Jonathan  Hutchinson,  also,  mentions  it  as  a
curious  fact  that  Chlorate  of  Potash  causes  a  form
of  stomatitis  very  similar  to  that  which  it  cures. —
Our  experience  is  quite  at  one  with  yours  as  to  the
value  of  the  Chlorate  in  these  cases.  Mr.  Frazer
thinks  it  has  a  specific  power  over  ulceration,  and
gives  a  good  case  where  this  process  in  the  throat
of  a  syphilitic  patient  was  arrested  by  it.

In  this  action  of  Chlorate  of  Potash  it  has  for
analogues  Mercury,  Iodine,  Nitric  and  Muriatic  acid,
and  Iris.

Your  use  of  the  drug  shows  that  material  doses
will  manifest  its  specific  properties.  I  commonly
use  the  1st  dec.  trituration.  Mr.  Frazer  finds  ten
grains  to  a  pint  a  sufficient  strength  for  local  applica-
tion.

The  third  salt  of  Potash  which  comes  before  us
here  is  the  Nitrate,  Nitre,  or

Kali  nitricum.

The  nitre  of  the  shops,  dissolved  in  hot  water  and
deposited  in  crystals  as  it  cools,  is  triturated  for  our
use.


KALI NITBICUM.  355

The  proving  is  in  the  '  Chronic  Diseases/  sub  voce
"Nitrum."  By  far  the  best  account,  however,  of
the  pathogenetic  effects  of  the  salt  is  given  in
Hempel.

While  I  was  an  Alloeopath,  Nitre  was  a  very
favourite  remedy  of  mine  in  the  febrile  affections  of
children.  I  supposed  it  to  act  chemically  on  the
hyperinotic  blood,  and  dynamically  on  the  excited
circulation.  I  see  no  reason  for  supposing  that  I
was  wrong.  Hahnemann  says  that  "inasmuch  as
the  production  of  cold  in  the  system  is  the  primary
effect  of  Nitrum,  its  action  in  inflammatory  fevers
must  be  palliative  only."  I  dare  say  it  is;  but  in
these  ephemeral  fevers  a  palliative  answers  much
the  same  purposes  as  a  curative.  I  have  better
remedies  now :  but  I  look  back  with  affection  to
my  former  Nitre.  I  confess,  moreover,,  that  I  have
not  yet  found  a  place  for  it  in  my  new  therapeutics.
The  pathogenetic  effects  it  has  occasionally  produced
are  not  a  little  remarkable.  Besides  its  anti-plastic
influence  upon  the  blood,  and  its  power  of  reducing
the  circulation,  it  manifests  active  neurotic  properties.
In  one  of  the  cases  of  poisoning  by  it  collected  by
Dr.  Hempel  is  caused  general  paralysis,  with  blind-
ness, in  another  chorea,  in  another  acute  oedema  of
the  whole  body.  Its  well-known  diuretic  action,
moreover,  is  worth  noting  and  studying.  Altogether
I  think  that  Nitre  bids  fair  to  become  one  of  the
"  medicines  of  the  future."

I  can  say  nothing  at  present  about  allied  remedies
or  dose.

The  Permanganate  of  Potash —


356  KALI PERMANGANICUM.

Kali  permanganicum,

has  been  best  known  hitherto  in  the  form  of
"  Condy's  Fluid,"  where  it  disinfects  and  deodorizes
by  means  of  (as  it  is  supposed)  the  large  proportion
of  oxygen  it  contains  (comp.  Kali  chloricum).  I
mention  it  here  because  it  has  lately  been  proved,
and  bids  fair  to  fill  a  gap  in  the  treatment  of
malignant  diphtheria  which  has  long  remained — to
our  cost — open.  The  heroic  proving  of  Dr.  H.  C.
Allen  (which  you  will  find  in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of
Horn/  for  April,  1867)  has  shown  the  power  of  the
Permanganate  to  set  up  acute  inflammation  of  the
throat,  extending  to  the  nares,  larynx,  and  salivary
glands,  and  along  the  Eustachian  tubes.  With  these
symptoms  there  were  diuresis  and  obstinate  consti-
pation. Putting  together  this  elective  affinity  for
the  throat  and  its  neighbourhood,  and  the  chemical
power  of  the  drug  in  dissolving  the  false  membrane
and  destroying  the  offensive  emanations  of  diphtheria,
Dr.  Allen  tried  it  in  a  desperate  case  of  the
malignant  form  of  this  disease,  with  the  most  rapid
and  brilliant  results.  The  usual  remedies  had  been
given  without  effect  :  the  odour  of  the  breath  had
become  almost  unbearable  ;  a  dark-coloured  offen-
sive diarrhoea  had  set  in,  while,  "  with  vomiting,
fluids  taken  by  the  mouth  were  returned  by  the
nose,  and  a  general  prostration  seemed  to  be  the
precursor  of  a  fatal  termination.  At  this  stage  I
dissolved  three  grains  of  Permanganate  in  one  half-
glass  of  water,  gave  her  a  teaspoonful  at  9  p.m.,
to  be  repeated  every  hour  until  I  saw  her.  Called
at  12  p.m.,  found  her  much  improved,  breathing


KALMIA LATIFOLIA.  357

easier,  and  a  warm  perspiration  had  made  its
appearance.  Continued  the  medicine.  The  next
morning — found  her  sitting  up  in  her  bed,  and
her  whole  appearance  changed.  On  examining  the
throat,  to  my  astonishment,  I  found  the  membrane
hitherto  so  extensive  almost  gone,  a  small  patch  on
the  left  tonsil  only  being  visible.  The  offensive
character  of  the  breath  was  completely  changed ;  in
fact,  I  could  discover  no  odour  at  all.  Continued
the  medicine  every  three  hours  while  awake,  and
she  went  on  to  a  speedy  convalescence."

Dr.  Allen  adds,  <c  This  is  only  one  of  a  number  I
could  relate  treated  with  the  Permanganate,  all
with  equally  good  results."  To  my  mind  it  recalls
a  score  of  cases  in  which  I  would  have  given  any-
thing for  such  a  medicine,  but  which  went  down  to
the  grave,  untouched  by  our  ordinary  means.  I
have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  testing  Dr.
Allen's  recommendation,  but  shall  gladly  do  so
when  occasion  offers.

, The  mountain-laurel,

Kalmia  latifolia,

I  include  in  my  list  of  medicines  only  because  its
proving  is  contained  in  Esrey's  collection,  and
comes  from  Dr.  Constantine  Hering.  The  sole
point  in  its  pathogenesis  which  seems  worthy  of
note  is  that  it  diminishes  the  force  and  frequency
of  the  heart's  action  in  a  very  marked  manner.
Whether  its  action  upon  the  circulation  is  exerted,
like  that  of  Aconite,  through  the  vaso-motor  nerves,
like  that  of  Tartar  Emetic,  through  the  vagi,  or  like


358  KREASOTE.

that  of  Digitalis,  upon  the  substance  of  the  heart
itself,  I  cannot  say.  It  has  been  little  used  in
disease.  Dr.  Russell  speaks  of  having  tried  it  in  a
case  of  nervous  palpitation,  but  with  purely  negative
results.

Let  us  now  consider  the  place  occupied  in  specific
medicine  by

Kreasote,

of  which  we  make  alcoholic  dilutions  for  use.

There  is  a  pathogenesis  of  Kreasote  in  Jahr's
1  Manual/  embodying  the  results  of  a  proving  by
Dr.  Wahle.  Much  interesting  matter  is  contained
in  Dr.  Cormack's  monograph  on  the  drug :  and
Teste's  article  should  by  all  means  be  consulted.

The  results  of  Dr.  Cormack's  experiments  on
animals  seem  to  me  negative  as  respects  its  medi-
cinal value.  It  seems  to  suspend  the  functions  of
the  first  organ  through  whose  capillaries  it  passes,
causing  vertigo  and  stupor  if  introduced  into  the
carotids,  asphyxia  if  injected  into  the  veins.  These
effects  are  probably  due  to  the  coagulation  of  the
albumen  of  the  blood,  since  Kreasote  exerts  an
influence  of  this  kind  under  all  other  circumstances.
Upon  this  influence,  indeed,  the  remedial  powers  of
the  drug  when  applied  locally  seem  to  depend.  If
your  experience  leads  you  to  think  favourably  of
these  uses,  pray  do  not  abandon  them  till  you  get
something  better.  The  point  is  quite  outside  the
domain  of  Homoeopathy :  she  says  neither  yea  nor
nay  to  the  practice.

When we come to the dynamic effects of


KREASOTE.  359

Kreasote,  however,  the  aspect  of  things  is  changed.
Pereira  is  never  more  homoeopathic  in  his  uncon-
scious honesty  than  in  treating  of  the  properties  of
this  drug.  "  Swallowed  in  large  doses/'  he  writes,
"  it  causes  vomiting  and  purging  •"  and  again,
"  when  the  dose  has  been  considerably  augmented,
diarrhoea,  or  even  dysentery,  has  been  produced."
And  then  he  goes  on  to  tell  us  that  "  as  an  internal
remedy,  Kreasote  has  been  principally  celebrated,
in  this  country,  as  a  medicine  possessing  extra-
ordinary powers  of  arresting  vomiting ;"  that  in
Sweden  it  was  found  very  useful  in  a  wide-spread
epidemic  of  dysentery ;  and  that  Mr.  S pinks  and
Dr.  Kesteven  have  published  cases  of  its  successful
employment  in  common  diarrhoea.  While,  to
crown  all,  we  have  this  sentence,  "  Occasionally  it
increases  the  quantity  of  the  urinary  secretion ;  but
in  diabetes  it  sometimes  has  an  opposite  effect."

The  power  of  Kreasote  over  vomiting  is  the  only
one  of  these  actions  upon  which  I  need  dwell.  It
is  recognised  by  us  with  our  small  doses  as  heartily
as  by  you  with  your  large.  We  agree,  moreover,
that  it  is  in  sympathetic  vomiting  that  Kreasote
proves  specific, — where  the  irritation  starts  from
some  other  organ  than  the  stomach.  Thus  the
vomiting  of  phthisis,  of  cancer  of  liver  or  uterus,
of  pregnancy,  and  of  chronic  kidney  disease  is  often
checked  by  it.  I  must  say,  however,  that  I  have  a
chronic  case  of  cancer  of  the  stomach  under  treat-
ment, the  vomiting  of  which  is  always  arrested  by
Kreasote  when  it  becomes  troublesome.  I  believe
that  some  esteem  Kreasote  very  highly  in  hysterical
vomiting.


360  KREASOTE.

This  has  been  the  main  homoeopathic  as  well  as
alloeopathic  use  of  Kreasote.  My  friend  Dr.
Hilbers,  however,  considers  that  Kreasote  has  great
power  of  sustaining  the  strength  in  some  of  these
exhausting  diseases,  as  well  as  of  checking  the
vomiting :  and  relies  much  upon  it  in  the  treatment
of  phthisis.  Like  the  other  antiseptics,  moreover,
(vide  Arsenic  and  Carbo),  Kreasote  has  a  dynamic
influence  over  foul  discharges  and  putrescent  pro-
cesses. I  once  made  a  very  pretty  cure  with  it  of
persistent  lochial  discharge,  which  had  become
brown  and  offensive.

But  we  owe  to  the  fertile  and  original  mind  of
M.  Teste  a  remarkable  development  of  the  uses  of
Kreasote.  He  calls  attention  to  the  effects  of  the
continued  use  of  smoked  meat ;  "  a  sort  of  scurvy
carrying  off  the  teeth,  foul  breath,  costiveness,  a
general  malaise,  and  a  real  cacohymia."  He  then
suggests  that  the  power  of  Kreasote  when  locally
applied,  not  merely  to  relieve  temporarily  the  pain
of  toothache,  but  to  arrest  the  progress  of  caries,  is
of  a  dynamic  nature.  Putting  these  facts  together,
he  justifies  by  them  the  following  statements  drawn
from  his  experience.

1.  Kreasote  is  in  children  of  all  ages,  as  well  as
in  adults,  the  chief  remedy  for  odontalgia,  when  it  is
caused  by  caries  of  the  teeth.

2.  When dentition  is  so  badly  performed  as  to
become  a  disease,  comprising  general  irritation  and
cachexia  with  degeneration  of  the  teeth  themselves,
especially  when  the  child is constipated,  Kreasote
is  the  specific  remedy.

These  statements  I  can  confirm  from  repeated


KREASOTE.  361

trials  in  my  own  practice,  which  have  yielded  me
almost  uniform  success.*  I  cannot  follow  M.  Teste,
however,  when  he  goes  on  to  extol  Kreasote  as  the
"  specific  for  syphilis  in  nursing  children."  If  he
limits  it,  as  he  seems  to  do  subsequently,  to  cases
"  where  the  disease  manifests  itself  under  the
exanthematous  form,"  I  shall  not  disagree.  But
I  have  failed  to  see  any  effect  from  Kreasote  upon
the  profound  cacohymia  which  this  sad  disease  so
often  manifests.

M.  Teste  further  adds  that  Kreasote  is  most
suitable  to  delicate  or  cachectic  children  :  and  when
given  to  those  of  a  lively,  vigorous,  and  sanguine
constitution  makes  them  feel  so  uncomfortable  that
the  exhibition  of  Ferrum  metallicum  as  an  antidote
becomes  necessary.

The  chief  analogues  of  Kreasote  are  Carbo
animalis  and  Vegetabilis ;  Mercurius ;  and  Petroleum.

I  have  always  used  the  2nd  dilution  for  vomitings
and  foul  discharges :  but  have  followed  M.  Teste  in
giving  the  12th  in  toothache,  and  the  24th  in  morbid
dentition.

I  have  now  to  direct  your  attention  to  one  of  the
most  important  of  our  serpent-poisons,  the  virus  of
the  lance-headed  viper,  Trigonocephalus  lachesis,
commonly  known  among  us  as —

*  Dr.  Madden  writes  to  me,  "  I  like  Kreasote  in  dentition  very
much.  My  first  case  was  our  own  baby.  She  had  been  extremely
fretful  and  irritable  and  sleepless  for  three  or  four  days,  and  Cha-
momilla  had  done  no  good.  I  gave  Kreasote  24,  and  in  a  quarter
of  an  hour  she  was  asleep,  and  slept  eleven  hours  right  off,  and
woke  cheerful.  The  nurse  was  almost  frightened,  thinking  I  must
have  given  an  opiate."


362  LACHESIS.

Lachesis.

Triturations  were  originally  made  of  the  poison  by
Dr.  Hering,  from  whom  we  derive  the  whole  of  our
present  supply  of  the  medicine.  In  this  country
we  have  it  only  in  the  form  of  tincture,  and  it
cannot  be  had  below  the  5th  centes.  dilution.

Lachesis  was  proved  by  Dr.  Hering ;  you  will  find
his  pathogenesis  in  schema  form  in  Jahr's  '  Manual.'
Nearly  all,  however,  of  the  important  uses  of  the
medicine  are  based  upon  the  effects  of  the  ser-
pent's bite  ;  which  you  may  read  of  in  any  treatise
on  Surgery.

It  is  generally  admitted  that  the  constitutional
phenomena  resulting  from  snake-bites  depend  partly
upon  blood-poisoning  and  partly  upon  distress  of  the
nerve-centres.  Whether  both  these  effects  are
primary,  or  whether  the  nervous  centres  result  from
the  toxication  of  the  blood,  seems  an  open  question.
I  incline  to  believe  that  they  are  both  primary,
although  I  doubt  not  that  it  is  by  absorption  and
diffusion  through  the  circulation  that  the  virus
reaches  the  nerve-centres.  The  pneumo-gastric
nerves  are  those  which  chiefly  manifest  the  influence
of  the  poison  :  thus  we  have  sense  of  constriction
and  choking  about  the  throat,  spasmodic  dysphagia
and  dyspnoea,  and  slowing  even  to  stopping  of  the
heart's  action.  If  reaction  takes  place,  the  haematic
influence  of  the  virus  becomes  apparent.  "  The
disordered  state  of  the  blood  induces  febrile  dis-
turbance of  a  low  kind,  aggravated  by  the  local
changes  which  meanwhile  have  occurred  in  the
bitten  part ;  and  under  this  the  patient  may  sink  at


LACHESIS.  363

a  more  remote  period."  I  quote  from  the  late
Professor  Milter's  '  Principles  of  Surgery/  He
goes  on  "the  local  affection  is  itself  formidable.
By  the  absorption  of  virus  into  the  blood,  and  its
subsequent  diffusion  through  the  system,  vital  power
is  lowered  generally.  By  imbibition  of  the  poison
in  the  part  injured,  the  same  result  takes  place
locally.  Under  the  stimulus  of  the  injury  the
part  inflames ;  and  the  process,  advancing  uncon-
trolled, in  consequence  of  deficiency  both  in  general
and  in  local  vital  power,  soon  attains  its  worst
results — gangrene,  attended  with  diffuse  infiltration
of  a  putrid  sanies/'  With  this,  of  course,  there  is
secondary  fever  of  a  typhoid  type.

Now  I  have  already,  when  speaking  of  Apis,
justified  the  use  of  these  toxical  phenomena  in  the
choice  of  medicines  according  to  the  law  of  similars.
Lachesis  is  another  illustration  of  the  doctrine.
There  are  two  great  spheres  of  action  in  which  it
has  proved  a  successful  remedy ;  and  these  precisely
correspond  to  the  haematic  and  neurotic  phenomena
induced  by  the  bite  of  the  serpent.

1.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  in  the
primary  toxasmiae,  as  typhus,  Lachesis  has  any
place  as  a  remedy.  But  when  a  local  affection
assumes  a  malignant  character,  and  from  thence
proceed  poisoning  of  the  blood  and  prostration  of
the  nervous  energies,  there  is  no  medicine  to  com-
pare with  it.  '  The  best  instance  of  what  I  mean  is
traumatic  gangrene,  of  which  you  will  find  three
cases  in  Hempel's  article,  in  which  the  effect  of
Lachesis  was  most  surprising.  Other  examples  are
afforded  by  carbuncle,  malignant  pustule,  pyaemia


364  LACHESIS.

from  phlebitis,  and  putrid  sore-throat  (not  diph-
theritic), of  all  of  which  diseases  Dr.  Carroll
Dunham  has  given  us  cases  showing  the  curative
power  of  Lachesis.*  You  will  perceive  at  once
that  this  list  might  be  widely  extended  :  and  that
such  a  principle  of  administration  gives  us  in  this
medicine  a  most  important  and  often  needed
remedy.

2.  The  power  of  Lachesis  over  the  pneumogastric
nerves  is  very  frequently  called  into  play.  It  is  an
exceedingly  useful  medicine  in  what  may  be  called
the  irritable  throat,  especially  when  coughing  is
excited  by  the  morbid  sensations.  You  will  find  a
striking  case  of  this  kind  in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of
Horn./  vol.  xxii,  p.  488;  to  which  I  could  add
another  very  similar  one.  It  has  a  remarkable
power  of  allaying  the  sympathetic  cough  of  cardiac
disease,  and  sometimes  relieves  that  of  pulmonary
abscess  and  of  phthisis.  It  must  be  thought  of  in
globus  hystericus,  in  spasmodic  stricture  of  the
oesophagus,  and  in  nervous  palpitation.

These  are  the  main  spheres  of  action  of  Lachesis ;
but  it  has  received  other  applications,  some  empirical,
some  drawn  from  its  pathogenesis.

1.  It  is  a  most  useful  medicine  for  women  at  the
change  of  life. The  menopausic  troubles  over  which
it  has most control are the "  flushes," and the
burning  vertex-headaches  and  pains  in  the  back.

2.  Dr.  Black gave  it  with  much success  in a
case of  inflammation  of  the  caecum  which  he has
narrated  in  the  '  British  Journal,'  vol.  v. I  have

*  '  American  Horn.  Review,'  vol.  iy.


LACHESIS.  365

myself  given it with benefit in  anomalous  pains
affecting  this  part  of  the  bowel.

3.  Lachesis  has  effected  a  cure  in  some  forms  of
recurrent  "  sick-headache." I  would refer  you  to
Dr. Black's papers "  On Headache," in the
'  Journal,'  vol. v, and to a case in  vol.  xxii,  p.
482.

4.  Lachesis is often a good medicine for  the
"  irritable  ulcer." Dr.  Madden  relies  upon  it  to
arrest  threatened  ulceration  about  the  ankle  in  cases
of  varicosis  of  the  leg.

A  good  deal  of  incredulity  has  at  various  times
been  expressed  concerning  the  therapeutic  powers  of
Lachesis.  My  own  experience  with  it  has  not
extended  to  the  "  malignant  "  disorders  in  which  it
is  so  highly  esteemed  :  but  I  think  that  no  one  can
read  Dr.  Dake's  three  cases  in  Hempel,  and  Dr.
Carroll  Dunham's  series  in  the  ( American  Homoeo-
pathic Review/  without  feeling  convinced  that  the
reputation  of  the  medicine  is  merited.

The  analogues  of  Lachesis  are  the  other  serpent-
poisons,  Crotalus  and  Naja  ;  and  Arsenicum.

As  the  5th  and  6th  are  the  lowest  potencies  we
can  obtain,  I  need  say  nothing  about  dose.  It  is  a
medicine  high  in  esteem  among  those  who  habitually
use  the  "  high  potencies."


LETTER  XXVIII.

LAUROCERASUS,  LEDUM,  LEPTANDRA,  LOBELIA,  LYCO-
PODIUM,  MAGNESIA  CARBONICA  AND  MURIATICA,
MANGANUM,  MENYANTHES.

THE  first  drug  on  the  longish  list  before  us  to-
day is  the  cherry-laurel,

Laurocerasus,

from  the  leaves  of  which  we  prepare  a  tincture.

There  is  a  pathogenesis  of  Laurocerasus  in  Jahr's
'  Manual/  taken  from  Hartlaub  and  Trinks ;  to
which  Hempel  adds  some  experiments  by  Jorg  and
his  pupils.

The  cherry-laurel  is  one  of  those  plants,  like  the
bitter  almond  and  the  wild  cherry  (Primus  virgi-
niana),  which  owe  their  virtues  mainly  to  the
Hydrocyanic  acid  they  contain.  I  confess  myself
unable  to  see  anything  peculiar  in  the  symptoms
produced  by  Laurocerasus  :  and  know  of  no  reason
why  I  should  use  it  in  place  of  the  acid  itself.

Laurocerasus  has  been  very  little  employed :
and  I  can  give  you  no  hint  as  to  its  most  suitable
dose.

Next  we  come  to  the  marsh  tea,  or  wild  rose-
mary—


LEDUM PALUSTRE.  367

Ledum  palustre.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  leaves  and
flowers.

The  proving  of  Ledum  is  in  the  '  Mat.  Med.
Pura :'  but  Teste's  article  must  be  read.

From  Hahnemann's  proving  we  were  led  to  em-
ploy Ledum  in  some  papular  skin  eruptions,  and  in
chronic  rheumatism  affecting  the  hips  and  ankles.
Hahnemann  also  noted  coldness  as  a  characteristic
symptom  of  the  drug.  But  I  confess  that  for  my-
self I  knew  little  how  to  use  Ledum  until  I  had
read  Teste.  He  classes  it  with  Arnica,  Rhus,  and
Croton  in  its  double  relation  to  cutaneous  affections
and  to  arthritis.  He  thinks  it  acts  specially  on
parts  of  the  body  where  the  cellular  tissue  is  want-
ing, as  the  fingers  and  toes;  and  hence  affects  the
small  joints  rather  than  the  large.  He  recom-
mends it  accordingly  for  traumatic  whitlow,  and
for  true  gout  of  a  sub-acute  nature  and  in  the  hands
or  feet.  He  further  proclaims,  that  Ledum  is  to
punctured  wounds  what  Arnica  is  to  contusions.
Besides  some  obvious  applications  of  this  property
of  the  drug  he  mentions  that  it  gives  almost  imme-
diate relief  to  the  itching  caused  by  mosquito-bites  :
and  this  when  given  internally  in  the  15th  dilu-
tion !  In  the  stings  of  bees  and  wasps,  he  says,  the
result  is  less  prompt,  but  still  very  satisfactory.  On  the
skin  it  causes  (according  to  this  authority)  "  an
eczematous  eruption,  with  a  tingling  itching,  that
spreads  over  the  whole  body,  penetrates  into  the
mouth,  probably  also  into  the  air-passages,  and
occasions  a  spasmodic  cough,  which  is  sometimes


368  LEPTANDRA VIRGIN1CA.

very  violent."  A  similar  condition  is  sometimes
met  with  idiopathically  in  gouty  subjects.

I  can  only  add  that  so  far  as  I  have  had  oppor-
tunity of  testing  these  statements,  I  have  found
them  perfectly  correct.

Besides  the  medicines  already  mentioned,  Ledum
has  points  of  resemblance  to  Bryonia,  Pulsatilla,
and  Ruta.

M.  Teste's  suggestions  are  best  carried  out  with
his  dilutions,  viz.  about  the  sixth  or  twelfth.

My  next  is  an  American  medicine,  the  "black
root/'

Leptandra  virginica.

The  tincture  of  the  root,  and  triturations  of  Lep-
tandrin,  are  the  officinal  preparations.

A  proving  of  this  medicine,  with  clinical  remarks,
is  given  in  Dr.  Hale's  '  New  Remedies.'

The  action  of  Leptandra  is  upon  the  liver  and
bowels.  Dr.  Burt  suffered  from  dull  aching
burning  distress  in  the  region  of  the  liver  and  gall-
bladder, extending  to  the  spine.  With  this  there
were  such  sympathetic  symptoms  as  frontal  headache,
soreness  of  the  eyeballs,  and  pain  in  the  left
shoulder.  One  prover  reports  that  the  medicine
gave  him  actual  jaundice.  The  intestinal  evacua-
tions are  much  affected  by  Leptandra.  Its  most
frequent  and  characteristic  effect  is  seen  in  stools
frequent,  profuse,  black,  foetid,  and  papescent ;  they
are  difficult  to  retain.  Under  the  prolonged  use
of  the  drug  the  stools  become  watery,  and  later
have  quantities  of  mucus  in  them.


LOBELIA INFLATA.  369

Leptaudra  has  not  been  much  used  as  a  remedy :
but  such  applications  as  it  has  received  have  been
in  precise  accordance  with  the  pathogenetic  effects  I
headache"  and  "liver-complaint/'  especially  when
the  characteristic  blackish  stools  are  present,  it  has
been  found  very  useful.  And  it  has  occasionally
proved  curative  in  dysentery.

It  most  resembles  Bryonia,  Iris,  and  Podo-
phyllum.

The  lower  potencies  only  have  been  used.

We  are  still  on  American  soil  when  we  come  to
the  medicine  next  on  our  list,

Lobelia  inflata.

A tincture  or triturations  are  prepared  from  the
powder  as  imported.

The  original  proving  of  Lobelia  was  made  by
the  late  Dr.  Noack,  and  is  translated  in  the  Appen-
dix to  the  1st  vol.  of  the  '  British  Journal.'  It  is
re-produced,  with  additional  matter,  in  Esrey's
'American  Provings'  and  in  the  2nd  edition  of
Hale's  '  New  Remedies/

You  know  the  close  resemblance  between  the
effects  of  the  "  Indian  Tobacco"  and  those  of  the
pernicious  weed  after  which  it  is  named.  The
main  sphere  of  Lobelia  is  undoubtedly  the  pneu-
mogastric  nerves.  No  drug  more  uniformly  pro-
duces that  condition  we  call  "  nausea,"  with  its  con-
comitant vomiting.  It  has  been  occasionally  used
with  success  in  Homoeopathic  practice  in  cardialgia,
for  which  I  refer  you  to  Esrey  and  Hale.

24


370  LOBELIA INFLATA.

But  the  chief  interest  about  Lobelia  lies  in  its
relation  to  another  region  of  pneumogastric  influ-
ence, the  respiratory  organs.  Has  it  any  specific
relation  to  asthma?  or  does  it  merely  relieve  the
paroxysms  by  causing  relaxation,  like  any  other
nauseant  ?  I  believe  it  to  be  homoeopathic  to
asthmatic  constriction  of  the  air- tubes.  Every  one
quotes  Darwin's

"  Fell  Lobelia's  suffocating  breath
Loads  the  dank  piuions  of  the  gale  with  death."

And  one  prover,  who  took  the  tincture  in  tea-
spoonful  doses  every  fifteen  minutes  until  nearly  an
ounce  had  been  taken,  without  exciting  vomiting,
complained  of  a  general  tightness  of  the  chest,  with
short  and  somewhat  laborious  breathing.  I  would
not  lay  too  much  stress  upon  these  observations,
but  that  I  have  so  often  given  rapid  relief  in  the
asthmatic  paroxysms  by  the  administration  of
Lobelia.  Giving  it,  as  I  do,  in  the  2nd,  3rd,  and
6th  dilutions,  I  feel  pretty  sure  that  I  must  be
using  a  homoeopathic  remedy.  I  think,  too,  that  I
have  seen  good  effects  from  the  continued  use  of
the  medicine  in  suitable  cases,  especially  when  the
attacks  are  easily  excited  through  the  stomach.
Lobelia  also  relieves  somewhat  the  sensation  of
dyspnoea  in  sufferers  from  emphysema.

I  note,  without  being  able  to  confirm  the  obser-
vation, that  Dr.  Jeanes  considers  a  lateritious  urine
a  characteristic  indication  for  Lobelia.  Also  that
one  of  the  provers  suffered  from  burning  prickling
of  the  skin,  "  far  exceeding  in  severity  that  of
Mezereum,  Ledum,  Polygonum,  and  Euphorbia."


LYCOPODIUM  CLAVATUM.  371

The  analogues  of  Lobelia  are  Antimonium  tar-
taricum,  Digitalis,  Ipecacuanha,  and  Tabacum.

I  have  already  indicated  the  dilutions  from  2
to  6  as  those  which  have  done  me  the  most  service.

I  now  come  to  one  of  those  curious  medicines
whose  virtues  we  owe  almost  entirely  to  the  Hahne-
mannian  process  of  trituration.  It  is  the  club-moss,

WOlf  8-foot,

Lycopodium  clavatum.

The  well-known  unmoistenable  powder  is  tritu-
rated for  our  use.

The  original  proving  of  Lycopodium  is  in  the
'  Chronic  Diseases/  A  guide  through  its  labyrinth
is  afforded  to  us  by  a  very  admirable  study  of  the
drug  by  Mr.  A.  C.  Pope,  which  you  will  find  in  the
'  British  Journal/  vol.  xvii.  In  the  second  vol.  of
the  same  Journal  you  will  find  some  further  patho-
genetic  experiments  with  Lycopodium  :  and  in  the
eighteenth  vol.  is  a  short  re-proving,  conducted  by
Prof.  Martin  of  Jena  and  his  students.

The  provings  last  named  were  conducted  with  the
crude  drug,  and  sometimes  the  first  trituration.
The  general  symptoms  are  those  of  excitement, —
quickened  circulation,  headache,  increased  appetite,
more  frequent  evacuations,  stronger  sexual  appetite.
The  chief  local  affinity  manifested  was  for  the  urinary
organs.  There  was  frequent  and  sometimes  pain-
ful micturition  :  and  the  urine  was  cloudy  and  sedi-
mentous,  occasionally  charged  with  mucus  and  even
blood.

This  may  be  called  the  crude  action  of  Lycopo-


372  LYCOPODIUM CLAVATUM.

dium  :  and  therewith  correspond  its  alloeopathic  uses.
These  are  confined  to  urinary  affections.  In  the
spasmodic  retention  of  urine  of  children,  and  in
catarrh  of  the  bladder  in  adults  it  had  considerable
repute  as  a  remedy  even  before  Hahnemanri's  tritu-
ration  developed  its  more  extensive  powers.

When  we  turn  to  the  proving  in  the  '  Chronic
Diseases/  doubtless  instituted  with  the  potencies,  a
very  different  scene  is  manifested.  Instead  of  acute
disorder,  we  are  looking  upon  gradually  advancing
chronic  disease ;  instead  of  excitement  we  have  de-
pression and  decay.  Mental,  nervous,  and  bodily
weakness;  sallow  complexion,  and  cold  extremities;
anorexia,  slow  and  depraved  digestion,  flatulence,
and  constipation ;  a  passive  catarrh  of  the  air-
passages  ;  and  slow  degeneration  of  the  skin — are  the
effects  of  its  influence.  This  is  the  general  charac-
ter of  the  profounder  action  of  Lycopodium.  Of
the  details  of  the  pathogenesis  I  feel  too  little
assurance  to  attempt  their  physiological  analysis  and
expression.  I  think,  however,  that  I  shall  be  able
to  fix  the  sphere  of  the  medicine  from  clinical
experience.

I  would  lay  down,  then,  that  Lycopodium  has  no
direct  neurotic,  haematic,  or  myotic  influence.  It  is
a  purely  vegetative  remedy,  affecting  the  three  great
tracts  of  mucous  membrane  with  their  cutaneous
continuation.

1.  The  digestive  canal,  with  the  liver,  is  the  most
important  seat  of  the  action  of  Lycopodium.  There
is  a  form  of  dyspepsia  in  which  it  is  quite  specific  :
a  typical  case  of  the  kind  is  recorded  by  my  friend
Dr.  Hutchinson  in  the  number  of  the  '  Brit.


LYCOPODIUM  CLAVATUM.  373

Journal/  for  July,  1867.  The  constituent  elements
of  such  a  dyspepsia  occasionally  appear  separately,
and  often  require  this  remedy.  In  water-brash  it
will  nearly  always  prove  curative,  and  when  it  fails
Nux  vomica  will  succeed.  For  flatulence  the  choice
generally  lies  between  'Lycopodium  and  Carbo
vegetabilis;  I  think  the  former  most  suitable  when
the  distension  takes  place  in  the  intestines,  the
latter  when  the  wind  accumulates  in  the  stomach,
oppressing  the  breathing.  For  constipation  Lyco-
podium stands  very  high  as  a  remedy,  most  re-
sembling Bryonia.  Teste  commends  it  highly  for
obstinate  constipation  in  young  children.  He  has
a  notion  that  it  corresponds  best  to  the  indiges-
tions caused  by  heavy  farinaceous  and  fermentable
food.  I  have  also  used  Lycopodium,  according  to
his  suggestion,  in  that  most  dangerous  enteritis
which  is  set  up  in  infants  by  the  ingestion  of  food
which  they  cannot  digest ;  and  often  with  success.
Here  also,  when  Lycopodium  fails,  Nux  vomica  will
often  succeed.

Besides  the  above-named  affections,  acidity  and
heart  burn  are  prominent  effects  of  Lycopodium  :
and  it  has  the  characteristic  symptom  of  "  uncon-
querable sleep  after  dinner,  followed  by  great  ex-
haustion." It  is  probable  that  some  of  its  digestive
disturbance  is  due  to  its  influence  upon  the  liver.
In  Prof.  Martin's  provings,  this  organ  frequently
gave  signals  of  distress  :  and  Mr.  Pope  says  that  in
old  hepatic  congestions  he  has  found  Lycopodium
more  useful  than  any  other  medicine,  Sulphur  per-
haps excepted.

2.  In  the  respiratory  sphere  Lycopodium  mani-


374  LYCOPODIUM  CLAVATUM.

fests  great  power  in  what  may  be  called  "  chronic
influenza  ;"  i.  e.  where  catarrh  becomes  persistent,
with  much  general  weakness.  Some  forms  of
chronic  bronchitis  would  doubtless  come  within  this
category  :  though  I  cannot  point  out  their  charac-
teristic indications  for  the  drug.  Teste  commends
it  highly  for  "  chronic  pneumonia,  with  purulent,  foul
smelling  expectoration,  even  when  one  of  the  lungs
(especially  the  left)  had  become  partially  hepatised."
Mr.  Pope  adds  that  few  medicines  are  so  valuable
in  pulmonary  phthisis  as  this,  when  perseveringly
used.  "  The  cough/'  he  says,  "  the  gastric  irrita-
tion, the  exhaustion,  and  the  intercurrent  attacks  of
pleurisy,  are  wonderfully  mitigated  by  it."  I
nevertheless  see  no  reason  to  suppose  that  Lyeopo-
dium  checks  the  deposition  of  tubercle  into  the
lungs  :  and  only  a  medicine  that  does  this  can
claim  to  be  more  than  a  palliative  for  consumption.
Mr.  David  Wilson  has  lately  called  our  attention
to  the  fan-like  movement  of  the  alae  nasi  noted  in
the  pathogenesis  of  Lycopodium :  and  which  he
believes  to  be  a  pathognomonic  indication  for  the
choice  o  this  drug  in  diseases  of  children  and  young
people.  Much  controversy  was  excited  by  the
manner  in  which  Mr.  Wilson  put  forward  this  state-
ment :  but  1  cannot  in  this  instance  join  my  good
friends  his  assailants.  There  is  nothing  a  priori
improbable  in  his  statement.  "When  this  symp-
tom is  clearly  marked"  he  writes  "no  matter
through  what  organ  or  tissue  the  symptoms  of  any
attack  of  illness  may  manifest  themselves  in  children
and  young  people,  I  venture  to  submit  that  the
whole  group  of  the  phenomena  in  such  attacks  will


LYCOPODIUM  CLAVATUM.  375

be  found  under  Lycopodium."  This  is  a  pure
matter  of  experience  :  and  a  good  many  cases  have
since  been  published  which  go  to  confirm  Mr.
"Wilson's  statement.  It  is  of  course  in  respiratory
affections  that  this  symptom  is  most  frequently
present.

3.  Of  the  action  of  Lycopodium  on  the  urinary
organs I have already spoken. Dr. Arnold of
Heidelberg  says  that he  has  seen  in several cases
an  increase  in the  secretion of  urine on the  ad-
ministration  of Lycopodium,  especially  when any
dropsical affection  was  present. He has likewise
observed  diminution  of  the  quantity  of  urine  in  cases
where  it  was  morbidly  increased. I  find  it  the  very
best  medicine  where  the  patient  is  suffering  from  an
excess  of  Lithic  acid  gravel :  and  look  upon  copious
sediments of  this  nature as  one of  the  most  un-
erring indications  for  its  choice  in  dyspepsia.

4.  Lycopodium  developes  its chronic  inflamma-
tion  all over  the skin,  but  most especially  in  the
hairy  scalp. It  is very  good  for  the  intertrigo  of
children,  and  for  dry  porrigo  capitis. It  is  said to
be  curative in  that scourge of  Poland,  the  plica
polonica.

I  will  only  add  that  Lycopodium  has  a  good
many  arthritic  symptoms :  and  in  a  case  mentioned
in  the  second  vol.  of  the  Journal  caused  an  inflam-
matory rheumatism  of  the  right  fore-arm,  wrist,
hand,  and  fingers.

The  analogues  of  Lycopodium  in  the  digestive
sphere  are  Bryonia  and  Nux  vomica.  I  know  no
medicines  really  resembling  it  as  a  whole.


376  MAGNESIA CARBONICA.

The  higher  dilutions  are  those  most  used  in
practice.  I  nearly  always  employ  the  12th.

Of  the  salts  of  Magnesium  we  use  for  dynamic
purposes  two,  the  Chloride  of  magnesium  and  the
Carbonate  of  magnesia.  Both  of  these  have  a  long
pathogenesis  attached  to  them  in  the  '  Chronic  Dis-
eases :'  but  the  application  of  the  symptoms  to
practice  has  been  extremely  rare.  The  Chloride,

Magnesia  muriatica,

is  recommended  by  Hahnemann  for  "  knotty,  hard,
difficult,  insufficient,  delaying  stool,"  and  by  Noack
and  Trinks  for  chronic  congestion  and  induration
of  the  liver.  It  is  said  also  to  be  curative  in
"  cramp  of  the  broad  ligaments  of  the  uterus."  As
these  "  ligaments"  are  merely  folds  of  peritoneum,
it  is  difficult  to  see  how  they  can  be  affected  with
cramp.  Perhaps  the  round  ligaments  which  lie
within  them,  and  which  are  muscular,  are  meant.
But  the  affection  must  be  difficult  to  diagnose.
Magnesia  muriatica  is  also  good  for  some  kinds  of
leucorrhrea.

Magnesia  carbonica

has  a  still  more  decided  action  on  the  uterine  func-
tions. The  menses  sometimes  anticipate,  some-
times delay ;  but  are  characteristically  of  dark  colour
and  pitchy  consistence.  The  influence  of  Magnesia
on  the  bowels  must  also  be  borne  in  mind  in  some
cases  of  diarrhoea,  especially  in  children.  Trousseau
and  Pidoux  point  out  that  the  evacuations  produced
by  this  drug  are,  at  first,  simply  liquid  fecula  ;  but


MANGANUM.  377

that  its  continued  use  sets  up  sub-acute  inflamma-
tion of  the  intestinal  mucous  membrane.

I  can  say  nothing  about  analogous  medicines  or
dose.

Of  Manganese  also  we  use  two  salts,  the  Carbonate
prepared  by  trituration,  and  the  Acetate,  by  solution.
The  symptoms  detailed  in  the  '  Chronic  Diseases'
were  obtained  from  the  two  indiscriminately.  More
recently,  a  proving  has  been  instituted  with  the
Binoxide  by  Dr.  Lembke  of  Riga,  an  account  of
which  you  will  find  in  Hempel's  article.  As  there
seems  no  essential  difference  between  the  effects
of  these  various  preparations  of  the  metal,  we  will
class  them  together  under  the  title

Manganum.

The  only  decided  symptoms  obtained  by  Dr.
Lembke  from  his  large  and  continued  doses  of  the
drug  were  a  frontal  headache,  with  heat  and  heavi-
ness (like  that  of  Ferrum)  ;  an  irritative  laryngeal
cough ;  and  some  pains  in  the  bones  and  joints.
It  is  in  affections  pointed  to  by  these  last  two  symp-
toms that  Manganum  has  been  chiefly  used  by
Homoeopaths.  Hahnemann  and  Noack  and  Trinks
concur  in  recommending  it  in  inflammations  of  the
bones,  periosteum,  and  joints  ;  and  in  chronic  dis-
ease of  the  larynx.  The  Manganum  aceticum  has
also  been  used  with  some  benefit  in  Eustachian
deafness  and  in  chronic  cutaneous  eruptions.

I  have  no  personal  experience  with  Manganese.
Were  I  to  employ  it,  I  should  be  guided  in  my
choice  by  the  statements  as  to  its  pathogenetic


378  MANGANUM.

effects  collected  by  Pereira.  Upon  workmen  engaged
upon  it  it  produces  paralysis  of  the  motor  nerves,
beginning  with  paraplegia.  This  differs  from  the
paralysis  of  lead  in  not  causing  colic  or  constipation,
and  from  that  of  Mercury  in  first  affecting  the  lower
extremities,  and  in  not  exciting  tremors  of  the
affected  part.  The  sulphate  has  a  decided  action
on  the  liver.  This  organ  was  found  inflamed  in
animals  poisoned  by  it,  and  both  in  these  and  in
the  human  subject  it  acts  as  a  vigorous  cholagogue.
Again,  "  Grille  long  since  observed  that  the  work-
men in  the  Manganese  mines  at  Macon  were  not
subject  to  the  itch ;  and  that  others  who  became
affected  with  this  disease  were  cured  by  working  in
the  mines.  This  led  him,  as  well  as  Morelot  and
others,  to  employ  it  in  cutaneous  maladies."  Of
late,  Dr.  Leared  has  published  a  number  of  cases
showing  the  good  effects  of  Manganese  in  pain  after
food  occurring  in  weakly  females.

Besides  these  facts,  sundry  speculations  have
been  hazarded  as  to  the  value  of  the  preparations
of  Manganese  in  blood  diseases,  as  chlorosis  and
anaemia.  I  have  read  these  with  much  attention  ;
but  am  not  impressed  with  the  theoretical  reasoning
or  with  its  practical  results.  With  Iron  as  food,
and  Pulsatilla,  Sepia,  Sulphur,  &c.,  as  dynamic
medicines  in  these  cases,  I  know  of  no  need  of
experimenting  farther  upon  such  a  very  hypothetical
basis.

I  can  say  nothing  as  to  this  medicine  also  of
analogous  medicines  or  of  dose.

I  conclude  this  letter  with  a  short  account  of  the
buck-bean,  marsh-trefoil,  or —


MENYANTHES TRIFOLIATA.  379

Menyanthes  trifoliata.

The  tincture  is  prepared from the entire plant,
dried.

The  proving  is  in  the  '  Materia  Medica  Pura/
There  is  little  in  the  proving  which  is  character-
istic ;  and  Menyanthes  has  rarely  been  employed  in
medicine.  Hahnemann  recommends  it  in  some
forms  of  ague  where  the  chill  predominates.  Teste
remarks,  "  According  to  my  own  experience,  Meny-
anthes is  most  closely  analogous  to  Drosera,  except
that  the  effects  of  Drosera  are  more  intense  than
those  of  Menyanthes.  Obscuration  of  sight,  which
is  one  of  the  first  symptoms  of  these  drugs,  develops
itself  alike  under  the  influence  of  one  or  the  other.
It  is  a  sort  of  white  mist,  or  vibrations,  which  are
sometimes  so  violent  that  they  prevent  sight,  come
on  irregularly,  of  varied  duration,  especially  in  the
open  air,  during  a  walk,  and  without  any  other
sensation.  I  experienced  this  symptom  from  either
drug  so  violently,  while  walking  on  the  Boulevard,
that  I  dared  not  cross  lest  I  should  be  crushed  by
the  carriages.  The  pains  of  Drosera  and  Meny-
anthes are  likewise  alike.  In  their  action  on  the
air-passages  they  differ  only  in  the  degree  of  intensity.
Menyanthes  is  little  used,  and  never  will  be  used
much.  I  have  used  it  with  success  in  a  case  of
amaurosis  ;  but  there  are  few  diseases  where  Meny-
anthes is  indicated  which  could  not  be  cured  much
better  with  Drosera.  This  opinion,  however,  is
founded  on  my  own  impressions,  which  I  am  always
willing  to  distrust."

This  is all  I have to say  about Menyanthes.


380  MENYANTHES TRIFOL1ATA.

Indeed,  I  have  been  speaking  at  second-hand  ever
since  I  left  Lycopodium.  I  shall  be  quite  glad  to
come  upon  more  familiar  ground  in  the  action  of
the  great  polychrest  to  which  my  next  letter  will
be  devoted,  Mercury.


LETTER  XXIX.

MERCURIUS.

THE  dynamic  action  of  the  various  mercurial
preparations  is  so  essentially  the  same,  that  I  shall
speak  of  them  all  together  under  the  common  head-
ing of

Mercurius.

We  triturate  the  insoluble  salts,  and  make  dilutions
of  the  bichloride.

Hahuemann  has  proved  the  black  oxide  of  Mer-
cury— a  preparation  of  his  own,  known  as  "  Mer-
curius Solubilis" — in  a  very  thorough  manner.
The  pathogenesis  is  in  the  '  Materia  Medica  Pura.'
He  has  also  given  there  a  few  symptoms  obtained
from  other  mercurial  preparations.  Dr.  Roth  has
collected  the  poisonous  effects  recorded  of  the  bi-
chloride— "  Mercurius  corrosivus" — in  schema  form
in  his  Materia  Medica.  And  the  bisulphide —
Cinnabar — has  been  proved  by  Dr.  Neidhard  :
whose  experiments  you  may  read  in  MetcalPs
'  Homoeopathic  Provings/  When  we  combine  with
these  symptoms  the  effects  of  poisoning  and  of
over-dosing,  as  they  stand  in  treatises  on  Toxicology
and  Materia  Medica,  we  have  a  pretty  complete
view  of  the  physiological  action  of  Mercury.  For


382  MERCURIUS.

general  remarks  upon  its  therapeutical  application,
I  refer  you  to  a  paper  by  Dr.  Quin  in  the  second
vol.  of  the  '  Annals/  to  another  by  Mr.  Leadam  in
the  twelfth  vol.  of  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  to  a
review  of  Dr.  C.  Drysdale's  counterblast  against
Mercury  from  my  own  pen  in  the  twenty-second
vol.  of  the  same  journal,  and  to  Dr.  Gerson's
practical  remarks  '  On  Various  Mercurial  Prepara-
tions/ translated  in  the  eighth  vol.  of  the  'North
Amer.  Journ.  of  Homoeopathy/  Other  references
I  will  make  as  I  go  on.

It  would  be  a  work  of  supererogation  were  I  to
detail  to  you  with  any  minuteness  the  pathogenetic
effects  of  this  well-known  drug.  Nevertheless
I  will  ask  you  to  follow  me  through  them,  as  I
attempt  to  classify  and  define  them  ;  to  separate
the  certain  from  the  doubtful,  and  the  dynamic
from  the  merely  local ;  and  to  decide  upon  the
many  questions  which  in  this  critical  age  have  been
raised  concerning  them.

We  shall  have  to  consider  Mercury  as  hsematic,
as  tissue-irritant,  and  as  neurotic.

I.  The  haematic  influence  of  Mercury  is  of
prime  importance :  but  it  is  soon  stated.  I  cite
your  own  best  pharmacologist,  Dr.  Headland.
"  By  some  inscrutable  chemical  power,  of  whose
agency  we  know  nothing,  it  is  able  to  decompose
the  blood  :  by  some  destructive  agency  it  deprives
it  of  one-third  of  its  fibrin,  one-seventh  of  its  albu-
men, one-third  or  more  of  its  globules ;  and  at  the
same  time  loads  it  with  a  fetid  fatty  matter,  the
product  of  decomposition."  Hence  we  have,  as  a
result  of  the  diminished  fibrin,  ecchymoses  and


MERCURITJS.  383

haemorrhages ;  as  the  sign  of  the  absent  corpuscles,
the  anaemia  of  which  we  have  read  in  our  Watson ;
and  the  peculiar  foetor  of  the  secretions.

II.  As  tissue-irritant,  Mercury  affects  most  of
the  glands,  the  mucous  and  serous  membranes,  the
skin,  the  lungs,  and  perhaps  the  sympathetic  ganglia
and  the  periosteum.  I  will  give  you  authorities
for  these  statements  as  we  go  on.  Let  us  now
arrange  these  organs  in  regions ;  and  begin  by
studying  the  action  of  Mercury  upon  the  alimentary
canal  and  its  associated  glands.

1.  I  think  that  the  general  action  of  Mercury
upon  the  alimentary  canal  may  be  stated  as  follows.
The  mildest  degree  of  its  influence,  as  by  small
doses  of  unirritating  preparations,  is  shown  in  an
increased  secretion  from  the  whole  mucous  tract,
and  from  the  glands — salivary,  pancreas,  and  liver

— which  open  into  it.  A  more  intense  action — as
especially  seen  in  poisoning  by  Corrosive  Sublimate

— sets  up  irritation  with  diminished  secretion,  or
actual  inflammation,  along  the  whole  tract :  but  in
some  regions  attacking  chiefly  the  mucous  surface,
in  others  the  glandular  involutions.  Thus  in  the
mouth  we  have  intense  stomatitis,  while  the  salivary
glands  secrete  vigorously.  In  the  small  intestine,
on  the  other  hand,  the  mucous  membrane  is  rarely
affected ;  but  the  liver  often  becomes  congested,
and  its  secretion  diminished.  Let  us  see  how
these  principles  are  carried  out  in  the  several
portions  of  the  tract.

stomatitis.  I  trust  that  you  have  never  seen  it  in


384  MERCURIUS.

text-books.  The  best  description  of  it  I  know  is
in  Dr.  Wood's  '  Materia  Medica/  The  inflamma-
tion, while  accompanied  with  some  pain  and  con-
siderable tenderness,  is  especially  characterised  by
swelling,  and  by  the  advance  (if  not  checked)  to
ulceration,  and  even  to  gangrene  of  the  soft  parts
and  necrosis  of  the  neighbouring  bones.  Notice
also  the  peculiar  fo3tor  of  the  breath,  and  the  ten-
dency to  haemorrhage.  While  the  drug  is  thus
raging  in  the  mucous  surface,  the  salivary  glands
are  simply  stimulated,  and  pour  out  their  secretion
profusely.  Orfila  tells  us  that  in  mercurial  saliva-
tion there  is  no  true  inflammation  of  the  glands,
but  only  effusion  into  the  cellular  tissue  around
them.  Sometimes,  however  (as  in  a  case  related
by  Prof.  Taylor),  the  glands  enlarge  and  become
tender :  and  with  this  the  salivary  secretion  is
diminished.

A  word  as  to  the  contents  of  the  mouth.  The
tongue  is  affected  like  the  cavity  generally,  so  far  as
its  mucous  membrane  is  concerned.  I  see  no
reason,  however,  to  suppose  that  its  substance  is  at
all  affected.  As  to  the  teeth,  I  should  much  like
to  see  a  thorough  and  unprejudiced  study  of  the
influence  of  Mercury  upon  them.  Does  it  attack
them  immediately,  setting  up  true  caries  ?  or  do
they  loosen  and  fall  out  as  a  consequence  of  the
degenerated  state  of  the  gums,  themselves  remain-
ing entire?  I  confess  myself  at  present  unable  to
form  a  judgment  upon  this  question.

b.  The  throat  may  be  either  acutely  or  chroni-
cally affected  by  Mercury.  The  acute  affection  is
identical  with  the  mercurial  stomatitis,  which  it


MERCURIUS.  385

commonly  accompanies :  there  is  much  swelling
always,  ulceration  often,  gangrene  sometimes.  The
by  Dietterich  :  you  may  read  his  account  of  it  in
Hempel.  It  is  characterised  by  a  dark  or  bluish
redness ;  great  sense  of  dry  ness,  with  hawking  of
tenacious,  glassy  mucus;  and  enlargement  of  the
mucous  follicles.

c.  The  stomach  is,  so  far  as  I  know^  affected  by
the  bichloride  only  of  all  the  mercurial  preparations.
The  irritant  action  of  this  salt,  however,  is  dynamic
and  elective,  and  not  merely  chemical and  local :
for it is  exerted as  certainly  when  the poison is
injected  into the  veins,  or  applied  to a  wound,  as
when it  is  swallowed. The  gastric  mucous  mem-
brane invariably  presents  the  living  symptoms  and
post-mortem appearances of acute inflammation.
Ulceration,  however,  is  rarely present  except  when
the drug  is introduced  directly  into  the stomach
(comp.  Kali  bichromicum).

d.  The  small  intestines  are  very  rarely  inflamed
by  Mercury,  but  the  two  great  glands  which  pour
their  secretions  into  this part  of  the bowel  suffer
from  the  drug  in  a  very  considerable  degree.

Of  the  influence  of  Mercury  on  the  pancreas,
Dietterich  writes,  "  In  some  cases  there  is  fulness  of
the  left  hypochondrium,  burning  pain  and  tender-
ness of  the  region  of  the  pancreas,  and  the  evacua-
tions are  frothy,  whitish,  tough,  and  often  greenish,
at  least  at  the  commencement.  These  symptoms
may  fairly  be  referred  to  an  affection  of  the  pancreas
analogous  to  that  of  the  salivary  glands."  I  do
not  think  that  the  character  of  the  stools  goes  for

25


386  MERCUR1US.

much  towards  this  inference.  But  then  Wibmer
states  that  in  the  bodies  of  those  who  have  been
long  treated  with  mercurial  frictions,  he  has  found
the  pancreas  hypertrophied  and  of  a  reddish  colour.
And  the  physiological  similarity  between  the  sali-
vary glands  and  the  pancreas  makes  it  probable —
as  with  Iodine  and  Iris — that  a  drug  which  power-
fully influences  the  one  will  affect  the  other  also.

That  Mercury  acts  upon  the  other  great  intestinal
gland — the  liver — there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt.
But  about  the  precise  nature  of  this  action  there
has  been  of  late,  as  you  probably  know,  much
controversy.  I  think  that  the  modus  operandi
alimentary  sphere  helps  us  to  a  solution  of  the
difficulties.  After  a  full  consideration  of  the
opposing  facts  and  arguments,  I  venture  to  make
the  following  statement  upon  the  subject.  A  mild
and  unirritating  preparation  of  Mercury,  in  small
doses,  increases  the  biliary  in  common  with  all  the
intestinal  secretions.  A  purgative  dose  of  Calomel
may  strongly  stimulate  the  liver,  causing  a  kind  of
bilious  cholera,  but  more  commonly  diminishes  its
secretion — in  Dr.  Scott's  experiments  from  one  to
two-thirds  of  its  normal  amount.  In  large  or  long
continued  doses  (especially  of  the  bichloride)  Mer-
cury frequently  causes  congestion,  enlargement,  in-
duration, and  other  organic  affections  of  the  liver,
these  being  not  uncommonly  accompanied  by  general
jaundice.  These  are  the  facts  ;  and  now  for  their
rationale.  Moderate  doses  will  here,  as  in  other
glands,  give  increased  secretion  as  the  primary
stage  of  action.  Purgative  doses  may  excite  the


MERCURIUS.  387

gland  to  still  more  vigorous  action,  or,  by  diverting
the  portal  blood  to  the  intestinal  surface,  may  cut
down  its  pabulum,  and  so  diminish  the  amount  of
bile  formed.  While  poisonous  doses  or  long  con-
tinued stimulation  may  carry  the  irritation  beyond
the  secreting  point,  and  acute  congestion,  diminished
secretion,  icterus,  and  organic  disease  may  result.

e.  While  Mercury  has  little  influence  upon  the
small  intestines,  the  caecum,  colon,  and  rectum  sus-
tain the  whole  weight  of  the  poison.  They  all
present  signs  of  intense  inflammation,  going  on  to
ulceratiou  and  sloughing ;  and  the  symptoms  during
life  and  appearances  after  death  are  those  of  acute
dysentery.

This  is  the  place  in  which  to  speak  of  the  in-
fluence of  Mercury  upon  the  intestinal  evacuations.
The  stools  produced  by  it  are  of  various  characters.
When  given  as  a  purgative  in  the  form  of  calomel
or  blue-pill,  it  causes  (as  you  know)  copious  fluid
evacuations,  of  a  dark  brown  or  yellowish  colour, —
sometimes,  especially  in  children,  of  a  green  hue.
I  suppose  these  evacuations  to  consist  of  an  increased
quantity  of  the  biliary  and  other  intestinal  secretions.
The  green  "  calomel  stools"  of  children  seem  as  yet
unaccounted  for.  Some  suppose  them  to  consist  of
bile,  altered  in  tint  by  superabundant  acid  in  the
intestines.  Others  consider  them  to  be  due  simply
to  the  presence  of  the  sub-sulphide  of  Mercury  in
the  fseces,  their  colour  being  a  phenomenon  analo-
gous to  the  blackness  of  the  stools  in  those  who  are
taking  Iron.  Others  consider  them  to  depend  upon
a  vitiated  secretion  from  the  bowels,  and  especially
from  the  colon.  My  own  impression  is  in  favour


388  MERCURIUS.

of  the  last  hypothesis.  I  fancy  that  the  green
stools  of  Mercury  are  a  phenomenon  of  the  same
order  as  the  white  stools  of  Digitalis.  And  I  would
suggest,  on  post-mortem  evidence,  that  the  patho-
logical state  of  the  colon  implied  by  them  is  one  of
catarrhal  inflammation.  The  purging  caused  by
mercurials  always  tends  to  assume  the  dysenteric
character  :  and  in  acute  poisoning  by  Corrosive  Sub-
limate the  stools  are  scanty,  frequent,  and  bloody,
just  as  in  true  idiopathic  dysentery.

In  this  sketch  of  the  action  of  Mercury  upon  the
alimentary  canal  and  its  glands,  I  have  nearly
comprised  its  whole  irritant  properties,  for —

2.  The respiratory mucous membrane suffers
very  little  from its influence. Conjunctivitis  and
coryza  have been caused  by Mercurius solubilis,
and bronchitis  by  M.  corrosivus  :  but  all far  less
frequently than in poisoning by Arsenic. The
lungs  stand  in  about  the  same  category. Pneumonia
is  by  no  means a  common  effect  of  Mercury  : yet
both  symptoms  during  life  and  post-mortem  appear-
ances indicate  the  existence  of  this  lesion  in  many
animals poisoned by Corrosive Sublimate. It is
most commonly  found  when  the drug  is injected
into  the  veins  : and  the  inflammation set  up  is  in
patches  rather  than  extensively  diffused.

3.  The reverse,  however,  of  the comparison  ob-
tains in  the  genito -urinary  tract,  which, according
to  Christison,  suffers  more  from  Corrosive  Sublimate
than  from  Arsenic. The  kidneys  are  much  affected
by  this  poison. Suppression  of  urine  is  a  very  common
phenomenon  : and  post-mortem  investigation  shows
it  to  be  connected  with  acute  congestion or  inflam-


MERCUR1US.  389

mation  of  the  secreting  structure  of  these  organs.
The  form  of  inflammation  set  up  appears  to  be  a
non-desquamative  nephritis,  as  in  the  most  common
variety  of  Bright' s  disease.  The  urine  is  albuminous
during  life,  and  the  patients  die  with  all  the
symptoms  of  ursemic  poisoning.  Lower  down,  we
have  frequent  and  painful  micturition  :  and  some-
times swelling  and  blackness  of  the  scrotum,  with
erection  of  the  penis.  This  too  is  from  the
bichloride :  but  from  Mercurius  solubilis  two  of
Hahnemann's  provers  had  balanitis  and  balanor-
rhoea :  and  another  (Helbig)  reports  the  following
symptom,  which  is  very  interesting  as  regards  the
relation  of  Mercury  to  syphilis.  "A  number  of
small  red  vesicles  at  the  termination  of  the  glans
penis  behind  the  prepuce,  becoming  converted  into
ulcers,  which  break  open  and  pour  forth  a  yellowish-
white,  staining,  strong-smelling  matter;  afterwards
the  larger  ulcers  bled,  and  when  touching  them,  a
pain  was  felt  in  them  which  affected  the  whole
body ;  they  were  round  ;  their  edges,  which  looked
like  raw  flesh,  overlapped  the  ulcers,  the  base  of
which  was  covered  with  a  cheesy  lining."  A
similar  symptom  was  experienced  by  one  of  the
provers  of  Cinnabar.

4.  Inflammation  of  the  peritoneum  and  effusion
into  its sac  are  frequent  results  of  poisoning  with
Corrosive  Sublimate. A  similar  condition  has  once
been  set  up  by  the  same  poison  in  the  arachnoid.
This is all  I  can  say  of  the  irritant  influence  of
Mercury  upon  the  serous  membranes.

5.  The  action  of  Mercury  upon  the  skin  seems


390  MERCURIUS.

when  speaking  of  its  effects  on  the  alimentary
mucous  membrane.  Its  mildest  operation  is  to
produce  diaphoresis :  but  the  secretion  is  often
vitiated  as  well  as  increased,  being  sometimes  sour,
sometimes  fetid.  A  more  intense  or  continued
action  inflames  the  skin,  producing  eruptions  of  the
vesicular  and  pustular  type.  You  know  well  the
"eczema  mercuriale."  One  of  Hahnemann's
provers  had  well  marked  porrigo  of  the  scalp,  with
rhagades  of  the  hands.

6.  Dietterich  states  that  periostitis  is  a  not  un-
common effect  of  the  long-continued  use  of  Mercury.
Pereira  considers  that  this  affection  is  rather  to  be
had been administered. But Dr.  Graves (who  is
surely  an  authority)  affirms  that  periostitis  attacked
patients  who had  taken  a  great  deal  of  Mercury,
even  if  they  had  never  been  affected  with  syphilis,
as  often  as  they  took  cold. The so-called "  mer-
curial  rheumatism"  is  probably a  symptom  of  the
irritation  of  this  and  other  fibrous  tissues.

7.  Our  knowledge  of  the  irritant  action  of  Mer-
cury upon  the  sympathetic  ganglia  rests  upon  the
statement of Mr. Swan, who avers that he has
found  these ganglia and their  branches inflamed.
However  rare  this  effect  may  be,  any  fact  tending  to
show the relation of  these  mysterious organs  to
disease  or  drugs  is  too  valuable  to  be  omitted. It
is  all  the  more  interesting,  as  Mercury  has  none  of
the  excitni-t  influence  upon  the  vaso-motor nerves
so characteristic  of  Arsenic. The  face  is flushed
and  even  swelled,  and  the  whole  surface  often hot
and  red,  in  poisoning  by  Corrosive  Sublimate  :  while


MERCURIUS.  391

the  contracted,  ghastly  countenance,  and  the
shrunken,  pale,  cold  skin  of  Arsenical  collapse  are
well  known  to  all.

III.  I  think  that  Mercury  has  more  neurotic
influence  than  it  is  commonly  credited  with.  The
"  mercurial  tremor"  is  as  characteristic  an  action  of
the  drug  as  its  eczema  and  salivation  :  and  I  cannot
understand  this  as  anything  but  an  affection  of  the
Dr.  Wood  as  accompanying  mercurialization*  is
probably  secondary  ;  and  so  perhaps  is  the  wake-
fulness  by  night  and  sleepiness  by  day  complained  of
by  most  of  the  provers  of  Cinnabar.  But  the
workers  in  Mercury  get  cerebral  symptoms  as  idio-
pathic  as  is  the  mercurial  tremor.  Sleeplessness,
loss  of  memory,  delirium,  and  apathy  come  on  :  the
sufferers  may  die  comatose  and  hemiplegic :  and
the  cerebral  hemispheres,  one  or  both,  are  found
after  death  in  a  softened  condition,  with  effusion
into  the  ventricles.

I  come  now  to  the  therapeutical  uses  of  Mercury.
And  here  a  remarkable  phenomenon  greets  us.  It
has  become  quite  a  badge  of  the  more  advanced
school  of  the  old  practice  to  renounce  the  use  of
Mercury  in  disease.  It  is  declared  to  have  no  in-

*  "  The  most  prominent  nervous  phenomenon  of  Mercurialization
is  an  increased  susceptibility  to  impressions ;  slight  causes  producing
a  disturbance  of  the  mental  equanimity,  and  unpleasant  influences
of  all  kinds  having  more  than  their  ordinary  effect.  A  fretful,
peevish  state  of  mind,  arid  irritable  condition  of  temper  are  not
uncommon;  and  restlessness,  wakefulness,  and  general  uneasiness
are  frequently  added  to  the  other  sufferings."  ('  Mat.  Med.,'  vol.  ii,
p.  236.)


392  MERCURIUS.

fluence  on  the  liver  :  to  be  at  least  unnecessary  in
syphilis  ;  and  to  act  perniciously  in  most  acute  in-
flammations. On  the  other  hand,  the  applications
of  Mercury  which  are  made  according  to  our  law
and  in  our  doses  are  continually  affording  us  satis-
faction. Few  medicines  are  so  frequently  in  our
hands :  and  in  none  have  we  more  thorough  confi-
dence. This  looks  a  little  as  if  we  had  found  the
clue  to  the  right  use  of  these  powerful  poisons.  I
must  refer  you  to  my  review  of  Dr.  C.  Drysdale's
pamphlet  for  further  remarks  on  this  subject :  and
will  proceed  at  once  to  state  what  uses  we  make  of
Mercury  in  the  affections  to  which  its  pathogenesis
points.

I.  The  hcematic  effects  of  Mercury  serve  rather
as  additional  indications  for  its  choice,  than  as  pic-
tures of  diseases  to  which  it  is  homoeopathic.
Scurvy  is  the  only  condition  I  know  of  the  latter
kind  :  and  this  is  so  satisfactorily  met  by  dietetic
means  that  it  hardly  needs  a  specific  medicine.  But
I  must  take  the  haematic  action  of  Mercury  as  my
standpoint  for  discoursing  on  its  relation  to  one  of
the  principal  blood  diseases,  syphilis.

I  speak  of  syphilis  as  a  blood-disease.  I  suppose
that  the  modern  doctrines  of  syphilis,  as  summarised
by  Dr.  Cl.  Miiller  in  the  'Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.'  of
January,  1867,  may  be  assumed  as  well-established.
Chancre,  then, — "  soft  chancre"  as  it  used  to  be
called — is  a  purely  local  disease,  and  has  no  power
of  contaminating  the  system.  That  Mercury  causes
chancroid  ulcers  on  the  glans  penis  we  have  already
seen  :  that  it  promotes  the  healing  of  these  ulcers,
sometimes  alone,  sometimes  followed  by  Nitric  Acid,


MERCURIUS.  393

you  will  see  well  illustrated  iu  Dr.  Yeldham's  book.*
It  is  a  fact  of  the  same  order  as  its  control  over
ulcers  of  the  mouth  and  throat,  where  again  Nitric
Acid  helps  it.  But  this  proves  nothing  as  to  the
relation  of  Mercury  to  that  constitutional  blood-
infection  to  which  the  term  syphilis  is  now  re-
stricted. Have  we  anything  in  the  pathogenesy  of
Mercury  which  answers  to  the  true  hard  syphilitic
infiltration  (of  which  ulceration  is  but  an  accident),
to  the  indolent  and  indurated  swellings  of  the
lymphatic  glands,  and  to  the  papular  eruption  ?  I
speak  with  restraint,  but  I  cannot  see  that  we  have.
Plastic  effusion  into  the  cellular  tissue  is  a  very
unlikely  effect  of  a  drug  which  is  so  decidedly
liquefacient.  Such  glands  as  are  affected  by  it
swell  from  irritation  approaching  to  inflammation,
and  tend  to  suppurate ;  in  all  this  reminding  us  of
scrofula  rather  than  of  syphilis.  And  the  eruption
proper  to  hydrargyrosis  is  vesicular  and  not  papular.
Again,  what  power  has  Mercury  to  cause  those
infiltrations  of  the  internal  organs  which  are  now
recognised  as  so  characteristic  of  secondary  syphilis?
Altogether,  I  cannot  but  conclude  that  Mercury
has  no  essential  similarity  to  the  syphilitic  poison,
and  cannot  be  relied  upon  to  neutralise  its  influence
in  the  blood,  or  to  combat  it  at  every  point  of  its
attack.

I  think  all  therapeutic  evidence  goes  in  this
direction.  Our  brethren  of  the  old  school  have
either  relinquished  Mercury  altogether  in  syphilis ;

*  '  Homoeopathy  in  Venereal  Diseases,'  Turner.  I  may  add  to
what  he  there  advances  that  Dr.  Gerson  strongly  recommends
Mercurius  corrosivus  when  these  ulcers  tend  to  become  phagedsenic.


394  MERCURIUS.

or  they  give  it  to  resolve  the  induration,  but  at  the
admitted  cost  of  procrastinating  the  definite  cure
and  of  favouring  destructive  local  manifestations.
In  our  smaller  doses  we  do  not  run  this  risk :  but
I  doubt  if  a  comparison  with  the  natural  course  of
the  disease  would  leave  much  credit  to  our  power
of  shortening  it.  Dr.  Yeldham  thinks  that  the
Iodides  of  Mercury  are  very  efficient  in  the  erythe-
matous  and  papular  eruptions  of  secondary  syphilis.
If  the  presence  of  the  Iodine  modifies  the  cutaneous
action  of  Mercury,  so  as  to  make  it  homoeopathic
to  papular  rashes,  there  is  nothing  in  this  fact
which  opposes  what  I  have  said.

Has  Mercury,  then,  no  proper  place  in  the
treatment  of  true  syphilis?  I  should  be  the  last
to  affirm  such  a  proposition.  There  are  certain
local  manifestations  of  the  syphilitic  poison  to  which
it  is  thoroughly  homoeopathic,  and  of  which  it  will
always  prove  more  or  less  curative.  One  of  these
is  the  affection  of  the  mouth  and  throat  which  is
almost  as  frequent  a  symptom  of  the  secondary
stage  of  the  disease  as  is  the  papular  eruption.
Another  is  the  sub-acute  inflammation  of  the  perios-
teum. But  its  main  uses  should  be  those  hinted  at  by
the  results  of  its  abuse.  It  is  when  the  local  manifes-
tations of  the  disease  become  destructive,  when  the
eruptions  take  the  form  of  impetigo  or  rupia,  or
when  ulceration  attacks  the  skin  and  mucous  mem-
branes, that  Mercury  ought  to  be  the  main  remedy.
There  are  many,  too,  who  believe  that  disease  of  bone
when  occurring  in  syphilitic  patients  is  generally  a
consequence  of  the  Mercury  they  have  taken.  This


MERCURIUS.  395

may  suggest  its  trial  in  cases  where  the  complica-
tion in  question  has  arisen  from  other  causes.

I  must  agree  with  Trousseau  and  Pidoux,  as
against  Teste,  that  the  syphilitic  cachexia  is  a  very
diverse  thing  from  chronic  hydrargyrosis,  as  seen
in  workers  with  the  metal.  That  cachectic  con-
ditions caused  by  Mercury  in  syphilitic  patients
have  been  mistakenly  treated  for  the  effects  of  the
disease  itself,  is,  I  submit,  no  argument  to  the  con-
trary.

I  will  now  trace  Mercurius  through  the  tissues
and  organs  it  influences,  pointing  out  how  far  its
physiological  effects  have  found  their  application  to
therapeutic  practice.

1.  In  affections  of  the  mouth  Mercury  naturally
holds  a  high  place.  It  is  not  homoeopathic  to  the
true  membranous  stomatitis — muguet  of  the  French:
— but  it  is  so  to  thrush,  which  always  tends  to
ulceration.  It  is  rarely  necessary,  however,  to  give
anything  but  Borax  in  this  disease,  when  the  mor-
bid process  is  limited  to  the  mouth.  For  simple
ulceration,  as  well  as  syphilitic,  of  the  mucous  mem-
brane of  the  buccal  cavity  Mercury  is  specific,  es-
pecially when  followed  up  by  Nitric  acid.  Cancrum
oris  is  another  idiopathic  disease  of  this  part  which
closely  resembles  the  pathogenetic  effects  of  Mer-
cury. We  of  course  treat  it  with  this  drug ;  but
it  is  rather  amusing  to  find  one  of  your  own  writers
advocating  the  practice.  I  refer  you  to  Hempel  for
the  citation.

With  the  mouth  we  class  the  salivary  glands,  the
tongue,  and  the  teeth.

a.  Mercury  has cured  idiopathic salivation, as


396  MERCURIUS.

from  pregnancy,  Drs.  Marcy  and  Hunt  recommend
in  this  affection  a  wash  for  the  mouth  made  of  two
grains  of  the  2nd  trit.  of  Mercurius  corrosivus  in  a
pint  of  water.  In  inflammation  of  the  salivary
glands  Mercury  must  always  be  the  leading  remedy.
I  may  specify  two — mumps,  in  which  we  always
give  it,  though  whether  it  affects  the  natural  course
of  the  disease  I  cannot  say;  and  the  tenderness
and  swelling,  threatening  suppuration,  left  behind
after  scarlatina,  in  which  the  Iodides  of  Mercury  act
most  efficiently.

b.  In sub-acute inflammations of the lingual
mucous  membrane  I  should  expect  to  find  Mercury
act  very  well. When syphilis affects  this organ,
and  Mercury  has  not  been  previously  taken  (perhaps
an  unusual  concatenation)  it might be  tried ; but
I  should  prefer  Muriatic  acid  or  Iodide of  Potas-
sium.

c.  In  our  present  uncertainty  as  to the  action
of  Mercury  upon  the  teeth,  it  would  be  premature
to  fix  its  curative  place  in  their  diseases. It  is  a
good  deal,  perhaps  indiscriminately,  used  among  us.
In  my  own  hands  it  has  been  pretty  well  superseded
by  Kreasote.

2.  I  have  now  to  speak  of  the  action  of  Mercury
in  affections  of  the  throat.  Simple  catarrhal
angina  is  another  malady  in  which  I  think  this
medicine  far  too  frequently  used.  It  is  recom-
mended in  our  Domestic  Treatises  whenever  there
is  any  tendency  to  ulceration.  But  ulceration,  in
an  acute  sore-throat,  is  but  a  surface  phenomenon.
Cut  away  the  inflamed  base  with  your  Aconite  and
Belladonna,  and  the  ulcer  will  not  remain  behind.


MERCURIUS.  397

In  my  own  experience,  the  angina  calling  for
Mercurius  has  been  of  rare  occurrence.  It  is  of  a
sub-acute  or  torpid  character,  with  pale  or  bluish-
red  swelling,  and  tendency  to  ulceration.  In  the
acute  perforating  ulcer  of  the  soft  palate  Mercury
may  be  good,  but  Iodide  of  potassium  seems
specific.  The  ulceration,  with  tendency  to  gan-
grene, which  everywhere  characterises  the  action  of
Mercurius,  points  to  the  scarlatinal  sore-throat  as  one
most  important  sphere  of  its  operation.  In  simple
cases  the  Belladonna  we  are  giving  for  the  general
symptoms  is  all  that  the  angina  requires.  But
when  the  throat  symptoms  predominate,  especially
when  anything  like  the  cynanche  maligna  or  putrid
sore-throat  of  the  old  writers  is  present,  Mercurius
is  an  indispensable  remedy.  On  the  other  hand,
those  same  characteristics  of  its  action  which  make
it  so  suitable  for  the  sore-throat  of  scarlatina,  unfit
it  for  that  of  diphtheria.  There  is  so  much
phenomenal  resemblance  between  the  effects  of
Mercury  and  the  symptoms  of  diphtheria,  that  the
preparations  of  this  drug — especially  the  Iodide —
have  been  extensively  used  in  its  treatment.  I  have
watched  their  action  over  and  over  again,  without
being  able  to  satisfy  myself  of  their  exerting  the
least  control  over  the  morbid  process.  Nor  can  we
expect  them  to  do  so.  For  in  diphtheria  there  is
neither  ulceration  nor  gangrene  ;  but  a  false  mem-
brane formed  upon  an  unbroken  surface.  Until  it
has  been  proved  that  Mercury  can  cause  this
pathological  formation,  there  is  no  evidence  that  it
is  truly  homoeopathic  to  the  diphtheritic  process.
Mercury  may  occasionally  be  useful  in  chronic


398  MERCURIUS.

ulcers  of  the  throat,  simple  or  syphilitic :  and
would  probably  cure  such  a  chronic  angina  as  that
idiopathic  affection.

3.  Mercury  has  no  relation  to  dyspepsia,  nor
have  I  any  knowledge  of  its  use  in  inflammations
of  the  stomach.  If  given  here,  the  bichloride
should  be  selected.  Nor  can  I  say  anything  about
it  in  affections  of  the  small  intestine,  except  that
the  late  Dr.  Petroz  has  published  some  cases
tending  to  prove  that  the  black  sulphide  (Ethiop's
mineral)  has  considerable  control  over  the  enteric
lesion  of  typhoid  fever.  But  when  the  large
intestines  are  affected,  whether  with  simple  inflamma-
tion, with  chronic  ulceration,  or  with  dysentery,  the
effects  of  Corrosive  Sublimate  are  amongst  the  most
brilliant  things  in  specific  medicine.  I  am  not  sure,
however,  whether  other  remedies  do  not  rival  it  in  the
caecum  and  the  rectum.

As  to  the  glands  which  wait  upon  the  alimentary
canal,  we  know  too  little  of  pancreatic  disease  to  be
able  to  indicate  the  curative  sphere  of  Mercury
therein.  I  can  only  suggest  it  as  an  alternative  to
Iodine,  should  such  be  required.  But  to  us  alike
with  you  of  the  old  school,  the  very  mention  of  the
word  liver  suggests  the  thought  of  Mercury.  Not
that  we  credit  it  as  a  panacea  in  hepatic  disorders,
as  I  think  has  too  often  been  done.  But  it  is
an  admirable  remedy  in  minute  doses  for  what  is
called  a  "torpid"  liver,  where  deficient  secretion  of
bile  is  indicated  by  pale,  costive,  and  offensive
motions,  loss  of  appetite,  and  depression  of  spirits.
I  think  that  there  is  generally  some  congestion


MERCURIUS.  399

present  in  these  cases,  as  shown  by  dull  pain  in  the
right  hypochondrium.  In  simple  jaundice,  as  in
children,  Mercurius  will  generally  do  all  that  is
required.  Dr.  Gerson  speaks  very  highly  of  Calomel
in  acute  parenchymatous  inflammation  of  the  liver.
The  steady  use  of  the  bichloride  ought  to  be  bene-
ficial in  cirrhosis.

Putting  now  together  the  relations  of  Mercury
to  the  intestinal  mucous  membrane  and  to  the
hepatic  secretion,  we  see  that  it  should  be  beneficial
in  many  forms  of  diarrhoea :  and  so  it  is.  Few
medicines  are  more  frequently  called  for  in  the
diarrhoea  of  infants  and  young  children,  when  the
evacuations  are  vitiated,  of  various  colours,  slimy
and  offensive,  sometimes  excoriating  the  anus.
Mercurius  corrosivus  is  called  for  when  the  disorder  in
children  is  of  a  more  inflammatory  type  :  and  gene-
rally whenever  diarrhoea  assumes  a  dysenteric  form.

4.  The  mercurial  preparations  hold  a  very  inferior
place  as  remedies  for  affections  of  the  respiratory
mucous  membrane,  save  for  those  of  its  conjunctival
offset.  When  these  occur  in  unhealthy  subjects,
and  take  on  a  chronic  and  ulcerative  action,
Mercury  is  as  curative  as  it  is  homoeopathic.  You
will  find  some  beautiful  cases  of  strumous  ophthalmia
by  Dr.  Kidd  in  the  'Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.
xxii,  in  which  Mercurius  corrosivus  was  the  remedy.
In  Hempel,  too,  you  may  read  how  a  chronic
inflammation  of  the  meibomian  glands  disappeared
in  a  prover  of  the  red  oxide.  Mercurius  solubilis
has  a  high  domestic  reputation  as  a  remedy  for
"  running  colds  :"  and  certainly  seems  to  act  very
well  in  some  cases.  Dr.  Cooke  of  New  York,  in


400  MERCURIUS.

some  interesting  remarks  which  you  will  find  in
Jahr's  '  Manual/  speaks  highly  of  the  Iodide  in
chronic  bronchitis  occurring  in  strumous  subjects.
I  would  suggest  Mercurius  corrosivus  as  a  remedy
for  the  bronchitis  which  frequently  accompanies
Bright's  disease,  and  for  pneumonia  occurring  in
syphilitic  subjects.

5.  Coming now  to the  uro-genital organs, we
have  in  Mercurius  corrosivus  another  truly  homoeo-
pathic remedy  for  nephritis  and  albuminuria. Cli-
nical experience  has  not  yet  decided  upon  its  place
in  the  treatment  of  these  diseases  as distinguished
from  those  of  Cantharis,  Terebinthina,  and  Arsenic.
Of  the  relation  of  Mercury  to chancre  and  syphilis
I  have  already  spoken  : and  will  only  add  that  Dr.
Yeldham  recommends  M.  solubilis  as  the  best  medi-
cine in  balanitis ; M.  corrosivus,  in  alternation  with
Aconite, in the first stage of gonorrhoea ; and
Cinnabar  in  gleet.

6.  The  traditional  use  of  Mercury  in  inflamma-
tions  of the serous  membranes has probably no
relation  to  its  specific  influence  upon  them,  and  is
upon  our  principles  quite  inadmissible. We  hold
it  a  very  questionable  advantage  to  prevent  lymphous
exudation  by  a  poison  which  causes  a  lower  form  of
effusion  to  take  its  place. But in  one of  these
inflammations — peritonitis —  Mercurius corrosivus
has  high  curative  power of  a  specific nature. I
have  used  it  here  even  more  frequently  than  Bryonia,
and  with  most  gratifying  results.

7.  The  only  two  non-syphilitic  cutaneous  diseases
which I have  treated with Mercury  are psoriasis
of  the  hands  and  impetigo  capitis. In  the  former  I


MERCURIUS.  401

use  M.  solubilis,  in  the  latter  M.  corrosivus.  In
syphilitic  eruptions  Dr.  Yeldham  recommends  that
unless  Mercury  has  already  been  fully  given,  it
should  be  fairly  tried.  He  prefers  the  Iodides  :  but
confesses  that  they  are  only  serviceable  in  the  less
inveterate  forms  of  cutaneous  syphilis.  Perhaps
Corrosive  Sublimate  might  be  found  more  effectual.

8.  Mercury  has  not  been  much  used  hitherto  in
affections  of  the  fibrous  tissues. It  is  recommended
in  the  books  for  rheumatism  with  profuse  perspira-
tions which  afford  no  relief. But  I  had  no  notion
of  its powers in this malady  until Dr. Yeldham
published  his  cases  in  the  '  Annals/  vol.  iii and  iv.
I  am  prepared  to  try  it now  more  extensively. —
Perhaps  your  use  of  the  Bichloride  in  ulceration  of
the  cartilages  of  the joints  has  something  to do
with  this  action  of  Mercury.

9.  I  can  say  nothing  of  the application  of  the
neurotic  powers  of  Mercury  to  practice. It  would
seem indicated in paralysis agitans and in some
forms of chorea, especially when these are ac-
companied by  mental disorder  of  the  fatuous  type.
When  Watson  says  "  I  have  known  several  obscure
but threatening  symptoms  of brain disease  clear
entirely  away,  when  the  gums '  were  made  sore  by
Mercury,  and  kept  slightly  tender  for  some  little
time,"  one  feels  tempted  to  suppose  that  the  power
of  the  drug  to  cause  cerebral  disease  has  had  some-
thing to  do  with  the  cure.

This  is  all  I  have  to  say  about  the  therapeutic
virtues  of  Mercury.  Yet  I  do  not  feel  that  I  have
by  any  means  given  them  exhaustively.  I  would
recommend  you  to  complete  my  sketch  by  reading

26


402  MEKCURIUS.

powers  very  well  and  fully.

Mercury  forms  the  central  figure  of  that  remark-
able triad,  Arsenic,  Mercury,  and  Iodine.  Its
milder  preparations  approach  most  nearly  to  Iodine,
while  the  Corrosive  Sublimate  is  the  closest  of
analogues  to  Arsenic.  These  are  the  only  remedies
generally  allied  to  Mercury : — those  resembling  it
in  their  action  upon  special  tissues  and  organs  we
have  mentioned  in  their  respective  places.

The  range  of  the  dose  of  Mercury  is  necessarily
extensive.  In  syphilitic  affections,  we  use  nearly
as  full  doses  as  you  do,  stopping  short,  however,  of
the  quantity  necessary  to  affect  the  gums.  In  most
of  the  disorders  calling  for  Mercurius  solubilis  the
3rd  or  6th  dec.  trituration  will  be  found  suitable  :
but  in  catarrh  the  6th  centes.  is  better.  Of
Mercurius  corrosivus  I  give  the  3rd  centes.  in  acute,
the  3rd  dec.  in  chronic  inflammations.  The  Iodide
is  generally  used  in  the  2nd  dec.,  and  the  Biniodide
in  the  3rd  dec.  trituration.


LETTER  XXX.

MEZEREUM,  MILLEFOLIUM,  MOSCHUS,  MUREX,  NAJA,
NATRUM  CARBONICUM  AND  MURIATICUM,  NUPHAR,
NUX  JUGLANS,  NUX  MOSCHATA.

ANOTHER  long  list  of  minor  medicines  lies  before
us  to-day.  We  begin  with  the  spurge-olive,
Daphne

Mezereum.

We  make  a  tincture  of  the  recent  bark,  or  tritura-
tions  of  the  dried.

The  proving  is  in  the  '  Chronic  Diseases.'
The  proving,  so  far  as  it  goes,  confirms  the  long-
standing reputation  of  Mezereum  as  a  remedy  for
affections  of  the  periosteum.  It  evidently  specifically
affects  this  tissue ;  and  we  use  it  in  periostitis,
periosteal  rheumatism,  and  nodes,  much  as  you  do
Iodide  of  Potassium.  Whether  it  acts  also  upon
the  bones  themselves,  I  hesitate  to  say.  There  is
a  case  on  record  in  which  it  seemed  to  check  the
necrosis  of  the  jaw  produced  by  Phosphorus  :  and
Noack  and  Trinks  recommend  it  for  several  osseous
diseases.  The  proving  has  further  shown  that  the
irritation  produced  by  the  application  of  Mezereum
juice  to  the  skin  is  of  a  specific  nature,  and  results
also  from  its  internal  administration.  The  itching
produced  is  very  intense,  and  the  irritation  often


404  M1LLEFOLITJM.

goes  on  to  the  development  of  an  eczematous  erup-
tion. Mezereum  is  recommended  by  Noack  and
Trinks  for  several  forms  of  cutaneous  eruption  :  but
Riickert  gives  no  instance  of  its  use. — I  myself  know
this  remedy  only  in  periosteal  affections  :  but  for
these  I  esteem  it  very  highly.

Kali  bichromicum  and  hydriodicum,  Phytolacca,
Mercurius,  Guiacum,  and  perhaps  Aurum  are  the
analogues  of  Mezereum.

I  have  always  used  the  lowest  potencies.

I  have  next  to  speak  of  the  common  yarrow,
millefoil,

Millefolium.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  tops  of  the  plant
cut  off  just  before  the  period  of  flowering.

There  is  a  pathogenesis  of  Millefolium  in  Jahr's
'  Manual/  collected  from  fragmentary  provings,  &c.j
in  Hartlaub  and  Trink's  Annals,  the  Archiv,  and
Noack  and  Trink's  Manual.

The  effects  of  Millefolium  on  the  healthy  body
are  few  and  unimportant.  I  have  myself  taken  fre-
quent doses  of  it  up  to  thirty  drops  of  the  mother-
tincture  without  any  result  but  vivid  and  unpleasant
dreaming.  It  has  long  been  a  domestic  remedy  in
haemorrhages,  to  which  it  probably  has  a  specific
relation.  I  have  myself  seen  it  act  well  in  haemo-
ptysis and  recurring  epistaxis :  and  Riickert  has  a
case  of  haematuria  in  which  it  proved  curative.  It
is  recommended  in  the  so-called  "  phthisis  florida."

Hamamelis  and  Ipecacuanha  are  allied  remedies.

I  use  the  first  dilution. In  the  case  of  hsematuria


MOSCHUS.  405

above  mentioned,  quarter-drop  doses  of  the  mother-
tincture  were  given.  I  have,  however,  seen  such
doses  seriously  aggravate  an  haemoptysis.

We  come  now  to  that  curious  animal  secretion,
musk,

Moschus,

of  which  we  make  a  tincture  by  maceration.

There  is  a  proving  of  Moschus  in  the  Mat.  Med.
Pura.  Dr.  Langheinz's  analysis  of  this  pathogenesis,
which  you  may  read  in  vol.  xxii  of  the  '  British
Journal/  shows  it  to  be  of  little  value.  I  refer  you
to  his  paper,  also,  for  an  account  of  Prof.  Jorg's
experiments  with  this  substance.

You  know  that  Musk  is  a  pretty  powerful  nervine
stimulant ;  it  seems  to  affect  the  brain  much  like
alcohol.  I  always  carry  it  in  my  pocket-case,  on
account  of  its  great  value  in  two  conditions  demand-
ing speedy  relief.  These  are  the  hysterical  paroxysm
and  nervous  palpitation.  I  know  nothing  which  so
rapidly  dissipates  an  hysterical  attack,  even  when  it
has  gone  as  far  as  unconsciousness,  as  Moschus.  It
is  of  no  less  potency  in  palpitation  which  has  been
set  off  by  some  nervous  excitement,  when  there  is
no  organic  disease  of  the  heart.  Moschus  is  also
occasionally  useful  in  laryngismus  stridulus  affecting
nervous  children :  and  should  be  remembered  in
hysterical  asthma.

Moschus  is  allied  with  Ambra,  Asafcetida,  Casto-
reum,  and  Valerian;  also  with  Camphor  and  Nux
Moschata.

1  use  the  2nd  and  3rd  dec.  dilutions  of  the  tine-


406  MUREX PURPUREA.

ture.  I  believe  that  the  odour  of  this  medicine  is
of  importance  to  its  action,  and  that  pilules  and
globules  of  it  are  useless.

I  must  now  say  a  few  words  about  the  drug  we  call

Murex  purpurea,

being  the  colouring  matter  of  the  shell-fish  so
named.  It  is  prepared,  however,  by  triturating  the
whole  mollusc.

The  original  proving  of  Murex  was  made  by  the
late  Dr.  Petroz,  and  may  be  found  in  Dr.  Cretin's
edition  of  his  collected  writings.  It  is  translated,
with  additional  matter,  by  Dr.  C.  Dunham,  in  the
'  American  Homoeopathic  Review  '  for  January  and
March,  1864.

Murex  evidently  acts  specifically  upon  the  uterus,
rendering  the  female  provers  painfully  conscious  of
possessing  such  an  organ.  It  produces  also  in  these
the  well-known  sympathetic  symptoms  of  sinking
in  the  stomach  and  pain  in  the  left  side  (comp.
Actsea).  It  has  proved  curative  in  several  cases  of
uterine  congestion,  which  you  will  find  in  Dr.  Dun-
ham's article.

Besides  Acttea  racemosa,  Murex  evidently  corre-
sponds, both  as  a  medicine  and  as  a  natural  product,
with  Sepia.

The  dilutions  from  4  to  6  were  used  in  the  cases
cured.

My  next  medicine  is  the  third  of  our  group  of
serpent-poisons,  the  virus  of  the  cobra  di  capello,  or
Naja  tripudians,  which  for  convenience  we  call —


NAJA.  407

Naja.

It  is  prepared  either  by  trituration  or  alcoholic
solution.  I  think  the  latter  mode  preferable.

We  owe  Naja  entirely  to  Dr.  Russell.  His
proving  of  it  will  be  found  in  vols.  xi  and  xii  of
the  '  British  Journal ; '  and  there  are  few  of  his
practical  writings  but  contain  some  mention  of  the
virtues  of  this  his  favourite  medicine.  I  would
also  refer  you  to  a  paper  by  Dr.  Bradshaw  on  the
snake-poisons  in  the  1st  vol.  of  the  '  Annals.'

The  action  of  Naja  is  essentially  identical  with
that  of  serpent-poisons  in  general,  which  I  have
cobra  bite,,  indeed,  we  only  note  that  the  neurotic
symptoms  predominate  over  the  haematic.  The
affection  of  the  pneumogastric  is  very  apparent :  in
the  keeper  killed  at  the  Zoological  Gardens  death
ensued  from  suspension  of  respiration,  and  the  air-
passages  were  filled  with  frothy  mucus.  In  the
very  careful  and  thorough  provings  instituted  under
Dr.  Russell's  superintendence  the  parts  supplied  by
the  pneumogastric  were  those  which  chiefly  suffered.
Dryness  of  mouth  and  throat,  spasmodic  catching
of  the  larynx,  and  irritable  cough  were  common  to
most  of  the  provers.  Next  to  these  parts,  the  head
seems  the  main  seat  of  the  action  of  Naja.  Five
of  the  provers  suffered  severely  from  continuous
temporo-frontal  headache,  accompanied  with  great
depression  of  spirits.

My  own  experience  fully  concurs  with  that  of
Dr.  Russell  as  to  the  value  of  Naja  as  a  remedy.
I  have  frequently  cured  with  it  the  kind  of  headache


408  NAJA.

spinal  pain  and  palpitation  of  the  heart.  Mr.  Gil-
low  gives  a  good  case  in  the  'British  Journal,'
vol.  xii,  p.  214,  and  suggests  it  for  the  gloomy
headache  which  results  from  disorder  of  the  sexual
function  in  males.  In  the  same  place  you  will
find  a  case  by  Dr.  Russell,  showing  how  rapidly
Naja  can  act  in  acute  pharyngo-laryngeal  inflam-
mation. He  has  more  recently  pointed  out  a  dark-
red  colour  of  the  fauces  as  especially  indicating  this
medicine.  Dr.  Bradshaw  commends  it  highly  in
the  cough  of  phthisis,  and  in  incipient  phthisis
laryngea.  Dr.  Russell  speaks  well  of  it  in  that
mysterious  disorder  called  "  spinal  irritation."  But
the  main  sphere  of  Naja  lies  in  diseases  of  the
heart.  To  quiet  chronic  nervous  palpitation,  to  aid
in  the  restoration  of  a  heart  recently  damaged  by
inflammation,  and  to  assuage  the  sufferings  of  chro-
nic hypertrophy  and  valvular  disease,  it  was  ranked
by  Dr.  Russell  as  the  chief  remedy :  and  I  think  I
can  confirm  his  estimate.

Naja  compares  with  the  other  snake-poisons,
Crotalus  and  Lachesis,  and  perhaps  with  Cactus.

I  have  always  used  the  2nd  dilution,  which  was
Dr.  Russell's  favourite ;  and  should  feel  disposed  to
go  lower  rather  than  higher  in  the  scale.

I  have  now  to  speak  of  the  two  salts  of  Sodium
we  use  in  our  practice,  the  Carbonate  of  Soda  and
the  Chloride  of  Sodium.  It  is  the  old  name  for
Sodium,  Natron  or  Natrum,  which  gives  it  this  place
in  our  alphabetical  series.

The  Carbonate  of  Soda —


NATRUM MURIATICUM.  409

Natrum  Carbonicum,

is  triturated  for  our  use,  after  being  first  dissolved
and  crystallized  out  of  solution.

The  proving  is  in  tlie  '  Chronic  Diseases/
Natrum  Carbouicum  is  one  of  those  puzzles  with
which  the  volumes  of  the  'Chronic  Diseases'  abound.
Its  pathogenesis  fills  thirty  pages  of  smallish  print ;
ordinary  disorders  of  the  human  frame.  And  yet
I  know  not  that  it  has  ever  effected  a  cure  worth
placing  on  record.  I  have  never  used  it  myself,
nor  have  I  ever  heard  it  recommended  by  a  col-
league. Teste  omits  it :  Hempel  mentions  its  che-
mical uses  only  :  Noack  and  Trinks'  nosological  list
seems  purely  hypothetical.  I  cannot  explain  the
puzzle.  But  in  the  meantime  I  feel  no  disposition
to  analyse  a  pathogenesis  of  such  questionable  value,
and  will  pass  at  once  to  the  other  and  more  im-
portant salt,  the  Chloride  of  Sodium,  common  salt,
or

Natrum  muriaticum.

We  prepare  it  in  the  same  way  as  the  carbonate.

The  original  proving  is  in  the  '  Chronic
Diseases/  A  most  exhaustive  re-proving  has  been
made  by  the  Austrian  Society,  and  published  in
their  '  Journal/  vol.  iv.  It  has  not  been  trans-
lated.

I  wish  I  could  tell  you  that  the  results  of  this
proving  had  rewarded  the  pains  of  the  experi-
menters. They  are  to  me  most  disappointing.
When  I  have  said  that  the  provers  generally


410  NATRtTM MURIATICtJM.

became  constipated  while  taking  the  potencies ;
that  the  liver  was  usually  somewhat  affected,  one
prover  having  much  biliary  colouring  matter  in  the
urine ;  that  the  sexual  desire  was  diminished  and
(in  females)  the  menstruation  delayed  ;  that  pains
in  the  thumb  and  forefinger  were  common,  and
the  skin  often  showed  signs  of  irritation, — 1  have
summed  up  the  main  results  of  the  proving.  It
gives  us  little  more  than  what  had  been  already
elicited  as  the  action  of  salt  from  the  symptoms  ex-
perienced by  those  who  had  immoderately  used  it.
These  are  a  scorbutic  degeneration  of  the  blood  and
tissues  ;  various  eruptions  and  ulcers  upon  the  skin  ;
delay  of  menstruations ;  and  in  one  man  genital
irritability  with  its  accompanying  depression.

What  now  have  been  the  therapeutic  uses  of
Natrum  muriaticum  ?  I  quote  from  Noack  and
Trinks.  "  This  drug  is  recommended  by  Rummel
against  protracted  cases  of  chlorosis,  with  deficient
nutrition,  and  dirty,  flaccid,  torpid  skin ;  by  Hart-
mann  against  urticaria;  by  Schmidt  against  scor-
butic dyscrasia  of  the  blood ;  by  Thorer  against
quotidian,  tertian,  and  quartan  fever ;  by  Neumann
against  inveterate  quotidian  fevers  ;  by  Hartlaub
against  intermittent  fevers;  by  Gross  against
nervous  fevers  with  great  weakness,  dryness  of  the
tongue  and  great  thirst ;  in  the  '  Homoeopathic
Gazette'  against  vertigo  caduca ;  by  Gross  against
headache  with  nausea,  and  likewise  against  lanci-
nating, boring,  throbbing  toothache  in  hollow  teeth,
not  bearing  the  open  air  on  contact,  worst  at  night,
arresting  the  breathing,  and  relieved  by  sitting  up  ;
by  Wahle  against  herpes  on  the  tongue ;  by  Weigel


NUPJIAR LTJTEA.  41,1

against  flat  ulcers  on  the  tongue  and  on  the  inner
walls  of  the  lips  and  corners  of  the  mouth,  with
copious  discharge  of  limpid  saliva ;  by  Griesselich
against  the  nausea  and  vomiting  of  pregnant
females ;  by  Engelhard  against  scirrhus  and  carci-
noma ventriculi ;  by  Veith  against  obstinate  consti-
pation ;  by  Knorre  against  dysentery ;  by  Veith
against  involuntary  discharge  of  urine  at  every  fit
of  cough  in  typhus  ;  by  Miiller  against  incontinence
of  urine;  by  Gross  against  balanorrhoea,  amenor-
rhoea,  and  irregularity  of  the  pulse  and  beats  of  the
heart;  by  Hartlaub  against  tumor  genu  (in  con-
junction with  Sulphur) ;  by  Hering  against  short-
ening of  the  hamstrings  in  lepra ;  by  Des  Guidi
against  inflammation  of  the  teudo-Achillis."

At  the  risk  of  offending  you  by  its  antiquated
pathology  I  have  made  the  preceding  extract,  as  I
really  know  nothing  myself  of  the  virtues  of  salt.
I  will  only  add  the  words  of  a  recent  American
writer,  "  If  there  be  in  our  Materia  Medica  any
such  thing  as  a  specific  for  intermittent  fever,  it  is
Natrum  muriaticum."*

And  now  a  few  words  about  a  medicine  which,
though  included  by  Dr.  Hale  in  his  '  New  Ameri-
can Remedies/  we  yet  owe  to  one  of  our  French
colleagues.  It  is  the  small-flowered  yellow  pond-
lily—

Nuphar  lutea.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  whole  plant.

*  Dr.  Pearson,  in  '  United  States  Med.  and  Surg.  Journ./  vol.  i,
p.  211.


412  NUX MOSCHATA.

The  proving  to  which  I  have  alluded,  by  Dr.
Pitet  of  Paris,  is  given  in  Dr.  Male's  book,  with
clinical  observations.

This  proving  confirms  the  ancient  reputation  of
Nuphar  as  an  anaphrodisiac.  It  shows  also  its
power  to  excite  a  diarrhoea,  which  is  most  trouble-
some in  the  early  morning.  These  are  the  two
pathogenetic  effects  of  Nuphar  which  have  led  to
practical  results.  Several  cases  of  morning  diarrhoea,
and  of  atonic  spermatorrhoea  are  reported  in  Dr.
Hale's  article  in  which  the  medicine  was  used  with
very  happy  results.

Agnus  castus  and  Rumex  crispus  are  the  two
medicines  which  cover  the  double  sphere  of  action
of  Nuphar  lutea.

The  dilutions  from  1 — 6  have  been  used.

I  have  put  down  Nux  juglans,  the  common
walnut,  in  my  list  of  medicines,  but  it  is  really  not
worth  a  separate  article.  There  is  a  short  patho-
genesis  of  it  in  Jahr's  (  Manual,'  but  it  has  no
recorded  application  to  Homoeopathic  practice.
Before,  however,  I  come  to  the  "  Nux"  par  excel-
lence, I  must  say  something  of  the  nutmeg,  which
you  call  Myristica,  and  we

Nux  moschata.

We prepare a tincture by maceration from the
powdered  nut.

The  pathogeuesis  of  Nutmeg  is  in  Jahr's
'  Manual,'  taken  from  a  proving  by  Dr.  Helbig.
The  articles  in  Hempel  and  Teste  also  should  be
consulted.


NUX MOSCHATA.  413

Nux  moschata,  like  most  of  the  odoriferous  sub-
stances, acts  mainly  on  the  nervous  centres.  It
seems  to  cause  in  large  quantities  a  kind  of  intoxi-
cation, closely  resembling  that  of  Musk.  It  is
chiefly  used,  like  the  latter  medicine,  in  hysteric
complaints.  It  is  recommended,  also,  for  flatu-
lence, and  for  retrocession  of  gout  to  the  stomach.

Allied  medicines  are  Moschus,  Asafoetida,  and
Camphor.

The  lowest  dilutions  will  probably  be  found  the
most  efficacious.


LETTER XXXI.

NUX VOMICA.

THIS  letter  will  be  devoted  to  a  drug  whose  name
will  ever  be  inseparably  associated  with  Homoso-
pathy,

Nux  vomica.

A  tincture,  or  (better)  triturations  are  prepared  from
the  nut,  dried  and  powdered.

The  original  proving,  with  many  of  Hahnemann's
characteristic  remarks,  is  in  the  '  Materia  Medica
Pura/  Pereira  (and  Hempel  from  him)  gives  the
general  physiological  action  of  Nux  vomica  very
fully.  Teste  has  some  suggestive  remarks  upon  it
in  his  '  Materia  Medica' ;  and  Hartmann  has
discussed  its  therapeutic  action  at  length  in  his
'  Practical  Remarks  on  some  of  the  chief  Homeo-
pathic Remedies/  2nd  series  (a  translation  by  Dr.
Okie  is  published  by  Raclde  of  New  York).  I
would  also  refer  you  to  some  observations  on  Nux
vomica  by  another  of  our  veterans,  Dr.  Schron,  in
vol.  xvi  of  the  '  British  Journal/

If  you  have  come  to  know  anything  of  the
domestic  reputation  of  Nux  vomica,  you  may  have
thought  that  its  uses  bear  no  relation  to  its  well-
known  physiological  effects.  But  I  think  that
when  we  have  analysed  these  effects,  and  pursued


NUX VOMICA.  415

them  into  detail  (herein  enabled  by  our  provings),
we  shall  see  that  a  discriminate  application  of  the
drug  to  dyspepsia  and  constipation  is  thoroughly
warranted  thereby.

The  most  general  description,  then,  of  the  patho-
genetic  action  of  Nux  vornica  is  that  it  produces
tetanus.  There  seems,  from  the  testimony  of  all,
no  essential  distinction  between  this  condition  when
resulting  from  Nux  vomica  and  when  occurring  as
an  idiopatbic  disease.  Moreover,  Claude  Bernard's
beautiful  experiments  have  made  it  pretty  certain
that  the  drug  sets  up  the  disease  in  the  same
manner  as  does  a  wound;  that  its  morbid  im-
pression is  first  made  upon  the  sensory  nerves,  and
carried  by  them  to  the  spinal  cord,  whence  it  is
reflected  upon  the  motor  nerves  and  muscles.*
Hence  the  preternatural  acuteness  of  the  senses
noticed  in  the  subjects  of  Strychnia  poisoning,  and
the  readiness  with  which  the  spasms  can  be  excited
by  any  impression  upon  the  surface.

The  condition  induced  in  the  spinal  cord  itself
is  one  of  excitement  and  excitability.  It  is  not,
however,  at  its  highest  inflammatory ;  although  effu-
sion of  blood  may  take  place  from  the  distended
capillaries,f  and  the  molecular  disturbance  may
lead  to  softening, — both  of  these  conditions  having
appeared  after  death  from  Strychnia.  From  this
follow  the  phenomena  of  the  motor  sphere,  which
range  from  simple  stiffness  or  twitching  to  complete

*  There  is  a  good  account  of  Cl.  Bernard's  experiments  by
Dr.  Carfrae  in  the  '  Annals,'  vol.  iv,  p.  119.

f  See  Schroeder  van  der  Kolk  on  the  '  Spinal  Cord'  (New
Sydenham  Soc.),  p.  78.


416  NUX VOMICA.

tetanic  rigidity.  Pereira  has  pointed  out  that  the
influence  extends  also  to  the  involuntary  muscles,
as  to  those  of  the  alimentary  canal,  the  respiratory
organs,  and  the  genito-urinary  system.  To  this
fact  our  proving  bears  abundant  witness.  It  also
reveals,  what  is  indeed  most  probable,  that  the
excitation  caused  by  the  drug  affects  (though  in  a
minor  degree)  the  vascular  nerves  and  the  arteries,
causing  the  febrile  phenomena  of  chill,  heat,  and
sweat.

I  am  very  much  disposed  to  think  that  all  the
other  symptoms  experienced  by  the  provers  of  Nux
vomica  are  due  to  this  influence  it  exerts  upon  the
nervous  centres.  If  I  made  any  exception,  it  would
be  on  behalf  of  the  respiratory  mucous  membrane,
upon  which  some  irritant  action  may  be  directed.
The  head  symptoms,  which  are  important,  are
certainly  manifestations  of  an  extension  of  the
spinal  excitation  of  Nux  to  the  intra-cranial  con-
tinuation of  the  cord.  I  cannot  illustrate  them
better  than  by  the  following  citation  from  the
'  Annals/  vol.  i,  p.  380.

"  Dr.  Chapman  related  the  case  of  a  chemist
who,  by  way  of  bravado,  took  one  night  three  or
four  drops  of  the  mother-tincture  of  Nux  vomica.
He  awoke  early  the  next  morning  with  a  feeling  as
if  his  head  would  burst.  He  was  so  giddy  that  he
could  neither  sit  nor  stand ;  he  had  rushing  sounds
in  his  ears,  intolerance  of  light  and  sound,  and  he
could  not  see.  His  face  was  tumid  ;  and  he  looked
besotted,  like  a  man  reeling  drunk.  When  he
(Dr.  Chapman)  saw  him,  in  addition  to  the


NUX VOMICA.  417

symptoms  already  mentioned,  he  found  the  pupils
closed  to  about  a  pin's  point."

You  will  see  there  is  no  disorder  of  the  cerebral
functions,  as  from  Belladonna :  but  that  excitement
and  active  hypersemia  are  well-marked.

uses  of  Nux  vomica  in  the  Homo3opathic  school.
We  shall  see,  as  we  progress,  that  they  are  for  the
most  part  legitimate  applications  of  its  physiological
action  according  to  the  law  of  similars.

The  general  characteristics  of  the  curative  action
of  Nux  are  plainly  put  by  Hahnemann,  and  have
stood  the  test  of  large  experience.  It  is  specially
suitable  to  vigorous  persons,  of  dry  habit,  tense
fibre,  ardent  and  irascible  temperament,  and  tena-
cious disposition ;  to  patients  addicted  to  the  use  of
much  wine  or  coffee,  and  to  those  of  sedentary
habits  combined  with  considerable  mental  exertion  :
lastly,  where  there  is  a  tendency  to  sleep  in  the
evening,  to  wake  at  two  or  three  a.m.,  and  to  be
kept  awake  for  hours  by  ideas  crowding  in  upon
the  mind,  and  then  to  sleep  late  in  the  morning.
It  is  an  indication  for  Nux,  moreover,  when  the
symptoms  come  on  or  grow  worse  at  this  early
hour;  also  when  they  are  increased  by  taking  food
or  by  mental  exertion.  If  you  desire  to  follow
up  still  farther  these  general  characteristics  of  our
drug,  you  will  find  them  well  put  and  illustrated  in
Hartmaun's  '  Observations/

Now  for  its  special  applications.

1.  In  affections  of  the  nervous  system,  Nux
vomica  naturally  holds  a  high  place.  In  traumatic

27


418  NUX VOMICA.

tetanus  it  should  be  a  specific  remedy.  The  only
record  of  its  use  which  I  have  come  across  is
strangely  enough  from  an  allceopathic  source.  You
will  find  the  reference  in  Hempel  to  several  hospital
cases  treated  successfully  by  small  doses  of  Strychnia:
in  which  form  I  should  recommend  the  administra-
tion of  the  drug  for  this  disease.  To  paralysis  it
would  of  course  be  homoeopathic  only  where  it
depended  upon  cerebral  congestion,  of  which  I  shall
speak  farther  on.  In  chorea  and  hysteria  it  is
generally  superseded  by  Ignatia,  which  corresponds
more  closely  to  their  peculiar  character.  To
neuralgia  I  cannot  think  it  homoeopathic,  except
when  the  pain  is  sympathetic  of  gastro-intestinal
derangement.  The  hypersesthesia  of  Nux  is  quite
a  different  thing  from  neuralgia,  which  may  even  be
associated  with  the  opposite  condition  of  the  surface.
The  same  thing  may  be  said  of  epilepsy  ;  in  Dr.
Russell's  words,  it  acts  "  rather  by  removing  the
peripheral  exciting  causes,  than  by  acting  on  the
abnormal  condition  of  the  nervous  centres/'*  The
only  remaining  disorder  of  the  nervous  system  is
ague :  and  in  the  treatment  of  this  malady  Nux  is
often  required,  generally  in  association  with  Ipecacu-
anha. Its  special  indications  are  the  accompany-
ing gastro-intestinal  symptoms  ;  though  it  is  said
that  the  paroxysm  itself  points  to  it  when  the  heat
precedes  or  mingles  with  the  chill.

In  the  treatment  of  blood-diseases,  on  the  other
hand,  Nux  has  hardly  any  place.  I  cannot  think  it
homoeopathic  to  the  peculiar  form  of  dyspepsia
which  leads  to  gout  :  and  if  it  is  beneficial  in

*  '  Clinical  Lectures,'  p.  268.


NUX VOMICA.  419

lumbago,  as  a  case  of  Dr.  Russell's  would  go  to
prove,  it  is  more  likely  to  be  so  in  tlie  myalgic
than  in  the  rheumatic  form  of  the  malady.

3.  Affections  of  the  brain  are  among  those  which
most  frequently  call  for  Nux  vomica.  The  strong
resemblance  of  its  cerebral  symptoms  to  the  effects
of  alcohol  have  led  to  its  use  in  delirium  tremens.
It  would  hardly  reach  this  disease  at  its  height  :
but  in  its  forming  stage  and  during  convalescence
it  ought  to  be  useful.  It  is  certainly  very  good
for  the  morning  vomiting,  the  trembling  hands,  and
other  nervo-muscular  affections  of  drunkards.  The
character  of  the  action  of  Nux  on  the  nervous
centres,  while  unfitting  it  for  inflammation  of  the
brain,  makes  it  just  the  remedy  for  those  congestive
states  of  the  organ  which  predispose  to  apoplexy.
Even  when  sanguineous  effusion  has  taken  place,
Xux  vomica  is  the  best  medicine  to  give,  unless  the
state  of  the  general  circulation  should  call  for
Aconite.*  Lastly,  few  medicines  are  more  fre-
quently useful  in  headache  than  Nux  vomica.  You
will  see  at  once  the  chief  form  of  the  affection  in
which  it  is  likely  to  be  advantageous, — the  head-
aches of  strong,  plethoric  adults  with  congestion,
giddiness,  flushed  face,  and  constipation.  But  it  is
also  (in  higher  dilutions)  curative  of  several  other
cephalalgise,  as  clavus  hystericus,  where  the  con-
stitution suits  Nux  better  than  Ignatia  ;  hemicrania
under  the  same  conditions ;  and  severe  headache
beginning  with  dazzling  of  the  sight. f

4.  I  come  now  to  a  still  more  important  sphere

*  See Dr. Yeldharn's cases in his '  Homoeopathy in  Acute
Diseases.'

f  See  Peters's  '  Treatise  on  Headaches.'


420  NUX VOMICA.

of  the  action  of  Nux  vomica, — its  influence  over  the
disorders  of  the  alimentary  canal.  It  is  here  that
we  need  to  be  especially  discriminating :  for  the
really  great  power  of  Nux  in  dyspepsia  and  con-
stipation has  led  to  its  abuse  and  even  discredit.
It  is  no  uncommon  thing  for  Homoeopathic  neo-
phytes to  take  a  pilule  of  Nux  the  first  time  their
evacuations  delay,  and  expect  it  to  act  like  Aloes  or
Colocynth.  They  fancy,  moreover,  that  it  will
clean  their  coated  tongues,  and  disperse  their
bilious  attacks,  and  indeed  be  a  remedy  for  "  indi-
gestion" of  all  kinds.  But  the  remembrance  of  the
physiological  action  of  the  drug  will  save  us  from
this  indiscriminate  use.  Nux  has  little  or  no  in-
fluence upon  the  mucous  membranes  or  the  secreting
organs :  it  acts  here  as  elsewhere  upon  the  nerves
and  muscles.  Hence  its  true  place  in  gastric
disorders.  The  acute  dyspepsia  of  which  it  is
curative  is  that  caused  by  taking  indigestible  food.
There  is  no  particular  mucous  disorder, — but  on
the  other  hand  pain,  vomiting  with  much  retching,
and  frequent  scanty  motions  with  colic  and  urging
are  present.  The  chronic  dyspepsia  of  Nux  is
essentially  the  same,  but  of  course  presents  more
variety.  Its  most  frequent  form  is  that  of  cardi-
algia.  When  this  affection  is  spasmodic  in  charac-
ter, and  accompanied  with  much  flatulence,  Nux  is
its  specific.  You  will  find  notes  of  a  long  succession
of  cases  treated  successfully  by  it  in  the  '  Brit.
Journ./  vol.  xi,  pp.  435,  548.  Water-brash  is  another
form  of  dyspepsia  in  which  Nux  is  specifically  cura-
tive :  I  do  not  know,  however,  what  are  the  diagnostic
marks  between  it  and  Bryonia  or  Lycopodium.


NUX VOMICA.  421

These  are  the  two  leading  forms  of  the  Nux
dyspepsia :  but  it  may  fairly  be  said  that  there  are
very  few  painful  non-organic  affections  of  the
stomach  which  may  not  be  helped  by  this  precious
medicine.  The  same  virtues  display  themselves  in
the  intestines.  It  is  quite  homoeopathic  to  spas-
modic colic  from  flatulence  :  but  other  medicines —
as  Colocyuth  and  Cocculus — are  more  frequently
used.  Constipation  is  a  well-known  indication  for
Nux  vomica  in  complex  cases.  As  an  idiopathic
affection,  moreover,  it  frequently  requires  this
remedy.  You  may  think  that  the  use  of  Nux
must  be  antipathic  here,  as  constipation  means
atony  of  the  intestines,  and  Nux  is  excitant  and  not
depressant  thereto.  Your  own  therapeutists  recom-
mend it  on  these  grounds.  But  I  must  point  out
that  constipation  by  no  means  always  depends  upon,
atony  of  the  intestines.  Schroeder  van  der  Kolk
states  that  "  long  experience  and  a  great  number  of
post-mortem  examinations  have  satisfactorily  proved
to  him  that  chronic  constipation  is  almost  always
dependent  on  constrictions  in  the  descending  colon."
And  of  the  Nux  constipation  Dr.  C.  Dunham  well
says,*  'fthis  medicine  does  not  diminish  the
action  of  the  intestine.  It  rather  increases  it,
but  at  the  same  time  renders  it  inharmonious  and
spasmodic, — a  hindrance,  therefore,  and  not  a  help
to  evacuation.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  con-
stipation characteristic  of  Nux  vomica  is  accompanied
by  frequent  ineffectual  desire  for  stool — the  action
of  the  intestine  being  irregular  and  spasmodic,  and

* '  Amer.  Horn.  Review,'  vol.  vi,  p.  154.


422  NTJX VOMICA.

the  constipation  resulting  from  the  irregularity  of
action,  and  not  from  inaction."  It  is  probably  by  a
similar  action  that  Nux  occasionally  relieves  ileus,
and  incarcerated  or  even  strangulated  hernia.*
Perhaps  also  the  benefit  occasionally  obtained  from
this  medicine  in  dysentery  is  due  to  its  control  over
the  tormina  and  tenesmus — which  are  iiervo-
muscular — rather  than  from  any  action  on  the
mucous  membrane.  The  same  cannot  be  said,
however,  of  its  undoubted  power  over  at  least  one
form  of  diarrhoea,  that,  namely,  which  comes  on  in
infants  brought  up  by  hand  when  the  artificial  food
disagrees  with  them.  But  in  this  affection  the
lowest  dilutions  seem  indispensable.  Another
somewhat  anomalous  use  of  Nux  is  in  abdominal
plethora  and  the  hemorrhoids  which  result  there-
from. It  is  generally  given  here  in  alternation
with  Sulphur  :  and  perhaps  most  of  the  benefit  is
traceable  to  the  latter  medicine.

5.  In  disorders  of  the  respiratory  organs  Nux
vomica  plays  a  much  less  important  part  than  in
those  of  the  alimentary  canal.  It  is  very  good,
however,  for  dry  coryza, — the  so-called  "  stuffy
cold  ;"  and  for  violent  coughs,  with  little  or  no  ex-
pectoration, jarring  the  head,  and  straining  the
abdominal  muscles.  Nux  is  obviously  homoeopathic
to  spasmodic  asthma :  and  frequently  plays  an
important  part  in  its  treatment.  There  is  a
brilliant  case  on  record  treated  by  Hahnemann  in
his  early  days,  which  teaches  us  that  the  medicine
need  not  be  used  in  infinitesimal  doses  for  this
malady  at  any  rate.  You  may  read  it  in  Hempel.
*  See  a  case  in  Harttnann,  p.  151.


XUX VOMICA.  423

6.  Still  less  frequently  is  Nux  vomica  required
when  the  genito -urinary  organs  are  affected.  I  can
only  suggest  it  hypothetically  for  the  irritable
bladder  of  those  accustomed  to  take  much  alcohol,
and  for  spasmodic  stricture.  It  is  said,  however,  to
have  afforded  relief  in  the  passage  of  urinary  calculi ;
and  it  is  certainly  very  beneficial  in  irritable  con-
ditions of  the  male  sexual  organs,  when  the  other
symptoms  correspond  and  the  general  characteristics
are  present.  All  this  is  intelligible  on  the  ground
of  the  nervo-muscular  influence  of  Nux  :  but  not  so
another  use  of  it  in  this  sphere,  viz.  for  metritis.
Hartmann  writes,  "  Nux  is  a  very  admirable  remedy
in  inflammation  of  the  womb,  and  its  virtues  in  this
complaint  are  lauded  by  many  experienced  Homoeo-
pathists,  with  whom  I  must  join  myself.  Whether  the
metritis  has  occurred  in  the  unimpregnated  uterus,
or  during  gestation,  or  after  delivery,  it  matters  not ;
and  just  as  little  influence  has  the  particular  part  of
the  uterus  which  is  affected."  This  is  curious
enough :  but  I  must  say  that  in  two  cases  of
metritis  after  parturition  which  I  have  had  under
my  care,  the  effects  of  Nux  30  were  astonishing.

I  will  jot  down  a  few  more  applications  of  Nux
vomica,  of  which  I  am  reminded  as  I  look  through
Hartmann,  Hempel,  and  Schron.

a.  The  first-named  recommends  Nux  when  bright
sparks  trouble  the  eyes,  flying  from  the  periphery
to  the  centre. He  thinks  it  a  symptom  of  cerebral
congestion.

b.  Nux  is  occasionally  useful  for  the  photophobia
accompanying  strumous  ophthalmia. Here  its  in-
fluence on  the  sensory  nerves  comes  into  play.


424  NUX VOMICA.

c.  Hartmann  also  recommends  our  medicine  for
the reduction of  enlarged  tonsils, and "  where a
number  of  offensive  ulcers  are situated  within  the
buccal  cavity  and  upon  the  fauces,  which  produce  a
disagreeable  taste which  the patient  cannot  over-
come, and  exhale  a  putrid  odour  perceptible  to  the
attendants." I  give  this  on  his  authority  : but  it
seems  outside  the  sphere  of  the  drug.

d.  Nux  is  certainly  indispensable  for  the  morning-
sickness  of  pregnancy. It probably  acts  here  by
diminishing  reflex  excitement.

e.  Schron  credits  Nux  with  considerable  power
over the aching  of  carious  teeth,  and  against  the
recurrence  of  gum-boils. These  again  are  anomalous
actions  of  the  drug.

But  I  need  give  no  further  illustrations  of  the
action  of  Nux.  Whatever  else  it  may  do,  it  must
always  be  thought  of  when  nervous  and  muscular
excitement  are  present,  and  when  cramps  and
spasms  present  themselves.  I  will  conclude  by
citing  from  Hartmann  a  typical  case  for  its  applica-
tion.

"  Mad.  B — ,  some  thirty  years  old,  who  had  suffered  for  many
years  with  a  troublesome  and  distressing  cough,  lost  her  cough  sud-
denly without  any  cause :  instead  of  the  cough,  she  was  afflicted
with  a  constant  pressure,  which  sometimes  became  a  griping,  in  the
gastric  region,  which  was  aggravated  after  every  meal,  and  after
drinking  coffee  became  so  much  exacerbated,  that  she  was  obliged
to  sit  completely  bent  over.  She  was  at  the  same  time  afflicted
with  constriction  and  oppression  of  the  chest,  and  could  only  make
a  short  inspiration,  with  which  a  partial  hiccough  was  always  con-
joined.  Water-brash  occurred  frequently  during  the  day:  inap-
petence :  alvine  evacuations  hard,  occurring  every  third  or  fourth
day.  She  had  suffered  from  this  complaint  for  full  two  years.  I
regulated  her  diet,  and  cured  her  entirely  in  four  weeks  by  the


STRYCHNIA.  425

administration  of  two  doses  of  Nux  vomica.  After  this  she  could
eat  with  impunity :  she  could  even  occasionally  indulge  in  coffee,
without  reproducing  her  complaint ;  but  she  dare  not  make  it  her
daily  drink."

lynatia  is  of  course  the  closest  analogue  of  Nux
vomica.  Then  come  Aconite,  Hydrocyanic  acid,
and  Cicuta, — like  it  producing  tetanus  and  tonic
spasm  generally.  Last  stands  Bryonia,  which  acts
so  similarly  on  the  digestive  organs  and  the  air-
passages.

Nux  is  another  drug  whose  action  is  qualitative
rather  than  quantitative.  The  30th  potency  was
that  used  by  Hahnemann  and  his  immediate  dis-
ciples ;  and  the  great  reputation  of  the  medicine  is
unquestionably  founded  upon  their  successful  results.
Yet  the  lower  potencies,  and  even  fractional  doses
of  the  pulverised  nut,  have  made  many  brilliant
cures :  and  this  even  when  the  dilutions  have
failed.  You  may  see  this  by  Hempel's  citations
from  Kopp's  '  Memorabilia/  I  myself  have  used
all  dilutions  with  advantage  :  and  continually  sub-
stitute the  lower  for  the  higher,  and  vice  versa,
wheii  the  potency  first  chosen  had  failed  to  act.

A  word  in  conclusion  about  the  chief  alkaloid  of
Nux  vomica,

Strychnia.

Being  sparingly  soluble,  it  should  be  triturated  up
to  at  least  the  3rd  dec.  potency.

As  Strychnia  contains,  in  its  most  concentrated
form,  the  spasm-causing  property  of  Nux  vomica,  it
seems  obvious  to  use  it  as  a  Homoeopathic  remedy


426  STRYCHNIA.

for  such  conditions.  I  have  accordingly  done  so  in
the  treatment  of  spasmodic  asthma,  and  should
adopt  the  same  course  in  tetanus.  These  are
examples  of  pure  spasm.  But  in  the  more  complex
forms  of  disease  in  which  Nux  is  so  beneficial,  as  in
gastro-intestinal  disorders,  I  think  we  should  suffer
loss  by  substituting  Strychnia.  I  am  inclined,
that  the  influence  of  Strychnia  is  limited  to  the
cord,  and  does  not  reach  the  brain.  In  the  tetanic
paroxysms  excited  by  this  poison,  the  pupils  are
strongly  dilated.  This  would  just  be  the  effect  of
an  excitation  of  the  upper  part  of  the  cord,  leaving
the  brain  untouched.*  While  the  influence  of  Nux
vomica  contracts  the  pupil,  being  (as  I  suppose)
transmitted  thereto  through  the  third  cranial  nerve.

*  See  my  "  Observations  on  the  Pupil  as  affected  by  Disease  and
Drugs,"  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  vol.  xxii,  p.  430.


LETTER  XXXII.

OLEANDER,  OLEUM  ANIMALE,  OPIUM,  ORIGANUM,
PETROLEUM.

THIS  will  be  but  a  short  letter :  as  the  names
which  come  between  the  two  polychrests,  Nux
vomica  and  Phosphorus,  are  few  and  (save  Opium)
unimportant.  The  first  is  the  laurel  rose,  Nerium

Oleander.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  leaves.
The  proving  is  in  the  '  Materia  Medica  Para/
The  list  of  symptoms  obtained  from  Oleander  is
not  a  long  one,  and  has  much  vraisemblance  about
it.  The  drug  seems  to  have  a  decided  elective  affi-
nity for  the  skin.  "  The  skin  of  the  body  is  very
sensitive  all  over ;  it  becomes  sore,  raw,  and  painful,
merely  by  the  friction  of  the  clothes ;  for  example,
the  skin  of  the  neck  becomes  so  from  the  rubbing
of  the  cravat,  that  of  the  thighs  from  the  rubbing  of
wide  trousers  when  walking.''  And  again,  "  Forty
hours  after  taking  the  dose,  gnawing  itching,  as  of
an  eruption  over  the  whole  body,  while  undressing."
Hahnemann  recommends  it  for  "  eruptions  of  the
head  and  other  affections  of  the  scalp."  Sympt.
122-3  ("  The  power  of  speech  is  almost  entirely  lost,
the  breathing  being  natural.  She  attempted  to


428  OPIUM.

answer  when  asked,  but  she  was  only  able  to  utter
sounds,  but  no  intelligible  words")  have  led  to  its
recommendation  for  paralysis  of  the  tongue.  And
Hartmann,  from  Sympt.  189,  suggests  it  for
lienteria.  If  China  ever  fails  you  in  this  disorder,
Oleander  might  be  worth  a  trial.

I  can  tell  you  nothing  about  allied  medicines  or
dose.

Oleum  animale

or  DippePs  Oil,  is  included  in  the  Materia  Medica
Homoeopathica  on  the  strength  of  a  pathogenesis
from  Hartlaub  and  Trinks,  which  you  will  find  in
Jahr's  'Manual.'  I  apprehend  that  any  virtues
which  this  oil  may  possess  reside  in  a  much  greater
degree  in  the  Kreasote  which  is  obtained  from  it.

And  now  we  come  to  a  drug,  which  stands  at
the  head  of  your  list  of  medicines,  but  occupies
only  a  second-rate  position  in  ours,

Opium.

We  prepare  the  tincture  as  you  do :  but  I  think
triturations  better.

There  is  a  pathogenesis  of  Opium  in  the  '  Materia
Medica  Pura/  This  has  been  analysed  by  Dr.
Langheinz  (see  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.,  vol.  xxii.,  p.
17)  :  and  found  very  unsatisfactory.  Dr.  Eidherr
has  since  instituted  a  new  proving,  the  "  schema"
of  which  you  will  find  translated  in  vol.  xxiii  of  the
same  Journal,  p.  1.  The  attempt  was  laudable;
but  it  seems  to  me  to  have  added  nothing  to  the
knowledge  of  the  effects  of  Opium  which  can  be


OPIUM.  429

obtained from the ordinary treatises  on Materia
Medica  and  Toxicology.

The  general  symptoms  of  Opium  are  too  well-
known  to  you,  to  require  detailing  here.  It  is  not
easy,  however,  to  characterise  them.  They  closely
resemble  those  of  Alcohol ;  and  the  modus  operandi
of  Alcohol  is  to  this  drug  a  qu&stio  vexata.  It
seems  certain  that  the  primary  effect  of  Opium  is  a
moderate  excitement  of  the  nervous  functions,  with
vascular  fulness ;  but  that  signs  of  diminished  con-
trol of  the  will  soon  appear,  and  sopor  results.  I
have  discussed  the  meaning  of  these  phenomena  as
regards  the  brain  in  some  ''  Observations  on  the
pupil  as  affected  by  Disease  and  Drugs"  in  the
'  Brit.  Journ.  of  Homoeopathy/  vol.  xxii.  Permit
me  to  cite  here  a  portion  of  my  remarks.

"  The  influence  of  Opium  upon  the  pupil  presents  a  problem  of
far  greater  difficulty.  It  is  natural  to  suppose  that  an  agent  which
uniformly,  and  at  every  stage  of  its  poisonous  operation,  contracts
the  pupils,  should  act  in  a  manner  directly  opposite  to  one  which
as  uniformly  and  persistently  dilates  them.  And  such  a  theoretical
conclusion  seems  strongly  confirmed  hy  the  results  of  a  practical
inference  drawn  from  the  phenomena.  I  was  among  the  first  to
recommend  the  use  of  Opium  and  Belladonna  as  antidotes  one  to
another  in  cases  of  poisoning.  This  practice  has  now  been  exten-
sively carried  out,  especially  in  America,  and  with  most  gratifying
results.  In  all  the  cases  whose  details  have  come  under  my  notice,
an  alteration  in  the  state  of  the  pupils  under  the  influence  of  the
antidote  was  the  first  symptom  of  recovery.  Opium  has  also  been
used  with  success  in  cases  of  Stramonium  poisoning  in  India.  Shall
we  say,  then,  that  Opium  acts  upon  the  brain  in  a  manner  dia-
metrically opposed  to  that  of  Belladonna  ?  The  mutually  antidotal
powers  of  the  two  remedies  would  point  to  such  a  conclusion ;  and
the  comparative  study  of  their  symptoms  confirms  it.  The  full
effects  of  Belladonna  are  excitement  going  on  to  delirium ;  those
of  opium  are  oppression  merging  fast  into  sopor  and  coma.  The


430  OPIUM.

testimony  of  Homoeopathic  therapeutics  also  is  in  favour  of  this
essentially  opposite  action  upon  the  cerebral  substance.  Opium  is
of  benefit  where  the  symptoms  of  depression  and  oppression  of  the
brain  prevail ;  and  in  cases  where  the  nervous  system  appears  in-
sensible to  the  action  of  remedies,  a  dose  or  two  of  Opium  will
sometimes  revive  its  sinking  energies.  While  Belladonna,  as  we
know  well,  meets  best  the  erethistic  and  inflammatory  conditions
of  the  nervous  centres.

"  But  since  we  have  already  seen  that  the  dilated  pupil  of  Bella-
donna is  not  dependent  upon  the  state  of  the  brain  induced  by  that
drug,  it  is  certain  that  Opium  cannot  overcome  that  dilatation  by
its  antagonistic  influence  upon  the  brain.  This,  indeed,  our  case
of  compound  poisoning  has  already  taught  us.  And  again,  if  the
state  of  the  pupil  in  Opium  poisoning  were  connected  with  the
consentaneous  depression  of  the  cerebral  energy,  it  should  be  (as
we  have  seen)  one  of  dilatation  rather  than  contraction.  In  seek-
ing for  an  explanation  of  these  facts,  we  light  upon  certain  residual
phenomena  of  the  influence  of  Opium  which  cannot  be  accounted
for  by  simple  depression  of  the  substance  of  the  brain.  There  are
the  primary  excitement  which  nearly  always  appears  from  moderate
doses,  and  the  signs,  both  living  and  post-mortem,  of  engorgement
of  the  intra-cranial  blood-vessels.  Let  us  now  suppose  (which  is  at
least  probable)  that  Opium  exerts  upon  the  sympathetic  system  an
influence  of  a  similar  kind  to  that  which  it  exhibits  in  the  cerebro-
spinal  sphere ;  we  shall  then  have  contraction  of  the  pupils,  as  from
division  of  the  sympathetic  in  the  neck.  Further,  the  coats  of  the
cerebral  arteries  being  relaxed  by  the  loss  of  energy  in  the  vaso-
motor  nerves,  a  larger  supply  of  blood  than  natural  will  be  sent  to
the  brain ;  the  first  effect  of  which  will  be  to  excite  its  functional
energy,  and  then,  as  this  latter  declines  under  the  depressing
influence  of  the  drug,  to  give  a  congestive  character  to  the  semi-
paralysis  which  ensues."

The  after  effects  of  Opium,  when  the  sopor  has
passed  off,  are  just  those  which  follow  a  debauch, —
nausea,  anorexia,  headache,  listlessness,  sleeplessness,
constipation.  They  are  seen  in  their  fullest  intensity
in  habitual  Opium-eaters.

It  appears,  therefore,  that  the  full  effects  of  a


OPIUM.  431

dose  of  Opium  pass  through  several  stages  from
excitement  with  vascular  fulness  to  a  condition
precisely  opposite.  Hahuemaun  and  Teste  are  at
variance  upon  the  question  whether  the  latter
"  secondary"  symptoms  should  be  taken  into  account
in  prescribing  the  medicine  homceopathically.  I
side  with  Teste  in  answering  the  question  in  the
affirmative.  But  I  think  that,  to  make  the  drug
truly  homoeopathic,  these  symptoms  should  be  part
of  the  Opium  series,  and  not  mere  individual  oc-
currences. Thus,  Opium  may  be  indicated  in
sleeplessness,  but  only  when  this  has  been  preceded
by  drowsiness,  and  is  accompanied  with  headache,
chilliness,  listlessness,  and  so  on.

Hahnemann  foresaw  truly  when  he  said  "  Opium
is  one  of  those  drugs  the  primary  effects  of  which
seldom  correspond  homoeopathically  to  the  symp-
toms of  disease."  He  moreover  pointed  out  with
great  sagacity  the  two  leading  morbid  conditions  to
which  it  really  corresponds.  "  Opium  is  a  specific"
he  wrote  "for  certain  kinds  of  the  most  obstinate
constipation."  It  holds  a  high  place  among  us  in
the  treatment  of  this  disorder :  reaching  even  to
intestinal  obstruction  when  of  a  paralytic  nature,
and  to  incarcerated  hernia.  We  also  esteem  it  the
principal  remedy  for  lead-colic,  and  suppose  that  it
acts  here  by  removing  the  constipation.  In  these
latter  uses  we  are  at  one  with  our  brethren  of  the
old  school :  but  this  because  they  are  herein
unconsciously  homoeopathising. — Opium  is  also  a
specific,  Hahnemann  continues,  "for  acute  fevers
characterised  by  a  sopor  bordering  upon  stupor,  and
by  absence  of  any  complaint,  snoring  with  the


432  OPIUM.

mouth  open,  half-jerking  of  the  limbs,  and  burning
heat  of  the  perspiring  body."  The  cerebral  symp-
toms of  fever,  indeed,  quite  as  often  remind  one  of
the  effects  of  Opium  as  of  those  of  Hyoscyamus  or
Belladonna :  and  in  such  cases  it  will  be  found  very
useful. — The  drowsiness  of  which  this  is  the  intensest
form  is  always  a  special  indication  for  Opium  :  and
may  sometimes  present  itself  as  a  morbid  state  per
se}  when  there  is  little  difficulty  about  the  choice  of
the  medicine.  Opium  should  also  be  occasionally
serviceable  in  headaches  like  those  it  causes ;  and
in  the  atonic  dyspepsia  of  drunkards.  It  seems  to
paralyse  the  muscular  fibres  of  the  fundus  of  the
bladder  rather  than  those  of  its  sphincter  (herein
just  the  reverse  of  Belladonna) :  and  is  accordingly
remedial  in  paralytic  retention  of  urine.

I  have  left  to  the  last  the  relation  of  Opium  to
two  important  cerebral  affections,  delirium  tremens
and  apoplexy.  Resembling  as  it  does  so  very
closely  in  its  action  that  of  alcohol,  it  ought  to  find
a  place  in  the  homoeopathic  treatment  of  the
drunkard's  mania.  But  I  cannot  claim  your  use
of  it  in  this  disease  as  an  instance  of  the  operation
of  the  law  of  similars.  There  is  very  little  recorded
experience  of  delirium  tremens  in  our  literature.
In  the  cases  I  have  myself  seen,  Hyoscyamus  or
Belladonna  were  better  indicated  than  Opium. — In
apoplexy,  Opium  has  been  a  good  deal  used  in  our
school.  I  will  cite  the  remarks  upon  its  applica-
bility to  this  affection,  with  which  in  the  above-
mentioned  paper  I  followed  up  the  discussion  as  to
its  cerebral  influence.


OPIUM.  433

"  If  these  views  as  to  the  action  of  Opium  be  correct,  it  becomes
very  questionable  whether  the  symptomatic  resemblance  warrants
its  administration  in  cases  of  apoplexy.  What  we  have  to  treat  in
apoplexy  is  not  the  extravasation,  which  is  irremediable,  but  that
which  has  caused  the  rupture  of  the  degenerated  blood-vessel ;  and
which,  if  allowed  to  continue,  threatens  to  increase  the  mischief.
This  cause  may  be  either  an  excitement  of  the  general  circulation
or  an  active  congestion  of  (i.  e.  attraction  of  blood  to)  the  brain.  In
either  case  is  Opium  truly  homoeopathic  to  the  morbid  condition  ?
Aconite  is  our  substitute  for  the  lancet  in  the  former,  and  Nux
vomica  seems  to  me  the  true  pathogenetic  analogue  to  the  latter.
The  active  congestion  of  Belladonna  is  too  inflammatory-like  to
make  it  perfectly  homoeopathic  to  that  which  obtains  in  apoplexy.
In  cases  of  apoplexy,  where  extravasation  has  not  occurred,  but
active  congestion  is  the  beginning  and  the  ending  of  the  whole
matter,  Nux  vomica  seems  to  me  to  cover  the  whole  malady.  But
I  can  conceive  it  possible  that  where  extravasation  has  occurred,
and  the  danger  arises  not  so  much  from  congestion  as  from  oppres-
sion of  the  vital  parts  at  the  base  of  the  brain,  a  few  doses  of  Opium
might  be  of  service,  as  the  drug  would  certainly  be  homoeopathic
to  this  portion  of  the  disorder."

I  should  suppose  that  the  abandonment  of  opiates
will  be  one  of  your  hardest  trials  in  your  change  of
system.  You  need  not  necessarily  do  it  all  at  once.
Feel  your  way.  See  how  far  the  more  numerous  and
more  potent  specifics  you  now  possess  will  enable  you
to  do  without  them.  The  cough,  the  diarrhoea,  the
neuralgia  which  of  old  you  hushed  up  by  poisoning
the  nerves,  no\v  find  in  your  new  armoury  their
direct  remedies.  Keep  your  opiates  for  cases
otherwise  irremediable  :  and  their  use  will  become
rarer  and  rarer.  For  myself,  I  can  safely  say  that
I  have  not  during  seven  years'  practice  found  one
patient  in  five  hundred  who  required  them.

Cannabis  indica,  and  perhaps  Gelseminum,  are
the  only  real  analogues  I  know  to  Opium.  Bella-

28


434  PETROLEUM.

donna,  and  only  less  so  Stramonium  and  Hyoscya-
mus,  are  its  physiological  opposites  and  antidotes.

Save  in  lead-colic,  the  higher  attenuations  of
Opium  seem  most  in  favour.

Our  information  regarding  the  wild  marjoram,

Origanum  vulgare,

is  derived  from  a  paper  by  Dr.  Gallavardin  of  Lyons,
translated  in  the  'North  Amer.  Journ.  of  Horn./
vol.  xv,  p.  62.

It  has  been  proved  on  an  old  man  and  two  young
women :  in  the  latter  it  is  said  to  have  caused
decided  sexual  excitement.  The  symptom  has  been
verified  in  practice.  Dr.  Gallavardin  gives  eight
cases  of  erotomania  in  the  female  in  which  the
action  of  Origanum,  generally  in  the  3rd  dil.,  was
most  satisfactory.

My  next  medicine  is  a  substance  which  has  of
late  become  one  of  great  commercial  importance,
the  rock-oil,  Oleum  petrse,  or

Petroleum.

We  use  the  white  variety.  It  is  either  triturated,
or  dissolved  in  strong  alcohol.

The  proving  is  in  the  '  Chronic  Diseases/
I  have  little  to  say  of  the  pathogenesis  there
given,  except  that  one  of  its  symptoms  once  guided
me  to  the  choice  of  the  right  medicine  for  an  ano-
malous but  annoying  complaint,  viz.  a  feeling  as  if
there  were  a  cold  stone  in  the  heart.  I  would  call
attention,  also,  to  the  urinary  symptoms,  as  present-


PETROLEUM.  435

ing  a  pretty  close  resemblance  to  some  forms  of
vesical  catarrh.  The  chief  reputation  of  Petroleum
in  our  school  has  been  as  a  remedy  for  sea-sickness.
Hempel,  who  in  his  first  edition  had  recommended
it,  in  his  second  repudiates  it  as  ineffective.  But  I
must  say  that  both  myself  and  friends  whom  I  have
supplied  with  it  can  testify  to  decided  benefit  from  its
use.  In  other  forms  also  of  nausea  and  vomiting
it  may  prove  useful.  Then  there  are  certain  uses
of  Petroleum  for  which  I  am  indebted  to  the  expe-
rience of  my  friend  Dr.  Madden,  but  which  I  have
frequently  verified  for  myself.  These  are  to  check
fetid  sweat  in  the  axillae ;  to  relieve  tenderness  of
the  feet  when  these  too  are  bathed  in  a  more  or
less  foul-smelling  moisture ;  and  to  modify  that
unhealthiness  of  the  skin  which  causes  a  general
tendency  to  fester  and  ulcerate.  Lastly,  Teste
recommends  it,  in  alternation  with  Ipecacuanha,  in
dysentery  affecting  children.

I  commend  Petroleum  to  your  study  as  a  me-
dicine whose  virtues  have  been  as  yet  by  no  means
exhausted.

Kreasote  is  its  physical  analogue :  but,  as  you
see,  resembles  it  little  as  a  medicine.

I  have  nearly  always  used  the  third  dec.  di-
lution.


LETTER  XXXIII.

PHOSPHORUS.

I  have  to  bring  before  you  to-day  one  of  our
greatest  polychrests,— a  medicine  which  will  repay
the  utmost  care  we  may  bestow  upon  its  study,

Phosphorus.

We make  the dilutions  at  first  with ether,  after
the  second  with  alcohol.

Our  material  for  information  relative  to  Phos-
phorus is  very  extensive.  We  have  first  the  patho-
genesis  of  the  drug  given  us  by  Hahnemann  in  his
'  Chronic  Diseases/  Then,  in  the  '  North  Amer.
Journ.  of  Homoeopathy/  vol.  vii,  Dr.  Holcombe
has  given  us  "  Phosphorus ;  a  pathogenetic  study"
containing  several  important  cases  of  poisoning,
and  a  short  proving  on  himself.  Next,  we  have
Dr.  Sorge's  Prize  Essay  on  Phosphorus,  an  ac-
count of  which  is  given  in  the  '  British  Journal/
vol.  xxi,  p.  140 :  but  which,  if  you  read  German,
you  had  better  study  in  the  original.  Add  to
these  the  numerous  cases  of  poisoning  by  the
drug  which  are  scattered  through  recent  medical
literature  (to  most  of  which  I  shall  refer  as  I
proceed),  and  we  have  a  body  of  information  such
as  we  possess  upon  few  other  constituents  of  the


PHOSPHORUS.  437

Materia  Medica.  Let  me  now  endeavour  to
present  and  analyse  the  pathogenetic  effects  of  this
poison,  and  to  estimate  the  value  of  their  thera-
peutic applications.

The  history  of  Phosphorus  has  been  very  curious.
Its  primary  stimulant  influence  was  all  that  was
known  to  old  medicine  :  and  this  property  was  made
use  of  (often  with  success)  in  typhoid  and  other
adynamic  states.  Hahnemann  was  misled  thereby
into  denying  its  homoeopathic  applicability  to  states
of  depression.  This  mistake,,  and  the  unsatisfactory
results  of  his  proving,  kept  Phosphorus  in  the  back-
ground for  some  time.  But  pari  passu  with  the
better  knowledge  of  its  poisonous  effects,  its  use  in
our  hands  as  a  remedial  agent  has  widened  and
extended.  For  old-school  therapeutics  it  is  of  no
advantage  to  learn  that  Phosphorus  inflames  the
lungs,  necroses  the  maxillae,  prostrates  the  nervous
system,  and  causes  fatty  degeneration  throughout
the  body.  But  to  us  such  knowledge  is  fruitful  of
practical  results  :  and  has  already  raised  Phosphorus
into  the  first  rank  of  our  medicines.

The  pathogeuetic  effects  of  Phosphorus  appear  in
several  groups,  which  are  so  natural  and  uniformly
associated  that  they  will  not  bear  breaking  up  into
their  component  elements.

I.  In  the  first  group  the  symptoms  are  those  of
pure  irritation.  This  is  the  form  of  Phosphorus
poisoning  you  read  of  in  Christison  and  Pereira.
There  is  gastro-enteritis,  with  its  usual  concomi-
tants ;  and  Taylor  adds  that  "  chronic  poisoning
by  the  drug  is  accompanied  by  cardialgia,  frequent
vomiting,  sense  of  heat  in  the  stomach,  diarrhoea,


438  PHOSPHORUS.

tenesmus,  pains  in  the  joints,  marasmus,  hectic  fever,
and  disease  of  the  stomach,  under  which  the  patient
may  slowly  sink."  Chronic  inflammatory  degenera-
tion is  plainly  shown  here,  perhaps  ulceration.  The
chemical  reaction  of  the  poison  with  the  mucous
membrane  seems  to  hinder  its  absorption,  but  when
injected  into  the  veins  pneumonia  is  set  up.  Dr.
Holcombe,  too,  in  his  proving,  experienced  decided
symptoms  of  pulmonary  congestion.  Moreover,  the
workers  in  the  lucifer-match  manufactories  almost
invariably  suffer  from  bronchitis  of  a  very  severe
form,  accompanied  by  weakness,  and  frequently
emaciation  and  hectic.*

In  some  rabbits  exposed  for  some  weeks  to  Phos-
phorus fumes  the  lungs  were  generally  found  he-
patized,  and  sometimes  beset  with  tubercles.f  The
word  "  tubercle,"  however,  is  used  too  vaguely  by
the  older  pathologists  to  enable  us  to  credit  the
poison  with  the  power  of  setting  up  tuberculosis.

Some  important  therapeutical  applications  have
been  made  of  this  action  of  Phosphorus.

1.  In  acute  affections  of  the  alimentary  canal
this  medicine  has  rarely  been  used.  The  only  case
I  know  of  is  one  of  pharyngo-cesophagitis,  apparently
caused  by  Gelseminum,  in  which,  after  the  failure  of
Arsenicum,  Phosphorus  2  was  given  by  Dr.  Hale,
with  speedy  benefit.  But  in  some  forms  of  chronic
diarrhcea  Phosphorus  is  of  striking  usefulness,  es-
pecially in  nervous  subjects  and  in  delicate  children.
It  benefits  even  the  diarrhoea  of  phthisis  in  its  milder
grades.  I  cannot  say  whether  it  controls  ulceration

*  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  xi,  p.  118.
t  Ibid.,  p.  128.


PHOSPHORUS.  439

high  up  in  the  bowel ;  but  certainly  when  this
morbid  process  affects  the  rectum  its  healing
effects  are  of  the  happiest  kind.  If  the  rectal
symptoms  of  Hahnemann's  pathogenesis  are  to  be
relied  on,  they  amply  account  for  its  curative  in-
fluence here.

2.  Pneumonia  was  the  disease  in  which  Phos-
phorus won  its  spurs.  First  introduced  by  Dr.
Fleischmann,  of  Vienna,  his  great  success  with  it
has  led  to  its  general  use  throughout  the  Homoeo-
pathic body.  I  refer  you  to  Dr.  Cl.  Miiller's
valuable  remarks  in  '  Laurie's  Elements'  (p.  289),
for  the  indications  for  the  preference  of  Phosphorus
to  Tartar  emetic  in  this  disease.  I  am  myself  dis-
posed to  prefer  it  to  any  other  remedy  in  all  the
stages  of  pneumonia  simplex  and  in  the  pneumonia
of  typhus.  Bryonia  is  probably  superior  in  pleuro-
pneumonia;  and  in  broncho-pneumoniaTartar  emetic
contends  with  it  for  precedence,  though  in  this
malady  occurring  in  children  Phosphorus  has  al-
ways given  me  the  utmost  satisfaction.  I  cannot
recommend  it  for  affections  of  the  laryngo-tracheal
mucous  membrane  ;  but  in  chronic  bronchitis,  with
with  every  prospect  of  benefit.

A  word  here  about  the  use  of  Phosphorus  in  pul-
monary phthisis.  It  is  of  great  service  in  many  ways
in  this  disease.  It  keeps  down  the  hypersemia  of  the
lungs,  quiets  the  cough,  and  often  (as  I  have  said  be-
fore) moderates  the  diarrhoea.  I  am  unable,  however,
to  credit  it  with  any  power  of  modifying  the  tuber-
cular dyscrasia.  Neither  our  small  doses  of  the
pure  substance,  nor  Dr.  Churchill's  large  quantities


440  PHOSPHORUS.

of  the  hyposulphites,  show  any  real  power  of  check-
ing the  deposit  of  fresh  tubercle.

II. In  nearly  all  the  cases  of  poisoning  by  Phos-
phorus which  have  been  recorded  during  the  last
ten  or  twelve  years,  while  symptoms  of  irritation
have  not  been  absent,  another  and  a  very  different
group of  phenomena  arrests  our  attention. The
patient  appears  to  be  suffering  from  what  used  to  be
called  malignant  jaundice. The  skin  and  conjunc-
tiva assume  a  more  or  less  yellow  tint; but  with
this  there  is  a  general  typhoid  prostration  which  is
absent from ordinary jaundice. Petechise and
haemorrhages  occur  in  various  parts  of  the  body.
The  urine  is  scanty,  high  coloured,  and  loaded  with
albumen. Cerebral  symptoms, — delirium,  convul-
sions, &c.,  somewhat  like  those  of  uremia, — super-
vene, and  the  patient  dies  in  a  few  days,  in  a  state
of  coma.  At  the  post-mortem  investigation  nothing  is
discovered  in  the  brain  save  a  little  fulness. But  the
blood  is  found  in  a  state  of  complete  fluidity,  non-
coagulable, and with very  few corpuscles, while
ecchymoses  and  sanguineous  effusions  appear  every-
where. The  liver,  which  during  life  had  been  en-
larged  and  tender,  presents  profound  alterations  of
structure. It  varies  in  size ;  but  an  acute  fatty  de-
generation is found to have taken place  in  its
secreting structure. The acini are sometimes
found  filled  with  fat,  even  to  bursting;  but  more
commonly  they  are  wholly  destroyed,  and  oil  and
fat  globules  fill  their  place. The  secreting  struc-
ture of  the  kidneys  also  is  found  to  be  imdergoing
fatty  degeneration, and the  ducts  are  sometimes
filled  with  exudation  matter. When  (as  in  the  last


PHOSPHORUS.  441

two  or  three  years)  the  examination  has  been
carried  further,  this  fatty  degeneration  is  found  to
have  involved  other  parts  of  the  body,  notably  the
heart  and  the  muscles  generally.  Numerous  experi-
ments on  animals  have  verified  these  observations,
and  have  put  it  beyond  doubt  that  these  remarkable
changes  of  tissue  are  really  producible  by  Phos-
phorus in  the  space  of  a  few  days.

If  you  will  turn  to  a  paper  by  Dr.  Madden  and
myself  in  the  '  British  Journal,'  vol.  xxi,  you  will
find  a  detailed  account  of  these  remarkable  phe-
nomena. To  the  references  there  given  I  will  add
in  a  note  a  few  more,  that  you  may,  if  you  like,
possess  yourself  of  the  whole  literature  of  the  sub-
ject.*

Now  what  is  the  rationale  of  all  this?  I  would
answer,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  fundamental
lesion  is  an  acute  fatty  degeneration,  which  Phos-
phorus has  the  power  of  causing  in  every  part  of  the
body  susceptible  thereof.  In  the  second  place,  I
would  refer  the  neurotic  and  haematic  phenomena  to
the  suspension  of  the  functions  of  the  liver  and  kid-
neys, owing  to  the  metamorphosis  of  their  secreting
cells.  I  attach  most  importance  to  the  affection  of
the  liver.  Although  the  cerebral  symptoms  re-
semble those  of  ura3mia  so  far  that  they  suggest
the  retention  of  a  similarly  hurtful  excretion  in  the
blood,  they  could  hardly  be  mistaken  for  them.
Combined  with  the  petechise  and  haemorrhages,  they
present  a  morbid  condition  only  present  elsewhere
in  what  Prof.  Frerichs  calls  "  acholia,"  i.  e.  a  sus-

*  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  vol.  xxi,  p.  460;  vol.  xxiii,  p.  128,  280;
and  No.  for  July,  1867.


442  PHOSPHORUS.

pension  of  the  functions  of  the  liver,  owing  to  a
destruction  of  its  secreting  cells.  The  most  pro-
minent instance  of  this  lesion  is  acute  atrophy  of
the  liver  ;  but  it  also  occurs  occasionally  in  the
course  of  cirrhosis,  obstructive  jaundice,  and  other
chronic  hepatic  affections.  The  symptoms  are  those
of  blood-poisoning,  to  which  the  nervous  phenomena
are  probably  secondary.  I  do  not  want  to  wander
too  far  into  pathology ;  but  I  must  call  your  atten-
tion to  the  very  interesting  speculations  on  the
subject  by  Dr.  Austin  Flint,  of  New  York,  which
you  will  find  in  our  Journal,  vol.  xxi,  p.  490.  His
theory  is  that  cholesterine  is  the  excrementitious
material  of  the  bile  as  urea  is  of  the  urine,  and
that  the  blood-poisoning  of  acholia  is  accordingly
a  cholestera?mia.  But  I  must  proceed  to  inquire
into  the  therapeutic  bearing  of  these  curious  facts.

1.  Phosphorus  unquestionably  deserves  the  fullest
trial  in  every  case  of  malignant  jaundice.  In  the
great  majority  of  these  cases  the  pathological  con-
dition is  acute  atrophy  of  the  liver.  Now  all  ob-
servers, including  Frerichs  himself,  are  struck  with
the  resemblance  of  Phosphoric  poisoning  to  this
disease.  I  was  myself  at  first  inclined  to  question
the  identity  of  the  two,  seeing  that  in  acute  atrophy
the  fatty  change  of  the  secreting  cells  is  by  no
means  a  prominent  feature.  But  it  is  sufficiently
marked  to  lead  three  pathologists  (Engel,  Wedl,  and
Bamberger)  to  explain  the  destruction  of  the  cells
by  a  fatty  degeneration  arising  from  an  acute  exuda-
tion-process. And  a  case  has  recently  occurred  in
a  London  hospital  which  was  diagnosed  during  life
as  acute  atrophy,  but  in  which,  after  death,  "  the


PHOSPHORUS.  443

entire  disappearance  of  the  true  hepatic  secreting
structure  and  its  conversion  into  oily  and  fatty
matter  rendered  it  a  remarkable  case,  justifying
the  term  acute  fatty  degeneration."*  I  think,
therefore,  that  we  may  with  confidence  combat
this  nearly  always  fatal  disease  with  our  Phos-
phorus.

2.  Dr.  Holcombe, who  was the  first to  bring
forward  these pathogenetic effects of  Phosphorus,
suggested its use where jaundice complicates
toxsemic  disorders,  and  notably  in  yellow  fever.  Still
more  recently  Dr.  Ozanam,  of  Paris,  seeing  a  case
of  the  form  of  Phosphoric  poisoning  in  which  to  the
other  symptoms  black  vomit  was  added,  is  forcibly
struck by  the  resemblance  of  the phenomena  to
those  of  yellow  fever. I  have  felt  a difficulty  in
acceding to these views, because, according to
Frerichs,  there  is  not  in  yellow  fever  (or  in  jaundice
accompanying  typhus  and  pysemia)  any  destruction
of  the  hepatic  cells,  but  rather,  if  anything,  poly-
cholia. But  Phosphorus  is  said  to have proved
successful  in  an  epidemic  of  this  disease  in  Rio  de
Janeiro ;  and,  for  the  present,  the  question  must  re-
main,  as far as these pages are concerned,  sub
judice.

3.  In Phosphorus  we evidently  have  a  homoeo-
pathic remedy  for  that  important  pathological  change
known as  fatty degeneration,  wherever occurring.
I  need  hardly  enlarge  upon  the  picture  thus  opened
to  us  of  the  applicability  of  our  medicine. Most
obvious  when  this  morbid  process  attacks  the  liver
or  the heart,  we  must remember  its presence  in

*  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  xxiv,  p.  166.


444  PHOSPHORUS.

atheroma  of  the  arteries  and  in  mollities  ossium  :
and  it  is  worth  bearing  in  mind  as  an  occasional
cause  of  softening  of  the  brain  and  cord.  If  Dr.
Chambers  is  right,  moreover,  its  invasion  of  the
bronchial  tubes  is  the  predisposing  cause  of  emphy-
sema. So  far  as  I  have  had  opportunity  of  testing
Phosphorus  in  these  maladies  its  use  has  given  me
every  satisfaction.

4.  Is  the  peculiar  change  induced  by  Phosphorus
in  the  blood  a  result  of  a  direct  haematic  influence,
or  is  it  secondary  to  the  affection  of  the  liver  ? I
fear  that  the  latter  is  the  true  alternative,  as  I  have
never  in  my  reading  met  with  the  one  set  of  symp-
toms without  the  other. I  say  te  I  fear ;"  for,  could
it  be  otherwise,  we  should  have in  Phosphorus  an
exactly-fitting  remedy  for  purpura  hsemorrhagica.

5.  It  is  difficult  to  assign  the  place  of  Phosphorus
in renal disease. Fatty degeneration is not a
recognised  affection  of  the kidneys  :  but  it  is  in-
teresting to  observe  that  in  two  of  Frerichs's  best-
was discovered in  their glandular  cells. I  must
mention,  too,  that  there is one  case  on  record  in
which  there  was  no  jaundice  or  cerebral  disturbance
during  life, although the liver  was  found (P.M.)
enlarged  and  fatty. In  this  case  the  urine  during
life  was  high-coloured  and  frothy,  its  specific  gravity
increased, and containing  albumen and exudation
cells. After  death,  the  cortical  substance of  the
kidneys  was granular ;  the Malpighian  corpuscles
resembled  red points ; and on  a  microscopical  ex-
amination the  uriniferous  tubuli  were  found  blocked
up  by  exudation  matter. While  I  agree  with  Dr.


PHOSPHORUS.  445

Hempel  that  this  is  not  Blight's  disease,  it  is  never-
theless a  very  decided  nephritis ;  and  warrants  the
expectation  that  Phosphorus  may  find  a  place  in  the
treatment  of  the  idiopathic  affection.

III.  The  third  group  of  pathogenetic  effects
developed  by  Phosphorus  lies  within  the  sphere  of
the  nervous  system.  In  describing  this  group  I
shall  draw  largely  upon  a  valuable  paper  on  "  Phos-
phoric Paralysis/'  by  Dr.  Gallavardin,  of  Lyons,
translated  in  the  '  British  Journal/  vol.  xx.

The  temporary  stimulation  caused  by  small  quan-
tities of  Phosphorus  is  never  seen  as  a  result  of
poisonous  doses.  On  the  contrary,  even  in  acute
cases  there  are  often  symptoms  of  nervous  de-
pression (as  in  the  third  of  Dr.  Holcombe's  series)  :
and  where  life  has  been  prolonged,  there  has  been
progressive  paralysis.  Dr.  Gallavardin  relates  a
most  interesting  case  of  this  kind.  It  is  noticeable
here  that  although  the  spinal  paralysis  went  on  in-
creasing and  extending  for  years,  the  cerebral
functions  were  unimpaired.  This  makes  it  unlikely
that  the  symptoms  depended  upon  fatty  degene-
ration of  the  cord,  as  there  would  be  no  reason  why
that  process  should  not  have  gone  on  in  the  brain
also.*  There  are  two  other  cases  cited  by  Dr.
Gallavardin,  in  which  the  paralysis  was  partial —
in  one  limited  to  the  left  arm,  in  another  affecting
the  hands  only.

Dr.  Gallavardin  completes  his  account  of  Phos-
phoric Paralysis  by  citing  thirteen  cases  of  the  dis-
ease in  which  the  medicine  effected  a  cure.  One

*  In  one  case  of  poisoning  it  is  said  to  have  done  so. '  Brit.
Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  xxiii,  p.  280.


446  PHOSPHORUS.

of  these  is  given  in  extenso  by  Hempel  (vol.  i,  p.
with  his  wonted  fulness  and  accuracy.*  The
paralysis  in  nearly  all  was  of  a  functional  nature,
from  debilitating  causes  such  as  acute  disease,  sexual
excesses,  &c.  In  one  it  involved  only  the  third
pair,  in  another  only  the  sixth  pair  of  cranial  nerves.
Dr.  Gallavardin  suggests  the  trial  of  Phosphorus
also  in  muscular  weakness  of  children  who  are  long
in  learning  to  walk.  Altogether  we  must  look
upon  Phosphorus  as  about  the  most  important
medicine  we  have  for  atonic  states  of  the  cranio-
spinal  axis  and  its  issuing  nerves.  When  the
cerebral  hemispheres  themselves  are  affected,  it
appears  (as  its  pathogenetic  effects  would  imply)  to
have  no  influence.

IV.  The  symptoms  produced  by  Phosphorus  in
the  male  sexual  organs  are  probably  a  part  of  its
influence  on  the  nervous  system  generally.  They
are,  however,  of  sufficient  importance  to  merit
special  and  distinct  consideration.

The  sexual  organs  share  in  the  general  excite-
ment caused  by  moderate  doses  of  Phosphorus ;  but
they  manifest  its  influence  in  so  marked  a  manner
as  to  evidence  a  special  action  of  the  drug  upon
them,  or  upon  that  part  of  the  nervous  centre  whence
they  derive  their  energy.  That  Phosphorus  is  an
aphrodisiac  has  been  known  for  a  long  time.  It
has  displayed  this  property  in  a  most  unmistakable
manner  among  the  lower  animals.  Leroy  (quoted
by  Pereira)  ascertained  that  it  was  aphrodisiac  to
drakes.  In  Dr.  Sorge's  experiments  cocks,  pigeons,
*  'Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  xix,  p.  315.


PHOSPHORUS.  447

dogs,  and  frogs  were  affected  in  the  same  way;  the
latter  got  those  large  growths  on  their  forefeet  that
appear  during  their  pairing  season,  and  used  them
accordingly.  But  the  same  prover's  experiments  on
the  human  subject  show  that  this  excitement  is  but
temporary,  and  is  followed  by  a  much  longer- con-
tinued .  depression,  showing  itself  in  absence  of
desire,  imperfect  erections,  with  too  rapid  ejaculatio
seminis,  and  frequent  involuntary  emissions.

Phosphorus  is  thus  a  thoroughly  homoeopathic
remedy  for  that  irritable  weakness  of  the  male
sexual  organs  which  is  left  behind  by  excesses  in
venery,  and  by  masturbation.  Experience  has  over
and  over  again  confirmed  the  indication  of  theory
in  this  matter.  Phosphorus  would  also  (in  very
small  doses)  be  homoeopathic  to  satyriasis,  which
corresponds  to  its  primary  effects.  Might  it  also
be  desirable  to  use  it  occasionally  as  a  special  stimu-
lant, in  full  doses,  as  in  impotentia  senilis  when
offspring  is  much  desired  ?  The  following  obser-
vation from  Dr.  Sorge's  collection  bears  upon  the
question  : — "  An  old  dog  who  had  long  lost  his  sexual
power,  after  taking  phosphorus  rat-poison  that  was
given  to  kill  him,  became  sexually  excited,  and  died
in  the  act  of  coitus."

V.  The  last  distinct  action  of  Phosphorus  is  its
influence  upon  the  jaws.  These  effects  are  mainly
seen  in  the  workers  in  lucifer-match  manufactories.
In  the  '  British  Journal/  vol.  xi,  you  will  find  a  full
account  of  the  researches  instituted  on  this  subject
by  Drs.  Von  Bibra  and  Geist.  The  disease  usually
begins  in  a  carious  tooth,  which  gnaws  and  throbs,
and  sometimes  shoots,  with  itching  and  bleeding  of


448  PHOSPHORUS.

the  neighbouring  gum.  Then  gum-boils  form,  and
discharge  fetid  pus  in  which  are  found  granules  of
bone.  Then  the  teeth  fall  out,  and  the  gums  recede
or  melt  away,  and  the  bone  appears  in  a  state  of
caries  or  necrosis.  Inflammation  of  the  neighbour-
ing parts  and  irritative  fever  are  present :  and  the
case  often  terminates  in  death.  It  is  a  moot  point
whether  this  effect  of  Phosphorus  is  produced  by  a
local  and  chemical  action  on  the  parts,  or  whether
it  is  a  result  of  the  dynamic  influence  of  the  poison.
I  have  myself  little  doubt  of  the  latter  being  the
true  interpretation.  In  a  case  of  poisoning  by
Phosphorus  recorded  by  Dr.  J.  O.  Miiller,  on  the
fourteenth  day  there  came  on  painful  boring  burning
pains  in  the  bones,  especially  in  the  teeth,  the  jaws,
and  the  nose.*  These  were  removed  by  Mezereum,
a  drug  which  has  cured  the  maxillary  caries  of  a
worker  in  Phosphorus. f

The  most  obvious  homoeopathic  application  of
this  power  of  Phosphorus  would  be  to  those  cases,
where  the  irritation  of  a  carious  tooth  was  causing
frequent  gum-boils  and  incipient  disease  of  the
maxilla.  I  do  not  mean,  of  course,  that  it  should
supersede  extraction  of  the  tooth.  But  it  is  an
important  question  whether  these  facts  justify  us  in
using  Phosphorus  when  caries  or  necrosis  is  attacking
other  parts  of  the  osseous  system.  This  question,
however,  I  cannot  answer  for  you  at  present.

There  is  one  curious  use  of  Phosphorus  which
does  not  fall  under  any  of  the  above  categories.
It  is  its  power  of  curing  chronic  mastitis,  where

*  '  North  Amer.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  vii,  p.  467.
f  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  xi,  p.  130.


PHOSPHORUS.  449

sinuses  have  been  left  in  the  gland  after  extensive
suppuration.  There  are  several  cases  on  record
illustrating  this  power  of  the  medicine.*

Phosphorus  is  so  unique  a  drug  that  I*  cannot
name  a  single  genuine  analogue  to  it.

As  for  dose;  in  the  acute  affections  of  the  respi-
ratory organs  for  which  Phosphorus  is  so  frequently
required,  I  find  the  2nd  and  3rd  dilutions  answer
every  purpose.  The  1st  has  been  most  used  in
paralysis,  and  I  should  not  be  disposed  to  go  higher
in  malignant  jaundice.  The  higher  potencies  have
acted  well  in  sexual  irritability,  and  in  chronic
affections  of  the  respiratory  organs,  alimentary  canal,
and  mammae.

*  '  North  Amer.  Journ./  vol.  xxii,  p.  255.


29


LETTER  XXXIV.

PHYTOLACCA,  PLATINA, PLUMBUM, PODOPHYLLUM.

WE  have  to-day  for  consideration  four  medicines,
each  of  which  has  a  very  well-defined  place  in  the
causation  and  treatment  of  disease.  The  first
comes  from  America :  it  is  the  Poke,  or

Phytolacca  decandra.

The  tincture  is  usually  prepared  from  the  green
root ;  but,  as  there  is  some  reason  to  believe  that
the  berries  act  medicinally,  it  would  be  better  to
use  the  whole  plant.

The  original  proving  of  Phytolacca,  by  Drs.
Hering  and  Williamson,  is  contained  in  the
1  Transactions  of  the  American  Institute/  vol.  ii.
Its  symptoms  are  collated  with  those  of  more  recent
provings  by  Dr.  Burt  and  others  in  the  article  on
the  drug  in  the  '  New  Remedies/  where  also  you  will
find  all  recorded  clinical  experience  with  it.

The  interest  of  Phytolacca  resides  in  three
aspects  of  its  operation :  its  action  on  the  throat,
its  power  over  chronic  rheumatism,  and  its  influence
upon  the  mammary  glands.

I.  Phytolacca  is  undoubtedly  a  specific  irritant
of  the  throat.  All  the  provers  suffered  more  or
less  at  this  part.  The  fauces  appeared  much,  some-


PHYTOLACCA DECANDRA.  451

times  darkly,  reddened,  and  the  tonsils  swollen :
one  prover  had  thick  white  and  yellow  mucus  about
the  fauces.  But  it  was  a  startling  inference  from
such  premises  that  Phytolacca  would  prove  a
valuable  remedy  in  diphtheria.  Nevertheless,  this
inference  Dr.  Burt  did  make :  and  his  success
and  that  of  the  many  American  practitioners  who
have  imitated  his  practice  seems  to  have  justified
him  in  so  doing.  Within  the  last  two  years  my
friend  Dr.  Bayes  has  introduced  Phytolacca  into
English  practice  as  the  remedy  for  diphtheria;  and
again  most  gratifying  results  have  been  obtained
both  by  himself  and  by  many  of  his  colleagues.
The  only  dissonant  note  has  hitherto  been  struck
by  myself:  and  I  fear  I  must  here  prolong  it.

That  Phytolacca  was  curative  in  the  cases  recorded
I  do  not  question  for  a  moment.  But  on  going
carefully  through  them  I  must  say  that  I  do  not
recognise  in  them  the  symptoms  I  have  learned  to
dread  as  those  of  true  diphtheria.  Some,  indeed,
were  instances  of  simple  inflammatory  ulceration  of
the  tonsils ;  for  when  the  so-called  false  membrane
came  away,  it  left  "  large  holes"  behind  it,  which
the  diphtheric  pellicle  never  does.  The  great
majority,  however,  were  undoubtedly  diphtheritic  in
nature.  But  they  seem  to  bear  to  the  really
dangerous  form  of  the  disease  much  the  same  rela-
tion as  scarlatina  anginosa  to  scarlatina  maligna.
In  no  case  is  foetor  of  the  breath  mentioned,  save
in  two  out  of  my  own  three,  and  both  these  died.
In  nearly  all  there  was  high  fever,  with  pains  in
the  head,  back,  and  limbs  :  symptoms  which  are
never  present,  according  to  my  experience,  in  bad


452  PHYTOLACCA DfTCANDRA.

cases  of  diphtheria.  I  have  lately  had  a  diphthe-
ritic case  in  which  these  latter  symptoms  were  very
prominent.  Aconite  had  no  effect,  but  Phytolacca
acted  with  magical  rapidity.  Equally  good  results
followed  its  use  after  Belladonna  had  failed,  in  a
case  where  the  "  large  holes"  in  the  tonsils  followed
the  disappearance  of  the  white  patches.  But  then
I  had  a  case  of  genuine  "  stinking  diphtheria,"  as
Dr.  Hilbers  calls  it.  Phytolacca  was  given  as-
siduously, in  doses  of  two  drops  of  the  mother-
tincture  every  two  hours.  The  throat  certainly
cleared  under  its  use ;  but  the  morbid  process  went
on  in  the  nose,  invaded  the  larynx,  and  death  from
exhaustion  closed  the  scene.  The  patient  was  a
boy  of  nine,  and  we  could  not  get  him  to  gargle.

The  inference  from  what  has  been  said  is  ob-
vious. We  must  speak  of  medicines,  as  of  persons,
as  we  find  them.  I  should  be  delighted  to  find  a
truly  homoeopathic  remedy  for  malignant  diphtheria,
which  (unless  it  be  the  Permanganate  of  Potash,
q.  v.)  we  certainly  do  not  possess  at  present.  But
my  own  impression  is  that  Phytolacca  has  not  the
capabilities  which  enable  it  to  fill  the  place.  In
doubt  its  specific  applicability.*  But  there  the

II.  Phytolacca  is  without  question  an  accession
to  our  means  of  combating  chronic  rheumatism.

*  If  Div  Burt's  urinary  symptoms  are  confirmed,  these  are  an  im-
portant addition  to  the  proof  of  the  essential  homoeopathicity  of
Phytolaeca  to  diphtheria.  His  urine  was  "at  first  diminished,
afterwards  increased.  The  urine  remained  acid  and  became  de-
cidedly albuminous.  The  specific  gravity  became  greatly  increased."


PHYTOLACCA  DECANDRA.  453

At  first  we  knew  it  only  as  a  periosteal  medicine
(like  Mezereum).  But  the  cases  given  in  Dr.
Hale's  second  edition  prove  that  its  influence  ex-
tends also  to  the  other  fibrous  tissues,  as  the  sheaths
of  nerves,  and  the  fascia  (comp.  Rhus).  I  have
myself  seen  it  act  very  well  in  periosteal  rheuma-
tism :  and  am  quite  disposed  to  test  its  virtues  in
the  wider  sphere  which  now  opens  out  for  their
exercise.

III.  To  the  influence  of  Phytolacca  on  the
mammary  glands  our  attention  was  first  called  by
Dr.  Hale  himself  in  our  Journal,  vol.  xxi.  The
article  is  reprpduced  in  his  '  New  Remedies/  It
appears  from  this  that  the  Poke  root  is  in  constant
use  in  the  dairies  to  remove  "  caking,"  i.  e.  inflam-
matory engorgement  of  the  udders.  Dr.  Hale  has
used  it  successfully  for  this  purpose  in  the  human
female,  and  finds  it  useful  even  after  suppuration
has  commenced,  and  when  sinuses  have  formed.  I
have  myself  never  wanted  any  medicine  but  Bry-
onia  in  threatened  milk  abscess;  but  should  the
mischief  outrun  the  abortive  power  of  that  medi-
cine should  certainly  try  Phytolacca.  Dr.  Hale
commends  this  medicine  also  in  irritable  mammary
tumour,  and  where  the  breasts  are  morbidly  sensi-
tive at  the  menstrual  period  or  during  suckling.

I  myself  once  had  a  case  where  the  administra-
tion of  Phytolacca  obviated  any  injury  which  might
have  resulted  from  a  necessarily  obscure  diagnosis.
In  a  baby  of  a  few  months  old,  a  succession  of
restless  nights  occurred  simultaneously  with  the
development  of  a  hard  tender  swelling  about  mid-
way between  the  nipple  and  the  sternum,  but


454  PHYTOLACCA DECANDRA.

nearer  the  latter  than  the  former.  Whether  the
inflammation  was  affecting  some  of  the  elements  of
the  undeveloped  mammary  gland,  or  whether  it
lay  in  the  periosteum  of  a  rib,  seemed  doubtful.
In  any  case,  however,  Phytolacca  was  indicated.  I
gave  it  in  the  6th  dilution,  and  the  malady  rapidly
disappeared.

To  these  leading  facts  regarding  Phytolacca,  I
would  add —

1st.  That  it  seems  to  have  a  specifically  irritant
action  on  the  rectum.

2nd.  That  it  is  emetic,  the  vomiting  not  coming
on  until  an  hour  or  two  after  ingestio^i.

3rd.  That  in  powdering  the  root  some  persons
suffer  as  from  Ipecacuanha.

4th.  That  glandular  enlargements  have  dis-
appeared under  its  use.

5th.  That,  guided  by  a  symptom  in  the  original
proving,  "  irresistible  inclination  to  bite  the  teeth
together,"  Dr.  Merrill  reports  that  he  has  used  it
with  brilliant  results  (12th  dil.)  in  difficult  dentition.

6th.  That  it  once  cured  an  obstinate  cough,
characterised  by  a  sensation  as  if  there  were  a
small  ulcerated  spot  in  the  trachea,  just  above  the
sternum.

The  analogues  of  Phytolacca  are  Mezereum,  Kali
Hydriodicum  and  Bichromicum.

The  curative  virtues  of  Phytolacca  have  hitherto
been  obtained  almost  entirely  from  the  mother-
tincture.  In  diphtheria  and  mammary  affections
its  local  application  has  been  added.


PLATINA.  455

I  have  next  to  make  some  observations  on

Platina.

Our  preparation  is  made  by  triturating  the  precipi-
tated metal.  It  would  more  correctly  be  called  Pla-
tinum.

The  proving  of  Platina  is  in  the  '  Chronic  Dis-
eases/ There  is  an  admirable  "  Study"  of  this  prov-
ing, and  of  the  clinical  uses  of  the  drug,  by  Dr.  V.
Meyer  :  it  is  translated  in  the  '  Philadelphia  Journal
of  Homoeopathy/  vol.  ii.  Upon  this  study  mainly
my  remarks  will  be  based.

The  chief  action  of  Platina  appears  to  be  upon
the  nervous  centres, — the  symptoms  being  generally
characterised  by  depression.  There  is  a  strong  ten-
dency to  paralysis  and  anaesthesia ;  and  in  the
emotional  sphere  there  is  anxiety  and  apprehension,
even  to  the  fear  of  death.  With  this — probably
through  an  action  upon  the  abdominal  and  pelvic
plexuses — there  is  torpor  of  the  intestinal  canal,
shown  in  flatulence  and  constipation ;  and  also  pre-
mature menstruation.  As  is  usually  the  case,  many
spasmodic  and  neuralgic  phenomena  are  mixed  up
with  those  of  paralysis  and  anaesthesia.

In  accordance  with  these  pathogenetic  indications,
Platina  has  hitherto  been  used  mainly  for  neuralgia
accompanied  with  torpor  and  numbness;  and  for
melancholia  in  females  connected  with  deranged
uterine  health.  It  has  cured  even  religious  melan-
choly in  these  subjects;  and  altogether  may  be
said  to  be  to  women  what  Aurum  is  to  men.  Meyer
extols  it  highly  in  the  treatment  of  hysteria,  where
the  patients  are  much  depressed.  Mr.  Harmar


456  PLUMBUM.

Smith  has  published  a  case  of  chronic  ovarian  irri-
tation with  sterility  where  Platina  was  curative.
Hahnemann  recommends  it  also  for  "  induration  of
the  uterus"  and  for  lead-poisoning.  Of  late,  the
Chloride  of  Platinum  has  been  used  successfully  in
the  old  school  in  the  treatment  of  chronic  syphilis
and  of  condylomata,  acting  very  much  like  the
Chloride  of  Gold.  A  very  severe  and  obstinate  sy-
philitic headache  in  a  woman  which  Iodide  of  Po-
tassium alone  seemed  unable  to  cure,  rapidly  went
on  to  recovery  when  I  gave  the  Chloride  of  Platinum
(five  drops  of  the  3rd  dec.  dil.  twice  daily)  as  an
alternating  remedy.  As  to  condylomata,  Teste
long  ago  classed  Platina  with  Thuja  as  an  anti-
sycotic.

The  analogues  of  Platina  are  Asafcetida,  Aurum,
Crocus,  Plumbum,  and  Pulsatilla.  You  will  find
their  points  of  resemblance  and  difference  well
pointed  in  Dr.  Meyer's  article.

Platina  has  generally  been  used  in  the  higher
potencies  (6-30) :  but  Dr.  Meyer  professes  himself
quite  satisfied  with  the  2nd  and  3rd  triturations.

The  next  name  to  Platina  in  our  alphabetical
list  is  another  and  somewhat  analogous  metal,

Plumbum.

Either  the  metal  itself,  the  carbonate,  or  the  acetate
may  be  used  to  obtain  the  specific  action  of  lead.
The  first  two  are  triturated,  the  third  prepared  by
solution.

Plumbum  has  not  been  "  proved  :"  but  this  is  of
little  importance,  as  its  pathogenetic  effects  are  too


PLUMBUM.  457

well  known  as  seen  in  workers  with  the  metal.  An
account  of  these,  mainly  taken  from  the  well-known
work  of  Tanquerel  des  Planches,  is  given  by  Dr.
Black  in  the  Appendix  to  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of
Homoeopathy/  vol.  i.

With  regard  to  these  effects,  I  need  only  remind
you  that  the  earliest  symptoms  of  saturnine  poison-
ing are  the  well-known  "  lead  colic/' — severe  spas-
modic pains  in  the  abdomen,  from  contraction  of
the  colon,  with  obstinate  constipation  :  —  and
"  dropped  hand"  from  paralysis  of  the  extensor
muscles  of  the  forearm,  accompanied  (if  not  caused
by)  wasting  of  their  substance.  More  profound
poisoning  of  the  system  induces  a  kind  of  degenera-
tion of  all  the  tissues.  The  nervous  centres  are  found
indurated  or  softened ;  and  headache,  amaurosis,
neuralgia,  palsy,  anaesthesia,  epilepsy,  &c.  occur
during  life.  The  muscular  tissue  throughout  the
body  is  wasted  and  contracted.  The  kidneys  are
small.  There  is  complete  decay  of  the  bodily  and
mental  powers,  with  profound  melancholia.  Lead
has  been  credited  with  the  power  of  producing,  or
at  least  predisposing  to  gouty  and  rheumatic  con-
ditions. Dr.  George  Moore,  however,  has  lately
examined  this  subject  in  an  able  paper  which  you
will  find  in  the  '  British  Journal/  vol.  xxiv.  He
comes  to  the  conclusion  that  the  relation  between
the  two  affections  is  to  say  the  least  "  not
proven."

I  know  no  better  instance  of  the  truth  of  the
law  of  similars  than  the  beautiful  effect  of  Plumbum
in  obstinate  constipation.  It  is  my  favourite  remedy
in  bad  cases.  It  has  also  several  times  afforded


458  PLUMBUM.

relief  in  intestinal  obstruction.*  Nor  is  it  less
beneficial  in  colic  and  enteralgia,  whether  acute  or
chronic,  if  accompanied  with  constipation;  herein
just  the  opposite  of  Colocynth,  which  is  indicated
by  diarrhoea.  I  have  more  than  once  used  it  suc-
cessfully in  chronic  dull  headaches,  with  depressed
spirits  and  constipation.  I  do  not  think  that  any
benefit  can  be  expected  from  Plumbum  in  such
disorders  as  epilepsy,  unless  these  are  a  part  of  a
general  cachexia  such  as  that  which  it  causes.  But
conditions  of  body  do  every  now  and  then  come  across
us  in  practice,  which  remind  us  of  lead-poisoning,
and  lead  us  to  expect  benefit  from  its  use.  Two
such  cases  are  related  by  the  late  Dr.  Chapman  in
the  '  Brit.  Jouru.  of  Homoeopathy/  vol.  iii.  The
mental  disorder  took  the  form  of  melancholia  reli-
giosa.  Plumbum  proved  curative  in  both :  and
also  in  a  third  case  of  spasmodic  stricture  of  the
rectum.  Teste  claims  to  have  cured  with  Plumbum
several  chronic  affections  of  the  urinary  organs,  and
agues,  quotidian  or  double-tertian,  where  the
splenic  region  is  painful  on  being  touched.

Alumina,  Opium,  Platina,  and  Zincum  are  medi-
cines more  or  less  allied  to  Plumbum.

As  to  dose,  I  must  say  that  I  have  never  seen
good  effects  from  potencies  higher  than  the  3rd  and
4th  for  adults,  and  the  6th  for  children.  On  the
other  hand,  I  have  not  found  benefit  from  lower
potencies  when  the  medium  ones  I  have  mentioned
have  failed.  I  speak  of  the  Carbonate,  in  which
form  I  have  always  used  the  metal.

*  '  North  Amer.  Journ.5  (I  cannot  find  the  reference).


PODOPHYLLUM  PELTATUM.  459

My  last  medicine  is  one  which  we  took  many
years  ago  from  the  so-called  "  eclectic"  practi-
tioners of  America,  and  of  which  you  have  lately
made  the  acquisition  from  the  same  source,  the
"  mandrake,"  May-apple,

Podophyllum  peltatum.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  root.  Podophyl/i«,
which  is.  now  so  much  used  as  a  cholagogue,  is  said
to  be  a  resin  obtained  from  the  plant.  It  is  tritu-
rated for  our  purposes.

There  is  a  proving  by  Dr.  Williamson  in  the
'  Mat.  Med.  of  American  Provings.'  But  the
knowledge  of  the  action  of  Podophyllum  is  best
learned  from  its  toxical  and  curative  powers,  as  we
read  of  them  in  the  '  New  Remedies/

The  specific  influence  of  Podophyllum  is  exerted
mainly,  if  not  entirely,  upon  the  mucous  membrane
of  the  alimentary  canal,  with  the  glands  which
accompany  it.  It  causes  inflammation  of  the
stomach,  small  intestines,  and  rectum,  with  vomit-
ing and  purging,  griping,  dysenteric  evacuations,
tenesmus  and  prolapsus  ani.  Salivation  is  often
produced,  and  I  think  there  is  no  doubt  that  the
drug  causes  an  increased  secretion  of  bile.  Corre-
spondingly, the  curative  action  of  the  drug  is  pretty
well  limited  to  this  sphere.  I  have  seen  it  act
well  in  a  case  of  chronic  duodenitis :  and  it  is
recommended  (I  think  justly)  for  the  diarrhoea  of
typhoid  fever.  Besides  these,  I  know  not  of  any
application  having  been  made  of  its  specific  power
of  inflaming  the  small  intestine  ;  which  nevertheless


460  PODOPHYLLUM PELTATUM.

Dr.  Anstie's  experiments  on  animals*  show  to  be
among  its  most  characteristic  effects.  It  is  impor-
tant to  know  that  we  have  a  medicine  homoeopathic
to  enteritis  affecting  the  jejunum  and  ileum,  for
neither  Arsenic,  Kali  bichromicum,  nor  Mercurius
corrosivus  have  much  influence  on  this  part  of  the
mucous  tract.  It  differs  from  the  last-named
medicine,  again,  in  not  affecting  the  colon  :  and
thus  being  unsuitable  for  ordinary  dysentery  which
has  its  seat  there.  But  when  dysenteric  diarrhoea
appears  to  depend  upon  inflammatory  irritation  of
the  rectum,  Podophyllum  will  give  rapid  relief.
Such  a  malady  is  not  uncommon  in  children,  and  is
generally  accompanied  with  painful  prolapse  of  the
rectum  at  each  stool. f  Here  I  give  Podophyllin
in  the  3rd  trituration  :  but  in  the  simple  prolapsus
ani  from  debility  of  infancy  and  childhood,  I  have
almost  invariably  seen  beautiful  results  from  the
tincture  of  Podophyllum  in  the  12th  dilution.  In
the  same  form  and  dose,  following  Dr.  Jeanes,  I
have  given  it  with  perfect  success  in  cases  where,
in  children,  the  stools  are  too  large  and  frequent,
but  natural  in  colour  and  consistence.

The  benefit  obtained  from  Podophyllum  in  some
cases  of  prolapsus  uteri  collected  by  Dr.  Hale  is,  I
sentaneous rectal  troubles.

From  its  action  on  the  liver  Podophyllum  has

*  I  have  mislaid  the  exact  reference  to  these  experiments  :  but
you  will  find  them  somewhere  in  the  '  Medical  Times  and  Gazette*
for  1863  or  1864.

t  T  have  put  on  record  in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  xxiv,
p.  673,  a  case  of  this  kind,  in  which  the  curative  action  of  Podo-
phyllin was  very  marked.


PODOPHYLLUM PELTATUM.  461

acquired  the  title  of  "  vegetable  Mercury."  I  do
not  think  the  generalization  well-founded.  The
form  of  "  biliousness"  in  which  I  have  found  it
useful,  differs  widely  from  that  which  calls  for
Mercurius.  When  nausea  and  giddiness,  bitter
taste  and  risings,  tendency  to  bilious  vomiting  and
purging,  and  dark  urine  have  been  the  symptoms
present,  Podophyllum,  from  the  1st  to  the  3rd
trituration,  has  generally  rapidly  removed  them.
But  when  "  biliousness"  means  dull  pain  in  the
right  hypochondrium,  pale  and  costive  motions,
loss  of  appetite,  and  depression  of  spirits,  it  resists
Podophyllum,  and  yields  pretty  quickly  to  the  3rd
dec.  trituration  of  Mercurius  solubilis. — It  may
be  occasionally  justifiable,  in  cases  of  obstructive
jaundice,  to  endeavour  to  force  a  passage  by  the
vis  a  teryo.  In  such  a  case  (of  which  an  example
is  recorded  by  Dr.  Hale),  Podophyllin,  in  doses  of
from  three  to  ten  grains  of  the  1st  dec.  triturations,
is  best  calculated  to  produce  the  desired  effect.

The  analogues  of  Podophyllum  are  Aloes,  Col-
chicwn,  Iris,  Leptandra,  and  Mercurius.

I  have  mentioned  the  most  suitable  doses  as  I
have  gone  on.


LETTER  XXXV.

PULSATILLA.

I  shall  devote  a  whole  letter  to-day  to  one  of
the  great  Hahnemannian  polychrests,  the  Meadow
Anemone,

Pulsatilla  nigricans.

A  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  whole  plant,  minus
the  root,  by  cutting  it  in  pieces  and  adding  double
its  weight  of  alcohol.

The  proving  of  the  Pulsatilla  nigricans  is  in  the
'  Materia  Medica  Pura/  Recently,  an  American
species  of  the  plant,  the  Pulsatilla  Nuttalliaua,  has
been  proved  by  Dr.  Burt.  You  may  read  his
experiments  in  Dr.  Hale's  '  New  Remedies/  2nd
edition.

Hahnemann's  pathogenesis  of  Pulsatilla  is  about
the  best  he  has  left  us  :  and  if  we  had  the  day-
books of  the  provers,  our  knowledge  of  its  physiologi-
cal influence  would  be  well-nigh  perfect.  Even  from
the  schema  a  tolerable  notion  of  its  action  can  be
gained;  and  Dr.  Burt's  recent  proving  of  its
American  relative  has  helped  to  give  precision  to
our  knowledge.

In  the  broadest  terms,  Pulsatilla  exerts  its  main
influence  upon  the  mucous  and  synovial  membranes
and  upon  the  veins;  while  it  displays  an  elective


PTJLSATILLA N1GRICANS.  463

affinity for the eyes, the ears,  and the  genital
organs  of  both  sexes.

1.  In the  mucous membranes  Pulsatilla  sets  up
the  catarrhal  process. The  dry  stage  is  short  and
little  marked  (except  sometimes  in  the  respiratory
tract)  : and much mucous secretion is the
rule. As  symptoms  of  this  condition  the  pathoge-
nesis  gives  us — in  the  alimentary  canal,  raw  throat,
coated tongue,  furred mouth,  fetid smell of  the
breath,  taste deadened  or  variously  altered  (bitter,
sour, salt, even putrid),  foul or acid eructations,
nausea  and  inclination  to  vomit,  sensation  as  if  the
stomach  were spoiled,  weight  and  pressure in the
stomach,  and mucous  diarrhoea;  in  the  respiratory
tract  green  or  yellow  discharge  from  the  nose,  and
cough  with  much  expectoration*  (often  tasting  salt
or bitter) ; in the urinary mucous membrane
frequent  micturition  with  tenesmus,  and  jelly-like
sediment  in  the  urine.

2.  Pulsatilla  seems  to  fall  just  short  of  the  true
serous  membranes,  but  compensates  itself  by  acting
powerfully  upon  their  near relatives, the  synovial
membranes. The  joints chiefly affected are the
knees,  the  ankles,  and  the  small  joints  of  the  hands
and (most especially) the  feet. The rheumatico-
gouty  action  thus  displayed is also manifested  in
pains  of  divers  kinds  in  the  nape  of  the  neck  and
the  extremities.

3.  The  veins  seem  to  lose  their  vital  resistance
under  the  action  of Pulsatilla; so that  varicosis
readily  occurs.

*  The  dry  cough  of  Pulsatilla  I  am  disposed,  from  clinical  expe-
rience, to  set  down  as  sympathetic,  i.  e.  as  a  "  stomach  cough."


464  BULSATILLA NIGRICANS.

4.  Pulsatilla  manifests  its  affinity  for  the eyes
mainly by affecting the lids, which it inflames
greatly,  causing them to be agglutinated  in  the
morning,  and  to  pour  out  quantities  of  mucus. It
causes  also,  however,  considerable  aching  pain  in  the
eyeballs,  and  many  disturbances  of  vision. Tempo-
rary obscurations  of  sight  often  occur ;  fiery  circles
or  haloes  are  seen ;  and  after  sleep  there  is  a  feeling
as  if  something  were  hanging  over  the  cornea  which
could  be  wiped  away. The  sensation  is  only  sub-
jective, and  disappears  spontaneously.

5.  The  ears  suffer  from  the  action  of  Pulsatilla
even  more  than  do  the  eyes. In  some  provers  the
concha and external meatus were  inflamed, with
purulent  discharge. In  others  deafness,  generally
with noises  of  various kinds,  was present. The
seat  of  the  latter  symptoms  is  indicated  by  Dr.  Burt,
who  suffered  from  "  snapping  noises  in  the  ear,"  and
"  drawing  pains  along  the  right  Eustachian  tube.3'
Others  yet suffered from mere pain  in the ear,
generally  of  a  jerking  character.*

6.  The  action  of  Pulsatilla  upon  the  genital  organs
of  both  sexes is  very  marked,  but  is not easy  to
define. It  exerts  so  powerful  an  influence  over  the
ovario- uterine functions that I have sometimes
thought  that  its  seat  of  action  was  the  hypogastric
plexus. The  pathogenetic  symptoms  of  its  action
in  this  sphere  are,  in  the  female,  contractive  pains

*  Hahnemann  says  of  these  pains  generally,  when  caused  by
Pulsatilla,  that  they  are  "a  short-lasting  drawing  tension,  which
always  terminates  in  a  darting  analogous  to  tearing,  somewhat  as  if
a  nerve  were  put  upon  the  stretch,  and  then  let  loose  again  sud-
denly, causing  a  painful  jerk."


PULSATILLA NIGRICANS.  465

of  the  uterus,  leucorrhoea  of  various  kinds,  and
scanty,  delayed, .  and  often  painful  menses.  The
us  to  discern  any  irritation  of  the  ovaries ;  but
their  analogues  in  the  male,  the  testes,  swell  up  and
become  painful ;  the  spermatic  cord  also  being
involved.

The  febrile  condition  which  accompanies  most  of
these  ailments  is  marked  by  predominant  chilliness.

This  is  the  best  outline  I  can  give  you  of  the
physiological  action  of  Pulsatilla.  It  has  little
interest  in  itself,  being  hardly  capable  of  a  rational
exposition ;  but  it  is  amply  available  for  thera-
peutic applications.  To  these  I  now  turn.

Pulsatilla  is  a  remedy  of  prime  importance :  and
its  place  in  our  armoury  is  well-ascertained.  There
are  certain  general  indications  for  it  upon  which
much  stress  is  deservedly  laid.  Hahnemann  charac-
terises "  the  disposition  which  corresponds  best  to
the  nature  of  Pulsatilla  "  as  "  timid,  with  tendency
to  weep,  and  to  experience  silent  grief  and  chagrin ;
mild  and  yielding,  slow  and  phlegmatic."  Teste
says  it  is  "  particularly  suitable  to  persons  who,  by
the  relative  predominance  of  the  adipose  tissue  in
their  composition,  by  the  whiteness  of  their  flesh,
the  roundness  of  their  forms,  the  mildness  of  their
disposition,  and  their  fitful  moods,  exhibit  all  the
marked  features  of  the  female  sex."  Absence  of
thirst  and  frequent  chilliness  are  always  indications
for  its  choice.

I  see  no  reason  for  supposing  that  Pulsatilla  has
any  general  influence  upon  the  nervous  system  or
upon  the  blood.  I  shall  arrange  its  therapeutic

30


466  PULSATILLA NIGRICANS.

virtues  under  the  headings  already  adopted  for  the
physiological  outline.

1.  Pulsatilla  plays  an  important  part  in  gastric
disorders.  In  dyspepsia,  whether  acute  or  chronic,
the  prominence  of  mucous  derangement — i.  e.  white
tongue,  nausea  with  little  vomiting,  and  absence  of
much  pain — indicates  this  medicine  in  preference
to  others,  such  as  Nux  (q.  v.).  The  tongue  calling
for  Pulsatilla  is  thickly  coated  with  a  white  roughish
fur,  very  different  from  the  milky  white  of  Anti-
monium  crudum,  or  the  yellowish  brown  of  Kali
bichromicum.  The  acute  dyspepsia  in  which  Pul-
satilla is  curative  generally  arises  from  the  ingestion
of  fat  or  other  rich  food.  In  chronic  gastric
disorder  it  does  better  when  heart-burn  than  when
water-brash  is  present,  in  which  it  again  contrasts
with  Nux.  The  diarrhoea  for  which  Pulsatilla  is
suitable  is  a  passive  mucous  flux,  with  little  pain,
occurring  chiefly  at  night.  These  gastro-intestinal
symptoms  are  often  present  in  the  febrile  affections
of  childhood,  as  in  mumps  and  varicella;  and  a
few  doses  of  Pulsatilla  are  useful  accordingly.  In
two  of  these  diseases  our  medicine  is  indispensable,
viz.  measles  and  remittent  fever.  Having  no  control
over  the  fever  itself, — which  requires  in  the  former
Aconite,  in  the  latter  Gelseminum, — it  aids  power-
fully to  recovery  by  cleaning  the  tongue  and  (in
measles)  checking  the  diarrhoea  and  moderating  the
catarrh. — Pulsatilla  has  less  influence  when  the
respiratory  mucous  membrane  is  affected.  Never-
theless it  is  often  a  valuable  palliative  in  nocturnal
coughs,  as  of  phthisis ;  and  is  sometimes  the  best
medicine  in  sub-acute  bronchitis  occurring  in  delicate


PULSAT1LLA NIGRICANS.  467

persons,  and  accompanied  with  much  mucous  ex-
pectoration. So  in  disorders  of  the  urinary  tract
Pulsatilla  is  far  less  frequently  indicated  than
Cantharis,  Cannabis,  and  Belladonna  :  yet  is  some-
times useful  for  the  dysuria  of  pregnancy,  and  for
chronic  catarrh  of  the  bladder.

2.  The  action  of  Pulsatilla  upon  the  joints  has
led  to  its  use  in  suitable  forms  of  gout  and  rheuma-
tism. The  disorder  of  digestion  which  lies  at  the
foundation  of  gout  is  just  that  to  which  Pulsatilla
corresponds. Hence  it  is  well  calculated  to  effect
radical  benefit  in  more  recent  cases  of  this  malady.
In  the  paroxysm  itself  it  is  generally  superseded  by
Colchicutn ; though I  know  of  one case  in  which
the  timely  administration  of  Pulsatilla  has several
times  seemed  to  blight an  incipient  attack. It  is
said  to  be  indicated  especially  when  the  pains  fly
from  place to place. In sub-acute rheumatism
occurring  in  delicate  persons  it  is  extremely  useful,
especially  when  the  knees,  ankles,  or  small  joints  of
the hands and feet are affected. In idiopathic
inflammations  of  these  joints,  moreover,  Pulsatilla
is  the  best  remedy  while  the  mischief  is  yet  recent.
But  perhaps  the  form  of  arthritis  to  which  Pulsatilla
most closely  corresponds is  rheumatic  gout,  using
this term to signify the independent  malady so
named. Dr. Puller  has  pointed out the much
preponderating  frequency  with  which  the  female  sex
is  invaded  by  this  disorder,  and  its  intimate  relations
with  menstrual  derangements. Pulsatilla  is  almost
specific  in  its  acute  form :  and  even  in  chronic  cases
will  be  found  of  much  service.

3.  In  affections  of  the  veins  Pulsatilla  occupies


468  PULSATILLA NIGRICANS.

much  the  same  ground  as  Hamamelis.  It  is
superior  to  that  medicine  in  crural  phlebitis  follow-
ing parturition,  hut  yields  to  it  in  venous  haemor-
rhages. In  piles  and  other  varicoses — as  of  the
spermatic  cord  or  the  lower  extremity — Pulsatilla
will  act  well  when  the  general  condition  of  the
patient  seems  to  call  for  its  use.  It  is  recom-
mended even  in  dilatation  of  the  right  ventricle.

4.  It  was  for  diseases  of  the  eyes  that  Pulsatilla
was first  brought prominently forward by Baron
Storck. He  reported it curative (of course in
massive  doses)  of  amaurosis,  opacities  of  the  cornea,
and cataract. Numerous disappointments, how-
ever, have  led  to  its  disuse  in  the  treatment  of  these
maladies : and Homoeopathy has not revived its
pretensions. The more modest claims  to  service
warranted  by  our  experiments  can  nevertheless  be
amply sustained. Pulsatilla is most useful in
affections  of  the  lids. In  recent  blephar ophthalmia,
with  profuse  lachrymation  and  meibomian  secretion,
it is the best medicine. It will blight a  stye
almost  as  effectually  as  Belladonna  will  a  boil  :  but
it  will  not  prevent  their  tendency  to recur. For
the  twitching  of  the  eyelids,  with  dazzling  of  sight,
with  which  some  persons  are  annoyed,  I  know  no
remedy  so  useful  as  Pulsatilla. It  is  also  good  for
"  weak  eyes/'  when  this  is  a  local  affection,  and  not
a  symptom  of  constitutional  debility. The  aching
of  the  eyeballs  produced  by  Pulsatilla  is  rather  such
as  occurs  in  some  forms  of  headache  than  an  idio-
pathic  affection.

5.  Few medicines  are  used  in  our  practice  in
affections  of  the  ears  more  frequently  than  Pulsa-


PULSATILLA NIGRICANS.  469

tilla.  Its  curative  virtues  are  most  evident  in  the
ear-ache  which  so  often  troubles  children ;  and  in
recent  catarrhal  deafness,  with  noises  in  the  ears.
But  it  has  also  been  used  with  good  results  in  acute
inflammation  of  the  auricle  and  meatus,  in  neural-
gia of  the  nerves  of  the  ear,  and  in  non-scrofulous
otorrhcea  with  deafness.

6.  I  now  come  to  what  is  perhaps  the  most
important  sphere  of  the  operation  of  Pulsatilla, —
the  generative  organs  of  both  sexes.  In  the  male
subject  you  will  find  it  invaluable  in  acute  orchitis
however  caused;  and  in  prostatitis  (with  Thuja).
It  is  one  of  the  medicines  (with  Graphites  and
Rhododendron)  which  have  cured  hydrocele.  But
its  fullest  powers  are  displayed  in  the  female
organism.  When  in  girls  of  mild  disposition
puberty  is  unduly  delayed,  or  the  menstrual  func-
tion is  defectively  and  irregularly  performed  :  when
they  grow  pale  and  languid,  and  complain  of
headache,  chilliness,  and  lassitude,  Pulsatilla  (with
or  without  Ferrum)  is  a  most  excellent  remedy.
When  the  menses  have  been  suppressed  by  a  chill,
if  the  time  for  Aconite  has  gone  by  Pulsatilla  will
generally  restore  the  discharge.  I  believe  it  to  be  as
good  a  remedy  for  ovaritis  as  it  is  for  orchitis ;  and
far  superior  to  most  of  those  ordinarily  recom-
mended. In  simple  mucous  leucorrhoea  it  is  often
curative.  It  presides  in  a  most  beneficial  manner
over  the  function  of  parturition.  Given  daily  for  a
month  or  so  previously,  it  greatly  facilitates  the
process  in  women  whose  labours  are  tedious  and
difficult.  In  labour  itself,  when  the  pains  are
irregular,  tardy,  and  defective,  yet  Ergot  is  hardly


470  PULSATILLA NIGRICANS.

called  for,  Pulsatilla  will  often  do  good  service.
And  there  are  several  cases  recorded  which  leave
little  doubt  but  that  in  false  presentations  Pulsatilla
furthers  that  tendency  to  spontaneous  version  the
occasional  occurrence  of  which  makes  it  probable  is
always  present.  After  labour,  it  is  very  useful  in
promoting  the  secretion  of  milk,  when  this  is  defi-
cient. Altogether,  the  weaker  sex  has  much  for
whfch  to  thank  Homoeopathy  in  its  gift  of  Pulsa-
tilla.

Pulsatilla  like  the  polychrests  generally,  has  no
true  analogue.  The  medicines  which  most  fre-
quently come  up  for  comparison  with  it  in  practice
are  Actcea,  Antimonium  crudum,  Caulophyllum,
Vonium,  Cyclamen,  Hamamelis,  and  Sabina.

Again  like  the  polychrests  generally,  Pulsatilla
requires  to  be  given  in  various  potencies  to  obtain
all  its  virtues.  I  have  no  experience  with  the
mother  tincture  or  first  dilutions.  But  I  can  re-
commend to  you  the  3rd  dec.  in  gastric  disorders
and  orchitis, — the  3rd  centes.  in  affections  of  the
eyes  and  ears,  and  in  rheumatism :  while  the  6th
and  12th  I  believe  to  be  best  suited  for  gout,  for
affections  of  the  veins,  and  for  ovario-uterine  dis-
turbances.


LETTER XXXVI.

RANUNCULUS, RATANHIA, RHEUM, RHODODENDRON,
RHUS.

THERE  are  several  botanical  species  of  Ranun-
culus. Two  of  these,  R.  bulbosus  and  R.  sceleratus,
have  received  a  very  fair  proving.  As  I  see  no
essential  difference  between  the  properties  of  these
two  species,  I  shall  treat  of  them  indiscriminately
here  under  the  title  of

Ranunculus.

The  tincture  of  either  variety  is  prepared  from
the  whole  plant.

The  provings  of  both  appear  in  Stapf's  '  Addi-
tions to  the  Materia  Medica.'

The  Ranunculi  are  intensely  irritant,  when
applied  locally,  causing  inflammation  and  vesication,
with  burning  itching.  I  cannot  decide,  however,
whether  this  effect — so  much  resembling  that  of
Rhus — is,  as  with  that  medicine,  dynamic  and
specific  in  nature.  The  most  characteristic  symp-
toms of  the  provings  are  undoubtedly  those  of
the  walls  of  the  chest.  Symptoms  175 — 212  of
R.  bulbosus,  and  symptoms  117 — 138  of  R.  scele-
ratus  are  composed  almost  entirely  of  the  various


472  RANUNCULUS.

kinds  of  pain  and  soreness  experienced  by  the
provers  in  the  sternum,  ribs,  and  intercostal
spaces.

Correspondingly,  the  Ranunculi  have  been  used
with  the  utmost  success  in  pleurodynia,*  infra-mam-
mary pain,  and  thoracico- abdominal  myalgia.^  I
cannot  a  priori  diagnose  for  you  their  place  in  these
maladies  as  compared  with  that  of  Actsea  racemosa
and  of  Arnica  (q.  v.)  :  you  must  be  guided  by  the
accompanying  symptoms.  I  know  of  no  other
standing  uses  of  Ranunculus.  I  once  treated  a  case
of  chronic  dysentery  in  a  domestic  servant  accom-
panied by  infra-mammary  pain  on  both  sides.
After  a  fruitless  trial  of  Mercurius  corrosivus  and
Kali  bichromicum,  I  was  led  by  the  pains  to  give
Ranunculus  bulbosus,  in  the  3rd  dilution.  Under
its  use,  the  intestinal  symptoms  rapidly  subsided,
and  the  pain  disappeared  from  the  left  side,  but
persisted  in  the  right,  from  which  it  was  at  length
dislodged  by  Nux  vomica.  Two  or  three  returns
of  the  malady  have  been  rapidly  checked  by  the
same  drug.

In  conclusion,  Ranunculus  should  be  borne  in
mind  in  some  cases  of  sciatica,  and  other  rheumatic
neuralgise  :  also  in  herpes  and  eczema.  It  ought  to
be  a  very  efficient  medicine  for  shingles,  covering  as
it  does  the  intercostal  neuralgia  as  well  as  the  erup-
tion.

Rhus,  Clematis,  Euphorbium,  Croton,  Sabadilla,
and  Staphysagria  are  analogues  of  Ranunculus.

*  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  xxiv,  p.  160.
f  '  Monthly  Horn.  Review,'  December,  1866.


RATANHIA.  473

The  dilutions  from  1  to  3  seem  to  have  been
generally  used.

And  now  a  few  words  about  a  medicine  which
you  know  only  as  an  astringent,  and  do  not  often
use  even  in  that  capacity,  the  Krameria  root,

Ratanhia.

The  tincture  is  prepared  by  maceration.

There  is  a  pathogenesis  of  Ratanhia  in  Jahr's
'  Manual/  taken  from  Hartlaub  and  Trinks.  Some
additional  symptoms  are  furnished  by  Teste,  in  his
article  on  the  drug.

I  can  give  no  general  account  of  the  symptoms
I  know,  has  led  to  practical  results, — "  sensation  as
of  a  skin  before  the  eyes."  Acting  on  this  very
slight  hint,  Dr.  Madden  tried  it  in  a  case  of
pterygium,  and  with  success.  I  have  myself  used  it
with  curative  results  in  three  cases  of  this  disease, —
one  in  the  human  subject,  and  two  in  the  lower
animals  (a  dog  and  a  cat  respectively).  Another
symptom  of  Ratanhia,  "  dry  heat  at  the  anus,  with
sudden  stitches  which  the  patient  compares  to  stabs
with  a  pen-knife,"  makes  it  possible  that  it  is  some-
what homoeopathic  to  the  fissure  of  the  anus  which
the  French  physicians  profess  to  cure  with  it.
Teste  recommends  it  in  uterine  pains  following
retrocession  of  an  eruption  situated  on  the  lumbar
region.

I  can  say  nothing  about  medicines  allied  to
Ratanhia.

For  dose  I  have  always  used  the  2nd  dilution.


474  RHODODENDRON CHRYSANTHUM.

And  now  for  the  homoeopathic  uses  of  your  old
friend,  the  children's  enemy,  Rhubarb,  Latine
Rhabarbarum  or

Rheum.

Our  tinctiire  is  made,  like  your  own,  from  the  root.

There  is  a  proving  of  Rhubarb  in  the  '  Materia
Medica  Pura  •'  to  which  Hempel  adds  the  symptoms
obtained  by  the  Vienna  Provers'  Union.

These  provings  add  little  or  nothing  to  our
previous  knowledge  of  the  drug.  Its  primary  and
only  significant  influence  is  that  which  it  exerts
upon  the  alimentary  canal.  Have  not  your
therapeutists  caused  some  confusion  by  calling  it
"  tonic"  as  well  as  "  purgative"  ?  The  fact  seems
to  be  that  it  stimulates  the  muscular  fibre  of  the
whole  length  of  the  intestine,  causing  colicky  pain
and  frequent  evacuations,  which  latter  are  fsecal,  and
show  little  or  no  increase  of  the  secretions  of  the
canal.  It  never,  so  Pereira  states,  inflames  the
mucous  membrane.

The  corresponding  idiopathic  form  of  diarrhoea
is  rarely  met  with,  chiefly  among  children.  When
it  occurs,  Rheum — from  the  2nd  to  the  6th  dilu-
tion— will  give  you  every  satisfaction  :  and  you
will  not  mourn  over  its  loss  to  you  as  an  aperient.

My  next  medicine  is  prepared  from  the  beautiful
Siberian  Rose,

Rhododendron  chrysanthum.

The  dried  leaves  are the  officinal  portion  of  the
plant.


RHODODENDRON CHRYSANTHUM.  475

The  proving  is  in  StapPs  f  Additions  •'  with  cases
appended.

The  most  characteristic  symptoms  of  Rhododen-
dron are  the  pains  which  it  excites  in  the  muscular
and  fibrous  tissues  :  and  the  swelling  and  tenderness
of  the  testes  and  epididymis.  In  practice  it  has
been  found  useful  accordingly.  It  has  a  high
native  reputation  for  gout  and  rheumatism :  and
Homoeopathic  experience  shows  it  to  be  specifically
curative  in  many  forms  of  these  maladies.  It
seems  especially  serviceable  in  rheumatism  of  the
cervical  and  thoracic  muscles,  and  in  rheumatic
neuralgia  of  the  extremities.  The  pains  are  worse
at  rest,  and  in  cloudy  and  stormy  weather.  I  have
myself  used  Rhododendron  with  much  benefit,
acting  on  a  hint  from  German  experience,  in
rheumatic  face-ache.  Chronic  affections  of  the
testes — as  orchitis  and  hydrocele — have  also  been
frequently  cured  by  Rhododendron.

The  stools  characteristic  of  this  drug  are  loose,
but  requiring  much  pressure  for  their  expulsion.

Rhus  and  Clematis,  and  perhaps  Ranunculus,  are
analogues  of  Rhododendron.

The  dilutions  from  12  to  30  seem  generally  to
have  been  employed.  In  rheumatic  face-ache  I  use
the  1st.

And  now  I  have  to  speak  of  the  remarkable
American  family  of  plants  which  we  call  the  Rhoes,
— Rhus  toxicodendron,  the  sumach,  or  poison-oak  :
Rhus  radicans,  the  poison-ivy  or  -vine :  and  Rhus
venenata,  the  poison-wood  or  -ash.  The  latter,
by-the-by,  must  not  be  confounded  (as  it  sometimes


476  RHUS.

is)  with  the  Rhus  vernix  of  Linriseus,  which  grows
in  Japan.  I  shall  here  again,  believing  the  action
of  the  different  species  to  differ  in  intensity  only,
speak  of  them  together  under  the  common  and
familiar  name  of

Rhus.

The  juice  which  exudes  from  the  plants  when
wounded  is  mixed  with  equal  parts  of  Alcohol  for
the  tincture.

The  proving  of  Rhus  toxicodendron  (incorrectly
there  called  R.  radicans)  is  in  the  'Mat.  Med.
Pura.'  Rhus  radicans  was  proved  by  Dr.  Joslin
and  others  :  the  pathogenesis  is  in  Jahr's  '  Manual.'
Rhus  venenata  has  lately  been  proved  by  Dr.  Burt :
his  symptoms  are  collated  with  the  poisonous  effects
of  the  plant  in  Dr.  Hale's  'New  Remedies,'  2nd
ed.  Besides  the  proving,  you  should  read  the
articles  on  Rhus  in  Hempel  and  Teste.  There  is
also  a  study  of  this  medicine  in  Hirschel's  '  Pharmaco-
dynamics/  translated  by  Dr.  Hayle;  and  some
"  Observations  on  Rhus,"  by  Dr.  Carroll  Dunham,
are  contained  in  the  '  American  Homoeopathic
Review/  vol.  vi.

The  pathogenetic  effects  of  Rhus  do  not  need  any
lengthy  description.  It  is  best  known  by  its
effects  on  the  skin.  The  smallest  quantity  produces
burning  and  redness  over  large  cutaneous  surfaces,
which  soon  swell  up,  and  become  covered  with
vesicles, — these  phenomena  being  accompanied
throughout  by  almost  intolerable  itching.  The
burning  felt  and  redness  observed  in  the  mouth  and
throat,  the  diarrhoea,  and  the  irritable  cough,  which


RHUS.  477

coexist  with  the  affection  of  the  skin,  indicate  a  like
disorder  of  the  mucous  membranes.  The  accom-
panying fever  and  malaise  correspond  with  the
extent  and  severity  of  the  local  symptoms.  Severe
boils  followed  in  two  of  the  provers  of  Rhus  venenata.
the  action  of  a  "  corrosive  caustic,  which,  from  its
extreme  subtilty,  has  a  tendency  to  invade  large
surfaces,  rather  than  to  penetrate  deeply  into  the
tissues."  He  compares  it  with  Arnica,  which  dips
deeper  down;  and  with  Ledum,  whose  action  is
more  localised.

These  are  the  symptoms  which  usually  follow  ex-
posure to  the  exhalations  or  contact  with  the  juice
of  the  different  species  of  Rhus.  The  provings
made  with  the  tinctures  exhibit  the  same  pheno-
mena, but  in  a  milder  degree.  They  also  show  that
Rhus  is  possessed  of  a  very  depressing  influence  upon
the  nervous  and  muscular  power,  as  shown  by  many
paralytic  phenomena.  Still  more  marked  are  the
rheumatoid  pains  which  affect  every  part  of  the
trunk  and  limbs.  In  the  proving  of  Rhus  venenata
the  knees,  ankles,  feet,  and  hands  were  the  joints
most  affected  (comp.  Pulsatilla)  :  but  there  was  no
genuine  synovial  swelling,  as  with  Bryonia  and  Pul-
satilla. It  is  chiefly  of  these  rheumatoid  pains  that
Hahnemann  made  his  celebrated  observation  that,
unlike  those  of  Bryony,  they  are  most  violent  when
the  part  affected  is  in  a  state  of  perfect  rest.  He
extends,  indeed,  the  statement  to  the  symptoms  of
Rhus  generally :  and  the  recent  proviugs  of  Rhus
venenata  bear  out  his  assertion.


478  RHUS.

And now  for  the  therapeutic  virtues  of  Rims,
which  are  extensive  and  important.

1.  In  cutaneous  affections,  especially  when  acute,
Rhus  naturally  takes  high  rank  as  a  remedy. The
members  of  the  order  Vesiculse — herpes  (especially
h.  zoster),  eczema,  and  pemphigus — are  the  forms
of  eruption  to  which  it  is most  suitable. I  have
frequently  cured  these  affections  with  Rhus,  and  in-
deed rarely require any other remedy for them.
Itching  with  burning  is  a  characteristic  indication
for it  here. Still more closely do  the  effects  of
Rhus correspond with erythema and erysipelas.
"When  this  latter  malady  goes  on  to  the  formation
of  vesicles  and  bullse  (vesicular  erysipelas) Rhus  is
the classical remedy in  our  school :  and I  have
often  seen  it  act  here  in  the  most  beautiful  manner.
Teste  seems  justified  in  recommending  it  as  the  best
medicine  to  be given  in  extensive  but  superficial
burns.

2.  The  next  most  important  action  of  Rhus  is  in
the treatment of  rheumatism. It is very rarely
that it is  indicated in  rheumatic fever. But  in
various  sub-acute  and  chronic  rheumatic  affections
it  is  a  most  precious  remedy. Its  action  is  mainly,
if  not  entirely,  upon  the  fibrous  tissues — tendons,
fascise, sheaths of  nerves, &c. — and perhaps  the
muscles. I do not think  that it controls the
rheumatic  affection  of  the  synovial  membranes,  but
only  those  of  the  ligaments  external  to  the  capsules
of  the  joints. Nor  do  I  think  that  it  acts  upon  the
nerves  themselves. Its  undoubted value  in  rheu-
matic sciatica  depends,  I  take  it,  upon  its  influence
on  the  fibrous  sheath  of  the  nerve,  which  is  so  often


RHUS.  479

the  seat  of  the  pain.  It  is  powerless  in  pure  neu-
ralgia here  or  elsewhere.  It  is  certainly  the  best
remedy  in  most  cases  of  lumbago,  after  Aconite : —
I  suspect  that  here  the  lumbar  fascia  is  the  part
affected  rather  than  the  actual  muscles.  In  rheu-
matic lameness  of  the  lower  extremities,  depending
largely  upon  the  state  of  the  fascia  lata,  Rhus  has
made  many  brilliant  cures.* — In  all  these  maladies
the  characteristic  features  "  worse  at  rest ;  relieved
by  motion,"  are  of  immense  weight  in  determining
our  choice  of  Rhus,  Dr.  Noidhard  has  added  the
important  observation  that  on  first  moving  after
rest  the  pains  are  increased.  It  is  not  until  the
parts  have  been  moved  for  some  little  time  that  re-
lief ensues.  With  Bryony,  on  the  other  hand,  the
longer  the  movement  continues,  the  worse  the  pains
become.  Dr.  C.  Dunham  has  drawn  out  these
characteristics  of  the  Rhus  pains  in  a  very  interest-
ing manner  :  for  which  I  refer  you  to  his  remarks. —
The  action  of  Rhus  on  the  white  fibrous  tissues  has
led  to  its  being  used  in  the  treatment  of  strains.  I
know  nothing,  however,  to  lead  me  to  suppose  it
superior  or  even  equal  to  Arnica.

3.  Rhus  seems  first  to  have  been  introduced  into
practice — by  Dufresnoy  in  France  and  Alderson  in
England — as  a  remedy  for  paralysis.  I  cannot
ascertain  from  their  accounts  the  form  or  cause  of
the  malady  cured :  they  only  state  that  it  was
"painless."  Noack  and  Trinks  give  some  similar
cases,  cured  by  increasing  doses  of  the  mother-
tincture,  f  But  in  the  minute  doses  commonly

*  '  Philadelphia  Journal  of  Homoeopathy,'  vol.  iii,  p.  359.
t  Cited  in  Hempel.


480  RHUS.

used  in  our  school,  Rhus  has  been  more  frequently
used  for  the  rheumatic  form  of  paralysis,  which  is
far  from  being  painless.  It  often  results  from  ex-
posure of  the  back  or  seat  to  damp  cold.  Dr.
Dunham  suggests  that  the  paraplegia  occurring  in
young  children  is  generally  thus  caused  :  and  states
that  it  readily  yields  to  Rhus  and  an  occasional
dose  of  Sulphur.

4.  And  now  as  to  the  use  of  Rhus  in  typhoid
conditions.  Dr.  Dunham  points  out  the  symptoms
of  depression  and  prostration  which  so  abound  in
the  pathogenesis :  and  insists  on  their  similarity  to
those  of  low  fever.  Dr.  Wurmb  of  Vienna  (whom
he  cites)  assigns  to  Rhus  a  definite  place  in  the  treat-
ment of  typhoid.  It  corresponds,  he  says,  to  a
mild  erethistic  type  of  the  disease,  such  as,  when
more  severe,  requires  Arsenic.  Hahnemann,  also,
used  either  Rhus  or  Bryonia,  according  to  the
symptoms,  in  the  first  stage  of  the  epidemic  fever
which  ravaged  Germany  in  1813.  And  it  is  the
usual  practice  in  our  school  to  go  to  Rhus  when
the  fever  accompanying  scarlatina  or  acute  rheuma-
tism assumes  a  typhoid  character.  In  the  face  of
so  general  a  consent,  it  may  seem  presumptuous  to
cast  any  doubt  upon  the  relation  of  Rhus  to  the
typhoid  condition.  But  I  must  do  so.  Whatever
we  may  make  of  isolated  symptoms,  there  is  nothing
in  the  connected  phenomena  of  Rhus  poisoning
which  has  any  resemblance  to  low  fever.  Teste,
whose  article  on  Rhus  is  one  of  the  best  in  his  book,
protests  against  its  application  to  these  forms  of  dis-
ease. I  have  never  myself  seen  any  telling  results
from  sits  use  here ;  and  I  shall  wait  for  much


RHUS.  481

stronger  evidence  ere  I  admit  it  to  companionship
with  fever-medicines  like  Baptisia  and  Arsenic.
My  opinion  is  certainly  not  changed  by  reading  the
cases  in  Dr.  Russell's  '  Clinical  Lectures/  The
only  "  fever,"  strictly  speaking,  to  which  I  have
found  Rhus  applicable  is  the  scarlatina  rheumatica.

I  will  only  add  that  Rhus  has  occasionally  proved
beneficial  in  affections  of  the  mucous  membranes
resembling  those  which  it  causes  in  the  cutaneous
surface.  In  its  power  over  the  conjunctiva  it  goes
beyond  this  limit ;  for  it  seems  not  unfrequently  to
have  proved  curative  of  strumous  ophthalmia.

The  medicines  most  allied  to  Rhus  are  Croton,
Ranunculus,  Ledum,  Rhododendron,  and  Bryonia.

In  recent  cutaneous  affections  I  recommend  the
6th  dilution  :  in  chronic,  from  the  1st  to  3rd  de-
cimal, as  also  in  shingles  and  erysipelas.  In
rheumatism  the  higher  dilutions  seem  to  have  made
the  best  cures  :  while  in  paralysis  and  strumous
ophthalmia  the  material  doses  of  old  Medicine  have
given  the  drug  its  reputation.  Hahnemann  says
that  the  action  of  Rhus  is  slow ;  and  improvement
is  frequently  perceived  (I  hope  he  means  in  chronic
cases)  only  thirty-six  hours  after  the  administration
of  the  dose.


31


LETTER  XXXVII.

RUMEX, RUTA, SABADILLA, SABINA, SAMBUCUS, SAN-
GUINARIA, SARSAPARILLA, SCILLA.

ONCE  again,  to-day,  we  turn  to  America,  as  she
sends  us  the  yellow  dock,

Rumex  crispus.

The  juice  of  the  root  is  used  in  the  preparation  of
the  tincture.

The  original  proving  of  Rumex,  by  Dr.  Joslin,
is  in  the  '  Amer.  Horn.  Review/  vol.  ii.  The
pathogenesis  is  given,  with  numerous  clinical  cases,
in  Dr.  Hale's  '  New  Remedies.'

Rumex  has  some  influence  on  the  skin  and  ali-
mentary mucous  membrane,  causing  in  the  former
an  itching  which  is  increased  by  exposure  to  cool
air,  and  relieved  by  warmth  (herein  contrasting  with
that  of  Sulphur),  and  in  the  latter  a  sense  of  weight
at  the  stomach,  and  a  morning  diarrhoea.  Its  main
action,  however,  is  exerted  upon  the  respiratory
mucous  membrane,  and  especially  that  of  the
larynx ;  where  it  diminishes  secretion  while  ex-
alting sensibility.  Hence  changes  in  voice,  and  a
dry  titillating  cough.  The  action  hardly  goes  on
to  inflammation.

Rumex  has  cured  some  cases  of  gastric  and  in-
testinal derangement  characterised  as  above,  es-


RUTA GRAVEOLENS.  483

pecially  morning  diarrhcea  fcomp.  Apis,  Nuphar,
Podophyllum,  Sulphur).  It  should  be  thought  of
in  prurigo,  where  the  itching  has  the  unusual  cha-
racteristic of  that  excited  by  the  drug.  But  the
chief  use  of  Rumex  is  in  laryngo-tracheal  cough,  of
which  quite  an  array  of  cases  may  be  read  in  Dr.
Hale's  article.  The  symptoms  are  those  of  catarrh,
with  excessive  irritability  of  the  laryngo-tracheal
mucous  membrane,  causing  a  violent,  incessant,  and
fatiguing  cough,  with  little  expectoration.  Pressure,
talking,  and  especially  inspiration  of  cool  air,  cause
aggravation.  There  is  often  a  sense  of  excoriation
behind  the  sternum.  I  have  several  times  pre-
but  quite  as  often  with  entire  failure,  though  it
seemed  thoroughly  indicated.  When  it  cures  it
does  so  with  almost  magical  rapidity.

The  analogues  of  Rumex  are  stated  by  Dr.  C.
Dunham  to  be  Lachesis,  Belladonna,  Causticum,
and  Phosphorus.  His  sketch  of  the  laryngeal
symptoms  of  the  five  medicines  respectively  (given
by  Dr.  Hale)  is  a  model  of  delicate  application  and
discriminate  comparison.  I  would  add  to  his  four
analogues  a  fifth,  Spongia.

Nearly  all  the  recorded  cures  have  been  made
with  the  dilutions  6 — 30.

My  next  medicine  is  the  common  Rue,

Ruta  graveolens.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  expressed
juice  of  the  whole  plant.


484  RUTA GRAVEOLENS.

The  proving  is  in  the '  Mat.  Med.  Pura :'  Hempel's
article  also  should  be  consulted.

The  poisonous  effects  of  Ruta  are  thus  summed
up  by  Wibmer  (cited  in  Hempel).  "When  fresh
it  is  an  acrid  irritant,  which,  applied  externally,
causes  inflammation  and  swelling,  redness,  and
even  draws  blisters ;  internally,  it  inflames  the
stomach  and  duodenum ;  if  absorbed  the  poison
causes  some  narcotism,  with  restlessness  and  nervous
excitement,  and  finally  irritation  of  the  uterus,
which,  if  impregnated,  expels  the  foetus.  The  local
and  remote  effects  of  the  poison  do  not  seem  to  be
necessarily  connected  with  each  other,  and  some-
times hold  even  inverse  relations."  Upon  this
basis  you  use  Ruta  as  "  antispasmodic"  and  emmena-
gogue.  A  remedy  which  causes  "  nervous  excite-
ment" may  well  be  useful,  as  it  is  certainly  ho-
moeopathic, in  similar  conditions  occurring  idio-
pathically.  But  the  knowledge  that  Ruta  is
amenorrhoea,  but  in  meno-  and  metrorrhagia.  That
it  is  occasionally  curative  in  these  conditions  we
have  the  testimony  of.  one  of  your  own  leading  men,
M.  Beau  of  La  Charite  (see  under  Sabina).

In  Hahnemann's  proving,  the  chief  symptoms
elicited  are  pains  in  the  bones,  joints,  and  cartilages,
especially  of  a  "  bruised"  character.  The  rectum
and  bladder,  also,  are  much  irritated,  even  to  pro-
lapse of  the  former.  Ruta  has  accordingly  been
used  in  the  treatment  of  rheumatism  of  the  wrist
and  ankle.  I  believe  that  it  has  a  special  in-
fluence upon  the  former  joint.  I  have  seen  it
disperse  a  ganglion  which  had  formed  there.  In


SABADILLA.  485

my  hands,  also,  it  has  arrested  the  growth  of  a
"  bunion."  Dr.  Henriques  has  published  an  inter-
esting case  in  which  an  ununited  fracture  in  a
cachectic  patient  rapidly  took  on  healing  action  under
the  influence  of  Ruta  in  the  ]2th  dilution.*  '

Of  yet  another  character  is  the  undoubted  power
of  Ruta  in  asthenopia  caused  by  over- exertion  of
the  eyes.  Hahnemann  says  "  Rosenstein  praises  it
in  affections  of  the  eyes  induced  by  too  much
reading.  Swedjaur  and  Chomel  join  in  that  praise.
Symptoms  38  and  39  show  that  the  good  effects  of
Ruta  in  those  diseases  depend  upon  its  being
homoeopathic  to  them."  These  symptoms  are —
"  Sensation  in  the  eyes  as  if  he  had  exerted  them
too  much  by  reading."  "  Slight,  aching  pain
in  the  right  eye,  with  obscuration  of  vision,  as  after
having  observed  too  long  time  an  object  incom-
moding the  eyes."  You  will  remember  that
Milton's  angel  "  purged"  Adam's  "  visual  nerve
with  euphrasy  and  rue,"  that  he  might  see  clearly.

Crocus,  Mezereum,  Sabina,  and  Rhus  are  analogues
more  or  less  close  to  Ruta.  M.  Beau  says  that  rue
is  to  savin  what  Ipecacuanha  is  to  Tartar  Emetic.

I  have  always  used  the  2nd  dilution,  which  is
that  also  recommended  by  Hahnemann.

I  have  very  little  to  say  about  the  next  medicine
on  my  list,  the  Indian  barley,

Sabadilla.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  seeds.
The  proving  is  in  StapPs  Additions.

*  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  x,  p.  448.


486  SABINA.

Sabadilla  contains  Veratria,  and  has  the  acrid
properties  of  the  alkaloid.  Its  provings  exhibit
many  well-characterised  symptoms ;  but  it  has
been  very  little  employed  in  disease.  From  patho-
genetic  indications  it  would  seem  likely  to  prove
serviceable  in  porrigo  capitis,  with  corrosive  itching ;
in  some  forms  of  chronic  angina  faucium ;  in  cases
where  the  stools  are  half-diarrhceic  and  half  con-
stipated, with  much  flatulence ;  in  hyperaesthesia  of
the  bladder ;  and  against  ascarides.  It  is  also  an
occasional  remedy  for  intermittents.

Staphysagria  and  Veratrum  seem  somewhat  ana-
logous medicines.

Of  dose  I  can  say  nothing,  except  that  the
dilutions  from  6  upwards  will  probably  be  the  most
efficacious.

We- come  now  to  a  much  more  important  medi-
cine in  the  shape  of  savin,  the  Juniperus

Sabina.

The  tincture  is  prepared  either  from  the  green  tops,
or  from  the  oil  distilled  from  the  same,  dissolved  in
ether.  It  is  not  satisfactorily  soluble  in  alcohol.
Sometimes  the  oil  is  triturated  with  sugar  of  milk.

The  proving  is  in  Stapf's  Additions.

Sabina  is  a  general  irritant,  inflaming  specifically
(however)  the  rectum,  and  perhaps  the  urinary  organs
by  which  it  passes  off.  Its  main  specific  action  is
exerted  on  the  ovaries  and  uterus,  which  it  excites  to
the  extent  of  producing  haemorrhages,  inflammation,
and  (in  pregnant  women)  abortion.  It  also  caused
in  the  provers  an  unusual  number  of  symptoms


SABINA.  487

relating  to  the  joints,  even  so  far  as  to  set  up  heat,
redness,  and  swelling.  The  therapeutic  applications
of  Sabina  result  directly  from  these  facts.  I  cannot
say  that  it  must  never  be  used  as  an  emmenagogue,
to  bring  on  the  absent  menses.*  But  it  must  be
remembered  that  it  does  this  as  a  purgative  opens
the  bowels  ;  and  its  use  in  our  hands  must  be  cor-
respondingly exceptional.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is
a  most  valuable  homoeopathically  acting  remedy  for
ovario-uterine  excitement ;  as  in  menorrhagia,
where  the  blood  is  bright  red,  in  metrorrhagia,  in
threatened  miscarriage  from  irritation,  and  in
metritis — in  a  case  of  which  disease  in  an  acute
form  I  have  seen  it  effect  a  most  satisfactory  cure.
The  presence  of  consentaneous  rectal  and  vesical
irritation  adds  weight  to  the  indications  for  the
choice  of  Sabina  in  these  disorders.  M.  Beau,  whom
I  have  already  quoted  as  a  witness  to  the  value  of
Ruta  in  uterine  haemorrhage,  extols  Savin  as  its
chief  remedy.  He  will  have  it  exactly  homoeopathic,
moreover :  for  it  is  in  "  hsemorrhagic  metritis/'
"  metritis  accompanied  by  flooding/'  that  he  gives
it.  One  grain  of  the  powder  is  given  for  a  dose,
and  very  often  needs  no  repetition  .f

Sabina  has  also  been  used  in  both  schools  for
what  are  vaguely  called  "  arthritic  affections.3'  The
connection  which  has  recently  been  traced  between
rheumatic  gout  and  the  uterine  functions  makes  it
probable  that  this  is  the  malady  in  which,  especially
when  recent,  Sabina  would  be  curative.  I  have

*  See  a  case  by  Dr.  Madden  iu  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'
vol.  xxiv,  p.  301.

f  Ibid.,  vol.  xxi,  p.  342.


488  SAMBTJCUS NIGRA.

used  it  once  or  twice  upon  these  indications  with
very  satisfactory  results.

As  allied  medicines  to  Sabina  I  may  name  Bella-
donna, Crocus,  Pulsatilla,  Ruta,  and  Trillium.

All  dilutions,  from  the  1st  to  the  24th,  and  even
the  crude  oil  or  powder,  have  in  various  hands
proved  efficacious.  I  myself  am  very  well  satisfied
with  the  2nd  and  3rd  dec.

The  next  name  on  my  list  is  the  common  elder,

Sambucus  nigra.

The  juice  of  the  flowers  and  leaves  is  used  for  the
tincture.

There  is  a  pathogenesis  of  Sambucus  in  the
'  Mat.  Med.  Pura :'  the  articles  in  Hempel  and
Teste  also  should  be  consulted.

The  only  facts  about  the  physiological  action  of
Sambucus  to  which  I  can  assign  importance  are
that  it  is  a  powerful  sudorific ;  and  that  it  has
caused  asthmatic  phenomena.  Its  therapeutic  use
accordingly  has  been  to  moderate  excessive  sweat-
ing, and  to  relieve  asthma,  laryngismus  stridulus,
and  the  obstructive  coryza  of  infants.  I  have  myself
found  it  of  great  use  in  checking  those  debilitating
perspirations  which  often  retard  convalescence  after
delivery.  I  think,  too,  that  I  have  seen  some
benefit  from  it  in  asthma.

Aconite  and  Ipecacuanha  are  allied  remedies.

Sambucus  is  a  very  mild  drug.  I  have  swallowed
fifteen  drops  of  a  freshly  prepared  tincture  without
any  result.  The  1st  dec.  is  the  dilution  I  have
used  in  diaphoresis  and  asthma.


SANGUINARIA CANADENSIS.  489

America  again  comes  forward  to  furnish  us  with
our  next  medicine,  the  Blood-root,

Sanguinaria  canadensis.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  root.

There  is  a  pathogenesis  in  the  '  Mat.  Med.  of
American  Provings.'  Dr.  Hale's  article  in  his
'  New  Remedies/  should  also  be  consulted.

The  physiological  effects  of  Sanguinaria  are  not
very  distinctly  known.  It  seems  to  be  a  general
irritant.  It  comes  to  us  from  the  botanic  practi-
tioners of  America  with  a  high  reputation  in  the
treatment  of  affections  of  the  respiratory  organs.  It
is  said  to  have  proved  curative  in  membranous
croup,  in  chronic  cough  with  hectic,  and  even  in
incipient  phthisis.  Dr.  Hale  recommends  it  in  the
third  stage  of  pneumonia  (grey  hepatization) ;  and
Dr.  Drysdale  also  in  pulmonary  abscess.*  Then
again  Dr.  C.  Hering  states  that  Sanguinaria  is  the
best  medicine  we  have  for  recurring  "sick-headache"
Lastly,  Dr.  Gray  of  New  York  recommends  it  for
the  flushings  which  are  so  annoying  at  the  climac-
teric age.

I  have  myself  tried  Sanguinaria  in  all  these  con-
ditions, where  the  symptoms  indicated  it.  My
experience  with  it  has  been  on  the  whole  satisfac-
tory ;  but  I  cannot  yet  assign  its  exact  place  in
relation  to  other  medicines.

Dr.  Hale  compares  Sanguinaria  with  Phosphorus
and  Lycopodium.

Both  high  and  very  low  dilutions  seem  to  have
been  used  with  advantage.

*  '  Monthly  Horn.  Review,'  February,  1866,  p.  349.


490  SCILLA MARITIMA.

Of

Sarsaparilla.

We  prepare  triturations  or  a  tincture  from  the  root.
The  proving  is  in  the  '  Chronic  Diseases/
I  believe  that  in  your  school  the  physicians
despise,  and  the  surgeons  swear  by  this  medicine.
I  must  leave  them  to  fight  out  the  battle.  In  oui
minute  doses  Sarsaparilla  has  some  reputation  in
the  treatment  of  gravel,  especially  in  children.  Teste
also  makes  a  curious  statement  about  it,  which  1
will  give  you  verbatim  : — "  When  a  child  with  red
hair  takes  Sarsaparilla  for  three  months  (three  tea-
spoonsful  a  day  of  a  solution  of  four  ounces  of  distilled
water  with  three  drops  of  tincture  at  the  eigh-
teenth), his  hair  absolutely  changes  colour.  From
red,  that  it  was,  it  becomes  a  light  flaxen.  It  is  to
be  remarked  that  Sarsaparilla  in  such  a  case  causes
no  appreciable  organic  trouble  ;  the  health  of  the
child  is  in  no  way  affected."  In  the  present  fashion
parilla would  not  be  considered  valuable.
The  higher  potencies  only  have  been  used.

Our last medicine to-day is your old friend
Squills,  under  the  name  of

Scilla  maritima.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  recent  bulb.

The  proving  is  in  the  'Materia  Medica  Pura/

We  quite  agree  with  you  that  Squills  is  emetic,

diuretic,  and  expectorant. Nor  are  we  peculiar  in

supposing  that  it  produces  these  effects  by  a  specific


SC1LLA MARITIMA.  491

action  on  the  stomach,  kidneys,  and  respiratory
mucous  membrane.  But  there  our  agreement
ceases.  We  do  not  use  it  to  produce  vomiting  or
diuresis,  or  to  promote  expectoration,  but  to  combat
these  conditions  when  occurring  in  disease.  Thus,
I  find  Scilla  invaluable  in  checking  over  activity  of
the  kidneys ;  I  have  even  cured  two  cases  of
Diabetes  insipidus  with  it.  Again,  I  use  it  in
coughs  almost  as  frequently  as  you  do,  but  only
when  the  expectoration  is  profuse.

Scilla  has  been  used  in  Homoeopathic  practice
mainly  for  pleurisy;  but  I  cannot  think  it  required
in  the  treatment  of  a  disorder  for  which  we  have  so
many  good  remedies.  I  would  suggest  to  my
brethren  a  more  extended  use  of  it  in  coughs ;  it  is
not  for  nothing  that  it  is  so  great  a  favourite  in  the
other  school  and  in  domestic  practice.

I  know  of  no  other  medicine  that  has  the  double
action  upon  the  kidneys  and  the  aerial  mucous  mem-
brane possessed  by  Squills.

I  have  used  the  1st  dil.  for  coughs,  the  2nd  and
3rd  for  diuresis.


LETTER  XXXVIII.

SECALE, SELENIUM, SENEGA, SEPIA, SILICEA.

THE  first  medicine  on  our  list  to-day  is  the  Ergot
of  Rye,

Secale  cornutum.

A  tiricture  is  made ;  but  the  drug  should  be  pre-
pared by  trituration.

There  is  no  "  proving"  of  Secale  extant.  Hem-
pel's  article  is  good,  and  there  is  a  collection  of
facts  relating  to  "  ergotism"  in  the  Appendix  to
the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  vol.  iv.

Ergot  has  three  very  different  kinds  of  action,
according  as  it  is  taken  for  some  time  with  the
food,  injected  into  the  vessels,  or  swallowed  in  sub-
stance. In  the  first  case  the  group  of  poisonous
symptoms  known  as  "  ergotism,"  or  "  raphania,''  is
developed.  These  appear  under  two  forms,  the
"  convulsive"  and  the  "  gangrenous."  The  spasms
in  the  first  form  are  tonic  rather  than  clonic,  and
are  accompanied  with  more  or  less  paralysis  and
anesthesia.  The  gangrene  is  of  the  "  dry"  form,
and  attacks  the  lower  far  more  frequently  than  the
upper  extremities;  it  proceeds  upwards.  Bulimia
is  a  curious  but  almost  constant  symptom  in  these
cases.  The  effects  of  Ergot  when  injected  into  the
vessels  have  been  ascertained  by  Dr.  Wright :  his


SECALE CORNTJTUM.  493

experiments  may  be  found  in  the  '  Edinburgh
Medical  and  Surgical  Journal'  for  1838.  It  seems
to  paralyse  directly  the  brain,  or  the  spinal  cord,  or
both.  When  taken  into  the  stomach  in  the  pure
state,  besides  inducing  in  men  symptoms  similar  in
kind  to  those  of  ergotism,  it  exerts  in  gravid  women
its  well-known  action  upon  the  uterus,  stimulating
the  muscular  fibre,  causing  expulsion  of  the  foetus,
and  sometimes  (in  animals)  haemorrhage  from  and
inflammation  of  the  organ  itself.

The  phenomena  of  Ergotism  have  hitherto  given
rise  to  very  few  successful  applications  of  the  drug
as  a  remedy.  It  should  be  borne  in  mind,  how-
ever, in  senile  gangrene.  It  has  proved  curative  of
paralysis  of  the  bladder ;  and  Dr.  Russell  had  "  great
faith  in  it  in  some  of  the  worst  varieties  of  Asiatic
cholera,"  especially  in  women.*  Its  chief  use,  how-
ever, is  based  upon  its  action  on  the  uterus.  To
check  the  tendency  to  miscarriage,  it  is  generally
the  best  remedy  in  the  later  months  of  pregnancy,
when  the  muscular  tissue  of  the  womb  is  largely
developed.  Frequent  labour-like  pains,  without
discharge,  are  the  indications  for  it  here.  It  will
also  relieve  after-pains,  when  these  are  continuous
and  unremitting.  The  fact,  moreover,  that  it  acts
specifically  on  the  uterus  may  warrant  us  in  trying
it  in  many  diseases  of  the  organ  to  which  its
homosopathicity  is  not  yet  established.  Thus  it  is
said  to  be  used  in  the  Leopoldstadt  Hospital  with
much  benefit  to  relieve  the  pain  of  uterine  cancer.

All  these  are  homosopathic  applications  of  the
drug ;  but  I  hope  you  will  not  feel  yourself  de-

*  '  On  Epidemic  Cholera,'  p.  237.


494  SELENIUM.

barred  from  giving  it  in  the  usual  doses  to  obtain
its  physiological  effects  in  labour,  whenever  you
think  them  required.  We  have  no  disease  to  deal
with  here.  We  merely  want  temporarily  to  in-
crease the  muscular  energy  of  an  organ,  to  enable
it  to  expel  its  contents.  So  that,  whether  it  be  that
the  foetus,  the  placenta,  or  coagula  need  extrusion,
or  that  you  wish  to  prevent  post-partum  haemor-
rhage by  inducing  immediate  contraction  of  the
uterine  walls  and  vessels,  you  certainly  cannot  do  it
better  than  by  Ergot ;  and  I  see  nothing  to  prevent
your  use  of  it,  under  the  usual  rules  and  pre-
cautions.

Caulophyllum  probably  acts  upon  the  uterus  in  a
manner  similar  to  that  of  Secale.

For  homoeopathic  purposes  I  have  always  given
drop  doses  of  the  mother-tincture.

I  have  but  little  to  say  of  my  next  medicine,

Selenium.

It  is  of  course  prepared  by  trituration.

The  pathogenesis  is  in  '  Jahr's  Manual/  taken
from  the  '  Archiv.'

Selenium  appears  to  have  some  influence  upon
the  larynx  and  the  male  genital  organs.  A  similar
concatenation  obtains  in  the  pathogenesis  of  Spongia  :
it  is  interesting,  from  the  physiological  connection
between  the  two  parts,  as  seen  in  the  changes  which
occur  at  puberty.  It  has  been  used  with  benefit  in
thickness  of  voice,  and  in  sexual  atony  and  impo-
tence.


SENEGA.  495

Besides  the  Spongia  already  mentioned,  I  know
of  no  other  analogue.

The  higher  dilutions  only  have  been  employed.

My  next  medicine  is  the  snake-root,  Polygala

Senega.

We  make  a  tincture  from  the  root.

The  proving,  with  clinical  cases,  is  in  StapFs
Additions.

You  know  and  use  Senega  as  a  "  stimulating  ex-
pectorant." The  drugs  so-called  are  generally,  if
not  always,  specific  irritants  of  the  respiratory  mu-
cous membrane.  Such  is  Senega.  The  proving
reveals  that  it  has  a  special  affinity  for  this  tissue,
causing  a  great  deal  of  cough,  mostly  dry,  and  pains
of  all  kinds  about  the  chest.  You  will  find  at  the
end  of  the  pathogeuesis  some  good  cases  of  chronic
bronchitis,  thus  characterised,  in  which  Senega
with  the  utmost  benefit  in  the  bronchitis  of  old
people,  when  the  cough  is  irritating  and  shaking.
One  patient  to  whom  I  gave  it  compared  its  effects
to  that  of  an  opiate.  That  in  such  cases  it  acts
homoeopathically  we  have  the  testimony  of  one  of
your  own  men,  Dr.  H.  Dobell.  "  Senega,"  he  says,
"  irritates  the  cough.  If  it  already  is  frequent,  it
does  harm."*  I  have  seen  it  cause  this  aggravation
even  in  the  1st  dilution.

This  is  the  main  sphere  of  the  action  of  Senega.
But  it  undoubtedly  has  something  to  say  also  to
the  eyes.  In  the  provers,  the  lids  were  much  in-

*  '  On  Winter-cough.'


496  SEPIA.

flamed,  and  there  were  aching  pains  and  sense  of
tension  in  the  balls.  I  believe  that  this  medicine
is  in  high  repute  among  German  oculists.  You
will  find  appended  to  the  proving  some  cases  of
iritis  and  of  specks  upon  the  cornea  treated  by  it :
and  in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  vol.  xxiii,  there
are  some  observations  as  to  its  value  in  hypopyon.

If  you  wish  to  extend  by  experiment  the  sphere
of  usefulness  of  Senega,  you  will  find  many  useful
hints  in  the  preface  to  the  proving.

Bryonia  is  the  medicine  which  Senega  most
resembles  in  its  influence  upon  the  respiratory
organs.

I  have  always  used  the  2nd  dilution  :  but  higher
potencies  seem  to  have  acted  well.

And  now  we  come  to  one  of  those  medicines
whose  extensive  use  is  so  marked  a  differentia  of
Homoeopathic  practice,

Sepia.

More  fully,  Sepise  succus.  It  is  the  blackish-brown
fluid  contained  in  the  pouch  of  the  Molluscae  so
named.  It  is  prepared  by  trituration.

The  proving  of  Sepia  is  in  the  '  Chronic  Dis-
eases.' A  "  study"  of  the  pathogenesis  has  been
given  us  by  Dr.  V.  Meyer  :  you  will  find  it  trans-
lated in  the  'British  Journal/  vols.  xiii,  xiv.  Testers
article  also  is  well  worth  consulting.

Dr.  Meyer,  in  the  "  Study''  referred  to  above,
has  attempted  to  explain  all  the  symptoms  of  Sepia
on  the  hypothesis  of  a  primary  portal  congestion.
I  cannot  think  his  demonstration  very  successful  :


SEPIA.  497

nor  do  therapeutic  facts  confirm  the  theory.  But
you  cannot  do  better  than  read  the  pathogenesis  of
the  drug  under  his  headings  and  with  his  accom-
panying commentary.  You  will  certainly  get  a
better  notion  of  its  character  thus  than  by  barely
running  through  the  symptoms  as  given  in  the
'  Chronic  Diseases/  For  my  own  part,  I  can  but
regard  such  pathogeneses  as  those  of  Sepia  as  an
inscrutable  mystery.

But  there  is  little  obscurity  about  the  therapeutic
sphere  of  our  medicine.  It  has  been  chiefly  used
in  chronic  diseases  affecting  the  female  sex  during
the  period  of  ovario-uterine  activity,  and  especially
when  the  sexual  organs  themselves  are  in  trouble.
"  Whatever  may  be  the  apparent  seat  of  the  Sepia
disease"  says  Teste,  "it  may  be  safely  affirmed  (I
know  this  from  experience)  that  it  implies  in  any
case  certain  apparent  or  latent  organic  or  functional
disorders  of  the  genital  apparatus."  The  uterine
condition  of  which  Sepia  is  curative  is  one  of  pas-
sive congestion.  This  of  course  may  manifest
itself  in  various  ways.  One  of  the  simplest  and
most  frequent  is  leucorrhoea,  for  which  trouble
Sepia  is  generally  our  best  medicine.  At  the  other
extremity  stand  such  formidable  affections  as  retro-
version  and  other  misplacements  of  the  womb,
which  Sepia  is  said  to  have  cured, — probably  by
dispelling  the  local  congestion  which  caused  them.
Between  these  are  ranged  amenorrhoea  and  menor-
rhagia,  either  of  which  when  depending  on  venous
congestion  may  yield  to  our  medicine.

Whether  the  venous  congestion  which  character-
ises the  Sepia  affection  of  the  uterus  involves  the

32


498  SEPIA,

whole  abdomen,  I  cannot  say.  But  that  (as  with
Aloes)  it  extends  to  the  other  chief  pelvic  organ,
the  rectum,  there  is  no  doubt.  The  presence  of
constipation,  prolapsus,  and  hsemorrhoidal  fulness
in  uterine  disease  strengthens  greatly  the  indication
for  Sepia  :  and  it  may  possibly  help  these  conditions
when  occurring  alone.

Next,  Sepia  comes  to  us  as  a  lauded  remedy  in
chronic  recurring  sick-headaches,  especially  of  course
in  the  female  sex,  and  in  cachectic  subjects.  You
will  find  the  indications  for  it  here  given  from  Hah-
nemann,  Hering,  Kreussler,  Tietze,  and  Black  in
Peters  on  Headaches.  Tietze  points  to  the  "  sudor
hystericus,"  a  peculiar  odorous  perspiration  in  the
axilla  and  the  soles  of  the  feet,  as  an  unerring
guide  to  its  selection :  and  Cl.  Muller  says  he  has
given  Sepia  with  happy  results  in  other  maladies
when  this  symptom  was  present.

Lastly,  there  are  some  chronic  catarrhal  con-
ditions, especially  of  the  air-tubes,  in  which  Sepia
does  good  service.  The  expectoration  is  greyish-
white  in  colour  and  salt  in  taste. — It  is  the  best
medicine  for  gonorrhoea  in  the  female,  after  the
acute  symptoms  have  subsided :  but  I  know  of
nothing  confirmatory  of  Testers  recommendation  of
it  in  subacute  and  chronic  forms  of  this  disease  in
the  male  subject.

I  conclude  with  Dr.  Meyer's  summary  of  the
action  of  Sepia.

"  1st.  Sepia  has  its  sphere  of  action  in  the  portal
system,  in  which  it  causes  obstructions.

2nd.  Most  of  its  symptoms  indicate  a  high  degree
of  venous  congestion.


SILICEA.  499

3rd.  It  is  characterised  by  torpidity  and  depres-
sion, often  ending  in  perfect  exhaustion  of  the  vital
powers.

4th.  Hence  it  is  suitable  in  mild  and  easy  dis-
positions, therefore  especially  for  women.

5th.  The  affections  arise  and  increase  in  severity
mostly  in  the  evening  and  at  night,  during  and  im-
mediately after  a  meal.

6th.  The  affections  either  disappear  during,  or
are  alleviated  by  active  exercise,  and  by  pressure  of
the  painful  part.

7th.  The  affections  are  often  accompanied  with
chilliness.

8th.  Great  sensitiveness  of  the  skin  to  cold  air."

As  analogues  of  Sepia,  I  can  suggest  Aloes,
Collinsonia,  Kali  carbonicum,  Magnesia,  Pulsatilla,
and  Stannum.  Teste  adds  Copaiba  and  Alumina.

This  medicine  seems  in  favour  with  those  only
who  use  the  higher  dilutions.  For  myself  I  find
the  12th  perfectly  satisfactory.

My  next  medicine  comes  to  us  with  similar  claims
and  similar  difficulties,  the  common  flint,

Silicea,

or,  more  correctly,  Silica.  Silicea  is  an  adjective,
the  substantive  being  terra,  which  you  will  find
joined  to  it  in  the  '  Chronic  Diseases/  Chemically,
it  is  of  course  Silicic  acid,  an  oxide  of  Silicon.  I
must  refer  you  to  Hahnemann's  proving,  or  to
Gruner's  c  Pharmacopoeia/  for  the  directions  for
obtaining  the  pure  Silica  in  powder.  This  is  tritu-
rated for  our  use.


500  SILICEA.

The  pathogenesis  of  Silicea  is  as  obscure  as  that
of  Sepia :  and  we  have  no  Meyer  to  make  even  a
hypothetical  attempt  at  its  explanation.  We  will
turn  at  once,  therefore,  to  the  therapeutical  uses
of  the  drug,  which  are  numerous  and  important.

Silicea  influences  the  nutrition,  rather  than  the
functional  activity  of  the  tissues  which  come  within
its  sphere  of  action  :  it  is  hence  suited  to  organic
changes  rather  than  to  functional  disorders.  Its
deep  and  slow  action,  moreover,  makes  it  appropriate
to  chronic  rather  than  acute  diseases.  Teste  says
it  is  especially  suited  to  fat  people,  of  a  lymphatico-
sanguine  temperament.  Such  is  its  general  charac-
ter ;  now  to  descend  to  particulars.

1st.  Silicea  has  an  extraordinary  control  over  the
suppurative  process,  seeming  to  mature  abscesses
when  desired,  and  certainly  reducing  excessive  suppu-
ration to  moderate  limits.  Of  this  latter  most
important  property  you  will  find  a  brilliant  instance
in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  vol.  xxiii,  p.  424.

2nd.  Tt  has  probably  some  power  over  the
nutrition  of  the  nervous  centres,  and  has  proved
curative  in  some  forms  of  paralysis  and  perhaps
also  of  epilepsy.  Dr.  Black  thinks  it  the  best
medicine  in  tabes  dorsalis :  and  recommends  it  in
headache  from  nervous  exhaustion.  But

3rd.  Its  main  sphere  is  in  the  diseases  of  the
vegetative  tissues  and  organs.  I  regard  it  as  a
remedy  even  more  important  than  Calcarea  for
rachitis  in  children.  The  sweat  about  the  head
only,  pointed  out  by  Dr.  Jeriner  as  so  characteristic
of  this  dyscrasia,  is  mentioned  by  Hahnemann  among
the  indications  for  Silicea.  The  tenderness  of  the


SILICEA.  501

general  surface  also  caused  by  it  is  often  met  with
in  rickety  children.  The  influence  upon  the  bones
thus  revealed  (Silica  is  a  constituent  of  osseous
tissue)  has  led  to  the  use  of  the  drug  in  caries,  and
with  reported  success.  The  appendages  to  the
bones  also  come  within  its  range.  Dr.  Yeldham
thinks  it  the  best  remedy  for  soft  nodes  ;  and  it
has  proved  curative  in  periostitis  and  in  enchondroma
of  the  fingers.*  It  is  the  best  medicine  for  whit-
lows ;  it  will  even  blight  them  if  given  early  enough,
and  will  sometimes  check  their  tendency  to  recur-
rence. It  is  often  serviceable  in  chronic  suppura-
tive  diseases  of  the  joints.

4th.  Like  most  of  the  vegetative  medicines,
Silicea  acts  powerfully  upon  the  lymphatic  glands,
promoting  (when  they  are  enlarged)  either  their
maturation  or  their  dispersion.  Dr.  Dudgeon  has
communicated  a  remarkable  case  in  which  it  arrested
the  progress  of  inflammation  of  the  lachrymal  sac,f
and  I  have  myself  had  a  case  precisely  similar.  It
is  said,  also,  to  have  caused  the  healing  of  a  lachry-
mal fistula.

I  have  only  to  add  that  Silicea  is  one  of  the
best  medicines,  locally  and  constitutionally,  for  the
"  simple  ulcer  :"  and  that  Teste  recommends  it  in
chronic  bronchitis  with  much  expectoration,  and  in
impetigo  capitis.  Quite  recently,  Dr.  Gallavardin
has  put  on  record  in  the  '  Art  Medical '  a  series  of
cases  in  which  Silicea  30  on  the  one  hand  diminished
excessive  perspiration  of  the  feet,  and  on  the  other
restored  that  perspiration  when  suppressed  from

*  See  case  by  Grauvogl  in  '  Hempel.'

f  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  xiii,  p.  135.


502  SILICEA.

without,  thus  relieving  the  system  from  many
troubles  therefrom  resulting.

As  allied  medicines  we  have  Acidum  fluoricum
and  phosphoricum,  Calcarea,  Hepar  sulphuris,  Mer-
curius,  and  Phosphorus.

The  higher  dilutions  are  generally  used ;  but  in
caries,  ulcers,  and  periosteal  affections,  I  have — like
Yeldham  and  Trinks — seen  capital  results  from  the
3rd,  4th,  and  6th  dec.  triturations.


LETTER  XXXIX.

SPIGELIA, SPONGIA, STANNUM, STAPHYSAGRIA,
STRAMONIUM.

I  begin  to-day  with  a  very  interesting  and  (to
you)  little  known  medicine,  the  pink-root,

Spigelia  anthelmia.

The  tincture  is  prepared  by  maceration  from  the
dried  herb.

The  proving  is  in  the  '  Materia  Medica  Pura/

The  influence  of  Spigelia  is  chiefly  manifested  in
the  sensitive  nerves,  which  in  many  parts  of  the  body
are  stirred  up  to  pain,  usually  of  a  shooting  cha-
racter. The  most  frequent  seats  of  pain  are  the
head  and  face,  and  the  left  side  of  the  chest.
Vertigo,  with  pressure  outwards  at  the  forehead
(comp.  Bryonia) :  pain  and  painful  inflammation  of
the  eyes ;  itching  at  the  anus ;  diuresis ;  palpita-
tion ;  restlessness  of  the  limbs ;  chilliness ;  and
lassitude — are  prominent  among  its  symptoms.  In
large  doses,  it  produces  convulsions.

The  chief  therapeutic  interest  of  Spigelia  centres
in  its  anti- rheumatic  properties.  It  has  no  relation
to  general  rheumatic  fever : — its  place  is  found  in
the  treatment  of  two  rheumatic  inflammations,  that
of  the  sclerotica  and  that  of  the  heart.  The  eye


504  SPIGELIA ANTHELMIA.

symptoms  of  Spigelia  point  plainly  to  the  sclerotica
as  the  tissue  affected  :  and  when  "  rheumatic  oph-
thalmia" means  sclerotitis,  Spigelia  will  act  most
satisfactorily  in  its  cure.*  Still  more  important  is
its  control  over  the  cardiac  inflammation  of  acute
rheumatism.  Dr.  Russell,  in  his  lately  published
'  Clinical  Lectures/  expresses  some  doubt  as  to  its
value  here.  But  in  his  earlier  treatise  on  the
'  Diseases  of  the  Heart/  he  wrote  "  In  the  few
cases  of  pericarditis  I  have  treated,  it  has  done  all
that  medicine  could  do,  and  I  have  the  utmost  con-
fidence in  it"  ('Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  vol.  xii,  p.
560).  But  the  most  decisive  testimony  is  that  of
Dr.  Fleischmann.  He  has  treated,  he  says,  in  the
Gumpendorf  Hospital  at  Vienna  fifty-seven  cases  of
"  carditis"  (evidently  including  under  that  name  all
forms  of  inflammation  of  the  heart)  with  only  one
death :  and  Spigelia  was  the  only  medicine  em-
ployed, f  In  the  c  Annals/  vol.  iii,  p.  539,  you
will  find  a  case  in  which  a  chronically  damaged
rheumatic  heart  received  very  great  benefit  from  the
mother-tincture  of  Spigelia.

Two  other  uses  of  Spigelia  require  notice  here.

1st.  It  has  frequently  proved  curative,  in  high
dilutions,  of  hemicrania  and  other  neuralgic  head-
aches, when  the  pain  is  increased  by  motion,  noise,
and  especially  by  stooping.  One  or  both  eyes  are
generally  involved  in  the  disorder.  For  this  I  refer

*  See  Dudgeon  on  "  Diseases  of  the  Eye,"  in  '  Brit.  Journ.  of
Horn.,'  vol.  vi.  Lobethal,  cited  here,  considers  Spigelia  specific  in
gouty  ophthalmia  also.

t  See  also  a  good  case  of  endocarditis  by  Dr.  Bayes,  in  the
'  Monthly  Horn.  Rev.'  for  June,  1867.


SPONGIA.  505

you  to  Peters  "  On  Headaches/'  and  to  a  case  in
the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  vol.  xxiv,  p.  153.  T
have  several  times  verified  the  indications  there
given ;  but  curiously  enough  have  found  the  12th
and  6th  dilutions  inoperative,  while  the  1st  dec.  has
rapidly  cured.  I  think  Teste  is  right  in  saying
that  Spigelia  is  especially  suitable  to  ansemic  and
debilitated  subjects.

2nd.  Spigelia  is  a  well-known  vermifuge.  Like
Cina  it  has  numerous  symptoms  in  its  pathogenesis
which  resemble  those  of  helminthiasis :  and  it  may
possibly  act  in  this  condition  with  the  same  mys-
teriously beneficial  results  as  those  we  have  already
recognised  in  Cina  itself.

Aconite,  Bryonia,  and  Cina  are  medicines  allied
to  Spigelia.

I  have  already  said  something  about  the  dose  of
Spigelia.  In  rheumatic  inflammations  I  certainly
prefer  the  lowest  dilutions.

We  have  next  the  medicine  which  we  call
Spougia  marina  tosta,  or,  more  briefly,

Spongia.

The sponge, roasted brown, is treated with
alcohol  to  make  a  tincture. I  prefer  triturations,
as  more  likely  to  contain  all  the  constituents.
The  proving  is  in  the  '  Materia  Medica  Pura.'
From  this  proving  it  seems  that  the  physiological
action of  Spongia is  chiefly expended upon the
testes and ovaries (shown  by paiu and  swelling,
menorrhagia,  &c.)  and  upon  the  larynx  and  trachea
(hoarseness,  dry  cough,  obstructed  breathing,  &c.).


506  SPONGIA.

As  a  curative  agent,  you  know  its  old  repute  in  the
treatment  of  bronchocele.  It  is  now  superseded  by
Iodine,  to  which  ingredient  its  virtues  in  this  direc-
Bromine,  Chlorine,  Carbonate  and  Phosphate  of
Lime,  Iron,  Silica,  and  organic  substances,  such  an
hypothesis  must  remain  questionable  .  and  the
sponge  may  cure  when  Iodine  fails.  Hahnemann
states  that  he  has  "  found  that  one  or  two  doses  of
the  smallest  portion  of  a  drop  of  the  potentialized
drug  are  sufficient  to  cure  goitre."  It  is  not  very
clear  as  to  what  potency  is  meant  here.  I  know,
however,  of  one  case  of  goitre  cured  by  Spongia  30,
after  fruitless  trial  of  Iodine  in  alloeopathic  hands.
I  have  myself  treated  several  cases  with  the  1st  dec.
trituration,  in  grain  doses  three  times  a  day  :  but
in  all  as  the  tumour  has  diminished  symptoms  of
lodism  have  come  on,  which  have  compelled  me  to
suspend  the  medicine.

Spongia  has  been  more  justly  superseded  by
Iodine  in  the  treatment  of  true  membranous  croup  -.
although  it  remains  the  best  remedy  (with  Aconite)
for  catarrhal  croup,  and  for  the  dry  painful  cough
sometimes  left  behind  by  the  membranous  form  of
the  disease.*  It  is  also  the  prime  remedy  for
laryngitis,  and  for  dry  hard  laryngo-tracheal  coughs.
I  have  seen  it  rapidly  remove  laryngeal  symptoms
in  a  phthisical  patient :  so  that  I  can  well  believe
the  reports  of  its  value  in  laryngeal  phthisis.  The
influence  of  Spongia  becomes  weaker  as  it  descends
into  the  chest :  so  that  I  cannot  follow  the  recom-
mendation of  some  to  rely  upon  it  in  bronchitis. —
*  See  Elb,  in  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  x,  p.  539.


STANNUM.  507

Spongia  is  sometimes  curative  in  chronic  orchitis
(sarcocele).  Teste  recommends  it  in  all  serous  in-
flammations— pleurisy,  pericarditis,  peritonitis,  &c.
— with  or  without  effusion.

Allied  medicines  are  Iodine  (of  course),  Bromine,
Hepar  sulphuris,  Kali  bichromicum,  and  perhaps
Selenium.

Spougia  appears  to  act  well  in  all  dilutions :  I
myself  prefer  the  2nd  and  3rd  decimal.

The  medicine  I  have  next  to  bring  before  you  is
metallic  Tin,

Stannum.

Tin-foil  is  used,  and  prepared  by  trituration.

The  proving  is  in  the  '  Chronic  Diseases  :'  the
articles  in  Hempel  and  Teste  should  also  be  con-
sulted.

Tin  came  into  our  hands  with  a  reputation  as  a
vermifuge.  It  was  supposed  to  act  mechanically  ;
but  it  has  since  been  affirmed  that  water  in  which
tin  has  been  boiled  is  anthelmintic,  and  that  several
compounds  of  the  metal  have  also  this  property.
A  step  farther,  and  we  find  that  the  chloride  is  an
active  neurotic  poison,  causing  convulsions  and
paralysis ;  and  that  (if  Hahnemann  is  to  be  credited)
workers  in  tin  are  very  frequently  affected  with
tape-worm.  Thus  we  get  at  a  very  probable
homoeopathic  relationship  between  the  effects  of  tin
and  the  nervous  disorders  produced  by  the  presence
of  worms,  and  can  follow  Teste  when  he  recommends
the  administration  of  the  dynamized  Stannum  in
such  cases.  I  must  refer  you  back  to  our  study


508  STANNUM.

of  Cina  for  some  remarks  on  the  rationale  of  the
Homoeopathic  treatment  of  helminthiasis.

The  Hahnemannian  proving  of  Stannum  is  wrap-
ped in  the  deepest  obscurity.  I  have  only  to  note
the  leading  applications  which  have  been  made  of
it  to  practice.

1.  Hahnemann  mentions,  as  a  general  condition
of  the pains  of Stannum, that "  they  commence
lightly,  increase  gradually  and  to  a  very  high  degree,
and  decrease  again  as  slowly." This characteristic
has  led to a  very  successful use of  the drug  in
certain  neuralgia and headaches. You  will find
some  interesting  cases  of  this  kind  by  one  of  our
Russian  colleagues  in  the  (  British  Journal/  vol.  xvii,
p.  165. The  form  of  headache  in  which  I  have
found  it  beneficial  is  the  periodical  "  sick-headache,"
the  pain  'gradually  increasing,  vomiting  supervening
when  it  reaches  its  acme,  and  then  the  whole  affec-
tion gradually  subsiding.

2.  The symptoms of the respiratory organs
produced  by  Stannum  have  seemed  to  justify  its  use
in  chronic bronchial  and  pulmonary  affections,  the
pseudo-phthisis  of the older  writers. The sputa
especially  indicative  of  it  are  abundant  in  quantity,
of  greenish  colour,  and  sweetish  taste. Of  this  use
of  Stannum  some  instances  may  be read in the
'  Brit.  Journ./  vol.  xxii,  p.  573,  and  in  the  'Annals/
vol.  iii,  p.  464.

3.  The  sensations  experienced  by  a  female  prover
in  the  uterine region have  suggested  its use in
relieving  the  sensation  of  "  bearing  down  "  so  often
complained  of  by  women,  and  even  in  benefiting
prolapsus uteri and  vayincs. I have  hardly  ever


STAPHYSAGRIA.  509

known  it  fail  to  effect  the  former  purpose  :  and  I
have  been  quite  astonished  at  its  power  over  pro-
lapsus. I  suppose  it  acts  upon  the  uterine  ligaments
in  some  way.

Sepia  is  the  only  medicine  which  seems  compar-
able with  Stannum.

All  potencies  seem  to  act  well :  but  I  know  of
no  advantage  in  going  beyond  the  3rd.

And  now  we  come  to  a  medicine  which  we  have
turned  to  more  noble  purposes  than  that  of  destroy-
ing lice,  the  "  staves-acre,"  Delphinium

Staphysagria.

The  tincture  is  prepared  by  maceration  from  the
seeds.

The  proving  is  in  the  '  Mat.  Med.  Pura/  Again
I  must  recommend  you  to  supplement  its  informa-
tion by  the  articles  on  the  drug  of  Hempel  and
Teste.

Staphysagria  is  one  of  those  drugs  which  one
hardly  ever  thinks  of  in  connection  with  the  treat-
ment of  the  ordinary  forms  of  disease.  But  every
now  and  then  the  consultation  of  a  repertory  leads
us  to  choose  it  as  the  simillimum  to  the  group  of
symptoms.  In  time,  perhaps,  it  will  attain  a
forward  place  in  therapeutics;  for  its  provings
evidence  its  possession  of  a  very  extensive  range  of
influence.  In  the  mean  time,  I  would  call  atten-
tion to  its  effects  upon  the  genito-urinary  organs.
Putting  them  all  together,  they  present  a  perfect
by  Lallemand,  in  which  the  prostatic  portion  of


510  STRAMONIUM.

the  urethral  mucous  membrane  is  the  seat  of  chronic
inflammatory  irritation,  which  sometimes  extends
into  the  ejaculatory  canals  and  seminal  ducts.  I
have  used  it  several  times  in  this  malady  with  great
benefit. — Teste  recommends  Staphysagria  for  vertigo
with  nausea,  as  in  sea-sickness,  and  in  the  '  morning
sickness '  of  pregnancy.

By  this  author  Staphysagria  is  classed  with
Causticum,  Coffea,  and  Cocculus.

The  dilutions  from  6 — 30  have  given  most  satisfac-
tion.

We  will  wind  up  to-day's  letter  with  a  drug  more
familiar  to  you  than  any  other  it  has  discussed,  the
thorn-apple,  Datura

Stramonium.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  expressed  juice  in
the  usual  manner.

The  proving  is  in  the  '  Mat.  Med.  Pura  :'
HempePs  article  should  also  be  consulted  for  its
poisonous  effects.

To  the  therapeutists  of  the  old  school,  Stra-
monium must  be  a  greater  puzzle  than  even  Hyos-
cyamus.  Pereira's  article  on  the  drug  might  have
been  written  by  an  avowed  Homoeopathist.  It  is
"used  to  produce  intoxication  for  licentious  pur-
poses," i.  e.  as  an  aphrodisiac  :  and — "  Wendt  used
it  to  lessen  venereal  excitement,  as  in  nymphomania."
In  fatal  doses  "  the  leading  symptoms  are  .  .  .
delirium  (usually  maniacal)  :"  and — "  the  diseases
in  which  Stramonium  has  been  principally  used  are
mania  and  epilepsy."  "  In  some  cases  of  spasmodic


STRAMONIUM.  511

asthma  smoking  the  herb  has  given  at  least
temporary  relief;"  but — "the  practice  requires
great  caution,  as  it  has  proved  highly  injurious.  .  .  .
Aggravation  of  the  dyspnoea  ...  is  one  of  the  evils
said  to  have  been  induced."  We  may  fairly  seek
for  more  satisfaction  in  the  systematic  account  of
the  drug  which  Homoeopathy  enables  us  to  give.

Stramonium  acts  chiefly  on  the  brain,  and  in  a
manner  closely  resembling  that  of  Belladonna  and
Hyoscyamus.  The  delirium  it  causes  is  more
furious  than  that  of  either :  but  the  determination
of  blood  to  the  head,  while  greater  than  that  of
Hyoscyamus,  is  less  than  and  not  so  inflammatory
as  that  of  Belladonna.  With  the  delirium  are
hallucinations ;  dilated  pupil ;  amaurosis ;  diminished
general  sensibility  ;  extreme  mobility  of  the  mus-
cular system,  with  loss  of  voluntary  control ;  sexual
excitement ;  spasmodic  dysphonia  and  dysphagia ;
great  dryness  of  throat ;  and  frequently  a  bright
red  eruption  over  the  body.  If  the  poisoning  goes
on,  congestive  sopor  and  general  palsy  set  in.  I  have
already  discussed  the  rationale  of  these  phenomena,
when  speaking  of  Belladonna.  Stramonium  is
evidently  an  almost  pure  neurotic.  The  only  parts
which  show  any  signs  of  tissue-irritation  are  the
throat  and  the  skin.

Correspondingly,  the  use  of  Stramonium  as  a
therapeutic  agent  has  been  nearly  exclusively  con-
fined to  affections  of  the  brain  and  nervous  system.
The  only  exception  is  scarlatina ;  in  some  forms  of
which  Stramonium  may  be  preferable  to  Belladonna.
The  distinguishing  characteristics  of  the  two  drugs
in  relation  to  this  malady  are  well  given  by  Dr.  P.


512  STRAMONIUM.

P.  Wells,  in  the  '  American  Homoeopathic  Review/
vol.  v,  p.  398.  He  lays  most  stress  on  the  presence
of  an  extreme  degree  of  nervous  erethism — con-
vulsions, trembling,  restlessness,  &c. — as  indicating
Stramonium.

There  are  few  neuroses  in  which  Stramonium  is
not  more  or  less  useful.  It  is  our  chief  remedy  in
acute  mania,  to  which  it  is  more  homoeopathic  than
the  inflammatory  Belladonna.  So  also  in  delirium
ebriosorum, — the  "  mauia-a-potu"  of  the  old  writers.
It  may  sometimes  be  indicated  in  the  cerebral
complication  of  typhus  :  but  less  often  than  Hyos-
cyamus  or  even  Belladonna.  In  nymphomania  and
in  puerperal  mania  it  stands  highest  among  remedies
(comp.  Origanum  for  the  former,  and  Cannabis
indica  for  the  latter) .  In  epilepsy  brought  on  by  a
fright,  and  yet  recent,  it  may  prove  very  useful.  I
have  seen  somewhere  that  in  China  it  is  considered
a  remedy  for  hydrophobia :  to  which  indeed  it  is
more  homoeopathic  than  even  Belladonna.  Nor  is
it  less  beneficial  when  the  nervous  erethism,  just
short  of  inflammation,  which  these  maladies  imply
within  the  cranium,  manifests  itself  in  the  spinal
cord.  In  chorea  I  regard  it  as  the  best  vegetable
medicine :  though  it  rarely  cures  cases  of  any
standing  without  the  aid  of  the  minerals  (Arsenic,
Zinc,  Cuprum,  &c.).  It  is  frequently  indicated  in
spinal  convulsions  (comp.  Ignatia)  :  a  good  case  by
Trinks,  where  these  originated  from  concussion  of
the  spine,  is  given  in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./
vol.  xix,  p.  318.

You  will  of  course  occasionally  meet  with  this
condition  characteristic  of  Stramonium  in  cases


STRAMONIUM.  513

which  do  not  fall  under  any  of  these  nosological
headings.

As  allied  medicines,  besides  its  blood-sisters
Hyoscyamus  and  Belladonna,  Stramonium  has
Agaricus,  Chamomilla,  Cannabis  indica,  and  Ignatia.

For  dose,  I  am  very  well  satisfied  with  the
dilutions  from  3  to  6.


33


LETTER  XL.

SULPHUR.

I  must  devote  to-day's  letter  to  a  medicine
which,  if  not  the  most  important,  is  perhaps  the
most  frequently  used  of  all  we  have —

Sulphur.

The  washed  flowers  of  sulphur  of  commerce,  again
washed  in  alcohol,  are  used  in  our  pharmacy ;  and
of  course  prepared  by  trituration.  A  "  Tincture  of
Sulphur"  is  also  in  use;  and  is  a  very  service-
able preparation.  It  is  made  by  mixing  together  in
a  small  bottle  100  drops  of  the  best  alcohol  with  5
grains  of  the  purified  sulphur.  The  bottle,  after
being  corked,  is  slightly  shaken ;  then,  at  the  end  of
twenty-four  hours,  the  clear  liquid  is  decanted
therefrom  into  another  bottle,  and  kept  under  the
name  of  Tincture  of  Sulphur  (Hempefs  Gruner).

The  original  proving  of  Sulphur  is  in  the
'  Chronic  Diseases.'  A  reproving  by  the  Austrian
Society,  conducted  in  its  usual  thorough  manner
under  the  auspices  of  Dr.  Wurmb,  is  translated  in
the  '  Brit.  Jour,  of  Horn.'  vols.  xv  and  xvi.  Teste's
article  on  the  drug  is  full  of  suggestive  matter ;  as
is  also  an  account  by  Dr.  Casanova  of  the  physiolo-
gical and  therapeutical  properties  of  the  sulphurous


SULPHUR.  515

waters  of  Harrogate  ('Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./
vol.  xxi,  p.  353).

Dr.  Wurmb's  proving  confirms  and  illustrates  the
ancient  opinion  of  the  specific  influence  of  Sulphur
upon  the  skin.  It  excites  a  peculiar  itching  of  the
whole  surface,  giving  an  agreeable  sensation  on
rubbing  or  scratching,  and  increased  notably  by  the
warmth  of  bed.  With  this  are  various  eruptions,
mostly  papular,  but  sometimes  vesicular,  and  occa-
sionally closely  resembling  that  of  scabies.  Boils,  too,
frequently  result  from  the  use  of  sulphur.  I  know
of  a  lady  who  accompanied  her  husband  to  Harro-
gate ;  and,  although  herself  in  good  health,  joined
him  in  drinking  the  waters.  When  she  returned
home,  she  came  under  treatment  covered  with  boils.
After  the  skin,  the  mucous  membranes  feel  most
severely  the  influence  of  Sulphur,  especially  those
of  the  eyes  (conjunctiva  oculi  et  palpebrarum),
bronchi,  urethra,  and  rectum.  Burning,  with  itching
and  mucous  discharge,  are  the  characteristic  symp-
toms here.

Besides  these  more  general  effects,  the  use  of
Sulphur  produces  other  pretty  constant  phenomena,
as  follows : —

1.  There  is  decided  determination  of  blood  to  the
head. Fulness with aching was experienced  by
nearly all  the provers : vertigo by some. The
Harrogate  waters,  if  drunk  largely  and  incautiously,
appear  to  be  capable  of  bringing  on  apoplexy. Part
and  parcel  of  the  above  is  the  erysipelatoid  inflam-
mation of  the  nose  so  frequent  among  the provers,
and  mentioned  also  by  Dr.  Casanova.

2.  The  sexual  organs  are  always  excited  by  Sul-


516  SULPHUR.

phur,  even  to  swelling  of  the  external  parts.  The
catamenia  in  one  prover  came  on  profusely  ;  and
were  black,  clotted,  and  gluey  (comp.  Crocus).

3.  Although  Sulphur  in  massive  doses  is  a  mild
aperient,  its  dynamic  action  is  manifested  by  consti-
pation, from  which  nearly  all  the  provers  suffered.
The  alternative,  diarrhoea,  is  very  rare.

4.  Rheumatoid  pains were  very  common  among
the  provers ; most  of  whom  also  were  troubled by
awaking  early  in  the  morning,  and  finding  it im-
possible to  go  to  sleep  again.

5.  In  two  provers  there  was  painful  swelling  of
the  tongue.

Unless  we  add  to  these  the  countless  symptoms
of  the  pathogenesis  in  the  '  Chronic  Diseases/  we
seem  to  have  but  a  narrow  basis  on  which  to  rest
the  vast  fabric  of  the  therapeutic  applications  of
Sulphur.  But  this  drug  has  attained  a  unique
place  among  Homoeopathic  medicines,  of  which  the
relation  of  Mercury  to  syphilis  affords  the  only —
and  that  a  faint — resemblance.  This  is  owing  to  the
famous  "  psora  theory  "  of  Hahnemann,  of  which  I
must  here  take  notice.

The  first  volume  of  Hahnemann's  '  Chronic
Diseases '  is  devoted  to  an  exposition  of  this  theory
of  his.  He  begins  by  assigning  one-eighth  of  these
maladies  to  syphilis  and  its  ally  sycosis.  He  points
out  that  each  of  these  diseases  depends  upon  a
specific  and  contagious  "  miasm."  This,  being
received  into  the  organism,  after. a  period  of  incuba-
tion developes  an  external  sign — the  chancre  or  the
condyloma  respectively.  If  these  are  left  alone  or
cured  from  within  by  small  quantities  of  their


SULPHUR.  517

appropriate  specific  (Mercury  iu  the  one  case,  Thuja
or  Nitric  Acid  in  the  other),  no  general  evils  result.
On  the  other  hand,  the  suppression  of  the  external
sign  is  followed  by  the  well-known  constitutional
symptoms.  The  maladies  thus  set  up  are  far  more
difficult  to  cure,  and  are  only  curable  at  all  by  the
same  or  similar  specifics — selected  not  merely  on
the  ground  of  their  homoeopathicity  to  the  existing
symptoms,  but  also  because  of  their  relation  to  the
primary  taint.  Thus  (the  illustration  is  my  own)  it
would  be  useless  to  attempt  to  cure  a  syphilitic
angina  with  Belladonna,  or  a  syphilitic  psoriasis  with
Arsenic.

In  the  remaining  seven-eighths  of  chronic  diseases,
Hahnemann  found  the  same  impossibility  of  effect-
ing a  permanent  cure  with  the  common  Homoeo-
pathic specifics.  He  sought  therefore  for  some
constitutional  miasm  or  miasms  which  should  ex-
plain the  Protean  changes  and  inveterate  duration
of  these  maladies,  as  the  syphilitic  poison  explained
the  character  of  the  disorders  resulting  therefrom.
In  the  common  itch  (psora,  scabies)  he  thought  he
had  found  what  he  sought.  Numerous  authors
testified  to  the  evils  resulting  from  repercussion  of
the  itch  eruption — these  evils  including  nearly  every
ill  to  which  flesh  is  heir.  Again,  many  of  his
chronic  patients  confessed  to  having  had  the  itch,
and  in  many  others  he  ascertained  the  same  fact  by
inquiry  of  parents  and  nurses.  The  itch  was  a
specific  disease,  very  contagious,  having  a  period  of
incubation  after  infection,  and  then  manifesting
itself  by  one  or  more  vesicles  at  the  point  of  con-
tact,— iu  all  these  points  resembling  syphilis  and


518  SULPHUR.

sycosis.  Unable  to  discover  any  other  chronic
miasm  but  this  to  account  for  the  host  of  chronic
diseases  which  were  neither  syphilitic  nor  sycosic,
Hahnemann  propounded  the  theory  that  they  were
a\\psoric.  Hence  followed  the  treatment.  Recent
itch  could  nearly  always  be  cured  in  a  reasonably
short  time,  by  one  or  more  infinitesimal  doses  of
Sulphur ;  and  the  same  medicine  was  curative  of
some  of  the  consequences  of  the  suppression  of  the
eruption.  But  these  were  too  multifarious  to  be
homceopathically  covered  by  any  one  remedy.  Hence
a  number  of  other  medicines  were,  on  various
grounds  (see  HempeFs  translation  of  the  '  Chronic
Diseases/  vol.  i,  p.  185),  classed  with  it  as  "  anti-
psorics ;"  and  with  these,  selected  according  to  the
law  of  similars,  all  chronic  non-venereal  diseases
were  to  be  combated.

I  think  that  the  above  is  a  fair  presentation  of
Hahnemann's  theory.  I  would  strongly  recommend
you  to  read  his  own  exposition  of  it,  which  composes
the  1st  vol.  of  the  '  Chronic  Diseases.'  It  is  a
marvel  of  erudition,  of  thought,  and  of  reasoning, —
if  only  the  premises  were  sound.

But  here  is  the  fatal  flaw.  Hahnemann  lived  at
a  time  when  the  parasitic  nature  of  scabies  had
been  forgotten.  Even  so  late  as  Rayer  it  is  treated
of  as  questionable ;  and  Autenrieth  before  him,  and
Schonlein  and  Weitenweber  after  him,  traced  nume-
rous diseases  to  the  repercussion  of  the  eruption.
Now,  however,  no  reasonable  doubt  can  exist  but
that  the  reception  of  the  acarus  is  the  proximate
cause  of  the  whole  phenomena  of  scabies.  The
disease  is  invariably  treated  by  external  applications,


SULPHUR.  519

chiefly  Sulphur  ointment :  and  the  extensive  ex-
perience of  such  men  as  Hebra  and  Erasmus  Wilson
may  be  taken  as  conclusive  when  they  say,  that
they  have  never  seen  any  ill  effects  from  the
practice.

Is  there  then  no  truth  in  Hahnemann's  theory  ?
Just  the  reverse ;  as  I  shall  now  attempt  to  show.

Although  Hahnemann  undoubtedly  based  the
logical  superstructure  of  his  theory  upon  the  distinct
entity — scabies — yet  ever  and  anon  he  includes
other  cutaneous  affections  under  its  name.  Thus
he  considers  the  ancient  leprosy  to  hold  the  same
relation  as  scabies  to  chronic  diseases :  and  in
another  place  he  speaks  of  "  tinea  capitis,  crusta
lactea,  herpes,  etc.,"  as  "  varieties"  of  itch.  He  is
thus  standing  upon  the  truth  which  is  every  day
becoming  more  generally  recognised,  that  many
cutaneous  diseases  are  external  manifestations  of  a
constitutional  taint.  To  say  nothing  of  the  syphi-
litic exanthemata,  who  does  not  know  how  fre-
quently the  gouty,  rheumatic,  or  scrofulous  diathesis
comes  before  us  represented  solely  by  an  eruption
on  the  skin  ?  Nor  would  it  be  denied  that  the
suppression  of  such  eruptions  would  greatly  favour
the  development  of  internal  disease.  The  same
thing  would  happen,  though  more  slowly  and  mildly,
as  that  which  follows  the  retrocession  or  even  non-
development  of  the  rash  in  the  acute  exanthemata.
Again,  there  is  no  doubt  but  that  the  repulsion
by  external  applications  of  any  cutaneous  eruption
is  liable  to  cause  disorder  of  the  internal  organs  in
its  immediate  neighbourhood.  Consider  Lallemand's


520  SULPHUR.

cases  of  spermatorrhoea  thus  induced  ;*  Beer's
of  amaurosis;  and  Weitenweber's  of  aphoniaf—
in  the  two  latter  the  itch  itself  being  the,  exan-
them  in  question  :  and  I  think  the  allegation  is
amply  sustained.  So  much  evidence  of  tKis  kind
has  accumulated,  that  the  French  pathologies  have
re-discovered  for  themselves  the  psora  theory,  in
a  modified  form.  Men  like  Chomel  and  €ruenau
de  Mussy  speak  of  a  herpetic  ("  dartreux")  diathesis,
chronic  maladies.  J

Now  the  point  of  main  interest  to  us  here  is,  that
for  all  these  disorders  alternating  with  skin  eruptions
or  resulting  from  their  suppression,  Sulphur  is  con-
fessedly the  principal  remedy.  Dr.  de  Mussy
recommends  the  Eaux  Bonnes  (which  are  sulphur
springs)  as  the  best  treatment  for  the  chronic  throat
affections  he  traces  to  "  herpetism."  Lallemand
cures  his  cases  by  sulphuretted  baths.  Dr.  Casa-
nova maintains  that  the  reason  why  the  Harrogate
waters  cure  some  cases,  and  utterly  fail  in  others
apparently  similar,  is  that  in  the  former  the  symp-
toms may  be  traced  back  to  the  suppression  of  some
eruption,  while  in  the  latter  they  have  originated
from  other  causes.  He  gives  two  pairs  of  cases
strikingly  illustrative  and  confirmatory  of  his  doc-
trine. And  in  chronic  gout,  rheumatism,  and
scrofula, — diatheses  in  which  the  skin  is  so  fre-
quently involved,  Sulphur  stands  at  the  head  of  our
remedies :  while  in  other  constitutional  maladies,

*  '  On  Spermatorrhoea,'  p.  83.

f  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  vol.  vi,  p.  314.

£  Ibid.,  vol.  xvii,  p.  53.


SULPHUR.  521

such  as  cancer,  rachitis,  and  tuberculosis,  which
have  no  such  cutaneous  determination,  it  plays  no
useful  part.

This  is  not  the  place  to  go  further  into  the
pathological  question.  But  we  may  intelligently
base  on  what  has  been  said  our  account  of  the
therapeutical  application  of  Sulphur.

I.  There  are  very  few  chronic  diseases  in  which
the  treatment  may  not  be  advantageously  com-
menced by  a  few  doses  or  a  short  course  of  Sulphur.
I  have  already  mentioned  the  typical  forms  of  dis-
ease known  as  gout,  rheumatism,  and  scrofula.
Dr.  Acworth  says  he  knows  no  better  medicines  for
the  gouty  diathesis  than  Sulphur  and  Calcarea.
Dr.  Russell  speaks  in  the  highest  terms  of  the  value
of  Sulphur  in  chronic  rheumatism.  He  writes  "  I
almost  always  commence  the  treatment  of  chronic
rheumatism  by  the  administration  of  Sulphur  in
some  form,  and  sometimes  I  find  it  useful  to  per-
severe with  this  one  remedy  for  months.  I  believe
that  in  this  I  merely  act  in  accordance  with  the
genera]  practice  of  all  experienced  Homoeopathists."
And  in  scrofula  in  all  its  manifestations  (except
perhaps  its  effects  on  the  bones)  the  occasional
exhibition  of  Sulphur  is  indispensable.  But  besides
these,  we  frequently  meet  with  cases  presenting
numerous  symptoms  of  ill  health,  which  rapidly  clear
up  under  the  influence  of  Sulphur.  I  suppose  that
in  these  patients  there  is  or  has  been  some  tendency
to  cutaneous  eruption.  And  many  observers  testify
to  the  striking  results  of  giving  a  dose  or  two  of  a
high  dilution  of  Sulphur  in  the  course  of  such  dis-
eases as  inflammation  of  the  brain  and  lungs.  In,


522  SULPHUR.

all  these  instances  Sulphur  seems  itself  to  effect  a
certain  amount  of  improvement,  while  it  renders
subsequent  medicines  more  efficacious.  Curiously
enough,  however,  it  rarely  cures  alone.  If  it  be
continued  above  a  week  or  two,  the  progress  made
towards  cure  is  generally  arrested,  and  even  becomes
retrograde.  Hahnemann  says  "  Sulphur,  when
administered  in  a  small  dose,  seldom  fails  in  effect-
ing an  incipient  cure  of  the  chronic  non-venereal
diseases.  I  know  a  physician  in  Saxony  who  ob-
tained a  great  reputation  for  curing  chronic  diseases,
by  adding,  without  knowing  why,  flowers  of  sulphur
to  every  one  of  his  prescriptions.  In  the  beginning,
they  produced  a  good  effect,  but  only  in  the  begin-
ning, for,  in  a  little  while,  the  good  effects
ceased."

II.  Over  and  above  its  "  antipsoric"  action,  thus
understood,  Sulphur  plays  a  fairly  important  part
as  a  remedy  for  many  affections  of  the  bodily
organs.

1.  For  many  cutaneous  diseases  it  is  the  best
medicine  we  have.  It  readily  cures  recent  prurigo,
when  the  itching  has  the  characteristic  of  that  in-
duced by  the  drug.  It  clears  the  skin  of  the  ano-
malous eruptions  which  infest  it  in  unhealthy
children.  It  is  good  for  acne,  where  also  the  local
application  of  the  tincture  is  useful;  and  Teste
recommends  it  for  "  favus."  It  is  an  almost  un-
failing preventive  of  the  recurrence  of  boils  :  and
only  less  so  of  that  of  styes  and  whitlows.  In
scabies  we  of  course  use  Sulphur  as  you  do  to
destroy  the  acarus.  But  since  the  eruption  often
spreads  far  beyond  the  burrows  of  the  parasite,  and


SULPHUR.  523

endures  after  its  destruction,  we  need  an  internal
remedy  homoeopathic  to  it :  and  this  our  provings
show  that  we  possess  in  Sulphur.

2.  Sulphur  is very  useful  in many  affections  of
the  eyes. It  acts  most  upon  the  conjunctiva : and
is  of  course best indicated  when inflammations  of
this membrane  take place in unhealthy  subjects.
Its  chief  place  is  accordingly  in  strumous  ophthalmia,
for  which  at  some  time  in  the  treatment  it  is  indis-
pensable. But  it  also,  says  Dr.  Dudgeon,  possesses
in acute catarrhal ophthalmia an efficacy almost
magical : and has been  used  with  more or less
success  in inflammation  of  almost  every  texture  of
the  visual  organ. I  refer  you  to  his  able  series  of
papers  ('  Brit.  Journ./  vols.  vi,  vii)  for  cases  illus-
trative of  its  value.

3.  Another  chief  seat  of  the  influence  of  Sulphur
is the rectum. It  is very  good for itching and
burning  of  the  anus  ; and  for  piles,  especially  when
dependent upon abdominal plethora (with Nux
vomica). I  recommend you always to begin  the
treatment of chronic constipation with Sulphur,
especially  when  piles  are  present. But  here,  also,
you  will  generally  have  to  go  to  some  other  medi-
cine to  complete  the  cure. Often,  delighted  by  the
wonderful  improvement  effected  in  these  cases  by  a
week's  course  of  Sulphur,  I  have  continued  its  ad-
ministration : and as often have seen  the benefit
gained steadily disappearing until I changed  the
medicine.

4.  I  have  little  experience  of  Sulphur  in  affections
of  the respiratory organs ;  though I  have  several
times  seen  the  tincture  act  well  in  extinguishing  a


524  SULPHUR.

suspicious  cough  following  upon  fever.  At  the
Leopoldstadt  Hospital,  however,  Sulphur  holds  a
very  high  place  among  the  medicines  for  pleurisy
and  pneumonia.  In  pleurisy,  it  is  given  (after
Aconite)  in  the  acute  plastic  form,  where  it  is  said
to  disperse  rapidly  the  effusion.  Nor  has  it  less
power,  according  to  the  able  physicians,  in  pro-
moting the  resolution  of  pneumonic  hepatization.
Dr.  Russell  considers  Sulphur  a  most  important
remedy  for  asthma :  and  points  out  the  frequent
alternation  of  paroxysms  of  this  disease  with  fits  of
gout  and  attacks  of  lepra  and  psoriasis.

5.  I  have  only  to  add  that  Teste  recommends
Sulphur  in  indolent  ulcers,  in  some  chronic  cerebral
affections,  and  when  irregular  and  malignant
symptoms  occur  in  variola :  and  I  myself  have
more  than  once  cured  acute  nasitis  with  it.

Except  its  own  compound,  Hepar  sulphuris,  I
cannot  find  any  true  analogue  of  Sulphur.

As  to  dose, — the  dilutions  from  12  to  30  are
most  used,  and  will  give  every  satisfaction.  But
in  rheumatic  affections  the  lower  triturations  may
be  used  with  advantage  ;  and  in  the  acute  maladies
of  the  chest  the  Tinctura  Sulphuris  seems  in  much
favour.


LETTER  XLI.

TABACUM, TARAXACUM, TELLURIUM, TEREBINTHINA,
TEUCR1UM, THEA.

SULPHUR  is  the  last  of  our  polychrests.  We
begin  now  to  see  the  end  of  our  journey.  In  about
three  more  letters  I  hope  to  complete  all  I  have  to
say  about  the  Materia  Medica  Homoeopathica.

My  first  medicine  to-day  will  be  the  "  weed,"
par  excellence,

Tabacum.

We  make  a  tincture  from  the  leaves  of  the  Virginian
plant.

There  is  no  proving  of  Tobacco  extant  :  but  you
will  find  a  good  store  of  information  concerning  it
in  Hem  pel's  article ;  in  a  paper  by  Teste  in  the
'  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  vol.  xvii  ;  and  in  another
in  the  '  Monthly  Horn.  Review/  vol.  ix,  p.  44.

You  are,  I  believe,  a  smoker.  I  need  not  there-
fore remind  you  of  the  deathly  sickness  and  vomit-
ing, the  giddiness,  and  tendency  to  faintness  pro-
duced by  Tobacco  in  unsophisticated  frames.  These
symptoms  appear  to  result  entirely  from  its  action
on  the  nervous  centres.  In  poisonous  doses,  the
cerebral  functions  are  much  affected,  and  a  semi-


526  TABACUM.

apoplectic  state  is  induced.  The  evil  effects  of
long-continued  use  of  Tobacco  in  excess  are  also
well-marked  and  known.  Palpitation  and  inter-
mittent action  of  the  heart  are  among  the  most  com-
mon symptoms.  White  atrophy  of  the  retina  seems
still  among  its  more  dubious  effects.  In  a  case  re-
corded by  Lallemand,  spermatorrhoea  with  all  its
attendant  evils  seems  to  have  been  induced  by  con-
tinued exposure  to  the  emanations  of  Tobacco.*
Then  we  have  observations  upon  the  state  of  health
of  workmen  in  cigar  manufactories  :  some  of  which
you  will  find  in  Testers  paper.  It  produces  in  these
subjects  a  peculiar  dull  grey  complexion  (evidently
of  haematic  origin,  as  it  is  removable  by  the  prepa-
rations of  Iron),  loss  of  flesh,  and  dyspnoea  pro-
bably asthmatic.  Last,  we  get  such  effects  as  those
1864,  where  long-continued  tobacco-eating  (!)  caused
complete  marasmus,  paralysis,  and  death.

Shall  I  add  to  these  unquestionable  symptoms  any
derivable  from  what  is  called  the  "  moderate"  use
of  Tobacco  ?  As  I  am  no  smoker  myself,  I  must
be  careful  to  preserve  impartiality  here.  I  believe
that  the  use  of  Tobacco  stands  on  the  same  footing
as  that  of  tea  and  coffee.  They  are  all  medicinal
agents  ;  all  produce  violent  symptoms  of  poisoning
when  taken  in  large  quantities ;  and  all,  when
habitually  used  in  excess,  disorder  the  functions,
especially  those  of  the  nervous  system.  But  the
experience  of  all  of  us  goes  to  prove  that  tea  and
coffee  may  be  taken  daily  without  any  appreciable
effect  on  the  health.  This  is  the  "  moderate"  use.
*  '  On  Spermatorrhoea/  p.  233.


TARAXACUM.  527

Its  figure  can  only  be  ascertained  by  experience,
and  probably  differs  with  different  persons.  So  also
with  Tobacco.  Only  I  suspect  that  the  quantum
allowed  themselves  by  most  smokers  is  beyond  the
safety-point  of  "  moderation."  Teste  says,  "  All
smokers  of  long-standing,  or  almost  all — for  I
admit  exceptions — have  their  slight  or  severe  ail-
ments which  would  immediately  cease  were  they  to
leave  off  smoking."  It  is  easy  for  any  one  who
suffers,  but  does  not  as  yet  mistrust  his  pipe,  to  try
the  experiment  for  himself.  In  the  mean  time  (not
to  be  personal  in  my  suggestions)  I  may  recommend
you  to  read  Testers  cases  (including  his  own)  illus-
trative of  his  statement.

I  can  say  little  or  nothing  about  the  therapeu-
tical uses  of  Tabacum.  To  poison  people  with  it
for  the  sake  of  obtaining  muscular  relaxation,  as
recommended  in  your  text-books,  is  of  course  no
part  of  our  practice.  It  ought  to  be  a  good  remedy
for  sea-sickness :  my  trials  of  it,  however,  have
hitherto  yielded  only  negative  results.  Testers  ob-
servations would  show  its  homoeopathicity  to  some
forms  of  gastralgia  and  enteralgia.

As  allied  medicines  to  Tabacum,  we  have  Anti-
monium  tartaricum,  Digitalis,  Ipecacuanha,  and
Lobelia.

We  next  come  to  the  dandelion,  Leontodon

Taraxacum.

Our  tincture  is  prepared  from the expressed  juice
of  the  recent  plant.


528  TELLURIUM.

The  proving  t  is  in  the  'Materia  Medica  Pura/
Hempel's  article  should  also  be  consulted.

Hahnemann's  pathogenesis  presents  little  that  is
characteristic.  The  coating  of  the  tongue  with  a
white  skin,  which  peels  off  in  patches,  leaving  a
raw  surface;  and  profuse  perspiration  throughout
the  night,  are  the  only  symptoms  which  strike  me.
A  case  of  poisoning  with  the  drug,  cited  by  Hempel
from  the  (  Lancet/  shows  its  power  of  causing  an
exanthem  like  a  mixture  of  lichen  and  urticaria,
with  fierce  itching  and  constitutional  irritation.

We  have  no  experience  with  Taraxacum  confir-
matory of  the  hepatic  action  you  of  the  old  school
use  in  our  records.  It  ought  to  be  serviceable  in
cases  of  dyspepsia  with  patchy  tongue  :  and  for
itching  eruptions  preceded  by  gastro-intestinal  dis-
order.

For  dose,  Hahnemann  advises  a  drop  of  the
mother-tincture.

And  now  we  have  for  study  one  of  those  rare
metals  which  Homoeopathy  has  pressed  into  the
service  of  Medicine,

Tellurium

The  precipitated  metal  is  triturated  for  our  use.

The  proving  of  Tellurium,  by  Dr.  Hering,  may
be  read  in  the  '  American  Homoeopathic  Review/
vol.  v.

In  this  proving,  the  most  prominent  symptoms
are,

1st.  Prickling  itching all over the skin, with


TEREB1NTHINA.  529

papular  eruption,  and  in  one  case  patches  resembling
those  of  herpes  circinnatus.

2nd.  (Edematous  inflammation  (with  itching)  of
the  eyelid  and  external  ear.

3rd.  Tenderness  of  the  upper  dorsal  vertebrae  ;
and  pain  in  the  sacrum  going  down  the  right  sciatic
nerve.

Correspondingly,

1st.  It  has  proved  the  best  remedy  for  ringworm
of  the  surface  (herpes  circinnatus),  as  I  can  attest;
and  might  be  tried  for  that  which  occurs  on  the  scalp.

2nd.  It  has  cured  several  cases  of  inflammation  of
the  external  ear  and  meatus,  with  acrid  discharge.

3rd.  One  case  of  sciatica  has  yielded  to  it :  and
it  should  be  thought  of  in  affections  connected  with
spinal  tenderness.

Dr.  Heriug  compares  it  with  Selenium.  It  has
some  resemblance  to  Apis.

As  Tellurium  was  proved  mainly  in  the  3rd  and
4th  centes.  potencies,  it  should  not  be  used  lower
than  this  in  disease.

I  must  next  direct  your  attention  to  the  place  in
our  practice  occupied  by  the  oil  of  turpentine,

Terebinthina.

We  make  a  solution  of  the  oil  in  strong  alcohol.

There  is  no  proving  of  Turpentine  extant :  but
its  physiological  properties  are  well  known.  They
are  detailed  by  Hempel  in  his  article  on  the  drug.

By  far  the  most  important  sphere  of  the  action
of  Terebinthina  lies  in  the  region  of  the  kidneys
and  urinary  mucous  membrane  generally.  It  is  an

*  34


530  TEREBINTHINA.

irritant  throughout  the  tract.  Acting  on  the
kidneys,  in  very  small  doses  it  is  diuretic :  in  larger
quantities,  it  sets  up  congestion  going  on  to  inflam-
mation of  these  organs,  with  haematuria,  albuminuria,
and  sometimes  complete  suppression  of  urine.  It
inflames  also  the  bladder  and  urethra,  and  often
causes  strangury. — All  this  is  so  well  known,  that
any  application  of  Turpentine  to  urinary  inflamma-
tions must  be  admitted  to  be  homoeopathic.  So
Pereira  says,  "  In  bleriorrhcea  of  the  urinary  appa-
ratus, it  seems  to  set  up  a  new  kind  of  irritation  in
the  affected  membrane,  which  supersedes  the  pre-
viously existing  disease."  It  is  indeed  our  chief
remedy  in  hypersemise  of  the  urinary  organs.  In
simple  renal  congestion,  which  is  almost  as  common
as  the  corresponding  affection  of  the  liver,  it  is  well-
nigh  infallible.  When  this  condition  goes  on  to
complete  suppression  of  urine,  Turpentine  will
often  restore  the  secretion ;  as  in  a  case  of  Dr.
Yeldham's  in  the  'Annals/  vol.  r,  p.  386.  When
it  manifests  itself  by  haematuria,  you  will  generally
find  Turpentine  the  best  styptic.  It  is,  I  think,
less  valuable  when  the  hypersemia  is  completely
inflammatory  in  degree.  In  acute  nephritis  it  is
rivalled,  if  not  excelled,  by  Cantharis.  The  most
common  form  of  this  inflammation  is  the  state  of
kidney  which  obtains  in  post-scarlatinal  dropsy.
Dr.  Yeldham  speaks  highly  of  Terebinthina  here, —
admitting,  however,  that  it  acts  better  in  adults
than  in  children.  I  must  confess  that  I  have  been
disappointed  with  it  in  the  disease  occurring  in  these
latter  subjects.  Perhaps  the  3rd  dec.  dilution,  in
which  I  have  given  it,  is  too  strong  :  as  Dr.  Hender-


TEREBINTHINA.  531

son  caused  decided  aggravation  with  doses  of  ,th
and  even  ±ih  of  a  drop  of  the  oil.  But  I  venture
to  suggest  that  it  is  not  to  a  desquamative  nephritis,
such  as  this,  that  Turpentine  is  homeopathic ;  but
rather  to  the  non-desquamative  nephritis  which  in
the  majority  of  cases  constitutes  "  Bright's  disease."
The  hyperaemia  and  exudation  here  take  place
mainly  outside  the  tubuli  uriniferi ;  and  in  Blight's
disease  Turpentine  stands  almost  if  not  quite  first
among  our  remedies.  I  refer  you  to  cases  and
observations  by  Drs.  Kidd  and  Henderson  in  the
'  British  Journal/  vols.  xiii  and  xiv.  I  suspect  that
in  the  "  contracted  kidney  "  of  the  old  writers,  the
"  chronic  desquamative  nephritis  "  of  Dr.  George
Johnson,  Turpentine  would  prove  much  less  effi-
cacious.— In  cystitis,  urethritis,  and  other  affections
of  the  urinary  mucous  surface,  Terebinthiua  is  only
an  alternative  to  Cantharis,  Caunabis,  &c.,  which
are  probably  better  medicines.

To  these  urinary  affections  the  use  of  Terebinthina
in  our  school  has  been  pretty  well  confined.  Most
of  its  uses  in  your  hands  are  outside  the  limits  of
Homoeopathic  practice.  But  in  sciatica,  and  in
arthritic  ophthalmia,  whatever  value  it  possesses
must  be  of  a  dynamic  nature.  So  also  its  power
over  intestinal  ulceration  and  hemorrhage  in  typhoid
fever.  I  must  cite  for  you  the  graphic  indications
for  it  in  this  disease  given  by  Dr.  Wood  of  Phila-
delphia.

"  There  is  a  particular  condition,  and  that  not
an  uncommon,  and  sometimes  a  very  dangerous  one,
in  which  I  have  often  employed  it,  and  never  known
it  fail,  viz.  when  the  tongue  instead  of  cleaning


532  TEREBINTHINA.

gradually  from  the  edges  and  tips,  parts  with  its  fur
quickly  and  in  large  flakes,  generally  first  from  the
middle  or  back  part  of  the  surface,  which  is  left
smooth  and  glossy  as  if  deprived  of  its  papillae,  or
as  if  glazed  or  varnished.  If,  after  this  process,
the  tongue  remains  moist,  a  slow  convalescence  may
be  pretty  confidently  expected  :  but  if  it  becomes  dry
again  there  will  generally  be  an  increase  of  tympa-
nitis, and  an  aggravation,  or  certainly  no  abatement,
of  the  other  symptoms.  This  state  of  things  depends
upon  an  active  state  of  the  ulceration  of  the  bowels,
and  Turpentine  will  almost  unfailingly  prove  useful.
In  the  course  of  twenty-four  or  forty-eight  hours
some  amelioration  of  the  symptoms  will  be  observed  :
the  tongue  becomes  gradually  moister  and  covers
itself  with  a  whitish  fur;  the  tympanitis  ceases  to
augment,  and  after  a  time  diminishes :  the  pulse
becomes  less  frequent,  the  skin  dry  and  harsh,  and
the  patient  enters  slowly  but  regularly  into  con-
valescence often  without  the  aid  of  any  other  remedy.
I  have  known  such  cases  run  on  for  a  considerable
time  without  material  change,  and  have  seen  them
yield  immediately  to  Turpentine. "

The  analogues  of  Terebiuthina  in  the  urinary
sphere  are  Arsenicum,  Cannabis  sativa,  Cantharis,
Chimaphila,  Copaiba,  Kali  bichromicum,  Mercurius
corrosivus,  Thuja,  Uva  ursi.

The  lower  dilutions  only  have  been  employed.
I  use  from  the  3rd  to  the  1st  of  the  decimal  scale
according  as  the  case  is  acute  or  chronic.

I  have  now  a  few  words  to  say  about  the  cat-
thyme  —


THEA.  533

Teucrium  marum  verum.

A  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  fresh  juice  of  the
whole  plant.

The  proving  is  in  Stapf's  '  Additions/

I  see  nothing  characteristic  in  the  symptoms
produced.  Teucrium  appears  to  have  some  specific
action  upon  polypus  narium, — where  it  may  also  be
used  locally  as  a  snuff.  But  its  chief  value  is  as  a
remedy  for  ascarides.  I  prefer  it  even  to  Cina  and
Santonine  where  these  parasites  cause  much  irrita-
tion of  the  rectum.  It  rarely  fails  to  effect  their
expulsion.

In  Cina  and  Santonine  I  have  already  mentioned
the  ouly  analogues  of  Teucrium.

For  dose  I  use  the  1st  dec.  dilution :  but  the
2nd  centes.  has  proved  effectual  against  ascarides.

Lastly,  we  must  estimate  the  place  as  a  medicine
occupied  by  that  great  friend  to  man, — tea,

Thea.

The  tincture  is  preferably  prepared  from  the  green
variety.

There  is  no  proving :  but  some  useful  informa-
tion regarding  the  action  of  tea  is  given  by  Hempel
in  his  article  on  it.

Tea  is  in  such  general  use  as  a  beverage  that  it
is  rarely  applicable  as  a  medicine.  Its  well-known
effects  upon  the  brain  and  heart,  however,  may
occasionally  suggest  it  as  the  most  suitable  remedy
in  some  cases  of  sleeplessness,  and  of  palpitation  or
other  irregular  action  of  the  heart.

The  analogues  of  Thea  are  Coffea  and  Tabacum.


LETTER  XLII.

THUJA, URANIUM, URTICA, UVA URSI, VALERIAN,
VERATRUM  ALBUM AND VIRIDE.

I  have  to  begin  my  letter  to-day  with  a  medicine
quite  new  to  you,  but  whose  name  "  Arbor  vitse"
indicates  the  possession  of  valuable  properties.  It
is  the

Thuja  occidentalis.

Our  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  juice  of  the  green
leaves.

The  original  proving  of  Thuja  is  in  the  '  Mat.
Med.  Pura/  It  was  one  of  the  medicines  selected
for  re-proving  by  the  Austrian  Society  :  their  results,
with  clinical  addenda,  are  translated  in  MetcalFs
'  Homoeopathic  Provings/

From  this  latter  most  exhaustive  proving  it
appears  that  the  main  action  of  Thuja  is  on  the
genito-urinary  organs,  with  the  rectum  and  anus,
and  the  skin.  It  causes  copious  and  frequent
urination ;  burning  in  several  parts  of  the  mucous
tract :  pains  of  various  kinds  in  the  penis  ;  inflam-
mation of  the  prepuce  and  glans ;  ulcers,  tubercles,
and  other  excrescences  on  the  sexual  organs,  with
profuse  sweating :  and  (in  the  female)  leucorrhoea.
The  sexual  appetite  is  depressed,  and  the  catamenia


THUJA OCCIDENTALIS.  535

retarded.  On  the  skin  tubercles  and  warts  are
produced,  especially  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
generative  organs.  Thuja  also  causes — a  headache
on  the  left  side  as  if  a  convex  button  were  being
pressed  on  the  part ;  nasal  catarrh  ;  irritation  of  the
buccal  mucous  membrane;  teasing  dry  cough;
constipation ;  burning,  itching,  swelling,  and  dis-
charge at  the  anus.  The  symptoms  are  most
marked  on  the  left  side ;  and  are  increased  by  rest.

The  symptoms  observed  by  Hahnemann  himself
in  the  generative  organs  induced  him  to  recommend
it  as  the  most  homoeopathic  remedy  for  the  disease
he  called  "  sycosis."  Condylomata,  usually  re-
garded as  one  of  the  manifestations  of  syphilis,  were
by  him  considered  as  the  external  symptoms  of  an
independent  though  allied  poison.  He  pointed  out
that  they  are  generally  accompanied  by  a  peculiar
kind  of  gonorrhoea  :  and  that  their  forcible  suppres-
sion is  followed  by  the  appearance  of  more  or  less
similar  tubercles  and  ulcers  in  other  (especially
hairy)  parts  of  the  body.  He  states  that  Thuja,
followed  or  not  by  Nitric  acid,  is  sufficient  to  cure
both  the  gonorrhoea  and  the  excrescences  of  sycosis.
In  the  most  difficult  and  inveterate  cases,  he  recom-
mends that  the  larger  excrescences  be  touched  once
a  day  with  the  mother-tincture.

All  later  investigation  has  gone  to  support
Hahnemann's  pathological  views  concerning  sycosis.
I  would  refer  you  especially  to  a  paper  on  the
disease  in  the  '  Edinburgh  Med.  and  Surg.  Journ.'
for  January  and  February,  1857,  and  to  another  by
Dr.  Petroz  in  his  collected  writings.  The  Austrian
proving,  moreover,  has  made  still  more  certain  the


536  THUJA OCCIDENTAL1S.

homoeopatliicity  of  Thuja  to  every  sycotic  mani-
festation :  and  the  clinical  observations  thereto
appended  leave  no  doubt  of  its  curative  power.
Both  in  old-school  and  in  Homoeopathic  practice
Thuja  has  over  and  over  again  caused  the  sycotic
vegetations  to  wither  away.  The  co-existing
gonorrhoea  also  yields  to  its  use  :  and  even  simple
gonorrhoea,  when  chronic  and  involving  the  prostate
gland,  has  been  more  than  once  cured  by  it.  Then
there  are  a  number  of  general  affections  slightly
resembling  or  possibly  traceable  to  sycosis,  in  which
Thuja  has  been  used  with  success.  Such  are
fungous  tumours  of  the  orbit  or  elsewhere :  warts  :
and  bronchial  and  even  uterine  polypi.  It  is  also
reputed  in  our  veterinary  practice  in  the  treatment
of  farcy,  and  of  warty  and  other  affections  of  the
surface  resembling  the  vegetations  of  sycosis.

I  have  myself  verified  most  of  these  uses  of
Thuja.  In  warts  I  have  never  known  it  to  fail.
If  one  or  two  only  are  present,  they  should  be
painted  with  the  mother-tincture  daily.  But  when
they  come  in  crops,  the  internal  administration  of
the  drug  is  the  proper  treatment.  I  have  seen  two
cases  in  which  a  large  collection  of  these  excre-
scences, of  long  standing,  disappeared  in  a  few  weeks
under  Thuja  12  and  30.  I  gave  it  also  with
striking  results  in  an  elevated  and  enlarging  nsevus
maternus  on  the  thigh  in  a  child  of  five  months
old.  In  a  fortnight  the  growth  had  withered  and
vanished.

Cannabis,  Cantharis,  Copaiba,  Mercurius,  Petro-
selinum,  and  Pulsatilla  resemble  Thuja  in  its
influence  on  the  genito-urinary  organs.


URANIUM.  537

All  dilutions  seem  to  have  acted  well :  perhaps
on  the  whole  the  balance  is  in  favour  of  the
higher.

I  must  now  tell  you  something  about  the  Nitrate
of

Uranium.

It  is  prepared  by  aqueous  solution.

In  a  paper  "  On  Diabetes,"  in  the  '  Brit.  Journ.
of  Horn./  vol.  xxiv,  I  have  collected  or  referred  to
all  knowledge  then  extant  concerning  this  drug.
M.  Curie,  of  Paris,  in  the  April  number  of  the
'  Bullet,  de  la  Soc.  Med.  Horn,  de  France '  of  this
year  has  added  some  further  information  of  value.

The  one  pathogenetic  effect  of  Nitrate  of  Uranium
known  to  us  is  that  the  gradual  poisoning  of  dogs
with  small  doses  invariably  causes  the  urine  to
become  saccharine.  This  fact,  curious  only  in  the
eyes  of  one  of  the  traditional  school,  was  to  us
Homoeopaths  pregnant  with  suggestiveness.  In
the  paper  to  which  I  have  referred  you  will  be
found  several  cases  in  which  it  has  been  adminis-
tered to  patients  suffering  from  diabetes  mellitus.
Cure  in  some,  great  improvement  in  all,  has  been
the  result.  M.  Curie's  communication  relates  three
more  cases,  one  of  which  was  cured,  and  in  the
other  two  the  quantity  of  sugar  in  the  urine  was
reduced  to  one-half.

We  know  of  no  other  medicine  which  has  the
same  relation  as  Nitrate  of  Uranium  to  saccharine
urine.

The  1st  and  2nd  dec.  dilutions  only  have  hitherto
been  used.


538  UVA  URSI.

My  next  medicine  is  the  common  stinging-
nettle,

Urtica  urens.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  powdered  seeds,
in  the  .proportion  of  one  to  ten.  So  says  Griiner  :
but  I  should  think  that  the  whole  plant  ought  to  be
employed  for  the  purpose.

There  is  a  proving  of  Urtica  in  the  second
edition  of  Dr.  Male's  c  New  Remedies  •/  his  article
contains  also  all  else  that  is  known  of  the  drug.

A  case  of  poisoning  by  the  internal  use  of  Urtica
is  cited  in  this  article  from  Wibmer,  where  the
upper  half  of  the  body  felt  as  if  burnt,  and  became
very  cedematous,  serum  flowing  out  on  puncture.
There  was  also  suppression  of  urine,  and  excitement
of  the  mammary  glands. — Urtica  is  the  favourite
Homoeopathic  remedy  for  burns  of  the  first  degree,
i.  e.  where  the  injury  does  not  involve  the  cutis.
It  should  be  used  both  internally  and  externally.
It  has  also  been  recommended  in  nettle-rash,  for
obvious  reasons  (this  affection  resulted  from  its
internal  use  in  the  provers)  :  and  might  be  useful  in
acute  dropsy,  as  from  a  chill.

Apis,  Rhus,  and  Canthuris  are  analogous  medi-
cines. I  can  say  nothing  about  dose.

And  now  a  few  words  about  the  bear-berry,
Arbutus

Uva  ursi.

There  is  no  proving :  but  as  there  is  no  doubt
that  this  plant  affects  specifically  the  urinary  mucous
membrane,  it  has  found  a  place  in  the  Materia


VALERIANA.  539

Medica  Homoeopathica.  We  have,  however,  very
little  experience  with  it.  Pereira  says  of  its  use  in
chronic  catarrh  of  the  bladder  "  In  some  cases,  the
benefit  obtained  by  the  use  of  it  was  marked ;
whereas,  in  other  instances,  it  was  of  no  avail."  It
lies  with  Homoeopathy  here,  as  elsewhere,  to  deter-
mine what  is  the  form  of  the  complaint  to  which  it
is  the  simillimum,  and  therefore  the  remedy.

It  would  seem  best  to  prepare  it  by  triturating
the  dried  leaves.  Its  analogues  are  of  course  Tere-
binthina,  Cantharis,  and  Copaiba.

We  come  next  to  a  medicine  well  known  to  you,

Valeriana.

The  tincture  is  prepared,  with  diluted  alcohol,  from
the  dried  root.

There  is  a  good  proving  of  Valerian  in  Stapfs
'  Additions  :'  to  which  Hempel  adds  an  account  of
Jorg's  experiments.

The  pathogenetic  effects  of  Valerian  warrant  the
reputation  it  enjoys  in  your  school  in  the  treatment
of  hysteria  and  nervous  disorders  in  general.  It
should  be  specially  serviceable  for  the  headaches
and  the  local  pains  which  occur  in  hysterical  sub-
jects. The  only  Homoeopathic  records  of  its  use
with  which  I  am  acquainted  are  some  cases  in  the
'  Philadelphia  Journal  of  Homoeopathy/  vol.  ii,
p.  715.  One  of  these  was  hysterical  dyspnoea,
coming  on  in  spasms :  the  other  a  kind  of  typhoid
chorea.  In  both  the  effect  of  the  Valerian  was
verv  marked.


540  VERATRUM ALBUM.

Ignatia  and  Stramonium  are  the  most  obvious
analogues.

The  1st  dec.  dilution  was  used  in  the  cases
referred  to.

(NOTE. — I  hardly  know  whether  to  rank  the
Valerianates  under  the  head  of  their  acid  or  of  their
bases.  But  I  had  better  refer  here  to  the
Valerianate  of  Zinc,  which  Dr.  E.  M.  Hale  has
lately  introduced  as  a  remedy  for  headache  and
neuralgia,  where  the  symptoms  seem  a  combination
of  those  of  Valerian  and  of  Zinc.  I  refer  you  to
his  cases,  some  of  which  are  very  striking,  in  the
'  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn./  vol.  xxv,  p.  163.)

My  next  medicine  is  of  some  importance,  though
I  cannot  agree  with  Dr.  Hempel  in  placing  it
among  the  polychrests.  It  is  the  white  hellebore,

Veratrum  album.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  root,  either  fresh
or  dried.

The  proving  is  in  the  '  Mat.  Med.  Pura/  There
are  cases  of  poisoning  in  Hempel's  article.

The  picture  presented  by  acute  Veratrum
poisoning  is  decidedly  choleraic.  There  is  general
coldness,  with  prostration  going  on  to  collapse,
embarrassed  circulation,  copious  watery  vomiting  and
purging,  and  severe  spasmodic  colic.  The  experi-
ments collected  by  Christison  show  that  the
vomiting  and  purging  of  Veratrum  are  specific,
appearing  however  the  poison  may  have  been
introduced  into  the  system.  The  more  recent
experiments  of  Schroff  have  further  proved  that


VERATRUM ALBUM.  541

these  evacuations  do  not  depend  upon  gastro-
enteritis, as  Veratrum  causes  no  inflammation,  but
at  most  a  transient  hyperaemia  of  the  parts  it
touches.  "  If  its  action  be  more  intensified/'  he
says,  "  it  causes  a  rapid  degeneration  of  the  gastric
mucous  membrane,  but  no  gastro-enteritis."*  In
the  less  perturbing  doses  of  the  proving,  Veratrum
produced  great  debility,  with  tendency  to  perspire
on  the  least  exertion  :  and  a  paralytic  state  of  the
rectum,  causing  a  sort  of  constipation.

Veratrum  stands  very  high  among  our  remedies
for  Asiatic  cholera.  In  Russia  and  America  it  is
thought  more  of  than  any  other  medicine :  but  in
Great  Britain  we  are  accustomed  to  place  it  beneath
Arsenic.  Dr.  Russell's  remarks  are  so  valuable,
that  I  will  cite  them  here,  especially  as  you  may  not
have  access  to  his  treatise. f  "  As  far  as  our
experience  goes,  we  feel  at  present  inclined  to  trust
to  it  more  in  cases  of  violent  vomiting  and  purging,
and  all  the  other  prominent  phenomena  of  cholera,
but  which  are  destitute  of  what  we  should  call  the
essential  physiognomy  of  the  disease.  Such  cases
will  pass  for  cholera  in  all  reports,  Homoeopathic  and
Allopathic,  and  they  will  be  cured :  but  to  a
practical  eye  there  is  something  about  them  different
from  fatal  cases,  at  the  very  outset.  The  disease
seems  to  be  going  inwards,  advancing  towards  the
seat  of  life,  not  coming  outwards  from  it.  That
they  are  often  fatal,  there  is  no  doubt ;  and  that
Veratrum  cures  them,  there  is  no  doubt  either :  but
still  Veratrum  is  not  sufficient  in  the  worst  type  of

*  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  xviii,  p.  660.
t  '  On  Epidemic  Cholera,'  p.  226.


542  VERATRUM ALBUM.

the  disease  :  and  the  reason  of  its  great  exaltation
is,  that  it  cures  so  many  curable  cases  very  like  true
cholera.  .  .  .  We  have  found  it  most  useful  in
cases  where  there  was  violent  vomiting  and  purging,
without  that  sudden  deadly  collapse  which  we  have
characterised  as  the  indication  for  Arsenicum."  It
follows  from  this  that  it  is  precisely  suited  to
choleraic  diarrhoea.  I  used  to  give  it  in  summer
diarrhoea,  but  of  late  years  have  abandoned  it  in
favour  of  China.  As  the  autumn  comes  on,  however,
when  vomiting  is  superadded  to  the  purging,  and
when  the  intestinal  evacuations  are  expelled  in  a
forcible  gush,  with  little  or  no  griping,  I  give
Veratrum  in  alternation  with  China,  and  with  great
advantage.

Besides  these  great  uses  of  Veratrum,  it  is
occasionally  indicated  in  colic,  and  sometimes  cures
constipation — probably  when  arising  from  rectal
inactivity.  Tt  is  curative  of  ague  when  the  chill
predominates :  and  is  sometimes  beneficial  in  the
third  stage  of  pertussis.  Veratrum  album  was
most  probably  the  Hellebore  of  the  ancients.
Hahnemann  says  that  at  least  one-third  of  the
cases  of  insanity  generally  occurring  in  lunatic
asylums  might  be  cured  by  it.

Aconite,  Antimonium  tartaricum,  Colchicum,  and
Veratrum  viride,  are  the  analogues  of  Veratrum
album.

For  dose,  Hahnemann  recommends  the  12th :
but  higher  and  lower  dilutions  have  been  used.  In
the  last  cholera  epidemic  at  Liverpool,  Mr.  Procter
found  the  1st  dec.  dilution  to  answer  best.


VERATRUM VIR1DE.  543

There  is  an  American  species  of  hellebore,  which
Las  lately  attained  some  celebrity.  It  is  the

Veratrum  viride.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  green  root.

All  information  concerning  this  drug,  with  a
proving  by  Dr.  Burt,  may  be  found  in  Dr.  Hale's
'  New  Remedies/*

I  suppose  that  the  action  of  the  green  must
correspond  with  that  of  the  white  hellebore.  Other-
wise, I  should  have  said  from  appearances  that
Veratrum  viride  depresses  arterial  activity  and  the
action  of  the  heart  rather  by  paralysing  functional
power  than  by  stimulating  the  vaso-motor  nerves.
It  certainly  does  not  control  fever  as  Aconite  does.
It  is  used  for  this  purpose  by  alloeopathic  and
"  eclectic"  practitioners  in  America,  and  even  by
some  Homoeopaths.  It  requires,  however,  unlike
Aconite,  to  be  given  in  material  doses  :  and  much
further  proof  than  has  yet  been  afforded  is  needful
to  convince  us  of  its  superiority.  From  the  cases
collected  by  Dr.  Hale,  it  would  seem  to  have  yielded
the  best  results  in  such  diseases  as  chorea,  puerperal
convulsions,  and  mania.  He  himself  specially
recommends  it  in  acute  cerebral  congestions. — I
have  only  to  add  that  Veratrum  viride  developed  in
a  prover  a  large  haemorrhoid,  with  neuralgic  pains  in
the  rectum  and  anus.

Allied  medicines  are  Veratrum  album  and  (perhaps)
Gelseminum.

The  mother-tincture  has  usually  been  given.

*  The  part  of  Dr.  Hale's  second  edition  containing  Veratrum
viride  has  reached  me  too  late  to  enable  me  to  epitomise  here  its
important  additions  to  our  knowledge  of  the  drug.


LETTER  XLIII.

VERBASCUM,  VINCA MINOR,  VIOLA  ODORATA  AND
TRICOLOR, XANTHOXYLLUM, ZINCUM.

THIS  will  be  my  last  letter  upon  the  Materia
Medica.  And  it  will  be  a  short  one  :  for  with  the
exception  of  Zinc,  there  is  no  medicine  to  be  dis-
cussed in  it  which  is  worth  more  than  a  few  lines.

My  first  is  the  great  mullein,  "high  taper,"  or

Verbascum  thapsus.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  blossoms  and
leaves  by  treating  them  with  double  their  weight  of
alcohol.

The  proving  is  in  the  '  Mat.  Med.  Pura/  but  it
does  not  appear  in  HempePs  translation  thereof.

I  cannot  say,  however,  that  English  readers  have
lost  much  by  the  omission.  Verbascum  has  caused
no  distinctive  symptoms.  It  has  occasionally  been
given  with  success  in  prosopalgia,  and  in  hoarse  dry
night-coughs.

The  mother-tincture  has  been  used.

My  second  is  the  lesser  periwinkle  (the  plant,
not  the  mollusc), —


VINEA MINOR.  545

Vinca  minor.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  juice  of  the  fresh
plant.

There  is  a  short  pathogenesis  of  Vinca  in  Jahr's
'  Manual/

Vinca  has  cured  crusta  lactea  and  even  (it  is
said)  plica  Polonica.  In  my  own  hands  it  once
checked  for  some  time  a  passive  uterine  haemorrhage
in  a  single  woman  of  62.  The  mischief  afterwards
developed  into  carcinoma.

In  all  these  cases  the  1st  dec.  dilution  or  mother-
tincture  was  used.

We  come  next  to  two  species  of  Viola.  First,
the  sweet  violet  itself,

Viola  odorata.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  juice  of  the  entire
plant.

There  is  a  pathogenesis  of  Viola  in  Jahr's
'  Manual  :'  but  our  best  information  regarding  it  is
derived  from  Teste's  article.

From  this  latter  authority,  Viola  would  seem
particularly  suitable  to  cases  of  spasmodic  cough  and
dyspnoea  occurring  in  lymphatico-nervous  consti-
tutions ;  the  symptoms  are  more  troublesome  in
the  day-time.  In  one  of  his  cases  the  cough  and
dyspnoea  were  due  to  the  retrocession  of  measles  :
and  the  eruption  was  restored  by  the  medicine.  In
a  note,  Teste  says  "  Petroz  informed  me  that  he
has  used  Viola  with  success  in  various  rheumatic
affections  of  the  upper  limbs."  Later,  in  the

35


546  VIOLA TRICOLOR.

'  Gazette  Homceopathique  de  Paris'  Dr.  Tessier
published  several  cases  of  rheumatism  affecting  the
carpal  and  metacarpal  joints,  in  which  striking
results  followed  the  administration  of  Viola  odorata.
Dr.  Kitchen  translated  these  for  the  '  Philadelphia
Journal  of  Homoeopathy/  adding  some  confirmatory
cases  of  his  own.  I  have  transferred  his  article  to
the  *  British  Journal  •'  you  will  find  it  in  vol.
xxiv,  p.  314.  A  curious  point  about  these  cases  is
that  the  rheumatism  was  always  on  the  right  side
of  the  body.  In  two  cases  where  both  wrists  were
affected,  the  right  one  soon  got  well  :  but  the  left
remained  in  statu  quo.

Teste  thinks  Viola  an  analogue  of  Chelidonium.

The  12th  dilution  in  Tessier's  hands,  and  the
1st  in  Dr.  Kitchen's,  seem  to  have  acted  equally
well.

The  other  species  of  Viola  is  the  pansy,  hearts-
ease,

Viola  tricolor.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  entire  plant  as
with  Verbascum.

There  is  a  pathogenesis  in  Jahr's  f  Manual  :'  but
again  Teste  gives  us  our  best  information  regarding
the  drug.

The  substance  of  the  information  is  this,  that
Viola  tricolor  enjoyed  a  general  reputation  among
the  older  physicians  as  a  remedy  for  impetigo,
especially  in  its  most  common  form  of  crusta  lactea.
One  case  is  especially  interesting,  where  it  cured
nervous  paroxysms  in  a  young  girl  which  seemed  to


XANTHOXYLLUM FRAXINEUM.  547

have  been  caused  by  the  suppression  of  milk-crust.
For  myself,  I  have  never  needed  any  other  medicine
for  this  plague  of  children  :  and  I  have  more  than
once  given  it  in  recent  impetigo  in  adults  with  very
satisfactory  results.

Teste  classes  Viola  tricolor  with  Lycopodium.

I  have  seen  the  6th  dil.  answer  very  well  in
children :  but  prefer  the  1st  dec.  for  adults.

I  have  now  another  American  medicine  to  intro-
duce to  you,  the  prickly  ash,

Xanthoxyllum  fraxineum.

The  tincture  is  prepared  from  the  bark.

A  good  proving,  on  three  men  and  three  women,
with  clinical  remarks,  may  be  found  in  Male's  '  New
Remedies/

These  provings  are  not  a  little  notable,  and  ought
to  prove  fruitful.  The  only  symptoms  which  have
as  yet  led  to  practical  results  are  those  of  the
female  generative  organs.  It  caused  in  one  woman
the  appearance  of  the  menses  a  week  before  their
usual  time,  and  attended  with  much  pain  :  in
another,  there  seemed  "  an  unnatural  forcing  of
nature,"  the  menses  came  on  profusely,  "  with
dreadful  distress  and  pain,  baffling  description."  It
has  accordingly  been  used  to  relieve  dysmenorrhcea,
and  with  success.  Like  all  drugs  which  help
dysmenorrhcea.,  it  is  applicable  to  after-pains :  I  have
occasionally  given  it  for  these  with  good  effect.
Dr.  Hale  says  that  it  is  specially  suitable  to  women
of  spare  habit,  nervous  temperament,  and  delicate
organisation.


548  ZINCUM.

I  can  say  nothing  at  present  about  allied
remedies.

The  dose  is  from  the  1st  to  the  3rd  decimal.

The  last  medicine  in  my  list  is  a  metal  of  some
medicinal  importance,

Zincum.

We  use  indifferently  the  metal  itself,  its  oxide,
or  its  sulphate, — making  triturations  of  each.

There  is  a  proving  of  the  metal  in  the  '  Chronic
Diseases :'  and  a  pathogenesis  of  the  oxide  appears
in  Jahr's  '  Manual.'

If  these  provings  are  to  be  trusted,  Zinc  is  a
primary  depressant  and  atonizer  of  the  nervous
centres,  causing  aversion  to  labour  ;  weak  memory  ;
mental  depression,  even  to  idiocy ;  dim  sight ;
weakness  and  heaviness  of  the  limbs.  "With  this,  as
so  often  happens,  the  peripheral  nerves  are  in  a
state  of  irritation ;  and  we  have  trembling  and
jactitation  in  the  motor,  and  neuralgic  pains  in  the
sensitive  sphere.  Of  late,  too,  Zinc  has  been  shown
to  produce  in  those  who  work  with  it  a  form  of
ague,  characterised  by  repeated  rigor,  short  hot
stage,  and  profuse  sweating :  during  the  chill  there
is  malaise,  nausea,  and  constriction  of  the  chest.
The  action  on  the  vaso-motor  nerves  which  these
phenomena  imply  is  indicated  also  in  Wibmer's
experiments  cited  by  Hempel ;  in  which  a  spas-
modically contracted  pulse  and  palpitation  of  the
heart  were  constant  symptoms.  Zinc  also  profoundly
depresses  the  nutritive  functions,  causing  a  kind  of
"  tabes  sicca."  Pereira  mentions  the  case  of  a


ZIXCUM.  549

gentleman  who,  "for  the  cure  of  epilepsy,  took
daily,  at  an  average,  twenty  grains  of  the  oxide  till
he  had  consumed  3246  grains,  which  must  have  taken
him  about  five  months.  At  the  end  of  this  time  he  was
found  of  a  pale  earthly  hue,  wasted  away,  and  almost
idiotical :  his  tongue  was  thickly  coated,  the  bowels
•were  constipated,  the  inferior  extremities  cold  and
oedematous,  the  abdomen  tumid,  the  superior  ex-
tremities cold  and  shrivelled,  and  their  skin  dry
like  parchment :  the  pulse  was  about  60,  thready,
and  scarcely  perceptible."  The  provers  also  suffered
from  many  pains  in  the  diaphragm,  between  the
shoulders,  and  all  down  the  spine.

The  uses  of  Zinc  correspond  perfectly  with  its
pathogenetic  effects.  Some  of  the  symptoms  I  have
mentioned  make  probable  its  homceopathicity  to
those  forms  of  chorea  and  epilepsy  which  it  some-
times benefits.  But  its  reputation  in  our  school  of
medicine  is  as  a  remedy  for  states  of  cerebral  de-
pression. It  has  proved  curative  in  chronic  head-
aches* and  in  melancholia,  where  this  condition  was
present.  Dr.  Kidd  recommends  it  in  chronic
atrophy  of  the  brain,  and  in  the  progressive  para-
lysis of  the  insane. f  Drs.  Trinks  and  Madden
think  very  highly  of  it  in  infantile  convulsions  : —
I  suppose  that  a  depressed  fontanelle  should  be  pre-
sent to  indicate  it.  And  Dr.  Elb,  of  Dresden,  has
called  our  attention  to  its  great  value  in  that  para-
lysed state  of  the  brain  which  sometimes  occurs  in
scarlatina.  It  has  removed  this  condition  whether
occurring  before,  during,  or  after  the  eruptive  period.

*  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  xii,  p.  489.
f  'Annals,'  vol.  iii,  p.  427.


550  ZINCUM.

Besides  this  chief  application  of  Zinc,  it  is  also
recommended  for  cardialgia  occurring  in  delicate
and  nervous  females,  and  for  disorders  of  the  nerves,
motor  and  sensory,  which  supply  the  heart  and  air-
passages  ;  also  of  those  which  surround  the  joints
and  penetrate  into  the  bones.  These  are  Testers
suggestions.  He  also  states  that  it  will  (in  the
30th  dil.)  blight  a  commencing  variola  !  The  pa-
thogenesy  points  to  it  as  a  suitable  remedy  for  the
dry  atrophy,  without  hectic,  which  we  sometimes
see  in  adults :  and  to  a  form  of  ague.  Dr.  Carroll
Dunham  has  lately  reported  a  case  of  pterygium
crassum  apparently  cured  by  Zinc,  in  the  200th
dilution.*

Cuprum  and  Plumbum  are  somewhat  analogous
medicines.

Except  where  I  have  mentioned  the  higher  po-
tencies, Zinc  has  usually  been  given  in  the  1st  or
2nd  dec.  trituration.  Whether  the  metal,  the
oxide,  or  the  sulphate  be  used  seems  immaterial.

And  so  I  bring  my  task  to  an  end.  I  hope  that
you  will  be  better  contented  with  its  execution  than
I  can  be.  My  own  feeling  is  one  of  much  dissatis-
faction at  the  manifold  shortcomings  of  my  work.
I  feel,  too,  that  the  later  medicines  show  signs  of
wearied  attention  and  relaxing  grasp.  However,  I
have  done  my  best  on  your  behalf:  and  the  friendship
which  magnifies  merits  will  be  blind  to  faults.

Since  I  began  these  letters,  there  have  been
several  contributions  to  our  literature  which  occupy
somewhat  the  same  ground  as  myself.  Dr.  Lippe's

*  'American  Horn.  Eeview,'  vol.  v,  p.  71.


CONCLUSION.  551

'  Text  Book  of  Materia  Medica'  and  Mr.  Buck's
Outlines'  are  catalogues  raisonnees  of  pathogenetic
symptoms.  They  stand  outside  the  path  which  I
have  followed  in  tracking  my  way  through  the
Materia  Medica.  ,  But  the  running  comments  on
our  medicines  furnished  by  Dr.  Cl.  Muller  from
Germany,*  Dr.  Holcombe  from  America,  f  and  Dr.
Bayes  from  this  country,!  are  quite  germane  to  the
scope  of  my  work.  They  touch  it,  indeed,  at  only
one  point ;  for  they  profess  merely  to  convey  the  per-
sonal experience  of  their  authors  with  the  several
drugs.  Such  as  they  are,  however,  they  supplement
the  account  of  the  general  usage  which  I  have
given  :  and  may  advantageously  be  read  side  by
side  with  my  letters.

And  now  I  will  give  myself  and  you  a  little
breathing-time,  ere  I  lead  you  from  Pharmaco-
dynamics  to  Therapeutics.  What  you  have  learnt
already  will  furnish  you  for  the  treatment  of  most
of  the  ordinary  forms  of  disease.  And  when  you
have  found  out  how  much  you  can  accomplish  by
general  principles,  then  it  will  be  time  to  take  up
the  subject  from  the  other  side,  and  tell  you  what
Homoeopathy  can  do  for  each  malady,  and  how  it
does  it.  For  the  present,  farewell  !

Your  affectionate  Friend,

RICHARD  HUGHES.

*  '  Brit.  Journ.  of  Horn.,'  vol.  xxiii,  p.  353.

t  '  United  States  Mcd.  and  Surg.  Journ.,'  vol.  L

J  '  Monthly  Horn.  Review'  for  1866-7.


PUBLISHED BY


HENRY TURNER & CO.,

LONDON AND MANCHESTER.


BATES  (Dr.  WM.)  TWO  SIDES  TO  A  QUESTION ;  a  Few  Observa-
tions on  Mr.  Braithwaite's  Temperate  Examination  of  Homcao-
pathy.  Second  Edition,  with  Emendations  and  Additions.
Sewed  6d.

BATES  (Dr.  WM.)  MEDICAL  TERRORISM  IN  1862. Sewed,  6d.

THE  BRITISH  JOURNAL  OF  HOMCEOPATHT.  Edited  by  DBS.
DBYSDALE,  DUDGEON,  and  HUGHES.  Published  Quarterly,

COCKBURN  (Dr.  SAMUEL).  THE  TWO  STSTEMS  OF  MEDICINE
CURE  EXPLAINED  AND  CONTRASTED.  Limp  cloth,  2s.

COCKBURN  (Dr.  SAMUEL).  EXPOSITION  OF  THE  HOMEO-
PATHIC LAW,  WITH  A  REFUTATION  OF  SOME  OF
THE  CHIEF  OBJECTIONS  ADVANCED  AGAINST
HOMOEOPATHY :  a  Lecture  delivered  in  Glasgow  under  the
auspices  of  the  Glasgow  Homeopathic  Association.  Sewed,  3d.

THE  HOMOEOPATHIC  MEDICAL  DIRECTORT  OF  GREAT  BRITAIN
AND  IRELAND,  AND  ANNUAL  ABSTRACT  OF  BRITISH
HOMOEOPATHIC  SOCIAL  LITERATURE  Price  3s.  6d.,  if
prepaid,  2s.  6d.  Published  on  the  1st  of  January  in  each  year.

DRUMMOND  (Dr.  J.)  HOMCEOPATHT  AMONGST  THE  ALLOPATHS;
being  a  Collection  of  Evidence  favorable  to  the  tenets  of
Hahnemann  and  his  Followers,  Extracted  from  the  standard
Works  of  the  Old  School.  In  stiff  cover,  Is.

DRUMMOND  (Dr.  J.)  A  FACT  IN  FAVOUR  OF  HOMCEOPATHT.
Sewed  2d.

DRTSDALE,  DUDGEON,  AND  BLACK  (Dns.)  THE  HAHNEMANN
MATERIA  MEDICA  PURA,  Part  I.  In  stiff  cover,  7s.

DUDGEON  (Dr.  R.  E.)  LECTURES  ON  THE  THEORT  AND
PRACTICE  OF  HOMOEOPATHY.  Cloth,  7s.  6d.


2  HOMOEOPATHIC WORKS PUBLISHED BY

FEANKLIN  (Dr.  E.  C.)  THE  SCIENCE  AND  ART  OF  SUEGERY.

(Now  publishing,  in  Four  Parts,  two  of  which  are  ready  for
delivery.)

In  preparing  this  work  for  the  practitioners  of  the  Homoeopathic
system  of  medicine,  the  author  embodies  his  experience  as  a  surgeon
in  civil  practice  since  1846,  and  the  numerous  advantages  enjoyed
in  a  United  States  military  hospital  and  field  service  for  three  years
and  a  half,  in  many  of  the  hardest  fought  battles  in  the  West.  The
first  field  hospital  in  the  West  (while  the  troops  were  engaged  in
active  service)  was  organized  by  him  at  Springfield,  Mo.,  during  the
memorable  campaign  of  General  Lyon,  in  that  State,  which  termi-
nated with  his  death,  and  over  one  thousand  rank  and  file  wounded
also  at  Mound  City,  Ills.,  in  which  over  six  thousand  wounded  were
treated  by  him  during  the  fourteen  months  he  presided  at  that
institution ;  and  subsequently  in  expeditions  under  Major- General
Sherman.

Part  I  contains  the  art  of  Bandaging  and  other  operations  of
Minor  Surgery,  with  the  consideration  of  surgical  dressings,
fumigations,  the  removal  of  foreign  bodies,  administration  of
injections,  introduction  of  the  catheter,  dressing  of  wounds,
means  of  arresting  haemorrhage,  general  and  local  aua3sthesia,
'the  manner  of  using  instruments.  Illustrated  with  copious
Plates,  &c.

Part  II  comprises  the  theory  of  inflammation,  its  terminations
and  treatment ;  effects  of  injury,  shock  ;  injuries  of  soft  parts;
wounds  and  their  treatment,  viz.,  incised,  lacerated,  punctured,
contused,  poisoned;  mortification,  gangrene  and  treatment;
classification  of  tumours ;  wounds  of  veins,  arteries  and  nerves,
effects  of  heat  and  cold ;  abscesses,  ulcers.  With  appropriate
illustrations,  &c.

Part  III  will  treat  of  Syphilis,  Gonorrhea,  Scrofula ;  diseases  of
lymphatics,  veins,  arteries  and  nerves,  Aneurisms,  diseases  of
bones,  joints  and  spine,  Hernia,  Fractures  and  Dislocations,
with  all  improved  methods  for  reducing  and  treating  the
same;  disease  of  bladder,  prostate,  and  testis;  including
valuable  Cuts,  &c.  &c.

Part  IV  will  comprise  Operative  Surgery,  and  the  various  ex-
pedients, appliances,  instruments,  &c.,  required  in  the  treat-
ment of  those  diseases  that  require  surgical  interference,  with
many  new  and  interesting  Plates  from  the  author's  private
collection.

The  characteristic  symptoms  and  indications  of  each  remedy  as  to
its  adaptability  to  cure  the  various  surgical  diseases  homosopathically
which  are  treated  of  in  the  work,  are  plainly  and  carefully  presented
to  the  reader,  so  that  the  profession  may  possess  a  thorough  and
systematic  treatise  of  Surgery  adapted  to  the  principles  of  Similia.
Profusely  illustrated.  Price  15s.  per  Part.


HENRY TURNER AND CO.


GLIMPSES  OF  HAHNEMANN,  THE  FOUNDEK  OF  HOMOEO-
PATHY :  a  Compilation  from  various  sources,  illustrative  of
the  Life  and  Character  of  Hahnemann.  Extra  bound,  gilt
edges,  2s.

GROSS  (Dr.  H.)  COMPARATIVE  MATERIA  MEDICA.  Translated
and  Edited  by  DK.  CONSTANTINE  HEEIXG.  Imp.  8vo,  half-
bound,  £2  2s.

Since  Hahnernann's  time  our  Materia  Medica  and  Repertories  have
been  filled  to  overflowing  with  the  results  of  new  provings.  By  the
process  of  comparison  of  Dr.  Gross,  these  results  are  digested,  sifted,
and  classified ;  the  relative  position  of  one  remedy  towards  other
similar  ones  determined,  and  its  distinction  from  others  for  the  first
time  pointed  out  in  such  a  way  that  the  practitioner  is  enabled  to
choose  with  precision.

The  place  which  the  present  work  takes  in  Homoeopathy  is  best
shown  from  the  following  extracts  from  Dr.  Gross's  preface.  He
says —

"  Great,  but  not  insurmountable,  are  the  difficulties  which,  until
now,  have  prevented  the  universal  recognition  and  practical  applica-
tion of  Homoeopathy.

In  so  far  as  these  difficulties  lie  in  the  Materia  Medica,  which,
indeed,  to  the  novice  appears  a  chaos,  I  hope  to  remove  them  in  a

great  measure  by  the  present  work It  is  therefore

necessary  to  find  and  smooth  a  path  which,  without  being  arbitrary,
shall  be  correct,  and  by  which  we  may  discover  and  appropriate,
without  much  difficulty,  the  results  of  the  hitherto  known  provings.
I  believe  I  have  taken  this  path  by  exhibiting  the  DIFFERENTIAL
DIAGNOSIS  of  such  remedies  as  are  similar  in  their  effects."

Again  he  says — "  The  diagnostics  of  one  remedy  offer  here  a
supplement  and  correction  to  another,  and  also  show  one  and  the
same  remedy  in  different  lights.  They  are  based,  not  upon  mere
abstractions,  new  stand-points,  and  the  like,  but  upon  provings  and
clinical  observations,  i.  e.,  upon  facts  of  medicine  according  to
Nature's  laws,  and  are  gained  by  the  rules  of  the  art  of  observation."

GUERNSEY  (Dr.  E.)  OBSTETRICS  AND  DISEASES  OF  FEMALES.

Preparing  for  Press.

This  work  will  contain  between  700  and  800  pages  and  150  En-
gravings, and  the  price  will  be  about  35s.

HAHNEMANN  (Dr.  S.)  MATERIA  MEDICA  PURA.  Translated
by  Dr.  C.  J.  HEMPEL.  In  1  vol.,  half-bound,  30s.

HAHNEMANN  (Dr.  S.)  ORGANON.  A  New  Edition,  corrected
by  the  Author  up  to  the  time  of  his  death,  is  in  the  Editor's
hands  preparing  for  press.


4  HOMOEOPATHIC WORKS PUBLISHED BY

HALE  (Dr.  E.  M.)  NEW  REMEDIES;  THEIR  PATHOGENETIC
EFFECTS  AND  THERAPEUTIC  APPLICATION  IN
HOMOEOPATHIC  PRACTICE.  Second  Edition,  revised  and
enlarged.  Handsomely  bound,  40s.

HARPER  (Dr.  J.  P.)  HOMEOPATHY  TESTED  BY  FACTS,  being  a
Collection  of  Cases  illustrative  of  the  Homoeopathic  Action  of
Remedial  Agents.  Third  Edition,  Sewed,  6d.

HAYLE  (Dr.  T.)  ALCOHOL,  ITS  ACTION  AND  USE  IN  RELATION
TO  THE  HUMAN  FRAME. Sewed  6d.

HAYWARD  (Dr.  J.  W.)  ALLOPATHY  AND  HOMEOPATHY  CON-
TRASTED.

Part  I,  Medicine — its  origin  and  early  history ;  Allopathy — what
it  is.  Sewed,  3d.

Part  II,  The  origin  and  early  history  of  Allopathy  and  Homoeo-
pathy. Sewed,  2d.

Part  III,  The  basis  of  the  old  and  new  systems. Sewed,  3d.

HEMPEL  (Dr.  J.  C.)  A  NEW  AND  COMPREHENSIVE  SYSTEM  OP
MATERIA  MEDICA  AND  THERAPEUTICS.  Arranged
upon  a  Physiologico-Pathological  Basis,  for  the  use  of  Prac-
titioners and  Students  of  Medicine.  With  a  complete  Glossary
of  Medical  Terms,  and  Repertory,  by  W.  H.  WATTS.  1703  pp.
Royal  8vo,  2  vols.,  half-bound,  42s.

HEMPEL  AND  BEAKLEY,  MANUAL  OP  HOMOEOPATHIC  THEORY
AND  PRACTICE.  An  Elementary  Treatise  on  the  Homoeo-
pathic Treatment  of  Surgical  Diseases.  Third  Edition.  Cloth,
12s.  6d.

HERING  (Dr.  C.)  COMPLETE  HOMEOPATHIC  MATERIA  MEDICA.
Preparing  for  Press.  The  Agency  in  this  country  for  the  sale
of  this  valuable  work  has  been  entrusted  to  HENEY  TUBNEB
and  Co.,  who  will  be  glad  to  receive  the  names  of  intending

HIRSCHEL'S  RULES  AND  EXAMPLES  FOR^THE  STUDY  OP
PHARMACODYNAMICS.  Translated  by  THOMAS  HAYLE.
Cloth,  5s.


HENRY TURNER AND CO.


HOLCOMBE  (Dr.  W.  H.)  HOW  I  BECAME  A  HOMEOPATH.
American  Edition,  on  toned  paper  and  in  wrapper,  Is.  2d.
English  Edition,  in  cheap  pamphlet  form,  sewed,  3d.  For
gratuitous  distribution  in  quantities  of  250  at  2jd.  each ;  or
500,  Id.  each.

HOENEE  (Dr.  E.  E.)  REASONS  FOR  ADOPTING  THE  RATIONAL
SYSTEM  OF  MEDICINE,  being  a  Letter  to  the  Governors  of
the  Hull  General  Infirmary.  Fifth  Edition.  (Twentieth
Thousand.)  Sewed,  6d.

HUGHES  (Ed.,  M.E.C.S.)  ON  THE  PEESENT  STATE  OP  THE
PHYSIOLOGY  AND  PATHOLOGY  OF  THE  NERVOUS
SYSTEM  (1861).  Sewed,  Is.

HULL'S  JAHE  ;  A  NEW  MANUAL  OF  HOMOEOPATHIC  PEACTICE.
Edited  with  Annotations  by  F.  G.  SNELLING,  M.D.,  from  the
last  Paris  Edition.  Fourth  Edition.  2  vols.,  35s.

IEISH  COLLEGES  VEESUS  MEDICAL  PEOGEESS. Sewed,  3d.

JAHE  (Dr.  J.  H.  G.)  ON  MENTAL  DISEASES.  Translated  by  Dr.
GALLOWAY.  Cloth,  10s.

JAHE  (Dr.  J.  H.  G.)  NEW  MANUAL  OF  THE  HOMEOPATHIC
MATERIA  MEDICA,  WITH  POSSART'S  ADDITIONS.

Arranged  with  reference  to  well-authenticated  observations  at
sick-bed,  and  accompanied  by  an  alphabetical  Repertory,  to
facilitate  and  secure  the  selection  of  a  suitable  remedy  in  any
given  case.  Fifth  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged  by  the  Author.
SYMPTOMATOLOGY  and  REPEETOEY.  Translated  and  edited  by
C.  J.  HEMPEL,  M.D.  Bound,  17s.  6d.

LADE  (Dr.  G.)  EESULT  OF  AN  EXPEEIMENTAL  INQUIEY  INTO
THE  HOMCEOPATHIC  TREATMENT  OF  DISEASE.
Second  Edition.  Sewed,  6d.

MALAN  (Dr.  H.  V.)  ANSWEE  TO  THE  QUESTION,  "  HOW  CAN
SUCH  SMALL  DOSES  HAVE  ANY  EFFECT?"  Fourth
Edition.  Sewed,  3d.

THE  MONTHLY  HOMCEOPATHIC  EEVIEW.  Edited  by  Drs.
RTAN,  EAYES,  and  POPE.  Published  Monthly,  price  Is. ;  or,
for  binding  ready  every  December  to  hold  the  past  twelve
month's  numbers,  price  Is.


6  HOMCEOPATHIC WORKS PUBLISHED BY

MOORE  (Dr.  G.  L.)  SUPPLEMENT  TO  THE  '  DOMESTIC  PRACTICE
OF  HOMOEOPATHY,'  being  a  companion  to  the  various  works
thereon  ;  containing  information  on  a  variety  of  subjects  con-
nected with,  and  bearing  on,  the  family  practice  of  Homoeo-
pathy, but  not  treated  of  in  the  domestic  works  on  that  sub-
ject— such  as  the  domestic  management  of  the  Sick-room,  con-
duct of  Nurses  and  Attendants,  Ventilation,  Baths,  Bandages,
Poultices,  and  Cookery  for  the  Sick  and  Convalescent,  &c.  &c.
Cloth,  2s.  6d.

MOORE  (Mr.  JAS.,  V.S.)  LUNG  DISEASE  OF  CATTLE ;  OR.PLEURO-
PNEUMONIA  CURABLE  BY  HOMOEOPATHY,  with  Direc-
tions for  its  Treatment.  Eighth  Edition.  Sewed,  3d.

MOORE  (J.,  V.S.)  OUTLINES  OP  VETERINARY  HOMEOPATHY,
containing  Horse,  Cow,  Dog,  Sheep,  and  Hog  diseases.  Fifth
Edition.  Cloth,  5s.

MOORE,  COMMON  DISEASES  OP  ANIMALS,  AND  THEIR  HOMEO-
PATHIC TREATMENT;  carefully  abridged  from  the  '  Out-
lines of  Veterinary  Homoeopathy,'  by  the  Author  of  that  work.
Cloth,  2s.  6d.

MOORE  (Mr.  JAS.,  V.S.)  MILK  FEVER  OF  COWS  ;  ITS  HOMCEO-
PATHIC TREATMENT  AND  CURE,  with  Directions.
Second  Edition.  Sewed,  6d.

MOORE  (Mr.  JAS.,  V.S.)  VETERINARY  HOMEOPATHY.  Illus-
trated  by  125  Cases,  selected  from  many  years'  practice  in  the
Homoeopathic  Treatment  of  Animals,  with  Observations.
Sewed,  6d.

POPE  (Dr.)  ETHICAL  IMPEDIMENTS  TO  THE  PROGRESS
OF  HOMOEOPATHY  THROUGHOUT  THE  PROFESSION.
Sewed,  6d.

POPE  (Dr.)  THE  HOMCEOPATHIC  SYSTEM  OF  MEDICINE;
its  Theory  and  Results  examined  and  compared  with  those  of
other  Methods  of  Treatment.  Sewed,  6d.

POPULAR  HOMCEOPATHIC  TRACTS. Sewed,  6d.

RANSFORD  (Dr.  C.)  REASONS  FOR  EMBRACING  HOMOEOPATHY
AND  REASONS  FOR  CONTINUING  TO  PRACTISE  IT.
Fourth  Edition.  In  Wrapper,  6d.


HENRY TURNER AND CO.


REASONS  FOR ADOPTING HOMEOPATHIC TREATMENT IN

THE  DISEASES  OF  ANIMALS.  Sewed,  2d.
REPERTORY  (THE  NEW) ;  OR,  SYSTEMATIC  ARRANGEMENT
AND  ANALYSIS  OP  THE  HOMEOPATHIC  MATERIA
MEDICA.  This  work  is  expected  to  be  completed  in  about
six  or  eight  Parts,  five  of  which  are  already  published.  Post
price  per  Part  is  5s.

RYAN  (Dr.  JOHN)  HOMEOPATHIC  INFINITESIMAL  DOSES
AND  THEIR  ANALOGIES  IN  NATURE.  Fcap.  8vo,  limp
cloth,  Is.

SHARP  (Dr.  W.,  F.R.S.)  ADDRESS  DELIVERED  AT  THE  FIRST
MEETING OF THE MIDLAND COUNTIES HOMCEO-
PATHIC  SOCIETY  AT  BIRMINGHAM. Sewed,  6d.
SHARP  (Dr.  W.,  F.R.S.)  ON  THE  PHYSIOLOGICAL  ACTION  OF
MEDICINES. Read  at  the  Meeting  of  the  British  Association
at  Nottingham,  Aug.  23,  1866. Sewed,  3d.
SHARP  (Dr.  Wm.,  F.R.S)  AN  INVESTIGATION  OF  HOMEOPATHY,

in  a  Series  of  Essays.  Seventh  Edition,  extra  cloth,  5s.
SHARP  (Dr.  Wm.,  F.R.S.)  A  LETTER  TO  SIR  BENJAMIN  C.
BRODIE,  BART.,  P.R.S.,  IN  REPLY  TO  HIS  LETTER  IN
ERASER'S  MAGAZINE,  FOR  SEPTEMBER,  1861.  Second
Edition,  extra  cloth,  uniform  with  the  '  Investigation  of  Ho-
moeopathy,' 2s.  6d.

SHARP  (Dr.  Wm.,  F.R.S.)  TRACTS  ON  HOMEOPATHY.  Seventh
Edition.  Price  2d.  each.

CONTEXTS.— 1.  What  is  Homoeopathy?  2.  The  Defence  of
Homoeopathy  (an  answer  to  Routh's  '  Fallacies  of  Homoeopathy').
3.  The  Truth  of  Homoeopathy.  4.  The  Small  Dose  of  Homceo-
pathy  (out  of  print).  5.  The  Difficulties  of  Homoeopathy.  6.  The
Advantages  of  Homoeopathy.  7.  The  Principle  of  Homoeopathy.
8.  The  Controversy  of  Homoeopathy  (out  of  print).  9.  The  Reme-
dies of  Homoeopathy.  ]0.  The  Provings  of  Homoeopathy.  11.
The  Single  Medicine  of  Homoeopathy.  12.  The  Common  Sense  of
Homoeopathy.

*#*  In  all  48  Editions,  comprising  173,000  copies  exclusive  of
the  American  sale,  which  has  been  of  equal  magnitude.  The  Series
was  begun  in  1852,  and  completed  in  1854.

The  '  Investigation  of  Homoeopathy/  mentioned  above,  contains
the  substance  of  these  tracts.  The  Volumes  still  on  hand  of  the
'  Investigation'  are  the  only  complete  sets  offered  for  sale,  the
popular  2s.  Edition  being  for  the  present  out  of  print.


8 WORKS PUBLISHED BY HENRY TURNER AND CO.

SHERWIN  (Dr.  W.)  PHYSIOLOGY  AND  PHARMACO-DYNAMICS.
A  Lecture.  Sewed,  6d.

SMITH  (Rev.  F.)  HOMEOPATHY  AND  ITS  ADVANTAGES  TO  THE
WORKING  CLASSES  ;  a  Lecture  delivered  in  Turner  Street
Schools,  Manchester.  Sewed,  3d.

SMITH  (J.  H.,  M.R.C.S.)  FACTS  IN  EVIDENCE  OF  THE  TRUTH  OF
HOM(EOPATHY.  Being  an  account  of  Fifty  Cases  Success-
fully  Treated  on  that  principle,  with  Remarks.  Sewed,  6d.

SMITH  (FRED.)  HOMOEOPATHIC  STATISTICS.  Sewed,  3d.;  or
8s.  per  hundred.

STENS  (Dr.  WILHELM)  THERAPEUTICS  OF  THE  DAY,  in  a
Series  of  Letters.  Translated  from  the  German,  with  special
permission  of  the  Author,  by  H.  ST.  CLAIE  MASSIAH.  Second
Edition,  revised.  In  handsome  cloth  binding,  8s.  6d.

TEN  REASONS  WHY  I  PREFER  HOMEOPATHY  TO  THE  COMMON
SYSTEM  OP  MEDICAL  TREATMENT.  By  the  Father  of
a  Family.  Third  Edition.  (Thirty  Thousand.)  In  wrapper,
2d.;  or  sewed,  Id.

THOMAS  (Dr.H.)  ADDITIONS  TO  THE  HOMEOPATHIC,  MATERIA
MEDICA ;  with  Explanations  and  Remarks  respecting  the
Provings  of  Homoeopathic  Medicines.  Limp  cloth,  2s.  6d.

THOMAS  (Dr.  H.)  DISEASES  OF  CHILDREN,  AND  THEIR
TREATMENT.  Compiled  from  the  Works  of  TESTE,  HABT-
MANN,  WILLIAMSON,  and  others,  with  Additions.  Cloth,  3s.

WILLIAMSON  (Dr.  WALTER)  DISEASES  OF  CHILDREN.  Re-
vised by  Dr.  THOMAS.  Cloth,  3s.

WILLIAMSON  (Dr.  WALTER)  DISEASES  OF  FEMALES  AND
THEIR  HOMOEOPATHIC  TREATMENT;  containing  also  a
full  description  of  the  Dose  of  each  Medicine.  Second  English
Edition.  Cloth,  2s.

YELDHAM  (Dr.  S.)  HOMCEOPATHY  IN  VENEREAL  DISEASES.
Cloth,  2s.  6d.


HENRY  TURNER  &  CO.,
LONDON  AND  MANCHESTER.


* /


UCSB  LIBRARY


PH..
