Not Without Laughter (Langston Hughes, 1930)
==========================================================
Sandy Rogers's coming of age — the classic novel of the Harlem Renaissance's Midwestern roots. Public domain. Sourced from the Internet Archive scan 'notwithoutlaught00lang' (https://archive.org/details/notwithoutlaught00lang).

pet Ped acie Fc Bad ie oda 0k. iptv ee 
n eeeeiilaeadnkid ainda bed taanm dele teen 


oN AN a tee 


GE AE PRL ice DOP ROL ALLE DE Le Aa AG OOP ELAM Rd SAREE AE OE pe A anh tre RD iS NI 
Fa Telling Peg Pid aay FS i NOS ee ignlitog tel hn ha SSRN yap glee ete ew i we 


Rete en en a” ny Sa RNS Te ON Pains ny ne ane na 
sO et eg me sat Naa a . 


navel Nar ec at ee 
fae ae ated Tel ee ee ie tig we Tad tee CPF 

FE AeA Fl alm 
Na tah TN aE A NS NNT REN el 0 ale aga ee: 
Fae LT a NDEI ona PRA At ett al A aM lol 


wpa wie este thectnate Aa ieg Tie Reta che line o Pati hit ema t OF aa cs RR et GIT on et nent Not - — n 
: Te ee Se a a alae ipa PT ce Le PoE ct SE OP a tad pal aN al nl tee ea aa NO Pie iS OMe taal No hl dat Na Ge PA iT ay a Oe a oe 
- é my ae na 


ee en a te ame 


na Pinata wart Pn ign il od Sn ios Pad y 4 - ioe 
Re nel anette indintaceaieds > — RE en IE Tan TPP NR IN ta wh TI DA AS ERENT ak OL ISAT iam 
ee eT IED AL ILO IW LOOT LITLE ONE OE AROS EEN DE A ES EE 
ee nie ennbipee per hes tn ine get ono Pree rt ghas F Pr adil oes rte oa Se ee aR pl le Ne NT GE le ag GET ae Saeco 
ee en kre ie edad tp Sad ma a ah tg el es tt ma aa Daa halt i a Daag oe See Unde taon cok cee pes 
Ree ee ei nedeniea raped rey nat ada Nea Pee PP Rh PSA Mc PS Re OP TPO I eo IAN Rg ot anal od om 

. P Peat os a ey cd wl a RE el INE OG IL nN DOF ELEN an Neg et NB Niel Ce Ne a EEL walt: = 

an So 


rE eh. nari 


eal 
preteen cpethn ana eed eran Alea ah a ee NS ae Se ny Fen aE oa te ne > 
ae eet Per eten A DDE AE wt ate at oe ae eal 4 “> Fe al nin al ag eet ene ie Baca a ao a Een i GR Seo Pe Net Sia it Stree Na, 
en ete ell ae earlier nada - - Et eect A ALR Pca cei beBereted cael ag LG Daag Get et ig Sa Dan LE a ena taal, en a, 
ec alae ee xy re eG a IGE, os NL nen es eign ali aaa el PPA P En a ie nan Eo A NINN oA PENA A AL ORT LENE LAP BET AE ch AR A AN OP te! A OL 
Sia RET mang oe a pI OO RENIN OT OT Se rene Dee er Ce Sea RO ee RS OI Se tele oil 
a eg Seats tI Tie tae eT a Ot ae on AERO I g Fa tn Nigel An ty gl ae a 
a ee STs a ie eal AA te lion Par sala weg tiated Wicd mon ges et NE ioe Cattle AT Post 
= (Fe Patt Pite a ial tT gg OG cart me LL AREER EI ee Re ae ee 
5 aE me Pa Toad PS BRA eod a etm eID SNE wa ol DI ILE GR AAS SONA A EE Sal on PF 
ace SO a na a ace ipecslee odliochetindien ina ac dipper aenk Ay eee oninrtiond erate math: eee 
a a as oe tia aaa ee oe Bid Phas cnt Ran x inal ill ST hs oe Li OC AG doe oie SR ns Se pe SUR CATE SOIR IRS tt < SE Ree 
IS vei ethan Tins PEL Ps SP ec ag AS AN Mergen AR by Peas ia? alia nc es le Ni al le TART Ne ee Ect PPMP LE PE ELAAPEAL AGRE ps Spi geie i 
te Si ES SO aren ig gusde ecm aes eae ens pineal re i a ee - 7 . ee eo seater ee i ce 
” “ig Fie Nea hind adh al Ps Mi en Ee tp TEL ARS TE AIta RE IER TCP Lt NL ea RGN Ee I ~ i ed 
sia mean Teen Eta PRT Ll ie oT ls STEIN TR oe tg RPL A SOP TO oe Paatie = 
Dp Negan etal eae an aac oT HE Nl GA ES AA AA 
ih Seo PE LF ns lem ore Dae ot Loew CBCRP in Fe Sm 


Tn At ae OTE RAS, Ain I OF om hin te SpE > 
Revie hese Sarit mtn Cane Bet were ha ered athe tenn tte 
9 Dan oe Neate Rn a ee 


Hughes 


Nate Dre 


Not without laughter - hee 


SAUSALITO PUBLIC LIBRARY 
SAUSALITO, CALIF. 94765 


Ge 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2013 


http://archive.org/details/notwithoutlaughtOOlang 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


Poetry 
by 
LANGSTON HUGHES 


The Weary Blues - 1920 


Fine Clothes to the Jew + 1927 


as NOT WITHOUT 
le LAUGHTER 
se BY 


LANG/ TON 
HUGHES 


> ALFRED A. KNOPF 


Ry NEWYORK 1930 


LONDON 3% 


Te os a ae lag Lae 


Copyright 1930 by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc. 
All rights reserved — no part of this book may be reprinted 


| 
! in any form without permission in writing from the publisher 


Manufactured in the United States of America 


To 
J. E. AND AMY SPINGARN 


kee RE AAAAAD 


CONTENTS 


i) 


€¢ eee TVVVS 


I- Storm - 3 
II - Conversation - 16 
III - Jimboy’s Letter - 30 
IV - Thursday Afternoon - 38 
V - Guitar - 50 
VI - Work - 62 
VII - White Folks - 72 
VIII - Dance - 86 
IX + Carnival - 107 
X + Punishment - 121 
XI + School - 130 
XII - Hard Winter - 138 


Vil 


CONTENTS 
XIII - Christmas - 153 


XIV - Return - 168 
XV - One by One - 176 
XVI - Nothing but Love - 188 
XVII - Barber-Shop - 195 
XVIII - Children’s Day - 205 
XIX - Ten Dollars and Costs - 215 
XX - Hey, Boy! - 221 
XXI - Note to Harriett - 231 
XXII - Beyond the Jordan - 243 
XXIII - Tempy’s House - 250 
XXIV - A Shelf of Books - 258 
XXV - Pool Hail - 265 
XXVI - The Doors of Life « 274 
XXVII - Beware of Women - 282 
XXVIII - Chicago - 294 
XXIX - Elevator - 309 
XXX - Princess of the Blues - 315 


Vill 


a 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


, 


RRR RAMA AH 


ONE 


STORM 


9 


Ee eECE YEIIVS 


UNT HAGER WILLIAMS stood in her doorway 
A looked out at the sun. The western sky was 
a sulphurous yellow and the sun a red ball 
dropping slowly behind the trees and house-tops. Its 
setting left the rest of the heavens grey with clouds. 
““Huh! A storm’s comin’,” said Aunt Hager aloud. 
A pullet ran across the back yard and into a square- 
cut hole in an unpainted piano-box which served as 
the roosting-house. An old hen clucked her brood to- 
gether and, with the tiny chicks, went into a small box 
beside the large one. The air was very still. Not a leaf 
stirred on the green apple-tree. Not a single closed 
flower of the morning-glories trembled on the back 
fence. The air was very still and yellow. Something 
sultry and oppressive made a small boy in the door- 
way stand closer to his grandmother, clutching her 
apron with his brown hands. : 
3 


eS A I oo 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


9 99 


“Sho is a storm comin’,” said Aunt Hager. 

“T hope mama gets home ’fore it rains,” re- 
marked the brown child holding to the old woman’s 
apron. “ Hope she gets home.” 

“I does, too,” said Aunt Hager. “ But I’s skeared 
she won't. 

Just then great drops of water began to fall heavily 
into the back yard, pounding up little clouds of dust 
where each drop struck the earth. For a few moments 
they pattered violently on the roof like a series of 
hammer-strokes; then suddenly they ceased. 

** Come in, chile,” said Aunt Hager. 

She closed the door as the green apple-tree began 
to sway in the wind and a small hard apple fell, roll- 
ing rapidly down the top of the piano-box that shel- 
tered the chickens. Inside the kitchen it was almost 
dark. While Aunt Hager lighted an oil-lamp, the 
child climbed to a chair and peered through the square 
window into the yard. The leaves and flowers of the 
morning-glory vines on the back fence were bending 
with the rising wind. And across the alley at the big 
house, Mrs. Kennedy’s rear screen-door banged to and 
fro, and Sandy saw her garbage-pail suddenly tip 
over and roll down into the yard, scattering potato- 
peelings on the white steps. 

“* Sho gwine be a terrible storm,” said Hager as she 
turned up the wick of the light and put the chimney 
on. Then, glancing through the window, she saw a 
black cloud twisting like a ribbon in the western sky, 
and the old woman screamed aloud in sudden terror: 

4 


STORM 


“Tt’s a cyclone! It’s gwine be a cyclone! Sandy, let’s 
|, get over to Mis’ Carter’s quick, ’cause we ain’t got no 
| cellar here. Come on, chile, let’s get! Come on, chile! 
. . . Come on, chile! ” : 

Hurriedly she blew out the light, grabbed the boy’s 
‘hand; and together they rushed through the little 
house towards the front. It was quite dark in the inner 
rooms, but through the parlor windows came a sort of 
sooty grey-green light that was rapidly turning to 
_ blackness. 

“‘Lawd help us, Jesus 
Aunt Hager opened the front door, but before she 
| or the child could move, a great roaring sound sud- 
_ denly shook the world, and, with a deafening division 
_ of wood from wood, they saw their front porch rise 
_ into the air and go hurtling off into space. Sailing high 
in the gathering darkness, the porch was soon lost to 
sight. And the black wind blew with terrific force, 
_ numbing the ear-drums. | 

_ For a moment the little house trembled and swayed 
and creaked as though it were about to fall. 

* Help me to shut this do’,” Aunt Hager screamed; 
“help me to shut it, Lawd! ” as with all her might she 
_ struggled against the open door, which the wind held 
back, but finally it closed and the lock caught. Then 
she sank to the floor with her back against the wall, 
while her small grandson trembled like a leaf as she 
took him in her lap, mumbling: “‘ Whata storm! .. . 
Q, Lawdy! . . . O, ma chile, what a storm! ” 

They could hear the crackling of timbers and the 

) 


{? 
° 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
rolling limbs of trees that the wind swept across the 
roof. Her arms tightened about the boy. 

* Dear Jesus! ” she said. “I wonder where is yo’ 
mama? S’pose she started out fo’ home "fore this 
storm come up!” Then in a scream: ‘“‘ Have mercy 
on ma Annjee! O, Lawd, have mercy on this chile’s 
mamma! Have mercy on all ma chillens! Ma Harriett, 
an’ ma Tempy, an’ ma Annjee, what’s maybe all of 
em out in de storm! O, Lawd! ” 

A dry crack of lightning split the darkness, and 
the boy began to wail. Then the rain broke. The old 
woman could not see the crying child she held, nor 
could the boy hear the broken voice of his grand- 
mother, who had begun to pray as the rain crashed 
through the inky blackness. For a long while it roared 
on the roof of the house and pounded at the windows, 
until finally the two within became silent, hushing their 
cries. Then only ihe lashing noise of the water, 
coupled with the feeling that something terrible was 
happening, or had already happened, filled the eve- 
ning air. 


After the rain the moon rose clear and bright and 
the clouds disappeared from the lately troubled sky. 
The stars sparkled calmly above the havoc of the 
storm, and it was still early evening as people emerged 
from their houses and began to investigate the damage 
brought by the twisting cyclone that had come with 
the sunset. Through the rubbish-filled streets men 
drove slowly with horse and buggy or automobile. 

6 


ee 


STORM 


The fire-engine was out, banging away, and the soft 
tang-tang-tang of the motor ambulance could be heard 
in the distance carrying off the injured. 

Black Aunt Hager and. her brown grandson put 
their rubbers on and stood in the water-soaked front. 
yard looking at the porchless house where they lived. 
Platform, steps, pillars, roof, and all had been blown 
away. Not a semblance of a porch was left and the 
front door opened bare into the yard. It was grotesque 
and funny. Hager laughed. 

““ Cyclone sho did a good job,” she said. “ Looks 
like I ain’t never had no porch.” 

Madam de Carter, from next door, came across 
the grass, her large mouth full of chattering sympathy 
for her neighbor. 

** But praise God for sparing our lives! It might’ve 
been worse, Sister Williams! It might’ve been much 
more calamitouser! As it is, I lost nothin’ more’n a 
chimney and two wash-tubs which was settin’ in the 
back yard. A few trees broke down don’t ’mount to 
nothin’. We’s livin’, ain’t we? And we’s more im- 
portanter than trees is any day!” Her gold teeth 
sparkled in the moonlight. 

“’Deed so,’ agreed Hager emphatically. “ Let’s 
-move on down de block, Sister, an’ see what mo’ de 
Lawd has ’stroyed or spared this evenin’. He’s gin us 
plenty moonlight after de storm so we po’ humans 
can see this lesson o’ His’n to a sinful world.” 

The two elderly colored women picked their way 
about on the wet walk, littered with twigs and branches 

: i 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


of broken foliage. The little brown boy followed, with 
his eyes wide at the sight of baby-carriages, window- 
sashes, shingles, and tree-limbs scattered about in the 
roadway. Large numbers of people were out, some 
standing on porches, some carrying lanterns, picking 
up useful articles from the streets, some wringing 
their hands in a daze. 

Near the corner a small crowd had gathered quietly. 

** Mis’ Gavitt’s killed,” somebody said. 

“Lawd help!” burst from Aunt Hager and 
Madam de Carter simultaneously. 

** Mister and Mis’ Gavitt’s both dead,” added a 
nervous young white man, bursting with the news. 
‘““We live next door to ’em, and their house turned 
clean over! Came near hitting us and breaking our 
side-wall in.” 

““Have mercy!” said the two women, but Sandy 
slipped away from his grandmother and pushed 
through the crowd. He ran round the corner to 
where he could see the overturned house of the un- 
fortunate Gavitts. 

Good white folks, the Gavitts, Aunt Hager had 
often said, and now their large frame dwelling lay on 
its side like a doll’s mansion, with broken furniture 
strewn carelessly on the wet lawn — and they were 
dead. Sandy saw a piano flat on its back in the grass. 
Its ivory keys gleamed in the moonlight like grinning 
teeth, and the strange sight made his little body shiver, 
so he hurried back through the crowd looking for his 
grandmother. As he passed the corner, he heard a 

& 


STORM 


woman sobbing hysterically within the wide house 
there. 

His grandmother was no longer standing where he 
had left her, but he found Madam de Carter and took - 
hold of her hand. She was in the midst of a group of 
excited white and colored women. One frail old lady 
was saying in a high determined voice that she had 
Ah Sauer seen a cyclone like this in her whole life, and 
__ she had lived here in Kansas, if you please, going on 
| seventy-three years. Madam de Carter, chattering ner- 


_ vously, began to tell them how she had recognized its 
, coming and had rushed to the cellar the minute she 
| saw the sky turn green. She had not come up until 
| the rain stopped, so frightened had she been. She was 
extravagantly enjoying the telling of her fears as 
Sandy kept tugging at her hand. 

““Where’s my grandma? ” he demanded. Madam 
de Carter, however, did not cease talking to answer 
his question. 

“What do you want, sonny?” finally one of the 
white women asked, bending down when he looked as 
if he were about to cry. “ Aunt Hager? . . . Why, 
she’s inside helping them calm poor Mrs. Gavitt’s 
niece. Your grandmother’s good to have around when 
folks are sick or grieving, you know. Run and set on 
the steps like a nice boy and wait until she comes out.” 
So Sandy: left the women and went to sit in the dark 
on the steps of the big corner house where the niece 
of the dead Mrs. Gavitt lived. There were some 
people on the porch, but they soon passed through 

9 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


the screen-door into the house or went away down the 
street. The moonlight cast weird shadows across the 
damp steps where Sandy sat, and it was dark there 
under the trees in spite of the moon, for the old house 
was built far back from the street in a yard full of 
oaks and maples, and Sandy could see the light from 
an upstairs window reflecting on the wet leaves of their 
nearest boughs. He heard a girl screaming, too, up 
there where the light was burning, and he knew that 
Aunt Hager was putting cold cloths on her head, or 
rubbing her hands, or driving folks out of the room, 
and talking kind to her so that she would soon be 
better. 

All the neighborhood, white or colored, called 
his grandmother when something happened. She was a 
good nurse, they said, and sick folks liked her around. 
Aunt Hager always came when they called, too, bring- 
ing maybe a little soup that she had made or a jelly. 
Sometimes they paid her and sometimes they didn’t. 
But Sandy had never had to sit outdoors in the dark- 
ness waiting for her before. He leaned his small back 
against the top step and rested his elbows on the porch 
behind him. It was growing late and the people in the 
streets had all disappeared. 

There, in the dark, the little fellow began to think 
about his mother, who worked on the other side of 
town for a rich white lady named Mrs. J. J. Rice. 
And suddenly frightful thoughts came into his mind. 
Suppose she had left for home just as the storm came 
up! Almost always his mother was home before 

10 


STORM 


dark — but she wasn’t there tonight when the storm 
came — and she should have been home! This thought 
appalled him. She should have been there! But maybe 
she had been caught by the storm and blown away as 
she walked down Main Street! Maybe Annjee had been 
carried off by the great black wind that had over- 
turned the Gavitt’s house and taken his grandma’s 
porch flying through the air! Maybe the cyclone had 
gotten his mother, Sandy thought. He wanted her! 
Where was she? Had something terrible happened to 
her? Where was she now? 

The big tears began to roll down his cheeks — but 
the little fellow held back the sobs that wanted to come. 
He decided he wasn’t going to cry and make a racket 
there by himself on the strange steps of these white 
folks’ house. He wasn’t going to cry like a big baby 
in the dark. So he wiped his eyes, kicked his heels 
against the cement walk, lay down on the top step, and, 
by and by, sniffled himself to sleep. 


“Wake up, son!” Someone was shaking him. 
* You'll catch your death o’ cold sleeping on the wet 
steps like this. We’re going home now. Don’t want 
me to have to carry a big man like you, do you, boy? 
. . » Wake up, Sandy! ” His mother stooped to lift 
his long little body from the wide steps. She held him 
against her soft heavy breasts and let his head rest on 
one of her shoulders while his feet, in their muddy 
rubbers, hung down against her dress. 

“Where you been, mama?” the boy asked 

Act 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
drowsily, tightening his arms about her neck. “I been 
waiting for you.” 

“Oh, I been home a long time, worried to death 
about you and ma till I heard from Madam Carter 
that you-all was down here nursing the sick. I stopped 
at your Aunt Tempy’s house when I seen the storm 
coming.” 

“T was afraid you got blowed away, mama,” 
murmured Sandy sleepily. “Let’s go home, mama. 
I’m glad you ain’t got blowed away.” 

On the porch Aunt Hager was talking to a pale white 
man and two thin white women standing at the door of 
the lighted hallway. “ Just let Mis’ Agnes sleep,” she 
was saying. “ She'll be all right now, an’ Pll come 
back in de mawnin’ to see ’’bout her. . . . Good-night, 
you-all.” 

The old colored woman joined her daughter and 
they started home, walking through the streets filled 
with debris and puddles of muddy water reflecting 
the moon. 

* You’re certainly heavy, boy,” remarked Sandy’s 
mother to the child she held, but he didn’t answer. 

“Tm right glad you come for me, Annjee,” Hager 
said. “I wonder is yo’ sister all right out yonder at 
de country club. . . . An’ I was so worried *bout 
you I didn’t know what to do — skeared you might a 
got caught in this twister, ’cause it were cert ly awful! ” 

*““T was at Tempy’s! ” Annjee replied. “ And I was 
nearly crazy, but I just left everything in the hands o’ 
God. That’s all.” In silence they walked on, a piece; 

12 


STORM 


then hesitantly, to her mother: “ There wasn’t any 
mail for me today, was there, ma? ” 

‘Not a speck! ” the old woman replied shortly. 
** Mail-man passed on by.” 

For a few minutes there was silence again as they 
walked. Then, “It’s goin’ on three weeks he’s been 
gone, and he ain’t written a line,” the younger woman 
complained, shifting the child to her right arm. 
“Seems like Jimboy would let a body know where he 
is, ma, wouldn’t it? ” 

“ Huh! That ain’t nothin’! He’s been gone before 
this an’ he ain’t wrote, ain’t he? Here you is worryin’ 
*bout a letter from that good-for-nothing husband 0’ 
your’n— an’ there’s ma house settin’ up without a 
porch to its name! ... Ain’t you seed what de 
devil’s done done on earth this evenin’, chile? . 
An’ yet de first thing you ask me *bout is de mail-man! 
. . . Lawd! Lawd! ... You an’ that Jimboy! ” 

Aunt Hager lifted her heavy body over fallen tree- 
trunks and across puddles, but between puffs she man- | 
aged to voice her indignation, so Annjee said no more 
concerning letters from her husband. Instead they 
went back to the subject of the cyclone. “I’m just 
thankful, ma, it didn’t blow the whole house down and 
you with it, that’s all! I was certainly worried! .. . 
And then you-all was gone when I got home! Gone 
on out — nursing that white woman... . It’s too 
bad *bout poor Mis’ Gavitt, though, and old man 
Gavitt, ain’t it? ” 

“Yes, indeedy! ” said Aunt Hager. “It’s sho too 

13 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 

bad. They was certainly good old white folks! An’ her 
married niece is takin’ it mighty hard, po’ little soul. 
I was nigh two hours, her husband an’ me, tryin’ to 
bring her out o’ de hysterics. Tremblin’ like a lamb 
all over, she was.” They were turning into the yard. 
** Be careful with that chile, Annjee, you don’t trip 
on none o’ them boards nor branches an’ fall with 
him.” 

** Put me down, ’cause I’m awake,” said Sandy. 

The old house looked queer without a porch. In the 
moonlight he could see the long nails that had held the 
porch roof to the weather-boarding. His grandmother 
climbed slowly over the door-sill, and his mother 
lifted him to the floor level as Aunt Hager lit the large 
oiul-lamp on the parlor table. Then they went back 
to the bedroom, where the youngster took off his 
clothes, said his prayers, and climbed into the high 
feather bed where he slept with Annjee. Aunt Hager 
went to the next room, but for a long time she talked 
back and forth through the doorway to her daughter 
about the storm. 

““'We was just startin’ out fo’ Mis’ Carter’s cellar, 
me an’ Sandy,” she said several times. “‘ But de Lawd 
was with us! He held us back! Praise His name! We 
ain’t harmed, none of us — ’ceptin’ I don’t know “bout 
ma Harriett at de club. But you’s all right. An’ you 
say Tempy’s all right, too. An’ I prays that Harriett 
ain’t been touched out there in de country where she’s 
workin’. Maybe de storm ain’t passed that way.” 

Then they spoke about the white people where 

14 


STORM 
Annjee worked ... and about the elder sister 
Tempy’s prosperity. Then Sandy heard his grand- 
mother climb into bed, and a few minutes after the 
springs screaked under her, she had begun to snore. 
Annjee closed the door between their rooms and 
slowly began to unlace her wet shoes. 

“Sandy,” she whispered, “we ain’t had no word 
yet from your father since he left. I know he goes 
away and stays away like this and don’t write, but I’m 
sure worried. Hope the cyclone ain’t passed nowhere 
near wherever he is, and I hope ain’t nothin’ hurt 


him. . . . ’m gonna pray for him, Sandy. I’m gonna 
ask God right now to take care o’ Jimboy. . . . The 
Lawd knows, I wants him to come back! . . . I loves 


him. . . . We both loves him, don’t we, child? And 
we want him to come on back! ” 

She knelt down beside the bed in her night-dress 
and kept her head bowed for a long time. Before she 
got up, Sandy had gone to sleep. 


pee 


15 


kT AAA AH 


TWO 
CONVERSATION 


° 


ee ee YTV 


had been for a long time. 

Get out o’ that bed, boy! * Aunt Hager allen 
““ Here’s Buster waitin’ out in de yard to play with 
you, an’ you still sleepin’! ” 

** Aw, tell him to cut off his curls,” retorted Sandy, 
but his grandmother was in no mood for fooling. 

“Stop talkin’ *bout that chile’s haid and put yo’ 
clothes on. Nine o’clock an’ you ain’t up yet! Shame 
on you! ” She shouted from the kitchen, where Sandy 
could hear the fire crackling and smell coffee boiling. 

He kicked the sheet off with his bare feet and rolled 
over and over on the soft feather tick. There was plenty 
of room to roll now, because his mother had long since 
got up and gone to Mrs. J. J. Rice’s to work. 

“ Tell Bus I’m coming,” Sandy yelled, jumping into 
his trousers and running with bare feet towards the 
door. “‘ Is he got his marbles? ” 

16 


[: was broad daylight in the town of Stanton and 


CONVERSATION 
““ Come back here, sir, an’ put them shoes on,” cried 
Hager, stopping him on his way out. “ Yo’ feet’ll get 


long as yard-sticks and flat as pancakes runnin’ round 


barefooted all de time. An’ wash yo’ face, sir. Buster 
ain’t got a thing to do but wait. An’ eat yo’ breakfast.” 

The air was warm with sunlight, and hundreds of 
purple and white morning-glories laughed on the back 
fence. Earth and sky were fresh and clean after the 
heavy night-rain, and the young corn-shoots stood 
straight in the garden, and green pea-vines wound 
themselves around their crooked sticks. There was the 
mingled scent of wet soil and golden pollen on the 
breeze that blew carelessly through the clear air. 

Buster sat under the green apple-tree with a pile 
of black mud from the alley in front of him. 

“Hey, Sandy, gonna make marbles and put ’em in 
the sun to dry,” he said. 

“ All right,” agreed Sandy, and they began to roll 
mud balls in the palms of their hands. But instead of 
putting them in the sun to dry they threw them against 
the back of the house, where they flattened and stuck 
beautifully. Then they began to throw them at each 
other. 

Sandy’s playmate was a small ivory-white Negro 
child with straight golden hair, which his mother made 
him wear in curls. His eyes were blue and doll-like 
and he in no way resembled a colored youngster; 
but he was colored. Sandy himself was the shade of a 
nicely browned piece of toast, with dark, brown-black 
eyes and a head of rather kinky, sandy hair that would 

Lr 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
le smooth only after a rigorous application of vase- 
line and water. That was why folks called him Annjee’s 
sandy-headed child, and then just — Sandy. 

“He takes after his father,” Sister Lowry said, 
*’cept he’s not so light. But he’s gonna be a mighty 
good-lookin’ boy when he grows up, that’s sho! ” 

“Well, I hopes he does,” Aunt Hager said. “‘ But 
I'd rather he’d be ugly ’fore he turns out anything like 
that good-for-nothing Jimboy what comes here an’ 
stays a month, goes away an’ stays six, an’ don’t hit a 
tap o work ’cept when he feels like it. If it wasn’t for 
Annjee, don’t know how we'd eat, ’cause Sandy’s 
father sho don’t do nothin’ to support him.” 

All the colored people in Stanton knew that Hager 
bore no love for Jimboy Rodgers, the tall good- 
looking yellow fellow whom her second daughter had 
married. 3 

“First place, I don’t like his name,” she would say 
in private. ““ Who ever heard of a nigger named Jim- 
boy, anyhow? Next place, I ain’t never seen a yaller 
dude yet that meant a dark woman no good — an’ 
Annjee is dark! ” Aunt Hager had other objections, 
too, although she didn’t like to talk evil about folks. 
But what she probably referred to in her mind was the 
question of his ancestry, for nobody knew who Jim- 
boy’s parents were. 


“ Sandy, look out for the house while I run down 
an’ see how is Mis’ Gavitt’s niece. An’ you-all play 
outdoors. Don’t bring no chillen in, litterin’ up de 

18 


CONVERSATION 

place.” About eleven o’clock Aunt Hager pulled a dust- 
cap over her head and put on a clean white apron. 
‘“‘ Here, tie it for me, chile,” she said, turning her 
broad back. “ An’ mind-you don’t hurt yo’self on no 
rusty nails and rotten boards left from de storm. I'll 
be back atter while.” And she disappeared around the 
house, walking proudly, her black face shining in the 
sunlight. 

Presently the two boys under the apple-tree were 
joined by a coal-colored little girl who lived next 
door, one Willie-Mae Johnson, and the mud balls 
under her hands became mud pies carefully rounded 
and patted and placed in the sun on the small box 
where the little chickens lived. Willie-Mae was the 
mama, Sandy the papa, and Buster the baby as 
the old game of “ playing house ” began anew. 

By and by the mail-man’s whistle blew and the 
three children scampered towards the sidewalk to 
meet him. The carrier handed Sandy a letter. “ Take it 
in the house,” he said. But instead the youngsters 
sat on the front-door-sill, their feet dangling 
where the porch had been, and began to examine the 
envelope. 

** T bet that’s Lincoln’s picture,” said Buster. 

*“ No, “taint,” declared Willie-Mae. “It’s Rossie- 
felt! ” 

* Aw, it’s Washington,” said Sandy. “‘ And don’t 
you-all touch my mama’s letter with your hands all 
muddy. It might be from my papa, you can’t tell, and 
she wants it kept clean.” 

19 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


“°Tis from Jimboy,” Aunt Hager declared when 
she returned, accompanied by her old friend, Sister 
Whiteside, who peddled on foot fresh garden-truck 
she raised herself. Aunt Hager had met her at the 
corner. 

* T knows his writin’,”” went on Hager. “ An’ it’s got 
a postmark, K-A-N-, Kansas City! That’s what ’tis! 
Niggers sho do love Kansas City! ... Huh! ... 
So that’s where he’s at. Well, yo’ mama’ll be glad to 
get it. If she knowed it was here, she’d quit work an’ 
come home now. . . . Sit down, Whiteside. We gwine 
eat in a few minutes. You better have a bite with us 
an’ stay an’ rest yo’self awhile, ’cause I knows you 
been walkin’ this mawnin’! ” 

Deed I is,” the old sister declared, dropping her 
basket of lettuce and peas on the floor and taking a 
chair next to the table in the kitchen. “ An’ I ain’t sold 
much neither. Seems like folks ain’t got no buyin’ 
appetite after all that storm an’ wind last night — but 
de Lawd will provide! I ain’t worried.” 

“ That’s right,” agreed Hager. “‘ Might 0’ been me 
blowed away maself, ’stead o’ just ma porch, if Jesus 
hadn’t been with us. . . . You Sandy! Make haste 
and wash yo’ hands, sir. Rest 0’ you chillens go on 
home, ’cause I know yo’ ma’s lookin’ for you. . 
Huh! This wood fire’s mighty low! ” 

Hager uncovered a pot that had been simmering on 
the stove all morning and dished up a great bowlful 
of black-eyed peas and salt pork. There was biscuit 
bread left from breakfast. A plate of young onions and 

20 


CONVERSATION 


a pitcher of lemonade stood on the white oilcloth- 
covered table. Heads were automatically bowed. 

‘“* Lawd, make us thankful for this food. For Christ’s 
sake, amen,” said Hager; then the two old women and 
the child began to eat. 

“ That’s Elvira’s boy, ain’t it— that yaller-headed 
young-one was here playin’ with Sandy?” Sister 
Whiteside had her mouth full of onions and beans as 
she asked the question. 

“Shsss! . . . That’s her child!” said Hager. 
** But it ain’t Eddie’s! ” She gave her guest a meaning 
giance across the table, then lowered her voice, pre- 
tending all the while that Sandy’s ears were too young 
to hear. “ They say she had that chile ’fore she mar- 
ried Eddie. An’ black as Eddie is, you knows an’ I 
knows ain’t due to be no golden hair in de family! ” 

** T knowed there must be something funny,” whis- 
pered the old sister, screwing up her face. “ That’s 
some white man’s chile! ” 

“Sho it is!” agreed Hager. . . . “I knowed it 
all de time. . . . Have some mo’ meat, Whiteside. 
Help yo’self! We ain’t got much, but such as ’tis, 
you're welcome. . . . Yes, sir, Buster’s some white 
“man’s chile. . . . Stop reachin’ cross de table for 
bread, Sandy. Where’s yo’ manners, sir? I declare, 
chillens do try you sometimes. . .. Pass me de 
onions.” 

“Truth, they tries you, yit I gits right lonesome 
since all ma young-ones is: gone.” Sister Whiteside 
worked her few good teeth vigorously, took a long 

a) 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


swallow of lemonade, and smacked her lips. “* Chillen 
an’ grandchillen all in Chicago an’ St. Louis an’ 
Wichita, an’ nary chick nor child left with me in de 
house. . . . Pass me de bread, thank yuh... . I 
feels kinder sad an’ sorry at times, po’ widder-woman 
that I is. I has ma garden an’ ma hens, but all ma 
chillens done grown and married. . . . Where’s yo’ 
daughter Harriett at now, Hager? Is she married, too? 
I ain’t seen her lately.” 

Hager pulled a meat skin through her teeth; then 
she answered: “ No, chile, she too young to marry 
yet! Ain’t but sixteen, but she’s been workin out this 
summer, waitin’ table at de Stanton County Country 
Club. Been in de country three weeks now, since school 
closed, but she comes in town on Thursdays, though. 
It’s nigh six miles from here, so de women-help sleeps 
there at night. I’s glad she’s out there, Sister. Course 
Harriett’s a good girl, but she likes to be frisky — 
wants to run de streets ’tendin’ parties an’ dances, an’ 
I can’t do much with her no mo’, though I hates to 
say it.” 

‘“‘ But she’s a songster, Hager! An’ I hears she’s 
sho one smart chile, besides. They say she’s up with 
them white folks when it comes to books. An’ de high 
school where she’s goin’ ain’t easy. ... All ma 
young ones quit fore they got through with it — 
wouldn’t go—ruther have a good time runnin’ to 
Kansas City an’ galavantin’ round.” 

‘“‘De Lawd knows it’s a hard job, keepin’ colored 
chillens in school, Sister Whiteside, a mighty hard 

22 


CONVERSATION 


job. De niggers don’t help ’em, an’ de white folks 
don’t care if they stay or not. An’ when they gets along 
_. sixteen an’ seventeen, they wants this, an’ they wants 
| that, an’ t’other — an’ when you ain’t got it to give to 
~ ’em, they quits school an’ goes to work. . . . Harriett 
. say she ain’t goin’ back next fall. I feels right hurt 
» over it, but she ’clares she ain’t goin’ back to school. 
Says there ain’t no use in learnin’ books fo’ nothin’ 
- but to work in white folks’ kitchens when she’s 
_ graduated.” 
_ “Do she, Hager? I’s sho sorry! I’s gwine to talk to 
' that gal. Get Reverend Berry to talk to her, too. .. . 
| You’s struggled to bring up yo’ chillens, an’ all we 
Christians in de church ought to help you! I gwine see 
Reverend Berry, see can’t he ’suade her to stay in 
- school.” The old woman reached for the onions. “ But 
_ you ain’t never raised no boys, though, has you, 
Hager? ” 
“No, I ain’t. My two boy-chillens both died fore 
they was ten. Just these three girls ——Tempy, an’ 
_ Annjee, an’ Harriett — that’s all I got. An’ this here 
grandchile, Sandy. . . . Take yo’ hands off that meat, 
_ sir! You had ’nough! ” 

“Lawd, you’s been lucky! I done raised seven 
grandchillen ’sides eight 0’ ma own. An’ they don’t 
_ thank me. No, sir! Go off and kick up they heels an’ 
_ git married an’ don’t thank me a bit! Don’t even write, 
some of ’em. . . . Waitin’ fo’ me to die, I reckon, 
so’s they can squabble over de little house I owns an’ 
ma garden.” The old visitor pushed back her chair. | 

23 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


“Huh! Yo’ dinner was sho good! . . . Waitin’ fo’ 
me to die.” 
“ Unhuh! . . . That’s de way with ’em, Sister 


Whiteside. Chillens don’t care -— but I reckon we old 
ones can’t kick much. They’s got to get off fo’ them- 
selves. It’s natural, that’s what ’tis. Now, my Tempy, 
she’s married and doin’ well. Got a fine house, an’ her 
husband’s a mail-clerk in de civil service makin’ good 
money. They don’t ’sociate no mo’ with none but de 
high-toned colored folks, like Dr. Mitchell, an’ Mis’ 
Ada Walls, an’ Madam C. Frances Smith. Course 
Tempy don’t come to see me much ’cause I still earns 
ma livin’ with ma arms in de tub. But Annjee run in 
their house out o’ the storm last night an’ she say 
Tempy’s just bought a new pianer, an’ de house looks 
fine. . . . I’s glad fo’ de chile.” 

“Sho, sho you is, Sister Williams, you’s a good 
mother an’ I knows you’s glad. But I hears from 
Reverend Berry that Tempy’s done withdrawed from 
our church an’ joined de Episcopals! ” 

“ That’s right! She is. Last time I seed Tempy, she 
told me she couldn’t stand de Baptist no mo’ —too 
many low niggers belonging, she say, so she’s gonna 
join Father Hill’s church, where de best people go. 
. . . I told her I didn’t think much o’ joinin’ a church 
so far away from God that they didn’t want nothin’ 
but yaller niggers for members, an’ so full o’ forms 
an’ fashions that a good Christian couldn’t shout — 
but she went on an’ joined. It’s de stylish temple, that’s 
why, so I ain’t said no mo’. Tempy’s goin’ on thirty- 

24, 


CONVERSATION 


five now, she’s ma oldest chile, an’ I reckon she knows 
how she wants to act.” 
“Yes, I reckon she do. . . . But there ain’t no 


) church like de Baptist, praise God! Is there, Sister? 


If you ain’t been dipped in that water an’ half 


_ drowned, you ain’t saved. Tempy don’t know like we 
» do. No, sir, she don’t know!” 


There was no fruit or dessert, and the soiled plates 


were not removed from the table for a long time, for 
_ the two old women, talking about their children, had 


forgotten the dishes. Young flies crawled over the 
biscuit bread and hummed above the bowl of peas, 


while the wood fire died in the stove, and Sandy went 


out into the sunshine to play. 

““ Now, ma girl, Maggie,” said Sister Whiteside; 
*“* de man she married done got to be a big lawyer in 
St. Louis. He’s in de politics there, an’ Maggie’s got 
a fine job herself — social servin’, they calls it. But 
I don’t hear from her once a year. An’ she don’t send 
me a dime. Ma boys looks out for me, though, some- 
times, round Christmas. There’s Lucius, what runs on 
de railroad, an’ then Andrew, what rides de horses, 
an’ John, in Omaha, sends me a little change now an’ 
then — all but Charlie, an’ he never was thoughtful 
*bout his mother. He ain’t never sent me nothin’.” 

** Well, you sho is lucky,” said Hager; “ ’cause they 
ain’t no money comes in this house, Christma? nor no 
other time, less’n me an’ Annjee brings it here. Jim- 
boy ain’t no good, an’ what Harriett makes goes for 
clothes and parties an’ powderin’-rags. Course, I takes 

29 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


some from her every week, but I gives it right back for 
her school things. An’ I ain’t taken nothin’ from her 
these three weeks she’s been workin’ at de club. She 
say she’s savin’ her money herself. She’s past sixteen 
now, so I lets her have it. . . . Po’ little thing! .. . 
She does need to look purty.” Hager’s voice softened 
and her dark old face was half abashed, kind and 
smiling. “ You know, last month I bought her a gold 
watch — surprise fo’ her birthday, de kind you hangs 
on a little pin on yo’ waist. Lawd knows, I couldn’t 
ford it—took all de money from three week’s 0’ 
washin’, but I knowed she’d been wantin’ a watch. 
Av’ this front room — I moved ma bed out last year 
an’ bought that new rug at de second-hand store an’ 
them lace curtains so’s she could have a nice place to 
entertain her comp’ny. . . . But de chile goes with 
such a kinder wild crowd o’ young folks, Sister White- 
side! It worries me! The boys, they cusses, an’ the 
girls, they paints, an’ some of ’em live in de Bottoms. 
I been tried to get her out of it right along, but seems 
like I can’t. That’s why I’s glad she’s in de country 
fo’ de summer an’ comes in but only once a week, an’ 
then she’s home with me. It’s too far to come in town 
at night, she say, so she gets her rest now, goin’ to bed 
early an’ all, with de country air round her. I hopes 
she calms down from runnin’ round when she comes 
back here to stay in de fall. . . . She’s a good chile. 
She don’t lie to me *bout where she goes, nor nothin’ 
like that, but she’s just wild, that’s all, just wild.” 
‘Is she a Christian, Sister Williams? ” 
26 


CONVERSATION 

“No, she ain’t. I’s sorry to say it of a chile o’ mine, 
but she ain’t. She’s been on de moaner’s bench time 
after time, Sunday mawnins’ an’ prayer-meetin’ 
+ evenin’s, but she never would rise. I prays for her.” 
“Well, when she takes Jesus, she’ll see de light! 
- That’s what de matter with her, Sister Williams, she 
_ain’t felt Him yit. Make her go to church when she 
_ comes back here. . . . I reckon you heard ’bout when 
de big revival’s due to come off this year, ain’t you? ” 

“No, I ain’t, not yet.” 

“Great colored tent-meetin’ with de Battle-Ax of 
de Lawd, Reverend Braswell preachin’! Yes, sir! 
' Gwine start August eighteenth in de Hickory Woods 
yonder by de edge o’ town.” 

“Good news,” cried Hager. “‘ Mo’ sinners than 
enough’s in need o’ savin’. I’s gwine to take Sandy an’ 
get him started right with de Lawd. An’ if that onery 
Jimboy’s back here, I gwine make him go, too, an’ 
look Jesus in de face. Annjee an’ me’s saved, chile! 
. . . You Sandy, bring us some drinkin’-water from 
de pump.” Aunt Hager rapped on the window with 
_her knuckles to the boy playing outside! ‘‘ An’ stop 
wrastlin’ with that gal.” 

Sandy rose triumphant from the prone body of 
black little Willie-Mae, lying squalling on the cinder- 
path near the back gate. “ She started it,”’ he yelled, 
running towards the pump. The girl began a reply, but 
at that moment a rickety wagon drawn by a white mule 
-and driven by a grey-haired, leather-colored old 
man came rattling down the alley. | 

27 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER | 

“Hy, there, Hager! ” called the old Negro, tighten- | 
ing his reins on the mule, which immediately began | 
to eat corn-tops over the back fence. “ How you been — 
treatin’ yo’self? ” 

“Right tolable,” cried Hager, for she and Sister | 
Whiteside had both emerged from the kitchen and | 
were approaching the driver. “How you doin’, 
Brother Logan? ” 

*““ Why, if here ain’t Sis’ Whiteside, too!” said the — 
old beau, sitting up straight on his wagon-seat and 
showing a row of ivory teeth in a wide grin. “I’s 
doin’ purty well for a po’ widower what ain’t got no- 
body to bake his bread. Doin’ purty well. Hee! Hee! 
None o’ you all ain’t sorry for me, is you? How de 
storm treat you, Hager? . . . Says it carried off yo’ 
porch? . . . That’s certainly too bad! Well, it did 
some o’ these white folks worse’n that. I got ’nough 
work to do to last me de next fo’ weeks, cleanin’ up 
yards an’ haulin’ off trash, me an’ dis mule here. . . . 
How’s yo’ chillen, Sis’ Williams? ” 

‘Oh, they all right, thank yuh. Annjee’s still at 
Mis’ Rice’s, an’ Harriet’s in de country at de club.” 

“Is she? ” said Brother Logan. “I seed her in 
town night fore last down on Pearl Street bout ten 
o'clock.” 

“You ain’t seed Harriett no night ’fore last,” dis- 
puted Hager vigorously. “She don’t come in town 
’ceptin’ Thursday afternoons, an’ that’s tomorrow.” 

‘“* Sister, I ain’t blind,” said the old man, hurt that 
his truth should be doubted. “ I — seen — Harriett 

28 


CONVERSATION 
Williams on Pearl Street . . . with Maudel Smothers 
-an’ two boys *bout ten o’clock day before yestidy 
night! An’ they was gwine to de Waiters’ Ball, ’cause 
I asked Maudel where they was gwine, an’ she say 
so. Then I says to Harriett: "Does yo’ mammy know 
you’s out this late?’ an’ she laughed an’ say: ‘ Oh, 
that’s all right! . . . Don’t tell me I ain’t seen Har- 
riett, Hager.”’ 

“* Well, Lawd help! ” Aunt Hager cried, her mouth 
open. “ You done seed my chile in town an’ she ain't 
come anear home! Stayed all night at Maudel’s, I 
reckon. . . . I tells her *bout runnin’ with that gal 

| from de Batons: That’s what makes her lie to me — 
tellin’ me she don’t come in town o’ nights. Maudel’s 

_ folks don’t keep no kind o’ house, and mens goes there, 

an’ they sells licker, an’ they gambles an’ fights. . . . 

Is you sho that’s right, Brother Logan, ma chile done 

been in town an’ ain’t come home? ” 

“It ain’t wrong!” said old man Logan, cracking 
his long whip on the white mule’s haunches. “ Gitti- 
yap! You ole jinny! ” and he drove off. 

*Um-uh! ” said Sister Whiteside to Hager as the 
two toil-worn old women walked toward the house. 
** That’s de way they does you! ” The peddler gathered 
up her things. “I better be movin’, ’cause I got these 
greens to sell yit, an’ it’s gittin’ "long towards evenin’. 

. That’s de way chillens does you, Sister Wil- 

liams! I knows! That’s de way they does! ” 


29 


i SSS AAAAA 


THREE 
JIMBOY’S LETTER 


° 


© EE EE VS ISS 


Kansas City, Mo. 
13 June 1912 


EAR ANNJELICA, 
I been laying off to written you ever since I 


left home but you know how it is. Work has 
not been so good here. Am with a section gang of 
coloreds and greeks and somehow strained my back 
on the Union Pacific laying ties so I will be home 
on Saturday. Will do my best to try and finish out 
weak here. Love my darling wife also kiss my son 
Sandy for me. Am dying to see you, 
affectionately as ever and allways 
till the judgment day, 
Jimboy Rogers 


“* Strained his back, has he? Unhuh! An’ then comes 
writin’ *bout till de judgment day! ” Hager muttered 
30 | 


JIMBOY’S LETTER 


when she heard it. “‘ Always something wrong with 
that nigger! He’ll be back here now, layin’ ’round, 
doin’ nothin’ fo’ de rest o’ de summer, turnin’ ma 
house into a theatre with him an’ Harriett singin’ their 
rag-time, an’ that guitar o’ his’n wangin’ ever’ evenin’! 
’Tween him an’ Harriett both it’s a wonder I ain’t 
plumb crazy. But Harriett do work fo’ her livin’. She 
ain’tno loafer. . . . Huh! . . . Annjee, you was sho 
a fool when you married that boy, an’ you still is! 
. . . ’s gwine next do’ to Sister Johnson’s! ” Aunt 
Hager went out the back and across the yard, where, 
next door, Tom and Sarah Johnson, Willie-Mae’s 
grandparents, sat on a bench against the side-wall of 
an unpainted shanty. They were both quietly smoking 
their corn-cob pipes in the evening dusk. 

Sandy, looking at the back of the letter that his 
mother held, stood at the kitchen-table rapidly de- 
vouring a large piece of fresh lemon pie, which she 
had brought from Mrs. J. J. Rice’s. Annjee had said 
to save the two cold fried lamb chops until tomorrow, 
or Sandy would have eaten those, too. 

“Wish you’d brought home some more pie,” 
the boy declared, his lips white with meringue, but 
Annjee, who had just got in from work, paid no 
attention to her son’s appreciative remarks on her 
cookery. 

Instead she said: “ Ma certainly ain’t got no time 
for Jimboy, has she? ” and then sat down with the 
open letter still in her hand — a single sheet of white 
paper pencilled in large awkward letters. She put it 

ol 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
on the table, rested her dark face in her hands, and 
began to read it again. . . . She knew how it was, of 
course, that her husband hadn’t written before. That 
was all right now. Working all day in the hot sun with 
a gang of Greeks, a man was tired at night, besides 
living in a box-car, where there was no place to write 
a letter anyway. He was a great big kid, that’s what 
Jimboy was, cut out for playing. But when he did 
work, he tried to outdo everybody else. Annjee could 
see him in her mind, tall and well-built, his legs apart, 


muscles bulging as he swung the big hammer above _ 


his head, driving steel. No wonder he hurt his back, 
trying to lay more ties a day than anybody else on the 
railroad. That was just like Jimboy. But she was kind 
of pleased he had hurt it, since it would bring him 
home. 

** Ain’t you glad he’s comin’, Sandy? ” 

“Sure,” answered the child, swallowing his last 
mouthful of pie. “I hope he brings me that gun he 
promised to buy last Easter.” The boy wiped his sticky 
hands on the dish-cloth and ran out into the back 
yard, calling: “ Willie-Mae! Willie-Mae! ” 

“Stay right over yonder!” answered his grand- 
mother through the dusk. “‘ Willie-Mae’s in de bed, 
sir, an’ we old folks settin’ out here tryin’ to have a 
little peace.” From the tone of Hager’s voice he knew 
he wasn’t wanted in the Johnson’s yard, so he went 
back into the house, looked at his mother reading 
her letter again, and then lay down on the kitchen- 
floor. 

32 


JIMBOY’S LETTER 

“ Affectionately as ever and allways till the judg- 
ment day,” she read, “‘ Jimboy Rogers.” 

He loved her, Annjee was sure of that, and it wasn’t 
another woman that made him go away so often. Eight 
years they'd been married. No, nine — because Sandy 
was nine, and he was ready to be born when they had 
had the wedding. And Jimboy left the week after they 
were married, to go to Omaha, where he worked all 
winter. When he came back, Sandy was in the world, 
sitting up sucking meat skins. It was springtime and 


{ they bought a piano for the house — but later the 


instalment man came and took it back to the store. 
All that summer her husband stayed home and worked 
a little, but mostly he fished, played pool, taught Har- 
riett to buck-dance, and quarrelled with Aunt Hager. 
Then in the winter he went to Jefferson City and got a 
job at the Capitol. 

Jimboy was always going, but Aunt Hager was wrong 
about his never working. It was just that he couldn’t 
stay in one place all the time. He’d been born running, 
he said, and had run ever since. Besides, what was 
there in Stanton anyhow for a young colored fellow 
to do except dig sewer ditches for a few cents an hour 
or maybe porter around a store for seven dollars a 
week. Colored men couldn’t get many jobs in Stanton, 
and foreigners were coming in, taking away what 
little work they did have. No wonder he didn’t stay 
home. Hadn’t Annjee’s father been in Stanton forty 
years and hadn’t he died with Aunt Hager still taking 
in washings to help keep up the house? 

33 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 

There was no well-paid work for Negro men, so 
Annjee didn’t blame Jimboy for going away looking 
for something better. She’d go with him if it wasn’t for 
her mother. If she went, though, Aunt Hager wouldn’t 
have anybody for company but Harriett, and Harriett 
was the youngest and wildest of the three children. 
With Pa Williams dead going on ten years, Hager 
washing every day, Tempy married, and Annjee her- 
self out working, there had been nobody to take much 
care of the little sister as she grew up. Harriett had 
had no raising, even though she was smart and in high 
school. A female child needed care. But she could 
sing! Lawdy! And dance, too! That was another reason 
why Aunt Hager didn’t like Jimboy. The devil’s mu- 
sicianer, she called him, straight from hell, teaching 
Harriett buck-and-winging! But when he took his soft- 
playing guitar and picked out spirituals and old-time 
Christian hymns on its sweet strings, Hager forgot 
she was his enemy, and sang and rocked with the rest 
of them. When Jimboy was home, you couldn’t get 
lonesome or blue. 

“Gee, I'll be glad when he comes! ” Annjee said 
to herself. “ But if he goes off again, Ill feel like 
dying in this dead old town. I ain’t never been away 
from here nohow.” She spoke aloud to the dim oil- 
lamp smoking on the table and the sleeping boy on 
the floor. “I believe Pll go with him next time. I 
declare I do! ” And then, realizing that Jimboy had 
never once told her when he was leaving or for what 
destination, she amended her utterance. “ I'll follow 

34 


JIMBOY’S LETTER 


him, though, as soon as he writes.”” Because, almost 
always after he had been away two or three weeks, he 
would write. “Vl follow him, sure, if he goes off 
again. I'll leave Sandy here and send money back to 
mama. Then Harriett could settle down and take care 
of ma and stop runnin’ the streets so much. . . . Yes, 
that’s what I'll do next time! ” 

This going away was a new thought, and the dark, 
strong-bodied young woman at the table suddenly 
began to dream of the cities she had never seen to 
which Jimboy would lead her. Why, he had been as 
far north as Canada and as far south as New Orleans, 
and it wasn’t anything for him to go to Chicago or 
Denver any time! He was a travelling man — and 
she, Annjee, was too meek and quiet, that’s what she 
was — too stay-at-homish. Never going nowhere, never 
saying nothing back to those who scolded her or talked 
about her, not even sassing white folks when they got 
beside themselves. And every colored girl in town 
said that Mrs. J. J. Rice was no easy white woman to 
work for, yet she had been there now five years, accept- 
ing everything without a murmur! Most young folks, 
girls and boys, left Stanton as soon as they could for 
the outside world, but here she was, Annjelica Wil- 
liams, going on twenty-eight, and had never been as 
far as Kansas City! 

“* [ want to travel,” she said to herself. “‘ I want to 
go places, too.” 

But that was why Jimboy married her, because she 
wasn’t a runabout. He’d had enough of those kind of 

30 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


women before he struck Stanton, he said. St. Louis | 

was full of them, and Chicago running over. She was | 
the first nice girl he’d ever met who lived at home, so | 
he took her. . . . There were mighty few dark women | 
had a light, strong, good-looking young husband, | 
really a married husband, like Jimboy, and a little | 
brown kid like Sandy. | 

“Tm mighty lucky,” Annjee thought, “ even if he | 
ain’t here.”’ And two tears of foolish pride fell from - 
the bright eyes in her round black face. They trickled | 
down on the letter, with its blue lines and pencil- | 
scrawled message, and some of the words on the paper | 
began to blur into purple blots because the pencil had 
been an indelible one. Quickly she fumbled for a | 
handkerchief to wipe the tears away, when a voice — 
made her start. 

* You Annjee! ” cried Aunt Hager in the open door. 
“Go to bed, chile! Go on! Settin’ up here this late, 
burnin’ de light an’ lurin’ all sorts o’ night-bugs an’ 
creepers into de house! ” The old woman came in out 
of the dark. “ Lawd! I might anigh stumbled over this 
boy in de middle o’ de flo’! An’ you ain’t even took off 
yo’ hat since you got home from work! Is you crazy? 
Settin’ up here at night with yo’ hat on, an’ lettin’ this 
chile catch his death o’ cold sleepin’ down on de flo’ 
long after his bedtime! ” 

Sheepishly Annjee folded her letter and got up. 
It was true that she still had on her hat and the sweater 
she had worn to Mrs. Rice’s. True, too, the whole 
room was alive with soft-winged moths fluttering 

36 


JIMBOY’S LETTER 


against the hot glass of the light — and on the kitchen 
% floor a smali, brown-skin, infinitely lovable edition of 
0  Jimboy lay sprawled contentedly in his grandmother’s 
1 path, asleep! 

1 “‘ He’s my baby! ” Annjee said gently, stooping to 
e pick him up. “ He’s my baby — me and Jimboy’s 
baby!” 


a7 


ke I I MAGA 
FOUR | 
THURSDAY AFTERNOON 


© 


© eC CE SISSS 


AGER had risen at sunrise. On Thursdays she 
He the Reinharts’ washing, on Fridays she 
ironed it, and on Saturdays she sent it home, 

clean and beautifully white, and received as pay the 
sum of seventy-five cents. During the winter Hager 
usually did half a dozen washings a week, but during 
the hot season her customers had gone away, and only 
the Reinharts, on account of an invalid grandmother 
with whom they could not travel, remained in Stanton. 
Wednesday afternoon Sandy, with a boy named 
Jimmy Lane, called at the back door for their soiled 
clothes. Each child took a handle and between them 
carried the large wicker basket seven blocks to Aunt 
Hager’s kitchen. For this service Jimmy Lane received 
five cents a trip, although Sister Lane had repeatedly 
said to Hager that he needn’t be given anything. She 
wanted him to learn his Christian duties by being use- 

38 


THURSDAY AFTERNOON 


y ful to old folks. But Jimmy was not inclined to be 
' Christian. On the contrary, he was a very bad little 
| boy of thirteen, who often led Sandy astray. Some- 
| times they would run with the basket for no reason at 
. all, then stumble and spill the clothes out on the side- 
) walk — Mrs. Reinhart’s summer dresses, and draw- 
ers, and Mr. Reinhart’s extra-large B. V. D.’s lying 
) generously exposed to the public. Sometimes, if occa- 
_ sion offered, the youngsters would stop to exchange un- 
 couth epithets with strange little white boys who called 
them “ niggers.” Or, again, they might neglect their 
job for a game of marbles, or a quarter-hour of scrub 
baseball on a vacant lot; or to tease any little colored 
girl who might tip timidly by with her hair in tight, 
well-oiled braids — while the basket of garments 
would be left forlornly in the street without guardian. 
But when the clothes were safe in Aunt Hager’s 
kitchen, Jimmy would usually buy candy with his 
nickel and share it with Sandy before he went 
home. 

After soaking all night, the garments were rubbed 
through the suds in the morning; and in the afternoon 
the colored articles were on the line while the white 
pieces were boiling seriously in a large tin boiler on 
the kitchen-stove. 

* They sho had plenty this week,” Hager said to 
her grandson, who sat on the stoop eating a slice of 
bread and apple butter. “I’s mighty late gettin’ *em 
hung out to dry, too. Had no business stoppin’ this 
mawnin’ to go see sick folks, and me here got all I can’ 

39 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
do maself! Looks like this warm weather old Mis’ 
Reinhart must change ever’ piece from her dress to her 
shimmy three times a day — sendin’ me a washin’ 
like this here!” They heard the screen-door at the 
front of the house open and slam. “ It’s a good thing 
they got me to do it fo’ em! . . . Sandy, see who’s | 
that at de do’.” | 

It was Harriett, home from the country club for 
the afternoon, cool and slender and pretty in her 
_ black uniform with its white collar, her smooth black 
face and neck powdered pearly, and her crinkly hair 
shining with pomade. She smelled nice and perfumy 
as Sandy jumped on her like a dog greeting a favor- 
ite friend. Harriett kissed him and let him hang to her 
arm as they went through the bedroom to the kitchen. 
She carried a brown cardboard suit-case and a wide 
straw hat in one hand. 

“* Hello, mama,” she said. 

Hager poked the boiling clothes with a vigorous 
splash of her round stick. The steam rose in clouds of 
soapy vapor. 

“ T been waitin’ for you, madam! ” her mother re- 
plied in tones that were not calculated to welcome 
pleasantly an erring daughter. “I wants to know 
de truth—was you in town last Monday night or 
not?” 

Harriett dropped her suit-case against the wall. 
‘““'You seem to have the truth,” she said carelessly. 
How'd you get it? . . . Here, Sandy, take this out in 
the yard and eat it, seed and all.” She gave her nephew 

40 


THURSDAY AFTERNOON 


a plum she had brought in her pocket. “ I was in town, 
but I didn’t have time to come home. I had to go to 
| Maudel’s because she’s making me a dress.” 

_ “To Maudel’s! . . . Unhuh! An’ to de Waiters’ 
_ Ball, besides galavantin’ up an’ down Pearl Street 
_. after ten o’clock! I wouldn’t cared so much if you’d 
_ told me beforehand, but you said you didn’t come in 
town ’ceptin’ Thursday afternoon, an’ here I was be- 
lieving yo’ lies.” 

** It’s no lies! I haven’t been in town before.” 

“Who brung you here at night anyhow — an’ there 
ain’t no trains runnin’? ” 

““O, I came in with the cook and some of the 
boys, mama, that’s who! They hired an auto for the 
dance. What would be the use coming home, when you 
and Annjee go to bed before dark like chickens? ” 

 That’s all right, madam! Annjee’s got sense — 
savin’ her health an’ strength! ” 

Harriett was not impressed. “‘ For what? To spend 
her life in Mrs. Rice’s kitchen? ” She shrugged her 
shoulders. 

** What you bring yo’ suit-case home fo’? ” 

“Tm quitting the job Saturday,” she said. “ I’ve 
told them already.” 

** Quitting! ” her mother exclaimed. ‘‘ What fo’? 
Lawd, if it ain’t one thing, it’s another! ” 

“What for? ” Harriett retorted angrily. “ There’s 
plenty what for! All that work for five dollars a week 
with what little tips those pikers give you. And white 
men insulting you besides, asking you to sleep with 

Al 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 

°em. Look at my finger-nails, all broke from scrub- 
bing that dining-room floor.” She thrust out her dark 
slim hands. “ Waiting table and cleaning silver, wash- 
ing and ironing table-linen, and then scrubbing the 
floor besides — that’s too much of a good thing! And 
only three waitresses on the job. That old steward out 
there’s a regular white folks’ nigger. He don’t care 
how hard he works us girls. Well, ’'m through with the 
swell new Stanton County Country Club this coming 
Saturday — I’m telling everybody!” She shrugged 
her shoulders again. ' 

_ “What you gonna do then? ” 

** Maudel says I can get a job with her.” 

“ Maudel? . . . Where?” The old woman had 
begun to wring the clothes dry and pile them in a large 
dish-pan. | 

“At the Banks Hotel, chambermaid, for pretty 
good pay.’ 

Hager stopped again and turned decisively towards 
her daughter. “ You ain’t gonna work in no hotel. 
You hear me! They’s dives o’ sin, that’s what they is, 
an’ a child 0’ mine ain’t goin’ in one. If you was a boy, 
I wouldn’t let you go, much less a girl! They ain't 
nothin’ but strumpets works in hotels.” 

‘¢ Maudel’s no strumpet.” Harriett’s eyes narrowed. 

‘“* T don’t know if she is or ain’t, but I knows | wants 
you to stop runnin’ with her —I done tole you befo’. 
. . . Her mammy ain’t none too straight neither, 
raisin’ them chillen in sin. Look at Sammy in de re- 
form school fore he were fifteen for gamblin’. An’ 

42 


THURSDAY AFTERNOON 
de oldest chile, Essie, done gone to Kansas City with 
that yaller devil she ain’t married. An’ Maudel runnin’ 
de streets night an’ day, with you tryin’ to keep up 
with her! . . . Lawd a mercy! . . . Here, hang up 
these clothes! ” 

Her mother pointed to the tin pan on the table filled 
_ with damp, twisted, white underwear. Harriett took 
_ the pan in both hands. It was heavy and she trembled 
_ with anger as she lifted it to her shoulders. 

* You can bark at me if you want to, mama, but 
_ don’t talk about my friends. I don’t care what they 
, are! Maudel’d do anything for me. And her brother’s 
' a good kid, whether he’s been in reform school or not. 
They oughtn’t to put him there just for shooting dice. 
What’s that? I like him, and I like Mrs. Smothers, 
too. She’s not always scolding people for wanting 
a good time and for being lively and trying to be 
happy.” 

Hot tears raced down each cheek, leaving moist 
lines in the pink powder. Sandy, playing marbles with 
Buster under the apple-tree, heard her sniffling as she 
shook out the clothes and hung them on the line in 
the yard. 

“You Sandy,” Aunt Hager called loudly from the 
kitchen-door. “Come in here an’ get me some water 
an’ cut mo’ firewood.” Her black face was wet with 
perspiration and drawn from fatigue and worry. “I 
got to get the rest o”’ these clothes out yet this evenin’. 
. . . That chile Harriett’s aggravatin’ me to death! 
Help me, Sandy, honey.” 

A3 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
They ate supper in silence, for Hager’s attempts at 
conversation with her young daughter were futile. 
Once the old woman said: “ That onery Jimboy’s 
comin’ home Saturday,” and Harriett’s face bright- 
ened a moment. 


“Gee, I’m glad,” she replied, and then her mouth q 


went sullen again. Sandy began uncomfortably to 
kick the table-leg. 

“For Christ’s sake!” the girl frowned, and the 
child stopped, hurt that his favorite aunt should yell 
at him peevishly for so slight an offense. 

** Lawd knows, I wish you’d try an’ be mo’ like yo’ 
sisters, Annjee an’ Tempy,” Hager began as she 
washed the dishes, while Harriett stood near the stove, 
cloth in hand, waiting to dry them. “ Here I is, an old 
woman, an’ you tries ma soul! After all I did to raise 
you, you don’t even hear me when I speak.” It was 
the old theme again, without variation. “‘ Now, there’s 
Annjee, ain’t a better chile livin’ — if she warn’t crazy 
*bout Jimboy. An’ Tempy married an’ doin’ well, 
an’ respected everwhere. ... An’ you runnin’ 
wild! ” 

“Tempy? ” Harriett sneered suddenly, pricked by 
this comparison. “ So respectable you can’t touch her 
with a ten-foot pole, that’s Tempy! . . . Annjee’s all 
right, working herself to death at Mrs. Rice’s, but 
don’t tell me about Tempy. Just because she’s mar- 
ried a mail-clerk with a little property, she won’t even 
see her own family any more. When niggers get up in 
the world, they act just like white folks— don’t pay 

44 


ee ee ee 


THURSDAY AFTERNOON 


\you no mind. And Tempy’s that kind of a nigger — 
she’s up in the world now! ” 

“Close yo’ mouth, talking that way ’bout yo’ own 
) sister! I ain’t asked her to be always comin’ home, 
_is I, if she’s satisfied in her own house? ” 

“No, you aren’t asking her, mama, but you’re 
_ always talking about her being so respectable. . . . 
Well, I don’t want to be respectable if I have to be 
_ stuck up and dicty like Tempy is. . . . She’s colored 
_and I’m colored and I haven’t seen her since before 
Easter. . . . It’s not being black that matters with 
her, oul it's being poor, and that’s what we are, 
| you and me and Annjee, working for white folks and 
_ washing clothes and going in back doors, and taking 
tips and insults. I’m tired of it, mama! I want to 
_ have a good time once in a while.” 

* That’s *bout all you does have is a good time,” 
Hager said. “ An’ it ain’t right, an’ it ain’t Christian, 
_ that’s what it ain’t! An’ de Lawd is takin’ notes on 
you! ” The old woman picked up the heavy iron skillet 
and began to wash it inside and out. 

** Aw, the church has made a lot of you old Negroes 
act like Salvation Army people,” the girl returned, 
throwing the dried knives and forks on the table. 
“Afraid to even laugh on Sundays, afraid for a 
girl and boy to look at one another, or for people 
to go to dances. Your old Jesus is white, I guess, 
that’s why! He’s white and stiff and don’t like 
niggers! ” 

Hager gasped while Horvien went on excitedly, 

45 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
disregarding her mother’s pain: “ Look at Tempy, the 
highest-class Christian in the family — Episcopal, 
and so holy she can’t even visit her own mother. Seems 
like all the good-time people are bad, and all the old 
Uncle Toms and mean, dried-up, long-faced niggers 
fill the churches. I don’t never intend to join a church 
if I can help it.” 

*“* Have mercy on this chile! Help her an’ save her 
from hell-fire! Change her heart, Jesus!” the old 
woman begged, standing in the middle of the kitchen 
with uplifted arms. “God have mercy on ma 
daughter.” 

Harriett, her brow wrinkled in a steady frown, put 
the dishes away, wiped the table, and emptied the 
water with a splash through the kitchen-door. Then 
she went into the bedroom that she shared with her 
mother, and began to undress. Sandy saw, beneath 
her thin white underclothes, the soft black skin of her 
shapely young body. 

“Where you goin’? ” Hager asked sharply. 

“ Out,” said the girl. 

“Out where? ” 

““O, to a barbecue at Willow Grove, mama! 
The boys are coming by in an auto at seven o’clock.” 

“What boys? ” 

“* Maudel’s brother and some fellows.” 

“You ain’t goin’ a step! ” 

A pair of curling-irons swung in the chimney of 
the lighted lamp on the dresser. Harriett continued to 
get ready. She was making bangs over her forehead, 

46 


THURSDAY AFTERNOON 


and the scent of scorching hair-oil drifted by Sandy’s 
‘nose. 
“Up half de night in town Monday, an’ de Lawd 
_ knows how late ever’ night in de country, an’ then you 
-comes home to run out agin! . . . You ain't goin’! ” 
continued her mother. 
_ Harriett was pulling on a pair of red silk stockings, 
| bright and shimmering to her hips. 
“You quit singin’ in de church choir. You say you 
_ain’t goin’ back to school. You won’t keep no job! 
Now what is you gonna do? Yo’ pappy said years ago, 
; fore he died, you was too purty to “mount to anything, 
' but I ain’t believed him. His last dyin’ words was: 
_ * Look out fo’ ma baby Harriett.’ You was his favour- 
ite chile. . . . Now look at you! Runnin’ de streets 
an’ wearin’ red silk stockings!” Hager trembled. 
“°’Spose yo’ pappy was to come back an’ see 
you? ” 

Harriett powdered her face and neck, pink on 
| ebony, dashed white talcum at each arm-pit, and 
_ rubbed her ears with perfume from a thin bottle. Then 
she slid a light blue dress of many ruffles over her 
head. The skirt ended midway between the ankle and 
the knee, and she looked very cute, delicate, and 
straight, like a black porcelain doll in a Vienna 
toy shop. 

“Some o’ Maudel’s makin’s, that dress — any- 
body can tell,” her mother went on quarrelling. 
“* Short an’ shameless as it can be! Regular bad gal’s 
dress, that’s what “tis. . . . What you puttin’ it on fo’ 

47 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
anyhow, an’ I done told you you ain’t goin’ out? You 
must think I don’t mean ma words. Ain’t more’n six- 
teen last April an’ runnin’ to barbecues at Willer 
Grove! De idee! When I was yo’ age, wasn’t up after 
eight o’clock, ’ceptin’ Sundays in de church house, 
that’s all. . . . Lawd knows where you young ones 
is headin’. An’ me prayin’ an’ washin’ ma fingers to 
de bone to keep a roof over yo’ head.” 

The sharp honk of an automobile horn sounded 
from the street. A big red car, full of laughing brown 
girls gaily dressed, and coatless, slick-headed black 
boys in green and yellow silk shirts, drew up at the 
curb. Somebody squeezed the bulb of the horn a sec- 
ond time and another loud and saucy honk! struck 
the ears. 

* You Sandy,” Hager commanded. “ Run out there 
an’ tell them niggers to leave here, ’cause Harriett 
ain’t goin’ no place.” 

But Sandy did not move, because his young and 
slender aunt had gripped him firmly by the collar 
while she searched feverishly in the dresser-drawer 
for a scarf. She pulled it out, long and flame-colored, 
with fiery, silky fringe, before she released the little 
boy. 

“You ain’t gwine a step this evenin’!”’ Hager 
shouted. “‘ Don’t you hear me? ” 

“OQ, no?” said Harriett coolly in a tone that cut 
like knives. “ You’re the one that says I’m not going 
— but Il am!” 

Then suddenly something happened in the room — 

4S 


SSS 


— EE 


THURSDAY AFTERNOON 


the anger fell like a veil from Hager’s face, disclosing 
aged, helpless eyes full of fear and pain. 

“* Harriett, honey, I wants you to be good,” the old 
woman stammered. The words came pitiful and low 
—~—not a command any longer — as she faced her ter- 
ribly alive young daughter in the ruffled blue dress 
and the red silk stockings. “‘ I just wants you to grow 
up decent, chile. I don’t want you runnin’ to Willer 
Grove with them boys. It ain’t no place fo’ you in the 
night-time — an’ you knows it. You’s mammy’s baby 
girl. She wants you to be good, honey, and follow 
Jesus, that’s all.” 

The baritone giggling of the boys in the auto came 
across the yard as Hager started to put a timid, re- 
straining hand on her daughter’s shoulder — but Har- 
riett backed away. 

“You old fool! ” she cried. “ Lemme go! You old 
Christian fool!” _ 

She ran through the door and across the sidewalk 
to the waiting car, where the arms of the young men 
welcomed her eagerly. The big machine sped swiftly 
down the street and the rapid sput! sput! sput! of its 
engine grew fainter and fainter. Finally, the auto was 
only a red tail-light in the summer dusk. Sandy, stand- 
ing beside his grandmother in the doorway, watched 
it until it disappeared. 


49 


FIVE 
GUITAR 


ee CE VVVTVS 


THROW yo’ arms around me, baby, 
Like de circle round de sun! 
Baby, throw yo’ arms around me 
Like de circle round de sun, 

An’ tell yo’ pretty papa 

How you want yo’ lovin’ done! 


IMBOY was home. All the neighborhood could 

hear his rich low baritone voice giving birth to 

the blues. On Saturday night he and Annjee went 
to bed early. On Sunday night Aunt Hager said: “‘ Put 
that guitar right up, less’n it’s hymns you plans on 
playin’. An’ I don’t want too much o’ them, ’larmin’ 
de white neighbors.” 

But this was Monday, and the sun had scarcely fal- 
len below the horizon before the music had begun to 
float down the alley, over back fences and into kitchen- 
windows where nice white ladies sedately washed their 


supper dishes. 
50 


! 
| 


| 
| 


= 
13 
\ 


EERE K AAAAA 


| 
| 


| 


GUITAR 


Did you ever see peaches 
Growin’ on a watermelon vine? 
Says did you ever see peaches 
On a watermelon vine? 

Did you ever see a woman 

That I couldn’t get for mine? 


Long, lazy length resting on the kitchen-door-sill, 
back against the jamb, feet in the yard, fingers pick- 
ing his sweet guitar, left hand holding against its 
finger-board the back of an old pocket-knife, sliding 
the knife upward, downward, getting thus weird croons 
and sighs from the vibrating strings: 


O, I left ma mother 

An’ I cert’ly can leave you. 
Indeed I left ma mother 

An’ I cert’ly can leave you, 

For I’d leave any woman 

That mistreats me like you do. 


Jimboy, remembering brown-skin mamas _ in 
Natchez, Shreveport, Dallas; remembering Creole 
women in Baton Rouge, Louisiana: 


O, yo’ windin’ an’ yo’ grindin’ 

Don’t have no effect on me, 

Babe, yo’ windin’ an’ yo’ grindin’ 

Don’t have no ’fect on me, 

’Cause I can wind an’ grind 

Like a monkey round a coconut-tree! 
ol 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


Then Harriett, standing under the ripening apple- 
tree, in the back yard, chiming in: 


Now I see that you don’t want me, 
So it’s fare thee, fare thee well! 
Lawd, I see that you don’t want me, 
So it’s fare — thee — well! 

I can still get plenty lovin’, 

An’ you can go to — Kansas City! 


“Q, play it, sweet daddy Jimboy! ” She began 
to dance. 

Then Hager, from her seat on the edge of the plat- 
form covering the well, broke out: “‘ Here, madam! 
Stop that prancin’! Bad enough to have all this singin’ 
without turnin’ de yard into a show-house.” But Har- 
riett kept on, her hands picking imaginary cherries 
out of the stars, her hips speaking an earthly language 
quite their own. 

* You got it, kid,” said Jimboy, stopping suddenly, 
then fingering his instrument for another tune. “ You 
do it like the stage women does. You'll be takin’ Ada 
Walker’s place if you keep on.” 

“Wha! Wha! ... You chillen sho can sing!” 
Tom Johnson shouted his compliments from across the 
yard. And Sarah, beside him on the bench behind their 
shack, added: “ Minds me o’ de ole plantation times, 
honey! It sho do! ” 

‘“ Unhuh! Bound straight fo’ de devil, that’s what 
they is,’ Hager returned calmly from her place beside 
the pump. “You an’ Harriett both —singin’ an’ 

o2 | 


GUITAR 


dancin’ this stuff befo’ these chillens here.” She 
pointed to Sandy and Willie-Mae, who sat on the 
ground with their backs against the chicken-box. “ It’s 
a shame!” 
“T likes it,” said Willie-Mae. 
—“ Me too,” the little boy agreed. 

“Naturally you would—none o’ you-all’s con- 
verted yet,” countered the old woman to the children 
as she settled back against the pump to listen to 
some more. 

The music rose hoarse and wild: 


I wonder where ma easy rider’s gone? 
He done left me, put ma new gold watch in pawn. 


It was Harriett’s voice in plaintive moan to the 
night sky. Jimboy had taught her that song, but a 
slight, clay-colored brown boy who had hopped bells 
at the Clinton Hotel for a couple of months, on his way 
from Houston to Omaha, discovered its meaning to 
her. Puppy-love, maybe, but it had hurt when he 
went away, saying nothing. And the guitar in Jimboy’s 
hands echoed that old pain with an even greater throb 
than the original ache itself possessed. 

Approaching footsteps came from the front yard. 

“Lord, I can hear you-all two blocks away! ” said 
Annjee, coming around the house, home from work, 
with a bundle of food under her left arm. “ Hello! 
How are you, daddy? Hello, ma! Gimme a kiss Sandy. 
. . . Lord, I’m hot and tired and most played out. 
This late just getting from work! . . . Here, Jimboy, 

O23 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
come on in and eat some of these nice things the white 
folks had for supper.” She stepped across her hus- 
band’s outstretched legs into the kitchen. “I brought 
a mighty good piece of cold ham for you, hon’, from 
Mis’ Rice’s.” 

** All right, sure, P’ll be there in a minute,” the man 
said, but he went on playing Easy Rider, and Harriett 
went on singing, while the food was forgotten on the 
table until long after Annjee had come outdoors again 
and sat down in the cool, tired of waiting for Jimboy 
to come in to her. 

Off and on for nine years, ever since he had mar- 
ried Annjee, Jimboy and Harriett had been singing 
together in the evenings. When they started, Harrieit 
was a little girl with braided hair, and each time that 
her roving brother-in-law stopped in Stanton, he would 
amuse himself by teaching her the old Southern songs, 
the popular rag-time ditties, and the hundreds of vary- 
ing verses of the blues that he would pick up in the 
big dirty cities of the South. The child, with her strong 
sweet voice (colored folks called it alto) and her 
racial sense of rhythm, soon learned to sing the songs 
as well as Jimboy. He taught her the parse me la, too, 
and a few other movements peculiar to Southern Negro 
dancing, and sometimes together they went through 
the buck and wing and a few taps. It was all great fun, 
and innocent fun except when one stopped to think, as 
white folks did, that some of the blues lines had, not 
only double, but triple meanings, and some of the 
dance steps required very definite movements of the 

a4 


GUITAR 


hips. But neither Harriett nor Jimboy soiled their 
minds by thinking. It was music, good exercise — and 
they loved it. 

‘“‘Do you know this one, Annjee? ” asked Jimboy, 
calling his wife’s name out of sudden politeness be- 
cause he had forgotten to eat her food, had hardly 
looked at her, in fact, since she came home. Now he 
glanced towards her in the darkness where she sat 
plump on a kitchen-chair in the yard, apart from the 
others, with her back to the growing corn in the gar- 
den. Softly he ran his fingers, light as a breeze, over 
his guitar strings, imitating the wind rustling through 
the long leaves of the corn. A rectangle of light from 
the kitchen-door fell into the yard striking sidewise 
across the healthy orange-yellow of his skin above the 
unbuttoned neck of his blue laborer’s shirt. 

** Come on, sing it with us, Annjee,” he said. 

*T don’t know it,” Annjee replied, with a lump in 
her throat, and her eyes on the silhouette of his long, 
muscular, animal-hard body. She loved Jimboy too 
much, that’s what was the matter with her! She knew 
there was nothing between him and her young sister 
except the love of music, yet he might have dropped 
the guitar and left Harriett in the yard for a little 
while to come eat the nice cold slice of ham she had 
brought him. She hadn’t seen him all day long. When 
she went to work this morning, he was still in bed — 
and now the blues claimed him. | 

In the starry blackness the singing notes of the guitar 
became a plaintive hum, like a breeze in a grove of 

sys) 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
palmettos; became a low moan, like the wind in a 
forest of live-oaks strung with long strands of hanging 
moss. The voice of Annjee’s golden, handsome hus- 
band on the door-step rang high and far away, lonely- 
like, crying with only the guitar, not his wife, to under- 
stand; crying grotesquely, crying absurdly in the 
summer night: 


I got a mule to ride. 
I got a mule to ride. 
Down in the South somewhere 
I got a mule to ride. 


Then asking the question as an anxious, left- 
lonesome girl-sweetheart would ask it: 


You say you goin’ North. 
You say you goin’ North. 
How ’bout yo’. . . lovin’ gal? 
You say you goin’ North. 


Then sighing in rhythmical despair: 


O, don’t you leave me here. 
Babe, don’t you leave me here. 
Dog-gone yo’ comin’ back! 

Said don’t you leave me here. 


On and on the song complained, man-verses and 
woman-verses, to the evening air in stanzas that Jim- 
boy had heard in the pine-woods of Arkansas from 
the lumber-camp workers; in other stanzas that were 

26 


ee a 


GUT Par 
desperate and dirty like the weary roads where they 
were sung; and in still others that the singer created 
spontaneously in his own mouth then and there: 


O, I done made ma bed, 

Says I done made ma bed. 
Down in some lonesome grave 
I done made ma bed. 


It closed with a sad eerie twang. 

“ That’s right decent,” said Hager. “ Now I wish 
you-all’d play some o’ ma pieces like When de Saints 
Come Marchin’ In or This World Is Not Ma Home — 
something Christian from de church.” 

*“ Aw, mama, it’s not Sunday yet,” said Harriett. 

“ Sing Casey Jones,” called old man Tom Johnson. 
*“* That’s ma song.” 

So the ballad of the immortal engineer with another 
mama in the Promised Land rang out promptly in 
the starry darkness, while everybody joined in the 
choruses. 

** Aw, pick it, boy,” yelled the old man. “‘ Can’t no- 
body play like you.” 

And Jimboy remembered when he was a lad in 
Memphis that W. C. Handy had said: “‘ You ought to 
make your living out of that, son.” But he hadn’t fol- 
lowed it up — too many things to see, too many places 
to go, too many other jobs. 

“What song do you like, Annjee? ” he asked, re- 
membering her presence again. 

a7 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
“OQ, I don’t care. Any ones you like. All of ’em 
are pretty.” She was pleased and petulant and a little 
startled that he had asked her. 
** All right, then,” he said. “‘ Listen to me: ” 


Here I is in de mean ole jail. 

Ain’t got nobody to go ma bail. 

Lonesome an’ sad an’ chain gang bound — 
Ever’ friend I had’s done turned me down. 


“That’s sho it!” shouted Tom Johnson in great 
sympathy. ““ Now, when I was in de Turner County 
Jai. a3 

“Shut up yo’ mouth! ” squelched Sarah, jabbing 
her husband in the ribs. 

The songs went on, blues, shouts, jingles, old hits: 
Bon Bon Buddy, the Chocolate Drop; Wrap Me in 
Your Big Red Shawl; Under the Old Apple Tree; 
Turkey in the Straw — Jimboy and Harriett breaking 
the silence of the small-town summer night until Aunt 
Hager interrupted: 

** You-all better wind up, chillens, ’cause I wants to 
go to bed. I ain’t used to stayin’ ’wake so late, nohow. 
Play something kinder decent there, son, fo’ you 
stops.” 

Jimboy, to tease the old woman, began to rock and 
moan like an elder in the Sanctified Church, patting 
both feet at the same time as he played a hymn-like, 
lugubrious tune with a dancing overtone: 


08 


GUITAR 


Tell me, sister, 
Tell me, brother, 
Have you heard de latest news? 


Then seriously as if he were about to announce the 
coming of the Judgment: 


A woman down in Georgia 
Got her two sweet-men confused. 


How terrible! How sad! moaned the guitar. 


One knocked on de front do’, 
One knocked on de back — 


Sad, sad . . . sad, sad! said the music. 


Now that woman down in Georgia’s 
Door-knob is hung with black. 


O, play that funeral march, boy! while the guitar 
laughed a dirge. 


Av’ de hearse is comin’ easy 


With two rubber-tired hacks! 
Followed by a long-drawn-out, churchlike: 


Amen... ! 


Then with rapid glides, groans, and shouts the in- 
strument screamed of a sudden in profane frenzy, and 
Harriett began to ball-the-jack, her arms flopping like 
the wings of a headless pigeon, the guitar strings 
whining in ecstasy, the player rocking gaily to the 

29 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
urgent music, his happy mouth crying: “‘ Tack ’em on 
down, gal! Tack ’em on down, Harrie! ” 

But Annjee had risen. 

**T wish you’d come in and eat the ham I brought 
you,” she said as she picked up her chair and started 
towards the house. “ And you, Sandy! Get up from 
under that tree and go to bed.” She spoke roughly to 
the little fellow, whom the songs had set a-dreaming. 
Then to her husband: “ Jimboy, I wish you’d come in.” 

The man stopped playing, with a deep vibration of 
the strings that seemed to echo through the whole 
world. Then he leaned his guitar against the side of 
the house and lifted straight up in his hairy arms Ann- 
jee’s plump, brown-black little body while he kissed 
her as she wriggled like a stubborn child, her soft 
breasts rubbing his hard body through the coarse 
blue shirt. 

“You don’t like my old songs, do you, baby? You 
don’t want to hear me sing ’em,” he said, laughing. 
“Well, that’s all right. I like you, anyhow, and I like 
your ham, and I like your kisses, and I like everything 
you bring me. Let’s go in and chow down.” And he 
carried her into the kitchen, where he sat with her on 
his knees as he ate the food she so faithfully had 
brought him from Mrs. J. J. Rice’s dinner-table. 

Outside, Willie-Mae went running home through 
the dark. And Harriett pumped a cool drink of water 
for her mother, then helped her to rise from her low 
seat, Sandy aiding from behind, with both hands push- 
ing firmly in Aunt Hager’s fleshy back. Then the three 

60 | 


GUITAR 


of them came into the house and glanced, as they 
passed through the kitchen, at Annjee sitting on Jim- 
boy’s lap with both dark arms tight around his neck. 

“‘ Looks like you’re clinging to the Rock of Ages,” 
said Harriett to her sister. “‘ Be sure you don’t slip, 
old evil gal! ” 

But at midnight, when the ow! that nested in a tree 
near the corner began to hoot, they were all asleep — 
Annjee and Jimboy in one room, Harriett and Hager 
in another, with Sandy on the floor at the foot of his 
grandmother’s bed. Far away on the railroad line a 
whistle blew, lonesome and long. 


6l 


Re Ke RHR GN GN_GN GH 


Six 
WORK 


i?) 


ee ee VVVVWS 


taller than Tom Johnson’s head, and the holly- 
hocks in the fence corners were almost as high. 
The nasturtiums, blood-orange and gold, tumbled over 
themselves all around Madam de Carter’s house. Aunt 
Hager’s sweet-william, her pinks, and her tiger-lilies 
were abloom and the apples on her single tree would 
soon be ripe. The adjoining yards of the three neigh- 
bors were gay with flowers. “ Watch out for them 
dogs!” his grandmother told Sandy hourly, for the 
days had come when the bright heat made gentle ani- 
mals go mad. Bees were heavy with honey, great green 
flies hummed through the air, yellow-black butterflies 
suckled at the rambling roses . . . and watermelons 
were on the market. 
The Royal African Knights and Ladies of King 
Solomon’s Scepter were preparing a drill for the Sep- 
62 


T HE sunflowers in Willie-Mae’s back yard were 


WORK 


tember Emancipation celebration, a “ Drill of All 
Nations,” in which Annjee was to represent Sweden. 
It was not to be given for a month or more, but the 
first rehearsal would take place tonight. 

“Sandy,” his mother said, shaking him early in 
the morning as he lay on his pallet at the foot of Aunt 
Hager’s bed, “listen here! I want you to come out to 
Mis’ Rice’s this evening and help me get through the 
dishes so’s I can start home early, in time to wash 
and dress myself to go to the lodge hall. You hears 
me?” 

“Yes’m,” said Sandy, keeping his eyes closed to 
the bright stream of morning sunlight entering the 
window. But half an hour later, when Jimboy kicked 
him and said: “‘ Hey, bo! You wanta go fishin’? ” he 
got up at once, slid into his pants; and together they 
went out in the garden to dig worms. It was seldom 
that his father took him anywhere, and, of course, he 
wanted to go. Sandy adored Jimboy, but Jimboy, 
amiable and indulgent though he was, did not often 
care to be bothered with his ten-year-old son on his 
fishing expeditions. 

Harriett had gone to her job, and Hager had long 
been at the tubs under the apple-tree when the two 
males emerged from the kitchen-door. “‘ Huh! You 
ain’t workin’ this mawnin’, is you?” the old woman 
grunted, bending steadily down, then up, over the 
wash-board. , 

“Nope,” her tall son-in-law answered. “ Dona- 
hoe laid me off yesterday on account o’ the white 

63 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER. 
bricklayers said they couldn’t lay bricks with a 
nigger.” | 

“ Always something to keep you from workin’,” | 
panted Hager. | 

“Sure is,” agreed Jimboy pleasantly. “‘ But don’t 
worry, me and Sandy’s gonna catch you a mess o’ fish 
for supper today. How’s that, ma? ” 

‘Don’t need no fish,” the old woman answered. 
** An’ don’t come ma-in’ me! Layin’ round here fishin’ 
when you ought to be out makin’ money to take care 
o’ this house an’ that chile o’ your’n.” The suds rose. 
foamy white about her black arms as the clothes | 
plushed up and down on the zinc wash-board. “‘ Lawd 
deliver me from a lazy darky! ” | 

But Jimboy and Sandy were already behind the tall 
corn, digging for bait near the back fence. 

“Don’t never let no one woman worry you,” said 
the boy’s father softly, picking the moist wriggling 
worms from the upturned loam. “ Treat ’em like chick- | 
ens, son. Throw ’em a little corn and they'll run after 
you, but don’t give ’em too much. If you do, they'll 
stop layin’ and expect you to wait on ’em.” 


“Will they? ” asked Sandy. 


The warm afternoon sun made the river a languid 
sheet of muddy gold, glittering away towards the © 
bridge and the flour-mills a mile and a half off. Here 
in the quiet, on the end of a rotting jetty among the 
reeds, Jimboy and his son sat silently. A long string © 
of small silver fish hung down into the water, keeping © 

64, 


WORK 


fresh, and the fishing-lines were flung far out in the 
stream, waiting for more bites. Not a breeze on the 
flat brown-gold river, not a ripple, not a sound. But 
once the train came by behind them, pouring out a 
great cloud of smoke and cinders and shaking the 
jetty. 

“'That’s Number Five,” said Jimboy. “Sure is 
flyin’,” as the train disappeared between rows 
of empty box-cars far down the track, sending 
back a hollow clatter as it shot past the flour- 
mills, whose stacks could be dimly seen through 
the heat haze. Once the engine’s whistle moaned 
shrilly. 

*“* She’s gone now,” said Jimboy as the last click 
of the wheels died away. And, except for the drone of 
a green fly about the can of bait, there was again no 
sound to disturb the two fishermen. 

Jimboy gazed at his lines. Across the river Sandy 
could make out, in the brilliant sunlight, the gold of 
wheat-fields and the green of trees on the hills. He 
wondered if it would be nice to live over there in the 
country. 

“Man alive!” his father cried suddenly, hauling 
vigorously at one of the lines. “‘ Sure got a real bite 
now. . . . Look at this catfish.” From the water he 
pulled a large flopping lead-colored creature, with 
a fierce white mouth bleeding and gaping over the 


hook. | 
“ He’s on my line!” yelled Sandy. “{ caught 


. him!” 


65 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 

“ Pshaw!” laughed Jimboy. “ You was setting 
there dreaming.” 

“No, I wasn’t! ” 

But just then, at the mills, the five-o’clock whistles 
blew. “* Oh, gee, dad! ” cried the boy, frightened. “I 
was s’posed to go to Mis’ Rice’s to help mama, and 
I come near forgetting it. She wants to get through 
early this evenin’ to go to lodge meeting. I gotta 
hurry and go help her.” 

* Well, you better beat it then, and I'l] look out for 
your line like I been doing and bring the fishes home.” 

So the little fellow balanced himself across the 
jetty, scrambled up the bank, and ran down the rail- 
road track towards town. He was quite out of breath 
when he reached the foot of Penrose Street, with Mrs. 
Rice’s house still ten blocks away, so he walked 
awhile, then ran again, down the long residential 
street, with its large houses sitting in green shady 
lawns far back from the sidewalk. Sometimes a 
sprinkler attached to a long rubber hose, sprayed 
fountain-like jets of cold water on the thirsty grass. 
In one yard three golden-haired little girls were 
playing under an elm-tree, and in another a man 
and some children were having a leisurely game of 
croquet. 

Finally Sandy turned into a big yard. The delicious 
scent of frying beefsteak greeted the sweating young- 
ster as he reached the screen of the white lady’s 
kitchen-door. Inside, Annjee was standing over the hot 
stove seasoning something in a saucepan, beads of per- 

66 


WORK 


spiration on her dark face, and large damp spots under 
the arms of her dress. 

“You better get here! ” she said. “ And me waiting 
for you for the last hour. Here, take this pick and 
break some ice for the tea.” Sandy climbed up on a 
stool and raised the ice-box lid while his mother 
opened the oven and pulled out a pan of golden-brown 
biscuits. “‘ Made these for your father,”’ she remarked. 
“The white folks ain’t asked for ’em, but they 
like ’em, too, so they can serve for both... . 
Jimboy’s crazy about biscuits. . . . Did he work 
today? ” 

““No’m,” said Sandy, jabbing at the ice. “ We went 
fishing.” 

At that moment Mrs. Rice came into the kitchen, tall 
and blond, in a thin flowered gown. She was a middle- 
aged white woman with a sharp nasal voice. 

“ Annjee, I’d like the potatoes served just as they 
are in the casserole. And make several slices of very 
thin toast for my father. Now, be sure they are thin! ” 

“Yes, m’am,” said Annjee stirring a spoonful of 
flour into the frying-pan, making a thick brown gravy. 

“* Old thin toast,” muttered Annjee when Mrs. Rice 
had gone back to the front. “ Always bothering round 
the kitchen! Here ’tis lodge-meeting night — dinner 
late anyhow — and she coming telling me to stop and 
make toast for the old man! He ain’t too indigestible 
to eat biscuits like the rest of ’em. . . . White folks 
sure is a case!” She laid three slices of bread on top 
of the stove. “So spoiled with colored folks waiting 

67 | 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


on ‘em all their days! Don’t know what they’ll 
do in heaven, ’cause I’m gonna sit down up there 
myself.” 

Annjee took the biscuits, light and brown, and © 
placed some on a pink plate she had warmed. She car- 
ried them, with the butter and jelly, into the dining- 
room. Then she took the steak from the warmer, dished 
up the vegetables into gold-rimmed serving-dishes, 
and poured the gravy, which smelled deliciously _ 
onion-flavored. 

“Gee, ’'m hungry,” said the child, with his eyes 
on the big steak ready to go in to the white people. 

** Well, just wait,” replied his mother. “ You come 
to work, not to eat. . . . Whee! but it’s hot today! ” 
She wiped her wet face and put on a large white bunga- 
low apron that had been hanging behind the door. 
Then she went with the iced tea and a pitcher of water 
into the dining-room, struck a Chinese gong, and came 
back to the kitchen to get the dishes of steaming food, 
which she carried in to the table. 

It was some time before she returned from waiting 
on the table; so Sandy, to help her, began to scrape 
out the empty pans and put them to soak in the sink. 
He ate the stewed corn that had stuck in the bottom 
of one, and rubbed a piece of bread in the frying-pan 
where the gravy had been. His mother came out with 
the water-pitcher, broke some ice for it, and returned 
to the dining-room where Sandy could hear laugh- 
ter, and the clinking of spoons in tea-glasses, and 
women talking. When Annjee came back into the 

638 


WORK 


kitchen, she took four custards from the ice-box and 
placed them on gold-rimmed plates. 

“ They’re about through,” she said to her son. “ Sit 
down and [Il fix you up.” 

Sandy was very hungry and he hoped Mrs. Rice’s 
family hadn’t eaten all the steak, which had looked 
so good with its brown gravy and onions. 

Shortly, his mother returned carrying the dishes 
that had been filled with hot food. She placed them 
on the kitchen-table in front of Sandy, but they 
were no longer full and no longer hot. The corn had 
thickened to a paste, and the potatoes were about gone; 
but there was still a ragged piece of steak left on the 
platter. 

“* Don’t eat it all,”’ said Annjee warningly. “‘ I want 
to take some home to your father.” 

The bell rang in the dining-room. Annjee went 
through the swinging door and returned bearing a 
custard that had been but little touched. 

* Here, sonny —the old man says it’s too sweet for 
his stomach, so you can have this.” She set the yellow 
cornstarch before Sandy. “ He’s seen these ripe 
peaches out here today and he wants some, that’s all. 
More trouble than he’s worth, po’ old soul, and me in 
a hurry! ” She began to peel the fruit. “ Just like a 
chile, *deed he is!” she added, carrying the sliced 
peaches into the dining-room and leaving Sandy with 
a plate of food before him, eating slowly. ““ When you 
rushing to get out, seems like white folks tries their- 
selves.” 

69 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


In a moment she returned, ill-tempered, and began | 
to scold Sandy for taking so long with his meal. q 

“T asked you to help me so’s I can get to the lodge | 
on time, and you just set and chew and eat! ... 
Here, wipe these dishes, boy!” Annjee began hur- 
riedly to lay plates in a steaming row on the shelf of 
the sink; so Sandy got up and, between mouthfuls 
of pudding, wiped them with a large dish-towel. j 

Soon Mrs. Rice came into the kitchen again, briskly, | 
through the swinging door and glanced about her. — 
Sandy felt ashamed for the white woman to see him 
eating a left-over pudding from her table, so he put 
the spoon down. 

** Annjee,” the mistress said sharply. “I wish you 
wouldn’t put quite so much onion in your sauce for 
the steak. I’ve mentioned it to you several times be- 
fore, and you know very well we don’t like it.” 

** Yes, m’am,” said Annjee. 

** And do please be careful that our drinking water 
is cold before meals are served. . . . You were cer- 
tainly careless tonight. You must think more about 
what you are doing, Annjee.” 

Mrs. Rice went out again through the swinging door, 
but Sandy stood near the sink with a burning face and 
eyes that had suddenly filled with angry tears. He 
couldn’t help it — hearing his sweating mother repri- 
manded by this tall white woman in the flowered dress. 
Black, hard-working Annjee answered: “ Yes, m’am,” 
and that was all — but Sandy cried. 

“Dry up,” his mother said crossly when she saw 

70 


WORK 


him, thinking he was crying because she had asked 
him to work. “ What’s come over you, anyway? — 
can’t even wipe a few plates for me and act nice 
about it! ” 

He didn’t answer. When the dining-room had been 
cleared and the kitchen put in order, Annjee told him 
to empty the garbage while she wrapped in newspapers 
several little bundles of food to carry to Jimboy. 
Then they went out the back door, around the big 
house to the street, and trudged the fourteen blocks 
to Aunt Hager’s, taking short cuts through alleys, 
passing under arc-lights that sputtered whitely in the 
deepening twilight, and greeting with an occasional 
“Howdy” other poor colored folks also coming 
home from work. 

* How are you, Sister Jones? ” 

* Right smart, I thank yuh! ” as they passed. 

Once Annjee spoke to her son. “‘ Evening’s the only 
time we niggers have to ourselves! ” she said. “* Thank 


God for night . . . cause all day you gives to white 
folks.” 


fal 


fe fe fa fe fe AAAAD 
WHITE FOLKS 


© EEE CE SVS S 


HEN they got home, Aunt Hager was sitting 

\ \ | in the cool of the evening on her new porch, 

which had been rebuilt for thirty-five dol- 
lars added to the mortgage. The old woman was in 
her rocking-chair, with Jimboy, one foot on the 
ground and his back against a pillar, lounging at her 
feet. The two were quarrelling amicably over nothing 
as Annjee and Sandy approached. 

** Good-evenin’, you-all,” said Annjee. “I brought 
you a nice piece o’ steak, Jimboy-sugar, and some 
biscuits to go with it. Come on in and eat while I get 
dressed to go to the drill practice. I got to hurry.” 

“We don’t want no steak now,” Jimboy answered 
without moving. “‘ Aunt Hager and me had fresh fish 
for supper and egg-corn-bread and we're full. We 
don’t need nothin’ more.” 

‘Oh! .. .” said Annjee disappointedly. “ Well, 
come on in anyhow, honey, and talk while I get 

72 


WHITE FOLKS 


dressed.” So he rose lazily and followed his wife into 
the house. 

Shortly, Sister Johnson, pursued by the ever- 
present Willie-Mae, came through the blue-grey dark- 
ness from next door. ‘* Good-evenin’, Sister Williams; 
how you been today? ” 

“ Tolable,” answered Hager, “ ’ceptin’ [’s tired out 
from washin’ an’ rinsin’. Have a seat. ... You 
Sandy, go in de house an’ get Sister Johnson a settin’- 
chair. . . . Where’s Tom? ” 

** Lawd, chile, he done gone to bed long ago. That 
there sewer-diggin’ job ain’t so good fer a man old as 
Tom. He ’bout played out. . . . I done washed fer 
Mis’ Cohn maself today. . . . Umh! dis cheer feels 
good! . . . Looked like to me she had near ’bout 
fifty babies’ diddies in de wash. You know she done 
got twins, ’sides dat young-’un born last year.” 

The conversation of the two old women rambled on 
as their grandchildren ran across the front yard laugh- 
ing, shrieking, wrestling; catching fire-flies and watch- 
ing them glow in closed fists, then releasing them to 
twinkle in the sultry night-air. 

Harriett came singing out of the house and sat down 
on the edge of the porch. “ Lord, it’s hot! . . . How 
are you, Mis’ Johnson? I didn’t see you in the dark.” 

“* Jest tolable, chile,” said the old woman, “ but I 
can’t kick. Honey, when you gits old as I is, you'll be 
doin’ well if you’s livin’ a-tall, de way you chillens 
runs round now "days! How come you ain’t out to some 
party dis evenin’? ” 

» § 73 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 

“QO, there’s no party tonight,” said Harriett laugh- 
ing. “ Besides, this new job of mine’s a heart-breaker, 
Mis’ Johnson. I got to stay home and rest now. ’m 
kitchen-girl at that New Albert Restaurant, and time 
you get through wrestling with pots and arguing with 
white waitresses and colored cooks, you don’t feel 
much like running out at night. But the shifts aren’t 
bad, though, food’s good, and —well, you can’t 
expect everything.” She shrugged her shoulders 
against the two-by-four pillar on which her back 
rested. | 

““ Long’s it keeps you off de streets, I’s glad,” said 
Hager, rocking contentedly. “ Maybe I can git you 
goin’ to church agin now.” 

“* Aw, I don’t like church,” the girl replied. 

** An’, chile, I can’t blame you much,” said Sister 
Johnson, fumbling in the pocket of her apron. “ De 
way dese churches done got now’days. . . . Sandy, 
run in de house an’ ask yo’ pappy fo’ a match to light 
ma pipe. . . . It ain’t ‘Come to Jesus’ no mo’ a-tall. 
Ministers dese days an’ times don’t care nothin’ *bout 
po’ Jesus. “Stead o’ dat it’s rally dis an’ collection dat, 
an’ de aisle wants a new carpet, an’ de pastor needs a 
*lectric fan fer his red-hot self.” The old sister spat 
into the yard. “Money! That’s all ‘tis! An’ white 
folkses’ religion —Lawd help! ’Taint no use in men- 
tionin’ them.” 

“ True,” agreed Hager. 

“* Cause if de gates o’ heaven shuts in white folkses’ 
faces like de do’s o’ dey church in us niggers’ faces, 

74 


WHITE FOLKS 
it'll be too bad! Yes, sir! One thing sho, de Lawd ain’t 
prejudiced! ” 

“No,” said Hager; “ but He don’t love ugly, neither 
in niggers nor in white folks.” 

“Now, talking about white folks’ religion,” said 
Annjee, emerging from the house with a fresh white 
dress on, “ why, Mis’ Rice where I work don’t think 
no more about playing bridge on Sunday than she 
does about praying— and I ain’t never seen her 
pray yet.” 

** You’re nuts,” said Jimboy behind her. “ People’s 
due to have a little fun on Sundays. That’s what’s 
the matter with colored folks now — work all week 
and then set up in church all day Sunday, and 
don’t even know what’s goin’ on in the rest of the 
world.” 

“ Huh! ” grunted Hager. 

“Well, we won’t argue, daddy,” Annjee smiled. 
** Come on and walk a piece with me, sweetness. Here 
tis nearly nine and I should a been at the hall at eight, 
but colored folks are always behind the clock. Come 
on, Jimboy.” 

“ Good-bye, mama,” yelled Sandy from the lawn 
as his parents strolled up the street together. 

** Jimboy’s right,” said Harriett. “‘ Darkies do like 
the church too much, but white folks don’t care nothing 
about it at all. They’re too busy getting theirs out of 
this world, not from God. And I don’t blame ’em, ex- 
cept that they’re so mean to niggers. They’re right, 
though, looking out for themselves . . . and yet I 

75 


9 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
hate ’em for it. They don’t have to mistreat us besides, 
do they? ” 

Honey, don’t talk that way,” broke in Hager. “ It 
ain’t Christian, chile. If you don’t like ’em, pray for 
"em, but don’t feel evil against ’em. I Wasa slavery, 
Harrie, an’ I been knowin’ white folks all ma life, an’ 
they’s good as far as they can see — but when it comes 
to po’ niggers, they just can’t see far, that’s all.” 

Harriett opened her mouth to reply, but Rowe 
who left Annjee at the corner and had 1 
the porch, beat her to it. “ We too di rk for ’er 
he laughed. “‘ How they gonna see in Le k? You 
colored folks oughta get lighter, that’s what! ” 


dem same tree boys dont ae round an’ 
me an’ Tom out 0” town? ” | | 

The old sister took a l > draw on her corn-cob 
pipe, and a fiery red spot glowed in its bowl, while 
Willie-Mae and Sandy stopped playing and sat down 
on the porch as she began a tale they had all heard at 
least a dozen times. 

“ T’s tole you ‘bout 1 it befo’, ain’t I? ” asked Sister 
Johnson. 


76 


WHITE FOLKS 


““ Not me,” lied Jimboy, who was anxious to keep 
her going. 

““No, you haven’t,” Harriett assured her. 

“Well, it were like dis,” and the story unwound 
itself, the preliminary details telling how, as a young 
freed-girl after the Civil War, Sister Johnson had 
gone into service for a white planter’s family in a 
Mississippi town near Vicksburg. While attached to 
this family, she married Tom Johnson, then a field- 
hand, and raised five children of her own during the 
years that followed, besides caring for three boys be- 
longing to her white mistress, nursing them at her 
black breasts and sometimes leaving her own young 
ones in the cabin to come and stay with her white 
charges when they were ill. These called her mammy, 
too, and when they were men and married, she still 
went to see them and occasionally worked for their 
families. 

““ Now, we niggers all lived at de edge o’ town in 
what de whites called Crowville, an’ most of us owned 
little houses an’ farms, an’ we did right well raisin’ 
cotton an’ sweet ’taters an’ all. Now, dat’s where de 
trouble started! We was doin’ too well, an’ de white 
folks said so! But we ain’t paid ’em no ’tention, jest 
thought dey was talkin’ fer de pastime of it... . 
Well, we all started fixin’ up our houses an’ paintin’ 
our fences, an’ Crowville looked kinder decent-like 
when de white folks ’gin to ’mark, so’s we servants 
could hear ’em, ’bout niggers livin’ in painted houses 
an’ dressin’ fine like we was somebody! .. . Well, 

ri 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


dat went on fer some time wid de whites talkin’ an’ de 
coloreds doin’ better’n better year by year, sellin’ 
mo’ cotton ever’ day an’ gittin’ nice furniture an’ 
buyin’ pianers, till by an’ by a prosp’rous nigger 
named John Lowdins up an’ bought one o’ dese here 
new autimobiles —an’ dat settled it! . . . A white 
man in town one Sat’day night tole John to git out o’ 
dat damn car ’cause a nigger ain’t got no business wid 
a autimobile nohow! An’ John say: ‘ J ain’t gonna git 
out! ’ Den de white man, what’s been drinkin’, jump 
up on de runnin’-bo’ad an’ bust John in de mouth fer 
talkin’ back to him —he a white man, an’ Lowdins 
nothin’ but a nigger. ‘De very idee!’ he say, and hit 
John in de face six or seven times. Den John drawed 
his gun! One! two! t’ree! he fiah, hit dis old red-neck 
cracker in de shoulder, but he ain’t dead! Aint nothin’ 
meant to kill a cracker what’s drunk. But John think 
he done kilt this white man, an’ so he left him kickin’ 
in de street while he runs that car o’ his’n lickety- 
split out o’ town, goes to Vicksburg, an’ catches de river 
boat. . . . Well, sir! Dat night Crowville’s plumb 
full o’ white folks wid dogs an’ guns an’ lanterns, 
shoutin’ an’ yellin’ an’ scarin’ de wits out o’ us col- 
oreds an’ wakin’ us up way late in de night-time 
lookin’ fer John, an’ dey don’t find him. . . . Den 
dey say dey gwine teach dem Crowville niggers a les- 
son, all of ’em, paintin’ dey houses an’ buyin’ cars 
an’ livin’ like white folks, so dey comes to our do’s 
an’ tells us to leave our houses — git de hell out in de 
fields, *cause dey don’t want to kill nobody there dis 
78 


. 
y 


evenin’! . . . Well, sir! Niggers in night-gowns an’ 
underwear an’ shimmies, half-naked an’ barefooted, 
was runnin’ ever’ which way in de dark, scratchin’ up 
dey legs in de briah patches, fallin’ on dey faces, 
scared to death! Po’ ole Pheeny, what ain’t moved 
from her bed wid de paralytics fo’ six years, dey 
made her daughters carry her out, screamin’ an’ wall- 
eyed, an’ set her in de middle o’ de cotton-patch. An’ 
Brian, what was sleepin’ naked, jumps up an’ grabs 
his wife’s apron and runs like a rabbit with not another 
blessed thing on! Chillens squallin’ ever’where, an’ 
mens a-pleadin’ an’ a-cussin’, an’ womens cryin’ 
*Lawd ’a’ Mercy ’ wid de whites of dey eyes showin’! 
. . . Den looked like to me *bout five hundred white 
mens took torches an’ started burnin’ wid fiah ever’ 
last house, an’ hen-house, an’ shack, an’ barn, an’ 
privy, an’ shed, an’ cow-slant in de place! An’ all de 
niggers, when de fiah blaze up, was moanin’ in de 
fields, callin’ on de Lawd fer help! An’ de fiah light 
up de whole country clean back to de woods! You 
could smell fiah, an’ you could see it red, an’ taste de 
smoke, an’ feel it stingin’ yo’ eyes. An’ you could hear 
de bo’ads a-fallin’ an’ de glass a-poppin’, an’ po’ 
. animals roastin’ an’ fryin’ an’ a-tearin’ at dey halters. 
An’ one cow run out, fiah all ovah, wid her milk 
streamin’ down. An’ de smoke roll up, de cotton-fields 
were red . . . an’ dey ain’t been no mo’ Crowville 
after dat night. No, sir! De white folks ain’t left 
nothin’ fer de niggers, not nary bo’ad standin’ one 
"bove another, not even a dog-house. . . . When it 
19 


WHITE FOLKS 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


were done — nothin’ but ashes! . . . De white mens 
was ever where wid guns, scarin’ de po’ blacks an’ 
keepin’ ’em off, an’ one of ’em say: ‘I got good mind 
to try yo’-all’s hide, see is it bullet proof — gittin’ so 
prosp’rous, paintin’ yo’ houses an’ runnin ovah white 
folks wid yo’ damn gasoline buggies! Well, after dis 
you ll damn sight have to bend yo’ backs an’ work a 
little!’ . . . Dat’s what de white man say. . . . But 
we didn’t — not yit! "Cause ever’ last nigger moved 
from there dat Sunday mawnin’. It were right funny to 
see ole folks what ain’t never been out o’ de back- 
woods pickin’ up dey feet an’ goin’. Ma Bailey say: 
“De Lawd done let me live eighty years in one place, 
but ma next eighty’ll be spent in St. Louis.’ An’ she 
started out walkin’ wid neither bag nor baggage. . . . 
An’ me an’ Tom took Willie-Mae an’ went to Cairo, 
an’ Tom started railroad-workin’ wid a gang; then we 
come on up here, been five summers ago dis August. 
We ain’t had not even a rag o’ clothes when we left 
Crowville — so don’t tell me ’bout white folks bein’ 
good, Hager, ’cause I knows *em. . . . Yes, indeedy, 
I really knows ’em. . . . Dey done made us leave 
our home.” 

The old woman knocked her pipe against the edge 
of the porch, emptying its dead ashes into the yard, 
and for a moment no one spoke. Sandy, trembling, 
watched a falling star drop behind the trees. Then 
Jimboy’s deep voice, like a bitter rumble in the dark, 
broke the silence. 

80 


WHITE FOLKS 


“‘T know white folks, too,” he said. “‘ I lived in the 
South.” 

“And I ain’t never been South,” added Harriett 
hoarsely, “but I know ’em right here . . . and I 
hate ’em! ” 

** De Lawd hears you,” said Hager. 

‘““T don’t care if He does hear me, mama! You 
and Annjee are too easy. You just take whatever white 
folks give you — coon to your face, and nigger be- 
hind your backs — and don’t say nothing. You run to 
some white person’s back door for every job you get, 
and then they pay you one dollar for five dollars’ 
worth of work, and fire you whenever they get ready.” 

“ They do that all right,” said Jimboy. “‘ They don’t 
mind firin’ you. Wasn’t I layin’ brick on the Daily 
Leader building and the white union men started 
sayin’ they couldn’t work with me because I wasn’t 
in the union? So the boss come up and paid me off. 
“Good man, too,’ he says to me, ‘ but I can’t buck the 
union.’ So I said I’d join, but I knew they wouldn’t 
let me before I went to the office. Anyhow, I tried. I 
told the guys there I was a bricklayer and asked ’em 
how I was gonna work if I couldn’t be in the union. 
And the fellow who had the cards, secretary I guess he 
was, says kinder sharp, like he didn’t want to be 
bothered: ‘ That’s your look-out, big boy, not mine.’ 
So you see how much the union cares if a black man 
works or not.” | 

** Ain’t Tom had de same trouble? ” affirmed Sister 

Sl 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
Johnson. “ Got put off de job mo’n once on ’count 0’ 
de white unions.” 

*“ O, they’ve got us cornered, all right,” said Jim- 
boy. “ The white folks are like farmers that own all 
the cows and let the niggers take care of ’em. Then 
they make you pay a sweet price for skimmed 
milk and keep the cream for themselves — but 
I reckon cream’s too rich for rusty-kneed niggers 
anyhow! ” 

They laughed. 

That’s a good one! ” said Harriett. “You know 
old man Wright, what owns the flour-mill and the new 
hotel — how he made his start off colored women 
working in his canning factory? Well, when he built 
that orphan home for colored and gave it to the city 
last year, he had the whole place made just about the 
size of the dining-room at his own house. They got 
the little niggers in that asylum cooped up like chick- 
ens. And the reason he built it was to get the colored. 
babies out of the city home, with its nice playgrounds, 
because he thinks the two races oughtn’t to mix! But 
he don’t care how hard he works his colored help in 
that canning factory of his, does he? Wasn’t I there 
thirteen hours a day in tomato season? Nine cents an 
hour and five cents overtime after ten hours — and 
you better work overtime if you want to keep the job! 
. . . As for the races mixing — ask some of those 
high yellow women who work there. They know a 
mighty lot about the races mixing! ” 

“* Most of ’em lives in de Bottoms, where de sportin’ 

G2 | 


WHITE FOLKS 


houses are,” said Hager. “It’s a shame de way de 
white mens keeps them sinful places goin’.” 

“Tt ain’t Christian, is it? ’’ mocked Harriett... . 
“White folks!” . . . And she shrugged her should- 
ers scornfully. Many disagreeable things had hap- 
pened to her through white folks. Her first surprising 
and unpleasantly lasting impression of the pale world 
had come when, at the age of five, she had gone alone 
one day to play in a friendly white family’s yard. 
Some mischievous small boys there, for the fun of it, 
had taken hold of her short kinky braids and pulled 
them, dancing round and round her and yelling: 
* Blackie! Blackie! Blackie!” while she screamed 
and tried to run away. But they held her and pulled her 
hair terribly, and her friends laughed because she was 
black and she did look funny. So from that time on, 
Harriett had been uncomfortable in the presence of 
whiteness, and that early hurt had grown with each 
new incident into a rancor that she could not hide 
and a dislike that had become pain. 

Now, because she could sing and dance and was 
always amusing, many of the white girls in high school 
were her friends. But when the three-thirty bell rang 
and it was time to go home, Harriett knew their polite 
“ Good-bye” was really a kind way of saying: “ We 
can’t be seen on the streets with a colored girl.” To 
loiter with these same young ladies had been all right 
during their grade-school years, when they were all 
younger, but now they had begun to feel the eyes of 
7oung white boys staring from the windows of pool 

83 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


halls, or from the tennis-courts near the park — so 
it was not proper to be seen with Harriett. 

But a very unexpected stab at the girl’s pride had 
come only a few weeks ago when she had gone with 
her class-mates, on tickets issued by the school, to see 
an educational film of the under-sea world at the 
Palace Theatre, on Main Street. It was a special per- 
formance given for the students, and each class had 
had seats allotted to them beforehand; so Harriett sat 
with her class and had begun to enjoy immensely the 
strange wonders of the ocean depths when an usher 
touched her on the shoulder. 

‘“* The last three rows on the left are for colored,” 
the girl in the uniform said. 

“T— But— But Pm with my class,” Harriett 
stammered. “‘ We’re all supposed to sit here.” 

“T can’t help it,” insisted the usher, pointing 
towards the rear of the theatre, while her voice carried 
everywhere. “‘ Them’s the house rules. No argument 
now — you'll have to move.” 

So Harriett rose and stumbled up the dark aisle 
and out into -the sunlight, her slender body hot with 
embarrassment and rage. The teacher saw her leave 
the theatre without a word of protest, and none of her 
white classmates defended her for being black. They 
didn’t care. 

‘¢ All white people are alike, in school and out,” 
Harriett concluded bitterly, as she told of her ex- 
periences to the folks sitting with her on the porch in 
the dark. 

84, 


Se aad = 


ee 


WHITE FOLKS 


Once, when she had worked for a Mrs. Leonard 
Baker on Martin Avenue, she accidentally broke a 
precious cut-glass pitcher used to serve some out-of- 
town guests. And when she tried to apologize for the 
accident, Mrs. Baker screamed in a rage: “‘ Shut up, 
you impudent little black wench! Talking back to me 
after breaking up my dishes. All you darkies are alike 
— careless sluts — and I wouldn’t have a one of you 
in my house if I could get anybody else to work for 
me without paying a fortune. You’re al! impossible.” 

“So that’s the way white people feel,” Harriett 
said to Aunt Hager and Sister Johnson and Jimboy, 
while the two children listened. “ They wouldn’t have 
a single one of us around if they could help it. It don’t 
matter to them if we’re shut out of a job. It don’t 
matter to them if niggers have only the back row at 
the movies. It don’t matter to them when they hurt our 
feelings without caring and treat us like slaves down 
South and like beggars up North. No, it don’t matter 
tothem. . . . White folks run the world, and the only 
thing colored folks are expected to do is work and 
grin and take off their hats as though it don’t matter. 
. . . O, I hate ’em!” Harriett cried, so fiercely that 
Sandy was afraid. “I hate white folks!” she said to 
everybody on the porch in the darkness. “‘ You can 
pray for ’em if you want to, mama, but I hate ’em! 
. . . [hate white folks! . . I hate ’em all!” 


85 


Ke AIL ILI MAA AD 


EIGHT 
DANCE 


© 


we EEE BSI S 


rs. J. J. Rice and family usually spent ten 
M days during the August heat at Lake Dale, 
and thither they had gone now, giving Annjee 
a forced vacation with no pay. Jimboy was not work- 
ing, and so his wife found ten days of rest without 
income not especially agreeable. Nevertheless, she 
decided that she might as well enjoy the time; so she 
and Jimboy went to the country for a week with 
Cousin Jessie, who had married one of the colored 
farmers of the district. Besides, Annjee thought that 
Jimboy might help on the farm and so make a little 
money. Anyway, they would get plenty to eat, be- 
cause Jessie kept a good table. And since Jessie had 
eight children of her own, they did not take Sandy 
with them — eight were enough for a woman to be 
worried with at one time! 
Aunt Hager had been ironing all day on the Rein- 
harts’ clothes — it was Friday. At seven o’clock Har- 
86 


Ae 


DANCE 


riett came home, but she had already eaten her sup- 
per at the restaurant where she worked. 

“Hello, mama! Hy, Sandy!” she said, but that 
was all, because she and her mother were not on the 
best of terms. Aunt Hager was attempting to punish 
her youngest daughter by not allowing her to leave 
the house after dark, since Harriett, on Tuesday night, 
had been out until one o’clock in the morning with no 
better excuse than a party at Maudel’s. Aunt Hager 
had threatened to whip her then and there that night. 

** You ain’t had a switch on yo’ hide fo’ three years, 
but don’t think you’s gettin’ too big fo’ me not to fan 
yo’ behind, madam. ‘ Spare de rod an’ spoil de chile,’ 
that’s what de Bible say, an’ Lawd knows you sho is 
spoiled! De idee of a young gal yo’ age stayin’ out till 
one o'clock in de mawnin’, an’ me not knowed where 
you’s at. . . . Don’t you talk back to me! . . . You 
rests in this house ever’ night this week an’ don’t put 
yo’ foot out o’ this yard after you comes from work, 
that’s what you do. Lawd knows I don’t know what I’s 
gonna do with you. I works fo’ you an’ I prays fo’ 
you, an’ if you don’t mind, I’s sho gonna whip you, 
even if you is goin’ on seventeen years old! ” 

Tonight as soon as she came from work Harriett 
went into her mother’s room and lay across the bed. 
It was very warm in the little four-room house, and 
all the windows and doors were open. 

““We’s got some watermelon here, daughter,” 
Hager called from the kitchen. “ Don’t you want a 
nice cool slice? ” 

87 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


“No,” the girl replied. She was fanning herself 
with a palm-leaf fan, her legs in their cheap silk stock- 
ings hanging over the side of the bed, and her heels 
kicking the floor. Benbow’s Band played tonight for 
the dance at Chaver’s Hall, and everybody was going 
—but her. Gee, it was hard to have a Christian 
mother! Harriett kicked her slippers off with a bang 
and rolled over on her stomach, burying her powdery 
face in the pillows. . . . Somebody knocked at the 
back door. 

A boy’s voice was speaking excitedly to Hager: 
*““Hemorrhages ... and papa can’t stop “em... 
she’s coughin’ something terrible . . . says can’t you 
please come over and help him” — frightened and 
out of breath. 

“Do, Jesus! ” cried Hager. “ ll be with you right 
away, chile. Don’t worry.” She rushed into the bed- 
room to change her apron. “ You Harriett, listen; 
Sister Lane’s taken awful sick an’ Jimmy says she’s 
bleedin’ from de mouth. If I ain’t back by nine o’clock, 
see that that chile Sandy’s in de bed. An’ you know 
you ain’t to leave this yard under no circumstances. 
. . « Po’ Mis’ Lane! She sho do have it hard.” In a 
whisper: “‘I ’spects she’s got de T. B., that what I 
’spects! ” And the old woman hustled out to join the 
waiting youngster. Jimmy was leaning against the 
door, looking at Sandy, and neither of the boys knew 
what to say. Jimmy Lane wore his mother’s cast-off 
shoes to school, and Sandy used to tease him, but to- 
night he didn’t tease his friend about his shoes. 

88 | 


SEES 


Bete 


DANCE 


“You go to bed fore it gets late,” said his grand- 
mother, starting down the alley with Jimmy. 

“*'Yes’m,” Sandy called after her. “ So long, Jim! ” 
He stood under the apple-tree and watched them 
disappear. 

Aunt Hager had scarcely gotten out of sight when 
there was a loud knock at the front door, and Sandy 
ran around the house to see Harriett’s boy friend, 
Mingo, standing in the dusk outside the screen-door, 
waiting to be let in. 

Mingo was a patent-leather black boy with wide, 
alive nostrils and a mouth that split into a lighthouse 
smile on the least provocation. His body was heavy 
and muscular, resting on bowed legs that curved back- 
ward as though the better to brace his chunky torso; 
and his hands were hard from mixing concrete and 
digging ditches for the city’s new water-mains. 

** T know it’s tonight, but I can’t go,” Sandy heard 
his aunt say at the door. They were speaking of Ben- 
bow’s dance. “And his band don’t come here often, 
neither. ’'m heart-sick having to stay home, dog-gone 
it all, especially this evening! ” 

“Aw, come on and go anyway,” pleaded Mingo. 
“ After I been savin’ up my dough for two weeks to 
take you, and got my suit cleaned and pressed and all. 
Heck! If you couldn’t go and knew it yesterday, why 
didn’t you tell me? That’s a swell way to treat a 
fellow! ” | 

“ Because I wanted to go,” said Harriett; “ and still 
want to go. ... Don’t make so much difference 

89 


NOT WITHOUT LAUCHTER 


about mama, because she’s mad anyhow . . . but 
what could we do with this kid? We can’t leave him 
by himself.” She looked at Sandy, who was standing 
behind Mingo listening to everything. 

“You can take me,” the child offered anxiously, 
his eyes dancing at the delightful prospect. “ll be- 
have, Harrie, if you take me, and I won’t tell on you 
either. . . . Please lemme go, Mingo. I ain’t never 
seen a big dance in my life. I wanta go.” 

* Should we? ” asked Harriett doubtfully, looking 
at her boy friend standing firmly on his curved legs. 

“Sure, if we got to have him . . . damn ’im! ” 
Mingo replied. “ Better the kid than no dance. Go git 
dressed.” So Harriett made a dash for the clothes- 
closet, while Sandy ran to get a clean waist from one 
of his mother’s dresser-drawers, and Mingo helped 
him put it on, cussing softly to himself all the while. 
“* But it ain’t your fault, pal, is it? ” he said to the little 
boy. | 

“Sure not,” Sandy replied. “I didn’t tell Aunt 
Hager to make Harrie stay home. I tried to ’suade 
grandma to let her go,” the child lied, because he 
liked Mingo. “I guess she won’t care about her goin’ 
to just one dance.” He wanted to make everything all 
right so the young man wouldn’t be worried. Besides, 
Sandy very much wanted to go himself. 

** Let’s beat it,” Harriett shrilled excitedly before 
her dress was fastened, anxious to be gone lest her 
mother come home. She was powdering her face and 
neck in the next room, nervous, happy, and afraid all 

90 | 


DANCE 
at once. The perfume, the voice, and the pat, pat, pat 
of the powder-puff came out to the waiting gentleman. 
“Yo” car’s here, madam,” mocked Mingo. “Step 
right this way and let’s be going! ” 


Wonder where ma easy rider’s gone — 
He done left me, put ma new gold watch in pawn! 


Like a blare from hell the second encore of Easy 
Rider filled every cubic inch of the little hall with 
hip-rocking notes. Benbow himself was leading and 
the crowd moved like jelly-fish dancing on individual 
sea-shells, with Mingo and Harriett somewhere among 
the shakers. But they were not of them, since each 
couple shook in a world of its own, as, with a weary 
wail, the music abruptly ceased. 

Then, after scarcely a breath of intermission, the 
band struck up again with a lazy one-step. A tall brown 
boy in a light tan suit walked his partner straight 
down the whole length of the floor and, when he 
reached the corner, turned leisurely in one spot, body 
riding his hips, eyes on the ceiling, and his girl shak- 
ing her full breasts against his pink silk shirt. Then 
they recrossed the width of the room, turned slowly, 
repeating themselves, and began again to walk 
rhythmically down the hall, while the music was like 
a lazy river flowing between mountains, carving a 
canyon coolly, calmly, and without insistence. The 
Lazy River One-Step they might have called what the 
band was playing as the large crowd moved with the 
greatest ease about the hall. To drum-beats barely 

ol 


hy 

’ 

_ NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
_ audible, the tall boy in the tan suit walked his partner 
round and round time after time, revolving at each cor- 
ner with eyes uplifted, while the piano was the water 
flowing, and the high, thin chords of the banjo were 
the mountains floating in the clouds. But in sultry 
tones, alone and always, the brass cornet spoke harshly 
about the earth. 

Sandy sat against the wall in a hard wooden folding 
chair. There were other children scattered lonesomely 
about on chairs, too, watching the dancers, but he 
didn’t seem to know any of them. When the music 
stopped, all the chairs quickly filled with loud-talking 
women and girls in brightly colored dresses who 
fanned themselves with handkerchiefs and wiped their 
sweating brows. Sandy thought maybe he should give 
his seat to one of the women when he saw Maudel 
approaching. 

“* Here, honey,” she said. “‘ Take this dime and buy 
yourself a bottle of something cold to drink. I know 
Harriett ain’t got you on her mind out there dancin’. 
This music is certainly righteous, chile! ’’ She laughed 
as she handed Sandy a coin and closed her pocket- 
book. He liked Maudel, although he knew his grand- 
mother didn’t. She was a large good-natured brown- 
skinned girl who walked hippishly and used too much 
rouge on her lips. But she always gave Sandy a dime, 
and she was always laughing. 

He went through the crowd towards the soft-drink 
stand at the end of the hall. “ Gimme a bottle o’ cream 
soda,” he said to the fat orange-colored man there, 

92 


DANCE 


who had his sleeves rolled up and a white butcher’s- 
apron covering his barrel-like belly. The man put 
his hairy arms down into a zinc tub full of ice and 
water and began pulling out bottles, looking at 
their caps, and then dropping them back into the 
cold liquid. 

“Don’t seem like we got no cream, sonny. How'd 
a lemon do you?” he asked above the bedlam of 
talking voices. 

*“ Naw,” said Sandy. “It’s too sour.” 

On the improvised counter of boards the wares dis- 
played consisted of cracker-jacks, salted peanuts, a 
box of gum, and Sen Sens, while behind the counter 
was a lighted oil-stove holding a tin pan full of spare- 
ribs, sausage, and fish; and near it an ice-cream freezer 
covered with a brown sack. Some cases of soda were 
on the floor beside the zinc tub filled with bottles, in 
which the man was still searching. 

** Nope, no cream,” said the fat man. 

“Well, gimme a fish sandwich then,” Sandy re- 
plied, feeling very proud because some kids were 
standing near, looking at him as he made his pur- 
chase like a grown man. 

“Buy me one, too,” suggested a biscuit-colored 
little girl in a frilly dirty-white dress. 

“T only got a dime,” Sandy said. “But you can 
have half of mine.” And he gallantly broke in two 
parts the double square of thick bread, with its hunk 
of greasy fish between, and gravely handed a portion 
to the grinning little girl. 

93 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 

“Thanks,” she said, running away with the bread 
and fish in her hands. 

‘Shame on you! ” teased a small boy, rubbing his 
forefingers at Sandy. “ You got a girl! You got 
a girl!” 

“Go chase yourself!” Sandy replied casually, as 
he picked out the bones and smacked his lips on the 
sweet fried fish. The orchestra was playing another 
one-step, with the dancers going like shuttles across 
the floor. Sandy saw his Aunt Harriett and a slender 
yellow boy named Billy Sanderlee doing a series of 
lazy, intricate steps as they wound through the crowd 
from one end of the hall to the other. Certain less 
accomplished couples were watching them with 
admiration. 

Sandy, when he had finished eating, decided to look 
for the wash-room, where he could rinse his hands, 
because they were greasy and smelled fishy. It was at 
the far corner of the hall. As he pushed open the door 
marked GENTS, a thick grey cloud of cigarette-smoke 
drifted out. The stench of urine and gin and a crowd 
of men talking, swearing, and drinking licker sur- 
rounded the little boy as he elbowed his way towards 
the wash-bowls. All the fellows were shouting loudly 
to one another and making fleshy remarks about the 
women they had danced with. 

‘ Boy, you ought to try Velma,” a mahogany-brown 
boy yelled. “* She sure can go.” 

“Hell,” answered a whisky voice somewhere in 
the smoke. “That nappy-headed black woman? 

94 


DANCE 
Gimme a high yaller for mine all de time. I can’t use 
no coal!” 

“‘ Well, de blacker de berry, de sweeter de juice,” 
protested a slick-haired ebony youth in the center of 
tre place... . “ Ain’t that right, sport?” he de- 
inanded of Sandy, grabbing him jokingly by the neck 
and picking him up. 

**T guess it is,” said the child, scared, and the men 
laughed. 

“Here, kid, buy yourself a drink,” the slick- 
headed boy said, slipping Sandy a nickel as he set him 
down gently at the door. “ And be sure it’s pop— 
not gin.” 

Outside, the youngster dried his wet hands on a 
handkerchief, blinked his smoky eyes, and immedi- 
ately bought the soda, a red strawberry liquid in a 
long, thick bottle. 

Suddenly and without warning the cornet blared at 
the other end of the hall in an ear-splitting wail: 
“Whaw!... Whaw! ... Whaw!... Whaw!” 
and the snare-drum rolled in answer. A pause .. . 
then the loud brassy notes were repeated and the banjo 
came in, “ Plinka, plink, plink,” like timid drops of 
rain after a terrific crash of thunder. Then quite casu- 
ally, as though nothing had happened, the piano 
lazied into a slow drag, with all the other instruments 
following. And with the utmost nonchalance the drum- 
mer struck into time. 

“ Ever’body shake!” cried Benbow, as a ribbon 
of laughter swirled round the hall. 

95 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


Couples began to sway languidly, melting together 
like candy in the sun as hips rotated effortlessly to the 
music. Girls snuggled pomaded heads on men’s chests, 
or rested powdered chins on men’s shoulders, while 
wild young boys put both arms tightly around their 
partners’ waists and let their hands hang down care- 
lessly over female haunches. Bodies moved ever so 
easily together — ever so easily, as Benbow turned 
towards his musicians and cried through cupped 
hands: “‘ Aw, screech it, boys! ” 

A long, tall, gangling gal stepped back from her 
partner, adjusted her hips, and did a few easy, gliding 
steps all her own before her man grabbed her again. 

** Fu-0-00-000-0000! ” moaned the cornet titillating 
with pain, as the banjo cried in stop-time, and the 
piano sobbed aloud with a rhythmical, secret passion. 
But the drums kept up their hard steady laughter — 
like somebody who don’t care. 

““T see you plowin’, Uncle Walt,” called a little 
autumn-leaf brown with switching skirts to a dark- 
purple man grinding down the center of the floor with 
a yellow woman. Two short prancing blacks stopped 
in their tracks to quiver violently. A bushy-headed 
girl threw out her arms, snapped her fingers, and 
began to holler: “ Hey! . . . Hey!” while her per- 
spiring partner held doggedly to each hip in an effort 
to keep up with her. All over the hall, people danced 
their own individual movements to the scream and 
moan of the music. 

“Get low . . . low down . . . down! ” cried the 

96 


DANCE 
drummer, bouncing like a rubber ball in his chair. 
The banjo scolded in diabolic glee, and the cornet 
panted as though it were out of breath, and Benbow 
himself left the band and came out on the floor to 
dance slowly and ecstatically with a large Indian- 
brown woman covered with diamonds. 

‘* Aw, do it, Mister Benbow! ” one of his admirers 
shouted frenziedly as the hall itself seemed to tremble. 

“High yallers, draw nigh! Brown-skins, come 
near!” somebody squalled. “ But black gals, stay 
where you are! ” 

““Whaw! Whaw! Whaw!” mocked the cornet — 
but the steady tomtom of the drums was no longer 
laughter now, no longer even pleasant: the drum-beats 
had become sharp with surly sound, like heavy waves 
that beat angrily on a granite rock. And under the dis- 
solute spell of its own rhythm the music had got quite 
beyond itself. The four black men in Benbow’s wan- 
dering band were exploring depths to which mere 
sound had no business to go. Cruel, desolate, un- 
adorned was their music now, like the body of a 
ravished woman on the sun-baked earth; violent and 
hard, like a giant standing over his bleeding mate in 
the blazing sun. The odors of bodies, the stings of 
flesh, and the utter emptiness of soul when all is done 
— these things the piano and the drums, the cornet and 
the twanging banjo insisted on hoarsely to a beat that 
made the dancers move, in that little hall, like pawns 
on a frenetic checker-board. | 

“* Aw, play it, Mister Benbow! ” somebody cried. 

97 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


The earth rolls relentlessly, and the sun blazes for 
ever on the earth, breeding, breeding. But why do you 
insist like the earth, music? Rolling and breeding, 
earth and sun for ever relentlessly. But why do you 
insist like the sun? Like the lips of women? Like the 
bodies of men, relentlessly? 

** Aw, play it, Mister Benbow! ” 

But why do you insist, music? 

Who understands the earth? Do you, Mingo? Who 
understands the sun? Do you, Harriett? Does anybody 
know — among you high yallers, you jelly-beans, you 
pinks and pretty daddies, among you sealskin browns, 
smooth blacks, and _ chocolates-to-the-bone — does 
anybody know the answer? 

** Aw, play it, Benbow! ” 

“It’s midnight. De clock is  strikin’ twelve, 


? 99 


ae 
** Aw, play it, Mister Benbow! ” 

During intermission, when the members of the band 
stopped making music to drink gin and talk to women, 
Harriett and Mingo bought Sandy a box of cracker- 
jacks and another bottle of soda and left him standing 
in the middle of the floor holding both. His young aunt 
had forgotten time, so Sandy decided to go upstairs to 
the narrow unused balcony that ran the length of one 
side of the place. It was dusty up there, but a few 
broken chairs stood near the railing and he sat on one 
of them. He leaned his arms on the banister, rested 
his chin in his hands, and when the music started, he 

98 


DANCE 

looked down on the mass of moving couples crowding 
the floor. He had a clear view of the energetic little 
black drummer eagle-rocking with staccato regularity 
in his chair as his long, thin sticks descended upon the 
tightly drawn skin of his small drum, while his foot 
patted the pedal of his big bass-drum, on which was 
painted in large red letters: “ BENBOW’S FAMOUS 
KANSAS CITY BAND.” 

As the slow shuffle gained in intensity (and his 
eracker-jacks gave out), Sandy looked down drowsily 
on the men and women, the boys and girls, circling and 
turning beneath him. Dresses and suits of all shades 
and colors, and a vast confusion of bushy heads on 
swaying bodies. Faces gleaming like circus balloons — 
lemon-yellow, coal-black, powder-grey, ebony-black, 
blue-black faces; chocolate, brown, orange, tan, 
creamy-gold faces — the room full of floating balloon 
faces — Sandy’s eyes were beginning to blur with sleep 
— colored balloons with strings, and the music pull- 
ing the strings. No! Girls pulling the strings — each 
boy a balloon by a string. Each face a balloon. 

Sandy put his head down on the dusty railing of the 
gallery. An odor of hair-oil and fish, of women and 
sweat came up to him as he sat there alone, tired and 
a little sick. It was very warm and close, and the room 
was full of chatter during the intervals. Sandy strug- 
gled against sleep, but his eyes were just about to 
close when, with a burst of hopeless sadness, the St. 
Louis Blues spread itself like a bitter syrup over the 
hall. For a moment the boy opened his eyes to the 

99 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
drowsy flow of sound, long enough to pull two chairs 
together; then he lay down on them and closed his 
eyes again. Somebody was singing: 


St. Louis woman with her diamond rings . . . 


as the band said very weary things in a loud and 
brassy manner and the dancers moved in a dream 
that seemed to have forgotten itself: 


Got ma man tied to her apron-strings .. . 


Wah! Wah! Wah! . . . The cornet laughed with ter- 
rible rudeness. Then the drums began to giggle and 
the banjo whined an insulting leer. The piano said, 
over and over again: “ St. Louis! That big old dirty 
town where the Mississippi’s deep and wide, deep and 
wide . . .”’ and the hips of the dancers rolled. 


Man’s got a heart like a rock cast inde sea . . . 


while the cynical banjo covered unplumbable depths 
with a plinking surface of staccato gaiety, like the 
sparkling bubbles that rise on deep water over a man 
who has just drowned himself: 


Or else he never would a gone so far fromme .. . 


then the band stopped with a long-drawn-out wail from 

the cornet and a flippant little laugh from the drums. 

A great burst of applause swept over the room, and 

the musicians immediately began to play again. This 

time just blues, not the St. Louis, nor the Memphis, 
100 | 


DANCE 
nor the Yellow Dog — but just the plain old familiar 
blues, heart-breaking and extravagant, ma-baby’s- 
gone-from-me blues. 

Nobody thought about anyone else then. Bodies 
sweatily close, arms locked, cheek to cheek, breast to 
breast, couples rocked to the pulse-like beat of the 
rhythm, yet quite oblivious each person of the other. 
It was true that men and women were dancing together, 
but their feet had gone down through the floor into the 
earth, each dancer’s alone — down into the center of 
things —and their minds had gone off to the heart of 
loneliness, where they didn’t even hear the words, the 
sometimes lying, sometimes laughing words that Ben- 
bow, leaning on the piano, was singing against this 
background of utterly despondent music: 


When de blues is got you, 
Ain’t no use to run away. 

When de blue-blues got you, 
Ain’t no use to run away, 

Cause de blues is like a woman 
That can turn yo’ good hair grey. 


| Umn-ump! ... Umn! ... Umn-ump! 


Well, I tole ma baby, 

Says baby, baby, babe, be mine, 

But ma baby was deceitful. 

She must a thought that I was blind. 


'E De-da! De-da! . . . De da! De da! Dee! 
| 101 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
O, Lawdy, Lawdy, Lawdy, 
Lawdy, Lawdy, Lawd ... Lawd . .. Lawd! 
She quit me fo’ a Texas gambler, 
So I had to git another broad. 


Whaw-whaw! .. . Whaw-whaw-whaw! As though 
the laughter of a cornet could reach the heart of 
loneliness. 

These mean old weary blues coming from a little 
orchestra of four men who needed no written music 
because they couldn’t have read it. Four men and a 
leader — Rattle Benbow from Galveston; Benbow’s 
buddy, the drummer, from Houston; his banjoist from 
Birmingham; his cornetist from Atlanta; and the 
pianist, long-fingered, sissyfied, a coal-black lad from 
New Orleans who had brought with him an exag- 
gerated rag-time which he called jazz. 

““ [’m jazzin’ it, creepers! ” he sometimes yelled as 
he rolled his eyes towards the dancers and let his 
fingers beat the keys to a frenzy. . . . But now the 
piano was cryin’ the blues! 

Four homeless, plug-ugly niggers, that’s all they 
were, playing mean old loveless blues in a hot, 
crowded little dance-hall in a Kansas town on Friday 
night. Playing the heart out of loneliness with a wide- 
mouthed leader, who sang everybody’s troubles until 
they became his own. The improvising piano, the 
whanging banjo, the throbbing bass-drum, the hard- 
hearted little snare-drum, the brassy cornet that 
laughed, “ Whaw-whaw-whaw. . . . Whaw!” were 

102 


DANCE 


the waves in this lonesome sea of harmony from which 
Benbow’s melancholy voice rose: 


You gonna wake up some mawnin’ 
An’ turn yo’ smilin’ face. 

Wake up some early mawnin’, 

Says turn yo’ smilin’ face, 

Look at yo’ sweetie’s pillow — 

An’ find an’ empty place! 


Then the music whipped itself into a slow fury, an 
awkward, elemental, foot-stamping fury, with the 
banjo running terrifiedly away in a windy moan and 
then coming back again, with the cornet wailing like a 
woman who don’t know what it’s all about: 


Then you gonna call yo’ baby, 
Call yo’ lovin’ baby dear — 

But you can keep on callin’, 
’Cause I won’t be here! 


And for a moment nothing was heard save the shuf- 
shuf-shuffle of feet and the immense booming of the 
bass-drum like a living vein pulsing at the heart of 
loneliness. 


“Sandy! ... Sandy! ... My stars! Where is 
that child? ... Has anybody seen my little 

nephew?” All over the hall... . “Sandy! ... 
_ Oh-o-o, Lord!” Finally, with a sigh of relief: “ You 
little brat, darn you, hiding up here in the balcony 
| 103 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
where nobody could find you! . . . Sandy, wake up! 
It’s past four o’clock and [ll get killed.” 

Harriett vigorously shook the sleeping child, who 
lay stretched on the dusty chairs; then she began to 
drag him down the narrow steps before he was scarcely 
awake. The hall was almost empty and the chubby 
little black drummer was waddling across the floor 
carrying his drums in canvas cases. Someone was 
switching off the lights one by one. A mustard-colored 
man stood near the door quarrelling with a black 
woman. She began to cry and he slapped her full in 
the mouth, then turned his back and left with another 
girl of maple-sugar brown. Harriett jerked Sandy past 
this linked couple and pulled the boy down the long 
flight of stairs into the street, where Mingo stood wait- 
ing, with a lighted cigarette making a white line 
against his black skin. 

“You better git a move on,” he said. “ Daylight 
ain’t holdin’ itself back for you!” And he told the 
truth, for the night had already begun to pale. 

Sandy felt sick at the stomach. To be awakened pre- 
cipitately made him cross and ill-humored, but the 
fresh, cool air soon caused him to feel less sleepy and 
not quite so ill. He took a deep breath as he trotted 
rapidly along on the sidewalk beside his striding aunt 
and her boy friend. He watched the blue-grey dawn 
blot out the night in the sky; and then pearl-grey blot 
out the blue, while the stars faded to points of dying 
fire. And he listened to the birds chirping and trilling 
in the trees as though they were calling the sun. Then, 

104 


3 


DANCE 
as he became fully awake, the child began to feel very 
proud of himself, for this was the first time he had 
ever been away from home all night. 

Harriett was fussing with Mingo. “ You shouldn’t ’ve 
kept me out like that,” she said. ““ Why didn’t you 
tell me what time it was? . . . I didn’t know.” 

And Mingo came back: “ Hey, didn’t I try to drag 
you away at midnight and you wouldn’t come? And 
ain’t I called you at one o’clock and you said: * Wait 
a minute’ — dancin’ with some yaller P. I. from St. 
Joe, with your arms round his neck like a life- 
preserver? . . . Don’t tell me I didn’t want to leave, 
and me got to go to work at eight o’clock this mornin’ 
with a pick and shovel when the whistle blows! What 
de hell? ” 

But Harriett did not care to quarrel now when there 
would be no time to finish it properly. She was out of 
breath from hurrying and almost in tears. She was 
afraid to go home. 

** Mingo, I’m scared.” 

“Well, you know what you can do if your ma puts 
you out,” her escort said quickly, forgetting his anger. 
*T can take care of you. We could get married.” 

** Could we, Mingo? ” 

** Sure!” 

She slipped her hand in his. “‘ Aw, daddy! ” and the 
pace became much less hurried. 

When they reached the corner near which Harriett 
lived, she lifted her dark little purple-powdered face 
for a not very lingering kiss and sent Mingo on his 

105 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
way. Then she frowned anxiously and ran on. The 
sky was a pale pearly color, waiting for the warm 
gold of the rising sun. 

““T’m scared to death!” said Harriett. ‘“‘ Lord, 
Sandy, I hope ma ain’t up! I hope she didn’t come 
home last night from Mis’ Lane’s. We shouldn’t ’ve 
gone, Sandy . . . I guess we shouldn’t ’ve gone.” 
She was breathing hard and Sandy had to run fast to 
keep up with her. “Gee, I’m scared!” 

The grass was diamond-like with dew, and the red 
bricks of the sidewalk were damp, as the small boy 
and his young aunt hurried under the leafy elms along 
the walk. They passed Madam de Carter’s house and 
cut through the wet grass into their own yard as the 
first rays of the morning sun sifted through the trees. 
Quietly they tiptoed towards the porch; quickly and 
quietly they crossed it; and softly, ever so softly, they 
opened the parlor door. 

In the early dusk the oil-lamp still burned on the 
front-room table, and in an old arm-chair, with the 
open Bible on her lap, sat Aunt Hager Williams, a 
bundle of switches on the floor at her feet. 


106 


Ke Ke IRI _ GN GGG 


NINE 
CARNIVAL 


° 


EEE KEE SSSI 


ETWEEN the tent of Christ and the tents of sin 
Be: stretched scarcely a half-mile. Rivalry 

reigned: the revival and the carnival held sway 
in Stanton at the same time. Both were at the south 
edge of town, and both were loud and musical in their 
activities. In a dirty white tent in the Hickory Woods 
the Reverend Duke Braswell conducted the services of 
the Lord for the annual summer tent-meeting of the 
First Ethiopian Baptist Church. And in Jed Galoway’s 
meadow lots Swank’s Combined Shows, the World’s 
Greatest Midway Carnival, had spread canvas for 
seven days of bunko games and cheap attractions. 
The old Negroes went to the revival, and the young 
Negroes went to the carnival, and after sundown these 
August evenings the mourning songs of the Christians 
could be heard rising from the Hickory Woods while 
the profound syncopation of the minstrel band blared 

107 


NOT WITHOUT LAUCHTER 
from Galoway’s Lots, strangely intermingling their 
notes of praise and joy. 

Aunt Hager with Annjee and Sandy went to the re- 
vival every night (Sandy unwillingly), while Jimboy, 
Harriett, and Maudel went to the carnival. Aunt Hager 
prayed for her youngest daughter at the meetings, but 
Harriett had not spoken to her mother, if she could 
avoid it, since the morning after the dance, when she 
had been whipped. Since their return from the country 
Annjee and Jimboy were not so loving towards each 
other, either, as they had been before. Jimboy tired 
of Jessie’s farm, so he came back to town three days 
before his wife returned. And now the revival and the 
carnival widened the breach between the Christians 
and the sinners in Aunt Hager’s little household. And 
Sandy would rather have been with the sinners — 
Jimboy and Harriett — but he wasn’t old enough; so 
he had to go to meetings until, on Thursday morning, 
when he and Buster were climbing over the coal-shed 
in the back yard, Sandy accidentally: jumped down on 
a rusty nail, which penetrated the heel of his bare foot. 
He set up a wail, cried until noon over the pain, and 
refused to eat any dinner; so finally Jimboy said that 
if he would only hush hollering he’d take him to the 
carnival that evening. 

“* Yes, take de rascal,” said Aunt Hager. “ He ain’t 
doin’ no good at de services, wiggling and squirming 
so’s we can’t hardly hear de sermon. He ain’t got reli- 
gion in his heart, that chile! ” 

“* T hope he ain’t,” said his father, yawning. 

108 


CARNIVAL 

“ All you wants him to be is a good-fo’-nothin’ 
rounder like you is,” retorted Hager. And she and 
Jimboy began their daily quarrel, which lasted for 
hours, each of them enjoying it immensely. But Sandy 
kept pulling at his father and saying: “‘ Hurry up and 
let’s go,” although he knew well that nothing really 
started at the carnival until sundown. Nevertheless, 
about four o’clock, Jimboy said: “ All right, come 
on,” and they started out in the hot sun towards Galo- 
ways Lots, the man walking tall and easy while the 
boy hobbled along on his sore foot, a rag tied about 
his heel. 


At the old cross-bar gate on the edge of town, 
through which Jed Galoway drove his cows to pasture, 
there had been erected a portable arch strung with 
electric lights spelling out “ SwANxK’s SHOws” in red 
and yellow letters, but it was not very impressive in 
the day-time, with the sun blazing on it, and no people 
about. And from this gate, extending the whole length 
of the meadow on either side, like a roadway, were 
the tents and booths of the carnival: the Galatea illu- 
sion, the seal and sea-lion circus, the Broadway musi- 
cal-comedy show, the freaks, the games of chance, the 
pop-corn- and lemonade-stands, the colored min- 
strels, the merry-go-round, the fun house, the hoochie- 
coochie, the Ferris wheel, and, at the far end, a canvas 
tank under a tiny platform high in the air from which 
the World’s Most Dangerous and Spectacular High 
Dive took place nighily at ten-thirty. 

109 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
“We gonna stay to see that, ain’t we, papa?” 


Sandy asked. 

“Sure,” said Jimboy. “ But didn’t I tell you there 
wouldn’t be nothin’ runnin’ this early in the after- 
noon? See! Not even the band playin’, and ain’t a 
thing open but the freak-show and I'll bet all the freaks 
asleep.” But he bought Sandy a bag of peanuts and 
planked down twenty cents for two tickets into the 
sultry tent where a perspiring fat woman and a tame- 
looking wild-man were the only attractions to be found 
on the platforms. The sword-swallower was not yet at 
work, nor the electric marvel, nor the human glass: 
eater. The terrific sun beat fiercely through the canvas 
on this exhibit of two lone human abnormalities, and 
the few spectators in the tent kept wiping their faces 
with their handkerchiefs. 

Jimboy struck up a conversation with the Fat 
Woman, a pink and white creature who said she lived 
in Columbus, Ohio; and when Jimboy said he’d been 
there, she was interested. She said she had always 
lived right next door to colored people at home, and 
she gave Sandy a postcard picture of herself for 
nothing, although it had “ 10¢” marked on the back. 
She kept saying she didn’t see how anybody could stay 
in Kansas and it a dry state where a soul couldn’t even 
get beer except from a bootlegger. 

When Sandy and his father came out, they left the 
row of tents and went across the meadow to a clump 
of big shade-trees beneath which several colored 
men who worked with the show were sitting. A blanket 

110 


CARNIVAL 

had been spread on the grass, and a crap game was 
~ going on to the accompaniment of much arguing and 
_ good-natured cussing. But most of the men were just 
| sitting around not playing, and one or two were 
_ stretched flat on their faces, asleep. Jimboy seemed to 
__ know several of the fellows, so he joined in their talk 
_ while Sandy watched the dice roll for a while, but 
since the boy didn’t understand the game, he decided 
to go back to the tents. 

( “All right, go ahead,” said his father. “Il pick 
- you up later when the lights are lit and things get 
_ started; then we can go in the shows.” 

|| Sandy limped off, walking on the toe of his injured 
- foot. In front of the sea-lion circus he found Earl 
_ James, a little white boy in his grade at school; the 
_ two of them went around together for a while, looking 
_ at the large painted canvas pictures in front of the 
_ shows or else lying on their stomachs on the ground 
_ to peep under the tents. When they reached the min- 
_ strel-show tent near the end of the midway, they heard 
a piano tinkling within and the sound of hands clap- 
_ ping as though someone was dancing. 

_ “ Jeezus! Let’s see this,” Earl cried, so the two boys 
got down on their bellies, wriggled under the flap of 
the tent on one side, and looked in. 

A battered upright piano stood on the ground in 
front of the stage, and a fat, bald-headed Negro was 
beating out a rag. A big white man in a checkered 
' vest was leaning against the piano, derby on head, . 
_and a long cigar stuck in his mouth. He was watching 
111 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 

a slim black girl, with skirts held high and head 
thrown back, prancing in a mad circle of crazy steps. 
Two big colored boys in red uniforms were patting 
time, while another girl sat on a box, her back towards 
the peeping youngsters staring up from under the edge 
of the tent. As the girl who was dancing whirled about, 
Sandy saw that it was Harriett. 

“Pretty good, ain’t she, boss? ” yelled the wrinkle- 
necked Negro at the piano as he pounded away. 

The white man nodded and kept his eyes on Har- 
riett’s legs. The two black boys patting time were grin- 
ning from ear to ear. 

“Do it, Miss Mama!” one of them shouted as 
Harriett began to sashay gracefully. 

Finally she stopped, panting and perspiring, with 
her lips smiling and her eyes sparkling gaily. Then 
she went with the white man and the colored piano- 
player behind the canvas curtains to the stage. One of 
the show-boys put his arms around the girl sitting on 
the box and began tentatively to feel her breasts. 

“Don’t be so fresh, hot papa,” she said. And Sandy 
recognized Maudel’s voice, and saw her brown face 


as she leaned back to look at the showman. The boy . 


in the red suit bent over and kissed her several times, 
while the other fellow kept imitating the steps he had 
just seen Harriett performing. 

“ Let’s go,” Earl said to Sandy, rolling over on the 
ground. The two small boys went on to the next tent, 
where one of the carnival men caught them, kicked 
their behinds soundly, and sent them away. 

112 


ee 


CARNIVAL 


The sun was setting in a pink haze, and the show- 
grounds began to take on an air of activity. The steam 


| calliope gave a few trial hoots, and the merry-go-round 


circled slowly without passengers, The paddle-wheels 
and the get-’em-hot men, the lemonade-sellers and the 
souvenir-venders were opening their booths to the eve- 
ning trade. A barker began to ballyhoo in front of the 
freak-show. By and by there would be a crowd. The 
lights came on along the Midway, the Ferris wheel 
swept languidly up into the air, and when Sandy 
found his father, the colored band had begun to play 
in front of the minstrel show. 

“*T want to ride on the merry-go-round,” Sandy in- 
sisted. “And go in the Crazy House.” So they did 
both; then they bought hamburger sandwiches with 
thick slices of white onion and drank strawberry soda 
and ate pop-corn with butter on it. They went to the 
sea-lion circus, tried to win a Kewpie doll at the 
paddle-wheel booth, and watched men losing money 


on the hidden pea, then trying to win it back at four- 


card monte behind the Galatea attraction. And all the 


while Sandy said nothing to his father about having 


seen Harriett dancing in the minstrel tent that after- 
noon. 

Sandy had lived too long with three women not to 
have learned to hold his tongue about the private do- 
ings of each of them. When Annjee paid two dollars 
a week on a blue silk shirt for his father at Cohn’s cut- 
rate credit store, and Sandy saw her make the pay- 
ments, he knew without being told that the matter was 

113 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 

never to be mentioned to Aunt Hager. And if his 
grandmother sometimes threw Harriett’s rouge out in 
the alley, Sandy saw it with his eyes, but not with his 
mouth. Because he loved all three of them — Har- 
riett and Annjee and Hager — he didn’t carry tales on 
any one of them to the others. Nobody would know 
he had watched his Aunt Harrie dancing on the carni- 
val lot today in front of a big fat white man in a 
checkered vest while a Negro in a red suit played the 
piano. 

** We got a half-dollar left for the minstrel show,” 
said Jimboy. “* Come on, let’s go.” And he pulled his 
son through the crowd that jammed the long Midway 
between the booths. 

All the bright lights of the carnival were on now, 
and everything was running full blast. The merry-go- 
round whirled to the ear-splitting hoots of the cal- 
liope; bands blared; the canvas paintings of snakes 
and dancing-girls, human skeletons, fire-eaters, bil- 
lowed in the evening breeze; pennants flapped, barkers 
shouted, acrobats twirled in front of a tent; a huge 
paddle-wheel clicked out numbers. Folks pushed and 
shoved and women called to their children not to 
get lost. In the air one smelled the scent of trampled 
grass, peanuts, and hot dogs, animals and human 
bodies. 

The large white man in the checkered vest was mak- 
ing the ballyhoo in front of the minstrel show, his ex- 
pansive belly turned towards the crowd that had been 
attracted by the band. One hand pointed towards a 

114 


{ 
{ 
' 


CARNIVAL 


tawdry group of hard-looking Negro performers 
standing on the platform. 

“Here we have, ladies and gents, Madam Cale- 
donia Watson, the Dixie song-bird; Dancing Jenkins, 
the dark strutter from Jacksonville; little Lizzie 
Roach, champeen coon-shouter of Georgia; and last, 
but not least, Sambo and Rastus, the world’s funniest 
comedians. Last performance this evening! .. . 
Strike her up, perfesser! . . . Come along, now, 
folks! ” 

The band burst into sound, Madam Watson and 
Lizzie Roach opened their brass-lined throats, the men 
dropped into a momentary clog-dance, and then the 
whole crowd of performers disappeared into the tent. 
The ticket-purchasing townspeople followed through 
the public opening beneath a gaudily painted sign 
picturing a Mississippi steamboat in the moonlight, 
and two black bucks shooting gigantic dice on a street- 
corner. 

Jimboy and Sandy followed the band inside and 
took seats, and soon the frayed curtain rose, showing 
a plantation scene in the South, where three men, 
blackened up, and two women in bandannas sang long- 
ingly about Dixie. Then Sambo and Rastus came out 
with long wooden razors and began to argue and shoot 
dice, but presently the lights went out and a ghost ap- 
peared and frightened the two men away, causing 


them to leave all the money on the stage. (The audi- 


| 
| 
| 
: 


ence thought it screamingly funny — and just like | 
niggers.) After that one of the women sang a ragtime 
115 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


song and did the eagle-rock. Then a man with a banjo 
in his hands began to play, but until then the show had 
been lifeless. 

“Listen to him,” Jimboy said, punching Sandy. 
** He’s good! ” 

The piece he was picking was full of intricate runs 
and trills long drawn out, then suddenly slipping into 
tantalizing rhythms. It ended with a vibrant whang! 
— and the audience yelled for more. As an encore he 
played a blues and sang innumerable verses, always 
ending: 


An’ Ah can’t be satisfied, 
’Cause all Ah love has 


Done laid down an’ died. 


And to Sandy it seemed like the saddest music in the 
world — but the white people around him laughed. 

Then the stage lights went on, the band blared, and 
all the black actors came trooping back, clapping their 
hands before the cotton-field curtain as each one in 
turn danced like fury, vigorously distorting agile 
limbs into the most amazing positions, while the scene 
ended with the fattest mammy and the oldest uncle 
shaking jazzily together. 


The booths were all putting out their lights as the 
people poured through the gate towards town. Sandy 
hobbled down the road beside his father, his sore heel, 
which had been forgotten all evening, paining him 
terribly until Jimboy picked him up and carried him 

116 | 


CARNIVAL 


on his shoulder. Automobiles and buggies whirled 
past them in clouds of gritty dust, and young boys 
calling vulgar words hurried after tittering girls. 
When Sandy and his father reached home, Aunt 
Hager and Annjee had not yet returned from the re- 
vival. Jimboy said he thought maybe they had stopped 
at Mrs. Lane’s to sit up all night with the sick woman, 
so Sandy spread his pallet on the floor at the foot of 
his grandmother’s, bed and went to sleep. He did not 
hear his Aunt Harriett when she came home, but late 
| in the night he woke up with his heel throbbing pain- 
| fully, his throat dry, and his skin burning, and when 
"he tried to bend his leg, it hurt him so that he began 


| to cry. 


| 
i 


_ Harriett, awakened by his moans, called drowsily: 
** What’s the matter, honey? ”’ 

_ “ My foot,” said Sandy tearfully. 

So his young aunt got out of bed, lit the lamp, and 

helped him to the kitchen, where she heated a kettle 

of water, bathed his heel, and covered the nail-wound 

_ with vaseline. Then she bound it with a fresh white rag. 

_ “ Now that ought to feel better,” she said as she led 

_ him back to his pallet, and soon they were both asleep 

| again. 

The next morning when Hager came from the sick- 

| bed of her friend, she sent to the butcher-shop for a 

| bacon rind, cut from it a piece of fat meat, and bound 

it to Sandy’s heel as a cure. _ 

_ “Don’t want you havin’ de blood-pisen here,” she 

_ said. “ An’ don’t you run round an’ play on that heel. 

17 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
Set out on de porch an’ study yo’ reader, ’cause 
school’ll be startin’ next month.” Then she began Mrs. 
Reinhari’s ironing. 

The next day, Saturday, the last day of the carnival, 
Jimboy carried the Reinharts’ clothes home for Hager, 
since Sandy was crippled and Jimmy Lane’s mother 
was down in bed. But after delivering the clothes Jim- 
boy did not come home for supper. When Annjee and 
Hager wanted to leave for the revival in the early 
evening, they asked Harriett if she would stay home 
with the little boy, for Sandy’s heel had swollen purple 
where the rusty nail had penetrated and he could 
hardly walk at all. 

“You been gone ever’ night this week,” Hager said 
to the girl. “ An’ you ain’t been anear de holy tents 
where de Lawd’s word is preached; so you ought to 
be willin’ to stay home one night with a po’ litle sick 
boy.” 

‘““Yes’m,” Harriett muttered in a noncommittal 


tone. But shortly after her mother and Annjee had — 


gone, she said to her nephew: “‘ You aren’t afraid 
to stay home by yourself, are you? ” 

And Sandy answered: “‘ Course not, Aunt Harrie.” 

She gave him a hot bath and put a new piece of fat 
meat on his festering heel. Then she told him to climb 
into Annjee’s bed and go to sleep, but instead he lay 
for a long time looking out the window that was be- 
side the bed. He thought about the carnival — the 
Ferris wheel sweeping up into the air, and the minstrel 
show. Then he remembered Benbow’s dance a few 

| 118 3 


CARNIVAL 


weeks ago and how his Aunt Harriett had stood sul- 
lenly the next morning while Hager whipped her — 
and hadn’t cried at all, until the welts came under 
her silk stockings. . . . Then he wondered what 
Jimmy Lane would do if his sick mother died from 
the T. B. and he were left with nobody to take care 
of him, because Jimmy’s step-father was no good. 
. . . Eu-uuu! His heel hurt! . . . When school be- 
gan again, he would be in the fifth grade, but he 
wished he’d hurry up and get to high school, like Har- 
riett was. . . . When he got to be a man, he was go- 
ing to be a railroad engineer. . . . Gee, he wasn’t 
sleepy — and his heel throbbed painfully. 

In the next room Harriett had lighted the oil-lamp 
and was moving swiftly about taking clothes from the 
dresser-drawers and spreading them on the bed. She 
thought Sandy was asleep, he knew — but he couldn’t 
go to sleep the way his foot hurt him. He could see her 
through the doorway folding her dresses in little piles 
and he wondered why she was doing that. Then she 
took an old suit-case from the closet and began to pack 
it, and when it was full, she pulled a new bag from 
under the bed, and into it she dumped her toilet- 
articles, powder, vaseline, nail-polish, straightening 
comb, and several pairs of old stockings rolled in 
| balls. Then she sat down on the bed between the two 
_| closed suit-cases for a long time with her hands in her 
lap and her eyes staring ahead of her. 

Finally she rose and closed the bureau-drawers, - 
tidied up the confusion she had created, and gathered 

119 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 

together the discarded things she had thrown on the 
floor. Then Sandy heard her go out into the back yard 
towards the trash-pile. When she returned, she put on 
a tight little hat and went into the kitchen to wash her 
hands, throwing the water through the back door. Then 
she tip-toed into the room where Sandy was lying and 
kissed him gently on the head. Sandy knew that she 
thought he was asleep, but in spite of himself he sud- 
denly threw his arms tightly around her neck. He 
couldn’t help it. 

“Where you going, Aunt Harriett? ” he said, sitting 
up in bed, clutching the girl. 

““ Honey, you won’t tell on me, will you? ” Harriett 
asked. 

“No,” he answered, and she knew he wouldn’t. 
“But where are you going, Aunt Harrie? ” 

“You won’t be afraid to stay here until grandma 
comes? ” 

““ No,” burying his face on her breast. “‘ I won’t be 
afraid.” 

** And you won’t forget Aunt Harrie? ” 

“* Course not.” 

““T’m leaving with the carnival,” she told him. 

For a moment they sat close together on the bed. 
Then she kissed him, went into the other room and 
picked up her suit-cases — and the door closed. 


120 


RE _ ALAS IL _AL_Gh_GR_GK_ GG 


TEN 
PUNISHMENT 


° 


© EEE VSS 


LD white Dr. McDillors, beloved of all the 
() = in Stanton, came on Sunday morning, 

swabbed Sandy’s festering foot with iodine, 
bound it up, and gave him a bottle of green medicine 
to take, and by the middle of the week the boy was 
able to hobble about again without pain; but Hager 
continued to apply fat meat instead of following the 
doctor’s directions. 

When Harriett didn’t come back, Sandy no longer 
slept on a pallet on the floor. He slept in the big bed 
with his grandma Hager, and the evenings that fol- 
lowed weren’t so jolly, with his young aunt off with the 
carnival, and Jimboy spending most of his time at the 
pool hall or else loafing on the station platform watch- 
ing the trains come through— and nobody playing 
music in the back yard. 

They went to bed early these days, and after that 
eventful week of carnival and revival, a sore heel, and 

121 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


a missing Aunt Harriett, the muscles of Sandy’s little 
body often twitched and jerked in his sleep and he 
would awaken suddenly from dreaming that he heard 
sad raggy music playing while a woman shouted for 
Jesus in the Gospel tent, and a girl in red silk stockings 
cried because the switches were cutting her legs. Some- 
times he would lie staring into the darkness a long 
time, while Aunt Hager lay snoring at his side. And 
sometimes in the next room, where Annjee and Jim- 
boy were, he could hear the slow rhythmical creaking 
of the bedsprings and the low moans of his mother, 
which he already knew accompanied the grown-up 
embraces of bodily love. And sometimes through the 
window he could see the moonlight glinting on the tall, 
tassel-crowned stalks of corn in the garden. Perhaps 
he would toss and turn until he had awakened Aunt 
Hager and she would say drowsily: “‘ What’s de mat- 
ter with you, chile? Ill put you back on de flo’ if you 
can’t be still! ” Then he would go to sleep again, and 
before he knew it, the sun would be flooding the room 
with warm light, and the coffee would be boiling on 
the stove in the kitchen, and Annjee would have gone 
to work. 

Summer days were long and drowsy for grown-ups, 
but for Sandy they were full of interest. In the morn- 
ings he helped Aunt Hager by feeding the chickens, 
bringing in the water for her wash-tubs and filling the 
buckets from which they drank. He chopped wood, 
too, and piled it behind the kitchen-stove; then he 
would take the broom and sweep dust-clean the space 

122 


PUNISHMENT 


around the pump and under the apple-tree where he 
played. Perhaps by that time Willie-Mae would come 
over or Buster would be there to shoot marbles. Or 
maybe his grandmother would send him to the store to 
get a pound of sugar or ten cents’ worth of meal for 
dinner, and on the way there was certain to be an 
adventure. Yesterday he had seen two bad little boys 
from the Bottoms, collecting scrap-iron and junk in 
the alleys, get angry at each other and pretend to 
start a fight. . 

The big one said to the smaller one: “‘ I’m a fast- 
black and you know I sho won’t run! Jest you pick up 
that piece o’ iron that belongs to me. Go ahead, jest 
you try!” 

And the short boy replied: “‘ I’m your match, long 
skinny! Strike me an’ see if you don’t get burnt up! ” 
And then they started to play the dozens, and Sandy, 
standing by, learned several new and very vulgar 
words to use when talking about other peoples’ 
mothers. 

The tall kid said finally: “Aw, go on, you little 
clay-colored nigger, you looks too much like mustard 
to me anyhow!” Picking up the disputed piece of 
scrap-iron, he proceeded on his quest for junk, looking 
into all the trash-piles and garbage-cans along the 
alley, but the smaller of the two boys took his gunny- 
sack and went in the opposite direction alone. 

“Be careful, sissy, and don’t break your dishes,” 
his late companion called after his retreating buddy, 
and Sandy carefully memorized the expression to try 

123 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER’: 
on Jimmy Lane some time —that is, if Jimmy’s 
mother got well, for Mrs. Lane now was in the last 
stages of consumption. But if she got better, Sandy 
was going to tell her son to be careful and not break 
his dishes — always wearing his mother’s shoes, like 
a girl. 

By that time he had forgotten what Hager sent him 
to the store to buy, and instead of getting meal he 
bought washing-powder. When he came home, after 
nearly an hour’s absence, his grandmother threatened 
to cut an elm switch, but she satisfied herself instead 
by scolding him for staying so long, and then sending 
him back to exchange the washing-powder for meal — 
and she waiting all that time to make corn dumplings 
to put in the greens! 

In the afternoon Sandy played in his back yard or 
next door at the Johnson’s, but Hager never allowed 
him outside their block. The white children across the 
street were frequently inclined to say “ Nigger,” so 
he was forbidden to play there. Usually Buster, who 
~ looked like a white kid, and Willie-Mae, who couldn’t 

have been blacker, were his companions. The three 
children would run at hide-and-seek, in the tall corn; 
or they would tag one another in the big yard, or play 
house under the apple-tree. 

Once when they were rummaging in the trash-pile 
to see what they could find, Sandy came across a pawn 
ticket which he took into the kitchen to Hager. It was 
for a watch his Aunt Harriett had pawned the Satur- 
day she ran away. 

124 


PUNISHMENT 

Sometimes in the late afternoon the children would 
go next door to Madam de Carter’s and she would 
give them ginger cookies and read to them from the 
Bible Story Reader. Madam de Carter looked very 
pompous and important in her silk waist as she would 
put on her pince-nez and say: “‘ Now, children, seat 
yourselves and preserve silence while I read you-all 
this moralizing history of Samson’s treacherous hair. 
Now, Buster, who were Samson? Willie-Mae, has you 
ever heard of Delilah? ” 

Sometimes, if Jimboy was home, he would take 
down his old guitar and start the children to dancing 
in the sunlight— but then Hager would always call 
Sandy to pump water or go to the store as soon as she 
heard the music. 

* Out there dancin’ like you ain’t got no raisin’! ” 
she would say. “I tells Jimboy bout playin’ that ole 
ragtime here! That’s what ruint Harriett! ” 

And on Sundays Sandy went to Sabbath school at 
the Shiloh Baptist Church, where he was given a 
colored picture card with a printed text on it. The 
long, dull lessons were taught by Sister Flora Garden, 
who had been to Wilberforce College, in Ohio. There 
were ten little boys in Sandy’s class, ranging from 
nine to fourteen, and they behaved very badly, for 
Miss Flora Garden, who wore thick-lensed glasses on 
her roach-colored face, didn’t understand little boys. 

‘“ Where was Moses when the lights went out?” 
Gritty Smith asked her every Sunday, and she didn’t 
even know the answer. 

125 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


Sandy didn’t think much of Sunday-school, and 
frequently instead of putting his nickel in the collec- 
tion basket he spent it for candy, which he divided 
with Buster — until one very hot Sunday Hager found 
it out. He had put a piece of the sticky candy in his 
shirt-pocket and it melted, stuck, and stained the whole 
front of his clean clothes. When he came home, with 
Buster behind him the first thing Hager said was: 
*“What’s all this here stuck up in yo’ pocket? ” and 
Buster commenced to giggle and said Sandy had 
bought candy. 

““Where’d you get the money, sir?” demanded 
Aunt Hager searchingly of her grandson. 

** T— we — er — Madam Carter gimme a nickel,” 
Sandy replied haltingly, choosing the first name he 
could think of, which would have been all right had 
not Madam de Carter herself stopped by the house, 
almost immediately afterwards, on her way home 
from church. 

“Ts you give Sandy a nickel to buy candy this 
mawnin’?”’ Hager asked her as soon as she entered 
the parlor. 

“Why, no, Sister Williams, I isn’t. I had no coins 
about me a-tall at services this morning.” 

“Umn-huh! I thought so!” said Hager. “ You 
Sandy!” 

The little boy, guilt written all over his face, came 
in from the front porch, where he had been sitting with 
his father after Buster went home. 

‘“‘Where’d you tell me you got that nickel this 

126 


PUNISHMENT 
mawnin’? ” And before he could answer, she spat out: 
“‘T’m gonna whip you! ” 

“ Jehovah help us! Children sure is bad these days,” 
said Madam de Carter, shaking her head as she left 
t’ go next door to her own house. “ They sure are 
bad,” she added, self-consciously correcting her 
English. 

“[’m gonna whip you,” Hager continued, sitting 
down amazed in her plush chair. “‘ De idee o’ with- 
holdin’ yo’ Sunday-school money from de Lawd an’ 


- buyin’ candy.” 


- you has some left to gum up in yo’ pocket? Tell me that, 
- how you gonna do it? ” 


“T only spent a penny,” Sandy led, wriggling. 
“* How you gwine get so much candy fo’ a penny that 


Sandy, at a loss for an answer, was standing with 


_ lowered eyelids, when the screen door opened and 


Jimboy came in. Sandy looked up at him for aid, but 
his father’s usually amiable face was stern this time. 
** Come here! ” he said. The man towered very tall 
above the little fellow who looked up at him helplessly. 
* T’s gwine whip him! ” interposed Hager. 
* Ts that right, you spent your Sunday-school nickel 
for candy?” Jimboy demanded gravely. 
Sandy nodded his héad. He couldn’t lie to his 


_ father, and had he spoken now, the sobs would have 
- come. 


“Then you told a lie to your grandma — and I’m 


ashamed of you,” his father said. 


Sandy wanted to turn his head away and escape the 
127 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


slow gaze of Jimboy’s eyes, but he couldn’t. If Aunt 
Hager would only whip him, it would be better; then 
maybe his father wouldn’t say any more. But it was 
awful to stand still and listen to Jimboy talk to him 
this way— yet there he stood, stiffly holding back 
the sobs. 

‘To take money and use it for what it ain’t s’posed 
to be used is the same as stealing,” Jimboy went on 
gravely to his son. “ That’s what you done today, and 
then come home and lie about it. Nobody’s ugly as a 
liar, you know that! . . . I’m not much, maybe. Don’t 
mean to say I am. I won’t work a lot, but what I do 
I do honest. White folks gets rich lyin’ and stealin’ — 
and some niggers gets rich that way, too — but I don’t 
need money if I got to get it dishonest, with a lot o’ lies 
trailing behind me, and can’t look folks in the face. 
It makes you feel dirty! It’s no good! ... Don’t 
I give you nickels for candy whenever you want ’em? ” 

The boy nodded silently, with the tears trickling 
down his chin. 

‘* And don’t I go with you to the store and buy you 
ice-cream and soda-pop any time you ask me? ” 

The child nodded again. 

““And then you go and take the Sunday-school 
nickel that your grandma’s worked hard for all the 
week, spend it on candy, and come back home and lie 
about it. So that’s what you do! And then lie! ” 

Jimboy turned his back and went out on the porch, 
slamming the screen door behind him. Aunt Hager 
did not whip her grandson, but returned to the kitchen 

128 


| 


PUNISHMENT 
and left him standing disgraced in the parlor. Then 
Sandy began to cry, with one hand in his mouth so no 
one could hear him, and when Annjee came home 
from work in the late afternoon, she found him lying 
across her bed, head under the pillows, still sobbing 
because Jimboy had called him a liar. 


129 


KLASSE AS_ O_O GEG 


SCHOOL 


© EELS BIB SS 


OME weeks later the neighbors were treated to 
an early morning concert: 


I got a high yaller 

An’ a little short black, 

But a brown-skin gal 

Can bring me right on back! 
I’m singin’ brown-skin! 
Lawdy! ... Lawd! 


Brown-skin! . . . O, ma Lawd! 


“Tt must be Jimboy,” said Hager from the kitchen. 
‘* A lazy coon, settin’ out there in the cool singin’, an’ 
me in here sweatin’ and washin’ maself to dust!” 


Kansas City Southern! 

I mean de W. & A:! 

I’m gonna ride de first train 

I catch goin’ out ma way. 

I’m got de railroad blues — | 
130 | 


SCHOOL 


““T wish to God you'd go on, then!” mumbled 
Hager over the wash-boilers. 


But I ain’t got no railroad fare! 
I’m gwine to pack ma grip an’ 
Beat ma way away from here! 


“Learn me how to pick a cord, papa,’ Sandy 
begged as he sat beside his father under the apple-tree, 
loaded with ripe fruit. 

“All right, look a-here! . . . You put your thumb 
like this. . . .”’ Jimboy began to explain. “ But, dog- 
gone, your fingers ain’t long enough yet! ” 

Still they managed to spend a half-day twanging at 
the old instrument, with Sandy trying to learn a 


_ simple tune. 


ber mornings, and most of Aunt Hager’s 
_ folks” had returned from their vacations; her kitchen 
was once more a daily laundry. Great boilers of 
_ clothes steamed on the stove and, beside the clothes, 
_ pans of apple juice boiled to jelly, and the peelings 
of peaches simmered to jam. 


The sunny August mornings had become Septem- 
“* white 


There was no news from the runaway Harriett. 


_... Mrs. Lane died one sultry night, with Hager at 
_ the bedside, and was buried by the lodge with three 
hacks and a fifty-dollar coffin. . . . The following 
_ week the Drill of All Nations, after much practising 
_ by the women, was given with great success and Ann- 
_ jee, dressed in white and wrapped in a Scandinavian 


131 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


flag, marched proudly as Sweden. . . . Madam de 
Carter’s house was now locked and barred, as she 
had departed for Oklahoma to organize branches of 
the lodge there. . . . Tempy had stopped to see 
Hager one afternoon, but she didn’t stay long. She 
told her mother she was out collecting rents and that 
she and her husband were buying another house. . . 

Willie-Mae had a new calico dress. . . . Buster had 
learned to swear better than Sandy. . . . And next 
Monday was to be the opening of the new school term. 

Sandy hated even to think about going back to 
schoo!. He was having much fun playing, and Jimboy 
had been teaching him to box. Then the time to go to 
classes came. 

“Wash yo’ face good, sir, put on yo’ clean waist, 
an’ polish yo’ shoes,” Aunt Hager said bright and 
early, “‘’cause I don’t want none o’ them white teach- 
ers sayin’ I sends you to school dirty as a ’cuse to put 
you back in de fourth grade. You hear me, sir!” 

*'Yes’m,” Sandy replied. 

This morning he was to enter the “ white” fifth 
grade, having passed last June from the “ colored ” 
fourth, for in Stanton the Negro children were kept in 
separate rooms under colored teachers until they 
had passed the fourth grade. Then, from the fifth 
grade on, they went with the other children, and the 
teachers were white. 

When Sandy arrived on the school grounds with his 
face shining, he found the yard already full of shout- 
ing kids. On the girls’ side he saw Willie-Mae jump- 

132 


SCHOOL 


ing rope. Sandy found Ear! and Buster and some boys 
whom he knew playing mumble-peg on the boys’ side, 
and he joined them. When the bell rang, they all 
crowded into the building, as the marching-lines had 
not yet been formed. Miss Abigail Minter, the princi- 
pal, stood at the entyance, and there were big signs on 
all the room doors marking the classes. Sandy found 
the fifth-grade room upstairs and went in shyly. It was 
full of whispering youngsters huddled in little groups. 
He saw two colored children among them, both girls 
whom he didn’t know, but there were no colored boys. 
Soon the teacher rapped briskly on her desk, and 
silence ensued. 

Take seats, all of you, please,” she rasped out. 
“Anywhere now until we get order.” She rapped 
again impatiently with the ruler. “Take seats at 
once.” So the children each selected a desk and sat 
down, most of the girls at the front of the room and 
most of the boys together at the back, where they could 


_. play and look out the windows. 


Then the teacher, middle-aged and wearing glasses, 
passed out tiny slips of paper to each child in the 
front row, with the command that they be handed back- 
wards, so that every student received one slip. 

** Now, write your names on the paper, turning it 
longways,”’ she said. “‘ Nothing but your names, that’s 
all I want today. You will receive forms to fill out 
later, but I want to get your seats assigned this morn- 
ing, however.” | 

Amid much confusion and borrowing of pencils, the 

133 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


slips were finally signed in big awkward letters, and 
collected by the teacher, who passed up and down the 
aisles. Then she went to her desk, and there was a de- 
lightful period of whispering and wriggling as she 
sorted the slips and placed them in alphabetical order. 
Finally she finished. 

* Now,” she said, “ each child rise as I call out your 
names, so I can see who you are.” 

The teacher stood up with the papers in her hand. 

“Mary Atkins . . . Carl Dietrich . . . Josephine 
Evans,” she called slowly glancing up after each 
name. “Franklin Rhodes ... James Rodgers.” 
Sandy stood up quickly. “Ethel Shortlidge .. . 
Roland Thomas.” The roll-call continued, each child 
standing until he had been identified, then sitting 
down again. 

“Now,” the teacher said, “ everybody rise and 
make a line around the walls. Quietly! No talking! 
As I call your names this time, take seats in order, 
starting with number one in the first row near the 
window. ... Mary Atkins... Carl Dietrich. 
. .. ” The roll was repeated, each child taking a seat 
as she had commanded. When all but four of the chil- 
dren were seated, the two colored girls and Sandy 
still were standing. 

** Albert Zwick,” she said, and the last white child 
sat down in his place. “ Now,” said the teacher, “ you 
three colored children take the seats behind Albert. 
You girls take the first two, and you,” pointing to 
Sandy, “take the last one. . . . Now I’m going to 

134 


SCHOOL 


put on the board the list of books to buy and I want 
all of you to copy them correctly.” And she went on 
with her details of schoolroom routine. 

One of the colored girls turned round to Sandy 
and whispered: “‘She just put us in the back cause 
we're niggers.” And Sandy nodded gravely. “ My 
name’s Sadie Butler and she’s put me behind the Z 
cause I’m a nigger.” 

“An old heifer! ” said the first little colored girl, 
whispering loudly. “I’m gonna tell my mama.” But 
Sandy felt like crying. And he was beginning to be 
ashamed of crying because he was no longer a small 
boy. But the teacher’s putting the colored children in 
the back of the room made him feel lke crying. 

At lunch-time he came home with his list of books, 
and Aunt Hager pulled her wet arms out of the tub, 
wiped her hands, and held them up in horror. 

* Lawdy! Just look! Something else to spend money 
for. Ever’ year more an’ more books, an’ chillens learn 
less an’ less! Used to didn’t have nothin’ but a blue- 
backed speller, and now look ahere—a list as 
long as ma arm! Go out there in de yard an’ see is yo’ 
pappy got any money to give you for ’em, ’cause I 
ain’t.” 

Sandy found Jimboy sitting dejectedly on the well- 
stoop in the sunshine, with his head in his hands. 
* You got any money, papa? ” he asked. 

Jimboy looked at the list of books written in 
Sandy’s childish scrawl and slowly handed him a 
dollar and a half. 

135 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 

“You see what I got left, don’t you? ” said his 
father as he turned his pants-pockets inside out, show- 
ing the little boy a jack-knife, a half-empty sack of 
Bull Durham, a key, and a dime. But he smiled, and 
took Sandy awkwardly in his arms and kissed him. 
“Tt’s all right, kid.” 

That afternoon at school they had a long drill on 
the multiplication table, and then they had a spelling- 
match, because the teacher said that would be a good 
way to find out what the children knew. For the 
spelling-bee they were divided into two sides — the 
boys and the girls, each side lining up against an op- 
posite wall. Then the teacher gave out words that they 
should have learned in the lower grades. On the 
boys’ side everyone was spelled down except Sandy, 
but on the girls’ side there were three proud little 
white girls left standing and Sandy came near spelling 
them down, too, until he put the e before z in “ chief,” 
and the girls’ side won, to the disgust of the boys, and 
the two colored girls, who wanted Sandy to win. 

After school Sandy went uptown with Buster to buy 
books, but there was so large a crowd of children in 
the bookstore that it was five o’clock before he was 
waited on and his list filled. When he reached home, 
Aunt Hager was at the kitchen-stove frying an egg- 
plant for supper. 

“You stayin’ out mighty long,” she said without 
taking her attention from the stove. 

*“ Where’s papa?” Sandy asked eagerly. He wanted 
to show Jimboy his new books—a big geography, 

136 


SCHOOL 


with pictures of animals in it, and a Nature Story 
Reader that he knew his father would like to see. 

“Look in yonder,” said Hager, pointing towards 
Annjee’s bedroom. 

Sandy rushed in, then stopped, because there was 
no one there. Suddenly a queer feeling came over him 
and he put his books down on the bed. Jimboy’s 
clothes were no longer hanging against the wall where 
his working-shirts and overalls were kept. Then Sandy 
looked under the bed. His father’s old suit-case was 
not there either, nor his work-shoes, nor his Sunday 
patent-leathers. And the guitar was missing. 

*“* Where’s papa?” he asked again, running back 
to the kitchen. 

“Can’t you see he ain’t here? ” replied his grand- 
mother, busily turning slices of egg-plant with great 
care in the skillet. “‘ Gone — that’s where he is — a 
lazy nigger. Told me to tell Annjee he say goodbye, 
’cause his travellin’ blues done come on . . . ! Huh! 
Jimboy’s yo’ pappy, chile, but he sho ain’t worth his 
salt! . .. an’ I’s right glad he’s took his clothes an’ 
left here, maself.” 


137 


Ke KS IL IIR GN GG 


TWELVE 
HARD WINTER 


© © SE © GG 


EPTEMBER passed and the corn-stalks in the gar- 

den were cut. There were no more apples left 

on the trees, and chilly rains came to beat down 
the falling leaves from the maples and the elms. Cold 
and drearily wet October passed, too, with no hint of 
Indian summer or golden forests. And as yet there 
was no word from the departed Jimboy. Annjee wor- 
ried herself sick as usual, hoping every day that a 
letter would come from this wandering husband whom 
she loved. And each night she hurried home from 
Mrs. Rice’s, looked on the parlor table for the mail, 
and found none. Harriett had not written, either, since 
she went away with the carnival, and Hager never 
mentioned her youngest daughter’s name. Nor did 
Hager mention Jimboy except when Annjee asked her, 
after she could hold it no longer: “ Are you sure the 
mail-man ain’t left me a letter today? ” And then Aunt 

138 


HARD WINTER 


Hager would reply impatiently: “ You think I’d a et 
it if he did? You know that good-for-nothin’, upsettin’ 
scoundrel ain’t wrote! ” 

But in spite of daily disappointments from the 
postal service Annjee continued to rush from Mrs. 
Rice’s hot kitchen as soon after dinner as she could 
and to trudge through the chill October rains, anxious 
to feel in the mail-box outside her door, then hope 
against hope for a letter inside on the little front-room 
table — which would always be empty. She caught a 
terrible cold tramping through the damp streets, for- 
getting to button her cloak, then sitting down with her 
wet shoes on when she got home, a look of dumb dis- 
appointment in her eyes, too tired and unhappy to 
remove her clothes. 

* You’s a fool,” said her mother, whose tongue was 
often much sharper than the meaning behind it. 
** Mooning after a worthless nigger like Jimboy. I tole 
you years ago he were no good, when he first come, 
lookin’ like he ought to be wearin’ short pants, an’ out 
here courtin’ you. Ain’t none o” them bell-hoppin’, 
racehoss-followin’ kind o’ darkies worth havin’, an’ 
that’s all Jimboy was when you married him an’ he 
ain’t much mo’n that now. An’ you older’n he is, too! ” 

** But you know why I married, don’t you? ” 

* You Sandy, go outdoors an’ get me some wood 
fo’ this stove. . . . Yes, I knows why, because he 
were de father o’ that chile you was "bout to bring 
here, but I don’t see why it couldn’t just well been 
some o’ these steady, hard-workin’ Stanton young 

139 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
men’s what was courtin’ you at de same time. . 
But, chile or no chile, I couldn’t hear nothin’ but Jim- 
boy, Jimboy, Jimboy! I told you you beiter stay in de 
high school an’ get your edication, but no, you had to 
marry this Jimboy. Now you see what you got, don’t 
you? ” 

“* Well, he ain’t been so bad, ma! And I don’t care, 
I love him! ” 

**Umn-huh! Try an’ live on love, daughter! Just 
try an’ live on love. . . . You’s made a mistake, 
that’s all, honey. . . . But I guess there ain’t no use 
talkin’ *bout it now. Take off yo’ wet shoes ’fore you 
catch yo’ death o’ cold! ” 

On Thanksgiving at Mrs. Rice’s, so Annjee re- 
ported, they had turkey with chestnut dressing; but at 
Aunt Hager’s she and Sandy had a nice juicy possum, 
a present from old man Logan, parboiled and baked 
sweet and brown with yams in the pan. Aunt Hager 
opened a jar of peach preserves. And she told Sandy 
to ask Jimmy Lane in to dinner because, since his 
mother died, he wasn’t faring so well and the people 
he was staying with didn’t care much about him. But 
since Jimmy had quit school, Sandy didn’t see him 
often; and the day before Thanksgiving he couldn’t 
find him at all, so they had no company to help them 
eat the possum. 

The week after Thanksgiving Annjee fell ill and 
had to go to bed. She had the grippe, Aunt Hager said, 
and she began to dose her with quinine and to put hot 
mustard-plasters on her back and gave her onion syrup 

140 | 


- =) F eget sd mE ” Cae Se ee Re te ae ay = 


HARD WINTER 


to drink, but it didn’t seem to do much good, and 
finally she had to send Sandy for Dr. McDillors. 

“‘ System’s all run down,” said the doctor. “ Heavy 
cold on the chest — better be careful. And stay in 
the bed! ” But the warning was unnecessary. Annjee 
felt too tired and weak ever to rise, and only the mail- 
man’s whistle blowing at somebody else’s house would 
cause her to try to lift her head. Then she would de- 
mand weakly: “ Did he stop here? ” 

Hager’s home now was like a steam laundry. The 
kitchen was always hung with lines of clothes to dry, 
and in the late afternoon and evenings the ironing- 
board was spread from the table to a chair-back in 
the middle of the floor. All of the old customers were 
sending their clothes to Hager again during the win- 
ter. And since Annjee was sick, bringing no money 
into the house on Saturdays, the old woman had even 
taken an extra washing to do. Being the only wage- 
earner, Hager kept the suds flying — but with the wet 
weather she had to dry the clothes in the kitchen most 
of the time, and when Sandy came home from school 
for lunch, he would eat under dripping lines of white 
folks’ garments while he listened to his mother cough- 
ing in the next room. 

In the other rooms of the house there were no stoves, 
so the doors were kept open in order that the heat 
might pass through from the kitchen. They couldn’t 
afford to keep more than one fire going; therefore the 
kitchen was living-room, dining-room, and work-room 
combined. In the mornings Sandy would jump out of 

141 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


bed and run with his clothes in his hands to the kitchen- 
stove, where his grandmother would have the fire blaz- 
ing, the coffee-pot on, and a great tub of water heating 
for the washings. And in the evenings after supper he 
would open his geography and read about the strange 
countries far away, the book spread out on the oilcloth- 
covered kitchen-table. And Aunt Hager, if her ironing 
was done, would sit beside the stove and doze, 
while Annjee tossed and groaned in her chilly bed- 
room. Only in the kitchen was it really bright and 
warm. 

In the afternoons when Sandy came home from 
school he would usually find Sister Johnson helping 
Hager with her ironing, and keeping up a steady 
conversation. 

“Dis gonna be a hard winter. De papers say folks 
is out o’ work ever’ where, an’, wid all dis sleet an’ 
rain, it’s a terror fo’ de po’ peoples, I tells you! Now, 
ma Tom, he got a good job tendin’ de furnace at de 
Fair Buildin’, so I ain’t doin’ much washin’ long as 
he’s workin’ — but so many colored men’s out 0 
work here, wid Christmas comin’, it sho is too bad! 
An’ you, Sis Williams, wid yo’ daughter sick in bed! 
Any time yo’ clothes git kinder heavy fo’ you, I ain’t 
mind helpin’ you out. Jest send dis chile atter me or 
holler ’cross de yard if you kin make me hear! .. . 
How you press dis dress, wid de collar turn up or 
down? Which way do Mis’ Dunset like it? ” 

“‘T always presses it down,” returned Hager, who 
was ironing handkerchiefs and towels on the table. 

142 


HARD WINTER 


“‘ Better let me iron that, an’ you take these here 
towels.” 

“ All right,” agreed Sister Johnson, “’cause you 
knows how yo’ white folks likes dey things, an’ I don’t. 
Folks have so many different ways! ” 

““Sho do,” said Hager. “I washed for a woman 
once what even had her sheets starched.” 

‘But you’s sure got a fine repertation as a washer, 
Sis Williams. One o’ de white ladies what I washes 
fo” say you washes beautiful.” 

““T reckon white folks does think right smart of 
me,” said Hager proudly. “They always likes you 
when you tries to do right.” 

** When you tries to do yo’ work right, you means. 
Dey ain’t carin’ nothin’ *bout you ’yond workin’ fo’ 
em. Ain’t dey got all de little niggers settin’ off in one 
row at dat school whar Sandy an’ Willie-Mae go at? 
I’s like Harriett — ain’t got no time fo’ white folks 
maself, ’ceptin’ what little money dey pays me. You 
ain’t been run out 0’ yo’ home like I is, Hager... . 
Sandy, make haste go fetch my pipe from over to de 
house, an’ don’t stay all day playin’ wid Willie-Mae! 
Tote it here quick! . . . An’ you oughter hear de way 
white folks talks *bout niggers. Says dey’s lazy, an’ 
says dey stinks, an’ all. Huh! Dey ought to smell dey- 
selves! You’s smelled white peoples when dey gets 
to sweatin’ ain’t you? Smells jest like sour cream, 
only worser, kinder sickenin’ like. And some 0’ 


dese foriners what’s been eating garlic — phew! 
Lawdy! ” 


6 


143 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 

When Sandy returned with the pipe, the conversa- 
tion had shifted to the deaths in the colored 
community. “ Hager, folks dyin’ right an’ left already 
dis winter. We’s had such a bad fall, dat’s de reason 
why. You know dat no-’count Jack Smears passed 
away last Sunday. Dey had his funeral yesterday an’ 
I went. Good thing he belonged to de lodge, too, else 
he’d been buried in de po’-field, ’cause he ain’t left 
even de copper cents to put on his eyes. Lodge beared 
his funeral bill, but I heard more’n one member 
talkin’ "bout how dey was puttin’ a ten-dollar nigger 
in a hundred-dollar coffin! . . . An’ his wife were at 
de funeral. Yes, sir! A hussy! After she done left him 
last year wid de little chillens to take care of, an’ she 
runnin’ round de streets showin’ off. Dere she sot, big 
as life, in front wid de moaners, long black veil on 
her face and done dyed her coat black, an’ all de time 
Reverend Butler been preachin’ ’bout how holy Jack 
were, she turn an’ twist an’ she coughed an’ she 
whiffled an’ blowed an’ she wiped —tryin’ her best 
to cry an’ couldn’t, deceitful as she is! Then she jest 
broke out to screamin’, but warn’t a tear in her eye; 
makin’ folks look at her, dat’s all, ’cause she ain’t 
cared nothin’ *bout Jack. She been livin’ in de Bottoms 
since last Feb’ary wid a young bell-hop ain’t much 
older’n her own son, Bert! ” 

“Do Jesus!” said Hager. “Some womens is 
awful.” 

““Worse’n dat,” said Sister Johnson... . 
“‘Lawdy! Listen at dat sleet beatin’ on dese winders! 

144 


HARD WINTER 


Sho gwine be a real winter! An’ how time do pass. 
Ain’t but t’ree mo’ weeks till Christmas! ” 

“Truth!” said Sandy’s grandmother. “ An’ we 
ain’t gwine have no money a-tall. Ain’t no mo’n got 
through payin’ ma taxes good, an’ de interest on ma 
mortgage, when Annjee get sick here! Lawd, I tells 
you, po’ colored womens have it hard! ” 

‘* Sho do! ” said Sister Johnson, sucking at her pipe 
as she ironed. “‘ How long you been had this house, 
Sis Williams? ” 

“ Fo’ nigh on forty years, even sence Cudge an’ me 
come here from Montgomery. An’ I been washin’ fo’ 
white folks ever’ week de Lawd sent sence I been here, 
too. Bought this house washin’, and made as many 
payments myself as Cudge come near; an’ raised ma 
chillens washin’; an’ when Cudge taken sick an’ laid 
on his back for mo’n a year, I taken care o’ him 
washin’; an’ when he died, paid de funeral bill 
washin’, cause he ain’t belonged to no lodge. Sent 
Tempy through de high school and edicated Annjee 
till she marry that onery pup of a Jimboy, an’ Harriett 
till she left home. Yes, sir. Washin’, an’ here I is with 
me arms still in de tub! . . . But they’s one mo’ got 
to go through school yet, an’ that’s ma little Sandy. 
If de Lawd lets me live, I’s gwine make a edicated man 
out o’ him. He’s gwine be another Booker T. Wash- 
ington.” Hager turned a voluminous white petticoat 
on the ironing-board as she carefully pressed its em- 
broidered hem. “I ain’t never raised no boy o’ ma 
own yet, so I wants this one o’ Annjee’s to “mount to 

145 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


something. I wants him to know all they is to know, 
so’s he can help this black race o’ our’n to come up 
and see de light and take they places in de world. I 
wants him to be a Fred Douglass leadin’ de people, 
that’s what, an’ not followin’ in de tracks o’ his good- 
for-nothin’ pappy, worthless an’ wanderin’ like Jim- 
boy is.” 

“OQ, don’t say that, ma,” Annjee cried weakly 
from her bed in the other room. “‘ Jimboy’s all right, 
but he’s just too smart to do this heavy ditch- 
digging labor, and that’s all white folks gives the 
colored a chance at here in Stanton; so he had to 
leave.” 

“There you go excitin’ yo’self agin, an’ you sick. 
I thought you was asleep. I ain’t meant nothin’, honey. 
Course he’s all right,”’ Hager said to quiet her daugh- 
ter, but she couldn’t resist mumbling: “ But I ain’t 
seen him doin’ you no good.” 

“Well, he ain’t beat her, has he? ” asked Sister 
Johnson, who, for the sake of conversation, often took 
a contrary view-point. “ I’s knowed many a man to 
beat his wife. Tom used to tap me a few times ’fo’ I 
found out a way to stop him, but dat ain’t nedder here 
nor dere! ” She folded a towel decisively and gave it 
a vigorous rub with the hot iron. “ Did I ever tell you 
*bout de man lived next do’ to us in Cairo what cut 
his wife in de stomach wid a razor an’ den stood ovah 
her when de doctor was sewin’ her up moanin’: ‘I don’t 
see why I cut her in de stomach! O, Lawd! She always 
told me she ain’t want to be cut in de stomach!’ .. . 

146 


HARD WINTER 


An’ it warn’t two months atter dat dat he done sliced 
her in de stomach agin when she was tryin’ to git 
away from him! He were a mean nigger, that man 
were! ” 

““ Annjee, is you taken yo’ medicine yet? It’s past 
fo’ o’clock,” Hager called. “Sandy, here, take this 
fifteen cents, chile, and run to do store an’ get me a 
soup bone. I gwine try an’ make a little broth for yo’ 
mother. An’ don’t be gone all day neither, ’cause I got 
to send these clothes back to Mis’ Dunset.” Hager was 
pressing out the stockings as she turned her attention 
to the conversation again. “ They tells me, Sister John- 
son, that Seth Jones done beat up his wife something 
terrible.” 

** He did, an’ he oughter! She was always stayin’ 
way from home an’ settin’ up in de church, not even 
cookin’ his meals, an’ de chillens runnin’ ragged in 
de street.” 

** She’s a religious frantic, ain’t she? ” asked Hager. 
... You Sandy, hurry up, sir! an’ go get that soup 
bone! ” 

*““ No, chile, ’tain’t that,” said Sister Johnson. “‘ She 
ain’t carin’ so much ’bout religion. It’s Reverend But- 
ler she’s runnin’ atter. Ever’ time de church do’ opens, 
there she sets in de preacher’s mouth, tryin’ to "tract 
de shepherd from his sheep. She de one what taken her 
husband’s money an’ bought Reverend Butler dat 
gold-headed walkin’- cane he’s got. I ain’t blame Seth 
fer hittin’ her bap on de head, an’ she takin’ his money 
an’ buyin’ canes fer ministers! ” 

147 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


“ Sadie Butler’s in my school,” said Sandy, putting 
on his stocking cap. “ Reverend Butler’s her step- 
father.” 

“Shut up! You hears too much,” said Hager. 
** Ain’t I told you to go on an’ get that soup bone? ” 

* Yes’m. ’m going.” 

“* An’ I reckon I’Il be movin’ too,” said Sister John- 
son, placing the iron on the stove. “It’s near *bout 
time to be startin’ Tom’s supper. I done told Willie- 
Mae to peel de taters fo’ I come ovah here, but I 
spects she ain’t done it. Dat’s de worse black gal to 
get to work! Soon as she eat, she run outdo’s to de 
privy to keep from washin’ de dishes! ” 

Sandy started to the store, and Sister Johnson, with 
on old coat over her head, scooted across the back 
yard to her door. It was a chill December afternoon 
and the steady sleet stung Sandy in the face as he ran 
along, but the air smelled good after the muggy 
kitchen and the stale scent of Annjee’s sick-room. 
Near the corner Sandy met the mail-man, his face red 
with cold. 

“* Got anything for us?” asked the little boy. 

** No,” said the man as he went on without stopping. 

Sandy wished his mother would get well soon. She 
looked so sad lying there in bed. And Aunt Hager was 
always busy washing and ironing. His grandmother 
didn’t even have time to mend his stockings any more 
and there were great holes in the heels when he went 
to school. His shoes were worn out under the bottoms, 
too. Yesterday his mother had said: “ Honey, you bet- 

148 


HARD WINTER 
ter take them high brown shoes of mine from under- 
neath the bed and put ’em on to keep your feet dry 
this wet weather. I can’t afford to buy you none now, 
and you ain’t got no rubbers.” 

‘““You want me to wear old women’s shoes like 
Jimmy Lane?” Sandy objected. “ I won’t catch cold 
with my feet wet.” 

But Hager from the kitchen overruled his objec- 
tions. “‘ Put on them shoes, sir, an’ don’t argue with yo’ 
mother, an’ she sick in de bed! Put ’em on an’ hush 
yo’ mouth, till you get something better.” 

So this morning at recess Sandy had to fight a boy 
for calling him “sissy” on account of his mother’s 
shoes he was wearing. 

But only a week and a half more and the Christmas 


vacation would come! Uptown the windows were al- 


ready full of toys, dolls, skates, and sleds. Sandy 


_ wanted a Golden Flyer sled for Christmas. That’s all 
_ he wanted — a Golden Flyer with flexible rudders, so 
you could guide it easy. Boy! Wouldn’t he come shoot- 
_ ing down that hill by the Hickory Woods where the 


fellows coasted every year! They cost only four dol- 
lars and ninety-five cents and surely his grandma could 
afford that for him, even if his mother was sick and 
she had just paid her taxes. Four ninety-five — but 
he wouldn’t want anything else if Aunt Hager would 
buy that sled for Santa Claus to bring him! Every 
day, after school, he passed by the store, where many 
sleds were displayed, and stood for a long time look- — 
ing at this Golden Flyer of narrow hard-wood timbers 
149 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
varnished a shiny yellow. It had bright red runners 
and a beautiful bar with which to steer. 

When he told Aunt Hager about it, all she said was: 
Boy, is you crazy?” But Annjee smiled from her 
bed and answered: “ Wait and see.” Maybe they 
would get it for him — but Santa Claus was mean to 
poor kids sometimes, Sandy knew, when their parents 
had no money. 

* Fifteen cents’ worth of hamburger,” he said 
absent-mindedly to the butcher when he reached the 
market. . . . And when Sandy came home, his 
grandmother whipped him for bringing ground meat 
instead of the soup bone for which she had sent him. 


So the cold days passed, heavy and cloudy, with 
Annjee still in bed, and the kitchen full of garments 
hanging on lines to dry because, out of doors, the 
frozen rain kept falling. Always in Hager’s room a 
great pile of rough-dried clothes eternally waited to 
be ironed. Sandy helped his grandmother as much as 
he could, running errands, bringing in coal and wood, 
pumping water in the mornings before school, and 
sitting by his mother in the evenings, reading to her 
from his Nature Story Reader when it wasn’t too cold 
in her bedroom. 

Annjee was able to sit up now and she said she felt 
better, but she looked ashen and tired. She wanted to 
get back to work, so she would have a little money for 
Christmas and be able to help Hager with the doctor’s 

150 


HARD WINTER 

bill, but she guessed she couldn’t. And she was still 
worrying about Jimboy. Three months had passed 
since he went away —a longer time than usual 
that he hadn’t written. Maybe something had hap- 
pened to him. Maybe he was out of work and hun- 
gry, because this was a hard winter. Maybe he was 
dead! 

“QO, my God, no!” Annjee cried as the thought 
struck her. 

But one Sunday morning, ten days before Christ- 
mas, the door-bell rang violently and a special- 
delivery boy stood on the front porch. Annjee’s heart 
jumped as she sat up in bed. She had seen the young- 
ster approaching from the window. Word from Jim- 
boy surely — or word about him! 

“Ma! Sandy! Go quick and see what it is! ” 

“Letter for Mrs. Annjelica Rodgers,” said the boy, 
stamping the snow from his feet. “Sign here.” 

While Sandy held the door open, letting the cold 
wind blow through the house, Hager haltingly 
scrawled something on the boy’s pink pad. Then, with 
the child behind her, the old woman hurried to her 
daughter’s bed with the white envelope. 

It’s from him! ” Annjee cried; “ I know it’s from 
Jimboy,” as she tore open the letter with trembling 
fingers. 

A scrap of dirty tablet-paper fell on the quilt, and 
Annjee quickly picked it up. It was written in pencil 
in a feminine hand. | 

L5l 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
Dear Sister, 

I am stranded in Memphis, Tenn. and the show 
has gone on to New Orleans. I can’t buy anything 
to eat because I am broke and don’t know anybody 
in this town. Annjee, please send me my fare to 
come home and mail it to the Beale Street Colored 
Hotel. I’m sending my love to you and mama. 

Your baby sister, 
Harriett 


152 


ke hh fh ARAAA 
CHRISTMAS 


9 


An’ here we ain’t got no money.” 

The night before, on Saturday, Hager had 
bought a sack of flour, a chunk of salt pork, and some 
groceries. Old Dr. McDillors had called in the after- 
noon, and she had paid him, too. 

*T reckon it would take mo’n thirty dollars to send 
fo’ Harriett, an’ Lawd knows we ain’t got three dollars 
in de house.” 

Annjee lay limply back on her pillows staring out 
of the window at the falling snow. She had been 
crying. 

“But never mind,” her mother went on, “ I’s gwine 
see Mr. John Frank tomorrow an’ see can’t I borry a 
little mo’ money on this mortgage we’s got with him.” 

So on Monday morning the old lady left her wash- 
ing and went uptown to the office of the money-lender, 

153 


p O’ LITTLE thing,” said Hager. “ Po’ little thing. 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


but the clerk there said Mr. Frank had gone to Chicago 
and would not be back for two weeks. There was 
nothing the clerk could do about it, since he himself 
could not lend money. 

That afternoon Annjee sat up in bed and wrote a 
long letter to Harriett, telling her of their troubles, 
and before she sealed it, Sandy saw his mother slip 
into the envelope the three one-dollar bills that she had 
been guarding under her pillow. 

“There goes your Santa Claus,” she said to her 
son, “ but maybe Harriett’s hungry. And you don’t 
want Aunt Harrie to be hungry, do you? ” 

*“ No’m,” Sandy said. 


9 


The grey days passed and Annjee was able to get 
up and sit beside the kitchen-stove while her mother 
ironed. Every afternoon Sandy went downtown to look 
at the shop windows, gay with Christmas things. And 
he would stand and stare at the Golden Flyer sleds in 
Edmondson’s hardware-shop. He could feel himself 
coasting down a long hill on one of those light, swift, 
red and yellow coasters, the envy of all the other boys, 
white and colored, who looked on. 

When he went home, he described the sled minutely 
to Annjee and Aunt Hager and wondered aloud if that 
might be what he would get for Christmas. But Hager 
would say: “‘ Santa Claus are just like other folks. He 
don’t work for nothin’! ” And his mother would add 
weakly from her chair: “‘ This is gonna be a slim 
Christmas, honey, but mama’ll see what she can do.” 

154 


CHRISTMAS 


She knew his heart was set on a sled, and he could tell 
that she knew; so maybe he would get it. 

One day Annjee gathered her strength together, put 
a woollen dress over her kimono, wrapped a heavy 
cloak about herself, and went out into the back yard. 
Sandy, from the window, watched her picking her way 
slowly across the frozen ground towards the outhouse. 
At the trash-pile near the alley fence she stopped and, 
stooping down, began to pull short pieces of boards 
and wood from the little pile of lumber that had been 
left there since last summer by the carpenters who 
had built the porch. Several times in her labor she 
rose and leaned weakly against the back fence for 
support, and once Sandy ran out to see if he could 
help her, but she told him irritably to get back in the 
house out of the weather or she would put him to bed 
without any supper. Then, after placing the boards 
that she had succeeded in unearthing in a pile by the 
path, she came wearily back to the kitchen, trembling 
with cold. 

“Tm mighty weak yet,” she said to Hager, “ but 
I’m sure much better than I was. I don’t want to have 
the grippe no more. . . . Sandy, look in the mail- 
box and see has the mail-man come by yet.” 

As the little boy returned empty-handed, he heard 
his mother talking about old man Logan, who used 
to be a carpenter. 

“Maybe he can make it,” she was saying, but 
stopped when she heard Sandy behind her. “I guess 
Pll lay back down now.” 

155 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 

Aunt Hager wrung out the last piece of clothes that 
she had been rinsing. “ Yes, chile,” she said, “ you 
go on and lay down. I’s gwine make you some tea 
after while.” And the old woman went outdoors to 
take from the line the frozen garments blowing in the 
sharp north wind. 

After supper that night Aunt Hager said casually: 
“Well, I reckon Pll run down an’ see Brother Logan 
a minute whilst I got nothin’ else to do. Sandy, 
don’t you let de fire go out, and take care o’ yo’ 
mama.” 

‘“Yes’m,” said the little boy, drawing pictures on 
the oilcloth-covered table with a pin. His grandmother 
went out the back door and he looked through the 
frosty window to see which way she was going. The 
old woman picked up the boards that his mother had 
piled near the alley fence, and with them in her arms 
she disappeared down the alley in the dark. 

After a little, Aunt Hager returned pufiing and 
blowing. 

“Can he do it? ” Annjee demanded anxiously from 
the bedroom when she heard her mother enter. 

“Yes, chile,’ Hager answered. “‘ Lawd, it sho is 
cold out yonder! Whee! Lemme git here to this 
stove! ” 

That night it began to snow again. The great heavy 
flakes fell with languid gentility over the town and si- 
lently the whiteness covered everything. The next 
morning the snow froze to a hard sparkling crust on 
roofs and ground, and in the late afternoon when 

156 | 


CHRISTMAS 
Sandy went to return the Reinharts’ clothes, you could 
walk on top of the snow without sinking. 

At the back door of the Reinharts’ house a warm 
smell of plum-pudding and mince pies drifted out as 
he waited for the cook to bring the money. When she 
returned with seventy-five cents, she had a nickel for 
Sandy, too. As he slid along the street, he saw in many 
windows gay holly wreaths with red berries and big 
bows of ribbon tied to them. Sandy wished he could 
buy a holly wreath for their house. It might make his 
mother’s room look cheerful. At home it didn’t seem 
like Christmas with the kitchen full of drying clothes, 
and no Christmas-tree. 

Sandy wondered if, after all, Santa Claus might, by 
some good fortune, bring him that Golden Flyer sled 
on Christmas morning. How fine this hard snow would 
be to coast on, down the long hill past the Hickory 
Woods! How light and swift he would fly with his new 
sled! Certainly he had been a good boy, carrying Aunt 
Hager’s clothes for her, waiting on his mother when 
she was in bed, emptying the slops and cutting wood 
every day. And at night when he said his prayers: 


Now I lay me down to sleep. 

Pray the Lord my soul to keep. 

If I should die before I wake, 

Pray the Lord my soul to take... . 


he had added with great earnestness: ‘* And let Santa 
bring me a Golden Flyer sled, please, Lord. Amen.” 
157 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 

But Sandy knew very well that there wasn’t really 
any Santa Claus! He knew in his heart that Hager and 
his mother were Santa Claus— and that they didn’t 
have any money. They were poor people. He was 
wearing his mama’s shoes, as Jimmy Lane had once 
done. And his father and Harriett, who used to make 
the house gay, laughing and singing, were far away 
somewhere. . . . There wasn’t any Santa Claus. 

“J don’t care,” he said, tramping over the snow 
in the twilight on his way from the Reinharts’. 

Christmas Eve. Candles and poinsettia flowers. 
Wreaths of evergreen. Baby trees hung with long 
strands of tinsel and fragile ornaments of colored 
glass. Sandy passed the windows of many white folks’ 
houses where the curtains were up and warm floods 
of electric light made bright the cozy rooms. In Negro 
shacks, too, there was the dim warmth of oil-lamps and 
Christmas candles glowing. But at home there wasn’t 
even a holly wreath. And the snow was whiter and 
harder than ever on the ground. 

Tonight, though, there were no clothes drying in 
the kitchen when he went in. The ironing-board had 
been put away behind the door, and the whole place 
was made tidy and clean. The fire blazed and crackled 
in the little range; but nothing else said Christmas — 
no laughter, no tinsel, no tree. 

Annjee had been about all day, still weak, but this 
afternoon she had made a trip to the store for a 
quarter’s worth of mixed candies and nuts and a sin- 
gle orange, which she had hidden away until morning. 

158 


CHRISTMAS 


Hager had baked a little cake, but there was no frost- 
ing on it such as there had been in other years, and 
there were no strange tissue-wrapped packages stuck 
away in the corners of trunks and drawers days ahead 
of time. 

Although the little kitchen was warm enough, the 
two bedrooms were chilly, and the front room was 
freezing-cold because they kept the door there closed 
all the time. It was hard to afford a fire in one stove, 
let alone two, Aunt Hager kept saying, with nobody 
working but herself. 

“ T’s thinking about Harriett,” she remarked after 
their Christmas Eve supper as she rocked before the 
fire, ““ and how I’s always tried to raise her right.” 

“ And [’m thinking about — well, there ain’t no 
use mentionin’ him,” Annjee said. 

A sleigh slid by with jingling bells and shouts of 
laughter from the occupants, and a band of young 
people passed on their way to church singing carols. 
After a while another sleigh came along with a jolly 
sound. 

** Santa Claus! ” said Annjee, smiling at her serious 
little son. “ You better hurry and go to bed, because 
he'll be coming soon. And be sure to hang up your 
stocking.” 

But Sandy was afraid that she was fooling, and, as 
he pulled off his clothes, he left his stockings on the 
floor, stuck into the women’s shoes he had been wear- 
ing. Then, leaving the bedroom door half open so that 
the heat and a little light from the kitchen would come 

159 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
in, he climbed into his mother’s bed. But he wasn’t 
going to close his eyes yet. Sandy had discovered long 
ago that you could hear and see many things by not 
going to sleep when the family expected you to; there- 
fore he remained awake tonight. 

His mother was talking to Aunt Hager now: “I 
don’t think he’ll charge us anything, do you, ma? ” 
And the old woman answered: “‘ No, chile, Brother 
Logan’s been tryin’ to be ma beau for twenty years, 
an’ he ain’t gonna charge us nothin’.” 

Annjee came into the half-dark bedroom and looked 
at Sandy, lying still on the side of the bed towards the 
window. Then she took down her heavy coat from 
the wall and, sitting on the edge of a chair, began 
to pull on her rubbers. In a few moments he heard 
the front door close softly. His mother had gone 
out. 

Where could she be going, he wondered, this time 
of night? He heard her footsteps crunching the hard 
snow and, rolling over close to the window, he pulled 
aside the shade a little and looked out. In the moon- 
light he saw Annjee moving slowly down the street 
past Sister Johnson’s house, walking carefully over 
the snow like a very weak woman. 

‘“*Mama’s still sick,” the child thought, with his 
nose pressed against the cold window-pane. “ I wish 
I could a bought her a present today.” 

Soon an occasional snore from the kitchen told 
Sandy that Hager dozed peacefully in her rocker be- 
side the stove. He sat up in bed, wrapped a quilt about 

160 3 


CHRISTMAS 
his shoulders, and remained looking out the window, 
with the shade hanging behind his back. 

The white snow sparkled in the moonlight, and the 
trees made striking black shadows across the yard. 
Next door at the Johnson’s all was dark and quiet, but 
across the street, where white folks lived, the lights 
were burning brightly and a big Christmas-tree with 
all its candles aglow stood in the large bay window 
while a woman loaded it with toys. Sandy knew that 
four children lived there, three boys and a girl, whom 
he had often watched playing on the lawn. Sometimes 
he wished he had a brother or sister to play with him, 
too, because it was very quiet in a house with only 
grown-ups about. And right now it was dismal and 
lonely to be by himself looking out the window of a 
cold bedroom on Christmas Eve. 

Then a woman’s cloaked figure came slowly back 
past Sister Johnson’s house in the moonlight, and 
Sandy saw that it was his mother returning, her head 
down and her shadow moving blackly on the snow. 
You could hear the dry grate of her heels on the frozen 
whiteness as she walked, leaning forward, dragging 
something heavy behind her. Sandy prepared to lie 
down quickly in bed again, but he kept his eyes against 
the window-pane to see what Annjee was pulling, and, 
as she came closer to the house, he could distinguish 
quite clearly behind her a solid, home-made sled 
bumping rudely over the snow. 

Before Anjee’s feet touched the porch, he was lying 
still as though he had been asleep a long time. 

161 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


The morning sunlight was tumbling brightly into 
the windows when Sandy opened his eyes and blinked 
at the white world outside. 

** Aren’t you ever going to get up? ” asked Annjee, 
smiling timidly above him. “ It’s Christmas morning, 
honey. Come see what Santa Claus brought you. Get 
up quick.” 

But he didn’t want to get up. He knew what Santa 
Claus had brought him and he wanted to stay in bed 
with his face to the wall. It wasn’t a Golden Flyer sled 
— and now he couldn’t even hope for one any longer. 
He wanted to pull the covers over his head and cry, but, 
* Boy! You ain't up yet? ” called Aunt Hager cheerily 
from the kitchen. “De little Lawd Jesus is in His 
manger fillin’ all de world with light. An’ old Santa 
done been here an’ gone! Get out from there, chile, 
an’ see!” 

~ I’m coming, grandma,” said Sandy slowly, wiping 
his tear-filled eyes and rolling out of bed as he forced 
his mouth to smile wide and steady at the few little 
presents he saw on the floor — for the child knew he 
was expected to smile. 

“OQ! A sled!” he cried in a voice of mock sur- 
prise that wasn’t his own at all; for there it stood, 
heavy and awkward, against the wall and beside it on 
the floor lay two picture-books from the ten-cent store 
and a pair of white cotton gloves. Above the sled his 
stocking, tacked to the wall, was partly filled with 
candy, and the single orange peeped out from the top. 

But the sled! Home-made by some rough carpenter, 

162 | 


CHRISTMAS 
with strips of rusty tin nailed along the wooden run- 
ners, and a piece of clothes-line to pull it with! 

“Tt’s fine,” Sandy lied, as he tried to lift it and 
place it on the floor as you would in coasting; but it 
was very heavy, and too wide for a boy to run with in 
his hands. You could never get a swift start. And a 
board was warped in the middle. 

“Tt’s a nice sled, grandma,” he lied. “I like it, 
mama.” 

“¢ Mr. Logan made it for you,” his mother answered | 
proudly, happy that he was pleased. “I knew you 
wanted a sled all the time.” 

“Tt’s a nice sled,” Sandy repeated, grinning 
steadily as he held the heavy object in his hands. “ It’s 
an awful nice sled.” 

“Well, make haste and look at de gloves, and de 
candy, and them pretty books, too,” called Hager 
from the kitchen, where she was frying strips of salt 
pork. “My, you sho is a slow chile on Christmas 
mawnin’! Come ’ere and lemme kiss you.” She came 
to the bedroom and picked him up in her arms. 
“Christmas gift to Hager’s baby chile! Come on, 
Annjee, bring his clothes out here behind de stove an’ 
bring his books, too. . . . This here’s Little Red 
Riding Hood and the Wolf, and this here’s Hansee and 
Gretsle on de cover — but I reckon you can read ’em 
better’n I can. . . . Daughter, set de table. Break- 
fast’s ’bout ready now. Look in de oven an’ see ’bout 
that corn-bread. . . . Lawd, this here Sandy’s just 
like a baby lettin’ ole Hager hold him and dress him. 

163 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
. . « Put yo’ foot in that stocking, boy! ” And Sandy 
began to feel happier, sitting on his grandmother’s 
lap behind the stove. 


Before noon Buster had come and gone, showing off 
his new shoes and telling his friend about the train he 
had gotten that ran on a real track when you wound it 
up. After dinner Willie-Mae appeared bringing a 
naked rag doll and a set of china dishes in a blue box. 
And Sister Johnson sent them a mince pie as a Christ- 
mas gift. 

Almost all Aunt Hager’s callers knocked at the 
back door, but in the late afternoon the front bell rang 
and Annjee sent Sandy through the cold parlor to 
answer it. There on the porch stood his Aunt Tempy, 
with several gaily wrapped packages in her arms. She 
was almost a stranger to Sandy, yet she kissed him per- 
emptorily on the forehead as he stood_in the doorway. 
Then she came through the house into the kitchen, with 
much the air of a mistress of the manor descending 
to the servants’ quarters. 

** Land sakes alive! ” said Hager, rising to kiss her. 

Tempy hugged Annjee, too, before she sat down, 
stiffly, as though the house she was in had never been 
her home. To little black Willie-Mae she said nothing. 

“Tm sorry I couldn’t invite you for Christmas din- 
ner today, but you know how Mr. Siles is,” Tempy 
began to explain to her mother and sister. “‘ My hus- 
band is home so infrequently, and he doesn’t like a 
house full of company, but of course Dr. and Mrs. 

164 | 


CHRISTMAS 


Glenn Mitchell will be in later in the evening. They 
drop around any time. . . . But I had to run down 
and bring you a few presents. . . . You haven’t seen 
my new piano yet, have you, mother? I must come and 
take you home with me some nice afternoon.” She 
smiled appropriately, but her voice was hard. 

‘¢ How is you an’ yo” new church maki’ it? ” asked 
Hager, slightly embarrassed in the presence of her 
finely dressed society daughter. 

“Wonderful!” Tempy replied. ‘“ Wonderful! 
Father Hill is so dignified, and the services are abso- 
lutely refined! There’s never anything niggerish about 
them — so you know, mother, they suit me.” 

“T’s glad you likes it,” said Hager. 

There was an awkward silence; then Tempy dis- 
tributed her gifts, kissed them all as though it were 
her Christian duty, and went her way, saying that she 
had calls to make at Lawyer and Mrs. Moore’s, and 
Professor Booth’s, and Madam Temple’s before she 
returned home. When she had gone, everybody felt 
relieved — as though a white person had left the 
house. Willie-Mae began to play again, and Hager 
pushed her feet out of her shoes once more, while 
Annjee went into the bedroom and lay down. 

Sandy sat on the floor and untied his present, 
wrapped in several thicknesses of pink tissue paper, 
and found, in a bright Christmas box, a big illus- 
trated volume of Andersen’s Fairy Tales decorated in 
letters of gold. With its heavy pages and fine pictures, 
it made the ten-cent-store books that Hager had 

165 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
bought him appear cheap and thin. It made his 
mother’s sled look cheap, too, and shamed all the 
other gifts the ones he loved had given him. 

““T don’t want it,” he said suddenly, as loud as he 
could. “‘I don’t want Tempy’s old book! ” And from 
where he was sitting, he threw it with all his might 
underneath the stove. 

Hager gasped in astonishment. “ Pick that up, sir,” 
she cried amazed. “ Yo’ Aunt Tempy done bought you 
a fine purty book an’ here you throwin’ it un’neath de 
stove in de ashes! Lawd have mercy! Pick it up, I say, 
this minute! ” 

“T won't! ” cried Sandy stubbornly. “I won't! I 
like my sled what you-all gave me, but I don’t want 


!? 


no old book from Tempy! I won’t pick it up! 


Then the astonished Hager grabbed him _by the— 


scruff of the neck and jerked him to his feet. 

“Do I have to whip you yet this holy day? .. . 
Pick up that book, sir! ” 

“No!” he yelled. 

She gave him a startled rap on the head with the 
back of her hand. “ Talkin’ sassy to yo’ old grandma 
an’ tellin’ her no! ” 

** What is it? ” Annjee called from the bedroom, 
as Sandy began to wail. 

** Nothin’,” Hager replied, “’ceptin’ this chile’s 
done got beside hisself an’ I has to hit him — that’s 
all!” 

But Sandy was not hurt by his grandmother’s easy 
rap. He was used to being struck on the back of the 

166 


CHRISTMAS 

head for misdemeanors, and this time he welcomed 
the blow because it gave him, at last, what he had been 
looking for all day —a sufficient excuse to cry. Now 
his pent-up tears flowed without ceasing while Willie- 
Mae sat in a corner clutching her rag doll to her breast, 
and Tempy’s expensive gift lay in the ashes beneath 
the stove. 


167 


Ke Ke Re S_OK GGA DM 


FOURTEEN 
RETURN 


ee EEE VUVVTVF 


FTER Christmas there followed a ee | 
Ae weather, made bright by the winter-sun 
shining on the hard crusty snow, where chil- 
dren slid and rolled, and over which hay-wagons made 
into sleighs on great heavy runners drove jingling into 
town from the country. There was skating on the | 
frozen river and fine sledding on the hills beyond the | 
woods, but Sandy never went out where the crowds | 
were with his sled, because he was ashamed of it. | 
After New Year’s Annjee went back to work at Mrs. 
Rice’s, still coughing a little and still weak. But with | 
bills to pay and Sandy in need of shoes and stockings | 
and clothes to wear to school, she couldn’t remain idle | 
any longer. Even with her mother washing and ironing | 
every day except the Sabbath, expenses were difficult 
to meet, and Aunt Hager was getting pretty old to | 
work so hard. Annjee thought that Tempy ought to 
help them a little, but she was too proud to ask her. 
168 


RETURN 

Besides, Tempy had never been very affectionate 
towards her sisters even when they were all girls to- 
gether —but she ought to help look out for their 
mother. Hager, however, when Annjee brought up the 
subject of Tempy’s help, said that she was still able 
to wash, thank God, and wasn’t depending on any of 
her children for anything — not so long as white folks 
wore clothes. 

At school Sandy passed all of his mid-year tests 
and, along with Sadie Butler, was advanced to the 
fifth A, but the other colored child in the class, a 
little fat girl named Mary Jones, failed and had to 
stay behind. Mary’s mother, a large sulphur-yellow 
woman who cooked at the Drummer’s Hotel, came to 
the school and told the teacher, before all the children, 
just what she thought of her for letting Mary fail — 
and her thoughts were not very complimentary to the 
stiff, middle-aged white lady who taught the class. 
The question of color came up, too, during the 
discussion. 

** Look at ma chile settin’ back there behind all de 
white ones,” screamed the sulphur-yellow woman. 
** An’ me payin’ as much taxes as anybody! You treats 
us colored folks like we ain’t citizerzens — that’s 
what you does! ” The argument had to be settled in 
the principal’s office, where the teacher went with the 
enraged mother, while the white children giggled that 
a fat, yellow colored lady should come to school to 
quarrel about her daughter’s not being promoted. But 
the colored children in the class couldn’t laugh. 

169 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


St. Valentine’s day came and Sadie Butler sent 
Sandy a big red heart. But for Annjee, “ the mail-man 
passed and didn’t leave no news,” because Jimboy 
hadn’t written yet, nor had Harriett thanked her for 
the three dollars she had mailed to Memphis before 
Christmas. There were no letters from anybody. 

The work at Mrs. Rice’s was very heavy, because 
Mrs. Rice’s sister, with two children, had come from 
Indiana to spend the winter, and Annjee had to cook 
for them and clean their rooms, too. But she was man- 
aging to save a little money every.week. She bought 
Sandy a new blue serge suit with a Norfolk coat and 
knickerbocker pants. And then he sat up very stiffly 
in Sterner’s studio and had his picture taken. 

The freckled-faced white boy, Paul Biggers, who 
sat across from Sandy in school, delivered the Daily 
Leader to several streets in Sandy’s neighborhood, 
and Sandy sometimes went with him, helping to fold 
and throw the papers in the various doorways. One 
night it was almost seven o’clock when he got home. 

* T had a great mind not to wait for you,” said Aunt 
Hager, who had long had the table set for supper. 
“Wash yo’ face an’ hands, sir! An’ brush that snow 
off yo’ coat *fo’ you hang it up.” 

His grandmother took a pan of hot spoon-bread 
from the oven and put it on the table, where the little 
oil-lamp glowed warmly and the plain white dishes 
looked clean and inviting. On the stove there was a 
skillet full of fried apples and bacon, and Hager was 
making a pot of tea. 

170 


RETURN 


“ Umn-nn! Smells good! ” said Sandy, speaking of 
everything at once as he slid into his chair. “Gimme _ 
a lot o’ apples, grandma.” 

“Is that de way you ask fo’ ’em, sir? Can’t you 
say please no mo’? ” 

‘“‘Please, ma’am,” said the boy, grinning, for 
Hager’s sharpness wasn’t serious, and her old eyes 
were twinkling. 

While they were eating, Annjee came in from work 
with a small bucket of oyster soup in her hands. They 
heated this and added it to their supper, and Sandy’s 
mother sat down in front of the stove, with her feet 
propped up on the grate to dry quickly. It was very 
comfortable in the little kitchen. 

“Seems like the snow’s melting,” said Annjee. 
“Tt’s kinder sloppy and nasty underfoot. . . . Ain’t 
been no mail today, has they? ” 

““No, honey,” said Hager. “‘ Leastwise, I been 
washin’ so hard ain’t had no time to look in de box. 
Sandy, run there to de front do’ an’ see. But I knows 
there ain’t nothin’, nohow.”’ 

“Might be,” said Annjee as Sandy took a match 
and went through the dark bedroom and parlor to the 
front porch. There was no mail. But Sandy saw, com- 
ing across the slushy dirty-white snow towards the 
house, a slender figure approaching in the gloom. He 
waited, shivering in the doorway a moment to see who 
it was; then all at once he yelled at the top of his 
lungs: “* Aunt Harrie’s here! ” 

Pulling her by the hand, after having kissed and 


171 
t 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


hugged and almost choked her, he ran back to the 
kitchen. ‘‘ Look, here’s Aunt Harrie!” he cried. 
‘“* Aunt Harrie’s home!” And Hager turned from the 
table, upsetting her tea, and opened wide her arms to 
take her to her bosom. 

“Ma chile!” she shouted. “Done come home 
again! Ma baby chile come home! ” 

Annjee hugged and kissed Harriett, too, as her 
sister sat on Hager’s knees —and the kitchen was 
filled with sound, warm and free and loving, for the 
prodigal returned. 

** Ma chile’s come back! ” her mother repeated over 
and over. “‘ Thank de Lawd! Ma chile’s back! ” 

“You want some fried apples, Harrie?” asked 
Sandy, offering her his plate. “‘You want some 
tea?” 

* No, thank you, honey,” she replied when the ex- 
citement had subsided and Aunt Hager had released 
her, with her little black hat askew and the powder 
kissed off one side of her face. 

She got up, shook herself, and removed her hat to 
brush down her hair, but she kept her faded coat on 
as she laid her little purse of metal mesh on the table. 
Then she sat down on the chair that Annjee offered 
her near the fire. She was thinner and her hair had 
been bobbed, giving her a boyish appearance, like the 
black pages in old Venetian paintings. But her lips 
were red and there were two little spots of rouge burn- 
ing on each cheek, although her eyes were dark with 
heavy shadows as though she had been ill. 

172 


RETURN 


Hager was worried. “ Has you been sick, chile? ” 
she asked. 

“No, mama,” Harriett said. “‘ I’ve been all right 
—just had a hard time, that’s all. I got mad, and 


_ quit the show in Memphis, and they wouldn’t pay 


me— so that was that! The minstrels left the carni- 
val for the winter and started playing the theatres, 
and the new manager was a cheap skate. I couldn’t 
get along with him.” 

“Did you get my letter and the money? ” Annjee 
asked. ‘We didn’t have no more to send you, and 
afterwards, when you didn’t write, I didn’t know if 
you got it.” 

*““T got it and meant to thank you, sis, but I don’t 
know — just didn’t get round to it. But, anyway, I’m 
out of the South now. It’s a hell —I mean it’s an 
awful place if you don’t know anybody! And more 
hungry niggers down there! I wonder who made up 
that song about Dear Old Southland. There’s nothing 
dear about it that I can see. Good God! It’s awful! 
. . . But I’m back.” She smiled. “‘ Where’s Jimboy? 
. . . O, that’s right, Annjee— you told me in the 
letter. But I sort-a miss him around here. Lord, I hope 
he didn’t go to Memphis! ” 

“Did you find a job down there? ” Annjee asked, 
looking at her sister’s delicate hands. 

** Sure, I found a job all right,” Harriett replied in 
a tone that made Annjee ask no more questions. “ Jobs 
are like hen’s teeth —try and find ’em.” And she 
shrugged her shoulders as Sandy had so often seen 

173 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


her do, but she no longer seemed to him like a little 
girl. She was grown-up and hard and strange now, 
but he still loved her. 

“Aunt Harrie, I passed to the fifth A,” he an- 
nounced proudly. 

“That’s wonderful,” she answered. “‘ My, but 
_you’re smart! You'll be a great man some day, sure, 
Sandy.” 

““'Where’s yo’ suit-case, honey?” Hager inter- 
rupted, too happy to touch her food on the table or 
to take her eyes away from the face of her returned 
child. “ Didn’t you bring it back with you? Where 
is it?” 

“Sure, I got it... . But [’m gonna live at 
Maudel’s this time, mama. . . . I left it at the sta- 
tion. I didn’t think you-all’d want me here.” She tried 
to make the words careless-like, but they were piti- 
fully forced. 

** Aw, honey! ” Annjee cried, the tears coming. 

The shadow of inner pain passed over Hager’s black 
face, but the only reply she made was: “ You’s 
growed up now, chile. I reckon you knows what you’s 
doin’. You’s been ten thousand miles away from yo’ 
mammy, an’ [ reckon you knows. . . . Come on, 
Sandy, let’s we eat.” Slowly the old woman returned 
to the cold food on her plate. ““ Won’t you eat some- 
thing with us, daughter? ” 

Harriett’s eyes lowered and her shoulders drooped. 
“No, mama, thank you. ’m — not hungry.” 

Then a long, embarrassing silence followed while 

174 | 


| 


RETURN 
Hager gulped at her tea, Sandy tried to swallow a 
mouthful of bread that seemed to choke him, and 
Annjee stared stupidly at the stove. 

Finally Harriett said: “ I got to go now.” She stood 
up to button her coat and put on her hat. Then she took 
her metal purse from the table. 

“* Maudel’ll be waiting for me, but I'll be seeing 
you-all again soon, I guess. Good-bye, Sandy honey! 
I gottogo. . . . Annjee, I gotto gonow. . . . Good- 
bye, mama! ” She was trembling. As she bent down 
to kiss Hager, her purse slipped out of her hands and 
fell in a little metal heap on the floor. She stooped to 
pick it up. 

“T got to go now.” 

A tiny perfume-bottle in the bag had broken from 
the fall, and as she went through the cold front room 
towards the door, the odor of cheap and poignant 
drugstore violets dripped across the house. 


175 


fe fe fe fe fe AMAA 


| 
FIFTEEN | 
ONE BY ONE | 


© 


CEE ESE SIV 


ou could smell the spring. 
“°Tain’t gwine be warm fo’ weeks yet!” 


Hager said. 

Nevertheless, you could smell the spring. Little 
boys were already running in the streets without their 
overcoats, and the ground-hog had seen its shadow. 
Snow remained in the fence corners, but it had melted 
on the roofs. The yards were wet and muddy, but no 
longer white. 

It was a sunny afternoon in late March that a letter 
came. On his last delivery the mail-man stopped, 
dropped it in the box — and Sandy saw him. It was 
addressed to his mother and he knew it must be from 
Jimboy. 

“Go on an’ take it to her,” his grandma said, as 
soon as she saw the boy coming with it in his hand. 
“I knows that’s what you want to do. Go on an’ take 
it.” And she bent over her ironing again. 

176 | 


| 


ONE BY ONE 


Sandy ran almost all the way to Mrs. Rice’s, drop- 
ping the letter more than once on the muddy sidewalk, 
so excited he did not think to put it in his pocket. 
Into the big yard and around to the white lady’s back 
door he sped — and it was locked! He knocked loudly 
for a long time, and finally an upper window opened 
and Annjee, a dust-rag around her head, looked down, 
squinting in the sunlight. 

““Who’s there? ” she called stridently, thinking of 
some peddler or belated tradesman for whom she did 
not wish to stop her cleaning. 

Sandy pantingly held up the letter and was about 
to say something when the window closed with a bang. 
He could hear his mother almost falling down the 
back stairs, she was coming so fast. Then the key 
turned swiftly in the lock, the door opened, and, with- 
out closing it, Annjee took the letter from him and 
tore it open where she stood. 

“It’s from Jimboy! ” 

Sandy stood on the steps looking at his mother, her 


_ bosom heaving, her sleeves rolled up, and the white 
cloth tied about her head, doubly white against her 
dark-brown face. 


** He’s in Detroit, it says. . . . Umn! I ain’t never 


seen him write such a long letter. ‘I had a hard time 


this winter till I landed here,’ it says, ‘ but things look 


_ pretty good now, and there is lots of building going 


on and plenty of work opening up in the automobile 


plants . . . a mighty lot of colored folks here .. . 
hope you and Sandy been well. Sorry couldn’t send 


Lid 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER | 
you nothing Xmas, but I was in St. Paul broke. . . . | 
Kiss my son for me. . . . Tell ma hello even if she | 
don’t want to hear it. Your loving husband, Jimboy 
Rogers.’ ” | 

Annjee did her best to hold the letter with one hand — 
and pick up Sandy with the other, but he had grown 
considerably during the winter and she was still a_ 
little weak from her illness; so she bent down to his | 
level and kissed him several times before she re-read © 
the letter. | 

“From your daddy!” she said. “Umn-mn. .. . | 
Come on in here and warm yourself. Lemme see what | 
he says again!” . . . She lighted the gas oven in the ' 
white kitchen and sat down in front of it with her | 
letter, forgetting the clock and the approaching time | 
for Mrs. Rice’s dinner, forgetting everything. “ A letter | 
from my daddy! From my far-off sugar-daddy! ” | 

“From my daddy,” corrected Sandy. . . . “Say, 
gimme a nickel to buy some marbles, mama. I wanta | 
go play.” | 

Without taking her eyes from the precious note | 
Annjee fumbled in her apron and found a coin. “ Take | 
it and go on!” she said. 

It was a dime. Sandy skipped around the house and | 
down the street in the chilly sunshine. He decided to — 
stop at Buster’s for a while before going home, since 
he had to pass there anyway, and he found his friend | 
in the house trying to carve boats from clothes-pins 
with a rusty jack-knife. 1 

Buster’s mother was a seamstress, and, after open- 

178 | 


99 


ONE BY ONE 


ing the front door and greeting Sandy with a cheery 
“Hello,” she returned to her machine and a friend 
» who was calling on her. She was a tall young light- 
| mulatto woman, with skin like old ivory. Maybe that 


i 
| 


| 


» was why Buster was so white. But her husband was a 
black man who worked on the city’s garbage-trucks 
. and was active politically when election time came, 
| getting colored men to vote Republican. Everybody 
_ said he made lots of money, but that he wasn’t really 
_ Buster’s father. 


The golden-haired child gave Sandy a butcher-knife 
and together they whacked at the clothes-pins. You 
could hear the two women talking plainly in the Little 


- sewing-room, where the machine ran between snatches 


of conversation. 
“Yes,” Buster’s mother was saying, “I have the 
hardest time keeping that boy colored! He goes on 


_ just like he was white. Do you know what he did last 
week? Cut all the blossoms off my geranium plants 


here in the house, took them to school, and gave them 
to Dorothy Marlow, in his grade. And you know who 


Dorothy is, don’t you? Senator Marlow’s daughter! 


. I said: ‘ Buster, if you ever cut my flowers to 


carry to any little girl again, I'll punish you severely, 
but if you cut them to carry to little white girls, I don’t 


know what [ll do with you. . . . Don’t you know 
they hang colored boys for things like that?’ I 


wanted to scare him — because you know there might 
be trouble even among kids in school over such things. — 


. . . But I had to laugh.” 
179 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


Her friend laughed too. “‘ He’s a hot one, taking | 
flowers to the women already, and a white girl at that! | 
You’ve got a fast-working son, Elvira, I must say. 
. . . But, do you know, when you first moved here 
and I saw you and the boy going in and out, I thought 
sure you were both white folks. I didn’t know you was 
colored till my husband said: ‘ That’s Eddie’s wife! ’ 
You-all sure looked white to me.” | 

~The machine started to whir, making the conversa- 
tion inaudible for a few minutes, and when Sandy — 
caught their words again, they were talking about the 
Elks’ club-house that the colored people were plan- 
ning to build. 

“Can you go out?” Sandy demanded of Buster, 
since they were making no headway with the tough 
clothes-pins and dull knives. | 

“Maybe,” said Buster. “‘ ll go see.” And he went 
into the other room and asked his mother. 

“Put on your overcoat,” she commanded. “ It’s . 
not summer yet. And be back in here before dark.” 

* All right, Vira,” the child said. | 
The two children went to Mrs. Rumford’s shop on 
the corner and bought three cents’ worth of candy and 
seven cents’ worth of peewees with which to play 
marbles when it got warm. Then Sandy walked 
back past Buster’s house with him and they played > 
for a while in the street before Sandy turned to run 
home. 

Aunt Hager was making mush for supper. She sent — 
him to the store for a pint bottle of milk as soon as he | 

180 


| 
i 
I 


f 
i 
{ 
| 


| 


| 


' 


ONE BY ONE 
arrived, but he forgot to take the bottle and had to 
come back for it. 

“You'd forget yo’ head if it wasn’t tied to you! ” 
the old woman reminded him. 

They were just finishing supper when Annjee got 
home with two chocolate éclairs in her coat-pocket, 
mashed together against Jimboy’s letter. 

“Huh! I’m crazy!” she said, running her hand 
down into the sticky mess. “‘ But listen, ma! He’s got 
a job and is doing well in Detroit, Jimboy says. . . . 
And I’m going to him!” 

“You what? ” Hager gasped, dropping her spoon 
in her mush-bowl. “‘ What you sayin’? ” 

“T said ’'m going to him, ma! I got to!” Annjee 
stood with her coat and hat still on, holding the sticky 
letter. “I’m going where my heart is, ma! . . . Oh, 
not today.” She put her arms around her mother’s 
neck. “I don’t mean today, mama, nor next week. 
I got to save some money first. I only got a little now. 
But I mean I’m going to him soon’s I can. I can’t help 
it, ma — I love him! ” 

‘“ Lawd, is you foolish? ” cried Hager. “ What’s 
you gwine do with this chile, trapesin’ round after 
Jimboy? What you gwine do if he leaves you in De- 
troiter or wherever he are? What you gwine do then? 
You loves him! Huh! ” 

“ But he ain’t gonna leave me in Detroit, ’cause 
I’m going with him everywhere he goes,” she said, 
her eyes shining. “ He ain’t gonna leave me no more! ””- 

* An’ Sandy?” 

18] 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER | 
“Couldn’t he stay with you, mama? And then_ 
maybe we’d come back here and live, Jimboy and me, | 
some time, when we get a little money ahead, and ) 
could pay off the mortgage on the house. . 7 oa | 
there ain’t no use arguing, mama, I got to eat | 
Hager had never seen Annjee so positive before; 
she sat speechless, looking at the bowl of mush. | 
“T got to go where it ain’t lonesome and where I 
ain’t unhappy —and that’s where Jimboy is! I got 
to go soon as I can.” 
Hager rose to put some water on the stove to heat — 
for the dishes. 
“One by one you leaves me — Tempy, then Har-' 
riett, then you,” she said. “ But Sandy’s gonna stick - 
by me, ain’t you, son? He ain’t gwine leave his 
grandma.” | 
The youngster looked at Hager, moving slowly — 
about the kitchen putting away the supper things. 
** And I’s gwine to make a fine man out o’ you, 
Sandy. I’s gwine raise one chile right yet, if de Lawd — 


lets me live — just one chile right! ” she murmured. | 
1 


That night the March wind began to blow and the 
window-panes rattled. Sandy woke up in the dark, 
lying close and warm beside his mother. When he went | 
back to sleep again, he dreamed that his Aunt Tempy’s 
Christmas book had been turned into a chariot, and 
that he was riding through the sky with Tempy stand- 
ing very dignifiedly beside him as he drove. And he 
couldn’t see anybody down on earth, not even Hager. 

182 | 


ONE BY ONE 

When his mother rolled out at six o’clock to go to 
work, he woke up again, and while she dressed, he lay 
watching his breath curl mistily upwards in the cold 
room. Outside the window it was bleak and grey and 
the March wind, humming through the leafless 
branches of the trees, blew terrifically. He heard Aunt 
Hager in the kitchen poking at the stove, making up a 
blaze to start the coffee boiling. Then the front door 
closed when his mother went out and, as the door 
slammed, the wind howled fiercely. It was nice and 
warm in bed, so he lay under the heavy quilts half 
dreaming, half thinking, until his grandmother shook 
him to get up. And many were the queer, dream- 
drowsy thoughts that floated through his mind — not 
only that morning, but almost every morning while he 
lay beneath the warm quilts until Hager had called 
him three or four times to get ready for school. 

He wondered sometimes whether if he washed and 
washed his face and hands, he would ever be white. 
Someone had told him once that blackness was only 
skin-deep. . . . And would he ever have a big house 
with electric lights in it, like his Aunt Tempy — but it 
was mostly white people who had such fine things, and 
they were mean to colored. . . . Some white folks 
were nice, though. Earl was nice at school, but not the 
little boys across the street, who called him “ nigger ” 
every day . . . and not Mrs. Rice, who scolded his 
mother. . . . Aunt Harrie didn’t like any white folks 
at all. . . . But Jesus was white and wore a long, 
white robe, like a woman’s, on the Sunday-school 

183 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 

cards. . . . Once Jimmie Lane said: “God damn 
Jesus’ when the teacher scolded him for not know- 
ing his Bible lesson. He said it out loud in church, 
too, and the church didn’t fall down on him, as Sandy 
thought it might. . . . Grandma said it was a sin 
to cuss and swear, but all the fellows at school swore 
—and Jimboy did, too. But every time Sandy said 
“God damn,” he felt bad, because Aunt Hager said 
God was mighty good and it was wrong to take His 
name in vain. But he would like to learn to say “‘ God 
damn” without feeling anything like most boys said 
it— just ““God damn! ... God damn! .. . God 
damn!” without being ashamed of himself... . 
The Lord never seemed to notice, anyhow. . . . And 
when he got big, he wanted to travel like Jimboy. He 
wanted to be a railroad engineer, but Harriett had said 
there weren’t any colored engineers on trains... . 
What would he be, then? Maybe a doctor; but it was 
more fun being an engineer and travelling far away. 

Sandy wished Annjee would take him with her when 
she went to join Jimboy — but then Aunt Hager would 
be all by herself, and grandma was so nice to him he 
would hate to leave her alone. Who would cut wood 
for her then? . . . But when he got big, he would 
go to Detroit. And maybe New York, too, where his 
geography said they had the tallest buildings in the 
world, and trains that ran under the river. . . . He 
wondered if there were any colored people in New 
York. . . . How ugly African colored folks looked 
in the geography — with bushy heads and wild eyes! 

184 


ONE BY ONE 


Aunt Hager said her mother was an African, but she 
wasn’t ugly and wild; neither was Aunt Hager; neither 


was little dark Willie-Mae, and they were all black 


like Africans. . . . And Reverend Braswell was as 
black as ink, but he knew God. . . . God didn’t care 
if people were black, did He? . . . What was God? 


Was He a man or a lamb or what? Buster’s mother 
said God was a light, but Aunt Hager said He was a 
King and had a throne and wore a crown — she in- 
tended to sit down by His side by and by. . . . Was 
Buster’s father white? Buster was white and colored 
both. But he didn’t look like he was colored. What 
made Buster not colored? . . . And what made girls 
different from boys? . . . Once when they were play- 
ing house, Willie-Mae told him how girls were dif- 
ferent from boys, but they didn’t know why. Now 
Willie-Mae was in the seventh grade and had hard 
little breasts that stuck out sharp-like, and Jimmy 
Lane said dirty things about Willie-Mae. . . . Once 
he asked his mother what his navel was for and she 
said, ““ Layovers to catch meddlers.” What did that 
mean? . . . And how come ladies got sick and stayed 
in bed when they had babies? Where did babies come 
from, anyhow? Not from storks — a fairy-story like 
Santa Claus. . . . Did God love people who told 
fairy-stories and lied to kids about storks and Santa 
Claus? . . . Santa Claus was no good, anyhow! God 
damn Santa Claus for not bringing him the sled he 
wanted Christmas! It was all a lie about Santa Claus! 

The sound of Hager pouring coal on the fire and 

185 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


dragging her wash-tubs across the kitchen-floor to get 
ready for work broke in on Sandy’s drowsy half- 
dreams, and as he rolled over in bed, his grandmother, 
hearing the springs creak, called loudly: “ You 
Sandy! Get up from there! It’s seven and past! You 
want to be late gettin’ to yo’ school? ” 

“ Yes’m, I’m coming, grandma! ” he said under the 
quilts. “* But it’s cold in here.” 

“You knows you don’t dress in yonder! Bring them 
clothes on out behind this stove, sir.” 

** 'Yes’m.” So with a kick of the feet his covers went 
flying back and Sandy ran to the warmth of the little 
kitchen, where he dressed, washed, and ate. Then he 
yelled for Willie-Mae — when he felt like it — or 
else went on to school without her, joining some of the 
boys on the way. 


So spring was coming and Annjee worked diligently 
at Mrs. Rice’s day after day. Often she did something 
extra for Mrs. Rice’s sister and her children — pressed 
a shirtwaist or ironed some stockings — and so added 
a few quarters or maybe even a dollar to her weekly 
wages, all of which she saved to help carry her to 
Jimboy in Detroit. 

For ten years she had been cooking, washing, iron- 
ing, scrubbing —and for what? For only the few 
weeks in a year, or a half-year, when Jimboy would 
come home from some strange place and take her in 
his strong arms and kiss her and murmur: “ Annjee, 
baby! ” That’s what she had been working for — then 

186 


ONE BY ONE 

the dreary months were as nothing, and the hard years 
faded away. But now he had been gone all winter, and, 
from his letter, he might not come back soon, because 
he said Detroit was a fine place for colored folks. 
. . . But Stanton — well, Annjee thought there must 
surely be better towns, where a woman wouldn’t have 
to work so hard to live. . . . And where Jimboy was. 

So before the first buds opened on the apple-tree 
in the back yard, Annjee had gone to Detroit, leaving 
Sandy behind with his grandmother. And when the 
apple blossoms came in full bloom, there was no one 
living in the little house but a grey-headed old woman 
and her grandchild. 

“One by one they leaves you,” Hager said slowly. 
“One by one yo’ chillen goes.” 


187 


Ke TID GH GG 


SIXTEEN 


NOTHING BUT LOVE 


Ee EES FV TI 


YEAR ago tonight was de storm what blowed 
A ma porch away! You members, honey? . . . 

Done seem like this year took more’n ma 
porch, too. My baby chile’s left home an’ gone to stay 
down yonder in de Bottoms with them triflin’ Smothers 
family, where de piano’s goin’ night an’ day. An’ yo’ 
mammy’s done gone a-trapesin’ after Jimboy. .. . 
Well, I thanks de Lawd you ain’t gone too. You’s 
mighty little an’ knee-high to a duck, but you’s ma 
stand-by. You’s all I got, an’ you ain’t gwine leave yo’ 
old grandma, is you? ” 

Hager had turned to Sandy in these lonely days for 
comfort and companionship. Through the long summer 
evenings they sat together on the front porch and she 
told her grandchild stories. Sometimes Sister Johnson 
came over and sat with them for a while smoking. 
Sometimes Madam de Carter, full of chatter and big 
words about the lodge and the race, would be there. 
But more often the two were alone — the black wash- 

188 | 


NOTHING BUT LOVE 

woman with the grey hair and the little brown boy. 
Slavery-time stories, myths, folk-tales like the Rabbit 
and the Tar Baby; the war, Abe Lincoln, freedom; 
visions of the Lord; years of faith and labor, love 
and struggle filled Aunt Hager’s talk of a summer 
night, while the lightning-bugs glowed and glimmered 
and the katydids chirruped, and the stars sparkled in 
the far-off heavens. 

Sandy was getting to be too big a boy to sit in his 
grandmother’s lap and be rocked to sleep as in sum- 
mers gone by; now he sat on a little stool beside her, 
leaning his head on her legs when he was tired. Or else 
he lay flat on the floor of the porch listening, and look- 
ing up at the stars. Tonight Hager talked about love. 


“These young ones what’s comin’ up now, they 
calls us ole fogies, an’ handkerchief heads, an’ white 
folks’ niggers ’cause we don’t get mad an’ rar’ up in 
arms like they does ’cause things is kinder hard, but, 
honey, when you gets old, you knows they ain’t no 
sense in gettin’ mad an’ sourin’ yo’ soul with hatin’ 
peoples. White folks is white folks, an’ colored folks 
is colored, an’ neither one of ’em is bad as t’other 
make out. For mighty nigh seventy years I been 
knowin’ both of ’em, an’ I ain’t never had no room in 
ma heart to hate neither white nor colored. When you 
starts hatin’ people, you gets uglier than they is — an’ 
I ain’t never had no time for ugliness, ’cause that’ s 
where de devil comes in — in ugliness! 

* They talks *bout slavery time an’ they makes out 

189 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


now like it were de most awfullest time what ever was, 
but don’t you believe it, chile, ’cause it weren’t all that 
bad. Some o’ de white folks was just as nice to their 
niggers as they could be, nicer than many of ’em is 
now, what makes ’em work for less than they needs to 
eat. An’ in those days they had to feed ’em. An’ they 
ain’t every white man beat his slaves neither! Course 
I ain’t sayin’ ’twas no paradise, but I ain’t going to 
say it were no hell either. An’ maybe I’s kinder seein’ 
it on de bestest side ’cause I worked in de big house 
an’ ain’t never went to de fields like most o’ de niggers 
did. Ma mammy were de big-house cook an’ I grewed 
up right with her in de kitchen an’ played with little 
Miss Jeanne. An’ Miss Jeanne taught me to read what 
little I knowed. An’ when she growed up an’ I growed 
up, she kept me with her like her friend all de time. 
I loved her an’ she loved me. Miss Jeanne were de 
mistress’ daughter, but warn’t no difference ’tween us 
’ceptin’ she called me Hager an’ I called her Miss 
Jeanne. But what difference do one word like ‘ Miss’ 
make in yo’ heart? None, chile, none. De words don’t 
make no difference if de love’s there. 

““T disremembers what year it were de war broke 
out, but white folks was scared, an’ niggers, too. Didn’t 
know what might happen. An’ we heard talk o’ Abra- 
ham Lincoln ’way down yonder in de South. An’ de 
ole marster, ole man Winfield, took his gun an’ went 
to war, an’ de young son, too, an’ de superintender and 
de overseer — all of ’em gone to follow Lee. Ain’t 
left nothin’ but womens an’ niggers on de plantation. 

190 | 


NOTHING BUT LOVE 


De womens was a-cryin’ an’ de niggers was, too, ’cause 
they was sorry for de po’ grievin’ white folks. 

“Is I ever told you how Miss Jeanne an’ Marster 
Robert was married in de springtime o’ de war, with 
de magnolias all a-bloomin’ like candles for they 
weddin’? Is I ever told you, Sandy? ... Well, I 
must some time. An’ then Marster Robert had to go 
right off with his mens, ’cause he’s a high officer in 
de army an’ they heard Sherman were comin’. An’ he 
left her a-standin’ with her weddin’-clothes on, leanin’ 
*gainst a pillar o’ de big white porch, with nobody 
but me to dry her eyes—ole Missis done dead an’ 
de men-folks all gone to war. An’ nobody in that big 
whole mansion but black ole deaf Aunt Granny Jones, 
what kept de house straight, an’ me, what was stayin’ 
with ma mistress. 

“ Q, de white folks needed niggers then mo’n they 
ever did befo’, an’ they ain’t a colored person what 
didn’t stick by °em when all they men-folks were gone 
an’ de white womens was a-cryin’ an’ a-faintin’ like 
they did in them days. 

But lemme tell you ’bout Miss Jeanne. She just 
set in her room an’ cry. A-holdin’ Marster Bob’s pit- 
cher, she set an’ cry, an’ she ain’t come out 0” her room 
to see ‘bout nothin’ — house, horses, cotton — nothin’. 
But de niggers, they ain’t cheat her nor steal from her. 
An’ come de news dat her brother done got wounded 
an’ died in Virginia, an’ her cousins got de yaller 
fever. Then come de news that Marster Robert, Miss 
Jeanne’s husband, ain’t no mo’! Killed in de battle! 

i91 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER | 
An’ J thought Miss Jeanne would like to go crazy. De | 
news say he died like a soldier, brave an’ fightin’. But | 
when she heard it, she went to de drawer an’ got out || 


her weddin’-veil an’ took her flowers in her hands like | 


she were goin’ to de altar to meet de groom. Then she | 
just sink in de flo’ an’ cry till I pick her up an’ hold | 
her like a chile. 

“Well, de freedom come, an’ all de niggers scatter _ 
like buck-shot, goin’ to live in town. An’ de yard nig- | 
gers say I’s a ole fool! I’s free now— why don’t I | 
come with them? But I say no, I’s gwine stay with Miss _ 
Jeanne — an’ I stayed. I lowed ain’t nary one 0’ them | 
colored folks needed me like Miss Jeanne did, so I 
ain’t went with ’em. 

** An’ de time pass; it pass an’ it pass, an’ de ole 
house get rusty for lack o’ paint, an’ de things, they 
’gin to fall to pieces. An’ Miss Jeanne say: ‘ Hager, I 
ain’t got nobody in de world but you.’ An’ I say: ‘ Miss 
Jeanne, I ain’t got nobody in de world but you neither.’ | 

** And then she’d start talkin’ *bout her young hus- | 
band what died so handsome an’ brave, what ain’t | 
even had time that last day fo’ to ’scort her to de 
church for de weddin’, nor to hold her in his arms fore 
de orders come to leave. An’ we would set on de big 
high ole porch, with its tall stone pillars, in de evenin’s 
twilight till de bats start flyin’ overhead an’ de sun- 
set glow done gone, she in her wide white skirts a- 
billowin’ round her slender waist, an’ me in ma apron 
an’ cap an’ this here chain she gimme you see on ma 
neck all de time an’ what’s done wore so thin. 

192 | 


NOTHING BUT LOVE 
“‘ They was a ole stump of a blasted tree in de yard 


| front 0’ de porch “bout tall as a man, with two black 
) pieces 0” branches raised up like arms in de air. We 


used to set an’ look at it, an’ Miss Jeanne could see it 
from her bedroom winder upstairs, an’ sometimes this 
stump, it look like it were movin’ right up de path 


| like a man. 


“* After she done gone to bed, late one springtime 


| night when de moon were shinin’, I hear Miss Jeanne 


a-cryin’: ‘He’s come! ... Hager, ma _ Robert’s 
come back to me!’ An’ I jumped out o’ ma bed in de 
next room where I were sleepin’ an’ run in to her, an’ 
there she was in her long, white night-clothes standin’ 
out in de moonlight on de little balcony, high up in 
de middle o’ that big stone porch. She was lookin’ 
down into de yard at this stump of a tree a-holdin’ up 
its arms. An’ she thinks it’s Marster Robert a-callin’ 
her. She thinks he’s standin’ there in his uniform, 


come back from de war, a-callin’ her. An’ she say: 
“Tm comin’, Bob, dear;” . . . I can hear her now. 


... Shesay: ‘I’mcomin’!’ .. . An’ fore I think 


what she’s doin’, Miss Jeanne done stepped over de 
little rail o’ de balcony like she were walkin’ on moon- 
light. An’ she say: ‘ I’m comin’, Bob! ’ 


** She ain’t left no will, so de house an’ all went to 
de State, an’ I been left with nothin’. But I ain’t care 
*bout that. I followed her to de grave, an’ I been with 


_ her all de time, ’cause she’s ma friend. An’ I were 


sorry for her, cause I knowed that love were painin’ 
her soul, an’ warn’t nobody left to help her but me. 
193 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


*“* An’ since then I’s met many a white lady an’ | 
many a white gentleman, an’ some of ’em’s been kind |} 
to me an’ some of ’em ain’t; some of ’em’s cussed me. 
an’ wouldn’t pay me fo’ ma work; an’ some of ’em’s | 
hurted me awful. But I’s been sorry fo’ white folks, 
fo’ I knows something inside must be aggravatin’ de 
po’ souls. An’ I’s kept a room in ma heart fo’ ’em, | 
‘cause white folks needs us, honey, even if they don’t | 
know it. They’s like spoilt chillens what’s got too much) | 
o ever thing — an’ they needs us niggers, what ain ty 
got nothin’. | 

“Ts been livin’ a long time in yesterday, Sandy | 
chile, an’ I knows there ain’t no room in de world fo’ 
nothin’ mo’n love. J knows, chile! Ever’thing there is © 
but lovin’ leaves a rust on yo’ soul. An’ to love sho — 
*nough, you got to have a spot in yo’ heart fo’ ever’- © 
body — great an’ small, white an’ black, an’ them | 
what’s good an’ them what’s evil — ’cause love ain’t © 
got no crowded-out places where de good ones stays | 
an’ de bad ones can’t come in. When it gets that way, _ 
then it ain’t love. 

“White peoples maybe mistreats you an’ hates 
you, but when you hates ’em back, you’s de one what’s 
hurted, ’cause hate makes yo’ heart ugly — that’s all 
it does. It closes up de sweet door to life an’ makes 
ever thing small an’ mean an’ dirty. Honey, there ain’t 
no room in de world fo’ hate, white folks hatin’ nig- 
gers, an’ niggers hatin’ white folks. There ain’t no 
room in this world fo’ nothin’ but love, Sandy chile. 
That’s all they’s room fo’ — nothin’ but love.” 

194, | 


KEEEK AAABA 


SEVENTEEN 


BARBER-SHOP 


KEKE EEE VIIVSVS 


r. LocANn, hearing that Aunt Hager had an 
M empty room since all her daughters were 

gone, sent her one evening a new-comer in 
town looking for a place to stay. His name was Wim 
Dogberry and he was a brickmason and hod-carrier, a 
tall, quiet, stoop-shouldered black man, neither old 
nor young. He took, for two dollars and a half a week, 
the room that had been Annjee’s, and Hager gave him 
a key to the front door. 

Wim Dogberry was carrying hod then on a new 
moving-picture theatre that was being built. He rose 
early and came in late, face, hands, and overalls 
covered with mortar dust. He washed in a tin basin by 
the pump and went to bed, and about all he ever said 
to Aunt Hager and Sandy was “ Good-mornin’” and 
“ Good-evenin’,” and maybe a stumbling “ How is | 
you? ” But on Sunday mornings Hager usually asked 

195 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


him to breakfast if he got up on time — for on Sat- | 


urday nights Wim drank licker and came home mum- 


bling to himself a little later than on a week-day eve- | 
nings, so sometimes he would sleep until noon Sundays. | 

One Saturday night he wet the bed, and when Hager | 
went to make it up on the Sabbath morning, she found | 
a damp yellow spot in the middle. Of this act Dogberry | 
was so ashamed that he did not even say “Good-- 
mornin’ ” for several days, and if, from the corner, he | 
saw Aunt Hager and her grandson sitting on the porch | 
in the twilight when he came towards home, he would | 


pass his street and walk until he thought they had gone 


inside to bed. But he was a quiet roomer, he didn’t - 
give anyone any trouble, and he paid regularly. And | 
since Hager was in no position to despise two dollars | 


and a half every week, she rather liked Dogberry. 


Now Hager kept the growing Sandy close by her all 


the time to help her while she washed and ironed and | 


to talk to her while she sat on the porch in the eve- | 


nings. Of course, he played sometimes in his own 
yard whenever Willie-Mae or Buster or, on Sundays, 


Jimmie Lane came to the house. But Jimmie Lane was 
running wild since his mother died, and Hager didn’t | 


like him to visit her grandson any more. He was bad. 

When Sandy wanted to go to the vacant lot to play 
baseball with the neighbor boys, his grandmother 
would usually not allow him to leave her. “‘ Stay here, 
sir, with Hager. I needs you to pump ma water fo’ me 


an’ fill up these tubs,” she would say. Or else she 


196 


BARBER-SHOP 


would yell: “* Ain’t I told you you might get hurt down 
there with them old rough white boys? Stay here in 
yo’ own yard, where you can keep out o’ mischief.” 

So he grew accustomed to remaining near his grand- 
‘mother, and at night, when the other children would 
be playing duck-on-the-rock under the arc-light at the 
corner, he would be sitting on the front porch listening 
to Aunt Hager telling her tales of slavery and talking 
of her own far-off youth. When school opened in the 
fall, the old woman said: “I don’t know what I’s gwine 
do all day without you, Sandy. You sho been com- 
| pany to me, with all my own chillens gone.” But 
Sandy was glad to get back to a roomful of boys and 
girls again. 

One Indian-summer afternoon when Aunt Hager 
was hanging up clothes in the back yard while the 
boy held the basket of clothes-pins, old man Logan 
drove past on his rickety trash-wagon and bowed 
elaborately to Hager. She went to the back fence to 
joke and gossip with him as usual, while his white 
mule switched off persistent flies with her tail. 

Before the old beau drove away, he said: “ Say, 
Hager, does you want that there young one o’ your’n 
to work? I knows a little job he can have if you does,” 
pointing to Sandy. 

* What’ll he got to do? ” demanded Hager. 

* Well, Pete Scott say he need a boy down yonder 
at de barber-shop on Saturdays to kinder clean up 
where de kinks fall, an’ shine shoes fo’ de customers. | 
Ain’t nothin’ hard ’bout it, an’ I was thinkin’ it would 

1934 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


just "bout be Sandy’s size. He could make a few | 


pennies ever’ week to kinder help things ’long.” 
* True, he sho could,” said Hager. “ P1l have him 
go see Pete.” 


So Sandy went to see Mr. Peter Scott at the colored | 


barber-shop on Pearl Street that evening and was given 
his first regular job. Every Saturday, which was the 
barber-shop’s only busy day, when the working-men 


got paid off, Sandy went on the job at noon and worked | 


until eight or nine in the evening. His duties were to 


keep the place swept clean of the hair that the three — 
barbers sheared and to shine the shoes of any cus- | 


tomer who might ask for a shine. Only a few custom- 


ers permitted themselves that last luxury, for many | 


of them came to the shop in their working-shoes, cov- 
ered with mud or lime, and most of them shined their 
own boots at home on Sunday mornings before church. 
But occasionally Cudge Windsor, who owned a pool 
hall, or some of the dressed-up bootleggers, might 


climb on the stand and permit their shoes to be cleaned — 
by the brown youngster, who asked shyly: “ Shine, — 


mister? ” 

The barber-shop was a new world to Sandy, who 
had lived thus far tied to Aunt Hager’s apron-strings. 
He was a dreamy-eyed boy who had grown to his 


present age largely under the dominant influence of | 
women — Annjee, Harriett, his grandmother — be- | 


cause Jimboy had been so seldom home. But the 

barber-shop then was a man’s world, and, on Satur- 

days, while a dozen or more big laborers awaited 
| 198 


BARBER-SHOP 


their turns, the place was filled with loud man-talk 
and smoke and laughter. Baseball, Jack Johnson, race- 
horses, white folks, Teddy Roosevelt, local gossip, 
Booker Washington, women, labor prospects in 
Topeka, Kansas City, Omaha, religion, politics, 
women, God — discussions and arguments all after- 
noon and far up into the night, while crisp kinks 
rolled to the floor, cigarette and cigar-butts were 
thrown on the hearth of the monkey-stove, and Sandy 
called out: ‘* Shine, mister? ”’ 

Sometimes the boy earned one or two dollars from 
shines, but on damp or snowy days he might not make 
anything except the fifty cents Pete Scott paid him 
for sweeping up. Or perhaps one of the barbers, too 
busy to go out for supper, would send Sandy for a 
sandwich and a bottle of milk, and thus he would 
make an extra nickel or dime. 

The patrons liked him and often kidded him about 
his sandy hair. “‘ Boy, you’s too dark to have hair like 
that. Ain’t nobody but white folks s’posed to have 
sandy-colored hair. An’ your’n’s nappy at that! ” 
Then Sandy would blush with embarrassment — if 
the change from a dry chocolate to a damp chocolate 
can be called a blush, as he grew warm and perspired 
— because he didn’t like to be kidded about his hair. 
And he hadn’t been around uncouth fellows long 
enough to learn the protective art of turning back a 
joke. He had discovered already, though, that so- 
called jokes are often not really jokes at all, but rather. 
unpleasant realities that hurt unless you can think of 

199 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
something equally funny and unpleasant to say in 
return. But the men who patronized Pete Scott’s 
barber-shop seldom grew angry at the hard pleas- 
antries that passed for humor, and they could play 
the dozens for hours without anger, unless the parties 
concerned became serious, when they were invited to 
take it on the outside. And even at that a fight was 
fun, too. 

After a winter of Saturday nights at Pete’s shop 
Sandy himself became pretty adept at “kidding”; 
but at first he was timid about it and afraid to joke with 
grown-up people, or to give smart answers to strang- 
ers when they teased him about his crinkly, sand- 
colored head. One day, however, one of the barbers 
gave him a tin of Madam Walker’s and told him: 
“Lay that hair down an’ stop these niggers from 
laughin’ at you.” Sandy took his advice. 

Madam Walker’s—a thick yellow pomade— and 
a good wetting with water proved most efficacious to 
the boy’s hair, when aided with a stocking cap—the 
top of a woman’s stocking cut off and tied in a knot 
at one end so as to fit tightly over one’s head, pressing 
the hair smooth. Thereafter Sandy appeared with his 
hair slick and shiny. And the salve and water to- 
gether made it seem a dark brown, just the color of 
his skin, instead of the peculiar sandy tint it possessed 
in its natural state. Besides he soon advanced far 
enough in the art of “kidding” to say: “So’s your 
pa’s,” to people who informed him that his head was 


nappy. 
200 


BARBER-SHOP 


During the autumn Harriett had been home once 
to see her mother and had said that she was working 
as chambermaid with Maudel at the hotel. But in the 
barber-shop that winter Sandy often heard his aunt’s 
name mentioned in less proper connections. Some- 
times the boy pretended not to hear, and if Pete 
Scott was there, he always stopped the men from 
talking. 

“Tired o’ all this nasty talk "bout women in ma 
shop,” he said one Saturday night. “Some o’ you men 
better look after your own womenfolks if you got 
any.” 

“Aw, all de womens in de world ain’t worth two 
cents to me,” said a waiter sitting in the middle chair, 
his face covered with lather. “I don’t respect no 
woman but my mother.” 

‘An’ neither do I,” answered Greensbury Jones. 
“All of em’s evil, specially if they’s black an’ got 
blue gums.” 

*T’s done told you to hush,” said Pete Scott behind 
the first chair, where he was clipping Jap Logan’s hair. 
“Ma wife’s black herself, so don’t start talkin’ *bout 
no blue gums! I’s tired o’ this here female talk any- 
how. This is ma shop, an’ ma razors sho can cut some- 
thin’ else ’sides hair—so now just keep on talkin’ 
*bout blue gums! ” 

“I see where Bryant’s runnin’ for president agin,” 
said Greensbury Jones. 

But one Saturday, while the proprietor was out to 
snatch a bite to eat, a discussion came up as to who 

201 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
was the prettiest colored girl in town. Was she yellow, 
high-brown, chocolate, or black? Of course, there was 
no agreement, but names were mentioned and qualities 
were described. One girl had eyes like Eve herself; 
another had hips like Miss Cleopatra; one smooth 
brown-skin had legs like — like — like — 

““ Aw, man! De Statue of Liberty! ” somebody sug- 
gested when the name of a famous beauty failed the 
speaker’s memory. 

“But, feller, there ain’t nothin’ in all them rainbow 
shades,” a young teamster argued against Uncle Dan 
Givens, who preferred high yellows. “‘Gimme a cool 
black gal ever’ time! They’s too dark to fade — and 
when they are good-looking, I mean they are good- 
looking! I’m talkin’ *bout Harrietta Williams, too! 
That’s who I mean! Now, find a better-looking gal 
than she is!” 

*T admits Harrietta’s all right,” said the old man; 
“all right to look at but — sput-t-tsss! ”’ He spat con- 
temptuously at the stove. 

““O, I know that! ” said the teamster; ‘* but I ain’t 
talkin’ *bout what she is! I’m talkin’ bout how she 
looks. An’ a songster out o’ this world don’t care if 
she isa—!” 

““S-s-s-sh! Soft-pedal it brother.” One of the men 
nudged the speaker. “‘There’s one o’ the Williamses 
right here — that kid over yonder shinin’ shoes’s Har- 
riett’s nephew or somethin’ ’nother.” 

“You niggers talks too free, anyhow,” one of the 
barbers added. “Somebody gwine cut your lips off | 

202 | | 


BARBER-SHOP 


some o’ these days. De idee 0’ ole Uncle Dan Givens’ 
arguin’ bout women and he done got whiskers all 
round his head like a wore-out cheese.” 

“That’s all right, you young whip-snapper,” 
squeaked Uncle Dan heatedly. “‘ Might have whiskers 
round ma head, but I ain’t wore out! ” 

Laughter and smoke filled the little shop, while the 
winter wind blew sleet against the big plate-glass win- 
dow and whistled through the cracks in the doorway, 
making the gas lights flicker overhead. Sandy smacked 
his polishing cloth on the toes of a gleaming pair of 
brown button shoes belonging to a stranger in town, 
then looked up with a grin and said: “ Yes, sir!” as 
the man handed him a quarter. 

“Keep the change,” said the new-comer grandly. 

“That guy’s an actor,” one of the barbers said 
when the man went out. “‘ He’s playin’ with the Smart 
Set at the Opery House tonight. I bet the top gallery’ll 
be full o’ niggers sence it’s a jig show, but I ain’t 
goin’ anear there myself to be Jim-Crowed, cause I 
don’t believe in goin’ nowhere I ain’t allowed to set 
with the rest of the folks. If I can’t be the table-cloth, 
I won’t be the dish-rag — that’s my motto. And if I 
can’t buy the seats I want at a show, I sure God can 
keep my change!” 

“Yes, and miss all the good shows,” countered a 
little red-eyed porter. “ Just as well say if you can’t 
eat in a restaurant where white folks eat, you ain't 
gonna eat.” 

* Anybody want a shine?” yelled Sandy above the 

203 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


racket. “‘ And if you don’t want a shine, stay out of my 
chair and do your arguing on the floor!” 

A brown-skin chorus girl, on her way to the theatre, 
stepped into the shop and asked if she could buy a 
Chicago Defender there. The barber directed her to 
the colored restaurant, while all the men immediately 
stopped talking to stare at her until she went out. 

“Whew! . . . Some legs!” the teamster cried as 
the door closed on a vision of silk stockings. “‘ How'd 
you like to shine that long, sweet brown-skin mama’s 
shoes, boy? ” 

“She wouldn’t have to pay me!” said Sandy. 

“Whoopee! Gallery or no gallery,” shouted Jap 
Logan, “I’m gonna see that show! Don’t care if they 
do Jim-Crow niggers in the white folks’ Opery 
House! ” 

“Yes,” muttered one of the barbers, “that’s just 
what’s the matter now — you ain’t got no race-pride! 
You niggers ain’t got no shame! ” 


204, 


ke fe fe fh AAAAD 


EIGHTEEN 


CHILDREN’S DAY 


EEE SE BSG ss 


HEN Easter came that spring, Sandy had 

\ \ | saved enough money to buy himself a suit 

and a new cap from his earnings at the 
barber-shop. He was very proud of this accomplish- 
ment and so was Aunt Hager. 

““You’s a ’dustrious chile, sho is! Gwine make a 
smart man even if yo’ daddy warn’t nothin’. Gwine get 
ahead an’ do good fo’ yo’self an’ de race, yes, sir!” 

The spring came early and the clear balmy days 
found Hager’s back yard billowing with clean white 
clothes on lines in the sun. Her roomer had left her 
when the theatre was built and had gone to work on a 
dam somewhere up the river, so Annjee’s room was 
empty again. Sandy had slept with his grandmother 
during the cold weather, but in summer he slept on a 
pallet. 

The boy did not miss his mother. When she had 
been home, Annjee had worked out all day, and she 
was quiet at night because she was always tired. 

205 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 

Harriett had been the one to keep the fun and laughter 
going — Harriett and Jimboy, whenever he was in 
town. Sandy wished Harrie would live at home instead 
of staying at Maudel’s house, but he never said any- 
thing about it to his grandmother. He went to school 
regularly, went to work at the barber-shop on Satur- 
days and to Sunday-School on Sundays, and remained 
with Aunt Hager the rest of his time. She was always 
worried if she didn’t know where he was. 

“ Colored boys, when they gets round twelve an’ 
thirteen, they gets so bad, Sandy,” she would say. “I 
wants you to stay nice an’ make something out o’ 
yo self. If Hager lives, she ain’t gonna see you go 
down. She’s gonna make a fine man out o’ you fo’ de 
glory o’ God an’ de black race. You gwine to ’mount 
to something in this world. You hear me? ” 

Sandy did hear her, and he knew what she meant. 
She meant a man like Booker T. Washington, or 
Frederick Douglass, or like Paul Lawrence Dunbar, 
who did poetry-writing. Or maybe Jack Johnson. But 
Hager said Jack Johnson was the devil’s kind of great- 
ness, not God’s. 

*'That’s what you get from workin’ round that old 
barber-shop where all they talks ’bout is prize-fightin’ 
an’ hossracin’. Jack Johnson done married a white 
woman, anyhow! What he care *bout de race? ” 

The little boy wondered if Jack Johnson’s kids 
looked like Buster. But maybe he didn’t have any kids. 
He must ask Pete Scott about that when he went back 
to work on Saturday. 

206 


CHILDREN’S DAY 


_ In the summer a new amusement park opened in 
‘ Stanton, the first of its kind in the city, with a merry- 
| go-round, a shoot-the-shoots, a Ferris wheel, a dance- 
| hall, and a bandstand for week-end concerts. In order 
| to help popularize the park, which was far on the 
‘north edge of town, the Daily Leader announced, 
| under its auspices, what was called a Free Children’s 
_ Day Party open to all the readers of that paper who 
clipped the coupons published in each issue. On 
_ July 26 these coupons, presented at the gate, would 
entitle every child in Stanton to free admittance to 
the park, free popcorn, free lemonade, and one ride 
on each of the amusement attractions — the merry-go- 
round, the shoot-the-shoots, and the Ferris wheel. All 
you had to do was to be a reader of the Daily Leader 
and present the coupons cut from that paper. 

Aunt Hager and Sister Johnson both took the Leader 
regularly, as did almost everybody else in Stanton, so 
_ Sandy and Willie-Mae started to clip coupons. All the 

children in the neighborhood were doing the same 
thing. The Children’s Day would be a big event for all 
the little people in town. None of them had ever seen 
a shoot-the-shoots before, a contrivance that pulled 
little cars full of folks high into the air and then let 
them come whizzing down an incline into an artificial 
pond, where the cars would float like boats. Sandy and 
Willie-Mae looked forward to thrill after thrill. 
When the afternoon of the great day came at last, 
Willie-Mae stopped for Sandy, dressed in her whitest - 
white dress and her new patent-leather shoes, which 
207 


. NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER | 
hurt her feet awfully. Sandy’s grandmother was mak- | 
ing him wash his ears when she came in. | 

“You gwine out yonder ’mongst all them white} 
chillens, I wants you to at least look clean!” said 
Hager. | 

They started out. 

“Here!” called Aunt Hager. “ Ain’t you gwine to 
take yo’ coupons? ” In his rush to get away, Sandy had! 
forgotten them. | 

It was a long walk to the park, and Willie-Mae. 
stopped and took off her shoes and stockings and car-. 
ried them in her hands until she got near the gate; then, 
she put them on again and limped bravely along, 
clutching her precious bits of newspaper. They could: 
hear the band playing and children shouting and | 
squealing as the cars on the shoot-the-shoots shot down- | 
ward with a splash into the pond. They could see the | 
giant Ferris wheel, larger than the one the carnival | 
had had, circling high in the air. 

““[’m gonna ride on that first,” said Sandy. | 

There were crowds of children under the bright red ° 
and white wooden shelter at the park entrance. They — 
were lining up at the gate— laughing, merry, clean — 
little white children, pushing and yelling and giggling 
amiably. Sandy let Willie-Mae go first and he got in | 
line behind her. The band was playing gaily inside. 

. They were almost to the entrance now... . 
There were just two boys in front of them... . 
Willie-Mae held out her black little hand clutching the 
coupons. They moved forward. The man looked down. 

208 


CHILDREN’S DAY 

“Sorry,” he said. “This party’s for white kids.” 

Willie-Mae did not understand. She stood holding 
out the coupons, waiting for the tall white man to take 
them. 

“Stand back, you two,” he said, looking at Sandy 
as well. “I told you little darkies this wasn’t your 

-party. . . . Come on—next little girl.” And the line 
of white children pushed past Willie-Mae and Sandy, 
going into the park. Stunned, the two dark ones drew 
aside. Then they noticed a group of a dozen or more 
other colored youngsters standing apart in the sun, 
|just without the bright entrance pavilion, and among 
them was Sadie Butler, Sandy’s class-mate. Three or 
four of the colored children were crying, but most 
of them looked sullen and angry, and some of them 
had turned to go home. 

** My papa takes the Leader,” Sadie Butler was say- 
ing. “And you see what it says here on the coupons, 
too— ‘Free Admittance to Every Child in Stanton.’ 
Can’t you read it, Sandy?” 

“Sure, I can read it, but I guess they didn’t mean 
colored,” he answered, as the boy watched the white 
children going in the gate. “They wouldn’t let us in.” 

Willie-Mae, between the painful shoes and the hurt 
of her disappointment, was on the verge of tears. One 
of the small boys in the crowd, a hard-looking little 
fellow from Pearl Street, was cursing childishly. 

““God damn old sons of biscuit-eaters, that what 
they are! I wish I was a big man, dog-gone, I’d shoot © 
’em all, that’s what I’d do!” 

209 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
a | suppose they didn’t mean colored kids,” said }}\ 
Sandy again. | 


But they didn’t know he was colored, I guess. When 
I went up to the gate, the man said: ‘Whoa! Where you 
goin’?’ just like I was a horse. . . . ’'m going home 
now and tell my papa.” | 

She walked away, followed by five or six other little | 
girls in their Sunday dresses. Willie-Mae was sitting 
on the ground taking off her shoes again, sweat and | 
tears running down her black cheeks. Sandy saw his | 
white schoolmate, Earl, approaching. 

““What’s matter, Sandy? Ain’t you goin’ in?” Earl | 
demanded, looking at his friend’s worried face. “ Did — 
the little girl hurt her foot?” 

“No,” said Sandy. “ We just ain’t going in... . 
Here, Earl, you can have my coupons. If you have }; 
extra ones, the papers says you get more lemonade © 

. so you take ’em.” 

The white boy, puzzled, accepted the proffered 
coupons, stood dumbly for a moment wondering what | 
to say to his brown friend, then went on into the park. 

“It’s yo’ party, white chile!” a little tan-skin girl 
called after him, mimicking the way the man at the © 
gate had talked. “ Whoa! Stay out! You’s a nigger!” 
she said to Sandy. 

The other children, in spite of themselves, laughed 
at the accuracy of her burlesque imitation. Then, with 
the music of the merry-go-round from beyond the high 
fence and the laughter of happy children following | 

210 


CHILDREN’S DAY 
them, the group of dark-skinned ones started down the 
‘dusty road together — and to all the colored boys 
and girls they met on the way they called out, “ Ain't 
(no use, jigaboos! That party’s for white folks! ” 
When Willie-Mae and Sandy got home and told 
\their story, Sister Johnson was angry as a wet hen. 
“‘Crackers is devils,” she cried. “I ’spected as 
i much! Dey ain’t nary hell hot ’nough to burn ole white 
‘folks, ’cause dey’s devils deyselves! De dirty 
‘hounds! ” 

But all Hager said was: “ They’s po’ trash owns that 
| park what don’t know no better, hurtin’ chillens’ feel- 
‘in’s, but we’ll forgive ’em! Don’t fret yo’self, Sister 
Johnson. What good can frettin’ do? Come on here, let’s 
_we have a party of our own.” She went out in the yard 
_and took a watermelon from a tub of well-water where 
it had been cooling and cut it into four juicy slices; 
then they sat down on the grass at the shady side 
of the house and ate, trying to forget about white 
folks. 

“Don’t you mind, Willie-Mae,” Hager said to the 
little black girl, who was still crying. “‘ You’s colored, 
honey, an’ you’s liable to have a hard time in this life 
_—but don’t cry. ... You Sandy, run round de 
house an’ see didn’t I heard de mail-man blowin’.” 

“Yes’m,” said Sandy when he came back. “ Was 
the mail-man, and I got a letter from mama.” The 
boy sat on the grass to read it, anxious to see what 
Annjee said. And later, when the company had gone, — 
he read it aloud to Hager. 

Zt 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 

Dear little Son: ) 
How have you all been? how is grandma? I get 
worried about you when I do not hear. You know | 
Aunt Hager is old and can’t write much so you must. 
do it for her because she is not used to adress let-| 
ters and the last one was two weeks getting here and | 
had went all around everywhere. Your father says 
tell you hello. I got a job ina boarding house for old 
_ white folks what are cranky about how they beds 
is made. There are white and colored here in the | 
auto business and women to. Tell Madam de Carter | | 
T will send my Lodge dues back because I do not | 
want to be transfer as I might come home sometime. | 
I ain’t seen you all now for more’n a year. Jimboy 
he keeps changing jobs from one thing to another 
but he likes this town pretty well. You know he | 
broke his guitar carrying it in a crowded street car. 
Ma says you are growing and have bought your- 
self a new suit last Easter. Mama certainly does | 
right well to keep on washing and ironing at her _ 
age and worrying with you besides. Tempy ought to — 
help ma but seem like she don’t think so. Do you | 
ever see your Aunt Harrie? I hope she is settling | 
down in her ways. If ma wasn’t all by herself maybe | 
I could send for you to come live with us in Detroit | 
but maybe I will be home to see you if I ever get any | 
money ahead. Rent is so high here I never wittnessed | 
so many folks in one house, rooming five and six | 
together, and nobody can save a dime. Are you still - 
working at the barber shop. I heard Sister Johnson — 
212 | 


' 


CHILDREN’S DAY 


was under the weather but I couldn’t make out 
from ma’s scribbling what was the matter with her. 
Did she have a physicianer? You behave yourself 
with Willie-Mae because you are getting to be a big 
boy now and she is a girl older then you are. [am go- 
ing to send you some pants next time I go down town 
but I get off from work so late I don’t have a chance 
to do nothing and your father eats in the restaurant 
count of me not home to fix for him and I don’t care 
where you go colored folks has a hard time. I want 
you to mind your grandma and help her work. She 
is too old to be straining at the pump drawing water 
to wash clothes with. Now write to me. Love to you 
all both and seven kisses XXXXXXX right here on 
the paper, 
Your loving mother, 
Annjelica Rogers 


Sandy laughed at the clumsy cross-mark kisses. He 
Was glad to get a letter from his mother, and word in it 
about Jimboy. And he was sorry his father had broken 
ais guitar. But not even watermelon and the long 
etter could drive away his sick feeling about the 
gark. 

“T guess Kansas is getting like the South, isn’t it, 
na?” Sandy said to his grandmother as they came out 
m the porch that evening after supper. “They don’t 
ike us here either, do they?” 

But Aunt Hager gave him no answer. In silence 
hey watched the sunset fade from the sky. Slowly 

213 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


Hager began to sing, very sof tly aa first: 


From this world o’ trouble free, 
Stars beyond! 
Stars beyond! 


And Sandy, as he stood beside his grandmother on. 
the porch, heard a great chorus out of the black past — | 
singing generations of toil-worn Negroes, echoing, | 
Hager’s voice as it deepened and grew in volume: 


There’s a star fo’ you an’ me, 
Stars beyond! 


214 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


Ke II O_O GND 


NINETEEN 


TEN DOLLARS AND COSTS 


° 


EE EEE FITTS 


after school hours, as well as on Saturday and 

Sunday. One afternoon at the barber-shop, Charlie 
Nutter, a bell-hop who had come to have his hair cut, 
asked Sandy to step outside a minute. Once out of 
earshot of the barbers and loafers within, Charlie went 
on: “Say, kid, I got some dope to buzz to yuh *bout a 
job. Joe Willis, the white guy what keeps the hotel 
where I work, is lookin’ for a boy to kinder sweep up 
around the lobby every day, dust off, and sort o’ help 
the bell-boys out sometimes. Ain’t nothin’ hard at- 
tached to it, and yuh can bring ‘long your shine-box 
and rub up shoes in the lobby, too, if yuh wants to. 
I though maybe yuh might like to have the job. Yuh’d 
make more’n yuh do here. And more’n that, too, when 
yuh got on to the ropes. Course yuh’d have to fix me 
up with a couple o’ bucks o’ so for gettin’ yuh the job, 
but if yuh want it, just lemme know and [ll fix it 

215 


I: THE fall Sandy found a job that occupied him 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
with the boss. He tole me to start lookin’ for somebody 


and that’s what I’m doin’.” Charlie Nutter went on 
talking, without stopping to wait for an answer. 
“Course a boy like you don’t know nothin’ ’bout hotel 
work, but yuh ain’t never too young to learn, and that’s 
a nice easy way to start. Yuh might work up to me 
some time, yuh never can tell — head bell-hop! Cause 
I ain’t gonna stay in this burg all my life; I figger if I 
can hop bells here, I can hop bells in Chicago or some 
place worth livin’ at. But the tips ain’t bad down there 
at the Drummer’s though — lots o’ sportin’ women and 
folks like that what don’t mind givin’ yuh a quarter 
any time. . . . And yuh can get well yourself once 
in a while. What yuh say? Do yuh want it? ” 

Sandy thought quick. With Christmas not far off, 
his shoes about worn out, and the desire to help Aunt 
Hager, too — “I guess I better take it,” he said. “‘ But 
do I have to pay you now?” 

“ Hell, naw, not now! I’ll keep my eye on yuh, and 
yuh can just slip me a little change now and then down 
to the hote! when you start workin.’ Other boy ain’t 
quittin’ nohow till next week. S’pose yuh come round 
there Sunday morning and I'll kinder show yuh what 
to do. And don’t pay no mind to Willis when he hollers 
at yuh. He’s all right — just got a hard way about him 
with the help, that’s all—but he ain’t a bad boss. 
Pll see yuh, then! Drop by Sunday and lemme know 
for sure. So long!” 

But Aunt Hager was not much pleased when Sandy 
came home that night and she heard the news. “I ain’t 

216 | 


| 
| 


| 


| 
: 


TEN DOLLARS AND COSTS 


never wanted none o’ my chillens to work in no ole 
hotels,” she said. “‘ They’s evil, full o’ nastiness, an’ 
you don’t learn nothin’ good in ’em. I don’t want you 
to go there, chile.” 

“But grandma,” Sandy argued, “I want to send 
mama a Christmas present. And just look at my 
shoes, all worn out! I don’t make much money any 
more since that new colored barber-shop opened up. 
It’s all white inside and folks don’t have to wait so 
long ’cause there’s five barbers. Jimmy Lane’s got the 
porter’s job down there . . . and I have to start work- 
ing regular some time, don’t I?” 

““T reckons you does, but I hates to see you workin’ 
in hotels, chile, with all them low-down Bottoms nig- 
gers, and bad womens comin’ an’ goin’. But I reckon 
you does need de job. Yo’ mammy ain’t sent no money 
here fo’ de Lawd knows when, an’ [ ain’t able to buy 
you nice clothes an’ all like you needs to go to school 
in... . But don’t forget, honey, no matter where 
you . ae be good an’ do right. . . . I reckon | 
you'll get along.” 

So Sandy found Charlie Nutter on Sunday and told 
him for sure he would take the job. Then he told Pete 
Scott he was no longer coming to work at his barber- 
shop, and Pete got mad and told him to go to hell, 
quitting when business was bad after all he had done 
for Sandy, besides letting him shine shoes and keep 
all his earnings. At other shops he couldn’t have done 
that; besides he had intended to teach Sandy to be a 
barber when he got big enough. 

217 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
“But go on!” said Pete Scott. “Go on! I don’t need 
you. Plenty other boys I can find to work for me. But 
I bet you won’t stay at that Drummer’s Hotel no time, 
though — I can tell you that!” 


The long Indian summer lingered until almost 
Thanksgiving, and the weather was sunny and warm. 
The day before Sandy went to work on his new job, 
he came home from school, brought in the wood for 
the stove, and delivered a basket of newly ironed 
clothes to the white folks. When he returned, he found 
his grandmother standing on the front porch in the 
sunset, reading the evening paper, which the boy had 
recently delivered. Sandy stopped in the twilight be- 
side Hager, breathing in the crisp cool air and won- 
dering what they were going to have for supper. 

Suddenly his grandmother gave a deep cry and 
leaned heavily against the door-jamb, letting the paper 
fall from her hands. “‘O, ma Lawd!” she moaned. 
““O, ma Lawd!” and an expression of the uttermost 
pain made the old woman’s eyes widen in horror. “Is 
I read de name right?” 

Sandy, frightened, picked up the paper from the 
porch and found on the front page the little four-line 
item that his grandmother had just read: 


NEGRESSES ARRESTED 


Harrietta Williams and Maudel Smothers, two 
young negresses, were arrested last night on Pearl 
218 | 


TEN DOLLARS AND COSTS 
Street for street-walking. They were brought before 
Judge Brinton and fined ten dollars and costs. 


‘What does that mean, ma — street-walking? ” the 
child asked, but his grandmother raised her apron to 
her eyes and stumbled into the house. Sandy stopped, 
perplexed at the meaning of the article, at his aunt’s 
arrest, at his grandmother’s horror. Then he followed 
Hager, the open newspaper still in his hands, and 
found her standing at the window in the kitchen, cry- 
ing. Racking sobs were shaking her body and the boy, 
who had never seen an old person weep like that be- 
fore, was terribly afraid. He didn’t know that 
grown-up people cried, except at funerals, where it 
was the proper thing to do. He didn’t know they ever 
cried alone, by themselves in their own houses. 

“T’m gonna get Sister Johnson,” he said, dropping 
the paper on the floor. “I’m gonna get Sister Johnson 
quick!” 

“No, honey, don’t get her,” stammered the old 
woman. “She can’t help us none, chile. Can’t nobody 
helpus . . . but de Lawd.” 

In the dusk Sandy saw that his grandmother was 
trying hard to make her lips speak plainly and to con- 
trol her sobs. 

** Let’s we pray, son, fo’ yo’ po’ lost Aunt Harriett — 
fo’ ma own baby chile, what’s done turned from de 
light an’ is walkin’ in darkness.” 

She dropped on her knees near the kitchen-stove 
with her arms on the seat of a chair and her head 

219 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


bowed. Sandy got on his knees, too, and while his 
grandmother prayed aloud for the body and soul of 
her daughter, the boy repeated over and over in his 
mind: “JI wish you’d come home, Aunt Harrie. 
It’s lonesome around here! Gee, I wish you’d come 
home.” 


220 


| 
} 
} 
j 


| 
| 
| 


RRR Rm AADAD 


TWENTY 
HEY, BOY! 


EEE CE 5G 


six large brass spittoons — one in the center of the 
place, one in each corner, and one near the clerk’s 
desk. It was Sandy’s duty to clean these spittoons. 
Every evening that winter after school he came in the 


[: THE lobby of the Drummer’s Hotel there were 


back door of the hotel, put his books in the closet where 


he kept his brooms and cleaning rags, swept the two 
short upper halls and the two flights of stairs, swept 
the lobby and dusted, then took the spittoons, emptied 
their slimy contents into the alley, rinsed them out, 
and polished them until they shone as brightly as if 
they were made of gold. Except for the stench of 
emptying them, Sandy rather liked this job. He always 
felt very proud of himself when, about six o’clock, he 
could look around the dingy old lobby and see the six 
gleaming brass bowls catching the glow of the electric 
lamps on their shining surfaces before they were again 
221 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


covered with spit. The thought that he himself had }) 
created this brightness with his own hands, aided by a | 
can of brass-polish, never failed to make Sandy happy. 

He liked to clean things, to make them beautiful, 
to make them shine. Aunt Hager did, too. When she 
wasn’t washing clothes, she was always cleaning some- 
thing about the house, dusting, polishing the range, or 
scrubbing the kitchen-floor until it was white enough 
to eat from. To Hager a clean thing was beautiful — 
also to Sandy, proud every evening of his six unblerh- 
ished brass spittoons. Yet each day when he came to 
work, they were covered anew with tobacco juice, 
cigarette-butts, wads of chewing-gum, and phlegm. 
But to make them clean was Sandy’s job — and they 
were beautiful when they were clean. 

Charlie Nutter was right — there was nothing very 
hard about the work and he liked it for a while. The 
new kinds of life which he saw in the hotel interested 
and puzzled him, but, being naturally a silent child, he 
asked no questions, and, beyond the directions for his 
work, nobody told him anything. Sandy did his clean- 
ing well and the boss had not yet had occasion to 
bellow at him, as he often bellowed at the two 
bell-boys. 

The Drummer’s Hotel was not a large hotel, nor a 
nice one. A three-story frame structure, dilapidated 
and run down, it had not been painted for years. In the 
lobby two large panes of plate glass looked on the 
street, and in front of these were rows of hard wooden 
chairs. At the rear of the lobby was the clerk’s desk, a 

222 


HEY, Boy! 


case of cigars and cigarettes, a cooler for water, and 
\the door to the men’s room. It was Sandy’s duty to clean 
this toilet, too. 
_ Upstairs on the second and third floors were the 
»bedrooms. Only the poorest of travelling salesmen, 
itransient railroad workers, occasionally a few show- 
‘people, and the ladies of the streets with their clients 
‘rented them. The night trade was always the most 
brisk at the Drummer’s Hotel, but it was only on Sat- 
| -urdays that Sandy worked after six o’clock. That night 
he would not get home until ten or eleven, but Aunt 
acer would always be waiting for him, keeping the 
fire warm, with the wash-tub full of water for his 
weekly bath. 
There was no dining-room attached to the hotel, 
and, aside from Sandy, there were only five em- 
ployees. The boss himself, Joe Willis, was usually at 
the desk. There were two chambermaids who worked 
in the mornings, an old man who did the heavy clean- 
ing and scrubbing once or twice a week, and two bell- 
boys—one night boy and one day boy supposedly, 
but both bellmen had been there so long that they ar- 
ranged the hours to suit themselves. Charlie Nutter 
had started small, like Sandy, and had grown up there. 
The other bell-boy, really no boy at all, but an old 
man, had been in the hotel ever since it opened, and 
Sandy was as much afraid of him as he was of the 
boss. 
This bellman’s name was Mr. George Clark. His 
uniform was frayed and greasy, but he wore it with the 
223 


ian 
4 


My 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


air of a major, and he acted as though: all the burdens. | 


of running the hotel were on his shoulders. He knew 


how everything was to be done, where everything was” 
kept, what every old guest liked. And he could divine | 
the tastes of each new guest before he had been there if 
a day. Subservient and grinning to white folks, evil | 
and tyrannical to the colored help, George was the - 
chief authority, next to Joe Willis, in the Drummer’s | 
Hotel. He it was who found some fault with Sandy’s / 
work every day until he learned to like the child be- | 
cause Sandy never answered back or tried to be fly, | 
as George said most young niggers were. After a time 
the old fellow seldom bothered to inspect Sandy’s — 


spittoons or to look in the corners for dust, but, never- 
theless, he remained a person to be humored and 
obeyed if one wished to work at the Drummer’s Hotel. 

Besides being the boss’s right-hand man, George 


Clark was the official bootlegger for the house, too. In — 


fact, he kept his liquor-supply in the hotel cellar. 
When he was off duty, Charlie, the other bell-hop, sold 
it for him if there were any calls from the rooms 
above. They made no sales other than to guests of the 
house, but such sales were frequent. Some of the white 
women who used the rooms collected a commission 
from George for the sales they helped make to their 
men visitors. 

Sandy was a long time learning the tricks of hotel 
work. “Yuh sure a dumb little joker,” Charlie was 


constantly informing him. “ But just stay around , 


awhile and yuh’ll get on to it.’ 
224, 


“ 


HEY, Boy! 

Christmas came and Sandy sent his mother in De- 
troit a big box of drugstore candy. For Aunt Hager 
he started to buy a long pair of green ear-rings for 
fifty cents, but he was afraid she might not like them, 
so he bought her white handkerchiefs instead. And he 
sent a pretty card to Harriett, for one snowy Decem- 
ber day his aunt had seen him through the windows 
sweeping out the lobby of the hotel and she had called 
him to the door to talk to her. She thrust a little 
piece of paper into his hand with her new address 
on it. 

*“*Maudel’s moved to Kansas City,” she said, “so I 
don’t live there any more. You better keep this address 
yourself and if mama ever needs me, you can know 
where I am.” 

Then she went on through the snow, looking very 
pretty in a cheap fur coat and black, high-heeled slip- 
pers, with grey silk stockings. Sandy saw her pass the 
hotel often with different men. Sometimes she went by 
with Cudge Windsor, the owner of the pool hall, or 
Billy Sanderlee. Almost always she was with sporty- 
looking fellows who wore derbies and had gold teeth. 
Sandy noticed that she didn’t urge him to come to see 
her at this new house-number she had given him, so he 
put the paper in his pocket and went back to his sweep- 
ing,-glad, anyway, to have seen his Aunt Harriett. 

One Saturday afternoon several white men were 
sitting in the lobby smoking and reading the papers. 
Sandy swept around their chairs, dusted, and then took 
the spittoons out to clean. This work did not require 

225 


* his attention; while he applied the polish with a hand- 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


ful of soft rags, he could let his mind wander to other 
things. He thought about Harriett. Then he thought 
about school and what he would do when he was a 
man; about Willie-Mae, who had a job washing dinner | 
dishes for a white family; about Jimmy Lane, who — 
had no mama; and Sandy wondered what his own | 
mother and father were doing in another town, and | 
if they wanted him with them. He thought how old and | 
tired and grey-headed Aunt Hager had become; how | 
she puffed and blowed over the wash-tubs now, but ty 
never complained; how she waited for him on Satur- | 
day nights with the kitchen-stove blazing, so he would | 
be warm after walking so far in the cold; and how she 
prayed he would be a great man some day. . . . Sit- 
ting there in the back room of the hotel, are won- 
dered how people got to be great, as, one by one, he — 
made the spittoons bright and beautiful. He wondered — 
how people made themselves great. } | 

That night he would have to work late nidage Ep 7 
papers in the lobby, running errands for the boss, and 
shining shoes. After he had put the spittoons around, 
he would go out and get a hamburger sandwic. i and a 
cup of coffee for supper; then he would come back 
and help Charlie if he could. . . . Charlie was a 
good old boy. He had taken only a dollar for getting 
Sandy his job and he often helped him make tips by 
allowing Sandy to run to the telegraph office or do 
some other little odd job for a guest upstairs... . 
Sure, Charlie was a nice guy. 

226 


HEY, BOY! 
Things were pretty busy tonight. Several men 


| had their shoes shined as they sat tipped back in the 
| lobby chairs while Sandy with his boot-black box 


rer tn 


let them put up a foot at a time to be polished. One 
tall farmer gave him a quarter tip and a pat on the 
head. 

Bright little feller, that,” he remarked to the boss. 

About ten o’clock the blond Miss Marcia McKay’s 
hell rang, and, Charlie being engaged, Joe Willis sent 
Sandy up to see what she wanted. Miss McKay had 
just come in out of the snow a short time before with a 
heavy-set ugly man. Both of them were drunk. Sandy 
knocked timidly outside her room. 

“Come in,” growled the man’s voice. 

Sandy opened the door and saw Miss McKay stand- 
ing naked in the middle of the floor combing her hair. 
He stopped on the threshold. 

“* Aw, come in,” said the man. “‘ She won’t bite you! 
Where’s that other bell-boy? We want some licker! 

. - Damn it! Say, send Charlie up here! He knows 
what I want!” 

Sandy scampered away, and when he found 
Charlie, he told him about Miss McKay. The child 
was scared because he had often heard of colored 
boys’ being lynched for looking at white women, 
even with their clothes on — but the bell-boy only 
laughed. 

*Yuh’re a dumb little pales ” he said. “ Just stay 
around here awhile and yuh’ll see lots more’n that!” 
He winked and gave Sandy a nudge in the ribs. “ Boy, 

227 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


I done sold ten quarts o” licker tonight,” he whispered © 
jubilantly. ‘“‘ And some a it was mine, too!” a 


Sandy went back to the lobby and the shining of |” 


shoes. A big, red-necked stranger smoking and drink- © 


ing with a crowd of drummers in one corner of the (( 
room called to him “ Hey, boy! Shine me up here!” |) 
So he edged into the center of the group of men with || 


his blacking-box, got down on his knees before the big | 
fellow, took out his cans and his cloths, and went to |} 
work. | 

The white men were telling dirty stories, uglier 
than any Sandy had heard at the colored barber-shop * 
and not very funny—and some of them made him | 
sick at the stomach. } 

The big man whose shoes he was shining said: | 
“ Now I’m gonna tell one.” He talked with a Southern — 
drawl and a soft slurring of word-endings like some | 
old colored folks. He had been drinking, too. | 
“ This is "bout a nigger went to see Aunt Hanner-one — 
a | anal i 

A roar of laughter greeted his first effort and he 
was encouraged to tell another. f 

“Old darky caught a gal on the levee...” he | 
commenced. ; 

Sandy finished polishing the shoes and put the | 
cloths inside his wooden box and stood up waiting for | 


his pay, but the speaker did not notice the colored if 


boy until he had finished his tale and laughed heartily — 
with the other men. Then he eo at Sandy. Sud- © 
denly he grinned. 

228 


HEY, Boy! 
“Say, little coon, let’s see you hit a step for the 


boys! . . . Down where I live, folks, all our niggers 
- can dance! . . . Come on, boy, snap it up! ” 


“T can’t,” Sandy said, frowning instead of smiling, 
and growing warm as he stood there in the smoky cir- 
cle of grinning white men. “I don’t know how to 
dance.” 

““O, you’re one of them stubborn Kansas coons, 


_ heh?” said the red-necked fellow disgustedly, the 
thickness of whisky on his tongue. “ You Northern 
; darkies are dumb as hell, anyhow!” Then, turning to 
’ the crowd of amused lobby loungers, he announced: 


~ “Now down in Mississippi, whar I come from, if you 


_ offer a nigger a dime, he’ll dance his can off . . . an 


9 


they better dance, what I mean!” 

He turned to the men around him for approbation, 
while Sandy still waited uncomfortably to be paid for 
the shine. But the man kept him standing there, look- 
ing at him drunkenly, then at the amused crowd of 
Saturday-night loungers. 

“Now, a nigger his size down South would no more 
think o’ not dancin’ if a white man asked him than 
he would think o’ flyin’. This boy’s jest tryin’ to be 
smart, that’s all. Up here you-all’ve got darkies spoilt, 
believin’ they’re somebody. Now, in my home we keep 
’em in their places.” He again turned his attention to 
Sandy. “Boy! I want to see you dance!” he 
commanded. | | 

But Sandy picked up his blacking-box and had be- 
gun to push through the circle of chairs, not caring any 

229 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


longer about his pay, when the southerner rose and | 
grabbed him roughly by the arm, exhaling alcoholic q 
breath in the boy’s face as he jokingly pulled him } 
back. 
‘““Com’ere, you little —”’ but he got no further, for — 
Sandy, strengthened by the anger that suddenly pos- 
sessed him at the touch of this white man’s hand, | 
uttered a yell that could be heard for blocks. | 
Everyone in the lobby turned to see what had hap- 7 
pened, but before Joe Willis got out from behind the 
clerk’s desk, the boy, wriggling free, had reached the | 
street-door. There Sandy turned, raised his boot- | 
black box furiously above his head, and flung it © 
with all his strength at the group of laughing white | 
men in which the drunken southerner was standing. | 
From one end of the whizzing box a stream of polish- — 
bottles, brushes, and cans fell clattering across the | 
lobby while Sandy disappeared through the door, run- | 
ning as fast as his legs could carry him in the falling — 
snow. 
“Hey! You black bastard!” Joe Willis yelled from — 
the hotel entrance, but his voice was blown away in © 
the darkness. As Sandy ran, he felt the snow-flakes — 
falling in his face. . : 


230 


———— ——— ———— a? oom ae 


RRRRRAAARA HM 


TWENTY-ONE 
NOTE TO HARRIETT 


+o) 


CEE EEC BGG 


pocket the piece of paper that his Aunt Har- 

riett had given him that day in front of the hotel, 
he noticed that the address written on it was some- 
where in the Bottoms. He felt vaguely worried, so he 
did not show it to his grandmother, because he had 
often heard her say that the Bottoms was a bad place. 
And when he was working at the barber-shop, he 
had heard the men talking about what went on there 
— and in a sense he knew what they meant. 

It was a gay place — people did what they wanted 
to, or what they had to do, and didn’t care—for in 
the Bottoms folks ceased to struggle against the 
boundaries between good and bad, or white and black, 
and surrendered amiably to immorality. Beyond Pearl 
Street, across the tracks, people of all colors came 
together for the sake of joy, the curtains being drawn 
only between themselves and the opposite side of the 

231 


S EVERAL days later, when Sandy took out of his 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 

railroad, where the churches were and the big white 
Y.M.C. A. 

_ Atnight in the Bottoms victrolas moaned and banjos 
cried ecstatically in the darkness. Summer evenings 
little yellow and brown and black girls in pink or biue 
bungalow aprons laughed invitingly in doorways, and 
dice rattled with the staccato gaiety of jazz music on 
long tables in rear rooms. Pimps played pool; boot- 
leggers lounged in big red cars; children ran in the 
streets until midnight, with no voice of parental 
authority forcing them to an early sleep; young blacks 
fought like cocks and enjoyed it; white boys walked 
through the streets winking at colored girls; men 
came in autos; old women ate pigs’ feet and water- 
melon and drank beer; whisky flowed; gin was like 
water; soft indolent laughter didn’t care about any- 


thing; and deep nigger-throated voices that had long — 
ago stopped rebelling against the ways of this world | 


rose in song. 

To those who lived on the other side of the railroad 
and never realized the utter stupidity of the word 
““sin,” the Bottoms was vile and wicked. But to the 
girls who lived there, and the boys who pimped and 
fought and sold licker there, “sin ” was a silly word 
that did not enter their heads. They had never looked 
at life through the spectacles of the Sunday-School. 
The glasses good people wore wouldn’t have fitted their 
eyes, for they hung no curtain of words between 
themselves and reality. To them, things were — what 
they were. | 

232 


NOTE TO HARRIETT | 
“Ma bed is hard, but I’m layin’ in it jest de same!” 


sang the raucous-throated blues-singer in her song; 
“Hey! . . . Hey! Who wants to lay with me?” 


i It was to one of these streets in the Bottoms that 
_ Sandy came breathlessly one bright morning with a 
| note in his hand. He knocked at the door of a big 
grey house. 
“Ts this where Harriett Williams lives? ” he panted. 
| “You means Harrietta? ” said a large, sleek yellow 
woman in a blue silk kimono who opened the door. 
“ Come in, baby, and sit down. I'll see if she’s up yet.” 
Then the woman left Sandy in the parlor while she 
went up the stairs calling his aunt in a clear, lazy voice. 
There were heavy velvet draperies at the windows 
and doors in this front room where Sandy sat, and 
_a thick, well-worn rug on the floor. There was a divan, 
a davenport covered with pillows, a centre table, and 
several chairs. Through the curtains at the double 
door leading into the next room, Sandy saw a piano, 
more sofas and chairs, and a cleared oiled floor that 
might be used for dancing. Both rooms were in great 
disorder, and the air in the house smelled stale and 
beerish. Licker-bottles and ginger-ale bottles were 
underneath the center table, underneath the sofas, and 
on top of the piano. Ash-trays were everywhere, over- 
flowing with cigar-butts and cigarette-ends— on the 
floor, under chairs, overturned among the sofa-pillows. 
A small brass tray under one of the sofas held a 
233 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


half-dozen small glasses, some of them still partly full _ 


of whisky or gin. 


Sandy sat down to wait for his aunt. It was very | 
quiet in the house, although it was almost ten o’clock. _ 
A man came down the stairs with his coat on his arm, | 
blinking sleepily. He passed through the hall and out | 
into the street. Bedroom-slippered feet shuffled to the _ 
head of the steps on the second floor, and the lazy | 
woman’s voice called: “She'll be down in a minute, | 


darling. Just wait there.” 


Sandy waited. He heard the splash of water above | 
and the hoarse gurgling of a bath-tub being emptied. | 
Presently Harriett appeared in a little pink wash | 
dress such as a child wears, the skirt striking her just _ 
above the knees. She smelled like cashmere-bouquet _ 
soap, and her face was not yet powdered, nor her | 
hair done up, but she was smiling broadly, happy to © 


see her nephew, as her arms went round his neck. 


“My! I’m glad to see you, honey! How'd you hap- _ 


pen to come? How’d you find me?” 


*“Grandma’s sick,” said Sandy. “ She’s awful sick | 


and Aunt Tempy sent you this note.” 
The girl opened the letter. It read: 


Your mother is not expected to live. You better 
come to see her since she has asked for you. Tempy. 


“O! .. . Wait a minute,” said Harriett softly. 


“Tl hurry.” 


Sandy sat down again in the room full of ash-trays | 


234 


NOTE TO HARRIETT 


and licker-bottles. Many feet pattered upstairs, and, 
as doors opened and closed, women’s voices were 
heard: ‘‘ Can I help you, girlie? Can I lend you any- 
thing? Does you need a veil? ” 

When Harriett came down, she was wearing a tan 
coat-suit and a white turban, pulled tight on her head. 
Her face was powdered and her lips rouged ever so 
slightly. The bag she carried was beaded, blue and 
gold. 

‘Come on, Sandy,” she said. “I guess I’m ready.” 

As they went out, they heard a man’s voice in a 


_ shabby house across the street singing softly to a two- 


finger piano accompaniment: 


Sugar babe, i’m leavin’ 
An’ it won’t be long... . 


While outside, on his front door-step, two nappy- 
headed little yellow kids were solemnly balling-the- 
jack. 


Two days before, Sandy had come home from 
school and found his grandmother lying across the 
bed, the full tubs still standing in the kitchen, her 
clothes not yet hung out to dry. 

*“What’s the matter?” he asked. 

““1’s washed down, chile,” said the old woman, 
panting. “I feels kinder tired-like, that’s all.” 

But Sandy knew that there must be something else 
wrong with Aunt Hager, because he had never seen 

235 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


her lying on the bed in broad daylight, with her clothes 
still in the tubs. 

“Does your back ache? ” asked the child. 

““T does feel a little misery,” sighed Aunt Hager. 
‘“‘But seems to be mo’ ma side an’ not ma back this 
time. But ’tain’t nothin’. I’s just tired.” 


But Sandy was scared. “‘ You want some soda and _ 


water, grandma?” 

‘““No, honey.” Then, in her usual tones of assumed 
anger: ““Go on away from here an’ let a body rest. 
Ain’t I told you they ain’t nothin’ the matter ’ceptin’ 
I’s all washed out an’ just got to lay down a minute? 
Go on an’ fetch in yo’ wood . .. an’ spin yo’ top 
out yonder with Buster and them. Go on!” 

It was nearly five o’clock when the boy came in 
again. Aunt Hager was sitting in the rocker near the 
stove then, her face drawn and ashy. She had been 
trying to finish her washing. 

“Chile, go get Sister Johnson an’ ask her if she 
can’t wring out ma clothes fo” me— Mis’ Dunset ain’t 
sent much washin’ this week, an’ you can help her hang 
’em up. I reckon it ain’t gonna rain tonight, so’s they 
can dry befo’ mawnin’.” 

Sandy ran towards the door. 

“Now, don’t butt your brains out!” said the old 
lady. “ Ain’t no need o’ runnin’.” | 

‘Not only did Sister Johnson come at once and hang 
out the washing, but she made Hager get in bed, witha 
hot-water bottle on her paining side. And she gave her 
a big dose of peppermint and water. 

236 


NOTE TO HARRIETT 


“I ’spects it’s from yo’ stomick,” she said. “ I knows 
you et cabbage fo’ dinner! ” 

“Maybe ’tis,” said Hager. 

Sister Johnson took Sandy to her house for supper 
that evening and he and Willie-Mae ate five sweet 
potatoes each. 

“'You-all gwine bust! ”’ said Tom Johnson. 

About nine o’clock the boy went to bed with his 
erandmother, and all that night Hager tossed and 
groaned, in spite of her efforts to lie quiet and not 
keep Sandy awake. In the morning she said: “Son, 
I reckon you better stay home from school, ’cause I’s 
feelin’ mighty po’ly. Seems like that cabbage ain’t 
digested yet. Feels like I done et a stone. . . . Go see 


\ ieee 


if you can’t make de fire up an’ heat me a cup o’ hot 


water.” 

About eleven o’clock Madam de Carter came over. 
“T thought I didn’t perceive you nowhere in the yard 
this morning and the sun “luminating so bright and 
cheerful. You ain’t indispensed, are you? Sandy said 
you was kinder ill.” She chattered away. “ You know 
it don’t look natural not to see you hanging out clothes 
long before the noon comes.” 

* T ain’t well a-tall this mawnin’,” said Hager when 
she got a chance to speak. “I’s feelin’ right bad. I 
suffers with a pain in ma side; seems like it ain’t 
gettin’ no better. Sister Johnson just left here from 
rubbin’ it, but I still suffers terrible an’ can’t eat 
nothin’. . . . You can use de phone, can’t you, Sister 
Carter?” 


237 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


““Why, yes! Yes indeedy! i oftens phones from over | 


to Mis’ Petit’s. You think you needs a physicianer?” | 

In spite of herself a groan came from the old | 
woman’s lips as she tried to turn towards her friend. — 
Aunt Hager, who had never moaned for lesser hurts, _ 
did not intend to complain over this one—but the | 
pain! ! 
-“Tt’s cuttin? me in two.” She gasped. “Send fo’ | 
old Doc McDillors an’ he’ll come.” 

Madam de Carter, proud and important at the — 
prospect of using her white neighbor’s phone, rushed | 
away. 

“T didn’t know you were so sick, grandma!” — 
Sandy’s eyes were wide with fright and sympathy. 
“T’m gonna get Mis’ Johnson to come rub you again.” 

“O!...0, ma Lawd, help!” Alone for a 
moment with no one to hear her, she couldn’t hold | 
back the moans any longer. A cold sweat stood on her | 
forehead. | 

The doctor came — the kind old white man who had 
known Hager for years and in whom she had faith. 

“Well,” he said, “It’s quite a surprise to see you 
in bed, Aunty.” Then, looking very serious and pro- 
fessional, he took her pulse. 

““Go out and close the door,” he said gently to 
Madam de Carter and Sister Johnson, Willie-Mae and 
Sandy, all of whom had gathered around the bed in 
the little room. “Somebody heat some water.” He 
turned back the quilts from the woman’s body and 
unbuttoned her gown. 

2338 


NOTE TO HARRIETT 

Ten minutes later he said frankly, but with great 
kindness in his tones: “‘ You’re a sick woman, Hager, 
a very sick woman.” 

That afternoon Tempy came, like a stranger to the 
house, and took charge of things. Sandy felt uncom- 
fortable and shy in her presence. This aunt of his had 
a hard, cold, correct way of talking that resembled 
Mrs. Rice’s manner of speaking to his mother when 
Annjee used to work there. But Tempy quickly put 
ithe house in order, bathed her mother, and spread the 
bed with clean sheets and a white counterpane. Before 
evening, members of Hager’s Lodge began to drop in 
bringing soups and custards. White people of the 
neighborhood stopped, too, to inquire if there was 
anything they could do for the old woman who had so 
often waited on them in their illnesses. About six 
o'clock old man Logan drove up the alley and tied 
his white mule to the back fence. 

The sun was setting when Tempy called Sandy in 
from the back yard, where he was chopping wood for 
the stove. She said: “ James ” — how queerly his cor- 
rect name struck his ears as it fell from the lips of this 
cold aunt! —“‘ James, you had better send this tele- 
gram to your mother. Now, here is a dollar bill and 
you can bring back the change. Look on her last letter 
and get the correct address.” 

Sandy took the written sheet of paper and the money 
that his aunt gave him. Then he looked through the 
various drawers in the house for his mother’s last 
letter. It had been nearly a month since they had 

239 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


heard from her, but finaliy the boy found the letter i 
in the cupboard, under a jelly-glass full of small coins i 
that his grandmother kept there. He carried the en-| |» 
velope with him to the telegraph office, and there he ' 
paid for a message to Annjee in Detroit: it 


Mother very sick, come at once. Tempy. 


As the boy walked home in the gathering dusk, he’ \ 
felt strangely alone in the world, as though Aunt I | 
Hager had already gone away, and when he reached 
the house, it was full of lodge members who had come | 
to keep watch. Tempy went home, but Sister Johnson ( 
remained in the sick-room, changing the hot-water _ 
bottles and administering, every three hours, the ; 
medicine the doctor had left. } 

There were so many people in the house that Sandy | 
came out into the back yard and sat down on the edge ~ 
of the well. It was cool and clear, and a slit of moon 
rode in a light-blue sky spangled with stars. Soon the | 
apple-trees would bud and the grass would be grow- 
ing. Sandy was a big boy. When his next birthday 
came, he would be fourteen, and he had begun to grow 
tall and heavy. Aunt Hager said she was going to buy © 
him a pair of long pants this coming summer. And — 
his mother would hardly know him when she saw | 
him again, if she ever came home. | 

Tonight, inside, there were so many old sisters from 
the lodge that Sandy couldn’t even talk to his grand- 
mother while she lay in bed. They were constantly 
going in and out of the sick-room, drinking coffee in 

240 


NOTE TO HARRIETT 


| the kitchen, or gossiping in the parlor. He wished 
| they would all go away. He could take care of his 
_ grandmother himself until she got well —he and Sis- 
| ter Johnson. They didn’t even need Tempy, who, he 
| felt, shouldn’t be there, because he didn’t like her. 


“They callin’ you inside,” Willie-Mae came out 


) to tell him as he sat by himself in the cold on the edge 
of the well. She was taller than Sandy now and had a 


regular job taking care of a white lady’s baby. She no 


_ longer wore her hair in braids. She did it up, and she 


i 


had a big leather pocket-book that she carried on her 
arm like a woman. Boys came to take her to the movies 


on Saturday nights. “‘ They want you inside.” 


Sandy got up, his legs stiff and numb, and went into 


_ the kitchen. An elderly brown woman, dressed in black 


silk that swished as she moved, opened the door to 
Hager’s bedroom and whispered to him loudly: “‘ Be 
quiet, chile.” 

Sandy entered between a lane of old women. Hager 
looked up at him and smiled —so grave and solemn 
he appeared. 

“Is they takin’ care 0’ you?” she asked weakly. 
Ain't it bedtime, honey? Is you had something to 
eat? Come on an’ kiss yo’ old grandma befo’ you go 
to sleep. She’ll be better in de mawnin’.” 

She couldn’t seem to lift her head, so Sandy sat 
down on the bed and kissed her. All he said was: “I’m 
all right, grandma,” because there were so many old 
women in there that he couldn’t talk. Then he went out 
into the other room. 

241 


| 

| 

| 

NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
a 

The air in the house was close and stuffy and the | 


boy soon became groggy with sleep. He fell across the || 
bed that had been Annjee’s, and later Dogberry’s, with | 
all his clothes on. One of the lodge women in the room — 
said: “‘ You better take off yo’ things, chile, an’ go — 
to sleep right.” Then she said to the other sisters: | 
“Come on in de kitchen, you-all, an’ let this chile |} 
go to bed.” 
In the morning Tempy woke him. “Are you sure | 
you had Annjee’s address correct last night?” she de- — 
manded. “The telegraph office says she couldn’t be | 
found, so the message was not delivered. Let me see | 
the letter.” / 
Sandy found the letter again, and the address was © 
verified. | 
“Well, that’s strange,” said Tempy. “I suppose, as | 
careless and irresponsible as Jimboy is, they’ve got | 
it wrong, or else moved. . . . Do you know where | 
Harriett can be? I don’t suppose you do, but mother | 
has been calling for her all night. I suppose we'll have _ 
to try to get her, wherever she is.” | 
“I got her address,” said Sandy. “She wrote it — 
down for me when I was working at the hotel this — 
winter. I can find her.” | 
“Then I'll give you a note,” said Tempy. “Take | 
it to her.” | 
So Sandy went to the big grey house in the Bottoms 
that morning to deliver Tempy’s message, before the 
girls there had risen from their beds. 


242 


fe fe fe fe fe GN GR Gk GO 


TWENTY-TWO 


BEYOND THE JORDAN 


EEE EE VIVES 


and laundries of the town. And Madam de 
Carter was ordered to Tulsa, Oklahoma, where a split 
in her organization was threatened because of the 
elections of the grand officers. Hager was resting easy, 
no pain now, but very weak. 
“It’s only a matter of time,” said the doctor. “‘ Give 
_ her the medicine so she won’t worry, but it does no 
_ good. There’s nothing we can do.” 
_ “She’s going to die!” Sandy thought. 
| Harriett sat by the bedside holding her mother’s 
hand as the afternoon sunlight fell on the white spread. 
_ Hager had been glad to see the girl again, and the 
old woman held nothing against her daughter for no. 
longer living at home. 
“Is you happy, chile?” Hager asked. ‘‘ You looks 
243 


URING the day the lodge members went to their 
work in the various kitchens and restaurants 


| 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER {| 


so nice. Yo’ clothes is right purty. I hopes you’s findin " 
what you wants in life. You’s young, honey, an’ you 
needs to be happy. . . . Sandy!” She called sc _ 
weakly that he could hardly hear her, though he ol 
standing at the head of the bed. “ Sandy, look in thai 
drawer, chile, under ma night-gowns an’ things, an| 
hand me that there little box you sees down in de } 
corner.’ \} 
The child found it and gave it to her, a edi: white | 
box from a cheap jeweller’s. It was wrapped care- 
fully in a soft handkerchief. The old woman took it; | 
eagerly and tried to hold it out towards her daughter. | 
Harriett unwound the handkerchief and opened the } 
lid of the box. Then she saw that it contained the tiny 
gold watch that her mother had given her on her six-' 
teenth birthday, which she had pawned months ago in 
order to run away with the carnival. Quick tears came. 
to the girl’s eyes. | 

““T got it out o’ pawn fo’ you,” Hager said, “cause 
I wanted you to have it fo’ yo’self, chile. You know 
yo’ mammy bought it fo’ you.” 

It was such a little watch! Old-timy, with a breast- | 
pin on it. Harriett quickly put her handkerchief over © 
her wrist to hide the flashy new timepiece she was — 
wearing on a gold bracelet. | 

That night Hager. died. The undertakers came at | 
dawn with their wagon and carried the body away to — 
embalm it. Sandy stood on the front porch looking at 
the morning star as the clatter of the horses’ hoofs | 
echoed in the street. A sleepy young white boy was 

244, . 


BEYOND THE JORDAN 

‘driving the undertaker’s wagon, and the horse that 
pulled it was white. 

» The women who had been sitting up all night began 
,to go home now to get their husbands’ breakfasts and 
to prepare to go to work themselves. 

' “Ts Wednesday,” Sandy thought. “Today I’m 
. supposed to go get Mrs. Reinhart’s clothes, but grand- 
ma’s dead. I guess I won’t get them now. There’s no- 
body to wash them.” 

Sister Johnson called him to the kitchen to drink a 
,cup of coffee. Harriett was there weeping softly. 
| empy was inside busily cleaning the room from 
, which they had removed the body. She had opened all 
, the windows and was airing the house. 

Out in the yard a rooster flapped his wings and 
_ crowed shrilly at the rising sun. The fire crackled, and 
. the coffee boiling sent up a fragrant aroma. Sister 
Johnson opened a can of condensed milk by punching 
, it with the butcher-knife. She put some cups and 
_ saucers on the table. 

*“Tempy, won’t you have some?” | 

“No, thank you, Mrs. Johnson,” she called from 
| the dead woman’s bedroom. 

When Aunt Hager was brought back to her house, 
she was in a long box covered with black plush. They 
placed it on a folding stand by the window in the 
front room. There was a crape on the door, and the 
| shades were kept lowered, and people whispered in 
| the house as though someone were asleep. Flowers be- 
gan to be delivered by boys on bicycles, and the lodge 
| ’ 245 


— 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


members came to sit up again that night. The time 
was set for burial, and the Daily Leader carried this 
paragraph in small type on its back page: | 


son survive. 


They tried again to reach Annjee in Detroit by tele; 
gram, but without success. On the afternoon of the 
funeral it was cold and rainy. The little Baptist Church! 
was packed with people. The sisters of the lodge came 
in full regalia, with banners and insignia, and the’ 
brothers turned out with them. Hager’s coffin was 
banked with flowers. There were many fine pieces 
from the families for whom she had washed and from’ 
the white neighbors she had nursed in sickness. There: 
were offerings, too, from Tempy’s high- toned friends | 
and from Harriett’s girl companions in the house in. 
the Bottoms. Many of the bell-boys, porters, and boot- 
leggers sent wreaths and crosses with golden letters on: 
them: “ At Rest in Jesus,” “ Beyond the Jordan,” or 
simply: “Gone Home.” There was a bouquet of vio- | 
lets from Buster’s mother and a blanket of roses from | 
Tempy herself. They were all pretty, but, to Sandy, 
the perfume was sickening in the close little church. | 

The Baptist minister preached, but Tempy had 
Father Hill from her church to say a few words, too. | 

246 | 


| 
} 


| 
} 


<2 


a 


BEYOND THE JORDAN 
The choir sang Shall We Meet Beyond the River? 


People wept and fainted. The services seemed inter- 
minable. Then came the long drive to the cemetery in 
horse-drawn hacks, with a few automobiles in line be- 
hind. In at the wide gates and through a vast expanse 


of tombstones the procession passed, across the grave- 


yard, towards the far, lonesome corner where most of 
. the Negroes rested. There Sandy saw the open grave. 


} 
| 


Then he saw the casket going down... down... 


, down, into the earth. 


The boy stood quietly between his Aunt Tempy and 
his Aunt Harriett at the edge of the grave while Tempy 


| stared straight ahead into the drizzling rain, and Har- 
| riett cried, streaking the powder on her cheeks. 


* That’s all right, mama,” Harriett sobbed to the 


| body in the long, black box. “‘ You won’t get lonesome 
| out here. Harrie’ll come back tomorrow. Harrie’ll 
come back every day and bring you flowers. You won’t 
| get lonesome, mama.” 


They were throwing wet dirt on the coffin as the 


| mourners walked away through the sticky clay towards 
| their carriages. Some old sister at the grave began to 
| sing: 


Dark was the night, 
Cold was the ground... 


| in a high weird monotone. Others took it up, and, as 


the mourners drove away, the air was filled with the 
minor wailing of the old women. Harriett was wearing 
247 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 

Hager’s gift, the little gold watch, pinned a j 
her coat. a 
When they got back to the house where Aunt Hager | 
had lived for so long, Sister Johnson said the mail-man }) 
had left a letter under the door that afternoon ad- |; 
dressed to the dead woman. Harriett was about to open || 
it when Tempy took it from her. It was from Annjee. |; 
“Dear mama,” it began. | 


We have moved to Toledo because Jimboy | 
thought he would do better here and the reason [| 
haven’t written, we have been so long getting set- |} 
tled. I have been out of work but we both got jobs | 
now and maybe I will be able to send you some . 
money soon. I hope you are well, ma, and all right. 
Kiss Sandy for me and take care of yourself. | 
With love and God’s blessings from your daughter, | 

Annjee 


Tempy immediately turned the letter over and wrote 9 
on the back: , 


We buried your mother today. I tried to reach 
you in Detroit, but could not get you, since you were - 
no longer there and neglected to send us your new 
address. It is too bad you weren’t here for the 
funeral. Your child is going to stay with me until | 
I hear from you. 

Tempy 


Then she turned to the boy, who stood dazed beside | 
Sister Johnson in the silent, familiar old house. | 
248 


BEYOND THE JORDAN 


“You will come home with me, James,” she said. 


“We'll see that this place is locked first. You try all 
the windows and I'll fasten the doors; then we'll go out 


the front. . . . Mrs. Johnson, it’s been good of you 


to help us in our troubles. Thank you.” 
Sister Johnson went home, leaving Harriett in the 


» parlor. When Sandy and Tempy returned from lock- 
_ ing the back windows and doors, they found the girl 
_ still standing there, and for a moment the two sisters 


looked at one another in silence. Then Tempy said 
coldly: “ We’re going.” 
Harriett went out alone into the drizzling rain. 


_ Tempy tried the parlor windows to be sure they were 
_ well fastened; then, stepping outside on the porch, she 


locked the door and put the key in her bag. 


““Come on,” she said. 
Sandy looked up and down the street, but in the 
thick twilight of fog and rain Harriett had disap- 


_ peared, so he followed his aunt into the waiting cab. 
_ As the hack clattered off, the boy gave an involuntary 
shiver. 


“Do you want to hold my hand,” Tempy asked, un- 


| bending a little. 


“No,” Sandy said. So they rode in silence. 


249 


fe fe fe fe fe AAAAD 


TWENTY-THREE 
TEMPY’S HOUSE 


© 


ee EEE VVBVZVS. 


AMES, you must get up on time in this house. }: 
Breakfast has been ready twenty minutes. I can’t 
come upstairs every morning to call you. You are }! 
old enough now to wake yourself and you must learn 
to do so—you’ve too far to walk to school to lie }) 
abed.”’ | 
Sandy tumbled out. Tempy left the room so that he’ 
would be free to dress, and soon he came downstairs | 
to breakfast. 
He had never had a room of his own before. He had }) 
never even slept in a room alone, but here his aunt had 
given him a small chamber on the second floor which 
had a window that looked out into a tidy back yard 
where there was a brick walk running to the back gate. 
The room, which was very clean, contained only the 
bed, one chair, and a dresser. There was, too, a little 
closet in which to hang clothes, but Sandy did not have 
many to put in it. 


250 


TEMPY’S HOUSE 
The thing that impressed him most about the second 


| floor was the bathroom. He had never lived where there 
\ was running water indoors. And in this room, too, 
- everything was so spotlessly clean that Sandy was 
afraid to move lest he disturb something or splash 
) water on the wall. 


When he came downstairs for breakfast, he found 


| the table set for two. Mr. Siles, being in the railway 


postal service, was out on a trip. The grapefruit was 
waiting as Sandy slid shyly into his place opposite the 
ash-brown woman who had become his guardian since 


_ his grandma’s death. She bowed her head to say a 


.. short grace; then they ate. 


“Have you been accustomed to drinking milk in 


_ the mornings?” Tempy asked as they were finishing 


the meal. “If you have, the milkman can leave an- 


other bottle. Young people should have plenty of 


milk.” 

*Yes’m, I’d like it, but we only had coffee at home.” 

“You needn’t say ‘yes’m’ in this house. We are 
not used to slavery talk here. If you like milk, Ill get 
it for you. . . . Now, how are your clothes? I see 
your stocking has a hole in it, and one pants-leg is 
hanging.” 

“It don’t stay fastened.” 

“Tt doesn’t, James! Pll buy you some more pants 
tomorrow. What else do you need?” , 
Sandy told her, and in a few days she took him to 
Wertheimer’s, the city’s largest store, and outfitted 
him completely. And, as they shopped, she informed 
2Zol 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
him that she was the only colored woman in town) 
who ran a bill there. 
“J want white people to know that Negroes have a_ 
little taste; that’s why I always trade at good shops. 
. And if you’re going to live with me, you'll have: 
to eae to do things right, too.’ 


ee a 


———— i 


_ The tearful letter that came from Annjee when she | 
heard of her mother’s death said that Toledo was a } 
very difficult place to get work in, and that she had no 
money to send railroad fare for Sandy, but that she 
would try to send for him as soon as she could. Jim- 
boy was working on a lake steamer and was seldom | 
home, and she couldn’t have Sandy with her anyway | 
until they got a nicer place to stay; so would Tempy | 
please keep him a little while? q 
By return post Tempy replied that if Annjee had } 
any sense, she would let Sandy remain in Stanton, | 
where he could get a good education, and not be fol- | 
lowing after his worthless father all over the country. | 
Mr. Siles and she had no children, and Sandy seemed 
like a quiet, decent child, smart in his classes. | 
Colored people needed to encourage talent so that | 
the white race would realize Negroes weren’t all mere | 
guitar-players and housemaids. And Sandy could be | 
a credit if he were raised right. Of course, Tempy 
knew he hadn’t had the correct environment to begin | 
with — living with Jimboy and Harriett and going to 
a Baptist church, but undoubtedly he could be trained. | 
He was young. “ And I think it would be only fair to 
202 


—=—— 
——— = 


TEMPY’S HOUSE 
the boy that you let him stay with us, because, Annjee, 
you are certainly not the person to bring him up as 
he should be reared.” The letter was signed: “‘ Your 


‘sister, Tempy,” and written properly with pen and ink. 


So it happened that Sandy came to live with Mr. 


_ and Mrs. Arkins Siles, for that was the name by which 


his aunt and uncle were known in the Negro society 
of the town. Mr. Siles was a mail-clerk on the rail- 


_ road —a position that colored people considered a 


high one because you were working for “‘ Uncle Sam.” 
He was a paste-colored man of forty-eight who had 
inherited three houses from his father. 

Tempy, when she married, had owned houses too, 


_ one of which had been willed her by Mrs. Barr-Grant, 


for whom she had worked for years as personal maid. 
She had acquired her job while yet in high school, and 
Mrs. Barr-Grant, who travelled a great deal in the 
interest of woman suffrage and prohibition, had taken 
Tempy east with ker. On their return to Stanton she 
allowed the colored maid to take charge of her home, 
where she also employed a cook and a parlor girl. 
Thus was the mistress left free to write pamphlets and 
prepare lectures on the various evils of the world 
standing in need of correction. 

Tempy pleased Mrs. Barr-Grant by being prompt 
and exact in obeying orders and by appearing to wor- 
ship her Puritan intelligence. In truth Tempy did. 
worship her mistress, for the colored girl found that 
by following Mrs. Barr-Grant’s early directions she 
had become an expert housekeeper; by imitating her 

293 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
manner of speech she had acquired a precise flow of. 
language; and by reading her books she had become 
interested in things that most Negro girls never thought || 
about. Several times the mistress had remarked to her 
maid: “ You’re so smart and such a good, clean, quick _ 
little worker, Tempy, that it’s too bad you aren’t| 
white.” And Tempy had taken this to heart, not as an 
insult, but as a compliment. | 

When the white lady died, she left one of her small ! 
houses to her maid as a token of appreciation for faith- _ 
ful services. By dint of saving, and of having resided | 
with her mistress where there had been no living ex- 
penses, Tempy had managed to buy another house, | 
too. When Mr. Siles asked her to be his wife, every- | 
body said it was a fine match, for both owned property, 
both were old enough to know what they wanted, and © 
both were eminently respectable. . . . Now they | 
prospered together. | 

Tempy no longer worked out, but stayed home, | 
keeping house, except that she went each month to col- 
lect her rents and those of her husband. She had a _ 
woman to do the laundry and help with the cleaning, — 
but Tempy herself did the cooking, and all her meals | 
were models of economical preparation. Just enough | 
food was prepared each time for three people. Sandy | 
never had a third helping of dessert in her house. No | 
big pots of black-eyed peas and pigtails scented her | 
front hall, either. She got her recipes from The | 
Ladies’ Home Journal—and she never bought a | 
watermelon. | 


294 


TEMPY’S HOUSE 


White people were for ever picturing colored folks 
with huge slices of watermelon in their hands. Well, 
she was one colored woman who did not like them! 
Her favorite fruits were tangerines and grapefruit, 
for Mrs. Barr-Grant had always eaten those, and 
Tempy had admired Mrs. Barr-Grant more than any- 
body else— more, of course, than she had admired 
Aunt Hager, who spent her days at the wash-tub, 
and had loved watermelon. 

Colored people certainly needed to come up in 
the world, Tempy thought, up to the level of white 
people — dress like white people, talk like white peo- 
ple, think like white people—and then they would 
no longer be called “niggers.” 

In Tempy this feeling was an emotional reaction, 
born of white admiration, but in Mr. Siles, who shared 
his wife’s views, the same attitude was born of practi- 
cal thought. The whites had the money, and if Negroes 
wanted any, the quicker they learned to be like the 
whites, the better. Stop being lazy, stop singing all 
the time, stop attending revivals, and learn to get the 
dollar — because money buys everything, even the re- 
spect of white people. 

Blues and spirituals Tempy and her husband hated 
because they were too Negro. In their house Sandy 
dared not sing a word of Swing Low, Sweet Chariot, 
for what had darky slave songs to do with respectable 
people? And rag-time belonged in the Bottoms with 
the sinners. (It was ironically strange that the Bot- 
toms should be the only section of Stanton where 

259 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
Negroes and whites mingled freely on equal terms. ) 
That part of town, according to Tempy, was lost to | 
God, and the fact that she had a sister living there 
burned like a hidden cancer in her breast. She never 
mentioned Harriett to anyone. 
Tempy’s friends were all people of standing in the 


darker world — doctors, school-teachers, a dentist, a |! 


lawyer, a hairdresser. And she moved among these 
friends as importantly as Mrs. Barr-Grant had moved 
among a similar group in the white race. Many of 
them had had washwomen for mothers and day- 
laborers for fathers; but none ever spoke of that. 
And while Aunt Hager lived, Tempy, after getting her 
position with Mrs. Barr-Grant, was seldom seen with 
the old woman. After her marriage she was even more 
ashamed of her family connections —a little sister 
running wild, and another sister married for the sake 
of love —Tempy could never abide Jimboy, or un- 
derstand why Annjee had taken up with a rounder 
from the South. One’s family as a topic of conversa- 
tion, however, was not popular in high circles, for too 
many of Stanton’s dark society folks had sprung from 
humble family trees and low black bottoms. 

** But back in Washington, where I was born,” said 
Mrs. Doctor Mitchell once, “we really have blood! 
All the best people at the capital come from noted 
ancestry — Senator Bruce, John M. Langston, Gover- 
nor Pinchback, Frederick Douglass. Why, one of our 
colored families on their white side can even trace 
its lineage back to George Washington! . . . O, yes, 

256 


TEMPY S HOUSE 


we have a background! But, of course, we are too re- 
fined to boast about it.” 

Tempy thought of her mother then and wished that 
black Aunt Hager had not always worn her apron in 
the streets, uptown and everywhere! Of course, it was 
clean and white and seemed to suit the old lady, but 
aprons weren't worn by the best people. When Tempy 
was in the hospital for an operation shortly after her 
marriage, they wouldn’t let Hager enter by the front 
door — and Tempy never knew whether it was on ac- 
count of her color or the apron! The Presbyterian 
Hospital was prejudiced against Negroes and didn’t 
like them to use the elevator, but certainly her mother 
should not have come there in an apron! 

Well, Aunt Hager had meant well, Tempy thought, 
even if she didn’t dress right. And now this child, 
Sandy — James was his correct name! At that first 
breakfast they ate together, she asked him if he had a 
comb and brush of his own. 

“No’m, I ain’t,” said Sandy. 

“T haven’t,” she corrected him. “I certainly don’t 
want my white neighbors to hear you saying ‘ ain’t’ 
. . . You’ve come to live with me now and you must 
talk like a gentleman.” 


257 


| 


1! 


meek K AARAAAD | 


TWENTY-FOUR 
A SHELF OF BOOKS 


CE CEE TITIS 


with Tempy, there was an epidemic of mumps 

among the schoolchildren in Stanton, and, old 
as he was, he was among its early victims. With jaws 
swollen to twice their normal size and a red sign, 
MUMPS, on the house, he was forced to remain at 
home for three weeks. It was then that the boy began 
to read books other than the ones he had had to study 
for his lessons. At Aunt Hager’s house there had been 
no books, anyway, except the Bible and the few fairy- 
tales that he had been given at Christmas; but Tempy 
had a case full of dusty volumes that were used to give 
dignity to her sitting-room: a row of English classics 
bound in red, an Encyclopedia of World Knowledge 
in twelve volumes, a book on household medicine full 
of queer drawings, and some modern novels— The 
Rosary, The Little Shepherd of Kingdom Come, the 

258 


Te spring, shortly after Sandy went to stay 


A SHELF OF BOOKS 


newest Harold Bell Wright, and all that had ever been 
written by Gene Stratton Porter, Tempy’s favorite 
author. The Negro was represented by Chestnut’s 
House Behind the Cedars, and the Complete Poems of 
Paul Lawrence Dunbar, whom Tempy tolerated on 
account of his fame, but condemned because he had 


_ written so much in dialect and so often of the lower 
classes of colored people. Tempy subscribed to 
_ Harper’s Magazine, too, because Mrs. Barr-Grant had 


taken it. And in her sewing-room closet there was 
also a pile of The Crisis, the thin Negro monthly 
that she had been taking from the beginning of its 
publication. 

Sandy had heard of that magazine, but he had never 
seen a copy; so he went through them all, looking at 


_ the pictures of prominent Negroes and reading about 
- racial activities all over the country, and about racial 


wrongs in the South. In every issue he found, too, 
stirring and beautifully written editorials about the 


_ frustrated longings of the black race, and the hidden 
| beauties in the Negro soul. A man named Du Bois 
_ wrote them. 


“Dr. William Edward Burghardt Du Bois,” said 


_ Tempy, “and he is a great man.” 


“ Great like Booker T. Washington? ” asked Sandy. 

“Teaching Negroes to be servants, that’s all Wash- 

ington did!”” Tempy snorted in so acid a tone that 

Sandy was silent. “‘ Du Bois wants our rights. He wants 

us to be real men and women. He believes in social 

equality. But Washington — huh!” The fact that he 
259 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


had established an industrial school damned W singel it 
ton in Tempy’s eyes, for there were enough colored | 
workers already. But Du Bois was a doctor of philoso- ||: 
phy and had studied in Europe! . . . Thai’s what |! 
Negroes needed to do, get smart, study books, go to |! 
Europe! “ Don’t talk to me about Washington,” Tempy | 
fumed. “Take Du Bots for your model, not some | 
white folks’ nigger.” | 
“Well, Aunt Hager said —” then Sandy a 
His grandmother had thought that Booker T. was 
the greatest of men, but maybe she had _ been! 
wrong. Anyway, this Du Bois could write! Gee, | 
it made you burn all over to read what he said about 
a lynching. But Sandy did not mention Booker Wash- }} 
ington again to Tempy, although, months later, at the 

library he read his book called Up from Slavery, and 
he was sure that Aunt Hager hadn’t been wrong. “I } 
guess they are both great men,” he thought. 7 
Sandy’s range of reading increased, too, when his ]- 
aunt found a job for him that winter in Mr. Prentiss’s 
gift-card- and printing-shop, where he kept the place 
clean and acted as delivery boy. This shop kept a shelf 
of current novels and some volumes of the new poetry 
— Sandburg, Lindsay, Masters—which the Young 
Women’s Club of Stanton was then studying, to the | 
shocked horror of the older white ladies of the town. | 
Sandy knew of this because Mr. Prentiss’s daughter, a | 
student at Goucher College, used to keep shop and she 
pointed out volumes for the boy to read and told him | 
who their authors were and what the books meant. | 
260 | 


A SHELF OF BOOKS %™, 


. She said that none of the colored boys they had em- 


_ ployed before had ever been interested in reading; so 
. she often lent him, by way of encouragement, shop- 
- worn copies to be taken home at night and returned 
the next day. Thus Sandy spent much of his first year 
y with Tempy deep in novels too mature for a fourteen- 
e year-old boy. But Tempy was very proud of her studi- 
ous young nephew. She began to decide that she 
. had made no mistake in keeping him with her, and 


;, when he entered the high school, she bought him 


' his first long-trouser suit as a spur towards further 
_ application. 

Sandy became taller week by week, and it seemed 
. to Tempy as if his shirt-sleeves became too short for 
him overnight. His voice was changing, too, and he 
had acquired a liking for football, but his after-school 
_ job at Prentiss’s kept him from playing much. At night 
_ he read, or sometimes went to the movies with Buster 
_—but Tempy kept him home as much as she could. 


;| Occasionally he saw Willie-Mae, who was keeping 


_ company with the second cook at Wright’s Hotel. And 
sometimes he saw Jimmy Lane, who was a bell-hop 
now and hung out with a sporty crowd in the rear 
,| room of Cudge Windsor’s pool hall. But whenever 
.| Sandy went into his old neighborhood, he felt sad, 
| remembering Aunt Hager and his mother, and Jim- 


,| boy, and Harriett — for his young aunt had gone away . 


.| from Stanton, too, and the last he heard about her 
,| rumored that she was on the stage in Kansas City. 
| Now the little house where Sandy had lived with his 
| 261 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
grandmother belonged to Tempy, who kept it rented 
to a family of strangers. 4! 

In high school Sandy was taking, at his aunt’s re- |} 
quest, the classical course, which included Latin, }} 
ancient history, and English, and which required a_ 
great deal of reading. His teacher of English was a 


large, masculine woman named Martha Fry, who had ° a 


once been to Europe and who loved to talk about the — 


splendors of old England and to read aloud in a) “4 


deep, mannish kind of voice, dramatizing the printed | 
words. It was from her that Sandy received an intro- | 
duction to Shakespeare, for in the spring term they }* 
studied The Merchant of Venice. In the spring also, }° 
under Miss Fry’s direction, the first-year students were — 
required to write an essay for the freshman essay } 
prizes of both money and medals. And in this contest 
Sandy won the second prize. It was the first time in 
the history of the school that a colored pupil had ever 
done anything of the sort, and Tempy was greatly 
elated. There was a note in the papers about it, and © 
Sandy brought his five dollars home for his aunt to put 
away. But he gave his bronze medal to a girl named | 
Pansetta Young, who was his class-mate and a new- 
found friend. 

From the first moment in school that he saw Pan- 
setta, he knew that he liked her, and he would sit 
looking at her for hours in every class that they had 
together — for she was a little baby-doll kind of girl, 
with big black eyes and a smooth pinkish-brown skin, — 
and her hair was curly on top of her head. Her 

262 


A SHELF OF BOOKS 
| \ widowed mother was a cook at the Goucher College 
_dining-hall; and she was an all-alone little girl, for 
. | Pansetta had no brothers or sisters. After Thanks- 
, : giving Sandy began to walk part of the way home with 
, | her every day. He could not accompany her all the 
| _way because he had to go to work at Mr. Prentiss’s 
| shop. But on Christmas he bought her a box of candy 
| -—and sent it to her by mail. And at Easter-time she 
| gave him a chocolate egg. 

| — “Unh-huh! You got a girl now, ain’t you?” teased 
| Buster one April afternoon when he caught Sandy 
standing in front of the high school waiting for Pan- 
_ setta to come out. 
_ “Aw, go chase yourself!” said Sandy, for Buster 
.. had a way of talking dirty about girls, and Sandy was 
.| afraid he would begin that with Pansetta; but today 
his friend changed the subject instead. 

** Say come on round to the pool hall tonight and I'll 
teach you to play billiards.” 
— “Don’t think I'd better, Bus. Aunt Tempy aie 
get sore,” Sandy replied, shaking his head. “ Besides, 
Ihave to study.” 
“Are you gonna read yourself to death?” Buster 
demanded indignantly. “‘ You’ve got to come out some 
| time, man! Tell her you’re going to the movies and 
we ll go down to Cudge’s instead.” 

Sandy thought for a moment. 

** All the boys come round there at night.” 

* Well, I might.” 

“Little apron-string boy!” teased Buster. 

263 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
“Tf I hit you a couple of times, you’l! find out ’'m 
not!” Sandy doubled up his fists in pretended anger. | 
“TH black bes blue eyes | for an re | 


boy!” | 
And that evening Sandy didn’t finish reading, as he. 1 
had planned, Moby Dick, which Mr. Prentiss’s daugh- || 
ter had lent him. Instead he practised handling a cue- |} 
stick under the tutelage of Buster. | 


264 


i} 
| 
t 
| 


| HERE were no community houses in Stanton and 
no recreation centres for young men except the 


fee fhe kh ke AAAAD 


TWENTY-FIVE 
POOL HALL 


ESE EE FITTS 


Y. M. C. A., which was closed to you if you 


- were not a white boy; so, for the Negro youths of the 
town, Cudge Windsor’s pool hall was the evening 
_ meeting-place. There one could play billiards, shoot 
_ dice in a back room, or sit in summer on the two long 
_ benches outside, talking and looking at the girls as 
_ they passed. In good weather these benches were 


i 


| 


j 


crowded all the time. 
Next door to the pool hall was Cudge Windsor’s 


_ lunch-room. Of course, the best colored people did 
not patronize Cudge’s, even though his business was 
not in the Bottoms. It was located on Pearl Street, some 
_ three or four blocks before that thoroughfare plunged 
across the tracks into the low terrain of tinkling pianos. 
and ladies who loved for cash. But since Cudge catered 
- to what Mr. Siles called ‘‘ the common element,” the 
_ best people stayed away. 


265 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


After months of bookishness and subjection to. 
Tempy’s prim plans for his improvement, Sandy | 
found the pool hall an easy and amusing place in| 
which to pass time. It was better than the movies, where | 
people on the screen were only shadows. And it was | 
much better than the Episcopal Church, with its stoop- 
shouldered rector, for here at Cudge’s everybody was 
alive, and the girls who passed in front swinging their | 
arms and grinning at the men were warm-bodied | 
and gay, while the boys rolling dice in the rear | 
room or playing pool at the tables were loud-mouthed | 
and careless. Life sat easily on their muscular 
shoulders. . 

Adventurers and vagabonds who passed through | 
Stanton on the main line would often drop in at 
Cudge’s to play a game or get a bite to eat, and many | 
times on summer nights reckless black boys, a long | 
way from home, kept the natives entertained with — 
tales of the road, or trips on side-door Pullmans, and © 
of far-off cities where things were easy and women > 
generous. They had a song that went: | 


O, the gals in Texas, 
They never be’s unkind. 
They feeds their men an’ 
Buys ’em gin an’ wine. 
But these women in Stanton, 
Their hearts is hard an’ cold. 
When you’s out of a job, they 
Denies you jelly roll. 

266 


| 
| 


| 
/ 


\ 
ty 


POOL HALL 
Then, often, arguments would begin — boastings, 
proving and fending; or telling of exploits with guns, 
_knives, and razors, with cops and detectives, with evil 
‘women and wicked men; out-bragging and out-lying 


-/ one another, all talking at once. Sometimes they would 
“, create a racket that could be heard for blocks. To the 


uninitiated it would seem that a fight was imminent. 
But underneath, all was good-natured and friendly — 
and through and above everything went laughter. No 
matter how belligerent or lewd their talk was, or how 
sordid the tales they told—of dangerous pleasures 
and strange perversities —these black men laughed. 


_ That must be the reason, thought Sandy, why poverty- 


stricken old Negroes like Uncle Dan Givens lived so 
long — because to them, no matter how hard life might 
be, it was not without laughter. 

Uncle Dan was the world’s champion liar, Cudge 
Windsor said, and the jolly old man’s unending flow 


of fabulous reminiscences were entertaining enough 


to earn him a frequent meal in Cudge’s lunch-room or 


a drink of licker from the patrons of the pool hall, 


who liked to start the old fellow talking. 


-, One August evening when Tempy was away attend- 
Ing a convention of the Midwest Colored Women’s 
_ Clubs, Sandy and Buster, Uncle Dan, Jimmy Lane, 


and Jap Logan sat until late with a big group of young: 


_ sters in front of the pool hall watching the girls go by. | 
A particularly pretty high yellow damsel passed in 


a thin cool dress of flowered voile, trailing the sweet 


ness of powder and perfume behind her. 


267 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER | 
““Dog-gone my soul! ” yelled Jimmy Lane. “Just 9: 
gimme a bone and lemme be your dog —I mean your 4) 
salty dog!” But the girl, pretending not to hear, — 
strolled leisurely on, followed by a train of compli- © 
ments from the pool-hall benches. 


“Sweet mama Venus!” cried a tall raw-bony 4; 


boy, gazing after her longingly. 
“Tf angels come like that, lemme go to heaven— }; 
and if they don’t, lemme be lost to glory!” Jap 4} 
exclaimed. |. 
Shut up, Jap! What you know *bout women?” 
asked Uncle Dan, leaning forward on his cane to in- © 
terrupt the comments. “‘ Here you-all is, ain’t knee- | 
high to ducks yit, an’ talkin’ *bout womens! Shut up, | 
all o’ you! Nary one o’ you’s past sebenteen, but when 
I were yo’ age — Hee! Hee! You-all want to know © 
what dey called me when I were yo’ age?” The old | 
man warmed to his tale. “ Dey called me de ‘stud © 
nigger ’! Yes, dey did! On ’count o’ de kind o’ slavery- 
time work I was doin’ —I were breedin’ babies fo’ to — 
sell! ” | 
** Another lie!” said Jap. 
“No, ’tain’t, boy! You listen here to what I’s gwine | 
tell you. I were de onliest real healthy nigger buck ma 
white folks had on de plantation, an’ dese was ole po’ — 
white folks what can’t ford to buy many slaves, so dey 
figures to raise a heap o” darky babies an’ sell ’em 
later on —dat’s why dey made me de breeder. . . . | 
Hee! Hee! . . . An’ I sho breeded a gang o’ pickanin- | 
nies, too! But I were young then, jest like you-all is, _ 
268 


POOL HALL 
an’ I ain’t had a pint 0’ sense — laying wid de womens 


all night, ever’ night.” 


“Yes, we believe you,” drawled Jimmy. 

“* An’ it warn’t no time befo’ little yaller chillens 
an’ black chillens an’ red chillens an’ all kinds 0’ 
_ chillens was runnin’ round de yard eatin’ out o’ de 
_ hog-pen an’ a-callin’ me pappy. . . . An’ here [I is 
_ today gwine on ninety-three year ole an’ I done out- 
lived ’em all. Dat is, I done outlived all I ever were 
, able to keep track on after de war, ‘cause we darkies 
! sho scattered once we was free! Yes, sah! But befo’ 
de fightin’ ended I done been pappy to forty-nine 
— chillens — an’ thirty-three of ’em were boys!” 

— “ Aw, [know you’re lying now, Uncle Dan,” Jimmy 
laughed. 

“No, I ain’t, sah! . . . Hee! Hee! . . . I werea 
_ great one when I were young! Yes, sah!” The old man 
went on undaunted. “I went an’ snuck off to a dance 
one night, me an’ nudder boy, went ’way ovah in 
Macon County at ole man Laird’s plantation, who 
been a bitter enemy to our white folks. Did I ever tell 
you ‘bout it? We took one o’ ole massa’s best hosses out 
de barn to ride, after he done gone to his bed. . . . 
Well, sah! It were late when we got started, an’ we 
rid dat hoss lickety-split uphill an’ down holler, ovah 
de crick an’ past de mill, me an’ ma buddy both on 
his back, through de cane-brake an’ up anudder hill, 
till he wobble an’ foam at de mouth like he’s *bout to 
drap. When we git to de dance, long *bout midnight, 
we jump off dis hoss an’ ties him to a post an’ goes in 

269 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


de cabin whar de music were — an’ de function were }1 
ewine on big. Man! We grabs ourselves a gal an’ dance jj: 
till de moon riz, kickin’ up our heels an’ callin’ figgers, 
an’ jest havin’ a scrumptious time. Ay, Lawd! We sho | 
did dance! . . . Well, come ‘long ’bout two o’clock | 
in de mawnin’, niggers all leavin’, an’ we goes out in 
de yard to git on dis hoss what we had left standin’ at | 
de post. . . . An’ Lawd have mercy —de hoss were | 
dead! Yes, sah! He done fell down right whar he | 
were tied, eyeballs rolled back, mouth a-foamin’, an’ | 
were stone-dead! . . . Well, we ain’t knowed how we | 
gwine git home ner what we gwine do ’bout massa’s 
hoss— an’ we was skeered, Lawdy! Cause we know ' 
he beat us to death if he find out we done rid his best 
hoss anyhow — let lone ridin’ de crittur to death. . . . 
An’ all de low-down Macon niggers what was at de 
party was whaw-whawin’ fit to kill, laughin’ cause it 
were so funny to see us gittin’ ready to git on our hoss | 
an’ de hoss were dead! . . . Well, sah, me an’ ma _ 
buddy ain’t wasted no time. We took dat animule up | 
by de hind legs an’ we drug him all de way home to 
massa’s plantation befo’ day! We sho did! Uphill an’ 
down holler, sixteen miles! Yes, sah! An’ put dat 
damn hoss back in massa’s barn like he war befo’ we 
left. An’ when de sun riz, me an’ ma buddy were in de 
slavery quarters sleepin’ sweet an’ lowly-like as if we 
ain’t been nowhar. . . . De next day old massa ’maze 
how dat hoss die all tied up in his stall wid his halter 
on! An’ we niggers ’maze, too, when we heard dat > 
massa’s hoss been dead, cause we ain’t knowed a> 
270 


cv cer 


= 


= SOI | et cr Oe Sa w. — 


POOL HALL 
thing *bout it. No, sah! Ain’t none o’ us niggers knowed 
a thing! Hee! Hee! Not a thing! ” 
““Weren’t you scared?” asked Sandy. 
“Sho, we was scared,” said Uncle Dan, “ but we 
ain’t act like it. Niggers was smart in them days.” 
“ They’re still smart,” said Jap Logan, “if they can 


lie like you.” 


““T mean!” said Buster. 
“Uncle Dan’s the world’s champeen liar,” drawled 


_atall lanky boy. “Come on, let’s chip in and buy him 


| a sandwich, ’cause he’s lied enough fo’ one evening.” 


5 | 


i 
t 


They soon crowded into the lunch-room and sat on 
stools at the counter ordering soda or ice-cream from 
the fat good-natured waitress. While they were eating, 


. a gambler bolted in from the back room of the pool 


hall with a handful of coins he had just won. 
“*Gonna feed ma belly while I got it in ma hand,” 


he shouted. “Can’t tell when I might lose, ’cause de 
dice is runnin’ they own way tonight. Say, Mattie,” 
_ he yelled, “tell chef to gimme a beefsteak all beat up 
like Jim Jeffries, cup o’ coffee strong as Jack Johnson, 
an’ come flyin’ like a airship so I can get back in the 
game. Tell that kitchen buggar sweet-papa Stingaree’s 
out here 


{ 


* All right, keep yo’ collar on,” said Mattie. “De 


_ steak’s got to be cooked.” 


“What you want, Uncle Dan?” yelled the gambler — 


_ to the old man. “ While I’s winnin’, might as well feed 
you, too. Take some ham and cabbage or something. 
_ That sandwich ain’t “nough to fill you up.” 


271 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


Uncle Dan accepted a plate of spareribs, and | 
Stingaree threw down a pile of nickels on the) 
counter. | 

“TInjuns an’ buffaloes,” he said loudly. “‘ Two things } 
de white folks done killed, so they puts ’em on de | 
backs o’ nickels. . . . Rush up that steak there, gal, | 
I’s hongry!” | 
_ Sandy finished his drink and bought a copy of the’ 
Chicago Defender, the World’s Greatest Negro’ 
Weekly, which was sold at the counter. Across the | 
front in big red letters there was a headline: Negro |! 
Boy Lynched. There was also an account of a race | 
riot in a Northern industrial city. On the theatrical — 
page a picture of pretty Baby Alice Whitman, the tap- | 
dancer, attracted his attention, and he read a few of | 
the items there concerning colored shows; but as he | 
was about to turn the page, a little article in the bottom 
corner made him pause and put the paper down on 
the counter. | 


ACTRESS MAKES HIT 


St. Louis, Mo., Aug. 3: Harrietta Williams, sen- 
sational young blues-singer, has been packing the | 
Booker Washington Theatre to the doors here this | 
week. Jones and Jones are the headliners for the 
all-colored vaudeville bill, but the singing of Miss 
Williams has been the outstanding drawing card. 
She is being held over for a continued engagement, 
with Billy Sanderlee at the piano. | 

212 


POOL HALL 
“Billy Sanderlee,” said Buster, who was looking 


‘over Sandy’s shoulder. “That’s that freckled-faced 


yellow guy who used to play for dances around here, 


‘isn’t it? He could really beat a piano to death, all 


right!” 
“Sure could,” replied Sandy. “Gee, they must 


make a great team together, ’cause my Aunt Harrie 
can certainly sing and dance!” 


D 
| 


** Ain’t the only thing she can do!” bellowed the 


| gambler, swallowing a huge chunk of steak. “ Yo’ Aunt 
} 


Harrie’s a whang, son!” 
“Shut yo’ mouth!” said Uncle Dan. 


273 


KEE AAAAA 


i 
h 


TWENTY-SIX 


THE DOORS OF LIFE 


© 


URING Sandy’s second year at high school | 
De: was busy sewing for the local Red 
Cross and organizing Liberty Bond clubs | 
among the colored population of Stanton. She earn- | 
estly believed that the world would really become safe | 
for democracy, even in America, when the war ended, | 
and that colored folks would no longer be snubbed 
in private and discriminated against in public. 
““ Colored boys are over there fighting,” she said. — 
“Our men are buying hundreds of dollars’ worth of | 
bonds, colored women are aiding the Red Cross, our | 
clubs are sending boxes to the camps and to the front. 
White folks will see that the Negro can be trusted in 
war as well as peace. Times will be better after this 
for all of us.” 
One day a letter came from Annjee, who had moved | 
to Chicago. She said that Sandy’s father had not long © 
274 


THE DOORS OF LIFE 


remained in camp, but had been sent to France almost 


| 
| 


immediately after he enlisted, and she didn’t know 


- what she was going to do, she was so worried and 


alone! There had been but one letter from Jimboy 


_since he left. And now she needed Sandy with her, but 


she wasn’t able to send for him yet. She said she hoped 


_and prayed that nothing would happen to his father 
at the front, but every day there were colored sol- 


diers’ names on the casualty list. 
“Good thing he’s gone,” grunted Tempy when she 
read the letter as they were seated at the supper-table. 


_ Then, suddenly changing the subject, she asked Sandy: 


| 


“Did you see Dr. Frank Crane’s beautiful article this 
- morning? ” 


“No, I didn’t,” said the boy. 

“You certainly don’t read as much as you did last 
winter,” complained his aunt. “ And you’re staying 
out entirely too late to suit me. I’m quite sure you’re 
not at the movies ali that time, either. I want these late 
hours stopped, young man. Every night in the week out 
somewhere until ten and eleven o’clock! ” 

“Well, boys do have to get around a little, Tempy,” 
Mr. Siles objected. “It’s not like when you and I were 
coming up.” 

“Tm raising this boy, Mr. Siles,” Tempy snapped. 
“When do you study, James? That’s what I want to 
know.” | | 

* When I come in,” said Sandy, which was true. His 
light was on until after twelve almost every night. 
And when he did not study late, his old habit of lying 

275 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


awake clung to him and he could not go to sleep! 
early. ! 
“You think too much,” Buster once said. “Stop! 
being so smart; then you'll sleep better.” 

“Yep,” added Jimmy Lane. “ Better be healthy and} 


smellin’ bad.” 

“O, I’m not sick,” objected Sandy, “but I just! 
get to thinking about things at night—the war, and | 
white folks, and God, and girls, and —O, I don’t! 
know — everything in general.” 

“Sure, keep on thinking,” jeered Buster, “and turn | 
right ashy after while and be all stoop-shouldered like | 
Father Hill.” (The Episcopalian rector was said to be’ 
the smartest colored man in town.) “ But I’m not. 
gonna worry about being smart myself. A few more | 
years, boy, and I’ll be in some big town passing for | 
white, making money, and getting along swell. And [| 
won't need to be smart, either —T I be ofay! So if 
you see me some time in St. Louis or Chi with a little 
blond on my arm — don’t recognize me, hear! I want | 
my kids to be so yellow-headed they won’t have to | 
think about a color line.” | 

And Sandy knew that Buster meant what he said, | 
for his light-skinned friend was one of those people. 
who always go directly towards the things they want, | 
as though the road is straight before them and they can | 
see clearly all the way. But to Sandy himself nothing | 


ever seemed quite that clear. Why was his country | 
276 


THE DOORS OF LIFE 


going stupidly to war? . . . Why were white people 


and colored people so far apart? Why was it wrong 


‘to desire the bodies of women? . . . With his mind 
-a maelstrom of thoughts as he lay in bed night after 


night unable to go to sleep quickly, Sandy wondered 
many things and asked himself many questions. 
Sometimes he would think about Pansetta Young, 


his class-mate with the soft brown skin, and the pointed 
and delicate breasts of her doll-like body. He had 


vnever been alone with Pansetta, never even kissed her, 


yet she was “his girl” and he liked her a great deal. 


‘Maybe he loved her ! . . . But what did it mean to 
_ love a girl? Were you supposed to marry her then and 


| 
e) 


live with her for ever? . . . His father had married 
his mother — good- nanieed, ae -playing Jimboy — 
but they weren’t always together, and Sandy knew that 


,| Jimboy was enjoying the war now, just as he had al- 
ways enjoyed everything else. 


“Gee, he must of married early to be my father 


| and still look so young!” he thought. “Suppose I 
‘marry Pansetta now!” But what did he really know 
| about marriage other than the dirty fragments he had 
| picked up from Jimmy and Buster and the fellows at 
| the pool hall? 


On his fifteenth birthday Tempy had given him a 
book written for young men on the subject of love and 
living, called The Doors of Life, addressed to all - 
Christian youths in their teens — but it had been writ- 
ten by a white New England minister of the Presby- 


“| terian faith who stood aghast before the flesh; so its 


Zid 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


advice consisted almost entirely in how to pray in the | 
orthodox manner, and in how not to love. | 
“Avoid evil companions lest they be your undoing | 
(see Psalms cxix, 115-20); and beware of lewd | 
women, for their footsteps lead down to hell (see | 
Proverbs vii, 25—7),” said the book, and that was the | 
extent of its instructions on sex, except that it urged | 
everyone to marry early and settle down to a healthy, 
moral, Christian life. . . . But how could you marry } 
early when you had no money and no home to which | 
to take a wife, Sandy wondered. And who were evil | 
companions. Neither Aunt Hager nor Annjee had ever | 
said anything to Sandy about love in its bodily sense; _ 
Jimboy had gone away too soon to talk with him; and — 
Tempy and her husband were too proper to discuss such 
subjects; so the boy’s sex knowledge consisted only in 
the distorted ideas that youngsters whisper; the dirty 
stories heard in the hotel lobby where he had worked; | 
and the fact that they sold in drugstores articles that. 
weren’t mentioned in the company of nice people. | 
But who were nice people anyway? Sandy hated the © 
word “nice.” His Aunt Tempy was always using it. 
All of her friends were nice, she said, respectable and | 
refined. They went around with their noses in the air | 
and they didn’t speak to porters and washwomen— | 
though they weren’t nearly so much fun as the folks 
they tried to scorn. Sandy liked Cudge Windsor or | 
Jap Logan better than he did Dr. Mitchell, who had | 
been to college — and never forgotten it. 
Sandy wondered if Booker T. Washington had — 
278 


THE DOORS OF LIFE 
been like Tempy’s friends? Or if Dr. Du Bois was a 
snob just because he was a college man? He wondered 
if those two men had a good time being great. Booker 
T. was dead, but he had left a living school in the 
South. Maybe he could teach in the South, too, Sandy 
thought, if he ever learned enough. Did colored folks 


need to know the things he was studying in books now? 
_ Did French and Latin and Shakespeare make people 
_ wise and happy? Jap Logan never went beyond the 
, seventh grade and he was happy. And Jimboy never 
|| attended school much either. Maybe school didn’t mat- 
‘| ter. Yet to get a good job you had to be smart — and 
| white, too. That was the trouble, you had to be white! 


“But I want to learn!” thought Sandy as he lay 


Fbawake in the dark after he had gone to bed at night. 


“I want to go to college. I want to go to Europe and 


_ study. ‘ Work and make ready and maybe your chance 


will come,’ it said under the picture of Lincoln on the 
calendar given away by the First National Bank, where 
Karl, his white friend, already had a job promised him 
when he came out of school. . . . It was not nearly 
so difficult for white boys. They could work at any- 
thing —in stores, on newspapers, in offices. They 
could become president of the United States if they 
were clever enough. But a colored boy. . . . No 
wonder Buster was going to pass for white anet he 
left Stanton. | 
*T don’t blame him,” thought Sandy. “ Sometimes 


_ I hate white people, too, like Aunt Harrie used to say 
she did. Still, some of them are pretty decent — my 


279 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


English-teacher, and Mr. Prentiss where I work. Yet | 
even Mr. Prentiss wouldn’t give me a job clerking in| 
his shop. All I can do there is run errands and scrub }. 
the floor when everybody else is gone. There’s no ad- 
vancement for colored fellows. If they start as por- | 
ters, they stay porters for ever and they can’t come | 
up. Being colored is like being born in the basement - 
of life, with the door to the light locked and barred — }\1 
and the white folks live upstairs. They don’t want us | 
up there with them, even when we’re respectable like }; 
Dr. Mitchell, or smart like Dr. Du Bois. . . . And {}] 
guys like Jap Logan —well, Jap don’t care anyway! | 
Maybe it’s best not to care, and stay poor and meek | 
waiting for heaven like Aunt Hager did. . . . But I. 
don’t want heaven! I want to live first!” Sandy | 
thought. “‘I want to live!” | 
He understood then why many old Negroes said: 
Take all this world and give me Jesus!” It was be- 
cause they couldn’t get this world anyway —it be-— 
longed to the white folks. They alone had the power | 
to give or withhold at their back doors. Always back 
doors—even for Tempy and Dr. Mitchell if they 
chose to go into Wright’s Hotel or the New Albert Res- | 
taurant. And no door at all for Negroes if they wanted — 
to attend the Rialto Theatre, or join the Stanton Y. M. — 
C. A., or work behind the grilling at the National — 
Bank. | 
The Doors of Life. . . . God damn that simple- 
minded book that Tempy had given him! What did an | 
old white minister know about the doors of life for. 
280 | 


| THE DOORS OF LIFE 

| him and Pansetta and Jimmy Lane, for Willie-Mae 
| and Buster and Jap Logan and all the black and brown 
. and yellow youngsters standing on the threshold of the 
- great beginning in a Western town called Stanton? 
What did an old white minister know about the doors 
»| of life anywhere? And, least of all, the doors to a 
t} Negro’s life? . . . Black youth. . . . Dark hands 
knocking, knocking! Pansetta’s little brown hands 
knocking on the doors of life! Baby-doll hands, tiny 
_autumn-leaf girl-hands! ... Gee, Pansetta! ... 
| The Doors of Life . .. the great big doors... . 
J Sandy was asleep . . . of life. 

| 


j 


: 
| 


281 


RRR AAAAR 


TWENTY-SEVEN 
BEWARE OF WOMEN 


Ee EEE BAIS 


for it. You'll have to mend your ways, young 
man! Spending your evenings in Windsor’s pool 
parlor and running the streets with a gang of common 
boys that have had no raising, that Jimmy Lane among 
them. I won’t stand for it while you stay in my house. 
. - - But that’s not the worst of it. Mr. Prentiss tells 
me you ve been getting to work late after school three 
times this week. And what have you been doing? O, 
don’t think I don’t know! I saw you with my own 
eyes yesterday walking home with that girl Pansetta 
Young! . . . Well, I want you to understand that I 
won't have it! ” 
** T didn’t walk home with her,” said Sandy. “I only 
go part way with her every day. She’s in my class in 
high school and we have to talk over our lessons. She’s 


the only colored kid in my class I have to talk to.” 
282 


I WON'T permit it,” said Tempy. “I won’t stand 


BEWARE OF WOMEN 


>) 


“‘Lessons! Yes, I know it’s lessons,” said Tempy 
sarcastically. “If she were a girl of our own kind, 
it would be all right. I don’t see why you don’t asso- 
ciate more with the young people of the church. Marie 
Steward or Grace Mitchell are both nice girls and 
you don’t notice them. No, you have to take up with 
this Pansetta, whose mother works out all day, leaving 
her daughter to do as she chooses. Well, she’s not going 
to ruin you, after all I’ve done to try to make some- 

thing out of you.” 

“Beware of women, son,” said Mr. Siles pontifi- 
cally from his deep morris-chair. It was one of his 
few evenings home and Tempy had asked him to talk 
to her nephew, who had gotten beyond her control, for 
Sandy no longer remained in at night even when she 
expressly commanded it; and he no longer attended 
church regularly, but slept on Sunday mornings in- 
stead. He kept up his school-work, it was true, but he 
seemed to have lost all interest in acquiring the re- 
spectable bearing and attitude towards life that Tempy 
thought he should have. She bought him fine clothes 
and he went about with ruffians. 

“In other words, he has been acting just like a 
nigger, Mr. Siles! ” she told her husband. “ And he’s 
taken up with a girl who’s not of the best, to say the 
least, even if she does go to the high school. Mrs. 
Francis Cannon, who lives near her, tells me that this 
Pansetta has boys at her house all the time, and her 
mother is never at home until after dark. She’s a cook 
or something somewhere. . . . A fine person for a 

283 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


nephew of ours to associate with, this Pansy daughter |" 


of hers! ”’ 


“Pansetta’s a nice girl,” said Sandy. “‘ And she’s j“! 
smart in school, too. She helps me get my Latin every }" 


day, and I might fail if she didn’t.” 


“Huh! It’s little help you need with your Latin, jin 


young man! Bring it here and [ll help you. I had | 


Latin when I was in school. And certainly you don’t |: 
need to walk on the streets with her in order to study | 


Latin, do you? First thing you know you'll be getting 
in trouble with her and she’! be having a baby —I see 
I have to be plain—and whether it’s yours or not, 


she'll say it is. Common girls like that always want to }' 


marry a boy they think is going to amount to some- 
thing — going to college and be somebody in the 
world. Besides, you’re from the Williams family 
and you're good-looking! But I’m going to stop this 
affair right now. ... From now on you are to © 
leave that girl alone, do you understand me? She’s 
dangerous! ” 

* Yes,” grunted Mr. Siles. ‘‘ She’s dangerous.” 

Angry and confused, Sandy left the room and went 
upstairs to bed, but he could not sleep. What right 
had they to talk that way about his friends? Besides, 
what did they mean about her being dangerous? About 
his getting in trouble with her? About her wanting to 
marry him because her mother was a cook and he was 
going to college? 

A white boy in Sandy’s high-school class had “ got 
in trouble” with an Italian girl and they had had to go 

284, 


BEWARE OF WOMEN 


to the juvenile court to fix it up, but it had been kept 
_ quiet. Even now Sandy couldn’t quite give an exact 
explanation of what getting in trouble with a girl 
meant. Did a girl have to have a baby just because a 
fellow walked home with her when he didn’t even go 
in? Pansetta had asked him into her house often, but 
_ he always had to go back uptown to work. He was due 
at work at four o’clock — besides he knew it wasn’t 
| quite correct to call on a young lady if her mother was 
not at home. But it wasn’t necessarily bad, was it? And 
| how could a girl have a baby and say it was his if it 
_ wasn’t his? Why couldn’t he talk to his Aunt Tempy 
about such things and get a clear and simple answer 
| instead of being given an old book like The Doors of 
| Life that didn’t explain anything at all? 
_. Pansetta hadn’t said a word to him about babies, or 
_ anything like that, but she let him kiss her once and 
_ hold her on his lap at Sadie Butler’s Christmas party. 
_ Gee, but she could kiss—and such a long time! He 
_ wouldn’t care if she did make him marry her, only he 
_ wanted to travel first. If his mother would send for 
him now, he would like to go to Chicago. His Aunt 
_ Tempy was too cranky, and too proper. She didn’t like 
| any of his friends, and she hated the pool hall. But 
_ where else was there for a fellow to play? Who wanted 
to go to those high-toned people’s houses, like the 
Mitchells’, and look bored all the time while they put 
Caruso’s Italian records on their new victrola? Even _ 
if it was the finest victrola owned by a Negro in Stan- 
ton, as they always informed you, Sandy got tired of 
: 285 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
listening to records in a language that none of them 
understood. 
“But this is opera! ” they said. Well, maybe it was, 
but he thought that his father and Harriett used to sing 
better. And they sang nicer songs. One of them was: 


Love, O love, O careless love — 
Goes to your head like wine! 


“And maybe I really am in love with Pansetta. 
. . . But if she thinks she can fool me into marrying 
her before I’ve travelled all around the world, like my 
father, she’s wrong,” Sandy thought. “She can’t trick 
me, not this kid!” Then he was immediately sorry 
that he had allowed Tempy’s insinuations to influence 
his thoughts. 

“Pretty, baby-faced Pansetta! Why, she wouldn’t 
try to trick anybody into anything. If she wanted me 
to love her, she’d let me, but she wouldn’t try to trick 
a fellow. She wouldn’t let me love her that way any- 
how — like Tempy meant. Gee, that was ugly of Aunt 
Tempy to say that! . . . But Buster said she would. 
. . . Aw, he always talked that way about girls! He 
said no women were any good —as if he knew! And 
Jimmy Lane said white women were worse than 
colored — but all the boys who worked at hotels 
said that.” 

Let ’em talk! Sandy liked Pansetta anyhow. . .. 
But maybe his Aunt Tempy was right! Maybe he had 
better stop walking home with her. He didn’t want to 

236 


BEWARE OF WOMEN 
| ‘get in trouble” and not be able to travel to Chicago 
some time, where his mother was. Maybe he could go 
. »0 Chicago next summer if he began to save his money 
; aow. He wanted to see the big city, where the buildings 
- vere like towers, the trains ran overhead, and the lake 
vas like a sea. He didn’t want to “ get in trouble” 
vith Pansetta even if he did like her. Besides, he had 
10 live with Tempy for awhile yet and he hated to be 

quarreiling with his aunt all the time. He’d stop going 
0 the pool hall so much and stay home at night and 
, [tudy. . . . But, heck! it was too beautiful out of 
loors to stay in the house — especially since spring 
- iad come! 

_ Through his open window, as he lay in bed after 
» Tempy’s tirade about the girl, he could see the stars 

ind the tops of the budding maple-trees. A cool earth- 
smelling breeze lifted the white curtains, scattering the 
' zeometry papers that he had left lying on his study 
able. He got out of bed to pick up the papers 
-jind put them away, and stood for a moment in 
us pyjamas looking out of the window at the roofs of 
_|he houses and the tops of the trees under the night 
iky. 
“T wish I had a brother,” Sandy thought as he 
tood there. “ Maybe I could talk to him about things 
; ind I wouldn’t have to think so much. It’s no fun being 
he only kid in the family, and your father never home 
sither. . . . When I get married, I’m gonna have a 
ot of children; then they won’t have to grow up by 
nemselves.” 


287 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 

The next day after school he walked nearly home| 
with Pansetta as usual, although he was still thinking | 
of what Tempy had said, but he hadn’t decided to obey | 
his aunt yet. At the corner of the block in which the’ 
girl lived, he gave her her books. 
“T got to beat it back to the shop now. Old man | 
Prentiss’ ll have a dozen deliveries waiting for me 
just because I’m late.” 
All right,” said Pansetta 1 in her sweet little voice. : 


Wouldn’ t you make more money there? ” | 
“Guess I would,” replied | the boy. “But my nt | | 
thinks it’s better where I am.’ 


last bre and he’s + lots on money at the hotel. } 
He wanted to meet me around to school this ea 
but I told him no. I said you took me home.” | 
“TI do,” said Sandy. i 
“Yes,” laughed Pansetta; “but I didn’t tell him 


you wouldn’t ever come in.” 


During the sunny spring weeks that followed, Sandy | 
did not walk home with her any more after school. — 
Having to go to work earlier was the excuse he gavel 1 


288 


BEWARE OF WOMEN 


‘nome in the afternoons. To see other fellows buying 
ner ice-cream and walking home with her made Sandy 
angry, but it was his own fault, he thought. And he 
felt lonesome having no one to walk with after classes. 
_ Pansetta, in school, was just as pleasant as before, 
but in a kind of impersonal way, as though she hadn’t 
‘been his girl once. And now Sandy was worried, be- 
jause it had been easy to drop her, but would it be 
easy to get her back again if he should want her? The 
po boys had money, and once or twice he saw her 
jtalking with Jimmy Lane. Gee, but she looked pretty 
in her thin spring dresses and her wide straw hat. 

_ Why had he listened to Tempy at all? She didn’t 
know Pansetta, and just because her mother worked 
out in service she wanted him to snub the girl. What 
was that to be afraid of —her mother not being home 
after school? Even if Pansetta would let him go in| 
the house with her and put his arms around her and 
love her, why shouldn’t he? Didn’t he have a right to 
have a girl like that, as well as the other fellows? 
Didn’t he have a right to be free with women, too, like 
all the rest of the young men? .. . But Pansetta 
wasn’t that kind of girl! . . . What made his mind 
run away with him? Because of what Tempy had said? 
. .. To hell with Tempy! 

_ “She’s just an old-fashioned darky Episcopalian, 
‘that’s what Tempy is! And she wanted me to drop 
Pansetta: because her mother doesn’t belong to the 
Dunbar Whist Club. Gee, but I’m ashamed of myself. 
Tm a cad and a snob, that’s all [ am, and I’m going 
| 289 

| 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
to apologize.” Subconsciously he was living over 4) 
scene from an English novel he had read at the 
printing-shop, in which the Lord dropped the Squire’s, 
daughter for a great Lady, but later returned to his, 
first love. Sandy retained the words “cad” andj 
“snob” in his vocabulary, but he wasn’t thinking of| 
the novel now. He really believed, after three weeks) 
of seeing Pansetta walking with other boys, that he 
had done wrong, and that Tempy was the pari | 


boys on the corner waiting for her as she went out 
Now he could have kicked himself for his neglect, he 
ena as he cleaned the rear room of Mr. Prentiss’: | 


fore I go home to supper. Gee, but I’m satel of 
the way I’ve treated her.” 
On the way to Pansetta’s house the lawns looked 
fresh and green and on some of them tulips were 
290 


BEWARE OF WOMEN 


/ looming. The late afternoon sky was aglow with sun- 
‘et. Little boys were out in the streets with marbles 
ind tops, and little giris were jumping rope on the 
‘idewalks. Workmen were coming home, empty 


_ “T must hurry,” the boy thought. “It will soon be 
ur supper-time.”” He ran until he was at Pansetta’s 
iouse —then came the indecision: Should he go in? 
" Jr not go in? He was ashamed of his treatment of her 
ind embarrassed. Should he go on by as if he had not 
neant to call? Suppose she shut the door in his face! 


auny more. He wanted to be friends with Pansetta 
igain. He wanted her to know he still liked her and 
wanted to walk home with her. But how could he say 
'/t? Had she seen him from the window? Maybe he 
‘sould turn around and go back, and see her Monday 
at school. 

“No! I’m not a coward,” he declared. “‘ Afraid of 
a girl! [ll walk right up on the front porch and 
‘snock!”’ But the small house looked very quiet and 


20 one home. . . . Yes, he heard somebody. 
Finally Pansetta peeped through the curtains of the 
zlass in the front door. Then she opened the door and 


brown skin pink from the warm blood pulsing just 
291 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


under the surface. Her eyes were dark and luminous, | 
and her lips were moist and red. 

“It’s Sandy! ” she said, turning to address someone ier 
inside the front room. pi 

“O, come in, old man,” a boy’s voice called in a/ 
tone of forced welcome, and Sandy saw Jimmy Lane! 
sitting on the couch adjusting his collar self-| 
consciously. “‘ How’s everything, old scout? ” | 

All right,” Sandy stammered. “Say, Pansy, I—}) 
I— Do you know — I mean, what is the subject we’re | 
supposed to write on for English Monday? I must off 
forgotten to take it down.” 


“Why, ‘ A Trip to Shakespeare’s England.’ That’ ’ 


. Won't you a dine is 
i No, thanks, ’ve— I guess I got to get back to 
supper.” 
* Jesus!” cried Jimmy jumping up from the cofal 


hotel. Roe I’m behind time!” He picked up his coat 
from the floor, and Pansetta held it for him while he’ 


meanwhile for his cap, which lay among the sofa-| 
pillows. Then he kissed the girl carelessly on the lips: 
as he slid one arm familiarly around her waist. 

“So long, baby,” he said, and the two boys went 
out. On the porch Jimmy lit a cigarette and passed the 
pack to Sandy. 

Jimmy Lane looked and acted as if he were much. 

292 


BEWARE OF WOMEN 

older than his companion, but Jimmy had been out of 
school several years, and hopping bells taught a fel- 
low a great deal more about life than books did — and 
also about women. Besides, he was supporting him- 


s 


When they had walked about a block, the bell-boy 
said carelessly: “‘ Pansetta can go! Can’t she, man?” 

“T don’t know,” said Sandy. 

“Aw, boy, you’re lying,” Jimmy Lane returned. 
6 Don’t try to hand me that kid stuff! You had her for 
a year, didn’t you? ”’ 

“Yes,” replied Sandy slowly, “but not like you 
,);mean.”” 

“Stop kidding,” Jimmy insisted. 

“No, honest, I never touched her that way,” the 
boy said. “I never was at her house before.” 

Jimmy opened his mouth astonished. “‘ What!” he 
| exclaimed. “ And her old lady out working till eight 
and nine every night! Say, Sandy, we’re friends, but 
| you're either just a big liar — or else a God-damn 
1 fool! ” He threw his cigarette away and put both hands 
in his pockets. “‘ Pansetta’s easy as hell, man!” 


<—o 


293 


TWENTY-EIGHT 


CHICAGO 


eee ee VVIVVY 


CHICAGO, Iut.| 
May 16, 1918. 


EAR SANDY: 
Have just come home from work and am_ 
very tired but thought I would write you this _ 
letter right now while I had time and wasn’t sleepy. | 
You are a big boy and I think you can be of some. 
help to me. I don’t want you to stay in Stanton any | 
longer as a burden on your Aunt Tempy. She says. 
in her letters you have begun to stay out late nights _ 
and not pay her any mind. You ought to be with 
your mother now because you are all she has since 
I do not know what has happened to your father in | 
France. The war is awful and so many mens are} 
getting killed. Have not had no word from Jimboy | 
for 7 months from Over There and am worried till 
I’m sick. Will try and send you how much money | 
you need for your fare before the end of the month. 
so when school is out in june you can come. Let me_ 
know how much you saved and I will send you the | 
294, | 


CHICAGO 


rest to come to Chicago because Mr. Harris where 
I stay is head elevator man at a big hotel in the 
Loop and he says he can put you on there in July. 
That will be a good job for you and maybe by sav- 
ing your money you can go back to school in Sept. 
I will help you if I can but you will have to help 
me too because I have not been doing so well. Am 
working for a colored lady in her hair dressing 
parlor and am learning hairdressing myself, sham- 
poo and straighten and give massauges on the face 
and all. But colored folks are hard people to work 
for. Madam King is from down south somewhere 
and these southern Negroes are not like us in their 
ways, but she seems to like me. Mr. Harris is from 
the south too in a place called Baton Rouge. They 
eat rice all the time. Well I must close hoping to 
see you soon once more because it has been five 
years since I have looked at my child. With love 
to you and Tempy, be a good boy, 
Your mother, 
Annjelica Rogers. 


A week later another letter came to Sandy from his 
mother. This time it was a registered special-delivery, 
which said: “If you’ll come right away you can get 
your job at once. Mr. Harris says he will have a 
vacancy Saturday because one of the elevator boys 
are quitting.”’ And sufficient bills to cover Sandy’s fare 
tumbled out. 

With a tremendous creaking and grinding and 

295 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


steady clacking of wheels the long train went roaring | 
through the night towards Chicago as Sandy, ina day | 
coach, took from his pocket Annjee’s two letters and | 


re-read them for the tenth time since leaving Stanton. 


He could hardly believe himself actually at that mo- 


ment on the way to Chicago! 


In the stuffy coach papers littered the floor and the | 
scent of bananas and human feet filled the car. The | 
lights were dim and most of the passengers slumbered | 
in the straight-backed green-plush seats, but Sandy | 
was still awake. The thrill of his first all-night rail 
journey and his dream-expectations of the great city | 
were too much to allow a sixteen-year-old boy to go © 
calmly to sleep, although the man next to him had | 


long been snoring. 


Annjee’s special-delivery letter had come that morn- | 


ing. Sandy had discovered it when he came home for 


lunch, and upon his return to the high schoo! for the | 
afternoon classes he went at once to the principal to | 
inquire if he might be excused from the remaining 


days of the spring term. 


“Let me see! Your record’s pretty good, isn’t it, 
Rogers?” said Professor Perkins looking over his — 
glasses at the young colored fellow standing before © 
him. “Going to Chicago, heh? Well, I guess we can || 


let you transfer and give you full credit for this year’s 


work without your waiting here for the examinations | 
— there are only ten days or so of the term remaining. | 
You are an honor student and would get through your © 
exams all right. Now, if you'll just send us your ad- 


296 


CHICAGO 
dress when you get to Chicago, we'll see that you get 
your report. . . . Intending to go to school there, 
are you? ... Thai’s right! I like to see your people 
get ahead. . . . Well, good luck to you, James.” The 
old gentleman rose and held out his hand. 
“Good old scout,” thought Sandy. “ Miss Fry was 


| a good teacher, too! Some white folks are nice all 
_ right! Not all of them are mean. . . . Gee, old man 


Prentiss hated to see me quit his place. Said I was 
the best boy he ever had working there, even if I was 
late once in awhile. But I don’t mind leaving Stanton. 
Gee, Chicago ought to be great! And I’m sure glad to 
get away from Tempy’s house. She’s too tight! ” 

But Tempy had not been glad to see her nephew 
leave. She had grown fond of the boy in spite of her 
almost nightly lectures to him recently on his be- 
havior and in spite of his never having become her 
model youth. Not that he was bad, but he might have 
been so much better! She wanted to show her white 
neighbors a perfect colored boy —and such a boy 
certainly wouldn’t be a user of slang, a lover of pool 
halls and non-Episcopalian ways. Tempy had given 
Sandy every opportunity to move in the best colored 


society and he had not taken advantage of it. Neverthe- 


less, she cried a little as she packed a lunch for him to 

eat on the train. She had done all she could. He was a 

good-looking boy, and quite smart. Now, if he wanted. 

to go to his mother, well — “‘I can only hope Chicago 

won't ruin you,” she said. “It’s a wicked city! 

Goodbye, James. Remember what I’ve tried to teach 
207 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


you. Stand up straight and look like you’re some- | 
body! ” 
Stanton, Sandy’s Kansas home, was back in the | 
darkness, and the train sped towards the great center 
where all the small-town boys in the whole Middle | 
West wanted to go. | 
“Pm going now! ” thought Sandy. “ Chicago now!” | 
A few weeks past he had gone to see Sister Johnson, | 
who was quite feeble with the rheumatism. As she | 
sat in the corner of her kitchen smoking a corn-cob | 
pipe, no longer able to wash clothes, but still able to || 
keep up a rapid flow of conversation, she told him all | 
the news. 
“Tom, he’s still at de bank keepin’ de furnace goin’ | 
an’ sorto’ handy man. . . . Willie-Mae, I ’spects you 
knows, is figurin’ on gettin’ married next month to | 
Mose Jenkins, an’ I tells her she better stay single, | 
young as she is, but she ain’t payin’ me no mind. © 
Umn-unh! Jest let her go on! . . . Did you heerd | 
Sister Whiteside’s daughter done brought her third | 
husband home to stay wid her ma—an’ five o’ her | 
first husband’s chillens there too? Gals ain’t got no 
regard for de old folks. Sister Whiteside say if she | 
warn’t a Christian in her heart, she don’t believe she | 
could stand it! . . . I tells Willie-Mae she better not 
bring no husbands here to stay wid me — do an’ Il 
run him out! These mens ought be shame o’ demselves | 
comin’ livin’ on de womenfolks.” | 
As the old woman talked, Sandy, thinking of his | 
grandmother, gazed out of the window towards the | 
298 


CHICAGO 


_ house next door, where he had lived with Aunt Hager. 


ee 


Some small children were playing in the back yard, 


running and yelling. They belonged to the Southern 
family to whom Tempy had rented the place... . 
| Madam de Carter, who still owned the second house, 


had been made a national grand officer in the women’s 
division of the lodge and many of the members of the 
order now had on the walls of their homes a large pic- 
ture of her dressed in full regalia, inscribed: “* Yours 
in His Grace,” and signed: “‘ Madam Fannie Rosalie 
de Carter.” 

“Used to be just plain old Rose Carter befo’ she got 


so important,” said Sister Johnson, explaining her 
— neighbor’s lengthy name. “All these womens dey 


mammy named Jane an’ Mary an’ Cora, soon’s dey 


_ gets a little somethin’, dey changes dey names to 
_ Janette or Mariana or Corina or somethin’ mo’ 
| flowery then what dey had. Willie-Mae say she gwine 
_ change her’n to Willetta-Mayola, an’ I tole her if she 
| do, PU beat her —don’t care how old she is!” 


Sandy liked to listen to the rambling talk of old 
colored folks. “‘ I guess there won’t be many like that 


| in Chicago,” he thought, as he doubled back his long 


legs under the green-plush seat of the day coach. 
** T better try to get to sleep — there’s a long ways to 
go until morning.” 


Although it was not yet June, the heat was terrific 
when, with the old bags that Tempy had given him, 
Sandy got out of the dusty train in Chicago and walked 

299 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


the length of the sheds into the station. He caught sight | 
of his mother waiting in the crowd, a fatter and much | 
older woman than he had remembered her to be; and | 
at first she didn’t know him among the stream of peo- | 
ple coming from the train. Perhaps, unconsciously, she | 
was looking for the little boy she left in Stanton; but |, 
Sandy was taller than Annjee now and he looked quite |} 
a young man in his blue serge suit with long trousers. | 
His mother threw both plump arms around him and | 


hugged and kissed him for a long time. 


They went uptown in the street-cars, Annjee a trifle || 


out of breath from helping with the bags, and both 


of them perspiring freely from the heat. And they | 


were not very talkative either. A strange and unex- 
pected silence seemed to come between them. Annjee 
had been away from her son for five growing years 


and he was no longer her baby boy, small and eager | 
for a kiss. She could see from the little cuts on his | 
face that he had even begun to shave on the chin. And — 


his voice was like a man’s, deep and musical as Jim- 
boy’s, but not so sure of itself. 

But Sandy was not thinking of his mother as they 
rode uptown on the street-car. He was looking out of 
the windows at the blocks of dirty grey warehouses 
lining the streets through which they were passing. 
He hadn’t expected the great city to be monotonous 
and ugly like this and he was vaguely disappointed. 
No towers, no dreams come true! Where were the 
thrilling visions of grandeur he had held? Hidden in 


the dusty streets? Hidden in the long, hot alleys | 


300 


CHICAGO 


‘through which he could see at a distance the tracks 
of the elevated trains? 


“* Street-cars are slower, but I ain’t got used to them 


» air lines yet,” said Annjee, searching her mind for 


‘something to say. “I always think maybe them ele- 


j vated cars’ll fall off o’ there sometimes. They go 
i so fast! ” 


“I believe I’'d rather ride on them, though,” said 


_ Sandy, as he looked at the monotonous box-like tene- 


) ments and dismal alleys on the ground level. No trees, 


a 


“no yards, no grass such as he had known at home, and 


yet, on the other hand, no bigness or beauty about 
the bleak warehouses and sorry shops that hugged the 
sidewalk. Soon, however, the street began to take on a 
racial aspect and to become more darkly alive. Ne- 
groes leaned from windows with heads uncombed, or 


_ sat fanning in doorways with legs apart, talking in 


kimonos and lounging in overalls, and more and more 


_ they became a part of the passing panorama. 


“This is State Street,” said Annjee. ‘They call it 


_ the Black Belt. We have to get off in a minute. You 
- got your suit-case? ” 


She rang the bell and at Thirty-seventh Street they 


| walked over to Wabash Avenue. The cool shade of the 


_ tiny porch that Annjee mounted was more than wel- 


come, and as she took out her key to unlock the front 
door, Sandy sat on the steps and mopped his fore-. 
head with a grimy handkerchief. Inside, there was a 
dusky gloom in the hallway, that smelled of hair-oil 
and cabbage steaming. 

301 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER | 

‘Guess Mis’ Harris is in the kitchen,” said Annjee. |) 
“Come on — we'll go upstairs and [ll show you our |° 
room. I guess we can both stay together till we can do | 


better. You’re still little enough to sleep with your }| 


mother, ain’t you? ” ! 
They went down the completely dark hall on the }! 
second floor, and his mother opened a door that led 


into a rear room with two windows looking out into }' 


the alley, giving an extremely near view of the elevated | 
structure on which a downtown train suddenly rushed | 


past with an ear-splitting roar that made the entire |}. 


house tremble and the window-sashes rattle. There was | 


a wash-stand with a white bowl and pitcher in the | 


room, Annjee’s trunk, a chair, and a brass bed, cov- 
ered with a fresh spread and starched pillow-covers | 
in honor of Sandy’s arrival. | 
“See,” said Annjee. “There’s room enough for us | 
both, and we'll be saving rent. There’s no closet, but — 
we can drive a few extra nails behind the door. And © 
with the two windows we can get plenty of air these | 
hot nights.” 
“It’s nice, mama,”’ Sandy said, but he had to re- 
peat his statement twice, because another L train thun- | 
dered past so that he couldn’t hear his own words as 
he uttered them. “‘ It’s awful nice, mama! ” | 
He took off his coat and sat down on the trunk be- | 
tween the two windows. Annjee came over and kissed 
him, rubbing her hand across his crinkly brown hair. | 
“Well, you’re a great big boy now. .. . Mama’s | 
baby — in long pants. And you’re handsome, just like | 
302 


) 


| 
f 
# 
| 


4 


! 


| 


CHICAGO 


your father!’ She had Jimboy’s picture stuck in a 


corner of the wash-stand—a postcard photo in his 
army uniform, in which he looked very boyish and 


‘| proud, sent from the training-camp before his com- 


pany went to France. “‘ But I got no time to be setting 


|| here petting you, Sandy, even if you have just come. 


I got to get on back to the hairdressing-parlor to make 
some money.” 

So Annjee went to work again—as she had been 
off only long enough to meet the train—and Sandy 
lay down on the bed and slept the hot afternoon away. 


_ That evening as a treat they had supper at a restaurant, 
_ where Annjee picked carefully from the cheap menu 


so that their bill wouldn’t be high. 

** But don’t think this is regular. We can’t afford it,” 
she said. “I bring things home and fix them on an oil- 
stove in the room and spread papers on the trunk for 
a table. A restaurant supper’s just in honor of you.” 

When they came back to the house that evening, 
Sandy was introduced to Mrs. Harris, their landlady, 
and to her husband, the elevator-starter, who was to 
give him the job at the hotel. 

“That’s a fine-looking boy you got there, Mis’ 
Rogers,” he said, appraising Sandy. “ He’ll do pretty 
well for one of them main lobby cars, since we don’t 
use nothing but first-class intelligent help down where 
I am, like I told you. And we has only the best class 0” 
white folks stoppin’ there, too. . . . Be up at six in 
the mornin’, buddy, and I'll take you downtown 
with me.” 

303 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
Annjee was tired, so they went upstairs to the back 


room and lit the gas over the bed, but the frequent roar_ |! 


of the L trains prevented steady conversation and | 
made Sandy jump each time that the long chain of | 
cars thundered by. He hadn’t yet become accustomed | 
to them, or to the vast humming of the city, which was | 
strange to his small-town ears. And he wanted to go | 
out and look around a bit, to walk up and down the 
streets at night and see what they were like. 

“Well, go on if you want to,” said his mother, “ but 
don’t forget this house number. [’m gonna lie down, || 
but I guess Pll be awake when you come back. Or | 
somebody’ll be setting on the porch and the door’ll | 
be open.” 

At the corner Sandy stopped and looked around |! 
to be sure of his bearings when he returned. He © 
marked in his mind the sign-board advertising 


CHESTERFIELDS and the frame-house with the tumble- — 


down stairs on the outside. In the street some kids were 


playing hopscotch under the arc-light. Somebody ie 


stopped beside him. | 

“Nice evening? ” said a small yellow man with a — 
womanish kind of voice, smiling at Sandy. 

“Yes,” said the boy, starting across the street, but 
the stranger followed him, offering Pall Malls. He 
smelled of perfume, and his face looked as though it © 
had been powdered with white talcum as he lit a tiny | 
pocket-lighter. | 

“Stranger?” murmured the soft voice, lighting | 
Sandy’s cigarette. | ¥ 

304, 


CHICAGO 


““T’m from Stanton,” he replied, wishing the man 
thad not chosen to walk with him. 

“‘ Ah, Kentucky,” exclaimed the perfumed fellow. 
‘*T been down there. Nice women in that town, heh?” 

“But it’s not Kentucky,” Sandy objected. “ It’s 
Kansas.” 

_ “Qh, out west where the girls are raring to go! I 
|! know! Just like wild horses out there — so passionate, 
| aren’t they?” 

, I guess so,” Sandy ventured. The powdered voice 
| was softly persistent. 

“Say, kid,” it whispered smoothly, touching the 
boy’s arm, “ listen, I got some swell French pictures 
up in my room — naked women and everything! Want 
to come up and see them? ” 

“No,” said Sandy quickening his pace. “I got to 

go somewhere.” 

* But I room right around the corner,” the voice 
insisted. “‘Come on by. You’re a nice kid, you know 
it? Listen, don’t walk so fast. Stop, let me talk to 
you.” | 

But Sandy was beginning to understand. A warm 
sweat broke out on his neck and forehead. Some- 
times, at the pool hall in Stanton, he had heard the 
men talk about queer fellows who stopped boys in 
the streets and tried to coax them to their rooms. 

“He thinks I’m dumb,” thought Sandy, “but I’m 
wise to him!’ Yet he wondered what such men did 
with the boys who accompanied them. Curious, he’d 
like to find out— but he was afraid; so at the next 

305 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


corner he turned and started rapidly towards State | 
Street, but the queer fellow kept close beside him, | 
begging. | 

«|, . and we'll have a nice time. . . . I got wine | 
in the room, if you want some, and a vic, too.” 

“Get away, will you!” 

They had reached State Street where the lights were | 
bright and people were passing all the time. Sandy | 
could see the fellow’s anxious face quite clearly now. | 

“Listen, kid . . . you . 

But suddenly Ae man was no silo beside him — 
for Sandy commenced to run. On the brighily lighted 
avenue panic seized him. He had to escape this pow- 
dered face at his shoulder. The whining voice made 
him sick inside — and, almost without knowing it, 
his legs began swerving swiftly between the crowds 
along the curb. When he stopped in front of the 
Monogram Theatre, two blocks away, he was freed of 
his companion. 

* Gee, that’s nice,” panted Sandy, grinning as he 
stood looking at the pictures in front of the vaudeville 
house, while hundreds of dark people passed up and 
down on the sidewalk behind him. Lots of folks were 
going into the theatre, laughing and pushing, for one 
of the great blues-singing Smiths was appearing there. 
Sandy walked towards the ticket-booth to see what the 
prices were. 

“ Buy mea ticket, will you? ” said a feminine voice 
beside him. This time it was a girl—a very ugly, 
skinny girl, whose smile revealed a row of dirty teeth. 

306 


CHICAGO 
‘She sidled up to the startled boy whom she had ac- 
costed and took his hand. 

“Tm not going in,” Sandy said shortly, as he 
backed away, wiping the palm of his hand on his 
_coat-sleeve. 

“ All right then, stingy! ” hissed the girl, flouncing 
her hips and digging into her own purse for the coins 
to buy a ticket. “I got money.” 

Some men standing on the edge of the sidewalk 
laughed as Sandy went up the street. A little black 
) child in front of him toddled along in the crowd, seem- 
ingly by itself, licking a big chocolate ice-cream cone 
that dripped down the front of its dress. 

So this was Chicago where the buildings were like 
towers and the lake was like a sea . . . State Street, 
the greatest Negro street in the world, where people 
were always happy, lights for ever bright; and where 
the prettiest brown-skin women on earth could be 
found — so the men in Stanton said. 

“T guess I didn’t walk the right way. But maybe 
tomorrow I’II see other things,” Sandy thought, “ the 
Loop and the lake and the museum and the library. 

- Maybe they’ll be better.” 

He turned into a side street going back towards 
Wabash Avenue. It was darker there, and near the 
alley a painted woman a him, stepping out from 
among the shadows. 

** Say, baby, com’ere! ” But the boy went on. 

Crossing overhead an L train thundered by, flashing 
its flow of yellow light on the pavement beneath, 

307 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 

Sandy turned into Wabash Avenue and cut across 
the street. As he approached the colored Y. M. C. A., | 
three boys came out with swimming suits on their | 
arms, and one of them said: “ Damn, but it’s hot!” | 
They went up the street laughing and talking with | 
friendly voices, and at the corner they turned off. 
-“T must be nearly home,” Sandy thought, as he (f 
made out a group of kids still playing under the street- 
light. Then he distinguished, among the other shabby | 
buildings, the brick house where he lived. The front | 
porch was still crowded with roomers trying to keep 
cool, and as the boy came up to the foot of the steps, . 
some of the fellows seated there moved to let him pass. | 

** Good-evenin’, Mr. Rogers,” Mrs. Harris called, 
and as Sandy had never been called Mr. Rogers be- | 
fore, it made him feel very manly and a little em- | 
barrassed as he threaded his way through the group | 
on the porch. | 

Upstairs he found his mother sleeping deeply on }. 
one side of the bed. He undressed, keeping on his } 
underwear, and crawled in on the other side, but he |} 
lay awake a long while because it was suffocatingly } 


hot, and very close in their room. The bed-bugs bit him} 


on the legs. Every time he got half asleep, an L train } 
roared by, shrieking outside their open windows, 
lighting up the room, and shaking the whole house. 
Each time the train came, he started and trembled 
as though a sudden dragon were rushing at the bed. But | 
then, after midnight, when the elevated cars passed | 
less frequently, and he became more used to their — 
passing, he went to sleep. | 

308 


fe Ke fe fe fe GG Gk GG 


TWENTY-NINE 
ELEVATOR 


CEE ECE VIVIIS 


T HE following day Sandy went to work as ele- 
| vator-boy at the hotel in the Loop where Mr. 
| Harris was head bellman, and during the hot 
summer months that followed, his life in Chicago 
gradually settled into a groove of work and home — 
work, and home to Annjee’s stuffy little room against 
the elevated tracks, where at night his mother read the 
war news and cried because there had been no letter 
from Jimboy. Whether Sandy’s father was in Brest or 
Saint-Lazare with the labor battalions, or at the front, 
she did not know. The Chicago Defender said that 
colored troops were fighting in the Champagne sec- 
tor with great distinction, but Annjee cried anew when 
she read that. , 

“No news is good news,” Sandy repeated every © 
night to comfort his mother, for he couldn’t imagine 
Jimboy dead. “ Papa’s all right! ”” But Annjee worried 

309 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


and wept, half sick all the time, for ever reading the — 


death lists fearfully for her husband’s name. 


That summer the heat was unbearable. Uptown in 
the Black Belt the air was like a steaming blanket | 
around your head. In the Loop the sky was white-hot — 


metal. Even on the lake front there was no relief un- 


less you hurried into the crowded water. And there |, 
were long stretches of beach where the whites did not |, 
want Negroes to swim; so it was often dangerous to | 


bathe if you were colored. 


Sandy sweltered as he stood at the door of his box- | 


like, mirrored car in the big hotel lobby. He wore a red 


uniform with brass buttons and a tight coat that had 
to be kept fastened no matter how warm it was. But he | 


felt very proud of himself holding his first full-time 
job, helping his mother with the room rent, and trying 
to save a little money out of each pay in order to re- 
turn to high school in the fall. | 

The prospects of returning to school, however, were 
not bright. Some weeks it was impossible for Sandy 
to save even a half-dollar. And Annjee said now that 
she believed he should stay out of school and work to 


take care of himself, since he was as large as a man — 


and had more education already than she’d had at his 
age. Aung Hager would not have felt that way, though, 
Sandy thought, remembering his grandmother’s great 
ambition for him. But Annjee was different, less far- 
seeing than her mother had been, less full of hopes for 


her son, not ambitious about him—caring only for — 


the war and Jimboy. 
310 


ELEVATOR 


At the hotel Sandy’s hours on duty were long, and 
his legs and back ached with weariness from standing 
straight in one spot all the time, opening and closing 
the bronze door of the elevator. He had been assigned 
_ the last car in a row of six, each manned by a colored 
_ youth standing inside his metal box in a red uniform, 
operating the lever that sent the car up from the base- 
ment grill to the roof-garden restaurant on the fifteenth 
_ floor and then back down again all day. Repeating up- 
_ down— up-down — up-down interminably, carrying 
| white guests. 

After two months of this there were times when 
Sandy felt as though he could stand it no longer. The 
same flow of people week after week — fashionable 
women, officers, business men; the fetid air of the 
elevator-shaft, heavy with breath and the perfume of 
bodies; the same doors opening at the same unchang- 
ing levels hundreds of times each innumerable, mo- 
notonous day. The L in the morning; the L again at 
night. The street or the porch for a few minutes of air. 
Then bed. And the same thing tomorrow. 

“T’ve got to get out of this,” Sandy thought. “It’s 
an awful job.” Yet some of the fellows had been there 
for years. Three of the elevator-men on Sandy’s shift 
were more than forty years old — and had never got- 
ten ahead in life. Mr. Harris had been a bell-hop since 
his boyhood, doing the same thing day after day — 
and now he was very proud of being head bell-boy in 
Chicago. 

“T’ve got to get out of this,” Sandy kept repeating. 

dll 


wh 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


“Or maybe I'll get stuck here, too, like they are, and 
never get away. l’ve got to go back to school.” 

Yet he knew that his mother was making very little 
money — serving more or less as an apprentice in the 
hairdressing-shop, trying to learn the trade. And if 
he quit work, how would he live? Annjee did not 
favor his returning to school. And could he study if 
he were hungry? Could he study if he were worried 
about having no money? Worried about Annjee’s 
displeasure? . 

* Yes! I can! ” he said. “ I’m going to study! ” He 
thought about Booker Washington sleeping under the 
wooden pavements at Richmond— because he had 
had no place to stay on his way to Hampton in search 


of an education. He thought about Frederick Douglass | 


—a fugitive slave, owning not even himself, and yet a 
student. “If they could study, I can, too! When school 
opens, I’m going to quit this job. Maybe I can get 
another one at night or in the late afternoon — but it 
doesn’t matter —I’m going back to my classes in 
September. . . . I’m through with elevators.” 
Jimboy! Jimboy! Like Jimboy! something inside 
him warned, quitting work with no money, uncaring. 
“Not like Jimboy,” Sandy countered against him- 
self. “ Not like my father, always wanting to go some- 
where. I'd get as tired of travelling all the time, as I do 
of running this elevator up and down day after day. 


... ’'m more like Harriett—not wanting to be a | 


servant at the mercies of white people for ever. .. . 
I want to do something for myself, by myself... . 
o12 


| 
| 
| 


ELEVATOR 


Free. . . . I want a house to live in, too, when I’m 
older—like Tempy’s and Mr. Siles’s. . . . But I 
wouldn’t want to be like Tempy’s friends—or her 
husband, dull and colorless, putting all his money 
away in a white bank, ashamed of colored people.” 

‘A lot of minstrels —that’s all niggers are!” Mr. 
Siles had said once. “ Clowns, jazzers, just a band of 
dancers — that’s why they never have anything. Never 
be anything but servants to the white people.” 

Clowns! Jazzers! Band of dancers! . . . Harriett! 
Jimboy! Aunt Hager! . . . A band of dancers! ... 
Sandy remembered his grandmother whirling around 
in front of the altar at revival meetings in the midst 
of the other sisters, her face shining with light, arms 
outstretched as though all the cares of the world had 
been cast away; Harriett in the back yard under the 
apple-tree, eagle-rocking in the summer evenings to 
the tunes of the guitar; Jimboy singing. . . . But was 
that why Negroes were poor, because they were danc- 
ers, jazzers, clowns? ... The other way round 
would be better: dancers because of their poverty; 
singers because they suffered; laughing all the time 
because they must forget. . . . It’s more like that, 
thought Sandy. 

A band of dancers. . . . Black dancers — captured 
in a white world. . . . Dancers of the spirit, too. Each 
black dreamer a captured dancer of the spirit. . . 
Aunt Hager’s dreams for Sandy dancing far beyond 
the limitations of theiz poverty, of their humble sta- 
tion in life, of their dark skins. 

13 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 

““T wants you to be a great man, son,” she often 
told him, sitting on the porch in the darkness, singing, 
dreaming, calling up the deep past, creating dreams 
within the child. “I wants you to be a great man.” 

“* And I won’t disappoint you! ” Sandy said that hot 
Chicago summer, just as though Hager were still there, 
planning for him. “I won’t disappoint you! ” he said, 
standing straight in his sweltering red suit in the cage 
of the hotel elevator. “{ won’t disappoint you, Aunt 
Hager,” dreaming at night in the stuffy little room in 
the great Black Belt of Chicago. “I won’t disappoint 
you now,” opening his eyes at dawn when Annjee 
shook him to get up and go to work again. 


314 


‘he. 
KALIL IR IM NGG 


THIRTY 
PRINCESS OF THE BLUES 


° 


EEE KEKE VVVVS 


billed as “The Princess of the Blues,” opened 

at the Monogram Theatre on State Street. The 
screen had carried a slide of her act the week previous, 
so Sandy knew she would be there, and he and his 
mother were waiting anxiously for her appearance. 
They were unable to find out before the performance 
where she would be living, or if she had arrived in 
town, but early that Monday evening Sandy hurried 
home from work, and he and Annjee managed to get 
seats in the theatre, although it was soon crowded to 
capacity and people stood in the aisles. 

It was a typical Black Belt audience, laughing up- 
roariously, stamping its feet to the music, kidding the 
actors, and joining in the performance, too. Rows of 
shiny black faces, gay white teeth, bobbing heads. 
Everybody having a grand time with the vaudeville, 
swift and amusing. A young tap-dancer rhymed his 

315 


‘Ox hot Monday in August Harrietta Williams, 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


feet across the stage, grinning from ear to ear, step- 
ping to the tantalizing music, ending with a series of 
intricate and amazing contortions that brought down 
the house. Then a sister act came on, with a stock of 
sentimental ballads offered in a wholly jazzy manner. 
They sang even a very melancholy mammy song with 
their hips moving gaily at every beat. 


O, what would I do 
Without dear you, 
Sweet mammy? 


they moaned reverently, with their thighs shaking. 

“ Aw, step it, sweet gals!” the men and boys in the 
audience called approvingly. “We'll be yo? mammy 
and yo’ pappy, too! Do it, pretty mamas! ” 

A pair of black-faced comedians tumbled on the 
stage as the girls went off, and began the usual line 
of old jokes and razor comedy. 

““Gee, I wish Aunt Harriett’s act would come on,” 
Sandy said as he and Annjee laughed nervously at the 
comedians. 

Finally the two blacked-up fellows broke into a song 
called Walking the Dog, flopping their long-toed shoes, 
twirling their middles like egg-beaters, and made their 
exit to a roar of laughter and applause. Then the can- 
vas street-scene rose, disclosing a gorgeous back- 
ground of blue velvet, with a piano and a floor-lamp 
in the centre of the stage. 

“This is Harriett’s part now,’ Sandy whispered ex- 

316 


| 


PRINCESS OF THE BLUES 


citedly as a tall, yellow, slick-headed young man came 
in and immediately began playing the piano. “ And, 
mama, that’s Billy Sanderlee! ” 

“Sure is!’ said Annjee. 

Suddenly the footlights were lowered and the spot- 
light flared, steadied itself at the right of the stage, 
and waited. Then, stepping out from among the blue 
curtains, Harriett entered in a dress of glowing orange, 
flame-like against the ebony of her skin, barbaric, yet 
beautiful as a jungle princess. She swayed towards 
the footlights, while Billy teased the keys of the piano 
into a hesitating delicate jazz. Then she began to croon 
a new song—a popular version of an old Negro 
melody, refashioned with words from Broadway. 

“Gee, Aunt Harrie’s prettier than ever!” Sandy 
exclaimed to his mother. 

“Same old Harriett,” said Annjee. “But kinder 
hoarse.” 

“Sings good, though,” Sandy cried when Harriett 
began to snap her fingers, putting a slow, rocking pep 
into the chorus, rolling her bright eyes to the tune of 
the melody as the piano rippled and cried under Billy 
Sanderlee’s swift fingers. 

“*She’s the same Harrie,”’ murmured Annjee. 

When she appeared again, in an apron of blue 
calico, with a bandanna handkerchief knotted about 
her head, she walked very slowly. The man at the 
piano had begun to play blues — the old familiar folk- 
blues—and the audience settled into a receptive 
silence broken only by a “Lawdy! . . . Good 

317 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


Lawdy! Lawd! ” from some southern lips at the back 
of the house, as Harriett sang: 


Red sun, red sun, why don’t you rise today? 
Red sun, O sun! Why don’t you rise today? 
Ma heart is breakin’ — ma baby’s gone away. 


A few rows ahead of Annjee a woman cried out: 
“True, Lawd!” and swayed her body. 


Little birds, little birds, ain’t you gonna sing this 
morn? 

Says, little chirpin’ birds, ain’t you gonna sing 
this morn? 

I cannot sleep — ma lovin’ man is gone. 


““Whee-ee-e! . . . Hab mercy! ... Moan it, 
gal!” exclamations and shouts broke loose in the 
understanding audience. 

“¢ Just like when papa used to play for her,” said 
Sandy. But Annjee was crying, remembering Jimboy, 
and fumbling in her bag for a handkerchief. On the 
stage the singer went on — as though singing to her- 
self — her voice sinking to a bitter moan as the listen- 
ers rocked and swayed. 


It’s a mighty blue mornin’ when yo’ daddy leaves 


yo’ bed. 

I says a blue, blue mornin’ when yo’ daddy leaves 
yo’ bed — 

’Cause if you lose yo’ man, you’d just as well be 
dead! 


318 


> 
ot 


PRINCESS OF THE BLUES 


Her final number was a dance-song which she sang 

in a sparkling dress of white sequins, ending the act 
_ with a mad collection of steps and a swift sudden whirl 
| across the whole stage as the orchestra joined Billy’s 
| piano in a triumphant arch of jazz. 
| The audience yelled and clapped and whistled for 
_ more, stamping their feet and turning to one another 
_ with shouted comments of enjoyment. 
“Gee! She’s great,” said Sandy. When another 
| act finally had the stage after Harriett’s encores, he 
was anxious to get back to the dressing-room to see 
her. 

“Maybe they won’t let us in,” Annjee objected 
timidly. 

“ Let’s try,’ Sandy insisted, pulling his mother up. 
“We don’t want to hear this fat woman with the flag 
singing Over There. You'll start crying, anyhow. 
Come on, mama.” 

When they got backstage, they found Harriett 
standing in the dressing-room door laughing with one 
of the black-face comedians, a summer fur over her 
shoulders, ready for the street. Billy Sanderlee and 
the tap-dancing boy were drinking gin from a bottle 
that Billy held, and Harriett was holding her glass, 
when she saw Sandy coming. 

Her furs slipped to the floor. “ My Lord!” she 
cried, enveloping them in kisses. “ What are you doing. 
in Chicago, Annjee? My, I’m mighty glad to see you, 
Sandy! .. . I’m certainly surprised — and so happy 
I could cry. . .. Did you catch our act tonight? 

319 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 


Can’t Billy play the piano, though? ... Great 
heavens! Sandy, you’re twice as tall as me! When did 
you leave home? How’s that long-faced sister o’ mine, 
Tempy? ” 

After repeated huggings the new-comers were intro- 
duced to everybody around. Sandy noticed a certain 
harshness in his aunt’s voice. ““ Smoking so much,” she 
explained later. “ Drinking, too, I guess. But a blues- 
singer’s supposed to sing deep and hoarse, so it’s all 
right.” 

Beyond the drop curtain Sandy could hear the 

audience laughing in the theatre, and occasionally 
somebody shouting at the performers. 
_ “Come on! Let’s go and get a bite to eat,” Harriett 
suggested when they had finally calmed down enough 
to decide to move on. “ Billy and me are always hun- 
gry. ... Where’s Jimboy, Annjee? In the war, I 
suppose! It’d be just like that big jigaboo to go and 
enlist first thing, whether he had to or not. Billy here 
was due to go, too, but licker kept him out. This white 
folk’s war for democracy ain’t so hot, nohow! .. . 
Say, how’d you like to have some chop suey instead 
of going to a regular restaurant? ” 

In a Chinese café they found a quiet booth, where 
the two sisters talked until past midnight — with 
Sandy and Billy silent for the most part. Harriett told 
Annjee about Aunt Hager’s death and the funeral that 
chill rainy day, and how Tempy had behaved so coldly 
when it was all over. 

“* T left Stanton the week after,” pasics said, “* and 

320 


PRINCESS OF THE BLUES 


haven’ t been back since. Had hard times, too, but we’re 
‘kinder lucky now, Billy and me — got some dates 
| booked over the Orpheum circuit soon. Liable to get 
‘wind of us at the Palace on Broadway one o’ these 
‘days. Can’t tell! Things are breakin’ pretty good for 
‘spade acts — since Jews are not like the rest of the 
white folks. They will give you a break if you’ ve got 
/some hot numbers to show ’em, whether you're col- 
_ored or not. And Jews control the theatres.” 

But the conversation went back to Stanton, when 
| Hager and Jimboy and all of them had lived together, 
laughing and quarrelling and playing the guitar — 
while the tea got cold and the chop suey hardened to a 
sticky mess as the sisters wept. Billy marked busily on — 
the table-cloth meanwhile with a stubby pencil, ex- 
plaining to Sandy a new and intricate system he had 
found for betting on the numbers. 

“Harrie and me plays every day. Won a hundred 
forty dollars last week in Cleveland,” he said. 

“Gee! I ought to start playing,” Sandy exclaimed. 
“How much do you put on each number? ” 

“Well, for a nickel you can win. . .” 

‘““No, you oughin’t,” checked Harriett, suddenly 
conscious of Billy’s conversation, turning towards 
Sandy with a handkerchief to her eyes. “ Don’t you 
fool with those numbers, honey! . . . What are you 
trying to do, Billy, start the boy off on your track? | 

. You’ve got to get your education, Sandy, and 
amount to something. .. . Guess you’re in high 
school now, aren’t you, kid? ” 

o2l 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
“Third year,” said Sandy slowly, dreading a new !! 
argument with his mother. 
*“* And determined to keep on going here this fall, | 
in spite o’ my telling him I don’t see how,” put in 
Annjee. ‘‘ Jimboy’s over yonder, Lord knows where, 
and I certainly can’t take care of Sandy and send him | 
to school, too. No need of my trying — since he’s big | 
enough and old enough to hold a job and make his own }) 
living. He ought to be wanting to help me, anyway. | 
Instead of that, he’s determined to go back to school.” | 
“ Make his own living! ” Harriett exclaimed, look- '}} 
ing at Annjee in astonishment. “ You mean you want }! 
Sandy to stay out of school to help you? What good }; 
is his little money to you? ” I: 
“Well, he helps with the room rent,” his mother | 
said. “And gets his meals where he works. That’s | 
better’n we'd be doing with him studying and depend- } 
ing on me to keep things up.” 
‘What do you mean better? ” Harriett cried, glar- | 
ing at her sister excitedly, forgetting they had been 
weeping together five minutes before. “ For crying | 
out loud — better? Why, Aunt Hager’d turn over in | 
her grave if she heard you talking so calmly about | 
Sandy leaving school — the way she wanted to make | 
something out of this kid. . . . How much do you | 
earn a week? ” Harriett asked suddenly, looking at 
her nephew across the table. 
“Fourteen dollars.” | 
“ Pshaw! Is that all? I can give you that much my- | 
self,” Harriett said. “ We’ve got straight bookings | 
322 | 


(0 


| 


| 
| 
} 
| 


PRINCESS OF THE BLUES 


v until Christmas —then cabaret work’s good around 


] 


there. Bill and I can always make the dough — and 
yyou go to school.” 


“T want to, Aunt Harrie,” Sandy said, suddenly 


‘content. 


“Yea, old man,” put in Billy. “* And [Il shoot you 
-a little change myself —to play the numbers,” he 


added, winking. 


99 


“Well,” Annjee began, “what about .. . 
But Harriett ignored Billy’s interjection as well as 


| ‘her sister’s open mouth. “ Running an elevator for 
‘| Barter dollars a week and losing your education! ” 


| 


she cried. “Good Lord! Annjee, you ought to be 


_ashamed, wanting him to keep that up. This boy’s gotta 


get ahead —all of us niggers are too far back in this 
white man’s country to let any brains go to waste! 
Don’t you realize that? . . . You and me was foolish 
all right, breaking mama’s heart, leaving school, 
but Sandy can’t do like us. He’s gotta be what his 
grandma Hager wanted him to be — able to help the 
black race, Annjee! You hear me? Help the whole 


| race!” 


* T want to,” Sandy said. 
“Then you'll stay in school! ” Harriett affirmed, 


still looking at Annjee. “ You surely wouldn’t want 


him stuck in an elevator for « ever — just to help you, 
would you, sister? ” | 
“T reckon I wouldn’t,” Annjee murmured, shaking 
her head. 
“You know damn well you wouldn’t,” Harriett 
323 


NOT WITHOUT LAUGHTER 
concluded. And, before they parted, she slipped a ten- 
dollar bill into her nephew’s hand. 

“For your books,” she said. 


When Sandy and his mother started home, it was 
very late, but in a little Southern church in a side 
street, some old black worshippers were still holding. 
their nightly meeting. High and fervently they were}}! 
singing: 

By an’ by when de mawnin’ comes, 


Saints an’ sinners all are gathered home. .. . 


As the deep volume of sound rolled through the 
open door, Annjee and her son stopped to listen. 
“It’s like Stanton,” Sandy said, “ and the tent in 


the Hickory Woods.” 
““ Sure is! ” his mother exclaimed. “* Them old folks 
are still singing — even in Chicago! . . . Funny how 


old folks like to sing that way, ain’t it? ei | 
“Tt’s beautiful! ” Sandy cried — for, vibrant and 
steady like a stream of living faith, their song filled | 


the whole night: 


An’ we'll understand it better by an’ by! 


at 


LANGSTON HUGHES 


ells 
‘has written poetry in every corner of the world while 
‘working al nearly every kind of job. He has lived in 
| Mexico, he has been to A frica where he drank palm wine 
ig | ON the Gold Coast, bought a monkey up the Niger and 
te) fell into the Congo. He has been a cook in a Montmartre 


night club. He has been a beach comber in Genoa. Bul 


| when he sat down to write his first novel he chose a small 
town in Kansas for his scene because, he says, “I am 

lt interested primarily in life, not in ‘local color’.” 

With the exception of a few short stories, 


this is Mr. Hughes’ first prose work. 


m7 
id 


| THIS BOOK WAS SET ON THE LINOTYPE 


IN BODONTI, 


| ELECTROTYPED, PRINTED AND BOUND BY 
The Plimpton Press, NORWOOD, MASS. 
THE PAPER WAS MADE BY 


S. D. Warren Co., BOSTON. 


NU I 
_ LAUGHT El 


This poignant story of a poor Negro famik 
in the Middle-west, is one of the most hv 
man, most appealing pictures of the rac 
ever drawn. Mr. Hughes writes of his pec 
ple, not as a mass, but as indiwiduals— 
some lazy and lovable, some hard-worki (, 
some bigoted, but all fighting the comm’ 
foes, poverty and prejudice. Here ase . 
where, there is bitter conflict between th’ 
younger and older generations. Aun 
Hager, bent over a washtub for fori 
years, goes to church and revival meeting 
to pray that her children may ‘‘see th 
light.” Jimboy and Harriet laugh, | q 
and sing in the sun, forgetful of all bu 
pleasure; and little Sandy tries to puml 
out for himself why he cannot hat ( 
Golden F lyer sled for Christmas and ph 
he must sit in the last row at school. 


Here is none of the melodrama of Harlen 
cabarets nor the sentimentality of Souser 
colton fields. Instead, there is a glo 
beauty and a sensitive perception w 
deeply human picture of a simple pe 
living in a typical Kansas town, meety 
best they can the problems of their de: 
tive, complex environment. In their 
Mr. Hughes embodies the joys, the pe | 
the fears and hopes of his race in moder 
America. This gifted writer has al 
attained wide popularity as a poe iF 
WitHovt LAUGHTER will place h 


SAUSALITO PUBLIC LIBRARY 
SAUSALITO, CALIF. 24965 


7 


serine aunt 


eee et ee a 


: ee - > ~ . . ~ To - + ‘4 " ~ 2 
ae . ear - ¢ raaal? * be ’ ~ ‘ . ee - 


: 
Sey SES OM ag ws 
ore . 
ween 7m 
t 
mys arass = 
mera es 7 
Sete en “ 
TOP RS ESA ANTENA HE ESOT gatas ONG a 
WR qhe Mega Sek CUS Se EE VL 
ay erat ease nr S ce reen 
hrgrercegry : 


Hoyas ht 
CAR MEP WS WEE AY REDE PURE ARS Beene 
errerte nC ttt ie Mtr air pee Sr Ets tra 
be tek ck oh an ech tel ok oe oll “pyar cima 
Syd oe nthe ak ah ell al oe Re ied 2 Vd ok tal a hod WET Ne rote 9 ENP TAQ IEE AQ RTTQT ET AY 
“ eee et ey Oepepeit yet ts Resereeietapetere vines <haver banat ponent Trane e 
Cave UP EP CUP REe A Bhes DOD EON FREES GEREN AES RABE TA tN 
eer ete cur eee ot) Dis Oa ate eteces Tomrirican Gcvle Ce seen rae ecm ler saianiset She Sita ad 1A RM SS SRR 
TUAW SR 2 A Ae poh ob aos Pe ee otras TY nae 
ek Se oh DESEA EPd PAR RE TENS ONL het ALU epee wr os et veree vere! 

yi Sr te 
quae torn 


bal od a oat 
ere thes 
ee BIO SP Ee gS 
Semen aet 
odeyns 

Ap egey eset 


Tyee terysT eB Ke 


ut 


mise, 
Set R WS gana SUP Re A eine SED RUPE 


pie 


rer Teor. 


eee 
enrye os Sy eararpdy Maies ntdher teeta hy SUPRA 
ft SF eek BES CEOs we TERS HE TOT AE SE LPetE AG 
CRATER GENO Le RT OELRAET TET BP ORAS uae Dm gentle A hae RAD Peleg UPR ty 
Fyre ene Oe oumewernenrn nite T retire nter otro t ter sat eat 
ROE OO ERS Oh E Sg Fema eT WEA ls HOF ers TRI 
oR? SS 8 8 De CREPE HE OPLE HER COPE DAES ET EMRE NES LAE NE 
GAePusieeyeue LET ys jorge REPUTE UTE 
veg res EIA? EST MTT SAG HF OUTED EERE UEEM ERAS 4 SCRYS EE BNEE SAS gd BUG CYA Qt amd 
pee peer es PAPA U even ees eres sadsore CAND A RAS PEM tp RE UM EO CVU OPUS Be ft VAY 


gtr tespryee*s 


AS oe ‘be Sot oat ie Sa 


ALLEL A LD INE Y 


a 


See RS Nag RL EME TRE GAO Sie HA BOT NEC! HTT RUS REY 414 cli s LEENA ERNE AROR BTL UMA Git G AAG 
SR REE OCIA PUNE gL eA UF ETE OM BP WIN GMs UREA US POMEL OF is cept 69 gt pa BY ED Yt ; 
ws? beVeNtrt tt or a ala heey Mer iol ao er Tee See rag errant ere ite hemnirrss : 


QE gee ae 


ent Tie tee te Shik a eS a Vat OPA pearing E814 Ut US ise 8 Citas ota ds (Ene ee ANA i et Cee 
PRE nee CLUE TP Sak BOR PTET EF OME EF WHE On he Tim he GEA HE pct B-ge OREN GS vt ETE EE ETERS EO Kgs SA new 
AG PUSERE DER ELPA TRE Ue 98 US Oe aR ho Hie LF Sa Gr wt YP Gre SPH EPUB eH Hath 4ctesgh TA HEA VE ESE ERNE TE UPS 9 OID HR ron gprdiny Sart Sites we 
iF URE HARES CONF PALE ERPS HERE LCE EEE TIA SS nals Pe ente Ste spp ar eC truce eget Reg et Cr TON OER t AT AW rege sie tat pry 
Heer sen POR O0 does tir ee OPE ee Ae TH CA tape GERI e Ere he CAR it rece Oru 
HME Eee Qent et PPO tr St bial oo ACA EERE OH eR eames ran ae a oe rk oe tt ChE PIL DT od a Ve S| 
TSUN EBESEASGBYAPegied Aye evn tre tal otc ee De ee re or ore A he a oar aay 
promt LOM AIT? HFT eP ee Ors Vter ded 
pds ree P ER HEL REL OEE PRE TUE PO EAE? Ress NR CI OF OT TAUMOTE TOE YE EE OO tL gt et tp goa gt mt EE Ut Et 
Me ta ot As ot Ses ibe On ak OR be Od 
wr bt cat Sak Got eho a Sa RL hae Ree 
92 ex DORIA ETH Oe we SENT ENG SEN SE EET CREE ROBEY URNS Et 


SPE SEES 

sed EF RN Mees 
é ERAAS« REAP CRRA 
RPP SD -Net Ke Kad pear te’ viw 
oe eae ee nee ~ 
sere 


A ents: y 
Or ar a ae ee ae 
eAp reir oer 


TORP ALIEN Re pe 


PURUCA thydewidtanget 
Sere 


Deh er bret Be ge 


PhD ate at Sri UMied 


oy S=ardmg nde Signy Het enti gtOR TMU e HE SHE Mn BR EeUP ar Sed? fT Test bs be Use yew hin res UR es es LTS Serer es fries buat rr ease (er Cement Rirtis A HAAR ERR OP grey 
Leer ge der gr gens ade Ags wep ge act: Pann hahad ch ohiats see oh Gh ok hota te ok ok eek a ht, USS VE WAR GOCE CRG AL ULE FATE PO PP ORs 
SRUF HE TES BX Hitt Ur png e ie od LE, Ty rar oe to er an Solel eee Shere OP ect Citar of tml chem Bere itera st leo ade Rebun pine La BONO Wr rey pase peg eeeepe, 
at el et) ek Mk kee ade te ee Be ee metre A Pe Aer PE ETERS Ot Fete ot tt qd et et tat tN ee > . nainaivainensiies sho - POSE EAE AH 
wd OCH 4 RES PEUH ED SiH YP Deere ees HOE™ a Ande Heys parte eh ue 2 aryoda regu d eer ee ere ns eee emer paeaeenad we ¥ : erin. cocked cariitedl 
apa pean es ORGele PaReue we GUhtda are eNeT Tee EAERED CL TUE ARSA DHEA BRERA LS Ux Wer G ag UkEEUT EK Lois mpg At nny 8 ewes ya n= ne GE Raed OER Ve ite 48 A UN OF RA wl a Se “4 nah Rab cceumenbainnamed: 
Pas TGRESPAG EAS ET eer 2 | SEEN HEE Pee OR Lege 0 pt hut eh eT Fre angs OA ste | pre Re ER OF EN NY Jen 4 09 UA Hi LPL RANA A eh Be pet Guat PAE & pthusmanebarivaksmsen ase ena inci 49 S24 a et Sane ee 
. , ~ yaw sy AM oe he el Bd 


. ce ot UP Whe Et Ee ed pout RE 


Turi) .erelys tee ee Pe baad tet & ct pte™ 


errr orare vt) ao) (tt 


6a awe a sete th" Oe. TA tant tat he? (the OP Pate ine 4 


er
