Source note (Tower of Babel staging): Alexander von Humboldt, Personal Narrative of Travels to the Equinoctial Regions of the New Continent, translated by Helen Maria Williams (London: Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme & Brown, 1814), Vol. I. Text from Internet Archive item personalnarrati1humba (OCR).
Public domain work. This file was produced from a public scan; OCR imperfections may remain.

i rca 
(arene netaed 
ee i rete! : 


ihe 
iets 


€ ee 1: 
esaaht 
F, 

fy 


EX LIBRIS 


LIBRARY 


DUMBARTON OAKS 


at 


TaAUNTO Nog ea sowbeS’ 


Presented by 
S/R PRIOR GoLONEY, Batt, C6. 


om 


G.5486 


= SSS SSS SSS SS ee 


ee Lee 
alpissay, 


, WUC PA 


YW 
7 


Gj: 


~ 


En buv.ig WF 
my 83 
wap. 


Personal Parrative 
OF TRAVELS 


EQUINOCTIAL REGIONS 
NEW CONTINENT; 
DURING THE YEARS. 1799—1804, 
ALEXANDER DE HUMBOLDT; 


sis 
AIME BONPLAND; 
WITH MAPS, PLANS, ée: 
Pe pee 


ALEXANDER DE HUMBOLDT; ® 


AND TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH BY 


HELEN MARIA WILLIAMS. 


> 


VOL. I: 


LONDON: 


PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, HURST, REES, ORME, AND BROWN; 
PATERNOSTER ROW; J. MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET 3 
AND H. COLBURN, CONDUIT STREET. 


1814. = 


W. Pople, Printer, 67, Chancery Lane. 


PREFACE. 


Arrrr haying so long withdrawn myself 


from the public eye, it is only under the 
auspices of the following work, that I 
should have ventured to appear once 
more in its presence. 

The narratives of travellers, and, above 
all, the description of those remote coun- 
tries of the globe, which have immortalized 
the name of Cook, have always had a par- 
ticular attraction for my mind; and led 
me in my early youth, to weave an 
humble chaplet for the brow of that great 
navigator, which my venerable friend, 
Doctor Kippis, inserted in the history of 
his life. The narratiye of Cook’s glorious 


vi PREFACE. 


career derives a peculjar charm from 
presenting to us new systems of social 
organization; but it must be admitted, 
that in general , seq-expeditions have a 
certain monotony, which arises from the 
necessity of continually speaking of navis 
gation in technical language. The mariner 
also, while he braves the element on which 
he steers his perilous course, is chiefly 
occupied by its dangers. The outlines 
and the bearings of coasts are the leading 
objects of his researches ; he visits only 
the shores of the countries where he dis- 
embarks, and holds but slight communica- 
tions with the natives by whom they are 
peopled. 

“The history of journies by land in 
distant regions is far more calculated to 
excite general interest; not only by ex- 
tending the limits of science, but by pre- 
senting new aspects of the variegated 


scenery of the Globe. Happy the traveller, 


with whom the study of Nature has not 


PREFACE. Vv 


been merely the cold research of the 
understanding, in the explanation of her 
properties, or the solution of her problems! 
who, while he has interpreted her laws, has 
adored her sublimity, and followed her 
steps with passionate enthusiasm, amidst 
that solemn and stupendous scenery, those 
melancholy and sacred solitudes, where 
she speaks in a voice so well understood by 
the mysterious sympathy of the feeling 
heart. With what soothing emotions, 
what eager delight, do we follow the tra- 
veller, who leads us from the cares, the 
sorrows, the joys of ordinary life, to wan- 
der in another hemisphere! to mark un- 


known forms of luxuriant beauty, and 


unknown objects ot majestic greatness— 


to view a new earth, and even new skies! 
from which the stars known from child- 
hood, the stars of home, have disappeared, 
and are succeeded by a foreign firmament. 
How often will posterity also turn from 


the terrible page of our history, to repose 


vill PREFACE. 


on the charm of a narrative, which dis- 
plays the most enlarged views of science 
and philanthropy! What sympathy does the 
traveller excite, while he imprints the first 
step, that leads to civilization and all its 
boundless blessings, along the trackless 
desert, and, struggling with the savageness 
of the untamed wilderness, obtains a 
victory that belongs to mankind. 

It were ecrroncous to believe, that 
countries, because they have been already 
visited, are therefore known. A_ penetrat- 
ing and capacious mind finds every where 
new materials for observation. The work, 
of which I now offer the translation to the 
public, relates to regions of which the 
greater part have never till now been de- 
scribed by a scientific and learned traveller. 
A few botanists had indeed herbalized 
along those distant coasts, and added some 
riches to the vegetable world. La Con- 
damine, Don Jorge Juan, and Bouguer, 


scaled the lofty Andes; but it was only to 


PREFACE. ix 


measure their height, and make astronomi- 
cal observations. - Their journals, which 
date farther back than half a century, 
were written when geology did not exist 
as a science, and the physical structure of 
those giants of our Globe was yet un- 
known. 

What has hitherto been wanting is now 
accomplished. M. de Humboldt has in 
this work displayed, more than in any other 
he has yet published, his peculiar manner 
of contemplating nature in all her over- 
whelming greatness. ‘The appropriate cha- 
racter of his writings is the faculty he pos- 
sesses of raising the mind to general ideas, 
without neglecting individual facts; and 
while he appears only to address himself to 
our reason, he has the secret of awakening 
the imagination, and of being understood 
by the heart. 


The general picture, which he has drawn 


of the Isle of Teneriffe, and the geography 
of its plants, proves, that in objects often 


Xx PREFACE. 


viewed by others he has seen what they 
had failed to discern; and. in almost the 
whole of the remainder of his travels he 
pursues alone the difficult path of scientific 
discovery. From the Canary Islands he 
passes to Cumana, New Andalusia, and 
the missions of the Indians, Chaymas, the 
province of the Caraccas, the banks of the 
Apure and the Rio Negro, to the limits of 
Brazil, New Grenada, the Andes of Po- 
payan, Porto, Quito, and Peru, the wes- 
tern part of the Amazons, Mexico, and the 
Isle of Cuba. How majestic is nature in 
the forest and on the banks of the Oronoco! 
the communications of which flood with 
that of the Amazons M. de Humboldt 
has astronomically laid down and_ deter- 
mined. 

This great work will now soon be ter- 
minated. M. de Humboldt remains in Paris 
for this purpose, with the permission of 
his own government. } 


In becoming his interpreter in the. text 


PREFACE. Xi 


of the Picturesque Atlas, and the Personal 
Narrative of his voyage, 1 have been en- 
couraged by the care with which he has 
read most of my pages, and corrected 
many of my errors. My scanty knowledge 
-of the first principles of science seemed in- 
deed to preclude the full comprehension of 
many of the subjects of which he treats ; 
but a short experience convinced me, that 
what is clearly expressed may be clearly 
understood ; and [I shall perhaps be par- 
doned, if, from the novelty of the subject, | 
neologisms sometimes occur. Long a 
stranger to my country, I have indeed no 
critical favour to expect; I mean that 
species of favor, which arises from personal 
acquaintance, and, perhaps even unknow- 
ing to the critic himself, softens the stern 
brow of reproof, and leads him unconsci- 
ously to be indulgent, when he only meant 


to be just. I have nothing to hope from 


such predilection. My literary patrons 


belonged to what Ossian calls “ the days 


Sit PREFACE. 


of other years.” Above all, the learned 
protector of my early pen, he, whom | 
have already mentioned, and of whom I 
never think without emotion, is long since 
no more! But in appearing before an Eng- 
lish tribunal, I will not fear injustice, if J 
have nothing to hope from partiality ; and 
whatever may be the fate of my imperfect 
copy of a sublime model, I shall never feel, 
that the moments were mispent, which I 
have employed in so soothing, and so no- 
ble a task. 


HELEN MARIA WILLIAMS. 


CONTENTS. 


BOOK If, 


05 5 OA as V3 Hy tea G 


Preparations.—Instruments.—Departure from Spain. 
—Landing at the Canary Islands. . . . . . 


‘CHAPTER II. 


Stay at Teneriffe.—Journey from Santa Cruz to 
Orotava.—Excursion to the top of the Peak of 
DEVE oe Nors \niaais hese coh’ Reveae pa et ee 


PAGEs 


U 


INTRODUCTION. 


Twenve years have elapsed since I quit- 
ted Europe, to examine the interior of the 
new continent. Devoted from my earliest 
youth to the study of nature, feeling with 
enthusiasm the savage beauties of a coun 
try guarded by mountains, and shaded by 
ancient forests, I experienced in my travels 
such enjoyments, as have amply compen- 
sated for the privations inseparable from 
a laborious, and often agitated life. ‘These 
enjoyments, which J endeavoured to im- 


part to my readers in my Remarks upon 
the Steppes, and in the Essay on the Phy- 


siognomy of Plants, were not the only 

fruits I have reaped from an undertaking, 

formed with the design of contributing to 

the progress of natural philosophy. I had 

long prepared myself for these observations 

which were the principal objects of my 
VOL. 1. 


es 


il 


voyage to the torrid zone. I was provided 
with instruments of easy and convenient 
usc, constructed by artists of the highest 
reputation ; and J enjoyed the special pro- 
tection of a government, which, far from 
presenting obstacles to my investigations, 
constantly honored me with every mark of 
regard and confidence. I was aided by a 
courageous and enlightened friend, and, 
what is singularly propitious to the success 
of participated labor, whose zeal and equa~ 
nimity never failed, amidst the fatigues 
and dangers to which we were sometimes 
exposed. 

Under such favorable circumstances, 
traversing regions which for ages have re- 
mained almost unknown to the greatest 
part of the nations of Europe, I might add 
even to Spain, we have collected, M. Bon- 
pland and. myself, a considerable number 
of materials, the publication of which may 
throw some light on the history of nations, 
and the knowledge of nature. Our in-— 
quiries having been directed towards a 
great variety of objects, we have been un- | 
able to present the result under the com- 
mon form of an itinerary, and have there- 


ill 


fore consigned our observations in a series 
of separate works, compiled in the same 
view, and connected with each other by the 
nature of the phenomena which they ex- 
plain. This sort of composition betrays 
more readily the imperfection of partial 
labors, and therefore is unfavorable to the 
self-love of the traveller, but it is highly 
preferable for whatever relates to the phy- 
sical and mathematical sciences, because 
the different branches of those sciences are 
seldom cultivated by the same class of 
readers. 

I had in view a double purpose in the 
travels, of which I now publish the histori- 
cal narrative. I wished to make known 
the countries I had visited; and to collect 
such facts as are fitted to elucidate a sci- 
ence, of which we have possessed scarcely 
the outline, and which has been vaguely 
denominated natural history of the world, 
theory of the Earth, or physical geography. 
The last of these two objects seemed to 
me the most important. I was passionate- 
ly devoted to botany, and certain parts of 
zoology, and I flattered myself that our 
investigations might add some new species 

b 2 


iv 


to those which have been already describ- 
ed; but preferring the connection of facts, 
which have been long observed, to the 
knowledge of insulated facts, although 
they were new, the discovery of an un- 
known genus seemed to me far less inter- 
esting than an observation on the geogra- 
phical relations of the vegetable world, 
on the migration of the so¢ial plants, and 
the limit of the height which their dit 


ferent tribes attain on the flanks of the 


Cordilleras. 

‘he natural sciences are connected by 
the same ties that link all the phenomena 
of nature. The classification of the species 
which we ought to consider as the funda- 
mental part of botany, and thestudy of which 
is become more attractive and more easy by 
the introduction of natural methods, is to 
the geograpny of plants, what descriptive 
mineralogy is to the indication of the rocks 
which constitute the exterior crust of the 
globe. ‘To comprehend the laws which are 
observed in the position of these rocks, and 
determine the age of their- successive for- 
mations, and their identity in the most 
distant regions, the geologist ought to be 


Vv 


previously acquainted with the simple fos-: 
sils, which compose the mass of mountains, 
and of which the names and character are 
the object of oryctognostical knowledge. 
It is the same with that-part of the natural 
history of the globe, that treats of the rela- 
tions the plants have to each other, with 
the soil whence. they spring, or the air 
which they inbale and modify. The pro- 
gress of the geography of plants depends 
in a great measure on that of descriptive 
botany; and it would be injurious to the 
advancement of the sciences to attempt 
rising to general ideas, in neglecting the 
knowledge of particular facts. 

Ihave been guided by these considera- 
tions in the course of my inquiries ;. they 
were always present to my mind at the 
period of my preparatory studies. When 
I began to read the numerous relations of 
voyages, which, compose so interesting a 
part of modern literature, I regretted that 
travellers, the most enlightened in the in- 
sulated branches of natural history, were 
seldom possessed of a sufficient variety of 
knowledge, to avail themselves of every ad- 
vantage atising from their position, It ap- 


vi 

peared to me, that the importance of the 
results hitherto obtained did not keep 
pace with the immense progress, which se- 
veral parts of science, and particularly geo- 
logy, the history of the modifications of 
the atmosphere, and the physiology of 
animals and plants, had made at the end 
of the eighteenth century. Isaw with re- 
gret, and all scientific men have shared 
this sentiment, that whilst the nomber of 
accurate instruments was daily increas- 
ing, we were still ignorant of the height of 
so many mountains and elevated plains ; 
of the periodical oscillations of the aerial 
ocean ; the limit of perpetual snows under 
the polar circle, and on the borders of the 
torrid zone; the variable intensity of the 
magnetic forces, and so many other phe- 
homena, ‘equally important. 

Maritime expeditions, voyages round 
the world, have conferred just celebrity on 
the names of those naturalists and astro- 
nomers, who have been appointed by go- 
vernments to encounter the dangers they 
present ; but while those distinguished per- 
sons haye given precise notions of the ex- 
ternal configuration of countries, of the 


Vil 


natural history of the ocean, and of the 
productions of islands and coasts, their ex- 
peditions seem less fitted to advance the 
progress of geology, and other parts of ge- 
neral physics, than travels into the imterior 
of a continent. The advancement of the 
natural sciences has been subordinate to 
that of geography and nautical astronomy. 
During a navigation of several years, the 
land but seldom. presents itself to the ob- 
servation of the mariner; and when, after 
lengthened expectation, it 1s descried, he 
often finds it stripped of its most beautiful 
productions. Sometimes beyond a barren 
coast he perceives. a ridge of mountains 
covered with verdure, but its distance for- 
bids his examination, and the view serves 
only to increase his regrets. : 

Journeys by land are attended with con- 
siderable difficulty in the carriage of in- 
struments and ‘collections, but these diffi- 
culties are compensated by real advantages, 
which it would be useless to enumerate. 
Itis not by sailmg along the coast, that we 
can discover the direetion of the chains of 
mountains, and their geological constitu- 
tion, the climate of each zone, and its in- 


Vill 


fluence on the forms and the habits of or- 
ganized beings. In proportion to the breadth 
of the continents, the greater is the display 
on the surface of the soil, of the richness of 


| the animal and vegetable productions ; the 
more distant the central chain of moun- 
tains from the shores of the ocean, the 
i greater variety we find, in the bosom of the 
| Earth, of those stony strata, the regular 
! succession of which unfolds to us the his- 
| tory of our planet. In the same manner, 
as every being considered apart is im- 
_ pressed with a particular type, we find the 
same impression in the arrangement of 
brute matter organized in rocks, in the dis- 
tribution and mutual relations of plants 
and animals. The great problem of the 
physical description of the globe, is the 
determination of the form of these types, 
the laws of their relations with each other, 
and the eternal ties which link the phe- 
nomena of life, and those of inanimate na- 
ae 
In explaining the motives which. en- 
| gaged me to undertake an expedition ito 
the interior of a continent, 1 merely state 
the general direction of my ideas at an age 


ix 


when we have not obtained a just estimate 
of our faculties. The plans of my early 
youth have been very incompletely exe- 
cuted. My journey has not had all the 
extent, which I proposed when I sailed 
for South America; nor has it furnished 
the number of general: results, which I had 
hoped to obtain. |The court of Madrid 
had granted me in 1799 permission to 
embark on board the galleon of Acapul- 
co, and visit the Marian and Philippine 
islands, after traversing, the colonies of the 
new continent. I had then purposed to 
go back to Europe by the great Archipe- 
lago of Asia, the Persian Gulf, and the 
way of Bagdad. I shall find occasion 
hereafter to state the reasons, which de- 
termined me to hasten my return. With 
respect to the works which M. Bonpland 
and myself have published, we hope that 
_ their imperfection, of which we are con- 
scious, will be attributed neither to a want 
of zeal during the progress of our re- 
searches, nor to precipitation in the pub- 
lieation of our labors. A determined will 
and active perseverance are not always 
sufficient to surmount every obstacle. 


x 


Having stated the general object I had 
in view in my expeditions, I shall hasten 
to give a slight sketch of the whole of the 
collections and observations which we have 
accumulated, and the union of which is 
the aim and end of every scientific jour- 
ney. The maritime war, during our abode 
in America, having rendered the commu- 
nications with Europe very uncertain, we 
found ourselves compelled, in order to di- 
minish the chance of losses, to form three 
different collections. Of these, the first 
was embarked for Spain and France, the 
second for the United States and England, 
and the third, which was the most consi- 
derable, remained almost constantly under 
our eyes. ‘Towards the close of our ex- 
pedition, this last collection formed forty 
two boxes, containing an herbal: of six 
thousand equinoctial plants, seeds*, shells, 


* Among the plants which we have introduced 
into the different gardens of Europe, I shall cite here, 
as worthy the attention of botanists, the following 
species. Lobelia fulgens, |. splendens, caldasia he- 
terophylla, (bonplandia geminiflora, Cav.), maurandia 
antirrhiniflora, gyrocarpus americana, Jacq:, czsal- 
pinia cassioides, salvia casia, cyperus nodosus, fa- 


Xl 


inseets, and, what had hitherto never been 
brought to Europe, geological specimens 
from the Chimborazo, New Grenada, and 
the banks of the river of the Amazons. 
After the journey to the Orinoco, we left 
a part of these objects at the island of 
Cuba, in order to take them on our return 
from Peru to Mexico. ‘The rest followed 
us during the space of five years, on the 
chain of the Andes, across New Spain, 
from. the shores of the Pacific Ocean to the 
West Indian seas. The conveyance of these 
objects, and the minute care they required, 
occasioned us such embarrassments as would 
scarcely be conceived, by those even who 


gara lentiscifolia, heliotropium chenopodioides, con- 
volvulus bogotensis, c. arborescens, ipomcea longi- 
flora, solanum Humboldti, Willd., dichondra argentea, 
pitcairnia furfuracea, cassia pendula, c. mollissima, 
c. prostrata, c. cuspidata, euphorbia Humboldti, 
Willd,, ruellia foetida, sisyrinchium tenuifolium, sida 
cornuta, s. triangularis, phaseolus heterophyllus, 
glycine ‘precatoria, g. sagittata, palea bicolor, pso- 
Talea divaricata, myrica mexicana, atriplex linifolia, 
inga microphylla, acacia diptera, a, flexuosa, a, 
patula, a, brachyacantha, a. ciliata, a. acicularis, a. 
peruviana, a. edulis, and several varieties. of geor- 
gines. (See Willdenow Enwn. plant. hort. Berol, 
180-9. 


XH 


have traversed the most uncultivated parts 
of Europe. Our progress was often reé- 
tarded by the threefold necessity of drag- 
ging after us, during expeditions of five or 
six months, twelve, fifteen, and sometimes 
more than twenty loaded mules, exchang- 
ing these animals every eight or ten days, 
and superintending the Indians who were 
employed in leading so numerous @ Cara- 
van. Often, in order to add to our col- 
lections of new mineral substances*, we 


* The mineral and vegetable substances which we 
have brought from America, several of which were 
till then unknown, have been submitted to chemical 
analysis by M.M. Vauquelin, Klaprotb, Descotils, 
Allen, and Drapier, who have given descriptions of 
them in separate memoirs, | shall here mention two 
new mineral species: The feuer-opal, or quartz resi- 
nite miellé of Mexico (Klaproth, chem. Unters. der 
Min. T. 4, p. 156. Sonneschmidt Beschr. der Mex. 
Bergref. S. 119. Karsten min. Tubellen, 1808, p. 26, 
88.) and the conchoidal muriated silver of Peru, 
muschliches hornerz (Klapr. 1V, 10. Karst, p. 60, 97. 
Magazin der Berl. Naturf. I, 158); the silver ore, pa- 
co of Pasco (Klapr.IV,) the antimonial gray copper ore, 
graugultigerz of Tasco (Ki. IV, 74); the mete- 
oric iron, meteoreisen, of Durango (Kl. IF, -101); 
the ferriferous carbonated limestone, stenglicher 
braunspath, of Guanaxuato, the crystals of which 
reunited in bars form equilateral triangles (Ki, IF, 


xii 


found ourselves obliged to throw away 


others, which we had collected a consider- 
able time before. These sacrifices were not 
less painful than the losses which we acci- 
dentally made. Sad experience taught us 
but too late, that from the sultry humidity 
of the climate, and the frequent falls of the 
beasts of burden, we could preserve nei- 


199); the obsidians of the Knife mountain of Moran, 
and the pierre perlée, perlstein of Cinapecuaro (Des- 
cotéls, Annales de Chimie, LIIT, 260); concrete oxi- 
dated tin, (wood tin) of Mexico (Descotils, Ann. 
LITT, 266) ; the brown Jead-ore of Zimapan ( Desvo- 
tils, Aun. LIII, 268) ; the celestine of. Popayan and 
the wavellite, or hydrargillite; a pepite of platina 
of Choco, weighing 1088°8 grains, which is 18°947 
specific gravity (Karsten, 96); the moya of Pelileo, 
a volcanic combustible substance, containing felds- 
path (Klapr. IV, 289); the guano of the islands of 
Peru, containing urat of ammonia (Klapr. IV, 
299. Foureroy et Vauquelin, Mem. of the Inst. VI, 
369) ; the dapiché of the river Temi, a species of white 
caoutchouc, which is found at the depth of three or 
four-feet in a damp soil (Allen, Journ, Phys. Liv. XVIT. 
77); the tabashéer of the bamboos of America, dife 
ferent from that of Asia (Vauquelin, Mem. del’ Instit. 
V'I,382); the cortex Angusture, bark of the bonplan- 
dia trifoliata of Carony;- the cinchona condaminea of 
Loxa, and several other species of cinchina, which 
we-collected in the forests of New Grenada (Vau- 
guelin, Ann. LIX, 187. 


XIV 


ther the skins of animals too hastily pre- 
pared, nor the fishes and reptiles placed in 
phials filled with alcohol. I have thought 
proper to enter into these details, which, 


although little interesting in themselves, 
prove that we had no means of bringing 
back, in their natural state, many objects 


of zoology and comparative anatomy, 
of which we have published descriptions 


and drawings. Notwithstanding some ob- 


stacles, and the expense occasioned by the | 
carriage of these articles, I-had reason to 
applaud the resolution I had taken before | 
my departure, of sending to Europe the 
duplicates only of the productions we had 


collected. I cannot too often repeat, that 


i when the seas are infested with privateers, 
a traveller can be sure only of the objects 
i in his.own possession. A very smal] num- 
ber of the duplicates, which we shipped 


i] for the ancient continent during our abode 

j in America, were saved; the greater part | 
ai fell into the hands of persons unknown to | 

/ science. When a ship is condemned in a 


foreign port, boxes containing only dried 
plants or stones, far from being sent to the 
scientific men to whom they are addressed, | 


XV 


remain consigned to oblivion. Some of 
our geological collections taken in the 
Southern Ocean had, however, a happier 
fate. We were indebted for their preser- 
vation to the generous activity of Sir Jo- 
seph Banks, President of the Royal Society 
of London, who, admidst. the -political 
agitations of Europe, has unceasingly la- 
bored to strengthen the ties by which are 
united the scientific of all nations. 

‘The same causes, which checked our com- 
munications, have contributed also to form 
numerous obstacles, since our return, to the 
publication of a work, which from its na- 
ture must be accompanied by a consider- 
able number of engravings and maps. If 
such difficulties are sometimes encountered 
in undertakings made at the expense, and 
by the munificence of governments, how 
much more must they be felt by private 
‘individuals! It would have been im possi- 
ble for us to have surmounted them, if the 
liberal zeal of the editors had not been 
seconded by the extreme favor of the pub- 
lic. More than two thirds of our work-are 
already published. The maps of the 
Orinoco, of the Cassiquiare, and of the 


XV1 


river Magdalena, founded on my astrono- 
mical observations, together with several 
hundred plants, are engraved and ready 
to appear. I shall not leave Europe to 
undertake an expedition into Asia, till I 
have laid before the public the whole result 
of my travels in the New Continent. 

In the memoirs in which we have’ in- 
vestigated the various objects of our re- 
marks, we have considered each, pheno- 
menon under different aspects, and classed 
our observations according to the relations 
which they bear to each other. ‘To give a 
just idea of the method we have followed, 
I shall here add a succinct enumeration of 
the materials, with which we were furnished 
for describing the volcanoes of Antisana 
and Pichincha, as well as that of Jorullo, 
which in the night of the 20th of September 
1759 rose from the earth one thousand 
five hundred and seventy-eight French feet 
above the surrounding plains of Mesico. 
The position of these singular mountains in 
longitude and latitude was ascertained by 
astronomical observations. We took the 
heights of the different parts by the aid of 
the barometer, and ‘determined the dip 


XVii 


of the needle and the intensity of the mag- 
netic forces. Our collections contain the 
plants which are spread on the flanks of 
these voleanoes ; and specimens of different 
rocks, which, piled on each other, consti- 
tute their external coat. We are en- 
abled to indicate by measures sufficiently 
exact the height above the level of the 
ocean, at which we found: each group of 
plants, and each volcanic rock. Our jour. 
nals furnish us with a series of observations 
on the humidity, the temperature, the elee- 
tricity, and the degree of the transparency 
of the air on the brinks of the craters of Pi- 
chincha and Jorullo; the topographical plans 
and the geological profiles of these moun- 
tains, founded in part on the measure of 
vertical bases, and on angles of altitude. 
Each observation has been ealculated ac- 
cording to the tables and the methods, which 
are considered as the most exact in the 
actual state of our knowledge; and in 
order to judge of the degree of confidence 
which the results may claim, we have pre- 


served the whole detail of our partial oper- 

ations. 

It would have been possible to blend 
G 


XVI 


these different materials in a work devoted 
wholly to the description of the volcanoes 
of Peru and New Spain. Had I given the 
physical description of a single province, I 
could have treated separately what relates 
to geography, mineralogy, and botany ; but 
how could [ interrupt either the narrative, 
a disquisition on the manners, the aspect 
of nature, or the great pheenomena of 
general physics, by the fatiguing enumera- 
tion of the productions of the country, the 
description of new species of animals and 
plants, or by the dry detail of astronomical 
observations? Had I adopted a mode of 
composition, which should have contained 
in the same chapter all that has been ob- 
served on the same point of the globe, I 
should have composed a work of eumbrous 
length, and devoid of that clearness, which 
arises in a great measure from the methodi- 
cal distribution of the matter. Notwith- 
standing the efforts which I have made to 
avoid, in this narration of my journey, the 
errors I had to dread, I feel conscious, that 
I have not always succeeded in separating 
the observations of detail from those gene- 
ral consequences, which interest every en- 


XIX 


lightened mind. . ‘These results comprise in 
one view the climate, and its influence on 
organized beings, the aspect of the country, 
varied according to the nature of the soil 
and its vegetable covering, the direction of 
the mountains, and the rivers which sepa- 
rate the races of men as well as the tribes 
of vegetables; and finally, those modifica- 
tions, which the state of nations, placed in 
different latitudes, and in circumstances 
more or less favourable to the display of 
their faculties undergoes. I am not afraid 
of having too much enlarged on objects so 
worthy of attention: one of the noblest 
privileges, which distinguish modern civiliza- 
tion from that of remoter times, is the hav- 
ing enlarged the mass of our conceptions; 
having rendered us more capable of per- 
ceiving the connection between the physical 
and intellectual world, and having thrown 
a more general interest over objects, which 
heretofore occupied only a small number of 
scientific men, because these objects were 
contemplated separately,-and from a nar- 
rower point of view. 

It is probable that the volumes, which i 
am now about to publish, will fix the atten- 

c2 


xX 


tion of a greater number of readers, than the 
detail of observations merely scientific, or 
than my researches on the population, the 
commerce, and the mines of New Spain. 
I may therefore be permitted to enume- 
rate in this place all that we have hitherto 
published. When several works are inter- 
woven in some sort with each other, it may 
perhaps be interesting to the reader, to 
know the sources from which he may ob- 
tain more circumstantial information. In 
the journey of Pallas, which is so remark- 
able for the precision and depth of his 
researches, the same Atlas contains geogra- 
phical maps, the costumes of different 
nations, relicks of antiquity, and figures 
of plants and animals. In conformity to 
the plan of our work, we have distributed 
these plates into distinct parts; having 
divided them into the two geographical and 
physical Atlasses, which belong to the nar- 
rative of the travels, and the Political Essay 
on the Kingdom of New Spain; the Views 
of the Cardilleras, and the monuments of the 
natives of America; and the [quinoctial 
plants, the Monography of the Melastomas, - 
and the Collection of zoological observations. 


XX 


As I shall often be obliged to cite these 
different works, I shall mention in notes 
the abbreviations, which Ihave used to in- 
dicate the titles. 

I. Astronomical observations, trigonome- 


trical operations and barometrical measure- 


ments made during the course of a journey 
to the equinoctial regions of the New Con- 
tinent* from 1799 to 1804. ‘This work, 
to which are added historical researches 
on the position of several. points important 
to navigators, contains, first, the original ob- 
servations which I made from the 12° of 
southern, to the 41° of northern latitude ; 
the transits of the sun and stars over the 
meridian; distances of the moon from thesun 
‘and the stars; occultations of the satellites; 
eclipses of the sun and moon; transits of 
mercury over the disk of the sun; azimuths ; 


* Astron. Observations, two volumes in 4to. I 
have discussed in the introduction, placed at the head 
ot this work, the choice of the most proper instru- 
ments to employ in distant journies, the degree of pre- 
cision that can be obtained in the different kinds of 
observations, the peculiar motions of certain great 
stars of the southern hemisphere, and several methods, 
the use of which is not sufficiently common among 


navigators. “ 


XX 


circum-meridian altitudes of the moon, to 
determine the longitude by the differences of 
the declination; researches on the relative 
intensity of the light of the austral stars ; 
geodesical measures, &c. Secondly, a trea- 
tise on the astronomical refractions under 
the torrid zone, considered as the effect of 
the decrement of calorie in the strata of the 
air; thirdly, the barometric measurement of 
the Cordillera of the Andes, of Mexico, of 
the province of Venezuela, of the kingdom 
of Quito, and of New. Grenada; followedby 
geological observations, and containing the 
indication of four hundred and. fifty-three 
heights, calculated, according to the me- 
thod of Mr. Laplace, and the new co- 
efficient of Mr. Ramond; fourthly, a table 
of near seven hundred geographical. posi- 
tions on the New Continent; two hundred 
and thirty-five of which have been deter- 
mined by my own observations, according 
to ihe three coordinates of longitude, 
latitude, and height. 

Il. Equinoctial plants collected in Mexico, 
in the Isle of Cuba, in the provinces of Ca- 
yaccas, Cumana, and Barcelona, on the 


Andes of New Grenada, Quito, and Peru, 


XXiil 


and on the banks of the Rio Negro, the 
Orinoco, and the river of Amazons*. 
Mr. Bonpland- has given the figures of 
more than forty new generat of plants of the 
torrid zone, classéd according to their natu- 
ral families. The methodical descriptions 
of the species are both in French and in 
Latin, and accompanied by observations 
on the medicinal properties of the plants, 
on their use in the arts, and on the climate 
of the countries where they are found. 
III. Monography of the Melastomas, rhez- 
ia, andother genera of this order of plantst. 
This work will comprise upwards of a 


- Equinoctial plants, 2 vols. folio, with more than 
120 plates. This number of plates has been greatly 
augmented since M. de Humboldt wrote this 
introduction. The number contained in the two 
volumes will exceed 150. See the prospectus of M. 
de Humboldt’s works at the end of the volume. 


+ We shall cite here only the genera, ceroxylon, 
marathrum, cassupa, saccelliam, cheirostemon, the- 
tiniphyllum, machaonia, limnocharis, bertholetia, ex- 
ostema, vauquelinia, guardiola, turpinia, salpianthus, 
hermesia, cladostyles, lilea, culcitium, espeletia, 
‘ bonplandia, platycarpum, andromachia, menodora, 
gaylussaica, podopterus, leacophyllum, angelonia. 


+ Melastomas, 2 vols. folio, with coloured plates. 


XXIV 


hundred and fifty species of melastomacea, 
# which we collected during the course 
I] of our expeditions, and which form one of 
a the most beautitul ornaments of tropical 
vegetation, M. Bonpland has added the 
plants of the same family, which, among so 


. 


many other rich stores of natural history, 
M. Richard collected in his interesting ex- 
pedition to the Antilles and French Gui- 
ana, and of which he has communicated to 
us the descriptions, 

IV. Essay on the geography of plants, 
accompanied with a physical table of the 
equinoctial regions, founded on measures 
taken from the tenth degree of northern 
to the tenth degree of southern latitude*. | 
I have endeavoured to collect under a | 
single point of view the whole of the phy- 
sical pheenomena of that part of the New 
Continent, comprised in the torrid zone, 
from the level of the South Sea to the 
highest summit of the Andes ; namely, the 


eS ee 


ee ae ————— 


| 


== 


* This work, printed for the first time in 1806, will 
be reprinted with additions, and form part of the fifth 
division of the complete coliection, under the title of 


General Physics. 1 have explained the first ideas of 
the geography of plants, their natural associations, and 
the history of their migrations, in my Flora, &c. 


XXV 


vegetation, the animals, the geological facts, 
the cultivation of the soil, the temperature 
of the air, the limit of the perpetual snows, 
the chemical constitution of the atmos- 
phere, its electrical intensity,its barometrical 
pressure, the decrement of gravitation, the 
intensity of the azure colour of the sky, the 
diminution of the light during its passage 
through the successive strata of the air, 
the horizontal refractions, and the heat of 
boiling water at different heights. Four- 
teen scales, disposed at the side of a pro- 
file of the Andes, indicate the modifications 
which these pheenomena undergo from the 
influence of the elevation of the soil above 
the level of the ocean. Each group. of 
plants is placed at the height that nature 
has assigned, and we may follow the pro- 
digious variety of their forms, from the 
region of the palms and _ the fern-trees to 
those of the johannesia (chuquiraga, 
Juss.) the gramineous plants, and lichens, 
These regions form the natural divisions of 
the vegetable empire; and in the same 
manner as the perpetual snows are found 
in every climate at a determinate height, 
the febrifuge species of the quinquina 


XXV1 


(cinchona) have also their fixed limits, 
which I have marked in the botanical chart 
belonging to this essay. 

V. Collection of observations on zoology 
and comparative anatomy ee TY have ‘com- 
prised in this work the history of the 
condor; experiments on the electrical ac- 
tion of the gymnotus‘}; a treatise on the 
larynx of the crocodiles, the quadruniani, 
and birds of the tropics; the description 
of several new species of reptilcs, fishes, 
birds, monkeys and other mammalia but 
little known. A distinguished man of sci- 
ence, Whose constant friendship has been 
highly honourable and advantageous to me 
during a great number of years, M. Cu- 
vier, bas enriched the collection with a 
very extensive treatise on the axolotl. of 
the lake of Mexico, and on the genera of 


* Zoolog. Obs. two vols, in 4to. The first of these 
volumes is published with thirty plates, most of which 
are coloured. The second volume is far advanced. 

4+ These experiments are connected with those I 
published previous to my departure to America, in 
the second volume of my essay on the irritability of 
and muscular fibre, and on the chemi- 


the nervous 
keeps up the life of animals and 


cal action which 


plantse 1 796. 


XXVil 


the protei in general. This naturalist has 
also recognized two new species of masto- 
dontes, and a real elephant, among the 
fossil bones of quadrupeds which we 
brought from America®. The description 
of the insects collected by Mr. Bonpland 
is due to Mr. Latreille, whose labours have 
so much contributed to the progress of en- 
tomology in our times. The second vyo- 
lume of this work will contain the figures 
of the Mexican, Peruvian, and Aturian 
skulls, which we have deposited in the 
Museum of Natural History at Paris, and 
on which Mr. Blumenbach has already 
published observations in the Decas quin- 
ta craniorum diversarum gentium. 

VI. Political essay on the kingdom of 
New Spain, with a physical and geogra- 
_phical atlas, founded on astronomical ob- 
servations, and trigonometrical and baro- 
metrical measurement*. 'This work, found- 


* Anon. of the Museum of Nat. Hist. t. 85 pe ov 
and pp. 412, 413, pl. 2, figs. 1, 5. 

* Polit, Ess. &c. in two vols, in 4to, and an Atlas 
of twenty charts in folio. My general map of the 
kingdom of New Spain, formed 'on astronomical obser- 
vations, and on the whole of the materials which er. 
isted in Mexico in 1804, has been copied by Mr, 


XXVIU 


ed ona great number of official memoirs, } 
F presents, in six divisions, considerations on 
Ui the extent and natural appearance of ; 
| Mexico, on the population, on the man- 
[ ners of the inhabitants, their ancient civi- 
lization, and the political division of their 
territory. It embraces at the same time 
the agriculture, the mineral riches, the ma- 


nufactures, the commerce, the finances, 
and the military defence of this-vast coun- 


Arrowsmith, who has appropriated it to himself, by 
publishing it on a larger scale, under the title of 


New Map of Mexico, compiled from original Docu- 


ments, by Arrowsmith. It is very easy to recognize 


this map from the number of chalcographical errors 


with which it abounds, from the explanation of the 


signs which be has forgotten to translate from the 


French into English, and from the word ocean, which 


is engraved amidst the mountains, in a place where 
the original states, that the elevated plain of Toluca 
is 1400 toises above the lecel of the ocean. The con- 
duct of Mr. Arrowsmith is so much the more repre- 


hensible, as neither Messrs. Dalrymple, Rennel, 
D’ Arcy dela Rochette, nor any of those other ex- 


cellent geographers England boasts, have ever given 


him the example, either in their maps, or the ana, 


lyses which accompany them. The reclamations of a 


traveller must appear just, when mere copies of his 


labours are published under the names of other 


“persons. 


XXix 


try. In treating on these different objects 
of political economy, I have endeavoured 


to consider them under a general point of 


view; I have drawn the parallel of New 
Spain, not only with the other Spanish co- 
lonies, and the confederation of the United 
States of North America, but also with 
the possessions of the English in Asia; I 
have compared the agriculture of the 
countries situate under the torrid zone, 
with that of the temperate climates; and 
I have examined the quantity of colonial 
produce necessary to Europe in the pre- 
sent state of its civilization. In. tracing 
the geognostic description of the districts 
of the richest mines of Mexico, I have 
given a statement of the mineral produce, 
the population, the imports, and exports, 
of the whole of Spanish America; I have, 
upon the whole, examined several ques- 
tions, which, for want of precise data, had 
never hitherto been treated with the impor- 
tance which they demand; such as those 
on the influx and reflux of metals*, on their 


* The recent travels of Major Zebulon Montgo. 
mery Pike, in the northern provinces of Mexico, 
(Account of the Expedition to the sources of the Mis- 


XX 


progressive accumulation in Europe and 
Asia, and on the quantity of gold and sil- 
ver, which, since the discovery of Aimerica 
down to our own times, the old world has 
received from the new. ‘The geographical 


sisippt, and to the interior Parts of New Spain, Phi- 
ladelphia, 1810) contains valuable notions on the ri- 
vers La Platte and Arkansas, as well as on the 
chain of mountains which extends to the North of 
New Mexico, towards the sources of these two rivers: 
but the numerous statistical data, which Mr. Pike has 
collected in a country of the language of which he was 
ignorant, are for the greater part very inaccurate. Ac- 
cording to this author, the mint of Mexico coins every 
year 50 millions of piastres in silver, and 14 millions 
in gold: while it is proved by the tables annually 
printed by order of the Court, and published in the 
Political Essay, that, the year in which the produce of 
the mines was the most abundant, the coinage 
amounted only to 25,806,074 piastres in silver, and to 
1,359,814 piastres in gold. Mr. Pike displayed admi- 
rable courage in an important undertaking for the 
investigation of western Louisiana;. but unprovided 
with instruments, and strictly watched on the road 
from Santa Fe to Natchitoches, he could do nothing 
towards the progress of the geography of the provin- 
cias internas. The maps of Mexico, which are annexed 
to the narrative of his journey, are reduced from 
my great map of New Spain, of which I left a copy, 
in 1804, at the secretary of state’s office at Wash- 
ington. 


XXX1 


introduction at the beginning of this work 
contains the - analysis of the materials, 
which have been used in the construction 
of the Mexican Atlas. 

VII. Views of the Cordilleras, and monu- 
ments of the indigenous nations of the new 
continent™. ‘This work is meant to display 
a few of the great scenes of nature in the 
lofty chain of the Andes, and at the same 
time throw some light on the ancient civi- 
lization of the Americans, from the study 
of their monuments of architecture, their 
hieroglyphics, their religious rites, and their 
astrological reveries. I have given in this 
work a description of the teocalli, or Mex- 
ican pyramids, compared with that of the 
temple of Belus; the arabesques which 
cover the ruins of Mitla, idols in basalt, 
ornamented with the calantica of the 
heads of Isis ; and a considerable number 
of symbolical paintings, representing the 


serpent woman, who is the Mexican Eve; 


* Monum. Amer. one vol. in folio, with 60 plates, 
part of which are colored, accompanied by explana- 
tory treatises. This work may be considered as the 
picturesque Atlas to the historical narrative of the 
voyage. 


= 


XxX1l 


the deluge of Coxcox, and the first migra- 
tions of the natives of the Azteck race. 
I have endeavoured to prove the striking 
analogies which exist between the calendar 
of the Toltecks, and the catasterisms of 
their zodiac, and the division of time of 
the people of Tartary and Thibet ; as well 
as the Mexican traditions on the four re- 
generations of the globe, the pralayas of 
the Hindoos, and the four ages of Hesiod. 
I have also included in this work, in addi- 
tion to the hieroglyphical paintings I 
brought back to Europe, fragments of all 
the Azteck manuscripts, which are found 
at Rome, Veletri, Vienna, and Dresden, 
and of which the last reminds us, by its 
lineary symbols, of the kouas of the Chi- 
nese. ‘l'ogether with the rude monuments o1 
the natives of America, the same volume 
contains picturesque views of the moun- 
tainous countries, which these people have 
inhabited ; such as those of the cataract 
of Tequendama, of Chimborazo, of the 
volcano of Jorullo, and of Cayambe, 
the pyramidal summit of which, covered 
with perennial ice, is situate directly un- 
der the equinoctial line. ‘In every .zone 


XXXHI 


the configuration of the ground, the physiog- 

nomy of: the: plants, and the aspect of a 
smiling or savage nature, have great in- 
fluence on the pr gress of the arts,-and on 
the style which distinguishes their produc- 
tions ; and this influence is so»much the 
more perceptible, as man. is farther remov- 
ed from civilization. ' 

I could have added» to: this’ work re- 
searches. on the character of languages 
which are the most durable monuments of 
nations. I have collected a number. of 
materials on those of America; of whieh 
Messrs. Frederic Schlegel and Vater have 
made use; the first in his Considerations 
on the Hindoos, the second “in ‘his conti- 
nuation of the Mithridates of Adelung, in 
the Ethnographical Magazine, and in his 
Inquiries into the Population of the New 
Continent. . These materials are now in 
the ‘hands of my brother, M. William’ de 
Mumboldt, who, during ‘his journey” in 
Spain, and a long abode at Rome, formed 
the richest collection of American vocabu- 
Jaries, that has ever existed. His know- 


ledge of the ancient and modern languages 
being very extensive, he has made some 
q | 


XXXIV 


curious approximations on this cbject, so 
| important for the philosophical study of 
ri the history of man. I flatter myself, that 
a part of his labors will find a place in 
this narrative. 

Of those. different works which I have 
here enumerated, the second and_ third 
were composed by M. Bonpland, from 
the observations which he made on the 
spot, in a botanical journal. This jour- 
nal contains more than four thousand 
methodical descriptions of equinoctial 
plants, a ninth part only of which have 
been made by me, and will appear in a se- 
parate publication, under the title of Nova 
Genera et Species Plantarum. In this 
work will be found not only the new spe- 
cies which we collected, and the number 
of which, after a long examination by one 
of the first botanists of the age, Prof. Will- 
denow, amounts to fourteen or fifteen hun- 
dred*, but also the interesting observations 


* A considerable part of these species is already in- 
serted in the second division of the fourth part of the 
Species Plantarum of Linnzus, fourth edition. Of 
the eringiams, which we brought over from America, 
eleven new species have been engraved in the beaati- 


EXKYV. 


made by M. Bonpland; on the plants 
which have hitherto been imperfectly des- 
cribed: The plates of this work will be 
engraved and executed according to the 
inethod followed by M. Labillardiere, in 
the Specimen Plantarum Nove Hollandia, 
which is a model of sagacity in research, 
and order in compilation: 

The astronoinical; geodesical; and baro- 
metric observations havé been calculated 
in a unifofm manner; by employing corres- 
pondent observations; and according to 
tables of the utmost precision; by Mr. Olt- 
manns; professor of astronomy, and mem- 
ber of the academy of Berlin; who undertook 
the publication of my astronomical jour- 
nal, which he has enriched with the results 
of his inquiries. concerning the geography 
of America; the observations of Spanish, 
French, and English travellers, and the 
choice of the methods used by astrono- 
mers. I had calculated, during the course 
of my journey, two thirds of my own ob- 
servations, a part of the results of which 


~ fol monography of this genus, published by M, de ia 
Roche. 


dQ 


SERENE So 


= 


XKXVI 


had been published previous to my return, 
in the Connaissance des Temps, and in the 
Ephemerides of Baron Zach. The trifling 
differences, which exist between the results 
obtained by Prof. Oltmanns and myself 
arise from his having made a more rigorous 
calculation from the whole of my observa- 
tions, and his having employed ‘the lunar 
tables of Burg, and of correspondent ob- 
servations at. Greenwich;) while I used 
only the Connaissance des: ‘Temps, calcu- 
Jated from the tables of Masson. 

The observations I had. made on the dip 
of the needle, the intensity of the magnetic 
forces, and the small horary variations of 
the variation, will appear in a_ separate 
treatise, whicly will be added.to my Essay 
on Geological Pasigraphy. This last work, 
which I began to compose. in Mexico, 
in 1803, will be accompanied by profiles, 
indicating the stratification and. relative 
age of the rocks, the types of which 
were observed» by Mr: Leopold Von 
Buch and myself in the two’ continents, 
between the twelfth of southern and the 
seventy-first. of northern latitude. Aided 
by the labors of this great geologist, who 


XXXVH 


has examined Europe from, the ,North 
Cape in Lapland, and with whom, I had 
the-happiness of beginning my earliest stu- 
dies at the school of Freiberg, I have been 
enabled to extend the plan of a work in- 
tended. to throw some light. on the con- 
struction of the Globe, and on the relative 
antiquity of its formation. 

After‘ having distributed into separate 
works all that belongs to astronomy, bota- 
ny, zoology, the. political description. of 
New Spain, and the history of the ancient 
civilization of certain nations of the New 
Continent, there still remained a_ great 
number of general results and local de- 
scriptions, which I-might have. collected 
into. separate treatises. I had prepared 
several during my journey ;.on the races 
of men in South America ; on the missions 
of the Orinoco; on the obstacles to the 
‘ progress. of society in the torrid zone, from 
the climate, and the strength of vegetation ; 
the character of the landscape in the Cor- 
dilleras of the Andes, compared with that 
of the Alps in Switzerland; the analogies 
between the rocks of the two hemispheres ; 
on the physical constitution of the air in 


SXXVIUE - 


the equinoctial regions; &c. [ had left 
Europe with the firm intention of not 
writing what is usually ¢alled the histori- 
cal narrative of a journey, but to publish 
the fruit of my inquiries in works merely 
descriptive; and I had arranged the facts, 
not in the order in which they successively 
presented themselves, but according to the 
relation they bore to each other. Amidst 
the overwhelming majesty of Nature, and 
the stupendous objects she presents at 
every step, the: traveller is little disposed 
to record in his journal what relates on- 
ly to himself, and the ordinary details of 
life. ? 

I had composed a very brief itinerary 
during the course of my navigation on the 
rivers of South America, and in mv long 
journies by land, in which I regularly des- 
eribed, and almost always on the spot, 
the excursions which I made toward the 
summit of a’volcano, or any other moun- 
tain remarkable for its height; but the 
composition of my journal was interrupted 
whenever I resided in a town, or when 
other occupations prevented me from con- 
tinuing a work, which I considered as hay- 


XXXIX 


ing only a secondary intcrest. When I 
employed myself in the composition, I 
had no other motive than the preservation 
of some of those fugitive ideas, which pre- 
sent themselves to a naturalist, the whole 
of whose life is passed in the open air; to 
make a temporary collection of such facts, 
as I had not then leisure to class; and 
trace the first impressions, whether agree- 
able or painful, which I received from na- 
ture, or from man. Far from thinking at 
the time, that these pages, precipitatedly 
composed, would form the basis of an ex- 
tensive work to be offered to the public, 
it appeared to me, that my journey, though 
it might furnish certain data useful to sci- 
ence, would present very few of those in- 
cidents, the recitals of which give the prin- 
cipal charm to an itinerary. 

The difficulties which I have experi- 
enced since my return in the composition 
of a considerable number of treatises, in 
order to make known certain classes of 
phenomena, insensibly overcame my re- 


pugnance to write the narrative of my 
journey. In undertaking this task, I nave 
been guided by the advice of a number 


xl 


of respectable persons, who honour me 
with peculiar kindness. I even perceived, 
that so distinguished a preference is given 
to this sort of composition, that. scientific 
men, after having presented in an isolated 
manner the, account of their researches on 
the productions, the manners, and. the po- 
litical state of the countries through which 
they have passed, imagine that: they have 
not fulfilled their engagements with the 
public, till they have written their itine- 
rary. 

An _ historical narrative embraces twa 
very distinct objects; the greater or less 
important events that have a connection 
with the purpose of the traveller, and the 
observations which he has made during his 
journey. The unity of composition also, 
which distinguishes good works from, those 
on an ill constructed plan, can be strictly 
observed only when the trayeller describes 
what has passed under his own eye; and 
when his principal attention has been fixed 
less on scientific observations, than on. the 
manners of a people, and the great phae- 
nomena of nature. Now, the most faith- 
ful picture of manners is that, which best 


xli 


displays the relations of men toward each 
other. The character of savage or civi- 
lized nature is portrayed either in the ob- 
stacles which a traveller meets with, or 
in the sensations. which he feels. It is 
the man himself that we continually desire 
to see in contact with the objects that 
surround him; and. his narration interests 
us the more, when a local tint is spread 
over the description of the country and 
its inhabitants. Such is the source of the 
interest excited by the history of» those 
first navigators, who, led on by intrepidity 
more than by science, struggled against 
the elements, while they sought a new 
world in unknown seas. Such is the irre- 
sistible charm which attaches us to the fate 
_of that enterprising traveller *, who, full 
of enthusiasm and energy, penetrated 
alone into the centre of Africa, in order 
to. discover amidst barbarous. nations the 
traces of ancient civilization. 

In. proportion as voyages have been 
made by-persons more enlightened, and 
whose views have been directed towards 
researches into descriptive natural, history, 


* Mungo Park. 


xh 


geography or political economy, itineraries 
have partly lost that unity of composition, 
and that simplicity, which characterised 
those former ages. It is now become scarce- 
ly possible to connect so many different 
materials with the. narration of events; 
and that part which we may call drama- 
tic gives way to dissertations merely des- 
criptive. The great number of readers, 
who prefer an agreeable amusement to so- 
lid instruction, have not gained by the 
exchange ; and I am afraid, that the temp- 
tation will not be great to follow those tra- 
vellers in their expeditions, who drag along 
with them a considerable apparatus - of 
instruments and collections. 

In order to give greater variety to my 
work, [ have often interrupted the histori- 
cal narrative by simple descriptions. I 
first describe the phenomena in the order 
in which they appeared ; and I afterward 
consider them in the whole of their indi- 
vidual relations. ‘This mode has been suc- 
cessfully followed in the journey of M. de 
Saussure, whose most valuable work has 
contributed more than any other to the 
advancement of the sciences, and often, 


xiii 


amidst dry discussions on meteorology, 
contains many charming descriptions ; such 
as those of the modes of life of the inha- 
bitants of the mountains, the dangers of 
hunting the chamois, and the sensations 
felt on-the summit of the higher Alps. 

These are details of ordinary life, which 
it might be useful to note in an itinerary, 
because they serve to regulate the conduct 
of those, who afterwards journey through 
the same countries. I have preserved a 
few, but have suppressed the greater part 
of those personal incidents, which offer no 
interesting situations, and which can be 
rendered amusing only by the perfection 
of style. 

With respect to the country which has 
been the object of my investigations, I do 
not dissemble the great advantages, which 
those who travel to Greece, Egypt, the 
banks of the Euphrates, and the islands 
of the Pacific Ocean, enjoy over those who 
traverse America. In the ancient world, 
nations, and the distinctions of their civiliz- 
ation formed the principal figures on the 
canvass; in the new, man and his produc- 


xliv 


tions almost disappear amid the stupendous 
display of wild and gigantic nature. The 
human race here presents but a few rem- 


nants of indigenous hordes, slightly ad- 


vanced in civilization; or that uniformity 
of manners and institutions, which has been 
transplanted by . European. colonists to 
foreign shores. What relates therefore to 
the history of our species, to the various 
forms of government, to the monunients 


of the arts, to those places which are full 
of great remembrances, affect, us far more 


than the descriptions of those vast solitudes, 


which seem destined only for the display 
of vegetable life, and to form, the domain 
of wild animals. ‘The savages of America, 
who have been the object of so many syste- 
matic reveries, and on whom M. Volney 
has lately published some highly just and 
sagacious observations, inspire less interest, 
since celebrated navigators have made 
known‘to us the inhabitants of the islands 
of tne South Sea, in whose character we 
find so striking a mixture of perversity and 
meekness. ‘I'he state of half-civilization, 
in which those islanders are found, gives a 


xlv 


peculiar charm to the description of their 
manners. Here a king, followed by a 
numerous suite, comes and presents | the 
fruits of his orchard; there, the funereal 
festival imbrowns the shade of the lofty 
forest. Such pictures, no doubt, have 
more attraction than those, which portray 
the solemn gravity of the inhabitant of the 
banks of the Missouri or the Maranon. 

If America occupies no important place 
in the history. of mankind, and ofthe 
ancient revolutions which have agitated the 
human race, it offers an ample field to the 
labours of the naturalist. On no other 
part of the:Globe is he called upon more 
powerfully: by nature, to raise himself to 
general ideas on» the cause of the phzeno- 
mena, and their natural connection. I 
shall not speak: of that luxuriance: of vege- 
tation, that eternal spring of organic life, 
those climates varying by: stages as’ we 
climb the flanks of: the Cordilleras, and 
those majestic rivers which a celebrated 
writer * has described with so much grace- 


* M. Chateaubriand, 


xlvi 


ful precision. The means which the new 
world affords for the study of geology and 

natural philosophy in general are long since 

acknowledged. Happy the traveller who 

is conscious, that he has availed himself of 

the advantages of his position, and that he 

has added some new facts to the mass of 

those which were already acquired !. 

Itis almost useless to recapitulate what J 
have already observed in the preface to 
the equinoctial plants, that, connected by 
the most intimate ties of friendship with 
M. Bonpland, during the course of our 
travels and the years that have followed, 
we publish in common the whole of the 
works, which are the fruit of our labours. 
I have endeavoured to explain the facts, 
such as we observed them together; but 
this narrative having been composed by 
myself, from notes written by me on the 
spot, whatever errors may be found in 
my recital must be attributed to myself 
alone. 

The observations we made during the 
course of our journey have been distributed 
into six sections: the first comprehends 


xlvii 


the historical narrative ; the second zoology 
and comparative anatomy; the third, the 
political essay on the kingdom of New 
Spain; the fourth, astronomy; the. fifth, 
physics and geology; and the sixth, the 
description of the new plants collected in 
both Americas. The editors have dis- 
played a liberal zeal to render these works 
worthy of the public attention. 1 cannot 
pass over in silence the frontispiece to this 
itinerary.. M. Gerard, with whom I have 
had the pleasure of being acquainted these 
fifteen years, has devoted to me some 
moments of his time, and I feel the value 
of this public testimony of his esteem and 
friendship. 

I have carefully mentioned in this work 
the persons, who have had the kindness to 
communicate to me their observations ; 
and in this introduction I ought to express 
my gratitude to Messrs. Gay-Lussac, and 
Arago, my fellow members of the Institute, 
who have annexed their names to important 
labours, and who are endowed with that 
elevation of character, which is so congenial 
to an ardent love of the sciences. Living 


of this chemist, in correcting my ideas re- 


xl viii 


with them on terms of the most intimate 
friendship, I have had the means of con- 
sulting thei daily on objects of chemistry, 
natural history, and several branches of the 
mathematics. I have already mentioned 
in the collection of my astronomical ob- 
servations what I owe to the friendship of 
Mr. Arago, who, after having terminated 
the measure of the meridian of Spain, has 
been exposed to so many dangers; and 
who unites the talents of an astronomer 
with those of a geometrician and a natu- 
ralist. At the period of my return I 
discussed particularly with M. Gay-Lussac 
the different phenomena of meteorology 
and physical geology, which I had amassed 
in my journey. For eight years past we 
have usually dwelt under the same roof in 
France, Germany, and Italy; we have 
witnessed together one of the great erup- 
tions of Vesuvius; and have joined our 
labours on the chemical analysis of the 
atmosphere, and the variations of terrestrial 
magnetism. I have been enabled to avail 
myself of the profound and ingenious views 


xlix 


specting several objects, of which I treat 
in the narrative of my journey. 

Since I left America, one of those great 
revolutions, which at certain periods agitate — 
the human race, has burst forth in the 
Spanish colonies, and seems to prepare 
new destinies for a population of fourteen 
millions of inhabitants; spreading itself from 
the southern to the northern hemisphere, 
from the shores of Rio La Plata. and 
Chili to the remotest part of Mexico. 
Deep resentments excited by colonial legis- 
lation, and fostered by mistrustful policy, 
have stained with blood those countries, 
which had enjoyed during the last three 
ages what I will not call happiness, but 
uninterrupted peace. Already at Quite 
the most virtuous and enlightened citizens 
have perished victims of devotion to their 
country. While I am giving the descrip- 
tion of regions, the remembrance of which 
is so dear to me, I meet at every step. with 
places, which recall to my mind the loss 
of a friend. 

When we reflect on the great political 
agitations of the new world, we observe, 

€ 


that the Spanish Americans are by no meatis 
in so favourable a position as the inhabi- 
tants of the United States, prepared for 
independance by the long enjoyment of 
constitutional liberty. Internal dissensions 
aré chiefly to be dreaded in regions, where 
eiviligation is but slightly rooted ; and where, 
from the influence of climate, the forests 
tay soon regain their empire over cleared 
lands, if their culture be abandoned. It 
is also to be apprehended, that, during a 
long series of years, no foreign traveller 
will be enabled to traverse the whole of the 
countries, which I have visited. This cir- 
cuthstance may perhaps add to the interest 
of a work, that portrays the state of the 
greater part of the Spanish colonies at the 
beginning of the 19th century. I may even 
indtilge the hope, under the influence of 
more soothing ideas, that this work will be 
thought worthy of attention, when the 
passions shall be hushed into peace; and 
when, under the influcnce of a new social 
order, those countries shall have made a 
rapid progress tawards public welfare, If 
then some pages of my book are snatched 


h 


ton oblivion, the inhabitant of the banks 
of the Ori noco will behold with extasy, that 
populo us cities enriched by commerce, and 
fertile fields cultivated by the hands of 
freemen, adorn those very spots, where, 
at the time of my travels, I found only im- 
penctrable fore sts, and inundated lands. 


JOURNEY 


TO THE 


EQUINOCTIAL REGIONS 


OF 


THE NEW CONTINENT 


t 


BOOK I. 


CHAPTER I. 


Preparations.— Instruments. — Departure from 
Spain.—Landing at the Canary Islands. 


Wuen a government undertakes one of those 
maritime expeditions, which contributes to the 
knowledge of the globe, and the progress of natural 
philosophy, there is no obstacle to the accomplish- 
ment of its purpose. The time of departure, and 
the direction of the voyage may be fixed, whenever 
the vessel is equipped, and astronomers and 
naturalists are appointed to traverse unknown seas. 
The islands and coasts, the productions of which 
these travellers are prepared to examine, are sub- 
ject to the influence of no European policy. If-.it 
R 


2 


happer that the freedom of the seas be interrupted 
by lengthened hostilities, passports are mutually 
granted by the belligerent powers, and partial 
enniities disappear before the advancement of 
general knowledge, which is the.common cause of 
all nations. Far different is the situation of a 
private individual, who undertakes a journey at 
his own expense into the interior of a continent, 
over which* Europe has extended its system of 
colonization. The traveller in vain nieditates the 
plan, which he judges the most convenient either 
for the object of his investigations, or the political 
state of the country he intends to examine; he 
eollects In vain all his resources, which in distant 
regions may secure him for a long time an inde- 
pendant existence ; his designs are often thwarted 
by unforseen obstacles, at the moment that he 
thinks of putting them into execution. Few in- 
dividuals have had greater difficulties to struggle 
with than myself, before my departure for Spanish 
America; FE should spare the recital, and begin 
this narrative by the expedition to the summit of 
the Peak of Teneriffe, had not the failure of my 
first projects had a decided influence on the direc- 
tion I have given my. travels since my return from 
the Ormoco. I shall, however, pass rapidly over 
those events, which have no interest for science, 
‘but: which I wish to present in their true light. 
The curiosity of the public bemg oftener fixed on 
the persons of travellers than on their works, what 


3 


relates to the first plans I had traced out, has 
been strangely disfigured*. 

From my earliest youth I had felt an ardent 
desire to travel into distant regions, which Eu- 
ropeans had seldom visited. This desire is the 
characteristic of a period of our existence, when 
life appears an unlimited horizon, and when we 
find an irresistible attraction in the impetuous 
agitations of the mind, and the image of positive 
danger.’ Educated in a country which has no 
direct communication with the colonies of either 
India, living amidst mountains, remote from the 
coasts, and celebrated for their numerous mines, 
I felt an increasing passion for the sea and dis- 
tant expeditions. The objects with which we are 


acquainted only by the animated narratives of 
travellers have a particular charm; imagination 
wanders with delight over what is vague and un- 
defined ; and the pleasures of which we are de- 
prived seem possessed of a fascinating power, com- 


* T here beg leave to observe, that, I-never had the slightest 
knowlodge of a work in six volumes, published by Vollmer, at 
Hamburg, under the strange title of “© Voyage round the 
World, and in South America, by A. de Humboldt.” This 
narrative, which appeared in my name, was compiled, it 
seems, fron: accounts given in the public papers, and from 
memoirs which I read to the first class of the Institute. ‘The 
compiler, with a view of engaging the attention of the public, 
thonght he might give to an expedition made to some parts 
of the New Continent the more attractive title of Voyage 
round the World. 


B 2 


4 


pared. to which all we daily feel in the narrow 
circle of sedentary life appears insipid. “The taste 
for herborisation, the study of geology, rapid ex- 
cursions to Holland, England, and France, with 
the celebrated Mr. George Forster, who had the 
happiness to accompany Captain Cook in his 
second expedition round the globe, contributed to 
give a determined direction to the plan of travels, 


which I had formed at eighteen years of age. No- 


longer deluded by the agitation of a wandering 
life, I was anxious to contemplate nature in all its 
variety of wild and stupendous scenery; and the 
hope of collecting some facts useful to the advance- 
inent of science mcessantly impelled my wishes 
towards the luxuriant*regions spread under the 
torrid zone. As my personal situation then pre- 
vented me from executing the projects, by which I 
was so powerfully influenced, I had leisure to pre~ 
pare myself during six years for the observations 
I purposed to make on the New Continent, to 
visit different parts of Europe, and explore the 
lofty chain of the Alps, the structure of which I 
might afterwards eompare with that of the An- 
des, of Quito, and of Peru. As I employed 
“successively instruments of different construc- 
tions, I fixed my choice on those which appeared 
to me the most exact, and the least subject to 
break in the earriage.. I had an opportunity of 
repeating measurements, which had been taken 
according to. the most rigorous methods ; and I] 


5 


learnt from experience the extent of the errors, te 
which I might be exposed. 

I had traversed a part of Italy in 1795, but 
had not been able to visit the volcanic regions of 
Naples and Sicily; and I regretted leaving Europe 
without having seen Vesuvius, Stromboli, and 
‘Etna. T felt, that in order to form a proper 
judgment of a great number of geological phe- 
nomena, especially of the nature of the rocks of 
trap formation, it became necessary to have 
examined strictly the phenomena offered by burn- 
ing volcanoes. I determined therefore to return to 
Italy in the month of November, 1797. I made 
a long stay at Vienna, where the fine collections 
of exotic plants, and the friendship of Messrs. de 
Jacquin, and of Mr. Joseph Van der Schott were 
highly useful to my preparatory studies. [| 
travelled with Mr. Leopold de Buch, who has since 
published an excellent work on Lapland, through 
several cantons of Salzburgh and Styria, countries 


alike interesting to the landscape-painter and the 


geologist; but at the moment I was passing the 
Tyrolese Alps, the war which raged in Italy obliged 
me to abandon the project of going to Naples. 

A short time before, a person who was passion- 
ately fond of the fine arts, and who had visited the 
coasts of Greece and Illyria to inspect their monu- 
ments, made me a proposal to accompany him in 
an expedition to Upper Egypt. This expedition 
was to last only eight months: provided with 


4 


~ 


6 


astronomical instruments and able draughtsmen, 
we were to ascend the Nile as far as Assouan, 
after minutely examining the positions of the 
Said, between Tentyris and the cataracts. Though 
my views had not hitherto been fixed on any re- 
gion beyond the tropics, I could not resist the 
temptation of visiting countries so celebrated in 
the annals of human civilization. I therefore 
accepted this proposition, but with the express 
condition, that on our return to Alexandria I 
should be at liberty to continue my journey 
through Syria’ and Palestine. I directed hence- 
forth my studies in conformity to this new project, 
which I afterward found useful, when I exa- 
mined the relations between the barbarous monu- 
ments of Mexico, and those belonging to the na- 
tions of the old world. I thought myself on the 
point of embarking for Egypt, when political 
events forced me to abandon’a plan, which pro- 
mised me so much satisfaction. ‘The situation of 
the East was such, that no individual could hope 
to pursue operations, which even in the most 
peaceful times often expose the traveller to the 
suspicion of its governments, 

An expedition of discoveries in the Southern 
Ocean, under the direction of Captain Baudin, 
was then preparing in France. The first plan was 
executed by a 


great, bold, and worthy of | being 
more: enlightened commander. The purpose of 


this expedition was to visit the Spanish posses- 


i 


7 


sions of South America, from the mouth of the 
river Plata to the kingdom of Quito and the isth- 
mus of Panama. After traversing the Archipe- 
lago of the great Ocean, and-exploring the coasts 
of New Holland, from Diemen’s Land to that of 


Nuyts, both vessels were to stop at Madagascar, 


and return by the Cape of Good Hope. I was 
at Paris when the preparations for this voyage 
were begun. I had but little confidence in the. 
personal character of captain Baudin, who had 
given cause of discontent to the Court of Vienna, 
when he was commissioned to conduct to- Brazil 
one of my friends, the young botanist, Mr. Van 
der Schott; but as I could not hope, with my 
own resources, to make a voyage of such extent, 
and view so fine a portion of the globe, I deter- 
mined to take the chances of this expedition. I ob- 
tained permission to embark, with the instruments 
I had collected, in one of the vessels destined for 
the South Sea, and I reserved to myself: the liber- 
ty of leaving Captain Baudin, whenever I thought 
proper. M. Michaux, vho had already visited Per- 
sia, and a part of North America, and M.. Bon- 
pland, with whom I formed a friendship that still 
unites us, were appointed to accompary this expe- 
dition as naturalists. 

I had flattered myself during several months 
with the idea of sharing in labors directed to so 
great and- honorable an object, when the war, 
which broke out in Germany and Italy, determined 


8 


the Freach government to withdraw the funds 
granted for their voyage of discovery, and ad- 
journ it to an indefinite period. _Cruelly deceived 
in my hopes, seeing the plans which I had been 
forming during many years of my life overthrown 
in asingle day, I sought at any risk the speed- 
iest means of quitting Europe, and engaging in 
some enterprise, which might console me for my 
disappointment. 

I became acquainted with a Swedish Consul, Mr. 
Skioldebrand, who, appointed by his Court to car- 
ry presents to the Dey of Algiers, passed through 
Paris, ia order to embark at Marseilles. This esti- 
mable man had resided a long time on the coasts 
of Africa; and being highly respected by the go- 
vernment of Algiers, he could easily procure me 
permission to visit tliat part of the chain of 
the Atlas, which had not been the object of the 
important researches of M. Desfontaines. He 
despatched every year a vessel for Tunis, where 
the pilgrims embarked for Mecca, and he pro- 
mised to convey. me by the same occasion to 
Egypt. I eagerly seized so favorable an op- 
portunity, and thought myself on the point of 
executing a plan, which I had formed previous 
to my arrival in France. No. mineralogist 
had yet examined that lofty chain of moun- 
tains, which in the empire of Morocco rises to 
the limit of the perpetual snows. I flattered my- 
self, that, after executing some useful operations 


9 


in the Alpine regions of Barbary, I should re- 
ceive in Egypt from those illustrious men, who 
had for some months formed the Institute of 
Cairo, the same kind attentions, with which I had 
been honored during my abode in Paris. I has- 
tily completed my collection of instruments, and 
purchased works which related to the coun- 


tries I was going to visit. I separated myself 
from a brother, who by his advice and example 


had hitherto exercised a great influence on the 
direction of my thoughts. He approved the mo- 
tives which determined me to quit Europe; a se- 
cret voice assured us, that we should meet again; 
and that hope, which has not proved delusive, 
softened the pain of a long separation. I left 
Paris with the intention of embarking for Algiers 
and Egypt; but in consequence of one of those 
vicissitudes, which sway the affairs of this life, I 
returned to my brother from the river of Ama- 
zons and Peru, without having touched the conti- 
nent of Africa. 

The Swedish frigate, which was to convey Mr, 
Skioldebrand to Algiers, was expected at Mar- 
seilles toward the end of October. M]. Lonpland 
and myself repaired thither with so much. the 
more celerity, as during our journey we were tor- 
mented with the fear of being too late, and mis- 
sing our passage. We did not at that time fore- 
see the new impediments that awaited us. 

Mr. Skioldebrand was no less impatient than 


10 


ourselves to reach his place of destination. Se- 
veral times a day we climbed the mountain of 
Notre Dame de la Garde, which commands an 
extensive view of the Mediterranean. Every sail 
which we descried in the horizon excited in us 
the most powerful emotion; but after two months 
of anxiety, and vain expectation, we learnt by the 
public papers, that the Swedish frigate, which was 
to convey_us, had suffered greatly in a storm on 
the coasts of Portugal, and had been forced to 
enter the port of Cadiz, to retit. This news was 
confirmed by private letters, assuring us that the 
Jaramas, which was the name of the frigate, 
would not reach Marseilles before the Spring. 
We had not the courage to prolong our stay in 
Provence to this period. ‘The country, and espe- 
cially the climate, were delightful, but the aspect 
of the sea reminded’ us of the failure of our pro- 
jects. In an excursion we made to Hyeres and 
Toulon, we found in this last port the frigate 
la Boudeuse, which had been commanded by Mr. 
de Bougainville in his voyage round the world, 
fitting out for Corsica. This illustrious naviga- 
tor had honored me with particular kindness du- 
ring my stay at Paris, when I was preparing to 
accompany the expedition of Captain Baudin. I 
cannot describe the-impréssion made upon my 
mind by the sight of the vessel which had carried 
Commerson to the islands of the Southern Sea, 
There are dispositions of the soul, in which a 


es 


1] 


painful emotion blends itself with all our fcel- 
ings. 

We still persisted in our intention of visiting 
the African coasts, and were nearly becoming the 
victims of this perseverance.- A small vessel of 
Ragusa, on the point of setting sail for Tunis, 
was at this period in the port of Marseilles; we 
thought the opportunity favorable to reach Egypt 
and Syria, and we agreed with the captain for our 
passage. (The vessel was to sail the following 
day, but a circumstance, trivial in itself, happily 
prevented our departure. The animals that were 
to serve us for food, during our passage, were 
kept in the great cabin. We desired that some 
changes should’ be made, which were indispensa- 
ble for the safety of our instruments ; and during 
this interval we learnt at Marseilles, that the go- 
vernment of Tunis persecuted the French residing 
in Barbary, and that every person coming from a 
French port was thrown into a dungeon. Having 
escaped this imminent danger, we were compelled 
to suspend the execution of our projects, and re- 
solved to pass the winter in Spain, in hopes of 
embarking the next spring, either at Carthagena, 
or at Cadiz, if the political situation of the East 
permitted. 

We crossed Catalonia, and the kingdom of Va- 
lentia, in’ our way to Madrid. We visited the 
ruins of Tarragona, and those of the ancient Sa 
guntum ; and from Barcelona made an excursion 


12 


to Montserrat*, the lofty peaks of which are in- 
habited by hermits,’ and where the contrast be- 
tween luxuriant vegetation, and masses of naked 
and arid rocks, forms a landscape of a peculiar 
character. I employed myself in ascertaining by 
astronomical methods the position of several im- 
portant points for the geography of Spain}, and 
determined by means of the barometer the height 
of the central plaint ; and I made several observa- 


*Mr. William de Humboldt, who travelled through the 
whole of Spain, a short time after my departure from Kurope, 
has given a description of this place in the Geographical 
Epbemerides of Weimar for 1803. 

+ Astronomical Observations, Vol. t. Introduction, page 35 
to 37, and lib. 1, page 3 to 33. At this period the latitude 
of Valencia was still several minutes uncertain. | found the 
cathedral (which Tofino places in 39° 26’ 307) to be 39° 28! 
42”, latitude, and 0° 11’ 0°3 ’’ longitude, Four years later, 
Baron de la Puebla'and M. Mechain fixed this point by ze- 
nith distances taken with a repeating circle, and by the occul- 
tations of stars, to be 39° 28’ 37:6” latitude, and 0° 11/0°6’, 
longitude. At Murviedro (the ancient Saguntum) I deter. 
mined the position of the ruins of the temple of Diana, near 
the convent of the Trinitarians. ‘These ruins are in 39° 40’ 26” 
lat. and 0" 10’ 34” longitude. 

{See my notice on the configuration of the territory of Spain 
in the itinerary of M. de la Borde, vol. 1, p. 147. According 
to M. Bauza, the medium height of the barometer at Madrid 
is 26 inches 2:4 lines, whence it results, according to the 
method of M. Laplace, and the new coefficient of M. Ra- 
mond, that the capital of Spain is 309 toises (603 metres) 
above the level of the ocean. ‘This result is nearly the same 
as that found by Don Jorge Juan, and published .by M. La- 


: 
4 


+3 


tions on the inclination of the needle, and on the 
intensity of the magnetic forces. The results of 
these observations have been separately published, 
and I shall enter mto no detail on the natural 
history of a country, in which I resided only six 
months, and which has recently been examined by 
so many well-informed travellers. 

On my arrival at Madrid I had reason to con- 
gratulate myself on the resolution I had taken to 
visit the peninsula. Baron de Forell, minister 
from the court of Saxony, treated me with a de- 
gree of kindness, of which I soon felt the value. 
He was well versed in mineralogy, and had the 
purest zeal for every undertaking, that promoted 
the progress of knowledge. He observed to me, 
that under the administration of an enlightened 
minister, Don Mariano Luis de Urquijo, I might 
hope to obtain permission to visit, at my own ex- 
pense, the interior of Spanish America. After the 
disappointments I had undergone, I did not hesi- 
tate a moment to adopt this idea. 


lande, by which the height of Madrid above the level of Paris 
is 294 toises (Mem. of the Acad, ‘1776, page 148). The 
highest mountain of the peninsula is not, as has been hitherto 
thought, mount Perdu, but the Mulahacen, which forms part 
of the Sierra Nevada of Grenada. ‘This peak, according to 
the geodesical measurement of Don Clemente Roxas, is 1824 
toises of absolute height, whilst Mount Perdu, in the Pyrenees, 
is only 1763 toises. Near the Mulahacen is situate the Pice 
de Veleta, which is 178] toises. 


14 


I was presented to the court of Aranjuez m 
March, 1799. The king received me graciously. 
I explained to. him the motives, which led me to 
undertake a voyage to the new continent, and the 
Philippine islands, and I presented a memoir on 
this subject to the secretary of state. Mr. d’Ur- 
quijo supported my demand, and overcame every 
obstacle. The conduct of this minister was so 
much the more generous, as I had no personal 
connection with him, and the zeal which he con- 
stantly showed for the execution of my projects 
had no other motive than his love for the sciences. 
I feel that it is no less avduty than a pleasure, to 
record in this work the services which he rendered 
me. 

I obtained two passports, one from the first 
secretary of state, the other from the council of 
the Indies. Never had so extensive a permission 
been granted to any traveller, and never had any 
foreigner been honoured with more confidence on 
the part of the Spanish government. To dissipate 
every doubt, which the viceroys or captains general, 
representing the royal authority in America, might 
entertain with respect to the nature of my labors, the 
passport of the primera secretaria de estado stated, 
that I was authorised to make free use of my 
instruments of physic and geodesy, that I might 
make astronomical observations through the whole 
of the Spanish dominions, measure the height of 
mountains, examine the productions of the soil, 


15 


and execute all operations which I should judge 
useful for the progress of the sciences*. These 
orders of the court were strictly followed, even 
after the events which obliged Mr. d’Urquijo to 
quit the ministry. I endeavoured on my part to 
justify by my conduct these marks of unceasing 
attention. During my abode in America, I 
presented the governors of the Provinces with a 
duplicate of the materials which [I had collected, 
and which might interest the mother country by 
throwing some light on the geography and the 
statistics of the colonies. Agreeably to the offer 
I had made before my departure, I addressed 
‘several geological collections to the cabinet of 
natural history of Madrid. The purpose of our 
journey being merely scientific, we succeeded in 
conciliating the friendship of the natives, and that 
of the Europeans entrusted with the administration 


* Ordena 8. M. a les Capitanes generales, comandantes, 


gobernadores, yntendentes, corregidores y demas justicias no 
impidan por ningun motivo la conduccion de los instrumentos 
de fisica, quimica, astronomia y matematicas, ni el hacer en 
todas las posessiones ultramarinas las observaciones y experi- 
mentos que juzgue utiles, como tampoco el colectar libremen- 
te plantas, animales, semillas y minerales, medir la altura de 
los montes, examinar la naturaleza de estos y hacer observae 
ciones astronomicas y descubrimentos utiles para el progresse 
de las ciencias : pues por el contrario quiere el Rey que todas 
las personas a quienes corresponda, den al B. de Humboldt 
todo el favor, auxilio y proteccion que necessite. (De Arane 
juez, 7 de mayo 1799.) 


16 


of these vast countries. During the five years 
that we travelled throughout the new continent, 
we did not perceive the slightest mark of mistrust ; 
and we remember with pleasure, that amidst the 


most painful privations, and whilst we were strug- 
gling against the obstacles which arose from the 


savage state of those regions, we never had to 


complain of the injustice of men. 


Many considerations might have induced us 
to prolong our abode in Spain. The Abbe Cava- 
nilles, no less remarkable for the variety of his 
attainments than his acute intelligence, Mr. Nee, 
who, together with Mr. Henke, had, as botanist, 


made part of the expedition of Malaspina, and 


who had formed one of the greatest herbals 


that was ever seen in Europe; Don Casimir 
Ortega, the Abbe Pourret, and the learned authors 
of the Flora of Peru, Messrs. Ruiz and Pavon, 
opened to us without restriction their rich collec- 
tions. We examined part of the plants of Mexico, 
discovered by Messrs. Sesse, Mocino and Cervan- 
tes, whose drawings had been sent to the Museum 
_of Natural History of Madrid. This great esta- 
blishment, the direction of which was confided to 
Mr. Clavijo, author of an elegant translation of the 
works of Buffon, offered us, it is true, no geolo- 
gical suite of the CordiHeras,: but Mr. Proust, se 
well known by the great accuracy of his chemical 
labors, and a distinguished mineralogist, Mr. Her- 
gen, gave us curious details on several mineral sub- 


17 


stances of America. It would have been useful to us, 


to have employed a longer time in studying the pro- 
ductions of the countries, which were to be the ob- 


jects of our researches, but our impatience to take 


advantage of the permission given us by the court 
was too great, to suffer us to delay our departure. 
For a year past, I had experienced so many disap- 
pointments, that I could scarcely persuade myself, 
that my most ardent wishes would be at length 
fulfilled. 

We left Madrid about the middle of May, 
crossed a part of Old Castile, the kingdoms of 
Leon and Galicia, and reached Corunna, whence 
we were to embark for the Island of Cuba. The 
winter having been long and tempestuous, we en- 
joyed during the journey that mild temperature of 
the spring, which in so southern a latitude is 
commonly that of March and April. The snow 
still covered the lofty granitic tops of the Guada- 
rama; but in the deep vallies of Gallicia, which 
resemble the most picturesque spots of Switzerland 
and the Tyrol, cistuses loaded with flowers and 
aborescent heaths clothed every rock. We quitted 
without regret the elevated plain of the two Castiles, 
which is every where depr ived of vegetation, and 
where the severity of the winter's cold. is followed 
by the overwhelming heat of summer. From the 
few observations I personally made, the interior 
of Spain forms a vast plain, which, elevated thres 
hundred toises (five hundred and eighty-four 


VOL. I. G 


18 


metres) above the level of the ocean, is covered 
with secondary formations, grit stone, gypsum, 
saleem, and the calcareous stone of Jura. 
The climate of the Castiles is much colder than 
that of Toulon and Genoa ; for its mean temper- 
ature searcely rises to 15° of the centigrade 
thermometer™. 


We are astonished to find, that in the latitude. 


of Calabria, Thessaly, and Asia Minor, the 
orange-trees do not flourish in the open air. The 
central elevated plain is encireled by a low and 
narrow zone, where the chamerops, the date-trec, 


the sugar cane, the banana, and a number of 


plants common to Spain and the norti of Africa, 
vegetate on several spots, without suffering from 
the rigors of winter. From the 36th to the 40th 
degrees of latitude, the medium temperature of the 
year is from 17 to 20 degrees; and by a con- 
currence of circumstances, which it would be too 
long to explain, this happy region is become the 
principal seat of industry and intellectual im- 
provement. 


* Whenever in the course of this work, the contrary is not 
expressly indicated, the variations of the temperature are 
noted after the centigrade scale of the ‘thermometer with 
mercury ; but to avoid the errors which may arise from the 
reductions of the different scales, and.the frequent suppression 
of decimal fractions, I have printed the partiat observations, 
such as the instrument I made use of gave me. On this 
point E have followed the plan adopted by the illustrious 
author of the Basis of the Metrical System, M, Delambre. 

+ For the note see the following page. 


wouer7) 66 *d ‘1 ‘joa ‘AristteyD s,uosmoyy, 


*So.1]9U SOGS ‘YSIapy 
*ysvoo Apues Arq 
*sanjotu £16 “Vystayy 
“sora £09 “YSIefFy 


“Oproquaoypy ap weryytay) 
*y}xou ayy oF suUIeIUDOTY 
‘sanboer ywies 


aD "sama 96g qSMyy 
inn “sivok 7 jo aderaae *(pivanog) 
*(adsng) 

“(argued.1e 44 ) 

“(yong ) 

*auiyised udaysra &19 4 *(10/nq) 


*(qoug pee usz@n) 


YSii9}8e uv pappe 
our aonjd sq. ul 


aaey | 


Oo Sulpjoyun oq} al aunqeseduray UINIPIU IY} Jo aauanyut af} 


00-GT 
00-46 
o¥ SG 
00-AT 
60-GT 
00: ST 
oA GT 
oG LE 
ol OL 
ol OL 
ol 8 
9-4 
o£G 
of G 
oheS 


yavxa ATpenba suo1jeAsasqo Woy pautioj you sem YOIM pue (uoTyPIsURIy 


0} UdTJONpoNjUT ay) UI VARS Y yeqy wo APYSYS stayip 21qe} stqy, 


92:0 “diay, wBeqy 


re 


ial m0) 

/93 sO 

yin OT 
486. Ol 
7G 0 oOP 
PS OF 
nS g ° PF 
ye 3eVv 
jl oP 
pole 2o¥ 
ps oS 
pVE 009 
pW” io 
po 6G 
pd ~ e869 
So 69 
799 0669 


ey 


° ° . ° e e e ° 


oun? 
fe95Q) at} ie [PAs] 9y7 3% Joyenby 


s bas x20) Bld A 
¢ OOIXO TAT 
% PLIPP TAL 
sofden 
awoy 
xU0[N0L, 
Sa] [lassie Ay 
* gt AINA 
€ Boe i ee 
eee 
usseyuadog 
* wmypoyyo03¢ 
eS ne ieee RT erga Th | 
youngs.ia}aq 


o Gao. (elses soe) eck © oauig 


° e . . . ° . 


ae ° e Tinta ©: ° ° 


(on 


6 
° 


° ° e e ° ° 


‘apnjqyey aq} Jo JURpuadapar saourysuinaito ayy Aq 10 ‘uZa20 
SY} JO Toda] 94) adAoqge vorraaya aay) kq fayqia ‘pagipow AprvpaSuis SIYOIYM JO aJVMMIJD 91 ‘saljId Jo sate aq} OF 


“uostirdtuoa Jo SuIta} SB aAtas 0} pajdepr pure Suda sesqo JoRx9 UO papunoy ‘REP Furaojyoy 
aAiF 0} sadoad eq YIM Hi ‘pauonuant uaqyo st aanyjnotiSe yo suoonposd ay pue uonrzetaa 
OAR [RITOJSIY Sig] JO ssined syyursy f 


20 


Ascending from the shores of the Mediterranean i 
into the kingdom of Valencia, towards the lofty } 
plains of La Mancha and the Castiles, we seem ' 
to recognize far inland, from the lengthened de- : 
clivities, the ancient coast of the Peninsula. This 


curious phenomenon recalls the traditions of the 


Samothracians, and other historical testimonies, 


according to which it is supposed, that the eruption 
of the waters through the Dardanelles, augmenting 
the basin of the Mediterranean, rent and’ over- 
flowed the southern part of Europe. If we admit 
that these traditions owe their origin, not to mere 
geological reveries, but to the remembrance of 
some ancient catastrophe, we see the central ele- 
vated plain of Spain resisting the'efforts of these 
great inundations, till the draining of the waters, 
by the straights formed between the pillars of 
Hercules, brought the Mediterranean progressively 
to its present level, while lower Egypt emerged 
above its surface on the one side, and the fertile 
plains of Tarragon, Valencia, and Murcia, on the 
other. Every thing that relates to the formation of 
this sea*, which has had.so powerful an influence 

* Diodor. Sicul. edit. Wesseling. Amstelodam., 1746, 
Lib. IV, c. 18, p. 336; Lib. V, c. 47, p. 369. Dionys, 
Halicarn. ed. Oxon. 1704, Lib. I, c.61, p. 49. Aristot. Opp. 
omn. ed. Casaub. Lugdun. 1590. Meteorolog. Lib I, c. 14, 
t.J, p. 336. H. Strabo, Geogr. ed. Thomas Falconer, Oxon. 
1807, t. I, p. 76 et 83. (Tournefort, Voyage au -Levant, 
p- 124. Pallas, Voyage en Russie, t. V, p. 195. Choiseul- 
Gouffier, Voyage pittoresque, t. II, p. 116. Dureau de la 
Malle, Géographie physique de la mer Noire, p. 157, 196, et 


RO TRS Fae Rn 


21 


on the first civilization of mankind, is highly in- 
teresting, We might suppose, that Spain, forming a 
promontory amidst the waves, was indebted for its 
preservation to the height of its land ; but in order 
to give weight to these systematic ideas, we must 
clear up the doubts that have arisen respecting the . 
rupture of so many transverse dikes; .we must. 
discuss the probability of the Mediterranean having 
been formerly divided into several separate basins, 
of which Sicily and the Isle of Crete appear to 
mark the ancient limits. We will not here risk the 
solution of these problems, but will satisfy ourselves 
in fixing the attention on the striking contrast in 
the configuration of the land in the eastern and 
western extremities of Europe. Between the Baltic 


$41. Olivier, Voyage en Perse, t. Ill, p.130. Meiners 
iiber die Verschiedenbeiten der Menschennaturen, p. 118.) 
Some of the ancient geographers, such as Straton, Eratost- 
henes, and Strabo, believed, that the Mediterranean, swelled 
by the waters of the Euxine, the Palus Meotis, the Caspian 
sea, and the lake Aral, had broken the pillars of Hereules ; 
others, such as Pomponius Mela, admitted, that the irruption 
was made by the waters of the ocean, In the first of these 
hypotheses, the height of the land between the Black Sea and 
the Baltic, and between, the ports of Cette and Bourdeaux, 
determine the limit, which the accumulation of the waters may 
have reached before the junction of the Black sea, the Mediter- 
ranean, and the Ocean, as well to the north of the Dardanelles» 
as to’ the east of this strip of land, which ‘formerly joined 
Europe to Mauritania, and of which in the time of Strabo 
certain vestiges remained in the Islands of Juno and_ the 


Moon. 


22 


and the Black Sea, the ground is at present 
searcely fifty toises above the level of the ocean, 
while the plain of La Mancha, if placed between 
the sources of the Nicmen and the Borysthenes, 
would figure as a group of mountains of consider- 
able height. If the causes, which may have 
changed the surface of our planet, be an interesting 
speculation, investigations of the phenomena, such 
as they offer themselves to the measures and 
observations of the naturalist, lead to far greater 
certainty. 

From Astorga to Corunna, especially from Lugo, 
the mountains rise gradually. The secondary 
formations gently disappear, and are succeeded by 
the transition rocks, which indicate the proximity 
of primitive strata. We found considerable 
mountains composed of that ancient gray stone, 
which the mineralogists of the school of Freibourg 
name grauwakke, and grauwakkenschiefer. Ido 
not know whether this formation, which is not 
frequent in the south of Europe, has hitherto been 
discovered in other parts of Spain. Angular frag- 
ments of lydian stone, scattered along the vallies, 
seemed to indicate, that the transition schist is the 
basis of the strata of grauwakke. Near Corunna 
eyen granitic ridges stretch as far as Cape Ortegal. 
These granites, which seem formerly to have been 
contiguous to those of britanny and Cornwall, are 
perhaps the wrecks of a chain of mountains de- 
stroyed and sunk in the waves. Large and 
beautitul crystals of feldspath characterize ‘this 


29 


cock; the common tin ore is sometimes dis- 
covered there, the working of which is a laborious 
and unprofitable operation for the inhabitants of 
Gallicia. 

When we reached Corunna, we found the port 
blockaded by an Euvlish man of war and two 
frigates, which were stationed to intercept the 
communication between the mother-country and 
the American colonies; since it was from Corunna, 
and not from Cadiz, that a packet boat (correo 
maritimo,) sailed every month for the Havannah, 
and another every two months for Buenos Ayres, 
or the mouth of the river Plata. I shall in the 
course of my work give an exact statement of the 
posts on the new continent; and shall here only 
observe, that since the administration of Count 
Florida Blanca, the service of the land post othce 
has been so well organized, that an iahabitant of 
Renae: or of the province of Jaen de Braca~ 


moros *, may carry on a regular corres} pondence 
with New Mexico, or the coasts of California, at a 
distance equal to that from Paris to Siam, or from 
Vienna to the Cape of Good. Hope. In the same 
manner, a letter ‘confided to the post in a small 
town of Aragon arrives at Chili, or in the tuisslons 
of the Oronoco, provided the name of the corregi- 


mento, or district that comprises the gee village 
to which the letter is addressed, be distinctly 
marked. It is pleasing to recall to mind institu- 


*-On the banks of the river of Aiiazons. 


24 


tions, which may be considered as among the great- 
est benefits of modern civilization. The establish- 
ment of maritime and inland posts has placed the 
colonies in more intimate intercourse with each 
other, and with the mother-country. The circula- 
tion of ideas is become more expeditious; the 
complaints of the natives reach Europe with more 
facility, and the supreme authority has sometimes 
succeeded in repressing yexations, which, from the 
distance of the place, would have remained for 
ever unknown, 


a! ees ‘aarota tat reeammenda 
Phe first. secretary of state had recommendec 


te ded 
us yery particularly to the Riad Don, Raphael 
Clavijo, who had lately been named. director- 
general of the maritime posts. er, dis- 
tinguished for his talent in ship-building, was em- 


=? 


ployed in fonming new dock-yar!s at Corvana. 
He neglected igi to render our abode at this 
port agreeable, and advised us to embark on board 
the sloop Pivaiirot, ancl was to sail in company 
with the Alcudia, the packet-boat of the month of 
May, which, on aecount a the blockade, had been 
detained three weeks. in the port. The Pizarro 
was not esteemed a swift sailer ; but she had happily 
escaped the English vessels in her Jong voyage 
from the river Plata to Corunna, Mr, Clavijo 
ordered the necessary arrangements to be made on 
board the sloop for placing our instruments, and 


* According to the Spanish nomenclature, the Pizarro was 
alight frigate: (fragata lijera). 


mtbr 


Rt RR a nD 


25 


facilitating the means of making chemical, experi- 
ments on the air, during our passage. The 


captain of the Pizarro received orders to stop at 


Teneriff, as long as we should judge necessary, to 
visit the port of Orotava, and ascend the peak. 
We had yet ten days to wait before we embarked, 
which seemed to us a long delay. During this 
interval, we employed ourselves in preparing the 
plants we lad collected in the beautiful valies of 
Gallicia, which no naturalist had yet visited: we 
examined the fuci and the mollusce which the 
north west winds had cast with great profusion at 
the foot of the steep rock, on which the light-house 
of the tower of Hercules is built. This edifice; 
called also the Iron Tower, was repaired in 1788, 
It is ninety-two feet high, its walls are four. feet and 
a half thick, and its construction clearly proves, that 
it was built by the Romans. An inscription -dis- 
covered, near its foundations, a copy of. which 
M. Laborde obligingly gave me, informs us, that 
this pharos was constructed by Caius Sevius Lupus, 
architect of the city of Aqua Flavia (Chaves), and 
that it was dedicated to Mars. Why is the Iron 
Tower called in the country by the name of Her- 
cules ? Was it built by the Romans on the ruins of 
a Greek, or Phoenician edifice? Strabo, indeed, 
affirms, that Gallicia, the country of the Calleci, 
had been peopled by Greek colonies. According 
fo an extract from the geography of Spain, by 
Asclepiades the Myrlean, an ancient, tradition 


206 


stated, that the ae ae of Hercules had 
setited in these countries *. 

I made the necessary observations to assure 
myself of the rate of going of Lewis Berthoud’s 
time-keeper, and I had the satisfaction to find, that 
t had not changed its diurnal retardation, notwith- 
standing the shocks it had met with in our journey 
from Madrid to Corunna. This circumstance was 
the more important, as much uncertainty existed 
respecting the true longitude wii ‘errol, the centre 
of which town is 10’ 20” east of the tower 
of Hercules at Corunna. An _ occultation 
of Aldebaran, and a long series of eclipses of 
Jupiter’s satellites, observed by Admiral Mazar- 
redo, and calculated by Mechain, seemed to prove 
that, in the maritime atlas of Tofino, which is in 
ether respects so accurate in the indication of 
partial distances, the determinate positions of 
Corunna and Ferrol were inexact by two or three 


leagues. My time-keeper confirmed these doubts 


respecting the operations. of Tofino, I found + 


* Strabo, ed; Casaub. Lutet. Par. 1620, Lib, IIT, p. 157, 
The Phoenicians and Greeks visited the coasts of Gallicia 
(Gallecia) to trade for tin, which they drew from this country | 
as well as from the Cassiterides, Strabo, Lib. III, p. 147. 
Plin. Lib. XXXIV, c. 16. 

+ Observat. Astron. Introd. p. xxxvi, t. I, p. 24 et 33; 
Espinosa, Memorias sobre las observaciones astron. hechas 
por los navegantes espanoles, 1809, t. i, pe 25 If we 
suppose, that my chronometer did not augment its diurnal 
retardation during the passage from Madrid to Corunna, which 


ME 


27 


the observatory of the Admiralty at Ferrol 
O! 42, %i4 west of Paris. The mean of all the 
observations made by the Spanish astronomers, 
and lately published by Mr. Espinosa, gives 
Oh 49’ 2:5” J have already observed, that 
several expeditions having set sail from this last 
port, the false position, which has been laid down, 
has had a disadvantageous influence on the longi- 
tudes of several towns of America, determined 
not by absolute observations, but only by the 
difference of time. Although time-keepers extend 
the limits of our geographical knowledge, they 
often contribute to propagate the mistake in the 
longitude of the point of departure, Uecause they 
render“the position of the coast in the most distant 
regions dependent on this single point. 

The ports of Ferrol and Corunna communi- 
cate with the same bay, so that.a vessel driven by 
bad weather towards the coast may anchor in 
either according to the wind. This advantage 
is invaluable, where the sea is almost always tem- 
pestuous, as between the Capes Ortegal and 
Finisterre, which are the promontories Trileu- 
cum and Artabrum* of the ancient geography. 
A narrow passage, flanked by perpendicular rocks 


would be contrary to direct experiments made at Marseilles, 
the longitude of Ferrol will still be 23’ of time more than 
that at which it is fixed by Mr. Tofino, 

* Ptolemy. cites the port of the Artabri: Geogr. Lib. II. 
cap. 6. (Bertsi Theatr. geograph. vet, Amstels, 1618, p. 34.) 


28 


of granite, leads to the extensive basin of Ferrol. 
No port in Europe has so extraordinary an an- 
chorage, from its very inland position. The nar- 
row and tortuous passage, by which, vessels enter 
this port, has been opened, either by the irruption 
of the waves, or by the reiterated shocks of very 
violent earthquakes. In the New World, on the 
coasts of new-Andalusia, the Laguna del Obispo, 
(Bishop’s lake) is formed exactly like the port of 
Ferrol. The most curious geological phenomena 
are often repeated at immense distances. on. the 
surface of continents; and the naturalists, who 
have examined different parts of the globe, are 
struck with the extreme resemblance observed in 
the rents on coasts, in the sinuosities of the vallies, 
in the aspect of the mountains, and in. their distri- 
bution by groups. The accidental concurrence 
of the same causes must have every where pro- 
duced the same effects; and amidst the variety 
of nature, an. analogy of structure ‘and form is 
observed in the arrangement of brute matter, as 
well as in the internal organization of plants and of. 
animals. 

Crossmg from Corunna to Ferrol, in shallow 
water, near the White Signal; in the bay, which 
according to d’Anville is the Portus Magnus of 
the Ancients, we made several experiments by means 
of a valved thermometrical sounding lead, on the 
temperature of the ocean, and on the decrement.of 


caloric in, the. successive strata of water. ~The 


29 


thermometer on the bank, and near the surface; 
was from 12°5° to 13°3° centigrades, while in deep 
water it constantly marked 15° or 15°3°, ‘the air 
being at 12°8°. The celebrated Franklin, and 
Mr. Jonathan Williams, author of the work 
which appeared at Philadelphia under the title of 
Thermometrical Navigation, were the first to in- 
vite the attention of naturalists to the phenomena 
of the temperature of the ocean over’ shoals, 
and in that zone of tepid and flowing waters, 
which runs from the Gulf of Mexico to the Banks 
ef Newfoundland, and the northern coasts of 
Europe. The observation, that the proximity of a 
sand-bank is indicated by a rapid descent of the 
temperature of the sea at its surface, is not only in- 
teresting to the naturalist, but may become also 
very important for the safety of navigators. The 
use of the thermometer ought certainly not to lead 
us to neglect the use of the lead; but the 
experiments, which I shall mention in the course 
of this narrative, sufficiently prove, that variations 
of temperature, sensible>to the most imperfect 
instruments, indicate danger long before the ves- 
sel reaches the shoals. In such cases, the frigid- 
ity of the water may engage the pilot to heave the 
lead'in places, where he thought himself in the 
most perfect safety. We shall examine in ano- 
ther place the natural causes of these complicated 
phenomena; and shall only here observe, that 
the waters. which cover the shoals owe in a great 


36 


measure the diminution of their temperature to 
their mixture with the lower strata of water, 
which rise towards the surface on the edge of the 
banks. . 

A heavy sea from the North-west hindered us 
from continuing our experiments on the tempera- 
ture of the ocean in the bay. of Ferrol. The great 
height Of the waves was the effect of an impetu- 
ous wind at sea, and forced the English vessels 
to retire from the coast. Desirous to avail our- 
selves of this opportunity of sailing, we instantly 
embarked our instruments, books, and baggage ; 
butthe west wind, which blew still more impetu- 
ously, did not permit us to weigh anchor, and 
during this delay we wrote to our friends in 
France and Germany. The moment of leaving 
Europe for the first time is attended with a so- 
Jemn feeling. We in vain summon to our minds 
the frequency of the communication between the 
two worlds; we in vain reflect on the great facility, 
with which, from the improved state of navigation, 
we traverse the Atlantic, which compared to the 
great ocean is but a larger arm of the sea; the 
sentiment we feel when we first undertake so dis- 
tant a voyage is not the less accompanied by @ 
deep emotion, unlike any other impression we 
have hitherto felt. Separated from the objects of 
our dearest affections, entering in some sort on @ 
new state of existence, we are forced to turn back 
-on the family of our thoughts, and we find them 


ative abicinhes aecsiaces ae a ee eel 


$1 


in a situation which they have never known before. 
Among the letters which I wrote at the time of 
our embarking, one had a considerable influence 
on the direction of our travels, and on our suc- 
ceeding operations. When I left Paris with the 
intention of visiting the coasts of Spain, the expe- 
dition for discoveries in the Southern Ocean seem- 
ed to be adjourned for several years. I had 
agreed with Captain Baudin, that if, contrary 
to his expectation, his voyage took place at an 
earlier period, and the news should reach me in 
time, I would endeavour to return from Algiers to 
a port in France, or Spain, to join the expedition. 
I renewed this promise on leaving Europe, and 
wrote to M. Baudin, that if the government per- 
sisted in sending him by Cape Horn, I would 
endeavour to meet him, either at Monte Video, 
Chili, or Lima, or wherever he should touch in the 
Spanish. Colonies. In consequence of this en- 
gagement, I changed the plan of my journey, on 
reading in the American papers, in 1801, that the 
French expedition had sailed from the port of 
Havre, to make the tour of the globe from east 
to west. I hired a small vessel from Batabano, 
in the Island of Cuba, to Portobello, and 
thence crossed the isthmus to the coasts of the 
southern ocean; this mistake of a journalist led 
M. Bonpland and myself to travel eight hundred 
leagues through a country we had no intention to 
visit. It was only at Quito, that a letter from M. 


Ne) 


8 


Delambre, perpetual secretary of the first class of 
the institute, informed us, that Captain Baudin 
went by the Cape of Good Hope, without touch- 
ing on the eastern or western coasts of America. 

I cannot recal without regret an expedition, 
which is connected with. several events of my life, 
and. the history of which has lately been sketched 
by a * man of science, no less distinguished for 
the number of his discoveries, than by the noble 
courage which he displayed in circumstances of 
extreme difficulty and danger. 

When I went into Spain I could not carry with 
ime the complete collection of my physical, geo- 
desical, and astronomical instruments. I had left 
the duplicates at Marseilles, with the :ntention of 
ordering them to be sent to Tunis or Algiers, 
when I should find an opportunity of passing 
over to the coasts of Barbary. In peaceable 
times travellers ought by no means to carry with 
ther the coniplete collection of their instruments : 
they should on the contrary cause them to be sent 
successively, ii order to replace such as suffer 
most by use and carriage. This precaution is 
- particularly necessary, when they are obliged to 
determine a great number of points by means 
merely chrohometrical. But in times of maritime 


* Mr. Peron, lost’'to the sciences at thirty five years of 
age, after a long and painful iliIness, See an interesting me- 


roir on the life of this traveller, by Mr. Deleuze, in his An- 


nales du Maseum, t. 17. 


i 
7 
| 
9 
1 
‘ 


Se TR PRD ANE EET 


33 


warfare, it is highly prudent never to lose sight 
either of instruments, manuscripts, or collections. 
Sad experience, as I have observed in the intro- 
duction to this work, has confirmed the justness 
of this observation. Our abode at Madrid and 
Corunna had been too short, to transport from 
Marseilles the meteorological apparatus I had 
left. 

It was in vain that I requested its being sent 
to the Havannah, after our return from the Ori- 
noco; neither the apparatus nor the achromatic 
telescopes, nor the timekeeper by Arnold, which I 
had sent for to London, reached America. The 
following is the list of the instruments I had col- 
lected for my journey from the year 17y7, and 
which, excepting a small number easy to replace, 
erved me till 1804 


LisT OF THE PHYSICAL AND ASTRONOMICAL 
INSTRUMENTS. 


A timekeeper by Lewis Berthoud, No. 27. 
This timekeeper had belonged to the celebrated 
Borda. I have published the detail of its rate 
of going, in the introduction to my collection of 
astronomical observations; 

A demi-chronometer by Seyffert, serving for as- 
certaining the longitude at short distances ; 

A three-foot achromatic telescope by Dollond, in- 
tended for the observation of Jupiter’s satellites ; 

VOL, I. D 


34 


A. telescope by Caroché, of less dimensions, with 
an apparatus to fix the instrument to the trunk 
of a tree, in forests ; 

A lunette @epreuve, with a micrometer engraved 
on glass, by M. Kéhler, astronomer at .Dres- 
den. This apparatus, placed on the plane of the 
artificial horizon, serves to level bases, to 
measure the progress of an eclipse of the sun or 

the moon, and determine the value ‘of very 

small angles under which very remote mountains 
appear ; 

A sextant by Ramsden, of ten inches radius, with 
a silver Jimb, and telescopes which magnify 
from twelve to sixteen times ; 

A snuffboxr sextant by Troughton, of two inches 

a nonius divided into minutes, teles- 

agnify four times, and an artificial 

This small instrument is 

forced in a boat 

or take 


radius, with 
copes which m 
horizon of crystal. 
very useful for travellers when 
to lay down the sinuosities of a river, 
angles on horseback without dismounting ; 

A reflecting and repeating circle by Le Noir, of 
twelve inches diameter, with a mirror of platina® ; 

A theodolite by Hurter, the azimuth circle of 
which was eight inches in diameter 5 

An artificial horizon by Caroché, of plane glass, 


* } have compared in another place the advantages and 
of the reflecting instruments 


disadvantages, in long journeys, 
(Astron. Obsero. Introd. 


and astronomical repeating circles. 
t. 1, p. W-) 


' | 


Se ee ee 


35 


six inches in diameter, with an air bubble level, 
the divisions of which are equivalent to two 
sexagesimal seconds ; 

A quadrant by Bird, with a radius of a foot, 
furnished with a double division of the limb into 
ninety and ninety-six degrees, the micrometer 
screw indicating two sexagesimal seconds; the 
perpendicularity of the plane capable of being 
determined by means of a plummet and a large 
air-bubble level ; 

A graphometer by Ramsden, placed on a cane, 
with a magnetic needle, and a wire meridian 
to take magnetical azimuths ; 

A dipping needle of twelve inches, constructed on the 
principles of Borda and Le Noir. ‘This instru- 
ment, of the most perfect execution, was ceded to 
me, at the time of my departure, by the French 
board of longitude. The figure of this instru- 
ment will be found in the narrative of the 
voyage of d’Entrecasteaux*, the astronomical 
part of which was composed by a learned 
navigator, M. de Rossel. An azimuth circle 
serves to find the plane of the magnetic meri- 
dian, either by correspondent dips, or by 
seeking the position im which the needle is 
vertical, or observing the minimum of the 
dippings. The instrument is verified by ob- 


* Vol, ji, p. 14. 
pn2 


36 


serving on the east and west side, and chang- 

ing the poles: 

A variation compass by Le Noir, constructed on 
the principles of Lambert, and furnished with 
a wire meridian. The nonius was divided at 
every two minutes ;- 

A needle twelve inches long, furnished with sight- 
canes, and suspended to an untwisted thread 
according to the method of Coulomb. » This 
apparatus, like the magnetic telescope of Prony, 
served meto determine the small horary variations 
of the magnetic variation, and the intensity of 
the forces which change with the latitudes. 
The oscillations of the great magnetic dipping 
needle of M. Le Noir give also a very exact 
measure of this last phenomenon. 

A magnetometer of Saussure ™, constructed by 
M. Paul at Geneva, with a limb that corres- 
ponds to an arch of three feet radius ; 

An invariable pendulum, constructed by Mr- 
Megnie, at Madrid ; 

Two barometers by Ramsden ; 

Two barometrical apparatuses+, with the aid of 

which we find the mean height of the barometer, 


* This magnetometer, which I found inaccurate, the theodo- 


lite, and reflecting circle, are the only instruments which 1 


could not embark with me at Corunna. 
+ I have described this apparatus in the Journal de 


Physique, t. xlvii, p. 468, and in my ‘Observ. Astron. 


t. i, p, 3600. 


87 


by successively plunging into a vessel several 
glass tubes, filled with mercury, closed at 
one end by a steel screw, and placed in a 
metal case ; 

everal thermometers by Paul, Ramsden, Megnie, 
and Fortin; 


Two hygrometers of Saussure and Deluc, of hair 


and whalebone ; 


Two electrometers of Bennet and Saussure, of 


gold leaf and elder pith, furnished with con- 
ductors four feet long, to collect, according to 
the method prescribed by Mr. Volta, the 
electricity of the atmosphere, by means of an 


ignited substance which yields smoke ; 


A cyanometer by Paul. To give me the means of 


comparing with some certainty the blue colour 
of the sky, as it is seen on the summit of the 
Alps and the Cordilleras, M. Pictet had this 
cyanometer colored conformably to the division 
of that which M. de Saussure made use of at 
the top of Mount Blanc, and during his memor- 
able abode at the Col du Geant; 


An eudiometer of Fontana, for nitrous gas ; with- 


out strictly knowing how. many parts of this gas 
are necessary to saturate a portion of oxygen, 
we may still precisely determine the quantity of 
atmospheric azote, and consequently the purity 
vf the air, by employing, beside the nitrous 
gas, the oxygenated imuriatic acid, or a solu- 
tion of sulphat of iron. Volta’s cudiometer, 


58 


though the most exact of any, is embarrassing 

for travellers, who traverse damp countries, on 

account of the small electric discharge, which the 

inflammation of oxygen and hydrogen gasses 

requires. The most portable eudiometrical ap- 

paratus, the most ‘speedy and most eligible in 

every respect, is that published by M. Gay- 
Lussac in the memoirs of the society of 
Arcueil®* ; 

A phosphoric eudiometer by Reboul. By the 
nice researches of Mr. Thenard, on charcoal 
mixed with phosphorus, it is proved, that the 
slow action of this acidifiable basis | yields re- 
sults less exact than strong combustion ; 

An apparatus by Paul, proper to determine with 
the greatest precision the degree at which water 
boils at different heights, above the level of the 
ocean. The thermometer with a double nonius 
had been constructed from the apparatus, which 
M. de Saussure employed in his excursions ; 

A thermometrical lead by Dumotier, consisting 
of a cylindric vase, furnished with two conical 
valves, and enclosing a thermometer ; 

Two areometers of Nicholson and Dollond ; 

A compound microscope of Hofmann, described in 


* Vol. 2, p. 235. See also the memoirs in the composi- 
tion of the air which I published conjointly with Mr. Gay- 
Lussac in the Journal de Physique, vol. lix, p. 129, and my 
Zoological Observations, vol. i, p. 256. 

+ Bulletin of the Philomathic Society, 1812, No 37,p. 93. 


39 


the history of the Cryptogamie by Mr. Hedwig; 
a standard metre by Le Noir, a land surveyor’s 
chain; an assay-balance ; a rain gauge 5 tubes 
of absorption to indicate small quantities of 
carbonic acid aad oxygen, by means of lime- 
water, or a solution of sulphuret of potash ; some 
HHauy’s electroscopical apparatuses ; vases to 
measure the quantity of the evaporation of 
liquids in the open air; a mercurial artificial 
horizon ; small Leyden phials to be charged by 
rubbing; galvanic apparatus ; reagents to try 
some experiments on the chemical composition 
of mineral waters, and a great number of small 
tools necessary for travellers to repair such in- 
struments as might be deranged from the fre- 
quent falls of the beasts of burden. 


We spent two days at Corunna, after our instru- 
ments were embarked. A thick fog, which covered 
the horizon, at length indicated the change of 
weather we so anxiously desired. On the 4th of 
June, in the evening, the wind turned to the north 
east, a point, which, on the coast of Gallicia, is con- 
sidered. very constant during the summer. The 
Pizarro prepared to sail on the 5th, though we had 
intelligence but a few hours before, that an English 
squadron had been hailed from the watch tower of 
Sisarga, appearing to stand towards the mouth of 


- the Tagus. Those who saw our ship weigh anchor, 


asserted that we should be captured in three days, 


40 


and that, forced to follow the fate of the vesse., 
we should be carried to Lisbon. ‘This prognostic 
gave us the more uneasiness, as we had known 
some Mexicans at Madrid, who, in order to re- 
turn to Vera-Cruz, had embarked three times at 
Cadiz, and who, having been each time taken at 
the entrance’ of the port, were obliged to return 
to Spain through Portugal. 

The Pizarro set sail at two in the afternoon. 
As the long and narrow passage by which a ship 
sails from the port of Corunna opens towards the 
north, and the wind was contrary, we made eight 
short tacks, three of which were useless. A fresh 
tack was made, but very slowly, and we were for 
some moments in danger at the foot of the fort St. 
Amarro; the current having driven us very near 
the rock, ‘on which the sea breaks with considerable 
violence. We remained with our eyes fixed on 
the castle of St.t Antony, where the unfortunate 
Malaspina* was then a captive in a state prison. 
On the point of leaving Europe to visit the 
countries which this illustrious traveller had 
visited with so much advantage, I could have 
wished to have fixed my thoughts on some object 
less affecting. 

At half past six we passed the tower of Her- 
cules, which is the lighthouse of Ccrunna, as 
we have alieady mentioned, and where, from the 

* Essai Politique sur le Mexique, t. I, p. 338. Observ. 


Astron. t. I, p. 34. 


~ 5 


SSS 


Tr 


41 


remotest times, a coal fire is kept up for the direc« 
tion of vessels. ‘The light of this fire is no way 
proportionate to the beautiful construction of so 
vast an edifice; being so weak, that the ships cannot 
perceive it till they are in danger of striking on the 
shore: Towards the close of day, the wind in- 
creased, and the sea ran high. We directed our 
course to the north west, in order to avoid the 
English frigates, which we supposed were cruiz- 
ing off those coasts. About nine we spied the 
light of a fishing hut, at Sisarga, which was. the 
last object we beheld in the west of Europe. As 
we advanced, this feeble light mingled itself with 
the stars, which rose on the horizon ; and our eyes 
remained involuntarily fixed on this object. Such 


impressions are not easily effaced from the memory 
of those who have undertaken long voyages, at an 
age when the emotions of the heart are in full 


vigour. How many remembrances are awakened 
in the imagination by a luminous point, which in 
the midst of an obscure night, appearing at in- 
tervals above the swelling waves, points out the 
coast of our native home! 

We were obliged to run under our courses, at 
the rate of ten knots, though the vessel was not 
constructed for making such way. At six in the 
morning the ship rolled so much, that the fore-top 
gallant mast was carried away, but without any 
disagreeable consequence. As we were thirteen 
days in our passage from Corunna to the Canary 


42 


Islands, it was long enough to expose us to the 
danger of meeting English vessels, on stations so 
much frequented as the coasts of Portugal. No 
sail however appeared in sight the first three days, 
which gave encouragement to the crew, who were 
no way prepared for fighting. 

On the 7th we were in the latitude of Cape Finis- 
terre. The groupof granitic rocks, which forms part 
of this promontory, like that of Toriafies and Mont 
de Corcubion, bears the name of the Sierra de 
Torifona. Cape Finisterre is lower than the 
neighbouring lands ; but the Torifiona is visible at 
sea at 17 leagues distance, which proves that the 
elevation of its highest summit is not less than 300 
toises (582 metres). The spanish navigators pre- 
tend, that on these coasts the magnetic varia- 
tion differs extremely from that observed at sea. 
M. Bory*, it is true, in the voyage of the 
sloop Amaranth, found, in 175}, that the 
variation of the needle, determined at the Cape, 
was four degrees less than could have been con- 
jectured from the observations made at the same 
period, along the coasts. In the same manner as 
the granite of Gallicia contains tin disseminated in 
its mass, that of Cape Finisterre probably contains 
micaceous iron. In the mountains of the Upper 
Palatinate, there are indeed granitic rocks, in 


% Mémoires de L’Académie des Sciences, 1768, p. 280. 


Fleurieu, Voyage de V’Isis, t. 1, p. 225. 


a 


43 


_which crystals of micaceous iron take the place of 
4 ay 


common mica. 

The 8th, at sunset, we descried from the mast- 
head an English convoy, which sailed alongthe coast, 
steering towards the south east. In order to 
avoid it, we altered our course during the night. 
From this moment’no light was permitted in the 
great cabin, to prevent our being seen at a distance. 
This precaution, used on board allmerchant vessels, 
and prescribed in the regulations: of the packet- 
boats of the royal navy, was extremely irksome 
to us during the passages we made in the course 
of the five following years. We were constantly 
obliged to make use of dark-lanterns to examine 
the temperature of the water, or read the divisions 
on the limb of the astronomical instruments. In 
the torrid zone, where twilight lasts but a few 
minutes, our operations ceased almost at six in 
the evening. ‘This state of things was so much the 
more displeasing to me, as from the nature of 
my constitution I never was subject to sea-sick- 
ness, and feel an extreme ardour for study during 
the whole time I am at sea, 

A voyage from the coast of Spain to the 
Canary Islands, and thence to South Ame- 
rica, is scarcely attended with any event which 
deserves attention, especially when undertaken in 
summer. The navigation is often less dangerous 
than crossing one of the great lakes of Swit- 
zerland, I shall therefore confine. myself in this 


44 


narrative to the general results of the magnetic 


and metereological experiments, which I made in 
this part of the ocean ; and offer some observations, 
which may prove interesting to navigators. What- 
ever relates to the variations of the temperature 
of the air, and that of the sea, the hygrometrical 
state of the atmosphere, the blue colour of the 
sky, the inclination and intensity of the magnetic 
focus, will be found collected in my journal at the 
end of the third chapter, where it will be seen, 
from the detail and number of experiments, that 
we endeavoured to make the best use possible of 
the instruments with which we were furnished. 
It were to be wished, that the same observations 
could be repeated in the African and Asiatic seas, 
to indicate éxactly the constitution of the atmos- 
phere which covers the great basin of the waters. 
The 9th of June, latitude 39° 50’, and longitude 
16° 10° west of the meridian of the observatory 
of Paris, we began to feel the effects of the great cur- 
rent, which from the Azores directs itself towards 
the straits of Gibraltar, and the Canary Islands. 
Comparing the place of our ship deduced from 
Berthoud’s time-keeper with the pilot’s reckoning, 
I was able to discover the smallest variations in 
the direction and velocity of the currents. From 
$7° to 30° of latitude, the vessel was some- 
times, carried in twenty-four hours, from eighteen 
to twenty-six miles to the east. The direction of 
the current was at first E by S, buat nearer the 


45 


straits it became due east. Captain Mackin- 
tosh, and one of the most distinguished navigators 
of our time, Sir Erasmus Gower, have noticed the 
modifications of this movement of the waters at 
different seasons of the year. Several pilots who 
frequent the Canary Islands have found them- 
selves on the coasts of Lancerotte, when they 
expected to make good their landing on the Isle 
of Teneriff. M. de Bougainville*, in his passage , 
from Cape Finisterre to the Canary Islands, found 
himself in sight of the Isle of Ferro, 4° more to 
the east than his reckoning indicated. 

The current which is felt between the Azores, 
the southern ceasts of Portugal, and the Canary 
Islands, is commonly attributed to that tendency 
towards the east, which the straits of Gibraltar im- 
press on the waters of the Atlantic Ocean. M. de 
Fleurieu, in notes added to the voyage of Captain 
Marchant, observes even, that the Mediterranean, 
losing, by evaporation, more water than. the 
rivers can supply, causes a movement in the neigh- 
bouring ocean, and that the influence of the Straits 
is felt at the distance of six hundred leagues. 
Without derogating from the sentiments of esteem 
which I owe to this celebrated navigator, from 
whose works I have derived much imstruction, I 
may be permitted to consider this important 
object in a far more general point of view. 


* Voyage round the World, vol. i, p. 10. 
f Vol. ii, p. 9 and 229. 


46 


When .we cast our eyes over the Atlantic, or 
that deep valley which divides the western coasts 
of Europe and Africa from the eastern coasts of 
the new continent, we distinguish a contrary di- 
rection in the motion of the waters. Between the 
tropics, especially fram the coasts of Senegal to 
the Caribbean sea, the general current, that 
which was earliest known to mariners, flows con- 
stantly from east to west. This is called the Equi- 
noctial current. Its mean rapidity, corresponding 
to different latitudes, is nearly the same in the 
Atlantic and in the Southern Ocean*, and may be 
estimated at nine or ten miles in twenty-four hours, 
consequently from 0°39 to0°65 ofa foot everysecond! 
In those latitudes the waters run towards the west, 
with a velocity equal to a fourth of the rapidity of 
the greater part of the large rivers of Europe. The 
movement of theocean, in a direction contrary to 
that of the retation of the globe, is probably con- 
nected with this last phenomenon, only as faras the 
rotation changes the polar winds, which, in the 
low regions of the atmosphere, bring back the cold 
air of the high latitudes towards tke equator, into 


* In comparing the observations which I had occasion to 
make in the two hemispheres, with those which are laid down 
in the voyages of Cook, La Péyrouse, d’Entrecasteaux, Van- 
couver,’ Macartney, Krusenstern and Marchand, I found that 
the swiftness of the general current of the tropics, varies 
from 5 to 18 miles in twenty-four hours, or 0°3 to 1:2 feet 


each second, 


* 


47 


trade winds*. To this general impulsion, which 
these trade winds give the surface of the seas, we 
must attribute the equinoctial current, the force 
and rapidity of which are not sensibly modified 
by the local variations of the atmosphere. 

In the channel which the Atlantic has dug be- 
tween Guiana and Guinea, on the meridian of 
20 or 23 degrees, from the 8th or 9th to the 2d 
or 8d degrees of northern latitude, where the 
trade winds are often interrupted by the winds 
which blow from the south, and south-south-west, 
the equinoctial current is more inconstant in its 
direction. ‘Towards the coasts of Africa, the ves- 
sels are drawn towards the south-east ; whilst to- 
wards the Bay of All-Saints and Cape St. Augus- 
tin, the coasts of which are dreaded by navigators 
who are sailing towards the mouth of the Plata ; 
the general motion of the waters is masked by a 
particular current, the effects of which extend from 
Cape St. Roche to the Isle of Trinidad; and which 
runs north-west with a mean velocity of a foot 


or a foot and a half every second. 


The equinoctial current is felt, though feebly, 
even beyond the tropic of Cancer, in the 26th and 
28th degrees of latitude. Jn the vast basin of 


* Halley, on the cause of the general trade winds, in the 
Philosoph. Ti ans. for the year 1735, p. 58. Dalton, Meteorolog. 
Exp. and Essays, 1793, p. 89. Laplace, Explan. of the System 
of the World; p. 227. The limits of the trade winds were, 
for the first time, determined by Dampierre, in 1666. 


48 


the Atlantic, at six or seven hundred leagues from 


the coasts of Africa, the vessels from Europe bound 
to the West Indies, find their sailing accelerated be- 
fore they reach the torrid zone. 
north, under 28 and 35 degrees, between the 
parallels of Teneriff- and Ceuta, in 46 and 48 
degrees of longitude, no constant motion is ob- 


More to the 


served ; there, a zone of 140 leagues in breadth’ 


separates the equinoctial current, the tendency of 


which is towards the west, from that great mass 


of water which runs towards the east, and is dis- 


tinguished for its extraordinary high temperature. 


To this mass of waters, known by the name of the 


Gulf-stream *, the attention of naturalists was di- 


rected in 1776 by the curious observations of 


Franklin, and Sir Charles Blagden. 


Its direction 


having lately become an important object of inves- 


tigation among the English and American naviga- 


tors, wemust go farther back, to take a more general 


view of this phenomenon. 


The equinoctial current drives the waters of the 


Atlantic towards the coasts inhabited by the 


Mosquito Indians, and towai 


oat 


Us 


those of Hon- 


duras. The New Continent, stretching from 


south to north, forms a sort of dyke to this cur- 
rent. The waters are carried at first to the north- 
west, and passing into the gulf of Mexico through 


* Sir Francis Drake had already observed this extraordi- 


nary movement of the waters, but he was unacquainted with 


their elevated temperature, 


49 


the strait which is formed by False Cape and 
Cape St. Antonio, follow the bendings of the 
Mexican coast, from Vera Cruz to the mouth of 
the Rio del Norte, and thence to the mouths 
of the Missisippi, and the shoals to the west of 
the southern extremity of Florida. ~Having made 
this vast circuit to the west, the north, the east, 
and the south, the current takes a new direction 
towards the north, and throws itself with impetu- 
osity into the Gulf of Florida. I there observed, 
in the month of May, 1804, in the 26th and 
27th degrees of latitude, a celerity of eighty miles 
in twenty-four hours, or five feet every second, 
though at this period the north wind blew with 
great violence. At the end of the Gulf of Flo- 
rida, in the parallel of Cape Cannaveral, the 
Gulf-stream, or current of Florida, runs to the 
north-east. Its rapidity resembles that of a tor- 
rent, and is sometimes five miles an hour. The 
pilot may judge, with some certainty, of the error 
of his reckoning, and of the proximity of his ap- 
proach toward New York, Philadelphia, or Charles- 
town*, when he reaches the edge of the stream ; 


* The current of Florida flows at greater distances from the 
coasts of the United States, as it advances towards the north. 
Its position being exactly marked in the new maritime charts, 
the navigator finds the longitude of the vessel to half a degree, 
when he is on the brink of the current, where the eddy begins, 
if he obtain a good observation for the latitude., This method 
‘is practised by a great number of captains of merchant ships 
who cross from Europe to North America. 


E 


50 


for the elevated temperature of the waters; their 
strong saltness, indigo-blue colour, and the 
shoals of sea-weed which cover the surface, as 
well as the heat of the surrounding atmesphere, 
sensible even in winter, all indicate the Gulf- 
stream. Its rapidity diminishes towards the north, 
at the same time that its breadth increases, and the 
waters cool. Between Cayo Biscaino and the 
bank of Bahama *, the breadth is only 15 leagues, 
whilst in the latitude of 28 degrees and a half, it 
is 17, and in the parallel of Charlestown, oppo- 
site Cape Henlopen, from 40 to 50 leagues. The 
rapidity of the current is from three to five miles 
an hour, where the stream is the narrowest, and 
is only one mile as it advances towards the north. 
The waters of the Mexican Gulf, forcibly drawn 
to the north-east, preserve their warm tempera- 
ture to such a point, that at 40 and 41 degrees 
of latitude I found them at 22°5° (18° R.), when, 
out of the current, the heat of the ocean at its 
surface was scarcely 17°5° (14° R.). In the pa- 
rallel of New York and Oporto, the temperature 
of the Gulf-stream is consequently equal to: that 
of the seas of the Tropics in the 18th degree of. 
latitude; as for instance, in the parallel of Porto 
Rico, and the islands of Cape Verd. 


* Journal of Andrew Ellicott, Commissioner of the United 
States, for determining the boundary on the Ohio and Missisippiy 
1803, p. 260. Hydraulic and nautical Observations. on the At- 
lantic Ocean, by Gov. Pownall, (Lond. 1787.) 


51 


To the east of the port. of Boston, and on the 
meridian of Halifax, under 41° 25’ of latitude, 
and 67° of longitude, the current is near 80 leagues 
broad. From this point it turns suddenly to the 
east, so that its western edge,’ as it bends, be- 
comes the western limit of the running waters, 
skirting the extremity of the great bank of New- 
foundland, which Mr. Volney ingeniously calls 
the bar of the mouth of this enormous sea river *. 
The cold waters of this bank, which according to 
my experiments are at .he temperature of 8°7° or 
10° (7° or 8° R.) present a striking contrast with 
the waters of the torrid zone, driven to the north 
by the Gulf-stream, the temperature of which is 
from 21° to 22°5° (7° to 18° R.). In these lati- 
tudes, the caloric is distributed in a singular manner 
throughout the ocean; the waters of the bank are 
y°4° colder than the neighbouring sea; and this 
sea is 3° colder than the current. ‘These zones can 
have no equilibrium of temperature, having -a 
source of heat, or, a cause of refrigeration, which 
is peculiar to each, and the influence of which is 


permanent f. 


* Tableau du climat et du sol des Etats-Unis, T.1, p. 230, 
Romme, Tableau des Vents, des Marées et des Courants, T. 
1, p. 228. 

+ In treating of the temperature of the ocean, we should 
carefully distinguish four very different phanomena ;—Ist, the 
temperature of the water at its surface corresponding to dif- 


ferent latitudes, the ocean being considered as in repose ; 2dly, 


E. 


52 


From the bank of Newfoundland, or from the 
52d degree of longitude to the Azores, the Guif- 
stream continues its course towards the east, and 
the east-south-east. The waters still preserve a 
part of the impulsion they have received near a 
thousand leagues distance, in the Straits of Flo- 
rida, between the Isle of Cuba, and the shoals 
of Tortoise island. This distance is double 
the length of the course of the river of the 
Amazons, from Jaen or the Straits of Man- 
seriche to Grand-Para. On.the meridian of the 
isles of Corvo and Flores, the most western of 
the group of the Azores, the breadth of the cur- 
rent is 160 leagues. When vessels, on their) re- 
turn from South America to Europe, endeavour 
to make these two islands to rectify their longi- 
tude, they constantly perceive the motion of the 
waters to the south-east. At the 33d degree of 
latitude the equinoctial current of the tropics is. in 
the near vicinity of the Gulf-stream. In this part 
of the ocean, we may in a single day pass from 
waters that flow towards the west, into those which 
run to the south-east or east-south-east. 

From the Azores, the current of Florida turns 
towards the Straits of Gibraltar, the Isle of Ma- 


the decrement of caloric in the successive strata of the water; 
Sdly, the effect of the deep shoals on the temperature of the 
ocean; 4thly, the temperature of the currents, which cause 


the waters of one zone to pass with acquired velocity across - 


the motionless waters of another zone. 


53 
deira, and the group of the Canary islands. The 
opening of the Pillars of Hercules bas no doubt 
accelerated the motion of the waters towards the 
east. We may in this peint of view assert, that 
the strait, by which the Mediterranean commu- 
nicates with the Atlantic, produces its effects at 
a great distance; but it is probable also, that, 
without the existence of this strait, the vessels 
which sail to Teneriff would be driven to the 
south-east by a cause, which we must seek on the 
coasts of the New World. Every motion is the 
cause of another motion in the vast basin of the 
seas as well as in the aerial. ocean. Pursuing the 
currents to their most distant sources, and re- 
flecting on their variable celerity, sometimes de- 
creasing as between the Gulf of Florida and 
the bank of Newfoundland; at other times aug- 
menting, as in the neighbourhood of the Straits of 
Gibraltar, and near the Canary Islands, we can- 
not doubt but the same cause which drives the 
waters to make the circuitous sweep of the Gulf 
of Mexico, agitates them also near the Isle of 
Madeira. 

It is to the south of this island, that we can 
follow the current, in its direction to the SE 


-and SSE towards the coast of Africa, between 


Cape Cantin and Cape Bojador. In these latitudes 
a vessel becalmed is carried on the coast, at the 
time it is thought at a great distance, if the reck- 
oning be not corrected. Were the motion of 


54 


the waters caused by the opening at the straits of 
Gibraltar, why, on the south of these straits, 
should it not foilow an opposite direction? On 
the contrary, in the 25th and 26th degrees of 
latitude, the current flows at first directly to the 
south, and then to the south-west. Cape Blanc, 
which, after Cape Verd, is the most salient pro- 
montory, seems to have an influence on this 
direction, and it is in this parallel that the waters, 
of which we have followed the course from the 
coasts of Honduras to those: of Africa, mix with 
the great current of the tropics to begin their 
tour from east to west. We have already observed, 
that, several hundred leagues to the west of the 
Canary islands, the motion which is peculiar to 
the equinoctial waters is felt in the temperate zone 
from the 28th and 29th degrees of northern  lati- 
tude; but on the meridian of the island of Ferro, 
the vessels reach the south as far as the tropic of 
Cancer, before they find themselves, by their 
reckoning, to the east of their true position. 

I hope to have given some value to the chart * 
of the Northern Atlantic Ocean, which I have 


* This chart, which I began to sketch in October, 1804, 
beside the temperature of the sea, furnishes observations un 
the dip of the magnetic needle, the lines without variation, 
the intensity of the magnetic forces, the stripes of floating sea 
weeds, and other phenomena which interest physical geography. 

NB. This chart, net yet engraved, will be published ‘in 
the succeeding volumes. 


45 


published, by tracing in it with particular care the 
direction of this retrograde current, that like a 
river, the bed of which is gradually enlarged, 
traverses the vast extent of the sea. I flatter 
myself that the navigators, who have studied the 
charts of Jonathan Williams, of Governor Pow- 
nall, of Heather, and of Strickland*, will find 
several objects in mine worthy of their attention. 
Independant of the observations 1 have made dur- 
ing six voyages, namely, from Spain to Cumana, 
from Cumana to the Havannah, from the Isle 
of Cuba to Carthagena in America, from Vera 
Cruz to the Havannah, from this port to Phila- 
delphia, and from Philadelphia to the coasts of 
France, I have collected in this map all that my 
laborious and active exertions could discover-in the 
journals of such authors, as have been able to make 
use of astronomical means to determine the effect 
of the currents. I have indicated also the lati- 
tudes, in which the motin of the waters is not 
constantly perceived; for in the same manner as 
the northern limit of the current of the tropics and 
that of the trade winds vary according to the 
seasons, the gulf-stream also changes its place and 
direction. These changes become very perceptible 
from the 38th degree of latitude as far as the great 
bank of Newfoundland, and are observed even be- 


* Amer. Trans. vol. ii, p. 328; vol. ili, p. 82 and 194; 
vol. v, p. 90; and an interesting essay on the currents, by 
M. Delamétherie. Journ. de Phys. 1808, t. 67, p. 91. 


56 


tween the 48th degree of longitude west of Paris; 


and the meridian of the Azores, 


The variable 


winds of the temperate zone, and the melting of the 


ice of the northern pole, whence in the months of 


July and August a great quantity of fresh water 
flows towards the south, may be considered as the 
principal causes, which modify in these high lati- 
tudes, the force and direction of the gulf-stream. 
We have just seen that between the parallels of 11 
and 43 degrees, the waters of the Atlantic are drawn 


on by the currents in a continual whirlpool. Sup- 
posing that a molecule of water returns to the same 


place from which it departed, we can estimate, 


from our present knowledge of the swiftness of 


currents, that this circuit of $800 leagues is not 


terminated in less than two years and ten months. 


A boat, which may be supposed to receive no im- 


pulsion from the winds, would require thirteen 


months from the Canary islands to reach the coast 
of Carracas, ten months to make the tour of the 
gulf of Mexico and reach Tortoise Shoals opposite 
the port of the Havannah, while forty or fifty days 


might be sufficient to carry it from the straits of 


Florida to the bank of Newfoundland. It would 
be difficult to fix the rapidity of the retrograde 
eurrent from this bank to the coasts of Africa : 
estimating the mean velocity of the waters at seven 
or eight miles in twenty-four hours, we find ten or 


eleven months for this last distance. 


eftects of this slow but regular motion, which agitates 


Such are the 


57 


the waters of the ocean. ‘Those of the river of 
the Amazons take nearly forty-five days to flow 
from Tomependa to Grand Para. 

A short time before my arrival at Teneriff, the 
sea had left in the road of St. Croix a trunk of 
a cedrela odorata covered with the bark. This 
American tree vegetates exclusively under the tro- 
pics, or in the neighbouring regions. It had no 
doubt been torn up on the coast of the continent, 
or of that of Honduras. The nature of the wood, 
and the lichens which covered its bark, were evi- 
dent proofs, that this trunk did not belong to these 
submarine forests, which ancient revolutions of the 
globe have deposited in lands transported from the 
polar regions. If the cedrela, instead of having 
been thrown on the strand of Teneriff, had been 
carried farther south, it would probably have made 
the whole tour of the Atlantic, and returned to its 
native soil with the general current of the tropics. 
This conjecture is supported by a fact of more an- 
cient date, recorded in the general history of the 
Canaries by the Abbé Viera. In 1770, a small 
vessel laden with corn, and bound from the Island 
of Lancerotte, to Santa Cruz, in Teneriff, was 
driven to sea, while none of the crew were on 
board. The motion of the waters from east to 
west, carried it to America, where it went on shore 
at La Guayra near Carracas *. 


* Viera Hist. gen. de las Islas Canarias, t. ii, p. 167. 


58 


Whilst the art of navigation was yet in its 
infancy, the gulf stream furnished the genius of 
Christopher Columbus with certain indications of 
the existence of western regions. ‘Two corpses, 
the features of which indicated a race of unknown 
men, were thrown on the coasts of the Azores, 
towards the end of ths 15th century. Nearly at 
the same period, the brother-in-law of Columbus, 
Peter Correa, governor of Porto Santo, found on 
the strand of this island pieces of bamboo of an 
extraordinary size, brought thither by the western 
currents*, These corpses and the bamboos at- 
tracted the attention of the Genoese navigator, 
who conjectured, that both came from a continent 
situate towards the west; we know at present, that 
in the torrid zone the trade winds and the cur- 
rent of the tropics are in opposition to every 
motion of the waves in the direction of the earth’s 
rotation. The productions of the new world cannot 
reach the old, but by the very high latitudes, and 
in following the direction of the current of Florida. 
The fruit of several trees of the Antilles are often 
thrown on the coasts of the Isle of Ferro and 
Gomera. Before the discovery of America, the 


Canarians considered these fruits as coming from 
the enchanted isle of St. Borondon, which. accord- 
ing to the reveries of the pilots, and certain legends, 


* Munorz, Hist. del nueva mundo, Lib. ii, §. 14. Fernan 
Colon, vida del Almirante, cap.9. Herera Decad. 1, cap. 2. 


59 


was placed towards the west in an unknown part 
of the ocean, buried, as was supposed, in eter- 
nal fogs. 

My chief view in tracing a sketch of the cure 
rents of the Atlantic is to prove, that the motion 
of the waters towards the South-east, from Cape 
St. Vincent to the Canary islands, is the effect 
of the general motion, which the surface of the 
Ocean feels at its western extremity. We shall 
give but a very succinct account of the arm of the 
Guilf-Stream, which in the 45th and 50th degrees 
of latitude, near the bank of Bonnet-Flamand, runs 
from the south-west to the north-east towards the 
coasts of Europe. This partial current becomes 
very strong when the winds have continued to. 
blow a long time from the west: and, like that 
which flows along the isles of Ferro and Gomera, 
deposits. every year on the western coasts of 
Ireland and Norway the fruit of trees, which be- 
long to the torrid zone of America. On_ the 
shores of the Hebrides, we collect seeds of mi- 
mosa scandens, of dolichos urens, of guilandina 
bonduc, and several other plants of Jamaica, the 
isle of Cuba, and of the neighbouring continent*. 
The current carries thither also barrels of French 
wine, well preserved, the remains of the cargoes 


* Pennant, Voyage to the Hebrides, 1772, p. 232. -Gun- 
ner’s Acta Nidrosiensia, t. 2, p. 310. Sloane, in the Philos. 


Trans, No. 222, p. 398. Linn, Aman. Acad. vol. 2, p. 
A477. ; 


60 


of vessels wrecked in the West Indian seas*. To 
these examples of the distant migration of the 
vegetable world others no less striking may be 
added. The wreck of an English vessel, the 
- Tilbury, burnt near Jamaica, was fuund on the 
coasts of Scotland. -On these same coasts va- 
tious kinds of tortoises are sometimes found, that 
inhabit the waters of the Antilles. When the 
western winds are of long duration, a current is 
formed in the high latitudes, which runs directly 
towards the east-south-east, from the coasts of 
Greenland aud Labrador, as far as the North 
of Scotland. Wallace relates, that twice, in 1682 
and 1684, American savages of the race of the 
Esquimaux, driven out to sea in their leathern 
canoes, during a storm, and left to the guidance 
of the currents, reached the Orcades +. This 
last example is so much the more worthy of at- 
tention, as it proves at the same time how, at a 
period when the art of navigation was yet in its 
infancy, the motion of the waters of the ocean 
would contribute to disseminate the different 
races of men over the face of the globe. 
The small portion of knowledge, which we hi- 


* Necker, View of Nature in the Hebrides, in the Bibl. 
Brit. vol. 42, p. 90. y 
_ + James Wallace, (of Kirkwall) Account of the Islands of 
Orkney, 1700, p. 60. Fischer, in Pallas, Neue Nordische 
Beiterge, B. 3, p. 320. Greenlanders have been seen in the 
islands of Eda and Westram, 


6f 


therto possess with respect. to the absolute posi- 
tion, and breadth of the. Gulf-Stream, as well as 
its prolongation towards the coast of Europe 
and Africa, has been accidentally observed by a 
small. number of. enlightened .men, who have 
crossed the Atlantic in different directions. As 
the knowledge of the currents is of the highest 
importance to shorten navigations, it would be 
no. less useful to the pilot, than the naturalist, 
that vessels, furnished with excellent chronome- 
ters, should cruise in the gulf of Mexico, and in 
the Northern Ocean between the 30th and 54th 
degrees of latitude, in order to determine at what 
distance the Gulf-stream is found. in | different 
seasons, and under the influence of different 
winds, to the south of the mouth of the Missis- 
ippi, and. to the east of Capes Hatteras and Cod. 
The same navigators might have instructions to 
examine whether the great current of Florida con- 
stantly skirts the southern bank of Newfound- 
land; and on what parallel, between, 32 and 40 
degrees of west longitude, the waters which run 
from. east to west. are nearest those which follow 
an opposite direction. 

The solution of this last problem becomes so 
much the more. important, as the latitudes which 
we have just indicated are traversed. by the 
greater part of the vessels, which return to’ Eu- 
rope from the. West India islands, or’ the Cape 
of Good Hope. Beside the direction and swift- 


Sera =o. 


Aa. 


if. 
fi 


6% 


néss of the currents, this expedition would serve 
to discover the temperature of the sea at its 
surface, the lines without variation, the dip of 
the needle, and the intensity of the magnetic for- 
ces. Observations of this kind become extremely 
valuable, when the position of the place where 
they were made has been determined ‘by astro- 
nomical means. In the seas most frequented by 
the Europeans, far out of sight of land, an able 
navigator may still devote his time to important 
labours. The discovery of a group of uninhabit- 
ed islands is less interesting than the knowledge 
of those laws, which link together a considerable 
number of insulated facts. 

In reflecting on the causes of the currents, we 
find, that they are much more numerous than is 
generally believed ; for the waters of the sea may 
be put in motion by an external impulse, by a 
difference in heat and saltness, by the periodical 
melting of the polar ice, or by the inequality of 
the evaporation, which takes place in different la- 
titudes. Sometimes several of these causes con- 
cur to the same effect, and sometimes they pro- 
duce effects that are contrary. : Winds that are 
light, but which, like the trade winds, are conti- 
nually acting on the whole of a zone, cause a real 
movement of transition, which we do not observe 
in the heaviest tempests, because these last are 
circumscribed within a small space. When, in a 
great mass of water, the particles placed at the 


' 
i 
| 
| 
| 


eee ee 


63 


surface acquire a different specific gravity, a su- 

perficial current is formed, which takes its direc 

tion towards the point where the water is coldest, 

or that which is most saturated with muriat of 
soda, sulphat of lime, and with muriat or sulphat 

of magnesia. In the seas of the tropics we find, 

that at great depths the thermometer marks 7 or 

8 centesimal degrees. Such is the result of the 

numerous experiments of Commodore Ellis and 
of M. Peron. The temperature of the air in those 
latitudes being never below 19 or 20 degrees, it 
is not at the surface that the waters can have ac- 
quired a degree of cold so near the point of con- 
gelation, and of the maximum of the density of 
water. The existence of this cold strata in the 
low latitudes is an evident proof of the existence 
of an inferior current, which runs from the poles 
towards the equator: it also proves, that the sa- 
line substances, which alter the specific gravity of 
the water, are distributed in the ocean, so as not 
to annihilate the effect produced by the differences 
of temperature™. 


* fn fact, if the mean saltness of the sea was 0005 greater 
under the equator than in the temperate zone, as several 
naturalists pretend, a current at the bottom, from the equator 
towards the pole, would be the result: for 0°005 produce a 
difference of density of 00017, while, according to the tables 
of Hallstrom, a refrigeration of 16 centesimal degrees, be= 
tween the 20th and 4th of temperature, causes only a change 
of 0-00015 in the specific gravity. After attentive examina- 


64 


Considering the velocity of the molecules, which, 
on account of the rotatory motion of the globe, 
vary with the parallels, we may be tempted -to 
admit that every current, in the direction from 
south to north, tends at the same time toward 
the east, while the waters, which run from the 
pole towards the equator, have a tendency to de- 
viate toward the west. We may also be led to 
think, that these tendencies diminish to a certain 


tion of the results of the experiments of Black, reduced by 
Mr. Kirwan to the temperature of 16°, 1 find on the average 
the density of the water of the sea, 

from O° to 14° latitude at 1:0272 


‘ 


from 15° to 259 1:0232 
from 30° to 44° 0:0278 
from 54° to 60° 10971 


The proportion of salt corresponding to these four zones 
are, according to bishop Watson, 0:0374; 0°0394; 0:0386; 
and 0°0372. ‘Those numbers sufficiently prove, that the experis 
ments hitherto published do not in any way justify the renew- 
ed opinion, that the sea is salter under the equator than under 
the 30th and 44th.degrees of latitude. It is not therefore a 
greater quantity of saline substance held in solution, which 
opposes itself to this inferior current, by which the equinoc- 
tial ocean receives particles of water, which during the win- 
ter of the temperate zones have sunk towards the bottom of 
the sea, from the 30th to the 44th degree of southern and 
northern latitude. Baumé has-analysed the sea-water collect- 
ed by M. Pagés in different latitudes, and found in this wa- 
ter 0°005 less salt at 1° 16” of latitude than between the 23th 
and 40th degrees. (Kirwan’s Geol. Essays, p, 350. Pages 
Voyage round the World, vol. 2, p. 6 and 275.) . 


pnerhtinimensnashdeemnistieemintate ate oe 


65 


point the speed of the tropical current, in the 
same manner as they change the direction of the 
polar ‘current, which in July and August, is regu- 
larly perceived during the melting of the ice, on 
the parallel of the bank of Newfoundland, and 
farther north. Very old nautical observationss 
which I have had occasion to confirm by com- 
paring the longitude given by the chronometer with 
that which the pilots obtained by their reckoning, 
are contrary to these theoretical ideas. In both 
hemispheres, the polar currents, when they are 
perceived, decline a little to the east; and we 
think that the cause of this phenomenon should 
be sought in the constancy of the westerly winds 
which prevail in the high latitudes. Besides, the 
particles of water do not move with the same 
rapidity as the particles of air; amd the currents 
of the ocean, which we consider as the most ra- 
pid, have only a swiftness of 8 or 9 feet a second: 
it is consequently very probable, that the water, in 
passing through different parallels, gradually ac- 
quires a velocity correspondent ‘to those parallels, 
and that the rotation of the Earth does not change 
the direction of the currents. 

The variable pressures, which the surface of the 
sea undergoes by the changes in the weight of the 
air, are another cause of motion which deserves 
particular attention. It is well known, that the 
barometric variations do not in general take place 


at the same moment on two distant points, which 


VOL. f, E 


66 


are on the same level. If in one of these points 
the barometer stands a few lines lower than in the 
other, the water will rise where it finds the least 
pressure of the air, and this local intumescence 
will continue, till, from the effect of the wind, the 
equilibrium of the airis restored. Mr. Vaucher 
thinks that the tides in the lake of Geneva, known 
by the name of the seiches, arise from the same 
cause. Under the torrid zone, the horary varia- 
tions of the barometer may produce small oscilla- 
tions at the surface of the seas, the meridian of 4", 
which corresponds to the minimum of the pressure 
of the air, being situate between the meridian of 
215 and 114 upon which the height of the mercury 
is the greatest; but these oscillations, if even they 
were perceptible, will be accompanied by no 
change of place*. 

When this last movement is produced by the ine- 
quality of the specific weight of the particles, a 
double current is formed, the upper of which has 
a contrary direction to the lower. ‘Thus in the 
greatest part of the straits, as in the seas of the 
tropics, which receive the cold waters of the north- 
ern regions, the whole mass of water is agitated 
to a very great depth. We are ignorant if jit be 
the same, when the movement of progression, which 
must not be confounded with the oscillation of the 
waves, is the effect of an external impulse. M. 


* Mouvement de translation. 


67 


de Fleurieu, in his narrative of the voyage of the 
Isis, cites several facts, which render it probable 
that the sea is much less still at the bottom than 
naturalists generally admit. Without entering 
here into a discussion which we shall treat here- 
after, we shall-only observe, that, if the external 
impulse is constant in its action, like that of the 
trade winds, the friction of the particles of water 


on each other must necessarily propagate the mo- 


tion of the surface of the ocean even to the infe- 
rior strata; and in fact this propagation in the 
Gulf stream has long been admitted by navigators, 
who think they discover the effects in the great 
depth of the sea wherever it is traversed by the cur- 
rent of Florida, even amidst the sand-banks which 
surround the northern coasts of the United States. 
This immense river of hot waters, after a course 
of fifty days, from the 24th to the 45th degree of 
latitude, or 450 leagues, does not lose, amidst the 
rigors of winter in the temperate zone, more than 
3 or 4 degrees of the temperature it had under the 
tropics. ‘The greatness of the mass, and the small 
conductibility of water for heat, prevent a more 
speedy refrigeration. If therefore the Gulf-stream 
has dug a channel at the bottom of the Atlantic 
ocean, and if its waters are in motion to consider- 
able depths, they must also in their inferior strata 
keep up a lower temperature than that which is 

+ Voyage made by order of the king, in 1768 and 1769, to 


try the marine time-pieces. Vol. 1, p. 513, 
Ba 


68 


observed in the same parallel, in a part of the sea 
which has neither currents nor deep shoals. ‘These 
questions can be cleared up only by direct expe- 
riments, made by thermometrical soundings. 

Sir Erasmus Gower remarks, that, in the pas- 
sage from England to the Canary Islands, the 
current, which draws the vessels towards the south 
east, begins at the 39th degree of latitude. During 
our navigation from Corunna to the coasts of 


South America, the effect of this motion of the > 


waters was perceived farther to the north, From 
the 37th to the 30th degree, the deviation was 
very unequal; the daily average effect was 12 
miles, that is, our sloop drove towards the east 75 
miles in six days. In cutting the parallel of the 
strait of Gibraltar, at a distance of 140 leagues, 
we had occasion to observe, that in those latitudes 
the maximum of the rapidity does: not correspond 
with the mouth of the strait, but with a more nor- 
therly point,’which lies in the - prolongation of a 
line passing through the strait and Cape Saint Vin- 
cent. This line is parallel to the direction which the 
waters follow from the Azores to Cape Cantin. 
We should moreover observe, (and this fact is not 
uninteresting to those who examine the nature of 
fluids) that in this part of the retrograde current, 
ona breadth of 120 or 140 leagues, the whole 
mass of water has not the same rapidity, nor does 
it follow precisely the same direction. When the 
sea is perfectly calm, there appears at the surface 


Beis ilindine Roan, F 


69 


narrow. stripes, like small rivulets, in which the 
waters run with a murmur yery sensible to the 
ear of an experienced pilot. The 13th of June, in 
34° 36’ of northern latitude, we found ourselves 
in the midst of a great number of these beds 
of currents. We took their direction with the com- 
pass; some ran north-east, others east-north-east, 
though the general movement of the ocean, indi- 
cated by comparing the reckoning with the chrono- 
métrical longitude, continued to be south-east. It 
is very common to see a mass of motionless wa- 
ters crossed by threads of water, which run in diffe- 
rent directions, and we may daily observe the phe- 
nomenon on the surface of lakes ; but it is much 
less frequent to find partial movements, impressed 
by local causes on small portions of waters in the 
midst of a sea-river, which occupies an immense 
space, and which moves, though slowly, ina con- 
stant direction. In the conflict of currents, as in 
the oscillation of the waves, our imagination is 
struck by those movements which seem to pene- 
trate each other, and by which the ocean is conti- 
nually agitated. 

We passed Cape St. Vincent, which is of ba- 
saltic formation, at more than eighty leagues dis- 
tance. It is not distinctly seen at a greater dis- 
tance than 15 leagues, but the granitic mountain 
called the Foya de Monchique, situate near the 
Cape, is perceptible, as the pilots pretend, at the 


distance of 26 icagues*. If their assertion be 
exact, the Toya is 700 toises (1363 metres) and 
consequently 116 toises (225 metres) higher than 
Vesuvius. It seems extraordinary that the Portu- 
guese government should neglect to maintain a 
fire on this point, which must be made by every 
vessel coming from the Cape of Good Hope or 
Cape Horn, and is an object for which they look 
with the greatest eagerness. Between Ferrol and 
Cadiz there is but one single light-house, that 
of Cape la Rocque, to ‘direct the mariners on 
coasts where the approach is so dangerous. The 
fires on the tower of Hercules and Cape Spichel 
are so feeble, and so little visible at a distance, that 
they scarcely deserve to be cited. Besides, the 
convent of the Capuchins, which rises above Cape 
St. Vincent, would be one of the fittest places to 
build a light-house, with a rotatory light like that 
of Cadiz, or the mouth of the Garonne. 

From Corunna to the 36th degree of latitude 
we had scarcely seen any organic being, except- 
ing sea-swallows, and a few dolphins.’ We looked 
in vain for sea-weeds (fucus) and molluscas, when 
on the 11th of June we were struck with a curious 
sight, which afterwards was frequently re- 
newed in the southern ocean. We entered ona 
zone where the whole sea was covered with a pro- 


* Elementos de Navigacion de Don Dionisio Macarte, p. 47. 
Borda, Voy. de la Flore, vol. i, p. 39, pl. 2. Link and Hoff 
mansegg, Voy. en Portugal, vol. ii, p. 128; vol. iii, p- 323. 


eS eee 


Seaditanet 2 the iat acti ee 


71 

digious quantity of medusas. The vessel was 
almost becalmed, but the molluseas were borne to- 
wards the south-east, with a rapidity four times 
that of the current. Their passage lasted near 
three quartersofan hour. We then perceived but 
a few scattered individuals, following the crowd at 
a distance as if they were tired with their journey. 
Do these animals come from the bottom of the sea, 
which is perhaps-in these latitudes some thousand 
fathoms deep? or do they make distant voyages in 
shoals? We know that the molluscas haunt 
banks; and if the eight rocks, near the surface, 
which Captain Vobonne asserts having seen in 
1732, to the north of Porto Santo, really exist, 
we may suppose that this innumer able quantity of 
medusas had been thence detached; for we were 
but 28 leagues from this recf. We found, beside 
the medusa aurita of Baster, and the medusa 
pelagica of Bosc with eight tentacula (pelagia 
denticulata, Peron), a third species which resembles 
the medusa hysocella, and which Vandelli found at 
the mouth of the Tagus. It is known by its 
brownish-yellow colour, and by its. tentacule, 
which are longer than the body. Several of these 
sea-nettles were four inches in diameter: their re- 
flection was almost metallic: their changeable co- 
lours of violet and purple formed an agreeable 
contrast with the azure tint of the ocean. 

In the midst of these medusas M. Bonpland 
observed bundles of dagysa notata, a mollusca of 


72 


a singular construction, which Sir Joseph Banks 
first discovered. These are small gelatinous bags, 
transparent, cylindrical, sometimes polygonal, which 
are thirteen lines long and two or three in diameter. 
These bags are open at both ends. In one of 
these openings, we observed a hyaline bladder, 
marked with a yellow spot. The cylinders are 
longitudinally placed on each other, like the cells 
of a bee-hive, and form chaplets from six to eight 
inches in length. I tried the galvanic electricity on 
these molluscas, but it produced no contraction; 
It appears that the genus dagysa, formed at the 
time of Cook’s first voyage, belongs to the salpas 
(biphores of Bruguiére) to which M, Cuvier joins 
the thalia of Brown, and_ the tethis vagina of 
Tilesius.. The salpas journey also by groups, 
joining in chaplets, as we have observed of the 
dagysa *, 

The morning of the 18th of June, in 34° 33/ 
latitude, we saw large masses of this last mollusca 
in) its passage, the sea being perfectly calm. We 
observed during the night, that, of three species of 
medusas which we collected, none yielded any 
light but at the moment of a very slight shock. 
This property does not belo ong exclusively to the 


medusa noctiluca, which Forskzl has described in 


his Fauna Aigyptiaca, and which Gmelin has: ap- 


* Account of Voyages undertaken by order of his Britannic 
Majesty, 1789; vol. ii, p. 261. Ann, du Museum, vol. xiv, 
p. 360, 


Se ee é 


78 


plied to the medusa pelagica of Leefling, notwith- 
standing its red tentacula, and the brownish tuber- 
osities of its body. If we place a very irritable me- 
dusa on a pewter plate, and strike against the plate 
with any sort of metal, the small vibrations of the 
plate are sufficient to make this animal emit light. 
Sometimes.in galvanising the medusa, the phos- 
phorescence appears at the moment that the 
chain closes, though the exciters are not in imme-, 
diate @ontact with the organs of the animal. The 
fingers with which we touch it remain luminous 
for two or three minutes, as is observed in breaking 
the shell of the pholades. If we rub wood with 
the body of a medusa, and the part rubbed ceases 
shining, the phosphorescence returns if we. pass a 
dry hand over the wood. When the light is ex- 
tinguished a second time, it can no longer be re- 
produced, though the place rubbed be still humid 
and viscous. In what manner ought we to consider 
the effect of the friction, or that of the shock ? 
This is a question of difficult solution. Is it a 
slight augmentation of temperature which favours 
the phosphorescence? or does the light return, 
because the surface is renewed, by putting the 
animal parts proper to disengage the phosphoric . 
hydrogen in contact with the oxygen of the at- 
mospheric air? I have proved by experiments 
published in 1797, that the shining of wood, is 
extinguished in hydrogen gas, and in pure 
azotic gas, and that its light reappears whenever 


74 
we mix with it the smallest bubble of oxygen gas. 
These facts, to which we shall hereafter add 
several others, lead to the discovery of the causes 
of the phosphorescence of the sea, and of that 
peculiar influence, which the shock of the waves 
exercises on the production of light. 

When we were between the Isle of Madeira 


and the coasts of Africa, we had Slight breezes and. 


dead calms, very favourable for the magnetic ob- 
servations, which occupied me during this passage. 
We were never wearied of admiring the beauty of 
the nights; nothing can be compared to the trans- 
parency and serenity ofan African sky. We were 
struck with the innumerable quantity of falling 
stars, which appeared at every instant. The 
farther progress we made towards the south, the 
more frequent was this phenomenon, especially 
near the Canaries. I have observed during my 
excursions, that these igneous meteors are in 
general more common and luminous in some 
regions of the globe than in others; I have never 
beheld them so multiplied as in the vicinity of the 
volcanoes of the province of Quito, and in the 
part of the Pacific Ocean which bathes the volcanic 
coasts of Guatimala. The influence, which place, 
climate, and seasons appear to have on the falling 
stars, distinguishes this class of meteors from those 
which give birth to stones that fall from the sky 
(aerolites), and which probably exist beyond the 
boundaries of our atmosphere. According to the © 


75 


corresponding observations of Messrs. Benzenberg 
and Brandes *, many of the falling stars seen in 
in Europe were only thirty thousand toises high. 
One was even measured which did not exceed 
fourteen thousand toises, or five leagues. These 
measures, which can give no result but by approxi- 
mation, deserve well to be repeated. In warm 
climates, especially under the tropics, the falling 
stars leave a tail behind them, which remains 
luminous 12 or 15 seconds: at other times they 
seem to burst into sparks, and they are generally 
lower than those in the north of Europe. We 


perceive them only in a serene and azure sky; they 
have perhaps never been seen below a cloud, 
Falling stars often follow the same direction for 


several hours, which direction is then that of the 
wind}. In the bay of Naples M. Gay-Lussac 
and myself observed luminous phenomena, very 
analogous to those which fixed my attention during 
a long abode at Mexico and Quito. These meteors 
are perhaps modified by the nature of the soil and 
the air, like certain effects of the looming { and 
of the terrestial refraction peculiar to the coasts of 
Calabria and Sicily. 

* Gilbert. Annalen de Physik, th. xii, p. 368. 

+ Such is the result of numerous observations by Mr. 
Arago, who, at the period of the prolongation of the meridian 
in Spain, was enabled to observe the direction of the meteors, 
during whole nights, on the Tosal @Encanade, 2 mountain in 
the kingdom of Valentia. 

j Mirage. 


76 

During our navigation we. saw neither the 
Desert islands nor Madeira; I should have wished 
to have had the means of verifying the longitude of 
those islands, and of taking the angles of altitude 
of the volcanic mountains, which rise to the north 
of Funchal. M. Borda* says, that these moun- 
tains are seen at 20 leagues distance, which would 
give a height of only 414 toises (S06 metres) ; but 
we know by recent measures, that the most elevated 
point + of Madeira is 5162 English feet, or 807 
toises. The small Desert islands and the Salvage, 
on which are gathered the archil and the mesembry- 
anthemum crystallinum, are only 200 toises in per- 
pendicular height. I think it useful to fix the 


attention of navigators on these measures, 


because, according to a method. of which this 
narrative offers. several examples, and _ which 
Borda, Lord Mulgrave, M. de Rossel, and Don 
Cosmo Churruca have successfully employed in 
their expeditions, we may, by angles of height 
taken with good reflecting instruments, discover 
with sufficient exactness the distance, at which a 
vessel finds itself from a cape, or an island with 
mountains, 


* Voy. de Ja Flore, vol. i, p. 65. The Salvage is visible at 
eight leagues; the little Desert islandsare seen at 12 leagues 
distance. Borda, vol, ip p. 67 et 70. 

+ Smith’s Tour of the Continent, vol. i,,p.. 200. Irish 
Trans. vol. vili, p. 124. According to Heberden, the Peak 
Ruivo of Madeira is 595 toises above the plane which sur 
rounds its basis. Cook’s first Veyage, vol. i, p. 272, 


77 


When we were forty leagues east of the island of 
Madeira, a common swallow came and perched on 
the topsail-yard. It was so fatigued, that it suffered 
itself to be easily taken. What could engage a 
bird, in that season, and in calm weather, to fly so 
far? Inthe expedition of d’Entrecasteaux, a com- 
mon swallow was seen at 60) leagues distance from 
Cape Blanc; but this was towards the end of 
October, and M. Labillardiére thought it had 
newly arrived from Europe. We crossed these 
latitudes in June, at a period when the seas had 
not for along time been agitated by tempests. I 
dwell ‘on this last circumstance, because small birds, 
and even butterflies, are sometimes forced out to 
sea by the impetuosity of the winds, as we ob- 
served in the southern ocean, when we were on 
the western coasts of Mexico: 

The Pizarro had orders to touch at the isle 
of Lancerote (Lanzarote, ) one of the seven great 
Canary islands, to inquire whether the English 
blockaded the road of St. Croix of YVeneriff. We 
had been uncertain, since the 15th of June, what 
course to follow. Till then the pilots, to whom 
the use of marine watches: was not vefy fami- 
liar; had shown little confidence in the longitude 
which I obtained regularly twice a day, by the 
difference of time, in taking horary angles morning 
and evening. They hesitated at steering to the 
south-east, in apprehension of running on Cape 

Nun, or at least of leaving the island of Lance- 


78 


rote to the west. At length on the 16th of 
June, at nine in the morning, when we were al- 
ready in 29° 267 of latitude, the Captain changed 
his course, and sailed toward the east. The ex- 
actness of Lewis Berthoud’s timekeeper was soon 
recognized : at two in the afternoon we had sight 
of land, which appeared like a small cloud at 
the edge of the horizon. At five, the sun being 
lower, the isle of Lancerote presented itself so 
distinctly, that I was able to take the angle of 
altitude of a conic mountain, which towered ma- 
jestically over the other summits, and which we 
thought was the great volcano which had committed 
so many ravages in the night of the first of Sep 
tember, 1730. 

The current drew us toward the coast more 
rapidly than we wished. As we advanced, we 
discovered at first the island of Fortaventure 
(forteventura) famous for the great number of 
camels * which it feeds; and a short time after 
we saw the small island of Lobos in the chan- 


ee These camels, which serve for labor, and sometimes 
fer food when salted, did not exist! ull the Béthencourts 
made the conquest of the Canaries. In the sixteenth cen 
tury, asses were so abundant in the isle of Fortaventura, 
that they became wild and were hunted. Several thousands 
were killed to save the harvest. The horses of Fortaven« 
tura are of singular heauty, and of the Barbary raee. Noe 
ticias de la historia general de las islas Canarias, por Don 
Jose de Viera, t. 2, p. 436, 


iii lied Ka tit nea teat TS a a Sa 


79 

nel which separates Fortaventura from Lancerote. 
We spent part of the night on the deck. The 
moon illumined the volcanic summits of Lance- 
rote, the flanks of which, covered with ashes, re- 
flected a silver light. Antares threw out its re- 
splendent rays near the lunar disk, which was but 
a few degrees above the horizon. The night 
was beautifully serene and cool. ‘Though we 
were but a little distance from the west of Africa, 
and on the limit of the torrid zone, the centi- 
grade thermometer rose no higher than 18°, 
The phosphorescence of the ocean seemed to 
augment the mass of light diffused through the 
air. I was able to read for the first time 
the nonius of a sextant, by Troughton, of two 
inches, the division of which was very minute, 
without using a taper for the limb. Several of 
our fellow-travellers were Canarians, who, like all 
other inhabitants of islands, vaunted with enthu- 
siasm the beauty of their country. After mid- 
night, great black clouds rising behind the vol- 
cano shrouded at intervals the moon and _ the 
beautiful constellation of the Scorpion. We be- 
held lights carried to and fro on shore, which © 
were probably those of fishermen preparing for 
their labors. We had been employed, during our 
passage, in reading the ancient voyages of the Spa- 
niards, and these moving lights recalled to our 
fancy those which Pedro Gutierrez, page of 
Queen Isabella, saw in the isle of Guanahani, 


80 


on that memorable night of the discovery of the 
New World. 

On the 17th, in the morning, the horizon was 
foggy, and the sky slightly covered with vapours, 
The outlines of the mountain of Lancerote ap- 
peared stronger; the humidity, increasing the 
transparency of the air, seemed at the same time 
to have brought the objects nearer our view. 
This phenomenon is well known to those, who 
have made hyegrometrical observations in places 
whence the chain of the high Alps or the An- 
des is seen. We passed through the channel 
which divides the isle of Alegranza from Mon- 
tana Clara, taking soundings the whole way. 
We examined the Archipelago of small islands si- 
tuate to the north of Lancerote, which are so 
ill laid down in the chart of M. Fleurieu, though 
it is otherwise very exact, and in that which ap- 
peared in the voyage of the Flora frigate, The 
chart of the Atlantic Ocean, published in 1786 
by, order of M. de Castries, is equally erroneous 
in this. .point.. The currents being extremely ra- 
pid in these latitudes, it is important for the safe- 
ty of navigators to observe here, that the position 
of the five small islands, Alegranza, Clara, Gra- 
ciosa, Roca del Este, and Infierno, are no whére 
laid down with exactness, but in the chart of 
the Canaries by Mr. de Borda, and in the Atlas of 
Totino, founded for this part on the observations 


$1 


of Don Jose Varela, which are nearly conform- 
able to those of the Boussole frigate. 

In the midst of this Archipelago, which is sel- 
doin traversed by vessels bound-for Teneriffe, we 
were singularly struck with the configuration of 
the coasts. We thought ourselves transported to 
the Euganean mountains in the Vicentin, or the 
banks of the Rhine near Bonn*. The form of 
organized beings varies according to the climate, 
and it is that extreme variety, which renders the 
study of the geography of plants and animals so 
attractive; but the rocks, more ancient perhaps 
than the causes which have produced the differ- 
ence of the climates on the globe, are the same 
in both hemispheres ft. ‘The porphyries contain- 
ing vitreous feldspath and hornblende {, the pho- 
nolite §, the greenstone, the amygdaloids, and 
the basalt have forms almost as invariable as sim- 
ple crystallized substances. In the Canary isands, » 
and in the mountains of Auvergne, in the Mit- 
telgebirge in Bohemia, in Mexico, and on the 
banks of the Ganges, the formation of trapp is 
indicated by a symmetrical disposition of the 
mountains, by truncated cones, sometimes insu- 
lated, sometimes grouped ||, and by elevated plains, 


* Siebengebirge, described by Mr. Nose. 
+ Monum. Amer. p. 122. 
¢ Amphnbole of Hauy. 
§ Porphyrschiefer of Werner. 
|| Montigemelli, Zwillingsberge. 
VOL. I. G 


82 


both extremities of which are crowned by @ 
conical rising. 

The whole western part of Lanzerota, of which 
we had a near view, bears the appearance of a 
country recently overturned by volcanic eruptions. 
Every thing is black, parched, and stripped of 
vegetable mould. We distinguished, with our 
glasses, stratified basalt in thin and steeply sloping 


strata. | Several hills resembled Monte Novo, | 


near Naples, or those hillocks of scoria and ashes, 
which the opening earth threw up in a single 
night at the foot of the volcano of Jorullo, in 
Mexico: In fact, the Abbé Viera*-relates, that 
in 1730 more than half the island changed. its 
appearance, The great volcano, which we have just 
mentioned, and which the inhabitants call. the 
volcano of Temanfaya, spread desolation over 
a most fertile and highly cultivated region ; nine 
villages were entirely destroyed by. the lavas. 
This catastrophe had.been preceded by a tre- 
mendous earthquake, and for several years.shocks 
equally violent were felt. This last phanomenon 
is so much the more singular, as it seldom hap- 
pens at the end of an eruption, when the elastic 
vapours have found vent by the crater, after the 
ejection of the melted matter. The summit of 
the ‘great volcano is a rounded hill, but not 
entirely conic. From the angles of altitude which 


* Viera, t. 2, p. 404. 


83 


I took at different distances, its absolute eleva- 
tion did not appear to exceed three hundred toises. 
The neighbouring hills, and those of Alegranza, 
and Isla Clara were scarcely above one hundred 
or one hundred and twenty toises. We may be 
surprised at not finding these summits at a 
greater elevation, which seen at sea wear so ma- 
jestic a form; but nothing is more uncertain than 
our judgment on the greatness of angles, which 
are subtended by objects close to the horizon. 
From illusions of this sort it arose, that before 
the measures * of Messrs. de.Churruca and Gal- 
leano, at Cape Pilar, navigators considered the 
mountains of the Straits of Magellan, and those 
of Terra del Fuego, as being extremely ele- 
vated. 

The island of Lanzerota bore formerly the 
name. of Titeroigotra. On the arrival .of the 
Spaniards, its inhabitants were distinguished from 
the other Canarians by marks of greater ciyili- 
zation. Their houses were built with free stone, 
while the Guanches of Teneriffe, like real trog- 
lodytes, dwelt in caverns. At Lanzerota, a very 
singular custom f prevailed at that time, of which 


* Churruca, Apendice a la Relacion del Viaje al Magel- 
lanes, 1793, p. 76. 

t Viera, t. i, p. 150,171,191. Du Halde, Descrip. of 
China, t. iv, p. 461. In Thibet, polyandry is nevertheless 
much less common than is thought, and is blamed by the 
clergy, Hackman in Pallas, Neue Nordische Beitrege, B. 3, 
p- 282. 


GQ 


4 


we find no example except among the people of 
Thibet. A woman had several husbands, who’ 
alternately enjoyed the prerogatives due to the 
head of a family. A husband was considered 
as such only during a tunar revolution, and whilst 
his rights were exercised by others, he remained 
classed among the household domestics. ft must 
be regretted, that the missionaries who accompa- 
nied Jean de Béthencourt, and who sketched the 
history of the conquest of the Canaries, have 
given us 10 ampler details on the manners of 4 
people who had such singular customs. In the 
fifteenth century, the island of Lanzerota contain= 
ed two small distinct states, divided by a wall; 
a kind of monuments which outlive national en- 
mities, and which. we find in Scotland, in China, 
and Peru. 

We were forced by the winds to pass between 
the islands’ of Alegranza and Montana Clara ; 
and as none en board the sloop had sailed through 
this passage, we were obliged to be continually 
sounding. We found from twenty five to thirty 
two fathom, The lead brought up an organic 
substance of so singular a construction, that we 
were for a Jong time doubtful whether it was a 
zoophite or a kind of seaweed. The drawing I 
made on the spot is engraved in the. second vo- 
lume of our Equinoctial Plants*. The stem, of 


* Equinox. Plants. t. ii; p- 8, pl. 69. 


85 


a brownish color and three inches long, has cir- 
~ cular leaves “that have lebes, and are indented 
at the edge. The colour ef these leaves is a 
tender , green, and they: are membranous and 
streaked like those of the adiantums and the ginkgo 
biloba. Their surface is covered with stiff and 
whitish hairs; before their opening they are con- 
eave and envelloped one in. the other. We ob- 
served no mark of spentanecus motion, ne sign 
of irritability, not even on the application of gal- 
vanic electricity. The stenr is not woody, but 
almost of a horny substance, like the stem of the 
gorgons. Azote and phosphorus having been 
abundantly found ia several cryptogamous plants, 
an appeal to chemistry would be useless, to de- 
termine whether this organized substance belong- 
ed to the animal or vegetable kingdom. Its great 
analogy to several sea plants, with adiantum leaves, 


especially with the genus caulerpa of M. Lamou- 
reux, of which the fucus prolifer of Forskal is 


one of the numerous species, engaged us to 
rank it provisionally among the | sea-wracks, 
and give it the name of fucus vitifolius. The 
bristles which cover this plant are found in seve- 
ral other fuci * The leaf, examined with a mi- 
croscope at the instant we drew it up from the 
water, did not present, it is true, those conglohate 
glands, or those opake points, which the parts 


* Fucus lycopodioides, and f. hirsutus. 


86 


of fruetification in the genera of ulva and fucus 
contain ; but how often do we find sea-weeds in 
such a state, that we cannot yet distinguish any 
trace of seeds in their transparent parenchyma. 

I should not have entered into these details, 
which belong to descriptive natural history, had 
not the vine-leaved fucus presented a physiological 
phenomenon of the greatest interest. Fixed to a 
piece of madrepora, this seaweed vegetates at 
the bottom of the ocean, at the depth of 192 feet, 
notwithstanding which, its leaves were as grecn as 
those of our grasses. According to the experi- 
ments of Bouguer*, light is weakened after a pas- 
sage of 180 feet in the ratio of 1 to 1477°8.. The 
sea-weed of L’Alegranza consequently presents a 
new example of plants, which vegetate in a great 
obscurity without being whitened. Several germs, 
still enveloped in the bulbs of the lily tribes, the 
embryo of the malvacex, of the rhamnoides, of the 
pistacea, the viscum, and the Citrus, the branches 
of some subterraneous plants ; in short, vegetables 
transported into mines, where the ambient. air 
contains hydrogen, or a great quantity of azote, 


* Traité optique, p. 256, 264, 346. The fucus vitifolius, 
at the depth of 32 fathoms, can have received a light only 203 
times stronger than that of the moon, and consequently equal 
to half the light of a candle at a foot’s distance. But after 
my direct experiments, the lepidium sativum scarcely takes 
a tint of green by the vivid light of two lamps of Argand, 
See also Lambert, Photometria, p. 223. 


87 


become green without light. From these facts, 
we are inclined to admit, that it is not only under 
the influence of the solar rays that this carburet of 
hydregen is formed in the organs of plants, the 
presence of which makes the !parenchyma: ap- 
pear of a lighter or darker green, according as the 
carbon predominates in the mixture*. 

Mr. Turner, who has so’ well’made known the 
family of the seaweeds, and many other celebratec 
botanists, think that the greater part of the fuci 
which we gather on the surface of the ocean, and 
which from the 23d to the 35th degree of latitude, 
and 32d ‘of longitude, appear to the mariner 
like a vast inundated meadow, grow: primitively 
at the bottom of the ocean, and float only im their 
ripened state, when they are torn off by the motion 
of the waves. If this opinion be founded, we must 
agree, that the family of seaweeds offers formidable 
difficulties: to naturalists, who persist in thinking, 
that absence of light must always produce a white- 
ness; for how can we admit, that so many spe- 
cies of ulvacee, and dictyotez, with stems and 
green leaves, which float on the ocean, have vege- 
tated on rocks almost at the surface of the water? 


* These ideas are in part explained in my memoir on the 
phenomenon of etiolation, (Journal de Physique, t. 40, p. 154) 
and in my Aphorisms on the chemical physiology of Vegetables. 
(Flora Freibergensis, p. 179). See also Trans. of the Irish 
Academy, vol. 8, p. 260. 


88 


From some notions which the captain of the 
Pizarro had collected in an old Portuguese itine- 
rary, he thought himself opposite a small fort, si- 
tuate at the north of Teeuisa, the capital of the 
island of Lanzerota. Mistaking a rock of basalt 
for a castle, he saluted it by hoisting the Spanish 
flag, and sent a boat with an officer to inquire of 
the commander if the English vessels were crulz- 
ing in the roads. We were not a little susprised 
to learn, that the land, which we had considered as 
a prolongation of the coasts of Lanzerota, was the 
small island of Graciosa, and that for several 
leagues there was not an inhabited place. 

We took advantage of the boat to survey the 
land, which enclosed a large bay. No language 
can express the emotion, which a naturalist feels, 
when he touches for the first time a land that is 
not European. ‘The attention is fixed on so great 
a number of objects, that he can scarcely define the 
impression he receives.. At every step he thinks 
he discovers some new production; and in this - 
tumultuous .state of mind he does not recollect 
those which are mest common in our botanical 
gardens, and collections of natural history. At 
two hundred yards from the coast, we saw a man 
fishing with a line. We steered towards him, but 
he took fright, and hid himself behind a rock. 
The sailors brought him back with difficulty. The 
sight of the sloop, the fire of the cannon in so 
solitary a place, though sometimes visited by Bar- 


89 


bary corsairs, and the landing of the crew, had 
frightened this poor man. He informed us, that 
the small island of Graciosa, on which we had 
just landed, was separated from Lanzerota bya 
narrow channel called El Rio. He offered to 
conduct us to the port of Los Colorados, to get 
information respecting the blockade of ‘Teneriffe, 
but as he assured us at the same time, that he had 
not seen any vessel for some weeks on the seas, 
the captain resolved to pursue his course to Santa 
Cruz. 

The small part of the island of Graciosa, which 
we traversed, resembles those promontories of lava, 
which we see near Naples, between Portici and 
Torre del Greco. The rocks are naked, with no 
marks of vegetation, aud scarcely any of vegeta- 
ble soil; A few crustaceous lichen — variolarie, 
leprariw, and urceolarie * were- scattered about 
upon the basaltes.. ‘The lavas which are not co- 
yered with volcanic ashes remain for ages without 
any appearance of vegetation. On the African soil 
excessive heat, and lengthened drought, retard the 
growth of cryptogamous plants. ; 


* We found the lecifea astrovirens, urceolaria ocelleta, u. 
diamarta, (to which M. Achariur assitnilates the lichen keni- 
gri.of my Flora of Friberg) parmelia parietina, p. tenella, 
(lichen hispidus Willd.) p. atra, lecidia fusco-atra, and many 
other species, which were hitherto thought to belong exclue 
sively to the north of Europe. (Achar. Methodus Lichenum, 
fo 3; b. 188 


90 


The basalts of Graciosa are not in columns, but 
divided into strata 10 or 15 inches thick.. These 
strata are inclined under an angle of 80 degrees to 
the north-west... The compact basalt alternates 
with the strata of porous basalt and marl. The 
rock does not contain hornblende, but great crys 
tals of foliated olivine, which have a triple clivage*. 
This substance is decomposed with great difficulty. 
M. Haity considers it as a variety of the pyroxene. 
The porous basalt, which passes into mandel- 
stein, has oblong cavities from two to eight 
lines diameter, lined’ with chalcedony, enclosing 
fragments of compact basalt. I did not remark 
that these cavities had the same direction, or that 
the porous rock lay on compact strata, as happens 
in the currents of lava of A‘tna and Vesuvius. 
The marl}, which alternates more than a ‘hundred 
times with the basalts, is yellowish, friable by de- 
composition, very coherent in the inside, and often 
divided into irregular prisms, analogous to the 
basaltic prisms. ‘The sun discolors their surface, 
as it whitens several schists, by reviving'a hydrocar- 
buretted principle, which appears to’be combined 
with the earth, The marl of Graciosa contains a 
great quantity of chalk, and strongly effervesces 
with nitric acid, even on points where it is found 
in contact with the basalt. This fact is so much 
more remarkable, as this substance does not fill 


* Blettriger olivin. 
+ Mergel. 


91 


the fissures of the rock, but its strata are parallel 
to those of the basalt; whence we may con- 
clude, that both fossils are of the same formation, 
and have a common origin. “The phenomenon of 
a basaltic rock containing masses of indurated marl 
split into small columns, is also found in the 
Mittelgebirge, in Bohemia. Visiting those countries 
in 1792, in company with Mr. Freiesleben*, we 
even recognized in the marl of the Stiefelberg 
the imprint of a plant nearly resembling the ceras- 
tium, or the alsine. Are these strata, contained 
in the trappean mountains, owing to muddy irrup- 
tions? or must we consider them as sediments of 
water, which alternate with volcanic depositions ? 
This last hypothesis seems so much the less admis- 
sible, since, from the researches of Sir James Hallon 
the influence of pressure in fusions, the existence of 
carbonic acid in substances contained in basalt 
offers nothing surprising. Several lavas of Vesu- 
vius present similar phenomena. In Lombardy, 
between Vicenza and Abano, where the calcareous 
stone of the Juraf contains great masses of basalt, 
I have seen this latter enter into effervescence 
. with the acids wherever it touches the calcareous 
rock. : 

We had not time to reach the summit of a hill, 
that was very remarkable in having its base formed 
of banks of clay under strata of basalt, like a 


* Bergmznnisches Journal, 1792, p. 215. 
4 Jura-kalksteim, 


G2 


gaountain in Saxony *, which is become celebrated 
on account of the disputes of volcanean and neptu- 
nean geologists. These basaltes were covered with a 
mammeform substance, which I vainly sought on 
the Peak of Teneriffe, and which is known by the 
name of volcanic glass, glass of Muller or Hyalite: 
it is the transition from the opal to the calcedony. 
We struck off with difficulty some fine specimens, 
leaving masses that were eight or ten inches square 
untouched. I never saw in Europe such fine 
byalites.as I found in the island of Graciosa, and 
on the rock of porphyry called ed Peol de los 
Bannos, on the bank of the lake of Mexico. 

Two kinds of sand cover the shore; one is 
black and basaltic, the other white and quartzose. 
In a place exposed to the rays of the sun, the first 
raised the thermometer to 51°99 (41° R.) and the 
second to 40° (32° R.) T he temperature of the 
air in the shade was 27°7¢ or 7°5° higher than that 
of the air over the sea. ‘The quartzose sand con- 
tains fragments of feldspath. It is thrown back 
by the water, and forms, in some sort, on the sur- 
face of the rocks, small islets where the seaweed 
vegetates. Fragments of granite have been ob- 
served at Teneriffe; the island of Gomora, from 
the details furnished me by Mr. Broussonnet, 
contains a nucleus of micaceous schist{; the 
quartz disseminated in the sand, which we found 
* Scheibenbergen hnegel. . 

+ Glimmerschiefer. 


93 


on the shore of Graciosa, is a different substance 
from the lavas, and the trappean porphyries which 
are so intimately connected with the volcanic pre- 
ductions. From these facts it seems evident, that 
in the Canary islands, as well as on the Andes of 
Quito, in Auvergne, Greece, and the greater part 
of the globe, the subterrancous fires have pierced 
through the rocks of primitive formation. In treat- 
ing hereafter of the great number of warm springs, 
which we have seen issuing from granite, gneiss, 
and micaceous schist, we shall have occasion to re- 
turn te this subject, which is one of the most im- 
portant of the physical history of the globe. 

We reembarked at sunset, and hoisted sail, 
but the breeze was too feeble to permit us to con- 
tinue our course to Teneriffe. The sea was calm ; 
a reddish vapor covered the horizon, and seemed 
to magnify every object.. In this solitude, amidst 
so many uninhabited islets, we enjoyed for a fong 
time the view of an austere and savage nature. The 
black mountains of Graciosa appeared like per- 
pendicalar walls of five or six hundred feet. Ther 
shadows, threwn over the surface of the ocean, 
gave a gloomy aspect to the scenery. Rocks of 
basalt, emerged from the bosom of the water, 
wore the resemblance of the ruins of some vast 
edifice; their existence carried our thoughts back 
to the remote period when submarine volcanoes 
gaye birth to new islands, or rent the continents 
asunder. Every thing which surrounded us seemed 


94 


to indicate destruction and sterility ; but the back 
ground of the picture, the coasts of Lanzerota, pre- 
sented a more smiling aspect. In a narrow pass, 
betiveen two. hills,.crowned with scattered tufts of 
trees, the marks of cultivation were visible. , The 
last rays of the sun gilded the corn ready for the 
sickle. The desert even is animated wherever we 
can discover a trace of the industry of man. 

We endeavoured. to get out of this bay by the 
pass. which separates Alegranza from Montana- 
Clara, and through which we had easily entered to 
Jand at the northern point of Graciosa. ‘The wind 
having fallen, the currents drove us very near a 
rock, on which the sea broke with violence, and 
which is noted in the old charts under the, name of 
Hell, or Infierno. As we examined this rock at 
the distance of two cables length, we found that it 
was a mass of lava three or four fathoms high, full 
of cavities, and covered with scoria resembling 
coke. We may presume that this rock *, which 
modern charts call the West Rock (Roca del 


Oeste), was raised by volcanic fire; and it might 


* Borda; Voyage de la Flore, vol. i, p. 386. Bory St. 
Vincent, Essai sur les Iles Fortunées, p. 20. I must here 
observe, that. this rock is already noted on the celebrated 
venetian chart of Andrea Bianco, but that the name of 
Inferno is given, as in the most ancient chart of Picigano, 
made in 1367, to Teneriff, without doubt because the Guan- 
ches considered the peak as the entrance into Hell. In the 
same latitudes an island made its reappearance in 1811. 


95 


heretofore have been much higher; for the new 
asland of the Azores, which rose from the sea, at 
successive: periods, in 1638 and 1719, had 
reached 354 feet* when it totally disappeared in 
1723, to the depth of 480 feet. This opinion on 
the origin of the basaltic mass of the Infierno is 
confirmed by a phenomenon, which was observed 
towards the middle of the last century in these 
same latitudes. At the time of the irruption of 
the volcano of Temanfaya, two pyramidal hills of 
lithoid lava rose from the bottom of the ocean, 
and united themselves by degrees to the island of 
Lancerote. : 
AAs we were prevented by the fall of the wind, 
and by the currents, from repassing the channel of 
Alegranza,we resolved on tacking during the night 
between the isle Clara and the West Rock. 
This resolution had. nedrly proved fatal. . A calm 
is very dangerous near this last rock, towards 
which the current drives with considerable force. We 
began to feel the effects of this current at midnight. 
The proximity of the stony masses, which rise per- 
pendicularly above the water, deprived us of the 
little wind which blew: the sloop no longer obeyed 
the helm, and we dreaded striking every instant. 
It is difficult to conceive how a mass of basalt, in- 
sulated in the vast expanse of the ocean, can 


* In 1720, this island was visible at seven or eight leagues 
distance. Mem, de l’Académie, 1722, p. 12. Fleurieu, Voyage 
de V’Isis, vol.’i, p. 565. 


96 


cause so considerable a motion in the waters. 
These phenomena, well worthy the attention of 
naturalists, are nevertheless well known to mari- 
ners; they are extremely to be dreaded in the 
Pacific Ocean, particularly in the small Archipelago 
of the islands of Gallipagos. The difference of 
temperature which exists between the fluid and the 
mass of rocks cannot explain the direction which 
these currents take ; and how can we adinit, that the 
water is engulfed at the base of these rocks, which 
often are not of volcanic origin; and that this 
continual engulfing determines the particles of 
water to fill up the vactum that takes place* ? 

The wind having freshened a little towards the 
morning on the 18th, we succeeded in passing the 
channel. We drew very near the Infierno the 
second time, and remarked the large crevices, 
through which the gazeous fluids probably issued, 
when this basaltic mass was raised. We lost sight 
of the small islands of Alegranza, Montana Clara, 
and Gracioza, which appear to have never been 
imhabited by the Guanches. They are now visited 
only to gather archil; this production is however 
less sought after, since so many other lichens 


* We are surprised to§read in a highly useful work, whieh 
is in the hand of every seaman, in the ninth edition of Hamil- 
ton Moore’s Practical Navigator, p,. 200, that it is by the 
effect of the attraction of the masses, or of universal gravita- 
tion, that a vessel leaves the,coasts with difficulty, and that the 
boat of a frigate is attracted by the frigate itself, 


97 


{the north of Europe yield other materials proper 
for dyeing. Montana Clara is noted for its beau- 
tiful Canary birds. The note of these birds va- 
ries with their flocks, like that of our chaffinches, 
which often differs in two neighbouring districts. 
Montana Clara yields pasture for goats, which 
proves that the interior of this islet is less arid than 
its coasts. The name of Alegranza is synonimous 
with the Joyous*, which was given it by the first 
conquerors of the Canary Islands, two Norman 
- barons, Jean de Béthencourt, and Gadifer de 
Salle. This was the first point on which they 
landed. After remaining several days at Graciosa, 
a small part of which we examined, they conceived 
the project of taking possession of the neighbouring 
isle of Lanzerota, where they were welcomed by 
Guadarfia, sovereign of the Guanches, with the 
same hospitality that Cortez found in the palace of 
Montezuma.. The shepherd king, who had no 
other riches than his goats, became the victim of 
coward treachery, like the sultan of Mexico. 

We sailed along the coasts of Lanzerota, of the 
island of Lesbos, and of Fortaventura. The second 
of these islands seems to have anciently formed 
part of the two others. This geological hypothe- 
sis was started in the seventeenth century by a 
franciscan, Juan Galindo. This writer even sup- 
posed that, the king, Juba; had named six Canary 


* La Joyeuse. 
HA 


98 


Islands only, because, in his time, three among 
them were contiguous. Without admitting the 
small probability of this hypothesis, learned geo- 
graphers have seemed to recognize, in the Archipe- 
lago of the Canaries, the two isles Junonie, 
Nivaria, Ombrios, Canaria, and the Capraria of 
the ancients*. 

The haziness of the horizon prevented us, during 
the whole of our passage from Lanzerota to 
Teneriffe from discovering the summit of the peak 
of Teyde. Ifthe Keight of this volcano is 1905 
toises, as the last trigonometrical measure of 
Borda indicates, its summit ought to be visible at 
a distance of 43 leagues, supposing the eye on a 
level with the ocean, and a refraction equal to 
0'079, of distance. It has been doubted} whether 
the peak has ever been seen from the channel, 
which separates Lanzerota from Fortaventura, and 
which is distant from the volcano, according to the 
chart of Varela, 2 29, or nearly 50 leagues. 
This phenomenon appears nevertheless to have 
been verified by several officers of the Spanish 
royal marine. I had in my hand, on board the 
Pizarro, a journal, in which it was noted, that the 
peak of Teneriffe had been seen at 135 miles dis- 


os Gosselin, Rech. sur la Géog. des Anciens, t. i, p- 140; 
156, 163. 
+ Voyage de la Flore, t. i, p. 380. My chronometer gave 


me, on the coast north-west of Lanzerota, 15° 527 10” west 
of the meridian of Paris. 


99 


tance, near the southern cape of Lanzerota, called 
Pichiguera. Its summit was discovered under an 
angle considerable enough to lead the observer, 
Don Manuel Baruti, to think that the voleano 
might have been visible at nine miles farther. It 
was in September, towards the evening, and in 
very damp weather. Reckoning fifteen feet for the 
elevation of the eye, I find, that to render an ac- 
count of this phenomenon, we must suppose a re- 
fraction equal to 0°158 of the arch, which is not 
very extraordinary for the temperate zone. Ac- 
cording to the observations of General Roy, the 
refractions vary in England from one twentieth to 
one third; and if it be true, that they reach these 
extreme limits on the coast of Africa, which I 
much doubt, the peak, in certain circumstances, 
may be seen on the deck ofa vessel as far off as 
61 leagues. 

Navigators who have much frequented these 
latitudes, and who can reflect on the physical 
causes of the phenomena, are surprised that the 
peaks of Teyde and of the Azores* are sometimes 


* The height of this peak, according to Fleurieu, is 1100 
toises; to Ferrer, 1238 toises; and to Tofino, 1260 toises: 
but these measures are only approximative estimations. The 
captain of the Pizarro, Don Manuel Cagigal, proved to me, by 
his journal, that he observed the peak of the Azores at the 
distance of 37 leagues, when he was sure of his latitude 
within two minutes. The volcano was seen at S. 4° E., so that 
the error in longitude must have an almostimiperceptible ins 


H & 


100 


visible at a very great distance, though at other 
times they are not seen when the distance is much 
less, and the sky appears serene and the horizon 
free from fogs. . These circumstances. are so much 
the more worthy the attention of naturalists, as 


a EE Ser ee ee 


several vessels returning to Europe wait im- 
patiently for a sight of these mountains, to rectify 
their longitude, and think themselves much farther 
off than they really are, when in fine weather these 
peaks are not perceptible at distances where the 
angles subtended ought to be very considerable. 
The constitution of the atmosphere has a great in- 
fluence on the visibility of distant objects. It may 
be admitted in general, that the peak of Teneriffe is 
seldom seen at a great distance, in the warm and 
dry months of July and August, and that on the 
contrary if is seen at very extraordinary distances 
in the months of January and February, when the 
sky is slightly covered, and immediately after a 
heavy rain, or a few hours before it falls. It ap- 
pears, that the transparency of the air is pro- 
digiously increased, as we have.already observed, 
when a certain quantity of water is uniformly 
diffused through the atmosphere. Independant of 
these observations, itis not astonishing, that the 


fluence in the estimation of the distance. Nevertheless, the 
angle which the peak of the Azores subtended was so great, 
that Mr. Cagigal thinks this volcano must be visible at more : 
than 40 or 42 leagues. The distance of 37 leagues supposes 


an elevation of 1431 toises. 


10! 


peak of Teyde should be seldomer visible at.a very 
remote distance, than the summits of the Andes, 
which were so long under: my observations. This 
peak, inferior in height to those parts of the chain - 
of Mount Atlas, at the foot of which is the city of 
Morocco, is not, like those points * covered with 
perpetual snows. The Piton, or Sugar Loaf, 
which terminates the peak, no doubt reflects a 
eveat quantity of light, on account of the whitish 
colour of the pumice stone thrown up by the crater; 
but the height of this little truncated cone does 
not form a twenty-secondth part of the total eleva- 
tion. The flanks of the volcano are covered either 
with blocks of black and scorified lava, or with a 
luxuriant vegetation, the masses of which reflect 
so much the less light, as the leaves of the trees are 
separated from each other by shadows of more 
considerable extent than thiat-of the part which is 
enlightened. 

Hence it results, that setting aside the Pzton, 
the Peak of Teyde is in the class of those moun- 
tains, which, according to the expression of Bou- 
guer, are seen at considerable distances only ina 
negative manner, because they intercept the light 
which is transmitted to us from the extreme limits 
of the atmosphere; and that we perceive their 
existence only on account of the difference’ of 
intensity, which subsists between the aerial light 


* According to Haest, and Jackson, Account of the Empire 


of Morocco, p. 43. 


102 


which surrounds them, and that which is reflected 
by the particles of air placed between the moun- 
tains and the eye of the observer*. As we with- 
draw from the isle of Teneriffe, the Piton or Sugar 
Loaf is seen for a long time in a positive manner, 
because it reflects a whitish light, and clearly de- 
taches itself from the sky ; but as this cone is only 
80 toises high, by 40 in breadth at its summit, it 
has recently been a question}, whether from the di- 
minutiveness of its mass it can be visible at. dis- 
tances which exceed 40 leagues ; and’ if it be not ra- 
ther probable, that navigators distinguish the peakas 
a small cloud above the horizon, only when the base 
of the Piton begins to be visible on it. Tf we ad- 
mit, that the mean breadth of the Sugar Loaf is 
100 toises, we find that the little cone, at 40 leagues 
distance, still subtends, in the horizontal direc- 
tion, an angle of more than three minutes. ‘This 
angle is considerable enough to render an object 
visible ; and if the height of the Piton greatly ex- 
ceeded its basis, the angle in the horizontal direc- 
tion might be still smaller, and the object. still 


continue to make an impression on our organs ; 


* Traité d'Optique, p. 365. It follows from the experiments 
of the same author, in order that this difference may become 
perceptible to our organs, and the mountain detach itself dis. 
tinctly from the sky, that one of these lights should be a sixe 
tieth part stronger than the other. 

+ Marchand, t, 2, p. 10. 


103 


for micrometrical observations have proved, that 
the limit of vision is but a minute only, when the 
dimensions of the objects are the same in every 
direction. We distinguish at a distance, by the eye 
only, trunks of trees insulated in avast plain, though 
the subtended angle be under twenty five seconds. 

As the visibity of an object, which detaches it- 
self in a brown color, depends on the quantities of 
light which the eye meets with on two lines, one of 
which ends at the mountain, and the other reaches 
on to the surface of the aerial ocean, it follows that 
the farther we remove from an object, the smaller 
the difference becomes between the light of the sur- 
rounding atmosphere, and that of the strata of air 
placed before the mountain. It is on this account, 
that, when less elevated summits begin to appear 
above the horizon, they present themselves at 
first under a darker tint, than those we discover at 
very great distances. In the same manner, the 
visibility of the mountains, which are seen only 
in a negative manner, does not depend. solely 
on the state of the lower regions of the air, to which 
our meteorological observations are limited, but 
also on its transparency and physical constitution 
in the most elevated parts ; for the image detaches — 
itself better in proportion as the aerial light, which 
comes from the limits of the atmosphere, has been 
originally more intense, or rather has undergone 
less loss in its passage. ‘This consideration €X- 
plains to a certain point, why, under a perfectly 


104 


serene sky, the state of the thermometer and the 
hygrometer being precisely the same in the air 
which is nearest the Earth, the peak is sometimes 
visible, and at other times invisible, to navigators 
at equal distances. It is even probable, that the 
chance of perceiving this volcano would not be 
greater, if the ashy cone, at the summit of which 
is the mouth of the crater, were equal, as in Vesu- 
vius, to a quarter of the total height. These ashes 
which are pumice stone crumbled. into dust, do 
hot reflect as much light as the snow of the An- 
des ; are the cause why the mountain, seen from 
afar, without detaching itself in a bright, de- 
taches itself more feebly in a brown color ; and 
contribute, if we may use the expression, to equalize 
the portions of aerial light, the variable difference 
of which renders the object more or less distinctly 
visible. Calcareous mountains, stripped of vegeta- 
ble earth, summits covered with granitic sand, the 
high savannahs of the Cordilleras*, which are of 
a golden yellow, ure undoubtedly distinguished 
at small distances better than objects: which. are 
seen in a negative manner; but the theory indi- 
cates a certain limit, beyond which these last de- 
tach themselves more distinctly from the azure 
vault of the sky. 


The colossal summits of Quito and Peru, tow- 
* Los Pajonales, from paja, straw: It is the name of the 


vegion of the gramina, which encircles the zone of the pereny 
nial snows? Géopr. vég. p. 70, 


| 


105 


ering above the limit of the perpetual snows, con- 
centre all the advantages, which render them visi- 
ble under very ‘small angles. We have stated, 
that the circular summit of the peak of Teneriff 


is only a hundred toises in diameter. Aécording 


to’ the measures I made at Riobamba, in 1808, 
the dome of the Chimborazo, 153 toises below 
its summit, consequently in a point which is 1300 
toises higher than the peak, is still 673 toises 
(1312 metres) in breadth. The zone of peren- 
nial ‘snows also forms a fourth of the height of 
the mountain; and the base of this zone, seen 
on the coast of the Southern Ocean, fills an 
extent of 3437 toises (6700 metres). But though 
Chimborazo is two thirds higher than the 
peak, we do not see it, on account of the curve 
of the globe, at more than 38 miles and a third 
farther *. The radiant brilliancy of its snows, 


“when at the port of Guayaquil, at the end of 


the rainy season, it is discovered at the horizon, 
may lead us to suppose, that it must be seen at 
a very great distance in the South Sea.  Pi- 
lots highly worthy of credit have assured me, that 
they have seen it from the rock of Muerto, to 


* Without attending to the refraction, the Peak of Tene- 
riffe (1904 toises) is visible at 1° 57/ 22/, Mount Blane 
(2440 toises) at 2° 13% 0/7, and Chimborazo (3350  toises) 
at ° 35230%. The mean refraction, supposed to be 0°08, 
augments this distance, as to Chimborazo, only fourteen 
miles, 


106 


the south west of the isle of Puna, at a distance 
of 47 leagues*. Whenever it has been seen at 
a greater distance, the observers, uneertain of 
their longitude, have not been in a situation to 
furnish precise data. 

The aerial light, projected on the mountains: 
increases the visibility of those which are seen 
positively ; its energy diminishes, on.the contrary, 
the visibility of the objects, which, like the peak 
of Teneriffe and that of the Azores, detach them- 
selves in a brown tint. Bouguer, building on 
theoretical considerations, found that according 
to the constitution of our atmosphere, the moun- 
tains seen negatively cannot be perceived at dis- 


tances which exceed 35 leagues}. It is impor- 


* According to the charts of the Deposito hydrografico of 
Madrid. [Admitting 1° 13/ 39” for the difference of the 
meridians of Guayaquil and Quito, such as I found it (Ob- 
serv. Ast. t. ii, p. 298, 357, and 433) the Muerto is a litt] 
less distant than Chimborazo. 

+ If, according to the theory of Bouguer, (Traité d’ Op- 
tique, p. 360) the intensity of the aérial colour, which is re= 
flected by the whole of the atmosphere towards the horizon 
in a determinate direction, is equal to pal g.; the intensis 
ty, after a passage of 30 leagues, would be Cem q. This 
quantity differs from the other a little more than one six- 
tieth, whilst after a RaEEABC: of 45 leagues, the intensity of 
ie sooo 09 Which differs. too little 
fromm 559 d+ for the difference to be perceived by our or- 
gans. From these data we find by interpolation, that the 
visibility should have ceased at 35 leagues distance. 


the aerial colour is already = 


107 


tant here to observe, that these calculations are 
contrary to experience. The peak of Teneriffe 
has’ been often seen at 36, 38, and even at 40 
leagues. Moreover, in the vicinity of .the Sand- 
wich islands, the summit of Mowna Roa*, at a 
season when it was without snows, was seen, on 
the skirt of the horizon, at the distance of 53 
leagues. ‘This is the most striking example we 
have hitherto known of the’ visibility of a moun- 
tain; and what is the more remarkable, it is an 


* The height of Mowna Roa, according to Marchand, is 


more than 2598 toises; according to King, it is 2577 toises ; 
but these measures, notwithstanding their accidental con-— 
cordance, are not founded on very exact measurements. It 
is a very extraordinary phenomenon, to see a summit placed 
in the 19th degree of latitude, and which is probably 2500 
toises high, entirely stripped of its snows. The very flattened 
form of Mowna Roa, the Mesa of the old Spanish charts, 
its insulated situation in the midst of the ocean, and the 
frequency of certain winds, which, modified by the ascending 
current, blow obliquely, may be the principal causes. It 
is difficult to believe, that captain Marchant was much deceived 
in the estimation of the distance at which he saw, on the 
10th of October 1791, the summit of Mowna Roa. He had 
left the island of Owhyhee onlythe 7th in the evening; and from 
the movement of the waters, and the lunar observations of the 
19th, it is probable that the distance was even greater than 
53 leagues. Besides, an experienced navigator, Mr. Fleu- 
rieu, relates, that at a distance of 35 or 36 leagues the peak 
of Teneriffe is visible, even in weather that is not perfectly 
clear. Voy. de Marchand, vol. i, p.408 and 427; vol. ii, 
p. 10 and 78. 


108 


object seen negatively which furnishes the ex- 


ample. 

I thought it proper to bring together these con- 
siderations at the end of this chapter, because in 
treating so closely on one of the most important 

problems of optics, that of the diminution of light 

in its passage across the strata of the atmosphere, 
they may be at the same time of some practical 
utility. The volcanoes of Teneriffe, and of the 
Azores, the Sterra Nevada of St. Martha, the 
peak of Orizaba, ‘the Silla of Caraccas, Mowna 
Roa, and Mount St. Elias, insulated in the vast 
extent of the seas, or placed.on the coasts of con- 
tinents, serve as sea marks to direct the pilot, 
who is deprived of the means fitted to determine 
the position of the vessel by the observation of 
the stars; every thing, which has a relation to 
the visibility of these natural seamarks, is inte- 
resting to the safety of navigation. 


| 
| 


CHAPTER If. 


Stay at Teneriffe —Journey from Sania Cruz 
to Orotava.— E.rcursion to the top of the Peak 
of Teyde. 


From the time of our departure from Graciosa, 
the horizon continued so hazy, that notwithstand- 
ing the considerable height of the mountains of 


Canary *, we did not discover this. island till 
the evening of the 18th of June. It is the gra- 
nary of the archipelago of the Fortunate islands, 
and what is very remarkable in a region situate 
beyond the limits of the tropics, we were. as- 
sured, that in some districts, there are two wheat 
harvests inthe year; one in February, and. the 
other in June t.. Canary has never been visited 
by a learned mineralogist; yet this island is so 
much the more worthy of observation, as the 
physiognomy of its mountains, disposed in paral. 
lel chains, appeared to me to differ entirely from 
that of the summits of Lanzerota and Teneriffe, 


* Isla de la Gran Canaria. 


+ Ledra; Voyage 4 Teneriffe, t. i, p. 37. 


ve 


110 


Nothing is more interesting for the geologist, 
than to observe the relations, on the same point 
of the globe, between volcanic countries, and 
those which are primitive or secondary. When 
the Canary islands shall have been some day 
examined in all the parts, which compose the sys_ 
tem of these mountains, we shall find, that we 
have been too precipitate in considering the 
whole group as raised by the action of submarine 
fires. 

The 19th, in the morning, we discovered the 
point of Naga*, but the peak of Teneriffe was 
still invisible: the land, obscured by a thick fog, 
presented forms that were vagye and confused. 
As we approached the road of Santa Cruz, we 
observed that these vapours, driven by the winds, 
drew nearer. The sea was strongly agitated, as 
it most commonly is in those latitudes. - We an- 
chored after several soundings, for the mist was 
so thick, that we could scarcely distinguish ob- 
jects at. a few cables’ distance; but at the mo- 
ment we began to salute the place, the fog was 
instantly dispelled. The Peak of Tcyde appeared 
in a break above the clouds, and the first rays of 
the sun, which had not yet risen on us, illuminated 
the summit of the volcano. We hastened toward 
the bow of the vessel, to enjoy the magnificent 


spectacle, when at the same instant we saw four 


* 


* Punta de Naga, Anaga, or Nago, 


111 


English ships of the royal navy lying to very near 
the poop. We had passed without being per- 
ceived; and'the same mist, which had hidden the 
peak from our view, had saved us from the dan- 
ger of being carried back to Europe. It would 
have been very painful to naturalists, to have seen 
the coast of Teneriffe, without having been able to 
tread a soil torn up by volcanoes. 

We immediately got up our anchor, and the Pi- 
zarro stood in as close as possible to the fort, to be 
under its protection. It was on this shore, that, 
in the landing attempted by the English two 
years before our arrival *, admiral Nelson had 
his arm carried of by a cannon ball. The gover- 
nor general of the Canaries + sent an order to 
the captain of the sloop, to put on shore the dis- 
patches from the court for the governors of the 
colonies, the money on board, and the public 
correspondence. ‘The English vessels left the 
road, having given chace the evening before to 
the packet boat the Alcudia, which had left Co- 
runna a few days before us. She was. obliged 
to touch at the port of Palmas, in the isle of 


as i ai Seen : 
Canary, and several passengers,.who were going 
in a boat to Santa Cruz, had been made _pri- 
soners. 


The situation of this town is, very similar to that 


* In the monthrof July, 1797. 
4 Don Andrea de Perlasca. 


112 


of La Guayra, the most frequented port of the 
province of Caraccas. The heat is excessive in 
both places, and from the.same causes ; but the as- 
pectof Santa Cruz is more gloomy. Ona narrowand 
sandy beach, houses of dazzling whiteness, with flat 
roofs, and windows without glass, are stuck against a 


wall of black perpendicular rocks, stripped of ve- 
getation. <A fine mole, built of free stone, and the 
public walk planted with poplars, are the only ob- 
jects, which break the sameness of the landscape. 
The view of the peak, such as it presents itself 
above Santa Cruz, is much less picturesque than 
that we enjoy from the port of Orotava. There, a 


highly cultured and smiling plain offers a pleasing 
contrast with the wild aspect of the volcano. From 
the groups of palm trees and bananas. which line 
the coast to the region of the arbutus, the laurel, 
and the pine, the volcanic rock. is crowned with 
luxuriant vegetation. We easily conceive how the 
inhabitants, even of the beautiful climates of Greece 
and Italy, fancied that they recognised one of the 
Fortunate Isles in the western part of Teneriffe. 
The eastern side, that of Santa»Cruz, on the con- 
trary, is every where struck with the marks of ster+ 
ility.. The summit of the peak is not more arid 
than the promontory of basaltic lavas, which 
stretches towards the point of Naga, and on which 
succulent plants, springing up in the clefts of the 
rocks, scarcely indicate a preparation of soil. At 
the port of Orotava, the top of the Piton subtends 


natn: 


See 


113 


an angle in height of more than eleven degrees and 
a half; whilst at the mole of Santa Cruz* this 
angle scarcely exceeds 4° 36”. 

Notwithstanding this difference, and though in 
the latter place the volcano rises above the horizon 
scarcely as much as Vesuvius seen from the mole 
of Naples, the aspect of the peak is still very 
majestic, when those who anchor in -the road 
discover it for the first time. The Piton alone 
was visible to us; its cone projected itself ona 
sky of the purest blue, whilst dark thick clouds 
enveloped the rest of the mountain to the height of 
1800 toises. The pumice stone, illumined by the 
first rays of the sun, reflected a reddish light, like 
that which paints the summits of the higher Alps. 
This light by degrees becomes a dazzling whiteness; 
and, deceived like the greater part of travellers, we 
thought that the peak was still covered with snows, 
and that we should with difficulty reach the edge 


of the crater. 


We have remarked, in the Cordilleras of the 
Andes, that. the conical mountains, such as 
Cotopaxi and Tungurahua, are oftener seen 
free from clouds, than those mountains, the 
tops of which are broken into bristly points, like 
Antisana and Pichincha; but the peak-of Te- 
neriffe, notwithstanding its pyramidical form, is a 
great part of the year enveloped in vapours, and 
* The oblique distance from the top of the volcano to Orotava 
and to Santa Cruz are nearly 8600 toises and 22500 toises. 

VOL. I. : 


114 


is sometimes, during several weeks, invisible from 
the road of Santa Cruz. Its position to the west 
of an immense continent, and its insulated situa- 
tion in the midst of the seas, areino doubt the 
causes of this phenomenon. Navigators are well 
apprised, that the smallest islets, those which are 
without mountains, collect and harbour the clouds. 
The decrement of heat is also different above the 
plains of Africa, and above: the surface of the 
ocean *; and the strata of air, brought by the trade 
winds, cool in proportion as they advance towards 
the west. If the air has been extremely dry above 
the burning sands of the desert ; it is very quickly 
saturated when it has entered inte contact with the 
surface of the sea, or with the air that lies on this 
surface. Itis easy to conceive, therefore, why the 
vapors become visible in the atmospherical strata, 
which, at‘a distance from the continent, have no 
longer the same temperature as when they began 
to be saturated with water. The considerable mass 
of a mountain, which rises in the midst of the 
Atlantic, is also an obstacle to the clouds, which are 
driven out to sea by the winds. 

We waited long and impatiently the permission 
of the governor of the place to land. I employed 
this time in making the necessary observations: for 
determining the longitude of the anole of Santa 
Cruz, and the dip of the needle. Berthoud’s 


* Obs. Aste ts i, p. 126. 


115 


chronometer gave, for the first 18° 33°10”. This 
differs three or four minutes from the result of 
former observations by Fleurieu, Pingré, Borda, 
Vancouver, and La Peyrouse. M. Quenot never- 
theless obtained 18° 33” 36”, and the unfortunate 
Captain Bligh 18° 34/20”. The precision of my 
result was confirmed three years after, the 
voyage of the chevalier Krusenstern, who found 
Santa Cruz 16° 19’ 45” west of Greenwich, and 
consequently 18° 837 0” west of Paris. These 
data prove, that the longitudes Captain Cook 
assigned to Teneriffe and the Cape of Good Hope 
are much too far west*, The same navigator had 
found the magnetic dip, in 1799, 61,52. M. 
Bonpland and myself observed itat 62° 24, a re- 
sult conformable to that which was~ obtained in 
1791 by M. de Rossel in the voyage of D’ Entre- 
casteaux t. The variation of the needle differs several 
degrees, according 'to the place where the observa- 
tion is made, at the Mole, or at several points to 
the north, along the shore. We must not be 
surprised at these variations in a place surrounded 
by volcanic rocks. I remarked with M. Gay- 
Lussac, that on the declivity of Vesuvius, and in 
the inside of its crater, the intensity of the mag- 


* Galeano, Viage ad Magellanes, p. 8: Krusenstern, Reise 
am die Welt, th. i, s..78: and my Obs. Astron. t.i, p. XxxVil, 
97, and 33. 

+ Voyage & la Recherche de la Peyrouse, t. 2, p. 291. 

IQ 


116 


netic forces is modified by the proximity of the 
lavas *. 

After having undergone the fatigue of answer- 
ing the numberless questions about political events 
put by persons who came to visit us on board, we 
landed. .The boat was immediately sent back to 
the ship, lest the surf, which in this road is. very 
dangerous, should drive it against the mole. The 
first object that met our view was a tall woman, of 
a very tawny complexion, and badly clothed, who 
was called the capitana. She was followed by 
several others, whose dress was not more becom- 
ing.. They all earnestly requested permission to 
go on board the Pizarro, which was of course re- 
fused. In this port, so much frequented by Eu- 
ropeans, licentiousness bears the semblance of 
order. The capitana is a chief chosen by her com- 
panions, over whom she exercises great authority. 
She prevents whatever may be injurious to the ser- 
vice of the vessels; she engages the sailors to 
return on board at their stated hours. — It is to her 
that the officers apply, when they fear that any of 
their crew conceal themselves with the intention of 
deserting. 


On entering the streets of Santa Cruz, we felt a 
suffocating heat, though the thermometer was not 
above 25 degrees. Those who have for a long 


* Memoires de la Société d’Arcueil, t. i, p. 9. 


| 
i 
i 


1i7 


time breathed the air of the sea suffer every time 
they»land; not because this air contains » more 
oxygen than the air on shore, as has. been errone- 
ously stated, but because it is less charged with 
those gazeous combinations*, which the animal 
and vegetable substances, and the mud resulting 
from their decomposition, pour into the atmosphere. 
Miasms that escape chemical analysis have a 
powerful effect on our organs, especially when these 
have not undergone for a long while the same 
kind of irritation. 

Santa Cruz, the Annaza of the Guanches, is a 
neat town, with a population of 8000 souls. 1 
was not struck with the excessive number of monks 
and secular ecclesiastics, which travellers have 
thought themselves under the necessity of finding in 
every country under the Spanish government: not 
shall I stop to enter into the description of the 
churches; the library of the Dominicans, which 
contains scarcely a. few hundred volumes; the 
mole, where the inhabitants assemble to inhale the 
freshness .of, the evening breeze; or the famed 
monument of marble of Carara, thirty feet high, 
dedicated to our Lady of the Candelaria, in 
memory of her miraculous appearance, in 1392, at 
Chimisay, near .Guimar. The port of Santa 
Cruz may be considered asa great caravansary, on 
the road to America and the Indies. Eyery travel } 


* Nouv. Espag, t, ti, p. 787. 


118 


ler, who writes the narrative of his adventurés, 
begins by a description of Madeira and Tenertffe ; 
and if in the natural history of these islands there 
yet remains as it'were, an immense field untrod, 
we must admit, that the topography of the little 
towns of Funchal,’ Santa Cruz, Lag 
Orotava, leaves scarcely any thing untold*. 

The recommendation of the court of Madrid 
procured us in the Canaries, as in all the other 
Spanish possessions, the most satisfactory recep- 
tion. * The captain general gave us immediate 


na, and 


permission to ‘examine the island. Col. Armiaga, 
who commanded a regiment of infantry, received us 
into his house with kind hospitality. We could 
not cease admiring the banana, the papaw tree, 
the poinciana pulcherrima, and'other plants, which 
we had hitherto seen only in hot houses, culti- 
vated in his garden in the open air. The cli- 
mate of the Canaries however is not warm 
énough to ripen the real platano arton, with tri- 
angular fruit frony seven or eight inches long, and 
which, requiring a temperature’ of 24 ‘centesimat 
degrees, does not flourish even in the Valley of Ca- 
raccas. The bananas of Teneriffe are those named 


*' Borda; Voy. de la Flore, t. 1,’ p, 86. Vieyra, Noticias 
historicas. t. ii, p. 134. ~ Bory de St. Vincent, Essai sur les 
Isles Fortunées, p.. 230.  Ledru, Voyage aux Isles de ‘Téné- 
riffe et de Porto-Rico, t. i, p. 37. Milbert, Voy.. pitt. & 
V Isle de Frrance, t. i, p. 9. Lord Magartney’s Voyage, 
vol. i, p. 74. i 


° 


119 


by the Spanish planters camburis: or guineos, and 
dominicos. ‘Fhe camburi, which suffers the least 
from the cold, is even. cultivated with success at 
Malaga *; but the fruit which we see occasionally 
at Cadiz-comes from the Canary islands by ves- 
sels, which make the passage in three or four 
days. In general, the musa, known by every 
people under the torrid zone, though hitherto 
never found in a wild state, has as great ava- 
riety of fruit as our apple and pear trees. These 
varieties , which are confounded by. the greater 
part of botanists, though they require a very 
different climate, are become permanent by long 
cultivation. 

We went to herbalize in the evening towards 
the fort of. Passo Alto, along the basaltic rocks 
that close the promontory of Naga. We, were 
very little satisfied with. our. harvest, for, the 


drought and dust had almost destroyed .vegeta- 
tion. The cacalia kleinia, the cuphorbia cana- 
riensis, and several other succulent, plants, which 


draw their nourishment from the air rather than 
the soil on which they grow, reminded us by 
their appearance, that. this group, of. islands , be- 
longs to Africa, and eyen to the most arid part 
of that continent. 

Though the, captain of. the ship had orders to 


* The mcan temperature of this town is only 18°) 


* Nouv. Esp.'t. ii, p. 362. 


oO) 


stop long enough at Teneriffe, to give us time 
to scale the summit of the Peak, if the snows 
did not prevent our ascent, we received notice, 
on account of the blockade of the English ships, 
not to hope a longer delay than that of four or 
five days. We consequently hastened our de- 
parture for the port of Orotava, which is situate 
on the western declivity of the volcano, where we 
were sure of finding guides. I could find no 
one at Santa Cruz, who had mounted the Peak, 
and I was not surprised at this. The most cu- 
rious objects become less interesting, in propor- 
tion as they are placed nearer to us; and I 
have known inhabitants of Schaffhaussen; in Swit- 
zerland, who had never seen the fall of the Rhine 
but at.a distance, 

The 20th of June, before sunrise, we began 
our excursion by ascending to the Villa de La- 
guna, elevated 350 toises * above the port of San- 
ta Cruz, We could not verify this estimation of 
the height, the surf not having permitted us to 
return on board during the night, to take our ba- 
rometers and dipping needle. As we foresaw, 
that our expedition to the Peak would. be very 
precipitate, we consoled ourselves easily with the 
idea of not exposing instruments, which were to 
serye us in countries less known by Europeans, 


* This estimation is bat an approximation, See the note 
at the end of the third chapter, 


‘ 


121 
The road by which we ascended to Laguna is on 
the right of a torrent, or baranco, which in the 
rainy season forms fine cascades; it is narrow 
and tortuous. I have been assured since my re- 
turn, that Mr. de Perlasca has laid out a new 
road, which will admit carriages. Near the town 
we met some white camels, which seemed to be 
very slightly laden. The chief employment of 
these animals is to transport merchandise from 
the customhouse to the warehouses of the mer- 
chants. They are gencrally laden with two chests 
of Havanna sugar, which together weigh 900 
pounds; but this load may be augmented’ to thir- 
teen hundred weight, or 52 arrobas of Castile. 
Camels are*not plenty at Teneriffe ; while they 
exist by thousands in the two isles of Lanze- 
rota and Fortaventura; the climate and vegetation 
of these islands, placed nearer Africa, ave more 


analogous to those of ‘that continent. It is very 


extraordinary, that’ this useful animal, which 
breeds in South America, should be almost bars 
ren at Teneriffe. In the fertile district of Adexe 
only, where the plantations of the ‘sugar cane are 
most considerable*, camels have sometimes been 
known to breed... These’ beasts’ of burden, as 
well as horses, were brought into the Canary 
islands in the? fifteenth century -by the Nor- 


* They do not at present,produce yearly above 300 quin- 
tals of moist sugar. 


122 


me 


man conquerors. The .Guanches were unac- 
quainted with them; and this fact seems to be 
very well accounted for by the difficulty of trans- 
porting an animal of su¢h. bulk in frail canoes, 


without recurring. to the necessity of considering 
the Guanches as a remnant of the people of the 
Atlantis, or a different race from that of the 
western Africans. 

The hill, on which the town of San Christo- 
bal de la Laguna is built, belongs to the system 
of basaltic mountains, which, independant of the 
system of Jess ancient volcanic rocks, form a broad 
girdle around the peak of Teneriffe. The basalt 
on which we walked was of a darkish brown, 
compact, half decomposed, and exhaled, . when 
breathed on, a clayey smell. We discovered 
hornblende, olivine *, and translucid pyroxenes f, 
with a perfectly lamellar fracture, of a tender 
olive green, and. often crystallized in prisms of six 
planes. The first of these substances is extremely 
rare at Teneriffe; and I never found it in the 
lavas of Vesuvius; those of Etna alone contain 
it in abundance. Notwithstanding the great num- 
ber of blocks, which we stopped to break, to 
the great regret of our guides, we could disco- 
ver neither nepheline, nor leucitet, nor feldspath. 
This, which is so commen in the basaltic lavas 


* Peridot granuliforme. Havy. 
+ Augit. Werner. 
+ Amphigéne. Hauy. 


SE SERS 


128 


of the island of Ischia, does not begin to appear 
at Teneriffe, till we approach the volcano. The 
rock of Laguna is not columnar, but) divid- 
ed into ledges of small thickness, and inclined 
to the east under an angle of 30 or 40 degrees. 
Tt has no where the appearance of a current of 
lava flowing from the sides of the peak. If the 
present volcano has given birth to these basaltes, 
we must suppose, that, like the ‘substances which 
compose the Somma, at the back of Vesuvius, 
they are the effect of a submarine effusion, in 
which the liquid mass has formed real strata. 
A few bushy euphorbiums, the cacalia kleinia, 
and Indian figs (cactus), which are become wild 
in the Canary islands, as well as in the south 
of Europe and the whole continent of Africa, 
are the only plants we see on these arid rocks. 
The feet of our mules were slipping every mo- 
ment on beds of stone, which were very steep. 
We nevertheless recognized the remains of an 
ancient pavement. In these colonies we dis- 
cover at every step some traces of that activity, 
which the Spanish nation displayed in the 16th 
century. 

As we approached Laguna, we’ felt the’ tem- 
perature of the ‘atmosphere gradually decrease. 
This sensation is so much the more agreeable, as 
the air of Santa Cruz is very suffocating. As our 
organs are more affected’ by disagreeable impres- 
sions, the ¢hange’ of temperature becomes still 


124 


more sensible when we return from Lagund to 
the port: we seem then to be drawing ‘near the 
mouth of a furnace. The same impression is felt, 
when, on the coast of Caraccas, we descend from 
the mountain of Avila to the port of La Guayra. 
According to the law of the decrement of heat, 
three hundred toises in height produce in this 
latitude only three or four degrees difference in 
temperature. The heat which overpowers. the 
traveller on his entrance into Santa Cruz, or La 


Guayra, ought consequently to be attributed to 


the reverberation from the rocks, against which 
these towns are built. 

The perpetual coolness, which is found at La- 
guna, is the reason why in the Canaries it is con- 
sidered as a delightful abode.  Situate in a small 
plain, surrounded by gardens, protected by a hill 
which is crowned by a wood of laurels, myrtle, 
and arbutus, the capital.of Teneriffe is very beau- 
tifully placed: We should be mistaken, if, ac- 
cording to the account of some travellers, we be- 
lieved it seated on the border of a lake. The rain 
sometimes forms a sheet of water of some extent ; 
and the geologist, who beholds in every thing the 
past rather than the. present state of nature, can 
have no doubt, but that the whole plain is a great 
basin dried up. Laguna, fallen from its opulence, 
since the lateral eruptions of the volcano have de- 
stroyed the port of Garachico, and Santa, Cruz has 
become the centre of the. commerce of this island, 


125 


contains only 9000 inhabitants, of whom nearly 
400 are monks, divided among six convents. 
Some travellers have asserted, that half thé popu- 
lation wore the ecclesiastic dress. The town is 
surrounded with a great number of windmills, 
which indicate the cultivation of wheat in these 
high countries. I shall observe on this occasion, 
that different kinds of grain were known to the 
Guanches, They called wheat at Teneriffe tano, 
at Lanzerota ¢riffa ; barley, in the grand Canary, 
bore the name of aramotanoque, and at Lanzerota 
that of tamosen. The flower of roasted barley 


¢ gofio) and goat’s milk constituted the principal 


food of this nation, on the origin of which so 
many systematic fables have been built. These ali- 
ments are sufficient proofs, that the race of the 
Guanches belonged to the nations of the old con- 
tinent, perhaps to those of Caucasus, and not like 
the rest of the Atlahtides*, to the inhabitants of 
the New World; these, before the arrival of the 
Europeans, were unacquainted with corn, and 
milk, and cheese. 

A great number of chapels, which the Spaniards 
call ermitas, encircle the town of Laguna. Shaded 


* Without entering here into any discussion respecting the 
existence of the Atlantis, I shall cite the opinion of Diodorus 
Siculus, according to whom the Atlantides were ignorant of 
the use of corn, because they were separated from the rest of 
mankind before these gramina weie cultivated. Diod. Sicul. 
t. IIT, p. 130, Wessel. 


196 


by trees of perpetual verdure, and placed on small 
eminences, these chapels add to the picturesque 
effect of the landscape. The interior side of the town 
is not equal to its external appearance. The 
houses are solidly built, but very antique, and the 
streets seem deserted. A botanist ought not to 
complain of the antiquity of the edifices. The 
roofs and walls are covered with Canary house- 
leek, and those elegant trichomanes, mentioned by 
every traveller. These plants are nourished by 
the frequent fogs. 

Mr. Anderson, the naturalist in the third voy- 
ave of Captain. Cook, advises the European phy- 
sicians to send their sick to Teneriffe, undoubtedly 
not from those motives, which induce some prac- 
titioners to prefer the mineral waters that are at 
the greatest distance, but on account of the mild- 
ness of the temperature and equal climate of the 
Canaries. The ground on these islands rises in an 


amphitheatre, and presents simultaneously, as in 


Peru and Mexico, the temperature of every cli- 
mate, from the heats of Africa to the cold of the 
higher Alps.. Santa Cruz, the port of Orotava, 
the town of the sane name, and that of Laguna, 
are four places, the mean temperatures of which 
form a descending series. In the south of Europe, 
the change of the seasons is still too perceptible, 
to offer the same advantages. Teneriffe on the 
contrary, situate as it were on the threshold of the 
tropics, though but a few days’ sail from Spain, 


en 


127 


shares in the beauties, which nature has lavished 
on the equinoctial regions. Vegetation here dis- 
plays some of its. fairest and most majestic forms 
in the banana and the palm-tree. He who is 
awake to the charms of nature finds in this deli- 
cious island remedies still more potent than the 
climate. . No abode appeared to me more fitted 
to dissipate-melancholy, and restore peace to the 
perturbed mind, than that of Teneriffe, or Madeira. 
These advantages are the effect not of the beauty 
of the site and the purity of the air alone; the 
moral feeling is no longer harrowed up by the view 
of slavery, the appearance of which is so revolting 
in the West Indies, and in every other place, whi- 
ther European planters have conveyed what they 
cali their civilization, and their industry. 

In winter the climate of Laguna is. extremely 
foggy, and the inhabitants often complain of the 
cold. A fall of snow however has never been 
seen, which may seem to indicate, that the mean 
temperature of this town must be. above 18°7° (15° 
R.), that is to say, exceeding that of Naples. I 
do not lay this down as a rigorous conclusion ; for 
in winter, the refrigeration of the clouds does not 
depend so much on the mean temperature of the 
whole year, as on the instantaneous diminution of 
heat, to which a district is exposed by its local 
situation. The mean temperature of the capital 
of Mexico, for instance, is only 16°8° (13°59 R.) 
nevertheless, in the space of a hundred years, 


128 


snow has fallen only once, while in ‘the south of 
Europe, and in Africa, it ‘snows in places where 
the mean temperature is above 19 degrees. 

The vicinity of the sea renders the climate of 
Laguna more temperate in winter, than‘it would 
otherwise be on account of its elevation above the 
level of the ocean. I was even astonished to learn, 
that M. Broussonet had. planted in the midst of 
this town, in the garden of the Marquis de Nava, 
the bread-fruit tree (artocarpus incisa), and cinna- 
mon tree (laurus cinnamomum). These valuable 
productions of the South Sea and the East Indies 
are naturalized there as well as at Orotava. Does 
not this attempt prove, that the bread-fruit might 
flourish in Calabria, Sicily, and Grenada? The 
culture of the coffee tree has not equally succeed- 
ed at Laguna, though its fruit ripens at Teguesta, 
as well as between the port of Orotava and the 
village of St. Juan de la Rambla. It is pro- 
bable, that some local circunistances, perhaps the 
nature of the soil, and the winds that prevail in 
the flowering season, are the cause of this pheno- 
menon. In other regions, in the neighbourhood 
of Naples for instance, the ccffce-tree produces 
abundantly, though the mean temperature scarcely 
rises above 18 centigrade degrees. 

No person has ascertained, in the island of Te- 
neriffe, the lowest height at which snow falls every 
year. This fact, easy of execution by barometri- 
cal measurements, has hitherto heen generally 


exes neene oS RISE ESE 


129 


neglected under every zone; it is nevertheless 
highly interesting both to agriculture in the co- 
lonies and meteorology, and full as important as 
the measure of the limit of the perpetual snows. 
My observations furnished me with the data, 
which I shall record in the following table. 


jLowest height‘ Inferior limit 
at which the } of the perpe- 
Northern) snow falls. | taal snows. {ding columns.itemperature. 
latitude. | | me | Re | eR 
toises.|metres toises. metres toises. metres; Cent. | Reaus 
a es 4: — —— ee | nie | | 
02 2040] 8976 2460 4794 420 818 | 27) 21-0) 
202 1550 | 3020 2360 | 4598 | 810 | 1578 245° 19-6 
¥ 4 & 
f 
t 


Difference of| 
the two prece- Mean 


} 40° lo lo 


| Socsageeoaeo M4 


1540 3001! 1540 soo1! 17> 13-69, 


This table presents only the ordinary state of 
nature, that is to say, the phenomena as they 
are annually observed. ‘ Exceptions founded on 
particular local circumstances, exist. Thus. it 
sometimes snows, though seldom, at Naples, at 
Lisbon, and even at Malaga, consequently as low 
as the 37th degree of latitude: and, as we have 
just observed, snow has been seen to fall at Mex- 
ico, the elevation of which is 1173 toises above 
the level of the Ocean. This ‘phenomenon, 
which had not been seen for several centuries, 
took place on the day that the Jesuits were ex- 


‘-pelled, and was attributed by the people ‘to this 


act of severity. A more striking exception was 

found in the climate of Valladolid, the capital of 

the province of Mechoacan. According to my 
VOL, I, K 


130 


measures, this height of the town, situate in 
19° 49’ of latitude, is only a thousand toises: 
and yet, a few years before our arrival in New 
Spain, the streets were covered with snow for 


some hours. 

Snow has been seen to fall also at Teneriffe, 
in a place lying above Esperanza de la Laguna, 
very near the town of this name, in the gardens 
of which the artocarpus flourishes. This ex- 
traordinary fact was confirmed to M. Brous- 
sonet by very aged persons. The erica ar- 
borea, the myrica faya, and the arbutus  calli- 
carpa™*, did not suffer from this snow; but it de- 
‘stroyed all the swine in the open air. This ob- 
servation is interesting to vegetable physiology. 
In hot countries, the plants are so vigorous, that 
cold is less injurious to them, provided it be of 
short duration. I have seen the banana culti- 
vated in the island of Cuba, in places where the 
thermometer descends to seven centesimal degrees, 
and sometimes very near the freezing point. In 
Italy and Spain the orange and date trees do 
not perish, though the cold during the night is 
two degrees below: the freezing point. In general 
it is remarked by cultivators, that the trees which 
grow in a fertile soil are less delicate, and con- 
sequently, less affected by great changes in the 

% This fine arbutus, imported by M. Broussonet, is very 


different from the arbutus laurifolia, with which it has been 
confounded, and which belongs to North America. 


eee 


131 


temperature, than those which grow in land that 
affords but little nutriment *. 

In order to pass from the town of Laguna to 
the port of Orotava and the western coast of 
Teneriffe, we cross at first a hilly region covered 
with black and argillaceous earth; in which are 
found some small crystals of pyroxene. The wa- 
ters most probably detach these crystals from the 
neighbouring rocks, as at Frascati near Rome. 
Unhappily, strata of ferruginous earth conceal 
the soil from the researches of the geologist. It 
is only in some ravines, that we find columnar 
basaltes, somewhat curved, and above them very 
recent brecciz, resembling volcanic tufa. These 
brecciz contain fragments of the same basaltés 
which they cover; and<t is asserted, that marine 
petrifactions are observed in them. ‘The same 
phenomenon occurs in the Vicentin, near Monte- 
chio Maggiore. 

The valley of Tacoronte is the entrance into 
this charming country, of which travellers of 
every nation have spoken with rapturous enthu- 


* The mulberries, cultivated in the meagre and sandy soils 
of countries bordering on the Baltic Sea, are examples of 
this feebleness of organization. The late frosts do more in- 
jury to them, than to the mulberries of Piedmont. In Italy 
a cold of 5° below the freezing point does not destroy robust 
orange trees. According to Mr. Galesio, these trees, less 
tender than the lemon and bergamot orange trees, freeze 
only at ten centesimal degrees below the freezing point. 


K Q 


132 


siasm. Under the torrid zone I found sites, where 
‘nature is more majestic, and richer in the display 
of organic forms; but after having traversed the 
banks of the Orinoco, the Cordilleras of Peru, 
and the most beautiful valleys of Mexico, I own, 
that I have never beheld a prospect more varied, 
more attractive, more harmonious in the distribu- 
tion of the masses of verdure and of rocks. 

The seacoast is lined with date and cocoa trees. 
Groups of musa, as the country rises, form a 
pleasing contrast with the dragon-tree, the trunks _ 
of which have béen justly compared to the tortu- 
ous form of the serpent. The declivities are co- 
vered with vines, which throw their branches over 
towering poles. Orange-tres loaded with flowers, 


myrtles, and cypress treés entwine the chapels 
reared to devotion on the isolated hills. The 


divisions of property are marked by hedges formed 
of the agave and the cactus. An innumerable quan- 
tity of cryptogamous. plants, among which ferns 
are the most predominant, cover the walls, moist- 
ened by small springs of limpid water. In winter, 
when the volcano is buried under ice and snow, 
this district enjoys perpetual spring. In summer, 
as the day declines, ‘the breezes from the sea come 
loaded with delicious coolness. The population of 
this coast is very considerable ; and it appears to 
be still greater than it is, because the houses and 
gardens are more distant from each other; which 
adds to the picturesque beauty of the situation. 


133 


Unhappily the real welfare of the inhabitants does not 
correspond with the exertions of their industry, or 
with the advantages which nature has lavished on 
this spot. The farmers are not proprietors; the 
fruits of their labour belong to the nobles, and 
those feudal institutions, which, for so long a time, 
spread misery throughout Europe, still weigh 
heavily on the happiness of the people of the 
Canary Islands. — 

From Tegueste: and Tacoronte to the village of 
St. Juan de la Rambla, which is celebrated for its 
excellent malmsey, the rising hills are cultivated 
like a garden. I might compare them to the en- 
virons of Capua and Valentia, if the western part 
of Teneriffe was not infinitely more beautiful on 
account of the proximity of the Peak, which pre 
sents on every side a varied landscape. The view 
of this mountain is interesting not merely from its 
gigantic mass; it fills the mind, by carrying it back 
to the mysterious source of its volcanic agency. 
For thousands of years, no flames or light have 
been perceived on the summit of the Piton, never- 
theless enormous lateral eruptions, the last of which 
took place in 1798, are proofs of the activity of a 
fire still far from being extinguished. ‘There is also 
something, that leaves a melancholy impression on 
the mind on seeing a crater in the centre of a fer- 
tile and well cultivated country. The history of 
the globe instructs us, that voleanoes destroy what 
they have been a long series of ages in creating. 


134 


Islands, which the action of submarine fires has 
raised above the waters, are decked by degrees in 
rich and smiling verdure; but these new abodes 
are often laid waste by the renewed action of the 
same power, which caused them to emerge from 
the bottom of the ocean. Perhaps those islets, 
which are now ‘but heaps of scorie and volcanic 
ashes, were once as fertile as the hills of Taco- 
ronte and Sauzal. Happy the country, where 
man has no distrust of the soil on which he lives! 

Pursuing our course to the port of Orotava, 


we passed the smiling hamlets of Matanza and 


Vittoria. These names are mingled together in all 
the Spanish colonies, and form a disagreeable con- 
trast with the feelings of peace and tranquillity, 
which those countries inspire. Matanza signifies 
butchery, or carnage; and the word alone recalls 
the price, at which victory has been purchased. 
In the New World, it generally indicates the defeat 
of the natives; at Teneriffe, the village of Matanza 
was built in a place* where the Spaniards’ were 
conquered by those same Guanches, who soon after 
were sold as slaves in the markets of Europe. 
Before we reached Orotava, we visited a botanic 
garden at a small distance from the port. We 
there found M, Le Gros, the French vice-consul, 
who had often, scaled fhe sum..it of the Peak, and 
who served us as an excellent guide. He was 


* The ancient Acantejo. 


135 


accompanying Captain Baudim in a voyage to the 
West Indies, which has largely contributed to en- 
| rich the garden of plants at Paris. A dreadful 
| tempest, of which M. Le Dru has given an account 


in the narrative of his voyage to Porto Rico, 
forced the vessel to put into Teneriffe; where 
M. Le Gros was led by the beauty of the spot to 
settle. It was he who gave the learned of Europe 
the first accurate ideas of the great lateral erup- 
tions of the Peak, which has been very improperly 
called the explosion of the volcano of Chahorra *. 
The establishment of a botanical garden at 
Teneriffe is a very happy idea, on account of the 
double influence, which it may have on the pro- 
gress of botany, and on the introduction of useful 
plants into Europe. For the first idea of it we are 
indebted to the Marquis de Nava, whose name 
deserves to be recorded with that of M. Poivre, 
and who, habitually.engaged in doing good, has 
made a noble use of his fortune. He undertook, 
at an enormous expense, to level the hill of 
Durasno, which now rises as an amphitheatre, and 
which was begun to be planted in 1795. The 
marquis thought, that the Canary Islands, from the 
mildness of their climate and geographical positions 
afforded the most suitable place for naturalising the 
productions of the two Indies, and serving as a 


* The Sth of June, 1798. 
+ Marquis de Villanueva del Prado, 


136 


repository to habituate the plants gradually to the 


colder temperature of the south of Europe. In 
fact, the plants of Asia, Africa, and South Ame- 
rica, may easily be brought to Orotava; and in 
order to introduce the bark-tree * into Sicily, 
Portugal, or Grenada, it should be first planted at 
Durasno, or at Laguna, and the shoots of this tree 
may afterwards be transported into Europe from 
the Canaries. In happier times, when maritime 
wars shajl no longer interrupt communication, the 
garden of Teneriffe may become extremely useful 
with respect to the yreat number of plants, which are 
gent from the Indies to Europe; for ere they 
reach our coasts, they often perish, on account of 
the length of the passage, during which they inhale 
an air impregnated with salt water. These plants 
would meet at Orotava with the care and climate 
necessary to their preservation. ‘The keeping of 
the botanic garden having become every year more 
expensive, the Marquis de Nava has ceded it to 
the government. We found in it a well-informed 


* JY speak of the species of bark-tree (cinchona), which at 
Peru, and in the kingdom of New Grenada, flourish on the 
back of the Cordilleras, at the height of between 1000 and 
1500 toises, in places where the thermometer is between nine 
an ten degrees during the day, and-from three to four during 
the night. ‘The oranged bark-tree (cinchona lancifolia) is 
much less tender than the red bark-tree (c. oblongifolia). See 
the Memoir on the Forests of the bark-tree, which I published 
in 1807, in the Magasin der Naturkunde, B. i, p. 118. 


137 


gardener, who had been brought up under Mr. 
Aiton, director of the royal garden at Kew. The 
earth is raised in terraces, and watered by a 
natural spring. It hasa view of the island of 
Palma, which appears like a castle in the midst of 
the ocean. We found this establishment but little 
stocked with plants, vacant places of genera were 
filled up with tickets, the names of which seemed to 
have been taken by chance, as they were found in the 
systema vegetabilium of Linneus. This distribu- 
tion of. plants, after the classes of the sexual 
system, which is unhappily the case in several 
gardens in Europe, is very hostile to their cultiva- 
tion. At Durasno, the protei, the psidium, the 
jambos, the chirimoya of Peru *, sensitive plants, 
and heliconias, flourish in the open air. We 
gathered the ripened seeds of several beautiful 
species of glycine from New Holland, which the 
governor of Cumana, Mr. Emparan, successfully 
cultivated, and which since grow wild on the 
coasts of South America. 

We arrived very late at the port of Orotava {, if 
we may give the name of port to a road, in which 
the vessels are obliged to put to sea whenever the 
winds blow violently from the north-west. It is 
impossible to speak of Orotava, without recalling 


* Annona cherimolia. Lamarck. 
+ Puerto de la Cruz. The only fine port of the Canary 
Islands is that of St, Sebastien, in the isle of Gomera, 


135 


to the remembrance of the scientific world’ the 
name of Mr. Cologan, whose house at all times 
was open to travellers of every nation. Several 
members of this respectable family have been 
educated at London and at Paris. Don Bernardo 
Cologan unites the most ardent zeal for the good 
of his country to various parts of solid instruction. 
We are agreeably surprised to find, in a group of 
islands near the coasts of Africa, that urbanity, 
that taste for knowledge, that love of the arts, 


which is thought to belong exclusively to a small 


part of Europe. 

We could have wished to have sojourned for 
some time in Mr. Cologan’s house, -and visited 
with him the charming scenery of St. Juan de 
la Rambla and of Rialexo de Abaxo*. - But on 
a voyage such as that we had undertaken, the 
present is but little enjoyed. Continually haunted 
by the fear of not executing the designs of the 
morrow, we live in perpetual uneasiness. Persons 
who are passionately fond of nature and the arts 
feel the same sensations, when they travel through 
Switzerland and Italy. Enabled to see but a 
small portion of the objects which allure them, 
they are disturbed in their enjoyments by the re- 
straints they impose on themselves at every step. 

On the morning of the 21st of June, we were 


* The last of these two villages is placed at the foot of the 
lofty mountain of Tygayga. 


a ae 


139 


already on the road for the summit of the volcano. 
M. Le Gros, whose attentions were unwearied, 
M. Lalande, secretary of the French Consulate 
at Santa Cruz, and the English yardener at Du- 
rasno, shared in the fatigues of this excursion. 
The day was not very fine, and the summit of the 
Peak, which is generally visible at Orotava from 
sunrise till ten o’clock, was covered with thick 
clouds. There is only one path to the volcano, 
by the Villa de Orotava, the Plain 6f Spartium, 
and the AZalpais ; it is this which was taken by 
father Feuillée, Borda, La Billardiere, Barrow, and 
all late travellers, who have made but a short stay 
at Teneriffe. In an excursion to the Peak, as 
well as in those which are commonly made in the 


valley of Chamouni and to the top of Etna, where 


we are forced to follow the guide, we see almost 
nothing but what has been already seen and de- 
scribed by former travellers. 

We were agreeably surprised by the contrast 
between the vegetation of this part of Teneriffe, 
and that of the environs of Santa Cruz. Under 
the influence of a cool and humid climate, the 
ground was covered with beautiful verdure; while 
on the road from Santa Cruz to Laguna the plants 
exhibited nothing but pods emptied of their seeds. 
Near the port of Santa Cruz, the strength of the 
vegetation is an obstacle to geological researches. 
We went on foot over two small hills, which rise 
in the form of bells. Observations made at Ve- 


140 


suvius, and in Auvergne, lead us to think, that 


these paps owe their origin to lateral eruptions of 


the great volcano. The hill called Montannita 
de la Villa seems indeed to have already emitted 
lavas; and according to the tradition of the Guan- 
ches this eruption took place in 1430. Colonel 
Franqui assured Borda, that the place is still to 
be seen whence the melted matter issued ; and that 
the ashes, which covered the ground adjacent, 
were not yet productive*. Wherever the rock 
appears, we discovered basaltic amygdaloidf co- 
vered with hardened clay}, which contains rapilli, 
or fragments of pumice stone. This last forma- 
tion resembles the tufas of Pausilippo,. and .the 
strata of Puzzolana, which I found in the valley 
of Quito, at the foot of the Volcano of Pichincha., 


* This fact is taken from a manuscript now at Paris, at the 
depdt of the Charts of the Marine. It bears the title of Rés 
sumé des Operations de fa Campagne de la Boussole (in 1776) 
pour determiner les Positions géographiques des Cotes d’ Espagne 
& de Portugal sur VOcean, dune ‘Partie des Cétes occideniales 
de V Afrique, 5 des Iles Canaries, par le Chevalier de Borda. 
This is the manuscript of which M. Fleurieu speaks in the 
notes, which he has added to the Voyage of Marchand, vol. 
2, p. 11, and which M. de Borda had communicated to me 
previous to my departure. As I have extracted some impor. 
tant observations from it, which have never been published, 
T shall cite it in this work under the title of Manuscript dis 
 Dépot. 

+ Basaltartiger mandelstein. Werner. 
+ Bimstein-conglomerat. W. 


a TE ETAL AE TEE EE 


T41 


The amygdaloid has very long pores, like the su- 
perior strata of the lavas of Vesuvius, arising pro- 
bably from the action of an elastic fluid forcing its 
way through the matter in fusion. Notwithstand- 
ing, these analogies, I must here repeat, that in all 
the low region of the Peak of Teneriffe, on the side 
of Orotava, I have met with no flow of lavas, no 
current, the limits of which were strongly marked. 
Torrents and inundations change the surface of 
the globe, and when a great number of currents 
of lava meet and spread over a plain, as I. have 
seen at Vesuvius, in the Atrio det Cavalli, they 
seem to be confounded together, and wear the ap- 
pearance of real strata. 

The villa de Orotava has a pleasant aspect at 
a distance, from the great abundance of waters 
which ran through the principal streets. The 
spring of Agua mansa, collected in two large re- 
servoirs, turns several mills, and is afterward 
discharged among the vineyards of the adjacent 
hills. . The climate is still more refreshing at the 
villa than at the port of La Cruz, from the in- 
fluence of the breeze, which blows strong after ten 
in the morning. The water, which has been dis- 
solved in the air at a higher temperature, frequent- 
ly? precipitates itself, and renders the climaté very 
fueoy. The villa is nearly 160 toises (312 metres) 
above the surface of the ocean, consequently 200 
toises less than the ground on which Laguna is 


142 


built; it is observed also, that the same kind of 
plants flower a month later in this latter place. 
Orotava, the ancient Taoro of the Guanches, 
is placed on a very stcep declivity; the streets 
seem deserted ; the houses, solidly built, but of a 
gloomy appearance, belong almost all to the no- 
bility, who are accused of being estremely haugh- 
ty, and who give themselves the pompous title of 
the doze casas (the twelve houses). We passed 
along a lofty aqueduct, lined with a great number 
of fine ferns ; and visited several gardens, in which 
the fruit trees of the north of Europe are mingled 
with orange trees, pomegranate, and date trees. 
We were assured, that these last were as little 
productive here as on the coasts of Cumana. Al- 
though we were acquainted, from the narratives of 
so many travellers, with the dragon-tree of the 
garden‘of Mr. Franqui, we were not the less struck 
with its enormous magnitude. We were told, 
that the trunk of this tree, which is mentioned in 
several very ancient documents as marking the 
boundaries of a field, was as gigantic in the fif- 
teenth century, as it is at the present moment. 
Its height appeared to us to be about 50 or 60 
feet ; its circumference near the roots is 45 feet. 
We Gould not measure higher, but Sir George 
Staunton found, that, 10 feet from the ground, the 
diameter of the trunk is still 12 English feet; 
which corresponds perfectly with the assertion of 
Borda, who found its mean circumference 33 feet 


WW 
it 
ih 
/ 


| 
1 
i 
| 


Se ee ee 


148 


8 inches, French measure... The. trunk is divided 
into a great number of branches, which rise in the 
form of a candelabrum, and are terminated by 
tufts of leaves, like the yucca which adorns the 
valley of Mexico. It is this division, which gives 
ita very different appearance from that of the 
palm-tree™. 

Among organised beings, this tree is undoubt- 
edly, together with the adansonia or baobab of 
Senegal, one of the oldest inhabitants of our globe. 
The baobabs are of still greater dimensions than 
the dragon-tree of Orotava. There are some, 
which near the root measure 34 feet in diameter, 
though their total height is only from 50 to 60 
feet ¢. But we should observe, that the adansonia, 


* J have given, in the Picturesque Atlas which accompanies 
this narrative, (P]. 58 of the folio A tlas), the figure of the 
dragon tree of Franqui, from a sketch made in 1776 by 


M. D’Qzonne, at the time of the expedition of Mesernc de 


“Borda and Varela. 


+ Adanson is surprised, that the bacbabs have not been 
cited by other travellers. I find, in the collection of Gry- 
naeus,. that Aloysio Cadamosto speaks of the great age of 
those monstrous trees, which he saw in 1504, and of whith 
he says very.truly; “ emientia altitudinis non guadrat magnitu,, 
din.” Cadam. Nayig. chap. 42. At Senegal, and. near 
Praya, in the islands of Cape Verd, Messrs. Adanson and 
Staunton remarked adansoniz, the trunks of which were 
from 56 to 60 feet in circumference. Voy. au Sénégal, t. 1, 
p. 54." The baobab 34 feet in diameter was seen by Mr. Gol- 
berry, in the valley of the two Gagnacks.. Fragmens d'un 
Voy. en Afrique, t. 2, p. 92. 


144 


like the ochroma, and all the plants of the family 
of bombax, grow much more rapidly* than the 
dracoena, the vegetation of which is very slow. 
That in Mr. Franqui’s garden bears still every vear 
both flowers and fruit. Its aspect feelingly recalls 
to mind “ that eternal youth} of nature,” which. 
is an inexhaustible source of motion and of life. 
The draccena, which is seen only in cultivated 
spots in the Canary islands, at Madeira, and Por- 
to Santo, offers a curious phenomenon with res- 
pect to the migration of plants. It has never 
been found in a wild state on the continent of 
Africat: the East Indies is its.real country. By 


* It is the same with the plane-tree (platanus occidentalis) 
which M. Michaux measured at Marietta, on the banks of 
the Ohio, and which, at twenty feet from the ground, was 
15:7 feet in diameter (Voy. & Quest des Monts Alleghany, 
1804, p. 93). The taxus, chesnut, oak, plane-tree, cupressus 
disticha, bombax, mimosa, czsalpinia, hymenea, and dra- 
coena, appear to me to be the plants, which, in different cli« 
mates, offer specimens of the most extraordinary growth. 
An oak, discovered together with some Gallic helmets in 
1809, in the turf pits of the department of the Somme, near 
the village of Yseux, seven leagues from Abbeville, was about 
the same size as the dragon tree of Orotava. According to 
a memoir by M. Traullée, the trunk of this oak was 14 feet 
in diameter. 

+ Aristot. de Longit. Vite, cap. 6, (ed. Casaub. p. 442.) 

} Mr. Schousboe, in his Flora of Morocco (Danske Videns- 
kabens-Selskabs Skrioter, B. v, p. 4) does not even mention it 
among the cultivated plants, while he speaks of the cactus, 


eee 


145 


what means has this tree been transplanted to 
Teneriffe, where it is no way common? does its 
existence prove, that, at some very distant epocha, 
the Guanches had connections with other nations 
originally from Asia ? 

On leaving Orotava, a narrow and stony path- 
way led us across a beautiful forest of chesnut 
trees, ef monte de Castannos, to a site which is 
covered with brambles, some species of laurels, 
and arborescent heaths. The trunks of the last 
grow to-an extraordinary size; and the flowers 
with which they are loaded form an agreeable 
contrast, during a great part of the year, with 
the hypericum canariense, which is very abundant 
at this height. We stopped to take in our pro- 


the agave, and the yucca. The form of the dragou-tree 
is exhibited in several species of the genus drac®na, at the 
Cape of Gvuod Hope, in China, and in New Zealaad; but 
in the New World it is replaced by the form of the yucca; 
for the dracena borealis of Aiton isa convallaria, of which 
it has all the appearance. The astringent juice, known in 
commerce by the name_of dragon’s blood, is, according to 
the inquiries we made on the spot, the produce of several 
American plants, which do not belong to the same genus, 
and of which some are liannes*. At Laguna, toothpicks 
steeped in the juice of the dragon-tree are made in the 
nunneries, and are much extolled as highly useful for ‘the 


preservation of the gums. 


* A general term used for climbing plants in the French 
West India islands. Ep. 
ViOLs a L ‘ it 


146 


vision of water under a solitary firtree. ‘This 
station is known in the country by the name 
of Pino del Dornajito; its height, according to 
the barometrical measurement of M. de Borda* 
is 522 toises; atd it commands a magnificent 
prospect of the sea, and the whole of the nor- 
thern part of the island. Near Pino del Dor- 
najito, a little on the right of the pathway, is a 
copious spring of water, into which we plunged 
the thermometer, which fell to 154°. At a hun- 
dred toises distance from this spring is another 
equally limpid. If we admit, that these waters 
indicate nearly the mean heat of the place whence 
they issue, we find the absolute elevation of the 
station 520 toises, supposing T the mean tem- 


* Manuscrit du Dépot, 7me cahier, p. 15. I calculated the 
heights, which I mention in the text, according to the for- 
mula of M. Laplace, and the coefficient of Mr. Ramond: 
In the “manuscript, we find “ 516 toises, according to the 
tables of De Luc.” We must not confound the Pino del 
Dornajito with the station of the Pino de la Merienda, cited 
by Eden and father Feuillée; and elevated 800 toises above 
the level of the Ocean. This last station is between the 
€aravela and the Portillo. See the note on the whole o 
these measures, at the end of the Journal de Route. 

+ As a proof, that these objections are founded on accurate 
observations, I will here observe, that the mean temperature 
of the low regions of the isle of Madeira, which is a little 
to the north of Teneriffe is 20°4°; and that my observa- 
tions, made under the torrid zone, allow for the decrement 
of caloric 98 toises.to each centesimal degree; while the re- 
sults taken by M. Ramond, under the temperate zone, in la- 


147 


perature of the coast to be 21°, and allowing one 
degree for the decrement of caloric correspond- 
ing under this zone to 93 toises. We should 
not be surprised, if this spring remained a little 
below the heat of the air, since it is probably 
formed in some more elevated part of the peak, 
and communicates perhaps even with the small 
subterranean glaciers, of which we shall speak 
hereafter. The accordance which we have just 
observed between the barometrical and thermo- 
metrical measures is so much the more striking, 
because in general, as I have elsewhere explained*, 
in mountainous countries, with steep declivities, the 
Springs indicate too great a decrement of caloric, 
because they unite small currents of water, which 
filter at different heights, and their temperature 
is consequently the mean between the tempera- 
ture of these currents: The spring of Dorna- 
jito has considerable reputation in the countr : 


titude 45°, give 84 toises. From these extremes it follows, 
that the height of the Dornajito is either 548 toises, or 470 
toises. M. de Borda found in 1776. the temperature of the 
air near the spring 59 colder than at the port of Orotaya, 
whieh seems to prove, that the decrement of 93 toises, which 
I have supposed, is not too slow. Phil. Trans. vol. xlvii, p. 
358. Ramond, Mém. sur la Formule baroni. p. 189. 

* Astron. Obs. vol. i, p. 132. Thus in the Blue Moun- 
tains of. Jamaica Mr Hunter found springs constantly colder 
than they ought to have been, according to the height at 
which they issued. 


Loe 


148 


and-was the only one known, at the time of 


my excursion, on the road which leads to the 
summit of the volcano. The formation of 
springs demands a certain regularity in the di- 
rection and inclination of the strata. On a vol- 
canic soil, porous and splintered rocks absorb 
the rain waters, and lead them to considerable 
depths. Hence arises that aridity observed in 
the greater part of the Canary islands, notwith- 
standing the considerable height of their moun- 
tains, and the mass of clouds which navigators 
behold incessantly piled over this archipelago. 
From Pino del Dornajito to the crater of the 
voleano we continued to ascend without crossing 
a single valley; for the small ravines (barancos ) 
do not merit this name. To the eyes of the 
geologist the whole of the isle of Teneriffe is 
but one monntain, the almost elliptical base of 
which is prolonged to the north-east, and in which 
we distinguish several systems of volcanic rocks 
formed at different epochas. The Chahorra, or 
Montana Colorada, and the Urca, considered in 
the country as insulated volcanoes, are only lit- 
tle hills abutting on the Peak, and marking its 
pyramidal form. The great volcano, the lateral 
eruptions of which have given birth to vast pro- 
montorics, is not however precisely in the centre 
of the island, and this peculiarity of structure 
appears less surprising, if we recollect, as a learn- 


149 


ed mineralogist has observed *, that -it is- not 
perhaps the small crater of the Piton, which has 
acted the principal part in the revolutions under- 
gone by the isle of Teneriffe. 

Above the region of arborescent heaths, called 
Monte Verde, is the region of the ferns. No 
where, under the temperate zone, have I seen 
such an abundance of the pteris, blechnum, aud 
asplenium; yet none of these plants have the 
stateliness of the arborescent ferns, which at the 
height of five or six hundred toises form the prin- 
cipal ornament of equinoctial America. The root 
of the pteris aquilina serves the inhabitants of 
Palma and Gomera for food; they grind it to 
powder, and mix with it a small quantity of barley- 
meal. This composition, when boiled, is called 
gofio ; the use of so homely an aliment is a proof 
of the extreme penury of the lower order of people 
in the Canary islands. 

Monte Verde is intersected by several small and 
very arid ravines (cannadas), -and the region of 
ferns is succeeded by a wood of juniper trees and 
firs, which has suffered greatly from the violence 
of the hurricanes.. In this place, mentioned by 
some travellers under the name of Caravela, Mr. 
Eden f asserts that he saw little flames, which, 


* M. Cordier. 
+ This visit took place in 1715. Phil. Trans, vol, xxix, 


p. 317. Carabela is the name. of a vessel-with latin sails, 


150 


according to the doctrine of the naturalists of his 
time, he attributes to sulphurous exhalations that 
take fire of themselves. We continued to ascend, 
till we came to the rock of La Gayta and to 
Portillo; traversing this narrow passage between 
two basaltic hills, we entered the great plain of 
Spartium*. At the time of the voyage of La 
Peyrouse, M. Manneron had taken ‘the levels of 
the Peak, from the port of Orotava to this elevated 
plain near 1400 toises above the level of the sea ; 
but the want of water, and the misconduct of the 
guides, had prevented him from taking the levels to 
the top of the volcano. The results of this opera- 
tion, which was two thirds finished, unfortunately 
were not sent to Europe, and this work is still to 
be recommenced from the seacoast. 

We spent two hours and a half in crossing the 
Liano del Retama, which appears like an immense 
sea of sand. Notwithstanding the elevation of 
this site, the centigrade thermometer rose in the 
shade, toward sunset, to 13°3°, or 3°7° higher 
than toward noon at Monte Verde. This aug- 
mentation of heat could be attributed only to the 
reverberation from the ground, and the extent of 
the plain. We suffered much from the suffocating 


The pines of the peak formerly were used as masts of vessels, 
and the royal navy eut its wood (cortes de madera) on the 
Monte Verde. 

* Los Llanos del Retama, 


151 


dust of the pumice stone, in which we were. con- 
tinually enveloped, In the midst of this plain are 
tufts of the retama, which is the spartiam nubige- 
num of Aiton. This charming shrub, which M. de 
Martiniere* wished to introduce into Languedoc, 
where firewood is very scarce, grows to the height 
of nine feet ; it is loaded with odoriferous flowers, 
with which the goat hunters, that we met in our 
road, had decorated their hats. The goats of the 
Peak, which are of a deep brown, are reckoned de- 
licious food; they browse on the spartium, and 
have run wild in the deserts from time im- 
memorial. They have even been transported to 
Madeira, where they are preferred to the goats 
of Europe. 

As far as the rock of Gayta, or the entrance of 
the extensive Llano del Retama, the Peak of Tene- 
riffe is covered with beautiful vegetation: nothing 
bears the mark of recent devastation. We might 
have imagined ourselves scaling the side of some 
volcano, the fire of which had been extinguished 
as remotely as that of Monte Cavo, near Rome ; 
but scarcely had we reached the plain covered 
with pumice stone, when the landscape changed 
its aspect, and at every step we met with large 
blocks of obsidian thrown out by the volcano. 
Every thing here speaks perfect solitude. A few 


* One of the botanists who perished in the expedition of 


La Peyrousee 


152 


goats and rabbits only bound across the plain. 
The barren region of the Peak is nine square 
leagues ; and as the lower regions viewed from this 
point shrink in the prospect, the island appears an 
immense heap of torrefied matter, ‘hemmed round 
by a scanty border of vegetation. 

From the region of the spartium nubigenum 
we passed through narrow defiles, and small ravines 
hollowed very anciently by the torrents, first to a 
more elevated plain (el Monton de Trigo), then 
to the place where we intended to pass the night. 
This station, which is more than 1530 toises above 
the coast, bears the name of the English Halt 
(Estancia de los Ingleses*), no doubt because 
English travellers were those, who formerly visited 
the Peak most frequently. Two inclined rocks 
form a kind of cavern, that affords a shelter from 
the winds. This point, already higher than the 


summit of the Canigou, can be reached on. the 


backs of mules; and here ends the expedition of 
numbers of travellers, who on leaving Orotava 


* This denomination was already in use at the beginning 
of the last century. Mr. Eden, who corrupts all Spanish 
words, as do the greater part of travellers in our own times, 
calls it the Stencha; it is the Station des Rochers of M. Borda, 
as is, proved by the barumetrical heights there observed. 
These heights were in 1803, according to M. Cordier, 
19 inches 9°5 lines ; and in 1776, according to Messrs. Borda 
and Varela, 19 inches 9:8 lines; the barometer at Orotava 
keeping within nearly a line at_the same height. 


1538 


had hoped to have ascended to the brink of the 
crater. Though in the midst of summer, and 
under ‘the bright sky of Africa, we suffered from 
the cold during the night. The thermometer 
descended as low as to five degrees. Our guides 
made a large fire with the dry branches of retama. 
Having neither tents nor cloaks, we lay down on 
a heap of burnt rocks, and were singularly incom- 
moded by the flame and smoke, which the wind 
drove towards us. We had attempted to forma 
kind of screen with cloths tied together, but our 
enclosure took fire, which we did not perceive, till 
the greater part had been consumed by the flames. 
We had never passed a night on a point so elevated, 
and did not then conjecture, that on the ridge of 
the Cordilleras we should one day inhabit towns 
higher than the summit of the volcano we were to 
scale on the morrow. As the temperature di- 
minished, the Peak became covered with thick 
clouds. The approach of night interrupts the 
play of the ascending current, which, during the 
day, rises from the plains towards the high regions 
of the atmosphere ; and the air, in cooling, loses 
its capacity of suspending water. A strong 
rortherly wind chased the clouds ; the moon at 
intervals, shooting across the vapors, exposed its 
disk on a firmament of the darkest blue$ and the 
view of the volcano threw a majestic character over 
the nocturnal scenery. Sometimes the Peak was 


154 


entirely hidden from our eyes by the fog, at others, 
it broke upon us in terrific nearness; and, like an 
enormous pyramid, threw its shadow over the 
clouds rolling beneath our feet. 

Towards three in the morning, by the sombrous 
light of a few fir torches, we began our expedition 
for the summit of the Piton. We scaled the 
volcano on the north east, where the declivities are 
extremely steep; and we came, after two hours 
toil; to a small plain, which, on account of its 
isolated situation, bears the name of Alfa Vista. 
~ It is the station also of the neveros, those natives, 
whose occupation it is to collect ice and snow, 
which they sell in the neighbouring towns. Their 
mules, better practised in climbing mountains than 
those hired by travellers, reach dA/ta Vista, and 
the neveros are obliged to transport the snow to 
this place on their backs. Above this point the 
Malpays begins, a term by which is designated 
here, as well asin Mexico, Peru, and every other 
country subject to volcanoes, a ground destitute 
of vegetable mould, and covered with fragments 
of lavas. 

We turned towards the right to examine the 
Cavern of Ice, which is at 1728 toises, conse- 
quently below the limit of the perennial snows 
under this zone. It is probable, that the cold 
which reigns in this cavern is owing to the same 
causes, which perpetuate the ice in the crevices of 


| 
| 
| 


155 


Mount Jura, and the Apennines, and on which the 
opinions of naturalists are still much divided *. 
This natural ice-house of the Peak has nevertheless 
none of those perpendicular openings, which give 
emission to the warm air, while the cold air re- 
mains undisturbed at the bottom. It seems that 
the ice is preserved in it on account of its mass, and 
because its melting is retarded by the cold, which 
is the consequence of quick evaporation. This 
small subterranesus glacier is situate in a region, 
the mean temperature of which is probably not 
under three degrees ; and it is not, like the true 
glaciers of the Alps, fed by the snow waters that 
flow from the summits ofthe mountains. During 
winter, the cavern is filled with ice and snow ; and 
as the rays of the sun do not penetrate beyond the 
mouth, the heats of summer are not sufficient 
to empty the reservoir. The existence of a natural 
ice house depends, consequently, rather on the 
quantity of snow which enters it in winter, and the 
small influence of the warm winds that blow in 


* Saussure, Voyage dans les Alpes, §. 1406—1414, 
Prevost, du Calorique rayonnant, p. 409—422. In the 
greater part of the cellars of ice, for instance that of St. 
George, between Niort and Rolle, a thin layer of limpid ice 
forms itself in summer on the walls of the calcareous rock. 
Mr. Pictet observed, that at this epocha the thermometer 
does not descend, in the air of the cellar, below two or three 
degrees, so that we must attribute the congelation to a local 
and very rapid evaporation, 


156 


summer, than on the absolute elevation of the 
cavity, and the mean temperature of the layer of 
air in which it is situate. The air contained in the 
bowels of a mountain is not easily displaced, as is 
proved by Monte-Testaceo, at -Rome, the temper- 
ature of which is so different from that of the sur- 
rounding atmosphere. We shall see in the course 
of this work, that on Chimborazo enormous heaps 
of ice are found covered with sand, and, in the 
same manner as at the Peak, far below the inferior 
limit of the perpetual snows. 

It was near the Cellar of Ice (Cueva del Hielo), 
that, in the voyage of La Péyrouse, Messrs, Lama- 
non and Mongés made: their. experiments on the 
temperature of boiling water. These naturalists 
found it 85°7°, the barometer being at nineteen 
inches one line. In the kingdom of New Grenada, 
at the chapel of Guadaloupe, near Santa-Fe de 
Bogota, I have seen water boil at 89°9°, under a 
pressure of 19 inches 1°9 lines. At Tambores, 
in the province of Popayan, Mr. Caldas found the 
heat of boiling water 89°5°, the barometer being 
at 18 inches 11°6 lines.. These results might lead 
us to suspect, that, in the experiment of M. Lama- 
non, the water had not reached the maximum of 
its temperature *. 

The dawn appeared when we left the cavern of 


* A calculation, made according to the tables of Mr. 
Dalton, gives 89°4° for La Cueva, and 89°5° for Guadaloupe. 


157 


ice. We observed, during the twilight, a pheno- 
menon which is not unusual on high mountains, 
but which the position of the volcano, that we 
were scaling, rendered very, striking. .A layer of 
white and fleecy clouds concealed from us_ the 
sight of the ocean, and the lower region of the 
island. This layer did not appear above 800 
toises high ; the clouds were so uniformly spread, 
and kept so perfect a level, that they wore the 
appearance of a vast plain covered with snow. 
The colossal pyramid of the Peak, the volcanic 
suminits of Lanzerota, of Fortaventura, and the 
isle of Palma, were like rocks amidst this vast sea 
of vapors, and. their black tints were in fine con- 
trast with the whiteness of the clouds. 

While we were climbing over the broken lavas 
of the Malpays, we perceived a very curious op- 
tical phenomenon, which lasted eight minutes. 
We thought we saw on the east side small rockets 
thrown into the air. Luminous points, about 
seven or eight degrees above the horizon, appear- 
ed first to move in a vertical direction; but their 
motion was gradually changed into a real hori- 
zontal oscillation. Our fellow travellers, our 
guides even, were astonished at this phenomenon, 
without our having made any remark on it. to 
them. We thought at first sight, that these lu- 
minous points, which floated in the air, indicated 
some new eruption of the great volcano of Lan- 
zerota. We recollected, that Bouguer and La Con- 


158 


danine, in scaling the volcano of Pichincha, were 
witnesses of the eruption of Cotopaxi; but the 
illusion soon ceased, and we found, that the !umi- 
nous points were the images of several stars mag- 


nified by the vapors. These images remained mo- 


tionless at intervals, they then seemed to rise per- 
pendicularly, descended sideways, and returned to 
the point whence they had departed. This mo- 
tion lasted one or two seconds. Though we had 
no exact means of measuring the greatness of the 
lateral shifting, we did not less distinctly observe 
the path of the luminous point. It did not appear 
double from an effect of looming (mirage), and 
left no trace of light behind.’ Bringing, with the 
telescope of a small sextant by Troughton, the 
stars into contact with the lofty summit of a moun- 
tain in Lanzerota, I observed, that the oscillation 
was constantly directed towards the same point, 
that is to say, towards the part of the horizon 
where the disk of the sun was to appear; and 
that, making allowance for the motion of the star 


in its declination, the image returned always to the ° 
) 5 y 


same place. These appearances of lateral re- 
fraction ceased long before daylight had ren- 
dered the stars quite invisible. I have faithfully 
related what we saw during the twilight, without 
undertaking to explain this extraordinary pheno- 
menon, of which I published an aecount in Baron 
Zach’s Astronomical Journal, twelve years. ago, 
The motion of the vesicular vapors, caused by the 


159 


rising of the sun; the mingling of several layers of 
air, the temperature and density. of which were 
very different, no doubt contributed to produce 
an apparent movement of the stars in the horizon- 
tal direction. We see something similar in the 
strong undulations of the solar disk, when it cuts 
the horizon ; but these undulations.seldom exceed 
twenty seconds, while the lateral motion of the 
stars, observed at the Peak, at more than 1800 
toises, was easily distinguished by the sight alone, 
and seemed to exceed all that we have thought it 
possible to consider hitherto as the effect of the 
refraction of the light of the stars. On the top 
of the Andes, at Antisana, I was present at sun- 
rise, and passed the whole night at 2100 toises, 
without noting any appearance resembling this 
phanomenon. 

I was anxious to make an exact observation of 
the instant of sunrising at an elevation so conside- 
rable as that we had reached on the Peak of Tene- 
riffe. No traveller, furnished with instruments,’ 
had as yet taken such an observation. I had a te- 
lescope, and’a chronometer, of which I knew the 
great exactness. In the part where the sun was 
to appear, the horizon was free from vapors. We 
perceived the upper limb at 4 48” 557 apparent 
time, and what is very remarkable, the first lumi- 
nous point of the disk was found immediately in 
contact with the limit of the horizon ; consequent- 
ly we saw the true horizon, that is to say, a_part 


160 


of the sea farther than 43 leagues. It is proved 
by calculation, that, under the same parallel in the 
plain, the rising would have begun at 5 17 50°4” 

r 11’ 51°3” later than at the height of the Peak. 
The difference observed was 12’ 55”, which arose 
no doubt from the uncertainty of the refraction 
for a zenith distance, of which observations are 
wanting™. 

We were surprised. at the extreme slowness, 
with which the lower limb of the sun seemed to 
detach itself from the horizon. This limb was not 
visible till 44 56” 56”. The disk of the sun, much 
flattened, was well defined; during the ascent, 
there was neither double image nor lengthening 
of the lower part. The durationt of the sun’s 


*In this calculation we have supposed, that for an appa- 
rent zenith distance of 91° 54/, there are 574-777, of. re- 
fraction. The rising sun appears sooner at the Peak of Te- 
neriffe than’ in the plain by the time that it takes to pass 
through an are of 1° 54’. “The greatness of the are is aug~ 
mented only 41’ for the summit of Chimborazo. The an- 


cients had such exaggerated ideas of the acceleration of the, 


rising of the sun on the top of high mountains, that they ad- 
mitted, that this luminary was visible on Mount Athos three 
hours sooner than on the coast of the Egean sea (Strabo edit. 
Almeloven, lib. 7, p. 510): yet Mount Athos, according to 
M. Delambre, is only 713 toises high (Choiseul Gouffier, Voy. 
pitt. de la Grece, t. 2, p. 140.) 

+The apparent duration was 8’ 1” instead of 2741”. 
Though my journals contain near eighty observations of the 
rising and setting of the sun, made either during the voyage, 


i61 


rising being triple that which we might have €x« 
pected in this latitude, we must ‘suppose, that a 
fog bank, very uniformly extended, concealed the 
true horizon, and followed the sun in its ascents 
Notwithstanding the libration of the stars*, which 
we had observed toward the east, we could not 
attribute the slowness of the rising to an extraor- 
dinary refraction of the rays occasioned by the 
horizon of the sea; for it-is-precisely at’ the rising 
of the sun, ‘as Le Gentil daily observed at Pondi- 
cherry, and as I have several times remarked at 
Cumana, that the horizon sinks, on account, of 
the elevation of temperature in the stratum of the 
air+ which lies immediately over the surface of the 
ocean. 

The road, which we were obliged to find across 
the Malpays, was extremely fatiguing. The ascent 
is steep, and the blocks of lava rolled from beneath 
our feet. I can compare this part of the road 


er on the coasts, I have never perceived any sensible retard 
ation. 

* A celebrated .astronomer, Baron Zach, (Mon. Corres: 
1800, p. 396) has compared this phanomenon of an apparent 
libration of the stars to that described in the Georgies (lib. 1, 
vy. 365). But this passage relates only to the falling stars, 
which the ancients, as well as our mariners, considered as a 
prognostic of wind. The Latin poet appears to have imi- 
tated the verses of Aratus. (Diosem. v. 926, edit. Buhle 1, 


p. 206, Lucret. UU, v. 143.) 
+ Biot, Rech. sur les Refractions extraordinaires, p.218, 223; 


and 228. 


YOL. I. uM 


162 


only to the Moraine of the Alps, or that mass of 
pebbly stones, which we find at the lower extre- 
mity of the glaciers; at the Peak, the lava, broken 
into. sharp pieces, leaves hollows, in which we 
risked falling up to our waists. Unfortunately the 
laziness of our guides contributed to render this 
ascent more painful. Unlike those of the valley of 
Chamouni, or the nimble footed Guanches, who 
could, it is asserted, seize the rabbit or wild goat 
in its course, our Canarian guides were models of 
the phlegmatic: they wished to persuade us the 
preceding evening, not to go beyond the station 
of the rocks: every ten minutes they sat down to 
_ repose themselves, and when unobserved threw 
away the specimens of obsidian and pumice- 
stone, which we had carefully collected. We 
discovered at length, that none of them had ever 
yet visited the summit of the volcano. 

After three hours march, we reached, at the 
extremity of the Malpays, a small plain, called 
la Rambleta, from the centre of which the Piton, 
or Sugar-loaf, takes its rise. On the side toward 
Orotava the mountain resembles those pyramids 
with steps, that are found at Fayoum and_ in 
Mexico; for the elevated plains of Retama and 
Rambleta form two stages, the first of. which is 
four times higher than the second. If we suppose 
the total height of the Peak to be 1904 toises, the 
Rambleta is 1820 toises above the level of the sea. 
Here are found those spiracles, which are called 


163 


by the natives the Nostrils of the Peak*. Watery 
and heated vapors issue at intervals from several 
crevices in the ground, and the thermometer rose 
to 43°20: M. Labillardiere had found the tem- 
perature of these vapors, eight years before us, 
53°7° ; a difference which does not perhaps. prove 
so much a diminution of activity in the volcano, 
as a local change in the heating of its internal sur- 
face: The vapors have no smell, and seem to 
be pure water. A short time before the great 
eruption of Mount Vesuvius, in 1805, M. Gay- 
Lussac and myself had observed, that water, 
under the form of vapor, in the interior of the 
crater, did not redden paper dipped in sirup of 
violets. I cannot, however, admit the bold hy- 
pothesis of several naturalists, according to which 
the Nostrils of the Peak are to be considered as 
the mouths of an immense apparatus of distilla- 
tion, the lower part of which is placed below the 
level of the ocean. Since the time that volcanoes 
have been carefully studied, and that the love of 
the marvellous has-been less observed in works on 
geology, very well founded doubts have been raised 
respecting these direct and constant communica- 
tions between the waters of the sea, and’ the focus 
of the volcanic fire f. We may find a very simple 


* Narices del Pico. 
+ This question has been examined with much sagacity by 
Mr. Breislak, in his Introduzzione alla Geologia, t. 2, p. 302, 
323, 347. Cotopaxi and Popocatepetl, which I have seen 


MQ 


164, 


explanation of a phenomenon, that has in it no- 
thing very surprising. The Peak is covered with 
snow during part of the year; we ourselves found 
it- still so in the plain of Rambleta. Messrs. 
©O’Donnel and Armstrong discovered in 1806 a 
very abundant spring in the Malpays, a hundred 
toises above the cavern of icc, which is perhaps 
fed partly by this spring. Every thing, conse- 
quently, leads us to presume, that the Peak of 
Teneriffe, like the volcanoes of the Andes, and 
those of the island of Manilla, contains within 
itself great cavities, which are filled with atmos- 
pherical water, owing merely to filtration. The 
aqueous vapors, which are exhaled by the nos- 
trils and crevices of the crater, are only those 
same waters heated by the interior surfaces down 
which they flow. 

We had yet to scale the steepest part of the 
mountain, the Piton, which forms the summit. 
The slope of this small cone, covered with volca- 
nic ashes, and fragments of pumice stone, is so 
steep, that it would have been almost impossible 
to reach the top, had we not ascended by an old 


ejecting smoke and ashes, in 1804, are farther from the 
South Sea and the Gulf of the Antilles, than Grenoble is 
from the Mediterranean, and Orleans from the Atlantic. We 
must not consider the fact as merely accidental, that we have 
not yet discovered an active volcano more than 40 leagues 
distant from the ocean; but I consider the hypothesis, that 
the waters of the sea are absorbed, distilled, and decomposed 
by volcanoes, as very doubtful. 


Se ne eee 


165 


current of lava, the wrecks of which have resisted 
the ravages of time. These wrecks form a wall 
of scorious rocks, which stretches itself into the 
midst of the loose ashes. We ascended the Piton 


by grasping these half decomposed scoriz, the 


sharp edges of which remained often in our hands. 
We employed nearly half an hour to scale a hill, 
the perpendicular height of which is scarcely 
ninety toises. Vesuvius *, three times lower than 


* According to the barometrial measurements, which Mr. 
Leopold von Buch, M. Gay-Lussac, and myself, took in 1805, 
the height of Vesuvius is diminished on the south-west side 
since the year 1794, where a part of the cone fell in, two 
days after the ashes had been ejected. Saussure found Vesu- 
vins, in 1773, 609 toises high, at a time when the brinks of 
the whole of the crater were nearly of the same heiyht. Sir 
George Shuckburgh measured, in 1776, a hill.placed in the 
midst of the crater; it was 615 toises in height. This hill 
scarcely existed at the time of Saussure’s journey, and dis- 
appeared in the eruption of 1779. It was the eruption of 
1794, which caused the great inequality of the two brinks of 
the crater; this unevenness was 71 toises in 1805. Mr. 
Poli found Vesuvius, a short time before, 606 toises in height. 
Sir G. Shuckburgh reckoned the highest point of the Somma, 
called del Vitello, 584 toises. This observation is not very 
accordant with the height, which M. Gay-Lussac assigns to 
the highest brink of the crater ; for, in 1805, this~part of 
the brink seemed to have the same elevation as the Punta del 
Vitcllo. 1 know not where Shuckburgh placed his instru- 
ment at the foot of the cone of ashes; for he states this point 
at only 216 toises of absolute height. The following is a 
table of. the measures made*in very calm weather, with a 


portable cistern-barometer by Ramsden, 


of@ | O-LEE =. ee es oe Wap] WoOoUsIIJe 94} UI gy Te 
oO FOLSS Soe te Ls Snel g ysed $38 
“Ayn 1g oG-ST | L008 497819 9} JO YUNG 389 « oT) 8 12 
JO YIGZ oy? ULY? Jono; pooeid se yuo BPG ofl. § 866 |407219 BE} Jo a.4}U99 Vy) Ut [TUT | Lye 
“RAQsUL ay) 6197B19 OY} JO YULIG! 190, Y} gos of LL} OTIE + gu0s ay} Jo BSulauigag) g¢ ysed sajnumiu ¢ gyre 
je S URVUeAIZ}IPIPT 9y} JO Jods; oy? VACQE, 108 oll w-G1S . ee ess ase} m13y 
$9810} J, SUA LIOg JB JaJswWOIeEG ayy ay) jo ureyd payedsje yyemg} Zums0w ayy ui g ye IF 94g, 


— ; ee a “ee ne ne 


S9StO} UT vas vay] ‘soult Te “ast 
ay jojaaat| jo I saved Cost “Isusny 


soge a ySiojtl sunray yf mowed 


ted by a cone of 


termina 


‘pioqungy pun ‘yong ‘ovssnT fing ‘sassayy fiq uayv} sainsvapy *y] 


088 *  * syuntay ou) TY TT 3sud $32 
*pajejodiajzur ussq] = gg o8l t Se %* ‘Soyse zo 
BABY JoJIMOUIIIY} 94} JO PUB JajaWOIeY ay) 2002 on jo Suiuulseq ay) TY L ysed 
JO S34Sloy Juopuodsotu0d egy, *1oprareg 909 of FT 96% | * Se, Ph SEIS BIO 
juteg Jo ureld jyeus oy} aAoqe sosio} ¢ PY JO1UrMg HON) ap IV G ysed 
JiUtay ayy Jo JUIUZiede a4} JO JYF LEY oy) ‘ol | 9-008 aap] 
pue “aie vy? Jo yey? 0} yenba vq 0} pasor oGl | u-0OS | *  * pees oy) U1 JoyeI9 
-dns st Aanosow a4} jo oinjesoduia} 3q7, au 30" qn ai au} IV €1e 
*g0R[ dey o61 | ¥-918 wrap] SUIIOW. 943 UL gy Ie YIGS 2qT, 
‘W jo eynurroy an 49}j@ “payeNoyVo o19M ofl | 8-91 Is Jopeayes § JO queasy aq) FW [Suess ay) WI QT IV 
‘moos yey} osoy, puew ‘s}ySteq osoyy, -886 - + 4 opiseas 09 3 [Sutaase. ay UL 27 Weg omy, 


*sooRtd - “post Ainge 


wm 
om 
o 
& 
ae 
Oo 
cS 
Get 
fo) 
wad 
[ae] 
oO 
AY 
o 
q 
2 


rauojy ausswy-hng "yy hg Uayn} sounsnayy °F 


167 


ashes almost three times higher, but with a more 
accessible and easy slope. Of all the volcanoes 
which I have visited, that of Jorullo, in Mexico, 
is the only one, that is more difficult to climb than 
the Peak, because the whole mountain is covered 
with loose ashes. 

When the Sugar loaf (el Piton) is covered with 
snow, as it is in the beginning of winter, the 
steepness of its declivity may be very dangerous 
to the traveller. MM. Le Gros showed us the 
place, where Captain Baudin had nearly perished, 
at the time of his voyage to the isle of Trinidad. 
This officer had the courage to undertake, in com- 
pany with the naturalists Advenier, Mauger, and 
Riedlé, an excursion to the top ef the volcano to- 
wards the end of December, 1797. Having 
reached half the height of the cone, he had a 
fall, and rolled down as far as the small plain of 
Rambleta; happily a heap of lava, covered with 
snow, hindered him from rolling farther with ac- 


. 


M. de la Jumélidre asserts, in a paper printed in the Mo« 
niteur, that he found, by geometrical measurement, the 
height of Vesuvius 597 toises. It were to be wished, that he 
had published the detail of his operations. Our measurements 
give 606 toises (1181 metres) for the most elevated brink of 
the crater; 535 toises (1042 metres) for the lower brink ; 
370 toises (721 metres) for the foot of the cone of ashes ; 
aud 302 toises (538 metres) for the hermitage of San Salva. 
dor. Such was-the state of Vesuvius a short time before the 
eruption in the year 1805, in which the lava’ made a breach 
in the brink of the crater on the side of Torre del Gréco, 


168 


celerated velocity. I have been told, that in Swit- 
zerland a trayeller was suffocated by rolling down 
the declivity of the Col de Balme, oyer the com- 
pact turf of the Alps. 

When we gained the summit of the Piton, we 
were surprised to find scarcely room enough to 
seat ourselyes conveniently. We were stopped by 
a small circular wall of porphyritic lava, with base 
of pitchstone, which concealed from us the view 
of the crater*. The west wind blew with such 
violence that we could scarcely stand. It was 
eight in the morning, and we were frozen with 
the cold, though the thermometer kept a little 
above the freezing point. For a long time we 
had been accustomed to a very high temperature, 
and the dry wind increased the feeling of cold, 
because it carried off every moment fii small at- 
mosphere of warm and humid air, which was 
formed around us from the effect of cutaneous 
perspiration. 

The brink of the crater of the Peak bears no 
resemblance to those of the greater part of the 
other volcanoes which I have visited : for instance, 
the craters of Vesuvius, Jorullo, and Pichincha, 
In these the Piton preserves its conic figure to 
the very summit: the whole of their declivity is 
inclined the same number of degrees, and uni- 


* La Caldera, or the caldron of the Peak, a denomination 
which recals to mind the Qules of the Pyrenees. Ramond, 
Yoy, au Mont-Perdu, p. 235. 


169 


formly covered witha layer of pumice stone very 
minutely divided; when we reach the top of 
these volcanoes, nothing obstructs the view of the 
bottom of the crater. The Peak of Teneriffe, 
and Cotopaxi, on the contrary, are of very dif- 
ferent construction. At their summit a circular 
wall surrounds the crater ; which wall, at a distance, 
has the appearance of a small cylinder placed on 
a truncated cone. On Cotopaxi* this peculiar 
construction is visible to the naked eye at more 
than 2000 toises distance; and no person has 
ever reached the crater of thig volcano. On the 
Peak of Teneriffe, the wall, which surrounds the 
crater like a parapet, is so high, that it would be 
impossible to reach the Caldera, if on the east- 
ern side there was not a breach, which seems to 
have been the effect of a flowing of very old lava. 
We descended through this breach toward the 


bottom of the funnel, the figure of which is 


elliptic. Its greater axis has a direction from 
north-west to south-east, nearly N. 35° W. The 
greatest breadth of the mouth appeared to us to 
be 300 feet, the smallest 200 feet. These num- 
bers agree very nearly with the measures. of 
Messrs. Verguin, Varela, and Borda, for these 
travellers assign 40 and 30 toises to the two axest 


* Picturesque Atlas, folio, pl. 10. 
+ Voy. de la Flore, t. i, p. 94. Manusc. du Depot de la 
Marine, cah. 7, p. 15. Voy. de Marchand, t. ii, p. 11. 


+ M. Cordier, who visited the top of the Peak four years 


170 


It is easy to conccive, that the size of a cra 
ter does not depend solely on the height and mass 
of the mountain, of which it forms the principal 
air vent. This opening is indeed seldom in di- 
rect ratio with the intensity of the volcanic 
fire, or with the activity of. the volcano. At 
Vesuvius, which is but a hill compared with the 
Peak of Teneriffe, the diameter of the crater is 
five times greater. When we reflect, that very 
lofty volcanoes throw out less matter by their 
summits, than by lateral openings, we should be . 
led to think, that the lower the volcanoes are; 
their force and. activity being the same, the more 
considerable ought to be their craters. In fact, 
there are immense volcanoes in the Andes, which 
have but very small openings; and we might 
establish it as a geological principle, that the 
most colossal mountains have craters of little ex- 
tent at the summits, if the Cordilleras did not 


offer many instances * to the ontrary. I shall 


have occasion, in the progress of this work, to 
cite a number of facts, which will throw some 
light on what may be called the external struc- 
ture of volcanocs. ‘This structure is as varied 


after me, estimates the greater axis at 66 toises (Journ. de 
Phys. t. lvil, p. 62). Lamanon thinks it 50 toises. But 
Mr, O’ Donnel gives the crater a circumference of 236 toises 
(550. vdras). 

* The great voleanees of Cotopaxi and Rucupichincha 
have craters, the diameter of which, according. to my meas 


surements, exceed 400 and 700 toises, 


171 


as the volcanic phenomena themselves; and in 


order to raise ourselves to geological. conceptions 
worthy of the greatness of nature, we must set 


aside the idea, that all volcanoes are formed 
after the model of Vesuvius, Stromboli, and 
Etna. 

The external edges of the Caldera are almost 
perpendicular. Their~ appearance is somewhat 
like the Somma, seen from the Atrio del Cavallo. 
We descended to the bottom of the erater on a’ 
train of broken lava, trom the eastern breach of 
the enclosure. The heat was perceptible only 
in a few crevices, which gave. vent to aqueous 
vapours with a peculiar buzzing noise. Some of 
these funnels or crevices are on the outside of 
the enclosure, on the external brink of the para- 
pet that surrounds the crater. We plunged the 
thermometer into them, and saw it rise rapidly 
to 68 and 75 degrees. It no doubt indicated 
a higher temperature, but we could not observe 
the instrument till we had drawn it up, lest we 
should burn our hands. M. Cordier found seve- 
ral crevices, the heat of which was that of boil- 
ing water. It might be thought, that these va- 
pours, which are emitted in gusts, contain muria- 
tic or sulphurous acid; but when condensed, they 
have no particular taste; and experiments, which 
several naturalists* have made with reagents, 


? Voyage de La Pérouse, t. ili, p. 2 


172 


prove, that the chimneys of the Peak exhale onty 
pure water. This phenomenon, analogous to 
what 1 observed in the crater of Jorullo, de- 
serves the more attention, as muriatic acid 
abounds in the greater part of volcanoes, and 
as M. Vauquelin has discovered it even in the 
porphyritic lavas of Sarcouy in Auvergne. 

I sketched on the spot a view * of the interior 
edge of the crater, as it presented itself in the 
descent by the eastern break. Nothing is more 
striking than the manner, in which these strata 
of lavas are piled: on one another, exbibiting the 
sinuosities of the calcareous rock of the higher 
Alps. These enormous ledges, sometimes. hori- 
zontal, at others inclined and undulating, remind 
us of the ancient fluidity of the whole mass, and 


the combination of several deranging causes, which: 


determined the direction of each flow. The top of 
the circular wall exhibits those grotesque ramifica- 
tions, which we find in coak. The northern edee 
is more elevated; towards the south-west, the 
enclosure is considerably sunk, and an enormous 
mass of scorious lava seenis glued to the extremity 
of the brink. On the west the rock is perforated ; 
and a large opening gives a view of the horizon of 
the sea. ‘The force of the elastic vapours formed 
perhaps this natural aperture, at the moment of 
some inundation of lava thrown out from the 
crater. 


* Picturesque Atlas, folio, Pl. 54. 


173 


The inside of ‘this funnel mdicates a volcano, 
which for thousands of years has vomited no fire 
but by its sides. ‘This assertion is not founded on 
the absence of great openings, which inight be ex- 
pected in the bottom of the Caldera. © Those 
naturalists, who have studied nature on the spot, 


know, that several volcanoes, in the intervals of an 
eruption, appear filled up, and almost  extin- 
guished ; but that in these same mountains; the 
crater of the volcano exhibits layers of scorix, 
rough, sonorous, and. shining; with hillocks and 
intumescences, caused by the action of the elastic 
vapours, cones of broken scori, and ashes, which 
cover the funnels. None of these phenomena 
characterise the crater of the Peak of ‘Teneriffe ; 
its bottom has not remained in the state which 
follows the end of an eruption. From the lapse of 
time, and the action of the vapors, the inside walls 
are detached, and have covered the basin with 
great blocks of lithoid lavas. ; 

We reached the bottom of the Caldera without 
danger. In. a volcano, the activity of which is 
principally directed towards the summit, such as, 
Vesuvius, the depth of the crater varies before and 

‘after each eruption; but at the Peak of ‘Teneriffe 
the depth appears to:have remained the same for 
a long time. Eden, in 1715, estimated it at 115 
feet; Cordier, in 91803, at 110: feet. Judging 
by mere inspection, I should have thought the 
funnel of still less depth, Its present state is‘that 


174 


of a solfatara; and itis rather an object of curious 
investigation, than of tremendous aspect. The 
majesty of the site consists in its elevation above 
the level of the ocean, in the profound solitude 
of these lofty regions, and the immense space over 
which the eye ranges from the summit of the 
mountain. 

The wall of compact lava, which forms the en- 
closure of the Caldera, is snow white at its surface, 
The same colour prevails in the inside of the 
solfatara of Puzzuoli. When we break these lavas, 
which might be taken at some distance for cal- 
careous stone, we find in them a blackish brown 
nucleus. Porphry with basis of pitch stone is 
whitened externally by the slow action of the 
vapors of sulphurous acid gas. ‘These vapors 
rise inabundance; and, what is remarkable enough, 
through crevices which seem to have no communi- 
cation with the apertures that emit aqueous vapors. 
We may be convinced of the presence of the’ sui- 
phurous acid, by examining the fine crystals of 
sulphur, which are every where found in the 
crevices of the lava. This acid, combined with 
the water with which the soil is impregnated, is 


transformed: into sulphuric acid by contact with 


the oxygen: of the atmosphere. In general, the 
humidity in tbe crater of the Peak is more to be 
feared than the heat; and they who seat them- 
selves for a while on the ground find their clothes 
corroded. The porphyritie lavas are affected by 


175 


the action of the sulphuric acid: the alumin, mag- 
nesia, soda, and metallic oxids, gradually disap- 
pear; and often nothing remains but the silex, 
which unites in mammillary plates, like opal. 
These siliceous concretions*, which M. Cordier 
first made known, are similar to those found in the 


Isle of Ischia, in the extinguished volcanoes of 
Santa Fiora, and in the Solfatara of Puzzuolit. It 
is not easy to form an idea of the origin of these 
incrustations. The aqueous vapours, discharged 
through great spiracles, do not contain alkali in 
solution, like the waters of the Geyser, in Iceland f. 
Perhaps the soda contained in the lavas of the 


Peak acts an important part in the formation of 
these depositions of silex.. There may exist in the 
crater small crevices, thie vapors. of which are not 
of the same nature as those on which travellers, 
employed at the same moment in a great number 
of objects, have made experiments. 

Seated on the northern brink of the crater; I 
dug a hole of some inches depth ; the thermometer 
placed in this hole rose rapidly to 42°. Hence 


* Opalartiger kieselsinter. The siliceous gurh of the 
volcanoes of the Isle of France contains, according to Klaproth, 
0°72 silex, and 021 water; and thus comes near to opal, 
which Karsten considers as a hydrated silex. Miner. Tubedlen, 
1800, p. 70. 

+ Breislak, Introduzzioné alla. Geologia, t. 2, p, 238, 

' { Black, in Philos. Transact. 1794, p. 24. 


176 


we may conclude what must be the heat, that 
reigns in this solfatara at the depth of thirty or 
forty fathoms. The sulphur reduced into vapour 
is condensed into fine crystals, which however are 
not equal in size to those M. Dolomieu brought 
from Sicily*. They are semidiaphanous octae- 
drons, with very brilliant surfaces, and of a con- 
choidal fracture. ‘These masses, which will one 
day perhaps be objects of commerce, are constantly 
bedewed. with sulphurous acid. I had the impru- 
dence to wrap up a few, in order to preserve them, 
but I soon discovered, that the acid had consumed 
not only the paper which contained them, but a 
part also of my mineralogical journal. The heat 
of the vapors, which issue from the crevices of the 
Caldera, is not sufficiently great, to combine the 
sulphur, while in a state of minute division, with 
the oxygen of the atmospheric air; and after the 
experiment which I have just cited on the temper= 
ature of the soil, we may presume, that the sulphur- 
ous acid is formed at a certain depth f, in cavities 
to which the external air has free access. 


* These crystals were four or five inches in length. Drée, 
Cat. d'un Musée thinéral. p. 21. 

+ An observer, in general very exact, Mr. Breislack, asserts 
(Geologia, t. 2, p. 232), that the muriatic acid always pre. 
dominates in the vapours of Vesuvius. This assertion is con- 
trary to what M. Gay-Lussac and inyself observed, before the 
great eruption of 1805, and while the lava was issuing 


177 


The vapors of heated water,- which act on the 
fragments of lava scattered about on the Caldera, 
reduce certain parts of it to a state of paste. On 
examining, after I had reached America, those 
earthy and friable masses, I found crystals of 
sulphat of alumin. Messrs. Davy and Gay- 
Lussac* have already made the ingenious remark» 
that two bodies highly inflammable, the metals of 
soda and potash, have probably an important part in 
the action of a volcano ; now the potash necessary 
to the formation of alum is found not only in 
feldspar, mica, pumice stone, and augit, but also 
in obsidians t. This last substance is very common 
at Teneriffe, where it forms the basis of the teph- 
rinic lavat. These analogies between the Peak 
of Teneriffe and the Solfatara of Puzzuoli, would 
no doubt appear more numerous, if the former 
were more accessible, and had been frequently 
visited by naturalists. 

An expedition to the summit of the volcano of 


from the crater, The smell of the sulphurous acid, so 
easy to distinguish, was perceptible at’ a great distance; and 
when the volcano threw out scoria, the smell was mingled 
with that of petroleum. 

* Davy, on the Decomposition of fixed Alkalies, Phil. 
Trans. 1808, P. 1, p. 44. 

+ Collet Descotils, in the Ann. de Chimie, t. 53, p. 260. 
See Klaproth, Beitrage, B. 5, p. 159, 162, and 166. 

t Laméthiere, Minéralogie, t. 2, p. 533; and Journal de 
Physique, 1806, p. 192. - 

VOL. I. N 


173 


Teneriffeis interesting, not solely on account of the 
great number of phenomena which are the objects 
of scientific research ; it has still greater attractions 
from the picturesque beauties, which it lays open te 
those who are feelingly alive to the majesty of na- 
ture. Itis a difficult task, to describe those sensa- 
tions, which act with so much the more force as 
they have something undefined, produced by the 
immensity Of the space as well as by the greatness, 
the novelty, and the multitude of the objects, 
amidst which we find ourselves transported. When 
a traveller attempts to furnish descriptions of the 
loftiest summits ef the Globe, the cataracts of the 
great rivers, the tortuous vallies of the Andes, he 
_is exposed to the danger of fatiguing his readers by 
the monotonous expfession of his admiration. It 
appears to me more conformable to the plan, which 
I have proposed to myself in this narrative, to indi- 
cate the peculiar character that distinguishes each 
zone, we exhibit with more clearness the physi- 
ognomy of the landscape, in proportion as we 
endeavour to sketch its individual features, to com- 
pare them with each other, and discover by this 
kind of axalysis the sources of those enjoyments, 
which are offered us by the great picture of nature. 
Travellers have learnt by experience, that views 
from the summits of very lofty mountains are neither 
30 beautiful, picturesque, nor varied, as those from 
heights which do not exceed that of Vesuvius, Rigi, 
and the Puy-de-Déme. Colossal mountains, such 


179 


as Chimborazo, Antisana, or Mount Rose, com- 
pose so large a mass, that the plains covered with 
rich vegetation are seen only in the immensity of 
distance, where a blue and vapory tint is uni- 
formly spread over the landscape. The Peak of 
Teneriffe, from its slender form and local position, 
unites the advantages of less lofty summits to those 
which arise from very great heights. We not only 
discover from its top a vast expanse of sea, but we 
see also the forests of Teneriffe, and the inhabited 
parts of the coasts, in a proximity fitted to produce 
the most beautiful contrasts of form arid colour. 
We might say, that the volcano crushes with its 
mass the little isle which serves as its basis, and 
shoots up from the bosom of the waters to a height 
three times loftier than the region where the clouds 
float in the summer. If its crater, half extin- 
guished for ages past, shot forth flakes of fire like 
that of Stromboli in the A©olian Islands, the Peak of 
Teneriffe, resembling a lighthouse, would furnish 
a direction to the mariner in a circuit of more than 
260 leagues. es : 

When seated on the external edge of the crater, 
we turned our eyes towards the north-west, where 
the coasts are decked with villages and hamlets. 
At our feet, masses of vapour, constantly driven 
by the winds, afforded us the most variable spee- 
tacle. A uniform stratum of clouds, the same as 
we have just described, and which separated us 
from the lower regions of -the island, had been 

N2 


180 


pierced in several places by the effect of the small 
currents of air, which the earth, heated by the sun, 
began to send towards us. ‘Vhe port of Orotava, 
its vessels at anchor, the gardens and the vineyards 
which encircle the town, exhibited themselves 
through an opening which seemed ‘to enlarge every 
instant. From the summit of these solitary regions 
our eyes hovered over an inhabited world; we en- 
joyed the striking contrast between the bare sides of 
the Peak, its steep declivities covered with scoria, 
its elevated plains destitute of vegetation, and the 
smiling aspect of the. cultured country beneath ; 
we beheld the plants divided by zones, as_ the 
temperature of the atmosphere diminished with the 
height of the site. Below the Piton, lichens begin 
to cover the scorious lava with Justered surface: a 
violet *, akin to the viola decumbens, rises on the 
slope of the volcano at 1740 tojses of heights it 
takes the lead not only of the other herbaceous 
plants, but even of the gramina, which, in the 
Alps and‘on the ridge of the Cordilleras, form 
close neighbourhood with the plants of the family 
of cryptogamia, Tufts of retama, loaded with 
flowers, make gay the vallies hollowed out by the 
torrents, and which are encumbered with the 
effects of the lateral eruptions ; below the spartium, 
‘or retama, lies the region of ferns, bordered. by the 


* Viola cheiranthifolia, See our equinoctial plants, vol. i, 
p. 111, Pl. 32, ons 


ees 


1&1. 


tract of the aborescent heaths. Forests of laurel, 
rhamnus, and arbutus divide the ericas from the 
rising grounds planted with vines and fruit trees. 
A rich carpet of verdure extends from the plain of 
spartium, and the zone of the alpine plants even 
to the group of the date trees and the musa, at the 
feet of which the ocean appears to roll. I here 
pass slightly over the principal features of this 
botanical chart, as I shall enter hereafter into 
some farther details respecting the geography of 
the plants of the Isle of Teneriffe. 

The seeming proximity, in which, from the 
summit of the Peak, we behold the hamlets, the 
vineyards, and gardens on the coast, is increased 
by the prodigious transparency of the atmosphere. 
Notwithstanding the great distance, we distin: 
guished not only the houses, the sails of the vessels, 
and the trunks of trees, our eyes dwelt on the rich 
vegetation of the plains, enameled with the most 
vivid colouring. These phenomena are owing not 
only to the height of the site, but to the peculiar 
modifications of the air in warm climates. . Under 
every zone, an object placed on a level with the 
sea, and viewed in a horizontal direction, appears 
less luminous, than when seen from the top of a 
mountain, where- vapors arrive across strata of air 
of decreasing-density. Differences equally striking 
are.produced by the influence of climates; the sur- 
face of a lake or large river is less resplendent, 
when we see it at an €qual distance, from the top 


18% 


of the higher Alps of Switzerland, than when we 

view it from the summit of the Cordilleras of Peru 

or Mexico. In proportion as the air is pure and 
serene, the soluticn of the vapours becomes more 
perfect, and the light loses less in its passage. 

When from the coast of the South Sea we reach the 
elevated plain of Quito, or that of Antisana, we are 

struck for some days at the nearness at which we 

think we see objects whieh are seven or eight 
leagues distant. The Peak of Teyde has not the 
advantge of being situate in the equinoctial region ; 
but the dryness ‘of the columns of air which rise 
perpetually above the neighbouring plains of 
Africa, and which the eastern winds bring with 
rapidity, gives the atmosphere of the Canary 
Islands a transparency, which surpasses not only 
that of the air of Naples and Sicily, but perhaps 
also the purity of the sky of Quito and Peru. 
This transparency may be regarded as one of the 
chief causes of the beauty of the landscape under 
the torrid zone; it is this which heightens the 
splendor of the vegetable coloring, and contributes 
to the magical effect of their harmonies and their 
contrasts. If a mass of light, which circulates about 
objects, fatigues the external senses during a part 
of the day, the inhabitant of the-southern climates 
has his compensations in moral enjoyments. A 
lucid clearness in the conceptions, a serenity of 
mind, correspond with the transparency of the 
surrounding atmosphere, We feel these impres- 


183 


sions without oyerstepping the limits of Europe. 
I appeal to travellers who have visited countries 
rendered famous by prodigies of the imagination 
and the arts, the favored climates of Italy and 
Greece. 

We prolonged in vain our stay on the summit 
of the Peak, to wait the moment when we might 
enjoy the view of the whole of the Archipelago of 
the Fortunate islands *. _ We discovered Palma, 
Gomera, and the Great Canary, at our feet. The 
mountains of Lanzerota, free from vapors at sun- 
rise, were soon enveloped in thick clouds. Ona 
supposition only of an ordinary refraction, the 
eye takes in, in calm weather, from the summit of 
the volcano, a surface of the globe of 5700 square 
leagues, equal to a fourth of the surface of Spain. 
The question has often been agitated, if it were 
possible to perccive the coast of Africa from the top 
of this colossal pyramid; but the nearest parts 
of this coast are still farther from Teneriffe than 
9° 49’,0r S6leagues. The visual ray of the ho- 
rizon from the Peak being 1° 57’, Cape Bojador 
can be. seen’ only on the supposition of its height 
being 200 toises above the level of the ocean. We 


* Of all the small islands of the Canaries, the Rock of 
the East is the only one, which cannot be seen, even in fine 
weather, from the top of the Peak. Its distance is 3° 5’, 
awhile that of the Salvage is only 2° 17. The isle of Madeira, 
distant 4°29’, would be visible, if its mountains were more 


than 3000 toises high. 


184 


are absolutely ignorant of the height of the Black 
Mountains near Cape Bojador, as well as that of 
the Peak, called by navigators Pennon grande, 
farther to the south of this promontory. If the 
summit of the volcano of Teneriffe was more 
accessible, we should observe without doubt, with 
certain winds, the effects of an extraordinary 
refraction. In looking over what the Spanish and 
Portuguese authors relate respecting the existence 
of the fabulous isle of San Borondon, or Antilia, 
we find, that it is particularly the humid wind of 
the west-south-west, which produces in these lati- 
tudes the phenomena of the mirage. We shall 
not however admit with Mr. Vieyra, “ that the 
play of the terrestrial refractions* may render 
visible to the inhabitants of the Canaries the islands 
of Cape Verd, and even the Apalachian Moun 
tains of America.” 

The cold, which we felt on the top of the Peak, 
was very considerable for the season. The centi- 


* “ Ta refraction da para todo.’’ Noticias historicas, t. 1, 
p. 105. We have already stated, that the American fruits, 
frequently thrown by the sea on the coasts of the isle of Ferra 
aud Gomera, were formerly attributed to the plants of the 
island of San Borondon. “Vhis land, said by the people to be 
governed by an archbishop and six bishops, and which Father 
Feijoo believed to be the image of the.isle of Ferro, reflected on 
a fog bank, was ceded in the 16th century, by the king uf Por- 
tugal, to Lewis i ateatnl at the time the latter was BTcRenag 
to make the conquest of it 


185 


grade thermometer *, at a distance from the ground, 
and from the apertures that emitted the hot va- 
pors, descended in the shade to 2°7°. The wind 
was west, and consequently opposite to that 
which brings to Teneriffe, during a great part: of 
the year, the warm air, that risés above the burn- 
ing desert of Africa. As the temperature of the 
atmosphere, observed at the port of Orotava by 
Mr. Savagi, was 22°8°, the decrement of calaric 
was one degree every 94 toises. This result per- 
fectly corresponds with those obtained by Lamanon 
and Saussure t on the summits of the Peak and 
Etna, though in very different seasons. ‘The tall 
slender form of, these mountains facilitates the 
means of comparing the temperature of two strata 
of the atmosphere, which are nearly in the same 
perpendicular plane ; and under this point of view 
the observations made in an excursion to the vol- 
cano of Teneriffe resemble those of an ascent in 


a balloon. We must. nevertheless remark, that 


the ocean, on account of-its transparency and eva- 


* Messrs, O’Donnel and Armstrong observed the 2d of 
August, 1806, at eight in the morning, on the top of the 
Peak, the thermometer in the shade at 13°8°, and in the sun 


at 20'5°. Difference or power of the sun 67 centesimal de. 
grees. 


+ The observations of Lamanon give 99 toises for each 
degree of the centigrade thermometer, though the tempera- 
ture of the Piton differed 9° from that which we observed, 
At Etna the decrement observed by Saussure was 91 toises. 


186 


poration, reflects less caloric than the plains inte 
the upper regions of the air; the summits also 
which are suriounded by the sea are colder in the 
summer, than the mountains which rise from a 
continent; but this circumstance has very little in- 
fluence on the decrement of the atmospherical 
heat, the temperature of the low regions being 
equally diminished by the proximity of the ocean. 
It is not the same with respect to the influence 
exercised by the direction of the wind, and the 
rapidity of the ascending current ; the latter some- 
times increases in an astonishing manner the tem- 
perature of the loftiest mountains. I have seen 
the thermometer rise, on the slope of the volcano 
of Antisana, in the kingdom of Quito, to 19°, 
when we were 2837 toises high, M. Labillar- 
diare * has seen it remain, on the edge of the 
erater of the Peak of Teneriffe, at 18°72, though 
he had used every possible precaution to avoid the 
effect of accidental causes. The temperature of 
the road of Santa Cruz being then at 289, the 
difference between the air of the coast and on the 
summit of the Peak was 9°3°, instead of 20°, 


which corresponds to a decrement of caloric of 94 


toises to each degree. I find in the Journal of the 
Expedition of d’Entrecasteaux, that at this period 
the wind at Santa Cruz was south-south-east. 
This same wind blew perhaps more impetuously 


* Voyage dla Recherche de La Pérouse, 40) Pi Ban ce 
Vol. 2, p. 65s 


187 


in the higher regions of the atmosphere, and 
forced back, in an oblique direction, the hot air 
of the neighbouring continent towards. the summit 
of the Piton. Besides, the visit of. M. Labillar- 
diére took place on the 17th of October, 1791; 
and, in the Alps of Switzerland, we have observ- 
ed, that the difference of temperature between 
the mountains and the plains is considerably less 
in autumn, than in summer. All these varia- 
tions * of the rapidity, with whieh caloric de- 
creases, have their influence on the measures. taken 
by the barometer, only in as much as the decre- 
ment is not uniform in the intermediate strata, and 
as it differs from the arithmetical or harmonic 


* T shall here bring into.one point of view the whole of 
the thermometrical observations made at the Peak of Tene- 
riffe, and which are proper to determine the number of toises, 
that correspond to.a lowering of a centigrade degree : 

1° Borda (month of September.) : 
To the Pino de Dornajito, 104 toises (morning) ; 
‘To the Station of the Rocks, 107 toises (evening) ; 
To the natural icehouse, 105 toises (morning) ; 
To the foot of the Piton, 151 toises (morning) ; 
‘To the top of the Peak, 137 toises (morning) 5 
2° Lamanon (month of August), 
To the top, 99 toises (morning); 
3° Cordier (month of April), 
To the Station of the Rocks, 122 toises (evening) ; 
To the top, 115 toises (morning) ; 
4° Our Voyage (month of June), 
To the top, 94 toises, 


188 


progression, which is presumed in the formule 
employed. 

We could not withdraw our eyes, on the sum- 
mit of the Peak, from beholding the color of the 
azure vault of the sky. Its intensity at the zenith ap- 
peared to correspond to 41° of the cyanometer. We 
know by Saussure’s experiment, that this intensity 
increases with the rarity of the air, and that the 
same instrument indicated at the same period 20° 
at the priory of Chamouni, and 40° at the top of 
Mont-Blanc. This last mountain is 540 toises 
higher than the volcano of Teneriffe; and if, 
notwithstanding this difference, the sky is seen 
there of a less deep blue, we must attribute this 
phenomenon to the dryness of the African air, 
and the proximity of the torrid zone. 

We collected air on the brink of the crater, 
which we meant to analyse on our voyage to 
America. The phial remained so well corked, 
that, on opening it ten days after, the water 
rushed in with impetuosity. Several experiments, 
made by means of nitrous gas in the narrow tube 
of Fontana’s eudiometer, seemed to prove, that 
the air of the cratér contained 0°09 less oxygen 
than the air of the sea; but I have hittle confi- 
dence in this result obtained by means which we 
now consider as very inexact. ‘The crater of the 
Peak has so little depth, and the air is renewed 
with so much facility, it is scarcely probable, 
that the quantity of azot is greater there than on 


189 


the coasts. We knew also, from the experiments 
of Messrs. Gay-Lussac and Theodore de Saus- 
sure, that in the highest as well as in the lowest 
regions of the atmosphere, the air equally con- 
tains 0°21 of oxygen *. 

We saw on the summit of the Peak no trace of 
psora, lecidea, or other cryptogamous plants; ne 
insect fluttered in the air. We found however a 
few hymenopteras adhering to masses of sulphur 
moistened with sulphurous acid, and lining the 
mouths of the funnels.. These are bees, which 
appear to have been attracted by the flowers of 
the spartium nubigenum, and which oblique cur- 


rents of air had carried up to. these high regions, 


like the butterflies found by M, Ramond at the 
top of Mont Perdu. The butterflies perished 
from cold, while the bees on the Peak were 
scorched on imprudently approaching the cre- 
vices where they came\in search of warmth. 
Notwithstanding the heat we felt in our feet 
on the edge of the crater, the cone of ashes re- 
mains covered. with snow during several months 


* During the stay Messrs. Gay-Lussac and myself made 
at the hospice of Mount Cenis, in March, 1805, we collect- 
ed air in the midst of a strongly electrified cloud. This air, 
analysed in Volta’s eudiometer, contained no hydrogen, and 
its purity did not differ 0°002 of oxygen from the air of 
Paris, which we had carried with us in phials hermetically 
sealed. On air collected at 3405 toises height, see Annal. 
de Chime, tw 52,°p. 92, 


190 


in the winter. It is probable, that under the cap 
of snow considerable hollows are found, like those 
we find under the glaciers of Switzerland, the 
temperature of which is constantly less elevated 
than that of the soil on which they repose*. 
The cold and violent wind, which blew from the 
time of sunrise, engaged us to seek shelter at 
the foot of the Piton. Our hands and faces were 
frozen, while our boots were burnt by the soil 
on which we walked. We descended in the 
space of a few minutes the Sugar Loaf which we 
had scaled with so much toil; and this rapidity 
was in part involuntary, for we often rolled down 
oh the ashes. It was with regret that we quitted 
this solitary place, this domain where Nature 
towers in all her majesty; we soothed ourselves 
with the hope of once again visiting the Canary 
islands, but this, like many other plans which we 
then formed, has never been executed. ; 
We traversed the Malpays but slowly; the 
foot finds no sure foundation on loose blocks of 
lava. Nearer the Station of the Rocks, the des- 
cent becomes extremely painful; the compact 
short-swarded turf is so slippery, that we 
were obliged to incline our bodies continually 
backward, in order to prevent our falling. In 
the sandy plain of Retama, the thermometer rose 


* See the excellent work of Mr. Stapfer, Voy. Pittoresq. 
de !’ Oberland, p. 61. 


vin areola sae 


191 


to 22°5°; and this heat seemed to us suffocating 
in comparison with the sensation of cold, which 
we had suffered from the air on the summit of 
the volcano. We were absolutely without water ; 
eur guides, not satisfied with drinking clandes- 
tinely the little provision of malinsey, for which 
we were indebted to Mr. Cologan’s careful kind- 
ness, had broken our water vessels. Happily the 
bottle which contained the air of the crater es- 
caped unhurt. 

We at length enjoyed the refreshing breeze in 
the beautiful. region of- the arborescent erica and 
fern; we were enveloped in a thick bed. of clouds 
stationary at six hundred toises above the plain. 
In crossing this; we remarked a phenomenon 
which was afterwards familiar to us on the decli- 
vities of the Cordilleras.. Small cutrents of ait 
chased trains of clouds with unequal velocity, and 
in opposite directions ; and bore the appearance 
of streamlets of water in rapid motion and in 
all directions, amidst a great mass of stagnant 
waters. The causes of this: partial motion: of 
the clouds are probably very various; we may 
suppose it to arise from sonie impulsion at a 
great distance; from the slight inequalities of the 
soil, which reflects in a greater or less degree 
the radiant heat; from a difference of tempera- 
ture kept up by some chemical action; or per- 
haps from a strong electric charge of the vesicu- 
lar vapors. 


192 


As we approached the town of Orotava, we 
met great flocks of canaries*. These birds, well 
known in Europe, were in general uniformly 
green; some had a yellow tint on their backs; 
their note was the same as that of the tame cana- 
ry. It is nevertheless remarked, that those which 
bave been taken in the isle of the Great Canary, 
and in the islet of Monte Clara, near Lanzerota, 
have a stronger, and at the same time the most 
harmonious song. Under every zoneg among 
birds of the same species, each flock has its pe- 
culiar note. The yellow canaries are a variety, 
which has taken birth in Europe; and those we 
saw in cages at Orotava and Santa Cruz had 
been bought at Cadiz, and in other ports of 
Spain. But of all the birds of the Canary islands, 
that which has the most heartsoothing song is 
unknown in Europe; this is the capirote, which 
no effort has been able to tame, so sacred to his 
soul is liberty. I have stood in admiration at his 
soft and melodious warbling, in a garden at Oro- 
tava; but I have never seen him sufficiently near, 
to know to what family he belongs. As ‘to the 
parrots, which were supposed to have been seen 
at the period of Captain Cook’s abode at Tene- 
riffe, they never existed but in the narrative o1 


* Fringilla canaria. La Caille relates, in the narrative of 
his voyage to the Cape, that on Salvage island these cana- 
ries are so abundant, you cannot walk there in a certain seu- 
son without breaking their eggs. 


193 


a few travellers, who have copied from each other. 
Neither parrots nor monkeys inhabit the islands 
of the Canaries; and though in the New Conti- 
nent the former migrate as far as North Carolina, 
I doubt whether in the Old they have ever been 
met with beyond the 28th degree of north lati- 
tude. P 
Toward the close of day we reached the port 
of Orotava, where we heard the unexpected news, 
that the Pizarro would not set sail till the 24th 
or 25th. If. we could have calculated on this 
delay, we should either have lengthened our stay* 
on the Peak, or made an excursion to the vol- 
cano of Chahorra, We passed the following day 
in visiting the environs of Orotava, and enjoying 
the agreeable company we found at Mr. Cologan’s. 
We perceived, that the abode at Teneriffe was 


* As agreat number of travellers, who land at Santa Cruz, 
do riot undertake the excursion to the Peak, because they are 
ignorant of the time which it takes, it may be useful to lay 
down the following data: In making use of mules as far as 
the Station of the English, it takes twenty-one hours from 
Orotava-to arrive at the summit of the Peak, and return to 
the port; namely, from Orotava to the Pino del Dornajito 
three hours; from the Pino to the Station of the Rocks six 
hours; andfrom this station to the Caldera three hours and 
a half. I reckon nine hours for the descent. In this valuae_ 
tion I count only the titme employed in walking, and no way 
that which is necessary to examine the productions of the 
Peak, or to take repose. Half a day is sufficient to go from 
Santa Cruz to Orotava. 


VOL. I. 9 


194 


interesting not only to those whose business is the 
study of nature; we found at Orotava several 
persons, who have a taste for literature and music, 
and who have transplanted into these distant cli- 
mates the amenity of European society. In these 
respects, the Canary islands have no great re- 
semblance to the other Spanish colonies, excep-. 
ting the Havannah. 

We were present, the eve of St. John, at a 
pastoral féte in the garden of Mr. Little. This 
gentleman, who had rendered great service to the 
Canarians during the last famine, has cultivated a 
hill covered with volcanic substances. He has 
formed in this delicious site an English garden, 
whence there is a magnificent view of the Peak, 
of the villages along the coast, and the isle of 
Palma, which limits the vast extent of the ocean. 
I cannot compare this prospect with any, except 
those of the bays of Genoa and Naples; but Oro- 
tava is greatly superior to both in the magnitude 
of the masses, and in the richness cf vegetation. 
In the beginning of the evening, the slope of the 
volcano exhibited on a sudden a most extraordi- 
nary spectacle. ‘The shepherds, in conformity to 
a. custom, no doubt introduced by the Spaniards, 
though it dates from -the highest antiquity, had 
lighted the fires of St. John. These scattered 
masses of fire, these columns of smoke driven by 
the wind, formed a fine contrast with the deep 
verdure of the forests, which covered the sides of 


SS a SSS 


195 


the Peak. Shouts of joy heard from afar were the 
only sounds, that broke the silence of nature in 
these solitary abodes. 

Mr. Cologan’s family -has a country house 
nearer the coast than that I have just mentioned. 
The name given by the proprietor is appropriate 
to the sentiment, which this rural spot inspires. 
The house of La Paz was also connected with a 
circumstance that rendered it peculiarly interesting 
tous. M. de Borda, whose death we deplored, 
was its inmate during his last visit to the Canary 
islands. It was in a small neighbouring plain, 
that this gentleman measured the base, by which 
he determined the height of the Peak. In this 
geometrical operation, the great draceena of Oro- 
tava served asa mark, If any well-informed tra- 
veller should some future day undertake a new 
measurement of the volcano with more exactness, 
and by means of astronomical repeating circles, 
he ought to measure the base, not near Orotava, 
but near Silos, at a place called Bante. Accord- 
ing to M. Broussonet, there is no plain near the 
Peak of greater extent. In herbalizing near La 
Paz, we found a great quantity of lichen roccella 
on the basaltic rocks bathed by the waters of the 
sea. Tne archil of the Canaries is a very ancient 
branch of commerce ; this lichen is however found 
in less abundance in the isle of Teneriffe, than in 
the desert islands of Salvage, La Graciosa, and 
L’ Alegranza, or even in Canary and Hierro, 

0g 


196 


We left the port of Orotava on the 24th of 
June in the morning: we dined, as we passed 
through Laguna, with the French consul. He 
had the kindness to take charge of the geological 
collections* we had made, and which we destined 
for the king of Spain’s cabinet of natural history. 
As we left the town, and turned our eyes toward 
the road of Santa Cruz, we were alarmed at see- 
ing our vessel, the Pizarro, under way.. On reach- 
ing the port, we learnt, that she was plying under 
an easy sail, to wait for us. The English vessels, 
that were stationed off the island of Teneriffe, had 
disappeared; and we had not a moment to lose 
to go on board. We embarked alone, for our 
fellow-travellers were Canarians, and at the end 
of their journey. We regretted in this number 
Don Francisco Salcedo, son of the late Spanish 
governor of Louisiana, whom we met with again 
at the isle of Cuba, on our return from the Ori- 
noco, " 

Not to interrupt the narrative of the excursion 
to the top of the Peak, I have said nothing of the 
geological observations I made on the structure 
of this colossal mountain, and on the nature of 
the volcanic rocks of which it is composed. Be- 
fore we quit the Archipelago of the Canaries, I 
shall delay a moment, and bring into one point of 


* Mr. Hergen has described them in the Aznales de Ciencias 
naturales, which he published jointly with Abbé Cavanilles. 


i| 
} 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


197 


view what relates to the physical picture of these 


countries. 


The mineralogists who think, that the end of 
the geology of volcanoes is the classification of 
lavas, the examination of the crystals they contain, 
and their description according to their external 
characters, are generally very well satisfied, when 
they come back from the mouth of a burning vol- 
cano. They return loaded with numerous collec- 
tions, which are the principal objects of their re- 
scarches. ‘This is not the feeling of those, who, 
without confounding descriptive mineralogy* with 
geognosy, endeavor to raise themselves to ideas 
generally interesting, and seek, in the study of na- 
ture, for answers to the following questions : 

Is the conical mountain of a volcano entirely 
formed of liquified matter, heaped together by 
successive eruptions; or does it contain in its 
centre a nucleus of primitive rocks covered with 
lavas, which are these same rocks altered by fire? 
What are the affinities, which unite the produc- 
tions of modern volcanoes with the basaltes, the 
phonolites, and_ those porphyries with basis of 
feldspar, which are without quartz, and which 
cover the Cordilleras of Peru and Mexico, as well 
as the small groups of the Monts d’Or, of Cantal, 
and of Mézen in France? Has the central nucleus 
of volcanoes been heated in its primitive position, 


* Qryctognosy. 


198 


and raised up, in a softened state, by the force of 
the elastic vapours, before these fluids communi- 
cated, by means of a crater, with the external air ? 
What is the substance, which, for thousands of 
years, keeps up this combustion, which is some- 
times so slow, and at other times so active? Does 
this unknown cause act at an immense depth ; or 
does this chemical action take place in secondary 
rocks lying on granite ? 

The farther we are from ‘finding a solution of 
these problems: in the numerous works hitherto 
published on Etna and Vesuvius, the greater is the 
desire of the traveller, to see with his own eyes. 
He hopes to be more fortunate than those who 
have preceded him; he wishes to form a precise 
idea of the geological relations, the volcano and 
the neighbouring mountains bear to each other : 
but, how often is he disappointed, when, on the 
limits of the primitive soil, enormous banks of 
tufa and puzzolana. render every observation on the 
position and stratification impossible! We reach 
the inside of the crater with less difficulty than we , 
at first expected, we examine the cone from its 
summit to its basis ; we are struck with the differ- 
ence in the produce of each eruption, and with 
the analogy which still exists between the lavas of 
the same volcano: but, notwithstanding the care 
with which we interrogate nature, and the number 


of partial observations which are presented at every 
step, we return from the summit of a burning 


gh ponies sc 


199 


volcano less satisfied, than when we were preparing 
to go thither. It is after we have studied them 
on the spot, that the volcanic phenomena appear 
still more isolated, more variable, more obscure, 
than we figure them when consulting the narratives 
of travellers. 

These reflections occurred to me on returning 
from the summit of the Peak of Teneriffe, the first 
unextinct volcano I had yet visited. They returned 
anew, whenever in South America, or in Mexico, 
I had occasion to examine volcanic mountains. If 
we reflect on the little progress, which the jabours 
of mineralogists, and the discoveries in chemistry, 
have made toward the knowledge of the physical 
geology of mountains, we cannot help being affected 
with a painful sentiment ; and this is felt still more 
those, who, questioning nature :nder 
pro- 


hi 


strongly by 
different climates, are more occupied by the 
blems they have not been able to solve, than wit 
the small number of results they have obtained. 
The Peak of Ayadyrma, or of Echeyde*, is a 
conic and isolated mountain, placed in an islet of 
very small circumference. ‘The learned, who do 
not take into consideration the whole surface of the 
Globe, believe, that these three circumstances are 
common to the greater part of volcanoes. They 
_* The word Echeyde, which signifies Hed! in the language 
of the Guanches, has’ been corrupted by the Europeans inte 


. Teyde. 


200 


cite, in support of their opinion, Etna, the Peak 
of the Azores, the Solfatara of Guadaloupe, the 
Trois-Salazes of the Isle of Bourbon, and that 
archipelago of volcanoes contained in the Indian 
Sea and the Great Ocean. In Europe and in Asia, 
as far as the interior of the latter continent is 
known, no burning volcano is situate in a chain 
of mountains ; all being at a greater or less distance 
from these chains. In the New World, on the 
contrary, and this fact deserves the greatest at- 
tention, the volcanoes the most stupendous for 
their masses form a part of the Cordilleras them- 
selves. The mountains of mica-slate and gneiss in 
Peru and New Grenada immediately touch the 
volcanic porphyries of the provinces of Quito and 
Pasto. To the south and north of these countries, 
in Chili-and in the kingdom of Guatimala, the 
active volcanoes are grouped in rows. They are 
the continuation, as we may say, of the chains of 
primitive rocks ; and if the volcanic fire has broken 
forth in some plain far from the Cordilleras, as in 
mount Sangay and Jorullo*, we must consider this 
phenomenon as an exception to the law, which 
nature seems to have imposed on these regions. 
I here ought to state again these geological facts, 
because this pretended isolated situation of every 


* Two volcanoes of the provinces of Quixos and Mechoacan, 


ene in the southern, and the other in the northern hemi- 
sphere. 


Jip ciemmeppigawgt Kirn onto 


| 
} 


201 


voleano has been opposed to the idea, that the 
Peak of Teneriffe, and the other volcanic summits 
of the Canary Islands, are the remains of a sub- 
merged chain of mountains. The observations, 
which have been made on the grouping of the 
volcanoes in America, prove, that the ancient state 
of things represented in the conjectural map of 
the Atlantic by M. Bory de St. Vincent* is no 
way in contradiction to the acknowledged laws of 
nature; and that nothing opposes our admitting, 
that the summits of Porto Santo, Madeira, and the 
Fortunate Islands, may heretofore have formed, 
either -a distinct range of primitive mountains, or 
the western extremity of the chain of Atlas. 

The Peak of Teyde forms a pyramidal mass like 
Etna, Tungurahua, and Popocatepetl. “This phy- 
siognomic character is very far from being com- 
mon to all voleanoes. We have seen some in the 
southern hemisphere, which, instead of having 
the form of a cone or a bell, are lengthened in one 
direction, having the ridge sometimes smooth, and 


* The question, whether the traditions of the ancients re- 
specting the Atlantis are founded on historical facts, is en- 
tirely different from this, whether the Archipelago of the 
Canaries and the adjacent islands are the wrecks of a 
chain of mountains, rent and sunk in: the sea in one of the 
great convulsions of our Globe. I do not pretend to form any 
opinion in favour of the existence of the Atlantis; but I en- 


deavour to prove, that the Canaries have no more been cre- 


ated by volcanoes, than the whole body of the smaller An- 
tilles has been formed by madrepores. 


202 


at others rough with small pointed rocks. This 
structure is peculiar to Antisana and Pichincha, 
two burning mountains of the province of Quito ; 
and the absence of the conic form ought never to 
be considered as a reason excluding a. volcanic 
origin. I shall develope in the progress of this 
work some of the analogies, which I think I have 
perceived between the physiognomy of volcanoes 
and the antiquity of their rocks. It is here suf- 
ficient to observe in general, that. the summits, 
which are still subject to eruptions of the greatest 
violence, and at the nearest periods to each other, 
are slender peaks of a conic form; that the moun- 
tains with lengthened summits, and rugged with 
small stony masses, are very old volcanoes, and 
near being extinguished; and that rounded tops in 
the form of domes, or bells, indicate those pro- 
blematic porphyries, which are supposed to have 
been heated in their primitive place, penetrated by 
vapours, and Jorced up in a softened state, without 


having ever flowed as real lithoidal lavas. To the. 
first * of these distinctions belong Cotopaxi, the 
Peak of Teneriffe, and that of Orizava in Mexico. 
The second} is common to Cargueirazo and Pi- 
chincha, in the province of Quito ; to the voleano of 
Puracey, near Popayan; and perhaps also to 
Hecla, in Iceland. The third}. and last is found 


* Picturesque Atlas, folio, Pl. 10. 
+ Ibid. Pl. 61. 
{ Ibid, Pl. 16. 


203 


in the majestic figure of Chimborazo, and, if it be 
permitted to place by the side of this colossus a 
hill of Europe, in the Great Sarcouy in Auvergne. 
In order to forma more exact idea of the ex- 
ternal structure of volcanoes, it is important to 
compare their perpendicular height with their, cir- 
cumference. This however cannot be done with 
any exactness, unless the mountains are isolated, 
and placed on a plain which is nearly on a level 
with the sea. In calculating the circumference of 
the Peak of Teneriffe in a curve passing through 
the port of Orotava, Garachico, Adexe, and 
Guimar, and setting aside the prolongations of its 
basis towards the forest of Laguna, and the north- 
east cape of the island, we find that this extent is 
more than 54000 toises. The height of the Peak 
is consequently one twenty-eighth of the circum- 
ference of its basis. Mr. Von Buch found a thirty- 
third for Vesuvius; and, which perhaps is less 
certain, a thirty-fourth for Etna*. If the slope of 


* Gilbert, Annalen der Physik, B. 5, p. 455. Vesuvius is 
133,000 palmas; or eighteen nautical miles in circumference. 


The horizontal distance from Resina to the crater is 3700 
toises. © Italian mineralogists have estimated the circum- 
ference of Etna at 840,000 palmas, or 119 miles. With these . 
data, the ratio of the height to the circumference would be 
only a seventy-second ; but I find on tracing a curve through 
Catania, Palermo, Bronte, and Piemonte, only 62 miles in 
circumference according to the best maps. This increases 
the ratio to a fifty-fourth. Does the basis fall on the outside 
of the curve that [ assume? 


204 


these three volcanoes were uniform from the summit 
‘to its basis, the Peak of Teyde would have an in- 
clination of 12° 29’, Vesuvius 12° 41’, and Etna 
10° 13%; a result which must astonish those, who 


do not reflect on what constitutes an average slope. 


In a very long ascent, slopes of three or four 
degrees alternate with others which are inclined 
from 25 to 30 degrees ; and the latter only strike 
our imagination, because we think all the slopes of 
mountains more steep than they really are. I may 
cite in support of this consideration the example 
oi the ascent from the port of Vera Cruz to the 
elevated plain of Mexico. It is on the eastern 
slope of the Cordilleras that a road has been 
traced, which for ages has not been frequented 
except on foot, or on the back of mules. From 
Encero to the small Indian village of Las Vigas, 
there are 7500 toises of horizontal distance; and 
Encero being, according to my barometric mea- 
surement, 746 toises lower than Las Vigas, the 
result, for the mean slope, is only an angle of 
5° 40%. 

I have drawn on the same plate, the profiles of 
the Peak of Teneriffe, Cotopaxi, and Vesuvius. 
I could have wished to have substituted Etna for 
this last mountain, because its form is more ana- 
logous to that of the two volcanoes of America and 
Africa; but I chose to trace only the outlines of 
mountains that L had visited and measured myself ; 
and with respect to Etna I should have wanted data 


205 


for the intermediary heights. I ought also to ob- 
serve, that, in the three profiles, the scales of 
distances and of heights have the same proportions. 
The distances have been determined after the 
charts of Zanoni, Borda, and La Condamine. 
The reader versed in the practice of levelling will 
not be astonished at the very gentle slope, which 
these profiles seem to indicate. In nature, an 
inclined plane of an angle of 35° appears to be 
50°: we scarcely dare go down a hill of 22° slope 
in a carriage; and the parts of the volcanic cones, 
that are inclined 40° or 42,, are almost inacces- 
sible, though the foot may form steps by plunging 
it in the ashes. I have recorded in a note* the 


* In places where there were at the same time slopes 
covered with tufted grass and loose sands I took the following 
measures : 


5°, slope already of a very marked inclination. {n France the 
high roads must not exceed 4° 46” by law; 


15°, slope extremely steep, and which we cannot descend in 
a carriage ; 

37°, slope almost inaccessible on foot, if the bottom be a 
naked rock, or a turf too thick to form steps. The body 
falls backwards when the tibia makes a smaller angle than 
53°, with the sole of the foot ; 

42°, the steepest slope that can be climbed on foot ina ground 


that is sandy, or covered with volcanic ashes, 


When the slope is 44°, it is almost impossible to scale it, 
though the ground permits the forming of steps by thrusting 
in the foot. The cones of volcanoes have a medium slope from 


206 


experiments I made on the difficulties arising fronr 
the declivities in mountainous countries. 

Isolated volcanoes, in the ,most distant regions, 
are very analogous in their structure. At great 
elevations all have considerable plains, in the 
middle of which arises a cone perfectly circular: 
Thus at Cotopaxi the plains of Suniguaicu extend 
beyond the farm of Pansache. ‘The stony sum- 
mit of Antisana, covered with eternal snow, forms 
an islet in the midst of an immense plain, the 
surface of which -is twelve leagues square, while 
its height exceeds that of the Peak of Teneriffe 
two hundred toises. At Vesuvius, at three hun- 
dred and seventy toises high, the cone detaches 
itself from the plain of Atrio del Cavallo. The 
Peak of Teneriffe presents two of these elevated 
plains, the uppermost of which, at the foot of the 
Piton, is as high as Etna, and of very little ex- 
tent; while the lowermost, covered with tufts of 
retama (spartium nubigenum), reaches as far as 
the Estancia de los Ingleses. ‘This rises above the 
level of the sea almost as high as the city of Quito, 
and ‘the summit of Mount Lebanon. 

The greater the quantity of matter that has 
issued from the crater of a mountain, the more 


33° to 40°. The steepest parts of these cones, either of 
Vesuvius, the Peak of ‘l'eneriffe, the volcano of Pichincha, 
or Jorullo, are from 40° to 42°, A slope of 55° is quite 
inaccessible. If seen from above it would be estimated at 


75%. 


1 
| 
| 
i 
} 
H 
i 
? 
{1 
i 
i 


207 


elevated is its cone of ashes in proportion to the 
perpendicular height of the. volcano itself. No- 
thing is more striking under this point of view, 
than the difference of structure between Vesu- 
vius, the Peak of Teneriffe, and Pichincha. I 
have chosen this last volcano in preference, be- 
cause its summit* enters scarcely within the limit 
of the perpetual snows. The cone of, Cotopaxi, 
the form of which is the most elegant and most 
regular hitherto known, is 540 toises in. height; 
but it is impossible to decide, whether the whole 
of this mass is covered with ashes. 
moth heist pS! ght of the [Proportion off 
Br Goides: cone covered |the cone to the 
aie with ashess | total height. 


Names of the volcanoes.| 


Vesuvius 606 200 


—~ | ete ATES 


Peak of Teneriffe 1904 


Pichincha |" 2490 


his table seems to indicate, what we shall 


hgve an opportunity of proving more amply here- 
after, that the Peak of Teneriffe belongs to that 


* T have measured the summit of Pichincha, that is the 
small mountain covered with ashes above the Llano del Vul- 
can, to the north of Alto de Chuquira. ‘This mount has not 
however the regular form of acone. As to Vesuvius, I have 
indicated the mean height of the Sugar-Loaf, on account of 


the great difference between the two edges of the crater. 


208 


group of great volcanoes, which, like Etna and 
Antisana, have had more copious eruptions from 
their sides than from the summit, Thus the cra- 
ter at the extremity of the Piton, which is called 
the Caldera, is extremely small; and this dimi- 
nutiveness had already struck M. de Borda, and 
other travellers, who took little interest in geolo- 
gical investigations. 

As to the nature of the rocks which compose the 
soil of Teneriffe, we must first distinguish between 
productions of the present volcano, and the range 
of basaltic mountains, which surround the Peak, 
and which do not rise more than five or six 
hundred toises above the level of the Ocean. 
Here, as well as in Italy, Mexico, and the Cor- 
dilleras of Quito, the rocks of trapp-formation * 
are at a distance from the currents of recent la- 
vas; every thing shows, that these two classes of 
substances, though they owe their origin to similar 
phenomena, date from very different periods. It 
is important to geology, not to confound the 
currents of modern lavas, the heaps of basalt, 
greenstone, and phonolite, which are dispersed 
over the primitive and secondary formations, with 
those porpbyroid masses with basis of compact 
feldspar t, which perhaps have never been per- 


* The trapp-formation includes the basaltes, greenstone 
(grunstein), the trappean porphyries, the phonolites or por= 
phyrschefer, &c. . 

+ These petrosiliceous masses contain vitreous and often 


209 


fectly liquified, but which do not less belong to 
the domain of volcanoes. 

In the isle of Teneriffe strata of tufa, puzzo- 
lana, and clay, separate the range of basaltic 
hills from the currents of recent lithoid lavas, 
and from the eruptions of the present volcano. 
In the same manner as the eruptions of Epomeo 
in the isle of Ischia, and those of Jorullo in Mex- 
ico, have taken place in countries covered with 
trappean porphyry, ancient basalt, and volcanic 
ashes, so the Peak of Teyde has. raised itself 
amidst the wrecks of submarine volcanoes. Not- 
withstanding the difference of composition in the 
recent lavas of the Peak, there is a certain regu- 
larity of position, which must strike the naturalist 
the least skilled in geognosy. The great elevated 
plain of Retama separates the black, basaltic, 
and earthlike lava, from the vitreous and feld- 
sparry lava, the basis of which is obsidian, pitch- 
stone, and phonolite. This phznomenon is so 
much the more remarkable, as in Bohemia and 
other parts of Europe, the porphyrschiefer with 


calcined crystals of feldspar, of hornblende, of pyroxene, a 
little of olivine, but scarcely any quartz. To this very am- 
biguous formation belong the trappean porphyries of Chim- 
borazo and of Riobamba in America, of the Euganean moun- 
tains in Italy, and of the Siebengebirge in Germany ; as well 
as the domites of the Great-Sarcuy, of Puy-de-Dome, of the 
Little-Cleirsou, and of ‘one part of the Puy Chopine in Au- 
vergne. 


ViObs5. 


: *) ae 


base of phonolite * covers also the convex suim- 
mits of the basaltic mountains. 

We have already observed, that from the le- 
vel of the sea to Portillo, and as far as the en- 
trance on the elevated plain of the Retama, that is 
two thirds of the total height of the volcano, the 
ground is so covered with plants, that it is diffi- 
cult to make geological observations. The cur- 
rents of lava, which we discover on the slope 
of Monte Verde, between the beautiful spring of 
Dornajito and Caravela, are black masses, altered 
by decomposition, sometimes porous, and with 
very oblong pores. The basis of these lower 
lavas is rather wacke than basalt; when it is 
spongy, it resembles the amygdaloids + of Frank- 
fort on the Main. Its fracture is generally irre- 
gular; wherever it is conchoidal, we may pre- 
sume, that the cooling was more rapid, and the 
mass was exposed to a less powerful pressure. 
These currents of lava are not divided into regu- 
lar prisms, but into very thin layers, not very 
regular in their inclination; they contain much 
olivine, small grains of magnetic iron, and augits, 
the colour of which often varies from a deep 
leek green to an olive green, and which might 
be mistaken for crystallized olivine, though no 
transition from one to the other of these sub- 


* Klingstein. Werner. 
4+ Wakkenartiger mandelstein of Steinkaute. 


fae 


ee 


211 


stances exists*. Hornblende, or amphibole, is in 
general very rare at Teneriffe, not only in the 
modern lithoid lavas, but also in the ancient ba- 
salts, as has been observed by M. Cordier, 
who resided longer at the Canaries than any 
other mineralogist. Nepheline, leucite, idocrase, 
and mejonite have not yet been seen at the 
Peak of Teneriffe ; for a reddish gray lava, which 
we found on the slope of Monte Verde, and which 
contains small microscopic crystals, appears to 
me to be an intimate mixture of basalt and anal- 
cime f. In the same manner the lava of La 
Scala, with which the city of Naples is paved, 
offers an intimate mixture of basalt, nepheline, 
and leucite. With respect to this last substance, - 
which has hitherto been observed only at Vesu- 
vius, and in the environs of Rome, it exists per- 
haps at the Peak of Teneriffe, in the old currents 
of lava that are covered by more recent ejections. 


* Steffens, Handbuch der Oryktognosie, T. i, s. 364. The 
crystals which Mr. Friesleben and myself have made known 
under the denothination of foliated olivine (blattriger olivin ) 
belong, according to Mr. Karsten, to the pyroxene, augit. 
Journal des Mines de Frieberg; 1791, p. 215. 


+ This substance, which M. Dolomieu discovered in the 
amygdaloids of Catania in Sicily, and which accompanies 
the stilbites of Fassa in Tyrol, forms, with the chabasie of 
Haiiy, the genus cubicit of Werner. M. Cordier found at 
Teneriffe zeolite in an amygdaloid which covers the baseltes 
of La Punta di Naga. 


Pog 


212 


“Vesuvius during a long series of years* has also 
thrown out lavas without leucites: and if it be 
true, as Mr. Von Buch has rendered very proba- 
blef, that these crystals are formed only in the 
currents, which flow either from the crater itself, 
or very near its brink, we must not be surprised, 
if we do not find them in the lavas of the Peak, 
which are almost all owing to lateral eruptions, 
and which consequently have been exposed to an 
enormous pressure in the interior of the volcano. 
In the plain of Retama, the basaltic lavas dis- 
appear under heaps of ashes, and pumice stone 
reduced to powder. Thence to the summit, from 
1500 to 1900 toises in height, the volcano exhi- 
bits only vitreous lava with basis of pitchstone } 
and obsidian. These lavas, destitute of horn- 
blende and mica, are of a blackish brown, often 
varying to the deepest olive green. They contain 
large crystals of feldspar, which are not fissured, and 
seldom vitreous. The analogy of those decidedly 
volcanic masses with the resinit porphyries 4 of 
the valley of Tribisch in Saxony is very remark- 
able; but the latter, which belong to a very ex- 


* For instance in 1760, 1794, and 1805. 

+ Leopold von Buch, Geognostische Beob. t. 2, 8. 221. Gil. 
berts Ann. t. 6, 8 53. The existence of leucites (amphigénes) 
at Arendahl in Norway, in Scotland, in the Pyrenecs, in 
Transylvania, in Mexico, does not rest on any very accurate 
obser vations. 

{ Petrosilex résinite. Haiiy. 


coy 


& 


» Pechstein-porphyr. Werner. 


Q13 


tended and metalliferous formation of porphyry *, 


often contain quartz, which is wanting in the mo- 

* We can now distinguish four formations Chauptmeder= 
lagen) of porphyry. The first is primitive,. and found in sube 
ordinate strata in the gneiss, and the mica-slate (Isaac at 
Freyberg). The sccond alternates with syenit : it is older than 
grauwakke, and belongs most probably already to the tran- 
sition mountains (uebergangs gebirge). It contains beds of 
pitchstone and obsidian, and even granular limestone, of which 
we see instances near Meissen in Saxony: it is extremely 
rich in metals, and is found in Mexico (at Guanaxuato, 
Regla, &c.), in Norway, in Sweden, and at Schemnitz in 
Hungary. The porphyry of Norway covers, near Skeen, 
grauwakke and mandelstein; it encloses crystals of quartz. 
Near Holmestrandt, abed of basalt, which abounds in augit, 
is interposed among the transition porphyry. The rock of 
Schemnitz (the sarum metalliferum of Ferber and Born), which 
lies on the thonschiefer, is destitute of quartz, and contains 


hornblende and common feldspar. It is this second formation 


_of porphyry, which appears tu have been the centre of the 


oldest volcanic revolutions. The third formation helongs to 
the ancient sandstone (todtesliegende), which seems as a basis 
to the alpine limestone (alpen-kalkstein or zechstein): it 
contains mandelstein (amygdaloides) mixed with agate (at 
Oberstein, in the Palatinate), and sometimes covers (in Thu. 
ringia) strata of coal. The fourth formation of porphyries is 
trappean, destitute of quartz, and, especially in America, 
often mixed with olivin and augit; it accompanies basalts, 
greenstone, and phonolites (Chimborazo, the province de los 
Pastos, Drachenfels near Bonn, Pay-de-Déme). The classi- 


fication of the porphyries is accompanied with great difficule 


ties. Granite, gneiss, micaaslate or micaceous schist, thon- 


i) 


schiefer, and chloritschiefer, form a series, in which.each rock ~ 


= 


is connected with that which precedes it. The porphyries, on 


214 


dern lavas. When the basis of the lavas of the 
Malpays changes from pitchstone to obsidian, the 
color is paler, and mixed with gray; in this case, 
the feldspar passes by imperceptible gradations 
from the common to the vitreous. Sometimes both 
varieties meet in the same fragment, as we ob- 
served also in the trappean porphyries of the val- 
fey of Mexico. ‘The feldsparry lavas of the Peak, 
of a much less. black color than those of Arso, in 
the isle of Ischia, whiten at the edge of the crater 
from the effect of the acid vapors; but their inside 


the contrary, are found, as it were, isolated in the geognostica} 
system; they offer transitions into each other, but not 
into the substances on which they repose. (Buch. Geoganost. 
Beob. t.1, 8.56). As inthe course of this work volcas 
nic and nonvoleanie porphyries may often occur, it ap- 
pears to me indispensible, to exhibit the general table of the 
formation traced by the illustrious chief of the Freyberg 
school, from his own observation, those of Von Buch, Es- 
mark, and Friesleben, and mine. The great divisions, which 
are susceptible of much improvement, are independent of any 
hypothesis on the origin of porphyries, as they relate only to 
position, superposition, and relative age. ‘The four forma- 
tions just described, may be distinguished by the names of pri- 
mitive porphyries (urporphyre), of transition porphyries 
Cucbergangsporphyre), secondary porphyries (/lezporphyre), 
and trappean porphyries (trapporphyre). If we confound the 
second and fourth of these formations under the common 
mame of porphyry-lavas, we throw geognosy back into the 
obscurity from which it is scarce freed: we might as well 
class gneiss, mica-slate, and thonschiefer, under the genera} 


name of laminar and schistose rocks. 


215 


is no way deprived of color like that “of the felds- 
parry lavas of the solfaterra at Naples, which per- 
fectly resemble the trappean porphyries at the foot 
of Chimborazo. In the middle of the Malpays, at 
the height of the cavern of ice, we found among 
the vitreous lavas with the pitchstone and obsidian 
basis, blocks of real greenish-gray, or mountain 
green phonolite, with a smooth fracture, and di- 
vided into thin laminz, sonorous and keen edyed. 
These masses were the same as the porphyr- 
schicfer of the mountain of Bilin in Bohemia; we 
recognised in them small long crystals of vitreous 
feldspar. 

This regular disposition of lithoid basaltic lava 
and feldsparry vitreous lava is analogous to the 
phenomena of all trappean mountains ; it reminds 
us of those phonolites lying in very ancient basalts, 
those intimate mixtures of augit and feldspar which 
cover the hills of wakke ‘or porous amygdaloids : 
but why are the porphyritic or feldsparry lavas of 
the Peak found only on the summit of the moun- 
tain? Should we conclude from this position, 
that they are of a more recent formation than the 
lithoid basaltic lava, which contains olivine and 
augit? I cannot admit this last hypothesis; for 
lateral eruptions may have covered the feldsparry 
nucleus, at a period when the crater had ceased its 
activity. At Vesuvius also, we perceive small 
crystals of vitreous feldspar only in the very an- 
cient lavas of the Somma, These lavas, setting 


216 


aside the leucite, very nearly resemble the phono- 
litic productions of the Peak of Teneriffe. In 
general the farther we go back from the period of 
modern eruptions, the more appearance the cur- 
rents, increasing both in size and extent, acquire 
of real rocks, in the regularity of their position, in 
their division into parallel strata, or in their inde- 
pendance of the present form of the ground. 

The Peak of Teneriffe is, next to Lipari, the 
volcano that has produced most obsidian. This 
abundance is so much the more striking, as in 
other regions of the Earth, in Iceland, in Hun- 
gary, in Mexico, aad in the kingdom of Quito, 
we meet with obsidian only at great distances from 
burning volcanoes. Sometimes they are scattered 
over the fields in angular pieces, for instance, near 
Popayan, in South America; at other times they 
form isolated rocks, as at Quinche, near Quito ; 
in other places, and this position is very remark- 
able, they are disseminated in perlstein, as at 
Cinapecuaro, in the province of Mechoacan*, 
and at Cabo de Gates, in Spain. At the Peak of 
Tencriffe, the ebsidian is not found toward the 
basis of the volcano, which is covered with mo- 
dern lava: it is frequent only towards the sum- 
mit, especially from the plain of Retama, where 
very fine specimens may be collected. This pe- 
culiar position, and the circumstance that the 


* To the west of the city of Mexico, 


i 
| 
I 
\ 
| 
of 


217 


obsidian of the Peak has been ejected by a crater, 
which for ages past has thrown out no flames, are 
favourable to the opinion; . that volcanic vitrifica- 
tions, wherever they are found, are to be consi- 
dered as of very ancient formation. 

Obsidian, jade, and touchstone*, are three mi- 
nerals, which nations ignorant of the use of brass 
or iron, in all ages, employed to make keen- 
edged weapons. In the most distant parts of :the 
Globe, necessity fixed their choice on the same 
substance. We see wandering hordes have dragged 
with them, in their distant excursions, stones, the 
natural position of which the mineralogist has not 
yet been able to discover. Hatchets of jade, co- 
vered with Azteck hieroglyphics, which I brought 
from Mexico, resemble both in their form and 
nature those made use of by the Gauls, and those 
we find among the islanders of the Pacific Ocean. 
The Mexicans dug obsidian in mines, which took 
up a vast extent of ground; and of it made knives, 
sword-blades, and razors. In like manner the 
Guanches, who called obsidian by the name of 
tabona, fixed splinters of this mineral to the ends 
of their lances. They carried on a considerable 


trade in it with the neighbouring islands; and 


from the consumption thus occasioned, and the 
quantity of obsidian which must have been broken 
in the fabrication, we may presume, that this mi- 


* Lydischerstein, 


218 


neral is become scarce from the lapse of ages. We 
are surprised to see an Atlantic nation substi- 
tuting, like the Americans, vitrified lava for iron. 
In both countries, this variety of lava was em- 
ployed as an object of ornament: the inhabitants 
of Quito made beautiful looking glasses with an 
obsidian divided into parallel lamine. 

There are three varieties of obsidian at the Peak. 
Some form enormous blocks, several toises long, 
and often of a spheroidal figure. We might sup- 
pose, that they had been thrown out in a softened 
state, and had undergone a rotary motion. They 
contain a quantity of vitreous feldspar, of a snow 
white color, and the most brilliant. pearly lustre. 
These obsidians are nevertheless but little transpa- 
rent on the edges, almost opake, of a brownish 
black, and of an imperfect conchoidal fracture. 
They pass into pitchstone; and we may consider 
them as porphyries with a basis of obsidian. The 
second variety is found in fragments much less 
considerable. It is in general of a greenish black, 
sometimes of murky gray, very seldom of a per- 
fect black, like the obsidian of Hecla and Mexico. 
Its fracture is perfectly conchoidal, and it is ex- 
tremely transparent on the edges. J have found 
in it neither hornblende nor pyroxene, but some 
small white points, which seem to be feldspar. 
All the obsidians of the Peak are free from those 
gray masses Of pearl or lavender blue, striped, and 
in separate pieces of the form of wedges, contain- 


an. eee 


219 


ed in the obsidian of Quito, Mexico, and Lipari, 
and which resemble the fibrous plates of the crys- 
tallites of our glass houses, on which Sir James 
Hall, Dr. Thomson, and M. Fleuriau de Bell 
have published some very curious observations 
The third variety of obsidian of the Peak is the 
most remarkable of the whole, from its connec- 
tion with pumice stones. It is, like the former, 
of a greenish black, sometimes of a murky gray, 
but its very thin plates alternate with layers of 
pumice stone. Dr. Thomson’s fine collection at 
Naples contained similar examples of lithoid lava 
of Vesuvius, divided into very distinct plates, 
only a line thick. The fibres of the pumice stone 
of the Peak are very seldom parallel to each 
other, and perpendicular to the strata of obsidian ; 
they are most commonly irregular, asbestoidal, 
like fibrous glass-gall; and instead of being disse- 
minated in the obsidian, like crystullites, they are 
found simply adhering to one of the external sur- 
faces of this substance. During my stay at 
Madrid, Mr. Herge n showed me several specimens 


* Bibl. Britann. t. 15, p. 340; t. 27, p- 147. Edin, 
Trans., vol. 5, Pl. 1, No. 3. Je 
alli 


et an 18 prairial. The name of crystallites has been given to 


ourn. de ~~ an 12, jloréal, 


the crystallized thin plates included in sia cooling slowly. 
Dr. Thompson and others indicate by the word verre g/astenisé, 
glass which by slow cooling is wholly wnvitrified, and 1 has as- 
stmed the appearance of a fossile substance, or real glass 


stone. 


OO 


= a sak 


in the mineralogical collection of Don Jose Cla- 


vijo; and for a long time the Spanish mineralo- 
gists considered them as undoubted proofs, that 
punice stone owes its origin to obsidian, in some 
degree deprived of color, and swelled by volcanic 
fire. I was formerly of this opinion, which must 
be confined to one variety only of pumice. I 
even thought, with many other geologists, that 
obsidian, so far from being vitrified lava, belonged 
to rocks that were not volcanic; and that the fire, 
forcing its way through the basalts, the green stune 
rocks, the phonolites, and the porphyries’ with 
basis of pitchstone and obsidian, the lavas and 
pumice stone, were no other than these same rocks 
altered by the action of the volcanoes. The de- 
privation: of color and extraordinary swelling, 
Which the greater part of the obsidians undergo in a 
forge fire, their transition into pechstein, and 
their position in regions very distant from burning 
volcanoes, appear* to be phenomena very diffi- 
cult to reconcile, when we consider the obsidians 
as volcanic glass. A more profound study of na- 
ture, new journeys, and observations made on the 
productions of burning volcanoes, have led me to 
renounce those ideas. 

It appears to me at present extremely probable, 
that obsidians, and porphyries with basis of obsi- 
dian, are vitrified masses, the cooling of which has 


* Aun. du Mus. d’Hist. nat. t. 3, p. 398, 


221 


been too rapid to change them into lithoid lava. I 
consider even the perlstein of Mr. Esmarck as an 
unvitrified obsidian : for among the minerals in the 
king’s cabinet at Berlin there are volcanic glasses 
from Lipari, in which we see striated crystallites, 
of a pearl gray color, and of an earthy appear- 
ance, form gradual approches to a granular lithoid 
lava, like the perlstein of Cinapecuaro, in Mexico. 
The oblong bubbles observed in the obsidians of 
each of the continents are incontestible proofs of 
their. ancient state of igneous fluidity; and Dr. 
Thomson possesses specimens from Lipari, which 
are, very instructive in this point of view, because 
fragments of red porphyry, or porphyry lavas, 
which do not entirely fill up the cavities of the 
obsidian, are found enveloped in them. We might 
say, that these fragments had not time to enter 
into complete solution in the liquified mass; they 
contain vitreous feldspar, and augit, and are the 
same as the celebrated columnar porphyries of the 
island of Panaria, which, without having made 
part of a current of lavas, seem raised up in the 
form of hillocks, like so many porphyries in 
Auvergne, in the Euganean mountains, and in the 
Cordilleras of the Andes, 

The objections against the volcanic origin of 
obsidians, drawn from their speedy loss of color, 
and their swelling by a slow fire, are deprived of 
their force by the ingenious experiments of SirJames 
Hall. These experiments prove, that a stone, 


22 


which is fusiible only at. thirty eight degrees. of 
Wedgwood’s pyrometer, yields a glass, that softens 
at fourteen degrees; and that this glass, melted 
again and unvitrified (glastémisé), is fusible again 
only at thirty five degrees of the same pyrometer. 
I applied the blowpipe to some black pumice 
stones from the volcano of the Isle of Bourbon, 
which, on the slightest contact of the flame, whit- 
ened and melted into an enamel. 

But whether obsidians be primitive rocks, which 
have undergone the action of volcanic fire, or lavas 
repeatedly melted within the crater, the origin of 
the pumice stones which they envelope at the Peak 
of Teneriffe is not less problematic. This subject 
is the more worthy of being investigated, since it 
is generally interesting to the geology of volcanoes ; 
and since an excellent mineralogist*, after having 
visited Italy and the adjacent islands with great 
attention, afiirms, that it is highly improbable, 
that pumice stone owes its origin to the swelling 
of obsidian. 

On recurring to the observations, which I have 
had the means of making in Europe, in the Ca- 
nary islands, and in America, I conclude, that the 
term pumice stone does not denote a simple fossil, 
like the word calcedony, opal, or pyroxene, but 
that it indicates only a certain state, a capillary or 


*M. Fleuriau de Bellevue, Journ. de Phy. t.:60, p. 451 
et 461. 


223 


fibrous form, under which . several substances 
thrown out by volcanoes are seen. ‘The nature 
of these substances is as different as the thickness, 
the tenacity, the flexibility, the parallelism, or the 
direction of their fibres. We may consequently 
doubt, whether pumice. ought to hold any place 
in a system of oryctognosy ; or whether, like com- 
pound rocks, they do not rather belong to the 
domain of geognosy. I have seen black pumice 
stones, in which augit and hornblende are easily 
recognised ; they are less light, of a spongy tex- 
ture, and rather cellular than fibrous. We might 
be tempted to think, that these substances owe 
their origin to basaltic lavas. I have observed 
them in the volcano of Pichincha, as well as in 
the tufa of Pausilippo, near Naples. Other pu- 
mice stones, and_ these the most common, are of 


a grayish white, or of a blueish gray, with nume- 
rous parallel fibres, and containing vitreous feld- 
spar and mica. The greater part of the pumice 
stones of the Aolian islands, and those I collect- 
ed at the foot of the volcano of Sotara, near Po- 
| payan, belong to this class. They seem to have 
been originally granitic rocks, as Dolomieu first 


recognised in his voyage to the islands of Lipari*. 
Assembled in enormous blocks, they sometimes 
form whole mountains far from any active volca- 


| * Dolomieu, Voy. aux Iles de Lipari, p. 67, Id, Mém. sur les 
Lles Ponces, p. 89. 


224 


no. It is thus that we find obsidians between 
Llactacunga and Hambato, in the kingdom -of 
Quito, covering the space of a league square ; and 
in Hungary, where they were accurately examined 
by Mr. Esmarck. This singular position made the 
Danish mineralogist. think, that they -belonged to 
the secondary or floetz formation; and that the 
volcanic fire had traversed the strata of pumice, as 
well as the obsidians and the basalts, which he 
equally considers as not of volcanic origin, A 
third variety of pumice is that with fragile fibres, 
somewhat thick, transparent on the edges, and of 
an almost vitreous lustre, which exhibits the tran- 
sition from the granitic pumice stone to the capil- 
lary glass. This variety, which is adherent to the 
green and grayish obsidian of the Peak of Tene- 
riffe, seems to have been produced by the action 
of the fire on matters already vitrified. 

From the whole of these considerations it re- 
sults, that it is as erroneous to consider the whole 
of the pumice stones as tumefied obsidians, as to 
look for their origin exclusively in granites ren- 
dered fusile and fibrous by the action of fire, or 
of acid vapors. It is possible, that the obsidians 
themselves were only liquified granites*; but we 


* We meet sometimes, though very rarely, with mica in 
the obsidians: and Delomieu thinks he has found not only 
feldspar and mica, but also quartz, in the granitic pumice, 
Voy. aux Iles Ponces, p. 122; Voy. aux Iles de Lipari, pe 
83. 


225 . 


must distinguish, with Spallanzani, between the 
pumices which draw their origin directly from 
primitive rocks, and those which, being only al- 
tered volcanic productions, vary like them in their 
composition*. A certain state, into which several 
heterogeneous substances pass, or the result of a 
particular mode of action, are insufficient to esta- 
blish a species in the classification of ft cabmaple mi- 
nerals. 

The experiments of Mr. Da Camara, and those 
I made in 1802, come in support of the opinion, 


’ that the pumice stones adherent to the obsidians 


of the Peak of Teneriffe do not unite to them 
accidentally, but are produced by the expansion 
of an elastic fluid, which is disengaged from the 
compact vitreous matter. This idea had for a 
long time occupied the mind of a person highly 
dining for his talents and reputation at Qui- 

0, who, unacquainted with the labors of the mi- 
pres of Europe, had devoted. himself to re- 
searches on the volcanoes of his country. Don 
Juan de Larea, one of those lately sacrificed to 
the fury of faction, had been struck w ith the ph- 
nomena exhibited by obsidians exposed to a white 


* The word lava is still more vague than that of pumice 
stone. “It is as little philosophical. to require an exterior 
description of lava, asa mineral species, as it is to ask the 
general characters of the mass, that fills the veins of ore.” 
Leop. Von Buch, Geognost. Beob. vol. 2, p. 173. 


VOL. 1, @ 


296 


heat. He had thought, that, wherever volcanoes 
act in the centre of a country covered with por- 
phyry with base of obsidian, the elastic fluids must 
cause a swelling of the liquified mass, and act an . 
important part in the earthquakes preceding erup- 
tions. Without adopting an opinion, which seems 
somewhat bold, I made, in concert with Mr. La- 
rea, a series of experiments on the tumefaction of 
the volcanic vitreous substances at Teneriffe, and 
on those which are found at Quinché, in the king- 
dom of Quito. To judge of the augmentation of 
their bulk, we measured pieces exposed to a forge 
fire of moderate heat by the water they displaced 
from a cylindric glass, enveloping the spongy mass 
with a thin coating of wax. According to our 
experiments, the obsidians swelled very unequally: 
those of the Peak and the black varieties of Coto- 
paxi and of Quinché increased near five times 
their bulk. The swelling on the contrary was 
very little perceptible in the obsidians of the An- 
des, the color of which is a brown approaching to 
red. When the reddish variety is mingled, in 
thin plates, with the black and blackish gray obsi- 
dians, the striated mass resembles porcelain jas- 
per*; and the opake parts resist the action of the 
fire for a length of time, while those which are 
less rich in oxid of iron, lose their color and tu- 


* Porzellan-jaspis of Werner: thermantide porcellanite of 
Haiiy. 


Sie. 


297 


mefy. What is this substance, the disengaging 
of which reduces the obsidian to the state of white 
pumice, sometimes fibrous, and at other times 
spongy, with oblong cells? It is easy to perceive, 
that it really loses a coloring principle; and that 
the deprivation of color is not merely apparent, 
that is to say, it is not owing to the extreme te- 
nuity to which the lamine and fibres of the vol- 
canic glass are reduced. Can we admit, that this 
coloring principle* is a hydruret of carbon, ana- 
logous to that which perhaps exists in the flint so 
easy to whiten by fire? Some experiments, which 
I made at Berlin in 1806 jointly with Messrs. 
Rose and Karsten, on the obsidians of Teneriffe, 
Quito, Mexico, and Hungary, in porcelain retorts, 
did not yield any results that were satisfactory. 
Nature probably employs very different means 
to produce the spongy and vitreous pumices of 
Teneriffe, the pumices with parallel fibres of the 
Z£olian islands and of Llactacungaf, and the capil- 
lary vitrifications of the Isles of Bourbon, which 
sometimes resemble a spider's web{. We may 


* It is remarkable, that this principle is not always equally 
volatile. M. Gay-Lussac saw lately obsidians of Faroé not 
whiten at a degree of heat, which totally deprived of color 
obsidians of Mexico, though from exterior appearance it 
would have been difficult to distinguish these substances from 
one another. 

+ Between Quito and Riobamba. 

+ Bory de St, Vincent, Voy. aux Iles d’Afrique, t. 3, p. 50. 


Q% 


228 


admit, that these differences consist principally in 
the degree of heat of the volcanic fire, in the pres- 
sure under which this fire acts, and in the nature 
of the rocks altered by it. Above all, the pres- 
sure, which the obsidians undergo in their fusion, 
explains why these substances, except some va- 
rieties which I collected near Popayan, are never 
found whitened. Those of the pumice stones that 
have the appearance of being formed at great 
depths, are fibrous, of silky lustre, which abound 
more in mica than in feldspar, and in which, oa 
the Andes, blocks of eight or ten toises in length 
have the fibres exactly parallel with each other, 
and perpendicular to the direction of the strata. 
Several volcanoes too do not throw out any pumice 
stone; and those that do, eject them only by their 
crater, after the flowing of the lavas. Several 
mineralogists think, that primitive granular rocks 
may be changed progressively, and in their place, 
either by the fire, or by a penetration of hot and 
acid vapors, into porphyroidal masses, of a fo- 
liated or fibrous texture. This opinion seems sup- 
ported by the existence of the fissured and fibrous 
feldspars, which we found in the trappean por- 
phyries of Quito. These crystals resemble rhom- 
boidal fragments of pumice stone, disseminated in 
a domite deprived of color. 

The color of the pumice stones of the Peak 
leads to another important observation. The sea 
of white ashes, which encircles the Piton, and co- 


Le ee 


229 


vers the vast plain of Retama, is a certain proof 
of the ancient activity of the crater: for in all vol- 
canoes, even when there are lateral eruptions, the 
ashes and the rapilli issue jointly with the vapors 
only from the opening at the summit of the moun- 
tain. Now, at Teneriffe, the black rapzll: extend 
from the foot of the Peak to the seashore; while 
the white ashes, which are only pumice ground to 
powder, and among which I have discovered, with 
a lens, fragments of vitreous feldspar and pyrox- 
ene, exclusively occupy the region next to the 
Peak. ‘This particular distribution seems to con- 
firm the observations. made a long time ago at 
Vesuvius, that the white ashes are thrown out the 
last, and indicate the end of the eruption. In 
proportion as the elasticity of the vapors dimi- 
nishes, the matter is thrown to a less distance ; 
and the black rapilli, which issue the first, when 
the lava has ceased running, must necessarily 
reach farther than the white rapilli. The last ap- 
pear to have undergone the action of a more in- 
tense fire. 

I have now examined the exterior structure of 
the Peak, and the composition of its volcanic pro- 


_ ductions, from the region of the coast to the top 


of the Piton. I have endeavoured to render these 
researches interesting, by comparing the pheno- 
mena of the volcano of Teneriffe with those that 
are observed in other regions, the soil of which is 
equally undermined by subterrancan fires. This 


930 


mode of viewing Nature in the universality of her 
relations is no doubt prejudicial to the rapidity 
suitable to an itinerary; but I thought, that, in a 
narrative, the principal end of which-is the pro- 
gress of physical knowledge, every other conside- 
ration ought to be subservient to those of instruc- 
tion and utility. It is by isolating facts, that tra- 


vellers, on every other account respectable, have 
given birth to so many false ideas of the pretended 
contrasts, which Nature offers in Africa, in New 
Holland, and on the ridge of the Cordilleras. The 
great geological phenomena are subject to the 
same laws, as well as the forms of plants and ani- 


mals. The ties which unite these phanomena, 
the relations which exist between such varied forms 
of organized beings, are discovered only when we 
have acquired the habit of viewing the Globe as a 
great whole ; and when we consider in the same 
point of view the composition of rocks, the forces 
which alter them, and the productions of the soil, 
in the most distant regions. 

After having treated of the volcanic substances 
of the isle of Teneriffe, we have to solve a ques- 
tion intimately connected with the preceding in- 
yestigation, which in these latter times has much 
engaged the attention of mineralogists.. Does the 
Archipelago of the Canary islands contain any 
rocks of primitive or secondary formation; or is 
there any production observed, that has not been 
modified by fire? This interesting problem has 


231 


been examined by the naturalists with Lord 
Macartney, and by those) who accompanied 
Captain Baudin in his voyage to the Austral 
lands. The opinions of these distinguished scien- 
tific men are in direct opposition to each other ; 
and a contradiction of this nature is so much the 
more striking, as there is no question here of one 
of those geological reveries, which we are ac- 
customed to call systems, but of a positive fact, 
easy to verify. 

Doctor Gillan, according to the narrative of Sir 
George Staunton *, imagined, that he observed, 
between Laguna and the port of Orotava, in very 
deep ravines, beds of primitive rocks. This as- 
sertion, though repeated by a number of travellers, 
who copy each other, is not the less inaccurate. 
What Dr. Gillan calls somewhat vaguely, moun- 
tains of hard ferruginous clay, are nothing but an 
alluvion, which we find at the foot of every 
volcano. Strata of clay accompany basalts, as 
tufas the modern lavas. Neither M. Cordier nor 
myself observed in any part of Teneriffe a primitive 
rock, either in its natural place, or thrown out by 
the mouth of the Peak; and the absence of these 
rocks characterizes almost every island of small 
extent, that has an unextinguished volcano. We 
know nothing positive of the mountains of the 
Azores; but it is certain, that the island of Re- 


* Voy. de Lord Macartney, t. i, p. 15. 


232 


union *, as well as that of Teneriffe, exhibits only 
a heap of lavas and basalts. No volcanic rock 
rears its head, either on the Gros Morne}, or on 
the volcano of Bourbon, or on the colossal pyra- 
mid of Cimandef, which is perhaps more elevated 
than the Peak of the Canary Islands. 

It is nevertheless asserted {, that lavas including 
fragments of granite have been found on the 
elevated plain of Retama. M. Broussonet. in- 
formed me, a short time before his death, that, on 
a hill above Guimar, fragments of mica-slate, con- 
taining beautiful plates of specular iron had been 
found. I can affirm nothing respecting the accu- 
racy of this observation, which it would be so 
much the more important to verify, as M. Poli, of 
Naples, is in possession of a fragment. of rock 
thrown out by Vesuvius§, which I found to be a 


* The Isle of Bourbon. 

+ Blocks of granite, thrown out probably by the ancient 
volcano of the Gros-Morne, are found near the source of 
Trois-Riviéres; and this fact is so much the more worthy at- 
tention, as the neighbouring islands, known under the name of 
Sechelles, are formed of granitic rocks.—Bory de St. Vincent, 
Voy. aux Iles d’ dfrique, t. i, p. 3383 t. ii, ps 355i teal, 
p. 145 et 246. 

{ Bory St. Vincent, Essai sur les Iles Fortunées, p- 278. 

§ In the valuable collection of Dr. Thomson, who resided 
at Naples till 1805, is a fragment of lava enclosing a real 
granite, which is composed of reddish feldspar with a pearly 
Justre like adularia, quartz, mica, hornblende, and, what is 
very remarkable, lazulite, But in general the masses of 


e 


real mica-slate. Every thing that tends to en- 
lighten us with respect to the site cf the vol- 
canic fire, and the position of rocks subject to its 
action, is highly interesting to geology. 

It.is possible, that, at the Peak of Teneriffe, the 
fragments of primitive rocks thrown out by the 
mouth of the volcano were less rare than they ap- 
pear to be, and are heaped together in some ravine, 
which may not yet have been visited by travellers, 
In fact, at Vesuvius, these same fragments are met 
with only in one single place, at the Fossa-Grande, 
where they are hidden under a thick layer of ashes. 
If this ravine had not long ago caught the attention 
of naturalists, when masses of granular limestone, — 
and other primitive rocks, were laid bare by the 
rains, we might have thought them as rare at 
Vesuvius, as they are, at least in appearance, at 
the Peak of Teneriffe. 

With respect to the fragments of granite, gneiss, 
and mica-slate, which we find on the shores of 
Santa Cruz and Orotava, they do not come from 


known primitive rocks, I mean those which perfectly resem- 
ble our granites, our gneiss, and our mica-slates, are very rare 
in lavas; the substances we commonly denote by the name of 
granite thrown out by Vesuvius are mixtures of. nepheline, 
mica, and pyroxene. We are ignorant whether these mixtures 
constitute rocks sui generis placed under granite, and con- 
sequently of more ancient date; or simply form either inter- 
mediate strata or veins, in the interior of the primitive 


mountains, the tops of which appear at the surface of the 
Globe. 


254 


the opposite coasts of Africa, which are calcareous, 
but were probably brought in ships as ballast. 
They no more belong to the soil where they lie, 
than the feldsparry lavas of Etna, which we ob- 
serve in the pavements of Hamburgh and other 
towns of the north.: The naturalist is exposed to a 
thousand errors, if he loses sight of the changes, 
which the intercourse between nations produces on 
the surface of the Globe. We might be led to 
say, that man, expatriating himself, is desirous 
that every thing should change country with him. 
Not only plants, insects, and different species of 
small quadrupeds, follow him across the ocean ; 
his active industry covers the shores with rocks, 
that he has torn from the soil in distant climes. 


If it be certain, that no enlightened observer bas 


hitherto found at Teneriffe primitive strata, or even 
those trappean and ambiguous porphyries, which 
constitute the basis of Etna*, and of several 


* The Chevalier Giceni, who, like several mineralogists of 
Germany and France, distinguishes the basalts from the mo- 
dern lavas, considers Etna as a mountain of porphyry, sur- 
mounted by columnar basalts, which serve, in their turn, as 
a basis to the feldsparry lavas, The last alone appear to be 
owing to the present volcano. The basalts and the por- 
phyries belong to a system of older mountains, which cover a 
great part of Sicily. The porphyries of Etna are volcanic 
without doubt; but every rock, which owes its composition 
and its form to the action of fire and vapours, has not made 
part of a current of lavas. These observations appeared to 
me so much the more necessary, as some very distinguished 


Or 
235 


volcanoes of the Andes, we must not conclude from 


this isolated fact, that the whole of the Archipe- 


lago of the Canaries is the production of submarine 
fires. The island of Gomera contains mountains 
of granite and mica-slate *, and it is undoubtedly 
in these very ancient rocks, that we must here 
seek, as well as on all other parts of the Globef, 
the centre of the volcanic action. Hornblende, 
sometimes pure and forming intermediate strata; 
at other times mixed with granite, as in the 
basanites or basalt of the ancients, may, by itself, 
furnish all the iron contained in the black and 
stony lavas. This quantity amounts in the basalt 
of the modern mineralogists only to 0°20, while in 
hornblende it exceeds 0°30. | 


mineralogists have recently affirmed, that the Peak of Tene 
riffe and Vesuvius are mountains of porphyry of Neptunian 
origin, and undermined, by subterranean fires. The lava of 
la Scala has been described without hesitation as a particular 
rock, under the name of graustein, though it issued from the 
crater at a well known epocha, in 1631: some have even 
gone farther; they have supposed, that Somma exhibits the 
untouched nucleus of Vesuvius, though its stratified mass, 
traversed by veins filled with more recent lava, is identical 
with the rock constituting the actual crater, which has evie 
dently been in a state of fusion. Somma exhibits the same 
leucites a8 abound in the greater part of the lavas of Vesuvius, 
and their crystals are included in a phonolite resembling that 
of the top of the Peak of Teneriffe. 


* Note manuscrite de M. Broussonet. 
+ Dolomieu, in the Journ. de Phys. 1798, p. 414, 


236 


Were these granites and these mica-slates of 
Gomera anciently united to the chain of Atlas, as 
the primitive mountains of Corsica appear to be the 
central nucleus of Bochetta and the Apennines ? 
This question can never be solved, till mineralogists 
shall have visited the islands that surround the 
Peak, and the mountains of Morocco covered with 
eternal snows. Whatever at some future day may 
be the result of these investigations, we could not 
admit with Mr. Peron*, ‘‘ that in none of the 
Canary Islands do we meet with true granites ; 
and that, the whole of the Archipelago being 
exclusively volcanic, the partisans of the Atlantis 
must suppose, what is equally destitute of pro- 
bability, either a continent perfectly volcanic, or 
that only the volcanic parts of that continent were 
spared in the catastrophe, by which it was swal- 
lowed up.” 

From the information of several well instructed 
persons, to whom I addressed myself, I found, that 
there are calcareous formations in the Great 
Canary, Fortaventura, and Lanzerotaf. I was 
not able to determine the nature of this secondary 
rock ; but it appears certain, that the island of 
Teneriffe is altogether destitute of it; and that 
among ‘its alluvial lands it exhibits only clayey 


* Voyage de Découvertes aux Terres Australes, t. i, p. 24. 
+ At Lanzerota calcareous stone is burned to lime witha 
fire made of the alhulaga, a new species of thorny and arbo- 


rescent sonchus. 


a as cal 


237 


ealcareous tufa, but which alternates with volcanic 

breccias, and which, according to Mr. Vieyra*, con- 

tains near the village of La Rambla, at Calderas, 

and near Candelaria, plants, imprints of fishes, 

buccinites, and other fossil marine productions. 

M. Cordier has brought away some of this tufa, 

which resembles that in the environs of Naples and 
Rome, and contains fragments of reeds. At the 

Salvages, which La Pérouse took at a distance for 

a mass of scorie, even fibrous gypsum is found. 

I had seen, while herbalizing between the port 
of Orotava and the garden of La Paz, heaps of 
grayish calcareous stones, of an imperfect con- 
choidal fracture, and analogous to that of Mount 
Jura and the Apennines. I was informed, that 
these stones were extracted from a quarry near 
Rambla; and that there were similar quarries 
near Realejo, and the mountain of Roxas, above 
Adexa. This information, probably not very ac- 
curate, led me into an error. As the coasts of 
Portugal consist of basalts covering calcareous 
rocks, containing shells, I thought, that a trap- 
pean formation, like that of the Vicentin in Lom- 
bardy, and of Harutsch in Africa, might have 


* Noticias historicas, t. i, p. 35. The Isle of France, 
which rises in the form of-a pyramid, and in the disposition 
of its volcanic hills has many points of resemblance with 
Teneriffe, has a Neptunian plain in the quartier des Pample- 
mousses. The calcareous stone there is filled with ma- 
diepores. Bory de St. Vincent, t. 1, p. 207, 


238 


extended from the banks of the Tagus and Cape 
St. Vincent as far as the Canary islands; and 
that the basalts of the Peak might perhaps con- 
ceal a secondary calcareous stone. I mentioned 
these ideas in a letter, which was not intended to 
be made public; and they have exposed me to 
the severe reprehension of a naturalist, according 
to whom every volcanic island is only an accu- 
mulation of lavas and scoriz, and who admits 
no fact contrary to his own theory of volca- 
noes *, 

Though Teneriffe belongs to a group of islands 
of considerable extent, the Peak exhibits never- 
theless all the characters of a mountain placed on 
a solitary islet. As at St. Helena, the lead finds 
no bottom ft at a little distance from the ports 


* Examination of certain geological opinions*of M. de 
Humboldt, by Mr. G. A. De Lue (Journ. de Phys. t. 50, P. 
1, p. 114). This memoir, in which we recognise an excel- 
lent observer, is the continuation of another against Mr. 
Kirwan, who thinks, that the lavas of Vesuvius repose on 
the calcareous beds of the Apennines. Ibid. vol. xix, p. 
23. ‘According to the Theory of Volcanocs, given by Mr. 
De Lue, it is zmpossrble, that a real lava should contain frag- 
ments of vegetable substances. Our collections, however, 
contain pieces of \trunks of palm-trees, enclosed and penee 
trated by the very liquid lava of the Isle of Bourbon. See 
the interesting memoir of M. de Fleuriau, 2. c. vol. Ix, p. 
AAI. 

+ Voy. de T'Isis, vol. i, p..287; Voy. de Marchand, t. i, 
p: 542. 


239 


of Santa Cruz, Orotava, and Garachico. The 
ocean, as well as the continents, has its moun- 


_ tains and its plains; and, if we except the Andes, 


the volcanic cones are formed every where in the 
regions of the Globe. 

As the Peak rises amid a system of basalts 
and old lava, and as the whole part whichis vi- 
sible above the surface of the waters exhibits 
burnt substances, it has been supposed, that this 
immense pyramid is the effect of a progressive 
accumulation of lavas; or that it contains in its 
centre a nucleus of primitive rocks. Both of 
these suppositions appear'to me improbable. I 
think that there as little existed mountains of 
granite, gneiss, or primitive calcareous stone, 
where we at present see the tops of the Peak, 
of Vesuvius, and of Etna, as in the plains where 
almost in our own time has been formed the vol- 
cano of Jorullo, which is more than.a third of 
the height of Vesuvius. On examining the cir- 
cumstances, which accompanied the formation of 
the new island in the Archipelago of the Azores *; 


* Sabrina island. See the letter of Captain Tillard to Sir 
Joseph Banks, Philos. Trans for 1812, p. 152. At Sabrina 
island, near St. Michael’s, the crater opened at the foot of 
a solid rock, of almost. a cubical form. ‘This rock, termi- 
nated by a small elevated plain perfectly even, is more than 
two hundred toises in breadth. Its formation was anterior to 
that of the crater, into which, afew days after its opening, 
the sea made an irruption. At Kameni, the smoke was not 


240 


on carefully reading the minute and ingenuous 
narrative, which the Jesuit Bourguignon gave of 
the slow appearance of the islet of the little Ka- 
meni, near Santorino; we find, that these extra- 
ordinary eruptions are generally preceded by a 
swelling of the softened crust of the Globe. Rocks 
appear above the waters before the flames force 
their way, and lava can issue from the crater: 
we must distinguish between the nucleus raised 
up, and the mass of lavas and scorie, which suc- 
cessively increase its dimensions. 

It is true, in all the revolutions of. this kind, 
which have taken place since the time that their 
history has been written, the perpendicular height 
of the stony nucleus appears never to have ex~ 
ceeded one hnndred and fifty or two hundred 
toises; even taking into the account the depth of 
the sea, the bottom of which had been lifted up: 
but when we are considering the great effects of 
nature, and the intensity of its forces, it is not 
the bulk of the masses, that ought to stop the 
geologist in his speculations. Every thing indi- 


even visible till twenty six days after the appearance of the 
raised rocks. Plal. Trans. vol. xxvi, p. 69 and 200; vol. 
xxvii, p. 353. All these phenomena, on which Mr. Haw- 
kins collected very valuable observations during his abode 
at Santorino, are unfavorable to the idea commonly enter- 
tained of the origin of volcanic mountains, which ascribes 
them to a progressive accumulation of liquified matter, and 
* the diffusion of lavas issuing from a central mouth. 


ont. 


ess he 


241 


cates, that the physical changes, of which tradi- 
tion has preserved the remembrance, exhibit but 
a feeble image of those gigantic catastrophes, 
which have given mountains their present form, 
changed the positions of the rocky strata, and 
buried seashells on the summit of the higher 
Alps. It was undoubtedly in those remote times, 
which preceded the existence of the human race, 
that the raised crust of the Globe produced those 
domes of trappean porphyry, those hills of iso- 
lated. basalt on vast elevated plains, those solid nu- 
clei which are clothed in the modern lavas of the 
Peak, of Etna, and of Cotopaxi.. The volcanic 
revolutions have succeeded each other after long 
intervals, and at very different periods: of this 
we see the vestiges in the transition mountains, 
in the secondary strata, and in those of alluvion. 
Volcanoes of earlier date than the sandstone and 
calcareous rocks have been for ages extinquished; 
those which are yet in activity are in general 
surrounded only with breccias and modern tufas ; 
but nothing hinders us from admitting, that the 
archipelago of the Canaries may exhibit some 
real rocks of secondary formation, if we recollect, 
that subterraneous fires have been there rekindled 
in the midst of a system of basalts and very 
ancient lavas. 

I should wander too long from the principal 
object of my researches, were I to pursue a sub- 
ject, in which mere conjecture supplies the place 

VOL. I. R 


24% 


of geological fact. From those dark times, when 
the elements, subjected to the same laws, had 
not yet attained their present equilibrium, I come 
back to a period less tumultuous, nearer our own 
age, and on which tradition and history may throw 
some light. We seek in vain in the Periplus of 
Hanno or of Scylax the first notions written on 
the eruptions of the Peak of Teneriffe. Those 
navigators sailed timidly along the coast, anchor- 
ing every evening in some bay, and had no know- 
ledge of a volcano distant fifty six leagues from 
the coast of Africa. Hanno nevertheless relates, 
that he saw torrents of light, which seemed to 
fall on the sea; that every night the coast was 
covered with fires; and that the great mountain, 
called the Car of the Gods, had appeared to 
throw up sheets of flame, which rose even to 
the clouds. But this mountain, placed to the 
north of the island of the Gorilli*, formed the 


* It was in this island, that the Carthaginian admiral 
saw, for the first time, a large species of apes of human 
form, the Gorilli: He describes them like women, their 
body covered entirely with hair, and very mischievous, be- 
eause they defended themselves with their teeth and nails. 
He boasts of having flayed three of them to preserve their 
skins. M. Gosselin places the isle of the Gorilli at the 
mouth of the river Nun; but, according to this account, 
the lake, near which Hanno saw a multitude of elephants 
feeding, should be in the latitude of thirty five anda half, 


almost at the northern extremity of Africa. Recherches sur — 


@ Géographie des Anciens, t. i, p. 74 et 98. 


243 


western extremity of the chain of Atlas; and it 
is also very uncertain, whether the flames seen by 
Hanno were the effect of some volcanic eruption, 
or whether they should be attributed to the cus- 
tom, common to so many nations, of setting fire to 
the forests and dry grass of the savannahs. In 
our own days similar. doubts were entertained 
by the naturalists, who, in the voyage of d’En- 
trecasteaux, saw the island of Amsterdam co- 
vered with a thick smoke*. On the coast of the 
Caraccas, trains of reddish fire, fed by the burn- 
ing grass, exhibited to me, for several nights, the 
delusive aspect of a current of lava, descending 
from the mountains, and dividing itself into se- 
veral branches. 

Though the journals of Hanno and Scylax, in 
the state in which they have reached us, contain 
no passage, which we can reasonably apply to 
the Canary islands, it is however very probable, 
that the Carthaginians, and even the Phcenicians, 
had some knowledge of the Peak of Teneritie. 


* Voy. de Labillurdiére, t. i, p. 112. Voy. de d’ Entrecas- 
teaua, t. i, p. 45. 

+ See a Treatise by Mr. Ideler, inserted in my Views of 
Nature, t. i, p. 141; and Gosselin, Recherches, t. i, p. 
135—159. One of the most distinguished writers of Ger- 
many, Mr. Heeren, thinks, that the Fortunate Islands of 
Diodorus Siculus were Madeira and Porto Santo. Afrika, t. 
i, p. 124. Malte-Brun, Histoire de la Géographie, p. 76, 
90 et 194. 

R 


244 


In the time of Plato and Aristotle, vague notions 
of it had reached the Greeks, who considered the 
whole of the coast of Africa, beyond the Pillars of 
Hercules, as thrown into disorder by the fire of 
volcanoes*. The Place of the Blessed, which was 
sought first in the north, beyond the Riphean 
mountains, among the Hyperboreans ¢, and then 
to the south of Cyrenaica, was situate in re- 
gions that were considered as toward the west, 
where the world known to the ancients terminated. 
The name of Fortunate Islands had long been as 
vague a ‘signification, as that of Dorado among 
the first conquerors of America. Happiness was 
thought to reside at the “end of the Earth, as 
we seek for the most exquisite enjoyments of 


* Arist. Mirab. Auscult. (ed. Casaub.) p. 704. Solinus 
says of Atlas, verter semper nivalis lucet nocturnis agnibus ; 
but this Atlas, which, like the mountain Meru of the Hin- 
doos, exhibits a mixture of true ideas and mythological fic- 
tions, was not situate in one of the islands of the Hespe- 
rides, as the Abbé Vieyra admits, and after him several tra- 
vellers, who have described the Peak of Teneriffe Vieyra, t. 
i, p. 225; Bory de St. Vincent, p. 395). The following pas- 
sages leave no doubt on this head. Herod. iv, 184; Strabo, 
xvii (ed. Falconer, t. ii, p. 1167); Mela, iii, 10; Pliny, v. 
1s Solinus, i. 243 and even Diod. Sic. iii (ed. Wess. ts i, Pe 
221). 

+ Mannert, Geogr. der Griechen, t. iv, 3. 57. The idea of 
the happiness, of the great civilization, and of the riches pf 
the inhabitants of thé north, was common to the Greeks, to 
the people of India, and to the Mexicans. 


ee 


245 


the mind in an ideal world beyond the limits of 
reality. 

We must not be surprised, that, previous to the 
time of Aristotle, we find no accurate notion re- 
specting the Canary islands, and the volcanoes 
they contain, among the Greek geographers. The 
only nation, whose navigations extended toward 
the west and the north, the Carthaginians, were 
interested in throwing a veil of mystery over those 
distant regions. While the senate of Carthage 
was averse to any partial emigration, it pointed 
out these islands as a place of refuge in times of 
trouble and public misfortune; they were to the 
Carthaginians, what the free soil of America is 
become to Europeans amidst their religious and 
and civil dissensions, 

The Canaries were not better known to the 
Romans.till eighty-four years before the reign of 
Octavian. A private individual was desirous of 
executing the project, which wise foresight had 
diétated to the senate of Carthage. Sertorius, 
conquered by Sylla, wearied with the tumult of 
arms, looks out for a safe and peaceable retreat. 
He chooses the Fortunate Islands, of which a de- 
lightful picture had been drawn for him on the 
coasts of Betica. He carefully combines the no- 
tions he can acquire from travellers; but in the 
little that has been transmitted to us of these no- 
tions, and in the more minute descriptions of Se- 
bosus and Juba, there is no mention of volcanoes 


246 


or volcani¢ eruptions. Scarcely can we recognise 
the isle of Teneriffe, and the snows with which 
the summit of the Peak is covered in winter, in 
the name of Nivaria, given to one of the Fortu- 
nate Islands. Hence we might conclude, that the 
volcano at that time threw out no flames; if it 
were permitted to interpret the silence of a few 
authors, whom we know only by short fragments, 
or dry nomenclatures. The naturalist vainly seeks 
in history for documents of the first eruptions of 
the Peak, he no where finds any but in the language 
of the Guanches, in which the word Echeyde * 
denotes at the same time Hell and the volcano of 
Teneriffe. 


Of all the written testimonies, the oldest I 


have found of the activity of this volcano ‘dates 
from the beginning of the sixteenth century. It is 
contained in the narrative of the voyage t of 


* The same mountain bore the name of Aya-dyrma, in 
which Horn (de Originib. Americ. p. 155 and 185) imagines 
he finds the ancient denomination of Atlas; which, according 
to Strabo, Pliny, and Solinus, was Dyris. This etymology 
is very doubtful; but in not giving more*importance to the 
vowels, than they have among the people of the East, we 
find Dyris almost coimplete in the word Daran, by which the 
Arabian geographers denote the eastern part of Mount Atlas. 

+ Nec silendum puto de insula Teneriffe, quz et eximie 
colitur, & inter orbis insulas est eminentior. Nam czlo sereno 
pminus conspicitur ; adeo ut qui absunt ab ea ad leucas hise 
panas sexaginta vel septuaginta non difficulter eam intueantur. 
Quod cernatur a longe id efficit acuminatus lapis adamantinus, 


Q47 


Aloysio Cadamusto, who landed at the Canaries 
in 1505. This traveller was witness of no erup- 
tions, but he positively affirms, that, like Etna, 
this mountain burns without interruption, and that 
the fire has been seen by Christians retained in 
slavery by the Guanches of Teneriffe. The Peak 
therefore was not at that time in the state of re- 
pose, in which we find it at present; for it is 
certain, that no navigator or inhabitant of Tene- 
riffe, has seen issue from the mouth of the Peak, 
I will not say flames, but eyen any smoke that 
was visible at a distance. Perhaps it is to be 
wished, that the funnel of the Caldera may open 
anew; the lateral eruptions would thus be ren- 
dered-less violent, and the whole group of islands 
would have less to fear from the effects of carth- 


quakes *. 


instar pyramidis, in medio. Qui metiti sunt lapidem aiunt 
altitudine lucarum quindecim mensuram excedere ab imo ad 
summum verticem. Is lapis jugiter flagrat, instar Aitnaz 
montis ; id affirmant nostri Christiani, qui capti aliquando 
hee animadvertére.. Aluysit Cudamusti Navigatio ad Terras 
Incognitas, ¢. 8. 

* At Teneriffe the shocks have hitherto been very inconsi- 
derable, and limited to a small extent of ground. The same 
thing has been observed at the Isle of Bourbon, and almost 
every: where at the foot ‘of burning volcanoes. At Naples, 
earthquakes precede the eruptions of Vesuvius, they cease 
when the lava begins to flow, and are in general very feeble in 
comparison of those felt on the slope of the calcareous 


Apennines. 


248 


I have heard the question discussed at Orotava, 
whether it can be admitted, that in the lapse of 
ages the Peak will begin again to act. Ina mat- 
ter so doubtful, analogy alone can serve as a guide. 
Now according to the report of Braccini, the inte- 
rior of the crater of Vesuvius was covered with 
shrubs in 1611. Every thing then indicated the 
greatest tranquillity ; and nevertheless twenty years 
after, the same gulf, which seemed transformed 
into a shadowy vale, threw out sheets of fire, and 
an enormous quantity of ashes. Vesuvius re- 
sumed in 1631 the same activity it had in 1500. 
In the same manner it is possible, that the crater 
of the Peak may change its appearance at some 
future period. It is a solfatara like the tranquil 
solfatara of Puzzuoli; but itis placed on the sum- 
mit of a volcano yet in activity. 

The eruptions of the Peak have been very rare 
for two centuries past, and these long intervals 
appear to characterize volcanoes highly elevated. 
The smallest of the whole, Stromboli, is almost 
always burning. At Vesuvius, the eruptions are 
already rarer, though still more frequent than those 
of Etna and the Peak of Teneriffe. The colossal 
summits of the Andes, Cotopaxi, and Tungurahua, 
scarcely have an eruption once in a century. We 
might say, that in active volcanoes the frequency 
of the eruptions is in the inverse ratio of the 
height and the mass. The Peak also had seemed 
extinguished during ninety-two years, when, in 


i 
| 
) 
| 


249 


1798, it made its last eruption by a lateral open- 
ing formed in the mountain of Chahorra. In this 
interval Vesuvius had sixteen eruptions. 

I have observed in another place *, that the 
whole of the mountainous part of the kingdom of 
Quito may be considered as an immense volcano, 
occupying more than seven hundred square leagues 
of surface, and throwing out flames by different 
cones, known under the particular denominations 
of Cotopaxi, Tungurahua, and Pichincha, In 
like manner, the whole group of the Canary 
islands is placed, as it were, on the same subma- 
rine volcano. The fire makes its way sometimes 
by one and sometimes by another of these islands. 
Teneriffe alone contains in its centre an immense 
pyramid terminated by a crater, and throwing out, 
from one century to another, lava by its flanks. 
In the other islands, the different eruptions have 
taken place in various parts; and we no where 
find those isolated mountains, to which the vol- 
canic effects are restrained. The basaltic crust, 
formed by ancient.volcanoes, seems every where 
undermined ; and the currents of lava, seen at 
Lanzerota and Palma, remind us by every geolo- 


- gical affinity of the eruption, which took place in 


1301 at the isle of Ischia, amid the tufas of 
Epomeo. : 
The following is a statement of the volcanic 


* Géograph, Végét. p. 130. 


250 


phenomena, of which the historians of the Cas 


nary islands have preserved the remembrance since 
the middle of the sixteenth century. 


Year 1558. 

At the period when the island of Teneriffe was 
ravaged for the first time by the plague’ brought 
from the Levant, a volcano burst open, on the 15th 
of April, in the isle of Palma, near a spring in 
the Partido de los Llanos. A mountain rose from 
the earth; and formed a crater at the top, which 
threw out a current of lava a hundred’ toises in 
breadth, and more than two thousand five hundred 
in length. The lava flowed into the sea, and, 
raising the temperature of the water, destroyed 
the fish * at great distances around, 


Year 1646. 


The 13th of November, a volcanic mouth 
opened in the island of Palma, near Tigalate. Two 
others were formed on the seashore. The lavas 
which issued from these crevices dried up the ce- 
lebrated spring of Furcaliente, or Fuente Santa; 
the mineral waters of which attracted the visits of 
the diseased, who flocked thither even from Eu- 
rope. According to a popular tradition, the erup- 


* This same phzenomenen teok place in 1811, near the 
Azores, when the volcano of Sabrina opened at the bottom of 
the ocean. The calcined skeleton of a shark was found in tlie 
inundated and extinguished crater. 


251 


tion ceased in a very extraordinary manner. The 
image of our Lady of the Snows, of Santa.Cruz, 
was carried to the mouth of the new volcano, and 
immediately there fell such an. immense quantity 
of snow, that the fire was extinguished. — In the 
Andes of Quito, the Indians think they have ob- 
served, that an abundance of snow water filtrating 
into volcanoes increases their activity. 


Year. 1677. 


Third eruption in the isle of Palma. The 
mountain de Las Cabras threw out scorise and 
ashes through a multitude of small mouths, which 
were formed in succession. 


Year 1704. 

On the 31st of December, the Peak of 
Teneriffe formed a lateral eruption in the plain De 
los Infantes, above Icore, in the district of Guimar. . 
Tremendous earthquakes preceded this eruption. 
On the 5th of January 1705, a second opening 
took place in the ravine of Almerchiga, a league 
from Icore. The lavas were so abundant, that 
the whole valley of Fasnia, or Areza, was filled 
up. This second mouth ceased its eruption on the 
13th of January. A third was formed the 2d of 
February, in the Cannada.de Arafo. ‘The lavas 
divided into three currents, and threatened the 
village of Guimar ; but they were stopped in the 
valley of Melosar by a chaia of rocks, which 


252 


formed an insuperable obstacle to their passage. 
During these eruptions, the town of Orotava, 
separated from the new mouths by a very narrow 
dyke, felt strong shocks, 


Year 1706. 

On the 5th of May another lateral eruption of 
the Peak of Teneriffe took place. The mouth 
opened on the south of the port of Garachico, 
which was then the finest and most frequented 
harbour in the island. This opulent and populous 
city was built on the edge of a forest of laurels, 
in a very picturesque situation. Two currents of 
lava destroyed it in a few hours, nota single edifice 
being left standing. The port, which had already 
suffered in 1645 by the accumulation of sand and 
mud caused by a great inundation, was so filled up, 
that the lavas formed a promontory in the midst:of 
it. Inthe environs of Garachico, the surface of 
the ground changed its appearance. Hills arose 
in the plain; the springs became dry ; and the 
rocks, shaken by frequent earthquakes, remained 
naked, without vegetation, and without mould. 
The fishermen only retained their affection for 
their native spot. Intrepid, like the inhabitants of 
the Torre del Greco, they rebuilt a small village 
on the masses of scoria, and on the vitrified rock. 


Year 1730. 


On the Ist of September a dreadful revolution 


253 


broke up the ascent of the Isle of Lanzerota. A 
new volcano opened at Temanfaya. The lavas 
which flowed, and the earthquakes which accom- 
panied the eruption, destroyed a considerable num- 
ber of villages ; among which were the three old 
Guanche townships of Tingafa, Macintafe, and 
Guatisca. The shocks lasted till 1736; and the 
greater part of the inhabitants of Lanzerota fled to 
the island of Fortaventura. During this eruption, 
which has been noticed in the preceding chapter, a 
column of thick smoke was seen to issue from the 
sea. Pyramidal rocks rose above the surface of the 
waters; and these new rocks, gradually extending, 
became a part of the island itself. 


Year 1798. 


On the 9th of June there was a lateral eruption 
of the Peak of Teneriffe, by the flanks of the 
mountain of Chahorra, or Venge*, in a place 
entirely uncultivated, to the south of Icod, near 
the village of Guia, the ancient Isora. This 
mountain, ‘backed by the Peak, was at all times 
considered as an extinguished volcano. Though 
formed of solid matter, it is with respect to the 
Peak, what Monte Rosso, which appeared in 1661, 


* The slope of the mountain of Venge, on which the erup- 
tion took place, is called Chazajanne. See Nicolas de Segundo 
de Franqui, in Cavyanilles y Hergen, Annales de Historia 
natural, t. 1, p. 298. 


aa oe ae 


Sa aes 


254 


and the Boche nuove of 1794, are to Vesuvius and 
Ema. ~The eruption of Chahorra lasted three 
months and six days. The lavas and-scorie were 
thrown out by four mouths, placed in the same 
line. When the lava had gained three or four 
toises in height, it advanced three feet every hour. 
This eruption took place but a year before my ar- 
rival at Teneriffe, and had left a durable impression 
among the inhabitants. I saw at the house of M. 
Legros, at Durasno, a drawing of the mouths of 
the Chahorra, which he had taken on the spot. 
Don Bernardo Cologan had visited these mouths 
eight days after they were opened, and he had 
described the principal phenomena of this erup- 
tion ina memoir, of which he gave me a copy to 
insert in the narrative of my travels. Thirteen 
years having elapsed since that period, and M. 
Bory de St. Vincent having preceded me in the 
publication of this memoir, I refer the reader for 
it to his interesting Essay on the Fortunate 
Islands*. J shall only mention some circum- 


stances respecting the height, to which very con- 
siderable fragments of rocks were projeeted by the 
mouths of the Chahorra. Mr. Cologan + reckoned 


* Bury de St. Vincent, p. 296. 

+ ‘ Three of these stones,” says M. Bory de St. Vincent, 
* took from twelve to fifteen seconds to rise till they were 
out of sight and fall back to the ground.” If such was the 
observation of Mr. Cologan, the result of the calculation 


255 


from twelve to fifteen seconds during the fall of 
these stones, that is to say, béginning to count 
from the moment they had reached the maximum 
of their height. This curious experiment proves, 
that the. mouth projected rocks upwards of three 
thousand feet. 

The whole of the eruptions recorded in this 
chronological statement belong solely to the three 
‘islands.of Palma, Teneriffe, and Lanzerota*. It 
is probable, that, previous to the sixteenth century, 
the other islands experienced also the effects of 
the volcanic fire. Some vague accounts were 
given me of an extinguished voleano in the centre 
of the isle of Ferro, and of another in the Great 
Canary, near Arguineguin, ut it would be curi- 


would differ from that Ihave given; but the observer expressly 


says, in the manuscript in my possession: “ De noche se 
observé con relox en mano y a muy corta distancia de la 
tercera bocca de] volcan de Chahorra, el tiempo que desde su 
mas alto punto de elevacion hasta perderlas de vista en su 
caida, gastaban las piedras mas faciles de distinguir y de tres 
conque se hizo la experiencia, dos cayeron en cliez segundas 
cada una y la otra en quinze.” Mr. Cologan observes, that 
the duration of the fall was even something more than 
fifteen seconds, because he could not keep the stones in sight 
till they touched the ground. This kind of observation is 
susceptible of great precision, as I was convinced from 
similar experiments, which I made during the eruption of 
Vesuvius in 1805. 

* Vieyra, Noticias, t. ii, p. 404; t. in, p. 151, 238, 352, 
356, and 516, 


256 


ous to know whether traces of subterranean fire 
are found in the calcareous formations of Forta- 
ventura, or in the granites and mica-slates of 
Gomera. 

The merely lateral action of the Peak of 
Teneritfe is a geological phenomenon, so much 
the more remarkable, as it contributes to make 
mountains, which are backed by the principal 
volcano, appear isolated. It is true, that in Etna 
and Vesuvius the great flowings of the lavas do 
not proceed from the crater itself, and that the 
abundance of melted matter is generally in the 
inverse ratio of the height, at which the opening, 
that ejects the lava, takes place. But at Vesuvius 
and Etna a lateral eruption constantly finishes by 
flashes of flame and by ashes, which issue from 
the crater, that is, from the summit of the 
mountain. At the Peak, this phenomenon has 
not taken place for ages: and yet recently, in the 
eruption of 1798, the crater remained quite in- 
active. Its bottom did not sink in, while at 
Vesuvius, as Mr. von Buch ingeniously observes, 
the greater or less depth of the crater is an in- 
fallible indication of the proximity of a_ new 
eruption. ; 

I might terminate these geological sketches by 
discussing the nature of the combustible, which 
feeds, for so many thousands of years, the fire of 
the Peak of Teneriffe ; I might examine whether 
it be sodium or potassium, the metallic basis 


I 
i 


257 


of some earth, carburet of hydrogen, or pure sul- 
phur combined with iron, that burns in the vol- 
cano ; but wishing to limit myself to what may be 
the object of direct observation, I will not take 
upon me to solve a problem, for which we have 
not yet sufficient data. We are ignorant, whether 
we should conclude from the enormous quantity 
of sulphur contained in the crater of the Peak, 
that it is this substance which keeps up the heat 
of the volcano ; or whether the fire, fed by a com- 
bustible of an unknown nature, effects merely the 
sublimation of the sulphur. What we learn from 
observation is, that in craters which are still burn- 
ing sulphur is very rare; while all the ancient vol- 
canoes finish by-remaining true sulphur pits. We 
might presume, that in the former the sulphur is 
combined with oxygen, while in the latter it is 
inerely sublimed; for nothing hitherto authorises 
us to admit, that it is formed in the interior of 
volcanoes, like ammonia and the neutral salts. 
When we were yet unacquainted with sulphur, 
but as disseminated in the muriatiferous gypsum, 
and in the Alpine limestone, we were almost 
obliged to suppose, that in every part of the Globe 
the volcanic fire acted on rocks of floetz or secondary 
formation ; but recent observations have proved, 
that sulphur exists in great abundance in those 
primitive rocks, which so many phenomena indi- 
cate as the centre of the volcanic action. Near Alau- 
si, on the summit of the Andes of Quito, I found an 
VOL. I. s 


258 


immense quantity in a bed of quartz, which formed 
a layer of mica-slate* ; and this fact is so much 
the more important, as it. is in strict conformity 
with the observation of those fragments of ancient 
rocks, which are thrown out untouched “by the 
volcanoes. ‘ 

We have just considered the isle of Teneriffe 
under mere geological points of view; we have 
seen the Peak towering amid fractured strata of 
basalt and mandelstein ; let us examine how these 
melted matters have been gradually adorned with 
vegetable clothing, what is the distribution of 
plants on the steep declivity of the volcano, and 
what is the aspect or physiognomy of vegetation 
in the Canary islands. 


*In geognosy we must distinguish seven formations of 
sulphur, which are of a very different relative antiquity. The 
first belongs to the mica-slate (Cordilleras of Quito); the se- 
cond, to the transition gypsum (Bex in Switzerland); the 
third to the trappean porphyries (Antisana in America, Mont 
-Serrat in the archipelago of the smaller Antilles, Mont d’Or 
in France); the fourth, to the Alpine limestone (Sicily) ; 
the fifth, to the muriatiferous gypsum, placed between the 
sand-stone and the Alpive limestone (Thuringia) ; the sixth, 
to the gypsum which is more recent than chalk (Montmartre, 
near Paris); and the seventh, to clayey alluvions (Venejuelo, 
Lower Orinoco, Mexico), It is scarcely necessary to observe, 
that, in this nomenclature, those small masses of sulphur, 
which are not contained in strata, but in the veins that 
traverse rocks of different formations, are left’ out of the 
question. - 


i 
H 
+ 


259 


In the northern part of the temperate zone, the - 
cryptozamous plants are the first, that cover the 
stony crust, of the Globe. The lichens and mosses, 
that display their foliage beneath the snows, are 
succeeded by gramina, and other phanerogamous 
plants. This order of vegetation is different on 
the borders of the torrid zone, and in the coun- 
tries between the tropics. We there find, it is 
true, whatever some travellers may have asserted, 
not only on the mountains, but also in humid and 
shady’ places, almost on a level with the ocean, 
funaria, dicranum, and bryum ; and these genera, 
among their numerous species, exhibit several, 
which are common to Lapland, the Peak of Tene- 
riffe, and the Blue Mountains of Jamaica*. Never- 
theless, in general, it is not by mosses and lichens 
that’ vegetation in the countries: near the tropics 
begins. In the Canary islands, as well as in 
Guinea, and on the rocky coasts of Peru, the first 
vegetables, that prepare the mould for others, are 
the succulent plants ; the leaves of which, provided 
with an infinite number of orifices} and cutaneous 


* This extraordinary fact, of which we shall speak here- 
after, was first observed by Mr. Swarz. It was confirmed 
by the careful examination, which Mr. Willdenow made of 
ourherbals, especially of the collection of eryptogamous plants, 
which we gathered on the tops of the Andes, in a region of 
the world where organised beings totally differ from those of 
the rest of the old continent. 

+The bark pores of M. Decandolle, discovered by Glei- 
chen, and figured by Hedwig. 


Ses D 


260 


vessels, deprive the ambient air of the water it 
holds in solution. Fixed in the crevices of vol- 
canic rocks, they form, as it were, that first layer 
of vegetable earth, with which the currents of ‘li- 
thoid lava are clothed. Wherever these lavas are 
scorified, and where they have a shining surface, 
as in the basaltic mounds to the north of Lanze- 
rota, the unfolding of vegetation is extremely slow, 
and many ages may roll away before shrubs can 
take root. Itis only when lavas are covered with 
tufa and ashes, the volcanic islands lose that ap- 
pearance of nudity which marks their origin, and 
deck themselves with a rich and _ brilliant vegeta- 
tion. 

Tn its present state, the island of Teneriffe, the 
Chinerfe* of the Guanches, exhibits five zones of 
plants}, which we may distinguish by the names 
of region of vines, region of laurels, region of 
pines, region of the retama, and region of grasses. 


® Of Chinerfe the Europeays-have formed, by corruption, 
Tchineriffe and Teneriffe. 

+I have partly sketched this picture of the vegetation of 
the Canaries from the manuscript notes of M. Broussonet. 
When I pnblished my first “ Essay on the Geography of the 
Equinoctial Plants of the New World,” I begged this distin- 
“guished naturalist, who had long resided at Mogadore, in the 
empire of Morocco, and at Santa Cruz, in Teneriffe, to com- 
municate to me his ideas relative to the geographical distribu- 
tion of plants in those countries. He yielded tu my entreaty 
with that complaisance and urbanity, which he constantly 
exercised in his communications with learned foreigners. 


\ 


261 


These zones are arranged in stages, one above the 
other, and occupy, on the steep declivity of the 
Peak, a perpendicular height of 1750  toises ; 
while fifteen degrees farther north, on the Pyrenees, 
the snows already descend to thirteen or fourteen 
hnndred toises of absolute elevation. If the plants 
of Teneriffe do not reach the summit of the vol- 
cano, it is not because the perpetual snows*, and 


* Though the Peak of Teneriffe is covered with snow during 
the winter months. only, it is nevertheless possible, that the 
volcano reaches the limit of the perpetual snows correspond- 
ing to its latitude, and that the total absence of the snows in 
summer is owing to the isolated situation of the mountain in 
the midst of the seas, to the frequency of the ascending hot 
winds, or the elevated temperature of the ashes of the Piton: 
but we are unable to solve these doubts, in the present state 
of our knowledge. From the parallel of the mountain of Mexico 
to that of the Pyrenees and the Alps, between the 20th and the 
45th degrees, the curve of the perpetual snows has not been 
determined by any direct measure ; and as an infinite number 
of these curves may be traced through the small number of 
points which are known to us under the latitudes of 0°, 20°, 
45°,. 62°, and 71° north, calculation is a very imperfect subs 
stitute for observation. Without advancing any thing very 
positive, we may say, thatit is probable in 28° 177 the limit 
of the snows is above 1900 toises. From the equator, where 
the snows begin at 2460 toises, that is near the height of 
Mont Blanc, to the twentieth of latitude, consequently to the 
limits of the torrid zone, the snows descend only a hundred 
toises ; now ought we to admit, that eight degrees farther, 
and in a climate which ‘still bears almost the character of a . 
climate of the tropics, this line already lowers four hundred 
wises ? Supposing even a lowering in arithmetical progression 


262 


the cold of the surrounding atmosphere, lay 
down limits which they cannot pass; it is the 
scorified lava of the Malpays, the powdered and 
barren pumice stone of the Piton, which impede 
the migration of the plants toward the brink of 
the crater. 


from the twentieth to the forty fifth degree of latitude, a sup- 
position which is contrary to known facts (Rec. d’Obs. as- 
tron., vol. i, p. 134), the perpetual snows would not begin 
under the parallel of the Peak but at the height of 2050 
toises above the level of the Ocean, consequently 550 toises 


higher than on the Pyrenees and in Switzerland. This result . 


is supported also by other considerations. The mean tempe- 
rature of the stratum of air, with which the snows are in cone 
tact during the summer, is, on the Alps, a few degrees below 
the point of congelation, and under the equator, a few degrees 
above it (i. c. p. 137). Admitting that, at 28 degrees 
and a half, this temperature is 0, we find according to 
the law of the decrement of heat, reckoning 98 toises « to 
each centesimal degree, that the snows ought to exist at 
the height of 2058 toises above a plain, the mean tempera- 
ture of which is 21 degrees, and consequently equal to that 
of the coasts of Teneriffe. This number is almost identical 
with that deduced from the hypothesis of a diminution in 
arithmetical progression. One of the high tops of the Sierra 
Nevada of Grenada, the Pico de Veleta, the absolute height 
of which is 1781 toises, is perpétually covered with snows ; 


but the inferior limits of these -snows not having been mea- - 


sured, this mountain, in the latitude of 37° 10%, gives us no 
information respecting the problem we wish to solve. With 
respect to the. position of the volcano of Teneriffe, in the cen- 
‘tre of an island of little extent, it does not appear, that this 
circumstance can cause a rising of the curve of the perpetual 


snows. If in islands the winters are less rigorous, the sum- 


63 


The first zone, that of the vines, extends from 
the seashore to two or three hundred toises of 
height; it is that which is most inhabited, and 
the only part carefully cultivated. In these low 


regions, at the port of Orotava, and whereve 


r 
mers are less scorching ; and itis not so much on .the mean 
temperature of the whole year, as on that of the summer 
months, that the height of the snows depends. On Etna the 
snows begin at 1500 toises, and even a little below ; which 
is extraordinary enough for a summit placed in 37.degrees 
and a half of latitude. , 

Towards the polar circle, where the heats of summer are 
tempered by the fogs that rise continually above the Oceans 
the difference between the islands on the coasts and the in- 
terior of the country becomes extremely perceptible. In 
Iceland, for example, on the Osterjoeckull, in the sixty fifth 
degree of latitude, the perpetual snows descend to four hun. 
dred and eighty two toises; while in Norway, in the sixty 
seventh, far from the coasts, in situations where the winters 
are much more rigorous, and where consequently the mean 
temperature of the year is less than in Iceland, the snows 
descend only to six hundred toises of height (Leopold von 
Buch, in the Ann. of Gilb. 1812, t. ii, p. 37 and 43). From 
these considerations it appears probable enough, that Bouguer 
and Saussure were deceived, when they admitted, that the 
Peak of Teneriffe reaclies the constant inferior limit of the 
snows (Figure de la terre, p. 48,.and Voy. dans les Alpes, te 
iv, p. 103). We find this term. for latitude 28° 17% at 
least at 1950 toises high, even in calculating it by interpo- 
lation between Etna ‘and the volcanoes of Mexico. This 
matter will be made entirely clear, when we shall have 
measured the western part of Atlas, which near Morocco; 
in'thirty degrees and “a half of latitude, is covered with pers 
petual snows. 


264 


the winds have free access, the centigrade ther- 
mometer stands in winter, in the months of Janu- 
ary and February, at noon, between fifteen and 
seventeen degrees; and the strongest heats of the 
summer do not exceed twenty-five or twenty-six 
degrees: they are consequently five or six de- 
grees below the extremes, which the thermometer 
annually reaches at Paris, Berlin, and -Peters- 
burgh. These results are taken from the obser- 
vations made by Mr. Savaggi from 1795 to 1799. 
The mean temperature .of the coasts of Teneriffe 
appears at least to rise to twenty one degrees 
(16°8° Reaumur); and their climate holds the me- 
dium between the climate of Naples, and that 
of the torrid zone. At the island of Madeira, 
the mean temperatures of the months of January 
and August are, according. to Heberden, from 
17°7° to 23°8° ; while at Rome they rise to 56° 
and 26°2°. But notwithstanding the extreme 
analogy observable between the climates of Ma- 
deira and Teneriffe, the plants of the. first of 
these islands are generally less delicate to culti- 
vate in Europe, than the plants of Teneriffe. 
The cheiranthus longifolius of Orotava, for in- 
stance, freezes at Montpellier, according to the 
observation of M. Decandolle ; while the chei- 
ranthus mutabilis of Madeira passes the winter 
there in the open ground. The heats of sum- 
mer are of less continuance at Madeira, than at 
Teneriffe. 


265 


The region of the vines exhibits, among its 
vegetable productions, eight kinds of arborescent 
euphorbia ; mesembrianthema, which are mul- 
tiplied from the Cape of Good Hope to the Pe- 
loponnesus ; the-cacalia kleinia, the dracaena, and 
other plants, which in their naked and_ tortuous 
trunks, in their succulent leaves, and their tint 
of blueish green, exhibit features , distinguishing 
the vegetation of Africa. It is inthis zone, that 
the date tree, the plantain, the sugar cane, the 
India fig, the arum colocasia, the root of» which 


furnishes the lower class with a nutritive fecula, 
the olive tree, the fruit trees of Europe, the vine, 
and corn are cultivated. The wheat is reaped 
from the end of March to the beginning of May: 


and the culture of the breadfruit tree of Otaheite, 
that of the cinnamon tree of the Moluccas, the 
coffee tree of Arabia, and the cocoa tree of Ame- 
rica, have been tried with success. On several 
points of the coast, the country assumes the cha- 
racter of a tropical landscape; and we recognise, 
that the region of the palms extends beyond the 
limits of. the torrid zone. The chamerops and 
the date:tree flourish in the fertile plains of Mur- 
viedro, on the coasts of Genoa, and in Provence, 
near Antibes, between the thirty-ninth and forty- 
fourth degrees of latitude: a few trees of the latter 
species, planted within the walls of the city of 
Rome, resist even a cold of 9°5° below the freez- 
ing point. But if the south of Europe does not 


266 


yet but feebly share in the gifts lavished by Nature 
on the zone of palms, the isle of Teneriffe, placed 
under the parallel of Egypt, southern Persia, and 
Florida, ‘is already ‘decorated with the greater 
part of the vegetable forms, that increase the 
majesty of the landscape’in regions near the equa- 
tor. , 

On reviewing the different tribes of indigenous 
plants, we regret the not ‘having found trees with 
small pinnated leaves, and arborescent gramina. 
No species of the numerous family of the sen- 
sitive plants has pushed its migrations as far as 
the archipelago of the Canary islands, while’ on 
both continents they have been discovered as-far 
as the thirty-eighth and fortieth degrees of lati- 
tude. In America the schranckia uncinata of 
Willdenow* advances even to the forests of 
Virginia; in Africa: the gum-dropping acacia ve- 
getates on the hills of Mogadore: in Asia, to the 
west of the Caspian Sea, Mr. von Biberstein saw 
the plains of Shirvan covered with ‘the acacia 
stephaniana. If we more carefully examine the 
plants of the islands of Lanzerota and Fortaven- 
tura, which are nearest the coasts of Morocco, 
we shall perhaps find a few mimosas among so 
many other plants of the African Flora. — 

The second zone, that of the laurels, contains 
the woody part of Teneriffe; this is the region of 


* Mimosa horridulae Michaux, 


| 
| 
i 
i 
) 


267 


the springs that rise’ up amidst a turf always ver- 
dant, and never parched with drought. Lofty 
forests crown the hills, that lead to the volcano, 
and in them find four species of laurel *, an oak 
nearly resembling the quercus Turnerif of the 
mountains of Thibet, the visnea mocanera, the my- 
rica faya of the Azores, a native olive (olea 
excelsa), which is: the largest tree of this’ zone, 
two species of sideroxylon, the leaves of which 
are extremely beautiful, the arbutus callicarpa, 
and other evergreen trees of the family of myrtles. 
Bindweeds; and an ivy very different from that 
of Europe (hedera canariensis) entwine the [trunks 
of the laurels; at their feet vegetate a number- 
less quantity of ferns}, of which three species § 
alone descend as low as the region of the vines. 
The soil, covered with mosses and a tender grass, 
is enriched with the flowers of the golden cam- 
panula, the chrysanthemum pinnatifidum, the Ca- 
nary mint, and several bushy species of hyperi~- 
cum||. Plantations of wild and grafted chesnut 


* Laurus indica, 1. foetens, 1. nobilis, and 1. Til. With these 
trees are mingled the. ardisia excelsa, rhamnus glandulosus, 
erica arborea, and e, texo. 

+ Quercus canariensis, Broussonet. (Willd. Enum. Plante 
Hort. Berol. 1809, p. 975.) 

 Woodwardia-radicans, aspleniam palmatum, a. canariensis, 
a. latifolium, notholena subcordata, trichomanes canariensis, 
t. speciosum, and davallia canariensis. 

§ Two acrostichums and the ophyoglossum Iusitanicum. 


| Ilypericum canariense, h, floribundum, and h. glanduloe 
sum, 


268 


trees form a large border around the. region of 
the springs, which is the greenest’ and most agree- 
able of the whole. 

The third zone begins at nine hundred toises of 
absolute height, where the last group of arbutus, 
of myrica faya, and that beautiful heath known to 
the natives under the ‘name. of texo, appears. 
This zone, four hundred toises. in breadth, -is en- 
tirely filled by a vast forest of pines, among which 
mingles the juniperus cedro of Broussonet. The 
leaves of these pines are very long, stiff, and-sprout 
sometimes by pairs, but oftener by threes in one 
sheath. As we had no opportunity of examining 
the fructification, we cannot say whether this 
species, which has the appearance of the Scotch 
fir, is really different from the eighteen species of 
pines, with which we are already acquainted on 
the old continent. A celebrated botanist, who 
by his excursions has rendered great services to 
the botanical geography of Europe, M. Decan- 
dolle, thinks, that the pine of Teneriffe is equally 
distinct from the pinus atlantica of the neighbour- 
ing mountains of Mogadore, and from the pine of 
Aleppo*, which belongs to the basin of the 


* Pinus halepensis. . Mr. Decandolle observes, that this 
species, which is not found in Portugal, but grows on the 
Mediterranean side of France, Spain, and Italy, in Asia 
Minor, and in Barbary, would be better named pinus mediter- 
ranea, It composes the principal part of the forests of pines 
in the south-east of France, where Gouan and Gerard haye 


269 


Mediterranean, and does not appear to have 
passed the Pillars of Hercules. We have met 
with these last pines on the slope of the Peak, 
near twelve hundred toises above the level of the 
ocean. In the Cordilleras of New Spain, under 
the torrid zone, the Mexican pines reach as high 
as two thousand toises. Notwithstanding the simi- 
larity of structure, that exists between the different 
species of the same genus of plants, each of them 
requires a certain degree of temperature and rarity 
in the ambient air, to attain its due growth. If in 
the temperate climates, and wherever snow falls, 
the constant heat of the soil is somewhat above the 
mean heat of the atmosphere, it is probable, that 
at the height of Portillo the roots of the pines 
draw their nourishment from a soil, in which, at 
a certain depth, the thermometer rises at most to 
nine or ten degrees. 

The fourth and: fifth zones, the regions of the 
retama and the gramina, occupy heights equal to 
the most inaccessible summits of the Pyrenees. 
It is the sterile part of the island, where heaps of 
pumice stone, obsidian, and broken lava, form 
impediments: to vegetation. We have already 
spoken of those. flowery tufts of alpine broom 
(spartium nubigenum), that form oases amidst a 
vast sea of ashes. Two herbaceous plants, the 


confounded it with the pinus syslvestris, It comprehends the 
pinus halepensis, Mill., Lamb., and Desfont., and the pinus 
maritima, Lamb. j 


270 


scrofularia glabrata, and the viola cheiranthifolia, 
advance even to the Malpays. Just above a turf 
scorched by the heat of an African sun, an arid 
soil is: overspread by the cladonia paschalis, to 
which the herdsmen often set fire, that rolls to 
considerable distances. Toward the summit of 
the Peak, the urceolarea, and other ‘plants of the 
family of the lichens, labour at the decomposition 
of the scorified matter. By this unceasing action 
of organic forces the empire of Flora extends 
itself over islands ravaged by volcanoes. 

In traversing the different zones of the vegeta- 
tion of Teneriffe, we see that the whole island 
may be considered as a forest of laurels, arbutus, 
and pines, of which the border has scarcely been 
cleared, and which contains in its. centre a naked 
and rocky soil, unfit either for pasturage or cul- 
tivation. M. Broussonet observes, that the archipe- 
lago of the Canaries may be divided into two 
groups of islands, ‘The first contains Lanzerota 
and Fortaventura, the second Teneriffe, Canary, 
Gomera, Ferro, and Palma. The appearance of 
the vegetation essentially differs in these two 
groups. The eastern islands, Lanzerota and 
Fortaventura, consist of extensive plains and 
mountains of little elevation; they have very few 
springs, and bear the appearance, still more than 
the other islands, of having been separated from 
the continent. The winds blow in the same direc- 
tion, and at the same periods: the euphorbia 


271 


mauritanica, the atropa frutescens, and the 
arborescent sonchus, vegetate there in the loose 
sands, and serve, as.in.Africa, for food to camels. 
The western group of the Canaries presents a more 
elevated soil, more woody, and watered by a 
greater number of springs. 

Though the whole archipelago contains several 
plants found in Portugal*, in Spain, at the 
Azores, and in the north-west of Africa, a great 
number of species, and even of genera, are peculiar 
to Teneriffe, to Porto Santo, and Madeira. Such 
are the mocanera, the plocama, the bosea, the 
canarina, the drusa, and the-pittosporum. A form 
which may be called northern, that of the cruci- 
form plantst, is already much rarer in the 


* Mr. Willdenow and myself found, among the plants of 
the Peak of Teneriffe, the beautiful satyrium diphylluin (orchis 
cordata, Willd.), which Mr. Link discovered in Portugal. The 
Canaries have, in common with the Flora of the Azores, not the 
dicksonia culcita, the only arborescent heath found at the 
thirty-ninth degree of latitude, but the asplenium palmatum, 
and the myrica faya. This tree is met with in Portugal, in a 
wild state. Count Hoffmannsegg has seen very old trunks of 
it; but it was doubtful whether it was indigenous, or imported 
into this part of our continent. In reflecting on the migrae 
tions of plants, and on the geological possibility, that lands 
sunk in the ocean may have heretofore united Portugal, the 
Azores, the Canaries, and the chain of Atlas, we conceive, 
that the existence of the myrica faya in western Europe is a 
phznomenon at least as striking as that of the pine of Aleppo 
would be at the Azores, 


f Among the small number of cruciform species contained 


Satna, 


jee ace ee 


= 


Fe 


eee ee ee 


cas aan 


272 


Canaries, than in Spain and in Greece. — Still 
farther to the south, in the equinoctial regions of 
both continents, where the mean temperature of the 
air rises above twenty-two degrees, the cruciform 
plants are scarcely ever to be seen. 

A question highly interesting to the history of 
the progressive display of organization on- the 
Globe has been very warmly discussed in our own 
times, that of ascertaining whether the polymor- 


phous plants are more common in the volcanic 
islands. The vegetation of Teneriffe is unfavour- 
able to the hypothesis, that nature in new coun- 
tries appears less subjected to constant forms. 
M. Broussonet, who resided sa long at the Ca- 
naries, asserts, that the variable plants are not 


more common there than in the south of Europe. 
Ought it not to be presumed, that the polymor- 
phous species, which are so abundant in the Isle 
of Bourbon, are owing rather to the nature of the 
soil, and to the climate, than to the newness -of 
the vegetation ? 

I have now given a physical sketch of the island 
of Teneriffe; I have endeavoured to lay down 
precise notions respecting the geological constitu- 
tion of the Canaries, the geography of plants 
peculiar to this archipelago, and their ‘grouping at 


in the Flora of Teneriffe, we shall here mention cheiranthus 
longifolius, l’Herit.; ch. fructescens, Vent.; ch. scoparius, 
Brouss.; erysimum bicorne, Aiton; crambe strigosa, and c. 
levigata; Brouss. 


273 


different heights above the level of the ocean. 
Though I flatter myself with having thrown some 
light on objects, which have*been so often dis- 
cussed by other travellers, I think nevertheless, that 
the natural history of this archipelago still offers a 
vast field to inquiry. The commanders in scien- 
‘tific ‘expeditions, of which England, France, Spain, 
Denmark, and Russia have furnished such brilliant 
examples, have in general been too hasty in quitting 
the Canaries. They have imagined, that these 
islands have been sufficiently described, because 
they :are so nearly bordering, on Europe; they 
have forgotten, that, in a geological point of view, 
the interior of New Holland is not more unknown, 
than the rocks of Lanzerota and Gomera, of Porto 
Santo and Terceira. We every year see a great 
number of naturalists traverse without any deter- 
mined end the most frequented parts of Europe. 
Let us hope, that some among them, influenced by 
a love of science, and capable of pursuing a plan 
of several years, will devote themselves to the ex- 
amination of the archipelago of the Azores, 
Madeira, the Canaries, Cape Verd Islands, and 
the north-west coast of Africa. By comparing 
observations made under the same point of view, 
in the Atlantic islands, and on the neighbouring 
continent, we shall attain exact information with 
respect to geology, and the geography of animals 
and plants. 

Before we take leave of the old world to pass 
vOL, I. vt 


ae 


OSG AE REITEE 


Teme Sama Se 


274 


into the new) I must speak of a subject which in- 
spires a still greater interest, because it belongs to 
the history of man, and to those fatal revolutions, 
which have swept off whole tribes from the face of 
the earth. We inquire at the isle of Cuba, at St. 
Domingo, and in Jamaica, where is the abode of 
the primitive inhabitants of those countries? We 
ask at Teneriffe what is become of the Guanches, 
whose mummies alone, buried in caverns, have 
escaped destruction? -In the fifteenth century, 
almost all the mercantile nations, especially the 
Spaniards and the Portuguese, sought for slaves 
at the Canary islands, as we seek them at present 
on the coast of Guinea*. The Christian religion, 
which in its origin was so highly favourable to 
the liberty of mankind, served as: a pretext to the 
cupidity of Europeans. Every. individual, made 
prisoner before he received the rite of baptism, was 
aslave. At this period, no attempt had yet been 
made to prove, that the blacks were an- inter- 
mediary race between men and animals. ‘The 
swarthy Guanche and the African negro were 
simultaneously sold in the market of Seville, 
without a question whether slavery ought to 
weigh only.on men with a black skin and friz- 
aed hair. 


~* The Spanish historians speak of expeditions made by the 


Fluguenots of La Rochelle to carry off Guanche slaves. Ihave’ 
some doubt respecting these expeditions, which would have 
taken place posterior to the year 1530. 


275 


The archipelago of the Canaries was divided 
into several small states hostile to each other. 
Oftentimes the same island was subject to two 
independant princes, as happens in the islands of 
the South Sea, and wherever society is not highly 
advanced. ‘The trading nations, influenced by that 
hideous policy which they still exercise on the 
coast of Africa, kept up intestine warfare. One 
Guanche then became the property of another, 
who sold him to the Europeans ; several, who pre- 
ferred death to slavery, killed themselves and 
their children. It is in this manner that the popu- 
lation-of the Canaries had considerably suffered by 
the slave trade, by the depredations of pirates, and 
especially by a long period of carnage, when 
Alonzo de Lugo completed their conquest. What 
remained of the Guanches perished mostly in 
1494, in the terrible pestilence called the modorra, 
which was attributed to the quantity of dead bodies 
left exposed to the air by the Spaniards after the 
battle of la Laguna. When a semibarbarous nation, 
robbed of its property, is compelled to live in the 
same country with a polished people, it seeks a re- 
treat on the mountains and in the forests. This 
is the only refuge left to the choice of an islander. 
The nation of the Guanches was therefore extinct 
at the beginning of the seventeenth century ; a few 
old men only were found at Candelaria and 
Guimar. 

It is: however consoling to find, that the whites 

T2 


276 


have not always disdained to intermarry with the 
natives; but the Canarians of the present day, 
whom the Spaniards denote by the familiar title of 
Islennos, have very powerful motives for denying 
this mixture. Ina long series of generations time 
effaces the characteristic marks of a race ; and as 
the dependants of the Andalusians settled. at Te- 
neriffe are themselves of a dark complexion, we 
may Conceive, that the intermarriages cannot have 
produced a perceptible change in the color of the 
skins of the whites. It -is very certain, that no 
native of pure race exists in the whole island ; and 
some travellers, who may be otherwise. relied on, 
are mistaken, when they assert, that their guides 
to the Peak were some of those slender and nim- 
ble footed Guanches. It is true, that a few Cae 
narian families boast of their relationship to the 
last shepherd king of Guimar ; but these preten- 
sions do not rest on very solid foundations; and 
are renewed from time to time, when some re 
rian, of a more dusky hue than his countrymen, 
18 prompted to solicit a commission in the service 
of the king of Spain. >) Se 
A short time after the discovery of America, 
when Spain was at the highest degree of its splen- 
dor, the gentle character of the Guanches was the 
fashionable topie, as we chaunt in our times the 
Arcadian innocence of the inhabitants of Otaheite. 
In both these pictures, the coloring is more gaudy 
than appropriate, . When nations, wearied sith 


Q77 


mental enjoyments, behold nothing in the réfine- 
ment of manners but the germe of depravity, they 
are flattered with the idea, that in some distant re- 
gion, in the first dawn of civilization, infant socie- 
ties enjoy pure and perpetual felicity. .To this 
sentiment Tacitus owed a part of his success, when 
he sketched for the Romans, subjects of the Cau- 
sars, the picture of the manners of the inhabitants 
of Germany. The same sentiment gives an in- 
effable charm to the narrative of those travellers, 
who, at the close of the last century, visited the 
islands of the Pacific Ocean. 
The inhabitants of those islands, too much 
vaunted, though heretofore anthropophagi, resem- 
ble, under more than.one point of view, the Guan- 
ches of Teneriffe. We see both nations groaning 
under the yoke of feudal government. Among 
jhe Guanches this institution, which facilitates and 
renders a state of warfare perpetual, was sanc- 
tioned by religion. The priests declared to the 
people, “‘ The great Spirit, Achaman, created 
first the nobles, the achimenceys, to whom he de- 
stributed all the goats, that exist on the face of the 
Earth. After the nobles, Achaman created the 
plebeians, achicarnas. ‘This younger race had the 
boldness to petition also for goats; but the su- 
preme being answered, that this race was destin- 
ed to serve the nobles, and that they had need of 
no property.” This tradition was made, no doubt, 
to please the ‘rich vassals of the shepherd kings. 


278 


Thus the faycan, or high priest, exercised the 
right of conferring nobility ; and the law of the 
Guanches expressed, that every achimencey, who 
“degraded himself by milking a goat with his own 
hands, lpst his title to nobility. This law does 
not remind us of the simplicity of the Homeric age. 
We are astonished to see the useful labors of agri- 
culture, and of a pastoral life, exposed to contempt 
at the very dawn of civilization. 

The Guanches, famed for their tall stature, were 
the Patagonians of the old world; and historians 
exaggerated the muscular force of the Guanches, 
as, previous to the voyage of Bougainville and 
Cordoba, a colossal form was conferred on the 
tribe, that inhabited the southern extremity of 
America. I never saw Guanche mummies but in. 
the cabinets of Europe ; at the period of my 
journey, they were very scarce; a considerable 
number, however, might be found, if miners were 
employed to open, the sepulchral caverns, which 
are cut in the rock on the eastern slope of the Peak, 
between Arico and Guimar. . These mummies are 
in astate of desiccation so singular, that whole 
bodies, with their integuments, frequently do not 
weigh above six or seven pounds; ora third less 
than the skeleton of an individual. of the sare 
size, recently stripped of the muscular flesh. The 
conformation of the scull has some slight resem- 
blance to that of the white race of the ancient. Egyp- 
tians ; and the incisive teeth of the Guanches are 


ox eemmasespmoaneseSISTNIa) 


279 


blunted, like those in the mummies found on the 
banks of the Nile. But this form of the teeth is 
owing to art alone ; -and on examining more care- 
fully the - physiognomy of the ancient Canarians, 
able anatomists * have recognized in the cheek 
bones, and the lower jaw, perceptible differences 
from the Egyptian mummies. On opening those 
of the Guanches, remains of aromatic plants are 
discovered, among which the chenopodium arm- 
brosioides is constantly perceived’: the corpses are 
often deccrated with small laces, to which are 
hung little discs of baked earth, that appear to 
have served as numerical signs, and resemble the 
quippoes of the Peruvians, the Mexicans, and the 


Chinese. 


As the population of islands is in general less 
exposed to the effect of migrations than that of 
continents, we may presume, that, in the time of 
the Carthaginians and the Greeks, the Archipelago 
of the Canaries was inhabited by the same race of 
men, as were found by the Norman and Spanish 
conquerors. Thé only monument that can throw 
some light on the origin of the Guanches is.their 
language; but unhappily there are not above a 
hundred and fifty, words remaining, several of 
which express the same object, according to the 
dialect of the different islanders. Independent of 


* Blumenbach, Decas quinta Collect. sue Craniorum, divers 
sarum Gentiwn illustr. 1808, p.7 


280 


these words, which have been: carefully noted, 
there are still some valuable fragments existing in 
the names of a great number of hamlets, hills, and 
valleys. The Guanches, like the Biscayans, the 
Hindoos, the Peruvians, and all the primitive na- 
tions, had named the places after the quality of the 
soil they cultivated, the shape of the rocks, the 
caverns that gave them shelter, and the nature of 
the tree that overshadowed the springs. 

Tt has been long imagined, that the language of 
the Guanches had no analogy with the living 
tongues; butsinee thetravelsof Hornemann, and the 
ingenious researches of Marsden and Venturi, have 
drawn the attention of the learned to the Berbers, 
who like the Sarmatic tribes, occupy an immense 
extent of country in the north of Africa, we find, 
that several Guanche words have common roots 
with words of the Chilha and Gebali dialects *. 
We shall cite for instance the words: 

Heaven, in Guanche — Tigo; in Berberic, Tigot. 

Sie; . Aho; : . Acho. 

Barley, i‘ Temasen , - Tomzeen. 


Basket , ; Carianas 7 pGarlan, 
Water. , Aenum : - Anan. 


{ doubt whether this analogy is a proof of a 
common origin; but it is an” indication of the 
ancient connexion between the Guanches and Ber- 
bers, a tribe of mountaineers, in which the Nu- 


» Adelung und Vater, Mithridates, t. ili, p. 60. 


281 


midians, the Getuli, and the Garamanti are con- 
founded, and who extend themselves from the 


‘eastern extremity of Atlas by Harutsch and Tez- 


zan, as far as the Oasis of Siwah and Augela. 
The natives of the Canary Islands called themselves 
Guanches from guan, man; as the Tonguese call 
themselves bye and donki, which have the same 
signification as guan.. Besides, the nations who 
speak the Berberic language are not all of the same 
race; and the description, which Scylax gives in 
his Periplus of the inhabitants of Cerne, a shep- 
herd people of a tall statue and long hair, reminds 
us of the features, which characterise the Canary 
Guanches. 

The greater attention-we give to the study of 
languages in a philosophical point of view, the 
more we must observe, that no one of them is en- 
tirely distinct: the language of the Guanches * 
would appear still less so, had we any data re- 


® According to the researches of Mr. Vater, the Guanche 
language offers the following analogies with the languages of 
nations very remote from each other: dog among the Ame- 
rican Hurons, aguéenon; among the Guanches, aguyan; man, 
among the Peruvians, cari; among the Guanches, coran’; 
king, among the African Mandingoes, monso; among the 
Guanches, monsey. The name of the island of Gomera is 
found in that of Gomer, which designates a tribe of Berbers 
(Vater, Untersuch. ueber Amerika, p. 170). The Guanche 
words Alcorac, God, and almogaron, temple, seem to be of 
Arabic origin; at least in the latter tongue a/moharram signi 
fies sacred. 


282 


specting its mechanism and grammatical construc- 
‘tion; two elements more important than the form 
of words, and the identity of sounds. — It is the 
same with certain idioms, as with those organized 
beings, that seem to shrink from all classification 
in the series of natural families. Their isolated 
state is only so in appearance; for it ceases, 
when, on embracing a greater number of objects, 
we come to discover the intermediate links. . The 
learned, who find Egyptians wherever there are 
mummies, hieroglyphics, ‘or pyramids, will ima- 
gine perhaps, that the race of Typhon was united 
to the Guanches by the Berbers, real Atlantics, to 
whom belong the Tibboes and the Tuarycks of the 
Desert *: but it is sufficient here to observe, that 
this hypothesis. is supported by no analogy. be- 
tween the Berberic and Coptic languages, which 


are justly considered as a remnant of the ancient 


Egyptian. 

The people who succeeded the Guanches de- 
scended from the Spaniards, and in a less degree 
from the Normans. ‘Though these two races have 
been exposed during three centuries past to the 
same climate, the latter is distinguished by a whiter 
skin. ‘The descendants of the Normans inhabit 
the valley of Teganana, between Punta de Naga 
and Punta de Hidalgo. The names of Grandville 


* Voyage de Hornemann du Cairo & Mourzouk, t. ii, p. 406. 
+ Mithridates, t, 111, p. 77. 


283 


and Dampierre are still pretty common in this dis- 
trict. The Canarians are a moral, sober, and 
religious people; of a less industrious character 
at home, than in foreign countries. A roving and 
enterprising disposition leads these islanders, like 
the Biscayans and Catalonians, to the Philippines, 
to the Marian islands, to America, and wherever 
there are Spanish settlements, from Chili and la 
Plata to New-Mexico. To them we are in a 
great measure indebted for the progress of agri- 
culture in those colonies. The whole Archipelago 
does not contain 160,000 inhabitants, and the 
Tslennos are perhaps more numerous in the new 
continent, than in their own country. The tol- 
lowing table indicates whatever relates to the sta- 


tistics of this country. 


O0O'F LI 


tr9 | 
' 


0000S 


0006 


000'02 


“o6LE UranSeaz-nbs| O6LT 
1y9V9 07 SpuRzIqeyuT| WL. 

sO JOqQuanU *uory 

zndod aanepy 


beeen 


998°SEL SOT‘9ST OL6 


BLO 


L89'S L60'¢ 


SFO‘ 1939 els" 


GOL‘6 Oss 


OSS‘ ZT 663'ST 


F9OS8‘Ss 8SF'0G 


ose d 


GOTO 
S80 
€98'8 


#°E'99 


81°09 SIT‘6¥ 


CPLT SLOT 


a Bae hans 


uoneindod ajnjosqy 


S9LT 


*sonseay 


arenbs [v01} 
Neu UL soRJANG) 


eBIBUIOL) 


BYOLVZUCY 

2 . * cued 
ee 

* Areueg purig 


BIN} U9ALIIO T 


ayiiaua [, 


*soLIBURC 
24} so odejadiqory 


285 


The enumerations of 1678, 1745, and 1768, 
have been published by Vieyra. The estimation of 
1790 is by M. Ledru. The total population, 
according to Lord Macartney, was 196,500; of 
which there were. 100,000 at Teneriffe, 40,000 
at Canary, and 30,000 at Palma. ‘The surfaces 
have been calculated for the first time, and very 
accurately, by Mr. Oltmanns*, from the charts 
of Borda and Varela. The vintage at Tenerific 
yields from 20 to 24,000 pipes, 5000 of which are 
malmsey. The annual exportation of wine is from 


8 to 9000 pipes. The amount of the harvest in’ 


the whole of the Archipelago in wheat is 54,000 
fanegas, of a hundred pounds each. In ordinary 
years this crop is sufhcient for the consumption of 
the inhabitants, who otherwise live on maize, po- 
tatoes, and French beans, frisoles. ‘The cultivae 
tion of the sugar-cane and cotton is of little im- 
portance ; the principal objects of commerce are 
wine, brandy, archil, and soda. The gross 
amount of the revenue, including the tax on to- 
bacco, is 240,000 piastres. 


* Extent of the surface of the Canaries more accurately 
expressed in geographic leagues of 15 to a degree: Teneriffe, 
412; Portaventura, 353; Canary, 332; Palma, 151; Lan- 
zerota, 142; or, including the small neighbouring islands, 
152; Gomera, 8; and Ferro, 32: total 153}. . It is asto- 
nishing, that Mr. Hassel, in his excellent work on the statis- 
tics of Europe, gives the Canaries a population of 420,000 in- 
habitants, and an extent of 353 square German miles. (Stat. 
Unmriss. Heft, 1, 17.) 


286 


I shall not enter into any discussions of political 
economy relative to the importance of the Canary 
islands to the trading nations of Europe. Having 
long employed myself in statistical researches on 
the Spanish colonies, and being on terms of inti- 
macy with persons who had held places of import- 
ance at Teneriffe, I had an opportunity, during 
my abode in Caraccas and at the Havannah, of 
collecting considerable information respecting the 
commerce of Santa Cruz and Orotava. But seve- 
ral distinguised persons having since visited the 
Canaries, they have obtained the same means of 
information as myself; and I do not hesitate to 
strike out from my narrative, what has been ex- 
plained, with greater precision, in works that have’ 


preceded mine. Ishall here confine myself to a 
few considerations, which will terminate the sketch 
I have just given of the Archipelago of the Ca- 


naries. 

These islands have undergone the same fate as 
Fgypt, the Crimea, and many other countries, re- 
specting which travellers, who are anxious to ele- 
vate and surprise by contrasts, have been extra- 
vagant both in their praise and their blame. Some, 
landing at Orotava, describe Teneriffe as the 
garden of the Hesperides, ard celebrate the 
amenity of the climate, the fruitfulness of the soil, 
and the richness of the cultivation; others, forced 
to sojourn at Santa Cruz, behold nothing in these 
Fortunate Islands but’ a country, naked, barren, 


287 


and inhabited by a stupid and miserable race. It 
appeared to me, that in this archipelago, as in all 


‘mountainous and volcanic countries, Nature has 


been very unequal in the distribution of her gifts. 
The Canaries are generally deficient in water; but 
wherever there are springs, artificial irrigations, or 
plentiful rains, the ‘soil is highly fertile. The 
lower class of the people is laborious ; but its in- 
dustry is more active in distant colonies, than at 
Teneriffe, where it meets with obstacles, which a 
wise administration might progressively remove. 
Emigration would be diminished, if the unculti- 
vated demesne lands were distributed among pri- 
vate persons, those which are annexed to the ma- 
jorats of the great families were sold, and feudal 
rights were gradually abolished. 

The present population of the Canaries un- 
doubtedly appears inconsiderable, when compared 
with that of several countries of Europe. The 
island of Malta, the industrious inhabitants of 
which cultivate a rock almost destitute of mould, 
is seven times less than ‘Teneriffe, and yet has 
twice the population: but writers, who are fond 
of painting in vivid colors the depopulation of the 
Spanish colonies, and who attribute the cause to 
the ecclesiastical hierarchy, forget that in every 
place, since the reign of Philip V, the number of 
inhabitants has obtained, in a greater or less de- 
gree, a rapid increase. ‘The relative population is 
already greater in the Canaries, than in both Cas- 


288 


tiles, in Estramadura, and in Scotland. The 
whole archipelago exhibits a mountainous country, 
the extent of which is a seventh less than the 
surface of the island of Corsica : it supplies, how- 
ever, the same number of inhabitants. 

Though the islands of Lanzerota and Vortaven- 
tura, which are the least populous, export corn, 
while Teneriffe does not produce two thirds of its 
consumption, we must not conclude, that in this 
last island the nuniber of inhabitants cannot in- 
crease for want of subsistence. The Canary 
islands are still remote from feeling the evils, that 
arise from too considerable a population, and of 
which Mr, Malthus has unfolded the causes with 
so much precision and knowledge. The misery of 
the people has considerably diminished, since the 
cultivation of potatoes * has been introduced, and 
since they have begun to sow more maize, than 
wheat and barley. 

The inhabitants of the Canaries exhibit traits 
characteristic of a people, who are at the same time 
mountaineers and islanders. In order to estimate 
them truly, it is not enough to behold them in their 
own country, where powerful obstacles prevent the 
display of industry ; we must study them in the 
plains of the province of Caraccas, on the ridge of 
the Andes, in the burning plains of the: Philippine 


* Tessier and Desautoy, on the Agriculture of the 
Canaries, Mem, de (Inst. t. i, p, 250 et 279. 


289 


islands, and wherever isolated in uninhabited 
countries they have had occasion to display that 
energy and activity, which are the true riches of a 
planter. 

The Canarians are fond of considering their 
country as forming part of European Spain, and 
they have added some portion to the riches of 
Castilian literature. . The names of Clavijo, 
author of the Pensador Madritense, of Vieyra, ’ 
Yriarte, and Betancourt, are honourably dis- 
tinguished in the scientific and in the literary 
world. The Canarians are endowed with that 
liveliness of imagination, which characterizes the 
inhabitants of Andalusia and Grenada; and we 
may be led to hope, that, at some future period, the 
Fortunate islands, like every other climate of ‘the 
Globe, either where man reposes on the lavish 
bounties of Nature, or shrinks from the severity ef 
her frown, will inspire the muse of some native 
poet. 


END OF VOL, f. 


Table of Degrees of the Centigrade Thermometer, from the 
point of boiling water to that of freezing mercury, reduced 


TABLES. 


1 toise 


os 


6 feet 4°736 inches 


1 foot (pié du roi) = 


1 metre = 


to Fahrenheit’s scale. 


Centigr. 


Fahren, 


Centigr. 
78 
77 
76 


3 


Fahren, 


172°4 
170°6 
168°3 
167 

165-2 
163°4 
161°6 
159°8 
158 


156°2 


154°4 
152°6 
150°8 
149 

147°2 
145°4 
143°6 
141°8 
140 

138°2 
136°4 
134°6 


12°789 
3°371 


\Centigr, 
56 
55 
54 
53 
5g 
51 
50 
49 
48 
A7 
46 
45 
44 
43 
42 
Al 
40 
39 
38 
ot 
36 

35 


Fah rem 
132°8 
131 
129°2 
197°4 
125'°6 
123°8 
122 
120°2 
118°4 
116°6 
114°8 
113 
llieg 
109°4 
107°6 
105°8 
104 
102°3 
100°4 
98°6 
96°8 
95 


Centigr.; Fahren. Centigr. | Fahren. Centigr.| Fahren. 
34 93°2 A8*2 16 3°2 
33 O1°4 46° a7. 
32 89°6 AA*6 18 
31 87°8 — 42°83 19 
30 ) 20 
29 Pak 
28 22 
Q7 ks ae 
26 24 
25 25 
24 26 
23 27 
22 238 
on 29 
20 30 
19 31 
138 32 
17 Bo 
16 34 
15 35 
14° 36 
13 2/ * 37 
12 s : 38 
il : Of 39 
10 | 40 


PAN Q TOO 
me=OWSE SW O 


e 


CO OND EB WWH OM dW bo 


W, Pople, Printer, 67, Chancery Lanes 


se 


