Source note (Tower of Babel staging): Alexander von Humboldt, Personal Narrative of Travels to the Equinoctial Regions of the New Continent, translated by Helen Maria Williams (London: Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme & Brown, 1829), Vol. VII. Text from Internet Archive item personalnarrati7humb (OCR).
Public domain work. This file was produced from a public scan; OCR imperfections may remain.

=p


b>
Se
pFlito 41)


IDs Dp
IRD UNI


EX LIBRIS
DUMBARTON OAKS
LIBRARY


BOBRARIRDER
Taunto ME epsitlic .
Presented by


"SIR PRIOR GOLONEY, Bark, 2,
1911,


Personal Parrattye
OF TRAVELS


TO THE


EQUINOCTIAL REGIONS


OF THE


NEW CONTINENT,


DURING THE YEARS 1799—1804,
BY
ALEXANDER DE HUMBOLDT,


AND


AIME BONPLAND.


WRITTEN IN FRENCH BY


ALEXANDER DE HUMBOLDT,
AND TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH BY
HELEN MARIA WILLIAMS.
VOL. VII.
tate on cemnenene


LONDON:


PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, REES, ORME, BROWN, AND GREEN,
PATERNOSTER ROW.


1829.


a ROT WERT IST


W. Pople; Printer,
67, Chancery Lane.
& é


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER XXVIII.


Political Essay on the Island of Cuba—The Ha-
vannah—Hills of Guanavacoa, considered in their
geognostical relations—Valley of Los Guines—
Batabano, and Port of Trinidad—The King and
Queen’s Gardens _ - ~ ~ ~ - “


NOTES TO BOOK xX,


A—On the Productions and Consumption of Colonial
Produce - - - - - " .
Of the Temperature of different Parts of the Torrid
Zone at the Level of the Sea, - - ~ ™


BOOK XI.
CHAPTER XXIXx.


Passage from Trinidad of Cuba to Rio Sinu—Car-
thagena—Air Volcanoes of Turbaco—Canal of
Mahates S - - 4 s2 ms E


JOURNEY


TO THE


EQUINOCTIAL REGIONS


OF


THE NEW CONTINENT.


CHAPTER XXVIII.
Political Essay on the Island of Cuba.—The Ha-


vannah.— Hills of Guanavacoa, considered in


their geognostical relations.—Valley of Los
Guines.—Batabano, and Port of Trinidad.—
The King and Queen’s Gardens.


Tue political importance of the island of Cuba
is not founded merely on the extent of its sur-
face, which is one-third larger than that of
Hayti, on the admirable fertility of its soil, on
its naval establishments, or on the nature of its
_ population, of which three-fifths are composed
of free men: it is derived also from the advan-
tages of the geographical position of the Ha-
vannah. The northern part of the Caribbean
Sea, known by the name of the Gulph of Mex-
ico, forms a.circular basin more than two hun-
VOL. VU. we:


2


dred and fifty leagues in diameter; a mediterra-
nean with two outlets, the coasts of which, from
the point of Florida to Cape Catoche of Yuca-
tan, now belong exclusively to the Confedera~
tions of the Mexican States, and of North
America. The island of Cuba, or ‘rather its
coast between Cape Saint Antonio and the
town of Matanzas, situated at the opening of
the old channel, closes the gulph of Mexico, on
the south-east, leaving the oceanic current,
known by the name of the Gulph Stream *, no
other outlet on the south than a strait between:
Cape St. Antonio and Cape Catoche; and on
the north than the channel of Bahama, between
Bahia-Honda and the shoals of Florida. Near
the northern outlet, where the high-ways of so
many trading nations may be said to cross each:
other, the fine port of the Havannah is situated,
fortified at the same time by nature and by nu-
merous works of art. The fleets which sail
from this port, and which are partly construct-
ed of the cedrela and the mahogany of the
island of Cuba, might act at the entrance of
the Mexican Mediterranean, and menace the |
opposite, coast, as the fleets that sail from Ca~-
diz command the ocean near the Pillars of
Hercules. In the meridian of the Havannah,
the gulph of Mexico, the old channel, and the


* Vol. i, p. 47-64 ; vol. vi, P- 817,


3


channel of Bahama unite. The opposite direc-
tion of the currents, and the violent agitations
of the atmosphere at the beginning of winter;
give a peculiar character to these latitudes, at
the extreme limit of the equinoxial zone.

The island of Cuba is not only the largest of
the Antilles (its area differing little in extent
from that of England, properly so called, with-
out Wales), but presents by its narrow and
lengthened form such a developement of coast,
that it approaches at the same time Hayti and
Jamaica, the most southern province of the
United States (Florida), and the most easterly
province of the Mexican Confederation (Yuca-
tan). This circumstance merits the most serious
attention; for the countries which communi-
cate by a navigation of from ten to twelve days,
Jamaica, Hayti, Cuba, and the southern parts of
the United States (from Louisiana to Virginia),

contain nearly two millions eight hundred thou-
sand Africans. Since Santo Domingo, the Flori-
das, and New Spain, have been separated from
the mother country, the island of Cuba is no
longer connected except by acommon worship,
language, and manners, with the neighbouring
countries, which during ages were subject to
the same laws.

Florida forms the last link in the long chain
of which the northern extremity reaches the

_ basin of St. Lawrence; and extends from the
B2


4


region of palm trees to that of the most rigor-
ous winter. The inhabitant of New England
regards the increasing augmentation of the
black population, the preponderance of the
slave states, and the predilection for the culti-
vation of colonial products, as a public danger,
and earnestly wishes that the strait of Florida,
the present limit of the great American Confe-


deration, may never be passed but with the


views of free trade, founded ou equal rights.
If he fears events which may place the Havan-


nah under the dominion of an European power _


more formidable than Spain, he does not the
less desire that the political ties by which Lou-
isiana, Pensacola, and Saint Augustin of Flori-
da, were heretofore united to the island of Cuba,
may remain for ever broken.

The extreme sterility of the soil, and the want
of inhabitantsand of cultivation, have at all times
rendered the neighbourhood of Florida of small


importance to the trade of the Havannah ; the


case is not the same on the coasts of Mexico,
which, stretching in a half circle, from the fre-
quented ports of Tampico, Vera Cruz, and Al-
varado to cape Catoche, almost touch by the
peninsula of Yucatan the western part of the
island of Cuba. Commerce is extremely active
between the Havannah and the port of Cam-
peche ; and increases notwithstanding the new
order of things in Mexico, because the trade


5


equaily illicit with a more distant coast, that of
Caraccas or Columbia, employs but a small
number of vessels. In such difficult times, the
provision of salt meat (tasajo), necessary for
the subsistence of the slaves *, is drawn with
less danger from Buenos Ayres and the plains
of Merida, than from those of Cumana, Barce_
lona, and Caracecas. It is known that the is-
land of Cuba and the Archipelago of the Philli_
pines, have for ages drawn from New Spain the
funds necessary for the internal administration,
and for keeping up the fortifications, arsenals,
and dock yards (sitwados de atencion maritima ).

The Havannah, as I have stated in another
work, was the military port of the New
World, and, till 1808, received annually
1,800,000 piastres from the Mexican treasury.
At Madrid it was long the custom to consider
the island of Cuba and the archipelago of the
Phillipines, as dependencies on Mexico, situated
_ at very unequal distances, east and west of
Vera Cruz and Acapulco, but linked to the
Mexican metropolis, then an European colony

itself, by all the ties of commerce, mutual aid,
and antient affections. The increase of internal
wealth has rendered unnecessary the pecuniary
succour which Cuba used to draw from the

A
* Vol. iii, p. 361; vol. iv, p. 338.
+ Political Essay, vol. iv, p. 273.


6


Mexican treasury. Of all the Spanish posses-
sions, that island has most prospered ; the port
of the Havannah has risen, since the troubles of
Saint Domingo, to the rank of one of the first
places of the commercial world. A fortunate
concurrence of political circumstances; the mo-
deration of the crown officers; the conduct of
the inhabitants, who are intelligent, prudent,
and much engaged with their own interests,


have preserved to the Havannah the uninter-


rupted enjoyment of the freedom of interchange
with foreign nations. The revenue of the cus-.
toms has increased so prodigiously, that the is-
land of Cuba suffices not only for its own wants,
but during the struggle between the mother
country and the Spanish colonies of the conti-
nent, furnished considerable sums to the re-
mains of the army which had fought at Vene-
zuela, to the garrison of the castle of San Juan
d’Uloa, and also towards very expensive and
most commonly useless armaments.

I resided twice in this island, once during
three months, and once during six weeks ; and
enjoyed the confidence of persons, who, from


- their abilities, and their situation as adminis-


trators, proprietors, or merchants, were enabled
to give me the best information respecting the
increase of public prosperity. The particular
protection with which I was honoured by the
Spanish minister, justified this confidence, and


7


which I flattered myself I merited by the mo-
deration of my principles, a circumspect con-
duct, and by the nature of my peaceful labors.
For thirty years past the Spanish government
has not shackled the publication, even at the
Havannah, of the most valuable statistic docu-
ments on the state of commerce, colonial agri-
culture, and finance. I examined those docu-
ments ; and the connections I have maintained
with America since my return to Europe have
enabled me to complete the materials I had col-
lected on the spot. I visited with Mr. Bon-
pland only the vicinity of the Havannah, the
beautiful valley of Guines, and the coast be-
tween Batabano and the port of Trinidad. After
having succinctly described the aspect of this
scenery, and the singular modifications of a
climate so different from that of the other is-
' lands, I shall examine the general population of
Cuba, its area calculated from the most exact
sketch of the coast, the objects of trade, and
the state of the public revenue.

The aspect of the Havannah, at the entrance
of the port, is one of the gayest and most pic-
turesque on the shore of Equinoxial America,
north of the equator. This spot, celebrated by
travellers of all nations, has not the luxury of
vegetation that decorates the banks of the river
Guayaquil, nor the wild majesty of the rocky
coast of Rio Janeiro, two ports of the southern


8


hemisphere ; but the graces which in those cli-
mates embellish the scenes of cultivated nature,
are here mingled with the majesty of vegetable
forms, and the organic vigour that character-
izes the torrid zone. Amidst a variety of
soothing impressions, the European forgets the
dangers that menace him in the populous cities
of the Caribbean islands ; he seeks to seize the
different elements of a vast landscape; to con-
template the fortified castles that crown the
rocks on the east of the port ; the inland basin,
surrounded by villages and farms; those palms
that rise to a majestic height; and that city, half
concealed by a forests of masts and the sails of
vessels, In entering the port of the Havannah
you pass between the fortress of Morro (€as-
tillo de los Santos Reyes,) and the fort of San Sal-
vador de la Punta: the opening is only from
one hundred and seventy to two hundred toises
wide. It preserves this breadth during three-
fifths of a mile. Having passed this narrow
entrance, and left on the north the fine castle
of San Carlos de la Cabana, and the Casa
Blanca, we reach a basin in the form ofa trefoil,
of which the great axis, stretching from S.S.W. |
to N.N.E., is two miles and one-fifth long. This
basin communicates with three creeks, that. of
Regla, Guanavacoa, and Atares, of which the
last has some springs of fresh water. The
town of the Havannah, surrounded by walls,


9


forms a promontory bounded on the south by
the arsenal, and on the north by the fort of la
Punta. Beyond the vestiges of some vessels
sunk in the shoals of la Luz, we no longer find
eight to ten, but five to six fathoms of water.
The castles of Santo Domingo de Atares and
San Carlos del Principe, defend the town tow-
ards the west ; they are distant from the inte-
rior wall on the land side, the one 660
toises, the other 1240. The intermediate space
is filled by the suburbs (arrabales or barrios ex-
tra muros) of the Horcon, Jesus Maria, Guada-
loupe, and Senor de la Salad, which from year
to year contract the Field of Mars (Campo
de Marte). The great edifices of the Havan-
nah, the cathedral, the Casa. del Govierno, the
house of the commandant of the marine, the
arsenal, the Correo or General Post Office, and
the factory of tobacco, are less remarkable for
their beauty than the solidity of their construc-
tion; the streets are for the most part narrow,
and the greater number are not paved. The
stones coming from Vera Cruz, and their trans-
port being very expensive, the idea was con-
ceived a short time before my voyage, of join-
ing great trunks of trees together, as is done in
Germany and Russia, when dykes are constructed
across marshy places. This project wassoonaban-
doned, and travellers recently arrived saw with
surprize the fine trunks of Cahoba (mahogany)


10


sunk in the mud of the Havannah. At the time
of my stay, few towns of Spanish America pre-
sented, from the want of a good police, a more
hideous aspect. People walked in mud up to
the knee; and the multitude of caleches or vo-
lantes, the characteristic equipage of the Ha-
vannah, the carts loaded with cases of sugar,
the porters who elbow the passengers, rendered
walking disagreeable and humiliating. The
smell of ¢asajo, or meat ill dried, often poisons
the houses, and the winding streets; but it ap-
pears that of late the police has interposed, and
that a sensible improvement has taken place in
the cleanliness of the streets; that the houses are
more airy, and that the Calle de los Mercadares
presents a fine aspect. Here, as in the oldest
towns of Europe, an ill-traced plan of streets
can only be slowly amended.

There are two fine walks; the dlamada, es
tween the hospital of Paula and the theatre, of
which the interiour was. decorated with great
taste, in 1803, by an Italian artist, M. Peruani ;
and the other, between the Castillo de la Punta,
and the Puerta de la Muralla, called the Passeo
extra muros, has a delicious coolness, and is fre-
quented by carriages after sun-set. It was be-


gun by the Marquis de la Torre, governor of


the island, who gave the first and happiest im-
pulse to the improvement of the police, and the
municipal regime. Don Luis de las Casas,


li


whose name is equally dear to the inhabitants of
the Havannah, and the Count of Santa Clara,
enlarged these plantations. Near the Campo de
Marte is the Botanical Garden, well worthy to
fix the attention of government, and another
object, fitted to excite at once pity and indigna-
tion, the barracks before which the wretched
slaves are exposed to sale. A statue in marble
of Charles III. has been placed since my return
to Europe in this Extra muros walk. This spot
was at first destined for a monument to Christo-
pher Columbus, whose ashes, after the cession
of the Spanish part. ef Saint Domingo, were
brought to the island of Cuba. The same year
the ashes of Fernand Cortez were transferred in
Mexico from one church to another: thus at
the same time, at the end of the 18th century,
the two greatest men who promoted the conquest
of America, received new sepulchres.

The most majestic palm-tree of its tribe, the
Palma real, gives a peculiar character to. the
Jandscape in the vicinity of the Havannah ; it is
the Oreodoxa regia of our description of Ameri-
can palm-trees*; it’s tall trunk, a little swelled
towards the middle, rises to 60 or 80 feet high;
the upper part glossy, of a tender green newly
formed by the closing and dilatation of the pe-
tioles, contrasts with the rest, which is whitish


* Nova genera et Spec. equin., Tom. i, p. 305,


12


and fendilated. It appears like two columns
which surmount on another. The Palmareal of
the Island ofCuba has feathered leaves rising per-
pendicularly towards the sky,and curved only at


- the point. The form of this plant reminded us


of the Vadgiai palm-tree that covers the rocks in
the cataracts of the Oroonoko, balancing it’s long
points over a mist of foam. Here, as every where
else where the population is concentred, vegeta-
tion diminishes. Those palm-trees round the
Havannah, and in the amphitheatre of Regla,
on which I delighted to gaze, disappear by de-
grees. The marshy places which I saw covered
with Bambousacees, are cultivated and drained.
Civilization advances, and the soil, more stript
of plants, scarcely offers any traces of its wild
abundance. From the Punta to San Lazaro,
from Cabana to Regla, and from Regla to
Atarés, the road ‘is covered with houses, and
those that surround the bay are of a light and
elegant construction. The plan of these houses


is traced, and they are ordered from the United :


States, like a piece of furniture. When the yel-
low fever rages at the Havannah, the proprietors
withdraw to those country-houses, and on the
hills between Regla and Guanavacoa, to breathe


a purer air. In the coolness of the night, when
the boats cross the bay, and from the phospho-.


rescence of the water, leave behind them long
tracks of light, these romantic scenes furnish


PERRET SENIRR TTT
= Cen - a


ae in


13


charming and peaceful. retreats to the inhabit-
ants who fly from the tumult of a populous city.
Travellers, in order to judge of the progress of
cultivation, should visit the small chacaras of
maize, and other alimentary plants, the straight
lines of ananas in the fields of Cruz de Piedra,
and the bishop’s garden (Quinta del Obispo),
which of late is become a delicious spot.

The town of the Havannah, properly so called,
surrounded by walls, is only 900 toises long, and
500 broad ; yet more than 44,000 inhabitants,
of which 26,000 are blacks and mulattoes, are
crowded together in this narrow space. A po-
pulation nearly as considerable has. found re-
fuge in the two great suburbs of Jesus-Maria
and the Salud. The latter does not merit the
fine name it bears; the temperature of the air is
indeed less elevated than in the city, but the
streets might have been larger and better
planned. The Spanish engineers have made
war for 30 years past with the inhabitants of the
suburbs or arrabales ; they have proved to the
government that the houses are too near the for-
tifications, and that the enemy might lodge
there with impunity. But the government have
not the courage to demolish the suburbs and
drive away a population of 28,000 inhabitants
collected in the Salud only. Since the great
fire of 1802, that quarter has been considerably
enlarged ; barracks were at first constructed, but


by degrees those barracks became houses. The
inhabitants of the arrabales have presented seve.
ral projects to the king, by which they might be
comprehended within the line of the fortifications
of the Havannah, and their possession be le-
galized, which is at present only founded on
tacit consent. They wish to construct a great
moat from the Puente de Chaves, near Matadero,
to San Lazaro, to form the Havannah into an
island. The distance is nearly 1200 toises, and
the bay terminates between the arsenal, and the.
Castillo de Atarés, in a natural canal bordered
by mangliers, and cocolloba. By this means
the town towards the west, on the land-side,
would have a triple range of fortifications ex-
ternally ; the works of Atares and Principe,
placed on the eminences, then the projected
moat, and lastly the wall and ancient covered-.
way of the Count of Santa Clara, which cost
700,000 piastres. The defence of the Havannah
towards the west is of the highest importance ;
as long as the besieged are masters of the town,
properly so called, and of the southern part of
the bay, the Aforro Cabana, the first requiring
800 defenders, the second 2000, they are impreg-
nable, because they can be provisioned by the
Havannah, and the losses of the garrison re- —
paired. I have heard well-informed French .
engineers assert that an enemy should begin |
his operations by taking the town in order to


15


bombard the Cabana, a strong fortress, but
where the garrison, shut up in the cassmates,
could not long resist the insalubrity. of the cli-
mate. The English took the Morro without
being masters of the Havannah ; but the Cabana
and the Fort No. 4, which commands the Morro,
did not then exist. The most important works
on the south and west, are the Castillos de
Ataré y del Principe, and the battery of Santa
Clara.


16


GLUEP


LEV'Sl
€Z0'T
988'¢
VIV'Y


cogs |


8
"NO WOM
pur
NOUW
jo
| IVLOL


ee ee


PPO PI


V6G'S
6IT

806°C
cI¢ 1
8SLY'S


‘sivok G9
0} GT wWoxy


a


“NGWOM


698


8L

P6T
S&T
OTT
SPE


i)


Sees ee


‘suvak OOT
gp oUO | 07 OQ WO


0} G1 Woz] 07 Avp ou0


pone Oe:


SALTS OL
SOALTG SOplvg
- syorlg oon 4}
- sopieg 9014


= 27 eee uay


ee


‘UNOTOD


‘OISL NI ‘xus GNV “ADV “ANOTOO HO AONAUAAAIG AHL OL DNIGUODDV
‘(QHTIVO OS ATURAOUd ALIO AHL) HVNNVAV]] SHL 40 (NOUdVg) NOILVYAWANG TVIOILIO


| LGE'8


008%
681

960°E
000'T
G18


660°¢


6fE'8


SOARS Yorlg


SAARIS sopavg


SHOR v0.17


sopaeg ayy


~ Sort AA
ee ae


“MNO'TOO


‘OST NI “antvg ant 40 (1vavary) TUAGAG AHL 40 NOMVYAWANG ‘TVIOLIO


VOL, VII.


Se NOT,


ct


SOARS YL


CoO'IL | GEO 91V'S OSe1l | 970% 81s VLOG


G20°S 186 9L6 LVS 1¥G 614 80¢


OOF 9¢ LL PL 8g ze.—Cts«éd{:s«éCS&S8 SoArTg Sopseg


9 (pees Syorl_


E966 vIs 8&8 OLE FOS 8G


18


zest | FAI Ig¢ 99% 691 668 sopitd 901]


7.7 S01 AR


‘aNOTOD


“OIST NI ‘VIUVIAI sasa¢ 40 TVAVUUYV FHL JO NOILVUANANG TVIWIO


J Se


Tg¢ SEP Te30L,


ee


96 IZ - saaRg Word


Li rE Bo SOARTS SOPALg
09 IP syovyg 9.17


sopieg 90.1,


- = SONU AA


‘WAOTO9


“OIST Ni ‘NOOUOLT GHL dO TVEVAUY AHL AO NOLLVAAWONA TVIOIMAO


[PIO


SOARS Yortg


SOARTG SOpieg


Syovpq 91,7


sopied 9014
Sore, SOAR


“HNOToOo


[2301


SOARS Yorygq
SOATTY sopieg
Syor[g 9017
sopieg 99.19


= SON MA


“UNOTOD


‘OIST NI ‘ouvzv'] Nvg do IvavauW FHL dO NOLVUaWANS TVIOIGQ


[e30L

SOARS OL
SOARTS wed]
syorlq aoaq
sopled 9917


~ — SOE


‘HNOTOdD


“OIST NI “ALNOJAl 19d SASHC dO IVAVUUY AHL JO NOLLVUANONE TVIDMAO s


R101,


SOARS WORT


SOALTS Sopirg


SYIe[_ 17


sopieg 9914


- > Sou


‘HNOTOO +


‘OIL NI ‘VIDTY AO NOMVYIWANT TVIOMIQ


LPL'S


S9V'6G VES Ly | gece S06'LG | 06891 fo i as


TLV'9G | E6V'SE


68h PSI'6 | OL8'S | secs | cop 09G'0L | 9az'e fo saAvTS yorg |


LEGG 880'L 69S LéP GOV 606'T TLS 69P GOP SOARTS sopieg
i


VOO'OT | G6G'6 O18 ILP'9 8h6'1L GlLe'h 66¢ DPL'D CAR ercfares (E32 * syorlg ony |


&PL'6 LIT'¢.


¢9s GFE'S OlP'L | 929° oss GLP'G | GLA fo sopieg vatq |


68th | SPS'1Z | GIST OOLIL | #29'9 9F9°0G | FEST VvI6'6 888s (fo. "soy AA |


ATErn Oy *savad *savod sant arane *srvak “saad *savak
‘uomtoa | 30 peoy, OOT 9% 09 93 i Sie oy Jo [ej07, 00T % 09 03 bert 07
pue ca f 09 moa | oT moa | depT moe, 09 Woy } cy wor | hep _ Woy ‘MNOTIOO L
uaur jo os


IVLOL “NENOM “Na


"XUG GNV “EDY ‘YNOTOD OL ONIGUODDW “yT *


‘OLST UW (epsoy pue
‘a}UOJ [OP snsae ‘olezery ueg ‘01199 “UOd10F] “eLARyA snsoe ‘odnojepeny) 10 pn[eg ey
JO sqingng ayy yyta ‘A310 oy) HVNNVAV]] SHL AO NOMLVIAdOG AHL 40 LT


ASAY IVaINTD


6VE'9G


1Ev'9G


89
869
€1h
G89


26° : uodlo Fy


Ga0'S Lies eee ee ee ee VIVA snsor


ct6'9 : PHIBS ey


LEV'st yeuuraryy oy,


*SOARTS *SaARTS *smOVIg. *soauvd "7 : . ,
sven same cae 204 SH.LIHA STVAVUYV IHL JO SANVN


“SHUNANS AHL OL SNIGIODIV "II


Whites

Free Pardos
Free Blacks
Pardos Slaves
Black Slaves


We have noted in these tables, under the
name of pardos (copper-coloured men), all who
are not morenos, that is, of pure negro race,
The land forces, the sailors and soldiers of the
royal marine, the monks, nuns, and strangers
not established, (transeuntes) are not comprized
in the enumeration of 1810; of which, by an


error, the results have been inserted, in several
works of merit published recently, as belonging
to the year 1817. The garrison of the Havan-
nah amounts generally to 6000 men, and the
number of strangers to 20,000.; there is there-
fore no doubt that the total population of the
Havannah and the seven arrabals now sur-
passes (in 1825), 130,000. The following table
marks the increase of the population of “the
Havannah and of its suburbs, since the enumer-
ation made in 1791, to 1810, by order of the
Captain General Don Luis de las Casas.


‘ ssvpg Arado jo
SOALTG JO
IMO]OO jo usu sa1q JO
Soy M PY} JO osvotouy
i
L961S US LT 86991 OGY 214 - ses  ePeel


—_——————$ | —————— a


0€ - - 46> ~ &F 966°96 0ZL'8G 6FE'9S LOoIV OIsT
foc fie 5. oF LES VV 6F8'OT 1926 LEL'SS 16L1


¥ (0) *NOILVUTWANGA
anotoo , 1H d
GHL do saoludd


‘SASSVIO ADTUNL
"IVLOG
AHL JO NOILWOdOUd 10 NOWTAUA


SOAS JO
usUIpsedy JO
SOY AA OY) JO asvasouy


tra muros de


10 Cx.


|806'02 6FI'S ‘9 |6gr¢ - asvor0Uuy
| 617'82 S169 |co9 |60e°6 |ZeZ9 |426% loso'tL! OTT


lIig'z |¢ 994'L | 36 OES [EFI 0081


°
°


but only for the barr


to 1810,
Guadalupe


“syoRrg | ‘sopieg smojoo | SPP | ‘sopreg
Seg ey, SS ae a ie
#0, Uae *anO100 *saoruda


ax Oat JO
SMAVIS Seudd 410 NOW caus
IVLOL


SOALTS JO!
IVLOL


D
|
Se)
Cet
(=)
|
°
om
—
3
ee)
=|
oO
|
an
=
we
ee) =
a sg
ro
ro
3S
o
Sg
o
a
—|
a
o
as]
WR
=


population during half this interval, from 1800


29


We have just seen that the population’ has
more than doubled in twenty years, from 1791
to 1810; in the same interval of time, the po-
pulation of New York, the most populous city
of the United States, rose from 33,200 to 96,400:
it amounts now to 140,000: consequently a
little superiour to that of the Havannah, and
nearly equal to the population of Lyons. The
town of Mexico, which in 1820 counted
170,000 inhabitants, appears to me to hold the
first rank among the towns of the New Continent.
It is perhaps fortunate for the free states of that
part of the world, that only six towns of Ame-
rica, Mexico, New-York, Philadelphia, the Ha-
vannah, Rio Janeiro and Bahia, have attained a
population of 100,000 souls. At Rio Janeiro,
there are 105,000 blacks, on a population of
135,000 persons :.at the Havannah the whites
form two-fifths of the whole population. We
find in that town the same preponderance of
women that is observed in the principal towns
of the United States, and of Mexico*.


* The enumerations of Boston, New York, Philadelphia,
Baltimere, Charlestown, and New Orleans, yield for women
in relation to men, 109 : 100; at Mexico were found 92,338
women, and 76,008 men, which yields a still more extraor-
dinary comparison, that of 122 :100. I have already treated
of this subject in another place, (Political Essay, vol. i, p.
247,) where I observed that, in comprehending in the same
. point of view the whole population of the villages and cities,


e


30


The great accumulation of foreigners not
acclimated, in a narrow and populous town, no
doubt augments the mortality; yet the effects:
of the yellow fever are much less felt in the
total balance between births and deaths than is
commonly imagined. When the number of im-
ported negroes is not very considerable, and the
activity of trade does not draw together many
unacclimated seamen, either from Europe or
the United States, the births nearly equal the
deaths *.


we find in Mexico and the United States only, the number of
living men exceed that of women, while the reverse result
exists throughout Europe. The number of living men in
the United States (in the whole country), is to the number
of living women, as 100 to 97. After having rectified the
census of 1820, published officially, but in which many of
the partial numbers are inexact, we find that in the vast ter-
ritory of the United States, there existed of the race of
whites, 3,993,206 males, and 3,884,017 females; total,
7,857,223. On the contrary, in Great Britain, in the year
1821, 7,137,014 males, and 7,254,613 females ; in Portu-
gal, in 1821, 1,478,900 males, and 1,512,030 feinales ; in
the kingdom of Naples, in 1818, 2,432,431 males, and
2,574,452 females ; in Sweden, in 1805, 1,599,487 males, .
and 1,721,160 females ; in Java, in 1815, 2,268,180 males,
and 2,347,090 females. In Sweden the relation of living
women to men appears to be 100: 94; in the kingdom of
Naples, 100: 95; in France, Portugal, and Java, 100 : 97;
in England and Prussia, 100: 99. Such is the influence of |
various occupations and manners on the mortality of men !
* See the Guia de Forasteros de la Jsla de Cuba para 1815,


31


The following are tables for five years for the
city of the Havannah and the suburbs (barrios
extramurales) :


ee


YEARS. |MARRIAGES.| BIRTHS. DEATHS.


eS


1813 386 2948


1814 4 3622


1820 5 4833


4466


3697


This table, which presents an extreme fluc-
tuation on account of the very unequal accu-
mulation of foreigners, yields, mean term, in
estimating the total population of the Havan-
nah and the suburbs at 130,000, the relation of


p. 245, para 1825, p. 303,—a statistic almanack, much better
executed than most of those that appear in Europe. In 1814,


5696 persons were vaccinated at the Havannah ; and in
1824, nearly 8100.


. 32


births to the population, 1 ; 33,5 ; and the re-
lation of deaths to the population, 1 : 33,2.
According to the late accurate labours on the
population of France, these relations are, for
the whole of France, as 313 : 1 and 397: 1;
for Paris, from 1819 to 1823, as 1 : 28, and
1: 31,6. The circumstances that modify these
numerical elements in great towns, are so com-
plicated and of so variable a nature, that the
number of inhabitants can scarcely be appreci-
ated by that of births and deaths. In 1806, a
period at which the population of Mexico was
little above 150,000, the number of births and
deaths was 5166, and 6155 ; while at the Ha-


vannah, on 130,000 inhabitants, the numbers,
mean term, are 3900 and 3880. . In this town
there are two hospitals, in which the number of
sick is considerable ; the general hospital (of-
Caridad or San Felipe y Santiago), and the mi-
litary hospital of San Ambrosio *,


* See my Political Essay, vol. iv, p. 195,-on the mean
mortality of the hospitals at Vera Cruz and at Paris.


O€1 9S £86

VEEL 9968 &C9P paind yno auOXy
€86 Fol CGS - + S<_ syjvog
LE9L_ | vorr | 98IE - = [eo],


i ce a ef


PSF O9LF 6Z8F = Sh €s> ated oud
JO 981n0d 94} Ul paraquy


- JvaX Jaud0J 94} 9dUIS
speq oy} UI poulemoy


“POST “1681 ; ‘VE8L “168T ‘VIST
1 St SS ea ee SENA OW TVINNY


“OOVILNVS A “OISOUANV
a@dITIA NVS dO IVLIdSOH IVYANAD NVS JO IVLIASOH AUVLITIN


VOL. VII.


In the general hospital, mean year, more than
24 per cent perished ; and in the military hos-
pital scarcely 4 per cent. It would be unjust
to attribute this immense difference to ‘the
treatment employed by the monks of San Juan
de Dios, who preside over the former establish-
ment. More sick persons, no doubt, enter the ~
hospital of San Ambrosio, attacked by the vo-
mito or the yellow fever, but the greater num-
ber have only slight maladies; while, on the
contrary, the general hospital receives the old,
and incurable negroes, who have but a few
months to live, and whom the planters or mas-
ters (los amos) get rid of inthis manner. It may
also be admitted in general, that by the im-
provement of the police the sanitary state of
the Havannah is ameliorated ; but the effect of
these changes is only manifest among the na-
tives. Strangers who come from the north. of
Europe and America, suffer from the influence
of the climate; and would continue to suffer,
whatever were the degree of cleanliness. in the
streets. Such is the influence of the shore, that
the inhabitants of the island who live at a.dis-
tance from the coast, are often attacked with
the vomito when they arrive at the Havannah.
The markets of the town are well furnished ;
in 1819, the price of provisions was carefully
estimated, which are daily brought to the mar-
kets of the Havannah by 2000 beasts of burden;


and it was found that the consumption in meat,
maize, manioc, vegetables, brandy, milk, eggs,
forage, and snuff,amounts to 4,480,000 piastres
yearly.

We employed the months of December, Ja-
nuary, and February, in making observations in
the vicinity of the Havannah and the fine
plains of Guines. We found in the family of
M. Cuesta, which then formed with M. Santa
Maria one of the greatest commercial houses in
America, and in the house of the Count O’
Reilly, the attentions of the most noble hospi-
tality. We lived with the former, and placed |
our collections and instruments in the spacious
hotel of the Count O’Reilly, of which the ter-
races favored especially our astronomical obser-
vations. The longitude of the Havannah was
at this period more than one-fifth of a degree
uncertain *. It had been fixed by M. Espinosa,
the learned director of the Deposito hydrogra-
Jfico of Madrid, at 5n 38’ 11”, in a table of posi-
tions which he communicated to me on leaving
Madrid. M. de Churruca fixed the Morro at


* Humboldt, Rec. d’Obs. Astr., tom. ii, p. 53, 89. I
also fixed, by direct observations, several positions in the in-
terior of the island, (Rio Blanco, plantation of Count Ja-
ruco y Mopex; the Almirante, plantation of the Countess
Buenavista; San Antonio de Beitia; the village of Mana-
gua ; San Antonio de Bareto, and the Fondadero, near the
town of San Antonio de los Baiies). L, c., p. 58—67.

pd 2


54 39’ 1”. I met at the Havannah with one of
the most able officers of the Spanish navy,
Captain Don Dionisio Galeano, who had taken
a survey'of the coast of the strait of Magellan.
We made observations together, on a series of
eclipses of the satellites of Jupiter, of which
the mean result gave 54 38’50”. M. Oltmanns
deduced in 1805, the whole of those observa-
vations, which I marked for the Morro, at
55 38’ 52:5” = 84° 43’ 7°5” west of the meridian
of Paris. This longitude was confirmed by
fifteen occultations of stars observed from 1809
to 1811, and calculated by M. Ferrer *: ‘that
excellent observer fixes the definitive result at
5t 38’ 50:9”. With respect to the magnetic
dip, I found it by the compass of Borda (Dec.
1800), 53° 22’ of the ancient sexagesimal divi-
sion: twenty-two years before, according to the
very accurate observations made by Captain
Sabine, in his memorable voyage to the coasts
of Africa, America, and Spitzbergen, the dip
was only 51° 55’; it had therefore diminished
1° 27’. More to the east, but also in the north-_
ern hemisphere, at Paris-{-, the diminution. in


* Conn, des temps pour 1817, p. 330.

+ I found in 1798, at Paris, conjointly with the Chevalier
de Borda, in changing the poles several times, 69° 51/: M,
Gay-Lussac obtained incl. 69° 12’ in 1806; M. Arago, incl.
68° 40’ in 1817; and in 1824, incl. 68° 7’. All these expe-
riments were made with instruments of the same construction.


37


nineteen years (from 1798 to 1817), had been
1° 11’.. My needle of inclination had made in
the magnetic meridian at Paris, 245 oscillations
in ten minutes time (Oct. 1796); I had seen
the number of oscillations decrease, in propor-
tion as we approached the magnetic equator.
The number * at San Carlos del Rio Negro,
(north latitude 1° 53’ 42”), was only 216. I
then perceived the diminution of the intensity
of the magnetie force from the pole to the
equator. My surprise was so much the greater,
when repeated observations yielded 246 oscilla-
lations for the Havannah, which proved that
the intensity of the force was greater in the
western hemisphere at 23° 8’ latitude, than at
Paris at 48° 50’. I have stated elsewhere that
the isodynamic lines can in no way be con-
founded with the lines of equal magnetic incli-
nation; and Captain Sabine+ has just confirmed,,


* Per, Nar., vol. v, p. 396 and 693. These results re-
quire to be corrected relatively to the temperature.


+ Sabine, Account of Exper. to determine the figure of
the earth by pendulum experiments, 1825, p. 483, 494, The
intensity of the magnetic forces is weaker at the magnetic
equator, near the western coast, of Africa, than near the
western coast of South America. I obtained for the decrease
of this force from the magnetic equator which passes be-
tween Micuipampa and Caxamarca (nearly south lat, 7° 1/
long. 80° 40’, height, 1500 toises) to Paris, the relation of
1:0000 : 1.3482. M. Sabine found the decrease from a


38


by observations no doubt more precise than
mine, the rapid increase of this force in equi-
noxial America. That able observer finds the
intensity of the force at the Havannah and
at London, in the oscillation of 1:72: 1°62
(naming 1 the force at the magnetic equator
near the island of St. Thomas, in the gulph of
Guinea). The position of the north magnetic
pole is such (lat. 60°, long. 82° 20’ west), that
the polar distance of the Havannah is less than
the polar distances of London and Paris. I
found (January 4th, 1801) the magnetic dip at
the Havannah, 6° 22’ 15” east. Harris marks
it at 4° 40’ in 1782. How can it be admitted
that it does not change at Jamaica, since it
undergoes so many variations in the island of
‘Cuba?

Extent, TerriroriaL Division, CLimatTe.—
The island of Cuba being surrounded with
shoals and breakers, for more than two-thirds
of its length, and the navigation being made
beyond those dangers, the real configuration of


point of the magnetic equator, near St. Thomas (lat. 0° 5”
north, long. 4° 24’ east, height 3 t.), as far as London, in
the relation of 1:00 : 1°62. MM. Biot and Hansteen had
remarked, in comparing my experiments of oscillations with
those of M. de Rossel, that, in the meridian of Surabaya, in
the island of Java, the magnetic force was not so great as at
Peru. (Untersuchungen iiber den Magnetismus der Erdé, Th.
I, 70.)


39


the island remained for a long time unknown.
Its breadth, especially between the Havannah
and the port of Batabano, has been exaggerated,
and it is only since the Deposito hidrografico of
Madrid, the finest establishment of the kind in
Europe, has published the labors of the captain
of a frigate, Don Jose del Rio, and of the lieu-
tenant, Don Ventura de Barcaiztegui, that the
area of the island of Cuba could be calculated
with any exactness. The form of the isle of
Pinos and the southern coast between Puerto
Casilda and Cabo Cruz (behind the Cayos de
las doce leguas) have assumed a very different .
aspect on our maps. M. de Lindeneau * found,
according to the works which the Deposito
had published as low down as 1807, the surface
of the island of Cuba, without the neighbouring
isles, to be 2255 geographical square leagues
(15 to a degree) ;’ and with the surrounding
isles, 2318 geographical square leagues. ‘The
latter result is equivalent to 4102 square
marine leagues (20 to a degree). M. Ferrer,
from materials somewhat different, fixed on
3848 square marine leagues >. In order to
furnish in this work the most exact result that
can be obtained in the present state of our
astronomical knowledge, I engaged M. Bauza,


* Zach, Monatl Corresp.; Dec. 1807, p. 312.
+ Manuscript notes.


40


who honors me with his friendship, and whose
name is distinguished by great and_ solid
labors, to calculate the area according to the
map of the island of Cuba, in four sheets, which
will soon be completed. He found, in June,
1825, the surface of the island of Cuba, without
the isle of Pinos, to be 3520 square marine
leagues, and with that isle, 3615. From this
calculation, which has been twice repeated, it
results, that the island of Cuba is one-seventh
less than has hitherto been believed; that it is
iw larger than Hayti, or Saint Domingo; that
its surface equals that of Portugal, and nearly
one-eighth that of England without Wales; and
that if the whole archipelago of the Antilles
presents as great an area as the half of Spain,
the island of Cuba alone almost equals in sur-
face the other Great and Little Antilles. Its
greatest length, from cape Saint-Antonio to
Point Maysi (in a direction from W.S.W.-
E.N.E. and from W.N.W.-E.S.E.) is 227 lea-
gues*; and its greatest breadth (in the direc-


* Marine leagues, 2854 toises, or 20 to a degree, when
the contrary is not expressly marked. Don Felipe Bauza, in -
the calculation of the area, supposes the longitude of cape
Saint-Antonio to be 87° 17/22; the Morro of the Havan-
nah, 84° 42/ 20”; the Batabano, 84° 46’ 23”; and the
Punta Maysi (placing Porto-Rico, as Don Jose Sanchez
Cerquero has done, at 68° 28' 29//), 76° 26/2877. The
longitude of the two former are at 3” or 4”' of time, con-


41


tion N. and S.), from Point Maternillo to the
mouth of the Magdalena, near Peak Tarquino, is
37 leagues. The mean breadth of the island, on
four-fifths of its length, between the Havannah
and Puerto Principe, is 15 leagues. In the best
cultivated part, between the Havannah (lat. of


formably to my observations. (Obs. astr., Tom. 1, p. 9, and
Per. Nar., vol. vii, p. 85.) The geodesic operations given
me by Don Francisco Le Maur, an able engineer, who
recently commanded the castle of San Juan d’Ulua, then
at the Havannah (hotel of Count O'Reilly), are for Batabano,
84° 45’ 56”. M. Ferrer adopts for cape Maysi, 76° 30725”,
although he also persists in placing Porto-Rico at 68° 28' 3.
(Conn. des temps, 1817, p. 323). I shall not here enlarge
on the longitude of Porto-Rico which has already given
rise to such warm discussions, and for which three cor-
respondent observations of occultation of Aldebaran (Oct.
21, 1793) by M. Oltmanns, yielded 68° 35° 43°5”, and the
whole of the observations of occultation, distances, and
transport of time, 68° 33’ 30”. (Obs. astr., Tom. 2, p. 125
and 139). Ancient calculations, somewhat vague, gave the
island of Cuba either 6764 leguas planas 0 legales espanolas


(5000 varas or 26 i to a degree), equal to 906,458 caballerias


(of 432 square vares, or 35 English acres), according to the
Patriota Amer., 1812, Tom, 2, p. 292, and the Docum. sobre
el trafico de Negros, 1814, p. 136; or, 52,000 square
English miles (at 640 acres or iy square marine leagues).
Melish, Geogr., p. 444. Morse, New System of Mod. Geogr.,
p. 238. In order to judge the more correctly of the terri-
torial greatness of the island of Cuba, compared with the
rest of the archipelago of the Antilles, 1 shall present the
following table :


000‘ers‘s LSLL - - = saquy'sq3 Jo oSvjadryory


OL 000°969 soyUy oy
sd Es 000°L71% SoT[IWV yeAx)


169 000°SZ% = Od1Y-0}.10g
vL8 000°GOF : 3 - - - = = - voreuler
VEE 000°0Z8 OFS nevspury ‘Jl 0} Surps0o9r ‘1 AVzT


L61 000°STL CIOS - ezneg “JA 0} sulpio90e “eqng


*


*“SHASVAT AUVAOS AG “NOILVTNdOd ‘SHNOVAT ANIUVW


; “SGNV'ISI
NOILV1Nd0da


IVLOL GuUVvNOS NI G9VAUAS


43


the centre of the town 23° 8’ 35”) and the
Batabano (lat. 22° 43’ 24”), the isthmus is only
8 marine leagues. We shall soon see that the
proximity of the northern and southern coasts
renders the port of Batabano highly important
with respect to commerce and military defence.
Among the great islands of the Globe, that of
Java most resembles the island of Cuba in its
form and area (4170 square leagues). Cuba
has a circumference of coast of 520 leagues, of
which 280 belong to the south shore, between
cape Saint-Antonio and Point Maysi.

The island of Cuba, for more than four-fifths
of its extent, is composed of low lands. The
soil is covered with secondary and tertiary
formations, formed by some rocks of gneiss-
granite, syenite, and euphotide. The know-
ledge obtained hitherto of the geognostic con-
figuration of the country, is as little exact as
what is known of the relative age and nature of
the soil. Itis only ascertained that the highest
groupe of mountains lies at the south-east
extremity of the island, between Cabo-Cruz,
Punta Maysi, and Holguin. This mountainous
part, called the Sierra or las Montanas del
Cobre, situated north-west of the town of San-
tiago de Cuba, appears to have 1200 toises * of


* Are the Montaiias del Cobre visible, as some pilots pre-
tend, from the coast of Jamaica, or, which is more probable,


44


absolute height. According to this suppo~
sition, the summits of the Sierra would com-
mand those of the Blue Mountains of Jamaica,
and the peaks of la Selle and la Hotte, in the
island of Saint Domingo. The Sierra of Tar-
quino *, fifty miles west of the town of Cuba,
belongs to the same groupe as the Copper
Mountains. The island is crossed from E.S.E.
to W.N.W. by a chain of hills, which approach
the southern coast between the meridians of la
Ciudad de Puerto Principe, and the Villa Clara;
while, more to the west, towards Alvarez and
Matanzas, they stretch towards the northern
coast. Going from the mouth of the Rio
Guaurabo to the Villa de la Trinidad, I saw, on


the north-west, the Lomas de San Juan +, that
form needles or horns more than 300 toises
high ¢, and of which the declivities go regularly
towards the south. This calcareous groupe has


from the northern declivity of the Blue Mountains? In the
former case, their height would exceed 1600 toises, sup- .
posing a refraction of one-twelfth. It is certain that. the.
mountains of Jamaica are perceived from the summit of the
Cuchillas, or Lomas de Tarquino. (Patriota americano, Tom.
2, p. 282.)

* Lat. 19° 52! 57”; long. 79° 11’ 45’, according to M.
Ferrer.

Tt Lat, 21° 58’; long. 82° 40’.

t This estimate is founded on angles of height which I
took at sea, at distances approximatively known,


45


a majestic aspect, seen from the anchorage near
the Cayo de Piedras. Xagua and Batabano are
low coasts; and I believe that in general, west
of the meridian of Matanzas, there is no hill
more than 200 toises high, with the exception
of the Pan de Guaixabon. The land in the
interior of the island, gently undulated as in
England, rises only from 45 to 50 toises above
the surface of the ocean*. The objects most
visible at a distance, and most celebrated by
navigators, are the Pan de Matanzas f, a trun-
cated cone which has the form of a small monu-
ment; the Arcos de Canasi, which appear be-.
tween Puerto Escondido and Jaruco, like small
segments of a circle, the Mesa de Mariel f, the


Tetas de Managua, and the Pan of Guai-


* The village of Ubajay, at the distance of 15 marine
miles from the Havannah, S, 25 W., at the absolute height
of 38 toises ; the line from the top of Bejucal to the Taverna
del Reya, 48 toises,

+ Height 197 toises. Lat. 23° 1/55”; long. 84° 3/ 36",
supposing with M. Oltmanns, the long. 84° 43’ 8". I
found, while sailing, the Arcos de Canasi 115 toises high.

{ Middle of Guanajay, in the Mesa, lat. 22° 57! 24”,
long. 85° 0/20’, Torreon del Mariel, 85° 3’ 14”,

§ The astronomical position of two calcareous hills, called
the Tetas de Managua, and situated S.W., is of great im-
portance for the landing at the Havannah. I observed the
latitudes, not at the foot of the eastern Teta, but at the vil-
lage of Managua and at San Antonio de Barreto ; and having
linked the Teta oriental with those two places, [ found the


xabon*. This decreasing level of the lime-
stone formations of the island of Cuba towards
the north and west, indicates the sub-marine
connection of those rocks with the lands equally
low of the Bahama Islands of Florida and
Yucatan.

Intellectual cultivation and improvement
were so long restricted to the Havannah and
the neighbouring districts, that we must not be
surprised at the complete ignorance which we
find respecting the geognosy of the Montatas
del Cobre. A traveller, the pupil of M. Proust,
and well versed in chemical and mineralogical
science, Don Francisco Ramirez, told me that
the western part of the island is granitic, and


that he there recognized gneiss and primitive
slate. It is probable that the alluvial deposits
of auriferous sand which were explored with so


Teta oriental de Managua to be lat. 22° 58748”. M. Ferrer
fixes it at 22° 587 19”; long. 84° 40’19”; and Captain Don
Jose del Rio, at 84° 37’. M. Ferrer’s calculation appears to
me preferable ; in the French copy of the map of Rio, the
Tetas is placed at 84° 34’! The trigonometric operations of
Francisco M. Le Maur assigns 84° 39'52”. M. Robredo finds ©
the difference of latitude between the Mirador of the Marques
del Real Socorro, at the Havannah, and the Teta oriental
de Managua, to be 8666,85 toises.

»* Lat. 220 47’ 31”; long. 85° 44’ 37/’; height 390
toises. More to the west, on the southern coast, lies the
Sierra de los Organos and Rosaio; at the south, that of
Rio Puerco.


47


much ardour * at the beginning of the conquest,
to the great misfortune of the natives, came


* At Cubanacan, that is, in the interior of the island, near
Jagua and Trinidad, where the auriferous sands have been
borne by the waters as far as the limestone soil. (Manu-
scripts of Don Felix de Arrate, 1750, and of Don Antonio
Lopez, 1802). Martyr d’Anghiera, the most intelligent
writer on the conquest, says, (Dec. 3, Lib. 9, p. 24, D. and
p. 63 D., ed. 1533) : ‘Cuba is richer in gold than Hispa-
niola (Hayti) ; and at the moment I am writing, 180,600
castillanos of ore have been collected at Cuba.’’ If this esti-
mate be not exaggerated, which I am inclined to believe, it
would prove a product of working, and a robbery committed
on the natives of 8600 marks of gold. Herera estimates the
quinto del Rey, in the island of Cuba, at 6000 pesos, which
indicates an annual product of 2000 marks of gold, at 22
carats, and consequently purer than the gold of Cibao of
Saint Domingo. (See, on the value of the castellanos de oro,
and the peso ensayado of the sixteenth century, my Political
Essay, vol. iii, p. 365). In 1804, the whole mines of Mexico
produced 7000 marks of gold; and those of Peru 3400. It
is difficult to distinguish, in these calculations, between the
gold sent to Spain by the first Conquistadores, that which is
awing to washings, and that which had been accumulated
for ages in the hands of the natives, who were pillaged at -
will. In supposing that the two islands of Cuba and Hayti
(in the Cubanacan and the Cibao), that the product of the
washings was 3000 marks of gold, we find a quantity three
times less than the gold furnished annually (1790 to 1805)
by the small province of Choco. In this supposition of
ancient wealth there is nothing improbable; and if we are
surprised at the penury of the gold washings attempted: in
our days at Cuba and Saint Domingo, which heretofore
yielded such considerable quantities, it must be recollected


48


from those granitic formations; traces of that
sand are still found in the rivers Holguin and
Escambray, known in general in the vicinity of
Villa-Clara, Santo Espiritu, Puerto del Principe,


that at Brazil also the product of the gold washings has

fallen, from 1760 to 1820, from 6600 gold kilogrammes to

less than 595, (Per. Nar., vol. vi, p. 652). Pepites of gold

weighing several pounds, found in our days in Florida and

the two Carolinas, prove the primitive wealth of the whole

basin of the Antilles, from the island of Cuba to the Monts

Apallaches. It is also natural that the product of the gold

washings should diminish with greater rapidity than that of :
the subterraneous working of the veins. No doubt the

metals are now no more renewed in the clefts of the veins

(by sublimation) that they accumulate in alluvial soil, by

the course of the rivers where the table-lands are higher

than the level of the surrounding running waters. But in

rocks with metalliferous veins, the miner does not at once

know all he has to work. He may chance to lengthen. the

labors, to go deep, and to cross other accompanying veins.

Alluvial soils are generally of small thickness where they

are auriferous ; they most frequently rest upon sterile rocks.

Their superficial position, and their uniformity of compo-

sition, facilitates the knowledge of their limits, and accele-

rates, wherever several workmen can be collected, and where

the waters for the washings abound, the total drawing-off of -
the auriferous clay. ‘These considerations, furnished by the _
history of the conquest, and by the science of the art of the
miner, may throw some light on the problem of the metallic
wealth of Hayti, which is now agitated. In that island, as
well as at Brazil, it would be more profitable to attempt
subterraneous workings (on veins) in primitive and inter-
mediary soils, than to renew the gold washings, abandoned
in the ages of barbarism, rapine, and carnage.


49


de Bayamo, and the Bahia de Nipe. Perhaps
the abundance of copper mentioned by the Con-
quistadores of the sixteenth century *, at a
period when the Spaniards were more attentive
to the natural productions of America, than in
later times, was owing to the formations of
amphibolic slate, transition clay-slate mixed
with diorite, and to euphotides, analogous to
those I found in the mountains of Guana-
bacoa?

The central and western parts of the island
contain two formations of compact limestone, .
one of clayey sandstone, and another of gypsum.
The former of these formations has (not by its
position and superposition, which are unknown
to me, but by its aspect and composition) some
resemblance to the Jura formation. It is white
or of a clear ochre yellow, of a dull fracture,
sometimes eonchoide, sometimes smooth, di-
vided in thin layers, furnishing some rognons
of pyromac silex, often hollow, (Rio Canimar,
two leagues east of Matanzas), and petrifi-
cations of pecten, cardites, terebatules, and
madrepores {. I found no oolitic beds, but
porous beds almost bulbous, between the


* Hai buen cobre in Cuba (in the eastern part then visited).
Gomara, Hist. de Ind., fol. xxvii.

t I saw neither gryphites, nor ammonites of Jura-lime-
stone, nor the nummulites and cerites of coarse limestone.


VOL, VII. E


00


Potrero del Conde de Mopox, and the port of
Batabano, resembling the spungy beds of Jura-
limestone in Franconia, near Dondorf, Pegnitz,
and. Tumbach. Yellowish cavernous strata,
with cavities from 3 to 4 inches in diameter,
alternate with strata altogether compact * and
poorer in petrifications. The chain of hills
that borders the plain of Guines towards the
north, and is linked with the Lomas de Camua,
and the Tetas de Managua, belongs to the lat-
ter variety, which is reddish-white, and almost
lithographic, like the Jura-limestone of Papen-
heim. The compact and cavernous beds con-
tain nests of brown ocracious iron; perhaps
the red earth (tierra colorada) so much sought
for by the planters (haciendados) of coffee, is
only owing to the decomposition of some
superficial beds of oxidated iron, mixed with
silex and clay, or to a reddish sandstone -—
superposed on limestone. The whole of this
formation, which I shall designate by the name
of the limestone of Guines, to distinguish it
from another much more recent, forms near
Trinidad, in the Lomas of S. Juan, steep decli-


* The western part of the island having no deep ravins,
we recognize this alternance in travelling from the Havan-
nah to Batabano, the deepest beds (inclined from 30° to 40°
N.E.) appearing as we advance.


+ Sandstone and ferruginous sand; iron-sand ?


51


vities resembling the mountains of Limestone of
Caripe, in the vicinity of Cumana*. They
also contain great caverns, near Matanzas and
Jaruco, where I have not heard that any fossil
bones have been found. The frequency of
caverns where the pluvial waters accumulate,
and disappear in small rivers, sometimes causes
a sinking of the earth-++. I believe that the
gypsum, of the island of Cuba belongs not to
tertiary, but to secondary soil; it is worked in
several places on the east of Matanzas, at San
Antonio de los Banos, where it contains sul-—
phur, and at the Cayos, opposite San Juan de
los Remedios. We must not confound with
this (Jura?) limestone of Guines, sometimes
porous, sometimes compact, another formation
so recent, that it seems to augment in our
days. I mean the calcareous agglomerats, which
I saw in the cayos or islands that border the
coast between the Batabano and the bay of
Xagua, principally south of the Cienega de
Zapata, Cayo Buenito, Cayo Flamenco, and
Cayo de Piedras. The soundings prove that
they are rocks rising abruptly from a bottom
of 20 to 30 fathoms. Some are at the water's
edge, others one-fourth or one-fifth of a toise


* Per. Nar., vol. vi, p. 626.
+ For instance, the tobacco mills of the ancient royal


farm,
2


52


above the surface of the sea. Angular fragments
_ of madrepores, and cellularies from 2 to 3 cubic
inches, are found cemented by grains of quartz-
ous sand. The inequalities of the rocks are
covered by a mold, in which, with a glass, we
only distinguish the detritus of shells and
corals. This tertiary formation no doubt be-
longs to that of the coast of Cumana, Cartha-
gena, and the Great Land of Guadaloupe, of
which I have spoken in my geognostic table of
South America *. MM. Chamiso and Guia-
mard have recently thrown great light on the
formation of the coral islands in the South Sea.
When seated near the Havannah, at the foot of


the Castillo de la Punta, on shelves of cavern-
ous rocks-{~, and covered at the same time


* See above, vol. vi, p. 585. M. Moreau de Jonnés has
also well distinguished, in his Histoire physique des Antilles
francoises (Tom. 1, p. 186, 188, and 543), between the
Roche @ Ravets of Martinico and Hayti, which is porous,
filled with terebratulites, and other vestiges of pelagic shells,
somewhat analogous to the limestone of Guines of the island
of Cuba, and the calcareous pelagic sediment called at Gua-
daloupe Platine or Magonne bon Dieu. In the Cayos of the
island of Cuba, or Jardinillos del Rey y de la Reyna, the
whole cotal rock which rises above the surface of the water;
appeared to me to be fragmentary, that is, composed of
broken blocks. It is probable, however, that in the depth,
it reposes on masses of lythophyte polypiers still living.

+ The surface of hese shelves, blackened and excavated
by the waters, presents ramifications like the cauliflower, as


53


with verdant alves and living polypiers, we find
enormous masses of madrepores and other
lithophyte corals set in the texture of those
shelves, we are at first tempted to admit, that
the whole of this limestone rock, which consti-
tutes the greater part of the island of Cuba, is
owing to an uninterrupted operation of nature,
to the action of productive organic forces, an
action which continues in our days in the
bosom of the ocean; but this appearance of
the novelty of limestone formations soon van-
ishes, when we quit the shore, and recollect
the series of coral rocks which contain the for-
mations of different ages, the muschelkalk, the
Jura limestone, and coarse limestone*. The
same coral rocks as those of Castillo and la
Punta are found in the lofty inland mountains,


they are observed on the currents of lavas. Is the change

of colour produced by the waters owing to the manganese

which we recognize by some dendrites? (Vol. v, p. 19,

305.) The sea, entering into the clefts of the rocks, and in

a cavern at the foot of Castillo del Morro, compresses the’
air, and makes it issue with a tremendous noise. This

noise explains the phenomena of the baxos roncadores (snor-

ing bocabecos), so well known to navigators who cross

from Jamaica to the mouth of Rio San Juan of Nicaragua,

or to the isle of San Andrés.

* See, on the accumulation of corals in the coarse limes
stone of Paris, (limestone with cerites and nummulites),
Brongniart, Descr, géol. des env. de Paris, p. 269, Maraschini
sulle format, del Vicentino, p. 177.


54


accompanied with petrifications of bivalve shells,
very different from those which are actually seen
on the coasts of the Antilles. Without posi-
tively assigning a determined place in the table
of formations to the limestone of Guines, which
is that of Castillo and la Punta, I have no
remaining doubt of the relative antiquity of
that rock with respect. to the calcareous agglo-
merat of the Cayos, situated south of Batabano,
and east of the isle of Pinos. The globe has
undergone great revolutions between the periods’
when these two soils were formed, one contain-
ing the great caverns of Matanzas, the other
daily augmenting, by the agglutination of frag-
ments of coral and quartzous sand. On the
south of the island of Cuba, the latter of these
soils seems to repose sometimes on (Jura) lime-
stone of Guines, as in the Jardinillos, and
sometimes (towards Cape Cruz) immediately
on primitive recks*. In the Little Antilles,
the corals are covered with volcanic produc-
tions. Several of the Cayos of the island of
Cuba contain fresh water, which I found very
good in the middle of the Cayo de Piedras.
When we reflect on the extreme smallness of


* Ihave already stated above, this indifference of super-
position, vol. vi, p.'638, &c. :

+ According to my observations : lat. 210 56’ 40”; long.
880 37’ 12’, (Obs. astr., Tom. 2, p. 111.)


59


these islands, we can scarcely believe that the
wells of fresh water are filled with rain-water
not evaporated. Do they prove a sub-marine
communication of the limestone of the coast
with the limestone which serves for the basis
of lithophyte polypiers, and is the fresh water
of Cuba raised up by a hydrostatic pressure
across the coral rocks of Cayos, as it is in the
bay of Xagua, where, in the middle of the sea,
it forms springs frequented by the lamantins?
The secondary formations on the east of the
Havannah, are pierced in a singular manner
by syenitic and euphotide rocks# united in
groupes. The southern bottom of the bay as
well as the north, (the hills of Morro and
Cabana), are of Jura limestone; but on the
eastern bank of the two Ensenadas de Regia
and Guanabacoa, the whole is transition soil,
In going from north to south, and first near
Marimelena, we find syenite composed of a
great quantity of amphibol, partly decomposed,
a little quartz, and a reddish-white feldspar sel-
dom crystalized: This fine syenite, of which
the strata are inclined to the north-west,


* A succinct description of this groupe, which 1 had writ-
ten in Spanish, in 1804, with that of Noticia mineralogica del
Cerro de Guanabacoa communicada al Ex. Sr. Marques de
Someruelos, Capitan General de la Ista de Cuba, was published
at the Hayannah, (Patriota Americano, 1812, Tom. 2, p. 29.)


alternates twice with serpentine. The layers
of intercalated serpentine are three toises thick.
Farther south, towards Regla and Guanabacoa,
the syenite disappears, and the whole soil -is
covered with serpentine, rising in hills from 30
to 40 toises high, and running from east to
west. This rock is much fendillated, externally
of a bluish-grey, covered with dendrites of
manganese, and internally of a leek and aspara-
gus-green, crossed by small veins of asbestos.
It contains no garnet or amphibole, but metal-.
loide diallage disseminated in the mass. The
serpentine is sometimes of an esquillous, some-
times of a conchoide fracture; this was the
first time I had found metalloide diallage within
the tropics. Several blocks of serpentine have
magnetic poles ; others are of sucha homogene-
ous texture, and have such a succulent glossi-
ness, that at a distance they may be taken for
pechstein (resinite). It were to be wished that
these fine masses were employed in the arts, as
they are in several parts of Germany. In
approaching Guanabacoa, we find serpentine _
crossed by veins from 12 to 14 inches thick, and
filled with fibrous quartz, amethyst; and fine
mammelonnes, and stalactiforme calcedoines ;
perhaps chrysoprase will also one day be found.
Some - copper pyrites appear among these
veins, accompanied, it is said, by silvery-grey
copper. I found no traces of this grey-copper ;


57


it is probably the metalloide diallage that has
given the Cerros de Guanabacoa the reputation
of riches in gold and silver, which it has en-
joyed for ages. In some places, petroleum *
runs out from rents in the serpentine. Springs
of water are frequent; they contain a little sul-


* Does there exist in the bay of the Havannah, any other
source of petroleum than that of Guanabacoa, or must it be
admitted that the betun liguido, which in 1508, served
Sebastian de Ocampo, for the caulking of ships, is dried up ?
This spring, however, fixed the attention of Ocampo on the
port of the Havannah, where he gave it the name of Puerto
de Carenas. It is said that abundant springs of petroleum
are also found in the eastern part of the island (Manantialis de
betun y chapapote) between Holguin and Mayari, and on the
coast of Santiago de-Cuba. An islet has recently been dis--
covered (Siguapa) near Punta Icacos, where nothing appears
but solid earthy bitumen. This mass reminds us of the
asphalte of Valorbe in the limestone of Jura. Is the forma-
tion of the serpentine of Guanabacoa repeated near Bahia
Honda, in the Cerro del Rubi? On the hills of Regla and
Guanabacoa, the botanists find at the foot of some scattered
palm-trees, Jatropha pandurefolia, J. integerrima Jacq., J.
fragrans, Petiveria alliacea, Pisonia loranthoides, Lantana —
involucrata, Russelia sarmentosa, Ehretia Havanensis, Cor-
dia globosa, Convolvulus pinnatifidus, C. calycinus, Bignonia
lepidota, Lagascea mollis Cav., Malpighia cubensis, Triop-
teris lucida, Zanthoxylum Pterota, Myrtus tuberculata,
Mariscus Havanensijs, Andropogon avenaceus Schrad., Olyra
latifolia, Chloris cruciata, and a great number of Banisteria,
of which the golden flowers embellish the landscape. (See
our Florata Cube Insule inthe Nov. Genera and Spec., Tom.
7, p. 467).


58


phurated hydrogen, and deposit an oxid of
iron. The Banos of Bareto are agreeable, but
of nearly the same temperature as the atmo-
sphere. The geognostic constitution of this
groupe of serpentine rocks, from its insulated
position, its veins, its connection with syenite,
and its rising up across shell-formations, merits
particular attention. Feldspar with a basis of
souda (compact feldspar), forms, with diallage,
the euphotide and serpentine; with pyroxene,
dolerite and basalt ; and with garnet, eclogite *.
These five rocks, dispersed over the whole
globe, charged with oxidulated and titanious
iron, are probably of similar origin. It is easy
to distinguish two formations in the euphotide;
one is destitute of amphibol, even when it alter-
nates with amphibolic rocks (Joria in Piedmont,
Regla in the island of Cuba), rich in pure ser-
pentine, in metalloide diallage, and sometimes
in jasper (Tuscany, Saxony); the other, strongly
charged with amphibol, often passing to dio-
rite , has no jasper in layers, and sometimes
contains rich veins of copper, (Silesia, Mussinet


* Renthberg, near Dolau (Bareuth), Saualpe (Styria). 5

+ On a serpentine that flows like a penombre, veins of
greenstone (diorite) near lake Clunie, in Perthshire. See
Mae Culloch, in Edinb. Journ. of Science, 1824, July, p.
3-16. On a vein of serpentine, and the alterations it pro-
duces on the banks of Carity, near West-Balloch in Forfar-
shire, see Charles Lyell, 1. c., vol. iii, p. 43.


59


in Piedmont, the Pyrenees, Parapara in Vene-
zuela, Copper Mountains of North America).
It is the latter formation of euphotide which,
by its mixture with diorite, is itself linked with
hyperthenite, in which real beds of serpentine
are sometimes developed in Scotland and Nor-
way. No volcanic rocks of a more recent
period have hitherto been discovered in the
island of Cuba; for instance neither trachytes,
dolerites nor basalts. I know not whether they
are found in the rest of the Great Antilles, of
which the geognostic constitution differs essen-
tially from that of the series of calcareous.
and volcanic islands, which stretch from Trini-
dad to the Virgin Islands. Earthquakes, in
general less fatal at Cuba than at Portorico and
Hayti, are most felt in the eastern part, be-
tween cape Maysi, Santiago de Cuba, and la
Ciudad of Puerto Principe. Perhaps towards
those regions the action of the crevice extends
laterally, which is believed to cross the neck of
granitic land between Port-au-Prince and cape —
Tiburon, and on which whole mountains were
overthrown, in 1770 *.

The cavernous texture of the limestone for-
mations (soboruco) which we have just de-
scribed, the great inclination of their shelves,


* Dupuget, in the Journal des mines, vi, p. 58, and Leo-
pold de Buch, Phys. Beschr, der Canar. Inseln, 1825, p. 403.


60
the smallness of the island, the frequency, and
nakedness of the plains, and the proximity of
the mountains that form a lofty chain on the
southern coast, may be considered as among
the principal causes of the want of rivers, and
the drought which is felt, especially in the
western part of Cuba. In this respect, Hayti,
Jamaica, and several of the Little Antilles,
which contain volcanic heights covered with
forests, are more favored by nature *. The
lands most celebrated for their fertility, are the
districts of Xagua, Trinidad, Matanzas, and
Mariel. The valley of Guines owes its repu-
tation to artificial irrigation (sanjas de riego).
Notwithstanding the want of great rivers, and
the unequal fertility of the soil, the island of
Cuba, by its undulated surface, its continually
renewed verdure, and the distribution of its
vegetable forms, presents at every step the
most varied and beautiful landscape. Two
trees with large, tough, and glossy leaves, the
Mammea and the Calophyllum Calaba, five
species of palm-trees (the Palma real, or Oreo-.
doxa regia, the common Cocoa-tree, the Cocos:
crispa, the Corypha Miraguama, and the C.
maritima), and small shrubs constantly loaded
with flowers, decorate the hills and the


* Hist. phys. des Antilles, Tom. 1, p. 44, 118, 287, 295,
300.


61


savannahs. The Cecropia peltata marks the
humid spots. It would seem as if the whole
island had been originally a forest of palms, le-
mons and wild orange trees. The latter, bear-
ing a small fruit, are probably anterior to the
arrival of the Europeans*, who transported
thither the agrumi of the gardens; they rarely ex-
ceed the height of ten to fifteen feet. The lemon,
and orange trees are most frequently separate ;
and the new planters, in clearing the ground by
the means of fire, distinguish the quality of the
soil, according as it is covered with one or other
of those groupes of social plants; they prefer
the soil of naranjal to that which produces the
small lemon. Ina country where the fabrica-
tion of sugar is not sufficiently improved to
employ any other fuel than the bagasse
(dried sugar-cane), the progressive destruction
(desmonte) of the small woods is a real calami-
ty. The aridity of the soil augments in pro-
portion as it is stripped of the trees that shel-


* See my Political Essay, vol. ii, p. 467. The best in-
formed inhabitants of the island assert, that the cultivated
orange-trees brought from Asia, preserve the size, and all
the properties of their fruits when they become wild. (This
is also the opinion of M. Gallesio, Traité de Citrus, p. 32).
The Brazilians have no doubt that the small bitter orange
which bears the name of Joranja do terra, and is found wild,
far from the habitations of man, is of American origin.
(Caldcleugh, Travels in South Amer., vol. i, p- 25.)


62


tered it from the ardor of the sun, and of which
the leaves, emitting heat under a sky always
serene, occasion as the air cools, a precipitation
of aqueous vapors.

Among the very small number of rivers wor-
thy of attention, the Rio Guines may be no-
ticed, which, in 1798, there was a project of
joining to the canal of small navigation, which
was to cross the island in the meridian of Ba-
tabano; the Rio Armendaris or Chorrera, of.
which the waters are led to the Havannah by
the Zanja de Antoneli ; Rio Canto, on the north
of the town of Bayamo ; the Rio Maximo which
rises on the east of Puerto Principe; the Rio
Sagua Grande, near Villa Clara; the Rio de las
Palmas, which issues opposite Cayo Galiado ;
the small rivers of Jaruco and Santa Cruz, be-
tween Guanabo and Matanzas, navigable at the
distance of some miles from their mouths, and
favorable to the embarkment of sugar-casks ;
the Rio San Antonio, which, like many others,
is ingulphed in the caverns of limestone rocks ;
the Rio Guaurabo, west of the port of Trinidad;
and the Rio Galafre, in the fertile district of
Filipinas, which throws itself into. the Laguna
de Cortez. - The most abundant springs rise on
the southern coast, where, from Xagua to Punta
de Sabina, on a length of forty-six leagues, the
soil is extremely marshy. The abundance of
the waters which filter by the clefts of the stra-


63


tified rock is such, that from the effect of an
hydrostatic pressure, fresh water springs far
from the coast, and amidst salt-water. The
jurisdiction of the Havannah is not the most
fertile; and the few sugar-plantations that ex-
isted in the vicinity of the capital, are now re-
placed by farms for cattle (potreros), and fields
of maize and forage, of which the profits are
considerable on account of the consumption of
the town. The agriculturists of the island
of Cuba distinguish two kinds of earth,
often mixed together like the squares of a
draught-board, black earth (negra ou prieta)
clayey and full of moisture, and red earth (ber-
meja), more silicious, and mixed with oxid of
iron. The ¢ééerra negra is generally preferred,
on account of its best preserving humidity, for
the cultivation of the sugar-cane, and the tierra
bermeja for coffee; but many sugar plantations
are established on the red soil.

The climate of the Havannah corresponds to
the extreme limits of the torrid zone: it isa_
tropical climate, in which a more unequal dis-
tribution of heat at different parts of the year,
denotes the passage to the climates of the tem-
perate zone. Calcutta (lat. 23° 8’ N.), Macao
(lat. 22° 12’N.), the Havannah (lat. 23° 9’ N.),
and Rio Janeiro (lat. 22° 54’ S.) are places
which from their position, at the level of the
ocean, near the tropics of Cancer and Capri-


64


corn, consequently at an equal distance from
the equator, are of great importance for the
study of meteorology. This study can only ad-
vance by the determination of certain numerical
elements, which are the indispensible basis of
the laws we seek to discover. The aspect of
the vegetation being identic towards the limits
of the torrid zone, and at the equator, we are
accustomed to confound vaguely the climates
of two zones comprized between 0° and 10°,
and between 15° and 23° of latitude. The region
of palm-trees, bananas, and arborescent gra-
mina extends far beyond the two tropics: but
it would be dangerous (as was done recently on
the death of Dr. Oudney, in discussing at what
elevation of soil ice could have been formed in
the kingdom of Bornou) to apply what has.
been observed at the extremity of the tropical
zone, to what may take place in the plains near
the equator. In order to rectify those errors,
it is important that the mean temperature of
the year and months be well known, as also the.
thermometric oscillations in different seasons at -
the parallel of the Havannah ; and to prove by
an exact comparison with other points alike
distant from the equator, for instance, with Rio
Janeiro and Macao, that the great lowering of
temperature observed in the island of Cuba is
owing to the irruption, and the stream of layers
of cold air borne from the temperate zones


65


towards the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn.
The mean temperature of the Havannah, ac-
cording to four years of good observations, is
25°7° (20°6° R.), only 2° cent. above that of the
regions ‘of America nearest the equator *. The
proximity of the sea raises the mean tempera-
ture of the year on the coast; but in the inte-
rior of the island, when the north winds pene-
trate with the same force, and where the soil
rises to the height of forty toises-+, the mean
temperature attains only 28° (184° R.), and
does not surpass that of Cairo and Lower
Egypt. The difference between the mean tem-
perature of the hottest and coldest months, rises
to 12° in the interior of the island; at the Ha-
vannah, and on the coast; to 8°; at Cumana, to
scarcely 3°. The hottest months, July and
and August, attain 20°8°, at the island of Cuba,
perhaps 29.5° of mean temperature, as at the
equator. The coldest months are December
and January; their mean temperature, in the
interior of the island,.is 17°; at the Havannah,
21°, that is 5° to 8° below the same months at


* Mean temperature of Cumana (lat. 10° 27') 27°7° cent.
It is asserted that in the Little Antilles, at 13° and 160 of
latitude, we find for Guadaloupe 27°5°; for Martinico,
272° ; for Barbadoes, 26°3°. Hist. Phys., des Antilles, tom,
i, p. 186.

t Scarcely six toises more than the height of Paris (first
floor of the Royal Observatory) above the level of the sea,


VOL. Vila EF


66


the equator, yet still 3° above the hottest month
_ at Paris. With respect to the extreme tempe-
rature *, which the centigrade thermometer at-
tains in the shade, we observe, towards the limit
of the torrid zone, what characterizes "the re-
gions nearest the equator (between 0° and 10°
of north and south latitude) ; the thermometer,
which has been seen at Paris at 38-4° (30.7°
R.), rises only to 33° at Cumana ; at Vera Cruz,
it was but once at 32° (25°6° R.) during thir-
teen years; and M. Ferrer saw it oscillate at
the Havannah, only between 16° and 30° in the
space of three years (1810-1812). Mr. Robredo
mentions, in his manuscript notes in my posses-
sion, as very remarkable, that the temperature
rose, in 1801, to 34:4° (275° R.); while at
Paris, according to the curious researches of
M. Arago, the extremes of temperature between
367° and 38° (29°4° and 30°7° R.) were attained
four times in ten years (from 1793 to 1803).
The nearness of the two periods, when the sun
passes by the zenith of places situated towards
the extremity of the torrid zone, often produces
intense heat on the shore of Cuba and in the
country comprised between the parallels of 20°


* M. Lachenaie asserts that, in 1800, he saw the centesi-
mal thermometer rise in the shade (at Saint Rose, in the
island of Guaduloupe,) to 39° 3’; but we are ignorant if his
instrument was exact, and free from the effects of reflection.
The extremes at Martinico are 20° to 35°,


67


and 204°, le for whole months than for some
successive days. The thermometer does not
rise in August (common year), above 28° to
30°: the excessive heat is complained of when
it rises to 31° (24°8° R.). The lowering of the
wintry temperature to 10° or 12° is rare; but
when the north wind blows during several
weeks, and brings the cold air of Canada, ice is
sometimes formed during the night, in the in-
terior of the island, in the plain at a small dis-
tance from the Havannah*. According to the
observations of MM. Wells and Wilson, we
may admit that the reflexion of the caloric pro--
duces this effect, when the thermometer keeps
up at 5°, and even 9° above the freezing point ;
but M. Robredo assured me he had seen the
thermometer at zero. This formation of thick
ice almost at the level of the sea, in a spot
which belongs to the torrid zone, is the more
remarkable, as at Caraccas (lat. 10° 31’), and
at 477 toises high, the atmosphere does not
cool below 11°; and that nearer the equator, we
must ascend 1400 toises to find ice-~. It may
be observed further, that between the Havan-


* This accidental cold was remarked by the first travel-
lers. ‘* En Cuba,” says Gomara, “‘ algo se siente el frio.”
Hist. of the Indies, fol. 27.

+ We do not find any, even at Quito (1490 toises), situ-
ated in a narrow valley, where a sky, often cloudy, dimin-
ishes the force of reflection.

F2


nah and Saint, Domingo, and between Bataba-
no and Jamaica, there is a difference of only 4°
or 5° of latitude; and at Saint Domingo, Ja-
maica, Martinico, and Guadaloupe, the minima
of temperature in the plains * is from 18°5° to
20°5°.

It will be interesting to compare the climate
of the Havannah with that of Macao and Rio
Janeiro; two spots, one of which is placed near
the limit of the northern torrid zone; one on
the eastern coast of Asia, and the other on the
eastern coast of America, towards the extremi-
ty of the southern torrid zone. The mean tem-
perature of Rio Janeiro is deduced from 3500
observations made by M. Benito Sanchez Dor-
ta; and that of Macao from 1200 observations
communicated to me by the Abbé Richenet +-.


HAVANNAH. Macao. | R10 JaNerno.
lat. 23° 9’ N, jlat, 22° 12’ N. lat. 22° 54’ S.
Mean temp.ofthe year} 25-"7o 23°3° 23°5°

of the hottest month} 28°8° 28°4° 27°20


of the coldest month 21°1° 16°6° 20°0°


* The observation of 18°5° is by M. Hapel. Lachenaie.
M. Dru also asserts that he never saw the thermometer de-
scend at Portorico lower than to 18'7°; but he believes that
snow falls on the mountains of Loquillo in the same island !

+ When I shall have compared the registers of this res-


pectable and studious ecelesiastic, the partial results of Ma-
cao may undergo some slight changes. See above, vol. vi,
p. 750.


69


The climate of the Havannah, notwithstand
ing the frequency of the north and north-west
winds, is hotter than that of Macao, and Rio
Janeiro. The former participates in the cold
which, on account of the frequency of the west
winds, is felt in winter along all the eastern
coast of a great continent. The proximity of
great spaces of land, covered with mountains
and table-lands, renders the distribution of heat
in the different months of the year, more un-
equal at Macao and Canton, than in an island
circled on the west and north by the hot waters -
of the Gulfstream. The winters are therefore
much colder at Canton and Macao than at the
Havannah. The mean temperature at Canton,
of December, January, February, and March,
in 1801, was between 15° and 17°3° eent.; and
at Macao, between 16°6° and 20°, while at the
Havannah it is generally between 21° and
24°3°: yet the latitude of Macao is 1° more
southerly than that of the Havannah; and the
latter town and Canton are within nearly a mi-
nute on the same parallel. Now, although the
isotherme lines, or lines of equal heat, have a con-
cave summit towards the pole in the systemof the
climates of eastern Asia, as in the system of
eastern America, the cooling, on the same geo-
graphical parallel, is however, most consider-
able on the side of Asia *. The Abbe Richenet,


* Such is the difference of e/imate on the eastern and


70


who during nine years (1806-1814), made use
of the excellent thermometer of maxima and
minima of six, observed that the instrument
descends to 3.3° and 5° (38° and 41° Fahr.)
The thermometer at Canton sometimes almost
reached the point zero, and by the effect of re-
flection, ice is found on the terraces of houses.
Although this great cold never lasts more than
one day, the English merchants residing at Can-
ton, like to make chimney-fires in their apart-
ments from November to January; while at the
Havannah, no want is felt of being warmed-even
by a brazero. Hail is frequent, and extremely
large in the Asiatic climate of Canton and Ma-
cao, while it is scarcely seen once in fifteen
years at the Havannah. In these three places
the thermometer sometimes keeps up for seve-
ral hours between 0° and 4° cent.; and yet,
(which appears to me very remarkable), snow
has never been seen to fall ; and notwithstand-


ing the great lowering of the temperature, the
banana and the palm-trees display as beautiful
a vegetation around Canton, Macao, and the
Havannah, as in the plains nearest the equator.


western coast of the ancient continent, that at Canton (lat.
23° 8/), the mean temperature of the year is 22°9°, while at
Saint Croix of Teneriffe (lat. 28° 28’) it is, according to
MM. de Buch and Escolar, 23°8°. Canton, situated on an
eastern. coast, participates of the continental climate. Tene-
riffe is an island near the western coast of Africa.


It is fortunate for the study of meteorology,


that in the present state of civilization, so many
numerical elements can be collected on the
climate of places situated almost immediately
within the two tropics. Five of the largest
towns of the commercial word, Canton, Macao,
Calcutta, the Havannah, and Rio Janeiro, are
in that position. In the northern hemisphere,
Mascate, Syene, Nuevo Santander, Durango,
and the most northerly of the Sandwich islands;
and in the southern hemisphere, Bourbon, the
Isle of France, and the port of Cobija, between
Copiapo and Arica, are places frequented by
Europeans, and which furnish naturalists with
the same advantages of position as Rio J aneiro
and the Havannah. Climatology makes slow
progress, because results obtained on points of
the globe where human civilization begins to
develope itself, are accumulated by chance.
Those points form small groupes separated
from each other by immense spaces of land un-
known to meteorologists. In order to ascertain
the laws of nature in the distribution of heat |
on the globe, we must give our observations a
direction conformable to what anew science
requires, and know what numerical statements
are the most important. Nuevo Santander, on
the eastern coast of the gulph of Mexico, has
probably a mean temperature lower than that
of the island of Cuba. The atmosphere must


72


participate in the wintry cold of a great conti-
nent which widens towards the north-west. If, on
the contrary, we quit the system of the climates
of eastern America, if passing over the basin or
rather the submerged valley of the Atlantic, we
fix our regards on the coast of Africa, we find,
in the system of cisatlantic climates, on the
western shore of the antient continent, the rais-
ed isotherme lines, convex towards the poles.
The tropic of Cancer passes between cape Boja-
dor and cape Blanc, near the Rio de Ouro, on
the inhospitable bounds of the desert of Sahara;
and the mean temperature of those places must
be far above that of the Havannah, on account
of their position on an oriental coast, and also
of the proximity of the desert, which reflects the
heat, and spreads the molecules of sand
through the atmosphere.

We have seen that the great lowerings of the
temperature in the island of Cuba are of such
short duration, that neither the bananas, the
sugar-cane, nor other productions of the torrid
zone, suffer habitually on that account. We
know how well plants of vigorous organization
resist temporary cold, and that the orange trees
and bigaradiers of the river of Genoa survive
the fall of a and cold which does not ex-
tend 6° or 7° below the freezing point *. As the


* Gallesio, p. 55.


at
10


vegetation of the island cf Cuba bears the cha-
racter of the vegetation of regions nearest the
equator, we are surprized to find even in the
plains, a vegetable form of the temperate cli-
mates, and mountains of the equatorial part of
Mexico. I have often in other works fixed the
attention of botanists on this extraordinary
phenomenon in the geography of plants. The:
pines (pinus occidentalis) are not found in the
Little Antilles ; not even in Jamaica (between
172° and 183° of latitude), according to Mr.
Robert Brown, notwithstanding the elevation
of the soil of that island in the Blue Mountains.
They are only seen further north, in the moun-
tains of Saint Domingo, and in the whole island
of Cuba*, extending between the parallels


* M. Barataro, the learned pupil of professor Balbis,
whom I consulted on the stations of the pinus occidentalis
of Saint Domingo, assured me that near cape Samana (lat.
19° 18’), he saw that tree in plains, amidst other plants of
hot regions, and that in general it is found at Saint Domin-
go and Porto Rico on mountains of small height, and not .
on the most lofty. The pines of Cuba and the isle des Pines,
south of Batabano, are, according to the relation of travel-
lers, real pines with imbricated cones, similar to the pinus
occidentalis Swarz, and not podocarpus, as | had for some
time suspected. The first Spaniards who visited the West In-
dies have sometimes confounded the pines and the podocarpus;
and a passage of Herera (Decad. i, p. 52), proves indubita-
bly that the Pinos del Cibao, mentioned by Columbus in his
second voyage, were coniferes with monocarpe fruit, real


74


from 20° to 23. They attain a height of 60 to
70 feet ; and it is remarkable, that the Cahoba*
(mahogany), and pines vegetate at the island
of Pinos, in the same plains. We also find
pines towards the south-east of the island of
Cuba, on the declivity of the Copper mountains,
where the soil is barren and sandy. The in-
terior table-land of Mexico is covered with the
same species of coniferous plants; at least the
specimens brought by M. Bonpland and myself
from Acaguisotla, Nevado de Toluca, and.
Cofre de Perote, do not appear to differ specifi-
cally from the pinus occidentalis of the West


podocarpus, ‘* Estos Pinos mui altos, says the Admiral, que
no llevan pifias (the cones of the pine), son por tal orden com-
puestos por naturaleza que parecian aceitunas del Alzxarafe de
Sevilla.” I have already remarked, in presenting the first
description of Bertholletia, according to Laet (vol. v, p.
587), how simple and characteristic were the descriptions of
the ancient travellers, who had not the rage of employing
technical terms of which they were ignorant of the value.
Were the pines of the isles of Guanaja and Rattan (in 162°
of latitude), which served to make masts, podocarpus, or of
the pinus kind? (Herera, Dec. i, p. 131; Laet, Orb. Nov.,


p. $41; Juarros, Hist. de Guatemala, tom. ii, p. 169 ;
Tuckey, Maritime Geography, vol. iv, p. 294). We know
not if the name of the isle of Pinos, situated 8° 57' of lati-
tude east of Portobello, is founded on the error of the first
navigators. Between the parallels of 0° and 10° in equi-
noxial America, I saw no podocarpus descend below 1100


toises of height.
* Swieteni Mahogany L.


79


\


India Islands, described by Swartz. Now,
those pines which we see at the level of the
ocean in the island of Cuba, in 10° and 22° of
latitude, and which belong only to the southern
part of that island, do not descend on the Mex-
ican continent between the parallels of 172° and
193°, below the elevation of 500 toises. I even
observed that, in the road from Perote to Ka-
lapa, in the eastern mountains opposite the
island of Cuba, the limit of the pines is 935
toises ; while in the western mountains, between
Chilpanzingo and Acapulco, near Quasiniqui-
lapa, two degrees further south, it is 580 toises,
and perhaps on some points, 450. These ano-
malies of stations are very rare in the torrid
zone, and are probably less connected with the
temperature * than with the nature of the soil.
In the system of the migration of plants, we
must suppose that the pinus occidentalis of
Cuba came from Yucatan before the opening of
the channel between Cape Catoche and Cape
Saint Antonio, and not from the United States,
so rich in coniferous plants; for the species of
which we here trace the botanical geography,
has not been discovered in Florida.

® See a table of the stations of the coniferous plants and
the amentacies, with an indication of the temperature they
require, in the Nov. Gen. and Spec., tom. ii, p. 26. No pines


have yet been found near Xalapa, on the eastern declivity of
the Mexican table-land, at 700 toises high, although the


thermometer there descends below 12° cent.


f


= =


PL Ieak ayy jo uvoyy


10S 0


.


09 JaquiaoaqT
94 : 19QUIdAON
$61 - 1990399
08  daquiaydog
Z8 -  4ysnény
cg Site < ate
8.16 68 - - dune
LV cL - - Avy
L1G OL - Judy
€.61 89 YoreyAl
¢.61 69 Areniqoy
SI 389 Arenue ¢


RAED


panaae ‘a ‘a al *SHLINOM
ee “66L1 ‘86L1 “LOLI ‘9641 ,
SS ee ee |


“AVEVAE) NO SNOLLVAUGSIG)


detail the observat


|
om
oO


I shall here not
temperature made at the island of Cuba:


marine


Yyuow ysapjog Jaquisseq
YoU 489},0F] é JaquiosoN


",8-GT UVa ‘3 EE of h FR] “OUloyy : “""19G0}O
Jaquiea}dag


1-66 8.83 9.8%  YyUOUT 49930 FF ; “+ qasnsny
6-96 L1G L9Ot Yuour ysoplopy
9-L3 L-S% 6-ZG 2IN}e19d WI} UAT,


89% 193 Sate “AON-"3dog ; “+ YOaR TAL
8-LG ¢ 8% B8S  'ysnsny-oune D * Kreniqaq

ee ++ Krenuee
L.8Z 6:96 Avy-qore yl


06-96 08-16 °3U99 00.8T i
(LB OT “IPT *4sv0o *eBqny JO IIS 943 Jo qu99 “UL, “SHLNON
‘suvmng Sqvuuearyy towoyur “{efeqa 2 ‘OOST


The partial


»
>
io]
a
3)
5
wm
3

a
®
_
a
=
~—
_


ajay is $


The village of Ub
observed above, at the distance of 5


“AVNNVAV]] GHL LV “Sado


to 189° (Thermometer constructed by Nairne).


leagues from the Havannah, on a table-land 38
mean of December 1795, was 18°8° cent.; that
of January and February, 1800, rose from 13°8°


toises above the level of the sea.


78


This is the real mean deduced from the
maxima and minima of each day; yet the re-
sults of Don Antonio Robredo, made at the
village of Ubajay and at.the Havannah (1800),
are perhaps some tenths too high, three diurnal
observations (at 7 in the morning, noon, and
10 in the evening) having been simultaneously
employed. The mean of M. Ferrer, to whom
we owe the observations of three years, 1810,
1811, and 1812 (see above, vol. vi, p. 748), are
the most exact we possess on the climate of the
Havannah, the instruments of that able navi-
gator having been better exposed during ten
months of 1800, than those of M. Robredo.
The latter remarks himself, that “the current
of air was not sufficiently free in his apartment
at the Havannah (priza no mug ventilades),
while the exposure at Ubajay was all that could
be desired, (un lugar abierto & todos vientos,
pero.cubierto contra el sol y la lluvia). I saw
the centigrade thermometer in the latter half
of December, 1800, constantly between 10° and
15°. It lowered in January, at the Hacienda
del Rio Blanco, to 75°. Water was sometimes.
frozen some lines thick in the country, near
the Havannah, at the height of 50 toises above
the level of the Ocean. This observation was
communicated to me by M. Robredo, in 1801,
and was repeated in December, 1812, after im-
petuous north winds had blown nearly a month.


As snow falls in Europe, when the temperature
in the plains is some degrees above the freez-
ing point, we may be surprised that in no part
of the island, not even on the Lomas of San
Juan, nor on the lofty mountains of Trinidad,
snow is seen to fall. Nothing is observed on
the summit of these mountains, and those of
del Cobre, but hoar-frost (escarcha). It would
seem that in the high regions of the air it
acquires other conditions than that of a rapid
lowering of the temperature, to produce a fall
of snow or hail. We have already observed
above, that the latter is never seen (vol. iv, p.
538; vol. vi, p. 785) at Cumana, and so rarely
at the Havannah, that it is only observed dur-


ing electric explosions, and with blasts from
the S.S.W., once in fifteen or twenty years. On
the coast of Jamaica, at Kingston, the thermo-


meter lowering at sun-rise to 20°5° (69° F.), is
mentioned as an extraordinary phenomenon *.
In that island, we must ascend the Blue Moun-
tains 1150 toises, to see it (August) at 83°: I
did not observe the thermometer lower at Cu-
mana, at 10° of latitude, than 20°8° (vol. vi, p.
781). The changes of the temperature are very
sudden at the Havannah; the variations were |
in three hours, in the shade, from 32°2° to 23°4°,


* Edwards, Hist, of the British Colonies, 4793, vol. i, p- x
183.


80


consequently 9° cent., which is very consider-
able for the torrid zone, and double the change
felt further south, on the coast of Columbia.
At the Havannah (lat. 22° 8’), the inhabitants
complain of cold when the temperature de-
scends rapidly to 21°; at Cumana (lat. 10° 28’),
when it descends to 23° (vol. vi, p. 781). Water
that had been exposed to a strong evaporation,
and was considered as quite fresh at the Ha-
vannah, in April 1804, was at 24:4° (19°5° R.),
while the mean temperature of the day rose to
29°3° (vol. vi, p. 785). During the three years
of M. Ferrer’s observations (1810-1812), the
thermometer never sank below 164° (20th
February, 1812), nor rose above 30° (August
4th, same year). I saw it in April (1801), at
32°2°, but in a long succession of years, the.
temperature of the atmosphere does not once
rise to 34° (27:2° R.), an extreme which in the
temperate zone, it surpasses 4 centesimal de-
grees (vol. vi, p. 781). It would be very inter-
esting to collect good observations on the heat
of the interior of the earth, at the extremity of
the tropical zone. I found it in the caverns of - -
calcareous rock, near San Antonio de Beitia, ~
and at the sources of the Rio Chorera, to be
between 22° and 23° (Rec. @Obs. astr., Tom. i,
p. 134). M. Ferrer found it in wells 100 feet
deep, 24°4°. These observations, not made’
perhaps in circumstances sufficiently favcrable,


Se ee Ee ee ee


81


would indicate a temperature of the earth below
the mean temperature of the air, which, on the
coast of the Havannah, appears to be 25°7°; and
in the interior of the island, at 40 toises eleva-
tion, 23°. This result is little conformable to
what is every where observed in the temperate
and frozen zones. Do the currents which bear
at great depths the water of the poles towards
the equatorial regions, diminish the tempera-
ture of the interior of the earth in small is-
lands? We have already treated this delicate
question in relating the experiments made in
the cavern of Guacharo, near Caripe (vol. iii,
Per. Nar., p.115 and 155). Yet, it is affirmed,
that in the wells of Kingston and the Low-land
of Guadaloupe, the thermometer has. been seen
at 27°7°; 28°6°, and 27-2°, consequently, at a
temperature at least equal to the mean tempe-
rature of the air in those places.

The great lowering of the temperature to
which countries are exposed situated at the
extremity of the torrid zone, is connected with
the oscillations of the mercury in the baro-
meter, which is not observed in regions near
the equator. At the Havannah, as at Vera-
Cruz, the regularity of the variations of the
pressure of the atmosphere, at certain hours, is
interrupted when the north-winds blow with
violence. I observed that in general, at the
island of Cuba, when the barometer kept up

VOL. VII. G


82
during the breeze, at 0°765", it lowered with
the south-winds to 0°756", and even below.
We have elsewhere remarked, that the baro-
metric mean of the months when the barometer
is highest (December and January), differs
from the mean of the months when the baro-
meter is lowest (August and September), 7 to'8
millimeters, that is, almost as much as at
Paris, and 5 or 6 times more than between the
equator and the 10° of north and south
latitude.


Mean of December... 0°'76656" by 22°1° cent. of temperature.
January...... 076809 21°2
Shy (otk nal tl 0°76453 28°5
August ...... 0°76123 28:8


During the course of three years in which M.
Ferrer took the mean *, the extreme difference
of the days when the mercury in the barometer
rose or fell most, exceeded 30 millimeters. In
order to shew the progress of the accidental
_ oscillations of each month, I shall here subjoin,
according to the manuscript notes of Don
Antonio Robredo, the table ‘+ of observations of
1801, expressed in centimes of English inches.


* See above, vol. vi, p: 749,

+ In this table, the mean of the months is the real mean
drawn from the maxima and minima of each day. The
extremes of the month indicate the barometric heights of
two days when the barometer was at the highest’ and
owest, The heights are not reduced to the temperature of


83


MAXIMA, MINIMA. MEAN. | MEAN TEMP.
January 30°35" 29-96" 30°24" 145° R.
February ... 30°38 30°01 30:26 15°6
March -. 30°41 30°20 30°32 15°5
30°39 30°32 30°35 17°2
30°44 30°38 30°39 19°4
30°36 30°33 30°34 22°2
30°38 29°52 30°22 22°4
30°26 30°12 30°16 22°8
September . 30°18 29°82 30°12 21:0
October .... 30°16 30°04 30°08 18°6
November . 30°18 30:09 30°12 16°5
December . 30:26 30°02 30°08 | 121


Hurricanes are much more rare in the island
of Cuba than at. Saint Domingo, Jamaica, and.
the Little Antilles, situated east and south-east
of Cabo-Cruz; for we must not confound the
violent blasts of north-wind (los nortes) with
the hurricanes which are most frequently from
south-south-east and south-south-west. At the
period when I visited the island of Cuba, there
had been no hurricane, properly so called, since
the month of August, 1794, for that of the 2d
of November 1796, was feeble. The season of
these sudden and frightful movements of the
atmosphere, during which the wind blows from
every point of the compass, and which are often
attended with lightning and hail, is at Cuba,


zero, and the level of the bason was not rectified, the table
being only intended to furnish the differences of the extremes
of every month, and not the absolute mean heights.

G2


84


the end of August, the month of September,
and especially the month of October. At Saint
Domingo and the Carib Islands, the months of
July, August, September, and the middle of
October, are most dreaded by navigators. The
most frequent hurricanes are there felt in the
month of August; so that this phenomenon
appears later in proportion as we advance
towards the west. Most impetuous blasts of
wind from the south-east, are sometimes felt
in March, at the Havannah. The periodical
regularity of hurricanes is no longer believed in
the West Indies *; from 1770 to 1795, seventeen
were felt in the Carib Islands; while not one
took place at Martinico from 1788 to 1804.
That island reckoned three during the course
of the year 1642. It is worthy of remark, that
at the two extremities of the long chain of -the
West Indies, S.E. and N.E. hurricanes are the
most rare. The islands of Tobago and Trinidad
never felt their effects ; and at Cuba, those vio-
lent ruptures of the atmospheric equilibrium
seldom happen. When they arrive, they exer-
cise their ravages more at sea than in ‘the
devastation of the habitations, and more on the
south and south-east coast, than towards the


the Hist. phys. des Antilles, Tom. i,p. 325, 350, 355, 376,
387,


* See the description of this important phenomenon in


85


north and north-west *. In 1527, the famous
expedition of Pamfilo Narvaez was partly de-
stroyed in the port of Trinidad of Cuba.

I shall here state, from the manuscript notes
of the captain of a ship, Don Tomas de Ugarte,
the movements of the barometer during the
hurricane of the 27th and 28th August, 1794,
which occasioned the loss of many ships in the


bay of the Havannah.


IN. IN.

25th August ..... 16... 30-04|27th August ..... 7°... 29°80
20 = 03 8 79

noon 02 AOF = V7

(Mean tempera- 4... 02 10z.. 6
ture 85°8° Fahr.) 8... 01 ALA Ods
mid... 01 11g... 69

26th August ..... 16%... 30°00 mid.. 63
20... - 00)28th August..... 1245 , 29.59

(Mean temp. 88°) noon. 00 18... 58
4... 29°99 13%.. 57

mid.. 98 14... 56

27th August ..... 165... 29°95 143.. 54
18... 94: 15... 52

20... y 90 154.. 50

(Mean temp. 81°) 22 ... 89 16... 51
noon 86 18 ... 52

Diss 4|(Mean temp. 83°) 184.. 54

4... 82 19F.-. 59

6... 89} 193.. 63.


*® This difference between the two coasts is


at Jamaica.


also observed.


28th August fis) 28th August


mid, . 30°01


The hurricane commenced on the 27th in
the morning ; its foree augmented in proportion
as the barometer went down; it ended in the
evening of the 28th. We have related above
that M. Ferrer saw his barometer, (which
marked 26° cent. of temperature for the mean
height of the year 763-71" ) descend, October
25th, 1810, by a furious S.S.W. wind, to
744°72" by 24° cent.

I might enumerate among the causes of the
lowering of the temperature during the winter
months, the great number of shoals with which
the island of Cuba is surrounded, and on which
the heat is diminished several degrees of cente-


simal temperature, either by the mollecules’ of |


water locally cooled which go to. the bottom,
or by the polar currents which are borne to-
ward the abyss of the tropical ocean, or by
the mixture of the deep waters with those of
the surface at the declivities of the banks *;
but this lowering of the temperature is partly


* See above, vol. i, p. 29; vol. ii, p. 56; vol. iii, p. 158.


ee


SS Sh SESS ERE EE


(naa nice, destonimasmity Mite


87


compensated by the flood of hot-water, the
gulph-stream, which runs along the north-west
coast, and of which the swiftness is often dimi-
nished by the north and north east winds. The


chain of shoals which encircles the island, and


appears on our maps like a penumbra, is hap-
pily interrupted on several points, and those
interruptions afford a free access to the coast.
In general, the parts of the island most exempt
from danger (breakers, sand-banks, rocks) are
on the south-east, between Cabo-Cruz and
Punta Maysi (72 sea-leagues) ; and north-west,
between Matanzas and Cabafias (28 1.). In
the south-east part, the proximity of the lefty
primitive mountains renders the coast more
precipitous ; there are the ports of Santiago de
Cuba, Guantanamo, Baitiqueri, and (in turning
the Punta Maysi) Baracoa. The latter port is
the place most anciently peopled by the Euro-
peans. The entrance of the Old Channel, from
Punta de Mulas, W.N.W. of Baracoa, as far as
the new settlement which has taken the name
of Puerto de las Nuevitas del Principe, is alike
free from shelves and breakers. Navigators


find excellent anchorage a little to the east of


Punta de Mulas, in the three rocks of Tanamo,
Cabonico, and Nipe; and on the west of the
Punta de Mulas, in the ports of Sama, Naranjo,
del Padre, and Nuevas Grandes. It is remark-
able, that near the latter port, almost in the


88


same meridian where on the southern side of
the island we find the shoals of Buena Esper-
anza and of las doce leguas, stretching as far as
the isle of Piaos, the uninterrupted series
begins of the Cayos of the Old Channel; it
extends on a length of 94 leagues, from Nue-
vitas to Punta Icacos. The Old Channel is
narrowest opposite to Cayo Cruz and Cayo
Romano ; its breadth is scarcely 5 to 6 leagues.
It is on this point also that the Great Bank of
Bahama takes the greatest development. The
Cayos nearest the island of Cuba, and those
parts of the bank that are not covered with
water (Long Island, Eleuthera) are, like Cuba,
of a lengthened form. An island much larger
than Hayti would appear at the surface of the
Ocean, if it were to lower only from 20 to 30
feet. The chain of breakers and cayos that
bound the navigable part of the Old Channel
towards the south, leave between the Channel
and the coast of Cuba, small basins without
breakers, which communicate with several
ports with good anchorage, such as Guanaja,
Moron, and Remedios,
After having passed by the Old Channel, or

rather by the Channel of Saint Nicolas, between
Cruz del Padre and the bank of the Cayos de
Sel, of which the lowest furnish springs of
fresh water *, we again find the coast, from


* Cayos del Agua (lat. 23° 58, long. 82° 36’), on the


|
|


{|
i
|
|


89


Punta de Icacos to Cabanas, free from danger.
It affords in the interval, the anchorage of
Matanzas, Puerto Escondido, the Havannah,
and Mariel. Further on, westward of Bahia
Honda, of which the possession might tempt
a maritime enemy of Spain, the chain of sboals
recommences (bajos de Santa Isabel y de los
Colorados) extending without interruption as far
as cape Saint Antonio. From that cape to Punta
de Piedras and Bahia de Cortez, the coast is al-
most precipitous, and does not afford soundings
at any distance ; but between Punta de Piedras
and Cabo Cruz, almost the whole southern
part of Cuba is surrounded with shoals of
which the isle of Pinos is but a portion not
covered with water, and which are known on
the west by the name of Jardins (Jardines y
Jardinillos) ; and on the east, by that of Cayo
Breton, Cayos de las doce ieguas, and Bancos de
Buena Esperanza. In all this southern circle
the coast is exempt from danger only from the
strait of Cochinos to the mouth of the Rio Guau-.
rabo. These seas are of very difficult naviga-


Placer de los Roques, or del Cayo de Sal. I place Cayo del
Agua a little more to the west than Captain Steetz, in the
excellent maps that accompany l’ Instruction nautique sur les
Passages a Vile de Cuba, 1825, p. 55, where the Morro of
the Havannah is placed 84° 39’, and the Pan de Matanzas
15° 58’; while M. Ferrer, by means that merit the utmost
confidence, finds them at 84° 42/ 44” and 84° 3/12",


90


tion: I had occasion to determine the position
of several points in latitude and longitude dur-
ing the passage from Batabano to Trinidad of
Cuba and to Carthagena. It would seem that the
resistance of the currents of the high-lands-of
the isle of Pines, and the remarkable stretching
of cape Cruz, have at the same time favored
the accumulation of sand, and the labor of the
saxigen corals which prosper in calm and shal-
low water. In this development of the south-
ern coast 145 leagues in length, there is only
one-Seventh of which the access is entirely free
between Cayo de Piedras and Cayo Blanco, a
little to the east of Puerto Casilda, where
anchorages are found that are often frequented
by small barks; such as the Surgidero del
Batabano, Bahia de Xagua, and Puerto Casilda,
or Trinidad of Cuba. Beyond this latter port,
towards the mouth of the Rio Cauto and Cabo
Cruz (behind the Cayos de doce leguas), the
coast, filled with lagons, is little accessible, and
almost entirely desert.

I have here annexed the most correct state-
ments of the position of the ports of the island
of Cuba :— é ;

On the east of Cabo Cruz (lat. 19° 47’ 16”,
long. 80° 4’ 15”): Santiago de Cuba (lat. 19°
07’ 29”, long. 78° 18’); Bahia de Guantanamo
(lat. 19° 54’, long. 77° 36’);.Puerto Escondido
(lat. 19° 54°55”, long. 77° 24’); Baitiqueri (lat.


9)
20° 2, long. 77°12’). North-west of cape Maysi
(lat. 20° 16’ 40”, long. 76° 30° 25”): Puerto de
Mata (lat. 20° 17’ 10”, long. 76° 43’) ; Baracoa
(lat. 20° 20’ 50”, long. 76°50’) ; Maravi (lat. 20°
24/11”, long. 77° 17'); Puerto de Navas (lat,
20° 29' 44”, long. 77° 20’) ; Cayaguaneque (lat.
20° 30', long. 76° 56') ; Taco (lat. 20° 31' Li’,
long. 77° 0’); Jaragua (lat. 20° 32’ 44”, long,
77° 3’); Puerto de Cayo Moa (lat. 20° 42” 18”,
long. 77° 14’); Yaguaneque (lat. 20° 42’, long.
77° 22’) ; Cananova (lat. 20° 41’ 30”, long. 77° _
24’); Cebollas (lat. 20° 41’ 52”, long. 77° 28’) ;
Tanamo (lat. 20° 42' 41”, long. 77° 37’); Puer-
tos de Cabonica y Livisa (lat. 20° 42/11”, long.
77° 46’); Nipe (lat: 20° 44’ 40”, long. 77° 51’);
Banes (lat. 20° 52’ 50”, long. 78° 1’). North-
west of Punta de Mulas (lat. 21° 5’, long. 77°
57’): Sama (lat. 21° 5’ 50”, long. 78° 11’).
In the old Channel of Bahama: Naranjo
(lat. 21° 5’ 23’’, long. 78° 19”) ; Vita (lat. 21° 6,
long. 78° 25’); Bariai (lat. 21° 49%, long. 78°
27'); Jururu (lat. 21° 3° 39’, long. 78° 28);
Gibara’ (lat. 21° 6 12”, long. 78° 33’); Puerto
del Padre (lat. 21° 15’ 40”, long. 78° 49’);.
Puerto del Malagueta (lat. 21° 16%, long. 78°
58’); Puerto del Manati (lat. 21° 23! 44”, long.
79° 7’); Puerto de Nuevas Grandes (lat. 21° 26’
50”, long. 79° 13’); Puerto de las Nuevitas del
Principe (lat. 21° 38’ 40”, long. 79° 20’); Gua-
naja (lat, 21° 42’, long. 80° 11’; Embarcadero


92


del Principe (lat. 21° 44, long. 80° 23’), between
Rio Jiguey and Punta Curiana on the N.N.E. of
Hato de Guanamacar; Moron (lat. 22° 4’, long.
80° 56°); Puerto de Remedios (lat. 22° 32’, long.
81, 56’); Puerto de Sierra Morena (lat. 23° 3’,
long. 82° 54’). West and south-west of Punta
Tcacos (lat. 23° 10’, long. 83° 32’): Matanzas
(lat. 23° 3’, long. 83° 54’) ; Puerto Escondido
(lat. 23° 8’, long. 84° 12’); mouth of Rio Santa
Cruz (lat. 23° 7’, long. 84° 18’); Jaruco (lat.
23° 9’, long. 84° 25’) ; Havannah (lat. 23° 9’, long.
84° 43’); Mariel (lat. 23° 5’ 58”, long. 85° 2’);
Puerto de Cavanas (lat. 23° 3’, long. 85° 13’) ;
Bahia Honda (the most southern coast of the
bay near Potrero de Madrazo, lat. 20° 56’ 7”,
long. 85°32’ 10”). East of Cabo San Antonio
(lat, 21° 50’, long. 87° 17’ 22”): Surgidero del
Batabano (lat. 22° 43’ 19”, long. 84° 45’.56”) ;
Bahia de Xagua (lat. 22° 4’, long. 82° 54’);
the two ports of the town of Trinidad de Cuba,
namely, Puerto Casilda (lat. 21° 45’ 26”, long.
82° 21’ 7"), the mouth of Rio Guaurabo (lat.
21o 45 46”, and long. 82° 23’ 37’). We find
many ¢fagons (Vertientes, Santa Maria, Cura:
jaya, Yaguabo, Junco, &¢.) ; but no ports pro.
perly so called, from Trinidad to Cabo Cruz.
The positions of 50 ports and anchorages oi

Cuba are the result of a labor from which (ir
1826) I corrected the map of the island, pub:
lished in 1820. The latitudes are, for the most


93


part, those of Portulano de la America septentr.
constr. en el Dep. hidrografico de Madrid, 1818;
but the longitudes differ considerably. Portu-
lano places the Morro of the Havannah at 84°
37’ 45", or 5’ too much to the east. (Consult
Bauza, Derotero de las Islas Antillas 1820, p.
487, and Purdy Colomb., Nav. p. 175.) I have
preferred the positions which M. Ferrer assigns
to cape Cruz and cape Maysi, and to Punta de
Mulas, and at those capes I reduced several
points determined by Don Jose del Rio and
Don Ventura Barcaiztegui, founded on my
own observations, and differing altogether from
those able mariners in the position they assign
to Puerto Casilda. M. Bauza, who adopts the
positions of Batabano and Punta Matahambre
in my map, prefers placing Punta Maysi in long.
76° 26' 28", because he places Porto Rico, with
Don Jose Sanchez Cerquero, at 68° 28’ 29’. The
assemblage of observations sufficiently hetero-
geneous gives M. Cerquero 68° 26’ 20’, while
M. de Zach regards 68° 31' 0 as the most pro-
bable result. (Corresp. astr., vol. 13, p. 125,
128.) M. Oltmanns had found after a discus-
sion of all these elements, the mean to be 68°
32’ 30”. (See my Rec. d’Observ. astron., Tom.
ii, p. 139.)

At the island of Cuba, as heretofore in all the
possessions of Spain in America, we must distin-
guish between the ecclesiastic, politico-military,


94


and financial divisions. We will not add those
of the judicial hierarchy, which have created so
much confusion amongst modern geographers*,
the island having but one Audiencia resid-
ing since the year 1797 at Puerto Principe,
whose jurisdiction extends from Baracoa to
Cape Saint Antonio. The division into two bi-
shopricks dates from 1788, in which Pope Pius
the 6th named the first bishop of the Havannah.
The island of Cuba depended formerly, with
Louisiana and Florida, on the archbishop of
Santo Domingo, and from the period of its dis-
covery, one bishoprick only had been founded
in 1518, in the most western part, at Baracoa,
by Pope Leo 10th. The translation of this bi-
shoprick to Santiago de Cuba, took place four
years later; but the first bishop, Fray Juan de
Ubite, arrived only in 1528. In the beginning
of the nineteenth century (1804), Santiago de
Cuba was erected into an archbishoprick. The
ecclesiastical limit between the diocese of the
Havannah and Cuba passes in the meridian of
Cayo Romano, nearly in the 803° of longitude
west of Paris, between the Villa de Santi Espi-
ritus and the Ciudad of Puerto Principe. The
island, with relation to its political and milita-
ry government, is divided in two gobiernos, de-
pending on the same captain-general. The


* See above, vol. iii, p. 443.


95


gobierno of the Havannah comprehends, besides
the capital, the district of the Quatre Villas
(Trinidad, now Ciudad; Santo Espiritu, Villa
Clara, and San Juan de los Remedios), and the
district of Puerto Principe. The Capitan ge-
neral y Gobernador of the Havannah, names a
lieutenant in the latter place (Tentente Gober-
nador), as at Trinidad and Nueva Filipina.
The territorial jurisdiction of the captain gene-
ral extends as the jurisdiction of corregidor, to
eight pueblos de Aguntaimento (the ciudades of
Matanzas, Jaruco, San Felipe y Santiago, Santa
Maria del Rosario; the villas of Guanabacoa,
Santiago de las Vegas, Guines, and San Anto-
nio de los Banos). The gobierno of Cuba com-
prehends Santiago de Cuba, Baracoa, Holguin,
and Bayamo. The present limits of the gobi-
ernos are not the same as those of the bishop-
ricks. The district of Puerto Principe, with its
seven parishes, for instance, depended till 1814,
at the same time on the gobierno of the Havan-
nah and the archbishoprick of Cuba*, In the
enumerations of 1817 and 1820, we find Puerto .
Principe joined with Baracoa and Bayamo,
under the jurisdiction of Cuba. It remains to
speak of a third division altogether financial.
By the cedule of the 23d March, 1822, the is-


* Documentos sobre el trafico de los Negros, 1814, p. 127
130,


96


land was divided in three Intendencias or Pro-

vincias ; that of the Havannah, Puerto Principe,

and Santiago de Cuba, of which the respective

length from east to west is nearly 90, 70, and

65 marine leagues. The intendant of the Ha-

vannah preserves the prerogatives of Superin-
tendente general subdelegado de Real Hacienda

de la Isla de Cuba. According to this division,

the Provincia de Cuba comprehends Santiago

de Cuba, Baracoa, Holguin, Bayamo, Gibara,

Manzanillo, Jiguani, Cobre, and Tiguaros ; the
Provincia.de Puerto Principe, the town of that

name, Nuevitas, Jagua, Santo Espiritu, San

Juan de los Remedios, Villa de Santa Clara,

and Trinidad. The most westerly intendance,

or Provincia de la Havannah, occupies all that

is situated west of the Quatro Villas, of which
the intendant of the capital has lost the finan-

cial administration. When the cultivation of the

lands shall be more uniformly advanced, the di-

vision of the island into five departments, de la

vuelta de abaxo (from Cape Saint Antonio to the

fine village of Guanajay and Mariel), the Ha-

vannah (from Mariel to Alvarez), the Quintas

Villas (from Alvarez to Moron), Puerto Prin-

cipe (from Moron to Rio Cauto), and Cuba
(from Rio Cauto to Punta Maysi), will perbaps
appear the most fit, and most connected with

the historical ~ aieaahi ek of the first times
of the conquest.


97


My map of the island of Cuba, however im-
perfect it may be for the interior, is yet the
only one on which the 13 ciudades and 7 villas
are found which form the object of the divisions
I have just enumerated. The limit between
the two bishopricks (linea divisoria de los dos
obispados de la Havana y de Santiago de Cuba)
stretches from the mouth of the small river of
Santa Maria (long. 80° 49’), on the southern
coast by the parish of San Eugenio de la Palma,
and by the haciendas of S. Ana, dos Hermanos,
Copey and Cienega, towards la Punta de Iudas
(long. 80> 46’), on the northern coast, opposite —
Cayo Romano. During the government of the
Cortes of Spain, it was agreed that this eccle-
siastical limit should be also that of the two
Deputaciones provinciales of the Havannah and
of Santiago. (Guia Constitucional de la isla de
Cuba, 1822, p. 79). The diocese of the Havan-
nah comprehends 40, and that of Cuba 22
parishes. Established at a time when the
greater part of the island was occupied by
farms of cattle (haciendas de ganado), these
paroquias are of too great an extent, and little
adapted to the wants of present civilization.
The bishoprick of Santiago de Cuba contains
the 5 .ciudades of Baracoa, Cuba, Holguin,
Guiza, Puerto Principe, and the Villa of Bay-
amo. In the bishoprick of San Cristobal of the
Havannah are reckoned the 8 ciwdades of the

‘VOL, VI. H


98


Havannah, Santa Maria del Rosario, San Anto-
nio Abad or de los Banos, San Felipe y Santiago
del Bejucal, Matanzas, Jaruco, La Paz, and
Trinidad, and the six villas of Guanabacoa, San-
tiago de las Vegas or Compostela, Santa Clara,
San Juan de los Remedios, Santo Espiritu, and
S. Julian de los Guines. The territorial divi-
sion the most used, and the most popular among
the inhabitants of the Havannah, is that of
vuelta de arriba and de abazo, east and west of
the meridian of the Havannah. The first go-
vernor of the island who took the title of Cap-
tain-general (1601), was Don Pedro Valdes.
Before him 16 other governors are reckoned, of
whom the series begins with the famous Pob-
lador and Conquistador, Diego Valasquez,
native of Cuellar, whom Columbus had named
in 1511.


Porutation.—We have just examined the
extent, the climate, and the geologic consti-
tution of a country which opens a vast field to
human civilization. In order to appreciate the
weight which, under the influence of such a
position, the richest of the West India islands
may one day put in the political balance of
insulary America, we shall compare the actual
population which a space of 3600 square lea-
gues, for the most part virgin soil, and fertilised
by tropical rains, might nourish. Three suc-


99


cessive enumerations, of very unequal exact-
ness, yielded in
170,862
272,140
630,980


According to the last declaration of which
we shall state the details, there were 290,021
whites; 115,691 free copper-coloured men, and
225,268 slaves. These results are conformable
to the excellent statement which the munici-
pality of the Havannah had submitted, in 1611,
to the Cortes of Spain, and in which it fixed
approximatively 600,000, of which 274,000
whites, 114,000 free men, and 212,000 slaves.
In reflecting on the divers omissions of the last
enumeration in 1817, on the introduction of
slaves (the custom-house at the Havannah
registered, in only three years, 1818, 1819, and
1820, more than 41,000); and on the increase °
of free men of colour and whites, by the com-
parison of the enumeration of 1810 and 1817,
in the eastern part of the island, we find, that
the island of Cuba, at the end of 1825, probably
contained :

455,000
whites
free copper-coloured .... 180,000


100


The population of the island of Cuba is con-
sequently now very little different from that of
all the English islands, and is almost double
that of Jamaica. The relation of the divers
classes of inhabitants grouped according to
their origin, and the state of their civil liberty,
furnishes the most striking contrasts in coun-
tries where slavery has taken such deep root.
The table indicating these relations may give
tise to the most serious reflections.


emt reeecees * Soarys
OO °.°°° °°") paanoyoo sel


008929


peinofoo 3a1,7


“ees: a


i9¢°0 Qo eas ree" soAuTS 000°09%


sO aaRE ** pammojoo 904.7
Ses dts Se saqry AA


*SOSSV[Q JO. UOTYNGIySIG. *SaARIS


ocs’eh


000‘¢s


000°0ST


“syoulg pur
$909}8[D]
fanolog
jo wom 9014


eeeteeeeeeseeeeneesee gmap
-s] Yst[sugq oy} JO spo oy T,


00S‘9LL


eoreuree


000°S¢8


*“LNUNILNOO
ay} Jo saqeig ou} IIA pur]
SJaqjour ouo YITA poredui0a


SANVSI VIGNI LSaM FAL


‘uoneindod


“SOUT AMA TROL,


Sais ae et


102


2s 'O weet eceesssese es saity AA


** SaARTS
oo ct “++ pamoyoo vary


Eats sreetereeees | soar A


pedNnopood sd1 yy
Slanes tert riece is soy MA


*sassefQ JO MONNquysig


Rech: esto ts eek SOArTS
ozo poanojoo 9arq


000‘090‘S


ow


000‘¢99'T


“SARIS


000°0Z0‘E |000°0%6 000‘000°F


000°¢86 000°eLe’s 000°¢ze‘OI


006°ZIZ‘T |009°%8P 00°E63%


*syovtg pue
$90}}e[NY]
‘molog


suoyendod


“Son AA not


jo uamt sary |


Mve Ribweheas Weopirer |


ROII-
-aUTY YON JO sayeyg poyug


SAIPUT 4SOA4 OY3
JO osvjediyo1y ofoqa oxy,


*(panuyuos) TNANTLNOO
ay} JO SozvIg ay} YIIA pu
‘zayjoue duo qQIA parvdul0d


‘SANVISI VIGNI ISAM 25]


103


We see by this table *, that in the island
of Cuba free men compose ;= of the whole
population +; and in the English islands,
scarcely . In the whole archipelago of the
West Indies, the copper-coloured men (blacks
and mulattoes, free and slaves) form a mass of
2,360,000, or = of the total population. If the
legislation of the West Indies and the state of
the men of colour does not shortly undergo a
salutary change; if the legislation continues to
discuss instead of acting, the political prepon-
derance will pass into the hands of those who
have strength to labour, the will to be free, and
the courage to endure long privations. This
sanguinary catastrophe will take place as a


necessary consequence of circumstances, with-
out the intervention of the free blacks of Hayti,
and without their abandoning the system of
insulation which they have hitherto followed.
Who would venture to predict the influence
which may be exerted by “An African Con-


% This table relates to the end of the year 1823; the
population of Cuba only, is of the year 1825. If we admit
936,000 for Hayti (vol. vi, p. 832), instead of 820,000,
we shall have for the whole archipelago of the West Indies
2,959,000, of which 1,329,000, or = instead of = are free
men of colour.

+ The free men formed in 1788, in the French port of Saint
Domingo 0,18 (namely, the whites, 0,08; free men of
colour, 0,05), and slaves, 0,87.


104.


Federation of the free stutes of the West Indies,
placed between Columbia, North America, and
Guatimala, on the politics of the New World?”
The fear of this event may act more powerfully
on the minds of many, than the principles of
humanity and justice; but in every island; the
whites believe that their power is not to be
shaken, All simultaneous action on the part
of the blacks appears to them impossible; and
every change, every concession granted to the
captive population, a sign of weakness. No-
thing presses: the horrible catastrophe of Saint
Domingo was only the effect of the inability of
the governors. Such are the illusions that
prevail amidst the great mass of the planters of


the West Indies, and which are alike opposed
to an amelioration of the state of the blacks in


Georgia and in the Carolinas. The island of
Cuba, more than any other of the West India
islands, might escape this common shipwreck.
That island reckons 435,000 free men and
160,000 slaves: by prudent and humane mea-
sures, she might procure the gradual abolition
of slavery. Let us not forget, that since Hayti
is become free, there are in the whole archi-
pelago of the West Indies, more free negroes
and mulattoes than slaves. The whites, and
above all, the free men, whose cause it would
be easy to link with that of the whites, take a
very rapid numerical increase at Cuba. The


105


slaves would have diminished, since 1820, with
great rapidity, but for the fraudulent continua-
tion of the slave-trade. If, from the progress
of human civilization, and the firm will of the
new states of free America, this infamous com-
merce should cease altogether, the diminution
of the captive population would become more
considerable for some time, on account of the
disproportion existing between the two sexes,
and the emancipation which continues; and
would only cease when the relation between
the deaths and births of slaves were such that
even the effects of setting free would be com-
pensated. The whites and free men now form
two-thirds of the whole population of the island,
and this increase partly conceals the diminution
of the slaves. Among the latter, the women
are to the men, excluding the mulatto slaves,
scarcely in the relation of 1 : 4, in the planta-
tions of sugar-cane; in the whole island, as
1 : 1,7; and in the towns and farms where the
negro slaves serve as domestics, or work by the
day, at the same time on their own account and
that of their master, as 1 : 1,4; even (for in-
stance at the Havannah*), as 1: 1,2. The


* It appears to me probable that at the end of 1825, there
existed, of the total population of men of colour (mulattoes
and negroes, free and slaves), nearly 160,000 in the towns,
and 230,000 in the fields, In 1811, the Consulado, in a


|
j
|


106


developments that follow, will shew that these
relations are founded on numerical statements,
which may be regarded as the limit numbers of
the maximum.

The prognostics which are indulged on the
diminution of the total population of the island,
at the period when the slave-trade shall be
really abolished, and not merely according to
the laws, as since 1820; on the impossibility of
continuing the cultivation of sugar on a large
scale, on the approaching time when the agri- |
cultural industry of Cuba shall be restrained to
plantations of coffee and tobacco, and the
breeding of cattle, are founded on arguments
of which the justness is far from appearing to
me sufficiently proved. It is forgotten, that
the sugar settlements, in several of which hands
are wanted, and which weaken the negroes by
frequent night labours, contain but one-fifth of
the totality of slaves, and that the problem of
the quotient of the total increase of population
in the island of Cuba, at the period when the
introduction of the African blacks shall entirely
cease, rests on the most complicated elements ;


statement presented to the Cortes of Spain, supposed 141,000
men of colour in the towns, and 185,000 in the fields.
Documentos sobre los Negros, p. 121. This great accumu-
lation of mulattoes, free negroes, and slaves, in the towns,
is a characteristic feature of the island of Cuba.


107


on compensations so varied in their effects among
the whites, the free men, and the slaves who
are cultivators; in the plantations of sugar-
cane, coffee, or tobaceo, among the slaves
attached to farms of cattle, and the domestic
slaves, artisans, or workmen in towns ; instead
therefore of hastening those gloomy presages,
the planters would do well to wait till the
government has procured positive statistical
statements. The spirit in which even the most
ancient enumerations were made, for instance
that of 1775, by the distinction of age, sex,
race, and state of civil liberty, merits the
greatest praise. Nothing but the means of
execution were wanting; it was felt that the


repose of the inhabitants was powerfully in-
terested in knowing partially, the occupations
of the blacks, and their numerical distribution
in the sugar settlements, farms, and towns. To


remedy evil, to avoid public danger, to console
the misfortunes of a race who suffer, and who
are feared more than is acknowledged, the
wound must be probed; for in the social body»
there is found, when directed by intelligence, as
in organic bodies, a repairing force, which may
be opposed to the most inveterate evils.

For the year 1811 (when the municipality
and the Tribunal of Commerce of the Havan-
nah supposed the total population of the island
of Cuba to be 600,000, and that of 326,000


108


men of colour, free or slaves, mulattoes or
blacks), the distribution of this mass in differ-
“a ent parts of the island, in the towns and the

| country, yielded the following result, not stop-
ping at absolute quantities, but only at the re-
lations of every partial number with the total
number of the men of colour considered as a
unity.


f colour
TERRITORIAL DIVISIONS } Free coloured pga 4


Slaves. free and
OF THE ISLAND OF CUBA. men, slaves.


I. Western part (Juris-
of the Havannah,


In the towns...


0,11 0,115 0,225
In the fields....


0,014 0,34 0,353


Il. Eastern part (Quatro
Villas, Puerto Princi-
pe, Cuba).


In the towns...


In the fields....


It results from this table, susceptible of be-
ing much improved by ulterior researches, that
in 1811, nearly three-fifths of the men of colour
resided in the jurisdiction of the Havannah,


109


from Cape Saint Antonio to Alvarez; that ir
this part, the towns contained as many mulat-
toes and free negroes as slaves, but that the
coloured population of the towns was to that of
the fields as 2 : 3. In the eastern part of the
island, on the contrary, from Alvarez to Santi-
ago de Cuba and Cape Maysi, the men of co-
lour inhabiting the towns, nearly equalled in
number those spread over the farms. We shall
soon see that from 1811 till the end of 1825,
the island of Cuba has received on the whole
extent of its coast, by lawful, and illicit means,
185,000 African blacks, of which the custom-
house of the Havannah only, registered, from
1811 to 1820, nearly 116,000. This mass newly
introduced, has no doubt been spread more in
the country than in the towns; it must have
changed the relations which men best informed
of the localities, had established in 1811, be-
tween the eastern and western part of the
island, between the towns and the fields. The
negro slaves have much augmented in the east-
ern plantations ; but the horrible certainty |
that, notwithstanding the importation of 185,000
bozale negroes, the mass of men of colour, free
and slaves, has not augmented from 1811 to
1825, more than 64,000, or one-fifth, shews that
the changes in the relation of partial distribu-
tion, are restrained within narrower limits than
we were at first inclined to admit.


110


'We have seen above, that in supposing
715,000 inhabitants (which I believe to be the
limit number of the minimum,) the relative po-
pulation of the island of Cuba is, at the end of
the year 1825, 197 individuals by square marine
league, consequently little more than half the
population of Saint Domingo, and about one-
fourth of that of Jamaica. If Cuba had been
as well cultivated as the latter island, or rather,
if the density of the population were the same,
Cuba would have 3615 x 874 or 3,159,000
inhabitants *, that is, more than we now reckon
in the whole republic of Columbia, or in the
whole Archipelago of the West Indies. Yet
Jamaica has still 1,914,060 acres not culti-
vated.

The most ancient official enumerations (; padro-
nes y censos) of which I obtained any knowledge
during my stay at the Havannah, were made
by the Marquess of la Torre (in 1774 and 1775),


* In supposing the population of Hayti to be 820,000,
we find 334 inhabitants foreach square marine league. Sup-
posing 936,000, the relative population is 382. National
authors.think that the island of Cuba can nourish seven mil-
lions and a half of inhabitants. (See Récl. de los repr. de
Cuba contra la ley de aranceles, 1821, p. 9.) Even in this
hypothesis the relative population would not equal that of
Ireland. Some English geographers give Jamaica 4,090,000
acres, or 534 square marine leagues,


lil


and Don Luis de Las Casas + (in 1791). It is
known that in both an extreme negligence pre-
vailed, and that a great part of the population
found means to avoid being numbered. The
Padron of 1775, which was known to the Abbe
Raynal, gave for result :


Men Whites
Free Mulattoes 10,021
Free Blacks 5,959
Mulatto Slaves 5,618
Black Slaves . 25,256


99,309


+ This governor founded the Patriotic Society, the Junta
de agricultura y comercio, a public library, the Consulado,
the house for poor girls (Casa de beneficiencia de ninas indi-
gentes), the botanic garden, a chair of mathematics, and gra-
tuitous primary schools (escuelas de primeras letras). He
endeavoured to soften the barbarous forms of criminal jus-
tice, and created the noble function of defensor de pobres.
The embellishment of the Havannah, the opening of the
road of Guines, the construction of ports and dykes, and
what is far more important, the protection granted to peri-
odical writings fitted to vivify public spirit, date at the same
period. Don Luis de las Casas y Aragorri, Captain-general
of the island of Cuba (1790-1796), was born in the aldea of
Sopuerta, in Biscay. He fought with great distinction in Por-
tugal, at Pensacola, in the Crimea, before Algiers, at Mahon,
and at Gibraltar. He died aged 55 years, at Puerto Santa
Maria, in July, 1800. See the account of his life by Fray
Juan Gonzales, (del Orden de Predicadores) and Don Tomas
Romay.


Free Negresses
Mulatress Slaves
Negress Slaves


71,061


Total, 170,370, of whom the sole jurisdiction
of the Havannah contained 75,617. I had no
opportunity of verifying the numbers by the
official papers. The Padron of 1791 gives, .
conformably to the numbers on the registers,
272,141 inhabitants, of whom 137,800 were in
the jurisdiction of the Havannah, namely :
44,337 in the capital, 27,715, in the other
ciudadas and villas of the jurisdiction, and
65,748 in the country (partidos del campo).
The most simple reflections seem to prove
what is contradictory in the results of this
statement *. The mass of 137,800 inhabitants
of the jurisdiction of the Havannah appears
here to be composed of 73,000 whites, 27,600
free men of colour, and 37,200 slaves; the
whites would therefore be in relation to the
slaves as 1 : 0,5, instead of the relation of
1 : 0,83, which has been long observed in the
town and in the fields. In 1804, I discussed,


* Andreas Cavo de vita Jos. Jul. Parent Havanensis (Rome,
1792), p.10. Some copies bear 151,150 instead of 137,800.


113


with persons who possessed great knowledge of
the localities, the enumeration of Don Luis de
las Casas. In seeking by partial. compari-
sons, the value of the quantities omitted, it ap-
peared to us that the population of the island
in 1791, could not be below 362,700. That
population has been augmented from 1791 to
1804 by a number of negroes (bozales), which
amounted during that period, according to the
custom-house registers, to 60,393 ; the emigra-
tions from Europe to Saint Domingo (5000) ;
and finally, the excess of births over deaths, so
very small in a country where one-fourth or one-
fifth of the whole pepulation is condemned to a
state of celibacy. The effect of these three


causes of augmentation, reckoning only an
annual loss of seven per cent on the bozale
negroes, was estimated at 60,000 ; whence re-
sulted approximatively for 1804, a minimum *


* In the number of 432,000, I computed for 1804:
whites, 234,000; free men of colour, 90,000; slaves,
108,000. (The enumeration of 1817, yielded 290,000
whites, 115,000 free men of colour, and 225,000 slaves.) I
had estimated the black slave population, counting a pro-
duction of 80 to 100 arrobas of sugar per head in the sugar
manufactories, and 82 slaves for the mean population .of
an yngenio. There were at that time more than 350 sugar
manufactories ; and, in the seven parishes of Guanajay, Ma-
nagua, Batabano, Guines. Cano, Bejucal, and Guanabacoa, an
exact enumeration had yielded 188 yngenios, 15,139 slaves.
(Expediente, p. 184. Represent. del Consulado de la Habana


VOL, VII. I


114


of 432,080. The enumeration of 1817 yields a
population of 572,363, and should also be only
considered as a limit-number at the minimum ;
it justifies the result on which I fixed in 1804,
and which has since been inserted in several
statistical works. The registers of the customs
state, that from 1804 to 1816, more than
78,500 negroes have been landed.

del 10 Julio, 1799, manuscript.) The relative proportion be-


tween the production of sugar and the number of negroes em-
ployed in the fabrication, it is very difficult to ascertain : there


are establishments where 300 negroes scarcely produce 30,000


arrobas of sugar; in others, 150 negroes fabricate yearly 27,000
arrobas. The number of whites may be determined by that
of the milicius, of which there were in 1804, disciplinadas,
2680 ; rurales, 21,831, notwithstanding the extreme facility
of avoiding the service, and the exceptions granted without
number to Abogados, Escribanos,M edicos, Boticarios, Notarios,
Sacristanes y Servientes de Iglesia, Ministros de Escuela, Mayo-
rales, Mercadores, and whoever called themselves noble.
Compare Reflewiones de un Habanero sobre la independencia de
esta isla, 1823, p. 17. In 1817, the men computed capable
of bearing arms, from 15 to 60, were: Ist. in the free class,
17,047 whites ; 17,862 free mulattoes ; 17,246 free negroes
(total of free-men, 106,155); 2d. in the class of slaves,
10,506 mulattoes, and 75,393 blacks (total of slaves 85,899;
total of free and slaves, between 15 and 60 years, 192,054).
In taking for the basis the relations of the military levies,
and the population in France (Peuchet Stat., p. 243, 247), we
find that the estimate of 192,054 would suppose a popula-
tion of less than 600,000. The contingents of the three
classes of whites, freed-men and slaves, are as the numbers
0,37; 0,18; 0,45 ; while the population of those classes is
probably as 0,46; 0,18; 0,36.


115


The most important documents which we hi-
therto possess on the population of the island,
were published on occasion of a celebrated pro-
position made in the assembly of the Cortes,
26th March, 1811, by MM. Alcocer and Ar-
guelles, against the slave-trade in general, and
against the perpetuity of slavery among the
blacks born in the colonies. These precious
documents accompany, as justificatory pieces,
the representations * which Don Francisco de
‘Arango, one of the most enlightened and best-
informed statesmen of his country, and of its
position, made to the Cortes, in the name of
the Municipality, the Consulado and the Patri-
otic Society of the Havannah. He reminded
them that “ there exists no other general veri-
fication than that which was attempted in 1791,
under the able administration of Don Luis de
las Casas, and that since that period there had
been only partial enumerations in some of the
most peopled districts.” The results published
in 1811, are therefore only founded on the in-
complete statements and the approximative esti-

* Representacion del 16 de Agosto 1811, que por encargo
del Ayuntamiento, Censulado y Sociedad patriotica de la Ha-
bana, hizo el Alferez mayor de aquella ciudad, y s¢ elevé a las
Cortes por los espresudas cwerpos. This piece is printed among
the Documentos sobre el trafico y esclavitud de negros, 1814,
p- 1-86, which I had occasion to mention above. Some


general results of the labours of M. Arango had been pub-
lished, in 1812, in the Patriota de la Habana, tom. ii, p. 291.


ra


116


mates of the augmentation in 1791 to 1811. In
the following table we have adopted the divi-
sion of the island into four districts; namely :
Ist. The Jurisdiction of the Havannah, or West-
ern Part, between Cape Saint Antonio and Al-
varez ; 2d. The Jurisdiction des Quatro Villas,
with its eight parishes, situated on the east of
Alvarez ; 3d. The Jurisdiction de Puerto Prin-
cipe, with seven parishes; 4th. The Jurisdic-
tion of Santiago de Cuba, with fifteen parishes.


The three latter districts comprehend the east-


ern part of the island. :


Sa nen tee ery de! AO, S
Pe 2Sseésé Ss BS SE =
Bic dct we i, ek As ee
= Soo ce DS ea =
1 et tt Bae Aare, RE) OD: iO S
Cia 2 Be) i to)
DSi cee ee |
2 Sse WA Sas S.
8 Weise icthanprechiiate aie Dy te kanoupinat = GN
a bo 8 a we wt A eal
| ex
— gs S66 6 8S 6:9 =
pod =a eececseese S
© Gr ht Bg eSin fry sey i ences leon
be 22 Rae MR ai Sl Onde Seago ~
m mS ty oO SETS ER a igi on,
_

Zz 21Seee2e822/|8
Ee /2 /SFES3 5/5
= eS no So Oo =a & © acy
< a +t nnrmowct = nr
sy Lom = a A
Raid. Cates Bey Te TRG T AYER
= a | Be Opiate ny eOt Ny cise INE = :
(=) x ° pra fig ca} ak 1S, 4 “
Aa 5) | ee Meesc a les: el : 2 : :
— . nih if niiey’ “pte: - 8 : .
Ke 2 Oy ea Ww : :
. le) a a} .
5 Sh la’ feo gs CUEF ERAS us fog 3
a ROR AN CT Hua is lanl pee 3
] Pay SN athe td ba Ol BONY a}
ns ob OUR Shes ei ‘ 5

q xg ic :
5 ipo Sb) Op enue oe. | es
a lie ae cet a 2
8 Som RE me 3
a i pn a
— — Loe


|
|


117


The relations of the castes with each other _
will remain a political problem of high import-
ance till the period when a wise legislation shall
have succeeded in calming inveterate animosi-
ties, and in granting a greater equality of rights
to the oppressed classes. In 1811, the num-
ber of whites in the island of Cuba surpassed
that of the slaves by 62,000, whilst it nearly
equalled the number of the people of colour,
both free and slaves. The lancs, who in the
French and English islands formed at the
same period nine-hundredths of the total
population, composed at the island of Cuba
forty-five-hundredths. The free men of-eolour
amounted to nineteen hundredths, that is
double what is found at Jamaica and Marti-
nique. The enumeration of 1817, modified by
the Deputacion Provincial, having only yielded
115,700 freedmen and 225,300 slaves, that
comparison proves, Ist. that the freedmen have
been estimated with little precision either in
1811 or in 1817; and, 2d. that the mortality of
the negroes is so great, that notwithstanding
the introduction of more than 67,700 African
negroes registeredat the custom house, there were:
only 13,300 more slaves in 1817 than in 1811.

The decrees of the Cortes (of 3d March and
26th July, 1813), and the necessity of knowing
the population in order to assemble the juntas:
-electorales de provincia, de partido and paroquias,


Hi


118


engaged the administration in 1817 to substi-
tute a new enumeration for the approximative
estimates attempted in 1811. I shall give this
statement from a manuscript note communi-
cated to me officially by the American depu-
ties to the Cortes. The results have hitherto
been only printed by extracts, in the Guias de
Forasteros de la Isla de Cuba (1822, p. 48, and
1825, p. 104), and in the Reclamacion hecha
contra la ley de Aranceles (1821, p. 7.)


ee


+ +++ 7g] Jo susttad 94} 0} Burps09
soe fequy Jo purjst oy} Jo uonyndog


e9s‘oZs | 76z‘661 169°S1T re


“TTA


6L9°9T 66S 686° SZ “89109
“TAT
“HTT -poovling pur Sumsopy

*sa[0q ‘omvkeg jo ‘oualuay, 9214} O47
“TLAIO ygta ‘9gn9 JO oonyod-ousatqoy (P

eae: * 8 see eeererees vgn) JO DUIAOI TI


sadrourt Rang JO *U9GON) ‘UAT, (q


00S°9F oes'os | eez‘es


986°6L1 | BLO‘E9 | ESLTLS | ZEL°6S


‘ ; “TAL “eav[Q PTIEA Pur Sorpatuay
L6¥PT MP 9r ¥98 I *sa [007 “nyuidsy oqueg JO SUTTLA 92249
TAD ays Yaa pupmenz jo ousarqoy (?
‘ “UETTAL
¥6S‘6 9491 L19‘01 *so[00q ‘sozunyoyy Jo ouratqon (9
“WAID
2 4 296°01 “UIA 3

CZCS 61P OF LIVGEI #r9 “01999 ynuuDe

: : . ; 996°ezI “tte <A) ayy JO oonod-ousargoy (v
LLE‘G6E | SIZ'9ST | VOY BS | SSO" LET Beat So serees yeuUeAREy OY) JO VOUIACI “]


a ccc | LS. —


+100 c E :
*[e10J, s0AvTg a Somos ice RSE -semmboavg | ‘sopyieg (ssorwuarqoy f svr912a04q )
Wau eat . pu «Arey ttyl Tag 0 . *SNOISIAIG IVIVOLIVUTL LVIYS


“(aeak yey) UE puR[sy ayy 07 34dnoIq s00iGaN pue sayumasuvry, L19°BS Supnpoxe) LIST JO NOILVUIWAN GT


20


It may seem surprising that the approxima-
tive estimate, presented to the Cortes in 1811,
furnishes a total of 28,000 more than that of
the effective verification of 1817; but this is
only an apparent contradiction. The last verifi-
cation was no doubt less imperfect than that of
1791; yet it remained below the existing popu-
lation, on account of the apprehension every
where excited in the people by an operation
which they regarded as the precursor of new
taxes. ‘The Deputacion Provincial also, in trans--
mitting the enumeration of 1817 to Madrid,
thought fit to make two modifications, Ist. by
adding 32,641 whites (transeuntes del comercio
y de los buques entrados) whom commercial
affairs call to the island of Cuba, and who
make a part of the equipage in the books of the
-captains of the ports; and 2dly. the 25,076 bozale
negroes, who were imported in the year 1817
only ; whence would result, for that year, ac-
cording to the opinion of the Deputacion Pro-
vincial, a total of 630,980, of which 290,021 were
whites, 115,691 free men of colour, and 225,261
slaves. It is, I suppose, by an error, that in
the almanacks (Guias) published at the Havan-
nah, and in several manuscript tables lately
sent to me, this total of 630,980 is marked as
belonging not to the end of 1817, but to the
commencement of the year 1820. The Guias,
for instance, add to 199,292 slaves of the


12]


census of 1817, 25,076 as “aumento que se con-
sidera de 181721819.” Now, if the registers *


* Notes on Mecaico, p. 217. The verification of 1817, is
carried in this work to 671,079 instead of 630,980. This
difference arises from a fault in the numbers relating to the
free men of colour. The table of M. Poinsett yields: free
blacks, males 28,373; females 26,002: free mulattoes,
males 70,512 ; females 29,170: total free of colour, 154,057.
Now, the censo furnishes, according to the Guias and my
manuscript table, but 115,699, a difference of 38,358. - In
substituting for the free men $2,154 for 70,512, we find a
number that renders the relative proportion of the two sexes
less shocking, and more in harmony with the relations
observed among the free blacks. _ If there were 70,000 free
mulattoes and 28,000 free blacks in the island of Cuba, how
should we find, according to M. Poinsett himself, a number
of individuals capable of bearing arms, nearly equal (17,862
and 17,246) of the free mulattoes and negroes? And how,
at the Havannah, according to the verification of 1810 (vol.
vii, p. 26), would there be only 9700 free mulattoes of both
sexes, and 16,G00 free negroes and negrésses ? The Notes
on Mexico, the accuracy of which in general Wwe cannot too
much applaud, indicate for the whole island, in 1817, a),
32,302 mulatto slaves, and 166,843 negro slaves, in the
relation of 1 : 5; 6)74,821 women slaves of all colours, and
124,324 men slaves, in the relation of 1: 1,7. At the Ha-
yvannah, however, where mulatto slaves are much more
numerous than in the country, their relation to the black
slaves is only | : 11; and in the jurisdiction ‘of Filipinas
(Memorias de la Soc. economica de la Habana, 1819, n° 31, p.
232), there was found, in 1819, on 3634 slaves, 1049
women (52 mulatresses, 487 creole negroes, and 560 bozale
negresses, recently imported), and 2585 men (91 mulattoes,


548 creole negroes, and 1946 bozale negroes).


122


of the custom-house prove, that the number
of negroes landed in those three years was
62,947; namely, in 1817, 25,851; in 1818,
19,902; in 1819, 17,194. The judicious author
of Letters on the Havannah, addressed to Mr.
Croker, first secretary of the Admiralty, believes
the population of the men of colour, free and
slaves, to be 370,000, in 1820; but he regards *
the total addition of 32,641 proposed by the
provisional Junta to be too much. He supposes


that the whole population was, in 1820, only -


250,000; and he admits, as the result of the
census of 1817, only 238,796 whites (of whom
129,656 were males, and 109,140 females). The
real number published during several successive
years in the Guza, is 257,380.

How can we wonder at the partial contradic-
tions of the tables of population prepared in
America, when we recollect the difficulties to


* There are also several errors of figures in the Letters
from the Havannah, pp. 16-18, and 86; the slaves, in 1817,
are estimated at 124,324, instead of 199,292; for 1819, at
181,968, forming an excess of 143,050 above the white
population, That population, however, was already above
290,000. I believe it was in 1825, at least 325,000, anda
Habanero, one of the best informed on the localities, had even
supposed it, in 1823, to be 340,000. Sobre la Independ. de
Cuba, p.1%. The statistical tables have, in some parts of
the island, been framed with great care; for instance, at San
Juan de los Remedios and at Filipinas, for the year 1819, by
Don Joaquin Vigil de Quitiones, and Don Jose de Aguilar.


123


be vanquished, at the centre of European civi-
lization, in England and France, whenever the
great operation of a general enumeration is
undertaken? We know, for instance, that the
population of Paris was 714,000, in 1820; and
it is believed, that according to the number of


deaths and the supposed relation of births
with the total population, it was 530,000 at the
beginning of the eighteenth century (Rech.
stat. sur la ville de Paris, par le comte de Cha-
brol, 1823, p. 18); but we do not know within
one-sixth the population at the period of the
ministry of M. Necker. We know that in-
England and Wales, the population increased
from 1801 to 1821, 3,104,683, and yet the
registers of births and deaths shew an increase
of only 2,173,416, and it is impossible to attri-
bute 931,276 to the emigrations from Ireland to
England. (Statist. Illustrations on the British
Empire, 1825, p. 14 and 157.) These examples
do not prove that we must distrust all calcu-
lations of political economy; they only prove
that we should employ numerical elements -
after having well discussed them and deter-
mined the limits of the errors. We might
almost compare the different degrees of proba-
bility which statistical results furnish in the
Ottoman Empire, in Spanish or Portugueze
America, in France or in Prussia, with those geo-
graphical positions which are founded either on


124


lunar eclipses, on the distances of the moon
from the sun, or on the occultations of the
Stars.

To reduce an enumeration made twenty years
before to another stated period, we must know
the quotient of the increase ; now, that quotient
is known only from the enumerations of 1791,
1810, and 1817, made in the eastern part of
the island, which is the least populous. When
the comparisons bear upon too small masses,
placed under the influence of peculiar circum-
stances, (for instance, on the sea-ports, or on
the cantons where the fabrics of sugar are
much accumulated), they cannot yield numeri-
cal results fit to be employed for the whole
extent of a country. It may be perceived that
the number of whites increases more in the


country than in towns; that the free men of


colour who prefer agriculture to the exercise of
a trade in the towns, augment with more rapi-
dity than the other classes, and that the negro
slaves, among whom there is not a third of


8


women, diminish more than ;, annually.


100


We have seen above, that at the Havannah »


and in the suburbs, the increase of the whites
has been in 20 years, 73 per cent; that of free
men of colour, 171 per cent. In the eastern
part, the whites and free men were doubled
almost every where during the same interval.
We shall remark on this occasion, that the free


125


men of colour augment partly by the passage
of one caste to another, and that the augmenta-
tion of the slaves, by the activity of the slave-
trade, contributes also powerfully. The whites
now gain little by the emigrations from Eu-
rope *, the Canaries, the West India islands,
and the continent; they augment of them-
selves, for the examples of an official whitening,
or white letters granted by the Audiencia to
families of a pale yellow, are not numerous.

In 1775, was found, by an official dismem-
bering of the jurisdiction of the Havannah, com~
prehending under that denomination Six ciu-
dades (the capital with the suburbs, Trinidad,
San Felipe y Santiago, S. Maria del Rosario,
Jaruco, and Matanzas) and six villas (Guana-
bacoa, Santi Espiritus, Villa Clara, San Ante-
nio, San Juan de los Remedios, and Santiago),
and thirty-one pueblos : a population of 171,626;
and in 1806, with more certainty, 277,364
(Patriota amer. tom. ii, p. 300), ‘The increase
during thirty-one years was consequently but
0,61; it would appear much more rapid, if we
could compare the half of that interval. In
fact, the Padron of 1817 gives, for the same
extent of country, then called Provincia de la


* In 1819, for instance, there arrived only 1702 indivi-
duals, amomg whom were: from Spain, 416; from France,
384; from Ireland and England, 201. Maladies carry off one-
seventh to one-sixth of the whites who are not acclimated.


126


Habana, and containing the Gobiernos of the
eapital, of Matanzas, Trinidad, or the Quatro
Villas, a population of 392,377; which proves
an increase in eleven years, of more than 0,41.
We must not forget, that in comparing the
population of the capital and the province of
Cuba in the years 1791 and 1810, we obtain
results of increase a little too great, the first of
these enumerations having led to many more
omissions than the second. I believe we ap-
proach nearer the truth in comparing, for the
province of Cuba, the more recent censos of
1810 and 1817. We there find: in 1810,
whites, 35,513; free men of colour, 32,884;
slaves, 38,834. Total, 107,231; and in 1817,
whites, -33,733; free men of colour, 50,230 ;
slaves, 46,500. Total, 130,463; an increase
in six years of above 23,200, or 21 per cent,
for there is probably an error in the second
verification of the whites. ‘The number of the
latter, and the number of free men in general,
is so considerable in the district of the Quatro
Villas, that, in the six partidos of S. Juan de
los Remedios, S. Augustin, S. Anastasio. del
Cupey, San Felipe, Santa Fe, and Sagua la
Chica, there was found, in 1819, on an area of
24,651 caballerias, a total population of 13,722 ;
of which, 9572 were whites; 2010 men of colour ;
and 2,140 slaves. In the same year, on the
contrary, in the ten partidos of the jurisdiction


(


of Filipinas, were found, on a total population of
13,026, nearly 9400 free men, namely: whites,
5871; free men of colour, 3521 (of whom 203
were free bozale negroes) ; slaves, 3634: the free
men were therefore to the whites = 1: 1,7.

In no part of the world where slavery pre-
vails is emancipation so frequent as in the
islaad of Cuba. The Spanish legislature, far
from preventing this, or rendering it difficult,
like the English and French legislatures, favors
liberty. The right of every slave to buscar amo
(change his master), or set himself free, if he
can repay the price of the purchase, the religious
feeling which inspires many masters in easy
circumstances with the idea of giving liberty
by their will, to a certain number of slaves, the
habit of keeping a multitude of blacks for
domestic services, the attachments which arise
from this intercourse with the whites, the faci-
lity with which slaves make money who are
mechanics, and who pay their masters a certain
sum daily, in order to work on their own
account; such are the principal causes from
which so many slaves in the towns pass from
the captive state, to that of free men of colour.
I might add the chances of the lottery, and.
games of hazard, if too much confidence in
those means had not often produced the most
fatal effects. The condition of free men of
colour is happier at the Hayannah, than among


128


nations which boast during ages of the most
advanced civilization, Here those barbarous
laws * are unknown, which have been appealed
to in our days, and according to which, free
‘men incapable of receiving the donations of
whites, may be deprived of their liberty, and
sold for the profit of the fiscal, if they are con-
victed of having afforded an asylum to maroon
negroes ! ;

The primitive population of the West India
islands having entirely disappeared (the Zam-


bos Caribs, mixture of natives: and negroes,


having been transported in 1796, from: St. Vin-
cent’s island to that of Ratan), the actual popu-
lation of the islands (2,850,000) must be con-
sidered as composed of European and African
blood. The negroes of pure race form nearly
two-thirds ; the whites. one-fifth; and the mixed
race one-seventh. In the Spanish colonies of
the continent, we find the descendants of the
Indians who disappear among the mestizos and
zambos, a mixture of Indians with whites and
negroes. The archipelago of the West Indies
presents no such consoling idea. The state of
society was there such, at the beginning of the»
sixteenth century, that, with some rare excep-
tions, the new planters paid as little attention


* Judgment of the Sovereign Council of Martinique, 4th
June, 1810. Ordinance of March 1st, 1766, § 7.


129


to the natives as the English now do in Canada.
The Indians of Cuba have disappeared like the
Guanches of the Canaries, although at Guana-
bacoa and Teneriffe false pretensions were
renewed forty years ago, by several families,
who obtained small pensions from the govern-
ment on pretext of having in their veins. some
drops of Indian or Guanche blood. There no
longer exist any means of judging of the popu-
lation of Cuba or Hayti in the time of Colum-
bus. How can we admit, with some otherwise
judicious historians, that the island of Cuba, at
its conquest in 1511, had a million of inhabi-
tants *, and that there remained of that million,
in 1517, only 14,000! All the statistic state-
ments in the writings of the bishop of Chiapa
are filled with contradictions ; and if it be true
that the good dominican monk, Fray Luys
Bertran, who was persecuted -+ by the encomen-
deros, as the methodists in our times are by
some English planters, predicted, on his return, -
that “the 200,000 Indians which Cuba con-
tained, would perish the victims of the cruelty
of the Europeans,” we must at least conclude,
that the native race was far from being extinct


* Albert Htne, Historisch-philosophische Darstellung des
Negersclavenhandels, 1820, tom. i, p. 137,

+ See the curious revelations in Juan de Marieta, Hist. de
todos los Santos de Espaia, libro vii, p. 174.

‘VOL, Vil. K


130
at


between the years 1555 and 1569 * ; according a
to Gomara +, however, (such is the confusion
among the historians of those times,) there i
were no more Indians in the island of Cuba in
1553. In order to conceive how vague were
the estimates made by the first Spanish travel-
lers, at a period when the population of no i
province of the peninsula was known, we have |
but to recollect the number of inhabitants
which Captain Cook and other navigators attri- |
buted to Taiti and the Sandwich islands {,


* The only thing known with certainty of Fray Luys Ber-
tran is the time of his return to San Lucar (in 1569), He was _f
consecrated priest in 1547. L.c. p. 167 and 175. (Compare
also Fatriota, tom. ii, p. 51.)

+ Hist. de las Indias, fol. xxvii.

+ Qn the rapid diminution of the population in the
archipelago of the Sandwich islands, since Captain Cook’s
voyage, see Gilbert Farquhar Mathison, Narrat, of a visit to
Brazil, Peru, and the Sandw. Islands, 1825, p. 489. .We
know with some certainty, from the reports of missionaries
who have changed the face of things at Taiti, profiting from
its interior dissensions, that the whole archipelago of the
Society islands contained, in 1818, but 13,900 inhabitants, of
whom 8000 pertained to Taiti. Can we believe in the 100,000
which were supposed to exist in Taiti only, in the time of
Cook? The bishop of Chiapa was not more vague in the
estimates of the native population of the West - Indies,
than modern writers on the population of the groupe of the
Sandwich islands, to which they sometimes give 740,000.
(Hassel, Hist. stat. Almanach fur 1824, p. 384), sometimes
400,000 (Id., Stat. Umriss, 1824, Heft 3, p. 90). ‘This
groupe, according to M. Freycinet, contains but 264,000.


131


at a time whenstatistics furnished the most exact
comparisons, varied from one to five. We may
conceive that the island of Cuba, surrounded
with fishing coasts, might, from the great
fertility of its soil, nourish several millions of
Indians, sober, without taste for animal food,
and cultivating maize, manioc, and other
nourishing roots; but if this accumulation of
population had taken place, would it not have
manifested itself by a more advanced degree of
civilization than the narrative of Columbus re-
lates? Would the people of Cuba have re-
mained below the civilization * of the inhabi-
tants of the Lucayes islands? Whatever acti-
vity we may attribute to the causes of destruc-
tion, the tyranny of the conquistadores, the
faults of governors, the too severe labors of the
gold washings, the small-pox, and the frequency


* De menor policia, Gomara, p. xxi. The disgust marked
by the natives in general of equinoxial America, for animal
food and milk, is expressed in the famous bull of Pope
Alexander VI, in 1498, ‘Certas insulas remotissimas et
etiam terras firmas invenerunt, in quibus quamplurime
gentes, paciice viventes, nude incedentes, nec earnibus ves-
centes, inhabitant et, ut nuntii vestri possunt opinari, gentes
ipsze credunt unum Deum creatorem in celis esse.” (Car. Co-
quel. Bull. amp. Coll., tom. iii, p. iii, p. 234.) In those very
islands where the people dreaded the influence of the zemes,
small idols of cotton (Petr. Martyr. Epist., fol. 46), mo-
notheism (the belief of a Great Spirit, superior to the
zemes) was universally spread !

x 2


ad


132


of suicides *, it would be difficult to conceive
how in thirty or forty years, I will not saya
million, but three or four hundred thousand
Indians could entirely disappear. The war


* The rage of hanging themselves by whole families, in
huts and caverns, related by Garcilasso, was no doubt the
effect of despair; yet instead of lamenting the barbarism of
the sixteenth century, it was attempted to exculpate the
conquistadores, by attributing the disappearance of the natives
to their taste for suicide. See Patriota, tom. ii, p.50. All
the sophisms of this kind are found assembled in a work
published by M. Nuix, on the humanity of the Spaniards in the
conquest of America. (Reflexiones imparciales sobre la huma-
nidad de los Epanoles contra los pretendidos filosofos y politicos,
para illustrar las historias de Raynal y Robertson, escrito en
. Italiano por el Abate Don Juan Nuiz, y traducido al castel-
lano por Don Pedro Varela y Ulloa, del Consejo de S. M.,
1782.) The author, who calls the expulsion of the Moors
under Philip II1, a meritorious and religious act (p. 186),
terminates his work by congratulating the Indians of Ame-
rica (p. 298) “ on having fallen into the hands of the Spa-
niards, whose conduct has been at all times the most humane,
and the government the wisest.’ Several pages of this


’


book recall ‘‘the salutary rigour of the dragonades ;”’ and
that odious passage, in which a man known for his talents
and his private virtues, the Count de Maistre (Soirées de
Saint Petersbourg, tom. ii, p. 121), justifies the inquisition
of Portugal, “ which has only caused some drops of guilty
blood to flow.”” To what sophisms must they have recourse,
who would defend religion, national honor, or the stability
of governments, by exculpating all that is offensive to
humanity in the actions of the clergy, the people, or kings !
It is a vain attempt to seek to destroy the power most firmly
established on the earth, the testimony of history.


i
il


|
1
|


ees


133 a


with the Cacique Hatuey was short, and re-
strained to the most eastern part of the island.
Few complaints arose against the administra-
tion of the two first Spanish governors, Diego
Velasquez and Pedro de Barba. The oppres-
sion of the natives dates from the arrival of
the cruel Hernando: de Soto, towards 1539.
Supposing, with Gomara, that fifteen years
later, under the government of Diego de
Majariegos (1554-1564), there were no longer
any Indians, we must necessarily admit, that
there were considerable remains of that people
which saved themselves on canoes in Florida, -
believing, according to ancient traditions, that
they were returning to the country of their
ancestors. The mortality of the negro slaves,
observed in our days in the West Indies, can
alone throw some light on these numerous con-
tradictions. To Columbus and Velasquez, the
island of Cuba must have appeared well peo-
pled *, if it was, for instance, to the degree in


* Coiumbus relates that the island of Hayti was some-
times attacked by a race of black men, gente negra, who
lived more to the south or south-west. He hoped to visit
them in his third voyage, because those black men possessed
a metal guanin, of which the admiral had procured some
pieces in his second voyage. These pieces were sent to
Spain, and found to be composed of 0,63 of gold, 0,14 of
silver, and 0,19 of copper (Herera, Dec. I, lib. 3, cap. 9,
p. 79). In fact; Balboa discovered this black tribe in the


134


which it was found by the English in 1762.
The first travellers were easily deceived by the


isthmus of Darien. ‘‘That conquistador, says Gomara (Hisé.
de Ind., fol. 84), entered the province of Quareca: he
found no gold, but some blacks, slaves of the lord, of the
place.. tle asked this lord whence he had received them ;
who replied, that men of that colour lived near the place,

‘with whom they were constantly at war.” <oehese
negroes, adds Gomara, exactly resembled those of Guinea,
and no others have been seen in Ainerica (en las Indias yo
pienso qué no se han visto negros despues).”’. ‘The passage is
very remarkable. Hypotheses were formcd in the sixteenth
century, as they are now; and Petrus Martyr (Ocean. Dec. UJ,
lib. 1, p. 43) imagined that these men, seen by Balboa, the
Quarecas,wereEthiopian blacks who,(/atrocinii causa) infested
the seas, and had been shipwrecked on the coast of America.
But the negroes of Soudan are not pirates ; and it is easier to
conceive that the Esquimaux, in their boats of skins, may
have gone to Europe, than the Africans to Darien. The
learned who believe in a mixture of the Polynesians with the
Americans, rather consider the Quarecas as of the race of
Papoux, similar to the negritos of the Philippines. These
tropical migrations from west to east, from the most western
part of Polynesia to the isthmus of Darien, present great
difficulties, although the winds blow during whole weeks
from the west. Above all, it is essential to know if the
Quarecas were really like the negroes of Soudan, as Goma~
ra asserts, or whether they were only a race of very dark
Indians (with flat and glossy hair), who from time to time,
before 1492, infested the coasts of this very island of Hayti,
become in our days the demain of Ethiopians. On the
passage of the Caribs, from the Lucayes isles to the Little
Antilles, without touching at the Great, see above, vol, vi,
p- 28.


ed?)


crowds.which the appearance of European ves-
sels brought together on some points of the
coast. Now, the island of Cuba, with the same
Ciudades and Villas which it possesses at present,
had not in 1762 more than 200,000 inhabitants ;
and yet, among a people treated like slaves,
exposed to the madness and brutality of their
masters, to excess of labor, want of nourishment,
and the ravages of the small-pox,—forty-two
years do not suffice to leave no remembrance
of their misfortunes on the earth. In several
of the Little Antilles, the population diminishes
under English domination, five and six per cent
annually *; at Cuba, more than eight per cent 3
but the annihilation of 200,000 in forty-two


years, supposes an annual loss of twenty-six
per cent, a loss scarcely credible, although we
may suppose that the mortality of the natives
of Cuba was much greater than that of negroes
bought at a very high price.


* The number of registered slaves at Dominico, in
1817, was 17,959; at Grenada, 28,024; at Saint Lucia,
15,893 ; at Trinidad, 25,941. These islands, in 1820, rec-
koned only 16,554 ; 25,677 ; 13,050, and 23,537 slaves res-
pectively. The loss therefore, in three years, according to the
registers, was one-twelfth, one-eleventh, one-fifth, and one-
éleventh. (Manuscript Documents, communicated by the
kindness of Mr, Wilmot, under-secretary of state in the
€olonial department in Great Britain.) We have seen
above, that before the abolition of the slave-trade, the
slaves in Jamaica diminished 7000 annually.


136


In studying the history of the island, we ob-
serve that the movement of colonization has
been from east to west; and that here, as every
where in the Spanish colonies, the places first
peopled are now the most desert. The first es-
tablishment of the whites was in 1511, when,
according to the orders of Don Diego Colum-
bus, the conquistador and poblador Velasquez,
disembarked at Puerto de Palmas, near Cape
Maysi, then called Alfa y Omega, and subdued
the cacique Hatuey, who, an emigrant and fu-
gitive from Hayti, had withdrawn to the east-
ern part of the island of Cuba, and had become
the chief of a confederation of little native
princes. The town of Baracoa was begun to
be built in 1512; and later, the Puerto Prin-
cipe, Trinidad, the Villa de Santi Espiritus,
Santiago * de Cuba (1514), San Salvador de
Bayamo, and San Cristobal de la Havana. This
last town was at first founded in 1515, on
the southern coast of the island, in the Partido
of Guines, and transferred, four years later, to
Puerto de Carenas, the position of which at the


* Patriota, tom. ii, p. 280. Manuscrits de Don Felix de
Arrate, put in order in 1750, from the official pieces saved
in the great fire of the Havannah, in 1538. I am surprised
to see (Guia, 1815, p. 78) that the Franciscan monks of
Santiago de Cuba carry back the foundation of their convent
to the year 1505 ; the whole discovery of the coast by Se-
bastian de Ocampo dates only from the year 1508.


i
|
}
}


137


entrance of the two channels of Bahama (el
Viejo y el Nuevo), appears to be much more
favorable to commerce than the coast on the
south-west of Batabano *, The progress of ci-
vilization since the sixteenth century, has had
a powerful influence on the relations of the
castes with each other; these relations vary in
the districts which contain only farms for cat-
tle, and in those where the soil has been long
cleared; in the sea-ports and inland towns, in
the spots where colonial produce is cultivated,
and in such as produce maize, vegetables, and
forage. .
I. The Jurisdiction of the Havannah shewsa
diminution of the relative population of the
whites in the capital and its vicinity, but not
in the inland towns, and in the whole vuelta de
abaxo destined for plantations of tobacco, where
free hands are employed. The verification of
Don Luis de las Casas, in 1791, gave, for the
jurisdiction of the Havannah, 137,800 souls ;
among whom, the relations of the whites, the free
men of colour, and the slaves, were respectively.


* See above, vol. vii, p.59. Documentos, p. 116. A
tree is still shewn at the Havannah, under the shade of
which (at Puerto de Carenas), the Spaniards celebrated their
first mass. The island, now called officially the siempre fiel
Isla de Cuba, was after its discovery named successively
Juana, Fernandina, Isla de Santiago, and Isla del Ave Maria.
its arms date from the year 1516.


138
0,53 ; 0,20; 0,27: in 1811, from the great impor-
tation of slaves, these relations were believed to
be as 0,46; 0,12; 0,42. In the districts of the
great plantations of sugar and coffee (partidos
de grande labranzas), the whites scarcely form
a third of the population, and the redations of
the castes (taking that expression in the sense
of the relation of each caste to the total popu-
lation), oscillate for the whites between 0,30
and 0,36; for the free men of colour, between


0,03 and 0,06; for the slaves, between 0,58 and


0,67; while, in the districts of the cultivation
of tobacco of the vuelta de abaxo, we find 0,62 ;
0,24; 0,14; and in the districts of pasturage
(ganaderia), even 0,66 ; 0,20; 0,14. From these
statements it results, that liberty diminishes
in slave countries in proportion as cultivation
and civilization augment.

Il. In the jurisdiction of the Quatro Villas,


and in those of Puerto Principe and Cuba, the


progress of population is known with more ex-


actness than in the western part. The Quatro’


Villas have felt the same effects which arise
from the difference of the occupations of the
inhabitants. In the districts of Santo Espiritu,
where the farms of cattle prosper ; at San Juan
de los Remedios, where contraband trade is very
frequent with the Bahama islands, the whites
augmented from 1791 till 1811. While, on the
contrary, they have diminished in the eminent-


139


ly fertile district of Trinidad, where the sugar-
plantations have taken an extraordinary deve-
lopement. At Villa Clara, the free men of
colour gain on the other classes.

Ill. In the jurisdiction of Puerto Principe,
the total population has nearly doubled in
twenty years. Is has increased 0,89, as in the
finest parts of the United States; and yet
Puerto Principe is surrounded only with im-
mense plains, where cattle, half wild, graze.
The proprietors, says a recent traveller *, have -
no other care than to bury the money in their
strong box, which they receive from the major-
domo of the hatos, and to dig it up for gaming,
and for the law-suits which are bequeathed from
one generation to another.

IV. In the jurisdiction of Cuba, considered
ds a whole, the relations between the three
classes have little changed during twenty years.
The Partido de Bayamo continues to be distin-
guished by the great number of free men of
colour (0,44), which increases from year to
year, as at Holguin and Baracoa. The coffee-
plantations prosper in the vicinity of Cuba, and
furnish a very considerable augmentation of
slaves {.


* Masse, sur UIsle de Cuba, 1825, p. 302.
+ In the table just published by the secretary of the Con-
sutado, M. del Valle Hernandez, (Documentos, p. 149, and


140


Pair., tom. ii, p. 283), the slaves of Bayamo are estimated
at 16,733: this number neither agrees with the sum total
47,984, nor with the quotient 0,26. It being more probable
that there was a typographical error in one amount than in
two, I substituted the number of slaves (12,633), which is
found at the same time by the quotient and the sum total.
The table of the four districts of the province of Cuba is
the result of enumerations not modified ; it yields 106,531
for the population of the province of Cuba. In the general
table of the Island of Cuba (see above, p. 116), the results of
the censo are modified, either by reducing or augmenting
them to round sums, as is said expressly in the Docum., p.


137; the contradictions are consequently but apparent. I |


know not why, in the general table, the number of slaves
has been diminished in the jurisdiction of Cuba only; but
this change bears only upon one-tenth of the captive popu-
lation of the eastern part of the island. As variantes lecti-
ones exist in all the results of enumerations, I shall add that
other Padrones gave in 1810, for the four districts of Cuba,
98,780; for the district (?) of Puerto Principe, 48,033.
(Docum., p. 137 and 150.) An enumeration of 1800 yielded
for the Quatro Villas 53,267.


Leo 18°0 ZB‘0 1g690L | pes‘ss 86'S Slebes fn OTSE
eso $80 ¥S‘0 61Z‘9S 16881 GIGBI OFC |e eo IGLT. 12301,


_——_— } ———_- a


920 FPO 08'0 F86'LP EeOGL £4803 O6R Vie |e ee 7 ee O1st
180 oro 6z‘0 800‘6S LEG‘ h SSELC $Esg‘9 Deedee ecdee vee see IGLL owrdeg


Seca ee es | a


650 S1‘0 820 92666 o¢e‘9L GEST Fee's Bec eet eae ae O18T
¥¢°0 600 LEO 6L6'0L z98‘¢ 100‘T has 1S Shc seit: I6LL umnsjoH


ero'r 799 GIE‘1 090°S Wise SWhe go etare OTOL
00V'S 691 13eL scence eeeee eee IGLL eoowieg


LGP'VS 9€9°8 OL1'9 ge eee ee HOLST
Le3‘6L 1B 869'9 : sro TELE BqnD


————


*NOILYINdOd
*unotos Jo


TIVLOL AHL OL SASSVIO “IVLOL *SHAVIS *SaLIHM *SLOIULSIA
NAW Godda


AGUUL AHL JO SNOILVITH


‘VANQ dO AONIAOUG FHL JO SLOLULSICE YOY


142


The number of female slayes was extremely
small in the sugar plantations, till the latter
years of the eighteenth century; and what
may appear surprising is, that a prejudice
founded on religious scruples opposed the in-
troduction of women, whose price at the Ha-
vannah was generally a third less than that of
men*. The slaves were forced to celibacy on
the pretext of avoiding moral disorder. ‘The
Jesuits and the Bethlemite monks only had
renounced that fatal prejudice, and encouraged


negresses in their plantations. If the enumer-—


ation, no doubt imperfect, of 1775, yielded
15,562 women-slaves, and 29,366 men-slaves,
we must not forget that this enumeration com-
prehended the totality of the island, and that
the sugar plantations occupy even now but a
quarter of the captive population. Since the
year 1795, the Consulado of the Havannah began
to be seriously occupied with the project of ren-
dering the increase of the captive population
more independent of the variations of the slave-
trade. Don Francisco Arango, whose views were
ever full of wisdom, proposed a tax on the plant-
ations which had nota third of negresses among
their slaves. He proposed also a tax of six pias-
tres on every negro brought into the island,
and from which the women (negras bazales),


* Documentos, p. 34.


143


should be exempted. Although these measures
were not adopted, the colonial assembly refusing
to employ coercive means, the desire of multi-
plying marriages, and taking better care of the
children of the slaves, has existed since that
period, when a cedule royale (of the 22d April,
1804), recommended those objects “ to the
conscience and humanity of the planters.” The
enumeration of 1817, yielded, according to Mr.
Poinsett, 60,322 negress-slaves, and 106,521
negro-slaves. The relation of the black female
slaves to the men, was, in.1777, as 1: 1,95
and-forty years later, it had scarcely sensibly
changed *. It was = 1 : 1,7; the smaliness
of this change must be attributed to the im-
mense number of bozale negroes imported since
1791, the introduction of negresses not having
been considerable before 1817 to 1820; so that
the negro-slaves who serve in the towns are be-
come a small fraction of the total mass. In
the partido of Batabano, which, in 1818, con-
tained a population of 2078, with thirteen inge-
nios of sugar and seventy-three cafetales, there
were 2226 negroes, and only 257 negress-slaves


* In the English islands, on a population of 627, 7717
slaves, were reckoned, in 1823: males, 308,467 ; females,
319,310, which consequently yields an excess of females of
three and one-fifth per cent. Trinidad and Antigua only,
like Demerara, contained more male than female slaves. See
Stat. Illustr, of the Brit. Emp., 1825, p. 54-


144


(relation =8: 1). In the jurisdiction of San
Juan de los Remedios (which reckoned in 1817
a population of 13,700, with seventeen sugar-
fabrics and seventy-three cafetales}, there were
1200 negroes and 669 negress-slaves (relation
9:1). In the jurisdiction of Filipinas
(which reckoned in 1819 a population of 13,026),
there were 2494 negroes and 997 negress-slaves
(relation = 2,4 : 1); and ifin the whole island
of Cuba, the bik male-slaves are to the fe-
male = 1,7 : 1, in the sugar-fabrics only they
are scarcely = 4 : I.
The first introduction of negroes into the
eastern part of the island, took place in 1521,
and did not exceed 300 in number. The
Spaniards were then much less eager for slaves
than the Portugueze; for, in 1539, there was a
sale of 12,000 negroes at Lisbon *, as in our
days (to the eternal shame of christian Europe)
the slave-trade of Greeks is made at Constan-
tinople and Smyrna. In the 16th century the
slave-trade was not free in Spain; the court
granted the privilege, which was bought in
1586, for all Spanish America, by Gaspar de
Peralta; in 1595, by Gomez Reynel; and in
1615, by Antonio Rodriguez de Elvas. The
total importation was then only 3500 negroes


* Bryan Edwards, West. Ind., vol. iii, p. 202. See also
above, vol. i, p. 277.


145


annually ; and the inhabitants of Cuba, entirely
engaged in rearing cattle, scarcely received any.
During the war of succession, the French
stopped at the Havannah to exchange slaves for
tobacco. The asiento of the English quickened
alittle the introduction of negroes ; yet in 1763,
although the taking of the Havannah and the
sojourn of strangers gave rise to new wants,
the number of slaves in the jurisdiction of the
Havannah did not attain 25,000; and in the
whole island, not 32,000. The total number of
African negroes, imported from 1521 to 1763,
was probably * 60,000 ; their descendants exist ©
among the free mulattoes, who inhabit for the
most part the eastern side of the island. From
the year 1763 to 1790, when the negro-trade
was declared free, the Havannah received
24,875 (by the Compania de Tobacos 4957, from
1763 to 1766; by the contract of the Marquess
de Casa Enrile, 14,132, from. 1773 to 1779 ; by
the contract of Baker and Dawson, 5786, from
1786 to 1789). If we estimate the introduction
of slaves in the eastern part of the island during
those twenty-seven years (1762 to 1790) at
6000, we find from the discovery of the island
of Cuba, or rather from 1521 to 1799, a total of
90,875. We shall soon see that by the ever in-
creasing activity of the slave trade, the fifteen


* Documentos, p. 39 and 118.
VOL. VIL, L


146


years that followed that of 1790, furnished
more slaves than the two centuries and a half
which preceded the period of the free trade.
That activity was redoubled when it was sti-
pulated between England and Spain, that the
slave-trade should be prohibited north of the
equator, from November 22d, 1817, and en-
tirely abolished on the 30th May, 1820. ‘The
King of Spain accepted from England (which
posterity will one day scarcely believe), a sum
of 400,000 pounds sterling, as a compensation
for the loss which. might result from the cessa-
tion of that barbarous commerce. The follow-
ing is the number of negroes brought into the


port of the Havannah alone, according to the
custom-house registers :


17,737
25,841
19,902
17,194


147


The annual mean in this interval * of time
7470, and for the last ten years 11,542. This
number may be augmented at least a fourth
part, on account of the illicit commerce, the
omissions at the customs, and the legal intro-
duction by Trinidad and Santiago de Cuba: we
therefore find


For the whole island, from 1521 to 1763 60,000
from 1764 to 1790 33,409
For the Havannah, from 1791 to 1805...... 91,211
from 1806 to 1820 131,829


316,449


Augmentation for the illicit trade, and also for
the eastern part of the island, from 1791 to


DB 20.6. isos Ves oe oto caine ncaa meee aera 56,000


372,449


We have seen above, that Jamaica received
from Africa +, in those three hundred years,
$50,000 blacks; or, to fix on a more cer-
tain estimate, in one hundred and eight years


* Other manuscript-notes. in my possession give, for
1817, 23,560 slaves.

+ See vol. vi, p. 820. I shall here add, that the English
colonies of the West Indies, which have now but 700,000
negroes and mulattoes, free and slaves, have received in one
hundred and six years (from 1680 to 1786), according to
the registers of the custom-house, 2,130,000 negroes from


the coast of Africa !
uo


148


(from 1700 to 1808) nearly 677,000 ; and yet
that island does not now possess 380,000 blacks,
free mulattoes and slaves. The island of Cuba
furnishes a more consoling result; it has
130,000 free men of colour, while Jamaiea, on
a total population half as great, reckons only
35,000. The island of Cuba has received from
Africa,


Before the year 1791 .......... . 93,500
From 1791 to 1825 at least 320,000


413,500 blacks,


There was found in 1825, on account of the
small number of negresses introduced by the
slave trade, only


Free negroes and slaves 320,000
Mulattoes 79,000


Men of colour 390,006


A similar calculation, founded on numerical
elements little different, was addressed to the
Cortes of Spain, 20th July, 1811. It was at-
tempted to be proved by this calculation, that
the island of Cuba had received till the year
1810, less than 229,000 African negroes *,


* According to a note published by the Consulado of the
Havannah (Papel periodico, 1801, p. 12), the mean price of
15,647 bozale negroes, imported from 1797 to 1800, was 375
piastres per head. According to this rate, the 307,00°


149


which it represented in 1811, by a captive and
free population of negroes and mulattoes,
amounting to 326,000, so that there is an ex-
cess of 97,000 on the African importation *.
Forgetting that the whites have had their part
in the existence of 70,000 mulattoes +, forget-
ting the natural increase of so many thousand
negroes progressively imported, they exclaim,
blacks of Africa brought from 1790 to 1823, must have cost
the inhabitants of the island the sum of 115,125,000 piastres.

* My calculation terminates in 1825, and yields 413,500
negroes imported since the conquest. This calculation trans-
mitted to the Cortes, terminates in 1810, and yields 229,000.
(Documentos, p. 119.) Difference 184,500: now, accord.
ing to the registers of the customs of the Havannah only,
the number of Loza/le negroes imported, from 1811 to 1820,
was beyond 109,000, which must be augmented, Ist. accord-
ing to the principles admitted by the Consulado itself, 4 or
27,000 for the illicit introduction in the eastern part of the
island ; 2d. the produce of the illicit trade from 1811 to
1825.

+ The task undertaken by the Consulado in 1811, on the
probable distribution of 326,000 free men of colour and
slaves, contains very remarkable materials, and which only
a great knowledge of the localities could have furnished the
administration. A) Townrs: Western part; at the Havan-
nah, 27,000 free men of colour and 28,000 slaves; the seven
pueblos of 4yantamiento, 18,000 ; in the whole jurisdiction
of the Havannah, 36,000 free men of colour and 69,000
slaves, or 141,000. B) Fields: Jurisdiction of the Havan-
nah, 6000 free men of colour and 110,000 slaves. Eastern
part, 36,000 free men of colour and 53,000 slaves. ‘Total
of the fields (campos) 185,000. Documentos sobre los negros,
p. 121.


150


“What other nation or human society can ren-
der so advantageous an account of the effects
of that fatal trade of blacks (disgraciado tra-
fico)!” respect the sentiment that dictated
these lines; and repeat, that in comparing the
island of Cuba with Jamaica, the result of the
comparison seems to be to the advantage of the
Spanish legislation, and the morals of the in-
habitants of Cuba. These comparisons demon-
strate a state of things in the latter island more
favorable to the physical preservation, and the
setting free of the blacks; but what a melan-
choly spectacle is that of christian and civilized
nations, discussing which of them has caused
the fewest Africans to perish in three centuries,
by reducing them to slavery! I shall not boast
of the treatment of the blacks in the southern
parts of the United States *; but degrees exist
in the sufferings of the human species. The
slave who has a hut and a family, is less miser-
able than he who is purchased, as if he formed
part of a flock. The greater the number of


* On the comparative state of the misery of the slaves of


the West Indies and the United States, see Negro Slavery in
the United States of America and Jamaica, 1823, p. 31. Ja-
maica reckoned, in 1823, male slaves, 170,466 ;° females,
171,916: in the United States were found, in 1820, male
slaves, 788,028 ; females, 750,100. It is not therefore the
disproportion between the sexes that causes the want of in-
crease natural to the West Indies.


151
slaves established with their families in a dwel-
ling which they believe to be their own pro-


perty, the more rapid will be their multiplica-
tion. The United States counted in


480,000 slaves.

676,696

894,444
1,191,364
1,541,568


The annual* increase of the last ten year's
(without counting the manumission of 100,000),
was twenty-six on a thousand, which produces
a doubling in twenty-seven years. Now, I as- —
sert with Mr. Cropper, that if the slaves at


* The increase of the negro slaves, from 1790 to 1810
(514,668), is owing, Ist, to the natural augmentation in the
families; 2d. to 30,000 negroes imported in the four. years
(1804 to 1808), during which South Carolina unhappily
permitted again the importation by the slave-trade ; 3d. to
the acquisition of Louisiana, where there were 30,000 blacks.
The augmentation resulting from the two latter causes, bears
on one-eighth only of the total increase, and the compensation
is found in the manumission of more than 100,000 blacks,
who disappear, in 1810, from the registers. The slaves aug-
ment a little less rapidly (in the exact proportion of 0,2611
to 0,2915) than the totality of the population of the United
States ; but their increase is more rapid than that of the
whites, where they form a considerable part of the popula-
tion, as in the southern states. (Morse, Mod. Geogr., 1822,
p- 608.)

+ Letter addressed to the Liverpool Society, 1828, p. 18.


152


Jamaica and Cuba had multiplied in the same
proportion *, those two islands, the former since
1795, and the latter since 1800, would pos-
sess almost their actual population, without
400,000 blacks having been loaded with irons
on the coast of Africa, and dragged to Port-
Royal and the Havannah.

The mortality of the negroes is very different
in the island of Cuba, as in all the West Indies,
according to the kind of culture, the humanity
of the masters and overseers, and the number
of negresses who can take care of the sick,
There are plantations in which fifteen to eigh-
teen per cent perish annually. I have heard it
coolly discussed, whether it were better for the
proprietor not to fatigue the slaves to excess
by labour, and consequently to replace them
less frequently, or to draw all the advantage
possible from them in a few years, and replace
them oftener by the acquisition of bozale negroes.


* The number 480,000 for the year 1770, is not founded
on an effective enumeration; it is but an approximation.
M. Albert Gallatin is of opinion, that the United ‘States,
which at the end of 1823 possessed a population of 1,665,000
slaves and 250,000 free men of colour, consequently a total
of 1,915,000 negroes and mulattoes, never received from the
coast of Africa more than 300,000 blacks, that is 1,830,000
less than the English West Indies received from 1680 to 1786;
yet their present population in negroes and mulattoes scarcely
surpasses the third of that of the United States.


153


Such are the reasonings of cupidity, when man
employs man as a beast of burden! It would
be unjust to entertain a doubt, that within fif-
teen years the mortality of the negroes has
greatly diminished in the island of Cuba. Se-
veral proprietors have occupied themselves in a
laudable manner in the amelioration of the
system of plantations. The mean mortality of
the negroes recently imported is still from ten
to twelve per cent *; it might, from the experi-
ence of several well-governed fabrics, diminish
from six to eight per cent. The loss of bozale
negroes differs greatly according to the period of
their arrival; the most favorable is that of Oc-
tober to January, when the season is healthy,
and the abundance of aliments considerable in
the plantations. In the hot months, the mor-
tality is sometimes four per cent, during the
sale, as happened in 1802. The increase of the
number of female slaves, so useful by their care
of their sick husbands and countrymen, the
exemption from labor during their pregnancy,


* It is affirmed that at Martinico, where there are 78,000
slaves, the mean mortality is 6000. The births among the
slaves amounts annually but to 1200, On the losses in the
English islands, see above, vol. vi, p. 829. Before the abolition
of the slave trade, Jamaica lost annually 7000 individuals, or 25
per cent: since that period, the diminution of the population
is almost null. Review of the Registry Laws by the Com. of
the Afric. Inst., 1820, p. 43.


154


their solicitude for their children, the establish-
ment of negroes by families in separate dwel-
lings, the abundance of provisions, the multi-
plication of days of repose, and the introduction
of moderate labor by task ; such are the means
most capable of preventing the destruction of
the blacks. Persons who well know the inter-
nal system of the plantations believe, that in
the actual state of things the number of black
slaves would annually diminish one-twentieth,
if the fraudulent slave-trade ceased altogether.
This diminution is nearly equal to that of the ©
Little English Antilles, if we except Saint Lu-

cia and Grenada. Warned in the latter by

parliamentary discussions, fifteen years before

the definitive abolition of the slave-trade, they

had time to augment the importation of ne-

gresses. The abolition in the island of Cuba —
was more sudden, and unexpected. '

In official publications at the Havannah, it
has been attempted to compare the relative po-
pulation (the relation of the population with
the area of the island), with the relative popu-
lation of the least peopled parts of France and
Spain. The real area of the island being then
unknown, these essays could not be exact. We
have seen above, that the whole island contains
nearly two hundred individuals by the square
marine league (twenty to a degree). This is
one-fifth less than the least peopled province of


155


Spain, that of Cuenca ; four times less than the
least peopled department of France, the Upper
Alps. The inhabitants of the island of Cuba
are so unequally distributed, that five-sixths
of the island might almost be considered as
unpeopled *. ‘There are several parishes (Con-
solacion, Macuriges, Hanabana) where, in the
middle of pasturages, we do not find fifteen in-
habitants to the square league; on the con-
trary, in the triangle formed by Bahia Honda,
Batabano, and Matanzas (or rather between
Batabano, the Pan of Guaixabon, and Guama-
caro), we find on 410 square leagues, or on one.
ninth of the total area of the island, more
than 300,000 inhabitants, that is five-sevenths
of the population of the island, and more
than six-sevenths of its agricultural and com-
mercial wealth. This triangle furnishes but
732 inhabitants to the square league; it has not
quite the extent of two departments of mid-
dling size in France, and a relative population
one-half less considerable; but we must not
forget that even in this small triangle, between
Guaixabon, Guamauaro, and Batabano, the
southern part is little peopled. The richest
Paroquias in plantations of sugar, are those of
Matanzas with Naranjal, or Cuba mocha and
Yumuri; Rio Blanco del Norte with Madraga,


* Documentos, p. 186. See also above, vol. vi, p. 187, 192.


156


Jibacoa, and Tapaste; Jaruco, Guines and Ma-
nagua with Rio Blanco del Sur, San Geronimo,
and Canoa; Guanabacoa with Bajurayabo and
Sibarimon ; Batabano with Guara and Buena-
ventura; San Antonio with Govea; Guanajay
with Bahiahonda and Guajaybon; Cano ‘with
Bauta and Guatao; Santiago with Hubajay
and Trinidad. The most unpeopled Paroquias,
which serve only for pastoral eeconomy (cria de
ganado), are, in the Vuelta de abaxo, those of
Santa Cruz de los Pinos, Guanacape, Caca-
ragicaras, Pinal del Rio, Guane and Boxa; in
the Vuelta de arriba, those of Macuriges,.Hana-
bana, Guamacaro and Alvarez. The hatos, or
farms of cattle which occupy deserts of 1600 to
1800 caballerias, disappear by degrees; and if
the settlements attempted at Guantanamo and
Nuevitas, have not had the rapid success which
was justly expected; other settlements, those,
for instance, of the jurisdiction of Guanajay,
have perfectly answered. (Exvpediente de Don
Franc. de Arango, 1798, manuscrit.)

We have remarked above, how much the po-
pulation of the island of Cuba is susceptible of
being augmented in the lapse of ages. As the
native of a northern country, little favoured by
nature, I shall observe that the Marche of
Brandebourg, for the most part sandy, nou-
rishes, under an administration favorable to the
progress of agricultural industry, on a surface


157


only one-third of that of Cuba, a population
neatly double. The extreme inequality in the
distribution of the population, the want of in-
habitants on a great part of the coast, and its
immense development, renders the military de-
fence of the whole island impossible; the dis-
embarking of an enemy cannot be hindered,
nor illicit trade. The Havannah is no doubt
well defended, and rivals by its works the
most important places of Europe; the Yorre-
ones, and the fortifications of Cogimar, Jaruco,
Matanzas, Mariel, Bahia Honda, Batabano,
Xagua, and Trinidad, might oppose a longer
or shorter resistance; but two-thirds of the
island are almost without defence, and could
scarcely be protected by the most active gun-
boats.

Intellectual cultivation, almost entirely re-
strained to the class of the whites, is as un-
equally distributed as the population. The
first society of the Havannah resembles, in ease
and pcliteness of manners, the society of Cadiz,
and of the richest commercial towns of Eu-
rope; but quitting the capital, or the neigh-
bouring plantations, inhabited by rich proprie-
tors, a striking contrast to this state of partial
and local civilization presents itself, in the
simplicity of manners that prevails in the
insulated farms and small towns. The Hava-
neros were the first among the rich inhabitants


158


of the Spanish colonies, who visited Spain,
France, and Italy; and at the Havannah the
people were the best informed of the politics of
Europe, and the springs put in movement in


courts to sustain or overthrow a ministry.. This’


knowledge of events, this prescience of future
chances, have powerfully aided the inhabitants
of the island of Cuba to free themselves from a
part of the shackles which stop the develop-
ment of colonial prosperity. In the interval of
time that separated the peace of Versailles and
the beginning of the revolution of Saint Do-
mingo, the Havannah appeared ten times nearer
Spain than Mexico, Caraccas, and New Grenada.
Fifteen years later, at the period of my stay in
the colonies, this appearance of inequality of
distance had already considerably diminished ;
now, when the independence of the continental
colonies, the importation of foreign industry,
and the financial wants of the new states, have
multiplied the connections between Europe and
America; when the passage is shortened by the
improvements in navigation ; when the Colum-
bians, the Mexicans, and the inhabitants of
Guatimala*, rival each other in visiting Eu-
rope; the ancient Spanish colonies, those at


* Los Centro--Americanos, as they are called in the consti-
tution of the federal Republic of Centro-America, decreed
November 22d, 1824. j


159


least that are bathed by the Atlantic Ocean, ©
seem alike to have drawn nearer to the conti-

nent. Such are the changes which a few years

have produced, and which proceed with in-

creasing rapidity. They are the effects of

knowledge, and of an activity long restrained ;

and render the contrast less striking which I

observed at the beginning of the century, in

manners and civilization, at Caraccas, Bogota,

Quito, Lima, Mexico, and the Havannah. The

influence of the Basque, Catalanian, Galician,

and Andalusian origin *, becomes every day

more insensible; and perhaps at the period

when I am tracing these lines, it would be unjust

to characterize the different shades of national

civilization -in the six capitals I have just
named, as I attempted to do elsewhere +.

The island of Cuba does not possess those
great and magnificent establishments of which
the foundation dates far back at Mexico; but
the Havannah can boast of institutions which
the patriotism of the inhabitants, animated by
a happy rivalship between the different centres
of American civilization, will know how to
extend and improve, when political circum-
stances and confidence in the preservation of
internal tranquillity will permit. The patriotic
society of the Havannah (established in 1793) ;


*® See above, vol. iii, p. 426,
+ Vol iii, p. 471.


160


that of Santo Espiritu, Puerto Principe, and
Trinidad, which depend on it; the university
with its chairs of theology, jurisprudence,
medicine *, and mathematics, established since
1728, in the convent of Padres Predicadores + ;
the chair of political economy, founded in 1818;
that of agricultural botany; the museum and
the school of descriptive anatomy, due to the
enlightened zeal of Don Alexander Ramirez ;
the public library, the free school of drawing
and painting; the national school; the Lancas-
trian schools, and the botanic garden, are
institutions partly new, and partly old. Some
wait for progressive ameliorations, others for a
total reform, fitted. to place them in: harmony
with the spirit of the age, and the wants of
society.

* At the Havannah only, in 1828, there were more than
500 practising physicians, surgeons, and pharmacians ;
namely, 61 medicos, 333 cirujanos latinos y romancistas,
and 100 farmacenticos!. There were reckoned in the whole
island, in the same year, 312 advocates (of whom 198 were
at the Havannah) and 94 escribanos. The increase of the
advocates only, in 1814, was such, that there were still 84 at
the Havannah, and 130 in the whole island.

+ The clergy of the island of Cubais neither numerous
nor rich, if we except the bishop of the Havannah and the
archbishop of Cuba, the former of whom has 110,000
piasters, and the latter 40,000 piasters of annual revenue.
The canons have 3000 piasters. ‘The number of ecclesias-
tics does not exceed 1100, according to the official enume-


ration in my possession.


161


Acricutrure.—When the Spaniards began
their settlements in the islands, and on the
continent of America, the principal objects of
the cultivation of the soil were as in Europe,
the plants that serve to nourish man. This
state of the agricultural life of nations, the
most natural and encouraging for society, has
been preserved till our days in Mexico, in
Peru, in the cold and temperate regions of
Cundinamarca, wherever the domination of the
whites comprehends a vast extent of territory.
The alimentary plants, bananas, manioc, maize,
the cereals of Europe, potatoes and quinoa, have .
remained, at different heights above the level
of the sea, the basis of continental agriculture
between the tropics. Indigo, cotton, coffee, and
the sugar-cane, appear in these regions only in
intercalated groupes. Cuba, and the other
islands of the archipelago of the Antilles, have,
during two centuries and a half, presented the
same aspect: the same plants were cultivated
which had nourished the half-wild natives, and
the vast savannahs of the great islands were
peopled with numerous herds of cattle. Piedro
de Atienza planted the first sugar-canes in
Saint Domingo, about the year 1520; and
cylindrical presses were constructed, moved by
hydraulic wheels *; but the island of Cuba

* On the trapiches or molinos de agua of the sixteenth cen-
tury, see Oviedo, Hist. nat, des Ind., lib, 4, cap. 8,


‘VOL. VII. M


162


participated little in these efforts of rising
industry; and, what is very remarkable, in
1553, the historians of the Conquest * mention
no other exportation of sugar besides that of
Mexican sugar for Spain and Peru. Far from
throwing into commerce what we now call
colonial productions, the Havannah, till the
eighteenth century, exported only skins and
leather. The rearing of cattle was succeeded
by the cultivation of tobacco and the multipli-
cation of bees, of which the first hives (codme-
nares) were brought from the Floridas. Wax
and tobacco soon became more important. ob-
jects of commerce than leather, but were shortly
replaced in their turn by the sugar cane and
coffee. The cultivation of these productions
did not exclude more ancient cultivation ; and,
in the different phases of agricultural industry,
notwithstanding the general tendency to make
the plantations of coffee predominate, the
fabrics of sugar furnish the greatest value of
the annual productions. The exportation of
tobacco, coffee, sugar, and wax, by lawful and
illicit means, amounts to fourteen millions of
piasters, according to the actual price of those
articles.


* Lopez de Gomara, Conquista de Mexico (Medina det
Campo 1553), fol, 129,


163


Suear.—The port of Havannah has exported,
according to the registers in the custom-house,
in the following sixty-four years:


From 1760 to 1768, mean year, at most 13,000 cases.
From 1770 to 1778 - - 50,600
In 1786 - - - 63,274
1787 - - - 61,245
1788 - - 69,221
1789 - 69,125
1790 - 77,896
1791 - 85,014
1792 - 72,854
1793 - 87,970
1794 - 103,629
1795 - 70,437
1796 - 120,374
1797 s 118,066
1798 - 134,872
1799 z 165,602
1800 - 142,097
1801 - 159,841
1802 e 204,404
1803 158,075
1804 193,955
1805 174,544
1806 156,510
1807 181,272
1808 125,875
1809 - a ine 288,842
1810 - - 186,672
From 1811 to 1814, mean year 206,487
In 1815 - - 214,111
1816 ~ 200,487
1817 - , 217,076


In 1818 207,378 cases.
1819 192,743
1820 215,593
1821 236,669
1822 261,795
1823 300,211
1824, year little fertile 245,329


This is the most extensive table hitherto
published; it is founded on a great number of
official manuscript pieces communicated to me,
on the Aurora and the Papel periodico de la
Havana; on the Patriota Americano (vol. ii, p.
59); on the Guias de Forasteros dela Isla de
Cuba; on the Sucinta Noticia de la situacion
presente de la Havana, 1800 (manuscript); on
the Reciamacion contra la ley de Aranceles,
1821, and on the Redactor general de Guate-
mala, 1825 Jul., p. 25. According to a less
certain statement, 183,960 cases of sugar were
embarked at the Havannah, and registered at
the custom-house, from January Ist to Novem-
ber 5th, 1825. The two months of November
and December are wanting, during which, in
1823, 23,600. cases were shipped at the same
port. .

In order to ascertain the whole exportation
of sugar from the island of Cuba, we must add
to the exportation of the Havannah, Ist. that
of the other authorised ports, especially Matan-
zas, Santiago de Cuba, Trinidad, Baracoa, and


165


Mariel; 2dly, the produce of the illicit trade.
During my stay in the island, the exportation
of Trinidad, in Cuba, was estimated at only
25,000 cases. In examining the registers of
the custom-house of Matanzas, we must avoid
a double enumeration, and carefully distinguish *
the sugar directly exported to Europe from that
which is embarked for the Havannah. In 1819,
the real transatlantic exportation of Matanzas
was but one-fifteenth of that of the Havannah ;
and in 1823, I find one tenth; for, according to
two tables of the custom-house, of which one
presents the exportation of the Havannah only,
and the other that of the Havannah and Ma-
tanzas, the former marks 300,211 cases of
sugar and 895,924 arrobas of coffee ; the latter
328,418 cases of sugar and 979,864 arrobas of
coffee. From these statements, we may add to
the 235,000 cases which the mean of the last
eight years furnishes, for the Havannah only, at
least 70,000 cases shipped in other ports; in
estimating therefore the frauds on the custoin-
house at one-fourth, we receive for the exporta-
tion of the whole island, by lawful and illicit
means, more than 380,000 cases (near seventy
millions of kilograms) of sugar. Persons well
acquainted with the localities, estimated -~ the
* Letters from the Havannah, p. 91, 95.


+ Historia natural y politica de la Isle de Cuba, by Don
Antonio Lopez Gomez, 1794 (manuscript), cap. 1, p. 22,


166


consumption of the Havannah, in 1794, at
298,000 arrobas, or 18,600 cases of sugar, and
the consumption of the whole island, at 730,000
arrobas, or 45,600 cases. If we consider that
the population of the island at that period was *
nearly 362,000, of which at most 230,000 were
free men, and that it is now 715,000, of which
455,000 are free men, we must admit a total
consumption, in 1825, of 88,000 cases. In fix-
ing on 60,000, we obtain for the total produc-
tion of the plantations of sugar-cane at least
440,000 cases, or eighty-one millions of kilog.
This is a limit-nwmber which would diminish
but one-fifteenth, if we supposed that the esti-
mate of the interior. consumption in 1794 and
1825, was one-half too much.

In order to judge more correctly of the
agricultural wealth of Cuba, we shall compare
the production of that island, in years of com-


I know not on what researches the estimate was founded of
the consumption of 25,000 to 30,000 cases in the whole
island, which was given to me as an exact result, in 1804,


before I had any knowledge of the manuscript of M. Lopez
Gomez. Perhaps the consumption of the whole island was
concluded from that of the Havannah, which can be con-
trolled more easily, The quantity of sugar employed in
that town, either in the fabrication of chocolate and sweet-


meats, or in the aliments of the people, is beyond what can
be imagined in Europe, even after having visited the south
of Spain. c

* See above, vol, vii, p. 393.


167


mon fertility, with the production and exporta-
tion of sugars in the rest of the West Indies, in
Louisiana, Brazil, and Guyana *.


IsLanp or Cua, according to the estimates
discussed above: production, at least 440,000
cases; exportation, by lawful means, 305,000
cases, or 56 millions of kilog.; contraband,
380,000 cases (70 millions of kilog.) ; conse-
quently, nearly one-seventh less than the mean
exportation of Jamaica.


» In the following estimates, we have fixed on the results
given by the registers of the custom-house, without augment-
ing the numbers, conformably to vague hypotheses, on the
effects of illicit trade. It is supposed in the reduction of
the weight 1 quintal or 4 arrobas = 100 Spanish pounds =
45*i1,976; 1 arroba = 25 Spanish pounds = 11*",494; 1
caja de azucar of the Havannah — 16 arrobas = 183*"!,904 ;
1 cwt = 112 English sounds — 50*,796. The last esti-
mate is founded on the labors of Mr. Kelly, who supposes
453%',544 = 1 pound avoir du poids. Mr. Francceur, in cal-
culating according to the weight of a cubic inch of distilled
water, under the conditions indicated in the new English
law, finds only 4532',296 in the avoir du poids, which gives
1 cwt = 50*!!,769, or to ys near the result of the reduc-
tion of Mr. Riffault, in the second edition of Thompson's
Chemistry, vol. i, p. 17. 1 have employed, according to Mr.
Kelly, 1 cwt = 501,79, but I considered it proper to men-
tion the doubts that remain on so important an elemient. In
the Price Current printed at the Havannah, the Spanish
quintal is estimated at 46‘: the reduction of a Hundred
Weight, used in trade at Paris, is also 50*'!,792.


168


Jamaica. Production * (that is, the interior
consumption + the exportation) in 1812, ac-
cording to an estimate of Mr. Colquhoun which
appears a littie high, 135,592 hogsheads, at
14 ewt, or 96,413,648 kil. The exportation in
1722, when the island had not 60,000 slaves,
11,008 hogsheads; in 1744, 35,000 hds; in
1768 (with 166,914 slaves), 55,761 hds, or
780,654 cwt +; in 1823 (with 342,382 slaves),
1,417,758 cwt{, or 72,007,928 kilograms. . It
results from these statements, that the exporta-
tion of Jamaica, in the very fertile year of
1823, was not one-eighteenth greater than that
of the island of Cuba, which amounted in the
same year, by lawful means, to 370,000 cases,
or 68,080,000 kilograms. Taking the mean
from 1816 to 1824, we find, from documents’
which I owe to the kindness of Mr. Charles
Ellis, that the exportation of Jamaica to the
ports of Great Britain and Ireland is 1,597,000
ewt (81,127,000 kil.).


Barpapoes (with 79,000 slaves); Grenapa
(with 25,000 slaves); Sarnr Vincent (with
24,000 slaves); are the three islands of the


* Colquhoun, Wealth of the Brit. Emp., p. 378.
+ Stewart, View of the present state of Jamaica, 1828, p. 17.


{ Stat. Illustr., p.54. See-Note A, at the end of the
10th Book,


169


English possessions which furnish most sugar.
Their exportation for Great Britain, was, in
1812, 174,218 ewt. ; 211,134 ewt.; and 220,514
ewt. In 1823, it was 314,630 cwt.; 247,360
ewt.; and 232,577 cwt. Barbadoes, Grenada,
and Saint Vincent do not consequently export
altogether a quantity of sugar equal to that
sent annually to France from Guadaloupe and
Martinique. The three English islands have
128,000 slaves and forty-three square marine
leagues; the two French islands have 178,000
slaves and eighty-one square marine leagues.
The island of Trinidad, which, after Cuba, Hay-
ti, Jamaica, and Portorico, is the largest in the
West Indies, has, according to MM. de Linde-


nau and Bauza, an area of 133 square leagues ;
yet, in 1823, it exported only 186,891 cwt.
(9,494,000 kilog.), produce of the labor of
23,500 slaves. ‘The progress of the cultivation
of this island conquered from the Spaniards,
has been so rapid, that in 18]2, the production
was only 59,000 cwt.


EneuisnH Istanps. “The cultivation of the
sugar-cane began at Jamaica as a branch of
colonial industry in 1763. The exportation of
the whole of the English islands, for the ports
of Great Britain, was, mean year, from 1698 to
1712, 400,000 cwt.; from 1727 to 1733, a

million of cwt.; from 1761 to 1765, 1,485,377


170


cwt.; from 1791 to 1795 (with 460,000 slaves),
2,021,325 ewt.; in the very fertile year of 1812,
3,112,734 ewt.; and in 1823 (with 627,000
slaves), 3,005,366 cwt. *. The mean, from 1816


* The year 1812, according to the work of Mr. -Col-
quhoun, and 1825, according to the work recently published
with the title of Statistical Illustrations of the British Empire.
I became convinced by partial statements, that the exporta-
tions of 1812 and of 1823 belong nearly to the same islands
that England possesses since the peace of Paris. The island
of Tobago and Saint Lucia only are added, which yield
175,000 cwt. of sugar. The estimates anterior to the year
1812, are those of Mr. Edwards (West. Ind., vol. i, p. 19),
and relate tv the same parts of the West Indies, with the ex-
ception of a few islands of very insignificant production, We
may observe that from 1812, to the present period, the ex-
portation of sugar for England has not augmented ; yet no
sensible change appears in the number of slaves, if we sup-
pose that the omissions on the registers were the same in
1812 and 1825. In the former of those years were reckon-
ed (with Saint Lucia, the Bahamas, and Bermuda), 634,100
slaves ; in the latter,630,800. Researches made before the
publication of the Statistical Illustrations, had given me
626,800 slaves (vol. vi, p. 29). I would not make use of
the tables published for the years 1807-1822, in which,
under the name of the sugar of the English West Indies, are
comprehended the exportation of the West Indies generally,
an ephemeral conquest, and that of Dutch Guyana (Deme-
rara, Berbice, and, before the peace of Paris, Surinam).


This geographical confusion: has given rise to the idea of a


greater increase of production than really exists. The mean
exportation, for instance, of 1809-1811, and 1815-1818,
were (Siat. Ill. p. 56.) 3,570,803 and 3,540,993 cwt.; but
deducting 870,000 cwt. from the sugar of English Amer-


171


to 1824, was 3,053,373 cwt. Jamaica now ex-
ports to the ports of Great Britain more than
half the sugar of the English West Indies. Its
slave-population is, to the total population of
the English islands, as 1: 13. The exporta-
tion of the English islands for Ireland, is
185,000 cwt.


Frencu Istanps. Exportation for France;
42 millions of kilograms. Guadaloupe ex-
ported in 1810, in refined sugar, 5,104,878
pounds; in coarse sugar, 37,791,300 pounds ;
Martinique, 53,059 casks (of a thousand
pounds) of sugar, and 2,699,588 gallons
(of four quarts) of molosses; thence results


95,955,288 pounds * for the two islands. The


ica, for Demerara and Berbice, there remains for the fifteen
islands now under the domination of England, only 3,185,000
ewt. The year 1822 only gives, with the same corrections,
2,933,700 cwt., and this result agrees within nearly one-
forty-second with that which I gave in the text for the year
1823 (3,095,366 cwt.) Mr. Edwards, in the last edition of
his excellent work on the West Indies, believes the meam
exportation of the English islands, from the period of 1809
to 1811, to be 4,210,276 cwt. In this estimate, a third
too high, the sugar of the West India islands has no doubt
been confounded with that which arrives from Guyana,
Brazil, and all the other parts of the world; for the total
importation of sugar in Great Britain, was only 4,242,468
ewt., from 1809 to 1811, mean year.
* Official. Notes.


172


French islands, from 1820 to 1823, imported
into France, 142,427,968 kilog. of coarse sugar,
and 19,041,840 kilog. of refined sugar; together,
161,469,808 kilog. which yield, mean year,
40,367,452 kilog. *.


ARCHIPELAGO oF THE West Inpies. In esti-
mating the exportation of the little Dutch,
Danish, and Swedish islands, which have only
61,000 slaves, at eighteen millions of kilograms,
we find, for the exportation of the whole archi- .
pelago of the West Indies, in coarse and refined
sugar, near 287 millions of kilograms, of which


165 millions or % the English Islands (626,800 slaves).


62 iso the Spanish Islands (281,400 slaves).
42 34 the French Islands (178,000 slaves).
18 & the Dutch, Danish, and Swedish Islands


(61,300 slaves). .


The exportation of the sugar of Saint Domingo
is at present almost nothing. It was 80,360,000
kilog. in 1788 ; and in 1799, it was believed to
be twenty millions. If it had remained such as
it was in the great prosperity of that island, it
would have augmented the total exportation of
the sugar of the West Indies twenty-eight-
hundredths; but that of all America, scarcely
eighteen-hundredths. Brazil, Guyana, and


* Rodet, de l’ Enirepot de Paris, 1825, p. 150,


173


Cuba, with 2,526,000 slaves, now furnish alto-
gether nearly 230 millions of kilograms, tbat
is, without the contraband, three times as
much sugar as Saint Domingo, in its greatest
wealth. The enormous increase of cultivation
since 1789 in Brazil, Demerara, and Cuba, has
replaced what Hayti has diminished, and ren-
dered insensible the want of sugar-factories in
that republic.


Tue Eneuisu, DutcH, aND Frencu Guyanas,.
Total exportation, at least forty millions of kilo-
grams. English Guyana, mean of 1816 to 1824,
557,000 cwt. or twenty-eight millions of kilog.
The exportation in 1823, from Demerara and


Essequebo to the ports of Great Britain, was
607,870 cwt. (with 77,370 slaves); from Berbice
(with 23,400 slaves) 56,000 cwt.; total,
33,717,757 kilog. We may admit for Dutch
Guyana *, or Surinam, nine or ten millions of


* A Dutch author, M. Van den Bosch, in a very instruc-
tive work on the Nedar landsche Bezittingen in Azia, Ameri-
ka en Afrika, (1818, vol. ii, p. 188, 202, 204, 214), estimates
the three colonies of Demerara, Essequebo, and Berbice, in
1814 (with 85,442 slaves) at an exportation of only
32,408,293 of sugar. Surinam, according to the same au-
thor, -has scarcely 60,000 slaves, and exported in 1801,
nearly 20,477,000 pounds of sugar. -'This exportation has
since little varied; it is generally 17,000 casks (at 550
kilog.). Cayenne begins to yield one million of kil. The


174
kilograms. The exportation of Surinam in
1823, was 15,882,000 pounds ; in 1824,
20,266,000. These statements were collected


by M. Thuret, consul-general of the King of
the Low Countries.


Brazit. The exportation of this vast coun-
try, which reckons 1,960,000 slaves, and where
the sugar-cane is cultivated in the Capitania-
general of the Rio Grande, as far as the parallel
* of Porto Alegre (lat. 30° 2’), is much more
considerable than is generally believed--. In


estimate of the black population of the three Guyanas is
perhaps one-seventh too high. (See above, vol. vi, p. 838).

* On the limits of the plants cultivated in the southern
hemisphere, see Auguste de Saint Hilaire, Apercu d’un Voy-
age au Brésil, p. 57. North of the tropic of Cancer, we find
the production of sugar in Louisiana, in 1815, to be fifteen
millions of pounds, or 7,350,000 kilograms. (Pitkins, p.
149).

t In the statistical work entitled, Commerce du diz-
neuvieme siécle, tom. ii, p. 238, the exportation of the sugar
of Brazil for Europe is estimated at only 50,000 cases ; but
according to the registers of the custom-house at Hamburg,
that port alone received in 1824, 44,800 cases of Brazilian
sugar; and in 1825, more than 31,900 cases (at 650 kilog.).
England and the Netherlands imported at the same period,
more than 10,000 cases. According to official documents col-
lected by Mr. Adrien Balbi, the exportation of Brazilian sugar
to Portugal, in 1796, was 34,692,000 kilog.; in 1806,
36,018,000 kilog. ; and in 1812, forty-five millions of kilo-
grams. ;


175


1816, according to very exact information, it
was 200,000 cases (at 650 kilog.), or 130 mil-
lions of kilograms, of which one-third was des-
tined for Germany and Belgium, by Hamburgh,
Breme, Trieste, Leghorn, and Genoa, and the
rest for Portugal, France, and England ; the
latter country received, in 1823, only 71,438
cwt., or 3,628,335 kilog. This sugar is gene-
rally at a very high price on the coast of Brazil;
the production of Brazilian sugar has dimin-
ished since 1816, on account of the interior
commotions: in the years of great drought, the
exportation scarcely rose to 140,000 cases.
Persons well-informed on this branch of Ameri-
can commerce, believe, that when tranquillity
shall be ultimately established, the exportation
of sugar will become, mean year, 192,000 cases,
or 125 millions of kilograms, of which 150,000
cases will be of refined sugar,and 42,000 of coarse
sugar. Rio Janeiro, it is thought, will furnish
40,000 cases; Bahia, 100,000; Pernambuco,
52,000, without reckoning the years of extraor-
dinary fertility.


EeurinoxiaL America and Louisiana now
throw into the commerce of Europe and the
United States, 460 millions of kilograms of
sugar; (such is the result of the minute dis-
cussion of all the partial statements ;) of this


176


287 millions or = West Indies (1,147,500 slaves).


125 ie Brazil (2,060,000 slaves).
40 i Guyanas ( 206,000 slaves).


We shall soon see that Great Britain only,
with a population of 14,400,000, consumes
more than the third of 460 kilograms, which
the New Continent furnishes for the countries
where the slave-trade has assembled 3,314,000
unfortunate slaves! The cultivation of the
sugar-cane is now so spread over the different
parts of the globe, that the physical or political:


causes which suspend or destroy the efforts of


industry in one of the Great West India islands
can no longer produce the same effect on the
price of sugar and the general trade of Europe
and the United States, as where great cultiva-
tion was concentrated in a small space. Span-
ish writers have often compared the island of
Cuba, for the riches of its productions, to the
mines of Guanaxuato in Mexico. In fact Gua-
naxuato furnished, at the commencement of
the 19th century, a fourth of all the Mexican
money, and a sixth of all the American money.
The island of Cuba now exports by lawful
means one eighth of all the sugar of the Archi-
pelago of the West Indies; one-eighth of all the
sugar of equinoxial America which abounds in
Europe and the United States.


177


Three qualities of sugar are distinguished in
the island of Cuba, according to the degree of
purity which that substance attains by refining
(grados de purga). In every loaf or reversed
cone, the upper part gives the white sugar; the
mean part the yellow sugar, or quebrado ; the
lower part, or point of the cone, the cucurucho.
All the sugar of Cuba is consequently refined; a
very small quantity isintroduced ofcoarse or mus-
covade sugar (by corruption azucar mascabado).
The forms being of a different size, the loaves
~ (panes), differ also in weight. They generally
weigh, after refining, an arroba. The refiners
(maestros de azucar) will have every loaf of
sugar render five-ninths of white, three- ninths
of quebrado, and one-ninth of cucurucho. The
price of white sugar is higher when sold alone,
than in the sale called surtido, in which three-
fifths of white sugar and two-fifths of quebrado
are joined in the same lot. In the latter case
the difference of the price is generally four
reals (reales de plata) ; in the former, it rises
to six or seven reals. The revolution of Saint
Domingo, the prohibitions dictated by the con-
tinental system, the enormous consumption of
sugar in England and the United States, the
progress of cultivation in Cuba, Brazil, Deme-
rara, Bourbon, and Java, have occasioned
great fluctuations in the price. In a period
of twelve years, it was from three to seven

VOL, VII. . N


173


reals* in 1807, and from twenty-four to twenty-
eight reals in 1818, which proves fluctuations
in the relation of one to five. The price of
sugar in England in the same space of time
varied only + from thirty-three to thirty-seven
shillings per quintal, that is, as one to two and
one-fifth. In considering, not the price of the
whole mean year, but that of the sugar of the
Havannah at Liverpool, during the course of
some months, we also find variations of thirty


shillings, in 1811, and one hundred and thirty- _


four shillings in 1814, whence results the rela-
tion of one to four and two-fifths. The high
price of sixteen to twenty reals the arroba, was
kept up at the Havannah during five years,
from 1810 to 1815, almost without interrup-
tion; while from 1822, the price has fallen a
third, from ten to fourteen; and recently, in
1826, even from nine to thirteen reals. I enter
into these details to give a more precise idea of
the net produce of a sugar-fabric, and the sacri-
fices which a proprietor disposed to be satisfied


* In the price of sugar at the Havannah, the two numbers
indicate the price of sugar quebrado and blanco by the arroba.
A piaster contains eight reals, and is worth five franks forty-
three cent. ; it is worth thirteen cent. less in trade.

+ See the tables of the price from 1807 to 1820, in Stat,
Illustrations of the Brit. Emp., p. 56, and from 1782 to 1822,
in Tooke on High and Low Prices, 1824, Append. to patt ii,
pe 46, 53.


179


with a more moderate profit can make to alle-
viate the condition of his slaves. The cultiva-
tion of sugar is still profitable with the actual
price of twenty-four piasters per case (taking
the mean between the blanco and the quebrado);
a proprietor with a middling fabric, yielding
eight hundred cases, now sells his harvest for
19,200 piastres, which twelve years ago was
worth, at thirty-six piasters per case, 28,800
piasters.

During my stay in the plains of Guines, in
1804, I endeavoured to obtain some accurate in-
formation on the numeric elements of the fabri-
cation of the cane-sugar; a great yngenio,
producing 32,000 to 40,000 arr. (367,000 to
460,000 kil.) of sugar, is generally fifty cabal-
larias *, or 650 hectares in extent, of which the
half (less than one-tenth of a square marine
league), is allotted for the sugar-fabric properly
so called (cavaveral), and the other half for
alimentary plants and pasturage (potrero). ‘The
price of the land varies, naturally, according to
the quality of the soil, and the proximity of the
ports of the Havannah, Matanzas, and Mariel.
In a circuit of twenty-five leagues round the


* The agrarian measure, called caballeria, is eighteen
cordels, (each cordel has twenty-four varas) or 432 square
varas ; consequently, as 1 vara = 0°835™, according to
Rodriguez, a-caballeria is 186,624 square varas, or 130,118
square meters, or thirty-two and two-tenths English acres,


n 2


180


Havannah, the caballeria may be estimated at
two or three thousand piasters. For a produce*
of 32,000 arrobas (or 2000 cases of sugar), the
yngenio must have at least three hundred ne-
groes. An adult and acclimated slave is worth
from four hundred and fifty to five hundred
piasters ; a bozale negro, adult, not acclimated,
three hundred and seventy to four hundred
piasters. It is probable that a negro costs an-
nually, in nourishment, clothing, and medicine,
forty-five to fifty piasters ; consequently, with
‘the interest of the capital, and deducting
the holidays, more than twenty-two sols per
day. The slaves are fed with ¢asajo (meat. dried
in the sun) of Buenos Ayres and Caraccas ;
salt-cod (bacalao), when the tasajo is too dear ;
and vegetables (viandas), such as calebasses,
munatos, batates, and maize. An arroba of
tasajo was worth ten to twelve reals at Guines,


* There are very few plantations in the whole island of


Cuba that can furnish 40,000 arrobas ; such as the yngenio |


of Rio Blanco, or of the Marquess del Arca, Don Rafael
Ofarrel, and Dofia Felicia Jaurregui. The sugar-fabrics are
thought to be very considerable that yield 2000 cases annu-
ally, or 32,000 arrobas (nearly 368,000 kilograms). In the
French colonies, it is generally computed that the third or
fourth part only of the land is allotted for the plantation of
food, (bananas, ignames, and batates) ; in the. Spanish co-
lonies, a greater surface is lost in pasturage ; this is the
natural consequence of the ancient habits of the haciendas de
ganado, :


181


in 1804; it now costs, 1825, fourteen to six-
teen. An yngenio, such as we here suppose,
(with a produce of 32,000 to 40,000 arrobas),
requires Ist. three machines with cylinders put
in motion by oxen (trapiches), or two hy-
draulic wheels; 2d. according to the ancient
Spanish method, which, by a slow fire, causes a
great consumption of wood, eighteen cauldrons
(piezas) ; according to the fresh method of re-
verberation (introduced since the year 1801 by
Mr. Bailli of Saint Domingo, under the auspices
gf Don Nicolas Calvo), three clarificadoras,
three peilas, and two traines de tachos (each .
train has three piezas), in all twelve fondos. Itis
vulgarly asserted, that three arrobas of refined
sugar, yield one barrel of mie/, and that the
molasses are sufficient for the expences of the
plantation: this is especially the case where
they vroduce brandy in abundance. Thirty-two
thousand arrobas of sugar yield 15,000 bari-
les de miel (at two arrobas), of which five hun-
dred pipas de aguardiente de cana are made, at
twenty-five piasters. Ifa table of expence and
production were formed from these statements,
we should find for 1825:


Value of 32,000 arr. of sugar (blanco and


quebrado) at 24 piasters the case, or 16
arrobas 48,000 piasters.


Value of 500 pipas de aguardiente 12,500


60,500 piasters.


182


The expence of the yngenio would be estimated
yearly, at 30,000 piasters.
Now, the capital employed consists in


50 caballerias of land, at 2500 piasters... 125,000 piasters.
300 negroes, at 450 piasters .............. : 185,000
Buildings, mills .......... ORR Siu Rae SARs 80,000
Cuyes, cylinders, cattle, general inventory 180,000


470,000 piasters.


From this calculation it results that, in estab-
lishing an yngenio at present, capable of furnish-
ing two thousand cavas yearly, a capitalist
would draw, according to the old Spanish me-
thod, and with the actual price of sugar, an
interest of six and one-sixth per cent.; an in-
terest not considerable for an establishment not
merely agricultural, and of which the expence
remains the same, although the produce some-
times diminishes more than a third. It is very
rarely that one of those great yngenios can
make 32,000 cases of sugar during several suc-
cessive years. We must not therefore be sur-
prised that when the price of sugar in the
island of Cuba was very low (four or five pias-
ters the quintal), the cultivation of rice was
preferred to that of the sugar-cane. The profit
of the ancient proprietors (haciendados) consists,
Ist. in the circumstance that the expences of
the settlement were much less twenty or thirty


183

years past, when a caballeria of good land cost
only 1200 or 1600 piasters, instead of 2500 to
3000; and the adult negro 300 piasters, instead
of 450 to 500; 2d. in the compensation of the
very low and the very high price of sugar.
These prices are so different in a period of ten
years, that the interest of the capital varies
from five to fifteen per cent. In the year 1804,
for instance, if the capital employed had been
only 400,000 piasters, the raw produce, accord-
ing to the value of sugar and brandy, would
have amounted to 94,000 piasters. Now, from
1797 to 1800, the price of a case of sugar was
sometimes, mean value *, forty piasters instead
of twenty-four, which I was obliged to suppose
in the calculation for the year 1825. Whena
fabric of sugar, a great manufacture, or a mnine,
is found in the hands of the person who first
formed the establishment, the estimate of the
rate of interest which the capital employed
gives the proprietor, can be no guide to those
“who, purchasing afterwards, balance the advan-
tages of different kinds of industry.

From the calculations I made at the island
of Cuba, it appeared to me that a hectare yields,
mean term, twelve cubemeters of vezou, from
which may be drawn by the processes hitherto
used, at most from ten to twelve per cent. of


* Papel periodico de la Hav., 1801, No,. 12.


184


coarse sugar. At Bengal, according to Mr.
Bockford, it requires six pounds of juice, and
according to Mr. Roxburgh five and six-tenths;
for twenty-eight decilitres of vezou furnish 450
gramms of coarse sugar. It results, that consi-
dering the vezou as a liquid charged with salt,
it contains according to the fertility of the soil,
twelve to sixteen per cent. of erisallisable
sugar. The sugar-plant (acer saccharinum),
renders in good soils in the United States, 450
grammes of sugar for eighteen kilog. of sap, or
two and a half per cent. The beetroot fur-
nishes the same quantity of sugar, comparing
that quantity with the whole weight of the tube-
rose root; 500 kilog. of coarse sugar are drawn
from 20,000 kilog. of beetroot cultivated ina
good soil. As the sugar-cane loses half its
weight when the juice is expressed, it yields, in
comparing, not the juice, but the tuberose root
of the beta vulgaris to the loss of the saccharum
offiicinarum, at an equal weight of vegetable
mass, six times more coarse sugar than the beet-
root. The juice of the sugar-cane varies in its
constituent parts according to the nature of
the soil, the quantity of rain, the distribution
of heat in the different seasons, and the dispo-
sition more or less precose of the plant when in
flower. It is not only, as is said by the praticzens
or maestros de azucar, the sugared-part which
is more or less diluted; the difference consists


185


rather in the relations between the cristallizable
and incristallizable sugar (liquid sugar of Mr.
Proust), the allumine, the gum, the green fecu-
la, and the malic acid. The quantity of crys-
tallized sugar may be the same; and yet, ac-
cording to the uniform processes employed, the
quantity of cassonade drawn from the same
volume of vezou differs considerably, on account —
of the variable relations of other principles
that accompany the crystallizable sugar, which
in combining with some of those principles,
forms a syrup that has not the property of
crystallizing, and remains in molasses. ‘Too
great an elevation of the temperature seems to
accelerate and augment the loss. These con-
siderations explain why the maestros de azucar
regard themselves during a certain season as
bewitched, because with the same care, they can-
not make ihe same quantity of sugar ; these
considerations also explain, why with the same
vezou, in modifying the process, for instance,
the degree of heat and the rapidity of the boil-
ing, more or less cassonade is obtained. It
cannot be too often repeated, that it is not only
from the construction and disposition of caul-
drons and ovens that great economy must be
expected in the fabrication of sugar; it is from
the amelioration of chemical processes, a more
intimate knowledge of the modes of action of
lime, alcaline substances, and animal charcoal;


‘ 186
it is from the exact determination of the maxima
of temperature to which the vezou ought to be
successively exposed in different cauldrons. 'The
ingenious analyses of sugar, starch, gum, and
wood, made by MM. Gay-Lussac and Thénard;
the labors undertaken in Europe on the sugar
of grapes and beetroot; the researches of MM.
Dutrone, Proust, Clarke, Higgins, Daniell, How-
ard, Braconnot, and Desrones, have facilitated
and prepared those improvements; but every
thing yet remains to be done on the spot, in
the West Indies. It is certain that the Mexi-
can amalgation cannot be ameliorated without
having been examined, during a long stay at
Guanaxuato or at Real del Monte, the nature of
the mineral, when put in contact with mercury,
the muriate of soda, the magristal, and lime ;
so also, in order to ameliorate the technical pro-
cesses in the sugar fabrics, a chemist, who is well
acquainted with the actual state of vegetable
chemistry, must begin by analyzing in several
yngenios of the island of Cuba, small quantities
of vezou drawn from different soils, at different
seasons of the year, either from ordinary or
créole sugar-cane, from that of Otaheite, or
from the red-cane of Guinea. Without this
previous labor by a person recently employed
in one of the most celebrated laboratories of
Europe, and possessing a solid knowledge of the
manufacture of the sugar from beetroot, some


187


partial improvement may be attained; but the
whole manufacture from the sugar-cane will:
remain what it now is, the result of essays more
or less successful.

In soils that can be watered, or where plants
with tuberose roots have preceded the culti-
vation of the sugar-cane, a caballeria of fertile
land yields, instead of 1500 arrobas, three or
four thousand, which makes 2660 or 3340
kilog. of sugar (blanco and quebrado) by the
hectare. In fixing on 1500 arr. and estimating
the case of sugar at 24 piasters, according to
the price of the Havannah, we find that the
hectare produces the value of 870 francs, in
sugar; and that of 288 frances in wheat, in the
supposition of an octuple harvest, and the price
of a hundred kilog. of wheat, being 18 francs.
I have observed elsewhere, that, in this com-
parison of the two branches of cultivation, it
must not be forgotten that that of sugar re-
quires a great capital, for instance, at present
400,000 piasters for an annual production of
32,000 arrobas, or 368,000 kilograms, if .this
quantity is made in one single settlement. At
Bengal, in watered lands, an aere (4044 square
meters) renders, according to MM. Bock ford *
and Roxburgh, 2300 kilog. of coarse sugar, which


* Ind. Reereat. (Calcutta, 1810, p. 75), Roxburg, Reper-
tory, vol. ii, p. 425.


188


makes 5700 kilog. by the hectare. If this ferti-
lity is common in lands of great extent, we must
not be surprised at the low price of sugar in
the East Indies. The produce of a hectare is
double that of the best soil in the West Indies,
and the price of a free Indian day-labourer, is
not one-third the price of the day-labour of a
negro slave in the island of Cuba.

In Jamaica, in 1825, a plantation of five
hundred acres (or fifteen and a half caballerias),
of which two hundred acres are cultivated in
sugar-cane, yields, by the labor of two hundred
slaves, one hundred oxen, and fifty mules, 2800
cwt. or 142,200 kilog. of sugar, and is computed
to be worth, with its slaves, 43,000 pounds
sterling. According to this éstimate of Mr.
Stewart, one hectare would yield 1760 kilog.
of coarse sugar; for such is the quality of the
sugar delivered to commerce at Jamaica. We
have seen above, that in reckoning in a great
sugar-fabric of the Havannah 25 caballerias or
325 hectares for a produce of 32,000 to 40,000
cases, we find 1130 or 1420 kilog. of refined sugar
(blanco and quebrado) by the hectare. . This re-
sult agrees sufficiently with that of Jamaica,
if we reflect on the loss sustained in the weight
of sugar by refining, in converting the coarse


sugar into azwcar blanco y quebrado, or refined _
sugar. At Saint Domingo, a square is esti-


189


mated (at 3403 square toises — 1 = hectare)
at forty, and sometimes at sixty quintals: if
we fix on 5000 pounds, we still find 1960 kilog.
of coarse sugar by the hectare. In supposing, as
we ought to do when speaking of the produce of
the whole island of Cuba, that, in soils of mean
fertility, the caballeria (at 13 hectares) yields
1500 arrobas of refined sugar (mixed with blanco
and quebrado), or 1330 kilog. by the hectare,
it results that 60,872 hectares, or nineteen five-
fourths square marine leagues, (nearly a ninth
of the extent of a department of France of mid-
dling size), suffice to produce the 440,000 cases
of refined sugar, which the island of Cuba fur-
nishes for its own consumption and for lawful
and illicit exportation. It seems surprising that
less than twenty square marine leagues can
yield an annual produce of more than the value
of fifty-two millions of francs (counting one
case, at the Havannah, at the rate of twenty-
four piasters). To furnish the coarse sugar
wanted for the consumption of thirty millions
of French, and which is actually from fifty-six to
sixty millions of kilograms, it requires within the
tropics *, but nine and five-sixths square marine


* M. Barruel reckons 67,567 acres of water and forests
(11 square marine leagues) for 15 millions of kilog. of coarse
sugar of beetroot. (Moniteur of March 22d, 1811.) I admit
in the cultivation within the tropics, 1900 kilog. of coarse sugar


190


leagues cultivated with sugar-cane; and in
temperate climates, but thirty-seven and a half
square marine leagues cultivated with bect-
root! <A hectare of good scil, sown or planted
with beetroot, produces in France, from ten to:
thirty thousand kilograms of beetroot. The
mean fertility is 20,000 kilog. which: furnish
24 per cent., or five hundred kilograms of coarse
sugar. Now, one hundred kilog. of that sugar
yield fifty kilog. of refined sugar, thirty of
sugar vergeoise, and twenty of muscovade ; con-


sequently, a hectare of beetroot produces 250.


kilog. of refined sugar. ‘

A short time before my arrival at the Ha-
vannah, some specimens had been sent from
Germany of the sugar of beetrout, which was
said to “menace the existence of the sugar
islands in America.” The planters had ascer-
tained with alarm that it was a substance
entirely similar to sugar-cane, but flattered
themselves that the high price of labour in Eu-
rope, and the difficulty of separating the sugar


by the hectare. I owe very precise information on the
fabrication of the sugar of beetroot, to the obliging commu-
nications of the Baron De Lessert, my colleague at the Aca-
demy of Sciences, and who, by his botanical publications, his
immense herbals, and a library alike well stored with works
of science and of political economy, has facilitated, during
so many years, the collection of the different parts of my
Voyage to the Equinoxial Regions.


191


fit for cristallization from so great a mass of
vegetable pulp, would render the operation, on
a grand scale little profitable. Chemistry has,
since that period, succeeded in vanquishing
those difficulties; and in the year 1812, France
alone had more than two hundred manufac-
tories of sugar of beetroot, that worked with
very unequal success, and produced a million
of kilograms of coarse sugar, that is, a fifty-
eighth part of the actual consumption of sugar
in France. Those two hundred fabrics are
now reduced to fifteen or twenty, which, di-
rected with intelligence, yield a produce of
300,000 kilog, * The inhabitants of the West
Indies, well informed of the affairs of Europe,
no longer fear beetroot, grapes, chesnuts, and
mushrooms, nor the coffee of Naples, nor the


* Although the actual price of the cane-sugar not refined,
is 1 fr. 50 cent. the kilog., in the ports, the fabrication of the
sugar of beetroot offers a still greater advantage in certain
localities, for instance, in the vicinity of Arras. These
fabrics would be established in many other parts of France,
if the price of the sugar of the West Indies rose to 2 francs,
or 2 francs 25 cent. the kilogram, and that the government
laid no tax on the sugar of beetroot, to compensate the loss
of the custom-house on the consumption of colonial sugar.
The fabrication of the sugar of beetroot is above all profit-
able when linked with a general system of rural ceconomy,
with the amelioration of the soil, and the nourishment of
cattle : it is not a cultivation independent of local circum-
stances, like the cultivation of the sugar-cane in the tropics,


192


indigo of the south of France. Fortunately,
the hope of.seeing the fate of the slaves of the
West Indies changed, does not depend on the
success of this little European cultivation.


I have several times observed, that till 1762,.


the island of Cuba did not furnish more pro-
ductions for trade, than the three last indus-
trious and most neglected provinces with re-


spect to cultivation, Veragua, the isthmus of


Panama, and Darien, do at present. A poli-


tical event which appeared extremely unfortu-—
nate, the taking of the Havannah by the Eng-'


lish, roused the public mind. The town was
evacuated in 1784, and its subsequent efforts of
industry date from that memorable period. The
construction of new fortifications on a gigantic
plan * put a great deal of money suddenly into
circulation ; later, the slave-trade beeame free-+,
and furnished hands for the sugar manufacture.
The liberty of commerce with all the ports of
Spain, and sometimes with neutral states, the
able administration of Don Luis de Las Casas,
the establishment of the Consulado and the
Patriotic Society, the destruction of the French
colony of Saint Domingo f, and the rise in the


* Tt is affirmed, that the construction of the fort of
Cabata alone, cost 14 millions of piasters.

+ Real cedula de 28 de Febraro de 1789.

{ In three successive attempts, in August 1791, June,
1793, and October 1803. Above all, the unfortunate and


193


price of sugar which was the natural conse-
quence, the improvement in the machines and
ovens, owing in great part to the refugees of
Cape Francois, the more intimate connection
formed between the proprietors of the sugar
manufactories and the merchants of the Havan-
nah, the great capitals employed by the latter
in agricultural establishments (sugar and coffee
plantations), such have been successively the
causes of the increasing prosperity of the is-
land of Cuba, notwithstanding the conflict of
the authorities, which serves to embarrass the
progress of affairs *.

The greatest changes in the plantations of
sugar-cane and the sugar manufactories, took
place from 1796 to 1800: first, mules were sub-
stituted (trapiches de mulas) for oxen (trapiches
de bueyes); and afterwards, hydraulic wheels
were introduced (trapiches de agua), which the
first conquistadores had employed at Saint Do-
mingo ; finally, the action of steam-engines was


sanguinary expedition of Generals Leclere and Rochambeau,
completed the destruction of the sugar fabrics of Saint Do-
mingo.

* The complication of autoridades y gurisdicciones is such
that, in the memoir on the present situation of the island of
Cuba, p. 40, twenty-five kinds of Juzgados, civil and eccle-
siastic, are counted. This division of the supreme authority
explains what was said above (p. 160), on the increasing
number of advocates.

‘VOL, VII. 0


194


tried at Ceibabo, at the expence of the Count
Jaruco y Mopex. There are now twenty-five
of those machines in the different sugar mills
of the island of Cuba. The culture of the
sugar-cane of Otaheite became in the meantime
more common. Boilers of preparation (clarifica-
doras) were introduced, and the reverberating
furnaces better arranged. It must be said, to the
honor of wealthy proprietors, that in a great
number of plantations, a generous solicitude is
displayed for sick slaves, for the introduction
of negresses, and for the education of children.

The number of sugar manufactories (ynge-
nios), in 1775, was 473 in the whole island ; and
in 1817, more than 780. Among the former,
none produced the fourth part of the sugar now
fabricated in the yngenios of second rank ; it is
consequently not the number of the sugar
manufactories that can give an accurate idea
of the progress of that branch of agricultural
industry, There were reckoned in the pro-
vince of the Havannah,


Daal ly 87 ee ee 740 sugar-houses.
HU £2 eee AM Re atk 305 i
SOG oa cs te cabins te 480


896'GY VEG


PIGS
Tre
PSG'T
G20'S
S6L‘T.
CEB‘
Pegg
6E'T
PET
GLE
Lee's
g19‘91


“SasnoH ‘SHaHOUNHO


‘OODVAOL AO
(spSaQ)SNOmL
-VLNVId


“VIGO Ad
SVGONGIOVH


‘, SOUAULOd


*(sa)D}a{D9) ,


Soldadva
-“AGA100


Lh
FL
6
8L
eet


6
Gol
v
6V
&V
T


(‘sponzp ap
sowwasug )
Sold
-Vd-uvons


“"* Sound)
“-oonler

or a “** spuldyLy
iia ~ ae “Rooeqeurns
eee ce uccece kefeueny
‘oruoyuY Ug Jo BITE A
. er ee yeon fog
“OSRIYURS OP RTILA
“"* YRuUeAR ET


‘SOGILUVd


“JIS NI SHVNNVAVH GHL 40 AONIAOUd AHL dO SAHOIY TVYALINOMOV FHL 10 aTAVy,


'*, In order not to alter the characteristic features of the


196


In this table we distinguish the districts
(Trinidad and Santa Clara) which still preserve
their ancient predilection for pastoral life, and
the establishment of hatos for breeding cattle ;
districts of tobacco (Filipinas, Trinidad) ; and
finally those that most abound in plantations of
sugar (Jaruco, Guanajay, Matanzas, and San
Antonio Abad). Partial increase has been very
remarkable; in 1796, there was in the partido
of Jaruco and Rio Blanco del Norte only, and
in the partidos of Guines and Matanzas, seven-
ty-three, twenty-five, and twenty-seven sugar-
fabrics ; and in 1817, there existed one hundred
and thirty-three, seventy-eight, and ninety-five.

The augmentation of tithes being in every
zone, one of the most certain signs of the in-
crease of agricutural wealth, we shall here


agriculture of the Spanish colonies, I abstain from substitut-
ing French words for the Spanish words conseerated by long
use. The Hatos or Haciendas de cria and the Potreros are
all of them farms of cattle; but the former, often of
an extent of two or three leagues in diameter, whi¢h are
not inclosed, contain cattle almost wild, which require only
the care of three or four men on horseback (peones), whe
run over the country to discover the cows and mares
who have brought forth, and to mark the young animals.
The Potreros are inclosed pasturages, with a small part some-
times cultivated with maize, bananas, and manioc. There the
animals produced in the Hatos are fattened, and the proprie-
tors are also secondarily occupied by the multiplication of
cattle (de pequenas crias).


197


state its progress during fifteen years. The
tithes (rentas decimales arrendadas) were
farmed on the bishoprick of the Havannah *
from four years to four years, as follows :


From 1789 to 1792 for 192,386 piasters
1798 to 1796 for 1,044,005
1797 to.1800 for 1,595,340
1801 to 1804 for 1,864,464


We see, that at the last period the tithes
rose, mean year, to 2,330,000 francs, although
the sugars pay buta half-tithe, ora twentieth.

In order to shew by the example of some
years, the relations which, I will not say the


production preserves, but the exportation of
brandy and molasses (miel de purga) with the
exportation of refined sugar, I shall here state
the result of the years 1815-1824, from the regis-
ters of the custom-house of the Havannah.


* Official Documents, in which the produce of forty Paro-
quias and the Casas excusadas is distinguished for every
period ; that is, the houses or habitations of which the tithes
are reserved for the construction of churches and hospitals.


198


PIPES OF BOCOYVES OF |} CASES OF RE-


PERIODS.
BRANDY. MOLASSES. FINED SUGAR.


17,874 214,111
28,793 200,487
30,759 217,076
34,990 | 207,378
30,845 192,743
34,604 261,795
30,145 800,211 ©
27,046 245,329


According to the mean of the last five years,
we find that the exportation of one thousand
cases of refined sugar (183,904 kilog.), corres-
ponds with the exportation of seventeen pipas
of brandy, of sugar-cane, and one hundred and
thirty bocoyes of molasses *.


* Une pipa de aguardiente = 180 frascos, or 674 gallons ;
1 bocoy = 6 bariles. The pipe d’aguardiente de cana, now
worth twenty-five piasters at the Hayannah, was worth
more than thirty-five in 1815 to 1819. The bocoy de miel de
purga was worth seven reales of plata. It is generally ad-
mitted that three loaves of sugar yield a baril de miel de
purga, at two arrobas. In the terrage, after the first layer
of moistened clay (barro) which has been trodden by the
feet of animals under a shed (piza), is often put, another


199


The enormous expence of the great yngenios,
and frequent domestic arrangements, the effects
of luxury and disorder, too often place the pro-
prietors in absolute dependence on the mer-
chants*. The most common loans are an
advance. of capital to the hacendado, who fur-
nishes every quintal of coffee at two piasters, and
every arroba of sugar at two reales de Plata be-
low the current price at the period of the harvest.
Thus, a harvest of a thousand cases of sugar is
sold by anticipation (or refaccion) with a loss
of four thousand piasters. The multitude of
affairs and the scarcity of money are so great at:
the Havannah, that the government itself is
often compelled} to borrow at ten per cent.,


and private persons give twelve or fifteen. ‘The
enormous profits of the slave trade, which
amount sometimes at the island of Cuba in a


layer of clay (barrillo) is often added. In taking this off, the
refined sugar is still left eight days in the cone (horma), so
that the small residue of molasses may be entirely drained
off (para escurrir y limpiar).

* By the contracts between the merchants who are capi-
talists, and the haciendados, the latter have sustained losses,
especially on the construction of so many new fabrics of
sugar, in 1798, of 30 to 40 per cent. The law prohibits
loans exceeding 5 per cent, but its effect is avoided by ficti-
tious contracts. (Sedano, sobre la Decadencia del ramo de
Azucar, 1812, p. 17.)

+ As in the emprestito dela Intendencia de la Havana,
5th November, 1804,


200


single voyage to one hundred and one hundred
and twenty-five per cent. have much contribut-
ed to the rise of interest, several speculators
having borrowed money at eighteen and twenty
per cent. for the purposes of that vile and exe-
crable commerce.

The first sugar-canes planted with care on a
virgin soil yield a harvest during twenty to
twenty-five years, after which they must be re-
planted every three years. There existed in1804,
at the Hacienda de Matamoros, a square (ca/a-
veral) worked during forty-five years. The most
fertile soil for the production of sugar is now
in the vicinity of Mariel and Guanajay. That
variety of sugar-cane known by the name of
Cana de Otahiti, recognised at a distance by a
fresher green, has the advantage of furnishing
at the same time, on the same extent of soil,
one-fourth more juice, and a stem which is
more woody, thicker, and consequently richer
in combustible matter. The refiners (maestros
de azucar), who have all the self-sufficiency of
the half-learned, pretend that the vezow (gua-
rapo) of the Cena de Otahiti is more easily
marked, and yields more crystallized sugar by
adding* less lime or potass of vezou. The


*® At the moment the lime is added the froth blackens ;
the tallow and other fat substances. cause the froth (cachasa)}
to descend to the bottom, and diminish it.


————


201


sugar-cane of the South Sea furnishes no doubt
after five or six years of cultivation, the thin-
nest stubble, but the knots remain more distant
from each other than in the Cana creolia or de
la tierra. The apprehension at first entertained
of the former degenerating by degrees into or-
dinary sugar-cane* is happily not realized.
The sugar-cane is planted in the island of Cuba
in the rainy season from July to October ; and
the harvest is made from February to May.

In proportion as by too rapid clearing the
island is become unwooded, the sugar-houses
have begun to want fuel. A little stalk (sugar-.
cane destitute of its juice) used to be employed
to quicken the fire beneath the ancient caul-
drons (tachos) ; butvit is only since the intro-
duction of reverberating furnaces by the emi-
grants of Saint Domingo, that the attempt has
been made to do altogether without wood, and
burn only refuse sugar-cane. In the ancient
construction of furnaces and cauldrons, a ¢area
of wood of one hundred and sixty cubic feet
is burnt to produce five arrobas of sugar,
or, for a hundred kilog. of raw sugar, 278


® On these varieties, and the history of their introduc-
tion, see above, vol. iv, p. 84, 179. The sugar cases sent
from the Mississipi in vessels laden with 3000, are of pine
and cypress. They cost in 1804, from 14 to 18 reals a


piece,


202


cubic feet of the wood of the lemon and orange
trees are required. In the reverberating fur-
naces of Saint Domingo, a cart of refuse-cane
of 495 cubic feet produced 640 pounds of coarse
sugar, which make 158 cubic feet of refuse-cane
for 100 kilog of sugar. I attempted during my
stay at Guines, and especially at Rio Blanco,
with the Count de Mopex, several new con-
structions, with the view of diminishing the
expence of fuel, surrounding the focus with
substances that conduct the heat badly, and thus
causing the slaves to suffer less who keep up
the fire. A long residence in the salt districts of
Europe, and the labors of practical halurgy, to
which I have been devoted since my early
youth, had given me the idea of those construc-
tions, which have been imitated with some
success. Cuvercles of wood, placed on clarifica-
doras, accelerated the evaporations, and led me
to believe that a system of cuvercles and move-
able frames, furnished with a counter-weight,
might extend to other cauldrons. This object
merits further examination ; but the quantity of
vezou (quarapo), of the crystallized sugar extract-
ed, and that which is destroyed, the fuel, the
time, and the pecuniary expence, must be care-
fully estimated. ps

In the discussions on the possibility of re~
placing the sugar of the colonies in Europe by
the sugar of beetroot, several assertions have


203


been advanced on the price of the cane-sugar
that are not correct. The following statements
may serve for more exact comparisons. The
price of colonial sugar * in Europe, is com-
posed, Ist. of the primitive price of the acquisi-
tion; 2d. the freight and assurance; and 3dly.
the custom-house dues. The price of the


* It cannot now be doubted that the profit of the planters
(haciendados) of the Havannah is much less than is generally
believed in Europe ; a very ancient calculation however of
Don Jose Ignacio Echegoyen, on the expence of the fabrication
of sugar appears to me somewhat exaggerated. He had
great experience in the technical part, and computed that
the annual expence of the manufacturer of 10,000 arr. of
sugar was 12,767 piasters, and required a capital of 60,000
piasters. The expence would be consequently 55 francs per
100 kilograms ; and supposing their value to be 65 francs °
(nearly 24 piasters of cara), the capital of 60,000 piasters
would yield, according to those unfavorable suppositions, an
interest of only three and four-fifths per cent. This cal-
culation, which was communicated to me at the Havannah,
dates in 1798, a time when the expence of manufacture, and
the purchase of land and negroes, was much less than at pre-
sent. But we must not forget, Ist. that the molasses and
the production of brandy, of which the pipa is worth 25 pi-
asters, and which may amount to a fourth of the value of
the sugar made, is not placed to account; 2d. that Mr.
Echegoyen composed his memoir to prove how vexatious
were the tithes on the production of sugar, and believed it a
duty to exaggerate the expence of the hacendados. (See
above, vol. vii, p. 178; Patriota, tom. ii, p. 68; and the
memoir already mentioned of Don Diego Jose de Sedano,
sobre la Decadencia del ramo de Azucar, 1812, p. 5.)


204


acquisition in the West Indies is now but the
third of the price of the sale in Europe. When
an equal mixture of white and brown sugar
(blanco y quebrado) costs twelve reals of plata
at the Havannah, the arroba, a cara, at 184
kilog., is worth 126 francs, 48 cent.; conse-
quently the price of 100 kilog. of refined sugar
is 68 francs 69 centimes ; estimating the piaster
in this calculation at 5 francs 27 cent. In the
French colonies, the primitive price is 50 francs
for 100 kilograms of raw sugar, or 50 cent. the
kilogram. The freight and.assurance amount
also to 50 cent. The taxes are 49 francs 50
cent. the 100 kilograms, or 493 cent: the kilog. ;
whence results the total price in the ports of
coarse sugar (for instance at Havre) 1 franc 50
cent. The juice of the beetroot, cultivated in
temperate climates, contains but the third or
the fourth of crystallized sugar * found in the


* Count Chaptal supposes also, but 210 kilog. in coarse
sugar by the 10,000 kilog. of roots of beetroot, or two and
one-tenth per cent. of the whole weight. (Chimie appliquée 2
? Agr., tom. ii, p. 452.) As the roots, when well rasped,
yield 70 per cent. of juice, it may be computed that, com-
mon year, 3% per cent. of raw sugar is drawn from the juice
of beetroot. In some parts of Touraine, this juice contains
5 per cent. of crystullizable sugar, as at Java, 25 and 80 per
cent. of sugar is sometimes computed in the vezou of the
sugar-cane! The produce of the hectare in that, however,
differs for the lands of mean fertility but very little from the
produce on which we fixed (p. 417) for the island of Cuba.


205


vexzou or juice of the sugar-cane within the tro-
tics; but the beetroot sugar gains in freight,
assurance, and taxes, ten sols, or two-thirds of
the total price per pound of saw sugar, on the
sugar of the colonies. If the latter were entirely
replaced by native sugar, the French customs
would lose annually, in the actual state of
things, near 29 millions of francs.

It is an error generally spread through
Europe, and which has an influence on the
manner of considering the effects of the ces-
sation of the slave-trade, that in the West India
islands called sugar colonies, the majority of
the slaves are supposed to be employed in the
production of sugar. The cultivation of the
sugar-cane is no doubt a powerful motive for
giving activity to the trade in blacks; but a
very simple calculation proves that the total
mass of slaves contained in the West Indies is
nearly three times greater than the number
employed in the production of sugar. I shewed,
seven years ago*, that, if the 200,000 cases of
sugar exported by the island of Cuba, in 1812,
were produced in the great establishments, less
than 30,000 slaves would have sufficed for that


Mr. Crawfurd estimates the English acre at Java, at 1285
pounds of avoir du poids weight of refined sugar, which makes
1445 kilograms by the hectare. (Hist. of the Ind. Arch., vol. i,
p. 476.)

* Personal Narrative, vol. iv, p..236.


206


kind of labour. It ought to be recollected in
the interests of humanity, that the evils of
slavery weigh on a much greater number of
individuals than the agricultural labours re-
quire, even admitting, which I am very far from
doing, that sugar, coffee, indigo, and cotton,
can be cultivated only by slaves. At the island
of Cuba, one hundred and fifty blacks are
generally reckoned for the fabrication of 1000
cases (184,000 kilog.) of refined sugar; or, in
round numbers, a little more than 1200 kilog.
per head of an adult slave *. A production of


* At Saint Domingo, in five extensive habitations, one and
four-fifths cultivating slaves was computed for one square ;
but in the plantations dispersed over the island, there are
three slaves for one square, according to the documents of
the Marquis of Galliffet ; or, if the produce of a square (at
1 = hectares) be 2500 kilograms of raw sugar, we find
833 kilograms per head. M. Moreau de Jonés has even
shewn that the total mass of cultivated land in the French
colonies yields but thirty-three and one-fifth quint., or
1640 kilog. by the square. (Commerce au 19™* siécle, tom. ii, p.
808, 311.) At Jamaica, a negro is valued at only a hogs-
head of sugar (or 711 kilog.), according to Mr. Whitmore.
The editor of the Representation of the Consulado of the
Havannah to the Cortes, appears to have been struck with
the greater quantity of sugar produced at Cuba with fewer
negroes than at Jamaica, (Documentos, p. 36.) In the
manusctipt memoir, Sucinta Noticia de la situacion de la Isla
de Cuba, en Agosto 1800, written by a rich proprietor of the
Havannah, | find the following assertion: ‘‘ Such is the
immense fertility of our lands, that in fortunate positions we


207


440,000 cases would consequently require only
66,000 slaves. If we add 36,000 to that num-
ber, for the cultivation of coffee and tobacco in
the island of Cuba, we find that about 100,000
of the 260,000 slaves which now exist there,
would suffice for the three great branches of
colonial industry on which the activity of com-
merce depends. Besides, tobacco is scarcely
at all cultivated but by whites and free men.
We have stated above (page 108), and I am
justified in that assertion by the most respect-
able authority, that of the Consulado of the
Hawvannah, that a third (32 p. c.) of the slaves .
inhabit the towns, and are consequently
strangers to every kind of cultivation. Now,
if we take into consideration, Ist. the number
of children spread over the haciendas and in-
capable of labor; 2d. the necessity of employ-
ing in small plantations, or dispersed culti-
vation, a much more considerable number of
negroes to produce the same quantity of sugar
than in the united cultivation, or great fabrics,
we find that on 187,000 slaves spread over the


compute 160 to 180 arrobas, and in the totality. of the
island a hundred arrobas of white sugar per head of negroes.
At Saint Domingo, the computation is sixty; and at Ja-
maica, seventy arrobas. of raw sugar.’ In reducing these
estimates to kilograms, they yield 1194 kilograms of re-
fined sugar for Cuba, and 804 kilograms of raw sugar for
Jamaica,


208


fields, there are at least a fourth part or 46,000
who produce neither sugar, coffee, nor tobacco.
The slave trade is not merely barbarous, it is
also unreasonable, because it misses the end it
would obtain. It is like a current of water con-
veyed from a distance, of which more than half
is turned away on the very spot from the lands
for which it was destined. Those.who repeat
unceasingly, that sugar cannot be cultivated
but by black slaves, seem to be ignorant
that the archipelago of the West Indies con-
tains 1,148,000 slaves, and*that the whole
mass of the colonial produce of the islands is
obtained by the labor of only five or six hun-
dred thousand *. Examine the actual state of
industry at Brazil, calculate what hands are
required to throw into the trade of Europe


* To prove how far this calculation is from being exag-
gerated, we shall observe that the exportation of the archi-
pelago of the West Indies is 287 millions of kilog. of sugar,
and 38 millions of kilog. of coffee; and that reckoning in
the great‘ establishments, and for a mean fertility only, 800
kilog. of sugar, and 500 kilog. of coffee (produce of 2000
shrubs), per head of negroes, we find for the production of
exported sugar and coffee 435,000 cultivators: let this num-
ber be augmented on account of the non-adults, and of a
third less in the production of small plantations, or even of a
half, and we shall not reach more than 652,000 slaves or
1,148,000, counting every age and both sexes, in the West
Indies, (See above, vol. vi, p.832.) The Consulado admitted,
in 1811, 69,000 slaves in the towns, and 143,000 in the fields.


209


the sugar, coffee, and tobacco, that issue from
its ports; visit those mines of gold so feebly
worked in our days; and pronounce if the in-
dustry of Brazil requires that 1,960,000 blacks
and mulattoes should be held in slavery. More
than three-fourths of those Brazilian slaves *
are neither occupied in gold washings, nor in
the labors of colonial productions, which we
are gravely told render the slave-trade a
necessary evil, an inevitable political crime !


Correr.—The cultivation of coffee dates, like
the improvement of the construction of caul-
drons in the sugar fabrics, from the arrival of
the emigrants of Saint Domingo, especially
from the years 1796 and 1798. A hectare
yields 860 kilog. the produce of 3500. shrubs.
The province of the Havannah reckoned :

In 1800 60 cafetales.

In 1817
The coffee tree being a shrub that yields a good
harvest only in the fourth year, the exportation
of coffee from the port of the Havannah was, in
1804, but 50,000 arrobas. It rose


In 180950: te eee 320,000 arrobas.
918,263


* A very intelligent traveller, M. Caldcleugh (Travels in
South America, vol. i, p. 79), estimates also the Brazilian
slaves at 1,800,000, although he supposes that the whole
population is but three millions. (See above, vol. vi, p- 140.)

VOL, VII. ie


ue aeh i. ‘seeeveeeeess 370,229 arrobag.


hg OR) ee ee ... 709,351
ee eo wilt ek 719,618
CURE See ena 642,716
BOP Nat etost es, 8 sun 686,046
POR OS Ue GO ely 501,429
AGS 1ild.. nes lo.. ee 895,924
TOGA iy 5.83 stay, besten 661,674


These numbers prove the great variations in
the fraud on the customs, and the abundance
of the harvests; for the results of the years
1815, 1816, and 1823, which might be thought
less precise, have been recently verified on the
registers of the custom-house. In 1815, when
the price of coffee was fifteen piasters the quin-
tal, the value of the exportation of the Havan-
nah exceeded the sum of 3,443,000 piasters. In
1823, the exportation of the port of Matanzas
was 84,440 arrobas ; so that it seems not doubt-
ful, that in years of mean fertility, the total
exportation of the island, by lawful and illicit
ways, is more than fourteen millions of kilo-
grams.


I, Exportation registered, mean year, from 1818 to 1824;


a) at the Havannah............... 694,000 arrobas.
b) at Matanzas, Trinidad, Santi-
ago de Cuba, &c. ..........6.- 220,000
Il. Fraud * on the customs .......... 304,000
i ag 1,218,000


® According to the information taken on the spot, the
fraud on the customs.is much- more considerable on the


oe


211


From this calculation it results, that the
exportation of coffee from the island of Cuba is
greater than that of Java, estimated by Mr.
Crawfurd *, in 1820, at 190,000 picuds, 11: mil-
lions of kilograms, and to that of Jamaica,
which amounted, in 1823, according to the


exportation of coffee than of sugar: I estimated the former
at one-fifth, the latter at one-fourth of registered quantities.
Bags of coffee which ought to contain five arrobas, often
hold seven and nine: of late, therefore, the proprietors
have been required to make a declaracion Jurada,

* It is by an erroneous reduction of tons into pounds of
avoir du poids. weight (supposing 54,260 tons = 486,158,960
pounds) that this estimable author has been led to consider
the exportation of Java (25,840,000 pounds, or 11,628,000
kilograms), as two-sevenths of the exportation of the Eng-
lish West Indies, and one-thirteenth of the consumption of
Europe. (Hist. of the Indian Arch., vol. iii, p. 374.) The
54,260 tons (at 20 cwt., or, 1016 kilog.} which ‘Mr. Craw-
furd regards as the consumption of coffee in Europe, is not
equivalent to 218 millions of kilog., but to 55,128,000
kilog., a lower estimate than that on which I fixed in 1818.
(Per. Nar., vol. iv, p. 71 and 242.) It is believed that all
Arabia does not throw into the commerce of Persia, India,
and Europe, more than from seven to eight millions of
kilog. of coffee. (Page, vol. i, p. 80.)

+ Mr. Colquhoun estimated, in 1812, the exportation of
Jamaica to the ports of the three united kingdoms, at
28,385,395 English pounds, or 12,773,427 kilog. ; the im-
portation of the whole English islands (without comprehend-
ing the islands temporarily conquered), at 31,871,612 Eng-
lish pounds, or 14,342,225 kilog. (Wealth of the Brit, Emp.,
p. 378. Per, Nar., vol, iv, p. 65—73.)

p 2


212


registers of the custom-house, but to 169,734
cwt., or 8,622,478 kilograms. In the same year,
Great Britain received *, from all the English
islands, 194,820 cwt., or 9,896,856 kilograms ;
which proves that Jamaica only produced six-
sevenths. Guadaloupe delivered, in 1810, to
the mother country, 1,017,190 kilog.; Marti-
nico, 671,336 kilog. At Hayti, where the pro-
duction of coffee before the French revolution
was 37,240,000 kilograms, Port-au-Prince ex-
ported, in 1824, only 91,544,000 kilograms. It
appears that the total exportation of coffee from
the archipelago of the West Indies by lawful means
only, now amounts to more than thirty-eight mil-
lions of kilograms ; which is nearly five times
the consumption of France, which from 1820
to 1823, was, mean year, 8,198,000 kilograms +.
The consumption of Great Britain is yet { but


* Stat. Ilustr., p. 54. The exportation of English Guy-
ana, in 1823, was 72,644 cwt., or 3,690,315 kilograms,

+ Rodet, on external commerce, p. 153. It appears that of
those eight millions of kilograms of coffee, Paris alone con-
sumes 24. Chateauneuf, Rech. sur les consommations de Paris,
1821, p. 107.

+ Before the year 1807, when the tax on coffee was
reduced, the consumption of Great Britain was not 8000
ewt. (less than $ million of kilog.); in 1809, it rose to
45,071 ewt.; in 1810, to 49,147 cwt.; in 1823, to 71,000
cwt. ; in 1824, to 66,000 cwt. (or 3,552,800 kilog.) Report
of the Com. of the Liverp. East India Assoc., 1822, p.38 ; and
Nichols., Lond. Price Gurr., 1825, p. 63.


213


34 millions of kilograms ; but the trade and the.
production of this article have so much aug-
mented in the two hemispheres, that Great
Britain has exported, in the different phases of
her commerce


30,862 cwt, (at 60+ kilog.);
96, L67.
268,392
641,131
1,193,361
456,615:
373,251
321,140-


The exportation of 1814 was 603 millions of
kilograms, which we may suppose was at that
period nearly the consumption of the whole of
Europe. Great Britain (taking that denomi-
nation in its true sense, as denoting only Eng-
land and Scotland), now consumes nearly two-
thirds less coffee, and three times more sugar
than France.

The price of sugar at the Havannah, is always
counted by the arroba of 25 Spanish pounds (or
11*",49), and the price of coffee by the quintal
(or 45,97). We have seen the latter oscillate
from 4 to 30 piasters; it even went down in
1808, below 24 reals. The price of 1815 and
1819, was between 13 and 17 piasters the quin-


214


tal; coffee is now at 12 piasters. It is probable
that the cultivation of coffee scarcely employs
in the whole island of Cuba 28,000 slaves, who
produce, mean year, 305,000 Spanish quintals
(14 millions of kilograms), or, according to the
present value, 3,660,000 piasters ; while 66,000
negroes produce 440,000 cases (81 millions of
kilograms) of sugar, which, at the price of 24
piasters, is worth 10,560,000 piasters. It re-
sults from this calculation, that a slave now
produces the value of 130 piasters of coffee, and
160 piasters of sugar. It is almost useless to
observe, that these relations change with the
price of the two articles, of which the variations
are often opposite, and that, in calculations
which may throw some light on agriculture ‘in
the tropical region, I comprehend in the same
point of view, the interior consumption, and
the exportation by lawful and illicit means.


Tozacco.—The tobacco of the island of Cuba
is celebrated in every part of Europe, where
the custom of smoking, borrowed from the
natives of Hayti, was introduced towards. the
end of the sixteenth and the beginning of the
seventeenth century. It was generally hoped
that the cultivation of tobacco, freed from all
the shackles of an odious monopoly, would
furnish the Havannah with a very considerable
object of commerce. The benevolent intentions


215


displayed by the government within six years,
in abolishing the Factoria de tabacos, has not
produced the amelioration in that branch of
industry which was expected. The cultivators
want capital, the farms are become extremely
dear, and the predilection for the cultivation of
coffee is prejudicial to that of tobacco.

The most ancient statements we possess on
the quantity of tobacco which the island of
Cuba has thrown into the magazines of the
mother country, go back to 1748. According
to the Abbé Raynal, a much more exact writer
than is generally believed, that quantity, from
1748 to 1753, mean year, was 75,000 arrobas. —
From 1789 to 1794, the produce of the island
amounted annually to 250,000 arrobas; but
from that period to 1803, the increased price of
land, the attention given exclusively to the
caféieres and the sugar factories, little vexations
in the exercise of the royal monopoly (estanco)
and the shackles of external trade, have pro-
‘gressively diminished the production more than
one-half. The total production, however, of
tobacco’ in the island, is believed to have been
from 1822 to 1825 again from three to four
hundred thousand arrobas.

The interior consumption of tobacco in’ the
whole island, is more than 200,000 arrobas.
The Company of Commerce of the Havannah, till
1761, delivered the tobacco of Cuba to the


216


royal manufactures of the peninsula, according
to contracts renewed from time to time with
the treasury or Real Hacienda. The govern-
ment (Factoria de tabacos) replaced this com-
pany, and worked the monopoly itself. The
price paid to three classes of cultivators
(suprema, mediana, y infima,) was reduced :
these prices were in 1804, six, three, and two
and a half piasters the arroba. In comparing
the diversity of price with the quantity pro-
duced, we find that the royal factory paid for
the leaves of tobacco, at.the mean price of 16
piasters the quintal. On account of- the ex-
pence of fabrication, a pound of cigarros cost
the administration, at the Havannah, 6 reals
(or 4 piasters); a pound of tobacco in powder,
in polvos delgados con color, 34 reals, and in
polvos suaves or cucaracheros of Seville, 13 reals.

In good years, when the harvest (the produce of
the advances made by the factory to cultivators
ill at ease) rose to 350,000 arrobas of leaves,
128,000 arrobas were fabricated for the pen-
insula, 80,000 for the Havannah, 9200 for Peru,
6000 for Panama, 3000 for Buenos Ayres, 2240
for Mexico, and 1000 for Caraccas and Cam-
pechy*. To complete the sum of 315,000,000


* De la situacion actual de la Real Factoria de Tabacos de la
Havana en Abril 1804 (official manuscript document). Ten
to twelve millions of pounds of tobacco were sometimes


217


(for the harvest loses ten per cent. of its weight,
in merma y aberias, during the preparation and
the transport), we must suppose that 80,000
arrobas were consumed in the interior of the
island (en los campos), where the monopoly and
the taxes were not exercised. The maintenance
of 120 slaves and the expence of the manufac-
ture amounted but to 12,000 piasters annually ;
the persons employed in the Factoria cost
54,100 piasters*. The value of 128,000 arro-
bas, which in good years was sent to Spain,
either in cigars or in snuff (rama y polvos), often
exceeded five millions of piasters, according to
the common price of Spain. It seems surpris-
ing to see that the statements of exportation


from the Havannah (documents published by
the Consulado) mark the exportations for 1816,
at only 3400 arrobas; for 1828, but 13,900
arrobas of tabac en rama, and 71,000 pounds of
tabac torcido, estimated together, at the cus-
‘tom-house, at 281,000 piasters; for 1825, but
70,302 pounds of cigars, and 167,100 pounds


accumulated at Seville, and the revenue of the Renta del
Tabaco of the Peninsula, in good years, was six millions of
piasters.

* We see in the statements of the Royal Treasury, pub-
lished in 1822, that after the suppression of the Factories of
Tobacco at the Havannah, the expence of keeping up the
building, and the appointments of persons who had obtained
a-retreat, still cost 18,600 and 24,800 piasters annually.


218


of tobacco in leaves; but it must be remem-
bered, that no branch of contraband is more
active than that of cigars. .Although the to-
bacco of the Vuelta de abaxo is the most fa-
mous, a considerable exportation of it is made
in the eastern part of the island. I rather doubt
the total exportation of 200,000 boxes of cigars
(value two millions of piasters), which several
travellers admit. for these latter years. If the
harvests were abundant to such a point, why
should the island of Cuba receive tobacco from.
the United States for the consumption of the
jower class of people?

After sugar, coffee, and tobacco, three pro-
ductions of high importance, I will not speak
of the cotton, the indigo, and the wheat of the
island of Cuba. These branches of colonial in-
dustry are little fruitful; and the proximity of
the United States and Guatimala render the
competition almost impossible. The state of
Salvador, belonging to the Confederation of
Centro- America, now throws 12,000 tercios an-
nually, or 1,800,000 pounds of indigo into trade;
an exportation which amounts to more than
two millions of piasters. The cultivation of
wheat succeeds to the great astonishment of
travellers who have passed through Mexico,
near the Quatro Villas, at small heights above
the level of the ocean, although in general it is
but little developed. The flour is fine; but


219


the colonial productions are more tempting,
and the fields of the United States, that Crimea
of the New World, yield harvests too abundant
for the commerce of native cereals to be effica-
ciously protected by the prohibitive system of
the custom-house, in an island near the mouth
of the Mississipi and the Delaware. Analogous
difficulties oppose the cultivation of flax, hemp,
and the vine.. The inhabitants of Cuba are
perhaps ignorant themselves, that, in the first
years of the conquest by the Spaniards, wine
was made in their island of wild grapes *. This
kind of vine, peculiar to America, has given
rise to the general error, that the true vitis vini-
fera is common to the two continents. ‘The
parras monteses, which yields “ the wine some-
what sour of the island of Cuba,” was probably
gathered on the vitis tilicefolia which Mr. Will-
denow has described from our herbals. In no
part of the northern hemisphere has the vine


* <« De muchas parras monteses cod ubas se ha cogido vino
aunque algo agrio.”’ (Herera,:Dec.1,-p. 238.). Gabriel de
Cabrera found a traditionat Cuba similar to that which the
people of semitic race have of Noah, experiencing for the
first time the effect of a fermented liquor. He adds, that
the idea of two races of men, one naked, another clothed, is
linked to the American tradition. Has Cabrera, pre-occu-
pied by the rites of the Hebrews, ill interpreted the words
of the natives, or, which seems more probable, has he added
something more to the analogies of the woman-serpent, the


220


hitherto been cultivated * with the view of pro-
ducing wine, south of the 27° 48’, or the latitude
of the Isle de Ferro, one of the Canaries, and
of 29° 2’, or the latitude of Abuscher in
Persia.


Wax.—This is not the produce of native bees
(Melipones of M. Latreille), but of bees brought
from Europe by Florida. This commerce has
only become important since 1772. The ex-
portation of the whole island, which from 1774
to 1779 was only 2700 arrobas +, mean year,
was estimated in 1803, comprehending the
fraud on the custom-house, at 42,700 arrobas,
of which 25,000 were destined for Vera Cruz.
The churches of Mexico make a great con-
sumption of the wax of Cuba. The price varies
from sixteen to twenty piasters the arroba. The
exportation from the Havannah only, accord-
ing to the custom-house registers, were


conflict of two brothers, the cataclysm of water, the raft of
Coxeox, the exploring-bird, and of many other things that
teach us incontestably that there existed a community of an-
tique traditions between the nations of the two worlds ?
See my Views of the Cordilleras and Monuments of America,
Pl. 13 and 26; vol. i, p. 114, 285, 237, 376 ; vol. ii, p. 14,
128, 173, 199, 392 (ed. in 8yo.)

* Leopold de Buch, Phys. Beschr. der Canar. Inschn.,1825,
p. 124.

+ Raynal, tom, iii, p. 257.


23,398 arrobas.
22,365


24,156


Trinidad and the small port of Baracoa have
also a considerable trade in wax, furnished by
the almost uncultivated regions on the east of
the island. In the proximity of the sugar-
factories many bees perish of inebriety from
the molasses, of which they are extremely fond.
In general the production of wax diminishes in
proportion as the cultivation of the land aug-


ments. The exportation of wax according to
the present price, by lawful and fraudulent
means, is an object of half a million of piasters.


Commerce.—We have already observed in
another place, that the importance of the com-
merce of the island of Cuba is not founded
solely on the riches of its productions, and the
wants of the population in the articles and mer-
chandize of Europe, but also in great part on
the favorable position of the port of the Ha-
vannah, at the entrance of the Gulph of Mexi-
co, where the high roads of the commercial


222:


nations of both worlds eross each other. The
Abbe Raynal has said *, that “at a period
when agriculture and industry were in their
infancy, and scarcely threw into commerce the
value of two millions of piasters in sugar and
tobacco, the island of Cuba alone might be
worth a kingdom to Spain.” There seems to
have been something prophetic in those memor-
able words ; and since the parent state has lost
Mexico, Peru, and so many other colonies de-
clared independent, they ought to be seriously
considered by statesmen who are called upon to:
discuss the political interests of the peninsula.
The island of Cuba, to which for a long time
the court of Madrid wisely granted greatliberty of
commerce, exports, by lawful and illicit means,
of its own native productions, in sugar; coffee,
tobacco, wax, and skins, to the value of more
than fourteen millions of piasters - ;. which is


* Hist. Philos., tom. iii, p. 257.

+ At the low price of late years we may reckon among
those productions : 380,000 cases of sugar (at 24 piasters)
= 9,120,000 piasters ; 305,000 quintals of coffee (at 12
piasters) = 3,660,000 piasters, (See above, p. 165, 177,
and 210.) According to the price of those articles, from
1810 to 1815, the value of the exportations of the island of
Cuba would amount at present to eighteen or nineteen. mil-
lions of piasters, Fortunately the production or the quan-
tity of sugar fabricated has augmented in proportion as the
price has lowered ; that price, in 1626, is scarcely 22 pias-
ters the case; while in 1801, it rose to'40 piasters.


223


about a third less than the value of the preci-
ous metals that Mexico furnished at the period
of* the greatest prosperity of its mines. It
may be said that the Havannah and Vera
Cruz+ are to the rest of America what New
York is to the United States. The tonnage of
1000 to 1200 merchant vessels that annually
enter the port of the Havannah, amounts (ex-
cluding the small coasting embarcations), to
150,000 or 170;000 tons t+. We often see also
in time of peace, one hundred and twenty to
one hundred and fifty ships of war anchor at
the Havannah. From 1815 to 1819, the pro-
ductions registered at the custom-house of
that port only (sugar, brandy, molasses, coffee,


* In 1805, gold and silver money was struck at Mexico,
to the value of 27,165,888 piasters ; but, taking a mean
of ten years of political tranquillity, we find from 1800 to
1810, scarcely 242 millions of piasters.

+ In 1808: importation of Vera Cruz, 15 millions of
piasters ; exportation (not comprehending the precious me-
tals), 5 millions of piasters, The re-exportations at the
Havannah commenced by the establishment of the depét.

t In 1816, the tonnage of the commerce of New York
was 299,617 tons ; that of Boston, 148,420 tons. The ca-
pacity of the ships is not always an exact measure of the
wealth of commerce. The countries which export rice,
flour, hewn wood, and cotton, want more tonnage than the
tropical regions, of which the productions (cochineal, indigo,
sugar, and coffee) take up little volume, although of consi-
derable value.


224


wax, and butter) attained, mean year, the value
of 11,245,000 piasters. In 1823, the exporta-
tion registered two-thirds less than their ef-
fective price, amounted (deducting 1,179,000
piasters in specie) to more than }23 millions
of piasters. It is probable that the importa-
tions of the whole island, made by lawful and
fraudulent means, and estimated at the real
price of the articles, the merchandize and the
slaves, amount at present to fifteen or sixteen
millions of piasters, of which scarcely three or
four millions are re-exported. The Havannah
purchases from abroad far beyond its own
wants, and exchanges its colonial articles for
the productions of the manufactures of Europe,,
to sella part of them at Vera Cruz, Truxillo,.
Guayra, and Carthagena.

I discussed in another work", fifteen years
ago, the elements of the tables which are pub-
lished by the erroneous denomination of ba-
lance of commerce ; I observed how little con-
fidence these accounts merit, which are opened
between nations who make mutual exchanges,
and where by false principles of political eco-
nomy, the advantages are only appreciated ac-
cording to the amount of the payment in

specie. The following statements furnish two


* Polit. Essay, vol. iv, p. 121, &c. ; and Per, Nar., vols
vi, p. 225,


225


years (1816 and 1823) of the Balanzas y Estados
de Comercia, made by order of the government.
I have not altered a single figure, because they
afford (a great advantage in quantities difficult
to be known), the minimum of the limit numbers.
The prices indicated in these statements are nei-
ther those of the productions at the place of their
origin, nor those which regulate the markets at
the ports where they arrive. They are fictitious
estimates, an official value, as they say in the sys-
tem of the custom-house* of Great Britain; and:
are, it cannot be too often repeated, at least a
third below the current price. To deduct from ©
the state of commerce at the Havannah, such as
we find it in the registers of the Spanish cus-
tom-house, the state of commerce of the whole
island, we must know the registered exporta-
tions and importations of all the other ports»
and augment their sum total by the produce of
the contraband trade, which differs according
to the spot, the nature of the merchandize, and
the variable price from year to year. Calcula-
tions of this nature can only be attempted by
the local authorities ; and what they published
in the struggle they very able sustained with
the Cortes of Spain, proves that they do not
think themselves sufficiently prepared for a task


* We distinguish in this system between the real price,
the official value, and the declared or bond fide value.


VOL, VII. Q


226


which comprehends so many objects at the
same time.

The Junta del Gobierno and the Real Consu-
lado appear annually, for the port of the Ha-
vannah only, by the name of the Balanza del
Comercio *, and contain a statement of the ex-
portations and importations registered at the
custom-house. We distinguish in these state-
ments the importations by national (Spanish)
and foreign ships; the exportations for the pe-
ninsula, for the Spanish ports of America, and
those beyond the domain of the crown of Spain.
The weight of the merchandize, its value (valor
por ajaros), and the municipal and royal dues,
are added; but the official estimate of the
price of merchandize is, as we have already
observed, much below the current price + of
the place.


* These Balanzas del Commercio of the Havannah, some
of which are printed with all the minute detail of partial es-
timates, generally form twenty-five to thirty pages in folio,
and contain more than 1800 articles. I possess a great num-
ber; but, in this Political Essay on the Island of Cuba, 1
only publish the figures that can lead to any general result.
I followed the same rule in my Political Essay on New Spain.

+ For instance, the negroes imported are valued at one
hundred and fifty piasters per head ; the barrels of flour at
ten piasters. After having given the total value of the pre-
tended balance of trade, I indicated the quantities of gold
and silver which only éraversed the island of Cuba. To give
an approximative idea of the interior consumption of the


|


297
-yeaR 1816.


PIASTERS.
A. ImporTATION 13,219,986


By 336 Spanish ships 5,980,443 p.
Articles and merchan-
1,032,135 p.
African slaves ......... 2,659,950
In gold and silver... 2,288,358
By 672 foreign ships ; 7,239,543


1008 ships 13,219,986


B. Exporration 8,363,135
By 497 Spanish ships 5,167,966 p.
For the penineula... 2,419,224 p.
For the Spanish ports
of America 2,104,890
For the coast ofAfrica 643,852


5,167,966
By 492 foreign ships 3,195,169


989 8,363,135


Of the 2,439,991 piasters, the registered ex-
portation in gold and silver, amounted to only
480,840 piasters.

Among the articles of importation we distin-
guish the following values: flour, 71,807 bar-
rels, or 718,921 p.; wines and liquors of
Europe, 463,067 p.; salt-meat, provisions, spi-
ceries, 1,096,791 p.; various kinds of clothing,


island, and its wants in objects manufactured in Europe, I
marked the same articles among the exportations and im~
portations.


Qe


228


127,681 p.; silk, 282,382 p.; linen, 3,226,859
p-; woollen cloth and other tissues of flannels,
103,224 p.; furniture, crystals, metals, 267,312
p-; paper, 61,486 p.; wrought iron, 330,368 p.;
leather and skins, 135,103 p.; planks and
other wood (timber) already worked, 285, 217 p.

Among the articles of exportation, we find:
flour, 10,965 bar., or 145,254 p.; wine and liquors,
111,466 p.; salt-meat and provisions, 227,274 p.;
various clothing, 4825 p.; silks, 47,872; linen,
1,529,610 p. ; furniture, crystals, metals, 29,000
p-3 paper, 20,497 p.; wrought iron, 99,581 p.;
sugar, 3,207,792 arrobas, or 3,962,709 p.;
coffee, 370,229 arrobas, or 847,729 p.; wax,
22,363 arrobas, or 169,683 p.; dressed skins,
19,978 p.


YEAR 1823.
PIASTERS.

A. ImporTATION ......... eee tata NS rea oa mek, 13,698,735

By_ spanish, Ships... 2. ..us-2 105 3,562,227 p.

By, foreien ships ....3..:..<..-- 10,136,508
IB Bxpom tawny io ciiies obsess achhsueniek waren 12,329,169

By Spanish ships............... 3,550,312 p,

By foreign ships ............... 8,778,857


Number of ships which entered the Havannah,
1125, carrying 167,578 tons ; quitted the port,
1000, carrying 151,161 tons.


!
|
i)


229


The native productions exported and regis-
tered have been estimated in this state of com-
merce, at


95,884 cases of white sugar.
204,327 yellow ditto.
672,007 arrobas of coffee, first quality.
223,917 second quality.
15,692 arrobas of wax.
30,145 bocois of molasses.
13,879 arrobas of tobacco en rama.
71,108 pounds of tobacco torcido.
26,610 pieces of leather of the island of Cuba.
3,368 garafons of bees’ honey.


Gold and silver imported in specie, 1,179,034


piasters; exported, 1,404,584 piasters.

Among the merchandize and articles import-
ed: ready-made clothes, 213,236 p.; cloth and
flax, 2,071,083 p.; silk, 459,869 p.; cotton,
muslins, &c., 1,021,827 p.; woollen cloth,
163,962 p.; salt-meat, rice, and other provi-
sions, and spices, 3,269,901 piasters (among
which were, 431,464 arr. of tasajo, value, 701,129:
p-; 809,601 arrobas of rice, value, 348,301 p. ;
and 89,947 barrels of tallow, value, 259,941 p.) ;
flour, 74,119 barrels, or 889,428 p.; wine and
liquors, 1,119,437 p.; wrought iron, 288,697
p-; metals, furniture, crystals, and porcelain,
464,328 p.; paper, 35,186 reams, or 158,337
- p.; Castille soap, 53,441 arrobas, or 213,764


230


p-; tallow (sebo labrado), 42,512 arrobas, or
170,050 p.; planks and other wood (timber)
already worked, 353,765 p.

Among the exported objects, we shall distin-
guish, besides the productions of the countries
indicated above; linen and flax, 29,526 p.;
cottons, 69,049 p.; silk, 11,316 p.; wool-
len stuffs, 9633 p.; furniture, crystals, metal,
8046 p.; wrought iron, 63,149 p.; planks and
wood (timber) worked, 23,433 p.; paper, 5527
reams, or 22,288 p.; wine and liquors, 49,286
p-; salt-meat, provisions, ‘spices, 86,882 p. ;
paper, 15,322 reams, or 27,772 p.

This is the most exact information I could


obtain respecting the entrance and departure
of vessels in the port of the Havannah. From
1799 to 1805, the number of ships that entered,
mean year, was 905, including in ships of
war.


The exportation of sugar was then estimated
at 40,000 tons. The total of the ships that en-
tered from 1815 to 1819, mean year, was 1192,
of which 226 were Spanish, and 966 foreign. In
1820, there entered, 1305, of which 288 were


231


Spanish ; departed, 1230, of which 919 were
foreign. In the following years the merchant-
vessels only have been computed :


entered, departed.


1821). =. 5.5 1268 1168. Of these 1268 only 258 were
Spanish. There entered besides
95 ships of war, of which 53
were Spanish.

1118, Of 1182, 843 were foreign; there
entered besides 141 ships of
war, of which '72 were Spanish.

1144. Of these 1168 (167,578 tons),
there were 274 Spanish, and 708
of the United States; besides 149 -
ships of war, of which 61 were
Spanish, 54 of the United States,
and 84 English and French.

1088. Among these 1086, 890 foreign
ships were counted. There en-


tered besides at the Havannah
129 ships of war, of which 59
were Spanish.


232


6 IS ECR-STS) Hons
‘HYNNVAVH GHL dO LY0d THLAG VENI AO GNVISI GHL AO SNOMLINGOUd AHL 10 gNOMVLAOdX A


808 FPZ‘11| 000‘F9 E86‘'CS €€0‘FS9 €96°8S G8IG 6ce'903 srerers ypak UROTAT
TrOPZS‘'NG | O00'OTE | B9E“6OT | LLT‘OsH'S e9z‘tht GOGOL | e6L‘1S0°L f°" steak aay Jo eI J)
L6G‘OLL‘OL 00°09 SLe6L OIL“SPO crs‘0s 08% SPLG6L ‘6181 ae
ero'eeo'1e ~ 00°09 9S FS 8196LL 65'S GIZE BLE‘LOG gle
6IZ‘169‘01 | 000°09 9L0°0% I¢¢°60k 6GL°0E Ope 9LOLIG LISt

Zs ILV'O1 ~ 900'08 C9E'Gs 63S ‘OLE &6L‘°9G O98L L8P003 9I8L
coL‘se6'tt 000‘09 868‘ —_ eoz‘aI6 | FLO‘LI 0008 LILV1S GIST

gor Nvaw | ‘MOELVST ‘Sinai ©) Cota | 82 “saSsVTON et ear ge hE ta ee

Beas carve ANV SNIMS | cvaounv |ao svaounv| 2° 5240908) so gaara —.


gistered productions, during five


* Jn this table of the re


233


‘In comparing, in the tables of commerce of
the Havannah, the great value of the merchan-
dize imported, with the little value of the mer-
chandize re-exported, we are surprised that the
interior consumption of a country should be so
considerable, which contains but 325,000 whites
and 130,000 free men of colour*. We find, in
estimating the different articles, according to
the real current prices: in cotton and linen
(bretanas, platillas, lienzos y hilo), two and a
half to three millions of piasters; in tissues of
cotton (zarazas musulinas), one million of pias-
ters; in silk (rasos y generos de seda), 400,000
piasters; and in cloth and tissues of wool,
220,000 piasters. The wants of the island, in


European tissues, registered as exported to the
port of the Havannah only, exceeded conse-
quently, in these latter years, four millions to


years, the case of sugar has been successively estimated at
16 and 12 reals, at 22 and 18 reals, at 20 and 16 reals, at 22
and 18 reals, at 20 and 16 reals; the pipe of brandy, at 35
piasters; the bocoyo of molasses, at 7 reals; the quintal of
coffee, at 15, 15, 12, 16, and 16 piasters ; the arroba of waz,
at 16 piasters.


* It is no doubt by an error in the figures, that in a work
which has just appeared (Apercu stat. sur Visle de Cuba,
1826, p. 231), the island is computed to contain 257,000
free men and 395,000 slaves. The free men of colour are
thrown into the same class with the 260,000 slaves, and the
whites are diminished 68,000,


234


four and a half millions of piasters *. To these
importations of the Havannah (by lawful means),
we must add: metals and furniture, more than
half a million of piasters ; iron and steel, 380,000
piasters ; planks and great timber, 400,000 pias-
ters; Castille soap, 300,000 piasters. With re-
spect to the importation of provisions and
liquids for the Havannah, it appears to me to
be well worthy the attention of those who
would know the real state of those societies
which are called sugar or slave colonies. Such-
is the composition of those societies established
on the most fruitful soil which nature can fur-
nish for the nourishment of man, such the
direction of agricultural labors and industry in
the West Indies, that, in the happiest climate
of the equinoxial region, the population would
want subsistence without the freedom and acti-
vity of external commerce. I do not speak of
the introduction of wines by the port of the
Havannah, which amounted (according to the
registers of the custom-house), in 1803, to
40,000 barrels ; in 1823, to 15,000 pipas and


* The importation of Vera Cruz, in tissues (generos ¥
ropas), was, at the beginning of this century, before the
revolution of Mexico, 9,200,000 piasters. We must not
forget that Mexico has native manufactures of which the
produce suffices for the poorer class of the population. See
above, on the consumption of Mexico and Venezuela com-


pared, vol. vi, p. 231.


235


17,000 barrels, or to the value of 1,200,000
piasters; nor to the introduction of 6000 bar-
rels of brandy of Spain and Holland, and
113,000 barrels (1,864,000 piasters) of flour.
These wines, liquors, and flour, of the value of
more than 3,300,000 piasters, belong to the con-
sumption of the opulent part of the nation. The
cereals of the United States are become a real ar-
ticle of necessity, ina zone where maize, manioc,
and bananas, were long preferred to every other
amylaceous food, The development of a luxury
altogether European, cannot be complained of
amidst the prosperity and increasing civili-
zation of the Havannah; but, placed by the
introduction of the flour, wine, and spirituous
liquors of Europe, we find, in the year 1816, 12
millions of piasters; and, in the year 1823, 38
millions for salt-meat, rice, and dried veget-
ables. In the latter of these two years, the
importation of rice (at the Havannah, accord-
_ ing to the registers, and without reckoning the
contraband), was 323,000 arrobas; and the im-
portation of dried and salt-meat (tasajo), so
necessary to the nourishment of the slaves,
465,000 arrobas *.


* In the balanza del comercio de la Havana (1823), the
official value for the tasajo, is 755,700 piasters; for rice,
363,600 piasters ; for pork, 223,000 piasters ; for bacon,
butter, cheese, 373,000 piasters; for salted cod, which is
given to the negroes with the tasqjo, 100,000 piasters.


236


The want of subsistence characterizes a part
of the tropical regions, where the imprudent
activity of the Europeans has inverted the
order of nature: it will diminish in proportion
as the inhabitants, more enlightened respecting
their true interests, and discouraged by the low
price of colonial produce, will vary the cultiva-
tion, and give free space for all the branches of
rural economy. The principles of a narrow
policy which preside in the administration of
very small islands, real work-shops depending
on Europe, and inhabited by men who desert
the soil whenever they are sufficiently enriched,
cannot be suitable for a country of an extent
nearly equal to that of England, covered with
populous cities, and where the inhabitants esta-
blished from father to son, during ages, far from
regarding themselves as strangers to the Ame-
rican soil, cherish it as their real country. The
population of the island of Cuba, which in fifty
years will perhaps exceed a million, may open
by its own consumption, an immense field to
native industry. Ifthe slave-trade ceases alto-
gether, the slaves will pass by degrees into the.
class of free men, and society, recomposed,
without suffering any of the violent convulsions,
of civil dissensions, will follow the path which
nature has traced for all societies that become
numerous and enlightened. The cultivation of
the sugar-cane and of coffee will not be aban-


237


doned; but it will no longer remain the prin-
cipal basis of national existence than the culti-
vation of cochineal for Mexico, of indigo for
Guatimala, and of cacao for Venezuela. A free,
intelligent, and agricultural population, will
progressively succeed a slave population, desti-
tute of foresight and industry. Already the
capitals which the commerce of the Havannah
has placed within twenty-five years in the
hands of cultivators, have began to change the
face of the country; and to that power, of
which the action is constantly increasing,
another will be necessarily joined, inseparable .
from the progress of industry and national
wealth, the development of human intelligence.
On these united powers the future destinies of
the metropolis of the West Indies depend.

We have seen, that according to the tables of
the commerce of the Havannah, the registered
exportations are increased, in the productions
of the island, by the average of from 1815-1819,
to 12,245,000 piasters ; and, in later years, to 13
millions of piasters*. If the registered expor-
tations of the Havannah and of Matanzas, in
indigenous productions and in foreign mer-
chandize, were re-exported together in 1823, to


* The estimate I mark here, is not that of the custom-
house, but an estimate made according to the eurrent
price at the port of the Havannah.


238


the amount of 15,139,200 piasters *, it may be
imagined, without exaggeration, that the whole
island might have exported, by lawful and illi-
cit means, in the same year 1823, when the
commerce was very active, to the amount of
more than 20 to 22 millions of piasters +.
These estimates in specie naturally vary with
the price of merchandize and articles of sub-
sistence. Before Jamaica enjoyed a free com-
merce, in 1820, the exportations were 5,400,000
pounds sterling. It is generally believed, that
Spain draws annually from forty to fifty thou-
sand cases of sugar from the Havannah. (The
statement in 1823, was 100,766 cavras; in 1825,
only 47,547.) The United States +, according


* In the valuable work which has appeared with the title
of Commerce du dix-neuvi?me sitcle, tom. i, p. 259, the
exportation of the Havannah, in 1823; is estimated at less
than two millions of piasters ; but this estimate is founded
on an error of figures. The sugar registered was 800,211
caras, or 120,084,400 Spanish pounds, and not six millions
of pounds ; the exportation of coffee was 22,398,100 Spanish
pounds, and not three millions of pounds. (See above, p.
163 and 209.)

t The exportations of the French port of Saint Domingo
were, in 1788, 67 millions of francs in sugar, 75 millions of
francs in coffee, and 15 millions of francs in cotton ; alto-
gether 51,400,000 piasters.

{ From official documents, the total importations of the
United States, in 1820, amounted to 62,586,724 dollars, of
which Great Britain and Ireland furnished 29 millions ; the


239


to the tonnage, make more than the half of the
trade of the island of Cuba, and according to
the value of the exports, more than a third,
We have estimated the total importation of the
island at more than 22 to 24 millions of pias-
ters, comprehending the contraband. 'T he value
of the merchandize and productions coming
from the United States only, by vessels of
106,000 tons *, was 4,270,600 dollars, in 1822.
The importations of Jamaica amounted in 1820,
according to Mr. Stewart, in value of English
manufactures, to two millions of pounds ster-
ling.

The importation of flour, registered + at the
port of the Havannah :


island of Cuba, 6,584,000 ; Hayti, 2,246,000; France,
5,909,000 dollars.

* Apercu statistique de Visle de Cuba, 1826 (Tab. B). M.
Huber has added to the translation of Letters from the Ha-
vannah, much important information on the commerce and
the system of imports of the island of Cuba. ‘The importa-
tion of 4,270,600 dollars may be regarded as very consider=
able; for, in 1824, that of Great Britain to Mexico, Colom-
bia, Buenos Ayres, Chili, and Peru, did not amount alto-
gether to more than 2,377,110 pounds sterling. (4n Ac-
count of the United Prov. of Rio de la Plata, 1825, p. 172.)

+ The United States exported, in the year 1820, to the
amount of 9,075,000 dollars of flour of wheat and maize.
The exportation of flour undergoes extraordinary fluctu-
ations. In 1803, it was 1,311,853 barrels ; in 1817,
1,479,198 ; in 1823, 756,702.


240


VITA Re a 62,727 barrels (at 72 arrobas, or 84 kilog.).
LIDS aie 08,474
MOD vb» Jc reins, 59,953
ASOD seers 54,441
1801 ...:...,.:.... 64,708
TS0e. ee $2,045
TOOS? 2A eee 69,254


The importation registered at the port of
the Havannah only, in 1823, by Spanish ves-
sels, was 38,987 barrels; by foreign vessels,


74,119 barrels; total, 113,506 barrels, at the.


mean price of 162 piasters (comprehending the
duties), 1,864,500 piasters. To the wise ad-
ministration of the governor Don Luis de las
Casas *, we owe the first direct introduction of
the flour of the United States into the island of
Cuba. Till that period, the flour could not
enter till after it had passed the ports of Europe !
Mr. Robinson + estimates the total introduc-
tion of this article in the different parts of the
island, by lawful and illicit means, at 120,000
barrels. He adds, what appears to me less cer-
tain, “that the island of Cuba, on account of
the bad distribution of the labor of the blacks,
is so much in want of subsistence, that it could
not sustain a blocus of five months.” The United
States imported to the island of Cuba, in 1822,


* See above, p. 111.
+ Mem. on the Mexican Revolution, vol. ii, p. 330.


241


144,980 barrels (more than twelve millions of
kilograms), of which the value, at the Havan-
nah, amounted (with the duties) to 2,391,000
piasters. Notwithstanding the duty of seven
piasters on every barrel of flour of the United
States that enters the island of Cuba, the flour
of the peninsula (that of Santander) cannot
sustain the competition. This competition be-
gan with the happiest auspices for Mexico:
during my stay at Vera Cruz, Mexican flour
was exported from that port to the value of
300,000 piasters. That quantity augmented,
according to Mr. Pitkins, in 1809, to 27,000
barrels, or 2,268,000 kilograms. The political
troubles of Mexico have entirely interrupted
the commerce of cereals between two countries,
both placed within the torrid zone, but ata
difference of height above the level of the sea,
which has a powerful influence on the climate
and on cultivation.


The registered importation of liquids at the
Havannah, was:


12,547 barrels of wine. 2300 barrels of brundy.
12,118
32,073
20,899
25,921
45,676
39,130
VOL. VII.


242


To complete what has been said of external
eommerce, let us hear the author of a memoir
whom I have often mentioned, and who states
the real situation of the island. ‘‘ At the Ha-
vannab, the effects of the accumulation of
wealth begin to be felt; the price of provisions
has been doubled in a small number of years.
Labor. is so dear, that a, bozal negro, recently
brought from the coast of Africa, gains by the
work of his hands (without having learnt any
trade), from four to five reals. (two francs thir-
teen sols to three francs five sols) a day. The
negroes who. follow a, mechanical trade, how-
ever common, gain from five to six francs. The
patrician families remain fixed to the soil: a
man who has enriched himself, does not return
to Europe and take his capital. Some families
are so, opulent, that Don Matheo de Pedroso,
who. died lately, left.in landed. property. above
two millions of piasters. Several commercial
houses of the Havannah purchase, annually, from
ten to twelve thousand cases of sugar, for which
they pay at the rate of 350,000 or 420,000 pias-
ters. The affairs which are transacted annually
in this. place, amount to more than twenty mil-
lions of piasters.” (De la situacion presente de
Cuba, manuscript.) Such was the state of the
public fortune at the end of 1800. Twenty-
five years of increasing prosperity have elapsed
since that period, and the population of the


243


island is nearly doubled. The exportation of
registered sugar had not, in any year, before
1800, attained the extent of 170,000 cases
(31,280,000 kilograms) ; in these latter times *
it has constantly surpassed 200,000 cases, and
even attained 250,000 and 300,000 cases (forty-
six to fifty-five millions of kilograms). A new
branch of industry has sprung up, that of plan-
tations of the coffee-tree, which furnishes an
exportation of the value of three millions and a


* Since the court of Madrid has taken the resolution to
open several ports in the western part of the island to -
Spanish and foreign trade, the exportation of sugar regis-
tered at the custom-house of the Havannah, should no
longer be considered as an exact measure of agricultural
prosperity. The port of Mariel, so useful to the planters
of the district of Guanajay, had already received its habili-
éacion (the technical term of the commercial Spanish lega-
tion) by the royal etdule of October 20th, 1817; but it is
within five or six years only that the exportation of Mariel
has had a sensible influence on that of the Havannah. The
government has alike extended this franchise to other ports,
for instance to Baracoa (13 December, 1816), San Fernando
de Nuevitas in the Estero of Baga and the Guiros (Sth April,
1819), Bahia de Guantanamo (13th August, 1819), and
from San Juan de los Remedios, which has been considered
the port of the district of Villa Clara (23d September, 1819).
La Bahia de Jagua, where Don Luis de Clouet has begun
an agricultural and commercial establishment, by fixing on
that spot the ancient planters of Louisiana and other white
and free men, is not yet habilitée. (Memorias de la Soc. econ.
de la Habana, No, 34, p. 287, 298, 297, 300, and 303.)

R 2


244


half of piasters; industry, guided by a greater
mass of knowledge, has been better directed;
the system of taxation that weighed on national
industry and exterior commerce, has been made
lighter since 1791, and been improved by suc-
cessive changes. Whenever the mother coun-
try, mistaking its own interests, attempted to
make a retrograde step, courageous voices have
arisen not only among the Havaneros, but often
among the Spanish administrators, in defence of
the cause of the freedom of American commerce.
A new channel has recently been opened for
capital, by the enlightened zeal and patriotic
views of the intendant Don Claudio Martinez
de Pinillos. The commerce of entrepot has
been granted to the Havannah, on the most
advantageous conditions *.

‘The difficult and expensive interior commu-
nications of the island, render the productions
dearer at the ports, notwithstanding the small
distance between the northern and southern
coast. A project of canalization, which unites
the double advantage of connecting the Ha-
vannah and Batabano by a navigable line, and


* Acuerdos sobre arreglo de derechos y establecimiento de
Almacenes de Deposito. (See Suplemento al Diario del Gobi-
erno constitucional de la Habana del 15 de Octubre 1822.)
Without the happy franchise of the port of the Havannah,
Jamaica would have become the centre of all the mercantile
operations with the neighbouring continent.


245


diminishing the dearness of transport of the
native productions, merits here a special men-
tion. The idea of the Canal of Guines * had
been conceived for more than half a century,
with the view of furnishing timber at a more
moderate price to the carpenters of the arsenal
of the Havannah. In 1796, the Count de
Jaruco y Mopox, an enterprising man, who had
acquired great influence by his connection with
the Prince of Peace, undertook to revive this
project. The survey was made, in 1798, by
two very able engineers, Don Francisco and
Don Felix Lemaur. These officers ascertained
that the canal in its whole development, would
be nineteen leagues long (5000 varas or 4150
meters), that the point of partition would be at
the Taverna del Rey, and that it would require
nineteen locks towards the north, and twenty-
one towards the south. There are only eight
and a half marine leagues - from the Havan-
- nah to Batabano. The canal of Guines would,
even as a canal of small navigation, be of great
use for the transport of the agricultural pro-
ductions by steam-boats{, because it would


* The survey gave, in feet of Burgos: from Cerro near
the bridge of Zanja, 106,2; Taverna del Rey, 329,3 ; Pueblo
del Rincon, 295,3; Laguna de Zaldivar, when it is full,
237,3; Quibican, 166,1 ; Batabano, village, 21,3.

t See above, p 48.

t Steam-boats are already established along the coast


246


take its course near the best cultivated lands.
The roads are no where worse in the rainy sea-
son than in this part of the island, where the
soil is of friable limestone, little fitted for the
construction of solid roads. The transport of
sugar from Guines to the Havannah, a dis-
tance of twelve leagues, now costs a piaster per
quintal. Besides the advantage of facilitating
the interior communications, the canal would
also give great importance to the sumgidero of
Batabano, into which small vessels loaded with
salt provisions (fasajo) from. Venezuela, would
enter without being obliged to double the cape
Saint Antonio. In the bad season, and in time
of war, when corsairs are met with between the
cape Catoche, Tortugas, and Mariel, the pas-
sage from the main land to the island of Cuba,
would be abridged by entering, not at the Ha-
vannah, but some port of the southern coast.
The construction of the canal de Guines, was
estimated, in 1796, at one million or 1,200,000
plasters: it is now thought that the expence
would amount to more than one million and a
half. The productions which might annually
pass the canal have been estimated at 75,000


from the Havannah to Matanzas, and less regularly from the
Havannah to Mariel. The government granted to Don
Juan O-Farrill (March 24th, 1819), a privilege on the bar-
cos de vapor.


247


cases of sugar, 25,000 arrobas of coffee, and
8000 bocoyes of molasses and rum. According
to the first project, that of 1796, it was intended
to link the canal with the small river of Gui-
nes, to be brought from the Ingenio de la Ho-
landa towards Quibican, three leagues south of
Bejucal and Santa Rosa*. This idea is now
relinquished, the Rio de los Guines losing its
waters towards the east in the irrigation of the
savannahs of Hato de Guanamon. Instead of
leading the canal on the east of the Barrio del
Cerro, and on the south of the fort of Atarés, in
the bay of the Havannah, it was proposed at
first to make use of the bed of the Chorrera or
Rio Armendaris, from Calabazal to the Husillo,
and then of the Zanja Real, not only to con-
vey the boats to the centre of the arrabales
and of the city of the Havannah, but also
to furnish water to the fountains, which want
to be supplied during three months of the
year. I visited several times, with MM. Le-
maur, the plains by which this line of navi-
gation is meant to pass. The utility of the pro-
ject is incontestible, if in the time of great
drought a sufficient quantity of water can be
brought to the point of partition.

At the Havannah, as in every place where


* Official pieces of the Commision para el fomento de la Isla
de Cuba, 1799, and manuscript notes of M. Bauduy.


248


commerce and the wealth it produces increase
rapidly, complaints are heard of the prejudicial
influence of this increase on ancient manners.
We cannot here stop to compare the first state
of the island of Cuba, covered with pasturage,
before the taking of the capital by the English,
and its present state, since it has become the
metropolis of the West Indies; nor to put in
the balance the candor and simplicity of man-
ners of an infant society, against the manners
that belong to the development of an advanced
civilization. The spirit of commerce, leading
to the love of wealth, no doubt brings nations
to depreciate what money cannot obtain. But
the state of human things is happily such, that
what is most desirable, most noble, most free in
man, is owing only to the inspirations of the
soul, to the extent and amelioration of its inte-
lectual faculties. Were the thirst of riches to
take absolute possession of every class of so-
ciety, it would infallibly produce the evil com-
plained of by those who see with regret what
they call the preponderance of the industrious
system; but the increase of commerce, in mul-
tiplying the connections between nations, by
opening an immense sphere to the activity of
the mind, by pouring capitals into agriculture,
and creating new wants by the refinements
of luxury, affords the remedy against the dan-
gers which appear to menace. In this extreme


249


complication of causes and effects, time is re-
quired to establish the equilibrium between the
different classes of society. Civilization, the
progress of knowledge, the development of gene-
ral intelligence, cannot at any given period be
measured by the tonnage, the value of the ex-
portation, or the improvement of the arts of
industry. Natives, like individuals, must not
be judged by one station of their life. They
accomplish their destinies in passing through
the whole scale of a civilization appropriated
to their national character, and their physical
situation.


Financus.—The increase of the agricultural
prosperity of the island of Cuba, and the in-
fluence of the accumulation of wealth on the
value of importations, has raised the public
revenue in these latter years, to four millions
and a half, perhaps five millions of piasters.
The custom-house of the Havannah, which be-
fore 1794, yielded less than 600,000 piasters,
and from 1797 to 1800, mean year, 1,900,000
piasters, pours into the treasury, since the
declaration of free trade, a revenue (importe
liquido) of more than 3,100,000 piasters *.. As


® The custom-house of Port-au-Prince, at Hayti, pro-
duced in 1825, the sum of 1,655,764 piasters; that of
Buenos Ayres, from 1819 to 1821, mean year, 1,655,000


250


the colonial government permits the greatest
publicity in all that regards the finances of the
island of Cuba, we may ascertain from the
budjets, the Cajas matrices de la Administracion


general de Rentas of the town and jurisdiction
of the Havannah, that, in the years 1820-1825,
the public revenue, as far as it depends on that
administration, has fluctuated between 3,200,000
and 3,400,000 piasters. Ifwe add to that sum
on one side, 800,000 of different branches of
revenue * (directa entrada) which the Tesoreria
general collects, and on the other side, the pro-
duct of the custom-house of Trinidad, Matan-
zas, Baracoa, and Santiago de Cuba, which
before 1819, amounted to more than 600,000
plasters, we may conceive that the estimate of
five millions of piasters, or twenty-five millions
of francs for the whole island-, is far from
being exaggerated. Very simple comparisons
prove how considerable this product is, rela-


piasters. See Centinela de La Plata (September 1822), No. 8.
Argos de Buenos Ayres, No. 85.

* Lottery, renta decimal, &c.

+ The deputies of the island of Cuba declared to the Core
tes of Spain (in May, 1821), that the sum total of contribu-
tions ‘‘ in the province of the Havannah ” solely, amounted
to five millions of piasters. (Reclamacion contra la ley de
aranceles, p.'7, No. 6.) In 1818 and 1819, the total receipt
of the general Treasury was 4,367,000 and 4,105,000 pias-
ters; the expence, 3,687,000 and 3,848,000.


251


tively to the actual state of the colony. The
island of Cuba yet contains but one-forty-
second of the population of France ; and the
half of its inhabitants, being in the most cruel
indigence, consume but little. Its revenue is
nearly equal to that of the Republic of Colum-
bia *, and is superior to the revenue of all the
custom-houses of the United States -~ before
the year 1795, when that confederation had
4,500,000 inhabitants, while the island of Cuba
had only 715,000. ‘The principal source of the
public revenue of this fine colony is the custom-
house, which alone produces above three-fifths, —
and amply suffices for all the wants of the in-
ternal administration and military defence. If,
in these latter years, the expence of the general
treasury of the Havannah amounted to more
than four millions of piasters, this increase of
expence is solely owing to the obstinate struggle
which the mother country has sustained against
its freed colonies. Two millions of piasters
were employed to pay the land and sea forces,
which poured back from the American conti-
nent, by the Havannah, on their way to the
peninsula. As long as Spain, forgetful of its


* See vol. vi,p, 301. ‘In 1580, esta Isla rento 6000
pesos de oro.” Herera, vol. iii, p. 134,

+ The custom-houses of the United States, which yielded
in 1801 to 1808, sixteen millions of dollars, produced in
1815 but 7,282,000. Morse, Mcdern Geogr., p. 638.


252


real interests, refuses to recognize the indepen-
dence of the New Republics, the island of
Cuba, menaced by Columbia and the Mexican
Confederation, must support a military force
for its external defence, that ruins the colonial
finances. The Spanish marine, stationed in
the port of the Havannah, generally costs above
650,000 piasters. The land forces require
nearly one million and a half of piasters. Such
a state of things cannot last indefinitely, if the
Peninsula does not relieve the burden that
weighs upon the colony. !

From 1789 to 1797, the produce of the cus-
tom-house at the Havannah, mean year, never
rose to more than 700,000 piasters; for the
royal taxes (rentas reales) poured into the trea-
sury were :


479,302 piasters.
642,720
520,202
849,904
635,098
642,320
643,583
784,689


From 1797 to 1800, the royal and municipal
taxes, raised at the Havannah, were 7,634,126
piasters; or, mean year, 1,908,000 plasters :


iy (37 (tei See) Ae ooet 1,257,017 piasters.
LI eexeyeshs i Ree 1,822,348
AT OOLEi noe ee aera ae oes 2,305,080
TBO sae ae ee stances 2,249,680
VO OU. aioe tees ine sae remiciene 2,170,970
1itS\ 0.) eas AS ome Orciery a 2,400,932


ASOD} HL ieee cee ee cae 1,637,465


The custom-house of the Havannah has pro-
duced :


1808 hess eee eosite ae 1,178,974 piasters.
ESOOS 5 cnc coet sores ese cote 1,913,605
1810 ..... el Pi ti 1,292,619
pe) i Geen ne ar OBR saana, Sno eS 1,469,137
AG LASSE aseeees Ester 1,855,117


The diminution of the custom-house revenue
in 1808, was attributed to the embargo put upon
American vessels*; but, in 1809, the Court
permitted the free entrance of foreign neutral
ships }.

From 1815 to 1819, the royal taxes were, in
‘the port of the Havannah, 11,575,460 piasters ;
the municipal taxes, 6,709,347 piasters ; total
18,284,807 piasters; or, mean year, 3,657,000


36


p., of which the municipal taxes formed ;,.


* Patr. Amer., vol. ii, p. 305.
+ Reclam, contra los Aranc., p. 8.


254


NUMBER OF
{VESSELS WHICH| DERECHOS MUNICIPAL
HAVE GONE IN REALS, DERECHOS.

AND OUT,


1,851,607 p, 804,693 p.


2,233,203 971,056


2,291,243 | 1,429,052


2,381,658 | 1,723,008


2,817,749 1,781,530


The public revenue of the Administracion ge-
neral de Rentas of the jurisdiction of the Ha-
vannah, amounted in


8,631,273 piasters.
3,277,639 |
3;378,228


The royal and municipal taxes of importation
at the custom-house of the Havannah, in 1823,
were 2,734,568 piasters. The state of the public
revenue of the ddministracion general de Rentas
of the jurisdiction of the Havannah in 18924,
was as follows :


I, Taxes of importation .............-. 1,818,896 piasters.
Almojarifazgo..... 1,817,980 p.
Aleatalarc csc 802
ATMA mineate 144

Il. Taxes of exportation ............... 326,316


Ill. Coasting-vessels and other differ-

ent branches (salt, 27,781 p. ; tax

of depdt, 154,924 p. ; media ana-

ta, armadilla, &c.) ; total......... 188,415
IV. Rentas de tierra (tax on the slaves, :

73,109 p.; sale of lands, or fin-

cas, 215,092 p. ; subaltern admi-

nistrations, 154,840 p. ; shops, or

pulperias, 19,714 p., &c.); total.. 473,686
VY. Auxiliary branches of the Tresoria

del Ejercito (Almirantazgo, Regis-

tros estrangeros, &C........+....-6-- 136,923


VI. Consuludo, Cuartillo adicional del
muelle, Vestuario de milicias, &c... 80,564


Total revenue in 1824 ............ 3,025,300 piasters.


The revenue of the town and jurisdiction of
the Havannah, in 1825, was 3,350,300 piasters.

These partial statements shew that, from
1789 to 1824, the public revenue has been in-
creased sevenfold ; this increase becomes still
more sensible when we observe the product of
ten administrations, or Tresorerias subalternas
interiores (Matanzas, Villa Clara, Remedios,
Trinidad, Santo Espiritu, Puerto Principe, Hol-
guin, Bayamo, Santiago de Cuba, and Baracoa).


256


M. Barrutia* has published an interesting
table on the provincial administrations, con-
taining a period of eighty-three years, from
1735 to 1818. The total product of ten cases
rose progressively from nine hundred piasters
to six hundred thousand.


898 piasters.
860
902

1,794

4,747


1,840


123,246 piasters.
114,366
128,303
168,624
146,007


133,315


31'7,699 piasters.
898,676
511,510
524,442
618,036


474,072


The total of the eighty-three years was


* Mem. de la Real Soc. Economica ‘de la Habana, No, 31,
p. 220.


257


13,098,000 piasters, of which Santiago de Cuba
gave 4,390,000 piasters; Puerto Principe,
2,223,000 p., and Matanzas, 1,450,789 piasters.

According to the state of the Cajas matrices,
the public revenue, in 1822, was in the province
of the Havannah alone, 4,311,862 p.; which
arose from the custom-house, (3,127,918 p.)
the los ramos de directa entrada, as lottery,
tithes, &c. (601,898 p.) and anticipations on
the charges of the Consulado and the Depo-
sito (581,978 p.). The expence in the same
year, for the island of Cuba, was 2,732,738 p.,
and for the succour destined to maintain the |
struggle with the continental colonies declared
independent, 1,362,029 p. In the first class of
expence we find 1,355,798 p. for the subsistence
of the land forces charged with the defence of’
the Havannah and the neighbouring’ places ;
and 648,908 p. for the royal navy stationed
in the port of the Havannah. In the second
class of expence foreign to the local adminis-
tration, we find: 1,115,672 p. for the pay of
4234 soldiers, who, after having evacuated
Mexico, Columbia, and other parts of the con-
tinent formerly Spanish, passed by the Havannah
to return to Spain ; 164,000 p., expence of the
defence of the castle of Saint Juan d’Uloa. The
~ intendant of the island of Cuba, Don Claudio
Martinez de Pinillos, in one of the notes that ac-
company [Estado de las Cajas matrices of 1822,

VOL, VH. s


258


adds the following consideration: “If, to the
extraordinary expenditure of 1,362,022 piasters
relative to the general interests of the Spanish
monarchy, we add, on the one hand, the greater
part of the 648,908 piasters furnished for thie
subsistence of the royal navy of which the
service is not limited to the defence of the Ha-
vannah, and, on the other, the expence occa-
sioned by the passage of maritime couriers and
ships of war, we shall find that 2,010,930
piasters, nearly the half of the public revenue,
is absorbed by expences which have no direct
relation with the interior administration of the
island.”. How much the cultivation and pros-
perity of this country will one day gain, when,
in a state of internal tranquillity, more than
one million and a half of piasters may be annu-
ally employed in works of public utility, but
above all in the ransom of laborious. slaves,
such as is already practised according to the
wise and humane legislation of the Republic of
Columbia !

I saw, by the documents which I collected in
the archives of the Vice-royalty of Mexico,
that the pecuniary succour, which at the begin-
ning at the 19th century was annually sent to
the Havannah by the treasury of New Spain,
was:


259


PIASTERS.
a) for the squadron, the docks, and all


the wants of the royal navy, accord-
ing to the cedule of 16th Jan. 1790... 700,000
‘ 1b) for the maritime establishment of the
coast of the Mosquitos 40,000
a) for the land service at the Havannah,
according to the cedules of May 18th,
1784, February 4th, 1788, and No-
vember Ist, 1790 : 290,000
b) for the land service at Santiago de
146,000
FortiricaTions, according to the royal cedule of
February 4th, 1788 150,000
Tozsacco, that is, the purchase of leaves and the :
fabrication of tobacco destined for Se-
ville, according to the cedules of August
2d, 1744, and December 22d, 1767 .. 500,000


1,826,000


To this may be added a sum of nine millions
of francs, which now fall to the charge of the
Havannah, 557,000 piasters which Mexico
paid to aid the treasury of Louisiana; 151,000
p. for Florida, and 377,000 p. for the isle of
Portorico.

I here terminate the Political Essay on the
Island of Cuba, in which Ihave traced the state
of that important possession of Spain, such as
it now is. As the historian of America, I
wished to throw light on facts, and give preci-
sion to ideas, by the aid of comparisons and

s2


260


statistical tables. That minute investigation
of facts seems necessary at a moment when, on
one side, the enthusiasm that leads to benevo-
lent credulity; and on the other, the passionate
animosities that menace the security of the
new republics, have given rise to the most
vague and erroneous statements. In conform-
ity to the plan of my work, I have abstained
from all reasoning on future chances, and on
the probability of the changes which external
politics may produce in the situation of the
West Indies; I have solely examined what re-
_ gards the organization of human societies; the
unequal partition of rights and of the enjoy-
ments of life; the threatening dangers which
the wisdom of the legislator and the modera-
tion of freemen may ward off, whatever be the
form of the government. It belongs to the tra-
veller who has himself seen what torments: or
degrades human nature, to make the complaint
of the unfortunate reach the ear of those by
whom they can be relieved. I observed the
condition of the blacks in countries where the
laws, the religion, and the national habits tend
to soften their fate; yet I preserved, on quitting
America, the same horror of slavery which I


had felt in Europe. It is in vain that writers |


of ability, in order to veil barbarous institu-
tions by ingenious fictions of language, have
invented the terms of negro peasants of the


261


West Indies, black vassalage, and patriarchal
protection : it is to profane the noble qualities
of the mind and the imagination, to exculpate
by illusory comparisons, or captious sophisms,
excesses that afflict humanity, and for which
they prepare violent commotions. ‘Do they
think they have acquired the right of dispens-
ing with commiseration, by comparing * the


* These comparisons do not tranquillize those who, secret
partizans of the slave-trade, seek to forget the calamities of
the black race, and in some resist every emotion they might
awaken. ‘The permanent state of a caste founded on bar-
barous laws and institutions, is often confounded with the -
excesses of a power. exerted momentarily on some indivi-
duals. Thus Mr. Bolingbroke, who lived seven years at
Demarara, and who visited the West India islands, does not
hesitate to repeat that ‘“ on board an English ship of war,
whipping is more frequent than in the plantations of the
English colonies.” He adds, “ that in general the negroes
are little whipped, but that very reasonable means of cor-
rection have been imagined, such as making them eat boil-
ing soup, strongly peppered, or drink, with a very small
spoon, a solution of Glauber-salt.”” The slave-trade appears
to him an universal benefit ; and he is persuaded that if the
negroes were permitted to return to the coast of Africa, who
have enjoyed during twenty years all the conveniences of
the life of slaves at Demarara, they would make a fine re-
cruiting, and bring whole nations to the English possessions. °
(Voyage to Demarara, 1807, p. 107, 108, 116, 136.) Here
is the profession of faith of a planter, firm and frank 3 yet
Mr. Bolingbroke, as several passages of his book prove, is a
‘moderate man, full of benevolent intentions towards the
slaves.


262


state of the blacks with that of the serfs of the
middle ages, and with that state of oppression
under which some classes still groan in the
north and east of Europe? Those comparisons,
those artifices of language, that disdainful im-
patience with which even a hope of the gradual
abolition of slavery is repulsed as chimerical,
are useless arms in the times in which we live.
The great revolutions which the continent of
America and the Archipelago of the West
Indies have undergone since the commence-
ment of the nineneenth century, have acted
upon the ideas and the public reason, even in
countries where slavery exists and begins to be
modified. Many wise men, deeply interested
in the tranquillity of the sugar and slave isiands,
feel that by a liberal agreement of the proprie-
tors, and by measures taken by those who know
the localities, they might emerge from a state
of crisis and uneasiness, of which indolence and
obstinacy will augment the danger. I will en-
deavour, at the end of this chapter, to give some
indications of the possibility of those measures,
and to prove, by extracts taken from official
pieces, that at the Havannah, long before ex-
ternal politics could have had the least influ-
ence on their opinions, the local authorities the
most attached to the mother-country, have from
time to time displayed dispositions favorable to
the amelioration of the state of the blacks.


263


Slavery is no doubt the greatest of all the
evils that afflict humanity, whether we consider
the slave torn from his family in his native
country, and thrown into the hold of a slave-
ship *, or as making part of a flock of black
men, parked on the soil of the West Indies;
but for individuals there are degrees of suffer-
ing and privation. What a distance between a
slave who serves in the house of a rich man at
the Havannah or Kingston, or who works for
himself, giving his master but a daily retribu-
tion, anda slave attached to a sugar-estate !
The threats which are used to correct an obsti-_
nate negro, develope this scale of human priva-
tions, The calessero is menaced with the
cafetal ; and the slave who works at the cafetal
is menaced with the sugar fabric. The black
who has a wife, who inhabits a separate hut,
who, affectionate as are the Africans for the


*® < Tf the slaves are whipped,” said one of the witnesses,
at the parliamentary inquest of 1789, “to make them dance
on the deck of a slave-ship, if they are forced to sing in
chorus ; messe, messe, mackerida (how gaily we live among
the whites), this only proves the care we take of the health
of those men.” ‘This delicate attention reminds me that in
the description of an auto-da-fe in my possession, a boast
is made of the prodigality with which refreshments are dis-
tributed to the condemned, and of the stair-case which the
inquisitors have had erected inthe interior of the pile for


the accommodation of the relaxados.


264


most part, finds, after his labor, that some care
is taken of him amidst his indigent family, has
a fate not to be compared with that of the in-
sulated slave lost in the mass. This diversity
of condition escapes those who have not had
the spectacle of the West Indies before their
eyes. The progressive amelioration of the state
even of the captive caste, explains that in the
island of Cuba the luxury of the masters, and
the possibility of gain by their work, have
drawn* more than eighty thousand slaves
towards the towns; and how the manumission
of them, favored by the wisdom of the laws, is
become so active as to have produced, fixing
on the present period, more than 130,000 free
men of colour. It isin discussing the indivi-
dual position of each class, in recompensing,
by the decreasing scale of privations, the intel-
-ligence, the love of labour, and the domestic
virtues, that the colonial administration will
find the means of ameliorating the fate of the
blacks. Philanthropy does not consist in giving
“a little more salt-fish, and some strokes. of
the whip less ;” a real amelioration of the cap-
tive caste ought to extend over the whole moral
and physical position of man.
The impulse might have been given by those
European governments which have the senti-


* See above, p. 108, 151, 208.


265


ment of human dignity, and who know that
whatever is unjust bears with it a germ of de-
struction; but this impulse, it is afflicting to
add, will be powerless, if the union of the pro-
prietors, if the colonial assemblies or Jegista-
tures, fail to adopt the same views, and to act
by a well concerted plan, of which the ultimate
aim is the cessation of slavery in the West
Indies. ‘Till then, it will be in vain to register
the strokes of the whip, diminish the number
that can be inflicted at any one time, require
the presence of witnesses, and name protectors
of the slaves; all these regulations, dictated by
the most benevolent intentions, are easily elud-
ed: the loneliness of the plantations renders
their execution impossible. They suppose a
system of domestic inquisition incompatible
with what is called in the colonies “the ac-
quired rights.” The state of slavery cannot be
altogether peaceably ameliorated but by the
simultaneous action of free men (white and
coloured) who inhabit the West Indies; by
colonial assemblies and Jegislatures; by the
influence of those who, enjoying a great moral
consideration among their countrymen, and
acquainted with the localities, know how to
vary the means of amelioration according to
the manners, the habits, and the position of
every island. In preparing this task, which
ought to comprehend at the same time, a great


266


' part of the archipelago of the West Indies, it is
useful to cast a retrospective look on the events
by which the freedom of a considerable part of
the human race was obtained in Europe in the
middle ages. In order to ameliorate without
commotion, new institutions. must be made to
issue from those which the barbarism of cen-
turies has consecrated. It will one day be
difficult to believe, that till 1826, there existed
no law in the Great Antilles to prevent selling
infants, and separating them from their parents,
and to prohibit the degrading custom of mark-
ing the negroes with a hot iron, merely that the
human cattle might be more easily recognised.
Enact laws to take away the possibility of a
barbarous outrage; fix, in every sugar estate,
the relation between the least number of ne-
gresses and that of the cultivating negroes;
grant liberty to every slave who has served
fifteen years, to every negress who has reared
four or five children ; set them free on the con-
dition of working a certain number of days for
the profit of the plantation; give the slaves a
part of the neat produce, to interest them in the
increase of agricultural riches*; fixa sum on


* General Lafayette, whose name is linked with all that
promises to contribute to the liberty of men, and to amelio-
rate their fate by institutions, had, in the year 1785, con-
ceived the project of purchasing a settlement at Cayenne,


267


the budget of the public expence, destined for
the ransom of slaves and the amelioration of
their fate;—such are the most urgent objects
of colonial legislation.

The conquest, on the continent of Spanish
America, and the slave-trade in the West In-
dies, Brazil, and in the southern parts of the
United States, have united the most heteroge-
neous elements of population. Now, this strange
mixture of Indians, whites, negroes, métis, mu-
lattoes, and zambos, appears accompanied with
all the perils which the heat and disorder of the
passions can engender, at such critical periods,
when society, shaken to its very foundations,
begins a new era. The odious principle of the
colonial system, that of security, founded on the
hostility of castes, and prepared during ages,
then bursts forth with violence. Fortunately
the number of blacks was so inconsiderable in


and to divide it among the blacks by whom it was cultivated,
and for whom the proprietor renounced for himself and his
descendants, all profit whatever. He had interested in this
noble enterprise the priests of the Mission of the Holy
Spirit, who themselves possessed lands in French Guyana.
A letter of the Marshal de Castries, dated 6th June, 1785,
proves that the unfortunate Louis XVI, extending his bene-
ficent intentions to the blacks and the free men of colour,
had ordered similar trials to be made at the expence of
government. M. de Richeprey, charged by M. de Lafay-
ette with the partition of the lands among the blacks, died
of the effects of the climate at Cayenne.


268


the new states of the Spanish continent, that,
with the exception of the cruelties exercised in
Venezuela, where the royalist party armed their
slaves, the struggle between the independents
and the soldiers of the mother country was not
stained by the vengeance of the captive popu-
lation. The free men of colour (blacks, mulat-
toes, and mestizos) have warmly espoused the
national cause, and the copper-coloured race in
its timid distrust, and mysterious passiveness,
has remained a stranger to the movements from
which it must profit in spite of itself. The In-
dians, long before the revolution, were poor and
free agriculturists ; insulated by their language
and manners, they lived separated from the
whites. If, in contempt of Spanish laws, the
cupidity of the corregidores, and the tormenting
system of the missionaries, often shackled their
liberty, that state of vexatious oppression was
far different from personal slavery like that of
the vassallage, the blacks, or of the peasants
in the Sclavonian part of Europe. It is the
small number of blacks, it is the liberty of the
aboriginal race, of which America has pre-
served more than eight millions and a half with-
out mixture of foreign blood, that characterises
the ancient continental possessions of Spain,
and renders their moral and political situation
entirely different from that of the West Indies,
where, by the disproportion between the free


269


men and the slaves, the principles of the colo-
nial system could be. developed with more
energy. In that archipelago, as at Brazil (two
portions of America which. contain near three
millions two hundred thousand slaves), the fear
of a reaction among the blacks, and the perils
that surround the whites, have been hitherto
the most powerful cause of the security of the
mother country, and of the maintenance of the
Portuguese dynasty. Can this security, from
its nature, be of long duration? Does it justify
the inaction of governments who neglect to
remedy the evil while it is yet time? Of this
I doubt. When, under the influence of extra-
ordinary circumstances, alarms are weakened,
and countries where the accumulation of slaves
has given society the fatal mixture of hetero-
geneous elements, will be led, perhaps unwil-
lingly, into an exterior struggle, civil dissen-
sions will manifest themselves in all their vio-
lence, and the European families, innocent of
an order of things which they have not created,
will be exposed to the most imminent dangers.

We can never enough praise the wisdom of
the legislation in the new republics of Spanish
America, which since their birth, has been seri-
ously occupied with the total extinction of sla-
very. That vast portion of the earth has, in
this respect, an immense advantage over the
southern part of the United States, where the


270


whites, during the struggle with England, esta-
blished liberty for their own profit, and where
the slave population, to the number of one mil-
lion six hundred thousand, augments still more
rapidly than the white *. If, civilization, instead
of extending itself, were to change its place ; if,
after great and deplorable convulsions in Eu-
rope, America, between cape Hatteras and the
Missouri, became the principal seat of the light
of christianity, what a spectacle would that
centre of civilization offer, where, in the sanc-
tuary of liberty, we could attend a sale of
negroes after death, and hear the sobbings of
parents who are separated from their children !
Let us hope that the generous principles which
have so long animated + the legislatures in the
northern parts of the United States, will extend
by degrees towards the south, and towards


* Vol. vii, p. 151.

+ Forty-six years before the declaration of the congress
at Vienna, and thirty-eight years before the abolition of the
slave-trade, decreed in London and at Washington, in 1769,
the chamber of representatives of Massachusetts had declared
itself against the unnatural and unwarrantable custom of enslav-
ing mankind. (See Walsh, Appeal to the United States, 1819,
p. 812.) The Spanish writer, Avendajio, is perhaps the first
who declaimed forcibly not only against the slave-trade,
abhorred even by the Afgangs (Elphinstone, Journ. to the
Cabul, p. 245), but against slavery in general, and “‘ all the
iniquitous sources of colonial wealth,” Thesaurus, ind., tom.


i, tit. 9, cap, 2.


those western regions, where, by the effect of
an imprudent and fatal law *, slavery and its
iniquities have passed the chain of the Alle-
ghanys and the banks of the Mississipi; let us
hope that the force of public opinion, the pro-
gress of knowledge, the softening of manners,
the legislation of the new continental republics,
and the great and happy event of the recogni-
tion of Hayti by the French government, will
exert either by motives of prudence and fear, or
by more noble and disinterested sentiments, a
happy influence on the amelioration of the state
of the blacks in the rest of the West Indies, in
the Carolinas, Guyana, and Brazil.

In order to slacken progressively the bonds
of slavery, the laws against the slave-trade must
be most strictly enforced, and punishments of
infamy inflicted on those who infringe them ;
mixed tribunals must be formed, and the right
of search exercised with equitable reciprocity.
It is melancholy to learn, that by the disdainful
and guilty indifference of some of the govern-
ments of Europe, the slave-trade, become more
cruel because it is more occult, has torn anew
from Africa, within ten years, almost the same
number of blacks as before 1807; but we must
not from this fact conclude the inutility, or, as


* Rufus King, Speeches on the Missouri Bill (New York,
1819), North American Review, No, 26, p. 187-168.


272


the secret partisans of slavery assert, the prac-
tical impossibility of these beneficent measures,
adopted first by Denmark, the United States,
and Great Britain, and successively by all the
rest of Europe. What passed since 1807, till
the moment when France again entered into
possession of her ancient colonies, and what
passes in our days in nations of which the
governments sincerely desire the abolition of
the slave-trade and its abominable practices,
proves the falsehood of this conclusion. Be-
sides, is it reasonable to compare numerically
the importation of slaves in 1825 and in. 1806?
With the activity which reigns in every enter-
prize of industry, what an increase would the
importation of negroes have taken in the Eng-
lish West Indies, and the southern provinces of
the United States, if the slave-trade, entirely
free, had continued to supply new slaves, and
had rendered the care of their preservation, and
the augmentation of the ancient population
superfluous? Can we believe that the English
trade would have been limited, as in 1806, to
the sale of 53,000 slaves; and that of the
United States, to the sale of 15,000? It is
pretty well ascertained that the English islands
received in the 106 years that preceded 1786,
more than 2,130,000 negroes, torn from the
coast of Africa. At the period of the French
revolution, the slave-trade furnished (according


to Mr. Norris) 74,000 slaves annually, of which
the English colonies absorbed 38,000, and the
French, 20,000. It would be easy to prove
that the whole archipelago of the West In-
dies, which now comprise scarcely 2,400,000
negroes and mulattoes (free and slaves), re-
ceived from 1670 to 1825, nearly five millions
of Africans (negros bozales). In these revolting
calculations on the consumption of the human
species, we have not included the number of
unfortunate slaves who have perished in the
passage, or been thrown into the sea as dam-
aged merchandize *. Now, by how many thou-
sands must we have augmented the loss, if the
two nations who possess the most ardor and
intelligence in the development of commerce
and industry, the English and the inhabitants
of the United States, had continued, from 1807,
to take a share of the trade as freely as some
other nations of Europe? Sad experience has
proved how much the treaties of the 15th July,
1814, and of the 22d January, 1615, by which
Spain and Portugal reserved to themselves


* Vol. vii, p. 151. See also the eloquent speech of the
Duke de Broglie (March 28th, 1822), p. 40, 43, 96.


+ © Dicen nuestros Indios del Ric Caura cuando se con-


fiesan que ya entienden que es pecado comer carne humana ;
pero piden que se les permita desacostumbrarse poco a poco:


VOL. VII. TN


274


‘the commerce in the blacks” during a cer-
tain number of years, have been fatal to huma-
nity.

The local authorities, or rather the rich pro-
prietors, forming the Ayuntamiento of the Havan-
nah, the Consulado, and the Patriotic Society,
have on several occasions* displayed disposi-
tions favorable to the amelioration of the fate
of the slaves. If the government of the mother
country, instead of dreading the least appear-
ance of innovation, had known how to take
advantage of those propitious circumstances,
and of the ascendancy of some men of abilities
over their countrymen, the state of society
would have undergone progressive changes, and
in our days, the inhabitants of the island of
Cuba would enjoy a part of the ameliorations
which have been discussed during thirty years.
The movements of Saint Domingo, in 1790, and
those of Jamaica, in 1794, caused so great an
alarm among the hacendados of the island of
Cuba, that in a Junta economica, it was warmly
debated what could be tried to preserve the
tranquillity of the country. Regulations were


quieren comer la carne humana una vez al mes, despues cada
tres meses, hasta que sin sentirlo pierdan la costumbre.”
Cartas de los Rev. Padres Observantes, No. 7 (manuscript).

* Representacion al” Rey de 10. de Julio de 1799 (manu-
script).


275
made respecting the pursuit of fugitives *,
which, till then, had given rise to the most
guilty excesses; it was proposed to augment
the number of negresses on the sugar estates,
to take more care of the education of children,
to diminish the introduction of African negroes,
to bring white planters from the Canaries, and
Indian planters from Mexico, to establish coun-


* Reglamento sobre los Negros Cimmarrones de 26 de Dec.
de 1796. Before the year 1788, there were many fugitive
negroes (czmarrones) in the mountains of Jaruco, where they
were sometimes apalancados, that is, where several of those
unfortunate men formed small intrenchments for their com-
mon defence, by heaping up trunks of trees. The maroon
negroes, born in Africa, or boza/es, are easily taken; for the
greater number, in the vain hope of finding their native
land, march day and night towards the east. When taken,
they are so extenuated by fatigue and hunger, that they are
only saved by giving them, during several days, very small
quantities of soup. The creole maroon negroes conceal
themselves by day in the woods, and steal provisions during
the night. Till 1790, the right of taking the fugitive ne-
groes belonged only to the 4lcade mayor provincial, an here-
ditary charge in the family of the Count de Bareto. At pre-
sent, all the inhabitants can seize the maroons, and the pro-
prietor of the slave pays four piasters per head, besides the
food. Ifthe name of the master is not known, the Consulado
employs the maroon negro in the public works. This man-
hunting, which, at Hayti and Jamaica, has given so much
fatal celebrity to the dogs of Cuba, was exercised in the most
cruel manner before the regulation which I have mentioned
above,


72


276


try schools in order to soften the manners of
the lower class, and to mitigate slavery in an
indirect manner. These propositions had not
the desired effect. The court opposed every
system of transmigration, and the majority of
the proprietors, indulging their ancient illu-
sions of security, would not restrain the slave-
trade, when the high price of the produce gave
a hope of extraordinary profit. It would, how-
ever, be unjust not to signalize, in this struggle
between private interests and the views of wise
policy, the desires and the principles displayed
by some inhabitants of the island of Cuba,
either in their own name, or in the name of
some rich and powerful corporations. “ The
humanity of our legislation,” says M. d’Ar-
ango nobly *, in a memoir written in 1796,
“ grants the slave four rights (quatro consuelos),
which somewhat soften his pains, and which


have always been refused him by a foreign po-
licy. These rights are, the choice of a master
less severe +; the faculty of marrying from his


* Informe sobre negros fugitivos (de 9 de Junio de 1769),
por Don Francisco de Arango y Pareito, Oidor honorario y
syndico del Consulado.

+ The right of buscar amo. When a slave yhas found a
new master who will purchase him, he may quit the master
of whom he has to confplain ; such is the sense and spirit of
a beneficent law, but often eluded, as are all the laws that
protect the slaves. In the hope of enjoying the privilege of


277


own inclination ; the possibility of purchasing
his liberty * by his labor, and of paying, with
an acquired property, for the liberty of his wife
and children-+. Notwithstanding the wisdom


buscar amo, the blacks often address to the travellers they
meet, a question, which in civilized Europe, where a vote or
an opinion is sometimes sold, is never made aloud ; quiere
Pm. comprarme (will you buy me) ?

* A slave in the Spanish colonies ought, according to the
law, to be estimated at the lowest price ; this estimation, at
the time of my voyage, was according to the localities, from
200 to 380 piasters. We have seen above (vol. vii, p. 151
and 180) that, in 1825, the price of an adult negro, at the
island of Cuba, was 450 piasters. In 1788, the French trade
furnished a negro for 280 to 300 piasters. (Page, Treatise on
the Political Economy of the Colonies, vol. ii, p. 149.) A
slave, among the Greeks, cost 300 to 690 drachmes (54 to
108 piasters), when the day-labourer was paid one-tenth of
a piaster. While the Spanish laws and institutions favor
manumission in every way, the master, in the other islands,
pays the fiscal, for every freed slave, five to seven hundred
piasters !

+ What a contrast between the humanity of the most
ancient Spanish laws concerning slavery, and the traces of
barbarity found in every page of the Black Code, and in some
of the provincial laws of the English islands! The laws of
Barbadoes, made in 1686, and those of Bermuda, in 1730,
order, that the’ master who killed his negro in chastising
him, could not be pursued, while the master who killed his
slave wilfully, must pay ten pounds sterling to the royal
treasury. A law of Saint Christophers, of March 11th,
1784, begins by these words : ‘© Whereas some persons have
of late been guilty of cutting off and depriving slaves of their
ears, we order that, whoever shall extirpate an eye, tear out


278


and mildness of the Spanish legislation, to bow '
many excesses the slave is exposed in the soli-
tude of a plantation or a farm, where a rude
capatax, armed with a cutlass (machete) and a
whip, exerts an absolute authority with impu-
nity! The law neither limits the punishment
of the slave nor the duration of labor; nor
prescribes the quality and the quantity of
food*. It permits the slave, it is true, to
have recourse to a magistrate, in order that he
may enjoin the master to be more equitable ;
but this recourse is nearly illusory; for there
exists another law, according to which every
slave may be arrested and sent back to his mas-


ter who is found without a permission at the
distance of a league and a half from the planta-
tion to which he belongs. How can a slave,
whipped, exhausted by hunger, and excess of
labour, find means to appear before the magis-


the tongue, or cut off the nose of a slave, shall pay five hun-
dred pounds sterling, and be condemned to six months im-
prisonment.” It is unnecessary to add, that these English
laws, which were in force thirty or forty years ago, are
abolished and replaced by laws more humane. Why can I
not say as much of the legislation of the French islands,
where six young slaves, suspected of an intention to escape,
were condemned, by a sentence pronounced in 1815, to have
the ham-strings cut! (Sée above, vol. vii, p. 128.)

* A royal cedule, of May 31st, 1789, had attempted to
regulate the nourishment and clothing; but that cedule was
never executed,


279


trate? and if he did reach him, how would he
be defended against a powerful master, who calls
upon the hired accomplices of his severities, as
witnesses *.”

I shall conclude by citing a very remarkable
extract from the Representacion del Ayunta-
miento, Consulado y Sociedad patriotica, dated
July 20th, 1811. “In all that relates to the
changes to be introduced in the captive class,
there is much less question of our fears on the
diminution of agricultural wealth, than of the
security of the whites, so easy to be compro-
inised by imprudent measures. Besides, those
who accuse the consulate andthe municipality of
the Havannah of an obstinate resistance, forget
that, in the year 1799, the same authorities
proposed fruitlessly, that the government would
occupy itself with the state of the blacks in the
island of Cuba (del arreglo de este delicado
asunio). Further, we are far from adopting
the maxims which the nations of Europe, which
boast of their civilization, have regarded as in-


* < Hasta abandono hemos hecho de especies muy favor
ables que pasan por inconcusas en esas naciones cultas, Tal
es la de que sin negros esclavos no pudiera haber colonias.
Nosotros contra este dictamen decimos que sin esclavitud, y
aun sin negros, pudo haber lo que por colonias se eutiende,
y que la diferencia habria estado en las mayores ganancias 6
en los mayores progresos.”” (Documentos sobre el trafico y
esclavitud de negros, 1814, p. 78-80.)


280


controvertible; that, for instance, without
slaves there could be no colonies, We declare,
on the contrary, that without slaves, and even
without blacks, colonies might have existed,
and that the whole difference would have been
comprised in more or less profit, by the more
or less rapid increase of the products. But, if
such is our firm persuasion, we ought also to
remind your Majesty, that a social organization
into which slavery has been introduced as an
element, cannot be changed with inconsiderate
precipitation. We are far from denying that it
was an evil contrary to all moral principles to
drag slaves from one continent to another; that
it was a political error not to have listened to
the complaints made by Ovando, the governor
of Hispaniola, of the introduction and accumu-
lation of so many slaves: placed ‘near a small
number of free men; but, these evils being now
inveterate, we ought to avoid rendering our
position and that of our slaves worse, by the
employment of violent means. What, we ask
of your Majesty, is conformable to the wish
proclaimed by one of the most ardent protec-
tors of the rights of humanity, by the most
determined enemy of slavery; we desire, like
him, that the civil laws should deliver us at the
same time from abuses and dangers.”

On the solution of this problem depends, in
the West Indies only, and excluding the re-


281


public of Hayti, the security of 875,000 free
men (whites and men of colour)*, and the
softening the fate of 1,150,000 slaves. We have
demonstrated that this can never be obtained
by peaceful means, without the concurrence of
the local authorities, either colonial assemblies,
or meetings of proprietors designated by less
dreaded names, by the old parent state. The
direct influence of the authorities is indispen-
sible; and it is a fatal error to believe “ that we
may leave it to time to act.” Yes, time will
act simultaneously on the slaves, on the rela-
tions between the islands and the inhabitants
of the continent, and on events which cannot
be controuled, when they have been waited for
in the inaction of apathy. Wherever slavery
is long established, the increase of civiliza-
tion solely has less influence on the treatment
of slaves than many are disposed to admit.
The civilization of anation seldom extends to a
great number of individuals; and does not at-
tain those, who in the fabrics, are in immediate
contact with the blacks. I have known very
humane proprietors shrink from the difficulties
that arise in the great plantations; they hesi-
tate to disturb the established order, to make


® Namely: 452,000 whites, of which 342,000 are in the
two Spanish islands (Cuba and Portorico), and 423,000 free
men of colour, mulattoes, and blacks.


282


innovations, which, if not simultaneous, not
sustained by the legislation, or, which would be
& more powerful means, by the general will,
would fail in their end, and perhaps aggravate
the wretchedness of those whose fate they were
meant to soften. These timid considerations
stop the good that might be done by men who
have the most benevolent intentions, and who
deplore the barbarous institutions of which
they have received the sad inheritance, Ac-
quainted with the local circumstances, they
know, that to produce an essential change in
the state of the slaves, to lead them progres-
sively to the enjoyment of liberty, requires a
firm will in the local authorities, the concur-


rence of wealthy and enlightened citizens, and
a general plan in which all the chances of dis-
order, and the means of repression, are calcu-
lated. Without this community of actions and
efforts, slavery, with its pains and excesses, will
maintain itself as it did in ancient Rome *, in


* The argument drawn from the civilization of Rome and
Greece, in favor of slavery, is much in vogue in the West
Indies, where sometimes we find it adorned with all the
elegance of philological erudition. Thus, in discourses
pronounced in 1795, in the legislative assembly of Jamaica,
it was proved, that from the example of elephants having
been employed in the wars of Pyrrhus and Hannibal, it
could not be blameable to have brought a hundred dogs and
forty hunters from the island of Cuba to hunt the maroon
negroes. Bryan Edwards, vol. i, p. 570.


283


the midst of elegance of manners, the boasted
progress of knowledge, and all the charm of
civilization which its presence condemns, and
which it menaces to overwhelm when the time
of vengeance arrives. Civilization, or the slow
decline of nations, only prepare the mind for
future events; but, to produce great changes
in the social state, requires a coincidence of
events of which the epoch cannot be calculated
beforehand. Such is the complication of hu-
man destiny, that the same cruelties which
stained the conquest of the two Americas, are
renewed before our eyes, in times which we bes
lieved to be characterized by an immense pro-
gress in knowledge, and a general amelioration
of manners. The life of one man alone has
sufficed to see terror in France, the expedition
to Saint Domingo*, the political reaction of
Naples and Spain; and, I might add, the mas-


* North American Review, 1821, No. 30, p. 116. The
struggles with the slaves who fight for their liberty, are not
only dreadful on account of the atrocities to which they give
rise on both sides ; but they, when that freedom is effected,
contribute also to confound all the sentiments of justice
and injustice. ‘‘ Some planters condemn to death all the
male population down to the age of six years. They affirm,
that the example which those who have not borne arms have
witnessed, may become contagious. This want of modera-
tion is the consequence of the long misfortunes of the plant-
ers.” Charault, Réflexvions sur Saint Domingue, 1806, p. 16.


284


sacres of Chio, Ipsara, and Missolonghi, deeds
of the barbarians of eastern Europe, which the
civilized nations of the west and north have not
thought it fit to prevent. In slave-countries,
where long habit tends to legitimate institu-
tions the most contrary to justice, we must
count on the influence of knowledge, intellec-
tual improvement, and the softening of man-
ners, only inasmuch as they accelerate the im-
pulse given by governments, and facilitate the
execution of measures once adopted. Without
this directing action of governments and of legis-
latures, a peaceable change is not to be hoped
for. Above all, the danger becomes imminent
when a general inquietude pervades the public
mind, and when in the midst of political dis-
cussions which agitate neighbouring nations,
the faults and duties of government have been
discerned; the calm can then only spring from
an authority, which in the noble sentiment of
its force and its right, knows how to direct
events in opening itself the career of ameliora-
tions.


PLE POLL POLL


Towards the end of the month of April, M.
Bonpland and myself, having terminated the
observations we proposed to make at the north-
ern extremity of the torrid zone, were on the
point of going to Vera Cruz with the squadron


285


of Admiral Ariztizabal ; but false intelligence
spread in the public papers about the expedi-
tion of Captain Baudin, led us to relinquish the
project of crossing Mexico in order to reach the
Philippine islands. Several journals, particularly
those of the United States, announced that two
French sloops, the Geographe and the Natu-
raliste, had sailed for cape Horn; that they
were to go along the coast of Chili and Peru,
and from thence to New Holland. This intel-
ligence threw me into great agitation ; all the
projects 1 had formed during my stay at Paris,
when I solicited the ministry of the Directory
to hasten the departure of Captain Baudin, pre-
sented themselves anew to my imagination. At
the moment of leaving Spain, I had promised to
rejoin the expedition wherever I could reach it.
When we ardently desire any thing of which
the issue may be fatal, we easily persuade our-
selves that a sentiment of duty was the sole
motive of the resolution we have taken. M.
Bonpland, always enterprising, and confiding
in our good fortune, resolved instantly to divide
our herbals into three portions; and to avoid
exposing to the chances of a long navigation
what we had collected with so much difficulty
on the banks of the Oroonoko, the Atabapo,
and the Rio Negro, we sent one collection by
the way of England to Germany, another by


286


the way of Cadiz to France, and a third collec-
tion remained deposited at the Havannah. We
had reason to congratulate ourselves on these
prudent measures; each collection contained
nearly the same species, and no precautions
were neglected to have the cases, if taken by
English or French vessels, remitted to Sir
Joseph Banks, or to the professors of natural
history at the Museum at Paris. Happily the
manuscripts which I at first intended to send
with the collection to Cadiz, were not entrusted
to our friend and fellow traveller, Fray Juan
Gonzales, of the order of the Observance of
Saint Francis. That estimable young man,
whom I have several times had occasion to
name, had followed us to the Havannah in
order to return to Spain. "He left the island of
Cuba soon after us, but.the vessel in which he
embarked foundered in a tempest on the coast
of Africa, and the cargo and crew were all lost.
We lost, by this shipwreck, a portion of the
duplicates of our herbals, and, what was a more
sensible loss for the sciences, all the insects
which M. Bonpland had collected in the most
dificult circumstances during our voyage to
the Oroonoko and the Rio Negro. By a very
singular fatality, we remained two years in the
Spanish colonies without receiving one letter
from Europe ; and those which arrived in the


287


three following years made no. mention of what
we had transmitted. My uneasiness may be
imagined for the fate of a journal which con-
tained the astronomical observations, and all
the measures of height by means of the barome-
ter, of which I had not had the patience to
make a detailed copy. After having visited
New Grenada, Peru, and Mexico, at the mo-
ment of leaving the New Continent, I happened,
at the public library of Philadelphia, to cast my
eyes on the table of contents of a scientific
review, where I found these words: “ Arrival of
M. de Humboldt’s manuscripts at his brother's
house at Paris, by way of Spain!” I could
scarcely suppress an exclamation of joy; never


did a table of contents appear to me better
made.


While M. Bonpland laboured day and night
to divide and put our collections in order, I had
the vexation of finding a thousand obstacles to
this unexpected departure. ‘There was no ves-
sel in the port of the Havannah that would
undertake to conduct us to Portobello or Car-
thagena; the persons I consulted seemed to
take pleasure in exaggerating the inconveni-
ences of the passage of the isthmus, and the
slowness of the navigation from north to south,
from Panama to Guayaquil, and from Guaya-
quil to Lima or Valparaiso. They reproached


288


me, perhaps justly, for not continuing to ex-
plore the coast and rich possessions of Spanish
America, which during half a century had not
been open to any foreign traveller. The chances
of a voyage round the world, in which vessels
in general only touch at some islands, or the
barren coast of a continent, did not appear to
them preferable to the advantage of studying
the interior of New Spain; those regions that
furnish alone five-eighths of the mass of silver
drawn annually from all the mines of the known
globe. To these considerations I opposed the
interest of determining on a greater scale, the
inflexion of the curves of equal inclination, the
decrease of the intensity of the magnetic force
of the pole towards the equator, the tempera-
ture of the Ocean, variable according to the
latitude, the direction of the currents, and the
proximity of the sand-banks. The more I saw
of contrariety to my purposes, the more I has-
tened their execution. Not being able to find
a passage in any neutral vessel, I freighted a
Catalonian sloop, lying in the road of Batabano,
which was to be at my disposal to take me
either to Portobello or Carthagena, according
as the gales of Saint Martha, which blow with
great violence at that season below 12° of lati-
tude, would permit. The prosperous state of
commerce at the Havafinah, and the multiplied


289


connections of that city with the ports of the
South Sea, would facilitate for me the means of
procuring funds for several years. General
Don Gonzalo O’Farrill, alike distinguished by
his abilities and the elevation of his character,
resided at that time in my native country, as


minister of the court of Spain. I could ex-
change my revenues in Prussia for a part of his
at the island of Cuba; and the family of the
respectable Don Ygnacio O’Farrill y Herera,
brother of the general, concurred kindly in all
that could favor my new projects. On the 6th
of March, the vessel I had freighted was ready
to receive us. The road of Batabano led us
once more by Guines to the plantation of Rio
Blanco, which the proprietor (Count Jaruco y
Mopox) embellished with all the means that a
taste for pleasure and a large fortune can fur-
nish. \ Hospitality, which generally diminishes
with the progress of civilization, is still exer-
cised at the island of Cuba with as much kind-
ness as in the most remote parts of Spanish
America. Mere scientific travellers find a plea-
sure in offering the inhabitants the same testi-
mony of gratitude which they have received
from those illustrious travellers *, who, wher-


* The young princes of the house of Orleans (the Duke
of Orleans, the Duke of Montpensier, and the Count of
Beaujolois), who came from the United States to the

VOL, VII. U


290


ever I followed their traces in the New World,
have left the remembrance of their noble sim-
plicity, their ardour for instruction, and their
love of public good,

The road from Rio Blanco to Batabano goes
across an uncultivated country, half covered


with forests; in the open spots, indigo and the
cotton-tree grow wild. As the capsule of the
Gossypium opens at the season when the north-
ern tempests are most frequent, the down that
envelops the grains is swept from one side to
the other; and the gathering of the cotton,
which is of a very fine quality, suffers greatly
from the coincidence of the tempests with the
maturity of the fruit. Several of our friends,
among whom was M. de Mendoza, captain of
the port of Valparaiso, and brother to the cele-
brated astronomer who resided so long in Lon-
don, accompanied us to Potrero de Mopox. In
herbalizing further, towards the south, we
found a new palm-tree * with fan-leaves (Cort-
pha maritima), having a free thread between
the interstices of the folioles. This Coripha
covers a part of the southern coast, and re-
places the majestic Palma Real- and the Co-


Havannah, descending the Ohio and the Mississipi, and who
remained during a year at the island of Cuba.
. *® See Nova Gen. et Spec., tom, i, p. 299.

+ Oreodoxa regia.


291


cos crispa of the northern coast. Porous lime-
stone (of the jurassic formation), appeared from
time to time in the plain.

Batabano was * then a poor village, of which
the church had been completed only a few
years. The Stenega begins at the distance of
half a league, a marshy soil, extending from the
Laguna de Cortez as far as the mouth of the
Rio Xagua, on a length of sixty leagues from
west to east. It is thought, at Batabano, that
in those regions the sea continues to gain upon
the land, and that the oceanic irruption was
especially sensible at the period of the great
heaving up which took place at the end of'
the eighteenth century, when the tobacco mills
disappeared, and the Rio Chorrera changed its
course. Nothing can be more gloomy than the
aspect of these marshes around Batabano; no
shrub interrupts the monotony of the view;
some stunted trunks of palm-trees rise like
broken masts, amidst great tufts of Joncaces


* On the real astronomical position of Batabano, see vol.
vii, p. 40, 92. Batabano was heretofore placed on the most
esteemed marine maps of Bellin, of San Martin Suares, &c.
10° more southerly, lat, 22°33’. Arrowsmith marks 22°
24’, instead of 22° 43” 24”. We owe the first good obser-
vations made on the southern coast of the island of Cuba, to
a captain of a frigate, Don Ventura Barcaiztegui, and Don


Francisco Lemaur.
+ See vol, vii, p. 51.


292


and Irides. As we staid only one night at
Batabano, I regretted much that I was unable
to obtain precise information on the two species
of crocodiles which infest the Stenega. The in-
habitants give to one the name of cayman, to
the other that of crocodile, or, as they say com-
monly in Spain, of cocodrilo. They assured us
that the latter had most agility, and was bigher;
his snout is more pointed than that of the cay-
mans, and they are never found together. The
crocodile is very courageous, and is said to
climb into boats when he can find a support for
his tail. The extreme boldness of this animal
was signalized in the first expeditions of the
governor Diego Velasquez *. The crocodile goes
as far as a league from the Rio Cauto and the
marshy coast of Xagua, to devour the pigs in
the islands; it is sometimes fifteen feet long,
and the most daring will, it is said, pursue a
man on horseback, like the wolves in Europe;
while the animals exclusively called caymans at
Batabano, are so timid, that people bathe with-
out apprehension in places where they live in
bands. These peculiarities, and the name of
cocodrilo, given at the island of Cuba, to the
most dangerous of the carnivorous serpents,
appear to me to indicate a different species
from the great animals of the Oroonoko, Rio


* Herera, Hist. des Ind. occid., Dec. I, lib. 9, cap. 4, Pp. 282.


93


Magdalena, and Saint Domingo. Every where
else on the continent ‘of Spanish America, the
settlers, deceived by the exaggerated accounts
of the ferocity of the crocodiles in Egypt, main-
tain that the real crocodile is only found in the
Nile, while zoologists have ascertained that
there are in America caymans or alligators with
obtuse snouts and legs not indented, and croco-
diles with pointed snouts and indented legs;
and, in the ancient continent, both crocodiles
and gaviales. The Crocodilus acutus of Saint
Domingo, in which I cannot hitherto specifically
distinguish the crocodiles of the great rivers of
the Oroonoko and the Magdalena, has even, to
use an expression of M. Cuvier*, a resem-
blance so surprising to the crocodile of the
Nile, that it required a minute examination of
its parts to prove that the law of Buffon rela-
tive to the distribution of species between the


* Cuvier, Rech. sur les ossemens fossiles, tom. v, Pl. II, p.
27. This striking analogy could only have been ascertained
by M. Geoffroy de Saint-Bilaire in 1803, when General
Rochambeau sent a crocodile from Saint Domingo to the
Museum of natural history at Paris. (Annals du Muséum,
tom. ii, p. 37, 53.) M. Bonpland and myseif had made
drawings and detailed descriptions in 1801 and 1802, of the
same species which inhabit the great rivers of South Ame-
rica, during our navigation on the Apure, the Oroonoko,
and the Magdalena. We committed the fault, so common
to travellers, of not sending them at that time to Europe,
together with some young specimens.


294


tropical regions of the two continents, was not
erroneous.

As I could not in my second passage by the
Havannah, in 1804, return to the Stenega of
Batabano, I had the two species, called caymans
and crocodiles by the inhabitants, brought to
me at a great expence. Two crocodiles arrived
alive ; the oldest was four feet three inches long:
they were taken with great difficulty, and were
transported, muzzled and bound, on a mule;
they were vigorous and fierce. In order to ob-
serve their habits and movements *, we placed
them in a great hall, where, by climbing on a
very high piece of furniture, we could see them
attack great dogs. Having lived among croco-
diles during six months, on the Oroonoko, the
Rio Apure, and the Magdalena, we were pleased
to observe once more before we returned to
Europe, those singular animals, who pass with
astonishing rapidity from a motionless state to
the most impetuous movements. ‘The animals
sent to us from Batabano, as being crocodiles,
had the snout nearly as sharp as the crocodiles
of the Oroonoko and the Magdalena (Crocodilus
acutus, Cuv.); their colour was a dark-green


* M. Descourtilz, who knows the habits of the crocodile
better than any other author,who has written on that reptile,
saw, like M. Dampier and myself, the Crocodilus acutus often
touch his tail with his mouth. Voyage d'un Naturaliste,
tom. ii, p. 87,


295


on the back, and white below the belly; the
flanks bad yellow spots. I counted, as in all
the real crocodiles, thirty-eight teeth in the
upper jaw, and thirty in the lower; in the for-
mer, the tenth and ninth; and in the latter, the
first and fourth, were the largest. In the de-
scription made by M. Bonpland and myself, on
the spot, we have expressly marked that the
lower fourth tooth touches freely the upper jaw.
The posterior extremities were palmated. These
crocodiles of Batabano appeared to us to be
specifically identical with the Crocodilus acu-
jus: it is true that what was related to us of
their habits did not quite agree with what we
had ourselves observed on the Oroonoko; but
carnivorous serpents, of the same species, are
milder and more timid, or fiercer and more
courageous, in the same river, according to the
nature of the localities*. The animal called
cayman at Batabano, died on the way, and was
not brought to us, 80 that we could make no
comparison of the two species. Are these real
caymans on the south of the island of Cuba,
with an obtuse snout, of which the fourth lower
tooth enters into the upper jaw, alligators
similar to those of Florida? What the planters
say of the much longer head of their cocodrilo
del Batabano, renders this fact almost cer-


* Vol. iv, p. 423; v, p- 448.


296


tain *; and, in that case, the people by a happy
instinct have distinguished, in that island, be-
tween the crocodile and the cayman, with the
justness that the learned zoologists do at pre-
sent in re-establishing sub-genders that bear
the same names. I have no doubt that the
crocodile with a sharp snout, and the alligator


* I thought I had found a slight difference in the great
plates of the nape of the neck. The great crocodile of
Batabano furnishes, near the head, four tubercles placed in
one row, and three ranged in two. In a younger animal I
counted, first, a row of four tubercles, then a row of two,
followed by a large void space; after which the blades of
the back commence. This is the most common disposition
of the parts in the crocodile of the Oroonoko, That of the
Magdalena presents three rows of tubercles at the nape of the
neck, the two first of four, and the latter of two plates. In
the specimens of the Crocodilus acutus received by the
Museum of natural history at Paris from Saint Domingo,
there are first two rows of four, and afterwards one of two
tubercles. I shall treat of the constancy of this character in


the sécond volume of my collection of Zoology. The four
pockets filled with musk (bolzas del almiscle) are placed, in
the crocodile of Batabano, exactly where I draw them in that
of the Rio Magdalena, beneath the lower jaw and near the


anus ; but I was much surprised at not perceiving that smell
at the Havannah, three days after the death of the animal,
in a temperature of 30°, while at Mompox, on the banks of
the Magdalena, living crocodiles infected our apartment, ~ I
have seen since, that Dampier also remarked ‘ an abserice
of smell in the crocodile of Cuba; where the caymans spread
“a very strong smell of musk.”


297


or cayman with a snout like a pike *, inhabit
at the same time, but in distinct bands, the
marshy coast between Xagua, the Surgidero of
Batabano, and the isle of Pinos. In this island
Dampier, no less deserving praise as an observ-
ing naturalist than as an intrepid mariner, was
struck with the great difference between the
caymans and the American crocodiles. What
he relates on that subject, in his voyage to the
bay of Campechy, might have excited the curio-
sity of the learned more than a century ago, if
zoologists did not often reject with disdain all
that navigators or other travellers, destitute of
scientific knowledge, have observed on animals.
After having given several characters which are
not equally exact, that distinguish crocodiles
from caymans, he traces the geographical dis-
tribution of those enormous Sauriens. “ In
the bay of Campechy, he says, I saw only cay-
mans or alligators; at the island of Great Cay-
man, there are crocodiles and no alligators ; at
the isle of Pinos, and in the innumerable creeks
of the coast of Cuba, there are both crocodiles
and caymans +.” I shall add to these valuable
observations of Dampier, that the real crocodile °


* Crocodilus acutus of Saint Domingo. Alligator Lucius
of Florida and the Mississipi.

+ Dampier’s Voyages and Descriptions (1599), vol. ii, P. I,
p. 30 and 75.


298


(C. acutus) is found in the West India islands
nearest the main-land, for instance, at the is-
land of Trinidad, la Marguerita, and also, pro-
bably, at Curacao, notwithstanding the want of
fresh water*. It is observed, further south
(without my having ascertained any of those
species of alligators that abound on the coast
of Guyana), in the Neveri, the Rio Magda-
lena, the Apure, and the Oroonoko, as far as
the confluence of the Cassiquiare with the Rio
Negro (lat. 2° 2’), consequently more than 400
leagues distant from Batabano. It would be
interesting to verify where, on the eastern coast
of Mexico and Guatimala, between the Missis-
sipi and the Rio Chagre (in the isthmus of
Panama), is found the limit of the different
species of carnivorous serpents.

We set sail on the 9th of March, a little un-
easy at the extreme smallness of our vessel, of
which the tackling left us no place for sleeping
but upon deck. The cabin (camera de pozo)
received no air or light but from above ; it was
really a hold for provisions, in which we placed
our instruments with difficulty. The thermo-
meter kept up constantly at 32° and 33° cen-
tisimal; happily these inconveniences lasted
only twenty days. The navigation in the canoes


* Seba, P. civ, fig. 1-9.
+ Alligator sclerops and Alligator palpebrosus.


299


of the Oroonoko, and in an American vessel
laden with several thousand arrobas of salt-
meat dried in the sun, had rendered us less


particular.

The gulf of Batabano, bounded by a low and
marshy coast, appears like a vast desert. The
fishing-birds, which are generally at their post
before the small land-birds, and the indolent
zamuros * ave awake, appear in small numbers.
The sea is of a greenish-brown, as in some
lakes of Switzerland; while the air, on account
of its extreme purity, had, at the moment that
the sun appeared at the horizon, a cold tint of
pale-blue, which landscape-painters observe at
the same hour in the south of Italy, and on
which distant objects detach themselves with
remarkable vigor. Our sloop was, the only
vessel in the gulf; for the road of Batabano is
scarcely visited but by smugglers, or, as they
here say politely, fos tratantes. We have men-
tioned above, in speaking of the projected
canal of Guines+, how important Batabano
might become for the communications of the
island of Cuba with the coast of Venezuela. In
its present state, without any cleansing having
been attempted, we scarcely find nine feet of


* The Percnopttre of equinoxial America, Vultur aura.
+ See above, p. 244 and following.


300


water *. The port is placed within a bay ter-
minated by Punta Gorda on the east, and by
Punta de Salinas on the west: but this bay
forms only the concave of a great gulf, which
is nearly fourteen leagues from south to north,
and, in an extent of fifty leagues, between the
Laguna de Cortez and the Cayo de Piedras, is
inclosed by an incalculable number of flats and
chains of rocks. One great island only, of
which the area is more than four times the
dimensions of that of Martinico, with bare
mountains crowned with majestic coniferes,
rises amidst this labyrinth. It is the Isle of
Pinos, called by Columbus El Evangelista, and
by other pilots of the sixteenth century, sla de
Santa Maria, It is celebrated for the maho-
gany (Swietenia Mahagoni) which it furnishes
for commerce. We sailed E.S.E., taking the
passage of Don Cristoval, in order to reach the
rocky isle of Cayo de Piedras, and get out of
this archipelago, which the Spanish pilots desig-
nate, since the first times of the conquest, by the


* The largest barks that enter in the Surgidero of Bata-
bano take fifteen palmas (at nine inches), ‘The good chan-
nels are, towards the west, the Canal del Puerto Frances,
between the western cape of the isle of Pinos and the
Laguna de Cortez, and, on the east of the isle of Pinos, the


four channels of Rosario, the Gordas, Savana de Juan Luis,
and Don Cristoval, between the chain of rocks and the coast
of Cuba.


301


names of Gardens and Bowers (Jardines y Jar-
dinillos). The real Gardens of the Queen *,
nearer cape Cruz, are separated from the archi-
pelago I shall describe, by an open sea thirty-
five leagues broad. Columbus gave them these
names in 1494, when, on his second voyage, he
struggled during fifty-eight days against the
winds and currents between the isle of Pinos
and the eastern cape of Cuba. He describes
the islands of this archipelago as verdes, lenos
de arbeledas y graciosos +.


* There exists great geographical confusion even at the
Havannah on the ancient denominations of the Jardines del
Rey and Jardines de la Reyna. In the description of the
island of Cuba, in the Mercurio Americano (vol. ii, p. 388),
and in the Historia natural de la Isla de Cuba (cap. i, §. 1),
published at the Havannah by Don Antonio Lopez Gomez,
the two groupes are placed on the southern coast of the
island. M. Lopez says that the Jardines del Rey extend
from the Laguna de Cortez to Bahia de Xagua; but there
remains no historical doubt that the governor Diego Velas-
quez gave his name to the western part of the chain of
rocks of the Old Channel, between Cayo Frances and le Mo-
nillo, on the northern coast of the island of Cuba. (Herera,
vol, i, p. 8, 81, 55, and 232 ; vol. ii, p. 181.) The Jardines
de la Reyna, situate between Cabo Cruz and the port of the
Trinity, are in no manner connected with the Jardines and
Jardinillos of the Isla de Pinos. Between the two groupes
of the chain of rocks are the flats (placeres) of la Paz and
Xagua.

+ Churchill’s Collect., p. 560. Pedro Munoz, Hist. del
Nuevo Mundo, p. 214, 216.


302


A part of these pretended gardens is indeed
beautiful; the navigator sees the scene change
every moment, and the verdure of some of these
islands appears the more lovely from the con-
trast with other chains of rocks that display
only white and barren sands. The surface of
these sands, heated by the rays of the sun, seem
undulating like the surface of a liquid. By the
contact of layers of air of unequal temperature,
the most varied phenomena of suspension and
mirage are produced, from ten: in the morning
till four in the afternoon*. Even in those
desert places the sun animates the landscape,
and gives mobility to every object where it
strikes its rays; to the sandy plain, the trunks
of trees, and the rocks that advance in the sea
in the form ef capes. When the sun appears,
these inert masses seem suspended in air; and
on the neighbouring beach, the sands present
the visual illusion of a sheet of water gently
agitated by the winds. A train of clouds suffices
to seat the trunks of trees and the suspended
rocks again on the soil, to render the undulat-
ing surface of the plains motionless, and dissi-
pate the charm which the Arabian, Persian, and
Hindoo poets have sung, as “ the soft delusion
of the solitude of the desert.”


* See the measures of extraordinary refraction, which I
made at Cumana, vol. iii, p. 552, &c.


303


We doubled very slowly the cape Mataham-
bre. The chronometer of Louis Berthoud hav-
ing preserved great precision at the Havannah,
I availed myself of this occasion to determine
on this and the following days, the positions of
Cayo de Don Cristoval, Cayo Flamenco, Cayo de
Diego Perez, and Cayo de Piedras*. J also em-
ployed myself in examining the influence which
the changes at the bottom of the sea produce
on its temperature at the surface-~. Sheltered
by so many islands, the surface is calm as a
lake of fresh water, and the layers of different


* See my Collection of Astron. Obs., vol. ii, p.109. M:
de Bauza has joined my observations to those of M. del Rio,
in the sketch of Jardines y Jardinillos, which he had the
kindness to communicate to me, and which rectifies the
southern part of my map of the island of Cuba. (Sce the
second drawing off of that map, in 1826.)

+ 1 found, in degrees of the thermometer of Reaumur :

SEA. arr. | DEPTH. PLACES.

19°7° 22°3° | 10 feet.| Eight miles north of Punta
Gorda,

18°8 : 4 Between the chain of rocks
of Las Gordas and of Don
Cristoval.


Around Cayo Flamenco.

Gulf between Cayo Flamenco
and Cayo de Piedras.

Eastern bank of the gulf, near
Cayo de Piedras.

A little more eastward.

No bottom, south of Xagua.


304


depths not being mixed, the smallest change
indicated by the sound, acts on the thermome-
ter. I was surprised to see that on the east of
the little Cayo of Don Cristoval the high banks
are only distinguished by the milky colour of
the water, like the bank of Vibora, south of
Jamaica, and many other banks which I ascer-
tained by means of the thermometer. The bot-
tom of the rock of Batabano is a sand com-
posed of destroyed corals; it nourishes fuci
which scarcely ever come to the surface; the
water, as I have already observed, is greenish :
and the absence of the milky tint is, no doubt,
owing to the perfect calm which reigns in those
regions. Whenever the agitation is propagated
to a certain depth, a very fine sand, or calcare-
ous particles suspended in the water, renders it
troubled and milky. There are flats, however,
which are distinguished neither by the colour
nor by the low temperature of the waters, and I
believe that phenomenon depends on the nature
of a hard and rocky bottom, destitute of sand
and corals, on the form and declivity of the
shelvings, the swiftness of the currents, and the
want of the propagation of motion towards the
lower layers of the water. The cold frequently
indicated by the thermometer, at the surface of
the high banks, is owing to the molecules of
water which the rays of heat and the nocturnal
cooling cause to fall from the surface to the


305


bottom, and which are stopped in their fall by
the high banks, and also to the mixture of the
layers of very deep water, that rise on the
shelvings of the banks as on an inclined plane,
to mix with the layers of the surface.
Notwithstanding the smallness of our bark,
and the boasted skill of our pilot, we often ran
aground. The bottom is soft, and there is no
danger of shipwreck ; at sun-set, however, near
the pass of Don Cristoval, we preferred to re-
main at anchor. The first part of the night
was beautifully serene: we saw an incalculable
number of falling stars on the side of the land,
all following the same direction, opposite to
that of the wind which blew in the low regions
of the atmosphere. The most absolute solitude
prevails in this spot, which, in the time of
Columbus, was inhabited, and frequented by a
great number of fishermen. The inhabitants of
Cuba then employed a small fish to take the
great sea-turtles; they fastened a long cord to
the tail of the reves (the name given by the
Spaniards to that species of the Echeneis ge-
nera*). The fisher-fish, by means of the flat-


* The sucet or guaican of the natives of Cuba; called ina
characteristic manner by the Spaniards reves, that is, fish
placed on the back, placed the wrong way. In fact, at first
sight, the position of the back and the abdomen is con-
founded. Anghiera says: Nostrates Reversum appellant,
quia versus venatur. J examined a remora of the South Sea


VOL, VII, x


306


tened disk, furnished with suckers on his head,
fixed himself on the shell of the sea-turtle,
which is so common in the narrow and winding
channels of the Jardinillos. “ The revés, says
Christopher Columbus, will sooner suffer him-
self to be cut in pieces than let go the body to
which he adheres.” The Indians draw to the
shore by the same cord, the fisher-fish and the
turtle. When Gomara, and the learned secre-
tary of the emperor Charles V, Peter Martyr
d’Anghiera, published this fact in Europe, which
they had learnt from the companions of Colum-
bus, the public no doubt received it as a ¢ravel-
ler’s tale. There is indeed an air of the marvel-
lous in the recital of d’Anghiera, which begins


in these words: “Non aliter ac nos canibus
gallicis per azequora campi lepores insectamur,
incole (Cubz insulz) venatorio pisce pisces
alios capiebant *.”. We now know from the


during the passage from Lima to Acapulco. As he lived a
long time out of the water, I tried experiments on the
weight he could carry before the blades of the disk loosened
the plank to which the animal was fixed; but I lost that
part of my journal. It is, no doubt, the fear of danger that
engages the remora not to loose its hold when he feels that
he is pulled by a cord, or by the hand of man. The suceé
spoken of by Columbus and Martin d’Anghiera, was probably
the Echeneis Naucrates, and not the Echeneis Remora. (See
my Collection of Obs. of Zoology, vol. ii, p. 192.)

* Fernand Colomb, in Churchill Coll., vol. ii, cap. 56, p.
560. Petr. Mart. Oceanica, 1532, Dec. I, p.9. Gomara,
Hist. de las Indias, 155%, fol. 14. Herera, tom. i, p. 5d.


307


united testimony of Captain Rogers, Dampier,
and Commerson *, that the same artifice resort-
ed to in the Jardinillos to catch turtles, is em-
ployed by the inhabitants of the eastern coast
of Africa, near cape Natal, at Mozambique,
and at Madagascar. Men, having their heads
covered with great calebashes, pierced with
holes, took ducks in Egypt, at Saint Domingo,
and in the lakes of the valley of Mexico, by
hiding themselves in the water, and seizing the
birds by the feet. The Chinese, from the
highest antiquity, use Cormorants, a bird of
the family of the Pelicans, which they send to
fish on the coast, placing rings round his neck
to prevent him from swallowing his prey, and
fishing for himself. In the lowest degree of
civilization, all the sagacity of man is display-
ed in the stratagems of hunting and fishing.
Nations, who probably never had any com-
munication with each other, furnish the most
striking analogies in the means fitted to exert
their empire over brute animals.

We were three days before we could get out
of this labyrinth of Jardines and Jardinillos.
At night we remained at anchor; and in the
day we visited the islands or chains of rocks the
most easy of access. As we advanced towards


* Dampier’s Voyages, vol. ii, Pl. iii, p. 110. Lacépede,
Hist. nat. des poissons, tom. iii, p 164,


oe Ge


308


the east, the sea became less calm, and the
high banks began to be distinguished by a
milky water. On the boundary of a sort of
gulf between Cayo Flamenco and Cayo de
Piedras, we found that the temperature of the
sea, at its surface, augmented suddenly from
23°5° cent. to 25'8°. The geognostic consti-
tution of these rocky islands that rise around
the island of Pinos, fixed the more my attention,
as I had always believed with difficulty in those
edifices of lithophite coral of Polynesia, which
are said to rise from the abyss of the Ocean,
towards the surface of the water. It appeared to
me more probable that these enormous masses
had some primitive or volcanic rock for a basis,
to which they adhered at small depths. The
formation, partly compact and lithographic,
partly bulbous, of the limestone of Guines, had
followed us as far as Batabano: it is somewhat
analogous to jura limestone ; and, judging from
the exterior aspect, the islands of Caymans are
composed of the same rock. If the mountains
of the isle of Pinos, which present at the same
time (as it is said by the first historians of the
conquest) pineta and palmeta*, are visible at
twenty marine leagues-+, they must attain a


* Petr. Martyr, Dec. III, lib. 10, p. 68.
+ Dampier, Discourse of Winds, Breezes, and Currents,


1699, chap, vii, p. 85.


309


height of more than five hundred toises: I have
been assured that they also are formed of a
limestone altogether similar to that of Guines.
From these facts, I expected to find the same
rock (jurassic) in the Jardinillos : but I saw, in
the chain of rocks that rises generally five to six
inches above the surface of the water, only a
fragmentary rock, in which angular pieces of
madrépores are cemented by quartzous sand.
Sometimes the fragments have a volume of one
to two cubic feet, and the grains of quartz so
disappear, that in several layers one would be
tempted to think that the lithophite polypiers
have remained on the spot. ‘The total mass of |
this chain of rocks appears to me a real lime-
stone aglomerat, somewhat analogous to the
earthy limestone of the peninsula of Araya*,
near Cumana, but of a much more recent for-
mation. The inequalities of this coral rock are
covered by a detritus of shells and madrepores.
Whatever rises above the surface of the water
is composed of broken pieces, cemented by the
carbonate of lime, in which grains of quartzous
sand are set. Are edifices of polypiers still liv-
ing, to be found at a great depth below this
fragmentary rock of coral? Are these polypiers
fixed on the jurassic formation? Of this I am
ignorant. The pilots believe that the sea di-


* Cerro del Barigon.


310


minishes in these latitudes, because they see
the chain of rocks augment and rise, either by
the earth which the waves heave up, or by suc-
cessive agglutinations. It is not impossible
that the enlarging of the channel of Bahama,
by which the waters of the Gulf-stream issue,
may cause in the lapse of ages, a slight lower-
ing of the waters south of Cuba, and above all
in the gulf of Mexico, the center of the grand
whirlpool of the pelagic flood which runs along
the United States, and throws the fruits of the
tropical plants on the coast of Norway *. The
configuration of the coast, the direction, the
force, and the duration of certain winds and
currents, the changes which the barometric


heights undergo on account of the variable
predominance of those winds, are causes of
which the concurrence may alter, in a long
space of time, and in circumscribed limits of
extent and height, the equilibrium of the seas +.


* « The Gulf-stream, between the Bahamas and Florida,
is very little wider than Behring’s Strait ; and yet the water
rushing through this passage is of sufficient force and quan-
tity to put the whole northern Atiantic in motion, and to
make its influence be felt in the distant strait of Gibraltar and
on the more distant coast of Africa.” (Quarterly Rev., 1818,
Feb., p. 217.)

+ Ido not pretend to explain, by the same causes, the
great phenomena of the coast of Sweden, where the sea has,
on some points, the appearance of a very unequal lowering,


31)


When the coast is so low, that the level of the
soil, at a league within the islands, does not
change a few inches, these swellings and dimi-
nution of the waters strike the imagination of
the inhabitants.

The Cayo bonito, which we first visited,
merits that name* from the richness of its
vegetation. Every thing announces that it has
been long above the surface of the Ocean ; and
the interior is not more depressed than the
banks. Ona layer of sand and ground-shells,
five to six inches thick, covered by a fragmen-
tary madreporic rock, rises a forest of Paletu-
viers (Rhizophora). From their form and foli-
age, they might be taken at a distance for lau-
rel-trees. The Avicennia, the Batis, small Eu-
phorbes, and some graminas, fix, by the inter-
twining of their roots, the moving sands. But
what above all characterises the Flora -~ of


of three to five feet in 100 years. (Bruncrona and Hall-
strem, in Pogendorff’s Annalen, 1824, St. 11, p. 308-328.
Hoff, Geschichte der Erdoberfldche, vol. i, p. 405-406.) The
great geologist, M. Léopold de Buch, has spread a new in-
terest on these observations, in examining whether it-be not
rather some parts of the continent of Scandinavia which in-
sensibly heaves up. (Reise durch. Norwegen, vol. 2, p. 291.)
An analogous supposition was made by the inhabitants of
Dutch Guyana. (Bolingbroke, Voyage to Demerary, p- 148.)

* Boniio, pretty.

+ We gathered, Cenchrus myosuroides, Euphorbia buxi-


312


these coral islands, is the magnificent Tourne-
fortia gnaphalioides of Jacquin, with silvered
leaves, which we found here for the first time.
This plant lives in society, and is a real shrub,
four feet and a half to five feet high, and of
which the flowers spread an agreeable perfume.
It makes alike the ornament of Cayo Flamenco,
Cayo Piedras, and perhaps of the greater part
of the low lands of the Jardiniilos. While we
were employed in herbalizing, our mariners
were seeking for langoustes. Irritated at not
finding them, they avenged themselves by climb-
ing on the Paletuviers, and making a horrible
carnage of the young Alcatraz, grouped two
by two in their nests. This name is given, in


Spanish America, to the brown Pelican with a
swan-tail, of Buffon. With the stupid con-
fidence and carelessness peculiar to the great
pelagic birds, the Alcatraz forms his nest


folia, Batis maritima, Iresine obtusifolia ; Tournefortia gna-
phalioides, Diomedea glabrata, Cakile cubensis, Dolichos
miniatus, Parthenium hysterophorus, &c. The last plant,
which we had found in the valley of Caraccas and on the
temperate table lands of Mexico, between 470 and 900
toises high, covers the fields of the island of Cuba. It is
used by the inhabitants for aromatic baths, and to chase
away the fleas which are so frequent in tropical climates.
At Cumana, the leaves of several species of Cassia are em-=


ployed, on account of their smell, against those pernicious
insects,


313


where some branches of trees are joined toge-
ther. We reckoned four or five nests on the
same trunk of a Rhizophora. The young birds
defended themselves valiantly with their enor-
mous beaks, whieh are six to seven inches long;
the old hovered over our heads, making hoarse
and plaintive cries; blood streamed from the
tops of the trees, for the sailors were armed with
great sticks and cutlasses (machetes). In vain
we reproached them for this want of pity, and
these useless torments. Condemned to long
obedience in the solitude of the seas, they find
a pleasure in exercising a cruel empire on ani-
mals, when the occasion offers; the ground was
covered with wounded birds struggling with
death. At our arrival a profound calm pre-
vailed in this little spot of earth; now, every
thing seemed to say: Man has passed here.
The sky was covered with reddish vapours,
which were dissipated towards the south-west ;
we hoped, in vain, to discover the heights of the
isle of Pinos. That spot has a charm which is
wanting to the greater part of the New World.
It presents remembrances linked with the
greatest names of the Spanish monarchy, those
of Christopher Columbus and of Hernand Cor-
tez. It was on the southern coast of the island
of Cuba, between the bay of Xagua and the isle
of Pinos, that the admiral, in his second voy-
age, saw, with astonishment, “that mysterious


314


king who spoke to his subjects only by sigus,
and that groupe of men who wore long white
tunicks, and resembled the monks of Merced,
while the rest of the people were naked.”
“Columbus, in his fourth voyage, met in the
Jardinillos, great boats filled with Mexican
Indians, and laden with the rich produc-
tions and merchandize of Yucatan.” Seduced
by his ardent imagination, he thought he had
heard from those navigators, “that they came
from a country where the men were mounted
on horses *, and wore crowns of gold on their


* Compare Lettera rarissima di Christoforo Colombo di 7 di
Julio 1508, p. 11, with Herera, Dec. I, p. 125, 181. No-
thing can be more touching and pathetic than the expression
of melancholy which prevails in the letter of Columbus,
written at Jamaica, and addressed to king Ferdinand and
queen Isabella, I recommend to those who wish to study
the character of this extraordinary man, the recital of a noc-
turnal vision, in which a celestial voice, in the midst ofa
tempest, encourages the old man by these words: ‘* Iddio
maravigliosamente fece sonar tuo nome nella terra. Le In-
die que sono parte del mondo cosi ricca, te le ha date per
tue; tu le hai repartite dove ti & piaciuto, e ti dette potenzia
per farlo. Delli ligamenti del mare Oceano che erano ser-
rati con catene cosi forte, ti dond le chiave, &c.” This
fragment, full of elevation and poetry, has only reached us
in an ancient Italian tradition ; for the Spanish original, men-
tioned in the Bibliotica nautica of Don Antonio Leon, has
not hitherto been found. Fcould add other expressions of
great simplicity, from the lips of him who discovered a new


315


heads.” Already “ Catayo (China), the em-
pire of the Great Khan, and the mouth of the
Ganges,” appeared to him so near, that he hoped
soon to employ two Arabian interpreters, whom
he had embarked at Cadiz, in going to Ame-
rica. Other remembrances of the isle of Pinos,
and the surrounding Gardens, are connected
with the conquest of Mexico. When Hernand
Cortés prepared his great expedition, he was
wrecked in navigating from the port of Trini-
"dad to cape Saint Antonio, with his Mave Capi-
tana, on one of the flats of the Jardinillos. He
was believed to be lost during five days, when
the valiant Pedro de Alvarado sent (in Novem-
ber, 1518,) from the port of Carenas * (the


world: ‘‘ Your highness, says Columbus, may believe me,
the globe of the earth is far from being so great as the vul-
gar admit. I was seven years at your royal court, and dur-
ing seven years was told that my enterprise was a folly.
Now that I have opened the way, tailors and shoe-makers
ask the privilege of going to discover new lands, Per-
_ secuted, forgotten as I am, I never think of Hispaniola and
Paria without my eyes being filled with tears, I was twenty
years in the service of your highness ; I have not a hair that
is not white; my body is weakened ; I can no longer weep,
pianga adesso il cielo e pianga per me la terra; pianga per me
chi ha carita, verita, giustizia.” Let. rar., p. 13, 19, 34, 37.

* At that period there were two settlements,:one at
Puerto de Carenas, in the ancient Indian province of the
Havannah (Herera, Dec. I, p. 276, 277) ; and the other, the
most considerable, in the Villa de San Cristoval de Cuba.


316


Hiavannah) three vessels in search of him. In
February 1819, Cortés assembled his whole fleet
near cape Saint Antonio, probably on the spot
which still bears the name of Ensenada de Cor-
tes, west of Batabano, and opposite the isle of
Pinos. From thence, believing he should bet-
ter escape the snares laid for him by the gover-
nor Velasquez, he passed almost clandestinely
to the coast of Mexico. Strange vicissitude of
human things! The empire of Montezuma was
shaken by a handful of men, who, from the —
western extremity of the island of Cuba, landed
on the coast of Yucatan; and, in our days,
three centuries later, that very Yucatan, now a
part of the new confederation of the free states
of Mexico, has nearly menaced with conquest
the western coast of Cuba.

On the morning of the llth March, we
visited Cayo Flamenco. I found the latitude
21° 59’ 39”. The center of this island is de-
pressed, and only 14 inches higher than the
surface of the sea. The water here is brackish ;
while in other Cayos it is quite fresh. The
mariners of Cuba, as well as the inhabitants of


These settlements were only united in 1519, when the
Puerto de Carenas took the name of San Cristoval of the
Habana. See above, p, 401: “ Cortés,” says Herera (Dec.
IL, p. 80 and 95), “ pasé 4 la Villa de San Cristoval que 4 la
sazon estaba en lu costa del ‘sur, y despues se pasd 4 la
Habana.”


317


the lagunas of Venice, and some modern natt-
ralists, attribute this freshness of the water-to
the action of the sands in filtering sea-water.
But what is this mode of action of which the
supposition is not justified by any chemical
analogy? The cayos also are composed of
rocks, and not of sands, and their smallness
renders it extremely difficult to admit that the
pluvial waters unite in a permanent pool. Per-
haps the fresh water of this chain of rocks
comes from the neighbouring coast, from the
mountains of Cuba, by the effect of hydrosta-
tic pressure. This would prove a prolonga-
tion of the strata of jurassic limestone below
the sea, and a superposition of coral rock on
that limestone *. It is a too general prejudice,
to consider every source of fresh or salt water
as a local phenomenon: the currents of water
circulate in the interior of the lands between
strata of rocks of a particular density or na-
ture, at immense distances, like the floods that


% The ancients were acquainted with eruptions of fresh
water in the sea, near Bayz, Syracusa, and Aradus (in Phe-
nicia). Strabo, lib. 16, p- 754, The coral islands that sur-
round Radak, above all the low isle of Otdia, furnish also
fresh water. (Chamisso in Kotzebue, Entdekkungs-Reise, vol.
iii, p. 108.). We cannot enough recommend to travellers to
examine carefully the circumstances which these phenomena.
present at the level of the sea.


318


furrow the surface of the globe. The learned
engineer, Don Francisco Le Maur, the same
who has since displayed such firmness and
energy in defence of the castle of San Juan
d’Uloa, informed me, that in the bay of Xagua,
half a degree east of the Jurdinillos, there issue
frothing, in the middle of the sea, springs of
fresh water, two leagues and a half from the
coast. These waters gush up with such force,
that they cause a shock in the waves often
dangerous for small canoes. Vessels that are
not going to Xagua sometimes take in water
from this briny source; and this water is
fresher and colder in proportion as it is drawn


deeper. The lamatins (manatis), guided by in-
stinct, have discovered this region of fresh
waters ; and the fishermen, who like the flesh of
these herbivorous ceti*, find them in abund-
ance in the open sea.


* Do they feed upon fucus in the sea, as we saw them
feed on the banks of the Apure and the Oroonoko on several
species of Panicum and Oplismenus, (camalote)? It appears
that it is a phenomenon common enough, to find on the
coast of Tabasco and Honduras, at the mouth of rivers, the
lamantins swimming in the sea, as the crocodiles do some-
times. Dampier distinguishes between the Fresh-water Ma-
nati and the Sea-kind. (Voyages and Descr., vol. ii, pl. ii,
p. 109.) Among the Cayos de {as doce leguas, east of Xagua,
some islands bear the name of Meganos del Manati. 1 have


319


Half a mile east of Cayo Flamenco, we
passed close to two rocks at the edge of the
water, on which the waves rush tumultuously.
They are * the Piedras de Diego Perez (latitude
21° 58’ 10”). The temperature of the sea, at
its surface, lowers at this point to 22°6° cent.,
the depth of the water being only 6% feet. In
the evening we went on shore at Cayo de Pie-
dras ; they are two rocks joined by breakers, in
the direction of N.N.W. to S.S.E. These rocks
being somewhat insulated (forming the eastern
extremity of the Jardinillos), many vessels are
lost upon them; the Cayo de Piedras is almost
destitute of shrubs, because the shipwrecked
crews cut them in their distress, to make fire-


signals. The banks of the island are very
steep on the sea-side ; towards the middle there
is a small basin of fresh water. We found a
block of madrepore in the rock, of more than
three cubic feet. We had no doubt that this
limestone formation, which at a distance re-


elsewhere said, that the observations we have just noted on
the habits of the crocodiles and the lamantins, have a great
interest for the geognist, who is often embarrassed, by find-
ing the bones of land animals and pelagic productions col-
lected together in the same soil. :

* The Cayos Flamenco, Diego, Perez, Don Cristobal, and
Piedras, are placed 2’ further north in the table of positions
published by M. Espinosa. (Mem. de los Nav. Esp., vol. ii,
p. 65.)


320


sembles jurassic limestone, is a fragmentary
rock. It would be well that this chain of cayos
which surround the island of Cuba, were ex-
amined by geognostic travellers, in order to
determine what may be attributed to the ani-
mals which still work at the bottom of the sea,
and what belongs to the real tertiary forma-
tions, of which the age goes up to that of the
coarse limestone abounding in remains of litho-
phite coral. In general, what surmounts the
waters is only brechia, or aggregate of madre--
poric fragments cemented by carbonate of lime,
broken shells, and sand. It is important to
examine in each cayos on what this brechia re-
poses; if it covers edifices of mollusques still
- living, or those secondary and tertiary rocks,
which, by their aspect, and the preservation of
the remains of coral they contain, one would
be inclined to think were the product of our
days? The gypsum of the cayos opposite San
Juan de los Remedios, on the northern coast of
the island of Cuba, merits great attention. Its
age goes up no doubt beyond historic times,
and no geognost will believe that it is the
work of the mollusques of our seas.

From the Cayo de Piedras we began to dis-
cern, towards the E.N.E., the lofty mountains
that rise beyond the bay of Xagua. We again
remained during the night at anchor; and, the
next day (12th March), we turned round the


passage between the northern cape of the Cayo


de Piedras and the island of Cuba, we entered a
sea free from breakers. Its blue colour of dark
indigo, and the increase of the temperature,
proved how much the depth of the water had
augmented. The thermometer, which, at 63 and
8 feet of soundings, we had several times seen at
the surface of the ocean, at 22°6°, now kept up
at 26°2° cent. During these experiments, the
air, in the day, was from 25° to 27°, as among
the Jardiniilos. We tried under favor of the
variable winds of sea and land, to go up towards
the east, as far as the port of la Trinidad, in
order to find less difficulty from the north-east
winds that then prevail in the open sea, to
make the passage to Carthagena, of which the
meridian falls between Santiago of Cuba and
the bay of Guantanamo. Having passed the
marshy coast of Camareos, where Bartholemeo
de las Casas, celebrated for his humanity and
his noble courage, had obtained*, in 1514,
from his friend Velasquez, the governor, a good
repartimiento de Indios, we arrived (latitude 21°
50’) in the meridian of the entrance of the
Bahia de Xagua. The longitude the chrono-
meter gave me at this point was almost iden-
tical with that since published (in 1821) in the
map of the Deposito hidrografico of Madrid.

* This he renounced the same year from a scruple of
conscience, during a short stay at Jamaica,

VOL. VII. Y


322


The port of Xagua is one of the finest, but
least frequented of the island. No debe tener
otro tal en el mundo, said the Coronista major
Antonio de Herera*: the surveys and projects
of defence made by M. Le Maur, at the time of
the commission of Count Jaruco, have proved
that the anchorage of Xagua merited the cele-
brity it had acquired since the first years of the
conquest. We yet find only a small groupe of
houses and a fort (castillito), which prevents
the English navy from repairing their vessels
in the bay, which used to be done very tran-
quilly in the midst of war with Spain. On the
east of Xagua, the mountains (Cerros de San
Juan) draw near the coast, and assume an as-
spect more and more majestic, not from their
height, which does not seem to exceed three
hundred toises -, but from their steepness and
general form. The coast, I was told, is so
steep that a frigate can approach the mouth of
the Rio Guaurabo. When the temperature of
the air diminished at night to 23°, and the wind
blew from the land, it brought that delicious
odour of flowers and honey which character-
izes the shores of the island of Cubat. We


* Dec. L, lib; ix, p. 233.

+ Distance estimated three marine leagues. Angle of
height not corrected by the curve of the earth and refrac-
tion, 1° 47 10”. Height, 274 toises.

{ See above, vol. vi, p.817. Ihave already remarked (vol.


323


sailed along the coast at two or three miles dis-
tance: on the 13th March, a little before sun-
Set, we were opposite the mouth of the Rio San
Juan, dreaded by navigators on account of the
innumerable quantity of mosquitos and sancudos
which fill the atmosphere. It is like the open-
ing of a ravin, in which vessels drawing a great
deal of water could enter, if a shoal (; placer) did
not obstruct the passage. Some horary angles
gave me the longitude 82° 40’ 50”, for this port,
which is frequented by the smugglers of Jamaica
and the corsairs of the island of Providence.
The mountains that command the port scarcely
rise to 230 toises *. What a desert coast! not


one light announced a fisherman’s hut. There
exists no village from Batabano to Trini-


vii, p. 220), that the wax of Cuba, which is a very important
object of trade, is produced by the bees of Europe (the species
Apis, Latr.). Columbus says expressly, that in his time, the
inhabitants of Cuba did not collect wax. The great loaf of
that substance which he found in the island in his first voy-
age, and presented to King Ferdinand in the celebrated
audience of Barcelona, it was afterwards known, had been
brought thither by Mexican barks from Yucatan. (Herera,
Dec. I, p. 25, 131, 270.) It is curious to observe that the
waz of Melipones was the first production of Mexico that fell
into the hands of the Spaniards, in the month of November, :
1492. See my Rec. dobs. de Zoologie, tom. i, p. 251; and
Polit, Essay, vol. iii, p. G2.

* Dist. 33 miles. Angle of height of the culminant point
of Serrania, 3° 56’,

on


324


dad, a distance of fifty leagues; you scarcely
find two or three corrales of hogs or cows. Yet,
in the time of Columbus, this territory was
inhabited, even along the shore. When the
ground is dug to make wells, or torrents
furrow the surface of the earth in floods,
hatchets of stone and other utensils in copper *
are often discovered, the works of the ancient
inhabitants of America.

I engaged the captain at sun-rise to heave
the lead. There was no bottom found. at
sixty fathoms; and the surface of the ocean
was warmer than any where else; it was at
.26°8°; the temperature exceeded 4°2° that
which we had found near the breakers of Diego
Perez. At the distance of half a mile from the
coast, the water of the sea was not more than
25°5°; we had no opportunity of sounding,
but the depth of the water had no doubt dimi-
nished. On the 14th March, we entered the
Rio Guaurabo, one of the two ports of Trinidad
of Cuba, to put the practica of Batabano on


* No doubt the copper of Cuba. ‘The abundance of this
metal in its native state, would engage the Indians of Cuba
and Hayti to melt it. Columbus says, that there were
masses of native copper at Hayti, of the weight of six arro-
bas, and that the boats of Yucatan, which he met with on
the eastern coast of Cuba, carried among other Mexican
merchandize, “crucibles to melt copper.’’ (Herera, Dec. 1,
p. 86 and 131.)


325


shore, who had piloted us across the flats of the
Jardinillos, causing us to run a-ground several
times. We also hoped to find a packet-boat
(correo maritimo) in this port, which would
take us to Carthagena. I disembarked towards
the evening, and placed the compass of incli-
nation of Borda, and the artificial horizon, on
the shore, in order to observe the passage of
some stars by the meridian; but we had
scarcely begun our preparations, when some
small traders, Catalanians (pulperos), who had
dined on board a foreign ship recently arrived,
invited us gaily to accompany them to the
town. These good people made us mount two
by two on the same horse; and, as the heat
was excessive, we did not hesitate to accept
their offer. From the mouth of the Rio Guau-
rabo to Trinidad, is nearly four miles, in a
north-west direction. The road passes by a
plain which seems as if it had been levelled by
a long sojourn of the waters. It is covered
with a beautiful vegetation, to which the Mira-
guama, a palm-tree with silvered leaves, gives
a peculiar character *. This fertile soil, al-


* Corypha Miraguama. See the Nova Gen., t. i, p. 298.
It is probably the same species which struck M.M. John and
William Fraser (father and son), in the vicinity of Matan-
zas. ‘These botanists, who have brought a great number of
precious plants to the gardens of Europe, were shipwrecked
on their voyage to the Havannah from the United States, and


326


though of tierra colorada, waits only the hand
of man to be ploughed, and yield excellent
harvests. A very picturesque view opens to-
wards the west, on the Lomas of San Juan, a
chain of calcareous mountains from 1800 to
2000 feet high, and very steep towards the
south. ‘These bare and barren summits form
sometimes rounded groupes, sometimes real
horns *, a little inclined. Notwithstanding the
great lowering of the temperature during the
season of Nortes, snow is never seen, and only
a hoar-frost (escarcha) on these mountains and
those of Santiago. I have mentioned in another
place, this want of snow, which it is difficult to
explain. In going out of the forest, we per-
ceived a curtain of hills, of which the southern
slope is covered with houses; this is the town
of Trinidad, founded in 1514, by the governor
Diego Velasquez, on account of “the rich
mines of gold” which it was said were dis-
covered in the little valley of Rio Arimao-+-.


saved themselves with difficulty on the cayos, at the en-
trance of the Old Channel, a few weeks before my departure
for Carthagena.


* Wherever the rock appears, I saw compact limestone,
whitish-grey, partly porous, and partly with smooth frac-
ture, as in the jurassic formation.


+
+ This river enters towards the east in the Bahia de
Xagua.


327


The streets of Trinidad have all a rapid de-
scent: the inhabitants here complain, as for
the most part in Spanish America, of the bad
choice of the spot made by the Conquistadores,
founders of new towns*. At the northern ex-
tremity is the church of Nuestra Senora de la
Popa, a celebrated place for pilgrimages. This
point appeared to me 700 feet above the level
of the sea; it commands, like most of the
streets, a magnificent view of the ocean, the
two ports (Puerto Casilda and Boca Guaurabo),
a forest of palm-trees, and the groupe of the
lofty mountains of San Juan. Having forgot
to have the barometer brought to the town with


the rest of my instruments, I tried, the next
day, to determine the elevation of la Popa, by
taking alternatively the height of the sun above
the horizon of the sea, and in an artificial hori-
zon. ILhad already employed this method + at


* Was the town founded by Velasquez situated in the
plain and nearer the ports of Casilda and Guaurabo? Some
inhabitants think that the fear of the French, Portugueze,
and English free-booters led to the choice of this spot in the
islands, on the declivity of the mountains, where, as from a
watch-house, the approach of the enemy could be discover-
ed; but it seems to me that these fears could not be felt be-
fore the government of Hernando de Soto. The Havannah
was sacked for the first time by French corsairs, in 1539.

+ A method of finding the depression of the horizon by
means of an instrument of reflexion.


328


the castle of Murviedro, in the ruins of Sa-
gonte, and at Cabo Blanco, near La Guayra: but
the horizon of the sea was misty, and, in some
parts, interrupted by those dark streaks that
announce small currents of air*, or a play of
extraordinary refractions. We were received
at the town of Trinidad (now Ciudad) with the
kindest hospitality, by the administrator of the
Real Hacienda, M. Munoz. I made observa-
tions during a great part of the night, and
found the latitude, near the cathedral, by the
Spica Virginis, « of the Centaur, and £ of the
Cross of the South, under circumstances not
equally favorable, to be 21° 48’ 20”. My chro-
nometric longitude was 82° 21’ 7”. I heard, at
my second passage by the Havannah, in return-
ing from Mexico, that this longitude was nearly
identical with that obtained by the captain of a
frigate, Don Jose del Rio, who had long re-
sided on that spot, but that he marked the
latitude of the town at 21° 42°40”. Ihave dis-
cussed this difference in another place: it


* According to the opinion of a great naturalist, Mr.
Wollaston, whom I consulted on this curious phenomenon,
these black streaks are perhaps a part of the surface of the
ocean which is nearer, and which the wind begins to curl.
In that case, it must be by the opposition of colour, that the
true horizon, which is more distant, becomes invisible to
the eye.

+ Rec. @obs. astr., tom. ii, p. 72, In my map of the


329


suffices to remark here, that M. de Puységur
found 21° 47’ 15”, and that four stars of the
Great Bear, observed by Gamboa, in 1714,
gave M. Oltmanns (in determining the decli-
nation according to the catalogue of Piazzi),
21° 46’ 35”.

The Teniente Governadore of Trinidad, whose
jurisdiction then extended to Villa Clara, Prin-
cipe, and Santo Espiritu, was nephew to the
celebrated astronomer Don Antonio Ulfoa. He


gave us a grand entertainment at which we
found some French emigrants of Saint Do-
mingo, who had brought their talents and
industry to that country. The exportation of


the sugar of Trinidad, by the registers of the
custom-house, did not then exceed 4000 cases.
The people complained “ of the obstacles which
the general government, from its unjust predi-
lection for the Havannah, opposed to the de-
velopment of agriculture and commerce, in the
center and the eastern part of the island;
- they complained of the great accumulation of
wealth, population, and power in the capital,
while the rest of the country was almost a
desert; and that several smaller centers dis-


island of Cuba, I adopted the position given me by the ob-
servations of March 14th, 1801; in the map of the Deposito
of Madrid, published at Paris, in 1824, the result of M. del
Rio was preferred. (Espmosa, Mem., tom. ii, p. 65.)


330


tributed at equal distances over the whole sur-
face of the island, would be far preferable to
the actual system, which had collected on one
point luxury, corruption of manners, and the
yellow fever.” These exaggerated charges,
these complaints of provincial towns against
the capital, are the same in every region. It
cannot be doubted, that in political as in phy-
sical organization, the general well-being de-
pends on life universally spread ; but we must
distinguish between the pre-eminence which -
arises from the natural progress of things, and
that which is the effect of the measures of
government.

The advantage of having two ports is often
discussed at Trinidad ; it would perhaps be
better if the municipality, which has but small
funds at its disposition, were occupied in im-
proving only one. The distance of the town
from Puerto de Casilda and Puerto Guaurabo,
is nearly the same; yet the expence of transport
is greatest in the former port. The Boca del
Rio Guaurabo, defended by a new battery, fur-
nishes safe anchorage, although less sheltered
than that of Puerto Casilda. Barks that draw
little water, or are lightened to pass the bar,
can go up the river and approach the town
within a mile. The packet-boats (correos) that
touch at Trinidad de Cuba, prefer in general
the Rio Guaurabo, where they find safe anchor-


331


age without having need of a pilot. The Puerto
Casilda is more inclosed, and goes further back
into the land; but cannot be entered without a
pilot, on account of the breakers (arrecifes) of
Mulas and Mulattas. The great mole, construct-
ed with wood, and very useful to commerce, was
damaged in discharging pieces of artillery. It
is entirely destroyed, and it was undecided whe-
ther to reconstruct it with masonry, according
to the project of Don Luis de Bassecourt, or to
open the bar of Guaurabo by dragging it. The
great inconvenience of Puerto de Casilda is the
want of fresh water, which vessels are forced
te seek at the distance of a league; and in
doubling the western point, and being exposed,
in time of war, to be taken by corsairs. We
were assured that the population of Trinidad
with the farms that surround it, in a circum-
ference of 2000 toises, amounts to 19,000. The
cultivation of sugar and coffee has considerably
augmented; the cereals of Europe are culti-
vated further north, towards Villa Clara.

We passed a very agreeable evening in the
house of one of the richest inhabitants, Don
Antonio Padron, where we found assembled in
tertulia all the good company of Trinidad. We
were again struck with the gaiety and vivacity
that distinguished the women of Cuba, in the
province as in the capital: these are happy
gifts of nature, to which the refinements of


332


Kuropean civilization might lend a charm, but
which have the power to please in their primi-
tive simplicity. We quitted Trinidad in the
night of the 15th March, and our departure
was very unlike our entry into the town, on
horseback with the Catalanian shopkeepers.
The municipality caused us to be conducted to
the mouth of the Rio Guaurabo in a fine car-
_Yiage lined with old crimson damask; and, to
add to our confusion, an ecclesiastic, the poet
of the place, completely dressed in velvet, not- -
withstanding the heat of the climate, celebrated,
in a sonnet, our voyage to the Oroonoko.

On the road leading to the port, we were
singularly struck with a spectacle which our
stay of two years in the hottest part of the tro-
pics might have rendered familiar to us; but I
had no where seen such an innumerable quan-
tity of phosphorescent insects *. The grass that
covers the ground, the branches and foliage of
the trees, all shone with that reddish and move-
able light, of which the intensity varies accord-
ing to the will of the animal by which it is
produced, It seemed as if the starry firma-
ment reposed on the savannah! In the hut of
the poorest inhabitants of the country, fifteen
cocuyos, placed in a calebash pierced with holes,
serves to search for objects during the night. To


* Cocuyo (Elater noctilucus).


333


shake the vase with force, is all that is necessary
to excite the animal to augment the splendour
of the luminous disks placed on each side of
his body. The people say, with a simple truth
of expression, that calebashes filled with co-
cuyos, are lanterns always lighted. They are in
fact, only extinguished by the sickness or death
of the insects, who are easily fed with a little
sugar-cane. A young woman at Trinidad de
Cuba told us, that during a long and difficult
passage from the main-land, she always made
use of the phosphorescence of the cocuyos, when
she gave her child the breast at night ; the cap-
tain of the ship would allow no other light on
board, from the fear of corsairs.

As the breeze freshened, fixing at north-east,
we tried to avoid the group of the Caymans,
but the current drove us towards those islands.
In sailing to 8.4 S.E., we lost sight of the shore
covered with palm-trees, the hills that rise
above the town of Trinidad, and the lofty
mountains of the island of Cuba. There is
something solemn in the aspect of land which
you leave, and which sinks by degrees below
the horizon of the sea. The interest and seri-
ousness of this impression were augmented at
an epoch when Saint Domingo, the center of
great political agitations, threatened to involve
the other islands in one of those sanguinary


334


struggles which reveal to man the ferocity of
his nature. These threats, and these fears,
were happily not accomplished ; the storm was
appeased on the spot which gave it birth, anda
free black population, far from troubling the
peace of the neighbouring islands, has made
Some progress towards the softening of man-
ners, and the establishment of good civil insti-
tutions. Portorico, Cuba, and Jamaica, with
370,000 whites and 885,000 men of colour,
surround Hayti, where a population of 900,000
blacks and mulattoes is accumulated, freed by
their own will and the success of their arms.
The blacks, more inclined to cultivate alimen-
tary plants than colonial productions, augment
with a rapidity only surpassed by the increase
of the population of the United States. Will
the tranquillity enjoyed in the Spanish and
English islands during the twenty-six years
which have succeeded the first revolution of
Hayti, continue to inspire the whites with that
fatal security, which opposes with disdain
every amelioration in the state of the captive
class? Around that mediterranean of the West
Indies, towards the west and towards the south,
in Mexico, at Guatimala, and Columbia, new
legislations labour with ardour to extinguish
slavery. It may be hoped that the union of
these imperious circumstances will favor the


335


benevolent intentions of some European go-
vernments, who seek to soften progressively
the fate of the slaves. The fear of danger will
force concessions that are claimed by the eter-
nal principles of justice and humanity.


NOTES


BOOK THE TENTH.


Nore A.


Ont of the most interesting problems of political economy
is the determination of the articles which, in the present
state of civilization in Europe, are the principal objects of
colonial industry. We may arrive approximatively at exact
results, at limit numbers, by two different methods : first, by
discussing the exportation of the countries that furnish the
most considerable quantity of those articles, and which, for
sugar, are the West Indies, Brazil, the Guyanas, the isle of
France, Bourbon, and the East Indies ; secondly, by exa-
mining the importation of the colonial articles in Europe,
and by comparing their annual consumption with the popu-
lation, the wealth, and the national habits of each country.
When there is one source only for a production, as for
instance, for tea, researches of this kind are easy and pretty
certain ; but the difficulties augment in the tropical regions,
which all produce a quantity more or less considerable of
sugar, coffee, and indigo. To establish in that case a limit
number of the minimum of the consumption, we must begin
by fixing our attention on the great masses. If we know
that the English, Spanish, and French islands, export
annually, according to the *custom-house registers, 269
millions of kilograms of sugar, it imports little to know if


337


the Dutch and: Danish islands produce 18 or 22 millions,
If Brazil, Demerara, Berbice, and Essequebo, export: 155
millions of kilograms of sugar, a doubt on the production of
Surinam and Cayenne which yield together less than 12 mil-
lions of kilog., has but little influence on the estimate of the
general consumption of Europe. The case is the same with
respect to the importation of the sugar of the East Indies to
England, on which so many exaggerated notions have been
circulated. By neglecting altogether that importation, -the
error in the actual consumption of Europe, would be only
one forty-third ; and one of the Little Antilles, for instance,
Grenada, Barbadoes, or Saint Vincent’s, sends more sugar to
Europe than all the English possessions in the East Indies.
I have already treated the problem (Personal Narrative, vol.
iv, p. 241), of which the solution will be discussed in this .
note; 1 then thought, from less numerous and less exact
materials, that the consumption of sugar in Europe, in the
year 1818, amounted only to 450 millions of pounds. ‘This
number, even for that epoch, seemed a fifth or a quarter too
small; but we must not forget, that from 1818 to 1823, the
price of American sugar had lowered 38 per cent., and that
the consumption is in the increased ratio of the price. (Table
of Prices in Tooke, Append. to Part iv, id. 1824, p. 58; and
Statist. Illustr. of the Brit. Emp., 1825, p. 56.) In France,
for instance, it augmented from 1788 to 1825, more than 40
per cent.; in 1788, it was 21 millions; in 1818, 34-mil-
lions ; and, in 1825, more than 50 millions of kilograms.
It is on account of the rapidity of the increase of colonial
produce and the prosperity of Europe, that it becomes im-
portant to fix numerically the state of things at a given
time. Labors of this kind furnish points of comparison,
the importance of which will be sensibly felt by those. who,
on the traces of Mr. Tooke, would follow in another age the
progressive development of the system of industry in both
worlds.


VOL. VII. Z


338


1. Propucrion.—We shall here examine the state of
agriculture only as it pours its productions into the commerce
of Europe and the United States. Considered in this point of
view, the archipelago of the West Indies, Brazil, the English
and Dutch Guyanas, Louisiana, the isle of France, Bourbon,
and the East Indies, are now the sole countries that merit
our attention. Mexico exported, by Vera Cruz, annually,
from 1802 to 1804, five to five and a half millions of kilo-
grams of sugar ; namely :


In 1802. 489,132 arrobas, estimated at 1,476,435 p.
1803. 490,292 1,514,882
1804. 381,509 1,097,505
1810. 121,050 272,362
1811. 101,016 : Z 251,040
1812.


But the diminution of the price (three piasters the arroba, in
1823; and one piaster and three-fifths in 1825), the dearness
of transport from Cuernavaca, Puente dIstla, and Valla-
dolid de Mechoaean, to the port of Vera Cruz, and the poli-
tical troubles, have caused the entire cessation of the ex-


portation of Mexican sugar. That of Venezuela, Cayenne,
Guayaquil, and Peru, belong to the coasting trade, and the


exchange of productions which takes place in several parts of
_ Spanish America.

We stated above (vol. vii, p. 172), that the whole archi-
pelago of the West Indies exported, annually, from 1823 to
1825, according to the registers of the custom-house (and
in this discussion we first abstracted the product of illi-
cit trade), at least 287 millions of kilograms of sugar,
of which three-fourths were raw, and one-fourth refined.
The island of Cuba alone, pours into lawful commerce
fifty-six millions of kilograms of azucar blanco y quebrado.
In dividing the 287 millions of kilograms of the whole


339


archipelago, among the Great and Little Antilles, we find
the partition nearly equal at a period when, in the island of
Hayti, the produce of the cultivation of the sugar-cane
scarcely exceeded the interior consumption, Cuba and
Jamaica, of which the united surfaces are 4400 square
marine leagues, and the number of slaves is 623,500, export
altogether 136 millions of kilograms (with the contraband,
150 millions) ; the Little Antilles being 940 square leagues,
with 524,000 slaves, export 144 millions of kilograms.

In comparing the countries which at present pour the
most considerable quantity of sugar into the commerce of
Europe and the United States, we find them, on a scale of
agricultural industry, placed in the following order :


Brazin 125 millions k,
(Saint Domingo gave, in 1788, more
than 80 millions kil.)
Jamaica (area, 460 square m. leagues)
Cusa (area, 3615 square leagues), compre-
hending the illicit trade
According to the registers of the custom-
house, 56 millions kil.
Eneuisu Guyana
GuapaLoure (area, 55 square leagues) ....
Marrinico (area, 30 square league)
Istz or FRaNcE (area, 108 square leagues)
Louisiana (doubtful result)
Barsapors or Saint Vincent, each island
Area of the former, 13 s. 1.; of the lat-
ter, 11s. 1.
Grenapa and Antigua, each island
Area of the former, 15 s.1.; of the lat-
ter, 73s, 1.
Surinam


340


Trintpap (area, 139 square leagues)
Isuz pe Bourzon (area, 190 square lea-


Area, 5 and 12 square leagues.
Domrnica, Nevis, and Montserrat, each


island below


9 millions k.


C1610 TEHCE 66°81% 988 CEs ‘Tt


906° E9F 89¢°06L 8E9°SLS : ey TAB
VIG 086 T8Pr‘ce EELPZS 5 ee wpe iescesiipeer es i1-y Ah
606‘ 8ES ETELE 988°00Z
8B'SE 8L9°8P Geg*68T
91 L683 €95°ZB EST‘LOG


086‘88P PSP PSE OSL‘SEL LLE“S8PT


GLE PES OGL 161 9T9'SEL 6ST‘LZST Ppiraceieas Meloy gee eres (coy) y¢
F63 L6P 6cr tLe LPS‘GSL 620‘88F‘T ars “POLL
LE9‘Les LOV‘86E O&Z‘6EL 889°COL‘T eae sit cenineraee 612) 5
018‘99P L&S‘99E €8P‘ool 980°8tPr'T an a Cou
"1M 6E0°SLE ‘YAO BSS‘ PEP "749 [TL8OSL "WMO LOLLIG‘T es eere AS TOL


‘NOILVLYUOdXa-TU “SHIULNIOD “NIVLIUE
; “ANVTTAI OL
FHL 40 TIVLOL LNAYAAAIG OL LVAUD AO SLUOd


{ ) GHL OL SANVT


~SI HSITONG AHL
*NIVIIUG LVAD AO NOILVLYOdXa ;
WOU NOILVIWOMIWI


TSL‘9E0 CLO‘9G6P OF 9OFT ese'1s0% =f Aqguenb yenuue uvoyl


L6E‘*669 SSL‘Te¢ 609° LTT 89S TLL
ZIL‘9PG POS cok S6L°EST 960086
BCG SOE ¢00‘098 7G'CPL s0est lS
O81 Fz9 1z8°80g 608‘ELL €L6°086'T
889‘SOF LEE‘ LOG 6G IVE 0¢6‘808‘L


OSL VIE LIZ LST LES‘6LG‘T


CPL Fer FOG SZS 6E6°01G 606°GL0%
G1Z F9E OLO‘EGS GELGFL O8E‘SELT
986° 1Sg 6esLLT LUPELT CLE PSE'T
9G OFT 918°6P 0F9'96 692 PLE'T
‘WO BEELL] =|'9440 1E9°FI1 "yao 1¢66°COL ‘JMO 8P3‘080'T


“NOVLVLYOdXI-2a “SHIULNAOD *NIV.LIUS
‘GNVTdal OL
SHL iO TVLOL EINGUaddIaG OL LVAUD 30 SLYUOd


\ : J GHL OL SGNVI “SUVAA


-SI HSITONG FHL
WOUdT NOILVLYOdWI


“NIVZIUG LYIASD AO NOILVLUOIXA


0L8‘069 Z09‘e¢s goPr‘ces 1Z2°L68°e
6PS'6Ie‘T OTe LIS 680°COL EtP'6SL'P
169°96FT SPL‘EGE'T ShCCLE C8LPLE'S


9T8°E06‘1 968‘8C0'T OshSFL PEL ‘6se’s
LGL*816 6GP16L BEETLE LEoeLgy'e
9LE‘T96 €L0°808 e0s°est GOB‘ GEES
N6T‘9T6 Csr coL TILE¢1 069°896S
SIS°SEE‘T LOS‘ LLS‘T OPO PPT 00rSz6S
6VS‘LZ6T TLE LPL‘T 8L6°6LL 098 ‘6LLF
1M) L08‘9L6 *1M9 G68°S98 ‘9M GTOSIL "GMD FOG ‘6SL‘S


NOILVLYOdXE-Fa *SaIH4LNN00 *NIVIIYE


“AQNVIGUI OL
aHL dO TVLOL INGUAAAIA OL LVAYN AO SLUOAd


ee ce ee ON ‘SUVAA


-SI HSITONG AHL
“NIVLIYG LVAD JO NOILVLYOdXa
WOU NOILVLYOdNI


344


It must be observed that the English quintal, or cwt., is
equal to fifty kilograms and four-fifths. The preceding table
was framed in the Office of the Inspector-general of the Cus-
tom-house, in London, under the direction of Mr. William
Irwing. From 1812-to 1815, the exportation of the Eng-
lish islands, of Demerara, Berbice, and the Essequebo,


were:


In 1812 3,551,449 cwt.
1813 3,500,000
1814 3,408,798
1815 3,493,116


The English Guyanas furnished to trade, at that period,
only 340,000 cwt. yearly. (Stat. Illustr., p. 56.) The follow-
ing table, taken from the Parliamentary Returns, compre-
hends the exportation of the sugar of the West Indies and


Guyana, to the different ports of Great Britain, in the years
1816-1824,


Osten


eSa‘8e


G60°L8Ph


(1am)
uonrywod
“Xa UPaTL


869°829


809‘F9
(066819


("94\9)
“PEST


POV 1LOE|ZIZ°ZE0 °C


ogi’ 81Z
GLE0F

8Z6‘OFS
68L°Z8I


€60°08T
69903
898'Sal
1Z8°9ES
loor‘eZ
G89°ZE1
PEl‘OF
8h9‘0e
€19°LZS
668 GF
828°ShS
LOBES


BGEL9ST SES TSP


(9M)
"PEBT 01 918


y| (3M)


jo uoeiLod “PoSL


-x9 Uva


$¢8°¢99


66°99
898°L09


(-9a\0)
“SG8L


99€°S16


168°981
E89°1S
CIOS II
GLY‘GES
Sh‘Z9
tsi ‘9Z
E86 bP
99F'PG
696° LFS
€10°6E
Osa ts
99FSET
9PL*LIVT


(*4\9)


“ES8T


Gos‘98¢
Lgg‘egq
8F60SS


(yara)
“GC81


ZI6ISLILS


16F8Z1
OLTSS
G3L‘001
6ST 19%
090°G6
68968
969‘TE
{L023
SLT‘661
0S9‘TF
289°9¢1
886°COT
LIL‘SI¥'T


(9M)


“6681


GORGES

Lga‘Eg

OF ‘Z6r
(41a)
"1Z8T


LGz°Z9I
6SPh'ES
Cbs ‘801
SbF‘SES
tZ6‘LL
9EF‘SSl
860°99
BRSES
198916
61188
TZE‘11%
8hS°L0G
062'6L9'I


(149)
“TE8L


LGBPle


969‘Le
199°9¢9


(*yA\9)
‘OGST


PPS IBIL‘C|L0S'SFO'E


(F09S1
GZa‘a1
P61 ‘601
629°916
033‘0S
10°68
G6s‘9E
GI8‘ae
19S‘F8I
BE6SP
196°6L1
elg‘S9T
FEL 69L'1


(*ya90)
‘O@S81


006‘01¢


196°66
88608


(yaa)
“6I8L


682116


T69°99f
1aP‘9e
PES‘ZET
8805293
612582
1OS‘IFL
PST*E9
sorte
G9S‘F0G
968°Gh
9Sh°Z8S
S6E°608.
OFS FIO'T


(G@Y.\))
‘618T


06° Ler
FOL‘LT
981 ‘0GF


(79440)
"SLST


€/8L0'96EE


SST‘8sT
eLS‘SP
OS6SIT
OPE ESS
900°F
8IBOET
896°Z8
61 6.98
896063
0zs8‘es
910°6FS
808823
€08"ES9'T


(9M9)
*SISL


PS6‘168


Sagal
962°LLE


(Evo)
“LISI


SEP‘SsI
bS6‘CF
L8e°cst
E1VCES
1099
LL6°GCl
ZG8°Gh
FISTS
696°96I
eZ9T¢
GEL‘6SS
oLs‘6Zt
696 LL‘


(*940)
“LIST


192‘8¢
808 ‘ST
CPR ESE


("ya0)
‘9I8T


6090LT€|ZZS'0L0'E


S68°SEl
G60°TS
LS1°681
ESh'S9S
088°69
Lol vel
Gg9 TL
186°8
690°99%
Gso‘LPr
€B9‘88S
oos*Z61
11F686'I


(9440)
‘9181


“E681 Ni
STAVIS


918°909


Pgg‘Ol
GrE‘el
S86°0E
E8ECPE


"S681 Ni
SHAVIS


euvdns St]
“Sug JO [e101


> an1q.log
* BIVIIMIG


“VNVAND;


spuRyst Yst
-Suq JO [PI07,


"soe peprunyy,
Cpe POOL,


soese> oSeqog,
** quasur,A 96
“+ gronry Ig
““qdosini9 “S sc)
: Bae
JRATOSTO TAL
ooh) epRuady
+) worUTMOd
“T? saopeqaeg.
eo “en Snuy
ee" aRole ules


“SANVISI


HSITONG


346


The exportation for the ports of Ireland is not comprised
in this table: it was, according to the information kindly
communicated to me by Mr. Charles Ellis (now Lord Sea-
ford) :


1821, from Jamaica 21,785 cwt.; the other English islands.
123,037 cwt.; from English Guyana 24,843 cwt.

1822, from Jamaica 15,715 ewt. ; the other English islands
93,406 cwt.; from English Guyana 22,327 cwt.

1823, from Jamaica 28,490 cwt.; the other English islands
149,994 cwt.; from English Guyana 21,605 ewt.

1824, from Jamaica 30,472 cwt.; the other English islands
155,197 ewt.; from English Guyana 31,508 cwt.


We see, from the whole of these statements, that the
production has nearly doubled at Demerara and Berbice,
from 1816 to 1820; that that of Jamaica has, of late years,
diminished nearly one-eighth ; but, that the increase of the
production in several of the Little Antilles, especially at
Trinidad, Antigua, and Saint Lucia, has rendered this dimi-
nution less sensible for the commerce of Great Britain.


Brazil which, in years of great drought, furnishes an ex-
portation of only 90 millions of kilograms, has risen, in
1816, according to the researches of the Baron De Lessert,
to 180 millions.


Louisiana (with more than 75,000 slaves), probably now


exports nearly 13 millions of kilograms of sugar. Mr, Pit-
kin estimated the production in 1810, at five millions of
kilograms ; but it is asserted, that in 1815, the total quan-
tity amounted to 40,060 boucauts (at 1000 pounds a-piece).


The English and Dutch Guyanas may be estimated toge-
ther, at an exportation of 40 millions of kilograms. The
colony of Surinam alone, gave:


18,086,000 pounds.
18,549,000
17,964,000
20,266,000


In the isles of France and Bourbon, the cultivation of the
sugar-cane has made a remarkable progress. If it be ad-
mitted, that in the latter island, it has only become of some
importance since 1814, the exportation of the sugar of the
isle of Bourbon has been already—


4,541,000 kilog.
4,926,000
6,995,000
5,608,800


I owe these official statements to the Count des Bassayns
de Richmond, formerly intendant of the colony. The harvest
of 1823 was diminished by a hurricane which took place on
the 24th of February of that year. According to the re-
port of the directing commissary, it was believed that the
production of 1825 might amount to eight millions of kilo-
grams ; but we must not forget that the administration tends
to exaggerate the wealth of the island, in order to justify the


increase of taxes, while the consulting committee is disposed


to make the revenues of the colony appear to be less consider-
able, to prove that they are not in proportion with the bur-
dens. M. Rodet, in his excellent work on the External
Commerce of France, and the question of an Entrepét at Paris
(1825, p. 150), carries the exportation of the sugar of Bour-
bon to the mother country, in the four years 1820-1823,
only to 13,503,000 kilog. Sir Robert Farquhar, formerly
governor of the isle of France, saw the exportation of that
colony, which, in 1820, was eight millions of pounds, rise
to 15 millions in 1821, and to 25 millions in 1822. It is


348


now believed to exceed 30 millions of pounds. The sugar
of the isle of France and of the East Indies, were comprised
in the tables of the English custom-house, under the same
denomination ; and the greatest importation of sugar from
the East Indies to all the ports of Great Britain, having
been only 14 millions of kilograms before 1822 (the quantity
that corresponds to the year 1826), it is probable that the
exportation of the three Presidencies of India, did not sur-
pass, in the year 1820, nine or ten millions of kilograms.
Besides, neither all the sugar of India, nor of the isle of
France, flows into the ports of Great Britain. According to
the reports made from 1814 to 1821, on the state of exter-
nal commerce at Calcutta and Bombay, these ports, during”
seven years, exported sugar from the East Indies, to the


total value of 24,411,000 rupees, of which 10% millions were


for England, two millions for the rest of Europe, and 5%
millions for the United States. The exportation of the three
Presidencies to the ports of Great Britain, which was to
the value of 1,139,400 rupees, in 1815, rose in 1821, to
2,097,806 rupees. (On Protection to West India Sugar, 1823,
p. 154.)


e


II. Consumprion.—The production of sugar, or rather
the quantity exported and registered in America, at the
isles of France and Bourbon, and in the East Indies, for
Europe and the United States, may be determined with
sufficient precision ; but it is much more difficult to estimate
the distribution of this mass among the different nations.
We shall soon see that this consumption is only known with ~
some certainty in Great Britain, France, and the United
States ; three countries which together consume 230 mil-
lions of kilograms: the statistical notions collected on the
German States, Holland, and Italy, furnish statements that
are little satisfactory, the re-exportations being partly con-
founded with the internal consumption, and the complication


349


of the frontiers augmenting the effects of fraudulent trade.
In comparing the population, the well-being, and the habits
of the English and French nations with the same elements
of calculation in the rest of Europe, it is difficult to con-
ceive where that prodigious quantity of sugar (495 millions
of kilograms, or 9,744,000 cwt.) exported annually from
the ports of the West Indies, Brazil, the Guyanas, the Ame-
rican islands, and the peninsula of India, is employed.

The internal consumption of Great Britain is at present


142 millions of kilograms; it was even twice, in 1810 and
1811, 182,821,000 kilograms, and 163,932,000 kilograms.
[t has increased since the end of the seventeenth century, in


the following progression :


MEAN YEAR.
From 1690 to 1699. 200,000 cwt. or 10,160,000 kil.


1701 to 1705. 13,208,000
1771 to 1775. 1,5% 77,216,000
1786 to 1790. 1,640,000 83,312,000
1818 to 1822. 2,577,000 130,912,000


The consumption of sugar has consequently augmented
nearly thirteen times in 124 years (Report of a Committee of
the Liverpool- East India Association, 1822, p. 41. Stat.
Illustr., p. 57), while the population has more than doubled.
The latter was, in 1700, in England, 5,475,000 ; in Ire-
land, twelve years later, 2,099,000 ; and in Scotland, in
1700, probably 14 million. Total of the united kingdoms,
in 1700, nearly nine millions ; and in 1822, more than
21,290,060 souls, In computing the consumption of sugar
in the whole British islands (Great Britain and Ireland), we
find, mean year:


From 1761 to 1765. 1,130,943 cwt. or 57,452,000 kil.
1771 to 1775. 1,752,414 82,023,000


350


From 1781 to 1785, 1,422,024 72,239,000 kil.
1791 to 1795. 1,525,250 77,483,000
1801 to 1806. 2,331,398 118,435,000
1809 to 1811. 3,288,122 ..... ... 167,036,000


The following table furnishes the relation between the
total importation in the ports of Great Britaim (without Ire~
land) and the small quantity of sugar hitherto furnished by
the East Indies *.


=


* The inequality of the duties paid at the ports of Great
Britain, for the sugar of the West and the East Indies, is
the principal cause that prevents the commerce of the latter
article from becoming very considerable. That inequality
dates from the act of parliament of 1787, and has augmented
by the edicts of 1813 and 1821. It is ten shillings per cwt.


which is 50-79", «« If the duties,” says M. Cropper, “of
Asiatic and American sugar were the same, if the cultivation
of the sugar cane were encouraged in India, that part of Asia
would in ten years supply the whole population of Europe.”
(Letter to William Wilberforce, p. 48.)


000‘F2 BOF 98K T 000‘01S 000 ‘819 000°SSI GoLtoO f°? * Veo


nd | er eens Fc pennant


OSR P69‘ L9¥‘ZOT 166‘8h0'T 6SI ‘TIP 9LE‘9GS LE1‘Sk9'S ZS8t
} 9 e8a‘LF1 G16°689'T G18°8P ZI ‘693 L98‘006‘F 1Z81

i €09°98T 9S1‘6S9‘T g9g‘6L9 60e*F0¢ 826116 OFS‘E90°F 0zsI
oss‘PZZ' FIZ88 6L1°0e'T 0ZS‘G6S 808‘60F LZG°90% 600°Z20‘F 618
ZE‘OLSS CZs‘ OIL 69°S69‘T gsr‘itZ FI9‘98P G6SS9L 8h6°996'S SI8I
608‘SS1'S P6rS6 OFLTL9‘T 180°269 $69 98F ¥68°S2T 0g9‘G6Z‘e LIST
086°960°S 990‘Z0T 029°E99‘T ZBI ‘PSE 809‘029 606‘ L361 8S‘09L‘S 9I8I


020°8L0°% BEF'89 31L‘906'T L¥G'609 &66‘0L8 629°9SI_ | B8L'P86'E ST8I
GISE80'S 601 ‘ZOO'S gee‘ga¢ OF0‘8S0‘T 6h8°6P €3E°S80'F FIST
009‘F8e°S 00g°S19‘T 000°0SF 00¢‘0¢8 0000 000‘000‘F SIst
0Z0‘°F09‘S ZOT‘8S UT L19‘F83 PIS'PL9 9886 Zl S9L‘E ZI8I
BSL°9GS'E 028°069‘I £66‘001 LLY'619 06806 Le9°LI6‘E TIst
PIS 68h ogs‘61E‘T 606‘S1F 968919 OFS‘6P €99'808°F OIst


oo ce cere | es nem ff ayvicnmnnes Panes


“Mo “4M “yao *4Mo “4M “40
; d “avons *SHIGNI
3 pera a Ne ae “IVLOL iecavececgre *MVIOS MVU|LSVA FHL JO |PNOWLVLUOANIE “SUVAA
TVNUDLNI | VIGNI LSVH page ‘ Wee 3 Sich ‘es ue capeomake ciate
*NOLLVLUOAXA-TA NOLLVLUOAWI


‘NIVEIND LVEUS NI GHNOSNOD GNV ‘dNLU0dXH-TuY ‘CHLAOMKI UVIAS dO ALILENVAO


352


In this table, the total re-exportation in raw sugar, is
estimated on the principle that $4 cwt. of raw sugar yields
20 cwt, of refined sugar. The registers of the London
custom-house were destroyed by fire, in 1813; and the
numbers indicated for that year are taken from the Statist.
Illustr., published in 1825 (p. 56-57). Compare Thoughts on
High and Low Prices, 1824, Appendir, iv, p. 72.

The importation of Great Britain, in 1823, was 4,012,144
cwt., or 203,817,000 kilograms, and the interior consump-
tion 2,807,756 cwt., or 142,634,000 kilograms. When Mr.
Huskisson, in an excellent parliamentary discourse (pro-
nounced in March 1824), estimated the consumption at
3,000,130 cwt., or 152,406,000 kilograms, he meant, no
doubt, the total consumption of the united kingdoms. We
must not fail to remark also, that the quantity of sugar, in-
dicated as home consumption in the official tables, is only the
difference of the quantities imported and exported, without
including the sugar that remains every year accumulated in
the stores. The mean value of the imported quantity,
variable according to the current price and the activity of
trade, amounted (from 1813 to 1815) to 10 or 12 millions
sterling. This value has in these latter years, from 1820 to
1823, been only six millions sterling. It results that the
partial consumption of East India sugar in Great Britain


rose in


23,526 cwt.
9,313
42,145


It has consequently almost sextupled in twelve years. (See
also, On Protection of West India Sugar, 1823, p. 9, 148.)


393


The produce of the West Indies alone amply suffices at present
for the wants of the population of Great Britain : now, that
population forms only seven-hundredths of the whole Euro-
pean population, while the consumption of sugar in Great
Britain is nearly thirty-hundredths of all the sugar imported


into Europe.


France, in 1788, consumed but the fifth (at most the
fourth) of the sugar of its colonies. M. Peuchet (Stat. é/ém.
de la France, p. 406) estimates the consumption of the king-
dom to have been at that period 21,266,000 kilograms of
refined sugar. According to M. Chaptal, it was only, in
1801, 25,220,000 kilograms; but, from 1816 to 1821,
France received in kilograms, according to the statement of


the custom-house :


SUGAR OF THE| SUGAR FROM
FRENCH FOREIGN
COLONIES. PARTS.


17,530,000 | 17,049,000 | 24,579,000
31,102,000 | 5,443,000 | 36,545,000
29,809,000 | 6,277,000 | 36,086,000
34,360,000 | 5,400,000 | 39,760,000
40,752,000 | 8,467,000 | 49,219,000


41,702,000 | 2,649,000 | 44,351,000


This gives, mean year, an’ importation of 32,542,000 kilo-
grams of sugar of the French colonies, and 5,881,000 kilo-


VOL. VII. DK


304


grams of foreign sugar: total, 38,423,000 kilograms. In
fixing on the results of the last four years, from 1820 to
1825, we find a mean importation, in France, of 48,019,636
kilograms of sugar, of which 40,367,452 kilog. were from
the French islands and Cayenne, 3,375,888 from the isle of
Bourbon, and 4,276,296 from India, Brazil, and the Havan-
nah. Of these 48,019,636 kilograms, 1,123,168 kilograms
of refined sugar are re-exported, mean year, and 3,707,507
kilograms of molasses ; the annual consumption of France
was therefore, from 1820 to 1822, nearly 44 millions of
kilograms. (Rodet, du Commerce extérieur, p.154.) The quan-
tity of sugar imported into France in the last four years
_ has been, from the notes communicated to me by the Count
Saint Crieq, president to the board of trade :


55,481,004 kilog.
41,542,856
60,031,122
56,081,506


In 1825, were re-exported, 8,264,734 kilograms of re-
fined sugar, and 4,856,775 kilograms of molasses ; so that


including the sugar contained in the molasses, the interior
consumption of France was more than 51 millions of raw
sugar. The consumption in France and England augmented,
from 1788 to 1825, in the relation of 10: 24-4 and 10: 17°3;
but from 1819 to 1825, the increase has been ‘much more
rapid in France ; the consumption has risen from 39,800,000
kilograms, to 51 millions of kilograms.


The mean of three years 1800, 1801, 1812, in the United
States, furnishes, according to the information which I owe
to the friendship of M. Gallatin: importation, in sugar and
cassonade, 116,644,000 pounds ; ré- exportation, 71,676,000;
which gives a consumption of 44,968,000 pounds, (Polt-


355


tical Essay, vol. iv, p. 814, &c.) M. Pitkin (Statistical
Piew, 1816, p. 249) estimates this consumption, in 1815, at
70 millions of English pounds, or 31,500,000 kilograms.
Yet, from the registers of the custom-house, the mean of
ten years (1803-1812) give M. Seybert (Annales Statist.,
1820, p. 129) only 120,613,130 pounds of imported sugar,
and 66,243,660 pounds of re-exported ; thence results a
mean consumption for the beginning of the nineteenth cen-
tury, of 54,369,470 pounds. The molasses, of which the
annual consumption was at that period 7,355,000 quarts,
was not comprised in this estimate. From 1821 to 1825,
the exportation of sugar to the United States has been,
mean year, 75 millions of pounds, of which 4,300,000
pounds were from the East Indies, and the isles of France and
Bourbon. The re-exportation at that period, was annually
18 millions of pounds ; the consumption therefore amounted
to 57 millions of pounds of East and West India sugar, 15
millions of pounds of Louisiana sugar, and eight millions of
pounds of maple sugar ; total, 36 millions of kilograms.

In comparing the population of the island of Cuba, Great
Britain, the United States, and France, with the quantity of
raw sugar consumed annually in these different countries,


we find a remarkable descending progression, according to
the degrees of ease, and above all, according to the national
habits.


-
356
———— anes Senn ne
ANNUAL CON- ANNUAL CON-
SUMPTION IN FREE SUMPTION OF


KILOG, OF POPULATION. SUGAR PER
RAW SUGAR. HEAD.


COUNTRY.


Island of Cuba} 11 millions 450,000 | 242 kilogr.


eg a


Great Britain | 142 millions | 14,500,000 | 9¢ kilogr.


|


United States
of America ....; 386 millions 9,400,000 34 kilogr.


pees ber ie ee i ee eee


France 52 millions | 30,600,000 1% kilogr.


ee en na


I have already mentioned (vol. vii, p, 166) the immense con-
sumption of sugar in the tropical parts of America, inhabited
by nations of Spanish race. I fixed on the quotient given
by the number of free men only. ‘The negroes, however,
consume also raw sugar in the work-shops, during the
fabrication. The notions on Ireland not being sufficiently
precise, I have only given in the preceding table, the con-
sumption of Great Britain, now estimated approximatively,
at 2,800,000 ewt. According to the direct importations of
Ireland, which were stated above, it may be supposed that
that country, with a very poor population of 6,800,000
inhabitants, does not consume more than 12 millions of
kilograms annually, which makes one kilog. four-fifths per
head. The consumption of the United States, in 1825, re-
duced to the total free and slave population (probably,
11,138,000), would yield three kilograms and one-fifth per
head, or a third more than in France. The estimate made


357


by M. Pitkin (314 millions of kilograms for the year 1825),
was no doubt too high: it would give four kilog. and three-
fifths, for the free population of 6,983,000 which existed at
that period.

The relative consumption of the island of Cuba, Great
Britain, France, and the United States, is at present nearly
in the relation of the numbers,


13°6. 54, 21.


If we suppose the consumption of the United States (Great
Britain with Ireland) to be 15% millions of kilograms, which
is less certain, we find for the total population of 21,300,000
inhabitants, enjoying very unequal ease, seven kilog. one-
fifth per head.

To add to these accurate statements on the United States,
Great Britain, and France, some conjectures respecting
the consumption in other parts of our continent, we shall
first recapitulate the total mass of sugar thrown annually
into trade :


millions k.
ARCHIPELAGO OF THE WEST INDIES ............. 287
millions k.
Eneuisy Isuanps
We estimated above, the mean exportation
of Jamaica, from 1816 to 1824, for the ports
of Great Britain and Ireland (exportation
which must not be confounded with the pro-
duction), at 1,597,000 cwt., or 81,127,000
kilog. That of the rest of the English is-
lands, at 1,634,000 cwt., or 83,007,000 ; total,
3,231,000 cwt., or more than 164 millions of
kilograms. In fixing on the last five years
(1820-1824), we should find, according to the
same official statements, for Jamaica, com-


308


mon year, 1,573,000 cwt., er 79,908,000 kilo-
grams; and for the other English islands,
1,564,000 cwt., or 79,451,000 kilograms ;
total, 159,359,000 kilog. The difference,
according as the mean is taken from 1816 or
1820, is therefore only 43 millions of kilog.,
or 88,500 cwt., a much less quantity than the
variations which the exportation of Jamaica
sugar for Europe undergoes in two subsequent
years. In classing the English islands ac-
cording to the quantity of sugar which they
pow throw into trade, we shall obtain the fol-
lowing order: Jamaica; Saint Vincent’s and
Barbadoes, nearly equality of production;
Grenada, Antigua, Trinidad, Tobago, Saint
Christopher’s, Saint Lucia, Dominica, Nevis,
Montserrat, Tortola.


millions k.


Spanise, Isuanps i.e: is. waces. Atos. Wek eels

In this table we have fixed on the quantities
registered ; the exportation of Cuba only, with
the contraband, is more than 70 millions of


kilograms,


millions k,


Frencu Isiuanps


62


nibishriaija hate hale OR Aaron ak 42
The slave population of the French and
Spanish islands, is exactly in the same rela-
tion as the exportation of sugar; which
proves the great fertility of the soil of the
island of Cuba; for nearly a third of the slaves
in that island inhabit the great towns. (Vol.

vii, p. 113,

maillions k,

Durcu, Danisu, anp Swepisn I[scanvs......... 18

millions k.

287


339
millions k.
BRAZ LAs see ies PAO SONY Ee 125
In 1816, the exportation was 5,200,000 kilo-
grams greater ; but we have already observed, that
in years of great drought, the exportation dimi-
nishes as far as 91 millions of kilograms.
millions k.
ENGLISH, DUTCH, AND FRENCH GUYANAS.... 40
In fixing on the last five years (1820-1825), the
exportation of Demerara, Essequebo, and Berbice,
or English Guyana, was 30,937,000 kilograms.
We see that the cultivation of that part of
Guyana augments in proportion as that of the
English islands tends to decrease. The mean,
from 1816 to 1824, gave, for English Guyana,
525,000 cwt., or 263 millions of kilograms, which
denotes an annual increase of exportation of 43
millions of kilograms, or one-eighth; while the
English islands have diminished, according to the
comparison of the mean, from 1816 to 1824, and
from 1814 to 1824, 4! millions of kilograms, or
_ one thirty-fifth.


millions k.


LOUISIANA


millions k.


EAST INDIES, ISLES OF FRANCE AND BOUR-


isle of France, 12 millions kilog.; East Indies,


at most 10 millions kilog.; Bourbon, 8 millions
kilograms. The exportations for the United
States are joined, as every where in this table, to
those for Europe. If the East Indies were to re-
place the English West Indies, their exportation in
sugar must be 16 times greater.


millions k.


Total


360


I have indicated minutely the sources from which the ele-
ments of the general table are drawn; researches of this
kind have little value without the indication of the docu-
ments employed: the reader should be enabled to examine
the partial statements. The only remaining doubt at pre-
sent is on small quantities (for instance, on the exportations
of Portorico, Curagoa, Saint Thomas), or on the unequal


production of sugar at Brazil. In estimating these oscilla-


tions, or the whole of the uncertainties which remain, at 35
millions of kilograms, the sum total of the exportation still
varies but one-fourteenth. If we deduct 38 millions of
kilograms for the consumption of the United States and
Canada, there remain 457 millions of kilograms of sugar (of
which seven-eighths are raw and one-eighth refined) for the
annual importation to Kurope. It is a limit number at mini-
mum: for the elements of these calculations are all drawn
from the registers of the custom-houses, without adding
any thing for the product of fraudulent trade. In dividing
the mass of raw sugar consumed in Europe by the number
of the inhabitants (2084 millions), we find two and one-fifth
kilograms per head; but this result is only a sterile arith-
metical abstraction, which leads as little to useful consider-
ations as the attempt to distribute the population of the cul-
tivated regions of the United States or of Russia on the total
area of 174,000 and 616,000 square marine leagues. Eu-
rope reckons fifty-five-hundredths, or 106 millions of inha-
bitants who, accumulated in the British Empire, the Low
Countries, France, Germany properly so called, Switzer-
land, and Italy, consume an immense quantity of sugar ;
and thirty-three hundredths or 75 millions dispersed in Rus-
sia, Poland, Bohemia, Moravia, and Hungary, countries
where the indigence of the majority of the inhabitants ren-
ders the consumption extremely small. These are the
extreme points of the scale, with respect to luxury and the
factitious wants of society. In order to appreciate the ease


361


of the population of Germany, I shall here mention that the
port of Hamburg only, imported in 1821, near 45 millions
of kilograms of sugar; while in 1824, the importation was
44,800 cases, or 29,120,000 kilog. from Brazil; 23,800
cases, or 4,379,000 kilog. from the Havannah, and 10,600
barrels, or 8,480,000 kilog. from Lendon ; total 41,979,000
kilograms. In 1825, was imported: 31,920 cases, or
20,748,060 kilog. from Brazil; 42,255 cases, or 7,774,900
kilog. from the Havannah, and 20,506 barrels, or 16,404,800
kilog. from England; total 44,927,000 kilograms. ‘The
importation of Hamburg was, consequently, but one-sixth
lower in 1825, than that of the whole of France. The port
of Bremen imported, in 1824, near five millions of kilo-
grams; that of Antwerp, in the same year, 10,'758,000
kilograms. In the south of Germany, where the consump-
tion of sugar is also very considerable, the complicaticn of
transit and contraband, render the statistic researches very
difficult. How can we admit, for instance, with M. Mem-
minger, that, in the kingdom of Wurtemberg, which is
in great prosperity, 1,446,000 inhabitants consume only
980,000 kilograms of sugar yearly ?

In deducting the 457 millions of kilograms of raw sugar
imported into Europe, 2641 millions for the consumption
of France and the three United Kingdoms, and supposing
two kilograms per head (which is a great deal) for the popu-
lation of 76 millions in the Low Countries, Germany pro-
perly so called, Switzerland, Italy, the Iberian peninsula,
Denmark, and Sweden, there remains nearly 1003 millions
kilograms for Asia Minor, the coast of Barbary, the western
governments of Siberia and of Europe inhabited by the na-
tions of Sclavonian, Hungarian, and Turkish race. Now,
the population of Morocco, Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoli, are
pretty considerable, amounting to a total of 24 millions.


Asia Minor has four millions ; and we may suppose without
exaggeration, for the coast of Africa, Asia Minor, and Syria,


362


counting only the coast, covered with large commercial
towns, an exportation of 10 millions of kilograms of raw
sugar. From these statements, it must be concluded that the
80 millions of inhabitants of Sclavonian, Madjare, and Turk-
ish Europe (Russia, Poland, Bohemia, Moravia, Hungary,
and Turkey), consume thirteen-hundredths per head. This
result appears surprising, if we compare the actual state of
the civilization of those countries with that of France. We
should expect a much less consumption ; and yet the esti-
mate of the sugar exported from America and the East
Indies for Europe and the United States, far from being
exaggerated, is probably below the reality. If the fraud of
the custom-houses renders the consumption of Great Britain
and France (two countries which have served as a type in
the preceding reasonings) more considerable than we sup-
pose, if we admit that the French and English consume
still more than one and four-fifths and nine and four-fifths
kilog. per head, we must not forget that the same cause of
error acts on the estimate of the exportations in America
and the East Indies. In the year 1610, when Great Britain
consumed nearly 1772 millions of kilograms, the quotient
was twelve and one-fifth kilograms per head, It were to be
wished, that a writer who had the habit of precision in
numerical researches, and could draw his materials from
good sources, would treat, in a separate work, the important
problem of the European consumption of sugar, coffee, tea,
and cocoa, at a given time. Such a work would require
several years; for many of the documents are not printed,
and could only be obtained by an active correspondence
with some of the great commercial houses of Europe. I
could not devote myself to’ these researches in all their
extent. The time approaches when colonial articles will be
for the most part the produce, not of colonies, but of inde-
pendent countries; not of islands, but of the great con-
tinents of America and Asia. ‘The history of the commerce


of nations is wanting in numerical statements which relate
to the position of the whole, and this void can only be filled
up when at a period menacing the world of industry with
great revolutions, some one will have the courage to collect
the scattered materials, and submit them to a severe criti-
cism.

I shall terminate these researches by comparing the pro-
ductions of the sugar of the cane, of the sugar of beetrcot,
and of wheat, within the tropics, and in the middle region
of Europe. At the island of Cuba, the hectare yields 1330
kilograms of refined sugar; value, on the spot of produc-
tion, 870 francs, counting the price of the case of sugar
(or 184 kilograms) at 24 piasters. (Vol..vii, p. 204, &e.)
The price of land is regarded as very high at the Ha-
vannah and Matanzas, when a caballeria costs 2500 to
3000 piasters; it is, however, but rarely 1000 francs
the hectare. In the vicinity of Paris, the price of land
rises to 2500 and 3000 franes. Land of middling fertility
yields 500 kilograms of raw sugar of beetroot per hectare,
value 450 francs : but it is affirmed that in very fertile soils,
in la Beauce and la Brie, the hectare gives more than
1200 kilograms. Supposing, in France, an octuple harvest,
a hectare of land produces 1600 kilograms of wheat, value
288 francs, reckoning: the 100 kilograms of wheat at 16 to
20 francs. Lavoisier estimated the kilogram of wheat four
sous, which makes 20 francs the 100 kilograms. A hectare
yields consequently, within nearly one-fifth, the same weight
in the West Indies in cane-sugar, as in the temperate zone
in wheat. The amylaceous grains of a cereal weigh, by
the hectare, but 270 kilograms more than crystallized sugar
drawn trom the knots of the sugar-cane within the tropics.
Every individual consumes, in the totality of France, 15 to 13
pounds of bread per day, or 200 kilog. of wheat ina year. La-
voisier reckoned 11,667 millions of pounds weight of wheat,
rye, and barley, for a population of 24,676,000 (Peuchei,


,


364


Stat. de la France, p. 286), which makes annually about 230
kilograms per head. The consumption of bread at Paris,
is only 168 kilograms a year. (Chabrol de Volvic, Rech.
Stat:, 1623, p. 73.) In France the gonsumption per head
is 125 times, and in England scarcely 23 times, more of
wheat than sugar. The expence of bread at Paris is esti-
mated at more than 38 millions of francs; while the annual
expence of sugar, of which a great part however is re-
exported to the departments, amounts to 27 millions of
frances (Budget et Comptes de la ville de Paris pour 1825,
p. 16).

I marked above the produce of the cultivation of beetroot,
such as it was estimated in the vicinity of Paris, and ac-
cording to the processes employed four or five years past.
As this cultivation continues to excite the greatest curiosity
in the West Indies, I shall here relate the more recent state-
ments of M. de Beaujeu, in a very interesting memoir pre-
sented to the Academy of Science, in the month of August,
1826. That great agriculturist has kindly given me an
extract of his memoir ; and, as the results he obtains are
much greater than those of the more ancient methods, |
shall here transcribe them :

“€ Considering in general the cultivation of the sugar of
beetroot, above all, of the yellow variety, in those parts of
France particularly fitted for it, such as la Beauce, la Brie,
part of Normandy, and the plains of the north of the king-
dom, I shall estimate, says M. de Beaujeu, the ordinary pro-
duce of a hectare at 30,000 kilograms * from the result of
my own experience. In countries less fertile, 20,000 kilo-
grams is an estimate high enough. This yellow variety of
beetroot ought to yield at most five, at least four per
cent. raw, including that which is furnished by reboiling the
molasses. Now, computing in the fertile parts of France,


* Compare above, vol. vii, p. 204, &c.


365


30,000 kilograms of roots per hectare, those roots, well
scraped and worked, in a favourable season, will produce
1200 to 1500 kilograms of raw sugar; and 750 kilograms
of refined sugar in loaves; 450 kilograms of verjuice, and
300 kilograms of molasses, fit to yield brandy; which
makes 50 per cent. of loaf-sugar, 30 per cent. of verjuice,
and 20 per cent. of molasses. . We may calculate on a mean
of 1000 to 1200 kilograms of raw sugar per hectare, in the
state of improvement which the art of fabrication of native
sugar has attained.”

“ The beetroot, produced by a fertile soil which furnishes
30,000 kilog. the hectare, should yield 75 per cent. * of ex-
pressed juice, and there then remains five and one-third to six
and two-thirds per cent. of raw sugar of the juice of beet-
root, including what is obtained from the reboiling of the
molasses, become very advantageous from the improvement
of the fabrication of syrup. ‘There does not exist in France,
to my knowledge, in 1826, more than thirty establishments
for making sugar of beetroot, which can make at the utmost
500,000 kilog. of raw sugar of different qualities ; but the
greater part of these establishments are far from giving 50
per cent. for loaf-sugar. In the year 1812, it was computed
that there existed 200 establishments, which should furnish a
million of kilog. of raw sugar ; but many of these could only
succeed in making syrups or molasses, of the worst quality,
and of which it was difficult to make any use, It is easy to
obtain a good harvest of beetroot in fertile soils, every three
years: I have long tried one every two years, where the
soil is best appropriated to that cultivation. If the actual
consumption of France was 66 millions of kilograms of
raw sugar, it would require but 168,000 hectares of good
land, of which one-third, or 56,000 hectares cultivated
every year in beetroot, to furnish the sugar necessary for
the whole kingdom.”


* Vol. vii, p. 204, note,


‘261 “A'S'a pav

“a “UNA “65S “MN PUL “NF oGh-c8 | 00-99 | 00-66 | 06-63 | 00ST | o£-1¢
rN “*L0F Sag pue “Ess urs) “AAS
“TL COUN'N PUR PP CO MN
pure can “N °9S “M'S pur “A'S “SE Fz-F8 0-12 0-66 29-16 FST 0:82
3S CASA pur

‘ON N ‘61 SON - ‘Ze “A'S PUR 's} 9z.28 0-62 0-66 | FS-€% 0-61 8-2
‘OT CANE pue "|

‘Ch AN PUR TAN °ZG “A'S PUR ‘S| Zp.06 0-18 0-66 | ce-2e 1-63 ¥-08
*¢ “ONL pue “a

OS CMCN PUR N “8b “A'S Pur s} co-gg 1-Ze 0:96 | 298% 6-€3 PIE
83 CUS

pue'ay "SI “AN ‘OP “A'S PUR “st 96.98 0-82 5:96 ge 0-13 91E
86 “US pur

‘Hd ‘ILC AN “Ze Ca'S'S pur “AA'st 6T.G8 BIL 0:96 | 2-83 0:08 LTE
SCONE pus Trg a oF

91 CONN pure aN ‘ee O'S Pues} 17-28 € LL 0:96 | 31-98% 0-86 O-1E
:) Gace |

PUR" GI“ A'N ‘LT “A'S pue “sf Fe.¢8 BCL 6-46 | 90-Sz 6-12 5-0
8S COSY pur “g

‘GT “MN PUR N “HE SUS pur‘s] F678 0-99 0-86 | SI-'Z 0-61 G-0€
OL “AN pur “gq

‘GI “AN pue-N "eg “AS pues} z7.g8 BEL 0:86 | 32:8 0-61 G-62
“CT CANA Pe | 1S “MAN
pur N “AN ‘86 “a's pue “Ss “A'S| oP.08 0-02 0-66 G8-ZS 0-ST $93
: EI“ AA'N PUP ANN 6
“M'S PUB“A'S'S *8 CANA PU “af oGZ-EZ | 00-69 | 00-46 | oSF-1G | 0ST 09:93


COT 82)%2L Lo] GG gz|rcr’ ava
Te = A I) Hl “UT fog9 Jo uray


CFS 82) €-0 82] 6-F 8G f° Asquiadag


FST 86) 8-11 £461 6:3 82 f toqmaAoN
66-0 8B) GL LB} 81 8efr°** a0q01g
T€-11 46 | GOT 42 | £0 93 J stequiaydag
BFE 86 | 0-0 83) LT 86 ]e+e-3sn8ny|
6L-T 82160 86182 8a]'*"* Sing;
Sh-0 83) 8-01 Ze]/ 1g Boj -***eune


366


60-1 8611-0 861G1 go]'°°* 7: Sew
€1 83) 0-01 48)¢% gzfo-7* Tady
Z61T 20) €6 LO}61 gof°** Yate
Gh 83) G11 26} ¢- go]'* Arenaqay
8-I 82 8.1 121¢9¢ 9¢]°°° Arenuee


iy haclee eat
° “NVaA ‘NIW “xvi “NVA “NIW “XV *NVOIT “NIV "Xvi
SGNIM GHL dO NOLLOaUIG ise wea eS ———/ ISH LNOW
“WALANMOUDAH . “UALAMOWYTAL “YUDLAWOUVA


ee se


: “AUOLSIH IVHOLYN JO YOSSaIOUd SVUDVS
¥T add NOWVHY NOd Ad ‘CZ8I NI ‘UVNNVAVH @HL dO NUGUYD OINVLO@ GHL LY gavin SNOILVAUASHO TVOIDIONOALIIN


367


January, seven days of rain. February, nine days of rain.
The barometer attained its highest elevation in this and the
two preceding months. Afarch, violent showers during
seven days; hail. 4pril and May, little rain. June, eight
days of rain. July, the beginning of the southern tempest ;
storms; eight days of rain. dugust, great calm, the wind
S. and S.E.; seven days of rain. September, calms that
precede gales (chubascos) of south wind; great heat; thir-
teen days of rain. October, violent showers, and a sky that
announced the hurricane from which Trinidad and Cuba
suffered greatly, the Ist October. The same day an extra-
ordinary lowering of the barometer. November, little rain ;
great clouds on the south and south-west. December, the
N. and N.W. winds predominate ; some gales of wind; the
sky covered and foggy. Through the whole year, seventy-
five days of rain. In comparing this year only, the observa-
tions of the temperature of the Havannah, with the mean of
Ferrer (vol. vii, p. 86), we find:


Mean annual temperature in 1825, 24'9°; from 1810 to
1812, 25°7°.

Mean temperature of the hottest month, 28°5°; 28°8°.

Mean temperature of the coldest month, 21°4°; 21°1°.


The instruments were compared with those of the Royal
Observatory of Paris. The barometer is divided into inches
and lines (old French division). The thermometer is cente-
simal. The hygrometer is of hair, of the construction of
Saussure. The figures added to the direction of the winds
indicate, not the duration, but how many times the wind
blew from such or such a rumb. The mean is drawn from
the whole of the observations made three times a day. The
hoary variations of the barometer were 0°74 to 1°74,


368


OF THE TEMPERATURE OF DIFFERENT PARTS OF THE TORRID


ZONE AT THE LEVEL OF THE SEA.


The exact knowledge of the climate of the Havannah and
Rio Janeiro, situated within the tropics of Cancer and Capri-
corn, complete the notions we have acquired on the mean
temperature of different parts of the equinoxial region. That
region furnishes, no doubt, the maximum of mean annual
heat at the equator; but the heat decreases almost insen-
sibly from the equator to 10° of latitude, and with much
greater rapidity from the parallel 15° to that of 28°. The
traveller, in going from the equator towards the tropics, is
less struck by the decrease of the mean annual temperature,
than by the unequal distribution of heat in different parts of
the year. It cannot be doubted that the numerical elements
of tropical Climatology are yet far from being determined
with equal precision; we should labor to improve them ;
but even in the actual state of that science, certain limits of
error may be assigned to those elements, which it is not
probable will be surpassed by new observations. We have
recognised above (vol. vii, p. 81), that the mean tem-
perature of the Havannah, Macoa, and Rio Janeiro, three
places, situated at the level of the sea, and at the extremity
of the equatorial zone, in the two hemispheres, are 25°7° ;
23°3° ; 28°5° cent., and that these differences arise from the
unequal distribution of the neighbouring lands and seas.
What degree of temperature should be admitted for the
equator? This question was recently agitated in a memoir
published by Mr. Atkinson, in the second volume of the
Memoirs of the Astronomical Society of London (p. 187-
183), and which contains very judicious considerations on
several important points of Meteorology. The learned
author attempts to deduce from my cwh observations,
and by employing the most rigid rules of calculation.


369


that the mean temperature of the equator is, at least, 29-2°
of the centigrade thermometer (84'5° F.), and not 27°5°
(81-5° F.), as I had supposed in my Essay on the isotherme
lines. Kirwan fixed on 28°8° ; M. Brewster, in his Climateric
Formules, at 28°2°. (Edinb. Journal of Science, 1829, No. 7,
p. 180.)

If the question in this discussion were the mean tempera-
ture of an equatorial band surrounding the whole globe,
and limited by the parallel of 3° N. and 3°S., we ought
first to examine the temperature of the equatorial ocean ;
for there is only one-fifth of the circumference of the
globe which, in this zone, belongs to the main land. Now,
the mean temperature of the ocean, in the limits we
have reckoned, oscillates in general between 268° and 28°.
I say in general, for we sometimes find the limits of the”
maxima restrained to zones that have scarcely the breadth of
a degree, and of which the temperature rises, in different
longitudes, to 28:7° and 29°3°._ I observed this latter tem-
perature, which may be considered as extremely high in
the Pacific Ocean, on the east of the isles Galapagos, and
the Baron Dirckinck de Holmfeldt, a very well informed
officer of the Danish marine, who has made a great number
of thermometric observations at my request, found recently
(lat. 2°5° N. ; long. 81° 54’ W.), almost on the parallel of
the Punta Guascama, the surface of the water at 30°6°.
These maxima do not belong to the equator itself; but are
found sometimes north, sometimes south of the equator, and
often between 24° and 6° of latitude. The great circle which
passes by the points where. the waters of the sea are hottest,
cuts the equator under an angle which seems to vary with
the. declination of the sun. Travellers have passed several
times, on the Atlantic Ocean, from the northern temperate
zone to the southern temperate zone, without having seen
the centigrade thermometer rise above 28° in the band of the
hottest waters, The marima were for Perrins, 28°2°; for


VOL. VII. 2B


370


Churruca, 28'7° ; for Quevedo, 28°6°; for Rodman, 28°8° ;
for John Davy, 28°1°. The air that reposes on these equa-
torial waters, is 1° to 14° colder than the Ocean. It results
from these facts, that, on five-sixths of the circumference
of the globe, the pelagic equatorial band, far from having a
mean temperature of 29'2° (84'5° F.), has probably not even
28°5°, Mr. Atkinson himself admits (p: 171), that the mix-
ture of oceanic and continental parts, tends: to diminish the
mean temperature of the equator. But in confining himself
solely to the continental plains of South America, he adopts
for’ the equatorial zone (from 1° N. to 1° 8.), according to
different theoretic suppositions, 29°2° or 31°. He founds this
conclusion on the fact, that at 10° 27/ of latitude at Cumana,
the mean temperature is 27°62, and that, according to the
law of the increase of heat from the pole to the equator (an
increase’ which depends on the square of the cosine of lati-
tide), the mean temperature of the equator must be at least
above 29°20, M. Atkinson finds the confirmation of this re-
sult, in reducing to the level of the equatorial sea, differences
of temperature which I had observed on the declivity of the
Cordilleras as far as 500 toises high. In employing the cor-
rections which he thinks due to the latitude, and the pro-
gressive diminution of the heat in a vertical plan, he admits
how much the position of places on vast table-lands or in
narrow vallies, renders a part of those corrections uncertain.
(Mem. of the Astr. Soc., vol. ii, p. 149, 158, 171, 172, 182,
183.)

When the problem of the distribution of heat on the sur-
face of the globe, is studied in all its generality, and dis-
embarrassed of the accessory considerations of localities (for
instance, of the effects of the configuration, colour, and
geognostic nature of the soil, the predominance of certain
winds, the proximity of the sea, the frequency of clouds and
fogs, the nocturnal refraction towards a sky more or less
serene, &c.), we find that the mean temperature of a station


371


depends on the different manner in which the influence of
the meridional height of the sun is manifested. That height
at once determines the duration of the semi-diurnal arch ;
the length and diaphaneity of the portion of the atmosphere
crossed by the rays before they attain the horizon; the quan-
tity of rays absorbed or warming (a quantity which aug-
ments rapidly when the angle of incidence counted from the
level of the surface increases) ; finally, the number of solar
rays which a given horizon comprehends. ‘The law of
Mayer, with all the modifications which have been intro-
duced within thirty years, is an empiric law that represents
the generality of phenomena by approximation, and often
in a satisfactory manner, but which cannot be employed to
combat the testimony of direct observations. If the surface
of the globe, from the equator to the parallel of Cumana, :
were a desert like Sahara, or a savannah uniformly covered
with gramines like the Llanos of Calabozo and the Apure,
there would be indubitably an increase of the mean tempera-
ture, from 103° of latitude to the equator ; but it is very
probable that this increase would not attain 3 of a degree of


4
the centesimal thermometer. M. Arago, whose important


and ingenious researches extend to every branch of Mete-
orology, has recognized, by direct experiments, that, from
the perpendicular incidence to the 20° of zenital distance,


the quantity of reflected light is nearly the same. He has
also found that the photometric effect of the solar light
varies very little at Paris, in the month of August, from
noon till three in the afternoon, notwithstanding the change
in the length of the way which the rays pass over in cross-
ing the atmosphere.

If I fixed the mean equatorial temperature in round num-
bers, at 272°, it was in order to attribute to the equatorial
zone, properly so called (from 3° N. to 8° S.), the mean
temperature of Cumana (27°7°). That town, surrounded
with barren sands, placed beneath a sky always serene, and


2B2


372


of which the light vapours never dissolve in rain, has a more
ardent climate than all the places that surround it, and are
equally placed at the level of the sea. In advancing in
South America towards the equator, by the Oroonoko and
the Rio Negro, the heat diminishes, not on account of the
elevation of the soil, which from the fort San Carlos, is
inconsiderable, but on account of the forests, the frequent
rains, and the want of diaphaneity in the atmosphere. It is
to be regretted, that even the most laborious travellers are
so little enabled to advance the progress of Meteorology, by
augmenting our knowledge of the mean temperature; they
do not sojourn long in the countries of which we desire to
know the climate; they can only collect for the annual
mean, the observations of others, and often at hours, and
with the aid of instruments, that are far from giving exact
results, On account of the constancy of the atmospheric
phenomena in the zone nearest the equator, a short space of
time would suffice to give approximatively the mean tempe-
rature at different heights above the level of the ocean. I
devoted myself every where to these kinds of researches ; but
the sole precise result I could obtain, is drawn from obser-
vations made twice a day, at Cumana. The real numeric
numbers of Climatology can only be determined by well-
informed persons, settled for a great number of years, in dif-
ferent parts of the world; and, in that point of view, the
intellectual regeneration which is preparing in free equatorial
America, from the shore to two thousand toises high, on
the back and on the declivity of the Cordilleras, between the
parallel of the isle of Chiloé and that of San Francisco of
New California, will have the happiest influence on physieal
science.

In comparing what was known of the mean temperature of
the equatorial region forty years ago with what we now know,
we are astonished at the slow progress of positive Climato-
logy. Ihave heard but of one mean temperature hitherto


observed with some appearance of precision, between 3° N.
and 8° S. ; that of Saint Louis de Maranham (lat. 2° 29’ S.)
at Brazil, which Colonel Antonio Pereira Lago finds, from
observations made in 1821, three times a day (at 205, at 45,
and at 115), to be 27:4° cent. (Annaes das Sciencias, das
Artes e das Letras, 1822, vol. xvi, pl. 2, p. 55-80.) It is
still 0°3° less than the mean temperature of Cumana. We
know, below 10° of latitude, only the mean temperature of


Batavia (lat. 6° 12'S.)
Cumana (lat. 10° 27’ N.)


Between 1040 latitude, and the extremity of the torrid
zone, follow :


Pondicherry (lat. 11° 55’ N.)

Madras: (lathe! 3°47 Ni). ae ieee cone aur 26°9°
Manilla (lat. 14° 36’ N.)

Senegalie(lataoe!O8@ Na)js 7 wearers oe 26'5°
Bombay (lat. 18° 56”)

Macao (late22012/ ANis) vote svete ogee ts reece 23°30
Rio Janeiro (lat. 22° 547 S.)

The Havannah (lat. 23° 97 .N.) .............0+-- 25°79


To which may be added, from the observations of Colo-
nel Pereira,


Maranham (lat. 2° 29’ S.)


It appears to result from these statements, that the sole
place in the equinoxial region, of which the temperature
exceeds 27°7°, is situated in 12° of latitude. This is Pondi-
cherry, of which the climate can no more serve to charac-
terize the equatorial region, than the Oasis of Mourzouk,
where the unfortunate Ritchie and Captain Lyon, assert


374


that they saw, during whole months (perhaps on account of
the sand spread in the air), the thermometer of Reaumur
between 38° and 43°, characterizes the climate of the tem-
perate zone in the north of Africa. The great mass of tro-
pical lands are situated between 16° and 28° of north lati-
tude; and it is of that zone that, from the establishment
of so many rich and commerciai towns, we possess most
meteorological knowledge. The three or four degrees
nearest the equator is terra incognita for Climatology. We
are yet ignorant of the mean temperature of Grand Para,
Guayaquil, and even Cayenne.

If we consider the heat of only certain parts of the year


in the northern hemisphere, we there find climates even


beyond the most ardent of the tropics. At Abusheer, for
instance (lat. 283°), the mean temperature of the month of
July is 84°. In the Red Sea, the centesimal thermometer
is, at noon, 44°; at night, 342°. At Benares (lat. 25° 20’),
the heat in summer attains 44°, while it lowers in winter to
7-2°, These observations on India were made with an ex-
cellent thermometer at the maxima of Six; the mean tem-
perature of Benares is 25°20,

The extreme heat observed in the southern portion of the
temperate zone, between Egypt, Arabia, and the Gulf of
’ Persia, is the simultaneous effect of the configuration of the
surrounding lands, the state of their surface, the constant
diaphaneity of the air destitute of aqueous vapors, and the
length of the days, which increases with the latitude. Be-
tween the tropics great heats are rare, and generally do not
exceed 32°8° at Cumana and Bombay; and 35:1° at Vera
Cruz. It is almost useless to add, that the observations
marked in this note were made in the shade, and far from
the reverberation of the soil. At the equator, where the
solsticial heights attain 66° 32’, the passages of the sun by
the zenith are 186 days distant from each other; the sol-
sticial height at Cumana, is in summer 76° 59’; in winter,


315


560 5’, and the passages by the zenith (17th April and 26th
August) at a distance of 131 days. Further north, at the
Havannah, we find, solsticial height, summer, 89° 41’;
winter, 430 23’; distance of the passages (12th June and 1st
July), 19 days. If these passages are not always recognized
with equal evidence in the curve of the months, it is because
in some places their influence is marked by the entrance of
the rainy season, and other electrical phenomena. The
sun, at Cumana, is during 109 days, or more precisely, dur-
ing 1275 hours (from the 28th October to the 14th Feb-
ruary following), lower than at the equator; but in that
interval, its maximum of zenithal distance does not exceed
33° 55’. The slackened progress of the sun in approaching
the tropics augments the heat of places situated further from
the equator, above all, towards the confines of the torrid
and temperate zones. Near the tropics, for instance, at the
Havannah (lat. 23° 9’), the sun takes 24 days in passing
over a degree on each side of the zenith; and at the equa-
tor, only five days. At Paris (lat. 48° 50’), where the sun
lowers at the winter solstice to 17° 42’, the solsticial height
in summer is 64° 38’. The sun is consequently, at Paris,
from 1st May to 12th August, during the interval of 103
days, or 1422 hours, as high as at Cumana, at another
period of the year. In comparing Paris and the Havannah,
we find, at the former, from the 26th March to the 17th
September, during 175 days, or 2407 hours, the sun as high
as it is at another season within the tropic of Cancer. Now,
in that interval of 175 days, the mean temperature of the
hottest month (July), is 18°6°, according to the registers of
the Royal Observatory of Paris, from 1806 to 1820; while
at Cumana and the Havannah, when the sun lowers in the
former place to 36°5°, and in the latter to 43°23°, the


coldest month at Cumana, notwithstanding the long nights,
is 26°2°; and at the Havannah, 21°2° of mean heat. In
every zone, the temperature of one part of the year is modi-


376


fied by that of the preceding seasons. The lowering of the
temperature within the tropics is inconsiderable, because in
the anterior months the earth has received a mass of mean
heat equivalent, at Cumana, to 27°, and at the Havannah,
to 25°5° of the centigrade thermometer.

From the whole of the considerations which I have just
stated, it appears to me by no means probable that the
equatorial temperature can attain 29°2°, as the learned and
respectable author of the memoir on astronomical refractions
supposes. ‘The ecclesiastic de Béze, the first traveller who
gave the counsel to observe the coldest and hottest hours of
the day, thought he had found, in the years 1686 and 1699,
in comparing Siam, Malacca, and Batavia, “‘ that the heat
was not greater at the equator than at 14° of latitude.” - I


believe that a difference exists, but it is very small, and


marked by the effect of many causes which act simultane-
ously on the mean temperature of a place. The observa-
tions hitherto collected do not give as the measure of a pro-
gressive increase between the equator and the latitude of
Cumana.


BOOK XI.


CHAPTER XXIX.


Passage from Trinidad of Cuba to Rio Sinu.—
Carthagena.—Air Volcanses of Turbaco.—
Canal of Mahates.


On the morning of the 17th of March, we
perceived the most eastern island of the groupe ~
of the Little Caymans. In comparing the
reckoning with the chronometric longitude, I
ascertained that the currents had borne us in
seventeen hours, twenty miles to the west. The
island, which the English pilots call Cayman-
brack, and the Spanish pilots Cayman chico
oriental, forms a rocky wall, bare and steep
towards the south and south-east. The north
and north-west part, is low, sandy, and covered
with little vegetation. The rock is divided into
thin horizontal shelves.: From its whiteness,
and its proximity to the island of Cuba, I


37/8


believed it to be of jurassic limestone. We
approached the eastern extremity of Cayman-
brack within the distance of 400 toises. The
neighbouring coast is not entirely free from
danger and from breakers ; yet the temperature
of the sea had not sensibly diminished at its
surface. It was 25:5°; while at 20° 25’ of lati-
tude, in the open sea, fifteen leagues distance
from Caymanbrack and the Cayos de los doce
leguas, 1 found 25°3° of the centigrade thermo-
meter. I mentioned in another place, the
doubts in which the astronomical positions of
the Great and the two Little Caymans * have
so long been enveloped. These doubts will
then only be entirely removed when some
observer, furnished with several chronometers,
shall have successively examined the three
islands, and determined their length and re-
spective distances, connected with the meri-
dian of cape Saint Antonio+. The time-


* See above, vol. vi, p. 815, and the Analysis of
the Map of the island of Cuba, p. 23. The longitude
(83° 46’) assigned by Admiral Roussin at the Cape N. W.
of the Great Cayman agrees with the longitude of the
Cape S. E. (88° 25’) found by Captain Wallace Monteath;
in 1820. See Chart of the Mexican Sea by Purdy and Mac-
kellar (December 1823). The fine Map of the West Indies,
by Captain De Mayne (London, 1824), also places the
Cape N. W. of the Great Cayman 83° 50/.

+ The Chart of the Oceano Ailantico, published by the
hydrographic depdt of Madrid, in 1804, reduces the Channel


9


keeper of Louis Berthoud, gave me 82° 73
for the longitude of the eastern cape of Cay-
manbrack, supposing the port of Batabano 84°
45’ 56”, and the town of Trinidad of Cuba, 82°
21 7”. The latitude reduced by the reckoning
on the rhumbs of wind at the meridian obser-
vation, appeared to me to be 19° 40°50". Don
Ciriaco Cavallos, who visited this coast a year
after my voyage, has marked it 19° 42’; but
the longitude on which he has fixed by the
transport of time from Aguadilla de Portorico,
is 8’ more easterly than mine *. It is the
general opinion of the pilots, that the dip of the
loaded needle differs greatly around the Cay-
mans, from that which is observed at the


m/s
Vv;


western extremity of Jamaica and near the isle
of Pinos. Tbe calcareous nature of the rock,
and the magnetic experiments made in those
latitudes +, little favor this supposition. Tn


between the Great Cayman and the Little Western Cayman
to thirty miles. This Channel is, according to De Mayne,
56/; and according to Livingston and Purdy, 1° 2’. Cap-
tain Mackellar and De Mayne differ also five miles in the
length of the Great Cayman.

* The recent maps of De Mayne, Livingston, and Mac-
kellar, place the eastern cape of Caymanbrack at 82° 15’,
whence results a difference of 7’ towards the west.

+ The detailed. plan of the Great Cayman, by Purdy and
Mackellar, indicates the magnetic dip at Boddentown, 8°
east ; in the Channel of Yucatan, it is 84°, but, at the Havan-
nah and Kingston, 6° 0” to 6° 45! ; and at cape Beata, as at


380


navigating on a sea where the currents vary
with the winds and seasons, when the relative
place of the point of departure is very imper-
fectly known, and the islands to be avoided, it
is natural that those islands should appear
often to the navigator, where they were least
expected to be found; and the compass is ac-
cused, when we ought to complain of the un-
certainty of the reckoning and the imperfec-
tion of astronomical geography.

As long as we were in sight of the rock of
Caymanbrack, sea-turtles of an extraordinary
dimension swam around our vessel. The
abundance of these animals led Columbus to
give the whole groupe of the Caymans, the
name of Penascales de las Tortugas, rock of the
turtles. The sailors would have thrown them-
selves into the water in order to take some of
those animals; but the great number of sharks
that accompany them, rendered the attempt
too perilous. ‘The sharks nailed their jaws to


Cumana, 4° 0’ to 40157. In those latitudes the curve of
the magnetic variation runs from 8. E. to N. W. According
to the very precise observations of Captain Sabine, the mag-
netic dip at Jamaica (Port Henderson), was 46° 58’; at
Great Cayman, 48° 48’; at the Havannah, 51° 55‘; while
the magnetic intensity was represented, in those three
places, by the numbers 1°62, 1°63, and 1°72. Exper. Pen-
dulum (1825), p. 474 and 490. This progress of the phe-
nomena is very regular,


381


great hooks of iron which were flung to them;
these hooks were very sharp and (for want of
anzuelos encadenados) tied to cords; the sharks
were in this manner heaved up half their body,
and we were surprised to see that those which
had already their mouths bloody, again seized
this sort of bait during whole hours*. At the
sight of sharks, the sailors in a Spanish vessel
always recollect the local fable of the coast of
Venezuela, where the benediction of a holy bi-
shop + softened the habits of the Squals, which
are every where else the dread of mariners. Are
these wild sharks of the port of La Guayra spe-


* Vidimus quoque squales, quotiescunque hamo icti dimidia
parte corporis e fluctibus extrahebantur, cita alvo stercus emit
tere haud absimile excrementis caninis. Commovebat intes-
tina (ut arbitramur) subitus pavor. Although the form and
number of teeth change with age, and the teeth appear
successively in the squals, I doubt if it can be admitted,
with Don Antonio Ulloa (Memorias secretas de America diri-
gidas al Marques de la Ensenada, vol.i, p. 5), “that the
young sharks have two, and the old four rows (anda-
nas) of grinders.’ These, like many other sea-fish, are
easily accustomed to live in fresh water, or water a little
briny. It is observed that sharks (tiburones) abound of late
in the Laguna of Maracaybo, where they have been attracted
by the carcasses thrown into the water after the frequent
combats between. the Spanish royalists and the Columbian
republicans. (Manuscripts of M. Plee, travelling naturalist of
the Museum of Natural History of Paris, part vi, fol. 88.)

+ See above, vol. iii, p. 383.


382


cifically different from those which cause such
terrible accidents in the port of the Havannah ?
Do the former belong to the small groupe of
Emissoles with small sharp teeth, which M.
Cuvier * has separated from the Melandres, by
the name of Musteli ?

The wind freshened more and more from the
south-east, as we advanced towards cape Negril
and the western extremity of the great bank
of la Vibora. We were often forced to drive
from our course; and, on account of the ex-
treme smallness of our vessel, we were almost
constantly under water. The 18th March, at
noon, we found we were in latitude 18° 17’ 40”,
and in 81° 50’ of longitude. The horizon, to
the height of 15°, was covered with those red-
dish vapours so common within the tropics,
and which never seem to affect the hygrometer
at the surface of the globe. We passed fifty
miles west of cape Negril on the south, nearly
at the point where several charts indicate an
insulated flat, of which the position is similar
to that of Sancho Pardo, opposite cape Saint
Antonio of Cuba. We saw no change in the
bottom. It appears that the Rocky Shoal, at
four fathoms, near cape Negril, no more exists
than the rock (Cascabel) itself, long believed to
mark the western extremity of la Vibora (Pedro


* Animal Kingdom, vol. ii, p. 128.


383


Bank), as Portland Rock or la Sola designates
the eastern extremity. The 19th of March, at
four in the afternoon, the muddy colour of the
sea announced that we had reached that part
of the bank of la Vibora, where we no longer
find fifteen, and scarcely nine to ten fathoms of
water. Our chronometric longitude was 81° 3’;
and our latitude probably below 17°. I was
surprised that, at the noon observation, at 17° 7’
of latitude, we yet perceived no change in the
colour of the water. Having twice crossed
this bank, in its length and breadth, and hay-
ing tried to determine the position of its prin-
cipal dangers, I may here be permitted to add,
that the map of Captain Mayne only, appeared
to me conformable to what I had observed of
the real form, and southern and eastern limits
of la Vibora. That map indicates with great
precision the sudden diminution of the depth at
16° 54’ and 17° 5’ of latitude, and 81° 2’ of lon-
gitude, which I have just mentioned, as well as
the breakers twenty-four miles south-east of
Pedro Kays (Nordest Kays) on which we had
nearly perished in the night of the 6th of
December *, in going from Nueva Barcelona to


* Vol. iii, p. 818. The General Chart of the West In-
dies, published in 1824, by order of the English Admiralty,
places “‘a rock five feet above the water,” lat. 16° 49', and
long. 80° 32’. From this rock a chain of breakers extends
at twenty-two miles distance, in the direction S. E, and


384


the Havannah. Spanish vessels going from
Batabano or Trinidad de Cuba to Carthagena,


N. W., towards the isle of Savannah, or South West Kay,
and further, towards the isles of Pedro Kays. The rock
which put us in danger, in the night of the 6th of Decem-
ber, and on which we should indubitably have struck, but
for the vigilance of a passenger, M. Fernandez, is, accord-
ing to my observations, in latitude 16° 50’, and longitude
80° 44’, This longitude has been deduced by M. Oltmanns,
from horary angles which I had taken the evening before, a
little before sun-set, and in the morning of the 7th of De-
cember. Other combinations on the errors of the reckon-
ing, had giver: me on the very spot, a more eastern longi~
tude. When from South Kay, or the most southern of the
Pedro Kays, we direct our course S. W. at eighteen miles
distance, we enter among the breakers which succeed each
other from N. W. E. to S. S. W., but of which the southern
extremity turns towards the S. E., as in a sack. I have also
some reasons for believing that the bank of la Vibora, indi-
cated by the muddy colour of the water, extends on the
south of the Pedro Kays, a little more towards the south
than the charts indicate, even that of M. De Mayne. With
respect to the Piedra del Monarca of the Spanish maps (the
rock on which the ship e/ Monarca was nearly lost in 1798),
it cannot be placed as M. Espinosa indicates (Memorias del
Deposito hydrografico of Madrid, vol. ii, p. 68), in latitude
16° 447 26”, and longitude 80° 28/23”. ‘Lhat position, ac-
cording to the limits assigned to the bank of the Vibora in
M. De Mayne’s chart, would fall beyond the bank, ten
miles distant on the south. It must, however, be recollected
in this discussion, that M. De Mayne differs from the charts
of the Deposito, and those of Purdy and Livingston, both in
the absolute and relative longitudes of Jamaica. It places
cape Negril at the western extremity of the Vibora, 13’ and


385


usually pass over the bank of la Vibora, on its
western side, at fifteen to sixteen fathoms of
water. The dangers of the breakers begin only
beyond the meridian &0° 45’ of west longitude.
In passing along the bank on its southern limit,
as the pilots often do in the passage from
Cumana or other parts of the main land to
the Great Cayman or cape Saint Antonio, they
need not-ascend, along the rocks, above 16° 47°
of latitude. Fortunately the currents run on
the whole bank to the S. W.

In considering la Vibora not as submerged
land, but as a heaved-up part of the surface of
the globe which could not reach the level of
the sea, we are struck to see this great sub-
marine island display, like the neighbouring
land of Jamaica and Cuba, the loftiest heights


10’ more eastward, and Port Royal with Captain Sabine
(Pendul, Exper., p. 401), 79° 18', which, according to the
observations of Macfarlane and Candler, had hitherto been
believed to be 79° 5” 30”. The following is the comparison
of some points which I could only survey at great distances.
I found (in 1801) : Cape Beata, '73° 50’ (De Mayne, 73° 53 ;
cape Abacou, long. 76° 7’ 50” (De Mayne, 76° 8’); Ranas,
or Morant Kays, center '78° 23’ 35” (De Mayne, 78° 20') ;
cape Portland, long. 79° 19’, but seen at 50° of distance (De
Mayne, 79° 32’); Pedro Kays, employing the horary angles
which I had taken three hours before, according to M. Olt-
manns, long. 80° 3’; according to my calculations made on
board, and the combinations of the reckoning (Obs. astr.,
Introduction, p. xliii), long. 8° 13! 45” (De Mayne, 80° 14’).
VOL, VII. 2c


386


towards its eastern boundary. ‘There are placed
Portland Rock, Pedro Kays, and South Kay,
surrounded with dangerous breakers. The
depth is six or eight fathoms; but, in advanc-
ing to the middle of the bank, along the line of
the summit, first towards the west, and then to-
wards the north-west, the depth becomes suc-
cessively ten, twelve, sixteen, and nineteen
fathoms. When we consider on a map the
proximity of the high lands of Saint Domingo,
Cuba, and Jamaica, in the neighbourhood of
the Windward Channel, the position of the
island of Navaza and the bank of Hormigas,
between the capes Tiburon and Morant; finally
that chain of successive breakers from the Vi-
bora, by Bazo Nuevo, Serranilla and Quita-
Sueno as far as the Sound of the Mosquitos, we
cannot but recognize in this system of islands
and flats, the almost continued trace of a
heaved up ridge, running from N. E. to 8S. W.
This ridge and the ancient dyke, which links by
the rock of Sancho Pardo, cape Saint Antonio
to the peninsula of Yucatan, divides the great
sea of the West Indies into three partial basins,
similar to those we observe in the Mediter-
ranean*. J examined in this passage, as I had
done in going in an American vessel, with


* See above, vol. vi, p. 552.
+ Vol. vi, p. 814,


387


Captain Newton, from Nueva Barcelona to the
Havannah, the influence of the depth of the sea
on the temperature of the surface; but these
reiterated attempts were not successful. I
found, between Caymanbrack and the parallel
of cape Negril, consequently on the north of
the bank of la Vibora, in the deepest waters,
25°5° to 25°8°. On the bank itself, at nine or
ten fathoms deep, the most troubled waters in-
dicated 256°. Is it the rapidity of the cur-
rents which prevents the bank from exercising
its action on the temperature? Further north,
between the Jardines y Jardinillos, and. espe-
cially among the breakers of Diego Perez, I
found, according to the changes of depth, a
difference as great as 4°2°. In the Sound of
Campeachy *, at fifteen fathoms, the tempera-
ture lowers at the surface, 2°5°: I saw on the
Great Bank of Newfoundland (in July 1804),


* Manuscript Observations of Don Lucas Alaman. The
20th February, 1820, lat. 22°14’, long. 89° 4’; sea, 25°
(air, 27°5°): February 21st, lat. 21° 53’ ; long. 90° 15’; sea,
22-5° (air, 24°3°). See also above, Per. Nar., vol. t, p. 29, ;
vol. ii, p. 142 ; vol. iii, p. 367. The diminution of the tempera-
ture observed on the north of Tobago, was probably produced
by some accidental cause. The shoal indicated in the chart of
Borda as joining Tabago and Grenada, is suppressed in the
most recent marine: charts. Those charts however, mark,
at twelve miles distance from the South Cape of Grenada,
soundings of eighteen and nineteen fathoms deep. Would
that land sustain the soundings further in the open sea ?

20 2


388


the thermometer* between 8°3° and 12°2°,
while far from the bank, and beyond the Gulf
stream, it kept up at 19°4°; and in the Gulf-
stream, at 21'1°. Mr. Sabine, in a work filled
with important observations on the distribution
of heat on the globe, regards also the rapidity
of the currents as the real cause that some
shoals - have an influence on the temperature of
the Ocean. This circumstance is very im-
portant for the safety of navigation. A sudden
change in the heat of the waters should always
fix the attention of pilots; it indicates either a
change in the currents, or the proximity of a
bank; but as there are some banks which are
not manifested by the colour of the waters, so
there are some also which do not sensibly affect
the temperature of the Ocean. In general (and
I made the observation during the four days
which I passed on the Great Bank of New-
foundland), it appeared to me that the lower-
ing of the temperature is greatest on the edge
(accores) of the banks, and augments but little
towards the middle. Does not this phenomenon
seem to prove that the cold of the flats is less


* During this time, the air at noon, on the bank, was
between 14°3° and 15 5°. (Observations on the centigrade
thermometer, which is always meant in this work, when the
contrary is not expressly indicated.) ;

+ For instance, on the coast of Maranham. (Sabine, Pen-
dulum Eaxper., p. 445,)


389


produced by the molecules of water that cool
by reflection, at the surface of the Ocean, dur-
ing winter, or at night, and in summer in fall-


ing towards the bottom, than by the heaving
up of the lower layers of the Ocean, and their
mixture with the upper layers near the edge of
the banks?

The colour of the troubled waters on the shoal
of the Vibora, is not, properly speaking, milky,
like the colour of the waters in the Jardinillos
and on the bank of Bahama; it is of a dirty
grey. These striking differences of tint on the
bank of Newfoundland, in the archipelago of
the Bahama islands, and on the Vibora, these
variable quantities of earthy matter, suspended
in the more or less troubled waters of the
soundings, maybe alike the effect ofthe variable
absorption of the rays of light, contributing to
modify to a certain point the temperature of
the sea. Where the shoals are 8° to 10° colder at
their surface than the surrounding sea, we can-
not be surprised that they produce a local
change of climate. A great mass of very cold
water, as on the bank of Newfoundland, in the
current of the Peruvian shore (between the port
of Callao and Punta Parina*), or in the African


* Y found the surface of the Pacific Ocean, in the month
of October 1802, on the coast of Truxillo, at 15°8° cent. ;
in the port of Callao, in November, at 15°5° ; between the


390


current near cape Vert *, have necessarily an
influence on the atmosphere that covers the


parallel of Callao and Punta Parifia, in December, 19° and
progressively, when the current advanced towards the equa-
tor, and receded towards the W. N. W., 20°5° and 223°.
The temperature of the sea in the same latitudes, beyond
the current, was at the same epoch, 27°2°. This phe-
nomenon, of the greatest importance for the climate of Peru
along the shore, struck me the more forcibly, as till then
no traveller had seen the temperature of the sea decrease be-
tween the tropics, far from the coasts, to 15°5° (60° Fahr.).
The great number of observations made by different navi=
gators, between 14° north and 14° south, fixed, for the tro-
pical region, the extreme limits of the temperature of the
Ocean at, its surface, at 224° and 30°6°. The former tempe-
rature prevails in the month of July, in the channel between
the African island of Saint Thomas and the Ascension ; the
latter observation was made opposite the Punta Guascama,
on the coast of Peru, at 2° 5/ of north latitude. The mean
limit of the tropical region is but from 25° to 28°. A dis-
tinguished officer of the royal Danish marine, the Baron
Dirckinck de Holmfeldt, has recently confirmed (in 1825)
my observations on the current of cold waters of Peru; he
found the waters of Callao, in August, 15°7°; in June,
18°1°; in March, 19°5°; in January and February, from 22°
to 24'6°, The waters, in March and April, were beyond the
current, and on the north 2° of lat. ; on the south, 26°4° to
29°7°. Ishall discuss, in another place, the influence which
the garua and the mollizna, that is, the vapors which, on the
shore of Lower Peru, veil the sun from the month of April
and May till November, exert on the temperature of a por-
tion of the Ocean, in weakening the action of the rays ab-
sorbed by the surface of the water.

* Between cape Manoel and the isle of Gorée, where


391


sea, and on the climate of the neighbouring
land; but it is less easy to conceive that those
slight changes of temperature (for instance, a
centesimal degree on the bank of la Vibora),
can give a peculiar character to the atmosphere
of the shoals. Do these swhmarine islands act
upon the formation and accumulation of the
vesiculary vapours in another manner than by
cooling the waters of the surface?

In quitting the bank of la Vibora, we passed
between the Baxo Nuevo and the light-house of
Comboy. The former was then believed to be
in the meridian of the western extremity of la .
Vibora, in 81° 28’ of longitude, and 15° 57’ of
latitude. Some years later, in 1804, the col-
league of Fidalgo Don Manuel del Castillo,
captain of a frigate, was sent to fix the posi-
tions of the rocks of Roncador, Serrana, Ser-
ranilla, and the neighbouring dangers; he
placed the Baro Nuevo at 15° 49° of latitude,
and 80° 56’ of longitude *. If such be in fact
the position, and I am led to think so, we must
have almost touched the shoal in the day time on


Captain Sabine found the surface of the Ocean, in May 1822,
17°79 to 20°5°; while, beyond the current, which bears
S.S, E., the temperature was 22° to 28°. (Pendul, Exper.,
p. 434.)

* Compare the two editions of the Carta del Mar de los
Antillas, published by the hydrographic Depdt of Madrid, in
1805 and 1809.


392


the 20th of March, when we found ourselves, at
noon, in 16° 5’ of latitude. On the 19th, my
chronometric longitude was 81° 6 on the bank
of la Vibora; and, the 22d of March, on the
parallel 13° 41’, 80° 49’. It results * from these
precise statements, that, without reckoning the
partial variations caused by the currents, we
must have crossed the parallel of Baxo Nuevo,
at the meridian of 80° 55’. M. De Mayne
appears to doubt altogether the existence of
this shoal. That able navigator marks Comboy
only on his chart (lat. 15° 40’, long. 80° 12’),
which M. Castillo had sought for vainly be-
tween 15° 45’ and 15° 54’ of latitude. It is to
be hoped that new observations will fix the
longitude of Baxo Nuevo, which may become
so dangerous to vessels going from the Havan-
nah to Portobello and Carthagena. I thought
it my duty not to pass silently over the doubts
which have arisen in my mind from my own
experience. The temperature of the sea was, at
16° 5’ and 13° 36’ of latitude, constantly 26°6° ;
26°8°; 26°5°.


* J regret that I do not find on my journal the chrono-
metric longitude of the 20th and 21st March. The journal
merely indicates that, during two days, I had taken the lunar
distances to compare the method of calculation of Borda
with that of Bodtwitsch, which we find explained in the
Almanaque nautico de Cadiz, 1801; but the results of the
distances are not marked upon the registers.


393


22d March.—We passed more than thirty
leagues to the westward of Roncador. This shoal
bears the name of Snorer, because the pilots
assert, from ancient traditions, that a sound
like snoring (roncar) is heard from afar. If
this noise actually occurs, it arises, no doubt,
from a periodical issuing of the air com-
pressed by waters in a rocky cavern. I have
observed the same phenomenon on several
coasts, for instance, in the promontories of
Teneriffe, in the limestones of the Havannah *,
and in the granite of Lower Peru, between
Truxillo and Lima. A project was formed at
the Canary islands, of placing a machine at the
issue of the compressed air, and employing the
sea as an impelling force. While the autumnal
equinox (el Cordonazo de San Francisco) is
every where dreaded in the sea of the West
Indies, with the exception of the coast of Cu-
‘mana and Carracas, the spring equinox pro-
duces no effect on the tranquillity of those tro-
pical regions: a phenomenon, almost the in-
verse of what is observed in the high latitudes.
Since we had quitted la Vibora, the weather
was remarkably fine ; the surface of the sea, of
a blue indigo, sometimes violet, on account of
the innumerable quantity of meduses and eggs
of fish (purga de mar) which covered it, was


* See above, p. 52, note 2.


394


geutly agitated. The thermometer kept up, in
the shade, at 26° to 27°; not a cloud arose on
the horizon, although the wind was constantly
north, or N.N. W. Can we attribute to this
wind, which cools the higher layers of the
atmosphere, and there produces icy crystals,
the haloes which were formed round the moon
two nights successively? The haloes were of
small dimension, the diameter 45°. I never
had occasion to see and measure those* of
which the diameter had attained 90°. The
disappearance of one of those lunar haloes was
followed by the formation of a great black
cloud, which let fall some drops of rain; but
the sky soon resumed its fixed serenity, and we
saw a long series of falling stars and bolides,
which moved in the same direction, and con-
trary to that of the wind of the low regions.
23d March.—The comparison of the reckon-
ing with the chronometric longitude, mani-
fested the force of a current which bears to-
wards the W. S. W. Its swiftness in the


* In Captain Parry’s first voyage, haloes were measured
round the sun and moon, of which the rays were 224°; 220
52/; 38° ; 46°. ( Northwest Passage, 1821, p. 119, 131, 155,
172.) Can one be deceived with an instrument of reflection,
on account of the paleness of the milky way, more than
twenty minutes, when we are not guided by the position of
some star situated at the limit of the crown? (Scoresby’s
Greenland, p. 277-283.)


395


parallel of 17°, was twenty to twenty-two miles
in twenty-four hours. I found the temperature
of the sea a little diminished; in lat. 12° 35’, it
was only 25:9° (air 270°). During the whole
day, the heavenly vault displayed a spectacle
which struck even the most indolent sailors,
and which I had already remarked June 13th,
1799. There was a total absence of clouds,
even of those light vapours called dry ; yet the
sun coloured with a fine tint of rose, the air,
and the horizon of the sea. Towards night,
the sky was covered with great bluish clouds ;
and when they disappeared, we saw, at an_
immense height, fleeces of clouds in regular
spaces, and ranged in convergent bands. ‘Their
direction was from N..N. W. to 8. 8. E., or
more exactly, N. 20° W., consequently con-
trary to the direction of the magnetic meri-
dian. Can the uniform spaces which this
small groupe of vapours displayed, be con-
sidered as the effect of an electric repulsion,
such as is seen in the figures of Lichtenberg on
the electrophore, in the congelation of the
vapours on our windows, and in the dendrites
of manganese that cover the rents of jura lime-
stone? I beheld with surprise, that the points
of convergence, and the poles of these bands of
clouds, did not remain motionless, but ap-
proached by degrees the poles of the world,
without however attaining them. The vapours


396


became invisible towards two in the morning.
I have since frequently observed this pheno-
menon, which recalls some appearances of the
aurora borealis and australis, and which is
certainly not the simple effect of an optical illu-
sion (parallel streaks of clouds placed in the
direction of the winds). It is displayed at all
seasons, especially in very calm nights, at
Quito, Mexico, and in Italy and France; I
have marked it in my journals by the name of
polar bands, moveable, or immoveable ; the lat-
ter are often placed in the magnetic meridian
of the spot. Many philosophers in Europe have
fixed their attention on these bands. It were to
be wished that the azimuth of their poles, the
direction and swiftness of their movement, their
relations to the horary declination, and the
intensity of their magnetic force, were measured
with precision.

24th March.—We entered that kind of gulf
which is bounded on the east by the coast of
Saint Martha, and on the west by Costa Rica ;
for the mouth of the Magdalena and that of
the Rio San Juan de Nicaragua, are on the
same parallel, nearly at 11° of latitude. The
proximity of the Pacific Ocean, the configura-
tion of the neighbouring lands, the smallness of
the isthmus of Panama, the lowering of the soil
between the gulf of Papagayo and the port of
San Juan de Nicaragua, the vicinity of the


397


snowy mountains of Saint Martha, and many
other circumstances, too numerous to mention,
give a peculiar climate to this gulf. The atmo-
sphere is agitated by violent gales, known in
winter by the name of the brizotes de Santa
Marta. When the wind abates, the currents
bear to the N. E., and the conflict between the
slight breezes (from theE. and N. E.) andthe cur-
rent, renders the sea rough and agitated. When
it is calm, the vessels going from Carthagena to
Rio Sinu, at the mouth of the Atratoand at Porto-
bello, are impeded in their course by the cur-
rents of the coast. The heavy or brixote winds,
on the contrary, govern the movement of the
waters, and change it in an opposite direction,
towards W.S. W. It is the latter movement
which Major Rennell, in his great and ingeni-
ous hydrographic work, calls drift, and which
he distinguishes from real currents, which are
not owing to the local action of the wind, but
to differences of level in the surface of the
Ocean, to the rising and accumulation of
waters in very distant latitudes. The obser-
vations which I have collected on the force
and direction of the winds, on the temperature
and rapidity of the currents, on the influence
of the seasons, or the variable declination of
the sun, have sufficed to throw some light on
the complicated system of those pelagic floods
that furrow the surface of the Ocean: but it is


398


less easy to conceive the causes of the change
which the movement of the waters undergoes,
at the same season and with the same wind,
Why is the Gulf-stream sometimes borne on
the coast of Florida, sometimes on the border of
the shoal of Bahama? Why do the waters flow
during whole weeks from the Havannah to
Matanzas, and (to cite an example of the cor-
riente por arriba, which is sometimes observed *
in the most eastern part of the main land, by
winds alike gentle) from la Guayra to cape
Codera and Cumana?

25th March.—As we advanced towards the
coast of Darien, the north-east wind increased
with violence. We might have thought our-
selves transported to another climate, The sea
became very rough during the night, yet the
temperature of the water kept up (from lat. 10°
30’, to 9° 47’) at 25°8°. We perceived, at sun-
rise, a part of the archipelago of Saint Ber-
nard, which closes the gulf of Morrosquillo, on
the north. A clear spot between the clouds


* Compare above, vol. iii, p. 877; vol. iv, p. 207.

+ It is composed of the isles Mucara, Ceycen, Maravilla,
Tintipan, Panda, Palma, Mangles, and Salamanquilla, which
rise little above the sea, but some of which have the form
of a bastion. There are two passages in the middle of this
archipelago, from seventeen to twenty fathoms. Large ves-
sels can navigate between the Isla Panda and Tintipan, and
between the Isla of Mangles and Palma.


399


enabled me to take the horary angles. The
chronometer, at the small isle of Mucara, gave
78° 13’ 54” of longitude*. We passed on the
southern extremity of the Placer de San Ber-
nardo. The waters were milky, although a
sounding of twenty-five fathoms did not indicate
the bottom; the cooling of the water was not
felt, no doubt on account of the rapidity of the
current. Above the archipelago of Saint Ber-
nard and cape Boqueron, we saw in the dis-
tance the mountains of Tigua. The stormy
weather, and the difficulty of going up against
the wind, induced the captain of our frail ves-
sel to seek shelter in the Rio Sinu, or rather,
near the Punta del Zapote, situated on the
eastern bank of the Ensenada de Cispata, into
which the river Sinu or Zenu of the first Con-
quistadores throws itself. It rained with vio-
lence, and I availed myself of that occasion to
measure the temperature of the rain water ; it
was 26°3°, while the thermometer in the air
kept up in a place where the ball was not
humected, at 24°8°. This result differed much
from that we had obtained at Cumana, where
the rain water was often a degree colder than
the air +.


* Obs. astr., tom. ii, p. 142.

+ As within the tropics. It takes but little time to col-
lect some inches of water in a vase with a wide opening,
and narrow towards the bottom; and-I do not think there


400


Having again reached the continent of South
America, I shall take a last survey of the whole
basin of the West Indian sea. I have collected


cafi be an error in the observation, when the heat of the
rain water differs from that of the air. If the former is
less, it is, however, to be feared that only a part of the total
effect is Observed. I often found, at Mexico, at the end of
June, the rain at 19°20 or 19°4°, when the air was at 17°8°
and 18. In general, it appeared to me, that within the
torrid zone, either at the level of the Ocean, or on table-
lands from 1200 to 1500 toises high, there is no rain but
that of storms, which falls in large drops, very distant from
each other, and sensibly colder than the air. (See vol. vi, p.
789.) ‘These drops bring with them no doubt the low tempe-
rature of the high regions. In the rains which I found hotter
than the air, two causes may act simultaneously. Great
clouds heat by the absorption of the rays of the sun which
Strike their surface (Lignes, isoth., p. 18; Fresnel in Bull. de
la Soc. Philom., 1822, p. 200), the drops of water in falling
cause an evaporation, and produce eold in the air. The
temperature of rain water, which occupied me during my
voyage, is become a more important problem since M.
Boisgiraud, professor of experimental philosophy at Poitiers,
has proved, that in Europe rain is generally sufficiently eold,
relatively to the air, to cause precipitation of vapour at the
surface of every drop ; and since, that philosopher has sought
in this effect, the cause of the unequal quantity of rain col-
lected at different heights. (drago, Ann. de Chimie, Dec.
1826, p. 417.) When we recollect that one degree only of
cooling precipitates more water in the hot climate of the
tropics, than by a temperature of 10° to 13°, we must not be
surprised at the enormous size of the drops of rain that fall
at Cumana, Carthagena, and Guayaquil. (See above, vol. v,
p. 348.)


ey


401


in one table the indications of temperature con-


tained in my journals, and


have added what I


could collect from the manuscript notes of
several travellers, who, at my request, devoted
themselves to this kind of researches, with
thermometers carefully rectified.


TEMPERATURE OF THE CARIBBEAN S
SOUTH OF THE CHANNE


EA AT ITS SURFACE, ON THE
L OF YUCATAN.


Caen nn ee eee a


‘Western lon-| Temperature | Temperature
Latitude gitude from | of the sea. of the air.
* {the meridian! (cent. Th.) | (cent. Th.)
of Paris.


22015’ | 94°37’ | (23-59) 28:70
e4 38 (24:5)
83 35 (227)
84 5 (22:6)
82 41
87 18


45


REMARKS.


————$

Humboldt, March 1801, south of
Cuba, in the Jardines, depth, 7 feet.

Id., near Cayo Flamenco ; depth, 10
feet.

Id., a little east of Cayo de Piedras ;
depth, 10 feet.

Id., near Cayo de Diego Perez ;
depth, 8 feet.

Id., deep sea, opposite the mouth of
Rio San Juan.

Humb., Dec. 1800, near Cape Saint}
Antonio.

{d., Dec. near Cape Corientes, vio-
lent wind, N.N.E., current bear-
ing E.S.E. ; deep sea.

Alaman, February 1820.

Id., between the Isle of Pinos and

the Great Cayman.

Humb., March }801, near Cayman-

brack.

Id., Dec. 1800, near the Great Cay-

man.

Sabine, Nov. 1822, between Jamai-
ca and the Great Cayman.

Alaman, Feb. 1820, between Jamai-
ca and Cuba, S.E. of Cape Cruz,

Sabine, Nov. 1822, between Jamai-
ca and Saint Domingo.


17 50 78
VOL, VII.


Id., Nov.


402


TEMPERATURE OF THE CARIBBEAN SEA AT ITS SURFACE, ON THE |
SOUTH OF THE CHANNEL OF YUCATAN (continued).


Western lon-
gitude from

the meridian
of Paris.


LS | eS | A SS |


Temperature | Temperature
of the sea. of the air. REMARKS.
(cent. Th.) (cent. Th.)


Latitude.


{704th 79° 9! 250° 28-10 |Alaman, Feb. 1820, S.S.W. of Cape}
Tiburon. ,
17 22 70 42 250 26:2 ~=|Id., Feb. 1820, S.S.W. of Cape En-


gano. }

a al 258 26-0 |Humb., March 1801, west of Cap

Negril (long. a little doubtful).

17 78 : 23°5 Id., December 1800, wind N.N.W.

. south of Morant Kays.

17 73 F 26:2 Alaman, Feb. 1820, south of Cape

Beata.

17 81 25-4 |Humb., Dec. 1800, on La Vibora ;

depth, 18 fathoms ; wind, N.N.E,

17 68 : 26-2 Alaman, Feb. 1822, south of Porto-

rico. ;

17 80 23°2 Humb., December, on the bank of!

La Vibora, near Piedro Kays.

17 "76 é 23-0 Id., Dec. 1800, wind N.N.W., in the

meridian of Cape Abacou.

16 81 (25°6) 25°8 |Id., March 1801, on the bank of La}

Vibora; depth, 10 fathom; cur-

rent S.W. (long. a little doubtful),

80 (25:7) 3 Id., December 1800, on the eastern
rocks of La Vibora; wind, N.W.;
waters troubled (long. a little
doubtful).

Alaman, February 1822, S.S.W. of
Saint Eustacius.

Humb., December 1800, south of St.
Domingo.

Id., December, current W.N.W., in
the middle of the basin, between
Curacoa and Cape Saona.

Sabine, October 1822, in the middle
of the basin, between the Capes
Saint Roman and Beata.

MM. Martin and Dupont, January
1826, east of Martinique.


403


TEMPERATURE OF THE CARIBBEAN SEA. AT ITS SURFACE, ON THE
SOUTH OF THE CHANNEL OF YUCATAN (continued).


pe th be a et


Niceatehn Tok Temperature | Temperature
gitnde irom | ofthe sea. | of the air. REMARKS-


epsedin| i) | feat 7


Latitude.


[eS |


13° 38’ 80° 49’ 26°80 264° |Humb., March 1801, middle of the
basin, between Jamaica and Da-
rien, nearly in the parallel of Ron-
cador.

Sabine, October 1822, middle of the
basin, nearly in the meridian of
Cape Codera, and in the parallel
of the island of Saint Vincent.

Humb., November, wind E.N.E. 40
miles north of Los Roques.

Id., March 1801, middle of the ba-
sin, between Vibora and the isth-
mus of Panama, in the parallel of
the island of Saint Andrews.

Sabine, October 1822, between islal
Blanca and the Grenadines.

25:4 . Humb., north of the Boca de Dragos

(lat. doubtful).

27:7 . Boussingault, November 1822, north

of the island of la Marguerita.

25°8 . Humb., July 1799, east of Tobago.

(23-0) : Id., July. opposite Cabo de tres Pun-

: tas ; depth, 32 fathoms.

26:9 Boussingault, November. 1822, near

the coast of Venezuela.

(23*1) : Humb., August 1799, at Punta Ara-
ya, on the northern coast, sur-
rounded by shoals.

Boussingault, November 1822, in the
port of La Guayra.

Humb., March 1802, west of Car-
thagena, nearly in the meridian o:
the Gulf of Darien.

Td., October 1800.

Sabine, October, in the Gulf of Paria.


404


The preceding table* relates only to the
West Indian Sea, properly so called, which
terminates towards the north of the strait of
Yucatan, and is divided, according to geolo-
gical surveys, in two partial basins, that of
Honduras, and of the Caribbean Sea. This
Mediterranean of America presents a surface of
more than 60,000 square marine leagues, quad-
ruple the surface of France; and is conse-
quently two-thirds of the surface of the Medi-


* The following are some explications on the observa-
tions that have been recently added to those I made during
the passages of 1800 and 1801. M. Lucas Alaman, ancient
secretary of state of the Mexican Confederation, went from
Havre to la Desirade, and from thence to Vera Cruz, in
January and February 1820. Captain Sabine, furnished
with excellent chronometers, made the passage from the
mouth of the Oroonoko to Jamaica and cape Saint Antonio,
in September and October 1822. M. Boussingault, pro-
fessor of chemistry at the school of mines of Bogota, ob-
served the temperature of the water at sun-rise and at two
in the afternoon, when the temperature of the air is at its
minimum and its maximum, in crossing from Antwerp to
Guayra, in November 1822. The observations of M. Mar-
tin, general agent of the French government at Mexico,
were made on board the frigate Amphitrite, conjointly with
M. Dupont, ensign, in going from Martinico to Vera Cruz,
in February 1826. The thermometers employed by the
French travellers were compared, before their departure,
either with those of M.’Gay-Lussac, or with those of the
Observatory of Paris. All these results, with the exception
of those of M. Sabine, have remained unpublished.

+ Vol. vi, p, 553.


405


terranean of Europe; but, as the temperature
varies less in the different seasons from that of
the atmosphere, it has also a less powerful
influence on the climate of the neighbour-
ing countries. It extends, taking for the ex-
treme limit the bottom of some inlets*, from °
7° 55’ to 22° 40’ of latitude; but if we confine
ourselves to considering the geographical posi-
tion of the greater part of its surface, the tem-
perature designated in the table belongs only
to an oceanic band 520 marine leagues in,
length, and comprised between the parallels of
11° and 19°. I dwell on these local circum- .
stances, because the continental, like the liquid
masses placed near the boundary of the tro-
pical zone, between 21° and 23° of latitude,
participate, during one part of the year, the
climate of the temperate zone-.. The north
winds, between Cayman, cape Corientes, and
the coast of Yucatan, tend not only to cool the
air that rests upon the water, but cause also
the counter-currents of the N. and N.W., which
mix their waters in different latitudes. ‘These
accidental modifications of the normal tempe-
rature, characterize the latitudes near the tro-
pic of Cancer ; and are observed above all very


* In the gulf of Uraba, or of Darien, and the gulf of
Batabano.
+ Vol. vii, p. 63.


406


frequently in the Gulf of Mexico, in that part
of the Caribbean Sea which. extends at the
north of the Channel of Yucatan as far as the
parallel 293°, and which is nearly 54,000 square
leagues. It results that this gulf is much more
interesting for the study of the giratory move-
ment of the currents that run along all these
coasts, than for the determination of the
mean temperature of a particular latitude. In
another part of this work, I shall collect in
tables the thermometric observations which I
made between Vera Cruz, the mouth of the
Mississippi, aud the Havannah. It suffices to
observe at present, that the temperature of the
water of the gulf of Mexico is modified by the
winds which reign at the mouth of the three
channels of communication, that of the Yucatan,
Bahama *, and Florida. The Caribbean Sea
and the Gulf of Mexico form together the
most immense basin of inland sea known in
the whole world, a basin of 104,000 square lea-
gues, and consequently 13,000 leagues more
extensive than the Mediterranean which sepa-
rates Europe and Africa. It is remarkable
also, that the great axis of this basin runs like
that of the Cordilleras of Veragua, ‘of Guati-
mala and Mexico (I might add, like the coast of


* Canal viejo, Old Bahama Channel, which communicates
by the mouth of Santander, with the Channel of Florida.


407


South America, from cape Saint Roque to the
mouth of the Oroonoko), from S.E. to N.W.

In examining the temperature of the surface
of the water in the West Indian Sea, we recog-
nize a double influence of season and latitude.
The maxima (from 27° to 28°) are generally in
February and March ; the minima (from 25° to
26°) in November and December. The vari-
ations of the declination of the sun, the interval
more or less long between the two passages by
the zenith, and other causes which have been
elsewhere enumerated, act at the same time on
the air and water. The difference of the mean
temperature of the air in the coldest and hottest
months, are, on the southern shore of the West
India sea, at Cumana for instance, 3°; towards
the north, at 18° and 19° of latitude*, 4:5° to
5°, It thence results, that even in the latitudes
where the monthly differences of atmospheric

temperature are extremely small, the extent of
the variations, as far as belongs to the seasons
only, is still less in the water than in the air +.


* See the differences of mensua! temperature at Saint Do-
mingo, Martinique, and Guadaloupe, in Kirwan, Estimat des
temp., p. 157; Moreau de Jonnes, Hist. phys. des Antilles,
tom. i, p. 172 and 175. I have also examined the manu-
script meteorologic journal of Doctor Albert, written at cape
Frangois, in 1803.

+ Difference in the air at the border of the basin, 3°8° ;
in the water, 3°.


408


With respect to the influence of the latitudes,
or rather of certain geographical positions, it
is entirely owing to the currents, and to the
mixture of the waters of different parallels. Re-
searches carefully made on the numerical ele-
ments of climatology, have recently proved *
that the mean annual temperature of the atmo-
sphere differs in a manner scarcely sensible
from the equator to the 10° of north latitude.
From the latter parallel to that of 19°, the de-
crease of the heat does not probably exceed
one degree, or one degree and a half of the
centesimal thermometer. It is not, therefore,
the difference of latitude, or the solsticial height,
which can be manifested in the table of the


temperature of the West Indian Sea, between
the paraliel 10° and 19°: they cannot be ascer-
tained as we ascertain the influence of the


* Mr. Brewster has confirmed (Edinb. Journ. of Science,
Jan. 1827, p. 117-137), by interesting comparisons, my.
first assertion, that the equatorial temperatures little exceeded
27°7° (820 Fahr.). According to the communications of Mr.
Harvey, the mean temperature of the air, at the island of
Ceylon, is 27-10 (namely: Trincomalee, 269°; Pointe de
Galle, 27:2° ; Colombo, 270° ; Kandy, 25°8°). The learned
traveller, M. Reinwardt, found at Batavia, 27°7°.. M. Moll,
professor at Utrecht, fixes, for that place, 27°3°. Mr, Brew-
ster admits for the equator, in Africa, 28°2°; in America
and Asia, 27°6°. These numbers differ sensibly from 29:2°,
the result which Mr. Atkinson had deduced from several
theoretic suppositions. See vol. vii, p-. 368, &e.


409


seasons. The water was sometimes found at
28°3° near the Great Cayman, and the same at
9° more southerly on the coast of the main
land. If it happens that beyond 19°, between
cape Negril, the Caymans, and cape Saint An-
tonio, we have more frequent examples of great
lowering of temperature (25° to 24°5°) at the
surface of the water, this must be attributed to
the currents caused by the impulsion of the
north winds, to a long interruption in the
action of the sun on the surface of the sea, dur-
ing tempests, and to the cooling of the atmo-
sphere. I attribute to the latter cause the least
part of the total effect; for, on the south of
cape Saint Antonio, the air cools 18°, and not
only in the gulf of Mexico but on the northern
coast of Cuba, where the sky is covered during
the northerly gales of wind, but also in some
parts of the South Sea, where the air cools con-
siderably with a serene sky, I ascertained the
extreme slowness with which the atmosphere
acts, by communication, on the great mass of
water which it covers.

In treating of the distribution of heat, either
in the sea or in the ethereal ocean, we must dis-
tinguish between the temperature locally pro-
duced, and the temperature coming from a
distance by the movement of the air and water.
It is natural, that near the channel where the
West Indian sea communicates with the gulf of


410

Mexico, and consequently with waters that
flow back, in their giratory movement, from
29° of latitude towards the surges of Florida,
the rapid changes in the currents and winds
should considerably vary the heat of the waters.
I have marked by parentheses, in the table, the
observations: made under the particular in-
fluences of localities; and in fixing on those
which give no rise to such suspicion, I find, for
the mean annual temperature of the West Indian
sea, 26°'46°. We have seen above, that at dif-
ferent seasons, the oscillations round the mean
temperature are 1°5°.

Let us compare at present, with the same
care, the heat of an inland sea and the heat of
the open ocean, bounded on one side by Africa,
and on the other by the chain of the Little An-
tilles and the coast of South America. I can-
not have recourse to the table of the Atlantic
Ocean which I published in the first volume of
this work *, because it neither presents a suffi-
cient number of observations, nor of zones at
equal spaces. To remedy this defect, I shall
here mark 105 thermometric results, chosen in
journals for the most part unpublished, and
distributed in 5 and 5 degrees, from the equa-
tor to 45° of latitude. I collect, as much as
possible, observations made in the same months,


* Vol. ii, chapter 3d, p. 69.


All


but in very different longitudes, or observations
that correspond to months very distant from
each other. The table which contains the par-
tial observations is followed by that of the men-
sual mean, drawn separately from the months
of winter and summer. The increase of this
double series, from 45° of latitude to the equa-
tor, is very regular. What, in the table of re-
sults, is marked by the name of limit number, or
minimum, of the mean annual temperature is, in
an element deduced, not from all the months of
winter and summer, but from a certain number
of months among which we find the coldest and
hottest of the year. General considerations and
comparisons with the relations observed at an
equal latitude, in the atmosphere of the con-


tinents, between the mensual temperature and
the temperature of the whole year, prove that
the annual temperature of the Ocean, such as
the table presents it, is somewhat too little.


9Z8I ‘puBspneg, © %.SL VG 68
“(pura yOu) BELT GPIOguNA] 0-GL 91 68
“S081 ‘Opeaong L-LY Ze OF
"9681 ‘Puvipneg 1-61 0¢ OF
OZST “JouroAoIg L-61 6G OF | * 19q0100,
‘OZBT “UBIVA| «= «SSL gt Or Avenues
‘OZBT “uRWeTY| 00.9 o6L or | Aienurr] OF
CoP-LE Toausy) “Zegt ‘ourqus| 6-2 OF IT bP
6GLL “Ploqun| = 0.9L E281 baZ
"OSI ‘Opaaend| —-9.ST. PG 8% 0G FV
"OSST “oufoserq] —-L-OT S ws 1g bP 19401909
“wapy| GAT 6@ SL og tr | a Ount;
“OZBI ‘puvipneg; 6B be hl ii ee (Hh seed Me eee * Arenuee
‘978 Guodng puv uBIV] 3.3L ce 11 (Wea) 2a ogee ata Axenuee


OG8T ‘URULTY] oT (GE of L 6b 9h PoC Azenuve) cp


“sled
JO) UBIPoUE “Opnjyey
ayy JO 4Soad WON

apnyisuoT


: “7Uad °Y
*‘SHUVINTY *vas oY} JO
ainiesoduay,


*“SNOSVS *SHNOZ


"AGALILVT HLUON JO .GPp OL .Q AO SANOZ AHL NI ‘tOVAINAS SLI LV NVIIO OIINVILY GHL 40 TUALVUddNA


“LOST “SHIOY] GG : * TaqUIZAON
"6GLI “ploquiny 6.61 “+ oune
“LOST “SiIOJN] EPS 1940390
‘OZSL ‘puBapneg "G.LG oun
“OZET ‘ueweTy 1-81 precotsott tA eRUag
"9Z81 “uodng puv UNE &.81 sores Arenure
‘Zzat “Wneduissnog] —-V.8B tts sees JQQUIDAON
"PESl “YULyorg) 6.91 teeveees
‘9z8L ‘pueipneg) 1-06 : > Arenuve
‘QZBT “ourAorg] = =—- BPS ;
"E08T ‘opaamng| = 0G -0G


‘9ZRT ‘puripneg 6.8L 66 Axenuee
‘Oselt “jeurdorgq| ~—-F-GE re - 1390390
"LOSL ‘Sioy L:SG 96 IT ¢ pe "77" I9qG0390]
“e0gT ‘opoaong 3-81 ot te | soe Poe “hoy cg
“weas-JNH oy} ut “VZgt ‘urqes| (7-83) Aly walt * saquie.eqy
‘QZEI ‘puespneg) 6-SS y og Go oune
"6GLI 3proquinyy]| = -9T oa tt oe oune
"S8LT “vonamy) G-S6 co (OL 91 GE ** JaqQopPO
“OZET ‘ueteTy 8-GL GG VG 9F SE sos) Agenuee
‘OTST “uodng pur use] ~ 0-41 Cede: | OS Ceo peo Azenuee'
*wrosjs-j[nyH oy} puokag “Zzgi “ourqeg; 06-91 1GV ov BE 9G [UT sequmeed) oS


“seg
y : jo uvipuom |  ‘apnqyey
SMUVIWA ohaionae ay} JO Is9A YNON


“(panuyurg)—'IVT HLUON Gp OL o) JO SHNOZ IHL NI ‘SOVAUNS SLI LV NVIOQ OLNVILY AHL 10 TUALVAIANA Y,


“quad “YD
“SNOSVaS *“SHNOZ


“1G81 ‘youryouiq L-6t rae rd see ce eewecoees é, [udy
‘9381 “uodng pue ueyy Cl1ZG ZS VG “ Axenuee’
“LOBT ‘Sts0yy 0-GG Ge VG JOquUIdAON

‘cel ‘Aouedng 6-83 CG ‘7a * soquis}dag

'(oG-03 ‘MUUEY) BSL ‘ourqes| —-F-6T 1G ix Aaenuee
Uap] L-BG 98 bad > Arenues

‘OTRI “puripney| —-9- LS 6¢ ica oun

ZS8T “W[nesuIssnog OLS 0G CZ * JOQUIDAON,

“LOST ‘SIIOW] =—- 1.9% 89 rd ** JoqUIaaoN

‘LISL ‘gouroAodg PGS &S G3 seat eeeee eeee 19q0O

“66LE SPIoqunA] =—-0..0% 0G GUE G aes, oune

‘OZ8L ‘uRewely 9.0G Ze CL GS eee rene . Arenuee

“GES “OUIqeS| = 6 1g 03 GG [7777 SequIsAON,

"S081 ‘opaaanG| =—-9.1 68 63 So |"

“O08 ‘sUled) —-L-06 9% 6h &

‘OZBI “Jourohary] —oB-9B WG GE | 1B 9G | 7 -29qG02O


ee ee
i jo uvIpLiour *apnyyr]
‘s¥uVINaTU B98 911) JO

aanyeaodway, tse WON


aire Oo aaa aaa? Ter eh Ronee aaa ee emer


*SNOSVdS *SANOZ


*(panuzj]u07)—'LVT HLUYON oh OL o( JO SHNOZ AHL NI ‘HOVAUAS SLI LV NVSOQ OLLNVILY FHL JO AMOLVUTANAY,


“PUBL “POUL E13 Lo ¥ 61
‘EGBI Soules} = E- 1G OL Gz Gb ait eee lente
‘ZEB ‘Kaasodnq 6-F% OF & 6t | “+ gaquioydag
"GOST ‘Opeaeng} = ¢.8% Ip 61 vot qudy
OTSI ‘ULWILTY| =F. GG S$ GP (iy) ee age “+ Kaenuee
6GL1 ApPIOquInA] = GS TS, 8Z Oe oune
“LIST “ourohoig] —-B-8B 9% 9% 06 | JIqQUIOAON
"9631 “uodng pur uly] 0.4% tS AP OG 20G2 lo Arenues,
"ZSSL “Q[neduissnog 1-93 6h ce (ie. Sree JaquIaAON
"OZBT “Joutoharg] —-¢.93 Ly 78 Gyr 0G |; 1340390
“‘9GRT ‘purspneg G-8G ZL 9 Sr 06 aune
*goLT ‘oddeyo) —g..F% 0S tz 66 ww [oc oc Arenuepy
"9Z81 ‘puripneg! 09.8% 8S 088 | Sh old Aienuer


°3uaa a] A Suv

. ' . JO UVIPLIOUl “opnjyney .

SMUVWAY Bas oy3 JO aq) JO 389M. [MON SNOSVGS
aanjeradwiaL, apngiSu0r7y


SS


Cpanuyu0p9)—'1V1 ULUON cH OL °9 40 SINOZ AHL NI “AOVAUAS SLI LV NVHOQ OILNVILY SHL 40 TUALVARAWA TY,


"2zgt ‘Aasiadng 0-9% Joquiaydag
"GO8T ‘opeaeng| —-9.-.93 [dy
‘9G81 ‘pueIpneg 9.GB rey Aavnuee
“PERL OPUTpG) —0-.S% ¥G e., mo qudy
“OZ8T ‘gourAany 8-L3 9% sees wee ees ° 12q0}0Q
‘pORT ‘SUlIog 8-83 UG yore
"S08L ‘uewpoy GBS 9% eee ceed eccee co Judy
"SBLi “BonimYyD|  —¥.93 “te mrtesesss 24 19q0990
‘LIST ‘souroAorg C.9G CZ BS * JaquUIDAON
‘6GLI “pjoquiny 8-SZ 09 oe ae ee ee ee eet oe Aug
‘Gael ‘Aossadng ol 9% oS * laquieydag


“OGST “apy 9-L3 Il og * JaquIaAON,

"LISI Geupdoig] = GGG Tr LG mreeeesesss* I9GOIIO

‘ZEBL “Gnesulssnog]  G-LZ vy 1g

“66LI “3ploquinyy 0-82 1% GP g1

"SO8T ‘Opraong 8-86 cp 68 GI

‘OZBI ‘puripneg) 6.8% Ol GP 2 a see oo Arrnueg)

‘9zgl Guodng pure ujjaeyy BGS 9¢ 98g Gage | eermmiee * Areniqog
‘@zer ‘Aodedng| 09.8% 1LG oLB AG obl * saquiajdag) oS.


deal jo Prpoen *apnqyey
*SHUVATY *BaS ay} JO Fs *


aanjeiad way, Sass Oe RON


apnyisa0'[T


*(panuryuogj)—'LV'T HLUON oGf OL 9 IO SHNOZ FHL NI “FOVANAS SLI LY NVGOO OLNVILY AHL dO SUALVUFANG TY,


*sNOSVaS *SUNOZ


"S8LL “eonsdnyD C.LG
"PSS1 “Your! L-LS
"POST ‘SULog B-8G
‘GGBT ‘oulqeg 1-83
*08L ‘opoaony LLZ
‘CEB “oulque P96
‘LIST outosor7 G.G%
“GALT “soTe AA €-83
"SSSI ‘dostodng| 0G. FS


** JaqUIOAON
* raquiaydas
"+ aquiaydag


me oooooocoeo


°


‘9G8L ‘puripneg ELE

"SO8L fopaaong 9.9%

‘GSBT “ourqes} (0.63)
"SSSL ‘Aorsodnqg 0.9% 1G
‘PEST “OULOIIG GLB Gr OG
“S8LI “vonsimyD 8-86 ZG
“LIST Gourokarg] § —-G.9 Zo «OG
"GSRT ‘oulqes G.LG 6h 3g
“POSL “SULIog ¢.93 G& GS
“OZST “ournAo1g] «= «LG & 96
‘COST ‘urmMpoy] 08.8% 10L 0G@


* Arenuee

Sry Tudy

POR rere eee nracnee Avy
* raquiaydag

* Tndy

Prana * 1940100

"Hr tee) JgquIaAONy
ms ss* Taquiaidag
Your yiy

“* 13q019Q,

* JaquIsAON


WD 2D 29 10 09 19 19D HH


2
aN
°

Yes}


“sted ;
jo ueIpiiour capngryey
9o1]} JO 989A YON

apujisuory


*yuao "YT,
*SMUVN TY “BOs OY} JO
aanjeioduray,


*SNOSVsS


VOL, VII.


4 ul ‘ue SAVHNVUVI] FC SIN] NYS)


oF-L6
“oL-LG

FAon-dng $08.25 “dy-uee £09.22

Kou uvem ‘ue £)/% of ‘381 SVNVITAD


“06°46

Haon- dog $op-e% “udy-wep £ 04-43
aug uvour "me £6 of% “I¥l “HVNNVAVH]

“GEG “AON -0UNE £09.81 “ThHdy—ure

$og.z1 ‘Arenuve £o¢.1Z ‘ow UveuT ‘ue
6S 08% ‘II ‘AAAIYANAT, 10 XIOUD LINIVEg

*ol-LZ “AON pur oung $ of-E] ‘Arpnure
‘op.gg ‘ouity uvout ‘ue £ ,Z o0E “IPI “OUIVO)

*09-ZG “1qOWO puv sun £,0.0Z

aung pus Avy £ 0G TT ‘Atenuee £ o¢./T
Kom uvou ‘ue £,9 ogg ‘3¥[ ‘OWUaIVG

“op-0Z foung pue Av] £ o9.f ‘Arenuve
fog.cy oul, uvet sue £/¢¢ of p “3R] “AWOY

08-61 ‘oung pue Arp

o £o¢.g *Arvnuve yo our uvout £ 0Z.¢T
fom, uvoul yenuue £.9% oGp “IV “NVI


*(s}{Nse1 Zurpaoaid ayy
0} uostedu109 10} SUIAIAS SyUaUIATA [BOlIOUINN )


“UV


£91


8ST
eT


o£-9T


RS


oI


“WORIXVIT|WOWINIM


cmrecomemercece |


(zag)
UNULTUT UL
dy} Jo Jaq
-wnu WUT


g.egtttt


Ef" eoee *AON-"3da5


Zggct''* AON-ATNE
9.767777 -AON-AIOE


6-GZers *AON-OUNL|


S.egtt tt ‘AON ="3dog)


Geog ers: *AON-ouNP


gies ' 7 y-ouNe


B-8T'°** oung ‘Avy


*AON-"9dag}


o6-Gt°*** oun ‘Aviy


(‘eag)
‘SHLNONW UTWWOS


Aey-yoleyy
[udy-"uee


encecen


g-cg.+*** Tdy—uve
GeFS0 Td y-"uve


BBG Wdy—uve


Loge Tady-ne


perc dren


Gols tases ue p-"00q]
O.7T °°: Arenas


o-ZT ooo s: Arenuee


eR TTD


(eg)
“SHLNOMW WALNIM


*UWON
sapniney


saeak ay jo c
AVLININILNOO JHL 1O TUNLVUAMWAL |-VAUISHO GALVTOASN]} duty ceo “SUN LVURdWaL NVAN


QUALVUTMdWAL NVAW * SLTASAY


*AOVAUNS SLI LV NVAVO OILNVILY NUGHLUON AHL a0


419


The numerical eiements of the preceding
table * are chosen from more than seven hun-
dred observations of temperature made in the
Northern Atlantic Ocean. I was obliged to
assemble and rectify a great number of mate-
rials to extend my labors on the isotherm lines.
The greater part of the surface of the globe
being covered with water, the temperature of
the water, in the different seasons of the year,
the relative position of seas and currents, and
the direction of the prevailing winds that trans-
port the temperature from one zone to another,
are the three most important causes which
determine the climates. If 8000 observations
scarcely suffice to fix the mean temperature of
the months in a given spot of the continent, a
very small number of observations made at sea,
furnish very precise results on the variations
which the Ocean undergoes at different seasons
and in different latitudes. Many journals tend


* We must add to the journals already mentioned above,


p. 404, note 1, as sources from which the numerical numbers
of this table have been drawn: the two manuscript journals
of M. Morris, commanding the American sloop the Hornet,
and of M. Quevedo, captain of a ship, commanding the
Rujfina, and who in his voyage from Callao de Lima to
Cadiz, made use of thermometers compared with mine;
and the observations already published of Wales, Rennell,
Chappe, Rodman, Perrins, and Churruca. ;


PTs Os


420


to prove, what my own experience confirms *,
that, in a space surpassing the extent of France,


* In the South Sea, I found, in plunging the centesimal
thermometer daily in the water, at different hours of the
day, that, on a length of 560 marine leagues, the tempera-
ture of the surface did not vary 2°2°. From lat, 0° 35/
south (long. 84° 43/) to lat. 16° 57! north (long. 102° 51’),
the temperature was 27:20 to 29°4°. The following are
other examples of this admirable uniformity in the distribu-
tion of heat in the Ocean at its surface: M. Dirckinck de
Holmfeldt, of whose observations I possess 600 made in the
Atlantic Ocean and the South Sea, with a thermometer
compared with those of M. Gay-Lussac, from lat, 32° 45'N.
(long. 17° 47’) to lat. 28° 55! (long. 20° 35’) ; in May, 16°4°
to 182°. (Difference of the heat of the Ocean in that space,
1'8°.) The same observer, from lat. 2° 26’ N. (long. 24°
18’) to lat. 22° 56’ S. (long. 41° 15/), in April, 26°2° to
27°79, (Diff., 1°5°.\—M. Quevedo, from lat, 23° 23/ S. (long.
28° 57’) to lat. 9° 23’ N. (long. 36° 51’), in March, 26°2° to
27°3°. (Diff.,1°'l°.) The same observer, from lat. 40° 28’ N.
(long. 35° 35’) to 44° 15’ N, (long. 26° 26’), in May, 15°0°
to 1'7°7°, (Diff., 2°7°..—M. Boussingault, from lat. 18°54’ N.
(long. 41° 17’) to 11° 87’ N. (long, 59° 49’); in November,
from 26°6° to 27°9°. (Diff., 1:3°. Thermometer compared
with that of the Royal Observatory of Paris.)—MM. Martin
and Dupont, from lat. 21° 15’ N. (long. 40° 20’) to lat. 17
40/ N. (long. 55° 35’) ; in February, from 23°0° to 242°.
(Diff., 1:2°. Thermometer compared with those of M. Gay-
Lussac.)—General Baudrand, from lat. 46° 42’ N. (long.
15° 55’) to 41° 32/ N, (long. 20° 15’) ; in January, from
12°8° to 14°. (Diff., 1:2°.) The same observer, from lat.
&lo 10’ N, (long. 40° 20’) to lat. 17° 40’ N. (long. &5° 35’) ;
in February, from 23°2° to 24°3°, (Diff., 1:1°. Thermometer
compared to those of M, Arago.)


421


the temperature of the Ocean remains the same
in a given month, from 1:2° or 2° nearly. The
same journals shew, that in the same pelagic
zones, the difference the months attain, from
the equator to 35° of north latitude, is scarcely
4° to 5°. On the continents, for instance, in
45° of north latitude, the mean temperature of
the months of January and of June differ 20° ;
when, in the Atlantic Ocean, in the same
parallel, those months differ only 3°6°. The
temperature of the continental air, is often, in
the hottest season, by day, between the tropics,
from 7° to 9° higher than at night. At sea, the
influence of the hours is so small, that fora
long time it was altogether doubtful *. In
order to verify the observations of M. John
Davy, in his voyage from England to Ceylon, I
engaged several of my friends to observe the
heat of the air and water at different periods of
the day and night. The most complete table
of this kind of observations is that which I
owe to the zeal of M. Dirckinck, a lieutenant
of the ship, who made a regular observation in
the two hemispheres, at nine in the morning,
noon, six in the evening, and midnight. As
the vessel does not remain in one point, it
might be feared that the observations were
affected by the influence of change of place ;


* See above, vol. ii, p. 72.


422


but this doubt disappears when we see the
same temperature return at the same hours
during four or five days successively, in pas-
sages of 150 to 200 leagues. We must rather
mistrust observations in time of calm, in the
open sea, or at anchor in a port. In the former
case, the least change in the liquid varies the
high temperature ; in the latter, in a road or in
the ports, the tides * and the unequal heat of
the shore with which the sea is in contact,
cause periodical variations that are altogether.
local. The whole of the thermometric obser-
vations of Dirckinck give 0°76° for the differ-
ence of the temperature of the sea at noon and
at midnight. The extremes were, in the same
day, 0°3° to 1:2°.. The heat often did not dimi-
nish in the night, although the temperature of
the atmosphere had lowered 3°. The excellent
observations of M. Boussingault give, for sun-
rise and two in the afternoon, in November:
mean difference of the sea water, 0°52°; mean
difference of the air, on the same days, 1°4°.
The extreme limit of the temperature, in
twenty-four hours, was 0'11° and 0°74°. Lieu-
tenant Colonel Wilson continued his researches
at my request in the passage of the steam-
vessel, the Enterprize, from Falmouth to Ben-
gal. The following are the results of this ob-


* Vol. ii, p. 144, 176,


423


server: mean difference of the temperature of
the sea, at two in the afternoon and at sun-rise,
from August to December, 0°9° ; maximum * of
the temperature of the sea, 29:4° lat. 8° 42’
south, long. 88° 37’ east, the air being 28°3° ;
the greatest difference between the air and the
sea, when the temperature of the air was higher
than that of the Ocean, 448° in August, lat.
39° 17’ south ; when the temperature of the air
was lower, in October, 3°08°, lat. 33° 13’ south;
maximum of the temperature of the atmosphere
during the whole voyage, 30°2°; mean variation
of the temperature of the air, in twenty-four
hours, 1-6°. It must not be forgotten, in dis-
cussing the whole of the results communicated
by Colonel Wilson, that they are drawn from
observations made on the north and south of
the equator, in the temperate and tropical


zones. In examining my different journals of
the Atlantic, the West Indian Sea, and the
Pacific Ocean, I find, in the tropical zone, from
sun-rise to three in the afternoon, for the aug-
mentation of the temperature of the air-f, 0°8°


* Vol. vii, p. 368.

+ I chose days that were entirely calm, or when there
was only a light breeze. The instruments in the wind, and
removed several feet from the body of the vessel, of which
the heat might cause great errors. The partial differences
amounted to 1'8°, and even to 2'4° (sce, for instance, above,


vol. ii, p. 143; but these anamolies are rare. The appear-


424


to 1:3°.. M. Arago, who has employed himself
in these researches, has shewn that such an
augmentation proves that the absorption of the
rays of the sun in its passage across the differ-
ent layers of the atmosphere, is much more
considerable than has hitherto been believed.
In the middle of the Ocean, the increase of the
heat of the air, after the passage of the sun over
the meridian, can only be owing to the extinc-
tion of light in the air; for, according to the
observation of the great philosopher I have just
named, this increase is observed even in cir-
cumstances when the water is less warm than


the air. The extent of the mensual oscillations
of the temperature in the vast basin of the seas,


is, in the temperate zone, at 45° of latitude, a
fifth; and between the tropics, a third less in
the water than in the air. The surface of the
water is not enough heated during the day,


ance of the sun at the horizon, generally agitates the atmo-
sphere a little ; I therefore preferred making the observa~
tion at sea half an hour later. The difference of nine in
the morning and noon is so small, on the right sphere,
that navigators who have chosen these periods, have been
only able to estimate a very small part of the phenomenon.
As the course of this discussion relates to very small numeric
elements, it may be useful to remind the reader, that half a
degree of the scale of Fahrenheit is equivalent to 0:28° of the
centesimal thermometer, and that the doubts which may
sometimes be raised on the absolute estimations, do not
extend to relative or differential estimations.


4295


because the upper layers are mixed with the
lower, by the movement of the waves; and the
effect of the reflection is diminished during the
night, because the cooled molecules descend.
There is a tendency in the water to preserve an
uniform temperature. Between the equator
and 48° of north and south latitude, the water
is hotter than the air. M. Duperrey, in examin-
ing, at my desire, the number of times that the
air was hotter than the water, far from the
coast and beyond the tropics, in the expedition
round the world, found, the relation of this
number with that which gives an inverse re-
sult, at night, 3 tol; by day, 2 to 1; at noon,
13 to 1*. These three reports between the


* On 167 observations made in two voyages round cape
Horn, by MM. Quevedo and Dirckinck, in March and
November, when at 56° and 59°, the water was from 2° to
30, the air, south of the parallel of 35°, was 77 times hotter
than the sea, which may be attributed to the current of the
south pole. During my passage from the coast of Europe
to America, the relation in the temperate zone, was 1 : 2.
General Baudrand found, in January, 1:5; M. Martin, in
January also, 1:9. The tropical relation for M. Quevedo,
was 1: 38; for General Baudrand, 1 : $2; for M. Boussin-
gault, 1:16; forme,1:12. M. de Freycinet, in examin-
ing the immense number of observations collected during
the voyage of the Uranie, finds also that the water is gene-
rally hotter than the air, with the exception of the sea of
Japan, 8.E. of Madagascar. Beyond the tropics, the heat
of the air above that of the water is found in observations
made at noon only.


426


tropics, were made on 1314 observations, 6 to
1; 4tol; and 14to1l. In the equatorial re-
gion, the maximum of the difference between
the water and the air takes place generally be-
fore sun-rise; it is, mean term, from 1°2° to
1:6°; but the sea, at two in the afternoon, is
often scarcely 0°4° to 0°6° hotter than the atmo-
sphere; and therefore; the excess of the tempe-
rature of the air above that of the water, hap-
pens much more frequently from noon till two,
than at hours nearer sun-rise or sun-set. We
see, by the whole of these facts, that the habi-
tual state of the Ocean, from the equator to the
46° of north and south latitude, is that in which
‘the liquid surface is hotter than the atmosphere
that covers it. Between those limits, the sea
tends constantly to heat the air; and this heat-
ing effect is not confined, as is generally ima-
gined, to some months of winter; it is mani-
fested during the whole year, because the num-
ber of hours when the sea is hotter than the air,
greatly exceeds * the number when the tempe-


* The assertion of M. Kirwan (stim. de la temp., p. 47),
so often repeated in other works, “ that water is generally
colder in summer than the atmosphere that reposes on the
sea,” is not correct. It is not always so even from neon till
two in the afternoon, although the air of the sea, filled with


vesiculary vapours, is less diaphanous, and often absorbs the


solar rays better than continental air during the serene days
of summer.


427


rature of the atmosphere is higher than the
temperature of the Ocean.

In examining the table of partial observa-
tions, we see that from 30° to 45° between the
parallels of Cape de Geer and Bourdeaux, the
temperature of the Atlantic at its surface:
changes not only with the latitude and the
seasons, but also with the longitude. The
great pelagic river known by the name of the
Gulf-stream, produces that effect: it is more
sensible south of 35°, where the current is
nearest the coast of the United States, than at
the north of the Azores islands, where, flowing —
towards the coast of Ireland, it loses something
of its temperature by spreading itself. If we
study the mean annual temperature of the dif-
ferent zones of the northern Atlantic Ocean,
we may remark that it differs little from that
of the eastern coast, while it is higher than that
of the western. The Atlantic, and this fact is
very important for the physical history of our
planet, belongs to the system of climates that
verge on the western part of the Ancient Con-
tinent. The hot waters of the Gulf-stream give
it this advantage, from which the cisalleghanian
regions of the great Confederation of North
America would profit more, if the air that re-
poses on the Ocean took the temperature of the
water, and, if north of the parallel of 35° the
east winds were more frequent than the west.


428


Milan, Rome, Palermo, Cairo, Saint Croix of
Teneriffe, and the Havannah, six points of
which the climate is known by a great number
of precise observations, can furnish us by inter-
polation * with the mean temperature of the


* In order to enable the reader constantly to make the
calculations himself that are founded on a knowledge of
facts, I repeat, that the mean temperature of the continental
atmosphere is that which I marked above (p.501), and
which is founded on the numerous observations of M. Reg-
gio (1787-1812), for Milan; of MM. Calandrelli, Guil-
laume de Humboldt, and Schouw, for Rome ; M. Marabitti,
for Palermo; MM. Niebuhr, Nouet, and Coutelle, for Cairo ;
MM. Escolar and Leopold de Buch, for Saint Croix de
Teneriffe; and M. Ferrer for the Havannak. The mean
temperature of Cairo being probably a little higher than it
ought to be according to the latitude of the place, I took
(in the system of climates of the western parts of the Ancient
Continent), the mean of Cairo and Saint Croix de Teneriffe,
and sought, by this mean and the Havannah, the correspon-
dent temperature to the latitude of 25°. As the southern
lines, near the tropies, become parallel to the parallels of
the equator, the Havannah, notwithstanding its western
position, could serve for the term of interpolation. If it be
objected, that the given number in the table of results, indi-
cating by approximation the mean annual temperature of
the sea water, are not deduced from all the months of the
year, but only five or six, I shall observe that the error of
these numbers must be very small, because the temperature
of winter and summer are taken from months grouped
around the annual minima and maxima, January and July.
The results on which I fixed, and which I shall rectify in
another work, are, as the table indicates, limit numbers at the
minimum. The following are the proofs of what I advance :


429


continental air between 45° and 25° of latitude.
It is that part of the atmosphere which we shall
here compare with the temperature at the sur-
face of the Ocean.


Continental Air Continental Air
in the western | Atlantic Ocean jin the eastern part
part of the An- (water). of the

cient Continent. New Continent.


LATITUDE.


244°


It is probable, that on the north of the pa-
rallel of 45°, above all between this parallel and


mean time at Paris, in five years, taken at hazard (1816,
1818, 1620, 1821, 1826), in selecting the hottest and
coldest months ; % (2°6° + 15°6°) or 9°1° (vr. 9°3°) ; (2°19
+ 20°19) or 11°1° (vr. 11°3°) 5 $ (O°? 4 18°7°) or 9°7° (vr.
9°8°) ; F (31° + 201°) or 116° (vr. 11°0°) ; ¥ (17° +
21°2°) or 11°4° (vr. 11:4°). These comparisons give, in
taking a great number of years, for Milan, 4 (0°5° + 23°7°)
or 12°1° (vr. 13°2°) ; Rome, 4 (7'6° + 23°7°) or 15°6° (vr.
15°5°); Palermo, % (11°3° + 24°7°) or 18°0° (vr. 17°4°) ;
Cairo, $ (13°4° 4+ 29°7°) or 21°6° (vr, 22°4°), The limits
of the errors become still less if we employ three months of
winter and three months of summer.


430


that of 65°, the mean annual temperature of the
sea is higher than that of the continental air of
the lands on the east. In the westerly lands, in
the system of climates of eastern America, the
temperature corresponding to 30°, 35°, 40°, and
45°, is approximatively 19°4°; 16:0°; 12°5°;
8°2°. The mean annual temperature of the
Atlantic Ocean, between the parallel of cape
Hatteras and New Scotland, between 35° and
45° of latitude, is consequently, in its whole
extent, from 3° to 6° higher than the mean
annual heat of the air which reposes on the
eastern part of the New Continent. The coin-
cidence of the numeric elements, for the most
part, which express the mean temperature of
the sea in different zones, in my work, with the
figures furnished by the table of Kirwan, is the
more remarkable, as the results were by me-
thods altogether different. I employed, in a
direct manner, for every zone, the temperature
observed in the coldest and hottest months;
while Kirwan only made use of two observa-
tions corresponding with the parallels of 40°
and 50°. He found every other temperature by
the rule of the square of the sine of the lati-
tudes. The errors of the formula of Mayer are
in fact inconsiderable, as far as the parallel of
Paris, when the observations are confined to
the same system of climates, that is, when we
follow the meridians which pass by the concave


431


or convex summits of the isotherm lines; but
the errors of this formula augment prodigiously,


either in confounding the different systems of
the climates, or in advancing, in the same lon-
gitude, reckoning from the meridian which
passes, by one of the summits of the isotherm
curves, in 50° of latitude towards the pole.. In
the actual state of the theory of heat, it is pru-
dent to adhere to the simple results of obser-
vation, and have recourse to interpolations only
between points very near each other. If, in
45° of latitude, the western parts of the Ancient
and the eastern parts of the New Continent,
differ only 5-8°, in the mean temperature of the
year, this difference rises, between the 69° and
73° of north latitude, on the parallel of the isle
Igloolisk and port Bowen, to 15° and 16° of the
centesimal thermometer.

After having taken a general view of the
basin of the Atlantic, and compared the mean
annual temperature of the water with the tempe-
rature of the continental air near the coast of
the Ocean, it remains for me to examine the
distribution of heat at different seasons. We
are at first surprised at the high temperature
(12°3°) observed in the open sea, in the month
of January, at 45° of latitude, when, on the
continent of Europe, the mean temperature of
that month lowers, at Milan, to 0:5°; at Lon-
don, to 3°2°; at Brest, to 6°. It results from a


432


great number of observations which I collected,
that the winter temperature of 10° to 11° is pre-
served in the Atlantic, far from the coast, to the
parallel 47° and 483°; and, the surface of the
sea in those latitudes, being habitually, in July
and August, from 15° to 17°, the mean annual
temperature of the sea is at least 13'5°; while,
on the continent, in the same parallel, the
annual temperature of the air is only 10°8°.
The Ocean in those latitudes, not only tends to
equalize the temperature of the coast at differ-
ent seasons, but contributes also to raise it;
for, if in July and August, the continental air is
3°5° more elevated than the surface of the sea,
the temperature of that air in the month of
January, exceeds 9° that of the inland country.
The continents profit in winter, from the high
temperature of the seas, by the winds which are
heated by their contact with the water, and by
the vapours which condense and transport the
caloric from the sea towards the coast. Even
at 65° and 70° of north latitude, the mean
annual temperature of the surface of the Ocean
is (according to MM. Rennell and Sabine),
55°, or very near the maximum of the density
of the water; when, on the same parallel, the
mean temperature of the air, at Uleo, Umeo,
and Enontekies, is + 0°6° to — 2°8°. Such is
the influence exerted by the basin of the sea,
that vast liquid surface, in which the molecules


33
es


of water could by reflection descend towards
the bottom, on the augmentation of the mean
temperature of the globe.

The extent of the oscillations, or the differ-
ence of the mean maxima and minima of sum-
mer and winter, is, in the sea, at 30° and 45° of
latitude, 3°6° to 4°8°; in the continental air, it
rises, in Europe, to 15°; in America, to 22°.
Between 35° and 20° of latitude, between the
parallels of the Acores and cape Blanc, we ob-
serve in the preceding table, the influence of
more western longitude, and a great equality of
temperature, when navigators have passed by
the same latitudes, in different zones, in cor-
responding seasons *. On the south of the tro-


* Compare, for instance, my observation, lat, 35° 8’ with
that of General Baudrand, lat. 35° 2’, but 33° of longitude
more westerly ; the observations of M. Freycinet, in October
1817 and 1820, lat, 25° 4’ and 26° 8’ together, and with the
observation of M. Duperrey, commanding the sloop /a Co-
quille, lat. 24° 26’; my observation, lat. 20° 8’, and that of
General Baudrand, 36° of longitude more to the west; the
observations of M. Freycinet, in 1820, and of M. Boussin-
gault, in 1822, made in autumn, almost in the same lati-
tudes, lat. 20° 42’ and 20° 33’, long. 34° 47’ and 35° 49’,
The heat of the waters generally augments towards the
west; in the high latitudes, because we approach the Gulf-
stream, which widens; and in the low latitudes, at 25° of
western longitude, because the currents between Gambia ~
and the Guyana bear to the N.W. and bring the waters of
the zone at 4° to 6° towards more northern latitudes.


VOL. VII. Qe


434


pic of Cancer, in the great valley of the Atlan-
tic, as well as in the West Indian Sea, the
changes in the declination of the sun act on the
heat of the water only by deranging the atmo-
spheric equilibrium between the northern and
southern hemisphere, and by modifying the
limits of the trade-winds and currents. Two
passages of the sun at the zenith, at periods
more or less distant, render the climateric
bipartition of the year illusory.

In comparing the basin of the West Indian
Sea and that of the Atlantic Ocean in the cor-
responding limits of 10° to 20°, we find the
open sea is less warm than the inland sea. We
are above all astonished at the low temperature
of the waters (21°3° to 23°8°) in the parallel of
cape Vert and cape Maria, between 15° and 19°
of latitude. At the equator, and at some de-
grees to the north, the great channel that sepa-
rates Africa from Brazil, presents also very re-
markable variations of heat. The gulf of Gui-
nea, like that of Panama, belongs to the hot-
test pelagic regions (from 28° to 28°8°) known
in the equinoxial region. In advancing towards
the west from the meridian of Paris to the 15°
and even 25° of western longitude, Wales, Sa-
bine, and Duperrey found the water of the sur-
face, in July and September, at 22°2°, 23°3°,
and 24°5°. A very extraordinary cooling for a
region of the Ocean near the equator, and at


435


more than 200 leagues distant from the con-
tinent *. It is rightly attributed to the cur-
rents which flow with force from the southern
temperate zone. Captain Sabine has recently
proved that the thermometer may indicate to
the navigator the limit between the hot waters
of the current of Guinea which is borne to the
south-east, and the colder waters of the current
of the Atlantic, of which the direction: is dia-
metrically opposite. We must not suppose,
however, that the low temperature of 223° to
242° belongs to all the seasons and to the whole
channel. MM. Perrins and Dirckinck found the
waters of the Atlantic, in March and April, ©
near the meridian of 22° and 26°, at 27°7° and


28°2°. In the same longitude, but 5° further
north, Rodman observed the maximum to be
28°8°. No person has I believe found the ther-
mometer higher in the basin which we are now
examining. The extreme temperature of 30°
and even of 30°6° have been observed, far from
the coast, and by a fresh breeze, only in the


* During the whole voyage of the Uranie round’ the
world, commanded by M. de Freycinet, the temperature of
the equatorial Ocean was never found below 20°7°, and even
that temperature was only observed towards the extremity
of the tropical zone, nearly east of Rio Janeiro, lat. 22° 13/
south, and long. 26° 45’, therefore at more than 100 lea-
gues from the isle Martin Vaz. (Compare also Sabine, Pend.,
p- 441.) i

2F2


436


South Sea. I here conclude the discussion of
the numerical elements which the Climatology
of the Ocean presents. I thought it was proper
to resume these general considerations before I
advance anew in the main land. I did not
again see the horizon of the Ocean till after an
absence of eighteen months, from the height of
the Cordilleras of Peru, in descending the
Andes of Guangamarea, in the southern hemi-
sphere. At that period of my voyage, I shall
examine whether, at the south of the equator, in
equal latitudes, the mean annual temperature
of the waters of the Ocean be less elevated than
in the West Indian Sea.


POL LOL LLL PPD LID IEP


Our passage from the island of Cuba to the
coast of South America terminated at the mouth
of the Rio Sinu, having lasted sixteen days.
The road in which we anchored near the Punta
del Zapote, afforded very bad anchorage, and
in a rough sea and with a violent wind, we
found some difficulty in reaching the coast in
our canoe. How beautiful this land appeared
to us! such it must appear to the few travellers
who, sensible of the charms of nature, at the
aspect of a thick forest, crowned with palm-
trees, do not measure their enjoyments by the
civilization of the places where they disembark!


437


Every thing denoted that we had reached a
savage region rarely visited by strangers. Some
scattered houses form the village of Zapote : we
found a great number of mariners assembled
under a sort of shed, all men of colour, who
had descended the Rio Sinu in their barks, to
carry maize, bananas, poultry, and other articles
of consumption, to the port of Carthagena.
These barks, which are fifty to eighty feet in
length, belong for the most part to the planters
(haciendados) of Lovica. The value of their
freight amounts, in the largest embarcations, to
2000 piasters. These boats are flat-bottomed,
and cannot keep at sea when it is much agi-
tated. The breezes from the N.E. had during
ten days blown with violence on the coast, while,
in the open sea, as far as 10° of latitude, we
had only had slight gales, and a sea constantly
calm. In the aéreal, as in the pelagic currents,


some layers of fluids move with extreme swift-


ness, while others near them remain almost
motionless. The zambos of the Rio Sinu fati-
gued us with idle questions on the purpose of
our voyage, our books, and the use of the
instruments: they regarded us with mistrust,
and in order to escape from their importunate
curiosity, we went to herbalize in the forest,
although it rained. They had tried, as usual,
to frighten us with stories of Boas (Traga-
Venado), vipers, and the attacks of jaguars;


438


but during a long residence among the Chay-
mas Indians of the Oroonoko, we were habitu-
ated to these exaggerations, which arise less from
the credulity of the natives, than from the plea-
sure they find in tormenting the whites. Quit-
ting the coast of Zapote, covered with paletu-
viers *, we entered a forest remarkable for a
great variety of palm-trees. We saw the trunks
of the Corozo del Sinu-+ pressed against each
other, which formed heretofore our species
Alfonsia, yielding oil in abundance; the Cocos
butyracea, called here Palma dulce or Palma
real, and very different from the Palma real of
the island. of Cuba ft; the Palma amarga, with
fan-leaves that serve to cover the roofs of


houses, and the Latta § resembling the small


* Rhizophora Mangle.

+ In Spanish America, palm-trees with leaves, the most
different in kind and species, are called Corozo : the Corozo
of Sinu, with a short, thick, glossy trunk, is the Eleis me-
lanococca of M. Martius (Palm., p. 64, Tan. xxxIt, Lv).
I cannot believe it to be identic with the Elzis guineensis
(Herbal of Congo River, p. 37), since it vegetates spontane-
ously in the forests of the Rio Sinu. The Corozo of Caripe is
thin, small, and covered with thorns ; it approaches the
Cocos aculeata of Jacquin. ‘The Corozo de los Maranos of
the valley of Cauca, one of the tallest palm-trees, is the
Cocos butyracea of Linneus. See Kunth, in Humb, and
Bonpl., Nov. Gen., tom. i, p. 301-315.

{ See above, p. 350.

§ Perhaps of the species of Aiphanes.


3


a


Piritu Palm-tree of the Oroonoko. This variety
of palm-trees was remarked by the first Con-
quistadores*. The Alfonsia, or rather the spe-
cies of Eleis, which we had no where else seen,
is only six feet high, with a very large trunk ;
and the fecundity of its spathes is such that
they contain more than 200,000 flowers. Al-
though a great number of those flowers (one
tree furnishes 600.000 at the same time) are
avortious +, the soil remains covered with a
thick layer of fruits. We have often made the
same observation under the shade of the Mau-
ritia palm-tree, the Cocos butyracea, the Seje,
and the Pihiguao of the Atabapo. No other
family of arborescent plants is so prolific in the


development of the organs of flowering. The
almond of Corozo del Sinu is peeled in the
water. The thick layer of oil that swims in
the water is purified by boiling, and yields the
manteca de Corozo, which is thicker than the


* Pedro de Ciega de Leon, 8 native of Seville, who. tra-
velled in 1531, at the age of thirteen years, in the countries
that I have described, asserts that “‘ las tierras eomarcanas
del Rio Cena y del Golfo de Uraba stan Ilenas de unos pal-
que son wnos arboles gruessos y¥


mares muy grandes y espessos,
* See La Chronica


llevan unas ramas como palma de datiles.
del Peru nuevamenta escrita (Anvers, 1554), p. 21 and 204.

¢ I have carefully counted how many flowers are con~
tained in a square inch on each amentum, from 100 to 120


of which are found united in one spathe.


440 —


oil of the Cocoa-tree, and serves to light
churches and houses. The palm-trees of the
section of Cocoinies of Mr. Brown, are the olive-
trees of the tropical region. As we advanced
in the forest, we began to find little pathways
that appeared to be recently cut out with the
hatchet. Their windings displayed a great
number of new plants: Mougeotia mollis, Nel-
sonia albicans, Melampodium paludosum, Joni-
dium anomalum, Teucrium palustre, Gomphia
lucens, and a new kind of Composées, the Spira-
cantha cornifolia. A fine Pancratium embalmed


the air in the humid spots, and made us forget
how dangerous for health are those gloomy and
marshy forests.


After an hour’s walk, we found, in a cleared
spot, several inhabitants employed in collect-
ing the wine of the Palm-tree. The dark tint
of the Zambos contrasted singularly with that
of a little man with light hair and a pale face,
who seemed to take no part in the labour. I
thought at first that he was a sailor escaped
from some North American vessel; but I was
soon undeceived. This fair complexioned man
was my countryman, born on the coast of the
Baltic: he had served in the Danish marine,
and had lived for several years in the upper
part of the Rio Sinu, near Santa Cruz de Lorica.
He had come, to use the words of the loungers
of the country (para ver tierras y pasear, ne


44]


mas), “ to see other lands, and walk about a
little.” The sight of a man who could talk to
him of his country, seemed to have no charm
for him; and, as he had almost forgotten Ger-
man, without being able to explain himself
clearly in Spanish, our conversation was not
very animated. During the five years of my
voyage in Spanish America, I found only two
occasions of speaking my native language. The
first Prussian I met with was a sailor from Me-
mel, who served on board a ship from Halifax *,
and who refused to make himself known till
after he had fired some musket-shot at our
boat. The second, the man of Rio Sinu, had
very pacific intentions. Without answering
my questions, he continued repeating, with a
smile, “ that the country was hot and humid;
that the houses in the towns of Pomerania,
were finer than those of Santa Cruz de Lorica,
and that, if we remained in the forest, we
should have the calenturas, the tertian fever,
from which he had long suffered.” We had
some difficulty in testifying our gratitude to
this good man for his benevolent advice; since
according to the severity of his principles,
somewhat aristocratical, a white man, were he
bare-footed, should never accept money “ in
the presence of that vile yellow populace”


* See above, vol. iii, p. 43.


442


(gente parda). Less disdainful than our Eu-
ropean countrymen, we saluted politely the
groupe of men of colour who were employed in
drawing, by means of the great ¢utumas, or
fruits of Crescentia Cujete, the palm-tree wine
from the trunks of hewn down trees. We
begged them to explain to us this operation,
which we had already seen practised in the
missions of the Cataracts. The vine of the
country is the Palma dulce, the Cocos butyracea,
which, near Malgar, in the valley of Magdalena, —
is called wine palm-tree, and here, on account
of its majestic height, royal palm-tree. After
having thrown down the trunk, which dimi-
nishes but little towards the top, they dig;
below where the leaves (frondes) and spathes
come out, an excavation in the ligneous part,
eighteen inches long, eight broad, and, six in
depth. They work in the hollow of the tree,
as if they would construct a canoe ; and three
days after this cavity is found filled with a
yellowish-white juice, very limpid, with a sweet
and vinous flavour. The fermentation appears
to commence as soon as the trunk falls, but the
vessels preserve their vitality; for we saw that
the sap flowed even when the summit of the
palm-tree (that part where the leaves come
out) is placed a foot higher than the lower end,
which is that of the roots. The sap continues
to mount as in the arborescent Euphorbes re-


443


cently cut. During eighteen to twenty days,
this wine of the palm-tree is daily collected ;
the last is less sweet, but more alcoholic and
more esteemed. A tree yields as much as
eighteen bottles of sap, each having a volume
of forty-two cubic inches. The natives affirm
that the flowing is more abundant, when the
petioles of the leaves which remain fixed to the
trunk, are burnt.

The great humidity and thickness of the
forest forced us to retrace our steps, and regain
the shore before sun-set. In several places,
the compact limestone rock, perhaps of tertiary
formation, appears. A thick layer of clay and
mould rendered the observation difficult; but


a shelf of carburated and shining slate, seemed
to me to indicate the presence of more ancient
formations. M. Pombo*, in a report made in
the name of the chamber of commerce of Car-
thagena, positively affirms that there is real
coal on the banks of the Sinu. We met with


* Informe del Real Consulado a la Suprema Junta provincial,
1810, p.45. In the manuscript memoir left, in 1789, by the
archbishop-viceroy, Gongora, to his successor Fray Don
Francisco Gil y Lemos, there is even a doubt concerning the
sulphurated mercury found in small rounded pieces in the
upper part of the Rio Sint. These fragments were no doubt
torn by the torrents from some veins of the Sierra de Abibe.
I shall describe further on this cinnabre de lavage (in pepitas)
peculiar to the heaped up earth of the Andes of Quindiv.


444


Zambos, carrying on their shoulders the cylin-
ders of palmito, so improperly called cabbage-
palms, three feet long, and five to six feet thick ;
the whitening gave them a dazzling tint. It
appears that the stem of the palm-tree has been
for ages an esteemed food in those countries.
I believe it to be very innocent, although his-
torians relate that, when Alonso Lopez de Ayala
was governor of Uraba, several Spaniards died
after “ having eaten immoderately of the pal-
mito, and drunk at the same time a great quan-
tity of water.” In comparing the herbaceous
and nourishing fibres of the young leaves not
developed of the palm-trees, with the sagow of
Mauritia, of which the Indians make bread,
similar to that of the root of Jatropha Manihot,
we involuntarily recollect the striking analogy
which modern chemistry has found between
the ligneous matter and the amilaceous fécula.
We stopped on the shore to collect lichens,
opegraphas, and a great number of mosses
(Boletus, Hydnum, Helvela, Thelephora) that
were attached to Palétuviers, and there, to my
great surprise, vegetated, although moistened
by salt water. Night surprised us, and having
unfortunately broken an oar in returning on
board, in our little canoe, we had some diffi-
culty in embarking on a rough sea.

Before I quit this coast, so seldom visited by
travellers, and described in no modern voyage,


445


I shall here state some information which I
acquired during my stay at Carthagena. The
Rio Sinu, in its upper course, approaches the
tributary streams of the Atrato, which is of the
same importance to the auriferous and planiti-
ferous province of Choco, as the Magdalena for
Cundinamarca, or the Rio Cauca for the pro-
vinces of Antioquia and Popayan. The three
great rivers I have just mentioned form hitherto
the only commercial route, I might almost add
the only means of communication for the inha-
bitants. The Rio Atrato receives, at twelve
leagues distance from its mouth, the Rio Sucio,
on the east: the Indian village of San Antonio
is situated on its banks. In going up beyond
the Rio Pabarando *, you arrive in the valley
of Sinu. After several fruitless attempts dic-
tated by the warlike spirit of the Archbishop
Gongora, to establish colonies in Darien del
Norte and on the eastern coast of the gulf of
Uraba, the Viceroy. Espeleta counselled the
court to fix its whole attention on the Rio
Sinu, to destroy the colony of Cayman, to fix
the planters in the Spanish village of San Ber-
nardo del Viento, in the jurisdiction of Lorica,


* Tributary stream of the Rio Sucio. See Pombo, In-
forme, p. 101, and manuscript map of the Atrato, traced, in
1780, by Don Juan Donoso, captain of the corps of engi-
neers of S, C. M.


446


and from that post, which is the most westerly,
to push forward the peaceful conquests of agri-
culture and civilization towards the banks of
Pabarando, the Rio Sucio, and the Atrato *.


* Relacion del govierno del Excellentissimo Seftor Don Jose
de Espeleta en el Nuevo Reyno de Granada para entregar el
mando al Excellentissimo Seiior Don Pedro de Mendinuetta, en
1796 (manuscript), cap. v, fol. 88. I shall here state some
information which 1 drew from several official documents
during my stay at Carthagena, and which have not yet been
published. In the sixteenth and seventeenth century, the
name of Darien was given vaguely to the whole coast
extending from the Rio Damaquiel to the Punta de San
Blas, on 22° of longitude. The cruelties exercised by Ped-
rarias Davila rendered almost inaccessible to the Spaniards
a country which was one of the first they had colonized.
The Indians (Dariens and Cunas-Cunas) remained masters
of the coast, as they still are at Poyais, in the land of the
Mosquitos. Some Scotchmen formed, in 1698, the settle-
ments of New Caledonia, New Edinburgh, and Scotch Port,
in the most eastern part of the isthmus, a little west of
Punta Carreto. ‘They were soon driven away by the Spa-
niards ; but, as the latter occupied no part of the coast, the
Indians continued their attacks against Choco’s boats, which
from time to time descended the Rio Atrato. The san-
guinary expedition of Don Manuel de Aldarete, in 1729,
served only to augment the resentment of the natives, A
settlement for the cultivation of the cocoa-tree, attempted
in the territory of Urabia, in 1740, by some French planters,
under the protection of the Spanish government, had no
durable success; and the court, excited by the reports of
the vain and bustling archbishop-viceroy, Gongora, ordered,
by the cedule of the 15th August, 1783, ‘« either the conver-


447


The number of independent Indians who in-
habit the lands between Uraba, Rio Atrato,
Rio Sucio, and Rio Sinu, was, according to an
enumeration (padron): made, in 1760, at least
1800, distributed in three small villages (Su-
raba, Toanequi, and Jaraguai). This popula-


sion and conquest, or the destruction (reduccion 0 extincion)
of the Indians of Darien.” This order, worthy of another
age,’ was executed by the maréchal-de-camp Don Antonio
de Arebalo ;, he found little resistance, and formed, in 1785,
the four settlements and forts of Cayman on the eastern
coast of the gulf of Urabia, the Concepcion, Carolina, and
Mandinga. The Lele or high-priest of Mandinga took an
oath of fidelity to the king of Spain; but, in 1786, the war
with the Darien Indians recommenced, and finished by a
treaty concluded July 27th, 1787, between the archbishop-
viceroy and the cacique Bernardo. The forts and new colo-
nies, which figured only on the maps sent to Madrid, aug-
mented the debt of the treasury of Santa-Fe de Bogota, in
1789, to the sum of 1,200,000 piasters: The viceroy, Gil
Lemos, wiser than his predecessor, obtained permission
from the court (Real Orden de 2 Abril 1789) to abandon
Carolina, the Concepcion, and Mandinga. The settlement
of Cayman only was preserved, on account of the navigation
of the Atrato, declared free under the government of the
archbishop-viceroy: it was proposed to transfer this settle-
ment to a more healthy spot, that of Uraba ; but lientenant-
general Don Antonio Arebalo, having proved that the ex-
pence of this removal would amount to the sum of 40,000
piasters, the fort of Cayman was also destroyed, by order of
the viceroy Espeleta, in 1791, and the planters were ecom-
pelled to join themselves to those of the village of San Ber-
nardo,


448


tion was computed at the period of my voyage,
to be 8000. The natives, comprehended in the
general name of Caymans, live in peace with
the inhabitants of San Bernardo del Viento
(pueblo de FEspanoles), placed on the western
bank of the Rio Sinu, lower than San Nicolas
de Zispata, and near the mouth of the river.
These inhabitants have not the ferocity of the
Darien and Cunas Indians on the-Jeft bank of
the Atrato; who often attack the boats which
trade with the town of Quibdo in the Choco;
they also make incursions on the territory of
Uraba, in the months of June and November,
to collect the fruit of the cacao-trees, which are
the remains of some ancient plantations of
French settlers. The quality of the cacao of
Uraba is excellent, and the Darien Indians
sometimes come to sell it with other produc-
tions to the inhabitants of Rio Sinu, entering
the valley of that river by one of its tributary
streams, the Jaraguai.

It cannot be doubted that the gulf of Darien
was considered, at the beginning of the six-
teenth century, as a nook in the country of the
Caribs. The word Caribana is still preserved
in the name of the eastern cape of that nook.
We know nothing of the languages of the
Darien, Cunas, and Cayman Indians ; and we
are altogether ignorant if Carib or Arouac
words are found in their idioms; but it is cer-


449


tain, notwithstanding the testimony of Anghi-
era *, on the identity of the race of the Caribs
of the Little Antilles and the Indians of Uraba,
that Pedro de Cieca, who lived so long among
the latter, never calls them Caribs nor Canni-
bals. We describes the race of that tribe, as
being naked, with long hair, and going to the
neighbouring countries to trade; the women as
being cleanly, well dressed, and extremely en-
gaging (amorosas y galanas). “I have not
seen, adds the Conquistador, any more beauti-
ful-+ in all the Indian lands I have visited;


* See above, vol. vi, p. 24 and 39, note ig

+ Cronica del Peru, p. 21 and 22. The Indians of Darien,
Uraba, Zenu (Sint), Tatabé, the valleys of Nore and of
Guaca, the mountains of Abibe and Antioquia, are accused,
by the same author, of the most ferocious anthropophagy ;
and perhaps that circumstance alone gives rise to the idea
that they were of the same race as the Caribs of the
West Indies. In the celebrated Provision real of the 30th of
October, 1503, by which the Spaniards are permitted to make
slaves of the anthropophagitic Indians of the archipelago of
San Bernardo, opposite the mouth of the Rio Sinid, the Isla
Fuerte, Isla Bura (Bart), and Carthagena (gente que se dice
Canibales), there is more of a question of morals than of the
race, and the denomination of Caribs is altogether avoided.
Ciega asserts that the natives of the valley de Nore seized
the women of neighbouring tribes, in order first to de-
vour the children who were born of the union with foreign
wives, and then the women themselves. Foreseeing that
this horrible depravation of human nature would not be
believed, although it had. been observed by Colon in the West


VOL. VII, 2G


450


they have one fault however, that of having too
frequent conversations with the devil.”

The Rio Sinu, by its position and its fer-
tility, is of the highest importance for pro-


visioning Carthagena. In time of war, the
enemy usually placed their ships between the
Morro de Tigua and the Boca de Matunilla,
to interrupt the barks laden with provisions.
In that station, they were however sometimes
exposed to the attack of the gun-boats of


Indies, he cites the testimony of Juan de Vadillo who had ob-
served the same facts, and who was still living in 1554, when
the Chronica del Peru appeared in Dutch. See on the manners
of the Indians of the valley of de Nore, and the travelling bed
of a great Indian lord, named Nabonuco, J. c., p. 29 and 30.
With respect to the etymology of the word cannibal, it seems
to me entirely cleared up by the’ discovery of the journal
kept by Colon during his first voyage of discovery, and of
which Bartholome de las Casas has left us an abridged copy.
<© Dice mas el Almirante que en las islas passadas estaban
con gran temor de carib y en algunas los llamaban caniba
pero en la Espaiiola carib y son gente arriscada, pues andan
por todas estas islas y comen la gente que pueden haber.”
(Navarrete, tom. i, p. 135.) In. this primitive form of
words, it is easy to perceive that the permutation of the let-
ters r and”, an effect of the imperfection of the organs in
some nations, might change carib into canib, or caniba. Ger-
aldini, who, according to the tendency of that age, sought,
like Cardinal Bembo, to latinize ‘all the barbarous denomina-
tions, recognizes, in the Cannibals, the manners of dogs,
nearly as Saint Louis desired to send the Tatares or Tar-
tares, “ ad suas dartareas sedes unde exierint.”’


451


Carthagena, which can pass by the channel of
Pasacaballos, that separates, near Saint Anne,
the isle of Baru from the continent. Lorica has
remained, since the sixteenth century, the prin-
cipal town of Rio Sinu; but its population,
which, in 1778, under the government of Don
Juan Diaz Pimienta, amounted to 4000 souls,
has considerably diminished, because nothing
has been done to secure the town from inunda-
tions and the deleterious miasmata they pro-
duce.

The gold washings of the Rio Sinu, heretofore
so important, above all, between its source and
the village of San Geronimo, have almost entire-
ly ceased, as well as those of Cienega de Tolu,
Uraba, and all the rivers descending from the
mountains of Abibé*. “The Darien and the
Zenu, (says the bachelor Enciso, in his Work on
Geography, published at the beginning of the
sixteenth century,) is a country so rich in gold


* That chain of mountains forms one of the branches of
the knot of Antioquia. It seems to terminate towards the
north by the Cerro del Aguila, near the Punta de Uraba.
The famous Captain Francisco Cesar crossed it first: Cieca
there found a great number of suspended bridges. He dis-
tinguished the mountains of Abibé and the province of Da-
baybe (Dobaybe), the Dorado of those countries. See above,
vol. vi, p. 260 (note), 452, &c. Cieca, cap. x and xii,
p. 26 and 29, Herera, Dec. I, lib. 9, cap.6; Dec. IL, lib. 2,
cap. 4.

262


452


pepites, that, in the running waters, that metal
can be fished with nets.” Excited .by these
narratives, the governor Pedrarias sent his lieu-
tenant Francisco Becerra, in 1515, to the Rio
Sinu. This expedition had the most fatal con-
sequences, for Becerra and his troop were mas-
sacred by the natives, of whom the Spaniards,
according to the custom of the time, had car-
ried away a great number as slaves to be sold
in the West Indies. The province of Antio-
quia now furnishes, in its auriferous veins, a
vast field for mining speculations ; but it would
no doubt be prudent to lay aside gold washings
for the cultivation of colonial productions, in
the fertile lands of Sinu, the Rio Damaquiel,
the Uraba, and the Darien del Norte, above all,
that of cacao, which is of a superior quality.
The proximity of the port of Carthagena would
also render the neglected cultivation of quin-
quina, of great importance to the trade with
Europe. That precious tree vegetates at the
source of the Rio Sinu, as in the mountains of
Abibé and Maria. The real febrifuge quin-
quina, with a hairy corolla, is no where else
found so near the coast, if we except the Sierra
Nevada of Santa Marta. A memoir, written
by the prior of the Consulado of Carthagena,
Don Ignacio Pombo, contains the most useful
views on the colonization of the Rio Sinu, on
the establishment of a courier who would go by


3


land from Lorica to Uraba, and from thence by
water to Quibdo, after having left the correspon-
dence of Antioquia at the mouth of the Bebara ;
finally, on the timber trade, which seems to be
invited by the rivers descending from the Sierra
de Abibe and the mountains of Choco, such as
the Sinu, the Damaquiel, the Suriquilla, the
Sucio, and the Atrato.

The Rio Sinu and the gulf of Darien were
not visited by Columbus. The iost eastern
point where that great man touched land, on
the 26th November, 1503, is the Puerto de
Retreto, now called Puerto de Escribanos, near
the Punta of San Blas, in the isthmus of Pa-
nama*. Two years before, Rodrigo de Bastidas
and Alonso de Ojeda, accompanied by Amerigo
Vespucci, had discovered the whole coast of the
main land, from the gulf of Maracaybo + as far
as the Puerto de Retreto. Having often had
occasion in the preceding volumes to speak of
New Andalusia, ¥ shall here state the his-


torical remark on the primitive sense of that
denomination. I found it, for the first time, in
the convention made by Alonso de Ojeda with
the Conquistador Diego de Sicuessa, a powerful

man {, say the historians of his time, “ because


* See Cuarto Viage del Almiraute dans Navarrete, Col. de
los deseubr. esp., tom. 1, p. 285, 288.

+ Tenia fabor, por ser gran cortesano y de buenos dichos.

t This gulf was then called gulf de Coquibocoa, or Vene~


454


he was a flattering courtier and a wit.” In
1508, all the country from the cape de la Vela
to the gulf of Uraba, where the Castillu del Oro
begins, was called New Andalusia, a name
since restricted to the province of Cumana.

A fortunate chance led me to see, during the
course of my voyage, the two extremities of the
main land, the mountainous and verdant coast
of Paria, where Columbus, in his poetical ex-
altation, placed the cradle of the human race *,
and the low and humid coast which extends
from the mouth of the Sinu towards the gulf of
Darien. The comparison of these scenes, again
become savage, confirms what I have elsewhere
advanced, on the strange and sometimes retro-
grade state of civilization in America. On one
side, the coast of Paria, the islands of Cubagua
and la Marguerite; on the other, the gulf of
Uraba and Darien, received the first Spanish
planters. The gold and pearls which were
there found in abundance, because from time
immemorial they had been accumulated in the
hands of the natives, gave those countries a
popular celebrity, from the beginning of the
sixteenth century. At Seville, Toledo, Pisa,
Genoa, and Antwerp, the names of these coun-


zguela. (Herera, Dec. I, lib. 4, cap. 11.) The former name
is preserved in the neighbouring cape of Chichibacoa.

* Navarrete, tom. ii, p. 143, and Meios Hist. del Nueva
Mundo, tom, i, p. 217,


a


tries were pronounced like those of Ormuz and
Calicut. The pontiffs of Rome consigned them
in their bulls; and Bembo has recorded them
in those admirable pages which have added to
the glory of Venice, and survived its liberty.
There is something seducing in the indistinct-
ness of a happy beginning; the creative imagi-
nation of man gives grandeur to what is only
sketched. This charm of indefinite hope, this
pleasure of adding by the power of thought, to
what in the real world is narrow and limited, is
every where displayed in the germ of great dis-
coveries, as in the unfinished productions of the
pencil; in the first development of a noble cha-
racter; and. in the simplicity and confiding
youth of nations who attempt to construct their
social edifice.

At the close of the fifteenth and the begin-
ning of the sixteenth century, Europe saw only,
in the parts of the New World discovered by
Columbus, Ojeda, Vespucci, and Rodrigo de
Bastidas, the advanced capes of the vast land
of India and eastern Asia, of which the im-
mense wealth in gold, diamonds, pearls, and
spices, had been vaunted in the narratives of
Benjamin de Tudela, Rubriquis, Marco Polo,
~and Mandeville. Columbus, with an imagina-
tion filled with these narrations, caused an act
to be prepared before a notary, on the 12th


456


June, 1494, in which sixty of his companions,
pilots, sailors, and passengers, certified upon
oath, that the southern coast of Cuba made a
part of the continent of India. The descrip-
tion of the treasures of Catay and Cipango, of
the celestial town of Quinsay and the province
of Mango, which had inflamed his desires in
early life, pursued him like phantoms in his
declining days. In his fourth and last voyage,
on approaching the coast of Cariay (Poyais, or
Musquito Coast), Veragua, and the Isthmus, he
believed he was near the mouth of the Gan-
ges *. These geographical illusions, this mys-
terious veil, which enveloped the first dis-
coveries, contributed to enlarge every object,
and to fix the attention of Europe on regions of


which the names are to us scarcely known.
New Cadiz, the principal seat of the pearl-
fishery, was placed in an island which is again
become uninhabited. The extremity of the
rocky coast of Paria is alike desert. Several


* «© Tambien dicen que lar mar Baxa a Ciguare y de alli
a diez jornadas es el Rio de Guangues: parce que estas tier-
ras estan con Veragua como Tortosa con Fuenterabia 6 Pisa
con Venecia.” These words are taken from the Letiera
rarissima of Colon, which I have mentioned. above (vol. vii,
p. 314), and of which the original Spanish was lately found,
and published by the learned M. Navarrete, in his Coleccion
de Viages, vol. i, p. 299.


457


towns were founded at the mouth of the Rio
Atrato, by the names of Antigua del Darien,
Uraba, or San Sebastian de Buenavista, In
these spots, so celebrated at the beginning of
the sixteenth century, the historians of the con-
quest tell us, that the flower of the Castillian
heroes were found assembled: thence Balboa
set out to discover the South Sea; Pizarro, when
he conquered and ravaged Peru; Pedro de
Cieca, who, in combatting, constantly followed
the chain of the Andes, by Antioquia, Popayan,
and Couzco, as far as la Plata, after having
gone 900 leagues by land. These towns of
Darien are destroyed ; some ruins scattered on
the hills of Uraba, the fruit-trees of Europe
mixed with native trees, mark to the traveller
the spots which those towns once occupied. In
almost all Spanish America, the first lands peo-
pled by the Conquistadores, have fallen back
into barbarism *. Other countries, discovered


* In carefully collating the testimonies of the historians of
the Conquest, some contradictions are observed in the periods
assigned to the foundation of the towns of Darien. Pedro
de Cieca, who had been on the spot, affirms, that under the
government of Alonso de Ojada and Nicuessa, the town of
Nuestra Sefiora Santa Maria el Antigua del Darien was
founded on the western coast of the gulf or Culata de Uraba,
in 1509; and that later (despues desto passado) Ojeda passed
to the eastern coast of the Culuta to construct the town of
San Sebastian de Uraba. The former, called by abbreviation


458


later, draw the attention of the colonists: such
is the natural progress of things in peopling a


Ciudad del Antigua, had soon a population of 2000 Spa-
niards, while the latter, the Ciudad de Uraba, remained
desert, because Francisco Pizarro, since known as the con-
queror of Peru, was forced to abandon it, having vainly
demanded succours from Saint Domingo. (Chronica del Peru,
cap.G.) The historian Herera, after having said in the 15th
chapter of his Geographic Description of the West Indies, that
the foundation of Antigua had preceded one year that of
Uraba or San Sebastian, affirms the contrary in the follow-
ing chapter, and in the Chronicle itself. (Dec. J, lib. iv, cap.
11 ; lab. vii, cap. 16; lib. viii, cap. 11; lib. x, cap.17; Dec.
II, lib. ii, cap. 1; Dec. V, lib. ii, cap. 4. Descript. géeog., éd.
1601, p. 41 and 45.) It was, according to the Chronicle,
in 1501, that Ojeda, accompanied by Vespucci, and pene-
trating for the first time the gulf of Uraba or Darien, “ re-
solved to construct with wood and unbaked bricks, a fort at
the entrance of Culata.’’ It appears, however, that this
enterprize was not executed ; for, in 1508, in the convention
made by Ojeda and Nicuessa, they each promised to build
two fortresses on the limits of New Andalusia and of Castilla
del Oro. WHerera, in the 7th and 8th books of the first
Décade, places the foundation of San Sebastian de Uraba, at
the beginning of 1510, and as being the most ancient town
of the continent of America, after that of Ceragua, founded
by Columbus, in 1508, on the Rio Belen, He relates how
Francisco Pizarro abandoned that town, and how the foun-
dation of the Ciudad del Antigua by Entiso, towards the end
of the year 1510, was the consequence of that event. (Leo
X, erected Antigua into a bishoprick, in 1514; and this
was the first episcopal church of the continent. In 1519,
Pedrarias Davila persuaded the court of Madrid, by false re-
ports, that the seat of the new town of Panama was more


459


vast continent. It may be hoped that on seve-
ral points the people will return towards the
places that were first chosen. It is difficult to
conceive why the mouth of a great river, de-
scending from a country rich in gold and pla-
tina, has remained uninhabited. The Atrato,
heretofore called Rio del Darien, de San Juan,
or Dabayba, has had the same fate as the Oroo-
noko. The Indians who wander around the
Delta of those rivers have remained in a sa-
vage state. It is useless to invoke the great
shades of Christopher Columbus and of Ves-
pucci, one of whom ascertained in 1498 the
channel of Pedernales, one of the mouths of the
Oroonoko, and the other, in 1501, the gulf of


Uraba. The dates alone suffice to depose
against the indifference of the mother country,
and the spirit of the ages which have followed
the period of the great discoveries.

We weighed anchor in the road of Zapote,
the 27th March, at sun-rise. ‘The sea was less
stormy and rather warmer, although the fury of


healthful than that of Antigua ; the inhabitants were com-
pelled to abandon the latter town, and the bishoprick was
transferred to Panama, The gulf of Uraba remained desert
during thirteen years, till the founder of the town of Car-
thagena, Pedro de Heredia, after having dug up the graves,
or huacas of the Rio Sint, to collect gold, sent his brother
Alonso, in 1532, to repeople Uraba, and reconstruct on that
spot, a town by the name of San Sebastian de Buenavista.)


460


the wind was the same. We saw to the north,
a succession of small cones of an extraordinary
form, as far as the Morro de Tigua; they are
known by the name of Tetas de Santero, de Tolu,
de Rincon, and de Chichimar.. The two latter
are nearest the coast. Some angles of height of
the Tetas de Tolu scarcely gave them 240
toises: they rise in the middle of the savan-
nahs, where, on the trunks of the Toluifera
balsamum, the precious balm of Tolu is col-
lected, heretofore so celebrated in the pharma-
cies of Europe, and of which there is a little
trade carried on at Corozal, Caimito, and the
town of Tacasuan. In the savanas altas del
Tolu, oxen and mules wander half-wild. Seve-
ral of those hills, between Cienega de Pes-
quero and the Punta del Comissario, are
linked two and two together, like basaltic
cones ; it is, however, very probable that they
are calcareous, like the Tetas de Managua,
south of the Havannah. We passed in the
Archipelago of San Bernardo, between the
island of Salamanquilla and the Cape Boque-
ron. We had scarcely quitted the gulph of
Morosquillo, when the sea became so rough
that our little vessel of twenty tons was almost
constantly below water. It was a fine moon-
light, and our captain sought in vain a shelter
on the coast, on the north of the village of Rin-
con. We_cast anchor at four fathoms; but


461


having discovered that we were upon a rock of
coral, we preferred the open sea.

The coast has a singular configuration from
the Morro de Tigua, where the groupe of little
mountains cease which rise insularly from the
plain. We found at first a marshy soil, of eight
leagues square, between the Bocas de Matuna
and Matunilla. These marshes are connected
by the Cienaga de la Cruz, with the Dique of
Mahates and the Rio Magdalena. The Jsle of
Baru, which, with the isle of Tierra Bomba,
forms the vast port of Carthagena, is, properly
speaking, but a peninsula fourteen miles long,
separated from the continent by the narrow
channel of Pasacaballos. As a groupe of islands,
the Archipelago of San Bernardo is placed op-
posite Cape Boqueron. Another Archipelago,
that of Rosario, accompanies also the southern
extremity of the peninsula of Baru. These
rents in the coast are repeated at the 103° and
11° of Jatitude. The Peninsulas near the En-
senada of Galera de Zamba and near the port
of Savanilla, display the same aspect as the
Peninsula Baru. The same causes have pro-
duced similar effects; and the geognost ought
not to neglect those analogies, in the configura-
tion of a coast which, from Punta Caribana in
the mouth of the Atrato, beyond the Cape of
la Vela, on one hundred and twenty leagues of
length, has a general direction from S.W. to N.E.


462


The wind became calm during the night : we
could only advance near the isle of Arenas,
where we anchored. I found it was 78° 2’
10” of longitude *, supposing Carthagena to be
77° 50° 10”. When I arrived at Carthagena, I
compared this chronometric result with that ob-
tained by Mr. Fidalgo. That able navigator
placed the island of Arenas 10’ 35” west of the
meridian of the cathedral of Carthagena. The
weather became stormy during the night. We
again set sail, on the 29th of March, in the
morning, hoping to be able to enter that day at
Boca Chica. The gale blew with extreme vio-
lence, and we were unable to proceed with our
frail bark against the wind and the current. I
have seldom seen a higher sea. The surges
broke in foam upon the deck. We were run-
ning short tacks, when, by a false manceuvre
in setting the sails, (we had but four sailors,)
perhaps also through the fault of the boatswain,
we were during’ some minutes in imminent
danger. ‘The captain, who was‘not a very bold
mariner, would no longer ascend up the coast,
and we took refuge, under the wind, in a nook
of the isle of Baru, south of the Punta Gigan-
tes. It was Palm Sunday; and the Zambo,
who-‘had followed us to the Oroonoko, and did
not leave us till we returned to France, did not


* Obs. Astr., vol. ii, p. 142.


463


fail to remind us that on the same Sunday the
preceding year, we had nearly been lost, on the
north of the mission of Uruana *.

There was to be an eclipse of the moon dur-
ing the night, and the next day an occultation
of z of the Virgin. The observation of the latter
phenomenon might have been very important
as to the longitude of Carthagena. I insisted
in vain with my captain to give me one of his
sailors, to accompany me by land to the foot of
Boca Chica. The distance is five miles, and he
objected the savage state of the spot, in which
there is neither habitation nor path. A little
incident, which might have rendered Palm-
Sunday more fatal, justified the prudence of
the captain. We went, by a fine moon-light,
to collect plants on the shore; as we approach-
ed the land, we saw a young negro issue from
the brush-wood,. quite naked, loaded with
chains, and armed with a cutlass. He engaged
us to disembark on a beach covered with large
paletuviers, as being a spot where the sea did
not break in; he offered to conduct us to the
interior of the island of Baru, if we would pro-
mise to give him some clothes. His cunning and
savage air, the often-repeated question whether
we were Spaniards, the unintelligible words ad-
dressed 10 companions who remained concealed


* See above, vol. iv, p. 495.


464


behind the trees, inspired us with some mis-
trust. These blacks were no doubt maroon
negroes, slaves escaped from the prison where
they were held in irons. This unfortunate class
are the most to be dreaded; they have the
courage of despair, and a desire of vengeance,
nourished by the rigor of the whites. We were
without arms ; they appeared to be more numer-
ous than we were, and perhaps engaged us to
disembark, to take possession of our canoe. We
thought it most prudent to return on board our |
vessel. The aspect of a naked man, wandering
on an uninhabited beach, without being able to
unrivet the chains fastened round his neck and
the upper part of his arm, left us the most
painful impressions. They could only have
been augmented by the ferocious regrets of our
mariners, who wanted to return to the shore
and seize the fugitives, to sell them secretly at
Carthagena. In climates where slavery exists,
the mind is familiarized with suffering, and
that instinct of pity is stifled which charac-
terizes and enobles our nature.

At anchor, near the isle of Baru, in the me-
ridian of Punta Gigantes, I observed the eclipse
of the moon of the 29th of March, 1801. ‘The
total immersion took place at 11" 30’ 12:6”
mean time. Some groupes of vapors, scattered
over the azured vault of the sky, rendered the
observation of the immersion uncertain. I


465


measured the progress of the eclipse with the
sextant, a method which cannot be too much
recommended to mariners, because it may be
employed on a stormy sea, and multiplies the
means of observation. In order to draw ad-
vantage from a phenomenon generally regarded
as of little importance in the determination of
the longitude, we must be able to count on the
fortuitous compensation of errors. M. Olt-
manns* has discussed this observation, and
deduces the longitude at 55 11’ 22”. The
chronometer gave me 14°7” in time, for the
difference of the meridians of Punta Gigantes
and Carthagena. During the total eclipse, the
lunar disk displayed, as almost always happens,
a reddish tint, without disappearing; the edges,
examined with a sextant, were strongly undu-
lating, notwithstanding the considerable height
of the orb. It appeared to me that the moon
remained more luminous than I had ever seen
it in the temperate zone. The vividness of the
light, it may be conceived, does not depend
solely on the state of the atmosphere, which
reflects, more or less feebly, the solar rays, by
inflecting them in the cone of the shade, but
it is also modified by the variable transparency
of that part of the atmosphere across which we
perceived the moon eclipsed. Within the tro-


* Obs. Astr., vol. ii, p. 144.
VOL. VII. 24H


466


pics, a great serenity of the sky, a perfect dis-
solution of the vapors, diminish the extinction
of the light which the lunar disk sends us back.
I was singularly struck, during the eclipse, by
the want of uniformity in the distribution of
the refracted light by the terrestrial atmosphere.
The central region of the disk displayed a sha-
dow, like around cloud, of which the move-
ment was from east to west: The part where
the emersion was to take place was conse-
quently, a few minutes before the emersion,
much more illuminated than the western edges.
Must we attribute this phenomenon to an une-
qual part of our atmosphere, to a partial accumu-
lation of vapors which, in absorbing a consider-
able part of the solar light,inflects less on one side
the cone of the shadow of the earth? Ifa similar
cause, in the perigee central eclipses, sometimes
renders the disk invisible, may it not happen
also that only a small portion of the moon is
seen, a disk irregularly formed, and of which
different parts were successively enlightened ?
The morning of the 30th March, we doubled
the Punta Gigantes, and made sail towards the
Boca Chica, the present entrance of the port of
Carthagena. From thence there are seven ot
eight miles to the anchorage near the town;
and although we took a practico to pilot us, we
repeatedly touched the sand-banks, On disem-
barking, I learnt with great satisfaction, that


467


the expedition appointed to take the survey
of the coast, commanded by M. Fidalgo, had
not yet put to sea. This circumstance not only
gave me the facility of assuring myself of the
astronomical position of several towns on the
shore, which had served me as points of depar-
ture in fixing chronometrically the longitude of
the Llanos and the Oroonoko ; but also contri-
buted to instruct me with respect to the future
direction of my journey to Peru. The passage
from Carthagena to Portobello, and that of the
isthmus by the Rio Chagre and Cruces, are alike
short and easy; but it was to be feared, that in
sojourning a long time at Panama before we
found an opportunity of going to Guayaquil, the
navigation of the South Sea would be extremely
long, in a direction contrary to the winds and
currents. I relinquished with regret the hope
of levelling, with the aid of the barometer, the
mountains of the isthmus, although it would
then have been difficult to foresee that at the mo-
ment when I write these lines in 1827, while mea-
surements have been accumulated on so many
other points of Mexico and Columbia, we should
remain in the same ignorance of the height of
the ridge which divides the waters in the isth-
‘mus. The persons we consulted all agreed that
the journey by land, along the Cordilleras, by
Santa Fe de Bogota, Popayan, Quito, and Cax-
amarca, would be preferable to the sea-voyage,
2H 2


468


and furnish an immense field for exploration.
The predilection of the Europeans for the ¢zer-
ras frias, for the cold and temperate climate
that prevails on the back of the Andes, gave
further weight to these counsels. The dis-
tances were known, but we were deceived with
respect to the time it would take to pass over
them on the back of mules. We did not ima-
gine that, in a road of six hundred leagues, of
which every step was interesting for geography
and botany, it would require more than eigh-
teen months to go from Carthagena to Lima.
Notwithstanding this delay, or rather on ac-
count.of the slowness with which we passed
through Cundinamarca, the provinces of Po-
payan and Quito, I had no regret at having
sacrificed the passage of the Isthmus to the
journey of Bogota. This change of direction
gave me occasion to trace the map of the Rio
Magdalena, to determine astronomically the po-
sition of eighty points, situated in the inlands,
between Carthagena, Popayan, and the upper
course of the river of the Amazons and Lima,
to discover the error in the longitude of Quito,
to collect several thousand new plants, and to
observe ona vast scale the relations between
the rocks of syenitic porphyry and trachyte
with the fire of volcanoes.

The result of those labors, of which it is not
for me to appreciate the importance, have long


469


since been published. My map of Rio Magda-
lena, multiplied by the copies of the year 1802
in America and Spain, and comprehending the
country between Almaguer and Santa Marta,
from 1° 54’ to 11° 15’ of latitude, appeared in
1816, Till that period, no traveller had under-
taken to describe New Grenada; and the
public, except in Spain, knew the navigation of
the Magdalena only by some lines traced by Bou-
guer : that learned traveller had descended the
river from Honda; but, being in want of astro-
nomical instruments, he had fixed but four or
five latitudes, by means of small dials hastily
constructed. The narratives of voyages in
America are now singularly multipled. Politi-
- cal events have led a great number of persons
to those countries which have given themselves
free institutions; and those travellers have
_ perhaps too hastily published their journals on
returning to Europe. They have described the
towns where they resided, and the aspect of
some scenes remarkable for the beauty of the
landscape: they have made known the clothing
and nourishment of the inhabitants, and the
different modes of travelling, in barks, on mules,
or on men’s backs. These works, several of
which are agreeable and instructive, have fami-
liarized the nations of the Old World with
those of Spanish America, from Buenos Ayres
and Chili as far as Zacatecas and New Mexico.


470


It is however to be regretted, that the want of
a thorough knowledge of the Spanish lan-
guage, and the little care taken to acquire the
names of places, rivers, and tribes, have occa-
sioned the most singular mistakes: and it is
also afflicting (and the inhabitants of South
America have above all to complain) that, in
language without taste or dignity, the manners’
of the natives are described in the most unjust
and disdainful terms. Treating with levity
what is most serious in human nature, desiring
to characterize nations like individuals, some
of those narratives have renewed in our days,
those enumerations of vice and virtue which
disfigured the ancient treatises of geography,
and which are founded on vague popular belief.
Those writers have forgotten that great human
societies, in all that is generous or perverse in
their dispositions, display a family air, and are
only distinguished from each other by slight
shades of difference, by the preponderance of
some intellectual faculties, by some propensities
of the soul, of which the deviation constitutes
what we call the defects of national character.
In the tardy publication of my Personal
Narrative, which has been preceded by works
of science of a circumscribed interest, I have
been anticipated by travellers who have passed
through America twenty-five years after me. I
venture however to flatter myself, that whatever


471


+s most. essential in the following pages, is at
present as new, as if had been made known im-
mediately after my return to Europe. Such an
assertion may appear presumptuous and daring
to those who imagine that a region is known
whenever it has been passed over in every di-
rection by armies, or visited by a great number
of Europeans drawn thither by commercial spe-
culations; but it will appear irreproachable
and natural to those who will place themselves
in the position which the author of this work
has chosen. Since the middle of the eighteenth
century, since the observations simply astrono-
mical of La Condamine, Bouguer, Don George
Juan, and Ulloa, to the period of my voyage,
no page was published in Europe * that treated,
even in the most imperfect manner, of the con-
figuration of the surface, the extent and height
of the table-lands, the modifications of climate,
or mean temperature, the aspect and distribu-
tion of plants, the geognostic constitution of
the soil, and the variations of the dip and mag-
netic forces. The war of independence has


* An instructive journal, published by Mr. Caldas, at
Santa Fe de Bogota, in 1807 and 1808, with the title of
Semanario, made known not only the translation of my phy- .
sical table of the equinoxial regions, but many observations
of meteorology, and several measures of height made with
the aid of the barometer in the provinces of Popayan and of
Antioquia.


2


opened those fine regions of the globe to the
industry and trade of Europe; but the books
which have since appeared on the Columbian
republic and Peru, are composed by persons
whose occupations, and perhaps also whose
knowledge, did not admit of their throwing light
on the physical geography of the countries
which they visited. I have suppressed, in tran-
scribing my journal, all that has been already
said of the aspect and construction of towns,
the clothing of different castes, the details of
ordinary life, and the means of transport. Above
all, I have abstained from the polemics which
render the perusal of travels so fatiguing. Ar-
dently desirous of avoiding error, I have not
occupied myself with the opinions of those who
have written on the same subject. I wished
to preserve for the narrative of my travels, its
independence on passing circumstances, and its
peculiar character, that of a work of science.
In order to attain this end, I have directed my
efforts to retrace to the imagination the physi-
cal representation of the Cordilleras * and the


* Since the month of November, 1822, three travellers,
whose labors I have often mentioned with praise, MM.
Boussingault, Roulin, and Rivero, have begun to throw new
light on the parts of Columbia which I could not visit ; for
instance, on the road of Nueva Valencia, by Merida and
Pamplona, at Bogota, on the banks of the Meta, and on the
province of Antioquia. I owe particularly to the friendship


473


plains, the force of an agitated and powerful
nature, which fertilizes and destroys alternately,
the eternal influence exerted by the configura-
tion of the earth, the course of the rivers that
furrow it, the vegetable layer that covers it in
the social state, and finally, the institutions and
the destinies of nations.

During the six days of our stay at Cartha-
gena, our most interesting excursions were
directed towards the Boca Grande and the hill
of Popa, which commands the town and a very
extensive view. The port, or rather the bahia,
is nearly nine miles and a half long, if we com~ _
pute the length from the town (near the suburb
of Jehemani or Xexemani) to the Cienega of
Cacao. The Cienega is one of the nooks of
the isle of Baru, south-west of the Estero de
Pasacaballos, by which we reach the opening of
the Dique de Mahates. Two extremities of the
small isle of Tierra Bomba form, on the north,
with a neck of land of the continent, and on the
south, with a cape of the isle of Bard, the only
entrances to the bay of Carthagena; the former
is called Boca Grande, the second Boca Chica.
This extraordinary conformation of the land
has given rise, during a century, to theories


of M. Boussingault, manuscript notes, which were pub-
lished in the Annales de Chimie et de Physique, and which
prove the variety and extent of his knowledge.


474


entirely contradictory respecting the defence of
a place, which, after the Havannah and Porto-
cabello, is the most important of the main land
and the West Indies. The engineers differed
relatively to the choice of the opening which
should be closed; and it was not, as several
writers have repeated, after the disembarkment
of Admiral Vernon, in 1741, that the idea was
first conceived * of filling up the Boca Grande.
The English forced the small entrance, when
they rendered themselves masters of the bay;
but being unable to take the town of Cartha-
gena, which made a brave resistance, they de-
stroyed the Castillo Grande, called also Santa


Cruz, and the two forts of San Luis and San
Jose, which defended the Boca Chica. These
events made a strong impression in regions
where the inhabitants were accustomed to un-


interrupted peace. The negligence with which
the service of the place of Carthagena was
made, in 1735, was so great-+ that “ the cen-
tinels remained in their posts, without being
relieved, during two or three months; they


* La entrada antigua era por un angosto canal que llaman
Boca Chica, says Don Jorge Juan, in his Secret Notices,
addressed to the Marquis de la Ensenada; de resulias de esta
invasion se acordd dejar cioga y impassable la Boca Chica y
volver a abrir la antigua fortificandola. (Secr. Not., vol. i,
p- 4.)

+ Lic, p. 181.


475


slept there as at a country-house, and went
during the day to work in the town.”

The ill-founded apprehension which the prox-
imity of the Boca Grande to the town, excited
in some of the engineers, determined the court
of Madrid, after the English expedition, to shut
up the entrance on a distance of 2640 varas *.
From two and a half to three fathoms of water
were found, and a wall, or rather a dyke, in
stone, from fifteen to twenty feet high, was
raised on piles. The slope on the side of the
water is unequal, and seldom 45°. It is an
immense work, terminated under the Viceroy
Espeleta, in 1795, and has cost the lives of
many hundred Galerians. The expence, ac-
cording to the accounts found in the Conta-
duria, amounts to half a million of piasters,
taken on the funds allotted for the fortifications
of the Boca Chica and the Castillo de San
Lozaro. These fortifications were executed
since 1786, from plans traced by the brigadier
Don Augustin Cramer; but the filling up of
the Boca Grande ought not to be attributed to
that able engineer. The work was begun be-
fore he visited-~ Carthagena and Portobello,


* More than 1100 toises, of which only 720 toises were
walled.

+ Relacion del Govierno del Excellentissimo Seror Don
Josef de Espeleta, 1796, part iv, cap. 8, fol. 119 (manu-
script).


476


and it is known by tradition that he was as
hostile to that enterprize as Don Jorge Juan.
Art could not vanquish nature ; the sea tends,
by alluvions, to close the Boca Chica, while it
labors unceasingly to open and enlarge the
Boca Grande. The currents, that during a
great part of the year, above all when the ven-
davales blow with violence, ascend from S.W.
to N.E., throwing sands into the Boca Chica,
and further on, even into the bay itself. The
passage, which is from seventeen to eighteen —
fathoms deep, becomes more and more nar-
row *, and if a regular cleansing be not esta-
blished by dredging-machines, vessels will not
be able to enter without running the risk of
striking several times. It is this small entrance
which should have been closed; its opening is
only 260 toises, and the passage or navigable
channel is 110 toises. The flat of Salmedina
renders it dangerous for boats coming from the
N.W., and its distance from the port or anchor-
age near the town (a distance of seven miles)
would oblige ships of war to go out very slowly
in case of an aggression on the side of the


* At the foot of the two forts (San Jose and San Fer-
nando), constructed for the defence of the Boca Chica, it
may be seen how much the land has gained upon the sea,
Necks of land are formed on both sides, and also before the
Castillo del Angel, which towards the north commands the
fort of San Fernando.


477


Ocean. The current, which at the Boca Grande
descends from the promontory of Galera Zamba,
works continually at the destruction of what art
has formed; and the smugglers and fishermen
have seconded the efforts of the waves. The
dyke has been torn up towards the south on a
length of more than twenty feet. This breach
was nine feet deep in 1800, and after a warm
contest among the authorities, on the possibility
of the attack of an enemy by the Boca Grande,
the commander of the port of Carthagena, Don
Joaquin Fidalgo, caused all the lanchas cano-
neras to go out across the broken dyke. The
depth has since been diminished to three or four
feet, but the reparations are of short duration.
If the resolution be one day taken to abandon
the Boca Chica, and re-establish the Boca
Grande in the state which nature seems to pre-
scribe, new fortifications must be constructed
on the S.S.W. of the town. This fortress has
always required great pecuniary sacrifices to
keep it up; and, under the old Spanish domi-
nion, became often the cause of the most cruel
financial embarrassments. The construction of
the fortifications, the filling up the Boca Grande,
and the armaments of the viceroy Don Manuel
Antonio Flores *, gave occasion to the intro-


* The debt of the treasury at the end of the administra-
tion of the viceroy Flores, was 889,400 piasters.


478


duction of the tax on tobacco, and to the vex-
ations of a Regente Visitador, which excited the
people to revolt, in 1781, first at Sicerro, and
then at Zipaquira, almost at the gates of the
capital of Bogota. Under the administration
of the viceroy Don Pedro de Mendinueta, who
has left a reputation of the most honorable dis-
interestedness, the annual expences of fortifica-
tion, artillery, and marine, amounted at Car-
thagena, to 980,000 piasters, and for the isth-
mus of Panama, to 400,000.

If the republic of Columbia does not con-
siderably simplify the system of defence of its
shore, which is 660 marine leagues in extent *,
she will have to chuse whether she will suffer
the numerous fortifications of Cumana, Morro
de Barcelona, La Guayra, Portocabello, Castillo
de San Carlos, at the mouth of the lake Mara-
caybo, Toreon de San Jorge de Rio Hacha,
Morro de Santa Marta, Carthagena, Portobello,
Fuerte de San Lorenzo de Chagre, Panama,
and Guayaquil, to fall by degrees into ruin, or
to keep them up by an annual expence which
would be better employed in the augmentation
of her military marine. On the good state of
that marine, the salubrity of the coast, and the
wise distribution of the militia, the defence of
Columbia should be founded.


See above, vol, vi, p. 188,


479


The insalubrity of Carthagena, exaggerated
in the accounts of those who inhabit the upper
part (tierras frias) of Columbia, varies with the
state of the great marshes that surround the
town on the east and the north. The Cienega
de Tesca is more than fifteen miles long; it
communicates with the Ocean, where it ap-
proaches the village of Guayeper. When, in
dry years, the heaped-up earth prevents the salt
water from covering the whole plain, the ema-
nations that rise during the heat of the day,
when the thermometer keeps up between 28°
and 32°, become very pernicious to the health
of the inhabitants. A small portion of hilly
land separates the town of Carthagena and the
isle of Manga de la Cienega de Tesca. Those
hills, some of which are more than 500. feet
high, command the town. The Castillo de San
Lazaro presents itself from afar like a great |
rocky pyramid; examined nearer, its fortifica-
tions are less formidable. Tayers of clay and
sand,: belonging to the tertiary formation of
nagelfluhe, ave covered with bricks, and furnish
a kind of construction which has little stability.
The Cerro de Santa Maria de ta Popa, crowned
by a convent and some batteries, rises above
the fort of San Lazaro, and merits on that
account more solid and extensive works. The
image of the Virgin, preserved in the church of
the convent, has been long revered by the


480


mariners. The hill itself forms a prolonged
back, from west to east ; and is terminated by
a projection, which gives it the aspect of the
pump of a vessel. The calcareous rock, filled
with cardites, meandrites, and other petrified
corals, somewhat resembles the tertiary lime-
stone * of the peninsula of Araya, near Cumana.
It is split and decomposed in the steep parts
of the rock, and the preservation of the con-
vent, with foundations so little solid, is con-
sidered by the people as one of the miracles of
the patron of the place. Near Cerro de la
Popa, there appears, on several points, breche
with a limestone cement, containing angular
fragments of lydian. Is this formation of nagel-
Jluhe superposed on tertiary limestone of coral?
Do the fragments of the lydian stone come from
secondary limestone ~, analogous to that of
Zacatecas and Morro de Nueva Barcelona? I
have not had leisure to resolve these questions.
The view from the Popa is extensive and varied,
and the windings and rents of the coast give it
a peculiar character. I was assured that some-
times from the windows of the convent, and
even in the open sea, before the fort of Boca
Chica, the snowy tops are seen of the Sierra
Nevada de Santa Marta. _ The distance of the


* See above, vol. vi, p. 638.
t+ Luc., vol. iii, p. 365; vol. vi, p. 80.


481


Horqueta to the Popa is seventy-eight marine
miles. This groupe of mountains, of a colossal
height, is most frequently enwrapped in thick
clouds; it remains most veiled at the season
when the gales blow with violence. Although
it is only forty-five miles distant from the coast,
it serves so little as a signal to mariners who
seek the port of Saint Martha, that the expe-
dition of Fidalgo, during the whole time of its
operations near the shore, could take only once
the measurement of the Nevados.

A gloomy vegetation of Cactus, Jatropha
gossypifolia, Croton, and Mimosa, covers the
barren declivity of Cerro de la Popa. In her-
balizing in those wild spots, our guides shewed
us a thick bush of Acacia cornigera, become .
celebrated by a deplorable event. Of all the
species of Mimosa, the Acacia is that which is
armed with the sharpest thorns ; they are some-
times two inches long, and being hollow, serve
for the habitation of ants of an extraordinary
size. A woman, wearied of the jealousy and
well founded reproaches of her husband, con-
ceived a project of the most refined vengeance.
With the assistance of her lover, she bound her
husband with cords, and threw him, at night,
into a bush of Mimosa cornigera. The more he
struggled, the more the ligneous thorns of the
tree tore his skin. . His cries were heard by per-

VOL. VIL. 21


482


sons who were passing, and he was found after
several hours of suffering, covered with blood,
and cruelly tormented by the ants. This spe-
cies of correction, inflicted on a jealous hus-
band, is perhaps without example in the history
of human perversity ; it characterizes in the low
classes of society, a violence of passion of which
we should less accuse the climate than the bar-
barism of manners.


My most important occupation at Cartha-
gena was the comparison of my observations
with the astronomical positions, fixed by the
officers of the expedition of Fidalgo. No com-
munication was ever offered more frankly and


with greater kindness than that of which I have
given the result in another work. In the year
1787 (under the ministry of M. Valdés), Don
Josef Espinosa, Don Dionisio Galiano, and Don
Josef de Lanz, had proposed to the Spanish
government to appoint them to take a survey
of the coast of America, in order to extend the
Atlas of Tofino to the western colonies. The
plan of those officers, who have since given so
many proofs of their zeal and knowledge, was
approved; but it was not till 1792, that four
brigantins, commanded by Don Cosme Chur-
ruca and Don Joaquin Francisco Fidalgo, went
out of Cadiz, to commence their scientific ope-
rations at the island of Trinidad.


eee = oe = sees ES ee ee ee ne


i


fi
iis


forte sleazy af feawel (27
litg Coil: Apollo pte AAT
Be


i
Jew Gol,


; J
LeX or


Lowel “eed


q


tea


‘4


eee
Pee eTy


eet


tan


Bats:
sade


2
2
a


aoe
oh


Bie


aye
BEE


