Source note (Tower of Babel staging): Alexander von Humboldt, Personal Narrative of Travels to the Equinoctial Regions of the New Continent, translated by Helen Maria Williams (London: Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme & Brown, 1814), Vol. II. Text from Internet Archive item personalnarrati2humba (OCR).
Public domain work. This file was produced from a public scan; OCR imperfections may remain.

C ee Hed
ae bias
tit


i

Ke
FXii941)p


jp ss
qRD UNW


JEISE ILIUBMRUES)
DUMBARTON OAKS
LIBRARY


*) BY ORDER


OF THE COUNCIL
Taunton astle.


Presented by


S/R PRIOR GOLONEY, Bark, 2.8,
9 tt,


G.5486


Personal Narrative
OF TRAVELS


TO THE


EQUINOCTIAL REGIONS


OF THE


NEW CONTINENT,


DURING THE YEARS 1799—1804,


BY
ALEXANDER DE HUMBOLDT,


ANB


AIME BONPLAND;


WITH MAPS, PLANS, &c.
WRITTEN IN FRENCH BY
ALEXANDER DE HUMBOLDT,


AND TRANSLATED IN'TO ENGLISH BY


HELEN MARIA WILLIAMS.


VOL. II,


LONDON:


FRINTED FOR LONGMAN, HURST, REES, ORME, AND BROWN,
PATERNOSTER ‘ROW 3 J. MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET ;
AND Il, COLBURN, CONDUIT STREET,


1814.


W. Pople, Printer, 67, Chancery Lane.


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER III.


Passage from Teneriffe to the coasts of South America,
—The Island of Tebago.—Arrival at Cumana,
BOOK I.


CHAPTER IV.


First abode at Cumana.—-Banks of the Manzanares.


CHAPTER V.


Peninsula of Areya.—Salt-marshes.—Ruins of the
Castle of San Giacomo. PS ae


JOURNEY


TO THE


EQUINOCTIAL REGIONS


OF


THE NEW CONTINENT.


CHAPTER IIL.


Passage from Teneriffe to the coasts of South
America.— The Island of Tobago. —Arrival at
Cumana,


Wé« left the road of Santa Cruz the evening of the
25thof June, and directed our course towards South
America. The wind blew strong from the north-.
east, and the waves were short, and broken from
the opposition of the currents. We soon lost
sight of the Canary islands, the lofty mountains
of which were covered with a reddish vapour.
The Peak alone appeared from time to time in
the breaks, as the wind, which must have blown
strong in the upper regions of the air, dispersed at
VOL, II. eee


Q
a


intervals the clouds that. enveloped the Piton.
We felt for the first time how strong are the im-
pressions left on the mind from the aspect of
those countries placed on the limits of the torrid


zone, and in which nature appears at once so
rich, so various, and so majestic. Our stay at
Teneriffe had been very short, and yet we with-
drew from the island as if it had been for a long |
time our home. 8
Our passage from Santa Cruz to Cumana, the
most eastern part of the New Continent, was very
fine. We cut the tropic of Cancer the 27th, and
though the Pizarro was not a very good sailer, |
we ran in twenty days the space of nine hundred
leagues, which separates the coasts of Africa
from those of the New Continent. We passed
fifty leagues west. of Cape Bajador, Cape Blanco,
and the islands of Cape Verd. A few land birds,
which had been driven to sea by the impetuosity
of the wind, followed us for several days. If we
had not exactly known, by our time keepers,
our longitude, we should have been tempted
to think, that we were very near the coast of
Africa. Pac
Our course was such as is taken by all vessels
destined for the Antilles since the first voyage of
Columbus. The latitude diminished rapidly, al-
most without gaining in longitude, from the pa-
qf rallel of Madeira to the tropic. When we reach
| the zone, where the trade winds are constant, we


3


cross the ocean from east to west, on a calm and pa-
cific sea, which Spanish sailors call tne Ladies Gulf,
el Golfo de las Damas. We found, as all do whe
frequent those latitudes, that, in proportion as
we advance towards the west, the trade winds,
which were at first east-north-cast, fix to the
east.

Those winds, the most generally adopted thcory
of which is explained in a celebrated treatise of
Halley*, are a phenomenon much more com-
plicated ¢ than the greater number of naturalists
admit, In the Atlantic Ocean, the longitude
as well as the declination of the sun, in-


fluences the direction and limits of the trade
winds. On the side of the New Continent, in


* The existence of an upper current of air, which blows
constantly from the equator to the poles, and of a lower cur-
rent, which blows from the poles to the equator, had already
been admitted, as Mr. Arago has shown, by Hooke. The
"ideas of the celebrated English naturalist are developed in
a discourse on Karthquakes published in 1686. “I think
(adds he,) that several phenomena, which are presented by
the atmosphere and the ocean, especially the winds, may be
explained by the polar currents.” (Iooke’s Posthumous
Works, p. 364.) This curious passage is not cited by Hal-
ley (Phil. Trans. vol. xxxix, p. 58). On the other hand,
Hooke, speaking directly of the trade winds (Post. Works,
p. 88 and 363), adopts the erroneous theory of Galileo, who
admits a difference of velocity between the movement of the
Earth and that of the air.

+ Mem. de l’Acad. 1760, p. 18. DD? Alembert, sur Jes
Causes gén. des Vents, p. 5.


4 BQ


4


both hemispheres, these limits pass the tropics
eight or nine degrees; while in the vicinity of
Africa. the variable winds reign far beyond
the parallel of 28 or 27 degrees. It is to be
regretted, on account of the progress of meteoro-
logy and navigation, that the changes, which the
currents of the equinoctial atmosphere in the Pa-
cific Ocean undergo, are much less known, than
the variation of these same currents’in a sea that
is narrower, and influenced by the proximity of
the coasts of Guinea and Brazil. Navigators
have known for ages past, that in the Atlantic
Ocean the equator does not coincide with the
line which separates the trade winds of the north-
east from the general winds of the south-east.
‘This line, as Halley * has very well observed, is at
the third or fourth degree of north latitude; and
if its position be-the effect of a longer abode of
the Sun in the northern hemisphere, it tends to
prove, that the temperatures of the two hemi-
spheres { are in the ratio Of eleven to nine. We
shall see farther on in this work, when we treat


of the part of the atmosphere which extends over


* Phil, Trans. vol. xvi, p. 154. Ulloa, Conversaciones, p.
108. :

+ Prevost, on the limits of the trade winds. Journ. de
Phys. t. xxxvili, p. 369. Supposing with A®pinus, that the
southern hemisphere is only one fourteenth colder than the
northern, the calculation gives, for the northern limit of the
E.S. I. trade winds, the parallel of 1° 287, & :


5


the South Sea, that to the west of America the
trade winds of the south-east reach to a less dis-
tance beyond the equator, than they do in the At-
lantic Ocean. In fact the difference, with which
the strata of air flow back from the two poles
towards the equator, cannot be the same in every
degree of longitude, that is to say, on points of
the Globe, where the continents have very differ-
ent breadths, and where they stretch away more
or less towards the poles.

It is known, that im the passage from Santa
Cruz to Cumana, as in that from Acapulco to the
Philippine islands, the sailors are scarcely ever
under the necessity of touching the sails. We
pass those latitudes, as if we were descending a
river, and we might deem it no hazardous under-
taking, if we made the voyage in an open boat.
Farther west, on the coast of St. Martha, and
in the Gulf of Mexico, the trade wind blows im-
petuously, and renders the sea very stormy *.

The wind fell gradually the farther we removed
from the African coasts: it was sometimes smooth
water for several hours, and these short calms
were regularly interrupted by electrical pheno-
mena. Black thick clouds with strong outlines
rose on the east, and it seemed as if a squall


* The Spanish sailors call the rough trade winds at Car.
thagena in the West Indies dos brisotes de Santa Martha ; and
in the Gulf of Mexico, das brizas pardas. ‘These latter winds


are accompanied with a gray and cloudy sky.


6


would have forced us to hand our topsails; but
the breeze freshencd anew, there fell a few large
drops of rain, and the storm was dispersed without
our hearing any thunder. It was. curious to ob-
serve, during this time, the effect of several black,
isolated, and very low clouds, which passed the
zenith. We felt the force of the wind augment
or diminish progressively, according as small bo-
dies of vesicular vapour approached or receded,
while the electrometers, furnished with a long me-
tallic rod and-lighted match, showed no change
of electric tension in the lower strata of the air.
It is by means of these squalls, which alternate
with dead calms, that the passage from the Ca-
nary islands to the Antilles or southern coasts of
America is made in the months of June and July.
In the torrid zone, the meteorological phenomena
follow each other in a very uniform manner ;
and the year 1803 will be for a long time memo-
rable in the annals of navigation, because seve-
ral vessels coming from -Cadiz to the Caraccas
were forced to lie to in the fourteenth degree
of latitude, and the forty eighth degree of longi-
tude, on account of a very violent wind, which
blew for several days from the north-north-west.
What an extraordinary interruption must we sup-
pose in the play of the aerial currents, to explain
a cross wind, which without doubt must have


detanged at the same time the regularity of the
horary oscillations of the barometer!


7


Some Spanish. navigators have lately proposed


going to the West Indies and the coasts of Terra
Virma, by a different course from that. which had
been taken by Christopher Columbus, They advise,
instead of steering directly to the south in search
of the trade winds, to change both latitude and
longitude, in a diagonal line from Cape St. Vin-
cent to America. This method, which shortens
the way, cutting the tropic nearly twenty de-
grees west of the point where it is commonly cut
by the pilots, has several times been successtully
followed by Admiral Gravina. This experienced
seaman, who perished gloriously at the battle of
Trafalgar, arrived in 1802 at St. Domingo, by the
oblique passage, several days before the French
flect, though orders of the court of Madrid would
have forced him to enter Ferrol with his squadron,
and stop there some time.

This new system of navigation shortens the pas-
sage from Cadiz to Cumana a twentieth; but as
the tropic is attained only at the longitude of forty
degrees, the chance of meeting with contrary
winds, which blow sometimes from the south, and
at other times from the south-west, is more unfa-
vorable. In the old system, the disadvantage of


ee Titans = Rig:
making a longer passage is compensated by the
certainty of finding the trade winds in a shorter
space of time, and keeping them the greater part
of the passage. At the time of my abode in the
Spanish colonies, | witnessed the arrival of seve-


8


tal merchant ships, which the fear of privateers
had determined to choose the oblique course, and
that had a, very short passage; it is only after
repeated trials, that we can decide with certainty
on an object, at least as important as the choice
of the meridian, at which the equator should be
cut in the navigation from Europe to Buenos if
Ayres or Cape Horn.

Nothing equals the beauty and mildness of
the climate of the equinoctial region on the |
ocean. While the trade wind blew strongly, |
the thermometer kept at 23 or 24 degrees in
the day, and at 22 ur 29°5 degrees during the
night. To feel the full charm of these happy
climates bordering on the equator, the passage
from Acapulco or the coasts of Chili to Europe
should be undertaken in a very rough season.
What a contrast between the tempestuous seas of
i the nerthern latitudes, and the. regions where the
calm of nature is never disturbed! If the return
from. Mexico or South America to the coasts of |
Spain were as expeditious and as agreeable as the
passage from the old to the new continent, the |
number of Europeans settled in the colonies would
be much less considerable than it is at present. |
‘The sea which surrounds the Azores and the Ber-
muda islands, and which is traversed in returning
to Europe by the high latitudes, is called by the
Spaniards by the singular name of Golfo de las
i, Veguas (the Mares’ Gulf). Colonists who are


9


not accustomed to the sea, and who have led
solitary lives in the forests of Guiana, the savan-
nahs of the Caraccas, or the Cordilleras of Peru,
dread the neighbourhood of the Bermudas more
than the inhabitants of Lima fear at present the
passage round Cape Horn. They exaggerate the
danger of a navigation which is perilous only in


the winter, They defer from one year to another
the execution of a project which appears hazard-
ous, and death very often surprises them in the
midst of the preparations which they make for
their return.

To the north of the Cape Verd islands we met
with great masses of floating sca-weeds. They
were the tropic grape, fucus natans, which grows
on submarine rocks, only from the equator to the
fortieth degree of north and south latitude.
These weeds seem to indicate the existence of
currents in this place, as weil as to the south-west
of the banks of Newfoundland. We must. not
confound the latitudes abounding in scattered
weeds. with these banks of marinc plants, which
Columbus compares to extensive meadows, the
view. of which struck with terror the crew of the
Santa Maria in the forty-second degree of longi-
tude. I am assured from the comparison of
a great number of journals, that in the basin
of the Atlantic Northern Ocean there exist two
banks of weeds very different from each other.
The most extensive is a little west of the meri
dian of Fayal, one of the Azores, between the


twenty-fifth and

The temperature o

is from. sixteen

winds, which sometimes reign there very icles
tuously, drive f floating isles of sea-w | down into
the low latitudes as far

four and even twenty degrees. ‘The ves sels


re


which return to Europe, either from Montevideo


or the Cape of - -Good Hope, cross these banks


of fucus, which the Spanish pilots consider as at an
equal distance from the Antilles and Canaries ;
and they serve the less instructec 1 mariner to rectify
his longitude. The second bank of fucus is but
little known; it occupies a much smaller space
in the bee aka and twenty-sixth degrees of
latitude, eighty leagues west of the meridian of the
Bahama islands. It i is found on the passage from
the Caiques to the Bermudas.
Though a species of sea-weeds} has been seen


* Tt appears that Pheenician vessels came “ in thirty days
gail, with an easterly wind,” to the weedy sea, which the Por-
tugeeze and Spaniards call mar de zargasso. 1 have shown in
anowuer place, that the passage of Aristotle, De Mirabil. ed.
Duval, p. 1157, can scarcely be applied to the coasts of
Africa, like an analogous passage of the Periplus of Scylax.
Tubleaux de la Nature, t. 1, p.98. Supposing that this sea,
ful of weeds, which impeded the course of the Phenician
vessels, was the mar de zargasso, we need not admit, that the
ancients traversed the Atlantic beyond thirty degrees of west
longitude from the meridian of Paris.

+ Lhe baudreux of the Falkland islands; fucus giganteus,


Forster; laminaria pyrifera, Lamour.


11


with stems eight hundred feet long, the growth of
these marine’ cryptogamia being extremely rapid,


it is not less certain, that, in the latitudes we have
just described, the fuci, far from being fixed to
the bottom, float in separate masses on the surface
of the water. In this state, the vegetation can
scarcely continue a longer time than it would do
in the branch of a tree torn from its trunk ; and
in order to explain how moving masses are found
for ages in the same position, we must-admit, that
they owe their origin to submarine rocks, which,
placed at forty or sixty fathoms depth, continually
supply what has been carried away by the equi-
noctial currents. This current bears the tropic
grape into the high latitudes, toward the
coast of Norway and France; and it is not the
Gulf Stream, as some mariners think, which ac-
cumulates the fucus to the south of the Azores*,
t were to be wished, that navigators heaved the
lead more frequently in these latitudes covered
with weeds: for it is asserted, that Dutch pilots
have found a series.cf shoals from the bénks of
Newfoundland as far as the coasts 6f Scotland, by
using lines composed of silk thread f.
The causes that unroot these weeds at depths,
where it ‘is generally thought the sea ts slightly
agitated, are not: sufficiently known. We. learn


* Barrow, Voyage to Cochinchina, vol. 1, p. p. 93.

+ Fleurieu, Voy. of the Isis, vol. 1, p- 524. (Labuillardiere,
7 ; ». 331.)
Voy. vol. 1, p. 331.)


12


mouroux, that if the fucus adhere to the rocks
with the greatest firmness before the display of its
fructification, it separates with great facility after
this period, or during the season which suspends
its vegetation like that of the terrestrial plants.
The fish and-the molluscas that gnaw the stems
of the seaweeds-no doubt contribute also to de-
tach them from its roots.

From the twenty-second, degree of latitude, we
found the surface of the sea covered with flymg
fish *, which threw themselves up into the air
twelve, fifteen, or eighteen feet, and fell down
on the deck. «I do not hesitate to speak of an
object, of which voyagers discourse as frequently
as of dolphins, sharks, seasickness, and the phos-
phorescence of the ocean. None of these objects
can fail of affording interesting observations to
naturalists, provided they make them their par-
ticular study. Nature is an inexhaustible source
of investigation, and in proportion as the domain
of science is extended, she presents herself to those,
who know how to interrogate her, under forms
which-they have never yet examined.

I have named the flying fish in order to fix the
attention of naturalists on the enormous size of


their natatory bladder, which, in an animal of 6°4


inches, is 3°6 inches long, 0°9 of an inch broad, and


* Exocetus volitans.


13


. contains three cubic inches and a half of air. As
this bladder takes up more than half the size of the
fish, it is probable that it contributes to its light-
ness. We may assert, that this reservoir of air
is more fitted for flying than swimming ; for the
experiments * made by Mr..Provenzal and myself,
have proved, that, even in the species which are
provided with this organ, it is not indispensably
necessary for the movements of ascension towards
the surfate of the water. In a young flying-fish
5°8 inches long, each of the pectoral fins, which
serve as wings, presented a surface to the air of
3°7 square inches. We observed, that the nine
branches of nerves, which go to the twelve rays of
these fins, are almost three times the size of the
nerves that belong to the ventral fins. When
the former of these nerves are excited by galvanic
electricity, the rays which support the membrane
of the pectoral fin extend with five times the
force with which the other fins move when gal-
vanized by the same metals. By these means
the fish is capable of throwing itself horizontally
twenty feet distance, before retouching the water
with the extremity of its fins. This motion has
been aptly compared to that of a flat stone, which,
thrown horizontally, bounds one or two feet above
the water. Notwithstanding the extreme rapidity


* Researches on the respiration of fishes, and their air-
bladder, in the Mémoires de la Société d’Arcueil, vol. ii


ll,


p. 359,


14


of this motion, it is certain, that the animal beats
the air during the leap, that is, it altemnately
extends and closes its pectoral fins. The same
motion * has been observed in the flying scorpena
of the rivers of Japan, which contains also a large
air- bladder, with which the great part of the
scorpene, that have not the faculty of flying,
are unprovided fu si Tike flying-fish, like almost
all animals which ‘have gills, enjoy the privi-
lege { of equal respiration for a long tinie both in
water and in air, by the same organs; that is by
extracting the oxygen from the atmosphere as well
as from the water in which it is dissolved. ‘They
pass a great part of their life in the air, but this
life is at best but an unhappy one. If they escape
from the sea to avoid the voracity of the dolphin,


they meet in the air men-of-war birds, albatrosses,


and other birds, which seize them.in their flight
Thus, on the banks of the Orinoco, herds of
river cavies§, that rush from the water to escape
the crocodile, become the prey of the jaguar, which
awaits their arrival.

I doubt, however, if the flying fish spring out
of the water merely to escape the pursuit of
their enemies. Like swallows, they ‘move by


* Lacepede, Histvire naturelle des Poissons, vol. iii, p. 290.

+ S. poreus, s. scrofa, s. dactyloptera. - Delaroche, Ann
des Mus. t. 14, p. 189.

t Mém. d’Arcueil, t. ii. p. 397.

§ Cavia capybara, L. Thick-nosed tapir, Pennant.


15


thousands in a right line, and in a direction con-
stantly opposite to that of the waves. In our
own climates, on the brink of a river, the limpid
waters of which are illumined by the rays of the
sun, we often see solitary fish, with no motive. of
fear, bound above the surface, as if they felt
pleasure in breathing the air. Why should not
these gambols be more frequent with the flying-fish,
which from the strength of their pectoral fins, and
the smallness of their specific gravity *, can so
easily support themselves in the air? I invite
naturalists to examine whether other flying fish,
for instancé the exocoetus exiliens, the trigla
volitans, and the t. hirundo, have as capacious —
an air-bladder as the flying-fish of the tropics.
This last follows the heated waters of the gulf
stream when they flow towards the north. The
ship boys amuse. themselves with cutting off a
part of the pectoral fins, and assert, that these
wings grow again ; which seems to me not unlikely,
from facts observed in other families of fishes.

At the time I left Paris, experiments made ‘at
Jamaica, by Dr. Brodbeltt, on the air contained
in the natatory bladder of the sword-fish ft, had
made some naturalists think, that under the


* Cuvier, in the Ann. da Mus. t. 14, p. 165; and
Delaroche, ibid. p. 262 (note).

+ Duncan’s Ann. of Medicine, 1796, p. 393, Nicholson’s
Journ. of Nat. Phil. 4to ed., vol. i, p. 264,

i Xiphias gladius. Lin.


16


tropics, in the sea fish, this organ was filled with
pure oxygen gas. Tull of this idea, I was sur-
prised at finding in the air-bladder of the fly-
ing-fish only 0°04 of oxygen to 0°94 of azot and
0°2 of carbonic acid. The proportion of this last
gas, measured by the absorption of lime water in
graduated tubes*, appeared more constant than
that of the oxygen, of which some individuals
yielded almost double the quantity. From the
curious phenomena observed by M. Biot, Con-
figliachi, and Delaroche f, we night suppose, that
the sword fish dissected by Dr. Brodbelt had
inhabited the lower strata of the ocean, where
some fish { have as much as 0°92 of oxygen in


their air-bladder.


* Anthracometers, curved tubes with a large ball. See
my Essays on the atmosphere, plate 1 (German).

+ Mém. d’Arcueil, vol. i, p. 257. Ann. du Mus. t. 14,
p. 184—217 and 245—289. Configliachi sul? Analisi dell’
Aria contenuta nella Vesica natatoria, Pavia, 1809. Havirg
employed eight months in experiments on the respiration of


‘fishes, M. Provenzal and myself observed, that the fishes


absorbed not only oxygen, but also azot, and that the quantity
of this azot absorbed differs in individuals of the same
species. The oxygen inhaled was very far from being
equalled by the carbonic acid, which the fish exhale from the
whole surface of their body; and these facts tend to prove, that
the proportion of oxygen and azot vary in the air-vessel, ac-
cording as the vital action of the gills and the skin is
modified by the greater or less pressure, which the fish unders
goes at different depths.

¢ Trigla cucullus.


17


The Ist of July in 17° 49’ latitude and 34° 21°
longitude, we met with the wreck of a vessel, of
which we distinguished the mast covered with
floating sea-weed. This shipwreck could not
have taken place in a zone where the sea is con-
stantly calm. The wreck came perhaps from
the stormy seas of the north, and might be driven
back to the point where the vessel had perished,
carried on by that extraordinary whirl which the
waters of the Atiantic undergo in the northern
hemisphere.

On the Sd and 4th, we crossed that part of the
ocean, where the charts indicate the bank * of the
Maal-stroom; toward night we altered our
course to avoid this danger, the existence of which
is as doubtful as that of the isles Fonseco and
St. Annef. It would have been perhaps as


* Borda, Voyage de la Flore, vol. ii, p. 314.


+ Jeffery’s and Van-Keulen’s charts indicate four islands,
which are only imaginary dangers: the islands Garca and
St. Anne, to the west of the Azores; the Green island
(latitude 44° 52’, longitude 28° 30%) and the isle of Fonseco
(latitude. 13° 157, longitude 57° 10’). How is it possible to
believe in the existence of four islands in latitudes crossed by
thousands of vessels, when of so many small rocks and shoals,
announced by credulous pilots for a century past, there are
scarcely above two or three that are real? As to the general
question, what is the degree of probability we may admit, that
an islet visible at the distance of a league may be discovered
between America and Europe, we might submit this to a
rigorous calculation, if we knew the number of ships that have


VOL. Il. Cc


18


pradent to have continued our course.. The old
charts are filled with rocks, some of which really
exist, but the greater. part are owing to those
‘optical illusions, which,are more frequent at sea
than in inland countries. The position of. the
real dangers is generally indicated by chance ; they
have been seen by pilots who were several degrees
out in their longitude, and we might be certain
of meeting neither with rocks nor breakers, if we .
directed our course towards the points where they
are laid down on. the maps. As we approached
this pretended Maal-stroom, we observed no other
motion in the waters than the effect of a current
which bore to the north-west, and which hindered
us from diminishing our: latitude as much as. we
wished, The force of this current augments as we
approach the new continent; it is modified by the
configuration of the coasts of Brazil and Guiana,
and not by the waters of the Orinoco and the
Amazons, as some naturalists pretend.

From the time we entered the torrid zone, we
were never wearied with admiring, every night, the
beauty of the southern sky, which, as we advanced
towards the south, opened new constellations to
our view. We feel. an. indescribable sensation,


annually crossed) the Atlantic these three centuries past, and
if regard be had to the unequal distribution of those vessels in
different latitudes. If the Maal-Stroom, were, as Van Keulen
admits, in 16%ofilatituderand 39° 30” of longitude, we should


have crossed! it-the 4throfiJune,


19


when, on approaching the equator, and particu.
larly on passing from one hemisphere to the other,
we sée those stars, which we have contemplated
from our infancy, progressively sink, and finally
disappear. Nothing awakens in the traveller a
livelier remembrance of the immense distance by
which he is separated from his country, than the
aspect of an unknown firmament. The grouping
of the stars of the first magnitude, some scattered
nebula, rivalling in splendor the-milky way, and
tracks of space remarkable for their extreme black-
ness, give a particular physiognomy to the southern
sky. This. sight fills with admiration even
those, who, uninstructed in the branches of ac-
curate science, feel the same emotion of delight in
the contemplation of the heavenly vault, as in
the view of a beautiful landscape, or a majestic
site. A traveller has no need of being a botanist,
to recognize the torrid zone on the mere aspect of
its vegetation; and without having acquired any
notions of astronomy, without any acquaintance
with the celestial charts of Flamstead and de la
Caille, he feels he is not in Europe, when he sees
the immense constellation of the Ship, or the phos-
phorescent clouds of Magellan, arise on the horizon,
The heaven, and the earth, every thing in the
equinoctial regions, assumes an exotic character.
The lower regions of the air were loaded with
vapors for some days. We saw distinctly for the
C2


20


first time the Cross of the south only in the
night of the 4th and 5th of July, in the sixteenth
degree of latitude; it was strongly inclined, and
appeared from time to time between the clouds,
the centre of which, furrowed by uncondensed
lightnings, reflected a silver light.” If a traveller
may be permitted to speak of his personal emo-
tions, I shall add, that in’ this night I saw one of
the reveries of my earliest youth accomplished.
When we begin to fix our eyes on geo-
graphical maps, and read the narratives. of navi-
gators, we feel for certain countries and climates
a sort of predilection, for which we know not how
to account at a more advanced period of life.
These impressions, however, exercise a consider-
able influence over our determinations; and-from
a sort of instinct we endeavour to connect ourselves
with objects, on which the mind has long been
fixed as by a secret charm, At a period when I
studied the heavens, not with the intention of de-
voting myself to astronomy, but only to acquire a


knowledge of the stars, I was agitated by a fear


unknown to those who love a sedentary life. It
seemed painful to me to renounce the hope of be-
holding those beautiful constellations, which border
the southern pole. Impatient to rove in the
equinoctial regions, I could not raise my eyes
towards the starry vault without thinking of the
Cross of the South, and without recalling the sub-


21


lime passage of Dante, which the most celebrated
commentators have applied to this constellation ;


Io mi volsi a man destra e posi mente
All’ altro polo e vidi quattro stelle
Non viste mai fuor ch’ alla prima gente.


Goder parca lo ciel di lor fiammelle ;
O settentrional vedovo sito
Poi che privato se’ di mirar quelle!


The pleasure we felt on discovering the southern
Cross was warmly shared by such of the crew as
had lived in the colonies. In the solitude of the
seas, we hail astar as a friend, from whoin we have
long been separated. Among the Portuguese and
the Spaniards peculiar motives seem to increase
this feeling ; a religious sentiment attaches them to
a constellation, the form of which recalls the sign of
the faith planted by their ancestors in the deserts
of the new world.

The two great stars which mark the summit and
the foot of the Cross having nearly the same
‘right ascension, it follows hence, that the con
stellation is almost perpendicular at the moment
when it passes the meridian. This circumstance
is known to every nation, that lives beyond the
tropics, or in the southern hemisphere. It has
been observed at what hour of the night, in dif-
ferent seasons, the Cross of the south is erect, or
inelined. It is a time-piece that advances very
regularly near four minutes a day, and no other


22


group of stars exhibits, to the naked eye, an ob-
servation of time so easily made. How often
"have we heard our guides exclaim in the savannas
of Venezuela, or in the desert extending from
Lima to Truxillo, “. Midnight is past, the
Cross begins to bend!” How often those words
reminded us of that affecting scene, where Paul
and Virginia, seated near the source of the river
of Lataniers, conversed together for the last time,
and where the old man, at the sight of the
southern Cross, warns them that it is time to
separate.


The last days of our passage were not so happy,
as the mildness of the climate, and the calmness of
the ocean, had led us to hope. The dangers of


the sea did not disturb our enjoyments, but the
germe of a malignant fever discovered itself as we
drew near the Antilles. Between decks the ship
was excessively hot, and very much encumbered.
From the time we passed the tropic, the ther-
mometer was at thirty-four or thirty-six degrees.
Two sailors, several passengers, and, what is re-
markable enough, two negroes from the coast of
Guinea, and a mulatto child, were attacked with a
disorder which appeared epidemic. The symp-
toms were not equally alarming in them all;
nevertheless, several persons, and especially the
most robust, fell into a delirium after the second
day, and felt a total prostration of their strength.
The indifference which prevails on board: packet


ZF


boats, for every thing that does not regard the
working of the ship, and the quickness of the pas-
save, prevented the captain from employing the
ordinary means of diminishing the danger which
threatened us. No fumigation was made. A
Gallician surgeon, ignorant and phlegmatic, ordered
bleedings, because he attributed the fever to what
he called heat and corruption of the blood. There
was not an ounce of bark on board; we had forgot
to take any with us, because, being more occupied
with our instruments than our health, we thought
too carelessly, that this salutary production of
' Peru could not fail to be found on board a Spanish
vessel.

The 8th of July, a sailor, who was near expir-
ing, recovered his health from a circumstance
that is worthy of being mentioned. His
hammock was so hung, that there was not ten
inches between his face and the deck. It was im*
possible to administer the sacraments in this situa-
tion; for, agreeably to the custom aboard Spanish
yessels, the viaticum ought to be carried by the
light of tapers, and followed by the whole crew.
The patient was removed into an airy pl ace,
near the hatchway, where a small square
birth had been formed with sail cloth. Here
he was to remain till he died, which was an event
expected every moment; but passing from an air
extremely heated, stagnant, and filled with miasms


into fresher and purer air, which was renewed


24


every instant, he gradually revived from his
lethargic state. His recovery dated from the day
when he quitted the middle deck ; and as often in
medicine the same facts are cited in support of
systems diametrically opposite; this recovery con-
firmed our doctor in his ideas of the inflammation
of the blood, and the necessity of bleeding, eva-
cuating, and all the asthenic remedies. We soon
felt the fatal effects of this treatment ; and wished
more than ever to reach the coasts of America.
For several days the pilot’s reckoning differed
1° 12% in longitude from that of my time-keeper.
This difference was owing less to the genera] current,
which I have called the current of rotation, than
to that particular movement, which, drawing the
waters toward the north-west, from the coast of
Brazil to the Antilles, shortens the passage from
Cayenne to Guadaloupe*.. The 12th of July,
I thought I might foretell our seeing land the
next day before-sunrise, We found ourselves then,
according to my observations, in latitude 10° 46/,
and west longitude 602 547. A few series of
lunar distances confirmed the chronometrical re-
sult; but. we were surer of the position of the


*-In the Atlantic Ocean there is a space, where the water
is constantly milky, though the sea is very deep. This curious
phzenomenon exists-in the parallel of the island of Dominica,
very near the 57th degree of longitude. May there not
be in this place some sunk volcanic islet, more easterly
still than Barbadoes?


25


vessel, than of that of the land to which we directed
eur course, and which was so differently placed
in the French, Spanish, and English charts. The
longitudes, deduced from the accurate observations
ef Messrs. Churruca, Fidalgo, and Noguera, were
not published at this period.

The pilots trusted more to the log than the time-
keeper; they smiled at the prediction of speedily
making the land, and thought themselves two or
three days sail from the coast. It was therefore with _
great pleasure, that on the 13th, toward six in the
morning, I learnt that very high land was seen
from the mast-head, though not clearly, as it was
surrounded with a thick fog. The wind blew hard,
and the sea was very rough. Large drops of rain
fell at intervals, and every appearance menaced
tempestuous weather. The captain of the Pizarro in-


tended to pass through the channel, which separates


the isle of Tobago from that of Trinidad; and know-
ing that our sloop was very slow ih tacking, he was
afraid of falling to leeward toward the south,
and approaching the Bocca-del-Drago. We were
in fact surer of our longitude than of our
latitude, having had no observation at noon
since the 11th. Double altitudes which I took in
the morning, after Douwes’s method, placed us in
11° 6’ 50%, consequently 15’ north of our reckon-
ing. The impetuosity, with which the great
river Orinoco throws its waters into the ocean,
may undoubtedly, in these latitudes, increase the


26


strength of the currents ; but what has been stated
respecting the change of color and. the saltness of
the water, at sixty leagues, from the mouth of the
Orinoco, is a fable invented by the coasting pilots.
The influence of the most considerable rivers of
America, such as the Amazons, the Plata, the
Orinoco, the Mississipi, and the Magdalena, is re-
stricted, in this respect, within much narrower
limits than is generally thought.

Although the result of the double altitudes of
the sun proved clearly, that the high land in the
horizon was not Trinidad, but Tobago, the captain
continued to steer NN W, in search of this latter
island, which, even in Borda’s chart, is placed +
too far south. We can scarcely believe, that on
coasts frequented by every trading nation, such


€ : .
enormous errors in latitude should be thus per-


petuated for ages. Having discussed this matter
in another place *, it is sufficient here to observe,
that even in the last chart of the West Indies,
published by Mr. Arrowsmith, in 1803, con-
sequently a long time’after the labours of Churruca,
the latitudes of the different capes of ‘Tobago
and Trinidad, are still from six to eleven minutes
erroneous.

Ap observation of the meridian altitude of the
Sun fully confirmed the latitude obtained by


* Obs. Ast. p. 35 to 39, and Introduction, p. 38. (Chart of


the Atlantic Ocean. Sixth edition.)


27


Douwes’s method. No more doubt remained
respecting the position of the vessel, with respect
to the island, and we resolved to double Cape
North in Tobago to pass between this island and
Grenada, and steer towards a port in Mar-
garetta. In these latitudes we ran at every
moment the risk of being taken by privateers ;
but happily for us the sea was very rough, and a
small English. cutter passed without hailing us.
As to M. Bonpland and myself, we were less
afraid of this, since, as we were so near the con-
tinent of America, we were sure of not being
carried back to Europe.

The island of ‘Tobago presents itself under a
very picturesque aspect. It is a heap of rocks
carefully cultivated. The dazzling whiteness of
the stone forms an agreeable contrast with the
verdure of some scattered tufts of trees. Cylindric
and very lofty opuntia crown the top of the moun-
tains, and give a peculiar physiognomy to this
tropical landscape. ‘Their sight alone is sufficient
to remind the navigator, that he has arrived at an


American coast; for cactuses are exclusively


i


peculiar to the New World: as heaths to the
Old*. The north-west part of t! 2 idlatia of Tobago
is the least mountainous ; according to the angles
of height, taken with the sextant, the most lofty
points of the coast do not appear to exceed 140 or


* Essay on the Physiog gnomy, of Plants, See my
Views of Nature, vol. i, p. 47.


28


150 toises. At South-west Cape, the land
descends towards Sandy Point, the latitude of
which I found to be 10° 20° 13”, and the lon-
gitude 62° 47’ 50%. We perceived several rocks
on a level with the water, on which the sea
broke violently, and we distinguished a great
regularity in the inclination and direction of the
strata, which dip to the south-west at an angle
of 60°. It were to be wished, that the tour of the
West Indies, from the coast of Paria to Cape
Florida, were made by a good mineralogist, who
would examine this ancient chain of mountains
broken by the action of currents, earthquakes, and
volcanoes.

After having doubled the north cape of Tobago,
and the small island of St. Giles, we were alarmed
with the news of an enemy’s squadron seen from
the mast-head; the passengers were in the
utmost consternation, for several had laid out their
small fortunes in goods, which they counted’ on
selling in the Spanish colonies. The squadron
seemed motionless, and we soon discovered, that
what we had taken for ships was a multitude of
separate rocks *.

We crossed the shoal which joins Tobago
to the island of Grenada. The color of the sea had
no visible change: but the centigrade thermometer,
plunged into the water at some inches depth, rose


* Perhaps the rocks called the -LJermanas (the Sisters).


29


only to 23°; while farther at sea eastward on the
same parallel, and equally near the surface, it kept
at 25°6°. Notwithstanding the currents, the
cooling of the water indicated the existence of the
shoal, which is noted but in a small number of
charts. The wind slacked after sunset, and the
clouds disappeared as the moon reached the zenith.


The number of falling stars was very considerable
both this and the following nights ; they appeared
less frequent towards the north than the south
over Terra Firma, which we began to coast.
This position seems to prove the influence of
local causes on meteors, the nature of which is not


yet sufficiently known to us.

The 14th at sunrise, we were in sight of the
Bocca-del-Drago. We distinguished the island
Chacachacarreo, the most westerly of those islands
which are placed between Cape Paria and the
north-west cape of Trinidad. When we were five
leagues distant from the coast, we felt, near
Punta de la Baca, the effect of a particular cur-
rent, which drew the ship toward the south.
The motion of the waters which flow through the
Bocca-del-Drago, and the action of the tides,
occasion aneddy. We hove the lead, and found
from thirty-six to forty-three fathoms on a bottom
of very fine green clay. According to the rules
established by Dampier*, we ought not to have


* Voyage round the World, vol. ii, p. 476.


30


expected so little depth near a coast formed by
very high and perpendicular mountains. We
continued to heave the lead till we reached Cabo
de tres Puntas, and we every where found shallow
water, apparently indicating the prolongation
of the ancient coast. In these latitudes the tem-
perature of the sea was twenty-three or twenty-
four degrees, consequently from 1°5 to two degrees
less than in the open ocean, beyond the edges of
the bank.

Cape Three Points, the’ name given to ~it’
by Columbus himself*, is, according to my ob-
servations, in 65° 4’ 5” longitude. It seemed to
us so much the more elevated, as the clouds con-
cealed from us the view of its indented: top.
The physiognomy of the mountains of Paria,
their color, and especially their generally rounded
forms, made us suspect, that the coast was granitic;
but we afterward recognized how delusive, even


for those who have passed their lives in scaling


mountains, are opinions respectiyg the nature of
rocks seen at a distance..

_. A-dead calm, which lasted several hours, per-
mitted us to determine with exactness the inten-
sity of the magnetic forces opposite the Cado de
tres Puntas. This intensity was greater than in
the open sea, to the east of the island of Tobago,
in the ratio of 237 to 229. During the calm the


* Month of August, 1598.


31


current drew us on rapidly to the west. Its velocity

was three miles an hour, and increased as we ap-

proached the meridian of Testigos, a heap of rocks

which rise up amidst the waters. At the setting
of the Moon, the sky was covered with clouds, the

wind freshened anew, and the rain descended in:
one of those torrents, which are peculiar to the

torrid zone, and to which we were often exposed

during our inland excursions.

The malady which had broke out on ‘board the
Pizarro had made rapid progress, from the ,time
we came on the coasts: the thermometer kept
regularly during the night between twenty-two
and twenty-three degrees, and during the day
from twenty-four to twenty-seven. The conges-
tions toward the head, excessive dryness of the
skin, extreme weakness, all the symptoms grew
more alarming; but having almost reached the
end of our voyage, we flattered ourselves, that all
who were sick would be restored to health, as
soon as we could land them at the isle of St.
Margaretta, or the port of Cumana, distinguished
for their great salubrity.

This hope was not altogether realised. The
youngest of the passengers attacked with the


malignant fever was happily the first and only
victim. He was an Asturian, nineteen years of
age, the only son of a poor widow. Several cir-
cumstances rendered the death of this young man
affecting. His features bore the marks of sensi-


32


bility, and a great mildness of disposition; he had
embarked against his inclination, and his mother,
whom he had hoped to assist by the produce of
his Jabors, had sacrificed her own tenderness to


the idea of securing the fortune of her son, by


‘sending him to the colonies to a rich relation, who
resided at the isle of Cuba. The unfortunate
young man expired the third day of his illness,
having fallen from the beginning into a lethargic
state interrupted by fits of delirium. The yellow
fever, or black vomiting, at Vera Cruz, scarcely
carries off the sick with so alarming a rapidity.
Another Asturian, still younger, did not leave one
moment the bed of his dying friend, and, what
is very remarkable, did not contract the disorder.
He was to follow his countryman to St. Jago
de Cuba, by whom he was. to be introduced to
the house of this relation, on whom all their
hopes depended. Nothing could be more affect-
ing than the sorrow of him who had survived his
friend, and who bewailed with bitterness the fa-
tal counsels, which had thrown him on a foreign
climate, where he found himself abandoned, and
without support.

We were assembled on the deck, absorbed in
melancholy reflections. It was no longer doubt-
ful, that the fever which raged on board had as-
sumed in these last days a fatal aspect. Our
eyes were fixed on a hilly and desert coast, on
which the Moon, from time to time, shed its light


33


athwart the clouds. The sea, gently agitated,
shone with a feeble phosphoric glittering. No-
thing was heard but the monotonous cry of a few
large sea-birds, flying towards the shore. <A
profound calm reigned over these solitary abodes,
but this calm of nature was in discordance with
the painful feclings by which we were oppressed.
About eight the dead man’s knell was slowly
tolled ; at this lugubrious sound, the sailors ceased
their labor, and threw themselves on their knees
to offer a momentary prayer; an affecting cere-
mony, which, while it brought to our remembrance
those times, when the primitive christians consi-
dered themselves as members of the same family,
seemed to blend mankind into one common feel-
ing from the. sentiment of acommon evil. The
corpse of the Asturian was brought upon deck
during the night, and the priest entreated, that. it
might not be committed to the waves till after
sunrise, in order to pay it the last rites, accord-
ing to the usage of the Romish church. There
was not an individual on board, who did not sym-
pathise with the fate of this young man, whom
we had beheld, but a few days before, ‘full of
cheerfulness and health. }

The event I have just related proved the dan-
ger of this malignant fever*, the victims of which,


* Typhus, Sauvages 5 Febris nervosa, Frank:


VOL, II. D


34:


we apprehended, might be very numerous, if
a continuance of calms should lengthen the
passage from Cumana to the Havannah. On
board a ship of war, or a transport, the death of
a few individuals commonly makes no more im-
pression, than the sight of a funeral procession in
a populous city: not so on board a packet, the
crew of which are few in number, and where
the persons who have the same end in view form
habits “of intimacy with each other. The passen-
gers of the Pizarro, who had not yet felt the
symptoms of the disease, resolved to leave the
vessel at the first place where she touched, and
wait the arrival of another packet, to pursue their
course to the island of Cuba and to Mexico.
They considered the between decks of the ship
as pestiferous; and though it was by no means
clear to me, that the fever was contagious from
contact*, I thought it most prudent td land at
Cumana, I wished not to visit New Spain, till
I had made some abode on the coasts of Vene-
zuela and Paria; a small number of the produc-
tions of which had been examined by the unfor-
tunate Loefling. We were anxious to behold in


* The sailor of whom I have just spoken, and who ‘es-
eaped death by the change of air, was but slightly indisposed.
when he came on board at Corunna; it was no denbt from
some peculiar disposition of his organs, that he was first


attacked with the malignant fever, when we entered the tor-
rid zone.


35


their native site the beautiful plants, which Bose
and Bredemeyer had collected during their jour-
ney to the continent, and which adorn tlie green-
houses of Schoenbrunn and Vienna. It would
have been painful to have touched at Cumana, or
at Guayra, without visiting the interior of a coun-
try so little frequented by naturalists.

The resolution we took during the night of the
14th and 15th of July had a happy influence on
the direction of our travels. Instead of a few
weeks, we remained a whole year in this part
of the continent; had not the fever raged on
board the Pizarro, we should never have reached
the Orinoco, the Cassiquiare, and even the limits
of the Portuguese possessions on the Rio Negro.
We were also indebted perhaps to this direction
given to our travels for the-state of health we
enjoyed during so long an abode in the equinoc-
tial regions.

It is well known, that Europeans, during the
first months after their arrival undef the scorch-
ing sky of the tropics, are exposed to the greatest
dangers. They consider themselves as. seasoned,
when they have passed the rainy season in the
West India islands, at Vera Cruz, or at. Cartha-
gena. This opinion is very general, although
there are examples of persons, who, having es-
caped a first attack of the yellow fever, have pe-.
rished victims of the same disease in one of the
following years. The facility of being seasoned

D2


36


seems to be in the inverse ratio of the differ-
ence that exists between the mean temperature of
the torrid zone, and that of the country in which
the traveller, or planter, who changes his climate,
is born; because the irritability of the organs, and
their vital action, are powerfully modified by the
influence of the atmospheric heat. A Prussian,
a Polander, or a Swede, is more exposed on
their arrival at the islands or on the continent,
than a Spaniard, an Italian, or even an inhabi-
tant of the South of France*. With respect to
the people of the north, the difference of: the
mean temperature is from nineteen to twenty-one
degrees, while to the people of southern countries
it is only from nine to ten. We were fortunate
enough to pass the time, when a European recently
landed runs the greatest danger, in the extremely


hot, but very dry climate of Cumana, a city cele-
brated for its salubrity. Had we continued our


voyage to Vera Cruz, we should perhaps have
shared in the unhappy: fate of several passengers
of the packet boat, the Alcudia, which arrived at
the Havanna with the Pizarro, at a period when
the black vomiting made such cruel ravages in
the island of Cuba, and on the eastern coasts of
Mexico.

The 15th,-in the morning, when nearly abreast


of the hill of St. Joseph, we were surrounded by


* New Spain, vol. il, p. 754


37


a great quantity of floating sea weed. Its stems
had those extraordinary appendages in the form
of little cups and feathers, which Don Hippolyto
Ruiz remarked on his return from the expedition
to Chili, and which he described in a separate
memoir as the sexual organs of the fucus natans,
A fortunate accident allowed us the means of
verifying a fact, which had been but once ob-
served by naturalists. The~ bundles of fucus col-
lected by M. Bonpland were completely identical
with the specimens given us by the learned au-
thors of the Flora of Peru. On examining both
with the microscope, we found, that these pretend-
ed parts of fructification, these stamina and pis-
tils, belong to a new genus of the family of the
ceratophyte. The small cups, which Mr. Ruiz
took for pistils, proceed from horny and_ flat-
tened stems, which are so intimately united to
the substance of the fucus, that we might be
tempted to take them for mere fasciculated fibres ;
but these horny stems may be separated by a
very thin blade, without. hurting the parenchyma.
They are unarticulated, and at first of .a dark
brown; but they become -in time, by drying,
white and friable; in this state they effervesce
with acids, as the calcareous substance of the ser-
tularia, the extremities of which very much re-
semble the cups of the fucus of Mr. Ruiz. We
found again, in the South Sea, on our voyage
from Guayaquil to Acapulco, these same appen-


38


dages. to the tropic grape, and the most atten-
tive examination left us no doubt, that a zoo-
phyte is attached to the fucus, as ivy entwines the
trunks of trees. The organs described under the
name of female’ flowers are more than two lines
long, and their size alone should have removed the
suspicion, that these parts were real pisti's.

The coast of Paria stretches to the west, form-
ing a wall of rocks of no great height, with round-
ed tops and a waving outline. We were long
without perceiving the bold coasts of the island of
Margaretta, where we were to stop in order to
obtain information respecting the English cruizers,
and the danger of touching at Guayra. We had
learnt by altitudes of the sun, taken under very
favorable circumstances, how incorrect at this pe-
riod were the most esteemed marine charts. On
the fifteenth in the morning, when the time keeper
placed us in 66° i’ 15” longitude, we were not
yet in the meridian of Margarctta island; though
according to the reduced chart, of the Atlantic
ocean* we ought to have passed the very lofty
western cape of this island, which is laid down in
longitude 66°. The maccuracy with which the
coasts were delineated previous to the works of
Messrs. Fidalgo, Noguera, and Tiscarf, and I


* Constructed at the Depdt de la Marine in 1786, and core
rected in 1792.


+ Carta general del oceano Atlantico construida en el Depo-


39


may venture to add, before the astronomical ob-
servations I made at Cumana, might have become


dangerous to navigators, were not the sea uniform-


ly calm in those regions. The errors in latitude
were still greater than those in longitude, since the
coasts of New Andalusia stretch to the westward
of Cape Three Points fifteen or twenty miles more
to the north, than appears in the charts published
before the year 1800.

Toward eleven in the morning, we perceived a
very low islet, covered with a few sandy downs ; and
on which we discovered with our glasses no trace


sito hydrographico de Madrid en el anno 1800, et corregida en
1804. Curta esferica de las Islas Antillas con parte de la costa
ded continente de America, trabajada por Don Cosme Churruca y
Don. Juacguin Francisco Fidalgo, 180%. These two charts
have served as bases to all those that have appeared in these
latter times in different parts of Europe, which, copied one
from another, differ only in numberless chalcographical errors.
Most of the original observations of the Spanish astronomers
are mentioned in Mr. Espinosa’s valuable work, entitled Me-
morias subre las Observaciones astronomicas hechas por los Nave
gantes Espannoles en distintos Lugares del’ Globo (2 vols, 4to,
Madrid, 1809). I have compared, step by step, the results
of. these observations with those on which Mr. Oltmann and
myself are agreed (Astron. Obs. vol. 1; Introd. p. 33—49).
‘This comparison will be useful to those, who may hereafter
publisk charts of America; the new determinations deserving
so much the more confidence, as the positions have been ve-
rified by very different astronomical methods, and by. ob-
servers who did not communicate their results to each other,


tilllong after they had terminated their labours.


40


of habitation or culture. Cylindrical cactuses rose
here and there in the form of candelabra.. The
soil, almost destitute of vegetation, seemed to have
a waving motion, in consequence of the extraor-
dinary refraction, which the rays of the sun under-
go in traversing the strata of air in contact with
plains strongly heated. Under every zone, deserts
and sandy shores appear like an agitated sea, from
the effect of looming.

The appearance of so flat a country scarcely
corresponded with the ideas we had formed of the
island of Margaretta. While we were busy in
laying down our bearings on the charts, and un-
able to make them correspond, a few smail fishing
boats were descried from the mast-head. The


captain of the Pizarro fired a gun for them ;. but


this signal was useless on a coast where the weak
apprehend that they meet with the strong only to
be insulted. The boats hastened away toward the
west, and we found ourselves in the same perplex-
ity as we had been with respect to the small island
of Graciosa, on our arrival at the Canaries. No
person on board had landed on this spot, or could
give us any information respecting it. Though
the sea was very calm, the proximity of an islet, _
which rose scarcely a few feet above the surface
of the water, seemed to prescribe measures of
prudence. We ceased to stand toward the land;
and as the lead gave but three or four fathoms,
we speedily let go an anchor.


41


The coasts, seen at a distance, are like clouds,
in which each observer meets the form of the ob-
jects that occupy his imagination. Our bearings
and our chronometer being at variance with the
charts which we had to consult, we were lost in
vain conjectures. Some took mounds of sand for
Indian huts, and pointed out the place, where,
according to them, the fort of Pampatar was situ-
ate; others saw herds of goats, which are so com-
mon in the dry valley of St. John; or descried
the lofty mountains of Macanao, which seemed to
them partly hidden by the clouds. The captain
resolved to send a pilot on shore, and the men
were preparing to hoist out the long-boat, the
cutter having been damaged by the surge in the
road of Santa Cruz; but the coast being still far
off, the return of the boat might have become diffi-


cult, if the breeze had freshened toward evening.


At the moment we were preparing to go on
shore, we perceived two canoes sailing along the
coast. Again we fired a gun as a signal for these ;
and though we had hoisted Spanish colours, they
drew near with distrust. These canoes, like all
those made use of by the natives, were constract-
ed of the single trunk of a tree; and in each were
eighteen Guayqueria Indians, naked to the waist,
of very tall stature. They had the appearance of
great muscular strength, and the colour of their
skin was something between a brown and a copper
colour. Seen at a distance, motionless in their


42


attitudes, and projected on the horizon, they might
have been taken for statues of bronze. We were
so much the more struck with this aspect, as it did
not correspond with the ideas we had formed fro
the accounts of travellers of the characterist
features and extreme weakness of the natives. nk e
afterward learnt, without passing the limits of the
province of Cumana, the great contrast that exists
between the physiognomy of the Guayquerias and
that of the Chaymas and the Caribs. Notwithstand-
ing the intimate ties, which appear to unite the
whole of the American nations as belonging to the
same race, several tribes do not the less differ from
each other in the height of their stature, their’com-


plexion more or less tawny, and th ier looks, which


in some express tranquillity and mildness, in
others a sinister mixture of melancholy and fero-
city.

When we were near enough to hail them in
Spanish, the Indians threw aside their mistrust,
and came straight on board. They informed us,
that the low islet near which we were at anchor
was that of Coche, which had never been inha-
bited ; and that the Spanish vessels coming from
Europe were accustomed to sail farther north, be-
tween this island and that of Margaretta, to take
a coasting pilot at the port of Pampatar. Our
inexperience had led us into the channel to the
south of Coche; and as at this period the English
cruisers frequented this passage, the Indians had


45


taken us for an enemy’s ship. The southern pas-_
sage is in fact highly advantageous for vessels
going to Cumana and Barcelona: it has less water
than the northern passage, which is much nar-
rower; but there is no risk of touching the
ground, if vessels keep very close to the island of
Lobos and the Moros’ del Tunal. The channel
between Coche and Margaretta is narrowed by the
shoals off the north-west cape of Coche, and by the
bank that surrounds la Punta de Mangles. We
shall examine in another place, under a geological
point of view, this bank of sand, which surrounds
the rocks of Testigos and Margaretta ; and shall
show. that the latter island was formerly united,
by means of Coche and Lobes, to the peninsula
of Chacopapa.

The Guayquerias belong to that tribe of civilized
Indians, who inhabit the coasts of Margaretta,
and the suburbs of the city of Cumana. Next to
the Caribs of Spanish Guyana, it is the finest race
of men in Terra Firma. They enjoy ‘several
privileges, because from the earliest times of the
conquest they remained faithful friends to the
Castilians. The king of Spain names them in his
public acts, “his dear, noble, and loyal Guay-
querias.”” The Indians of the two canoes we had
met had left the port of Cumana during the night.
They were going in search of timber to the-cedar*


* Cedrela odorata, Lin.


44


forests, which extend from Cape San Jose farther
than the mouth of Rio Carupano. They gave us
some fresh cocoa nuts, ard very beautifully
colored fish of the chetodon genus *. What
riches to our eyes were contained in the canoes of


these poor Indians! Broad spreading leaves of
vijao f covered bunches of plantains. The scaly
cuirass of an armadillo {, the fruit of the. calabash
tree, crescentia cujete, used as a cup by the natives,
the productions most common.in the cabinets of
Europe, had a peculiar charm for us, because they
reminded us, that, having reached the torrid zone,
we had attained the end toward which our wishes
- had been so long directed.

The muster of one of the canoes offered to
remain on board the Pizarro as coasting pilotg.
He was a Guayqueria of an excellent disposition,
sagacious in his observattons, and led by an unceas-
ing curiosity to notice the productions of the sea, as
well as the plants of the country. By a fortunate
chance, the first Indian we met on our arrival was
the’man, whose acquaintance became the most
useful to us in the course of our researches. I
feel a pleasure in recording in this itinerary the
name of Carlos del Pino, who, during the

sixteen months, attended us in our


* Bandouliétes.
+ Heliconia bihai.
t Dasypus, cachicamo.


iD fe
§ rractico,


45


course along the coasts, and into the inland
country.

The captain of the corvette weighed anchor to-
wards the evening. Before we left the shoal or
placer of Coche, I ascertained the longitude of the
east cape of the island, which I found to be
66° 11/53”. As we steered toward the west, we
soon came in sight of the little island of Cubagua,
now entirely deserted, but formerly celebrated for
its fishery of pearls. There the Spaniards, im-
mediately after the voyages of Columbus and
Ojeda, founded, under the name of New Cadiz,
a town, of which there now remains no vestige.
At the beginning of the sixteenth century, the
pearls of Cubagua were known at Seville, at
Toledo, and at the great fairs of Augsburg and
Bruges. New Cadiz having no water, that of the
tio Manzanares was conveyed thither from the
neighbouring coast, though for some reason, I know
not what, it was thought to be the cause of diseases
of the eyes*. The writers of that period all speak
of the riches of the first planters, and the luxury
they displayed; at present, downs of shifting
sand cover this uninhabited land, and the name of
Cubagua is scarcely found in our charts.

Having reached these latitudes, we saw the high


mountains of Cape Macanao, on the western side


* Herrera, Descrip, de las Indias occidentales. (Madrid,
1730), vol.1, p. 12.


46


of the isle of Margaretta, which rose majestically
on the horizon. If we might judge from the angles
of altitude of the tops, taken at eighteen miles
distance, they appeared to be about 5 or 600 toises
high. According to Berthoud’s time-keeper, the
longitude of Cape Macanao is 66° 47’ 5”. I
speak of the rocks at the extremity of this cape,
and not that strip of very low land, which stretches
toward the west, and loses itselfin a shoal. The
position of Macanao, and that which I have as-
signed to the east point of the island of Coche,
differ only four seconds in time from the results
obtained by Mr. Fidalgo.

There being little wind, the-captain preferred
standing off and on till day break. He was afraid
to enter the port of Cumana during the night; and
this prudence seemed necessary, on account of an
unfortunate accident, which had lately taken place
on this coast. A packet that had anchored during
the night, without lighting her poop-lanterns, was
taken for an enemy’s ship, and was fired on from
the batteries of Cumana. The captain of the
packet had his leg shot off, and died a few days
after at that port.

We passed a part of the night on deck. The
Guayqueria pilot conversed with us on the animals
and plants of his country. We learnt with great
satisfaction, that. a few leagues from the coast was
a mountainous region inhabited by the Spaniards,
in which the cold was very much felt; and that in


47


the plains there were two species of crocodiles,
very different from each other*, boas, electric
eels}, and several kinds of tigers. Though the
words bava, cachicamo, and temblador, were
entirely unknown to us, we easily guessed, from
his simple description of their manners and forms,
the species which the creoles meant by these de-
nominations. Forgetting that these animals are
dispersed over a vast extent of country, we hoped
to find them in the forests of Cumana. Nothing
so much excites the curiosity of a naturalist, as the
recital of thé wonders of a country where he is on
the point of landing.

On the 16th of July, 1799, at the point of day,
we saw a verdant coast, of picturesque aspect. The
mountains of New Andalusia, half veiled by
mists, bounded the horizon to the south. ‘The city
of Cumana and its castle appeared between groups
of cocoa trees. We anchored in the port about
nine in the morning, forty-one days after our
departure from Corunna. The sick dragged them-
selves on deck to enjoy the sight of a land, which
was about to put an end to their sufferings.

I was unwilling to iaterrupt the narrative of our
voyage by the detail of the physical observations I
made during the passage from the coasts of Spain


* Crocodilus acutus, and c. bava.
+ Gymnotus electricus, temblador.


48


to Teneriffe, and thence to Camana. Observations
of this kind are not really interesting, except
when we can dispose their'results in such a manner


as to lead to general ideas. The form of a personal
narrative, and the nature of its composition, are
not well fitted for the full explanation of phe-
nomena, which vary with the seasons, and the
position of places. In order to study the laws of
these pheenomena, we must exhibit them in groups,
and not separately, as they were successively ob-
served. We are under great obligations to navi-
gators, who have accumulated an immense number
of facts: but must regret, that hitherto naturalists
have made so little use of their journals, which,
when examined anew, may yield unexpected
results. I shall insert at the end of this chapter
the experiments, which I made on the temperature
of the atmosphere and the ocean, with the hygro- .
metrical state of the air, the intensity of the blue
colour of the sky, and the magnetic phenomena.


1


TEMPERATURE OF THE AIR.


In the vast basin of the Northern Atlantic
Ocean, between the coasts of Europe, Africa,
and the New Continent, the temperature of the
atmosphere offered us a very slow increment, as
we passed from the 43d to the 10th degree of
latitude. From‘Corunna to the Canary islands,


49


the centigrade thermometer, observed at noon and
in the shade, ascended gradually from ten to
eighteen degrees*; from Santa Cruz in Teneriffe
to Cumana, the same instrument rose. from
eighteen to twenty-five degreest. In the first
part of the voyage, a difference of a degree of
temperature corresponded to 1° 48 of latitude;
in the second part, we must traverse 2° 807 of
latitude to see the thermometer risé one degree.
The maximum of the heat, which the air gradually
attains two hours after the passage of the sun over
the meridian, did not exceed, during this voyage,
26° 6” (21:3¥ Reaumur); nevertheless we were
in the month of July, and ten degrees to the
south of the tropic of Cancer. The evaporation
of the water, augmented by the motion of the
air and of the waves, and the property which
transparent liquids have { of absorbing very little
light at their surface, contribute equally to mode-
rate the heat in the part of the atmosphere that
surrounds the equinoctial seas. It is well known,
that as long as the breeze blows under the torrid
zone, navigators are never exposed to violent
heats,


* From the 6th to the 19th of June. See the particular
observations in the journal at the end of this chapter.

+ From the 25th of June to the 15th of July.

t The rays ef light penetrate the water to considerable
depths ; and the first strata, by freely transmitting them, are
not heated like the earth and rocks.


YOL. Ii. E


50


If we compare” the numerous observations made
in the South Sea and the Atlantic Ocean during
the voyages of Cook, Dixon, d’Entrecasteaux, and
Krusenstern, we find, that, between the tropics,
the mean temperature of the air at sea is from
twenty-six to twenty-seven degrees. We must
exclude from this statement the observations made
during a dead calm, because the body of the vessel

_is then extraordinarily heated, and it is almost im-
possible to make a just estimation of the temper-
ature of the atmosphere. When we look into the
journals of so many celebrated navigators, we are
surprised to see, that never, in either hemisphere,
have they observed the thermometer under the
torrid zone, in the open sea, above 34° (27°S° R).
In thousands of observations made at the time of
the passage of the Sun across the meridian, we
scarcely find a few days when the heat has risen
to thirty-one or thirty-two degrees (24°8° or
25°6° R.); while on the continents of Africa and
Asia, under the same parallels, the temperature
often exceeds thirty-five or thirty-six degrees. In
general, between ten degrees of north and ten
of south latitude, the mean heat of the atmos-
phere that rests on the ocean appears to me, in the
low regions, from one to two degrees lower than
the mean temperature of the air that surrounds the


* See an excellent memoir by Messrs. Horner and Langs-
dorf in the memoirs of the Academy of Petershurgh, vol. i,
p. 467.


di.

land situate between the two tropics. It is use-
less in this place to observe how much this circum-
stance modifies the climate of the whole Globe,
on account of the unequal distribution of the
continents at the north and south of the equator,
as well as to the east and west of the meridtan of
Teneriffe.

The extreme slowness, with which the temper-
ature increases during the passage from Spain to
the New Continent, is highly advantageous to the
health of Europeans, who go to settle in the
colonies. At Vera Cruz and at Carthagena, the
creoles who descend from the high savannahs of
Bogota, and the central elevated plain of New
Spain, are more exposed on the coasts to the
attack of the yellow fever, or vomito, than the in-
habitants. of the north, who arrive by sea*. In
travelling from Perote to Vera Cruz, the Mexicans
descend in sixteen hours from the region of pines
and oaks, from a mountainous country where the
thermometer very often sinks at noon to four or
five degrees, to a burning plain covered with cocoa
trees, with mimosa cornigera, and other plants
that vegetate only under the influence ofa strong
heat. These mountaineers feel a difference of tem-
perature of eighteen degrees; and this difference
produces the most fatal effects on the organs, by
exciting their iritability. The European, on the


* Nouv. Esp.'t. ii, p. 772,
EQ


5%


contrary, crosses the Atlantic Ocean in thirty-five
or forty days; he prepares himself gradually for
the sweltering heats of Vera Cruz, which, without.
being the direct cause of the yellow fever, do not
the less contribute to the rapidity of its progress.
A very sensible decrement of heat is observed on
the Globe, whether we go from the equator to the


poles, ascend from the surface of the earth into
the highest regions of the air, or dive into the
depth of the ocean. It is so much the more
interesting to compare the rapidity of this three-
fold decrement, as this phenomenon has a great
influence on the climatic distributions of vegetable


and animal productions. ‘The mean temperature
of the lower strata of the air, which corresponds to
the sixty-fifth, forty-eighth, and twentieth, degrees
of north latitude, are, according to the most recent
observations, 0°5°, 10°7°, and 25°; whence it
results, that a centigrade degree corresponds
nearly toa change of latitude of 1° 45-*. Now
the detrement of caloric is one degree every ninety
toises; when we raise ourselves perpendicularly
into the atmosphere f. It therefore follows, that


* In England and in Scotland it is reckoned, that a degree
of Fahrenheit’s thermometer corresponds to one degree of
latitude. Phil. Trans. 1775, vol. Ixxv, page. 459... Thome
son, Hist. of the Royal Soc. 1812, p. 508.

+ Mr. d’Aubnuisson finds only eighty-three toises to a de-
gree for .urope in summer at eight in the morning, conse.


quently at the period he thinks the most ‘faveurable. Journal


eo
46)


under the tropics, where the ‘lowering of the


temperature is very regular on mountains of con-
siderable height, 500 toises of vertical elevation
correspond to a change of latitude of G° 45%,, This
result, conformable enough to those which other
naturalists have adopted before me *, is very im-
portant to the geography of plants; for though in
the northern countries the distribution of vegetables
on the mountains and in the plains depends, like
the height of the perpetual snows, more on the
mean temperature of the months of summer + than


de Phys. t. Ixxi, p. 38. For the torrid zone, see Observ.
Astron. t. i, p. 129.


* Every hundred metres of height lower the temperature about
half a degree of the common division of our thermometers : and
if we take for the limit of refrigeration, that which excludes
the presence of vegetation, the perpetual ice, with which the
summits of mountains are loaded, will represent the perpetual
ice with which the pole is covered ; and every hundred metres
of vertical height will correspond to a degree of the distance
from the mountain to the pole. Ramond, on the Vegetation
of Mountains (Annales du Museum, t.iv, p- 396).


+ Decandolle, Flore francaise, t. i, p. 1, p. 9. Jueopold
yon Buch, Reise nach Lapland, t. ii, p. 276.. Wahlenberg,
Fléra Laponica, 1810, p. 28. In the temperate zone it often
happens, that the mean heat of a place, a, is less than that of a
place, 6, while the mean heat of the summer months is much,
greater at athan at 6. It is for this reason, that a, distinction
is properly made between a contemental climate and an insular ,
climate ; in the first, very warm summers succeed very rigorous


winters; in the second, the contrast of the winters is less ;


54


on that of the whole year, the latter does not less
determine in southern countries the limits, which


the summers are less warm, and the winters less cold, on ac-
count of the small changes in the temperature of the neigh
bouring ocean, by which the air is cooled in summer and
warmed in winter. . The perpetual snows descend more in Ice-
land than on the same parallel in the interior of Norway, and
we often see, in the islands and on the coasts of western Europe,
the laurel and the arbutus flourish, where the vine and the
peach tree do not ripen. In the equinoctial region, on the
contrary, where the difference of the seasons is, as it were
nothing, the geographical distribution of plants is regulated
almost only according to the mean temperature of the whole
year, which depends itself on the elevation of the soil above
the level of the ocean, In proportion as we advance toward
the north, the temperature of the months varies more and
more, and the strength and richness of vegetation no longer
give the measure of the mean temperature of the whole year,
In Lapland, for instance, there are beautiful forests on the
continent, at Enontekies, while on the island of Mageroe we
scarce find a few shrubs sprinkled over the rocks; neverthe-
less the mean annual temperature of Enontekies is three
degrees colder than that of Mageroe. The former is — 2°86°,
and the latter + 007°. (Wahlenberg, in Gilbert’s Annals,
1812, p. 271.) The more vigorous vegetation of Enontekies
is the effect of a warmer summer, the mean temperature of
the months of July being there 15:3°; while at the isle of
Mageroe it is only, according to Mr. von Buch, 82°. These
two places offer striking intances of the difference between a
continental climate and an insular climate; or, as Mr,
Wahlenberg says, between a climate of Siberia, and a climate
of Iceland. In general, the problem of the climatic distribu-
tion of plants is much more complicated in the northern
countries than under the tropics. In the former this distribue_


55


the species have not been able to pass in their
distant migrations. The observation made by
‘Tournefort on the summit of Ararat has been re-
peated by a great number of travellers. When
we descend from a high chain of mountains, and
advance toward the poles, we find at first in plains
of little height, and finally in the regions near the
coasts, the same arborescent plants *, which in
the low latitudes cover only the heights near the
perennial snows.

In estimating the rapidity with which the mean
temperature of the atmosphere diminishes in pro-
portion as we proceed from the equator to the
poles, or from the surface of the earth to the
high regions of the aerial ocean, I have consi-


tion depends at the same time both on the mean temperature
of the summer months, and on the temperature of the soil,
which differs from the mean heat of the year.

* Inthe study of the geographical relations of plants, we
must distinguish between those vegetables, the organization of
which resists great changes of temperature and barometric
pressure, and those plants which appear to belong oniy to
certain zones at certain heights. This difference is still more
sensible in the temperate zone than under the tropics, where
the herbaceous plants are less frequent, and where the trees
are stripped of their leaves only by the effect of the dryness
of the air, We see some vegetables push thir migrations
from the northern coasts ef Africa over the Pyrenees as far
as the downs near Bordeaux, and the basin of the Loire; fur
iustance, the merendera, the late-flowering hyacinth, and the
hoop-petticoat narcissus, narcissus bulbocodium. Annales da


oe


Mus., t. iv, p. 401.


56


dered the decrement of heat as following an arith-
metrical progression. This supposition is not
perfectly accurate with respect to the air*; and
is still less so for the water, the successive strata


of which seem to diminish in temperature accord-
ing to different laws at different degrees of lati-
tude. In the interesting experiments made by
Forster, Bladh, Wales, Ellis, and Peron, on the
rapidity of the decrement of heat in the ocean,


this decrement has been found so uncqual, that


a degree of the centigrade thermometer answers


sometimes to twelve, at other times to twenty-four


toises, and even more. We may in general admit,


that the temperature decreases six times as quick


in the sea as in the aerial ocean, and that it is


on account of this distribution of caloric in the


two elements, that plants and animals analogous
to those of the polar regions find under the torrid
zone, on the slope of mountains, and in the depths


of the ocean, the climate which is suitable to their


organization,


The same causes, to which we ought to attri-


bute the moderate heats we feel in sailing between


* The mean temperatures augment from the equator to
the poles, nearly as the square of the sine of the latitude,
(Journ. de Phys., t. Ixil, p. 4473) and the decrement .of


heat, in a vertical plane, follows most frequently, according


to” Oriani and Lindenau, the law of harmonical progression.
Tables barom. p. 45. Mon, CoreJuin 1805. Ephem. Med.
1798, p. 138.


57


the tropics, produce also a singular equality in
the temperature of the day and the night. This
equality is still greater on sea than in the inte-
terior of the continents. Jn the province of Cu-
mana, in the centre of vast plains, of small height
above the level of the ocean, the thermometer is
generally toward sunrise four or five degrees lower
than at two in the afternoon. In the Atlantic
ocean, on the contrary, between eleven and se-
venteen degrees of latitude, the greatest variations
of heat rarely exceed 1-5 or two degrees; and I
have often observed, that from ten in the morn-
ing to five in the evening the thermometer did
not vary 0°8 of a degree. Th looking over four-
teen hundred thermometrical observations made
hourly during the voyage of Mr. Krusenstern, in
the equatorial region of the South Sea, we see,
that the temperature of the air changed from
day to night only one or i°3 centesimal de-
gree*.

I have often endeavoured to measure the power
of the Sun by two thermometers of mercury per-
fectly equal, one of which remained exposed to the


* T constantly observed the thermometer on the deck, to
windward, and in the shade. Perhaps the thermometer and
barometer of Mr. Krusenstern were in a more sheltered place,
for instance in the great cabin,


+ This instrument had a ball of three lines. diameter,
which was not blackened, The scales were contained in


58


Sun, while the other was placed in the shade.
The difference resulting from the absorption of


the rays in the ball of the instrument never ex-
ceeded 3°7°. Sometimes it did not even rise


higher than one or two degrees; but the heat in
the body of the vessel, and the humid wind which
blows by fits, render experiments of this kind
very difficult. I have repeated them with more
success on the ridge of the Cordilleras, and in
the plains, by hourly comparing, in perfectly calm
weather, the power of the Sun with its height,
the blue colour of the sky, and the hygrometri-
cal state of the air. We shall examine in ano-
ther place, whether the variable differences ob-


served between the thermometer in the Sun, and
the thermometer in the shade, depend only on the
greater or less extinction of light in its passage
through the atrhosphere.


TEMPERATURE OF THE SEA,


In my observations on the temperature of the
waters of the sea, [ had in view four objects very


distinct from each other; the decrement of heat
in the successive strata of the air; the indication
of shoals by the thermometer; the temperature
of the seas at their surface; and, finally, the tem-


fubes of glass very distant from the ball. Travellers prefer
at present, and with reason, Mr. Leslie’s photometers, Ni-


cholson’s Journal, 4to edition, vol. iii, p. 467.


59

perature of the currents, which, flowing from the
equator * to the poles, and from the poles to the
equator, form warm or cold streamsf amid the mo-
tionless waters of the ocean. I shall treat here only
of the heat of the sea at its surface, the phenome-
non of most importance to the physical history
of the Globe, because the superior stratum of
the ocean is the only one, that has an immediate
influence on the state of our atmosphere.

The following table is extracted from the nu-
merous experiments contained in our journal from
the 9th of June to the 15th of July.


Temperat. of the |
North latitude. | West longitude. Atlantic Ocean
A at its surface.
16° 3 15°0°
i6 : 16°3
1; 17°7
16 g 186
16 19°3
19 20:0
23 | 21°2
oo 29°4
44 4¢ 23°7
49 24°7
60 é 25°8


: * The Gulf-stream.
+ The current of Chili, which, as I have elsewhere proved,
draws the waters of the high latitudes toward the equator.


60


From Corunna to the mouth of the Tagus, the
water of the sea varied but little in its temperature ;
but from the thirty-ninth degree of latitude to the
tenth, the increment was very sensible, and very
constant, though not always uniform. From the
parallel of Cape Montego to that of Salvage, the
progress of the thermometer was almost as rapid
as from 20° 8 to 10°46’; but.it slackened ex-
tremely on the limits of the torrid zone, from
96° 18’ to 20° 8’. This inequality is no doubt
caused by the currents, that mingle the waters of
different latitudes, and which, according as we ap-
proach the Canary Islands or the coasts of Guyana,
set either to the south-east or the north-north-
west. Mr. de Churruca, who crossed the equator,
in his voyage to the straits of Magellan, in the
twenty-fitth degree of west longitude *, found the
maximum of the temperature of the Atlantic
Ocean at its surface in six degrees north latitude.
In those parts, in latitudes equally distant from
the equator, the water of the sea was -colder
to the south than the north. We shall soon see,
that this phenomenon va‘ies with the seasons,
and that it depends in a great measure on the
impetuosity, with which the waters run toward
the north and north-west, across the channel form-
ed between Brazil and the coasts of Africa. Hf
the motion of these waters did not modify the


* In the month of October, 1788.


61


temperature of the ocean, the increment of heat
under the torrid zone would be enormous, because
the surface of the water reflects infinitely fewer of
those rays which approach the perpendicular,
than of those which fall in a more oblique direc-
tion.


I have observed in the Atlantic Ocean, as well


as in the South Sea, that, when we change both
latitude and longitude at the same time, the waters
often do not change one degree of temperature, in
an extent of several thousand square leagues ; and
that in the space comprised between the twenty-
seventh degree north ‘and the twenty-seventh
south, this temperature of the seas is almost en-
tirely independant of the variations of the atmos-
phere*. A very long calm, a momentary change
in the duration of the currents, a tempest mingling
the inferior strata of the water with the upper,
may for some time produce a difference of two or
even three .degrees; but as soon as these acci-
dental causes cease to act, the temperature of the
ocean resumes its former stability. I shall have


* To show what little influence the air has on the tempera-
ture of the immense basin of the seas, I have added, in the
journals, the indication of the heat of the atmosphere to that
of the heaf-of the ocean. The latter may be changed by
very remote causes, such as the more or less rapid melting of
the polar ice, or winds blowing in other latitudes, and pro-


ducing currents.


6% '


occasion to return to this phenomenon, one of the
most invariable that nature offers.

I have constructed a chart of the temperature
of the seas, as well from my own observations,
made from the forty-fourth degree of north to the
twelfth degree of south latitude, and from the
forty-third to the hundred and fifth of west lon-
gitude, as from a great number of materials,
which I have with some difficulty collected. As
a considerable body of water cools with extreme
slowness, it is sufficient to plunge the thermome-
ter into a bucket of water just taken from the
surface of the ocean. Though this experiment
is very simple, it has been hitherto singularly neg-
lected. In the greater part of the narrations of
voyages, the temperature of the ocean is but ca-
sually mentioned ; for instance, on occasion of the
researches made on the cold that prevails at great
depths, or on thestream of warm water that traverses
the Atlantic. ‘Ihave not been able to make use of
the excellent work of Mr. Kirwan on climates,
because this celebrated naturalist has not suffici-
ently distinguished, in his tables of the tempera-
ture of the different latitudes, between what is the
result of direct experiments, and what of theory :.
but the second voyage to the straits of Magellan”,
under the command of Churruca and Galeano,


*Don Cosme de Churruea, Apendice del Viage al Magels
lanes 1793, p. 98.


63


the relation of Abbé Chappe’s Voyage to California,
the work published at Philadelphia under the
title of Thermometrical Navigation*, and particu-
larly the interesting experiments made in 1800 by
Mr. Perrins, on board the Skelton, in the course
of a voyage from London to Bombay, have fur-
nished me with numerous materials for my work.
Employed at Lima in researches on the tempera-
ture of the sea, I had engaged an officer of the
royal navy, Mr. Quevedo, to observe day by day,
during his passage from Peru to Spain, round
Cape Horn, the heights of two thermometers, one
of which should be exposed to the air, and the
other plunged into the upper stratum of the ocean.
The observations made by Mr. Quevedo in 1802,
on board the frigate Santa Rufina, which will be
given in this work, embrace both temperatures,
from the sixth degree of south to the thirty-sixth
‘of north latitude; and are so much the more va-
luable, as this very well informed navigator knew
perfectly. his longitude by means of a chronometer
by Brockbanks, and of the distances of the moon
from the sun. [fis meteorological instruments,
constructed by Nairne, had been compared, be-
fore his departure, with those I made use of on
the Cordilleras. :

From the équator to the twenty-fifth and twen-


* Therniometrical Navigation, 1799, p. 37.
+ Nicholson’s Journal, 1804, p. 131,


64


ty-cighth degrees of north latitude, the tempera-
ture is remarkably constant, notwithstanding the
difference of the meridians: it is more variable in
the high latitudes, where the melting of the polar
ice, the currents caused by this melting, and the
extreme obliquity of the solar rays in winter, dimi-
nish the heat of the ocean. The following table,
which contains experiments taken without discri-
mination from several nautical journals, confirms
these assertions. The fractions of degrees, by
which the results are expressed, arise from the
reduction of the scales of the thermometer of
Reaumur or Fahrenheit to the centigrade division.


f. smerta, | O6LT eunp | sri | "MA Bt FL
| uyyury | OLLT ‘AON 6.0L "M OF F
hae suet, | 6s2t “oq | Lot | “M Zh FS
aug p C= 4 wpjoqumnyy | GS6LE ounce; 6st a Oa Sy
YOO) ) LOI | opaaany | cost Ary CST ‘MELO 1G
: SULLLIOg OOST "1497 ol- tT “M SP


ronunyy 88L1°q9190 CES “MLL SI
(ajdwfijeg addeyy soll ‘uer 9-13 WA AL


rad eUTa) 31S Opasanyy | gost judy Q 13 “Mm bo GE


Ipjoquinyy 66Lt . oune 00:08 “M. 9S 0d


RGR REO


i suliaqd | Oost ABW
g


pur " SULLIO] OOS Youre L-0% “M06 9%
A


“| Gb T¢
“MAGI -F8
“M.- 06 1%.
Net
"AN. PS


CARS Rt SO8l ‘qaq
suLag | OOST Yor
Opaaaney ost judy
vonringg BedT “AON


*(J004) 413


IN Om
rere or
RVRAIaqaa


o


2 a me RE,


jo useg 3


a *uovArasqo uva20 ay Jo
"sI9, 1

, aanjeiad wa,

ammjvsadtuay ueayAt ay} JO pollag 1 L


‘apnzisua'y *opnjyney


‘apnjiouoy fo saadsap puasafip Ur udaIQ, 207uD;I Fr |Y] Jo aUngosadwea FT,
ay? fo VIGVL


66


It is very remarkable, that, notwithstanding the
immensity of the ocean, and the rapidity of the
currents, there is a great uniformity every where
in the maximum of heat in the equinoctial seas.
Mr. Churruca found this maximum, in 17¢8, in
the Atlantic Ocean, at 28°7°; Mr. Perrins; in
1804, at 28°2° ; Mr. Rodman’, in his voyage from
Philadelphia to Batavia, at 287° ; and Mr. Que-
vedo, at 28°6°. In the South Sea I observed it
the same year at 29°3°: consequently, the differ-
ences scarcely exceed 1° of the centigrade ther-
mometer, or 4 of the total heat. We must recol-
lect, that, under the temperate zone, to the north
of the parallel of 45°, the mean temperatures of
different years vary more than 2°, or a fifth of
the quantity of caloric that a determinate part:of
the Globef receives.


* Coxe, Philadelphian Medical Museum, vol. 1, p, 83.
+ Geneva from 1796 to’ 1809: 7°87°; 8:34°; 8°; 7°47°;
8-38°; 849°; 649°; 8:27°; 85°; 77129; 8:73°3 7°78° ;
668°; and 7°54° of Reaumur’s thermometer: Paris, at the
Observatory, from 1803 to 1810; 11°95°; 10°75°; #0230? =
10°55°; 10°50°; 1065°; 11:10°; and 9°79° of the centi-
grade thermometer. In proportion as’ we approach the tro-
pics, the variations of the annual temperature diminish.
Rome (lat. 41° 53’) from 1789 to 1792; 136°; 12'5°; 13°4°5
and 129°, Reaum. (Buch, in Gilbert’s Annalen der Physik, t.
24, p. 238). Philadelphia, (lat. 39° 56’) from 1797 to 1803.
4.204. 2senidnbn Pas 118° 11:7°;.12:7°; and 128° of the centigrade
thermometer. From t! ese very accurate observations it results,
that the extremes at Geneva have been 2°5°; at Paris 2:2°;


67 -


The maximum of the temperature of the seas,
which is from 28 to 29 degrees, proves more than
any other consideration, that the ocean is in gene-
ral warmer than the atmosphere with which it is
immediately in contact, and of which tbe mean
temperature, near the equator, is from 26 to 27
degrees. An equilibrium between the two ele-
ments cannot be established; not only on account
of the winds, which carry the air near the poles
toward the equator, but also in consequence of
the absorption of caloric, the effect of evaporation.
It is so much the more extraordinary to see the
mean temperature rise, in a part of the equatorial
ocean, beyond 29° (23°2° R.); as even on the con-
tinents, amidst the most-arid sands, we scarcely
know a place, where the mean heat of the year
reaches to 31°,


It remains to be examined, whether in the low


latitudes, in the same parallels, we find, in differ-
ent seasons, nearly the same temperatures. The
following table will facilitate this kind of research.


at Rome, 1°3°; and at Philadelphia, 1°1° of the centesimal
division. The variations observed in the temperature of the
sea at its surface seemed to extend, under the temperate zone,
between the 35th and 45th degrees of latitude, to three de-
arees above and below its mean temperature; and I was
wrong in saying, in a-general manner, ‘in the introduction to
Thomson’s Chemistry (French translation, t. i, p. 100), that
the ocean every where directly indicates the mean tempera.
tures of the air corresponding to the different latitudes.


FQ


68


OF 039 “S|
0$-FS UL,


“COST
“AON pur “OO
‘uBUIpOY


108 096 BT | 66 083 ST | OF 09 ST 106 0FB ST |" + ‘ oT
04.83 UL | 06-83 UL | 08-93 UL ese OL fo oat bree

AG of “BT | 1 0B ‘ST | Ol 046 “SJ BS 08S “S] ess
04-90 UL | of 9S "UL | 0-35 UL Lin eS =

Ree SI | °° SS | hot BY 3 \
e996 EL | 38 S| 20% 08 “TE. ‘el

oo Ee ob Pelee yp |. G05 00% 5]

ge ee 08-83 UL | oF 81 UL | 08-61 "GL | 04 03 “UL


LS oO1 “ST
oF 6% “UL


‘


"SSZI “12q0}0G


‘eoniny 9


($5 o9 | “] | 08 ost “Sy |
ise? Ae: A 15 SOE ULF


"COST


6621 : ae
‘Aing puw aung | ‘Aeyy pure yuidy gS ile
‘qpyoquany] ‘opaaane) eg»


a


=<
*apN}IBUO'T JSAAA PUL JoJaMOWAIG], apeisyusg


"suoseas JUaTOAIp Ul UBID() OHUBIVY 9} fo einzesaduis [, 91 IO


aTdaViL


sae cy
‘qay pue ‘ure


‘addeqa


‘apnyney
——_.


sON


a Ae ae
"DUOT 4SOM.


7 jo /O 0fG 0}
70 0G% WoOdy
| pur *}e] qysoU
| JO ,CP of 0}
/OF 08 Wlosy
68.86 "UL


‘BUOT “}S9A\ JO

(BI 0B pue
‘ye, -WII0U
JOST 09 UL
oL.86 “UL,


A/OL 063 *S]
08-86 ‘UL
“COSI


‘AON pure “390
‘uRMpoYy


,L6 066 ‘ST
06-86 “UT,


——


'B8Zi ‘19qG0390
*vonting 9


‘Sto] 389.M Jo

OF 06% pure
ye] YNOs

JO56 06 Ul


“09-85 UL


“SUOT 389M FO
TS 03S pue
‘ye. you
JO /CT of UL
“03.83 “UL


“OGLI
‘Aine pae.oune
“apjoquinyy


Ol 086 ‘ST
06.96 "TY,


“€O8T -
‘Avy puv judy


‘opaaandy


NG Se — ;


Se
(SE 035 “0'T
of 96 “UL


"FOSL Youeyy
*SULLLag


‘apnjisuoyy 4SaAq pu AojaUOTUIaT J, epessrUad


ue990,

aq} jo
ainyeiad m9}

eq) jo
WINWATX? JA]


e e


2
|
|
5
|
|


“BOLT
“qoy pue cuee


‘Panunjnod "Iw “WedIQy OUR oy Jo sinqesodway, ay} Jo VIIVI.


70


A great mass of water follows with extreme
slowness the changes of temperature observed in
the atmosphere, and the maximum of the mean
temperatures of each month does not occur at the
same time in the ocean and in the air. The incre-
ment of the heat of the seas necessarily undergoes
a delay; and as the temperature of the air begins
to diminish, before that of the water has reached its
maximum, it follows, that the extent of the ther-
mometrical. variations is smaller at the surface of
the sea than in the atmosphere. We are still very
far from knowing the laws of these phenomena,
which have a great influence in the economy of
nature.

My. Kirwan admits, that between the eighteenth
degree of north and the eighteenth of south lati-
tude, the mean temperatures of the months differ
only five centesimal degrees, and this estimation
is somewhat too low ; for we know by observations,
carefully calculated, that at Pondicherry, at
Manilla, and in several other places between the
tropics, the mean heats of the months of January
and August differ eight or ten degrees. Now the
variations of the air are at least a third less in the
basin of the seas than on the continent; and the
ocean undergoes a part only of the changes of
temperature of the atmosphere that surrounds it.
Hence it results, that, if the equinoctial oceans did


_not communicate with the seas of the temperate


RI


zones, the local influence of the seasons would be


almost nothing in it.

M. Peron*, who has very successfully repeated
the experiments made by Ellis, Forster, and Irvine,
on the cold that. prevails at the bottom of the
ocean, affirms, “ that every where the open sea is
colder at noon, and warmer at night, than the sur-
rounding air.” This assertion has need of much
restriction; I am ignorant whether it be exact in
the forty-fourth. and forty-ninth degrees of south
latitude, where this laborious naturalist appears to
have made the greatest number of his thermome-~
trical observations ; but between the tropics, where
the air in the open sea is scarcely two or three de-
erees colder at midnight than two hours after the
culmination of the Sun, I have never found the
least change in the temperature of the ocean, either
day or night. This difference is sensible only in a
dead calm, during which the surface of the water
absorbs a greater mass of rays; but we have
already observed, that the thermometrical ex-
periments made in this state of the ocean relate to
a local phenomenon only, and ought to be entirely
excluded in discussing a problem of general
physics. x

The observations contained in the preceding
tables have all been collected under the same


* Annales du Museum, t. v. p. 123—148. Journ. de
Phys. t.lix, p. 361. Gilbert, Annalen der Physik, t. xix,
ps 427.


72


parallels, but in very different longitudes and sea-
sons. At the time of the voyage to the Magel-
lanick regions, and to Batavia, the maximum of
the temperature was found much more to the north
than it had been perceived in all the other voyages ;
“which has had a sensible influence on the heat of
the sea to the north of the tropic of Cancer. The
maximum, according to Churruca and Rodman,
was in October, in six degrees north ; according to
Mr. Quevedo, in March, in 20° 9/ south; and
according to Dr. Perrins, in April, in 6° 15/ north.
I observed it in March, at the east of the Galipago
islands, in 2° 27’ of north latitude. It is _pro-
bakle, that changes in the currents cause these
extraordinary anomalies ; and that the great circle,
which passes through the points where the water
of the sea is the warmest, cuts the equator at an
angle which is variable according as the declination
of the Sun is north or south. These phenomena,
connected perhaps with those of the limit of the
trade winds, and the maximum of the saltness of
the sea, deserve to be carefully examined; but .we
should not be surprised at a failure of accurate ob-
servations on the temperature of the equatorial seas,
if we recollect, that we are still ignorant of the
thermometrical variations in the neighbouring
seas of Europe *.


,


* Since my return in 1804, I have in vain exhorted those
' naturalists, who inhabit the coasts of: the ocean, in Spain, in


73


From the thirtieth degree of north latitude, the
results which I attained agree very well with the
observations of Perrins and Quevedo. It is not
probably to the local influence of the seasons, as
we have just proved, but to the motion of the
waters, and to remote causes, that we must attri-
bute the extent of the variations of temperature ob-
served between the tropics in the voyage from
London to Bombay. These variations have risen
to five degrees, while in the South Sea I found
them only 2°7°. Quevedo, in traversing from
south to north a space of six hundred and forty
leagues, saw the heat of the Atlantic ocean from
the tropic of Capricorn to the ninth degree of


France, and in England, to ascertain, for each month in the


year, the mean temperature of the sea at its surface, compared
with the mean temperature of the air on the neighbouring
coasts. Whathas been published on this subject is founded
either on theoretical considerations, or on a small number of
experiments, which have not been made in the open sea, but
in harbours and sheltered roads, What is the maximum of
eold, which the ocean attains in the forty fifth degree of
latitude, taking the mean average of several days? to what
month dves this maximum correspond? It is asserted
that, near Marseilles, the sea is never colder than 65°, o:
warmer than 25°; though the extremes of the temper-
ature of the air are often — 4° and + 35° (Mém. de la Soc.
Royal de Med. 1778, p. 70). Can it be admitted, that, in
the, open sea, the heat of: the Atlantic rises to 20° in
latitude 45°? 5


74


north latitude, change only 1°7° ; and as far as the
twenty-third of north latitude, the greatest varia-
tion of the sea extended no farther than 3°7°.

- This great regularity in the distribution of the
heat of the ocean is manifested also in a very
sensible manner, when we compare, in the two
hemispheres, zones equally distant from the
equator,


.


sipieniniaiaiainad acme


‘ava0Q opuvpy | 89%


wapy T Oost jud¥) “Mm 08 2a |S OS ZI
sunog | 2 00st * yore] “M98 $3


* wap 1 | SOBTL ery in “M IP
sa + opaaon® 6081 "yudy] “MA 1


&
{
"Uv990) onuepy | = wap oost* * qudw) aA TS
—
26 Lap


‘uraIQ SUL j


eg ene Sued cogt* * Aupl| “q.o¢
9 nee SSL 1aqMasON|." AA OL
B8LZT * 1aqo1I90Q a
sogt * Aaenury WN GB
sost * £reniqay “r\ JOS


z Wapy


Pond my


Rajan
ga


“. Wapy
aioe win bd


uraaQ o1UR pW
)
t


"vas YINOG 680 OF>5


7IO


Dir
‘omc
f O°
o°o|!nN


(spatered
Wolagip apun sah
ay} JO Fay URIW9Y} Sas


.
*s}uaUUOd 3129)
“said xa s1v oy} Jo"dwa}


d ay) wo paasas *s19AOSqO ‘govjans

amy fyruow oy} Jo dua} -qo aie 943 J ay} Jo Ss} 72

*ydsoune uvow 94} 0} “dwa) ueayy some NT uva2O

yenbo Ayavou st uv200 ayy jo

ay) Jo ‘Wwaadwu9} oyy,) ‘ sdway,
*SYyVUIIY


er


swONBAIaSYO


ay) Jo powlod sapnyisuo0'y apniney


‘salaydstumazy yo UT seag oy} Jo aunqesoduia 7, oy} Jo uostiedeog


“A TEAVL


J ° sutiag oost ° N\ oa
¢ Ponwinyg S82ZT Taquioson] * AK
| " sutiag | ¢.03 | OOgI’* * judy] “44
“3 Wapy SOST © yore py! “AA
{ * opasany cost * * judy] “A,
* sulted : OO8T ATzeh 2 ierala\
Pondinuc 882— — 19q019Q) “AA
q{pjoqurin yy Hf FOS "Aen AA
“og uvipuy | ". " mepy Joost s+ ken) a.
*  SUlliag
* Opgsan?y


Oost * * yudy) “Aq
GO8 1 Yolen] “Aq
*av3009 ONUrILY < jppequinyy |
* Oparangy


G6LT " aun). Aq St
* Stag


|


69 Oo
NO oF


X%


sos * * [Ndy) “Ay 9
COST * yore] "A, 0¢
GOST YOUR! “AN ES
6O8t * + [Edy] Ay bP


Yoaaq DN qa


Ol~qQonrogd


Yo


lg
i * +. wapy
UBID_) ONUR}} 5 Se BO Naan 48
O AES 8 * Opadang


aD W1 a9
— 10) 0}


1S)
2


C sjeyyezed juesayip
Japun wvah ay) Jo }eoy | COL
ugam 2y) sassaidxa *‘sjuauNU0g ‘jU99)
ne ayi jo ‘duay oy) oy} uo *S4dA ISO *aonjans
Fyqueru ayy jo ~duta3 OM peasasqo 2y} Jo Sow jy S}1 je
-oydsoune uzaut ay) 0} aw oy jo uv239
Jenba <jieau sr avasg | +dmoa} ueayy 24} jo
ou) Jo jergdua) ony, ) ‘duiay,


‘syivmay
| ESR I iS
5 ; ee


*apnzisuo'y ‘opnyney


ay} JO polieg


|
*NOTIRAIasSqQ |


"vaS YINOG * wapy GOST Arenigay|

8 wmapy €ORT * Yoleyy

; * Opaaaney GOS *. yore
‘uRddQ OUR \ *  SULID<f oogt  Aieniga,y
Ipjoquinyy post * ° Ang

 Opaaamne) cel ArT

"Bag YINOg * wapy SOst Arenigay
Opoaang 60st °° AR


ZAHWYW


iA


WFO On A
mG?


SULLIOg oosI * + judy
+ wap] SSLL 1oquiaaon
voniinyy Bast 1aqo1oe)
* wapy 6OLT * oaune


ANUS


°


,


“4ploquny gost" * Avy
* Opaaaney EONST Avi : SN


qapun wah au) Jo ywaq (UL
uvomt oy sossordxo] ‘sjuaunU0g ; W399)
qe ay. jo -dwo} 2y) oy} 20 "IOBJANS
fyquow ayy jo +dw3} a1 Pp :Asrosqo Spt ye
-aydsounje ream ay op} are ay) JO ur2dQO
yenba Ajivou st uva0Q | *dutaj ueayy ay jor
ayy Jo ywrod ura} ayy.) dua,
‘syeuay


“UONBAIISYO _  ‘epnzi3uory ‘apnqyey
ay} JO polog


SIOAIISYO
ay) JO soe Ny


78


In discussing these observations made at dif-
ferent seasons, we should compare the months,
which in both hemispheres are almost equally dis-
tant from the solstices. It is necessary also to pay
attention to the slowness, with which, in the tem-
perate zone, the sea receives and loses the heat
communicated to it by the air. The anomalies
that take place proceed perhaps in part from the
variations, which the mean atmospherical tem-
peratures of the months undergo onthe same spot,
but in different years.

The preceding table shows, that the ideas which
are generally formed of the low temperature of
the southern hemisphere ‘are not perfectly accu-
rate. Near the poles, and in very high latitudes.
the cold of the seas is undoubtedly less to the
north than the south of the equator; but this dif-
ference is not sensible between the tropics; it is
even very little perceptible as far as the 35th and
40th degrees of latitude.

Mr. Kirwan obtained an analogous result for
the air that rests on the ocean, by taking the
averages of a great number of observations made
during the winter and summer in each hemisphere,
and recorded in the journals of navigators*. From
the equator to the thirty-fourth degree of South


* See a very interesting paper by him in the. Transactions
of the Irish Academy, vol. viii, p. 422.


79


latitude, the winters are more temperate than


under the same parallels in the Northern Hemis-
phere; and even in fifty-one degrees South, at the
Falkland Islands, the month of July is much less
cold than the month of January. at London.


80
TABLE.
Comparison of the temperature of the air in both
hemispheres *.


\Mean temp. of the months.
—~ -—


Latitude. Correspondent


Cc
Southern Northern
months.


. . i
hemisphere, | hemisphere. §


Wecembere.. . (7 teeOr he oe
net ee a ee ee 98°5
Octobend irs ile
18 NM al va) msl Me a me oe


| Oo—15°


i TS Me PUR OM Me 1 Bs
ene July eS Pee 22°5 PRIN FHy


Septenyeer .tsi| Ge Se os 20°5
WeinGhigre seen, eros 7089


December «,- =|...
SIME) teers te 13°8


February . :
August ts 16°8


,
:
=
NX
ke
=


tea i a coe 18°2
January 2


June digg i a ] 77
December


July ie
January


* The observations employed in constructing this table


|
fH
|
a
|
a
tl
|


81


These investigations are highly interesting to
the physical history of our planet. Does the
quantity of free caloric remain the same during —
thousands of years? have the mean temperatures
corresponding to different parallels augmented, or
diminished, since the last revolution that altered
the surface of the Globe? We cannot answer
these questions in the present state of our know-
ledge; we are ignorant of every thing that re-
lates to a general change of the climates, as we
know not whether the barometric pressure of the
atmosphere, the quantity of oxygen, the intensity
of the magnetic powers, and a great number. of
other phznomena, have undergone any change
since the time of Noah, of Xisuthris, or Menou.
As a local variation in the, temperature of the
ocean at its surface might be the effect of a pro-
gressive change in the direction of the currents,
which bring hotter or colder water, according as
they coine from lower or higher latitudes; so, in
a very limited extent of sea, a similar refrigera-
tion might be produced by the conflict of oblique
and submarine currents, which mix the waters of
‘the bottom with those.at the surface; but we
can draw no general conclusions from changes
that have taken place on a few points of the


were all made at sea, except.those, from which the mean tem-
perature for the latitude of 34° was deduced. For these we
are indebted to Mr. Sparmann, during his stay at the Cape of
Good Hope.

VOL: tks G


82


Globe, whether at the surface of the sea, or on
the continent*. It is only by the comparison of
a great number of observations, made in different
parallels of latitude, and at different degrees of
longitude, that. we shall be able to solve the im-
portant problem of the increase or diminution of
the heat of the Earth.

As a preparation for this work, we must care-
fully determine, at a given period, the maximum of
the temperature of the waters of the sea under the
tropics, and in the parallel of the warmest waters.
We have proved, that this maximum is at present,
in places the most remote from each other, from
28° to 29° of the centigrade thermometer. Very
distant posterity will one day decide, whether, as
Mr. Leslie + has endeavoured to prove by ingenious
hypotheses, two thousand four hundred years are
sufficient to augment the mean temperature of the
atmosphere a single degree. However slow this
increment may be, we must admit, that an hypo-


* The currents of the aerial ocean act like the currents
of the sea. In Europe, for instance, the mean temperature of
a place may augment, because very remote causes make @
change in the equilibrium between the winds of the south-
‘west and*those of the north-east. We may even conceive a
partial change in the mean barometric height ofa place, with-
out this ph@nothenon indicating any general revolution in the
constitution of the atmosphere.

+ An experimental Inquiry into the Nature and Propaga-
tion of Heat, 1804, p. 181, and 536.


83

thesis, according to which organic life seems gradu-
ally to augment on the Globe, occupies more
agreeably our imagination, than the old system of
the cooling of our planet, and the accumulation of
the polar ice. Some parts of physics and geology
are merely conjectural ; and it might be said, that
science would lose much of its attraction, if we
endeavoured to confine this conjectural part
within too narrow limits.


HYGROMETRICAL STATE OF THE AIR.


Notwithstanding the doubts which have been
raised in these latter tinies respecting the accuracy,
with which hair or whalebone hygrometers indicate
the quantity of vapours mingled in the atmospheric
air, it must be admitted, that, even in the present
state of our knowledge, these instruments are
highly interesting to a naturalist, who can transport
them from the temperate to the torrid zone, from
the northern to the southern hemisphere, from the
low regions of the air that rest on the sea to the
snowy tops of the Cordilleras. I would rather, says
M. de Saussure *, that the most imperfect instru-
ment were made use of, a hempen string with a
stone suspended to it, than entirely neglect re-
searches, for which so little has been done in
distant voyages+. Without entering into the


* Essai sur l’Hygrométrie, §. 353.
+ M. Peron thinks, “ that it was in the voyage of Captain
G2


84


question, whether inaccurate experiments’ are
more injurious to the progress of the sciences than
the total ignorance of a certain number of facts,
I may affirm, that several hygrometers, constructed
by Mr. Paul at Geneva, and reduced from time
to time to the point of extreme humidity *, have
furnished me with observations, which accorded
very well: with each other. I have always pre-


Baudin, that hygrometers for the first time crossed the ocean.”
But before this voyage, and even a long time before my own,
hygrometrical observations had been made in the voyage of
Lapérouse, and at Bengal by the son of Mr. Deluc.

* J made this correction every time that 1 had any doubt of
the indication of the hygrometers: I employed immersion in
rain water, as Mr. Deluc recommends for whalebone. It is
known, that this method of verification, even with hair, can
cause but a slight error of 1° or 1°5° (Essai, §. 32, p. 37);
while the best hygrometers often differ from each other two
degrees. 1 have nevér been able to reduce the hair or whale-
bone to the degree of extreme siccity, for want of a portable
apparatus, which I regret fiot having made before ty de-
parture. I advise travellers to provide themselves with a nar-
tow jar, containing caustic potash, quicklime, or muriat of
lime, and closed with a screw by a plate on which the hygro-
meter may be fixed. ‘This small apparatus would be of easy
conveyance, if care were taken to keep it always in a pere
pendicular position. As under the tropics Saussure’s hygro-
meter generally keeps above 85°, a frequent verification of the
single point of extreme humidity is most commonly sufficient
to give confidence to the observer. Besides, in order to know
en which side the error lies, we should recollect, that old
hygrometers, if not corrected, have a tendancy to indicate too


great dryness.


85


ferred the old instrument with a single hair to that
of Richer, in which several hairs act at the same '
time on the index, and with unequal tensions. I

can affirm also, that every thing Mr. de Saussure

has advanced, in his Essay on Hygrometry, of the

long duration of his portable hygrometers, is ex-

tremely exact *. I have preserved some without

any alteration during three years travels in the

‘forests and mountains of South America. Before

my departure they were compared by Mr. Pictet

with the hygrometers of the observatory at Geneva;

and I have almost always found them at 99° or

100°5°, when I have been able to expose them

to a very thick fog.

As the fiftieth degree of the whalebone hygro-
meter cerresponds to the eighty-sixth degree of
the hair ‘hyrometer, I made use of the first at
sea and in the plains, while the second was gene-
rally reserved for the dry air of the Cordilleras. ‘The
hair below thesixty-fifth degree of Saussure’s instru-
ment indicates, by great variations, the smallest
changes of dryness ; and has besides the advantage
of putting itself more rapidly into a state of equili-
brium with the ambient air. Deluc’s hygrometer
acts, on the contrary, with extreme slowness ; and
onthe summit of mountains, as I have frequently .
experienced to my great regret, we are often un- *
certain whether we have not ceased our observa-


* Thid, §. 67.


86


tions before the instrument has ceased its move-
ment. On the other hand, this hygrometer, fur-
nished with a spring, has the advantages of being j
strong, marking with great exactness in very moist
air the least increment of the quantity of vapour . |
in solution, and acting in all positions; while
Saussure’s hygrometer must be suspended, and is
often deranged hy the wind, which raises the |
counterpoise of the index. Ihavethought it might — |
prove useful to travellers, to mention in this place !
the results of an experience of several years. |

During the whole of the passage, the apparent j
humidity of the atmosphere, that indicated by the |
hygrometer not corrected by the temperature,
augmented sensibly, notwithstanding the progres- |
sivé increment of the heat. _ In the month of July, |
in the thirteenth and fourteenth degrees of latitude, i
Saussure’s hygrometer marked at sea from eighty-
eight to ninety-two degrees *, in perfectly serene
weather, the thermometer being at twenty-four
degrees, On the banks of the lake of Geneva f,


¥ The hair hygrometer being much better known than that
of whalebone, in order to preserve a uniforin rate, the hygra-
metrical results have been given according to Saussure’s instru-
rent, even when the observations were made with thatof Deluc.
It is only in the metereological journal, that the hygrometer
employed for each series of experiments is mentioned. The
numbersalways mark the apparent humidity, if the contrary
be not expressly stated.


¥ Under the temperate zone, on the continent, the extremes


87


the mean humidity of the same month is only
eighty degrees, the average heat being nineteen
degrees. Now, on reducing these hygrometrical
observations to a uniform temperature, we find,
that the real humidity, in the equinoctial basin of
the Atlantic Ocean, is to the humidity of the
months of summer, at Geneva, in the ratio of
twelve to seven. This enormous humidity of the
atmosphere explains in a great measure the
strength of vegetation, which we admire on the
coasts of South America, where no rain falls for
several years.

As the quantity of vapours changes, not with
the elasticity of the air, but with the temperature,
we may compare, cither the absolute quantities of
vapour contained in the atmosphere in two places,
or th®proportion of their quantities to those neces-
sary to the complete saturation of the air in dif-
ferent climates. We know by very accurate ex-


periments the capacities of saturation of the air at
different degrees of the thermometer; but the re-
lations which exist between the progressive length-
ening of a hygroscopical body, and the quantities
of vapour contained in a given space, have not
been appreciated with the same degree of certainty.
These considerations have induced me to publish


were commonly in summer sixty-seven and eighty-eight
degrees, the temperature of the air being from twenty-six


to eighteen centegimal degrees.


88 »


the indications of the hair and whalebone hygro-
meters just as they were observed, marking the
degree shown by the thermometers connected with
these two instruments. To facilitate to a certain
point the comparison of the observations made in
different latitudes, I shall here insert a table,
which was calculated by M. d’Aubuisson, when he
made his valuable researches on the coefficients of
the barometric formulas. The whole of the re-
sults prove, that as we advance towards the
equator, the air approaches the point of saturation.
We have chosen the periods, when the temperature
of the sea was nearly equal to that of the air. Of
eight columns, which compose this table, the first
contains the time of the observation; the second
the latitude of the place; the third the state of the
thermometer ; the fourth the state of the hygro-
meter; the fifth the weight of vapour contained in
a cubic metre of air, supposing it saturated; the
sixth the weight of vapour contained in a cubic
metre of air, at the degree of the hygrometer ob-
“served ; the seventh, the thickness of the sheet of
water which should be evaporated in an hour’s


time, if the surrounding air was perfectly dry; .


the eighth the same thickness, admitting in the air
the quantity of vapor indicated by the hygrometer *,


* The following is the basis of Mr. d’Aubuisson’s éale
éulation ;
¢ = the height of the centigrade thermometer,
@ = the height of de Saussate’s hygrometer.


89


the quantities indicated in the columns of the fol-


lowing table, and designated by the same letters.


@ = Elastic force of the vapour in a space which is
saturated.


According to the observations of Saussure, it is found, that


the elastic force, in a space in which the hygrometer marks


w degrees is 9 (0015 pw—O-47), while ~ > 50°. Let
0:015 «6 — 047 =m.
Mr. La Place gives, from the experiments of Dalton,
gives, Pp
o= arene 23 x qo)” o279712__ 4. 70°000062583.
(Méc. cél. t. iv, p. 273.) Hence it is concluded :
1921°8 millim. @
a= ¢ 7 0:00878" b=4@ Xm; c= O42 4 and.d =c
° 7 re}
(1~m).


90


86.0 8-86 8.96
61-0 10.1 G.S6 2.96
1-0 ¢6.0 £16 8-06
ST-0 $3 0 ¥.01 6:68
06-0 62.0 0.gt Sule
OI.0 PL.0 LOT 0.06
ae) £2.0 6.91 0:06
$T-0 £¢.0 PLT 9.¥1
‘wy CP Paik ‘sourures3 (4) sommes (n
“Ap yeas Ut i “Ayyear ut | uonvangqes 0}


eee


—\—


Luv oy


OUI 8 1itog Ue Ut


Pajeiodnay 2070M Jo AJWQULNY] paurejuos sodea yo AQnHurNg


aad | Ne =!


“18 oy) UL


66
06
68
sg
C18
8.68
L.¢3
068


"woiZA yy


—


£6
V.G6
0.16
£.66
6-16
0-06
0.02
of-PT


“wray J,


vo
"UILG


=)


T 1S see 7]
OF... 4 ae as 2 GE
Teo We foe 4 cog
6i of} *. Apr
See Sali rece ae OS
QI= 68% “2 5 ge
he es 0) ike aie gaiete cae a]
AL ofS 16621 oune 6

‘vas uado

oy} Ul “UONBAIVSqO 943

goed oy} j0 Je Spoiiag

apnjney


"UDIIO I2RUYIIP BY? fo WisMg ay} Ut apNU suot7VA~LaSgQ JoIILJaMOASh IT 42 fo syinsaaz


“A TAVL


gi


It follows from these researches, that, if the
quantity of vapor, which the air commonly con-
tains in our middle latitudes, amounts to about
three quarters of the quantity necessary for its
saturation, in the torrid zone this quantity is raised
to nine tenths. The exact ratio is from 0°78 to
Oss. Itis this great humidity of the air, under
the trepies, which is the cause that the evaporation
is less than we should have supposed it to be from
the elevation of the temperature.

I was often surprised, during this passage, and
at a later period in the vast basin of the Pacific
Ocean, at not seeing the hygrometer make nearer
approaches to the point of extreme humidity.
This instrument has been sometimes, far from the
coasts, at eighty-three degrees; and generally in
the equinoctial zone, it kept between ninety and
ninety-two degrees. According to the meteorolo-
gical tables, published by Messrs. Langsdorff and
Horner, we see, that, in Krusenstern’s voyage, as
well as in that of La Perouse, the apparent hu-
midity* was found to be from eighty eight to
ninety two degrees, The extremes were eighty
three and nincty seven degrees, which is. conform-


* Mem. de l’Acad. de Pétersbourg, t. i, p. 454. I have
corrected the indications of Deluc’s hygrometer, which was
used by the Russian .navigators. In their instrument the
76th degree corresponded to the point of extreme humidity.
Lamanon’s hygrometers were well verified, since they indicated
100 or 101 degrees in a thick fog. Voyage de La Pérouse,
t. ivep, 26r.


92


able to my observations. It is true, that, from the
curious researches of M. Gay-Lussac, the hygro-
meter can never indicate beyond ninety degrees
in air in contact with a- saturated solution of
muriat of soda; but the water of the sea is every
where so distant from the point of saturation, that
the salt which it contains would scarcely change
a single degree the point of the greatest humidity,
that the lower strata of the air in the basin of the
seas night attain. This peint would be indicated
by the hygrometer, if the tranquillity of the atmos-
phere were not troubled by currents.

The wind, in displacing the particles of the air,
does not make the hair rise to dry, as it causes
the descent of a thermometer exposed to the sun
by carrying off the strata of air strongly heated.
Numerous experiments* of M. de Saussure prove,
that the air acts in the same manner on hygrosco-
pic substances, whether it be in motion or at rest ;
consequently the influence of horizontal or de-
scending winds becomes sensible to the hygro-
meter inasmuch only as these winds bring
strata of air less loaded with vapors. If oblique
currents are established, either by a sudden acce-
leration in the decrement of caloric, or by the con-
flict of several winds, or by electric phenomena,
the upper strata of the atmosphere are mingled
with the lower strata. These movements, joined
to the horizontal winds that traverse great conti-


* Essai sur l'Hyerométrie, § 150-156.


z


93


nents before they reach the basis of the seas, per-
petually tend to remove the hygrometer from the
extreme point of saturation. Perhaps also: the
polar currents, which, from the effects of the ro-
tation of the Globe, seem to produce the ap-
pearance of trade winds, have too much velocity
to suffer the air they bring, to load itself under
each parallel with the whole quantity of vapor
correspondent to its temperature,

Naturalists, who have long marked the pro-
gress of the hygrometer in the open air, have
seldom seen these instruments at a hundred de-
grees, except in a thick fog. In the heaviest rain,
even in the midst of the clouds, the hair hygro-
meter often keeps at ninety and ninety five de-
grees*. In this case the air placed between the
drops of water, or the vesicular vapor, is far
from being saturated; and I doubt whether the
atmosphere, preserving a perfect transparency,


* M. de Saussure observed it once at 84°7° during a very
heavy shower. Essai, § 226, p. 321. On the other hand,
Mr. Deluc found, that his hygrometers, which, plunged into
water, marked 100, kept at 83 3° when they were placed
under a glass jar filled with atmospheric air, and of which
the sides were constantly moistened. On seeing in my jour-
nal, that Deluc’s hygrometer kept oftenest between sixty
and sixty three degrees, it should be remembered, that in
this instrument the point of saturation im the air is not a
hundred, but about eighty-four or eighty-five degrees. Idées
sur Ja Météorologie, 1786, t. i, p. 72; t. ii, p. 473. Uren-
na, Anales de Historia natural, 1803, p. 229.


94


ever attains the maximum of humidity, which we
obtain under our glass jars. M. de Saussure,
after, having explained the long series of his ma-
nometrical and hygrometrical experiments, made
at different degrees of temperature, admits, that
the last degrees of his instrument are perhaps
only degrees of supersaturation, and that the
quantity of vapor that a certain volume of free
air can contain, is probably less than might be
admitted from the experiments made in our la-
boratories*.

The naturalists, who accompanied the Chevalier
Krusenstern in his voyage round the world, as-
sert, that Deluc’s hygrometer enabled the mari-
ners to foresee stormy weather, during the pas-
sage from Washington Islands to Sangasacky ;
and in all other parts of the torrid zone, where
the changes of the atmosphere have scarcely any
influence on the barometer. Mr. Peron, on the
other hand, says, that he has seen the barometer
constantly fall at sea, when the hair hygrometer
advanced toward extreme humidity.- I have
had no opportunity of verifying either of these
assertions,


* In determining the point of extreme humidity, it is sup=
posed, that the air in the jar is not yet saturated, when the
vapors begin to be precipitated in an almost imperceptible
manner, (Saussure, Essai, § 107 and 123). M. Gay-Lus-
sac has shown, that the hygroscopical property of the glass
becomes 2 source of errors difficult to avoid,


95


AZURE COLOR OF THE SKY, AND COLOR OF THE
SEA AT ITS SURFACE,


The cyanometrical indications contained in this
work are, I believe, the first that have been at-
tempted on the sea, and in the equinoctial re-
gions. The instrument I made use of had been
compared with that of M. de Saussure. I had
the satisfaction, in 1795, to consult this illus-
trious naturalist on my travelling projects; and
he had engaged me to make, at a distance from
Europe, a series of observations similar to those
he had collected on the chain of the higher
Alps *.

I shall not here enter into the theory of the


cyanométer, and the necessary precautions to avoid
errors. Though this imperfect instrument is yet
but little known, naturalists are not less acquaint-
ed with the ingenious principle, on which the de-
termination of the extreme points of the scalet
are founded. In order to assure myself by di-
rect proof, whether the cyanometrical observations


* Mr. Leslie has expressed the same desire in his work
on the propagation of heat, p. 442.

+ Mémoires de Turin, t. iv, p. 409. Journal de Physique,
t. xxxvili, p. 499. Voyages dans les Alpes, § 2086. Essai
sur la Géographie des Plantes, 1807, p. 102. Bouguer ap-
pears to have already had the idea of a similar instrument,
but of more general use. In speaking of the light reflected
by the particles of the air, he says ‘‘ We should employ, as
aterm of comparison, painted tablets of different colors.”
Traité d'Optique, p. 365.


96
are comparable with each other, I have often
placed the instrument in the hands of persons,
who had not been accustomed to this kind of
measurement, and I have observed, that their
judgment on the shades of blue toward the ho-
rizon and at the zenith never differed more than
two degrees.

Yhe chamois hunters and Swiss herdsmen have
at all times been struck with the intense color
of the heavenly vault on the summit of the Alps.
In the year 1765 Mr. Deluc fixed the attention
of naturalists on the phenomenon, the causes of
which he developed with equal precision and sim-
plicity. “In the lower part of the atmosphere,”
says he*, “the color of the air is always paler
and weakened by the vapors, which at the same
time cause a greater dispersion of the light. The
air of the plains becomes deeper, when it is
more pure; but it never approaches the vivid
and deep tint, which is remarked om the moun-
tains.” It seemed to me, that in the chain of the
Andes these appearances make less’ impression
on the mind of the natives, because those among
them, who scale the summits of the Cordilleras
to gather snow, do not come from the region
of the low lands, but from elevated plains, which
are themselves twelve or fifteen hundred toises
above the level of the sea.


* Researches on the Modifications of the Atmosphere,
§ 981,


97


I found on examining the cyanometrical obser-
vations recorded in my journal, that, from the
coasts of Spain and Africa to those of South-Ame-
rica, the azure color of the heavenly vault progres
sively augmented from thirteen to twenty-three
degrees. T’'rom the 8th to the 12th of July, in,
twelve and a half and fourteen degrees of latitude,
the sky was of an extraordinary paleness, without
any concrete or vesicular vapor being visible. The
cyanometer indicated at the zenith, between noon
and two in the afternoon*, only sixteen or seven-
teen degrees; though the preceding days it had
been at twenty-two degrees. -I found in general
the tint of the sky deeper under the torrid zone,
than in the high latitudes; but I have also proved,
that, in the same parallel, this tint is paler at sea
than on land.

As the color of the firmament depends on the
accumulation and on the nature of the opake va-


* The observations were always made at the zenith itself, or


near the zenith, but at times when the Sun was distant from
that part of the sky, of which the intensity of the blue color
was measured. At ten or twelve degrees distance around the
Sun, the tint has a local paleness; as on the contrary it has
a local intensity, when the blue of the sky is seen, either
between two clouds, or above a mountain covered with snow,
or between the sails of a ship, or the tops of trees. Itis
scarcely necessary to remark, that this intensity is only ap-
parent, and that it is the effect of a contrast of two colors of
different shades.


VOL. Ii. #


98


pors suspended in the air, we should not be asto-


nished, if during great droughts, in the steppes of
Venezuela and of Meta, we see the sky of a deep-
er blue than in the basin of the ocean, A very hot
air, almost saturated with humidity, rises per-
‘petually from the seas towards the high regions of
the atmosphere, where a colder temperature pre-
vails. This ascending current causes there a pre+
cipitation, or rather a condensation of vapor.
Part assembles in clouds, under the form of vesi-
cular vapor, at times when we see no clouds
appear in the dryer air that reposes on the land;
another part remains scattered, and suspended in
the atmosphere, the tint of which it renders paler.
When, from the summit of the Andes, we turn
our eye towards the great South Sea, we often
perceive a haziness uniformly spread to fifteen or
eighteen hundred toises in height, and covering,
as with a thin veil, the surface ,of the ocean.
This appearance takes place in a season, when
the atinosphere, beheld from the coast and at sea,
appears pure and_ perfectly transparent; and the
existence of the opake vapor is announced to na-
vigators only by the little intensity of the azure
color of the sky.. We shall hereafter have occa-
sion to return to these: phenomena, which modify

the extinction of light; and which, like the fogs
popularly called dry, remain so confined to the
high regions of the atmosphere, that our hygro-
meters undergo no sensible change.


|
i
|
t
{
|
i


99


I have often repeated, in the equinoxial part of
the Atlantic Ocean, the experiments of M. de Saus-
sure on the decrement of the intensity of color.
observed from the zenith to the horizon. On the
14th of July, in latitude 16° 19’, the sky being
of the purest blue, the thermometer keeping at
twenty-two degrees, and the hygrometer at eighty-


eight degrees, I found, toward noon,
oO


at 1° of height, 3° of the cyanometer


10 6
20. - 10
soil i 16°5
AO 18
60 22
between 70 & 90 23°5


The 30th of June, in latitude 18° 53/, the ther-
mometer being at 21°29, and the hygrometer at
81°5°, the cyanometric decrement had been some-
what less regular:

at 1° of height, 2°5° of the cyanometer


10 4

20 85

516) 12

45 S pesiery

50 18°3

60 . Vs aan
between 70 & 90 22°4,


This decrement has a great analogy with that
which was observed at Geneva on the llth of
HY


100


April, 1790, and to which Mr. Prevost* en-
deavoured to apply calculation. We know, that
‘both follow nearly an arithmetical progression, but
that at sea there are great irregularities before
twenty degrees of height. This zone near the
horizon exhibits tints extremely pale, on account of
the vapor that lies on the surface of the water,
and through which the blue rays are transmitted
tous. It is for the same reason, that near the
coasts, at an equal distance from the zenith, the
vault of the sky appears of a deeper colour on the
land side than on that toward the sea.

The quantity of vapor, which modifies the
shades of the atmosphere by reflecting white light,
is changing from morning to evening; and the
cyanometer, observed at the zenith, or near this
“point, indicates with sufficient precision the varia-
tions that correspond to the different hours of
the day.


Latitude. 6} o'clock. 10 o'clock. Noon. 2 oclock. 5$0’clock
‘180 53° 17° @1® ~—ga-4o ago go
16 19 19 2g 23°5 23 20°5
BSivida 15 16 Hn lis. 35's


I was unwilling to omit the last observation,
that of the 8th of July, though the sky, by a singular
anomaly, appeared that day as pale as we see it ©


* Journal de Physique, ¢, vii, p. 372.


101


on the continent in the temperate zone. The Sun
being at equal distances from the meridian, the tints
are deeper in the evening than in the morning,
without doubt because the maximum of temperature
falls between the hours of one and two. I have
not remarked, like M. de Saussure, that the
cyanometer was regularly less elevated at noon *,
than some time before the passage of the Sun across
the meridian ; but I have not been able to devote
myself with the same assiduity to this kind of in-
vestigation.

We must not confound the cyanometrical mea-
sures with the experiments, which Bouguer at-
tempted, by means of his /ucimeter, on the in-
tensity of the light ditfused or retlected by the air.
This intensity contributes without doubt to modify
the more or less azure tint of the heavenly vault ;
but the two phenomena do not depend directly on
the same causes, and there are.a great number of
circumstances, in which the intensity of the aérial
light is very small, while the cyanometer indicates ©
deeper tints. M. Lesliet has observed, for in-
stance, by his photometer, that the light diffused
is weaker, when the sky is of a very deep and
pure blue, than when itis slightly covered by trans-
parent vapor. So, on the mountains where the


* Cyanometrical observations at Geneva :


6 o'clock, 10 o’clock. Noon. Zo'clock.  60’clock.
14°7° 22°6° A apiNg 20°6° ide. 0 fog


+ Onthe Propagation of Heat, p. 441.


102


intensity of the direct light is the greatest *, the:
aerial light is very weak, because the rays are re-
flected by air of less density. A very deep tint
corresponds there to the feebleness of the diffused
light ; and the aspect of the sky on the mountains
would resemble that offered by the heavenly vault
on the plains, when it is illumined by the feeble
light of the Moon, if the state of the aqueous vapor
did not produce a sensible difference in the quantity
of white rays reflected toward the lower regions
of the Earth. In these regions, the vapors are
condensed after sunset, and the descending cur-
rents disturb that equilibrium of temperature, which
has been established during the day. On the ridge
of the Cordilleras, the azure of the sky is less
mingled with white, beeause-the air there is always
extremely dry. The rarer atmosphere of the
mountains, illumined by the vivid light of the Sun,
reflects almost as few blue rays as the dense at-
mosphere of the plains enlightened by the feeble
ight of the Moon. From these considerations it
follows, that we ought not to say, with M. de
Saussure and other naturalists, who have recently
treated on this subject, that the intensity of the |
blue is greater on the summit of the Alps than in
the plains; the color of the sky is only deeper, less
mixed with white.


* Laplace, Mécan. Céleste, t. iv, p. 282. Expos. du Syst.
du Monde, p. 96.


:


103


If we direct the cyanometer toward the parts of
the sky very near the Sun, the instrument in-
dicates, near the zenith, as faint tints as those
which are observed near the horizon. The causes
of this paleness are very different. Near the Sun
too intense a light fatigues our organs ; and the
eye, dazzled by the quantity of white rays it re-
ccives at once, becomes ‘almost insensible to the
impression of the blue rays. At the horizon, -on
the contrary, it is not the intensity of the aérial
light, that renders the azure tint of the sky pale;
before sunset this phenomenon is produced by
the white light, reflected by the vapors condensed
near the surface of the Earth.

Bouguer has made the curious observation, that,
when the Sun is fifteen or sixteen degrees high,
there are, on a line parallel to the horizon, two
parts of the sky, from 110 to 120 degrees distant
from the luminary, where the intensity is at its
minimum; while we observe the maximum ima
point diametrically opposite to the sun*, We
think, that this circumstance has but little in-
fluence on the accuracy of the cyanometrical mea-
sures made in the torrid,zone; for the greater the
elevation the Sun has above the horizon, the more
uniformity there is in the distribution of the aerial
light. It even appears, that a part of the sky


* Bouguer, Traité d'Optique, p.-71 and 367.
\t Ibid, p. 74.


104


may reflect a greater or less quantity of light,
without any indication of a deeper or fainter tint
by the cyanometer,


“TY shall not enlarge any farther on the analogy,


that exists between the results obtained by the
cyanometer of Saussure and the lucimeter of
Bouguer. This subject is one of the most delicate
investigations in optics; and the tint of the sky
deserves so much more the attention of natu-
ralists, as the ingenious experiments of Mr. Arago
have recently proved, that the aérial light is com-
posed of rays not all of the same nature, since it
contains some that are insusceptible of polarization.»

If the cyanometer indicate, I will not say the
quantity, but the accumulation and the nature of
the opake vapors contained in the air, the navigator
is in possession of a more simple marmer of
judging of the state of the low regions of the atmos-
phere, He attentively observes the colour and
figure of the solar disk. at its rising and setting.
This disk, beheld across the’ strata of air that
lie immediately upon the ocean, announces the
duration of fine weather, and the slackness or
strength of the wind. It is a kind of diapha-
nometcr*, the indications of which have been
interpreted with greater or less certainty for ages,


® See the description of the apparatus, to which Saussure
has given this name in the Mémoires de Turin, vol, iy,


Ps 425.


105,


Under the torrid zone, where the meteorological —
phenomena follow each’ other with great regu-
larity, and where the horizontal refractions are
more uniform, the prognostics are surer than in the
northern regions. A great paleness of the setting
Sun, a wan color, an extraordinary disfiguration
of its disk, are almost unéquivocal signs of a
tempest ; and we can scarcely conceive, how the
state of the low strata of the atmosphere, which
this natural diaphanometer shows us, can be so
intimately connected with meteorological changes,
that take place eight or ten hours after the- setting
of the Sun.

Mariners have carried the physiognomical
knowledge of the sky to a much higher state of
perfection, than the inhabitants of the fields.
Viewing only the ocean, and the, sky. which seems
to repose upon its surface, thcir attention is con-
tinually fixed on the slightest modifications of the


atmosphere. Among the great number of meteoro-
logical rules, which pilots transmit to each other
as a kind of inheritance, there are several that


evince great sagacity ; and, in general, prognostics
are less uncertain in the basin of the seas, especi=
ally in the equinoctial parts of the ocean, than on
the continent, where the configuration of the
ground, mountains, and plains, - interrupt the regu-
larity of the meteorological phenomena. The in-
fluence of the lunations on the duration of


106


tempests ; the action exercised by the Moon at
its rising, during several successive days, on the
dissolution of the clouds; the intimate connection
that exists between the descent of marine baro-
meters and the changes of weather; and other
similar facts; are scarcely observed in inland
countries comprised in the variable zone, while their
reality cannot be denied by those, who have long
been in the habit of sailing between the tropics.

I attempted to apply the cyanometer to measure
the color of the sea. Though this color is com-
monly green, we have no need of a chlorometer to
estimate the intensity of its tint. In this experi-
ment there is no question but of the strength of
the color, of the lighter or deeper shade, and not
of the individual nature or quality of the-tint. In
fine calm weather the colour of the ocean has been
equal to the thirty-third, the thirty-eighth, some-
times even the forty-fourth degree of the cyano-
meter ; though the’ vault of the sky was very pale,
and scarcely reached the fourteenth or fifteenth
degree. It would be useless to repeat these ex-
periments when the atmosphere is loaded with
clouds, or in the shadow of a vessel. When, in-
stead of directing the cyanometer toward a great
extent of open sea, we fix our eyes on a small part
of its surface through a narrow aperture, the water
appears of a beautiful ultramarine colour.  ‘To-


ward evening, on the contrary, when the edges of


107


the waves, illumined by the Sun, are of an emerald


ot


green their surface, on the” shady side, has a
3 reflection.


“Nothing is more striking than the rapid changes,
which the ocean undergoes beneath a serene sky,
where no variations whatever are to be perceived
in the atmosphere. Ido not here speak of the
whitish and milky tint, that marks the waters of
shoals, and’ in soundings, which is owing only to


the sand suspended in the liquid, since it is per--
ceived in places, where the bottom, in twenty or

thirty fathoms water, is no way visible; I speak

of those extraordinary changes, by which, in the

midst of the vast basin of the equinoctial ocean,
the water passes from an indigo blue to the deepest

green, and from this to a slate gray, without any

apparent influence from the azure.of the a or

the colour of the clouds.

The blue tint of the ocean is almost independ-
ant of the reflection of the sky. In general the sea
between the tropics is of a more intense and
purer azure than in high latitudes; and this dif
ference is remarked even in the Gulf-stream. The
ocean often remains blue, when, in fine weather,
more than four fifths of the sky are covered with
light and floating clouds. They who do not admit
Newton's theory of colours consider the blue of
the sky as the black of space seen through a mes
dium, the transparency of which is disturbed by


- 168


vapors *, this explanation they might extend to
the blue tint of the Ocean.
Whatever relates to the color of the water is


extremely problematic. The green tint of the
snow waters, that flow from the glaciers of the
Alps, and which contain very little air in’ solu-
tion, might induce us to believe, that this color


is appropriate to water in its greatest purity.
We address ourselves in vain to chemistry to ex-
plain this phenomenon, or that of the blue color
of the Rhone near Geneva: there is hitherto no
proof, that waters exist which contain a greater
or less degree of hydrogen; and the refrigera-
tion of the seas in tempests is much tuo weak,
to permit us to attribute the reflection of different
colored rays to the mere change of density. It
is no way probable, that the green color of the
water is owing to the mixture of yellow rays from
the bottom, and blue rays reflected by the watert;
for the open sea is often green, where it is more
than eight hundred fathoms deep. Perhaps, at
certain hours of the day, the red or yellow hght
of the Sun contributes to the colouring it green}.


* Antonio de Dominis, la Hire, and Mr. von Goethe,
{\ém. de ? Acad., t. ix, p. 615.  Farbenlehre, t.1, ps 59.)

+ Décade Egyptienne, vol. i, p. 101.

t The beautiful greenish blue color of ice, when we see
it ina great mass, 1s a phenomenon well worthy of inves-
tigation, and known by every naturalist, who has visited the


glaciers of the Alps.


109


The waves, like movable and inclined mirrors,
progressively reflect the shades and tints of the
atmosphere from the zenith to the horizon. ‘The
motion of the surface of the water modifies the
quantity of light, that penetrates toward the in-
ferior strata; and it may be conceived, that those
rapid changes of transmission, which act as it
were like changes of opakeness,.may, when they
are united to other causes unknown to us, change
the tint of the ocean.


DIP OF THE MAGNETIC NEEDLE. INTENSITY
OF THE MAGNETIC FORCES.


The variations of terrestrial magnetism belon
Se


to a kind of phenomena, on which I have em-
ployed myself with singular predilection, during
the course of my travels, and in the subsequent
years. The objects to which [ directed my re-
searches were, first, the dip of the magnetic nee-


dle; secondly, the variation, or angle which the
magnetic meridian makes with the meridian of
the place; thirdly, the horary variations of the
variation; fourthly, the intensity of the magnetic
forces, measured by the duration of the oscillation
of a horizontal or vertical needle*: The extent


* When we measure the intensity by the oscillations of 4
needle ina horizontal plane, we must correct the results by the


dip observed in the same place. This correction is unneces-
Ny


110


of the surface of the Globe, in which I have been
enabled to determine the magnetic phanomena
with the same instruments, and employing similar
methods, was one hundred and fifteen degrees-in
longitude, and is comprised between fifty two de-
grees north and twelve degrees south latitude.
This vast region is so much the more interesting,
as it is traversed by the magnetic equator ; so that
the point where the dip is nought, having been de-
termined by land, and by astronomical means, we
may, with respect to the two Americas, convert,
with precision, the terrestrial latitades into magne-
tic latitudes. This conversion, indispensable for
the study of the complicated laws of magnetism,
is, on the contrary, very problematic, when we
compare observations of the magnetic dip made
in meridians very remote from each other; and
when we consider the magnetic equator as a great
circle, without inflexion, and without irregularity
of curve.


sary, when we employ a dipping needle, which oscillates in
the plane of the magnetic meridian. The number also of
these oscillations, compared with the number of those which
the same needle makes in a plane perpendicular to the mag-
netic meridian, determines the dip of the place. This method
of finding the dip by an instrument without a divided limb
affords more precision near the magnetic equator, than in the
northern regions : it served to verify the exactness of a@ part
of my observations, published before my return to Europe by
M. de La Lande. (Journal de Phys. , vol. xlix, p 429.)


|
|
|
i
|
if
,


Iii


Notwithstanding the considerable degree of
perfection, which Mitchell and Nairne had attain-
ed in the construction of dipping needles, these
instruments, before the year 1791, had not reached
that degree of exactness, which they have now
attained. If La Caille, Dalrymple, Cook, Bayly,
and Lord Mulgrave have succeeded in obtaining
excellent results, it is because these able observers
made numerous comparative experiments, and
took the average of a great number. The com-
passes employed in La Pérouse’s expedition were
those made use of by Captain Cook in his last
voyage round the world. We must suppose, that
these instruments were out of order, or of difficult
use; for the dips observed on board the Astrolabe
often differ five, six, or eight degrees from those
obtained the same day on board the Boussole.
This uncertainty had induced the celebrated Borda
to.apply himself, conjointly with M. Le Noir,
to the improvement of the dipping needle. This
navigator, to whom astronomy is indebted for the
use of repeating circles, has also furnished travel-
lers with the means of making accurate observa-
tions on ‘the magnetic dip. Borda’s compass was
successfully employed in the voyage of Vicead-
miral d’Entiecasteaux, in that of Captain Baudin,
and in the excursions of M. Nouet in Egypt. If
we add the results obtained in these different
voyages to those I have collected during seven
years in the two divisions of America, in Spain,


112


France, Italy; Switzerland, and Germany; we shall
have a great mass of observations, comparable*


* The observations of the dipping needle made by de Rossel,
Freycinet, Nouet, Gay Lussac, and myself, are so much the


more adapted to be compared with each other, as they em- -


brace but a very short portion of time. Le Monnier (Lozs
du Magnétisme, p. 57) and Lord Mulgrave (Voyage to the
North Pole, p. 68) still admitted the invariability of the mag-
netic dip : but. Messrs. Gilpin and Cavendish proved, in 1806,
by direct experiments, that the dip of the needle is subject,
like the variation, to annual oscillations, though extremely
slow. The cities of London and Paris are hitherto the only
places, where the extent of these oscillations isknown. The
dip at London, in 1775, was 72° 30’, and in 1805, 70° 212
(Phil. Trans,, vol. Ixvi, pl. 1, p. 401). We cannot admit,
with P, Cotte (Journ. de Physique, t. Ixvi, p. 277), that,
before the year 1808, the dip of the magnetic needle was
not known with precision at Paris. I had determined it
with a great deal of care, conjointly with M. de Borda, in
1798, before my departure for Spain. It was then 69° 517,
M. Gay-Lussac found it in 1806, 69° 127, On the 7th of
October, 1810, the dip at Paris was 68° 50’; and on the 10th
of November, 1812, 68° 42/, The first of these two experi-
ments was made by Mr. Arago and myself; the second by
Mr. Arago alone. The particular observations did not differ
three or four minutes. The poles of the needle were changed
several times ; and all imaginable precautions were employed,
in the use of Borda’s compass, to avoid errors. From these
observations it results, that from 1775 to 1805 the dip di.
minished at London 4/187 yearly: at Paris the annual dimi-
nution, from 1798 to 1812, was 4’ 54”, J should think it
hazardous to go back to anterior times,when the instruments
were too imperfect, and when observers employed too little
nicety in their magnetic experiments.


|
:
|
|
|


113


with each other, and worthy of exercising the sa-
gacity of geometricians.

Though our passage from Corunna to Cumana
lasted thirty seven days; 1 could collect, during
this space of time, only twelve good observations
of the magnetic dip. I had caused an addition
to be made to. Borda's compass, by an able artist
of Madrid, Mr. Megnié, of a suspension with a
double movable ring, like that known under the
name of Cardan’s suspension. By these means
the instrument might be tied by a very long cord
to a part of the poop, which appeared nearly free
from iron, and where small portions of this metal
were very equally distributed. I ascertained the
advantages of this position by determining the dip
during a dead calm, on the deck, and in several
parts of the vessel below. During the course of
those observations, I found the direction of the
magnetic meridian in. seeking the minimum of the
the dips... Most commonly I had to judge of the
magnitude of the angle by taking, among a great
number of very small oscillations, the mean of the
elongations toward the north and the south. I
constantly employed two different needles ; their
centring was verified by comparing the indications
of the two extremities of the same needle, and i in-
yerting it, or successively directing the divided
face of the limb east and west. I think I may be
certain, that observations made when under sail

VoL. II. I


114


may attain an average exactness of twelve minutes
of the centesimal division*.


* The angles given by Borda’s dipping compass are express-
éd in centesimal degrees and decimal parts. The verifications
of the instrument, which can be made on land, and which I
have constantly employed with Mr. Gay-Lussac, during the
course of the observations. published in the Memoirs of the
Society of Arcueil, are reducible to the following: 1st, giving
a horizontal position to the azimuth circle, by means of a
bubble level and a thread level ; 2ndly, finding the direction of
the magnetic. meridian, either a) by correspondent dips, or 5)
by adding, on the azimuth circle, one hundred degrees to the
point “which corresponds to the perpendicular position of
the needle; or finally c) by the minimum of the dips ;
Sdly, correcting the ‘eccentricity of. the needle, by ob-
serving the superior’ and inferior points; 4thly, examin-
ing whether the magnetic axis of the needle coincides
with its physical axis, by observations to the east and the
west ; Sthly, correcting the want of equilibrium in the needle
by changing the poles. The slight differences, which will be
noticed between the results published in this nalrative, and
those that were inserted, during ‘my journey, in several publie
papers (Journ. de Physi t. iv, ps 4333 Mag. Encyclop. an 8,
p- 376; Zach, Monatl. Corresp, t. i, p- 402), arise from my
having sometimes neglected taking the average between the
observations made to the east and the west, and because the
latitudes and longitudes observed had not always been reduced


by estimation to the same time, when the magnetic dip had
been determined:


115


“poo


“pooy Leo GOLY 1g ¥9
-njiqnop Ausuaquyt “Pood dic PSS L909 Sl 6g 8 6
*poor) 666 CEOS Gig By sz cl Fl
pom} 966 “ 6G-69 CV 8G: ro 6L
"poor LES -  €0-69 * OB GG), 63 16
*pood KiaA 683 09-29 8g 03 SG PS
“poor - 86% S£.49 eg 8st F 83 88
Ayisuaiul 3 Ayetoadsa “qnyrqnoq LES Be O6.tk ve La OF 18
; “Wed YIJIIq FES cO-Sk Gg OL Of “PE
“wyeo yoajiad isow]Y BPS CE.Gh os OL 93-46


“UONRAIaSqO POOL) oVO 2h
ego NUIM OT UE | uoistar@ yeutisaqag


ho haa sUOLT[LOsO JO “AUN “dig: oyeuse fy tapnqisu0y 389M ‘opnyyey GIJON


GEL ue SuvaaQ 917um]IV YILON ay, ur ;
sooty auzausopy 247 fo Agsuazuy pup ‘qpaany ouausnpy 2Y? forgq


7)


116


Part of these observations served as a basis to
the theories and calculations of Messrs. Loewen-
oern, Biot, and Kraft* ; they give the direction of
the equator, or of the magnetic parallels, with so
much the more precision, as I took the same
pains in examining the dip, as in ascertaining the
geographical position of the vessel. The most
accurate observations on the variation of the nee-
dle, on its dip, and on. the intensity of the mag-
netic forces, would be of little value, if the tra-
veller were not provided with the instruments ne-
cessary to ascertain astronomically the latitude
and longitude of the place where the different phe-
nomena of terrestrial’ magnetism were observed.

I shall not speak of the attempt I made during
the passage, to determine the curves of the mag-
netic variation. The results obtained at sea by
the best azimuth compasses are so uncertain, that,
according to the testimony of the most experi-
enced navigators, errors of two or three degrees
often occur. Even supposing them only one de-
gree, this uncertainty, augmented by the slow


* Danske Vid. Selskabs Scrivter, 1802, p. 295. Journ.
de Phys., t.lix, p. 287. Mém. de Pétersbourg, 1809, ts i,
p- 248. See also Mollweide’s Attempt to generalize the The-
ories of Euler and Mayer, in Gilbert’s Annalen,’ t. xxix, pel,
and 251.

+ Voy. de Vancouver, t. i, p. 40 and 99. De Rossel, in
the Voy. de d’Entrecasteaux, t. ii, p. 172. Cook’s second
Voyage, vol. i, p, 24.


117


changes of the variation in different meridians,
would still throw much doubt over the real posi-
tion of the curves, which are attempted to be


traced on variation charts™.
On comparing the observations made during


several voyages, it appears, that we had cut the
curve of no variation in latitude 13° north, and
longitude 53° and 65° west: this curve is now
prolonged toward Cape Hatteras, and toward a
~ point in Canada, in 33° 27/ north latitude, and
70° 44/ west longitude. Before the first voyage
of Christopher Columbus, in 1460, the variation
was nought near the island of Corvo; but the pro-
gress of the curve of no variation toward the
west is not the same in all its parts, and it is
sometimes retarded by the local influence of the
continents and islands, which form so many par-
ticular systems of magnetic forces. Thus it seemn-
ed stopped for some time by the southern extre-
mity of New Holland ; and at Jamaica and Bar
badoes the variation has not undergone any per-


*The uncertainty of the observations of the magnetic
needle made at sea does not arise solely from the rolling and
pitching of the vessel, or the imperfection of the azimuth
compasses ; it is in a great measure caused by the masses ot
iron spread through the vessel, and acting unequally, accord-
ing to the direction in which it is steercd. Loewenoern, in
the Nye Samling of Danske Vid. Selsk. Skr., t. ili, p. 117, end
t. v, p- 299. ach, Mon. Cor. 1800, p. 529, Flinders, in
the Phil. Trans. 1805, p. 187.


118


ceptible changes for one hundred and forty years
past*,

The intensity of the magnetic forces is another
very important phenomenon, to which naturalists
have hitherto very little attended. Graham and

- Musschenbroeck had attempted to measure the diur-
nal variations of this force by the velocity of the ho-
rizontal oscillations of a magnetic bart; but it ap-
pears, that Borda was the first, who had the idea
of making the same dipping needle oscillate in ‘dif-
ferent places of the Globe. The attempts of this
learned navigator did not afford, as he has often
assured me, any. precise result, on account of the
friction, which the ancient needles underwent on
their axis. At this period men were-often satisfi-
ed with making the needle of the variation com-


pass oscillate: and in the manuscript account of —


Borda’s Voyage to the Canaries it is expressly
stated, in speaking of the modifications of the in-
tensity of the magnetic forces measured by the
velocity of the oscillations, that, at thé summit
of the Peak, he had counted ten oscillations . of
the card in 97” of tune; while at Santa Cruz their
duration had been 94”, at Cadiz 103”, and at Brest


* Thomson’s Hist. of the Royal Soc., p. 461. Phil. Trans,
vol. 50, p. 330 and 349, (The Oriental Navigator, 1801,
p. 650.)


+ Phil. Trans. vol. 33, p-. 332. Thomson’s Hist. of the


Royal See., p. 461. Diss. de Magnete, Exp, 102 and 107.


119


713, M. Le Monnier, in his workon the Laws
of Magnetism * observes how desirable it would
be, to know the relation between the oscillations
of the samé needle at Peru, and in the north of
Europe ; but a note added to his magnetic plani-
sphere T shows, that he had not a very accu
rate idea of the causes, which modify the intensity
of the total force. According to Cavendish 7, this
intensity must be the same over the whole surface
of the Globe; and the opinion of this great natu-
ral philosopher must have had a very consider-
able influence on those, who had not had an
opportunity of interrogating nature by direct ex-


periments.
In this state of uncertainty, the Academy of


Sciences at Paris very earnestly exhorted M. La
Pérouse to make, during the course of his voyage
round the world, experiments on the intensity of
the magnetic forces. “It is known”, say the
commissioners §, in the instructions communicated
to the naturalists engaged in the expedition, “ that
at Brest, Cadiz, Teneriffe, Goree on the coast Of
Africa, and Guadaloupe, the intensity is sensibly
the same. It would be interesting to repeat these
experiments, reckoning the magnetic force by the


duration of the oscillations ‘of a good dipping


* Introduction, p. 25.

+ Mém, de Paris, 1786, p. 43.

t Phil. Trans., 1773, p- 390.

§ Voyage de La Pérouse, t.i,p. 1603


120


needle, at sea, in very calm weather. It would
be above all important to know the magnetic force,
where the dip is the smallest.” The imperfection
of the compasses _put on board M. La Pérouse’s
vessels no doubt prevented tlie astronomers in
this expedition from paying attention to investiga-
tions of: this kind, and the wishes of the acade-
my of sciences were fulfilled only in the voyage
of d’Entrecasteaux; and in that of which _ this
work gives the narrative. Among the great num-
ber of valuable observations. for which we are in-
debted to M. Rossel, there are five on the oscil-
lations of the magnetic needle * made at Brest,
at Teneriffe, at Van Diemen’s Land, at Amboyna,
and at Java. For my part, I have determined,
Jointly with Messrs. Gay-Lussac and Bonpland,
from 5° of magnetic latitude south, to 60 mag-
netic latitude north, the intensity of the forces in
a hundred and eighty places belonging to two
systems of particular attractions ft. In the space
* These observations were published only in 1808 (Voy.
de d’Entrecasteaux, t. 2, p. 287, 291, 321, 480, and 644) ;


but they were made eight years before my journey to the


T was acquainted with them as early as the year
1805, iminediately after having


Orinoco.


“communicated to. the first
class of the Institute the general results of the progressive
decrement of the magnetic forces from Paris to the magnetic
equator. S'ee the memoir, which } published at that time,
conjointly with Mr. Biot, in the sixtieth vol. of the Journ.
de Physique. ;


+ On account of the inflexions of the magnetic equator, we


121


of three years, I have been enabled to procure
the oscillation of the same needles, or needles
compared with each other, at Lima, under the
magnetic equator, at Mexico, at Naples, and at
Berlin, which afforded me the means of deter-
mining the relation that exists between the magnetic
charges of the Globe in different climates. From
these extensive operations; an account of which
will be separately published, it follows, that, sup-
posing the intensity of the forces under the equa-
tor= 1, this intensity is, at Naples, 1:°2745; at
Paris, 1°3482; and at Berlin, 1°3703.

We see already, that from the thirty-eighth to
the thirteenth degree of terrestrial latitude, in the
part of the northern Atlantic Ocean to which the
preceding table refers, the number of the oscil-
lations diminishes from 242 to 234, while the
dip varies from 75°76° to 50°67° of the centesi-
mal division. I endeavored to make these obser-
vations in calm weather, and when the vessel os-
cillated ina plane perpendicular to the plane of
the limb of the compass. ‘The oscillations of the
needle are scarcely disturbed by these of the ves-
sel, the latter having, in a uniform wind, all the re-


gularity of an isochronous pendulum. In gener-
al the rate, which the magnetic variations and the


may consider the points of the Globe that differ little in mag-
netic longitude as belonging to one system of forces. The
longitudes are computed from the point of intersection be-
tween the terrestrial and magnetic equators.


122


dip follow in’ different longitudes, appears mere
regular in the basin of the sea, than on continents
where the inequalities of the surface, and the na-
ture ‘of the rocks of which the surrounding moun-
tains are composed, cause frequent anomalies.
As to the duration of the oscillations, it some-
times undergoes irregularities, even in the middle
of ‘the seas*; no doubt because the stratum of
water is too thin, to prevent the needle from be-
ing affected by the unequal distribution of the
magnetic forces in the interior of the Globe.
The mathematical theory of the tides, it is ‘true,
makes it probable, that the mean depth of the
ocean is at least four leagues}; but we know,
from the aerostatic voyage of M. Gay-Lussac,
that in rising perpendicularly from the surface of
the Earth 3600 toises, no sensible change is per-
ceived in the intensity of the magnetism. We
cannot therefore admit, that the sea is much
deeper in those latitudes, where, under the same
magnetic parallel, we see the number of oscil-
lations diminish.

I did not regret my not having embarked the
apparatus, which Saussure calls a magnetometer *,


* See, in the Journal, my observations made in 34° 30‘,
and 14° 15? of north latitude.

+ From the small height of the tides, in open seas, and the
ratio of the density of the sea to that of the land. (La Place,
in the Mém. de Paris. 1776, p. 218.

+ Voyage dans les Alpes, §. 458 aud 2103. I find the first
notion of a magnetometrical apparatus in Hooke’s posthumous


123


and which Mr. Paul constructed for me at Geneva:
Tam inclined to think, that the variations of in-
tensity, believed to have been seen in the same
place, by means of this complicated instrument,
were the effect of involuntary illusion. M. de
Saussure thought, that the magnetic force diminish-
ed both on the mountains and during the great
heats of summer, while Mr. Blondeaw*. believed,
that he had found by an instrument of his own in-
vention, that a high temperature of the atmosphere
increased the intensity of the magnetism. Neither
of these assertions has been confirmed by accurate
experiments. There is no doubt, that periodical
variations in the intensity of the magnetic forces
exist in the same place ; as have already been dis- ,


covered in the variation, and even to a certain
point in the dipt of the magnetic needle: but these
variations of intensity appear to be infinitely feeble,
since they cannot be perceived, if we employ, in-


works. This natural philosopher, a man of extraordinary
sagacity, thought, in 2680, of measuring, by means of a
steelyard (statera), the force with which a magnet attracts
iron at different distances. © Posth. Works, p. 23. See also
Brook Taylor’s experiments, made in 1715, Phil. Trans.
vol. xxxi, p. 204.

* On the apparatus, which Mr. Blondeaw called magnetoe
meter, before Saussure, See Mém. de l*Académie de la
Marine de Brest, t. i, p. 421. ;

+ Horary and diurnal variations of the dip have not-yet
been observed ; but a slow change takes place in the space of
several years.


124


stead of the magnetometer with a perpendicular
rod terminated by a ball of iron, the delicate ap~
paratus of Coulumb, that. is, the oscillations of a
small needle contained in a glass case, and sus-
pended by an untwisted silk thread*. Besides,
the two instruments are not founded precisely on
the same principle; for the artificial magnet having
a quantity of fluid, which is as it were independ-
ant of that of the Earth, it may be conceived, that


* At the hospice of Mount-Cenis, and at Rome, Mr. Gay-
Lussac and myself have observed the oscillations of the same
needle by day and by night, in very different atmospherical


temperatures. The result of these experiments was, that, if


there exists a horary ‘variation in the intensity of the magnetic
forces, it does not alter the duration of the oscillations a
twelve hundredth, At Milan, the same needle made, on the
the 15th of April, 1805, in the interior of the city, near the
cathedral, sixty oscillations in 4”56°8”; and on the 7th of
October, in a meadow without the walls, in 4’ 56‘4'., At
Rome the duration of the oscillations was the same to a few
tenths ofa second, at the Villa Borghese, at Monte-Pincio,
and on the road to Tivoli. Experiments of this sort are sus-
ceptible of so great an exactness, that, in different experiments
made on the top of Mount Cenis, two hundred and fifty oscilla-
tions lasted 1229°3/, 1229°2", 122 and 1200°5/7, At
Rome we successively found, with a ‘chronometer of Breguet,
1169°2", 1169:2/”, 1169”, and 1169°5//.- I have thought it
right to note in this place these results, in order to prove, that
the experiments made on the intensity of the magnetic forces,
and recorded in this work, are not subject, in a small extent
of ground, to that great number of local aud horary influences,
which affect the observations on the variation of the magnetic


needle.


SEE,


ee


125


the magnetometer, conveyed to different climates,
cannot give the same) results as the oscillatory ap-
paratus.


In speaking of the physical observations made
during the passage from Ferrol to Cumana, I have
not mentioned my experiments on the purity of the
air, and its electric charge *. The former were
made by means of the nitrous gas in the narrow
tubes of Fontana’s eudiometer, and seemed to in-
dicate a greater portion of oxygen in the strata of
the atmosphere lying on the sea, than in those
which surround continents. We know at present,
that, if eudiometrical variations exist, they must be
less than two thousandths; and that the results I
obtained in 1799 do not merit confidence, on ac-
count of the too imperfect means then employed in
the analysis of the atmosphere.

With respect to electrometrical experiments, it
was impossible for us, either on board the Pizar-
ro, or any other vessel in which we afterward
sailed, to perceive at $ca the least sign of tension,
on making use of Bennet’s and Saussure’s excel-
lent electrometers. M. Bonpland has often taken
the pains to carry these- instruments, furnished


7

* I-took the greater interest in this kind of experiments,
because, a short time before my departure from Germany,' 1
had devoted myself to a very extensive inquiry into -atmos-
pherical electricity at the foot of the high mountains of
Salzburgh. The results of my labours are related in the
Journal de Physique, an 7.


126


with long’ metallic stems anda lighted match, on
the masts and yards farthest from the hull of the
vessel. ‘These trials were repeated in the South
Sea, on board a Spanish frigate with very high
masts; but the gold leaf, the dryest straws, or
little balls of elder pith, which are electroscopical
substances, never indicated the slightest diver-
gence. Is it the surface of the ocean, that de-
prives the lower strata of the atmosphere of its
electricity? or do the hull of the vessel, the sails,
and masts, act as powerful conductors?’ If this
action take place, why did not our electrometers
indicate electricy in open boats, while, on the
coasts of Peru, we have seen signs of a strong
tension, when.a damp wind blew from the sea?

It is the duty of a natural philosopher candidly
to relate the circumstances in which certain ex-
periments did not succeed. As two thirds of our
atmosphere lie on the basin of the seas, meteoro-
logy would gain considerably, if we knew the elec-
tric state of this part of the aerial ocean. We
may be tempted to repeat the experiments I have
just. described. with the microelectrometers of
Weiss, Gersdorf, and Maréchaux*. These in-
struments discover electriciiy near a wall, in the
shade. of a tree, every where almost, when: Ben-
‘net’s and Saussure’s electrometers indicate none.
They are preferable to electric points fastened to


* Gilbert, Annalen, B. xv, p. 98.


127


flying kites, or small balloons, because the elec-
tricity’ marked by these last.is most: frequently
the mere result) of the ascending motion, as has
been proved by the fine experiments of MrioEr-
man *, '

I have had no better success: than the majo-
rity of travellers in) ascertaining». the degree. of
saltness of the sea}, which varies with the Jati«
tude. From the small number. of :accurate obs
servations I obtained by means ofan’ areometer
‘by Dollond,. differing little from that of Nichol-
son, it follows, that the specific gravity-of the sea-
water augments pretty regularly from the coasts
of Gallicia to Teneriffe, while it diminishes ‘anew
from latitude: 22° 52 to 18°45. In these re-


gions, in the twenty-fourth and thirtieth: degrees
of longitude, adlarge stripe of the ocean is less
salt than the rest.

The muriat of soda amounts to 0:028 from the
parallel of 18° 8/ to that of 12° 34/ between'the


* bid. p. 389 and 503,

+ Mr. Proust, struck with the traces of mercury which he
he had met with in all the muriats of soda of Spain (Ni-
cholson’s Journ, of Nat. Pihil., 4to ed., vol. iii, p. 376), rea
quested me, at my departure from Madrid, to suspend, due
ring the passage, a thin plate of gold or silver, to the poop
of the vessel, to see if it would offer any traces of amalgama,
I followed the advice of this celebrated chemist, though T
had little confidence in the success of this experiment; but
the thread, to which the plate was tied, broke a few days
after I had put my apparatus into the water.


128


thirtieth and fifty fourth degrees of longitude.
It seemed to me, that, in the part of the Atlantic
comprised between the coasts of Portugal and
Cumana, the water is a little salter to the south
of the tropic of Cancer, than under the temperate
zone; and I should be induced to generalize this
fact, if the experiments made during Cook's last
voyage did not peremptorily prove, that this dit-
ference does not exist in every meridian. Horizon-
tal currents, which cross the ocean at its surface ;
and oblique currents which mingle the strata of wa-
ter, placed at different depths ; modify the saltness of
the seas; and supposing even, that the absolute
quantity of the muriats dissolved in the ocean has
not been augmented by the action of ‘submarine
volcanoes, but has remained the same for. thou-
sands of years, it is not the less probable, that the
distribution of this salt. in different parts of the
Globe, undergoes, from time to time, considerable
changes.


129


JOURNAL


OFA
VOYAGE FROM THE COASTS OF SPAIN
TO THOSE OF
SOUTH AMERICA,
OR FROM


CORUNNA TO CUMANA.,


[The longitude was found by a time-keeper of
Lewis Berthoud, No. 27. The temperature of
the ocean indicated is that of the surface of the
water. The cyanometrical observations were
made at the zenith. The thermometer exposed
to the air was placed to the windward, and
in the shade. When an observation of the Sun
at the meridian could not be obtained, Douwe’s
method of double altitudes was employed. The
latitudes and longitudes are given for noon. |


Dz f
i 4 North West


month, |!atitude.| long.


1799 |.
June 5 |43° 28/|/10° 45/| Departure from the port of Corunna.


Temperature of the ocean, 15°4° cen-


PHYSICAL OBSERVATIONS.


tesimal: air 10'2°,
Hygrometer, whalebone, 44°, or 804°
of Saussure’s hair hygrometer,


K


Days |
of an North |
pi Dern Jat.
June 5
}
\
i
\
6 |44 0
7 {42 7
8 |41 0
9 {39 10


a


West
long.


ig) So


15 24


PHYSICAL OBSERVATIONS.


1


43° 28/\10° 45/\Cyanometer, 13°. Floating clouds ;


wind N.E. fresh; rough sea.

Dip of the magnetic needle observed
at the port of Ferrol, 76°6°, centi-
grade division.

Intensity of the magnetic forces, in

Gallicia, expressed by 243 oscilla-


tions in ten minutes of time.


|Temperature of the sea, 16°. ‘l'emper-
ature of the air, 9°; brisk gale; the


sea rough and very stormy.


Beyond the parallel of Cape Finisterre,
at forty-two leagues distance from
this cape. Gentle gale, N.N.E;
air, 187°.


Cyanometer, 14°.


Wind north east, very weak, Temp.
of the air, 12°5°.
Hygrometer, 45°6° Deluc (82° Saus-


sure).


16 18


Temperature of the sea, 15°; temp.
of the air, 14° 5’; northerly wind,


feeble ; serene sky.


Thermometer exposed to the sun,


16°.9’; Sun’s force, 2° 4”; in the
parallel of Peniche.

Cyanometer, 15° (the blue of the ocean
measured with the same instrument
35°). Hygrometer the whole day,
§1°—-83° Saussure.


|
|


H.-S TT OF
eee | Marth | West


of the
month, | _ lat. long.


PHYSICAL OBSERVATIONS.


38° 52’ and longitude 16° 22/)
157 One

Magnetic intensity, 242 oscillations ;
good observation.

The current, which sets E. by S, and


June 9 | 39° 101 16° 187|Dip of the magnetic needle (latitude
S. E., begins to be felt.


almost in-the parallel of Cape St.
Vincent, and between this cape
and the Azores at eighty leagues to
the west of the cape.

Temperature of the ocean, 15:2°;
temp. of the air, 15¢ ; thermometer
exposed to the Sun, 18°70; Sun’s
force, 3°79.

Hygrometer at noon, 47° Deluc (83°£«
Saussure). At three in the after-
noon, 50° Deluc. (85:20 Sauss.)

Dip of the magnetic needle, 75°35° ;
oscillations 242.

Cyanometer, 149; blue color of the sea,


10 |37 26 16 [ north-west wind, fine weather,


nearly calm, 44¢


a a
11 | 36 4/17 5 |Temperature of the sea, 15°20 ; temp.


of the air, 18:6; weather a little
cloudy. At seven in the evening,
temp. of the sea, still 15°2°3
temp. of the air, 17:4°; sea some-
what ruffled.

Hygrometer, at seven in the evening,
51° Deluc (86-4¢ Saussure).


K Q


132


Days
| arora | ares PHYSICAL OBSERVATIONS.


of the
maonth lat. long.


Junel@| 38° 817° 15/| Calm, hazy weather; a little rain at
nine in the morning; at fifty
leagues distance from the coasts of
Africa, to the west of Cape Blanco.

Temperature of the sea, 16°2° ; temp
of the air, 20°6°. At eight in the
evening, the sea 162°; the air
15:79.

| Hygrometer, 47°8° Deluc (84% Saus-


sure).


13°|34 30\ 16 55| Variable weather, calm, rainy. From
eleven in the morning clear sky,
without clouds; in the night, breeze
from the west.

Temperature of the sea, 16°3° (at-a
depth of fifteen metres, 15:7°) ;
temperature of the air, 19°75
thermometer exposed to the Sun
20°32; Sun’s force 0°5° 5 temper-
ature of the air at eleven at night,
1SH/Sh

Hygrometer, 545° Deluc (87°5 Saus-
sure).

Cyanometer, 16°; blue colour of the

~ sea 34°. The sky has a reddish
blue tint, almost violet, a singular
phenomenon, which I have also
sometimes observed in the Pacific
Ocean, especially in the southern

' hemisphere, and without the sea
being green,


133


~ Days
of the
month,


North West


lat. long. PHYSICAL OBSERVATIONS.


June 13/349 30/|16° 55"| Dip of the magnetic needle, 73:0°,


found in a dead calm.
Magnetic intensity, 234 oscillations.


To the east of the isle of Madeira,
at forty-five leagues distance ;
strong breeze from the west; sea
very rough.

Temperature of the sea, notwith-
standing the height of the waves,
17°7°; temperature of the air,
16°8e.

Dip. of the magnetic needle, 71°90,
somewhat doubtful (latitude 31° 467
longitude 17° 4/). |

Magnetic intensity, 237, very doubtful.


16 54] Fine weather, sea almost entirely calm.


Temperature of the water, 18°7°:
temperature of the air 20°6°.


Progressive variations of the hygro-
meter and thermometer observed
carefully in the shade, and four


metres above the surface of the
ocean:


Sanssure’s Centigrade
Hours. hygrom. therm.
At2it 85°3% = 212° calm.


85:7 20°0 little wind.
85°8 20:0 idem.
8593 214 calm.
842 23°7 idem.
84:3. 22°5 idem.
85°2 20°0 idem.
86°2 19'8 idem.


134
SC
Days |
of ihe Nowbaly erst PHYSICAL OBSERVATIONS
maniti lat. long. is


June 15}30° 36/\16° 54/| Sun's force, 3-1° ; thermometer in the
shade, 20°6°; thermometer exposed
to the Sun, 23 7e.

Between Cape Aguer and the Salvage
islands, twenty-three leagues east
of the latter. Pilot’s reckoning,
compared with the longitudes given
by the marine time-keeper, ~indi-
cates a current setting toward the
south-east.


16 |29 18| 16 40} Fine weather; westerly wind, very
feeble; near the western coasts of
the island of Lanzerota.

Temperature of the ocean, 19°83 ; air,
18-ge.


-40°),
Sun's force, 3°6°; thermometer ex-
posed to the Sun, 225°.
Variations of the hygrometer and
thermometer, the air being very
little agitated.


Saussure’s Centigrade
Hours. Hygrometer. Thermometer.
214 85°8° 19.5°
291 85°0 18°7
23d 84°8 18°7
ot 83'8 20°0
; 1z 834 Zi-2
24 $3°3 21:8
34 83°5 22°5
4x 83°5 21:2
53 83°8 21:2
64 85:0 19°3


Cyanometer, 22° (colour of the sea .


SP ear eae en O


ae ET a


re


t
t
i


a
of a North
lat.


month.


West


long. PHYSICAL OBSERVATIONS.


June.17|29° 214 16° 6’) Clear weather, calm at intervals :’on
| the coasts of the small island of
Graciosa, and in the archipelago
of islets that lie to the north of it.
Temperature of the Ocean, in the
channel, between the islands of
Alegranza and Santa Clara, where


i the sea is only sixty-two metres
deep, 17°8°, consequently ss
colder than in the open sea, in the
same parallel. Temperature of the


air, 20°. .


\{
18 |29 5|17,10| Temperature of the sea, far beyond
| soundings, 18°7; temperature of
|
i the air, 183: gentle breeze; clear
i weather. Sun’s force, 1°6°; ther-
|


mometer exposed to the Sun, 19°9°.


| 19 | 28 28118 33) Arrival in the road of Santa Cruz in
| the island of Teneriffe.
Dip of the magnetic needle, 69°35°.
Magnetic Intensity, 238 oscillations.
Abode at the island of Teneriffe, from
the 19th to the 25th of June.


| 25° 126 51|19 13| Temperature of the sea, 20°; air,


18°8°; strong breeze at N. Ki.


96 |25 15| 20 17| Temperature of the ocean, 20°; teme


perature of the air, 212°.
Dip of the magnetic needle, 67°60":
very good observation (lat, 24° 537,
~ and long. 20° 58”).


Days
of the |


ort
t.
month


|

|

isecden PHUYSICAL OBSERVATIONS.
4 - =


June 26 25° 15/120° 17’| fntensity, 239 oscillations, computed
in calm weather, to the south-west
of Cape Bojador, at 62 leagues


distance.


| 22 13 | Sea, 20°; air, 20°1°: fresh breeze
from the N. E., the Sun’s force
appearing only 2°. In the night,


temperature of the air 19°3°.


25 23 | Air, 22°; brisk wind from theN. E.:
90 leagues north of Cape Verd.
Dip of the magnetic needle, 64°65°:
very good observation (lat. 2f° 29/,
and long. 25° 427),
Oscillations 937.


29 | 20 8/28 51 | Temperature of the sea, 21-2°; air,
20°. From ten in the morning to
five in the evening, the thermome-
ter did not vary 08°, while the
breeze blew very strong.

Dip of the magnetic needle, 63°520,
Oscillations 236 (at 60 leagues
N. N. W. of ihe island of Santa
Antonio): latitude 19° 54/, longi-
tude 28° 45%,


30 | 18 53/30 41 | Lemperature of the sea, 21°89; tem-
perature of the air, 21°2°; fine
weather,

Cyanometer, 22°4°,
Hygrometer, 44° Deluc (81°5° Saus-
sure),


Days
of the
month,


North
lat.


West


long. PHYSICAL OBSERVATIONS,


July 1|


j

17° 57%33° 144 Sea, 22-4°; air 248° Wind N.E.,
moderate ; cloudy weather. Due
ring the night thick fog, which
lowered the thermometer at one in


the morning to 21°3°, :


17 26|35 8} Sea, 22°6°; air, 23°: dull weather ;
a few squalls. Few variations“in
the meteorological instruments.


Centig. Deluc’s
Hours therm. hygrom.


Laftern. 227° 51° (86 Saus.)
Z 229 51:25 raw weather
4 23:0 51-2 | but without
rain; wind
5 $29" 53°2 (N IE Ree.
Qevening 22-2  5§-9J ble.


10 223) 57 (89° Saus.)


oo


16 41/36 31 | Temperature of the sea, 2%5°.. Va-
| riations of the instruments :

Deluc’s
hrs, ther. hygrom.
V7 22:79 56-8. (88-10 Saus.) dull.
18 226 57-0 Sun rising, very soft rain
20 22:6 562 dull.


228 560 | very soft rain, scatter-
22'8 59-0 | ed drops, which do not
293-1 59+ ioe ‘h the hygrometer,

i and scarcely any way
227 62-0 | affect the hygroscopical
21:8 62-2 ! state of theair.


22-7 57:0 blue, stars beautiful.


16 19/39 19 Sea, 22°5; air, 22°, ;
| Cyunometer, 23°5° . Sky very clear,
At night, wind N. E. very fresh,
followed by squalls, and electric
rain.


138


"ayeer (me
of oe North West


PHYSICAL OBSERVATIONS.
month. lat. long.


|
July 4|16° 19%, 39° 191 Thermometer, the whole day, between
220 and 23°69; hugrometer. bee
tween 87° and 89°G6e, Saussures


division.


15 18} 42 21] Sea, 23°0°; air 22-2.
Variations of the meteorological in-


struments ;


: h Centig. Delue’s
a ae therm. hygrom.


21°90 61°2°
23°2 61:5

23°4 60:0

23°4 61°2

23:1 63°0

23°3 63:4
Dull and cloudy weather.


at 24


co © O Ww


~
wo D>


6 14 57 | 44 40 | Temperature of the Ocean,23'7°; temp.
of the air, 22'So,


Deluc’s
hygrom.


15 226° «68-59 7D
18 22°7 66°5
20 23 65'5 Dull and
22 «23°1 *° 66°4 ‘ cloudy
0. 23°5 65:0 weather.
7 23°6 (ays
POS" 93-5... O0:0.: J

Saussure’s hygrometer would have


Hrs, Therm.


remained between 92°8° and
94°4°.


i 14 20147 38|In the midst of the ocean between
Africa and South America, easter-


139


Days
of the
month.


North
lat


West


long. PHYSICAL OBSERVATIONS.


July 7} 14° 20}47° 387] ly wind very brisk, sky slightly
dull; sea very fine.


Deluc’s
hygrom.


Hrs. Therm.
14. 23:70 + 64*5° (92°4° Sauss.)

CUSED OG 26250

20. 23°3 61

O 244 58°5

4 . 24°2  56°0 (88°3° Sauss.)
SMITE ro}! at's 7/9

Tis 23.64, Ols0

Cyanometer at 0" 30/, the sky being
without vapors, 32°5°.

Dip of the magnetic needle £6°30° ;
oscillations, 239; good observa-
tion (latitude 14° 15% and long.
48° 3/).


|
|


8 13 51| 49 43] Temperature of the ocean, 24°7° ;

temp. of the air, 23°6°.

Cyanometer only 17°, and yet the sky
perfectly blue, without clouds or
visible vapours: blue color of the
ocean, 33°.

Fine breeze, sea beautiful, at 200
leagues distance from French Guy-
ana to the N. N. i.


Deluc’s
hygrom.


20 CD a Me

Dee 23) ave

4 23:0 56-2 (88°30 Sauss.)
fg 22°38 59°0

3 RN CYR: 62°2 (91'4 Sauss.)


Hrs. ‘Therm.


jean North West


a anth: lat. long.


140


PHYSICAL OBSERVATIONS.


July.9} 13° 27)52° 53/7


12 34) 54 19


Sea rough. Pretty strong breeze.

Dip of the magnetic needle, 50°67° s
good,

Oscillations, 234; a little doubtful.


| I'ine breeze, very clear sky.

| Cyanometer only 16°; color of the
sea 35°.

Temperature of the air from 17" to
105 between 24°6° and 23°38.

Hygrometer, during this time, be-~


tween $8°5° and 90o Saussure.
&


Fine weather, light wind.
Centig. Deluc’s
therm. hygrom,


Hours.
18 24°2° 60°
20 24°8 59
QA. 2522 58°83
23 2520 59
0 25:2 58°5
2 20:0. 3. 57
8 2520) 60
11 237 58
Hygrometer of Saussure constantly
between 89° and 90°79; on the


meridian of Surinam, at 89 leagues


distance from .the Orinoeo and
from Barbadses; during the night
a little rain anda beautiful lunar
rainbow.


July 12|10° 467)


E
:


141
Days |
sf tl North West
of the > , i207 AT
, PHYSICAL OBSERVATIONS.
goenth. fat. long. Pa


4


60° 547! A smart breeze, particularly during


| the night; wind east, pretty

strong; sea rough; very fiae sky,
not free from vapours.

Temperature of the ocean, 25°8°;
temp. of the air, 25°3°.

| Cyanometer, 14°4°.

Saussure’s hygrometer, the whole day,
from 89°5° to 90°.

Dip of the magnetic needle, 46°95° ;
oscillations, 229 (good observa.
tion).


11 16|62 45 Cloudy, with squalls; very strong
east wind; very high sea; a little
rain: distance one ae east-
south-east of the north cape of the
island of Tobago.

Temperature of the ocean, 25°89;
temp. of the air, 25°1°.

Flygrometer, from 90° to 91°8° (Sause
sure’s division).


ce ee. an ot st bs i aa a .


14 | 11 1164 51| Temperature of the ocean, 256°5


but on the shoal, which extends
from the island of Tobago to that
| of Grenada, 23:1°; temp. of the
air, 25°.
Saussure’s hygrometer 91°5° to 92°7°.
: Dip of the magnetic needle, 47'5°;
oscillations, 237 3 good observa-
tion. The mountainous coast of
Paria seen at 4 leagues distance:
slight breeze; fine and serene wea-
ther.


142
x ; sa


ote he ig PHYSICAL OBSERVATIONS.
me e
enna goer a do ee

July 15)10° 517/66° 12’ Wind north-east, feeble; fair; sea
very fine.

Temperature of the ocean, on the
shoal near Punta Araya, 23-40 ;
open sea, 25:2°; and at five miles
distance N.N.E. of the port of
Cumana the temperature of the


surface of the ocean was only
22°2°, though we had no bottom
at sixty fathoms depth. Is this
cold owing to the current, that
comes from the shoals of the island


of Margaretta? In very narrow


seas, for instance in the Baltic,
the temperature of the water
changes also very suddenly. In


the port of Cumana, the water of
the sea kept in 1799 and 1800
constantly between 25 and 26 de-
grees, the temperature at low wa-
ter being often 0-8 higher than at
high water.

Temperature of the air, 28°7°,

Hygrometer, 86° Saussure.


10 28} 66 30| Arrived at the port of Cumana.


*


|
q


143


DETERMINATION OF THE HEIGTHS OF SEVERAL
‘POINTS IN THE ISLAND OF TENERIFFE.


I shall, in this dissertation, discuss the trigono-
metrical and barometrical measurements, made
within the last century, by various travellers, who
have visited the island of Teneriffe; and at the
same time give an historical sketch of the attempts,
which ‘have been made to ascertain the height
of the Peak of Teyde, and of the most remark-
able points on the road leading to the top of
this volcano. It is highly interesting, not to the
science of geology alone, to know with preci-
sion the absolute height of this mountain; this
knowledge is also necessary to perfect the charts
of the Canary Islands, because Messrs. de
Borda and Varela, at the time of the voyage
of the frigate la Boussole, made use of the ver-
tical angles of the Peak and the azimuths, to
ascertain the relative distances of Teneriffe, Go-
mera, and Palma.

Although as early as the year - 1648, the ex-
periments of Pascal and Perrier had proved,
that the barometer might be successfully applied
to measures of height, it is however only since
the beginning of the 18th century, that we have
accurate ideas of the elevation of a few moun-
tains. Riccoli still gave ten Italian miles, and
Nichols fifteen leagues of height to the Peak


144


of Teyde*. Eden did not attempt to measure
the height, though he reached the summit of the
volcano in 1715. His voyage however, the
earliest that was published, fixed the attention of
the geographers and natural philosophers of Eu-


rope; and the first attempt at measuring the height
of the Peak was made by P. Feuillée} in 1724. This
traveller found by trigonometrical measurement
the absolute height to be 2213 toises. La Caille
speaking of this measurement in the Memoirs of
the Academy §, expressed his doubts of the ac-
curacy of the result. These doubts have been
revived by Bouguer; who, in fixing the limits
of the perpetual snows under different zones, has
examined with bis usual sagacity P. Feuillée’s
operations; and he concludes, that the height
of the Peak does not exceed 2069 toises ||.


* Zach, Journ. Astron., 1800, t. i, p. 396. Vieyra, No-
ticias Historicas, t. i, p. 234.

+ Phil. Trans., vol xxvil, p. 317.

{ Manuscript Journal of Pére Feuillée.

§ Mem. de l’Académie, 1746, p. 143. Voy. de la Flore,
tty pe an

|| Fig. dela Terre, p. 48. Deluc, Rech. sur les Mod. de
yAtmocephére, § 280 and 763. Notwithstanding the exami-
nation of Bouguer, and the well known measurement of Borda,
we still find, in several physical works, the height of the
Peak estimated at 2097, 2180, and 2270 toises. See the
‘third edition of Marsden’s valuable History of Sumatra, pub-
lished in 1811, p. 14; and Breislack’s Geology, t. i, p. 6,
in which work the table of heights swarms with typogra-
phical errors.


145


There exists also another measurement of this
mountain, made during the voyage of P. Feuil-
lée by M. Verguin. This measurement, merely
barometrical, has been hitherto neglected; be-
cause, having been calculated according to the
method of Cassini, it had given the excesssiye
height of 2624 toises*. This error, which ex-
ceeds two fifths of the total height of the vol-
cano, will be reduced to one twentieth, if the
method of Laplace, and the coefficient of Ra-
mond, be applied to the observations of M. Ver-
guin; and if we suppose, what is probable enough
in a latitude so southerly, that the pressure of
the air did not very sensibly change in the space
of three days.. On the 31st of July, 1724, P.
Feuillée’s barometer, at the Port of Orotava,
stood at 27 inches, 9°7 lines. On the 3d of
August the same instrument was found on Monte
Verde at 23 inches, 0 lines, and at the top of
the Peak at 17 inches, 5 lines. P. Feuillée men-
tions neither the temperature of the air at the
two stations, nor the correspondent observations
made at the same hours on the coast. ‘Travel-
Jers themselves, at that time, constructed their
barometers on the spot; and meteorological in-
struments were utterly unknown at Orotava and
at Santa Cruz. The observation on the top of
the volcano having been made in a season when


* Mém. de l’Académie, 1733, p, 45,
. IT, L


146


the variation ef the barometer, on the coasts cf
Teneriffe, seldom exceed in the space of three
days one or two lines, we may, in calculating
the height of the Peak, take for our basis the
height of the mercury observed on the 3lst of
July. Supposing twenty-two centesumal degrees
for the temperature of the coast several hours be-
fore the Sun passed the meridian, and five de-
grees for the temperature of the air at the top
of the volcano, which is conformable to the law
of decrement of heat in those regions ; I find, by
Mr. Laplace’s method, two thousand and twenty
five toises, or one hundred and twenty toises more
than is given by the trigonometric measurement
of M. de Borda. Whatever alteration we make
in the estimation of the temperature, and of the
barometrical height at Orotava, it will still be
found, and this fact is very. remarkable, that the
barometric measurement of M. Verguin is much
more accurate than the geometric measurement
of P. Feuillée. The error of the latter, in which
the level of the ground employed for the mea-
surement of the base was neglected, is almost
three times as great as the error of the barome-
tric measurement, which we have just stated.

The observations, which P. Feuillée made at
the town of Laguna, indicate nearly the absolute
height of this place, so well known for its great
coolness. Taking the barometrical average of two
months, during which the extreme deviations


147


amounted only to four or five lines, we find at
Laguna 25 inches, 11 linés, and at the port of
Orotava 27 inches, 10 lines. Now, supposing the
temperatures of these two stations at fifteen and
twenty degrees of Reaumur’s thermometer, I obs
tain by Laplace’s method, three hundred and thir-
teen toises for the town of Laguna. This height
would be augmented only sixty-six toises, or one
fifth, if 28 inches 3 lines were taken for the
mean height of the column of mercury at the port
of Orotava; though it is well known, that P.
Feuillée’s barometer, by no means well freed from
air, was constantly six or eight lines, er even more,
too low*. Mr. Lichtenstein, who has made an
interesting journey into the interior of Africa,
reckons the absolute height of Laguna two or
three thousand feet above the level of the
coasts f. » OE

Adanson, in his voyage to Senegal }, states,
“that the elevation of the Peak of Teyde (in
1749) was found to ‘be more than two thousand
toises.”” It is probable that this result was found-
ed on a base measured by the log, and or an
operation made under sail by M. Daprés de


* Feuillée’s barometer at the top of the Peak, 17 inches
5 lines. Borda’s barometer at the same point, 18 inches
O lines, Lamanon’s barometer, 18 inches 4 lines,

+ Allgem. Geog, Ephemer, 1806, p. 1. .

t Vol. i, p..g.


LQ.


148


Mannevilette, commander of the vessel which
Adanson was on board. .

Dr. Heberden*, in the narrative of his excur-
sion to the top of the Peak in 1752, says he found
the absolute elevation of the volcano to be 15396
English feet, or 2408 toises. “‘ This result,” adds
he, “has been confirmed by two other opera.
tions, which I have successively executed: it is
also entirely conformable to the results of two
trigonometrical operations made long before by
Mr. John Cross, English consul at Santa Cruz
in Teneriffe.” Here are five measurements, which
it is stated agree perfectly well with each other,
and in which there is an error of more than five
hundred toises, or a fourth part of the total
height of the Peak. Dr. Heberden lived seven
years at Orotava; we must regret, that he enters ©
into no detail on the nature of the instruments
employed by him and Mr..Cross, or the values
of the angles, or the length and levelling of the ©
base, on which the triangles repose. The whole
of these operations, which we have just mentioned,
deserve no more credit than those of Don Ma-
nuel Hernandez +; who asserts, that he found, in
1742, by geometrical measurement, the height of


* Phil. Trans. vol. xlvii, p. 353. Cook’s second Voyage
round the World, vol. ii, p. 282. Barrow, Voyage a la
Cochin Chine, t. 1, p. 69.

+ Borda, Voyage de la Flore, t. 1, p. 88.


149


the volcano to be 2658 toises, and consequently
200 toises higher than Mount Blanc.

We are indebted to Borda for the knowledge
of the real elevation-of the volcano of Teneriffe.
This excellent geometrician obtained an exact re-
sult after having fallen into an error, which he
attributes to the negligence of one of his coadju-
tors. He took three measurements of the Peak;
two geometrical, and one barometrical. The first


geometrical measurement *, executed in 1771,
gave only 1742 toises; and as long as it was
considered as accurate, Borda and Pingré found,
by operations made under sail, the height of the
Peak 1701 toisest.’ Happily Borda visited the
Canary Islands a second time, in 1776, conjointly .


with Mr. de Chastenet de Puységur ; and he then
executed a more accurate trigonometrical mea-
- surement, of which he published the result only -
in his Supplement to the Voyage of the Flora f.
We there find “‘ that the principal cduse of the
error committed in 1771 had been a mistake in
the indication of an angle, minuted in the regis-
gister as being thirty-three minutes, while it was
in reality found to be’ fifty-three minutes.”

The result of the trigonometrical measurement


* Borda, Voy. de la Flore; t. i, p. 89.

+ “ All the parts of our work reciprocally confirmed each
other, and concurred in the same determination.” Ibid., t. i,
p- 120. Journ. de Phys. 1776, p. 66; and 1779, p. 129.

fiVoli, i, poid7e)


150


made in 1776 is 1905 toises; it is this which
is now most generally adopted, and on which is
in great part founded the position of the Canary
- Islands, in Varela’s and de Borda’s charts. I
trust, that I shall render a service to naturalists,
philosophers, and navigators, in here recording
the detail of the operations made during the voy-
age of «the frigate la- Boussole, and taken from
the valuable manuscript which I mentioned in the
preceding chapter*. It were to be wished, that
M. de Borda’s Journal was published entire. The
results it contains are found in the Carte parti-
culiére des Isles Canaries, d'apres les Observations
de la Boussole et del’ Espiégle, 1776. This chart,
the best of all that have hitherto appeared, forms
a part of the collection published by the Dépdt
of the Marine, at Paris.

“‘ The measurement of the Peak of Teneriffe,”
says M. de Borda, “ was not an object of mere
curiosity, but was essentially connected with our
nautical labors. It was necessary for us to know
the exact height of this volcano, in order to avail
ourselves of the observations of apparent height
which we had made at several points of the island
of Teneriffe, Gomera}, and Canary, and which


* Vol. i,.p.140. The manuscript of the Dépdt is 190


pages in 4to; it was copied from the original, by M. de


Fleurieu, I am indebted for the communication of it*to the
kindness of Viceadmiral Rosily. ,
+ At the port of Gomera, for instance, M. de Borda


15}
were to serve for ascertaining the longitudes and
latitudes of those points. “

“The ground in the neighbourhood of the port
of Orotava being unequal, and intersected with
yales, it was not possible for us to find a_ base
extensive enough to determine the distance of the
Peak by a single triangle, and we employed three.
We measured near La Paz, a country house of
Mr. Cologan, our first basis*, a b, of 229°5 toises ;
by means of this we calculated asecond, ¢ ¢, of
614 toises; and afterward a third, cd, of 1526
toises. The point c was the summit of the hill,
called by the natives the Montanne del Puerto,
which commands the town of Orotava. The sta-
tion d is the western extremity of a gallery of the
house of Colonel, Franqui, at the villa del Oro-
tava, near the dragon-tree s0 celebrated for its
size and age. It appears that the base of P.
Feuillée had been measured on a plain sufficiently
large, but not horizontal, at the foot of the hill of
la Paz, near Mr. Cologan’s country house. Our
base a 6 was measured successively by two dif-
ferent parties: the first found it 1377 feet 6 in-
ches, the second 1377 feet, 8 inches, 6 lines.
Both made use of three rods of fifteen feet each,


found the angle of altitude of the Peak 4° 1% An azimuth
placed the mountain East 24° £7’ north. Supposing its
vation above the level of the ocean 1904 toises, we find


the port of Gomera distarit from the Peak 0° 27’ £876.


* See Plate 1.


152


carefully measured by a three foot rule, which
M. Varela had compared at Cadiz with the Pe-
ruvian toise of Mr. Godin. The following were
the angles taken with a quadrant of a foot ra-
dius, made by Ramsden,


Triangle abc Triangle acd. Triangle c Pd
bac = 85°53’ 5 | dac = 85° 58’ 40” led P = 94° 0! 40”
abe=73 8 55 |dcaz70 20 55 Libel EM OME. T NE 0)
ier = 20roy Vo lad oi OS 40" Ss ‘


Ne ee


180 0. 5 eet OUS OAS


We measured the three angles of the triangles
abcand acd. As in the triangle c Pd this
kind of verification could. not be employed, I
measured with the greatest exactness the two
angles cd P,and dc P, by means of a reflecting
circle; and I found only from 8 to 10 seconds of
difference. Hence it follows, that the angle at
the Peak, dP c, is 9° 2520”. We find also ac
= 3686:2 feet; ad = 8647°3 feet; cd — 9159°5
feet; c P = 55814°6 feet; and dP — 544920: 9
feet. The vertical angles give the foll owing heights
of the Peak, or of the different stations from one
another. Altitude of the Peak seen from point
d, = 10423°2 feet; the same seen from the point
¢, = 11116 feet; that of the point d above the
point 4, = 733°6 feet; the same above the point c
== 687°6 feet; and that of the point c above the
point @ = 47°3 feet. From these data, the height


155


Feet.


of the Peak above the point d being . 10493°2
if we add the height of the point d above

the point a . . ;
we have a first height of the Peak above

the point a . ; . 111568
In the same manner, that of the Peak

above the point c being - 11116°0
If we add that of the point c above the’

point @ 1 4d t 47°3
we have a second height of the Peak

above the pointa . «nbld 63a


Taking the mean of these two results, we find
11160 feet; and on deducting for the effect of
the refraction 13°7 feet; we have 11146°3 feet.
It now remains to determine the height of the
point a above the level of the Ocean. The depres-


sion of the horizon of the sea, at a, was 17’ 77’, .
and at d, 32’ 25”, According to these depres-
sions, the point @ is raised above the level of
the Ocean 283°6 feet; and on adding this quan-
tity to the height of the Peak* above the point


* M. de Borda had found, on his first calculation, 1904
toises, assuming nineteen feet for the effect of the refraction. He
has not indicated the apparent altitudes ; but we may deduce
them from the values of d Pand «¢ P. At c the Peak must
have subtended a vertical angle of 11°29’ 18//, A slight
error appears in the altitudes of d above c, and of c above a.
At the port of Orotava, at the house of Mr. Cologan, the
apparent altitude of the voleano was found to be 11° 297 35//,
An azimuth -gave for the position South 29° 44/ West,
whence results a distance of 0° 97 45”,


154


a, we have 11430 fect absolute height, or 1905
toises.”

The third measurement made by M. de Borda
was a barometrical one. We have extracted the
following details also from the Manuscript of the
Dépot, and find them nearly agreeing with the
results published by Mr. Cavanilles in 1799, from
the Manuscript of Don Jose Varela in the 4z-
ales de Ciencias natuyales*. “MM. de Borda left
Santa Cruz the 27th of September, 1776. He
was accompanied by forty persons, among whom
were eleven officers of the French and Spanish
navy. They were provided with variation’ com-
passes and dipping needles, a time-keeper, seve-
ral thermometers, and two excellent barometers,
which had been compared, at the port of Orotava,
with the barometer of Mr. Pasley, a Scotch mer-
chanty. On their return from the Peak, these
instruments were verified anew; the difference
remained absolutely the same, and by the inter-
polation of a great number of observations made
hourly by Mr. Pasley, the following differences
were found:


A BS p. 295. I know not from what misunderstanding
it is asserted, in this same work (t. i, p. 85), that I had
found the height of the Peak 1917 toises.

+ Mr. Pasley declared, that he had’ not observed, for sevee


ral years, Reaumur’s thermometer, at the port of Orotaya,
above 22°79, or below 12°5°.


2S


oul
-UJOTU OY} UL Ud} Joie JP


“SULUIOU
ay} Ul Jysia saye jypepy


“SUTUIOUL OY] UL UDA
J-os Joye soynuitd Ayuda],


Q


‘SuIUIAD OY} UL IYO


0.&
P.O


8G


tea


0.8
8.6


“sy IeUlay


wunvay |


Jo apRag
“11 oy}


OL el Ot


: @ Hog
yeeg oy} jo young


Wog
uo sq} JO 4007


° °


20g
901 JO UIIARD


*- 40g :
SysoY 9 Jo UOTRAg


*sdyOU *saut "saya
gee :
—-
*S19JIMIOIV


a


BAVIOI(C) JO Og


onfeuslog Jap ourg


“suey


156


“From eight in the evening of the 30th of
September, to half after ten in the morning, of |
the first of October, the barometer bad varied
only 0°2 of aline. According to the barometric
method of Deluc*, we find the following heights»
adding 11 toises je the elevation of Mr. Pasley’s
house above the level-of the sea: Pino del Dorna-
jito, 516 toises ; Station of the Rocks, 1518 toises >
Cavern of Ice, 1757 toises; foot of the Piton’
1847 toises; Summit of the Peak, 1929 toises.”
I have recalculated M. de Borda’s obserya-
tions, conjointly with M. Matthieu, after the
method of M. Laplace; and, supposing the
temperature of mercury equal to that of the airs
and reducing the station to the level of the sea, we
obtained for the Pino del Dornajito 533 toises ; for
the Estancia de los Ingleses, 1555 toises; for the
Cavern of Ice, 1799 toises; for the Foot of the
Piton, 1892 toises; for the Top of the Volcano,
1976 toises. This last result differs from that of
the trigonometrical measurement twice as much
as. the height obtained by the formula of Deluc.
We shall discuss farther on the causes of error,
that may have affected the particular operations.

It commonly happens, when the application


* Compare Fleurieu in Marchand’s Voyage, t. ii, p11,
Forster (Observat, during 2 Voy. round the World, vol. i, p.
22) allows the Peak 12340 englis sh feet, or 1931 toises, from
Borda’s barometrical measurement.


157


of small corrections to barometrical and thermo-
metrical heights is in question, that travellers, who
have made observations together, do not fix on
the same numbers, as means of good observa-
tions.

Messrs. Varela and Arguedas give, in their
memoir on the measurement of the Peak, . the
following barometrical heights :


inch. line


. Pino del Dornajito 25 0°86 Th. 17° R.
Level of the Sea 28 4°00 19>


(TSS RTF RATIO IE
. EstaciondelosIngleses 19 9°81
Level of the Sea DSaeS 7o


. Cueva dela Nieva 18 8°93
Level of the Sea 98 3°51


. Foot of the Sugar Loaf 18 3.89
Level of the Sea 98:1 3°51


. Top of the Peak 18 O11
Level of the Sea 981 io" TS


Mr. Varela finds, I know not after what formula,
534 toises for the first station, 1531 toises for these-
cond station, 1780 toises for the third station, 1864.
toises for the fourth station, and 1940 for the fifth
station. ‘The small differences which may be ob_
served between the barometrical heights indicated


158


by the Spanish navigators, and those laid down
by M. de Borda, arise in a great measure from
the one being reduced to the level of the sea, while
the others refer to the height of the ground where
stands Mr. Pasley’s house.

At the time of La Pérouse’s Vewees in 1785,
M. Lamanon carried a barometer to the top of the
Peak of Teneriffe. The observation of this natu-
ralist*, calculated by Mr. von Zach, gives, by
Mr. Deluc’s method, 1856 toises; by that of Sir
G. Shuckburgh, 1893 toises and by that of Roy,
1889 toises. ‘The result of the same barometric
observation, according to M. Laplace’s formuta,
is 1902 toises.

Mr. Johnstone, measuring a base by meansof the
log, found the height of the Peak to be 2093
toisest. M,. de Churruca in a voyage to the
Straits of Magellan, made in 1788, attempted
also to determine the height of the volcano, by a
geometrical operation while under sail Gat He
found it 2193 toises, ** congratulating himself on
having attained a greater exactness than could


* See Vol. I, p. 185, Zache Journ. Astron., 1800, p.
396. Weare susprised to see, that, at a time when the use-
ful labors of Deluc, Shuckburgh, and Tremblay, on the
barometie formulas, had long been known, the editor of La
Pérouse’s voyage (t. il, p. 18) should have expressed so many
doubts of the results obtained by the barometer.

+ Lord Macartney’s Voyage, t. i, p. 158.

{ Viage al Magellanes, Apendice, p. 10,


159


reasonably have been expected (toda esperanza
vacional), since the barometrical heights calcula-
ted by Bezout* gave the same number.of toises.”
It is the same with the measurement of moun-
tains, as with the determinations of’ latitudes and
longitudes. ‘The observers are satisfied with
their operations, when they find them agree.
with some old results, to which they give the pre-
ference above all others.

M. Cordier measured the Peak on the 16th of
April, 1803, employing Mossy’s barometer,
which he had boiled the preceding evening, and
in very fine and settled weather, which lasted a
month. ‘“ The instruments were placed to the
windward of the Peak, and the barometric height
was brought to the temperature of the ambient
air. The correspondent barometer, of English
construction, differed only ~ of a line, ancient
French measure, from that of Mossy employed
by the traveller. Though the persons appointed
to make the observations at Orotava, Messrs.
Little and Legros, did not employ the nonius,
they estimated nevertheless the heights “of the
mercury with great exactness to fourths or fifths
ofa linet.” M. Cordier took account of the
small changes of level in the cistern; ’ and being


* Cours de Mathématiques, vol. iv, p. 416 (edit. de1775:)
+ These particulars and barometrical heights, which were


not printed in the Journal de Physique, t. lvii, p. 60, have


A


160


well accustomed to barometric measurements,
employed every necessary precaution, to obtain
an accurate result. The following is the table


of his observations.
TABLE.


Reaum.


Stations. Hours. Barometer. Theta:


= —


inch. lines.


Estancia delos Ingleses| 43 19 95 | 4°9°
Port of Orotava 28 4°6 |15:0


Summit of the Peak ithe morn. 18 4°0 +. 67.
Port of Orotava 28 5:6 119-9


The corresponding barometer was placed at
the height of seven toises above the level of the
sea, M. Cordier found by Deluc’s formula the
Station of the Rocks to be 1529 toises, and the
top of the volcano 1901 toises. M. Laplace’s
formula gave me for the first of these points 1550
toises; and 1920 toises* for the second.


been communicated to me by M. Cordier, This: traveller,
who has visited Egypt, Spain, and the Canary Islands, is
preparing an interesting work on extinct Volcanoes.

* In the manuscript voyage of Mr. O’Donnell, for the
communication of which I am indebted to the kindness of
M. Leudé de Segrai, is the following note: ‘ The baron
metric measurements which we made of the height of the
volcano nearly coincide’ (con corta differencia) with those of


161


Let us now résume the barometrical and geo-
metrical ‘measurements of the Peak made for a
century past.


1. Geometrical measurements.
a) made on land.
toisese
P. Feuillée, im 1724 6. wy 9219
the same result modified by Bouguer 2062
Heberden and Cross, five operations, in 1752 2408
Hernandez; in 1742 ‘unary , . 2658
Borda and Pingré, in 1771 & 1742
Borda, in 1776 ; . . 1905
b) made under gail. rt
Mannevilette, in 1749-  . 2000
Borda and Pingré; in 1771 pore
Churruca, in 1788. " US oe 2193
Johnstone, i eon 2023


2. Barometric measurements calculated after the
formula of La Place.


toises.


Feuillée and Verguin, in 1794 f P 2025


M. Cordier, paying attention to the difference between the
French and Spanish toises, absolute height of the ravines
at the foot of the Peak 1278 Spanish teises; Estaneia de los
Ingleses, 1731 toises; summit of the Peak 3287 toises.” {
cannot guess what Mr. O’Donnell calls Spanish toises; for
supposing him to mean the vara castellana, 2:23 of which
make a French toise, the volcano would, be much legs ele-
vated than M. de Borda found it, even in the first of his
three measurements,


VOL, brs Mu


toises


Borda, in 1776 1976
Lamanon, in 1785 ° » 1902
Cordier, in 1803 é ° ‘ , 1920


These measures, taken at different periods,
vary from 1700 to 2600 toises; and, what is re-
markable enough, the results obtained by geome-
trical operations differ more from each other,
than those which were found by the barometer.
It has nevertheless been extremely wrong to cite
this want ef harmony as a proof of the uncertain-
ty of all measurements of mountains. Angles,
the value of which is determined by imperfect
graphometers ; bases that have not been levelled,
or the length of which has been determined by
the log; triangles that give an excessively acute

angle at the summit of the mountain ; heights of
the barometer without any notice taken of the
temperature of the air and of the mercury; un-
questionably are not means calculated to lead to
accurate results. Of fourteen trigonometrical
and barometrical operations above indicated,
the four following only can be considered as true
measurements.

toises.
Borda by trigonometry ‘ . 1905
Borda by means of the barometer 1976
Lamanon, the same A ; ie - LIOR
Cordier, thesame .- + + + 1920


The average of these four observations, the


163


whole of the particulars of which are known to
us, makes the absolute height of the Volcano
1926 toises; but we must here discuss the ques-
tion, whether, in taking the mean, we ought to
exclude Borda’s barometric measurement, as er-
ring too much in excess; or whethet we ought not
to prefer the result of the trigonometrical to that
of the barometric measurements of a Peak, al-
most continually swept by ascending or descend-


ing winds.

The trigonometrical operation, made in 1776,
is more complicated than those generally are, by
which we determine. the elevation of a_ single
point. ‘Travellers are in the practice of employ-
ing either a base directed toward the summit


of a mountain, and two vertical angles taken at
the extremity of this base, or rather a base
nearly perpendicular to the former, two angles
of position taken in an oblique plane, and a
single vertical angle. In both cases a direct
measure is taken of a side of the triangle, the
summit of which is at the top of the moun-
tain. The measurement of the Peak executed
by M. de Borda was a trigonometrical opera-
tion precisely similar to those, by which, in the
measurement of a meridian, the heights of sig-
nals, or of mountains near those signals, above
the level of the sea, is determined. It cannot
be denied, that the simplicity of a method, and
the small number of the elements entering inte
M %


164


the calculation of the altitude, offer peculiar ad-
vantages; but it " would be unjust to condemn
more complicated operations, if we could beassur-
ed, that the observers had taken the greatest care
in the resolution of each triangle.

M. de Borda could not directly measure the
great base of 1526 toises, at the extremities of
which he determined the oblique angles of po-
sition, and the vertical angles that subtend the’
height of the volcano. .The length of this base
was found by the resolution of two simall_ tri-
“angles; and this determination deserves so much
the more confidence, as all the angles were directly
measured, as the result obtained by a small qua-
drant of Ramsden was verified by a reflecting
circle, as the errors of each angle do not ap-
pear. to have exceeded eight or ten. seconds,
and as the first base of 213 toises was measur-
ed twice, without finding more than two inches
anda half difference. Ido not believe, that this
part of M. de Borda’s measurement can have
been deficient in accuracy ; and it must be
hoped, that the same precision was attained in
the vertical angles, three of which were indispens-
able for the measure of the Peak; namely the
summit of the Piton seen at d, the signal d
seen at a, and the depression of the horizon of
the sea. It.might have been wished, that the
observer had determined these angles by means
of his reflecting circle, employing as an artifical


Th
200


horizon a plane glass, or mercury *; for the
error of the line of collimation and the hori-
zontal position of the instrument are very difh-
cult to determine with exactness in a movable
quadrant of a foot radius. According to the
manuscript kept in the Depét de Ja Marine,
this verification of the vertical angles did not
take place; and the accordance of the two al-
titudes of the Piton above the points d and e
is a proof rather of the constancy» of the error
of collimation, than of the’ precision of the ab-
solute value of the angles. In. order to have
obtained ‘two comparative results, M. de Borda
should have taken seven zenith distances ; that
of the’ summit seen at ¢ and at d, that of
the signal d seen at'a and at e, that of the
sicnal c seen at a, and the depressions of the
horizon of the sea measuredvat d and at a.» It
is well known, that these zenith distances are
more difficult to obtain with exactness than the
oblique angles of position, ' especially when we
cannot make use of an astronomical circle of re-
petition. Farther, in-similar circumstances, a me-
thod is so much the more disadvantageous, as


* I jhave’ shown in another place, that, on’ the seashore,
wercan measure with great exactness the depression of, the
horizon. with a, reflecting instrument, by taking alternately
the height of the Sun above the horizon of the sea, and


in an artificial horizon, and reducing these heights “to


the same instant.


166


the vertical angles are more numerous. To solve
the question, what is the number of toises by
which the height of the Peak may have been found
too great, or. too little, I have supposed an error
in the measure of the base, in that of the vertical
angle subtended by the mountain, and in the ter-
restrial refractions. If the volcano be 1995
toises of absolute height, instead of 1905 toiscs,
the angle of P at c would be, according to Mr.
Oltmann’s calculation and mine, 10° 36’ 34%,
instead of 11° 29’ 18”, found by M. de Borda;
the bases cd and ab would be 9258 and 1392
feet, instead of 9159 and 1978. But how can
it be supposed, that he was deceived 7’ 16” in
determining the error of collimation of the qua-
drant, and fourteen feet in the double mea-
surement of a base of 249°5 toises? We are
ignorant at how much M. de Borda estimated
the effect of the terrestrial refraction ; but it is
probable, that his supposition did not much differ
from one tenth of the arc. The distance of the
volcano is nine miles, and a variation of refraction
of 22” would change the total height of the
mountain but one toise.

As bases adapted to the measurement of moun-
tains are not generally to be found on a coast,
and at the level of the Ocean, travellers are forced
to recur, either to barometrical measurements, or
to the depression of the horizon. In M. de Bor-
da’s operation, these reductions have: been pretty


167


considerable, d being elevated 169 toises, and ¢
55 toises above the surface of the sea. But when
the subject of discussion is the comparing baro-
metrical and geometrical measurements, which
differ but a small number of toises, we must exe
ainine, what is the limit of the mistakes that may
be committed, and whether the measure be too
great or too little. The variations of the terres-
trial refraction elevate or depress the horizon of
. the sea two or three minutes, to an observer placed
on the coast three or four toises high. At this
distance the trajectories may be more or less con-
cave or convex, according to the temperature of
the land and of the sea, and the unequal decrement
of density in the successive strata of the air. In
proportion as the observer increases his height
above the coast, the mistakes owing to the irregus -
lar variation of the refractions diminish consider-
ably; and it is easy to show, that at the time of
M. de Borda’s operation they did not exceed three
or four toises*, As the sea at this period was
colder than the air, the stations c and d may have
been found lower than they really aret; and we


¥ The numerous observations of depression made by Mr.
Méchain at Montjouy, near Barcelona, differ from each other
but 72 toises, the total height of the mountain being 105
toises. Delambre, Base du Systtme métrique, t. ii, p- 759
and 765.

+ Biot, on extraordinary refractions, in the Mém. de I’Ins
stitut, 1809, p.157, 177, and 180. M. de Borda, like the


168


may suppose, what is confirmed by barometrical
measurement, that the trigonometrical result ob-
tained in 1776 is rather too smail than too great.

On resuming what has just been laid down
from examining in. succession the different cle-
ments, that enter into the calculation of the ab-
solute elevation of the Peak of Teneriffe, it fol-
lows, that the trigonometrical measurement made
by M. de Borda is probably exact at least to
as Of the total height ;. unless we suppose acci-
dental mistakes, owing to the negligence of the
observers.

I have no doubt but the same degree of exact-
ess may be obtained in very favourable circum-
stances from repeated measurements ‘made by the
barometer; but it is difficult to judge, amidst a
‘few isolated observations, whether oblique winds,
or an unequal distribution of heat in the succes-


greater part of those geometricians who have measured the
depression of the horizon, has neglected to indicate the tem.
perature of the ocean: but, we know that at this period the
air was at, 25 degrees, and from the observations already
made, page 65—79, we may admit, that the heat of the
water of the sea was from 20to 21 degrees. Now, heights
of thirty toises, calculated on the supposition of a mean
refraction of 0-03, and of a uniform decrement in arithme-
tical progression, appear diminished three toises when there
are four degrees of difference between the temperature of the
air and the walter. This number is deduced from the nu-


merous observations made by Messrs. ce and Mathieu at
Dunkirk,


‘


we


sive strata of the air, have not altered the ree
sults. Of three barometric sdlbasic made
by M. M. de Borda, Lamanon, and Cordier, and
calculated after the formula of Laplace, and the
coefficient of Ramond, there is only the second
which does not give a greater height than the
geometrical operations. If Deluc’s or Trembley’s
formula be substituted for that of Laplace, the
heights, instead of being too great, will be too
little. Supposing the Peak to be really 1905
toises high, Laplace’s formula, applied to M. M.
Seilbesuipa ee Cordier’s ene would be
erroneous only 53 toises, or =; an extremely small
quantity, and which would be the half or the
third only of that, to which excellent observers

may be often exposed *.

The first coefficient f “of the barometric formula


* Mr. D’Aubuisson concluded, after having discussed a
great number of observations calculated after the formula
of Laplace, and compared with exact geodesical measures,
“ that in avoiding the manifest causes of inexactness, such
as the morning hours, the considerable changes of weather
from one day to another, storms, and the influence of lo-
calities, we may consider a hundredth as the limit of the
mistakes.” He adds, that ‘* most commonly, by fortunate
compensations, the error will be only some thousandths.?”
Journal de Physique, t. Ixxi, p. 35.


+ The coefficient, 17972 metres. Exposition du Systéme


du Monde, ed. 1, p. $2. Ramond, Mém. sur. la Formule
barométrique, p. 2.


176


of M. de Laplace, published in 1798, was founded
on the comparison of the barometrical and geo-
metrical measurement of the volcano of Teneriffe,
made by M. de Borda. The illustrious author
of La Mécanique céleste having afterward found,
that this coefficient did not give exact heights,
substituted another, furnished by the excellent
observations of M. Ramond. On examining the
manuscript narrative of Borda’s voyage, we can
not guess at the source of an error, which seems
considerably to surpass that of the barometric
measurement of Mount Blanc by Saussure. The
correspondent barometer was observed at Orotava
every quarter of an hour; its greatest variations,
in twenty-four hours, were a few tenths of a line.
The scales were carefully verified ; and an account
was taken of the accumulation of the mercury in
the cistern*. The thermometer was observed in
the shade; the slightest circumstances are found
indicated in Messrs. de Borda and Varela’s jour-
nals. They are the only travellers, who have
carried two barometers to the top of the Peak.


Both instruments agreed within three or four


tenths of a line with each other, and the average
of both was constantly taken. If we were not
acquainted with the real height of the Peak to a
considerable degree of exactness, we might pre~


* It was 0'9 of a line on the brink of the crater.


|
|
|
i
|
|
f


171


sume, that the barometric measurement taken in
1776 could not be; erroneous, while it is probae
bly beyond =. It is sufficient to compare the
indications of Borda’s barometer and thermome-
ter with the indications of these same instruments
in Lamanon’s and Cordier’s voyages, to discover,
that in the morning of the Ist of October, 1776,
on the summit of the Piton, the pressure of the
air underwent.an extraordinary and very problem-
atic modification. ‘The following are the elements
of this comparison.


vl 0361 *D

SSI “I | 606L "I | 6-61 | 9-€ 83 | $.F6 | O-€ 86 0G | 6-6 86 | ‘yrag ayy jo

$91 “| 9L61 “gG@{ 24.9 | 0.0 81 oF | &-F SI | o.8 6-0 8I JLUTUING

SSL “DO |SPSTD| SI.| 9b 8b ‘ " * | ¢.61 | 6.3 $& | ‘sosa[suy soy ap

rel “q'isssteq| 6-P 16.6 6r le | gg 126 6 vIOUR ST
: wf “Soul “qoul “Ssauly "Tout *SoUlT “(oul

~ *Sastoy, *sasloy, “19, “eg “PUL “eg eon eq
“INUUNvOyy
"COST “GSLT “OZAT

JO oF *R[NUULOY ‘sa1ps05 ‘uoueme’y ‘ep10g

Surpuodsar | g aaeidey j

~109 80810} | 9 3uiproa | oe Z =, *soovg


JO TOquINE | -o8 yy StF] ' 4
: *1Q}BWOUIIYT sAnuneery pus sajoul01e
£ o110je9 Jo u TL 8 UP yoWoIVg


quams129 gq


i ial Ta


173 :


We are struck at seeing in this table, ‘that
M. de Borda found his barometer, at the summit
of the Peak, four lines lower than other observers ;
and this, without any indications of the thermo-
meter tending to explain: why there was so enor-
mous a difference in the atmospherical pressure *.
It might be supposed, that the instruments were
deranged during the night, which ‘the travellers
passed at the Station of the Rocks; but we find
it expressly noted in Messrs. de Borda and Va-
rela’s journals, that, the day after the excursion,
the difference between Mr. Pasley’s barometer at
Orotava, and those which had been made use of
for the measurement of the Piton, remained the
same to nearly two tenths of a line. The volcano
of Teneriffe, like all other very slender peaks, is
undoubtedly but little adapted to disclose the error
of a barometric coefficient. Oblique winds sweep
along the rapid. declivity of the mountain; and
it is to be presumed, that, at the time when
M. de Borda measured it, a very violent ascend-
ing wind, or some other unknown deranging cause,
occasioned the barometer to fall, The weather


* The error of a degree in the indication of the temperature
of the air would alter the height of the Peak only 3°8 toises
nearly. <A considerable number of good observations, made
at the top of St. Bernard, prove, that the whole of the cal-
culated elevations are too great or too little, every time that
the temperatures are above or below the mean temperature
of the two stations, Journ. de Phys., t. Ixxi, p. 10, ’


174


had been rainy the preceding evening; the decre-
ment of caloric was very slow and probably of
very little uniformity ; circumstances under which
any formula would be at default; but notwith-
standing these considerations, without the testi-
mony of an observer so exact as M. de Borda,
we should scarcely believe that the barometric
pressure could change four lines at a height of
more than 1900 toises, and at the limits of the
torrid zone. A single barometric measurement
is like a longitude determined by the mere dif-
ference of time: both, executed with good instru-
ments, and under favorable ‘circumstances, “are
susceptible of great exactness ; but when the me-
teorological variations, or the rate of the chro-
nometer, are not regular and uniform, it is impos=
sible to fix the limit of the errors, as we may
do with success in discussing a geometrical ope-
ration, or the result of a series of lunar dis-
tances.

After having excluded the barometric measure-
ment of Borda, two others remain, which inspire
great confidence, but of which one appears to
be somewhat too little, and the other too great.
We have already remarked, that their mean result
does not differ 6°003 from the geometrical mea-
surement; and we shall not give a preference to
the barometric observations of Lamanon over
those of M. Cordier, because we think we have
proved, that the result even of the trigonometrical


|
i
ai
#
il


175


measurement may well be a few toises too small,
and M. Cordier made his excursion in very fine
and settled weather. This gentleman thinks, that
his measurement must have given a result near
the truth, on account of the numberless precau-
tions which he took to avoid errors*. The obser-
vation was made in the morning; and it is
known, that at this time of the day Laplace’s
formula makes the heights too little, because his
coefficient was deduced from observations made
at noon; but on the other hand, Mr. Ramond
has rendered it probable, that the coefficient ap-
propriate for our northern countries must undergo
a slight diminution to adapt it to the measure-
ment of the heights comprised between the tro-
pics, or near the limits of the torrid zonef. A
compensation therefore took place: and this come
pensation was not disturbed by the effects of the
diurnal variation of the barometer. I insist on
this latter circumstance, because distinguished na-
tural philosophers have recently asserted, that the
barometer must sink on high mountains, while
at nine in the morning it reaches its maximum
in the plains. This assertion { is founded only
on theoretical views, and on a local phenomenon
observed by Saussure in the Alps. The obser-


* Ramond, p. 5 and 26.
+ Ibid, p. 97. ¢
t Journ. de Phys., t. xxi, p. 15.


176


vations made by M. Bonpland and myself on
the horary variations of the barometer, frotn the
coasts to two thousand toises height, prove on the
contrary, that, under the tropics, the mercury
reaches its maximum and its minimum exactly at
the same hours in the low regions and on the
summits of the Andes.

The real height of the Peak of Teneriffe dif-
fers little probably frotn the mean between the
three geometrical and barometrical measurements
of Borda, Lamanon, and Cordier.


1905 toises
4902
1920


1909
The exact determination of this point is of
importance to the science of physics, on account
of the application of the new barometric formu-
las; to navigation, on account of the angles of
altitude, which experienced seamen sometimes
take, when they pass in sight of the Peak; and


to geography, on account of the use which M. M.
Borda and Varela have made of the same angles,
in the construction of the chart of the archipe-
lago of the Canaries.


PEI LPL LO LL LL LEG


In the second chapter of this work, Vol. i, p.
183, we have entered into the question, whether


77


the coast of Africa could be seen from the sum-
mit of the Peak of Teneriffe. This problem has
been discussed by M. Delambre, to whom we
are indebted for so great a number of valuable
observations on horizontal refractions. . The fol-
lowing are the foundations of the calculations, of
which we have given only the result, in that
chapter. Let m (fig. 2) be the Peak of Tene-
riffe, and N the coast, the distance of which from
the foot of the Peak is the arc PT Q = 2° 49’ 0”.
As refraction makes objects appear higher than
they really are, it will be possible to see from
the top of the Peak the point N, although it is
concealed by the curve of the Earth. This point
will be really visible if it be elevated enough to
send forth a ray, which, in describing the curve
N T M across the strata of the atmosphere, only
skims the Earth in T. From the summit of the
Peak we should perceive then at once the points
T and N, and an observer placed in T would see
the points M and N in his horizon N’ T M’.
If we designate by h = 1904 toises, the height
of the Peak, accordiag to the geometrical mea-
surement of Borda; by R = 3271225 toises, the
radius of the Earth; and finally by c the coeffi- |
cient of the terrestrial refraction, the mean value
of which was found to be 0°08 by Mr. Delambre;
we shall have the distance P T, at which the ob-
server ought to be in. order to see the summit
M, at M’ in the horizon, by the formula,
vol. If N


178


1 Vo
tang. P T Tae)
which gives PT — 2° 7’ 26%. Such is the great-
est distance at which we can perceive the Peak
from the level of the sea. If we deduct P T
from P T Q = 2° 49 0”, there will remain Q T=
4 34” ; and with this distance we shall easily find
the height N Q@ = A‘, which the coast must have
{o appear at N’ at the horizon. In fact, if in
the preceding formula we substitute Q T for the
arc P.T, and h’ for the height 4, we shall have

7
tang. QT = ee i 24 >


whence we deduce
_ R(I—ce) * tang. * Q T
2

Thus by means of the refraction, and notwith-
standing the curve of the Earth, which at the
distance P Q would conceal a mountain of 370
toises, we might sometimes see a mountain situate
on the coast only 202 toises high; but as the


hf = 202'2 toises.


refractions are uncertain, and may even be nega-
tive, it would be imprudent to affirm any thing
for such great distances, for which we have no
observation.


Results of the determinations of height.


toises.
Town of Laguna. ' «i abo
—-——— Orotava . ‘ WOR ie 38
Pino del Dernajito : . , $33


Estancia de los Ingleses . eg Looe


|


Hy


179


Cavern of ice 2 q «i, ALES
Foot of the Piton . 1825
Summit of the Peak of Tessie - .1909


PLL POLE LL OLD LIL


I have given in the third chapter * the result
of the observations of longitude which I made at
Santa Cruz. The following are the data taken
from M. de Borda’s manuscript, and which will
serve to complete what has been laid down in the
Collection of my astronomical observations (t. i,
p. xxxviiand 28). Don Joseph Varela observed,
the 30th of. August, at the port of Gomera, the
emersion of Jupiter’s third satellite, at 15° 40° 8”.
Tofino saw, at Cadiz, this same emersion, at
16" 93’ 98”. Difference of the meridians 43’ 20";
the port of la Gomera, being situate, according
to the operations of Borda, 0° 3’ 28’ to the east
of Santa Cruz, we find for this latter place
o' 39’ 59. The 12th of October, Varela ob-
served the immersion of the third satellite at Santa
Cruz at 19" 42’ 11’. Tofino made the same ob-
servation at Cadiz at 13° 29°26”. Difference of
the meridians 0° 40’ 15”. The same day the
emersion of the third satellite was observed at
Santa Cruz at 15° 52/51”; at Cadiz at 16° 32’ 54”.
Difference, 0° 40’ 3”. The mean of these three
observations of satellites, which had not yet been


*® Vol. i, p. 115.
N 2


180


published, makes Santa Cruz 18° 36’ 45’” west
of Paris, in reckoning with M. de Borda for
Cadiz 8° 36’ 0%, conformably to the observation
of the annular eclipse of the Sun in 1764, cal-
culated by Du Séjour. But the real longitude of
the old observatory of Cadiz being, according to
a great number of occultations of stars * calcu-
“lated by Messrs.' Triesnecker and Ol!tmanns,
s° 37’ 37”; we have thence by the satellites
18° 38’ 22” for the longitude of Santa Cruz.
Varela and Tofino made use of two telescopes
two feet anda half long, by Dollond, with which
these two observers had often obtained at Cadiz


exactly the same results. Two observations of
the first and second satellites, made by P. Feuil-
lée, in 1724, at Laguna and Orotava, and com-
pared with the observations of Maraldi at Paris,
give 18° 36’ 36” and 18° 29’ 11 for Santa Cruz
in Teneriffe ; supposing, with Borda, Laguna to
be 2’ 50’, and Orotava 16’ 5” west of the Mole
of Santa Cruz (Mém. del’Acad., 1746, p. 123).
These data, combined with the chronometrical
results, concur in proving what I have enlarged
on elsewhere, that the longitude of the Mole is
probably not less than 18° 33’, or greater than
18° 36/ or 18° 38. M.de Borda speaking. in his
journal of Capt. Cook, whom he had the plea-


* Rec. d’Obs, Astron., t. i, p. 25. Espinosa, Memorias
de los Navigantes, t.i, p. 45.


eae as ne


181


sure to meet at the Canaries, adds, “‘ I cannot
conceive why this celebrated navigator, who was
acquainted with the determinations. of the travel-
lers who preceded him, persists in stating, that
the port of Santa Cruz is in 18° 51’ 0°” (Third
Voyage, vol. i, p. 19). Before the expedition
of the Boussole and the Espiégle, the latitude of
the Peak of Teneriffe was generally thought. to
be 28° 197 54’’ (Maskelyne, Brit. Mariner’s Guide,
p. 17). Cook found the Peak, by observations
made under sail, 12’ 11” more to the South, and
29’ 30” more to the west, than the Mole of San-
ta Cruz. The geometrical operations of Borda
give with more exactness 11’ 37” difference in
latitude, and 23’ 4” difference in longitude. At


- the Mole, the Peak has been determined by


azimuths West 28° 55’ South; the angle of appa-
rent height being 4° 37’. Distance 22740 toises,
supposing the elevation of the volcano to be 1904
toises. Latitude of the Peak 28° 16’ 53’. Longi-
tude 18° 59’ 54”. I give here all that relates to
this celebrated mountain, in order to induce navi-
gators to verify results, which are so important to
nautical geography.


POLI POL I PD LPI LY


M. de Borda is the only traveller, who has
compared in an accurate manner the dip of the
needle at Santa Cruz, and at the top of the Peak
of Teneriffe. He found the latter 1° 15’ greater


182


(Manuscrit du Dépdt, Cah. 4). ‘This increase
of the dip observed on the summit of a high
mountain is conformable to what I have several
times remarked in the chain of the Andes. It
probably depends on some system of local attrac-
tions ; but in order to form a right judgment of
this phenomenon, we should know with precision
the dip of the magnetic needle at the foot of the
volcano, for instance at the town of Orotava.
The ‘variation in 1776 was 15° 457 at Gomera,
15° 50’ at the Mole of Santa Cruz, and ly° 40!
toward the north west, at the brink of the cra-
ter.


BOOK II.


CHAPTER IV.


First abode at Cumana.—Banks of the
Manzanares,


We anchored opposite the mouth of the river
Manzanares on the 16th of J uly, at break of day ;
but we could not land till very late in the morning,
because we were obliged to wait the visit of the
officers of the port. Our eyes were fixed on the
groups of cocoa-trees that border the river, and
the trunks of which, more than sixty feet high,
towered over the landscape. The plain was co-
vered with tufts of cassias, capers, and those arbo-
rescent mimosas, which, like the pine of Italy,
extend their branches in the form of an umbrella.
The pinnated leaves of the palms were conspi-
cuous on the azure of a sky, the clearness of which
was unsullied by any trace of vapors. The Sun
was ascending rapidly toward the zenith <A
dazzling light was spread through the air, along
the whitish hills strewed: with cylindric cactuses,
and over a sea ever calm, the shores of which were


184


peopled with alcatras*, egrets, and flamingoes. The
splendor of the day, the vivid coloring of the vege-
table world, the forms of the plants, the varied
plumage of the birds, every thing announced the
grand aspect of nature in the equinoctial regions.
The city of Cumana, the capital of New An-
dalusia, is a mile distant from the embarcadere, or
the battery of the Bocca, where we landed, after
having passed the bar of the Manzanares. We
had to cross a vast plain}, which divides the sub-
urb of the Guayquerias from the seacoast. The
excessive heat of the atmosphere was augmented
by the reverberation of the soil, partly stripped of
vegetation. The centigrade thermometer, plunged
into the white sand, rose to 37°7% In the small
pools of salt water it kept at 30°5°, while the heat
of the ocean, at its surface, is generally in the port
of Cumanat from 25°2° to 26°3°. The first plant


* Brown pelican of the size of aswan. Buffon, pl. eulum
No. 957. Pelicanus fuscus, Lin. (Oviedo, lib. xiv, c. 6.)

+ El Salado.

} On comparing a great number of experiments made in
1799 and 1800, at different seasons, I find, that in the port
of Cumana, to the north of Cerro Colorado, the sea during
the ebb is 0°8° warmer than during the flow, whatever be the
hour of the tide. I shall here give the observations of the
20th of October, which may almost serve as a type, and
which were made ona point of the coast, where the sea at
150 toises distance was 30 or 40 fathoms deep. At ten in
the morning, ebb 26°1°; air near. the coast 27°4°; .air near
the city 302°; water of the Manzanares 25°2°: at four in


185


that we gathered on the continent of America was
the avicennia tomentosa*, which in this place
scarcely reaches two feet high. ‘This shrub, the
sesuvium, the yellow gomphrena, and the cactus,
cover the lands impregnated with muriat of soda ;
they belong to that small number of plants, which
live in society like the heath of Europe, and which
in the torrid zone are found only on the seashore,
and on the elevated plains of the Andesf. The
avicennia of Cumana is distinguished by another
peculiarity not less remiarkable: it furnishes an
instance of a plant common to the shores of South
America and the coasts of Malabar.

The Indian pilot led us across his garden, which
rather resembled a copse than a piece of cultivated


ground. He showed us, as a proof of the fertility
of this climate, a silk-cotton tree (bombax hepta-
phyllum), the trunk of which, in its fourth year,
had reached nearly two feet and a half in diame-
ter. We have observed, on the banks of the Ori-
noco and the river Magdalena, that the bombax,


the afternoon, flow 25°3°; air near the coasts 26°2°; air at
Cumana 28°1°; water of the Manzanares 25:7°.

* Mangle prieto.

+ On the extreme rarity of the social plants between the
tropics, see my Essay on the Geog. of Plants, p. 19; anda
paper by Mr. Brown on the Proteacee (Trans. of the Lin, Soc.
vol. x, P. 1, p. 23), in which this great botanist has extended
and confirmed by numerous facts my ideas on the associa<
tions of plants of the same species,


186


>


the carolinea, the ochroma, and other trees of the
family of the malvacew, are of extrémely rapid
growth. I nevertheless think, that there was
some exaggeration in the report of the Indian re-
specting the age of his bombax ; for under the
temperate zone, in the hot and damp lands of
North America, between the Missisippi and the
Alleghany mountains, the trees do not exceed a
foot in diameter* in ten years; and vegetation
is in general but a fifth more speedy than in Eia-
rope, even taking as an example the platanus oc-
cidentalis, the tulip tree, and the cupressus disti-
cha, which reach from nine to fifteen feet in dia-
meter. On the strand of Cumana, in the garden
of the Guayqueria pilot,we saw for the first time
a guama+ loaded with flowers, and remarkable
for the extreme length and silvery splendor of it’s
numerous stamina. We crossed the suburb of
the Indians, the streets of which are very regular,


* Five feet above the ground. These measures were taken
by an excellent observer, Mr. Michaux.

+ Inga spuria, which we must not confound with the com-
mon inga, inga vera, Willd. (mimosa inga, Lin.). The white
stamina, to the number of sixty or seventy, are attached to
a greenish corolla, have a silky lustre, and are terminated by
a yellow anther, he flower of the guama is eighteen lines
long. The common height of this fine tree, which prefers a
moist soil, is from eight to ten toises. I shall observe on this
vuccasion, that we have distinguished in this work by italics
the names of the new plants, which M. Bonpland and myself
have collected.


187


and formed of small houses, quite new, and of a
pleasing appearance. This part of the town had
just been rebuilt, on account of the earthquakes,
which had laid Cumana in ruins eighteen months
before our arrival. Scarcely had we passed, on a
wooden bridge, the Manzanares, which contains a
few bavas, or crocodiles of the smaller species,
when we every where perceived the traces of this
horrible catastrophe ; new edifices were rising on
the ruins of the old.

We were conducted by the captain of the
Pizarro to the governor of the province, Don
Vincente Emparan, to present to him the passports
which had been given us by the first secretary of
state. He received us with that frankness, and
that noble simplicity, which has at all times
characterized the Biscayan nation. ~ Before he was
named governor of Portobello and Cumana, he
had distinguished himself as captain of a vessel in
the royal navy. His name recalls to mind one of
the most extraordinary and distressing events re.
corded in the history of maritime wars. At the
time of the last rupture between Spain and Eng-
land, two brothers of M. d’Emperan fought during
a whole night before the port of Cadiz, taking each
other’s ship for an enemy’s. The battle was so
terrible, that both vessels were sunk nearly at the
same time. A very small part of the crew was
saved, and the two brothers had the misfortune


188


to recognize each other. a little before they ex-
pired.

The governor of Cumana expressed his great
satisfaction at the resolution we had taken to
remain for some time in New Andalusia, the
name of which province at this period was very
little known in Europe, and which in its mountains,
and on the banks of its numerous rivers, contains
a great number of objects worthy of fixing the
attention of naturalists. Mr. de Emparan showed
us cottons dyed with native plants, and fine
furniture which was made exclusively with the
wood of the country: he interested himself much
in every thing that related to natural philosophy ;
and asked, to our great astonishment, if we
thought, that, under the beautiful sky of the
tropics, the atmosphere contained less azot (azotico)
than in Spain; or if the rapidity, with which iron
oxidates in those climates, was only the effect of
a greater humidity indicated by the hair hygro-
meter. The name of his native country pronounc-
ed on a distant shore would not have been more
agreeable to the ear of a traveller, than those words
of azot, oxyd of iron, and hygrometer, were to
ours. _ We knew, that, notwithstanding the orders
of the court, and the recommendations of a power-
ful minister, our abode in the Spanish climates
would expose us to numberless inconveniences, if
we did not succeed in inspiring some personal


189


interest in those who govern those vast countries.
Mr..de Emparan loved the sciences too well, to
deem it strange that we should come from so great
a distance to collect plants, and determine the
position of a few places by astronomical methods.
He suspected no other motives for our voyage than
those mentioned in our passports; and the public
marks of consideration, which he gave us during
a long abode in his government, contributed
greatly to procure us a favourable welcome in every
part of South America.

We disembarked our instruments toward the
evening, and we had the pleasure to find, that none
had been damaged... We hired a spacious house,
the situation of which was favourable for astro-
nomical observations. We enjoyed an agreeable
coolness, when the breeze arose;. the windows


‘were without glasses, and even wanted those paper


panes, which are often the substitutes of glass a,
Cumana. The whole of the passengers aboard
the Pizarro left the vessel, but the recovery of
those who had been attacked by the fever was
very slow. We saw some, who a month after,
notwithstanding the care bestowed on them by
their countrymen, were still extremely weak and
reduced. Hospitality, in the Spanish colonies, is
such, that a uropean who arrives, without recom-
meudation, or pecuniary means, is almost sure of
finding assistance, if.he lands in any port on ac-
count of sickness. The Catalans, the Gallicians,


190


and the Biscayans, have the most frequent inter-
course with America. They there form as it were
three distinct corporations, which exercise a .re-
markable influence over the morals, the industry,
and commerce of the colonies. The poorest in-
habitant of Siges or Vigo is sure of being received
into the house of a Catalan or Gallician pulpero *,
whether he arrives at Chili, or at the Philippine
Islands. I have seen the most affecting instances
of these attentions rendered to unknown persons,
during whole years, and always without a murmur.
It has been said, that hospitality was easy to be
exercised in a happy climate, where food is in
plenty, where the native plants yield salutary
remedies, and where the sick man, reposing in his
hammock, finds under a shed all the shelter of
which he stands in need. But should we consider
as of little value the embarrassment caused ina
family by the arrival of a stranger, whose character
is unknown ? ean we be permitted to forget those
marks of tender compassion, those endearing at-
tentions of the female part of the household, that
untired patience, which never relaxes during a long
and painful recovery? It has been remarked, that,
with the exception of a few very populous towns,
hospitality has not yet perceptibly diminished since
the first establishment of the Spanish colonists in
the new world. It is distressing to think, that this


* A retail dealer.


191


change will take place, when population and
colonial industry shall have made .more rapid pro.
gress ; and that this state of society, which we are
agreed to call an advanced state of civilization,
will by degrees have banished ‘“ the Old Castilian
frankness.”

Among the sick who landed at Cumana was a
negro, who fell into a.state of insanity a few days
after our arrival; he died in this deplorable con-
dition, though his master, almost seventy years old,
who had left Europe to settle at Sans Blas, at the
entrance of the gulf of California, had attended
him with the greatest care. I relate this fact as a
proof of its sometimes happening, that men born
under the torrid zope, after having dwelt in tem-
perate climates, feel the pernicious effects of the
heat of the tropics. The negro was.a young man,
eighteen years of age, very robust, and born on
the coast of Guinea: an abode of some years on
the high plain of Castile, had given bis organization
that kind of irritability, which renders the. miasms
of the torrid zone so dangerous to the inhabitants
of the countries of the north.

The soil, on which Cumana is built, forms part of
an extent of ground, that is very remarkable in a
geological point of view. As since my return to
Iurope, other. travellers have preceded me in the
description of certain parts of the coasts, which
they have visited after me, I shall here confine
myself to observations on subjects, that have


192


formed no part of their studies. The chain of the
calcareous Alps of Bergantin “and ‘Tataraqual
stretches east and west from the summit of
Imposible to the port of Mochima and to
-Campanario. The sea, in times far remote, ap-
pears to have divided this chain of the rocky coasts
of Araya. and Maniquarez. The vast gulf of
Cariaco is owing to an irruption of the sea; and no
doubt can be entertained, but that at this period
the waters covered, on the southern bank, the
whole of the ground impregnated with muriat of
soda, through which flows the Manzanares. It
requires but a slight inspection of the topogra-
phical plan of the city of Cumana, to render this
fact as incontestable as the ancient abode of the
sea on the. basins of Paris, Oxford, and Rome.
The slow retreat of the waters has turned into dry
ground this extensive plain, in which rises a group
of small hills, composed of gypsum and calcareous
breccia of very recent formation.

The city of Cumana is backed by this group,
which was formerly an island of the gulf of
Cariaco. That part of the plain, which is north of
thecity, iscalled PlagaChica, and extends eastwards
as far as Punta Delgada ; where a narrow valley,
covered with yellow gomphrena, stil]’ marks the
point of the ancient outlet of the waters. This
valley, the entrance of which is defended by no
exterior works, is the point, where the place is
most exposed to a military attack. An enemy


193


might ‘pass in perfect safety between the sandy
point of Barigon* and the mouth of the Man-
zanares ; where the sea, near the entrance of the
gulf of Cariaco, is forty or fifty fathoms deep,
and farther to the south-east, even as much as
eighty-seven . fathoms. A landing might be
effected near Punta Delgada; and Fort St: Antonio
and the city of Cumana turned; without ariy ap-
prehension from the western batteries formed at
Plaga Chica t, at the mouth of the river, and at
Cerro Colorado.

The hill of calcareous breccia, which we have
just regarded as an island in the ancient gulf, is
covered with a thick forest of columnar cactus and
Opuntia. Some, thirty or forty feet high, covered
with lichens, and divided into several branches in
the form of candelabras, wear a singular appear-
ance. Near Maniquarez, at Punta Araya, we
measured a cactus, the trunk of which was four
feet nine inclies in circumference +. A European
acquainted only with the opuntia in our hot-houses
is surprised to see the wood of this plant become
so hard from age, that it resists for centuries both
alr and moisture, and that the Indians of Cumana


* Punta Arenas del Barigon, to the south of the castle of
Araya.

+ To the west.of Los Serritos.

{ Tuna macho. We distinguish in the wood of the cactus
the medullary prolongations, as M. Desfontaines has already
observed (Journ. de Physique, t. xlviii, p. 153).


VOL, Il 0


194


employ it in preference for oars and door posts.
Cumana, Coro, the island of Margaretta, and
Curassoa, are the places. of South America that
abound most in plants of the family of the nopals.
There only a botanist after a long residence could
compose a monography of the genus cactus, the
species of which vary not only in their flowers
and fruits, but in the form of their articulated
stem, the number of coste, and the disposition
of the thorns. We shall see hereafter how
these plants, which characterize a warm and ex-
traordinarily dry climate, like that of Egypt and
California, gradually disappear in proportion as
we remove from the coasts, and penetrate into
the inland country.

The groups of cactus and opuntia produce
the same effect in the arid lands of equi-
noxial America, as the juncee and the hydro-
charides in the marshes of our northern climes.
A place where. the larger species of the strong
cactus are collected in groups is considered as
almost impenetrable. These places, called tu-
nales, are impervious not only to the native,
who goes naked to. the waist, they are formid-
able even to those who go fully clothed. In
our solitary rambles, we sometimes endeavour-
ed to penetrate into the tunal that crowns the
summit of the castle hill; a part of which is
crossed by a pathway, where we might study
amidst thousands, the organization of this singu-


195


Jar plant. Sometimes the night suddenly over-
took us, for there is scarcely any twilight in this
climate; and we then found ourselves in a situa-
tion so much the more disagreeable, as the cas-
cabel, or rattlesnake*, the coral, and other vi-
pers, armed with poisonous fangs, frequent, at
the time of laying, these scorched and arid haunts,
to deposite their eggs in the sand.

The castle of St. Antonio is built at the east-
ern extremity of the hill, but not on the most
elevated point, being commanded on the east by an
unfortified summit. The tunal is considered both
here and every where in the Spanish colonies as a
very important means of military defence ; and when
earthen works are raised, the engineers are eager
to propagate the thorny opuntia, and promote its
growth, as they are careful to keep crocodiles
in the ditches of fortified places. Under a cli-
mate where organized nature is so powerful
and active, man summons as auxiliaries in his
defence the carnivorous reptile, and the plant
with its armor of formidable thorns.

The casle of St. Antonio, on which the Spanish
flag is hoisted on festivals, is only thirty toises
above the level of the waters in the gulf of Ca-
riacof. Placed ona naked and calcareous hill,


* Crotalus cumanensis, &c. Leflingii, two new species.
See my Recueil d’Observ. Zoologiques, t. ii, p. 5

+ This elevation is concluded from the zenith distauce of the
staff on which signals are hoisted. I found in the great square


og


196


it commands the town, and forms avery pictu-
resque object to vessels entering the port. It
forms a bright object against the dark curtains of
those mountains, which raise their summits to the
region of the clouds, and of. which the vaporous
and bluish tint blends itself with the azure of the
sky. On descending from Fort St. Antonio toward
the southwest, we find on the slope of the same
rock the ruins of the old castle of St. Mary.
This site is delightful to those, who wish to
enjoy, toward sunset, the freshness of the breeze,
and the view of the gulf. The lofty summits
of the island of Margaretta* present themselves
above the rocky coast of the isthmus of Araya ;
toward the west, the small islands of Caracas,
Picuita, and Boracha, recall to mind the cata-
strophes, that have overwhelmed the coasts of
Terra Firma. These islets bear the resemblance’
of fortifications, and from the effect of the -
inirage, while the inferior strata of the air, the
ocean, and the soil, are unequally heated by
the Sun, their points appear raised like the ex-
tremity of the great promontories of the coast.
It is pleasing, during the day, to follow these


of Cumana this angle, not corrected for refraction, 83° 2/ 10/4,
According to the topographical plan of Cumana, laid down
in 1793 by ‘Mr. Fidalgo, the horizontal distance of the Gran
Plaza from the Castillo de San Antonio is 220 toises.

* The promontory of Macanao,


197


inconstant phenomena*:; we see, as the night
approaches, these stony masses, that had been
suspended in the air, settle themselves on their
bases; and the luminary, the presence of which
vivifies organic nature, seems by the variable in-
flection of its rays to impress motion on the
stable rock, and give an undulating movement to
plains covered with arid sands.

The city of Cumana, properly speaking, oc-
cupies the ground that lies between the castle of
St. Antonio, and the small rivers of Manzanares
and Santa Catalina. The Delta, formed by the
bifurcation of the first of these rivers, is a fertile
plain covered with mammees, sapotas ( achras},
plantains, and other plants cultivated in the gar-
dens or sharas of the Indians. The town has no
remarkable edifice, and the frequency of earth-
quakes forbids such embellishments. It is true,
that strong shocks occur less frequently in a given
time at Cumana, than at Quito, where we never-
theless find sumptuous and very lofty churches.
Bat the earthquakes of Quito are violent only in
appearance; and, from the particular nature of
the motion and of the ground, no edifice there
is overthrown. At Cumana, as well as at Lima,


* The real cause of the mirage, or the extraordinary
refraction which the rays undergo, when strata of air of
different densities are placed on each other, had already
been suspected by Hooke. See his Posthumous works,
p. 472.


198


and in several cities placed far from the mouths
of burning volcanoes, «it happens, that the series
of slight shocks is interrupted after a long course
of years by great catastrophes, that resemble the
effects of the explosion of a mine. We shall
have occasion to return several times to this phe- .
nomenon, for the explanation of which so many
vain theories have been imagined, and which have
been thought to be classed, by attributing them
to perpendicular and horizontal movements, to the
shock, and to oscillation *.

The suburbs of Cumana are almost as popu-
lous as the ancient town. We reckon three, that
of the Serritos, on the road to the Plaga Chica,
where we meet with some fine tamarind trees ;
that of St. Francis, toward the south east; and
the great suburb of the Guayquerias, or Guay-
guerias. The name of this tribe of Indians was
quite unknown before the conquest. ‘The natives |
who bear this namé formerly belonged to the
nation of the Guaraounoes, ef which we find no


remains but in the swampy lands of the branches
of the Orinoco. Old men have assured me, that
the language of their ancestors was a dialect of
the Guaraouno; but that for a century past no


* This classification dates from the time of Posidonius.
It is the suceussio and inclinatio of Seneca (Nat. Quest. 6,
c. 21): but the ancients had already judiciously remarked,
that the nature of these shocks is too variable, to permit
any subjection to those imaginary laws. (Plato, apud Plut.,
de Placit. Philos., lib. ili, c, 15, ed. Reiske, t. ix, p. 551.)


199


native of that tribe at Cumana, or in the island
of Margaretta, has spoken any other language
than the Castilian.

The denomination of Guayquerias, like those
of Peru and Peruvian, owes its origin to a mere
mistake. The companions of Christopher Colum-
bus, coasting along the island of Margaretta,
where still on the northern coast resides the no-
blest portion of the Guayqueria nation *, met a
few riatives, who were harpooning fish by throw-
ing a pole tied to a cord, and terminated by an
extremely sharp point. They asked them in the
Hayti language their name ; and the Indians,
thinking that the question of the strangers related
to their harpoons, formed of the hard and heavy
wood of the macana palm tree, answered guaike,
guaike, which signifies pointed pole. A. striking


difference at present exists between the Guay-


querias, a civilized tribe of skilful fishermen, and


* The Guayquerias of la Banda del Norte consider them:
selves as the most noble race, because they think, that they
are less mixed with the Chayma Indian, and other copper-
coloured races. They are distinguished from the Guayque-
rias of the continent by their manner of pronouncing the
Spanish, which they speak almost without separating their
teeth. They show with pride to Europeans the point of the
Galera, so called on account of the vessel of Columbus, which
anchored there, and the port of Manzanillo, where they first
swore to the Whites, in 1498, that friendship, which they
have never betrayed, and which has given them, in the Court
style, the title of eles, loyal. (See above, p. 43).


200


those savage Guaraounoes of the Orinoco, whos us-
pend their habitations on the trunks of the mau-
ritia palm tree, moriche.
The population of Cumana has been singularly
exaggerated in latter times. In 1800, several colo=
nists, little versed in questions of political economy,
carried this population to twenty thousand souls f
while the king’s officers employed in the govern-
ment of the country thought, that the city with
its suburbs did not contain twelve thousand. Mr.
Depons, in his valuable work on the province of
Caracas, gives Cumana, in 1802, near twenty
eight thousand inhabitants, ; others have carried
this number, for the year 1810, to thirty thou-
sand. When we consider the slowness, with
which the population increases in Terra Firma,
I do not speak of the country, but in the towns,
we must doubt whether Cumana be already a
third more populous than Vera Cruz, the princi-
pal port of the vast kingdom of New Spain. It
is eyen easy to prove, that in 1802 the popula-
tion scarcely exceeded eighteen or nineteen thou-
sand souls. I was favoured with a sight of the
different memoirs, which the government had pro-
cured to be drawn up on the statistics of the
country, at the time when the question was agi.
fated, whether the revenue of the farm of tobacco
could be replaced by a personal tax; and J flat-
ter myself, that my estimation rests on solid foun-
dations. |


901


An enumeration made in 1792 gives Cumana
but 10740 inhabitants, reckoning the suburbs and
scattered houses a league around. Don Manuel
Navarete, an officer of the treasury, asserts, that


-the error of this enumeration cannot be a third,


or even a fourth of the whole number. On com-
paring the annual registers of baptisms, we ob-
serve but a feeble increase from 1790 to 1800.
The women, it is true, are extremely fruitful, es-
pecially the natives; but though the small-pox
be yet unknown in this country, the mortality of
infants is prodigious, on account of the extreme
carelessness in which they live, and the pernicious
custom of eating green and indigestible fruits.
The number of births * generally amounts frdm
five hundred and twenty to six hundred, which
indicates at most a population of. sixteen thou-
sand eight hundred souls. We may be assured,
that all the Indian children are baptised, and in-


* The following are the results which I drew from the
registers communicated to me by the parish priests of Cu-
mana. Births in the year 1798, in the district of the Curas
rectores, 237; in the district of the Curas castrenses, 573 in
the suburb of the Guayquerias, or parish of Alta Gracia, 209:
in the suburb of the Serritoes, or parish of Socorro, 19. To-


tal 522, We see, by these parish registers, the great fe-


‘cundity of the Indian marriages; for though the suburb of


the Guayquerias contains a number of individuals of other
tribes, we are struck with the quantity of children born on


this left bank of the Manzanares. Their number amounts


to two fifths of the whole births,


202


scribed on the registers of the parishes; and sup-
posing, that the population in 1800 had been
twenty six thousand souls, there would have been
but one single birth to forty-three ‘individuals ;
while the ratio of births to the whole population
is in France as twenty-eight to a hundred, and
in the equinoctial regions of Mexico as seventeen
to a hundred.

It is to be presumed, that the Indian suburb
by degrees will extend as far as the Embarcadere,
the plain, which is not yet covered with houses
or buts, being more than 340 toises in length *.
The heats are somewhat less oppressive on the
side toward the seashore, than in the old town,
where the reverberation of the calcareous soil,
and the proximity of the mountain of St. Antonio,
raise the temperature to an extraordinary degree.
In the suburb of the Guayquerias, the sca breezes
have free access; the soil is clayey, and, as it is
thought, less exposed from this reason to the vio-
lent shocks of earthquakes, than the houses at the


* I have deduced this distance from the vertical angles
and the azimuths of several edifices, of which I carefully
measured the height. On the side of the river, in 1800,
the distance from the first hut of the suburbs of the Guay-
querias to the Casa blanca (of Don Pasqual Goda) was 538%
toises, and from this first hut to the bridge of the Manza-
nares 210 toises. ‘These data will some day be interesting,
when the progress of industry and prosperity at Cumana,
from the beginning of the ninetcenth century, becomes a sub-
ject of inquiry.


203


foot of the rocks and hills on the right bank of
the Manzanares.

The shore near the mouth of the small river
Santa Catalina is bordered with mangrove trees*,
but these mangroves are not sufficiently spread to
diminish the salubrity of the air of Cumana. The
soil of the plain is in part destitute of vegetation,
in part covered with tufts of sesuvium portulacas-
trum, gomphrena flava, g. myrtifolia, talinum cus-
pidatum, ¢. cumanense, and portulaca lanuginosa.
Among these herbaccous plants we find at inter-
vals the avicennia tomentosa, the scoparia dulcis,
a frutescent mimosa with very irritable leaves{,
and particularly cassias, the number of which is
so great in South America, that we collected, in
our travels, more than thirty new species.

On leaving the Indian suburb, and ascending
the river toward the south, we found a grove of
cactus, a delightful spot, shaded by tamarinds,
brasillettoes, bombax, and other plants, remarkable


* Rhizophora mangle. M. Bonpland found on the Plaga
Chica the allionia incarnata, in the same place where the
unfortunate Leefling had discovered this new genus of nycta>
gines.

+The Spaniards designate by the name of dormideras
(sleeping plants) the small number of mimosas with irritable
leaves. We have increased this number with three species,
which were unknown to botanists, namely, the mimosa humi-
lis of Cumana, the m. nellita of the. savannahs of Calabozo,
and the m. dormiens of the banks of the Apura.


204


for their leaves and flowers. The soil here is rich
in pasturage, where dairy houses, built ‘with reeds,
are separated from each other by clumps of trees.
The milk remains fresh, when kept, not in the
calebashes* of very thick ligneous fibres, but in
porous earthen vessels from Maniquarez. A pre-
judice prevalent in the countries of the north had
long led me to believe, that cows, under the torrid
zone, did not yield rich milk; but my abode at
Cumana, and especially an excursion through the
vast plains of Calabozo, covered with grasses, and
herbaceous sensitive plants, convinced me, that
the ruminating animals of Europe become perfect-
ly habituated to the most scorching climates, pro-
vided they find water and good nourishment. The
milk is excellent in the provinces of New Anda-
lusia, Barcelona, and Venezuela; and the butter
is better in the plains of the equinoctial zone, than
on the ridge of the Andes, where the Alpine
plants, enjoying in no season a sufficiently high
temperature, are less aromatic than on the Pyre-
nees, the mountains of Estremadura, and those of
Greece. As the inhabitants of Cumana prefer

the coolness of the sea breeze to. the appearance

of vegetation, they are accustomed to no other

walk than that of the open shore. The Spaniards,

who are accused in general of no predilection for

trees, or the warbling of birds, have transported


* The fruit of the crescentia cujete,


205


their prejudices and their habits into the colonies.
In Terra Firma, Mexico, and Peru, it is rare to
see a native plant a tree, merely with the view of
procuring himself shade; and if we except the
environs of the great capitals, walks bordered with
trees are almost unknown in these countries. The
arid plain of Cumana* exhibits after violent show-
ers an extraordinary phenomenon.- The earth,
drenched with rain, and heated again by the rays
of the sun, emits that musky odour, which under
the torrid zone is common to animals of very dif-
ferent classes, to the jaguar, the small species of
tiger cat, the thick-nosed tapir*, the galinazo vul-
turet, the crocodile, vipers, and rattlesnakes.
‘The gaseous emanations, which are the vehicles of
this aroma (odour), seem to be evolved in propor-
tion only as the mould, containing the spoils of
an innumerable quantity of reptiles, worms, and
insects, begins to be impregnated with water. I
have seen Indian children, of the tribe of the
Chaymas, draw out from the earth and eat mille-
pedes or scolopendras{ eighteen inches long, and
seven lines broad. Whenever the soil is turned


* Cavia capybara, Lin.; chiyuire.

+ Vultur aura, Lin., zamuro, or galinazo. The Brasilian
vulture of Buffon. I cannot reconcile myself to the adoption
of names, which designate as belonging to a single country
animals common to a whole continent.

t Scolopendras are very common behind the castle of


St. Antonio, on the summit of the hill,


206


up, we are struck with the mass of organic sub-
stances, which by turns are developed, transform-
ed, and decomposed. Nature in these climates
appears more active, more fruitful, we might even
say more prodigal of life.

On this shore, and near the dairies of which
we have just spoken, we enjoy, especially at sun-
rise, a very beautiful prospect over an elevated
group* of calcareous mountains. As this group
subtends an angle of three degrees only at the
house where we dwelt, it long served me to com-
pare the variations of the terrestrial refraction


* If the Brigantine (Cerro del Bergantin) be actually 24
miles, or 22800 toises distant frou’ Cumana, as is indicated
on the chart of Mr. Fidalgo, published by the Hydrographi-
cal Depét at Madrid, in 1805, the angles of altitude which I
took at the Plaga grande make this mountain 1255 toises high.
But this very chart, less accurate with regard to places dis-
tant from the coasts than to the coasts taemselves, assigns
the town of Cumanacoa a latitude of 10° 5’, while, according
to my direct observations, it is 10° 16% 11’’. (Obs. Astron. t.
i, p. 96.) If this too southern position has an influence on
that of the Brigantine, we must admit, that this mountain is
much lower. It presents itself at the Plaga Grande under a
vertical angle (corrected for the refraction and curve of the
Earth) of 3° 6’ 127”.. Other angles, taken ona base of 196
toises, which was measured on ground where the water had
rested a long time, would induce me to think, that the height
and distance of the Brigantine are uot much above. 800
toises, and 12 or 16 miles; but, we can have no confidence in
so short a basis, and an operation, the immediate object of
which was not the measure of the Brigantine.


t
}
,


—


207


with the meteorological phenomena. Storms are
formed in the centre of this Cordillera; and we
see from afar thick clouds resolve themselves into
abundant rains, while during seven or eight months
not a drop of water falls at Cumana. The Bri-
gantine, which is the highest part of this chain,
raises itself in a very picturesque manner 'be-
hind Brito and Tataraqual. It took its name
from the form of a very deep valley on the nor-
thern declivity, which resembles the inside of a
ship. The summit of this mountain is almost bare
of vegetation, and flattened like that of Mowna-
Roa, in the Sandwich Islands. It is a perpen-
dicular wall, or, to use a more expressive term of
the Spanish navigators, a table, mesa. This pe-
culiar physiognomy, and the symmetrical arrange-
ment of a few cones, which surround the Brigan-
tine, made me at first think, that this group, which
is wholly calcareous, contained rocks of basaltic
or trappean formation.
The governor of Cumana had sent, in 1797, a
band of determined men to explore this entirely
desert country, and to open a direct road to New
Barcelona, by the summit of the Mesa. It was
reasonably expected, that this way would be short-
er, and less dangerous to the health of travellers,
than that which was pursued by the couriers along
the coasts; but every attempt to cross the chain
of the mountains. of the Brigantine was: fruitless,


208


In this part of America, as in New Holland* to
the west of Sidney Town, it is not so much the
height of the Cordilleras, as the form of the rocks,
that presents obstacles difficult to surmount.

The longitudinal valley, formed by the lofty
mountains of the interior and the southern decli-
vity of the Cerro de San Antonio, is traversed by
the Rio Manzanares. This plain, which is the
only thoroughly wooded part in the environs of Cu-
mana, is called the Plain des Charas}, on account
of the numerous plantations, which the inhabitants
have begun for some years past along the river.
A narrow path leads from the hill of San Fran-
cisco across the forest to the hospice of the Capu-
chins, a very agreeable country house, which the
Arragonese monks. have built as a retreat for old
infirm missionaries, who can no longer fulfil the
duties of their ministry. As we advance toward

the west, the trees of the forest become more vigo-
rous, and we meet with a few monkeys{, which,
however, are very rare in the environs of Cumana.
At the foot of the capparis, the bauhinia, and the


*The blae mountains of New Holland, and those of Car-
marthen and Lansdown, are not visible, in clear weather,
beyond fifty miles. Peron, Voyage aux Terres Australes, p.
389. Supposing the angle of altitude half a degree, the ab-
solute height of these mountains would be about 620 toises.

+ Chacra, by corruption chara, a hut or cottage surrounded
by a garden, ‘The word ¢pure has the same signification.
£ The common machi, or weeping monkey.


209


zygophyllum with flowers of a gold yellow, ex-
tends a carpet of bromelia*, akin to the b. karatas,
which from the odour and coolness of its foliage
,attracts the rattlesnake,

The waters of the Manzanares are very limpid,
and happily it has no resemblance whatever to the
Manzanares of Madrid, which appears the nar-
rower from the contrast of the sumptuous bridge
by which it is crossed. It takes its source, like
all the rivers of New Andalusia, in a part of the
savannahs (llanos) known by the names of the
plateaux of Jonoro, Amana, and Guanipat, which
receives, near the Indian village of San Fernando,
the waters of the Rio Juanillo. It has been se-
veral times proposed to the government, but al-
ways without success, to constrict a dyke at the
first Zpure, in order to form artificial irrigations in
the plain of Charas;  hecause, notwithstanding
its apparent sterility, the soil is extremely produc-
tive, wherever humidity is joined to the heat of
the climate. The cultivators, who are but in
narrow circumstances at Cumana, were gradually
to refund the money advanced for the construction
of the sluices. Meanwhile Persian wheels, pumps


* Chihuchibue, of the family of the ananas,

+ ‘These three eminences bear the names of Mesas, tables,
An immense plain has an almost imperceptible rise from
hoth sides to the middle, without any appearance of. moun-


tains or hills.


VOL, IT.


Zid


worked by mules, and other hydraulic. but imper-
fect machines, have been erected, to serve till this
project is carried into execution.

The banks of the Manzanares are very pleasant,
and shadowed by mimosas, erythrinas, ceibas, and
other trees. of gigantic growth. A river, the tem-
perature of which, in the season of the floods, de-
scends as low as twenty-two degrees, when the air
is at thirty and thirty-three degrees, is an inesti-
mable benefit, in a country where.the heats are
excessive during the whole year, and where it is
so agreeable, to) bathe several times in the day.
The children pass, as it were, a part of their lives
in the water’: the whole of the inhabitants, even
the women of the most opulent families, know
how to swim; and in a country where man is so
near the state of nature, one of the first questions
asked at first meeting in the morning is, whether
the water is cooler than the preceding evening.
The mode; of bathing is various enough. We
every evening visited a. very respectable society, in
the suburb. of the Guayquerias.. In a fine,moon-
light night, chairs were. placed in the water the
men and women. were lightly clothed, as in some

baths of the north of Europe; and the family and
strangers, assembled in the river, passed some
hours in smoking segars, and in.talking, according
to the custom of the country, of the extreme dry-
fess of the season, of the abundant’ rains in the
neighbouring districts, and particularly of the lux-


Eatesicr


g11


uries, of which the ladies of Cumana accuse those
of the Caraccas and the Havannah. The com-
pany were under no apprehensions from the ba-
vas, or small crocodiles, which are now extremely
scarce, and which approach men without attack-
ing them. These animals are three or four feet
long. We never met with them in the Manza-
nares, but with a great number of dolphins*, which
sometimes ascend the river in the night, and
frighten the bathers by spouting water.

The port of Cumana is a road capable of re-
ceiving all the navies of Europe. The whole of
the Gulf of Cariaco, which is thirty-five miles long,
and sixty-eight miles broad, affords excellent an-
chorage. The great ocean is not more calm and
pacific on the:coasts of Peru, than the sea of the
Antilles from Portocabello, and especially from
Cape Codera, to the Point of Paria. The hurri-
canes of the West Indies are never felt in these
regions, the vessels of which are without decks.
The only danger in the port of Cumana is a shoal,
that of Morro Roxof, which is nine hundred toises


* Toninas.

+ There are from one to three fathoms water on this shoal,
while just beyond its edges there are eighteen, thirty, and
even thirty-eight. The remains of an old battery, situate
to the north north east of the castle of St. Antonio, and very
near it, serve as amark to avoid the bank of Morro Roxe.
Before this battery shuts ih with a very high mountain of
the peninsula of Araya, which ‘bears from the castle of St,


PQ


212


broad from east to west, and so steep, that you
are upon it alinost before you have any warning
of it. !
I have been somewhat diffuse in my description }
of the site of Cumana, because it appeared to nie |
important to make known a place, which for ages |
has been the focus of the most tremendous earth-
quakes. Before [ speak of these extraordinary
phzenomena, it will be useful to collect the scatter- j
i - ed traits of the physical position of which I have
just given the sketch.
_ The city, placed at the foot of a hill destitute
of verdure, is commanded by a castle. No
steeple or dome attracts from afar the eye of the i
traveller, but only a few trunks of tamarind, cocoa,
and date trees, which rise above the houses, the
roofs of which are flat. The surrounding plains,
especially those on the coasts, wear a melancholy,
dusty, and arid appearance, while a fresh and lux-
uriant vegetation points out from afar the windings
of the river, which separates the city from the
suburbs, the population of European and mixed.
race from the natives with a coppery tint. ‘The
hill of fort St. Antonio, solitary, white, and bare,
reflects a great mass of light, and of radiant heat :


-Antonio, north 65° 30? east, at six leagues distance, the ship
must be put about. If this be neglected, the danger of strik-
ing is so much the greater, as the heights of Bordones keep
the wind from a vessel steering for the port.


213


it is composed of breccia, the strata of which con-
tain pelagian petrifactions. In the distance, to-
ward the south, a vast and gloomy curtain of
mountains stretches along. ‘These are the high
calcareous Alps of New Andalusia, surmounted
by sandstone, and other more recent formations.
Majestic forests cover this Cordillera of the inte-
rior, and are joined by a woody vale to the open,
clayey lands, and salt marshes of the environs of
Cumana. <A few birds of considerable size con-
tribute to give a particular physiognomy to these
countries. On the seashore, and in the gulf, we
find flocks of fishing herons, and alcatras of a very
unwieldy form, which swim, like the swan, raising
their wings. Nearer the habitation of men, thou-
sands of galinazo vultures, the true jackals of the
winged tribe, are ever busy in uncovering the car-
cases of animals*. A gulf, which contains hot and
submarine springs divides the secondary from the pri-
mary and schistoserocks of the peninsula of Araya.
Each of these coasts is bathed by a tranquil sea,
of an azure tint, and always gently agitated by the
same wind. A bright and clear sky, with a few
light clouds at sunset, reposes on the ocean, on the
peninsula destitute of trees, and on the plains of
Cumana, while we see the storms accumulate and
descend in fertile showers among the inland moun-
tains. Thus on these coasts, as well as at the


* Buffon, Hist. Nat. des Oiseaux, t. i, p. 114,


Q14


foot of the Andes, the earth and the skies offer the
extremes of clear weather and fogs, of drought and
torrents of rain, of absolute nudity and never ceas-
ing verdure. In the New Continent, the low
regions on the seacoasts differ as widely from the
inland mountainous districts, as the plains of
Lower Egypt from the high lands of Abyssinia.

The analogies which we have just indicated;
between the seacoasts of Andalusia and those of
Peru, extend themselves also to the frequency of
earthquakes, and the limits which nature seems to
have prescribed to these phenomena. We have
ourselves felt very violent shocks at Cumana; and,
at the moment while the edifices recently over-
thrown were rebuilding, we were informed on the
spot of the most minute circumstances, that ac-
companied the great catastrophe of the 14th of-
December, 1797. These ‘observations will be
perhaps the more interesting, as earthquakes have
hitherto been considered rather in the fatal effects
which they have had on the population and welfare
of society, than under a physical and geological
point of view.


Tt is.a very generally received opinion on the coasts
of Cumana, and in the island of Margaretta, that the
gulf of Cariaco owes its existence to a rent of
the continent attended by an irruption of the
ocean. ‘The remembrance of this great revolution
was preserved among the Indidns to the end of
the fifteenth century; and it is related, that, at


215


the time of the third voyage of Christopher
Columbus, the natives mentioned it as a very
recent event. In 1530, the inhabitants were
alarmed by new shocks on the coasts of Paria and
Cumana, The lands were inundated by the sea,
and the small fort, built by James Castellon at
New Toledo*, was entirely destroyed... At the
same time an enormous opening was formed im the
mountains of Cariaco, on the shores of the gulf
that bears this mame, when a great body of salt
water, mixed with asphaitum, issued from the
micaceous schist >. Earthquakes were very fre-
quent toward the end. of the sixteenth century ;
and, according to the traditions preserved ab
Cumana, the sea often inundated the shores, rising
from fifteen, to twenty fathoms. The inhabitants
fled to the Cerro of San Antonio, and to the hill
where now stands the small convent of St. Francis:
It is even thought, that these frequent inundations
induced the inhabitants to build that. quarter of


*


a


’ * This was the first name given to the city of Cumana
(Girolamo Benzoni, Hist. del Mondo nuovo, p. 3,31, and 33).
James Castellon arrived at St. Domingo in 1521, after the
appearance of the celebrated Bartholomew de las Casas in
these countries. On attentively reading the narratives of
Benzoni and Caulin, we find that the fort of Castellon was!
built near the mouth of the Manzanares (alla ripa del fiume,
de Cumana); and not, as some modern travellers have as»
serted, on the mountain where now stands the castle of St.
Antonio. :
+ Herera, Description de las Indias, p, 14.


216


the town, which is backed by the mountain , and
stands on a part of its declivity.

As no record exists at Cumana, and its archives,
on account of the continual devastations of the
termites, or white ants, contain no document, that
goes back farther than a hundred and fifty years,
we are unacquainted with the precise dates of the
ancient earthquakes. We only know, that, in
times nearer our own, the year 1776 was at the
same time the most fatal to the colonists, and the

“most remarkable for the natural history of the
country. <A drought, like those which are felt at
times in the islands of Cape Verd, had reigned
during fifteen months, when, on the 21st of Oc-
tober, 1766, the city of Cumana was entirely de-
stroyed. ‘The remembrance of this day is every
year renewed by a religious festival, attended with
a solemn procession. The whole of the houses
were overturned in the space of a few minutes, and
the shocks were hourly repeated during fourteen
months, In several parts of the province the
éarth opened, and threw out sulphureous waters.
These irruptions were very frequent in a plain ex-
tending toward Casanay, two leagues to the east
of the town of Cariaco, and known by the name of
the hollow ground, tierra hueca, because it appears
entirely undermined by thermal springs. During
the years 1766 and 1767, the inhabitants of
Cumana encainped in the streets; and they began
to rebuild their houses, when the earthquakes took


27


place onlyonce amonth. What was felt at Quito,
immediately after the great catastrophe of the 4th
of February, 1797, took place on these coasts.
While the ground was in a state of continual oscil-
lation, the atmosphere seemed to dissolve itself
into water. The rivers were swollen by these
sudden torrents of rain, the year was extremely
fertile, and the Indians, whose frail huts easily
resist the strongest shocks, celebrated from ideas of
an old superstition, with feasting and dances, the
destruction of the world, and the approaching
epocha of its regeneration.

Tradition states, that in. the earthquake of
1766, as well as in another very remarkable one
in 1794, the shocks were mere horizontal oscilla-
tions; it was only on the disastrous day of the
14th of December, 1797, that for the first time at
Cumana the motion was felt by the raising up of
the ground. More than four fifths. of the city
were then entirely destrayed; and the shock, at-
tended by a very loud subterraneous noise, re-
sembled, as at Riobamba, the explosion of a mine
at a great depth. Happily the most violent shock.
was preceded by a slight undulating motion, so
that the greater part of the inhabitants could
escape into the streets, and a small number only
perished of those who had assembled in the
churches, It is a generally received opinion at
Cumana, that the most destructive earthquakes are
announced by very feeble oscillations, and bya


ais


hollow sound, which does not escape the observation
of persons habituated to this kind of phenomenon:
In this fatal moment, the cries of misericordia,
tembla, tembla*, are every where heard; and
it is very rarely, that a false alarm is given by @
native. Those who are most fearful attentively
observe the motions of dogs, goats, and swine.
The last of these animals, endowed with delicate
olfactory nerves, and accustomed to turn up the
earth, give warning of approaching danger by their
restlessness and their cries. We shall not decide,
whether, placed nearer the surface of the ground,
they are the first that hear the subterraneous
noise; or whether their organs receive the im-
pression of some gazeous emanation, which issues
from the earth. We cannot deny the possibility
of this latter cause. During my abode at Peru, a
fact was observed: in the inland country, which has
an analogy with this kind of phenomenon, and
which is not unfrequent. At the end of violent
earthquakes, the herbs that cover the savannahs
of Tucuman acquired noxious properties; an
epidemic disorder took place among the cattle, and
a great number among them appeared stupified or
suffocated by the deleterious vapours exhaled from
the ground.

At Cumana, half an hour before the catas-
trophe of the 14th of December, 1797, a strong


* Mercy! the earth trembles,


219


smell of sulphur was perceived near the hill of
the convent of St. Francis ; and on the same spot
a subterraneous noise, which seemed to proceed
from the south-east to the north-west, was heard
the loudest. At the same’ time flames appeared
on ‘the banks of the Manzanares, near the hos-
pice of the Capuchins, and in the gulf of Cariaco,
near Mariguitar. This last phenomenon, so ex-
traordinary in a country not volcanic, is pretty
frequent in the Alpine calcareous mountains near
Cumanacoa, in the valley of Bordones, in the is-
land of Margaretta, and ‘amidst the ZLdanos* or
savannahs of New: Andalusia. In these savan-
nahs flakes of fire rise to a considerable height ;
they are seen for hours together in the dryest
places; and it is asserted, that, on examining
the ground which furnishes the inflammable mat-
ter, no crevice is to be found. This fire, which
resembles the sources of hydrogen, or Salse, of
Modena‘, or what is called the Will o’ the wisp
of our marshes, does not burn the grass ; beeause,
no doubt the column of gaz, which developes it-
self, is mixed with azot, and carbonic acid, and
does not burn at its basis. The people, although
less superstitious here than in Spain, call these


reddish flames by the singular name of the soul


* In the Mesa of Cari, to the north of Aguasay, and
in the Mesa of Guanipa, far from the Morichales, which
are the humid spots where the mauritia palm.tree grows,

t Brieslak, Geologia, t, ii, p. 284.


220


of the tyrant Aguirre ; imagining, that the spec-
tre of Lopez Aguirre, harassed by remorse, wan-
ders over these countries sullied by his crimes *.

The great earthquake of 1797 produced some
changes in the configuration of the shoal of Morro
Roxo, toward the mouth of the Rio Bordones.
Similar swellings were observed at the time of the
total ruin of Cumana, in 1766. At this period,
the Punta Delgado, on the southern coast of the
gulf of Cariaco, was perceptibly enlarged; and
in the Rio Guarapiche, near the village of Matu-
rin, a shoal was formed, no doubt by the action
of the elastic fluids, which displaced and raised up
the bed of the river.

We shall not continue to describe with miaute-
ness the local changes produced by the different


earthquakes of Cumana. In order to follow a
plan conformable to the end we proposed in this
work, we shall endeavour to generalize our ideas,
and comprehend in one point of view every thing


* When at Cumana, or in the island of Margaretta, the
people pronounce the words el tiranno (the tyrant), it is al-
ways to denote the infarnous Lopez d’Aguirre; who, after
having taken part, in 1560, in the revolt of Ferdinando de
Guzman against Pedrode Ursua, governor of the Omeguas
and Dorado, gave himself the title of ¢raidor, or traitor.
He descended the river of the Amazons with his band, and
reached by a communication of the rivers of Guyana, of
which we shall hereafter speak, the island of Margaretta.
The port of Paraguache still bears, in ‘this island, the name
of the Tyrant’s Port.


)
i
|
.
|


221


that relates to these phanomena, so terrific, and
so difficult to explain, If it be the duty of those
natural philosophers, who visit the Alps of Swit-
zerland, or the coasts of Lapland, to extend our
knowledge respecting the glaciers and the au-
rora borealis, it may be expected, that a tra-


veller, who has traversed Spanish America, should


have chiefly fixed his attention on volcanoes and
earthquakes. Each part of the Globe is an ob-
ject of particular study; and when we cannot
hope to penetrate the causes of natural pheno-
mena, we ought at least to endeavour to disco-
ver their laws, and distinguish, by comparison of
numerous facts, what is constant and uniform
from what is variable and accidental.

The great earthquakes, which interrupt the long
series of slight shocks, appear to have no regular
periods at Cumana. They have taken place at
intervals of fourscore, a hundred, and sometimes
less than thirty years ; while on the coasts of Peru,
for instance at Lima, a certain regularity is ob-
served in the periods of the total ruin of the
city. The belief of the inhabitants in the exis-
tence of this uniformity has a happy influence on
public tranquillity, and the encouragement, of in-
dustry. It is generally admitted, that it requires
a sufhciently long space of time for the same
causes to act with the same energy; but this rea-
soning is just only in as much’ as the shocks are
considered as a local phenomenon: and as 8


922


particular focus, under each point of the Globe
exposed to those great catastrophes, is admitted.
Wherever new edifices are raised on the ruins
of the old, we hear from those who refuse to
build, that the destruction of Lisbon on the first
of November, 1755, was soon followed by a se-
cond, and not less fatal, on the 31st of March,
1761.

It is a very old* and commonly received-opi-
nion at Cumana, Acapulco, and Lima, that a per-
ceptible connection exists between earthquakes,
and the state of the atmosphere that precedes
these phenomena. On the coasts of New An-
dalusia, the inhabitants are alarmed, when, in
excessively hot weather, and after long droughts,
the.breeze suddenly ceases to blow, and the sky,
clear, and without clouds at the zenith, exhi-
hits, near the horizon, at six .or eight degrees ele-
vation, the appearance of a reddish vapor. These
prognostics are however very uncertain ; and when
the whole of the meteorological variations, at the
times when the Globe has been the most agitated,
are called to mind, it is found, that violent shocks


take place equally in dry and in wet weather ;
when the coolest winds blow, or during a dead
and suffocating calm. From the great number
of earthquakes, which I have witnessed to the


* Arist. Meteor., Lib. 2 (ed. Duval., t. i, p. 798). Se-
neca, Nat. Quast., lib, vi, ¢. 12.


223


north and south of the equator; on the conti-
nent, and in the basin of the seas; on the coasts,
and at 2500 toises height; it appears to me,
that the oscillations are generally very. indepen-
dant of the previous state of the atmosphere.
This opinion is embraced by a number of en-
lightened persons, who inhabit the “Spanish colo-
nies; and whose experience extends, if not over
a greater space of the Globe, at least to a greater
number of years, than mine. On the contrary,
in parts of Europe where earthquakes.are rare
compared to America, natural philosophers are
inclined to admit an intimate coniection between
the undulations of the ground, and certain me-
teors, which accidentally take place at the same
epocha. In Italy, for instance, the siroceo and
earthquakes are suspected to have some connec-
tion; and at London, the frequency of falling
stars, and those southern lights*, which have


* Philos. Transact., vol 46, p.642, 663, and 743. The
appearance of these meteors led two distinguished men of
science, nearly at the same time, to adopt theories diame-
trically opposite to each other. Hales, struck with his ex-
periments on the decomposition of nitrous gas when it comes
into contact with atmospheric air, invented a chemical the-
ory, according to which, the earthquake was the effect “of
a prompt condensation of sulphurous and nitrous exhala-
tions.” Ib. p. 678. Stukeley, familiar with Franklin’s
ideas of the distribution of electricity in the strata of the
atmosphere, considered the oscillatory motion of the surface


_of the Globe as the effect of an electric shock propagated


22%


since been often observed by Mr. Dalton, were
considered as the forerunners of those shocks,
which were felt from 1748 to 1756.

On the days when the earth is shaken by vio-
lent shocks, the regularity of the horary variations
of the barometer is not disturbed under the tro-
pics. I-have verified this observation at Cumana,
at Lima, and at Riobamba; and it is so much
the more worthy of fixing the attention of natu-
ral philosophers, as at St. Domingo, at the town
of .Cape Francois, it is asserted, that a water
barometer * was observed to sink two inches and
a half immediately before the earthquake of 1770.
In the sanie manner it is related, that, at the time
of the destruction of Oran, a druggist fled with
his family, because, observing accidentally, a few
minutes before the earthquake, the height of the
mercury in his barometer, he perccived, that the


from the air to. the earth. Ib. p. 642. Each of these
theories admitted the existence of a large black cloud’ sepa-
rating strata of air unequally charged with -electricity, or
with nitrous vapours; and this cloud was seen at London
at the moment of the first shocks. I mention these veve~
ries, to show to what errors we expose ourselves in geology
and physics, when, instead of taking into view the whole of
the phenomena that occur, we sufler our attention to be ar-
rested by accidental circumstances.

* Currejolles, in the Journal de Phys., tom. liv, p. 106.
This depression answers only to two lines of mercury. The
barometer remained motionless at Pignerol, in April, 1808.
(lbid., t. Ixvii, p. 292.)


225


column sunk in an extraordinary manner.
know not whether we can give credit to this as-
sertion; but as it is nearly impossible to examine
the variations of the weight of the atmosphere
during the shocks; we must be satisfied in observ-
ing the barometer before or after these phano-
mena have taken place. In the temperate zone,
the aurora borealis does not always modify the
variation of the needle, and the intensity of the
magnetic forces *. Perhaps also earthquakes do
not act constantly in the same manner on the air
that surrounds us.

We can scarcely doubt, that the earth, when
opened and agitated by shocks, spreads occasion-
ally gazeous emanations through the atmosphere,
in places remote from the mouths of volcanoes
not extinct. At Cumana, as we have already
observed, flames and vapors mixed with sulphu-
rous acid sprmg up from the most arid soil.
In other parts of the same province, the earth
ejects water and petroleum. At Riobamba a
muddy and inflammable. mass, which is called
moya, issues from crevices that close again, and
accumulates into elevated hills. At seven leagues


* J had an opportunity of observing, conjointly with Mr.
Oltmanns at Berlin, on the night of the 20th of December,
1806, a change of magnetic intensity, The point of con-
vergence of the rays of the Aurora borealis was determined
astronomically by the azimuth of a star. (Gilbert’s Annas
len, 1811, p. 274.)


VOL. II. 2


226


from Lisbon, near Colares, during the terrible
earthquake of the first of November, 1755, flames
and a column of thick smoke were seen to issue
from the flanks. of the rocks of Alvidras, and,
according to some witnesses, fromthe bosom of
the sea*. This smoke lasted several days, and
it was the more abundant in proportion as the
subterraneous noise, which accompanied the
shocks, was louder.

Elastic fluids thrown into the atmosphere may
act locally on the barometer, not by their mass,
which is very small, compared to the mass of the
atmosphere ; but because, at the moment of the
great explosions, an ascending current is probably
formed, which diminishes the pressure of the air.
I am inclined to think, that in the greater part
of earthquakes nothing escapes from the agitated
earth ; and that, where gazeous emanations and
vapours take place, they oftener, acccompany, or
follow, than precede the shocks. This last. cir-
cumstance explains a fact, which seems indubita-
ble, I mean that mysterious influence, in equinoc-
tial America, of earthquakes on the climate, and
on the order of the dry and rainy seasons. If
the earth generally act on the air only at the
moment of the shocks, we can conceive why it
is so rare, that a sensible meteorological change
becomes the presage of these great revolutions of
mature. —


* Phil. Trans., t. xlix, p. 414.


297


The hypothesis according to which, in the earth-
quakes of Cumana, elastic fluids tend to escape
from the surface of the soil, seems confirmed by
the observation of the dreadful noise, which is
heard during the shocks at the borders of the
wells in the plain of Charas. Water and sand
are sometimes thrown out twenty feet high. Si-
milar phenomena have not escaped the observa-
tion of the ancients, who inhabited parts of Greece
and Asia Minor abounding with caverns, crevices,
and subterraneous rivers. Nature, in its uniform
progress, every where suggests the same ideas of
the causes- of earthquakes, and the means by
which man, forgetting the measure of his strength,
pretends to. diminish the effect of the subterra-
neous explosions. What a great Roman natural-
ist has said of the utility of wells and caverns *
“is repeated in the New World by the most igno-


* In puteis est remedium, quale et crebri specus prebent:
conceptum enim spiritum exhalant: quod in eertis notatur


oppidis, que minus quatiuntur, crebris ad eluviem cuniculis
cavata. Plin. Lib. ii, c. 82 (ed. Par. 1725, t i, p- 912).
Even at present, in the capital of St. Domingo, wells are
considered as diminishing the violence of the shocks. I
shall observe on this occasion, that the theory of earth-
quakes, given by Seneca (Nat. Quest., Lib. vi, c. 431),

contains the germe of every thing that has been said in our
times on the action of the elastic vapors confined in the in-
terior of the Globe. (Compare Michell, in the Phil. Trans.,
t. li, p. 566—634; and Dr. Young in Rees's New Cyclope=
dia, Vol. xii, P. 2, art. EARTHQUAKE.)


QZ


228


rant Indians of Quito, when they show travellers
the guaicos, or crevices of Pichincha.

The subterraneous noise, so frequent during
earthquakes, is generally not in the ratio of the
strength of the shocks. At Cumana it constant-
ly precedes them, while at Quite, and for a short
time past at Caracas, and in the’ West India
Islands, a noise like the discharge of a battery
was heard, a long time after the shocks had ceas-
ed. A third kind of phenomenon, the most re-
markable of the whole, is the rolling of those
subterraneous thunders, which last several months,
without being accompanied by the least oscillat-
ing fhotion of the ground *.

In every country subject to earthquakes, the
point where, probably by a particular disposition
of the stony strata, the effects are the most sen-
sible is considered as the cause and the focus
of the shocks. Thus at Cumana the hill of the
castle of St. Antonio, and particularly the emi-
hence on which the convent of St. Francis is
placed, are belived to contain an enormous quan-
tity of sulphur, and other inflammable matter,
We forget, that the rapidity with which the un-


* The subterraneous thunders (bramidos y truenos subter=
raneos) of Guanaxuato will be described in the course of this
werk. (Nouv. Esp., t. p. 47.) ‘The phenomenon of a noise
without shocks had already been observed by the ancients.
(Aristot. Meteor. lib. ii, ed. Duval, p. 802. Plin. lib.
ii, ce 80),


229


dulations are propagated to great distances, even
across the basin of the ocean, proves, that. the
centre of action is very remote from the surface
of the Globe. From this same eause no doubt
earthquakes are not restrained to certain species
of rocks, as some naturalists pretend, but all are
fitted to propagate the movement. In order to
keep within the limits of my own experience, I
shall here cite the granites of Lima and Acapul-
co; the gneiss of Caracas; the mica-slate of
the peninsula of Araya; the primitive thonschiefer
of Tepecuacuilco, in Mexico; the secondary lime-
stones of the Apennines, Spain, and new Anda-
lusia; and finally the trappean porphyries of the
provinces of Quito, and Popayan*. In_ these
different places the ground is frequently agitated
by the most violent shocks; but sometimes, m
the same rock, the superior strata form invincible
obstacles to the propagation of the motion. Thus,
in the mines of Saxony}, we have seen workmen
hasten up affrighted by oscillations, which were
not felt at the surface of the ground.

If, in regions the most remote from each other,
plimitive, secondary, and volcanic rocks, share


* | might have added to the list of secondary rocks the
gypsum of the newest formation, for instance that of Mont»


martre placed on a marine calcareous rock, which is posterior
to the chalk. Sve the Mém, de ?Académie, t. 1, p» 341, on
the earthquake felt at Paris, and in its environs in 1681.

+ At Marienburgh in the Krzgebuerge.


230


equally in the convulsive movements of the Globe;
we cannot but admire also, that, in ground of
little extent, certain classes of rocks oppose them- —
selves to the propagation of the shocks. At Cu-
mana, for instance, before the great catastrophe
of 1797, the earthquakes were felt only along the
southern and calcareous coast of the gulf of Ca-
riaco, as far as the town of this name; while in the
peninsula of Araya, and at the village of Ma-
niquarez, the ground did net partake of the same
agitation. The inhabitants of this northern coast,
which is composed of mica-slate, built their huts
on a motionless earth; a gulf three or four thou-
sand toises in breadth separated them from a plain
covered with ruins, and overturned by earthquakes.
This security, founded on the experience of several
ages, has vanished; and since the 14th of De-
cember, 1797, new communications appear to
have been opened in the interior of the Globe.
At present the peninsula of Araya is not merely
subject to the agitations of the soil of Cumana,
the promontory of mica-slate is becomein its turn
a particular centre of the movements. ‘The earth
is sometimes strongly shaken at the village of Ma-
niquarez, when on the coast of Cumana the in-
habitants enjoy the most perfect tranquillity. ‘The
gulf of Cariaco nevertheless is only sixty or eighty
fathoms deep.

It has been thought from observations made


231


both on the continent and in the islands, that the
western and southern coasts are most exposed to
shocks*. This observation is connected with the
ideas which geologists have long formed of the
position of the high chains of mountains, and the
direction of their steepest declivities ; the existence
of the Cordillera of Caracas, and the frequency
of the oscillations on the eastern and northern
coast of Terra Firma, in the gulf of Paria, at
Carupano, at Cariaco, and at Cumana, are proofs
of the uncertainty of this opinion.

In New Andalusia, as well as in Chiliand
Peru, the shocks follow the course of the shore;
and extend but little inland. ‘This circumstance,
as we shall soon find, indicates an intimate con-
nection between the causes that produce earth-
quakes and volcanic eruptions. If the earth was _
‘most agitated on the coasts, because they are the
lowest part of the land, why should not the os-
cillations be equally strong and frequent on those
vast savaunahs or meadows, which are scarce-
ly eight or ten toises above the level of the
ocean ?

The earthquakes of Cumana‘ areconnected with
those of the West India islands ; and it has even


“* Courrejolles, ‘in the Journ. de Phys., t. liv, p. 104.
+ The Llanos of Cumana, of New Barcelona, of Calabozo,
of Apura, and,of Mcta.
+See my Geological Table of South America, Journ. de


Physique, t. lui, p. 68.


932


been suspected,. that- they have some connection
with the yolcanic. phenomena of the Cordilleras
of the Andes. On the 4th of November, 1797,
the soil of the province of Quito SE eS b
a destructive commotion, that, notw
extreme feebleness of the sities of F that coun-
try, near 40000 natives perished, buried undex


ruins of their houses, swallowed up in the cre
or drowned in lakes that were suddenly formed.

At the same period, the inhabitants of the eastern
Antilles were alarmed by shocks, which continued
during eight months, when the volcano of Guada-
loupe threw out pumice stones, ashes, and gusts of
sulphureous vapors. This eruption of the 27th of
September, during which very long-continued sub-
terraneous noises were heard*, was followed on
the 14th of December by the great earthquake of
Cumana. Another volcano of the West India
islands, that of St. Vincentsf, has lately given a


* Report made to the generals Victor Hugues and Lebas,
by Amie, Peyre, Hapel, Fontelliau, and Codé, appointed to
examine the situation of the volcano of Basse-Terre, and the
effects that had taken place in the night, from the seventh to
the eighth of Vendemiaire, in the year 6: p. 46. This nar-
rative of a journey to the top of the volcano, contains several
curious observations ; it was printed at Guadaloupe in 1798.
+ Letter from Mr. Hamilton to Sir Joseph Banks, 1813.
The eruption began on the 30th of April, 1812; it was pre-
ceded by repeated earthquakes during eleven months, (Phil.
Trans. for 1785, p. 16.)


235


fresh instance, of these extraordinary connections.
This volcano had not emitted flames since 1718,
when they burst forth anew, in 1812. The total
ruin of the city of Caracas* preceded this explo-
sion thirty-five days, and violent oscillations of
the ground were felt, both in the islands, and on
the coasts of Terra Firma.

It has long been remarked, that the effects of
great earthquakes extend much farther than the
phenomena arising from burning volcanoes. In
studying the physical revolutions of Italy, carefully
examining the series of the eruptions of Vesuvius
and Etna, we can scarcely recognize, notwithstand-
ing the proximity of these mountains, any traces
of a simultaneous action. It is on the contrary
doubtless, that at the period of the last and pre-
ceding destruction of Lishont, the sea was vio-


. * The 26th of March, 1812.

+The Ist of November 1755, and 31st of Mareh 1761.
During the first of these three earthquakes, the ocean inun-
dated, in Europe, the coasts of Sweden, England, and Spain 3
in America, the islands of Antigua, Barbadoes, and Marti-
nico. At Barbadoes, where the tides rise only from 24 to 28
inches, the water rose twenty feet in Carlisle Bay. It be-
came at the same time “as black as ink ;” because, without
doubt, it was mixed with the petroleum, or asphaltum,
which abounds at the boltom of the sea, as well on the
coasts of the gulf of Cariaco, as near the island of Trinidad.
In the West Indies, and iz several lakes of Switzerland, this
extraordinary motion of the waters was observed six hours


after the first shocas that. was felt at Lisbon. (Phil, Trans,


234


lently agitated even as far as the New World, for
instance, at the island of Barbadoes, more than
twelve hundred leagues distant from’ the coasts of
Portugal,


Several facts tend to prove, that the causes


vol. klix, p. 403, 410, 544, 668; ibid., vol. lii, p. 424.) At
Cadiz a mountain of water sixty feet high was seen eight
miles distant at sea; this mass threw itself impetuously on
the coasts, and beat down a great number of edifices ; like
the wave fourscore and four feet high, which, on the 9th of
June, 1586, at the time of the great earthquake of Lima, co-
vered the port of Callao. (Acosta, \Hist. natural de las Indias,
ed. de 1591, p. 123.) In North America, on Lake Ontuarios
strong agitations of the water were observed, from the month
of October-1755. ‘These phenomena are proofs of subterra-
neous communications at enormous distances. On compare
ing the epochas of the great catastrophes of Lima and Guae
timala, which generally succeed each other at long intervals,
it has sometimes been thought, that the effect of an action
slowly propagating itself along the Cordilleras, sometimes
from north to south, at other times from south to north, may
be perceived. (Cosme Bueno, Deseripcion del Peru, ed. de


Lima, p. 67.) The following are four of these remarkable
epochas.


Mexico. Peru,
(Lat. 13° 32? north.) (Lat. 12° 27 south.)
30th of Nov. 1577. 17th of June, 1578.
4th of March, 1679, 17th of June, 1678.
12th of Feb. 1689. 10th of Oct. 1688.
27th of Sept. 1717. 8th of Feb. 1716.


When the shocks are not simultaneous, or do not follow
at short intervals, great doubts may be entertained with re
spect to the pretended communication of the movement.


235


which produce earthquakes have a near connec-
tion with those that act in volcanic eruptions*.
We learnt at Pasto, that the column of black and
thick smoke, which, in 1797, issued for several
months from the volcano near this shore, disappear-
ed at the very hour, when, sixty leagues to the
south, the towns of Riobamba, Hambato, and
Tacunga were overturned by an enormous shock.


When, in the interior of a burning crater, we are


seated near those hillocks formed by ejections of
scoriz and ashes, we feel the motion of the ground
several seconds before each partial eruption takes
place. We observed this phenomenon at Vesu-
vius in 1805, while the mountain threw out scorie
at a white heat ; we were witnesses of it in 1802,
on the brink of the immense crater of Pichincha,


* The connection of these causes, already known to the
ancients, excited fresh atiention at the period of the discovery
of America. (Acosta, p. 121.) This discovery not only
oflered new productions to the curiosity of men, it gave also
extent to their ideas on physical geography, on the varieties
of the human species, and the migrations of nations. It is
impossible to read the first narratives of the Spanish tra-
vellers, especially those of the Jesuit Acosta, without per-
ceiving with surprise the influence which the aspect of a great
continent, the study of extraordinary appearances of nature,
and an intercourse with men of different races, have exerted
on the progress of knowledge in Europe. The germe of a
great number of physical truths is found in the works of the
sixteenth century ; and this germe would have fructified, had
it not’ been crushed by fanaticism and superstition.


236


from which nevertheless at that time clouds of
sulphureous acid vapours only issued.
Every thing in earthquakes seems to indicate
the action of elastic fluids seeking an outlet to
spread themselves in the atinosphere. Often, on
the coasts of the South Sea, the action is almost
instantaneously communicated from Chilj to: the
gulf of Guayaquil, a distance of six hundred
leagues; and, what is very remarkable, the shocks
‘appear to be so much the stronger, as the country
is more distant from burning volcanoes. The
granitic mountains of Calabria, covered with very
recent breccia, the calcareous chain of the Apen-
nines, the country of Pignerol, the coasts of Por-
tugal and Greece, those of Peru and Terra Firma,
afford striking proofs of this assertion*, ~The
Globe, it may be said, is agitated with greater
force, in proportion as the surface has a smaller
number of funnels communicating with the caverns
of the interior. At Naples and at Messina, at
the foot of Cotopaxi and of Tunguragua, earth-
quakes are dreaded only when vapours and flames
do not issue from the crater. In the kingdom of
Quito, the great catastrophe of Riobamba, which
we have before mentioned, has led~seyeral well-
informed persons to think, that this unfortunate
country would be less often desolate, if the sub-
terraneous fire should break the porphyritic dome


* Fleuriau de Bellevue, Journ, de Phys., t. Ixii, p. 261,


237


of Chimborazo; and if this colossal .mountain
should become a burning volcano. At all times
analogous facts have led to the same hypothesis,
The Greeks, who, like ourselves, attributed the
oscillations of the ground to the tension of elastic
fluids, cited in favour of their opinion the total
cessation of the shocks at the island of Kuboa, by
the opening of a crevice in the Lelantine plain®.

We have endeavoured to. collect at the end of
this chapter the general phenomena of earthquakes
under different climates. We have shown, that
subterraneous vapours are subjected to laws as
uniform as the mixture of gazeous fluids, which
constitutes our atmosphere. We have abstained
from all discussion of the nature of the chemical
agents, which are the causes of the great derange-
ments that the surface of the earth undergoes from
time to time. It is sufficient here to observe, that
these causes are concealed at immense depths ; and
that we must seek them in the rocks which we
call primitive, perhaps even below the earthy and
oxided crustof thé Globe, in the abysses that contain
the metalloidal bases of silex, lime, soda, and
potash.


The phenomena of volcanoes, and those of
earthquakes, have been considered of late as the


* The shocks ceased only when a crevice, which ejected &
“© riyer of fiery mud,” opened in the plain of Lelantum, near
Chaleis. Strabo, lib. 1, ed. Oxon., 1807, t. i, p. 85. (See also
the translation by M. du Theil, t. i, p. 137, note 4.)


238


effects of voltaic electricity, developed by a par-
ticular disposition of heterogeneous strata. It
cannot be denied, that often, when violent shocks
succeed each other in the space of a few hours,
the electricity of the air* sensibly increases at the
instant the ground is most agitated; but in order
to explain this phenomenon, it is unnecessary to
recur to an hypothesis, which is in direct. contra-
diction to every thing that has hitherto been ob-
served respecting the structure of our planet, and
the disposition of its strata.


* See the electroscopical experiments made in Piedmont,
in the valleys of Pelis and Clusson, in 1808. Journal de
Phys., t. 67, p» 292.


ae


CHAPTER V,


a


Peninsula of Araya.—Salt-marshes.—Ruins of
the Castle of San Giacomo.


Tue first weeks of our abode at Cumana were em-
ployed in verifying our instruments, in herbalizing
in the neighbouring fields, and in examining the
traces of the earthquake of the 14th of December,
1797. Overpowered at once by a great number of
objects, we were somewhat embarrassed to lay
down a regular plan of study and observation. If
every thing around us was fitted to inspire us with
the most lively interest, our physical and astro-
nomical instruments in their turns excited strongly
the curiosity of the inhabitants. We were dis-
tracted by frequent visits ; and in order not to dis-
satisfy persons, who appeared so happy to see the
spots of the Moon through Dollond’s telescope,
the absorption of two gazes in a eudiometrical tube,
or the effects of galvanism on the motions of a
frog, we were obliged to answer questions often
obscure, and repeat for: whole hours the same
‘experiments.

These scenes were renewed for the space of five
years, every time that we took up our abode in a


240


place where it was understood, that we were in
‘possession of microscopes, telescopes, and electri-


cal apparatus.


They were in general so much the


more fatiguing, as the persons who visited us had
confused notions of astronomy and physicks; two


sciences, which in the Spanish colonies are desig-


nated under the singular name of the new philoso-
phy, nueva filosophia. ‘The half-scientific looked
ou us with a sort of disdain, when they learnt that
we had not brought in our collection of books
the Spectacle de la Nature by Abbé Pluche, the
Cours de Physique of Sigaud la Fond, or the
Dictionary of Valmont de Bomare. ‘These three
works, and the Yraité d'Economie politique of
Baron Bielfeld, are the foreign work smost known
and esteemed in Spanish America, from Caracas
and Chili to Guatimala and the north of Mexico.
No one is thought learned, who cannot quote their
translations ; and it is only in the great capitals, at
Lima, at Santa Fe de Bogota, and at Mexico, that
the names of Haller, Cavendish, and Lavoisier, begin
to take the place of those, that have enjoyed
popular celebrity for these fifty years past.

The curiosity excited respecting the pheenomena
of the heavens, and various objects of the natural
sciences, takes a very different character among
anciently civilized nations, and among those who
have made but little progress in the unfolding of
their intellectual faculties. Each of them exhibits


in the highest classes of society frequent examples


241


of persons unacquainted with science ; but in the
colonies, and among new people, curiosity, far
from being idle or transient, arises from an ardent
desire of instruction, and discovers itself with an
ingenuousness and simplicity, which in Europe are
the characteristics only of youth.

I could not begin a regular. course of astro-
nomical observations: before the 28th of July,


though it was highly important for me to know the.


longitude given by Berthoud’s time-keeper ; but it
happened, that in a country, where the sky is
constantly clear and serene, no stars appeared for
several nights. Every day, two hours after the
Sun had passed the meridian, a storm gathered ;
and I had great difficulty in obtaining correspon-
dent altitudes of the Sun, though I took three or
four sets at different intervals. The chrono
metrical longitude of Cumana differed only four
seconds in time from that which I deduced from


the celestial phenomena; yet our voyage had
lasted more than forty days, and during the ex-
cursion to the top of the Peak of Teneriffe, the
watch had been exposed to great variations of


temperature *.

- From the whole of the observations { which I
made in 1799 and 1800 it follows, that the
latitude of the great. square at Cumana is


* Astron. Obsery. vol. i, p. xxiv.
+ Ibid, vol.i, p- 42 to 92.
VOL. II. R


ee re ee
aS 1S ASE Sea ae =


242


10° 27’ 52”, and its longitude 66° 90 2’. This
longitude is founded on the difference of time, on
lunar distances, on the eclipse of the Sun on the
28th of October, 1799, and on ten immersions of
Jupiter’s satellites, compared with observations
made in Europe. It differs very little from that
which Mr. Fidalgo had obtained before me, but
only by mere chronometrical means. The. oldest
chart which we have of the Continent, that of Don
Diego Ribeiro, geographer to the emperor Charles
the Fifth, places Cumana in latitude 9° 30'*$§.
which differs fifty-eight minutes from the real
latitude, and half a degree, from that marked by
Jefferies in his Amcrican Pilot, published in 1794.
During three centuries the. whole of the coast of
Terra Firma has been laid down too far to the
south: this has been owing to the current near the
island of Trinidad, which sets toward the north,
and mariners are led. by ‘their dead-reckoning,
to think ‘themselves farther South than they
really are.

On the 17th of August a halo, or luminous
circle, round the Moon, fixed the attention of the
inhabitants, who considered it as the presage of
some violent earthquake; for, according to the
physical notions of the people, all extraordinary.


* According to Herera, latitude 9° 50’ (Descripcion de las
Indias Occid. p. 9). According to the Carte de l’Octan
Atlantique, publiée au Dépdt de la Marine en 1792, latitude
9° 52’, The chart of Ribeiro is of the year 1529.


NSS,


245


phenomena are immediately connected with each
other. Coloured circles around the Moon ate
much more rare in the countries of the north, than
in Provence, Italy, and Spain. They are seen
particularly, and this fact is singular enough, when
the sky is clear, and the weather seems to be most
fair and settled. Under the torrid zone beautiful
prismatic colours appear almost every night, even at
the time of the greatest droughts ; often in the space
of a few minutes they disappear several times,
because, without doubt, the superior currents
change the state of the floating vapours, by which
the light is refracted. I sometimes even observed,
between the fifteenth degree of latitude and the
equator, small haloes around the planet Venus ;
the purple, orange, and violet, were distinctly per-
ceived ; but I never saw any colours around Sirius,
Canopus, or Acherner.

While the halo was visible at Cumtana, the
hygrometer noted great humidity ; nevertheless the
vapours appeared so perfectly in solution, or rather
so elastic and uniformly disseminated, that they
did not alter the transparency of the atmosphere.
The Moon arose aftera storm of rain, behind the
castle of St. Antonio. As soon as she appeared
on the horizon, we distinguished two circles; one
large and whitish, forty-four degrees in diameter ;
the other a small circle of 1° 4.3’, displaying all the
colours of the rainbow. The space between the
two circles was of the deepest azure. At four

R2


244


degrees height, they disappeared, while the
meteorological instruments indicated not. the
slightest change in the lower regions of the air.
This phenomenon had nothing extraordinary, ex-
cept the great brilliancy of the colors, added to the
circumstance, that, according to the measures taken
with Ramsden’s sextant, the lunar disk was not
exactly in the centre of the haloes. Without this
actual measurement, we might have thought, that
the excentricity was the effect of the projection of
the circles on the apparent concavity of the sky *,


* The 17th of August, 1799: thermometer, 25” 3’;
Delue’s hygrometer, 68°. The altitude of the Moon being
11° 8’, the herizontal diameter of the little corona was 1° nO",
and its vertical diameter 1°43’. The distance from the centre
of the Moon to the upper edge of the small halo was forty-one
minutes, and to the lewer edge fifty-nine minutes. The
whole space between the lunar disk and the extremity of the
‘small halo, shone with prismatic colours. The horizontal
diameter of the large white halo was 42° 37, When the
Moon had attained the altitude of 37° 34% above the horizon,
the diameter of the greater halo was 44° 10’, and the breadth
of the milky band 3° 35’. The Moon no longer showed any

excentricity, and the small halo had only 1° 27/ diameter.
These measures were taken without a telescope, and by
bringing with the sextant the edge of the Moon into contact
with the very well defined extremities of both haloes, It
seemed to me difficult to admit my being deceived niveteen
minutes with respect to the excentricity of the Moon: the
refraction would have rather diminished than have augmented
the extent of the halo toward the lower edge. We must not
eenfound this phenomenon, which belongs to the last strata


245


The form of the haloes, and the colors of the
atmosphere of the tropics enlightened by the
Moon, are worthy of new researches on the part
of natural philosophers. At Mexico, im extremely
fine weather, I have seen large bands*, having
all the colours of the rainbow, spread along the
vault of the sky, and converging toward the lunar
disk; a curious meteor, which reminds us of that
described by Mr. Cotes f in 1716.

If the situation of our house at Cumana was
highly favourable for the observation of the stars
and meteorological phenomena, it obliged us to
be sometimes the witnesses of afflicting scenes in
the day. A part of the great square is surrounded
with arcades, above which is one of those long
wooden galleries, which are common in warm
countries. This was the place where slaves,
brought from the coast of Africa, were sold. Of
all the European governments Denmark was the
first, and for a long time the only power, that


of the atmosphere, and which is observed in a clear sky
without any visible vapours, with those coloured circles, which
are projected on the white clouds driven - by the wind before
the lunar disk, and which have only seven or eight hundred
toises of absolute height. (See Gibbes Walker Jordan, in
Nicholson’s Journ, 4to. ed., vol. iv, p. 1413 and Newton’s
Optics, 1722, p. 476.)

* The night of the 8th of May, 1813.

+ Smith’s Optics, French translation, 1767, t. i, p. 173,
§. 109, and p. 121, §. 169.


246


abolished the trade; notwithstanding which, the
first negroes we saw exposed for sale had been
landed from a Danish slave-ship. What are the -
duties of humanity, national honour, or the laws
of his country, to a man stimulated by the specula-
tions of sordid. interest ?

The ‘slaves exposed to sale were young men
from fifteen to twenty years of age. very morn-
ing cocoa-nut oil was distributed among them,
with which they rubbed their bodies, to give their I
skin a black polish. The persons who came to
purchase examined the teeth of these slaves, to
judge of their age and health; forcing open their
mouths as we do those of horses in a market. This
degrading custom dates from Africa, as is proved
by the faithful picture, which, in one of his dra-
matic pieces *, Cervantes, released from his long
captivity among the Moors, has drawn of the sale
of the Christian slaves at-Algiers. It is distressing
to think, -that even at this day there exist
European colonists in the West Indies, who mark
their slaves with a hot iron, to know them again
if they escape. This is the treatment bestowed on
those, “‘ who save other men the trouble ef sowing,


tilling, and reaping, in order to live f.”


* El Trato de Argel. Jorn. If (Viage al Parnasso, 1784,
p. 316).

+ La Bruyére, Caractéres, Chap. XI. (ed. 1765, p. 300). I
wish to cite at length a passage, in which the love of the
human species is drawn with force, or rather with noble


el


a TRE


pis Deaaee 2
ete eS i


rz


el


247


The greater the impression which the first
sale of negroes made on us, the more we con-
gratulated ourselves on living among a people,
and on a continent, where this sight is rare, and
where the number of slaves is in general very
inconsiderable. The number in 1800 did not
exceed six thousand in the two provinces of Cu-
mana and Barcelona, when at the same period the
whole population was estimated at. one hundred
and ten thousand inhabitants. The trade in Afri-
can slaves, which the Spanish laws have never
favored, is almost nothing on coasts, where the
trade in American slaves was carried on in the
sixteenth century with a desolating activity. Ma-
carapan, anciently called Amaracapana, Cumana,
Araya, and particularly New Cadiz, built on the
islet of Cubagua, might then be considered as
commercial establishments to facilitate the trade.
Girolamo Benzoni.of Milan, who at the age of
twenty-two years, had gone over to Terra Firma,
took part in some expeditions made in 1542 to
the codsts of Bordones, Cariaco, and Paria, to
carry off the unfortunate natives. He relates with


severity. ‘ We find (under the torrid-zone) certain wild ani-
mals, male and female, scattered through the country, black,
livid, and all over scorched by the Sun, bent to the earth
which they dig and turn up with invincible perseverance.
They have something like an articulate voice; and, when
they stand up on their feet, they exhibit a human face, and
in fact these creatures are men.”


ibility not com-


Ollans of that time, the exa


ci cruejt;, of which he was a witness. é
the slaves dragged to. New Cadiz, to be marked
on the forehead and on the arms, and to pay the
quint to the officers of the crown. From. this
port the Indians were sent to the island of. Hay-
ti*, or St. Domingo, after having often changed
masters, not by way of sale, but because the
soldiers played for them at dice.

The first excursion we made was directed to-
ward the peninsula of Araya, and those coun-
tries formerly too much celebrated for the slave-
trade and pearl-fishery. We embarked on the
Rio Manzanares, near the Indian suburb, on the
igth of August, about two in the morning, , The
principal object of this excursion was to sce the


* «© Noi pigliammo dugento e quaranta schiavi fra maschi
e femine, piccoli e grandi. Cosa veramente molto colupase
sionevole da vedera la condutta di quelle meschine creature,
nude, stanche, stropiate. Le infelici. madri con due e tre
figliuoli su le spalle e in collo, colme di pianto e di dolore,
afflitte, legati tutti da cordee di eatene di ferro al collo, alle
braccia, e alle mani.’ Si conducono a Cubagua e tutti si
marchiano in facciae su le braccia con ferro infocato, sege
nato d'un C ; poi gli capitani ne fanno parte a soldati, ‘che
gli vendono, o se gli giuocano Vuno con altro. Se paga il
quinto delle perle, del oro e dei schiavi a gli ufficiali del:Re.’?
Benzoni, Hist. del Mondo Nuovo., 1565, p. 4,7, and 9. It


was thus that the Phenicians and Carthaginians formerly
sought for slaves in Europe, Heyne, Opuscula, t. iii, p.
63. .


249


ruins of the Castle of Araya, to examine the salts
works, and make a few geological observations
on the mountains, that form the narrow penin-
sula of Maniquarez. The night was delightfully


cool; swarms of phosphorescent insects * glittered


in the air, and over a soil covered with sesuvium,
and groves of mimosa, that bordered the river.
We know how common the glow-worm } is in
Italy, and in all the south of Europe ; but the pic-
turesque effect it produces cannot be compared
to those innumerable, scattered, and moving lights,
that embellish the nights of the torrid zone, and
seem to repeat on the earth, ‘along the vast ex-
tent of the savannahs, the spectacle of the starry
vault of the sky.

When, on descending the river, we drew near
some plantations, or charas, we saw bonfires kin-
dled by the negroes ; a light and undulating smoke
rose to the tops of the palm-trees, and gave a
reddish color to the disk of the Moon. It was
ona Sunday night, and the slaves were dancing
to the noisy and monotonous music of the guitar.
The people of Africa, of negro race, have an in-
exhaustible store of activity and gayety in their
character. . After having passed through the pain-
ful labors of the week, the slaves, on days of
festival, prefer the sounds of music, and the dance,


* [later noctilucus.
+ Lampynis italica, 1, noctiluca.


250


to listless sleep. Let us not blame this mixture
of carelessness and levity, which softens the bit-
terness of a life full of pains and sorrows !

The bark in which we passed the Gulf of
Cariaco was very spacious. Large skins of the
jaguar, or American tiger, were spread for our
repose during the night. We had scarcely been
two months under the torrid zone, and our or-
gans were’ already become so sensible to the
smallest, variation of temperature, that the cold
prevented us from sleeping; while to our surprise
we saw that the centigrade thermometer was as
high as 21°8°, This observation, well known
to those who have lived a long time in the Indies,
is worthy the attention of physiologists. Bouguer
relates, that, when he reached the summit of Mon-
tagne Pelée, in the island of Martinico, he and
his companion shook with cold, though the heat
was above 23'5 degrees*. In reading the inte-


* Figure de la Terre, p. liv. The height of this summit is
736 toises, according to Dupuget ; and 666 toises, according
to M. Le Blond. This elevation consequently is not cone
siderable enough, to cause a feeling of cold, as at Chimbo=
razo and Pichincha, by the smaller quantity of oxygen in.
haled by the lungs from a dilated air. If the barometer (at
16°2° temperature) keeps at the top of the Montagne Pelée
at 24 inches 2 lines (Le Blond, Voy. aux Antilles et dans
P Amérique Méridionale, t.i, p. 87), the absolute height of
this point is 660 toises, according to the rule of M. Laplace;
supposing at the level of the sea the height of the mercury
28 inches | line, and the thermometer at twenty-five deg ees.


i
-
i
!
j


251,


resting narrative of Captain Bligh, who, in con-
sequence of a mutiny on board the Bounty, was
forced to make a voyage of twelve hundred leagues
in an open boat, we see, that this navigator, in
the tenth and twelfth degrees of south. latitude,
suffered much more from cold than from hunger.
During our abode at Guayaquil, in the month of
January, 1803, we observed, that the natives co-
vered themselves, and complained of the cold,
when the thermometer sunk to 23°8°, while the
heat appeared suffocating at 30°5°. Six or seven
degrees were sufficient to cause the opposite sen-
sations of cold and heat, because on these coasts
of the South Sea the habitual temperature of
the atmosphere is twenty-eight degrees. The hu-
midity, which modifies the conducting power of
the air for heat, contributes greatly to these im-
pressions. In the port of Guayaquil, as every
where else in. the low regions of the torrid zone,
the weather grows cool only from storms of rain:
and I have shee that, when the thermometer
sinks to 23°8°, De Luc’s hygrometer keeps up


* Bligh’s Voyage to the South Sea, translated by Soulés,
p- 265 and 316. The crew in the boat were often wet by
the waves; but we know, that in this latitude, the tempe-
rature of the sea water cannot be below twenty-three degrees,
and that the cold produced by evaporation is inconsiderable
during the night, when the temperature of the air seldom


exceeds twenty-five degrees.
{ = 3


252


to fifty and fifty-two degrees *; it is, on the con-
trary, at thirty seven degrees t in a temperature of
30°5°. At Cumana, in very heavy showers, we
hear in the streets; gue hielo ! estoy empara-
mado}; though the thermometer exposed to the
rain sinks only to 21°5°. From the whole of
these observations it follows, that between the tro-


* 85°8 and 86°4° of Saussure’s hygrometer,
+ 73° Sauszure.

t “ What an icy cold! I shiver as of I was on the top of
the mountains.” The provincial word emparamarse can be trans-
lated only by a very long periphrasis. Paramo, in Peruvian
puna, 18 a denomination found on all the maps of Spanish
America. “In the colonies it signifies neither a desert
nor a heath, but a mountainous place covered with
stunted trees, exposed to the winds, and in whieh a damp
cold perpetually reigns. Under the torrid zone, the paramoes
are generally from one thousand six hundred to two thousand
toises high. Snow often falls on them, but it remains only
a few hours; for we must not confound, 2s geographers often
do, the words paramo and puna with that of nevado, in Peru-
vian ritticapa, a mountain which-enters into the limits of the
perpetual snows. These notions are highly interesting to
geology, and the geography of plants; because, in countries
where no height has been measured, we may form an exact
idea of the least height to which the Cordilleras rise, in looke
ing into the map for the words paramo aud nevado. As the
paramoes are almost continually enveloped in a cold and
thick fog, the people say, at Santa Fé, andat Mexico, cae un
paramo, when a thick small rain falls, and the temperature
of the air sinks considerably. From paramo has been made
emparam3se, to be as cold as if we were on the ridge of the
Ande .


[Xe


a3


pics, in plains where the temperature of the air
is in the day time almost invariably above twenty-
seven degrees, warmer clothing during the night
is requisite, whenever in a damp air the thermo-
meter sinks four or five degrees.

We landed, about eight in the morning, at the
point of Araya, near the new salt-works. A so=
litary house stands in a plain destitute of vegeta-
tion, near a battery of three guns, which is the
only defence of this coast, since the destruction
of the fort of St. James’s.. The inspector of the
salt-works passes his life in a hammock, whence
he issues his orders to the workmen :. a boat be-
longing to the king (/a dancha del re) brings him
every week his provision from Cumana. It is
surprising, that a salt-work, which formerly ex-
cited the jealousy of the English, Dutch, and
other maritime powers, has not given rise to a
village, or even a farm; a few huts only of poor
Indian fishermen are found at the extremity of the
point of Araya.

We see at the same time, from this spot, the


“islet of Cubagua, the lofty hills of Margaretta, the


ruins of the castle of St. Jago, the Cerro de la
Vela, and the calcareous chain of the Bergantin,
which bounds. the horizon toward the south. | I
availed myself of this view, to take the angles be-
tween these different points, from a basis of four
hundred toises, which I measured between the
battery and the bill called the Penna. As the
Cerro de la Vela, Bergantin, and the castle of St.


254


, Antonio at Cumana, are equally visible from the
Punta Arenas, situate to the west of the village
of Maniquarez, the same objects were employed
for an approximate determination of the respective
positions of several points, which are laid down
jn the mineralogical chart. of the peninsula of
Araya. It follows from these data, that the mere
of the old salt-works is nearly in 10° 33’. The
difference of longitude between Cumana and the
new salt-works is, according to Mr. Fidalgo,
5°34”. found the same difference by the time-
keeper*. The horary angles were exact to three
or four seconds nearly; but I have no confidence
in the chronometrical result, because the difference
of time amounted only to a few seconds, and the
gain of the watch on mean time at Cumana could
not be verified immediately after my return, but
only four days later.

The abundance of saltt contained in the penin-
sula of Araya was already known to Alonzo
Ninnof, when, following the steps of Columbus,
Ojeda, and Amerigo Vespucci, he visited these
countries in 1499. Though of all the people on
the Globe the natives of America are those
who consume the least salt, because they scarcely
eat any thing but vegetables, it nevertheless ap-


* Astron. Observ. vol. i, p. 6, No. 17.
+ Muriat of soda.
~ } Caulin, Hist. chorografica, p. 123.


955


pears, that the Guayquerias already dug into the
clayey and muriatiferous soil of Punta Arenas.
Even the brine-pits, which are now called new,
and which are situate at the extremity of Cape
Araya, had been worked at very early periods.
The Spaniards settled at first at Cubagua, and
soon after on the coasts of Cumana, worked from
the beginning of the sixteenth century the salt
marshes, which stretch away in the form of a
mere to the north of Cerro de la Vela. As at
that period the peninsula of Araya had no settled
population, the Dutch availed themselves of the
natural riches of a soil, which appeared a property
common to all nations. In our days, each colony
has its own salt-works, and navigation is so much
improved, that the merchants of Cadiz can send at
small expense salt from Spain and Portugal to
the southern hemisphere, a distance of 1900
leagues, to cure meat at Monte Video and Buenos
Ayres. These advantages were unknown at the
time of the conquest; colonial industry had then
made so little progress, that the salt of Araya was
carried at great expense to the West India islands,
Carthagena and Portobello*. In 1605, the court
of Madrid sent armed ships to Punta Araya, with
orders to station themselves there, and expel the
Dutch by force of arms. The Dutch, however,


*% MSS of the archives of Cumana. (Informes lechos sobre
ta Salina, nueva.)


256


continued to carry on a contraband trade. in salt,
till, in 1622, a fort was built near the salt-works,
that afterward became celebrated under the name
of the Castillo de Santiago, or of the Real Fuerza
de Araya. The gréat salt-marshes are laid down
on the oldest Spanish maps, sometimes as a bay,
and at other times as a mere. Laet, who wrote
his Orbis Novus in 1633, and who had some
excellent notions respecting these coasts, expressly
states, that the mere was separated from the sea
by an isthmus above the level of high water. In
1726, an extraordinary event destroyed the salt-
works of Araya, and rendered the fort, the con-
struction of which had cost more than a million of
piastres, useless. An impetuous hurricane took
place, which was a very rare phenomenon in these
regions, where the sea is in general as calm as the
water in our large rivers. The waves overflowed
the land to a great extent; and by the effect of
this eruption of the ocean the salt lake was con-
verted into a gulf several miles in length. Since
this period, artificial reservoirs, or pits, (vasets)
have been formed, to the north of the range of
hills. which separates the castle from the north
coast of the peninsula.

The consumption of salt amounted in 1799 and
1800, in the two provinces of. Cumana™ and Bar-


* At the period of my voyage the government of Cumana
eomprehended the two provinces of New Andalusia and New


Ce


257


celona, to nine or ten thousand fanegas, each six-
teen arrobas, or four hundred weight. This con-
sumption is very considerable, and gives, if we de-
duct from the total population fifty thousand In-
dians, who eat very little salt, sixty pounds for
each person. In France, according to Mr. Neck-
er, twelve or fourteen pounds only are reckoned ;
and this difference must be attributed to the quan-
tity of salt employed in curing meat. Salt beef,
called ¢asajo, is the most important article of ex-
port. from Barcelona. Of nine or ten thousand
‘fanegas furnished by the two provinces united,
three thousand only are produced by the salt-
works of Araya; the rest is extracted from the
sea-water at the Morro of Barcelona, at Pozuelos,
at Piritu, and in the Golfo Triste. In Mexico, the
salt lake of Pennon Blanco alone furnishes yearly


Barcelona. The words province and govierno, or government,
of Cumana, are consequently not synonimous. A Catalan,
Juan de Urpin, who had been by turns a canon, doctor of
laws, counsellor at law in St. Domingo, and private soldier
in the castle of Araya, founded, in 1036, the city of New
Barcelona, and attempted to give the name of New Catalonia
(Nueva Cathalunna) to the province, of which this newly
constructed city became the capital. This attempt was fruit-
jess ; and it is from the capital that the whole province took
its natne. Since my departure from America, it has been
raised to the’rank of a Govierno. In New Andalusia, the In-
dian name of Cumana has prevailed over those of Nueva To-
ledo and Nueva Cordoba, which we find on the maps of the
seventeenth century,


YOL. II, s


258


more than two hundred and fifty thousand fanegas
of unpurified salt*.

The province of Caraccas possesses fine salt-.
works at Los Rogues; that which formerly exist-
at the small island of Tortuga, where the soil is
strongly impregnated with muriat of soda, was
destroyed by order of the Spanish government.
A canal was made, by which the sea has free
access to the salt-marshes. Foreign nations, who
have colonies in the West Indies, frequented this
uninhabited island ; and the court of Madrid, from
views of suspicious policy, was apprehensive, that
the salt-works of Tortuga would have given rise
to settlements, by means of which an illicit trade
would have been carried on with Terra Firma.

The royal administration of the salt-works of
Araya dates only from the year 1792. Before
that period they were in the hands of Indian fish-
ermen, who manufactured salt at their pleasure,
and sold it, paying the government the moderate
sum of three hundred piastres. . The price of the
fanega was then four realst; but the salt was
extremely impure, gray, mixed with earthy parti-


* New Spain, vol. ii, p. 562 and 595.
+In this narrative, as well as in the Political Essay on
New Spain, all the prices are reckoned in piastres, and silver
reals (reales de plata). Light of these reals are. equivalent
to a piastre, or one hundred and five sous, French money
{4c. 43d. English]. Nouv. Esp., vol. ii, p. 519, 616, and
8fiG.


a


259


cles, and surcharged with muriat and sulphat of
magnesia, As the manufacture or labor of the
salt-makers was also carried on in the most irres
gular manner, salt was often wanted for curing
meat and fish; a circumstance that has a powerful
influence in these countries on the progress of
industry, as the lower class of people and the
slaves live on fish, and a small portion of tasajo:
Since the province of Cumana has become depen-
dant on the intendancy of Caraccas, the sale of
salt is under the excise ; and the fanega, which
the Guayquerias sold at half a piastre, costs a
piastre and a half*.. This augmentation of price
is slightly compensated by a greater purity of the
salt, and by the facility with which the fishermen
and farmers can procure it in abundance during
the whole year. The salt-works of Araya yielded
the treasury in 1799 a clear income of eight thou-
sand _piastres.

From these statistical accounts it results, that
the manufacture of salt is of no great import-
tance considered as a branch of industry. It
is more worthy our attention on account of the
nature of the soil, which contains the salt-marshes.
In order to have a clear idea of the geological
connection of this mufiatiferous soil with the rocks


* The fanega is. sold to those Indians and fishermen who
do not pay thé daties (derechos reales), at Punta Araya for
six, at Cumana for eight reals.’ The prices to the other
tribes are, at Araya ten, at Cumana twelve reals.


s


260


of more ancient formation, we shall take a general
view of the neighbouring mountains of Cumana,
and those of the peninsula of Araya, and the island
of Margaretta.

Three great parallel chains extend themselves
from east to west. The two most northerly chains
are primitive, and contain the mica-slates of Ma-
canao, and the valley of San Juan, of Maniquarez,
and of Chuparipari. These we shall distinguish
by the names of Cordillera of the island of Mar-
garetta, and Cordillera of Araya. ‘The third
chain, the most southerly of the whole, the Cor-
dillera of Bergantin and of Cocoliar, contains
rocks only of secondary formation ; and, what is
remarkable enough, though analogous to the geo-
logical constitution of the Alps to the west of St.
Gothard, the primitive chain is much less ele-
vated than that which was composed of secondary
rocks*, The sea has separated the two northern


*In New Andalusia, the Cordillera of Cocollar no where
contains primitive rocks. If these rocks form the nucleus
of this link, and rise above the level of the neighbouring
plains, which is scarcely probable, we must suppose, that
they are all covered. with lime-stone and sand-stone. In the
Swiss Alps, on the contrary, the link which is designated
under the too vague denomination of lateral and calcareous
link, contains primitive rocks, which, according. to the -va-
luable observations of Escher and Leopold von Buch, are
often visible to the height. of eiglit hundred or a thousand
toises.


261


’


Cordilleras, those of the island of Margaretta, and
the peninsula of Araya; and the small islands of
Coche and of Cubagua, are remnants of the land
that was submerged. Farther to the south, the
vast gulf. of Cariaco stretches away, like a
longitudinal valley formed by the irruption of the
ocean, between the two links of Araya and Cocol-
lar, between the mica-slates and the Alpine lime-
stones. We shall soon see, that the direction of the
strata, very regular in the first of these rocks, is
not quite parallel to the general direction of the
gulf. In the high Alps of Europe, the great
longitudinal valley of the Rhone also sometimes
cuts * at an oblique angle the calcareous banks in
which it has been excavated.
The two parallel links of Araya and Cocollar
were connected, to the east of the town of Cariaco,
between the lakes of Campoma, and Putaquao,
by a kind of transverse dyke, which bears the
name of Cerro de Meapire; and which in distant
times, by resisting the impulse of the waves, has
hindered the waters of the gulf of Cariaco from
uniting with those of the gulf of Paria. Thus,
in Switzerland the central chain, that which passes
by the Col de Ferrex, Simplon, St. Gothard, and
Spluegen, is connected on the north and the south
to two lateral chains, by the mountains of Furca


* Near Sitten (Alpina, t. iv, p. 295. Bernoulli, Geogn-
Uebersicht der Schweiz, p. 35-41).


262


and Maloya. It is pleasing to recall to mind
those striking analogies, which are ‘exhibited in
both continents by the external structure of the
Globe.

The primitive chain of Araya ends abruptly in
the meridian of the village of Maniquarez. WE
shall presently show, that thirty-four leagues to the
west its continuation is found in the gneiss of the
Silla. of Caracas, and in the granite of Las
Trincheras : we here confine ourselves to what
immediately relates to the environs of Cumana. |
The western slope of the peninsula of Araya, as
well as the plains in the midst of which the castle
of St. Antony rises, is covered with very recent
formations of sand-stone and clay mixed with gyp-
sum. Perhaps these same formations formerly
filled the longitudinal valleys, now occupied by the
ocean; and perhaps they favoured the irruption of
the waters, by making less resistance than the
mica-slates and Alpine lime-stone. Near Mani-
quarez, a breccia or sand-stone with calcareous
cement, Which might easily be confeunded with a
teal lime-stone, 1s placed immediately on the mica-
slate; while on the opposite side, near Punta
Delgada, this sand-stone covers a compact, bluish
gray lime-stone, almost destitute of petrifactions,


and traversed by small veins of calcareous spar.
This last rock is analogous to the lime-stone of
the high Alps *.


* Alpenkalkstein,


|
|
|
|
|
|


963


The very recent sand-stone formation of the
peninsula of Araya contains, first, near Punta
Arenas, a stratified sand-stone, composed of very
fine grains, united by a calcareous cement in small
quantity; secondly, at the Cerro de la Vela, a
schistose sand-stone*, without mica, and passing
into slate-clay ¢, which accompanies coal ; thirdly,
on the western side, between Punta Gorda and
the ruins of the castle of St. Jago, a breccia com-
posed of an innumerable quantity of petrified sea-

shells, united by a calcareous cement, in which are
mingled grains of quartz; fourthly, near the point
of Barigon, whence the stone employed for build-
ing at Cumana is drawn, banks of yellowish white
shelly lime-stone, in which are found some scat-
tered grains of quartz; fifthly, at Pennas negras,
“at the top of the Cerro de la Vela,a bluish gray
compact lime stone, very tender, almost without
petrifactions, and covering the schistose sand-stone.
However extraordinary this mixture of sand-stone
and compact lime-stone {| may appear, we cannot


‘doubt, that these strata belong to one and the


same formation. The very recent secondary rocks
every where present analogous phenomena ; the
mélasse of the Pays de Vaud contains a fetid
sheily lime-stone, and the cerite lime-stone of


* Sandsteinschiefer.
+ Schieferthon. 4
+ Dichter kalkstein,


264


the banks of the Seine is sometimes mixed with


sand-sione*,

The strata of calcareous breccia, which can be
best examined in going along the rocky coast from
Punta Gorda to the castle of Araya, are composed
of an infinite number of sea shells, from four to
six inches in diameter, and in part well preserved.
We find they contain not ammonites, but ampullai-
res, solens, and terebratule. The greater part
of these shells are mixed ; the oysters and pectinites
are sometimes arranged in families.. The whole
are easily detached, and their interior is filled with
fossil madrepores and cellepores (cellulaires).
Formerly, on examining the banks of sand-stone,
which at the northern extremity of Punta Araya
are frequently bathed by the sea, I had thought,
that some univalve shells, resembling the gcnus
helix, and mixed with sea bivalve shells, belonged
to the fluviatile species |. This mixture is in fact
found { in the lime-stone of very recent formation,
that covers the chalk in the basin of Paris; but in
order to verify a fact so important, we should have
under our eyes the fossile shells of Araya§, and

*

* Cuvier and Brongniart, Geogr. min. des Environs de
Paris, 1811, p. 18, 25, and 135.

+ Reuss, Lehrbuch der Geognosie, t. ii, p. 441.

} According to the interesting observation of Mr. Beudan.
(See Cuvier and Brongniart, 1. c. p. 89.)

§ Specimens of sand-stone, or shelly breccia of Araya, are
found among the geological series, which I sent in 1800 to the


965


examine them anew with that scrupulous exactness,
which has been recently followed in this kind of
investigation by Messrs.. Lamarck, Cuvier, and
Brongniart.

We have just mentioned the mica-slates of
Maniquarez and of Chuparipari; the formation of
the Alpine lime-stone of Punta Delgada, and of
Cocollar; and that of sand stone, of calcareous
breccia, and very recent compact lime-stone, which
is found united at the western extremity of Punta
Araya, as well as at the castle of St. Antonio at
Cumana, We have now to ‘speak of a fourth
formation, which probably reposes* on the cal-
careous sandstone of Araya, I mean the murt-
atiferous clay.

This clay, hardened, impregnated with petro-


collection of the king of Spain at Madrid. There are none of
them in the collections which we have deposited at Berlin,
and at Paris.


* T would wish mineralogical travellers, to examine more


particularly the Cerro de la Vela. The lime-stone of the


Pennas Negras reposes on a slate-eclay, mixed with quartzose
sand; but there is no proof of the muriatiferous clay of the
salt works being of a more ancient formation than this slate-
clay, or of its alternating with banks ofsand-stone. No well
having been dug in these countries, we can have no informa-
tion respecting the superposition of the strata. The banks of
calcareous sand-stone, which are found at the mouth of the
salt lake, and near the fishermen’s huts on the coast opposite
Cape Macanio, appeared.to me to lie beneath the muriati-


ferous clay.


266


feum, and mixed with lamellar and lenticular
gypsum, is analogous to the salzthon, which in
Europe accompanies the sal gem of Berchtesgaden,
and in South America* that of Zipaquira.\ It is
generally of a smoke gray colour, earthy, and
friable; but it encloses more solid masses. of a
blackish brown, of a schistose, and sometimes
conchoidal fracture. These fragments, from six
to eight inches long, have an angular form. When
they are very small, they give the clay a porphy-
roidal appearance. We find disseminated in it, as
we have already observed, either in nests, or in
small. veins, selenite, and sometimes, though
seldom, fibrous gypsum. It is remarkable enough,
that this stratum of clay, as well as the banks of


pure gem salt and the salzthon in Europe, scarcely
ever contains shells, while the rocks adjacent otter
them in great abundance.

Although the muriat of soda is not found visible
to the eye in the clay of Araya, we cannot doubt
of its existence. It discovers itself in large crystals,
if we sprinkle the mass with rain water, and ex-


pose it tothe Sun. The mere to the east of the
castle of San Jago exhibits all the phenomena,


'* Near Santa Fe de Bogota, this formation of murzatiferous
clay, long neglected in the systems of geognosy, characterizes
the gem salt more than the ancient secondary gypsum (aelterer
Flozgyps) which reposes on the zechstein, or Alpine calcareous
stone, as I have shown in 1798, in my work on the Moffettes
of the Mines. (Ueber die wuterirdischen Gasarten, p. 143.)


267


which have been observed in the salt lakes of
Siberia, described by Lepechin, Gmelin, and
Pallas. This mere receives however only the rain
waters, which filter through the banks ‘of clay, and
unite at the lowest point of the peninsula. While
the mere served as a Salt-work to the Spaniards
and the Dutch, it did not communicate with the
sea; at present this communication has been in-
terrupted anew, by placing faggots at the place
where the waters of the ocean had made an irrup-
tion in 1726. After great droughts, crystallized
and very pure muriat of soda, in masses of three
or four cubic feet, are still drawn from time to time
from the bottom of the mere. ‘The salt waters of
the lake, exposed to the heat of the Sun, evaporate
at their surface; crusts of salt, formed in a
saturated solution, fall to the bottom ; and by the
attraction between crystals of a similar nature and
form, the crystallized masses daily augment. It
is generally observed, that the water is brackish
wherever meres are formed in clayey ground. It
is true, that for the new salt work, near the battery
of Araya, the seawater is received into pits, as in
the salt marshes of the south of France; but in the
island of Margaretta, near Pampatar, salt is
manufactured by employing only fresh water, with
which the muriatiferous clay has been lixivated.

We must not confound the salt disseminated in
these clayey soils with that contained in the sands


268


of the seashore, which are advantageously worked
on the coasts of Normandy *. These phenomena,
considered in a geognostical point of view, have
scarcely any thing in common. I have seen
muriatiferous clay at the level of the ocean at
Punta Araya, and at two thousand toises height
in the Cordilleras of New Grenada. If m the
former of these spots it lies on a very recent shelly
breccia, it forms on the contrary in Austria, near
Ischel, a considerable stratum in the Alpine
lime-stone, which, though equally posterior to the
existence of organized beings on the Globe, is
nevertheless of high antiquity, as is proved by
the great number of rocks with which it ts covered.
We shall not call in question, that gem salt, either
pure f or mixed with muriatiferous clay{, may
have been deposited by an ancient sea; but every
thing evinces, that it was formed during an order
of things, that bears no resemblance to that in
which the sea at present, by a slower operation,
deposits a few particles of muriat of soda on the
sands of our shores. In the same manner as
sulphur and coal belong to periods of formation
very remote from each other, the gem salt is also


* In the bay of Avranches, and in many other parts of
Europe. Chaptal, Chimie appliquée aux Arts, t. iv, p. 161.

+ Buch, Geognost. Beobachtungen, t. i, p. 133.

t Those of Wieliczka and of Peru.

§ That of Hallein, Ischl, and Zipaquira.


269


found sometimes in transition gyhsum*, somes
times in the Aipine lime-stone {, soinetimes in a
muriatiferous clay lying on a very recent sand-
stone {, and lastly, sometimes in a gypsum§
posterior to the chalk.


*® Uebergangsgyps, in the transition slate of White Alley
{V’Allée ~Blanche], and between the grauwacke and black
transition lime-stone near Bex, below the Dent de Chamos-
saire, according to Mr. von Buch.

+ At Hall iv the Tyrol.

ft At Punta Araya.

§ Gypsum of the third formation among the secondary
gypsums. The first formation contains the gypsum, in which
are found the brine-springs of Thuringia, and which is placed
either in the Alpine lime-stone or zechstein, to which it essen=
tially belongs ([reiesleben, Geognost. Arbeiten, t. ii, p. 121),
or between the zechstcin and the lime-stone of the Jura,
er between the zechstcim and the new sandstone. It is the
ancient gypsum of secondary formation of Werner’s school
(aelterer floezgyps), which we almost preferably call muriati«
ferous gypsum. The second formation is composed of fibrous
gypsum, placed either in the molasse, or new sand-stone, or
between this and the upper lime-stone. It abounds in come
mon elay, which differs essentially from the salzthon or murie
atiferuus clay. The ¢hird formation of gypsum is more recent
than chalk. To this belong the bony gypsum of Paris ;
and, as appears from the researches of Mr. Steffens (Geogn.
Aufsatsze, 1810, p. 142), the gypsum of Segeberg, in Hole
stein, in which gem salt is sometimes disseminated in very
small nests (Jenaische Litteratur-zeitung, 1813, p. 100). The
gypsum of Paris, lying between a cerite lime-stone, which
covers chalk, and a sandstone without shells, is distinguished
by fossile bones of quadrupedes, while the Segeberg and Lune-
bourg gypsums, the position of which is more uncertain, are


270


The new salt works of Araya have five reser-
voirs, or pits, the largest of which have a regular
form, and two thousand three hundred square
toises surface. Their mean depth is eight inches.
Use is made both of the rain waters, which by
filtration collect at the lowest part of the plain, and
of the water of the sea, which enters by canals, or
martellicres, when the flood tide is favoured by
the winds. ‘The situation of these salt works is
less advantageous, than that of the mere. The
waters which fall into the latter pass over steeper
slopes, washing a greater extent of ground. The
natives make use of hand pumps to convey the
seawater from one principal reservoir into the
pits. It would nevertheless be easy enough to


employ the wind as the moving power, since the
breeze always blows strong on these coasts. The
earth already washed is never carried away here,


characterized by the boracits which they contain. Two
other formations, far anterior to the three we have just
mentioned, are the transition gypsum (uedergangsgyps) of
Aigle, and the primitive gypsum (urgyps) of the valley of
Canaria, near Airolo. I flatter myself, that I may render
some service to the small number of geologists, who prefer the
knowledge of positive facts to speculation on the origin of
things, in furnishing them with materials, from which they
may generalize their ideas on the formation of the rocks in
both hemispheres. The relative antiquity of the formations is
the principal object of a science, which is to render us ac-
quainted with the construction of the Globe; that is to say,
the nature and superposition of the stony strata, which con-
stitute the eaterior crust of our planet.


271


as is the custom from time to time in the island of
Margaretta; nor have wells beew dug in the muri-
atiferous clay, to find strata richer in muriat of
soda. The saltmen generally complain of want of
rain; and in the new salt works it appears to me
difficult to determine, what is the quantity of salt,
that is owing solely to the waters of the sea. The
natives estimate it at a sixth of the total produce.


The evaporation is extremely strong, and favoured.


by the constant motion of the air; so that the salt
is collected in eighteen or twenty days after the
pits are filled, We found* the temperature of the
salt water in the pits 32°5° while the air in the
shade was 27°2°, and the sand on the coast at six
inches depth, 42°5°. We were surprised to see,
that the thermometer plunged into the sea rose


- only to 23'1°, This low temperaturet is owing per-


haps to the shoals, which surround the peninsula
of Araya, and the island of Margaretta, and on the
edges of which the lower strata of water mix with
the waters of the surface.

Though the muriat of Soda is manufactured with
less care in the peninsula of Araya than at the salt
works of Europe, it is nevertheless purer, and con-
tains less of earthy muriats and sulphats. We are
ignorant whether this purity may be attributed to
the part of the salt which is furnished by the sea;


* The 19th of August, 1799, at three in the morning,
+ See above, page 142,


Hi
j


I Oe ee


272


for though it is extremely probable, that the
quantity of the salt dissolved in the waters of the
ocean is nearly the same* under every zone, it is
not less uncertain, whether the proportion between
the muriat of soda, the muriat and sulphat of mag-
nesia, and the sulphat and carbonat of lime be
equally invariable f.

After having examined the salt works, and ter-
minated our aia operations, we departed at
the decline of day to sleep at an Indian hut, at
some miles distance, near the ruins of the castle of
Araya. We were preceded by our instruments
and provision ; for fatigued by the excessive leat
of the air, and the reverberation of the soil,
felt no appetite in those climates, except in the


* With the exception of the Mediterranean seas, and the
regions where the polar ices are formed. See above, p. 127, 128;
and vol, i, p.63. This equality in the saltness of the seawater
(from 0°024 to 0°028) reminds us of the still greater uni-
formity, with which the oxygen is diffused throughout the
atrial ocean. In both of these elements, the currents estae
blish and preserve the equilibrium between the parts dissolved
or mingled with each other. (Bayly and Cook, Original
Observ., p- 345.) ‘

+ Lavoisier found, that in the waters of the sea, near
Dieppe, the quantity of muriat of soda is to that of the other
salts as 2°36 isto 1. According to Messrs. Bouillon-Lagrange
and Vogel, this proportion is as 2°60 to 1. See the judicious
observations of Dr. Thomson, in his Chemistry, t. vi,
p- 346—357. (Henry, Phil. ‘Trans., 1810, p. 97 and 122;
and Annales de Chémie, t. Ixxxvii, p. 193-208.)


. a


273


morning, or in the cool of the evening. Directing
our course toward the south, we traversed first the
plain covered with muriatiferous clay, and stripped
of vegetation ; then two chains of hills of sand-
stone, between which is the mere or laguna.
Night overtook us while we were in a narrow path,
bordered on one side by the sea, and on the other by
a range of perpendicular rocks. The tide was
rising rapidly, and narrowed the road at every step.
We at length arrived at the foot of the old castle
of Araya, where we enjoyed a prospect that had
in it something lugubrious and romantic. Here
however, neither the coolness of a deep and
gloomy forest, nor the grandeur of the vegetable
forms, heightens the beauty of these ruins ; which,
standing single on a bare and arid mountain,
crowned with agave, with columnar cactus, and
thorny mimosas, resemble less the works of man,
than those masses of rock that were ruptured at
the first revolutions of the Globe.

We were desirous of stopping to admire this
majestic spectacle, and observe the setting of
Venus, the disk of which appeared at intervals
between the yawning crannies of the castle; but
the muleteer, our guide, was parched with thirst,
and. pressed us earnestly to return. He had long
perceived, that we had lost our way; and as he
hoped to work on our fears, he continually warned
us of the danger from tigers and rattlesnakes.
Venomous reptiles were in fact very common near

VOL II, oy


EER BREESE


Se


SSR


ee =


2 AES seeaeeeraaes


274


the castle of Araya; and two jaguars had been
lately killed at the entrance of the village of Ma-
niquarez. If we might judge from their skins,
which had been preserved, their size was not less
than that of the Indian tiger. We vainly repre-
sented to our guide, that those animals did not
attack men, on coasts where the goats furnished
them with abundant food; we were obliged to
yield, and return. After having proceeded three
quarters of an hour along a shore covered by the
tide, we were joined by the negro, who carried
our provision. Uneasy at not seeing us arrive,
he was come to meet us, and led us across a wood
of nopals to a hut inhabited by an Indian family.
We were received with that cordial hospitality,
which is met with in this country among people
of every tribe. The hut in which we slung our
hammocks was very clean; and there we found
fish, plantains, and what in the torrid zone is pre-
ferable to the most sumptuous food, excellent
water.

The next day at sunrise, we found, that the
hut in which we had passed the night fermed part
of a group of small dwellings on the borders of
the salt lake, the remains of a considerable village
which had formerly stood near the castle. The
ruins of a church appeared buried in the sand, and
covered with brushwood. When in 1765, to
save the expense of the garrison, the castle of
Araya was totally dismantled, the Indians and


275


Mulattoes, who were settled in the neighbour-
hood, emigrated by degrees to reside at Maniqua-
rez, at Cariaco, and in the suburb of the Guay-
querias at Cumana. A small number, bound
from affection to their native soil, remained in
this wild and barren spot. These poor people
live by catching fish, which is extremely abun-
dant on the coast and the neighbouring shoals.
They appear satisfied with their condition, and
think it strange when they are asked why they
have no gardens or culinary vegetables. Our
gardens, they reply, are beyond the gulf; when
we carry our fish to Cumana, we bring back plan-
tains, cocoa nuts, and cassava. This system of
economy, grateful to idleness, is followed at Ma-
niquarez, and throughout the whole peninsula of
Araya. The chief wealth of the inhabitants
consists in goats, which are of a very large and
very fine breed, and.rove in the fields like those
at the Peak of Teneriffe; they are become en
tirely wild, and are marked like the mules, be-
cause it would be difficult to recognize them from
their physiognomy, their color, or the disposition
of their spots. The wild goats are of a brown-
ish yellow, and are not varied in their color like
domestic animals. If in hunting a colonist kills
a goat, which he does not consider as his own
property, he carries it immediately to the neighbour,
to whom it belongs. During two days we heard
at every where spoken of as an example of strange
TQ


4


976


perverseness, that an inhabitant of Maniquarez
had fost a goat, on which it was probable that
a neighbouring family had regaled themselves.
These traits, which are proofs of a great purity
of morals in the lower class, are often exhibited
in. New Mexico, in Canada, and in the countries
situate to the west of the Alleghanies.

Among the Mulattoes, whose huts surround
the salt-lake, we found a shoemaker of Castilian
descent. He received us with the air of gravity
and selfsufficiency, which in those climates charac-
ize almost all who are conscious of possessing
some peculiar talent. He was employed in
stretching the string of his bow, and sharpening
his arrows to kill birds. His trade of a shoema-
ker could not be very lucrative in a country,
where the greater part of the inhabitants go bare-
foot; and he’ only complained, that, on account
of the dearness of European gunpowder, a man
of his quality was reduced to employ the same
weapons as the Indians. He was the sage of the
plain, he understood the formation of the salt by
the influence of the Sun and the full Moon, the
symptonis of earthquakes, the marks by which
mines of gold and silver are discovered, and the
medicinal plants, which he divided, like all the
other colonists from Chili to California, into hot
and cold*. Having collected the traditions of the


* Exciting or debilitating, sthenic or asthenic of Brown's
system,


a ee


277


country, he gave us some curious accounts of the
pearls of Cubagua, objects of luxury, which he
treated with the utmost contempt. To show us
how familiar to him were the sacred writings, he
took a pride in quoting to us Job, who preferred
wisdom to all the pearls of the Indies. His phi-
losophy was circumscribed to the narrow circle
of the wants of life. A very strong ass, able to
carry a heavy load of plantains to the embarce-
dere, was the object of all his wishes.

After a long discourse on the emptiness of hu-
man grandeur, he drew from a leathern pouch a
few very small and opake pearls, which he forced us
toaccept, enjoining us at the same time to note on
our tablets, that a poor shoemaker of Araya, but
a white man, and of noble Castilian race, had
been enabled to give us what on the other side
of the sea* was sought for as a very precious
thing. I acquit myself rather late of the promise
I made this honest man; and I am happy to add,
that his disinterestedness did not permit him to ac-
cept of the slightest retribution. The Pearl
Coast presents, itis true, the same aspect of misery
as the countries of gold and diamonds, Choco and
Prasil; bat misery is not there attended with
that immoderate desire of gain, which is excited
by mineral riches.


* Por alla, or, del otro tado del chatco (properly, “ be-
yond the great mere”), a figurative expression, by which
the people in the Spanish colonies denote Europe.


3. SSS


|
il
f
he
iW


OEE fF Si REST


278


The pearl aronde(avicula margaritifera, Cuvier)
abounds on the shoals, which extend from Cape
Paria to that of Vela*. The island of Marga-
retta, Cubagua, Coche, Punta Araya, and the
mouth of the Rio la Hacha, were celebrated
in the sixteenth century, as the Persian Gulf, and
the island Taprobane were among the ancients{.
It is not just to say, as several historians have as-
serted, that the natives of America were unac-
quainted with the luxury of pearls. The first
Spaniards who landed in Terra Firma found the
savages decked with necklaces and bracelets ; and
among the civilized people of Mexico and Peru
pearls of a beautiful form were extremely sought
after. Ihave published a dissertation on the sta-


tue of a Mexican priestess in basalt}, whose head-
dress, resembling the calantica of the heads of
Isis, is ornamented with pearls. Las Casas and
Benzoni have described, but not without some


* Costa de las Perlas, .Herera, Dec. 1, lib. vii, c. 9.
Gomara, Hist. c. 78. Petri Bembi Cardin. Hist. Venete
ib. xii (1555), p. 83. Cancellieri, Diss. sopra Christ. Co-
lombo (1809), p. 101. ey a oats

+ Strabo, lib. xv, (pag. Oxon. 1017) Plin., lib. ix, «. 35,
hb. xii, c. 18. Solin. Polyhist. c. 66 (ed. 1518, p. 316
and 324), and above all, Athen. Deipnosoph. lib. iii, ce. 45
(ed. Schweighauser, 1801, t. 1, p. 360—367), and Animadvers.
in Athen. t. il, p. 126. eo ‘

t Picturesque Atlas, pl. 1, and 2. [See vol. xiii of this
edition, p. 43.] ‘


a


279
exaggeration, the cruelties which were exercised
on the unbappy Indian slaves and Negroes em-
ployed in the pearl fishery. At the beginning of
the conquest, the island of Coche alone furnished
the value of fifteen hundred marks of pearls a
month.

The guint, which the king’s officers drew from
the produce of pearls, amounted to fifteen thou-
sand ducats; which, according to the value of the
metals in. those times, and the extensiveness of
the contraband trade, might. be considered as a
very considerable sum. It.appears, that'till 1530
the value of the pearls sent to Europe amounted
yearly on an average to more than eight hundred
thousand piastres. In order to judge of the im-
portance of this branch of commerce to Seville,
Toledo, Antwerp, and Genoa, we should recol-
lect, that at the same period the whole of the
mines of America* did not furnish two millions
of piastres ; and that the fleet of Ovando seemed to
be of immense wealth, because it contained nearly
two thousand six hundred marks of silver. Pearls


* | have endeavoured to prove in another place (Nouv. Esp.


t. ii, p. 652), by a history at large of the ancient mines of
the accuracy of the ideas spread through-


Mexico and Peru,
d state of the metalliferous


out Europe on the exhauste
mines of America, on their decreasiug richness, and on


the quantity of metals which Spain received during the


reigns of Charles the fifth and Philip the second.


280


were so much the more sought after, as the luxury
of Asia had been introduced into Europe by two
Ways diametrically opposite; that of Constanti-
nople, where the Paleologi wore garments covered
with strings of pearls; and that of Grenada, the
residence of the Moorish kings, who displayed
at their court all the luxury of the East. The
pearls of the East Indies were preferred to those
of the West; but the number of the latter which
circulated in commerce was not less considerable
in the times which immediately followed the dis-
covery of America. In Italy as well as in Spain,
the islet of Cubagua became the object of numer-
ous mercantile speculations.

_Benzoni* relates the adventure of one Lewis


Lampagnano, to whom Charles the Fifth granted
the privilege of proceeding with five carvels to the
coasts of Cumana, to fish for pearls. The colo-
nists sent him back with this bold answer: “ That
the Emperor, too liberal of what was not his own,


had not the right to dispose of the oysters, which
live at the bottom of the sea.”

The pearl fishery diminished rapidly toward the
end of the sixteenth century; and, according to


* La Hist. del Mondo Nuovo, p. 34. Lewis Lampag-
nano, a relation of the assassin of the Duke of Milan, Ga-
leazzo Maria Sforza, could net pay the merchants of Seville,
who had advanced the money for. his voyage; he remained
five years at Cubagua, and died in a fit of insanity.


2s


281


Laet, it had long ceased in 1683*. The industry
of the Venetians, who imitated fine pearls with
great exactness, and the frequent use of cut dia-
monds+-, rendered the fisheries of Cubagua less
lucrative. At the same time the oysters which
yielded the pearls became scarcer, not, ‘as it is
believed from a popular tradition, because these
animals, frightened by the noise of the oars, con-
veyed themselves elsewhere; but because their
propagation had been prevented from the impru-
dent destruction of the shells by thousands., The
pearla ronde is of a much more delicate consti-
tution than the greater part of the other acepha-
lous mollusce. At the isle of Ceylon, where, in
the bay of Condeatchy, the fishery employs six
hundred divers, and where the annual produce is
more than half a million of piastres, it has vainly
been attempted to transplant the animals to other
parts of the coast. The government permits fish
ing there only during a single month; while at Cu-


¥ “ Insularum Cubagne ct Coches quondam magna fuit dig-
nitas, quam unionum captura floreret: nunc, illa deficiente,
obscura admodam fama.” Let. Nov. Orbis, p. 669. This
accurate compiler, speaking of Punta Araya, adds, this coun.
try is so forgotten, “ ut vix ulla alid Americz meridionalis
pars hodie obscurior sit.’”

+ The cutting of diamonds was invented by Lewis de Ber-
quen, in 1456, but it became common only in the following
century.


289


bagua the bank of shells was fished at all sea-
sons. To form an idea of the destruction of the
species caused by the divers, we must remem-
ber, that a boat sometimes collects, in two or
three weeks, more than thirty-five thousand oysters.
The animal lives but nine or ten years; and it
is only in its fourth year, that the pearls begin
to show themselves. In ten thousand shells there
is often not a single pearl of value*. Tradition
states, that on the bank of Margaretta the
fishermen opened the shells one by one; in the
island of Ceylon, the animals are thrown into
heaps, to rot in the air; and to separate the
pearls, which are not attached to the shell, the
animal pulp is washed, as the miners do the
sands that contain grains of gold, tin, or dia-
monds,

At present Spanish America furnishes no other
pearls for trade than those of the gulf of Pana-
ma, and the mouth of the rio de la Hacha. On
the shoals that surround Cubagua, Coche, and
the island of Margaretta, the fishery is as much
neglected as on the coasts of Californiaf. It is
believed at Cumana, that the pearl-aronde has


* Cordiner, Description of Ceylon, vol. ii, p, 187.

+ Nouv. Esp. t. i, p. 313; and t. ii, p. 465. I ain
astonished at. never having heard in the course of my trae
yels of pearls found in the fresh water shells of South Ame-
rica, though several species of the urio genus abound in the
rivers of Peru.


cles hi ph


285.


greatly multiplied after two centuries of repose *;
and itis asked, why the pearls found at present
in shells which are entangled in the fishermen’s
nets are so small, and have so ‘little brillancy,
while on the arrival of the Spaniards they were so
extremely beautiful among the Indians, who doubt-
less had not given themselves the trouble of diving
to collect them. The problem is so much the
more difficult to solve, as we are ignorant whe-
ther carthquakes have altered the nature of the
bottom of the sea, or whether the changes of the
submarine currents may have had an influence
either on the temperature of the water, or on the
abundance of certain mollusce on which the
aronde feeds.

On the 20th in the morning, our host’s son,
a young and very robust Indian, conducted us
over Barigon and Caney to the village of Ma-
niquarez, which was four hours walk. Froin the
effect of the reverberation of the sands, the ther-
mometer kept up to 31° 3%. The cylindric cactus,
which bordered the road, gave the landscape an
appearance of yerdure, without yielding either
coolness orshade. Before our guide had travelled
a league, he sat himself down at every instant,


* In 1812, some new attempts were made at Margaretta
for the fishing of pearls.

+ The inbabitants of Araya sometimes sell these small
pearls to the retail dealers of Cumana, The ordinary price


is a piastre a dozen.


}
i


RSE aS ES RET


——


ee


eames a


284


and wished to repose under the shade of a fine ta-
marind tree near Casas de la Vela, to wait the ap-
proach of the night. I dwell on this characteristic
trait, which we observed every time that we tra-
velled with Indians, and has given rise to very
false ideas of the physical constitutions of the
different races of men. ‘The copper-coloured na-
tive, more accustomed to the burning heat of the
climate, than the European traveller, complains
more, because he is stimulated by no interest.
Money is without. attraction for him; and if he
permits himself to be tempted by gain for a mo-
ment, he repents of his resolution as soon as he is
on the road. The same Indian, who complains,
when in herbalizing we load him with a box filled


with plants, rows his canoe fourteen or fifteen
hours together, against the swiftest current, be-
cause he wishes to return to his family. In or-


der to form a true judgment of the muscular
force of the people, we should-observe them in
circumstances, where their actions are determined
by a will equally energetic.

We examined the ruins of San Jago*, the con-
struction of which is remarkable for its extreme
solidity. The walls of free-stone are five feet


* On the map accompanying Robertson’s History of Ame-
rica we find the name of this castle confounded with that
of Nueva Cordoba. We have already observed, that this
latter denomination was formerly synonimous with Cumana.
(Herrera, p, 14.)


285


thick: they have been blown up by mines; but
we still found masses of seven or eight hundred
feet square, which have scarcely a crack in them.
Our guide showed us a cistern (el aljibe) thirty
feet deep, which, though much damaged, furnishes
water to the inhabitants of the peninsula of Araya.
This cistern was finished in 1681, by the governor
Don Juan de Padilla Guardiola, the same who
built at Cumana the small fort of Santa Maria*.
As the basin is covered with an arched vault, the
water, which is of an excellent quality, keeps very
cool, and has no conferva, which, while it decom-
poses the carburet of hydrogen, harbours worms
and small insects. It had been believed for ages,
that the peninsula of Araya was entirely destitute
of springs of fresh water; but in 1797, after
many usejes researches, the inhabitants of Mani-
quarez succeeded in discovering some.

In crossing the arid hills of Cape Cirial, we per-
ceived a strong smell of petroleum. The wind
blew from the side where the springs of this sub-

stance are found, and which were mentioned by
the first historians of these countriest. Near the
village of Maniquarez, the mica-slate{ comes out
from below the secondary rock, forming a chain of


* Castillo de Santa Maria, or Fuerte de N. S. de la Cabe-
za. See above, page 196. (Caulin.,p, 284.)

+ Oviedo, Lib. 19, cap. 1. “ Resinous, aromatic, and medi-
einal liquor.” 3

t Piedra pelada of the Creoles.


a gE ES DORI DR III EE TE aR TE


a an IPR EE


sucet Bees


286


mountains from one hundred and fifty. to one
hundred and eighty toises in height. The direction
of the primitive rock near Cape Sotto is from north
east to south west; its strata incline fifty degrees
to the north west* The mica slate is silvery
white, of lamellar and undulated texture, and
contains garnets. Strata of quartz, the thickness of-
which varies from three to four toises, traverse the
mica-slate, as we may observe in several ravines’
hollowed out by the waters. We detached with
difficulty a fragment of cyanitef from a block of
splintered and milky quartz, which was isolated
on the shore. ‘This was the only time we found
this substance in South Americat.

The potteries of Maniquarez, celebrated from
time immemorial, form a branch of industry,
which is exclusively in the hands of the Indian
women. The fabrication is still carried on accord-
ing to the method used before the conquest. It
indicates both the infancy of the art, and that
stability of manners, which is the characteristic of
all the natives of America. Three centuries have
been insufficient, to introduce the potter’s-wheel on


* Hours three and four of the Freiberg compass. Very
near the village of Maniquarez, the strata vary to hours eleven


and twelve, inclining often to the south west.

+ Disthéne, Haiiy.

} In New Spain, the cyanite has been discovered only in the
province of Guatimala, at Estancia Grande. Del Rio, Tablas
min,, 1804, p. 27.


237


a coast, which is not above thirty or forty days sail
from Spain. The natives have some confused
notions with respect to the existenee of this ma-
chine, and they would make use of it if they had a
model. The quarries whence they draw the clay
are half a league to the east of Maniquarez. ‘This
clay is produced by the natural decomposition of
a mica-slate reddened by oxid of iron. The Indian
women prefer the part most abounding in mica;
and with great address fashion vessels two or three
fect in diameter, giving them a very regular curve.
As they are not acquainted with the use of ovens,
they place twigs of desmanthus, cassia, and the
arborescent capparis, around the pots, and bake
them in the open air. ‘To the east of the quarry
that furnishes the clay is the ravine of la Mina,
It is asserted, that, a short time after the conquest,
some Venetians extracted gold from the mica-slate.
It appears, that this metal was not collected in
veins of quartz, but was found disseminated in the
rock, as it is sometimes in granite and gneiss.

At Maniquarez we met with some creoles, who
had been hunting at Cubagua. Deer of the small
breed are so common in this uninhabited islet, that
a single person may kill three or four ina day. I
know not by what accident these animals have got
thither, for Laet and other chroniclers of these
countries, speaking of the foundation of New Cadiz,
mention only the great abundance of rabbits. The


wenado of Cubagua belongs to one of those numer-


288


ous species of small American deer, which zoolo-
gists have long confounded under the vague name
of cervus mevicanus. It does not appear to be
the same as the hind of the savannahs of Cayenne,
or the guazuti of Paraguay”, which live also in
herds. Its colour is a brownish red on the back,
and white under the belly; and it is spotted like
the axis. In the plains of Cari we were shown, as
a thing very rare in these burning climates, a variety
quite white. It was a female of the size of the
roebuck of Europe, and of avery elegant shape.
White varieties are found in the New Continent
even among the tigers. Mr. d’Azara has seen a
jaguar, the skin of which was wholly white, except
the shade only, as it might be termed, of a few
circular spots.

Of all the productions on the coasts of Araya,
that which the people consider as the most ex-
traordinary, we may even say the most marvellous,
is the stone of the eyes, piedra de los ojos. This
calcareous substance is the subject of every con-
versation ; according to the natural philosophy of
the natives, it is both a stone and an animal. It
is found in -the sand, where it is motionless; but
placed singly on a polished surface, for instance on
a pewter or earthen plate, it moves when excited


* Pennant’s Quadrupeds, p. 119, n. 52; Azara, Essay on
the Quadrupeds of Paraguay, vol. i, p77. Cuvier on the
fossile ruminating Animals, in the Ann, du Musée, t, xii,
p. 365.


*


289


by lerrion juice. Placed in the eye, the pretended
animal turns on itself, and expels every other
foreign substance, that has been accidentally intros
duced. At the new salt works, and at the village
of Maniquarez, the stones of the eycs* were offered
us by hundreds, and the natives were earnest td
show us the experi nent of the lenon juice. They
wished to put sand into cur eyes, in order that we
might ourselves try the efficacy of the remedy. It
was easy to see, that these stones are thin and
porous opercula, which have formed part of small
univalve shells.. Their diameter varies from one
to four lines. One of their two, surtaces is plane,
and the.other convex. These calcareous opercula
effervesce with lemon juice, and put themselyes in
motion in. proportion. as the carbonic acid is dis-
engaged. By the effect of a similar reaction, loaves
placed in an oven move sometimes in a, horizontal
plane; a phenomenon that has given occasion, im
Europe, to the popular prejudice of enchanted
avens. The piedras de los ojos, introduced into
the eye, act like small, pearls, and different round
grains employed by the Ameriean savages to iné
crease the flowing of tears. These explanations
were little to the taste of the inhabitants of Araya.
Nature has the appearance of greatness to man in
proportion as she is veiled in mystery, and the


* They are found in the greatest abundance near the


battery at the puint of Cape Araya.


VOL. II, U


990


philosophy of the people rejects every thing that
bears a character of simplicity.


_ Proceeding along the southern coast, to the east
of Maniquarez, we find running out into the sea
very near each other, three strips of land, which
bear the names of Punta de Soto, Punta de la
Prea, and Ponta Guaratarito. In these parts the
bottom of the sea is evidently formed of a mica-
slate; and i! is froin this rock, that, near Cape de
la Brea*, but at eighty feet distance from the
shore, a spring of naphtha rises, the smell of which
spreads itself into the interior of the peninsula,
You must wade into the sea up to the waist, to exe
amine this interesting phenomenon. The waters
are covered with zostera; and in the midst of a
very extensive bank of weeds (d’herbes), we dis-
tinguish a free and circular spot of three feet dia-
meter, on which swim a few scattered masses of
ulva lactuca. Here the springs are found. The
bottom of the gulf is covered with sand; and the
petroleum, which, from its transparency, and its
yellow colour, resembles the real naphtha, rises
in jets, accompanied by air bubbles. On treading
down the bottom with the foot, we perceive, that
these little springs change their place. The naphtha
covers the surface of the sea to more than a thou-


* Tar Cape. The greatest reservoir of petroleum (chapa-
pote) is that of the island of Trinidad; which has been de-
scribed by Span, Hatchet. Anderson, and Dataxion Lavaysse.
(Voy. aux Isles de Trinidad and de Tabago, t. 1, p. 24 to 30.)


@91


sand feet distance. If we suppose the dip of the
strata to be regular, the mica-slate must be but a
few toises below the sand.

We have already observed, that the ‘mieten
ous clay of Araya contains solid and friable petro-
leum. This geological connection between the
muriat of soda and the bitumens is evident where-
ever there are mines of gem salt or salt springs:
but a very remarkable fact is the existence of a
fountain of naphtha in a primitive formation. All
those hitherto known belong to secondary moun:
tains *; and this situation of them seemed to favour
the idea, that all mineral bitumens weré owing to
the destruction of vegetables and animals f, or te
the burning of coal. In the peninsula of Araya,
the naphtha flows from the primitive rock itself ;
and this phenomenon acquires new importance,
when we recollect, that the same primitive rocks
contain the subterraneous fires, that on the brink
of burning craters the smell of petroleum is
perceived from time to time, and that the greater
part of the hot springs of America tise from gneiss
and micaceous schist.

After having examined the environs of Mani-
quarez, we embarked at night in a fishing boat for


ahi Pietra mala; Fanano; Mont Zibio ; Amiano, where are
the springs that furnish the naphtha employed in lighting the
city of Genoa; Bakou; &c.

+ Hatchet, in the Trans. of the Lin. Societ ty, 1798, p 140.


ug 8


292

‘Cumana. Nothing is a better proof of the calni-
ness of the sea of these revions, than the extreme
_ smallness and wretched state of these boats, which
carry a very high sail. That we chose as the least
damaged was so leak , that the pilot’s son was con-
stantly employed in baling out the water with a
tutuma, or shell of the crescentia cujete (calebash).
It often happens in the gulf of Cariaco, and especi-
ally to the north of the peninsula of Araya, that the
canoes loaded with cocoas are overset in sailing
tco near the wind, and against the waves. These
accidents are to be dreaded only by passengers
little accustomed to swimming; for if the canoe be
managed by an Indian fisherman and his son, the
father sets right the boat, and empties it of water,
while the son swims about collecting the cocoa nuts.
In less than a quarter of an hour, the canoe is
again under sail, without a single complaint on the
part of the Indian, who meets the accident with
calm unshaken indifference.

The inhabitants of Araya, whom we visited a
second time on returning from the Orinoco, did
not forget, that their peninsula was one of the
points first peopled by the Spaniards. They love
to talk of the pear! fishery ; of the ruins of thé castle
of St. Jago, which they hope to see some day rebuilt;
and of every thing that recalls to mind the ancient
splendour of those counfries. In China and Japan
those inventions are considered as recent, which
have not been known above tw thousand years ;


293


in the European colonies an event appears ex-
tremely old, if.it dates back three centuries, or
about the period of the discovery of America.

This absence of memorials, which characterizes
new nations, both in the United States, and in the
Spauish and Portuguese possessions, is well
worthy of attention, The void has not only
something painful to the traveller, who finds
himself deprived of the most delightful enjoyments
of the imagination ; it has also an influence on the
greater or less powerful ties, that bind the colonist
to the soil on which he dwells, to the form of the
rocks surrounding his hut, and to the trees which
have shaded his cradle.

Among the ancients, the Phoenicians and the
Greeks, for instance, traditions and national re-
membrances passed from the mother-country, to
the colonies ;, where, perpetuated from generation
to generation, they never ceased to have a favour-
able influence on the opinions, the manners, and
the policy of the colonists. The climates of these
first establishments beyond the seas differed but
little from those of the mother. country. The
Greeks of Asia Minor and Sicily were not stran-
gers to the inhabitants of Argos, Athens, and
Corinth, fram whom they boasted their descent.
A great analogy of manners contributed to cement
the union, which was founded on religious and
political interests. ‘The colonists frequently offer-
ed the first fruits of their harvests in the temples


294


of the metropolis; and when by some sinister
accident the sacred fire was extinguished on the
altars of Hestia, messengers were sent from the
farther part of Ionia, to rekindle the flame at the
Prytancion of Greece*, Every where, in Cyrene
as well as on the banks of the Meotis, the ‘due
bitants carefully preserved the tradiions of the
mother country. Other remembrances eyua'ly
fitted to affect the imagination, were attached to
the colonies themselves. They had their sacred
groves, their tutelary divinitics, their local mytho-
logy, and, what gave life and durability to ‘he
fictions of the first ages, they had poets, who ex-
tended their glory as far as the metropolis itsel/.
These advantages, and many others, are wante
ing in modern colonies. The greater part are
settled in a zone, where the climate, the produc-
tions, the aspect of the sky, and the scenery of
the landscape, differ altogether from those of Lu
rope. The colonist vainly bestows on mountains,
rivers, and vallies, those names, which call to his
remembrance the sites of the mother country;
these names soon lose their attraction, and have
no meaning with the generations that succeed,
Under the influence of au exotic nature, habits are
generated, that are adapted to new wants ; nar
tional remembrances are insensibly effaced ; and


® Clavier, Hist. des premiers nig dela Grece, t. ii, p. 67.
(to i, p. 188.)


295


those that remain, like phantoms of the Heope
tion, have neither ‘‘a local habitation, nor a name.’
The glory of Don Pelagio, and of the Cid Cam-
peador, has penetrated even to the mountains and
forests of America: the people sometimes pro-
nounce these illustrious names; but they form no
other notions of their existence, than that of heroes
belonging to some vague period of fabulous times.
This foreign firmament, this contrast of climate,
this physical conformation of the country, have a
more decided effect on the state of society in the
colonies, than the absolute distance of the mother
country. Such is the improved state of modern
navigation, that the mouths of the Orinoco and
of the Rio de la Plata seem more contiguous to
Spain, than in former times Phasis and Tartessus
did to the coasts of Greece and Phoenicia. We
even observe, that, in regions equally remote, the
manners and traditions of Europe are more ha-
bitually preserved in the temperate zone, and on
the ridges of the equatorial mountains, than in the
plains of the torrid zone. Similarity of situation


contributes in a certain degree to maintain more


intimate connections between the colonists and the
metropolis. This influence of physical causes in
the state of infant societies is particularly mani-
fested, when it concerns portions of people of the
sane race, who have been recently separated from
each other. In traversing the regions of the New


World, we imagine that we find more traditions,


296


a greater freshness in the remembrances of. the
mother country, wherever the climate permits the,


cultivation of corn. In this point of view, Penn-
sylvania, New Mexico, and Chili, resemble those
elevated plains of Quito and. New Spain, which
are covered with oaks and with firs.

Among the ancients, history, religious opinions,
and the physical state of a country, were linked
tagether by indissoluble ties. The colonist must
have renounced the faith transmitted to him by ©
his ancestors, could Le have forgotten the aspect
of the sites, and the ancient revolutions of the
mother country. With modern nations, religion
no longer wears, if I may use the expression, a
local tint. . Christianity, in furnishing new ideas,
and opening a wider range to the exercise of the
intellectual faculties.; in declaring, that all nations of
men that dwell on the face of the Earth are made of
one blood, and members of. the same family ; has
weakened every exclusive sentiment, and has spread
through both Worlds the ancient traditions of the
East with those that are peculiarly its own. Na-
tions of different origin, and discordant idioms, have
received from this common institution common
remembrances; and the establis'iment of the mis-
sions, after having laid the foundations of civiliza-
tion in a great part of the New Continent, has
given to cosmogonic and religious ideas a marked
preeminence over remembrances that were merely
national.


297
But this is not all; the American colonies are
almost all founded in countries, where the genera-
tions that are extinct have left scarcely any trace
of their existence. At the mouth of the Rio Gila,
on the banks of the Missouri, in the plains that
extend to the east of the Andes, traditions date
no farther back than a century. At Peru, Gua-
timala, and Mexico, ruins of edifices, historical
paintings, and monuments of sculpture, attest, it
is true, the ancient civilization of the natives; but
in a whole province we find very few families, whe
lave just ideas relative to the history of the Incas,
and of the Mexican princes. The native has pre-
served his language, his dress, and his national
character; but the disappearance of the quippus,
and of symbolic paintings, the introduction of
christianity, and other circumstances, which I
have elsewhere developed, have gradually extin-
guished historical and teligious traditions, On
the other hand, the colonist of European race
disdains whatever relates to the conquered people.
Placed between the remembrances of the mother
country, and those of the country where he first
drew his breath, he considers both with equal in-
difference ; and in a climate where the equality of
seasons renders the succession of years almost
imperceptible, he abandons himself to the enjoy-
ments of the present moment, and scarcely casts
back a look on the times that are past.
What a difference also between the monotonous


298


history of modern colonies, and the varied picture
exhibited by the legislation, the manners, and the
political revolutions of the colonies of the ancients!
Their intellectual culture, modified by the different
forms of their government, often excited the envy
of the mother countries ; and by this happy rival-
ship arts and letters attained the highest degree
of splendor in Tonia, in Gracia Magna, and in
Sicily. In our days, on the contrary, the colonies
have neither history, nor national _ literature.
Those of the New World have never had power-
ful neighbours, and there the state of society has
undergone only imperceptible changes. Without
political existence, these settlements, formed for
commerce or for agriculture, have taken but a
passive part in the great agitations of the World.
The history of modern colonies affords but two
memorable events: their foundation, and their
separation from the mother country. The first
of these events is rich in remembrances, which
essentially belong to the countries occupied by the
colonists; but, far from recalling to mind the
peaceful progress of industry, or the improvement
of colonial legislation, acts of violence and injus-
tice only protrude themselves on the scene. What


charm can those extraordinary times present,
when, under the reign of Charles the Fifth, the
Castilians displayed more courage than virtue?
and when chivalrous honour, like the glory of
arms, was sullied by fanaticism and the thirst of


299


riches? The colonists, of mild character, are
freed by their situation from national prejudices,
appreciate at their just value the exploits of the
conquest. The men who figured at that period
were Europeans; they were the soldiers of the
mother country ; they appear as strangers to the
inhabitants of the colonies, for three ages have
been sufficient to dissolve the ties of blood,
Among the conguistadores, no doubt, some up-
right and generous men may be found; but, mine
gled in the mass, they have been unable to escape
the general proscription.

I believe, that I have indicated the principal
causes, which in modern colonies have dispelled
national remembrances, without nobly filling their
place by others relative to the country newly in-
habited. This circumstance, we cannot sufficiently
repeat, exercises a great influence: over the situa-
tion of the colonists. In the stormy times of a
political regeneration, they find themselves isolat-
ed, like a peuple who, renouncing the study of its
annals, should cease to derive lessons of wisdom

from the misfortunes of preceding ages...


END OF VOL.


Ile


a
W. Porte, Printer, 67, Chancery Lane.


:
|
|
|


