Source note (Tower of Babel staging): Alexander von Humboldt, Personal Narrative of Travels to the Equinoctial Regions of the New Continent, translated by Helen Maria Williams (London: Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme & Brown, 1818), Vol. III. Text from Internet Archive item personalnarrati3humba (OCR).
Public domain work. This file was produced from a public scan; OCR imperfections may remain.

R. Cd Pui ON. 


a 


EX LIBRIS 


LIBRARY 


DUMBARTON OAKS 


at 


ASS 


RY, 
Taunton Castle. 


Presented by 


SIR PRIOR GoLoney, Bart, ca, 
(git, : 


Personal Parrative 
OF TRAVELS 


TO THE 


EQUINOCTIAL REGIONS 


OF THE 


NEW CONTINENT, 
DURING THE YEARS 1799—1804, 


ALEXANDER DE HUMBOLDT, 


AND 


AIME BONPLAND: 


WITH MAPS, PLANS, &¢; 
WRITTEN IN FRENCH BY 


ALEXANDER DE HUMBOLDT, 
AND TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH BY 
HELEN MARIA WILLIAMS, 
VOL. III. 


ee 


LONDON : 


FRINTED FOR LONGMAN, HURST, REES, ORME, AND BROWN, 
PATERNOSTER ROW; J. MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET; 
AND H. COLBURN, CONDUIT STREET, 


1818. 


© 
s 
g 
=) 
— 
a 
bs} 
oO 
s 
& 
a 
oO 
i 
3 
oy 
3 
B 
Puy 
im 
& 
eS; 
[-* 
S 
As 


CONTENTS. 


BOOK IIL 


CHAPTER VI. 


Mountains of New Andalusia—Valley of Cumana- 
coa—Summit of the Cocollar—Missions of the 
Chayma Indians - - -~ © = = - - - - 

CHAPTER VII. 


_ Convent of Caripe—Cavern of the Guacharo— 


Nocturnal Birds - - - - - - = += 4 = 


CAAPTER VIII. 
Departure from Caripe—Mountain and Forest of 
Santa Maria—Missions of Catuaro—Port of Ca- 


TACO aka e hye Be mm Pe ea poe al eee 


CHAPTER Ix. 


Physical Constitution ard Manners of the Chaymas 
—Their languages—Filiation of the Nations 
which inhabit New Andalusia—Pariagotoes seen 


by Columbus =~ - - = - - -.- * 7 > 


NOTES TO BOOK III. 


A—Bibliography of the Grammars of American 
Languages - - - = - = - * = - @ 
B—Fragment of a Vocabulary of the Language of 


the Chaymas- - - - - - 2.2% + = + 


CONTENTS. 


C—Observations of Christopher Columbus on the 


| passage of the Polar Star over the meridian - - 903 
| 
| BOOK IV. 
CHAPTER X. 
Second abode at Cumana—Earthquakes—Extraor- 
ditlanysmeteors) ts =. Shee Been tee gy 307 


CHAPTER XI. 
Passage from Cumana to La Guayra—Morro of 
New Barcelona—Cape Codera—Road from La 
Guayra-to' Cardécas (oll: f+ eielele Alvi Jo @ 347° 


eT 


CHAPTER XII. 
General View of the Provinces of Venezuela— 
Diversity of their Interestss—Town and Valley 


of Caraceasiaiiee-oi by siszal vento; 420 


CHAPTER XIII, 


Abode at Caraccas—Mountains that surround the 
Town—Excursion to the summit of the Silla 
—Indications of Mines = - 2 252 2040. 470 


NOTES TO BOOK Iv, 


A—Luminous points seen during the eclipse of the 


Sun on the 28th ‘of October, 1799 - = . . - 537 
B—Inquiry into the causes of the Twinkling of 

Saree eee re eae Ae ee 
C—Attempts to determine the Relative Tatensity 

Oa mie: light Of ip eT 540 
D—Observations on Mirage, and the variable de- 

pression of the horizon of the Sea 92 4a ylygragi 542 
E—Meteorological- observations made “in the valley 

of Carachasygemperd odile eilnidio ¥. a 2 - = 554 


Supplment- «~ .-'2 9 22S aad ad 


JOURNEY 
TO THE 


EQUINOCTIAL REGIONS 


OF 


THE NEW CONTINENT. 


BOOK III. 
CHAPTER VI. 


Mountains of New Andalusia.—Valley of Cu- 
manacoa.— Summit of the Cocollar.— Missions 
of the Chayma Indians. 


Our first visit to the peninsula of Araya was 
Soon succeeded by a longer and more instruc- 
tive excursion to the interior of the mountains 
of the missions of the Chayma Indians, where a 
variety of interesting objects claimed our atten- 
tion. We entered on a country studded with 
forests; and visited a convent surrounded by 
palm trees and arborescent fern, situate in a 
narrow valley, where we felt the enjoyment 
of a cool and delicious climate, in the centre of 
the torrid zone. The surrounding mountains 
VOL. WI. B 


4 


2 


contain caverns haunted by thousands of noc- 
turnal birds ; and, what affects the imagination 
more than all the wonders of the physical world, 
we find beyond these mountains a people so 
lately nomade, and still nearly in a state of 
nature, ‘savage without being barbarous, and 
stupid rather from ignorance than long rude- 
ness. This interesting meditation was blended 
involuntarily with historical remembrances. It 
was in the promontory of Paria that Columbus 
first recognized the continent: there terminate 
these valleys, alternately devastated by the war- 
like anthropophagical Carib, and by the com- 
mercial and polished nations of Europe. At 
the beginning of the sixteenth century, the un- 
happy Indians of the coasts of Carupano, of 
Macarapan, and of Caraccas, were. treated in 
the same manner as the inhabitants of the coast 
of Guinea in our days. The soil of the islands 
was cultivated, the vegetables of the ancient 
continent were transplanted thither; but the 
regular system of colonization remained long 
unknown on the continent. If the Spaniards 


visited it’s shores, it was only to procure, either 


by violence or exchange, slaves, pearls, grains 
of gold,.and dye-woods. The motives of this in- 
satiable avarice seemed to be ennobled by the 
pretence of an enthusiastic zeal for religion; for 
every age has its peculiar tint, and a character 
appropriate to itself. if t 


3 


The ‘trade in the copper-coloured Indians 
was accompanied by the same acts of inhuma- 
nity as that in the African negroes; and had 
also the same result, in rendering both the con- 
querors and the conquered more ferocious. 
Thence wars became more frequent among the 
natives; prisoners were dragged from the in- 
land countries to the coast, in order to be sold 
to the whites, who loaded them with chains in 
their ships. Yet the Spaniards were at this 
epocha, and long after, one of the most polish- 
ed: nations of Europe. The resplendent light, 
which arts and literature then shed over Italy, 
has been reflected on every country, of which 
the language emanated from the same source 
as that of Dante and Petrarch. It might have 
been thought, that a general melioration of 
manners would be the natural consequence of 
this noble awakening of the mind, this sublime 
soaring of the imagination. But in distant cli- 
mates, wherever the thirst of wealth has intro- 
duced the abuse of power, the nations of Eu- 
rope, at every period of their history, have dis- 
played the same character. The illustrious era 
of Leo X was signalized in the new world by 
acts of cruelty, that seemed to belong to the 
most barbarous ages. We are less surprised, 
however, at the horrible picture with which the 
conquest of America presents us, when we re- 
collect. what still takes place on the western 

B 2 


4 


coasts of Africa, notwithstanding the benefits of 
a more humane legislation. 

The principles adopted by Charles V had 
long abolished the slave-trade on the continent. 
But the Conquistadores, by the continuation of 
their incursions, prolonged this system of ra- 
vaging, which has diminished the American 
population, perpetuated national animosities, 


and duriag a long period crushed the seeds of. 


rising civilization. At length the missionaries, 
under the protection of the secular arm, spake 
words of peace. It was the privilege of religion, 
to console humanity for a part of the evils com- 
mitted in it’s name; to plead the cause of the 
natives before kings, to resist the violence of 
the commendataries, and to assemble wander- 
ing tribes into small communities, which are 
called Missions; and the existence of which 
favours the improvement of agriculture. Thus 
were insensibly founded, though by a uniform 
and premeditated progress, those vast monastic 
establishments, that singular system, which 
continually tends to insulate itself, and places 
countries four or five times more extensive than 
France under the control of religious orders. 
Institutions, thus useful in stopping the.effu- 
sion Of blood, and in laying the first basis of 
society, have become in their result hostile to 
it’s progress. The effects of this insulated sys- 
tem have been such, that the Indians have re- 


5 


mained in a State little different from that in 
which they existed, when their scattered dwell- 
ings were not yet collected round the habitation 
of a missionary. Their number has consider- 
ably augmented, but the sphere of their ideas 
is not enlarged. They have progressively lost 
that vigour of character, and that naturai viva- 
city, which in every state of society are the 
noble fruits of independence. By subjecting to 
invariable rules even the slightest actions of 
their domestic life, they have been rendered 
stupid, by the effort to render them obedient. 
Their subsistence is in general more certain, 
and their habits more pacific; but subject to 
the constraint and the dull monotony of the 
government of the missions, they discover by 
their gloomy and reserved looks, that they have 
not sacrificed their liberty to their repose with- 
out regret. The monastic system confined to the 
cloister, while it deprives the state of useful citi- 
zens, may however sometimes contribute to calm 
the passions, to sooth incurable sorrows, and fit — 
the mind for meditation ; but transplanted into 
the forests of the new world, applied to the nu- 
merous relations of civil society, it has conse- 
quences so much the more fatal, as it’s duration 
is prolonged ; it enchains from generation to 
generation the intellectual faculties, interrupts 
the intercourse of nations, and is hostile to 
whatever elevates the mind, or enlarges it’s con- 


6 


ceptions. From these united causes, the na- 
tives who inhabit the Missions are kept in a 
state remote from all improvement; and which 
we should call stationary, if societies did not 
follow the course of the human mind, and must 
therefore be said to retrograde, whenever they 
cease to go forward. 
On the 4th of September, at five in the morn- 
ing, we began our journey to the Missions of the 
Chayma Indians, and the group of lofty mountains 
which traverse New Andalusia. We had been 


advised, on account. of the extreme difficulties 


of the road, to reduce our baggage to a small 


bulk. Two beasts of burden were indeed suffi- 


cient to carry our provision, our instruments, 
and the paper necessary to dry our plants. One 
chest contained a sextant, a dipping-needle, an 
apparatus to determine the magnetic variation, 
thermometers, and Saussure’s hygrometer. We 
always selected these instruments in excursions 
of short duration. The barometer requires 
more attention even than the time-keeper ; and 
it may be well to add, that this instrument 
embarrasses travellers more than any other. 
We confided it during five years to a guide, 
who followed us on foot; and this precaution, 
which was expensive, did not always secure it 
from accidents. Having determined with pre- 
cision the period of the atmospheric tides, that 
‘is, the hours at which the mercury rises and falls 


rn ——— 


7 


regularly every day under the tropics, we as- 
certained the possibility of taking the level of 
the country by means of the barometer, without 
employing correspondent observations at Cu- 
mana. The greatest changes in the pressure 
of the air in these climates, on the coasts, arise 
only to 1—1°3 of a line; and if at any given 
hour, or place, the height of the mercury be 
once marked, we may with some probability 
determine the variations, which this height ex- 
periences throughout the whole year, ad every 
hour of the day or night*. Hence it results, 
that, under the torrid zone, the want of corres- 
pondent observations can scarcely produce an 
error exceeding 12 or 15 toises, which is of 
small importance relative to geological levelling, 
or the influence of height on the. climate, and 
the distribution of plants. 

The morning was deliciously cool. The road, 
or rather path, that leads to Cumanacoa, fol- 
lows the right bank of the Manzanares, pass- 
ing by the hospital of the Capuchins, situate 
in a small wood of lignum vite and arbores- 
eent capparis-+. On leaving Cumana we en- 
joyed during the short duration of the twilight, 


* See my Astronomical Observations, vol. 1, page 289. 

+ These caper-trees are called in the country, pachaca, 
olivo, ajito: they are the capparis tenuisiliqua, Jacq., c. ferru- 
ginéa, c. emarginata, Cc. elliptica, ¢, reticulata, c, racemosa. 


§ 


from the top of the hill of San Francisco, an ex- 
tensive view over the sea, the plain covered 
with bera* and its golden flowers, and the 
Mountains of the Brigantine. We were struck 
at the great proximity in which the Cordillera 
presented itself, before the disk of the rising sun 
had reached the horizon. The tint of the sum- 
mits is of a deeper blue, their outline is more 
strongly marked, and their masses are more 
detached, as’ long as the transparency of the air 
remains undisturbed by the vapours, which, ac- 
cumulated during the night in the vallies, rise 
in proportion as the atmosphere acquires 
warmth, 


At the hospital of the Divina Pastora, the 


path turns to the north-east, and stretches for 
two leagues over a soil without trees, and for- 
merly levelled by the waters. We there found 
not only cacti, tufts of cistus-leaved tribulus, 
and the beautiful purple euphorbia ‘+, cultivat- 
ed in the gardens of the Havanna under the sin- 
gular name of dictamno real, but also the avi- 
cennia, the allionia, the sesuvium, the thalinum, 
and most of the portulaceous plants, that grow 
on the banks of the gulf of Cariaco. This geogra- 
phical distribution of plants appears. to desig-~ 


* Palo sano, zygophyllum arboreum, Jacq. The flowers 
have the smell of vanilla. 
} Euphorbia tithymaloides, 


9 


nate the limits of the ancient coast; and to 
prove, as we have already observed, that the 
hills, of which we went along the southern side, 
formed heretofore a small island, separated 
from the continent by an arm of the sea. 

After walking two hours, we arrived at the 
foot of the high chain of the interior moun- 
tains, which stretches from:the east to the 
west; from the Brigantine to the Cerro de San 
Lorenzo. There, new rocks appear, and with 
them another aspect of vegetation. Every ob- 
ject assumes a more majestic and picturesque 
character; the soil, watered by springs, is fur- 
rowed in every direction; trees of gigantic lofti- 
ness, and covered with lianas, rise from the 
ravins; their bark, black and burnt by the dou- 
ble action of the light and the oxygen of the 
atmosphere, forms a contrast with the fresh ver- 
dure of the pothos and dracontium, the tough 
and shining leaves of which are sometimes se- 
veral feet long. The parasite monocotyledones 
take between the tropics the place ofthe moss and 
lichens of our northern zone. As we advanced, 
the forms and grouping of the rocks reminded us 
_ of the scenes of Switzerland and the Tyrol. In 
these American Alps, the heliconia, costus, ma- 
ranta, and other plants of the family of the bali- 
siers (canna indica), which near the coasts vege- 
tate only in damp and low places, flourish here 
at considerable height. Thus in the torrid zone, 


- 10 


an atmosphere continually loaded with vapours, 
as in the north of Europe * on a soil moistened 
by melting snows, the vegetation of the moun- 
tains offers the same aspect, as characterises the 
vegetation of marshes. 

Before we leave the plains of Cumana, and 
the breccia, or calcareous sandstone, which 
constitutes the soil of the seaside, we will notice 
the different strata, of which this very recent 
formation is composed, such as we observed 
it on the back of the hills that surround the 
Castle of St. Antonio. This is so much the 


more indispensaple, as we shall soon acquire the 
knowledge of other rocks, which may easily be 


confounded with the puddingstone of the coast. 
On advancing toward the interior of the con- 
tinent, the geological view of those countries 
will unroll itself gradually before our eyes. 

The breccia or calcareous sandstone, is a local 
and partial formation, peculiar to the peninsula 
of Araya-f, the coasts of Cumana and Carac- 
cas. We again found it at Cabo Blanco, to the 
west of the port of Guayra, where it contains, 
beside broken shells and madrepores, fragments, 
often angular, of quartz and gneiss. This cir- 


* Wahlenberg, de Vegetatione Helvetiz, et summi Sep- 


' temtrionis, p. xlvii and ‘lix, 


+ See vol. ii, p. 263. 


by a singular similitude, under the influence of 


li 


cumstance assimilates the breccia to that recent 
sandstone designated by the German mineralo- 
gists by the name of nagelfluhe, and which co- 
vers so great a part of Switzerland to the height 
of a thousand toises*, without presenting any 
trace of marine productions. Near Cumana 
the formation of the calcareous breccia con- 
tains, first a compact whitish gray limestone, 
the strata of which, sometimes horizontal, some- 
times irregularly inclined, are from five to six 
inches thick. Some beds are almost unmixed 
with petrifactions, but in the greatest part the 
cardites, the turbinites, the ostracites, and shells 
of small dimensions, are found so closely con- 
nected, that the calcareous matter forms only 
a cement, by which the grains of quartz and 
the organized bodies are united: 2dly, a calca~ 
reous sandstone, in which the grains of sand 
are much more frequent than the petrified 
shells; other strata form a sandstone. entirely 
free from organic fragments, yielding but a small 
effervescence with acids, and enclosing not la- 
mellze of mica, but nodules of compact brown 
iron ore: 3d, beds of indurated clay, which con- 
tain selenite and lamellar gypsum +. These 
last beds present a great. analogy with the mu- 
_ riatiferous clay of Punta Araya, and appear con- 
stantly inferior to the last strata. 


* At the Hohgaut, that towers over the Emmethal. 
+ At the north of St. Antony’s castle, very near Cumana. 


12 


which we have just described, has a white tint, 
and lies immediately on the calcareous forma- 
tion of Cumanacoa, which is of a blueish gray. 
These two rocks form a contrast no less strik- 
ing than the molasse (bur-stone) of the Pays de 
Vaud, with the calcareous limestone of the 
Jura*. It must be observed, that, by the con- 
tact of the two formations lying upon each 
other, the beds of the limestone of Cumanacoa, 
which I consider as an Alpine limestone, are 
always largely mixed with clay and marl. Ly- 
ing like the mica-slate of. Araya north-east and 
south-west, they are inclined, near Punta Del- 
gada, under an angle of 60 degrees to the south- 
east. 

We traversed the forest by a narrow path, 
and went along a rivulet, which rolls foaming 
over a bed of rocks. We observed, that the 
vegetation was every where more brilliant, 
where the Alpine limestone is covered by a 
quartzose sandstone without petrifactions, and 
very different from the breccia of the seacoast. 
The cause of this phenomenon depends proba- 
bly not so much on the nature of the ground, 
as on the greater humidity of the soil. The 
quartzose sandstone contains thin strata of a 


* For example, near Aaraw, Boudry, and Porentrui, in 
Switzerland. 


The breccia, or agglomerate of the seacoast, 


13 


blackish clay-slate*, which might easily be 
confounded with the secondary thonschiefer ; 
and these strata hinder the water from filtering 
into the crevices, of which the Alpine lime- 
stone is full. This last offers to the view here, 
as in the country of Saltzburg, and on the chain 
of the Apennines, broken and steep beds. The 
sandstone, on the contrary, wherever it is seat- 
ed on the calcareous rock, renders the appear- 
ance of the scene less savage. The hills which 
it forms appear more rounded, and the gentler 
slopes are covered with a thicker mould. 

In those humid places, where the sandstone 
envelopes the Alpine limestone, some trace of 
cultivation is constantly found. We met with 
huts inhabited by mestizoes in the ravine. of 
Los Frailes, as well as between the Cuesta of 
Caneyes, and the Rio Guriental. Each of these 
huts is placed in the centre of an enclosure, 
that contains plantains, papaw trees, sugar- 
canes, and maize. We might be surprised at 
the small extent of these cultivated spots, if we 
did not recollect, that an acre planted with 
plantainst produces near, twenty times as 
much food as the same space sown with corn. 
In. Europe, our wheat, barley, and rye cover 
vast spaces of ground; and. in general the ara- 


- * Schieferthon, ° 
+ Political Essay on New Spain, Vol. ii. p. 366. 
t Musa paradisiaca. 


14 


ble lands touch each other, wherever the inha- 
bitants live upon corn. It is not the same 
under the-torrid zone, where man has been able 
to appropriate to himself plants, that yield more 
abundant and earlier harvests. In these happy 
climates, the fertility of the soil is proportioned 
to the heat and humidity of the atmosphere. 
An immense population finds abundant nou- 
rishment on a narrow space, covered with plan- 
tains, cassava, yams, and maize. The isolated 
situation of the huts dispersed through the fo- 
rest indicates to the traveller the fecundity of 
nature, where a small spot of cultivated land 
suffices for the wants of several families. 


These considerations on the agriculture of 


the torrid zone involuntarily remind us of the 
intimate connexion, that exists between the ex- 
tent of land cleared, and the progress of society. 
That richness of the soil, that vigour of organic 
life, which multiply the means of subsistence, 
retard the progress of nations toward civiliza- 
tion. Under so mild and uniform a climate, 
the only urgent want of man is that of food. 
It is the feeling of this want only, which excites 
him to labour; and we may easily conceive, 
why in the midst of abundance, beneath the 
shade of the plantain and breadfruit tree, the 
intellectual faculties unfold themselves less ra- 
pidly than under a rigorous sky, in the region 
of corn, where our race is in a perpetual struggle 


15 


with the elements. When we take a general 
survey of countries inhabited by agricultural na- 
tions, we observe, that cultivated lands are either 
- separated by forests, or immediately touch each 
other; not only according to the growth of the 
population, but the choice of alimentary plants. 
In Europe we judge of the number of the inha- 
bitants by the extent of the cultivation: under 
the tropics, on the contrary, in the warmest 
and most humid parts of South America, very 
populous provinces appear almost deserted ; 
because man, in order to find nourishment, 
cultivates but a small number of acres. These 
circumstances, highly worthy of attention, mo- 
dify at the same time the physical appearance 
of the country, and the character of it’s inhabi- 
tants, giving a peculiar physiognomy to both; 
something wild and uncultivated, which belongs 
to nature, the primitive type of which has not 
yet been altered by art. Without neighbours, 
almost unconnected with the rest of mankind, 
each family of settlers forms a separate tribe. 
This insulated state arrests or retards the pro- 
gress toward civilization, which advances only 
in proportion as society becomes more nume- 
rous, and it’s connexions more intimate and 
multiplied: but on the other hand, it is solitude 
that developes and strengthens in man the sen- 
timent of liberty and independence’; and gives 
birth to that noble pride of character, which 


-16 


has at all times distinguished the Castilian 
race. 

From these causes, the powerful influence of 
which will often occupy us in the course of this 
work, the land in the most populous regions of 
equinoctial America still retains a Savage as- 
pect, which is destroyed in the temperate cli- 
mates by the cultivation of corn. Between the 
tropics the agricultural nations occupy less 


ground: man ‘has there less extended his em- 
- pire; he may be said to appear, not as an ab- 


solute master, who changes at his will the sur- 
face of the soil, but as a transient guest, who 


quietly enjoys the gifts of nature. There, in | 


the neighbourhood of the most populous cities, 
the land remains studded with forests, or co- 
vered with a thick mould, never torn up by the 
plough. Spontaneous plants still predominate 
by .their quantity over cultivated plants, and 
determine alone the appearance of the land- 
scape. It is probable, that this state of things 
will change very slowly. If in our temperate 
climate the cultivation of corn contributes to 
throw a dull uniformity upon the land we have 
cleared, we cannot doubt, that, even with an 
increasing population, the torrid zone will pre- 
serve that majesty of vegetable forms, those 
marks of an unsubdued, virgin nature, which 
render it so attractive, and so picturesque. ‘Thus 
it is, that, by a remarkable concatenation of 


iy 


physical and moral causes, tlie choice and pro- 
duction of alimentary plants have an influence 
on three important objects at once; the associ- 
ation or the isolated state of families, the more 
or less rapid progress of civilization; and the 
individual character of the landscape. 

In proportion as we penetrated into the fo- 
rest, the barometer indicated the progressive 
elevation of the land. The trunks of the trees 
presented here an extraordinary phenomenon ; 
a gramineous plant, with verticillate branches *, 
climbs, like a liana, eight or ten feet, and forms 
festoons, which cross the path, and swing about 
with the wind. We halted, about three o'clock 
in the afternoon, on a small flat, which is known 
under the name of Quetepe, and is elevated 
about one hundred and ninety toises above the 
level’ of the sea. A few small houses} have 
been erected near a spring, well known by the 
natives for its coolness and great  salubrity. 
We found the water delicious. It’s tempera- 
ture was only 22°5°¢ of the centigrade thermo- 
meter, while that of the air was 28°7°. The 


* Carice, analogous to the chusque of Santa Fe, of the 
group of the nastuses. This gramineous plant is excellent 
pasture for males.. See the Nova Genera et Species Planta- 
rum equin., which I am publishing in conjunction with 
Messrs. Bonpland and Kunth. 

+ Habitacion de Don Juan Pelay. 

t 18° of Reaumur’s thermometer. 


VOL, HI. Cc 


- 18 


springs which descend from the neighbouring 
mountains of a greater height often indicate a 
too rapid decrement of heat. If indeed we sup- 
pose the mean temperature of the water on the 
coast of Cumana equal to 26°, we must con- 
clude, unless other local causes modify the 
temperature of the springs, that the spring of 
Quetepe acquires it’s great coolness at more 
than 350 toises of absolute elevation*. In 
speaking of the springs, which gush out in the 
plains of the torrid zone, or ata small eleva- 
tion, I must observe in general, that it is only 
in regions where the mean temperature of sum- 
mer essentially differs from that of the whole 
year, that the inhabitants can drink spring wa- 
ter extremely cold during the season of the 
great heats.. The Laplanders, near Umea and 
Seersele, in the 65th degree of latitude, drink 
spring-water, the temperature of which, in the 
month of August, is scarcely two or three de- 
grees above the freezing point-; while in the 
day the heat of the air rises in the shade, in 


: the same northern regions, to 26 or 27 degrees. 


In the temperate climates of France and Ger- 
many, the difference between the air and the 
springs never exceeds 16 or 17 degrees; be- 
tween the tropics it seldom rises to 5 or 6 


* Vol. IT. p. 36, 142, 184. : 
+ Kongl. Vetenks, Acad, Nya Handl., 1809, p. 205. 


19 


degrees. It is easy to account for these phe- 
nomena, on recollecting, that the interior 
of the globe, and the subterraneous waters, 
have a temperature almost identical with the 
annual mean temperature of the air; and 
that the latter differs from the mean heat 
of the summer in proportion to the distance 
from the equator. The dip of the needle at 
Quetepe was 42°7° of the centesimal division. 
The cyanometer indicated for the colour of the 
sky at the zenith only 14°; no doubt because 
the season of the rains had begun some days 
before, and the air was already mingled with 
vapours *. 

From the top of a hill of sandstone, which 


overlooks the spring of Quetepe, we had a mag- 
nificent view of the sea, cape Macanao, and the 
peninsula of Maniquarez. An immense forest 
extended itself at our feet to the edge of the 
ocean. The tops of the trees, inteftwined with 
lianas, crowned with long wreaths of flowers, 
formed a vast carpet’ of verdure, the dark tint 


* At four in the afternoon; Deluc’s hygrometer 48°; 
centigrade thermometer 26°5°. From Quetepe I found by 
the compass the bearings of Cape Macanao N. 26° W. The 
angle between the Cape and the Valley of San Juan in the 
Island of Margaretta is 29° 28”. The distance in a straight 
line from Quetepe to Cumana appears to be three leagues 
and a half. 

c 2 


SSS SS eS 


eE= 


Se SE BSS 


20 


of which augmented the splendor of the aerial 
light. The aspect of this spot struck us the more, 
as we then first beheld those great masses of 
tropical vegetation. On the hill of Quetepe, at 
the foot of the malpighia cocollobzefolia, the 
leaves of which are extremely coriaceous, we 
gathered, among tufts of the polygala montana, 
the first melastomas, especially that beautiful 


_Species described under the name of the melas- 


toma rufescens. The remembrance of this spot 
will remain long impressed on our minds. |The 
traveller preserves a fond predilection for those 
places, where he meets with a group of plants 
which he had. never before beheld in their wild 
state. 

As we advanced toward the south-west, the 
soil became dry and sandy. We climbed a 
group of mountains, which separate the coast 
from the vast plains, or. savannahs, bordered 
by the Oronoko. That part of this group, over 
which passes the road to Cumanacoa, is desti- 
tute of vegetation, and has steep declivities to- 
ward both the north and the south. It is de- 
signated by the name of the Impossible, because 
it is believed, that, in the case of the landing of 
an enemy, this ridge of mountains would offer 


an asylum to the inhabitants of Cumana. We | 


reached the top a little before sunset, and I had 
scarcely time to take a few horary angles, to, 


21 


determine the longitude of the place by means 
of the chronometer *. 

The view from the Impossible is finer and 
more extensive than that from the table-land of 
Quetepe. We distinguished clearly by the na- 
ked eye the flattened top'of the Brigantine, the 
position of which it would be important to fix 
accurately, the landing-place, and the road of 
Cumana. The rocky coast of the peninsula of 
Araya appeared at it’s full length. We were 
particularly struck with the extraordinary con- 
figuration of a port, known by the name of La- 
guna Grande, or Laguna del Obispo. A vast 
basin, surrounded by high mountains, commu- 
nicates with the Gulf of Cariaco by a narrow 


channel, which admits only of the passage of 
one ship at a time. This port, of which Mr, 
Fidalgo has sketched the plan minutely, is ca- 
pable of containing several squadrons at once, 
It is an uninhabited place, but annually fre- 
quented by vessels, which carry mules to the 


* See my Astronomical Observations, vol. i, page 94. 
On account of the distance of the southern part of the gulf 
of Cariaco, the latitude must be nearly 10° 23’. I took the 
bearings of the road of Cumana, N. 61° 21” W.: of Cape 
Macanao, N. 299 27” W.; of Laguna Grande, on the northern 
coast of the gulf of Cariaco, N, 3° 10 W.; of the Cerro del 
Bergantin, (centre of the Mesa) S. 27° 5’ W.. Shortest dis- 
tance from the sea 3 or 4 miles. The angles were taken some 
with a sextant, some with the nautical compass; the latter 


are corrected by the magnetic variation, 


22 


West India Islands. There are some pasture 
grounds at the bottom of the bay. We traced 
the sinuosities of this arm of the sea, which, 
like a river, has dug a bed between perpendicu- 
lar rocks destitute of vegetation. This singu- 
lar view reminded us of the back-ground of 
the fanciful landscape, with which Leonardo 
da Vinci has decorated his famous portrait of 
Gioconda *. 


We could observe by the chronometer the 
moment when the disk of the sun touched the 
horizon of the sea. The first contact was at 
65 8’ 13”; the second, at 65 10’ 26” of mean 
time. This observation, which is not un- 
important for the theory of terrestrial refrac- 


tions, was made on the summit of the moun: 
tain, at the absolute height of 296 toises. The 
setting of the sun was attended by a very rapid 
cooling of the air, Three minutes after the 
last apparent contact of the disk with the hori- 
zon of the sea, the thermometer suddenly fell 
from 25:2° to 21:3. Was this extraordinary 
refrigeration owing to some descending cur- 
rent? The air was however calm, and no ho- 
rizontal wind was felt. 

We passed the night in a house where there 
was a military post of eight men, under the 
command of a Spanish serjeant. It is an hos- 


* Mona Lisa, wife of Francesco del Giocondo. 


23 


pital, built by the side of a powder-magazine, 
and affords every kind of aid to travellers. The 
same detachment inhabits the mountains five 
or six months. The post is for the most part 
occupied by soldiers who have chacras, or 
plantations, in the neighbourhood. When Cu- 
mana, after the capture of Trinidad by the En- 
glish, in 1797, was threatened with an attack, 
many of the inhabitants fled to Cumanacoa, 
and deposited what they possessed of most va- 
lue in sheds hastily constructed on the top of 
the Impossible. Tt was then resolved, in case of 
any unforeseen invasion, to abandon the castle 
of St. Antonio, after a short resistance, and to 
concentrate the whole force of the province 
yound the mountains, which may be considered 
as the key of the Llanos. The military events, 
which, in consequence of political revolutions, 
have since taken place in these countries, have 
shown how wisely this first plan was framed. 
The top of the Impossible, as nearly as I could 
perceive, is covered with a quartzose sand- 
stone, free from petrifactions. It’s strata are 
here, as on the ridge of the neighbouring moun- 
tains, pretty regularly directed from N. N. E. 
to S. 8. W.* I have already observed, that 
this direction is also the most common in the 
primitive formations in the peninsula of Araya, 


* Jlor, 3—4; 45° of southern inclination, 


24 


and along the coasts. of Venezuela. On the 
northern declivity of the Impossible, near the 
Pennas Negras, an abundant spring gushes 
from sandstone, which alternates. with a schis- 
tous clay. We remarked on this point. frac- 
tured strata, which lie from N. W. to S, E., and 
the dip of which is almost perpendicular, 

The Llaneros, or inhabitants of the plains, 
‘send their produce, especially maize, leather, and 
cattle, to the port of Cumana by the road over 
the Impossible. We continually saw mules ar- 
rive, led by Indians or Mulattoes. The solitude 
of this place recalled forcibly the nights I had 
passed on the top of St. Gothard. Several 
parts of the vast. forests, which surround the 
mountain, had taken fire. Reddish flames, 
half enveloped in clouds of smoke, presented 
the most aweful spectacle. The inhabitants 
set fire to the forests, to meliorate the pastu- 
rage, and destroy the shrubs, that choke the 
grass, already so scarce in these countries. 
Enormous conflagrations too are often caused 
by the carelessness of the Indians, who neglect, 
when they travel, to extinguish the fire with 
which they haye dressed their food. These 


accidents have contributed to diminish the 


number of old trees in the road from Cumana 
to Cumanacea; and the inhabitants observe 
justly, that, in several parts of their province, 
the dryness has increased, not only because 


25 


every year the frequency of earthquakes causes 
more. crevices in the soil; but also because it 
is now less furnished with wood than it was at 
the time of the conquest. 

I arose during the night, to determine the la- 
titude of the place by the passage of Fomalhaut 
over the meridian. The observation was lost, 
owing to the time which I employed in taking 
the level of the artificial horizon. _ It is the great 
inconvenience of reflecting instruments, when, 
on account of the mobility of the fluids, we do 
not use horizons of mercury, of amalgam, or of 
oil, but those flat glasses, which have been in- 
troduced by Mr. von Zach. It was midnight, 
and I was benumbed with cold, as were also 
our guides: yet the thermometer kept at 19-7°*. 
At Cumana I have never seen it.sink below 21°; 
but then the house in which we dwelt on the 
Impossible was 258 toises above the level of the 
sea. At the Casa de la Polvora I determined 
the dip of the magnetic needle, which was 
425°. The number of oscillations correspon- 
dent to 10’ of time was 233. The intensity of 
the magnetic forces had consequently augment- 
ed from the coast to the mountain, perhaps 
from. the influence of some ferruginous matter, 


* 15°5° Reaumpr’s thermometer. 

t+ The magnetic dip is always measured, in this work, 
according to the centesimal division, if the contrary be not 
expressly mentioned, 


26 


hidden in the strata of sandstone, which cover 
the Alpine limestone. 

We left. the Impossible on the 5th of Septem- 
ber, before sunrise. The descent is very dan- 
gerous for beasts of burden; the path being in 
general but fifteen inches broad, and bordered 
by precipices. In 1796, the useful project was 
formed of tracing a fine road from the village 
of St. Fernando as far as the mountain. A 
third of this road was even finished: but unfor- 
tunately it had been begun in the plain, at the 
foot of the Impossible, so that the most difficult 
part of the road remained untouched; and the 
work was suspended by one of those causes, 
which produce the failure of almost every plan 
of improvement in the Spanish colonies. Va- 
rious civil authorities were anxious to assume 
to themselves the right of directing the works ; 
and the people patiently paid the taxes for a 
road which did not exist, till the Governor of 
Cumana put an end to this abuse. 

In descending the Impossible, the rock of 
Alpine limestone reappears under the sand- 
stone. The strata being generally inclined to 
the south and south-east, a great number of 
springs gush out on the southern side of the 
mountain. In the rainy season of the year, 
these springs form torrents, which descend in 
cascades, shaded by the hura, the cuspa, and 
the silver-leaved cecropia *. 3 


_ * Trumpet-tree. 


a 


27 


The cuspa, a common tree in the environs 
of Cumana and of Bordones, is yet unknown 
to the botanists of Europe. It was long used 
only for the building of houses, and has become 
celebrated since 1797, under the name of the 
cascarilla or bark-tree (cinchona) of New Anda- 
lusia. It’s trunk rises scarcely above fifteen or 
twenty feet. It’s alternate leaves * are smooth, 
entire, and oval. It’s bark, very thin, and of a 
pale yellow, is eminently febrifuge. It is even 
more bitter than the bark of the real cinchona, 
but it’s bitterness is less disagreeable. The 
cuspa is administered with the greatest success, 
in a spirituous tincture, and in aqueous infusion, 
both in intermittent and in malignant fevers. 
The Governor of Cumana, Mr. d’Emparan, sent 
a considerable quantity of it to the physicians of 
Cadiz ; and, according to the information lately 
received from Don Pedro Franco, apothecary 
to the military hospital at Cumana, the cuspa 
has been acknowledged in Europe to be almost 
as good as the quinquina of Santa Fe. It is 
asserted, that, taken in powder, it has the ad- 
vantage over the latter of causing less irritation 
to the stomach of those patients whose gastric 
system is much debilitated. 

On the coasts of New Andalusia, the cuspa 


* At the summit of the boughs, the leaves are sometimes. 
opposite to each other, but constantly without stipule. 


- 28 


is considered as a kind of cinchona; and we 
were assured, that some Arragonese monks, 
who had long resided in the kingdom of New 
Grenada, recognised this tree from the resem- 
blance of it’s leaves with those of the real Peru- 
vian bark-tree. This assertion, however, is un- 
founded; since it is precisely by the disposition of 
the leaves, and the absence of the stipulz, that 
the cuspa differs totally from the trees of the 
rubiaceous family. It perhaps resembles the 
family of the honey-suckle, or eaprifoliaceous 
plants, one section of which has alternate leaves, 
and among which we find several. cornel-trees, 
remarkable for their febrifuge properties *. 

The taste, at once bitter and astringent, and 
the yellow colour of the bark, have alone led to 
the discovery of the febrifuge virtue of the cus- 
pa. As it blossoms at the end of November, 
we did not see it in flower, and we know not to 
what genus it belongs ; and J have in vain for 
several years past asked our friends at Cumana 
for specimens of the flower and the fruit. I 
hope, that the botanical determination of the 
bark-tree of New Andalusia will one day fix the 
attention of travellers, who visit this region af- 
ter us; and that they will not confound, not- 


* Cornus florida, and c. sericea of the United States, 


(Walker on the Virtues of the Cornus and. the Cinchona 
sompared. Philad.. 1803.) 


29 


withstanding the analogy of the names, the 
cuspa with the cuspare. This last not only ve- 
getates in the missions of the Rio Carony, but 
also to the west of Cumana, in the gulf of Santa 
Fe. It furnishes the druggists of Europe with 
the famous cortex angustura, and forms the ge- 
nus bonplandia, described by Mr. Willdenouw 
in the Memoirs of the Academy of Berlin *, 
from notes communicated to him by us. 

It is singular, that, during our long abode on 
the coast of Cumana and the Caracas, on the 
banks of the Apura, the Oronoko, and the Rio 
Negro, in an extent of country of forty thou- 
sand square leagues, we never met with one of 
those numerous species of cinchona, or exoste- 


ma, which are peculiar-~ to the low and warm 
regions of the tropics, especially to the archipe- 
jago of the West India Islands. Yet we are 
far from affirming, that, throughout the whole 


* An. 1802, p, 24. 

+ To the cinchonas of inferior regions (which are almost 
all exostemas, corollis glabris, filamentis longe exsertis, e 
bassi tubi nascentibus, seminibus margine integro cinctis) 
belong c. longiflora of Lambert, c. caribaea, c. angustifolia of 
Swartz, c. lineata of Wahl, c. philippica of Née. See my 
botanical and physical Essay on the Cinchonas of the New 
Continent, in the Berl. Magazin Naturforsch. Freunde, 1807, 
p- 108. The genus exostema was described for the first 
time in our Equinoctial Plants, vol. 1, page 131, by Messrs. 
Richard and Bonpland, (Schrader, Journ. fuer die Botanik, 
B. 1, p. 358. 


30 


of the eastern part of South America, from Por- 
tocabello to Cayenne, or from the equator to the 
10th degree of North latitude, between the me- 
ridians of 54 and 71 degrees, the cinchona ab- 
solutely does not exist. Can we boast of know- 
ing completely the Flora of so vast an extent of 
country? But when we recollect, that even at 
Mexico no species * of the genera cinchona and 
exostema has been discovered, either in the 
central table-land, or in the plains, we are led 
to believe, that the mountainous islands of the 
West Indies and the Cordillera of the Andes 
have peculiar Floras; and that they possess 
groups of vegetables, which have neither passed 
from the islands to the continent, nor from 
South America to the coasts of New Spain. 

It may be observed farther, that, when we 
reflect on the numerous analogies, which exist 


* The cinchona angustifolia, and the c. longiflora, have 
never been found in New Spain, or Cayenne, notwithstand- 
ing what has recently been asserted. (Lambert, Descrip, of 
the Genus Cinchona, 1797, p. 38, Bulletin de Pharmacie, 
1812, p. 492.) Mr. Richard, who resided long in French 
Guiana, after Oublet, affirms, that no new kind of cinchona 
has been there discovered. The specimen of the c: longi- 
flora, that Mr. Lambert cites in his interesting Monography, 
as taken from Oublet’s herbal, came probably from St. Do- 
mingo; at least Wahl recognised among the West Indian 
plants of Mr. Jussieu’s collection the c. longiflora. Is the 
bark of Grand Para (c. brasiliensis, Hofmansege) a true 
cinchona? or does it belong to the genus machaonia ? 


3l 


between the properties of vegetables and their 
external form, we are surprised to find qualities 
eminently febrifuge in the bark of trees belong- 
ing to different genera, and even different fa- 
milies*. Some of these barks so much resem- 


* It may be somewhat interesting to chemistry, physio- 
logy, and descriptive botany, to consider under the same 
point of view the plants, that have been employed in inter- 
mittent fevers with different degrees of success. We find 
among the rubiaceous plants, beside the cinchonas and ex- 
ostemas, the coutarea speciosa, or Cayenne bark, the port- 
landia grandiflora of the West Indies, another portlandia 
discovered by Mr. Sesse at Mexico, the pinkneia pubescens 
of the United States, the berry of the coffee tree, and per- 
haps the macrocnemum corymbosum, and the guettarda 
coccinea; among the mugnoliaceous, the tulip tree and the 
magnolia glauca; among the zanthoxylaceous, the cuspare of 
Angustura, known in America under the name of Oronoko 
bark, and the zanthoxylon caribeeum; among the leguminous, 
the geoffraas, the swietenia febrifuga, the «eschynomene 
grandiflora, the casalpinea bonducella ; among the caprifolia- 
ceous, the cornus' florida, and the cuspa of Cumana; among 


the rosaceous, the cerasus virginiana, and the geum urba- 
num; among the amentaceous, the willows, oaks, and birch 
trees, of which the alcoholic tincture is used in Russia by 
the common people, the populus tremuloides, &c.; among 
the annonaceous, the uvaria febrifuga, the fruit of which we 
saw administered with success in the Missions of Spanish 


Guiana; among the simaroubaceous, the quassia amara, cele- 
brated in the feverish plains of Surinam; among the ¢erebin- 
thinaceous, the rhus glabrum; among the euphorbaceous, the 
croton cascarilla; among the composite, the eupatorium per- 
foliatum, the febrifuge qualities of which are known to the 
savages of North America (Grindel’s Chinasurrogat, Dorpat, 


\ 


32 


ble each other, that it is easy to confound them 
at first sight. But before we examine the ques- 
tion, whether we shall one day discover, in the 
real cinchona, in the cuspa of Cumana, the 
cortex angusturee, the Indian swietenia, the wil- 
lows of Europe, the fruits of the coffee tree and 
uvaria, a matter uniformly diffused, and exhibit- 
ing, (like starch, caoutchouc, and camphor) 
the same chemical properties in different plants, 
we may ask in general, whether, in the present 
state of physiology and medicine, a febrifuge 
principle ought to be admitted. Is it not pro- 
bable, rather, that this particular derangement 
in the organization, which is known under the 
vague name of the febrile state, and in which 
both the vascular and the nervous systems are 


1809. Renard ueber inland. Surrogate der Chinarinde, 
Mainz, 1809. Decandolle, sur les Propriétés médicales des 
Plantes, 1816, p. 78, 129, 138, 142, 165, 171, 179. Ro- 
gers, on the Properties of the Liriodendron tulipifera, 
Philad. 1802.) It is the bark of the roots, that is used in 
the tnlip tree, as in the quassia. Eminent febrifuge virtues 
have equally been found at Loxa, in the cortical part of the 
roots of the cinchona condaminea; but it is happy, for the 
preservation of the species, that the roots of the real cin- 
chona are not employed in pharmacy. Chemical researches 
are yet wanting upon the very powerful bitters contained 
in the roots of the zanthoriza apiifolia, and the actea. 
racemosa: the latter have sometimes been employed 
with success against the epidemical yellow fever in New 
York. 


33 


at the same time attacked, yields to remedies 
‘which do not operate by the same principle, by 
the same mode of action on the same organs; 
by the same play of chemical and electrical at- 
tractions? Wevshall here confine ourselves to 
this observation, that, in the species of the genus 
cinchona, like antifebrile virtues do not appear 
to reside in the tannin (which is only accident - 
ally mingled in them), or in the cinchonat of 
lime; but in a resiniform matter, soluble both 
by alcohol and by water, and which, it is be- 
lieved, is composed. of two principles, the cin- 
chonic bitter and the cinchonic red*. Can it 
then be admitted, that this resiniform matter, 
which possesses different degrees of energy ac- 
cording to the combinations by which it is mo- 
dified, is found in all the febrifuge substances ? 
Those by which the sulphat of iron is precipitat- 
ed of a green colour, like the real cinchona, the 
bark of the white willow, and the horned peris- 
perm of the coffee tree, do not on this account 
indicate an identity of chemical composition-+ ; 


* In French, lamer et le rouge cinchoniques. 

+ The cuspare bark (cort. angusture) yields with iron a 
yellow precipitate; yet it is employed on the banks of 
the Oronoko, and particularly at the town of St. Thomas of 
Angustura, as an excellent cinchona ; and on the other hand; 
the bark of the ‘common cherry tree, which has searcély 
any febrifuge quality,. yields a green precipitate like thé 
feal cinchonas. (Vauquelin, Annales de Chimie, T. 59, page 
143. Reuss, in the Journal de Pharmacie, 1815, page 505, 

VOL III. D 


34 


and this identity might exist, without our con- 
cluding thence, that the medical virtues were 
analogous. We see, that the different species 
of sugar and tannin, when they are extracted 
from plants not of the same family, display 
numerous differences: while the comparative 
analysis of sugar, gum, and starch; the disco- 
very of the radical of the prussic acid, the 
effects of which are so powerful on the organi- 
zation; and so many other phenomena of ve- 
getable chemistry; clearly prove, that “ sub- 
stances composed of a small number of identical 
elements, and in the same proportion, exhibit 
the most heterogeneous properties,” on account 
ef that particular mode of combination, which 
eorpuscular chemistry calls the arrangement of 
the particles *. 

On coming out of the ravine which descends 
from the Impossible, we entered a thick forest 
traversed by a great number of small rivers -f, 


Grindel, Russisches Jahrb. der Pharm. 1808, p. 183). Not- 
withstanding the extreme imperfection of vegetable chemis- 
try, the experiments already made. on. cinchonas sufficiently 
show, that to judge of the febrifuge virtues of a bark, we 


must not attach too much importance either to the principle 
that turns to green the oxides of iron, er to the tannin, or to 
the matier that precipitates infusions of tan. 

* Gay-Lussac, Exp. on Jodine, page 149, note.1. (Humb, 
Vers, ueber gereizte Muskelfaser, B. 1, p. 128.) © 

+ The Manzanares; the Cedeno, witha plantation of eacae 
trees, and an hydraulic wheel; the Vichoroco; the Lucas- 


35 


which are easily forded. We observed, that the 
cecropia, which by the disposition of it’s 
branches, and it’s slender trunk, resembles the 
port of the palm tree, -is covered with leaves 
more or less silvery, in proportion as the soil is 
dry or moist. We saw some plants of it, the 
leaf of which was on both sides entirely green *. 
The roots of these trees are hid under tufts of 
dorstenia, which flourishes only in humid and 
shady places. In the midst of the forest, on 
the banks of the Rio Cedeno, as well as on the 
southern declivity of the Cocollar, we find, in 
their wild state, papaw trees, and orange trees 
with large and sweet fruit. ‘These are probably 
the remains of some conucos, or Indian planta- 
tions ; for in those countries the orange tree 
cannot be counted among the indigenous plants, 
any more than the banana tree, the papaw tree, 
maize, cassava, and so many other useful plants, 
with the true country of which we are unac- 
quainted, though they have accompanied man 
in his migrations from the remotest times. 
When a traveller newly arrived from Europe 
penetrates for the first time into the forests of 
South America, nature presents herself to him 
under an unexpected aspect. The objects that 


perez, with a habitation that is called Pre de la Cuesta ; the 
Rio St. Juan; &c. 
* Is not the cecropia concolor of Willdenouw a variety 


of the cecropia peltata? 


D2 


36 


surround him recall but feebly those pictures, 
which celebrated writers have traced on the 
banks of the Missisippi, in Florida, and in other 
temperate regions of the new world. He feels 
at every step, that he is not on the confines, 
but in the centre of the torrid zone: not in one 
of the West India islands, but on a vast conti- 
nent, where every thing is gigantic, the moun- 
tains, the rivers, and the mass of vegetation, 
If he feel strongly the beauty of picturesque 
scenery, he can scarcely define the various emo- 
tions, which crowd upon his mind; he can 
scarcely distinguish what most excites his ad- 
miration, the deep silence of those solitudes, 
the individual beauty and contrast of forms, or 
that vigour and freshness of vegetable life, which 
characterize the climate of the tropics. It 
might be said that the earth, overloaded with 
plants, does not allow them space enough to 
unfold themselves. The trunks of the trees are 
every where concealed under a thick carpet of 
verdure; and if we carefully transplanted the 
orchides, the pipers, and the pothos, which a 
single courbaril, or American fig-tree* nourishes, 
we should cover a vast extent of ground.. By 
this singular assemblage, the forests, as well as 
the flanks of the rocks and mountains, enlarge 
the domains of organic nature. The same 


* Ficus gigantea, 


37 


lianas as creep on the ground, reach the tops 
of the trees, and pass from one to another at 
the height of more than a hundred feet. Thus 
by a continual interlacing of parasite plants, 
the botanist is often led to confound the flowers, 
the fruits, and leaves, which belong to different 
species. 

We walked for some hours under the shade 
of these arcades, that scarcely admit a glimpse 
of the sky; which appeared to me of an indigo 
blue, so much the deeper as the green of the 
equinoctial plants is generally of a stronger hue, 
with somewhat of a brownish tint. A great fern 
tree*, very different from the polypodium ar- 
boreum of the West Indies, rose above masses 
of scattered rocks. In this place we were struck 
for the first time with the sight of those nests in 
the shape of bottles, or small pockets, which are 
suspended to the branches of the lowest trees, 
and which attest the admirable industry of the 
orioles, that. mingle their warblings with the 
hoarse cries of.the parrots and* the macaws. 
These last, so well known for their vivid colours, 
fly only in pairs, while the real parrots wander 
about in flocks of several hundreds. A man 
must have lived. in those climates, particularly in 
the hot valleys of. the Andes, to conceive how 
these birds sometimes drown with their voice 


* Perhaps our aspidium caducum. 


38 


the noise of the torrents, which rush down from 
rock to rock. 

We left the forests, at the distance of some- 
what more than a league from the village of 
San Fernando. A narrow path led, after many 
windings, into an open, but extremely humid 
country, In the temperate zone, the cyperace- 
ous and gramineous plants would have formed 
vast meadows; here the soil abounded in aqua- 
tic plants, with sagittate leaves, and especially 
in basil plants, among which we noticed the fine 
flowers of the costus, the thalia, and the heli- 
conia. These succulent plants are from eight 
to ten feet high, and in Europe their assemblage 
would be considered as a little wood. The de- 
lightful view of meadows, and of turf sprinkled 
with flowers, is almost entirely wanting in the 
low regions of the torrid zone, and is to be found 
only in the elevated plains of the Andes. 

Near St. Fernando, the evaporation caused by 
the action of the sun was so great, that, being 
very lightly clothed, we felt. ourselves as wet as 
ina vapour bath. The road was bordered with 
a kind of bamboo *, which the Indians call 
iagua, or guadua, and which is more than 
forty feet in height. Nothing equals the ele- 
gance of this arborescent gramen. The form 
and disposition of it’s leaves give it a charac- 

* Bambusa guadua, (See Plate 20 of our Equinoxial 
Plants, T. 1, p. 68.) 


39 


ter of lightness, which forms an agreeable con- 
trast with it’s height. The smooth and glossy 
trunk of the iagua is generally bent towards the 
banks of rivulets, and waves with the slightest 
breath of air. Whatever be the height. of the 
reed * in the south of Europe, it can give no idea 
of the aspect of the arborescent gramina, and, if 
I might presume to refer to my own feelings, I 
should assert, that the bamboo and fern tree are, 
of all the vegetable forms between the tropics, 
those which most powerfully strike the imagina- 
tion of the traveller. 

I shall not enter into the details of descriptive 
botany, to prove that the bamboos of the East 
Indies, calumets of the heights of the isle of 
Bourbon, the guaduas of South America, and 
even perhaps the gigantic arundinarias of the 
banks of the Missisippi, belong to the same 
group of plants. These discussions are confined 
to another work, devoted exclusively to the des- 
cription of the new genera and species, which we 
brought back from our travels{. It is sufficient 
here to observe in general, that the bamboos are 
less common in America than is usually believed. 
They are almost entirely wanting in the marshes 


* Arundo donax. 
+ Bambusa, or rather the nastus alpina. 
{ Noy. Gen. et Species, vols 1, p. 201 and 241 of the 
Ato edition. The two continents produce each of them dif 
ferent species of nastus and bambusa. 


40 


and vast inundated plains of the lower Oronoko; 
the Apure, and the Atabapo, while they form 
thick woods, several leagues in length, in the 
north west, in New Grenada, and in the kingdom 
of Quito. Wemight assert, that the western de- 
clivity of the Andes is their true country; and, 
what is remarkable enough, we found them not 
only in the low regions, at the level of the ocean, 
but also in the lofty vallies of the Cordilleras at 
the height of 860 toises. 

The road skirted with bamboos led us to the 


small village of San Fernando, which is situate 
in a narrow plain, surrounded by very steep cal- 
careous rocks. This was the first Mission * we 
saw in America. ‘The houses, or rather the huts 


of the Chayma Indians, separated from each 
other, are not surrounded by gardens. The 
streets, which are wide and very straight, cross 
each other at right angles. The walls, which 
are very thin and slight, are made of clay, 
strengthened by lianas. The uniformity of this 
construction, the grave and taciturn air of the 


* A certain number of habitations collected round a 
church, a missionary monk performing the ministerial duties, 
is called in the Spanish Colonies Mision or Pueblo de mision. 
Indian villages, governed by a priest, are called Pueblos 
de doctrma. They make a distinction between the Cura doc- 
trinero, who is the priest of an Indian parish, and the Cura 
rector, priest of a village inhabited by whites and men of 
mixed race. 


4) 


jnhabitants, and the extreme neatness that 
reigns throughout their habitations, reminded 
us of the establishments of the Moravian Bre- 
thren. Every Indian family cultivates, at some 
distance from the village, beside it’s own garden, 
the conuco* of the community. In this the 
-adults of each sex work one hour in the morn- 
ing, and one in the evening. In the missions 
nearest the coast, the garden of the community 
is generally a sugar or indigo plantation, under 
the direction of the missionary; and the pro- 
duce of which, were the law strictly observed, 
can be employed only for the support of the 
church, and the purchase of the sacerdotal or- 
naments. The great square of San Fernando, 
in the centre of the village, contains the church, 
the dwelling of the missionary, and that humble 
edifice, which is pompously called the king’s 
house—Casa del Rey. This is a real caravan- 
serai, destined to lodge travellers; and, as we 
often experienced, infinitely valuable in a coun- 
try, where the name of an inn is still unknown. 
The Casas del Rey are to be found in all the 
Spanish colonies, and may be deemed an imita- 
tion of the tamboes of Peru, established according 
to the laws of Manco Capac. 

We had been recommended to the friars, who 
govern the Missions of the Chayma Indians, by 


* Conuco de la comunidad, 


42 


their syndic, who resides at Cumana. This re- 

commendation was so much the more useful to 

us, as the missionaries, either from zeal for the 

purity of the morals of their parishioners, or to 

conceal the monastic system from the indiscreet 

curiosity of strangers, often adhere with rigor 

to an old regulation, by which a white man of 
the secular state is not permitted to sojourn 

more than one night in an Indian village. In 

order to travel agreeably in the Spanish. Mis: 
sions, it would be in general imprudent, to trust 

solely to a passport issued by the Secretary of 
State’s office at Madrid, or that of the civil go- 

vernors. A traveller must provide himself with 

recommendations from the ecclesiastical autho-— 
rities, particularly from the guardians of the 

convents, or the generals of the orders, residing 

at Rome; who are infinitely more respected by 

the missionaries, than are the bishops. The 

Missions form, I will not say according to their 

primitive and canonical institutions, but in fact, 

a distinct and nearly independent hierarchy, the 

views of which seldom accord with those of the 

secular clergy. 

The missionary of San Fernando was a’ ca- 
puchin, a native of Arragon, far advanced in 
years, but strong and healthy. His extreme 
corpulency, his hilarity, the interest he took in 
battles and sieges, ill accorded with the ideas 
we form in our northern countries of the melan- 


43 


choly reveries, and the contemplative life or 
missionaries. Though extremely busy about a 
cow, which was to be killed the next day, the 
old monk received us with kindness, and per- 
mitted us to hang up our hammocks in a gal- 
lery of his house. Seated, without doing any 
thing, the greater part of the day, in an arm 
chair of red wood, he bitterly complained of 
what he called the indolence and ignorance of 
his countrymen. He asked a thousand ques- 
tions on the real object of our journey, which 
appeared to him hazardous, and at all events 
useless. Here, as at Oronoko, we were fatigued 
by that restless curiosity, which the Europeans 
preserve in the forests of America, respecting 
the wars and political convulsions of the Old 
World. 

Our missionary, however, seemed well satis- 
fied with his situation. He treated the Indians 
with mildness ; he beheld his Mission prosper, 
and he praised with enthusiasm the waters, the 
bananas, and the dairy produce of the canton. 
The sight of our instruments, our books, and 
our dried plants, drew from him a sareastic 
smile; and he acknowledged, with the naiveté 
peculiar to those climates, that of all the enjoy- 
ments of life, without excepting sleep, none was 
comparable to the pleasure of eating good beef 
(carne de vacca) ; so true it is, that sensuality 
obtains an ascendancy, where there is no occu- 


44 


pation for the mind. Our host often engaged 
us to pay a visit with him to his cow, which he 
had just purchased; and on the morrow, at 
sunrise, he would not dispense with our seeing 
it killed after the epee of the country, that is, 
by ham-stringing the animal, and then plunging 
a large knife into ae: vertebree of the neck. 
This disgusting operation served to show us the 
great address of the Chayma Indians, eight of 
whom, in less than twenty minutes, cut up the 
animal into small pieces. The price of the cow 
was only seven piastres; but this price seemed 
‘to be thought very considerable. The same day 
the missionary had paid eighteen piastres to a 
soldier of Cumana, for Haring succeeded, after 
many fruitless attempts, in bleeding him in the 
foot. This fact, though seemingly very unim- 
portant, is a striking proof how greatly, in un- 
cultivated countries, the price of things differs 
from that of labor 

The Mission of San Fernando was founded 
toward the end of the 17th century, near the 
junction of the small rivers of the Manzanarés 
and Lucasperez*. <A fire, which consumed the 
church, and the huts of the Indians, induced 
the capuchins to place the village in it’s present 
fine situation. The number of families is in- 
creased to one hundred, and the missionary ob- 


* Caulin, Hist. corogr. de la Nueva Andalusia, p. 309, 


45 


served to us, that the custom of marrying at 
thirteen or fourteen years of age contributes 
greatly to this rapid increase of population. He 
denied that old age was so premature among 
the Chaymas, as is commonly believed in Eu- 
rope. The government of these Indian parishes 
is very complicated ; they have their governor, 
their major-alguazils, and their militia~-comman- 
ders, who are all copper-coloured natives. The 
company of archers have their colors, and. per- 
form their exercise with the bow and arrow, in 
shooting at a mark ; this is the national guard 
[militia] of the country. This military esta- 
blishment, under a purely monastic system, 
seemed to us very singular. 

On the night of the 5th of September, and 
the following morning, there was a thick fog; 
yet we were however not more than a hundred 
toises above the level of the sea. I determined 
geometrically, at the moment of our departure, 
the height of the great calcareous mountain, 
that rises at 800 toises distance to the south of 
San Fernando, and forms a perpendicular cliff 
on the north side. Itis only 215 toises higher 
than the great square; but naked masses of 
rock, which here exhibit themselves in the midst 
of a thick vegetation, give it a very majesic as- 
pect *. 


* The base, directed toward the mountain, was 290 feet. 
Angles of altitude, 14° 25/ 6”, and 15° 17/ 26” Barometer, 


46 


_ The road from San -Fernando to Cumana 
passes amidst’ small plantations, through an 
open and humid valley. We forded a number 
of rivulets. In the shade the thermometer did 
not keep above 30°: but we were exposed to 
the direct rays of the sun, because the bamboos, 
which skirted the road, afforded but small shel- 
ter, and we suffered greatly from the heat. We 
passed through the village of Arenas, inhabited 
by Indians, who are of the same race as those of 
San Fernando. But Arenas is no longer a‘ Mis- 
sion; and the natives, governed by a regular 
priest *, are better clothed, and more civilized. 
heir church is also known in the country on 
account of some rude paintings. A narrow bor- - 
der encloses figures of armadilloes, caymans, 
jaguars, and other animals peculiar to the new 
world. 

In this village lives a labourer, Francisco Lo- 
zano, who presented a physiological phenome- 
non, highly calculated to strike the imagination, 
though it is very conformable to the known laws 
of organized nature. This man has suckled a 


67 lines lower than at Cumana. Height above the level of 
the sea, 215 + 93 = 308 toises. From the great square at 
San Fernando, the mountain of the Impossible. lies N. 
74° W., and the town of Cumanacoa, S. 41° E, 

* The four villages of Arenas, Macarapana, Mariguitar, 
and Aricagua, founded by Arragonese Capuchius,. are called 
Doetrinas.de Encomienda; 


47 


child with his own milk. The mother having 
fallen sick, the father, to quiet the infant, took 
it into his bed, and pressed it to his bosom. Lo- 
zano, then thirty-two years of age, had never 
remarked till that day that he had milk: bat 
the irritation of the nipple, sucked by the child, 
caused the accumulation of that liquid. The 
milk was thick and very sweet. The father, as- 
tonished at the increased size of his breast, 
suckled his child two or three times a day during 
five months. He drew on himself the attention 
of his neighbours, but he never thought, as he 
probably would have done in Europe, of deriv- 
ing any advantage from the curiosity he excited. 
We saw the certificate, which had been drawn 
up on the spot, to attest this remarkable fact, 
eye-witnesses of which are still living. They 
assured us, that, during this suckling, the child 
had no other nourishment than the milk of his 
father. Lozano, who was not at Arenas during 
our journey in the Missions, came to us at Cu- 
mana. He was accompanied by his son; who 
was then thirteen or fourteen years of age. Mr. 
Bonpland examined with attention the father’s 
breast, and found it wrinkled like those of wo-' 
men who have given suck. He observed, that 
the left breast in particular was much enlarged; 
which Lozano explained to us from the circum- 
stance, that the two breasts did not furnish milk 
in the same abundance. Don Vicente Empa- 


48 


ran, Governor of the province, sent a circum 
stantial account of this phenomenon to Cadiz. 
It is not a very, uncommon circumstance, to 
find, both: among humankind and animals *, 
males whose breasts contain milk ; and the cli- 
mate does not appear to exert any marked in- 
fluence on the more or less abundance of this 
secretion. ~The ancients cite the milk of the he 
goats of Lemnos and Corsica. In our own time, 
we have seen in the country of Hanover, a he 
goat, which for a great number of years .was 
milked every other day, and yielded more milk 
than a female goat. Among the signs of the 
pretended weakness of the Americans, travellers 
have mentioned the milk contained in. the. 


breasts of men}... It is however improbable, 
that it has ever been observed in a whole tribe, . 
in some part of America unknown to modern 
travellers ; and I can affirm, that at present it 
is not more common in the new continent, than 
in the old. The labourer of Arenas, whose his; 
tory we have just related, is not of the copper- 


* Athanas. Joannides de Mammarum Struct., 1801, p. 6. 
Haller, Elem. Physiol., T. 7, P. II. page 18. 

Tt Blumenbach, Vergleich. Anat., 1805, p. 504. Hanoe- 
vrisches Magaz., 1787, page 753. Reil,. Arch. der Physiol., 
T. 3, p. 449. -Montegre, Gazette de Santé, 1812, p- 110. 

t It has even been seriously related, that in a part of 
Brazil it is the men, and not the women, that suckle chil- 
dren. Clavigero, Storia di Messico. T. 4. 169. 


49° 


eoloured race of Chayma Indians: he is a white 
man, descended from Europeans. . Moreover, 
the anatomists of Petersburg * have observed, 
that. aniong the lower orders of the people in 
Russia, milk in the breasts of men is much more 
frequent, than among the more southern na- 
tions; and the Russians have never been deem- 
ed weak and effeminate. 

There exists among the varieties of our kind 
a race of men; whose breasts at the age of pu- 
berty acquire a considerable bulk. Lozano did 
not belong to this class; and he often repeated to 
us, that it was only the irritation of the nipple, 
in consequence of the suction, which caused the 
flow of the milk. This confirms the observation 
of the ancients, “that men, who have a small 
quantity of milk, yield it in abundance, when 
their breasts are sucked.” These singular ef-- 
fects of a nervous stimulant were known to the 
shepherds of Greece; those of Mount Oeta rubbed 
the dugs of the young goats, that had not yet con- 
ceived, with nettles, to make them produce milk. 

When we reflect on the whole of the vital 
phenomena, we find, that no ore of them is en- 
tirely isolated. In every age examples are cited 
of young girls not marriageable, or women wi- 


* Comment. Petrop., Tom. 3, p- 278. 

t Arist., Hist Anim., lib. 3, cap, 20, ed. Dayal, 1639, 
Tom. 2, p. 259, 

VOL. ITI, Kk 


50 
thered by age, who have suckled children. 
Among men these examples are infinitely more 
rare; and after numerous researches, I have not 
found above two or three. One is cited by the 
anatomist of Verona, Alexander Benedictus, 
who lived toward the end of the fifteenth cen- 
tury. He relates the history of an inhabitant 
of Syria *, who, to calm the uneasiness. of his 
child, after the death of the mother, pressed it 
to his bosom. The milk immediately came 
with such abundance, that the father’ could 
take on himself the nourishment of his child, 
without assistance. Other examples are related 
by Santorellus, Paria, and Robert, bishop of 
Cork-+. The greater part of these phenomena 
having been noticed in times very remote, it is 
not uninteresting to physiology, that we can 
confirm them in our own days. Besides, they 
bear very strongly on the long disputed ques- 
tien respecting final causes. The existence of 


* Maripetrus sacri ordinis equestris tradidit, Syrum quem- 
dam, cui filius infans, mortua conjuge, supererat, ubera se- 
plus admovisse, ut famem filii ragientis frustraret, continua- 
toque suctu lacte manasse papillam ; quo exinde nutritus est, 
magno totius urbis miraculo. Alex. Benedicti hum. Corp. 
Anatome, Bas., 1549, lib. 3, cap. 4, p. 595. Barthol. Vin- 
dic. Anatom., 1648, p. 32. 

+ Gabr. Rzaczynski, Hist. natur. Cur. Sandomir., 1721, 
p. 3382. Misc. Acad. Nat. Cur., 1688, p. 219. Phil. Trans. 
ATA, p.810. > Pata 


51 


the nipple in men has long: puzzled philoso- 
phers; and it has even been recently affirmed, 
“that Nature has refused to one of the sexes 
the faculty of sucking, because this faculty 
would not accord with the dignity of man *.” 
On approaching the town of Cumanacoa, 
we found a more level soil, and a valley en- 
larging itself progressively. This small town 
is situate in a naked plain, almost circular, sur- 
- rounded by lofty mountains, having a dull and 
melancholy aspect. It’s population is scarcely 
two thousand three hundred inhabitants; in the 
time of Father Caulin-+, in 1753, it was only 
six hundred. The houses are low and slight, 
and, with the exception of three or four, all 
built of wood. We succeeded however in plac- 
ing our instruments advantageously enough in 
the house of the administrator of the duties on 
tobacco, Don Juan Sanchez, an amiable man, 
with much quickness of understanding. He 
had prepared for us a spacious and commo- 
dious abode, where we spent four days, and he 
obligingly accompanied us in all our excursions. 
Cumanacoa was founded in 1717 by Domin- 


* Comment. Petrop., Tom. 3, p. 277. 

+ Hist. Cor., p. 309 et 217. Recent travellers make the 
population of Cumanacoa amount to 5000 souls. But I have 
already observed (Chap. 4, Vcl. IL, p. 201), that it is in con- 


sequence of researches made with the king’s officers, and in- 
telligent planters, that I have assigned a smaller number, 


gE 2 


52 


go Arias *, at the return of an expedition to the 
mouth of the Guarapiche, in order to destroy an 
establishment, which some French freebooters 
had attempted to found. The new town was 
first called San Baltazar de las Arias; but the 
Indian denomination prevailed: as the name of 
Santiago de Leon, which is still to be met with 
in our maps, is forgotten in that of Caraccas. 
On opening the barometer, we were struck at 
seeing the column of mercury scarcely 7:3 lines 
shorter than on the coasts : yet the instrument 
appeared to be no way deranged. The plain, or 
ratherthe table land, on which the town of Cuma- 
nacoa is situate, is not more than 104 toises above 
the level of the sea, which is three or four times ° 
less than is supposed by the inhabitants of Cuma- 
na, on account of their exaggerated ideas of the 
cold of Cumanacoa. But the difference of cli- 
mate, which is observed between places so near 
each other, is perhaps less owing to the height 
of the spot, than to local circumstances ; among 
which we shall cite the proximity of the forests ; 
the frequency. of descending currents, so com- 
mon in these valleys, closed on every side; the 
abundance of rain; and those thick fogs, which 


* Father Caulin’ affirms, that the valley, in which Arias 
built for the first time, was known very anciently under the 
name of Cumanacoa. But the inhabitants of Biscay. claim 
the termination coa, as signifying depending on @umana, as 
im Jaungoicoa, Basocoa, &c. 


53 


diminish during a great part of the year the di- 
rect action of the solar rays. The decrement 
of the heat being nearly the same between the 
‘¢ropics *, and during the summer under. the 
temperate zone, the small difference of level of 
one hundred toises should produce only a 
change in the mean temperature of 1° or 1°5°. 
But we shall soon find, that at Cumanacoa the 
difference rises to more than four degrees. 
‘This coolness of the climate is sometimes the 
more surprising, as very strong heats are felt in 
the town of Carthago +; at Tomependa, on the 
bank of the river of Amazons; and in the val- 
jeys of Aragua, to the west of Caraccas; though 
the absolute height of these different places is 
between 200 and 480 toises. In plains, as well 
as on mountains, the isothermal lines [lines of 
similar heat] are not constantly parallel to the 
equator, or the surface of the globet. It is the 
grand problem of meteorology, to determine the 
inflections of these lines, and to discover, amid 
modifications produced by local causes, the con- 
stant laws of the distribution of heat. 


* See my memoir on horizontal refractions, in my Ast. 
Obs., Vol. [, p. 129 and 141: and in the present work, vol, 
I, p. 146, 185, 261. 

+ In the province of Popayan, the heat is caused by the 
reverberation of the plains. 

t See my Prolegomena de Distributione geographica Plan- 
tarum, secundum Coeli Temperiem et Altitadinem Monti _ 
um, in the Nov. Gen. et Spec., Tom. I, p. 28, 4to. edition. 


54 


The port of Cumana is only seven nautical 
leagues * from Cumanacoa. It scarcely ever 
rains in the first of these two places, while in 
the second there are seven months of wintery 
weather. At Cumanacoa, the dry season be- 
gins at the winter solstice, and lasts till the 
vernal equinox. Light showers are frequent 
in the months of April, May, and June. At 
this epoch the dry weather takes place again, 
and lasts from the summer solstice to the end 
of August. Then come the real winter rains, 
which cease only in the month of November, 
and during which torrents of water pour down 
from the skies. According to the latitude of 
Cumanacoa, the sun passes by the zenith of the’ 
place the first time on the 16th of April, and 
the second, on the 27th of August. It appears 
by what I have said, that these two passages 
coincide with the beginning of the rains, and 
the:great electrical explosions. 

It was during the winter season that we took 
up our first abode in the Missions. Every night 
a thick fog covered the sky, like a veil uniform- 
ly extended ; and it was only at intervals, that 
I succeeded in taking some observations of the 


* The itinerary distance reckoned in the country is 12 
leagues: but these leagues contain scarcely 2000 toises. I 
have deduced the real distance from astronomical observa- | 
tions made at Cumana and Cumanacoa, and published in 
1806. 


55 
stars. The thermometer kept from 185° to 
20°*; which under this zone, and to the feel- 
ings of a traveller who comes from the coasts, 
appears a very great coolness. I. never -per- 
ceived the temperature in the night at Cumana 
pelow 21°. The hygrometer of Deluc indicated, 
at Cumanacoa, 85°; and, what is remarkable 
enough, when the vapours were dispersed, and 
the stars shine in their full brilliancy, the in- 
strument fell to 55°. This difference in dryness 
of 30° would have made Saussure’s hygrometer 
vary only 11°. Toward morning the tempera- 
ture augmented slowly, on account of the force 
of the evaporation ; and at 10 o'clock it did not 
yet rise above 21°, The greatest heats are felt 
from noon to 3 o'clock; the thermometer keep- 
ing between 26° and 27°. The maximum of the 
heat, which took place about two hours after 
the passage of the sun over the meridian, was 
very regularly marked by a storm, that mur- 
mured near. Large black and low clouds dis- 
solved in rain, which came down in torrents ; 
and these showers lasted two or three hours, 
and sunk the thermometer five or six degrees. 
About five o'clock, the rain entirely ceased; the 
‘sun reappeared a little before it set; and the 
hygrometer moved toward the point of dryness ; 
but at eight or nine we were again enveloped 


rs 


* From 14'8° to 16° of Reanmur, 


56 


in a thick stratum of vapours. These different 
changes follow successively, we were assured, 
during whole months; and yet not a breath of 
wind is felt. Comparative experiments led us 
to believe, that in general the nights at Cuma- 
nacoa are from two to three, and the days from 
four to five centesimal degrees cooler, than at 
the port of Cumana. These differences are 
great; and if, instead of meteorological fistiti- 
ments, we consulted only our own feelings, we 
should suppose they were still more considera- 
ple *, 

The vegetation of the plain that surrounds 
the town is monotonous, but, owing to the ex- 
treme humidity of the air, remarkable for it’s’ 


freshness. It is chiefly characterized by an ar- 
borescent solanum, which is forty feet in height, 


* Cumanacoa, 1799, Sept. the 6th, midnight: thermome- 
ter, 15°7° of Reaumur: De Lue’s hygrometer, 85° (foggy). 
The 7h, at the same hour: thermom., 148° Reaum. ; hy- 
grom., 85°8°, At 25/ after 12: therm., 16-4° R.; hygrom., 
55°3° (starlight), At 4? after ith therm., 15° R.; hygr., 82° 
(sky cloudy, mist; lunar rainbow ; lightning without thun- 
der [éclairs de chaleur] ata distance). Sept. the 9th, at 8 
o’clock in the morning ; therm., 17-29 R.; hygr., 72° (sky. 
cloudy). At 45/ after L: therm., 22° R.; hygr., 48°. At 
7, after the rain and thunderstorm : therm., 17°3° R.; hygr., 
52°, At 10 in the evening: therm., 16-4? R.; hygr., 82° 
(foggy). The valley of Cumanacoa is very subject to thun- 
derstorms, It is affirmed, that in the month of October 


ober 
hunder is heard the greater part of every day, 


57 


dae urtica baccifera, and a new species of the 
genus guettarda*, The ground is very fertile, 
and might even be easily watered, if trenches 
were cut from a great number of rivulets, the 
springs of which never dry up during the whole 
year. The most valuable production of the 
district is tobacco ; it is also the only one, that 
has given some reputation to a town so small, 
apd so ili built. Since the introduction of the 
farm+ in 1779, the cultivation of tobacco in 
the province of Cumana is nearly confined to 
the valley of Cumanacoa; as in Mexico it is 
permitted only in the two districts of Orizaba 
and Cordova. The system of the farm is a mo- 
nopoly edious to the people. All the tobacco 
ihat is gathered must be sold to government ; 
and to prevent, or rather to diminish fraud, it 
has been found easiest to concentrate the culti- 
tivation in one point. Guards scour the coun- 
try, to destroy any, plantations without the 
boundaries of the privileged districts; and in- 
form against those inhabitants, who dare smoke 
segars prepared by their own hands. These 


* These trees are surrounded by galega pilosa, stellaria 
rotundifolia, cegiphila elata of Swartz, sauvagesia erecta, 
martinia perennis, and a great number of rivinas. We find 
among the gramineous plants, in the savanna of Cumanacoa, 
the paspalus lenticularis, panicum adscendens, pennisetum 
uniflorum, gynerium saccharoides, eleusine indica, &c. 

t Estanco real de tabaco, royal monopoly of tohacco. 


38 


guards are for the most part Spaniards, and are 
almost as insolent as those we see employed in 
similar cases in Europe. This insolence has 
not a little contributed to foster the hatred be- 
tween the colonies and the metropolis. 

Next to the tobacco of the isle of Cuba, and 
of the Rio Negro, that of Cumana is the most 
aromatic. It excels all the tobacco of New 
Spain, and of the province of Varinas’ We 
shall give some particulars of it’s culture, as it 
is essentially different from that which is prac- 
tised in Virginia. The prodigious expansion 
which is remarked in the solaneous plants of the 
valley of Cumanacoa, especially in the abun- 


dant species of the solanum ‘arborescens, of- 


aquartia, and of cestrum, seems to indicate 
how favourable this spot is for- plantations of 
tobacco. The seed is sowed in the open ground, 
at the beginning of September ; though some- 
times not till the month of December, which is 
less favorable for the harvest. The cotyledons 
appear on the eighth day: and the young 
plants are covered with large leaves of helico- 
nia or plantain, to shelter them from the direct 
action of the sun. Great care also is taken to 
destroy the weeds, which, between the tropics, 
spring up with astonishing rapidity. The to- 
bacco is transplanted into a rich and well pre- 
pared ground, a month or two after it has risen 
from the seed. The plants are disposed in‘ re- 


59 


gular rows, three or four feet distant from each 
other. Care is taken to weed them often, and 
the principal stalk is several times topped, till 
greenish blue spots indicate to the cultivator 
the maturity of the leaves. They begin to ga- 
ther them in the fourth month, and this first 
gathering generally terminates in the space ofa - 
few days. It would be better to pluck the 

leaves only as they dry. In good years, the 

cultivators cut the plant when it is only four 

feet high; and the-shoot, which springs from 

the root, throws out new leaves with such rapi- 

dity, that they may be gathered on the thir- 

teenth or fourteenth day. These last have the 

cellular texture very much extended ; and they 

contain more water, more albumen, and less of 

that acrid, volatile principle, which is but little © 
soluble in water, and in which the stimulant 

property of tobacco seems to reside. 

The preparation which the tobacco, after 
being gathered, undergoes at Cumanacoa, is 
what the Spaniards call cura seca. Monsieur 
de Pons has very well described it, as it is prac- 
tised at Uritucu, and in the valleys of Aragua *. 
The leaves are suspended by threads of cocui- 
za: their ribs are taken out, and they are 
twisted into cords. The prepared tobacco 


* Voyage a la Terre-Ferme, vol. ii, p. 360 to 306. 
+ Agave americana. 


60 


should be carried to the king’s warehouses in 
the month of June: but the laziness of the in- 
habitants, and the preference they give to the 
cultivation of maize and cassava, commonly 
prevent them from finishing the preparation 
before the month of August. It is easy to con- 
ceive, that the leaves; so long exposed to very 
moist air, must lose some of their flavour. The 
administrator of the farm keeps the tobacco 
deposited in the king’s warehouses sixty days, 
without touching it. When this time is ex- 
pired, the manoques are opened to examine the 
quality. If the administrator find the tobacco 
well prepared, he pays the cultivator three pi- 
astres for the arroba of twenty-five pounds: 
weight. The same quantity is resold for the 
king’s profit at twelve piastres and a half. The 
tobacco that is rotten (podrido), that is, again 
in fermentation, is publickly burnt; and the 
cultivator, who has received money in advance 
from the royal farm, loses irrevocably the fruits 
of a long labour. We saw heaps of five hun- 
dred arrobas burnt in the great Square, which 
in Europe might have served for making snuff, 
The soil of Cumanacoa is so proper for this 
branch of culture, that tobacco grows wild, 
wherever the.seed finds any moisture. It grows 
thus spontaneously at Cerro del Cuchivano, and 
around the cavern of Caripe. Besides, the only 


‘kind of tobacco cultivated at Cumanacoa, as 


61 


well asin the neighbouring districts of Aricagua 
and San Lorenzo, is the tobacco with large ses- 
tile leaves*, called Virginia Tobacco. The to- 
bacco with petiolate leaves--, which is. the 
yetl of the ancient Mexicans +, is unknown, 
though it is designated in Germany under the 
singular name of Turkish tobacco. 

If the culture of tobacco were free, the Pro- 
vince of Cumana might furnish a great part of 
Europe. It even appears, that other districts 
would not be less favorable to this branch of 
colonial industry, than the valley of Cumana- 
coa, in which the too great frequency of rains 
often injures the aromatic property of the leaves. 
The growth being now confined to the space of 
a few square leagues, the whole produce of the 
harvest is only 6000 arrobas §. Nevertheless, 
the two provinces of Cumana and Barcelona 
consume 12,000. What is wanting is furnished 
by Spanish Guyana. There are in general only 
fifteen hundred persons employed in the tobac- 
co harvest in the neighbourhood of Cumanacoa, 


* Nicotiana tabacum. 

+ Nicotiana rustica. ; 

{ Political Essay en New Spain, T. 2, p. 444. In the 
Crimea, the cultivation of the nicotiana paniculata is pre- 
ferred. Pallas, Reise in die sudl. Stadthalterschaften, vol, 
2, p. 397. 

§ The harvest oF ‘1798 was 3800 arrobas: that of 1799 
amounted to 6100. 


62 


and these are all whites. The hope of gain sel- 
dom stimulates the natives of the Chayma race 
to engage in this culture, and the administra- 
tion does not deem it prudent, to furnish them 
with advances. 

In studying the history of our cultivated plants, 
we are surprised to see, that before the conquest 
the use of tobacco was spread through the greater 
part of America, while the potato was unknown 


‘both in Mexico and the West India Islands, 


where it grows well in the mountainous regions. 
Tobacco has also been cultivated in Portugal 
ever since the year 1559, though the potato did 
not become an object of European agriculture 
till the end of the 17th and beginning of the 18th 
century. This latter plant, which has had such 
a powerful influence on the well-being of society, 
has spread in both continents with more slowness, 
than a production which can be considered only 
asa simple article of luxury. 

Next to tobacco, the most important culture 
of the valley of Cumanacoa is that of indigo. 
The indigo manufacturers of Cumanacoa, of 
San Fernando, and of Arenas, produce indigo 
of greater commercial value than that of Car- 
raceas ; and which often nearly equals in splen- 
dor and richness of colour the indigo of Guati- 


mala. It was from this province, that the coasts . 


of Cumana received the first seeds of the indi- 


63 


gofera anil *, which is cultivated jointly with 
the indigofera tinctoria. The rains being very 


frequent in the valley of Cumanacoa, a plant of 
four feet high yields no more colouring matter, 
than one of a third part this size in the arid val- 
leys of Aragua, to the west of the town of Ca- 
raccas. 
_ The manufactories we examined are all built 
on the same principles. Two steeping vessels, 
or vats, which receive the plants intended to be 
brought into a state of fermentatiou, are joined 
together. Each of them is fifteen feet square, 
and two and a half deep. From these upper 
vats the liquor runs into beaters, between which 
is placed the water-mill. ‘The axle-tree of the 
great wheel crosses the two beaters. It is fur- 
nished with ladles, fixed to long handles, adapt- 
ed for the beating. From a spacious settling- 
vat, the colouring fecula is carried to the drying 
place}, and spread on planks of brasiletto, 
which, having small wheels, can be sheltered 
under a roof in case of sudden rains. These 
sloping and very low roofs give the drying place 
the appearance of a hot-house at some distance. 


~ * The indigo found in commerce is produced by four spe- 
dies of plants: the indigofera tinctoria, i. anil, i. argentea, 
and i. disperma. At the Rio Negro, near the frontiers of 
Brasil, we found the i. argentea growing wild, but only in, 
places anciently inhabited by Indians. 

+ Officinas para secar el anil, 


64 


I will‘not here enter into farther details on the 
fabrication of the colonial productions. I sup 
pose the reader acquainted with the theory of 
the chemical arts, and shall therefore confine 
myself to observations, which may throw light 
on questions that have been less discussed. 
In the valley of Cumanacoa, the fermentation 
of the plant is produced with astonishing ra- 
pidity. It lasts in general but four or five 
hours. This short duration can be attributed 
only to the humidity of the climate, and the ab- 
sence of the sun during the unfolding of the 
plant. I think I have observed, in the course 
of my travels, that the drier the climate is, the 


slower the vat works; and the greater is the - 


quantity of indigo, at the minimum of oxida- 
tion, contained in the stalks. In the province 
of Caraccas, where 562 cubic feet of the plant 
slightly piled up yield 35 or 40 pounds of dry 
indigo, the liquid does not pass into the beater 
till after 20, 30, or 35 hours. It is probable, 
that the inhabitants of Cumanacoa would ex- 
tract more colouring matter from the plant em- 
ployed, if they left it longer steeping in the first 
vat*. During my abode at Cumana I made 
solutions of the indigo of Cumanacoa, some- 


* The planters are pretty generally of Opinion, that the 
fermentation should never continue less than ten hours: 
Beauvais Raseau, Art de V'Indigotier, p. 81. 


65 


what heavy and coppery, and that of Caraccas, 
in sulphuric acid, in order to compare them: 
and the solution of the former appeared to me 
of a much more intense blue. 

Notwithstanding the excellence of the pro- 
ductions, and the fertility of the soil, the agri- 
cultural industry of Cumanacoa is yet in it’s 
first infancy. Arenas, San Fernando, and Cu- 
manacoa, bring into commerce only three thou- 
sand pounds weight of indigo, the value of 
which in the country is 4500 piastres. Hands 
are wanting, and the feeble population is daily. 
diminishing by emigrations to the Llanos. These 
immense plains yield abundant nourishment to 
man, on account of the easy multiplication of 
cattle, while the cultivation of indigo and to- 
bacco demand particular care. The produce of 
this latter branch of industry, too, is uncertain, 
depending on the wintry season being more or 
less prolonged. The labourers are dependent 
also on the royal administration, which fur- 
nishes pecuniary advances; and here, as in 
Virginia * and Georgia, the culture of aliment- 
ary plants is preferred to that of tobacco. It 
had been recently proposed to the government, 
to purchase, at the King’s expense, four hun- 
dred negroes; and to distribute them among 
the planters, who would be able to return the 
advance of the purchase in two or three years. 


* Jefferson, Notes on Virginia, p. 306 and 388. 
VOL. III. F 


66 


By these means, it was computed, the yearly 
harvest of tobacco would amount to 15,000 ar- 
robas. I observed with pleasure, that this pro- 
ject was blamed by several proprietors. It 
could not be hoped, that, following the example 
of some parts of the United States, liberty 
would be granted to the negroes or their de- 
scendants, after a certain number of years. It 
might indeed well be considered as dangerous, 
since the fatal events of St. Domingo, to in- 
crease the number of slaves on the continent. 
A prudent policy produces often the same effects 
as the nobler and less common sentiments of 
justice and humanity. 

The plain of Cumanacoa, spotted with farms, 
and small plantations of indigo and tobacco, 
is surrounded with mountains, which rise to- 
ward the South, and are doubly interesting to 
the natural philosopher and the geologist. 
Every thing indicates, that the valley is the 
bottom of an ancient lake. The mountains, 
which in old times formed it’s shores, are all 
perpendicular toward the plain. The outlet 
for the waters of the lake was only on the side 
of Arenas. In digging foundations, beds of 
round pebbles, mixed with small bivalve shells, 
are found; and according to the report of se- 


veral persons well worthy of credit, there were 


discovered thirty years ago*, at the bottom of 


+ This discovery was made by Don Alexandro Mexias, 
corregidor of Catuaro, 


67 


the ravine of San Juanillo, two enormous fe- 
moral bones, four feet long, which weighed 
more than thirty pounds. The Indians ima- 
gined, as the common people of Europe still do, 
that these were giants’ bones; while the half- 
learned sages of the country, who assume the 
right of explaining every thing, gravely assert- 
ed, ,that they were sports of nature, little wor- 
thy! of attention.” They founded. their opinion 
on the circumstance, that human. bones decay 
rapidly in the soil of Cumanacoa. In order to 
decorate their churches on the festival of the 
dead, they take skulls from the cemeteries on 
the coast, where the earth is impregnated with 
saline substances. These pretended thigh-bones 
of giants were carried to the Port of Cumana, 
where I sought for them in vain; but from the 
analogy of some fossil bones, which I brought 
from other parts of South America, and which 
have been carefully examined by Mr. Cuvier *, 
it is probable, that the gigantic femoral bones of 
Cumanacoa belonged to elephants of a species 
now lost. It may appear surprising, that they 
were found in a place so little elevated above 
the actual level of the waters; since itis a re- 
markable fact, that the fragments of the masto- 
dontes and fossil elephants, which I brought 
from the equinoctial regions of Mexico, New 


* Recherches sur les Ossemens fossiles, T.. 2 (Elephans 
fossiles), p. 57. 
F 2 


68 


Grenada, Quito, and Peru, are not to be found 
in low regions; as the megatherium of Rio 
Luxan * and Virginia-+, the great mastodontes 
of the Ohio, and the fossil elephants of the 
Susquehana, in the temperate zone; but on ta- 
ble-lands having from six to fourteen hundred 
toises of elevation. 

As we approached the Southern bank of the 
basin of Cumanacoa, we enjoyed the view of 
Tumiriquirit. An enormous wall of rocks, the 
remains of an ancient cliff, rises in the midst of 


* At the distanice of one league South-east of the town of 
Buenos Ayres. 
+ The megatherium of Virginia is the megalonyx of Mr. 


Jefferson. All the enormous remains found in the plains of’ 


the new continent, either North or South of the equator, do 
not belong to the torrid but to the temperate zone. On the 
other hand Pallas observes, that im Siberia, consequently 
also beyond the tropics, fossil bones are never found in 
mountainous parts. (Nov. Comment. Petrop., 1772, p. 577.) 
These facts, intimately connected together, appear to lead 
toward the discovery of a great geological law. 

{ Some of the inhabitants pronounce Tumuriquiri, others 
Turumiquiri, or Tumiriquiri. During all our stay at Cuma- 
nacoa, the summit of this mountain was covered with clouds. 
It appeared uncovered the 11th of September in the evening, 
but only for a few minutes. The angle of elevation, taken 
from the great square of Cumanacoa, was 8° 2%. This de- 
termination, .and the barometrical measurement, which I 
made on the 18th, may enable us to fix, within a certain 


approximation, the distance of the mountain at 6 miles 2, or 


6050 toises; admitting that the part uncovered by clouds 
was: 850 toises above the plain of Cumanacoa. 


? 


69 


the forests. Farther to the West, at Cerro del 
Cuchivano, the chain of mountains seems as if 
broken by the effects of an earthquake. The 
crevice is more than a hundred and fifty toises 
wide, is surrounded by perpendicular rocks, and 
is filled with trees, the interwoven branches of 
which find no room to spread, The crevice 
appears like a mine opened by the falling in of 
the earth. A torrent, the Rio Juagua, traverses 
this crevice, the appearance of which is highly 
picturesque, and which is called Risco del Cu- 
chivano, The river rises at the distance of se- 
ven leagues to the South-west, at the foot of the 
mountain of the Brigantine, and forms some 
beautiful cascades, before it spreads through the 
plain of Cumanacoa, 

We visited several times a small farm, the 
Conuco of Bermudez; opposite the crevice of 
Cuchivano, where tobacco, plantains, and .se- 
veral species of cotton-trees *, are cultivated in 
the moist grounds ; especially that tree, the cot- 
ton of which is of a nankeen colour, and which 
is so common in the island of Margaretta +}. 
The proprietor of the farm told us that the cre- 
vice was inhabited by jaguar tigers. These 


* Gossipium uniglandulosum, improperly called herba- 
ceum, and g. barbadense. Mr. de Rohr has shown how 
much confusion still prevails in the determination of the 
varieties and species of the cotton-tree. 

+ G, religiosum. 


70 


animals pass the day in caverns, and rove 
around the habitations at night. Being well fed, 
they reach six feet in length. One of them had 
devoured the preceding year a horse belong- 
ing to the farm, He dragged his prey on a fine 
moon-light night, across the savannah, under a 
ceiba * of an enormous size. The groans of the 
dying horse awoke the slaves of the farm, who 
went out armed with lances, and machetes -+-. 
The tiger continued on his prey, awaited their 
‘approach with tranquillity, and fell only after a 
long and obstinate resistance. ‘This fact, and a 
great many others verified on the spot, prove, 
that the great jaguar + of Terra Firma, like the 
jaguarete of Paraguay, and the real tiger of 
Asia, does not flee from man, when it is dared 
to close fight, and when it is not frightened 
by the number of assailants. Naturalists at 
present admit, that Buffon was entirely mis- 


~ 


. 


* Bombax ceiba, five-leaved silk-cotton tree. 

+ Great knives, with very long blades, like a couteau de 
chasse. No one enters the woods in the torrid zone, with- 
out being armed with a machete, not only to cut his way 
through the woods, but as a defence against wild beasts. 

{ Felis onca, Lin., which Buffon called panthere oillée, 
and which he believed came from Africa. The female pan- 
ther, figured in the Histoire des Quadrupédes of Buffon, T- 
9, pl. 12, is a real jaguar. (Cuvier, Ossem. fossiles, Tom. 
IV, Chats, p. 13.) We shall have occasion to examine 
hereafter a fact so important with respect to zoology, and 
the geography of animals, 


| 


re 


taken with respect to the greatest of the feline 
race of America. What this celebrated writer 
says of the cowardice of the tigers of the new 
continent, relates to the small ocelots * ; and 
we shall see shortly, that, at the Oronoko, the 
real jaguar of America sometimes leaps into the 
water, to attack the Indians in their canoes. 

Opposite the cavern of Bermudez, two spa- 
cious caverns open into the crevice of Cuchi- 
vano, from which at times flames rush out, that 
may be seen at a great distance in the night. 
The adjacent mountains are illuminated by 
them; and, judging by the elevation of the 
rocks, above which these fiery exhalations as- 
cend, we should be led to think, that they rise 
several hundred feet. This phenomenon was 
accompanied by a subterraneous, dull, and long 
continued noise, at the time of ‘the last great 

_ earthquake of Cumana +. It is observed chief- 
ly during the rainy season; and the owners of 
the farms opposite the mountain of Cuchivano 
assert, that the flames are become more frequent 
since December 1797. 

In vain we attempted, in an herbalization we 
made at Rinconada, to penetrate into the cre- 
vice, wishing to examine the rocks, that seemed 
to contain in their bosom the cause of these ex- 


1 * Felis pardalis, Lin., or chibiguazu of Azzara, different 
from the tlateo-ocelotl, or tiger-cat of the Azteques. 
+ See vol, i. p. 217. 


72 


traordinary conflagrations. The strength of vege- 
tation, the interweaving of the lianas and thorny 
plants, hindered our progress. Happily the in- 
habitants of the valley themselves felt a warm 
interest in. our researches, less from the fear of 
a volcanic explosion, than because their imagi- 
nation was struck with the idea, that the Risco 
del Cuchivano contained a gold mine; and al 
though we expressed our doubts of the existence 
of gold in a secondary limestone, they wanted 
to know “ what the German miner thought: of 
the richness of the vein.” Since the time of 
Charles V, and the government of the Welsers, 
the Alfingers, and the Sailers, at Coro and Carac- 
cas, the people of Terra Firma still preserve a, - 
great confidence in the Germans, with respect 
to all that relates to the working of mines. 
Wherever I passed in South America, when the 
place of my birth was known, I was shown sam- 
ples of ore. In these colonies every Frenchman 
is a physician, and every German a miner, 
The farmers, with theaid oftheir slaves, opened 
a path across the woods to the first fall of the Rio 
Juagua; and onthe 10th of September, we made 
our excursion to the Cuchivano. On entering 
the crevice, we recognized the neighbourhood 
of tigers, by a porcupine recently embowelled, 
and also by the offensive smell of their excre- 
ments, not unlike those of an European cat. 
For greater security the Indians returned to the 


73 


farm, and brought back some dogs of a very 
small breed. We were assured, that in the 
_ event of meeting a jaguar in a narrow path, 
he springs on the dog rather than on the man: 
We did not proceed on the brink of the torrent, 
but on the slope of the rocks which overhung 
the water. We walked on the side of a preci- 
pice from two to three hundred feet deep, on a 
kind of very narrow cornice, like the road 
which leads from the Grindelwald along the 
Mettenberg to the great glacier. When the 
cornice was so narrow, that we could find no 
place for our feet, we descended into the tor- 
rent, crossed it by fording or on the shoulders of 
a slave, and climbed ‘the opposite wall. These 
_.descents are very fatiguing, and it is not safe 
to trust to the lianas, which hang like great 
cords from the tops of the trees. The creeping 
and parasite plants cling but feebly to the 
branches which they embrace : the united weight 
of their stalks is considerable, and you run the 
risk of pulling down a whole mass of verdure, 
if, in walking on a sloping ground, you support 
your weight by the lianas. The farther we 
advanced, the thicker the vegetation became. 
In several places the roots of the trees had 
burst the calcareous rock, by inserting them- 
selves into the clefts that separate the beds. 
We had some trouble to carry the plants we ga- 
thered at every step. The cannas, the helico- 


74 


nias with fine purple flowers, the costuses, and 
other plants of the family of the amomums, here 
attain eight or ten feet in height, and their 
fresh and tender verdure, their silky splendour, 
and the extraordinary developement of the pa- 
renchyma, form a striking contrast with the 
brown colour of the arborescent ferns, the 
foliage of which is so delicately shaped. The 
Indians made incisions with their large 
knives in the trunks of the trees, and fixed 
our attention on those beautiful red’ and 
golden yellow woods, which will one day be 
sought for by our turners and cabinet makers. 
They showed us a plant of the family of the 


composite twenty feet high, (the eupatorium: 


levigatum of la Marck,) the rose of Belve- 
ria*, celebrated for the brilliancy of it’s purple 
flowers, and the dragon’s-blood of this country, 
which is a kind of croton not yet described, 
the red and astringent juice of which is employ- 
ed ‘to strengthen the gums, They recognize 


* Brownea racemosa, Bredem. ined. 

t Plants of families entirely different are called in the 
Spanish colonies of both continents sangre de drago ; they 
are dracenas, pterocarpi, and crotons. Father Caulin, 
(Descri. Corografica, p. 25,) in speakmg,of resins found in 
the forests of Cumana, makes a just distinction between the 
drago de la sierra de Unare, which has piunate leaves, (ptero- 
carpus draco) and the draco de la sierra de Paria, with entire 
and hairy leaves. This last is our croton sanguiflaum of 
Cumanacoa, Caripe, and Cariaco. 


75 


the species by the smell, and more particularly 
by chewing the woody fibres. Two natives, to 
whom the same wood is given to chew, pro- 
nounce, and often without hesitation, the same 
name. We could avail ourselves but little of 
the sagacity of our guides, for how could we 
procure leaves, flowers, and fruits growing on 
trunks, the branches of which commence at 
fifty or sixty feet high? We were struck at 
finding in this hollow the bark of trees, and 
even the soil, covered with moss and lichens*. 
The cryptogamous plants are here as common 
as in the countries of the North. Their growth 
is favored by the moisture of the air, and the 
absence of the direct rays of the sun. Never- 
theless the temperature is generally at 25° in 
the day, and 19° at night. =~ 

The rocks which bound the crevice are per- 
pendicular like walls, and are of the same cal- 
careous formation which we observed the whole 
way from Punta Delgada. - It is here a blackish 
gray, of compact fracture, tending sometimes 
toward the sandy fracture, and crossed by small 
veins of white carbonated lime. In these cha- 
racteristic marks we thought we discovered the 
Alpine limestone of Switzerland and the Tyrol, 


* Real musci Jrondost. We also found, beside a small 
boletus stipitatus, of a snow white colour, the boletus igni- 
arius, and the lyéoperdon stellatum of Europe. J had found 
this last only in very dry places in Germany and Poland. 


76 


of which the colour is always very deep, though 
in a less degree than that of the transition lime- 
stone*. The first of these formations consti- 
tutes the Cuchivano, the nucleus of the Impos- 
sible, and in general the whole group of the 
mountains of New Andalusia, I saw no petri- 
factions in it; but the inhabitants assert, that 
considerable masses of shells are found at great 
heights. The same phenomenon occurs in the 
country about Saltzburg-. At the Cuchivano 
the alpine limestone contains beds of marly 
clay {, three or four toises thick ; and this geo- 
logical fact proves on. the one hand the identity 
of the alpenkalkstein with the zechstein of Thu- 


ringia, and on the other the affinity of formation. 


existing between the alpine limestone and that 
of Jura}. The strata of marl effervesce with 


* Escher, in the Alpina, Vol. 4, p. 340. 
t In Switzerland, the solitary beds ‘Of shells, at the height 
of from 1300 to 2000 toises, in the Jungfrauhorn, the Dent de 
Morcle, and the Dent du Midi, belong to transition limestone. 

1 Mergelschieter. 

§ The Jura and the Alpine limestone are kindred forma- 
tions, and sometimes difficult to distinguish, where they lie 
immediately one upon another, as in the Apennines. The 
alpine limestone and the zechstein, famous among the geolo- 
gists of Freiberg, arezdentical formations. This identity, which 
I noticed in the year 1793, (Ueber die Grubenwetter) is a geo- 
logical fact so much the more interesting, as it seems to unite 
the northern European formations to those of the central chain. 
It is known, that the zechstein is situate between the muriatife- 
rous gypsum and the conglomerate (ancient sandstone); or 


77 


acids, though silex and alumine predominate 
in them: they are strongly impregnated with 
carbon, and sometimes blacken the hands, like 
a real vitriolic schistus. The pretended gold 
mine of Cuchivano, which was the object of our 
examination, is nothing but an excavation cut 
into one of those black strata of marl, which 
contain pyrites in abundance. The excavation is 
on the right bank of the river Juagua; and must 
be approached with caution, because the torrent 
there is more than eight feet deep. The sul- 
phurous pyrites are found, some massive, and 


where there is no muriatiferous gypsum, between the slaty 
sandstone with roestones (bunte sandstein, Wern.), and the con- 
glomerate or ancient sandstone. It contains strata of schis- 
tous and coppery marl (bituminoce mergel and kupferschefer ) 
which form an important object in the working of mines at 
Mansfeld, in Saxony, near Riegelsdorf, in Hesse, and at Ha- 
sel and Praunitz, in Silesia. In the southern part of Ba- 
varia, (Oberbaiern), I saw the alpine limestone, containing 
these same strata of schistous clay and marl, which, though 
thinner, whiter, and particularly more frequent, character- 
ize the limestone of Jura. Respecting the slates of Blat- 
tenberg, in the Canton of Glaris, which some mineralogists, 
because of their numerous impressions of fish, have long 
mistaken for the cuprous slates of Mansfeld, they belong, 
according to Mr. Von Buch, to a real transition formation. 
The whole of these geological data tend to prove, that strata 
of marl, more or less mixed with carbon, are to be found in 
the limestone of Jura, in the alpine limestone, and in the 
transition schists. The mixture of carbon, sulphuretted 
iron, and copper, appears to me to augment with the relative 
antiquity of the formations. 


78 


others crystallized and disseminated in the rock ; 
their colour, of a very clear golden yellow, does 
not indicate that they contain copper. They 
are mixed with fibrous sulphuret of iron *, and 
nodules of swinestone, or fetid carbonat of lime, 
The ‘marly stratum crosses the torrent; and, as 
the water washes out metallic grains, the people 
imagine, on account of the brilliancy of the py- 
rites, that the torrent bears down gold. It. is 
reported, that, after the great earthquake, which 
took place in 1765, the waters of the Juagua 
were so charged with gold, that “men who 
came from a great distance, and whose country 
was unknown,” established washing places on 
the spot. ‘They disappeared during the night,, 
after having collected a great quantity of gold. 
It would be needless to show, that this is a fa- 
ble. Pyrites dispersed in quartzose veins, 
crossing the mica-slate*, are often auriferous 
no doubt; but no analogous fact leads to the 
supposition, that the sulphuretted iron, which is 
found in the schistose marls of the alpine lime- 
stone, contains gold. Some direct experiments, 
made with acids, during my abode at Caraccas, 
showed, that the pyrites of Cuchivano are not 
auriferous. Our guides blamed my incredulity; 
_in vain I repeated, that alum and sulphate of 


* Hlaarkies. 


+ Glimmerschiefer. 


" SipNet taki Pree ae on 


79 


iron only could be obtained from this pretended 
gold-mine; they continued picking up secretly 
every bit of pyrites they saw sparkling in the 
water. The morea country is unprovided with 
mines, the more exaggerated are ‘the ideas of 
the inhabitants respecting the facility, with 
which riches are drawn from the bowels of the 
earth. How much time did we not lose during 
five years travels, in visiting, on the pressing 
invitations of our hosts, ravines, of which the 
pyritous strata have borne for ages the pompous 
names of Minas de oro! How often have we 
grieved at seeing men of all classes, magis- 
trates, pastors of villages, grave missionaries, 
grinding, with inexhaustible patience, horn- 
blende, or yellow mica, in order to extract gold 
from it by means of mercury! This rage for 
the search of mines strikes us the more ina 
climate, where the ground has need of being 
but slightly raked to produce abundant har- 
vests. 

After visiting the pyritous marls of the Rio 
Juagua, we continued following the course of 
the crevice, which stretches itself like a narrow 
canal overshaded by very lofty trees. We ob- 
served strata on. the left bank, opposite Cerro 
del--Cuchivano, singularly. bent and. twisted. 
This phenomenon I had often admired at the 
Ochsenberg *, in passing the Lake of Lucerne. 


* This mountain of Switzerland is composed of transition 


80 


The calcareous beds of the Cuchivano and the 
neighbouring mountains keep pretty regularly 
the direction of N. N.E. and 8.8. W. Their 
inclination is sometimes North, and sometimes 
South; most commonly they seem to precipi- 
tate themselves toward the valley of Cumana- 
coa; and it cannot be doubted, that the forma- 
tion of the valley had an influence * on the in- 
clination of the strata. 

We had suffered great fatigue, and were 
quite drenched by the frequently crossing : the 
torrent, when we reached the foot of the ca- 
yerns of the Cuchivano. A wall of rock there 
rises perpendicularly to the height of eight hun- 
dred toises. It is seldom that in a zone, where 
the force of vegetation conceals every where the 
soil and the rocks, we behold a great mountain 
presenting naked strata in a perpendicular sec- 
tion. In the midst of this, and in a position 


limestone. We find these same inflexions in the strata 
near Bomeville, at Nant d’Arpenaz in Savoy, and in the 
valley of Estaubee in the Pyrenees, (Sauss. Voy. vol. I, § 
472, and 1672. Rasoumousky, Voy. minér., p. 154. Ra- 
mond. Voy. aux Pyrénées, p. 55, 100, and 280.) Another 
transition rock, the grawwakke of the Germans, (very near 
the English f:llas), offers the same phenomenon in Scotland. 
Edin. Phil. Trans. 1814, p. 80. 

* The same observation may be made at the lake of Ge- 
muenden in Austria, which I visited with Mr. de Buch, and 


which is one of the most picturesque situations in Europe. 
ve 


| 
| 
| 


ale kag 


Sie 


81 


unfortunately inaccessible to man, two caverns 
open in the form of crevices. We were assur- 
ed, that they are inhabited by the same noc- 
turnal birds, that we should soon become ac- 
quainted with in the Cueva del Guacharo of 
Caripe. Near these caverns we saw strata of 
schistose marl, and found with great astonish- 
ment rock-crystals enchased .in beds of alpine 
limestone. They were hexaedral prisms, ter- 
minated with pyramids, fourteen lines long and 
eight thick. The crystals, perfectly transparent, 
were solitary, and often three or four. toises 
distant from each other. They were enclosed 
in-the calcareous mass, as the quartz crystals of 
Burgtonna *, and the boracite of Lunebourg, 
are contained in gypsum. There was no crevice 
near, or. any vestige of calcareous spar -}-. 

We reposed ourselves at the foot of the ca- 
vern, whence those flames were seen to issue, 
which of late years are become more frequent. 
Our guides and the farmer, an intelligent. man, 


* Tn the duchy of Gotha. 
+ This phenomenon reminds tis of another equally rare, - 


‘the quartz crystals that Mr. Freiesleben (Kupferschiefer, T. 


2, p. 89) found in Saxony, near Burgoerner, in the county 
of Mansfeld, in the middle of a rock of porous limestone 
(rauchwakke), lying immediately on the alpine limestone: 
The rock crystals, which are pretty’ common in’ the primi- 
tive limestone of Carrara, line the insides of cavities in the 
rocks, without being enveloped by the rock itself. 


VOL. III. G 


82 


equally acquainted with the localities of the 
province, discussed in the manner of the creoles 
the dangers, to which the town of Cumanacoa 
would be exposed, if the Cuchivano became.an 
active volcano; se veniesse a reventar. It ap- 
peared to them evident, that since the great 
earthquakes of Quito and Cumana, in 1797, 
New Andalusia was every day more and more 
undermined by subterranean fires. They cited 
the flames, which had been seen to issue from 
the earth at Cumana; and the shocks felt in 
places, where heretofore the ground had never 
been shaken. They recollected, that at Maca- 
rapan sulphurous emanations had been fre- 
quently perceived for some months past. We 
were struck with these. facts, upon which were 
founded predictions, that have since been al- 
most all realised. Enormous convulsions of 
the earth took place at Caraccas in 1812; and 
proved how tumultuously nature is agitated in 
the North-east part of Terra Firma. 

But what is the cause of the luminous phe- 
nomena, which are observed in the Cuchivano? 
I know, that the column of air, that rises from 
the mouth of a burning volcano*, is sometimes 


* We must not confound this very rare phenomenon with 
the glimmering commonly observed a few toises above the 
brink of a crater; and which (as I remarked at Mount Ve- 
suvius, in 1805) is only the reflexion of great masses of in- 
flamed scoria, thrown up without sufficient force to pass the 
mouth of the volcano. 


83 
seen to shine with a splendid light. Such a 
light, which is believed to be owing to the hy- 
drogen gas, was observed from Chillo on the 
top of Cotopaxi, at a time when the mountain 
seemed in the greatest repose. I am aware 
that, according to the report of the ancients, 
the Mons Albanus, near Rome, known at pre- 
sent under the name ef Monte Cavo, appeared 
at times on fire during the night; but the Mons 
Albanus is a volcano recently extinguished, 
which, in the time of Cato, threw out rapilli*; 
while the Cuchivano is a calcareous mountain, 
and without any trap. formation near. Can 
these flames be attributed to the decomposition 
of water, entering into contact with the pyrites 
dispersed through the schistose marl? Is it 
inflamed. hydrogen, that issues from the cavern 
of Cuchivano? The marls, as the smell indi- 
cates, are pyritous, and bituminous at the same 
time; and the petroleum springs at the Buen 
Pastor, and in the Island of Trinidad, proceed 
probably from these same beds of alpine lime- 
stone. It would be easy to suppose some con- 
nexion between the waters filtering through 
this calcareous stone, and decomposed by py 
rites, and the earthquakes of Cumana, the 
springs of sulphuretied hydrogen in New Bar- 


* Albano monte biduum continenter lapidibus pluit, Livy; 
lib, xxv, cap. 7, (Heyne, Opuscula acad., T. iii, p. 261). 
G2 


84 


eelona, the beds of native sulphur.at Carupano, 
and the emanations of sulphurous acid, which 
are perceived at times in the savannahs. It 
cannot be doubted also, that the decomposition 
of water by the pyrites at an elevated tempera- 
ture, favoured by the affinity of oxidated iron 
for earthy substances, may have caused that 
disengagement of hydrogen gas, to the action 
of which several modern geologists have attri- 
buted so much importance. But in general, 
sulphurous acid is perceived more commonly in 
the eruption of volcanoes, than hydrogen is ; 
and it is principally the odour of this acid, that 
prevails while the earth is agitated by violent 
shocks. When we take a general view of the 
phenomena of volcanoes and earthquakes, when 
we recollect the enormous distance at which 
the commotion is propagated below the basin 
of the sea, we readily lay aside explanations, 
that are founded on small strata of pyrites and 
bituminous marls. I am of opinion, that the 
shocks so frequently felt in the province of Cu- 
mana are as little to be attributed to the rocks 
above the surface of the earth, as those which 
agitate the Apennines are to asphaltic veins, or 
springs of burning petroleum. The whole of 
these phenomena depend on more general, I 
would almost say, on deeper causes ; and it is 
not in the secondary strata, which form the ex- 
terior crust of our globe, but in the primitive 


| 


| 
| 


85 


yocks, at an enormous distance from the soil, 
that we should place the focus of volcanic ac- 
tion. The greater progress we make in geology, 
the more we feel the insufficiency of theories, 
founded on observations merely local. 

Meridian heights of the Southern Fish, ob- 
served in the night of the 7th of September, 
gave 10° 16’ 11” for the latitude of Cumana- 
coa; the error in the most esteemed maps is 
consequently a quarter of a degree. The dip 
of the magnetic needle was 42:6°; and the in- 
tensity of the magnetic force corresponded. to 
228 oscillations in 10 minutes time; “being 
consequently 9 oscillations, or 1-25, less than at 
Ferrol. 

On the 12th we continued our journey to the 
convent of Caripe, the principal place of the 
Chayma Missions. . We. chose, instead of the 
direct road, that by the mountains of Cocollar* 
and Turimiquiri, the height. of which little ex- 
ceeds that.of Jura. The road. first runs toward 
the East, crossing during three leagues the ta- 
ble-land of Cumanacoa, ina soil formerly le- 
velled by the waters, and then turns toward. the 
South. We passed the little Indian village of 


* Ts this name of Indian origin? At Cumana they de- 
rive it in a manner somewhat farfetched from the Spanish 
word cogollo, signifying the heart of oleraceous plants ; the 
Cocollar forming the centre of the whole group of the moun: 
gains of New Andalusia, 


86 


Arisagua, surrounded by woody hills and of a 


cheerful aspect. Thence we began to ascend, 
and the ascent lasted more than four hours. 
This part of the road is very fatiguing. We 
crossed the river of Pututucuar, a rapid torrent, 
full of blocks of calcareous rocks, two and 
twenty times. When on the Cuesta de Cocollar 
we reached an. elevation two thousand feet 
above the level of the sea, we were surprised to 
find scarcely any forests or great trees. -We 
passed over an immense plain covered with gra- 
mineous plants. Mimosas with hemispheric 
tops, and stems only four or five fect high, alone 
interrupt the dull uniformity of the savannahs. 


Their branches are bent toward the ground, or: 


spread out like umbrellas. Wherever there are 
steep declivities, or masses of rocks half cover- 
ed with mould, the clusia, or cupey with great 
nympheea flowers, displays it’s beautiful verdure. 
The roots of this tree are eight inches in diame- 
ier, and sometimes shoot out from the trunk at 
the height of five feet above the soil. 

After having for a long time continued to 
"climb the mountain, we reached a small plain, 
at the Hato del Cocollar, This is a solitary 
farm, situate on a table-land, which is 408 
toises high. We rested ourselves three days in 
this retreat, where we were received with great, 
kindness by the proprietor *, who had accompa- 


*% Don Mathias Yturburi, a native of Biscay. 


| 
. 


87 


nied us from the port of Cumana. We there 
found milk, excellent meat from the richness of 
the pasture, and above all, a delightful climate. 
During the day the centigrade thermometer * 
did not rise above 22° or 23°; a little before sun- 
set it fell to 19°, and at night it scarcely kept 
up to14°+. The nightly temperature was con- 
sequently seven degrees colder than that of the 
coasts, which is a fresh proof of an extremely 
rapid decrement of heat, the table-land of Co- 
collar being less elevated than the site of the 
town of Caraccas. 

As far as the eye could reach, we perceived 
only naked savannaks from this elevated point. 
Small tufts of scattered trees rise in the ravines ; 
and notwithstanding the apparent uniformity — 
of vegetation, we found here a great number of 
curious plants¢. We shall only speak of a 


* At five in the afternoon, with a clear sky Reaumur’s 
therm. was at 15°; De Luc’s hyg, 62°. At 9 at night, 
therm. 13°; hyg. 75°. 11 at night, therm. 11-2°; hyg. 80°. 
At 22 h, [10 in the morning] therm. 18°; hyg. 51°. At 
noon, therm. 19°; hyg. 50°. We never saw the hygrometer 
lower than 46° (83° Saus.), notwithstanding the elevation of 
the place; but the rainy season had begun, and at this time 
the air, though very blue and transparent, was already ex- 
cessively loaded with vapours. 

+ 11:2° Reaum. 

t Cassia acuta, andromeda rigida, casearia hypericifolia, 
myrtus longifolia, buettneria salicifolia, glycine picta, g. pra- 
tensis, g. gibba, oxalis umbrosa, malpighia caripensis, ¢#- 


88 


superb lobelia * with purple flowers ; the brown- 
ea coccinea, which is upwards of a hundred feet 
high; and above all, the pejoa, celebrated: in 
the country on account of the delightful and 
aromatic perfume emitted by it’s leaves when 
rubbed between the fingers ~. But what 
charmed us the most in this solitary place was 
the beauty and ‘serenity of the nights. The 
proprietor of the farm prolonged his evenings 
with us; he seemed to enjoy the astonish- 
ment produced on Europeans newly transplant- 
ed to the tropics by that freshness of the air 
like spring, which is felt on the mountains after 
sunset. In those distant climates, where men 
yet feel the full value of the gifts of nature, a 


pheelis salicifolia, stylosanthes angustifolia, salvia pseudo- 
coccinea, eryngium fetidum. We found a second time this 
last plant, but at a considerable height, in the great forests 
of bark-trees, surrounding the town of Loxa, in the centre 
of the Cordilleras. 

* ‘Lobelia spectabilis. 

f Itis the cualtheria odorata, described by Mr. Willde- 
nouw (Neue Schriften der. Nat. Freunde, T, 4, p. 218), from 
specimens that we had given him. The pejoa is found round 
the lake of Cocollar, which gives birth to the great river Gua- 
rapiche. We met with the same shrub at the Cuchilla de 
Guanaguana, It is'a subalpine plant, which, as we shall see 
very soon, forms at the Silla de Caraccas a zone much higher 
than in the province of Cumana. The leaves of the pejoa 
have a more agreeable smell even than those of the myrtus 
pimenta, but they yield no perfume when rubbed’ a fow 
hours after their separation from the tree 


89 


landholder boasts of the water of his spring, the 
absence of noxious insects, the salutary breeze 
that blows round his hill, as we descant in Eu- 
rope on the conveniencies of our dwellings, 


and the picturesque effect of our plantations. 
Our host had visited the new world with an 
‘expedition, which was to form establishments 
for cutting wood for the Spanish navy on the 
shores of the gulf of Paria. In these vast fo- 
rests of mahogany, cedar, and_brasil-wood, 
which border the sea of the West Indies, they 
reckoned on choosing the trunks of the largest 
trees, giving them in a rough way the shape 
adapted to the building of ships, and sending © 
- them every year to the dock-yard of the Carac- 
cas, near Cadiz. White men, unaccustomed to 
the climate, could not support the fatigue of 
labour, the heat, and the effect of the noxious 
air exhaled by the forests. The same winds 
that are loaded with the perfume of flowers, 
leaves, and woods, infuse also, as we may say, 
the germes of dissolution into the vital organs. 
Destructive fevers carried off not only the ship- 
carpenters, but the persons who had the ma- 
nagement of the establishment : and this bay, 
which the first Spaniards named Golfo Tristo, 
Melancholy Bay, on account of the mournful 
and savage aspect of it’s coasts, became the 
graye of European seamen. Our host had the 
rare good fortune to escape these dangers. Af 


90 


ter having witnessed the death of a great num- 
ber of his friends, he withdrew far from the 
coasts to the mountains of Cocollar. Without 
neighbours, the quiet possessor of five leagues 
of savannahs, he enjoyed at once that indepen- 
dence, which belongs to solitude, and that sere- 
nity of mind, which a pure and bracing air pro- 
duces in men who live agreeably to the simpli- 
city of nature. 

Nothing can be compared to the impression 
of majestic tranquillity, which the aspect of the 
firmament inspires in this solitary region. Fol- 
lowing with the eye, at the entrance of the 
night, those meadows that bound the horizon, 
that plain covered with verdure, and gently un- 
dulated, we thought we saw from afar, as in the 
deserts of the Oronoko, the surface of the ocean 
supporting the starry vault of Heaven. The 
tree.under which we were seated, the luminous 
insects flying in the air, the constellations that 
shone toward the south ; every object seemed 
to tell us, that we were far from our native soil. 
If amid this exotic nature the bell of a cow, or 
the roaring of a bull, were heard from the 
depth of a valley, the remembrance of our coun 
try was awakened suddenly in the sound. . They 
were like distant voices resounding from beyond 
the ocean, and with magical power transporting 
us from one hemisphere to the other. Strange 


91 


mobility of the imagination of man, eternal 
source of our enjoyments, and our pains ! 

We began in the cool of the morning to climb 
the Tumiriquiri. Thus is called the summit of 
the Cocollar, which, with the Brigantine, forms 
one single mass of mountain, formerly called by _ 
the natives the Sierra de los Tageres.. We tra- 
velled along a part of the road on horses, which 
roam about these savannahs; but some of 
them are used to the saddle. Though their ap- 
pearance is very heavy, they pass lightly over 
the most slippery turf. We first stopped ata 
spring, that issues not from the calcareous rock, 
put from a layer of quartzose sandstone*. 'The 
temperature was 21°, consequently 1°5° less 
than the spring of Quetepe ; hence the difference 
of the level is nearly 220 toises. Wherever the 
sandstone appears above ground the soil is level, 
and constitutes as it were small platforms, which 
follow like steps. To the height of 700 toises, 
and even beyond, this mountain, like those in 

‘it’s vicinity, is covered only with gramineous 
plants+. This failure of trees is attributed at 
Cumana to the great elevation of the ground ; 
but a slight reflection on the distribution of 
plants in the Cordilleras of the torrid zone will 


* Direction: hor. 4-3. Dip 45° south-east. 

+ The most abundant species are the paspalus; the an- 
dropogon fastigiatum, which forms the genus diectomis of 
Mr, Palissot de Beauvois; and the panicum olyroides. 


a 


92 


lead us to conceive, that the summits of New 
Andalusia are very far from reaching the supe- 
rior limit of the trees, which in this latitude is 
at least 1800 toises of absolute height. . The 
smooth turf of the Cocollar begins to appear at 
350 'toises above the level of the sea, and the 
traveller may contrive to walk upon this turf, 
til he reaches a thousand toises of height. Far- 
ther on, beyond this band covered with grami- 
neous plants, we found, amidst peaks almost 
inaccessible to man, a small forest of cedrela, 
javillo*, and mahogany. These local circum- 
stances induce me to think, that the mountain- 
ous savannahs of the Cocollar and Turimiquiri 
owe their existence only to the destructive cus- 
tom the natives have of setting fire to the woods, 
which they want to convert into pasturage. 
Thus, where during three centuries grasses and 
alpine plants have covered the soil with a thick 
carpet, the seeds of trees can no longer germi- 
nate and fix themselves in the earth, though the 


* Aura crepitans, of the family of the euphorbiums. The 
growth of it’s trunk is so enormous, that Mr. Bonpland 
measured vats of javillo wood, 14 feet long, and 8 wide. 
These vats, made out of one log of wood, are employed to 
keep the guarapo, or juice of the sugar-cane, and the melasses. 
The seeds of javillo are a very active poison, and the milk 
that issues from the petioles when broken frequently produced 
inflammation in our eyes, if by chance the least quantity 
penetrated between the eyelids. 


93 


birds and winds waft them continually from the 
distant forests into the savannahs. ; 

The climate of these mountains is so mild, 
that at the farm of Cocollar the cotton and 
coffee-tree, and even the sugar-cane, are culti- 
vated with success. Whatever the inhabitants 
of the coasts may allege, hoar frost has never 
been found in the latitude of 10°, on heights 
scarcely exceeding those of the Mount D’Or, or 
the Puy de Dome. The pastures of Tumiriquiri 
become less rich in proportion to the elevation. 
Wherever scattered rocks afford shade, lichens 
and some European mosses are found. The 
melastoma guacito *, and a shrub, the large and 
tough leaves of which rustle like parchment + 
when shaken by the winds, rise here and there 
in the savannah. But the principal ornament 
of the turf of these mountains is a liliaceous 
plant with golden flowers, the marica martini- 
censis. It is generally observed in the province 
of Cumana, and Caraccas, only at four or five 
hundred toises of elevation’. The whole rocky 
mass of the Turimiquiri is composed of an al- 


* Melastoma xanthostachyum, called guacito at Caraccas. 

+ Paliscourea rigida, chaparro bove. In the savannahs, or 
ilanos, the same Castillian name is given to a tree of the 
family of the proteacez. 

t For example, in the Montanna de Avila, in the road 
from Caraccas to La Guayra, and in the Silla de Caraccas. 
The seeds of the marica are ripe at the end of December. 


94 


pine limestone, like that of Cumanacoa, and a 


pretty thin strata of marl and quartzose sand- 


stone. The limestone contains masses of brown 
oxidated iron, and carbonat of iron. I have ob- 
served in several places, and very distinctly, 
that the sandstone not only reposes on the lime- 
stone, but that this last reck frequently includes 
and alternates with the sandstone. 

We distinguished clearly the round summit 
of the Turimiquiri, and the lofty peaks or Cucu- 
ruchos, covered with a thick vegetation) ‘and 
inhabited by tigers, which are hunted on ac- 
count of their size, and the beauty of their skin. 
This round summit, which is covered with turf, 
is 707 toises above the level of the ocean. A 
ridge of steep-rocks stretches out toward the 
West, and is interrupted at the distance of a 
mile by an enormous crevice, that descends to- 
ward the gulf of Cariaco. At the point where 
we might suppose'the continuation of the ridge, 
two calcareous paps or peaks arise, the northern- 
most of which is the most elevated. It is this 
last which is more particularly called the Cucu- 
rucho de Turimiquiri, and which is considered 
as higher than the mountain of the Brigantine*, 


* This popular opinion on the height of the Baigent 


favors the supposition, that the distance from the ‘port of « 


Camana to the mountain is much less than twen ty-four nau- 
tical miles. For we have seen alr eady (vol. ii, p. 206), that 
the angles of elevation measured at Cumana give 1255 


D5 


0 well known by the sailors who frequent the 
coasts of Cumana. We measured by angles of 
elevation, and a basis, rather short, traced on 
the round summit bare of trees, the peak, or 
Cucurucho, which was about 350 toises higher 
ihan our station, so that it’s absolute height 
exceeded 1050 toises. ae 

The view we enjoyed on the Turimiquiri is of 


toises for the height of the Brigantine, if we admit the ex- 
actness of the distance indicated in the map of the Deposito 
hydrografico at Madrid. I find, that to make the observed 
angle agree with a supposed elevation of a thousand toises, 
the summit of the Brigantine cannot be more than nineteen 
miles distant from Cumana. The chain of the mountains of 
New Andalusia is in the same direction as the neighbouring 
coast, nearly from east to west; aud, admitting a distance 
more considerable than nineteen miles, the Brigantine would 
‘be more south than the parallel of Cocollar. But the inha- 
bitants of Cumana wanted to lay out a road to Nueva Bar- 
celona over the Brigantine, and I did not find the latitude 
of this town less than 16° 6/52”. This circumstance con- 
firms the result of a trigonometrical calculation made at the 
Salado de Cumana; while on the other side the magnetic 
bearing of the Brigantine, taken at the summit of the Im- 
possible, gives a greater distance. This bearing would be 
highly important, if we were perfectly certain of the longi- 
tude of the Impossible, and of the variation of the needle in a 
place, where the sandstone is strongly impregnated with 
iron. It is the duty of the traveller, to declare with candour 
the doubts he may still entertain respecting points, the posi- 
tion of which is not yet sufficiently ascertained. On making 
land on the coast of Cumana, the pilot reckoned the distance 
of the Tataraqual fifteen or sixteen miles. 


F 


vast extent, and highly picturesque. From the 
summit to the ocean we perceived chains of 
mountains extended in parallel lines from east 
to west, and bounding longitudinal valleys. 
These valleys are intersected at right angles by 
an infinite number of small ravines, scooped out 
by the torrents: the result of which is, that the 
lateral ranges are transformed into so many 
rows of paps, some round, and others pyramidal. 
The ground in general is a gentle slope, as far 
as the Impossible ; farther on, the precipices be- 
come bold, and continue so to the shore of the 
gulf of Cariaco. The form of this mass of 
mountains reminded us of the chain of the Jura; 
and the only plain, that presents itself, is the 
valley of Cumanacoa. We seemed to see the 
bottom of a funnel, in which we distinguished, 
amidst tufts of scattered trees, the Indian vil- 
lage of Aricagua. Toward the north, a narrow 
slip of land, the peninsula of Araya, formed a 
dark stripe on the sea, which, illumined by the 
rays of the sun, reflected a strong light. Be- 
yond the peninsula the horizon was bounded by 
Cape Macanao, the black rocks of which rise 
amid the waters like an immense bastion. 

The farm of Cocollar, situate at the foot of 
the Turimiquiri, is in lat. 19° 9’ 32”*, I found 


* From meridian altitudes of Deneb Cyegni, which I teok 


in the nights of the 12th and 13th of September. Observ. 
Astron., vol. i, p. 98, 


| 


97 


the dip of the needle 42°1°. The needle oscil- 
lated 229 times in 10’. Perhaps masses of 
brown iron ore, included in the calcareous rock, 
caused a slight augmentation in the intensity of 
the magnetic forces. I do not give here the ex- 
periments made with an invariable pendulum ; 
since, notwithstanding the care I took in these 
experiments, I think them defective, on account 
of the imperfect suspension of the rod of the 
pendulum. 

On the 14th of September we descended the 
Cocollar, toward the Mission of San Antonio. 
The road led at first across savannahs strewed 
with large blocks of calcareous stone, and we 
then entered a thick forest. After having pass- 
ed two ridges of mountains extremely steep *, 
we discovered a fine valley five or six leagues in 
length, pretty constantly following the direction 
of east and west. In this valley the Missions of 
San Antonio and Guanaguana are situate; 
the first is famous on account of a small church 
with two towers, built of brick, in a pretty good 
style, and ornamented with columns of the Do- 
ric order, the wonder of the country. The pre- 


* These ridges, rather difficult to climb toward the end of 
the rainy season, are known: under the singular names of 
Los Yepes and . Fantasma. The limestone, whenever it ap- 
pears uncovered in these places, is directed, hor. 4—5. (Dip 
of the strata, 40° S. E.) 


VOL. WI. H 


98 


fect of the capuchins completed the building of 
iis church in less than two summers, though 
he employed only the Indians of his village. 
The mouldings of the capital, the cornices, and 
a frize decorated with suns and arabesques, are 
executed in clay mixed with pounded brick. If 
we be surprised to find churches in the purest 
Grecian style on the confines of Lapland *, we 
are still more struck with these first essays of 
art under a zone, where every thing indicates 
the savage state of man, and where the basis of 
civilization has not been laid by the Europeans 
more than forty years. The governor of the 
province disapproved the luxury of these con- 
structions in the Missions, and, to the great re- 
gret of the friars, the finishing of the temple 
has been suspended. ‘The Indians of San An- 
tonio are far from sharing these regrets: they 
secretly approve the decision of the governor, 
which suits their natural indolence; they care 
no more for ornaments of architecture, than the 
natives formerly did in the Missions of the Je- 
suits of Paraguay. 

I stopped at the Mission of San Antonio only 
to open the barometer, and take a few altitudes 
of the sun. The elevation of the great square 
above Cumana is 216 toises. After having 
crossed the village, we forded the rivers Coelora- 


* At Skelefter, near Torneo, Buch, Voyage en Nor- 
wege, T. LI, p. 275. 


99 
do and Guarapiche; both of which, rising in the 
inountains of the Cocollar, blend their waters 
lower down toward the East. The Colorado 
has ‘a very rapid current, and becomes at it’s 
mouth broader than the Rhine. The Guara- 
piche, united to the Rio Areo, is more than twen- 
ty-five fathoms deep. It’s banks are ornament- 
ed by a superb gramen, of which I made a 
drawing two years afterward on ascending the — 
river Magdalena, and the distich-leaved stalk of 
which often reaches fifteen or twenty feet*. 
Our mules could scarcely drag themselves on 
through the thick mud, with which the level 
and narrow road were covered. The rain fell in 
torrents, and the whole forest seemed converted 


into a marsh by the force and frequency of the 
showers. ; 

Toward evening we reached the Mission of 
Guanaguana, the soil of which is almost ona 
level with the village of San Antonio. We 
were much in need of drying our clothes. The 
missionary received us cordially ; he was an old 


* Lata or cia brava. It is a new genus, between aira and 
arundo, that we have described under the name of gynerium 
(PI. Equin., vol. 2, p. 112). This colossal gramen looks 
like the donax of Italy. This, the arundinaria of the Missi- 
sippi, (ludolfia Wild., miegia of Persoon,) and the bamboos, 
are the highest gramens of the new continent. It’s seed has 
been carried to St. Domingo, and it’s stalk employed to 
thatch the Negroes’ huts. 
H 2 


100 


nian, who seemed to govern his Indians with 
great intelligence. The village has existed only 
thirty years on the spot it now occupies. Be- 
fore that time it was placed more to the South, 
and backed by a hill. It is astonishing with 
what facility the Indians are made to remove 
their dwellings. There are villages in South 
America, which in lessthan half a century have 
thrice changed their situation. The native 
finds himself attached by ties so feeble to the 
soil he inhabits, that he receives with indiffer- 
ence the order of taking down his house, te 
rebuild it elsewhere. A village changes it’s si- 
tuation like a camp. Wherever clay, reeds, 
and the leaves of the palm or heliconia are 
found, a house is built in a few days. These 
compulsory changes have often no other motive 
than the caprice of a missionary, who, recently 
arrived from Spain, fancies that the situation of 
the Mission is feverish, or that it is not sufficient- 
ly exposed to the winds. Whole villages have 
been transported several leagues, merely be- 
cause the monk did not find the prospect from 
his house sufficiently beautiful or extensive. 
Guanaguana has yet no church. The old 
monk, who had inhabited during thirty years 
the forests of America, observed to us, that the 
money of the community, or the produce of the 
labour of the Indians, ought to be employed 
first in the construction of the missionary’s 


101 


house, next in that of the church, and lastly in 
the clothing of the Indians. He gravely as- 
sured us, that this order could not be changed 
on any pretence, and the Indians, who prefer a 
state of absolute nakedness to the slightest 
clothing, are in no hurry that their turn should 
come. The spacious abode of the Padre had 
just been finished ; and we remarked with sur- 
prise, that this house, the roof of which formed 
a terrace, was ornamented with a great number 
of chimnies, that looked like turrets. This, our 
host told us, was done to remind him of a coun- 
iry that was dear to his recollection, and of the 
winters of Arragon amid the heats of the torrid 
zone. The Indians of Guanaguana cultivate 
cotton for their own benefit, as well as for that 
ef the church and missionary. The produce is 
considered as belonging to the community ; and. 
it is with the money of the community, that 
the wants of the priest and the altar are sup- 
plied. The natives have machines of a very 
simple constructiou, to separate the cotton from 
the seeds. These are wooden cylinders of an 
extremely small diameter, between which the 
cotton passes, and which are made to turn by 
atreadle. These machines, however imperfect, 
are very useful, and begin to be imitated in 
other Missions. I have elsewhere explained, in 
my work on Mexico, how detrimental the habit 
of selling the cotton with the seed is, with re- 


102 


spect to carriage in the Spanish colonies, where 


all merchandize is conveyed on the backs of 


mules to the sea port. The soil of Guanaguana 
is not less fertile than that of Aricagua, a small 
neighbouring village, which has alsopreserved it’s 
ancient Indian name. An almuda of land, 1850 
Square toises, produces in good years from 25 to 
30 fanegas of maize, each fanega weighing 100 
pounds. But here, as every where else, where 
the beneficence of nature retards the display of 
industry, a very small number of acres -are 
cleared, and the culture of alimentary plants is 
neglected. Scarcity of subsistence is felt; when- 
ever the harvest of maize is lost by a protracted 
drought, The Indians of Guanaguana related. 
to us asa fact not uncommon, that, the pre- 
ceding year, they, their wives, and their chil- 
dren, had heen for three months a/ monte ; that 
is, wandering in the neighbouring forests, to 
live on succulent plants, palm-cabbages, fern 
roots, and fruits of wild trees, They did not 
speak of the nomade life as of a state of priva- 
tion. The missionary alone felt the inconve- 
nience ; because the village had been deserted, 
and the members of this little community, on 
their return from the forests, were less docile 
than before. 
The beautiful valley of Guanaguana stretches 
toward the east, opening into the plains of Pun- 
wera and Terecen. We wished to visit those 


105 


plains, and examine the springs of petroleum, 
which lie between the river Guarapiche and the 
Rio Areo: but the season of rains was already 
asrived, and we were in daily perplexity to dry 
and preserve the plants we had collected. The 
road from Guanaguana to the village of Punze- 
ra goes either by St. Felix or by Caycara and | 
Guayuta, which is a hato (farm for cattle) of the 
missionaries. In this last place, according to 
the report of the Indians, great masses of sul- 
phur are found, not in a gypseous or calcareous 
rock, but at a small depth below the soil, in a 
bed of clay. ‘This singular phenomenon ap- 
pears to me peculiar to America ; we shall find is. 
again in the kingdom of Quito, and in New 
Spain. On approaching Punzera, we saw in 
the savannahs small bags, formed of a tissue of 
silk, suspended from the branches of the lowest 
trees, It is the seda silvestre, or wild silk of 
the country, which is of a beautiful lustre, but 
very rough to the touch, The phalena which 
produces it is perhaps analogous with that of 
the provinces of Guanaxuato and Antioquia, 
which also furnish wild silk*. We found in 
the beautiful forest of Punzera two trees known 
by the names of curueay and canela ; the first, 
of which we shall speak hereafter, yields a resin 
very much sought after by the Piaches, or In- 


* Nouv. Esp., T. 1, p, 453; T. 3, p. 668, 


134 


dian sorcerers; the leaves of the second have 
the smell of the real cinnamon of Ceylon *, 
From Punzera the road leads by Terecen and 
Nueva Palencia, which was a new colony of 
Canarians, to the port of San Juan, situate on 
the right bank of the river Areo: and it is only 
by crossing this river in a canoe, that the tra- 
veller can arrive at the famous petroleum 
springs (or mineral tar) of Buen Pastor. They 
were described to us as small wells or funnels, 
hollowed out by nature in a marshy soil. This 
phenomenon recalled to us the lake of asphal- 
tum, or of chapapote, in the island of Trinidad, 
which is distant from Buen Pastor, in a straight 

- line, only thirty-five sea leagues. 
Having long combated the desire we felt to 
from descend the Guarapiche to the Golfo Triste, 
we took the direct road of the mountains. The 
valleys of Guanaguana and Caripe are separated 
by a kind of dyke, or calcareous ridge, well 


* Is it the laurus cinnamomoides of Mutis? What is that 
other cinnamon-tree, which the Indians call tuorco, common 
in the mountains of Tocuyo, and at the sources of the Rio 
Uchere, the bark of which is mixed with chocolate? Father 
Caulin gives the name of curucay to the copaifera officinalis, 
Which yields the balsam of capivi. 
34.) 

t Laguna de la Brea, south-east of the port of 
There is another spring of asphaltum on the easte 
the island, in the bay of Mayaro. 


(Hist. corograf., p. 24 et 


Naparima. 
rn. coast of 


105 


known by the name of the Cuchilla * de Guana- 
guana. We found this passage difficult, because 
at that time we had not climbed the Cordille- 
ras; but it is by no means so dangerous as they 
love to represent it at Cumana. The path is 
indeed in several parts only fourteen or fifteen 
inches broad; and the ridge of the mountain, 
along which the road runs, is covered with a 
short turf extremely slippery; the slopes on 
each side are steep, and the traveller, if he 
should stumble, might slide down on the grass 
to the depth of seven or eight hundred feet. 
Nevertheless, the flanks of the mountain offer 
rather steep declivities than real precipices ; 
and the mules of this country are so sure foot- 
ed, that they inspire the greatest confidence. 
Their habits are the same as those of the beasts 
of burden in Switzerland and the Pyrenees. In 
proportion as a country is more savage, the in- 
stinct of domestic animals improves in address 
and sagacity. When the mules feel themselves 
in danger, they stop, turning their heads to the 
right and to the left; the motion of their ears 
seems to indicate, that they: reflect.on the deci- 
sion they ought to take. Their resolution is 
slow, but always just, if it be free; that is to 


* Ridge like “the blade of a knife.” Throughout all 
Spanish America they give the name of cuchilla to the ridge 
-of a mountain terminated on each side by very steep decli- 
vities. 


106 


say, if it be not.crossed or hastened by the im- 
prudence of the traveller. It is on the frightful 
roads of the Andes, during journeys of six or 
seven months across mountains furrowed by 
torrents, that the intelligence of horses and 
beasts of burden displays itself in an astonish- 
ing manner. Thus the mountaineers are heard 
to say, “I will not give you the mule whose 
step is the easiest, but him who reasons best a 
la mas racional. This popular expression, dic- 
tated by long experience, combats the system of 
animated machines, better perhaps than all the 
arguments of speculative philosophy. 

When we had reached the highest. point of 
the ridge or cuchilla of Guanaguana, an inter-. 
esting spectacle presented itself to our eyes. 
We embraced in one view the vast savannahs 
or meadows of Maturin and Rio Tigre*; the 
peak of the Tumiriquiri + ; and an infinite num- 
ber of parallel ridges, which, seen at a distance, 
looked like the waves of the sea. Toward the 
north-east opens the valley, that contains the 
convent of Caripe. The aspect of this valley is 
peculiarly attractive, as, shaded by forests, it 
forms a strong contrast with the nudity of the 
neighbouring mountains, which are bare of 


* These natural meadows are part of the Uanos or ime 
mense steppes bordered by the Oronoke. 
+ El Cucurucho. 


107 


trees, and covered with gramineous plants. 
We found the absolute height of the Cuchillo 
to be 548 toises; it is consequently 329 toises 
more elevated than the house of the missionary 
at Guanaguana. 

Descending from the ridge by a winding path, 
we entered into a country completely woody. 
The soil is covered with moss, and a new spe- 
cies of drosera *, which by it’s form reminded us 
of the drosera of the Alps. The thickness of 
the forests, and the force of vegetation, aug- 
mented as we approached the convent of Ca- 
ripe. Every thing here changes it’s aspect, 
even to the rock that accompanied us from 
Pante Delgada. The calcareous strata become 
thinner, forming graduated steps, which stretch 
out like walls, cornices, and turrets, as in the 
mountains of Jura, those of Pappenheim in Ger- 
many, and near Oizow in Gallicia. The colour 
of the stone is no longer of a smoky or bluish 
gray ; it becomes white : it’s fracture is smooth, 
and sometimes even imperfectly conchoidal. It 
is no longer the calcareous formation of the 
Higher Alps, but a formation to which this 
serves as a basis, and which is analogous to the 
Jura limestone. In the chain of the Apennines, 
between Rome and Nocera, I observed this 
same immediate superposition ~. It indicates, 


* Drosera tenella. 
+ It is thus, that near Geneva the rock of the Mole, be- 


108 


we here repeat, not the transition from one rock 
to another, but the geological affinity existing 
between two formations. According to the ge- 
neral type * of ‘the secondary strata, recognised 


longing to the Alpine limestone, lies under the Jura lime- 
stone, which forms Mount Saleve. 


* The succession of secondary formations seems to be on 
the continent as follows, when they are all equally deve- 
loped ; that is to say, when none of them are either wanting, 
or involved in the ‘neighbouring formations. 1°. Ancient 
sandstone, lying on transition slate (alter sandstein, todes 
liegende). 2°. Alpine limestone (alpenkalkstein, zechstein). 
8°. Ancient gypsum (salzgyps). 4°. Jura limestone (jura~ 
kalkstein). 5°. Sandstone of the second formation, Molasse 


(bunter sandstein). 6°. Fibrous gypsum (neuer gyps). 7°. 


Limestone of the third formation (muschelkalkstein of W er- 
ner), 8°. Chalk. 9°. Limestone with cerites. 10°. Gyp- 


sum with bones. 11°. Sandstone. 12°. Fresh water forma-- 


tion. We shall often havo occasion to recur to this type, 
the complete knowledge of which seems to be the principal 
object of geognosy, and upon which accurate ideas have been 
begun’ to be formed only within these twenty years. We 
shall merely observe here, that the last formations 8, 9, 10, 
11, 12, examined with so much care by Brogniart and Cu- 
vier, are wanting in a great part of Europe; that the lime- 
stones 2 and 4 often form only one mass; and that in 
every place, where the two formations of gypsum (3 and 6). 
are missing, the order of secondary rocks is reduced to the 
very simple type of two sandstone formations alternating with 
two calcareous formations. To account for a great number of 
phenomena of superposition, which appear very singular at 
first sight, we must recollect the two following laws, founded 
upon the analogy of well observed facts: 1°. When twe 


109 


in a great part of Europe, the Alpine limestone 
is separated from the Jura limestone by the mu- 
riatiferous gypsum; but often this last is en- 
tirely wanting, or is contained as a subordinate 
layer in the Alpine limestone. In this case the 
two great calcareous formations succeed each 
other immediately, or are confounded in one 
mass. 

The descent from the Cuchilla is far shorter 
than the ascent. ‘We found the level of the 
valley of Caripe 200 toises higher than that of 
the valley of Guanaguana. A group of moun- 
tains of little breadth separates two valleys, one 
of which is of delicious coolness, while the other 
is famed for the heat of it’s climate. These con- 
gtrasts, so common in Mexico, New Grenada, 
and Peru, are very rare in the North east part of 
South America. Thus Caripe* is the only one 
of the high valleys of New Andalusia, which 
is well inhabited. Ina province, the population 


formatious succeed one another immediately, it often hap- 
pens, that the strata of one begin to alternate with the strata 
of the other, till the newest formation appears without being 
mingled with subordinate strata (Buch, Geogn. Beob., Vol, 
1, p. 104 and 156): 2°, When a formation of little thick- 
ness is placed, from its relative antiquity, between two great 
formations, we sometimes observe that it disappears entirely. 
or that it is involved as a subordinate stratum in one or other 
of the neighbouring formations. 

* Absolute height of the convent, above the level of the 
sea, 412 toises. 


110 


of which is inconsiderable, and where the moun- 
tains offer neither a great mass, nor very exten- 


sive flats, men have few motives to forsake the 
plains, and settle themselves in temperate er 
‘elevated regions. 


| 
\ 
| 
i 


CHAPTER VII. 


Convent of Caripe.—Cavern of the Guacharo.— 
Nocturnal Birds. 


Aw alley of perseas led us to the Hospital of 
the Arragonese Capuchins. We stopped near 
a cross of Brasil wood, erected in the midst of 
a square, and surrounded with benches, on which 
infirm monks seat themselves to say their ro- 
saries. The convent is backed by an enormous 
wall of perpendicular rocks, covered with thick 
vegetation. The stone, of resplendent white- 
ness, appears only here and there between the 
foliage. It is difficult to imagine a more pic- 
turesque spot. It recalled forcibly to my re- 
membrance the valleys of Derbyshire, and the 
cavernous mountains of Muggendorf in Fran- 
conia. The places of the beeches and maple- 
trees of Europe are here occupied by the proud- 
er forms of the ceiba, and the palm-trees, praga 
and irasse. Numberless springs gush out from 
the sides of the rocks, which encircle the basin 
of Caripe, and of which the abrupt slopes pre- 


112 


sent toward the South profiles of a thousand 
feet in height. . These springs arise for the most 
part from a few narrow crevices. The humidity, 
which they spread around, favors the growth of 
the great trees ; and the natives, who love soli- 
tary places, form their conucos along the sides 
of these crevices. Plantains and papaw trees 
surround tufts of arborescent fern. The mix- 


ture of wild and cultivated plants gives the 
place a peculiar charm. Springs are distin- 
guished from afar, on the naked flanks of “the 
mountains, by the tufted masses of vegetation *, 


* Among the interesting plants of the valley of Caripe, 
we found for the first time a calidium, the trunk of which 
is twenty feet high (c. arboreum); the mikania micrantha, 
which may probably possess some of the alexipharmic pro- 
perties of the famous guaco of the Choco; the bauhinia ob- 
tusifolia, a very large tree, called guarapa by the Indians ; 
the weinmaunia glabra; a psychotria-tree, the capsules of 
which, when rubbed between the fingers, give a very agree- 
able.orange smell; the dorstenia houstoni (raiz de resfriado) ; 
the martinia craniolaria, the white flowers of which are six 
or seven inches. long; a scrofularia, that has the aspect of 
the verbascum miconi, and the leaves of which, all radical 
and hairy, are marked with silvery glands. The nacibea 
or manettia of Caripe (manettia cuspidata), of which I made 
a drawing on the spot, is very different from the m. reclinata 
of Mutis. ‘This last, which serves as a type to the genus, 
Linneus places in Mexico, though it belongs to New Gre- 
nada. Mr. Mutis has never been in Mexico: and he re- 
guested us, to acquaint those who pursue the study of botany, 
that all the plants he sent to Upsai, and which are described 


eee 


113 


which at first sight seem suspended from the 
rocks, and in descending down the valley follow 
the sinuosities of the torrents. 

We were received with great hospitality by 
the monks* of the hospital. The father guar- 
dian, or superior, was absent; but, having had 
notice of our departure from Cumana, he had 
provided, with the most attentive care, whatever 
could render our abode agreeable. The hos- 
pital has an inner court, surrounded by a. por- 
tico, like the convents in Spain. . This enclosed 
place was highly convenient for setting up our 
instruments, and making observations. We 
found a numerous society in the convent ; young 
monks, recently arrived from Spain, were just 
going to be’settled in the Missions ; while old in- 
firm missionaries sought for health in the fresh 
and salubrious air of the mountains of Caripe. 
I was lodged in the cell of the Superior, which 
contained a pretty good collection of books. I 
found there with surprise, near the Teatro critico 
of Feijo, and the Lettres édifiantes, the Traité 
@Electricité by abbé Nollet. It seemed as if 


in the Species, the Mantissa, and the Supplement, ‘as coming 
from New Spain, are from the Montuosa near Pampeluna, 
or from the Mina del Zapo, near Ibague; consequently from 
the mountains of New Grenada. , 

* We take a pleasure in recording with gratitude the 
names of Fathers Manuel de Monreal, Luis de Mirabete, and 
Francisco de Allaga, 

VOL. Il. a 


114 


the progress of knowledge were felt even in the 
forests of America. The youngest of the capu- 
chin monks of the last Mission * had brought 
with him a Spanish translation of Chaptal’s 
Treatise on Chemistry, and intended to study 
this work in the solitude, where he was destined 
to pass the remainder of his days. I doubt 
whether this desire of instruction would be last- 
ing in the mind of a young monk, isolated on 
the banks of the Rio Tigre: but what is cer- 
tain, and highly honorable to the spirit of the 


age is, that, during our long abode in the Mis- 


sions of South America, we never perceived any 
sign of intolerance. The monks of Caripe were 
not ignorant, that I was born in the protestant 
part of Germany. Authorised by the orders of 
the court, I had no motives to conceal from 
them this fact; nevertheless, no mark of dis- 


trust, no indiscreet. question, no attempt at — 


controversy, ever diminished the value of the 
hospitality they exercised with so much liberal- 
ity and frankness. We shall examine in an- 
other place the causes and limits of this tolerance 
of the missionaries. : 


* Beside the villages where the Indians are collected to- 
gether under the government of a missionary, the name of 
Mission is given in the Spanish Colonies to an assemblage of 
young monks, who depart together from a Spanish Port, 
to form monastic establishments either in the New World, 
or in the Philippine Islands. Hence the phrase; “ Go to 
Cadiz, to seek a new Mission.” 


115 


The convent is founded on a spot, which 
was anciently called Areocuar. It’s height 
above the level of the sea is nearly the same as 
that of the town of Caraccas, or of the inhabited 
part of the Blue Mountains of J amaica*. Thus 
the mean temperatures of these three points, all 
situate between the tropics, are nearly the same. 
The necessity of being covered during the night 
is felt at Caripe, especially at sunrise. We saw 
the centigrade thermometer, at midnight, _be- 
tween 16° and 17°5°-+; in the morning, be- 
tween 19° and 20°. About one o'clock it had 
risen only to 21°, or 22°5°$. This temperature 
is sufficient for the developement of the produc- 
tions of the torrid zone; though, compared 
with the excessive heat of the plains of Cumana, 


* In the district of Clarendon, the centrigade therm, 


remains in the day between 22° and 24°; it rises but seldom 


to 26°5° and sometimes falls to 18°. This region of the Blue 


Mountains is pretty well inhabited. Some houses are there 
found at elevations, where the colonists are obliged to light 
when (as at Santa Fe de Bogota) the air 


fires to warm them, 
At the same. time 


is cooled in the morning down to 10°. 
the heat of the plain, at Kingston for example, is from 
32° to 35°. See the observations of Mr. Farquhar, who 


lived seventeen years in Jamaica, in the Philadelphian Med. 
6 collect in my work 


Museum, Vol. 1, p. 182. I wished t 
every thing relative to the influence of heights on climates, 
and organized beings, as well in the West India islands as 
‘on the continent of Equinoctial America. 

+ Between 12°8° and 14° Reaum.: 

t Only to 16°8° or 18° Reaum, 


116 


we might call it the temperature of spring. 
Water, exposed to currents of air in vessels of 
porous clay, cools at Caripe, during the night, 
as low as 13°*. I need scarcely observe, that 
this water appears almost ice to travellers, who 
arrive at the convent in one day, either from 
the coast, or from the burning savannahs of 
Terezen; and who consequently are accustom- 
ed to drink the water of rivers, the temperature 
of which is commonly from 25° to 26° of: the 
centigrade thermometer +. 

The mean temperature of the valley * Ca- 
ripe, inferred from that of the month of Sep- 
tember, appears to be 185°. Under this zone, 
according to observations made at Cumana, the 
temperature of September differs hardly half a 
degree from that of the whole year. The mean 
temperature of Caripe is equal to that of June 
at Paris, where nevertheless the extreme heats 
are ten degrees above those of the hottest days 
in Caripe. The elevation of the convent being 
only four hundred toises, the rapidity of the 
decrement of heat from the coasts may appear 
surprising. The thickness of the forests pre: 
vents any reverberation from the soil, which is 
soft and humid, and covered with a thick mat- 
ting of plants and mosses. During weather 


¥ 104° Reaum. 
t From 20° to 20°8° Reaum, 


117 


constantly foggy, the sun remains whole days 
without action; and toward the beginning of 
the night, fresh breezes descend from the Sierra 
del Guacharo into the valley. te 
Experience has proved, that the temperate 
climate. and rarefied air of this spot are singu- 
larly favorable to the cultivation of the. coffee- 
tree, which is well known to flourish on heights. 
The prefect of the Capuchins, an active and 
enlightened man, has introduced into the pro- 
vince this new branch of agricultural industry. 
Indigo was formerly planted at Caripe, but the 
small quantity of fecula yielded by this plant, 
which requires strong heats, caused the culture 
to be abandoned. We found in the Conuco of 
the community many culinary plants, maize, 
the sugar cane, and five thousand coffee-trees, 
which promised a fine harvest. The friars were 
in hopes of tripling the number in a few years. 
We cannot help remarking this uniform ten- 
dency, which manifests itself at the beginning: 
of civilization, in the policy of the. monastic 
hierarchy. Wherever convents have not yet 
acquired wealth, in the new continent, as for- 
merly in Gaul, in Syria, and in the north of 
Europe, they exercise a happy influence on the. 
soil, and the introduction of ex- 
otic vegetables. At Caripe, the Conuco of the 
community. presents the appearance of an ex- 
tensive and beautiful garden, The natives are 


clearing of the 


118 


obliged to work in it every morning from six to 
ten, and the aleaids and alguazils of Indian 
race overlook their labours. ‘These men are 
the great officers of state, who alone have the 
right of carrying a cane, and the choice of 
whom depends on the superior of the convent. 
They attach much importance to this right. 
Their pedantic and silent gravity, their cold and 
mysterious air, their love of appearing in form 
at church and in the assemblies of the people, 
force a smile from Europeans. We were not. 
yet accustomed to these shades of the Indian 
character, which we found the same at the Oro- 
noko, in Mexico, and in Peru, among people 
totally different in their manners and their lan- 
guage. The alcaids came daily to the convent, 
less to treat with the monks on the -affairs. of 
the Mission, than under the pretence of inquir- 
ing after the health of the newly arrived tra- 
vellers. As we gave them brandy, their visits 
‘Decame more frequent than the monks desired. 
During the whole time we passed at Caripe,. 
and in the other Chayma Missions, we observed, 
that the Indians were treated with kindness. 
{n ‘general the Missions of the Arragonese Ca- 
‘puchins appeared to us to be governed by a 
‘system of order and discipline, which unfortu- 
nately is not common in the New. World. 
“Abuses that belong to the general spirit of mo- 
‘nastic’ establishments cannot be imputed. to 


119 


any congregation in particular. The guardian 
of the convent sells the produce of the Conuco ; 
and, as all the Indians are employed in it’s 
cultivation, all have an equal share in the gain. 
Maize, clothes, tools, and, I was assured, some- 
times money, are distributed among the peo- 
ple. These monastic institutions resemble, as 
Ihave already observed, the establishments of 
the Moravian brethren. They are advantage- 
_ ous to the progress of a rising society; and in 


the catholic communities known under the 


name of Missions, the independence of families, 
and the individual existence of all the members 
of the society, are more respected than in the 
protestant communities, that follow the rules 
of Zinzendorf. 

What gives most celebrity to the valley of 
Caripe, beside the extraordinary coolness of the 
climate, is the great Cueva, or Cavern of the 
Guacharo*. In a country where the. people 
love what is marvellous, a cavern that gives, 


* The province of Guacharucu, which Delgado visited in 
1534, in the expedition of Hieronimo de Ortal, appears to - 
have been situate South, or South-east from Macarapana. 
Flas it’s name any. connexion with those of the cavern and, 
the bird? or is this last of Spanish origin ? (Laet, Nov. 
Orb., p. ‘676). Guacharo means in Castilian “ one whe 
cries and laments himself”; now the bird of the cavern of 
Caripe, and the guacharaca (phasianus parraka), are very 
noisy birds. 


120 


birth toa river, and is inhabited by thousands 
of nocturnal birds, the fat of which is employed. 
in the Missions to dress food, is an everlasting 
object of conversation and discussion. Scarce- 
ly has a stranger arrived at Cumana, when he 
is told of the stone of Araya for the eyes; of 
the labourer of Arenas, who suckled. his child; 
and of the cavern of Guacharo, which is said 
to be several leagues in length; till he is tired 
of hearing of them. A lively interest in the, 
phenomena of nature is preserved wherever 
society may be said to be without life; where, 
in dull monotony, it presents only simple rela- 
tions little fitted to excite the ardour of curi- 
osity. 

The cavern, which the natives call a mine 
of fat, is not in the valley of Caripe itself, 
but at three short leagues distance from the 
convent, toward the West-south-west. It opens 
dnto a lateral valley, which terminates at the 
Sierra del Guacharo. We set out toward 
the Sierra on the 18th of September, accom- 
panied by the Alcaids, or Indian magistrates, 
and the greater part of the monks of the Con- 
vent. A narrow path led us at first during 
an hour and a half toward the South, across. 
a fine plain, covered with a beautiful turf. We 
then turned toward the West, along a small ri- 
ver, which issues from the mouth of the cavern 
We ascended during three quarters of .an hour, 


121 


walking sometimes in the water, which wag 
shallow, sometimes between the torrent and a 
wall of rocks, on a soil extremely slippery and 
miry. The falling down of the earth, the scat- 
tered trunks of trees over which the mules 
could scarcely pass, the creeping plants that 
covered the ground, rendered this part of the 
road fatiguing. We were surprised to find here, 
at scarcely 500 toises of elevation above the le- 
vel.of the sea, a cruciferous plant, raphanus 
pinnatus. It is well known how scarce the 
plants of this family are between the tropics; 
they display in some sort a northern form, and 
as such we never expected to see it on: the plain 
of Caripe at so little an elevation. Those 
northern forms seem also to appear in the ga- 
jium caripense, the valeriana scandens, and a 
sanicle not unlike the s. marilandica. 

At the foot of the lofty mountain of Guacharo, 
we were only four hundred steps from the ca- 
vern, without yet perceiving the entrance. The 
torrent runs in a crevice, which has been hol- 
lowed out by the waters; and we went on under 
a cornice, the projection of which prevented 
us from seeing the sky. The path winds like 
the river: at the last turning we came suddenly 
before the immense opening of the grotto. The 
aspect of this spot is majestic even to the eye of 
a traveller accustomed to the picturesque scenes 
of the higher Alps. I had before this seen the 


caverns of the Peak of Derbyshire, where, ex- 
tended in a boat, we traversed a subterranean 
river, under a vault of two feet high. I had 
visited the beautiful grotto of Treshemienshiz, 
in the Carpathian mountains, the caverns of the 
Hartz, and those of Franconia which are vast 
cemeteries * of bones of tigers, hyenas, and 
bears, as large as our horses. Nature in every 
zone follows immutable laws in the distribution 
of rocks, in the exterior form of mountains 
and even in those tumultuous changes, which 
the exterior crust of our planet has undergone. 
So great a uniformity led me to believe, that 
the aspect of the cavern of Caripe would differ 
little from what I had observed in my preced- 
ing travels. The reality far exceeded my ex- 
pectations. If the configuration of the grottoes, 
the splendor of the stalactites, and all the phe- 


* The mould, that has covered for thousands of years the 
‘soil of the caverns of Gaylenreuth and Mugegendorf in Frav-. 
conia, emits even now choke-damps, or gazeous mixtures 
of hydrogen and nitrogen, that rise to the roof of their 
caves. This fact is known to all those who show these 
caverns to travellers; and when I had the direction of the 
mines of the Fichtelberg, I observed it frequently in the 
summertime. Mr. Laugier found in the mould of Mug- 
gendorf, beside phosphate of lime, 0°10 of animal matter. (Cu- 
yier, Recherches sur les Ossemens fossiles, T. 4. Ours, p. 
14.) I was struck, during my stay at Steeben, with the 
ammoniacal and fetid smell produced by it, when projected 
on a red hot iron. 


123 


nomena of inorganic nature, present striking 
analogies, the majesty of equinoxial vegetation 
gives at the same time an individual character 
to the aperture of the cavern. 

The Cueva del Guacharo is pierced in the ver- 
tical profile of a rock. The entrance is toward 
the South, and forms a vault eighty feet broad, 
and seventy-two feet high. This elevation is 
but a fifth less than that of the colonnade of 
the Louvre. The rock, that surmounts the 
grotto, is covered with trees of gigantic height. 
The mammee-tree, and the genipa* with large 
and shining leaves, raise their branches vertical- 
ly toward the sky; while those of the courbaril 
and the erythrina form, as they extend them- 
selves, athick vault of verdure. Plants of the 
family of pothos with succulent stems, oxalises, 
and orchidez of a singular structure-f, rise in 
the driest clefts of the rocks; while creeping 
plants, waving in the winds, are interwoven in 
festoons before the opening of the cavern. _We 
distinguished in these festoons a bignonia of a 
violet blue, the purple dolichos, and for the 
first time that magnificent solandra {, the 


* Caruto, genipa americana. The flower, at Caripe, has 
sometimes five, sometimes six stamens. 


+ A dendrobium, with a golden flower, spotted with 


black, three inches long. 
t Solandra scandens. It is the gousaticha of the Chay- 
ma Indians. 


124 


orangé flower of which has a fleshy tube more 
than four inches long. The entrance of grottoes, 
like the view of cascades, derive their principal 
charm from the situation, more or less majestic, 
in which they are placed, and which in some 
sort determines the character of the landscape. 
What a contrast between the Cueva of Caripe, 
and those caverns of the North crowned with 
oaks and gloomy larch-trees ! 

But this luxury of vegetation embellishes not 
only the outside of the vault, it appears even 
in the vestibule of the grotto. We saw with 
astonishment plantain-leaved heliconias eigh- 
teen feet high, the praga palm-tree, and arbor- 
escent arums, follow the banks of the river, 
even to those subterranean places. The vege- 
tation continues in the cave of Caripe, as in 
those deep crevices of the Andes, half excluded 
from the light of day; and does not disappear, 
till, advancing in the interior, we reach thirty 
of. forty paces from the entrance. We mea- 
sured the way by means of a cord: and we 
went on about four hundred and thirty feet, 
without being obliged to light our torches. 
Daylight penetrates even into this region, be- 
cause the grotto forms but one single channel, 
which keeps the same direction, from South-east 
to North-west. Where the light begins to fail, 
we heard from afar the hoarse sounds of the 
nocturnal birds; sounds, which the natives 


125 


think belong exclusively to those subterrane- 
ous places. 

The guacharo is of the size of our fowls, has 
the mouth of the goatsuckers and procnias, 
and the port of those vultures, the crooked beak 
of which is surrounded with stiff silky hairs. 
Suppressing, with Mr. Cuvier, the order of picee, 
we must refer this extraordinary bird to the 
passeres, the genera of which are connected 
with each other by almost imperceptible transi- 
tions. I have noted it under the name of 
steatornis, in a particular monography, con- 
tained in the second volume of my Observations 
on Zoology and Comparative Anatomy. ‘ It 
forms a new genus*, very different from the 
goat-sucker by the force of it’s voice, by the 
considerable strength of it’s beak, containing a 
double tooth, by it’s feet without the mem- 
branes that unite the anterior phalanxes of the 
claws. It is the first example of a nocturnal 
bird among the passeres dentirostrati. In it’s 
manners it has analogies both with the goat- 
suckers and the alpine crow-+. The plumage of 
the guacharo is of a dark bluish gray, mixed 
with small streaks and specks of black. . Large 


* It’s essential characters are: rostrum validum, lateribus 
compressum, apice aduncum, mandibula superiori subbiden- 
tata, dente anteriori acutiori. Rictus amplissimus.’ Pedes 
breves, digitis fissis, unguibus integerrimis, 

+ Corvus pyrrhocorax, 


126 


White spots, which have the form of a heart, 


and which are bordered with black, mark the 
head, the wings, and the tail. The eyes of the 
bird are hurt by the blaze of day ; they are blue, 
and smaller than those of the goat-suckers. The 
spread of the wings, which are composed of se- 
venteen or eighteen quill feathers, is three feet 
and a half. The guacharo quits the cavern at 
night-fall, especially when the moon. shines. 
It is almost the only frugiferous nocturnal bird, 
that is yet known; the conformation .of it's 
feet sufficiently shows, that it does not. hunt 
like our owls. It feeds on very hard fruits ; 
as the nut-cracker * and the pyrrhocorax. The 
latter nestles also in clefts of rocks, and is 
known under the name of night-crow. The 
Indians assured us, that the guacharo does not 
pursue either the lamellicornous insects, or 
those phaleenze which serve as food to the goat- 
suckers. It is sufficient to compare the beaks 
of the guacharo and goat-sucker, to conjecture 
how much their. manners must differ. It is dif- 


ficult to form an idea of the horrible noise oc- 


casioned by thousands of these birds in the 
dark part of the cavern, and which can only 


* Corvus caryocatactes, ¢. glandarius. Our alpine crow 
builds it’s nest, toward the top of Mount Libanus, in sub- 
terranean caverns, nearly like the guacharo; the horribly 
shrill voice of which it also has. (Labillardiére, Ann. du 
Musée, T. 18, p. 455.) 5 


127 


be compared to the croaking of our crows, 
which, in the pine forests of the North, live in 
society, and construct their nests upon trees, 
the tops of which touch each other. The shrill 
and piercing cries of the guacharoes strike upon 
the vaults of the rocks, and are repeated by the 
echo in the depth of the cavern. The Indians 
showed us the nests of these birds, by fixing 
torches to the end of a long pole. These nests 
were fifty or sixty feet high above our heads, in 
holes in the shape of funnels, with which the 
roof of the grotto is pierced like a sieve. The 
noise increased as we advanced, and the birds 
were affrighted by the light of the torches of 
copal. When this noise ceased a few minutes 
around us, we heard at a distance the plaintive 
cries of the birds roosting in other ramifications 
of the cavern. It seemed as if these bands an- 
swered each other alternately. 

The Indians enter into the Cueva del Gua- 
charo once a year, near midsummer, armed 
with poles, by means of which they destroy the 
greater part of the nests. At-this season several 
thousands of birds are killed ; and the old ones, 
as if to defend their brood, hover over the heads 
of the Indians, uttering terrible cries... The 
young *, which fall to the ground, are opened 
on the spot. Their peritoneum is extremely 


* Los pollos del Guacharo. 


128 


loaded with fat, and a layer of fat reaches front 
the abdomen to the anus, forming a kind of 
cushion between the legs of the bird. This 
quantity of fat in frugivorous animals, not ex- 
posed to the light, and exerting very little mus- 
cular motion, reminds us of what has been long 
since observed in the fattening of geese and oxen. 
It is well known how favourable darkness and 
repose are to this process. The nocturnal birds 
of Europe are lean, because, instead of feeding 
on fruits, like the guacharo, they live on the 
scanty produce of their prey. At the period 
which is commonly called at Caripe the oil har- 
vest*, the Indians build huts with palm leaves, 
near the entrance, and even in the porch of the 
cavern. Of these we still saw some remains. 
There, with a fire of brush-wood, they melt in 
pots of clay the fat of the young birds just 
killed. This fat is known by the name of but- 
ter or oil (manteca or aceite) of the guacharo. 
It is half liquid, transparent, without smell, and 
so pure that it may be kept above a year with- 
out becoming rancid. At the convent of Ca- 
ripe no other oil is used in the kitchen of the 
monks but that of the cavern; and we never 
observed, that it gave the aliments a disagreea- 
ble taste or smell. 

The quantity of this oil collected little corress 


* La cosecha de la manteca, 


129 


ponds with the carnage made every year in the 
grotto by the Indians. It appears, that they do 
not get above 150 or 160 bottles* of very pure 
manteca ; the rest, less transparent, is preserved 
in large earthen vessels. This branch of in- 
dustry reminds us of the harvest of pigeons’ 
oil +, of which some thousands of barrels were 
formerly collected in Carolina. At Caripe, the 
use of the oil of guacharoes is very ancient, and 
the missionaries have only regulated the method 
of extracting it. The members of an Indian 
family, which bears the name of Morocoymas, 
pretend, as descendants of the first colonists of 
the valley, to be the lawful proprietors of the. 
cavern, and arrogate to themselves the mono- 
poly of the fat; but, thanks to the monastic in- 
stitutions, their rights at present are merely 
honorary. In conformity to the system of the 
missionaries, the Indians are obliged to furnish 
guacharo-oil for the church lamp: the rest, we 
were assured, is purchased of them. We shall 
not decide either on the legitimacy of the rights 
of the Morocoymas, or on the origin of the ob- 
ligation imposed on the natives by the monks 
It would seem natural, that the produce of the 
chace should belong to those who hunt: but in 
the forests of the New World, as in the centre of 


* Sixty cubic inches each. 
+ This pegeon oil comes from the colamba mi igratoria 


(Pennant’s Arctic Zoology, T. 2, p. 13). 
VOL. Ill. K 


130 


European cultivation, public might is modified 
according to the relations, which are established 
between the strong and the weak, the victors and 
the vanquished. 

The race of the guacharoes would have been 
long ago extinct, had not several circumstances 
contributed to it’s preservation. The natives, 
restrained by their superstitious ideas, have 
seldom the courage to penetrate far into the 
grotto. It appears also, that birds of the same 
species dwell in neighbouring caverns, which 
are too narrow to be accessible to man.  Per- 
haps the great. cavern is repeopled by colonies, 
that abandon the small grottoes; for the mis- 
sionaries assured us, that hitherto no sensible 
diminution of the birds had been observed. 
Young guacharoes have been sent to the port 
of Cumana, and have lived there several days 
without taking any nourishment; the seeds 
offered to them not suiting their taste. When 
the crops and gizzards of the young birds are 
opened in the cavern, they are found to contain 
all sorts of hard and dry fruits, which-furnish, 
under the singular name of guacharo. seed, 
semilla del guacharo, a very celebrated remedy 
against intermittent fevers. ‘The old birds carry 
these seeds to their young. They are carefully 
collected, and sent to the sick at Cariaco, and 
other places of the low regions, where fevers 
are prevalent. 


131 


We followed, as we continued our progress 
through the cavern, the banks of the small river, 
which issued from it, and is from twenty-eight 
to thirty feet wide. We walked on the banks, 
as far as the hills formed of calcareous incrust- 
ations permitted us. When the torrent winds 
among very high masses of stalactites, we were 
often obliged to descend into it’s bed, which is 
only two feet in depth, We learnt, with sur- 
prise, that this subterraneous rivulet is the ori- 
gin of the river Caripe, which, at a few leagues 
distance, after having joined the small river of 
Santa Maria, is navigable for canoes. It enters 
into the river Areo under the name of Canno de 
Terezen. We found on the banks of the sub- 
terraneous rivulet a great quantity of palm-tree 
wood, the remains of trunks, on which the In- 
dians climb to reach the nests hanging to the 
roofs of the cavern. The rings, formed by the 
vestiges of the old footstalks of the leaves, fur- 
nish as it were the footsteps of a ladder perpen- 
dicularly placed. 

The Grotto of Caripe preserves the same di- 
rection, the same breadth, and it’s primitive 
height of sixty or seventy feet, to the distance of 
A72 metres, or 1458 feet, accurately measured, 
I have never seen a cavern, in either continent, 
of so uniform and regular a construction. We 

had great difficulty in persuading the Indians 
to pass beyond the outer part of the grotto; the 
K 2 


ae 


132 


only part which they annually visit to collect the 
fat. The whole authority of los padres was 
necessary, to induce them to advance as far 
as the spot, where the soil rises ‘abruptly at an 
inclination of sixty degrees, and where the tor- 
rent forms a small subterraneous cascade *. 
The natives connect mystic ideas with this cave, 
inhabited by nocturnal birds ; they believe, that 
the souls of their ancestors sojourn in the deep 
recesses of the cavern. . “ Man,” say. they, 
“should avoid places which are enlightened 
neither by the Sun (Zis), nor by. the Moon 
(Nuna).” To goand join the guacharces, is to 
rejoin their fathers, is to die. The magicians 
(piaches) and the poisoners (imorons). perform. | 
their nocturnal tricks at the entrance of the 
cavern, to conjure the chief of the evil spirits 
(wworokiamo). Thus in every climate the first 
fictions of nations resemble each other, those 
especially which relate to two principles go- 
verning the world, the abode of souls after 
death, the happiness of the virtuous, and the 
punishment of the guilty. The most different 
and most barbarous languages present a cer- 
tain number of images, which are the same, 
because they have their source in the nature of 
our intellect and our sensations. Darkness is 


* We find this phenomenon of a subterranean cascade, 


bat on a much larger scale, in England at Yordas Cave, 
hear Kingsdale, in Yorkshire. : 


133 


every where connected with the idea of death, 
The Grotto of Caripe is the Tartarus of the 
Greeks; and the guacharoes, which hover over 
the rivulet, uttering plaintive cries, remind us of 
the Stygian birds. 

At the point where the river forms the sub- 
terraneous cascade, a hill covered with vegeta- 
tion, which is opposite the opening of the grotto, 
presents itself in a very picturesque manner. 
It appears at the extremity of a straight pas- 
sage, 240 toises in length. The stalactites, 
which descend from the vault, and which re- 
semble columns suspended in the air, display 
themselves on a back-ground of verdure. The 
opening of the cavern appeared singularly con- 
tracted, when we saw it about the middle of the 
day, illumined by the vivid light reflected at 
once from the sky, the plants, and the rocks, 
The distant light of day formed somewhat of 
magical contrast with the darkness, that sur- 
rounded us in those vast caverns. We dis- 
charged our pieces at a venture, wherever the 
cries of the nocturnal birds, and the flapping of 
their wings, led us to suspect, that a great num- 
ber of nests were crowded together. After 
several fruitless attempts, Mr. Bonpland suc- 
ceeded in killing a couple of guacharoes, which, 
dazzled by the light of the torches, seemed to 
pursue us. This circumstance afforded me the 
- means of drawing this bird, which hitherto had 


rernained unknown to naturalists. "We climb- 
ed, not without some difficulty, the small hill, 
whence the subterranecous rivulet descends. 
We saw, that the grotto was perceptibly con- 
tracted, retaining only forty feet in ‘height; 
and that it continued stretching to the North- 
east, without deviating from it’s primitive di- 
rection, which is parallel to that of the great 
valley of Caripe. 

In this part of the cavern, the rivulet deposes 
a blackish mould, very like the matter, which 
in the grotto of Muggendorf, in Franconia, is 
called the earth of sacrifice*. We could not 
discover, whether this fine and spongy mould 
fall through the cracks, which communicate 
with the surface of the ground above; or be 
washed down by the rainwater, ‘that penetrates 
into the cavern. It was a mixture of silex, 
-alumin, and vegetable detritus. We walked 
in thick mud to a spot, where we beheld with 
astonishment the progress of subterraneous ve- 
getation. The seeds, which the birds carry into 


the grotto to feed their young, spring up wher- 
ever they can fix in the mould, that covers the 
calcareous incrustations. Blanched stalks, with 
some half formed leaves, had risen to the height 
of two feet. It was impossible to ascertain the 


* Opfer-erde of the cavern of Hole Berg. (mountain pierced 
entirely through). 


135 


species of plants, the form, colour, and aspect 
of which had been-changed by the absence of 
light. Those traces of organization amid dark- 
ness foreibly excited the curiosity of the natives, 
in general so stupid, and difficult to be moved. 
They examined them in that silent meditation 
inspired by a place they seemed to dread. It 
might be thought, that these subterraneous 
vegetables, pale and disfigured, appeared to 
them phantoms banished from the face of the 
Earth. To me the scene recalled one of the 
happiest periods of my. early yonth, a long 
abode in the mines of Freiberg, where I made 
experiments on the effects of blanching (étiole- 
ment) *, which are very different, according as 
the air is pure, or overcharged with hydrogen or 
azot. 

The missionaries, with all their authority, 
could not prevail on the Indians to penetrate 
farther into the cavern. As the vault grew 
lower, the cries of the guacharoes became more 
shrill. We were obliged to yield to the pusil- 
lanimity of our guides, and trace back our steps. 
The appearance of the cavern was indeed very 
uniform. We find, thata bishop of St. Thomas of 
Guiana had gone farther than ourselves. He had 
measured nearly 2500 feet + from the mouth to 


* Ffumboldt,. Aphorismi ex Physiologia chemica Plan 
tarum (Flora Friberg. subterranea, p. 181.). 
+ 960 -varas. 


136 


the spot where he stopped, though the cavern 
reached farther. The remembrance of this fact 
was preserved in the convent of Caripe, without 
the exact period being noted. The bishop had 
provided himself with great torches of white 
wax of Castille. We had torches composed only 
of the bark of trees, and native resin. The thick 
smoke which issued from these torches, in a 
narrow subterranean passage, hurts the eyes, 
and obstructs the respiration. 
We followed the course of the torrent to go 
out of the cavern. Before our eyes were daz- 
‘zled with the light of day, we saw, without the 
grotto, the water of the river sparkling amid the 
oliage of the trees that concealed it. It was 
like a picture placed in the distance, and. to 
which the mouth of the cavern served as a 
frame. Having at length reached the entrance, 
and seated ourselves on the bank of the rivulet, 
we rested after our fatigues, We were glad to 
be beyond the hoarse cries of the birds, and to 
leave a place where darkness does not. offer 
even the charm of silence and tranquillity, We 
could scarcely persuade ourselves, that the name 
of the Grotto of Caripe had hitherto remained 
unknown in Europe *. The guacharoes alone 


* We have reason to be surprised, that Father Gili, au_ 
thor of the Saggio di Storia Americana (Tom. 4, p. 414), did 
not mention it, though he had in his possession a manuscrip 
composed in 1780 at ihe convent of Caripe. I gaye the 


137 


would have been sufficient, to render it celebrat- 
ed. These nocturnal birds have been no where 
yet discovered, except in the mountains of Ca- 
ripe and Cumanacoa. 

The missionaries had prepared a repast at 
the entry of the cavern. Leaves of bananas 
and vijao*, which have a silky lustre, served 
us as a table cloth, according to the custom of 
the country. Nothing was wanting to our en- 
joyment, not even remembrances, which are so 
rare in those countries, where generations dis- 
appear without leaving a trace of their exist- 
ence. Our hosts took pleasure in reminding 
us, that the first monks, who came into those 
mountains to found the little village of Santa 
Maria+, had lived during a month in the ca- 
vern; and there, on a stone, by the light of 
torches, had celebrated the mysteries of reli- 
gion. This solitary retreat served as a refuge 


first information respecting the Cueva del Guacharo in 1800, 


in my letters to Messrs. Delambre and Delamétherie, pub- 
lished in the Journal de Physique. See also my Geog. des 
Plantes, p. 84. 

* Ffeliconia bibai, Lin. The Creoles have changed the 
b of the Haytian word bihao into v, and the 4 into 7, agree: 
ably to the Castilian pronunciation. 

+ This village, situate to the South of the cavern, was 
formerly the chief place of the Chayma Missions. It is for 
this reason, that in the Chorographia of Father Caulin, p. 7 
and 310, he mentions them as Missiones de Santa Maria de log 
P. P. Capuchinos. Aragoneses. 


135 


to the missionaries against the persecutions of 


a warlike chief of the Tuacopans, entenipad 
on the banks of the river Caripe. 

Before we quit the subterraneous rivulet and 
the nocturnal birds, let us cast a last glance at 
the cavern of Guacharo, and the whole of the 
physical phenomena it presents. When we have 

followed the traveller step by step, in a long 
series. of observations modified by the localities 
of a place, we love to stop, and raise our views 
to general considerations. Do the great cavi- 
ties, which are exclusively called caverns, owe 
their origin to the same causes, as have pro- 
duced the Jodes of veins and of metalliferous stra- 
ta, or the extraordinary phenomenon of the 
porosity of rocks? Do grottoes belong to every 
formation, or to that period only, when organized 
beings began to people the surface of the globe ? 
These geological questions can be solved only 
so far as they have for -their object the actual 
state of things, that is, of facts susceptible of 
being verified by observation. 

Considering rocks according to the succession 
of eras, we find, that the primitive formations 
exhibit very few caverns. The great cavities, 
which are observed in the oldest granite; and 
which are called fours [ovens] in Switzerland, 
and in the South of France, when they are lined 
with rock crystals; arise most frequently from 
the union of several contemporaneous veins of 


139 


quartz *, of feldspar, or of fir e-grained granite. 
The gneiss presents, though more seldom, the 
same phenomenon; and near Wunsiedel +, at 
the Fichtelgebirge, I had an opportunity of exa- 
mining crystal fours of two or three feet. dia- 
meter, in a part of the rock, which was now 
traversed by veins. We are ignorant of the 
extent of the cavities, which the subterraneous 
fires and volcanic agitations may have produced 
in the bowels of the earth in those primitive 
rocks, which, containing considerable quantities 
of hornblende, mica, garnets, magnetic iron- 
stone, and red schorl (titanite), appear to be 
anterior to granite, and of which we find some 
fragments among the matters ejected by vol- 
canoes. Those cavities can be considered only 
as partial and local phenomena ; and their ex- 
istence is scarcely any contradiction ‘to the no- 
‘tions we have acquired, from the luminous ex- 
periments of Maskelyne and Cavendish, of the 
mean density of the Earth. 
In the primitive mountains open to our re- 
searches, real grottoes, those which have some 
extent, belong only to calcareous formations, to 


* Gleichzeitige truemmer. Itis to these stone veins, that ap- 
pear to be ofthe same epoch as the rock, that belong the yems 
of talc and asbestus in the serpentine, and those of quartz 
traversing ‘the schistus (thonschiefer).. Jameson on contemea 
poraneous Veins, in the Mem. of the Werner. Soc., T. 1, p. 4 

+ Tn Franconia, South-east from ‘Luchsburg. 


140 


the carbonats or sulphat of lime. The solubi- 
lity of these substances appears to have favored 
the action of the subterrancous waters for ages. 
The primitive limestone presents spacious ca- 
verns, as well as transition limestone *, and that 
which is exclusively called secondary. If these 
caverns’ be less frequent in the first, it is be- 
cause this stone forms in general only layers 
subordinate to the mica-slate-+-, and not a sys- 
tem of particular mountains, into which the 
waters may filter, and circulate to great dis- 
tauces. The erosions occasioned by this ele- 
ment depend not only on it’s quantity, but also 
on the greater or less time it remains, the velo- 
city it acquires by it’s fall, and the degree of 
solubility of the rock. Ihave observed in ge- 
neral, that the waters act more easily on the 
carbonats and the sulphats of lime of secondary 
mountains, than on the transition limestones, 
which have a considerable mixture of silex and 
carbon. On examining the internal structure 
of the stalactites, which line the walls of ca- 


* In the primitive limestone are found the Kuetzel-loch, 
near Kaufungen in Silesia, and probably several caverns in 
the islands of the Archipelago. In the transition limestone 
we remark the caverns of Elbingerode, of Rubeland, and of 
Scharzfeld, in the Hartz; those of the Salzflueh in the Gri- 
sons; and, according to Mr. Greenough, that of Torbay in 
Devonshire. 

t Sometimes to gneiss, as at the Simplon, between Doyre. 
do and G@revolg, 


ptip aries 


14} 


’ 


verns, we find all the characters of a chemical 
precipitate. The carbonat of lime has not been 
held in suspension; it has been actually dis- 
solved. I am aware, that, in the experiments 
of our laboratories, this substance appears solu- 
ble only in water strongly impregnated with 
carbonic acid: but the phenomena, which na- 
ture daily presents in caverns and springs, are 
sufficient proofs, that-a small quantity of car- 
bonic acid is sufficient, to give water, after long ; 
contact, the power of dissolving some portion 
of carbonat of lime. : ; 
_As we approach those periods, in which orga- 
nic life displays itself in a greater number of 
forms, the phenomenon of grottoes becomes 
more frequent. There exist several under the 
name of bawmen*, not in the ancient sand- 
stone, to which the great coal formation belongs, 
but in the Alpine limestone, and in the Jura 
limestone, which is often only the superiour 
part of the Alpine formation. The Jura lime- 
stone so abounds with caverns in both conti- 


* In the dialect of the German Swiss, Balmen. The 
Baumen of the Sentis, of the Mole, and of the Beatenberg, 
on the borders of the lake of Thun, belong to the Alpine 
limestone. 

+ I shall mention only the grottoes of Boudry, Oe 
Travers, and Valorbe, in the Jura; the grotto of Balme 
near Geneva; the caverns between Muggendorf and Gailen- 
ruth in Franconia; Sowia Jama, Ogrodzimiec, and Wlodo- 


wice, in Poland. 


142 


nents, that several geologists of the school of 
Freiberg have given it the name of cavern 
limestone, hehlenkalkstein. It is this rock 
which so often interrupts the course of rivers 5s 
by ingulfing them into it’s bosom. It is this 
also, which includes the famous Cueva del Gua- 
charo, and the other grottoes of the valley of 
Caripe. The muriatiferous gypsum +-, whether 
it be found in layers in the Jura or Alpine lime- 
stone, or whether it separate these two forma- 
tions, or lie between the Alpine limestone, and 
argillaceous sandstone, presents also, on ac- 
count of it’s great solubility, enormous cavities, 
which sometimes communicate with each other 
at several leagues distance. When these sub- 
terraneous basins} are filled with water, their 
proximity becomes dangerous to the miners, 
whose works they expose to unforeseen inunda- 
tions. If the caverns, on the contrary, be dry, 
and very spacious, they are useful in freeing 
a, mine from water. Distributed in stages, 
they may receive the waters into their upper 
part, and assist the efforts of industry by serv- 
ing as subterrancous drains dug out by nature. 
After the limestone and. gypseous formations, 


* This geological phenomenon had very much attracted 
the notice of the ancients, Strabo, Geoer., lib. 6 (ed Oxon,, 
1807, T. 1, p. 397). 

t Gypsum of Bottendorf, schlottengyps. 

t Kalkschlotten, in Thuringia, 


143 


there would remain to examine, among the se; 
condary rocks, a third formation, that of the 
argillaceous sandstone“, newer than the brine- 
spring formations: but this rock, composed. of 
small grains of quartz cemented by clay, sel- 
dom contains caverns; and when it does, they 
are not extensive. Progressively narrowing to- 
ward their extremity, their walls are covered 
with a brown ochre. 

We have just seen, that the form of grottoes 
depends partly on the nature of the rocks in 
which they are found ; but this form, modified 
by exterior agents, often varies also in the same 
formation. The configuration of caverns, like 
the outline of mountains, the sinuosity of val- 
lies, and so many other phenomena, present at 
first sight only irregularity and confusion. The 
appearance of order is resumed, when we can. 
extend onr observations over a vast space of 
ground, which has undergone violent, but pe- 
yiodical and uniform revolutions. From what 
I have seen in the mountains of Europe, and in 
the Cordilleras of America, caverns may be 
divided, according to their interior structure, 
into three classes. Some have the form of large 
clefts, or crevices, like veins not filled with ore; 


* Sandstone of Weisenfels and of Nebra, odlite sand- 
stone, bunte sandstein. 

+ Such are the Heuscheune in Silesia; the Diebskeller, 
and the Kuhstall, in Saxony. 


144 


such as the cavern of Rosenmuller, in Franco» 

nia, Elden-hole, in the peak of Derbyshire, and 

the Sumideroes of Chamacasapa* in Mexico. 

Other caverns are open to the light at both 

ends. These are rocks really pierced through ; 

natural galleries, which traverse a_ solitary 

mountain. Such are the Hole-Berg of Mug- 

gendorf, and the famous cavern called Dantoe 
by the Ottomite Indians, and the Bridge of the 

Mother of God, by the Mexican Spaniards. It 
is difficult to decide respecting the origin of 
these channels, which sometimes serve as a bed 

for subterraneous rivers. Are these pierced 

rocks hollowed out by the impulse of a current? 

or should we rather admit, that one of the open- 

ings of the cavern is owing to a falling down of 
the earth subsequent to it’s original formation, 

to a change in the external form of the moun- 

tain, for instance, to a new valley opened on it’s 

flank? A third form of caverns, and the most. 
common of the whole, exhibits a succession of 
cavities, placed nearly on the same level, in the 

same direction, and communicating with each 

other by passages of greater or less breadth. 

To these differences of general form are add- 
ed_other circumstances not less remarkable. . It 
often happens, that to grottoes of little space the 
openings are extremely wide; while we have 
to creep under very low vaults, in order to‘pe- 


* Near Tasco, and Tehuilotepec. 


| 
| 


a Sa Spr ere aa 


145 


netrate into the deepest and most spacious ca- 
yerns. The passages, which unite partial. grot- 
toes, are generally horizontal. I have seen 
some, however, which resemble funnels or wells, 


and which may be attributed to the disengage- 


ment of some elastic fluid through a mass not 
yet hardened. When rivers issue from grottoes, 
they form only a single, horizontal, continued 
channel, the dilatations of which are almost im- 
perceptible ; such are the Cueva del Guacharo, 
which we have just described, and the cavern of 
St. Philip, near Tehuilotepec, in the western 
Cordilleras of Mexico. The sudden disappear- 


_ ance * of the river, which took it’s rise from this 


last cavern, has caused the impoverishment of a 
district, the farmers and miners of which have 
equally need of water, to refresh the fields, and 
to move their hydraulic machines. 

On considering this variety of structure ex- 
hibited by the grottoes in both hemispheres, we 
are compelled to refer their formation to causes 


_ totally different. When we speak of the origin 


of caverns, we must choose between two sys- 
tems of natural philosophy, one of which attri- - 
butes every thing to instantaneous and violent 
commotions; for instance, to the elastic force 
of va curs, and to the heavings occasioned by 
volcanoes; while the other has recourse to small 


* Jn the night of the 16th of April, 1802. 
WOL. III. +) 


146 


powers, which produce their effect almost in- 
sensibly by progressive action. It would be in. 
contradiction to the design of this work, which 
treats of the laws of nature, to discuss the origin 
of things, and abandon the small number of 
facts hitherto well observed, to wander amid 
vague conjectures. We will only recommend 
to those natural philosophers, who like to in- 
dulge in geological hypotheses, not to forget the 
horizontality, which is so often remarked in the 
bosom of gypseous and calcareous mountains to 
a vast extent, in the position of grottoes that 
communicate with each other by passages. This 
almost perfect. horizontality, this gentle and 
uniform slope, appear to be the result of a long 
abode of the waters, which enlarge by erosion 
clefis already existing, and carry off the softer 
parts * so much the more easily, as clay or mu- 
riat of soda is found mixed with the gypsum 
and fetid limestone. These effects are the 
same, whether the caverns form one long and 
continued range, or several of these ranges ly- 
ing one over another, as happens almost exclu- 
sively in gypseous mountains. 


* Saussure, Voy pereiie 5: 465, Freiesleben, Kupferschiefer, 
ea) 11, p- 172. 

t Stinkstein. According to an hypothesis of Mr. Wer- 
ner, the caverns in the ancient gypsum of Thuringia are 


owing to the abstraction of enormous masses of muriat of 
soda. 


147 


What in the shelly or Neptunean rocks is 
owing to the action of the waters, appears to be 
sometimes in the volcanic rocks the effect of 
gaseous emanations*, which act in ihe direc- 
tion where they find the least resistance. When 
melted matter moves on a very gentle slope, the 
great axis of the cavity formed by’ the’ disen- 
gagement of elastic fiuids is nearly horizontal, 
or parallel to the plane on which the movement 
of transition takes place. A similar disengage- 
ment of vapours, joined to the elastic force of 
the gasses, which penetrate strata softened and 
raised up, appears to give sometimes a great ex- 
tent to the caverns, which are joined in the ¢ra- 
chytes or trappean porphyries. These porphy- 
ritic caverns, in the cordilleras of Quito and 
Peru, bear the Indian name of Machays+. 
They are in general of little depth, lined with 
sulphur, and differ by the enormous size of 
their openings from those which the voleanic 


_ * At Monnt Vesuvius the Duke of Torre showed me, in 

1805, in currents of recent lava, cavities extended in the 
direction of the current, six or seven feet long and three feet 
high. These little voleanic caverns were lined with iron- 
glance, which cannot be called oligiste iron, since Mr. Gay- 
Lussac’s last experiments on the oxides of iron. 

+ Machay is a word of the Qquichua language, called com- 
monly by the Spaniards the Inca’s language. Thus Callanca- 
machay means ‘a cavern as large as a house,” a cavern that 
serves a as ¢ambo, or caravansary. 

Lu 2 


a 


148 


tufas* present in Italy, at Teneriffe, and in the 
Andes. Thus it is by connecting in the mind 
the primitive, secondary, and volcanic rocks, 
and making a distinction between the oxidated 
crust of the globe, and the interior nucleus, 
composed perhaps of metallic and inflammable 
substances, that we every where recognize the 
existence of grottoes: They act in the cecono- 
my of nature as vast reservoirs of water and of 
elastic fluids. . é 

The gypseous caverns glitter with the splen- 
dor of the chrystallized selenite. Vitreous 
chrystallized plates of brown and yellow display 
themselves in a striped ground composed of lay- 
ers of alabaster and fetid lime-stone. The cal- 
careous grottoes have a more uniform tint. 
‘They are more beautiful, and richer in stalacti- 
tes, in proportion as they are narrower, and the 
circulation of air is less free. It is on account 
of it’s being too spacious, and too accessible to 
air, that the cavern of Caripe is almost destitute 
of those incrustations, the imitative forms of 
which excite in other countries the curiosity of 


* Sometimes fire acts like water in carrying off subtances : 
and thus the cavities:may be caused by an igneous, though 
more frequently by an aqueous erosion or solution. Captain 
Flinders, whose melancholy and untimely end the friends of 

Science deplore, attributes a cavern, near the plantation Me-. 
nilin the Isle of France, to a mass of glance-iron melted 
and carried away by a volcanic eruption. Voyages to Terra 
Australis, vol. ii, p.415. 


aed pi Vat Sea ania 


149 


the people. I also sought in vain for subterra- 
nean plants, those cryptogamous plants of the 
family of the usneaceew, which we sometimes 
find fixed on the stalactites, as ivy on our walls, 
at the moment when we penetrate for the first 
time into a lateral grotto *. 

The caverns in the mountains of gypsum of- 
ten contain mephitic emanations and. deleteri- 
ous gasses‘. It is not the sulphat of lime, that 
acts on the atmospheric air, but the clay slight- 
ly mixed with carbon, and the fetid limestone, 
which are so often mingled with the gypsum. 
We cannot yet decide, whether the swinestone 
act as a hydrosulphuret, or by means of a bitu- 
minous principle{. It’s property of absorbing 


* Thus the lichen tophicola was discovered when the fine 
cavern of Rosenmueller in Franconia was first opened. 
(Humb., Ueber die Grubenwetter, p. 39.) The cavity con- 


taining the lichen was closed on all sides by enormous 


masses of stalactites. This example is not favorable to the 
opinion of some natural philosophers, who think, that the 
subterranean plants, described by Scopoli, Hoffmann, and 
myself, are cryptogamiz of our forests, accidentally conveyed 
into mines with the timber, employed in working them, and 
disfigured by the effects of blanching, 

+ Freiesleben, Vol. ii. , p. 189. 

t Ib. vol. ii, p. 16—22. The stinkstein is constantly of a 
blackish brown colour; it is only by decomposition that it 
becomes white, after having acted on the surrounding air. 
The stinkstein, which is of secondary formation, must not be 
confounded with a primitive granular limestone, very white, 
of the island of Thasos, which emits when scraped a smell 


150 


oxygen gas is known to all the miners of Thu- 
ringia. It is the same as the action of the car- 
buretted. clay of the gypseous grottoes, and of 
the great chambers (sinkwerke), which are dug 
outin the mines of fossil salt worked by the in- 
troduction of fresh water, The caverns of the 
calcareous mountains are not exposed to those 
decompositions of the atmospheric air, unless 
they contain bones of quadrupeds, or that 
mould mixed with animal gluten and phosphat 
of lime, from which arise, as we above observed, 
inflammable and fetid gasses, 

Notwithstanding all the inquiries we made 
among the inhabitants of Caripe, Cumanacoa, 
and Cariaco, we did not learn, that they had 
ever discovered in the cavern of Guacharo ei- 
ther the remains of carnivorous animals, or 
those breccia penetrated with bones. of her- 
bivorous animals, which are found in the caverns 
of Germany and Hungary, and in the clefts 
of the calcareous rocks of Gibraltar. The fos- 
sile Lones of the megatherium, of elephants, and 
of mastodontes, which travellers have brought 
from South America, were all found in the 
light soil of the valleys, or elevated table-lands, 


of sulphuretted hydrogen. This marble is larger grained than 
that of Carara (marmor lunense). It has been frequently em- 
ployed by the Grecian sculptors, and I often picked up frag- 
ments of it at the Villa Adriani, near Rome, 


151 


Excepting the megalonyx*, a kind of sloth of 
the size of an ox, described by Mr. Jefferson, I 
know not a single instance of the skeleton of 
an animal buried in a cavern of the New World. 
The extreme scarcity of this geological pheno- 
menon appears less surprising, if we recollect, 
that in France, England, and Italy, there are 
also a great number of grottoes, in which we 
have never met with any vestige ‘of fossile 
bones f, 

Although, in primitive nature, whatever re- 
jates to the ideas of extent and mass is of no 


‘ great importance, I must nevertheless observe, 


that the cavern of Caripe is one of the most 
spacious, that is known in limestone forma- 
tions. It is at least 900 metres or 2800 feet in 
length{. In general, on account of the differ- 
ent degrees of the solubility of the rocks, it is 


'* The megalonyx was found in the caverns of Green 
Briar, in Virginia, at 1500 leagues distance from the me- 
gatherium, which resembles it very much, and is as big as 
the rhinoceros. (Americ. Trans., No. 80, p. 246.) 

+ Cuvier, Recherches sur les Ossemens Fossiles, T. iv, 
Ours, p. 10. 

{ The famous Baumannshole in the Hartz, according to 
Messrs. Gilbert and Ilsen, is only 578 feet in length; the 
eavern of Scharzfeld 350; that of Gailenruth 304; that of 
Antiparos 300 (Freiesleben, T. ii, p. 165), But according 
to Saussure (Voyages, §.465), the Grotto of Balme is 1309 
feet long, : 


152 


not in calcareous mountains, but in gypseous 
formations, that we find the most extensive suc~ 
eession of grottees. We know in Saxony 
some in gypsum, that are several leagues in 
length ; for instance, that of Wimetbourg, 
which communicates with the cavern of Cres- 
feld. 

The most curious observation, that grottoes 
present to the natural philosopher, is the exact 
determination of their temperatures. The ca- 
vern of Caripe, situate nearly in the latitude of 
10° 10’, consequently in the centre ef the torrid 
zone, is elevated 506 toises above the level of 
the water in the Gulf of Cariaco... We found in 
every part of it, in the month of September, the 
temperature of the interior air between 18°1 and 
18°9° of the centesimal thermometer; the exter- 
nal atmosphere being at 162°. At the entrance 
of the cavern, the thermometer in the air was 
at 17-6’; but when immersed in the water of 
the little subterraneous river, it marked, even 
to the end of the cavern, 168°. These experi- 
ments are very interesting, if we reflect on the 
equilibrium of heat, which tends to establish it- 
self between the waters, the air, and the earth. 
When I left Europe, natural philosophers. still 
regretted, that they had not sufficient data on 
what is called, perhaps a little pompously, the 
temperature of the interior of the globe; and it 


153 
is but very recently, that pains had been taken 
with some success, to solve this grand problem 
of subterraneous meteorology. The stony stra- 
ta, that form the crust of our planet, are alone 
accessible to our examination; and we now 
know, that the mean temperature of these 
strata varies not only with the latitudes and 
the heights, but that, according to the position 
of the several places, it performs also, in the 
space of a year, regular oscillations round the 
mean heat of the neighbouring atmosphere- 
We are already far from that period, when 
men were surprised to find, under other zones, 
the heat of grottoes and wells differing from 
that, which is observed in the caves of the ob- 
servatory at Paris. The same instrument, which 
in those caves marks 12°, rises in the sub- 
terraneous caverns of the island of Madeira, 
near Funchal*, to 16:2°; in Joseph’s Well, at 
Cairo +, to 21:2’; in the grottoes of the Island 


» At Funchal (lat. 32° 37’) the mean temperature of the 
air is 20°4°. This is so much the more probable, as Mr. 
Escolar finds at Santa Cruz, in Teneriffe, 21-8° (Cavendish, 
in the Philosoph. Trans. for 1778,.p. 392). We shall 
hereafter recur again to this remarkable difference between 
the caves in the island of Madeira and the surrounding at- 
mosphere. 


+ At Cairo (lat. 30° 2’) the mean temperature of the air 
ig 22°4°, according to Nouet, 


154 


of Cuba * to 22° or 23°. This increase is near- 
ly in proportion to that of the mean tempera- 
ture of the atmosphere, from the latitude of 48° 
to the tropics. 

We have just seen, that in the Cueva del 
Guacharo, the water of the river is nearly 2° 
colder than the ambient air of the cavern. 
The water, whether in filtering through the 
rocks, or in running on stony beds, assumes 
‘without doubt the temperature of these beds. 
The air contained in the grotto, on the contrary, 
is not in repose; it communicates with the at- 
mosphere without. Though under the torrid 
zone, the changes of the exterior temperature 
are exceedingly small: currents are formed, 
which modify periodically the internal air. It 
is consequently the temperature of the waters, 
that of 16°8°, which we might look upon as the 
temperature of the earth in those mountains, if 
we were sure, that these waters do not descend 
‘with rapidity from more elevated neighbouring 
mountains. 

It follows from these observations, that, when 
we cannot obtain results perfectly exact, we 
find at least under each zone certain numbers, 
which indicate the maximum and minimum. At 
Caripe, in the equinoxial zone, at 500 toises of 


* Obs. Astr. Tom. i, p. 134. The mean temperature of 
the air at the Hayannah, according to Mr, Ferrer, is 25°6°. 


155 


height, the mean temperature of the globe is 
not below 16°8°, which was what the water of 
the subterranean river indicated. We can even 
prove, that this temperature of the globe is not 
above 19°; since the air of the cavern, in the 
month of September, was found at 187°. As 
the mean temperature of the atmosphere, in the 
hottest month, does not exceed 19°5°*, it is pro- 
bable, that a thermometer, placed in the open 
air in the grotto, would not rise higher than 
19° in any season of the year. These results, 
as well as many others, which we have record- 
ed in this journey, seem of little importance, on 
viewing them singly ; but, if we compare them 
with the observations recently made by Messrs. 
von Buch and Wahlenberg, under the polar 
circle, they throw light on the economy of na- 
ture in general, and the equilibrium of tempe- 
rature, toward which the air and earth are con- 


_tinually tending. It is no longer doubtful, 


that in Lapland the stony crust of the globe is 
three or four degrees above the mean temperature 
of the atmosphere. Does the cold, which per- 
petually reigns in the abysses of the Equinoc- 


* The mean temperature of the month of September at 
Caripe is 18°5°; and on the coast of Cumana, where we had 
opportunities of collecting a great number of observations, 
the mean heat of the warmest months differs only 1:8° from 
that of the coldest. 


156 


tial Ocean, and which is the effect of the polar 
currents, produce, under the tropics, a sensible 
diminution of the temperature of the earth? 
Is this temperature below that of the atmos- 
phere? This we mean to examine hereafter, 
when we have collected more facts in the high 
regions of the Cordillera of the Andes. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


Departure from Caripe-—Mountain and Forest 
of Santa Maria.—Mission of Catuaro.—Port 
of Cariaco. 


Tur days we passed at the convent of the Ca- 
puchins, in the mountains of Caripe, glided has- 
tily away, though our manner of living was sim- 
ple and uniform. From sunrise to nightfall we 
traversed the forests and neighbouring moun- 
tains, to collect plants, of which we had never 
made a more considerable harvest. When the 
winter rains prevented us from undertaking dis- 
tant excursions, we visited the huts of the Indi- 
ans, the conuco of the community, or those as- 
semblies, in which the alcaides settle every even- 
ing the labours of the succeeding day. We re- 
turned to the monastery, only when the sound 
of the bell called us to partake in the refectory 
the repast of the missionaries. Sometimes, ve- 
ry early in the morning we followed them to 
the church, -to attend the doctrina, that is to say, 
the religious instruction of the Indians. It is 
an undertaking at least very difficnlt, to speak 


) 158 


of dogmas to neophytes, especially. when they 
have but a very imperfect knowledge of the 
Spanish language. On the other hand, the 
monks are at present almost totally ignorant 
of the idiom of the Chaymas; and the resem- 
blance of sounds confuses the minds of these 
poor Indians so much, that it awakens in them 
the most whimsical ideas. I shall cite only one 
example. I beheld a missionary violently agi- 
tated in proving, that Inferno, Hell, and invier- 
no, Winter, were not the same thing; but that 
they were as different as heat and cold. The 
Chaymas are acquainted with no other winter, 
than the season of rains; and the Hell of the 
whites appeared to them a place, where the 
wicked are exposed to frequent showers. The 
missionary harangued to no purpose: it was 
impossible to efface the first impressions, pro- 
duced by the analogy between the two conso- 
nants; and he could not separate in the minds 
of the neophytes the ideas of rain and Hell, in- 
vierno, and Infierno. 

After having passed almost the whole of the 
day in the open air, we employed our evenings, 
when returned to the convent, in making notes, 
drying our plants, and sketching those that 
appeared to form new genera. The monks left 
us to enjoy our full liberty, and we recollect with 
much satisfaction an abode at once agreeable 

and advantageous to our researches. Unfortu- 


159 


nately, the foggy atmosphere of a valley, where 
the forests yield to the air an enormous quan- 
tity of water, was unfavourable to astronomical 
observations. I spent a part of the nights wait- 
ing to seize the moment when some star was 
visible between the clouds, near it’s passage 
over the meridian. I often shivered with cold, 
though the thermometer only sunk to 16°, 
which is the temperature of the day in our cli- 
mates towards the end of September. The in- 
struments remained set up in the court of the 
Convent for several hours, yet I was almost al- 
ways disappointed in my expectations. Some 
good observations of Fomalhaut and of Deneb 
in the Swan gave 10° 10’ 14” for the latitude of 
Caripe ; which proves, that the position indicat- 
ed in the maps of Caulin is 18’ tebe and in 
that of Arrowsmith 14’. 

Observations of corresponding altitudes of 
the Sun* having given me the true time to 
about 2”, I was enabled to determine with pre- 
cision, at noon, the magnetic variation. (It 
was, on the 20th of September, 1799, 3° 15’ 30” 
‘north-east; consequently 0° 58’ 15” less. than 
at Cumana. If we attend to the influence of 
the horary variations, which in these countries 
do not exceed in general 8’, we shall find, that 
at considerable distances the variation changes 


* See Obs. Ast., vol. i, p. 100-—106. 


160 


less rapidly than is commonly thought. The 
dip of the needle was 42°75’, cent. div. ; and the 
number of oscillations, expressing the ititeriet 
of the magnetic forces, rose to 229 in 10’. 

The vexation of seeing the stars disappear in 
a foggy sky was the only one we felt in the val- 
ley of Caripe. The aspect of this spot has some- 
thing init at once wild and tranquil, gloomy 
and attractive. Amidst a nature so over- 
whelming, we experienced only feelings of peace 
and repose. I might even add, that we are less 
struck in the solitude of these mountains with 
the new impressions we receive at every step, 
than with the marks of resemblance which we 
trace in climates the most distant from each 
other. The hills, by which the convent is back- 
ed, are crowned with palm-trees and arbores- 
cent ferns. In the evenings, when the sky de- 
notes rain, the air resounds with the uniform 
howlings of the alouate apes, which resemble the 
distant sound of wind, when it shakes the forest. 
Yet amid these unknown sounds, these strange 
forms of plants, and these prodigies of a new 
world, nature every where speaks to man ina 
voice, the accents of which are familiar to his 
soul. The turf, that is spread over the soil; 
the old moss and the fern, that cover the roots 
of the trees ;. the torrents, that gush over the 
sloping banks of the calcareous rocks; in fine, 
the harmonious agreement of colours reflected 


G 


eu Stace: © = bd ve 
orn ne re in 


ind Sem BEE ay ty, 


Res? 


SS ET UM ST 


7 
161 


by the waters, the verdure, and the sky; every 
thing recalls to the traveller sensations, which 
he has already felt. 

The natural beauties of the mountains so 
much ‘engaged us, that we perceived very 
tardily the embarrassment . felt by the kind 
monks, by whom we were entertained. They 
had but a slender provision of wine and bread; 
and although in those high regions both are 
regarded as belonging to the luxuries of the 
table, we saw with regret, that our hosts went 
without them on our account. Our portion of 
bread had already been diminished. three 
fourths, yet the most violent showers. still 
obliged us to delay our departure for two 
days. How long did this delay appear! How 
we dreaded the sound of the bell, that sum- 
moned us to the .refectory! The delicate con- 
duct of the missionaries made us feel sensibly 
the contrast between our own situation and 
that of the travellers, who complain of having 
been robbed of their provision in the convents 
of the Copts in Upper Egypt. ° 

We departed at length on the 22d of Septem- 
ber, followed by four mules, loaded with instru- 
ments and plants. We had to descend the 
north-east slope of the calcareous Alps of New 
Andalusia, which we haye called the great 
chain of the Brigantine and Cocollar, The 
mean height of this chain scarcely exceeds six 

VOL. Il. M 


- 162 


or seven hundred toises; and in this respect, 
and that of it’s geological constitution, we may 
compare it to the chain of the Jura. Notwith- 
standing the inconsiderable elevation of the 
mountains of Cumana, the descent is one of the 
most difficult, we might say the most danger- 
ous, on the side of Cariaco. The Cerro of San- 
ta Maria, which the missionaries climb in their 
journey from Cumana to their convent at Ca- 
ripe, is particularly famous for the difficulties it 
presents to travellers. On comparing these 
mountains, the Andes of Peru, the Pyrennees, 
and the Alps, which we have successively visit- 
ed, it has more than once occurred to us, that 
the less lofty summits are sometimes the most 
inaccessible. 

On leaving the valley of Caripe, we first cross- 
ed a ridge of hills situate to the north-east of 
the convent. The road led us on a continual 
ascent through a vast savannah, as far as the 

‘table-land of Guardia de San Augustin. We 
there halted to wait for the Indian, who carried 
the barometer; and found ourselves at 533 toi- 
ses of absolute elevation, or a little higher. than 
the bottom of the cavern of Guacharo. The sa- 
vannahs or natural meadows, which yield ex- 
cellent pastures for the cows of the convent, are 
altogether without trees or shrubs. It is the 
domain of the monocotyledonous plants; for 
amidst the gramina only a few plants of ma- 


163 


guey * rise here and there, the flowery stalks of 
which are more than 26 feet high. Having reach- 
ed the table-land of Guardia, we appeared to be 
transplanted to the bottom of an old lake, levelled 
by the long-continued abede of the waters. We 
seemed to trace the sinuosities of the ancient 
shore, tongues of land that advance themselves, 
and craggy rocks that.rise in the form of islands: 
This ancient state of things seems indicated 
even by the distribution of vegetation. The 
bottom of the basin is a savannah, while it’s 
banks are covered with tress of full growth. 
This is probably the most elevated valley in the 
provinces of Venezuela and Cumana. 11 is to 
be. regretted, that a spot where so temperate a 
climate is enjoyed, and which without doubt 
would be fit for the culture of corn, is totally 
uninhabited. From the table-land of Guardia 
we did nothing but descend, till we reached the 
Indian village of Santa Cruz. We passed at 
first by a slope extremely slippery and steep, to 
which the missionaries had given the singular 
name of Purgatory-?. It is a rock of schistose 
sandstone, decomposed, covered with clay, and 
the talus of which appears of a frightful steep- 
ness; as from the effect of an optical illusion, 
which is very common, when we look from the 


* Agave Americana. 
+ Baxada del Purgatorio. 
mM 2 


164 


top to the bottom the road seems inclined more 
than 60°. The mules in going down draw their 
hind legs near their fore legs, and, lowering 
their crupper, let themselves slide at a venture. 
The rider runs no risk, provided he loosens the 
bridle, and leaves the animal quite free in his 
movements. From this point we perceived to- - 
ward the left the great pyramid of Guacharo. 
The appearance of this calcareous peak is very 
picturesque, but we soon lost. sight of it, by en- 
tering into the thick forest, which is known by 
ithe name of the Montana de Santa Maria. We 
descended without interruption for seven hours, 
and itis difficult to form an idea of a more tre- 
mendous descent ;.it is a real chemin des échelles 
[road of steps], a kind of ravine, in which du- 
ring the rainy season impetuous torrents tumble 
from rock to rock. The steps are from two to 


three feet high, and the unfortunate beasts of bur- 


den, after having measured with their eye the space 
‘neeessary to let their load pass between the 
trunks of the trees, leap from one rock to another. 
Afraid of missing their leap, we saw them stop a 
few minutes to examine the ground, and bring 
together their four feet like wild goats. If the 
animal do not reach the nearest block of stone, 
he sinks half his depth into the soft ochrey clay, 
that fills up the interstices of the reck. When 
the blocks are wanting, enormous roots serve as 
supports to the feet. of men and beast . These 


165 


are some of them twenty inches thick, and of- 
ten issue from the trunks of the trees much 
above the level of the soil. The Creoles have 
sufficient confidence in the address and happy 
instinct of the mules, to remain on their saddles 
during this long and dangerous descent. Fear- 
ing fatigue less than they did, and accustomed 
to travel slowly, in order to gather plants, and 
examine the nature of the rocks,-we preferred 
going down on foot; and indeed the care, which 
our timekeepers demanded, left us no liberty 
of choice. 

The forest, that covers the steep flank of the 
mountain of Santa Maria, is one of the thickest 
I ever saw. The trees are of a stupendous 
height and size. Under their bushy, deep green 
foliage, there reigns constantly a kind of half 
daylight, a sort of obscurity, of which our fo- 
rests of pines, oaks, and beach-trees, afford no 
example. It might be said, that, notwithstand . 
ing it’s elevated temperature, the air cannot dis- 
solve the quantity of water exhaled from the 
surface of the soil, the foliage of the trees, and 
their trunks covered with an old drapery of 
orchideze, peperomia, and other succulent plants. 
With the aromatic odour yielded by the flow- 
ers, the fruit, and even by the wood, is min- 
gled that, which we perceive in autumn in fog- 
gy seasons. Here, as in the forests of the 
Oronoko, fixing our eyes on the top of the 


166 


trees, we now discerned streams of vapottr, 
whenever a solar ray penetrated, and traversed 
the dense atmosphere. Our guides pointed out 
to us among those majestic trees, the height of 
which exceeded 120 or 130 feet, the curucay of 
Terecen *, which yields a whitish, liquid, and 
very odoriferous resin, that was employed by 
the Cumanagoto and Tagiri Indians, to per- 
fume their idols. The young branches have an 
agreeable taste, though somewhat astringent. 
After the curucay and enormous trunks of 
hymenea, the diameter of which was more 
than nine or ten feet, the trees which most 
excited our attention were the dragon’s blood 
(croton sanguifluum), the purple brown juice 
of which flows down a whitish bark; the cala- 
huala fern, different from that of Peru, but 
almost. equally medicinal}; and the palm- 


trees irasse, macanilla, corozo, and pragat. 
The last yields a very savoury palm-cabbage, 
which we had sometimes eaten at the Convent 


© See page 103 of this volume. 

+ The calahuala of Caripe is the polypodium crassifo- 
linm; that of Peru, thé use of which has been so much ex_ 
tended by Messrs. Ruiz and Pavon, comes from the aspi- 
dium coriaceum, Wild. (tectaria calahuala, Cav.). They 
mix in commerce the diaphoretic roots of the polyp. crassi- 
folium, and of the acrostichum huascaro, with those of the 
calahualo, or aspidium coriaceum. 

{ Aiphanes praga. 


167 


of Caripe. These palms with pinnated and 
thorny leaves formed a pleasing contrast with 
the fern trees. One of the latter, the cyathea 
speciosa *, rises to the height of more than thir- 
ty five feet, which is prodigious for plants of 
this family. We discovered here, and in the 
valley of Caripe, five new kinds of arborescent 
ferns}: in the time of Linneeus, botanists knew 
no more than four on both continents. 

We observed, that the fern-trees are in gene- 
ral much more rare than the palm-trees. Na- 
ture has confined them to temperate, moist, and 
shady places. They shun the direct rays of 
the sun, and while the pumos, the corypha of 
the steppes, and other palms of America, flou- 
rish in the naked and burning plains, these 
ferns with arborescent trunks, which at a dis- 
tance look like palm-trees, preserve the charac- 
ter and habits of the cryptogamous plants. 
They love solitary places, little light, a moist, 


) 


* Perhaps a hemitelia of Robert Brown., The trunk 


-alone is from 22 to 24 feet long. This: and the cyathea ex- 


celsa of the Isle of Bourbon are the most majestic of all the 
fern-trees described by botanists. ‘The total number of these 
gigantic cryptogamous plants amounts at present to 25 spe 
cies, that of the palm-trees to 80. With the cyathea grow 
on the Mountain of Santa Maria rhexia juniperina, chiococ~ 
ca racemossa, and commelina spicata. 

+ Meniscium  arborescens, aspidium caducum, a. rostras 
tum, cyathea villosa, and ¢, speciosa, 


168 


) temperate, and stagnant air. If they sometimes 
descend toward the coast, it is only under co- 
ver of a thick shade. The old trunks of the 
cyathea, and the meniscium, are covered with 
a carbonaceous powder, which, probably de- 
prived of hydrogen, has a metallic lustre like 
the graphite. No other plant presents us with 
this phenomenon; for the trunks of the dico- 
tyledons, in spite of the heat of the climate, and 
the intensity of the light, are less burnt under 
the tropics than in the temperate zone. It may 
be said, that the trunks of the ferns, which, like 
the monocotyledons, are enlarged by the re- 
mains of the petiole, decay from the circumfe- 
rence toward the centre, and that, deprived of 
the cortical organs, through which the elabo- 
rated juices descend toward the roots, they are 
burnt more easily by the action of the oxygen 
of the atmosphere. I brought to Europe some 
of those powders of metallic lustre, taken. from 
very old trunks of meniscium and aspidium. 

As we descended the mountain of Santa Ma- 
ria, we perceived ihe arborescent ferns dimi- 
nish, and the number of palm trees increase. 
The beautiful butterflies with large wings, the 
nymphales, which fly at a prodigious height, 
became more common. Every thing announc- 
ed that we drew near the coast, and approach- 
edazone, the mean temperature of which was 
from 28 to 30 cent. degrees. 


eae 


% 
H 


169 


The weather was cloudy, and led us to fear 
one of those showers, during which from 1: to 
1:3 inch of water sometimes falls in a day. 
The sun at times illuminated the tops of the 
trees; and, though sheltered from it's rays, we 
felt an oppressive heat. The thunder already 
rumbled at a distance; the clouds seemed sus- 
pended on the top of the lofty mountains of 
Guacharo; and the plaintive howling of the . 
araguatoes, which we had so often heard at 
Caripe, denoted the proximity of the storm. 
We saw near us for the first time these howling 
apes. They are of the family of the alouates*, 
the different species of which authors have long 
confounded. While the small sapajous of Ame- 
rica, which imitate in whistling the voice of the 
passeres, have the bone of the tongue thin and 
simple, the apes of large size, as the alouates 
and marimondes-+, have the tongue placed on a 
large boney drum. Their superior larynx has 
six pouches, in which the voice loses itself; and 
two of which, shaped like pigeons’ nests, resem- 
ble the inferior larynx of birds. The air driven 
with force into the boney drum produces that 
mournful sound, which characterises the ara- 
guatoes. I sketched on the spot these organs, 
imperfectly known to anatomists, and publish- 
ed the description of them on my return to 


’ * Stentor, Geoffror, 
+ Ateles, G, 


170 


Europe*. When we consider the dimensions 
of the boney cavity of the alouates, and the 
great number of howling monkeys that seat 
themselves on a single tree in the forests of 
Guiana and Cumana, we are less astonished at 
the force and volume of their blended voices. 
The araguato, which the Tamanac Indians 
call aravata-, and the Maypures, marave, re- 
sembles a young bear. It is three feet long, 
reckoning from the top of the head, which is 
small and very pyramidal, to the beginning of 
the prehensile tail; it’s fur is bushy, and of a 
reddish brown; the breast and belly are both 
covered with a.fine hair, and not naked as in 
the mono colorado, or alouate roux of Buffon, 


which we carefully examined, in going from 


* Zoolog. Obs., V.i, p. 8, pl. 4, No. 9. 

+ Gomara (Hist. general de los Ind., cap. 80, p. 104). Fray 
Pedro Simon (Noticias de la Conquista de Tierra Firme, 1626; 
not. 4, c. 25, p. 317), and Father Caulin (Hist. Cor., p. 33), 
describe this monkey by the names of aranata, and araguato. 
In both names we easily discover the same root, The » has 
been transformed into g and x. The name of arabata, which 
Gumilla gives to the howling apes of the Lower Oronoko, 
and which Mr. Geoffroy thinks belongs to the s. straminea 
of Great Para, is still the same Tamanac word aravata. 
This identity of names ought not to surprise us. We shall] 
soon see, that the language of the Chayma Indians of Cu- 
mana is one of the numerous branches of the Tamanac lan- 
guage, and that tne latter is connected with the Caribbee 
language of the Lower Oronoko, 


lin iy 


naaee 


171 


Carthagena to Santa Fe de Bogota. The face 
of the araguato is of a blackish blue, and co- 
vered with a fine and wrinkled skin; it’s beard 
is pretiy long ; and, notwithstanding the direc- 
tion of the facial line, the angle of which is only 
of thirty degrees, the araguato has in the look, 
and in the expression of the countenance, as 
much resemblance to.man; as the marimonde 
(s. belzebuth, Bresson) and the capuchin of the 
Oronoko (s. chiropotes). Among thousands 
of araguatoes, which we observed in the pro- 
vinces of Cumana, Caraccas, and Guiana, we ne- 
ver saw any change in the reddish brown fur. of 
the back and shoulders, whether we examined 
individuals, or whole troops. It appeared to 
me in general, that variety of colours is less fre- 
quent among monkeys than naturalists think *. 
They are in particular very rare among those 
species, that live in society. 

The araguato of Caripe is a new species of 
the genus stentor, that I have described under 
the name of alowate ourse, simia ursina. I pre- 
ferred this name to those I might have derived 
from the colour of it’s fur; and I was so much 
the more inclined to this, as a passage of Pho- 
tius shows, that the Greeks were already ac- 
quainted with a hairy monkey under the name 
of arctopithecos, Our araguato differs equally 


* Spix, in the Mem, of the Acad, of Munich, 1815, p. 340, 


172 


from the owarine (s. guariba) and the alouate 
roux (s. seniculus, old man of the woods). It’s 
eye, voice, and gait, denote melancholy. I have 


seen young araguatoes. brought up in Indian 
huts. They never play like the little sagoins, 
and their gravity was described with much 
simplicity by. Lopez de Gomara, in the begin- 
ning of the sixteenth century. “The Aranata 
de los Cumaneses,” says this author, “has the 
-face of a man, the beard of a goat, and a 
grave behaviour, honrado gesto.” I have already 
observed, in another part of this work, that 
monkeys are more melancholy in proportion as 
they have more resemblance to man. Their 
petulant gaiety diminishes, as their intellectual 
faculties appear to increase *. 

We stopped to observe the howling monkeys, 
which, to the number of thirty or forty, crossed 
the road, by passing in a long file from one tree 
to another upon the horizontal and intersecting 
branches. While this new sight fixed our at- 
‘tention, we met a troop of Indians going toward 
the mountains of Caripe. They were quite 
naked, as are generally the natives of this 
country. The women, laden with pretty heavy 
burdens, closed the march; the men were all 
armed, even the youngest children, with bows 
and arrows. They marched in silence, their 


* Obs, Zoolog., vol. i, p. 329 and 355, pl. 80. 


173 


eyes fixed on the ground. We endeavoured to 
jearn from them whether we were yet far from 
the Mission of Santa Cruz, where we intended 
passing the night. We were overcome with 
fatigue, and tormented with thirst. The heat 
increased as the storm drew near, and we had 
not met with a single spring on the way. The . 
words si Patre, no Patre, which the’ Indians 
continually repeated, made us think they un- 
derstood a little Spanish. In the eyes of a na- 
tive every white man is a monk, a Padre*; for 
in the Missions the colour of the skin bianca 
terises the monk, more than the colour of the 
garment. We in vain pestered them with our 
questions on the length of the way: they an- 
swered, as if by chance, si and no, without our 
being able to attach any precise sense to their 
replies. This made us the more impatient, as 
their smiles and gestures discovered their inten- 
tion of satisfying us; and the forest seemed at. 
every step to become thicker. We separated 
at last; the Indian guides, who understood 
the Chayma tongue, being able to follow us only 
at a distance, because the beasts of burden fell 
at every step in the ravines, 
After several hours march, continually de- 
scending on blocks of scattered rock, we found 


'* In Modern Greece, the monks are commonly called 


good old men, kalogheroi. 


174 


ourselves unexpectedly at the end of the forest 
of Santa Maria. A savannah*, the verdure of 
of which had been renewed by the winter rams, 
stretched before us farther than the eye could 
reach. On the left, we discovered a narrow 
valley, which ended at the mountains of Gua- 
charo. The bottom of this valley is covered. 
with a thick forest. The eye looked down on 
the tops of the trees, which, at eight’ hundred 
feet below the road, formed a carpet of verdure 
ofa dark and uniform tint. The openings in 
the forest appeared like vast funnels, in which 
we distinguished by their elegant forms and 
pinnated leaves the palms praga and irasse. 
But what renders this spot eminently pictur- 
esque is the aspect of the Sierra del Guacharo. 
It’s northern slope, which looks toward the 
Gulf of Cariaco, is abrupt; it displays a wall 
of rocks, an almost vertical profile, the height 
of which exceeds 3000 feet. The vegetation 
that covers this wall is so scanty, that the eye 
‘can follow the lines of the calcareous strata. 
The summit of the Sierra is flattened, and it is_ 
only at it’s eastern extremity, that the majes- 
tic peak of the Guacharo rises like an inclined 
‘pyramid. It’s form reminds us of the needles 
and horns * of the Alps. As most mountains 


* We found in it the paspalum conjugatum, p. scoparium, 
isolepis junciformis, &c. 
t+ Schreckhoerner, Finsteraarhorn, 


175 


with abrupt slopes appear more lofty than they 
really are, we need not be surprised, that the 
Guacharo is supposed in the Missions to be a 
height overlooking the Turimiquiri and Bri- 
gantine. 

The savannah we crossed tothe Indian vil- 
lage of Santa Cruz is composed of several 
smooth flats, lying above each other in steps. 
This geological phenomenon, which is repeated 
under every climate, seems to indicate a long 
abode of the waters in basins, that have pour- 
ed them from one to the other.’ The calcareous 
rock no longer appears, but is covered with a 
thick layer of mould. The last time we saw it 
in the forest of Santa Maria, it was slightly 


porous, and looked more like the limestone of 
Cumanacoa than that of Caripe. We there 
found brown iron ore disseminated in patches, 
and, if we were not deceived in our observa- 
tion, a cornu ammonis, which we could not 


succeed in our attempt to get out. It was 
seven inches diameter. This fact is so much 
the more important, as in this part of America 
we have never seen ammonite. The Mission 
of Santa Cruz is situate in the midst of the 
plain. Wereached it toward the evening, suf- 
fering much with thirst, having travelled nearly 
eight hours without finding water. The ther- 
mometer kept at 26°; accordingly we were 


176 


not more than 190 toises above the level of the 
sea. ; 

We passed the night under one of thos aju- 
pas, which are called King’s houses, and which, 
as I have already said, serve as tamboes or 
caravanserays to travellers. The rains pre- 
vented any observations of the stars; and the ~ 
next day, the 23rd of September, we continued 
our descent toward the Gulf of Cariaco. Be- 
yond Santa Cruz a thick forest begins anew ; 
and in it we found, under tufts of melastomas, 
a beautiful fern, with osmundia leaves, which 
forms a new genus of the order of the polypo- 
diaceous plants *. 

Having reached the mission of Catuaro, we 
were desirous of continuing our journey toward 
the east by Santa Rosalia, Casanay, San Josef, 
Carupano, ‘Rio Carives, and the mountain of 
Paria ; but we learnt with great regret, that the 
_ torrents of rain had already rendered the roads 
impassable, and that we should run the risk of 
losing the plants we had already gathered. A 
rich planter of cacao-trees was to accompany 
us from Santa Rosalia to the port of Carupano; 
but we were informed in time, that his affairs 
had called him to Cumana, and we resolved in 
consequence to embark at Cariaco, and return 
directly by the Gulf, instead of passing between 


* Polybotria, 


177 


the Island of Margaretta and the isthmus of 
Araya. The Mission of Catuaro is situate on a 
very wild spot. Trees of full growth still sur- 
round the church, and the tigers come by 
night to devour the fowls and hogs belonging 
to the Indians. We lodged at the dwelling of 
the priest, a monk of the congregation of the 
Observance, to whom the Capuchins had confid- 
ed the Mission, because priests of their own 
community were wanting. He was a doctor of 
divinity, a little meagre man, and of petulant 
vivacity. He talked to us continually of the 
law-suit in which he was engaged with the su- 
perior of his convent, of the hatred of his bre+ 
thren, and the injustice of the alcaides, who, 
without. any respect for the privileges of his 
rank, had thrown him into a dungeon. Not- 
withstanding these misadventures, he retained 
an unfortunate predilection for what he called 
metaphysical questions. He wished to know 
what I thought of free-will, of the means of dis- 
engaging spirits from their corporeal prison, 
and, above all, my opinion on the souls of ani- 
mals, of which he had formed the most singu- 
lar ideas. After having just traversed forests 
in the rainy season, a man feels little taste for 
these kinds of speculations. Every thing, how- 
ever, was extraordinary in this Mission of Ca. 
tuaro, even the house of the vicar. It had two, 
stories, and, on this account, had been the subject 
VOL. II. N 


178 


of violent disputes between the ecclesiastic and 
secular authorities. The prefect of the Capu- 
chins, thinking it too sumptuous for a missionary, 
endeavoured to force the Indians to demolish it. 
The governor had strenuously withstood this 
demolition ; and his counsel prevailed against 
the monks. I mention these facts, though of 
little inportance in themselves, because they 
make us acquainted with the interior spirit of 
the Missions ; which is not always so peaceable, 
as is supposed in Europe. 

At the Mission of Catuaro we met the Corre- 
gidor* of the district, an amiable man, and of 
a cultivated mind. He gave us three Indians, 
who, armed with their machetes, were to pre- 
cede us, and cut a way through the forest. 
In this country so little frequented, the power 
of vegetation is such at the period of the great 
rains, that a man on horseback passes with 
difficulty through narrow paths, covered with 
lianas, and intertwining branches. To our great 
‘regret, the missionary of Catuaro would abso- 
lutely conduct us to Cariaco. We could not 
refuse; he tormented us no longer with his re- 
veries on the souls of animals, and the freewill 
of man; he had now to entertain us ona sub- 
ject far more perplexing. The movement to- 
ward independence, which had nearly broken 


* Don Alexandro Mexia. 


179 


out at Caraccas in 1798, had been preceded 
and followed by great agitation among the 
slaves at Coro, Maracaybo, and Cariaco. At 
the last of these places an unfortunate negro 
had been condemned to die, and our host, the 
vicar of Catuaro, went thither to offer him the 
assistance of his ministry. Flow long did this 


_ road appear to us, during which we could not 


escape conversations on “the necessity of the 
slave trade, on the innate wickedness of the 
blacks, and the benefit they derived from their 
state of slavery among the christians !” 

The mildness of the Spanish legislation com- 
pared with the Black Code of the greater part 
of other nations that have possessions in either 
India, cannot be denied. But such is the state 
of the negroes, dispersed in places scarcely be- 
gun to be cultivated, that justice, far from effi- 
caciously protecting them during their lives, 
cannot even punish acts of barbarity, that have 
caused their death. If an inquiry be attempt- 
ed, the death of the slave is attributed to the 
bad state of his health, to. the influence of a 
warm and humid climate, to the wounds which 
he has received, but which, it is asserted, were 
neither deep nor dangerous. The civil authority 
is powerless with respect to whatever constitutes 
domestic slavery; and nothing is more illusory 
than the effect so much vaunted of those laws, 
which prescribe the form of the whip, and the 

n 2 


180 


number of lashes which it is permitted to give 
at atime. Persons who have not lived in the 
colonies, or have inhabited only the West India 
islands, believe in general, that the interest of 
the master in the preservation of his slaves must 
render their condition so much the milder as their 
number is less considerable. Nevertheless, even 
at Cariaco, a few weeks before my arrival in 
the province, a planter, who had only eight ne- 
groes, killed six by beating them in the most 
barbarous manner. He thus voluntarily de- 
stroyed the greater part of his fortune. Two 
of his slaves expired on the spot. He embark- 
ed with four, who seemed more robust, for the 
Port of Cumana, but they died on the passage. 
This act of cruelty had been preceded in the 
same year by another, the circumstances of 
which are equally horrible. Such great crimes 
remain almost always unpunished; the spirit, 
that dictated the laws, is not that which pre- 
sides over their execution. The governor of 
Cumana Was a just and humane man; but the 
judiciary forms are prescribed, and the power 

_ of the governor does not extend to a reform of 
abuses, which are almost inherent in every sys- 
tem of European colonization. 

The road we followed across the forest of 
Catuaro resembles the descent of the mountain 
Santa Maria; and the most difficult passages 
are called here also by names equally whimsi-. 


18] 


cal. We walked as in a narrow furrow, scoop- 
ed out by torrents, and filled with fine and 
tenacious clay. The mules lowered their crup- 
per, and slid down the steepest slopes. This 
descent is called Saca Manteca, on account of 
the consistence of the mud, which is like but- 
ter. The danger of the descent is nothing, ow- 
ing to the great address of the mules of this 
country. The clay, which renders the soil so 
slippery, is produced by the frequent layers of 
sandstone and schistose clay crossing the bluish- 
gray alpine limestone. This last disappears as 
we draw nearer to Cariaco, When we reached 
the mountain of Meapira, we found it formed 
in great part of a white limestone, filled with 
pelagic petrifactions, and appearing to belong, 
‘as is proved by the grains of quartz age luti- 
-nated in the mass, to the great formation of 
the seacoast breccia*. We descend this moun- 
tain on the strata of the rock, the section of 
which forms steps of unequal height. It is a 
real chemin des échelles. Farther on, going out 
of the forest, we reach the hill of Buenavista. 
This hill is worthy of the name it bears; since 
from it may be seen the town of Cariaco, in the 
midst of avast plain filled with plantations, 
huts, and scattered groups of cocoa palms. To 


* See p. 10, of this volume, for an account of this sand- 
stone or calcareous puddingstone formation. 
+ Mountain of the Fine Prospect. 


182 


the west of Cariaco extends the wide gulf, 
which a wall of rock separates from the ocean: 
and toward. the east are seen like bluish clouds 
the high mountains of Paria and Areo*. This 
is one of the most extensive and magnificent 
prospects, that can be enjoyed on the coast of 
New Andalusia. 

In the town of Cariaco we found a great 
part of the inhabitants confined to their ham- 
mocks, and sick of intermittent fevers. These 
fevers assume in autumn a formidable charac- 
ter, and run into pernicious dysenteries. When 
we consider the extreme fertility of the sur- 
rounding plains, their moisture, and the mass 
of vegetables that coyer them, we may easily 
conceive, why, amid so many decompositions 
of organic matter, the inhabitants do not enjoy 
that salubrity of air, which characterises the 
dry country of Cumana. It is difficult to find 
under the torrid zone a great fecundity of soil, 
frequent and long continued rains, and an ex- 
traordinary luxury of vegetation, without these 
advantages being counterbalanced by a. climate 
more or less fatal to the health. of white men. 
The same causes, which preserve the fertility 
of the earth, and accelerate the growth of 
plants, produce gazeous emanations, that min- 
gle with the atmosphere, and impart to it noxi- 


} Sierra de Areo, and. Montana de Paria. 


183 


ous properties. We shall often have occasion 
to remark ‘the coincidence of these phenomena, 
when we come to describe the culture of the 
chocolate tree *, and the banks of the Oronoko, 
where in some parts the natives themselves are 
seasoned to the climate with difficulty. In the 
valley of Cariaco, the insalubrity of the air does 
not depend solely on the general causes we 
have just pointed out : the peculiar influence of 
local circumstances is also felt. It will not be 
uninteresting to examine the nature of this 
ground, which separates the Gulf of Cariaco 
from that of Paria. 

The chain of calcareous mountains of the 
Brigantine and the Cocollar+ sends off a con- 
siderable branch to the north, which joins the 
primitive mountains of the coast. This branch 
bears the name of Sierra de Meapira ; but! to- 
ward the town of Cariaco it is called Cerro 
grande de Cariaco. Its mean height’ did not 
appear to me more than 150 or 200 toises. It 
was composed, where I could examine it, of the 
calcareous breccia of the seacoast. Marly and 
caleareous beds alternate with other beds con- 
taining grains of quartz. It is a very striking 
phenomenon for those who study the relievo of 
a country, to see a transverse ridge connect at 


* Theobroma cacao. 
+ Nearly 0° 42/ east from the meridian of Cumana, 


‘184 


right angles two parallel ridges, of which ole, 
the more southern, is: composed of secondary 
rocks, and the other, the more northern, of 
primitive recks.. The latter, which we haye 
already described in our excursion to the pe- 
ninsula of Araya*, presents, nearly as far as 
the meridian of Carupano, only mica-slate ; but 
to the east of this point, where it communicates 
by a transverse ridge (the Sierra de Meapira), 
with the limestone range, it contains lamellar 
gypsum, compact limestone, axid other rocks 
of secondary formation. It might be supposed, 
that it is the southern ridge that has given these 
rocks to the northern. 

When standing on the summit of the Cerro 
del Meapira, we see the mountain currents rux 
on one side to the Gulf of Paria, and on the 
other to the Gulf of Cariaco. To the east and 
west of the ridge there are low and marshy 
grounds, which spread out without interruption; 
and if it be admitted, that both gulfs owe their 
origin to the sinking down of the earth, and 
rents caused by earthquakes, we must suppose, 
that the Cerro de Meapira has resisted the con- 
vulsive movements of the globe, and hindered. 
the waters of the Gulf of Paria from uniting. 
with those of the Gulf of Cariaco. Without 


* See vol. ii, p. 262. 
t Near Guira and Carupano, 


185 


this rocky dyke, the isthmus itself in all pro- 
bability would not exist? From the castle of 
Araya as far as Cape Paria, the whole mass of 
the mountains of the coast would form a nar- 
row island, parallel to the island of Santa Mar- 
garetta, and four times as long, It is not only 
the inspection of the ground, and considerations 
drawn from it’s relievo, which confirm these 
assertions: a simple view of the configuration 
of the coasts, and a geological map of the coun- 
try, would excite the same ideas. It appears, 
that the island of Margaretta has been hereto- 
fore contiguous to the coast chain of Araya, 
by the peninsula of Chacopata, and the Carrib- 
bee islands, Lobo and Coche, in the same man- 
ner as this chain is still to that of Cocollar and 
Caripe by the ridge of Meapira. 

In the present state of things, we see the hu- 
mid places, which stretch themselves to the 
east and west of the ridge, and which bear the 
improper names of the vallies San Bonifacio and 
Cariaco, enlarge themselves by gaining on the 
sea. The waters retire, and these changes of 
the shore are very remarkable, more particu- 
larly on the coast of Cumana, If the level of 
the soil seem to indicate, that the two gulfs of 
Cariaco and Paria occupied formerly a much 
more considerable space, we cannot doubt, that 
at present the land augments progressively. 
Near Cumana a battery, which is called'de la 


-186 


Bocca, was built in 1791 on the very edge of 
the sea; in 1799 we saw it very far in land. At 
the mouth of the Rio Neveri, near the Morro of: 
Nueva Barcelona, the retreat of the waters is 
still more rapid. This local phenomenon is‘ 
owing probably to the accumulation of sand, the 
progress of which has not yet been sufficiently 
examined. Descending the Sierra de Meapira, 
which forms the isthmus between the plains of 
San Bonifacio and Cariaco, we find toward the 
east the great lake of Putacuao, which commu- 
nicates with the river Areo, and is' four or five 
leagues in diameter. The mountainous lands 
that surround this basin are known only to the 
natives. ‘There are seen those great boa ser- 
pents, which are known to the Chayma Indians 
by the name of guwainas, and to which. they fa- 
bulously attribute a sting under the tail. On 
descending the Sierra de Meapira to the west, 
we find at first a hollow ground (tierra hueca) 
which, during the great earthquakes of 1766, 
threw out asphaltum enveloped in viscous pe- 
troleum; farther on a numberless quantity -of 
hydrosulphurous thermal springs * are seen 
springing up from the soil; and at length we 
reach the borders of the lake of Campoma, the 
exhalations from which contribute to render the 


* El Llano de Aguas calientes, to the E, N. E. of Cariacos 
at the distance of two leagues. 


187 


climate of Cariaco unhealthy. The natives 
think, that the hollow is formed by the ingulfing 
of the hot springs; and, judging by the sound 
heard under the feet of the horses, we must con- 
clude, that the subterranean cavities are con- 
tinued from west to east nearly as far as Casa- 
nay, a length of three or four thousand. toises. 
A little river, the Rio Azul, runs through these 
plains, which are.rent into crevices by earth- 
quakes, that have a particular centre of action, 
and seldom extend themselves as far as Cuma- 
na. -The waters of the Rio Azul are cold and: 
limpid; they arise on the western bank of the 
mountain of Meapira; and. it is. believed, that 
they are augmented by infiltrations, from. the 
lake Putacuao, which is situate on the other 
side of the chain. The latter river and the 
hydrosulphurous hotsprings fall into the Laguna 
de Campoma, together. This is a name given 
toa great meer, which is.divided in, dry weather 
into three basins situate to the north-west, of the 
town of; Cariaco, near the extremity of the Gulf. 
Fetid exhalations arise continually from the stag- 
nant water of this meer. The smell of sul- 
phuretted hydrogen, is mingled with that of 
putrid fishes, and rotting plants. 

Miasmata are formed in the valley of Caria- 
co, as in the Campagna di Roma; but. the heat 
of the climate of the tropics increases their de- 
leterious energy. These miasmata are proba- 


- 188 


bly ternary or quaternary combinations of azot, 
phosphorus, hydrogen, carbon, and sulphur. 
A five-hundredth part of sulphuretted hydrogen 
mixed with atmospheric air is sufficient, to as- 
phyxiate a dog; and the present state of eudio- 
metry does not afford us means of appreciating 
gaseous mixtures, which are more er less hurt- 
ful to health, according as the elements in in- 
finitely small quantities combine in different 
proportions. One of the most important ser- 
vices, that modern chemistry has rendered to 
physiology, is it’s having taught us, that we are 
still ignorant of what illusory experiments on 
the chemical composition and salubrity of the 
atmosphere had led us to admit fifteen years 
ago. 

The situation of the Laguna of Campoma ren- 
ders the north-west wind, which blows frequent- 
ly after sunset, very pernicious to the inhabi- 
tants of the little town of Cariaco. It’s in- 
fluence can be the less doubted, as intermit- 
ting fevers are seen to degenerate into typhoid 
fevers, in proportion as we approach the Laguna, 
which is the principal focus of putrid miasmata. 
Whole families of free negroes, who have small 
plantations on the northern coast of the Gulf of 
Cariaco, languish in their hammocks from the 
beginning of the rainy season. These inter- 
mittent fevers assume a dangerous character, | 
when persons, debilitated by long labour and 


189 


copious perspiration, expose themselves to the 
fine rains, that frequently fall toward the even- 
ing. Nevertheless the men of colour, and par- 
ticularly the Creole Negroes, resist. much bet- 
ter than any other race the influence of the cli- 
mate. Lemonade and infusions of scoparia dul- 
cis are given to the sick; but the cuspare, 
which is the cinchona of Angustura, is seldom 
used. 

It is generally observed, that in these epide- 
mics of the town of Cariaco the mortality is 
less considerable than might be supposed. In- 
termitting fevers, when they attack the same 
individual during several successive years, al- 
ter and weaken the constitution; but this state 


of debility, so common on the unhealthy coasts, 
does not cause death. What is remarkable 
enough is the belief, that prevails here as in the 
Campagna di Roma, that the air is become 


progressively more vitiated, as a greater num- 
ber of acres have been cultivated. The mias- 
mata, which these plains exhale, have however 
nothing in common with those, which arise 
from a forest when the trees are cut down, and 
the sun heats a thick layer of dead leaves. 
Near Cariaco the country is naked, and little 
woody. Can it be supposed, that the mould * 


* If this action be noxious, it certainly does not consist 
solely in that process of disoxydation, which I have demo.:- 


190 


fresh stirred, and moistened by rains, alters and 
vitiates the atmosphere more than that thick 
wood of plants, which covers an uncultivated 
soil? To these local causes are joined other 
causes less problematic. The neighbouring 
borders of the sea are covered with mangroves, 
avicennias, and other shrubs with astringent 
bark. All the inhabitants of the tropics are ac- 
quainted with the noxious exhalations of these 
plants; and they dread them so much the more, 
as their roots and stocks are not always under 
water, but alternately wetted and exposed to 
the heat of the sun*. The mangroves produce 


strated by numerous experiments on the humus and earth of a 
dark colour (carburetted). It is perhaps at the time that 
this absorption of oxygen takes place, and in consequence of 
it, that, according to the complicated action of affinities, these 
deleterious gaseous combinations with a double or triple 
basis are formed. { 

* The creoles comprehend the two genera, rhizophora and 
avicennia, under the name of mangrove, distinguishing them 
by the epithets colorado and prieto. The following is a cata- 
logue of the socal plants, that cover those sandy plains on 
the seaside, and characterize the vegetation of Cumana and 
the Gulf of Cariaco. Rhizophora mangle, avicennia nitida, 
gomphrena flara, g. brachiata, sesuvium portulacastrum (wt- 
driv), talinum cuspidatum (vicho), t. cumanense, portulacca 
pilosa {sargoso), p. lanuginossa, illecebrum maritimum, atri- 
plex cristata, heliotropium viride, h. latifolium, verbena 
cuneata, mollugo verticillata, euphorbia maritima, convolvu- 


lus cumanensis. These geographical sketches of vegeta- 


tion were traced on the spot, by entering in a journal under 


191 


miasmata, because they contain, as I have ob- 
served elsewhere, vegeto-animal matter combin- 
ed with tannin. It is said, that it would not 
be difficult to widen the canal, by which the 
lake of Campoma communicates with the sea, 
and give thereby an outlet to the stagnant wa- 
ters. The free Negroes, who often visit these 
marshy lands, affirm, that this drain scarcely re- 
quires to be deep, because the cold and limpid 
waters of the Rio Azul are found at the bottom 
of the lake, so that water drawn up from the 
lower strata is potable and without smell. 

The town of Cariaco has been repeatedly 
sacked in former times by the Caribs. | It’s po- 
pulation has augmented rapidly, since the pro- 


vincial authorities, in spite of the prohibitory 
orders of the court of Madrid, have often fa- 
voured the trade with foreign colonies. The 
population has doubled in ten years; and 
amounted, in 1800, to more than 6000 souls. 
The inhabitants are active in the cultivation of 


cotton, which is of a very fine quality, and the 


distinet numbers the plants of our herbals, which we sub- 
sequently ascertained. I think, that this method may be 
recommended to travellers: it contributes to make known 
the aspect of a country, upon which the catalogues desig-' 
nated by the vague term of F/oras instract us but very im- 
perfectly, because they comprehend at once all kinds of 


soil. 


92 


produce of which exceeds 10,000 quintals *. 
The capsules of the cotton tree, when the wool 
has been separated, are carefully burnt; as 
those husks, if thrown into the river, and expos- 
ed to putrefaction, yield exhalations, which are 
thought very noxious. The culture of the cacao- 
tree has of late considerably diminished. This 
valuable tree bears only after eight or ten years. 
It’s fruit keeps very badly in the warehouses, 
and. becomes mouldy at the end of a_ year, 
notwithstanding all the precautions employed 
for drying it. This isa great disadvantage to 
the planter. On these coasts commerce with 
neutrals is sometimes prohibited, sometimes 
permitted under certain restrictions, accord- 
ing to the caprice of the ministry of Madrid, 
and the greater or less courageous resistance 
of the governors. The demands for the same 
kind of. merchandize, and the prices, which are 
regulated by the frequency of these demands, 
undergo consequently the most sudden varia- 
tions. The planter cannot take advantage of 
these variations, because the cacao does not 
keep in the warehouses. Thus the old trunks 


* Nouv. Esp., T. ii, p.'745. The exportation of cotton 
in 1800 from the two provinces of Cumana and Barcelona 
amounted to 18,000 quintals; the port of Cariaéo alone 
furnishing six or seven thousand. In 1792 the total expor- 
tation was only 3900. The mean price of the quintal is 
from eight to ten piastres. 


193 


of the cacao-trees, which do not bear in general 
after they have stood 40 years, have noi been 
replaced. In 1792 it was. reputed, that there 
were still 254,000 in the valley. of Cariaco and . 
on the borders of the Gulf. At present other 
branches of culture are preferred, which yield 
a profit the first year, and the produce of which, 
while less slow, is of a less uncertain preserva- 
tion. Such are cotton and sugar, which, not 
being subject to spoil like the cacao, may be 
kept, in order to take advantage of all the vari- 
ations of sale. The changes, which civilization 
and intercourse -with foreigners. have intro- 
duced in the manners and characters of the 
ybabitants of the coast, have an influence on 
the marked. preference, which they give to dif- 
ferent branches of agriculture. That mode- 
ration of desires; that patience, which endures 
long expectation; . that calmness, which ‘sup- 
ports the dull monotony of solitude; are gra- 
dually Jost in the character of the Spanish Ame- 
rieans. More enterprising, more light and ac- 
tive, they prefer undertakings, the result of 
which is most speedy. 

It is only in the interior of the province, to 
the east of the Sierra de Meapira, in that uncul- 
tivated country which extends from Curupano 
by the valley of San Bonifacio toward the Gulf of 
Paria, that new plantations of the cacao-tree arise. 
They become there the more productive, as the 

VOL. Ill. 0 


194 


lands, newly cleared and surrounded by forests, 
are In contact with an atmosphere more damp, 
more stagnant, and more loaded with mephitic ex- 
halations. Wethere see fathers of families, attach- 
ed to the old habits of the planters, prepare for 
themselves and their children a slow and secure 
fortune. A single slave is sufficient, to help 
them in their toilsome labours. They clear the 
soil with their own hands; raise young: cacao- 
trees under the shade of the erythrinas or plan- 
tains; lop the grown trees; destroy the swarm 
of worms and insects, that attack the bark, the 
leaves, and the flowers; dig trenches; and re- 
solve to lead a wretched life for seven or eight 
years, till the cacao-trees begin to bear. Thirty 
thousand trees secure competence to a family 
for a generation and a half.. If the culture of 
cotton and coffee have led to the diminution 
of that of cacao in the province of Caraecas, and 
in the small valley of Cariaco, it must be con- 
fessed, that this last branch of colonial industry 
has in general increased in the interior of the 
‘provinces of ‘New Barcelona and Cumana*. 
The causes: of the progressive march of the 
cacao-trees from west to east may be easily con- 
ceived. The province of Caraccas is the most 
anciently cultivated: and, under the torrid zone, 


* Tatorme del Tesorero Don Manuel Navarete, sobre el 
projectado estanco de aguardiente de canna, 1792 (manu- 
script). 


195 


in’ proportion as a country is longer cleared, 
it becomes more denuded of trees, drier, and 
more exposed to the winds. These physical 
changes are adverse to the production of cacao- 
irees. Thus the plantations, diminishing in the 
province of Caraccas, accumulate in some sort 
toward the east, on a newly cleared and virgin 
soil. New Andalusia alone produced in 1799 
from eighteen to twenty thousand fanegas of 
cacao, at forty piastres the .fanega in time 
of peace, five thousand of which* were smug- 
gled to the island of Trinidad. The cacao of 
Cumana is infinitely superior to that of Guaya- 
quil. The best is produced in the valley of 
San Bonifacio; as the best cacao of New Bar- 
eelona, Caraccas, and Guatimala, is that of 
Capiriqual, Uritucu, and Soconusco. 

We had to regret, that’ the fevers prevalent 
at Cariaco hindered us from prolonging our 
stay there; we were not yet sufficiently season- 
ed, and the planters themselves, to whom we 


* The places where the culture is the most abundant are 
the valleys of Rio Carives, Carupano, Trapa, celebrated for 
it’s thermal waters, Chaguarama, Cumacatar, Caratar, Santa 
Rosalia, San Bonifacio, Rio Seco, Santa Isabela, Patu- 
cutal. In 1792, in all this space they reckoned only four 
hundred and twenty-eight thousand cacao-trees: in 1799, 
there were, from official documents, that 1 procured, near 
a million and a half. The’ fanega of cacao weighs one hun- 
dred and ten pounds. ; 

02 


196 


had récommendations, advised us to depart: 
We found in this town a great number of per- 
sons, who, by a certain ease in their manners, 
enlargement of their ideas, and, I must add, 
by a marked predilection for the government 
of the United States, discovered, that they had 
held frequent intercourse with foreigners. ‘There, 
for the first time in these climates, we heard 
the names of Franklin and Washington pro- 
nounced with enthusiasm. The expressions of 
this enthusiasm were mingled with complaints: 
on the actual state of New Andalusia ; the enu- 
meration, often exaggerated, of it’s natural riches; 
and ardent and anxious wishes, that happier 
tithes might arrive. This disposition of mind 
was striking to a traveller, who had just wit- 
nessed, and so near, the great .agitations of Eu- 
rope. It foreboded, as yet, nothing hostile and 
violent, no determinate direction. There was 
that degree of vagueness in the ideas and the 
expressions, which characterises in nations, as 
‘in individuals, a state of half cultivation, an 
immature display of civilization. Since the 
Island of Trinidad has become an English co- 
lony, the whole of the eastern extremity of the 
province of Cumana, especially the coast of 
Paria, and the Gulf of the same name, have 
changed their appearance. Strangers have set- 
tled there, and have introduced the cultiva- 
tion ef the coffee-tree, the cotton-tree, and the 


197 


sngar-cane of Otaheite. The population has 
greatly increased at Carupano, in the beautiful 
valley of Rio Caripe, at Guira, and. at the new 
town of Punta di Piedra, built opposite Spa- 
nish Harbour, in the island of Trinidad, The 
soil is so fertile in the Golfo Triste, that the 
maize yields two harvests in the year, and pro- 
duces three hundred and eighty times the quan- 
tity sown*. The isolated situation of the settle- 
ments has favored the trade with foreign colonies; 
and from the year 1797 a revolution has taken 
place in the ideas of the people, the conse- 
quences of which would have been long in prov- . 
ing fatal to the metropolis, if the ministry had 
not continued to thwart all their interests, and 
oppose all their wishes. ‘There is a period in 
the contentions with colonies, as in almost all 
popular commotions, when governments, if they 
be not blind respecting the course of human 
affairs, may, by a wise and provident modera- 
tion, reéstablish the equilibrium, and avert the 
storm. If they fail to seize this period, if they 
faney they can oppose a moral tendency by 
physical force, events unfold themselves irresis- 
tibly, and the separation of the colonies is ef- 
fected by a violence, that is but so much the 
more fatal, if the mother-country have succeed- 
ed during the struggle, in reéstablishing for a 


* One almuda produces in the Golfo Triste, 32 fanegas ; 


at Cariaco, 25. 


198 


time its monopolies, and it's ancient domina- 
tion. 

We embarked early in the morning in hopes 
of crossing the Gulf of Cariaco in the day. 

‘he motion of the waters resembles that of our 
great lakes, when they are gently agitated by 
the winds. There are only twelve nautical 
leagues from the place of embarkation to Cu- 
mana. On quitting the small town of Cariaco, 
we proceeded westward along the river of Care- 
nicuar, which, ina straight line hke an artifi- 
cial canal, leads through gardens and planta- 
tions of cotton-trees. The whole of this ground, 
a little marshy, is cultivated with the greatest 
care. During our abode in Peru, the cultiva- 
tion of the coffee-tree was intreduced in the 
driest spots. We saw the Indian women wash- 
ing their linen, along the river of Cariaco, with 
the fruit of the parapara (sapindus saponaria). 
This operation is said to be very injurious to the 
fine linen. The bark of the fruit produces much 
scum; and the fruit is so elastic, that thrown 
on a stone, it bounds three or four times to the 
height of seven or eight feet. Being of a spheri- 
cal form, it is employed in making rosaries. 

We were scarcely embarked, when we had 
to struggle against contrary winds, The rain 
came down in torrents, and the thunder rolled 
very.near. Swarms of flamingoes, egrets, and 
cormorants filled the air, seeking the’ shore. 


199 


The aleatras, a large species of pelican, alone - 
continued peaceably to fish in the middle of 
the Gulf. There. were eighteen, passengers of 
us; and we had much difficulty to find room 
for our instruments and. collections in a narrow 
canoe*, overloaded as it was with. raw sugar, 
plantains, and cocoa-nuts. The water was up 
to the boat’s gunwale. The Gulf of Cariaco is 
almost every where forty-five or fifty fathoms 
deep ; but at it’s eastern extremity, near Cura- 
guaca, for an extent of five leagues, the lead 
does not indicate more than three or four fa- 
thoms. Here is found the baxo de la Cotua, 
a sand-bank, which at low water appears like 
a small island. The canoes that carry pro- 
vision to Cumana sometimes ground on this 
bank; but always without danger, because the 
sea there is never rough or heavy. . ‘We crossed 
that part of the Gulf, where hot springs gush 
from the bottom of the sea. It was the time 
of flood, so that the change of temperature 
was less perceptible: besides, our canoe drove 
too much toward the southern shore. It may 
be supposed, that strata of water must be found 
of different temperatures, according to the 
greater or less depth, and according as the 
mixture of the hot waters with those of the Gulf 
is accelerated by the winds and currents. The 


a, 
* TLanchas 


200 


existence of these hot springs, which we were 
assured raise the temperature of the sea through 
an extent of ten or twelve thousand square toi+ 
ses, is a very remarkable phenomenon*.. Ow 
proceeding from the ‘promontory of Paria to- 
ward the west, by Irapa, Aquas Calientes, the 
Gulf of Cariaco, the Brigantine, and the valleys 
of Aragua, as far ‘asthe snowy mountains of 
Merida, a continued band of thermal waters 
is found in an extent of 150 leagues. 

The contrary winds and rainy weather forced 
us to go on shore at’ Pericantral, a small farm 
situate on the south side ofthe gulf. The whole 
of this coast, covered with beautiful vegetation, 
is almost without cultivation. 'There are 
scarcely seven hundred inhabitants: and, ex- 
eept the village of Mariguitar+, we saw only 
plantations of cocoa-trees, which are the olives 
of the country. This palm-tree occupies on 
both continents a zone, of which the mean tem- 


+ * In the island of Guadaloupe, there is a fountain of boil- 
ing water, that rushes out on the beach (Lescalier, Journ. de 
Physique, tom. 67, p. 379). Springs of hot water rise from 
the bottom of the sca in the Gulf of N aples, and near the 
Island of Palma, in the archipelago of the Canary Islands, 
+t The Geographical Atlas of Raynal indicates, 


Cariaco and Cumana, a town called Verina, 
isted. 


betweer 
that never ex- 
The most recent maps of America are loaded with 
names of places, rivers, and mountains, without it’s 
possible to discover the source of these errors, 
handed down from age to age. 


being 
which are 


201 


perature of the year is not below 30°*. It is, 
like the chameerops of the basin of the Medi- 
-terranean, a true palm-tree of the coast. It 
prefers salt to fresh waters ; and flourishes less 
inland, where the air is not loaded with saline 
particles, than on the coasts. When cocoa- 
trees are planted in Terra Firma, or in the Mis- 
sions of the Oronoko, at a distance from the 
sea, a considerable quantity of salt, sometimes 
as much as’ halfia bushel, is thrown into the 
hole that“ receives: the cocoa-nut. Among the 
plants ‘cultivated by man, the sugar-cane, the 
plantain, the mammee-apple, and alligator-pear 
(laurus persea), alone have the property of the 
cocoa-tree ; that of ‘being watered alike with 
fresh and salt water. This\ circumstance As 
favourable to their migrations ; and if the: su- 
gar-cane° of the shore yield a sirup that.is a 
little brackish, it is believed at the same time 
to be better fitted for the distillation of spirit, 
than the juice produced from the canes in the 
interior. Pt J 

The cocoa-tree, in the rest of America, is in 
general ‘cultivated around farm-houses, to be 
eaten as fruit ; in the Gulf of Cariaco, it forms 
real plantations. At Cumana, they talk of a 


* The cocoa-tree grows in the northern. hemisphere from 
the equator to the latitude of 28°. Near’ the equator we’ find 
it from the plains to 700 toises of elevation above the level 
of the sea. 


202 


hacienda de coco, as of a hacienda de canna or 
de cacao. In a fertile and moist ground, the 
cocoa-tree begins to bear fruit in abundance the 
fourth year; but in dry soils it yields produce 
at the end of ten years only. The duration of 
the tree does not in general exceed eighty ora 
hundred years; and it’s mean height at this pe- 
riod is from seventy to eighty feet. This rapid 
growth is so much the more remarkable, as 
other palm-trees, for instance, the moriche*, 
and the.palm of Sombrero +, the longevity of 
which is very great, frequently do not reach 
above fourteen or eighteen feet in sixty years. 
In the first thirty or forty years, a cocoa-tree 
of the Gulf of Cariaco bears every lunation a 
cluster of ten or fourteen nuts, all of which 
however do not ripen. It may be reckoned, 
that, on an average, a tree produces annually 
a hundred nuts, which yield eight flascos ¢ of 
oil. The flasce is sold for two rials and a half 
of plate, or sixteen pence. . In Provence, an 
olive-tree thirty years old yields twenty pounds, 
or seven flascoes of oil, so that it produces some- 
thing less than a cocoa-tree. There are in the 
Gulf of Cariaco haciendas of eight or nine thou- 
sand cocoa-trees. They resemble, in their pic- 


* Mauritia flexuosa. 
+ Corypha tectorum. 


t One fiasco contains 70 or 80 cubic inches, Paris mea- 
sure, 


203 


turesque appearance, those fine plantations of 
date-trees, near Elche, in Murcia, where in one 
square league are found upwards of 70,000 
palms. The cocoa-tree bears fruit in abundance 
till it is thirty or forty years old; after this age, 
the produce diminishes, and.a trunk a hundred 
years old, without being altogether barren, 
yields very little produce. In the town of Cu- 
mana a great quantity of oil of cocoas is made, 
which is limpid, without smell, and very fit 
for burning. The trade in this oil is not less 
brisk than that on the coast of Africa for palm 
oil, which is obtained from the elays guineensis, 
and is used as food. .At Cumana I have often 
witnessed the arrival of canoes laden with 3000 
cocoa-nuts.. A tree in full bearing yields an 
annual revenue of two piastres and half (eleven 
shillings and tenpence halfpenny). But in the 
haciendas of cocoa, trees of different ages being 
mixed, the capital* is estimated by appraisers 
only at four piastres. 


* These valuations may serve to throw some light on the 

~ advantages derived from the culture of fruit-trees under the 
torrid zone. Near Cumana, a banana is valued by estima- 
tion at one real de plata (G4d.). A nispero, or sapota, at 10 
piastres.. Four cocoa-nuts, or eight ‘fruits of the nispero 
(achras sapota), are sold for halfa real. The price of the 
former has doubled within these twenty years, on account 
of the great exportation that has been made to the islands. 
A good bearing nispero yields the farmer, who can sell the 


204 


We did not quit the farm of Pericantral till 
after sunset. The south coast of the Gulf, co- 
vered with a rich vegetation, presents the most 
agreeable aspect, while the northern coast is 
naked, dry, and rocky. In spite of this aridity, 
and the failure of rain, which is sometimes felt 
for-fifteen months *, the peninsula of Araya, like 
the desert of Canound in India, produces patit- 
las, or water melons, that weigh from fifty to 
seventy pounds. Under the torrid zone, the 
vapors contained by the air form about nine 
tenths of the quantity necessary to it’s satura- 
tion; and vegetation is maintained: by the ad- 


fruit in a neighbouring town, near eight piastres a year; 
a bixa [annotta tree] or a pomegranate tree yields only one 
piastre. The pomegranate. is much sought after on account 
of the refreshing juice of it’s fruit, which is preferred to 
those of the passiflora or parcha. 

* The rains appear to have been more frequent at the be- 
ginning of the 16th century. At least the Canon of Gra- 
nada, Petrus Martyr d’Anghiera (De Reb. Ocean., Colonize, 
1574, p. 93), speaking of the salt-works of Araya, or of 
Haraia, which we have described in the fifth Chapter, men- 
tions showers (cadentes imbres) as a very common phenome- 
non. The same author, who died in 1526 (Cancelieri, 
Notizie di Columbo, p- 212), affirms, that the Indians 
wrought the salt works before the arrival of the Spaniards, 
They dried the salt in form of bricks, and Petrus Martyr 
even then discussed the geological question, whether the 
clayey soil of Haraia contained salt springs, or whether it 


had been impregnated with salt by the periodical inundations 
of the ocean for ages, 


205 


tairable property, which the leaves pdssess, of 
attracting the water dissolved in the atmos- 
phere. We passed a very indifferent night in a 
narrow and deeply laden canoe; and ‘reached 
the mouth of the river Manganares at three in 
the morning. Accustomed for several weeks 
past to the aspect of mountains, to a stormy sky, 
and to gloomy forests, we were struck with the 
invariable clearness of the air, the nakedness 
of the soil, and the mass of reflected light, which 
characterize the site of Cumana. 

At sunrise, we saw the samuro vultures *, in 
flocks of forty or fifty, perched on the cocoa- 
trees. These birds range themselves in files to 
sleep together like fowls; and their indolence 
is such, that they go to roost long before sun- 
set, and awake not till after the sun is above 
the horizon. This idleness seems as if it were 
shared in those climates by the trees with pen- 
nate leaves. The mimosas and the tamarinds 
close their leaves in a clear and serene sky, | 
twenty-five or thirty-five minutes before the 
setting of the sun, and unfold them in the morn- 
ing when it's disk has been visible for the 
same time. As I noticed pretty regularly the 
setting and rising of the sun, in order to ob- 
serve the effect of the mirage, o1 of the terres- 
trial refractions, I was enabled to give continu. 


* Vultur oura. 


206 


ed.attention to the phenomenon of the sleep of 
plants. I found them the same in the steppes, 
where no irregularity of the ground interrupted 
the view of the horizon. It appears, that; ac- 
customed during the day to’ an extreme brilli- | 
ancy of light, the sensitive and other legumi- 
nous plants with thin and delicate leaves are 
affected in the evening by the smallest decline 
in the intensity of the sun’s rays; so that night 
begins for the vegetables, there as with us, be © 
fore the total disappearance of the solar disk. 
But why, under a zone where there is scarcely 
any twilight, do not the first rays of the sun 
stimulate the leaves with so much more force, 
as the absence of light must have rendered 
them more irritable? Does the humidity de- 
posited on the parenchyma by the cooling of 
the leaves, which is the effect of the nocturnal 
radiation, prevent perhaps the action of the first 
rays of the Sun? In our climates, the legumi- 
nous plants with irritable leaves awake during 
the twilight of the morning, before the sun ap- 
pears. oy 


CHAPTER IX. 


Physical Constitution and Manners of the Chay- 
mas.— Their Languages.— Filiation of the Na- 
tions which inhabit New. Andalusia.—Paria- 
gotoes seen by Columbus. 


{ was unwilling to mingle with the narrative 
of our journey to the Missions of Caripe general 
considerations on the different tribes of natives, 


that inhabit New Andalusia; on their man- 
ners, their languages, and their common origin. 
Having returned to the spot from which we set 
out, I shall now bring into one point of view 
these objects, which are so nearly connected 
with the history of the human race. As we ad- 
vance into the interior of the country, these 
subjects will become more interesting than the 
‘phenomena of the physical world. The north- 
east part of equinoctial America, Terra Firma, 
and the shore of the Oroonoko, resemble, with 
respect to the multiplicity of the nations that 
inhabit them, the defiles of Caucasus, the moun- 
tains of Hindeo-kho, at the northern. extre- 
mity of Asia, beyond the Tungooses, and. the 


208 


Tatars settled at the mouth of the Lena. The 
barbarism that prevails throughout these differ- 
ent regions is perhaps less owing toa primitive 
absence of all kind of civilization, than to the 
effects of a long degradation. The greater part 
of the hordes, which we designate under the 
name of savages, descend probably from nations 
more advanced in cultivation; and how can we 
distinguish the prelonged infancy of the human 
race, if indeed it any where exists, from, that 
state of moral degradation in which solitariness, 
want, compulsory misery, forced migrations, or 
the rigour of the climate, obliterate even the 
traces of civilization? If every thing which is 
connected with the primitive state of man, and 
the first population of a continent, could from 
its nature belong to the domain of history, we 
%hould. appeal to the traditions of India, to 
that opinion so often expressed in the laws of 
Menou and in the Ramajan, which considers 
savages as tribes banished from civil society, 
and driven into the forests. The word barbar- 
ous, which we have borrowed from the Greeks 
and the Romans, is perhaps only the parti- 
cular name of one of these rude hordes *. 

In the New World, at:the begmning’ of it’s 


* The Varvaras, the Palawas, the. Sakas, the Jawanas, the 
Kambodschas, the Tschinas. Wilkins, Heetopad., p. 310. 
Ropp, on the Grammatical System of the Sanscrit, the Greek, 
ghe Latin, and the Gothic (in German), 1816, p. V7. 


209 


conquest, the natives were collected into large 
societies only on the ridge of the Cordilleras,. 
and the coasts opposite to Asia. The plains, 
covered with forests, and intersected by rivers ; 
the immense savannahs, that extend toward the 
east, and bound the horizon; presented to the 
eye of the spectator wandering hordes, separat- 
ed by the difference of language and manners, 
and scattered like the remains of a vast ship- 
wreck. In the absence of all other documents, 
we will try whether the analogy of languages, 
and the study of the physical constitution of 
‘man, will enable us to group the different tribes, 
to follow the traces of their distant emigrations, 
and to discover some of those family features, 
by which the ancient unity of our species is ma- 
nifested. . 

In the country, the mountains of which we 
have just traversed, and in the two provinces of 
Cumana and New Barcelona, the natives, or 
primitive inhabitants, still constitute half of the 
scanty population. Their number may be rec- 
koned at sixty thousand ; of which twenty-four 
thousand inhabit New Andalusia. This num- 
ber is very considerable, if it be compared to 
that of the hunting nations of North America ; 
but appears small, when we consider those 
parts of New Spain, in which agriculture has 
existed more than eight centuries: for instance, 
the intendance of Oaxaca, which includes the 

VOL. III. P 


210 


Mixteca and the Tzapoteca of the old:-Mexican 
empire. This intendance is one third smaller 
than the two provinces of Cumana and Barce- 
lona * ; yet it contains more than four hundred 
thousand natives of the pure copper coloured 
race. The Indians of Cumana do not all live 
assembled in the Missions. Some are found 
dispersed in the neighbourhood of towns, along 
the coasts, to which they are attracted by the 
fisheries, and even in the little farms of the 
plains or savannahs. The Missions of the Arra- 
gonese Capuchins, which we visited, alone con- 
tain fifteen thousand Indians, almost all of the 
Chayma race. The villages however are less 
populous there, than in the province of Barce- 
Jona. Their average population is only be- 
tween five or six hundred Indians; while 
more to the west, in the Missions of the Fran- 
ciscans of Piritoo, we find Indian villages of two 
or three thousand inhabitants. In computing at 


, sixty thousand the number of the natives in the 


provinces of Cumana and Barcelona, I ‘have 
considered only those who inhabit the main 
land, and not the Guayquerias of the Island of 
Margaretta, and the great mass of the Guaraou- 
noes, who have preserved. their independence in 


* The area of the two provinces is 6100 square leagues, 
of 25 to a degree. 


+ Nouv. Esp., T. i, p. 77, and 262. 


ee ae ce 


211 


the islands formed by the Delta of the Oroonoko: 
The number of these is generally reckoned at six 
or eight thousand; but this computation appears 
to me to be exaggerated. Except a few families 
of Guaraounoes, that roam occasionally in the 
marshy grounds * covered with the moriche 


palm, between the Cano de Manamo and the 


Guarapiche, consequently on the continent it- 
‘self, there have not been for these thirty years 
any Indian savages in New Andalusia. 

I use with regret the word savage, because it 
sndicates a difference of cultivation between: the 
reduced Indian, living in the Missions, and the 
free or independent Indian, which is often belied 
by facts. In the forests of South America exist 
tribes of natives, who, peaceably united in villa- 
ges, obey chiefs +, cultivate the plaintain-tree, 
cassava, and cotton on a pretty extensive por- 
tion of ground, and employ this last in weaving 
hammocks. ‘These people are scarcely more 
barbarous than the naked Indians of the Mis- 
sions, who have been taught to make the sign 
of. the cross. It is a very common error in 
Europe, to look on all the natives not reduced 
to a state of subjection, as roving hunters. 
Agriculture existed on the continent long before 
the arrival of the Europeans. [ft still exists be 


* Jos Morichales. 
+ These chiefs are called pecanati, apoto, oF siblerene. 


ps2 


212 


tween the Oroonoko and the river of Amazons, 
in open land amid the forests, to which the 
missionaries have néver penetrated. | What 
has been effected by the system of the Missions 
is an increased attachment to landed property, 
the stability of dwellings, and a taste for a more 
calm and tranquil life. The progress however 
is slow, and often imperceptible, on account. of 
the perfectly isolated state, in which the In- 
dians are held. But it would be to imbibe 
false ideas on the actual condition of the nations 
of South America, to consider as synonimous 
the denominations of Christians, reduced, and ci- 
vilized ; and those of pagans, savages, and in- 
dependent. The reduced Indian is often as 
little of a christian, as the independent Indian 
is of an idolater; both, occupied by the wants 
of the moment, discover a marked indifference 
for religious opinions, and a secret tendency 
toward the worship of Nature and it’s powers. 
This worship belongs to the earliest infancy 
ef nations; it excludes idols, and recognizes 
no other sacred places, than grottoes, valleys, 
and woods. 

if the independent Indians haye nearly dis- 
appeared for a century past to the north of the 
Oroonoko and the Apura, that is from the snowy 
mountains of Merida to the promontory of Paria, 
it must not thenee be concluded, that fewer na- 
lives exist at present in those countries, than. 


213 


in the time of the Bishop of Chiapa, Bartholo- 
mew de las Casas. I have already proved, 
in my work on Mexico, the magnitude of the 
error of presenting as a general fact the des- 
truction and diminution of the Indians in the 
Spanish Colonies*. There still exist more 
than six millions of the copper-coloured race, 
in both Americas; and, though an mnumera- 
ble quantity of tribes and of languages are extin- 
guished, or confounded together, it is beyond 
a doubt, that within the tropics, in that part 
of the New World where civilization has pene- 
irated only since the time of Columbus, the 
number of natives has considerably increased. 
Two villages of Caribs, in the Missions of Piritoo 
or of Carony, contain more families than four 
or five hordes on the Oroonoko. The state of 
society among the Caribbees, who have preserved 
their independence, at the sources of the Es- 
quibo, and to the south of the mountians of Pa- | 
caraimo, sufficiently proves, how mueh, even 
among that fine race of men, the population of 
the Missions prevails in number over that of the 
free and confederated Caribbees. Besides, the 
state of the savages of the torrid zone is not. 
the same as that of the savages of the Mis- 
souri. The latter have need of a vast extent 
of country, because they live only by hunting 3 


* Es cosa constante irse. disminuyendo por todus partes el mine 
mero de los Indies. (Ulloa, Noticias Amer., 1772, p- 344). 


QN4 


while the Indians of Spanish Guiana plant cas: 
sava and plaintains. A little ground suffices 
these, to supply them with food. They do not 
dread the approach of the whites, like the sa- 
vages of the United States; who, progressively 
pushed behind the Alleghany: mountains, the 
Ohio, and the Missisippi, lose their means of sub- 
sistence, in proportion as they find themselves 
reduced within narrower limits. Under the 
temperate zone, whether in the provincias inter- 
nas of Mexico, or in Kentucky, the contact of 
the European planters is become fatal to the 
natives, because that contact is immediate. 
These causes have no existence in the greater 
part of South‘America. Agriculture, under the 
tropics, does not require great extent of ground. 
The whites advance slowly. . The religious or- 
ders have founded their establishments between 
the domain of the planters, and the territory 
of the free Indians. The Missions may be con- 
sidered as intermediary states. They have en- 
‘croached on the liberty of the natives no doubt ; 
but they have almost every where been advan- 
tageous to the increase of population, which 
is incompatible with the unquiet life of the 
independent Indians. As the Missionaries ad- 
vance toward the forests, and gain on the na- 
lives, the white planters in their turn seck. to 
invade from the opposite side the territory of 
the Missions. In this protracted struggle, the 


215 


secular arm continually tends to withdraw the 
reduced Indian from the monastic hierarchy, 
and the missionaries gradually give way to 
vicars. The whites, and the casts of mixed 
blood, favoured by the corregidors, establish 
themselves among the Indians. ‘The Missions 
become Spanish villages, and the natives lose 
even the remembrance of their natural idiom. 
Such is the progress of civilization from the 
coasts toward the interior; a slow progress, 
shackled by the passions of man, but sure, and 
uniform. 

The provinces of New Andalusia and Barce- 
lona, comprehended under the name of Govierno 
de Cumana, contain, in their present popula- 
tion, more than fourteen tribes. Those in New 
Andalusia are the Chaymas, Guayquerias, Pari- 
agotoes, Quaquas, Aruacas, Caribbees, and Gua- 
yaounoes; in the province of Barcelona, Cu- 
managotoes, Palenkas, Caribbees, Piritoos, To- 
moozas, Topocuares, Chacopatas, and Guari- 
vas. Nine or ten of these fourteen tribes con- 
sider themselves as of a race entirely different. 
The exact number of the Guaraounoes, who 
make their huts on the trees at the mouth of 
the Oroonoko, is unknown; that of the Guay- 
querias, in the suburbs of Cumana and in the 
peninsula of Araya, amounts to two thousand. 
Among the other Indian tribes, the Chaymas of 
the mountains of Caripe, the Caribs of the south- 


216 


ern savannahs of New Barcelona, and the Cu- 
managatoes in the Missions. of Piritoo, are the 
most numerous. Some families of Guaraou- 
noes have been reduced into Missions on the 
left bank of the Oroonoko, where the Delta 
begins to be formed. The language of the Gua- 
raounoes and that of the Caribs, of the Cu- 
managotoes and of the Chaymas, are the most 
general. We shall presently see, that they seem 
to belong to the same stock; and that they 
exhibit in their grammatical forms those inti- 
mate affinities, which, to use a comparison taken 
from languages more known, connect the Greek, 
the German, the Persian, and the Sanscrit. 
Notwithstanding these affinities, we must 
consider the Chaymas, the Guaraounoes, the Ca- 
ribbees, the Quaquas, the Aruacas or Arrawawks, 
and the Cumanagotoes, as different nations. 
I would not venture to affirm the same thing 
of the Guayquerias, the Pariagotocs, the Piri- 
toos, the Tomoozas, and the Chacopatas. The 
Guayquerias themselves admit the analogy of 
their language with that of the Guaraounoes. 
Both are a littoral race, like the Malays of the 
ancient continent. With respect to the tribes 
who at present speak the Cumanagoto, Carib- 
bean, and Chayma idioms, it is difficult to 
decide on their first origin, and their relations 
with other nations formerly more powerful. 
The historians of the Conquest, like the eccle- 


217 


siastics who have described the progress of the | 
Missions, continually confound, like the anci- 


ents, geographical denominations with the names 


of races. They speak of Indians of Cumana 
and of the coast of Paria, as if the proximity 
of abode proved the identity of origin. They 
most commonly even give to tribes the name 
of their chief, or that of the mountain or valley 
they inhabit. This circumstance, by infinitely 
multiplying the number of tribes, renders every 
thing uncertain, that the monks relate respect- 
ing the heterogeneous elements of which the 
population of their Missions are composed. 
How .can we at present decide, whether the To- 
mooza and Piritoo be of different races, when 
both speak the Cumanagoto language, which 
is the prevailing tongue in the western part of 
the Govierno of Cumana; as the Caribbean 
and the Chayma are in the southern and eas- 
tern parts. A great analogy of physical con- 
stitution renders these researches very difficult. 
Such is the contrast between the two con- 
tinents, that in the new a surprising variety 
of languages is observed among nations of the 
same origin, and which European travellers 
scarcely distinguish by their features; while 
in the old continent very different races of men, 
the Laplanders, the Finlanders, and the Es- 
thonians, the German nations and the Hindoos, 
the Persians and the Curds, the Tatar and Mun- 


_ 218 


val tribes, speak languages, the mechanism and 
roots of which present the greatest analogy. 

The Indians of the American Missions are 
all agriculturists; and excepting those, who 
inhabit the high mountains, they cultivate the 
same plants; their huts are arranged in the 
same manner ; their days of labour, their work 
in the conuco of the community, their connex- 
ions with the missionaries and the magistrates 
chosen from among themselves, are all subjected 
to uniform regulations. Nevertheless, and this 
fact is very remarkable in the history of na- 
tions, so great an analogy of situation has not 
been sufficient to efface the individual features, 
or the shades which distinguish the American 
tribes. We observe in the men of copper hue, 
a moral inflexibility, a stedfast perseverance 
in habits and manners, which, though modified 
in each tribe, characterize essentially the whole 
race. These dispositions are found under every 
climate, from the equator to Hudson’s Bay on 
the one hand, and to the streights of Magellan 
on the other. They are connected with the 
physical organization of the natives, but they 
are powerfully favoured by the monastic sys- 
tem. 

There exist in the Missions few villages, where 
the different families do not belong to different 
tribes, and speak different languages. Saci- 
eties composed of elements thus heterogencous 


219 


are difficult to govern. In general; the monks 
have united whole nations, or great portions 
of the same nations, in villages lying near each 
other. The natives see only those of their own 
tribe; for the want of communication, and the 
isolated state of the people, form the principal 
policy of the missionaries. The reduced Chay- 
mas, Caribs, and Tamanacs retain so much the 
more their natural physiognomy, as they have 
preserved their languages. If the individuality 
of man be in some sort reflected in his idioms, 
these in their turn react on his ideas and sen- 
timents. It is this intimate connection be- 
tween the languages, the character, and the 
physical constitution, which maintains and per- 
petuates the diversity of nations, that unfailing 
source of life and motion in the intellectual 
world, 

The missionaries may have prohibited the 
Indians from following certain practices in use 
on the birth of children, on their entrance on 
the age of puberty, and at the interment of the 
dead: they may have prevented them from 
painting their skin, from making incisions on 
their chins, noses, and cheeks; they may have 
destroyed among the great mass of the people 
superstitious ideas, which are mysteriously trans- 
mitted from father to son in certain families : but 
it has been easier for them to proscribe customs 
and efface remembrances, than to substitute 


220 


new ideas in the place of the old. The Indian 
of the Missions is more secure of subsistence. 
Not being continually struggling against hostile 
forces, against the elements and against man, 
he leads a more monotonous life, less active, 
and less fitted to impart energy to the mind, 
than the savage or independent Indian. He 
possesses that mildness of character, which be- 
longs to the love of repose ; not that which arises 
from sensibility and the emotions of the soul. 
The sphere of his ideas is not enlarged, where, 
having no intercourse with the whites, he has 
remained at a distance from those objects, with’ 
which European civilization has enriched the 
New World, All his actions seem prompted by 
the wants of the moment. Taciturn, without 
gaiety, absorbed in himself, he assumes a se- 
date and mysterious air. When a person has 
resided but a short time in the Missions, and is 
yet but little familiarized with the aspect of the 
natives, he is led to mistake their indolenee, 
and the benumbed state of their faculties, for 
the expression of melancholy, and a disposition 
toward meditation. 

I have dwelt on these features of the Indian 
character, and on the different modifications 
which this character undergoes under the go- 
vernment of the missionaries, to render more 
interesting the partial observations, which are 


221: 


the subject of this chapter. I shall begin by 
the nation of the Chaymas, of whom more than 
fifteen thousand inhabit the Missions that 
have just been described. This nation, little 
warlike, which father Francisco of Pamplona* 
began to reduce to subjection in the middle of 
the seventeenth century, has the Cumanago- 
' toes toward the west, the Guaraounoes toward 
the east, and the Caribbees toward the south. 
It occupies a space along the elevated moun- 
tains of the Cocollar and the Guacharo, the 
banks of the Guarapiche, of the Rio Colorado, 
of the Areo, and of the Cano of Caripe. | Ac- 
cording to a statistical survey made with great 
care by the father Prefect}, there were in the 
Missions of the Arragonese Capuchins: of Cu- 
mana— 

Nineteen villages of Missions, of which the 
oldest was established in 1728; containing 
one thousand four hundred and sixty-five fami- 
lies, and six thousand four hundred and thirty- 
three persons: sixteen villages de doctrina, of 
which the oldest dates in 1660; containing 
one thousand seyen hundred and sixty-six fami- 


* The name of this monk, celebrated for his active intre- 
pidity, is still revered in the province. THe sowed the first 
seeds of civilization among these mountains. He had long 
been captain of a ship; and before he became a monk, 
bore the name of Tiburtio Redin. 


t Fray Francisco de Chiprana (manuscript memoir). 


222 
lies, and eight thousand one hundred and 
seventy persons*. 

These Missions suffered greatly in 1681, 1697, 
and 1720, from the invasions of the Caribbees, 
then independent, who burnt whole villages. 
From 1730 to 1736, the population diminished 
from the ravages of the small-pox, a disease 
always more fatal to the copper-coloured In- 
dians, than to the whites. Many of the Gua- 
raounoes, who had been assembled together, 
fled back again to their marshes. Fourteen 
old Missions remained deserted, and have not 
been rebuilt. The Chaymas are in general 
short; and they appear so particularly, when 
compared, I shall not say with their neighbours 
the Caribbees, or with the Payaguas or Guay~ 
quilits} of Paraguay, equally remarkable for 
their stature, but with the ordinary natives of 
America. The common stature of a Chayma 
is 1-57 met. or four feet ten inches [five feet 
‘two inches nearly], their body is thick ‘set, 
shoulders extremely broad, and breast flat. 


* Cultivated land (/abranzas), belonging to these thirty-five 
villages, 6554 almudas. The number of cows in 1792 amount- 
ed only to 1883. 

+ The ordinary stature of the Guayquilits or Mbayas, 
who live between the 20th and 22d degrees of south latitude, 
is, according to Azzara 1°64, met. or five feet eight inches 
{six feet and half an inch Eng.] The Payaguas, equally 


tall, have giyen their name to Payaguay, or Paraguay. 


223 


All their limbs are round and fleshy. Their co- 
lour is that ef the whole American race, from the 
cold table lands of Quito and New Grenada to 
the burning plains of the Amazons. It is no - 
longer changed by the varied influence of cli- 
mate; it is connected with organic dispositions, 
which for ages past have been unalterably trans- 
mitted from generation to generation. If the 
uniform tint of the skin be more coppery and 
redder toward the north, it is on the contrary 
among the Chaymas of a dull brown inclining 
towards tawny. The denomination of copper co- 
loured [rouges-cuivrés| men could never have 
originated in equinoxial America to designate 
the natives. 

The expression of the countenance of the 
Chaymas, without being hard or stern, has some - 
thing sedate and gloomy; the forehead is small, 
and but little prominent. Thus in several lan- 
guages of these countries, to express the beauty 
of a woman, they say “ that she is fat, and has 
a narrow forehead.” The eyes of the Chaymas 
are black, sunk, and very long: but they are 
neither so obliquely placed, nor so small, as in- 
the people of the Mongul race, of whom Jornan- 
des says, that they have rather points, than 
eyes; magis puncta quam lumina. ‘The corner 
of the eye is however sensibly raised up  to- 
ward the temples; the eyebrows are black, or 
dark brown, slender, and little arched; the 


. 294 


eyelids are furnished with very long eyelashes, 
and the habit of casting them down, as if they 
_ were lowered by lassitude, softens the look of 
the women, and makes the eye thus veiled ap- 
pear less than it really is. If the Chaymas, and 
in general all the natives of South America and 
New Spain, resemble the Mongul race, by the 
form of the eye, their high cheek bones, their 
straight and flat hair, and the almost entire 
want of beard; they essentially differ from them 
in the form of the nose, which is pretty long, 
prominent throughout it’s whole length, and 
thick toward the nostrils, the openings of which 
are directed downward, as with all the nations 
of the Caucasian race. Their wide mouth, 
with lips but little protuberant though broad, 
has often an expression of goodness. The pas- 
sage from the nose to the mouth is marked in 
both sexes by two furrows, which run diverging 
from the nostrils toward the corners of ‘the 
mouth. The chin is extremely short and round; 
and the jaws are remarkable for their strength 
and width. 

Though the Chaymas have fine white teeth, 
like all people who lead a very simple life, 
they are however not so strong as those of the 
Negroes. The habit of blackening the teeth, 
from the age of fifteen, by the juices of certain 
herbs* and caustic lime, had engaged the at- 


# The first historians of the conquest attribute this effect 
4 


925 


tention of the earliest travellers; but it is at pre- 
sent quite unknown. Such have been the mi- 
grations of the different tribes in these coun- 
tries, particularly since the incursions of the Spa- 
niards, who carried on the slave trade, it, may 
be admitted, that the inhabitants of Paria, vi- 
sited by Christopher Columbus, and by Ojeda, 
were not of the same race as the Chaymas.. I 
doubt much, whether the custom of blackening 
the teeth were originally connected, as Gomara 
affirmed*, with extravagant ideas of beauty, 


to the leaves of a tree, that the natives called hay, which - 
resembled the myrtle. Among nations very distant from 


each other, the pimento bears a similar name; among the 
Haytians (of the island of St. Domingo) aji or ai ; among 


the Maypures of the Oroonoko a-. Some stimulant and 
aromatic plants, which do not all belong to the genus capsi- 
cum, were designated by the same name. 

* Cap. 78, p. 101. The nations; that were seen by the 
Spaniards on thé coast of Paria, had probably the custom 
of stimulating the organs of taste by caustic lime, as others 
employed tobacco, the chimo, the leaves of the cocea, or 
betel. This practice is found even in our days, but more 
toward the west, among the Guajiroes, at the mouth of the 
Rio la Hacha. These Indians, still savage, carry small 
shells, calcined and powdered, in the shell of a fruit, that 
gerves them as a vessel for various purposes, suspended to 
their girdle. The powder of the Guajiroes is an article 
of commerce, as was anciently, according to Gomara, that 
of the Indians of Paria. In Europe the immoderate habit 
of stioking also makes the teeth yellow and blackens them : 
but would it-be just to conclude from this fact, that they 


YOL. III. Q 


226 


or were practised with the view of preventitig 
the toothach. This disorder is almost un- 
known to the Indians; the whites even suffer 
very seldom from it in the Spanish Colonies, 
at least in the warm regions, where the tem- 
perature is so uniform. They are more ex- 
posed to it on the back of the Cordilleras, at 
Santa-Fe, and at Popayan. 

The Chaymas, like almost all the native 
nations I have seen, have small, slender hands. 
Their feet are large, and their- toes retain an 
extraordinary mobility. All the Chaymas have 
a family look; and this analogy of form, so 
often observed by travellers, is so much the 
more striking, as between, the years of. twenty 
and fifty difference of age is no way denoted 
by wrinkles of the skin, the colour of the hair, 


or decrepitude of the body. On entering 


a hut, it is often difficult, among adult persons 
to distinguish the father from. the son, and. not 
to. confound one generation with another. I 
attribute this family look to two different causes, 
the local situation of the Indian tribes, and 
their inferior degree of intellectual culture. 
Savage nations are subdivided into an infinity of 
tribes, which, bearing a cruel hatred toward 
each other, form no intermarriages, even when 
their languages ‘spring from the same root, 


who smoke with us do it because we think yellow teeth 
handsomer than white ? 


227 


and when only a small arm of a river, of a 
group of hills, separates their habitations: The 
less numerous are the tribes, the more the in- 
termarriages, repeated for ages, between the 
same families, tend to fix a certain equality of 
conformation, an organic type, which may be 
called national*. This type is preserved under 
the government of the Missions formed by a 
single horde. The isolated state is the same, 
and marriages are contracted only between the 
inhabitants of the same hamlet. Those ties of 
blood, which unite almost a whole nation, are 
indicated in a simple manner in the language 
of the Indians born in the Mission, or by those; 
who, taken from the woods, have learned Spa- 
nish. To designate the individuals, who be- 
long to the same tribe, they employ the words 
mis parientes, my relations. 

. These causes, which depend only on the iso- 
lated state, and the effects of which are found 
among the Jews of Europe, among the different 
easts of India, and among mountaineer nations 
in general, are connected with causes hitherto 
neglected. I have observed elsewhere, that it 
is intellectual culture which contributes most 
to diversify the featurés. Barbarous nations have 


* Nollis aliis aliarum nationum connubiis infecta, propria 
et sincera, et tantum sui similis gens, Unde habitus quoque 
corporum, quamguam in tanto hominum numero, idem omni- 
bus. ‘Tac. Germ, e. 4c 


228 


rather a physiognomy of tribe or horde, than 
one peculiar to such or such an individual. 
The savage and civilized man are like those 
animals of the same species, several of which 
rove in the forest, while others, connected with 
us, Share in the’ benefit and evils that accom- 
pany civilization. ‘The varieties of form and 
colour are frequent only in domestic animals. 
How great is the difference, with respect to 
mobility of features and variety of physiogno- 
my, between dogs again become savage in the 
New World, and those the slightest caprices 
of which are indulged in the houses of the opu- 
lent ! Both in men and animals the emotions of 
the soul are reflected in the features ; and the fea- 
tures acquire the habit of mobility, in proportion 
as the emotions of the mind are more frequent, 
more varied, and more durable. But the In- 
dian of the Missions, distant from all cultiva- 
tion, guided only by his physical wants, satis- 
fying almost without difficulty his desires, under 
‘a happy climate, drags on a dull monotonous life. 
The greatest equality reigns among the mem- 
bers of the same community ; and this uniform- 
ity, this invariableness of situation, is pictured 
on the features of the Indians. 

Under the system of the monks, violent pas- 
sions, such as resentment and anger, agitate 
the native more rarely than when he lives in 
the forest. If the savage man give himself up 


229 


to. impetuous and quick emotions; his physi- 
ognomy, till then calm and motionless, changes 
instantly to convulsive contortions. His passion 
is transient in proportion to it’s violence. With 
the Indians of the Missions, as I have often 
observed on the Orconoko, anger is less furious, 
less frank, but of longer duration. Besides, 
in every condition of man, it is not the energy 
or the transient bursts of the passions, which 
give expression to the features ; it is rather that 
sensibility of the soul, which brings us contin- 
ually into contact with the external world, mul- 
tiplies our sufferings and our pleasures, and 
reicts at once on the physiognomy, the man- 
ners, and the language. If the variety and 
mobility of the features embellish the domain 
of animated nature, we must admit also, that 
both increase by civilization, without being 
produced by it alone. In the great family of 
nations, no other race unites these’ advantages 
to a higher ‘degree than that of Caucasus, or 
the European. It is only in white men, that 
the instantaneous penetration of the dermoidal 
system by the blood can take place; that slight 
change of the colour of the skin, which adds 
so powerful an expression to the emotions of the — 
soul. “ How can those be trusted, who know 
not how to blush?” says the European, in his 
inveterate hatred to the Negro and the Indian. 
We must also admit, that this insensibility of 


- 230 


the features is not peculiar to every race of 
men of a very dark complexion: it is much 
less apparent in the African, than in the natives 
of America. 

-To this physical sketch of the Chaymas we 
shall add a few summary remarks on their 
manner of living, and on their morals. Unac- 
quainted with the language of the people, I 
do not pretend to have penetrated their cha~ 
racter during my short abode in the Missions, 
Whenever I speak of the Indians, I shall add 
what we heard from the missionaries to the 
little we observed ourselves. 

The Chaymas, like all savage people, who 
dwell in regions excessively hot, have an insu- 
perable aversion to clothing. The writers of 
the middle age inform us, that in the north 
of Europe the shirts and drawers, distributed 
by the missionaries, greatly contributed to the 
conversion of the Pagan, Under the torrid 
gone, on the contrary, the natives are ashamed 
as they say to be clothed; and flee to the woods, 
when they are teo soon compelled to give up 
their nakedness. Among the Chaymas, in spite 
of the remonstrances of the monks, men and 
women remain naked within their houses. 
When they traverse the village, they wear a 
kind of tunic of cotton, which scarcely reaches 
to the knees. It is furnished with sleeves for 
the men: but the women, and the young boys 


231 


to the age of ten or twelve, have the arms, 
shoulders, and upper part of the breast naked. 
The tunic is so cut, that the fore part is joined 
to the back by two narrow bands, which cross 
the shoulders. When we met the natives, with-. 
eut the Mission, we saw them, especially in 
rainy weather, stripped of their clothes, and 
holding their shirts rolled up under their arms. 
They preferred receiving the rain on their body 
quite naked, to wetting their clothes. The 
oldest women hid themselves behind trees, and 
laughed aloud when they. saw us pass. The 
missionaries complain in general, that the sen- 
timents of decency are scarcely more felt by 
young girls than by the men. Ferdinand Co- 
lumbus* relates, that in 1498 his father found 
the women entirely naked in the island of Trin- 
idad; while the men wore the guayuco, which 
is rather a narrow bandage than an apron. At 
the same period, on the coast of Paria, the girls 


* Life of the Admiral, cap.'71 (Churchill’s Collection, 1723, 
vol, ii, p. 586). This Life, written after the year 1537, 
from original notes in the handwriting of Christopher Co- 
lumbus, is the most valuable record of the history of his dis- 
coveries. It exists only in'the Italian and Spanish transla- 
tions of Alphonso de Ulloa and Gonzales Barcia; for the 
original, carried to Venice in 1571 by the learned Fornari 
has neither been published nor found since. Napione, della 
Patria di Colombo, 1804, p. 109 and 295. Cancellieri sopra 


Christ. Colombo, 1809, p. 129. 


“932 


distinguished themselves from the married wo- 
men, either, as Cardinal Bembo asserts*, by 
being quite naked, or, acccording to Gomaraf, 
by the colour of the guayuco. This bandage, 
which is still in use among the Chaymas, and 
all the naked nations of the Oroonoko, is only 
two or three inches broad, and is tied on .both 
sides to a string, that encircles the middle of 
the body. The girls are often married at the 
age of twelve years ; until nine the missionaries 
allow them to go to church naked, that is to 
say without a tunic, I need not repeat here, 
that among the Chaymas, as well as in all the 
Spanish Missions and the Indian villages, which 
I have visited, a pair of drawers, or shoes, ora 
hat, are objects of luxury unknown to the natives. 
A servant, who had been -with us during our 
journey to Caripe and the Oroonoko, and whom 
I brought to France, was so much struck on 
landing, when he saw the ground tilled by a 
‘peasant with a hat on, that he thought himself 
in a miserable country, where even the nobles 
(los mismos caballeros) followed the plough. 
The Chayma women are not handsome, ac- 


| * See the eloquent description of America, in the History 
of Venice (Book 12). ‘ Femine virum passe nullam par- 
tem, practer muliebria; virgines ne illam quidem tegebant,” 

+ Las donzellas se conocen en el color y tamano del cor- 
del, y traerlo asi, és senal certissima de virginidad. (Goma- 
ra, cap. 73, p. 96). 


SR Tenino 


233 


cording to the ideas that we annex to beauty ; 
yet the girls have something soft and melan- 
choly in their looks, which forms an agree- 
able contrast with the expression of the mouth, 
which is somewhat austere and savage. They 
wear the hair plaited in two long tresses 5 they 
do not paint their skin, and from their extreme 
poverty are acquainted with no other ornaments 
than necklaces and bracelets made of shells, 
birds’ bones, and seeds. Both men and women 
are very muscular, but fleshy and plump. It 
is superfluous to add, that I saw no person, who 
had any natural deformity; I might say the 
same of thousands of Caribs, Muyseas, and Mex- 
ican and Peruvian Indians, whom we observed 
‘during the course of five years. Bodily defor- 
mities, deviations from nature, are infinitely 
rare among certain races of men, especially 
‘those nations, who have the dermoid system 
‘highly coloured. I cannot believe, that they 
depend solely on the progress of civilization, 
a luxurious life, or the corruption of morals. 
.-In Europe a deformed or very ugly girl mar- 
ries if she have a fortune, and the children often 
inherit the deformity of the mother. In the 
‘savage state, which is a state of equality, no- 
‘thing can induce a man to unite himself to a 
deformed woman or one who is very unhealthy. 
Tf therefore such a women have had the misfor- 


234 


tune of attaining an adult age, and have re- 
sisted the chances of a restless and disturbed 
life, she dies without children. We might. be 
tempted to think, that savages all appear well 
made and vigorous, because feeble children die 
young for want of care; and that the strongest 
alone survive; but these causes cannot act on 
the Indians of the Missions, who have the man- 
ners of our peasants, and the Mexicans of Cho- 
lula and Tlascala, who enjoy wealth, that has 
been transmitted to them by ancestors more 
civilized than themselves. If in every state of 
cultivation, the copper coloured race manifests 
the same inflexibility, the same resistance to 
deviation from a primitive type, are we not 
forced to admit, that this property belongs in 
great measure to hereditary organization, to 
that which constitutes the race? I use inten- 
tionally the expression in great measure, not 
entirely to exclude the influence of civilization. 
Besides, with copper coloured men, as with the 
whites, luxury and effeminacy, by weakening 
the physical constitution, had heretofore ren- 
dered deformities more common at Couzco and 
Tenochtitlan. It is. not among the Mexicans 
of the’ present day, who are all labourers, and 
leading the most simple lives, that Montezuma 
would have found the dwarfs and hump-backs, 
that Bernal Diaz saw waiting at his table when 


235 


he dined*. The custom of marrying very 
young, according to ihe testimony of the monks, 

is no way detrimental to population. This 

precocious nubility depends on the race, and 

not on the influence of a climate excessively 

warm, It is found on the north-west coast of 
America, among the Eskimoes, and in Asia, 
among the Kamtschadales, and the Coriaes, 

where girls of ten years old are often mothers. 
It may appear astonishing, that the time of ges- 
tation, the duration of pregnancy, is never al- 
tered in a state of health, with any race, or in 
any climate. 

The Chaymas are almost without beard on the 
chin, like the Tungooses, and other nations of 
the Mongul race. They pluck out the few hairs 
that appear ; but it is not just to say in general, 
that they have no beard merely because they 
pluck out the hairs. Independently of this 
custom, the greater part of the natives would 
be nearly beardlesst. I say the greater part, 


* Bernal Diaz, Hist. verd. de la Nueva Espana, 1630, 
cap. 91, p. 68.” 

+ There would never have been any difference of opinion 
between physiologists upon the existence of the beard among 
the Americans, if they had paid attention to what the first 
historians of the Conquest of their country have said on this 
subject; for example, Pigafetta, in 1519, in his journal pre- 
served in the Ambrosian Library at Milan, and published (in 
1800) by Amoretti, p: 18; Benzoni, Hist. del Mundo Nu- 
ovo, 1572, p. 35-5 Bembo, Hist. Venet., 1557, p. 86. 


_ 236 


for there exist. tribes, which, appearing distinct 
among the others, are so much more worthy 
of fixing our attention. Such are in North 
America the Chippeways*, visited by Mac- 
kenzie, and. the Yabipaees-+, near the Toltec 
ruins at Moqui, with bushy beards; in South 
America, the Patagonians, and the Guaranies. 
Among these last individuals are found, some 
of whom have hairs on the breast. When the 
Chaymas, instead of extracting the little hair 
they have on the chin, attempt to shave them- 
selves frequently, their beard grows. I have 
seen this experiment tried with success by young 
Indians, who served at mass, and who anxiously 
wished to resemble the Capuchin Fathers, their 
missionaries and masters. The greater part of 
the people, however, have as great an antipathy 
to the beard, as the Eastern nations hold it in 
reverence. This antipathy is derived from the 
Same source as the predilection for flat fore- 
heads, which is seen in so singular a manner 
in the statues of the Azteck heroes and diyi- 
nities. Nations attach the idea of beauty to 
every thing, which particularly characterizes 
their own physical conformation, their natural 
physiognomy-. Thence it results, that, if Na- 


* Between latitude 60° and 65° north. 
+ Humb., Nouv. Esp., T. ii, p. 410, 
{ Thus, in their finest statues, the Greeks exaggerated the 


237 


ture have bestowed very little beard, a narrow 
forehead, or a brownish-red skin, every indi- 
vidual thinks himself beautiful, in proportion 
as his body is destitute of hairs, his head flat- 
tened, his skin more covered with annotto, or 
chica, or some other coppery red colour. 

The Chaymas lead a life of the greatest 
uniformity. They go to rest very regularly at 
seven in the evening; and rise long before day- 
light, at. half after four in the morning. Every 
Indian has a fire near his hammock. The wo- 
men are 80 chilly, that I have seen them shiver at 
church when the centigrade thermometer was 
not below 18°. Theinside of the huts of the In- 
dians is extremely clean. Their hammocks, their 
. mat of reeds, their pots to hold cassava and fer- 
mented maize, their bows and arrows, every 
thing is arranged in the greatest order. Men 
and women bathe every day, and being almost 
constantly naked, they are exempted from that 
want of cleanliness, of which the garments are 
the principal cause among the lower people in 
cold countries. Beside a house in the village, 
they have generally in their conucos, near some 
spring, or at the entrance of some solitary val- 
ley, a small hut, covered with the leaves of the 


form of the forehead, by elevating beyond proportion the 
facial line. (Cuv., Anat. Comp.:T. ii, p. 6. Humb., Monum. 
Americ., T. i, p- 158). 


238 


palm or plaintain-tree. Though they live less 
commodiously in the conuco, they love to retire 
thither as often as they can. We have alrea- 
dy spoken of that irresistible desire of fleeing 
from society, and of entering again on a savage 
life. The youngest children sometimes leave 
their parents, and wander four or five days in 
the forests, living on fruits, palm-cabbage, and 
roots. When travelling in the Missions, it is 
not uncommon, to find the villages almost de- 
serted, because the inhabitants are in their gar- 
dens, or in the forests, al monte. Among civi- 
lized nations, the passion for hunting is owing 
perhaps in part to the same sentiments, to the 
charm of solitude, to the innate desire of inde- 
pendence, to the deep impression made by Na- 
ture, whenever man finds himself in contact 
with her alone. 
The condition of the women among the Chay- 
mas, like that in all semibarbarous nations, is 
a state of privation and suffering. The hardest 
labour is their share. When we saw the Chay- 
mas return in the evening from their gardens, 
the man carried nothing but the knife (ma- 
chette), with which he clears his way among 
the underwood. The woman however bent un- 
der a great load of plantains; she held a child 
an her arms; and sometimes two other children 
were placed upon the load. Notwithstanding 
this inequality of condition, the wives of the 


239 


Indians of South-America appear to be in ge- 
neral happier than those of the savages of the 
North. Between the Alleghany mountains and 
the Missisippi, wherever the natives do not live 
in great part on the produce of the chace, the 
women cultivate the maize, beans, and gourds ; 
and the men take no share in the labours of 
the field. Under the torrid zone, the hunting 
nations are extremely scarce, and, in the Mis- 
sions, the men work in the fields like the wo- 
men. 

Nothing can exceed the difficulty, with which 
the Indians learn Spanish. They have an ab- 
solute aversion to it, while, living separate from 
the whites, they have not the ambition to be 
called polished Indians, or, as it is termed in 
the Missions, latinized Indians, Indios muy la- 
tinos. But what struck me most, not only 
among the Chaymas, but in all the very distant 
Missions, which I afterwards visited, is the ex- 
treme difficulty, which the Indians have to ar- 
range and express the most simple ideas in Spa- 
nish, even when they perfectly understand the 
‘meaning of the words, and the turn of the phrases. 
When a white questions them concerning ob- 
jects which surround them from their cradle, 
they seem to discover an imbecility, which ex- 
ceeds that of infancy. The missionaries assert, 
that this embarrassment is not the effect of 
‘timidity; that in the Indians who daily visit 


240 


the missionary’s house, and who regulate the 
public works, it does not arise from natural 
stupidity, but from the obstacles they find in 
the structure of a language so different from 
their native tongues. The more remote man 
is from cultivation, the greater his stiffness and 
moral inflexibility. We must not then be sur- 
prised, to find obstacles among the isolated In- 
dians in the Missions, which are unknown ‘to 
those, who inhabit the same parish with the 
mestizoes, the mulattoes, and the whites, in the 
neighbourhood: of towns. I have often been 
surprised at the volubility, with which, at Ca- 
ripe, the aicalde, the governador, and the sar- 
gento mayor, barangue for whole hours the In- 
dians assembled before the church; ree culating 
the labours of the week, reprimanding the idle, 
threatening the disobedient. Those chiefs, who 
are equally of the Chayma race, and who trans- 
mit the orders of the missionary, speak all at 
the same time, with a loud voice, with marked 
emphasis, but almost. without action. . Their 
features remain motionless; but their look is 
imperious and severe. 

These same men, who displayed quickness 
of intellect, and who were tolerably well ac- 
quainted with the Spanish, could no longer 
connect their ideas; when, accompanying us in 
our excursions around the convent, we put 
questions to them through the intervention of 


| 
| 


241 


the monks. They were made to affirm or de- 
ny, whatever the monks pleased: and indo- 
lence, attended with that wily politeness, to 
which the least cultivated Indian is no stranger, 
induced them sometimes to give to their an- 
swers the turn, that seemed to be suggested by 
eur questions. Travellers cannot be enough on 
their guard against this officious assent, when 
they wish to support their opinions by the tes- 
timony of the natives. To put an Indian Al- 
cade to the proof, I asked him one day, if he 
did not think the little river of Caripe, which 
issues from the cavern of the Guacharo, return- 
ed into it on the opposite side by some un- 
known entrance, after having ascended the 
slope of the mountain. After appearing grave- 
ly to reflect on the subject, he answered, by 
way of supporting my hypothesis: “How else, 
if it were not so, would there always be water 
in the bed of the river at the mouth of the ca- 
vern °” , 

The Chaymas have great. difficulty in com- 
prehending any thing, that belongs to nume- 
rical relations. I never saw a single man, who 
might not have been made to say, that he was 
eighteen or sixty years of age. Mr. Marsden 
has made the same observation on the Malays 
of Sumatra, though they have been civilized 
more than five centuries. The Chayma language 
contains words, which express pretty large num- 

VOL» Il. ", 


242 


bers, but few Indians know how to employ 
them; and having felt from their intercourse 
with the missionaries the necessity of so doing, 
the more intelligent count in Spanish, with an 
air that denotes a great effort of mind, as far 
as thirty, or perhaps fifty. The same persons 
do not count in the Chayma language beyond 
five or six. It is natural, that they should 
employ in preference the words of a language, 
in which they have been taught the series of 
units and tens. Since the learned of Europe 
have not disdained to study the structure of 
the idioms of America, with the same care as 
they study those of the semitic languages, of 
the Greek, and of the Latin, they no longer 
attribute to the imperfection of a language what 
belongs to the rudeness of the nation. It is 
acknowledged, that almost every where the idi- 
oms display greater richness, and more delicate 
gradations, than might be supposed from the 
uncultivated state of the people, by whom they 
ave spoken. I am far from placing the lan- 
guages of the New World in the same rank 
with the finest languages of Asia and Europe; 
but no one of them has a neater, more regular, 
and simpler system of numeration, than the 
Qquichua and the Azteck, which were spoken 
in the great empires of Couzco and Anahuac. 
Now is it right to’ assert, that in those languages 
men do not count beyond four, because in vil- 


243 


jJages where they are preserved among the poor 
labourers of Peruvian and Mexican race, in- 
dividuals are found, who cannot count beyond 
that number? The singular opinion, that so 
many American nations reckon only as far 
as five, ten, or twenty, has been propagated 
by travellers, who were ignorant, that, accord- 
ing to the genius of the different idioms,. men. 
stop, under every climate, at groups of five, ten, 
or twenty units, (that is, at the fingers of one 
hand, or of both hands, or at the fingers and 
toes taken together) ; and that six, thirteen, or 
twenty are differently expressed, by five one, ten 
three, and foot ten*. Can it be asserted, that 
the numbers of the Europeans do not extend 
beyond ten, because we stop after having form- 
ed a group of ten units? 

The construction of the languages of Ame- 
rica is so opposite to that of the languages de« 
rived from the Latin, that the Jesuits, who had 
thoroughly examined every thing that could con- 
tribute to extend their establishments, introduced 
among their neophytes, instead of the Spanish, 


~ gome Indian tongues, very rich, regular, and 


* See my American Monuments, vol, ii, p. 229—237. 
The savages, to express great numbers with more facility, 
are in the habit of forming groups of five, ten, or twenty 
grains of maize, according as they reckon in their language 
by fives, tens, or twenties, ! 

Rg 2 


oat 


244 

extensive, such as the Qquichua and the Gua- 
xani. They endeavoured to substitute these 
Janguages in the stead of poorer idioms, more 
barbarous, and more irregular in their syntax. 
This substitution was very easy: the Indians 
of the different tribes adopted it with docility, 
atid thenceforward those American languages 
generalized became a ready mode of commu- 
nication between the missionaries and the neo- 
phytes. It would be wrong to suppose, that 
the preference given to the language of the In- 
cas over the Spanish had no other aim, than 
that of isolating the Missions, and withdrawing 
them from the influence of two rival powers, 
the bishops and civil governors. The Jesuits 
had yet other motives, independent of. their 
policy, for wishing to generalize certain Indian 
tongues. ‘They found in these languages a com- 
mon tie, easy to establish between the nume- 
rous hordes that had remained separate, hostile 
to each other, and kept asunder by the diver- 
sity of idioms; for in uncultivated countries, 
after the lapse of several ages, dialects often 
assume the form, or at least the appearance, 
of mother tongues. 

When it is said that a Dane learns the Ger- 
man, and a Spaniard the Italian or the Latin, 
more easily than any other language; it. is 
at first thought, that this facility results from 
the identity of a great number of roots, which 


245 


are common to all the Germannic tongues, or 
to those of Latin Europe: it is not considered, 
that, with this resemblance of sounds, there is 
another, which acts more powerfully on nations 
of a common origin. Language is now the 
result of an arbitrary convention... Fhe mé- 
chanism of inilections, the grammatical con- 
structions, the possibility of inversions, every 
thing is derived from our interior, our indivi- 
dual organization. There is in man an in-— 


_ stinctive and regulating principle, differently 


modified among nations not of the same race. 
A climate more. or less severe, a residence in 
the defiles of mountains, or on the borders of 
the sea, or different habits of life, may alter 
the pronunciation, render the identity of the 
roots obscure, and multiply the number: but 
all these causes do not affect what constitutes 
the structure and mechanism of languages. 
The influence of climate, and of external cir- 
cumstances, vanishes before that which depends 
on the race, on the hereditary and indiyidual 
dispositions of men, 

Now, in America, and this result of the more 
modern researches * is extremely important with 
respect. to the history of our species, from the 
country of the Eskimogs to the banks of the 


* Vater, in Mithridates, T. iii, Part 2, p. 385—409, Id, 
Bevelkerung von America, p- 207. : , 


9° 


ao 


46 


Oroonoko, and again from these torrid banks 
to the frozen climate of the Straits of Ma- 
gellan, mother tongues, entirely different with 
regard to their roots, have, if we may use the 
expression, the same physiognomy. Striking 
analogies of grammatical construction are ac- 
knowledged, not only in the more perfect lan- 
guages, as that of the Incas, the Aymara, the 
Guarani, the Mexican, and the Cora, but also 
in languages extremely rude. Idioms, the roots 
of which do not resemble each other more than 
the roots of the Sclavonian and the Biscayan, 
have those resemblances of internal mechanism, 
which are found in the Sanscrit, the Persian, 
the Greek, and the German languages. Al- 
most every where in the New World we recog- 
nize a multiplicity of forms and tenses* in the 


* In the Greenland language, for example, the multiplici- 
ty of the pronouns governed by the verb produces twenty- 
seven forms for every tense of the indicative mood. It is sure 
prising to find, among nations now ranking in the lowest 
degree of civilization, that want of graduating the relations 
of time, that superabundance of modifications introduced 
into the verb, to characterize the object. Matarpa; he takes 
it away: mattarpet, thou takest it away : mattarpatit, he takes 
it away from thee; maitarpagt, I take away from thee, 
And in the preterit of the same verb, mattara, he has taken 
it away: mattaratit, he has taken it away from thee.’ This 
example from the Greenland language shows how the go- 
verned and the personal pronouns form one compound, in the 
American languages, with the radical of the verb, These 


: US UMN LE MEGS A 


247 


verb, an artificial industry to indicate before 
hand, either by inflexion of the personal pro-~ 
nouns, which form the terminations of the verb, 
or by an intercalated suffix, the nature and the 
relation of it’s object and it’s subject, and to- 
distinguish whether the object be animate or 
inanimate, of the masculine or the feminine 
gender, simple or in complex number. It is 
on account of this general analogy of structure, 
it is because American languages, which have 
no word in common (the Mexican, for instance, 
and the Qquichua), resemble each other by’ 
their organization, and form complete contrasts 
with the languages of Latin Europe, that the 
Indians of the Missions familiarize themselves 
more easily with an American idiom, than with 
that of the metropolis. In the forests of the 
Oroonoko I have seen the rudest Indians speak 
two or three tongues. Savages of different na- 
tions often communicate their ideas to each 
other by an idiom, which is not their own. 


slight differences in the form of the verb, according to the 


nature of the pronouns governed by it, is found in the old - 
world only in the Biscayan and Congo languages (Vater, 
Mithrid., vol. iii, P. I, p..218; P. II, p. 386; and P. III, 
p. 442. Guillaume de Humboldt, De La Langue Basque, 
p- 58). Strange conformity in the structure of languages 
on spots so distant, and among three races of men so diffe- 
rent, the white Cantabrians, the black Congocs, and the 
copper-coloured Americans. 


248 


If the system of the Jesuits had been follow- 
ed, languages, which already occupy a vast ex- 
tent of country, would have become almost 
general. In Terra Firma, and on the Oroono- 
ko, the Caribbean and the Tamanack alone 
would now be spoken: and in the south and 
south west the  Qquichua, the Guarani, the 
Omagua, and the Araucan. In appropriating 
to themselves these languages, the gramma- 
tical: forms of which are very regular, and al- 
most as fixed as those of the Greek and San- 
scrit, the missionaries would place themselves" 
in more intimate connexion with the natives 
whom they govern. The numberless difficul- 
ties, which occur in the system of the Mission 
formed by half a score of nations, would dis- 
appear with the confusion of idioms. Those 
which are little diffused would become dead 
languages; but the Indian, in preserving an 
American idiom, would retain his individuality, 
his national physiognomy, Thus by peaceable 
means would be effected, what those Incas, too 
highly vaunted, who gave the first example of 
religious fanaticism in the New World, began 
to establish by force of arms. 

How indeed can we be Surprised at the litile 
progress made by the Chaymas, the Caribbees, 
the Salives, or the Otomacs, in the knowledge of 
the Spanish language, when we recollect, that-one 
white man, one single missionary, finds himself 


ee ee 


es 


; 249 


alone amidst five or six hundred Indians? and 
that it is difficult for him to form among them 
a governador, an alcade, or a fiscal, who may 
serve him as an interpreter? If in‘place of the. 
system of the missionaries some other means of 
civilization were substituted, we might rather 
Say some softening of manners (for the reduced 
Indian has less barbarous manners without ha- 
ving acquired greater knowledge) ; if, instead of 
keeping the whites at a distance, they could be 
mingled with the natives recently united in vil- 
lages, the American idioms would soon be re- 
placed by the languages of Europe, and the na- 
tives would receive in those languages the great. 
mass of new ideas, which are the fruit of ci- 
vilization. Then the introduction of general 
tongues, such as that of the Incas, or the Gua- 
rani, without doubt would become useless. 
But after having lived so long in the Missions 
of South America, after having viewed so close- 
ly the advantages and the abuses of the system 
of the missionaries, [I may be permitted to 


doubt, whether it would be easy to abandon 


this system; which is very capable of being 
rendered more perfect, and affords preparatory 
means for another more conformable to our - 
ideas of civil liberty. It may be objected to 
me, that the Romans* succeeded in rapidly in- ' 


“* T believe we must look into the character of the natives 


and the state of the'r civilization, and not into the structure 


250 


troducing their language with their sovereign- 
ty into the country of the Gauls, into Beetica, 
and into the province of Africa; but the natives 
of these countries were not savages. They 
inhabited towns; they were acquainted with 
the use of money; they were in possession of 
institutions, which indicate a sufficiently ad- 
vanced state of cultivation. The allurement 
of commerce, and a long abode of the Roman 
legions, had promoted an intercourse between 
them and their conquerors. We see, on the 
contrary, that the introduction of the lan- 
guages of the metropolis found obstacles al- 
most innumerable wherever Carthaginian, Greek, 
or Roman colonies were established en coasts 
entirely barbarous. In every age, and in every 
climate, the first impulse of the savage is to 
shun the civilized man. 

The language of the Chayma Indians ap- 


of,their language, for the reason of this rapid introduction 


of Latin among the Gauls. The Celtic nations, with brown 
hair, were certainly different from the race of the German- 
nic nations, with light hair; and though the Druid cast re- 
calls to our minds one of the institutions of the Ganges, this 
does not demonstrate, that the idiom of the Celts belongs, 
like that of the nations of Odin, to a branch of the Indo-pe- 
lasgic languages.’ From analogy of structure and of foots, 
the Latin ought to have penetrated more easily on the other 
side of the Danube, than into Gaul; but an uncultivated 
state, joined to great moral inflexibility, opposed: probably 
it’s introduction among the Germannic nations. 


25} 


peared less agreeable to my ear, than the Ca- 
ribbee, the Salive, and other languages of the 
Oroonoko. It has in particular fewer sonorous 
terminations in accented vowels. We are struck 
with the frequent repetition, of the syllables 
guaz, ez, puec, and pur, We shall soon see, 
that these terminations are derived in part 
from the inflexion of the verb to be; and from 
certain prepositions, which are added at the 
end of words, and which, according to the 
genius of the American idioms, are incorporat- 
ed with them. It would be wrong to attribute 
this rudeness of sounds to the abode of the Chay- 
mas in the mountains. They are strangers to 
that temperate climate. They have been led thi- 
ther by the missionaries ; and it is well known, 
that, like all the inhabitants of the warm regions, 
they dreaded what they called the cold of Ca- 
ripe. Iemployed myself, during our abede, at 
the hospital of the Capuchins, in forming a 
small catalogue of Chayma words. Iam aware, : 
that languages are much more strongly charac- 
terized by their structure and grammatical 
forms, than by the analogy of their sounds and 
of their roots; and that this analogy of sounds 
is sometimes so disfigured in the different dia- 
lects of the same tongue, as not to be distin- 
guishable; for the tribes, into which a nation 
is divided, often designate the same. objects by 
words altogether heterogeneous. Hence it fol- 


252 


lows, that we are easily mistaken, if, neglecting 
the study of the inflexions, and consulting only 
the roots, for instance, the words which desig- 
nate the moon, sky, water, and earth, we de- 
cide on the. absolute difference of two idioms 
from the simple want of resemblance in sounds. 
But, while aware of this source of error, tra- 
vellers ought to’ continue, I think, to eollect 
those materials, which their situation may af- 
ford them. If they do not make known the 
interior structure, and the general arranges 
ment of the edifice, they will point out some 
important parts. Catalogues of words are ‘not 
to be neglected; they teach us even something 
with regard to the essential character of an 
idiom, if the traveller have collected phrases, 
which show the inflexions of the verb, and the 
mode of designating the personal and possessive 
pronouns, so different in different languages. 
The three languages most used in the pro- 
vinces of Cumana and Barcelona are at pre- 
sent the Chayma, the Cumanagote, and the 
Caribbee. They have been constantly regard- 
ed in these countries as different idioms ; each 
of which has it’s dictionary, composed, for the 
use of the Missions, by Fathers Tauste, Ruiz- 
blanco, and Breton. The’ Vocabulario y Arte | 
de la Lengua de los: Indios Chaymas is become 
ext remely scarce. The few copies of the Ame- 
rican grammars, printed for the most part in 


253 


the seventeenth century, have passed into thé 
Missions, and have perished in thé forests: The 
dampness of the air, and the voracity of in- 
sects *, render the preservation of books almost 
impossible in those burning regions. They are 
destroyed in a short space of time, notwith- 
standing the precautions that are employed. I 
had much difficulty to collect in the Missions, 
and in the convents, the grammars of the 
American languages, which I remitted, at my 
return to Europe, into the hands of Mr. Se- 
verin Vater, professor and librarian at the uni- 
versity of Koenigsberg. They furnished him 
with useful materials for the great work, which 
he has composed on the idioms of the New 
World. I had omitted, at the time, to trans- 
cribe from my journal, and communicate to that 
learned gentleman, what I had collected in the 
Chayma tongue. Since neither Father Gili, 
nor the Abbé Hervas, have mentioned this lan- 
guage, I shall here explain succinctly the result 
of my researches ¢. 

On the right bank of the Orconoko, to the 
south-east of the Mission of Encaramada, at. 
more than a hundred leagues distance from 


* The termites, so well known in Spanish America under 
the name of comegen. 

t See note A, at the end of this volume. . 
 t See for more ample details, note B. 

§ In the latitude of 7°, and 7° 257, 


254 


the Chaymas, live the Tamanacks, (Tamanacu) 
whose language is divided into several dialects. 
This nation, formerly very powerful, is now re- 
duced to a small number; is separated from 
the mountains of Caripe by the Oroonoko, and 
the vast steppes of Caraccas and of Cumana; 
and, what is a barrier far more difficult to sur- 
mount, by the nations of Caribbean origin. In 
spite of this distance and these numerous ob- 
stacles, we perceived on examining the lan- 
guage of the Chayma Indians, that it is a branch 
of the Tamanack tongue. The most ancient 
missionaries of Caripe have no knowledge of 
this curious circumstance, because the Capu- 
chins of Arragon seldom visit the southern 
banks of the Oroonoko, and are almost igno- 
rant of the existence of the Tamanacks. I 
recognised the analogy between the idiom of 
this nation, and that of the Chayma. Indians 
long after my return to Europe, in comparing 
the materials which I had collected with the 
sketch of a grammar published in Italy by an 
ancient missionary of the Oroonoko. . Without 
knowing the Chaymas, the Abbé Gili had con- 
jectured, that the language of the inhabitants 
of Paria* must have some relation to the Ta- 
manack. 


* Gil, Saggio di Storia Amer., T. iii, p. 201. Vater has 
also advanced some well founded conjectures on the connex-. 
ion that the Tamanack and Caribbean tongues have with 


D5 


I shall prove this connection by both the 
methods, that serve to make known the ana-’ 
logy of idioms; I mean, by the grammatical 
construction, and the identity of words and 
roots. The following are the personal pro- 
nouns of the Chaymas, which are at the same 
time possessive pronouns; w-re, I, me; eu-re, 
thou, thee; teu-re, he, him. The Tamanack, 
u-re, 1; amare or anja, thou ; iteu-ja, he. The 
radical of the first and of the third person* is 


those that are spoken on the north-east coast of South Ame- 
rica. Mithridates, T. iii, Part II, p. 654 and 676. I should 

warn the reader, that I have constantly written the words of 
the American languages according to the Spanish orthogra- 

phy, so that the w should be pronounced oo, the che like sche 

in German, &c. Having during a great number of years 

spoken no other language than the Castilian, I marked down 

the sounds according to the same system of writing, and now 

I am afraid of changing the value of these signs, by substitu- 

ting others no Jess imperfect. It is a barbarous practice, to 

express, like the greater part of the nations of Europe, the 

most simple and distinct sounds by many vowels, or many 
united consonants (ou, 00, augh, aw, ch, sch, tsch, gh, ph, ts, 
dz), while they might be indicated by letters equally simple, 
What a chaos is exhibited by the vocabularies written ac- 
cording to English, German, French, or Spanish notations ! 
A new essay, which the illustrious author of the travels 
in Egypt, Mr, dé Volney, is going to publish on the analysis 
of sounds found in different nations, and on the notation of 
those sounds according to a uniform system, will lead to 
great progress in the study of languages. 

~* We must not wonder at those roots, which reduce 


256 


in the Chayma wu and teu. The sanie roots are 
found in the Tamanack. 


CHAYMA, TAMANACK. 
Ure, I. Ure. 
Tuna, water. Tuna. 
Conopo, rain*. Canepo. 
Poturu, to know. Puturo. 
Apoto, fire. UVapto (in Caribbean uato), 
Nuna, the moon, a month, Nunat. 
Je, a tree. | Jeje. 


themselves to a single vowel. Ina language of the Ancient 
Continent, the structure of which is so artificially complicat- 
éd, in the Biscayan, the patronymic name Ugarte (between 
the waters) contains the u of ura (water) and arte between. 
The g is added for the sake of euphony. Guillaume de 
Humboldt on the Biscayan language, p. 46. 


* The same word, conopo, signifies rain and year. The 
years are counted by the number of winters, rainy seasons, 
“They say in Chayma, as in Sanscrit, “ so many rains,” mean- 
ing so many years. In the Biscayan, the word urtea, year, 
is derived from urten, (frondescere) to bring forth leaves in 
spring. 

t In the Tamanack and Caribbean languages Nono signi+ 
fies the Earth, Nuna the Moon; as in the Chayma. This 
affinity appears to me very curious; and the Indians of the 
Rio Caura say, that the Moon is another Earth. Among 
savage nations, amidst so many confused ideas, we find cer- 
tain reminiscences well worthy of attention. Among: the 
Greenlanders Nuna. signifies the Earth, and Anoningat the 


Moon, 


259 


CHAYMA. TAMANACK. 


Ata, & house. Aute. 
Euya, to you. Auya. 
Toya, to you. Iteuya. 
Guane, honey. Vane. 
Nacaramayre, he has said it. Nacaramai: 


Piache, (Piatsche) a phys? 


: Psiache (Psiaschi). 
cian, a sorcerer. 


Tibin, one. Obin (in Jaoi, Tewin). 

Aco, two. Oco (in Caribbean, Occo) 
Groa, two. Orua (in Caribbean, Oroa). 
Pun, flesh. Punu. 

Pra, no (negation). Pra. 


The verb substantive to be; is expressed in 
Chayma by az. On adding to the verb the 
personal. pronoun J, (w from u-re) a g is placed, 
for the sake of euphony, before the w, as in 
guaz, I am, properly g-uv-az. As the first per- 
son-is known by an u, the second is designated. 
by an m, the third by an 7; thou art, maz; 
muerepuec araquapemax ? why art thou sad? 
properly that for sad thou be; punpuec topuche- 
maz, thou art fat in body, properly flesh (pun) 
for (puec) fat (topuche) thou be (max). ‘The 
possessive pronouns precede the substantive ; 
upatay, in my house, properly me house in, 
All the prepositions and the negation pra are 
incorporated at the end, as in the Tamanack. 
We say in Chayma, ipuec, with him, properly 
him with ; euya, to thee, or thee to; epuec char- 
VOL. III. $ 


. B8 


pe guaz, I am gay with thee, properly, thee 
with gay I be; ucarepra, not as I, properly, I 
as not; quenpotupra quoguaz, I do not know 
him, properly, kim knowing not [am ; quenepra 
quoguaz, I have not seen him, properly, him see- 
ing not fam. In Tamanack, we say, acuri- 
vane, beautiful, and acurivanepra, ugly, not 
beautiful; outapra, there is no fish, properly, 
Jish not ; uteripipra, I will not go, properly, F 
to. go will not, composed of iteri*, to go, ipiri, 
to choose, and pra, not. Among the Caribbees, 
whose language also bears some relation to the 
Tamanack, though infinitely less than the Chay- 
ma, the negation is expressed by an m placed 
before the verb: amoyenlenganiti, it is very cold ; 
and mamoyenlengati, it is not very cold. In an 
analogous manner, the particle mna added to 
the Tamanack verb, not at the end, but by 
intercalation, gives it a negative sense, as taro, 
fo say, taromnar not to say. 

.‘ The verb substantive (fo be), very irregular 


* In Chayma: uéechire, I will go also, properly I (u) to 
go (the radical ite, or, because of the preceding vowel, te) 
also (chere, or ere, or ire), In utechire we find the Tama- 
nack verb to go, iteri, of which ite is also the radical, and i 
the termination of the infinitive. In order to show that in 
Chayma chere or ere indicates the adverb also, I shall cite 
from the fragment of a vocabulary in my possession u-chere, 
I also; nacaramayre, he said so also; guareazere, I carried 
alsoy charechere, to carry also. Inthe Tamanack, as in the 
Chayma, chareri signifies to carry. 


TOE te ee 


259 
in all languages, is az or ats in Chayma; and 
wochiri in (composition uwac, uatscha) in 'Tama- 
nack. It serves not only to form the passive, 
but it is added also incontestably, as by aggluti- 
nation, to the radical of attributive verbs, in a 
number of tenses *. These agglutinations re- 
mind us of the employment which the Sanscrit 


“makcs of the auxiliary verbs as and bhu (asti 


and bhavati+); the Latin, of es and fu, or fus 
the Biscayan, of izan, ucan, and eguin.. There 
are certain points, in which the idioms the most 
dissimilar, concur.. What is common to thé 
intellectual organization of man is reflected in 
the general structure of language; and every 
idiom, however barbarous it appears, discovers 
a regulating principle, which has presided at it’s 


- formation. 


The plural, in Tamanack, is indicated in se- 
ven different ways, according to the termination 
of the substantive, or according as it designates 
dn animate or inanimate object}. In Chaymia 


* The present in the Tamanack, jarer-bac-w'e, appears to 
me nothing else than the verb substantive bac, or vac (from 
uocschiri, to be) added to the radical to carry, jare (in the 
infinitive yareri), the result of which is carrying fo be I. : 

‘ + In the branch of the Germannic languages we find bhw 
tinder the forms: bin, bist; as,in the forms vas, vast, wvesum 
(Bopp, p. 138). 

t Hence fu-ero; amav-issem ; amao-eram$ pos-sum (pot 
gum). : j 
\ § Tamanacu, a Tamanack ; plur, -Tamanakemi - Pongheme, 


s 2 


- 260 


the plural is formed, as in Caribbee*, in on; 
teure, himself, teurecon, themselves ; tanorocon, 
those here; montaonocon, those below, suppos- 
ing that the interlocutor is speaking of a place 
where he was himself present ; miyonocon, those 
below, supposing he speaks of a place where he 
was not present. The Chaymas have also the 
Castilian adverbs aqui and alld, shades of dif- 
ference which we can express only by peri- 
phrases, in the idioms of German and Latin 
origin. 

Some Indians, who were acquainted with Spa- 
nish, assured us, that zis signified not only 
the Sun, but also the Deity. This appeared to 
me the more extraordinary, as among all other 
American nations we find distinct words for 
God and the Sun. The Carib does not. con- 
found Yamoussicabo, the Ancient of Heaven, 
with the Sun, Veyou. Even the Peruvian, though 
a worshipper of the Sun, raises his mind to the 
idea of a Being, who regulates the movements 
of the stars. The Sun, in the language of the 
Incas, bears the name of Inti-+-, nearly the same 


a Spaniard, properly a man clothed; Pongamo, Spaniards, 
er men clothed. The plural in cne characterizes inanimate 
objects: for example, cene, a thing; cenecne, things : jeje, a 
tree ; jejecne, trees. 

* Mithridates, T. iii, P. II, p. 687. 

+ In the Qquichua, or language of the Incas, ‘the Sun is 
inti ; love, munay ; great, veypul ; in Sanscrit, the Sun, indre; 


261 


as in Sanscrit; while God is called Vinay He- 
ayna, the eternally young *. 

The arrangement of words in the Chayma is 
such as is found in every language of both conti- 
nents, which has preserved a certain air of youth. 
The object is placed before the verb, the verb 
before the personal pronoun. The object, on 
which the attention should be principally fixed, 
precedes all the modifications of that object. 
The American would say ; liberty complete love 
we; instead of, we love complete liberty ; Thee 
with happy am I; instead of, I am happy with 
thee. There is something direct, firm, demon- 
strative, in these turns, the simplicity of which 
is augmented by the absence of the article. 
Ought we to admit, that with an advanced 
civilization these nations, left to themselves, 
would have changed by degrees the arrange- 
ment of their phrases? we are led to adopt this 
idea, when we recollect the changes, which the 
syntax of the Romans. has -undergone in the 
precise, clear, but somewhat timid languages 
of Latin Europe. 

The Chayma, like the Tamanack, and the 


love manya ; great, vipulo; (Vater, Mithridates, T. iii, p. 333), 
These are the only. examples of analogy of sound, that have 
yet been noticed. The grammatical character of the two 
nations is totally different. 

+ Vinay, always, or eternal; Auayna, im the flower of 
ages 


262 


greater part of the American languages, is en: 
tirely destitute of certain letters, as f, b, and d. 
No word begins with an J. The same observa-. 
tion has been made on the Mexican tongue, 
though it is overcharged with the syllables ¢dz, 
tla.'and itl, at the end or in the middle of 
words. The Chaymas substitute r for i, a sub- 
stitution that arises from a defect of pronunci- 
ation common in every zone*. It is thus that 
the Caribbees of the Orooncko have been trans- 
formed into Galibi in French Guiana by cons 
founding r with J, and softening the c. The 
Tamanack has made choraro (solalo) of the 
Spanish word soldado. The disappearance of 
the f and 6 in so many American idioms arises 
from the intimate connection between certain 
sounds, which is manifested in all languages 
of the same origin. The letters S, v, b, and p, 
are substituted one for the other; for instance 
in the Persian, peder, father, pater; burader sg 
frater; behar, ver; in Greek, phorton (for- 
ton), burde; pous, fouss, In the same man- 
ner with the Americans f and b become ps and 
d becomes ¢. The Chayma pronounces patre, 
Tios, Atani, aracapucha, for padre, Dios, Adan, 
and arcabuz (harquebuss). 
In spite of the relations which we have just 


* The substitution of r for J characterizes, 
the Bashmouric dialect of the Coptic language. 
Tt Whence the German bruder, with the same consonants, 


for example, 


a 
=| 


263: 


pointed out, we do not think, that the Chayma 
language can be regarded as a dialect of the 
Tamanack, as the Maitano, Cuchivero, and 
Crataima, are. There exist many essential dif- 
ferences, and the two languages appear to me 
at most connected, like the German, the Swe- 
dish, and the English. They belong to the 
same subdivision of the great family of the 
Tamanack, Caribbean, and Arouack tongues. 
‘Ag there exists no absolute measure of parent- 
age between idioms, the degrees of parentage 
can be indicated only by examples taken from 
known tongues. We consider those as being 
6f the same family, which are connected with 
éach other, as the Greek, the German, the Per- 
sian, and the Sanscrit. ace 

Some have thought they have discovered, 
on comparing languages, that they. are all di- 
vided into two classes *, of which some, more 
perfect in their organization, more easy and 
rapid in their movements, indicate an interior 
developement by inflexion ; while others, more 
rude and less susceptible of improvement, pre- 
sent, only a crude assemblage of small forms or, 
agglutinated particles, each preserving the phy- 
siognomy which is peculiar to itself, when it 
is separately, employed. This very ingenious’ 


# See the learned work of Mr. Frederick Schlegel, Sprache 
und Weisheit der Indier, p- 44—G0. 


264 


view would: be deficient in accuracy, if it were 
supposed, that there exist polysyllabic: idioms 
without any inflexion, or that those, which 
are organically developed as by interior germes, 
admit no external increase by means of suffixes 
and affixes*; an increase which we have al- 
ready mentioned several times under the name 
of agglutination or incorporation. Many things, 
which appear to us at present inflexions of a 
radical, have perhaps been in their origin af- 
fixes, of which there have barely remained one 
or two consonants. In languages, as in every 
thing in nature that is organized, nothing is 
entirely isolated, or unlike. The farther we 
penetrate into their internal structure, the more 
do contrasts and decided characters disappear. 


“ Even in the Sanscrit several tenses are formed by aggre, 
gation ; for example, in the first future, the substantive verb 
to be is added to the radical. Ina similar manner we find in 
the Greek mach-eso, if the s be not the effect of inflection, 
and in Latin pot-ero (Bopp, p. 26 and 66). These are ex- 
amples of incorporations and agglutinations in the gram- 
nfatical system of languages, which are justly cited as mo- 
dels of an interior developement by inflexion. In the gram- 
matical system of the Americans, for example in the Tama- 
nack, tarecschi, 1 will carry, is equally composed of the 
radical ar (infin. jareri, to carry) and of the verb substantive 
ecscht (infin. nocschiri, to be). . There hardly exists in the 
American languages a triple mode of aggregation, of which 
we cannot find a similar and analogous example in some 


other language, that is supposed to develope itself only by 
inflexion, 


id 


265 


“Jt might de said*, that they are like clouds, 


the outlines of which do not appear well defined, 
except when they are viewed at a distance.” 

But if we do not admit one simple and abso- 
lute principle in the classification of languages, 
we shall not the less agree, that in their pre- 
sent state some display a greater tendency to 
inflexion, ‘others to external aggregation: It 
is well known, that the languages of the Indian, 
Pelasgic, and German branch, belong to the 
first division; the American idioms, the Coptic 
or ancient Egyptian, and to a certain degree, 
the Semitic languages and the Biscayan to the 
second. The little we have made known of the 
idiom of the Chaymas of Caripe is sufficient 
without doubt, to prove that constant tendency 
toward the incorporation or aggregation of cer- 
tain forms, which it is easy to separate; though 
from a somewhat refined sentiment of euphony 
some letters have been dropped, and others 
have been added. Those affixes, in lengthening 
words, indicate the most varied relations of 
number, time, and motion. 

- When we reflect on the peculiar structure of 
the American languages, we imagine we dis- 
cover the source of the very ancient and uni- 
versal opinion in the Missions, that these lan- . 


* Guill. de Humb., sur la Monographie des Langues, § 1. 
The same, sur la Langue Basque, p. 43, 46, 50. 


266 


guages have an analogy with the Hebrew, and 
the Biscayan. Every where, at the Convent of 
Caripe as well as at the Oroonoko, in Peru as 
in Mexico, I heard this idea announced; and 
particularly by monks who had some vague 
notions of the Semitic languages. Did mo- 
tives which were thought to be interesting to 
religion cause so extraordinary a theory to be 
established? In the north of America, among 
the Chactaws and the Chickasaws, travellers 
somewhat credulous have heard the Hallelu- 
jah* of the Hebrews sung; as, according to 
the pundits, the three sacred words of the mys- 
teries of the Eleusis-+ (konx om pax) resound still 
in the Indies. I do not suspect, that the na- 
tions of Latin Europe have called whatever 
has a foreign physiognomy Hebrew or Biscay- 
an, as for a long time all those monuments were 
called Egyptian, which were not in the, Grecian 
or Roman style. I rather think, that the gram- 
matical system of the American idioms has 
confirmed the missionaries of the sixteenth cen- 
tury in their. ideas respecting the Asiatic origin 
of the nations of the New World. The tedious 
compilation of Father Garcia, Tratado del Ori- 


* L’Escarbot, Charlevoix, and even Adair (Hist. of the 
American Indians, 1775, p. 15—220). 

+ Asiat. Res., Vol. v, p. 231. Ouvaroff, on the Eleusinian 
Mysteries, 1816, p. 27 and 115, 


267 


gen de los Indios*, is a proof of this. The po- 
sition of the possessive and personal pronouns 
at the end of the noun and the verb, as well 
as the numerous tenses of the latter, characte- 
rize the Hebrew, and the other Semitie lan- 
guages. The minds of some of the mission- 
aries have been struck at finding the same 
gradations in the American tongues. They 
were ignorant, that the analogy of several scat- 
tered ‘features does not prove, that languages 
belong to the same stock. 

It appears less astonishing, that men, who 
dre well acquainted with only two languages 
extremely heterogeneous, the Castilian and’ the 
Biscayan,. should have found in the latter a 
family likeness with the American languages. 
The composition of words, the facility with 
which the partial elements are detected, the 
forms of the verb, and the different modifica- 
tions which it undergoes according to the na- 
ture of the object, may have caused and kept 
up this illusion. But we repeat, an equal ten- 
dency toward aggregation or incorporation does 
not constitute an identity of origin. The follow- 
ing are examples of these relations of physiog- 
nomy between the American and Biscayan 
languages; between idioms which differ en- 
tirely in their roots, 


* Libro ii, Cap. 7, § 8. 


268 


In Chayma; quenpotupra quoguaz, I do not 
know, properly, knowing not Lam. In Tama- 
nack, jarer-uac-ure, bearing am I, I bear ; anare- 
pra aichi, he,will not bear, properly, bearing not 
will be; patcurbe, good; patcutari, to make 
himself good; Tamanacu, a Tamanack; Ta- 
manacutari, to. make himself. a Tamanack ; 
Pongheme, a Spaniard; ponghemtari, to spa- 
niardize himself; tenectschi, I will see ; teneicre, 
I will see again; tecscha, I go; tecshare, I re- 
turn; maypur butke, a little Maypure Indian ; 
aicabutke, a little woman*; maypuritajé, an 
ugly Maypure Indian; aicataje, an ugly wo- 
man. 

In Biscayan: maitetutendot, I love him, pro- 
perly, I loving have him; beguia, the eye, and. 
beguitsa, to see; aitagana, toward the father; 
by adding tu, we form the verb aitaganatu, to 
go toward the father; wme-taswna, soft and 
infantile ingenuity ; wmequeria, disagreeable 
childishness +. 

‘ I will add to these examples some descriptive 
compounds, which call to mind the infancy of 
nations, and strike us equally in the American 


* The diminutive of woman (aica) or of Maypure Indian 
is formed, by adding butke the termination of cujuputke, 
little: ¢aje answers to the accio of the Italians. 

+ The termination tasuna indicates a good quality; queria 
a bad one, and is derived from eria, illness (Guill. de Humb., 
Basques, p. 40). 


269 


and Biscayan languages, by a certain ingenu- 
ousness of expression. In Tamanack, the wasp, 
uaneimu ; father (im-de); of honey (wane): 
the toes, ptari-mucuru, properly, the sons of 
the foot; the fingers, amgna-mucuru, the sons 
of the hand; mushrooms, jeje-panari, properly, 
the ears (panari) of a tree (jeje) ; the veins of . 
the hand, amgna-mitti, properly, the ramified 
roots; leaves, prutpejareri, properly, the hair 
of the top of the tree; puirene-veju, properly 
Sun (veu) straight or perpendicular; light- 
ning *, kinemeru-uaptori, properly, the fire 
(uapto) of the thunder, or of the storm. In 
Biscayan, becoquia, the forehead, what belongs 
(co and quia) to the eye (beguia) ; odotsa, the 
noise (otsa) of the cloud (odeia), or thunder ; 
arribicia, an echo, properly, the animated stone, 
from arria, stone, and bicia, life. 

_ The Chayma and Tamanack verbs have an , 
enormous complication of tenses, two presents, 
four preterits, three futures. This multiplicity 
characterizes the rudest American languages. 
Astarloa reckons, in like manner, in the gram- 
matical system of the Biscayan, two hundred 
and six forms of the verb. Those languages, 
the principal tendency of which is inflexion, 
excite less the curiosity of the vulgar, than those 
which seem formed by aggregation. In the 


* I recognise in kinemeru, thunder or storm, the root hine« 
sne, black. 


270 


first, the elements of which words are composed, 
and which are generally reduced to a few let- 
ters, are no longer distinguished. These ele- 
ments, when isolated, exhibit no meaning; the 
whole is assimilated and mingled together. 
The American languages, on the contrary, are 
like complicated machines, the wheels of which 
are exposed. The artifice is visible ; I mean, 
the industrious mechanism of their construc- 
tion. We seem to be present at their formation, 
and we should state them to be of a very recent 
origin, if we did not recollect, that the human 
mind. follows imperturbably an impulse once 
given; that nations enlarge, improve, and re- 
pair the grammatical edifice of their language, 
according to a plan already determined ; finally, 
that there are countries, the languages, the in- 
stitutions, and the arts of which, have remained 
invariable, we might almost say stereotyped, 
during the lapse of ages. ‘ 
The highest degree of intellectual develope- 
ment has been hitherto found among nations; 
which belong to the Indian and Pelasgic branch. 
The languages formed principally by aggregation 
seem themselves to oppose obstacles to the ini- 
provement of the mind. They are in fact unfur- 
nished with that rapid movement, that interior 
life, to which the inflexion of the root is fa~ 
vourable, and which gives so many charms to 
works of the imagination. Let us not, however, 


271 


forget, that a people celebrated in the remiotes 
antiquity, from whom the Greeks themselves 
borrowed knowledge, had perhaps a language, 
the construction of which recals involuntarily 
that of the languages of America. What a 
scaffolding of little monosyllabic and dissyllabic 
forms is added to the verb, and to the substan- 
tive, in the Coptic language! The Chayma 
and the Tamanack, half barbarous, have toler- 
ably short abstract words to express grandeur, 
envy, and lightness, cheictivate, woite, and uonde ; 
but in Coptic, the word malice *, metrepherpe- 
tou, is composed of five elements, easy to be 
distinguished. It signifies the quality (met) of 
a subject (reph), which makes (er) the thing 
which is (pet), evil (ow). Nevertheless the 
Coptic language has had it’s literature, like the 
Chinese, the roots of which, far from being 
aggregated, scarcely approach each other with- 


‘out immediate contact. We must admit, that. 


nations once awakened from their lethargy, 
and tending toward. civilization, find in the 
most uncouth languages the secret of expressing 
with clearness the conceptions of the mind, and, 
of painting the emotions of the soul. A re- 


‘* See on the incontestible identity of the ancient Egyp- 
tian and Coptic, and on the particular system of synthesis of 
the latter language, the ingenious- reflexions of Mr. Silvestre 
de Sacy, in the “ Notice des Recherches de M. Etienne Quatre- 
mere sur la Littérature de VEgypte, p. 18 and 23. 


272 


spectable man, who has perished in the bloody 
revolutions of Quito, Don Juan de la Rea, 
had imitated with graceful simplicity some idyls 
of Theocritus in the language of the Incas; 
and I have been assured, that, excepting’ irea- 
tises of science and philosophy, there is scarcely 
any work of modern literature, that might not 
be translated into Peruvian. 

The intimate connections, that have’ beer 
formed between the natives and the Spaniards 
since the conquest, have introduced a certain 
number of American words into the Castilian 
language. Some of these words express things 
not unknown before the discovery of the New 
World, and scarcely recal to our minds at pre- 
sent their barbarous* origin. Almost all be- 
long to the language of the greater West In- 
dia Islands, which was formerly designat- 
ed under the name of the language of Haiti, 
of Quizqueja, or of Itis-. I shall confine 
myself to citing the words maiz, tabaco, ca- 
toa, batata, cacique, balsa, conuco, &c. When 
the Spaniards, from the year 1498, began to 
visit the main land, they had already words ¢ 


* For example savana, cannibal. 

t The word Itis for Haiti or St. Domingo (Hispaniola) 
is found in the Itinerarium of Bishop Geraldini (Rome, 1631, 
p. 206). “Quum Colonus Ztm insulam cerneret.” 

t The following are Haytian words, in their’ real form, 
that have passed into the Castilian language from the end of 


273 
to designate the vegetables that are most uses 
fal to man, and that are common both to the 


the 15th century, and a great part of which are not uninter+ 
esting to descriptive botany. Ai (capsicum baccatum), ba- 
tata (convolvulus batatas), bikao (heliconia bihal), cazmito 
(chrysophyllum caimito), cahoba (swietenia mahagoni), jucce 
and casabi (iatropha manihot; the word casabi or cassuve is 
employed only for the bread made with the roots of the ia- 
tropha; the name of the plant, jucca, was also heard by 
Americus Vespucius on the coast of Paria), uge or ajes (dios- 
corea alata), copei (clusia alba), guayucan (guaiacum officinale), 
guajaba (psidium pyxiferum), guanavano (anona muricata), : 
mani (arachis hypogeea), guama (inga), henequen (was suppos- 
ed by the false accounts of the first travellers to be an herb; 
with which the Haytians used to cut metals; it means now 
every kind of strong thread), hicaco (chrysobalanus. icaco); 
maghet (agave Americana), mahiz or maiz (zea), mamet (mam- 
mea Americana), mangle (rhizophora), pitakaja (cactus pitaha- 
ja), ceiba (bombax), funa (cactus tuna), Aicotew (a tortoise), 
gguana (lacerta iguana), manati (trichecus mamati), nigua (pu- 
lex penetrans), hamaca (a hammock), balsa (a raft; however 
bolsa is. an ancient Castilian word signifying a pool of water), 
barbacoa (a small bed of light wood, or reeds), canet or buhio 
(a hut), canoa (a boat), cocuja (elater noctilucus),  chicha, 
ischischa (fermented liquor ), macana (a large stick or club, 
made with the petioles of a palm-tree), tabaco (not the herb, 
but the pipe through which it is smoked), cazique (a chief). 
Other American words, now as much in use among the 
Creoles, as the Arabic words naturalized in the Spanish, do 
not belong to the Haitian tongue ; for example, caiman, pi- 
ragud, papaja (carica), aguacate (persea), tarabita, paramo. 
Abbé Gili thinks with some probability, that,they are de+ 
rived from the tongue of some people, who inhabited the 
temperate climate between Coro, the mountains of Merida, 


- VOL. TI. ge 


274 


islands and to the coasts of Cumana and Paria. 
They were not satisfied with retaining these 
words borrowed from the Haitians, but con- 
tributed also to spread them all over America, 
at a period when the language of Haiti was 
already a dead language, and among nations 
who were ignorant even of the existence of the 
West India Islands. Some words, which are 
daily made use of in the Spanish colonies, are 
attributed erroneously to the Haitians. Banana 
is from the Chaconese, the Mbaja language; 
arepa (bread of manioc, or of the jatropha ma- 
nihot) and guayuco (an apron, perizoma) are 
Caribbee: curiara (a very long boat) is Tama- 


nack: chinchorro (a hammock), and tutuma’ 


(the fruit of the crescentia cujete, or a vessel to 
contain a liquid), are Chayma words. 

I have dwelt a long time on considerations 
respecting the American tongues, because in 
analyzing them for the first time in this work, 
Y wished that the interest of this kind of re- 
search should be deeply felt. This interest is 
dnalogous to that inspired by the monuments 


and the tableland of Bogota (Saggio, Vol. iii, p- 228. See 
alse above, vol. ii, p. 252, of the present work). How ma- 
ny Celtic and German words would not Julius Caesar and 
Tacitus have handed down to us, if the productions of the 
northern countries visited by the Romans had differed as 
much from the Italian and Roman, as those of equinoxial 
America ! 


275 
of semibarbarous nations, which are examined 
not because they deserve a place among the 
works of art, but because their study throws 
some light on the history of our own species, 
and the progressive display of our faculties. 

After the Chaymas, it remains for me to 
speak of the other Indian nations, which inha- 
bit the provinces of Cumana and Barcelona. 
These I shall only succinctly enumerate. 

1. The Pariagotoes or Parias. It is thought, 
that the terminations in goto, as in Pariagoto, 
Purugoto, Avarigoto, Acherigoto, Cumanagoto, 
Arinagoto, Kirikirisgoto*, imply a Caribbean 
origin +. \ All these tribes, excepting the Pu- 
-rugetoes of Rio Caura, formerly occupied the 
country, which has been so long under the do- 
minion of the Caribbees; namely, the coasts of 
Berbice and of Essequibo, the peninsula of 
Paria, the plains of Piritoo and Parima. It is 
by this’ Jast name that. the country little known, 


* The Kirikirisgotoes (or Kirikiripas) are of Dutch Gui- 
ana, Itis very remarkable, that among the small Brazilian 
tribes that do not talk the language of the Tupis, the Kiriris, 
notwithstanding the enormous distance of 650 leagues, have 
several Tamanack words. 

+ In the Tamanack tongue, which is of the same branch 
as the Caribbean; we find also the termination goto, as in 
anekiamgote, an animal. Often an analogy in the termination 
of names, far from showing an identity of race, only indicates; 
that the names of the-uations are borrowed from one languages 


7 2 


276 


between the sources of the Cujuni, the Caroni, 
and the Mao, is designated in the Missions. 
The Paria* Indians are mingled in part with 
the Chaymas of Cumana; others have been 
settled by the Capuchins of Arragon.in the 
Missions of Caroni; for instance, at Cupapuy. 
and Alta-Gracia, where they still speak their 
own language, which appears to be a mean. be- 
tween the Tamanack and the Caribbee. But 
is the name of Parias or Pariagotoes a name 
merely geographical? Did the Spaniards, who 
frequented these. coasts from their first. esta- 
blishment in the Island of Cubagua and in Ma- 
carapana, confer the name of the promontory of 
Paria-+ on the tribe by which it was inhabited? 


* Caulin, p. 9, 88, 136. Vater, Vol. iii, Part 2, p. 465, 
617, 676. Gili, Vol. iii, p. 201, 205. 

+ Paria, Uraparia, even Huriaparia and Payra, are the 
ancient names of the country, written as the first navigators 
thought they heard them pronounced (Ferd. Columbus, in 
Churchill’s Collection, Vol. ii, p. 586, chap. 71. Galvano, 
in Hakluyé’s Suppl., 1812, p. 18. Petrus Martyr, p- 73—75. 
Girolamo Benzoni, p. '7- Geraldini Itinerar., p. 11. Christ. 
Columbi Navigatio, in Gryn. Orb. Nov. p- 80 and 86. Go- 
mara, p. 109, cap. 84.) It appears to me not at all pro- 
bable, that the promontory of Paria should derive it’s nanie 
from that of a Cacique Uriapari, celebrated for the manner 
in which he resisted Diego Ordaz in 1580, thirty two years 
after Columbus had heard the name of Paria from the 
mouths of the natives themselves. (Fray Pedro Simon, pe 
103, Noticia 2, cap. 16. Caulin, p- 134 and 143.) The Oroo- 
noko at it’s mouth had also the name of Uriapari, Yuyapari, 


277 


This we will not positively affirm; for the Ca- 
ribbees themselves give the name of Caribana * 
toa country which they occupied, and which 
extended from the Rio Sinu, to the Gulf of 
Darien. This is a striking example of an iden- 
tity of name between an American nation and 
the territory it possessed. We may conceive, 
that in a state of society, where residence is not 
long fixed, such instances must be very rare. 

2. The Guaraons or Gu-ara-unu, almost ‘all 
free and independent, dispersed in the Delta 
of the Oroonoko, with the variously ramified 
channels of which they alone are well acquaint: 
ed. The Caribbees call the Guaraons U-ara-u. 


or Iyupari (Herrera, Dec., vol. i, p. 80; 84, and 108). In 
all these denominations of a great river, of a shore, and of a 
rainy country, I think 1 recognise the radical par, signifyimg 
water, not only in the languages of these countries, but also 
in these’ of nations very distant from one another on the 
eastern and western coasts of America. The sea, or great 
water, is in the Caribbean, Maypure, and Brazilian lan- 
guages, parana: in the Tamanack, paraca. In Upper 
Guiana the Oroonoko is also -called Parava. In the Peru- 
yian, or Qquichua, I find rain, para; to rain, parani. Be- 
sides, there is a lake in Peru, that has been very anciently 
called Paria (Garcia, Origen de los Ind., p. 292). Ihave 
entered into these minute details concerning the word Paria, 
because very recently some persons have thought they could 
recognise in this word the country. of the Parias, a Hindog 
cast. oy 
* Petrus Martyr, Ocean., p. 125. 


278 


They owe their independence to the nature of 
their country ; for the missionaries, in spite .of 
their zeal, have not been tempted to follow 
them on the tops of the trees. It is well known, 
that the Guaraons, in order to raise their 
abodes above the surface of the waters at the 
period of the great. inundations, support them 
on the cut trunks of the mangrove-tree and of 
the mauritia palm-tree *. They make bread of 
the medullary flour of this palm-tree, which is 
the true sago of America. The flour bears the 
name of yuruma: I have eaten of it at the town 
of St. Thomas in Guiana, and it seemed very: 
agreeable to the taste, resembling rather the 
cassava bread than the sago- of India. The 
Indians assured me, that the trunks of the 
mauritia, the ¢ree of life so much vaunted by 
father Gumilla, do not yield meal in any abun- 
dance, except the palm-tree is cut down just 


* Their manners have always been the same. Cardinal 
Bembo described them at the beginning of the 16th century. 
* quibusdam in locis propter paludes incole domus in arbor- 
ibus zdificant.” (Hist. Venet., 1551, p. 88.) Sir Walter Ra. 
leigh, in 1595, speaks of the Guaraons under the names of 
Araottes, Trivitivas, and Warawites. These were perhaps 
the names of some tribes, that divided the great Guaraonese 
nation, (Barrere, Essai sur ! Hist. Naturelle de la France 
équin., p. 150.) 

+ Mr. Kanth has united together three genera of the 
palms, calamus, sagus, and mauritia, in a new section, the 
calamex, 


279 


before the flowers appear. Thus too the ma- 
guey * , cultivated in New Spain, furnishes a 
saccharine liquor, the wine (pulque) of the 
Mexicans, only at the period when the plant 
pushes out it’s long stem. By interrupting the 
blossoming, nature is obliged to carry elsewhere 
the saccharine or amylaceous matter, which 
would have accumulated in the flowers of the 
maguey and in the fruit of the mauritia. Some 
families of Guaraons, associated with the Chay- 
mas, live far from their native land, in the 
Missions of the plains or Llanos of Cumana: 
as for instance, at Santa-Rosa de Ocopi. Five 
or six hundred of them voluntarily quitted their 
marshes, a few years ago, and formed on the 
northern and southern banks of the Oroonoko, 
at twenty-five leagues distance from Cape Ba- 
ima, two pretty considerable villages, under 
ithe names of Zacupana and Imataca, When I 
made my journey in Caripe, these Indians were 
still without missionaries, and lived in complete 
independence. The excellent qualities of these 
natives as seamen, their great number, their 
perfect knowledge of the mouths of the Oroono- 
ko, and of the labyrinth of branches commu- 
nicating with each other, give the Guaraons a 
certain political importance. They favour that 
clandestine commerce of which the Island of 


# Agave Americana, the aloe of our gardens, 


280 


Trinidad is the centre. They would also -faci- 
litate probably any military expedition, that 
should ascend the Oroonoko to attack Spanish 
Guiana. The governors of Cumana long ago 
sought to call the attention of the ministry to 
this Indian tribe, but always without success. 
The Guaraons run with extreme address on 
muddy lands, where the Whites, the Negro, 
or any other Indian, would not dare to walk ; 
and it is therefore commonly believed, that they 
are of less weight than the rest of the natives, 
This is also the opinion that is held in Asia of 
the Burat Tatars. The few yuaraons; whom EL 
saw, were of middle size, squat, and’ very mus- 
cular. The lightness with which they walk im 
places newly dried, without sinking in, when 
even they have no planks tied to their feet, 
seemed to me the effect of long habit. Though 
I sailed a considerable time on the Oroonoke, 
i never went so low as it’s mouth. Future tra- 
vellers, who visit those marshes, will rectify what 
I have advanced. 

_ 3, The Guaiquerias or Guaikeries. They are 
the mostable and most intrepid fishermen of these 
countries ; and they alone are well acquainted. 
with the bank abounding with fish, that sur. 


rounds the islands of Coche, Margaretta, Sola, , 


and Testigos; a bank of more than four hun: 
dred square leagues, extending east and west 
from Maniquares to the mouths of the Dragon, 


281 


The Guaikeries inhabit the island of Marga- 
retta, the peninsula of Araya, and that suburb 
of Cumana, which bears their name. We have 
already observed*, that they believe their lan- 
guage to be a dialect of that of the Guaraou- 
noes. This would connect them with the great 
family of the Caribbee nations; for the mis- 
sionary Gili thinks, that the idiom of the 
Guaikeries is one of the numerous branches 
of the Caribbean tongue. These affinities are 
interesting, because they lead us to perceive 
an ancient connection between nations dis- 
persed over a vast extent of country, from the 
mouth of the Rio Caurat and the sources of 


* Vol. ii, ch. IV, p. 198. (See also Hervas, Cat.,. p- 
49). If the name of the Port Pam-patar, in the Island of 
Margaretta, be Guaiquerie, as we have no reason to doubt ; 
it exhibits a feature of analogy with the Cumanagoto tongue, 
which approaches the Caribbean and Tamanack. In Terra 
Firma, in the Piritoo Missions, we find the village of Caygua- 
patar, which signifies house of Caygua. 

+ Vol. ii, chap. IV, p.198. Vater, Tom. iti, P. TH, 
p- 676. 

- t Are the Guaikeries, or O-aikerics, now settled. on the 
borders of the Erevato, and formerly between. the Rio Cau- 
ya andthe Cuchivero, near the little town of Alta Gracia, 
ofa different origin from the Guaikeries of Cumana? I 
know also in the interior of the country, in the Missions of 
the Piritoos, near the village of San Juan Evangelista del 
Guarive, a ravine very anciently called Guayquiricuar, These 
indications seem to prove migrations from the south-west 
toward the coast. The termination cuar, found so often in’ 


982 


the Erevato, in Parima, to French Guiana and 
the coasts of Paria. 

4. The Quaquas, whom the Tamanacks call 
Mapoje, a tribe formerly very warlike and al- 
lied to the Caribbees. It is a curious pheno- 
menon to find these mingled with the Chay- 
mas in the Missions of Cumana, for their idiom, i 
as well as the Aiura of the cataracts of the . | 
Oroonoko, is a dialect of the Salive tongue ; 
and their original abode was on the banks of 
the Assiveru, which the Spaniards call: Cu- | 
chivero. They have:pushed their migrations one 
hundred leagues to the north-east. I have often | 
heard them mentioned on the Oroonoko, above 
the mouth of the Meta; and, what is. very re- 
markable, it is asserted*, that missionary Je- 
suits have found Quaquas as far distant as the | 
Cordilleras of Popayan. Raleigh enumerates, j 
among the natives of the Island of Trinidad, 
the Salives, a tribe of the mildest manners, 
from the Oroonoko, which dwells south of the 


,Cumanagote and Caribbean names, means a ravine, as itt 
Guaymacuar (Ravine of Lizards) Pirichucuar (a ravine over- 
shaded by pirichoo or piritoo palm-trees), Chiguatacuar, (a 
ravine of land shells). Raleigh describes the Guaikeries 
under the name of Ouikeries. He calls the Chaymas Sai- 
mas, changing (according to the Caribbean pronunciation) 
the che into s. 

* Vater, Tom. iii, P. IL, p. 864. The name of Quague , 
is found on the coast of Guinea. The Europeans give it 
to a horde of Negroes to the east of Cape Lahon, 


283 


Quaquas.- Perhaps these two tribes, which 
speak almost the same language, travelled to- 
gether toward the coasts. 

5. The Cumanagotoes, or, according to the 
pronunciation of the Indians, Cumanacoto, at 
present to the west of Cumana, in the Missions 
of Piritoo, where they live by cultivating the 
ground to the number of more than twenty- 
six thousand. Their language, like that of the 
Palenkas, or Palenques, and Guarivas, is be- 
tween the Tamanack and the Caribbee, but, 
nearer to the former. These are indeed idioms 
of the same family; but, if we were to consi- 
der them as simple dialects, the Latin must 
be also called a dialect of the Greek, and the 
Swedish a dialect of the German. When the 
question arises of the affinity of languages with 
each other, it ought not to be forgotten, that 
these affinities may be very differently gradu- 
ated; and that it. would be to confound every 
thing, not to distinguish between simple dia- 
lects, and languages of the same family. The 
Cumanagotoes, the Tamanacks, the Chaymas, 
the Guaraons, and the Caribbees, do not un- 
derstand each other, in spite of the frequent 
analogy of words and of grammatical structure 
exhibited in their idioms. The Cumanago- 
toes inhabited, at the beginning of the sixteenth 
century, the mountains of the Brigantine and 
of Parabolata. Father Ruiz Blanco, at first 


284 


professor at Seville, and then missionary in the 
province of New Barcelona, published, in 1683, 
a grammar of the Cumanagoto, and some theo- 
logical works in the same language. I have 
not been able to learn, whether the Piritoos, 
Cocheymas, Chacopatas, Tomuzas, and Topo- 
cuares, now confounded in the same villages 


with the Cumanagotoes, and speaking their , 


language, were originally tribes of the same 
nation. The Piritoos, as we have elsewhere 
observed, have taken their name from the ra- 
vine Pirichucuar, where the small thorny palm- 
tree*, called piritoo, grows in abundance; the 
wood of which, excessively hard, and therefore 
little combustible, serves to make pipes. On 
this spot the village of the Conception of Piri- 
too was founded in 1556, the chief place of the 
Cumanagoto Missions, known by the name of 
the Missiones de Piritu. 

6. The Caribbees (Carives.). This is the name 
which was given them by the first navigators, 
and which is retained throughout all Spanish 
America. The French and the Germans. have 
transformed it, I know not why, into Caraibes.- 
They call themselves Carina, Calina, and Cal- 
linago. I traversed some Caribbean Missions 


* Caudice gracili aculeato, foliis pinnatis.. Perhaps of 
the genus aiphanes of Willdenouw. (See my Proleg. de 
Distrib. geogr. Plant., 1817, p. 228.) ; 


4 
@ 
: 


285 


in the Llanos*, in returning from my journey 
to the Oroonoko; and I shall confine myself 
here to repeating, that the Galibes (Caribi of 
Cayenne), the Tuapocas, and the Cunaguaras, 
who inhabited originally the plains between the 
mountains of Caripe (Caribe) and the village of 
Maturin, the Jaoi of the Island of Trinidad 
and of the province of Cumana, and perhaps 
also the Guarivas, allies of the Palenkas, are 
iribes of the great and fine Caribbee nation. 
With respect to the other nations, whose 
affinities of language with the Tamanack and 
the Caribbee we have mentioned, we do not 
think it indispensable, to consider them as of 
the same race. In Asia, the nations of Mongul 
origin differ totally in their physical organiza- 
tion from those of Tatar origin. Such has been, 
however, the mixture of these nations, that, 
according to the acute researches of Mr. de 
Klaproth, the Tatar languages (branches of the 
ancient Oigour) are spoken at present by hordes 
incontestably of the Mongul race. Neither the 
analogy nor the diversity of language can suf- 
' fice, to solve the great problem of the filiation 


* JT shall in future use the word Llanos (loca plana, sup-~ 
pressing the p), without adding the equivalent words pam- 
pas, savannas, ‘meadows, steppes, or plains. The: country be- 
tween the mountains of the coast, and the left bank of the 


Oroonoko,-constitutes the Llanos of Cumana, Barcelona, and 
Caraccas, att 


286 


of nations ; they afford only simple probabilities. 
The Caribbees, properly speaking, those who 
inhabit the Missions of the Cari, in the Llanos 
of Cumana, the banks of the Caura, and the 
plains to the north-east of the sources of the 
Oroonoko, are distinguished by their almost 
gigantic size from all the other nations I have 
seen in the new continent. Must it on this ac- 
count be admitted, that the Caribbees are an 
entirely distinct race? and that the Guaraons 
and the Tamanacks, whose languages have an 
affinity with the Caribbee, have no bond of rela- 
tionship with them? I think not. Among the 
nations of the same family, one branch may ac- 
quire an extraordinary developement of it’s 
organization. The mountaineers of the Tyrol 
and the Salzburgh are taller than the other 
Germannic races; the Samoyedes of the Altai 
are not so little and squat as those of the sea- 
coast. In the same manner it would be diff. 
cult to deny, that the Galibis are real Carib- 
bees; and yet, notwithstanding the identity of 
languages, what a striking difference in their 
stature and physical constitution ! 

While indicating the elements of which the 
indigenous population of the provinces of Cu- 
mana and Barcelona is at present composed, I 
would not mingle historical memorials with the 
simple enumeration of facts. Before Cortez 
burnt his ships at his landing on the coast of 


287 


Mexico, before he entered the capital of Monte- 
zuma in 1521, the attention of Europe was 
fixed on the regions, which we have just tra- 
versed. In painting the manners of the inha- 
bitants of Paria and Cumana, it was thought 
that the manners of all the inhabitants of the 
new continent were described. This remark 


_ cannot escape those, who read the historians of 


the Conquest, especially the letters of Peter 
Martyr of Anghiera, written at the court of 
Ferdinand the Catholic, filled with ingenious 
observations upon Christopher Columbus, Leo 
X, and Luther, and inspired by a noble enthu- 
siasm for the great discoveries of an age so rich 
in extraordinary events. Without entering into 
any detail on the manners of the nations, which 
have been so long confounded under the vague 
denomination of Cumanidns (Cumaneses), it 
appears to me important to clear up a fact, 
which I have often heard discussed in Spanish 
America. 

The Pariagotoes at present are of a brown 
red, as are the Caribbees, the Chaymas, and 
almost all the nations of the New World. Why 
do the historians of the 16th century affirm, that 
the first navigators saw white men with fair 
hair, at the promontory of Paria? Were they 
of the same race as those Indians, with a skin 
less tawny, whom Mr. Bonpland and myself 
saw at Esmeralda, near the sources. of the 


q 
3 
: 


288 


Oroonoko? But these Indians had hair ag 
black as the Otomacks and other tribes, whose 
complexion is the deepest... Were they Albinoes, 
such as have been found heretofore in the isth- 
mus of Panama? But examples of this dege- . 
neration are very rare in the coppercoloured 
race; and Anghieri, as well as Gomara, speaks 
of the inhabitants of Paria in general, and not | 
of a few individuals. Both describe * them as | 
if they were people of Germannic origin; they | 
call them Whites with light hair; they even | 
add, that they wore garments like those of the 
Turks. Gomara and Anghiera wrote from 


* AAthiopes nigri, crispi lanati, Pariz incolee albz, capillis ob « 
longis_ protensis flavis. Petrus Martyr, Ocean., Dec..1, Lib. 


vi, (ed. 1574), p. 71. Utriusque sexus indigenze albi veluti nos- 


trates, preter eos qui sub sole versantur. Ibid, p. 75. Gomara, 
speaking of the natives that Columbus saw at the mouth of | 
the river of Cumana, says: “Las donzellas eran amorosas, 
desnudas y blancas (las de la casa); los Indios que van al 
campo estan negros del sol.” Hist. de lus Indios, cap. 74, 
p. 97. Los Indios de Paria son blancos y rubios. Garcia, 
Origen de los Indios, 1729, Lib. iv, cap. 9, p. 270. 

t They wear round their. head a striped cotton handker: j 
‘chief. Ferd. Columb., cap. '71 (Churchill, vol. ii, p. 586). 
Was this kind of head-dress taken for a turban? (Garcia, ! 
del Origen de los Ind., p- 303). I am surprised, that -a ' 
people of those regions should wear a head-dress; but, what } 
is much more curious still, Pinzon; in a voyage that he 
made alone to the coast of Paria, the particulars of 
which have been transmitted’ to us by Peter’ Martyr op } 
Anghiera, professes to have seen natives who were clothed. | 


289 
the oral relations, which they had been able to 


eollect. 

These marvels disappear, if we examine the 
recital, which Ferdinand Columbus * drew from 
his father’s papers. There we find simply, that 
«the admiral was surprised to see the inhabitants 
of Paria, and those of the Island of Trinidad, 
better made, more civilized, (de buena conver- 
sacion,) and whiter, than the natives which he 
had till then seen.” This certainly did not 
mean, that the Pariagotoes are white. The less 
dark colour of the skin of the natives, and the 
great coolness of the mornings on the coast of 
Paria, seemed to confirm the fantastic hypothe- 


« Tncolas omnes genu tenus mares, foeminas surarum tenus, 
gossampinis yestibus amictos simplicibus repererunt; sed 
viros more Turcarum insuto minutim gossipio ad belli usum 
duplicibus.” (Pet. Martyr, Dee. ii, Lib. vii, p. 183.) Who 
were thesé people more civilized, clothed with tunics as on 
ghe summit of the Andes, and observed on a coast, where 
before and since the time of Pinzon only naked men have 


ever been seen? 

* Charchill’s Collection, vol. ii, p. 584 and 586. Herrera, 
p. 80, 83, 84. Munoz, Hist. del Nuevo Mundo, vol. i, p. 289. 
«El color era bazo como es regular en los Indios, pero 
‘mas claro que en las islas reconocidas.” ‘The missionaries 
aye accustomed to call those Indians, that are less black, less 
tawny, whitish, and even almost white. (Gumilla, Hist. de 
LOrenoque, vol i, chap. v, §. 2). These improper expres- 
gions may mislead those, who are not accustomed to the ex- 


aggerations, in which travellers often indulge themselves. 


wOL. Il. U 


290 


sis, which this great man had fiaimed, of the 
irregularity of the curvature of the earth, and 
‘of the height of the plains in this region, as the 
effect of an extraordinary swelling of the globe 
in the direction of the parallels of latitude *. 
Amerigo Vespucci (if we may be allowed to cite 
his pretended first Voyage, composed perhaps 
from the recital of other navigators,) compares 
the natives to the Tatar nations +, not for their 
colour, but for the broadness of their face, and 
‘the general expression of their physiognomy. 

_ But if it be certain, that at the end of the 13th 
century there were on thé coast of Cumana a 
few men with a white skin, as there are in our 
days, it must not thence be concluded, that 
the natives of the New World display every 
where a similar organization of the dermoidal 
system. It is not less inaccurate to say, that 
they are all coppercoloured, than to affirm, 
that they would not have a tawny hue, if they 
were not exposed to the heat of the sun, or 
tanned by the action of the air. The natives 
may be divided into two very unequal portions 
with respect to numbers; to the first belong 
the Eskimoes of Greenland, of Labrador, and 
the northern coast. of Hudson’s Bay, the inha- 


*, See note C at the end of this chapter. 

t Vultu non multum speciosi sunt, guoniam latas facies 
Tartariis adsimilatas habent. (Americi Vesputii Navigatio 
prima, ia Gryn’s Orb. Nov., 1555, p- 212) 


“291 


bitants of Béhring’s Straits, of the peninsula of 
Alaska, and-of Prince William’s Sound: The 
eastern and western branch* of this polar 
race, the. Eskimoes and the Tschougazes, not- 
withstanding the enormous distance of eight 
_hundred leagues which, separates them, are 
united. by the most! intimate analogy of jan- 
guages. This analogy extends, as has been 
recently proved, in the most evident, manner, 
even to the inhabitants of the north-east. of 
Asia; for the idiom of the Tschouktsches- at 
the mouth of the Anadir has the same roots, 
as the language of the Eskimoes who inhabit 
the coast of America opposite to Europe. The 
Tschouktsches are the Eskimoes of Asia. Like 
the Malays, this hyperborean race reside only 
on the seacoasts. They live on fish, and are 
almost all, of a less stature than the other 
Americans, quick, lively, and talkative. Their 
hair is flat, straight, and black; but their skin 
(and. this, is very characteristic of that race, 
which I shall designate under the name of 
Tschougaz-Eskimoes,). is originally whitish. It 


_ * Vater, in Mithridates, vol. iti, P. iii, p. 425—468, Ege- 
de, Crantz, Hearne, Mackenzie, Portlock, Chwostoff, Da- 
vidoff, Resanoff, Merk, and Billings, have described the 
great family of these Tschougaz-Eskimoes. 

Rie: only mean here the Tschouktsches who have fixed 
dwelling places, for the wandering-T'schouktsches approach 


very near the Coriacs. 


rp 


292 


is certain that the children of the Greenlanders 
are born white; some retain this whiteness ; 
and often in the bsownest (the most tanned) the 
redness of the blood is seen to appear on their 
cheeks *. 

The second portion of the natives of America 
includes all those nations that are now Tschou- 
gaz-Eskimoes, beginning from Cook’s River to 
the Straits of Magellan, from the Ugaljach- 
mouzes and the Kinaése of Mount St. Elias to 
the Puelches and Tehuelhets of the southern he- 
misphere. The men, who belong to this second 
branch, are taller, stronger, more warlike, and 
more taciturn. They present also very remark- 
able differences in the colour of their skin. In 
Mexico, Peru, New-Grenada, Quito, on the 
banks of the Oroonoko and the river of Ama- 
zons, in every part of South America, that 
I have examined, in the plains as well as on 
the coldest table-lands, the Indian children of 
two or three months old have the same bronze 
tint as is observed in adults. The idea that the 
natives may be whites tanned by the air and the 
Sun, never presented itself to a Spanish inha- 
bitant of Quito, or of the banks of the Oroonoko, 
In the north-east of America, on the contrary, 


* Crantz, Hist. of Greenland, 1667, T. i, p- 182. Green- 
land does not seem to have been inhabited in the 11th cen- 


tury; atleast the Eskimoes appeared only in the 14th, com- 
ing from the west. (Ib. p- 258.) 


293 


we meet with tribes among whom the children 

are white, and at the age of virility acquire the 

bronze colour of the natives of Mexico and 
| Peru. Michikinakoua, the chief of the Miamis, 
had the arms, and the parts of the body not ex- 
| posed to the sun, almost white. This difference 
of hue between the parts covered and not co- 
vered is never observed among the natives of 
Peru and Mexico, even in families that live 
much at their ease, and remain almost con- 
stantly within doors. To the west of the Mi- 
amis, on the coast opposite to Asia, among the 
Kolouches and Tchinkitans* of Norfolk Sound, 
the grown-up girls, when they are forced to 
wash their skin, display the white hue of the Eu- 
ropeans. This whiteness is found also, accord- 
ing to some accounts, -+ among the mountain- 
eers of Chili. | 3 
These facts are very remarkable, and con- 
wary to the opinion so generally spread of 
the extreme conformity of organization among 


* Between 54° and 58° of latitude. These white na- 
tions have been visited successively by Portlock, Marchand, 
Baranoff, and Davidoff. The Tchinkitans, or Schinkit, are 
the inhabitants of the Island of Sitka. Vater, Mithrid., vol. 
iii, P..2, p. 218. Marchand, Vuy., V. ii, p. 167—170, 

E .° + Molina, Saggio sulla Storia Nat. del Chili, edit. 2, p. 
| _ 993. Must we believe the existence of those blue eyes of 
¢ the Boroas of Chili and Guayanas of Uruguay, represented 
to us as nations of the race of Odin? Azara, Voy. tom, il, 
i 


294 


the natives of America. If we divide them 
into Eskimoes and non Eskimoes, we readily 
admit, that this classification is not more phi- 
losophical than that of the ancients, who saw 
in the whole habitable world only Celts and 
Scythians, Greeks and Barbarians. When the 
question however is to group nations without 
ittumber,’ we gain something by proceeding in 
the mode of exclusion. All we’have sought to 
establish here is, that, in separating the whole 
race of Tschougaz-Eskimoes, there remain still, 
among the coppery-brown Americans, other 
races, the children of which are born ‘white, 
without our being able to prove, by going back 
as far as the history of the Conquest, that they 
‘have been mingled with European blood. This 
fact deserves to be cleared up by ‘travellers, 
who, endowed with the knowledge of physio- 
logy, shall have opportunities of examining 
the brown children of the Mexicans at the age 
of two years, the white children of the Mia- 
mis, and those hordes* on the Oroonoko, who, 
diving in the most sultry regions, retain during 
their whole life, and in the fullness of their 
strength, the whitish skin of the Mestizoes. 
The little communication that. has hitherto 
existed between North America and the Spa- 


a 
ew 


* These whitish tribes are the Guaycas, the Ojos, aud 
the Maquiritare s, 


295. 


nish Colonies. has hindered the progress of ali 
researches of this kind. i 

In man, the deviations from the common type 
of the whole race turn rather on the stature *, 
the. physiognomy, or the form of the body, 
than on the colour. It is not so with, animals, 
where varieties are found more in ‘the colour, 


than in the form. The hair of the mammiferous 


kind, the feathers of birds, and even the scales 
of fish, change their hue, according to the 
lengthened influence of light and. darkness, 
according to the intensity of the heat and cold. 
In. man, the colouring matter seems to be de- 
posited, in. the dermoidal system by the. roots 
or the bulbs of the hair-; and all sound obser- 
yations prove, that the skin varies in colour 
from the action, of external stimuli on indivi- 
duals, and not. hereditarily in the whole. race. 
The Eskimoes of Greenland and the Lapland- 
ers are tanned by. the, influence of the air; but 
their children are born white. We will not 
decide on the changes, which nature may pro- 
duce in a space of time exceeding all historical 
traditions. Reason stops short in these matters, 


* The circumpolar nations of the two continents are small 
and squat, though of races entirely different. 

+ According to the interesting researches of Mr. Gaultier, 
on the organization of the human skin, p. 57, John Hunter 
observes, that in several animals the coloration of the hair is 
independent of that of the skin. 


296 


when no longer under the guidance of expe~ 
rience and analogy. 

The nations that have a white skin begin 
their cosmogony by white men; according to 
them, the Negroes and all tawny people have 
been blackened or embrowned by the excessive 
heat of the Sun. This theory, adopted. by the 
Greeks*, though not without contradiction+, 
has been propagated even to our own times. 
Buffon has repeated in prose, what 'Theodectes 
had expressed in verse two thousand years 
before: “that the nations wear the livery of 
the climate they inhabit.” “If history had been 
written by black nations, they would have 
maintained what even Europeans have recently 
advanced}, that man was originally black, or 
of a very tawny colour; and that he has whi- 
tened in some races, from the effect of civiliza~ 


¥ Strabo, liv. xy. (Oxford edition by Falconer, +. Vi, p. 
990.) 

t Onesicritus, apud Strabon., Lib. xv (loc. cit., p. 983). 
Alexander’s expedition appears to have contributed greatly 
fo fix the attention of the Greeks on the great question of 
the influence of climates. They had learned from the ac« 
count of travellers, that in Hindostan the nations of the 
south were of a darker colour than those of the north near 
the monntains; and they supposed, that they were both of 
the same race, 

T See the work of Mr. Prichard, abounding with curious 


research. <“ Researches into the physical History of Man, 
3813,” p. 233-239, 


297 


tion and progressive debilitation, as animals, 
in a state of domestication, pass from dark 
to lighter colours. In plants and in animals, 
accidental varieties, formed under our own eyes, 
are become constant, and have been propa- 
gated* without alteration: but nothing proves, 
that in the present state of the human orga- 
nization, the different races of black, yellow, 
copper-coloured, and white men, when they 
remain unmixed, deviate considerably from 
their primitive type by the influence of climates, 
] of food, and other external agents. 

| I shall have occasion to return to these general 
|. considerations, when we shall ascend the vast 
table-lands of the Cordilleras, which are four 
or five times more elevated than the valley 
1 of Caripe. I shall here only cite the authority 
of Ulloa}. This learned man has seen the 


* For example, the sheep with very short legs, called 
| ‘ancon sheep in Connecticut, and examined by Sir Everard 
Home. This variety dates only from the year 1791. 

+ “The Indians (Americans) are of a copper colour, 
which by the action of the sun and the air grows darker. I 
must remark, that neither heat nor cold produces any sene 
sible change in the colour, so that the Indians of the Cor- 
dilleras of Peru are easily confounded with those of the hot- 
test plains; and those who live under the line cannot be 
distinguished, by the colour, from those who inhabit the for- 
tieth degree of north and south latitude.” Noticias Americ., 
cap. 17, p.- 307. No ancient author has so clearly stated 
the two forms of reasoning, by which we still explain in our 


* 298. 


Indians of Chili, of the Andes of Peru, of the 
burning coasts of Panama, and those of Louisi- 
ana, situate under the northern temperate zone. 
He had. the good fortune to live at a period, 
when theories were less numerous; and, like 
me, he was struck at seeing the native, under 
the line, as much bronzed, as brown, in: the 
cold climate of the Cordilleras, as in the plains. 
Where. differences of colour are observed, they 
depend on the race. We shall soon find on 
the burning banks of the Oroonoko Indians 
with a whitish skin; Est durans originis vis, 


days the differences of colour and figure among neighbouring 
nations, as Tacitus, in the Life of Agricola. He makes a 
just distinction between the influence of climate, and heredi- 
tary dispositions; and, like a philosopher persuaded of our 
profound ignorance of the origin of things, leaves the ques- 
tion undecided. Habitus corporum ‘oartt atque ex eo argumenta. 
Seu durante originis vi, sew procurrentibus in diversa terris, positia 
cali corporibus habitum dedit. Agricola, Cap. MH, 


NOTES TO THE THIRD BOOK. 


NOTE A. 


I will give here a list of the grammars of American lan- 
guages, that I brought to Europe, and which have recently 
excited the interest of the learned by the investigations of 
Messrs. Hervas, Gili, Barton, Vater, and ‘Schlegel. 

Bernardo de Lugo, gramatica de la lengua del Nuevo 
Reyno de Granada o de la lengua de los Muyzcas 0 Mozcas. 
Madrid, 1619. 

Diego Gonzalez Holguin, Vocabulario de la lengua gene- 
ral de todo el Peru, llamada lengua: Qquichua o del Inca, 
conforme a la propriedad cortesanaidel Cuzco, Ciudad de 
los Reyes, 1608. 

Gramatica de la lengua del Inca. Jama, 1753. 

Al, de. Molina, Vocabulario de la lengua Mexicana. Mex- 
ico, 1571. : 

Augustin de Vetancurt, Arte de la lengua Mexicana, 
Mexico, 1673. 

Ant, Vasquez Gastelu y Raym. de Figueroa, arte de 
lengua Mexicana. Puebla de los Angeles, 1693. 

L. de Neve y Molina, Reglas de ortografia, Diccionario 
y arte del idioma Othomi. Mexico, 1767. 

Carlos de Tapia Zenteno, Noticia de la lengua Huasteca, 
con doctrina christiana, Mexico, 1767. 

Fr. Antonio de los Reyes, Gramatica de la lengua Mix- 
teca. Mexico, 1598. 

Jose Zambrano Bonilla, cura de San Andres de Hucitla- 
pan, arte de Ja lengua Totonaca, con una doctrina de la len- 


SSS SSeS 


Seas 


RE 


300 


gua de Naolingo, con algunas voces de Ja lengua de aquelia 
sierra y de esta por aca, por Franc. Dominguez, cura de 
Xalpan. Puebla de los Angeles, 1752. 

Jose de Ortega, Vocabulario della lengua Castellana y Co- 
ya. Mexico, 1732. 

Fern. Ximenez, Gramatica de la lengua Caribe. (Manus- 
cript.) 

My brother, Mr. William de Humboldt, who has pro- 
foundly studied the American languages, has enriched this 
collection with the following works. 

C. de Tapia Zenteno, arte novissima de lengua Mexicana. 
Mexico, 1753. 

Raymond Breton, Dict. Caraibe-Frangois. Auxerre, 1665. 

Dictionnaire Galibi, par M. D. L. S. Paris, 1763. 

Luiz Figueira, Gramatica de la lengua del Bresil. Lis- 
boa, 1795. 

Lexic. Bras. Lisb. 1795. 

He has also in his possession fourteen manuscripts, copied 
from those of the Abbé Hervas, and of the Propaganda at 
Rome: 1. MSS. on the Azteck or Mexican language. 2; 
MSS. on the language of the Otomites. 3. MSS. on the 
Maya or Yucatan language. 4. MSS. on the language of 
the Oroonoko in general. 5. MSS. on the languages of the 
Yaruroes. 6. MSS. on the Betoy language. 7% MSS. on 
the Omagua language. 8. MSS. on the Qquichua language 
by Father Camano. 9. MSS, on the Guarani tongue. 10. 
MSS. on the Guaicuru or Mbaya language. 11. MSS. on 
the Mocobi language. 12. MSS. on the Lule language, 
13. MSS. on the language of the Abiponians. 14. MSS. 
on the language of the Araucans of Chili. This list contains 
more than thirty American languages, that have been reduced 
into grammars for the use of the missionary monks. It 
appeared to me so much the more useful to give it here, as 
the richest libraries of Europe, for instance that of the King 
at Paris, do not contain three’ grammars of Spanish Ames 


rican languages. 


NO 


301 


TE B. 


Language of the Chaymas in the Missions of Caripe. 


U-re, 1, myself. 

Eure, you. 

Teure, he, him. 

Teurecon, themselves. 

Uchere, me also. 

Euya, to you. 

Toya, perhaps, tewya, to him. 

Taquer, with him. 

Uca or uguarey, like me. 

Ucarepra, not like me. 

Muene, muenere, that. 

Temerene, all that. 

Tibinpupra, one only. 

Achacono, both. 

Achoroaono, all three. 

Ucheepchic, ucheucurca, my- 
self, tz insisting, myself 
without doubt. 

Taquer, with him. 

Upuyao or upunyao, for me, 

Guaz, T am, (az, to be; g-u 

me, thus, me to be), ~ 

fra, no, not. 

Zis, sun, 

Nuna, moon, 

Septuca, Venus. 

Vilaborei, the Pleiades. 

Apotos, fire. 

Tuna, water. 

Conopo, rain, shower. 

Pesissi, wind. 


Mico, child. 
Ures, girl. 
Urajot, boy. 


Iguanetpur or ipuetepuin, wi- 


dower. 
Ipuetepur, widow. 
Tuguerizquen, the brides 
groom, 
Tuanequen, the bride. 
Ye, tree or wood. 
Caney, a shed. 
Chinchorro, hammock. 
Uguemur, fever. 
Notomocan, that is done. 


Panaz or paremana, that ig 


enough. 


Ucaymuer, uguozpar, or ugu- 
what. 


ozuar, my game, 


I have killed. 


Eniri, eneritpur, or enerizpo, 


your work. 


Piache, magician, physician. 
Tvorekiamo, devil, evil spirit. 


Chavi, tiger, jaguar. 


Chavinaci, descending from 
a tiger, a figurative ex- 
pression meaning a cruel 


man. 
Totelelo, cock. 
Focora, hen. 
Cutciet, duck. 


Tucucht, bumming-bird. 

Sicotu, chigoe, pulex pene- 
trans, 

Bututo, pronouncing the 
nearly as an f, flute. 

Camo, to sing. 

Tandema, to morrow. 

Chuque take, imperative. 

Pisca, carry, imperative. 

Tropse, he bursts. 

Kesoptreipnet, he is ill. 

Ispinkepolepi, it is hot. 

Tenethinpoli, it is cold, 

Nesselcane, it thunders, 

Tinpole poc maney, it rains 
already. 

Mico nis-inimipani, a child is 
born. 

_ Luquerizque camanay, or tue 
putcamanay? are you mar- 

__ ried? (masc.) 

Tuaneccamanay, are you 
married ? (fem.) 

Tuguerizqueguaz, 1 am mar- 

"ried. (mase.) 

Tuaniqueguaz, 1 am mar- 
ried. (fem.) 

Iguanepuin uze, or iguanepra, 
I am a widow. 

Lguirichipraguaz, or ipuitepra, 
I am a widower. 

Iguanetac, marry, speaking 
to a woman. 

Ipuetetac, marry, speaking 
to a man. 


Epmtpe nechia meche, \et this 
person be your wife. 

Tupaguenapiaz, I have eaten 
enough, 

Epuequere, for you. 

Cupuncomiao, or cupuecon, or 
cupuerecon, for us. 

Ipuec ipagua, he is with him. 

Onquepan, or aponomac, give 
me more. 

Guarepanca, I. will. carry 
more. 

Epuec charpe guaz, I am 
merry with you. 

Apazcatepayene, he likes, to 
kill. 

Notomocan, that is done. 

Guanatpucc, he cultivates his 
garden. 

Quenapuinuze, I have not 
seen him. 

Ayaz yecran, the maize is 
getting wet. 

Tecreguez, it is slippery. 

Imoron, or tmoromnique, poi- 
soner. 

Turopiurpuec, he is dying. 

Yarazinyao or tarazincomiao, 
he will be afraid. 

Nunenao, by moon-light. 

Eyepatechin, they must learn 

Etatechin, they must hear. 

Lnertechin, they must do. 

Uyare onquepe, give me also. 


Amachenepque go and bring 
me. 


303 


Amra zezin, or enzez, let us |) Chetayma, within. 

20. Cumueripian, he wanted’ to 
Etigua? what is.that? beat him. 
Mananequian, he is called. Upatay guane mana, there is 
Lpunet, he chooses it. honey in my hut. 

Anec narepo, who has seen Tumanemia, always dancing. 
him ¢ Utechirin, ¥ will go also, 
Guayque cumuepo, or eumue- Mazpantonoma apotoaca itu~ 

puec, they are going to muecon, the wicked only 

kill game. will go into the fire. 
Zazamar, road. Patre Cumanantacanan, is the 
Conopyaune, or conopyayere, father at Cumana ? 

in the time of the shower. Cumanantacamana, yes, he is 
Quenpotupra quoguaz, I do at Cumana. 

not know him. Montaonocon, or taronocon, 
Quenepra quoguaz, I have those of this place. 

not seen him. Miyonocon, those of that 
Terepuirpuec, why is he place below. 


frightened ? Yequis puec capuemiaz, ¥ 
Turayerpuec, because of the tied him to the tree. 
disease. 


NOTE C. 


"When Christopher Columbus returned from his third voy- 
age, a vague report was spread throughout all Europe, that 
- he had discovered by certain movements of the polar star, 


that the coast of Paria and the neighbouring sea were, ele- 
vated like a vast table-land; that the Earth was not perfectly 
round, but that (in the western countries) it had a rising 
toward the equator; that travellers ascended, in going from 
adiz to the peninsula of Paria, and that owing to the great- 
er elevation of these lands, Paria had a less burning cli- 


mate, and arace of men less. darkly coloured, than those of 
! 


304 


Africa. These singular hypotheses are mentioned by all the 
Historians of that time. (Pet. Martyr, Ocean., Dec. 1, libs 
vii, p. 77. Gomara, Hist. gen., cap. viii; p. 110. Herrera, 
Dec. 1, lib, iii, cap. xii.) 

But what observation of the polar star could induce Chris- 
topher Columbus to adopt such strange ideas? Ferdinand 
Columbus explains this in the life of his father (Churchill’s 
Collection, Vol. ii, p. 583). The admiral had observed, in 
the latitude of the Azores, the meridian altitude of the po- 
lar star above and below the pole. The difference of these 
two altitudes was 5°; and this gave 2° 30! for the distance of 
the star from the pole; while, by a trigonometric calculation, 
it ought to have been at that time 3° 24/30’. There was 
an error therefore of 54’ minus. Columbus judged of the 
passage of the star over the meridian by the position of the 
Great Bear. When the wain was east, or west, he considered 
it as indicating the passage of the star over the meridian; but 
this indication being very uncertain, Columbus was not sure 
of observing when the polar star was in the meridian; the 
inferior altitude must have been too great, and the superior 
too little; and this explains why Columbus found a differ- 
ence of 5° only between the two altitudes. 

Under the torrid zone, at about 7° or 8° of N. latitude, he 
found the pole star 11° above the horizon, at it’s superior 
meridian, and only six when it was in declination, or at the 
altitude of the pole, which gave him a polar distance of 5°. 
Here Columbus supposed again, that the pole star was in 
the superior meridian, when the wain was in the west; but 
as he could not perceive the pole star at it’s inferior meri- 
dian, because it was too low, he observed the altitude when 
the wain was in the superior meridian, and indicated the 
declination of the star. The pole star appeared to him 
again at the altitude of 9°, when the wain was in the inferior 


meridian and consequently not visible, because of the small 
- elevation of the pole. 
, Af the constellation did not indicate with precision the 


305 


passages of the polestar over the meridian, it appears, that the 
indications it gave of the declinations were still less exact; 
for-it is very probable, that Columbus tock the altitude. of 
the polestar when it was. below the declination and the pole, 
and therefore found too small an altitude, anda polar dis- 
tance of 5° instead of 2° 30’, which he had deduced from 
his observations in the Azores. In order to explain so 
great a difference, he imagined, that the Earth had the form 
not of a pincushon but of a pear ; and-that mariners ascended 
prodigiously toward the sky, in going from the Azores to 
Paria, where the circle described by the polestar must ap- 
pear very large, because it was seen from a nearer place. 
‘Though I am not,” says he, “ quite master of my explana- 
tion, the star appears in it’s fall orbit at the equator, while 
the nearer we approach the pole, the more this orbit dimi- 
nishes, because of the obliquity of the sky.” All this is not 
calculated to give us a favourable idea of the astronomical 
knowledge of Columbus. Is it possible that so great a man. 
had not more rational notions of the distance and apparent 
motions of the stars? The Admiral relates, that while he 
was at Paria, he had an inflammation in the eyes. Perhaps 
he observed worse than usual, or entered in his journal 
the observations of his pilots. Perhaps too the son has 
given a confused account of the ideas of his father. Gomara 
blames the Admiral for having imagined that Paria is nearer 
the sky than Spain. ‘The Earth,” says he, ‘is round, and 
not of the figure of a pear. This false opinion of Columbus 
has maintained it’s ground to our own days, and makes some 
unlearned pilots believe, that from India and Paria to Spain 
they descend to come to Europe, cuesta abaro.” Peter Mar- 
tyr. d’Anghiera judges also the Admiral with great seve- 
tity, “ que de poli varietate refert Colonus, contra omnium 
astronomorum sententiam prolata yidentur.” ; 


VOL. Il. 


Se SSS SSS SSS Se - 


i 
Hi 
f 


BOOK. IV. 


CHAPTER X. 


Second abode at Cumana. — Earthquakes. — 
Extraordinary meteors. 


We remained a month longer at Cumana. The 
voyage which we were going to undertake on 
the Oroonoko and the Rio Negro required pre- 
parations of every kind. We had to choose the 
instruments, that could be most easily transport- 
ed in narrow boats; and to furnish ourselves 
with guides for an inland journey of ten months, 
across.a country which is without communica- 
tion with the coasts. The astronomical deter- 
mination of places being the most important 
object of: this undertaking, I felt greatly inter- 
ested in not missing the observation of an 
eclipse of the Sun, which was to be visible at 
the end of the month of October: and in con- 
sequence I preferred remaining till that period 
x2 ; 


308 


at Cumana, where the sky is generally clear 
and serene. We had not sufficient time to 
reach the banks of the Orooncko; and the high 
vallies of Caraccas promised less favourable 
opportunities, on account of the vapours that 
accumulate .around the neighbouring moun- 
tains. In fixing with precision the longitude of 
Cumana, I had a point of departure for the 
chronometrical determination of longitudes on 
which alone I could depend, when I did not 
stop long enough to take lunar distances,. or ob- 
serve the satellites of Jupiter. 

I found myself however near being compelled 
by a fatal accident, to renounce, or at least to 
delay for a long time, my journey to the Oroo- 
noko. On the 27th of October, the day before 
the eclipse, we went as usual, to take the air, 
on the border of the Gulf, and to observe the 
instant of high water, which in those parts is 
only twelve or thirteen inches. It was eight in 
the evening, and the breeze did not yet blow. 
The sky was cloudy; and during a dead calm 
it was excessively hot. We crossed the beach, 
which separates the suburb of the Guayqueria 
Indians from the landing place. I heard some 
one walking behind me, and on turning, I saw 
a tall man of the colour of the Zamboes, naked 
to the waist. He held almost over my head a 
macana, a great stick of palm-tree wood, en- 
larged toward the end likea club. I avoided 


309 


the stroke by leaping toward the left hand. 
Mr. Bonpland, who walked on my right, was 
less fortunate. He-did not’see the Zambo so 
soon as I did, and received a stroke above the 
temple, that levelled him with the ground. We 
were alone, without arms, half a league from 
any habitation, on a vast plain bounded by the 

The Zambo, instead of attacking me, 
moved off slowly to lay hold of Mr. Bonpland’s 
hat, which, after somewhat deadening the vio- 
lence of the blow, had fallen at a distance. Af- 
frighted at seeing my companion on the ground, 
and for some moments senseless, I thought of 
him only. I helped him to raise himself, and 
pain and anger doubled his strength. We ran 
toward the Zambo, who, either from coward- 
ice, common enough in this cast, or because 
he perceived at a distance some men on the 
beach, did not wait for us, but ran off toward 
the Tunal, a little thicket of cactus and arbor- 
escent avicennia. He chanced to fall in run- 
ning; Mr. Bonpland, who reached him first, 
seized him round the body, and exposed him- 
self to the most imminent danger.. The Zambo 
drew a long knife from: his pantaloons, and in 
this unequal struggle we should infallibly have 
been wounded, if some Biscayan merchants, 
who were taking the ait on the beach, had not 
come to our assistance. The Zambo seeing 
himself surrounded, thought no longer of de- 


310 


fence; he escaped again, and after following 
him through the thorny cactuses, he took shel- 
ter, as if wearied, in a cowhouse, whence he 
suffered himself to be quietly led to prison. 

Mr. Bonpland had a fever during the night ; 
but of a stout heart, and possessing that cheerful 
character, which a traveller ought to consider 
as one of the most precious gifts of nature, he con- 
tinued. his labours the next day. The stroke of 
the macana had extended to the top of: his head, 
and he felt it’s effects two or three months dur- 
ing the stay he made at Caraccas. In stooping 
to collect plants, he was sometimes seized with 
a giddiness, which led us to fear that an inter- 
nal abscess was forming. Happily these appre- 
hensions were unfounded, and symptoms, at 
first so alarming, gradually disappeared. The 
inhabitants of Cumana showed us the warmest 
marks of their concern. We learnt, that the 
Zambo was a native of one of the Indian vil- 
lages, which surround the great lake of Mara- 
caybo. He had served on board a privateer 
belonging to the Island of St. Domingo, and in 
consequence of a quarrel with the Captain, he 
had been left on the coast of Cumana, when the 
ship quitted the port. Having seen the signal 
which we had placed to observe the height of 
the tides, he had watched the moment when 
he could attack us on the beach. But why, 
after having knocked one of us down, was he 


31h 


satisfied with simply stealing a hat? In an 
examination he underwent, his answers were so 
confused and stupid, that it was impossible to - 
clear up our doubts. Most frequently he main- 
tained, that his intention was not to rob us; 
but that, irritated by the bad treatment he had 
suffered on board the privateer of St. Domingo, 
he had not been able to resist the desire of 
doing us mischief, when he heard us speak 
French. Justice being so slow in this country, 
that the prisoners, of which the jail is full, re- 
jnain seven or eight years without being able to 
obtain a trial, we learnt with some satisfaction, 
that a few days after our departure from Cu- 
mana, the Zambo had succeeded in breaking 
out of the Castle of St. Antonio. 

In spite of Mr. Bonpland’s accident, I was 
the next day, the 28th of October, at five in the 
morning, on the terrace of our house, making 
preparations for the observation of the eclipse. 
The weather was fine and serene. The crescent 
of Venus, and the constellation of the Ship, so 
splendid from the disposition of it's immense 
nebulz, were lost in the rays of the rising sun. 
I had the greater reason to congratulate myself 
on so fine a day, as during several weeks the 
storms, which had regularly gathered to the 
south and: south-east, two or three hours after 
the passage of the Sun over the meridian, had 
prevented me from regulating the time-keepers 


312 


by corresponding altitudes: and at night, one 
of those reddish vapours, which do not affect 
the hygrometer in the lower regions of the at- 
mosphere, veiled the stars. 

‘This phenomenon was the more extraordinary, 
as in other years it often happens, during three 
or four months, no trace of clouds or vapours 
is tobe seen. I hada complete observation of 
the progress and of the end of the eclipse. I 
determined the distance of the horns, or the 
differences of altitudes and azimuth, by the 
passage over the threads of the quadrant. The 
end of the eclipse was at 2h 14’ 23-4”, mean 
time at Cumana. The result of my observation, 
calculated according to the ancient tables, by 
Mr. Ciccolini at’ Bologna, and: by’ Mr. Tries 
necker at Vienna, has been published in the 
-Connoissance des Temps*. This result’ did ‘not 
differ less than’1’ 9” in time from the longitude 
I had determined by the chronometer ; but. cal- 
culated afresh by Mr. Oltmanns, by the new 
lunar tables of Burg, and the solar tables of 
Delambre, the eclipse and the chronometer 
agreed to. 10” nearly.: I cite this remarkable 
instance of an error reduced to one seventh 
by the use of the new tables, to remind tra- 
vellers how much it is their interest. to note 
and publish the most minute details of their 


* Year 9, p. 142. Zach, Mon. Corresp., Vol.i, p. 596, 
(See also note A. at the end of this fourth book.) 


313 


partial observations. The perfect. concord- 
ance that I observed on the spot, between the 
satellites of Jupiter and ‘the chronometrical re- 
sults, inspired me’ with great confidence in the 
going of the time-keeper by Louis Berthoud, 
whenever it was not exposed to the violent jolt- 
_ing of the mules *. 

The days which preceded and followed the 
eclipse of the Sun displayed very remarkable 
‘atmospherical phenomena. It was what is 
called in those countries the season of winter; 
that is, of clouds and small electrical showers. 
From the 10th of October to the 3d of Novem- 
ber, at nightfall, a reddish vapour arose in the 
horizon, and covered in a few minutes, with a 
thicker or thinner veil, the azure vault of the 
sky. Saussure’s hygrometer-f, far from indi- 


* The following are the results of the whole of the obser- 
vations of the longitude made at Cumana in 1799 and 1800. 


By the timekeeper as regulated at Corunna 4h 26! 417 
By 10 immersions and emersions of. ‘the 
Satellites  - is od § i 2A 
By lunar distances - 3 = ~ Apes 
By. the eclipse of the sun - - - -"4 


LongitudeofCumana  - ~~ - -=4.25 54 
See my Astronomical Obs., Vol.i, p. 64—86. 


+ It must be remembered, that. in this latitude, at times 
when it never rains, Saussure’s hygrometer remains commonly 
between 85° and 90°, the temperature being from 25° to 30°. 
Ia Europe in the month of August, with the same degree of 


fi 


314 


-cating greater humidity, often went back from 
90° to 83°.. The heat of the day was froin 28° to 
32°, which for this part of the torrid zone is 
very considerable. Sometimes in the midst of 
the night the vapours disappeared in an instant ; 
and at the moment when I had arranged my 
instruments, clouds of a brilliant whiteness were 
formed at the zenith, and extended toward the 
horizon. On the 18th of October, these clouds 
were so remarkably transparent, that they did 
not hide stars even of the fourth magnitude. 
{ distinguished. so perfectly the spots of the 
moon, that it might have been thought that 
it’s disk was placed before the clouds. They 
were at a prodigious height, disposed in bands, 
and at equal distances, as from the effect of 
electric repulsions. ‘These are the same small 
masses of vapour, which I saw above my head 
on the ridge of the highest Andes, and which 
in several languages bear the name of sheep. 
When the reddish vapour was spread lightly 
over the sky, the great stars, which in general 
at Cumana scarcely twinkle below 20° or 25°, do 
not retain even at the zenith their steady and 
planetary light. They twinkled at all altitudes, 
as after a heavy storm of rain*. I was 


heat, the mean moisture of the atmosphere is from 78° 
to 80°. 

* T have not obseryed any direct relation between the 
twinkling of the stars, and the dryness of thatp art of the 


315 


struck with this effect of a fog, which did not 
affect the hygrometer at the surface of the 
Earth. JI remained a part of the night seated 
in'a balcony, from which I had a view of a 
great part of the horizon. In every climate I 
find a particular attraction in fixing my eyes, 
when the sky is serene, on some great constel- 
lation, and seeing groups of vesicular vapours 
appear and augment, as around a central nu- 
cleus, and then disappear, and form themselves 
anew. 

From the 28th of October to the 3d.of No- 
vember, the reddish fog was thicker than it had 
yet been. The heat of the nights seemed stif- 
ling, though the thermometer rose only to 26°. 


The breeze, which generally cooled the air 
from eight or nine o'clock in the evening, was 
no longer felt. The atmosphere appeared as if 


it were on fire. The ground, parched and dusty, 


atmosphere open to our researches. I have often seen at Cu- 
mana a great twinkling of the stars of Orion and Sagittarius, 
when Saussure’s hygrometer was at 85°. At other times 
these ‘same stars, considerably: elevated above the horizon, 
emitted a steady and planetary light, the hygrometer being 
at 90° or 93°. It is probably not the quantity of vapour, but 
ihe manner in which it is diffused, and more or less dissolved, 
in the air, that determines the twinkling, invariably attended 
with a coloration of light. Itis remarkable enough, that in 
northern countries, at a time when the atmosphere appears 
perfectly dry, the twinkling is stronger in very cold 
weather. ; 


316 


Was cracked on every side. On the 4th of 
November, about two in the afternoon, large 
clouds of an extraordinary blackness enveloped 
the high mountains of the Brigantine and Tata- 
raqual. ‘They extended by degrees as far as 
the zenith. About four in the afternoon, thun- 
der was heard over our heads, but at an im- 
mense height, without.rolling, and witha hoarse 
and often interrupted sound. At the moment 
of the strongest electric explosion, at 4519, 
there were two shocks of an earthquake, which 
followed at fifteen seconds distance from each 
other. The people in the streets filled the air 
with their cries.. Mr. Bonpland, who was lean- 
ing over a table examining plants, was almost 
thrown on the floor. I felt the ‘shock very 
strongly, though I was lying in a hammock. 
Its direction was from north to south, which is 
rare at Cumana. Slaves, who were drawing 
water from a well more than eighteen or 
twenty feet deep, near the river Manzanares *, 
heard a noise like the explosion of a strong 
charge of gunpowder. The noise seemed to 
come from the bottom of the well, a very sin- 
gular phenomenon, though very common in the 
greater part of the countries of America exposed 
to earthquakes. 


* In the plantation (chara) of the colonel of artillery, Don 
Antonio Montana, See Ch.iv, Vol. ii, p. 227. 


317 


A few minutes before the first shock, there 
was a very violent blast of wind, followed by an 
electrical rain in great drops. I immediately 


tried the atmospherical electricity by the elec- 
trometer of Volta. The small balls separated 
four lines; the electricity often changed from 
positive to negative, as is the case during storms, 
and, in the north of Europe, even sometimes in 
a fall of snow. The sky remained cloudy, and 
the blast of wind was followed by a dead calm, 
which lasted all night. The setting of the Sun 
presented a scene of extraordinary magnificence. 
The thick veil of the clouds was rent asunder as 
in shreds quite near the horizon: the Sun ap- 
peared at 120 degrees of altitude on a firma- 
ment of indigo-blue. It’s disk was enormously 
enlarged, distorted, and undulated toward the 
edges. The clouds were gilded; and. fasciculi 
of divergent rays, which refiected the most 
brilliant colours of the rainbow, extended even 
to the midst of the heavens. There was.a great 
crowd in the public square. This phenomenon, 
the earthquake, the clap of thunder which had 
accompanied it, the red vapour seen during so 
many days, all was regarded as the effect, of 
the eclipse. 

About nine in the evening there was a third 
shock, much slighter than the former two,,- 
but attended evidently with a subterraneous 
noise. The barometer was a, little lower than 


318 


usual*; but the progress of the horary. vari- 


* The 4th of November, 1799 - Barometer, 
9 o'clock in the morning - aaa es 
4 - - inthe evening - 336:04 
430° - - - = - 335°92 
il - - - - - - 33642 
The 5th of November. 
9 o'clock in the morning - - 337:02 
- = - = - 337-00 
in the afternoon = 336°72 
- 336'25 
336°20 
33652 
336'86 
The 6th of November. 
1 inthe morning - - = _ 336°32 
4 30’ - = - - - 336°28 
The 18th of August I was struck at finding the absolute 
height of the barometer a little less than usual. There were 
that day eleven strong shocks of an earthquake at Carupano, 
22 leagues east from Cumana. On the 25th a small shock 
was feltat Cumana, and the barometric height was the same 
as usual. During these two phenomena, the atmospheric 
tides were equally regular; only on the 25th of August their 
magnitude was much less considerable. I shall insert the 
three observations made by Mr. Bonpland and myself in 
each day. 
9in themorn, 4 30/in the aftern. 11 at night. 
August 18th. 336:85 335'92 336°75 
25th. 337°01 336°80 337:00 
26th. 337-50 336°42 33710 
27th. 33718 336'5L - 3386°87 
These examples confirm what 1 have said above on the: inva= 
riability of the atmospheric. tides during the shocks. See 
Chap. iv, Vol. ii, p. 224, 


319 


ations or small atmospheric tides, was no way 
interrupted. The mercury was precisely at. the 
minimum of height at the moment of the earth- 
quake; it continued rising till eleven in the 
evening, and sunk again till half after four in 
the morning, conformably to the law which 
regulates the barometrical variations. In the 
night between the 3d and 4th of November, 
the reddish vapour was so thick, that I could 
not distinguish the place of the moon, except 
by a beautiful halo of 20° diameter, 

It was scarcely twenty-two months since the 
town of Cumana had been almost totally de- 
stroyed by an earthquake. The people look on 
the vapours, which darken the horizon, and the 
failure of the breeze during the night, as prog- 
nostics infallibly disastrous. We had frequent 
visits from persons, who wished to know if our 
instruments indicated new shocks for the next 
day. The inquietude was particularly great and 
general, when on the 5th of November, exactly 
at the same hour as the preceding day, there 
was a violent gust of wind, attended by thun- 
der, and a few drops of rain. No shock was 
felt. .The wind and storm returned for five or 
six days at the same hour, almost at the same 
minute. The inhabitants of Cumana, and of 
many other places between the tropics, have 
long ago made the observation, that those at- 
mospherical changes, which appear the most 


320 


accidental, follow for whole weeks a certain 
type with astonishing regularity. The same 
phenomenon exists in summer, under the tem- 
perate zone; nor has it escaped the sagacity of 
astronomers, who often see clouds form: in a 
serene sky, during three or four days. together, 
at the same part of the firmament, take the 
same direction, and dissolve at the same height ; 
sometimes before, sometimes after the passage 
of a star over the meridian, consequently with- 
in a few minutes of the same point of apparent 
time *. 

The earthquake of the 4th of November, the 
first I had felt, made so much the more lively 
an impression. on me,-as it was accompanied 
with remarkable meteorological variations. It 
was moreover a real lifting up, and not a shock 
by undulations, I did not then imagine, that 
after a long abode on the table-lands of Quito 
and the coasts of Peru, I should become almost 
as familiar with the abrupt. movements of the 
ground, as we are in Europe with the noise of 
thunder. We did not think of rising at night, 
in the city of Quito, when subterraneous rum- 
blings (bramidos), which seem always to come 
from the volcano of Pichincha, announced, (two 


* Mr. Arago and I paid a great deal of attention to this 


phenomenon during a long series of observations made in 
the years 1809 and 1810, at the Observatory of Paris, tq 


verify the decl 


321 


or three, and sometimes seven or eight minutes 
beforehand) a shock; the force of which is sel- 
dom in proportion to the intensity of the noise. 
The carelessness of the inhabitants, who recol- 
lect that for three centuries past their city has 
not been overwhelmed, communicates itself 
easily to the least intrepid traveller. In general 
it is not so much the fear of the danger, as the 
-novelty of the sensation, that strikes so forcibly, 
when the effect of the slightest earthquake is 
felt for the first time. 

From our infancy, the idea of certain con- 
trasts fixes itself in our minds: water appears 
to us an element that moves; earth, a motion- 
less and inert mass. These ideas are the effect 
of daily experience; they are connected with . 
every thing that is transmitted to us by the 
senses. When a shock is felt, when the earth 
is shaken on it’s old foundations, which we had. 
deemed so stable, one instant is sufficient. to 
destroy long illusions. . It is like awakening 
from a dream; but a painful awakening. We 
feel, that we have been deceived by the appa- 
rent calm of nature; we become attentive to 
the least noise; we mistrust for the first time a 
soil, on which we had so long placed our feet 
with confidence. If the shocks be repeated, 
if they become frequent during several succes- 
sive days, the. uncertainty quickly disappears. 
In 1784, the inhabitants of Mexico were accus- 

YOL, Il. ¥ 


322 


tomed to hear the thunder roll beneath their 
feet*, as it is heard by us in the region of the 
clouds. Confidence easily springs up in the 
human breast, and we end by accustoming 
ourselves on the coast of Pert to the undula- 
tions of the ground, like the sailor to the toss- 
ings of the ship, caused by the motion of the 
waves. 

The earthquake of the 4th of November ap- 
peared to me, to have had a sensible influence 
on the magnetical phenemena. In a short 
‘time after my arrival on the coasts of Cumana, 
i had found the dip of the needle 43°53" of the 
centesimal division. Some days before the 
earthquakes, I was occupied very assiduously 
in verifying this result. The governor of’Cu- 
mana, who was in possession of several ‘scienti- 
fic books, had lent me the interesting Tratado 
de Navegacion of Mendoza. I was struck ‘with 
the assertion there made +, “that the monthly 
and horary fluctuation of the dip of the needle 
is greater than that of the magnetic variation.” 
A series of ‘observations, which I had made in 
1798, conjointly with ‘the Chevalier Borda at 
Paris, and afterwards by myself at Marseilles 
and Madrid, convinced me, that the diurnal 
variations could not be perceived in the ‘best 


_ * Los-bramidos de Guanazuato, See yol. i, ‘ch, iy; p. 228, 
Gah Ole vil, ps 72 


323 


dipping compasses; that, if they exist (as we 
must suppose) they do not exceed eight or ten 
minutes*; and that the far more considerable 
horary changes, mentioned by different au- 
thors, should be attributed to the imperfect 
levelling of the instrument. In spite of these 
well founded doubts, I did not hesitate on the 
first of November, to place Borda’s great dip- 
ping apparatus in a spot well calculated for 
delicate experiments of this nature. The dip 
was invariably 43°65°.. This quantity was the 
mean of many observations'made with the great- 
est care. On the 7th of November, three days 
after the violent shocks of the earthquake, I re- 
commenced the same series of observations, and 
was astonished to find, that the dip became 
less by 90 centesimal minutes. It was no more 
than 42°75°.. I thought, that perhaps it would 
again augment, and return progressively to it’s 
first state; but I was disappointed in my ex- 
pectation, A twelvemonth after, on my return 
from the Oroonoko, I still found the dip of the 
magnetic needle at Cumana to be 42°80°; 
though the intensity of the magnetic forces had 
remained the same before and after the earth- 


* The annual changes of the magnetic dip appear in our 
climates to be from four to five minutes; but, according to - 
the analogy of the daily and annual changes of the variation, 
we are not indispensably obliged to admit, that the daily 
changes are less considerable than the annual, 

¥ 2 


324 


quake. This was expressed by 229 oscillations 
in 10 minutes of time, when at Madrid it was 
240, at Paris 245. On the 7th of November I 
ascertained the magnetic variation; which I 
found to be 4° 13’ 50% east. I had found it 
before the earthquake, at different hours of the 
day, from five to six minutes greater and less. 
The horary variations conceal the effects of 
changes in the variation, when these are not 
very considerable. 

Reflecting on the whole of these magnetical 
phenomena*, I am not aware of any cause of 
error, that could have changed the result of 
my observations of the dip, made before the 4th 
of November. I employed the same precau- 
tions, I did not change the place of the instru- 
ment, and I noted in my journal the parti- 
culars of each observation. It is indeed very 
remarkable, that the needle kept with the great- 
est care in oiled paper, after a journey of seven 
hundred leagues, on our return to Cumana 
gave, on taking a mean of fifteen observations, 


* On the 28th of August, 1799, dip toward the east, 
42:07°; toward the west, 44:10°. On. the first of Nov., 
east 43°10° ; west 44°20°. On the 7th of Nov., east 42°15°; 
west 43°35°. On the 5th of September, 1800, east 42:20° ; 
west 43°40°. 

t Mr. Gay-Lussac and myself found in 1805, changing 


the poles in each place, at Milan 66° 46’ in the town, and in 
a field near the town, 65° 36’, of the old division. 


a 


325 


the same dip, within five centesimal minutes, 
as immediately after the earthquake. I did 
not indeed change the poles of the magnet, at 
each observation, as I have done. since in a 
long series of dips determined conjointly with 
Mr. Gay-Lussac, in 1805, and 1806, in France, 
Italy, Switzerland, and Germany; and as the 
astronomers did constantly in Captain Cook’s 
second Voyage. This operation is long and de- 
licate, when we are almost always obliged to 
make our observations in the open air. On 
leaving Europe, the Chevalier Borda advised 
me to deprive the needle of it’s magnetic power 
only after certain intervals, and to take note 
of the differences. These differences did not 
amount, in the experiments made with Mr. Le- 
noir at Paris, to more than 12 minutes; and at 
Mexico, in different trials, to 8, 15, 6, and 10 
minutes: the needle too, which was of well- 
tempered steel, retained it’s full polish during 
five years. Besides, in the phenomenon of which 
we are treating, the question relates only toa 
change of apparent dip, not to an absolute quan- 
tity. Not having touched the needle, I do not 
see the probability of an error of a centesimal 


degree. 

It is well known that the shock, in modifying 
the position of the particles of iron, cobalt, or 
nickel, modifies also their magnetic properties ; 
that it is capable of giving polarity, and some- 


326 


times even of changing the poles. When I de- 
scribed the magnetic axes of a great mountain 
of polarized serpentine, situate on the north of 
Baireuth, in Franconia, Mr. Lichtenberg, the 
celebrated naturalist of Gottingen, conjectured, 
that these axes might possibly be the effect of 
earthquakes, which, in the great catastrophe of 
our planet, had acted for a long time in the 
same direction. We know, by the recent ex- 
periments of Mr. Haiiy, that, if heat diminish 
the magnetic charge, it can also sometimes give 
certain substances *, in which iron is combined 
with other principles, the power of being at- 
tracted by the magnet. We may thereby con- 
ceive, to a certain point, how earthquakes and 
volcanic agents, by the changes they produce 
in the interior of the globe, at great depths, 


may modify the magnetic phenomena, which - 


Wwe observe at it’s surface, I shall not insist on 
such vague conjectures, but shall confine my- 
self to the simple observation, that, at the pe- 
riods when we felt such violent and frequent 
shocks in the Cordilleras of Quito, and on the 
coast of Peru, we were never able to discoyer 
any accidental variation in the magnetic dip. 
It is true, that the analogous changes, produced 
by the aurora-borealis in the variation of the 
needle, like those which I have imagined I re- 


* For example, sulphuretted iron and arseniated pyrites. 


i 


ration 


Sees: 


327 


marked in the intensity of the forces, are ob- 
served only from time to time; they are also. 
transitory, and cease: with the duration of the 
phenomenon. 

The reddish vapour; which spread a mist over 
the horizon a little before the setting of the Sun, 
had ceased since the 7th of Nevember.. The 
atmosphere returned to it’s, former purity, and 
the vault of the skies appeared at the zenith of 
that deep blue tint, which is peculiar to eli- 
mates where the heat, the light, and a great 
equality of electric charge seem at once to com- 
bine to promote the most perfect dissolution of 
water in the air, L observed, on the night of 
the 7th, the immersion of the second satellite 
of Jupiter*. The belts of the planet were 
more distinct than I had ever seen them be- 
fore. 

I passed a part of the night in compar 
ing the intensity of the light emitted by the 
beautiful stars, that shine in the southern sky. 
I pursued this task earefully at sea, and dur- 
ing my abode at Lima, at Guayaquil, and at 
Mexico, in both hemispheres. Near half a 
century has elapsed, since La Caille examined 


* J observed it at 11h 25/ 6’ mean time, whence on com- 
paring my observation with those of Viviers and Marseilles, 
the long. of Cumana comes out 4° 26! 6”, (Obs. Ast., vol, i, 
p. 79.) 


328 


this region of the sky, which is invisible in Eu- 
rope. The stars near the south pole are ob- 
served in general with so little perseverance 
and assiduity, that the greatest changes may 
take place in the intensity of their light, and 
their own motion, without astronomers having 
the slightest knowledge of them. I think I 
have remarked changes of this kind in the con- 
stellation of the Crane, and in that of the Ship 
Argo. I compared at first with the naked eye 
the stars which are not very distant from each 
other, in order to class them according to the 
method pointed out by Mr. Herschell *, in a 
paper read to the Royal Society of London in 
1796. I afterwards employed diaphragms di- 
minishing the aperture of the telescope, and 
coloured and colourless glasses placed before 
the eye-glass ; and more particularly an instru- 
ment of reflexion calculated to bring at the 
same time two stars into the field of the teles- 
cope, after having equalized their light by re- 
ceiving it with more or fewer rays at pleasure, 
reflected by the quicksilvered part of the mirror. 
I admit, that all these photometric processes 
are not of great precision; but I believe, that 
the last, which perhaps had never before been 


* Phil. Trans. for 1796, p. 166. (Compare also Pigott 
and Goodrich in the Trans., vol, Ixxv, Part 1, p, 127, 164, 
and vol Ixxvi, Part.1, p, 197.) ; 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 

| 


329 


employed, might be rendered nearly exact, by 
adding a scale of equal parts to the moveable 
frame of the telescope of the sextant. It was 
by taking the mean of a great number of valua- 
tions, that I saw the relative intensity of the 
light of the great stars decrease in the following 
manner: Sirius, Canopus, « Centauri, Acher- 
ner, Centauri, Fomalhaut, Rigel, Procyon, 
Betelgueuse, < of the Great Dog, © of the Great 
Dog, « of the Crane, « of the Peacock. 'These 
experiments of which I have published else- 
where the numerical results *, will become more 
interesting, when travellers shall have deter- 
mined afresh, at intervals of forty or fifty years, 
some of those changes, which the celestial bo- 
dies seem to experience, either at their surface, 
or in their distances from our planetary sys- 
tem. 

When we have observed for a long time with 
the same instruments, in our northern cli- 
mates, and under the torrid zone, we are sur- 
prised at the effect produced in the latter by the 
transparency of the air, and the less extinction 
of light, on the clearness with which the double 
stars, the satellites of Jupiter, or certain nebule 
present themselves. Beneath a sky equally se- 
rene in appearance, it would seem as if more 


* See note C at the end of this volume, and my Astron, 
Obs., vol. i, p. 71. 


330 


perfect instruments were employed ; so much 
more distinct and well defined do the objects 
appear between the tropics. It cannot be 
doubted, that at the period when equinoxial 
America shall become the centre of a great: ci- 
vilization, physical astronomy will make im- 
mense improvements, in proportion as the skies 
will be explored with excellent glasses, in the 
dry and burning climates of Cumana, Coro, 
and the Island of Margaretta. I do not here 
mention the ridge of the Cordilleras, because, 
with the exception of some high and. nearly bar- 
ren plains in Mexico and Peru, the very ele- 
vated table-lands, in which the barometric 
pressure is from ten to twelve inches ”* less than 
at the level of the sea, possess a foggy and ex- 
tremely variable climate. A great pureness of 
the atmosphere, such as~prevails constantly in 
the low regions during the dry season, compen- 


* From 27 to 30 centimetres; for example, the plains 
that surround the volcano of Cotopaxi, between the farm of 
Pansache and Pumaurcu ; the plains of Chusulongu on the 
declivity of Antisana; and on Chimborazo the plain above 
the Black Lake, in Peruvian Yanacocha. According to the 
formule of La Mécanique Céleste of Laplace, the extinction 
of light at the elevation of these plains is 9993 ; at the top of 
Chimborazo, 9989; at the top of the highest mountain of 
the Himalaya (supposing it with Mr. Weld 4013. toises 
high) 9987; whilst at the level of the ocean the extinction 
of light is 10000. (See my Table of the Geography of 
Plants, 1806.) 


331 


gates the effect of the height of the spot, and 
the thinness of the air, on the table-lands. The 
elevated strata of the atmosphere, when they 
envelop the ridges of mountains, experience ra- 
pid changes in their transparency. 

The night of the 11th of November was cool 
and extremely beautiful*. Toward the morn- 
ing, from half after two, the most extraordinary 
Juminous meteors were seen toward the east. 
Mr. Bonpland, who had risen to enjoy the 
freshness of the air in the gallery, perceived 
them first. Thousands of bolides and falling 
stars succeeded each other during four hours. 
Their direction was very regularly from north 
to south. They filled a space in the sky ex- 
tending from the true east 30° toward the 
north and south. In an amplitude of 60° the 
meteors were seen to rise above the horizon 
at E. N. E. and at E., describe arcs more or 
less extended, and fall toward the south, after 
having followed the direction of the meridian +. 
Some of them attained a height of 40°, and 
all exceeded 25° or 30°. There was very little 
wind in the low regions of the atmosphere, 


* Cent. Therm. at 11 at night, 21°8°. Hygr. 82°. No 
twinkling of the stars above 10° of elevation. 

+ This. uniform direction struck also several inhabitants 
of Nueva: Barcelona, who mentioned it to us at our return 
from the Oroonoko, without our having spoken to them of 
the obseryations at Cumana. 


332 


and this blew from the east. No trace of 
clouds was to be seen. Mr. Bonpland relates, 
that, from the beginning of the phenomenon, 
there was not a space in the firmament equal 
in extent to three diameters of the moon, that 
was not filled at every instant with bolides and 
falling stars. The first were fewer in number, 
but as they were seen of different sizes, it was 
impossible to fix the limit between these two 
classes of phenomena. All these meteors left 
luminous traces from five to ten degrees in 
length, as often happens in the equinoctial 
regions*.. The phosphorescence of these traces, 
or luminous bands, lasted seven or eight se- 
conds. Many of the falling stars had a very 
distinct nucleus, as large as the disk of Jupiter, 
from which darted sparks of vivid light. The 
bolides seemed to burst. as by explosion ; but 
the largest, those from 1° to 1° 15’in diameter, 
disappeared without scintillation, leaving be- 
hind them phosphorescent bands (é¢rabes) | ex- 
ceeding in breadth fifteen or twenty minutes. 
The light of these meteors was white, and 
not reddish, which must be attributed, no doubt, 
to the absence of vapours, and the extreme 
transparency of the air. For the same reason, 
under the tropics, the stars of the first magni- 
tude have at their rising a light evidently whit- 
er than in Europe. 


* See vol. i, p. 75. 


333 


Almost all the inhabitants of Cumana were 
witnesses of this phenomenon, because they 
leave their houses before four o‘clock, to attend 
the first morning mass. They did not behold 
these bolides with indifference; the oldest 
among them remembered, that the great earth- 
quakes of 1766 were.preceded* by similar phe- 
nomena. The Guaiqueries in the Indian sub- 
urb came out and asserted, “ that the fire- 
work had begun at one o‘clock; and that as 
they returned from fishing in the Gulf, they 
had already perceived very small falling stars 
toward the east.” They affirmed at the same 
time, that igneous meteors were extremely rare 
on those coasts after two in the morning. 

‘The phenomenon ceased by degrees after 
four o‘clock, and the bolides and falling stars 
became less frequent; but we still distinguish- 
ed some toward the north east by their whitish 
light, and the rapidity of their movement, a quar- 
ter of an hour after sunrise. This circumstance 
will appear less extraordinary, when I bring to 
the reader’s recollection, that in full daylight, in 
1788, the interior of the houses in the town 
of Popayan were brightly illuminated by an 
aérolite of immense magnitude. It passed over 
the town, when the sun was shining clearly, 
about one o‘clock. Mr. Bonpland and myself, 


® See vol. li, p. 216. 


334 

during our second residence at Cumana, after’ 
having observed, on the 26th of September, 
1800, the immersion of the first satellite of Ju- 
piter*, succeeded in seeing the planet distinct- 
ly with the naked eye, eighteen minutes after 
the disk of the sun had appeared in the hori- 
zon. ‘There was a very slight vapour in the 
east, but Jupiter appeared on an azure sky. 
These facts prove the extreme purity and trans- 
parency of the atmosphere under the torrid 
zone. ‘The mass of diffused light is so much 
less, as the vapours are more perfectly dissolved. 
The same cause, that weakens the diffusion of 
the solar light, diminishes the extinction of that 
which emanates either from a bolis, Jupiter, 
or the moon seen on the second day after her 
conjunction. 

The day of the 12th of November was ex- 
tremely hot, and the hygrometer indicated a 
very considerable dryness for those climates. 
The reddish vapour clouded the horizon anew, 
and rose to the height of 14°. This was the 
last time it appeared this year; and I must 


* IT observed it at 5h 10’ 8” mean time: long. of Cu- 
mana, deduced from the tables of Delambre, 4h 25/7 517” 
(Ast. Ob., Vol, i, p. 80). 

t At nine-in the morning, cent, therm. 26:2°; hygr. 66:4°. 
At one, therm. 29°; hygr. 81°. The scale of Saussure’s 
hygr. is always meant, when the contrary is not expressly 
mentioned, 


339 


here observe, that it is no less rare under the 
fine sky of Cumana, than it is common at 
Acapulco, on the western coast of Mexico. 

The researches of Mr. Chladni having sin- 
gularly fixed the attention of the scientific world 
upon the bolides and falling stars at my depar- 
wre from Europe, we did not neglect, during 
the course of our journey from Caraccas to 
the Rio Negro, to inquire every where, whether 
the meteors of the 12th of November had been 
perceived. In a savage country, where the 
greater number of the inhabitants sleep out in 
the air, so extraordinary a phenomenon could 
not fail to be remarked, except when concealed 
by clouds from the eye of observation. The 
Capuchin missionary at San Fernando de Apu- 
ra*, a village situate amid the savannahs of 
the province of Varinas ; the Franciscan monks 
stationed near the cataracts of the Oroonoke 
and at Maroat, on the banks of the Rio Ne- 
gro; had seen numberless falling stars and bo- 
ides illumine the vault of Heaven. Maroa 
is south-west of Cumana, at one hundred and 
seventy four leagues distance. All these ob- 
servers compared the phenomenon to a beau- 
+tiful firework, which had lasted from three till 
six in the morning. Some of the monks had 
marked the day upon their ritual; others had 


4 Lat. 7° 59” 12/7; long. '70° 20’. 
+ Lat, 2° 42’ 0”; long. 79° 21%, 


336 


noted it by the nearest festivals of the Church. 
Unfortunately none of them could recollect 
the direction of the meteors, or their apparent 
height. From the position of the mountains 
and thick forests, which surround the Missions 
of the Cataracts and the little village of Maroa, 
I presume that the bolides were still visible at 
20° above the horizon. On my arrival at the 
southern extremity of Spanish Guiana, at the 
little fort of San Carlos, I found some Portu- 
gueze, who had gone up the Rio Negro from 
the Mission of St. Joseph of the Marivitains ; 
who assured me, that in that part of Brazil the 
phenomenon had been perceived, at least as 
far as San Gabriel das Cachoeiras, consequently 
as far as the equator itself*. 

I was powerfully struck at the immense 
height, which these bolides must have attained, 
to have been visible at the same time at Cu- 
mana, and on the frontiers of Brazil, in a line 
oftwo hundred and thirty leagues in length. 
But what. was my astonishment, when, at. my 
return to Europe, I learnt, that the same 
phenomenon had _ been perceived on an ex- 


* A little to the north-west of San Antonio de Castan- 
heiro. I did not find any persons, who had observed this 
~ meteor, at Santa Fe de Bogota, at Popayan, or in the south- 
ern hemisphere at Quito and Peru. Perhaps the state of 
the atmosphere, so changeable in these western regions, 


alone prevented any observation. 


337 


tent of the globe of 64° of latitude, and 91° of 
longitude; at the equator, in South America, 

at Labrador, and in Germany ! I found acci- 
dentally during my passage from Philadelphia 
to Bourdeaux (in the Memoirs of the Pennsyl- 
yanian Society) the corresponding. observation 
of Mr. Ellicot (lat. 30° 42’); and upon my 
return from Naples to Berlin, I read the ac- 
vount of the Moravian Missionaries among the 
Eskimoes, in the Bibliothek of Gottingen. Se- 
veral philosophers* had already discussed at 
this period the coincidence of the observations 
in the North with those at Cumana, which Mr. 
Bonpland and I had published in 1800. 

The following is a succinct enumeration of 
facts: Ist. the fiery meteors were seen in the 
‘east, and the east-north-east, to 40° of elevation, 
from 2% to 6 at Cumana (lat. 10° 27’ 52”, long. 
66° 30’); at Porto Cabello (lat. 10° 6 52”, long. 
67° 5’); and on the frontiers of Brazil, near 
the equator, in the longitude of 70° west of the 
meridian of Paris. 2nd. In French Guiana 
(lat. 4° 56’, long. 54° 35’), “ the northern part 
of the sky was seen all on fire. Innumerable 
falling stars traversed the heavens during an 
hour and a half, and diffused so vivid a light, 


* Messrs de Hardenberg, Ritter, and Boeckmann, in Gil- 
bert’s Annals, vol. vi, p. 191; vol. xiii, p. 255; vol. xiv, ple 
116; vol. xv, p. 107%. (Voigt., Mag. der Naturkunde, Tom. 
ix, p. 468. ‘ 4 

VoL. Ul. Z 


338 


that those meteors might be compared to the 
blazing sheaves shot out from a firework.” 
The knowledge of. this fact rests upon highly 
respectable testimony, that of the Count of Mar- 
bois, at. that. time transported to Cayenne, .a 
victim. to his love of justice and of rational, 


constitutional, liberty. 3d. Mr. Ellicot, astro, 


nomer to the United States, having terminated 
his trigonometric operations for the rectifica- 
tion of the limits on the Ohio, being on the 


12th of November.in the Gulf of Florida, in 


the latitude of 25°, and longitude 81° 50/*, saw 
in all parts of the sky, “as many meteors as 
stars, moving in all. directions: some appeared 
to fall perpendicularly ; and it was expected. 
every minute that they would. drop into. the 
vessel.” The same. phenomenon was perceived 
upon the American continent as far as. the 
latitude.of 30° 42’. 4th. In Labrador, at Nain 
(lat. 56°55’) and Hoffenthal (lat. 58° 4’); in 
Greenland, at, Lichtenau (lat. 61° 5’) and -at 
New Herrenhut (lat. 64° 14’, long. 52° 20’); the 
Eskimoes. were frightened ‘at. the, enormous 
quantity of bolides, that. fell during twilight 
toward all points of the firmament, and “some 
of which were a foot.broad.” 5th. In Germany, 
Mr. Zeissing, Vicar of Itterstadt, near Weimar 
(lat. 50° 59’, long. 9° 1’ east), perceived, on the 


* Phil. Trans. of the American Soc, 1804, vol. vi, p. 29. 


339 

12th of November, betweeri the hotirs of six and 
seven’ in the morning, when it was half after 
two: at-Cumana, some falling stars which shed 
a-very white light. “Soon after, toward the 
south and ‘south-west, luminous rays appeared 
from four to six feet long; they were reddish; 
and: resembled the luminous track of a sky- 
rocket. ‘ During the morning twilight between 
the hours ‘of seven and eight, the south-west 
part of the sky was seen from time to time 
strongly illuminated by white lightning, which 
ran in’serpentine lines along the horizon. At 
night the cold increased, and the barometer 
had risen.” It is very probable, that the me- 
teor might have been observed more to the 
east, in Poland and in Russia*. If Mr. Ritter 
had not taken a particular account of them 
from the Vicar of Itterstadt’s papers, we should 
have supposed, that the bolides had not been 
visible beyond the limits of the New Conti- 
nent. 

The distance from Weimar to the Rio Negro 
is 1800 sea leagues; and from Rio Negro to 
Herrenhut in Greenland, 1300 leagues. Admit 


* At Paris and London the sky was cloudy. At Carls- 
yuh Mr. Backmann saw before dawn lightning at the same 
time in the north-west and south-east, On the 13th of 
November. a particular glare of light was seen at the same 
place in the south-east. (On the bolides seen at Hof, see 
Helfrecht, Ficht., vol. ii, p. 205.) 

re 


340 


ting that the same fiery meteors were seen at 
points so distant from each other, we must also 
admit, that their height was at least 411 
leagues. Near Weimar, the appearance like 
sky-rockets was seen in the south, and south- 
east; at Cumana, in- the east, and east-north- 
east. We may therefore conclude, that num- 
berless aérolites must have fallen into the Sea, 
between Africa and South America, to the west 
of the Cape-Verd Islands. But since the direc- 


tion of the bolides was not the same at Labrador: 


and at Cumana, why were they not perceived in 
the latter place towards the north, as at Cay- 
enne? We can scarcely be too cautious on a 
subject, on which good observations made in 
very distant places are - still wanting. I am 
rather inclined to think, that the Chayma In- 
dians of Cumana did not see’the same bolides, 
as the Portugueze in Brazil and the missionaries 
in Labrador ; but.at the same time it cannot be 
doubted, and this fact appears to me very re- 
markable, that in the New W orld, between the 
meridians of 46° and 82°, between the equator 
and 64° north, at the same hour, an immense 
number of bolides and falling stars were per- 
ceived ; and that those meteors had every 
where the same brilliancy, throughout a space 
of 921,000 square leagues. 

The scientific men *, who have lately made. 


* Mr. Benzenberg and Mr. Brandes, 


341 


such laborious researches on falling stars and 
their parallaxes, considered them as meteors 
belonging to the farthest limits of our atmos- 
phere, between the region of the Aurora Borea- 
lis and that of the lightest clouds*. Some 
have been seen, which had not more than 14,000 
toises, or about five leagues, of elevation. The 
highest do not appear to exceed thirty leagues. 
They have often more than a hundred feet dia- 
meter; and their swiftness is such, that they 
dart in a few seconds over a space of two 
leagues. Some of these have been measured, 
the direction of which was almost perpendicu- 
larly upward, or forming an angle of 50° with 
the vertical line. This extremely remarkable 
circumstance has led to the conclusion, that 
falling stars are not aérolites, which, after hay- 
ing hovered a long time in space, take fire on 
entering accidentally into our atmosphere, and 
fall toward the Earth f, 

Whatever may be the origin of these lumi- 
nous meteors, it is difficult to conceive an in- 
stantaneous inflammation taking place in a 


* According to the observations made on the ridge: of the 
Andes, at 2700 toises of elevation, on the moutons or. little 
white and fleecy clouds, it appeared to me, that their eleva- 
tion is sometimes not less than 6000 toises above the level 
of the coast. 

+ Mr, Chladni, who at first looked upon ee. stars as 
aérolites, has lately abandoned this idea. 


342 


region, where there is less air than in the 
vacuum of our airpumps; and where (at 25,000 
toises high) the mercury in the barometer would 
not rise to 0°012 of a line. We have ascer- 
tained the uniform mixture of atmospheric air 
to 0:003 nearly, only to an elevation of 3000 
toises ;. consequently not beyond the last stra- 
tum of fleecy clouds. It might be admitted, 
that, in the first revolutions of the globe, gaseous 
substances, which yet remain unknown to us, 
may have risen toward that’ region, through 
which the falling stars pass: but accurate expe- 
riments, made upon mixtures of gasses which 
have not the same specific gravity, prove, that 
we cannot admit a superior stratum of the at- 
mosphere entirely different from the inferior 
strata. Gaseous substances mix and penetrate 
each other with the least motion; and a uni- 
formity of their mixture would have taken place 
in the lapse of ages *, unless we suppose in 
them the effects of a repulsive ‘action unexam- 
pled in those substances which we can subject 
to our observations. Farther, if we admit the 
existence of particular aérial fluids in the inac- 
cessible regions of luminous meteors, falling 
stars, bolides, and the Aurora Borealis; how 


® See my experiments on a mixture of hydrogen and oxy- 
gen, or on an atmospheric air with base of hydrogen, in a 
paper on refractions inserted in my ‘Astron, Obs.. Vol. i, 
p- 117—120., 


343 


van we conceive why the whole stratum of those 
fluids ‘does not at once take fire, but that the 
gaseous emanations, like the clouds, occupy 
only limited spaces ? How can we suppose an 
electrical explosion without some vapours col- 
lected together, capable’ of containing unequal 
charges of electricity, im air, the mean tempe- 
rature:of which is perhaps 25° below the freezing 
point of the centigrade thermometer, and ‘the 
rarefaction | of which. is’so' considerable, that 
the compression of the electrical shock could 
scarcely disengage any heat* ?) These difficul- 
ties would im great part be removed, if the 
direction ofthe motion of falling stars allowed 
us to consider them’as bodies with’ a solid nu-. 
cleus, as-cosmic phenomena (belonging to space 
beyond the limits of our atmosphere), and not 
as tellwric' phenomena (belonging to our planet 
only). 

Supposing that: the meteors of Cumana were 
only at the usual height; at which ‘falling stars 
in general move, the same meteors ‘were seen 
above the horizon in ‘places more ‘than 310 
leagues distant from each other +. © Now what 


* See anexplanation of the heat’produced by the electrical 
shock .givea: by. Mr. Gay-Lussac, in’ the year 1805, im a 
Paper which I published jointly with him in the Journal de 


Phys. vol. Ix. 
+ It was this circumstance, that induced Lambert to pro- 
pose the observation of falling stars for the determination of 


344 


an extraordinary disposition to incandescence 
must have reigned on the 12th November, in 
the higher regions of the atmosphere, to have 
furnished during four hours myriads of bolides 
and falling stars visible at the equator, in Green~ 
land, and in Germany ! 

Mr. Benzenberg j udiciously observes, that the 
Same cause, which renders the phenomenon 
more frequent, has also an influence on the 
largeness of the meteors, and the intensity of 
their light. In Europe, the nights when there 
are the greatest number of falling stars are 
those, in which very bright ones are mixed with 
very small ones. The periodicalness of the phe- 
nomenon augments the interest which it ex- 
cites. There are months, in which Mr. Brandes 
has reckoned in our temperate zone only sixty 
or eighty falling stars in one night; and in 
other months their number has risen to two 
thousand. Whenever one is observed, which 
has the diameter of Sirius or of Jupiter, we are 
sure of seeing so brilliant a meteor succeeded 
by a great number of smaller meteors. -If the 
falling stars be very frequent during one night, 
it is very probable, that this frequency will 
continue during seyeral weeks. It would seem, 
that in the higher regions of the atmosphere, 


terrestrial longitudes. He Considered them as celestial sig- 
nals seen at great distances, 


| 

f 
I 
| 


345 


near that extreme limit where the centrifugal 
force is balanced by gravity, there exists at 
regular periods a particular disposition for the 
production of bolides, falling stars, and the 
Aurora Borealis *. Does the periodicalness of 
this great phenomenon depend upon the state 
of the atmosphere? or upon something which 
this atmosphere receives from without, while 
the Earth advances in the ecliptic ? Of all this 
we are still as ignorant as men were in the days 
of Anaxagoras, 

With respect to the falling stars themselves, 
it appears to me from my own experience, that 
they are more frequent in the equinoctial re- 
gions than in the temperate zone; more fre- 
quent over the continents, and near certain 
coasts, than in the middle of the ocean. Do 
the radiation of the surface of the globe, and 
the electric charge of the lower regions of the 
atmosphere, which varies according to the na- 
ture of the soil, and the positions of the conti- 
nents and seas, exert their influence as far as 
those heights, where eternal winter reigns ? The 


* Ritter, on the periods of nine or ten years (1788, 1798, 
1807,)in Gilbert’s Annals, Vol. xv, p.212; vol. xvi, p. 224, 
He makes a distinction, like several other natural philoso- 
phers, between the bolides mingled ‘with falling stars and 
those luminous meteors, which, enveloped in vapours and 
smoke, explode with great noise, and let fall (mostly in the 
day-time) aérolites. These latter certainly do not belong ta 
our atmosphere, 


346 


total absence-even of the smallest clouds, at 
certain. seasons, or above some barren plains 
destitute of vegetation, seem to prove, that this 
influence can be felt’ at least as far as five or 
six thousand toises high. A phenomenon ana- 
logous to that of the 12th of November. was ob- 
served thirty years before, on the table-land of 
the Andes, in a country studded: with volca- 
noes. At the city of Quito there was seen in 
one part of the sky, above the volcano of Cay- 
ambo, so great a number of falling stars, that 
the mountain was thought to be» in flames. 
This singular. sight lasted more than an: hour. 
The people assembled in. the: plain of. Exido, 
where a magnificent view) presents itself of the 
highest summits of the Cordilleras. _ A. proces- 
sion was already on the point of setting out 
from the Cenvent of St. Francis, when it was 
perceived, that. the blaze on the, horizon) was 
caused by fiery. meteors, which ran along, the 
skies in. all directions; at the altitude of twelve 
or thirteen degrees, 


ae Se Pees ie 


CHAPTER XI. 


Passage from Cumana to La Guayra.— Morro 
of New Barcelona.— Cape Codera. — Road 
Srom La Guayra to Caraccas. 


Ow the 16th of November, at eight in the 
evening, we were under sail to pass along the 
coast from Cumana to the port of La Guayra, 
by which the inhabitants of. the province. of 
Venezuela export the greater part. of. their 
produce. The passage. is only , sixty leagues, 
and. often takes only thirty-six, or forty hours, 
The little coasting vessels are favored at once 
by the wind, and by the currents, which run 
with more or less strength: from east. to. west, 
along the coasts of Terra Firma, particularly 
from. Cape Paria to that of Chichibacoa. The 
road by land. from Cumana to New Barcelona, 
and thence. to Caraccas,, is nearly in the same 
state as before the discovery of America. The 
traveller must. contend. with the obstacles of a 
miry country, large scattered rocks, and the 
force of vegetation. He must sleep in the open 
air, pass the yallies of the Unare, the Tuy, and 


348 


the Capaya, and cross the torrents, which in- 
crease rapidly on account of the proximity of 
the mountains. To these obstacles must be 
added the dangers, that arise from the extreme 
insalubrity of the country, through which he 
journies. The very low lands, between the sea- 
shore and the chain of hills nearest the coast, 
are extremely unhealthy, from the Bay of Mo- 
chima as far as Coro. But the latter town, 
surrounded by an immense wood of thorny cac- 
tuses, owes it’s great salubrity, like Cumana, to 
the barrenness of it’s soil and the absence of 
rain. ; 

The road by land is sometimes preferred to 
the passage by sea, in returning from Caraccas 
to Cumana, to avoid going against the current. 
The postman from Caraccas is nine days in per- 
forming this journey.. We often saw persons, 
who had followed him, arrive at Cumana ill of 
nervous and miasmatic fevers. The tree, of 
which the bark * furnishes a salutary remedy 
for those fevers, grows in the same vallies, and 
upon the edge of the same forests, which send 
forth such dangerous exhalations. Mr. Bon- 
pland recognized the cuspare among the veget- 
ables of the Gulf of Santa-Fe, situate between 
the ports of Cumana and Barcelona. The sick- 


* Cortex Angusture of our Dispensatories, the bark of 
the bonplandea trifoliata. 


if 
i 
' 
d 


ee De isin miei tents 


349 


ly traveller reposes himself in a cottage, the 
inhabitants of which are ignorant of the febri- 
fuge qualities of the trees, that shade the sur- 
rounding vallies, 

Passing by sea from Cumana to La Guayra, 
we intended to take up our abode in the town 
of Caraccas, till the end of the rainy season ; 
to direct our course thence across the great 
plains or Llanos to the Missions of the Oroonoko; 
to go up that immense river, to. the south of the 
cataracts, as far as Rio Negro and the frontiers 
of Brazil; and thence to return to Cumana by 
the capital of Spanish Guyana, vulgarly called, 
on account of it’s situation, Angostura, or the 
Strait. It was not possible for us to fix the 
time it would require, to accomplish a tour of 
seven hundred leagues, more than two thirds of 
-which was to be made in boats. The only parts: 
of the Oroonoko known on the coasts are those 
near it’s mouth. No commercial intercourse is 
kept up with the Missions. All the country 
beyond the Llanos is unknown to the inhabit- 
ants of Cumana and Caraccas. Some think, 
that the plains of Calabozo, covered with turf, 
stretch eight hundred leagues to the south, 
communicating with the Steppes or Pampas. 
of Buenos Ayres; others, recalling to mind the 
great mortality, that reigned among the troops 
of Iturriaga and Solano, during their expedi- 
tion to the Oroonoko, consider the whole coun- 


350 


try, south of the Cataracts of Atures, as’ ex- 
tremely pernicious to health. In a region where 
travelling is so uncommon, there seems to be 
a pleasure in exaggerating to strangers the 
difficulties arising from the climate, the animals, 
and the Indians. We were yet little accustom: 
ed to the means of discouragement’ employed 
by the planters, with a candor at once simple 
and affectionate; but we persisted in the project 
we had formed. We could rely upon the in- 
terest’ and solicitude of the governor’ of Cu- 
mana,’ Don Vicente’ Emparan, as well as on 
the recommendations of the Franciscan monks, 
who are the real masters of the shores of the 
Oroonoko. 

Fortunately for us, one-of those monks, Juan 
Gonzales, was at that time at Cumana. This 
young monk was only a lay brother, but he 
was enlightened, highly intelligent, and full 
of spirit: and courage: He had the misfortune 
shortly after his arrival on the coast to displease 
his superiors, upon the''election of ‘a new Di- 
rector of the Missions of Piritoo, which is a pe- 
riod of great agitation in the Convent of New 
Barcelona. ‘ The victorious party exercised so 
general a'retaliation, that the lay brother could 
not escape. He was. sent to Esmeralda, ‘the 
last Mission of the Upper Oroonoko, famous for. 
an innumerable quantity of noxious insects, 
with which the air is continually filled... Fray 


een 


aa 


351 


Juan Gonzales was thoroughly acquainted: witlt 
the forests, which extend from ‘the cataracts 
toward the sources of the Oroonoko.’ “Another 
revolution in the republican’ government of the 
' monks: had: some years ‘before again ‘brought 
him back to the: coast; where he enjoyed; and 
with a just claim, the esteem of his superiors. 
He confirmed us in our desire of examining the 
much disputed bifurcation of the Oroonoko, He 
gave us useful advice for the preservation of our 
health, in climates where he had himself suffered 
long from intermitting fevers.. We had the sa- 
tisfaction of finding Fray Juan Gonzales:at- New 
Barcelona, on our return from Rio Negro.’ In- 
tending to go from the Havannah to Cadiz, he 
obligingly offered to take charge of part of our 
herbals, and our insects of the Oroonoko ; but 
these collections: were unfortunately lost witl: 
himself in the Ocean. This excellent: young 
man, who was strongly attached to us, and 
whose courageous zeal might have rendered 
great services to the Missions of his order, pe- 


rished in a tempest on the coast of Africa, in 
1801. 


The boat which conveyed us from Cumang 
to La Guayra* was one of those, which trade 
between the coasts and the West India islands. 


* This passage costs one hundred and tweaty piastres, if 
you take the whole boat. 


352 


They are thirty feet long, and not more than 
three feet high at the gunwale; they have no 


decks, and their lading is generally from two 


hundred, to two hundred and fifty quintals. 
Although the sea is extremely rough from Cape 
Codera as far as La Guayra, and although the 
boats have an enormous triangular sail, some= 
what dangerous in those gusts which issue from 
the passes of the mountains, there is not an 
example during thirty years of one of these 
boats being lost in the passage from Cumana 
to the coast of Caraccas. The skill of the 


Guaiqueria pilots is so great, that shipwrecks” 


are very rare, even in the frequent trips they 
make from Cumana to Guadaloupe, or the 
Danish islands, surropnded with breakers, 
These voyages of 120 or 150 leagues, in an 
open sea, out of sight of land, are performed in 
boats without decks, in the manner of the an- 
cients, without any observations of the meridian 
altitude of the sun, without charts, and generally 
without a compass. ‘The Indian pilot directs his 
way at night by the polar star, and in the day 
by the course of the Sun and the wind, which 
he believes to be little variable. I have seen 
Guaiqueries and pilots of the coast of the Zam- 
boes, who could find the polestar by the direc- 
tion of the pointers, « and 6 of the Great Bear, 
and they seemed to me to steer less from the 
view of the polestar itself, than from the line 


ene 


FE ee 


353 


drawn through these stars. It is surprising, 
that at the first sight of land, they can find the 
Island of Guadaloupe, Santa Cruz, or Porto 
Rico; but the compensation of the errors of 
their course is not always equally fortunate. 
The boats, if they fall to leeward in making 
land, beat up with great difficulty to the east- 
ward, against the wind and the current. The 
pilots, in time of war, often pay dearly for their 
ignorance and their neglect of the quadrant; 
since the privateers cruize near those very capes, 
which the boats’ of Terra Firma, when they 
miss their course, are obliged to make in order 
to find out where they are. 

We descended rapidly the little river Man- 
ganares, the windings of which are marked by 
eocoa-treés, as the rivers of our climates are 
bordered by poplars and old willows. On the 
adjacent arid land, the thorny bushes, on which 
by day are seen nothing but bushes covered 
with dust, glitter during the night with thou- 
sands of luminous sparks. The number of 
phosphorescent insects augments in the stormy 
season. Weare never weary of admiring in the 
equinoctial regions the effect of those reddish 
and movable fires, which, reflected by a limpid 
water, blend their images with those of the 
starry vault of Heaven. 

We quitted the borders of Cumana, as if we 
had long been their inhabitants. This was the 

VOL. II. 2a 


354 


first land we had touched under a zone, toward 
which my wishes had been turned from my 
earliest youth. There is something so great, 
so powerful, in the impression made by nature in 
the climate of the Indies, that after an abode 
of a few months we seemed to have lived there 
during a long succession of years. In Europe, 
the inhabitant of the north and of the plains 
feels an almost similar emotion, when he quits 
even after a short abode the shores of the Bay 
of Naples, the delicious country between Tivoli 
and the Lake of Nemi, or the wild and solemn 
scenery of the Higher Alps and the Pyrenees. 
Yet every where under the temperate zone, the 
effects of the physiognomy of the vegetables 
afford little contrast. The firs and the oaks, 
that crown the mountains of Sweden, have a 
certain family air with those, which vegetate in 
the fine climates of Greece and Italy. Between 
the tropics on the contrary, in the lower regions 
of both Indies, every thing in nature appears 
new and marvellous. In the open plains, and 
amid the gloom of forests, almost all the re+ 
membrances of Europe are effaced ; for it is the 
vegetation that determines the character of a 
landscape, and acts upon our imagination by 
it’s mass, the contrast of it’s forms, and the glow 
of it’s colours. In proportion as impressions are 
powerful and new, they weaken antecedént im- 
pressions, and their strength gives them the ap- 


305 


pearance of duration.. I appeal to those, who, 
more sensible of the beauties of nature than of 
the charms of social life, have long resided in 
the torrid zone. How dear, how memorable 
during life, is the land where they first disem- 
barked! A vague desire to: revisit that. spot 
roots itself in their minds to the most advanced 
age. Cumana and it’s dusty soil are still more 
frequently present to my imagination, than all 
the wonders of the Cordilleras. Beneath the 
fine sky of the south, the light, and the magic 
of the aérial hues, embellish a land almost des- 
titute of vegetation. The Sun does not merely 
enlighten, it colours the objects, and wraps 
them in a thin vapour, which, without changing 
the transparency of the air, renders it’s tints 
more harmonious, softens the effects of the light, 
aud diffuses over nature that calm, which is re- 
flected in our souls. To explain this vivid im- 
pression, which the aspect of the scenery in the 
two Indias produces, even on coasts where 
there is little wood, it will be sufficient to re- 
collect, that the beauty of the sky augments 
from Naples toward the equator, almost as 
much as from Provence toward the south of 
Italy. - 

We passed at high water the bar which 
the little river Manzanares has formed at it’s 
‘mouth. The evening breeze gently swelled 
the waves of the Gulf of Cariaco, The moon 

2a2 


356 


had not risen, but that part of the milky way, 
which extends from the feet of the Centaur 
toward the constellation of Sagitiarius, seemed 
to pour a silvery light over the surface of the 
ocean. The white rock, crowned by the Castle 
of St. Antonio, appeared from time to time be- 
tween the bigh tops of the cocoa trees, that 
border the shore. We soon recognized the 
coasts only by the scattered lights of the Guay- 
queria fishermen. In these momenis we felt 
in all it’s force the charm of that spot, and the 
regret of leaving it. Five months had passed 
since we disembarked on that shore, as on a 
newly discovered land, strangers to all that 
surrounded us, approaching with mistrust every 
bush, every humid and shadowy spot. That 
coast now disappeared to our eyes, leaving re- 
membrances which seemed of a long. date, 
The soil, the recks, the plants, the inhabitants, 
all now were become familiar to us. 

We sailed at first to the N. N. W., approach- 
ing the peninsula of Araya; we then ran thirty 
miles to the W. and to the W. 8S. W. As we 
advanced toward the shoal that surrounds Cap¢ 
Arenas, and stretches as far as the petroleum. 
springs of Maniquarez, we enjoyed one of those 
varied sights, which the great phosphorescence 
of the sea so often displays in those climates, 
Bands of porpoises seemed to take pleasure in 
following our bark. Fifteen or sixteen of these. 


| 
| 


= 357 


dnimals swam at equal distances; when, in 
turning on their backs, they struck the surface 
of the water with their broad tails, they diffus- 
ed a brilliant light, that seemed like fiames 
issuing from the depth of the ocean. Each 
band, in ploughing the surface of the waters, 
léft behind it a track of light, the more striking 
as the rest of the sea was not phosphorescent. 
As the motion of an oar, and the track of the 
bark, produced on that night but feeble sparks, 
it is natural to suppose, that the vivid phospho- 
rescence caused by the porpoises was owing 
not only to the stroke of their tails, but also 
to the gelatinous matter, that envelopes their 
bodies, and is detached, by the shock of the 
waves. 

We found ourselves at midnight between some 
barren and rocky islands, which rise like bas- 
tions in the middle of the sea, and form the 
groupe of the Caraccas and Chimanas*. The 
Moon was above the horizon, and lighted up 
- those cleft rocks, bare of vegetation, and of a 
fantastic aspect. The sea here forms a sort 
of bay, a slight scooping out of the land De- 
tween Cumana and Cape Codera. The islets 
of Picua, Picuita, Caraccas, and Boracha, ap- 
pear like fragments of the ancient coast, which 


* There are three of the Caraccas islands and eight of 
the Chimanas, 


308 


stretches from Bordones in the same direction 
east and west. The Gulfs of Mochima and of 
Santa-Fe, which will no doubt one day become 
frequented ports, lie behind those little islands. 
The rents in the land, the fracture and dip 
of the strata, every thing here denotes the ef- 
fects of a great revolution. It was perhaps the 
same, that tore asunder the chain of the primi- 
tive mountains, and separated the mica-schistus 
of Araya and the island of Margaretta from 
the gneiss of Cape Codera. Many of these 
islands are visible at Cumana, from the terraces 
of the houses, and display, according to the 
superposition of layers of air more or less heat- 
ed, the most singular effects of suspension and 
mirage*, The height of these rocks does not 
probably surpass one hundred and fifty toises ; 


but at night, enlightened by the moon, they. 


seem to be of a very considerable elevation. 

It may appear extraordinary, to find Carac- 
cas Islands so distant from the city of that 
name, opposite the coast of the Cumanagotoes ; 
but the denomination of Caraccas+ denoted 
at the beginning of the Conquest not a par- 


* See note D at the end of this volume. 


+ Oviedo y Banos, Hist. de Venezuela, Lib. lil, cap. 9, p. 
140. One of the smaller West India islands, Gaudaloupe, 
was anciently called Caracqueira, Pet. Martyr, Ocean., 
Dee. iii, Lib. ix, p- 306, 


| 
| 
| 
a 


359 


ticular spot, but a tribe of Indians neighbours 
of the Tecs, the Taramaynas, and the Chaga- 
ragates. As we came very near this group 
of mountainous islands, they becalmed us; and 
at sunrise, small currents drifted us toward 
Boracha, the largest of them. The rocks 
rising almost perpendicularly, the shore is 
abrubt; and in a subsequent voyage I saw 
frigates at anchor almost touching the land, 
The temperature of the atmosphere sensibly 
augmented since we were sailing among the is- 
lands of this little archipelago. The rocks, 
heated during the day, give out at night by 
yadiation a part of the heat absorbed. As the 
sun arose on the horizon, the rugged moun- 
tains projected their vast shadows on the sur- 
face of the ocean. The flamingoes began to 
fish wherever they found in a creek calcare- 
ous rocks bordered by a narrow beach. All 
these islands are now entirely uninhabited ; 
but upon one of the Caraccas are found wild 
goats of a large size, brown, and extremely 
swift. Our Indian pilot assured us, that their 
flesh has an excellent flavour, Thirty years 
ago a family of whites settled on this island, 
and cultivated maize and cassava. The father 
alone survived his children, As his wealth 
had inereased, he purchased two black slaves, 
and this was the cause of his misfortunes. By 
his slaves he was murdered, The goats be- 


360 


came wild, but the cultivated plants did not. 
Maize in America, like wheat in Europe, con- 
nected with man since his first migrations, 
appears to be preserved only by his care. We 
sometimes see these nourishing gramina dis~ 
Seminate themselves; but when left to nature, 
the birds prevent. their reproduction by des- 
troying the seeds. The two slaves of the isle 
of Caraccas long escaped punishment; it was 
difficult to ascertain a crime committed in so 
lonely a spot. One of these blacks is now the 
hangman at Cumana. He informed against 
his accomplice, and an executioner being want- 
ed, he obtained pardon on condition, according 
to the barbarous custom of the country, of 
hanging all the prisoners on whom sentence. of 
death had been pronounced long before. It 
Seems difficult to believe, that there are men 
sufficiently ferocious, to preserve their lives 
at this price; and execute, with their own 
hands to day, those whom they informed 
against yesterday. 

We quitted a spot that left such painful re- 
; membrances, and anchored for some hours in 
the road of Néw Barcelona, at the mouth of 
the river Neveri, of which the Indian (Cuma- 
hagoto) name is Enipiricuar, This river -is 
full of crocodiles, which sometimes continue 
their excursions into the open sea, especially in 
calm weather, They are of the Species. com. 


361 


mon in the Oroonoko, which so much resem- 
bles the crocodile of Egypt, that they have long 
been confounded together. We may conceive 
that an animal, the body of which is surround- 
ed with a kind of armour, must be nearly in- 
different to the saltness of the water. Pigafetta * 
had already seen, as he relates in his journal 
recently published at Milan, crocodiles that 
inhabit alike the land and the sea. These 
facts must be interesting to geologists, since 
their attention has been fixed on the fresh-wa- 
ter formations, and the curious mixture of ma- 
rine and fluviatile petrifactions, which are 
sometimes observed in certain very recent 
rocks. 

The port of Barcelona, of which the name is 
scarcely to be found on our maps, has had a 
very active commerce ever since 1795. From 
it is exported great part of the produce of those 
vast steppes, which extend from the south side 
of the chain of the coast as far as the Oroonoko, 
and which abound in cattle of every kind, al- 
most as much as the Pampas of Buenos Ayres. 
The commercial industry of these countries de- 
pends on the demand in the great and little 
West India islands for salted provision, oxen, 
mules, and horses. The coasts of Terra Firma 
being opposite to those of the Island of Cuba, 


* Amoretti’s translation, p 154, 


362 


at_a distance of fifteen or eighteen days’ sail, 
the merchants of the Havannah prefer, espe- 
cially in time of peace, drawing their provi- 
sion from the port of Barcelona, to the risque 
of a long voyage in another hemisphere to the 
mouth of the Rio de la Plata. Of a black po- 
pulation amounting to 1,300,000, which the 
archipelago of the West India islands now con- 
tains, Cuba alone has more than 230,000 slaves* 
who are fed with vegetables, salt provision, and 
dried fish. Every vessel, that trades in salt 
meat, or fasajo, from Terra Firma, carries 
twenty or thirty thousand arobas, the sale price 
of which is more than forty-five thousand pias- 
tres. The situation of Barcelona is singularly 
advantageous for the trade in cattle. The 
animals have only three days’ journey from the 
Llanos. to the port, while it requires eight or 
nine days to reach Cumana, on account of the 
chain of mountains of the Brigantine and the 
Impossible. According to the best information 
I could obtain, eight thousand mules were em- 
barked at Barcelona, six thousand at Porto- 


* The debates in the Cortes of Cadiz on the abolition of 
the slave trade led the Consulado of the Havannah, to make 
an accurate inquiry, in 1811, into the population of the is- 
land of Cuba. It was found to contain 600,000 souls, of 
whom 274,000 were whites, 114,000 free men of colour, 
and 212,000 Negro slaves. The estimation published in 
my work on Mexico, vol, ii, p.'7, was therefore much tog 


small, 


| 


: 
I 
| 
I 
j 
| 
I 
| 
i 
| 
J 


363 


Cabello; and three thousand at Carupano, in 
1799 and 1800, for the Spanish, English, and 
French islands. I am ignorant of the precise 


exportation of Burburata, Coro, and the mouths 
of the Guarapiche and the Oroonoko; but I 
believe, notwithstanding the causes that have 
diminished the quantity of cattle in the Llanos 
of Cumana, Barcelona, and Caraccas, those 
immense steppes did not furnish less at that 
period than thirty thousand mules a year for 
the West India trade. Estimating each mule 
at twenty-five piastres (the cost price) we find 
that this branch of trade alone produces nearly 
3,700,000 francs, without reckoning the profits 
on the freight of the vessels.. Mr. de Pons *, 
in general very exact in his statistical compu- 
tations, estimates them at a much. smaller 
number. But as he could not himself visit 
the Llanos, his place of agent to the French 
government obliging him to reside constantly 
at the town of Caraccas, the proprietors of 
the Hatos perhaps communicated to him too 
low. estimations. I shall collect farther on, 
in a particular chapter, whatever relates to the 
trade and agricultural industry of these coun- 
tries. . 
Having disembarked on the right bank of 
the Neveri, we ascended to a litile fort, £/ 


* Voyage @ la Terra-Ferme, vol. ii, p. 386. 


364 


Morro de Barcelona, built at sixty or seventy 
toises of elevation above the level of the sea. 
It is a calcareous rock lately fortified; but is 
commanded -on the south by a hill far more 
lofty; and engineers assert, that it would not 
be difficult for an enemy, after having landed 
between the mouth of the river and the Morro, 


to turn the latter, and erect batteries on the | 


surrounding heights. We remained five hours 
in the fort, the guard of which is confided to 
the provincial militia. We waited in vain for 
intelligence concerning the English privateers 
stationed along the coast. Two of our fellow- 
travellers, brothers of the Marquis del Toro of 
Caraccas, came from Spain, where they had 
served in the King’s guards. They were men 
of highly cultivated minds, who, in company 
with the brigadier de Caxigal, and Count To- 
var, were returning, after a long absence, to 
their native couniry. They had more reason 
than we to fear being made prisoners, and car- 
ried to Jamaica. I had no passport from the 
admiralty, but secure in the protection, which 
the English government grants to those, who 
travel for the progress of science, I had written 
on my arrival at Cumana to the governor of 


_ the island of ‘Trinidad, to explain to him the 


purpose of my researches. The answer I re- 


ceived by way of the Gulf of Paria was entirely 
to my satisfaction, 


iS = eee 


865 


"The view from the height of the Morro is tot 
without beauty. ‘The rocky island of Boracha 
lies on the east, the lofty promontory of Unare 
on the west, and below is the mouth of the river 
Nereri, and the arid shores, on which the cro 
codiles come to sleep in the sun. Notwithstand- 
ing the extreme heat of the air, for the ther- 
mometer, exposed to the reflection of the white 
calcareous rock, rose to 38°, we walked all over 
the hill. A fortunate chance led us to observe 
a very curious geological phenomenon, which 
we again found in the Cordilleras of Mexico*. 
The limestone of Barcelona has a dull, even, or 
conchoidal fracture, with very flat cavities. It 
is divided into very thin strata, and displays 
less analogy with the limestone of Cumanacoa, 
than with that of Caripe, forming the cavern 
of Guacharo. [tis traversed by banks of schis~ 
fose jasper, black, with a conchoidal frac- 
ture, breaking into fragments of a parallelopi- 
pedal figure. This fossile does not exhibit those 
little streaks of quartz, so common in the Ly- 
dian stone. It is found decomposed at it’s sur- 
face into a yellowish gray crust, and does not 
act upon the magnet. It’s edges, a little trans- 
Aucid,; make it resemble the hornstein, which 
ig so common in secondary limestones{. It 


® Essai Politique sur la nouvelle Espagne, Tom. ti, p. 535. : 
+ Kieselschiefer of Werner. 


4 In Switzerland, the hornstein passing into common 


366 


is remarkable, that we find the schistose jasper 
which in Europe characterizes the transition 
rocks *, in a limestone that hasa great analogy 
with that of Jura. In the study of forma- 
tions, which is the great end of geognosy, the 
knowledge acquired in the two worlds should 
furnish reciprocal aid to each other. It appears, 
that these black strata are found also in the 
calcareous mountains of the Island of Boracha+-; 
Another jasper, that which is known by the 
name of the Egyptian pebble, was found by Mr. 
Bonpland near the Indian village of Curaca- 
tichef, fifteen leagues south of the Morro of 
Barcelona, when, returning from the Oroonoko, 
we crossed the Llanos, and approached the 
mountains on the coast. This stone presented 
yellowish concentric lines and. bands, on a 
reddish brown ground. It appeared to me, that 
the round pieces of Egyptian jasper belonged 
also to the Barcelona limestone. Yet, accord- 
ing to Mr. Cordier, the fine pebbles of Suez 
are owing to a breccia formation, or siliceous 
agglomerate. 


jasper is found in’ kidney-stones and in layers both in the 
Alpme and Jura limestone, especially in the former. 


“ The transition limestone and schistus. 

t+ We saw some of it as ballast, in a fishing boat at Pun- 
ta Araya. Its fragments might have been mistaken for 
hasaltes. 

{ Or Curacaguitiche. 


| 
| 
i 
4 
| 


367 


At the instant we set sail, on the 19th of 
November at noon, I took some altitudes of 
the Moon, to determine the longitude of the 
Morro. The difference of meridian between 
Cumana and the town of Barcelona, where I 
made a great number of astronomical observa- 
tions in 1800, is 0° 34’ 48. I have elsewhere 
discussed this difference, upon which there were 
many doubts at that period *. I found the dip+ 
of the needle 42°20°: the intensity of the forces 
was equal to 224 oscillations. : 

From the Morro of Barcelona, as far as Cape 
Codera, the land becomes low, as it recedes 
toward the south ; and it’s soundings run out 
into the sea to the distance of three miles. Be- 
yond this we find the bottom at forty-five or 
fifty fathoms. The temperature of the sea at it’s 
surface was 25°9°: but when we were passing 
through the narrow channel, that separates the 


* See the Introduction to my Ast. Obs., vol. i, p. xxxix. 
Mr. Espinosa has fixed on 34’. The pilots, who navigate 
these coasts, reckon from Cumana to Barcelona twelve 
leagues; from Barcelona to the Piritoo Islands six leagues ; 
from these islands to Cape Unare six leagues; from Cape 
Wnare to Cape Codera eighteen leagues. By Berthoud’s 
timekeeper I found the western point of the greatest of 
the Piritoo Islands 14’ 32, and Cape Codera 1° 24/4”, 
west of the meridian of Nueva Barcelona. 

+ This resulf properly belongs to the first of August, 
1800, and to the town of Nueva Barcelona (lat. 40° 6/ 52/"), 
where I was able to make the observation with greater 
@are. 


368 


two Piritoo Islands, in three fathoms water, 
the thermometer was only 24:5°. The differ- 
ence was constant. It would perhaps be great- 
er, if the current, which runs with rapidity to- 
ward the west, stirred up deeper waters; and 
if, in a pass of such small width, the land did 
not contribute to raise the temperature of the 
sea. The Piritoo Isles resemble those shoals 
which become visible when the tide falls.. They 
do not rise more than eight or nine inches 
above the mean height of the sea. Their sur- 
face is all smooth, and covered with grass. We 
might have thought we beheld one of our north- 
ern meadows. The disk of the setting sun ap- 
peared like a globe of fire suspended: over the 
savannah; and. it’s last rays, as they swept the 
earth, illumined the extremities of the grass, 
strongly agitated by the evening breeze. In 
the low and bumid places of the equinoctial 
zone, even when the gramineous plants and 
reeds present the aspect of a meadow, or of 
turf, a rich decoration of the picture is usually. 
wanting; I mean that variety of wild flowers, 
which, scarcely rising above the grass, seem to 
lie upon a smooth bed of verdure. Between 
the tropics, the strength and luxury of vegeta- 
tion give such a developement to plants, that 
the smallest of the dicotyledonous family be- 
come shrubs. It would seem as if the liliace- 
ous plants mingled with the gramina assumed 


369 


the place of the flowers of our meadows. ‘Their 
form is indeed striking ; they ‘dazzle ‘by the 
variety and splendour of their colours; but, 
too high above the soil, they disturb that har- 
monious relation, which exists among the plants 
that compose our meadows and our turf. Na- 
ture, in her beneficence, has given the land: 
scape under every zone it’s peculiar type of 
beauty. 

We ought not to wonder, that fertile islands, 
so near the continent, are not now inhabited. 
it was only at the first period of the discovery, 
and when the Caribbees, Chaymas, and Cuma- 
nagotoes were still masters of the coast, that 
the Spaniards formed. settlements at Cubagua 
and Margaretta. When the natives were sub- 
dued, or driven to the south, toward the sa- 
vannahs, settlements. on the .continent were 
preferred, where there was a choice of land, 
and ef Indians, who might be treated like beasts 
ef burden. If the little islands of Tortuga, 
Blanquilla, and Orchilla, had been placed amid — 
the group of the Antilles, they would not have 
remained without any trace of cultivation. 

Vessels that draw a great deal of water pass 
between the main land and the most southern 
of the Piritoo Islands. Being very low, their 
northern. point is dreaded by the pilots, who 7 
come near the coast: in those latitudes, When 
we found ourselyes to the westward of the 

YOu. UL 2B 


370 


Morro of Barcelona, and the mouth of the 
river Unare, the sea, till then calm, became 
agitated and rough in proportion as we ap- 
proached Cape Codera. The influence of that 
vast promontory is felt from afar, in that part 
of the Caribbean Sea. The length of the pas- 
sage from Cumana to La Guayra depends on 
the degree of facility, with which Cape Codera 
can be doubled. Beyond this cape the-sea con- 
stantly runs so high, that we can scarcely believe 
we are near a coast, where (from the point 
of Paria as far as Cape St. Roman) a gale 
of wind is never known. The impulse of the 
waves was strongly felt in our boat. My fellow 
travellers suffered much. I slept calmly, hav- 
ing the good fortune, uncommon enough, of 
not being subject to sea-sickness. It blew fresh 
during the night. On the 20th of November at 
sunrise we were sufficiently advanced, to have 
the expectation 6f doubling the cape in a few 
hours. We hoped to arrive the same day at 
ja Guayra; but our Indian pilot was assailed 
~ by fresh fears of the privateers stationed near 
that port. He thought it would be prudent 
therefore to make for the land, and anchor in 
the little harbour of Higuerota, which we had 
already passed, and await the shelter of night 
to proceed on our voyage. When it is proposed 
to persons suffering from sea-sickness to disem- 
hark, it is easy to guess the resolution they will 


371 


take. Remonstrances were useless ; and, com- 
pelled to yield, we were on the 20th of Novem- 
ber at nine in the morning at anchor: in the 
Bay of Tiguerota, west of the mouth of the Rio 
Capaya. 

We found neither village ‘nor farm, but two 
er three huts, inhabited by mestizo fishermen. 
Their livid tint, and the extreme thinness of 
their children, informed us, that this spot is 
one of the most unhealthy and feverish of the 
whole coast. The sea had so little depth in 
these parts, that even with the smallest barks 
you cannot land without wading in the water. 
The forests come down nearly to the beach, 
which is covered with a thicket of mangroves, 
avicennias, manchineel trees, and that new spe- 
cies of suriana, which the natives call romero 
de la mar*. It is to this thicket, and parti- 
cularly to the exhalations of the mangroves, 
that the extreme insalubrity of the air is attri- 
buted here, as every where else in both Indies. 
On disembarking, and when we were yet fifteen 
or twenty toises distant, we perceived a faint 
and sickly smell, which reminded me of that 
diffused through the galleries of deserted mines, 
where the lights begin to go out, and the timber . 
is all covered with flocculent byssus. The tem- 
perature of the air rose to 34°, heated by the 


* Suriana maritima. 


2e2 


is Lad 
4 a 


reverberation from the white sands, which form, 
a border between the mangroves and the great 
trees of the forest. As the shore descends with 
a gentle slope, the small tides are sufficient 
alternately to cover and. uncover the roots, and 
part of the trunk of the mangroves. It is, no 
doubt, while the Sun heats the humid wood, 
and causes the fermentation as it were of the 
ground, the remains of dead leaves, and the 
molluscz envelopped in the drift of floating 
sea-weed, that those deleterious gasses are 
formed, which escape our researches. We saw 
the sea-water, along the whole coast, acquire 
a yellowish brown tint, wherever it comes into 
contact with the mangrove trees. 

Struck with this phenomenon, I gathered at 
Higuerota a considerable quantity of branches 
and. roots, in order to make some experiments 


on the infusion of the mangrove, upon my arri- 


val at Caraccas. The infusion in warm water 
had a brown colour, and an astringent taste, 
{t contained a mixture of extractive matter, 
and tannin. The rhizophora, the mistleto, the 
cornel-tree, all the plants, which belong to the 
natural families of the lorantheous and the ca- 
prifoliaceous plants, have the same properties. 
The infusion of mangrove wood, kept in contact 
with atmospheric air under a glass jar for twelve 
days, did not sensibly affect it’s purity. A little 
blackish flocculent sediment was formed, but 


373 


it was attended by no sensible absorption of ox- 
ygen. The wood and roots of the mangrove 
placed under water were exposed to the rays of 
the Sun. I tried to imitate the daily operations 
of nature on the coasts at the rise of the tide. 
Bubbles of air were disengaged, and at the end 
of ten days formed a volume of thirty-three 
cubic inches. They were a mixture of azot 
gas and carbonic acid. Nitrous gas scarce- 
ly indicated. the presence of oxygen*. Lastly, 
I set the wood and the roots of the mangrove 
thoroughly wetted, to act on a given volume of 
atmospheric air in a phial with a ground glass 
stopple.. The whole of the oxygen disappeared ; 
and, far from being replaced by carbonic acid, 
limewater indicated only 0:02. There was even 
a diminution of the volume of air, more. than 
corresponded with the oxygen absorbed. These 
slight experiments led me to think, that it is 
the moistened bark and wood, that act upon the 
atmosphere in the forests of mangrove-trees, and 
not the water strongly tinged with yellow, 
which formed a distinct band along the coasts. 
In pursuing the different stages of decomposi- 
tion of the ligneous matter, I observed no ap- 
pearance of a disengagement of sulphuretted 


* In a hundred parts there were eighty-four of nitrogen, 
fifteen of carbonic acid gas that the water had not absorbed, 
and one of oxygen. \ 


374 


hydrogen, to which many travellers attribute 
the smell perceived amid mangroves. The 
decomposition of the earthy and alkaline sul- 
phats, and their transition to the state of sul- 
phurets, no doubt may favour this disengage- 
ment in many littoral and marine plants; for 
instance, in the fuci: but I am rather inclined 
to think, that the rhizophora, the avicennia, 
and the conocarpus, augment the insalubrity 
of the air by the animal matter, which they 
contain jointly with tannin. These shrubs be- 
long to the three natural families of the loran- 
thee, the combretacez *, and the pyrenaceze, in 
which the astringent principle abounds; and I 
have already observed, that this principle ac- 
companies gelatin, even in the bark of beech, 
alder, and nut-trees -. 

Besides, a thick wood covering marshy grounds 
would diffuse noxious exhalations in the atmoss 
phere, were it composed of trees which in them- 
selves have no deleterious properties. Wher- 
ever mangroves grow on the seashore, the beach 
is. covered with an infinite number of molluscs 
and insects. These animals love the shade, and 
a faint light; and they find themselves shelter- 
ed from. the shock of the waves amid this scaf-. 
folding of thick and intertwining roots, which 


* Rob. Brown, Flor. Nov. Holl. Prod., vol.i, p. 35%. 
fF Vauquelin, Annal. du Mus., T. XV, p. 77. 


373 


rises like lattice-work above the surface of the 
waters. Shell-fish cling to this lattice; crabs 
nestle in the hollow trunks; and the sea-weeds, 
which the winds and tides drive toward the 
coasts, remain suspended on the recurved 
branches, that bend toward the earth. It is 
thus that maritime forests, accumulating a 
slimy mud between their roots, aggrandize the 
domain of the continent; but while they gain on 
the sea, they augment but little in breadth ; for 
their progress itself becomes the cause of their 
destruction. The mangroves, and the other 
vegetables with which they live constantly in 
society *, perish as the ground dries, and they 
are no longer bathed with salt water. Their 
old trunks covered with shells, and half buried 
in the sand, denote, after the lapse of ages, the 
path they have followed in their migrations, 
and the limits of the land which they have 
wrested from the ocean. | 

The Bay of Higuerota is very favourably 
situate for examining Cape Codera, which pre- 
sents itself in all it’s extent seven miles distant. 
This promontory is more remarkable for it’s 
size, than for it’s elevation, which, according 


* The following are the names of these plants found on 
the continent, and on the islands. Avicennia nitida, a. guy- 
anensis Rich., conocarpus racemosa, rhizophora mangle, 
cocolloba uvigera, hippomane mancinella, echites biflora, 
suriania, strumpfia, the pinay palm-tree, &e. 


to the angles of elevation* taken on the shoreé, 
appeared to be only two. hundred toises. It is 
perpendicular: on the north, the west, and the 
east. In these grand profiles the dip of the 
strata. appears to be distinguishable. Judging 
from the fragments of rock found’ along. the 
coast, and from the hills near Higuerota, Cape 
Codera is not composed of granite with a gra- 
nular texture, but of a real gneiss with a foli- 
ated texture. It’s laminze are very broad, and 
sometimes sinuous-f. ‘They contain large no- 
dules of reddish feldspar, and little quartz. 
The mica is found in superposed lamelle, not 
isolated. The strata nearest the bay were in 
the direction of N. 60° E., and dipped 80°. to 
the N. W. These relations of direction and of 
dip are the same at the great mountain of the 
Silla, near Caraccas, and to the east of Mani- 
quarez in the isthmus of Araya. They seem to 
prove; that the primitive chain of that isthmus, 
after having been ruptured. or swallowed up by 
the sea through a space of thirty-five leagues ty, 
appears anew in Cape Codera; and continues 
toward the west as a chain of the coast. 

I was assured, that in the interior of the land, 
south of Higuerota, limestone formations are 


* The apparent angle is 1° 25/ 20/7, 


t Dickflasriger gneiss. 
{ Between the meridians of Maniquarez and Higuerota, 


377 


found. The gneiss did not act upon the mag- 
netic needle: yet along the coast, which forms 
a cove toward Cape Codera, and which is co- 
vered with a fine forest, I saw magnetic sands 
mixed with spangles of mica, which are depo- 
sited by the sea. This phenomenon occurs 
again near the port of La Guayra. It perhaps 
denotes the existence of some strata of horn- 
blende schistus covered by the waters, in which 
schistus the sand is disseminated. Cape Co- 
dera forms toward the north an immense 
spherical segment. A very low land stretches 
at it’s foot, which is known to navigators by the 
name of the Points of Tutumo and of San Fran- 
cisco. 

My fellow travellers dreaded so much the 
rolling of our little vessel, in a rough and swell- 
ing sea, that they resolved to take the road 
by land, which leads from Higuerota to Carac- 
cas. This passes through a wild and damp 
country, by the Montana of Capaya north of 
Caucagua, and the valley of Rio Guatira and 
Guarenas. I fouiid with satisfaction that Mr. 
Bonpland preferred this road, which, notwith- 
standing the continual rains, and the overflow- 
ing of the rivers, procured him a rich collec- 
tion of new plants*. For my part, I continued 

* Bauhinia ferruginea, brownea racemosa Bred., inga 


hymenzifolia, i. curiepensis, which Mr, Wildenouw has 
called by mistake i. caripensis, &c, 


378 
alone with the Guaiqueria pilot the voyage by 
sea. It appeared to me hazardous, to lose sight 
of the instruments, which we were to make 
use of on the banks of the Oroonoko, 

We set sail at the beginning of the night. 
The wind was unfavourable, and we doubled 
Cape Codera with difficulty. The surges were 
short, and often broke one upon another. A 
man must have felt the fatigue of an extremely 
hot day, to have slept in a little boat, that 
steered close to the wind. The sea ran the 
higher, on account of the wind being contrary 
to the current, till after midnight. The general 
motion of the waters between the tropics. to- 
ward the west is felt strongly on the coast dur- 
ing two thirds only of the year. In the months 
of September, October and November, the cur- 
rent often flows toward the east* for fifteen or 
twenty days in succession. Vessels on their 
way from Guayra to Porto Cabello have been 
known to be unable to stem the current, that 
runs from west to east, although they had the 
wind astern. The cause of these anomalies is 
not yet discovered. The pilots think they are 
the effect of some gales of wind from the north- 
west in the Gulf of Mexico. Yet these gales 
are much more violent toward the spring-f thar 
in autumn. It is also remarkable, that the 


*. Corriente por arriba. 
$+ Nouv. Espagne, Tom. i, p. 50. 


379 


current to the east precedes the change of the 
wind. It begins to be felt at first during a 
calm; and after some days, the wind itself 
follows the current, and becomes fixed in the 
west. While these phenomena last, the course 
of the small barometrical tides is in no degree 
interupted. 

On the 21st of November at sunrise, we 
were to the west of Cape Codera, opposite Cu- 
ruao. The Indian pilot was affrighted at see- 
ing an English frigate to the north, at a mile 
distant. We were no doubt taken for one of 
those boats, which carry on a contraband trade 
with the West India islands, and which (for 
every thing becomes regularly established in 
time,) were furnished with licences, signed by 
the governor of Trinidad. We were not even 
hailed by the ship’s boats, which appeared to 
approach us. From Cape Codera the coast 
is rocky, and very high, and presents scenes 
at once savage and picturesque. We were near 
enough the land to distinguish scattered huts 
surrounded by cocoa-trees and spots covered 
with vegetation, which studded the dark ground 
of the rocks. The mountains are every where 
perpendicular, and three or four thousand feet 
high ; their sides cast broad and deep shadows 
upon the humid land, which extends to the sea, 
and glows with the freshest verdure, This 
shore produces in great. part the fruits of the 


380 


hot regions, which are found in such great 
abundance in the markets of the Caraccas. 
The fields cultivated with sugarcanes and maize, 
between Camburi and Niguatar, stretch along 
narrow vallies, which resemble crevices or clefts 
in the rocks; and which, penetrated by the 
rays of the sun, then above the horizon, pre- 
sented the most singular contrasts of light and 
shade. 

The mountain of Niguatar and the Silla of 
Caraccas are the loftiest summits of this littoral 
chain. ‘The first almost reaches the height of 
Canigou; it seems as if the Pyrennees or the 
Alps, stripped of their snows, had risen from 
the bosom of the waters; so much greater 
appears the mass of mountains, when viewed 
for the first time on the side of the sea. Near 
Caravalleda, the cultivated lands enlarge; we 
find hills with gentle declivities, and the vege- 
tation rises. to a great height. The sugarcane 
is here cultivated, and the monks of La Merci 
have a plantation of two hundred slaves. This 
spot was formerly extremely subject to fever ; 
and_it is said, that the salubrity of the air is 
increased, since trees have been planted round 
a small lake, the emanations of which were 
dreaded, and which is now less exposed to the 
ardour of the sun. To the west of Caravalleda, 
a wall of bare rocks comes forward again to- 
ward the sea, but it has little extent. After 


38] 


-having passed it, we discovered at once the 
pleasant situation of the village of Macuto; the 
black rocks of La Guayra, studded -with batte- 
ries rising in tiers one over another; and in a 
misty distance. Cabo Blanco, a long promon- 
tory with conical summits, and of dazzling 
whiteness. Cocoa-trees border the shore, and 
give it under that burning sky an appearance of 
fertility. 

I landed in the port. of La Guayra, and the 
same evening made preparations for transport- 
ing my instruments to Caraccas. The persons: 
for whom I had recommendations advised me 
not to sleep in the town, where the yellow fever 
had only ceased a few weeks, but in a house 
on a little hill, above the village of Maiquetia, 
more exposed to frésh winds than La Guayra. 
I arrived at Caraccas ‘the 21st of November, 
in the evening, four days sooner than my fel- 
dow travellers, who on their journey by land 
had suffered greatly from the showers, and the 
inundations of the torrents, between Capaya 
and Curiepe. In order to avoid repeating the 
same subjects, I shall here subjoin to the des- 
cription of La Guayra, and the extraordinary 
road which leads from that port to the town 
of Caraceas, all the observations made by Mr. 
Bonpland and myself, in an excursion to Cabo 
Blanco* toward the end of J anuary, 1800. Mr, 

* From the 23d fo the 27th of January, 


382 


Depons having visited these spots after me, and 
his instructive work having preceded mine, I 
shall abstain from describing objects minutely, 
which he has treated with sufficient precision*. 

La Guayra is rather a roadstead than a port. 
The sea is constantly agitated, and the ships 
suffer at once by the action of the wind, the 
tideways, the bad anchorage, and the worms. 
The lading is taken in with difficulty, and the 
heights of the swell prevents embarking mules 
here, as at New Barcelona and Porto Cabello. 
The free Mulattoes and Negroes, who carry the 
cacao on board the ships, are a class of men 
of very remarkable muscular strength. They 
go up to their middles through the water ; and, 
what is well worthy of attention, they have no- 
thing to fear from the sharks, which are so fre- 
quent in this harbour. This fact seems con- 


* JT must here observe, that the measures of heights, and 
the results of magnetical observations published by Mr. 
Depons, vol. iii, p. 66, 197, are founded on my approximate 
calculations made upon the spot, and copies of which I had 
given to several persons, who were interested in these inves- 
tigations. It is to mistakes in these copies, no doubt, 
that must be attributed the indications of the Aydrometer of 
Deluc; the dip of the needle confounded with the height 
of the Pole at Caraceas ; the oscillations of a pendulum, the 
length of which is neither determined, nor the number. of 
oscillations compared to those performed at another place 
in the same space of time. 

+ La broma, teredo navalis, Lin, 


383 


mected with what I have often observed be. 
tween the tropics, relatively to other classes 
of animals that live in society, for instance, 
monkeys and crocodiles. In the Missions of 
the Oroonoko, and the river of Amazons, the 
Indians, who catch monkeys to sell them, know 
very well, that they can easily succeed in tam- 
ing those, which inhabit certain islands; while 
monkeys of the same species, caught on the 
neighbouring continent, die of terror or rage 
when they find themselves in the power of man. 
The crocodiles of one pool in the Llanos are 
cowardly, and flee even in the water; while 
those of another attack with extreme intrepid- 
ity. It would be difficult to explain this differ- 
ence of manners and habits, by the aspect of 
their respective localities. The sharks of the 
port of La Guayra seem to furnish an analo- 
gous example. They are dangerous and blood- 
thirsty at the island opposite the coast of Ca- 
raccas, at the Roques, at Bonayre, and at Cu- 
assao; while they forbear to attack persons 
swimming in the ports of La Guayra and San- 
ta Martha. The people, who, in order to sim- — 
plify the explanation of natural phenomena, 
have always recourse to the marvellous, affirm,, 
that in both places a bishop gave his benedic- 
tion to the sharks. 

The situation of La Guayra is very singular, 
and can only be compared to that of Santa, 


384 


Cruz in Teneriffe. The chain of mountains, 
that separates the port from the high valley 
of Caraecas, descends almost directly into the 
sea; and the houses of the town are backed 
by a wall of steep rocks. There scarcely re- 
mains one hundred or one hundred and_ forty 
toises breadth of flat ground between the wall 
and the ocean. The town has six or eight thou- 
sand inhabitants, and contains only two streets, 
running parailel to each other east and west. 
itis commanded by the battery of Cerro colo- 
rado; and it’s fortifications along the seaside 
are well disposed, and kept in repair. The as- 
pect of this place has something solitary and. 
gloomy ;° we seemed not to be on a conti- 
nent, covered with vast forests, but in a rocky 
island, destitute of mould and vegetation. With 
the exeeption of Cape Blanco and the cocoa- 
trees of Maiquetia, no view.meets the eye but 
that of the horizon, the sea, and the azure vault 
of Heaven. The heat is stifling during the day, 
and most frequently during the night. The 
climate of La Guayra is justly considered as 
more ardent than that of Cumana, .Porto-Ca: 
bello, and Coro; because the sea breeze is less 
felt, and the air is heated by the radiant calorie, 
which the perpendicular rocks emit ftom the 
time the Sun sets. We should however judge 
amiss of the atmospheric constitution of this 
gpot, and of all the neighbouring shore, if we 


385 


only compared the temperatures indicated by 
the degrees of the thermometer. A stagnant 
air ingulfed in a hollow of the mountains, in 
contact with a mass of barren‘ rocks, acts dif- 
ferently on our organs from air equally ‘hot in 
an open country. I am far from leoking for 
the physical ‘cause of this difference only in 
the modifications of the electrical charge of the 
air; I must however add, that a little to the 
cast of La Guayra, on the side of Macuto, far 
from houses, and more than a hundred toises 
distant from the rocks of gneiss, I could scarce- 
ly obtain during several. days a few feeble 
signs of positive electricity; while at the 
same hours of the afternoon at Cumana, and 
with the same electrometer of Volta, armed 
with a smoking match, I observed a separation 
of the balls of pith, of elder from one to two 
lines. I shall notice farther on the regular va- 
riations which the electrical charge of the air 
undergoes every day in the torrid zone, and 
which indicate a striking relation between the 
changes of the temperature and the height ‘of 
the Sun. The examination of the thermome 
tric observations, made during nine months 
at La Guayra by a distinguished physician *, 


* Don Joseph Herrera, correspondant of the Medical 
Society of Edinburgh. The observations (from the 2d of 
May 1799. to the 17th of January 1800) were made in the 
shade, far from the reflection of walls, with a thermometer 


¥OL, UI. 2 ¢ 


386 


enabled me to compare the climate of this port, 
and that of Cumana, the Havannah, and Vera- 
Cruz. This comparison is the more interesting, 
as it furnishes an inexhaustible subject of con- 
versation in the Spanish colonies, and among 
the mariners who frequent those latitudes. As 
nothing is more deceitful in this matter than 
the testimony of the senses, we can judge of 
the difference of climates only by numerical 
‘calculations. 

The four places of which we have been speak- 
ing are considered as the hottest* on the shores 
of the New World. A comparison of them 
may serve to confirm, what we have several 
times observed, that it is generally the dura- 
tion of a high temperature, and not the excess 
of heat, or it’s absolute quantity, which occa- 
sions the sufferings of the inhabitants of the 
torrid zone. i 


The mean of the observations made at) noon, 
from the 27th of June to the 16th of Novem- 
ber, were, at La Guayra, 31°6° of the centi- 
grade thermometer; at Cumana, 29:3°; at 


which I compared with mine, and, by means of mine, with 
the thermometer of the observatory at Paris. 

* We could add to this small number, ‘Coro, Carthagena, © 
Omoa, Campeachy,. Guayaquil. and Acapulco, My com- 
parisons are founded, for Cumana, on my own observations 
and those of Don Faustin Rubio; and for Vera Cruz and 


the Havannah, on the observations of Don Bernardo de Ore 
‘ta and Don Joacquin Ferrer, 


* 


387 


Vera Cruz, 28°7° at the Hayannah, 295°. The 
daily difference at the same hour, scarcely ex: 
ceeded 0:8° or 14°. During this period it rain- 
ed but four times, and then only for seven or 
eight minutes. At this season, the yellow fever 
prevails ; which usually disappears at La Guay- 
ra, as at Vera Cruz*, and the island of St. Vin- 
cent, when the temperature of the day descends 
below twenty three, or twenty four degrees. 
The mean temperature of the hottest month 
was, at La Guayra, nearly 29:3°; at Cumana, 
29°1°; at Vera Cruz, 27°7°; at Cairo, according 
to Nouet, 299°; at. Rome, 25°. From the 16th 
of November to the 19th of December, the 
mean temperature of noon, at La Guayra, was 
only 243°; at night, 21°6°.. This is the time 
at which the sufferings from heat are the least ;. 
and yet I do not believe, that the thermometer 
ever falls (and it is lowest a little before sun- 
rise) below 21°. It sometimes descends at Cu- 
mana to 21:2°; at Vera Cruz, to 16°; at the, 
Havannah (always when the north wind blows), 
to 8° and even lower. The mean temperature 
of the coldest month-+ is, in these four places, 
23°2°, 26°8°, 21-1>, 21:0°. At Cairo, it is 13°4°. 
The mean of the whole year, according to good 


* Nouv. Espagne, vol. ii, p- 765. 

+ The mean of the hottest month at Paris is 19° or 20°, 
eonsequently 3 or 4 degrees less thau the coldest month at 
La Guayra. 


262 


388 


observations carefully bp aghen i s, at La Guay- 
ra, nearly 28°1°; at Cumana, 27-7 ; at Vera Cruz, 
25:4°; at the Havannah, Peat at Rio Janeiro, 
23'5°; at Santa Cruz in Teneriffe, in the latitude 
of 28° 28’, but backed, like La Guayra, by a wall 
of rocks, 21:9°; at Cairo, 22°4¢; at Rome, 15:8: 

From the whole of these observations* it 
follows, that La Guayra is one of the hottest 


* The following are the horary variations of the barometer 
in Paris lines, with the heights of the centigrade thermo- 
meter and of the whalebone hygrometer of Deluc, as I 


observed them from the 23d to the 25th of January, at the ° 


port of La Guayra. 


Day Hour Barom. Therm. Hygrom. 
23d leven. 337:2° 23:5° 510° star light, fine. 
24° 4 morn. 386°7 23°1 52°4, 


ves 3375 23:9 45'3 

9 Bova 24°3 425 

10 3376 25°6 423 

12 3371 26'2 45:2 sky misty. 
2! aftern. 336-4 26°4 45°83 

4t 3363 26°2 463 

52 336°6 23°7 47:0 

9 3371 24°3 53°2 clouds 
11z 336'8 23°7 524 

25 7 morn. 337°0 22°5 51°2 serene, azuresky. 

8 3373 23°5 50°3 


The observations of temperature corresponding to mine 
gave for Cumana, the 23d of January at eleven at night, 
26°6°; the 24th of January, half after two in the afternoon, 
282°; at eleven in the evening, 26°5°; the 26th of January 


at seven in the morning, 25°5°. 


389 


places on the Earth*; that the quantity of 
heat which it receives in the course of a year 
is-a little greater than that felt at Cumana ; 
but that in the months of November, December, 
and January-+, (at equal distance from the 
two passages of the Sun through the zenith of 
the town), the atmosphere cools more at La 
Guayra. May not this cooling, much slight- 
er than that which is felt almost. at the same 
time at Vera Cruz and at the, Havannah, be 
the effect of: the more western position of La 
Guayra? The aérial ocean, which appears to 
- form only one mass, is agitated by currents, the 
limits of which are fixed by immutable laws ; 
and it’s temperature is variously modified by 
the configuration of the lands and seas by which 
it is sustained. It may be subdivided into se- 
veral basins, which overflow into each other, 
and of which the most agitated (for instance, 
that placed over the Gulf of Mexico, or between 


* In Asia the mean temperatures of Abushar, of Madras, 
and of Batavia, are not above 25° and 27°: but the hottest 
month at Madras rises to 32°, according to Roxburgh; and 
at Abushar, on the Persian Gulf, according to Mr. Jukes, 
to 83:9° ; which is from two to four degrees higher than at 
Cairo, See Barrow’s Voyage to Cochinchina, p. 180; 
Malcolm’s History of Persia, vol. ii, p. 505 ; and my essay 
on the distribution of heat, and the isothermal lines, in the 
Meén. de la Société d’ Arcueil, Tom. wis. : 

+ From the middle of the month of January the heat be. 
gins to augment at La Guayra, 


398 


the. Sierra of Santa Martha and the Sea of 
Darien) have a powerful influence on the cool- 
ing and the motion of the neighbouring co- 
lumns of air. The north winds sometimes 
cause influxes and counter currents in the 
south-west part of the Caribbean Sea, which 
seem, during particular months, to diminish 
the heat as far as Terra Firma. 

At the time of my abode at La Guayra, the 
scourge of yellow fever, or calentura amarilla, 
had been known only two years; and the mor- 
tality had not been considerable, because the 
confluence of strangers on the coast of Carac- 
cas was less than at the Havannah and Vera 
Cruz. <A few individuals, even Creoles and 
Mulattoes, were sometimes taken off suddenly 
by certain irregular remittent .fevers ; which, 
from being complicated with bilious appear- 
ances, hemorrhages, and other symptoms equal- 
ly alarming, appeared to have some analogy 
with the yellow fever. They were generally 
men employed.in the hard labour of cutting 
wood; in the forests, for instance, in the neigh- 
bourhood of the little port of Carupano, or the 
Gulf of Santa-Fe, west of Cumana. — Their 
death often alarmed the unseasoned Europeans, 
in towns that were regarded as eminently 
healthy ; but the seeds of the sporadical ma- 
lady by which they had been attacked were 
propagated ‘no farther, On the coast of Terra 


391 


Firma, the real typhus of America, which is 
known by the names vomito pricto (the black 
vomit) and of yellow fever, and which ought 
to be considered as a morbid affection sui ge- 
_ neris, was known only at Porto Cabello, at 
Carthagena, and at Santa Martha, where Gas- 
telbondo had observed and described it in 1729, 
The Spaniards, who had recently disembarked, 
and the inhabitants of the valley of Caraccas, 
were not then afraid to reside at La Guayra. 
They complained only of the oppressive heat, 
which prevailed during a great part of the year. 
If they opposed themselves to the immediate 
action of the Sun, they dreaded at most only 
those inflammations of the skin or eyes, which 
are felt every where in the torrid zone, and 
which are often accompanied by a febrile affec- 
tion, and powerful congestions in the head. 
Many individuals preferred the ardent but uni- 
form climate of La Guayra to the cool but 
extremely variable climate of Caraccas; and 
searcely any mention was made of the insa- 
-lubrity of that port. Wiis 

Since the year 1797 every thing has changed, 
Commerce being opened to other vessels than 
those of the mother country, seamen born in 
colder climates than Spain, and consequently 
more sensible to the impressions of the climate 
of the torrid zone, began to frequent La Guay- 
ra, The yellow fever declared itself; North 


392 


Americans; seized with the typhus, were re- 
ceived in the Spanish hospitals; and it was 
afiirmed, that they had imported the contagion, 
and that, before they entered the road, the 
disease had appeared on board a brig, which 
came from Philadelphia. The captain of the 
brig denied the fact; and asserted, that, far 
from having introduced this malady, his  sai- 
lors had caught it in the port. We know from 
what. happened at Cadiz in 1800, how difficult 
it is to elucidate facts, when their uncertainty 
Serves to favour theories, that are diametrically 
Opposite. The more enlightened inhabitants 
of Caraccas and La Guayra, divided in opinion, 
like the physicians in Europe and the United 
States, on the principle of contagion of the yel- 
low fever, cited the instance of the same Ame- 
rican vessel to prove, some, that the typhus 
came from abroad, and others, that it took birth 
in the country. itself. Those who embraced 
the latter. system admitted, that an extraordi- 
nary alteration had been caused in the consti- 
tution of the atmosphere by the overflowings 
of the Rio de La Guayra. This torrent, which - 
in general is not ten inches deep, was swelled 
after sixty hours rain in the mountains, in so ex- 
traordinary a manner, that it bore down trunks 
of trees, and masses of rock of a considerable 
size. During this augmentation, the waters 
Were from thirty to forty feet in breadth, and 


393 


from eight to ten feet in depth. It was stip- 
posed that they had issued from some subter- 
raneous basin, formed by successive infiltra- 
tions into the recently cleared arable lands. 
Many houses were carried away by the tor- 
rent ; and the inundation became more dan- 
gerous for the stores, in consequence of the gate 
of the town, which could alone have given an 
issue to the waters, being accidentally shut. 
It was necessary to make a breach in the wall on 
the seaside; more than thirty persons perished, 
and the damage was computed at half a million of 
piastres. The stagnant waters, which infected 
the stores, the cellars, and the dungeons of the 
public prison, no doubt diffused miasmata in 
the air, which, as predisposing causes, may 
have accelerated the developement of the yel- 
low fever; but I believe that the inundation 
of the Rio de la Guayra was as little the pri- 
mary cause, as the overflowings of the Guadal- 
quiver, the Xenil, and Gual-Medina, were at 
Seville, at Ecija, or at Malaga, in the fatal epi- 
demics of 1800 and 1804. I examined with 
attention the bed of the torrent of La Guayra ; 
and saw there only a barren soil, blocks of 
mica-slate and gneiss, containing pyrites, and 
broken off from the Sierra de Avila, but nothing 
that could have had any effect on the purity of 
the air, © 


Since the years 1797 and 1798, the same in 


394 
which there was a dreadful mortality at Phila» 
delphia, Santa Lucia*, and St. Domingo, the 
yellow fever has continued it’s ravages at La 
Guayra. It has proved fatal not only to the 
troops newly arrived from Spain, but also to 
those which had been raised far from the coasts, 
in the Llanos between Calabozo and Uritucu, 
in a region almost as hot as La Guayra, but 
favourable to health. This latter phenomenon 
would surprise us more, if we did not know, 
that even the natives of Vera Cruz, who-are 
not attacked with the typhus in their own town, 
sometimes sink under it in the epidemics of the 
Havannah and the United States}. As the 
black vomit finds an insurmountable limit at 
the Encero (four hundred and seventy - six 
toises high) on the declivity of the mountains of 
Mexico, on the road to Xalapa, where the 
. oaks and a cool and delicious climate begin; 
the yellow fever scarcely ever passes beyond 
the ridge of mountains, that separates La Guay- 
ra-from the valley of Caraccas. This valley 
has been exempted from it fora long time; for 
we must not confound the vomito and the yellow 
fever with the irregular and bilious fevers. 
The Cumbre and the Cerro de Avila form a 
very useful rampart to the town of Caraccas, 


* Gillespie; on the Disease of his Majesty’s Squadron in 
the Antilles, 1800, p. 17. 
fi Nouv. Esp, vol ii, p. 772. 


395 


the elevation of which a little exceeds that of 
the Encero, but of which the mean temperature 
is above that of Xalapa. 

I have published in another work * the phy- 
sical observations made by Mr. Bonpland and 
myself on the locality of towns, that are period- 
ically subject to the scourge of the yellow fe- 
ver; and I shall not hazard here any new con- 
jectures on the changes observed in the patho- 
genic constitution of particular cities. The 
more I reflect on this subject, the more myste- 
rious appears to me all that relates to those 
gaseous emanations, which we call so vaguely 
the seeds of contagion, and which are supposed, - 
to be developed by a corrupted air, déstroyed 
by cold, conveyed from place to place in gar. 
ments, and attached to the walls of houses. 
How can we explain why, during the eighteen 
years which preceded the year 1794, there was 
not one single instance of the vomito at Vera 
Cruz, though the concourse of unseasoned Ku- 
ropeans and of Mexicans from the interior, was 
very considerable; though the sailors indulged 
in the same excesses, with which they are still 
reproached ; and though the town was not sa 
clean as it has been since the year 1800? 

The following is the series of pathological 
facts, considered in their greatest simplicity. 


% Nouv, Esp. Tom, i, p. '752—788. 


396 


When a great number of persons, born in a 
cold climate, arrive at the same time ina port 
of the torrid zone, not particularly dreaded by 
navigators, the typhus of America begins to 
appear: ‘Those persons have not had the typhus 
during their passage ; it manifests itself among 
them only on the very spot. Is the atmospheric 
constitution changed? or does a new form of 
disease display itself among individuals, whose 
uritability is highly increased ? 

The typhus scon begins to exert it’s ravages 
among other Europeans, born in more southern 
countries, If it propagate itself by contagion, 
it seems surprising, that in the towns of the 
equinoctial continent it does not attach itself 
to certain streets ; and that immediate contact* 
does not augment. the danger, any more than 
seclusion diminishes it. The sick, when re- 
moved. to the inland country, and especially to 
cooler and more elevated spots, to Xalapa, for 
instance, do: not communicate the typhus to 
the inhabitants of those places, either because 


* In the oriental plague (another typhus characterized 
by a great disorder in the lymphatic system) immediate 
contact is less to be feared than is generally thought. Mr. 
Larrey asserts, that the tumefied glands may be touched, 
or cauterized without danger; but he thinks we ought not 
to risk putting on the clothes of persons attacked with the 
plague. Mém. sur les Maladies de Armée Francoise en Egypte, 
p. 3a. 


397 


it is not contagious in it’s nature, or that the 
predisposing causes are not the same as in the 
regions of the shore. When there is a consi- 
derable diminution of the temperature, the epi- 
demy usually ceases, even on the spot where 
it first appeared. It again begins at the ap- 
proach of the hot season, and sometimes long 
before; though during several months there 
has been no sick person in the harbour, and no 
ship has entered it. 

The typhus of America appears to be confin- 
ed to the shore, either because those persons 
who bring * the disease disembark there, and 
goods supposed to be impregnated with dele- 
terious miasmata are there accumulated; or 
because on the seaside gaseous emanations of a 
particular nature are formed. The aspect. of 
the places where typhus exerts it’s ravages seems 
often to exclude all idea of a local or endemical 
origin. It has been seen to prevail in the Ca- 
naries, the Bermudas, and among the smaller 
West India Islands, in dry places formerly 
distinguished for the great salubrity of their 
climate. Examples of the propagation’ of the 
yellow fever in the inland parts of the torrid 
zone appear very doubtful; this malady may 
have been confounded with remitting  bilious — 
fevers. With respect to the temperate zone; 


® Bailly, de la. Fiewre jaune, 1814, p. 421. 


398 


in which the contagious character of the ty- 
phus of America is mere decided, the disease 
has indubitably spread far from the shore, even 
into very elevated places, exposed to cool and 
dry winds, as in Spain, at Medina-Sidonia, at 
Carlotta, and the city of Murcia. That variety 
of phenomena, which the same epidemic ex- 
hibits, according to the difference of climates, 
the union of predisposing causes, it’s shorter or 
longer duration, and the degree of it’s exacer- 
bation, should render us extremely circumspect 
in tracing the secret causes of the American 
typhus. An enlightened observer, who, at the 
time of the violent epidemics in 1802 and 1803, 
was chief physician to the colony of St. Do- 
mingo, and who has studied that disease in the 
Island of Cuba, the United States, and Spain, 
Mr. Bailly, thinks like me, “that the typhus is 
very often, but not always, contagious *.” 

Since the yellow fever has made such cruel 
ravages in La Guayra, the want of cleanliness 
in that little town has been exaggerated, like 
that of Vera Cruz, and of the quays or wharfs 
of Philadelphia. In a place where the soil is 
extremely dry, destitute of vegetation, and 
where a few drops of water scarcely fall in 
Seven or eight months, the causes, that pro- 
duce what are called miasmata, cannoi be very 


* Bailly, as above &c., p. xii (Nowe. Esp., Tom. ii, p. 771)» 


Te 


Stes ae ee 


nos 


ee 


a 


SES 


— ie RUE 


399 


frequent. The streets of La Guayra appeared 
to me in general to be tolerably clean, with the 
exception of the quarter of the slaughter-houses. 
The sea-side has no beach, on which the re- 
mains of fuci and of mollusce are heaped up; 
but the neighbouring coast, which stretches to 
the east toward Cape Codera, and consequently 
to the windward of La Guayra, is extremely 
unhealthy. Intermitting, putrid, and bilious 
fevers often prevail at Macuto, and at Cara- 
yalleda; and, when from time to time the 
breeze is interrupted by a westerly wind, the 
little bay of Cotia, which I shall often have oc- 
casion to mention, sends an air loaded with 
putrid emanations toward the coast of La 
Guayra, notwithstanding the rampart opposed 
by Cape Blanco. 

The irritability of the organs being so differ- 
ént in the people of the north and those of the 
south, it cannot be doubted, that with a great> 
ér freedom of commerce, and a more frequent 
and intimate communication between countries 
. Situate in different climates, the yellow fever 

will extend it’s ravages in the New World. It 
As even probable, that the concurrence of so, 
many exciting causes, and their action on in- 
dividuals so differently organized, may give 
birth to new forms of disease, and new devi- 
ations of the vital powers. This is one of the 
evils, that inevitably attend a-rising civilization. 


400 
To point it out is not to regret barbarism ; it is 
not to partake the opinions of those, who would 
break the bands that unite nations, not in order 
to render the ports of the colonies more healthy, 
but to thwart the introduction of knowledge, 
and slacken the progress of reason. 

The yellow fever and the black vomit ceasé 
periodically at the Havannah and Vera Cruz, 
when the north winds bring the cold air of 
Canada toward the Gulf of Mexico. But from 
the extreme equality of temperature, which cha- 
racterizes the climates of Porto-Cabello, La 
Guayra, New Barcelona, and Cumana, it may 
be feared, that the typhus will there become 
permanent, whenever, from a great concourse of 
strangers, it has acquired a high degree of ex- 
acerbation. Happily the mortality has dimin- 
ished since the treatment of this epidemic has 
been varied, according to the character it pre- 
sents in different years; and since the different 
stages of the -disease have been better studied, 
which are recognized by symptoms of inflam- 
mation, and of ataxy or debility. It would, I 
think, be unjust to deny the success, which the 
new system of medicine has obtained over this 
terrible scourge ; yet the persuasion of this suc- 
cess has not made much progress in the colo- 
nies. It is there said pretty generally, “that 
the physicians now explain the course of thé 
disease in a more satisfactory manner than they 


401 


did formerly, but that they do not cure it bet- 
ter: that heretotore the patient was left, to die 
slowly, taking no other remedy than an infusion 
of tamarinds; and that in our days a more ac- 
tive practice carries him to the grave in a more 
direct and expeditious manner.” 

This opinion is not founded upon an accu- 
rate knowledge of what was done formerly in 
the West India islands. The voyage of Father 
Labat sufficiently demonstrates, that in the 
beginning of the 18th century the physicians of 
the West Indies did not suffer the sick to die 
so tranquilly, as seems to be supposed. ‘They 
did not then kill by emetics, bark, and opium, 
employed in too large doses, and unseasonably ; 
but by frequent bleedings, and the abuse of 
purgatives. The physicians indeed seemed so 
well aware of the effects of their treatment, 
that they had the candour “ to present them- 
selves at the bed-side of the sick, accompanied 
at their first visit by a confessor and a notary.” 
At present, in neat and well conducted hos- 
pitals, they often succeed in reducing the num- 
‘ber of deaths to eighteen or fifteen in a hundred, 
and even a little less. But whenever the sick 
are crowded together, the mortality increases 
to one half, or even to three quarters, of which 
the French army in St. Domingo afforded an 
example in 1802. 

I found the latitude of La Guayra to be 


VOL. UL. 2D 


402 


10° 36’ 197; ‘and the longitude 69° 26’ 13”. 
The dip of the needle on the 24th of January, 
1800, was 42:20°; and it’s variation 4° 20’ 35” 
east. The intensity of the magnetic forces was 
found proportional to 237 oscillations. 

In following the granitic coast of La Guayra 
toward the west, we find between ‘this port, 
which is in fact but an ill-sheltered roadstead, 
and that of Porto Cabello, ‘several indentations 
‘of the land, furnishing excellent anchorage for 
ships. ‘Such are the small bay of Catia, Los 
Arecifes, Puerto-la-Cruz, ‘Choroni, Sienega de 
Ocumare, Turiamo, Burburata, and Patanebo. 
All these ports, with the exception of that of 
Burburata, from which mules are ‘exported ‘to 
Jamaica, are now frequented only by small 
coasting vessels, which are there laden with 
provision and cacao from the surrounding 
plantations. The inhabitants of Caraccas, those 
at least who have more extensive views, feel a 
great interest in the anchorage of Catia, to the 
west of Cape Blanco. Mr. Bonpland and my- 
self examined this point of the coast during our 
second abode at La Guayra. A ravin, of 
which we shall speak hereafter, known by the 
name of the Quebrada de Tipe, descends from 


* Espinosa fixes, on the authority of Mr. Ferrer, the 
northern part of the town in the latitude of 10° 36/ 40’/. 
Bemorias de los Navegantes Espanoles, 1809, Tom. ii, Part iv, 
p- 24. 


Pe 


403 


the iableland of Caraccas towards Catia. A 
design has long been formed of making a wag- 
gon read through this ravin, and of abandoning 
the ancient road to La Guayra, which resem- 
bles the passage over St. Gothard. According 
to this plan, the port of Catia, equally large and 
safe, would replace that of La Guayra. Un- 
fortunately, however, all that shore, to leeward 
of Cape Blanco, abounds with mangroves, and 
is extremely unhealthy. I ascended to the 
summit of the promontory, that forms Cabo 
Blanco, in order to observe at the loek-out the 
passage of the Sun over the meridian. I wished 
to compare in the morning the altitudes taken 
with an artificial horizon and those taken with 
the horizon of the sea; to verify the apparent 
depression of the latter, by the barometrical 
measurement of the hill*. By this method, 


* Barometer, at the level of the sea, 337:3°; therm. 28°. 
Bardmeter at the look-out, on the summit of Cape Blanco, 
332-8 (in lines of the ancient pied de roi); Therm, 27-2°. 
Height, 65 toises. I found at the look-out the angle be- 
tween the house of the Manilla Company at La Guayra, and 
the tower of Maiquitia, 11° 31725’; between that house 
and Point Niguata, 14° 58’ 357’. The longitudinal axis of 


the Cape, forming an elongated promontory, is in the direc- 

tion of N. 81° east; the most salient part, that in the middle, 

points N. 47° east; at La Guayra, (the elevation of my eye 

being thirty-three feet) 1 saw the look-out of the Cape af 

an augle of 1° 12! of altitude; which, combined with the 

barometrical measurement, gives 3316 toises for the distance. 
Qn 3 


404 


hitherto very little employed, on reducing the 
heights of the Sun to the same time, a reflecting 
instrument may be used’ like an instrument 
furnished with a level. I found the-latitude of 
the Cape, which is net marked on the maps of 
the Deposito Hydrografico of Madrid, in other 
respects so exact, to be 10° 36’ 45”; I could 
only make use of the angles which gave the 
image of the Sun reflected ona plane glass; 
the horizon of the sea was very misty, and the 
windings of the coast prevented me from taking 
the height of the Sun on that horizon. 

The environs of Cape Blanco are not unin- 
teresting for the study of rocks. The gneiss 
here passes to the state of mica-slate *, and 
contains, along the seacoast, layers of schis- 
tose chlorite. In this latter I found garnets 
and magnetical sand. On the road to Catia we 
see the chloritic schistus passing into horn- 
blende schistus{. All these formations are 
found together in the primitive mountains of 
the Old World, especially in the north of Eu- 
rope. The sea atthe foot of Cape Blanco throws 
up on the beach rolled fragments of a rock, 


(Obs. Ast., Tom. i; p. 192.) Jefferys, in the West India Pilot, 
1783, places Cape Blanco twenty minutes, or almost seven 
leagues, west from La Guayra. 

“ Glimmerschiefer. 

t Chloritschiefer. 

& Hornblendschiefer. 


405 


which is a granular mixture of hornblende and 
lamellar feldspar. It is what is rather vaguely 
called primitive grunstein. In it we can recog- 
nize traces of quartz and pyrites. Submarine 
rocks probably exist near the coast, which fur- 
nish these very hard masses. I have compared 
them in my journal to the paterlestein of Fich- 
telberg, in Franconia, which is also a diabase, 
but so fusible, that glass buttons are made of 
it, which are employed for the slave-trade on 
the coast of Guinea. I believed at first, ac- 
cording to the analogy of the phenomena which 
the mountains of Franconia furnish *, that the 
presence of these hornblende masses with crys- 
tals of common (uncompact) feldspar indicated 
the proximity of transition rocks; but in the 
high valley of Caraccas, near Antimano, balls 
of the same diabase fill a vein crossing the mica- 
slate. On the western declivity of the hill of 
Cape Blanco, the gneiss. is covered with a for- 
mation of sandstone, or agglomerate, extremely 
recent. This sandstone combines angular frag- 
ments of gneiss, quartz, and chlorit, magnetical 
sand, madrepores, and petrified bivalve shells. 
Is this formation of the same date as that of 
Punta Araya and Cumana? I sent numerous 
specimens of it to the cabinet of the King of 
Spain at Madrid. 


* Near Schauenstein, and Steben, where the carburetted 


transition schist predominates, 


406 


Scarcely any part of the coast has so burn- 
ing a climate as the environs of Cape Blanco. 
We suffered much by the heat, augmented by 
the reverberation of a barren and dusty soil; 
but without feeling any bad consequences from 
the effects of insolation. The powerful action 
of the Sun on the cerebral functions is extremely 
dreaded at La Guayra, especially at the period 
when the yellow fever begins to be felt.. Being 
one day on the terrace of the house, to observe 
at noon the difference of the thermometer in 
the sun and in the shade, I saw a man ap- 
proaching behind me, who conjured me to 
swallow a potion, which he held prepared in 
his hand. He was a physician, who had ob- 
served me from his window, during half an 
hour, bareheaded, and exposed to the rays of 
the Sun. He assured me, that, born in a very 
northern climate, I should infallibly, after the 
imprudence I had committed, feel symptoms of 
the yellow fever that very evening, if I obstin- 
ately refused to take the preservative against it. 
I was not alarmed by this prediction, however 
serious, believing myself to have been long sea- 
soned ; but how could I avoid yielding to en- 
treaties, that had so benevolent a motive? I 
swallowed the dose; and the physician per- 
haps reckoned me among the number of the 
sick, whom he had saved in the course of the 
year. 


iraniad Sais sob ithlioaM 


407 


After having described the scenery, and the 
atmospheric constitution of La Guayra, we shall 
now leave the coasts of the Caribbean Sea, 
scarcely to behold them again before our re- 
turn from the Missions of the Oroonoko. The 
road that leads from the port to. Caraccas, the 
capital of a government of near 900,000 inhab- 
itants, resembles, as I have already observed, 
the passages over the Alps, the road of St. 
Gothard, and of the Great St. Bernard. Tak- 
ing the level of the road had never been at- 
tempted before my arrival in the province of 
Venezuela. No precise idea had even been 
formed of the elevation of the valley of Carac- 
cas. It had indeed been long observed, that 
the descent was much less from La Cumbre 
and Las Vueitas, which is the culminating 
point of the road toward the Pastora at the en- 
trance of the valley of Caraccas, than toward 
the port of La Guayra: but the mountain of 
Avila having a very considerable bulk, the eye 
cannot discover at the same time the points to 
be compared. It is even impossible to forma 
precise idea of the elevation of Caraccas from 
the climate of the valley. The air in it is cool- 
ed by the descending currents of air; and by 
the fogs,’ which envelop the lofty summit of the 
Silla during a ereat part of the year. I have 
often gone on foot from La Guayra to Caraccas ; 
and I sketched a profile of the road, founded on 


408 


twelve points, the heights of which were deter- 
mined by barometric measuremenis*. I have 
often earnestly wished, that my levelling should 
be repeated and rendered correct by some well 
informed traveller, who may visit this country, 
at once so picturesque and so interesting to the 
natural philosopher. 

When in the season of the great heats we 
breathe the burning atmosphere of La Guayra, 
and turn our eyes toward the mountains, we 
are strongly affected by the idea, that, at the 


* The following are the barometrical observations, and 
their results. Maiquetia, 335:0; therm. 25°6°. La Venta, 
a large inn on the northern slope of La Cumbre, or the Cerro 
de Avila, bar. 294-1; therm. 19°2°.. El Guayavo, or the 
little Venta de la Cumbre, 285°3; therm. 18°70. Fort of 
La Cuchilla, 281:5; therm. 18°8°. Venta chica de San- 
chorquiz, 284-2; therm. 18°7°. Near the spring of San- 
chorquiz. (la Fuente), 286-4; therm. 18°6°. Last little 
Venta, before arriving at the Cross of La Guayra 284-1; 
therm. 18°8°, The Cross of La Guayra, 292°2; therm. 19°6°- 
The Custom House of Caraccas, Aduana de la Pastora, 
barom. 301°3; therm. 15°1°. Caraccas at the Trinidad, 
barom. 303°7; therm. 15:2° (See my Obs. Ast., Tom. i, p, 


296 et 367). The results calculated are perhaps somewhat ~ 


too little. The barometrical heights have been reduced to 
the same time, by an exact knowledge of the effect of the 
small atmospheric tides. The absolute elevation of the 
barometer at the level of the sca here indicates less than 
the same instrument gave, when carefully rectified in the 


point 0 of the scale. The differences only are the question 
here, ‘ ; i 


/ 


409 


Girect distance of five or six thousand toises, a 
population of forty thousand souls, assembled 
in a narrow valley, enjoys all the coolness of 
spring, of a temperature which at night de- 
scends to 12° of the centesimal thermometer. 
This near approach of different climates is com- 
mon in the Cordilleras of the Andes ; but every 
where, at Mexico, at Quito, in Peru, and in 
New Grenada, along journey must be made 
into the interior, either by the plains, or by pro- 
ceeding up the rivers, in order to reach the 
great cities, which are the centres of civiliza- 
tion. The height of Caraccas is but a third of 
that of Mexico, Quito, and Santa Fe de Bogo- 
ta; yet among all the capitals of Spanish Ame- 
rica, which enjoy a cool and delicious climate 
in the midst of the torrid zone, Caraccas stands 
nearest to the coast. What a privilege, to pos- 
sess a seaport at three leagues distance, and to 
be situate among mountains, on a table-land, 
which would produce wheat, if the cultivation 
of the coffee-tree were not preferred ! 

The road from La Guayra to the Valley of 
Caraccas is infinitely finer than that from 
Honda to Santa Fe, or that from Guayaquil to 
Quito. It is even keptin better order than the 
ancient road, which led from the port of Vera 
Cruz to Perote, on the eastern declivity of the 
mountains of New Spain. With good mules 

i requires but three hours, to go from the port 


410 


of La Guayra to Caraccas; and only two hours 
to return. With loaded mules, or on foot, the 
journey is from four to five hours. The as- 
cent begins with a ridge of rocks extremely 
steep, and stations that bear the name of Torre 
quemada, Curucuti, and Salto, to a large inn 
(La Venta) built at six hundred teises above the 
level of the sea. The denomination of the 
Burnt Tower indicates the sensation that is felt 
in descending toward La Guayra. A suffocat- 
ing heat is reflected by the walls of rock, 
and still more by the barren plains, on which 
the traveller looks down. On this road, as on 
that from Vera Cruz to Mexico, and wherever 
on a rapid declivity the climate changes, the 
increase of muscular strength and the sensa- 
tion of well-being, that we experience as we 
advance into strata of cooler air, have always 
appeared to me less striking than that feeling 
of languor and weakness, which seizes on the 
frame, when we descend toward the burning 
plains of the coast. Such. is the organization 
of man, that, even in the moral world, we are 
less soothed by what meliorates: our ‘condition, 
than affected by a new sensation of pain. 

From Curucuti to Salto the ascent is some. 
what less laborious. The windings of the road 
contribute to render the deelivity easier, as 
in the old road over Mount Cenis. The Leap, 
or Salto, is a crevice, which is passed on a draw- 


411 


bridge. Real fortifications crown the summit 
of the mountain. We saw at Venta the ther- 
mometer at noon at 19°3°, when at La Guayra 
it kept up at the same hour to 26°2°. Since 
the period when neutrals have been from time 
to time admitted into the ports of the Spanish 
colonies, strangers having been more easily per- 
mitted to ascend to Caraccas than to Mexico, 
La Venta already enjoys some celebrity in Eu- 
rope and in the United States, for the beauty 
of it’s scenery. This spot does indeed, when 
the clouds permit, present a magnificent view of 
the sea, and the neighbouring coasts. You dis- 
cover an horizon of more than twenty-two lea- 
gues radius; the white and barren shore re- 
flects a dazzling mass of light; you see at your 
feet Cape Blanco, the village of Maiquetia with 
it’s cocoastrees, La Guayra, and vessels that 
enter the port, But I found this view far more 
extraordinary, when the sky was not serene, 
and trains of clouds, strongly illumined on their 
upper surface, seemed projected like floating 
islands on the surface of the ocean. Strata of 
vapour, hovering at different heights, formed 
intermediary spaces between the eye and the 
lower regions. From an illusion easily explain- 
ed, they. enlarged the scene, and rendered it 
more solemn. Trees and dwellings discovered 
themselves from time to time through the open 
ings, which were left by the clouds driven on 


412 


by the winds, and rolling over one another. 
Objects then appear at a greater depth, than 
when seen through a pure and uniformly se- 
rene air.. On the declivity of the mountains of 
Mexico, at the same height (between Las Tran: 
cas and Xalapa*), the sea is at twelve leagues 
distance, and the view of the coast is confused ; 
while on the road from La Guayra to Caraccas 


we command the plains (the tierra caliente) 
as from the top of a tower. 


We may conceive 
the impression, which this 


aspect must leave 
on persons, who, born in inland countries, con- 


template the sea and ships for the first time 
from this point. 

I determined by direct observations the lati- 
tude of the Venta, to enable myself to give a 
more precise idea of the distance of the coasts. 
The latitude is 10°33’ 9", Is longitude ap- 
peared to me by the chronometer -- nearly 2’ 47” 
west of the town of Caraccas. I found the dip 
of the needle at this height. to be 41-75°; and 
the intensity of the magnetic force. equal te 
two hundred and thirty four oscillations. From 

‘the Venta, called also Venta Grande ‘to distin- 
guish it from three or four small inns established 


* See the profile published in my Atlas of 
Plate 12. 
t The altitudes of the sun, which I took on the 20th of 


near the meridian, (Obs. Ast: Tom. 


New Spain, 


January, 1800, were very 
1, p. 186.) 


413 


in my time * along the road, there is still an 
ascent of one hundred and fifty toises to reach 
Guayavo. This is nearly the most lofty point 
of the way. I carried the barometer still far- 
ther, a little above La Cumbre +, to the litle 
fort of La Cuchilla. Being without a passport 
(for during five years I had never needed one, 
but at the moment of disembarking), I had 
nearly been arrested by a post of artillerymen. 
To calm the anger of these old soldiers I trans- 
lated for them into Castilian varas the number 
of toises their post was above the level of the 
sea. This seemed however to interest them 
little, and 1 owed my liberty solely to an Anda- 
lusian, who became very tractable, when I told 


him, that the mountains of his country, the 
Sierra Nevada of Grenada, were far more lofty 
than all the mountains in the province of Ca- 
raccas. 


The fort of Cuchilla is of the height of 
the top of the Puy de Dome; or nearly one 
hundred and. fifty toises lower than the post- 
house of Mount Cenis. The town of Carac- 
cas, the Venta del Guayavo, and the port of 
fla Guayra, being so near each other, Mr. 
Bonpland and I wished to have observed si- 
multaneously, during a few successive days, 
the extent of the little. barometrical tides, in 


* They are almost all destroyed at present, 
+t The top, the summit. 


414 


a valley of such small breadth, on a tableland 
exposed to the winds, and near the seacoast; 
but the atmosphere was not sufficiently calm 
during our abode in those parts, nor was I | 
furnished with the triple apparatus of mete- 
orological instruments, which those experi- 
ments required, and which I recommend to 
those natural. philosophers who may hereafter 
visit that country. 

When I passed for the first time that table- 
land, on my way to the capital of Venezuela, 
I found several travellers assembled round the 
little inn of Guayavo, to rest their mules. 
They were inhabitants of Caraccas, and were 
disputing on the efforts.teward independence, 
which had been made a short time before. Jo- 
seph Espana had perished on the scaffold ; and | 
his wife groaned im a prison, because she had | 
given an asylum to her husband when a fugi- 
give, and had not denounced him to the govern- 
ment. I-was struck with the agitation which 
prevailed in every mind, and the bitterness with 
which questions were debated, on which men 
of the same country ought not to have differed 
in opinion. While they descanted on the ha- 
tred of the Mulattoes against the free Negroes 
and’ whites, on the wealth of the monks, and 
the difficulty of holding slaves in obedience, 
a cold wind, that seemed to descend from the 
lofty summit of the Silla of Caraccas, enve- 


415 


Joped us in a thick fog, and put an end to this 
animated conversation. Wesought for shelter, 
in the Venta del Guayavo. When we entered 
the inn, an old man, who had spoken with the 
most calmness, reminded the others how impru- 
dent it was, in a time of denunciation, on the 
mountain as well as in the city, to engage in 
political discussions. These words, uttered im 
a spot of so wild an aspect, made a lively im- 
pression on my mind ; which was often renew- 
ed during our journies in the Andes of New 
Grenada and Peru. In Europe, where  nati- 
ons decide ‘their quarrels in ‘the plains, we 
climb the mountains in search of solitude and 
liberty. In the New World, the Cordilleras 
are inhabited to ‘the height of twelve thousand 
feet; and thither men carry with them their 
political dissentions, and their little and hateful 
passions. ‘Gaming-houses are ‘established on 
the ridge of the Andes, wherever the discovery 
of mines has led to the foundation of towns; 
and in those vast solitudes, almost above the 
region of the clouds, in the midst of objects fit- 
ted to elevate the thoughts, the news of ade; 
coration, or a title refused by the court, often 
disturbs the happiness of families. 

Whether we gaze:on the distant. horizon of 
"the sea, or direct our looks to the south-east, 
toward that serrated ridge of rocks, which seems 
to unite the Cumbre and the Silla, though ‘se- 


416 


parated from them by the ravin (quebrada) of 
Tocume, every where we admire the grand 
character of the landscape. From Guayavo we 
proceed for half an hour over a smooth table- 
land, covered with alpine plants. This part 
of the way, on account of it’s windings, is called 
Las Vueltas. We find a little higher up the 
barracks or magazines of flour, which were 
constructed by the Guipuzcoa company in a 
spot of cool temperature, when they had the 
exclusive monopoly of the trade of Caraccas, 
and supplying it with provision. On the road 
to Las Vueltas we see for the first time the 
capital, standing three hundred toises below, 
in a valley luxuriantly planted with coffee and 
European fruit trees. Travellers are accus- 
tomed to stop near a fine spring, known by the 
name of Fuente de Sanchorquiz, that descends 
from the Sierra on sloping strata of gneiss. I 
found it’s temperature 16°4°; which, for an ele- 
vation of seven hundred and twenty-six toises, 
is a considerable coolness ; and it would appear 
still greater, to those who drink it’s limpid 
water, if, instead of gushing out between La 
Cumbre and the temperate vailey of Caraccas, 
it were found on the descent toward La Guay- 
ra, But Ihave observed, that at this descent 
on the northern side of the mountain, the rock*, 


* Hor, 8°3; dip 40° south-east. 


417 


by an uncommon exception in that country, 
does not dip to the north-west, but to the south- 
east, which prevents the subterraneous waters 
from forming springs there. 

We continued to descend from the small 
ravin of Sanchorquiz to la Cruz de la Guay- 
ra; a cross erected on an open spot, six hun- 
dred and thirty-two toises high, and thence 
(entering by the customhouse and the quarter 
of the Pastora) to the city of Caraccas. On the 
south side of the mountain of Avila, the gneiss 
presents several geognostical phenomena worthy 
of the attention of travellers. It is traversed by 
veins of quartz, containing canulated and often 
articulated prisms of rutile titanite of two or 
three lines in diameter. In the fissures of the 
quartz we find, on breaking it, very thin erys- 
tals, which crossing each other form a kind of 
network. Sometimes* the red schorl occurs 
only in dendritic crystals of a bright red. The 
gneiss of the valley of Caraccas is characteriz- 
ed by the red and green garnets, which it ins 
cludes, and which disappear when the rock 
passes into mica-slate. This same phenomenon 
has been remarked by Mr. Von Buch in Sweden 
in Helsingland, while in the temperate parts of 
Europe garnets are in general contained in the 
Serpentine and mica-slates, not in gneiss. In 


* Especially below the Cross of La Guayra, at 594 toises 
of absolute elevation. 


VOL. III. ; Qk 


418 


the inclosures of the gardens of Caraccas, erect- 
ed partly with fragments of gneiss, we find gar- 
nets of a very fine red, a little transparent, 
and very difficult to detach. The gneiss near 
the Cross of La Guayra, half a league distant 
from. Caraccas, presented me also vestiges of 
-azare copper ore * disseminated in veins of 
quartz, and small strata of graphite, or earthy - 
carburetted iron. This last, which leaves traces 
upon paper, is found in pretty large masses, 
and sometimes mingled with sparry iron ore, 
in the ravin of Tocume, to the west of the 
Silla. 

Between the spring of Sanchorquiz and the 
Cross of La Guayra, as well as still higher up, 
the gneiss contains considerable beds of sac- 
charoidal bluish-gray primitive limestone, coarse 
grained, containing mica, and traversed by 
veins of white calcareous spar. The mica, with 
large folia, lies in the direction of the dip of 
the strata. I found in the primitive limestone 
@ great many crystallized pyrites, and rhom- 
boidal fragments of sparry iron ore of isabella 
yellow. All the pains I took to find some tre- 
molite +}, which in the Fitchelberg, in Franco- 


* Blue carbonated copper. 
t Grammatite of Mr. Haiiy, The primitive limestone 
above the spring of Sancliorquiz is directed, as the gneiss in 
that place, hor. 5-2) and dips 45° north; but the general 
direction of the gneiss is, in the Cerro.de Avila, hor. 3:4; 


419 


nia *, is common in the primitive limestoné 
(without dolomite) were useless. In Europe 
beds of primitive limestone are generally ob- 
served in the mica-slates; but we find also 
saccharoidal limestone in a gneiss of the most 
ancient formation, in Sweden near Upsal, in 
Saxony near Burkersdorf, and in the Alps in 
the road over the Simplon. These situations 
are analogous to that of Caraccas. The phe- 
nomena of geognosy, particalarly those which 
are connected with the stratification of rocks, 
and their grouping, are never solitary; but are 
found the same in both hemispheres. I was 
the more struck with these relations, and this 
identity of formations, as, at the time IT un- 


dertook my journey, mineralogists were unac- 
quainted with the name of a single rock of Ve- 
nezuela, New Grenada, and the Cordilleras of 
Quito. 


avith 60° of dip N. W. Exceptions merely local are obe 
served in a small space of ground near the Cross of La 
Guayra (hor. 62 dip 8* N.); and higher up, opposite the 
Quebrada of Tipe (hor. 12, dip 50° W.) 

* Near Wunsiedel, 


420 


CHAPTER XII 


General view of the. Provinces of Venezuela.— 
Diversity of their interests —Town and Val- 

a a ’ 

ley of Caraccas.— Climate. 


Tue importance of a capital does not depend 
solely on it’s population, it’s wealth, or it’s site: 
to be justly appreciated, we must attend to the 
extent of territory, of which it is the centre; 
the sum of native productions, that are the ob- 
ject of it's commerce; and it’s connection with 
the provinces, that are subject. to it’s political 
influence. These various circumstances: are 
modified by the ties, less or more relaxed, that 
unite the colonies with the mother country : 
but such is the empire of habit, and the com- 
binations of commercial interests, that it may 
be foreseen, that this influence of capitals: on 
the surrounding country, those associations of 
provinces, blended together under the denomi- 
nation of kingdoms, general captainrics, presi- 
dencies, and governments *, will survive even 
the catastrophe of the separation of the colo- 


* Reinos, Capitanias Generales, Presidencias, Goviernos, Pro- 
wincias, are the names, which the Court of Spain has always 


given to it’s transmarine possessions, dominios de ultramar. 


421 


nies, These dismemberments occur only when, 
in spite of the natural limits, places have been 
arbitrarily connected together, and thus find 
themselves shackled in their communications. 
In every part of America, where civilization 


did not exist to a certain degree before the 
Conquest (as it did in Mexico, Guatimala, 
Quito, and Peru), it has advanced from the 
coasts toward the interior, following sometimes 
the valley of a great river, sometimes a chain 
of mountains, that afforded a temperate cli- 
mate, Concentred at once in different points, 
it has spread itself as by diverging rays. . The 
union into provinces and kingdoms was effected 
at the first immediate contact between civilized 
parts, or those at least subject to a permanent 
and regular’ sway. Lands deserted, or inha- 
bited by savage nations, now surround the coun- 
tries, which European civilization has subdued. 
They divide it’s conquests like arms of the sea 
difficult to pass, and neighbouring states are of- 
ten connected with each other: only by strips 
of cultivated land. It is less difficult to acquire 
a knowledge of the configuration of coasts 
bathed by the ocean, than of the sinuosities of 
that interior shore, on which barbarism and 
civilization, impenetrable forests and cultivated 
land, touch and bound each other. It is from 
not having reflected on the early state of society 
in the New World, that geographers so often 


422 

disfigure their maps, by tracing the different 
parts of the Spanish and Portugueze colonies, 
as if they were contiguous at every point in the 


interior. The local knowledge, which I myself 


obtained, respecting these boundaries, furnishes 
me with the means of fixing the extent of the 
great territorial divisions with some certainty, 
of comparing the wild and inhabited parts, and 
of appreciating the greater or less political ins 
fluence exerted by certain towns of America, 
as centres of power and of commerce. 

Caraccas is the capital of a country, which 
is nearly twice as large as Peru at present, and 
which yields little in extent to the kingdom 
of New Grenada*. This country, which the 
Spanish government designates by the name of 
Capitania General de Caraccas-f, or of the (uni- 


* The Capitania General of Caraccas contains near 48,000 
Square leagues (twenty five 1o a degree); Peru since la Paz, 
Potosi, Charcas, and Santa Cruz de la Sierra, have been 
separated from it, and joined to the viceroyalty of Buenos 
Ayres, only 30,000.. New Grenada, including the province 
of Quito, 65,000. These calculations have been made by 
Mr. Oltmanns, from the alterations that my astronomical 
observations have introduced into the maps of Spanish Ame- 
rica. I prefer here valuations in round numbers; the par- 
ticular discussions on the magnitude of the various countries, 
their respective population, and other facts purely statistical, | 
will be placed in particular chapters, as we quit each great 
territorial division, 

t The captain general of Caraccas has the title of Capitan 
General de las Provincias de Venezucla y Ciudad de Caraccas. 


23 


ted) provinces. of Venezuela, has nearly a mil- 
lion of inhabitants, among whom are sixty thou- 
sand slaves. It contains, along the coast, New 
Andalusia, or the province of Cumana (with 
the island of Margaretta*), Barcelona, Venezu- 
ela or Caraccas, Coro, and Maracaybo; in the 
interior, the provinces of Varinas and Guiana, 
the first along the rivers of Santo-Domingo and 
the Apure, the second along the Oroonoko, the 
Casiquiare, the Atabapo, and the Rio Negro. In 
a general view of the seven united provinces 
of Terra Firma, we perceive, that they form 
three distinct zones, extending from east to 
west. ji 

We find at first cultivated land along the 
shore, and near the chain of the mountains on 
the coast; next savannahs or pasturages ; and 
finally, beyond the Oroonoko, a third zone, 
that of the forests, into which we can penetrate 
only by means of the rivers that traverse them, 
If the native inhabitants of the forests lived en- 
tirely on the produce of the chace, like those of 
ihe Missoury, we might say, that the three 
zones, into which we have divided the territory 
of Venezuela, present an image of the three 
states of human society ; the life of the wild 
hunter, in the woods of the Oroonoke; the 


~ * This Island, near the coast of Camana, forms a particu- 
Jar govierno, depending immediately on the captain- general 


ef Caraccas. 


424 


pastoral life, in the savannahs, or llanos; and 
the agricultural, in the high vallies, and at ‘the 
foot of the mountains on the coast. Mission- 
ary monks and a few soldiers occupy here, as 
in all America, advanced posts on the frontiers 
of Brazil. In this first zone are felt the pre- 
ponderance of force, and the abuse of power, 
which is a necessary consequence. The natives 
carry on a civil war, and sometimes devour 
one another. The monks endeavour to augment 
the little villages of their Missions, by availing 
themselves of the dissensions of the natives. 
The military live in a state of hostility with the 
monks, whom they were intended to protect. 
Every thing offers alike the melancholy picture 
of misery and privations. We shall soon have 
occasion to examine more closely that state of 
man, which is vaunted as a state of nature 
by those who inhabit towns. In the second 
region, in the plains and the pasture grounds, 
food is extremely abundant, but has little va- 
riety. Although more advanced in civilization, 
men without the circle of some scattered towns 
do not remain less isolated from one another. 
At the view of their dwellings, partly covered 
with skins and leather, it would seem, that, far 
from being fixed, they are scarcely encamped in 
those vast meadows, which extend to the ho- 
rizon. Agriculture, which alone lays the basis, 
and draws closer the ties of society, occupies 


f, 
| 
| 


PP aT SEEMED? Sg aor 


425 


the third zone, the shore, and especially the 
hot and temperate valleys in the mountains near 
the sea. 

It may be objected, that in other parts of 
Spanish and Portugueze America, wherever we 
can trace the progressive developement of civi- 
lization, we find the three ages of society * 
united. But it ought to be remembered, and 
this observation is extremely important: to 
those who desire to become thoroughly ac- 
quainted with the political state of these éolo- 
nies, that the disposition of the three zones, 
that of the forests, the pastures, and the culti- 
vated land, are not every where the same, and 
that it is no where so regular as in the country 
of Venezuela. It is far from being always 
from the coast to the interior, that population, 
commercial industry, and intellectual improve- 
ment diminishes. In Mexico, Peru, and Quito, 
the table-lands and central mountains display 
the most numerous assemblage of cultivators, 
towns nearest to each other, and the more an- 
cient institutions. We even find, that, in the 
kingdom of Buenos Ayres, the region of pastur- 
age, known by the name of the Pampas, lies 
between the isolated part of Buenos Ayres, and 
the great mass of Indian cultivators, who inha- 
bit the’ Cordilleras of Chareas, La Paz, and 


* Nouv. Esp., Tom, i, p. 144, 


426 


Potosi. This circumstance gives birth toa di- 
versity of interests, in the same country, be- 
tween the people of the interior, and those who 
inhabit the coasts. 

Where we seek to form a precise idea of 
those vast provinces, which have been governed 
for ages, almost like separate states, by viceroys 
and captains-general, we must fix our atten- 
tion at once on several points. We must dis: 
tinguish the parts of Spanish America that are 
opposite to Asia, from those that are bathed by 
the Atlantic Ocean; we must discuss, as we 
have already done, where the greatest portion 
of the population is placed; whether near the 
coast, or concentrated in the interior, on the 
cold and temperate table-lands of the Cordi- 
leras. We must verify the numerical propor- 
tions between the natives and other casts; 
search into the origin of the European families ; 
and examine to what race, in each part of the 
colonies, the greater number of whites belong. 
The Andalusian-Canarians of Venezuela, the 
mountaineers * and the Biscayans of Mexico, 
the Catalonians of Buenos Ayres, differ essen- 
tially in their aptitude for agriculture, the me- 
chanic arts, commerce, and the objects con- 
nected with the unfolding of the intellect. Each 

* Montaneses. The inhabitants of the mountains of Santam 
der are called by this name in Spain, 


i 
a 
| 


427 


ef those races has preserved, in the New as in 
the Old Worid, the shades that constitute it’s 
national physiognomy; it’s. harshness or mild- 
ness of character; its moderation, or it’s ex- 
cessive desire of gain; it’s kind hospitality, or 
it’s taste for solitude. In the countries where 
the population is for the most part composed of 
Indians and mingled casts, the difference, that 
manifests itself between the Europeans and 
their descendants, cannot indeed be so strongly 
marked, as that which was observed anciently 
in the colonies of Ionian and Doric origin. The 
Spaniards transplanted to the torrid zone hay- 
ing become under new skies strangers to the 
remembrances of their mother country, must 
have felt more sensible changes than the Greeks 
settled on the coasts of Asia Minor, and of 
Italy, the climates of which differ so little from 
those of Athens and Corinth. It cannot be 
denied, that the character of the Spanish Ame- 
ricans has received different modifications from 
the physical constitution of the country; the 
isolated site of the capitals on the table-lands, 
or in the vicinity of the coasts; the agricultural 
life; the labour of the mines, and the habit of 
commercial speculations: but in the inhabit- 
ants of Caraccas, Santa Fe, Quito, and Bu- 
enos Ayres; we recognize every where some 


thing. that belongs to the race, and the situation 


of the people, 


428 


If we examine the state of the Capitania- 
General of Caraccas, according to the principles 
we have laid down, we perceive that it’s agri- 
cultural industry, it’s great mass of population, 
it’s numerous towns, and whatever is connect- 
ed with an advanced civilization, are found 
near the coast. ‘This coast extends farther than 
two hundred leagues. It is bathed by the Little 
Caribbean Sea, a sort of mediterranean, on the 
shores of which almost all the nations of Europe 
have founded colonies ; which communicates at 
several points with the Atlantic Ocean; and 
the existence of which has had a considerable 
influence on the progress of knowledge in the 
eastern part of Equinoctial America, from the 
time of the Conquest. The kingdoms of New 
Grenada and Mexico have no connection with 
foreign colonies, and through them with that 
part of Europe which is not Spanish, except by 
the ports of Carthagena and of Santa Martha, 
of Vera Cruz and of Campeachy. These vast 
countries, from the nature of their coasts, and 
the remoteness of their population on the back 
of the Cordilleras, present few points of contact 
with foreign lands. The Gulf of Mexico is 
even less frequented during a part of the year, 
on account of the danger of gales of wind from 
the north. The coasts of Venezuela, on the 
contrary, from their extent, their stretching 
toward the east, the number of their ports, and 


429 


the safety of their anchorage at different seasons, 
possess al] the advantages of the interior Carib- 
bean Sea. The communications with the great- 
er islands, and even with those that are to 
windward, can no where be more frequent than 
from the ports of Cumana, Barcelona, La Guay- 
ra, Porto Cabello, Coro, and Maracaybo; and 
no where has it been found’ more’ difficult to 
restrain an illicit commerce with strangers. 
Can we wonder, that this facility of commercial 
intercourse with the inhabitants of free America, 
and the agitated nations of Europe, should 
have augmented in conjunction, in the pro- 
vinces united under the Capitania-General of 
Venezuela, opulence, knowledge, and that rest- 
less desire of a local government, which is 
blended with the love of liberty and republi- 
can forms? 

The  copper-coloured natives, or Indians, 
constitute a very important mass of the agri- 
cultural population only in those places, where 
the Spaniards found regular governments, a 
civil community, and ancient and very com- 
plicated institutions, at the Conquest; as in 
New Spain, south of Durango; and in Peru, 
from Cusco to Potési. In the Capitania-~Gene- 
ral of Caraccas, the Indian population is incon- 
siderable, at.least beyond the Missions, and in 
the cultivated zone. Atihe moments of great 
political dissentions, the natives excite no fear 


4360 


m the whites; or the mingled casts. Comput» 
ing, in 1800, the total population of the seven 
united provinces at nine hundred thousand 
souls, it appeared to me, that the Indians made 
only one ninth; while at Mexico they form 
nearly one half of the inhabitants. 

Among the casts that compose the popula. 
tion of Venezuela, that of the Blacks, which 
awakens at once the interest due to misfortune, 
and the dread of a violent reaction, is not im- 
portant from it’s number ; but it is so from it’s 
accumulation on'a small space of territory. 
We shall soon see, that in all the Capitania- 
General the slaves do not exceed a fifteenth of 
the whole population. In the island of Cuba, 
of all those in the West Indies where the Ne- 
groes bear the smallest proportion to the Whites, 
they were, in 1811, as one to three. The seven 
united. provinces of Venezuela have sixty thou- 
sand slaves; Cuba, the extent of which is eight 
times less, has two hundred and twelve thou- 
sand. Considering the sea of the West India 
islands, of which the Gulf of Mexico makes a 
part, as an interior sea with several mouths, 
it is important to fix our attention on the politi- 
cal relations, that result from this singular confi- 
guration of the New Continent, between coun- 
tries placed around the same basin. Notwith- 
standing the isolated state, in which the great- 
er part of the mother countries endeavour to 


¢ 
is 


sr 


431 


fold their colonies, the agitations that take 
place are not the less communicated from one 
to the other. The elements of discord are every 
where the same ; and, as if by instinct, a con- 
cert is established between men of the same 
colour, although separated by difference of lan- 
guage, and inhabiting opposite coasts. That 
American Mediterranean, formed by the shores 
of Venezuela, New Grenada, Mexico, the Unit- 
ed States *, and the West India islands, may 
count upon it’s borders near a million anda 
half of free and enslaved Blacks; but so un- 
equally distributed, that there are very few to 
the south, and scarcely any in the region of 
the west. Their great accumulation is on the 
northern and eastern coasts. This may be said 
to be the African part of the interior basin. 
It is natural, that the commotions, which since 
1792 have manifested themselves in St. Do- 
mingo, should have been propagated to the 
coasts of Venezuela. So long as Spain possess- 
ed those fine colonies in tranquillity, the little 
resistance of the slaves was entirely repressed : 
but when a struggle of another kind, that for 
independence, began, the Blacks by their me- 


* The produce of the states at the back of the Alleghany 
mountains is exported by the Missisippi; and the possession 
of Florida is so strongly desired by the Anglo-Americans, 
énly witha view of occupying a greater extent of coast on 
the interior sea. 


432 


nacing position excited alternately the appre- 
hensions of the opposite parties; and the gra- 
dual or instantaneous abolition of slavery has 
been proclaimed in different regions of Spanish 
America, less from motives of justice and hu- 
manity, than to secure the aid of an intrepid 
race of men, habituated to privation, and fight- 
ing for their own cause. I found in the narra- 
tive of the voyage of Girolamo Benzoni a curious 
passage, which proves of how old a date are 
the apprehensions caused by the increase of the 
black population. Those fears will cease only 
where governments, shall: second by laws the 
progressive meliorations, which refinement of 
manners, opinion, and religious sentiment, in+ 
troduce into domestic slavery. “The Negroes,” 
says Benzoni, “ multiply so’ much at St. Do- 
mingo, that in 1545, when I was in ‘Terra 
Firma (on the coast of Caraccas), I saw many 
Spaniards, who had no doubt that the island 
would shortly be the property of the blacks *.” 
It was reserved for our age, to see this pre- 


* Vi sono molti Spagnuoli, che tengono per cosa certa, 
che quest’ isola (San Dominico).-in breve tempo sara posses 
duta da questi Mori di Guinea. (Benzoni, Hist. del Mondo 
Nuovo, ed. 2da, 1572, p- 65.) The author, who is not very 
scrupulous jn the adoption of statistical facts, believés, that 
in his time there were at St. Domingo seven thousand fagi= 
tive Negroes (Mori cimaroni), with whom Don Luis Colomb 
made a treaty of peace and friendship. 


; 
a 
14 


433 


diction accomplished ; and a European colony: 
of America transform itself into an African 
‘state. 

The sixty thousand * slaves, which the seven 
united provinces of Venezuela contain, are so 
unequally divided, that in the province of Ca- 
raccas alone there are nearly forty thousand, 
one fifth of which are Mulattoes ; in that of Ma- 
racaybo, ten or twelve thousand; in those of 
Cumana and Barcelona, scarcely six thousand. 


* This estimation differs only one tenth from that, which 
T published in my work on Mexico, Tom, ii, p. 748; which 
terminates by general considerations respecting all the Spa- 
nish Colonies. Strongly interested to know with precision 
the black population of America, I had formed on the spot 
in 1800, after consulting rich proprietors (haciendados), par- 
tial lists for the vallies of Caraccas, Caucagua,-Guapo, Gua- 
tire, Aragua, Ocumare, &c. These estimations gave for 
the province of Venezuela thirty-two thousand five hundred 
slaves; for all the Capitania-general of Caraccas, fifty-four 
thousand, instead of two hundred and eighteen thousand 
Blacks, which Mr. Depons indicates, supposing (no doubt 
from an error in the figures) that the Blacks form nearly a 
third (three tenths) of the whole population. (Voyage @ la 
Terre-Ferme, Tome 1, p.178 et 241.) The computations 
which I-had collected during my abode at Caraccas, at Cu 
mana, and in Spanish Guiana, have been recently submitted 
to new verifications, by the care of Don Maauel Palacio- 


Faxardo, who has published a very interesting account of 


the carbonat of soda, or urao of Luganilla, and whose three 
journals of the road from Santa-Fe to Varinas, from Caraccas 
to the Llanos of Pore, and from Merida to Truxillo, afforded 
me valuable materials for rectifying the geographical maps. 


VOL. Il. QR 


434 

To judge of the influence which the slaves and 
the men of colour exert in general on the public 
tranquillity, it is not enough to know their 
number, we must consider their accumulation 
at certain points, and their manner of life, as 

cultivators or inhabitants of towns. In the pro- 

vince of Venezuela, the slaves are assembled to- 
gether on a space of no great extent, between the 
coast, and a line that passes (at twelve leagues 
from the coast) through Panaquire, Yare, Sa- 
bana de Ocumare, Villa de Cura, and Nirgua. 
The Llanos or vast plains of Calaboso, San Car- 
los, Guanare, and Barquecimeto, contain only 
four or five thousand, who are scattered among 
the farms, and employed in the care of cattle. 
The number of freed men is very considerable ; 
the Spanish laws and customs are favourable to 
affranchisement. A master cannot refuse liberty 
to a slave who offers him the sum of three hun- 
dred piastres, even though he may have cost him 
double that price, on account of his industry, or 
a particular aptitude for the trade he practises. 
Instances of persons, who by their. will bestow 
liberty on a certain number. of slaves, is more 
common in the province of Venezuela, than in 


any other place. A short time before we visited 


the fertile vallies of Aragua, and the lake of 
Valencia, a lady, who inhabited the great village 
of Victoria, ordered her children, on her death- 
bed, to give liberty to all her slayes, to the num- 


i 
4 
| 


aaa 


435 


ber of thirty. I love to record facts, that do 
honour to the character of a pedple, from whom 
Mr. Bonpland and myself received so many 
marks of kindness and affection. 

What is most interesting in the colonies next 
to the state of the Blacks, is to know the num- 
ber of white Creoles, whom I call Hispano-Ame- 
ricans *, and that of the Whites born in Europe. 
It is difficult to acquire notions sufficiently exact 
on so delicate a point. The people in the New, 
as well as the Old World, abhor numberings, 
suspecting them to be made in order to augment 
the weight of taxes. The men in office, on the 
other hand, sent by the mother-country to the 
colonies, dislike these statistical enumerations 
as much as the people, and this from motives of 
a jealous policy. These numberings, so irksome 
to make, are not easily withheld from the curi- 
osity of the planters. Although ministers at 
Madrid, aware of the real interests of their 
country, have endeavoured from time to time, 
to obtain precise information respecting the in- 
creasing prosperity of the colonies, the local 
authorities have not in general seconded these 
useful views. It required direct orders from 


© In imitation of the word Anglo-American, adopted in 
all the languages of Europes In the Spanish colonies, the 
Whites born in America’ are called Spaniards; and the real 
Spaniards, those who are born in the mother-country, Euro- 
peansy Guchupins, or Chapetons. 


Q2F 2 


436 


the court of Spain, to have those excellent no- 
tions of political economy delivered to the 
editors of the Peruvian Mercury, which they 
have published. It was in Mexico, and not at 
Madrid, that I heard Count de Revillagigedo, 
the viceroy, blamed for having informed all New 
Spain, that the capital of a country, which has 
six millions of inhabitants, contained in 1790 
only two thousand three hundred Europeans, 
while it was computed, that there were more 
than fifty thousand Hispano-Americans. The 
persons who uttered these complaints considered 
the fine establishment of posts, by which a letter 
travels from Buenos Ayres to New California, as 
one of the most dangerous conceptions of Count 
Florida Blanca. They counselled (happily with- 
out success) the rooting up of the vines of New 
Mexico and Chili, in order to favour the com- 
merce of the mother country. Strange blind- 
ness, which can make it believed, that num- 
berings will reveal to the colonies the conscious- 
ness of their strength! It is only in times of 
discord and. internal troubles, that an exami- 
nation of the relative preponderance of casts, 
that ought all to be animated by one interest, 
seems intended to estimate beforehand the num- 
ber of combatants. 

If we compare the seven united provinces of 
Venezuela, to the kingdom of Mexico and the 
island of Cuba, we shall succeed in finding the 


HY] 
{ 
| 
i 

(8 


Rarities ose 


EE Ee ST MEO EE Rp eee eee 


437 


approximate number of white Creoles, and even 
of Europeans. The first, or Hispano-Americans, 
form in Mexico nearly one fifth, and in the 
island of Cuba, according to the very accurate 
ennmeration of 1601, a third of the whole popu- 
lation. When we reflect, that the kingdom of 
Mexico is inhabited by two millions and a half 
of natives of the copper-coloured race ; when we 
consider the state of the coasts, that are bathed 
by the Pacific Ocean, and the smal! number of 
Whites in the intendencies of Puebla and Oaxaca, 
comparatively with the natives; we cannot 
doubt, that the province of Venezuela at least, 
if not the Capitania-General, has a greater pro- 
portion than that of one to five. The island of 
Cuba *, in which the Whites are even more nu- 
merous than in Chili, may furnish us with a 
limiting number, that is to say, the maximum 
that can be supposed in the Capitania-General 
of Caraccas. I believe we must stop at two 
hundred, or two hundred and ten thousand 
Hispano-Americans, in a total population of 
nine hundred thousand souls. The number of 
Europeans included in the white race (not com- 
prehending the troops sent from the mother 
country) does not exceed twelve or fifteen thou- 


* [do not mention the kingdom of Buenos-Ayres, where, 
among a million of inhabitants, the whites are extremely nu- 
merous in: the parts toward the coast; while the table-lands, 
or provinces of the Sierra, are almost entirely peopled with 
natives. 


sand. It certainly is not greater at Mexico than 
sixty thousand ; and I find by several statements, 
that, if we estimate the whole of the Spanish 
Colonies at fourteen or fifteen millions of inhabi- 
tants, there are in this number at most three 
millions of Creole Whites, and two hundred thou- 
sand Europeans. 

When the young Tupac-Amaru, who believed 
himself the legitimate heir to the empire of the 
incas, made the conquest of several provinces 
of Upper Peru, in 1781, at the head of forty 
thousand Indian mountaineers, all the Whites 
were seized with the same apprehensions. The 
Hispano-Americans felt, like the Spaniards born 
in Europe, that the contest was between the 
Copper-coloured race and the Whites ; between 
barbarism and civilization, Tupac-Amaru, who 
himself was not destitute of intellectual cultiva- 
tion, began with flattering the Creoles and the 
European clergy; but soon drawn on by events, 
and the spirit of vengeance that inspired his 
nephew, Andrew Condorcanqui, he changed his 
plan. A rising for independence became a cruel 
war between the different casts: the Whites were 
conquerors, and, excited by a feeling of common 
interest, from that period fixed a wakeful atten- 
tion on the proportions, that exist in the different 
provinces between their number and that of the 
Indians... It was reserved for our times, to see 
the whites direct this attention toward them 


ate om 


a eee ae 


439 


selves; and examine, from motives of distrust, 
the elements of which their cast is composed. 
Every enterprise in favour of independence and 
liberty puts the national or American party in 
opposition with the men of the mother country. 
When I arrived at Caraccas, the latter had) just 
escaped from’ the danger, with which they 
thought they were menaced by the insurrection 
projected by Espana. The consequences of that 
bold attempt were the more serious, because, 
instead of investigating the real causes of the 
popular discontent, it was thought, that the 
mother country would be saved by employing 
yigorous measures. At present the commotions, 
which have arisen throughout the country, from 
the banks of the Rio de la Plata to New Mexico, 
an extent of fourteen hundred leagues, , have 
divided. men of a common origin. | 

It seems to excite surprise im Europe, that 
the Spaniards of the mother country, of whom 
we have remarked the small number, have, made 
during ages so long and so firm a resistance. 
Men forget, that the European party in all the 
colonies is necessarily augmented by a great 
mass of the natives. Family interests, the de- 
sire of uninterrupted tranquillity, the fear of 
engaging in an enterprise that might fail, pre- 
vent these latter from embracing the cause of 
independence, or aspiring to establish a local 
and representative government, though depen- 


440 


dent on the mother country. Some shrink from 
violent measures, and flatter themselves, that 2 
gradual reform may render the colonial system 
less oppressive. They see in revolutions only 
the loss of their slaves, the spoliation of the 
clergy, and the introduction of religious tolera- 
tion, which they believe to be incompatible with 
the purity of the established worship. | Others 
belong to the small number of families, which, 
either from hereditary opulence, or having been 
long settled in the colonies, exercise a real mu- 
nicipal aristocracy. They would rather be de- 
prived of certain rights, than share them with 
all; they would prefer even a foreign yoke to 
the exercise of authority by the Americans of an 
inferior cast ; they abhor every constitution 
founded on equality of rights ; and above all, 
they dread the loss of those decorations and 
titles, which they have with so much difficulty 
acquired, and which, as we have observed above, 
compose so essential a part of their domestic 
happiness. Others again, and their number is’ 
very considerable, live in the country on the 
produce of their lands; and enjoy that liberty, 
which, in a country where there is only a scat- 
tered population, is obtained even under the 
most oppressive governments. Aspiring to no 
places, themselves, they see them with indiffer- 
ence filled by men, whose power can never 
reach them, and whose names are ta them 


44] 


almost unknown. They would no doubt pre- 
fer a national government, and complete liberty 
of commerce, to the ancient state of the colo- 
nies ; but this desire does not. sufficiently sub- 
due the love of ease, and the habits of an indo- 
lent life, to impel them to long and painful sa- 
crifices. 

In characterizing these different tendencies of 
political opinion in the colonies, from the va- 
rious intercourse I have had with all classes 
of the inhabitants, I have developped the causes 
of the long and peaceful dominion of the mo- 
ther country over America. The calm has 
been the result of habit, of the preponderance 
of a few leading families, and above all of the 
equilibrium established between the hostile 
forces. But security founded on disunion must 
be shaken, whenever a large body of men, for- 
getting their individual animosities, shall be 
united by a sentiment of common interest; 
when that sentiment, once awakened, is strength- 
ened by resistance; and when the progress of 
knowledge, and change of manners, shall 
diminish the influence of habit and ancient 
ideas. 

We have seen above, that the Indian popu- 
lation in the united provinces of Venezuela is 
not considerable, is recently civilized, and 
that all the towns have been founded by the 
Spanish conquerors. These could not follow, 


f 


442 


as in Mexico and Peru, the traces of the an- 
cient civilization of the natives. Caraccas, 
Maracaybo, Cumana, and Coro, have nothing 
Indian but their names. Compared with the 
three capitals * of Equinoctial America, placed 
on the mountains, and enjoying a temperate 
climate, Caraccas is the least elevated. The 
great population of Venezuela lying toward the 
coast, and the most cultivated region being 
parallel to it in the direction of east and west, 
Caraccas is not a centre. of commerce, like 
Mexico, Santa Fe de Bogota, and Quito. Each 
of the seven provinces united in one Capitania- 
General has a port, by which it’s produce is 
sent out, It is sufficient to consider the posi- 
tion of the provinces, their more or less inti- 
mate connection with the Windward Islands, 
the direction of the mountains, and the course 
of the great rivers, to perceive, that Caraccas 
can never exert any powerful political influence 
over the countries, of which it is the capital. 
The Apure, the Meta, and the Orconoko, run- 
ning from west to east, receive all the streams 
of the Llanos, and the region of pasturage. 
St. Thomas in Guiana will be necessarily, at 
some future day, a place of trade of high im- 


* Mexico, Santa Fe de Bogota, and Quito. The eleva- 
tion of the site of the capital of Guatimala is still unknown. 
From it’s vegetable productions we may infer, that it is less 
than 500 toises. : 


| 


443 


portance, especially when the flour of New 
Grenada, embarked above the confluence of 
the Rio Negro and the Umadea, and descend- 
ing by the Meta and Oroonoko, shall be pre- 
ferrred at Caraccas and Guiana to the flour of 
New England. It is a great adyantage to the 
provinces of Venezuela, that their territorial 
wealth is not directed to one point, like that 
of Mexico and New Grenada, which flows to 
Vera Cruz and Carthagena; but that they pos- 
sess a great number of towns equally well peo- 
pled, and forming so many yarious centres of 
commerce and civilization. 

Caraccas is the seat of an Audiencia (high 
court of justice) and one of the eight archbish- 
oprics, into which Spanish America is divided *, 


%* The archbishopricks and the audiencias have not the 
same limits as the great political divisions, which, independ- 
ent of one another, are known under the names of viceroyal- 
ties, and capitanias-generales. There are often two audiencias 
in the same viceroyalty, as those of Mexico and Guadalax- 
ara, of Lima aud of Cusco; sometimes the bishops of one 
viceroyalty are suffragans of an archbishop, who resides in 
another political division. The bishops of Panama, Mainas, 
Quito, and Cuenca, are subject to the archbishop of Lima, 
and not to the archbishop of New Grenada. The eight 
archbishops of Spanish America have their sees at Mexico, 
Guaiimala, St. Domiago, the Havannah, Caraccas, Santa- 
Fe de Bogota,. Lima, and Chuquisaca or Charcas. The 
twelve audiencias are those of Mexico, Guadalaxara, Gna- 
fimala, the Hayannah, Caraccas, Santa Fe de Bogota, 


444 


It’s population in 1800, according to the re~ 
searches I made into the number of births, was 
nearly 40,000; the best informed inhabitants 
believed it even to be 45,000, of which 18,000 
are whites, and 27,000 free men of colour. 
Computations made in 1778 had already given 
from 30,000 to 32,000. All the direct num- 
berings have remained a quarter, and more, 
below the effective number. In 1766, the po- 
pulation of Caraccas, and the fine valley in 
which that city is placed, suffered immensely 
by a severe aitack of the small pox. The mor- 
tality rose in the town to six or eight thousand. 
Since that memorable period, inoculation is 
become general, and I have seen it practised 


Quito, Lima, Cusco, Chuquisaca, Santiago in Chili, and 
Buenos Ayres. Finally, the eleven great political divisions 
are the viceroyalty of Mexico (with two commanders.gene- 
ral, in the provincias internas, and the Captain-General of 
Yucatan); the Capitanias-generales of Guatimala, the two 
Floridas, Cuba, St. Domingo, Porto-Rico, and Venezuela; 
the viceroyalty of New Grenada (with the presidencia of 
Quito); those of Peru and Buenos-Ayres; and the Capita. 
na General of Chili, There are only four  viceroyalties ; 
but Chili, Quito, and Guatimala have always borne in Spain 
officially the title of kingdoms, reinos. The president of 
an audiencia may be subject to a viceroy; for imstance, the 
president of Quito depends in civil and military affairs on’ 
the viceroy of Santa-Fe. I thought it proper to record 
here these triple divisions of the judicial, ecclesiastical, and 
political hierarchies, because they are often confounded in. 
works, that treat of the Spanish Colonies. 


a 
ul 


445 


without the aid of physicians. In the province 
of Cumana, where the communications with 
Europe are less frequent, there had not been, 
in my time, one instance of the small-pox dur- 
ing fifteen years; while at Caraccas that cruel 
malady was constantly dreaded, because» it 
always showed itself sporadically on several 
points at a time. I say sporadically, for in 
Equinoctial America, where the changes of the 
atmosphere, and the phenomena of organic life, 
seem subject to a remarkable periodicalness, 
the small-pox, before the benevolent introduc- 
tion of the vaccine disease, exerted it’s ravages 
only, if we may place confidence in general 
belief, every fifteen or twenty years. Since my 
return to Europe, the population of Caraccas 
has continued to augment. It amounted to 
50,000 souls; when, at the great earthquake of 
the 26th of March, 1812, twelve thousand in- 
habitants perished beneath the ruins of their 
houses. The political events, which have suc- 
ceeded this catastrophe, have reduced the num- 
ber of inhabitants to less than 20,000; but 
these losses will soon be repaired, if the fertile 
and commercial country, of which Caraccas is 
the centre, should have the happiness of enjoy- 
ing repose, and a wise administration, for a 
few years. _ 

The town is seated at the entrance of the 
plain of Chacao, which extends three leagues 


446 


east toward Caurimare and the Cuesta de At- 
yamas, and which is two leagues and a half in 
breadth. This plain, through which runs the 
Rio Guayra, is four hundred and fourteen toises 
in height above the level of the sea. The 
ground, which the town of Caraccas occupies, 
is uneven, and has a steep slope from N. N. W. 
to 8.8. E. In order to form an exact idea of 
the situation of Caraccas, we must recollect the 
general disposition of the mountains of the 
coast, and the great longitudinal vallies, by 
which they are traversed. The river Guayra 
rises in the group of primitive mountains of 
Higuerota, which separates the valley of Ca- 
raccas from that of Aragua. It is formed neat 
Las Ajuntas by the junction of the little rivers 
of San Pedro and Macarao, and runs first to 
the east as far as the Cuesta of Auyamas, and 
then to the south, to unite it’s waters with those 
of Rio Tuy, below Yare. The Rio Tuy is the 
only considerable river in the northern and 
mountainous part of the province. 

It follows regularly the direction from west 
to east for thirty leagues, in a straight line, more 
than three quarters of which are navigable. By 
barometrical measurements I found the slope 
of the Tuy for this length, from the plantation 
of Manterola * to it’s mouth, east of Cape Co- 


* At the foot of the high mountain of Cocuyza, 3’ east 
from Victoria. 


} 
| 
. 
| 


aE. 


447 


dera, two hundred and ninety-five toises. This 
river forms in the chain of the coast a kind of 
Jongitudinal valley, while the waters of the 
Llanos, or of five sixths of the province of Ca- 
raccas, follow the slope of the land toward the 
south, and join the Oroonoke. This hydro- 
graphic sketch may throw some light on the 
natural tendency of the inhabitants of the 
same province, to export their productions by 
different roads. 

If the valley of Caraccas be only a lateral 
branch of that of the Tuy, the two valleys still 
remain parallel during some time. They are 
separated by hilly ground, which we cross in 
going from Caraccas to the high savannahs 
of Ocumare, passing by Le Valle and Salaman- 
ca. These savannahs themselves are beyond 
the Tuy; and the valley of the Tuy being a 
great deal lower than that of Caraccas, the des- 
cent is almost constantly from north to south. 
In the same manner as Cape Codera, the Silla, 
the Cerro de Avila between Caraccas and La 
Guayra, and the mountains of Mariara, consti- 
tute the most northern and elevated range of 
the mountains of the coast; the mountains of 
Panaquire, Ocumare, Guiripa, and the villa 
de Cura, form the most southern range. We 
have already several times observed, that the 
general direction of the strata composing this 
vast, chain of the coast is from south-west to 


448 


north-east; and their dip is usually toward the 
north-west. Hence it follows. that the direc- 
tion of the primitive strata is independent’ of 
that of the whole chain; and, what is extremely 
remarkable, in following this chain* from Por- 
to Cabello as far as Maniquarez and Maca- 
nao, in the island of Margaretta, we find, from 
west to east, first granite; then gneiss, mica- 
slate, and primitive schistus; and finally com- 
pact limestone, gypsum, and agglomerates con- 
taining seashells, 

It is to be regretied, that the town of Ca- 
raccas was not built farther to the east, below 
the entrance of the Anauco into the Guayra ; 
on that spot near Chacao, where the valley 
widens into an extensive plain, which seems 
to have been levelled by the abode of the wa- 
ters. Diego de Losada, when he founded + the 
town, followed no doubt the traces of the first 
establishment made by Faxardo. The Span- 
iards at that time, attracted by the reputation 
of the two gold mines of Los: Teques and Ba- 
ruta, were not yet masters of the whole val- 


" * [have spoken in the preceding chapter, p- 376, of the 
interruption in the chain of the coast to the east of Cape 
Codera. ; 

t The foundation of Santiago de Leon de Carraccas dates 
from 1567,, and posterior to that of Cumana, Coro, Nueva 
Barcelona, and Caravalleda, or El Collado. fray Pedra 
Simon, Not, 7, cap. iii, p. 575. Oviedo y Banos, p. 262. 


449 


ley, and preferred remaining near the road, 
which led to the coast. The town of Quito ~ 
also is built in the narrowest-and most uneven 
part of a valley, between two fine plains, Turu- 
pamba and Rumipamba, of which great advan- 
tages might have been taken, had the ancient 
Indian habitations been abandoned. + 

The descent is continual from the custom- 
house of the Pastora, by the square of Trinidad 
and the Plaza Major, to Santa Rosalia, and the 
Rio Guayra. I found by barometrical mea- 
surements, that the customhouse was thirty 
toises above the square of Trinidad, near which 
I made my astronomical observations; this 
square, eight toises higher than the pavement 
of the cathedral in the great square; and the 
great square, thirty-two toises above the Rio 
Guayra at la Noria. This declivity of the 
ground does not prevent carriages from going 
about the town; but the inhabitants make 
little use of them. Three small rivers, descend- 
ing from the mountains, the Anauco, the Ca- 
tuche, and the Caraguata, cross the town from 
north to south; their banks are very high ; 
and, with the dried up ravins which join them 
furrowing the ground, remind the traveller of 
the famous Guaicos of Quito*, only being on 
a smaller scale. The water drunk at Caraccas 


* See chap. iv, vol. ii, p. 228. 
VOL. III. 2e6 


450 


is that of the Rio Catuche ; but the richer class 
have their water brought from La Valle, a vil- 
lage a league distant on the south. This wa- 
ter and that of Gamboa are reckoned very 
salubrious, because they flow over the roots 
of sarsaparilla*. I could not discover in them 
any, aromatic or extractive matter. The water 
of the valley does not contain any lime, but 
a little more carbonic acid than the water of 
the Anauco. The new bridge over this river 
is a handsome structure, and is frequented by 
those, who walk toward Candelaria, on the 
road to Chacao and Petare. Caraccas contains 
eight churches, five convents, and a theatre 
that holds. fifteen or eighteen hundred _per- 
sons. When I was there, the pit, where the 
men are separate from the women, was unco- 
vered. We saw at once the actors, and the 
stars. As the misty weather made me lose a 
great. many observations of Jupiter's satellites, 
I was able to ascertain from a box in the theatre 
whether the planet would be visible that night. 
The streets of Caraccas are wide, straight, and 
crossing each other at right angles, as in all the 
towns built by the Spaniards in America. The 


* Throughout America the waters-are supposed to share 
the properties of those plants, under the shade of which 
they flow. Thus at the straits of Magellan that water is 
much praised, which touches the roots of the canella winter- 
ana. Viage al Magellanes, 1788, p. 315. 


451 


houses are spacious, and higher than they ought 
to be in a country subject to earthquakes. In 
1800, the two squares of Alta Gracia and St. 
Francis presented a very agreeable aspect; I 
say in the year 1800, because the terrible 
shocks of thé 26th of March, 1812, destroyed 
almost the whole city. It rises slowly from it’s 
ruins. The quarter of, Trinidad; where I re- 
sided, was overturned as if a mine had been 
sprung underneath it. 

The small extent of the valley, and the prox- 
imity of the high mountains of Avila and the 
Silla, give a gloomy and stern character to the 
scenery of Caraccas; particularly in that part 
of the year; when the coolest temperature pre- 
vails, in the months of November and Decem- 
bers The mornings are then very fine; and 
on a clear and serene sky we perceived the two 
domes or rounded pyramids of the Silla, and 
the craggy ridge of the Cerro de Avila. But 
toward the evening the atmosphere thickens ; 
the mountains are covered ; streams of vapour 
cling to their ever-green slopes, and seem to 
divide them into zones one above another. 
These zones are gradually blended together ; 
the cold air, which descends from the Silla; 
accumulates in the valley, and condenses 
_ the light vapours into large fleecy clouds. 
“These often descend below the Cross of La 
Guayra, and advance, gliding on the soil, to- 

2a2 


452 


ward the Pastora of Caraccas, and the adjacent 
quarter of Trinidad. At the view of this misty 
sky, I could scarcely think myself in one of the 
temperate valleys of the torrid zone; but ra- 
ther in the north of Germany, among the pines 
and the larches overshadowing the mountains 
of the Hartz. 

But this gloomy and-melancholy aspect, this 
contrast between the clearness of the morning, 
and the cloudy sky of the evening, are not 
observed in the midst of summer. The nights 
of June and July are clear and delicious. The 
atmosphere then preserves, almost without in- 
terruption, that purity and transparency, which 
are peculiar to table-lands and all elevated 


valleys in calm weather, and as long as the . 


winds do not mix strata of air of unequal tem- 
perature. This is the season for enjoying all 
the beauty of a landscape, which I saw illu- 
mined only a few days at the end of January. 
The two rounded summits of the Silla are be- 
held at Caraccas, almost under the same an- 
gles of elevation* as the peak of Teneriffe at 
the port of Orotava. The first: half of the moun- 
tain is covered with short grass; then suc- 
ceeds the zone of evergreen trees, which reflects 
a purple light at the season, when. the befaria, 


* I found, at the square of Trinidad, the apparent height 
of the Silla 11° 12/49”, It was about four thousand five 
hundred. toises distant. 


| 
| 


453 


the alpine rosetree * of equinoctial America, is 
in blossom. The rocky masses rise above this 
zone in the form of woody domes. Destitute 
of vegetation, they increased by the nakedness 
of their surface the apparent height of a moun- 
tain, which in temperate Europe would scarcely 
enter on the limit of perpetual snows. The cul- 
tivated region of the valley, and the gay fields 
of Chacao, Petare, and La Vega, form an agree. 
able contrast to the imposing aspect of the 
Silla, and the great heavings of the ground on 
the north-of the town. 

The climate of Caraccas has often been called 
a perpetual spring. It is found every where, 
half way up the Cordilleras of Equinoctial 
America, between four hundred and nine hun 
dred toises of elevation, unless the great breadth 
of the valley joined to an arid soil causes an 
extraordinary intensity’ of radiant caloric. 
What indeed can we imagine more delightful, 
than a temperature, which in the day keeps 
between 20° and 26° {;' and at night between 
16° and 18° 4, which is equally favourable to the 
plantain (cambury), the orange-tree, the cof- 
fee-tree, the apple, the apricot, and corn? A 


* Rhododendron ferrugineum of the Alps. 

+ Asat Carthago and Ibagua in New Grenada, See my 
Proleg. de Distrib. Geogr. Plant., p. 98. 
_ 1 Between 16° and 20 ‘8° Reaum. 

§ Between 12°8° and 14°4° Reaum, 6.4 


454 


national writer * compares the situation of Ca- 
raccas to the terrestrial Paradise, and recog- 
nizes in the Anauco and the neighbouring tor- 
rents the four rivers of the Garden of Eden. 

It is to be regretted, that such a temperate 
climate is generally inconstant and variable, 
The inhabitants of Caraccas complain of having 
several seasons in the same day; and of the 
rapid change from one season to another. In 
the month of January for instance, a night, of 
which the mean temperature is 16°, is followed 
by a day, when the thermometer during eight 
successive hours keeps above 22° in the shade. 
In the same day, we find the temperature of 
24° and 18°. These oscillations are extremely 
common in our temperate climate of Europe, 
but under the torrid zone, the Europeans them- 
selves are so accustomed to the uniform action 
of exterior stimulus, that they suffer from a 
change of temperature of 6. At Cumana, and 
every where in the plains, the temperature from 
eleven in the morning to eleven at night changes 
only 2°or 3°. Moreover, these variations act 
on the human frame at Caraccas more violently 
than could be supposed from the mere indica- 
tions of the thermometer. In this narrow valley 
the atmosphere is in some sort balanced be- 


* The Historiographer of Venezucla, Jose de Oviedo y 
Banos, 


ai nln el 


455 


tween two winds, one that comes from the west, 
or the seaside, and the other from the east, or 
the inland country. The first is known by the 
name of the wind of Catia, because it blows 
from Catia to the west of Cape Blanco through 
the ravin of Tipe, which we have already. no. 
ticed, in speaking of a new read and a new port 
projected to replace the road and the port of La 
Guayra. The wind of Catia has only the ap- 
pearance of a western wind; it is oftener the 
breeze of the east and north-east, which, rush- 
ing with extreme impetuosity, ingulfs itself in 
the Quebreda de Tipe. Refiected by the high 
mountains of Aguas Negras, this wind goes up 
toward Caraccas, by the side of the hospital of the 
Capuchins, and the Rio Caraguata. Itis loaded 
with humidity, which it deposits as it’s tempe- 
rature decreases, and consequently the summit 
of the Silla is wrapped in clouds, when the 
catia blows in the valley. This wind is dreaded 
by the inhabitants of Caraccas ; it causes head- 
aches to those persons, whose nervous system 
is irritable. I have known some, who, in 
order to shun it’s effects, shut’ themselves up 
in their houses, as people do in Italy when 
the. sirocco’ blows. I thought I had_per- 
ceived during my stay at Caraccas, that the 
wind of Catia was purer (a little richer in oxi- 
gen) than the wind of Petare. 1 even imagined, 
that it’s purity might explain it's exciting pro- 


456 


perty. But the means I employed deserved 
little confidence. The wind of Petare coming 
from the east and south-east, by the eastern 
extremity of the valley of the Guayra, brings 
from the mountains and interior of the coun- 
try a dryer air, which dissipates the’ clouds, 
and the summit of the Silla rises in all it’s 
beauty. 

We know that the modifications brought by 
the winds in the composition of the air, in va- 
rious places, entirely escape our eudiometrical 
experiments ; the most exact of which can esti- 
mate only as far as 0:003° of oxygen. Che- 
mistry does not yet possess any means of dis- 
tinguishing two jars filled, one with the air of 
the sirocco or the catia, and the other before 
these winds are felt. It appears to me proba- 
ble, that the singular effects of the catia, and 
of all those currents of air, to the influence of 
which popular opinion attributes so much im- 
portance, must be looked for rather in the 
changes of humidity and of temperature, than 
in chemical modifications. We need not have 
recourse to miasmata brought to Caraccas from 
the unhealthy shore on the coast: it may be 
easily conceived, that men accustomed to the 
drier air of the mountains and the interior, 
must be disagreeably affected, when the very 
humid air of the sea, pressed through the gap 
of Tipe, reaches in an ascending current the 


457 


high valley of Caraccas, and, getting cooler by 
it’s dilatation, and by it’s contact with the ad- 
jacent strata, deposits a great portion of the 
water it contains. ‘This inconstancy of climate, 
these somewhat rapid transitions from a dry and 
transparent air to air humid and misty, are 
inconveniences, which Caraccas shares in com- 
mon with the whole temperate region of the 
tropics, with all the places situate between four 
and eight hundred toises of elevation, either on 
table-lands of small extent, or on the slope of 
the Cordilleras, as at Xalapa in Mexico, and 
‘Guaduas in New Grenada. A serenity unin- 


terrupted during a great part of the year pre- . 


vails only in the low regions at the level of the 
sea, and at considerable heights on those vast 
table-lands, where the uniform radiation of the 
soil seems to contribute to the perfect dissolu- 
tion of vesicular vapours. The intermediate 
zone is at the same height as the first strata of 
clouds, that surround the surface of the Earth ; 
and the climate of this zone, the temperature 
of which is so mild, is essentially misty and va- 
riable. 
Notwithstanding the elevation of the spot, 
the sky is generally less blue at Caraccas than 
at Cumana. The aqueous vapour is less per- 
fectly dissolved ; and here, as in our climates, 
a greater diffusion of light diminishes the in- 
tensity of the aerial colour, by introducing white 


458 


into the blue* of the air. This intensity, mea~ 
sured with the cyanometer of Saussure, was 
found from November to January generally 18°, 
never above 20°. On the coasts it was from 
22° to 25°. LT remarked in the village of Carac- 
cas, that the wind of Petare sometimes contri- 
butes singularly to give a pale tint to the celes- 
tial vault. On the 22d of January, the blue of 
the sky was at noon in the zenith feebler than 
Tever saw it in the torrid zone +. It corres- 
ponded only to 12° of the cyanometer. The 
atmosphere was then remarkably transparent, 
without clouds, and of extraordinary dryness. 
The moment the wind of Petare ceased, the 
blue colour rose at the zenith as high as 16°, 
Ihave often observed at sea, but in a smaller 
degree, a similar effect of the wind on the co- 
lour of the serenest sky. 

We know less exactly the mean temperature 
of Caraceas, than that of Santa Fe de Bogota, 
and of Mexico. I believe however I can de- 
monstrate, that it cannot be very distant from 
twenty or twenty-two degrees. I found by my 
own observations during the three’ very cool 


* Sce ch. iii, vol. ii, p. 101 and foll. 

+. At noon, thermometer in the shade 23°7° (in the sun, 
out of the wind, 30:4°; Deluc’s hygrometer, 36°2°; cyano- 
meter at the zenith, 12°, at the horizon 8°. The wind ceased 
at three in the afternoon. Th. 21°; hygr. 89.3°; cyan. 16° 
At six o'clock, therm. 20°2°; hygr. 39°. 


459 


months of November, December, and January, 
taking each day the maximum and minimum of 
the temperature, the heights were 20:2°; 20-1°; 
20:2°.. Now from the knowledge we have ac- 
quired of the distribution of heat in the differ- 
ent seasons, and at different elevations above 
the level of the sea, I can deduce within a cer- 
tain approximation, from the means of a few 
months, that of the whole year; almost in the 
same manner as we determine the meridian alti- 
tude of a star, by elevations measured out of the — 
meridian. The following are the considerations 
on which are founded the results I adopt. At 
Santa Fe de Bogota, the month of January, ac- 
cording to Mr. Caldas, differs from the mean 
of the year only 0:2”. At Mexico, very near the 
temperate zone, the difference reaches a max- 
imum of 3°. At La Guayra, near Caraccas, 
the coldest month differs from the annual mean 
4:9°; but if the air of La Guayra (and that of 
Catia) rises sometimes in winter by the Quebra- 
da de Tipe to the high valley of Carccas, this 
valley does not less receive, during a great part 
of the year, the winds of the east and south- 
east coming from Caurimare and the inland 
country. We have learned by direct observa- 
tions, that at La Guayra and Caraccas the’ 
coldest:months are 23:2°, and 20°1°.. These dif- 
ferences express a decrement of heat, which, in 
the valley of Caraccas, is the simultaneous effect 


460 


of the height of the situation (or of the dilatation 
of the air in the ascending current) and of the 
conflict between the winds of Catia and Pe- 
tare. . 

According to a small number of observations, 
made in the course of three years, partly at 
Caraccas, and partly at Chacao very near the 
capital, I perceived, that the centigrade ther- 
mometer kept ih the cold season, in November 
and December, generally * between 21° and 
22° in the day, and at night, between 16° and 
17°. In the hot season, in July and August, 
this instrument rises in the day + to 25° or 
26°; and at night to 22° or 23°. This is the 
habitual state of the atmosphere ; and the same 
observation, made with an instrument which I 
verified, gave for the mean temperature of the 
year at Caraccas a little more than 21 aaks 
which, in the system of. cisatlantic climates, 
is to be met with in the plains in the latitude of 
36° or 37°. It is almost unnecessary to observe, 
that this comparison is founded only on the 


* According to the scale of Reaumur, in the day from 
168° to 18°; at night, from 128° to 136°. 
+ In the day from 20° to 20-8°; at night, from 17:6° to 
18°40 of the Therm. of Reaum. 


t17-2° Reaum. I had stopped in my Prolegomena p. 


98,/at 15°8e KR. For the particular observations, see. note 
EF at the end of this volume. 


461 


. quantity of heat developed in each place dur- 
ing the course-of a whole year; and that it ex- 
tends by no means‘to the climate, that is, 
to the distribution of heat in the various sea- 
sons. 

At Caraccas the heat very seldom rises for a 
few hours in summer to 29° *., It is asserted, 
that, a little before the rising of the Sun, it has 
been seen to fall in winter as low as 11°+. 
During my stay at Caraccas, the maximum 
and minimum observed were only 25° and 12°5°. 
The cold at night is the more intense, from 
being usually accompanied with a misty sky. 
I have been unable for whole weeks, to take 
the altitudes of the Sun, or of the stars. I often 
found the transition from the purest transpa- 
rent air to complete obscurity so sudden, that, 
when I had my eye fixed ona satellite through 
the glass a minute before it’s immersion, I not 
only lost sight of the planet, but of all the ob- 

. jects close round me, inamist. Under the 

temperate zone in Europe, the temperature is- 


more uniform on the high mountains, than in 
the plains. At the Hospital of St. Gothard, 
for instance, the difference between the mean 
temperature of the warmest and coldest months 
is 173°; while, under the same parallel, nearly 


* 93:29 R. 
. t ee R. 


462 


at the level of the sea, it is 20° or 21°. Tha 


cold does not increase on our mountains so 
rapidly as the heat diminishes. We shall find 
as we advance toward the Cordilleras, that 
under the torrid zone the climate is more uni- 
form in the plains, than on the mountains: At 
Cumana and La Guayra (for we must not cite 
places where the north winds disturb for some 
months the equilibrium of the atmosphere) the 
thermometer keeps during the whole year be- 
tween 21° and 35°. At Santa Fe and Quito 
we find it vary from 3° to 22°, if we compare, 
J do not say the days, but the coldest and 
warmest hours of the year. In the low regions, 
at Cumana for instance, the nights differ from 
the days only three or four degrees. At Quito, 
I found this difference, taking carefully, every 
day and night, the mean of four or five obser- 
vations, amounting to seven degrees. At Ca- 
raccas, placed on a spot nearly three times 
less in height, and on a table-land of little ex- 
tent, the days in the months of November and 
December are still from 5° to 55° hotter than 
the nights. These phenomena of nocturnal re: 
frigeration may astonish at the first view: they 
are modified by the table-lands and the moun- 
tains being heated during the day, by the action 
of the descending currents, and above all by 
the nocturnal radiation of caloric in the. pure 
and dry air of the Cordiileras. The following 


463 


_are the differences of climate between Caraccas 
aud it’s port. 


CARACCAS. LA GUAYRA. 


Height Level of 
454 toises. the Sea. 


| Mean temperatnre of the year 21° to 22° 


Mean temp. of the hot season 24 


| Mean temp. of the cold season 19 


| Maximum - - 29 


Minimum - ~- 11 


Rains are extremely frequent at Caraccas in 
the months of April, May, and June. The 
storms always come from the east and south- 
east, from the side of Petare and La Valle. 
No hail falls in the low regions of the tropics ; 
yet it occurs at Caraccas almost every four or 
five years. Hail has even been seen in vallies 
still lower; and this phenomenon, when it does 
happen, makes a lively impression on the peo- 
ple. Falls of aérolites are less rare with us, 
than hail under the torrid zone, notwithstand- 
ing the frequency of thunder storms, at three 
hundred toises of elevation above the level of 
the sea. 

The cool and delightful climate we have been 
describing agrees also with the culture of equi- 


464 


noctial productions. The sugar-cane is culti- 
vated with success, even at heights exceeding 
that of Caraccas ; but in the valley, on account 
of the dryness of the climate, and the stony 
soil, the cultivation of the coffee-tree is prefer- 
red; which there yields little fruit indeed, but 
of the finest quality. When the shrub is in 
blossom, the plain extending beyond Chacao 
presents a delightful aspect. The banana-tree, 
which is seen in the plantations near the town, 
is not the great platano harton ; but the varieties 
camburi and dominico, which require less heat *. 
The great plantains are brought to the market 
of Caraccas from the haciendos of Turiamo, 
situate on the coast between Burburata and 
Porto Cabello. The highest flavoured pineap- 
ples are those of Baruto, of Empedrado, and of 
the heights of Buenavista, on the road to Vic- 
toria. When a trayeller ascends for the first 
time to the valley of Caraccas, he is agreeably 
surprised to find the culinary plants of our 
climates, the strawberry, the vine, and almost 
all the fruit-trees of the temperate zone, grow- 
ing by the side of the coffee and banana-tree. 
The apples and peaches esteemed the best come 
from Macarao, or from the western extremity 
of the valley. There, the quince-tree, the trunk 
of which attains only four or five feet in height, 


* See ch. ii, vol. i, p. 118, 119, 


465 


is so common, that it has almost become wild, 
Preserved apples and quinces, particularly 
the latter *, are much used in a country, where 
it is thought, that, to drink water, thirst must 
previously be excited by sweetmeats. In pro- 
portion as the environs of the town have been 
cultivated with coffee; and the establishment 
of plantations, which dates only from the year 
1795, has increased the number of agricultural 
Negroes-~; the apple and quince-trees  scat- 
tered in the savannahs have given place in the 
valley of Caraceas to maize and pulse. Rice, 
watered by means of small trenches, was for- 
merly more common than now in the plain of 
Chacao. I observed in this province, as in 
Mexico and in all the elevated lands of the 
torrid zone, that, where the apple-tree is most 
abundant, the culture of the pear-tree is at- 
tended with great difficulties. I have been 
assured, that near Caraccas the excellent ap- 
ples sold in the markets come from trees not 
grafted. Cherry-trees are wanting. The olive- 
trees, which I saw in the court of the convent 


* Dulce de manzana y de membrillo. 

_ +t The consumption of eatables, and especially meat, is so 
zonsiderable in the towns of Spanish America, that at Ca- 
raccas, in 1800, there were 40,000 oxen killed every year; 
while at Paris, in the time of Mr. Necker, with a popula- 
tion fourteen times as great, the number amounted only to 


~ 70,006. 


VOL. Til. oe 


466 


of San Felipe Neri, were large and fine; but 
the luxuriance of their vegetation prevents them 
from bearing fruit. 

If the atmospheric constitution of the valley 
be favourable to the different kinds of culture, 
upon which-colonial industry is founded, it is 
not equally so to the health of the inhabitants, 
and the strangers setiled in the capital of Vene- 
zuela. ‘The great inconstancy of the weather, 
and the frequent suppression of cutaneous 
perspiration, give birth to catarrhal affections; 
which assume the most different forms. A Eu- 
ropean, once accustomed to the violent heat, 
enjoys better health at Cumana, in the valley of 
Aragua, and in every place where the low re- 
gion of the tropics is not very humid, than at 
Caraccas, and in those mountain -climates, 
which are boasted of as the abode of perpetual 
spring. 

Speaking of the yellow fever of La Guayra, 
I mentioned the opinion generally adopted, that 
this cruel disease is propagated as little from 
the coast of Venezuela to the capital, as from 
the coast of Mexico to Xalapa. This opinion 
is founded on the experience of the last twenty 
years. The contagious disorders, which have 
exerted their ravages in the port of La Guayra, 
were scarcely felt at Caraccas. I would not 
disturb, by groundless terrors, the security en- 
joyed by the inhabitants of the capital; but I 


467 


am not convinced, that the American typhus, 
rendered endemic on the coast as the port be- 
comes more frequented, if it be favoured by 
particular dispositions of the climate, will not 
become common in the valley: for the mean 
temperature of Caraccas is considerable enough, 
to allow the thermometer in the hottest months 
to keep between twenty-two and twenty-six de- 
grees*, If there be no doubt that the typhus 
in the temperate zone is communicated by con- 
tact, can we be certain, that ina high degree 
of exacerbation, it would not be equally conta- 
gious by contact under the torrid zone, in places 
where, within four leagues of the coast, the 
predisposition of the organs is favoured by the 
temperature of summer? The situation of 
Xalapa, on the declivity of the Mexican moun- 
tains, promises more security, because this town, 
less populous, is five times farther distant 
from the sea than Caraccas, and two hundred 
and thirty toises higher; and it’s mean tem- 
perature is three degrees cooler. In 1696, a 
bishop of Venezuela, Diego de Banos, dedicat- 
ed a church (ermita) to Santa Rosalia of Pa- 
lermo, for having delivered the capital from the 
scourge of the black vomit (vomito negro)+, 
after it’s ravages had lasted sixteen months. A 


* Between 17° and 20°8° R. 
 Ovido y Banos, p, 269. 


2u 2 


465 


mass celebrated every year in the cathedral, 
in the beginning of September, has perpetuat- 
ed the memory of this epidemic, in the same 
manner as processions have fixed in the Spanish 
colonies the date of the great earthquakes. 
The year 1696 was indeed very remarkable for 
the yellow fever, which prevailed with violence 
in all the West India islands, where it had 
only begun to establish it’s empire + in 1688, 
But how can we give credit to an epidemical 
black vomit, which lasted sixteen months with- 
out interruption, and which may be said. to 
have passed through that very cool season, 
when the. thermometer at Caraccas falls to 
twelve or thirteen degrees? Can the typhus 
be more ancient in the elevated valley of Ca- 
raccas, than in the most frequented ports of 
Terra Firma? According to Ulloa it was un- 
known in these latter before 1729. I doubt 
therefore the epidemic of 1696 having been the 
yellow fever, or the real typhus of America, 
Black evacuations often accompany bilious re- 
mittent fevers; and are no more characteristic 
than hematemeses of that severe disease now 
known at the Havannah and Vera Cruz by 
the name of vomito. But if no accurate de- 
scription demonstrate, that the typhus of Ame- 
rica existed at Caraccas as early as the end of 


? Bally, p, 34, 


son 


2 SSL ee 


| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 


469 


the seventeenth century, it is unhappily too 
certain, that this disease. carried off in that 
capital a great number of young European sol- 
diers in 1802. It is terrifying to reflect, that, 
in the centre of the torrid zone, a table-land 
four hundred and fifty toises high, but very 
near the sea, does not preserve the inhabitants 
from a scourge, which was believed to belong 
only to the low regions of the coast. 


470 


CHAPTER XIII. 


Adode at Caraccas——Mountains that surround 
the Town.—Excursion to the Summit of the 
Silla.—Indications of Mines. 


IT remarnep two months at Caraceas, where 
Mr. Bonpland and I lived ina large and nearly 
Solitary house, in the highest part of the town. 
From a gallery we could survey at once the 
summit of the Silla, the serrated ridge of the 
Gallipano, and the charming valley of the 
Guayra, the rich cultivation of which formed a 
pleasing contrast with the gloomy curtain of the 
surrounding mountains. It was the season of 
drought, and in order to improve the pasturage, 
the savannahs, and the turf that covers the 
Steepest rocks, were set on fire. These vast 
conflagrations, viewed from a distance, produce 
the most singular effects of light. Wherever 
the savannahs, following the undulating slope of 
the rocks, have filled up the furrows hollowed 
out by the waters, the inflamed land appears in 
a dark night like currents of laya suspended 
over the valley. Their vivid but steady light 
assumes a reddish tint, when the wind, descend- 


=| 


ee 


A471 


ing from the Silla, accumulates streams of 
vapour in the low regions. At other times, and 
this aspect is still more solemn, these luminous 
bands, enveloped in thick clouds, appear only 
at intervals, where it is clear; and as the clouds 
ascend, their edges refiect a splendid light, 
These various phenomena, so common under 
the tropics, become still more interesting from 
the form of the mountain, the disposition of the 
slopes, and the height of the savannahs covered 
with alpine grasses. During the day, the wind 
of Petare, blowing from the east, drives the 
smoke toward the town, and diminishes the 
transparency of the air. 

If we had reason to be satisfied with the situ- 
ation of our house, we had still greater cause of 
satisfaction in the reception we met with from 
all classes of the inhabitants. I feel it a duty 
to cite the noble hospitality exercised toward us 
by the chief of the government, Mr. de Guevara- 
Vasconzelos, then captain-general of the pro- 
vinees of Venezuela. Although T had the ad- , 
vantage, which few Spaniards have shared with 
me, of having successively visited Caraccas, the 
Havannah, Santa Fé de Bogota, Quite, Lima, 
and Mexico, and of having been connected in 
these. six capitals of Spanish America with men 
of all ranks, I shall not venture to decide on the 
various degrees of civilization, which society 
has attained in the different colonies, It is 


472 


easier to indicate the different shades of national 
improvement, and the point toward which the 
unfolding of the intellect tends in preference, 
than to compare and class things that cannot be 
investigated under the same point of view. It 
appeared to me, that a strong tendency toward 
the study of the sciences prevailed at Mexico 
and Santa Fé de Bogota; more taste for litera~ 
ture, and whatever can charm an ardent and 
lively imagination, at Quito and Lima; more 
accurate notions of the political relations of 
countries, and more enlarged views on the state 
of colonies and their mother countries, at the 
Havannah and Caraccas. The numerous com- 
munications with commercial Europe, with that 
sea of the West Indies, which we have described 
as a mediterranean with many outlets, have had 
a powerful influence on the progress of society 
in the island of Cuba, and in the five provinces 
of Venezuela. Civilization has in no other part 
of Spanish America assumed a more European 
physiognomy. The great number of Indian 
cultivators, who inhabit Mexico and the interior 
of New Grenada, have impressed a peculiar, I 
might almost say an exotic character, on those 
vast countries, Notwithstanding the increase 
of the black population, we seem to be nearer 
Cadiz and the United States at Caraccas and the 
Havannah, than in any other part of the: New 
World. 


. 


‘A738 


| 
| 
| . Caraceds being situate on the continent, and 


its population less mutable than that of the 
islands, the national manners have been better 
preserved than at the Havannah. Society does 
not present very animated and varied pleasures ; 
but that feeling of comfort is experienced in 
domestic life, which leads to uniform cheerful- 
ness and cordiality united with politeness of 
manners. There exists at Caraccas, as in every 
place where a great change in the ideas is pre- 
paring, two races of men, we might say two 
distinct. generations ; one, of which but a small 
number remains, preserves a strong attachment 
for ancient customs, simplicity of manners, and 
moderation in their desires. They live only in 
the images of the past. America appears to 
them a property conquered by their ancestors. 
Abhorring what is called the enlightened state 
of the age, they carefully preserve hereditary 
prejudices as a part of their patrimony. The 
other class, less occupied even by the present 
than by the future, have a propensity, often ill- 
judged, for new habits and ideas. When this 
tendency is allied to the love of solid instruction, 
restrained and guided by a strong and enlight- 
ened reason, it’s effects. become beneficial to 
society. Iknew at Caraccas, among the second 
generation, several men equally distinguished 
by their taste for study, the mildness of their 
manners, and the elevation. of their sentiments. 


474 


T have also known men, who, disdaining all that 
is excellent in the character, the literature, and 
the arts of the Spaniards, have lost their national 
individuality, without having acquired from 
their connexions with foreigners any just ideas 
of, the real bases of happiness and social 
order. 

Since the reign of Charles V, the corporation 
spirit and municipal habits having passed from 
the mother country to the colonies, men take a 
pleasure at Cumana, and in other commercial 
towns of Terra Firma, in exaggerating the pre- 
tensions to nobility of the most illustrious fami- 
lies of Caraccas, known by the name of Ios 
Mantuanos. I am ignorant in what manner 
these pretensions were formerly manifested; but 
it appeared to me, that the progress of know- 
ledge, and the change effected in manners, have 
gradually and pretty generally destroyed what- 
ever is offensive in those distinctions among’ the 
Whites. In all the colonies there exist two 
kinds of. nobility. One is composed of the 
Creoles, whose ancestors have very recently 
filled great stations in America. Their prero- 
gatives are partly founded on the distinction 
they enjoy in the mother country; and they 
imagine they can retain them beyond the sea, 
whatever may be the date of their settlement 
in the colonies. The other nobility has more of 
an American cast. It is composed of the 


475 


descendants of the Conquistadores, that is to 
say, of the Spaniards who served in the army 
at the time of the first conquest. Among the 
warriors who fought with Cortez, Losada, and 
Pizarro, several belonged to the most distin- _ 
guished families of the peninsula ; others, born 
in the inferior classes of the people, have illus- 
trated their names by that chivalrous spirit, 
which prevailed at the beginning of the sixteenth 
century. I have elsewhere observed *, that in 
the records of those times of religious and mili- 
tary enthusiasm, we find, among the followers 
of the great captains, many simple, virtuous, 
and generous characters, who reprobated the 
cruelties that stained the glory of the Spanish 
name, but who, confounded in the mass, have 
not escaped the general proscription. The name 
of Conquistadores remains the more odious, as 
the greater number of them, after having out- 
raged peaceful nations, and lived in the midst of 
opulence, did not experience toward the end of 
their career those long misfortunes, which ap- 
pease the hatred of mankind, and sometimes 
soften the severity of the historian. 

But it is not only the progress of ideas, and , 
the conflict between two classes of different 
origin, which have induced the privileged casts 
to abandon their pretensions, or at least to 


* See chap. v, vol. ii, p. 299, 


476 


conceal them carefully. Aristocracy in the Spa- 
nish colonies has a counterpoise of another kind, 
and of which the action becomes every day more 
powerful. A sentiment of equality among the 
Whites has penetrated every bosom. Wherever 
men of colour are either considered as slaves, 
or as having been enfranchised, what constitutes 
nobility is hereditary liberty, is the proud boas 

of having never reckoned among ancestors any 
but freemen. In the colonies, the colour of the 
skin is the real badge of nobility. In Mexico, 
as well as Peru, at Caraccas as in the island of 
Cuba, a barefooted fellow is often heard exclaim- 
ing: “ Does that rich white man think himself 
whiter than I am? The population which 
Europe pours into America being very consider- 
able, it may easily be Supposed, that the axiom, 
every white man is noble, todo blanco es cabal- 
lero, must singularly wound the pretensions of 
a great number of ancient and illustrious 
European families. But we may observe far- 
ther, that the truth of this axiom has long since 
been recognized in Spain, among a people justly 
celebrated for probity, industry, and national 
spirit. Every Biscayan calls himself noble; and 
there being a greater number of Biscayans in 
America and the Philippine Islands, than in the 

peninsula, the Whites of this race have contri- 

buted in no small degree, to propagate in the 

colonies the system of equality among all men, 


i 
at 
i 
ti 
| 


477 


whose blood has not been contaminated by the 
African race. 

Moreover, the countries of which the inhabi- 
tants, even without a representative government, 
or any institution of peerage, annex so much 
importance to genealogy, and the advantages of 
birth, are not always those where the. aristo- 
cracy of families is the most offensive. We 
should seek in vain among the natives of Spa- 
nish origin that cold and assuming air, which 
the character of modern civilization seems to 
have rendered more common in the rest of 
Europe. Conviviality, candour, and a great 
simplicity of manners, unite the different classes 
of society in the colonies, as well asin the mother 
country. We might even venture to say, that 
the expressions of vanity and self-love are less 
offensive, when they retain something of simpli- 
city and frankness. . 

I found in several families at Caraccas a taste 
for instruction, a knowledge of the master-pieces 
of French and Italian literature, and a particu- 
Jar predilection for music, which is cultivated 
with success, and which, as it always happens 
in the pursuit of the fine arts, serves to bring 
the different. classes of society nearer to each. 
other. The mathematical sciences, drawing, 
painting, cannot here boast of any of those es- 
tablishments, with which royal munificence, 
and the patriotic zeal of the inhabitants, have 


478 


enriched Mexico. In the midst of the marvels 
of Nature, so rich in productions, no person on 
this coast was devoted to the study of plants 
and minerals. In a convent of St. Francis 


alone I met with a respectable old gentleman *, - 


who calculated the almanac for all the pro- 
vinces of Venezuela, and who possessed some 
precise ideas on the state of modern astronomy. 
Our instruments interested him deeply, and one 
day our house was filled with all the monks of 
St. Francis, begging to see a dipping-necdle. 
The curiosity that dwells on physical pheno- 
mena is augmented in countries undermined by 
volcanic fires, and in a climate where nature 
is at once so overwhelming, and so mysteriously 
agitated. 

When we remember, that in the United States 
of North America newspapers are published 
in small towns not exceeding three thousand 
inhabitants, we may be surprised to learn, that 
Caraccas, with a population of forty or fifty 
thousand souls, possessed no printing office be- 
fore 1806; for we cannot give this name to 
the presses, which served only from year to 
year to print a few pages of an almanac, or the 
pastoral letter of a bishop. The number of 
those who feel the want of reading is not very 
considerable, even in the Spanish colonies most 


* Father Puerto, 


479 


advanced in civilization ; but it would be un. 
just to attribute to the colonists what was the 
effect of a jealous policy. A Frenchman, Mr. 
Delpeche, allied to one of the most respectable 
families* in the country, has the merit of hav- 
ing first established a printing office at Ca- 
raccas. It appears sufficiently extraordinary in 
modern times, to see an establishment of this 
kind, affording the greatest means of commu- 
nication between men, follow, and not precede, 
a political revolation. 

In a country that presents such enchanting 
views, and ata period when, notwithstanding 
some symptoms of popular commotions, the 
greater part of the inhabitants seem only to 
direct their thoughts toward physical, objects, 
the fertility of the year, the long drought, or the 
conflict of the two winds of Petare and Catia, 
I believed that I should find many persons well 
acquainted with the lofty surrounding moun- 
tains. My expectations however, were not rea- 
lized; we could not discover at Caraccas’ a 
single person, who had. visited the summit, of 
the Silla. The hunters do not climb so high 
on the ridges of mountains; and no journies 
are undertaken in these couniries, to gather 
alpine-plants, to carry a barometer to an ele- 
vated spot, or to examine the nature of rocks. 


* The family of the Montillas, 


480 
Accustomed to a uniform and domestic life, 
they dread fatigue, and sudden changes of cli- 
mate. It would seem as if they live not to 
enjoy life, but only to prolong it’s duration. 

Our walks led us often toward two cof- 
fee plantations, the proprietors * of which were 
men of agreeable manners. ‘These plantations 
are opposite the Silla de Caraccas. Surveying, 
with our glasses, the steep declivity of the moun- 
tain, and the form of the two peaks by which 
it is terminated, we could appreciate the dif- 
ficulties, which we should have to conquer 
in order to reach it’s summit. Angles of ele- 
vation, taken with the sextant at our house, 
had led me to believe, that the summit was not 
so high above the level of the sea as the great 
square of Quito. This estimation was far from 
corresponding with the ideas of the inhabitants 
of the town. The mountains, which command 
great towns, acquire from this very circum- 
stance an extraordinary celebrity in both con- 
tinents. Long before they have been accu- 
rately measured, the learned of the country 
assign to them a height in toises, or Castilian 
varas, of which to entertain the least doubt 
would wound a national prejudice. 

The captain-general,. Mr. de Guevara, order- 
ed the ¢eniente of Chacao to furnish us with 


* Don Andres de Ibarra, and M. Blandin. 


i 
* 
5 


481 


guides. They were Blacks, and knew some: 
thing of the path, leading toward the shore* 
over the ridge of the mountain, near the west- 
ern pak of the Silla. This path is frequented 
by smugglers, but neither the guides, nor the 
most experienced of the militia, accustomed to 
pursue the smugglers in those wild spots, had 
been on the eastern peak, forming the most ele- 
vated summit of the Silla. During the whole 
month of December, the mountain, the angles 
of elevation of which made me acquainted with 
the effects of the terrestrial refractions, had 
appeared only five times without clouds. In 
this season two serene days seldom succeeding 
each other, we were advised not to choose a 
clear day for our excursion, but rather a time 
when, the clouds not being very elevated, we 
might hope, after having crossed. the first layer 
of vapours uniformly spread, to enter into a dry 
and transparent air. We passed the night of 
the 2d of January in the estancia of Gallegos, 
a plantation of coffee-trees, near which the 


little river of Chacaito, flowing in a luxuriantly 


shaded ravin, forms some fine cascades in des- 
cending the mountains. The night was pretty 


-clear; and though on the day preceding a 


fatiguing journey we should have wished to 
enjoy some repose, Mr. Bonpland and I pass- 


* To Carayalleda. 


VOL. III. Dea 


482 


ed the whole night in watching three occulta. 
tions of the satellites of Jupiter, I had previously 
determined the instant of the observation ; but 
we missed them all, owing to some error of eal- 
culation in the Connaissance des Temps. An 
evil destiny presided over the occultations of the 
months of December and January. The appa- 
rent time had been mistaken for mean time*. 

I was singularly disappointed by the acci- 


dent; and after having observed at the foot of 


the mountain the intensity of the magnetic 
forces before sunrise, we set out at five in the 
morning, accompanied by slaves carrying our 
instruments. There were eighteen of us, walk- 
ing one behind another, in a narrow path, traced 
on a steep acclivity, covered with turf. We 
endeavoured first to reach a hill, which toward 
the south-east seems to form a promontory of 
the Silla. It is connected with the body of the 
mountain by a narrow dyke, to which the shep- 
herds give the characteristic name of the gate 
or Puerta de la Silla, We reached it about 
seven. The morning was fine and cool, and 
the sky till then seemed to favour our excursion. 
I saw the thermometer keep a little belowl4’ +. 
The barometer showed, that we were already 
six hundred and eighty-five toises above the level 


* See my Obs. Ast,, Tom. i, p. 189, 
# 11:2° Reaum. 


pe a 


483 


of the sea, that is, nearly eighty toises higher 
than at the Venta, where we enjoyed so mag- 
nificent a view of the coast. Our guides thought, 
that it would require six hours more to reach the 
summit of the Silla. 
We crossed a narrow dike of rocks covered 
with turf; which led us from the promontory 
of the Puerta to the ridge of the great moun- 
tain. The eye looks down on two vallies, or 
rather crevices, filled with a thick vegetation. 
On the right is perceived the ravin, that des- 
cends between the two peaks to the farm of 
Munoz; on the left. we look over the crevice 
of Chacaito, the lavish waters of which gush 
out.near the farm of Gallego. The noise of the 
cascades is heard, while the torrent is unseen, 
being concealed under a thick shade of erythrina, — 
clusia, and the Indian fig-tree*. Nothing can be 
more picturesque in a climate, where so many 
plants have broad, large, shining, and coriace- 
ous leaves, than the aspect of trees at a great 
depth, and illumined by the almost perpendicu- 
lar rays of the Sun. 
From the Puerta the ascent becomes more 
steep. We were obliged to bend ourselves con- 
siderably forward, to be able to proceed. The 


* Ficus nympheifolia, erythrina midis. Two fine species 
of mimosa are found in the same valley; inga fastuosa, and 


1, cinerea. 


12 


484 


slope is often from 32°to 33°*. We felt the 
want of cramp irons, or sticks shod with iron. 
Short grass covered the rocks of gneiss, and 
it was equally impossible to hold by the grass, 
or to form steps as in a softer ground. ~This 
ascent, attended with more fatigue than danger, 
discouraged those who accompanied us from 
the town, and who were unaccustomed to climb 
mountains. We lost a great deal of time in 
waiting for them, and we did not resolve to 
proceed alone, till we saw them descend the 
mountain instead of climbing up. The weather 
was growing cloudy; the mist already issued in 
the form of smoke, and in slender and perpendi- 
cular streaks, from the small humid wood which 
bordered the region of alpine savannahs above 
us. It seemed as if a fire had burst forth at 
once on several points of the forest. These 
streaks of vapour gradually heaped together, 
and rising above the ground, were carried along 
by the morning breeze, and glided like a light 
cloud over the rounded summit of the moun- 
tain. 


Mr. Bonpland and I foresaw from these in- 


* Since my experiments on slopes, ch. ii, vol. i, p, 204, 
205, I have found in the Figure de la Terre of Bouguer, p. 
cix, a passage, which shows that this astronomer, whose 
opinions are of such weight, considered also %6° as the in- 
clination of a slope quite inaccessible, if the nature of the 
ground did not admit of forming steps with the foot. 


485 


fallible signs, that we should soon be covered 
by a thick fog; and lest our guides should 
avail themselves. of this circumstance to aban- 
don us, we obliged those who carried the most 
necessary instruments to precede us. We con- 
tinued climbing the slopes, that lead toward 
the crevice of Chacaito. The familiar loquacity 
of the Creolian Blacks formed a striking con- 
trast with the taciturn gravity of the Indians, 
who had constantly accompanied us in the 
Missions of Caripe. They amused themselves 
by laughing at those, who had been in such 
haste, to abandon an expedition so long prepar- 
ing ; and above all, they did not spare a young 
capuchin-monk, professor of mathematics, who 

ever ceased to boast of the advantages of physi- 
cal strength and courage, possessed by all classes 


of European Spaniards, over those born in Spa- 
nish America. He had provided himself with 
long slips of white paper, which were to be cut, 
and flung on the savannah, to indicate to those 
who strayed behind, the direction they ought to 
pursue. The professor had even promised the 
friars of his order, to fire off some rockets in 


order to announce to the whole town of Carac- » 
cas, that we had succeeded in an enterprise, 
which indeed to him alone appeared of great 
importance. He had. forgotten that his long 
and heavy garments would embarrass him in 
the ascent. Having lost courage long before 


486 


the Creoles, he passed the rest of the day in a 
neighbouring plantation, gazing at us with a 
spying-glass directed to the Silla, as we climbed 
the mountain. Unfortunately for us, he had 
taken charge of the water and the provision so 
necessary in an excursion to the mountains. 
The slaves, who were to rejoin us, were so long 
detained by him, that they arrived very late, 
and we remained during ten hours without 
bread or water. This monk, who was not des- 


titute of knowledge in natural philosophy, was. 


murdered a few years after by the savage In- 
dians of Apure. 

The eastern is the most ‘elevated of the two 
peaks, which form the summit of the mountain, 
and to this we directed our course with our 
instruments. The hollow between these two 
peaks has given the whole mountain the Span- 
ish name of Silla (saddle). A crevice, which 
we have already mentioned, descends from this 
hollow toward the valley of Caraccas. It is 
nearest the western dome at it’s origin. The 
eastern summit is accessible only by going first 
to the west of the crevice over the promontory 
of the Puerta, proceeding straight forward to 
the lower summit; and not turning io the east 
till we have almost reached the ridge, or the 
hollow of the Silla between the two peaks. The 
general aspect of the mountain points out this 
path; the rocks being so steep to the east of 


i. 


487 


the crevice, that it would be extremely difficult 
io reach the summit-of the Silla, by ascending 
straight toward the eastern dome, instead. of 
going by the Puerta. 

From the foot of the cascade of Chacaito to 
one thousand toises of elevation, we found only 
savannahs. ‘Two small liliaceous plants, with 
yellow flowers*, alone lift up their heads among 
the grasses, that cover the rocks. A few bram- 
bles + remind us of the form of our European 
plants. We in vain expected to find on the 
mountains of Caraccas, and subsequently on 
the back of the Andes, an eglantine near the 
brambles. We did not find one indigenous 
rose-tree in all South America, notwithstanding 
the analogy existing between the climates of 
the high mountains of the torrid zone, and the 
_glimate of our temperate zone. It appears; 
that this charming shrub is wanting in all the 
gouthern hemisphere, within and beyond the 
tropics. It was only on the Mexican moun- 
tains, that we were happy enough to discover, 
in the nineteenth degree of latitude, American 
eglantines {. 


* Cypura martinicensis, and sisyrinchium iridifolium. 
‘This last. is found also near the Venta of La Guayra at 
600 toises of elevation. 

+ Rubus jamaicensis. 


+ Mr. Redouté, in his superb monography of rosetrees; 


has published our Mexican eglantine, under the name of 
rosier de Montezuma, Montezuma rose. 


We. were sometimes lost in the mist, and 
could not without difficulty find our way. At 
this height there is no path, and. we were obliged 
to climb with our hands, when our feet failed 
us, on this steep and slippery acclivity. A vein * 
filled with porcelain clay attracted our atten- 
tion. .It is of a snowy whiteness, and no doubt 
the remains of a decomposed feldspar. I gave 
considerable portions of it to the intendant of 
the province. In a country where fuel-is not 
scarce, a mixture of refractory earths may be 
useful, to improve the earthen ware, and even 
the bricks. Every time the clouds surrounded 
ns, the thermometer sunk as low as 12° +; with 
a serene sky it rose to 21°. These observa- 
tions were made in the shade. But it is diffi- 
cult on such rapid declivities, covered with a 
dry, shining, yellow. turf, to elude the effects 
of radiant caloric. We were at nine hundred 
and forty toises of elevation; and yet at the 
same height toward \the. east we perceived ina 
ravin, not merely a few solitary palm-trees, but 


* The breadth of the vein is three feet, it’s direction is 
hor. 1-2 of the compass of Freyberg, while that of the gneiss 
is every where hor. 3:4, with 50° or 60° of dip to the north- 
west. This porcelain-clay, when moistened, readily absorbs 
the oxygen of the. atmosphere. JI found, at Caraccas, the 
residual nitrogen very slightly mingled with carbonic acid, 
though the experiment was made in phials with ground glass 
atopples, not filled with water. 

“+ To $69 R. 


489 

a whole wood. It was the palma real; perhaps 
a species of the genus oreodoxa. This group 
of palms, placed at so considerable an elevation, 
formed a striking contrast with the willows * 
scattered on the bottom of the more temperate 
valley of Caraccas. We here discovered plants 
of European forms, placed below those of the 
torrid zone. 

After proceeding four hours across the savan- 
nahs, we entered into a little wood composed 
of shrubs and small trees, which is called El 
Pejual ; no doubt because of the great abun- 
dance of the pejoa (gaultheria odorata), a plant 
with very odoriferous leaves-. The steepness 
of the mountain became less considerable, and 


we felt an indescribable pleasure in examin- 
ing the plants of this region. No where per- 
haps can be found collected together, in so small 
a space of ground, productions so beautiful, 
aud so remarkable in regard to the geography 
of plants. At the height of a thousand toises, 


® Salix humboldtiana of Wildenouw. On the Alpine 
palm-trees see my Prolegomena, de Dist. Plant., p. 235. 

+ See ch. vi, p. 88 of the present vol. The Spanish lan- 
guage has a great advantage in being able, like the Latin, 
to derive, from the name of most of the trees, a word designating 
an association or group of trees of the same species. ‘Thus are 
formed the words olivar, robledar, and pinal, from olwvo, roble, 
and pino.. The Hispano-Americans have added tunal, peju- 
al, guayaval, &c., places where a great many cactuses, gaul- 
theria odortas, and psidiums, grow together. 


490 


the lofty savannahs of the hills terminate in a 
zone of shrubs, which by their appearance, 
their tortuous branches, their stiff leaves, and 
the dimensions and beauty of their purple flow- 
ers, remind us of what iscalled in the Cordil- 
leras of the Andes the vegetation of the para- 
mos and the punas*. We there find the family 
of the alpine rhododendrons, the: thibaudias, 
the andromedas, the vacciniums, and those be- 
farias with resinous leaves, which we have seve- 
ral times compared to the rhododendron of our 
European Alps. 

Even when nature does not produce the same 
species in analogous climates, either in the 
plains of isothermal parallels +, or on table- 

Jands the temperature of which resembles that 
of places nearer the poles +, we still remark a 


* An explanation of these words has been given in vol. ii, 
p. 252, note. 

t We may compare together either latitudes which in the 
same hemisphere ‘present the same mean temperature (as, 
for instance, Pennsylvania and the middle of France, Chili 


and the southern part of New Holland); or consider the re- ° 


lations, that may exist between the vegetation of the two 
hemispheres under isothermal parallels (of the same heat). 

} The geography of plants not only examines the analogies 
observed in the same hemisphere, between the vegetation of 
the Pyrennees and that of the Scandinavian plains ; between 
that of the Cordilleras of Peru, and of the coasts of Chili; 
it discusses also the relations between the alpine plants 
of both hemispheres, It compares the vegetation .of the 
Alleghanies and the Cordilleras of Mexico, with that of the 


paises 


491 


striking vesemblance of appearance and physi- 
ognomy in the vegetation of the most distant 
countries. This phenomenon is one of the most 
curious in the history of organic forms. I say 
the history; for in vain would reason forbid 
man to form hypotheses on the origin of things; 
he is not the less tormented with these insoluble 
problems of the distribution of beings. 

A gramen * of Switzerland grows on the 
granitic rocks of the Straits of Magellan. New 
Holland contains above forty European phane- 
rogamous plants; and the greater number of 
those plants, which are found equally in the 


mountains of Chili and Brazil. Remembering that every 
isothermal line has an alpine branch (that, for instance, which 
connects Upsal with a point in the Swiss Alps) the great 
problem of the analogy of vegetable forms may be reduced to 
the following expression; Ist, to examine in each hemi- 
sphere, and at the level of the coasts, the vegetation on the 
game isothermal line, especially near convex or concave 
summits: 2d, to compare, with respect to the form of plants, 
on the same isothermal line, to the north and south of the 
equator, the alpine branch with that traced in the plains: 
3d, to compare the vegetation on homonymous isothermal 
lines in the two hemispheres, either in the low regions, or in 
the alpine regions. 

* Phleum alpinum, examined by Mr. Brown. Accord- 
ing to the investigations of this great botanist, there can be 
no doubt, that a certain number of plants are at once com- 
mon to both hemispheres. Potentilla anserina, prunella 
vulgaris, scirpus mucronatus, and panicum crus galli, grow 
in Germany, in New Holland, and in Pennsylvania. 


492 


temperate zones of both hemispheres, are en- 
tirely wanting in the intermediary or equinoc- 
tial region, as well in the plains as on the moun- 
tains. _A downy-leaved violet, which termin- 
ates in some sort the zone of the phanerogamous 
plants at Teneriffe, and which was long thought 
peculiar to that island *, is seen three hundred 
leagues farther north, near the snowy summit 
of the Pyrennees. Gramina and cyperaceous 
plants of Germany, Arabia, and Senegal, ‘have 
been recognized among those that were gather- 
ed by Mr. Bonpland and myself on the cold 
table-lands of Mexico, along the burning shores 
of the Oroonoko, and in the southern hemi- 
sphere on the Andes of Quito--. How can we 
conceive the migrations of plants through coun- 
tries of such a different climate, and which 
are now covered by the ocean? How have the 
germs of organic beings, which resemble each 
other, in their appearance, and even in their 
internal structure, unfolded themselves at un- 
equal distances from the poles, and the surface 


* The viola cheiranthifolia, which Mr. Bonpland and I 
have described, (see vol. i, p. 180 and 270) has been recog 
nized by Messrs. Kunth and Leopold von Buch- among. the 
alpine plants, which Joseph de Jussieu brought from the 
Pyvennees. 

t Cyperus mucronatus, poa eragrostis, festuca myurus, 
andropogon avenaceus, lapago racemosa. See our Nov. Gen. 
et Spec. Plant., vol. i, p. XXV, 158, 155, 189, 119. 


493 


of the seas, wherever places so distant present 
some analogy of temperature? Notwithstand- 
ing the influence, which the pressure of the air, 
and the greater or less extinction of light, exert 
on the vital functions of plants, it is no doubt 
heat, unequally distributed in different seasons 
of the year, that must be considered as the 
most powerful stimulus of vegetation. 

The number of identical species in the two 
continents and in the two hemispheres is far 
less, than the assertions of the first travellers led 
us to believe. The lofty mountains of Equinoc- 
tial America have certainly plantains, valerians, 
arenarias, ranunculuses, medlars, oaks, and 
pines, which from their physiognomy we might 
confound with those of Europe ; but they are all 
specifically different. When nature does not 
present the same species, she loves to repeat 
the same genera. Neighbouring ‘species are 
often placed at enormous distances from each 
other, in the low regions of the temperate zone, 
and on the alpine heights of the equator. At 


_ other times (and the Silla of Caraccas displays 


a striking example of this phenomenon,) they 
are not the European genera, which have sent 
species, to people like. colonists the mountains 
of the torrid zone ; but genera of the same tribe, 
difficult to distinguish by their appearance, 
which take the place of each other in different 
latitudes. 


494 


The mountains of New Grenada surrounding 
the table-lands of Bogota are more than two 
hundred leagues distant from those of Caraecas, 
and yet the Silla, the only elevated peak in the 
chain of low mountains, presents these singular 
groupings of befaria with purple flowers, of an- 
dromedas, of gaultherias, of myrtilli, of was 
camaronas *, of nerteras, and of aralias with 
hoary leaves}, which characterize the vegeta- 
tion of the paramos, on the high Cordilleras of 
Santa Fe. We found the same thibaudia glan- 
dulosa at the entrance of the table-land of Bo- 
gota, and in the Pejual of the Silla. The chain 
of the coast of Caraccas is connected, without 
the least doubt (by the Torito, the Palomera, 
Tocuyo, and the paramos of Rosas, of Bocono, 
and of Niquitao,) with the high Cordilleras of 
Merida, Pamplona, and Santa Fe; but from 
the Silla to Tocuyo, a distance of seventy 
leagues, the mountains of Caraccas are so low, 
that the shrubs of the family of the ericineous 
plants, which we have just cited, do not find the 
cold climate necessary for their developement. 


* The name of vine-tree and wvas camaronas is given in 
the Andes to plants of the genus thibaudia, on account of 
their large succulent fruits. ‘Thus the ancient botanists gave 
the name of bear’s vine, wva wrsi, and vine of Mount Ida, vitis 
idea, to an arbutus and a myrtillus, which belong, wai the 
thibaudia, to the family of the ericinex. 


+ Nertera depressa, aralia reticulata, hedyotis. blerioides. 


495 


Supposing even what is probable, that the thi- 
baudias, and the rhododendron, of the Andes, or 
befaria, exist in the paramo of Niquitao, and in. 
the Sierra de Merida, covered with eternal 
snows, these plants would nevertheless want a 
ridge sufficiently lofty and long’ for their migra- 
tion toward the Silla of Caraccas. 

The more we. study the distribution of orga- 
nized beings on the globe, the more we are in- 
clined, if not to abandon the ideas of migration, 
at least to consider them as being hypotheses 
not entirely satisfactory. The chain of the Andes 
divides the whole of South America into two 
unequal longitudinal parts. At the foot of this 
chain, on the east and the west, we found a 
great number of plants specifically the same. 
The various passages of the Cordilleras no where 
permit the vegetable productions of the warm 
regions to proceed from the coasts of the Pacific 
Ocean to the banks of the Amazon. When a 
peak attains a great elevation, either in the 
middle of very low mountains and plains, or in 
the centre of an archipelago heaved up by volca- 


nic fires, it’s summit is covered with alpine 


plants, many of which are again found at im- 


_mense distances on other mountains, that pos- 


sess an analogous climate. Such are the general 
phenomena of the distribution of plants, which 
we cannot too strongly urge the natural philo- 
sopher to study. When I combat hypotheses too 


496 


easily admitted, I do not engage to substitute 
others more satisfactory in their place. I am 
rather inclined to think, that these problems 
cannot be solved; and that the task of the phi- 
losopher is fulfilled, when he has indicated the 
laws, according to which nature has distributed 
vegetable forms. 

It is now said, that a mountain is high enough 
to enter into the limits of the rhododendrons, 
and the befarias, as it has long been said, that 
such a mountain reached the limit of perpetual 
snows. In using this expression it is tacitly 
admitted, that under the influence of certain 
temperatures certain vegetable forms must ne- 
cessarily be developed. Such a_ supposition 
however, taken in all it’s generality, is not 
strictly accurate. The pines of Mexico are 
wanting on the Cordilleras of Peru. The Silla 
of Caraccas is not covered with those oaks, 
which flourish in New Grenada at the same 
height. Identity of forms indicates an analogy 
in the climate; but under similar climates the 
species may be singularly diversified. 

The charming rhododendron of the Andes, the 
befaria, was first described by Mr. Mutis, who 
observed it near Pamplona and Santa Fe de 
Bogota, in the fourth and seventh degree of 
north latitude. It was’ so little known before 
our expedition to the Silla, that it was scarcely 
to be found in any herbal in Europe. The 


Eee seo ee 


497 


learned editors of the Flora of Peru had even 
described it under another name, that of acun- 


“na. In the same manner as the rhododendrons 


of. Lapland, Caucasus, and the Alps * differ 
from each other, the two species of befaria we 
brought from the Silla-?are also specifically 
different from that of Santa Fe and Bogota f. 
Near the equator the rhododendrons of the 
Andes § cover the mountains as far as the high- 
est paramos, at sixteen and seventeen hundred 
toises of elevation. Advancing toward the 
north; on the Silla de Caraccas we find them 
much lower, a little below one thousand. toises. 
The befaria recently discovered in Florida, in 
the latitude of 30°, grows even on hills of small 
elevation. Thus in a space of six hundred 


Aeaguesin latitude, these shrubs descend toward 


the plains in proportion as their distance from 
the equator augments. The rhododendron of 
Lapland grows also at eight or nine hundred 
4oises lower than the rhododendron of the Alps 


* Rhododendrum Japonicum, r. caucasicum, r. ferrugine- 


um, and yr. hirsutum. 
+ Befaria glauca, b. ledifolia. See our Equinoctial Plants, 


_ vol. ii, p. 118—i26, plate 117—121, which contain almost 


a complete monography of the genus befaria, which ought to 
he called bejarza. 

+ Befaria estuang, and b. resinosa. 

§ Particularly b. estuans of Mutis, and two new species 
of the southern hemisphere, which we have described under 
the names of b. cogretata, and b. grandiflora. 


VOL. III, Qk 


498 


and the Pyrennees. We were surprised at not 
meeting with any species of befaria in the moun- 
tains of Mexico, between the rhododendrons of 
Santa Fe and Caraccas, and those of Florida, 

In the small wood, that covers the Silla; the 
befaria ledifolia is only three or four feet high. 
The trunk is divided, even from it’s root, into a 
great- many slender and even verticillate 
branches. The leaves are oval, lanceolate, 
glaucous on their inferior part, and rolled up 
toward the sides. The whole plant is covered 
with long and viscous hairs, and emits a very 
agreeable resinous smell. The bees visit it’s 
fine purple flowers; which are very abundant, 
as in all the alpine plants, and, when in full 
blossom, often near an inch wide. 

The rhododendron of Switzerland, in those 
places where it grows between eight hundred 
and a thousand toises of elevation, belongs to 
a climate, the mean temperature of which is 
+ 2° and — 1°, like that of the plains of Lap- 
land. In this zone the coldest months are — 4°, 
and —10°: the hottest, 12? and 7°. Thermo- 
metrical observations, made at the same heights 
and in the same latitudes, render it probable, 
that at the Pejual of the Silla, one thousand 
toises above the Caribbean Sea, the mean tem- 
perature of the air is still 17° or 18°; and that 
the thermometer keeps in the coolest season 
between 15° and 20° in the day, and in the 


499 


night between 10° and 12°. © At the hospital of 
St: Gothard, situate nearly on the superior limit 
of the rhododendron of the Alps, the maximum 
of heat, in the month of August, at noon, in the 
shade, is usually 12° or 13°; in the night, at the 
same season, the air is cooled by the radiation of 
the soil down to +1° or —1°5°.. Under the same 
barometric pressure, consequently at the same 
height, but thirty degrees of latitude nearer the 
equator, the befaria of the Silla is often, at 
noon, in the sun, exposed to a heat of 23° or 
24°. The greatest nocturnal refrigeration pro- 
bably never exceeds 7°. We have carefully 
compared the climate, under the influence of 
which, at different latitudes, two groups of 
plants of the same family vegetate at equal dis- 
tances from the level of the sea; the results 
would have been far different, had we compared 
zones equally distant, either from the perpetual 
snows, or from the isothermal line of 0° *: 

In the little wood of the Pejual, near the 
purple-flowered befaria grows a heath-leaved 
hedyotis, eight feet high; the caparosa-+, which 


* The stratum of air, the mean temperature of which is 
‘0’, and which scarcely coincides with the superior limit of 
perpetual snow, is found in the parallel of the rhododendrons 
of Switzerland at nine hundred toises ; in the parallel of the 
befarias of Caraccas, at two thousand seven hundred toises 
of elevation. 

“t Vismia caporosa, (a loranthus clings to this plant, and 
appropriates to itself the yellow jnice of the yismia;) davallia 


Digey, 


500 


is a large, arborescent hypericum; a lepidium, 
which appears identical with that of Virginia; 
and lastly, lycopodiaceous plants and mosses, 
which cover the rocks and roots of the trees. 
What gives the most celebrity in the country 
to this small wood is a shrub ten or fifteen’ feet 
high, of the corymbiferous family. The Creoles 
call it incense, incienso*, It’s tough and cre- 
nate leaves, as well as the extremity of the 
branches, are covered with a white wool. It is 
a new species of trixis, extremely resinous, the 
flowers of which have the agreeable odour of 
storax. This smell is very different from that 
emitted by the leaves of the trixis terebinthina- 
cea of the mountains of Jamaica, opposite to 
those of Caraccas. The people sometimes mix 
the incienso of the Silla with the flowers of the 
pevetera, another composite plant, the smell of 
which resembles that of the heliotropium of 
Peru. The pevetera does not, however, grow on 
the mountains so high as the zone of the befa- 
rias ; it vegetates in the valley of Chacao, and 
the ladies of Caraceas prepare with it an odori- 
ferous water extremely agreeable. ’ 

We spent a long time in examining the fine 


meifolia, hieracium. Avile, aralia arborea Jacq., and lepidium 

virginicum. Two new species of lycopodium, the thyotdes, 

and the aristatum, are seen lower down toward the Puerta de 

Ja Silla. - (See. our Nov. Gen. et Species Plant., tom. i, p- 38.) 
* Trixis nereifolia of Mr. Bonpland. 


SSID Oe, 


fs 


ra 7a a 


err 


501 


resinous and fragrant plants of the Pejual. The 
sky became more and more cloudy, and the 
thermometer sunk below 11°, a temperature at 
which in this zone people begin to suffer from 
the cold. Quitting the little wood of alpine 
plants, we found ourselves again in a savannah. 
We climbed over a part of the western dome, 
in order to descend into the hollow of the Silla, 
a valley which separates it’s two summits. We 
there had great difficulties to overcome, occa- 
sioned by the force of the vegetation. A bota- 
nist would not easily guess, that the thick wood 
covering this valley is formed by the assemblage 
ofa plant of the musaceous family *. It is proba- 
bly a maranta, or a heliconia; it’s leaves are large 
and shining ; it reaches the height of fourteen or 
fifteen feet, and it’s succulent stalks are placed 
near one another like the stems of the reeds 
found in the humid regions of the south of Eu- 
rope t. We were obliged to cut our way through 
this forest of musacee, The Negroes walked 
before with their cutiasses, or machettes. The 
people confound this alpine scitamineous plant 
with the arborescent gramina, under the name 
_ of carice.. We saw neither it’s fruit nor flowers. 
We are surprised to meet with a monocotyledo- 
nous family, believed to be exclusively found in 
the hot and low regions of the tropics, at eleven 


* Scitamineous plants, oy family of the plantains. 
+ Arundo donax. 


502 


hundred toises of elevation; much higher than 
the andromedas, the thibaudias, and the rhodo- 
dendron of the Cordilleras*. In a chain of 
mountains no less elevated, and more northern, 
in the blue mountains of Jamaica, the Heii- 
conia of the parrots, and the bihai rather grow 
in the alpine shaded situations +: 

_ Wandering in this thick wood of musacez or 
arborescent plants, we constantly directed our 
course toward the eastern peak, which we sought 
to attain, and which we perceived from time to 
time through an opening. On a sudden we 
found ourselves enveloped in a thick mist ; the 
compass alone could guide us; but in advanc- 
ing toward the north, we were in danger at 
every step of finding ourselves on the brink of 
that enormous wall of rocks, which descends 
almost perpendicularly to ‘the depth of six thou- 
sand feet toward the sea. We were obliged to 
stop. Surrounded by clouds Sweeping the 
ground, we began to doubt whether we should 
reach the eastern peak before night. Happily 
the Negroes, who carried our water and provi- 
Sion, rejoined us, and we resolved to take some 
refreshment. Our repast did not last long. 
Whether the capuchin father had not thought 


* Befaria. 

t Heliconia psittacorum, and h. bihai. (Salisbury in the 
Trans. of the Hort. Society, vol.i, p, 273.) These two heli- 
conias are very common in the plains of Terra Firma, 


[RES apna aS Ane ie 


ee | 


503° 


ofthe great number of persons who accompa- 
nied us, or the slaves had made free with our 
provision on the way, we found nothing but 
olives, and scarcely any bread. Horace, in his 
retreat at Tibur*, never boasted of a repast 
more light and frugal ;.but olives, which might 
have afforded sufficient nourishment to a poet, 
devoted to study, and leading a sedentary life, 
appeared an aliment by no means sufficiently 
substantial for travellers climbing mountains. 
We had watched the greater part of the night, . 
and we walked for nine hours without finding 
a single spring. Our guides were discouraged ; 
they wanted absolutely to go down, which Mr. 
Bonpland and myself had great difficulty to 
prevent. 

In the middle of the mist I made trial of the 
electrometer of Volta, armed with a smoking 
match. Though very near a thick wood of 
heliconias, I obtained very sensible signs of 
atmospheric electricity. It often varies from 
' positive to negative, it’s intensity changing at 
every instant. These variations, and the conflict 
of ‘several small currents of air, which divided 
the mist, and transformed it into clouds, the 
borders of which were visible, appeared to me 
infallible prognostics of a change in the weather. 
It was only two o'clock in the afternoon; we 


* Carm.1, 31. 


504 


entertained some hope of reaching the eastern 
summit of the Silla before sunset, and of re- 


descending into the vale, Separating the two 


peaks, intending. there to pass the night, to 
light.a great fire, and. make. our Negroes con- 
struct a hut with the large and thin leaves of 
heliconia. We sent off half of our servants, 
with orders to hasten the next morning to meet 
us, not with olives, but salt’ beef. 

We had scarcely made these arrangements, 


when the east wind began to blow violently 


from the sea-side. The thermometer rose to 
125°. It was no doubt an ascending wind, 
which by augmenting the temperature dissolved 
the vapours. In less than two minutes the. 
clouds disappeared, and the two domes of the 
Silla appeared to us singularly near. We opened 
the barometer in the lowest part of the hollow 
that separates the two summits, near a, little 
pool of very muddy water. Here, as in the 
West India islands *, marshy plains are found 
at great elevations; not because the woody 
mountains attract the clouds, but because they 
condense the vapours by the effect of nocturnal 
refrigeration, occasioned by the radiation of 
heat from the ground, and from the parenchy- 
ma of the leaves. The mercury was at 2] 
inches 5:7 lines. We took our course right 


* Leblond, Voy, aux Antilles, Tom, i, p. 420, _ 


| 
| 
| 


505 


toward the oriental summit. The obstacles of 
the vegetation gradually diminished; it was 
however necessary to cut down some heliconias; 
but these arborescent plants were now less 
thick and high. The peaks of the Silla them- 
selves, as we have several times mentioned, are 
covered only with gramina, and. small shrubs 
of befaria. Their barrenness, however, is not 
owing to their height. The limit of trees in 
this region is four hundred toises still higher ; 
since, judging according to the analogy of 
other mountains, this limit would be found 
here only at a height of eighteen hundred toises. 
The absence of large trees on the two rocky 
summits of the Silla may be .attributed to the 
aridity of the soil, the violence of the winds 
blowing from the sea, and the conflagrations so 
frequent in all the mountains of the equinoctial 
region. 

In order to reach the eastern peak, which is 
the highest, it is necessary to approach as near 
as possible the great precipice, that descends 
‘toward Caravalleda and the coast. . The gneiss 
as far as this spot had preserved it’s lamellar 
texture, and it’s primitive direction ; but where 
we climbed the summit of the Silla, it passes 
into granite. It’s texture becomes granular ; 
the mica, less frequent, is more unequally spread 
through the rock. Instead of garnets we met 
with a few solitary crystals of hornblende. It 


506 


is, however, not a syenite, but rather a granite 


of new formation. We were three quarters of . 


an hour in reaching the summit of the pyramid. 
This part of the way is not at all dangerous, 
provided the traveller carefully examines the 
stability of each fragment of rock on which he 
places his foot. The granite superposed on the 
gneiss does not present a regular Separation into 
beds; it is divided by clefts, which often cross 
one another at right angles. Prismatic blocks, 
one foot wide and twelve long, stand out from 
the ground obliquely, and appear on the borders 
of the precipice like enormous beams suspend- 
ed over the abyss. 

Having arrived at the summit, we enjoyed, 
but only for a few minutes, all the serenity of 
the sky. The eye commanded a yast space of 
country, and looked down toward the north on 
the sea, and toward the south, on the fertile 
valley of Caraccas. The barometer was at 
20 inches 7:6 lines; the thermometer at 13°7°. 
We were at thirteen hundred and fifty toises 
of elevation. We gazed on an extent of sea, 
the radius of which was thirty-six leagues. 
Those persons, whose senses are affected by 
looking down a considerable depth, should re- 
main at the centre of the small flat, which 
crowns the eastern summit of the Silla. The 
mountain is net very remarkable for it’s height, 
which is nearly eighty toises less than that of the 


= ays 


Bie Oe, 


507 


Canigou; but it is distinguished among all the 
mountains I have visited, by an enormous pre- 
cipice on the side next the sea. The coast 
forms only a narrow border ; and looking from 
the summit of the pyramid on the houses of 
Caravalleda, this wall of rocks seems by an 
optical illusion, of which I have already spoken, 
to be nearly perpendicular. The real slope of 
the declivity appeared to me, according to an 
exact calculation, 53° 28’. The mean slope of 
the Peak of Teneriffe is scarcely 12° 30% A 
precipice of six or seven thousand feet, like 
that of the Silla of Caraccas, is a phenomenon 
far more rare, than is generally believed by 
those who cross mountains without measuring 
their height, their bulk, and their slopes. Since 
the experiments on the fall of bodies, and on 
their deviation to the south east, have been 
resumed in several parts of Europe, a rock of 
two hundred and fifty toises of perpendicular 
elevation has been in vain sought for among 
all the Alps of Switzerland +. The declivity 
of Mont Blanc toward the Allée Blanche does 


* Observations of the latitude give for the horizontal dis- 
tance between the foot of the mountain near Caravalleda, 
and the vertical line passing through it's summit, scarcely 
1000 toises. 

+ See the testimony of a Geognost, who has visited the 
Alps more fréquenily than any other person, Mr. Escher, 
of Zurich, in the Alpina, Tom. iv, p. 291, 


508 


not even reach an’ angle of 45°; though in the 
greater number of geological works Mont Blane 
is described as cut perpendicularly on the south 
side. | 

At the Silla of Caraccas, the enormous north- 
ern cliff is partly covered with vegetation, 
notwithstanding the extreme steepness of it’s 
slope. Tufts of befaria and andromedas ap- 
pear as if suspended from the rock. The little 
valley, which separates the domes toward the 
South, stretches toward the seaside. Alpine 
plants fill this hollow ; and, not confined to the 
ridge of the mountain, follow the sinuosities of 
the ravin. It would seem as if torrents were 
concealed under that fresh foliage, and the dis- 
position of the plants, the grouping of so many 
inanimate objects, give the landscape all the 
charm of motion and of life. 

Seven months had now elapsed since we were 
on the summit of the Peak of Teneriffe, whence 
we surveyed a space of the globe equal to a. 
fourth part, of France. |The apparent horizon 
of the sea is there six leagues farther distant * 
than at the top of the Silla; and yet we saw 
that horizon, at least for some time, very dis- 
tinetly. It was strongly marked, and not con- 
founded with the adjacent strata of air. At 
the Silla, which is five hundred and fifty toises 


* See ch, i, vol. i, p. 105; and chap. ii, p. 183, 


ee 


SSS ET 


509 
lower than the Peak of Teneriffe, the horizon, 
though nearer, remained invisible toward the 
north and north-north-east. Following with 
the eye the surface of the sea, which was smooth 
as glass, we were struck with the progressive 
diminution of the reflected light. Where the vi- 
sual ray touched the last limit of that, surface, the 
water was lost among the superposed strata of 
air. This appearance has something in it very 
extraordinary. We expect to see the horizon 
level with the eye; but, instead, of distinguish- 
ing at this height a marked limit between the 
two elements, the more distant strata of water 
“geem to be transformed into vapour, and min- 
gled with the aérial ocean. I observed the 
same appearance, not in one spot of the horizon 
alone, but on an extent of more than a hun- 
dred and sixty degrees, near the South Sea, 
when I found myself for the first time on the 
pointed rock, that commands the crater of 
Pichincha; a volcano, the elevation of which 
exceeds that of Mont Blanc. The visibility of 
a very distant horizon depends, when there is 
no mirage, upon two distinct things ; the quan- 
tity of light received on that part of the sea, 
_ where the visual ray terminates ; and the ex- 
tinction of the reflected light during it’s passage 
through the intermediate strata of air. It may 
happen, notwithstanding the serenity of the 
sky and the transparency of the atmosphere 


510 
that the ocean is feebly illuminated at thirty of 
forty leagues distance; or that the strata of 
air nearest the Earth may extingu‘sh a great 
deal of the light, by absorbing the rays thit 
traverse them. 

Even supposing the effects of refraction* not 
to exist, the islands of Tortuga, Orchila, Ro- 
ques, and Aves, the nearest of which are twenty- 
five leagues distant, ought to be visible in fine 
weather from the top of the Silla. We per- 
ceived none of these islands; either because 
the state of the atmosphere was not favourable, 
or because the time we could employ in looking 
for them while the sky was serene was not 
sufficiently long. A well informed pilot, who had 
attempted to climb with us to the top of the 
mountain, Don Miguel Areche, assured us, 
that he had seen the Silla from the sea near 
the Cayes de Sal, at the Rocca de Fuera, in the 
latitude of 12° 1’+-. If the surrounding moun- 
tains did not intercept the view, the coast to 
the east as far as the Morro de Piritoo, and to 
the west as far as the Punta del Soldado, ten 
_ leagues to leeward of Porto Cabello, ought to 
be visible ‘from the summit of the Silla. To- 
ward the south, within the land, the range of 


* The visual ray without refraction makes an angle of 
1° 39’; with a refraction of one tenth, it is 1° 50’. 

t The latitude of the Silla is 10° 31° 5’, according to 
Mr, Ferrer. 


eS ae 


D1i 


mountains, that separates Yare and the savan- 
nah of Ocumare from the valley of Caraccas, 
bounds the horizon like a rampart running pa- 
rallel to the equator. If this rampart had an 
opening, .a breach, as happens so often in the 
high mountains of Saltzburg* and Switzerland, 
the most stupendous scenery would thence un- 
fold itself to our view. We should discover 
through that breach the Llanos or vast steppes 
of Calabozo; and as these steppes would reach 
the height of the eye of the spectator, two simi- 
lar horizons of sea and land would be visible 
from the same point. 

The rounded. peak, or western dome of the 
Silla, concealed from us the view of the town of 
Caraccas; but we distinguished the nearest 
houses, the villages of Chacao and Petare, the 
coffee plantations, and the course of the. Rio 
Guayra, a slender streak of water reflecting a 
silvery light. The narrow band of cultivated 
ground formed a pleasing contrast with the 
wild and gloomy aspect of the neighbouring 
mountains. While we take in at one view the 
vast landscape, we feel little regret, that the 
solitudes of the New World are not embellished 
with the images of past times. Wherever, 
under the torrid zone, the Earth, studded with 
mountains and overspread with plants, has pre- 


# For example, at the Pass Lueg. 


512 


served it’s primitive characteristics, man no 
longer appears as the centre of the creation. Far 
‘from taming the elements, all his efforts tend 
to escape from ‘their empire. The changes 
made by savage nations during the lapse -of 
ages on the surface of the globe disappear be- 
fore those, that are produced in a few hours 
by the actions of volcanic fizes, the inundations 
of mighty floods, and the impetuosity of tem- 
pests. Itis the conflict of the elements, which 
characterizes in the New World the aspect of 
‘Nature. A country without population appears 
to the people of cultivated Kurope like a. city 
abandoned by it’s inhabitants. In America, 
after having lived during several years in the 
forests of the low regions, or on the ridge of 
the Cordilleras ; after having surveyed coun: 
tries as extensive as France, containing only 
a small number of scattered huts; a deep 
solitude no longer affrights the imagination. 
We become accustomed to the idea of a 
world, that supports only plants and animals ; 
where the savage has never uttered either the 
shout of joy, or the plaintive accents of sorrow. 
We could not long avail ourselves of the ad- 
vantage arising from the position of the Silla, 
commanding all the neighbouring summits, 
While we were examining with our glasses that 
part of the sea, the horizon of which was clearly 
terminated, and the chain of the mountains of 


, 913% 

Ocumare, behind which begins the unknown: 
world ofthe Oroonoko and Amazonia, a thick fog: 
rose from the plains to the elevated regions. 
It first filled the bottom of the vailey of Carac- 
cas. The vapours, illumined from above, pre- 
sented a uniform tint of a milky white. The 
valley appeared full of water: it seemed to be 
an arm of the sea, of which the adjacent moun- 
tains formed the’steep shore. In vain we wait- 
ed for the slave, who carried the great sextant 
of Ramsden. Iwas obliged to avail myself of 
the present state of the sky, and I resolved to 
take a few altitudes of the Sun with a sextant 
by Troughton of two inches radius. The disk 
of the Sun was half concealed by the. mist. 
The difference of longitude between the quar- 
ter of the Trinidad and the eastern peak of the 
‘Silla appears. scarcely to exceed 0° 3! 22 *, 

While, seated on the rock, I was employed 
in determining the dip of the needle, I found 
my hands covered with a species of hairy bee, 
a little smaller than the honey bee of the north 
of Europe. These insects make their nests in 
the ground. They seldom fly; and, from the 
slowness of their movements, I should, have be- 
lieved they: were benumbed by the cold of the — 
mountains. The people, in these regions, call 


* The difference of longitude between the Silla and-La 
Guayra, according to-Mr, Fidalgo, is 0° 6’ 40’, 
VOL. III. pane 


514° 


them little angels, angelitos, because they very 
seldom sting. They are no doubt of the genus 
apis, of the division melipones. Notwithstand- 
ing the report of several travellers, it is not 
true, that these bees, peculiar to the New World, 
are destitute of all offensive weapons. Their 
sting is indeed weaker, and they use it less fre- 
quently*; but a person, not yet entirely per- 
suaded of the harmlessness of these angelitos, 
can scarcely divest himself of a sensation of 
fear. I. confess, that, during my astronomical 
observations, I was often on the point of letting 
fall my instruments, when I felt my hands and 
face covered with these hairy insects: Our 
guides assured us, that these bees attempt to 
defend themselves only when they are irritated 
by being seized by their legs. I was not tempt- 
ed to try the experiment on myself. 

The dip of the needle at the Silla was one 
centesimal degree less than in the town of Ca- 
raccas. In collecting the observations which 
i made during calm weather, and in very fa- 
vourable circumstances, on the mountains as 
well as along the coast, it would at first seem, 
that we discover, in that part of the Globe, a 
certain influence of the heights on the dip of 
the needle, and the intensity of magnetical 


*“See'a paper by Mr. Latreille, inserted in my Observations 
de Aoologie, Tom.+i, p. 263 and 269. 


SS 


515 


forces; but we must remark, that the dip at 
Caraccas is much greater than could be sup- 
posed from the situation of the town, and that 
the magnetical phenomena are modified by the 
proximity of certain rocks*, which constitute so 


many particular centres, or little systems of at- 


traction. 


* T have seen fragments of quartz traversed by parallel 
bands of magnetic iron, carried into the valley of Caraccas 
by the waters descending from the Galipano and the Cerro 
de Avila, This banded magnetic iron ore is found also in 
the Sierra Nevada of Merida. Between the two peaks of 
the Silla angular fragments of cellular quartz are found, 
covered with red oxide of iron. They do not act on the 
needle, ‘This oxide is of a cinnabar red colour. 


SY a ann aes 


i ee 


*S99.L0J OY}. JO 
Agistoqur oy} ‘svour 


SNOLLVTTIOSO 


ALE OL PIES OGL 


#1 


AG 69 


(VIIAY op) BEA eT 


i 


A&E OL 


EG 69 


(peprurny) svooviey 


AG 69 | OS VE OL 


- - + eikenyg eq 


46 69 | AL AE OL 


*SaSTO] UT 


‘UOISTATp AOU “JSOM “YJION 


‘OOST ‘saovid 


JLHOIGH 


AANLISNOT AGA LILVT 


‘aid JILENOVW 


O17 


~ The temperature of the atmosphere varied 
on the summit of the Silla from eleven to four- 
teen degrees, according as the weather was 
calm or windy. Every one knows how diffi- 
cult it is to verify on the summit of a moun- 
tain the temperature, that» must be employed 
in the barometric calculation. The wind was 
east, which seems to prove, that the breeze, or 
the trade-winds, extends in this latitude much 
higher than fifteen hundred toises. Mr. Von 
Buch had observed, that, at the Peak of Tene- 
riffe, near the northern limit of the trade-winds, 
there exists generally at one thousand nine 
hundred. toises of elevation a contrary current, 
or wind from the west. The academy of sci- 
ences had engaged the natural philosophers 
who accompanied the unfortunate La Perouse; 
to employ little air balloons in order to exa- 
mine the extent of the trade-winds under the 
tropics at sea. Such experiments are very dif- 
ficult, unless the observer quits the surface of 
the Earth. The little balloons do not in gene- 
ral reach the height of the Silla; and the light 
clouds, that are sometimes perceived at an ele- 
- vation of three or four thousand toises, for in- 
' stance, the fleecy clouds *, remain almost fixed, 
or have such a slow motion, that it is impossible 
to judge of it’s direction. 


* What the French call moutons. 


518 


During the short space of time that the sky 
was serene at the zenith, I found the blue of 
the atmosphere sensibly deeper than on the 
coasts. It was 26°5° of Saussure’s. cyanometer. 
At Caraccas, the same instrument. generally 
indicated only 18° in fine and dry weather. It 
is probable, that, in the months of July and 
August, the difference of the colour of the sky 
on the coasts and the summit of the Silla is 
still more considerable *, but the meteorologi- 
cal phenomenon, with which Mr. Bonpland and 
myself were most struck during the hour we 
passed on the mountain, was that of the ap- 
parent dryness of the air, which seemed to 
increase as the fog augmented. When I took 
the whalebone hygrometer out of it’s case, it 
pointed to 52°(87° Sauss.). The sky was clear ; 
yet streams of vapours with distinct ontlines 
passed from time to time in the midst of us, 
sweeping the ground. Deluc’s hygrometer went 
back to 49° (85° Sauss.). Half an hour later, 
a thick cloud surrounded us; we could no 
longer perceive the objecis that were the near- 
est to us, and we saw with surprise, that the 
instrument continued retrograding toward dry- 
_ness'as low as 47-7° (84° Sauss.). The tempe- 
rature of theair in the mean time was from 12°to 
13°. Though in the whalebone hygrometer the 


© See, chap. ii, vol, i, p. 188; and chap. iii, vol, ii, p, 95. 


ana 


2 


519 


point of saturation in the air is not at 106°, but 
at 84:5° (99° Sauss.), this effect of a cloud on 
the instrument appeared to me very extraor- 
dinary. The mist lasted long enough for the 
whalebone to have increased it’s length by it’s 
attraction of the particles of water. Our clothes 
were not wet: A traveller, accustomed to ob- 
servations of this kind, lately assured me, that 
he had remarked on Mount Pélée in Martinico 
a similar effect of clouds on the hair hygrome- 
ier. Itis the duty of the natural philosopher, 
to relate all the phenomena that Nature dis- 
plays to him, especially when he has neglected 
nothing to avoid error in his observations. Mr. 
de Saussure, in a violent shower, saw his hy- 
grometer, which was not wetted by the rain, 
keep up * (almost as at the Silla in the cloud) at 
84:7° (48°6° Deluc) ; but it is easier to conceive, 
that the air dispersed between the drops of rain is 
not completely saturated, than to explain. how 
vesicular vapours, in immediate contact with 
the hygroscopic body, do not impart to it great- 
er humidity. What can be the state of a va- 
‘pour, which does not wet, and which is visible 
to the eye? We must, I believe, suppose that 
‘a much drier air had been mixed with that 
where the cloud was formed ; and that the yesi- 
cles of vapour, the volume of which is much 


# Sce cliap. iv, vol. ii, p. 98. 


520 


less considerable than that of the interposed 
air, did not wet the smooth surface of the slip 
of whalebone. The transparent air, which pre- 
cedes a cloud, may scmetimes be more -humid 
than the current of air which comes with the 
cloud. 

It would have. been imprudent. to’ remairi 
longer in ‘this thick fog, on the edge of a pre= 
cipice of seven or eight thousand feet deep*. 
We descended the eastern dome of the Silla; 
and gathered in our descent a gramen, that 
not only forms’ a new and very remarkable 


genus, but which to our great astonishment 


we found again some time after on the summit 


of the voleano of Pichincha, at four hundred 
leagues distance from the Silla in the south- 
ern hemisphere f- The lichen floridus, so com- 
mon in the north of Europe, covered the 
branches of the befaria and the gaultheria odo- 
rata, descending even to the roots of these 
shrubs, Examining the mosses, which cover 
the rocks of gheiss in the valley between the 
two peaks, I was Surprised at finding real peb- 


* Toward the north west the slopes appear more aceessi- 
ble. I have even heard of a path frequented by the smug- 
glers, which leads to CaravaHeda between the two peaks 
of the Silla.’’ From the eastern peak I took the bearings 
of, the western peak, S. 64° 40/ Wis; and).of: the houses, 
which I was told belonged to Caravalleda, N. 55° 90/ W. 

t Aegopogon cenchroides, See our Nov. Gen. et Species, 
vol. i, p. 182, Tab, xlii. ' i 


eae 


a = eae NESTS 


521 


bles, rounded fragments of quartz *. It may 
be conceived, that the valley of Caraccas was 
once an inlard lake, before the Rio Guayra had 
found an issue to the east near Caurimare, at 
the foot of the hill of Auyamas ; and before the 
existence of the ravin of Tipe on the west, to- 
ward Catia and Cape Blanco. But how can 
we imagine, that these waters could ascend as 
high as the Silla, when the mountains opposite 
this peak, those of Ocumare, were too low to 
prevent their gushing out into the Llanos? 
The pebbles could not have been brought by the 
torrents from more elevated points, since there is 
no height that commands the Silla. Must we 
admit, that they have been raised up, like all 
the mountains, which border the coast ? 

It was half after four in the evening’ when 
we finished our observations. Satisfied with 
the success of our journey, we forgot that there 
might be danger in descending in the dark 
steep declivities covered by a smooth and slip- 
pery turf. The mist concealed the valley from 
us; but we distinguished the double hill of La 
Puerta, which, tike all objects placed almost per- 
pendicularly beneath the eye, appeared extra- 

ordinarily near... We relinquished our design 
of passing the night between the two summits 


* Fragments of brown copper ore were found mixed 
with these pebbles at an elevation of 1170 toises, 


522 


of the Silla, and having again found the path 
we had cut through the thick wvod of helico- 
nias, we arrived at the Pejual, the region of 
odoriferous and resinous plants. The beauty of 
the befarias, and their branches covered with 
large purple flowers, again attracted all our 
attention. When in these climates we gather 
plants to formour herbals, we become difficult 
in our choice in proportion to the luxury of 
vegetation. We cast away the branches we 
have first cut, because they appear less beautiful 
than those we could not reach. Overloaded 
with plants in quitting the wood, we still regret 
not having made a more ample harvest. We 
tarried so long in the Pejual, that night sur- 
prised us as we entered the savannah, at more 
than nine hundred toises of elevation. — 

As twilight scarcely exists between the tro- 
pics, we pass suddenly from bright daylight. te 
darkness. The moon was on the horizon ; but 
her disk was veiled from time to time by thick 
clouds, hurried on by a cold and impetuous 
wind. The steep declivities, covered with yel- 
low and dry herbs, now appeared in shade ; and 
now, suddenly illumined, seemed like preci- 
pices, the depth of which the eye sought to 
measure. We proceeded in a long line, and 

endeavoured to assist ourselves by our hands, 
that we might not roll down by falling. The 
guides, who carried our instruments, abandoned 


} 
7 
| 


ee ES ee 


523 


us successively, to sleep in the mountain, 
Among those who remained I admired the ad- 
dress of a Congo Black, who, bearing on his 
head a large dipping needle, held it constantly 
steady, notwithstanding the extreme declivity of 
the rocks. The fog had disappeared by degrees 
in the bottom of the valley; and the scattered 
lights we perceived below us caused a double 
illusion. The steeps appeared still more dange- 
yous than they really were; and, during six 
hours of continual descent, we thought our- 
selves equally near the farms at the foot of the 
Silla. We heard very distinctly the voices of 
men, and the shrill notes of the guitars. Sound is 
generally so well propagated from below upward, 
that in a balloon at three thousand toises of ele- 
vation the barking of dogs is sometimes heard *. 
We did not arrive till ten at night at the 
bottom of the valley, overcome with fatigue and 
thirst. We had walked for fifteen hours, nearly 
without stopping; the soles of our feet were 
made sore by the asperities of a rocky soil, and 
the hard and dry stalks of the grapes. We had 
been obliged to pull off our boots, the soles 
having become too slippery. On declivities 
destitute of shrubs, or ligneous herbs, which 
may be grasped by the hand, the danger of the 
descent is diminished by walking barefoot. In 


* Mr. Gay-Lussac in his ascent on the 15th of September 
4805, 


524 


order to shorten the way, our guides led us 
from the Puerta de la Silla to the farm of Gal. 
legos by a path, which conducted us to a reser- 
voir of water, el tanque. They missed their 
way, however; and this last descent, the steep- 


est of all, brought us near the ravin of Cha- 


caito. The noise of the cascades gave this 
nocturnal scene a grand and wild character. 
We passed the night at the foot of the Silla. 
Our friends at Caraccas were able to distinguish 
us with glasses on the summit of the eastern 
peak. ‘They felt an interest in the history of our 
fatigues, but they were little satisfied with the 
result of a measurement, which did not give the 
Silla even the elevation of the highest summit of 
the Pyrennees*. How can we blame that na- 
tional feeling, which attaches itself to monu- 
ments of nature, in a spot where the monu- 
ments of art are nothing ? How can we wonder, 
that the inhabitants of Quito and Rio Bamba, 
proud for ages of the height of Chimborazo, mis- 
trust those measurements, that elevate the 
mountains of Himalaya in India above all the 
colossal Cordilleras ? 
During the journey to the Silla, which I have 
just described, and in all our excursions in the 
valley of Caraccas, we were very attentive to 


* It was formerly believed, that the height of the Silla af 
Caraccas scarcely differed ‘from that of the peak. of Teneriffe, 
Laet. Americe Descr., 1638, p. 682. 


505 


the lodes and -indications of ores; which we 
found in the mountains of gneiss. No regular 
trials having been made, we could only examine 


the fissures, the ravins, and the failings down 
of the earth occasioned by the torrents in the- 
rainy season. The rock of gneiss, passing some- 
times * into a granite of new formation, some- 
times mica-slate, belongs in Germany to the 
most metalliferous rocks; but-in the New Con- 
tinent, the gneiss has not hitherto. been ‘re- 
marked as very rich in ores worth working: 
The most celebrated mines of Mexico and Peru 
are found in the primitive and transition schistus, 
in the trap porphyries, the grauwakke, and the 
alpine limestone-{. In several spots of the 
valley of Caraccas, the gneiss contains a small 
quantity of gold, disseminated in small veins of 
quartz, sulphuretted silver, azure copper ore, 
and galena; but it remains doubtful, whether 
these different metalliferous substances are not 
too poor, to merit any attempt at working them, 
Attempts indeed were made at the conquest of 
the province, toward the middle of the sixteenth 
century. 

From the promontory of Paria to beyond Cape 
“Vela, navigators had found ornaments of gold, 
and gold dust, among the inhabitants of the 
coast. They penetrated into the interior of the 


* Especially at great elevations, 
+ Nouc, Esp, vol. ii, p. 494. 


526 


country, to discover whence the precious metal 
came ; and though the information obtained -in 
the province of Coro, and the markets of Curi- 
ana and Cauchieto*, had clearly shown, that real 
- mineral wealth was to be found only to the west 
and south-west of Coro, that is to say, in the 
mountains which lie near those of New Gre- 
nada, the whole province of Caraccas was not 
the less eagerly explored. A governor recently 
arrived on that coast could recommend himself 
to his court only by boasting of the mines of his 
province ! and in order to take from cupidity . 
what was most ignoble and repulsive, the thirst 
of gold was justified by the manner, in which it 
was pretended that riches acquired by fraud and 
violence were employed.“ Gold,” says Christo- 
pher Columbus, in his last letter + to King 


* Petr. Martyr, Ocean. Dec. i, lib. vili, p. 90, 91, Gry- 
nzeus, p. 83, 84. Fray Pedro Simon, Not. ll, cap. i, N° 3, 
p- 55. Herrera, Dec. i, lib. iv, eap. v (vol. i, p. 106). The 
Spaniards found in 1500 in the country of Curiana (now 
Coro) little birds, frogs, and other ornaments of gold. Those 
who had cast these figures lived at Cauchieto, a place nearer 
the Rio la Hacha. I have seen ornaments resembling those 
described by Peter Martyr of Anghiera, whch indicate tole- 
rably skilful goldsmiths, among the works of the ancient in- 
habitants of Cundinamarca. The same industry appears to 
have prevailed on the coasts, and farther to the south, in the 
mountains of New Grenada. 

t Lettera rarissima data nelle Indie nella. isola di Jamaica a 
7 Julbo del 1503. (Bassano, 1810, p. 2931.) “Le oro e 


527 


Ferdinand, “ gold is a thing so much the more 
necessary to your majesty, because, in order to 
fulfil the ancient prediction, Jerusalem is to be 
rebuilt by a prince of the Spanish monarchy. 
Gold is the most excellent of metals. What 
becomes of those precious stones, which are 
sought for at the extremities of the globe? They 
are sold, and are finally converted into gold. 
With gold we not only do whatever we please in 
this world, but we can even employ it to snatch 
souls from Purgatory, and to people Paradise.” 
These words, of such simple candour, bear the 
stamp of the age in which Columbus lived ; but 
we are surprised to see the most pompous eulo- 
gium of riches written by a man, whose whole 
life was marked by the most noble disinterest- 
edness. 

The conquest of the province of Venezuela 
having begun at it’s western extremity, the 
neighbouring mountains of Coro, Tocuyo, and 
Barquisimeto, first attracted the attention of the 
Conquistadores. ‘These mountains join the Cor- 
dilleras of New Grenada (those of Santa Fe, 
Pamplona, La Grita, and Merida) to the littoral 
chain of Caraceas. It is a land so much the 
more interesting to the geognost, as no map 
has yet made known the mountainous ramifica- 


metallo sopra gli altri excellentissimo, e dell’ oro si fanno 
li tesori € chi lo tiene fa e opera quante vuole nel mondo, ¢ 
finalmente aggionge a miandare le anime al Paradiso.” « 


528 


tions, which the paramos of Niquitao and Lag” 
Rosas, the last of those the height of which 


reaches sixteen hundred toises; send out toward 
the north-east. Between Tocuyo, Araure, and 
Barquisimeto, rises the group of the Altar-moun- 


tains, connected toward the south-east with the. 


paramo of Las Rosas. A branch of the Altar 
stretches to the north-east by San Felipe el 
Fuerte, joining the granitic mountains of the 
coast near Porto Cabello. The other b:anch 
is directed to the east toward Nirgua and 
Tinaco, and joins the chain of the interior, that 
of Yusma, Villa de Cura, and Sabana de Ocu-. 
mare. 

The whole land we have been describing’ 
separates the waters which flow to the Oroonoko: 
from those which run into the immense lake of 
Maracaybo, and the Caribbean Sea. It pre- 
sents rather temperate than hot climates; and 
it is looked upon in the country, notwithstand- 
ing the distance of more than a hundred leagues, 
as a prolongation of the metalliferous soil of 
Pamplona. It was in the group of the western 
mountains of Venezuela, that the Spaniards, iv 
the year 1551, wrought the gold mine of Bu- 
ria *, which was the cause of the foundation of 
the town of Barquisimeto-+-. But these works, 
like many other mines successively opened, were 


* Real de Minas de San Felipe de Buria. 
Tt Nueva Segovia. . 


529 


soon abandoned. Here, as in all-the moun 
tains of Venezuela, the ore has been, found 
to be very variable in it’s produce. The lodes 
are very often divided, or cease; and the me- 
tals appear only in kidney-ores, and present 
the most delusive appearances. It is how- 
ever only in this group of mountains of San 
Felipe. and Barquisimeto, that the working of 
mines has been continued till our days. Those 
of Aroa, near San Felipe el Fuerte, situate in 
the centre of a very feverish country, are the 
- only mines: which are wrought in the whole 
Capitania-General of Caraccas. They yield 
a small quantity of copper, and we shall speak 
of them after we have surveyed the fine valleys 
of Aragua, and the banks of the lake of Valen- 
cia. 

Next to the works at Buria, near Barquisi- 
meto, those of the valley of Caraccas, and of 
the mountains near the capital, are the most 
ancient. Francisco Faxardo and his wife Isa- 
bella, of the nation of the Guaiqueries, both 
founders of the town of Collado*, often visited 
the table-land, where the capital of Venezuela 
is now situate. They had given this table-land 
the name of Valle de San Francisco; and 
having seen some bits of gold in the hands of 
the natives, Faxardo succeeded, in the year 


% Caravalleda. 


VOL. III, 


530 


1560, in discovering the mines of Los Teques *, 
to the south-west of Caraccas, near the group 
of the mountain of Cocuiza, which separate the 
valleys of Caraecas and Aragua. It is thought, 
that in the first of these valleys, near Baruta 
(to the south of the village of Valle), the natives 
had made some excavations in veins of auri- 


ferous quartz; and that, when the Spaniards — 


first settled there, and founded the town of 
Caraccas, they filled the shafts which had been 
dry, with water. It is now impossible to verify 
this fact; but it is certain, that, long before the 
Conquest, grains of gold were a medium of 
exchange, I do not say generally, but among 
certain nations of the New Continent t. They 
gave gold to purchase pearls; and it does not 
appear extraordinary, that, after having for a 
long time picked up grains of gold in the rivu- 
lets, nations enjoying fixed habitations, and de- 


* Thirteen years later, in 1578, Gabriel de Avila, one of 
the alcades of the new town of Caraccas, began anew the 
working of these mines, which were from that time called 
the Real de Minas de Nuestra Senora. Perhaps this same 
Avila, on account of a few farms which he possessed in the 
mountains adjacent to La Guayra and Caraccas, has occas 
sioned the Cumbre to receive the name of Montana de Avila. 
This name has subsequently been applied erroneously to the 
Silla, and to all the chain which extends toward Cape Code- 
ra. Oviedo, p. 298 and 324, 

t Petrus:Martyr, p. 91. 


31 


voted to agriculture, should have tried to fol- 
low the auriferous veins, in the superior sur- 


face of the soil. The mines of Los Teques could 
not be peaceably wrought, till the defeat of 
the Cacique, Guaycaypuro, a celebrated chief 
of the Teques, who so long contested with the 
Spaniards the possession of the province of Ve- 
nezuela. 

We have yet to mention a third point, to 
which the attention of the Conquistadores was 
called by indications of mines, so early as the 
end of the 16th century. In following the. val- 
ley of Caraccas to the east beyond Caurimare, 
in the road to Caucagua, we reach a mountain- 
ous and woody country, where a great quantity 
of charcoal is now made, and which anciently 
bore the name of the Province of Los Mariches. 
In these eastern mountains of Venezuela, the 
gneiss passes into a talcous state. It contains, 
as at Salzbourg, lodes of auriferous quartz. 
The labours very anciently begun in those 
mines have often been abandoned and resumed. 

The mines of Caraccas remained forgotten 
during more thana hundred years. But in the 
_ times nearest our own, toward the end of the 
last century, an intendant of Venezuela, Don 
Jose Avalo, again gave into the illusions, which 
had flattered the cupidity of the Conquistado- 
ves. He fancied, that all the mountains near 
the capital contained great metallic riches. A 

2m 2 


532 


young viceroy of New Spain, Count Galvez, 
visiting at this period thé coast of Terra Firma, 
to examine it’s fortifications, dnd state of de- 
fence, was requested by the intendant, to send 
him some Mexican miners. The choice was 
not fortunate; they who were employed could 
not distinguish a single rock ; every thing, even 
mica, appeared to them gold and silver. The 
two chiefs * of these Mexican miners were al- 
lowed fifteen thousand francs a year; and it 
was not their interest, to discourage a govern- 
ment, which was afraid of no expense, that 
was intended to promote the working of the 
mines. Their-operations were directed toward 
the ravin of Tipe, and the ancient mines of 
Baruta to the south of Caraccas, where the 
Indians gathered even in my time a little stream 
gold. The zeal of the administration soon di- 
minished ; and after having incurred many use- 
less expenses, the enterprise of the mines of 
Caraccas was totally abandoned. A small quan- 
tity of auriferous pyrites, sulphuretted silver, 
and a little native gold, had been found; but 
these were only feeble indications, and in a 
country where labour is extremely dear, there 
was no inducement to pursue works ‘so little 
productive. 

We visited the ravin of Tipe, situate in that 


* Pedro Mendana and Antonio Henriquez. 


533 


part of the valley, which opens toward Cape 
Blanco. In going from Caraccas, we pass near 
the great barracks of San Carlos over a barren 
and rocky soil. Scarcely a few plants of arge- 
mone mexicana are to be found. The gneiss 
appears every where above ground. We might 
have fancied ourselves on the table-land of Frei- 
berg. We crossed first the little rivulet of Agua 
Salud, a limpid water, which has no mineral 
taste, and then the Rio Caraguata*. The road 
is commanded on the right by the Cerro de 
Avila and the Cumbre ; and on the left, by the 
mountains of Aguas Negras. ‘This defile is 
very interesting in a geological point of view ; 
at this spot the valley of Caraccas communi- 
cates by the vallies of Tacagua and of Tipe 
with the coast near Catia. <A ridge of rock, 
the summit of which is forty toises above the 
bottom of the valley of Caraccas, and more 
than three hundred toises above the valley of 
Tacagua, divides the waters which flow into 
the Rio Guayra and toward Cape Blanco. 
On this point of division, at the entrance of 
the branch, the view is highly pleasing. ‘The 
‘climate changes as we descend toward the 
‘west. In the valley of Tacagua we found 
some new habitations, conucos of maize and 
plantains. A very extensive plantation of iu- 


“* Gneiss, hor. 12, dip 70° west. 


534 


na, or cactus, stamps a peculiar character on 
this barren country. The cactuses reach the 
height of fifteen feet, and grow in the form of 
eandelabras, like the euphorbiums of Africa, 
They are cultivated in order to sell their refreshing 
fruits in the market of Caraccas, The variety 
destitute of thorns is called, whimsically enough, 
in the colonies, tuna de Espana. We measured 
at the same place magueys, or agaves, the long 
stem of which, loaded with flowers, was forty- 
four feet high. However common this plant 
is become in the south of Europe, a person born 
in a northern climate is never wearied of ad- 
miring the luxury of vegetation, the rapid de- 
velopement of a liliaceous plant, which con- 
tains at once a sweet juice, and astringent and 
caustic liquids, employed in the cure of wounds 
to consume proud flesh, 

We found several veins of quartz in the 
valley of Tipe appearing above the soil. They 
contained pyrites, carbonated iron ore, traces 
of sulphuretted silver (glasserz), and gray cop- 
per ore, or fahlerz. The works which had 
been undertaken, either to extract the ore, or 
to explore the nature of it’s bed, appeared to 
be very superficial. The earth falling in had 
filled up those excavations, and we could not 
judge ourselves of the richness of the lode. 
Notwithstanding the expense incurred’ under 
the intendancy of Don Jose Avalo, the great 


5395 


question, whether the province of Venezuela 
contains mines rich enough to be wrought, is 


yet problematical. Though in countries where 
hands are wanting, the culture of the soil 
demands unquestionably the first care of go- 
vernment, yet the example of New Spain is 
sufficient to prove, that the working of metals 
is not always unfavourable to the progress of 
agriculture. The best cultivated Mexican fields, 
those which recall to the memory of the tra- 
- yeller the most beautiful parts of France and 
the south of Germany, extend from Silao tow- 
ard the Villa of Leon: they are in the neigh- 
bourhood of the mines of Guanaxuato, which 
alone furnish a sixth part of all the silver of the 
New World, 


NOTES TO THE FOURTH BOOK. 


note A. 


The end of the eclipse of the Sun, on the 28th of October, 
1799 (Chapter X, p. 312 of this volume), presented me with 
ayery remarkable phenomenon, which I shall describe, as I 
find it noted in my Astronomical Journal. “ Looking. 
through Dollond’s large achromatic telescope very steadfastly 
(at 4°58’ by the chronometer) at the darkened part of the 
Sun’s disk, I saw three or four luminous dots, appear and. 
disappear successively. They were like stars of the fifth 
magnitude. I thought for some moments, that this pheno- 


menon was owing to the explosion of volcanoes in the moon, 
the existence of which is admitted by Herschell, but which 
Don Antonio Ulloa considers as holes, that pass through the 
planet. What was my astonishment, when, toward the end 
of the eclipse, at 5" 37’ by the chronometer, I perceived two 


similar luminous dots beyond the disk, at an arc of twelve or 
fifteen minutes distance from the limb which had not been 
eclipsed! The eclipse ended at 5" 48737” by the chronom- 
eter. These two luminous dots appeared only once. Their 
light was of the intensity of a star of the third magnitude, 

I could not explain to myself this appearance. My eye was 
not at all fatigued.” 

‘Louville relates (Mem. de ?Acad., 1715, p. 96) having seen 
at London, during the total eclipse of the Sun on the 3d of 
May 1715, “ fulminations, or instantaneous vibrations of, 
luminous rays., They appeared, during the total darkness, 
on the surface of the moon, so that I thought I saw trains of 


538 


gunpowder fired. Considering that the moon has a great 
many mountains, it is not astonishing that it should be sub- 
ject to very frequent storms.” In what I observed there 
was no fulguration, or appearance of trains of luminous mat- 
ter. They were spots of a steady light, which disappeared ~ 
after having shone six or eight seconds, They were not 
reddish, like those Ulloa believed to be the effect of an ex- 
cavation in the moon. (Phil. Trans., 1779, p- 116. Mém. 
_ de Berlin, 1788, p. 204.) To what cause must we refer these 
luminous appearances, ‘observed at different times on the 
lunar disk, during an eclipse of the Sun? The spots that I 
remarked beyond the solar disk could not be owing to the 
same optical illusion, that has made some observers believe 
they saw a satellite of Venus, in which a few even imagined 
they perceived phases. 


Nore B, 


I shall here insert the satisfactory and ingenious explana. 
tion, that Mr. Arago has given of the phenomenon of twink- 
ling, and which has not yet been made public, The follow- 
ing is the note, that this learned philosopher had the kind- 
ness to write for me. 

“The natural philosophers and astronomers, who have 
turned their attention to the twinkling of the stars, have almost 
all neglected the most remarkable circumstance, perhaps, of 
the phenomenon, I mean the sudden and frequent changes 
of colour, by which it is constantly accompanied. The pro- 
gress, which the physical theory of light has made within 
these few years, will enable us, I believe, to connect the 
explanation of this curious fact with the law of interferences, 
discovered. by Dr. Young, 

“ According to the experiments of this illustrious philoso- 


539 


pher, two rays of homogeneons light, arriving at the same 
point of space by two ways little different, add or neutralize 
themselves, according as the difference of the two ways has 
this, or that value. The differences, which accord with the 
neutralization of rays of different tints are so sensibly un- 
equal, that the result of the interference, or mixture of two 


white pencils of light, should always be accompanied by a 


manifest coloration. Experience has_ moreover shown us 
see Annales de Chimie et de Physique, tom. i, p.199), that, in 
seeking the place where two pencils are capable of influ 
encing each other, it is not sufficient to consider merely the 
difference of the ways they have traversed; but it is necese 
sary also to attend to the unequal refractive powers of the 
mediums they have traversed. This admitted, it is easy 
to demonstrate, that the rays emitted from the same place, 
collected in the focus of a small lens, vibrate in concert, or 
pnite together, if they have all traversed mediums of the same 
density, or equal refractive power; and the same mode of 
reasoning shows, that, on the contrary, an unequal refractive 
power must, according as we suppose it more or less consi- 
derable, occasion, in the same focus, the neutralization of 
some class or other of coloured rays. If we apply these 
considerations to the twinkling of stars, we shall find that, if 
all the rays of light, which arrive at the different parts of the 
pupil, constantly traverse atmospheric strata of equal den- 
sity, the image of the star will always be equally intense, 
‘and of the same colour; while in the contrary supposition, 
it’s colour and brilliancy,may vary every instant. The 
chances of twinkling will be much less numerous for a star at 
the zenith, under the same circumstances, than for one but 
little above the horizon. In our climates they will be less 
than under the tropics, where heat is more uniformly distri- 
buted in the strata of the atmosphere. The variations of 
intensity will be more easily perceived in stars, of the first 
magnitude, where they will be attended with a change of 
colour more striking than in small stars; and in white stars, 


540 


than in those which are naturally coloured. All these cire 
cumstances, if I be not mistaken, agree with observation.” 


NOTE C, 


In following the method T have indicated (Chap. X, p- 
528 of the present volume) for estimating the intensity of 
the light of the stars, there is no reason to fear, that a 
change of inclination in the mirrors should have any sensible 
influence on the quantity of light reflected. This influence is, 
without doubt, considerable, when light is reflected by a 
transparent glass; but it is almost null, when the rays are 
reflected by a glass silvered on the back. Hence it follows, 
that, in order to compare two stars, and equalize their light, 
we can bring into the field of the teleseope such as are at 
very considerable angular distances, The following are the 
results of my investigations, placing om the astrometer stars 
of the first magnitude, between 80° and 100°; those of the 
second magnitude, between 60° and 80°; those of the third, 
between 45° and 60°; . those of the fourth, between 30° and 
45°; and those of the fifth, between 20° and 30°. 


SIMs (oo sc ta TOO? 
Canopus = - - gg 
@ Centauri- ~ - - og 
Achernar - ~~ 94 
Pap Wentary. a cee 93 
Fomalhaut - 
Rigel ~- - 90 
Procyon - 88 
Betelgueuse 86 
e Canis majoris 83 
P ipa ing 8L 
@ Gruis. 5 3 81 


x Pavonis - - 
@ Gruis) -. - 
& Canis majoris 
« Leporis - - 
« Ramphasti - 
& Leporis - - 
« Columbe ~- 
Beer en a 
a Canis majoris 
a Phoenicis = 
y Gruis + - 
¢ Canis majoris 
« in the Indian 
€ Canis majoris 


Yt is more difficult to determine whether « in the Indian 
have half the light of Sirius, than to recognize whether « in 
the Crane be nearer the brilliancy of Sirius than that of 
« in the Indian. Comparing Betelgueuse and « in the Pea- 
cock to « in the Crane, we find, that Betelgueuse must be 
placed between « of the Crane and Sirius, and « of the Pea- 
cock between » in the Crane, and « in the Indian. The 
narrower the limits, the more ‘easy it is to avoid mistakes; 
especially if we try to arrive at the same numerical result by 
two different ways. For example, « in the Crane and Pro- 
cyon may be compared either directly; or by equalizing 
with a reflecting instrument the light of Procyon and Ca- 
nopus, and of Canopus and of « in the Crane; or lastly, by 
comparing a in the Crane and Procyon through the inter- 

_medium of Rigel and Sirius. Herschell classes the stars of 
. the Great Dog in the following order, a, s, 6, 2,”. In the 
Crane there is at present much less difference between « and 
@ than between B and y. Respecting the relative intensity 
of the light of Sirius and Canopus, the opinions of astrono- 


mers who have visited the equinoxial. zone have been singu- » 
larly divided. I believe I have determined by a great many 


542 
combinations, that Sirius is as much brighter than Canopus, 


as « Centauri is brighter than Achernar. JI hope to be able 
to pursue these investigations, 


note D. 


The following is an extract of the observations on the mii- 
rage, made in 1799 and 1800, during my stay at Cumana, 
as I noted them in my Astronomical Journal. I could not 
at that time be acquainted with the theory of Mr. Monge, 
and the experiments of Messrs. Brandes, Wollaston, and 
Tralles. Those of the celebrated English philosopher were 
made at the same period as mine. Mr, Vince contented 
himself with following with his telescope the phenomena of 
supension, without determining the magnitude of the images, 
and the depression of the horizon of the sea. These deter- 
minations were also wanting in the researches of Mr. Buesch 
at Hamburg (Tractatus duo optici argumenti); and of the 
Abbé Gruber (Ueber Stralenbrechung und Abprallung des 
Lichts, 1793). Though in 1800 I had only a vague idea of 
the different circumstances, which modify the mirage, I did 
not neglect to measure the angles of \depression of the hori- 
zon, the breadth of the interval between the horizon and the 
suspended object, the temperature of the sand, above the 
surface of which the rays of light passed, and that of the air 
and of the water. 1 examined the influence of the figure of 
the small islands on their more or less complete suspension ; 
the circumstances where the suspension takes place without 
double images; and at length the changes, which the rising 


or setting sun occasions in the appearances of these extraor- 
dinary refractions. (See vol. ii, p. 196; and chap. xi, p. 
358 of the present vol.) : 

« Cumana, lat. 10° 27/ 52”. Terrace of the house of Don 
Pasquel Martinez, which I have inhabited since my return 


545 


from the Rio Negro. I discern from it the same objects, as 
T perceived from my former dwelling, near the Rio Manza- 
nares. J sce on the south the mountains of the Brigantine, 
the Tataraqual, and the whole chain of the mountains of 
New Andalusia; on the north-west, the group of islands 
lying between the ports of Cumana and Nueva Barcelona, 
the Caraccas Islands, Picuita, and Boracha. Distance of 
these islands from ten to fifteen miles. Bird’s quadrant with 
a double division, carefully verified by a spirit level and 
plumbline. The instrument is placed on a thick wall. I 
constantly employed the division into 96°; every degree of 
which is equal to 56’ 15”. The vernier subdivides the de- 
grees into 120 parts. The exror of collimation was deter- 
mined by the latitude of the place, and by comparison with 
a sextant of Ramsden’s. It amounts to 8/ 40” (sexag. div.) 
to be added to the zenith distances. The object-glass of the 
quadrant is 124 feet 11 inches above the level of the sea. 
In order to be more certain, that no accident influences the 
angles of depression and of suspension, I measure every 
time the angle of altitude of a tower (A), which from it’s 
elevation and proximity cannot be sensibly affected by the 
changes in the horizontal refractions. 

<The first of September, 1800, at 23" 10/, the points of 


the islands, and capes of the neighbouring continent, all ap- 


pear elevated, suspended, Dollond’s telescope, magnifying 
65 times. Therm. in the open air, in the shade, 22°6° R.; 
Deluc’s hygrometer, 452°; cyanometer, 20°; A (or tower 
serving as a rectification of the instrument), 94° 31/ 3/7 ; Bs 
or eastern cape of the island of Caraccas, 95° 526, 25% iG, 
or summit of the small island Picuita, 95° 56/ 30’; D, or 
base of the island Picuita, 95¢ 58/ 23”; E, or height of 
the island of Boracha, 95° 467; F, or depression of the hori- 
zon of the sea, 95° 58/30’. The sea water, 21:4°; the 
sand of the plains between the town and sea, 30 8° R. 

“ The third: of September, 19" in the morning, Therm, 
21° R. Hyg. 48°, Cyan. 14°. 


A 94° 31’ 
B 95° 51! 4507 
C 95° 55/ 24" 
D_ 95° 58/21” 
E 985° 46! 
F 95° 59! 


“In the evening at six; cloudy sky; it is going to rain. 
The air extremely transparent. The islands appear much 
wearer. Therm. 21°7° R. Hyg. 49:2°, 

D_ 95* 55’ 30” 
E_ 95° 46! 15” 


“‘ The fourth of September, at 5in, Cloudy; air very trans- 
parent. Therm. 22°5°. Hyg. 41:2°. The water of the sea: 
at it’s surface 21°8°, White sand on the shore, 28°5°. 


94° 31’ 6 
95° 527157 
95° 557 397” 
95° 58’ 6” 
95° 46’ 157” 
95° 58/ 


“ All the capes suspended, but the suspended part is only 
five or six minutes in length. Picuita is entirely in the air, 
it’s apparent length 0° 1175”. At sunset, the interval be- 
tween the base of the island and the horizon of the sea di- 
minishes, as the atmosphere gets darker. When the disk of 
the Sun is hidden behind very: dark clouds, the centre of 
Picuita rests on the horizon; the extremities of the island 
are then alone suspended. The Sun reappears in all it’s 
splendour, though only at an altitude of four degrees, and 
the whole of the island is elevated again; it is entirely sus- 
pended, as well at it’s centre, which forms a small convexity, 
as at it’s two extremities. No double image, only suspen- 
gion. After the setting of the Sun, Picuita is still suspend> 


545 


éd. ‘J examine it with Dollond’s large telescope. It is al- 
ready so dark, that I cannot without some difficulty read 
the divisions on the limb of the instrument. The ground is 
no doubt getting colder; but I still perceive air (an. aérial 
space) between the depressed horizon of the sea and the base 


of the island. 

“The fifth of September. During the morning twilight. 
Therm. 21°3°. Hygr. 452°. The Sun’s disk not yet visi- 
ble, and already the whole of Picuita appears suspended in 
the air. Twilight very feeble. (In what follows I have in- 
serted after the degrees the hundred-and twentieth parts, as 
they appeared on the quadrant.) fi 

A 94 62 
B 95° 103°7 

C 95° 111-2 

D 95° 115°9 

E 95° 93 

F 95° 117-7 

“ Three in the afternoon. Therm. 23:°2e R. Hyg. 36:28 
Deluc. Cyan. 22°. 

B 95° 1053 
C 95° 112-7 
D 95° 1175 
E 95¢e 93 

F 95° 1175 

** Six in the afternooz. The Sun is only four degrees 

high. Therm, 22°89 R. Hyg. 365°. 
94° 62:2 
950 1045 
95° 111°3 
95? 116 
95° 92°7 
95° 1163 

«« During the setting of the Sun, the horizon is oscillating. 

Picuita sinks, and is no longer suspended, The depression 


VOL. HI ‘26 


546 


of the horizon, at the moment of the sun’s setting, 95* 


115°7; and twelve minutes after, during the twilight, 95% 
114-7. .C, or Picuita, 95° 112. Still later, C, 95° 111:3. 
F 95° 1163. There can be no error in ‘these observations, 
for the signal A remains at the same height, while the hori- 
zon of the sea undergoes such rapid changes. On other days, 
Ihave seen the small islands rest on the horizon a little before 
the setting of the sun. The setting does not always occasion 
the same change of temperature, and of the terrestrial re- 
fractions. 

“ The 24th of September. Since the 18th, sky constantly 
cloudy. The weather changes in the night of the 23d. Great 
transparency, the stars very brilliant, but no twinkling, even 
at the horizon, The 24th great dryness. Hyg. at 21" morn- 
ing, 32° Deluc (67 Sauss.). Therm: 21:5° Reaum. Depres- 
sion of the horizon, the greatest [ ever observed. Water of 
the sea, 22°, The arid soil of the shore, 82:7°. Boracha is 
entirely.in the air. The sky very blue. Cyan.21, Small 
fishing-boats suspended, swimming in the air, three or four 
minutes above the horizon of the sea, which is extremely well 
defined. One. of the boats, viewed through the telescope, 
presents an inverted image. 

A 94° 62 
95° 106 
95° 1162 
95° 93-2 
96° 12, consequently near 8/ greater than 
on the 4th of September. 


“ Picuita appears often double, and inverted during the 
remainder of the day. The inverted image is as large and 
as high as the direct image. This last is entirely suspended ; 
but the inverted. image, the intensity of the light of which is 
very weak, trenches on the horizon of the sea: it covers a 
portion of the last strata of the ocean, At 22" in the morn- 
ing, therm. 23°5°; hyg. 31:5°. 


A 94° 62:3 
C 95° 112 
F 96° 0 


«* At noon the depression of the horizon is still 96° 1; 


Dead calm. 

« Onthe 25th and 26th of September, the horizon, shining 
with light, oscillating three or four times in the space of an 
hour. The depression of the horizon is sometimes%5° 118, 
sometimes 96° 4, without any change in the meteorological 
instruments, in the place where Bird’s quadrant is. The 
changes no doubt take place in the intermediary strata of air, 
and in the temperature of the water and of the ground, which 
radiate heat. I think I perceive, that the changes of de+ 
pression are announced by a variation of colour. Without 
any alteration in the azure colour of the sky, the horizon of 
the sea separates into two bands. I see a streak ofa deeper 
colour than the rest; all that is farther off than this streak 
grows paler, and at length completely disappears; and all 
that is nearer than the streak acquires a deeper colour. The 
island of Picuita is already suspended. It’s. foot (it’s inferior 
limit) does not change; but progressively, as the streak be- 
comes the horizon, and as that part of the sea behind the 
streak disappears, the apparent suspension of the island 
augments. It seems to retire farther off from the hori- 
zon; while it is rather the horizon, that has retired from 
zhe island. Before the formation of the streak : D.95° 1163; 
F. 95°119. A quarter of an hour later, after the zone 
behind the streak has become invisible, I find D. 95° 1163; 
F. 96° 4:8. By degrees the anterior zone, which forms 
the horizon, grows paler in it’s turn, and the portion of sea 
behind the streak reappears. You would say, that this gains 
in colour what the other loses. Fis again 95°118. D. 
remains invariably 95° 116°5. The part which has reap- 
peared acquires a deep blue tint: the nearer part, on the 
eontrary (that which formed the horizon, when the depression 

2N 2 


548 


was 95°119) is quite white. I have observed this oscil- 
jation for several days. ~The variations of colour are’ the 
prognostics of a change in the depression. Ought we not to 
admit, that the luminous rays sent to us by the most distant 
part of the sea, that which grows paler, are inflected in such 
a manner, during their passage through the inferior strata of 
the atmosphere, that in their convex curvature toward the 
surface of the Earth, they are confounded with the rays of 
the nearer stratum of the sea? We can judge only from the 
direction of the rays; and those rays, which really arrive 
from the most distant strata of the water, being inflected, 
appear to us to belong to the nearest. It is this circumstance, 
which occasions the appearance of streaks, and which aug- 
ments that intensity of colour or brightness, remarked in the 
new horizon. 

“ All these phenomena are equally observable in the bar~ 
ren steppes of Caraccas, and on the borders of the Oroonoko, 
in those places where sandy plains surround the river, We have 
frequently seen the mirage this year, 1800, between Calabozo 
and San Fernando de Apure; and at the Oroonoko, to the north 
of the Mission of Encaramada. The litile hills of San Juan and 
Ortiz, the chain called Galera, appear suspended, when seen 
from the steppes, at three or four leagues distance. The 
sand, at noon, was heated (in the sun) as high as 42° Reau- 
mur, At eighteen inches above the surface, the thermometer 
kept at 32° Reaum. At six feet (in the shade) it marked 


29°5° R. Palm-trees, standing single in the Llanos, ap- 
peared to be cut off at bottom: it seemed as ifa stratum of 
air separated them from the ground. The plains, destitute 
of vegetation, appeared to be meers, or lakes. Itis the illu- 
sion so common in the African deserts. At the Mesa de 
Pavones, in the middle of the steppes of Caraccas, Mr. Bon- 


pland and I saw cows suspended in the air. ‘Distance one 
thousand to'ses. Measuring with the sextant, the breadth of 
the aérial interval, we found the animal’s feet elevated above 
the soil 3/20”. Simple snspension, no double image. Iwas 


549 


assured,: that horses had been seen, near Calabozo, suspended 
and inverted, without exhibiting any direct image.” 

All that precedes was written at Cumana, toward the end 
ef 1800. The last phenomenon was reported to me by per- 
sons of good authority. It appears to me analogous to that 
described by Mr. Vince, which Mr. Biot has so well ex- 
plained in his “ Recherches sur les Réfractions extraordi-~ 
naires,’ 1810, p. 239, fig. 40 bis. Two images of a ship 
were seen, the uppermost of which was inverted. In the 
work I have just quoted, Mr. Biot has discussed a part of the 
measurement I took during my stay in the torrid zone. The 
following is the reduction of the zenith. distances (ancient 


sexag. division, for the days of the greatest suspension. 


/ 


90 6 48 


Depression 
90 6 44 | 90 7 34 
90.6 48 | 90 6 51 


of the horizon 
of the Sea 


065 


} 
2 


907 6|90 7 43 


ré 
& 


Co 


S 
xt 
r 
©. 
S 
o>) 
SS 
ud 
~ 
= 
° 
=) 
SD 


Basis 
or Foot of 
Picuita. 


Summit 
f the Island 
Picuita. 
90° 57237 
90 5 20 
90 4 23 
90 4 36 
90 4 33 
26 


90 4 


0) 
: 


Summit 
of the Island 
Boracha 

89° 55/3 

89 55 33 
89 55 30 
89 55 47 
89 56 0 
89 56 0 


6° AS 


6° = 
Ath of September *5* $ 


3d of September 19" - 
at Gn - 


Evening twilight - | - 


Later 
24th of September 21" 


OBSERVATIONS 
2d of September 23" - 
5th of Sept. twilight - 


590 


On examiring the angles of altitude, under which the sum- 
mits of the islands of Boracha and Picuita are seen, we find, 
that the extent of the variations decreases with the magnitude 
of the angles. The oscillations of the horizon were 9 57; 
those of the summit of Picuita, 2725”; those of the summit 
of Boracha, 0/27’". The real depression of the horizon, in- 
dependent of any refraction, ought to be 5/29”: I found it 
between 6’ 10 and 14/17. In all these cases the refrac- 
tion was negative; that is to say, the trajectories described 
by the luminous rays were convex toward the surface of 
the water, at least in their inferior part. We find too, 
that the apparent base of the island of Picuita was not al- 
ways placed above the apparent horizon of the sea. It some- 
times came down to the same height, as on the 5th of Septem- 
ber at sunset. The island, of course, then appeared resting 
on the horizon. Sometimes the bases of the island appeared 
even lower than the apparent horizon of the sea, as on the 

_ 4th of September ; and the surface of the sea was seen then a 
little beyond the island. “ During these variations the tra- 
jectories of the luminous rays were convex toward the sea, at 
Jeast in their inferior part, as the depression of the horizon 
proves; but the point of contact of the limiting trajectories 
with the surface of the sea was more or less distant from the 
eye; and it was this circumstance that produced the variations 
observed in the suspension of the islands, which were seen 
sometimes more distant, sometimes nearer than the limit.” 
Biot. Recherch,; p. 216, 217, 219. 


The influence of the rising and setting of the sun, which is 


So apparent in my observations on Picuita, confirms what 
Legentil perceived during his abode at Pondicherry. This 
distinguished traveller constantly saw, during the winter, the 
horizon of the sea descend thirty-six seconds, when the first 
ray of the sun began to appear. The sun rose above the appa 
rent horizon, as if it rose out of Chavos. Biot, p. 225. See also 
my Recueil d’Obs. Astronomiques, tom. 1, p. 153. 

I frequently remarked, that the two capes of the island of 


551 


Boracha were irregularly elevated. The suspended part was 
at the northern cape five minutes long, and at the southern 
scarcely two minutes. The first of these capes looks toward the 
ocean, while the southern side is opposite the continent, and 
near the island Picuita, which radiates heat during the day. 
« When the sea is warmer in these latitudes than the air, 
the difference of their extreme temperatures must always be 
less on the southern, than on the northern side, whence re- 
sults‘a less negative refraction, and consequently a smaller 
suspension.” Biot. p. 238. 

During the course of my observations on the coast of Ca- 
mana, and in other observations made on the coast of the 
Pacific Ocean at Lima, [had carefully attended to the influ- 
ence of the drcailth of the object on the phenomenon of sus- 
pension. I thought I had found: 1st, that in islands with a 
convex summit, the centre of the island reposes on the hori- 
zon, while the extremities are elevated. 2dly, that of two 
islands of similar form, two of a parallelopiped figure for ex- 
ample, the longest island will be elevated only toward it’s 
ends, while the shortest will be entirely suspended. The 
fine experiments of Messrs. Biot and Mathieu on mirage 
have perfectly elucidated the causes of all these pheno- 
mena, .Whena rocky island does not appear like a wall of 
rocks perpendicularly cut at the two extremities, but is ele- 
vated at the céntre, it is ouly the part of the sky that re- 
poses on it’s extremities, those strata of air that appear as if 
nearer the horizon, that can exhibit the phenomenon of 
mirage. The aérial band, the reflected sky, will not be seen 
under the centre of the island, in that place where it is the 
most elevated. The same thing will happen, when of two 
objects of similar form one has a greater length in it’s lateral 
dimensions. ‘‘ According to the theory of extraordinary re- 
fractions near the horizon, the caustic surface rises.as it’s dis- 
tance augments. The lateral extremities of an object, being 
farther off the spectator than it’s centre, will then be cut by 


the caustic at a greater elevation. If the island have little 


width, the difference will be imperceptible, and the whole 


island will appear almost equally suspended in the air. But 


if we observe an island rather long, the borders of which 


belong to distances much more considerable than it’s centre, 
the difference of height of the caustic at these various dis- 
tances may become more apparent, and the lateral extremi- 


ties of the island will then alone he suspended. If the differ- 


ences of temperature gradually augment, and the point of 


contact of the limiting trajectory approach nearer the spec- 
tator, or, what is the same thing, if the spectator lower his 
position, the limiting trajectory may rise above the summit 
of the island, which will then appear entirely suspended in 
the air.” Biot, p. 212. Thus I find noted in my journal, on 
the 7th of September, on the coast near the mouth of the 
Rio Manzanares, at the foot of the Fuerte de la Bocea, therm; 
19° R.; hygr. 43-2°; height of the eye four feet three 
inches; at 19" in the morning, on the quadrant I had 
conveyed to the seaside, C. 95°-91'3. The bedy of the 
island rests on the horizon of the sea. The extremities alone 


are elevated. Water of the sea near the shore, 20-2° R. 
At 21", therm, 20:2° R.; hygr. 42°8°. C. 95° 91:8, but 
the whole of the island, the centre as well as the extremities, 
suspended. Water of the sea covering ashore heated by. the 
Sun, 21.8°. The sand 26° R. 

What has just been said, relative to the influence of the 


length and form of objects on the phenomena of suspension 
appears to me, to lead to the explanation of a curious pas- 


) i ed 


I 


sage of Theophrastus, in his book on the Prognosticks of 
Wind. ‘“ When the capes (or saliant parts of the coast) seem 
suspended in the air; or when, instead of one island, we think 
we percevve several, this phenomenon indicates a change of the 
south wiad. When the land appears to you black (detaching 
itself dark) you will have a north wind; if it appear white 
(detaching itself light) expect a south wind.” Theophr. de 
signs ventorum, 429, B. edit. Heinsii. Furlanus translates it 
thus : si promontoria sublimia, insuleye’ si ex una plures ap- 


5903 


parcant, austri mutationem indicant. When a distant island 
is of a height very unequal, it is the variations in the de- 
pression of the horizon, and not ‘the inverted image of the 
sky formed on the lowest. parts of the island, that make it 
look as broken, or divided into several’ small islands. If 
Theophrastus meant a multiplicity of images placed one be- 
neath the other, he would not have neglected to mention in- 
verted images. Aristotle in his Meteorologica, Tab. mi, eap. 
ix, p. 577 C, Daval’s edition, speaks also of the suspension 
of capes, and considers it as the effect of a refraction in con- 
densed air. 

In the course of my observations on the mirage, I carefully 
made a distinction between the very frequent eases, when 
there is suspension without inversion. Mr. Biot has related 
the circumstances, in which this phenomenon takes place. 
He shows (Rech. p. 261) that the inverted image may be 
yeduced to such small dimensions, as to become impercepti- 
ble. Respecting the variations of colour, to which the hori- 
zon of the sea is subject, and the prognosticks of a change of 
refraction derived from the bands or black streaks*, this phe- 
nomenon has not always the appearance of several horizons 
scparated by aérial intervals (Biot, p. 10, 151, 183 and 265). 
TL have never observed these intervals formed by the reflected 
air; I have merely seen that a great change in the depres- 
sion is preceded by the formation of streaks in that place, 
where the new horizon was about to be formed. I have 
proved above, (chap. iii, vol. ii, p. 67) that near the equator 
the surface of the sea is almost habitually 1° or 1°5° warmer 
than the surrounding air. This difference of temperature is 
considerable enough, to be looked upon as one cause of the mz- 
rage. Mr. Woltmann observed, that there was a double image, 


or simply suspension, on the banks of the Elbe, when the 
water was ouly two degrees of Fahrenheit (0°8° cent.) higher 
than the air. We cannot then be astonished, that the mirage 


See p. 547, 


d04 


is 80 comtnon under the tropics, where the rays reach ws 


gliding over the surface of the ocean. (Brandes, in Gilbert's 


Annal., tom. xvii, p. 175.) 

In the sanscrit, the phenomenon of the mirage is called 
mriga trichna, “ thirst or desire of the antelope,” no doubt 
because this animal, mriga, compelled by thirst, trichna, ap. 
proaches those barren plains, where, from the effect of the 
inflection of the rays, he thinks he perceives the undulating 


surface of the waters. 


WoTeE FE. 


The mean temperatures of the year indicate the tempera- 
tures that would exist in the various places of the globe, if 
the unequal quantities of heat emitted in different seasons, 
and at different hours of the day and night, were uniformly 
distributed in the space of a year. Since the latest inves- 
tigations of the heat of the interior of the Earth, at various 
latitudes and heights, we cannot consider as identical the 
mean temperatures of the lowest strata of the atmosphere 
and those of the stony crust of the globe. It has been often 
said, that the mean temperatures were suflicient to deter- 
mine by one single member the climates of different latitudes ; 
but this assertion is not perfectly accurate. To determing 
the climate, we must know the distribution of heat in differ- 
ent seasons of the year: and two places, as Milan, and Pe- 
kin for example, the mean temperatures of which (13°) are 
the same, may have, the first a winter of + 2°4°, and a sum- 
mer of 22°8°, and the second a winter of —3°, and a summer 
of 28°. It is true, that, wherever the mean temperature of 
the year is above 15°, we do not find a winter the mean heat 
ef which is below Ge. Joining by a curve (an isothermal) 
the places, the mean annual temperatures of which are the 


5095 


same, we discover, that the distribution of heat between 
summer and winter takes place according to fixed propor- 
tions ; that is to say, that the variations do not exceed cer- 
tain limits: but these oscillations, which I have recently ex- 
amined in a particular paper (Mém. de la Société @ Arcueil, 
tom. ii,) are still considerable enough, to have a sensible 
influence on the culture of the plants necessary to man. If 
we chose to characterize a vine-climate, it is not enough to 
say, that the mean temperature of the year must be above 
8-7° or 8°; we must add, that in order to have wine worth 
drinking, the winter must not be below + 1°, and the sum- 
mer not below 18°5° or 19°. Now on the New Continent, 
in the United States, the winters are lower than 0°, in 
those places, where the mean heat of the year does not ex- 
ceed 9°. On the isothermal line of 9°, we often see the 
thermometer fall to — 18° in the range of transatlantic cli- 
mates. 

It results from these considerations, that, to give an éxact 
idea of the climate of a place, we must determine, not only 
the mean of the year, of the seasons, and of the months, but 
also, the variations which take place at different hours of the 
day and night during a time of some extent. When we have 
a great number of observations to calculate from, I believe 
we ought to determine the annual mean, and’ the mean of 
each month, by taking the mean of fifteen years (consequent- 
ly by the help of 10950 partial observations); and then 
choose the month, the temperature of which is the nearest 
to that of the mean of fifteen years, to give as an example of 
the progress of the thermometer at different hours of the day 

.and night, This method of presenting the observations, as 
.,they have been successively made in the space of a month, 
appears to me preferable to adopting the rule of taking from 
10950 observations the mean of each day. To characterize 
a climate, we must not deprive it of what I would venture 
to call its physiognomy, it’s particular features, the sudden 
fransitions from one temperature to another, the variations 


which are accidental but often repeated. It is according te 


these principles, that I have determined to publish in this 
narrative a part of the meteorological observations 1 made 
between the tropics at different heights. If we reflect on 
the situation of a traveller, who cannot observe at fixed 
hours, and who must divide his attention among a great 
number of objects at a time, we must not be surprised to 
find interruptions, where we could wish for a continued series 
of observations. I have added to the temperatures of Ca- 
raccas, those of Cumana, noted by Don Faustin Rubio. 
They are both expressed in degrees of Reaumur’s thermo- 
meter, divided into 80°. The instruments were placed in 
the open air, in the shade, remote from any reflection from 
walls or the ground. The hygrometer was that of Deluc; it 
has not been corrected by the temperature, so that it indi- 
cates only the apparent humidity. The observations at Cu- 
mana are preceded by a C, and belong to the same hours: 
for ex. the 28th of October the temperature of the air at Ca- 
raccas was, at noon 184°; at Cumana (in the suburb of the 
Guaiqueria Indians), according to a thermometer compared 
with mine, 23:2°. In order to avoid continually adding the 
words morning and evening, the time is reckoned according 
to the method of astronomers, so that here, as in the Journal 
of the voyage, vol. ii, p. 129—142, 22" answer to ten in the 
morning. 

Caraccas. Trinidad quarter; Lat. 10° 30’ 50’. Long. 69° 
25’. Height, 454 toises, Mean temperature of the year 
17:2° R. See above p. 458. 


557 


§ NOVEMBER. THERM. Whalebone 
E OBSERVATIONS. 


1799. Reaumur. HYGROM. | 


clear (C. 23'2°). 


fog. 


clear. 


clear (C. 21°7°). 


(C. 24°1°), 


blue (C. 213°). 


(C.. 24°). 
blue. 


blue (C. 22°2°), 


clouds very low. 


¥ December 
Be 
193 blue (C. 21-2”). 
214 
22 


blue (C. 24°), 


DECEMBER THERM. Whalebone 
OBSERVATIONS. 


1799. Reaumur. HYGROM. 


cloudy. 
(C, 23:5°). 
cloudy. 


rain. 


blue. 
wind violent, east. 


(C. 23-6), 


blue. 
(©. 21°79), 


azure (C. 202°), 


(C. 23°5°), 


fine moon-light. 
blue (C. 21-3), 


azure sky with clouds. 
cloudy. 


nN 
bo 


bo 
oOo wo 
WH to 


azure sky, windy, 
(C. 23°5°), 


a) 


blue. 
calm (C. 21°5°). 


m= & 


DECEMBER. THERM. Whalebone 
OBSERVATIONS. 
1789. Reaumur. HYGROM. 


fog. 
cloudy (C. 20°4°). 


blue. 
clouds (C. 23°19). 


blue. 


azure (C, 195°). 


Silla clear. 
(C. 23°2°), 


ce oe 


azure sky. 


(C, 21°7) 


blue. 
sun rising. 
cloudy (C. 20°). 


cloudy (C. 22°). 


fogey, 


DECEMBER, 


1799. 


THERM. 


Reaumur. 


Whalebone 


HYGROM. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


blue, with clouds. 
blue, calm. 

(C. 230), 

blue. 


cloudy. 


blue. 


cloudy (C. 22°8°). 


blue. 


serene (C. 20°), 


azure sky. 
ad, (C. 21°3°), 


blue (C. 22 6°). 


cloudy. 
(CG. 213°). 


cloudy (C. 20°8°). 


cloudy. 


(C. 217°). 


DECEMBER. 


1799. 


Q3't 
0 


1 
2 
4, 


VOL. III. 


THERM. 


Reaumur. 


561 


Whalebone 


HYGROM. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


Silla clear. 


azure sky. 
Silla foggy. 
(C; 22-6). 


very low clouds. 
clondy. 


cloudy. 
(C.. 21°7-). 


blue (C. 20°4°). 
very low clouds. 


(Cs 22°6°). 
very fine. 


Silla clear. 


(C. 21°30). 


cloudy. 


(C. 23.10). 
cloudy. 


DECEMBER. THERM. 


Reaumur. 


Whalebone 


HYGROM. 


OBSERVATIONS. 


(C. 20°) cloudy. 


cloudy. 


(€. 22:6"), 
cloudy. 
azure sky. 


21; é | 
21 | 145 53°7 | cloudy. 


(C. 20°4°). cloudy. 


wind violent, east, 
(C20-a>), 
cloudy. 

calm, 


cloudy. 
(C. 21-0°) rain. 


(C, 20°4°) cloudy. 
wind violent, east. 


cloudy. 
(C. 22°6°),. | 


azure sky. 


(C. 21°8°) cloudy. 


563 


DECEMBER. THERM. Whalebone 


1799. Reaumur. | HyGROM. 


21. 


rain. 
(C.22'6°). 


cloudy. 
(C. 213°), 


cloudy. 


(G..23°1°). 


cloudy, 


(C. 213°), 


cloudy. 


a 
WIIAHD O 
30 


tw 6 OM 


some clouds, 


Se oe ep 


ir we 
at aw 


blue. 


Go 


— 


es 


_ — 
to mG st 
Pw Re S 


I = 
1) 


DECEMBER. THERM. Whalebone 


1799. Reaumur. HYGROM. 


24. 


wind violent, east. 


calm. 
cloudy. 


cloudy. 
rain. 
cloudy. 


cloudy. 


cloudy. 


blue. 


cloudy. 


some clouds, 
blue. 
Silla clear. 


blue. 


DECEMBER. 


1799. 


[S) 
o 
> 


hm DD 2 


Poh ee WD 


THERM. 


Reaumur. 


Whalebone 
OBSERVATIONS. 
HYGROM. 


foggy. 


a little blue. 


\ 


blae. 
starlight. 
cloudy. 


azure sky. 


azure sky. 


cloudy. 


blue. 


| 


DECEMBER. THERM. Whalebone 
OBSERVATIONS, 
Reaumur. HYGROM,. 


23°} 175° 
0 18:2 
1 18 5 
3 18-0 blue. 
4} 18-0 

103 15:2 i cloudy. 


Ist. Jan. 
9 ae 9 azure sky. 


113 : | completely cloudy. 


azure sky (C, 28°5°).|. 
azure sky. 
| cloudy (C. 217°). 


blue. 
(C. 22:2). 


blue (C. 21°3°). 


blue. f 
(C. 235%). 
cloudy. 


cloudy (C. 21°7,). 


49°2 cloudy (C. 21°3). 
48-4 


JANUARY. THERM. Whalebone 
OBSERVATIONS. 
1800. Reaumur. HYGROM. 


—_———— ae 


blue (C. 23°0°). 


starlight (C. 21°4°). f 


blue (C. 22°6°). 


cloud y- 


| starlight. 


blue (C. 22°7°). 


starlight (C, 21°3°). 


some clouds. 


blue (C. 22°6°). 


jon tie Oe 


starlight (C. 20°4°). 


= 
i) 


| 


e) 
S 


blue, (C. 18°6"). 


(Gs 22 2°), 
blue. 


we 


aie 


cloudy. 
cloudy -(C. 20°8°). 


roan 
mem On OO = 


68 


JANUARY, THERM. Whalebone 


OBSERVATION S. 
1800. Reaumur. HYGROM. 


aia 
~ 
a 


cloudy. 
blue (C. 229°), 
cloudy. 


i) 


rs 
Dl dome 


ee | 


starlight (C, 21:3), 


blue (C. 20°0°). 


Catia wind (C. ¢ 2:2°), 


- 
cloudy. 


‘loudy (C. 21°39), 


starlight (C, 21°3°), 


iS) 
_ 


azure sky, 


(€. 28-5°). 


CO me 


— Or 
WE top 


azure sky, 
cloudy (C. 21+4°), 


_ 


blue (C, 226°) 


| blue (C. 21°2°), 


569 


Observations made simultaneously at Cumana and Carace 
cas, at the extremities of a column of air nine hundred me- 
tres (four hundred and fifty toises) high, appear to me very 
interesting. Though the port of Cumana is farther than 
La Guayra from Caraceas, this port presents a point of com- 
parison much more certain. The air circulates more freely 
round Cumana, and it’s temperature is less influenced by 
local causes. Comparing, among the whole of the observations, 
twenty-one fine days, chosen indiscriminately in the months 
of November, December, and January, I find, on calculating 
the mean temperature of each day from the maximum and 


minimum observed, the following results : 


i 
| 
a 
1 a 
be 
|i 


Mean Temperature of the Differences. 


days at 
pi blake aces 
ane Reaumur. 


Cumana. Caraccas. 


22-9° 
22°6 
22°6 
22°6 
21°8 
21-7 
21°7 
217 
21°3 
21°6 
21:9 
20°8 
22°4 
22°0 
21-7 
20°4 
20°8 
21°1 
21:0 


571 


The mean temperatures of twenty-one fine days differed 
at Cumana 3°4°; at Caraccas, 3° cent. therm. The least 
differences between the mean temperatures of the two places 
did not always take place, when the weather was hottest 
at Caraccas; they oscillated between 4°8°, nnd 82°. The 
mean of all the differences was 6°8° (5°5° Reaumur), nearly 
one hundred and thirty-two metres to a centesimal degree. 
The valley of Caraceas is colder than it should be for an 
elevation of nine hundred metres, and this circumstance 


renders the decrement of heat extremely rapid. The mean 


of all my observations made between the tropics gave me, 
for the first strata of air comprised between the level of the 
sea and one thousand metres of elevation, one hundred and 
seventy metres corresponding to I° of the cent. therm., or 
ene hundred and nine toises to 1° of Reaumur. 


SUPPLEMENT. 


The desire I had manifested to see the Archipelago of 
the Canary Islands examined with respect to geology, and 
natural philosophy, and the geography of plants, by tra- 
vellers who could make along stay there, has been lately 
realized. Mr. Leopold von Buch is now preparing an ex- 
tensive work, the result of his laborious investigations on 
Teneriffe, and the neighbouring Islands. To this great geo- 
gnost, and to the researches of Mr. Smith, who has lately 
fallen a victim to his zeal for the sciences in the expedition 
on the river Congo, I am indebted for the Physical Map of 
the Peak of Teneriffe. I have not hesitated to substitute more 
accurate notions in the place of those communicated to me by 
Mr. Broussonnet, (see vol. i, p. 260—271). Mr. von Buch 
distinguishes, 1st, the region of African forms, 0—200 toises; 
2d, the region of vines and grain, 200—480 toises; 3d, 
the region of the laurels, regvo sylvatica, 4830—680 toises ; 
4th, the region of the pinus canariensis, 680—980 toises ; 
5th, the region of the retama, spartium nubigenum, 980—1730 
toises. The retama is found only at Teneriffe. Its infe- 
rior limit is at 1000 toises. The mountains of all the other 
islands, excepting Palma, are not high enough to enter this 
limit, and the summit of the Pico de lo Muchachos in 
Palma is composed only of naked and barren rocks, The 
gramineous plants are very rare; and, as Mr. von Buch ob- 
serves, they do not form a particular zone, The plants 


VOL. Ill. Qp 


574 


that do not belong to the Peak of Teneriffe, but which crow 
at the indicated heights on the mountains of the neighbour- 
ing islands, are placed between two parentheses. An S 
(Smith) is added to the new species, which will be published 
by Messrs. von Buch and Smith. A cross placed at the end 
of a word marks the superior limit of a plant, that at which 
it ceases to grow. 

I shall mention some other ideas, for which L am indebted 
to the communications of Mr. von. Buch, and which will 
serve to rectify what I have stated in the second chapter of 
this Narrative. I eagerly seize every opportunity of rec- 
tifying this work from the report of learned persons, who 
have visited the same places, and who have remained in 
them longer than myself. “The Canarian pine (vol. i, p. 
268) is certainly a new species, till now unknown to the bo« 
tanists of Europe. The dragon-tree (ib. p- 142) does not 
appear to belong to the East-Endies, as Linneus believed; 
it is found wild near Iguesta, 170 | or 200 toises above the 
level of the ocean, The thorny plant of Lancerota, which Mr. 
Broussonet: had taken for a sonchus (ib. p. 236 note), is the 
prenanthes spinosa. The volcano of Lancerota, which T had 
judged to be 300 toises high from angles which I took when 
under sail (ib. p. 82), is the Corona, the elevation of which, 
according to anextremely accurate barometrical measurement 
is 292 toises.. The height of the town of Laguna which had 
never been exactly determined (ib. p. 120; and vol. ii, toe 
178) is 264 toises. No circular wall of lava prevents enter- 
ing the crater of the Peak.of Tenerifie on the northern and 
western side, What I said of this wall and the analogy be- 
tween the summit of the Peak and that of Cotop axi (vol. i, p- 


169) does not appear to be aceurate. No subsequent ob- 
servation has confirmed the assertion of Mr. Broussonet (ib, 
p- 235), that the island of Gomera contains a nucleus of gra- 
nite and mica-slate; but Mr. Escobar, a learned Spanish 
mineralogist, has found in the island of F ortaventura a block 
ef primitive syenitic rock, It is a mass, the basis of which 


575 


is feldspar, containing crystals of /hornblende. Mr, von 
Buch has discovered in the great Circus of the island of 
Palma, which he considers as the ancient cratére de souléve- 
ment, crater of eruption, another primitive rock. This also 
consists of a feld-spar basis, containing garnets and actinolite 
(strahlstein). In a neighbouring ravin isolated blocks of 
mica-slate with hornblende are observed. The gypseous and 
limestone formations of Laucerota and Fortaventura (ib. p. 
2.36) are strata subordinate to the formation of volcanic tufs. 
We even find theré beds of oolites. According to Mr. von 
Buch, to whom belong all the observations of this supple- 
ment, the mean temperature of Santa-Cruz in Teneriffe is 
71-8° Fahr., or 21°8° Centigrade.” 


In this Personal Narrative all the indications of tempera- 
ture are reckoned in the degrees of the centesimal thermome- 


ter, when the coatrary is not expressly noted. The Gene-: 


ric and specific names of plants printed in italics designate 


genera or species unknown before our journey, and described 


in. our Nova Genera et Species Plantarum Orbis Novi. 


IND OF VOL. IIl. 


W. Pople, Printer, 67, Chancery Lane. 


an et 


72305 


Heights of 
2200 ——4 § Pazcaro 


2150 — 
2100 |i Gpula. 
2050 — 
2000 ——_} 


1950 —1 8 Valladolid. in Mechoacaa 
igoo —_ 
1850 —B Zelaya. 
1800 — 


the valley of Santiago . 


Puy de Dome ./ 


pi) ee 
Mean temperature of 20° cent. 


Masatlan. 


the lowest limit of the Mexican pines 
tm the read to Acapulco 


1050 — 


1000 ——, 


la Venta de Estola 


the lower limit of the Mexican Oaks 


Wto de Pozuelos . 


the valley of Papagallo 


Ocean 


2 0 
Mean temperature 26° cent. 


oF THE VOL 


CPUS CAN CPL 


* Mechoacan lat29%9'/2/ N. Xl 
Joo a0, 7 


4 by Longman Hurst, Res, Oi 


AR 


Wthe above places, & 


fing 


Heights of the 


Cty of Mexia 


Maravatio 


areo 


Temascatio 


Guernavaca 


Qguasarco 


dlapa 


Vesuvius / 


the Bridge of Ivtla 


la Venta de 


alto 


the Valley of Peregrino 


are in Mexico 


la Moxanera 


del Lamaron 


ppt Vesuvius, 


1200 ‘Toises 
|— 250 
p—— loo 


1 1050 


G s 
ww r 
g : gy 
= = S 
= 2 Sy 
a as . 
s 5 &~ 8 
BR 
E BS 8 S38 : 
4 CRS SS 
8 ORS S 
£ g& 3-8 
Ey 98s Ra ¥ 
=] gR8 WS gs 
u 3S SS Sz 
n EX BS ex 
« ass 2d Sa 
~ ODS &S 8.8 
8 ¢ Ssh 8.3 
% gi Tes RR 
“& s§ SN ¥ 
8 a Ry os g8 
8 a pa | =f 
8 N = 4 8 
N 5 SS Fk AN 
S . SS SES 
S $2 hee Nes 
S$ 8 aN SS SS. 
x —~Q - Sk 33 aes 
| a SAY ss 
gs y SS AS 
Ss Q a mS 
NI xs eae = 
ae NES SS 
S& S SS gx 
SES . ate RSH 
® 4% 8 YM sy 
IS R R A ‘ 
Qf 
RN S Re Vee 
SW ~ Re 73 SS 
S'S 8 Se Sa 
a8 R AS eS 
3 8 : oe 8 
: LS Ee RES 
Sah 8S gs §S 
~PS8 ae § 2° 
Sy x is 
BmaiS S28 ses 
ESR SS S28 
ack 28 
=) ays 
Bs og 
‘ROS eon 
Sy B88 
my BSs8 
S 
ak&§ wes 
oR § wok 
ays “as 
mey 


Lart of the Playas, ground 
not raised up, gog t. 


SG eee: 


in thom the duthors sketch by DonJuanJose Rodrigues, at the Mexican School of Mines,in 1804. 


eS : 
Maromelritcal 


The Volcano of Jorullo and the Malpays tr the Meaican Province 0} Mechoacar latag%9//2).N. Xelong.103°52/5 Wrose out of the Ground w the Month of September 1750. 


: : 5 200 200 300 400, ; aS 
Saale of 400 Totses = = i t heed = | The Scale ofheaghts 


= to that of distances as 30 2 
London Publifhed Feb? 7 "184 by Longman Hurst, Res,0rme &Brown Paternoster Ron: 


Plains on which Indigo ts cultivated , 
the ground not raised up, og t. 


Metre 


23007 


2200 — 


2150 


2100 ——- 

2050 — 

2000 —_} 

i 1950 — 
igoo 
1850 — 
1800 —_ 
ls 
1700 —_, 
1650 — 
1600 ——} 
1550 — 
1500-——} 
1450 — 
1400 ——+ 
4350 — 
1300-—} 
1250 — 
1200 ——} 
50 — 
noo —j 


1050 — 


1000 ——} 


Heights of 
Pazcuaro 


Capula 


Valladolid. in Mechoacaa. 


<elaya. 


the valley of Santiago . 


Puy de Dome. 


y eer 
Mean temperature of 20° cent. 


Masatlan. 


the lowest limit of the Mexican pines 
wn the road to Acapulco. 


la Venta de Estola. 


the lower limit of the Mexican Oaks, 


Wto de Poruelos. 


the valley of Papagallo 


Mean temperature 26° cent. 


ton Py 


‘erpetual snow in Sweden / 810 t. 


0 
65 
etual snow trom lat.62° to 65° N. 


( according to von Buch.) 


lon Published 4 


» é 
1 Z ’ 
. 
i é 
| 
{ 
\ 
| ‘ 
| f 
Summit of Chimborazo (3350 t. e 
' . e 
i 
3000-4 Cotopaxt / 2993 t./ 3000 3000 
Popocatepetl / 2772 t. / | 
| Perpetual snow at 2460 t. PederAre visi AD t/ H a 
. Perpetual snow at 2350 t. a hi 
{ [| ay 
} i g.farm of Antisana, inhabited / 2101.t./ Cotter of Perote / 2076 t.) : U | 
q ee 2000-4 : 2000 | sg 200i ; 
i : 
| Mont-Perdu,in the Pyrenees (1763 t./ 
j Gty of QUITO /2492 &/ . 
verpetual snow atiz5oL . 
{ Gity of MEXICO /2668 ¢/ 
| if 
4000 1000 1000 Mont-d Or / 968 a} 3 1000. 
\ Perpetual snow in Sweden / 810 t./ 
i | Vesuvius / 615 t 
x Perpetisnow in Norway / 700 t./ 
MADRID (307 t/ 
, 
GENEVA /286 ¢. : 
\ = = y t : i t PSs 1 
‘ ° * 
j : ° 5 10 15° 20° age go? 95. 40° 45° 50° 55° 65° jo° 15° 
Perpetual snow under the Equator . Perpetual snow in lat.1g? NV. Perpetual snow trom lat.43° to 406° N. ; Perpetual snow trom lat.62° to 65° N. ] 
| ‘according to Bouguer & Humboldt) ( according to Humboldt) ( according: to Saussure & Ramond.) (according to von Buch.) 4 
\ | i 
| ° 4 
| 5 a : . e : : 
: ) : : z : 
: Bes = {7 5: A . 
e WV LAU OF z 7 Me Lilli hes 
i Cee EES POPU ATL MAE! . 


i London Published Febr:7"1 814 by Longman Hurst, hiees,0rme & Brown. Faterno ster how. 


ore mae SRY 
be. 


wich 
fe Q gay 
S illage’e (des Pidicns 
Ya et QoIMACOS oA 


ipa At 
fogs 


_tlato de 


Pas 
ae Todos Santos 


Ri 


Raudal ou Premier 
le Cataracts 


rio auto 


j PO a Os 


}7 S . 
Salivas 


Le apa aes 
| Aa 
ehaguas ~=Macucoé 


| > 


napalogs 7 
CL, 
La 


Cabiruma 
Arimena 


Adhd Piedra Bi 


[4 é Buenavista Ch. Pe) Nigel 
- A Or 4 


Amarizanos Thea 
] & Vie 
eashooe iS 
| 
Uy i Boge a 
| oy, RSIS oF THE : RLO et ee) 
| 


Whey) and ap art-of the a a 


PWM Hdl WU he MoiMidiias 


VEW on EN ADA, m 
Aillonon se 2 Obeetwite nee, Goutrual, 


, Cabanes dIndiens 
tt Sagidaqueres 
eee 4e0 the love one bale Vee de Loguta” 


fom Paris. 


brgman & C2 Paternoster Row. 


ne 


| 
' 


i 
j 


REFERENCES. 


Village ~Lde Bruras”™, 

Astronomical observation “ing 2) 

by M.de Humboldt. — de Sardineta © ae 

Gnomoracal observation aN ¢ 

by UM Cabri. “abe, (YG) pada. 4.954 


2, ak 2 


2, =e y : aber as 


a nm Lhe Waters which the 
Guardnalito ——~ fip Apure loses mingle 
~~ : . with those of the Rio 
: : Arauca & the Rio Sinaruco. 


di VqL1.4A DE _ARAUCA 


Hato de 
Todos Santos os 


Ss Rio Casanare 
shade sCuiloto : : Bes DES 
éBetoye yy ne ie = a 


eee. coe 
88 


be Arc oro 
i | ier = = Y \ SS S®'Salvador 


pio Arip ot? 


ee : om i 
AN RON trip Ri . 
Sa : ae 
PORPesidene a eee gre oe 
the Governor arian al 


® SF Rosalia de(abapuna 


OF Casanare & nae Rio , Tome 


a ota Aa é 


es oe Salivas ae 3 (Guanapalo 


an ¢ 5 » us 
4 Cabres IG - Rio Gwey - 

: ; he ; Lara, ff 
Rio Labo CLAWS, BOABTAS —-Nacuco ® Cea J). 


guaran ye x ‘ — — 


2 a § Guacasta 
IN II Surme ae Se OE 


ZL 
Casimena _€ Avimena 
SS — 


soaiy A * Buenavista 


Achaguas 


Chorotas 


WK vs ; . SS ° : 1 ZBLOE = . 7 
i 9 d 3 ] Ri SS S . P Amarizanos The sources of the Rivers Lomo 


& Vichada are unkown. 


Mu ‘ = 2S a 
’ 4 AS it nk: ae. Z i Cabullaro$ ~ [Laguna de, ny Lies», os Rap Seg fear 
ie iigee a Z Ted ag aS LOOT col ORS IE or THE Rio BV ies ) 
Fequerdii . a , Marayail : 


"Veeez, — £O are, ae, apart of the yy 


° Puerto 
da Marayal 


OF nine colonies on the banks of the Meta 

three (Macuco, Zurimena & Castinena ) were 

founded by the Jesuits ti 1730,1740 &1746, 

the six others inhabited by various tribes 

ting with the ; of Indians were founded by the Monks of 
y la Candelaria de S“Fe de Bogota (Reco- 


‘north latitude 
YY Lo sass letos de §. Augustin.) 


Cteey, ; 
CE Nn thy - : 
Cth towards the Guaviare 


_ (abanes dindiens 
SY Sag idaqueres 


Catitahiiieg “Uf he. ll VE 
C Mew on. 'RENADA,) 


‘ omnpuled foi ben OH riba ao Obs banal Wes by fouinates, 
Oo 
collecléd at thee Oronoer A Ate he Lhogula!), 
S 


L Ameanavent 


Falls s into oe O7 sae 
atter reuuting with the Atabupo 
under 4 £3" of norih latitude and jo? 


Longitude West from Paris. 


London Publefned Fant 1? 1818 by Longman & CoPaternoster Row. 


Se ee gee ee ER 


ORIMWTU 
be it st 


EXPLANATION. : eee 
A ib VILLA DHL PAO 


Crrims. 
Villagres. 
Fares, z 
: : * Mesa 


Settlements abandoned, de Guanip: Le 


Astronomical observations made by 
AL de Humboldt The inclination of the : 
Compass was tn i600 at SiThomas LANOS DE) BARCELONA 


in New Guiana, 


Tadlans Kod ae Cnarecos. 


| ences Sue tartan 
| } of the Indians of 
i the Guartco 


| I eo eee amare eran. 4 COURSE 0 oF THE (ORC DONO KO,) 
& se no E es : a y He Pom the. Mouth GF the fe 

| | j 1 Ma “ ce ey é ye ) \Ree South east by the Cerros Gy WO fy, ? Va Vj LS UIE? . 

| a aoe DO its . sateen: Amoco and du 00 ¢ CHIL UC = ies li) 

| eS ~ n “ i yyy urvielago to the sources of 


the Brevato aud the Vertuart. 22) ee O (Con mpriled ao). mA eg: 
from Le De be ce Vad. OF es e fot 
\ FZ : ) 


\ on pe oh 


Spohlomtorhne hg 


London Pubiifhed Fan! 10 1818 by Longman ke Paternoster Row. 


———fretomchemerterat 


inti =—— nde —= reer 


Llai : 


Maia of the Eafter un part of the 
7 Cer ROVINCE oF VERINA,) 
between the? 


ORONOOKO the ABU RA &the RIO META 
es Ue, Compuled 2 ie 


foo A lronomicall Tha reales’ mealétisles 
Meadows with scattered collected on the tpot 


groups of Lalm Trees > x00 By O 0 o™~ 
R HUMBOLDT. 


}] Zhewe Plaing” 
Non the Wast | 
Whe Village a 
\Wdacion de Aj 
included in G 
oe the Lrovirg 
Nlsanare. 


aS. 
REFERE SY 
CITIES 
Villag: e| 
Farms Tih 
Glonics Yi ey, 
} wets f 
Road gina" ; Ree rami. 
Astrono, : 
by U.de 


: bo AAA) ypsl0ve? aS 
p.cantanapale A tainaco 


This Map i 0 Gane 


rom valuab ee ; 2S 
{ STeresa ‘ Lm LL Pile yy Radka de 
RGF 
a J 


Author rece de Jesus 
tom UD 
of the Gty ot = 


a il 


4 
4 


R: TE, 


Plains almost barren which extend trom the Mountains of 
Merida covered with perpetual Snow to the Delta of the Orioco 
& from the Chain on the Gast of Venezuela, by the Apur 


the 
and the Guaviare t the Valley of the kiver of the Ame 


Meta 
OTUs. 


R Boe 


Mr de Rubio es 
Meadows where Oxen and 
wild Horses gratxe 


Biosee yr ‘de Niebo 


Villa de de.dpurito ~"o 


S4WV ANTONIO e “Bus 


2 Bancolargo 
oe gp, FB a oh 


UT des? 


M22. Aportes 
tah 


4 ried oD. 5 
‘Apo ntes, Ade los 
Gamaros . 
las ~ » V8 de 
Gua 


oy 
2 eS, 


2) 
2 


3 ihe 
eae 


a our" “du Pinal 
anal ich 


YS 


uilol Xe M™ de Pobe a, 


These Plains extend 


“ & 
the Village of la Fun- - pane 
dacion de Arauca 
included in the limits 
jo the Lrovince oF 
Casanare. 


E Casangpie 
arv 
This territory ts inhabited 
by wild and independant 


REFERENCES Lndians 


CITIES 

Villages 

Farms 

Blonices destroyed 

Road 

Astronomical obscvations 
by U.de Humboldt. 


t 


This Map was corrected ir i601, 
Vrom valuable documents which the 
Wduchor received at the Hav annah 

rom MD Voser Rodriguez, Acad 
of the Gty of 3 Fernando de Apure. 


= See 


Mi 


r = 
phere ttt 


porbeambertreed ——htett 


Li 
eS 2 Guards 


$Achagns i 
M de Sihas on 


TO 


SY T41ME lh 


2 Sh de 


Je lost 
LALA os 


Se. 
HINO 
sepucii’ * 


“de Sebastian 


oftubio 


sy Rio 


MM de la Candelaria? 


Metdela | 
ovonceplion | 


de Perez 7 


T° de Tama 


Iie Zo ‘og 
las aros Cy Caretereo 


a 2 Cartes de Are 


MW de Sehasti 
hubio 


olony (& 
> Me ta IEEE = 


> 
a 
? 


SXFERWANDO . 


payars 


qe King 


S Francisco 
aT aro 


QCamaguan 
ox Llanos de Caracas great of "the Bi Ca Pa tof the 
covered with thick Grass -ROVINCE oF VE VERINA,) 
Paes: the? 
ORONOOKO the ABURA & the RIO META 


—? 00 Compued 0% 
: pe ee) ae fiona 2m cal biials 
Meadows with scattered 


collected on Thee Sot 
: 2p, ian >00) Gee 
groups of Lalm Tice: 00 Sv O02 


HUMBOLDT. 


“ x 
S” Geronimo : 
° ae Guyaval a 


fasiures uninhabited 


Land belon\ing t the Inhabita 

of the Gtv of kanando de Apure rhara\o% 
: \ drichuna \ 

i )) Pe fad b wos 

Rio de Lleary Inhabited by Indian 

O37, 2 Pie as an 
Ne 4; ond 

— “dows ° alqo4 

uz ce Z pedeAlg 


Ss aR ae; i! 
\de.dtamaica 
Meg Lory, i 


_,quadero 
lf" de Polbero i as 
| ° = = arguquile 
: OO f ss ee Rid? 

MU de Bouron %, aSylosef i 


de Cunabiche This Lake, as is the casewéh all the 


Riversor this Country, abounds 
\ aA with Gocodiles. OC 
& R 


abullarito 


5 thie. 


2, 5 eas OR eet 
“Hp MW de Santa Rita 
O 


Metairie d ie ¢ once sir 
Delgado bpiiea ou Cruane \ 


3 


Ls 
a 


$\\ar® de Mirabal 


ot 
gina aval’ d 


x %, p Capers 
\ des. Antonio £4 rN igi * 
2 - of edie y 
Wide felix 
a ase Indir ae de G, | ‘elu 


aNcoks. is Tenvter ‘) 
c Village Ve 2 abel 


Sgnacio Me" 4 
ia aPanag, 


pelt 


SYL[eresa 


AD 
de Jesus 


RMe 


iano 


ee 


Hh . 


See 


oS 


FAM ath sc 


SME 


2 


Miah 5 AAR AR 


EEE Er te 


