Source note (Tower of Babel staging): Alexander von Humboldt, Personal Narrative of Travels to the Equinoctial Regions of the New Continent, translated by Helen Maria Williams (London: Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme & Brown, 1819), Vol. IV. Text from Internet Archive item personalnarrati4humb (OCR).
Public domain work. This file was produced from a public scan; OCR imperfections may remain.

eae 
aoe 


sete 
eee eat 


(is Fie¥ ‘ 
asi 
oo 
iors 

re st 

Po atnnces 


EX LIBRIS 
DUMBARTON OAKS. 
LIBRARY 


PresenfOYNBiL . 
S/R PRIOR GOLONEY Barker, 
Ce 


Personal Marrative 
OF TRAVELS 


EQUINOCTIAL REGIONS 


OF THE 


NEW CONTINENT, 


DURING THE YEARS 1799-1804, 
BY 
ALEXANDER DE HUMBOLDT, 
AND 


AIME BONPLAND; 


WITH MAPS, PLANS, §C. 


WRITTEN IN FRENCH BY 


ALEXANDER DE HUMBOLDT, 


AND TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH BY 


HELEN MARIA WILLIAMS. 
VOL. IV. 
pean NCL 


LONDON: 


PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, HURST, REES, ORME, AND BROWN, 


PATERNOSTER ROW, 


1819. 


Ww. Pople, Printer, 67, Chancery Lane. 
SE 


BOOK V. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


PAGE 
Earthquakes at Caraccas—Connection of this pheno- 


menon with the volcanic eruptions of the West India 
islands - - - a = = fe e 


CHAPTER XV. - 
Departure from Caraccas—/Mountains of San Pedro 
and of Los Teques—La Victoria—Valleys of Aragua 


CHAPTER XVI. 
Lake of Tacarigua—Hot Springs of Mariara—Town 


of Nueva Valencia de el Rey—Descent toward the 
coasts of Porto Cabello. - - < - 


NOTES TO THE FIFTH BOOK. 


A—Extracts from the Letter of Aguirre to the king of 
Spain = > ze i yi 3 Es Z 
B—On vegetable Milk cr z - = 2 


BOOK VI. 


CHAPTER XVII. 


Mountains that separate the valleys of Aragua from the 
Llanos of Caraccas—Villa de Cura,—Parapara— 
Llanos, or Steppes—Calabozo - - 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 
i i PAGE 
San Fernando de Apure—Intertwinings and bifurca- 


tions of the rivers Apure and Arauca—Navigation 
on the Rie Apure. - - a eA u - 390 


BOOK. VII. 


CHAPTER, XLX. 


Junction of the Apure and the Oroonoko—Mountains 
of Encaramada—Uraana— Baraguan — Carichana 
—Mouth of. the Meta—Island of Panumana - < 


JOURNEY 
TO THE 


EQUINOCTIAL REGIONS 


OF fe 


THE NEW CONTINENT. 


BOOK V. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


Earthquakes at Caraccas. — Connection of this 
phenomenon with the volcanic eruptions of the 
West India islands. 


We left Caraccas on the 7th of February, in the 
cool of the evening, and began our journey to 
the Oroonoko. The remembrance of that depar- 
ture is more painful to us now, than it was some 
years ago. Our friends have perished in the 
sanguinary revolutions, which have successively 
given liberty to those distant regions, and de- 
prived them of it. The house which we inha- 
bited is now a heap of ruins. Tremendous 
earthquakes have changed the surface of the 
soil. The city, which I have described, has dis- 
VOL. IV. B | 


9g 


| appeared ; and on the same spot, on the ground 
fissured in various directions, another city is 
slowly rising. Already those heaps of ruins, the. 
grave of a numerous population, are become 
anew the habitation of men. 


| In retracing changes of so general an interest, 
I shall be led to notice events, that took place 
long after my return to Europe. I shall pass 
over in silence the popular commotions, and the | 
modifications which the state of society has un- 
dergone. Modern nations, careful of their own 
| remembrance, snatch from oblivion the history 
i of human revolutions, which is that of ardent 
passions, and inveterate hatred. It is not the 
same with respect to the revolutions of the phy- 
sical world. These are described with the least, 
accuracy, when they happen to coincide with 
the period of civil dissentions. Earthquakes 
and the eruptions of volcanoes strike the imagi-. 
nation by the evils, which are their necessary 
consequence. ‘Tradition seizes in preference 
whatever is vague and marvellous; and amid 
| great public calamities, as in private misfortunes, 
man seems to shun that light, which leads us to 

discover the real causes of events, and recognise 

the circumstances by which they are attended. 

I have thought proper to record in this work all 
I have been able to collect with certainty respect- 
ing the earthquake of the 26th of March, 1812; 
which destroyed the town of Caraccas; and. by: 


3 


which more than twenty thousand persons pe- 
rished almost at the same instant in the province 
of Venezuela. The intercourse which I have 
kept up with persons of all classes has enabled 
me, to compare the description of many eye- 
witnesses, and to interrogate them on objects, 
that may throw light on physical science in ge- 
neral. The traveller, being the historian of na- 
ture, should authenticate the dates of great 
catastrophes, examine their connection and mu- 
tual relations, and mark in the rapid course of 
ages, in this continual progress of successive 
changes, those fixed points, with which other 
catastrophes may one day be compared. All 
epochas approach each other in the immensity 
of time comprehended in the history of nature. 
Years passed away seem but a few instants; and 
if the physical descriptions of a country do not 
excite a very powerful and general interest, they 
have at least the advantage of never becoming 
old. Similar considerations, no doubt, led Mr. 
de la Condamine to describe in his Voyage a 
UEquateur, the memorable eruptions * of the 
volcano of Cotopaxi, which took place long after 
his departure from Quito. Following the exam- 
ple of this celebrated traveller, I think I shall 
the less deserve blame, as the events which I am 


- Those of the 30th of November 1744, and of the 3d of 
September 1750. (Introd. Hist., p. 156, and 160.) 
B 2 


| 7 4 


‘ going to relate will serve to elucidate the theory 
of volcanic reactions, or the influence of a system 
of volcanoes on “a vast space of circumjacent 
country. 
At the time that Mr. Bonpland and myself in- 
habited the provinces of New Andalusia, Nueva- 
Barcelona, and Caraccas, a general opinion pre- 
| vailed, that the easternmost parts of these coasts 
| were the most exposed to the destructive effects 
of earthquakes. The inhabitants of Cumana 
dreaded the valley of Caraccas, on account of 
its damp and variable climate, and its gloomy 
and foggy sky; while the inhabitants of that 
temperate valley considered Cumana as a town, 
where only a burning air was breathed, and 
where the soil is periodically agitated by violent 
commotions. Forgetful of the overthrow of Rio- 
bamba, and other very elevated towns; igno- 
i rant that the peninsula of Araya, composed of 
mica-slate, has partaken of the commotions of 
the calcareous coast of Cumana; well-informed 
persons thought they perceived motives of secu- 
rity in the structure of the primitive rocks of 
Caraccas, as well as in the elevated situation of 
this valley. Religious ceremonies celebrated at 
La Guayra, and even in the capital, in the middle 
of the night*, recalled no doubt to their memory, 


nN i : * For instance, the nocturnal procession of the 2ist of 
| October, instituted in commemoration of the great earth- 


5 


that the province of Venezuela had been subject 
at intervals to earthquakes; but dangers that 
seldom recur are slightly feared. Cruel expe- 
rience destroyed, in 1811, the charm of theory, 
and of popular opinions, Caraccas, situate in 
the mountains, three degrees west of Cumana, 
and’ five degrees west of the volcanoes of the 
Caribbee islands, has felt greater shocks, than 
were ever experienced on the coast of Paria or 
New Andalusia. 

At my arrival in Terra Firma, I was struck 
_ with the connection of two physical events, the 
destruction of Cumana on the 14th of Decem- 
ber, 1797, and the eruption of the volcanoes in 
the smaller West India islands*. This connec- 
tion has been again manifested in the destruction 
of Caraccas on the 26th of March, 1812. The 
volcano of Guadaloupe seemed to have reacted, 
in 1797, on the coasts of Cumana. Fifteen 
years after, it was a volcano situate nearer the 
continent, that of St. Vincent’s, which appeared 
to have extended it’s influence as far as Caraccas 
and the banks of the Apure. It is possible, that 
at these two epochas the centre of the explosion 
was at an immense depth, equally distant from 


quake, which took place on that day of the month, at one in 
the morning, in 1778. Other very violent shocks were those 
of 1641, 1703, and 1802. 

* See vol, ii, p. 231, 


nad 


6 


the regions toward which the motion was pro- 
pagated at the surface of the globe. 

From the beginning of 1811 till 1813, a vast 
extent of the Earth’, limited by the meridian of | 
the Azores, the valley of the Ohio, the Cordil. 
leras of New Grenada, the coasts of Venezuela, 
and the volcanoes of the smaller West India 
islands, has been shaken almost at the same 
time by commotions, which may be attributed to 
subterraneous fires. The following series of 
phenomena seems to indicate communications at 
enormous distances. On the 30th of January, 
1811, a submarine volcano appeared near the 
island of St. Michael, one of the Azores. At a 
place, where the sea was sixty fathoms deep, a 
rock appeared above the surface of the waters. 
The heaving up of the softened crust of the globe 
appears to have preceded the eruption of flames 
by the crater}, as had already been observed at 
the volcanoes of Jorullo in Mexico, and at the 
apparition of the little island of Kameni near 
Santorino. The new islet. of the Azores was at 
first nothing more than a shoal ; but on the 15th 
of January an eruption, which lasted six days, 
enlarged it’s extent, and carried it progressively 
to the height of fifty toises above the surface of 


- * Between the latitudes of 5° and 86° North, and the 
meridians of 31° and 91° West from Paris. 
+ See vol. i, p. 240. 


7 


the sea. This new land, of which captain Til- 
lard hastened to take possession in the name 
of the British government, calling it Sabrina 
island, was nine bundred toises in diameter. It 
has again, it seems, been swallowed up by the 
ocean. ‘Thisyis the third time, that submarine © 
volcanoes have presented this extraordinary spec- 
tacle near the island of St. Michael; and, as if 
the eruptions of these volcanoes were subject to 
a regular period, owing to a certain accumula- 
tion of elastic fluids, the island raised up has 
appeared at intervals of ninety-one or ninety- 
two years*. It is to be regretted, that, not- 
withstanding the proximity of the spot, no Ku- 
ropean government, or learned society, has sent 
natural philosophers and geologists to the 
Azores, to investigate a phenomenon, which 
would throw so much light on the history of 
volcanoes, and on that of the globe in general. 
At the time of the appearance of the new 
island of Sabrina, the smaller West India islands, 
situate eight hundred leagues to the south-west 
of the Azores, experienced frequent earthquakes. 


* Malte Brun, Geogra. Univ., vol. ili, p. 177—180. There 
remains however. some doubt, respecting the eruption of 
1628, which some place in 1638. The rising always hap- 
pened near the island of St. Michael, though not identically 
on the same spot. It is remarkable, that the small island of 
1720 reached the same elevation as the island of Sabrina in 
1811. See above, vol..i,. chap. i, p. 95. 


8 


More than two hundred shocks were felt from 
the month of May 1811, to Aprik 1812, in the 
island of St. Vincent; one of the three where 
there are still active volcanoes. The commotion. 
did not remain circumscribed to that insular 
portion of eastern America. From the 16th of 
December 1811, the earth was almost inces- 
santly agitated in the valleys of the Missisippi, 
the Arkansas, and the Ohio. The oscillations 
were more feeble on the east of the Alleghanies, 
than to the west of these mountains, in Ten- 
nessee and Kentucky. They were accompanied 
by a great subterraneous noise, coming from the 
south-west. At the spots between New Madrid 
and Little Prairie, as at. the Saline, north of 
Cincinnati, in latitude 37° 45’, the shocks were 
felt every day, nay almost every hour, during 
several months. The whole of these phenomena 
lasted from the 16th of December 1811, till the 
year 1813. The commotion, confined at first to 
the south, in the valley of the lower. Missisippi, 
appeared to advance slowly toward the north *. 
At the same period, when this long series of 
earthquakes began in the Transalleghanian 
States, in the month of December 1811, the 
town of Caraccas felt the first shock in calm 


* See the interesting description of these’ earthquakes, 
given by Mr. Mitchell, in the Trans. of the Liter. and-Phil. Soc. 
of New York,’ vol. i, p- 281—308; and by Mr. Drake, in 
the Nat. and Stat. View of Cincinnati, p, 282—238. 


9 


and serene weather. This coincidence of phe- 
nomena was probably not accidental; for we 
must not forget, that, notwithstanding the dis- 
‘tance which separates these countries, the low 
grounds of Louisiana, and the coasts of Vene- 
zuela and Cumana, belong to the same basin, © 
that of the Gulf of Mexico. This Mediterranean 
sea, with several outlets, runs from the south-east 
to-the north-west ; and an ancient prolongation 
of it seems to be found in those vast plains, 
rising gradually thirty, fifty, and eighty toises * 
above the level of the ocean, covered with se- 
condary formations, and watered by the Ohio, 
the Missouri, the Arkansas, and the Missi- 
sippi. When we consider geologically the basin 


of the Caribbean sea, and of the Gulf of Mexico, 
we find it bounded on the south by the chain of 
the coast of Venezuela and the Cordilleras of 
Merida and Pamplona; on the east by the moun- 
tains of the West India islands, and the Allegha- 
nies; on the west by the Andes of Mexico, and 
the Stony Mountains ¢; and on the north by the 


* Cincinnati, situated on the Ohio, in latitude 39° 6’, has 
only eighty-five toises absolute elevation. 

+ It is with regret I use this vague and improper denomi- 
nation, which is given to the northern prolongation of the 
mountains of New Mexico. I should prefer the name of 
Chippewan Range, which Mr. Drake (Stat. View, of Cin- 
cinnati, p. 91) and other geographers of the United States, 
begin to substitute for the received denomination of Stony 


eevee 


{0 


very inconsiderable elevations which separate 
the Canadian lakes from the rivers that flow 
into the Missisippi. More than two thirds of 
this basin are covered with water. It is bor- 
dered by two ranges of active volcanoes ; to the 
east, in the Caribbee islands, between the lati- 
tudes of 13° and 16°; and to the west in the 
Cordilleras of Nicaragua, Guatimala, and Mexi- 
co, between 11° and 20°. When we reflect, that 
the great earthquake at Lisbon, of the Ist of 


‘November 1755, was felt almost at the same 


moment on the coasts of Sweden, at lake Ontario, 
and at the island of Martinico, it will not ap- 
pear too daring to suppose, that ail this basin of 
the West Indies, from Cumana and Caraccas 
as far as the plains of Louisiana, may be simul- 
taneously agitated by commotions proceeding 
from the same centre of action. 

An opinion very generally prevails on the 
coasts of Terra Firma, that earthquakes become 
more frequent, when electric explosions have 
been very rare during some years. It is thought 


Mountains; but nations almost of the same name, very dis- 


tant from each other, and speaking different languages, the 
Chippeways of the sources of the Missisippi, and the Che- 
pewyans of the Slave Lake, described by Pike and Mac- 
kensie, may occasion those mountains to the south and south- 
west of the great Canadian lakes, which lie east and west, to 
be confounded with the Stony Mountains, which’ run north 
and south, 


it 


to have been observed, at Cumana and Caraccas, 
that the rains were less frequently attended with 
thunder from the year 1792 ; and. the total de- 
struction of Cumana in 1797, and the commo- 
tions felt * in 1800, 1801, and 1802, at Mara- 
caibo, Porto Cabello, and Caraccas, have not 
failed to be attributed to “an accumulation of 
electricity in the interior of the Earth.” It would 
be difficult for a person, who has lived a long 
time in New Andalusia, or in the low regions of 
Peru, to deny, that the season the most to be 
dreaded from the frequency of earthquakes is 
that of the beginning of the rains, which is 
however the time of thunder storms. The at- 
mosphere, and the slate of the surface of the 
globe, seem to have an influence unknown to 
us on the changes produced at great depths ; 
and I believe, that the connection, which some 
persons pretend to recognize between the ab- 
sence of thunder storms and the frequency of 
earthquakes, is rather a physical hypothesis 
framed by the half-learned of the country, than 
the result of long experience. The coimcidence 
of certain phenomena may be favoured by 
chance. The extraordinary commotions felt 
almost continually during two years on the bor- 
ders of the Missisippi and the Ohio, and which 
coincided in 1812 with those of the valley of Ca- 


* De Pons, vol. i; p. 125. 


12 


raccas, were preceded at Louisiana by a year 
almost exempt from thunder storms*. Every 


mind was again struck with this phenomenon. 
We cannot deem it strange, that in the country of 
Franklin a great predilection is retained for ‘ex- 
planations founded on the theory of electricity. 
The shock felt at Caraccas, in the month of 
December, 1811, was the only one, that preceded 
the horrible catastrophe of the 26th of March, 
1812. The inhabitants of Terra Firma were 
ignorant of the agitations of the volcano in the 
island of St. Vincent on one side, and on the 
other, of those that were felt in the basin of the 
Missisippi, where, on the 7th and 8th of February, 
1812, the earth was day and night in perpetual 
oscillation. A great drought prevailed at this. 
period in the province of Venezuela. Not a single 
drop of rain had fallen at Caraccas, or in the 
country ninety leagues round, during the five 
months which preceded the destruction of the ca- 
pital. The,26th of March was a remarkably hot 
day. The air was calm, and the sky unclouded. 
It was Holy Thursday, and a great part of the 
population was assembled in the churches. No- 
thing seemed to presage the calamities of the 
day. At seven minutes after four in the after- 
noon the first shock was felt; it was sufficiently 
powerful, to make the bells of the churches toll ; , 


* Trans..of New York, vol. i, p. 285 ; Drake, p. 210, 


SS SS aa 


* 18 


it lasted five or six seconds, during which time, 
the ground was in a continual undulating move- 
ment, and seemed to heave up like a boiling 
liquid. The danger was thought to be past, 
when a tremendous subterraneous noise was 
heard, resembling the. rolling of thunder, but 
louder, and of longer continuance, than that 
heard: within the tropics in time of storms. This - 
noise preceded a perpendicular motion of three 
or four seconds, followed by an undulatory- 
movement somewhat longer. The shocks were 
in opposite directions, from north to south, and 
from east to west. Nothing could resist the 
movement from beneath upward, and undula- 
tions crossing each other. The town of Caraccas 
was entirely overthrown. Thousands of the in- 
habitants (between nine and ten thousand) were 
buried under the ruins of the houses and 
churches. The procession had not yet set out ; 
but the crowd was so great in the churches, that 
nearly three or four thousand persons were 
crushed by the fall of their vaulted roofs. The 
explosion was stronger toward the north, in that 
part of the town situate nearest the mountain of 
Avila, and the Silla. The churches of la Trinidad 
and Alta Gracia, whieh were more than one 
hundred and fifty feet high, and the naves. of 
which were supported by pillars of twelve or 
fifteen feet diameter, left a mass of ruins scarcely 
exceeding five or six feet in elevation. The 


14 


sinking of the ruins has been so considerable, 
that there now scarcely remain any vestiges of 
pillars or columns. The barracks, called El 
Quartel de San Carlos, situate farther north of 
the church of the Trinity, on the road from the 
Custom-house de la Pastora, almost entirely dis- 
appeared. A regiment of troops of the line,- 
that was assembled under arms, ready to join 
the procession, was, with the exception of a few 
men, buried under the ruins of this great edifice. 
Nine tenths of the fine town of Caraccas were 
entirely destroyed. The walls of the houses that: 
were not thrown down, as those of the street 
San Juan, near the Capuchin Hospital, were 
cracked in such a manner, that it was impossible 
to run the risk of inhabiting them. The effects 
of the earthquake were somewhat less violent in 
the western and southern parts of the city, be- 
tween the principal square and the ravin of 
Caraguata. There, the cathedral, supported 
by enormous buttresses, remains standing *. 
Estimating at nine or ten thousand the num- 
ber of the dead in the city of Caraccas, we do 
not include those unhappy persons, who, danger- 
ously wounded, perished several months after, 
for want of food and proper care. The night of 
Holy Thursday presented the most. distressing 


*® Sur le Tremblement de Terre de Vi enezuelu, en 1812, par 
M. Delpeche, MS. 


~ 


15 


scene of desolation and sorrow. That thick 
cloud of dust, which, rising above the ruins, 
darkened the sky like a fog, had settled on the 
_ ground. No shock was felt, and never was a 
night more calm, or more serene. The Moon, 
nearly full, illumined the rounded domes of the 
Silla, and the aspect of the sky formed a perfect 
contrast to that of the earth, covered with the 
dead, and heaped with ruins. Mothers were 
seen bearing in their arms their children, whom 
they hoped to recall to life. Desolate families 
wandered through the city, seeking a brother, 
a husband, a friend, of whose fate they were 
ignorant, and whom they bclieved to be lost in 
the crowd. The people pressed along the 
streets, which could no more be recognized but 
by long lines of ruins. 

All the calamities experienced in the great 
catastrophes of Lisbon, Messina, Lima, and 
Riobamba were renewed on the fatal day of the 
26th of March, 1812. “The wounded, buried 
under the ruins, implored by their cries the help 
of the passers by, and nearly two thousand were 
dug out. Never was pity displayed in a more 
affecting manner ; never had it been seen more 
ingeniously active, than in the efforts employed 
to save the miserable victims, whose groans 
reached the ear. Implements for digging, and 
clearing away the ruins were entirely wanting : 
and the people were obliged to use their bare 


16 


hands, to disinter the living. The wounded, as 


well as the sick who had escaped from the hospi- 


tals, were laid on the banks of the small river 
Guayra, They found no shelter but the foliage of 
trees. Beds, linen to dress the wounds, instru- 
ments of surgery, medicines, and objects of the 
.most urgent necessity, were buried under the 
ruins. Every thing, even food, was wanting dur- 
ing the first days. Water became alike scarce in 
the interior of the city. The commotion had rent 
the pipes of the fountains; the falling in of the 
earth had choaked up.the springs that supplied 
them ; and it became necessary, in order to have 
water, to go down to the river Guayra, which 
was considerably swelled ; and then vessels to 
convey the water were wanting. 

“There remained a duty to be fulfilled to- 
ward the dead, enjoined at once by piety, and 
the dread of infection. It being impossible to 
inter so many thousand corpses, half-buried un- 
der the ruins, commissaries were appointed to 
burn the bodies: and for this purpose funeral 
piles were erected between the heaps of ruins. 
This ceremony lasted several days. Amid so 
many public calamities, the people devoted them- 


selves to those religious duties, which they | 


thought were the most fitted to appease the 
wrath of Heaven. Some, assembling in proces- 
sions, sung funeral hymns; others, in a state 
of distraction, confessed themselves aloud in the 


17 


streets. In this town was now repeated. what 
had been remarked in the province of Quito, 
after the tremendous earthquake of 1797; a 
number of marriages were contracted between 
persons, who had neglected for many years to 
sanction their union by the sacerdotal benedic- 
tion. Children found parents, by whom they 
had never till then been acknowledged; restitu- 
tions were promised by persons, who had never 
been accused of fraud; and families, who had 
long been enemies, were drawn together by the 
tie of common calamity.” If this feeling seemed 
to calm the passions of some, and open the heart 
to pity, it had a contrary effect on others, ren- 
dering them more rigid and inhuman. In great 
calamities vulgar minds preserve still less good- 
ness than strength: misfortune acts in the same 
manner, as the pursuits of literature and the 
study of nature; their happy influence is felt 
only by a few, giving more ardour to sentiment, 
more elevation to the thoughts, and more bene- 
volence to the disposition. 

“ Shocks as violent as those, which in the 
space of one minute * overthrew the city of 


* The duration of the earthquake, that is to say the whole 
of the movements of undulation and rising (undulaceon y tre- 


pidacion), which occasioned the horrible catastrophe of the 
26th of March, 1812, was estimated by some at 50”, by 
others at 17 12”, 


VOL. IV. 


18 


Caraccas, could not be confined to a small por- 
tion of the continent. Their fatal effects ex- 
tended as far as the provinces of Venezuela, 
Varinas, and Maracaybo, along the coast ; and 
still more to the inland mountains. La Guayra, 
Mayquetia, Antimano, Baruta, La Vega, San 
Felipe, and Merida, were almost entirely de- 
stroyed. 'The number of the dead exceeded four 
or five thousand at La Guayra, and at the town 
of San Felipe, near the copper mines of Aroa. 
It appears, that it was on a line running East- 
North-East, and West-South-West, from La 
Guayra and Caraccas to the lofty mountains of 
Niquitao and Merida, that the violence of the 
earthquake was principally directed. It was 
felt in the kingdom of New Grenada from the 
branches of the high Sierra de Santa Martha * 
as far as Santa Fe de Bogota and Honda, on the 
banks of the Magdalena, one hundred and eighty 
leagues from Caraccas. It was every where 
more violent in the Cordilleras of gneiss and 
mica-slate, or immediately at their foot, than 
in the plains: and this difference was par- 
ticularly striking in the savannahs of Varinas 
and Casanara. (This is easily explained accord- 
ing to the system of those geologists, who admit, 
that all the chains of mountains, volcanic and 


'* As far as Villa de Los Remedios, and even to Car- 
thagena. 


19 


not volcanic, have been formed by being raised 
up, as if through crevices.) In the vallies of 
Aragua, situate between Caraccas and the town 
of San Felipe, the commotions were very weak : 
and La Victoria, Maracay,and Valencia, scarcely 
suffered at all, notwithstanding their proximity to 
the capital. At Valecillo, a few leagues from 
Valencia, the earth, opening, threw out such an 
immense quantity of water, that it formed a 
new torrent. The same phenomenon took place 
near Porto-Cabello*. On the other hand, the lake 
of Maracaybo diminished sensibly. At Coro no 
commotion was felt, though the town is situate 
upon the coast, between other towns which suf- 
fered from the earthquakef}.” Fishermen, who 
had passed the day of the 26th of March in the 
island of Orchila, thirty leagues North-East of 
La Guayra, felt no shock. *These differences, 
in the direction and propagation of the shock, 
are probably owing to the peculiar arrangement 
of the stony strata. 

Having thus traced the effects of the earth- 
quake to the West of Caraccas, as far as the 


* It is asséfted, that in the mountains of Aroa, the ground, 
immediately after the great shocks, was found covered with 
a very fine and white earth, which appeared io have been 
projected through crevices. 

+ Apuntamientos sobre las principales Circumstancias deb 
Terremoto de Caracas, por Don Manuel Palacio Farardo.. MS. 


c2 


20 


snowy mountains of Santa Marta, and the table 
land of Santa Fe de Bogota, we will proceed to 
consider their action on the country East of the 
capital. ‘The commotions were very violent be- 
- yond Caurimare, in the valley of Capaya, where 
they’ extended as far as the meridian of Cape 
Codera: but it is extremely remarkable, that 
they were very feeble on the coasts of Nueva- 
Barcelona, Cumana, and Paria; though these 
coasts are the continuation of the shore of La 
Guayra, and formerly known to have been often 
agitated by subterraneous commotions. Admit- 
ting, that the destruction of the four towns of 
Caraccas, La Guayra, San Felipe, and Merida, 
may be attributed to a volcanic focus placed 
under or near the island of St. Vincent, it may 
be conceived, that the motion might have been 
propagated from North-East to North-West * 
in a line passing through the islands of Los 
Hermanos, near Blanquilla, without touching 
the coasts of Araya, Cumana, and Nueva Barce- 
lona. This propagation of the shock might even 
have taken place, without the intermediate points 
at the surface of the Globe, the Hermanos 
Islands for instance, having felt any commo- 
tion. This phenomenon is frequently remarked 
at Peru and Mexico, in earthquakes which have 


* Nearly in a line directed South, 64° West, 


21 


followed during ages a determinate direction. 
The inhabitants of the Andes say with simplicity, 
speaking of an intermediary ground, which is 
not affected by the general motion, “ that it 
forms a bridge” (que hace puente): as if they. 
meant to indicate by this expression, that the 
undulations are propagated at an immense depth 
under an inert rock. 

Fifteen or eighteen hours after the great 
catastrophe, the ground remained tranquil. The 
night, as we have already observed, was fine 
and calm; and the commotions did not recom- 
mence till after the 27th. They were then at- 
tended with a very loud and Jong continued 
subterranean noise (bramido). The inhabitants 
of Caraccas wandered into the country; but the 
villages and farms having suffered as much as 
the town, they could find no shelter till they 
were beyond the mountains of Los Teques, in 
the valleys of Aragua, and in the Llanos or 
Savannahs. No less than fifteen oscillations 
were often felt in one day. On the 5th of April 
there was almost as violent an earthquake, as 
that which overthrew the capital. During seve- 
ral hours the ground was in a state of perpe- 
tual undulation. Large masses of earth fell 

-in the mountains; and enormous rocks were 
detached from the Silla of Caraccas. It was 
even asserted, and this opinion prevails still in 
the country, that the two domes of the Silla sunk 


22 


fifty or sixty toises; but this assertion is founded 
on no measurement whatever. I am informed, 
that in the province of Quito also, the people, at 
every period of great commotions, imagine, that 
the volcano of Tunguragua is diminished in 
height.—It has been affirmed, in many descrip- 
tions published of the destruction of Caraccas, 
“that the mountain of the Silla is an extin- 
guished volcano; that a great quantity of vol- 
canie substances are found on the road from La 
Guayra to Caraccas*; that the rocks do not 
present any regular stratification; and that every 
thing bears the stamp of the action of fire.” It 
is even added, “ that, twelve years before the 
great catastrophe, Mr. Bonpland and myself, 
from our physical and mineralogical researches, - 
had considered the Silla as a very dangerous 
neighbour to the city, because that mountain 
contained a great quantity of sulphur, and that 
the commotionsmust come fromthe North-East.” 
It is seldom that natural philosophers have to 
justify themselves for an accomplished predic- 
tion; but I think it my duty to combat ideas, 


* See the account given by Mr. Drouet of Guadaloupe, 
translated in the Trans. of New York, vol.i, p, 308. The 
author, in giving to the Silla nine hundred toises of absolute 
height, has confounded the height of the mountain, in myy.- 
. measurement, above the level of the sea, with its height 
above the valley of Caraccas, which makes a diflerence of 
four hundred and sixty toises. 


23 


that are too easily adopted on the local causes 
of earthquakes. 

In all those places where the soil has been in- 
cessantly agitated for whole months, as at Ja- 
maica in 1693*, Lisbon in 1755, Cumana in 1766, 
and Piedmont in 1808, a volcano is expected to 
open. People forget, that it is far from the sur- 
face of the Earth we must seek the focus or 
centre of action; that, according to undeniable 
evidence, the undulations are propagated almost 
at the same instant across seas of an immense 


depth, at a distance of a thousand leagues ; and 
that the greatest commotions take place not at 
the foot of active volcanoes, but in chains of 
mountains composed of the most heterogeneous 


rocks. We have given in the preceding book a 
geognostical description of the country round 
Caraccas ; we there find gneiss, and mica-slates, 
containing beds of primitive limestone. ‘The 
strata are scarcely more fractured or irregularly 
inclined than near Freyberg in Saxony, or wher- 
ever mountains of primitive formation rise ab- 
ruptly to great heights. I there found neither 
basaltes nor dolerite, nor even trachytes or trap- 
porphyries; nor in general any trace of an ex- 
tinguished volcano, unless we choose to consider 
the diabases or primitive gruenstein, contained in 
gneiss, as masses of lava, which have filled up 


* Phil, Trans, for 1694, p. 99. 


a4 


fissures. These diabases are the same as those 
of Bohemia, Saxony, and Franconia *; and what- 
ever opinion is entertained on the ancient causes 
of the oxidation of the Globe at its surface, all 
those primitive mountains, which contain mix- 
tures of hornblende and feldspar, either in veins, 
or in balls with concentric layers, will not, I 
suppose, be called volcanic formations. Mont 
Blanc and Mont d'Or will not be ranged in the 
same class. The partizans of a universal vol- 
canism, or of the ingenious Huttonian theory, 
themselves make a distinction between the lavas, 
which were melted under the simple pressure of 
the atmosphere at the surface of the Globe, and 
those layers formed by fire beneath the immense 
weight of the ocean and superincumbent rocks. 
They would not confound Auvergne and the gra- 
nitic valley of Caraccas under the same denomi- 
nation, that of a country of extinct volcanoes. 

I never could have uttered the opinion, that 
the Silla and the Cerro de Avila, mountains of 
gneiss and mica-slate, were a dangerous vicinage 
for the capital, because they contained a great 
deal of pyrites in subordinate beds of primitive 
limestone. But I remember having said, during 
my stay at Caraccas, that the eastern extremity 


* These gruensteins are found in Bohemia, near Pilsen, in 
granite; in Saxony, in the mica-slates of Scheenberg; in 
Franconia, between Steeben and Lauenstein, in transition 
slates. 


~ 


2a), 


of Terra Firma appeared, since the great earth- 
quake of Quito, in a state of agitation, which 
led to an apprehension, that the province of Ve- 
nezuela would gradually be subjected to violent 
commotions. I added, that when a country had 
been long subject to frequent shocks, new sub- 
tierrancous communications seemed to open with . 
neighbouring countries ; and that the volcanoes 
of the West India islands, lying in the direction 
of the Silla, to the North-East of the city, were 
perhaps the vents by which, at the time of an 
eruption, those elastic fluids gushed. out, that 
cause the earthquakes on the coasts of the con- 
tinent. ‘These considerations, founded on a local 
knowledge of the place, and on simple analogies, 


are very far from a prediction justified by the 
course of physical events. 
While violent commotions were felt at the 


same time in the valley of the Missisippi, in the 
island of St. Vincent, and in the province of 
Venezuela, the inhabitants of Caraccas, of 
Calabozo, situate in the midst of. the steppes, 
and on the borders of the rio Apura, in a space 
of four thousand square leagues, were terrified 
on the 30th of April, 1812, by a subterrancous 
noise, which resembled frequent discharges of 
the largest cannon. This noise began at two in 
the morning. It was accompanied by no shock ; 
and, which is very remarkable, it was as loud on 
the coast as at eighty leagues distance inland. 


26 


It was every where believed to be transmitted 
through the air; and was so far from being 
thought a subterraneous noise, that at Caraccas, 
as well as at Calabozo, preparations were made 
to put the place into a state of defence against 
an enemy, who seemed to be advancing with 
heavy artillery. Mr. Palacio, crossing the rio 
Apura below the Orivante, near the junction, of 
the rio Nula, was told by the inhabitants, that 
the “firing of cannon” had been heard as dis- 
tinctly at the western extremity of the province 
of Varinas, as at the port of La Guayra to the 
North of the chain of the coast. 

The day on which the inhabitants of Terra 
Firma were alarmed by a subterraneous noise 
was that on which happened the great eruption 
of the volcano in the island of St. Vincent *. 
This mountain, near five hundred toises high, 
had not thrown out any lava since the year 1718. 
Scarcely was any smoke perceived to issue from 
it’s top, when, in the month of May, 1811, fre- 
quent shocks announced, that the volcanic fire 
was either rekindled, or directed anew toward 
that part of the West Indies.. The first eruption 
did not take place till the 27th of April, 1812, 
at noon. It was only an ejection of ashes, but 


“* Barbadoes Gazette for May 6,1812. Bibliot. Britt., 1813, 
May, p. 90. New England Journal of Medicine, 1818, p. 93. 
Trans. of New York, ‘vol. i, p.815. Le Blond, Voyage aux 
Antilles, vol. i, p. 187. 


27 


attended with a tremendous noise. On the 
30th, the lava passed the brink of the crater, 
and, after a course of four hours, reached the 
sea. The noise of the explosion “ resembled 
that of alternate discharges of very large cannon 
and of musketry ; and, which is well worthy of 
remark, it seemed much louder at sea, at a great 
distance from the island, than in sight of land, 
and near the burning volcano.” 

The distance in a straight line from the vol- 
cano of St. Vincent to the rio Apura, near the 
mouth of the Nula, is two hundred and ten 
leagues *. The explosions were consequently 
heard at a distance equal to that between Vesuvius 
and Paris. This phenomenon, connected with a 
great number of facts observed in the Cordil- 
leras of the Andes, shows how much more exten- 
sive the subterranean sphere of activity of a 
volcano is, than we are disposed to admit from . 
the small changes effected at the surface of the 
Globe. The detonations heard during whole 
days together in the New World, eighty, one 
hundred, or even two hundred leagues distant 
from a crater, do not_reach us by the propa- 
gation of the sound through the air; they are 
transmitted to us by the ground, perhaps in the 


* Where the contrary is not expressly stated, nautical 
leagues of twenty to a degree, or two thousand eight hun- 
dred and fifty-five toises, are always to he understood. 


very place where we happen to be.’ If the erup- 
tions of the volcano of St. Vincent, Cotopaxi, or 
Tunguragua, resounded from afar, like a cannon 
of an immense magnitude, the noise ought to 
have increased in the inverse ratio of the dis- 
tance: but observations prove, that. this aug- 
mentation does not take place. I must further 
observe; that Mr. Bonpland and I, going from 
Guayaquil to the coast of Mexico, crossed lati- 
tudes in the South Sea, where all the mariners 
of our ship were affrighted by a hollow sound, 
that came from the depth of the ocean, and was 
transmitted to us by the waters. It-was the 
period of a new eruption of Cotopaxi, and we 
were as far distant from that volcano, as Etna 
from the city of Naples. The little town of 
Honda, on the banks of the Magdalena, is not 
less than one hundred and forty-five leagues * 
from Cotopaxi; and yet in the great explosions 
of this volcano, in 1744, a subterraneous noise 
was heard at Honda, and supposed to be dis- 
charges of heavy artillery. The monks of St. 
Francis spread the news, that the town of Car- 
thagena was besieged and bombarded by the 
English; and the intelligence was _ believed 
throughout the country. Now the volcano of 
Cotopaxi is a cone, more than one thousand 
eight hundred toises above the basin of Honda, 


* This is the distance from Vesuvius to Mont Blanc. 


29 


and rises from a table-land, the elevation of 
which is more than one thousand five hundred. 
toises above the valley of the Magdalena. In 
all the colossal mountains of Quito, of the pro- 
vince of Los Pastos, and of Popayan, crevices 
and valleys without number are interposed. It 
cannot be admitted, under these circumstances, 
that the noise could be transmitted through the 
air, or by the superior surface of the Globe, and 
that it came from:that point, where the cone 
and crater of Cotopaxi are placed. It appears 
probable, that the higher part of the kingdom of 
Quito and the neighbouring Cordilleras, far from 
being a group of distinct volcanoes, constitute a 
single swollen mass, an enormous volcanic wail, 
stretching from South to North, and the crest of 
which exhibits a surface of more than six hun- 
dred square leagues. Cotopaxi, Tunguragua, 
Antisana, and Pichincha, are placed on this same 
vault, on this raised ground. They are diffe- 
rently named, although they are only different 
summits of the same volcanic mass. The fire 
issues sometimes from one, sometimes from 
another of these summits. The obstructed cra- 
ters appear to us to be extinguished volcanoes ; 
but we may presume, that, while Cotopaxi or 
Tunguragua have only one or two eruptions in 
the course of a century, the fire is not less con- 
tinually active under the town of Quito, under 
Pichincha and Imbaburu. | 


30 


Adyancing toward the North, we find, be- 
tween the volcano of Cotopaxi and the town of 
Honda, two other systems of volcanic mountains, 
those of Los Pastos and of Popayan. The con- 
nection of these systems was manifested in the 
Andes in an incontestible manner by a pheno- 
menon, which I have already had occasion to 
notice, in speaking of the last destruction of 
Cumana. Since the month of November, 1796, 
a thick column of smoke had issued from the 
volcano of Pasto, West of the town of that name, 
and near the valley of rio Guaytara. ‘The 
mouths of the volcano are lateral, and placed 
on its western declivity, yet during three suc- 
cessive months the column rose so much higher 
than the ridge of the mountain, that it was con- 
stantly visible to the inhabitants of the town of 
Pasto. They related to us their astonishment, 
when, on the 4th of February, 1797, they ob- 
served the smoke disappear in an instant, with- 
out feeling any shock whatever. At that very 
moment, sixty-five leagues to the South, between 
Chimborazo, Tunguragua, and the Altar (Capac- 
Urcu), the town of Riobamba was overthrown 
by the most dreadful earthquake, of which tra- 
dition has transmitted the history. Is it possible 
to doubt from ‘this coincidence of phenomena, 
that the vapours, issuing from the small aper- 
tures or ventanillas of the volcano of Pasto, had 
an influence on the pressure of those elastic 


31 


fluids, which shook the ground of the kingdom 
of Quito, and destroyed in a few minutes thirty 
or forty thousand inhabitants ? 

In order to explain these great effects of 
volcanic reactions, and. to prove, that the group 
or system of the volcanoes of the West India 
Islands may sometimes shake the continent, it 
was necessary to cite the Cordillera of the 
Andes. Geological reasoning can be supported 
only on the analogy of facts that are recent, 
and consequently well authenticated: and in 
what other region of the Globe could we find 
greater and at the same time more varied vol- 
canic phenomena, than in that double chain of 
mountains heaved up by fire? in that land, 
where Nature has covered every summit and 
every valley with her marvels? If we consider 
a burning: crater only as an isolated phenome- 
non, if we satisfy ourselves with examining the 
mass of stony substances which it has thrown 
up, the volcanic action at the surface of the 
Globe will appear neither very powerful, nor 
very extensive. But the image of this action 
swells in the mind, when we study the relations 
that link ‘together volcanoes of the same group ; 
for instance those of Naples and Sicily, of the 
Canary islands *, of the Azores, of the Caribbee 


* T have already related, vol. 1, p. 249, how the whole 
group of the Canary islands 4re placed, as we may say, on 
one and the same submarine volcano; the fire of which, 


32 


islands, of Mexico, of Guatimala, and of the 
table-land of Quito; when we examine either 
the reiictions of these different systems of volca- 
noes on one another, or the distance to which, 
by subterranean communications, they at the 
same moment shake the Earth. 

The study of volcanoes presents two very 
distinct branches; the object of one, simply 
mineralogical, is the examination of the stony 
strata, altered or produced by the action of 
fire; from’ the formation of the trachytes or 
trap porphyries, of basalts, phonolites, and dole- 


since the sixteenth century, has made it’s appearance alter- 
nately in Palma, Teneriffe, and Lancerota. Auvergne pre- 
sents us with a whole system of volcanoes, the action of 
which has ceased; but in the middle of a system of active 
volcanoes, for instance, in that of Quito, we must not con- 
sider as an extinguished volcano a mountain, the crater of 
which is obstructed, and through which the subterraneous 
fire has not issued for ages. Etna, the Eolian isles, Vesu- 
vius, and Epomeo; the peak of Teyde, Palma, and Lance- 
rota; St. Michael, la Caldiera de Fayal, and Pico; St. 
Vincent, St. Lucia, and Guadaloupe; Orizava, Popocatepec, 
Jorullo, and la Colima; Bombacho, the volcano of Grana- 
da, Telica, Momotombo, Isalco, and the volcano of Guati- 
mala; Cotopaxi, Tunguragua, Pichincha, Antisana, and 
Sangay, belong to the same system of burning volcanoes ; they 
are generally ranged in rows, as if they had issued from a 
crevice, or vein not filled up; and, what is very remarkable, 
_ their position is in some parts in the general direction of the 
Cordilleras, and in others in a contrary direction. (Essai 
politique sur le Mexique, tom, 1, p. 258. 


38 


rites, to the most recent lavas; the other, less 
accessible and more neglected, comprehends 
the physical relations which link volcanoes 
together, the influence of one volcanic system 
on another, the connection that manifests itself 
between the action of burning mountains and 
the commotions which shake the earth at great 
distances, and during a long time, in the same 
direction. This study cannot make any pro- 
gress, till the various epochas of simultaneous 
action, the direction, the extent, and the force 
of the commotions, are carefully noted ; as well 
as their progressive advance toward regions, 
which they had not yet reached*; and that 
coincidence between distant volcanic eruptions 
and those subterranean noises, which, on ac- 
count of their force, the inhabitants of the 
Andes denominate in a very expressive manner 
subterraneous thunders, or roarings. All these 
objects are comprehended in the domain of the 
history of nature, a science which has not even 
preserved it’s name, and the origin of which, like 
that of all other histories, begins with times 
which appear to us fabulous, and catastrophes, 
of which our imagination cannot embrace the 
violence and magnitude. 

The study of the history of nature has been 
long confined to that of the ancient documents 


* See vol. ii, p. 230. 
WOL. IV, D 


- in the interior of the Ea 


QA 


ws 


buried in the entrails of the Earth; but if the 
narrow circle, in which all certain traditions are 
confined, do not present any of those general 
revolutions, which have heaved up the Cordil- 
leras, and buried myriads of pelagian animals, 
Nature, acting under our eyes, dees not less 
exhibit tumultuous though partial changes, the 
study of which may throw light on the most 
remote epochs. Those mys foul powers reside 
rth, the effects of which 


ifested at the surface by i me st 


are Mant 


of vapours, of incandescent slags, of new vol- 


canic rocks and thermal springs, by the ap- 
pearance of new islands and mountains, by 
commotions propagated with the rapidity of 
an electric shock, finally by those subterranean 
thunders *, sibtah are heard during whole 


* Those which. alarmed the inhabitants of the town of 
Guanaxuato, in Mexico, lasted from the 9th of January till 
the 12th of February, 1784. This phenomenon, almost with- 
out example among those accurately observed, will be de- 
scribed in the sequel of this Narrative. It is sufficient here 
to observe, that the town is situate forty leagues North of 
the volcano of Jorullo, and sixty leagues North-West of the 
volcano of Popocatepetl. In places nearer these two volca- 
noes, three leagues distant from Guanaxuato, the subterra- 


neous thunders were not heard. The noise was circumscribed 


within a very narrow space, in the region of a primitive 


‘schist, which approaches a tr ansition schist, containing the 


richest silver mines of the known world, and on which rest 
trap porphyries, slates, and. diabasis (gruenstem). 


38 


months, without shaking the earth, in regions 
far distant from active volcanoes. 

In proportion as equinoctial America shall 
increase in culture and population, and the 
system of volcanoes of the central table-land 
of Mexico, of the Caribbee islands, of Popayan, 
of Los Pastos, and Quito, are more attentively 
ohserved, the connection of eruptions and of 
earthquakes, which precede and sometimes 
accompany these eruptions, will be more gene- 
rally recognized. The voleanoes we have just 
mentioned, particularly those of the Andes, 
which rise above the enormous height of two 
thousand five hundred toises, present great ad- 
vantages for observation. The periods of their 
eruptions are singularly regular. They remain 
thirty or forty years without emitting scoriee, 
ashes, or even vapours. In this interval, I 
could not perceive the smallest trace of smoke 
on the summit of Tunguragua or Cotopaxi. A 
gust of vapours, issuing from the crater of Mount 
Vesuvius, scarcely attracts the attention of the 
inhabitants of Naples, accustomed to the move- 
ments of that little volcano, which throws out 
slags sometimes during two or three years suc- 
cessively. It thence becomes difficult to judge, 
whether the emission of slags have been more 
frequent at the time when an eartliquake has 
been felt in the Apennines. On the ridge of 
the Cordilleras every thing assumes a more 

p 2 


x 


, 
36 | 
ot 


decided character. An eruption of ashes, which | 
lasts only a few minutes, is often followed by a 
calm of ten years. In such circnmstances, it 
is easy to mark the periods, and recognize the 
coincidence of phenomena. 

Admitting what we cannot doubt, that the 
destruction of Cumana in 1797, and that of 
Caraccas in 1812, indicate the influence of the 
volcanoes of the Caribbee islands * on the com- 
motions felt on the coasts of Terra Firma, it 
will be advantageous, before we close this 


* The following is the series of the phenomena: 

27th of September, 1796. Eruption in the West India | 
islands.. Volcano of Guadaloupe. 

November, 1796. The volcano of Pasto begins to emit 
amoke. 

44th of December, 1796. Destruction of Cumana. 

4th of February, 1797. Destruction of Riobamba. 

30th of January, 1811. Appearance of Sabrina island, in 
the Azores. Jt increases particularly on the 15th of June, 
1811. 

May, 1811. Beginning of the earthquakes in the island 
St. Vincent, which lasted till May, 1812. F 

16th of December, 1811. Beginning of the commotions in 
the Valley of the Missisippi and the Ohio, which lasted till 
1813. 

December, 1811. Earthquake at Caraccas. 
‘96th of March, 1811. Destruction of Caraccas. arth- 
quakes which continued till 1813. 
‘ 30th of April, 1811. Eruption of the volcano in St. Vin- 
cent’s; and the same day subterranean noises at Caraceas, 
and on the banks of the Apura. 


Dd 


chapter, to take a rapid view of this Mediterra- 
nean Archipelago. The volcanic islands form 
one fifth of that great arch extending from the 
coast of Paria to the peninsula of Florida. 
Running from South to North, they close this 
interior sea on the eastern side, while the 
Greater West India islands appear like the 
remains of a group of primitive mountains, the 
summit of which seems to have been between 
Cape Abacou, Point Morant, and the Copper 
Mountains, at that spot, where the islands of 
St. Domingo, Cuba, and Jamaica, are nearest to 
each other. Considering the basin of the At- 
lantic as an immense valley *, which separates 
the two continents, and where, from 20° South 
to 30° North, the saliant angles (Brazil and 


* See my first geological sketch of South America, pub- 
lished by Mr. de la Metherie in the Journal de Physique, 
vol. lili, p. 88. . The coasts of the ancient continent, 
between 5° and 10° North, have the same direction (from 
S. E. to N. W.) as the coasts of America between 8° South 
and 10° North. The direction of the coasts is, on the con- 
trary, from S. W. to N. E. in America, between 30° and 
72°; and in the ancient continent between 25° and 70°. 
The valley is narrowest (800 leagues) between Cape St. 
Roch and Sierra Leone.. Proceeding toward the North 
along the coasts of the New Continent, from it’s pyramidal 
extremity, or the Straits of Magellan, we imagine we recoge 
nise’ the effects of an impulsion directed first toward ,the 
North-East, then toward the North-West, and finally again 
te the North. East. 


38 


Senegambia) correspond to the entering angies 
(the gulf of Guinea and the sea of the West 
Indies), we are led to think, that the latter sea 
owes it’s formation to the action of currents, 
flowing, like the current of rotation now exist- 
ing, from East to West ; and which have given 
the southern coast of Porto-Rico, St. Domingo, 
and the Island of Cuba *, so uniform a configu- 
ration. This supposition, not improbable, of an 
oceanic irruption, has been the source of two 
other hypotheses on the origin of the Smaller 
West India islands. Some geologists admit, 
that the uninterrupted chain of islands from, 
Trinidad to Florida exhibits the remains of an 
ancient chain of mountains. They join the 
chain sometimes to the granite of French Gui- 
ana, sometimes to the calcareous mountains of 
Paria. Others, struck with the difference of 
geognostical constitution between the primitive 
mountains of the Greater West India islands 
and the volcanic cones of the Less, consider 
these last as having risen from the bottom of 
the sea. 

If we recollect, that volcanic swellings, when 
they take place through elongated crevices, 
affect most commonly a straight direction, we 
shall find it difficult to judge from the disposi- 
tion of the craters alone, whether the volcanoes 


* Between Cape Mayzi and Cape Cruz, 


39 


have belonged to the same chain, or have always 
been isolated. Supposing an irruption of the 
ocean to take place either in the eastern part of 
the island of Java*, or in the Cordilleras of 
Guatimala and Nicaragua, where so many burn- 
ing mountains form but one chain, that chain 
would be divided into several islands, and per- 
fectly resemble the Caribbean Archipelago. ‘The 
union of primitive formations and volcanic rocks 
in the same range of mountain has nothing in it 
strange: it is very distinctly to be seen in my 
geognostical sections of the Cordillera of the 
Andes. The trachytés and basaltes of Popayan 
are separated from the system of the voleanoes 
of Quito by the mica-slates of Almaguer ; the 
volcanoes of Quito from the trachytes of Assuay 
by the gneiss of Condorasto and se uasunto >. 
There does not exist a re f mountain 
running South-East and h- West ak 
Oyapoc to the mouths of | 

which the Smaller West 

northern prolongation. The granites wee Guiana, 


* Raffles, History of Java, 1817, p. 23—28. The principal 
line of the volcanoes of Java, on a distance of 160 leagues, _ 
runs from West to East, through the mountains of Gagak, 
Gedé, Tankuban-Prahu, Ungarang, Merapi, Lawu, Wilis, 
Arjuna, Dasar, and Tashem. 


+ Consult the Nivellemeént rca and Tableau des 


i yn 8303 and 83 
> Pe oUe, Qi oli, 


Formations des Andes, in my Obs: 
(N. 125—220.) 


| neve 


i 


40 


as well as the hornblende slates *, which I saw 
near Angostura, on the banks of the Lower 
Oroonoko, belong to the mountains of Pacaraimo 
and of Parime, stretching from West to East + 
in the interior of the continent, and not ina 
direction parallel with the coast, between the 
mouths of the River of Amazons and the Oroo- 
noko. But notwithstanding we find no chain 
of mountains at the North- East extremity of 
Terra Firma, that has the same direction as the 
Archipelago of the Smaller West India islands; 
it does not follow from this circumstance alone, 
that the volcanic mountains of the Archipelago 
may not have belonged originally to the conti- 
nent, to the littoral chain of Caraccas and 
Cumana ¢. 


i Hornblendschiefer, amphibolites schistoides of Brongniart. 


+ From the cataracts of Atures toward the Rio Esquibo. 
This chain of Pacaraimo divides the waters of the Carony 
from those of the Rio Parime, or Rio de Aguas Blancas. 
See my Analyse de L’Atlas geograph. Pl. xvi. 


t Among the numerous examples, which the structure of 
the Globe displays, we shall mention only the inflexion at 
a right angle formed by the High Alps toward the maritime 
Alps, in Europe; and the Belour-tagh, which joins trans- 
versely the Mouz-tagh with Himalaya, in Asia. Amid the 
prejudices, which impede the progress of mineralogical geo- 
graphy, we may reckon, Ist, The supposition of a perfect 
uniformity of direction in the chains of mountains ; 2d, The 
hypothesis of a continuity in all the chains; 3d, The suppo- 
sition, that the highest summits determine the direction of a 


1 
: 
4 
i 
‘ 


41 


In opposing the objections of some celebrated 
naturalists, I am far from maintaining the an- 
cient contiguity of all the Smaller West India 
islands. I am rather inclined to consider them 
as islands heaved up by fire, and ranged in that 
_regular line, of which we find the most striking 
examples in so many volcanic bills in Auvergne, 
in Mexico, and in Peru. The geognostical con- 
stitution of the Archipelago appears, from the 
little we know respecting it, to be very similar 
to that of the Azores and Canary islands. Primi- 
tive formations are nowhere seen above ground*; 


central chain; 4th, The idea, that in all places, where great 
rivers take rise, we may admit great table-lands, or very 
high mountains. 

* According to Messrs, Moreau de Jonnés and Cortes 
(Journal de Physique, tom. lxx, p. 129). Dupuget and Le- 
blond imagined they had recognized granite in the mountain 
Pelée of Martinico, and in other parts of the Archipelago 
(Voyage aux Antilles, tom, i, p. 87, 274, and 410). Gneiss 
has been mentioned as forming a part of the solfatara, at St. 
Kit’s, We cannot be too much on our guard against these 
indications of rocks in works, the authors of which are less 
familiarized with the name than with the object. How 
great was my surprise, when, during my stay at Santa-Fe- 
de-Bogota, Mr. Mutis showed me in the Journal de Physique 
for 1786, p. 321, a paper of Mr. Leblond, where this tra. 
veller, in other respects accurate, describes the table-land of 
Bogota, where he resided during some years, as granitic. 
We find there nothing but secondary formations, sand-stones 
and gypsum; not even detached fragments of granite. 


42 


we find only what belongs unquestionably to 
volcanoes, feldspar-lavas, dolerites, basaltes, ag- 
glomerated scorie, tufas, and pumice stones. 
Among the limestone formations we must 
distinguish those, which are essentially subor- 
dinate to volcanic tufas *, from those which ap- 
pear to be the work of madrepores and other 
zoophytes. The latter, according to Mr. Moreau 
de Jonnés, seem to lie on shoals of a volcanic 
nature. Those mountains, which present traces 
of the action of fire more or less recent, and 
some of which reach nearly nine hundred toises 
of elevation, are all situate on the western skirt 
of the Smaller West India islands. Each island 


* We have noticed some of these above (vol. iti, p. 575), 
after Mr. von Buch, at Lancerota, and at Fortaventura, in 
the System of the Canary Islands. Among the smaller islands 
of the West Indies, the following islets are entirely calcareous, 
according to Mr. Cortes: Marigalante, la Desirad, the 
Grand Terre of Guadaloupe, and the Grenadillas. According 
to the observations of this naturalist, Curasoa and Bonaire 
(Buen Ayre) present only calcareous formations. Mr. 
Cortes divides the West India islands into, 1st, those con- 
taining at once primitive, secondary, and volcanic formations, 
like the greater islands; 2nd, those entirely calcareous, (or 
at least so considered) as Marigalante. and Curasoa; 3rd, 
those at once volcanic and calcareous, as Antigua, St. Bar- 
tholomew, St. Martin, and St. Thomas; 4th, those which 
display volcanic rocks only, as St. Vincent, St, Lucia, and 
St. Eustatia. 

+ See the observations of Mr. Amic, in his Rapport sur 
PEtat du Volcan de la Guadeloupe en 1797, p. 17. 


i 
j 
te 

Hy 
i 
it 
I 

i 


43 


is not the effect of one single heaving up: most 
of them appear to consist of isolated masses, 
which have, been progressively united together*. 
The matter has not been emitted from one mouth, 
but from several: so that a single island of 
small extent contains a whole system of volca- 
noes, regions purely basaltic, and others covered: 
with recent lavas. The volcanoes still burning 
are those of St. Vincent, St. Lucia, and Guada- 
loupe. The first threw out lavas in 1718 and 
1812: in the second there is a continual forma- 
tion of .sulphur by the condensation of vapours, 
which, issue from the crevices of an ancient 
crater. The last eruption of the volcano of 
Guadaloupe took place in 1797. The Solfatara 
of St. Christopher’s was still burning in 1692. 
At Martinico, Vauclin, Montagne Pelée, and 
the crater surrounded by the five paps of Carbet, 
must be considered as three extinguished vol- 
canoes. The effects of thunder have been often 
confounded in that place with subterranean fire, 
No*good observation has confirmed the sup- 
posed eruption } of the 22nd of January, 1792. 
The group of volcanoes in the Caribbee islands 


* See above, vol. i, ch. 2, p. 255. 

+ These phenomena are very well indicated in the fine 
geological charts, that Mr. Moreau de Jonnés is going to 
publish. 

} Journal de Mines, tom. iii, p. 59. In order to exhibit 
in one point of view the whole system of the volcanoes of the 


Dauxion Lavaysse, vol. ii, p. 60. 


44 


resembles that of the voleanoes of Quito and 


Los Pastos; craters, with which the subterra- 
nean fire does not appear to communicate, are 
ranged on the same line with burning craters, 
and alternate with them. é 


Smaller West India islands, I shall trace in this note the direc- 
tion of the islands from South to North.—Grenada, an ancient 
crater, filled with water; boiling springs; basalts between 
St. George and Goave.—St. Vincent, a burning volcano.— 
St. Lucia, a very active solfatara, named Oualibou, two or 
three hundred toises high; jets of hot water, by which small 
basins are periodically filled.—Martinico, three great extin- 
guished volcanoes ; Vauclin, the paps of Carbet, which are 
perhaps the most elevated summits of the smaller islands, 
and Montagne Pelée. (The height of this last mountain is 
probably 800 toises; according to Leblond, 670 toises ; ac- 
cording to Dupuget, 736 toises. Between Vauclin and the 
feldspar-lavas of the paps of Carbet is found, as Mr. Moreau 
de Jownés asserts, in a neck of land, a region of ancient 
basalts called La Roche carrée). Thermal waters of Pré- 
cheur and Lameutin—Dominica, completely volcanised.— 
Guadaloupe, an active volcano, the height of which, according 
to Leboucher, is 799 toises, toAmie, 850 toises.— Montserrat, 
a solfatara, fine porphyritic lavas with large crystals of feld- 
spar and hornblende, near Galloway, according to Mr. 
Nugent.— Nevis, a solfatara.—St. Christopher's, a solfatara 
at Mount Misery.—S¢. Eustatia, a crater of an extinguished 
volcano, surrounded by pumice stones. (Trinidad, which is 
traversed by a chain of primitive slates, appears to have 
anciently formed a part of the littoral chain of Cumana, and 
not of the system of the mountains of the Caribbee islands, 
Edwards’s History of the West Indies, vol. iii, p. 275: 


45 


Notwithstanding the intimate connection, that 
manifests itself in the action of the volcanoes of 
the smaller West India islands and the earth- 
quakes of Terra Firma, it often happens, that 
shocks felt in the voleanie Archipelago are not 
propagated to the island of Trinidad, or to the 
coasts of Caraccas and Cumana. This pheno- 
menon has nothing in it surprising: even in the 
Caribbees the commotions are often confined to 
one place. The great eruption of the volcano 
in St. Vincent’s did not occasion an earthquake 
at Martinico-or Guadaloupe. Loud explosions 
were heard there, as well as at Venezuela, but 
the ground remained tranquil. ? 

These explosions, which must not be con- 
founded with the rolling noise that every where 
precedes the weakest commotions, are often 
heard on the banks of the Oroonoko, and par- 
ticularly, as we were assured, on the spot be- 
tween the Rio Arauca and Cuchivero. Father 
Morello relates, that. at the mission of Cabruta 
the subterranean noise so much resembles. dis- 
charges of small cannon (padereroes), that it has 
seemed as if a battle were heard at a distance. 
On the 2lst of October, 1766, the day of the 
terrible earthquake that desolated the province 
of New Andalusia*, the ground was agitated at 
once at Cumana, at Caraccas, at Maracaybo, 


* See chap. iv, vol. il, p. 216, 


46 


and on the banks of the Casanare, the Meta, the ; 
- Oroonoko, and the Ventuario. Father Gili* 


has described these commotions in. a country 
entirely granitic, at the mission of Encaramada, 
where they were accompanied by loud explosions. 
Great fallings in of the earth took place in the 
mountain Paurari; and near the rock Aravacoto 
a small island disappeared in the Oroonoko. 
The undulatory motion continued during a 
whole hour. This seemed the first signal of 
those violent commotions, which shook the 
coasts of Cumana and Cariaco for more than 
ten months. It might be supposed, that men 
scattered in woods, with no other shelter than 
huts of reeds and palm-leaves, had nothing to 
dread from earthquakes; but they terrify the 
Indians of Erevato and Caura, as a phenomenon 
that seldom happens, frightens the beasts of the 
forests, and impels the crocodiles to quit the 
depth of the waters for the shore. Nearer the 
sea, where the shocks are frequent, far from 
being dreaded by the inhabitants, they are re- 
garded with satisfaction as the prognostics of a 
wet and fertile year. 
In this dissertation on the earthquakes of 
Terra Firma and on the volcanoes of the neigh- 


bouring Archipelago of the West India islands, 


‘T have pursued the general plan adopted in this 


* Saggio di Storia Americana, vol. ii, p. 6. 


47 


work. I have first related a great number of 
solitary facts, and then considered them in one 
general point of view. Every thing announces 
in the interior of the Globe the operation of 
active powers, which react, balance, and mo- 
dify one another. The greater our ignorance 
of the causes of these undulatory movements, 
these evolutions of heat, these formations of 
elastic fluids, the more it becomes the duty of 
the. natural philosopher, to examine the relations 
existing between these phenomena at great dis- 
tances, and in so uniform a manner. It is only 
by considering these various relations under a 
general point of view, and following them on a 
large extent of the surface of the Globe, through 
formations of rocks the most different, that we 
are led ta abandon the supposition of trifling 
local causes, strata of pyrites, or of coal set on 
fire*. 


* Tn a work in other respects equally rich in ingenious 
views and well observed facts, the Geological Essays of Mr. 
Steffens: (Geognostich-geologische Aufsetze, p:.325, it is asserted, 
that, “‘ hot springs, earthquakes, and volcanic erruptions, 
take place only where there are strata of coal, because these 
alone can furnish materials for combustion, and keep. up,, in 
the great electro-motive apparatus of the Earth, a, strong 
electrical tension. If. travellers have thought they have 
observed. these phenomena in primitive formations, as recently 
in South America, they have confounded,” continues the 
author, “the sccondary porphyries (fletzporphyre) which 


48 


The following is the series of phenomena re- 
marked on the northern coasts. of Cumana, 
Nueva Barcelona, and Caraccas ; and presumed 
to be connected with the causes, that produce 
earthquakes and eruptions of lava. We shall 


may contain strata of coal, with primitive porphyries.” We 
have just described earthquakes in lands entirely granitic, in 
vast regions where, as on the banks of the Oroonoko, no other 
formation, primitive or secondary, rests onthe granite. We 
shall soon see, that boiling springs gush out, as if by prefe- 
rence, from granite and gneiss; and that the trachytes, or 
trap-porphyries of the Andes, far from belongmg to the 
formation of red sandstone, or to those fletsporphyries which 
Messrs. Steffens and Freiesleben have so well described, issue 
in the midst of volcanic lands from mica-slate and gneiss. The 
nature and disposition of the strata in the interior of the 
Earth, especially in primitive formations, appear to me but 
little favourable to the hypothesis of a great pile, the action 
of which occasions shocks at the surface of the Globe, and 
causes (by the chemical action of the electro-motive apparatus) 
in brine springs and thermal waters so surprising a constancy 
in their mixture and specific gravity. (Geogn. Aufs., p. 322 
and 335). A person who has lived a long time, like me, in 
the Cordillera of the Andes, who has heard these explosions 
propagated through the interior of the Globe, who has seen 
those enormous effects of the heaving up of the earth, those 
swollen masses, which, bursting, throw out immense quantities 
of water, mud, and vapours, finds it difficult not to admit the 
existence of cavities, of communications between the oxidated 
part of the Globe, and that part which abounds in metalloids, 
in sulphurets of silex, and other substances not oxidated. 
See above, chap. ii, vel. i, p. 256; and chap. iv, vol. ii, 
p. 237. : 


49 


begin with the easternmost extremity, the island 
of Trinidad; which, as we have said above, 
seems rather to belong to the shore of the con- 
tinent, than to the system of the mountains of 
the West India islands. 
The pit which throws up asphaltum in the 
bay of Mayaro, on the eastern coast of the island 
of Trinidad, to the South of Point Guataro. 
This is the Mine of Chapapole ormineral tar of 
the country. I was assured, that in the months 
of March and June the eruptions are often at- 
tended with violent explosions, smoke, and 
flames. Almost on the same parallel, and also 
in the sea, but to the West of the island (near 
Punta de la Brea, to the South of the port of 
Naparaimo), we found a similar vent. On the 
neighbouring coast, in a clayey ground, appears 
the celebrated lake of asphaltum (Laguna de la 
Brea), a marsh, the waters of which have the 
same temperature’ as the atmosphere. The 
small cones situate at the South-West extremity 
of the island, between point Icacos and the Rio 
Erin, appear to have some analogy with the 
volcanoes of air and mud, which I met with at 
Turbaco in the kingdom of New Grenada*. I 
mention these situations of asphaltum on ac- 
count of the remarkable circumstances, which 
are peculiar to them in these regions; for Iam 


® Dauxion-Lavaysse, Voyage a la Trinité, p. 25, 30, and 33, 
VOL. IV. E 


50 


not unaware, that naphtha, petroleum,’ and 
asphaltum are found equally in volcanic and 
secondary regions *, and even more frequently 
in the latter. Petroleum is found floating on 
the sea thirty leagues North of Trinidad, around 
the island of Grenada, which contains an ex- 
tinguished crater and basalts. 

Hot springs of Irapa, at the North-eastern 
extremity of New Andalusia, between Rio Caribe, 
Soro, and Yaguarapayo. Air-volcano, or Salce, 
of Cumacatar, to the South of San Jose and 
Carupano, near the northern coast of the con- 
tinent, between La Montana de Paria and the 
town of Cariaco. Almost constant explosions 
are felt in a clayey soil, which is affirmed to be 


impregnated with sulphur. ‘Thermal hydrosul- 
phuretted waters gush out with such violence, 
that the ground is agitated by very sensible 
shocks. It is said, that flames have been fre- 
quently seen issuing out since the great earth- 


* The inflammable emanations (of hydrogen gas containing 
naphtha ina state of suspension) of Pietra Mala issue from 
the Alpine limestone, which may be traced from Covigliano 
to Raticofa, and which lies on ancient sandstone near Scarica 
YAsino. Under this ancient sandstone (red sandstone) we 
find black transition limestone and the grauwacke (quartzose 
psammite) of Florence. Respecting the asphaltum of the 
secondary mountains of Thuringia, see Freiesleben, Kupfer- 
schiefer, vol. ili, p. 27; iv, p. 388. (Hausmaun Nordteutsche 
Beitr. St. i, p.93.) 


5] 


quake of 1797. These facts are well worthy of 
being examined by an enlightened traveller. 

Petroleum spring of Buen Pastor, near the 
Rio Areo. Large masses of sulphur have been 
found in clayey soils at Guayuta, as in the valley 
of San Bonifacio *, and near the junction of the 
Rio Pao with the Oroonoko. 

Aguas calientes, on the South of the Rio Azul, 
and the hollow ground of Cariaco, which, at the 
period of. the great earthquake of Cumana, threw 
up hydrosulphuretted waters and viscous pe- 
troleum +. 

Hot waters of the Gulf of Cariaco ¢. 

Petroleum spring in the same Gulf, near Ma- 
niquarez. It springs from mica-slate §. 

Flames issuing from the earth, near Cumana, 
on the banks of the Manzanares, and at Mari- 
guitar ||, on the southern coast of the Gulf of 
Cariaco, at the time of the great earthquake of 
1797. ; 

Igneous phenomena of the mountain of Cu- 
chivano, near Cumanacoa @. 

Petroleum spring gushing from a shoal to the 


® Chap viii, vol. iti, p. 185. 
+ Chap. iy, vol. ii, p.216; and chap. viii, vol. iii, p. 186. 
£ Chap. viii, vol, iii, p. 199. 
§ Chap. v, vol. 1, p. 290. 
|| Chap. iv, vol ii, p. 219. 
@ Chap. vi, vol. iii, p. 81. . 
E 2 


North of the Caraccas islands *. The smell of 


this spring warns ships of the danger of this 
shoal, on which there is only one fathom of 


water. 

Thermal springs of the mountain of the Bri- 
gantine, near Nueva Barcelona. ‘Temperature 
43'2° cent. 

Thermal springs of Provisor, near San Diego, 
in the province of New Barcelona. 

Thermal springs of Onoto, between ‘Turmero 
and Maracay, in the valleys of Aragua, to the 
West of Caraccas. 

Thermal springs of Mariara, in the same 
valleys. Temperature 58°9°. 

Thermal springs of Las Trincheras, between 
Porto Cabello and Valencia, issuing from granite, 
like those of Mariara, and forming a river of 
warm water, Rio de Aguas Calientes. 'Temper- 
ature 90°4°. 

Boiling springs of the Sierra Nevada of Me- 
rida. P 

Aperture of Mena, on the borders of Lake 
Maracaybo. It throws up asphaltum, and emits 
(it is affirmed) gazeous emanations, which take 
fire of themselves, and are seen at a great dis~ 
tance. : 

These are the springs of petroleum and of 
thermal waters, the igneous meteors, and the 


* Chap. xi, vol, ili, p. 357. 


wo 


ejections of muddy substances attended with 
explosions, of which I acquired the, knowledge 
in the vast provinces of Venezuela, in a space. of 
two hundred leagues from East to West. ‘These 
various phenomena have singularly agitated the 
minds of the inhabitants since the great: catas- 
trophes of 1797 and_1812: yet they present 
nothing that constitutes a volcano, in the sense 
which has hitherto been attributed to this word. 
If the apertures, which throw up vapours and 
water with a_vidlent noise, be sometimes called 
volcancitos, it is only by such of the inhabitants, 
as are persuaded, that volcanoes must neces- 
sarily exist in countries so frequently exposed to 
earthquakes. Proceeding from the burning 
crater of St. Vincent’s to the South, the West, 
and South-West, first. by the chain of the 
Caribbee islands, then by the littoral chain of 
Cumana and Venezuela, and finally by the Cor- — 
dilleras of New Grenada, for the space of three 
hundred and eighty leagues, no active volcano 
occurs before Purace, near Popayan. One 
of the most remarkable geological facts is this 
total absence of apertures, through which melted 
substances can issue, in that part of the con- 
tinent, which stretches to the East of the Cor- 
dillera of the Andes, and to the East of the 
Stony Mountains. 

We have examined in this chapter the great 
commotions, which shake from time to time the 


54 


stony crust of the Globe, and scatter desolation 
in a country favoured by the most precious gifts 
of nature. An uninterrupted calm prevails in 
the superior atmosphere; but, to use an ex- 
pression of Franklin’s more ingenious than true, 
the thunder often rolls in the subterranean at- 
mosphere, amid that mixture of elastic fluids, 
the impetuous movements of which are fre- 
quently felt at the surface of the Earth. In 
describing the destruction of so many populous 
cities, we have given a picture of the greatest 
calamities that afflict mankind. A nation, fight- 
ing for independance, is suddenly exposed to 
the want of subsistence, and of all the neces- 
saries of life. Famished, without shelter, the 
inhabitants are dispersed through the country. 
Great numbers of those, who have escaped from 
the ruin of their dwellings, are swept away by 
disease. Far from strengthening mutual con- 
fidence among the citizens, the feeling of mis- 
fortune destroys it; physical calamities augment 
civil discord ; nor does the aspect of a country 
bathed with tears and blood appease the fury of 
the victorious party. 

After the recital of so many calamities, it is 
soothing to repose the imagination on consola- 
‘tory remembrances. When the great catastrophe 
of Caraccas was known in the United States, 
the Congress, assembled at Washington, unani- 
mously decreed, that five ships laden with flour 


5d 


should be sent to the coast of Venezuela, to be 
distributed among the poorest inhabitants. So 
generous a supply was received with the warmest 
gratitude ; and this solemn act of a free people, 
this mark of a national interest, of which the 
increasing civilization of our old Europe displays 
but few recent examples, seemed to be a valuable 
pledge of the mutual benevolence, that ought 
for ever to unite the nations of both Americas. 


Hill 
(hy 


al 


CHAPTER XV. 


Departure from Caraccas.— Mountains of San 
Pedro and of Los Teques——La Victoria — 
Valleys of Aragua. 


To take the shortest road from Caraccas to ; 
the banks of the Oroonoko, we should have 
crossed the southern chain of mountains be- 
tween Baruta, Salamanca, and the savannahs 
of Ocumare ; traversed the steppes or Llanos 
of Orituca; and embarked at Cabruta, near 
the mouth of the Rio Guarico*. But this direct 
road would have deprived us of the opportunity 
of surveying the finest and most cultivated part 
of the province, the valleys of Aragua; of taking 
the level of an important part of the chain of the 
coast by means of the barometer; and of de- 
scending the Rio Apure as far as it’s junction 
with the Oroonoko. A traveller, who has the 
intention of studying the configuration and 


-* See chap. xii, vol. iii, p. 446; and the sketch of the 
valley of Caraccas, and the map of the lower Oroonoko in the 
Atlas Geographique. 


57 

natural riches of a country, is not guided by 
distances, but by the interest which the regions 
he may traverse excites in his mind. This 
powerful motive led us to the mountains of Los 
Teques, to the thermal springs of Mariara, to 
the fertile banks of the lake of Valencia, and 
through the immense savannahs of Calabozo to 


San Fernando de Apure, in the eastern part of 


the province of Varinas. Following this road, 
our first direction was to the West, then to the 
South, and finally to the East-South-East, to 
enter the Oroonoko by the Apure in the latitude 
‘of 7° 36’ 23”. 

In a journey of six or seven hundred leagues, 
the longitude being determined by the time- 
keeper from the points of Caraccas and Cumana, 
it became indispensable to fix with precision, 
and by particular observations, the situation of 
these two places. I have given above in the 
tenth chapter * the result of the astronomical 
observations made at the first point of departure, 
Cumana; the second point, the northernmost 
part of Caraccas, is situate in 10° 30’ 50” of 
latitude, and 69° 25/ of longitude. I found 


* See vol. iii, p. 313. 


+ Mr. Ferrer, who made his observations at the Custom 
house, found for the latitude 10° 30/ 24” ; and by the time- 
keeper, setting out from Porto-Rico (and admitting this 


place to be in 68° 28’ 3”), for the longitude 69° 23/, Ob- 


58 


the magnetic variation, on the 22d of January, 
1800, out of the town, near the gate of La Pas- 
tora, 4° 38’ 45” North-East; and on the 30th of 
January, within the town, at the University, 
4° 39° 15”; consequently 26’ more than at 
Cumana. The dip of the needle was 42:99, 
cent. division. The number of oscillations, 
measuring the intensity of the magnetic action, 
during 10’ of time at Caraccas, was 232; at 
Cumana, 229. We could not make very nu- 
merous observations: they are the result of 
an investigation of three months. 

The day that we qnitted the capital of Vene- 
zuela, subsequently swallowed up by terrible 
earthquakes, we reached the foot of the woody 
mountains, that close the valley toward the 
South-West, where we slept. We followed the 
right bank of the Rio Guayra as far as the vil- 
lage of Antimano, by a very fine road, partly 
scooped out of the rock; and passed by La 
Vega, and Carapa. The church of La Vega 


servations merely celestial give me for the Square of La 
Trinidad, : 

By lunar distances from the Sun and the stars, - 4° 37/ 27// 
By occultations of satellites - - - - 4° 37/537 


coe 


Mean - 4° 37/ 40” 


See Recueil @ Obs. Ast., vol. i, p. 158—184, We exclude a 
chronometrical determination, because of the tossing, of the 
boat, near Cape Codera, in a rough sea, 


59 


displays itself in a very picturesque manner on 
a range of hills covered with thick vegetation. 
Scattered houses are surrounded with date- 
trees, and seem to proclaim the easy circum- 
stances of their inhabitants. A chain of low 
mountains separates the little river Guayra 
from the valley of La Pascua*, so much cele- 
brated in the history of the country, and from 
the ancient gold-mines of Baruta and Oripoto. 
Ascending toward Carapa, we enjoy once more 


the sight of the Silla, which appears like an 
immense dome with a cliff toward the sea. This 
rounded summit, and the ridge of Galipano 
crenated like a wall, are the only objects, that 
in this basin of gneiss and mica-slate impress 


a character on the landscape. The other moun- 
tains are of a uniform and dull monotonous 
aspect. 

A little before reaching the village of Anti- 
mano, we find on the right a very curious geo- 
iogical phenomenon. In hollowing the new road 
out of the rock, two large veins of gneiss were 
discovered in the mica-slate. They are nearly 


* Valley of Cortes, or Easter Valley, so called because 
Diego de Losada, after having defeated the Teques Indians, 
and their cacique Guaycapuro, in the mountains of San 
Pedro, spent his Easter there in 1567, before entering the 
valley of San Francisco, where he founded the city of 
Caraccas. (Oviedo, p. 252.) 


60 


perpendicular, cut all the mica-slate strata *, 
and are nearly from six to eight toises thick. 
These veins contain, not fragments, but balls. or 
spheres of granular diabasis-+-, formed of con- 
centric layers. These balls are composed of 
lamellar feldspar. and hornblende intimately 
mixed together. The feldspar approaches some- 
times to vitreous feldspar, when it is dissemi- 
nated in very thin laminze in a mass of ¢ granular 
diabasis, decomposed, and emitting a strong 
argillaceous smell. The diameter of the ape es 
is very unequal, sometimes four or eight inches 

sometimes three or four feet ; their nucleus is 
more dense, without concentric layers, and of a 
botile-green, inclining to black. I could not 
perceive any mica in them; but, what is ver y 
remarkable, great quantities of disseminated 

e 

* The direction of the mica-slate is ‘or r. 12:2; dip, 72° 
East. Veins of gneiss, and even of granite, of new forma- 
tion, are very common in the metalliferous mountains (Erz- 
gebirge) of Saxony ; which, as we have alrea ady remarked, 
bear much analogy to the environs of Caraccas, There a are 
veins of granite in the gneiss at Geyer, and in the mica- 
slate of Johanngeorgenstadt. 

+ Ur-gruenstcin. I remember having seen similar balls 
filling a vein in transition-slate, near the castle of Sckaizen 
stein, in the margraviat of Bayreuth. I sent several balls 
from Antimano to the collection of the king of Spain at 
Madrid. See the description of the geological. specimens 


from Caraccas, in my letter to Don Joseph Clavijo. (Ann. de 
Fist, Nat., vol. ii, p. 262—271.) 


61 


garnets. ‘These garnets, of a very fine red, are 
found in the gruenstein alone,-and not in the 
gneiss, which serves as a cement to the balls, 
or in the mica-slate, which the veins traverse. 
The gneiss, the constituent parts of which are in 
a state of considerable disaggregation, contains 
large crystals of feldspar ; and, though it forms 
the body of the vein in the mica-slate, ‘it is tra- 
versed itself by threads of quartz two inches 
thick, and of a very recent formation. The 
aspect of this phenomenon is very curious: it 
appears as if cannon-balls were embedded ina 
wall of rocks. I also thought I recognized in 
these same regions, in the Montana de Avila, 
and at Cape Blanco, East of La Guayra, a gra- 
nular diabasis, mixed with a small quantity of 
quartz and pyrites, and destitute of garnets, not 
in veins, but in subordinate strata in. the mica- 
slate. This mode of position is unquestionably 
to be found in Europe in primitive mountains ; 
but in general the granular diabasis is more 
frequently connected with the system of transi- 
tion rocks; especially with a schist (Uebergangs- 
thonschiefer) abounding in beds of lydian-stone 
strongly carburetted, of schistoid-jasper *, am- 
pelites +, and black limestone. 

Near Antimano all the orchards were full of 


* Kieselschicfer. 
+ Alaunschicfer. 


62 


peach-trees loaded with flowers. ‘This village, 
the Valle, and the banks of the Macarao, fur- 
nish great abundance of peaches, quinces, and 
other European fruits for the market of Caraccas. 
Between Antimano and Ajuntas we crossed the 
Rio Guayra seventeen times. The road is very 
fatiguing; yet, instead of constituting a. new 
one, it would perhaps be better, to change the 
bed of the river, which loses a great quantity of 
water by the combined effects of filtration and 
evaporation. Each sinuosity forms a marsh 
more or less extensive. This loss of water is to 
be regretted in a province, the whole cultivated 
region of which, with the exception of the land 
between the sea and the littoral chain of Ma- 
riara and Niguatar, is extremely dry. The 
rains are much less frequent and less violent in 
this place, than in the interior of New Andalu- 
sia, at Cumanacoa, and on the banks of the 
Guarapiche. Many of the mountains of Ca- 
raccas enter the region of the clouds; but the 
strata of primitive rocks dip at an angle of 
70° or 80°, and generally toward the North- 
West, so that the waters are either lost in the 
interior of the Earth, or gush out in copious 
springs, not toward the South, but to the North 
of the mountains of the coast of Niguatar, Avi- 
la, and Mariara. The rising of the gneiss and 
mica-slate strata toward the South appears to 
me, to explain in great part the extreme humi- 


63 


dity of the coast. In the interior of the province 
we meet with spaces of land, two or three 


leagues square, quite destitute of springs. The 
sugar-cane, indigo, and coffee, can grow only in 
places where running waters can be made to 
supply the artificial irrigations necessary during 
very dry weather. The first colonists very im- 
prudently destroyed the forests. Evaporation is 
enormous on a stony soil surrounded with rocks, 
that radiate heat on every side. The mountains 
of the coast appear like a wall, extending East 
and West from Cape Codera toward Point 
Tucacas. They prevent the humid air of the 
shore, those inferior strata of the atmosphere 
resting immediately on the sea, and dissolving 
the largest proportion of water, from penetrating 
to the inlands. There are few apertures, few 
ravines, which, like those of Catia, or of Tipe *, 
lead from the coast to the high longitudinal 
valleys. No bed of a great river, no gulf allow- 
ing the sea to flow into the lands, spreads mois- 
ture by an abundant evaporation. In the eighth 
and tenth degrees of latitude, in regions where 
_ the clouds do not glide along the soil, many 
trees are stripped of their leaves in the months 
of January and February; not on account of 
the sinking of the temperature, as in Europe, 
but because the air, at this season, the farthest 


* Chap. xii, vol. iii, p. 455. and chap. xiii, p. 432. 


64 


from that of rains, has nearly attained it’s maxi- 
mum of dryness. The plants with very tough 
and glossy leaves alone resist this absence of 
humidity. Beneath the fine sky of the tropics, 
the traveller is struck with the aspect’ almost 
hibernal of the country; but the freshest ver- 
dure again appears, when he has reached’ the 
banks of the, Oroonoko, where another climate 
prevails; and the great forests preserve by their 
shade a certain quantity of moisture in the 
soil, which they shelter from the devouring 
ardor of the Sun. 

Beyond the small village of Antimano the 
valley becomes much narrower. The river is 
bordered with data, that fine gramineous plant 
with distich leaves, which sometimes reaches 
the height: of thirty feet, and which we have 
described under the name of gynerium*, Every 
hut is surrounded with enormous trees of per- 
sea}, at the foot of which the aristolochie, 
paullinia, and other creepers, vegetate. The 
neighbouring mountains, covered with forests, 
seem to spread humidity over the western ex- 
tremity of the valley of Caraccas.. We passed 
the night in a plantation of sugar-canes, before 
our arrival at Las Ajuntas. A square house ¢ 


* G, Saccharoides. Plant. aquin., vol. ii, tab, 115. Nova 
Gener., vol. i, p. 149. 

+ Laurus persea, alligator pear. 

Hacienda de Don Fernando Key-Munoz. 


65- 


contained nearly eighty negroes.; they were 
lying on skins of oxen spread upon the ground. 
In each apartment of the house were four slaves ; 
it looked like a barrack. A dozen fires were 
burning in the farm-yard, where people were 
employed in dressing victuals. We were again 
struck with the noisy mirth of the blacks, which 
almost prevented us from sleeping. The clouds 
hindered me from observing the stars; the 
Moon appeared only at intervals. ‘The aspect 
of the landscape was dull and uniform, and all 
the surrounding hills were covered with aloes. 
Workmen were employed at a small canal, 
which was intended to convey the waters of the 
Rio San Pedro to the farm, at a height of more 
than seventy feet. According to a barometric 
calculation, the site of the hacienda is only fifty 
toises above the bed of the Rio Guayra at La 
Noria, near Caraccas. 

The soil of these countries has been found but 
little favourable to the cultivation of the coffee- 
tree, which in general is less productive in the 
valley of Caraccas, than was imagined when 
the first plantations were made near Chacao, In 
order to form a general idea of the importance 
of this branch of commerce, we must remember, 
that the produce of the whole province of Ca- 
raccas in it’s greatest prosperity, before the 
revolutionary wars of 1812, amounted to fifty 
or sixty thousand quintals of coffee. This quan- 

‘VOL, IV. F 


65 


tity, almost equal to the produce of Guadaloupe 
and Martinico both together, must appear so 
much the more considerable, as it is only since 
1784, that a respectable citizen, don Bartho- 
lomew Blandin, endeavoured to introduce this 
branch of culture on the coasts of Terra Firma. 
Mr. Depons, in his statistical account of the 
Capitania-general of Venezuela, having been able 
to give information respecting the state of com- 
merce and agriculture only as far as the year 
1804, it will not be uninteresting to add some 
documents more recent, and not less exact. 
The finest coffee-plantations are now found in 
the savannah of Ocumare, near Salamanca, and 
at Rincon, in the mountainous countries of Los 
Mariches, San Antonio Hatillo,.and Los Budares. 
The coffee of the last three places, to the East 
of Caraccas, is of a superior quality ; but the 
trees bear a smaller quantity, which is attributed 
to the height of the spot, and the coolness:of 
the climate. The greater plantations of the 
province of Venezuela, as Aguacates, near Va- 
lencia, and Rincon, yield in good years a pro- 
duce of three thousand quintals. In 1796 the 
total exportation of the province was only four 
thousand eight hundred quintals, and in 1804, 
ten thousand; yet it began in 1789*. The 


* I obtained the following information from the custom- 
house at La Guayra : 


67 


prices varied from six to eighteen piastres per 
quintal. Atthe Havannah it has sunk as low as 
three piastres; but at this period, so disastrous for 
the planters, in 1810 and 1812, more than twe 
millions of quintals of coffee, amounting in value 
to ten millions sterling, were accumulated in the 
warehouses of England *. 

The extreme predilection entertained in this 
province for the culture of the coffee-tree. is 
partly founded on the circumstance, that the 
berry can be preserved. during a great num- 
ber of years; whereas, notwithstanding every 
possible care, cacao spoils in the warehouses 
after ten or twelve months. During the long 
dissensions of the European powers, at a time 
when the metropolis was too weak to protect 
the commerce of the colonies, industry was 
directed in preference toward productions, of 
which the sale was less urgent, and could wait the 
chances of political, and commercial events. I 
remarked, that, in the coffee-plantations, the nur- 
series are formed not so much by collecting to- 
gether those young plants, which accidentally rise 
under trees that have yielded a crop,as byexposing 


Exportation of 1789——= 233 quintals, each 100]bs of Castille. 
17921489 
1794-———-3646 
1796——4847 
L797 —— 3095 
* Colquhoun on the Wealth of the British Empire, 1814, p. 332. 
F2 


68 


the seeds of coffee to germination during five 
days, in heaps between plantain leaves. These 
seeds are taken out of the pulp, but yet retaining 
a part of it adherent to them. When this seed 
has germinated, it is sown, and produces plants, 
that can bear the ardour of the Sun better than 
those, that spring up in the shade in the coffee- 
plantations. In this country five thousand three 
hundred coffee-trees are generally planted in a 
vanega of ground, amounting to five thousand 
four hundred and seventy-six square toises *, 
This land, if it be capable of artificial irrigation, 
costs. five hundred piastres in the norther. part 
of the province. The coffee-tree bears flowers 
only the second year, and it’s flowering lasts only 
twenty-four hours. At this time the shrub has 
a charming aspect; seen from afar, it appears 
covered with snow. The produce of the third 
year becomes very abundant. In plantations 
well weeded and watered, and recently cultivated, 
we find trees bearing sixteen, eighteen, and even 
twenty pounds of coffee. In general however, 


* One vanega of Caraccas and Cumana contains nearly 
three almudas, or 28900 square varas, equal to 20'754 square 
metres. One vanega consequently is nearly equivalent to 
two hectares. A legal French acre of 1344 square toises, 
which produces in Europe, in land of a middling quality, 1200 
pounds of corn, or 3000 pounds of potatoes, is a quarter of 
a vanega, and would produce, under the torrid zone, near 
1700 pounds of coffee in a year, 


69 


% produce of more than a pound and half or 
two pounds cannot be expected from each plant ; 
and even this is superior to the mean produce of 
the West India islands. Rains at the time of 
flowering, the want of water for artificial irriga- 
tions, and a parasitic plant, a new species of 
loranthus, which clings to the branches, are 
extremely injurious to the coffee-trees. When, 
in plantations of eighty or a hundred thousand 
shrubs, we consider the immense quantity of 
organic matter contained in the pulpy berry of 
the coffee-tree, we may be astonished, that no 
attempts have been made to extract a spirituous 
liquor from them *. 


* The berries heaped together produce a vinous fermen- 
tation, during which a very pleasant alcoholic smell is emitted. 
Placing at Caraccas the ripe fruit of ‘the coffee-tree under 
an inverted jar, quite filled with water, and exposed to the 
rays of the Sun, I remarked, that no extrication of gas took 
place in the first twenty-four hours. After thirty-six hours 
the berries became brown, and yielded gas. A thermometer, 
enclosed in the jar in contact with the fruit, kept at night 
4° or 5° higher than the external air. In the space of 
eighty-seven hours, sixty berries, under various jars, yielded 
me from thirty-eight to forty cubic inches of a gas, which 
underwent no sensible diminution with nitrous gas. Though 
a great quantity of carbonic acid had. been absorbed by the 
water, as it was produced, I still found 0°78 in the forty 
inches. The remainder, or 0:22, was nitrogen. The carbonic 
acid had not been formed by the absorption of the atmos- 
pheric oxygen, That which is evolved from the berries of 


70 


If the troubles of St. Domingo, the augmen- 
tation for a time of the price of colonial pro- 
.duce, and the emigration of French planters, 
were the first causes of the establishment of 
coffee-plantations on the continent of America, 
in the island of Cuba, and in Jamaica; their 
produce has far more than compensated the 
deficiency of the exportation from the French 
West India islands. This produce has atg- 
mented in proportion to the population, the 
change of customs, and the increasing luxury 
of the nations of Europe. The island of St. 
Domingo exported in 1780, in the time of Mr. 
Necker, near seventy-six millions of pounds * of 
coffee. The exportation in 1812 and the three 


preceding years still amounted, according to the 
researches of Mr. Colquhoun, to thirty-six mil- 


the coffee-tree slightly moistened, and placed in a vial with 
a glass stopple filled with air, contains alcohol in suspension ; 
nearly as the foul air, which is formed in our cellars during 
the fermentation of must. On agitating the gas in contact 
with water, the latter acquires a decidedly alcoholic flavour. 
How many substances are perhaps contained in a state of 
suspension in those mixtures of carbonic aeid and hydrogen, 
which are called deleterious miasmuta, and which rise every 
where under the tropics, in marshy grounds, en the shores of 
the sea, in the forests where the soil is strewed with dead 
leaves, rotten fruits, and putrefying insects ! 

* Always French pounds, containing 9216 grains. 112 
English pounds = 105 French pounds; and 110 Spanish 
pounds = 93 French pounds, 


7h 


lions*. The cultivation of the coffee-tree, less 
fatiguing, and less expensive, than that of the 
sugar-cane, has not suffered so much from the 
domination of the blacks. The deficiency of 
forty millions of pounds is at present replaced 
by 


26,500,000 pounds produce of Jamaica. 
20,000,000 ——-— produce of Cuba. 
11,400,000 produce of Surinam, Deme- 
rara, Berbice, and Curasoa. 
5,000,000 produce of Venezuela. 


13,000,000 ———— produce of Java}. 


75,900,000 pounds. 


The total exportation of coffee from America to 
Europe now exceeds one hundred and _ six 
millions of pounds (French poids de marc). If 
we add to this quantity four or five millions 


* The exportation from St. Domingo to the English ports: 
alone amounted from 1809 to 1811, one year with another; to 
19,364,666 English pounds of coffee. Colquhoun, p. 331 and 
378. Produce of the Caribbee islands fourteen millions of 

’ pounds. Produce of Cuba, in 1809 alone, 80,000 quintals. 

+ More than 100,000 pikuls, at 183 pounds each. Mr. 
von Hogendorp thinks, that the islaed of Java, in it’s present 
state of civilization, but by means not very philanthropic, could 
furnish Europe with fifty millions of pounds of coffee. Raj= . 


fies Hist. of Java, vol. i, p. 129 and 213. 


72 


from the Isles of France and Bourbon, and 
thirty millions from Arabia and Java, we shall 
find the whole consumption of Europe* in 
1817 was not far from one hundred .and forty 
millions of pounds. In the inquiries I made 
concerning colonial produce in 1810, I fixed on 
a smaller quantity --. This enormous consump- 
tion of coffee has not diminished that of tea, the 
exportation of which from China has augmented 
more than one fourth in the last fifteen years ¢. 
Tea could be cultivated as well as coffee in the 
mountainous parts of the provinces of Caraccas 
and Cumana. Every climate is there found 
rising in stages one above another; and this 
new culture would succeed there as well as in 
the southern hemisphere, where the government 
of Brazil, nobly protecting at the same time 
industry and religious toleration, suffered at 
once the introduction of tea, of the Chinese, and 
of the dogmas of Fo. It is not yet a century 
since the first coffee-trees were planted at 


* The consumption of France is generally estimated (rather 
high) at twenty-three millions of pounds. But the population 
of France is about one sixth of that of all Europe. 

+ Essai polit. sur le Mexique, vol. ii, p. 435. 

t The exportation of tea from Canton, from 1804 to 1806, 
was on a mean 260,000 pekles, or thirty-one millions of 
pounds annually. ‘The consumption of Great Britain exceeds 
twenty millions. See as above, vol. ii, p- 658; and Colqu- 
houn, p. 384; Appendit, p. 8, 26, 34, 


“3 


Surinam, and in the West India islands, and 
already the produce of America amounts to 
fifteen millions of piastres, reckoning the quintal 
of coffee at fourteen piastres only. 

On the eighth of February we set out at 
sunrise, to cross Higuerota, a group of lofty 
mountains, which separate the two longitudinal 
valleys of Caraccas and Aragua. After having 
passed, near Las Ajuntas, the junction of the, 
two small rivers San Pedro and Macarao, which 
form the Rio Guayra, we ascended a steep hill 
to the table-land of La Buenavista, where we 
saw a few lone houses. The view extends on 
the North-West to the city of Caraccas, and on 
the South to the village of Los Teques. The 
country has a savage aspect, and is thickly 
wooded. We had gradually lost the plants of 
the valley of Caraccas*. We were eight hun- 


* The Flora of Caraccas is characterized chiefly by the 
following plants, which grow between the heights of four 
hundred and six hundred toises. Apura martinicensis, 
panicum mieranthum, parthenium hysterophorus, vernonia 
odoratissima (pevetera, the flowers of which have a delicious 
smell of heliotropium), tagetes caracasana, t. scoparia of La- 
gasca (introduced by Mr. Bonpland into the gardens of Spain), 
croton Aispidus, smilax scabriusculus, limnocharis humboldti 
Rich., equisetum ramosessimum, heteranthera alismoides, gly- 
cine punctata, hyptis Plumeri, pavonia cancellata Cav., sper- 
macoce rigida, crotalaria acutifolia, polygala nemorosa, stachy- 
tarpheta mutabilis, cardiospermum ulmaceum, amaranthus 
caracasanus, elephantopus strigosus, hydrolea molits, alter- 


74 


dred and thirty-five toises above the level of the 
ocean, which is almost the height of Popayan ; 
but the mean temperature of this place is pro- 
bably only 17° or 18°*. The road over these 
mountains is much frequented ; we met at 
every step long files of mules and oxen; it is 
the great road leading from the capital to Vic- 
toria, and the valleys of Aragua. The road is 
cut out of a talcose gneiss} in a state of de- 


nanthera caracasana, eupatorium amydalinum, elytraria fas- 
eiculatu, salvia jfimbriata, angelonia salicaria, heliotropium 
strictum, convolvulus batatilla, rubus jamaicensis, datura arbo- 
rea, dalea enneaphylla, buchnera rosea, salix humboldtiana 
Willd., theophrasta longifolia, tournefortia caracasana, inga 
cmerea, i, ligustrina, i. sapindioides, i. fastuosa, schwenkia 
patens, erythrina mitis. The most agreeable places for her- 
borizations near Caraccas are the ravines of Tacagua, Tipe, 
Cotecita, Catoche, Anauco, and Chacaito. (With respect to 
plants that grow between the heights of 800 and 1300 toises 
-on the Silla, in the region of the befarias, the trixis nerei- 
folia, and the myrica caracasana, see above, chap. xiii, vol, 
iii, p. 494—505.) In the four works of descriptive botany, 
which we have published, the Plantes Equinowiales, the Mono- 
graphie des Rhewia, that of the Melastomes, and the Nova 
Genera, the plants of the different parts of Spanish America 
are collected and arranged in natural families; “in this 
Personal Narrative 1 endeavour to bring together what be- 
longs to the same place, not in order to give a Flora, but to 
enable the botanical reader to form an idea of the physiog- 
nomy of the country, and the aspect of vegetation. 
* From 13:6° to 144° Reaumur. 
t. The direction of the strata of gneiss varies; it is either 
hor. 3:4, dipping to the N. Wy. or hor. 8'2, dipping to the 
Hel Of 


75 


composition. A clayey soil mixed with spangies 
of mica covered the rock, to the thickness of 
three feet. Travellers suffer from the dust in 
winter, while in the rainy season the place is 
changed into a slough. On descending the 
table-land of Buenavista, about fifty toises to- 
ward the South-East, an abundant spring, gush- 
ing from the gneiss, forms several cascades sur- 
rounded with the thickest vegetation. The path 
leading to the spring is so steep, that we could 
touch with our hands the tops of the arborescent 
ferns, the trunks of which reach a height of 
more than twenty-five feet. The surrounding 
rocks are covered with jungermannias and 
hypnoid mosses. The torrent, formed by the 
spring, and shaded with heliconias *, uncovers, 
as it falls, the roots of the plumerias+, cu- 


* Mr. Bredemeyer, who has in his possession valuable 
manuscripts on the plants of Caraccas, has described a musa- 
ceous plant under the name of heliconia cassupa. . It grows 
only in very temperate or cold places, We know not whe- 
ther it be the species of the Silla (see chap. xiii, vol. iti, p. 
501), for Messrs. Bredemeyer and Bose did not reach the 
summit of that mountain, or, see the befarias of so elevated a 
region. 

+ The red jessamine-tree, frangipaner of the French West 
India islands. The plumeria, so common in the gardens of 
the Indians, has been very seldom found in a wild state. It 
is mixed here with the piper jlagellare, the spadix of which 
sometimes reaches three feet long. With the new kind of 
fig-tree, which we have called ficus gigantea (Nov. Genera; 


76 


pevs *, browneas, and ficus giganteas. his 
humid spot, infested by serpents, presents a rich 
harvest to the botanist. The brownea, which the 
inhabitants call rosa del monte, or palo de Cruz, 
bears four or five hundred purple flowers toge- 
ther in one thyrsis; each flower has invariably 
eleven stamina, and this majestic plant, the 
trunk of which reaches the height of fifty or 


vol. il, p. 48), because of it’s attaining the height sometimes 


of a hundred feet, we find in the mountains of Buenavista, 
and of Los Teques, the ficus nympheeifolia of the garden of 
Schoenbrun, introduced ‘into our hot-houses by Mr. Brede- 
meyer, I am certain of the identity of the species found in 
the same places; but is it really the f. nymphzifolia of 
Linneus, which is supposed to be a native of the East In- 
dies? This I doubt. 

® Tn the experiments which I made at Caraccas, on the 
air that circulates in plants, I was struck with the fine 
spectacle, which the petioles and leaves of the clusea rosea 
display, when slit open under water, and exposed to the 
rays of the Sun. Each trachea gives out a current of pas, 
which is purer by 0-08 than atmospheric air. The phenome- 
‘non ceases, the moment the apparatus is placed in the shade. 
There is also but a very slight disengagement of air at the 
two surfaces of the leaves of the clusia exposed to the Sun 
without being slit open. The gas inclosed in the capsules 
of the cardiospermum vesicarium appeared to me to contain 
the same proportion of oxygen as the atmosphere, while that 
contained between the knots, in the hollow of the stalk, is 
generally less pure, containing only from 0-12 to 0:15 of 
oxygen. It is necessary 1o distinguish between the air 
circulating in the traehez, and that which is stagnant in tho 
great cavities of the stems and perivarps. 


“7 


sixty feet, is becoming rare, because it’s wood 
yields a highly valued charcoal. The soil is 


covered ‘with pine-apples, hemimeris, polygala, 


and melastomas. A climbing gramen* unites 
together with it’s light festoons trees, the pre- 
sence of which attests the great coolness of the 
climate of these: mountains. Such are the 
aralia capitata-~, the vismia caparosa, and the 
clethra fagifolia. Amid these plants, peculiar 
to the fine region of the arborescent ferns (re- 
gion de los helechos) some palm-trees rise in the 
openings, and some scattered groups of guarumo, 
or cecropia with silvery leaves, the trunks of 
which, of small thickness, are of a black colour 
toward the summit, as if they had been burnt 
by the oxygen of the atmosphere. We are 
surprised to find so noble a tree, which has the 
port of the theophrasta and the palm-tree, bear- 
ing generally only eight or ten terminal leaves. 
The ants, that inhabit the trunk of the gwarumo, 
or jarumo, and. destroy the interior cells, seem 
to impede it’s growth. We had already made 
one herborization in the temperate mountains 
of Higuerota, in the month of December, 
accompanying the capitania-general, Mr. de 
Guevara, in an excursion with the intendant of 


* Carice. See vol. iii, p. 17. 
+ Candelero. We found it also at la Cumbre, at a height 
of '700 toises. 


ke} 


the province to the Valles de Aragua. Mr. 
Bonpland then found in the thickest part of the 
forest some plants of aguatire, the wood of 
which, celebrated for it’s fine red colour, may 
one day become an article of exportation to 
Europe. It is the sickingia erythroxylon des- 
cribed by Messrs. Bredemeyer and Willdenow. 
Descending the woody mountain of Higue- 
rota toward the South-West, we reached the 
small village of San Pedro *, situate in a basin, 
where several valleys meet, and which is almost 
three hundred toises lower than the table-land 
of Buenavista. Plantain-trees, potatoes +, and 
coffee were cultivated together on that spot. 
The village is very small, and the church was 
not yet finished. We met at an inn (pulperia) 
several European Spaniards employed at the 
tobacco office. Their ill humour formed a sin- 
gular contrast with our disposition. Fatigued 
with the road, they vented their displeasure in 
complaints and maledictions against the wretch- 
ed country (estas tierras infelices), where they 
were doomed to live; while we were never 
wearied of admiring the wild scenery that 
surrounded us, the fertility of the soil, and the 
mildness of the climate. Near San Pedro, the 
talcose gneiss of Buenavista passes into a mica- 


* Absolute height, 584. toises, 
+ Solanum tuberosum. 


19 


slate filled with garnets, and containing subor- 
dinate beds of serpentine. This situation has 
some analogy with that of Zoeblitz in Saxony. 
The serpentine, very pure and of a fine green, 
varied with spots of a lighter tint, often appears 
only superimposed on the mica-slate. I found 
in it a few garnets, but no metalloid diallage. 
The valley of San Pedro, through which flows 
the river of the same name, separates two great 
masses of mountains, Higuerota and Las Cocuy- 
zas. We ascended toward the West by the 
small farms of Las Lagunetas and Garavatos. 
These are only solitary houses, which serve as 
inns, and where the mule-drivers find their 
favourite beverage, the guarapo, or fermented 
juice of the sugar-cane; intoxication is very 
common among the Indians who frequent this 
road. Near Garavatos there is a mica-slate 
rock of a singular form, that of a ridge, or steep 
wall, crowned by a tower. We opened the 
barometer at the highest point * of the mountain 
Las Cocuyzas, and found ourselves almost at 
the same elevation as on the table-land of 
Buenavista, which is scarcely ten toises higher, 
‘The prospect at Las Lagunetas is extensive, 
but rather uniform, This mountainous and un- 
cultivated ground between. the sources of the 


* Absolute height 845 toises, 


80 


Guayra and the Tuy is more than twenty-five 
square leagues. We there found only one 
miserable village, that of Los Teques, to the 
South-East of San Pedro. The soil is in some 
sort furrowed by a multitude of valleys, the 
smallest of which, parallel with each other, 
terminate at a right angle in the largest valleys. 
The back of the mountains is of an aspect as 
monotonous as the ravines ; it has no pyramidal 
forms, no ridges, no steep declivities. I am 
inclined to think, that the undulation of this 
ground, for the most part gentle, is less owing 
to the nature of the rocks, to the decomposition 
of the gneiss for instance, than to the long abode 
of water, and the action of currents. The lime- 
stone mountains of Cumana exhibit the same 
phenomenon to the North of Tumiriquiri *. 
From Las Lagunetas we descended into the 
valley of the rio Tuy. This western slope of the 
mountains of Los Teques bears the name of Las 
Cocuyzas ; it is covered with two plants with 
agave leaves; the maguey of Cocuyza, and the 
maguey of Cocuy. The latter belongs to the 
genus yucca}. It’s sweet and fermented juice 
yields a spirit by distillation; and Ihave seen 
the young leaves of this plant eaten. The 


* See chap. vi, vol. iii; p. 96. 
+ It is our yucca acaulis, Nov. Gen., vol. i, pr 289. 


81 


fibres of the full-grown leaves furnish cords of 
extraordinary strength*. Leaving the moun- 
tains of Higuerota and Los Teques, we entered 
a highly cultivated country, covered with ham- 
lets and villages; several of which would in 
Europe be called towns. From East to West, on 
a line of twelve leagues, we passed La Victoria, 
San Matheo, Turmero, and Maracay, containing 
together more than 28,000 inhabitants. The 
plains of the Tuy may be considered as the 
eastern extremity of the valleys of Aragua, 
extending from Guigne, on the borders of the 
lake of Valencia, as far as the foot of Las 
Cocuyzas. A barometrical measurement gave 
me 295 toises for the absolute height of the 
Valle del Tuy, near the farm of Manterola, and 
222 toises for that of the surface of the lake, 
The Rio Tuy, flowing from the mountains of 
Las Cocuyzas, runs first toward the West, then 
turning to the South, and to the East, it takes 
it’s direction along the high savannahs of Ocu- 
mare, receives the waters of the valley of Carac- 
cas, and reaches the sea near Cape Codera. It 
is the small portion of it’s basin directed toward 
the West, that, geologically speaking, would 
seem to belong to the valley of Aragua, if the 


* At the clock of the cathédral of Caraccas, a eord of 
maguey, five lines in diameter, has sustained for fifteen 
years a weight of 850 pounds. 

VOL, IV. G 


$2. 


hills of calcareous tufa, which interrupt the con- 
tinuity of these valleys between Consejo and La 
Victoria, did not deserve some consideration. 
We shall here again remind the reader, that the 
group of the mountains of Los Teques, eight 
hundred and fifty toises high, separates two 
longitudinal valleys, formed in gneiss, granite, 
and mica-slate ; the easternmost of which, con- 
taining” the capital of Caraccas, is 200  toises 
higher than the western valley, which may be 
considered as the centre of agricultural industry. 

Accustomed for a long time to a moderate 
temperature, we found the plains of the Tuy 
extremely hot, although the thermometer kept 
in the day, between eleven in the morning and 
five in the afternoon, at only ‘23° or 24°. The 
nights were of delightful coolness, the tempera- 
ture falling as low as 17-6°*. As the heat gra- 
dually abated, the air became more fragrant 
- with the odour of flowers. We remarked above 
all the delicious perfume of the lirio hermoso}, a 
new species of pancratium, of which the flower, 
eightor nine inches long, adorns the banks of 
the Rio Tuy. We spent two very agreeable days 
at the plantation of don Jose de Manterola, who 
in his youth had accompanied the Spanish em- 
bassy to Russia. Brought up and patronised by 


* 14° Reaumur. 
+ Paneratium undulatum (Nov. Gen., vol. i, p. 280). 


83 


Mr. de Xavedra, one of the most enlightened 
intendants of Caraccas, he was going to em- 
bark for Europe, when that celebrated states- 
man became minister. But the governor of the 
province, dreading the influence of Mr. de Mon- 
terola, caused him to be arrested in the port ; 
and when orders arrived from the court to put 
an end to so arbitrary a confinement, that 
minister was already out of favour. At a dis- 
tance of one thousand five hundred leagues 
from Equinoxial America, it is not easy to arrive 
in time to profit by the power of a man in 
place. 

The farm we inhabited is a fine plantation of 
sugar-canes. The ground is as’ smooth as the 
bottom of a-drained lake. The Rio Tuy winds 
among grounds covered with plantains, and a 
little wood of hura crepitans, erythrina corallo- 
dendron, and fig-trees with nymphea leaves. 
The bed of the river is formed of pebbles of 
quartz. I never met with more agreeable 
baths than those of the Tuy. The water, as 
clear as crystal, preserves even in the day a 
temperature of 18°6°; a considerable coolness 
for these climates, and for a height of three 
hundred toises; but the sources of the river are 
in the surrounding mountains. The house of 
the proprietor, situate on a hillock, of fifteen or 
_ twenty toises of elevation, is surrounded by the 
casas of the negroes. Those who are married 

G 2 


84 


provide food for themselves, Here, as every 
where else in the valleys of Aragua, a small 
spot of ground is allotted to them to cultivate ; 
and where they labour on Saturdays and Sundays, 
the only days in the week that they are free. 
They keep poultry, and sometimes even a pig. 
Their masters boast of their happiness, as in the 
North of Europe the great landholders like to 
descant upon the ease which the peasants enjoy, 
who are attached to the glebe. The day of our 
arrival we saw three fugitive negroes brought 
back ; they were slaves newly purchased. I 
dreaded having to witness one of ‘those punish- 
ments, which, wherever slavery prevails, de- 
stroys all the charm of a country life. Happily 
these blacks were treated with humanity. 

In this plantation, as in all those of the pro- 
vince of Venezuela, three species of sugar-cane 
can be distinguished even at a distance by the 
colour of their leaves ; the ancient Creole sugar- 
cane, the Otaheite cane, and the Batavia cane. 
The first has a leaf of a deeper green, the stem 
less thick, and the knots nearer together. This . 
sugar-cane was the first introduced from India 
into Sicily, the Canary Islands, and the West 
Indies. The second is of a lighter green; and 
it’s stem is higher, thicker, and more succulent. 
The whole plant displays a more luxuriant ve~ 
getation. We owe this plant to the voyages of 


kK 


85 


Bougainville, Cook, and Bligh *. Bougainville 
carried it to the Isle of France, whence it passed 
to Cayenne, Martinique, and, since 1792, to 
the rest of the West India islands. The sugar- 
cane of Otaheite, the fo of those islanders, is 
one of the most important acquisitions, for which 
colonial agriculture is indebted to the travels of 
naturalists. It yields not only one third more 
of juice than the creolian cane on the same 
space of land; but from the thickness of it’s 
stem, and the tenacity of it’s ligneous fibres, it 
furnishes much more fuel. This last advantage 
is important in the West Indies, where the de- 
struction of the forests has for a long time 
obliged the planters to use the canes deprived of 
their juice, to keep up the fire under the boilers. 
But for the knowledge of this new plant, the 
progress of agriculture on the continent of Span- 
ish America, and the introduction of the East 
Indian and Java sugar, the revolutions of St. 
Domingo, and the destruction of the great sugar 
plantations of that island, would have had a 
more sensible effect on the prices of colonial pro- 
duce in Europe. The Otaheite sugar-cane was 
carried from the island of Trinidad + to Carac- 


* See my Tableaux de la Nature, tom. i, p. 74; Nov. Gee 
nera, tom. i, p. 181; and.a note of Messrs. Thonin and Du 
Buc in the Voyage a la Trinité, vol. ii, p. 357—362. 

_ + By the care of Messrs. Don Simon de Majora, Martin, 

Eriarte, Mannel Ayala, and Andres Ibarra. 


86 


eas. From Caraccas it passed to Cucuta and 
San Gil in the kingdom of New Grenada *. In 
our days it’s cultivation during twenty-five years 
has almost entirely removed the apprehension, 
which was at first entertained, that, transplant- 
ed to America, the plant would by degrees de- 
generate, and become as slender as the creole 
cane. If it be a variety, it is a very constant 
one. The third species, the violet sugar-cane, 
called Cana de Batavia, or de Guinea, is cer- 
tainly indigenous in the island of Java, where 
it is cultivated in preference in the districts of 
Japara and Pasuruan-+. It’s foliage is purple 
and very broad; and it is preferred in the pro- 
vince of Caraccas for rum. The tablones, or 
grounds planted with sugar-canes, are divided 
by hedges of a colossal gramen; the Jatta, or 
gynerium with distich leaves. At the Tuy men 
were employed in finishing a dyke, to form a ca- 
nal of irrigation. This enterprise had cost the 
proprietor seven thousand piastres for the ex- 


pense of workmanship, and four thousand pias- 


tres for the costs of lawsuits in which he was 
engaged with his neighbours. While the law- 
yers were disputing about a canal, of which only 


* Under the name of Cafia solera. See x paper by D. 
Eloy de Valenzuela, incumbent of Bucaramanga, in the Se- 
man de Santa Fe, tom. ii, p. 13. 


+ Rafiles, Hist. of Jaca, tom. i, p. 124, 


| 


=a 


SSN 


87 


one half was finished, Mr. de Manterola began 
to doubt even of the possibility of carrying the 
plan into execution. I took the level of the 
ground with a lunette d’epreuve, on an artificial 
horizon, and found, that the dam had been con- 
structed eight feet too low. What sums of mo- 
ney have I seen expended uselessly in the Span- 
ish colonies, for undertakings founded on errone- 
ous levelling ! 

The valley of the Tuy has it’s “gold mine,” 
like almost every part of America inhabited by 
Whites, and backed by primitive mountains. I 
was assured, that, in 1780, foreign gold-gather- 
ers were seen to pick up grains of that metal. 
and to establish a place for washing the sand in 
the ravine of the Oro. An overseer, or major- 
domo, of a neighbouring plantation, had follow- 
ed these indications; and after his death, a 
waistcoat with gold buttons being found among 
his clothes, this gold, according to the logic of 
these people, could only have proceeded from a 
vein, which the falling-in of the earth had ren- 
dered invisible. In vain I objected, that I could 
not, by the mere view of the soil, without dig- 
ging a large trench in the direction of the vein, 
well judge of the existence of the mine; I was 
compelled to yield to the desire of my hosts. 

For twenty years past the major-domo’s waist- 
coat had been the subject of conversation in the 
country. Gold extracted from the bosom of the 


88 


Farth is far more alluring in the eyes of the vul- 
gar, than that which is the produce of agricultu- 
ral industry, favored by the fertility of the soil, 
and the mildness of the climate. 

To the North-West of the Hacienda del Tuy, 
in the northern range of the chain of the coast, 
we find a deep ravine, called Quebrada Seca, be- 
cause the torrent, by which it was formed, loses 
it’s waters through the crevices of the rock, be- 
fore it reaches the extremity of the ravine. The 
whole of this mountainous country is covered 
with a thick vegetation. We there found the 
same verdure as had charmed us by it’s fresh- 


ness in the mountains of Buenavista and Las - 


Lagunetas, wherever the ground rises as high as 
the region of the clouds, and where the vapours 
of the sea have free access. In the plains, on 
the contrary, as we have observed above, many 
wees are stripped of a part of their leaves during 
the winter ; and when we descend into the val- 
ley of the Tuy, we are struck with the almost 
hybernal aspect of the country. The dryness of 
the air is such, that the hygrometer of Deluc * 


* The following is a series of hygrometrical observations, 
which I made in the valleys of the Tuy and Aragua, in the 
shade, the whalebone hygrometer having been carefully re- 
duced to the point of extremé humidity. Hacienda de Mon- 
terola (altitude 295 toises). On the 11th of February, at 
1 o'clock; hygr. 36:8°, therm. cent. 26°6°: at 4 ; hygr. 
347°, th. 27°5°: at 12 (midnight), hygr, 38°8°, th. 22°5% 


89 


keeps day and night between 36° and 40°. Far 
from the river we scarce find a few huras or 
piper trees extend their foliage over thickets 
destitute of verdure. This phenomenon seems 
owing to the dryness of the air, which attains it’s 


maximum in the month of February; and not, 
as the European planters assert, “to the seasons 
of Spain, of which the empire extends as far as 
the torrid zone.” | It is only plants transported 


The 12th of Feb., at 22 in the morning, hygr. 37:8°, th. 
25°: at 3, hygr. 35°, th. 262°: at 11, hygr. 42°6°, th. 
21:2°. Hacienda de Cura (altitude 226 toises). The 14th 
of Feb, at 2, hygr. 35°2°, th. 275°: at 4, hygr. 34°, th. 
281°: at 5° 30/, hygr. 342°, th. 263°: at 7, hygr. 
36°7°,. th. 25°: at 12, hygr. 39°5°. On the 15th of Feb. 
at 2° 30’, hygr. 342°, th. 25°: at 11, hygr. 37°6°, th. 
23°7°. The 16th of Feb. at 18, hygr. 38°5°, th. 20°: at 21, 
hygr. 39°7°, th. 23°3°: at 3° 30’, hygr. 352°, th. 26:2°: 
at 9, hygr. $7°6°, th. 23°3°: at 11, hygr. 38°6°, th. 227°. 
The 17th of Feb. at 19, hygr. 39-6, th. 212°: at 1, hygr. 
35:2°, th. 26°3°: at 12, hygr. 37-4°, th. 226°. The 19th 
of Feb. at 4, hygr. 34°, th. 262°: at 12, hygr. 38°7°, th. 
225°. During all these observations the sky was clear, 
and without clouds. The mean humidity of the month of 
February appeared to have been in the valleys of Aragua, 
35° —36° of Deluc, or 70:8°—72° of Saussure, with a mean 
temperature of 24°3°. These numbers indicate a consider- 
able dryness, if we recollect the usual state of the hygrome- 
ter between the tropics. (See chap. iii, vol. i, p. 88—90.) 
At Paris, and at Geneva, the humidity of the months, the 
_mean temperature of which reaches 18°, is above 82° of 
Saussure. 


90 


from one hemisphere to the other, which, in 
their organic functions, in the developement of 
their leaves and flowers, still retain their rela- 
tions to a distant climate ; and, faithful to their 
habits, follow for a long time it’s periodical 
changes. In the province of Venezuela the trees 
Stripped of their foliage begin to renew their 
leaves nearly a month before the rainy season. 
It is probable, that at this period the electrical 
equilibrium of the air is already disturbed, and 
the atmosphere, although not yet clouded, be- 
comes gradually more humid. The azure of the 
sky is paler, and the elevated regions are loaded 
with light vapours, uniformly diffused. This 
season may be considered as the awakening of 
nature ; it is a spring, which, according to the 
received language of the Spanish colonies, pro- 
claims the beginning of winter, and succeeds to 
the heats of summer *, 
Indigo was formerly cultivated in the Quebra- 
da Seca; but as the soil covered with vegeta- 
tion cannot there concentrate so much heat as 
the plains and the bottom of the valley of the: 
Tuy receive and radiate, the cultivation of coffee 
has been substituted in it’s stead. As we ad- 


* That part of the year most abundant in rain is called 
winter ; so that in Terra Firma the season, which begins. by 
the winter solstice, is designated by the name of summer ; 
and it js usual to hear, that it is winter on the mountains, at 
the time when swnmer prevails in the neighbouring plains. 


91 


vanced in the ravine we found the moisture in- 
crease. Near the Hato, at the northern extre- 
mity of the Quebrada, a torrent gushes down on 
sloping beds of gneiss. An aqueduct was there 
forming, to convey the water to the plain. 
Without irrigation, the progress of agriculture is 
null in these climates. A tree of monstrous size 
fixed our attention*. It lay on the slope of the 
mountain, above the house of the Hato. At 
the least sinking of the earth, it’s fall would 
have crushed the habitation which it shaded: it 
had therefore been burnt near it’s foot, and cut 
down in such a manner, that it fell between some 
enormous fig-trees, which prevented it from rol- 
ling into the ravine. We measured the fallen 
tree; and though it’s summit had been burnt, 
the length of it’s trunk was still one hundred 
and fifty-four feet-~. It was eight feet in dia- 
meter near the roots, and four feet two inches at 
the upper extremity. 

Our guides, less anxious than ourselves to 
measure the bulk of trees, continually pressed 
us to proceed, and seek for the “ gold mine.” 
This part of the ravine, little frequented, is not 
uninteresting. We made the following observa- 
tions on the geological constitution of the soil. 
At the entrance of the Quebrada Seca we re- 


* Hura crepitans. 


+ French measure, nearly fifty metres. 


92 


marked great masses of primitive saccharoidal 
limestone, tolerably fine grained, of a bluish tint, 
and traversed by a great number of veins of cal- 
careous spar of a dazzling whiteness. These 
calcareous masses must not be confounded with 
the very recent depositions of tufa, or carbonat 
of lime, that fill the plains of the Tuy; they 
form beds of mica-slate, passing into a talc- 
slate*. The primitive limestone often simply 
covers this latter rock in concordant stratifica- 
tion. Very near the hato the talcose slate be- 
comes entirely white, and contains small layers 
of soft and unctuous graphic ampelite +. Some 
pieces, destitute of veins of quartz, are a real 
granular graphite, which might be of use in the 
arts. The aspect of the rock is very singular in 
those places, where thin plates of black ampelite 
alternate with thin, sinuous, and satiny plates 
of a talcose slate white as snow. It would seem 
as if the carbon and iron, which in other places 
colour the primitive rocks, are here concentrated 
in the subordinate strata. 
Turning toward the West we reached at length 
the ravine of gold (Quebrada del Oro). We 


* Real talkschiefer of Werner, without garnets or serpen- 
tine, not eurite or weisstine. It is rather in the mountains of 
Buenavista, that the gneiss manifests a tendency to pass into 
eurite. 

¥ Direction hor. 3:5°; dip ‘70° South-East. 
t Zetchenschtefer. 


93 


hardly recognized the vestige of a vein of quartz 
on the slope of a hill. The falling down of the 
earth caused by the rains had changed the sur- 
face of the ground, and rendered it impossible to 
make any observation. Great trees were grow- 
ing in the same places, where the gold-washers 
had worked twenty years before. It is proba- 
ble, that the mica-slate contains here, as near 
Goldcronach in Franconia, and in the country 
of Saltzbourg, auriferous veins; but how is it 
possible to judge whether this vein be worth the 
expense of being wrought, or whether the ore 
occur only in nodules, and in less abundance 
in proportion as it isso rich? In order to de- 
rive some advantage from our fatigues, we 
made a long herborization in the thick forest, 
that extends beyond the hato, and ‘abounds in 
cedrelas, browneas, and fig-trees with nym- 
phea leaves. The trunks of these last are co- 
vered with very odoriferous plants of vanilla, 
which in general flower only in the month of 
April. We were here again struck with those 
ligneous excrescences, which in the form of 
ridges, or ribs, augment in so extraordinary a 
manner, and as far as twenty feet above the 
ground, the thickness of the trunk of the fig- 
trees of America. I found trees twenty-two 
feet and half in diameter near the roots. These 
ligneous ridges sometimes separate from the 
trunk ata height of eight feet, and are trans- 


94 


formed into cylindrical roots two feet thick. 
The tree looks as if it were supported by but 
tresses. ‘This scaffolding however does not pe- 
netrate very deep into the earth. The lateral 
roots wind at the surface of the ground, and 
when at twenty. feet distance from the trunk 
_ they are cut with a hatchet, we see the milky 
juice of the fig-tree gush out, which, when de- 
prived of the vital influence of the organs of the 
tree, is altered and coagulates. What a won- 
derful combination of célls and vessels exists in 
these vegetable masses, in these gigantic trees 
of the torrid zone, which without interruption, 
perhaps during a thousand years, prepare nu- 
tritious fluids, raise them to the height of one 
hundred and eighty feet, convey them down 
again to the ground, and conceal beneath a 
rough and hard bark, under the inanimate 
layers of ligneous matter, all the movements of 
organic life ! 

I availed myself of the clearness of the nights, 
to observe at the plantation of Tuy two emer- 
sions of the first and third satellites of Ju- 
piter. ‘These two observations gave, according 
to the tables of Delambre, long. 4h 39’ 14”; 
and by the chronometer I found 4% 39’ 10”, 
These are the last occultations I observed be- 
fore my return from the Oroonoko ; they served 
to fix with some: accuracy the eastern extre- 
mity of the valleys of Aragua, and the foot of 


95 


the mountains of Los Cocuyzas. I found by 
meridian altitudes of Canopus the latitude of 
the Hacienda de Manterola, on the 9th of Fe- 
bruary, 10° 16° 55”; the 10th of February, 
10° 16 34”... Notwithanding the extreme dry- 
ness of the air, the stars twinkled even at alti- 
tudes of 80°; a very rare phenomenon in this 
zone, and which perhaps announced the end of 
the fine season. The dip of the needle was 
41-6° (cent. div.) ; and 228 oscillations in ten 
minutes time indicated the intensity of the mag- 
netic power. The variation of the needle was 
4° 30’ North-East. During my stay in the 
valleys of Tuy and Aragua, the zodiacal light 
appeared almost every night with extraordin- 
ary brilliancy. I had perceived it, for the first 
time between the tropics at Caraccas, on the 
18th of January, after seven in the evening. 
The point of the pyramid was at the height of 
53°. The light totally disappeared at 9" 35’ 
(apparent time), nearly 3° 50’ after sunset, 
without any diminution in the serenity of the 
sky *. La Caille, in his voyage to Rio Janeiro 
and the Cape, had already been struck with the 
_ beautiful appearance displayed by the zodiacal 
light between the tropics, not so much on ac- 


* Qn the 15th of February, the total disappearance took 
place 2' 50/ after sunset. Altitude of the pyramid, 50° 
above the horizon, 


96 


count of it’s less inclined position, as of the 
greater transparency of the air*. It would ap- 
pear singular, that long before Childrey and. 
Dominic Cassini, the navigators who frequented 
the seas of the two Indies had not directed the 
attention of the philosophers of Europe toward. 
this light, of a regular form and progress, if we 
did not know how little, till the middle of the 
eighteenth century, mariners were interested by 
any thing, that had not an immediate relation 
to the course of the ship, and the demands of 
navigation. 

However brilliant the zodiacal light in the 
dry valley of Tuy, I have observed it more 
beautiful still at the back of the Cordilleras of 
Mexico, on the banks of the lake of 'Tezcuco, 
eleven hundred and _ sixty toises above the sur- 
face of the ocean. On this table-land, the hy- 
grometer of Deluc goes back as far as 15° +; 
and under 21 inches eight lines of barometrical 
pressure the extinction of light is 3 weaker 
than on the plains. In the month of January, 
1804, the light rose sometimes to more than 60° 
above the horizon. The Milky Way appeared 


* It was the great serenity of the air, that caused this 
phenomenon to be remarked, in 1668, in the arid plains of 


Persia. 


+ To 428°, Sauss., at the temperature of 23:4° cent, 


therm. 


97 


to grow paler compared with the brilliancy of 
the zodiacal light; and if small, bluish, scat- 
tered clouds were accumulated toward the 
West, it seemed as if the Moon were going to 
rise. 
I must here relate another very singular fact, 
which is several times noted in my private 
journal written on the spot. . On the 18th of 
January, and the 15th of February, 1800, the 
intensity ofsthe zodiacal light changed in a very 
perceptible manner, at intervals of two or three 
minutes. Sometimes it was very faint, at others 
it surpassed the brilliancy of the Milky Way in 
Sagittarius. The changes took place in the 
whole pyramid, especially toward the interior, 
far from the edges. During these variations of 
the zodiacal light, the hygrometer indicated a 
considerable dryness. The stars of the fourth 
and fifth magnitude appeared constantly to the 
naked eye with the same degree of light. No 
stream of vapour was visible, nothing seemed to 
alter the transparency of the atmosphere. In 
other years I saw the zodiacal light augment in 
the southern hemisphere half an hour before it’s 
disappearance. Dominic Cassini admitted *, 
“that the zodiacal light was feebler in certain 
years, and then returned to it’s former bril- 
liancy.” He thought, that these slow changes 


# Mém. de l Académie, vol. viii, p. 164 and 208. 
VOL. Iv, H 


98 


were connected with “the same emanations, 
which render the appearance of spots and faculze 
periodical on the solar disk.” But this excellent 
observer does not mention those. changes of 
intensity in the zodiacal light, which I have 
several times remarked between the tropics, in 
the space of a few minutes. Mairan * asserts, 
that in France it is common enough to see the 
zodiacal light, in the months of February and 
March,-mingling with a kind of Aurora Borealis, 
which he calls wndecided, and the ‘nebulous 
matter of which spreads itself all around the 
horizon, or appears toward the West. I very 
much doubt, that, in the observations I have 
been relating, there was any mixture of these 
two species of light. The variations in intensity 
took place at considerable altitudes; the light 
was white, and not coloured; tranquil, and not 
undulating. Besides, the Aurora Borealis is so 
seldom visible between the tropics, that, during 
five years, though almost constantly-sleeping in 
the open air, and observing with unremitting 
attention the vault of Heaven, I never perceived 
the least traces of this phenomenon. 

Resuming the whole of what I find noted on 
my registers concerning the variations of the 
zodiacal light, I am rather inclined to think,.- 


* Traité de Udurore Boreale, (2d ed.) p. 112-—166. 
Mém. de ? Académie, 1738, p. 482, id, 1784, p. 572. 


99 


« 


that these variations are not all of them appear- 
ances dependant on certain modifications in the 
state of our atmosphere. Sometimes, during 
nights equally clear, I sought in vain for the 
zodiacal light, when the day before it had ap- 
peared with the greatest brilliancy *. Must we 
admit, that emanations, which reflect white 
light, and seem to have some analogy with the 
tail of comets, are less abundant at certain 
periods? The researches on the zodiacal light 
have acquired a new degree of interest, since 
geometricians have taught us, that we are igno- 
rant of the real causes of this phenomenon, 
The illustrious author of La Mécanique céleste 
has shown, that the solar atmosphere cannot 
reach even the orb of Mercury; and that it 
could not in any case display the lenticular 
form +, which observations have atiributed to 
the zodiacal light. We may also entertain the 


* Mairan had been struck with the same_phenomenon in 
our climates. <I cannot pass unnoticed,” he says, “ that 
twice, in the month of April, I have not been able to discover 

- toward the West the least trace of the zodiacal light, during 
weather which seemed most favourable for it’s appearance, 
and at the hour and season, when this light is most visible. 
And what is also worthy of being remarked, it appeared on 
the morrow of each of these days, very brilliant and very 
extensive.” Mém, de ? Académie, 1733, p- 483 ; and Matran, 
Traité de ? Aurore bor., (2d ed.) p. 263. 

t Syst. du Monde, (4th ed.) p. 270. 

H 2 


100 


same doubts respecting the nature of this light, 
as with regard to that of the tail of comets. Is 
it in fact a reflected, or a direct light? It is te 
be hoped, that philosophical travellers, who may 
visit the Equinoctial regions, will provide them- 
selves with instruments of polarization, calcu- 
lated to solve this important question. 

We left the plantation of Manterola on the 
llth of February, at sunrise. The road fol- 
lows the smiling banks of the Tuy ; the morning 
was cool and humid, and the air seemed em- 
balmed by the delicious odour of the pancratium 
undulatum, and other large liliaceous plants. 
In our way to La Victoria, we passed the pretty 
village of Mamon, or of Consejo, celebrated in 
the country for a miraculous image. of the 
Virgin. A little before we reached Mamon, we 
stopped at a farm belonging to the family of 
Monteras.’ A negress more than a hundred years 
old was seated before a small hut, constructed 
with earth and reeds. . Her age was known, 
because she was a creole slave. She seemed still 
to enjoy very good health. “ I hold her to the 
Sun” (la tengo al sol), said her grand-son ; “the 
heat keeps her alive.” The means appeared to 
us rather violent, for the Sun darted it’s rays 
almost perpendicularly. ‘The nations with a 
brown skin, Blacks well seasoned, and. Indians, 
attain a happy old age in the torrid zone. I have 


+ 


101 


mentioned elsewhere the history of a native of 
Peru *, who died at the age of one hundred and 
forty-three years, after having been ninety years 
married. 

Don Francisco Montera, and his brother, a 
young and enlightened ecclesiastic, accompanied 
us, in order to conduct us to their house at La 
Victoria. Almost all the families, with whom 
we had lived in friendship at Caraccas, the Usta- 
rizes, the Tovars, and the Toroes, were assembled. 
in the ‘fine valleys of Aragua. Proprietors of 
the richest plantations, they contended with 
each other in whatever could render our stay 
agreeable. Before we plunged into the forests 
of the Oroonoko, we enjoyed once more all the 


advantages of an advanced civilization. 


‘The road from Mamon to La Victoria runs 
toward the South and the South-West. We 
soon lost sight of the river Tuy, which, turning 
to the East, forms an elbow at the foot of the 
high mountains of Guayraima. As we drew 
nearer to Victoria, the ground became smoother; 
it looked like the bottom of a lake, the waters 
of which had been drained off. We might have 


fancied ourselves in the valley of Hasli, in the 


canton of Berne. The neighbouring bills, only 
one hundred and forty toises in height, are 
composed of calcareous tufa; but their abrupt 


® Hilario Pari de Chiguata. 


102 


declivities . project like promontories on the 
plain. Their form indicates the ancient shore of 
the lake. The eastern extremity of this valley 
is parched and uncultivated. No advantage 
has been derived from the ravines, that water 
the neighbouring mountains ; but a fine cultiva- 
tion is commencing in the proximity of the 
town. I say of the town, though in my time 
Victoria was considered only as a village 
(pueblo). 

We do not easily accustom ourselves to the 
idea of a village with seven thousand inhabi- 


tants, fine edifices, a church decorated with 


doric columns *, and all the resources of com- 
mercial industry. ‘The inhabitants of Victoria 
had long demanded of the court of Spain the 
title of villa, and the right to choose a cabildo, 
a municipality. The Spanish ministry opposed 
their request, though at the expedition of Itur- 
riaga and Solano to the Oroonoko, the pompous 
title of ciudad, city, had been granted, at the 
earnest solicitations of the monks of St. Francis, 
to a few groups of Indian huts. The municipal 
government, according to it’s nature, ought to 
be one of the principal bases of the liberty and 
equality of the citizens; but in the Spanish 
colonies it has degenerated into a municipal 


* Tt was not finished, notwithstanding that the work had 
been going on for five years. 


|| 
! 


4 
| 
a 
4 
‘| 
4 
A 


aes 


Tete 


103 


aristocracy. Those who exercise an absolute 
power, instead of availing themselves skilfully 
of the influence of a few powerful families, dread 
what they call the spirit of independance of 
small boroughs. They prefer leaving the body 
of the state without strength and animation, to 
favouring those centres of action which escape 
their influence, and to keeping up that partial 
life which animates the whole mass, because it 
emanates rather from the people, than from the 
supreme authority. In the time of Charles V 
and Philip If the institution of municipalities 
was wisely protected by the court. Powerful 
men, who had acted a part in the conquest, laid 
the foundation of towns, and formed tke first 
cabildos, in imitation of those of Spain. An 
equality of rights then existed between the men’ 
of the mother country and their American de- 
scendants. Politics, without: being frank, were 
less suspicious than at present. The continent, 
recently conquered and ravaged, was considered 
as a distant Spanish possession. The idea of a 
colony, in the sense annexed to it in our days, 
developed itself only with the modern system of 
commercial policy; and this policy, while it 
recognized the real sources of national wealth, 
soon became narrow, mistrustful, and exclusive. 
It prepared the disunion. between the. colonies 
and the mother-country; it established among 


104 


the whites an inequality, which had not been 
fixed by the first legislature of the Indies. 
The concentration of powers gradually weakened 
the influence of the municipalities ; and these 
same cabildos, that in the 16th and 17th cen- 
turies * had the privilege of governing the 
country per interim after the death of a gover- 
nor, were considered by the court of Madrid as 
dangerous shackles on the royal authority. From 
that time the richest villages, notwithstanding 
their rising population, obtained with difficulty 
the title of a town, and the right of governing 
themselves. Hence it results, that the recent 
changes in colonial politics have not all been in 
favour of philosophy. We may be convinced 
of this by looking over the laws of the Indies + 
as far as they concern the Spaniards who have 
migrated to America and their descendants, the 
rights of communities, and the establishment of 
municipalities. 

The environs of La Victoria present a very 
remarkable aspect, with regard to agriculture. 
The height of the cultivated ground is from two 
hundred and seventy to three hundred toises 
above the level of the ocean, and yet we there 
find fields of corn mingled with plantations of 


* Cedulas reales of 1560, and 1675, 
+ Leyes de Indias, the most ancient. 


105 


sugar-canes, coffee, and plantains. Excepting 
the interior of the island of Cuba*, we scarcely 
find any where else in the equinoctial regions 
European corn cultivated in large quantities in 
so low a region. The. fine fields of wheat in 
Mexico are between six hundred and twelve 
hundred toises of absolute elevation ; and it is 
rare to see them descend to four hundred toises. 
We shall soon perceive, that the produce of 
grain augments sensibly, from high latitudes 
toward the Equator, with the mean temperature 
of the climate, in comparing spots of different 
elevations. The success of agriculture depends 
on. the dryness of the air; on the rains distri- 
buted among different seasons, or accumulated 
in one rainy season; on winds blowing con- 
stantly from the east, or bringing the cold air 
of the North into very low latitudes, as in the 
gulf of Mexico; on mists, which for whole 
months diminish the intensity of the solar rays ; 
in short, on a thousand local circumstances, 
which have less influence on the mean tempe- 
rature of the whole year, than on the distribu- 
tion of the same quantity of heat among the 
different parts of the year. It is a striking 
spectacle, to see the grain of Europe cultivated 
from the Equator as far as Lapland, in the lati- 
inde of 69°, in regions where the mean heat is 


* The district of Quatro Villas. 


106 


frgm 22° to —2°, in every place where the tempe- 
rature of summer is above 9° or 10°. We know 
the minimum of heat requisite to ripen wheat, 
barley, and oats; we are less certain in re- 
spect to the maximum, which these species of 
grain, accommodating as they are, can support. 
We are even ignorant of all the circumstances, 
which favor the culture of corn between the 
tropics at. very small heights. La Victoria and 
the neighbouring village of San Matheo yield an 
annual produce of four thousand -quintals of 
wheat. It is sown in the month of December, 
and the harvest. is reaped on the seventieth or 
seventy-fifth day. The grain is large, white, 
and abounding in gluten: it’s pellicle is thinner 
and not so hard as that of the wheat of the very 
cold table-lands of Mexico. An acre * near Victo. 
ria generally yields from three thousand to three 
thousand two hundred pounds weight of wheat. 
The average produce is consequently here, .as 
at Buenos Ayres, three or four times as much 
as that of northern countries. Nearly sixteen 
times the quantity of the seed is reaped ; while, 
according to Lavoisier, the surface of France 
yields on a mean only five or six for one ; or 
from one thousand to twelve hundred pounds 
per aere. Notwithstanding this fecundity of 


* An arpent des eaux et foréts, or legal acre of France, of 
which 1:95 = 1 hectare. It is about 1} acre English. 


4 


SR Dy i ND ee Nal a ap Gat gia An 


107. 


- 


the soil, and this happy influence of the climate, 
the culture of the sugar-cane is more productive 
in the valleys of Aragua, than that of corn. 

La Victoria is traversed by the little. river 
Cal nchas, running not into the Tuy, but into 
the Rio Aragua. ‘It thence results, that this 
fine country, producing at once sugar and corn, 
belongs already to the basin of the lake of Va- 
lencia, to a system of interior rivers, which do 
not communicate with the sea. - The quarter of 
the town West of the Rio Calanchas is called da 
otra banda; it is the most commercial part ; 
merchandize is. every where exhibited, and 
ranges of shops form the streets. Two com- 
mercial roads pass through La Victoria; that of 
Valencia, or of Porto Cabello, and the road of 
Villa de Cura, or of the plains, called camino de 
los Llanos. We here find more Whites in pro- 
portion than at Caraccas. We visited at sun- 
set the little hill of Calvary, where the view is 


extremely fine and extensive. We discover on 


the West the smiling valleys of Aragua, a vast 
space covered with gardens, cultivated fields, 
clumps of wild trees, farms, and hamlets. 
Turning toward the South and South-East, we 
see, extending as far as the eye can reach, 
the lofty mountains of La Palma, Guayraima, 
Tiara, and Guiripa, which conceal the immense 
plains or steppes of Calabozo. This interior 
chain stretches to the West along the lake of 


108 


Valencia, toward the Villa de Cura, the Cuesta 
de Yusma, and the denticulated mountains of 
Guigue. It is very steep, and constantly co- 
vered with that light vapour, which in hot 
climates gives a vivid blue tint to distant objects, 
and, far from concealing their outlines, renders 
them more strongly marked. It is believed, 
that, among the mountains of the interior chain, 
that of Guayraima reaches an elevation of twelve 
hundred toises. I found, in the night of the 
eleventh of February, the latitude of La Victoria 
10° 13° 35”, the magnetic dip 40°8°, the inten- 
sity of the forces equal to 236 oscillations in 
10’ of time*, and the variation of the needle 
4:4° to the North-East. 

We proceeded slowly on our. way by the 
villages of San Matheo, Turmero, and Maracay, 
to the-Hacienda de Cura, a fine plantation be- 
longing to Count Tovar, where we did not 
arrive till the oveerith of February, in the 
evening. The valley, which gradually widens, 
is bordered with hills of calcareous tufa, called 


* The intensities of the magnetic force at La Guayra, at 
La Venta Grande, between La Guayra and Caraccas, and 
at La Victoria, including from 2384 to 236 oscillations, are 
the greatest £ observed in Terra Firma. In this zone, where 
the dip is generally from 40° to 43°, the mean intensity of 
the forces corresponds to 226 or 228 oscillations. These 
augmentations depend no doubt on some local cause, in the 
neighbouring gneiss, mica-slate, and granite, 


yi Seeks ah inka g 


109 


here tierra blanca. ‘The scientific men of the 
country have made several attempts to calcine 
this earth; mistaking it for the porcelain earth 
proceeding from the decomposition of strata of 
feldspar. We stayed some hours with a family 
equally enlightened and respectable, the Usta- 
rizes, at Concesion. The house, which contains 
a ‘collection of choice books, is placed on an 
eminence, and surrounded with plantations of 
coffee and sugar-canes. A grove of balsam- 
trees (balsamo*) gives coolness and shade to 
this spot. We observed with a lively interest 
the great number of scattered houses in the 
valley, inhabited by freedmen. In the Spanish 
colonies the laws, the institutions, and the 
manners, are more favourable to the liberty of 
the Blacks, than in the other European settle- 
ments. 

San Matheo, Turmero, and Maracay, are 
charming villages, where every thing announces 
persons in the most easy circumstances. We 
seemed to be transported to the most industrious 
parts of Catalonia. Near San Matheo we find 
the last fields of wheat, and the last mills 
with horizontal hydraulic wheels. A harvest of 
twenty for one was expected : and, as if the pro- 
duce were but moderate, I was asked, whether 
corn produced more in, Prussia and in Poland, 


* Amyris elata. 


110 


it is an error that generally prevails under the 
tropics, to consider grain as plants which dege- 
nerate in advancing toward the Equator ; and 
to believe, that the harvests are more abundant 
in the northern climates. Since calculations 
have been made on the progress of agriculture 
in the different zones, and the temperatures 
under the influence of which corn will flourish, 
it has been found, that, beyond the latitude of 
45°, the produce of wheat is no where so consi- 
derable, as on the northern coasts of Africa, and 
on the table-lands of New Grenada, Peru, and 
Mexico. Without comparing the mean tempe- 
rature of the whole year, but only the mean 
temperature of the season which embraces the 
cycle of “vegetation of corn, we find for three 
months of summer *, in the north of Europe, from 


* The mean heat of the summers of Scotland in the environs 
of Edinburgh, lat. 56°, is found again on the table-lands of 
New Grenada, so rich in wheat, at 1400 toises of elevation, 
and at 4° of latitade. On the other hand, we find the mean 
temperature of the valleys of Aragua, lat. 10° 13/, and of all 


the plains that are not very elevated in the torrid zone, in 
the summer temperature of Naples and Sicily, lat. 39° to 40°. 
These numbers indicate the situation of the isotheric lines 
_(lines of the same summer heat), and not that of the iso- 
thermal lines (those of equal annual temperature). Consider- 
ing the quantity of heat received on the same spot of the 
Globe during a whole year, the mean temperatures of the 
valleys of Aragua, and the table-lands of New Grenada, of 
300 and 1400 toises of elevation, correspond to the mean 


ot sree darian 


ee ee 


ill 


15° to 19°; in Barbary, and in Egypt, from 27° 
to 29°; within the tropics, between fourteen and 
six hundred toises of height, from 14° to 25°5° 
of the centigrade thermometer. 

The fine harvests of Egypt and of the kingdom 
of Algiers, those of the valleys of Aragua and 
the interior of the island of Cuba, sufficiently 
prove, that the augmentation of heat is not 
prejudicial to the harvest of wheat and other 
alimentary grain, unless it is attended with an 
excess of drought or moisture. To this cireum- 
stance no doubt we must attribute the apparent 
anomalies, that are sometimes observed between 
the tropics, in the inferior limit of corn*. We 
are astonished to see to the East of the Havan- 
nah, in the famous district of Quatro Villas, 
this limit descend almost to the level of the 
ocean ; while to the West of the Havannah, on 
the slope of the mountains of Mexico and Xa- 
lapa, at six hundred and seventy-seven toises of 
height, the luxury of vegetation is such, that 


temperatures of the coasts at 23° and 45° of latitude, For 
the basis of these talculations, see my Essay on the Distri- 
bution of Heat id the Mém. de la Soc. d’Arcueil, vol. iii, Pp: 
516, 579, 602: and above, vol. ili, p. 459. 

* Since our return to Europe, Mr. Caldas has collected a 
great number of observations oa this dimit, in a memoir which 
ought to be found among the papers of. our illustrious friend, 
Don Jose Celestino Mutis. See the Spanish translation of 
my Geography of Plants, in the Semanario de N. Grenada, 
vol, ii, p. 187. 


112 


wheat does not form ears. At the beginning of 
the conquest, the corn of Europe was cultivated 
with success in several regions, which are now 
thought too hot, or too damp, for this branch of 
agriculture. The Spaniards recently removed 
to America were less accustomed to live on 
maize; they still adhered to their European 
customs; they did not calculate whether corn 
would be less profitable than coffee or cotton; 
they tried seeds of every kind ; they interrogated 
nature with more boldness, because their rea- 
sonings were less founded on false theories. 
The province of Carthagena, crossed by the 
chain of the mountains Maria and Guamoco, 
produced wheat till the sixteenth century*. In 
the province of Caraccas, this culture is very 
ancient among the mountainous lands of To- 
cuyo, Quibor, and Barquisimeto, which connect 
the littoral chain with the Sierra Nevada of 
Merida. It is still happily practised there, and 
the environs of the town of Tocuyo alone export 
annually more than eight thousand quintals of 
excellent flour. But, though the province of 
Caraccas, in it’s vast extent, presents several 
spots very favourable to the cultivation of Eu- 
ropean corn, I believe, that in general this 
branch of agriculture will never become of 


* Don Ignacio de Pombo, Informe del real Consulado de 
Cartagena de Indias, 1810, p. '75. 


Siar emit Ai sync ng i aS A at tc an rw 


113 

great importance there. The most temperate 
valleys are not sufficiently wide; they are not 
real table-lands; and their mean elevation 
above the level of the sea is not considerable 
enough, for the inhabitants to avoid perceiving, 
that it is more their interest to establish planta- 
tions of coffee, than to cultivate corn. Flour 
now comes to Caraccas either from Spain, or 
from the United States. When, in circum- 
stances more favourable to industry and public 
tranquillity, the road from Santa Fe de Bogota 
to the port of Pachaquiaro is laid open, the in- 
habitants of Venezuela will receive the flour of 
New Grenada by way of the Rio Meta and the 
Oroonoko. 

The village of Turmero is four leagues distant 
from San Matheo. The road leads through 
plantations of sugar, indigo, cotton, and coffee. 
The regularity, which we observed in the con- 
struction of the villages, reminded us, that they 
all owe their origin to monks and missions. 
The streets are straight and parallel; they cross 
each other at right angles; and the church is 
erected in the great square, situate in the centre. 
The church of Turmero is a sumptuous edifice, 
but overloaded with architectural ornaments. 
Since the missionaries have been replaced by 
vicars, the Whites have mixed their habitations 
with the Indians. The -latter gradually dis- 
appear as a separate race; that is to say, they 

YOL. IV. I 


114 


are represented in the general statement of the 
population by the Mestizoes andthe Zamboes, 
whose numbers daily increase. I still found 
however four thousand tributary Indians in the 
valleys of Aragua. Those of Turmero and Gua- 
cara are the most numerous. They are little, 
but less squat than the Chaymas; their eyes 
announce more vivacity and intelligence, owing 
perhaps less to a diversity in the race, than to a 
superior state of civilization. They work like 
freemen by the day; they are active and labo- 
rious during the short time they allot to labour ; 
but what they earn in two months is spent in 
one week, in buying strong liquors, at the small 
inns, of which unhappily the numbers daily 
increase. 

We saw at Turmero the remains of the as- 
sembled militia of the country, and their ap- 
pearance alone sufficiently indicated, that. these 
valleys had enjoyed for ages undisturbed peace. 
The Capitania-general, in order to give a new 
impulse to the military service, had ordered a 
grand review; and the battalion of Turmero, 
in a mock fight, had fired on that of La Vic- 
toria. Our host, a lieutenant of the militia, was 
never weary of describing to us the danger of 
these manoeuvres. “ He had been surrounded 
with muskets, which might have burst at every 
instant; he had been kept four hours in the 
Sun, and his slaves were not permitted to hold 


15 


1 99 


an umbrella over his head.” With what rapidity 
do nations, who appear the most pacific, acquire 
military habits! I then smiled at_a timidity 
avowed with such simple frankness ; and twelve 
years afterward those valleys of Aragua, those 
peaceful plains of La Victoria and Turmero, 
the defile of Cabrera, and the fertile banks of 
the lake of Valencia, have become the theatre 
of the most obstinate and bloody conflicts be- 
tween the natives and the soldiers of the mother 
country. 

To the South of Turmero, a mass of limestone 
mountains advances into the plain, separating 
two fine sugar-plantations, Guayavita and Paja. 
The latter belongs to the family of Count Tovar, 
who have property in'every part of the province. 
Near Guayavita, brown iron ore has been dis- 
covered. To the North of Turmero, a granitic 
summit (the Chuao) rises in the Cordillera of 
the coast; from the top of which we discern at 
the same time the sca and the lake of Valencia. 
Crossing this rocky ridge, which runs toward 
the West farther than the eye can reach, paths 

somewhat difficult lead to the rich plantations 
of cacao on the coast, to Choroni, Turiamo, and 
Ocumare, noted alike for the fertility of the soil, 
and the insalubrity of their climate. Turmero, 
Maracay, Cura, Guacara, every point of the 
valley of Aragua, has it’s mountain-road, which ° 
2 


116 


terminates at one of the small ports on the 
coast. 

Upon quitting the village of Turmero, we 
discover, at a league distant, an object, which 
appears at the horizon like a round hillock, or 
tumulus, covered with vegetation. It is neither 
a hill, nor a group of trees close to each other, 
but one single tree, the famous zamang del 
Guayre, known throughout the province for the 
enormous extent of it’s branches, which form a 
hemispheric head five hundred and seventy-six 
feet in circumference. The zamang is a fine 
species of mimosa, the tortuous branches of 
which are divided by bifurcation. It’s deli- 
cate and tender foliage displayed itself agree- 
ably on the azure of the sky. We stopped 
a long time under this vegetable roof. The 
trunk of the zamang del Guayre*, which is 
found on the road from Turmero to Maracay, 
is only sixty feet high, and nine thick ; but it’s 
real beauty consists in the form of it’s head. 
The branches extend like an immense umbrella, 
and bend toward the ground, from which they 
remain at a uniform distance of twelve or fif- 


* The mimosa of la Guayre, for zamang is the Indian name 
for the genera mimosa, desmanthus, and acacia. The place 
where the tree is found is called ef Guayre. The mimosa 
(inga) saman of Jacquin (Fragm. bot., p. 5, tab. ix), culti- 
vated in the fine hot-houses of Schoenbrun, is not of the same 
species as the colossal tree of Turmero, 


7 


teen feet. The circumference of this head is so 
regular, that, having traced different diameters, 
I found them one hundred and _ ninety-two 
and one hundred and eighty-six feet. One side 
of the tree was entirely stripped of it’s foliage, 
owing to the drought ; and on the other side 
there remained at once leaves and flowers. 
Tillandsias, lorantheze, cactus pitahayas, and 
other parasite plants, cover it’s branches, and 
crack the bark. The inhabitants of these vil- 
lages, but particularly the Indians, hold in ve- 
neration the zamang del Guayre, which the 
first conquerors found almost in the same state 
in which it now remains. Since it has been 
observed with attention, no change has appeared 
in it’s thickness or height. This zamang must 
be at least as old as the Orotava dragon-tree. 
There is something solemn and majestic in the 
aspect of aged trees, and the violation of these 
monuments of nature is severely punished in 
countries, that are destitute of monuments of 
art. We heard with satisfaction, that the pre- 
sent proprietor of the zamang had brought an 
action against a farmer, who had had the temerity 
to cut off a branch. The cause was tried, and 
the tribunal condemned the farmer. We find 
near Turmero and the hacienda de Cura other 
zamangs, the trunks of which are larger than 
ihat of Guayre, but their hemispherical head is 
not of equal extent. 


118 


The culture and population of the plams 
augment as we advance toward Cura and 
Guacara, on the northern side of. the lake, 
The valleys of Aragua contain more than 52,060 
inhabitants, on a space of ground thirteen 
leagues long, and two wide. This is a relative 
population of two thousand souls on a square 
league, which equals almost that of the most 
populous parts of France. The village, or rather 
the small town of Maracay, was heretofore the 
‘centre of the indigo plantations, when this 
. branch of colonial industry was in it’s greatest 
prosperity. In 1795, seventy tradesmen had 
established shops in a population of six thousand 
inhabitants. The houses are all of masonry, 
and every court contains cocoa-trees, which rise 
above the habitations. The aspect of general 
wealth is still more striking at Maracay, than 
at Turmero. The anil, or indigo, of these pro- 
vinces has always been considered in commerce 
as equal, and sometimes superior to that of 
Guatimala. This branch of culture has since 
1772 followed that of cacao, and preceded the 
cultivation of cotton and coffee. The predilec- 
tion of the colonists has been alternately fixed 
on each of these four productions; but the 
cacao and coffee are now the only important 
branches of commerce with Europe. In the 
most prosperous times the fabrication of indigo 


119 


has almost equalled ‘that of Mexico*; it rose 
in the province of Veriezuela to 40,000 arrobas, 
or a million of pounds, the value of which 
exceeded - 1,250,000 piastres +. I* shall here 
give from official documents {, never before 
published, the progressive augmentation of this 
branch of agriculture at Aragua. 


Exportation of Indigo by the way of La Guayra. 
20,300 pounds. 


1784 126,233 
1785 213,172 
1786 271,005 
1787 432,570 


Annual mean 
from 1774 ass 1778 


1788 505,956 
1789 718,393 
1792 680,229 


1794 898,353 
1796 737,966 


In this statement no attention has been paid 
to the contraband trade, which may be com- 


* The commerce of Guatimala amounts to 1,200,000 or 
1,500,000 pounds of indigo. 

+ The pound of indigo at ten rials of plate. 

t Expediente relativo al Comercio y Crecido contrabando de la 
Provincia de Caracas, dirigido al Exc. Senor Don Pedro Varela; 
por el Conde de Casa Ve alencia, 18 Junio, 1797. Informes de 
Don Esteban Fernandez de Leon, Intendente de Caracas, del 2 
Sept., 1795. (MSS.) 


120 


puted for indigo at least at a fourth or fifth of 
the annual exportation. To form an idea of the 
immense riches arising. from agriculture in the 
Spanish colonies, we must recollect, that the 
indigo of Cavaccas, the value of which amounted 
in 1794 to more than six millions of franks, was 
the produce of four or five square leagues. In 
‘the years 1789—1795 near four or five thou- 
sand freemen came annually from the Llanos to 
the valleys of Aragua, to assist in the culture and 
fabrication of indigo. They worked during two 
months, by the day. 

The indigo plant impoverishes the soil, where 
it is cultivated during a long series of years, 
more than any other. The lands of Maracay, 
Tapatapa, and Turmero, are looked upon as 
exhausted ; and indeed the produce of indigo 
has been constantly decreasing. Maritime wars 
have caused a stagnation in the trade, and the 
price has fallen in consequence of the frequent 
importations of indigo from Asia. The East- 
India company now sells at London* more 
than 5,500,000 pounds weight of indigo, while 
in 1786 it did not draw from it’s vast possessions 
more than 250,000 pounds. In proportion as 
the cultivation of indigo has decreased -in the 
valleys of Aragua, it has increased in the pro- 
vince of Varinas, and in the burning plains of 


* For example, in 1810, See Colyuhoun, Append. p. 22. 


121 


Cucuta, where, on the banks of the Rio Tachira, 
virgin land yields an abundant produce, and of 
the richest colour. 

We arrived very late at Maracay, and the 
persons to whom we were recommended were 
absent. Scarcely was ‘our embarrassment ‘per- 
ceived by the inhabitants, when they contended 
with each other in offering to lodge us, to place 
our instruments, and take care of our mules. 
It has been said a thousand times, but the 
traveller always feels the desire of repeating it 
again, the Spanish colonies are the land of hos- 
‘pitality: they are so even in those places, where 
industry and commerce have diffused wealth 
and improvement among the planters."A family 
of Canarians received us with the most amiable 
cordiality: an excellent repast was prepared 
for us, and every thing was carefully avoided, 
that might act as any restraint on us. The 
master of the house * was travelling on com- 
mercial business, and his young wife had lately 
had the happiness of becoming a mother. She 
was transported with joy, when she heard, that 
on our return from the Rio 'Negro we should 
proceed by the banks of the Oroonoko to 
‘Angostura, where her husband’was. We were 
to bear him the tidings of the birth of his first 
child. In those countries, as among the ancients, 


* Don Alexandro Gonzales. 


122 


travellers are looked upon by their hosts as the 
safest means of communication. There are 
indeed posts established, but they, make such 
great circuits, that private persons seldom en- 
trust them with letters for the Llanos, or savan- 
nahs of the interior. The child was brought to 
us at the moment of our departure; we had 
seen him asleep at night, but we must see him 
awake in the morning. We promised to de- 
scribe his features exactly to his father, but the 
sight of our books and instruments somewhat 
chilled the mother’s confidence. She said, “ that 
in a long journey, amid’ so many cares of 
another kind, we might well forget the colour 
of her child’s eyes.” Soothing habits of hospi- 
tality! Ingenuous expressions of such confi- 
dence, as marks the first dawn of civilization ! 
On the road from Maracay to the Hacienda 
de Cura we enjoyed from time to time the view 
of the lake of Valencia. An arm of the granitic 
chain of the coast stretches toward the South 
into the plain. It is the promontory of Porta- 
chuelo, which would almost close the valley, if 
it were not separated by a narrow defile from 
the rock of La Cabrera. This place has acquired 
a mournful celebrity in the late revolutionary 
wars of Caraccas ; each party having obstinately 
disputed it’s possession, as opening the way to 
Valencia, and to the Llanos. La Cabrera now 
forms a peninsula; not sixty years ago it was a 


| 
| 


123 


rocky island in the lake, the waters’ of which 
gradually diminish, We spent seven very 
agreeable days at the Hacienda de Cura, in a 
small habitation surrounded by thickets ; for 
the house itself, situate in a fine sugar planta- 
tion, was infected with the bubas [ yaws ?], a 
disease of the skin very, common among the 
slaves in these valleys. 

We lived after the manner of the rich in this 

country; we bathed twice, slept three times, 
and made three meals in the twenty-four hours. 
The temperature of the water of the lake is 
rather warm, being from twenty-four to twenty- 
five degrees; but there is another cool and 
delicious bathing-place, under the shade of 
ceibas and large zamangs, at Toma, in a torrent 
gushing from the granitic mountains of the 
Rincon del Diablo. In entering this bath, we 
‘had not to fear the sting of insects, but the 
little brown hairs, that cover the pods of the 
dolichos pruriens, cowitch. When these small 
hairs, well characterised by the name of pica- 
pica, stick to the body, they excite a violent 
irritation on the skin ; the dart is felt, but the 
cause is unperceived. 

Near Cura we found all the people occupied in 
clearing the ground covered with mimosa, ster- 
culia, and coccoloba excoriata, in order to extend 
the cultivation of cotton. This product, which 
partly supplies the place of that of indigo, has 


124 


Succeeded so well for some years, that the 
cotton-tree now grows wild on the borders of the 
lake of Valencia. We have found shrubs of eight 
or ten feet high, entwined with bignonia and 
other ligneous ‘creepers. The exportation of 
cotton from Caraccas however is yet of small 
importance. It amounted at an average at La 
Guayra scarcely to three or four hundred 
thousand pounds in a year; but including all 
the ports of the Capitania-general it arose, on 
account of the flourishing culture of Cariaco, 
Nueva Barcelona, and Maracaybo, to more 
than 22,000 quintals*. This is nearly the half 
of the produce of the whole Archipelago of the 


* In 1794 the exportation from all the ports of the 
Capitania-general for Spain amounted to 804,075 pounds of 
cotton ; for other Spanish colonies in America, particularly 
for the industrious province of Campeachy, where they 
manufacture a great quantity of cotton goods, 90,482; for 
foreign colonies, 117,281 ; total, 1,011,838 pounds. (Jnforme 
del Sr Conde de Casa Valencia, MS.) In the same year, La 


Guayra alone exported but 431,658 pounds, 126,436 pounds © 


of which were from the province of Maracaybo. Exportation 
of this port (without including the contraband trade) 


1789 ————-170,427 pounds 
1792———_—— 258,502 
1796 537,178 
1797 —_——-107,996 


For the first six months of 1809, see the Semanario de Santa 
Fe, vol. ii, p. 324. The prices in 1794 were from thirty- 
four to fifty-six piastres the quintal. E 


| 
thal 
| 


125 


West Indies*. The cotton of the valleys of 
Aragua is of a fine quality, being inferior only 
to that of Brazil; for it is preferred to that of 
Carthagena, St. Domingo, and the Caribbee 
islands. The cultivation of cotton extends on 
one side of the lake from Maracay to Valencia ; 
and on the other, from Guayca to Guigue. ‘The 
large plantations yield from sixty to seventy 
thousand pounds a year. When we reflect, that 
in the United States, consequently beyond the 
tropics, in a variable climate, often unfavourable 
to this produce, e exportatiqn of indigenous 
cotton rose in eignteen years, from 1797 to 
1815, from 1,200,000 pounds to 83,000,000, 
it is difficult to form an idea of the immense 


extent, which this branch of commerce will 


* Mr. Medford, in his researches on the manufactories of 
England, reckons, that, of 61,380,000 pounds of cotton, 
which these manufactories consumed in 1805, there were 
thirty-one millions from the United States; ten millions 
from Brazil; and ten millions from the West Indies. This 
last quantity was not the produce of a single year, or of the 
islands alone. The great and little islands together produced 
in 1812 only 5,200,000 pounds of cotton, the greater part of 
which grew in Barbadoes, the Bahama Islands, Dominica, 
and Grenada. The. produce of the soil of the West Indies 
must not be confounded with their exportation, which is 
augmented by the carrying trade. Colquhoun, p. 378; 
Page, tom i, p. 3. 

+ The cotton manufactures of Great Britain alone furnish, 
in all kinds of cotton goods (printed calicoes, stockings, &c.) 


126 


attain, when national industry shall cease to be 
shackled in the united provinces of Venezuela, 
in New Grenada, in Mexico, and on the banks 
of the river Plate. In the present state of things, 
the coasts of Dutch Guyana, the gulf of 
Cariaco, the valleys of Aragua, and the pro- 
vinces of Maracaybo and Carthagena, produce, 

next to Brazil, the greatest quantity of cotton in 
South America. 

During our stay at Cura, we made numerous 
excursions to the rocky islands, that rise in the 
midst of the lake of Valencia, to the warm 
Springs of Mariara, and to the lofty granitic 
mountain, called el Cucurucho de Coco: a 
dangerous and narrow path leads to the port of 
Turiamo and: the celebrated cacao-plantations 
of the coast. In all these excursions we were 
agreeably surprised, not only at the progress of 
agriculture, but the increase of a free, laborious 
population, accustomed to toil, and too poor to 
rely on the assistance of slaves. White and 
mulatto farmers had every where small separate 
establishments. Our host, whose father had a 
revenue of 40,000 piastres, possessed more lands 
than he could clear ; he distributed them in the 
valleys of Aragua among poor families, who 


to the value of twenty-nine millions sterling; and the value 


of) the material, in it’s unwrought state, amounts to six 
millions. 


127 


chose to apply themselves to the cultivation of 
cotton. He endeavoured to surround his ample 
plantations with freemen, who, working as they 
_ chose, either in their own land, or in the neigh- 
bouring plantations, supplied him with day- 
labourers at the time of harvest. Nobly occu- 
pied on the means best adapted gradually to 
extinguish the slavery of the Blacks in these 
provinces, Count Tovar flattered himself with 
the double hope of rendering slaves less neces- 
sary to the landholders, and furnishing the freed- 
men with opportunities of becoming farmers. 
On departing for Europe he had parcelled out 
and let a part of the lands of Cura, which 
extend toward the West at the foot of the rock 
of Las Viruelas. Four years after, at his return 
to America, he found on this spot, finely culti- 
vated in cotton, a little hamlet of thirty or 
forty houses, whichis called Punta Zamuro, and 
‘ which we after visited with him. The inhabi- 
tants of this hamlet are almost all Mulattoes, 
Zamboes, or free Blacks. This example of letting 
out land has been happily followed by several 
other great proprietors. The rent is ten piastres 
for a vanega of ground, and is paid in money, 
or in cotton. As the small farmers are often in 
want, they sell their cotton at a very moderate 
price. They sell it even before the harvest; 
and these advances, made by rich neighbours, 
place the debtor in a situation of dependance, 


128 


which frequently obliges him to offer his services 
as a labourer. The price of hands is cheaper 
here than in France. A freeman, working as a 
day-labourer (peon), is paid in: the valleys of 
Aragua, and in the Llanos, four or five piastres 
a month, not including food, which is very 
cheap on account of the abundance of meat and 
vegetables. I love to dwell on these details of 
colonial iudustry, because they prove to the 
inhabitants of Europe, what to the enlightened 
inhabitants of the colonies has long ceased to be 
doubtful, that the continent of Spanish America 
can produce sugar and indigo by free hands : 
and that the unhappy slaves are capable of 
becoming peasants, farmers, and landholders, 


CHAPTER XVI. 


Lake of Tacarigua.—Hot Springs of Mariara. 
—Town of Nueva Valencia de el Rey. — 
Descent toward the coasts of Porto Cabello. 


Tue valleys of Aragua, of which we have dis- 
played the rich cultivation and the admirable 
fecundity, form a narrow basin between granitic 
and calcareous mountains of unequal height. 
On the North, they are separated by the Sierra 
Mariara from the seacoast; and toward’ the 
South, the chain of Guacimo and Yusma serves 
them as a rampart against the heated air of the 
steppes. Groups of hills, high enough to de- 
termine the course of the waters, close this 
basin on the East and West, like transverse 
dikes. We find these hills between the Tuy 
and La Victoria *, as well as on the road from 


* The lofty mountains of Los Teques, which give birth to 
the Tuy, may be looked upon as the eastern boundary of 
the valleys of Aragua. The level of the ground continues in 
fact to rise from La Victoria (269 t.) to the Hacienda de 

K 


130 


Valencia to ‘Nirgua, and at the mountains. of 
Torito. From this extraordinary configuration 
of the land, the little rivers of the valleys of 
Aragua form a peculiar system, and direct their 
course toward a basin closed on all sides. 
These rivers do not bear their waters to the 
ocean; they are collected in an interior lake, 
and, subject to the powerful influence of evapo- 
ration, they lose themselves, if we may use the 
expression, in the atmosphere. On the existence 
of these rivers and lakes the fertility of the soil, 
and the produce of cultivation in these valleys, 
depend. ‘The aspect of the spot, and the ex- 
perience of half a century have proved, that 
the level of the waters is not invariable; the 
waste by evaporation, and the increase from the 
waters running into the lake, do not uninter- 
rupiedly balance each other. The lake, being 
elevated one thousand feet above the neighbour- 
ing steppes of Calabozo, and one thousand 
three hundred and thirty-two feet above the 
level of the ocean, it has been suspected, that 


Tuy (295 t.) : but the river Tuy, turning South toward the 
Sierras of Guaivaima and Tiara, ‘has found an issue on the 
East ; and it is more natural to consider as the limits of the 
basin of Aragua a line drawn through the sources of the 
streams flowing into the lake of Valencia. ‘The charts and 
sections I have traced of the road from Caraccas to Nueva 
Valencia, and from Porto Cabello to Villa de Cura, exhibit 
the whole of these geological relations. 


131 


there are subterraneous communications and 
filtrations. The appearance of new islands, and 
the gradual retreat of the waters, have led to the 
belief, that the lake may perhaps become en- 
tirely dry. An assemblage of physical cireum- 
stances so remarkable was well fitted to fix my 
attention on those valleys, where the wild 
beauty of nature is-embellished by agricultural 
industry, and the arts of rising civilization. 

The lake of Valencia, called Tacarigua* by 
the Indians, exceeds in magnitude the lake of 
Neufchatel in Switzerland ; but it’s general form 
has more resemblance to the lake of Geneva, 
which is nearly at the same height above the 
level of the sea. The slope of the ground 
in the valleys of Aragua tending toward the 
South and the West, that part of the. basin, 
which has remained covered with water, is the 
nearest to the southern chain of the mountains 
of Guigue, of Yusma, and of Guacimo, which 
stretch toward the high savannahs of Ocumare. 
The opposite banks of the lake of Valencia dis- 
play a singular contrast; those on the South 
are desert, and almost uninhabited, and a screen 
of high mountains gives them a gloomy and 
monotonous aspect. The northern shore, on 
the contrary, is cheerful, pastoral, and decked 


* Fray Pedro Simon calls the lake, no doubt by mistake, 
Acarigua aud Tarigua. (Notic. Hist., p. 533 and 668.) 
9 


K 4@ 


-132 


‘with the rich cultivation of the sugar-cane, 
coffee-tree, and cotton. Paths, bordered. with 
cestrums, azedaracs, and other shrubs, always 
in flower, cross the plain, and join the scattered 
farms. Every house is surrounded by clumps 
of trees. The ceiba with it’s large yellow * 
flowers gives a peculiar character to the land- 
scape, mingling it’s branches with those of the 
purple erithryna. This mixture of vivid vege- 
table colours contrasts with the uniform tint of 
an unclouded sky. In the season of drought, 
where the burning soil is covered with an undu- 
lating vapour, artificial irrigations preserve the 
verdure and fertility. Here and there the gra- 
nitic rock pierces through the cultivated ground. 
Enormous stony masses rise abruptly in the 
midst of the valley. Bare and forked, they 
nourish a few succulent plants, which prepare 
mould for future ages. Often at the summit of 
these lonely hills a fig-tree or a clusia with 
‘fleshy leaves has fixed it’s roots in the rock, and 
towers over the landscape. With their dead and 
withered branches they look like signals erected 
on a steep cliff. ‘The form of these mounts be- 
trays the secret of their ancient origin ; for, 
when the whole of this valley was filled with 
water, and the waves beat at the foot. of the 
peaks of Mariara, the Devil’s Wall-}-, and the 


* Carnes tollendas ; bombax hibiscifolius. 
+ El Rincon del Diablo. 


133 
chain of the coast, these rocky hills were sheals 
or islets. 

These features of a rich landscape, these con- 
trasts between the two banks of the lake of 
Valencia, often reminded me of the situations of 
the Pays de Vaud, “* where the earth, every 
where cultivated, and every where fertile, offers 
the husbandman, the shepherd, and the vine- 
dresser, the secure fruit of their labours,” while 
the opposite side of Chablais presents only a 
mountainous and half-desert country. In these 
distant climes, surrounded with the productions 
of an exotic nature, I loved to recall to mind 
the enchanting descriptions, with which. the 
aspect of the Leman lake and the rocks of La 
Meillerie inspired a great writer. Now, while 
in the centre of civilized Europe, I endeavour in 
my turn to paint the scenes of the New World, 
I do not imagine I present the reader with 
clearer images, or more precise ideas, by com- 
paring our landscapes with those of the equi- 
noctial regions. It cannot be too often repeated, 
that Nature, under every zone, whether wild 
or cultivated, smiling or majestic, displays’ an 
individual character. The impressions, which 
she excites, are infinitely varied, like the emo- 
tions produced by works of genius, according to 
the age in which they were conceived, and. the 
diversity of languages from which they derive a 


134 


part of their charms. We can justly compare 
only what belongs to dimensions and external 
forms. We may institute a parallel between 
the colossal summit of Mount Blanc, and the 
mountains of Himalaya; the cascades of the 
Pyrenees and those of the Cordilleras: but these 
comparisons, useful with respect to science, fail 
to make known what characterises Nature in. 
the temperate and torrid zones. On the banks 
of a lake, in a vast forest, at the foot of summits 
covered with eternal snows, it is not the simple 
magnitude of the objects, that penetrates us 
with secret admiration. What speaks to the 
soul, what causes such profound and various 
emotions, escapes our measurements, as it does 
the forms of language. Those who feel power- 
fully the charms of Nature fear to weaken their 
enjoyments by comparing scenes of a different 
character, 

But it is not alone the picturesque beauties of. 
the lake of Valencia, that have given celebrity 
to it’s'banks. This basin displays several other 
phenomena, the solution of which is interesting 
alike to physical science and to the well-being 
- of the inhabitants. What are the causes of the 
diminution of the waters of the lake? Is this 
diminution more rapid now than in former ages? 
Can we presume, that an equilibrium between 
the waters flowing in and the loss will be shortly 


135 


reéstablished ? or may we apprehend, that the 
lake will entirely disappear ? 

According to astronomical observations * 
made at La Victoria, Hacienda de Cura, Nueva 
Valencia, and Guigue, the length of the lake, in 
it’s present state, from Cagua to Guayos, is ten 
leagues, or twenty-eight thousand eight hundred 
toises. It’s breadth is very unequal. If we judge 
from the latitudes of the mouth of the Rio Cura 
and the village of Guigue, it no where surpasses 
2°3 leagues, or six thousand five hundred toises ; 
most commonly it is but four or five miles. 
The dimensions resulting from my observations 
are much less, than those hitherto adopted by 
the natives+. It might be thought, that, to 
form a precise idea of the progressive diminu- 
tion of the waters, it would suffice to compare 
the present dimensions of the lake with those 
attributed to it by ancient chroniclers; by 
Oviedo, for instance, in his History of the 
Province of Venezuela, published about the 
year 1723. This writer, in his emphatic style, 
gives “this interior sea, this monstruoso cuerpo 
de Ja laguna de Valencia,” fourteen leagues 
in length and six in breadth. He relates, 


* The itinerary distances from Ia Victoria to Cagua, as 
well as those from Guaecara to Mocundo and to Los Guayos, 
were taken into consideration. Angles were taken at the 
island of Cura, at Cabo Blanco, and at Mocundo. 

+ Depons, Voyage a La Terre Ferme, vol. i, p. 188. 


136 


that at a small distance from the shore, the 
lead finds no bottom; and that large floating 
islands cover the surface of the waters, which. 
are constantly agitated by the winds*. No 
importance can be attached to estimations, 
which, without being founded on any measure- 
ment, are expressed in leagues, leguas, reckoned 
in the colonies at three thousand, five thousand, 
and six thousand six hundred and fifty varas ae 
What is worthy of our attention in the works of 
aman, who must so often have passed over the 
valleys of Aragua, is the assertion, that the town 
of Nueva Valencia de el Rey was built in 1555, 
at the distance of half a league from the lake $s 
and that the proportion between the length of 


* Oviedo, p. 125. 

+ Seamen being the first, and for a long time the only 
persons, who introduced into the Spanish colonies any precise 
ideas on the astronomical position and distances of places, it 
was the legua nautica of 6650 varas, or of 2854 toises, 20 in 
a degree, that was originally used in Mexico and South 
America; but this legua nautica has been gradually reduced 
to one half or one third, on account of the slowness of tra- 
velling across steep mountains, or dry and burning plains. 
The common people measure only time directly ; and then, 
by arbitrary hypotheses, infer from the time the Space of 
ground travelled over, In the course of my geographical 
researches, I have had frequent opportunities of examining 
the real value of leagues, by comparing the itinerary distances 


between points. lying under the same meridian with the 
difference of latitudes, i 


} Oviedo, p. 140, 


137 


the lake, and it’s breadth, is as seven to three. 
At present the town of Valencia is separated 
from the lake by level ground of more than 
two thousand seven hundred toises, which 
Oviedo would no doubt have estimated as a 
space of a league anda half; and the length 
of the basin of the lake is to it’s breadth as 10 
to 2:3, or as 7 to 1-6. The appearance of the 
soil between Valencia and Guigue, the little hills 
that rise abruptly in the plain, East of the Cano 
de Cambury, and some of which (el Islote and 
la Isla de la Negra, or Caratapona) have even 
preserved the name of islands, sufficiently prove, 
that the waters have retired considerably since 
the time of Oviedo. With respect to the change 
in the general form of the lake, it appears to 
me improbable, that in the seventeenth century 
its breadth was nearly the half of it’s length. 
The situation of the granitic mountains of 
Mariara and of Guigue, the slope of the ground, 
which rises more rapidly toward the North and 
South than toward the East and West, are 
alike repugnant to this supposition. 

In treating the long-discussed question of 
the diminution of the waters, I couceive we 
must distinguish the different periods, at which 
the sinking of their level has taken place. 
Wherever we examine the valleys of rivers, or 
the basins of lakes, we see the ancient shore 
at great distances. No doubt seems now to be 


138 


entertained, that our rivers and lakes have 
undergone immense diminutions ; but many . 
geological facts remind us also, that these great _ 
changes in the distribution of the waters have 
preceded all historical times ; and that for many 
thousand years most lakes have attained a per- 
manent equilibrium between the produce of 
the water flowing in, and that of evaporation 
and filtration. Whenever we find this equili- 
brium broken, it will be more prudent to ex- 
amine, whether the rupture be not owing to 
causes merely local, and of a very recent date, 
than to admit an uninterrupted diminution of 
the water. This reasoning is conformable to 
the more circumspect method of modern science. 
At a time when the physical history of the 
world, traced by the genius of some eloquent 
writers, borrowed all it’s charms from the fic- 
tions of imagination, a new proof would have 
been found, in the phenomenon of which we | 
are treating, of the contrast that these writers 
were fond of establishing between the two 
continents. To demonstrate, that America rose 
later than, Asia and Europe from the bosom of 
the waters, they would have cited the lake of 
Tacarigua as ene of those interior basins, which 
have not had time to become dry by the effects 
of a slow and gradual evaporation. I have no 
doubt, that, in very remote times, the whole 
valley, from the foot of the mountains of 


139 


Cocuyza to those of Torito and Nirgua, and 
from La Sierra de Mariara to the chain of 
Guigue, of Guacimo, and La Palma, was filled 
with water. Every where the form of the pro-— 
montories,-and their steep declivities, seem to 
indicate the shore of an alpine lake, similar to 
those of Styria and Tyrol. The same little 
helicites, the same valvee, which now live in the 
lake of Valencia, are found in layers of three or 
four feet in the island, as far as Turmero and 
La Concesion near La Victoria. These facts 
undoubtedly prove a retreat of the waters ; but 
nothing indicates, that this retreat has continued 
from that remote period to our days. The 
valleys of Aragua are one of the parts of Vene- 
zuela the most anciently peopled ; and yet there 
is no mention in Oviedo, or any other old chro- 
nicler, of a sensible diminution of the lake. 
Ought we simply to suppose, that this phenome- 
non escaped their observation, at a time when the 
Indian population far- exceeded the white, and 
when the banks of the lake were less inhabited ? 
Within half a century, and particularly within 
these thirty years, the natural desiccation of this 
greatbasin has excited general attention. We find 
vast spaces of land that were formerly inundated, 
now dry, and already cultivated with plantains, 
sugar-canes, or cotton. Wherever a hut is 
erected on the bank of the lake, we see the 
shore receding from year to year. We discover 


140 


islands, which, in consequence of the retreat of 
the waters, scarcely begin to be joined to the 
continent, as the rocky island of Culebra, on 
the side of Guigue; other islands already form 
promontories, as the Morro, between Guigue 
and Nueva Valencia, and La Cabrera, South- 
East of Mariara ; others now rise in the islands, 
like scattered hills. Among these last, so easily 
recognised at a distance, some are only a 
quarter of a mile, others a league from the 
present shore. I shall cite as the most remark- 
able three granitic islands, thirty or forty toises 
high, on the road from Hacienda de Cura to. 
Aguas Calientes ; and at the western extremity 
of the lake, the Serrito de Don Pedro, Islote, and 
Caratapona. On visiting two islands * en- 
tirely surrounded by water, we found in the 
midst of brusk-wood, on small flats of four, six, 
and even eight toises height above the surface 
of the lake, fine sand mixed with _helicites, 
anciently deposited by the waters. In each of 
these islands may be perceived the most certain 
traces of the gradual sinking of the waters. 
But still farther, and this accident is regarded 
by the inhabitants as a marvellous phenomenon, 


* Isla de Cura, and Cabo Blanco. The promontory of 
Cabrera has been connected with the shore ever’ since 
ihe year 1750 or 1760, by a vale, which bears the name 
of Portachuelo, 


141 


in 1796, three new islands appeared to the East 
of the islaad Caiguira, in the same direction as 
the islands Burro, Otama, and Zorro. These 
new islands, called by the people los nuevos 
Penones, or las Aparecidas, form a kind of banks, 
with surfaces quite flat. They rose already, in 
1800, more than a foot above the mean level of 
the waters. 

We observed at the beginning of this chapter, 
that the lake of Valencia, like the lakes of the 
valley of Mexico * forms the centre of a little 
system of rivers, none of which have any com- 
munication with the ocean. These rivers for 
the greater part deserve only the name of. tor- 
rents, or brooks}; they are twelve or fourteen 
in number. The inhabitants, little acquainted 
with the effects of evaporation, have long 
imagined, that the lake has a subterranean 
outlet, by which a quantity of water runs out 
equal to that which flows in by the rivers. 
Some suppose, that this. outlet communicates 
with grottoes, which they place at great depths ; 
others admit, that the water flows through an 
oblique channel into the basin of the ocean. 
These bold hypotheses on the communication 


* Before the opening dug by the Spaniards near Hue- 
huetoque, and known by the name of Desague Real. 

+t The following are their names: Rios de Aragua, 
Turmero, Maracay, Tapatapa, Aguas Calientes, Mariara, 
Cura, Guacara, Guataparo, Valencia, Cano grande de 
Cambury, &c. 


142 


between two neighbouring basins have presented 
themselves under every zone to the imagination 
of the vulgar, as well as to that of natural 
philosophers ; for the latter, without confessing 
it, sometimes repeat popular opinions in scien- 
tific language. We hear of subterranean gulfs 
and outlets in the New World, as on the shores 
of the Caspian sea, though the lake of Taca- 
rigua is two hundred and twenty-two toises 
higher, and the Caspian sea fifty-four toises 
lower, than the ocean; and though it is well 
known, that fiuids find the same level, when they 
communicate by a lateral channel. 

The changes, which the destruction of forests, 
the clearing of plains, and the cultivation of 
indigo, have produced within half a century in 
the quantity of water flowing in on the one 
hand; and on the other the evaporation of the 
soil, and the dryness of the atmosphere, present 
causes sufficiently powerful to explain the suc- 
cessive diminution of the lake of Valencia. I 
am not of the opinion of a traveller, who has 
visited these countries since me *, that “ to set 


* Mr. Depons (Voyage a la Terre Ferme, vol. i, ».139) 
adds: “‘ The small extent of the surface of the lake” (it 
amounts however to 106,500,000 square toises) “‘ renders 
impossible the supposition, that evaporation alone, however 
considerable under the tropics, could remove as much water, 
as the rivers furnish.” In the sequel, the author himself 


seems to abandon “ this occult cause, the hypothesis of an 


aperture.” 


- " ei - a 


erent em at a nn 5 nS 


143 


the mind at rest, and for the honour of science,” 
a subterranean issue must be admitted. By 
felling the trees, that cover the tops and the 
sides of mountains, men in every climate pre- 
pare at once two calamities for future genera- 
tions ; the want of fuel, and a scarcity of water. 
Trees, by the nature of their perspiration, and 
the radiation from their leaves in a sky without 
clouds, surround themselves with an atmos- 
phere constantly cool and misty. They affect 
the copiousness of springs, not, as was long 
believed, by a peculiar attraction for the vapors 
diffused through the air, but because, by shel- 
tering the soil from the direct action of the Sun, 
they diminish the evaporation of the water pro- 
duced by rain. When forests are destroyed, as 
they ‘are every where in America by the Euro- 
pean planters, with an imprudent precipitation, 
the springs are entirely dried up, or become less 
abundant. The beds of the rivers, remaining dry 
during a part of the year, are converted into tor- 
rents, whenever great rains fall on the heights, 
The sward and moss disappearing with the 
brush-wood from the sides of the mountains, 
the watérs falling in rain are no longer impeded 
in their course: and instead of slowly augment- 
ing the level of the rivers by progressive filtra- 
tions, they furrow during heavy showers the 
sides of the hills, bear down the lodsened soil, 
and form those sudden inundations, that devas- 


144 


tate the country. Hence it results, that the 
destruction of forests, the want of permanent 
springs, and the existence of torrents, are three © 
phenomena closely connected together. Coun- 
tries that are situate in opposite hemispheres, 
Lombardy bordered by the chain of the Alps, 
and Lower Peru inclosed between the Pacific 
Ocean and the Cordillera of the Andes, exhibit 
striking proofs of the justness of this assertion *. 
Till the middle of the last century, the 
mountains that surround the valleys of Aragua 
were covered with forests. Great trees of the 
families of mimosa, ceiba, and the fig-tree, 
shaded and spread coolness along the banks of 
the lake. The plain, then thinly inhabited, was 
filled with brush-wood, interspersed with trunks 
of scattered trees and parasite plants, envelopped 
with a thick sward, less capable of emitting 
radiant caloric than the soil that is cultivated, 
and therefore not sheltered from the rays of the 
Sun. With the destruction of trees, and the 
increase of the cultivation of sugar, indigo, and 
cotton, the springs, and all the natural supplies 
of the lake of Valencia; have diminished from 
year to year. It is difficult to form a just idea 
of the enormous quantity of evaporation, that 
takes place under the torrid zone, in a valley 


* See my political Essai on New Spain, vol.i, p. 208, and 
the Recherches de M. de Prony sur les Crues du Pé. 


145 


surrounded with steep declivities, where a regu- 
lar breeze and descending’ currents of air are 
felt toward evening, and the bottom of which is 
flat, and looks as if it were levelled by the 
waters. We have elsewhere remarked, that 
the heat, which prevails throughout the year 
at Cura, Guacara, Nueva Valencia, and on the 
borders of the lake, is the same as that which 
is felt at midsummer in Naples: and Sicily. 
The mean annual temperature of the valleys of 
Aragua is nearly 25°5°*; my hygromeitrical 
observations of the month of February, taking 
the mean of day and night, gave 71:4° of the 
hair-hygrometer +. As the words great drought 
and great humidity have no determinate signi- 
fication, and an air, that would be called very 
dry in the lower regions of the tropics, would be 
regarded as a humid air in Europe, we can 
judge of these relations between climates only 
by comparing spots placed under the same 
zone. Now at Cumana, where it sometimes 
does not rain during a whole year, and where I 
had the means of collecting a great number of 
hygrometric observations made at different 
hours of the day and night, the mean humidity 


* 90-4e Reaumur. According to the observations of the 
month of February, 19°5° R.; and, at Cumana, this month is 
07° R. below the mean temperature of the year. 

+ These 71-49 of apparent humidity correspond to a mean 
temperature of 24°3°, 


VOL. IV. L 


146 


of the air is 86°; corresponding to the mear 
temperature of 27-:7° cent. Taking into ac- 
count the influence of the rainy months, that is 
to say, estimating the difference observed in 
other parts of South America between the mean 
humidity of the dry months and that of the 
whole year; an annual mean humidity is ob- 
tained, for the valleys of Aragua, at farthest of 
74°, the temperature being 25°5°. In this air, so 
hot, and at the same time so little humid, the 
quantity of water evaporated is enormous. The 
theory of Dalton estimates, under the conditions 
just stated, for the thickness of the sheet of 
water evaporated in an hour’s time 0°36 mill. or 
3°8 lines in twenty-four hours*. Assuming for 
the temperate zone, for instance at Paris, the 
mean temperature to be 10°6°, and the mean 
humidity 82°, we find, according to the same 
formule, 0°10 mill. an hour, and 1 line for 
twenty-four hours. If we prefer substituting 
for the uncertainty of these theoretical deduc- 
tions the direct results of observation, we may 
recollect, that at Paris, and at Montmorenci, 
the mean annual evaporation was found by 
Sedileau and Cotte, to be from $2 in. 1 line to 
38 in. 4 lines. Two able engineers in the South 
of France, Messrs. Clausade and Pin, found, 
that in subtracting the effects of filtrations, the 


* Compare, at the end of the first book, vol, ii, p. 90. 


147 


waters of the canal of Languedoc, and the basin 
of Saint Ferréol, lose every year from 0°758 met. 
to 0°812 met. or from 336 to 360 lines. Mr. de 
Prony found nearly similar results in the Pon- 
tine marshes. The whole of these experiments, 
made in the latitudes of 41° and 49°, and at 
10°5° and 16° of mean temperature, indicate a 
mean evaporation of one line, or one and three 
tenths, a day. Under the torrid zone, in the 
West India islands for instance, the effect of 
evaporation is four times as much, according 
to Le Gaux, and double according to .Cassan. 
At Cumana in a place where the atmosphere 
is far more loaded with humidity than in the 
valley of Aragua, I have often seen evaporate, 
during twelve hours, in the sun, 88 miil., in the 
shade 3°4 mill.; and I believe, that the annual 
produce of evaporation in the rivers near Cu- 
mana is not below one hundred and thirty 
inches. Experiments of this kind are extremely 
delicate, but what I have related will suffice to 
demonstrate how great must be the quantity of 
vapour, that rises from the lake of Valencia, 
and from the surrounding country, the waters 
of which’ flow into the lake. I shall have occa- 
sion elsewhere to resume this subject; for, in 
a work which displays the great laws of nature . 
under’ different zones, we must endeavour to 
solve the problem of the mean tension of the 
vapours contained in the atmosphere in different 
L2 


148 


latitudes, and at different heights. above the - 
surface of the ocean. . 

A great number of local circumstances cause 
the produce of evaporation to vary; it changes 
as more or less’ shade covers the basin of the 
waters, with their state of motion or of repose, 
with their depth, and the nature and colour’ of 
their bottom :, but in general evaporation de- 
pends only on three circumstances, the tem- 
perature, the tension of the vapours contained 
inthe atmosphere, and- the resistance which 
the air, more or less dense, more or léss agi- 
tated, opposes to the diffusion of vapour. The 
quantity of water, that evaporates in a given 
spot, every thing else being equal, is propor- 
tional to the difference between the quantity of 
vapour, which the ambient air can contain 
when saturated, and the quantity, which it 
actually contains. Hence it follows (as Mr. 
Daubuisson.has already observed, in subjecting 
my hygrometic observations to calculation), 
that the evaporation is not so great under the 
torrid zone, as ‘might be expected from the 
enormous augmentation of temperature; be- 
cause, in those ardent climates, the air is habi- 
tually very humid. ; 

Since the increase of agricultural industry in 
the valleys of Aragua, the little rivers, that run 
into the lake of Valencia, can no longer be re- 
garded as real supplies during the six months 


149 


succeeding December. They remain dried up 
in the lower part of their course, because the 
planters of indigo, coffee, and sugar-canes, have 
made frequent drainings (azequias), in order to 
water the ground by trenches. We may observe 
also, that a pretty considerable river, the Rio 
Pao, which rises at the entrance of the Llanos, at 
the foot of the range of hills called La Galera, 
heretofore mingled it’s waters with those of the 
lake, by uniting itself with the Cano de Cam- 
bury, on the road from the town of Nueva Va- 
lencia to Guigue. The course of this river was 
then from South to North. At the end of the 
seventeenth century, the: proprietor of a neigh- 
pouring plantation thought proper to dig at the 
back of the hill a new bed for the Rio Pao. 
He turned the river ; and, after having employ- 
ed part of the water for the irrigation of his 
fields, he caused the rest to flow at a venture 
toward the South, following the declivity of the 
Llanos. In this new southern direction the Rio 
Pao, mingled with three other rivers, the Tinaco, 
the Guanarito, and the Chilua, falls into the — 
Portuguesa, which is a branch of the Apure. 
It is a remarkable phenomenon, to observe, that 
by a particular disposition of the ground, and. 
the lowering of the ridge of division toward the 
South-West, the Rio Pao separates itself from 
the little system of interior rivers, to which it 
originally belonged, and for a century past has 


150 


communicated, through the channel of the 
Apure and the Oroonoko, with the ocean. 
What has been here effected on a small scale 
by the hand of man, Nature often performs, 
either by progressively elevating the level of the 
soil, or by those falls of the ground, which vio- 
lent earthquakes occasion. It is probable, that, 
in the lapse of ages, several rivers of Soudan, 
and of New Holland, which are now lost in the 
sands, or in inland basins, will open themselves 
a way toward the shores of the ocean. We 
cannot at least doubt, that in both continents 
there are systems of interior rivers, which may 
be considered as not entirely developed* ; and 
which communicate with each other, either in 
the time of great risings, or’ by permanent bi- 
furcations. 

The Rio Pao has scooped itself out a bed so 
deep and broad, that in the season of rains, 
when the Cano grande de Cambury inundates 
all the land to the North-West of Guigue, the 
waters of this Cano, and those of the lake of 
Valencia, flow back into the Rio Pao itself; so 
that this river, instead of adding water to the 
lake, tends rather to carry it away. We see 
something similar in North America, where 
geographers have chosen to represent on their 
maps an imaginary chain of mountains, between 


_ * Carl Ritter, Erdkunde, vol. i, p. 315. 


151 


the great lakes of Canada and the country of 
the Miamis. At the time of floods, the waters 
flowing into the lakes communicate with those 
which run into the Missisippi; and it is practi- 
cable to proceed by boats from the sources of 
the river St. Mary to the Wabash, as well as 
from the Chicago to the Illinois*. These ana- 
logous facts appear to me well worthy of the 
attention of hydrographers. 

The land that surrounds the lake of Valencia 
being entirely flat and eyen, what I daily ob- 
served in the lakes of Mexico takes place here ; 
a diminution of a few inches in the level of the 
water exposes a vast extent of ground covered 
with fertile mud and organic remains. In pro- 
portion as the lake retires, the planters advance 
toward the new shore. These natural desicca- 
tions, so important to the colonial agriculture, 
have been eminently considerable during the 
last ten years, in which all America has suffered 
from great droughts. Instead of marking the 
. sinuosities of the present banks of the lake, I 
have advised the rich landholders in these 
countries, to place columns of granite in the 
basin itself, in order to observe from year to 
year the mean height of the waters. The Mar- 
quis del Toro has undertaken to put this design 
into execution, employing the fine granite of the 


* Drake, Picture of Cincinnati, 1815, p. 222. 


152 


Sierra de Mariara, and establishing limnometers, 
on a bottom of gneiss rock, so common in the 
lake of Valencia. 

It is impossible to anticipate the limits, more ~ 
or less narrow, to which this basin of water will 
one day be confined, when an equilibrium, be- 
tween the streams flowing in and the produce 
of evaporation and filtration, shall be completely 
established. The idea very generally spread, 
that the lake will soon entirely disappear, seems 
to me chimerical. If in consequence of great 
earthquakes, or other causes equally mysterious, 
ten very humid years should succeed to long 
droughts ; if the mountains should clothe them- 
selves anew with forests, and great trees over- 
shadow the shore and the plains of Aragua; we 
should) more probably see the volume of the 
waters augment, and menace that beautiful eul- 
tivation, which now trenches on the basin of 
the lake. 

While some of the cultivators of the valleys 
of Aragua fear the total disappearance of the 
lake, and others it’s return toward the banks it 
has deserted, we hear the question gravely dis- 
cussed at Caraccas, whether it would not be 
advisable, in order to. give greater extent to 
agriculture, to conduct the waters of the lake 
into the Llanos, by digging a canal toward the 
Rio Pao. The possibility* of this enterprise 


* The dividing ridge, namely, that which divides the waters 


153 


cannot be denied, particularly by having re- 
course to tunnels, or subterranean canals. The 
progressive retreat of the waters has given birth 
to the beautiful and luxuriant plains of Mara- 
cay, Cura, Mocundo, Guigue, and Santa Cruz 
del Escoval, planted with tobacco, sugar-canes, 
coffee, indigo, and cacao; but how can it be 
doubted for a moment, that the lake alone 
spreads fertility over this country? Deprived 
of an enormous mass of vapours, which the sur- 
face of the waters sends forth daily into the 
atmosphere, the valleys of Aragua would become 


between the valleys of Aragua and the Llanos, lowers so 
much toward the West of Guigue, as we have already 
observed, that there are ravines, which conduct the wa- 
ters of the Cano de Cambury, the Rio Valencia, and the 
Guataparo, in the time of floods, to the Rio Pao; but it 
would be easier to open a navigable canal from the lake of 
Valencia to the Oroonoko, by the Pao, the Portuguesa, 
and the Apure, than to dig a draining canal level with the 
bottom of the lake. This bottom, according to the sounding, 
and my barometric measurements, is 40 toises less than 222, 
or 182 above the surface of the ocean. On the road from 
Guigue to the Llanos, by the table-land of La Villa de 
Cura, I found, to the South of the dividing ridge, and on it’s 
southern declivity, no point of level corresponding to the 182 
toises, except near San Juan. The absolute height of this 
village is 194 toises. But, I repeat, that farther toward 
the West, in the country between the Cano de Cambury 
and the sources of the Rio Pao, which I was not able 
to visit, the point of level of the bottom of the lake is much 
more toward the North, 


154 


as dry and barren as the surrounding moun- 
tains. ; 

The mean depth of the lake is from twelve to 
fifteen fathoms; the deepest parts are not, as is 
generally admitted, eighty, but thirty-five or 
forty deep. Such is the result of soundings 
made with the greatest care by Don Antonio 
Manzano. When we reflect on the vast depths 
of all the lakes of Switzerland, which, notwith- 
standing their position in high valleys, almost 
reach the level of the Mediterranean, it appears 
surprising, that greater cavities are not found 
at the bottom of the lake of Valencia, which is 
also an Alpine lake. The deepest places are 
between the rocky island of Burro and the point 
of Cana Fistula, as opposite the high mountains 
of Mariara. But in general the southern part 
of the lake is deeper than the northern: nor 
must we forget, that, if all the shores be now 
low, the southern part of the basin is the near- 
est to a chain of mountains with abrupt decli- 
vities; and we know, that even the sea is 
generally deepest where the coast is elevated, 
rocky, or perpendicular. 

The temperature of the lake, at the surface, 
during my abode in the valleys of Aragua, in 
the month of February, was constantly from 23° 
to 23°7°, consequently a little below * the mean 


*® From 0°6° to 1:3° 


155 


vemperature of the air; either from the effect of 
evaporation *, which carries off caloric from 
the air and the water; or because a great mass 
of water does not follow with an equal rapidity 
the changes of temperature of the atmosphere, 
and the lake receives streams, that rise from 
several cold springs in the neighbouring moun- 
tains. J have to regret, that, notwithstanding 
it’s small depth, I could not determine the 
temperature of the water at thirty or forty 
fathoms. I was not provided with the thermo- 
metrical sounding apparatus, which I had used 
in the Alpine lakes of Saltzburg-, and in 
the Caribbean sea. The experiments of Saussure 
prove, that, on both sides of the Alps, the lakes 
that are from one hundred and ninety to two 
hundred and seventy-four toises of absolute 


*- We shall see hereafter, that, according to observations 
made at Cumana on the produce of evaporation, the temper- 
ature of the water in vessels exposed to the Sun during seven 
or eight hours constantly remained, at the end of the experi- 
ment, from 1° to 1:8° below the temperature of the air in 
the shade. 

+ See above, vol. i, p. 38. I made the following obser- 
vation, on the 16th of April, 1798, at four in the afternoon, 
on the lake of St. Bartholomew, in the Alps of Berchtes- 
gaden, behind Falkenstein. Air, at the shore, therm. 17:7° 
cent.; hair-hygrometer 56°. Air at the centre of the lake, 
th. 16°; hyg. 68°. Water of the lake, at a depth of two 
fect, th. 7°7°; at forty-two feet, th. 62°; at sixty feet, th. 


? 


5°; and in another place, at cighty-four fect, therm. 5°6°. 


& 


156 


elevation *, have, in the middle. of winter, at 
nine hundred, at six hundred, and sometimes 
even at one hundred and fifty feet of depth, a 
uniform temperature from 4°3 to 6 cent. degrees; 
but ‘these experiments have not yet been  re- 
peated in lakes situate under the torrid zone. 
. The strata’ of cold water in Switzerland are.of 
an enormous thickness. They have been found 
so near the surface in the lakes of Geneva and 
Bienne, that the decrement of heat in the 
water was one centesimal degree for. ten or 
fifteen feet: that is to say, eight times more 
rapid than in the ocean, and forty-eight times 
more rapid than in the atmosphere ¢. Under the 
temperate zone, where the heat of the atmos- 
phere sinks to the freezing point, and far lower, 
the bottom of a lake, even were it not sur- 
rounded by glaciers and mountains covered 
with eternal snow, must contain particles of 
water, which, having during winter acquired at 
the surface the maximum of their density, be- 
tween 34° and 4:4°, have consequently fallen to 
the greatest depth. Other particles, the tem- 
perature of which is + 0°5°, far from placing 
themselves below the stratum at 4°, can only 


* This is the difference between the absolute elevations of 
the lake of Geneva and that of Thun. 

t See vol. ii, p. 66 ; and Arago, in the Annales de Physique, 
vol. v, p. 408. 


157 


find their hydrostatic equilibrium above that 
stratum. ‘They will descend lower only when 
their temperature is augmented 3° or 4°, by the 
contact of strata less cold. If water in cooling 
continued to condense itself uniformly to the 
freezing point, there would be found in very 
deep lakes, and basins of water that have no 
communication with each other, whatever were 
the latitude of the place, a stratum of water, 
the temperature of which would be nearly equal 
to the maximum of refrigeration above the 
freezing point, which the lower regions of the 
ambient atmosphere annually attain: From this 
consideration it is probable, that, in the plains 
of the torrid zone, or in the valleys but little 
elevated, the mean heat of which is from 25°5° 
to 27°, the temperature of the ‘bottom of the 
lakes can never be below 21° or 22°. If in the 
same zone the ocean contain, at depths of seven 
or eight hundred fathoms, waters the tempera- 
ture of which is at 7°, that is to say twelve or 
thirteen degrees colder than the maximum of 
the heat.* of the equinoctial atmosphere over 
the sea, I think it must be considered as a direct 


* It is almost superfluous to observe, that I am considering 
here only that part of the atmosphere lying on the ocean between 
10° of North and 10° of South latitude. Toward the northern 
limits of the torrid zone, in the latitude of 28°,.whither the 
North winds bring with ao extreme rapidity the cold air of 
Canada, the thermometer falls at sea as low as 16°, and even 
lower. 


158 | 


proof of a submarine current, carrying the a 
waters of the pole toward the equator. We will | 
not here solve the delicate problem, in what | 
manner within the tropics, and in the temperate | 
zone, for example in the Caribbean sea, and in 
the lakes of Switzerland, these inferior strata 
of water, cooled to 4° or 7° act upon the tem- 
perature of the stony strata of the globe which 
they cover; and how these same strata, the 
primitive temperature of which is under the 
tropics 27°, and at the lake of Geneva 10°, react 
upon the half-frozen waters at the bottom of the 
lakes, and of the Equinoctial Ocean. ' These 
questions are of the highest importance, both 
with regard. to the economy of animals that live 
habitually at the bottom of fresh and salt waters, 
and to the theory of the distribution of heat in 
lands surrounded by vast and deep seas. - 

The lake of Valencia is full of islands, which 
embellish the scenery by the picturesque form 
of their rocks, and the appearance of the vege- 
tation with which they are covered. This is an 
advantage, which this tropical lake possesses 
over those of the Alps. The islands are fifteen 
in number distributed in three groups *; no 


* The position of these islands is as follows: to the 
North, near the shore, Isla de Cura; to the South-East, 
Burro, Horno, Otama, Sorro, Caiguira, Nuevos Penones or the 
new Aparecidas ; to the North-West, Cabo-Blanco, or Isla de 


159 


longer reckoning Morro and Cabrera, which 
are already joined to the shore. They are partly 
cultivated, and extremely fertile on account of 
the vapours, that rise from the lake. Burro, 
the largest of these islands, is two miles in 
length ; and even inhabited by some families of 
Mestizoes, who rear goats. These simple men 
seldom visit the shore of Mocundo. To them 
the lake appears of immense extent; they have 
plantains, cassava, milk, and a little fish. A hut 
constructed of reeds; hammocks woven with 
the cotton, which the neighbouring fields pro- 
duce; a large stone, on which the fire is made, 
the ligneous fruit of the tutuma, in which they 
draw water ; constitute their domestic establish- 
ment. The old Mestizo, who’ offered some of 
the milk of his goats, had a beautiful daughter. 
We learned from our guide, that solitude had 
rendered him as mistrustful, as he might perhaps 
have been made by the society of men. The day 
before our arrival, some sportsmen had visited 
the island. They were surprised by the night ; 
and. preferred sleeping in the open air to return- 
ing .to Mocundo. This news spread alarm 
throughout the island. The father obliged the 
young girl to climb up a very lofty zamang or 


Aves, and Chamberg ; to the South-West, Brucha and Culebra. 
In the centre of the lake, rise, like shoals or smal] detached 
rocks, Vagre, I'raile, Penasco, and Pan de Azucar. 


160 © 


acacia, Which grows in the plain, at some dis- 
tance from the hut ; while he stretched himself 
at the foot of the tree, and did not permit his 
daughter to descend, till the sportsmen had de- 
parted. Travellers have not always found this 
timorous watchfulness, this great austerity of 
manners, among the inhabitants of islands. 

The lake isin general well stocked with fish; 
though it furnishes only three kinds, the flesh of 
which is soft. and insipid, the guavina, the vagra, 
and the sardina. The two last descend into 
the lake by the streams that flow into it. The 
guavina, of which I made a drawing on the 
spot, is twenty inches long, and 3°5 thick. It 
is perhaps a new species of the genus erythrina 
of Gronovius. It has large silvery scales, edged 
with green. This fish is extremely voracious, 
and destroys the other kinds. The fishermen 
assured us, that a small crocodile, the bava *, 
which often approached us when we were bathing, 
contributes also to the destruction of the fish. 
We never could succeed in procuring this reptile, 
So as to examine it near: it generally attains 


* The Lava, or bavilla, is very common at Bordones, near 
Cumana. Sce above, vol. ii, p. 47 and 211. -The name of 
bava (baveuse) has singularly misled Mr. Depons ; he takes 
this reptile for a fish of our seas, the blennius pholis. (Voyage 
ala Terre Ferme, vol. iv, p. 142). [The blennius pholis, smooth 
blenny, is called by the French baveuse (slaverer), in Spanish 
baba, —Ed.] — 


161 


only three or four feet in length. It is said to 
be very harmless; it’s habits however, as well as 
its form, much resemble those of the alligator, 
or crocodilus acutus. It swims in such a man- 
ner as to show only the point of it’s snout, and 
the extremity of it’s tail; and places itself at 
mid-day on the bare beach. It is certainly nei- 
ther a monitor (the real monitors living only in 
the old continent), nor the sauwvegarde of Seba 
(lacerta teguim), which dives, and does not 
swim*, Other travellers will decide that ques. 
tion; we shall here content ourselves with ob- 
serving, it is somewhat remarkable, that the 
lake of Valencia, and the whole system of small 
rivers, which flow into it, have no large alligators, 
. though this dangerous animal abounds a few 
leagues off in the streams, that flow either into 
the Apure, or the Oroonoko, or immediately into 
the Caribbean sea, between Porto Cabello and 
La Guayra. 

In the islands that rise like bastions in the. 
midst of the waters, and wherever the rocky 
bottom of the lake is visible to the eye, I recog- 
nized ‘a uniform direction} in the strata of 
gneiss. This direction is nearly that of the 
chains of mountains on the North and South of 


* Cuvier, Regne animal, 1817, vol.ii. p. 26, 27. 

+ Direction of the rock hor. 3—4. Dip toward the North- 
West. The mountains of the coast, and those of La Villa de 
Cura, lie W.S. W. and E, N. E. 

VOL, IV. M 


162 


the lake. In the hills of Cabo Blanco, angular 
masses of opake quartz, scarcely translucid on 
the edges, and varying from gray to deep black, 
are found amid the gneiss. It passes some- 
times into hornstein, sometimes into kiesel- 
schiefer (schistoid jasper). I do not think it 
constitutes a vein. The waters of the lake * 
decompose the gneiss by erosion in a very extra- 
ordinary mariner. I have found parts. of it 
porous, almost cellular, and split in the form of 
cauliflowers, fixed on gneiss perfectly compact. 
Perhaps the action ceases with the movement of 
the waves, and the alternate contact of air and 
water. 

The island of Chamberg is remarkable for it’s 
height. It isa rock of gneiss, with two summits 
joined. in the form. ofa saddle, and raised two hun- 
dred feet abovethe surfaceof the water. The slope 


of this rock is barren, and can scarcely support 
a few plants of clusia with. large white flowers. 
But the view of the lake, and of the richly eul- 
tivated neighbouring valleys, is admirable ; par- 
ticularly after sunset, when. thousands of aqua- 


*, The water of the lake is not salt, as is asserted at Ca- 
raccas. It may be drunk without having been filtered. On 
evaporation it leaves a very small residuum of carbonat of 
lime, and perbaps a little nitrat: of potash. It is even sur- 

prising, that an inland lake should not be richer in alcaline 
"and earthy salts, acquired from. the neighbouring soils. 
Halley. Phil. Trans, 1716, p. 294. 


Vs 


163 


tic birds, herons, flamingoes, and wild ducks, 
cross the lake to roost in the islands, and the 
broad zone of mountains, that surround the 
horizon, is covered with fire. The inhabitants, 
as we have already mentioned, burn the mea- 
dows in order to produce fresher and finer grass. 
Gramineous plants abound, especially at the 
summit of the chain; and those vast conflagra- 
tions extend sometimes over a length of a thou- 
sand toises, and appear like streams of lava 
overflowing the ridge of the mountains. When 
reposing on the banks of the lake in one of those 
beautiful evenings peculiar to the tropics, to 


- enjoy the soft freshness of the air, it is delight- 


ful to contemplate, in the waves that beat the 
shore, the image of the red fires that inflame the 
horizon. 

Among the plants, which the rocky islands of 
the lake of Valencia produce, many have beer 
believed to be peculiar to those spots, because 
ull now they have not been discovered else- 
where. Such are the papaw-trees of the lake ; 
and the love-apples* of the island of Cura. 
The latter differ from our solanum lycopersi- 
cum ; their fruit is round and small, but has a 


* The tomatoes are cultivated, as well as the papaw-tree. 
of the lake, in the Botanical Garden-of Berlin, to which I had 
sent some seeds. Mr. Willdenow has described and deline« 
ated this solanum, under the name of solanum Humboldtii, 
inthe Hortus Beral., p. 27, tab. 27, 

M 2 


164 


fine flavour; they are now cultivated at La Vic- 


toria, at Nueva Valencia, and every where in 


the valleys of Aragua. The papaw-tree (papaya 
de la laguna) abounds also in the island of Cura, 
and at Cabo-blanco; it’s trunk shoots higher 
than that of the common papaw (carica papaya), 
but it’s fruit is only half as large, perfectly 
spherical, without projecting ribs, and four or 
five inches in diameter. When cut open, it is 
found quite filled with seeds, and without those 
hollow places, which occur constantly in the 
common papaw. The taste of this fruit, of 
which I have often eaten, is extremely sweet *. 
I know not whether it be a variety of the carica 
microcarpa, described by Jacquin. 

The environs of the lake are unhealthful only 
in times of great drought, when the waters in 
their retreat leave a muddy sediment exposed to 
the ardour of the Sun. The banks, shaded by 
iufts of coccoloba barbadensis, and decorated 
with fine lilaceous plants +, remind us, by the 
appearance of the aquatic vegetation, of the 
marshy shores of our lakes in Europe. We find 
there, pondweed (potamogeton), chara, and 
cat’s-tails three feet high, which it is diffi- 
cult not to confound with the typha angustifolia 


* They attribute to them a binding quality, and the peo- 
ple call them tapacula. 

+ Pancratium undulatum, amaryllis nervosa. See our 
Nov. Gen, vol. i, p. 278. 


165 


of our marshes. It is only after a careful exa- 
mination, that we recognize each of these plants 
for distinct species *, peculiar to the new con- _ 
tinent. How many plants of the Straits of Ma- 
gellan, of Chili, and the Cordilleras of Quito, 
have anciently been confounded, on account of 
their analogy in form and appearance, with the 
productions of the northern temperate zone ! 
The inhabitants of the valleys of Aragua often 
inquire, why the southern shore of the lake, 
particularly the South-West part toward Agua- 
cates, is generally more shaded, and of fresher 
verdure, than the northern side. We saw, in the 
month of February, many trees‘stripped of their 
foliage, near the Hacienda de Cura, at Mocundo, 
and at Guacara; while to the South-East of 
Valencia every thing presaged the approach of 
the rains. I believe, that in the early part of 
the year, when the Sun has southern declination, 
the hills that surround Valencia, Guacara, and 
Cura, are scorched by the ardour of the solar 
rays; while the southérn shore receives with 
the breeze, when it enters the valley by the 
Abra de Porto Cabello, an air that has crossed 
the lake, and is loaded with aqueous vapour. 
On this southern shore, near Guaruto, the finest 
plantations of tobacco in the whole province are 


* Potamogeton tenufolium, chara compressa, typha tenuifolia. 
Eb. vol.i, p. 45, 83, and 370, 


166 


found. They are distinguished by the namnies of 
primera, segunda, and tercera fundacion. From 
the oppressive monopoly of the royal farm, 
which we have already noticed in describing the 
town of Cumanacoa*, the inhabitants of the 
province of Caraccas are allowed to cultivate 
tobacco only in the valleys of Aragua (at Guaruto 
and Tapatapa), and in the Llanos, near Uritucu, 
The produce of the sale is from five to six hun- 
dred thousand piastres ; but the administration 
of the farm is so enormously expensive, that it 
absorbs nearly two hundred and thirty thousand 
piastres a year. The capitania-general of Ca- 
raccas, from the extent and excellent quality of 
its soil, could furnish, as well as the island of 
Cuba, all the markets of Europe; but in it’s 
present state it receives tobacco from Brazil, 
smuggled by way of the Rio Negro, the Cassi- 
quiare, and the Oroonoko; and from the pro- 
vince of Pore, by the Casanare, the Ariporo, and 
the Rio Meta. Such are the fatal effects of a 
prohibitory system, which opposes the progress 
of agriculture, diminishes the riches of nature, 
and attempts in vain to separate countries tra~ 
versed by the same rivers, and the limits of 
which are confounded together in uninhabited 
spaces. 


Among the rivers flowing into the lake of 


* Ch, vi. vol. iii, p, 57. 


167 


Valencia some owe their origin to thermal 
springs, and deserve particular attention. These 
springs gush out at three points of the granitic 
Cordillera of the coast; near Onoto, between 
Turmero and Maracay; near Mariara, to the 
North-East of the Hacienda de Cura; and near 
Las Trincheras, on the road from Nueva Valen- 
cia to Porto Cabello. I could examine with care 
only the physical and geological relations of the 
thermal waters of Mariara aid Las Trinche- 
ras. In going up the small river Cura toward 
it’s source, the mountains of Mariara are seen 
advancing into the plain in the form of a vast 
amphitheatre, composed of perpendicular rocks, 
crowned by peaks with rugged summits. The 
central point of the amphitheatre bears the 
strange name of the Devils Wall or Nook 
(Rincon del Diablo). The range stretching to 
the East is called #l Chaparro; that to the 
West, Las Viruelas. These rocks, in ruins, com- 
mand the plain; they are composed of a coarse- 
grained granite, nearly porphyritic, the yellowish 
white feld-spar crystals of which are more than 
an inch and a half long. The mica is rare in 
them, and of a fine silvery lustre. Nothing can 
be more picturesque and solemn than the aspect 
of this group of mountains, half-covered with 
vegetation. The peak of Calavera, which 
unites the Devil’s Wall to Chaparro, is visible 
from afar. In it the granite is separated by per- 


168 


pendicular fissures into prismatic masses. 1t 
would seem as if the primitive rock were 
crowned with columns of basaltes. In the time 
of rains, a considerable sheet of water rushes in 
the form of a cascade from these cliffs. The 
mountains connected toward the East with the 
Devil's Wall are much less lofty, and contain, 
like the promontory of La Cabrera, and the 
little distinct hills in the plain, gneiss and mica- 
slate, including garnets. 

It is in these lower mountains, two or three 
miles North-East of Mariara, we find the ravine 
of hot waters, quebrada de aguas calientes. This 

‘yavine, running N. 75° W., contains several 
small basins. Of these the two uppermost, 
which have no communication with each other, 
are only eight inches in diameter; the three 
lower, from two to three feet. Their depth 
varies from three to fifteen inches. The tem- 
perature of these different funnels (pozos) is 
from 56° to 59° cent.; and, what is remarkable, 
the lower funnels are hotter than the upper, 
though the difference of the level is only seven 
or eight inches. The hot waters, collected 
together, form a little rivulet, (rio de aguas cali- 
entes,) which, thirty feet lower, has a temperature 
of only 48°. In the seasons of great drought *, 
the time at which we visited the ravine, the 


* The 18th February, 1800; 


169 


whole body of the thermal waters forms a sec- 
tion of only twenty-six square inches. ‘This is 
considerably augmented in the rainy season ; 
the rivulet is then transformed into a torrent, 
and it’s heat diminishes ; for it appears, that 
the hot springs themselves are subject only to 
imperceptible variations. All these springs are 
slightly impregnated with sulphuretted hydrogen 
gas*. The smell of rotten eggs, peculiar to this 
gas, can be perceived only by approaching very 
near the springs. In one of these wells only, 
the temperature of which is 56:2°, an extrica- 
tion of bubbles of air occurs, and takes place at 
nearly regular intervals of two or three minutes. 
I observed, that these bubbles constantly rose 
from the same points, which are four in number ; 
and that it was not possible to change the 
places, from which the gas is emitted, by stir- 
ring the bottom of the basin with a stick. ‘These 
places correspond no doubt to holes or fissures 
in the gneiss; and indeed when the bubbles rise 
from one of the apertures, the emission of gas 
follows instantly from the other three. I could 
not succeed in inflaming the small quantities of 
gas, that rise above the thermal waters; or those 
which I had collected in a glass vial held over 
the springs, an operation that excited in me a 
nausea, caused less by the smell of the gas, than 


+ Hydrosulphuric acid. 


170 


by the excessive heat prevailing in this ravine, 
Is this sulphuretted hydrogen mixed with a 
great proportion of carbonic acid, or of atmos 
pheric air? I am doubtful of the first of these 
mixtures, though so common in thermal waters 
(at Aix la Chapelle, Enghien, and Bareges), 
The gas collected in the tube of Fontana’s eudi- 
ometer had been shaken for a long time with 
water. The small basins are. covered with a 
light pellicle of sulphur, deposited by the sul- 
phuretted hydrogen in it’s slow combustion in 
contact with the atmospheric “oxygen. A few 
plants near the springs were incrusted. with 
sulphur. This deposite is s varcely visible, when 
the water of Mariara is suffered to cool in an 
open vessel; no doubt because the quantity of 
disengaged gas is very small, and is not renewed. 
The water when cold gives no precipitate with 
a solution of nitrat of copper; is destitute of 
flavour, and very drinkable. If it contain any 
saline substances, for example, sulphat of soda, 
or of magnesia, their quantities must: be very 
insignificant. Being almost destitute of chemical 
tests *, we contented ourselves with filling two 


* A. small case, containing acetat of lead, nitrat of silver, 
alcohol, prussiat of potash, &c., had been left by mistake-at 
Cumana. J evaporated some of the water of Mariara, and 
it yielded only a very small residaum, which, digested with 
nitric acid, appeared to contain only a little silica and 
extractive vegetable matter, 


ee ee Oe 


171 


bottles at the very source, which were sent, 
along with the nourishing milk of the tree called 
vaca, to Messrs. Fourcroy and Vauquelin, by 
the way of Porto-Cabello and the Havannah. 
This purity in hot waters issuing immediately 
from granitic mountains is one of the most cu- 
rious phenomena, which the two continents 
display *. How can we explain the origin of 
the hydrosulphuretted gas? It cannot proceed 
from the decomposition of sulphurets of iron, or 
pyritic strata. Is it owing to sulphurets of cal- 
cium, of magnesium, or other earthy metalloids, 
contained in the interior of our planet, under 
it’s rocky and oxidated crust ? 

In the ravine of the hot waters of Mariara, 
amid little funnels the temperature of which 
rises from 56° to 59°, two species of aquatic 
plants vegetate; the one is membranaceous, and 
contains bubbles of air; the other has parallel 
fibres-+. The first much resembles the ulva 
labyrinthiformis of Vandelli, which the thermal 
waters of Europe furnish. At the island of Am- 
sterdam Mr. Barrow < has seen tufts of lycopo- 


'* In the ancient continent warm waters equally pure are 
found gushing out from the granites of Portugal, and those 
of Cantal. In Italy, the Pisciarelli of the lake Agnano have 
a temperature equal to 93° cent. Are these pure waters the 
product of condensed vapours ? 

+ Conferva? fibrosa, laete viridis, fibris parallelis, indivisis, 
apicem versus attenuatis. 
£ Voyage to Cochinchina, p. 143. 


172 


dium and marchantia in places, where the heat 
of the soil was far greater. Such is the effect of 
an habitual stimulus on the organs of plants. 
The waters of Mariara contain no aquatic insects. 
Frogs are found in them, which, chased by ser- 
pents, have leaped into the funnels, and there 
perished. 
South of the ravine, in the plain that extends 
toward the shore of the lake, anether hydro- 
sulphurous spring gushes out, less hot, and 
more feebly impregnated with gas. The crevice, 
whence this water issues, is six toises higher 
than the funnel just described. The thermo- 
meter did not rise in the crevice above 42°. The 
water is collected in a basin surrounded by large 
trees, nearly circular, from fifteen to eighteen 
feet diameter, and three feet deep. The unhappy 
slaves throw themselves into this bath at the 
end of the day, when covered with dust, having 
worked in the neighbouring fields of indigo and 
sugar-canes. Though the water of this bano is 
habitually from 12° to 15° hotter than the air, 
the Blacks call it refreshing; because in the 
torrid zone this term is used for whatever re- 
stores strength, calms the irritation of the nerves, 
or causes a feeling of comfort. We ourselves 
found the salutary effects of the bath. We hung 
our hammocks from the trees that shade the 
basin, and passed ‘a whole day in this charming 
spot, which abounds in plants. We found near 


173 


the bano of Mariara the volador or gyrocarpus. 
The winged fruits of this large tree turn like a 
fly-wheel, when they fall from their stalk. On 
shaking the branches of the volador, we saw the 
air filled with it’s fruits, the simultaneous fall 
of which presents the most singular spectacle. 
The two membranaceous and striated wings are 
turned so as to meet the air, in falling, at an 
angle of 45°. Fortunately the fruits we gathered 
were at their maturity. We sent some to 
Europe, and they have germinated in the gar- 
dens of Berlin, Paris, and Malmaison. ‘The 
numerous plants of the volador, now found in 
hot-houses, owe their origin to the only tree of 
the kind found: near Mariara. The geographical 
distribution of the different species of gyrocarpus, 
which Mr. Brown considers as a laurinea, is 
very singular. Jacquin saw one species near 
Carthagena in America*. This is the same 
which we met with again in Mexico, near 
Zumpango, on the road from Acapulco to the 
capital}. Another species, that grows on the 


* Jacq., Hist. Amer., t. 178, f.80. This is the gyrocarpus 
Jacquini of Gertner (De Fruct., t. 97, vol. ii, p. 92), or 
gyrocarpus americanus, Willd. 

+ The natives of Mexico called it quitlacoctli. Isaw some 
of it’s young leaves, with three and five lobes; the full grown 
leaves are in the form of a heart, and constantly with three 
lobes. We never met with the volador in flower Messrs. ‘ 
Sesse and Mocino have drawings of it. 


174 


mountains of Coromandel *, has been described 
by Roxburgh: the third and fourth + grow in 
the southern hemisphere, on the coasts of New 
Holland. 

After getting out of the bath, while, half- 
wrapped in a sheet, we were drying ourselves in 
the Sun, according to the custom of the country, 
a little man of the mulatto race approached us. 
After bowing gravely, he made us a long speech 
on the virtues of the waters of Mariara, on the 
numbers of sick by whom they have been visited 
for some years past, and on the fortunate situa- 
tion of the springs between two towns, Valencia 
and Caraccas, where the neglect of moral con- 
duct is encreasing every day. He showed us his 
house, a little hut covered with palm-leaves, and. 
situate in an enclosure at a small distance, on 
the bank of a rivulet, that communicates with 
the bath. He assured ts, that we should there 
find all the conveniences of life; nails to suspend 
our hammocks, ox-leather to stretch over benches 
made of reeds, earthen vases always filled with 
cool water, and what, after the bath, would be 
most salutary to us of all, those great. lizards 
(iguanas), the flesh of which is known to be a 
refreshing aliment. We judged from his ha- 


* Roxb. Corom., I, pl. t.1. This is the gyrocarpus asiaticus, 
Willd. : 

t G. sphenopterus, and g. rugosus, (Brown, Prodr. 
vol. 1, p..405). 


b75 


rangue, that the poor man took us for sick 
persons, who were come to stay near the spring. 
His counsels and offers of hospitality were not 
altogether disinterested. -He-entitled himself 
“the inspector of the waters, and pulpero* of 
the place.” Accordingly all his obliging atten- 
tions to us ceased, as soon as he heard, that we 
were simply come to satisfy our curiosity ; or as 
they express it in the colonies, which are the 
land of idleness, para ver, no mas, “ to see and 
nothing more.” 

The waters of Mariara are used with success 
in rheumatic swellings, old ulcers, and those 
horrible affections of the skin called bubas, the 
origin of which is not always siphylitic. As 
the waters are but very feebly impregnated with 
sulphuretted hydrogen, it is necessary to bathe 
at the spot whence they gush out. Farther on, 
these small waters are employed for the irriga- 
tion of fields of indigo. The wealthy proprietor 
of Mariara, Don Domingo Tovar, had formed 
the project of erecting a bathing-house, and an 
establishment, which would ‘furnish people in 
easy circumstances with a few more resources 
than lizard’s flesh for food, and leather stretched 
on a bench for their repose. 

On the 21st of February in the evening we 


* Proprietor of a pulperia, or little shop, where eatables 
and drinkables are sold, 


4 


176 


set out from the beautiful Hacienda de Cura for 
Guacara and Nueva Valencia. We preferred 
travelling by night, on account of the excessive 
heat of the day. We passed by the hamlet of 
Punta Zamuro, at the foot of the high moun- 
tains of Las Viruelas. The road is bordered 
with large zamang trees or mimosas, the trunks 
of which rise to sixty feet high. Their branches, 
nearly horizontal, meet at more than’ one. hun-— 
dred and fifty feet distance. I have no where 
seen a vault of verdure more beautiful and 


luxuriant. The night was gloomy: the Devil's 
Wall and it’s denticulated rocks appeared from 
time to time at a distance, illumined by the 
burning of the savannahs, or wrapped in ruddy 


smoke. At the spot where the bushes were the 
thickest, our horses were frightened by the yell 
of an animal, that seemed to follow us closely. 
It was a large tiger, that had roamed for three 
years among these mountains. He had con- 
stantly escaped the pursuits of the boldest hun- 
ters ; and had carried off horses and mules from 
the midst of enclosures ; but, having no want of 
food, had not yet attacked men. The Negro, 
who conducted us, uttered wild cries. He 
thought he should frighten the tiger; but these 
means were of course without effect. The 
jaguar, like the wolf of Europe, follows travel- 
lers, even when he will not attack them ; the 
wolf in the open fields, and .in unsheltered 


V7 


places; the jaguar skirting the road, and ap- 
pearing only at intervals between the bushes. 
We passed the day on the 23d in the house 
of the Marquis de Toro, at the village of Gua- 
cara, a very considerable Indian community. 
The natives, of whom the corregidor, Don Pedro 
Penalver, was a man distinguished by the culti- 
vation of his mind, were in tolerably easy cir- 
cumstances. They had just gained a cause at 
the Audiencia, that replaced them in the pos- 
session of some lands, the property of which had 
been contested by the Whites. An avenue of 
carolineas leads from Guacara to-Mocundo. It 
was the first time that I had seen in the open 
air this majestic plant, which forms one of the 
principal ornaments of the extensive hot-houses 
of Schoenbrunn *. Mocundo is a rich plantation 
of sugar-canes, belonging to the family of Toro. 
We there find, what is so rare in that country, 
even a “luxury of agriculture,” a garden, arti- 
ficial clumps of trees, and on the border of the 
water, upon a rock of gneiss}, a pavilion with 
a mirador, or belvidera. The view is delightful 
over the western part of the lake, the surround- 


“* Every tree of the carolinea princeps at Schoenbrunn has 
sprung from seeds collected by Messrs. Bosc and Brude- 
meyer from one single tree, of an enormous size, near 
Chacao, East of Caraccas. 

+ Direction of the strata of gneiss, hor. 3—4. Dip 80° 
to the South-East, d 
VOL, IV. Noe 


ing mountains, and a forest of palm-trees, that 
separates Guacara from the city of Nueva Va- 
lencia. The fields of sugar-cane, from the soft 
verdure of the young reeds, resemble a vast 
meadow. Every thing denotes abundance; but 
it is at the price of the liberty of the cultivators. 
At Mocundo, with two hundred and thirty Ne- 
groes, seventy-seven ¢ablones, or cane-fields, are 
cultivated, each of which, ten thousand varas 
square *, yields a clear produce of two hundred 
or two hundred and forty piastres a year. The 
creoie cane and the cane of Oiaheite + are 
planted in the month of April, the first at four, 
the second at five feet distance. The cane 
ripens in fourteen months. It flowers in the 
month of October, if the plant be sufficiently 
vigorous; but the top is cut off before the pani- 
ele is unfolded. In all the monocotyledonous 
plants (the maguey cultivated at Mexico for 
extracting the pulque, the wine-yielding palm- 
tree, and the sugarcane), the flowering alters 
the quality of the juices. The fabrication of 
sugar, the boiling, and the claying, are very 


* A tablon, equal to 1849 square toises, contains nearly 
an acre and one fifth; for a legal acre has 1344 square 
toises, and 1:95 legal acre is equal to one hectare. 

+ At the island of Palma, where in the latitude of 29° 
the sugarcane is cultivated, according to Mr. de Buch, as 
high as 140 toises above the level of the Atlantic, the 
Otaheite cane requires more heat than the creole cane, 


ata ea a m9 ag Pe ns ca a eR a le enced 


4179 


imperfect in Terra Firma, because it is made 
only for home consumption ; and for wholesale 
the papelon is preferred to sugar, either refined 
orraw. The papelon is an impure sugar, in the 
form of little loaves, of a yellow brown colour. 
It contains a mixture of melasses and mucila- 
ginous matter. The poorest man eats papelon, 
as in Europe he eats cheese. It is believed to 
have nutritive qualities. Fermented with water, 
it yields the guarapo, the favorite beverage of 
the people. In the province of Caraccas, sub- 
carbonat of potash is used, instead of lime, to 
purify the juice of the sugarcane. The ashes of 
the bucare, which is the erythrina coralleden- 
dron, are preferred. 

The sugarcane was introduced very late, 
probably toward the end of the sixteenth cen- 


tury, from the West India islands into the valleys 


of Aragua. Known in India, in China, and all 
the islands of the Pacific ocean, from the most 
remote antiquity, it was planted in Persia, in 
Chorasan, as early as the fifth century of our 
era, in order to obtain from it solid sugar *. 


The Arabs carried this reed, so useful to the 


inhabitants of hot and temperate countries, 
the shores of the Mediterranean. In 1306, it’s 


* See my researches on sugar, and the tabasheer, the 
Indian name of which, scharkara, has passed into sugar, in 
the Nov. Gen. et Species Plant., vol, i, p. 243. : 

N 2 


180 


cultivation was yet unknown in Sicily ; but was 
already common in the island of Cyprus, at 
Rhodes, and in the Morea*. A hundred years 
after it enriched Calabria, Sicily, and the coasts 
of Spain. From Sicily the Infant Henry trans- 
planted the cane to Madeira}: from Madeira 
it passed to the Canary islands, where it was 
entirely unknown ; for the ferule of Juba ( quae 
expressee liquorem fundunt potui jucundum) are 
euphorbiums, the tabayba dulce, and not, as has 
been recently asserted +, sugarcanes. Twelve 
sugar-manufactories (ingenios de azucar) avere 
soon established in the island of Great Canary, 
in that of Palma, and between Adexe, Icod, and 
Guarachico, in the island of Teneriffe. Negroes 
were employed-in this cultivation, and their 
descendants still inhabit the grottoes of Tirax- 
ana, inthe Great Canary. Since the sugarcane 
has been transplanted to the West Indies, and 
the New World has given maize to the Canaries, 
the cultivation of this latter has taken the place 


* According to the collection known under the name of 
Bongars, Gesta Dei per Franeos (Sprengel, Gesch. der Geogr. 
Entdeckungen, p.186). Alexandri Benedicti-Opera med., 1549, 
p- 150. 

+ Ramusio, vol. i, p. 106. 5 4 

t On the Origin of Cane Sugar, in the Journ. de Pharmacie, 
1816, p. 387. The tabayba dulce is, according to Mr, von 
Buch, the euphorbia balsamifera, the juice of which is neither 
corrosive nor bitter, like that of the cardon, or euphorbia 
canariensis. 


18] 

ef the cane at Teneriffe, and the Great Canary. 
This is now found only in the island of Palma, 
near Argual and Tazacorte*, where it yields 
scarcely one thousand quintals of sugar a year. 
The sugarcane of the Canaries, which Aguilon 
transported to St. Domingo, was there cultivated 
extensively as early as 1513, or in the six or 
seven following years, under the auspices of the 
monks of St. Jerome-+. Negroes were em- 
ployed in this cultivation from it’s commence- 
ment; and in 1519 representations were already 
made to government, as in our own time, “ that 
the West India islands would be ruined and 
remain desert, if slaves were not conveyed thi- 
ther annually from the coast of Guinea” ft. 

For some years past the culture and fabrica- 
tion of sugar has been much improved in Terra 
Firma; and, as the process of refining is not 
permitted by the laws at Jamaica, they reckon 
on the fraudulent exportation of refined sugar to 
the English colonies. But the consumption of 
the provinces of Venezuela, either in papelon, or 
in raw sugar employed for the fabrication of 
chocolate and sweet-meats (dulces), is so enor- 
mous, that the exportation has been hitherto 


* Notice sur la Culture du Sucre dans les Isles Canaries, by 
Mr. Leopold von Buch. (MS.) 

+ Herrera, Dec. ii, b. 3,c. 14. Compare my Essai Bic 
eur la Nowo, Espagne,,tom. 2, p. 425. 

t Dec. ii, b. 3. Herera, c.3. 


182 


entirely null. The finest plantations of sugar are 
in the valleys of Aragua, and of the Tuy *, near 
Pao de Zarate, between La Victoria and San: 
Sebastian +, near Guatire, Guarenas, and Cau- 
rimaret. Ifthe first canes arrived in the New 
World from the Canary islands, it is also in ge- 
neral Canarians, or Jslengos, who are now 
placed at the head of the great plantations, and 
who superintend the labours of cultivation.and 


refining. 

It is this intimate connexion between the Ca- 
narians and the inhabitants: of Venezuela, that 
has given rise to the introduction of camels into 
those provinces. The Marquis del Toro caused 
three to be brought from Lancerota. The oa 


pense of conveyance was very considerable, on 
account of the space which these animals occupy 
on board merchant-vessels, and of the great 
quantity of water of which they stand in need, 
in the state of suffering to which they are re- 
duced by a long passage. A camel, bought 
for thirty piastres, costs between eight and nine 
hundred on arriving on the coast. of Caraccas. 
We saw four of these animals at Mocundo; 


* Tapatapa, or La Trinidad, Cura, Mocundo, El Palmar, 

+ For instance, the Hacienda de Santa Rosa. 

+ Price in the valleys of Aragua: a papelon,. or loaf of 
two pounds and a half weight, half a real de plata, or one 
sixteenth of a piastre; one pound of raw sugar, one real; 
one pound of clayed sugar, from one real to one and a half, 


183 


three of which had already been born in Ame- 


yica; and two had died of the bite of the coral, 


a venomous serpent very common on the banks 
of the lake. These camels have hitherto been 
employed only in the conveyance of the sugar- 
canes to the mill. The males, stronger than the 
females, carry from forty to fifty arrobas. A 
wealthy landholder in the province of Varinas, 
encouraged by the example of the Marquis del. 
Toro; has allotted a sum of 15,000: piastres. for 
the purpose of bringing fourteen or fifteen camels 
at once from the Canary islands. Such enter- 
prises‘are’so much the more laudable, as it is 
presumed these beasts of burden may be em- 
ployed in the conveyance of merchandize across 
the burning plains of Casanare, from the Apure 
and Calabozo, which in the season of drought 
resemble the deserts of Africa. I have already 
observed in another place * how much it were 
to be wished, that the Conquistadores, from the 
beginning of the sixteenth century, had peopled 
America with camels, as they have peopled it 
with horned cattle, horses, and mules. Where- 
ever there are immense distances to cross in un- 
inhabited lands; wherever the construction of 
canals becomes useless, because they require too 
great a number of locks (as in the isthmus of 


* Essai Politique sur la Nouv. Espagne, vol.i, p. 235 
vol. ii, p. 689. j 


184 


Panama, on the table-land of Mexico, and ia 
the deserts that separate thé kingdom of Quito 
from Peru, and Peru from Chili), camels would 
be of the highest importance, to facilitate inland 
commerce. It seems the more surprising, that 
their introduction was not encouraged by the 
government at the beginning of the conquest, as, 
long after the taking of Grenada, camels, for 
which the Moors had a great predilection, were 
still very common in the South of Spain. A Bis- 
cayan, Juan de Reinaga, carried some of these 
animals at his own expense to Peru. Father 
Acosta * saw them at the foot of the Andes, 
toward the end of the sixteenth century ; but 
little care being taken of them, they scarcely 
ever bred, and the race soon became extinct. 
In those times of oppression and calamity, which 
have been, described as the times of Spanish 
glory, the commendataries (encomenderos ) let out 
the Indians to travellers like beasts of burden. 
They were assembled by hundreds, either to 
carry merchandize across the Cordilleras, or to 
follow the armies in their expeditions of disco- 
very and pillage. The Indians endured this ser- 
vice more patiently, because, on account of the 
almost total want of domestic animals, they had 
long been constrained to perform it, though in a 
Jess inhuman manner, under the government of 


+ Hist. Nat. de Indias, libsiv, c. 38. 


185 


their own chiefs. The introduction of cameis 
attempted by Juan de Reinaga spread an alarm 
among the encomenderos, who were, not agree~ 
ably to the laws; but in fact, lords of the Indian 
villages. We cannot be surprised, that the court 
listened to the complaints of the Lords ; but in 
consequence of this measure America was de- 
prived of one of the means, which would most 
have facilitated it’s inland communication, and 
the exchange of productions. Now that the 
Indians, since the reign of Charles III, are go- 
verned according to a more equitable system, 
and as a larger field is about to be opened for 
all the branches of national industry, the intro- 
duction of camels should be attempted as a ge- 
neral measure, and by the government itself. 
A few hundreds of these useful animals, spread 
over the vast surface of America, in hot and 
barren places, would in a few years have a power- 
ful influence on the public prosperity. Provinces 
separated by steppes would then appear to be 
brought nearer:to each other ; several kinds of 
inland merchandize would diminish in price on 
‘the coast; and by increasing the number of 
camels, above all the hedjines, or ships of the de- 
sert, a new life would be given to the industry 
and commerce of the New World. 

On the evening of the 22d we continued ‘our 
journey from Mocundo by Los Guayos to the city 


of Nueva Valencia. We passed a little forest of 
3 


186 


palm-trees, which resembled by their appearance, 
and their leaves spread like a fan, the chamerops 
humilis of the coast of Barbary. The trunk 
however. rises to twenty-four and sometimes 
thirty feet high. It is probably a new species 
_ of the genus corypha*; and is called in the 
country palma de sombrero, the footstalks of 
the leaves being employed. in weaving hats, that 
resemble our straw hats. This grove of palm-- 
trees, the withered foliage of which rustles at the 
least breath of air; the camels, that feed in the 
plain ; the undulating motion of the vapours on 
a soil burnt by the ardour of the Sun; give the 
landscape an African aspect. The aridity of the. 
land;augments as the: traveller approaches’ the 
town; after passing the western extremity of the 
lake.» It.is a clayey soil, that has been levelled 
and. abandoned by the waters. The neighbour- 
ing hills, called the Morros de Valencia, are 
composed of white tufas, a very recent limestone 
formation, immediately covering the gneiss. ‘It 
is again found at Victoria, and on several other 
points along the chain of the coast. The white- 
ness of these iufas, which reflect the rays of the 
Sun, contribute greatly to the excessive heat felt 
in this place. Every thing seems smitten with 
sterility ; scarcely are a few plants of cacao found 
on the banks of the Rio de Valencia ; the rest of 


* Corypha tectorim ; Nova Gen., vol. i, pi 299. 


187 


the plain is bare, and destitute of vegetation. 
This appearance of sterility is here attributed, as 
it is every where in the valleys of Aragua, to the 
cultivation of indigo; which, according to the 
planters, is, of all plants, that which most ex- 
hausts (cansa, ‘ fatigues’) the ground. The real 
physical causes of this phenomenon would be an 
interesting inquiry ; since, like the effects of fal- 
lowing land, and of a rotation of crops, it is far 
from being sufficiently understood: [shall only 
observe in general, that the complaints’ of the 
increasing sterility of cultivated land become 
more frequent between the tropics, in proportion 
as they are near the period of their first breaking 
up. In a region almost) destitute of herbs; 
where every plant has a ligneous stem, and tends 
to raise itself as a shrub ; the virgin soil remains 
shaded either by great trees; or by bushes; and 
under this tufted shade it preserves every where 
coolness and humidity. However active the 
vegetation of the tropics may appear, the num- 
ber of roots, that penetrate into the earth, is not 
so great in an uncultivated soil; while the plants 
are nearer to each other in lands subjected to 
cultivation, and covered with indigo, sugarcanes, 
or cassava. The trees and shrubs, loaded’ with 
branches and leaves, draw a great part of their 
nourishment from the ambient air ; and the vir- 
gin soil augments it’s fertility by the decomposi: 
tion of the vegetable substances, which progres- - 


"188 
sively accumulate. It is not so in the fields 
covered with indigo, or other herbaceous plants; 
where the rays of the Sun penetrate freely into 
the earth, and by the accelerated combustion of 
the hydrurets of carbon, and other acidifiable 
principles, destroy the germes of fecundity. 
These effects strike the imagination of the plan- 
ters the more forcibly, as in lands newly inha- 
bited they compare the fertility of a soil, which 
has been abandoned to itself during thousands 
of years, with the produce of ploughed fields. 
The Spanish colonies on the continent, and the 
great islands of Porto-Rico and Cuba, possess 
remarkable advantages with respect to the pro- 
duce of agriculture over the Little West India 
islands. ‘The former, from their extent, the 
variety of their scenery, and their small relative 
population, still bear all the characters of a new 
soil; while at Barbadoes, Tobago, St. Lucia, 
the Virgin Islands, and the French part of St. 
Domingo, it may be perceived, that long culti- 
vation has begun to exhaust the soil. If in the 
valleys of Aragua, instead of abandoning the in- 
digo grounds, and leaving them fallow, they 
were covered during several years, not with corn, 
but with other alimentary plants and forage; if 
among these plants such as belong to different 
families were preferred, and which shade the 
soil by their large leaves ; the melioration of the 
. fields would be gradually accomplished, and 


189 


they would be restored to a part of their former 
fertility. 

The city of Nueva Valencia oceupies a consi- 
derable extent of ground, but it’s population 
scarcely amounts to six or seven, thousand souls. 
The streets are very broad, the dimensions of the 
market place, plaza major, are excessive ; and, 
the houses being low, the cisproportion between 
the population of the town, and the space that 
it occupies, is still greater than at Caraccas. 
Many of the Whites, above all the poorest, for-. 
sake their houses, and live the greater part of 
the year in their little plantations of indigo and 
cotton, where they*can venture to work with 
their own hands; which, according to the inye- 
terate prejudices of that country, would be a 
disgrace to them in the town. The industry of 
the inhabitants begins in general to awaken; 
and the cultivation of cotton has considerably 
augmented, since new privileges have been 
granted to the trade of Porto Cabello, and since 
that port has been opened as a principal port *, 
to vessels that come directly from the mother 
country. 

Nueva Valencia, founded in 1555 under the 
government of Villacinda, by Alonzo Diaz Mo- 
reno, is twelve years older than Cargccas, We 
have already shown elsewhere, that the Spanish 


* Puerto mayor, since 1798, 


196 


population spread in Venezuela from West to 
East. Valencia was at first only a dependancy 
of Burburata; but this latter town is nothing 
now but a place of embarkation for mules. It 
is regretted, and perhaps justly, that Valencia 
has not become the capital of the country. It’s 
situation in a plain, on the banks of a lake, re- 
calls to mind the position of Mexico. When we 
reflect on the easy communication, which the 
valleys of Aragua furnish with the Llanos, and 
the rivers that flow into the Oroonokoe ; when we 
recognize the possibility of opening an inland 
navigation, by the Rio Pao and the Portuguesa, 
as far as the mouths of the Oroonoko, the.Cas- 
siquiare, and the Amazon ; it may be conceived, 
that the capital of the vast provinces of Vene- 
zuela would have been better placed near the 
fine harbour of Porto Cabello, beneath a pure 
and serene sky, than near the unsheltered’ road 
of La Guayra, in a temperate but constantly 
foggy valley. Near the kingdom of New Gra- 
nada, andsituate between the fertile corn-lands of 
La Victoria and Barquesimeto, the city of Valen- 
cia ought to have prospered; but, notwithstand- 
ing these advantages, it has been unable to 
maintain the contest with Caraccas, which dur- 
ing two ceyturies has borne away a great num- 
ber of it’s inhabitants. The families of Man- 
tuanoes have preferred a residence in the capital 
to that of a provincial town. 


19} 


Those who do not know the immense quantity 
of ants, that infest every country within the tor- 
rid zone, can scarcely form an idea of the de- 
struction, and of the sinking of the ground 
occasioned by these insects. They abound to 
such a degree on the spot where Valencia is 
placed, that their excavations resemble subter- 
raneous canals, which are filled with water in 
the time of the rains, and become very dange- 
rous to the buildings. Here recourse has not 
been had to the extraordinary means employed 
at the beginning of the sixteenth century in the 
island of St. Domingo, when troops of ans ra- 
vaged the fine plains of La Vega, and. the rich 
possessions of the order of St. Francis.’ The 
monks, after having in vain burnt the larve of 
the ants, and had recourse to fumigations, ad- 
vised the inhabitants to choose by lot a saint, 
who would serve as an abagado contra las hor- 
migas*, The honour of the choice fell on St. 
Saturnin ; and the ants disappeared, as soon as 
the first. festival of this saint was celebrated, 
Tncredulity has made great progress since the 
time of the conquest ; and it was on the back of 
the Cordilleras only, that I found a small chapel, 
destined, according to it’s inscription, for prayers 
to be addressed to Heaven for the destruction 
of the termites. 


* Herrera, Decad. II, 1,8; c. 14, 


192 


Valencia affords some historical remembran- 
ces; but these, like every thing connected with 
the colonies, have no remote date, and recall to 
mind either civil discords, or sanguinary con- 

_flicts with the savages. Lopez de Aguirre, whose 
crimes and adventures form one of the most 
dramatic episodes of the history of the conquest, 
went, in 156], from Peru, by the river of Ama- 
zons, to the island of Margaretta; and thence, 
by the port of Burburata, into the valleys of 
Aragua. On his entrance into Valencia, which 
proudly entitles itself the City of the King, he 
proclaimed the independance of the country, and 
the deposition of Philip II. The inhabitants 
withdrew to the islands of the lake of Tacarigua, 
taking with them all the boats from the shore, 
to be more secure in their retreat. In conse- 
quence of this stratagem, he could exercise his 

- cruelties only on his own people. He composed 
at Valencia that famous letter to the King of 
Spain, which paints with such frightful truth 
-the manners of the soldiery of the sixteenth cen- 
tury *. The tyrant (Aguirre is still thus deno- 
minated by the vulgar) boasts alternately of his 
crimes and his piety ; he gives advice to the King 
on the government of the colonies, and the sys- 
tem of missions. Surrounded by-savage Indians, 
navigating on a great sea of fresh water, as he 


* See note A, at the end of this book. 


193 


calls the river of Amazons, he is alarmed at the 
heresies of Martin Luther, and the increasing 
influence of schismatics in Europe. Lopez de 
Aguirre was killed at Barquesimeto, after having 
been abandoned by his own men. At the mo- 
ment when he fell, he plunged a dagger into 
the bosom of his only daughter, “ that she 
might not have to blush before the Spaniards at 
the name of the daughter of a traitor.” The 
soul of the tyrant (such is the belief of the na- 
tives) wanders in the Savannahs, like a flame, 
that flies the approach of men *. 

The second historical event connected with 
the name of Valencia is the great incursion made 
by the Caribbees of the Oroonoko in 1578 and 
1580. That cannibal horde -went up the banks 
of the Guarico, crossing the plains or Llanos. 
They were: happily repulsed by the valour of 
Garcia Gonzalez, one of the captains whose 
names are still the most revered in those pro- 
vinces. It is soothing to recollect, that the de. 
seendants of those very Caribbees now live in the 
missions as peaceable husbandmen, and that no 
savage nation of Guiana dares to cross the plains, 
that separate the region of the forests from that - 
of cultivated land. The Cordillera of the coast 
is cut by several ravines, that are very uniformly 
directed from South-East to North-West. -This 


* See above, vol. ii, p. 219, 220. 
VOL. IV. O 


194 


phenomenon is general from the Quebrada of 
Tocume, between Petarez and Caraccas, as far 
as Porto Cabello. It would seem as if the im- 
pulsion had every where come from the South- 
East; and this fact is the more striking, as the 
strata of gneiss and mica-slate in the Cordilleras 
of the coast are generally directed from the 
South-West to the North-East. The greater 
part of these ravines penetrate into the mountains 
at their southern declivity, without crossing 
them entirely. But there is an opening (abra) 
in the meridian of Nueva Valencia, which leads 
toward the coast, and by which a cooling sea- 
breeze penetrates every evening into the valleys 
of Aragua. This breeze rises regularly two or 
three hours after sunset. 

By this abra, the farm of Barbula, and an 
eastern branch of the ravine, a new road is con- 
structing from Valencia to Porto Cabello. It 
will be so short, that it will require only four 
hours to reach the port, and the traveller will 
be able to go and return in the same day from 
the coast to the valleys of Aragua. In order to 
examine this road, we set out on the 26th of 
February in the evening for the farm of Barbula, 
accompanied by the proprietors of that farm, the 
amiable family of Arambary. 

On the 27th in the morning we visited the 
hot springs of La Trinchera, three leagues from 
Valencia. The ravine is very large, and the 


195 


descent almost continual from the banks of the 
lake to the sea-coasit. La Trinchera takes it’s 
name from little fortifications in earth, thrown 
up in 1677 by some French freebooters, who 
sacked the town of Valencia. . The hot springs, 
which is a remarkable geological fact, do not 
gush out to the South of the mountains, like 
those of Mariara, Onoto, and the Brigantine ; 
but they issue from the chain itself, almost at 
it’s northern declivity. They are much more 
abundant than any we had till then seen, form- 
ing a rivulet, which in the times of the greatest 
drought is two feet deep and eighteen wide. 
The temperature of the water, measured with 
great care, was. 90°3° of the centigrade thermo- 
meter. Next to the springs of Urijino, in 
Japan, which are asserted to be pure water at 
100° of temperature, the waters of the Trinchera 
of Porto Cabello appear to be the hottest in the 
world. We breakfasted near the spring; eggs 
plunged into the thermal waters were boiled in 
less than four minutes. These waters, strongly 
charged with sulphuretted hydrogen, gush out 
from the back of a hill rising one hundred and 
fifty feet above the bottom of the ravine, and 
trending from South-South-Eastto North-North- 
West. The rock, from which the springs gush, 
is a real coarse-grained granite, resembling that 
of the Devil's Wallin the mountains of Mariara, 
Wherever the waters evaporate in the air, they 
o 2 


196 


form sediments and incrustations of carbonat of 
lime ; perhaps they traverse strata of primitive 
limestone, so common in the mica-slate and 
gneiss of the coasts of Caraccas. We were sur- 
prised at the luxuriant vegetation that surrounds 
the basin ; mimosas with slender pinnate leaves, 
clusias, and fig-trees, have pushed their roots into 
the bottom of a pool, the temperature of which 
is 85°, and the branches of these trees extended 
over the surface of the water, at two or three 
inches distance. The foliage of the mimosas, 
though constantly humectated with the hot va- 
pours, displayed the most beautiful verdure. 
An arum, with a woody stem, and with large 
sagittate leaves, rose in the very middle of a 
pool, the temperature of which was 70°... The 
same species of plants vegetate in other parts 
of those mountains at the brink of torrents, the 
temperature of which is not 18°. What is still 
‘more singular, forty feet distant from the point, 
whence the springs gush out at a temperature of 
90°, other springs are found entirely cold. They 
all follow for some time a parallel direction ; 
and the natives showed us, that by digging a 
hole between the two rivulets, they could pro- 
cure a bath of any given temperature they 
pleased. It seems remarkable, that in the hot- 
test as well as the coldest climates, people dis- 
play the same predilection for heat. On the 
introduction of Christianity into Iceland, the 


197 


inhabitants would. be baptized only in the hot 
springs of Hecla: and under the torrid zone, in 
the plains, as well as on the Cordilleras, the 
natives flock from all parts to the thermal 
waters. The sick, who come to La Trinchera~ 
to use vapour baths, form a sort of arbor over 
the spring with branches of trees and very, 
slender reeds. They stretch themselves naked 
on this arbor, which appeared to me to possess 
little strength, and to be dangerous of access. 
The Rio de Aguas Calientes runs toward the 
North-East, and becomes, near the coast, a 
considerable river, peopled with great crocodiles, 
and. contributing by it’s inundations to the in- 
salubrity of the shore. 

We descended toward Porto Cabello, having 
constantly the river of hot water on our right. 
‘Phe road is extremely picturesque. The waters 
tumble down on the shelves of the rock. We 
seemed to gaze on the cascades of the Reuss, 
that flows down Mount St. Gothard ; but what 
a contrast in the vigour and richness of the 
vegetation ! The white trunks of the cecropia 
vise majestically amid bignonias and melasto- 
mas. They do not disappear till we are only 
one hundred toises above the level of the ocean. 
A small thorny palm-tree extends also to this 
limit ; the slender pinnate leaves of which look 
as if they had been curled toward the edges. 
‘This tree is very common in these mountains; 


but not having seen either it’s fruit, or its 
flowers, we are ignorant whether it be the piritu 
palm-tree of the Caribbees, or the cocos acu- 
~ Jeata of Jacquin. 

The rock on this road presents a geological 
phenomenon so much the more remarkable, as 
the existence of a real stratified granite has been 
long disputed. Between La Trinchera and the 
inn of Cambury a coarse-grained granite appears, 

‘which the disposition of the .spangles of mica, 
collected in small groups, scarcely admits of 
confounding with the gneiss, or with rocks of a 
schistose texture. This granite, divided into 
ledges of two or three feet thick, is directed N. 
52° E., and. slopes to the North-West regularly 
under angles of 30° or 40°. The feld-spar, crys- 
tallized in prisms with four unequal sides, and 
an inch long, passes through all the tints from a 
fiesh red to yellowish white. The mica united 
in hexagonal plates, is black, and sometimes 
green. The quartz predominates in the mass ; 
and is generally of a milky white. I observed 
neither hornblende, nor black schorl, nor rutile 
titanite, in this granite. In some ledges we 
recognised round masses, of a blackish gray, 
very quartzose, and almost destitute of mica. 
They are from one to two inches diameter 5 and 
are found in every zone, in all granitic moun- 
tains. These are not imbedded fragments, as 
at Greiffenstein in Saxony, but aggregations of 


199 


particles which seem to have been subjected to’ 
particular attractions. I could not follow the 
line of junction of the gneiss and granitic forma- 
tions. According to angles taken in the valleys 
of Aragua, the gneiss appears to descend below 
the granite, which must consequently be of a 
more recent formation. We shall examine else- 
where the relative antiquity of this rock, when, 
after our return from the Oroonoko, we shall 
attempt to trace in a particular chapter the 
geological table of formations, from the equator 
to the coast of the Caribbean sea. The appear- 
ance of a stratified granite excited my attention 
the more, because, having had the direction of 
the mines of Fichtelberg in Franconia for several 
years, I was accustomed to see granites divided 
into ledges of three or four feet thick; but little 
inclined, and forming masses like towers, or old 
ruins, at the summit of the highest mountains *. 
The heat became stifling as we approached 


* At Ochsenkopf, at Rudolphstein, at Epprechtstein, at 
Luxbourg, and at Schneeberg.. The dip of the strata of 
these granites of Fichtelberg is generally only from 6° to 10°; 
rarely (at Schneeberg) 18°. According to the dips I ob- 
served in the neighbouring strata of gneiss and mica-slate, I 
should think, that the granite of Fichtelberg was very ancient, 
and serving as a basis for other formations; but the strata of 
gruenstein, and the disseminated tin.ore, which it contains, 
may lead us to doubt, from the analogy of the granites of 
Saxony containing tin, it’s great antiquity, 


200 


the coast. A reddish vapour veiled the horizon. 
It. was near sunset, and the breeze did not yet 
blow. We reposed ourselves in the lonely farms 
known under the names of Cambury and the 
House of the Canarian (Casa del Islengo). The 
river of hot water, along the banks of which we 
passed, became deeper and deeper. A crocoaile, 
more than nine feet long, lay dead on the strand. 
We wished to examine it’s teeth, and the inside 
of it’s mouth ; but having been exposed to the 
Sun for several weeks, it exhaled a smell so 
fetid, that we were obliged to relinquish our 
design, and: remount our horses. When. ar- 
rived at the level of the sea, the road turns to 
the East, and crosses a barren ‘shore a league 
and a half broad, resembling that of Cumana- 
We there found some scattered cactuses, a 
sesuvium, a few plants of coccoloba uvifera, and 
along the coast some avicennias and mangroves. 
We forded the Guaiguaza, and the Rio Estevan, 
which by their frequent overflowings form 
great pools of stagnant water. Small rocks of 
meandrites, madreporites, and other corals, 
either ramified or with a rounded surface, rise 
in this vast plain, like those that threaten the 
mariner; and seem to attest the recent retreat 
of the sea. But these masses of the habitations 
_of polypi are only fragments imbedded in a 
breccia with a-calcareous cement. I say a 
breccia, because we must not confound the 


201 


fresh and white corallites of this very recent lit- 
toral formation, with the corallites blended in the 
mass of transition rocks, grauwakke, and black 
limestone. We were astonished to find in this 
uninhabited spot a large parkinsonia aculeata 
Joaded with flowers. Our botanical works indi- 
cate this tree as peculiar to the New World ; 
but during five years we saw it only twice in a 
wild state, once in the plains of the Rio Guai- 
guaza, and once in the Llanos of Cumana, thirty 
leagues from the coast, near la Villa del Pao. 
Nay, we may even suppose, that this latter 
place had been an ancient conuco, or cultivated 
enclosure. Every where else on the continent 
of America we saw the parkinsonia, like the 
plumeria, only in the gardens of the Indians. 

I reached Porto-Cabello in time to take some 
altitudes of Canopus near the meridian; but 
these observations, as well as the corresponding 
altitudes of the Sun, takenon the 28th of February, 
are not to be entirely depended on *. I did not 
perceive till too late a slight derangement. in 
the alidade of.a sextant by Troughton. It was 
a Snuf-box sextant, of two inches radius, which 
cannot be too much recommended to the use of 
travellers. I employed it in general only. for 
geodesical bearings, taken. in boats .on rivers. 
At Porto-Cabello, as at. La Guayra, it is. dis- 


* Obs. Ast., vol. i, p. 206, 


208 


puted whether the port lie to the East or to the 
West of the town, with which the communica- 
tions are the most frequent. The inhabitants 
believe, that Porto-Cabello is North-North-West 
from Nueva Valencia; and indeed my observa- 
tions give a longitude of three or four minutes 
more toward the West. Mr. Fidalgo finds a 
difference toward the East *. 

We were received with the utmost kindness 
in the house of a French physician, Mr. Juliac, 
who had studied with much advantage, at 
Montpellier. His small house contained a col- 
lection of things the most various, but which 
were all calculated to interest travellers. We 
found. works of literature and natural history ; 
notes on meteorology ; skins of the jaguar and 
of large aquatic serpents ; live animals, monkeys, 
armadilloes, and birds. Our host was principal 
surgeon to the royal hospital of Porto-Cabello, 
and celebrated in the country for his profound 
study of the yellow fever. During a period of 
seven years, he had seen six or eight thousand 
persons enter the hospitals attacked by this 
cruel malady. He had observed the ravages, 
that the epidemic caused in Admiral Ariztiza- 
bal’s fleet, in 1793. That fleet lost nearly the 
third of it’s men ; for the sailors were almost all 
unseasoned Europeans, and held an unrestrained 


* See Introd. to my Observ. Ast., vol. i, p. xli. 


208 


intercourse with the shore. Mr. Juliac had 
heretofore treated the sick as was commonly 
practised in Terra Firma, and in the islands, by 
bleedings, aperient medicines, and acid drinks. 
In this treatment no attempt was made to raise 
the vital powers by the action of stimulants. In 
attempting to calm the fever, the languor and 
debility were augmented. In the hospitals, 
where the-sick were crowded, the mortality was 
then thirty-three in a hundred among the 
white Creoles; and sixty-five in a hundred, 
among the Europeans recently disembarked. 
Since a stimulant treatment, the use of opium, 
of benzoin, and of alcoholic draughts, has been 
substituted for the ancient debilitating method, 
the mortality has considerably diminished. It 
was believed to be reduced to twenty in a 
hundred among Europeans, and ten among 
Creoles * ; even when black vomitings, and 
hemorrhages from the nose, ears, and gums, in- 


* I have treated in another work of the proportions of 
mortality in the yellow fever. Nouv. Esp., vol. ii, p. 777— 
785, and 867. At Cadiz, the average mortality was, in 1800, 
twenty in a hundred; at Seville, in 1801, it amounted to 
sixty ina hundred. At Vera-Cruz the mortality does not 
exceed twelve or fifteen in a hundred; when the sick can 
be properly attended. In the civil hospitals of Paris, the 
number of deaths, one year with another, is from fourteen to 
eighteen in a hundred; but it is asserted, that a great 
number of patients enter the hospitals almost dying, or at a 
very advanced time of life. . 


204 


dicated a high degree of exacerbation in the 
malady. I relate faithfully what was then given 
as the general result of observation: but I think, 
in these numerical comparisons, it must not be 
forgotten, that, notwithstanding appearances, 
the epidemics of several successive years do not 
resemble each other; and that, in order to 
decide on the use of fortifying or debilitating 
remedies, (if indeed this difference exist in an 
absolute sense,) we must distinguish between 
the various periods of the malady. 

The climate of Porto-Cabello is less ardent 
than that of La Guayra. ‘The breeze there is 
stronger, more frequent, and more regular. 
The houses do not lean against rocks, that 
absorb the rays of the Sun during the day, and 
emit caloric at night. The air can circulate 
more freely between the coast and the moun- 
tains of Ilaria. The causes of the insalubrity 
of the atmosphere must be sought in the shores 
that extend to the East, as far as the eye can 
reach, toward the Punta de Tucacos, near the 
fine port of Chichiribiche. ‘There are the salt- 
works ; and there at the beginning of the rainy 
season tertian fevers prevail, and easily degene- 
rate into asthenic fevers. A curious.observation 
has been made, that the Mestizoes who are em- 
ployed in the salt-works are more tawny, and 
have a yellower skin, when they have suffered 
several successive years from those fevers, which 


are called the malady of the coast. The poor 
fishermen, who dwell on this shore, assert, that 
it is not the inundations of the sea, and the 
retreat of the salt-water, which render the lands 
covered with mangroves so unhealthful * ; but 
that the insalubrity of the air is owing to the 
fresh water, to the overflowings of the Guay- 
' guaza and Estevan, the swell of which is so 
great and sudden in the months of October and 
November. The banks of the Rio Estevan have 
been less dangerous to inhabit, since little plan- 
tations of maize and plantains have been estab- 
lished; and, by raising and hardening the ground, 
the river has been contained within narrower 
limits. A plan is formed of giving another issue 
to the Rio San Estevan, and thus to render the 
environs of Porto-Cabello more wholesome. A 
canal is to lead the waters toward that part 
of the coast, which is opposite the island 
of Guaiguaza. 

The salt-works of Porto-Cabello somewhat 
resemble those of the peninsula of Araya, near 
Cumana. The earth, however, which they lixi- 
viate by collecting the pluvial waters into small 


* Jn the West India islands, all the dreadful maladies, 
which prevail during the wintery season, have been for a long 
time attributed to the South winds. These winds convey the 
emanations of the mouths of the Oroonoko, and of the small 
rivers of Terra Firma, toward the high latitudes. 


206° 


basins, contains less salt. It is questioned here, 
as at Cumana, whether the ground be impreg- 
nated with saline particles, because it has ‘been 
for ages covered at intervals with sea-water, 
evaporaied by the heat of the Sun ; or whether 
the soil be muriatiferous, as in a mine very poor 
in native salt. I had not leisure to examine this 
plain with the same attention as the peninsula 
of Araya. Besides, does not this problem re- 
duce itself to the simple question, whether the 
salt be owing to new or very ancient inundations ? 
The labouring at the salt-works of Porto-Cabello 
being extremely unhealthy, the poorest men 
alone employ themselves in it. They collect 
the salt in little stores, and afterward sell it to 


the shopkeepers in the town. 
During our abode at Porto-Cabello, the cur- 
rent on the coast, generally * directed toward 


* The wrecks of the Spanish ships, burnt at the island of 
Trinidad, at the time of it’s occupation by the English, in 
1797, were carried by the general or rotary current to Punta 
Brava, near Porto-Cabello. This general current toward 
the East, from the coasts of Paria to the isthmus of Panama 
and the western extremity of the island of Cuba, was the 
_ subject of a violent dispute between Don Diego Columbus, 
Oviedo, and the pilot Andres, in the sixteenth century. 
See “ De novis opinionibus fluentis ad occidentem pelagi 
Pariensis ; et de impulsu celorum, quo torrentes exeunt ad 
occidentem, et per universum circumaguntur.” Pet. Mart. 
Ocean., Dec. it, lib. x, p. 827. 


207 


the West, ran from West to East. This current 
upward (corriente por arriba), which we have 
already mentioned, is very frequent during two 
or three months of the year, from September to 
November. It is believed to be owing to some 
North-West winds, that have blown between 
Jamaica and Cape St. Antony in the island of 
Cuba. 


The military defence of the coasts of Terra 
Firma rests on six points. The castle of St: 
Antony, at Cumana; the Morro de Nueva 
Barcelona ; the fortifications of La Guayra, 
mounting one hundred and thirty-four guns ; 
Porto-Cabello; fort St. Charles, at the mouth 
of the lake of Maracaybo; and Carthagena. 


Porto-Cabello is, next to Carthagena, the most 
important fortified place. The town is quite 
modern, and the port is one of the finest known 
in both worlds. Art has: had scarcely any thing 
to add to the advantages, which the nature of 
the spot presents. A neck of land stretches 
first toward the North, and then toward the 
West. It’s western extremity is opposite to a 
range of islands, connected by bridges, and so 
close together, that they might be taken for 
another neck of land. These islands are all 
composed of a calcareous breccia, of extremely 
recent formation, and analogous to that we 
have described on the coasts of Cumana, and 
near the castle of Araya. It is an agglomerate, 


206 


containing fragments of madrepores and other 
corals cemented by a limestone basis and grains 
of sand. We had already seen this agglomerate 
near the Rio Guayguaza. By the singular 
disposition of the ground the port resembles a 
basin, or a little inland lake, the southern ex- 
tremity of which is filled with little islands, 

, covered with mangroves. The opening of the 
port toward the West contributes much to the 
smoothness of the water *. One vessel only can 
enter at a time; but the largest ships of the 
line can anchor very near land, to take in water. 
There is no other danger in entering the har- 
bour, than the reefs of Punta Brava, opposite 
which a battery of eight guns has been erected. 
Toward the West andSouth-West we see the fort, 
which is a regular pentagon with five bastions, 
the battery of the reef, and the fortifications 
that surround the ancient town, founded on an 
island of a trapezoidal form. A bridge, and the 
fortified gate of the Staccado, join the old to the 
new town, which is already larger, though con- 
sidered only as a suburb. The bottom of the 

. 


* Tt is disputed at Porto-Cabello, whether the name of 
the Port be owing to the tranquillity of it’s waters, ‘‘ which 
would not move a hair (cabello) ;’ or, which is more pro- 
bable, derived from Antonio Cabello, one of the fishermen, 
with whom the smugglers of Curassoa had formed an inti- 
mate connection, at the pericd when: the first hamlet was 
constructed on this half-desert coast. 


209 


basin or little lake, which forms the harbour of 
Porto-Cabello, turns behind this suburb to: the 
South-West. It is a marshy ground, filled with 
noisome and stagnant water. The town, which 
has at present nearly nine thousand inhabitants, 
owes it’s origin to an ‘illicit commerce, attracted 
to these shores by the proximity of the town of 
Burburata, which was founded in 1549. It is 
only under the administration of the Biscayans, 
and of the company of Guipuzcoa, that Porto- 
Cabello, which was but a hamlet, has been con- 
verted into a well fortified town. The vessels 
of La Guayra, which is less a port than abad | 
open roadstead, come to Porto-Cabello to be 
caulked and repaired. 

The real defence of the harbour consists in 
the low batteries of the neck of land at: Punta 
Brava, and of the reef: but from ignorance of 
this principle, a new fort, the Belvidere (Mira- 
dor) of Solano * has been constructed at a great 
expense, on the mountains that command the 
suburb ‘toward the South. This work, a quar-— 
ter of a league distant from the harbour, is 
raised four or five hundred feet above the sur- 
face of the water. The construction has cost 
annually, during a great number of years, from 


* The mirador is placed to the East of the Vigia alta, and 
to the South-East of the battery of the salt-works, and the 


powder-mill. 
VOL. IV. 


210 


twenty to thirty thousand piastres. The cap- 
tain-general of Caraccas, Mr. de Guevara Vas- 
conzelos, was of opinion with the most able 
Spanish engineers, that the Mirador, which in 
my time mounted only sixteen guns, would 
contribute very little to the defence of the place, 
and caused the work to be suspended. Long 
experience has proved, that very elevated bat- 
teries, even when provided with heavy guns, 
act with much less effect in defending a road- 
stead, than low and _half-drowned batteries, 
mounted with cannon of less size, but erected 
on the shore itself or on jetties. We found 
Porto-Cabello in a state of defence little calcu- 
lated to inspire confidence. The fortifications 
of the port and round the town, which have 
about sixty guns, require a garrison of eighteen 
hundred or two. thousand men, and there were 
not six hundred. One of the king’s frigates had. 
been attacked. in the night by the armed boats 
of an English man-of-war, and taken, though 
anchored at the entrance of the harbour.. The 
blockade rather favoured: than: prevented illicit 
commerce; and every thing at Porto-Cabello 
seemed to announce the increase of population 
and industry. Among the most:active branches 
of fraudulent intercourse are those with the 
islands of Curassoa and Jamaica.. More than 
ten thousand mules are exported annually. It 
is curious enough to see these animals em- 


211 


barked ; they are thrown down with ropes, and 
then hoisted on board. the vessels by means of 
a machine resembling a crane. Ranged in two 
files, the mules with difficulty keep their feet 
during the rolling and pitching of the ship; and 
in order to frighten and render them more 
docile, the drum is beaten during a great part 
of the day and night. We may guess what 
quiet a passenger enjoys, who has the courage 
to embark for Jamaica in a schooner? laden with 
mules. 

We left Porto-Cabello on the Ist of March at 
sunrise. We saw with surprise the great num- 
ber of boats, that were laden with fruit to be 
sold at the market. It reminded me of a fine 
morning at Venice. The town presents in 
general, on the side toward the sea, a cheerful 
and agreeable aspect. Mountains covered with 
vegetation, and crowned with peaks *, which 
from their outline would be taken for rocks of 
trap, form the back ground of the landscape. 
Near the coast, all is bare, white, and strongly 
illumined, while the screen of mountains is 
clothed with trees of thick foliage, that project 
their vast shadows upon the brown and rocky 
ground. On going out of the town we visited 
an aqueduct, that had been just finished. It is 
five thousand varas long, and conveys the 


* Las Tetas de Ilaria. 


pi 


212 
waters of the Rio Estevan by a trench to the 
town. This work has cost more than thirty 
thousand piastres ; but it’s waters gush out in 
every street. 

We returned from Porto-Cabello to the val- 
leys of Aragua, and again stopped at the plan- 
tation of Barbula, by which the new road to 
Valencia is traced. We had heard several 
weeks before of a tree, the juice of which is a 
nourishing milk. It is called the cow-tree ; and 
we were assured, that the Negroes of the farm, 
who drink plentifully of this vegetable milk, 
consider it as a wholesome aliment. All the 
milky juices of plants being acrid, bitter, and 
more or less poisonous, this assertion appeared 
to us very extraordinary; but we found by 
experience during our stay at Barbula, that the 
virtues of the palo de vaca had not been exag- 
gerated. This fine tree rises like the broad- 
leaved star-apple*. ‘It’s oblong and pointed 
leaves, tough and alternate, are marked by 
lateral ribs, prominent at the lower surface, and 
parallel. They are some of them ten inches 
long. We did not see the flower: the fruit is 
somewhat fleshy, and contains one or sometimes 
two nuts. When incisions are made in the 
trunk of the cow-tree, it yields abundance of a 


* Chrysophyllum cainito. See Annales du Musée, vol. ik, 
p. 180, 


213 


glutinous milk, tolerably thick, destitute of al} 
acrimony, and of an agreeable and balmy smell. 
it was offered to us in the shell of the tuéwmo or 
calebash-tree. We drank considerable quanti- 
ties of it-in the evening before we went to bed, 
and very early in the morning, without feeling 
the least injurious effect. The viscosity of this 
milk alone renders it a little disagreeable. ‘The 
Negroes and the free people, who work in the 
plantations, drink it, dipping into it their bread 
of maize or cassava. The majordomo of the 
farm told us, that the Negroes grow sensibly 
fatter during the season, when the palo de vaca 
furnishes them with most milk. This juice, 
exposed to the air, presents at it's surface, 
perhaps in consequence of the absorption of the 
atmospheric oxygen, membranes of a strongly 
animalized substance, yellowish, stringy, and 
resembling a cheesy substance. These mem- 
branes, separated from the rest of the more 
aqueous liquid, are elastic, almost like caout- 
chouc; but they undergo in time the same 
phenomena of putrefaction as gelatine. ''The 
people call the coagulum, that separates by the 
contact of the air, cheese. This coagulum 
grows sour in the space of five or six days, as I 
observed in the small portions which I carried 
io. Nueva Valencia. The milk, contained in a 
stopped vial, had deposited a. little coagulum ; 
and, far from beconting fetid, it. exhaled con- 


214 


‘stantly a balsamic odour: The fresh juice, 
mixed with cold water, was scarcely coagulated 
at all; but on the contact of nitric acid the 
separation of the viscous membranes took place. 
We sent two bottles of this milk to Mr. Four- 
croy at Paris: in one it was in it’s natural state, 
and in the other mixed witha certain quantity 
of carbonat of soda. The French consul re- 
siding in the island of St. Thomas undertook to 
convey them to him. 

The extraordinary tree, of which we have 
been speaking, appears to be peculiar to the 
Cordillera of the coast, particularly from Bar- 
bula to the lake of Maracaybo. Some stocks of 
it exist near the village of San Mateo; and, 
according to Mr. Bredemeyer, whose travels 
have so much enriched the fine hot-houses of 
Schoenbrunn and Vienna, in the valley of Cau- 
cagua, three days journey East of Caraccas. 
This naturalist found, like us, that the vege- 
table milk of the palo de vaca had an agreeable 
taste, and an aromatic smell. At Caucagua, 
the natives call the tree, that furnishes this 
nourishing juice, the milk-tree (arbol de leche). 
They profess to recognize, from the thickness 
and colour of the foliage, the trunks that yield 
the most juice; as the herdsman distinguishes, 
from external signs, a good milch-cow. No 
botanist has hitherto known the existence of this 
plant, of which it is easy to procure the parts 


915 


of fructification. It seems, according to Mr. 
Kunth, to belong to the sapota family *. Long 
after my return to Europe, I found in the De- 
scription of the East Indies by Laet, a Dutch- 
man, a passage, that seems to have some rela- 
tion to the cow-tree. “There exist trees,” says 
Laet +, “in the province of Cumana, the sap of 
which resembles curdled milk, and affords a 


salubrious nourishment.” 
Amid the great number of curious pheno- 
mena, which have presented themselves to me 


* Galactodendrum, ex familia sapotearum. Arbor 6-7 -— 
orgyalis. Ramuli teretes; glabri, juniores angulati, tenu- 
issime canescenti-puberuli. Gemme terminales, subulate, 
convolute, sericeo-pubescentes. Folia alterna, petiolata, 
oblonga, utrinque rotundata, apice brevissime acuminata, 
integerrima, reticulato-venosa, venis primariis transversali- 
bus paulo approximatis subparallelis nervoque subtus promi- 
nentibus, subcoriacea, glaberrima, exsiccata supra viridia, 
subtus aureo-fusca, novem aut decem pollices. longa, vix 
quatuor pollices lata. Petioli erassi, canaliculati, glabri, 8 
aut 9 lineas longi. Stipule nulle. Fructus facie drupz 
juglandis, carnosus, globosus, viridis, foetus nucibus 1 aut 
2, monospermis (Drupa? plari—, arbotu uni-aut bilocularis : 
loculis monospermis ?) Kunth in Humb. et Bonpl., Nov. Gen., 
Tom. wi, ined. 

+ Inter arbores qu sponte ltic passim nascuntur, memo- 
yantur a scriptoribus hispanis quedam que lacteum quemdam 
liquorem fundunt, qui durus admodum evadit instar gummi 
et suavem odorem de se fundit; alize quae Liguorem quemdam 
edunt, instar lactis coagulati, qui in cibis ab ipsis usurpatur sine 
nova. Descript. Ind. occ., Lib. 18, Cap. 4 (ed. 1683, p. 
672). 


216 


r] 


in the course of my travels, I confess there are 
few, that have so powerfully affected my ima- 
gination as the aspect of the cow-tree. What-- 
_ ever relates to milk, whatever regards corn, in- 
Spires an interest, which is not merely that of 
the physical knowledge of things, but is con- 
nected with another order of ideas and senti- 
ments. We can scarcely conceive how the 
human race could exist without farinaceous sub- 
stances; and without that nourishing juice, 
which the breast of the mother contains, and 
which is appropriated to the long feebleness of 
the infant. The amylaceous matter of corn, the 
object of religious veneration among so many 
nations, ancient and modern, is diffused in the 
seeds, and deposited in the roots of vegetables ; 
milk, which serves us as an aliment, appears to 
us exclusively the produce of animal organiza- 
tion, Such are the impressions we have received 
in our earliest infancy: such is also the source 
of that astonishment, which seizes us at the as- 
pect of the tree just described. It is not here 
the solemn shades of forests, the majestic course 
of rivers, the mountains wrapped in eternal 
frost, that excite our emotion. A few drops of 
vegetable juice recall to our minds all the power- 
fulness and the fecundity of nature. On the 
barren flank of a rock grows a tree with coria- 
ceous and dry leaves. It’s large woody roots 
can scarcely penetrate into the stone. For se- 


217 

veral months of the year not a single shower 
moistens it’s foliage. It’s branches appear dead 
and dried ; but when the trunk is pierced, there 
flows from it a sweet and nourishing milk. It is 
at the rising of the Sun, that this vegetable foun- 
tain is most abundant. The Blacks and natives 
are.then seen hastening from’ all quarters, fur-’ 
nished with large bowls to receive the milk, 
which grows yellow, and thickens at it’s surface. 
Some employ their bowls under the tree itself, 
others carry the juice home to their children. 
We seem to see the family of a shepherd, who 
distributes the milk of his flock. 

I have described the sensations, which the cow- 
tree awakens in the mind of the traveller at the 
first view. In examining the physical properties 
of animal and vegetable products, science dis- 
plays them as closely linked together; but’ it 
strips them of what is marvellous, and perhaps 
also’ of a part of their charms, of what excited 
our astonishment. Nothing appears isolated ; 
the chemical principles, that were believed to be 
peculiar to animals, are found in plants; a com- 
mon chain links together all organic nature. 

Long before chemists had recognized small 
portions of wax in the pollen of flowers, the var- 
nish of leaves, and the whitish dust of our plums 
and grapes, the inhabitants of the Andes of 
Quindiu fabricated tapers with the thick layer 


218 


of wax, that covers the trunk of a palm-tree *. 
It is but a few years since we have discovered in 
Europe caseum, the basis of cheese, in the emul- 
sion of almonds; yet for ages past in the 
mountains of the coast of Venezuela the milk of 
a tree, and the cheese separated from that veget- 
able milk, have been considered as a salutary 
aliment. What is the cause of this singular 
course in the unfolding of our knowledge? How 
have the vulgar in one hemisphere recognized, 
what in the other has so long escaped the saga- 
city of chemists, accustomed to interrogate na- 
ture, and seize her in her mysterious progress ? 
It is that a small number of elements and _prin- 
ciples differently combined are spread through 
several families of plants ; it is that the genera 
and species of these natural families are not 
equally distributed in the torrid, the frigid, and 
the temperate zones ; it is that tribes excited by 
want, and deriving almost all their subsistence 
from the vegetable kingdom, discover nourishing 
principles, farinaceous and alimentary substances, 
wherever nature has deposited them in the sap, 
the bark, the roots, or the fruits of vegetables. 


* Ceroxylon andicola, which we have described in our 
Plantes Equinoxiales, vol. i, p.9, Pl. i and ii. 

+ Proust in the Journ. de Physique, vol. liv, p. 430. 
Boullay and Vogel, in the Annales de Chimie et de Physique, 
vol, vi, p. 408. 


219 


That amylaceous fecula, which the seeds of the 
cereal plants furnish in all it’s purity, is found 
united with an acrid, and sometimes even 
poisonous juice, in the roots of the arums, the 
tacca pinnatifida, and the iatropha manihot. 
The savage of America, like the savage of the 
islands in the Pacific Ocean, has learned to dulcify 
the fecula, by pressing and separating it from 
it's juice. In the milk of plants, and in the 
milky emulsions, matter extremely nourishing, 
albumen, casewm, and sugar, are found mixed 
with caoutchouc and with deleterious and caus- 
tic principles, such as morphin and the hydro- 
cyanic acid*. These mixtures vary not only in 
the different families, but also in the species 
which belong to the same genus. Sometimes it 
is the morphin, or narcotic principle, that cha- 
racterizes the vegetable milk, as in some papa~ 
verous plants ; sometimes it is caoutchouc, as in 
the hevea, and the castilloa ; sometimes albumen 
and caseum, as in the cow-tree. 

The lactescent plants belong chiefly to the 
three families of the euphorbiacez, the urticee, 
and the apocinez +; and since, on examining 


* Opium contains morpiin, caoutchouc, &c. : 

+ After these three great families follow the papaveracce, 
the chicoracez, the lobeliacew, the campanulacee, the sapo- 
tas, and the cucurbitaceee, The hydrocyanic acid is peculiar 
to the group of rosaceo-amygdalacee. In the monocotyledon- 
ous plants there is no milky juice; but the perisperm of the 


220 


the distribution of vegetable forms over the giobe, 
we find that those three families are more nume- 
rous in species in the low regions. of the tropics, 
we must thence conclude, that a very elevated 
temperature contributes to the elaboration of 
the milky juices, to the formation of caoutchouc, 
albumen, and caseous matter. The sap of the 
palo de vaca furnishes unquestionably the most 
striking example of a vegetable milk, in which 
the acrid and deleterious principle is not united 
with the albumen, the caseum, and the caout- 
chouc : the genera euphorbia and asclepias, how- 
ever, though generally known for their caustic 
properties, had already presented us with a few 
species, the juice of which is sweet and harm- 
less. Such are the tabayba dulce of the Canary 
islands, which we have already mentioned *, 
and the asclepias lactifera of Ceylon. Burman 
relates, that in the latter country, when cow’s 
milk is wanting, the milk of this asclepias is 
used ; and that the aliments commonly prepared 
with animal milk are boiled with it’s leaves. We 
may hope, that a traveller, deeply versed in che- 
mical knowledge, Dr. John Davy, will throw 


palms, which yields such sweet and agreeable milky emul- 
sions, contains no doubt casewn. Of what nature is the milk 
_ef mushrooms ? 
* Euphorbia balsamifera. See above, p.180. The milky 
juice of the cactns mamillaris is equally sweet. (De Candolle, 
Essai sur les Propr, méd. des Plantes, p. 186.) 


22] 


light on this fact during his stay at the island of 
Ceylon; for it may be possible, as Mr. Decandolle 
has well observed, that the natives employ only 
the juice that flows from the young plant, at a 
period when the acrid principle is not yet de- 
veloped. In fact, the first shoots of the apocy- 
neous plants are eaten in several countries*. 

I have endeavoured, by these comparisons, to 
bring into consideration under a more general 
point of view the milky juices, that circulate in 
vegetables ; and the milky emulsions, that the 
fruits of the amygdalaceous plants and palms 
yield. I may be permitted to add the result of 
some experiments, which I attempted to make 
on the juice of the carica papaya during my stay 
in the valleys of Aragua, though I was then 
almost destitute of chemical tests. The juice 
has been since examined by Mr. Vauquelin -}. 
This celebrated chemist has very clearly recog- 
nized the albumen and caseous matter ; he com- 
pares the milky sap to a substance strongly 
animalized, to the blood of animals; but: his 
researches were confined to a fermented juice, 
and a coagulum of a fetid smell formed during 
the passage from the Isle of France to Havre. 
He has expressed a wish, that some traveller 


* Ib. p. 215. 
+ Vauquelin and Cadet de Gassicourt, in the Annales de 
Chimie, vol. xiii, p. 275; xlix, p. 250 and 304, 


222 


would examine the milk of the papaw-tree just 
as it flows from the stem or the fruit. 

The younger the fruit of the carica, the more 
milk it yields ; it is found already in the germen 
scarcely fecundated. In proportion as the fruit 
ripens, the milk, less abundant, becomes more 
aqueous. Less of that animal matter, which is 
coagulable by acids and by the absorption of 
atmospheric oxygen, is found init. As the whole 
fruit is viscous *, it might be supposed, that, as 
it grows larger, the coagulable matter is deposed 
in the organs, and forms a part of the pulp, or 
the fleshy substance. When nitric acid, diluted 
with four parts of water, is added drop by drop 
to the milk expressed from a very young fruit, a 


very extraordinary phenomenon appears. At 
the centre of each drop a gelatinous pellicle is 
formed, divided by grayish streaks. These 
streaks are simply the juice rendered more 
aqueous, owing to the contact of the acid having 
deprived it of the albumen. At the same time, 
the centre of the pellicles becomes opaque, and 


- * Tt is the same viscosity, which is remarked also in the 
fresh milk of the palo de vaca. It is no doubt occasioned by 
the caoutchouc, which is not yet separated, and which forms 
one mass with the albumen and the caseum, as the butter and 
the casewm in animal milk. The juice of a euphorbiaceous 
plant, the sapium aucaparium, which also yields caoutchouc, 
is so glutinous, that it is used to catch parrots. (De Candolle, 
loco cit., p. 263.) 


223 


of the colour of the yolk of an egg ; they enlarge 
as if by the prolongation of divergent fibres. 
The whole liquic assumes at first the appearance 
of an agate with milky clouds; and it seems as 
if organic membranes were forming under the 
eye of the observer. When the coagulum extends 
to the whole mass, the yellow spots again. dis- 
appear. By agitation it becomes granulous like 
soft cheese *. The yellow colour reappears on 
adding afresh a few drops of nitric acid... The 
acid acts in this instance as the oxygen of the 
atmosphere at a temperature from 27° to 35°; 
for the white coagulum grows yellow in two or 
’ three minutes, when exposed to the Sun. After 


* The substance which falls down in grumes and filamen. 
tous clods is not pure caoutchouc, but perhaps 'a mixture of 
this substance with caseum and albumen. Acids precipitate 
the caontchouc from the milky juice of the euphorbiums, fig- 
trees, and hevea; they precipitate the casewm from the milk 
of animals. A white coagulum. was formed in vials closely 
stopped, containmg the milk.of the hevea, and preserved 
among our collections, during our journey to the Oroonoko, 
It is perhaps the developement of a vegetable acid, that then 
furnishes oxygen to the albumen. The formation of the 
coagulum of the hevea, or of a real caoutchouc, is nevertheless 
much more. rapid-in. contact with, the air. The absorption of 
atmospheric oxygen is not in the least necessary to the produc- 
tion of butter, which exists already formed in the milk of 
animals ; but I believe it cannot be doubted, that, in the 
milk of plants, this absorption produces the pellicles of 
caoutchouc, of coagulated albumen, and of caseum, which 


are successively formed in vessels exposed to the open air. 


224 


afew hours the yellow colour turns to brown, 
no deubt because the carbon is set more freé 
progressively as the hydrogen, with which it was 
combined, is burnt. The coagulum formed by 
the acid becomes viscous, and acquires that 
smell of wax, which I have observed in treating | 
muscular flesh and mushrooms (morels) with 
nitric acid*. According to the fine experi- 
ments of Mr. Hatchett, the albumen may be 
supposed to pass partly to the state of gelatine. 
The coagulum of the papaw-tree, when newly 
prepared, being thrown into water, softens, dis- 
solves in part, and gives a yellowish tint to the 
fluid. The milk, placed in contact with water 
only, forms also membranes. In an instant a 
tremulous jelly is precipitated, resembling starch. 
This phenomenon is particularly striking, if the 
water employed be heated to 40° or 60°. - The 
jelly condenses in proportion as more water is 
poured upon it. It preserves a long time it’s 
whiteness, only growing yellow by the contact 
-of a few drops of nitric acid. Guided by the ex- 
periments of Messrs. Fourcroy and Vauquelin 
on the juice of the hevea, I mixed a solution of 
carbonat of soda with the milk of the papaw. 
No clot is formed, even when pure water is 
poured on a mixture of the milk with the alka- 


* See my Experiments on the Irritable and Nervous Fibre, 
(in German,) vol. i, p. V7. 


Hine solution. The membranes appear only 
when, by adding an acid, the soda is neutralized, 
and the acid is in excess. J miade the coagulum 
formed by nitric acid, the juice of lemons, or hot 
water, equally disappear by mixing it with car- 
bonat of soda. The sap becomes milky and 
liquid afresh, as in it’s primitive state; but this 
experiment succeeds only when the coagulum 
has been recently formed. 

In comparing the milky juices of the papaw, 
the cow-tree, and the hevea, there appears a 
striking analogy between the juices which abound 
in caseous matter, and those in which the caout. 
chouc prevails. All the white and newly pre- 
pared caoutchouc, as well as the impermeable 
cloaks, manufactured in Spanish America by 
placing a layer of milk of hevea between two 
pieces of cloth ; exhale an animal and nauseating 
smell. This seems to indicate, that the caout- 
chouc, in coagulating, carries with it the caseum, 
which is perhaps only an altered albumen *. 

The produce of the bread fruit tree can no more 
be considered as bread, than the plantains before 
the state of maturity, or the tuberous and amy- 
laceous roots of the cassava, the dioscorea, the 
convolvulus batatas, and the potato. The milk 
of the cow-tree contains, on the contrary, the ca+ 
seous matter, like the milk of mammiferots 


* See note B, at the end of this book. 
VOL. IV. Q° 


, 226 


animals. Raising our minds to more general 
considerations, we shall regard, with Mr. Gay- 
Lussac, the caoutchouc as the oily part, the 
butter of vegetable milk. We find in the milk 
of plants caseum and caoutchouc; in the milk 
of animals, caseum and butter. The propor- 
tions of the two albuminous and oily principles 
differ in the various species of animals and of 
lactescent plants. In these last they are most 
feequently mixed with other substances hurtful 
as food ; but of which the separation might per- 
haps be obtained by chemical processes. A 
vegetable milk becomes nourishing, when it is 
destitute of acrid and narcotic principles; and 
abounds less in caoutchouc, than in caseous 
matter, 

If the palo de vaca display to us the immense 
fecundity and the bounty of nature under the 
torrid zone, it reminds us also of the numerous 
causes, whieh favour in those fine climates.the 
careless indolence of man. Mungo Park has 
made known to us the butter-tree of Bambarra, 
which Mr, de Candolle suspects to be of the 
family of the sapotas, as well as our milk-tree. 
The plantains, the sago-tree, the mauritias of 
the Oroonoko, are as much bread-trees. as the 
rema of the South Sea. The fruits of the cres- 
centia and the lecythis serve for vessels: the 
spathes of the palms, and the bark of trees, fur- 
nish caps and garments without aseam. The 


227 


knots, or rather the interior cells of the trunks 
of bamboos, supply ladders; and facilitate in a 
thousand ways the construction of a hut, and 
the fabrication of chairs, beds, and other arti- 
cles of furniture, that compose the wealth of a 
savage. In the midst of this lavish vegetation, 
so varied in it’s productions, it. requires very 
powerful motives, to excite men to labour, to 
awaken him from his lethargy, and unfold his 
intellectual faculties. 


The cacao-tree and cotton are cultivated at 
Barbula. We there found, what is very rare in 
that country, two large cylindrical machines for 
separating cotton from it’s seeds; one put in 
motion by an hydraulic wheel, and the other by 


a wheel turned by mules. The majordomo of 
the farm, who had constructed these machines, 
was a native of Merida. He was acquainted 
with the road, that. leads from Nueva Valencia, 
by Guanare and Misagual, to Varinas; and 
thence, by the ravine of Callejones, to the 
Paramo de Mucuchies and the mountains of 
Merida covered with eternal snows. The no- 
tions he gave us of the time requisite for going 
from Valencia by Varinas to the Sierra Nevada, 
and thence by the port of Torunos, and the 
Rio Santo Domingo, to San Fernardo de Apure, 
were of infinite value to us. It-can scarcely be 
imagined in Europe, how difficult it. is to obtain 
accurate information, in a country where the 
Q2 


228 


eommunications are so rare; and where ffié 
length of distances is diminished, or exaggerated, 
according to the desire that is felt of encourag- 
ing the traveller, or averting him from his 
purpose. On leaving Caraccas, I had placed 
money in the hands of the intendant of the 
province, to be paid by the officers of the Royal 
Treasury at Varinas. I had resolved to visit 
the eastern extremity of the Cordilleras of New 
Grenada, where they lose themselves in the 
paramos of Timotes and Niquitao. I learned 
at Barbula, that this excursion would retard our 
arrival at the Oroonoko thirty-five days. This 
delay appeared to us so much the longer, as the 
rains were expected to begin sooner than usual. 
We had the hope of examining afterward a great 
number of mountains covered with perpetual 
snow, at Quito, Peru, and Mexico; and it ap. 
peared to me still more prudent, to relinquish 
our project of visiting the mountains of Merida, 
on account of the apprehension, that by so doing 
we might miss the real object of our journey, that 
of ascertaining by astronomical observations the 
point of communication between the Oroonoko 
and the Rio Negro and the river of Amazons. 
We returned in consequence from Barbula to 
Guacara, to take leave of the respectable family 
of the Marquis del Toro, and pass three days 
more on the borders of the lake. , 

It was the time of carnival, and all was gaiety. 


The sports in which the people indulge them- 
selves, and which are called games of carnes 
éollendas, assume sometimes a little of a savage 
character. Some led an ass loaded with water, 
and, wherever they found a window. open, 
sprinkled the apartment within by means of a 
pump. Others carry bags filled with the hairs 
of picapica, or dolichos pruriens; and blow the 
hair, which causes a great irritation of the skin, 
into the faces of those who pass by. 

From Guacara we returned to Nueva Valen- 
cia*. We found there a few French emigrants, 
the only ones we saw during five years passed 
in the Spanish colonies. Notwithstanding the 
ties of blood, that unite the royal families of 
France and Spain, even French priests were not 
permitted to take refuge in that part of the New 
World, where man with such facility finds food 
and shelter. Beyond the ocean, the United 
States of America afforded the only asylum to 


* I found the latitude of the Hacienda de Cura, one of 
the best determined points, 10°15’ 40"; that of Guacara, 
40° 11/ 23’; that of Nueva Valencia, 10°9’56”, (Obs. Ast., 
vol. i, p. 199—204, and 207—209. The variation of the 
needle, at the Hacienda de Cura, on the 17th of February, 
1800, was 4°48! 50// N. E. The magnetic dip amounted, 
at Hacienda de Cura, to 41:20°; at Nueva Valencia, to 
41:75°. In these two places, the oscillations in ten minutes 
time were two hundred and thirty and two hundred and 
twenty-four. All these observations were made in the open 
air, far from any edifice. See above, chap. xv, p. 108 


230 


misfortune. A government, strong because it 
is free, confiding because it is just, had nothing 
to fear in giving refuge to the proscribed. 

We have endeavoured above, to give some 
precise notions of the state of the cultivation of 
indigo, cotton, and sugar, in the province of 
Caraccas. Before we quit the valley of Aragua 
and it’s neighbouring coast, it remains for us to 
speak of the cacao-plantations, which have at 
all times been considered as the principal source 
of the prosperity of those countries. The pro- 
vince of Caraccas *, at the end of the eighteenth 
century, produced annually a hundred and fifty 
thousand Janegas, of which a hundred thousand 
were consumed in Spain, and thirty thousand in 
the province. Estimating a fanega of cacao 
at only twenty-five piastres for the price given 
at Cadiz, we find, that the total value of the 
exportation of cacao, by the six ports of the 


* The province, not the Capitania General, consequently 
excluding the cacao-plantations of Cumana, of the province 
of Barcelona, of Maracaybo, of Varinas, and of Spanish 
Guyana, During the war, the price of a fanega was, in 1800, 
in the province of Caraccas, twelve piastres, and in Spain, 
seventy piastres. From 1781 to 1799, the prices of a fanega 
varied at Cadiz from forty to a hundred piastres.. The 
expense of freight from La Guayra to Cadiz amounts in 
time of peace to three piastres, and in time of war to eleven 
or twelve piastres a fanega. In time of peace the price of 
cacao is from twelye to twenty piastres the fanega at 
Caraccas. ; 


231 


Capitania General of Caraccas*, amounts to four 
million eight hundred thousand piastres. So 
important an object of commerce merits a 
careful discussion; and I flatter myself, that, 
from the great number of materials I. have col- 
lected on all the branches of colonial agriculture, 
I shall be able to add something to the informa- 
tion published by Mr. Depons, in his valuable 
work. on the provinces of Venezuela. 

The tree that produces the cacao is not at 
present found wild in the forests of Terra Firma 
to the North of the Oroonoko; we began ‘to 
find it only beyond the cataracts of Atures and 
Maypures. It abounds particularly near the 
banks of the Ventuari, and on the Upper Oroo- 
noko, between the Padamo and the Gehette. 
This scarcity of wild cacao-trees in South 
America, North of the latitude of 6°, is a very 
curious phenomenon of botanical geography, 
and yet little known. This phenomenon appears 
so much the more surprising, as, according to 
the annual produce of the harvest, the number 
of trees in full bearing in the eacao-plantations 
of Caraecas, Nueva Barcelona, Venezuela, 
Varinas, and Maracaybo, is estimated at more 


* St. Thomas in New Guyana, or Angostura, Cumana, 
Nueva Barcelona, La Guayra, Porto-Cabello, and Mara- 
eaybe. 


232 


than sixteen millions. The wild cacao-tree hay 
many branches, and is covered with a tufted 
and dark foliage. It bears a very small fruit, 
like that variety which the ancient Mexicans 
called ¢lalcacahuatl. Transplanted into the 
conucos of the Indians of Cassiquiare and the 
Rio Negro, the wild tree preserves for several 
generations that force of vegetable life, which 
makes it bear fruit in the fourth year; while in 
the province of Caraceas, the harvest begins only 
the sixth, seventh, or eighth year. They are 
later in the inland parts, than on the coasts and 
in the valley of Guapo. We met with no tribe 
on the Oroonoko, that prepared a_ beverage 
with the seeds of the cacao-tree. The savages 
suck the pulp of the pod, and throw away the 
seeds, which are often found in heaps where 
they have passed the night. Though the chorote, 
which is a very weak infusion of cacao, is con- 
_sidered on the coast to be a very ancient beve- 
rage, no historical fact proves, that chocolate, 
or any. preparation whatever of cacao, was 
known to the natives of Venezuela before the 
arrival of the Spaniards. It appears to me 
more probable, that the cacao-plantations of 
Caraccas were made in imitation of those of 
Mexico and Guatimala ; and that the Spaniards, 
inhabiting Terra Firma, learned the cultivation 
of the cacao-tree, sheltered in it’s youth by the 


a3e 


foliage of the erythrina and plantain*; the 
fabrication of cakes of chocolatl, and the use of 
the liquid of the same name, by their communi- 
cations with Mexico, Guatimala, and Nicara- 
gua, three countries, the inhabitants of which 
were of Tolteck and Azteck origin. 

Up to the sixteenth century, travellers differ 
in the opinions they give respecting chocolatl. 
Benzoni, in his ingenuous style, says, that it is 
a drink rather da porci, che da huomine, “ fitter 
for hogs than men+.” The Jesuit Acosta + 
asserts, that ‘ the Spaniards, who inhabit 
America, are fond of chocolate to excess: but 
that it requires to be accustomed to that black 
beverage, not to be sick at the mere sight of it’s 
froth, which swims on it like yeast on a fer- 
mented liquor.”. He adds: “the cacao is a 
prejudice (una supersticion) of the Mexicans, as 
the coca is a prejudice of the Peruvians.” 
These opinions remind us of Madame de Se- 
vigne’s prediction respecting the use of coffee. 
Ferdinand Cortez, and his page, the gentil- 


* This process of the Mexican cultivators, exactly prac- 
tised on the coast of Caraccas, is already described in the 
memoirs known under the title of Reluzione di certo Gentiluomo 
del Signor Cortez, Conquistadore del Messico. (Ramusio, tom. ii, 
p. 184.) 

+ Girolumo Benzoni, Milanese, Hist. del Mondo Nuovo, 1572, 
p. 104. 

} List, Nat. de Indias, Lib, iv, c, 22 (edit. de 1589), p. 251. 


234 


hombre del gran Conquistador, whose memoirs 
were published by Ramusio, on the contrary, 
highly praise chocolate, not only as an agreeable 
drink, though prepared cold *, but in particular 
as a nutritious substance. “ He who has drunk 
one cup,” says the page of Ferdinand Cortez, 
“ can travel a whole day without any other food, 


especially in very hot climates ; for chocolate is 
by it’s nature cold and refreshing.” We shall 
not subscribe to the latter part of this assertion ; 
but we shall soon have occasion, in our voyage 
on the Oroonoko, and our excursions toward 
the summit of the Cordilleras, to celebrate the 
salutary properties of chocolate. Alike easy to 


convey, and employ as an aliment, it contains a 
large quantity of nutritive and stimulating par- 
ticles in a small compass. It has been said 
with truth, that in Africa, rice, gum, and shea 
butter, assist man in Crossing the deserts. In 
the -New World, chocolate: and the flower of 
maize have rendered accessible to him the table- 
lands of the Andes, and vast uninhabited 
forests. 

The cacao-harvest is extremely variable. The 
tree vegetates with such strength, that flowers 


* Father Gili has very clearly shown, from. two passages 
in Torquemado (Monarquia Indiana, lib. xiv, cap. 14 et 42), 
that the Mexicans prepared the infusion cold; and that the 
Spaniards have introduced the custom of preparing chocolate 
by boiling water with the paste of cacao, 


235 


spring out even from the ligneous roots, wher- 
ever the ‘earth leaves them uncovered. It 
suffers from the North-East winds, even when 
these winds lower the temperature only a few 
degrees. The heavy showers, that fall irregu- 
larly after the rainy season during the winter 
months, from December to March, are also very 
hurtful to the cacao-tree. The proprietor of a 
plantation of fifty thousand trees often loses the 
value of more than four or five thousand piastres 
in cacao in one hour. Great humidity is favor- 
able to the tree only when it augments progres- 
sively, and is for a long time uninterrupted. If, 
in the season of drought, the leaves and the 
young fruit be wetted by a violent shower, the 
fruit falls from the stem. It appears, that the 
vessels, which absorb water, break from being 
rendered turgid.. But if the cacao harvest be 
one of the most uncertain, on account of the 
fatal effects of intemperate seasons, and the 
great number of worms, insects, birds, and 
quadrupeds *, that devour the pod'of the cacao- 
tree; if this branch of agriculture have the 
disadvantage of obliging the new planter to wait 
eight or ten years for the fruit of his labours, 
and. of yielding an article of very difficult pre- 


* The parrots, monkeys, agoutis, squirrels, and stags. 
{See Depons, vol. ii, p, 182—-204). 


236 


‘ 


servation *; we must not forget, that the cacao- 
plantations require a much less number of slaves 
than most others. This consideration is of high 
importance, at a time, when all the nations of 
Europe have nobly resolved to put an end to 
the slave-trade. One slave is sufficient for a 
thousand trees, which may yield on an average 
annually twelve fanegas of ‘cacao. It is true, 
that in the island of Cuba one large sugar- 
plantation. with three hundred Blacks, yields, 
one year with another, forty thousand arrobas 
of sugar, the value of which, at forty piastres 
the cask +, amounts to a hundred thousand 
piastres ; and that in the province of Venezuela 
cacao to the value of a hundred thousand piastres, 
or four thousand fanegas, when the fanega is at 
twenty-five piastres only, requires three hundred 
or three hundred and thirty slaves. The two 
hundred thousand casks of sugar, or three 
million two hundred thousand arrobas {, which 
the island of Cuba has annually exported from 
1812 to 1814, amount to eight millions of 
piastres ; and might be fabricated with twenty- 
four thousand slaves, if the island had only very 


* See above, chap. viii, vel. iii,’ p. 192. The cacao of 
Guayaquil keeps better than that of Caraccas. 

+ A cask (cara) weighs from fifteen and a half to sixteen 
arrobas, each arroba = 25 pounds Spanish. 

{ The haciendas of Choroni, Octimare, Chuao, Turiama, 


Guaiguaza. 


237 


large plantations ; but this supposition is not 
conformable to the state of the colony, and the 
nature of things. -In 1811 the island of Cuba 
employed a hundred and forty-three thousand 
slaves in the fields alone; while the Capitania 
General of Caraccas, which produces but does 
not export two hundred thousand fanegas of 
cacao a year, or to the value of five millions of 
piastres, has, both in the towns and in the fields, 
only sixty thousand slaves. It is almost super- 
fluous to add, that these results vary with the 
prices of sugar and cacao. 

The finest plantations of cacao are found in 
the province of Caraccas along the coast, be- 
tween Carayalleda and the mouth of the Rio 
Tucuyo*, in the valleys of Caucagua, Capaya, 
Curiepe, and Guapo; and in those of Cupira, 
between Cape Codera and Cape Unare, near 
Arora, Barquesimeto, Guigue, and Uritucu. The 
cacao that grows on the banks of the Uritucu,’ 
at the entrance of the Llanos, in the jurisdiction 
of San Sebastian de las Reyes, is considered as, 
of the first quality. Next to the cacao of 
Uritucu comes that of Guigue, of Caucagua, of 
Capaya, and of Cupira. The merchants of 
Cadiz assign the first rank to the cacao of 
Caraccas, immediately after that of Socomusco ; 


* The two provinces of Caraccas and of Nueva Barcelona 
are disputing this very fertile tract of ground, 


238 


and it’s price is generally from thirty to forty 
per cent higher than that of Guayaquil. 

It is only since the middle of the seventeenth 
century, that the Dutch, tranquil possessors of 
the island of Curassoa, awakened by their 
smuggling the agricultural industry of the in- 
habitants of the neighbouring coasts, and that 
cacao has become an object of exportation. in 
the province of Caraccas. We are ignorant of 
every thing, that passed in those countries before 
the establishment of the Biscay Company of 
Guipuzcoa, in 1728. No precise statistical fact 
has reached us; we only know, that the expor- 
tation of cacao from Caraccas scarcelyamounted, 
at the beginning of the eighteenth century, to 
thirty thousand fanegas a year. From 1730 to 
1748, the company sent to Spain eight hundred 
and fifty-eightthousand nine hundred and seventy- 
eight fanegas, which make on an average forty- 
seven thousand seven hundred fanegas a year ; 
the price of the fanega fell in 1732 to forty-five 
piastres, when it had before kept at eighty 
piastres! In 1763 the cultivation had so much 
augmented, that the exportation rose to eighty- 
thousand six hundred and fifty-nine fanegas *. 
According to the registers of the: custom-house 


* Of these 80,659 fanegas, 50,319 were sent directly to 
Spain, 16,364 to La Vera Cruz, 11,160 to the Canaries, and 
2316 to the West India islands. 


239 


at La Guayra, of which I am in possession, the 
exports, without counting the produce of illicit 
trade, were 


in 1789 of 103,655 fanega 
1792 — 100,592 
1794 — 111,133 
1796 — 75,538 
1797 — 70,832 


In an official document, taken from the papers 
of the minister of finance *, “ the annual pro- 
duce (la cosecha) of the-province of Caraccas is 
estimated at a hundred and thirty-five thousand 
fanegas of cacao ; thirty-three thousand of which 
are for home consumption; ten thousand for 
other Spanish colonies ; seventy-seven thousand 
for the mother-country ; fifteen thousand for the 
illicit commerce with the French, English, 
Dutch, and Danish colonies. From 1789 to 
1793, the importation of cacao from Caraccas 
into Spain has been, on an average, seventy- 
seven thousand seven hundred and nineteen 
fanegas a year, of which sixty-five thousand 
seven hundred and sixty-six have been consumed. 
in the country, and eleven thousand nine hun- 
dred and fifty-three exported to France, Italy, 


* Report (MS. ) of the Count of Casa Valencia, counsellor 
in the Department of the Indies, to Don Pedro Varela, 
minister of Real Hacienda, on the commerce of Caraccas, the 
13th June, 1797 (fol. 46). 


240 


and Germany *.” According to numerous in- 
formations, which I collected on the spot, these 
estimations are still somewhat too low. The 
books of the custom-house of La Guayra alone 
give, on a mean, in time of peace an exporta- 
tion of eighty thousand or a hundred thousand 
fanegas a year. We may safely augment this 
sum a fourth or fifth, on account of the illicit 


* Accerding to the registers of the ports of Spain, the 
importation of cacao from Caraccas into the peninsula was 


in 1789 78,406 fanegas 88lbs. 
1790 74,089 3 
1791 71,500 43 
1792 87,656 34 
1793 — 76,983 — 4 

Annual average 77,719 fanegas. 


Of these 77,719 fanegas, 60,202 were consumed in the 
provinces of Spain not privileged (provincias contribuyentes ), 
and 5564 in the privileged provinces (provincias exemptas), . 
as Navarre, Biscay, &c. The exportation from Spain was 


in 1789 18,718 fanegas 98lbs, 
1790 6,421 80 
1791 21,446 ay; 
1792 17,452 48 
1793 7128 23 

Annual average 11,953 fanegas. 

As in the complicated system of the Spanish ‘custom- 
houses the cacao of Caraccas is subject to a very different 
duty, according as it is consumed in the peninsula, or 
exported out of the kingdom (in'the first case, fifty-two and a 
half per cent, and in the second twenty-nine and a half), a 
great quantity of cacao is reimported into Spain, 


241 


trade with Trinidad, and the other West India 
islands. It appears to me probable, that from 
1800 to 1806, the last period of internal tran- 
quillity in the Spanish colonies, the annual pro- 
duce of the cacao-plantations of the Capitania: 
General of Caraccas was at least a hundred and 
ninety-three thousand fanegas ; of which we 
may allot to 


the province of Caraccas . —. 150,000 
of Maracaybo . ~ 20,000 
of Cumana. « 18,000 
of Nueva Barcelona 5,000 


The crops that are gathered twice a year, at 
the end. of June and of December, vary much ; 


yet less than those of the olive and vine in 
Europe. Of the hundred and ninety-three 
thousand fanegas of cacao, which the Capitanir 
“General of Caraccas produces, a hundred and 
forty-five thousand pass over to Europe, either 
by the ports of the peninsula, or by contraband 
trade. hy, 

I think I can prove*, and these estimations 


* For the bases of these estimations, so important in all 
the researches of political economy, see my Essai sur la Nowo. 
Esp., vol. ii, p. 481, 435,:436, 658; the tables of exportation 
from Canton in Sainte-Croix, Voyage conimercial aux Indes orien- 
tales, vol, iii, p.153, 161, 170; Colquhoun, on the Wealth of the 
British Empire, p. 381, 334; and this Personal Narrative 
vol. iv, p. 71. The English West India islands exported 
of sugar to different parts of the world, in 1812, more than 


VOL. IV. R 


242 


yA, 


are the result of a great number of local state- 
ments, that Kurope consumes in it’s present state 
of civilization, 

Franks. 


27,600,000 


23 millions of pounds of cacao, a 
120 fr. the hundred weight. - 
32 millions of pounds of tea, at 128,000,000 


4fr.apound . , 


140 millions of pounds of cette. 30215 159,600,000 
114 fr. the hundred weight 


450 millions of pounds of sugar, at 243, 000,000 
54 fr. the hundred weight 


Total value*, “558,200,000 
233,000 hogsheads, at 14 cwt.,or 326,000,000 pounds ; of which 
Jamaica alone, with 350,000 negroes, furnished 189,000,000 
pounds. The produce of Cuba and. that of St. Domingo 
together have been estimated at 120,000,000. pounds of 
sugar. When we state the annual consumption of cacao 
in Europe at 23,000,000, and that of sugar at 450,000,000 
pounds, we think we ‘give the real numbers, exact to one 
fifth. This degree of precision may be attained by estimating 
with care the exportation of those countries, that Surnish’ the 
greatest quantity of cacao and sugar for the. European trade ; 
for instance, with respect te cacao, the exportation of the 
ports of Terra Firma, Guayaquil, and Guatimala ; and for 
sugar that of the 1 English, Spanish, and French, West India 
islands. We shall remark on this occasion, that the con- 
sumption of sugar is stated, in the statistical, tables. of 
France, to amount in 1800 to 51,000,000,;. in. 1817, it. was 
56,400,000: pounds. 
* Tn 1818, the price of cacag at London, was, for the caceo 
of Caraccas, from 6/. to 6/.10s.; for cacaa of inferior quality, 


’ The first of these four productions, which haye 
become within two or three centuries the prin- 
cipal objects of commerce and colonial industry, 
belongs exclusively to America; the second to 
Asia.- I say exclusively, for the exportation of 
cacao from the Philippine Isles is yet of as little 
importance, as the attempts which have been 
made to .cultivate tea in Brazil, the island) of 
. Trinidad, and Jamaica. The united provinces 
of Caraccas furnish nearly two thirds of all the 
cacao, that is consumed in the western and 
southern parts of Europe. This result is the 
more remarkable, as being contrary to what is 
generally believed ; but the cacao of Caraccas, 
Maracaybo, and Cumana, is not all of the same 
quality. We have just seen, that the Count of 
Casa Valencia -estimates the consumption of 
Spain at only six or seven millions of pounds ; 


from 4/, 10s. to 37. 10s. the hundred weight ; coffee was, at 
amean, 95s. the hundred weight: sugar, from 40s. to 50s. 
The price of these last two articles’ has considerably risen 
sinee the publication of Mr. Colquhoun’s work. It is difficult 
to fix a general statement for the price of tea, ow account of 
the great difference between the various qualities. In 1817, 
the importation of sugar from the East Indies into the port of 
London, was only 50,000 bags, or 5,500,000 pounds. In 
order to form a more precisé idea of the importance of Eu. 
ropean commerce in sugar, coffee, tea, and cacaos we shall 
here call to mind, that the value of all the importations of 
England amounts, from 1805 to 1810, on an average, to 
1200 millions of franes yearly. 
R 2 


244 


the Abbé Hervas fixes it at nine millions. Every 
person, who has long inhabited Spain, Italy, and 

France, must have observed, that the use of 

chocolate is frequent only in the first of these 

eountries among the poorer class of people ; and 

therefore will scarcely believe, that Spain con- 

sumes but a third of the cacao imported into 

Europe. 

The late wars have had much more fatal 
effects on the cacao trade of Caraccas, than on 
that of Guayaquil. On account of the increase 
of price, less cacao of the first quality has been 
consumed in Europe. Instead of mixing, as 
was done formerly for common chocolate, one 
quarter of the cacao of Caraccas, with three 
quarters of that of Guayaquil, the latter has been 
employed pure in Spain. We must here remark, 
that a great deal of cacao of an inferior quality, 
such as that of Maranon, the Rio Negro, Hon- 
duras, and the island of St. Lucia, bears the 
name, in commerce, of Guayaquil cacao. The 
exportation from that port amounts only to 
60,000 fanegas; consequently it is two thirds 
less than that of the ports of the Capitania 
General of Caraccas. ; 

Though the plantations of cacao have aug- 
mented in the provinces of Cumana, Barcelona, 
and Maracaybo, in proportion as they have di-. 
minished in the province of Caraccas, it is still 
believed, that in general this ancient branch of 


245 


agricultural industry gradually declines. Coffee 
and cotton-trees progressively take place on 
many spots of the cacao, of which the lingering 
harvests weary the patience of the cultivator. 
It is also asserted, that the new plantations of 
cacao are less productive than the old; the trees 
do not acquire the same vigour, and yield later 
and less abundant fruit. The soil is still accused 
of being exhausted ; but we think it is rather 
the atmosphere, that is changed by the progress 
of clearing and cultivation. The air, that re- 
poses on a virgin soil covered: with forests, is 
loaded with humidity, and those gaseous mix- 
tures, that serve for the nutriment of plants, and 
arise’ from the decomposition of organic sub- 
stances. When a country has been long sub- 
jected to cultivation, it is not the proportions 
between the azot and oxygen that vary. The 
constituent bases of the atmosphere remain un- 
altered ; but it no longer contains, in a state of 
suspension, those binary and ternary mixtures of 
carbon, azot, and hydrogen, which a virgin soil 
exhales, and which are regarded as a source of 
fecundity. The air, purer and less charged with 
miasmata and heterogeneous emanations, be- 
comes at the same time dryer. The elasticity 
of the vapours undergoes a sensible diminution. 
On land anciently cleared, and consequently 
little favourable to the cultivation of the cacao- 
tree, for instance in the West India islands, the 
\ 


(246 


fruit is almost'as small as that of the wild cacao- 
tree. It is, as we have already observed, on the 
banks of the Upper Oroonoko, after having 
crossed the Llanos, that we find the true country 
of the cacao-tree ; thick forests, in which, on a 
virgin soil, and surrounded by an atmosphere 
continually humid, the trees furnish from the 
fourth year abundant crops. Wherever the soil 
is not exhausted, the fruit is become by cultiva- 
tion larger and less bitter, but also more late. 
On seeing the produce of cacao diminish gra- 
dually in Terra Firma, it may be inquired, 
whether the consumption will diminish: in the 
same proportion in Spain, Italy, and the-rest of 
Europe; or whether it be not probable, that; by 
the destruction of the cacao-plantations, the price 
will augment sufficiently, to rouse anew ‘the 
industry of the cultivator. This latter opinion 
is generally admitted by those, who deplore, at 
Caraccas, the diminution of so ancient and be- 
neficial a branch of commerce. In proportion 
as civilization extends toward the humid forests 
of the interior, the banks of the Oroonoko and 
the Amazon, or toward the valleys that fur- 
row the eastern declivity of the Andes, the new 
planters will find lands and an atmosphere 
equally favourable to the culture of the cacao-. 
tree. 
It is known, that the Spaniards in general 

dread the mixture of vanilla with the cacao, 


247 


as irritating the nervous system ; the fruit there- 
fore of that orchideous plant is entirely neglected 
in the province of Caraccas, though abundant 
crops of it might be gathered on the humid and 
feverous coast between Porto Cabello and Ocu- 
mare; especially at Turiamo, where the fruits 
of the epidendrum vanilla attain a length of eleven 
or twelve inches. The English and the Anglo- 
Americans often seek to make purchases of va- 
nilla at the port of La Guayra, but the merchants 
procure with difficulty a very small quantity. 
In the valleys that descend from the chain of 
the coast toward the Caribbean sea, in the pro- 
vince of Truxillo, as well as in the missions of 
Guyana near the cataracts of the Oroonoko, a 


great quantity of vanilla might be collected ; the 
produce of which would be still more abundant, 
if, according to the practice of the Mexicans, 
the plant were disentangled from time to time 
from the creeping plants, by which it is entwined 
and stifled. 


In making known the actual state of the 
cacao-plantations in the province of Venezuela ; 
discussing the connection that is observed be- 
tween the produce of those plantations, the hu- 
midity of the air, and it’s salubrity; we have 
mentioned the hot and fertile valleys of the Cor- 
dillera of the coast. This tract of land, where 
it stretches on the West toward thé lake of Ma. 
racaybo, displays a remarkable variety of scenery. 


248 


I shall exhibit in one view, to close this chapter, 
the notions I have been able to acquire respect- 
ing the quality of the soil, and the metallic riches 
of the districts of Aroa, of Barquesimeto, and of 
Carora. 

From the Sierra Nevada of Merida, and the 
Paramos of Niquitao, Bocono, and Las Rosas %, 
which contain the valuable bark-tree, the eastern 
Cordillera of New Grenada-} decreases in height 
so rapidly, that between the ninth and tenth 
degrees of latitude it forms only a chain of little 
mountains, which, stretching to the North-East 
by the Altar and. Torito, separates the rivers 
that join the Apure and the Oroonoko from 
those numerous rivers that. flow either into. the 


* Many travellers, who were monks, have asserted, that 
the little Paramo de Las Rosas, the height of which appears 
to be more than 1,600 toises, is covered with rosemary, and 


the red and white roses of Europe, that grow wild there. 
These roses are gathered to decorate the altars in the neigh- 
bouring villages, on the festivals’ of the church. By what 
accident has our rosa centifolia become wild in this country, 
while we no where found it in the Andes of Quito and Peru? 
Is it really the rose-tree of our garden? See above, vol. iii, 
p- 487. : 

+ The bark exported from the port of Maracaybo does not 
come from the territory of Venezuela, but from the mountains 
of Pamplona in New Grenada, being brought down the Rio 
de San Faustino, that flows into the lake of Maracaybo, 
(Pombo, Noticias scbre las Quinas, 1814, p- 65.) Some is. 
collected near Merida, in the ravine of Viscucucuy. 


249 


Caribbean sea or the lake of Maracaybo*. On 
this dividing ridge are built the towns of Nirgua, 
San Felipe el Fuerte, Barquesimeto, and Tocuyo. 
The first three are in a very hot climate; but 
Tocuyo enjoys great coolness, and we. heard 
with surprise, that, beneath so fine a sky, the 
inhabitants have a strong propensity to suicide. 
The ground rises toward the South; for Truxillo, 
the lake of Urao, from which carbonat of soda 
is extracted, and La Grita, all to the East of 
the Cordillera, though no farther distant are 
four or five hundred toises high +. 

On examining the law, which the primitive 
strata of the Cordillera of the coast follow in 
their dip, we believe we recognize one of the 
causes of the extreme humidity of the land 
bounded by this Cordillera and the ocean.’ The 
dip of the strata is most frequently to the North- 
West; so that the waters flow in that direction 
on the ledges of the rock ; and form, as wehave 
stated above, that multitude of torrents and 
rivers, the inundations of which become so fatal ° 
to the health of the inhabitants, from Cape 
Codera as far as the lake of Maracaybo. 

Among the rivers that descend North-East 
toward. the coast of Porto-Cabello, and La 


* See ch. xiii, vol. ili, p. 495 and 528, 

+ The town of Pamplona, more toward the South-West, is 
elevated, according to Mr. Caldas, 1255 toises above the level 
of the ocean. 


Punta de Hicacos, the most remarkable are those 
of Tocuyo, Aroa, and Yaracuy.* Were it not 
for the miasmata, that infect the atmosphere, 
the valleys of Aroa and of Yaracuy would per- 
haps be more populous than those of Aragua *. 
Navigable rivers would even give the former the 
advantage of facilitating the exportation of their 
own crops of sugar and cacao, and that of the 
productions of the neighbouring’ lands ; as the 
wheat of Quibor, the cattle of Monai, and the 
copper of Aroa. The mines, from which this 
copper is extracted, are in a lateral valley, open- 
ing into that of Aroa; and which is less hot, 
and less unhealthy, than the ravines nearer the 
sea. Inthe latter the Indians havé their gold- 
washings, and the soil conceals rich coppeér-ores, 
which no one has yet ‘attempted to extract. The 
ancient mines of Aroa, after having been long 
neglected, have been wrought anew by the care 
of Don Antonio Henriquez, whom-we met at 
San Fernando on the borders of the Apure. It 
appears from the information hé gave us, that 
the situation of the ore is 'a kind of mass (stock- 
werck), formed by the union of several small 
veins, which cross each other in every direction. 
‘These masses are sometimes two or three toises 

* Urama, Moron, Cabria, San i icolas, and the valleys of 
Alpargaton, and Carayinas, are also mentioned as extremely 
unhealthy. 


251 


thick. There are three mines, which are all 
wrought by slaves. The largest mine, the Bis- 
cayna, has but thirty miners, and the total 
number of slaves employed in the extraction of 
the ore, and in smelting it, amounts only to sixty 
- or seventy. As the draining gallery is but thirty 
toises deep, the waters prevent working the 
richest parts of the mass, which is deeper than 
the gallery ; and no one has hitherto thought of 
erecting hydraulic wheels. The tetal produce 
of metallic copper is twelve or fifteen hundred 
quintals a year. This copper, known at: Cadiz 
by the name of Caraccas copper, is of an excel- 
lent quality.. It is even’ preferred to that of 
Sweden, and of Coquimbo in Chili*. Part of 
the copper of Aroa is employed in _casting bells 
on the spot. ‘Some ores of silver have been’ re- 
cently discovered between Aroa and Nirgua, 
near Guanita, in the mountain of San Pablo. 
Grains of gold are found in all the mountainous 
lands between the Rio Yaracuy, the’ town of 
San Felipe, Nirgua, and Barquesimeto; parti- 
cularly in the Rio de Santa’Cruz, im which the 
Indian gold-gatherers have sometimes found 
lumps of the value of four or five’ piastres. “Do 
the neighbouring rocks of mica-slate and gneiss 


* The exportation of Aroa copper from La Guayra, in 
1794, was only 11,525 pounds entered at the custom house ; in 
1796, 31,142 pounds; and in 1797, 2,400 pounds. At that 
time the hundred weight fetched twelve piastres: 


2 


contain real veins? or is the gold disseminated 
here, as in the granites of Guadarama_ in 
Spain, and of the Fichtelberg in Franconia, 
throughout the whole mass of the rock?  Per- 
haps the waters, in filtering through it, bring 
together the disseminated grains of gold; and in 
‘this case every attempt to work the rock would 
be useless. In the Savana de la Miel, near the 
town of Barquesimeto, a shaft has been sunk in 
a black shining slate resembling ampelite. The 
minerals extracted from this shaft, which were 
sent to me at Caraccas, were quartz, pyrites not 
auriferous, and carbonated lead, crystallized in 
needles of a silky lustre. i po 
We have already observed: above, that in the 
early times of the conquest the working of the 
mines of Nirgua and of Buria* was begun, 
notwithstanding the incursions of the’ warlike 
nation of the Giraharas. In this very district 
the accumulation of Negro slaves in 1553 gave 
rise to an event, which, little important in 
itself, becomes interesting by the analogy it 
displays with the events, that are now passing 
before our eyes in the island of St. Domingo. » 
A Negro slave excited an insurrection among 
the miners of the Real de San Felipe de Buria. 


* The valley of Buria, and the little river of the same 
name, communicate with the valley of the Rio Coxede, or 
Rio de Barquesimeto. 


253 


He retired into the woods, and founded, with 
two. hundred of his companions, a town, where 
he was proclaimed king. Miguel, this new 
king, was a friend to pomp and parade. He 
caused his wife Guiomar, to assume the title of 
queen; and, according to Oviedo*, he ap- 
pointed ministers and counsellors of state, offi- 
cers of da casa real, and even a Negro bishop. 
He had soon after the boldness to attack the 
neighbouring town of Nueva Segovia de Bar- 
quesimeto ; but, repulsed by Diego de Losada, 
he perished in the fight. This African monar- 
chy was succeeded at Nirgua by a republic of 
Zamboes, the descendants of Negroes and In- 
dians. The whole municipality (the cabildo) 
is composed of men of colour, to whom the 
king of Spain has given the title of “his faithful’ 
and loyal subjects, the Zamboes of Nirgua.” 
Few families of Whites will inhabit a country, 
where the system that prevails is so contrary to 
their pretensions ; and the little town is called 
in derision la republica de Zambos y Mulatos, 
It is as imprudent, to cede the government to a 
single cast, as to segregate that cast by depriving 
it of it’s natural rights. 

If the hot vallies of Aroa, of Yaracuy, and of 
the Rio Tocuyo, celebrated for their excellent 
timber, be rendered feyerous by the luxury of 


* Hist. de Venezuela, vol. i, p. 184, 


vegetation, and the extreme humidity of the 
atmosphere, it is not the same in the savannahs 
or Llanos of Monai and Carora. These Lianos 
. are separated by the mountainous tract of To- 
cuyo and Nirgua from the great Plaines de la 
Portuguesa et de Calabozo. It is a very ex- 
traordinary phenomenon to see barren savan- 
nahs joaded with miasmata. No marshy ground 
is found there, but. several phenomena indicate 
a disengagement of hydrogen gas *. When 
travellers, who are not acquainted with natural 
inflammable gasses, are shown the. Cueva del 
Serrito de Monai, it is usual to frighten them by 
setting fire to the gaseous mixture, which is 


* What is that luminous phenomenon known under the 
name of the lantern (farol) of Maracaybo, which is perceived 
every night, toward the seaside as well as in the inland 
parts, at Merida for example, where Mr. Palacios observed 
it during two years? The distance, greater than 40 leagues, 
at which the light is distinguished, has led to the supposition, 
that it might be owing to the effects of a thunderstorm, or 
of electrical explosions, which might daily take place in a 
pass in the mountains. It is asserted, that, on approaching 
the farol, the rolling of thunder is heard. Others vaguely 
pretend, that it is an air-volcano ; and that asphaltic soils, like 
those of Mena, cause these inflammable exhalations so con- 
stant in their appearance. The phenomenon takes place on 
@ mountainous and uninhabited spot, on the borders of the 
Rio Catatumbo, near it’s junction with the Rio Sulia. The 
place of the farol is such, that, being nearly in the meridian 
of the opening (boca) of the lake of Maracaybo, navigators 


are guided by it as by a lighthouse; 


955 


constantly accumulated in the upper part of the 
cavern, May we attribute the insalubrity. of 
the atmosphere to the same. causes as in the 
plains between Tivoli and Rome, to disengage- 
ments of sulphuretted hydrogen*? Perhaps 

also the mountainous lands, that are near the 
Llanos of Monai, have a baneful influence on 
the surrounding plains. The South-East winds 
may bring to them the putrid exhalations, that 
rise from the ravine of Villegas, and from La 
Sienega de Cabra, between Carora and Carache. . 

. Iam desirous of collecting every circumstance, 
which has a relation to the salubrity of the air ; 
for, in a matter so obscure, it is only by the 
comparison of a great number of phenomena, 
that we can hope to discover the truth. 

The barren yet feverous savannahs, that ex- 
tend from Barquesimeto to the eastern shore of 
the lake of Maracaybo, are partly covered with 
cactus; but the good silvester cochineal, known 
by the vague name of grana de Carora, comes 
from a more'temperate region, between Carora 

‘and Truxillo, and particularly from the valley 
/ 


* Don Carlos del Pozo has discovered in this district, at 
the bottom of the Quebrada de Moroturo, a stratum of clayey 
earth, black, strongly soiling the fingers, emitting a strong 
smell of sulphur, and inflaming spontaneously, when slightly 
moistened and exposed for a long time to the rays of the 
tropical Sun; the detonation of this muddy substance is 
very violent. 


256 


of the Rio Mucuju*, to the East of Merida. 
The inhabitants neglect altogether this produc- 
tion, so much sought for in commerce. 


* This little river descends from the Paramo de los 
Conejos, and flows into the Rio Albarregas, 


NOTES 


TO 


THE FIFTH BOOK, 


Nore A. 


The following are some remarkable passages in the letter 
from Aguirre to the king of Spain. 

** King Philip, native of Spain, Son of Charles the In- 
vincible! I, Lopez de Aguirre, thy vassal, an old Christian, 
of poor but noble parents, and native of the town of Onate 
in Biscay, passed over young to Peru, to labour lance in 


hand. I rendered thee great services in the conquest of 


India. I fought for thy glory, without demanding pay of 
thy officers, as is proved by the books of thy treasure. I 
firmly believe, Christian King and Lord, very ungrateful to 
me and my companions, that all those, who write to thee 
“from this land (America), deceive thee much, because thou 
seest things too far off. I recommend to thee, to be more 
just toward the good vassals, whom thou hast in this country ; 
for I and mine, wearied of the cruelties and injustice, which 
thy viceroys, thy governors, and thy judges, exercise in thy 
name, are resolved to obey thee no more. We regard 
ourselves no longer as Spaniards. We make a cruel war 
on thee, because we will not endure the oppression of thy 
ministers; who, to give places to their nephews and their 
children, dispose of our lives, our reputation, and our for- 
tune. I am lame in he left foot from two shote of an 


VOL. IV. s 


258 


arquebuse, which I received in the valley of Coquimbo, 
fighting under the orders of thy marshal, Alonzo de Alva- 
rado, against Francis Hernandez Giron, then a rebel, as I 
am at present, and shall be always; for since thy viceroy, 
the Marquis of Canete, a cowardly, ambitious, and effeminate 
man, has hanged our most valiant warriors, I care no more 
for thy pardon than for the books of Martin Luther. It is 
not well in thee, King of Spain, to be ungrateful toward 
thy vassals ; for, it was while thy father, the emperor 
Charles, remained quietly in Castille, that they procured 
for thee so many kingdoms and vast countries. Remember, 
King Philip, that thou hast no right to draw revenues from 
these provinces, the conquest of which has been without 
danger to thee, but inasmuch as thou recompensest those, 
who have rendered thee such great services. J am certain, 
that few Kings go to Heaven. Therefore we regard our- 
selves as very happy, to be here in the Indies, preserving 
in all their purity the commandments of God, and of the 
Roman church; and we intend, though sinners during life, 
to become one day martyrs to the glory of God. On going 
out of the river of Amazons, we landed in an island called 
La Margaretta. We there received news from Spain of 
the great faction and machination (maquina) of the Lu- 
therans. This news frightened us extremely; we found 
among us one of that faction; his name was Monteverde. 
I had him cut to pieces, as was just: for believe me, 
signior, wherever I am, people live according to the law, 
But the corruption of morals among the monks is so great 
in this land, that it is necessary to chastise it severely. 
There is not an ecclesiastic here, who does not think himself 


higher than the governor of a province. I beg of thee, 
great King, not to believe what the monks teil thee down 
yonder in Spain, ‘They are always talking of the sacrifices 
they make, as well as of the hard and bitter life they are 
forced to lead in America; while they occupy the richest 
lands, and the Indians hunt and fish for them every day. 


259 


If they shed tears before thy throne, it is that thou mayest 
send them hither to govern provinces. Dost thou know 
what sort of life they lead here? given up to luxury, ac- 
quiring possessions, selling the sacraments, being at once 
ambitious, violent, and gluttons ; such is the life they lead in 
America, ‘he faith of the Indians suffers by such bad 
examples. If thou dost not change all this, O king of Spain, 
thy government will not be stable. 

«* What a misfortune, that the Emperor, thy father, has 
conquered Germany at such a price, and has spent on that 
conquest the money, that we procured for him in these very 
Indies! In the year 1559, the Marquis of Canete sent to 
the Amazons Pedro de Ursua, a Navarrese, or rather a 
Frenchman: we sailed on the largest rivers of Peru, till we 
came to a gulf of fresh water. We had already gone three 
hundred leagues, when we killed that bad and ambitious 
captain. We chose a cavailero of Seville, Fernand de Guz- 
man, for king; and we swore fealty to him, as is done to 
thyself, Iwas named quarter-master general: and because 
I did not consent to all his will; he wanted to kill me. 
But I killed this new king, the captain of his guards, his 


lieutenant-general, his chaplain, a woman, a knight of the 


order of Rhodes, two ensigns, and five or six domestics of 
the pretended king. I then resolved to punish thy ministers, 
and thy auditors (counsellors of the audiencia). I named 
captains and sergeants: these again wanted to kill me, but 
I had them all hanged. In the midst of these adventures, 
we navigated eleven months, till we reached the mouth of 
the river. We sailed more than 1500 leagues. God knows 
how we got through that great mass of water. I advise 
thee, O great king, never to send Spanish fleets into that 
cursed river. God preserve thee in his holy keeping.” 

This letter was given by Aguirre to the vicar of the 
island of Margaretta, Pedro de Contreras, in order to be 
transmitted to king Philip Ef. Fray Pedro Simon,’ pro- 
vincial of the order of St, Francis'in New Grenada, saw 


s 2 


260 


several mannseript copies of it in America, and in Spaift, 
It was printed for the first time, in 1723, in the History 
of the Province of Venezuela by Oviedo, vol. i, p. 206. 
Complaints no less violent, on the conduct of the monks 
of the 16th century, were addressed directly to the Pope 
by the Milanese traveller, Girolamo Benzoni. 


DLP PLP LLP LILO LS 


Nore B. 


The milk of the lactescent agarics has not been separately 
analysed; it contains an acrid principle in the agaricus 
piperatus ; and in other species it is sweet and harmless. 
The fine experiments of Messrs. Braconnot, Bouillon-La- 
grange, and Vauquelin (Annales de Chimie, vol. xlvi, p. 212; 
vol. li, p. 75; vol. Ixxix, p. 265; vol. Ixxx, p. 272; vol. 
Ixxxv, p. 5), have pointed out a great quantity of albumen 
in the substance of the agaricus deliciosus, an edible mush- 
room. It is this albumen contained in their juice, which 
renders them so hard when boiled. I have mentioned above 
the experiments I made in 1796, to prove, that morels 
(morchella esculenta) can be converted into a sebaceous and 
ad:pocerous matter, capable of being used in the fabrication of 
soap. (De Candolle, sur les Propriétés méd. des Plantes, p. 345.) 
The saccharine matter had already been found in mushrooms, 
in 1791, by Mr. Gunther (See my Aphorism: ex Physiologia 
chem. Plantarum, in the Flora Friberg, p. 175). It is in the 
family of the fungi, more especially in the clavariz, phalli, 
helvetize, the merulii and the small gymnope which display 
themselves in.a few hours afier a storm of rain, that organic 
nature produces with most rapidity the greatest variety of 
chemical principles, sugar, albumen, adipocire, acetat of 
potash, fat, ozmazome, the aromatic principles, &c.. It 
would be interesting to examine, beside the milk of tha 


261 


lactescent fungi, those species, which, when cut in pieces, 
change their colour at the contact of atmospheric air. 

Though we have referred the palo de vaca to the family 
of the sapotas, we have nevertheless found in it a great 
resemblance with some plants of the urticeous kind, espe- 
cially with the fig-tree, because of it’s terminal stipnle in the 
shape of a horn; and with the brosimum, on account of the 
structure of it’s fruit. Mr. Kunth would even have preferred 
this last classification ; if the description of the fruit, made 
on the spot, and the nature of the milk, which is acrid in the 
urticeze, and sweet in the sapotas, did not seem to confirm 
the conjecture, which we have advanced above, p. 215. Mr. 
Bredemeyer saw, like us, the fruit, and not the flower of 
the cow-tree. He asserts, that he observed (sometimes ?) 
two seeds, lying one against the other, as in the alligator 
pear-tree, (laurus persea). Perhaps this botanist had the 
intention of expressing the same conformation of the nucleus, 
that Swartz indicates in the description of the brosimum : 
nucleus bilobus aut bipartibilis. We have mentioned the places 
where this remarkable tree grows: it will be easy for 
botanical travellers to procure the flower of the palo de vaca, 
and to remove the doubts, which still remain, of the faiily 
to which it belongs. 


geo yn tse or ee 


BOOK VIL. 


CHAPTER XVII. 


Mountains that separate the valleys of Aragua 
from the Llanos of Caraccas.—Villa de Cura, 
— Parapara.— Llanos, or Steppes.—Calabozo. 


Tue chain of mountains, that borders the lake 
of Tacarigua toward the South, forms in some 
sort the northern shore of the great. basin of the 
Llanos or savannahs of Caraccas. In order.to 
descend from the valleys of Aragua into these 
savannahs, the mountains of Guigue and of 
Tucutunemo must be crossed. From a peopled 
country embellished by cultivation, we plunge 
into a vast solitude. Accustomed to the aspect 
of rocks, and to the shade of valleys, the tra- 
veller beholds with astonishment these savan- 
nahs without trees, these immense plains, that 
seem to ascend toward the horizon. 

Before I trace the scenery of the Llanos, or 
of the region of pasturage*, I shall succinctly 
describe the road we took from Nueva Valencia, 


* See above, chap. xii, vol. ili, p. 424. 
? ? a 


264 


by Villa de Cura and San Juan, to the little 
village of Ortiz, placed at the entry of the 
steppes. We left the valleys of Aragua on the 
6th of March before sunrise. We passed over 
a plain richly cultivated, keeping along the 
South-West side of the lake of Valencia, and 
crossing the ground that the waters of the lake 
had left uncovered. We were never weary of 
admiring the fertility of the soil, covered with 
calebashes, water-melons, and plantains. The 
rising of the Sun was announced by the distant 
noise of the howling monkeys. Approaching a 
group of trees,.that rise in the midst of the 
plain, between the ancient islets of Don Pedro 
and La Negra, we perceived numerous bands 
of araguatoes going as in procession from one 
tree to another, with extreme slowness. A 
“ale was followed by a great number of fe- 
males, several of which carried their young on 

their shoulders. Naturalists have very often 
~ described the howling monkeys, that live in 
society in different parts of America. They 
every where resemble each other in their man- 
ners, though the species are not always the 
same. The uniformity with which the ara- 
guatoes execute their movements is extremely 
striking *. Whenever the branches of neigh-' 
bouring trees do not touch, the male that leads 
the band suspends himself by the callous 


* Simia ursina, (See chap. viii, vol. iii, p. 170.) 


265 


and prehensile part of his tail; and, letting fall 
the rest of his body, swings himself till in one 
of his oscillations he reaches the neighbouring 
branch. The whole file performs the same 
action on the same spot., It is almost super- 
fluous to add how dubious is the assertion of 
Ulloa*, and so many well-informed travellers, 
according to whom, the marimondoes +, the 
araguatoes, and other monkeys with a prehensile 
tail, form a sort of chain, in order to reach the 
opposite side of a river. We had opportunities, 
during five years, of observing thousands of 
these animals; and for this very reason we 
place no confidence in relations, perhaps in- 
vented by the Europeans themselves, though 
repeated by the Indians of the missions, as if 
they had .been transmitted to them by their 
fathers. Man, the most remote from civiliza- 
tion, enjoys the astonishment he excites in re- 
counting the marvels of his country. He says 
he has seen what he imagines may have been 
seen by others. Every savage is a hunter, and 
the stories of hunters borrow from the imagina- 
tion in proportion as the animals, of which they 
boast the artifices, are endowed with a higher 


* This celebrated traveller has not hesitated to represent 
in an engraving this extraordinary feat of the monkeys with 
a prehensile tail.—See Viage a la America meridional ( Madrid, 
1748), vol. i, p. 144 —149. 

+ Simia belzebuth. See my Obs. de Zool., vol.1, p. 327. 


266 


degree of intelligence. Thence the fictions, of 
which foxes, monkeys, crows, and the condor of 
the Andes, have been the subjects in the two 
hemispheres. ; 

The araguatoes are accused of sometimes 
abandoning their young, that they may be lighter 
for flight when pursued by the Indian hunters. 
It is said, that mothers have been seen taking 
off their young from their shoulders, and throw- 
ing them down to the foot of the tree. {I am in- 
clined to believe, that a movement merely acci- 
dental has been mistaken for one that was pre- 
meditated. The Indians have a hatred or pre- 
dilection for certain races of monkeys; they 
love the viuditas, the titis, and generally all the 
little sagoins ; while the araguatoes, on account 
of their mournful aspect, and their uniform 
howlings, are at once detested and calumniated. 
In reflecting on the causes, that may facilitate 
the propagation of sound in the air during the 
night, I thought it important to determine with 
precision the distance, at which, especially in 
damp and stormy weather, the howling of a 
band of araguatoes is heard. I believe I ob- 
tained proof of it’s being distinguished at eight 
hundred toises distance. The monkeys that are 
furnished with four hands cannot make excur- 
sions in the Llanos; and it is easy, amid vast 
plains covered with grass, to recognize a solitary 
group of trees, whence the noise issues, and 


267 


which is inhabited by howling monkeys. Now 
by approaching or withdrawing from this group 
of trees, the marimum of the distance may be 
measured, at which the howling is heard. These 
distances appeared to me sometimes. a third 
greater during the night, especially when the 
weather was cloudy, very hot, and humid. 

The Indians pretend, that, when the aragua- 
toes fill the forests with their howlings, there is 
always one that chaunts as Jeader of the band. 
The observation is pretty accurate. During a 
long time one solitary and strong voice is gene- 
rally distinguished, till it’s place is taken by 
another voice of. a different pitch. We may 
observe from time to time the same instinct of 
imitation among frogs, and almost all animals 
that live and exert their voices in society. The 
, missionaries farther assert, that, when a female 
among the araguatoes is on the point of bringing 
forth, the choir suspends it’s howlings till the 
moment of the birth of the young. I could not 
myself judge of the accuracy of this assertion ; 
but I do not believe it to be entirely destitute 
of foundation. I have observed, that, when an 
extraordinary incident, the moans for instance of 
a wounded araguato, fixed the attention of the 
band, the howlings were for some minutes sus- 
pended. Our guides assured us gravely, that, 
“+o cure fan asthma, it is sufficient to drink 
out of the bony drum of the hyoidal bone of the 


268 


araguato.” This animal, having so extraordi- 
nary a volume of voice, it’s larynx must neces- 
sarily impart to the water poured into it the vir- 
‘tue of curing the affections gf the lungs. Such 
is the science of the vulgar, which sometimes 
resembles that of the ancients. 

We passed the night at the village of Guigue, 
the latitude of which I found by observations of 
Canopus to be 10° 4° 11”. The village, sur- 
rounded with the richest cultivation, is only a 
thousand toises distant from the lake of Taca- 
rigua. We lodged with an old sergeant, a native 
of Murcia, a man of a very original character. 
To prove to us, that he had studied among the 
Jesuits, he recited to us the history of the crea- 


tion of the world in Latin. He knew the names 
of Augustus, Tiberius, and Dioclesian ; and while 
enjoying the agreeable coolness of the night in 


an enclosure planted with bananas, he interested 
himself in all that had passed at the court of the 
Roman emperors. He inquired of us with 
earnestness for a remedy for the gout, from which 
he suffered cruelly. “ ¥ know,” said he, “ that 
a Zambo of Valencia, who is a famous curioso, 
could cure me; but the Zambo would expect to 
be treated with attentions, that I cannot pay to 
a man of his colour, and I prefer remaining as 
Tam.” 

On leaving Guigue we began'to ascend the 
chain of mouniains, that extends to the South 


269 


of the lake toward Guacimo and La Palma, 
From the top of a table-land, at three hundred 
and twenty toises of elevation, we saw for the 
last time the valleys of Aragua. The gneiss 
appeared uncovered, presenting the same direc- 
tion of strata, and the same dip toward the 
North-West. Veins of quartz, that traverse the 
gneiss, are auriferous ; and hence the neighbour- 
ing ravine bears the name of guebrada del oro. 
We heard with surprise at every step the name 
of ravine of gold, in a country where only one 
single mine of copper is wrought. We travelled 
five leagues to the village of Maria Magdalena, 
and two leagues more to the Villa de Cura. It 
was Sunday, and at the village of Maria Mag+ 
dalena the inhabitants were assembled before the 
church. ‘They wanted to force our muleteers to 
stop, and hear mass. We resolved to remain; 
but, after a long altercation, the muleteers pur- 
sued their way. I ought to add, that this is the 
only dispute in which we were engaged from 
sucha motive. Very erroneous ideas are formed 
in Europe of the intolerance, and even of the 
religious fervour of the Spanish colonists ! 

San Luis de Cura, or, as it is commonly called, 
the Villa de Cura, is founded in a very barren val- 
ley, lying North-West and South-East, and ele+ 
vated, according to my barometrical observations, 
iwo hundred and sixty-six toises above the level 
of the ocean. The country, with the exception 


£ 


270 


of some fruit-trees, is almost destitute of vege- 
tation. The dryness of the flat is so much the 


greater, because several rivers, which is rather 
extraordinary in a country of primitive rocks, 
lose themselves in crevices in the ground. The 
Rio de Las Minas, North of the Villa de Cura, 
disappears in a rock, again appears, and is in- 
gulfed anew without reaching the lake of Valen- 


cia, toward which it flows. Cura resembles a 
village more than a town. The population is 
only four thousand souls; but we found many 
persons of highly cultivated minds. We lodged 
with a family, which had excited the resentment 
of government in the revolution at Caraccas in 
1797. One of the sons, after having languished 
in a dungeon, had been sent to the Havannah, 
to be shut up in a strong fortress. With what 
joy his mother heard, that, after our return from 
the Oroonoko, we should visit the Havannah! 
She entrusted me with five piastres, “ the whole 
fruit of her savings.” I earnestly wished to re- 
turn them to her; but how could I help fearing 
to wound her delicacy, to give pain to a mother, 
who finds a charm in the privations she imposes 
on herself? All the society of the town was as- 
sembled in the evening, to admire in a magic 
lantern the views of the great capitals of Europe. 
We were shown the palace of the Tuileries, and 
the statue of the great Elector at Berlin. it 
excites a singular sensation, to gaze on our 


271 


native city in a magic lantern, when we are at a 
distance of two thousand leagues from it! 

An apothecary, who had. been ruined by an 
unhappy propensity for working of mines, ac- 
companied us in our excursion to the Serro de 
Chacas, very rich in auriferous pyrites. We 
continued to descend the southern declivity of 
the Cordillera of the coast, in which the plains 
of Aragua form a longitudinal valley. We 
passed a part of the night of the 11th at the vil- 
lage of San Juan, remarkable for it’s thermal 
waters; and the singular form of two neighbour- 
ing mountains, called the Morros of San Juan. 
These form slender peaks, that rise from a wall 
of rocks with a very extensive basis. The wall 
is perpendicular, and resembles the Devil’s Wail, 
which surrounds a part of the group of moun- 
tains in the Hartz*. These being perceived 
from afar in the Llanos, affect the imagination 
of the inhabitants of the plain, who are not ac- 
customed to the least unequal ground, and the 
height of the peaks is singularly exaggerated 
by them. They were described to us as being 
placed in the middle of the steppes, which they 
in reality bound toward the North, far beyond a 
range of hills called La Galera. Judging from 
angles taken at a distance of two miles, these 
hills are scarcely more than a hundred and fifty- 


* Die Teufels Maner, near Wernigerode in Germany. 


272 


six toises higher than the village of San Juan, 
and three hundred and fifty toises above the 
level of the Llanos. The thermal waters glide 
out at the foot of these hills, which are formed 
of transition limestone; they are impregnated 
with sulphuretted hydrogen, like those of Ma- 
riara, and form a little pool, or laguna, in which 
the thermometer rose only to 31°3°. 

I found in the night of the 9th of March, by 
very satisfactory observations of the stars, the 
latitude of Villa de Cura to be 10° 2’47”. The 
Spanish officers, who carried astronomical in- 
struments to. the Oroonoko, on the expedition 
for assigning boundaries in 1755, certainly took 
no observations at Cura, for the map of Caulin, 
and that of La Cruz Omedilla, place this town 
a quarter of a degree too far South. 

The Villa de Cura is celebrated in the country 
for the miracles of an image ‘of the Virgin, 
known by the name of Nuestra Senora de los 
Valencianos. This image, found in a ravine by 
an Indian, about the middle of the eighteenth 
century, was the object of a contest between the 
towns of Cura and San Sebastian de Los Reyes. 
The vicars of this last town asserted, that the- 
Virgin had made her first appearance on the 
territory of their parish. The Bishop of Carac- 
cas, in order to put an end to the scandal of this 
long dispute, caused the image to be placed in 
the archives of his bishoprick, and kept it thirty 


273 


years under seal.” It was not restored to the 
inhabitants of Cura, till 1802. Mr. Depons has 
related at large the circumstances of this singu- 
lar cause *. 

After having bathed in the little river of San 
Juan, the bottom of which is of basaltic gruen- 
stein, in cool and limpid. water, we continued 
our journey at two in the morning, by Ortiz and 
Parapara, to the Mesa de Paja. The road of 
the Llanos being at that time infested with rob- 
bers, several travellers joined us, in order to form 
a sort of caravan. We continued going down 
hill during six or seven hours; and we skirted 
the Cerro de Flores, near which the road turns 
off, that leads to the great village of San Jose 
de Tisnao. We passed the farms of Luque and 
Juncalito, to enter the valleys, which, on account 
of the bad road, and the blue colour of the 
slates, bear the names of. Malpasso and Piedras 
azules. 

This ground forms the ancient shore of the 
great basin of the Steppes, and furnishes mte- 
resting researches to the geologist. We there 
find trap formations, which, probably more re- 


cent than-the veins of diabasis near the town of © 


Caraccas, seem to belong to the rocks of igneous 
formation. They are not long and narrow 
streams, as in a part of Auvergne, but large 


* Vol. iti, p. 178. 
VOL, IV. T 


a 


274 


sheets, streams that appear like real strata. 
The lithoid masses cover here, if we may use 
the expression, the shore of the ancient interior 
sea; whatever is subject to destruction, the li- 
quid dejections, the scoriz filled with bubbles, 
have been carried away. These phenomena 
become particularly worthy of attention by the 
intimate relations that are observed between 
the phonolites and the amygdaloids, which in- 
dubitably containing pyroxenes and hornblende 
gruensteins, form strata in a transition slate. 
‘In order to have an accurate idea of the whole 
of the situation and superposition of these rocks, 
we shall name the formations as they occur in a 
profile drawn from North to South. 

We find at first in the Sierra de Mariara, 
which belongs to the northern branch of the 
Cordillera of the coast, a coarse-grained granite ; 
then, in the valleys of Aragua, on the borders of 
the lake, and in the islands it contains, as well 
as in the southern branch of the chain of the 
coast, gneiss and mica-slate. These last two 
rocks are auriferous in the Quebrada del Oro, 
near Guigue; and between Villa de Cura and 
the Morros de San Juan, in the mountain of 
Chacao. The goldis contained in pyrites, which 
are found: sometimes disseminated almost im- 
perceptibly in the whole mass of the gneiss *, 


* The four metals, which are found disseminated in the 


fa 


3 


and sometimes united in small veins of quartz. 
Most of the torrents that traverse the mountains 
bear along with them grains of gold. The poor 
inhabitants of Villa de Cura and San Juan have 
sometimes gained thirty piastres a day by wash- 
ing the sand; but most commonly, in Spite of 
their industry, they do not in a week find parti- 
cles of gold of the value of two piastres, and 
therefore few persons devote themselves to this 
uncertain occupation. Here, however, as in 
every place, where native gold and auriferous 
pyrites are disseminated in the rock, or, by the 
_ destruction of the rocks, are deposited in allu- 
vial lands, the people conceive the most exag- 
gerated ideas of the metallic riches of the soil. 
But the success of the workings, which depends 
less on the abundance of the ore in a vast space 
of land, than on it’s accumulation in one point, 
has not justified these favourable prepossessions. 
The mountains of Chacao, bordered by the 
ravine of Tucutunemo, rises seven hundred. feet 
above the village of San Juan. It is formed of 
gneiss, which, especially in the superior strata, 
passes into mica-slate. We saw the remains of 
an ancient mine, known by the name of Real 
de Santa Barbara. The works were directed to 
a stratum of cellular quartz *, full of polyedric 


Sranite rocks, as if they were of contemporaneous formation, 
are gold, tin, titanium, and cobalt, 
* This stratum of quartz, and the gneiss in which it is 


276 


cavities, mixed with iron ocre, containing aurife- 


rous pyrites and small grains of gold, some- 
times, it is said, visible to the naked eye. It 
appears, that the gneiss of the Cerro de Chacao 
furnishes still another metallic deposite, a mix- 
ture of copper and silver ores. This deposite 
has been the object of works attempted with 
great ignorance, by some Mexican miners, under 
the superintendance of Mr. Avalo. The gallery* 
directed to the North-East, is only twenty-five 
toises long. We there found some fine speci- 
mens of blue carbonated copper, mingled with 
sulphat of barytes and quartz ; but we could not 
ourselves judge, whether the ore contained any 
argentiferous fahlerz, and whether it occurred 
in a stratum, or, as the apothecary who was 
our guide asserted, in real veins. This much is 
certain, that the attempt at working the mine 
cost more than twelve thousand piastres in two 
years. It would no doubt have been more pru- 
dent, to have resumed the works on the aurife- 
rous stratum of the Real de Santa Barbara. 


contained, lie hor. 8 of the Freyberg compass, and dip 70° to 
the South-West. At a hundred toises distance from the au- 
riferous quartz, the gneiss resumes it’s .ordinary situation, 
hor, 3—4, with 60° dip to the North-West. A few strata 
of gneiss abound in silvery mica, and contain, instead of gar- 
nets, an immense quantity of small octaedrons of pyrites. 
This silvery gneiss resembles that of the famous mine of 
Himmelsfuerst, in Saxony. 


* La Cueva de los Mewicanos. 


277 


The xone of gneiss, which we have just men- 
tioned, is, in the chain of the coast, from the 
sea to the Villa de Cura, ten leagues broad. 
In this great extent of land, gneiss and mica- 
slate are found exclusively, and, these constitute 
one formation *. Beyond the town of Villa de 
Cura and the Cerro de Chacao, the aspect of 
the country becomes more varied to the eye of 
the geognost. There are still eight leagues 
of declivity fromthe table-land of Cura, to the 
entry of the Llanos; and, on the southern 
slope of the mountains of the coast, four dif- 


® A formation which we shall call gnezss-micaslate, and which 
is peculiar to the chainof the coast of Caraccas. Five formations 
must be distinguished, as Messrs. von Buch and Raumer 
have so ably demonstrated in their excellent papers on 
Mandeck and the Riesengebirge, namely (a) granite; (b) 
granite-gnetss ; (c) gneiss ; (A) gneiss-micaslate ; (e) mica-slate. 
The geognosts, whiose researches have been confined to a 
small tract of land, having confounded these formations, 
which nature has separated in several countries in the most 
distinct manner, have admitted, that the gzeiss and micas 
slate alternate every where in superimposed beds, or furnish 
insensible transitions from one rock to the other. These 
transitions and alternating superpositions take place no doubt 
in formations of granite-gneiss, and gneissemcasiate ; but 
because these phenomena are observed in one region, it does 
not follow, that in other regions we do not find very distinct, 
circumscribed formations of granite, gneiss, and mica-slate. 
The same considerations may be applied to the formations of 
serpentine; which are sometimes isolated, and sometimes 
belong to the eurite, mica-slate, and gruenstein. 


278 


ferent formations of rock cover the gneiss. We 
shall first give their description, without group- 
ing them according to systematic ideas. 

On the South of the Cerro de Chacao, be- 
tween the ravine of Tucutunemo and Piedras 
Negras, the gneiss is concealed beneath a for- 
mation of serpentine, of which the composition 
varies in the different superimposed strata. 
Sometimes it is very pure, very homogeneous, of 
a dusky olive green, and of a conchoidal frac- 
ture passing to even: sometimes it is veined, 
mixed with bluish steatite, of an unequal frac- 
ture, and containing spangles of mica. In both 
these states I could not discover in it either 
garnets, hornblende, or diallage. Advancing 
farther toward the South, and we always passed 
over this ground in that direction, the green of - 
the serpentine grows deeper, and feld-spar and 
horneblende are recognized in it: it is difficult 
to determine, whether it pass into diabasis 
(gruenstein), or alternate with it. There is no 
doubt however, of it’s containing veins of copper 
ore*. At the foot of this mountain two fine 
Springs gush out from the serpentine. Near the 


* One of these veins, on which two shafts have been sunk, 
was directed hor, 2°1, and dipped 80° East. The strata of the 
serpentine, where it is stratified with some regularity, run 
hor 8, and dip almost perpendicularly. I found malachite 
disseminated in this serpentine, where it passes into gruen- 
stein, 


279 


village of St. Juan, the granular diabasis appears 
alone uncovered, and takes a greenish black hue. 
The feld-spar, intimately mixed with the mass, 
may be separated into distinct crystals. The 
mica is very rare, and there is no quartz. The 
mass assumes at the surface a yellowish crust, 
like dolerite and _basaltes. 

In the midst of this tract ct trap-formation, 
the Morros of San Juan rise like two castles in 
ruins. They appear linked to the mornes of St. 
Sebastian, and to La Galera, which bounds the 
Llanos like a rocky wall. The Morros of San 
Juan are formed of limestone of a erystalline 
texture; sometimes very compact, sometimes 
spongy, of a greenish gray, shining, composed of 
small grains, and mixed with scattered spangles 
of mica. This limestone yields a strong effer- 
vescence with acids. I could not find in it any 
vestige of organized bodies. It contains, in 
subordinate strata, masses of hardened clay, of 
a blackish blue, and carburetted. These masses 
are fissile, very heavy, and loaded with iron; 
their streak is whitish, and they produce no 
effervescence with acids. They assume at their 
surface, by their decomposition in the air, a 
yellow colour. We seem to recognize in these 
argillaceous strata a tendency either toward the 
transition-slates, or toward the kieselschiefer 
(schistoid jasper) which everywhere characterize 
the black transition limestones. When in frag- 


280 


ments, they might be taken at first sight for 
basaltes, or hornblendes *. Another white lime- 
stone, compact, and containing some fragments 
of shells, backs the Morros de San Juan. 
could not see the line of junction of these two 
limestones ; or that of the calcareous formation 
and the diabasis. 

The transverse valley, that descends from 
Piedras Negras and the village of San Juan to- 
ward Pavapara and the Llanos, is filled with 
trappean rocks, displaying close relations with 
the formation of green slates, which they cover. 
Sometimes we seem to see serpentine, sometimes 
gruenstein, and sometimes dolerites and basaltes. 
The arrangement of these problematical masses 
is not less extraordinary.’ Between San J uan, 
Malpasso, and. Piedras Azules, they form strata 
parallel to each other, and dipping regularly to . 
the North at an angle of 40° or 50° ; they cover, 
even in concordant stratification, the green slates. 
Lower down, toward Parapara and Ortiz, where 
the amygdaloids and phonolites ‘are. connected 
with the gruenstein, every thing assumes a 
basaltic aspect. Balls of gruenstein, heaped. 


* I had an opportunity of examining again, with the 
greatest care, the rocks of San Juan, of Chacao, of Parapara, 
and of Calabozo, during my stay at Mexico; where I formed, 
conjointly with Mr. del Rio, one of the most distinguished 
pupils of the school of Freyberg, a geognostical collection for 
the Colegio de Mineria of New Spain. 


281 


upon one another, form those rounded cones, 
that are found so frequently in the Mittelgebirge 
in Bohemia, near Bilin, the country of phonolites. 
The following is the result of my partial obser- 
vations. i 

The gruenstein, which at first alternated with 
strata of serpentine, or was connected with this 
rock by insensible transitions, is seen alone, 
sometimes in strata considerably inclined, and 
sometimes in balls with concentric strata, im- | 
bedded in strata of the same substance. It lies, 
near Malpasso, on green slates, steatitic, mingled 
with hornblende, destitute of mica and grains 
of quartz, “dipping like the gruensteins 45° to- 
ward. the North, and directed like them N. 
75° W. 

A great sterility prevails where these green 
slates predominate, no doubt on account of the 
magnesia they contain ; which (as is proved by 
the magnesian limestone of England *) is very 
inimical to vegetation. The dip of the green 
slates remains the same; but by degrees the 
direction of their strata becomes parallel to the | 
general direction of the primitive rocks of the 
chain of the coast. At Piedras Azules, these 
slates, mingled with hornblende, cover in con- 


* Magnesian limestone, straw yellow, with madrepores ; 
beneath red marl, or muriatiferous red sandstone, 


282 


cordant stratification a blackish blue slate *, 
very fissile, and traversed by small veins of 
quartz. ‘The green slates include some strata of 
gruensiem, and they even contain balls of this 
substance. I nowhere saw the green slates 
alternate with the black slates of the ravine of 
Piedras Azules ; at the line of junction, these 
two slates appear rather to pass one into the 
other, the green slates becoming of a pearl-gray 
in proportion as they lose their hornblende. 

Farther South, toward Parapara and Ortiz, 
the slates disappear. They are concealed under 
a trap formation more varied in it’s aspect. 
The soil becomes more fertile ; the rocky masses 
alternate with strata of clay, which appear to be 
produced by the decomposition of the gruensteins, 
the amygdaloids, and the phonolites. 

The gruenstein, which farther North was less 
granulous, and passed into serpentine, here 
assumes a very different character. It contains 
balls of mandelstein, or amygdaloid, of eight or 
ten inches diameter. These balls, sometimes a 
little flattened, are divided into concentric layers. 
This is the effect of decomposition. The nucleus 
is almost as hard as basalt. They are inter- 
mingled with little cavities, owing to bubbles 


’ * The two formations of green and blackish blue slates 
are directed N. 52° E. (or hor. 3°4), and dip 70° N. W. 


tara tn th a aaa 


we 


3) ghar ee ee 


283 


of gas, filled with green earth, and crystals of 
pyroxene and mesotype. Their basis is grayish 
blue, rather soft, and displays small white spots, 
which, bytheregular form they affect, [should con- 
ceive to be decomposed feld-spar. Mr. von Buch 
has examined with a powerful lens the species we 
brought. He has discovered, that each crystal 
of pyroxene, envelopped in the earthy mass, is 
separated from it by fissures parallel to the sides 
of the crystal. These fissures seem to be the 
effect of a contraction, which the mass or basis 
of the mandelsten has undergone. I sometimes 
saw these balls of mandelstein arranged in strata, 
and separated from each other by beds of 
gruenstein of ten or fourteen inches thick ; 
sometimes (and this situation is the most com- 
mon) the balls of mandelstein, two or three feet 
in diameter, are found in heaps, and form little 
mounts with rounded summits, like the sphe- 
roidal basaltes. The clay, which separates these 
amygdaloid concretions, arises from the decom- 
position of their crust. They acquire by the 
contact of the air a very thin coating of yellow 
ochre. : 

South-West of the village of Parapara rises 
the little Cerro de.Flores, which is distinguished 
from afar in the steppes. Almost at it’s foot, 
and in the midst of the mandelstein tract, which 
we have just been describing, a porphyritic 
phonolite, a mass of compact feld-spar, of a 


284 


greenish eray, or mountain green, containing 
long crystals of vitreous feld-spar, appears ex- 
posed. It is the real porphyrschiefer of Werner; 
and it would be difficult to distinguish, in a 
collection of stones, the phonolite of Parapara 
from that of Bilin in Bohemia. It does not 
however here form rocks with grotesque shapes, 
but little hills covered with tabular blocks, large 
plates extremely. sonorous,. translucid on the 
edges, and wounding the hands when broken. 
Such are the successions of rocks, which I 
described on the spot, as I progressively found 
them, from the lake of Tacarigua to the entrance 
of the steppes. Few places in Europe display a 


geological constitution so well worthy of being 
studied. We saw there in succession six* for- 
mations : 


mica-slate gneiss ; 

- green slate (transition) ; 
black limestone (transition) ; 
serpentine and gruenstein ; 
amygdaloid (with pyroxene); and 
phonolite. 

I must observe in the first place, that the sub- 
stance, which we have just described under the 
name of gruenstein, in every respect resembles 
that, which forms layers in the mica-slate of 
Cape Blanc, and veins near Caraccas *. It dif- 


* See above, vol. iii, p. 405; and p.59 of the present 
volume. 


285 


fers only by containing neither quartz, nor 
garnets, nor pyrites. The intimate relations, 
that we observed near the Cerro de Chacao, 
between the gruenstein and the serpentine, 


cannot surprise these geognosts, who have 
studied the mountains of Franconia and Silesia. 
Near Zobtenberg*, a serpentine rock-alternates 
also with gabbro. In the country of Glatz, the 
fissures of the gabbro are filled with a steatite of a 
greenish white colour; and the rock, which was 
long thought to belong to the gruensteins-}, is an 
intimate mixture of feld-spar and diallage. 

The gruensteins of Tucutunemo, which we 
consider as constituting the same formation 
with the serpentine rock, contain veins of mala- 


* Between Tampadel and Silsterwiz (Buch, Geogn. Beob. 
vol. i, p. 69; and Naturf. Freunde zu Berlin, 1810, vol. iv, 
p. 144). 

+ Leop. de Buch, Deer. de Landeck, translated by Mr. 
d’Aubuisson, p. 26. In the mountains of Bareith, in Fran- 
conia, so abundant in gruenstein and serpentine, these two for- 
mations are net connected together. The serpentine there 
belongs rather to the schistoid hornblende (hornblendschiefer), 
as in the island of Cuba. Near Guanaxuato, in Mexico, I saw 
it alternating with syenite. These phenomena of serpentine 
rocks forming layers in eurite (weisstein), in schistoid horn- 
blende, in gabbro, and in syenjte, are so much the more re- 
markable, as the great mass of garnétiferous serpentines, 
which are found in the mountains of gneiss and mica-slate, 
form little distinct mounts, masses not covered by other for- 
mations. It is not the same in the mixtures of serpentine 
and granulous limestone, 


286 


chite and copper pyrites. These same metalli- 
ferous situations ave found also in Franconia in 
the gruensteins of the mountains of Steben and 
Lichtenberg. With respect to the geeen slates 
of Malpasso, which bear all the characters of 
transition slates, they are identical with those, 
which Mr. von Buch has so well described, 
near Schoenau in Silesia. They contain beds of 
gruenstein, like the slates of the mountains of 
Steben, which we have just mentioned *. The 
black limestone ‘of the Morros de San Juan, is 
also a.transition limestone. It forms perhaps a 
subordinate stratum in the slates of Malpasso. 
This situation would be analogous to what is 
observed in several parts of Switzerland}. The 


slaty zone, the centre of which is the ravine of 
Piedras Azules,, appears divided into two for- 
mations. On some points we think we observe 
one passing into the other. The gruensteins, 
which begin again to the South of these slates, 
appear to me to differ little from those found 


* Buch, as above, vol. i, p.'75. On advancing into the 
adit for draining the mine (Friedrich-Wilhelmstollen), which 1 
caused to be begun in 1794,near Steben, and which is yet only 
340 toises long, in the transition slate have successively been 
found subordinate strata of pure and porphyritic gruensteim, 
strata of lydian stone and ampelite (alaunschiefer) and strata 
of fine grained gruenstein, All these strata characterize 


the transition slates. 
+ For instance at the Glyshorn, at the Col de Balme, &c. 


287 


North of the ravine of Piedras Azules.. I did 
not see there any pyroxene; but on the very 
spot I recognised a number of crystals in the 
amygdaloid, which appears so strongly linked 
to the gruenstein, that they alternate several 
times. 

The geognost may consider his task as ful- 
filled, when he has traced with accuracy the 
positions of the divers strata; and has pointed 
out the analogies, which these positions display, 
with what has been observed in other countries. 
But how can he avoid being tempted to ascend 
to the origin of so many different substances, 
and to inquire how far the dominion of fire has 
extended in the mountains, that bound the 
great basin of the steppes? In researches on 
the position of rocks, we have generally to com- 
plain of not sufficiently perceiving the connexion 
between the masses, which we believe to be su- 
perimposed on one another. Here the difficulty 
seems to arise from the too intimate and too 
numerous relations displayed by rocks, that are 
thought not to belong to the same family. | 

The phonolite (or leucostine compacte of Mr. 
Cordier) is pretty generally regarded by all, 
who have at once examined burning and extin- 
guished volcanoes, as a flow of lithoid lava. I 
found no real basaltes, or dolerites; but the 
presence of pyroxene in the amygdaloid of Para- 
para leaves little doubt of the igneous origin of 


288 


those spheroidal masses, fissured, and full of 
cavities. Balls of this amygdaloid are enchased 
in the gruenstein ; and this gruenstein alternates 
on one side with a green slate, on the other 
with the serpentine of Tucutunemo. Here then 
is a connexion sufficiently intimate established 
between the phonolites and the green slates, 
between the pyroxenic amygdaloids and the 
serpentines containing copper ores, between vol- 
canic substances and others that are included 
under the vague names of ¢ransition traps. All 
these masses are destitute of quartz like the 
real trap-porphyries, or volcanic trachytes.’ This 
phenomenon is the more remarkable, as the 
gruensteins, which are called primitive, almost 
always contain quartz in Europe. The most 
general dip of the slates of Piedras Azules, of 
the gruensteins of Parapara, and of the pyroxenic 
~amygdaloids imbedded in strata of gr uenstein, 
do not follow the slope of the ground from North 
to South, but is pretty regularly toward the 
North. The strata fall toward the chain of the 
coast, as substances that had not been in fusion 
would do. Can we admit, that so many alter- 
nating rocks, imbedded one in the other, have 
a common origin? The nature of the phonolites, 
which are lithoid lavas with a feld-spar basis, 
and the nature of the green slates mingled with 
hornblende, oppose this opinion. In this state 
of things we may choose between two solutions 


289 


of the problem in question. In one of these 
solutions, the phonolite of the Cerro de Flores 
is to be regarded as the sole volcanic production 
of the tract; and we are forced to unite the 
pyroxenic amygdaloids with the rest of the 
gruensteins in one single formation, that which 
is so common in the transition mountains of 
Europe, considered hitherto as not volcanic. In 
the other solution of the problem, the masses of 
phonolite, amygdaloid, and gruenstein, which 
are found to the South of the ravine of Piedras 
Azules, are separated from the gruensteins and 
serpentine rocks, that cover the declivity of the, 
mountains North of the ravine. In the present 
state of knowledge, I find difficulties almost 
equally great, in adopting either of these suppo- 
sitions: but I have no doubt, that, when the real 
gruensteins (not the hornblende gruensteins) 
contained in the gneiss and mica-slates, shall 
have been more attentively examined in other 
places; when the basaltes (with pyroxene), 
forming strata in primitive rocks *, and the 
diabases and: amygdaloids in the transition 
mountains, shall have been carefully studied ;- 
when the texture of the masses shall have been 
subjected to a kind of mechanical analysis, and 


* For instance, at Krobsdorf in Silesia, a stratum of 
basaltes has been recognized in the mica-slate by two 
celebrated geognosts, Messrs. von Buch and Raumer. (Vom 
Granit des Riesengebirges, 1813, p. 70.) 

VOL; IV. U 


290 


the hornblendes better distinguished from the 
pyroxenes*, and the gruensteins from the do- 
lerites; a great number of phenomena, which 
now appear solitary and obscure, will be ranged, 
as it were of themselves, under general laws. 
‘The phonolites and other rocks of igneous origin 
at Parapara are so much the more interesting, 
as they indicate ancient eruptions in a granitic 
zone; as they belong to the shore of the basin 
of the steppes, as the basaltes of Harusch belong 
to the shore of the desert of Sahara}; and 
lastly as they are the only rocks of the kind we 
observed in the mountains of the Capitania 
General of Caraccas, which are also destitute of 
trachytes, or trap porphyry, basaltes, and vol- 


canic productions f. 

The southern declivity of the chain of the 
West is pretty steep; the steppes, according to 
my barometrical measurements, being a thou- 
sand, feet lower than the bottom of the basin of 
Aragua. From the extensive table-land of the 


* The gruensteins or diabases of the Fichtelgebirge in 
Franconia, which belong. to the transition slate, sometimes 
contain pyroxenes. See Galdfuss und Bischof ueber. das 
Fichtelgebirge, vol. i, p, 172—174. 

+ Hornemann, Voyage en Afrique, vol. i, p. 81, and the 
excellent Geography of Mr, Ritter, vol. i, p. 372. 

t From the Rio Negro to the coasts of Cumana and 
Caraccas, to the East of the mountains of Merida, which we 
did not visit. 


291 

Villa de Cura we descended toward the banks 
of the Rio Tucutunemo, which has hollowed 
itself out in a serpentine rock a longitudinal 
valley directed from East to West, at nearly the 
same level as La Victoria. A transverse valley, 
lying generally North and South, led us thence 
into the Llanos, by the villages of Parapara and 
Ortiz. It grows very narrow in several parts. 
Basins, the bottom of which is perfectly hori- 
zontal, communicate together by narrow passes 
with steep declivities. They were no doubt 
formerly small lakes, which by the accumulation 
of the waters, or by some more violent catas- 
trophe, broke down the dykes, by which they 
were separated, This: phenomenon is found in 
both continents, wherever the longitudinal val- 
leys are examined, that form the passages of 
the Andes, the Alps*, or the Pyrennees. It is 
probable, that the irruption of the waters toward 
the Llanos have given by extraordinary rents 
the form of ruins to the Morros of San Juan and. 
of San Sebastian. The volcanic tract. of Para- 
para and Ortiz is now only 30 or 40 toises above 
the Llanos. The eruptions consequently took 
place at the lowest point of the granitic chain. 

In the Mesa de Paja, in the 9th degree of 
latitude, we entered the basin of theLlanos. ‘The 


* Tyemind travéllers of the road from the valley of Ursern 
to the hospice of St. Gothard, and thence to Aivolo. 
u 2 


292 


Sun was almost at the zenith; the earth, wher- 
ever it appeared sterile and destitute of vegeta- 
tion, was at the temperature of 48° or 50° *, 


Not a breath of air was felt at the height at 


which we were on our mules ; yet, in the midst 
of this apparent calm, whirls of dust incessantly 
arose, driven on by those small currents of air, 
that glide only over the surface of the ground, 
and are occasioned by the difference of tem- 
perature, which the naked sand and the spots 
covered with herbs acquire. These sand winds 
augment the suffocating heat of the air. Every 


grain of quartz, hotter than the surrounding air, 


radiates heat in every direction ; and it is dif- 
ficult to observe the temperature of the atmos- 
phere, without these particles of sand striking 
against the bulb of the thermometer. All 
around us, the plains seemed to ascend toward 
the sky, and that vast and profound solitude 
appeared to our eyes like an ocean covered with 
seaweeds. According to the unequal mass of 
vapours diffused through the atmosphere, and 
the variable decrement in the temperature of the 
different strata of air, the horizon in some parts 
was clear and distinct; in other parts it ap- 
peared undulating, sinuous, and as if striped. 
The earth there was confounded with the sky. 


* Reaumur’s thermometer, buried in the sand, rose to 
38°4° and 40°, 


293 


Through the dry fog, and strata of vapour, the 
trunks of palm-trees were seen from afar. 
Stripped of their foliage, and their verdant sum- 
mits, these trunks appeared like the masts of a 
ship discovered at the horizon. 

There is something awful, but sad and 
gloomy, in the uniform aspect of these Steppes. 
Every thing seems motionless; scarcely does a 
small cloud, as it passes across the zenith, and 
announces the approach of the rainy season, 
sometimes cast it’s shadow on the savannah. 
1 know not whether the first aspect of the Llanos 
excite less astonishment than that of the chain 
ofthe Andes. Mountainous countries, whatever 
may be the absolute elevation of the highest sum- 
mits, have an analogous physiognomy; but we 
accustom ourselves with difficulty to the view of 
the Llanos of Venezuela and Casanare, to that 
of the Pampas of Buenos-Ayres and of Chaco, 
which recall to mind incessantly, and during 
journeys of twenty or thirty days, the smooth 
surface of the ocean. I had seen the plains or 
Llanos of La Mancha in Spain, and the heaths 
(ericeta) that extend from the extremity of Jut- 
land through Luneburg and Westphalia * to 
Belgium. ‘These last are real Steppes, of which 
man during several ages has been able to sub- 


* The smoothest parts of these heaths (Heideland) are 
found between Oldenbourg and Osnabruck, near Frisoyde. 


294 


ject only some small portions to cultivation + 
but the plains of the West and North of Europe 
present a feeble image of the immense Llanos of 
South America. It is in the South-East of our 
continent, in Hungary between the Danube and 
the Theiss; in Russia, between the Borysthenes 
the Don, and the Wolga, that we find those 
vast pastures, which seem to have been levelled 
by along abode of the waters, and terminate 
the horizon on every side. The plains of Hun- 
gary, where I traversed them, on the frontiers of 
Germany, between Presburg and Q&denburg, 
strike the imagination of the traveller by the 
constant display of the mirage, or extraordinary 
refractions; but their greatest extent is more 


to the East, between Czegled, Debreczin, 
and Tittel*, which has only two outlets, one 


* These vast steppes of Hungary are elevated only thirty 
or forty toises above the level of the sea, which is more than 
eighty leagues distant from them. (Wahlenberg, Flora Car- 
path., p. 32.) Baron Podmanitzky, highly distinguished for 
his knowledge of the physical sciences, caused the level. of 
these plains to be taken, on account of a canal projected be- 
tween the Danube and the Theiss. He found the line of divi- 
sion, or the convexity of the ground, which slopes on each 
side toward the beds of the two rivers, thirteen toises above 
the height of the Danube. Several leagues square are des- 
titute of villages and farms. Those pastures, which constitute 
the horizon, are called in the country Pussta. These plains, 
intermingled with marshes and sandy tracts, are found on this 
side of the Theiss between Czegled, Csaba, Komloss, and 
Szarwass ; beyond the Theiss, between Debreczin, Karczag, 


295 


near Gran and Waitzen; the other between 
Belgrade and Widdin. 

The different parts of the world have been 
supposed to be characterized by saying, that 
Europe has it’s heaths, Asia it’s steppes, Africa 
it’s deserts, and America its savannahs ; but by 
this distinction contrasts are established, that 
are not founded either on the nature of things, 
or the genius of languages. The existence of a 
heath always supposes a association of plants 
of the family of erice; the steppes of Asia are 
not every where covered with saline plants; the 
savannahs of Venezuela furnish not only the 
gramina, but with them small herbaceous mi- 
mosas, legimina, and other dicotyledonous 
plants. The plains of Songaria, those which 
extend between the Don and the Volga, and 
the Puszta, of Hungary, are real savannahs, 
pasturages abounding in grasses ; while the sa- 
vannahs to the East and West of the Stony 
Mountains and of New Mexico produce cheno- 
podiums, containing carbonat and muriat of 
soda*. Asia has real deserts, destitute of vege- 
tation, in Arabia, in Gobi, and in Persia. Since 
and Szoboszlo, I calculated, according to the map of Lipsky, 
the area of these plains of the inferior basin of Hungary to be 
two thousand five hundred or three thousand square leagues, 
of twenty to a degree. Between Czegled, Szolnok, and 
Ketskemet, the plain is almost a sea of sand. 


% North-West of the Missoury, and North of the Rio 
Zaguananas, which flows into the Rio Colorado of California 


296 


we have become better acquainted with the de- 
serts in the interior of Africa, so long and so 
vaguely confounded together under the name of 
desert of Sahara (Zahra); it has been observed, 
that in this continent, toward the East, savan- 
nahs and pastures are found, as in Arabia, set 
in the midst of naked, and barren tracts. It is 
these last, these deserts covered with gravel, and 
destitute of plants, that are almost entirely 
wanting in the New World. I saw them only 
in the low part of Peru, between Amotape and 
Coquimbo, on the borders of the South-Sea. 
These are called by the Spaniards not Llanos, 
but the Desiertos of Sechura and Atacamez. This 
solitary tract is not broad, but four hundred and 
forty leagues long. The rock pierces every 
where through the quicksands. No drop of 
rain ever falls on it; and, like the desert of Sa- 


hhara, to the North of Tombuctoo, the Peruvian - 


desert affords, near Huaura, a rich mine of native 
salt. Every where else, in the New World, 
there are plains, desert because not inhabited, 
but no real deserts *. 5 


‘The same phenomena are repeated in the most 


the plains contain gypsum and sal gem. See my Mexican 
Atlas, Pl. 1. 

* We are almost tempted, however, to call that vast and 
sandy table-land of Brazil, the Campos dos Parecis, which gives 
birth to the rivers Tapajos, Paraguay, and Madeira, and which 
reaches the summit of the highest mountains, a desert. Al- 
most destitute of vegetation, it reminds us of Gobi in Mungolia. 


297 


distant regions ; and, instead of designating those 
vast plains destitute of trees by the nature of the 
plants they preduce, it seems natural to distin- 
guishthem into deserts, and steppes or savannahs; 
into bare lands without any.appearance of vege- 
tation, and lands covered with gramina or small 
plants of the dicotyledonous tribe. The savan- 
nahs of America, especially those of the tempe- 
rate zone, have in many works been designated 
by the name of prairies *: but this term appears 
to me little applicable to pastures, that are often 
very dry, though covered with grass of four or 
five feet in height. The Llanos and the Pampos 
of South America are real steppes. They dis- 
play a beautiful verdure in the rainy season, but 
in the time of great drought assume the aspect 
of a desert. The grass is then reduced to pow- 
der; the earth cracks; thé alligator and the 
great serpents remain buried in the dried mud, 
till awakened from their long lethargy by the 
first showers of spring. These phenomena are 
observed on barren tracts of fifty or sixty leagues 
in length, wherever the savannahs are not tra- 
versed. by rivers; for on the borders of rivulets, 
and around little pools of stagnant water, the 
traveller finds at certain distances, even during 
the period of the great droughts, thickets of 
mauritia, a palm, the leaves of which, spread 
out like a fan, preserve a brilliant verdure. 


* The French word for meadows. Ep. 


298 


The steppes of Asia are all beyond the tropics, 
and form very elevated table-lands. America 
also displays savannahs of considerable extent on 
the backs of the mountains of Mexico, Peru, and 
Quito; but its most extensive steppes, the 
Llanos of Cumana, Caraceas, and Meta, are 
little raised above the level of the ocean, and all 
belong to the Equinoctial zone. These circum- 
stances give them a peculiar character. They 
have not, like the steppes of southern Asia, and 
the deserts of Persia, those lakes without issue, 
those small systems of rivers, that lose them- 
selves either in the sands, or by subterraneous 
filtrations. ‘The Llanos of America are inclined 
toward the East and South ; and their running 
waters are branches of the Oroonoko. 

The course of these rivers had once led me to 
believe, that the plains formed table-lands, raised 
at least from one hundred to one hundred and 
fifty toises above the level of the ocean. I sup- 
posed, that the deserts of interior Africa were 
also at a considerable height; and that they 
rose one above another like stages, from the 
coast to the interior of the continent. No baro- 
meter has yet been carried into the Sahara. 
With respect to the Llanos of America, I found 
by barometric heights observed at Calabozo, at 
the Villa del Pao, and at the mouth of the Meta, 
that their height is only forty or fifty toises above 
the level of the sea.. The fall of the rivers is 


299 


extremely gentle, often nearly imperceptible: 
and therefore the least wind, or the swelling of 


.the Oroonoko, causes a reflux in those rivers 
that flow into it. The’ Indians believe they de- 
scend during a’whole day in navigating from 
their mouths toward their sources. The waters 
that descend are separated from those that flow 
back by a great body of stagnant water, in which, 
the equilibrium being disturbed, whirlpools are 
formed, that are dangerous for boats. 

The chief characteristic of the savannahs or 
steppes of South America is the absolute want 
of hills and inequalities, the perfect level of 
every part of the soil. Accordingly the Spanish 
conquerors, who first penetrated from Coro to 
the banks of the Apure, did not call them de- 
serts, or savannahs, or meadows, but plains, 
Llanos. Often in a space of thirty square leagues 
there is not an eminence of a foot high. This 
resemblance to the surface of the sea strikes the 
imagination most powerfully, where the plains 
are altegether destitute of palm-trees; and where 
the mountains of the shore and of the Oroonoko 
are so distant, that they cannot be seen, as in 
the Mesa de Pavones. A person would be 
tempted there, to take the altitude of the Sun 
with a quadrant, if the horizon of the land were 
not constantly misty, on account of the variable 
display of refraction, This equality of surface 
is still more perfect in the meridian of Calabozo, 


300 


than toward the East, between the Cari, La 
Villa del Pao, arid Nueva Barcelona; but it 
reigns without interruption from the mouths of 
the Oroonoko to La Villa de Araure and Ospinos, 
under a parallel of a hundred and eighty leagues 
in length ; and from San Carlos to the savannahs 
of Caqueta, on a meridian of two hundred 
leagues *. It particularly characterizes the new 
continent, as it does the low steppes of Asia, 
between the Borysthenes and the Wolga, between 
the Irtisch and the Obi. The deserts of cen- 
tral Africa, of Arabia, Syria, and Persia, Cobi, 
and Casna ¢, present on the contrary many in- 
equalities, ranges of hills, ravines without water, 
and rocks that pierce the sands §. 

The Llanos, however, notwithstanding the ap- 
parent uniformity of their surface, furnish two 
kinds of inequalities, that do not escape the ob- 
servation of an attentive traveller. The first is 
known by the name of Bancos: they are real 
shoals in the basin of the steppes, fractured 
strata of sandstone, or compact limestone, stand- 
ing four or five feet higher than the rest of the 


* In strictness from N.N. E. to S.S. W. 

+ Gueldenstedt Reise, vol. i, p. 116—126. Gmelin, Flor. 
Sitir. Pref. p. 31.  Pailas, vol. ii, p..75; vol. iii, p. 638. 

{Or Karak, between the Jaxartes and the Oxus. 

§ See the laborious investigations of Mr. Meiners on 
Deserts, in the Untersuchungen ueber die Menschenarten, vol. i, 


p- 101. 


301 


plain. These banks are sometimes three or four 
leagues in length; they are entirely smooth, 
with a horizontal surface ; their existence is per- 
ceived only by examining their borders. The 
second species of inequality can be recognized 
only by geodesical or barometric levellings, or 
by the course of rivers. It is called Mesa, and 
is composed of small flats, or rather convex 
eminences, that. rise insensibly to the height. of 
a few toises. Such are toward the East, in the 
province of Cumana, on the North of the Villa 
de la Merced and Candelaria, the Mesas of 
Amana, of Guanipa, and of Jonoro, the direc- 
tion of which is South-West and North-East ; 
and which, in spite of their inconsiderable eleva- 
tion, divide the waters between the Oroonoko 
and the northern coast of Terra Firma. ‘The 
convexity of the savannah alone occasions this 
partition: we there find the divortia aquarum* 
as in Poland, where, far from the Carpathian 
. mountains, the plain itself divides the waters 
between the Baltic and the Black Sea. Geo- 
graphers, who suppose that there exists a chain 
of mountains wherever there is a line of division, 
have not failed to mark one in the maps, at the 
sources of the Rio Neveri, the Unare, the Gua- 
rapiche, and the Pao. Thus the priests of Mon- 


* «Cn. Manlium-prope jugis (Tauri) ad divortia aquarum 
easira posuisse.” Livy, lib. 38, c.'75 (Ed, Venet. vol. iv, 
p-191.). 


302 


- gul race, according to ancient and superstitious 
custom, erect oboes, or little mounds of stone 
on every point where the rivers flow in an op- 
posite direction. 

The uniform landscape of the Lianos; the 
extreme rarity of inhabitants; the fatigue of 
travelling beneath a burning sky, and an atmo- 
sphere darkened by dust ; the view of that hori- 
zon, which seems for ever to fly before us ; those 
lonely trunks of palm-trees, which have all the 
same aspect, and which we despair of reaching, 
because they are confounded with other trunks, 
that rise by degrees on the visual horizon; all 
these causes. combined make the steppes appear 
far greater than they are in reality. The planters 
who inhabit the southern declivity of the chain 
of the. coast. see the steppes extend toward the 
South, as far as the eye can reach, like an ocean of 
verdure.. They know, that from the Delta of 
the Oroonoko to the province of Varinas, and 
thence, by traversing the banks of the Meta, 
the Guaviare, and the Caguan, they can advance 
three hundred and eighty leagues * in the plains, 
first from East to West, and then from North- 
East to South-East beyond the Equator, to the 
foot of the Andes of Pasto. They know by the 
accounts of travellers the Pampas of Buenos 


* This is the distance from. Fombuctoo to the northern 
coast of Africa. 


303 


Ayres, which are also Llanes covered. with fine 
grass, destitute of trees, and filled with oxen 
and horses become wild. They suppose, ac- 
cording to the greater part of our maps of Ame- 
rica, that this continent has only one chain of 
mountains, that of the Andes, which stretches 
from South to North; and they form a vague 
idea of the contiguity of all the plains from the 
Oroonoko and the Apure to the Rio de la Plata 
and the Straits of Magellan. 

I shall not stop here to give a mineralogical 
description of the transverse chains, which divide 
America from East to West, and which I made 
known in the year 1800 in my Sketch of a Geo- 
logical View*. It will be sufficient to notice 
in the most. clear and concise manner the gene- 
ral structure of a continent, the extremities of 
which, though placed in climates little analo- 
gous, yet afford several features of resemblance. 
In order to have an exact idea of the. plains, 
their configuration, and their limits, we must 
know the chains of mountains, that form. their 


* Esquisse @un Tableau Géologique, Journal de Physique, 
vol, lili, p. 30. This paper had been written and sent to 
Kurope immediately after my return from the Oroonoko, 
when I had scarcely had time to calculate the astronomical 
observations, by which I determined the configuration of the 
chain of La Parime. I have since rectified those first notions 
of the extent ofthe plains, by the help of ideas which I acquired 
during my stay. in Peru, and: by my-connections with Brazil. 


304 


boundary. We have already described the Cor- 
dillera of the coast, of which-the highest summit 

is the Silla de Caraccas, and which is linked by 

the Paramo de las Rosas to the Nevado de Me- 
rida, and the Andes of New Grenada. We have 

seen, that, in the tenth degree of North latitude, 

it stretches from Quibor and Barquesimeto as 

far as the point of Paria. A second chain of 

mountains, or rather a less elevated but much 
larger group, extends between the parallels of 
3° and 7° from the mouths of the Guaviare and 
the Meta to the sources of the Oroonoko, the 
Marony, and the Esquibo, toward French and } 
Dutch Guyana. I gall this chain the Cor- | 
dillera of Parime, or of the great cataracts 
of the Oroonoko. It may be followed for a 
length of two hundred and fifty leagues; but it 
is less a chain, than a collection of granitic moun- | 
tains, separated by small plains, without being | 
every where disposed in lines. The group of | 
the mountains of Parime narrows consider- | 
ably between the sources of the Oroonoko and 
the mountains of Demerary, in the Sierras of | 
Quimiropaca and Pacaraimo, which divide the 
waters between the Carony and the Rio Parime, 
or Rio de Aguas Blancas. This is the theatre 
of the expeditions undertaken in search of El 
Dorado, and the great city of Manoa, the Tom- 
buctoo of the New Continent. The Cordillera 
of Parime is not connected to the Andes of 


305 


New Grenada,, but is separated from these by a 
space eighty leagues broad. If we Suppose it 
to have been destroyed in this space by some 
great revolution of the globe, which is scarcely 
probable, we must admit, that it anciently 
branched off from the Andes between Santa Fe 
de Bogota and Pamplona. This remark serves 
to fix more easily in the memory of the reader 
the geographical position of a Cordillera, till 
now very imperfectly known. A third chain of 
mountains unites in 16° and 18° of South lati- 
tude (by Santa Cruz de la Sierra, the Serra- 
nias of Aguapehy, and the famous Campos dos 
Parecis) the Andes of Peru to the mountains 
of Brazil. It is the Cordillera of Chiquitos that 


widens in the Capitania de-Minas Geraes, and 
divides the rivers flowing into the Amazon from 
those of the Rio de la Plata*, not only in the 
interior of the country, in the meridian of Villa 
Boa, but also at a few leagues from the coast, 
between Rio Janeiro and Bahia +. 


* There is only a carrying place of 5,322 dracas between 
the Guapore (a branch of the Marmore and of the Madeira) 
and the Rio Aguapehy (a branch of the Jaura and of the 
Paraguay). See the instructive Journal published at Rio 
Janeiro under the name of Patriota, 1813, N° 5, p. 33. 

+ The Cordillera of Chiquitos and of Brazil stretches to-* 
ward the South-East, in the government of the Rio Grande, 
beyond the latitude of 30° South. 


VOL. IV, x 


306 


These three transverse chains, or rather these 
three groups of mountains stretching from West 
to East, within the limits of the torrid zone, are 
separated by tracts entirely level, the plains of 
Caraccas, or of the Lower Oroonoko ; the plains 
of the Amazon and the Rio Negro; and the 
plains of Buenos Ayres, or of La Plata. I de 
not use the name of valley, because the Lower 
Oroonoko and the Amazon, far from flowing in 
a valley, form but a little furrow in the midst 
of a vast plain. The two basins, placed at the 
extremities of South America, are savannahs or 
steppes, pasturage without trees; the interme- 
diate basin, which receives the equatorial rains 
during the whole year, is almost entirely one 
vast. forest, in which no other road is known 
than the rivers, That strength of vegetation, 
which conceals the soil, renders also the uni- 
formity of it’s level less perceptible; and the 
plains of Caraecas and La Plata alone bear this 
name. The three basins we have just decribed 
are called, in the language of the colonists, the 
Llanos of Varinas and of Caraccas, the bosques 
or selvas (forests) of the Amazon, and the Pam- 
pas of Buenos Ayres. The trees not only for 
the most part cover the plains of the Amazon, 
from the Cordillera of Chiquitos, as far as that 
of Parime; they crown also these two chains 


‘of mountains, which rarely attain the height. 


307 | 


of the Pyrennees*.. On this account, the vast 
plains of the Amazon, the Madeira, and the 
Rio Negro, are not so distinctly bounded as 
the Llanos of Caraecas, and the Pampas of 
Buenos Ayres. As the region of forests com- 
prises at once the plains and the mountains, it 
extends from 18° South-~ to 7° and 8° North, 
and occupies an extent of near a hundred and 
twenty thousand square leagues. This forest of 
South America, for in fact there is only one, is 
six times larger than France. It is known to 
Europeans only on the shores of some rivers, by 
which it is traversed; and has it’s openings, the 
extent of which is in proportion to that of the 
forest. We shall soon skirt the marshy savan- 
nahs, between the Upper Oroonoko, the Cono- 
richite, and the Cassiquiare, im the latitude of 
3° and 4°. There are other openings, or sava- 


* We must except the westernmost part of the Cordillera 
of Chiquitos, between Cochabamba and Sauta Cruz de la 
Sierra, where the summits are covered with snow ; but this 
colossal group almost still belongs to the Andes de la Paz, 
of which it forms a promontory or ‘spur, directed toward 
the East. 

+ To the West, in consequence of the Llanos of Manso, 
and the Pampas de Huanacos, the forests do not extend 
generally beyond the parallels of 18° or 19° South latitude ; 
but to the East, in Brazil (in the capitanias of St, Paul and 
Rio Grande), as well as in Paraguay, on the borders of the 
Parana, they advance as far as 25° South. 


x2 


308 


nas limpias* in the same parallel, between the 
sources of the Mao and the Rio de Aguas 
Blancas, to the South of the Sierra de Paca- 
raima. These last savannahs are inhabited by 
Caribbees, and nomade Macusis; they lie near 
the frontiers of Dutch and French Guyana. 

_ Having just described the geological consti- 
tution of South America; we.shall now mark 
it’s principal features. The coasts of the West 
are bordered by an enormous wall of moun- 
tains, rich in precious metals, wherever » the 
volcanic fire has not pierced through the eternal 
snows. This is the Cordillera of the Andes. 
Summits of trap porphyry rise beyond three 
thousand three hundred toises, and the mean 
height of the chain-+ is one thousand eight hun- 
dred and fifty toises. It stretches in the di- 
rection of a meridian, and sends into each he- 
misphere a lateral branch, in the latitudes of 
10° North, and 16° and 18° South. The first of 
these branches, that of the coast of Caraccas, 
is not so wide, and forms a real chain. The 


* Open savannahs, without trees, limpias de arboles. 

+-In New Grenada, Quito, and Peru, according to mea- 
surements taken by Bouguer, La Condamine, and myself. 
See, on the traces of resemblance displayed in the Pyrennees, 
the Alps, the Andes, and Himalaya, in their highest sum- 
mits, and the mean elevation of the chain (two particulars so 
often confounded), my researches on the mountains of India. 


(Aan. de Chimie et de Physique, 1816, t, iii, p. 310.) 


309 


second, the Cordillera of Chiquitos and of the 
sources of the Guapore, is very rich in gold, 
and widens toward the East, in Brazil, into 
vast table-lands, of a mild and temperate cli- 
mate. Between these two transverse chains 
contiguous to the Andes, an isolated group of 
granitic mountains is found, from 3° to 7° of 
North latitude; which runs equally in a direc- 
tion parallel to the Equator, but, not passing 
the meridian of 71°*, ‘terminates abruptly to- 
ward the West, and is not united to the 
Andes of New Grenada. These three trans- 
verse chains have no active volcanoes; we are 
ignorant whether the southernmost, like the two 
others, be destitute of trachytes or trap por- 
phyry. None of their summits enter the limit 
of perpetual snows ; and the mean height of the 
Cordillera of La Parime, and of the littoral 
chain of Caraccas, does not reach six hundred 
toises, though some summits rise fourteen hun- 
dred toises above the level of the sea-+-. The 
three transverse chains are separated by plains 
entirely closed toward the West, and open to- 


* The longitude of Porto-Cabello is 70° 37’ 3/’ West of 
Paris. 

+ We do not reckon here, as belonging to the chain of 
the coast, the Nevados and Paramos of Merida ‘and of 
Truxillo, which are a prolongation of the Andes of New 
Grenada. The chain of Caraccas begins only to the Hast 
of 71° of longitude. 


310 


ward the East and South-East. When we re- 
flect on their small elevations above the surface 
of the ocean, we are tempted to consider them 
as gulfs stretching in the direction of the cur- 
rent of rotation. If, from the effect of some 
peculiar attraction, the waters of the Atlantic 
were to rise fifty toises at the mouth of the 
Oroonoko, and two hundred toises at the mouth 
of the Amazon, the great tide would cover more 
than half of South America, The eastern de- 
clivity, or the foot of the Andes, now six hun- 
dred leagues distant from the coast of Brazil, 
would become a shore beaten by the waves. 


* This consideration is the result of a barometric 
measurement, taken in the province of Jaen de 


Bracamoros, where the Amazon issues out from 
the Cordilleras. I found the mean height of this 
immense river* only a hundred. and ninety- 
four toises above the present level of the At- 
lantic. The intermediate plains however, co- 
vered with forests, are still five times higher 
than the Pampas of Buenos Ayres, and the 


‘Llanos of Caraccas and the Meta, covered with 


gramina. 

Those Llanos, which form. the basin of the 
Oroonoko, and which we crossed twice in one 
year, in the months of March and July, com- 


* In the latitude of 5° 31/ 28 South, and longitude 
80° 56’ 377 West. 


--—__—__-_— 


SANE Aa = 


SST 


oli 


municate with the basin of the Amazon and the 
Rio Negro, bounded on one side bythe Cor- 
‘dillera of Chiquitos, and on the other by the 
mountains of Parime. The opening, which re- 
mains between these last and the Andes of New 
Grenada, occasions this communication. The 
aspect of the land here reminds us, but on a 
much larger scale, of the plains of Lombardy, 
which also are raised only fifty or sixty toises 
above the level of the ocean *; and are directed 
first, from La Brenta to Turin, East and West ; 
and then, from Turin to Coni, North and South. 
If we were authorized from other geological 
facts, to regard the three great plains of the « 


Lower Oronooko, the Amazon, and the Rio de’ - 


la Plata, as the basins of ancient lakes-, we 
should imagine we perceived in the plains of 


* Mr. Oriani found the surface of the botanical garden of 
the college of Brera, at Milan, only 65-7 toises, and that of 
the great square of Pavia only 43°5 above the coasts. But 
the level of lake Maggiore, on the northern side of the plain, 
is 106 toises high; and Turin (at the hall of the Academy), 
at the western extremity of the plain, is, according to Mr. 
Ducros, 125 toises above the level of the Adriatic. 

+ In Siberia the great steppes between the Irtisch and 
the Oby, especially that of Baraba, full of salt lakes 
(Ychabakly, Tchany, Karasouk, and Topolnoy), appear to 
have been, according to the Chinese traditions, even within 
historical times, an inland sea. See the learned researches 
of Mr. Julius von Klaproth,; Mag. Encyclopédique, Septembre 
1817, p. 134, : 


312 


the Rio Vichada aud the Meta a channel, by 
which the waters of the superior lake, those of 
the plains of the Amazon, forced their way 
toward the inferior basin, that of the Llanos o 
Caraccas, separating the Cordillera of La Pa- 
rime from that of the Andes. This channel is 
a kind of land-strait*. The ground, perfectly 
level, between the Guaviare, the’ Meta, and the 
Apure, displays no vestige of a violent irrup- 
tion of the waters ; but on the edge of the Cor- 
dillera of Parime, between the latitudes of 4° 
and 7°, the Oroonoke, which flows in a western 
direction from it’s source to the mouth of the 
Guaviare, has forced it’s way through the rocks, 
directing it’s course from South to North. All 
the great cataracts, as we shall soon see, are 
placed in this interval. When the river has 
reached the mouth of the Apure in that very 
low ground, where the slope toward the North 
is met by the counterslope toward the South- 
~ East, that is to say, by the ¢alus of the plains, 
which rise imperceptibly toward the mountains 
of Caraccas, the river turns anew, and flows 
toward the East. It appeared to me, that. it 
was proper already to fix the attention of the 
reader on these singular inflexions of the Oroo- 
noko, because, belonging at once to two basins, 


* Andreossy, Voyage a VEmbouchure de la Mer-Noire, 1818, 
p- 27, 34, and 311. 


313 
it’s Course marks in some sort, even on the most 
imperfect maps, the direction of that part of the 
plains, which are interposed between New Gre- 


nada, and the western border of the mountains 
of Parime. 


The Llanos or steppes of the Lower Oroonoko 
and of the Meta, like the deserts of Africa, bear 
different names in different parts. From the 
mouths of the Dragon, the Llanos of Cumana, 
of Barcelona, and of Caraccas or Venezuela *, 
follow from East to West. Where the steppes 
turn toward the South and the South-South- 
West, from the latitude of 8°, between the me- 
ridians of 70° and 73°, we find, from North to 
South, the Llanos of Varinas, Casanare, the 
Meta, Guaviare, Caguan, and Caqueta+. The 


* The following are subdivisions of these three great Llanos, 
as I marked them down on the spot. The Llanos of Cumana 
and New Andalusia include those of Maturin and Terecen, 
of Amana, Guanipa, Jonoro, and Cari. The Llanos of Nueva 
Barcelona comprise those of Aragua, Pariaguan, and Villa 
del Pao. We distinguish in the Llanos of Caraccas those of 
Chaguaramas, Uritucu, Calabozo or Guarico, La Portuguesa, 
San Carlos, and Araure. 

+ The inhabitants of these plains distinguish as subdivisions, 
from the Rio Portuguesa to Caqueta, the Llanos of Guanare, 
Bocono, Nutrius or the Apure, Palmerito near Quintero, 
Guardalito and ‘Arauca, the Meta, Apiay near the port of 
Pachaquiaro, Vichada, Guaviare, Arriari, Inirida, the Rio 
Hacha, and Caguan. The limits between the savannahs and 
the forests, in the plains that extend from the sources of the 
Rio Negro to Putumayo, are not sufficiently known. 


314 


plains of Varinas afford some feeble monuments 
of the industry of a nation, that has disappeared. 
Between Mijagual and. the Cano de la Hacha, 
we find some real ¢wmuli, called in the country 
the Serillos de los Indios. They are hillocks in 
the shape of cones, formed of earth by the hands 
of men, and probably contain bones, like the 
tumuli in the steppes of Asia. A fine road is 
also discovered near Hato de la Calzada, be- 
tween Varinas and Canagua, five leagues long, 
made before the conquest, in the most remote 
times, by the natives. It is a causeway of earth 
fifteen feet high, crossing a plain often over- 
flowed*. Did nations farther advanced in 
civilization descend from the mountains of 
Truxillo and Merida toward the plains of the 
Rio Apure? The Indians, whom we now find 
between this river and the Meta, are in too 
rude a state, to think of making roads or raising 
tumuli. 

I calculated the area of these Llanos from 
the Caqueta to the Apure, and from the Apure 
to the Delta of the Oroonoko, and found it 
seventeen thousand square leagues of twenty to 
a degree. The part running from North to 
South is almost double that which stretches 
from East to West, between the Lower Oroo- 
noko and the littoral chain of Caraccas. ‘The 


* Viage de Farinas a Santa-Fe, by My. Palacios, (MS. 
g My: 


315 


Pampas on the North and North-West of Bue- 
nos Ayres, between this city and Cordova, 
Jujuy, and the Tucuman, are of nearly the same 
extent as the Llanos; but the Pampas stretch 
still farther on for the length of 18° toward the 
South ; and the land they occupy is so vast, that 
they produce palm-trees at one of their extremi- 
ties, while the other, equally low and level, is 
covered with eternal frost. 

The Llanos of America, where they extend in 
the direction of a parallel to the equator, are 
four times narrower than the great desert. of 
Africa. This circumstance is very important in 
a region, where the winds constantly blow from 
East to West. The farther the plains stretch in 
this direction, the more ardent is their climate. 
The great ocean of sand in Africa communicates 
by Yemen * with Gedrosia and Beelochistan, as 


* We cannot be surprised, that the Arabic should be 
richer than any other language of the East in words expres- 
sing the ideas of desert, uninhabited plains, and plains 
covered with gramina. I could give a list of thirty-five of 
these: words, which the Arabian authors employ, without 
always distiuguishing them by the gradations, that each 
Separate word expresses. Makadd and kadh indicate in pre- 
ference, plains; bakaah, a table-land; afr, mikfar, smilis, 
mahk, and habaucer, a naked desert, covered with sand and 
gravel; tanufah, a steppe. Zahra means at once a naked 
desert and a savannah, The word steppe, or step, is Russian, 
and not Tatarian. In the Turco-tatar dialect, a heath is 
called tala or tschol. The word gobi, of which Europeans 


316 


far as the right bank of the Indus; and it js 
from the effect of winds, that have passed over 
the deserts situate to the East, that the little 
basin of the Red Sea, surrounded by plains, 
which send forth from all sides radiant caloric, 
is one of the hottest regions of the Globe. The 
unfortunate Captain Tuckey * relates, that the 
centigrade thermometer keeps there generally in 
the night at 34°, and by day from 40° to 44°. 
We shall soon see, that even in the westernmost 
part of the steppes of Caraccas, we seldom found 
the temperature of the air, in the shade, and 
remote from the Sun, above 37°. 

These physical considerations on the steppes 
of the New World are linked with others, more 
highly interesting because they are connected 
with the history of our species. The great sea 
of sand in Africa, the deserts without water, are 
frequented only by caravans, that take fifty days 
to traverse them -. Separating the nations of 
Negro race from those of the Moorish and Beri- 
ber { the Sahara is inhabited only in the Oases. 


have made by corruption coi, signifies in the Mungal tongue 
a naked desert. It is equivalent to the scha-mo or hhan-hai of 
the Chinese. A steppe, or plain covered with herbs, is in 
Mungal, ‘udah ; in Chinese, houang. 

* Exped. to explore the River Zaira, 1818, Introd. p. li. 

+ This is the maximum of the time, according to Major 
Rennell (Travels of Mungo Park, vol. ii, p. 385). 

+ The Shilha, and the Kabyles. 


Pa = 
= a — - - = en 
a SE a a a OE 


317 


it affords pasturage only in the eastern part, 
where, from the effect of the trade-winds, the 
layer of sand is less thick, so that the springs can 
appear at the surface of the earth. In America, 
the steppes, less vast, less scorching, fertilized 
by fine rivers, present fewer obstacles to the in- — 
tercourse of nations. The Llanos separate the 
chain of the coast of Caraccas and of the Andes 
of New Grenada from the region of forests ; 
from that Hylea * of the Oroonoko, which, from 
the first discovery of America, has been inhabited 
by nations more rude, and farther removed 
from civilization, than the inhabitants of the 
coast, and still more than. the mountaineers of 
the Cordilleras. The steppes however were no 
more heretofore the rampart of civilization, than 
they are now the rampart of the liberty of the 
hordes that live in the forests.. They have not 
hindered the nations of the Lower Oroonoko from 
going up the little rivers, and making inéursions 
on the North and the West. If, according to 
the various distribution of animals on the Globe, 
the pastoral life could have. existed in the New 
World ; if, before the arrival of the Spaniards, 
the Llanos and the Pampas had been filled with 
those numerous herds of cows and. horses, that 
graze there; Columbus would have found the 
human race in a state quite different. Pastoral 


* Yawn, Herod. Melp. (Ed. Schweigh., vol, ii, p, 267.) 


318 


nations, living on milk and cheese, real nomades, 
would have spread themselves over those vast 
plains, which communicate with each other. 
They would have been seen at the period of 
great droughts, and even at that of inundations, 
fighting for the possession of. pastures; subju- 
gating one another mutually; and, united by 
the common tie of manners, language, and 
worship, rise to that state of demicivilization, 
which we observe with surprise in the nations of 
the Mungal and Tatar race. America would 
then, like the centre of Asia, have had it’s con- 
querors ; who, ascending from the plains to the 
table-lands of the Cordilleras, and abandoning a 
wandering life, would have subdued the civilized 
nations of Peru and New Grenada; overturned 
the throne of the Incas, and of the Zaque*, and 
substituted forthe despotism, which is the fruit of 
theocracy, that despotism which arises from the 
patriarchal government of a pastoral people. 
In the New World the human race has not ex- 


perienced these great moral and political changes; 


because the steppes, though more. fertile than 
those of Asia, have remained without herds ; be- 
cause none of the animals, that furnish milk in 
abundance, are natives of the plains of South 


* The Zaque.was the: secular chief of Cundinamarca. His 
power was shared with the high priest (Lama) of Iraca. See 
my Recherches sur les Monuments des Americains (ed. in folio, 
p. 246; and Eng, transl. vol ii, or xiy of the present work, 
p. 106-9). 


319 


America; and because, in the progressive un- 
folding of American civilization, the interme- 
diate link is wanting, that connects the hunting 
with the agricultural nations. 

I have thought proper to bring together these 
general notions on the ,plains of the new conti- 
nent, and the contrast they exhibit with the 
deserts of Africa and the fertile steppes of Asia, 
in order to give some interest to the narrative 
of a journey across lands of so monotonous an 
aspect. Having now accomplished this task, I 
shall trace the road we followed from the vol- 
canie mountains of Parapara, and the northern 
side of the Llanos, to the banks of the Apure in 
the province of Varinas. 

After having passed two nights on horseback ; 
. and sought in vain by day for some shelter from 
the ardor of the Sun, beneath the tufts of the 
murichi palm-trees ; we arrived before night at 
the little farm of the Alligator (El Cayman), 
called also La Guadalupe. It was a hato de 
ganado, that is to say, a solitary house in the 
steppes, surrounded by a few small huts, covered 
with reeds and skins. The cattle, oxen, horses, 
and mules, are not penned, but wander freely 
over an extent of several square leagues. There 
is nowhere any enclosure; men naked to the 
waist, and armed with a lance, ride over the 
savannahs, to inspect the animals, bring back 
those that wander too far frem the pastures: of 


320 
the farm, and mark with a hot iron all that do 
not already bear the mark of the proprietor. 
These Mulattoes, who are known by the name 
of Peones Llaneros, are partly freed men and 
partly slaves. There does not exist a race more 
constantly exposed to the devouring heat of the 
tropical Sun. Their food is meat dried in the 
air, and a little salted; and of this even their 
horses sometimes eat. Always in the saddle, 
they fancy they cannot make the slightest ex- 
cursion on foot. We found an old Negro slave, 
who governed the farm in the absence of his 
master. He told us of herds composed of 
several thousand cows, that were grazing in the 
steppes, yet we asked in vain for a bow! of milk. 
We were offered, in the shell of the tutumo, a 
yellow, muddy, and fetid water, drawn from a 
neighbouring pool. The indolence of the. in- 
habitants of the Llanos is such, that they do not 
dig wells, though they know that almost every 
where at ten feet deep fine springs are found in 
a stratum of conglomerate, or red sand-stone. 
After having suffered one half of the year from 
the effect of inundations, they patiently expose 
themselves, during the other half, to the most 
painful want of water. The old Negro advised 
us, to cover the cup with a linen cloth, and 
drink as through a filter, that we might not be 
incommoded by the smell, and swallow less of 
the fine yellowish clay suspended in the wate’ 


Wejdid not then think, that we should afterward 
be forced during whole months to have recourse 
to this expedient. The waters of the Oroonoko 
are alike loaded with earthy particles ; they are 
even fetid, where dead bodies of alligators are 
found in the creeks lying on banks of sand, or 
half-buried in the mud. 

No. sooner were our instruments unleaded, 
and safely placed, than our mules were set at 
liberty, to go, as they say here, “and search for 
water in the savannah *.” There are little pools 
round the farm, which the animals find, guided 
by their instinct, by the view of some scattered 
tufts of mauritia, and by the sensation of humid 
coolness, caused by little currents of air amid 
an atmosphere, which to us appears calm. and 
tranquil. When the pools of water are far 
distant, and the people of the farm are too lazy 
to lead the cattle to these natural watering- 
places, they confine them during five or six 
hours in a very hot stable, before they let them 
loose. Excess of thirst then augments their 
sagacity, sharpening as it were their senses and 
their instinct. No sooner is the stable opened, 
than you see the horses and mules, especially the 
latter, the penetration of which exceeds the, in- 
telligence of the horses, rush into the savannahs. 
Their tail raised, their head thrown back, they 


_  * Para buscar agua. 
VOL. IV. ¥ 


322 


run against the wind, stepping from time to 
time as if they were exploring space ; they follow 
less the impressions of sight than of smell ; and 
at length announce by prolonged neighings, 
that there is water in the direction of their 
course. All these movements are executed 
more promptly, and with readier success, by 
horses born in the Llanos, and which have long 
enjoyed their liberty in wandering troops, than 
by those that come from the coast, and descend 
from domestic horses. In animals for the most 
part, as in man, the quickness of the senses is 
diminished by long subjection, and by the habits 
that arise from stability of abode, and the pro- 
gress of cultivation. 

We’ followed our mules in search of one of 
those pools, whence the muddy water was 
drawn, that had so ill quenched our thirst. 
We were covered with dust, and tanned by the 
sandy wind, which burns the skin still more 
than the rays of the Sun. We longed impa- 
tiently to take a bath, but we found only a great 
reservoir of feculent water, surrounded with 
palm-trees. The water was turbid, though, to 
our great astonishment, a little cooler than the 
air. Accustomed during our long journey to 
bathe whenever we had an opportunity, often 
several times in the same day, we hastened to 
phinge into the pool. We had scarcely begun 
to enjoy the coolness of the bath, when a noise, 


g 


292 
O49 


which we heard on the opposite bank, made ts 
leave the water precipitately. It was an alli- 
gator plunging into the mud. It would have 
been imprudeni, to pass the night in this marshy 
spot. 
We were only at the distance of a quarter of 
a league from the farm, yet we continued walk- 
ing more than an hour without reaching it. 
We perceived too late, that we had taken a 
false direction. Having left it at the decline of 
day, before the stars were visible, we had gone 
forward in the plain as by chance. We were, 
as usual, provided with a compass; and it was 
even easy for us to steer our course from the 
position of Canopus and the Southern Cross; 
but all these means became useless, because we 
were uncertain whether, on leaving the farms 
we had gone toward the East or the South. 
We attempted to return to the spot where we 
had bathed, and we again walked three quarters 
of an hour, without finding the pool. Wesome- 
times thought we saw fire at the horizon; but 
it was the stars that were rising, and of which 
the image was enlarged by the vapours. After 
having wandered a long time in the savannah, 
we resolved to seat ourselves beneath the trunk 
of a palm-tree, in a spot perfectly dry, sur- 
rounded by short grass; for the fear of water- 
serpents is always greater than that of jaguars 
in Europeans recently disembarked. Wecould 
¥ 2 


324 


not flatter ourselves, that Our guides, of whom 
we knew the insuperable indolence, would come 
in search of us in the savannah before they had 
prepared their food, and finished their repast. - 
In proportion to the uncertainty of our situation, 
we were agreeably affected by hearing from afar 
the sound of a horse advancing toward us. 
The rider- was an Indian armed with a lance, 
who had just made the rodeo, or round, in order 
to collect the cattle within a determinate space 
of ground. The sight of two white men, who 
said they had lost their way, led him at first to 
suspect some trick. We found it difficult to 
inspire him with confidence; he at last con- 
sented to guide us to the farm of the Cayman, 


but without slackening the gentle trot of his 
horse.. Our guides assured us, that “ they had. 


9 


already begun to. be uneasy about us :” and, to 
justify this inquietude, they gave a long enume- 
ration of personsy who, having lost themselves 
_in the Llanos, had been found nearly exhausted. 
It may be supposed, that the danger is imminent 
only to those, who lose themselves far from any 
habitation ; or who, having been stripped by 
robbers, which has happened of late-years, have 
been fastened by the body and hands to the 
trunk of a palm-tree. 

In’ order to suffer less from the heat of the 
day, we set off at two in the morning, with the 
hope of reaching Calabozo before noon, a little 


325° 


but very commercial town, situate in the midst 
of the Llanos. The aspect of the country was 
still the same. There was no moonlight; but 
the great masses of nebulee, that decorate the 
southern sky, enlighten, as they set, a part of 
the terrestrial horizon. The solemn spectacle of 
the starry vault, which displays itself in it’s 
immense,extent; the cool breeze which blows 
over the plain during the night; the waving 
motion of the grass, wherever it has attained any 
height ; every thing recalled to our minds the 
surface of the ocean. The illusion above all 
augments, and we are never weary of telling it, 
when the disk of the Sun shows itself at the 
horizon, repeats it’s image by the effects of 
refraction, and, soon losing it’s flattened form, 
ascends rapidly and straight toward the zenith. 

Sunrise too in the plains is the coolest moment 
of the day ; but this change of temperature does 
not make a very lively impression on the organs. 
We did not find the thermometer in general 
sink below 27:5°*; while near Acapulco, at 
Mexico +, in places equally low, the temperature 
at noon is often 32°, and at sunrise only 17° or 
18°. The level surface of the ground in the 
Llanos, which, during the day, is never in the 


* 99° Reaumur. 


+ On this extraordinary phenomenon, consult my Essat Pol., 
wol, ii, p. 760. 


326 


shade, absorbs so much heat, that, notwithstand- 
ing the nocturnal radiation toward a sky without 
clouds, the earth and air have not time to cool 
very sensibly from midnight to sunrise. At 
Calabozo *, the heat of the day, in the month of 
March, was from 31° to 32°5°; of the night, 
from 28° to 29°. The mean of this month, 
which is not the hottest in the year, appeared to 
be nearly 30°6°; which denotes an enormous 
heat for a country situate within the tropics, 
where the days are almost constantly of the 
same duration as the nights. ‘The mean tem- 


* At Calabozo, in the shade, and very far from the ground, 
or walls, on the 15th of March 1800, at 1" Reaumur’s therm. 
was 24:2°; the whale-bone hyg., 86°: at seven in the evening, 
th. 25°; hyg. 35°2°: at 12" th. 23:2° ; h. 35°4°. The 16th of 
March, at 17°, th. 22°7°;, h. 36°: at 23", th. 24-2°; h. 37°: 
at.0", th. 23°3°s h. 35°: at 2°, th. 26°; h: $4-3°) at 42", 
th. 25°5°; h. 33°5°: at, th. 24°6°; h. 335°. The1i7th of 
March, at 16", th. 26°3°; h. 34°: at 12", th. 29-4°; h.35:3°. 
The 18th of March, at 23", th. 23°2°; h, 36°: till 11>, at 
night, not a variation of O'S’ in the two instruments. I think 
that the climate of Calabozo is still hotter than that of Cu- 
mana. Having engaged Mr. Rubio, to make observations in 
this port ‘during my absence, I am enabled to compare the 
same days. At Cumana Reaumur’s therm. kept from the 
15th to the 18th of March, from 7 in the morning to 11 in 
the evening, between 20° and 24°, "At Calabozo,'130 leagues 
distant from the eastern coasts, at the same hours, it was 
from 23° to 26°. At Cumana, the temperature of the month 
of March, 1800, was 22°2°; at Calabozo, nearly 24°5° 
Reaum. 


327 


perature of the hottest month at Cairo is only 
29°9°; it is at Madras 31°8°; and at Abushar, 

in the Persian Gulf, where regular observations 
have been made, it is 84°; but the mean tem- 
perature of the whole year is lower at Madras, 
and at Abushar, than at Calabozo. Although 
a part of the Llanos is traversed, like the 
fertile steppes of Siberia, by little rivers, and 
banks extremely arid are surrounded by land 
that is inundated in the season of rains, the air 
is in general very dry. The hygrometer of 
Deluc* kept during the day at 34°, and by 
night at 36°. 

In proportion as the Sun rose toward the 
zenith, and the earth and the strata of superin- 
eumbent air took different temperatures, the 
phenomenon of mirage displayed itself with it’s, 
numerous modifications. ‘This phenomenon is 
so common under every zone, that I mention it 
only because we stopped to measure with some 
precision the breadth of the aérial interstice 
between the horizon and the suspended object. 
There was constantly suspension, without inver- 
sion. The little currents of air, that swept the 
surface of the soil, had so variable a temperature | 
that ina drove of wild oxen, one part appeared with 
the legs raised above the surface of the ground, 
while the other rested on it. The aérial inter- 


* See ahove, ch. xv, p. 88 of this vol. 


328 


stice was, according to the distance of the 
animal, from three to four minutes. Where 
tufts of ‘mauritia palm-trees were found united 
in long stripes, the extremities of these green 
stripes were suspended like the capes, which 
were for so long a time the object of my obser- 
vations at Cumana*. A well-informed person 
assured us, that he had seen, between Calabozo 
and Uritucu, the image of an animal inverted, 
without there being any direct image. Niebuhr 
made a similar observation in Arabia. We 
several times thought we saw at the horizon the 
figures of ¢wmuli and towers, that disappeared 
by intervals, without our being able to discern 
‘the real shape of the objects. They were 
perhaps hillocks, or small eminences, placed 
beyond the ordinary visual horizon. I shall not 
mention those tracts destitute of vegetation, 
which appear like large lakes with an undulat- 
ing surface. This phenomenon, the most an- 
ciently observed, has occasioned the mirage to 
receive in Sanscrit the expressive name of desire 
(thirst) of the antelope. We admire the frequent 
allusions in the Indian, Persian, and Arabic 
poets, to the magical effects of terrestrial refrac- 
tion. It was scarcely known to the Greeks and 
Romans. Proud of the riches of their soil, and 
the mild temperature of the air, they would have 


* See vol iii, p. 542—554. 


329 


felt no envy of this poetry of the desert. It was 
born in Asia. The oriental poets found it’s source 
in the nature of the country they inhabited ; 
they were inspired by the aspect of those vast 
solitudes, interposed like arms of the sea. or 
gulfs between lands adorned by nature with her 
most luxuriant fertility. 

The plain assumes at sunrise a more animated 
aspect. The cattle, which had reposed during 
the night along the pools, or beneath clumps of 
murichis and rhopalas, were now assembled in 
herds ; and these solitudes became peopled with 
horses, mules, and oxen, that live here, I will 
not say as wild, but as free animals, without 
settled habitations, and disdaining the care and 
the protection of man. In these hot climates, 
the oxen, though of Spanish breed, like those of 
the cold table-lands of Quito, are of a much 
gentler disposition. A traveller, runs no risk of 
being attacked or pursued, as we were often in 
our excursions-on the back of the Cordilleras, 
where the climate is rude, the aspect of the 
country more wild, and food less abundant. — As 
we approached Calabozo, we saw herds of roe- 
bucks browzing peacefully in the midst of horses 
and oxen. They are called matacani; their - 
“ flesh is good ; they are a little larger than our 
roes, and resemble deer with a very sleek skin of 
a fawn-colour, and spotted with white. Their 
horns appeared to me with single spears. They 


330 


had little fear of the. presence of man; and in 
herds of thirty or forty we observed several, that 
were entirely white. This variety, common 
enough among the large ‘stags of the cold cli- 
mates of the Andes, surprised us in these low 
and burning plains. I have since learnt, that 
even the jaguar of the hot regions of Paraguay 
sometimes affords albino varieties, the skin of 
which is of so uniform a whiteness, that the spots 
or rings can be distinguished only in the sun- 
shine. The number of matacani, or little deer *, 
is so considerable in the Llanos, that a trade -, 
‘might be carried on with their skins. A skilful 
hunter would kill more than twenty a day; but 
the indolence of the inhabitants is such, that 
often they will not give themselves the trouble 
of taking the skin. The same thing happens in 
the chace of the jaguars, or great American 
tigers, the skin of which fetches only one piastre 
in the steppes of Varinas, while at Cadiz it costs 
four or five. 

The steppes that we traversed are principally 
covered with grasses of the genera killingia, 
cenchrus, and paspalum ¢. At this season, near 


* Venados de tierra caliente. 

+ This trade is caried on, but on a very insignificant scale, 
at Carora and at Barquesimeto. 

} Kyllingia monocephala, k. odorata, cenchrus pilosus, vilfa 
tenacissima, andropogon plumesus, panicum micranthum, poa 


Calabozo and St. Jerome del Pirital, these 
grasses scarcely attain the height of nine or ten 
inches. Near the banks of the Apure and the 
Portuguesa they rise to four feet in height, so 
that the jaguar can conceal himself among them, 
to spring upon the mules and horses that cross 
the plain. Mingled with these gramina some 
plants of the dicotyledonous class are found ; as 
turneras, malvaceze, and, what is very remark- 
able, little mimosas * with irritable leaves, called 
by the Spaniards dormideras. .'The same breed 
of cows, which fatten in Spain on sainfoin and 
clover, have found excellent nourishment in the 
herbaceous sensitive plants. The pastures where 
these sensitives particularly abound are sold 
dearer than others. To the East, in the Llanos 
of Cari and Barcelona, the cypura and the cra- 
niolaria +, the beautiful white flower of which is 
from six to eight inches long, rise solitarily amid 
the gramina. The pastures are richest not only 
around the rivers subject to inundations, but 
also wherever the trunks of palm-trees are nearer 
each other. The least fertile spots are those 
destitute of trees; and attempts to cultivate 
them would be nearly fruitless. We cannot at- 


reptans, paspalum leptostachyum, p. conjugatum, aristida recar- 
vata. See our Nov. Genera et Species, vol. i, p. 84—2438. 

* Turmera guyanensis, mimosa pigra, m. dormiens. 

+ Cypura graminea, craniolaria annua (the scorzonera of 
the natives). 


332 


- tribute this difference to the shelter afforded by 
the palm-trees, in preventing the solar rays from 
drying and burning up the soil. I have seen, it 
is true, trees of this family in the forests of the 
Oroonoko spreading a tufted foliage; but we* 
cannot: boast of the shade of the palm-tree of 
the Llanos, the palma de cobija*, which has 
but a few folded and palmate leaves, like those 
of the chamerops, and of which the lowermost 
are constantly withered. We were surprised to 
see, that almost all these trunks of the corypha 
were nearly of the same size. They were from 
twenty to twenty-four feet high, and from eight 
to ten inches diameter at the foot. Nature has 
produced few species of palm-trees in such pro- 
digious numbers. Amid thousands of trunks 
loaded with fruit of the shape of an olive, we 
found about one hundredth part without fruit. 
Are there some trees with flowers purely 
moneecious, mingled with others furnished with 
hermaphrodite flowers ? 


The Llaneros, or inhabitants of the plains, 
believe that all these trees, though so low, are 
many centuries old. Their: growth is almost 
imperceptible, being scarcely to be noticed in 
the lapse of twenty or thirty years. The wood 
of the palma de cobija is excellent for building. 


* Roofing (or covering) palm-tree: corypha tectorum. See 
above, p. 186, 


333 


Tt is so hard, that it is difficult to drive a nail 
into it. The leaves folded like a fan are em- 
ployed to cover the roofs of the huts scattered 
through the Llanos ; and these roofs last more — 
than twenty years. The leaves are fixed by 
bending the extremity of the footstalks, which. 
have been beaten beforehand between two 
stones, so that they may bend without breaking. 
Beside the solitary trunks of this palm-tree, 
we find dispersed here and there in the steppes 
a few clumps, real groves (palmares), in which 
the corypha is intermingled with a tree of the 
proteaceous family, called chaparro by the na- 
tives, which is a new species of rhopala*, with 
hard and resonant leaves. The little groves of 
rhopala are called chaparrales ; and it may be 
supposed, that, in a vast plain, where only two 
or three species of trees are to be found, the 
chaparro, which affords shade, is considered as 
a highly valuable plant. The corypha spreads - 
through the Llanos of Caraccas from Mesa de 
Peja as far as Guayaval; farther North and 
North-West, near Guanare and San Carlos, it’s 
place is taken by another species of the same: 
genus, with leaves alike palmate but larger. . It 


* Near the embothrium, of which we found no species in 
the New Continent. The embothriums are represented in 
American vegetation by the genera lomatia and oreocallis. 
See our Nov, Genera et Species, vol, ii, p. 154. 


334 


is called the palma real de los Lianos *. - Other 
palm-trees rise to the South of Guayaval, espe- 
cially the piritu with pinnate + leaves, and the 
murichi (moriche), celebrated by father Gumilla 
under the name of arbol de la vidat. It is the 
sago-tree of America, furnishing “ 
amictum,” flour, wire, and thread to weave. 
hammocks, baskets, nets, and clothing. _ It’s 
fruit, of the form of the cones of the pine, and 
covered with scales, perfectly resembles those of 
the calamus rotang. It has somewhat the taste 
of the apple. When arrived at it’s maturity, it 
is yellow within and red without. ‘The araguato 
monkeys eat it with avidity ; and the nation of 
Guaraounoes, whose whole existence, it may be 


victum et 


said, is closely linked with that of the murichi 
palm-tree, draw from it a fermented lquor, 
slightly acid, and extremely refreshing. ‘This 
palm-tree, with large shining leaves, folded like 
a fan, preserves a beautiful verdure at the 
period of the greatest drought. . It’s sight alone 
produces an agreeable sensation of coolness, and 


* This palm-tree of the plains must not be confounded with 
the palma real of Caraccas and of Curiepe with pinnate leaves. 
Nov. Gen., p. 305. 

+ Perhaps an aiphanes. 

~ Muriche, or quiteve, mauritia flexuosa. See above, 
chap. ix, vol. ii, p.211. (Gumilla Orinoco illustrado, 1745, 
. vol. i, p.162—172. Gili, Storia Amer., vol.i, p. 168. 

§ Pliny, lib. xn, c. vii. 


339 


the murichi, loaded with scaly fruit, contrasts 
singularly with the mournful aspect of the palma 
de cobija, the foliage of which is always gray, 
and covered with dust. The Llaneros believe, . 
that the former attracts the vapours in the air*; 
and that for this reason, water is constantly found 
at it’s foot, when dug for to a certain depth. 
The effect is confounded with the cause. The 
murichi grows best in moist places; and it may 
rather be said, that the water attracts the tree. 
The natives of the Oroonoko, by analogous rea- 
soning, admit, that the great serpents contribute 
to preserve humidity in a canton. “ You would 
look in vain for water-serpents,” said an old 
Indian of Javita to us gravely, “ where there 
are no marshes; because the water collects no 
more, when you imprudently kill the serpents 
that attract it.” 

We suffered greatly from the heat in crossing 
the Mesa de Calabozo. ‘The temperature of the 
air augmented sensibly every time that the wind 
began to blow. ‘The air was loaded with dust; 
and during these gusts the thermometer rose to 
40° or 41°. We, went slowly forward, for it 
would have been dangerous to leave the mules 
that carried our instruments. Our guides ad- 


* If the head of the murichi were better furnished with 
leaves than it generally is, we might perhaps admit, that the 
soil round the tree preserves it’s humidity from the influence 
of it’s shade, 


336 

vised us to fill our hats with the leaves of the 
rhopala, to diminish the action of the solar rays 
on the hair and the crown of the head. We 
found relief from this expedient, which seemed 
to us particularly excellent, when we could pro- 
cure the leaves of the pothos or some other 
aroidea. 

It is impossible to cross these burning plains, 
without inquiring whether they have always 
been in thé same state; or whether they have 
been stripped of their vegetation by some revo- 
lution of nature. The stratum of mould now 
found on them is in fact very thin. The natives 
believe, that the palmares and the chaparales 
(the little groves of palm-trees and rhopala) were 
more frequent and more extensive before the 
arrival of the Spaniards. Since the Llanos have. 
been inhabited and peopled with cattle become 
wild, the ‘savannah is often set on fire, in order 
to meliorate the pasturage. Groups of scattered. 
trees are accidentally destroyed with the gra- 
mina. The plains were no doubt less bare in the 
fifteenth century, than they now are; yet the 
first Conquistadores, who came from Coro, de- 
scribed them then as savannahs, where nothing 
could be perceived but the sky and the turf, 
which were generally destitute of trees, and dif- 
ficult to traverse on account of the reverbera- 
tion from the soil. Why does not. the great 
forest. of the Oroonoko extend to the North, on 


337 


the left bark of that river? Why does it not 
fill that vast space, that reaches as far as the 
Cordillera of the coast, and which is fertilized 
by numerous rivers? This question is connected 
with all that relates to the history of our planet. 
If, indulging in geological reveries, we suppose, 
that the steppes of America, and the desert of 
Sahara, have been stripped of their vegetation 
by an irruption of the ocean; or that they 
formed originally the bottom of an inland lake; 
we may conceive, that thousands of years have 
not sufficed for the trees and shrubs to advance 


from the borders of the forests, from the skirts 
of the plains either naked or covered with turf, 
toward the centre, and darken so vast a space 


with their shade. It is more difficult to explain 
the origin of bare savannahs, enchased in forests, 
than to recognize the causes that maintain 
forests and savannahs within their ancient limits, 
like continents and seas. 

We found the most cordial hospitality at Cala- 
bozo, in the house of ihe administrator of the 
Real Hacienda, Don Miguel Cousin. The town, 
situate between the banks of the Guarico and the 
Uritucu, had at this period only five thousand 
inhabitants; but every thing denoted increasing 
prosperity. ‘The wealth of most of the inhabitants 
consists in herds, under the management of far- 
mers, who are called hateros, from the word hato, 
which signifies in Spanish a house or farm placed 

VOL. IV. _ Zz 


« 


338 


in the midst of pastures. The scattered popula- 
tion.of the Llanos being accumulated on certain 
points, principally around towns, Calabozo 
reckons already five villages or missions in it’s 
environs. It is computed, that 98,000 head of 
cattle wander in the pastures nearest to the 
town. It is very difficult to form an exact idea 
of the herds contained in the Llanos of Caraccas, 
_ Barcelona, Cumana, and the Spanish Guyana. 
Mr. Depons, who inhabited the town of Carac- 
cas longer ‘than I, and whose statistical state- 
ments are generally accurate, reckons in those 
vast plains, from the mouths of the Oreonoko 
to the lake of Maracaybo, 1,200,000 oxen, 
180,000 Horses, and 90,000 mules. He esti- 
mates the produce of these herds at 5,000,000 
franks ; adding to the value of the exportation 
the price of the hides consumed in the country *, 
There ,exist, it is believed, in the Pampas de 
Buenos Ayres, 42,000,000 cows, and 3,000,000 
horses, without comprising in this enumeration 
the cattle that have no acknowledged proprie- 
tor +}. 

I shall not hazard any of these general esii- 
mations, from their nature too uncertain; but 
shall only observe, that, in the Llanos of ‘Carac- 
fas, the proprietors of the great hatos are en- 


* Depons, Voyage a la Terre Ferme, vol. i, p.'10. 
| +. dsgara, Voyage au Paraguay, yol.i, p. 30. 


339 


trely ignorant of the number of the cattle they 
possess. They only know that of the young 
cattle, which are branded every year with a let- 
ter or mark peculiar to each herd. The richest 
proprietors mark as many as 14,000 head every 
year; and sell to the number of five or six thou- 
sand. According to official documents*, the 
exportation of hides from the whole Capitania 
General amounted annually for the West India 
islands alone, to 174,000 skins of oxen, and 
11,500 of goats. When we reflect, that these 
documents are taken from the books of the cus- 
tomhouses, where no mention is made of the 
fraudulent dealings in hides, we are tempted to 
believe, that the estimation of 1,200,000 oxen 
wandering in the Llanos, from the Rio Ca- 
rony and the Guarapiche to the lake of Ma- 
racaybo, is much underrated. The port of 
Guayra alone exported annually from 1789 to 
1792, 70,000 or 80,000 hides, entered in the 
customhouse books, scarcely one. fifth of which 
was for Spain. The exportation from Buenos 
Ayres, at the end of the eighteenth century, was, 
according to Don Felix d’Azzara, 800,000 skins. 
The hides of Caraccas are preferred in the ‘pe- 
ninsula to those of. Buenos Ayres; because the 
latter, on account of a longer passage, under- 


* Informe del Conde de Casa-Valencia, manuscript, which we 
have already quoted several times. 
Y, 9) 


a 


340 


go a loss of twelve per cent in the tanning. 
The southern part of the savannahs, vulgarly 
called Llanos de arriba, is very productive in 
mules and oxen; but the pasturage being in 
general less good, these animals are obliged to 
be sent to other plains to be fattened before they 
are sold. The Llano de Monai, and all. the 
Llanos de abaxo, abound less in herds, but the 
pastures are so fertile, that they furnish meat 
of an excellent quality for provisioning the coast.- 
The mules, which are not fit for labour before 
the fifth year, and then bear the name of mulas 
de saca, are purchased on the spot at the price 
of fourteen or eighteen piastres. The horses of 
the Llanos, descending from the fine Spanish 
- breed, are not very large; they are generally of a 
uniform color, brown-bay, like most of the wild 
animals. Suffering alternately from. drought 
and floods, tormented by the stings of insects 
and the bite of the large bats, they lead a hard 
and uneasy life. After having enjoyed for some 
months the care of man, their good qualities 
are developed, and become sensible. A wild 
horse, in the Pampas of Buenos Ayres, is worth 
from half to a whole piastre; and in the Llanos 
of Caraccas from two to three piastres ; but the 
price of the horse augments, when he has been 
broken in, and is fit for agricultural labour. 
Here are no sheep; we saw flocks only on the 
table-land of Quito. 


341 


The hatos of oxen have suffered considerably 
of late from troops of vagabonds, who roam 
over the steppes killing the animals merely to 
take their hides. This robbery has increased 
since the trade of the Lower Oroonoko is become 
more flourishing. For half a century, the banks 
of that. great river, from the mouth of the Apure 
as far as Angostura, were known only to the 
missionary monks. The exportation of cattle 
took place from the ports of the northern coast 
only, Cumana, Barcelona, Burburata, and Porto- 
Cabello. This dependence on the coast is now 
much diminished. The southern part of the 
plains has established an internal connexion with 
the Lower Oroonoko ; and this trade is the more 
brisk, as those who devote themselves to it easily 
escape the trammels of the prohibitory laws, 

The greatest herds of cattle that exist in the 
Llanos of Caraccas are those of the hatos of 
Merecure, la Cruz, Belen, Alta Gracia, and ~ 
Pavon. The Spanish cattle came from Coro 
and Tocuyo into ‘the plains. History has pre- 
served the name of the colonist, who first con- 
ceived the happy idea of peopling these pastur- 
ages, in which deer only brouzed, and a large 
species of cavy, the thick-nosed tapir, or river 
cavy, cavia capybara, called chiguire in those 
countries. Christoval Rodriguez sent the first 
horned. cattle into the Llanos *, about the year 


* Fray Pedro Simon, not. 5,.cap, xiv, No. 2, p: 871. 


342 


1548. He was an inhabitant of the town of 
Tocuyo, and had long resided in New Grenada. 

When we hear of the “innumerable quantity” 
of oxen, horses, and mules, that are spread over 
the plains of America, we seem generally to for- 
get, that in civilized Europe, on lands of much 
less extent, there exist in agricultural countries 
quantities no less prodigious. France, according 
to Mr. Peuchet, feeds 6,000,000 of large horned 
_ cattle, of which there are 3,500,000 oxen em- 
ployed in drawing the plough. In the Austrian 
monarchy the number of oxen, cows, and calves, 
is estimated by Mr. Lichtenstein at 13,400,000 
head. Paris alone consumes annually 155,000 
horned cattle *. Germany receives 150,000 
oxen yearly from Hungary. Domestic animals, 
collected in small herds, are considered by agri- 
cultural mations as a secondary object in the 
riches of the state. Accordingly they strike the 
imagination much less than those wandering 
droves of oxen and horses, which fill alone the 
uncultivated tracts of the New World. Civil- 
ization and social order favour alike the progress 
of population, and the multiplication of animals 
useful to man. 

We found at Calabozo, in the midst of the 


* 72,000 oxen, 9,000 cows, 74,000 calves, according to 
the official statement of 1817; the population of Paris being 
713,765 individuals. Paris consumes besides 328,000 sheep, 
and 74,000 hogs ; in all, 77,300,000 pounds of butcher’s meat. 


343 


Lianos, an electrical machine with large plates; 
electrophori, batteries, and electrometers; an 
apparatus nearly as complete as’ our first scien- 
tific men in Europe possess. All these articles 
had not been purchased in the United States ; 
they were the performance of a man, who had 
never seen any instrument, who had no person 
to consult, and who was acquainted with the 
phenomena of electricity only by reading the 
treatise of Sigaud de la Fond, and: Franklin’s 
Memoirs. Mr. Carlos deb Pozo, the name of 
this worthy and ingenious: man, had begun to 
* make cylindrical electrical machines, by em- 
ploying large glass jars, after having cut off the 
necks. It was only within afew years he had 
been able to procure, by way of Philadelphia, 
two plates, to construct a plate machine, and to 
obtain more considerable effects. It is easy to 
' judge what difficulties Mr. Pozo had to encounter, 
since the first works upon electricity had fallen 
into his hands; and that he had the courage to 
resolve to procure himself, by his own industry, 
all that: he had seen described in the books. 
Till now he had enjoyed only the astonishment 
and admiration produced by his. experiments on 
persons destitute of all information, and who had 
never quitted the solitude of the Llanos; our 
abode at Calabozo gave him a satisfaction. alto- 
gether new. It may be supposed, that he set 
some value on the opinions of two travellers, 


344 


who could compare his apparatus with those 
constructed in Europe. I had brought with me 
electrometers, with straws, with pith balls, and» 
with gold leaves ; and also a small Leyden vial, 
which could be charged by friction according to 
the method of Ingenhousz, and which served 
for my physiological experiments. Mr. Pozo 
could not contain his joy, on seeing for the first 
time instruments which he had not made, and 
which appeared to be copied from his own. We 
also showed him the effect of the contact of he- 
terogeneous metals on the nerves of frogs. . The 
names of Galvani and Volta had not yet re- 
sounded in those vast solitudes: 
After this electrical apparatus, the work of 
the industrious sagacity of an inhabitant of the 
Llanos, nothing at Calabozo excited in us’ so 
great an interest as the gymnoti, which are ani- 
mated: electrical apparatuses. Occupied daily 
for a great number of years by the phenomena 
of galvanic electricity ; given up to that enthu- 
siasm, which excites us to research, but prevents 
us from seeing accurately what we have dis- 
‘covered; having constructed, unconsciously, 
real piles, by placing metallic disks one upon 
another, and making them alternate with pieces 
of muscular flesh, or with other humid substan- 
ces*; I was impatient, from the time of my 


* See my Experiments on the irritable Fibre, vol. i, p. 74, 
pl. i, iv, v, of the German edition. - 


343 


afrival at Cumana, to procure electrical eels. 
We had been promised them often,: but’ our 
hopes had always been disappointed. Money 
loses it’s value as you withdraw from the coast ; 
and how is the imperturbable phlegm of the 
vulgar to be vanquished, when they are not ex- 
cited by the desire of gain ? 

The Spaniards confound all electrical fishes 
under the name of tembladores (producers. of 
trembling, literally tremblers). There are some 
in the Caribbean sea, on the coast of Cumana. 
The Guayqueria Indians, who are the most 
skilful and industrious fishermen in those parts, 
brought us a fish, which, they said, had be- 
numbed their hands. This fish ascends the 
little river Manzanares. It is a new species of 
the ray, the lateral spots of which are scarcely 
visible, and which much resembles the torpedo 
of Galvani. The torpedoes, furnished with an 
electric organ that is externally visible, on ac- 
count of the transparency of the skin, form a 
genus or subgenus, different from the rays pro- 
perly so called *. The torpedo of Cumana was 


* Cuvier, Regne Animal, vol. ii, p.136. The Mediterra- 
nean contains, according to Mr. Risso, four species of electri- 
cal torpedoes, all formerly confounded under the name of 
raia torpedo; these are torpedo narke, t. unimaculata, 
t. galvanii, and t. marmorata, The torpedo of the Cape of 
Good Hope, the subject of the recent experiments of Mr. 
Todd, is no doubt a nondescript species. 


346 


very lively, very energetic in it’s muscular move- 
ments, and yet the electrical shocks it gave us 
were extremely feeble. They became stronger 
on galvanizing the animal by the contact of 
zinc and gold. Other tembladores, real gymnoti 
or electrical eels, inhabit the Rio Colorado, the 
Guarapiche, and several little streams, that 
cross the missions of the Chayma Indians. They 
abound also in the large rivers of America, the 
Oroonoko, the Amazon, and the Meta; but the 
strength of the current, and the depth of the 
water, prevent their being caught by the Indians. 
They see these fish less frequently than they 
feel electrical shocks from them when swim- 
ming or bathing in the river. In the Llanos, 
particularly in the environs of Calabozo, be- 
tween the farms of Morichal and the missions 
de arriba and de abaxo, the basins of stagnant 
water, and the confluents of the Orconoko, 
(the Rio Guarico and the Canos of Rastro, 
Berito, and Paloma) are filled with electrical 
eels. We at first wished to make our experi- 
ments in the house we inhabited at Calabozo ; 
but the dread of the electrical shocks of the 
gymnoti is so great, and so exaggerated among 
the vulgar, that during three days we could not 
obtain one, though they are easily caught, and 
we had promised the Indians two piastres for 
every strong and vigorous fish. This fear of the 
Indians is the more extraordinary, as they do 


347 


not attempt to employ means in which they pro- 
fess to have great confidence. When interro- 
gated on the effect of the tembladores, they never 
fail to tell the Whites, that they may be touched 
with impunity, while you are chewing tobacco. 
This fable of the influence of tobacco on animal 
electricity is as general on the continent of South 
America, as the belief among mariners of the effect _ 
of garlick and tallow on the magnetic needle. 
Impatient of waiting, and having obtained 
very uncertain results from an electrical eel that 
had been brought to us alive, but much en- 
feebled, we repaired to the Cano de Bera, to 
make our experiments in the open air, on the 
borders of the water itself. We set off on the 19th 
of March, at a very early hour, for the village 
of Rastro de abaxo; thence we were conducted 
by the Indians to a stream, which, in the time 
of drought, forms a basin of muddy water, sur- 
rounded by fine trees *, the clusia, the amyris, 
and the mimosa with fragrant flowers. To catch 
the gymnoti with nets is very difficult, on account 
of the extreme agility of the fish, which bury 
themselves in the mud like serpents. We would 
not employ the barbasco, that is to say, the roots 


of the piscidea erithryna, jacquinia armillaris, 
and some species of phyllanthus, which, thrown 


t Amyris laterifiora, a. coriacea, laurus pichurin, inyroxylon 
secundum, malpighia reticulata, 


348 


into the pool, intoxicate or benumb these ani- 
mals.. These means would have enfeebled the 
gymnoti; the Indians therefore told us, that 
they would “ fish with horses,” embarbascar con 
cavallos *. We found it difficult to form an idea 
of this extraordinary manner of fishing ; but we 
soon saw our guides return from the savannah, 
which they had been scouring for wild horses 
and mules. They brought about thirty with 
them, which they forced to enter the pool. 

The extraordinary noise caused by the horses’ 
hoofs makes the fish issue from the mud, and 
excites them to combat. These yellowish and 
livid eels, resembling large aquatic serpents, 
swim on the surface of the water, and crowd 
under the bellies of the horses and mules. A 
contest between animals of so different an orga- 
nization furnishes a very striking spectacle. 
The Indians, provided with harpoons and long 
slender reeds, surround the pool closely ; and 
some climb upon the trees, the branches of 
which extend horizontally over the surface of the 
water. By their wild cries, and the length of 
their reeds, they prevent the horses from run- 
ning away, and reaching the bank of the pool. 
The eels, stunned by the noise, defend them- 
selves by the repeated discharge of their electric 


* Properly to set to sleep, or intoxicate the fish by means of 
horses. 


349 


batteries. During a long time they seem to 
prove victorious. Several horses sink beneath 
the violence of the invisible strokes, which they 
receive from all sides in organs the most essen- 
tial to life ; and stunned by the force and ‘fre- 
quency of the shocks, disappear under the 
water. Others, panting, with mane erect, and 
haggard eyes, expressing anguish, raise them- 
selves, and endeavour to flee from the storm by 
which they are overtaken. They are driven 
back by the Indians into the middle of the 
water ; but a small number succeed in eluding 
the active vigilance of the fishermen. These 
regain the shore, stumbling at every step, and 
stretch themselves on the sand, exhausted with 


fatigue, and their limbs benumbed by the elec- 
tric shocks of the gymnoti. 
In less than five minutes two horses were 


drowned. The eel, being five feet long, and 
pressing itself against the belly of the horses, 
makes a discharge along the whole extent of it’s 
electric organ. It attacks at once the heart, 
the intestines, and the plerus celiacus of the 
abdominal nerves. It is natural, that the effect 
felt by the horses should be more powerful, 
than that produced upon man by the touch of 
the same fish at only one of his extremities. 
The horses are probably not killed, but only 
stunned. They are drowned from the impos- 


3350 


sibility of rising amid the prolonged struggle 
between the other horses and the eels. 

We had little doubt, that the fishing would 
terminate by killing successively all the ani- 
mals engaged; but by degrees the impetu- 
osity of this unequal combat diminished, and 
the wearied gymnoti dispersed. They require 
a long rest*, and abundant nourishment, to 
repair what they have lost of galvanic force. 
The mules and horses appear less frightened ; 
their. manes are no longer bristled, and their 
eyes express less dread. The gymnoti approach 
timidly the edge of the marsh, where they are 
taken by means of small harpoons fastened to 
long cords. When the cords are very dry, the 


‘Indians feel no shock in raising the fish into 


the air. In a few minutes we had five large 
eels, the greater part of which were but slightly 
wounded. Some were taken by the same means 
toward the evening. 

The temperature of the waters, in which the 
gymnoti habitually live, is from 26° to 27°. 


* The Indians assured us, that when the horses are 
made to run two days successively into the same pool, none 
are killed the second day. See, on the fishing for gym- 
noti, and for the particulars of the experiments made at 
Calabozo, a memoir published in my Observations de Zoologie, 
vol, i, p. 59—92.; and my Tableau de la Nature, vol. i, p. 
53—57. Ihave been enabled to add here some new consi- 
derations, founded on a more intimate knowledge of the 
action of clectromotive apparatuses, 


351 


Their electric force diminishes, it is said, ‘in 
colder waters ; and it is remarkable, that in 
general, as a celebrated naturalist has already 
4 observed, animals endowed with electromotive 
organs, the effects of which are sensible to man, 
are not found in the air, but in a fluid that isa 
conductor, of electricity. The gymnotus is the 
largest of electrical fishes. I measured some, 
that were from five feet to five feet three inches 
long; and the Indians assert, that they have 
seen still longer. We found, that a fish of three 
feet ten inches long weighed twelve pounds, 
The transverse diameter of the body, without 
reckoning the anal.fin, which is elongated in 
the form of a keel, was three inches five lines. 
The gymnoti of Cano de Bera are of a fine olive- 
green. The under part of the head is. yellow 
mingled with red. Two rows of small yellow 
spots are ‘placed symmetrically along the back, 
from the head to the end of the tail. Every 
Spot contains an excretory aperture. In con- 
sequence, the skin of the animal is constantly 
covered with a mucous matter, which, as Volta 
has proved, conducts electricity twenty or thirty 
times better than pure water. It is in general 
somewhat remarkable, that. no electrical fish,' 
yet discovered* in the different parts of the 
world, is covered with scales. 


* We yet know with certainty only seven electrical fishes : 


352 


The gymnoti, like our eels, are fond of swal- 
lowing and breathing air on the surface of the 
water; but we must not thence conclude with 
Mr. Bajon, that the fish would perish, if it could 
not come up to breathe the air. Our eels wan- 
der a part of the night upon the grass, while 
I have seen a very vigorous gymnotus, that 
had sprung out of the tub, die on the ground. 
Mr. Provencal and myself have proved, by our 
researches on the respiration of fishes, that 
their humid bronchic can execute the double 
function of decomposing the atmospheric air, 
and of appropriating the oxygen dissolved in 
water. They do not suspend their respiration 


torpedo narke Risso, t. unimaculata, t. marmorata, t. galvanil, 
silurus electricus, tetraodon electricus, gymnotus electricus. 
It appears uncertain, whether the trichiurus indicus have 
electrical properties or not (Cuv. Regne animal, vol. ii, p. 247). 
But the genus torpedo, very different from that of the rays 
properly so called, has numerous species m the equatorial 
‘seas; and it is probable, that there exist several gymnoti 
specifically different. The Indians mentioned to us a very 
black and very powerful species, inhabiting the marshes of 
the Apure, which never attains a length of more than two 
feet, but which we were not able to procure. The raton of 
the Rio de la Magdalena, which I have described under the 
name of gymnotus equilabiatus (Odserv. de Zoologie, vol. i, 
pl. x, fig. 1), forms a particular subgenus. This is a carapa, 
not scaly, and without an electrical organ. This organ is 
also entirely wanting in the Brazilian carapo, and in all the 
rays, which Mr. Cuvier has had the goodness to examine 


again at my request, | 


353 


in the air ; but they absorb the gazeous oxygen, 
like a reptile furnished with lungs. It is known, 
that carp may be fattened by being fed ‘out of 
the water, and wetting their gills from time to 
time with humid moss, to prevent their drying. 
Fish separate their gill-covers wider in oxygen 
gas, than in water. Their temperature, how- 
ever, does not rise ; and they live the same length 
of time in pure vital air, and ina mixture of 
ninety parts azot and ten oxygen. We found, 
that tench (cyprinus tinca), placed under in- 
verted jars filled with air, absorb half a cubic 
centimetre of oxygen in an hour. This action 
takes place in the gills only; for fishes, on 
which a collar of cork has been fastened, and 
leaving their head out of the jar filled with air, 
do not act upon the oxygen * by the rest of 
their body. 

The swimming-bladder of the gymnotus, the 
existence of which Mr. Bloch has denied, is two 
feet five inches long in a fish of three feet ten 
inches-{-. It is separated by a mass of fat from 


| * Mém. de la Société @ Arcueil, vol. ii, p. 398. Is the respi- 
ration in the air effected through the intermedium of a plate 
of water, infinitely thin, which moistens the gills ? 

+ Mr. Cuvier has shown me, since my return to Europe, 
that in the gymnotus electricus there exists, besides the large 


swimming bladder, another bladder, situate before it, and 
much smaller. It looks like the bifurcated swimming bladder 
in the gymnotus equilabiatus, of which I made a drawing. 


VOL. Iv. QA 


the external skin; and rests upon the electric 
organs, which fill more than two thirds of the 
animal. The same vessels, which penetrate be- 
tween the plates or leaves of these organs, and 
which cover them with blood when they are cut 
transversely, send out also numerous branches 
to the exterior surface of the air-bladder. 1 
found in a hundred parts of the air of the swim- 
ming-bladder four of oxygen and ninety-six of 
azot. The medullary substance of the brain 
displays but a feeble analogy with the albumin- 
ous and gelatinous matter of the electric organs. 
But these two substances have in common the 
great quantity of arterial blood which they re- 
ceive, and which is disoxidated in them. We 
shall again remark on this occasion, that an 
extreme activity in the functions of the brain 
causes the blood to flow more abundantly to- 
ward the head; as the energy of the movement 
of the muscles accelerates the disoxidation of 
the arterial blood. What a contrast between 
the multitude and the diameter of the blood- 
vessels of the gymnotus, and the small space 
occupied by it’s muscular system! This con- 
trast reminds the observer, that three functions 
of animal life, which appear in other respects 
sufficiently distinct, the fanctions of the brain, 
those of the electrical organ, and those of the 
muscles, all require the afflux and concourse of 
arterial or oxygenated blood. 


359 


It would be temerity to expose ourselves to 
the first shocks of a very large and strongly 
irritated gymnotus. If by chance you receive a 
stroke before the fish is wounded, or wearied by 
a long pursuit, the pain and numbness are so - 
violent, that it is impossible to describe the 
nature of the feeling they excite. I do not re- 
member having ever received from the ‘discharge 
of a large Leyden jar, a more dreadful shock, 
than that which I experienced by imprudently 
placing both my feet on a gymnotus just taken 
out of the water. I was affected the rest’of the 
day with a violent pain in the knees, and in 
almost every joint. To be aware of the differ- 
ence, which is sufficiently striking, that exists 
between the sensation produced by the pile of 
Volta and an electrical fish, the latter should be 
touched when they: are in a state of extreme 
weakness. The gymnoti and the torpedoes then 
cause a twitching *, which is propagated from 
the part that rests on the electric organs as far 
as the elbow. We seem to feel at every stroke 
an internal vibration, that lasts two or three 
seconds, and is followed by a painful numbness. 
- Accordingly the Tamanack Indians call the 
temblador, in their expressive language, arimna, 
which means something that deprives of motion. 

The sensation caused by the feeble shocks of’ 


* Subsultus tendinum. 
z Ci 
vd A MY 


356 


an electrical eel appeared to me analogous ‘to 
that painful twitching, with which I have been 
seized at each contact of two heterogeneous 
metals applied to wounds, which I had made on 
my back by means of cantharides *. This dif- 
ference of sensation between the effects of elec- 
trical fishes and those of the pile or a Leyden 
vial weakly charged has struck every observer ; 
there is however nothing in this contrary to the 
supposition of the identity of electricity and 
the galvanic action of fishes. The electricity 
may be the same; but it’s effects will be vari- 
ously modified by the disposition of the electrical 
apparatus, by the intensity of the fluid, by the 
rapidity of the current, and by a particular 
mode of action. 

In Dutch Guyana, at Demerary for instance, 
electrical eels were formerly employed to cure 
the paralytic. At a time when the physicians 
of Europe had great confidence in the effects of 
electricity, a surgeon of Essequibo, Mr. Van 
der Lott, published in Holland a treatise on the 
~ medical properties of the gymnoti. These elee- 
trical cures are found among the savages of 
America, as well as among the Greeks. We are 
told by Scribonius Largus, Galen, and Diosco- 
rides, that’ torpedoes cure the headach and: the. 
gout. I did not hear of this species of remedy 


® Persuche ucber die gereizte Muskelfaser, yol.i, p. 323—329, 


in the Spanish colonies which I visited; but I 
can assert, that, after having made experiments 
during four hours successively with gymnoti, 
Mr. Bonpland and myself felt till the next day a 
debility in the muscles, a pain in the joints, and 
a general uneasiness, which was the effect of a 
strong irritation of the nervous system. 

Gymnoti are neither charged conductors, nor 
batteries, nor electromotive apparatuses, the 
shock of which is received every time they are 
touched with one hand, or when both hands are 
applied to form a conducting circle between two 
heterogeneous poles. The electric action of the 
fish depends entirely on it’s will; whether be- 
cause it do not keep it’s electric organs always 
charged; or by the secretion of some fluid, or 
by any other means alike mysterious to us, it be 
capable of directing the action of it’s organs to 
an external object. We often tried, both insu- 
lated and uninsulated, to touch the fish, with- 
out feeling the least shock. When Mr. Bon- 
pland held it by the head, or by the middle of 
the body, while I held it by the tail, and, stand- 
ing on the moist ground, did not take each other's 
hand, one of us received shocks, which the other 
did not feel. It depends upon the gymnotus to 
act toward the point, where it finds itself the 
most strongly irritated. The discharge is then 
made at one point only, and not at the neigh- 
bouring points. If two persons touch the belly 


358 


of the fish with their fingers, at an inch distatice, 
and press it simultaneously, sometimes one, 
sometimes the other will receive the shock. In 
the same manner, when one insulated person 
holds the tail of avigorous gymnotus, and another 
pinches the gills, or pectoral fin, it is often the 
first only by whom the shock is received. It did 
not appear to us, that these differences could 
be attributed to the dryness or dampness of our 
hands, or to their unequal conducting power. 
The gymnotus seemed to direct it’s strokes 
sometimes from the whole surface of it’s body, 
sometimes from one point only. This effect in- 
dicates less a partial discharge of the organ 
composed of an innumerable quantity of leaves ; 
than the faculty which the animal possesses, 
perhaps by the instantaneous secretion of a 
fluid spread through the cellular membrane, of 
establishing the communication between it’s 
organs and the skin only, in a very limited 
space. 

Nothing proves ‘more strongly the faculty, 
which the ‘gymnotus possesses, of darting and 
directing it’s stroke according to its will, than 
the observations made at Philadelphia, and re- 
cently at “Stockholm *, on gymmoti rendered 


* By| Messrs. Williamson and Fahlberg. The following 
account is given by the latter gentleman in an interesting 


note, published in the Vetensk. Acad. nya Handl., quart. 2, 


359 


extremely tame. When they had been made 
to fast a long time, they killed from afar small 
fishes put into the tub. They acted at a distance; 
that is to say, their electrical stroke passed 
through a very thick stratum of water. We 
need not be surprised, that what was observed in 
Sweden, on a single gymnotus only, we could 
not see on a great number of individuals in their 
native country. The electric action of animals 
being a vital action, and subject to their will, 
it does not- depend solely on their state of health 


(1801), p.122—156. ‘“ The gymnotus sent from Surinam to 
Mr. Norderling at Stockholm, lived more than four months 
in a state of perfect health. It was twenty-seven inches 
long; and the shocks it gave were so violent, especially in 
the air, that I found scarcely any means of protecting myself 
from it by nonconductors, in transporting the fish from one 
place to another. Is stomach being very small, it ate only 
a little ata time, but often. It approached living fish, send- 
ing them (from afar) a shock, the energy of which was pro- 
portionate to the size of the prey. The gymnotus was seldom 
mistaken in 2t’s judgment ; one single stroke was almost always 
sufficient to overcome the resistance (the obstacles, which the 
strata of water, more or less thick according to the distances, 

, opposed to the electrical current). When very much pressed 
by hunger, it directed the shocks sometimes also against the 
person, who daily brought it’s food of boiled meat not sea- 
soned. Persons afflicted with rheumatism came to touch it 
in hopes of being cured. They took it at once by the neck 
and tail: the shocks were in this case stronger, than when 
touched with one hand only. It lost almost entirely it’s 
electrical power a short time before it’s death.” 


360 


and vigour. A gymnotus, that has made. the 
voyage from Surinam to Philadelphia and Stock- 
holm, accustoms itself to the imprisonment, to 
which it is reduced ; it resumes by degrees the 
same habits in the tub, which it had in the rivers 
and pools. An electrical eel was brought to me 
at Calabozo, taken in a net, and consequently 
having no wound. It ate meat, and terribly 
frightened the little tortoises and frogs, which, not 
knowing the danger, placed themselves with con- 
fidence on it’s back. The frogs did not receive 
ihe stroke till the moment when they touched the 
body of the gymnotus. When theyrecovered, they 
leaped out of the tub; and when replaced near 
the fish, they were frightened at it’s sight only. 
We then observed nothing, that indicated an 
action at a distance; but our gymnotus, recently 
taken, was not yet sufficiently tamed, to attack 
and devour frogs. -On approaching the finger, 
or metallic points, within the distance of half a 
line from the electric organs, no shock was felt. 
Perhaps the animal did not perceive the neigh- 
bourhood of this foreign body; or, if it did, we 
must suppose, that the timidity it felt in the 
commencement of it’s captivity prevented it 
from darting forth it’s energetic strokes, except 
when strongly irritated by an immediate con- 
tact. ‘The gymnotus being immersed in water» 
I approached my hand, both armed and unarmed 
with a metal, within the distance of a few lines 


361 

from the electric organs ; yet the strata of water 
transmitted no shock, while Mr. Bonpland irri- 
tated the animal strongly by an immediate con- 
tact, and received some very violent shocks. 
If I had plunged the most delicate electroscopes 
we know, prepared frogs, into contiguous strata 
of water, they would no doubt have felt contrac- 
tions at the moment when the gymnotus seemed 
to direct it’s stroke elsewhere. Prepared frogs, 
placed immediately on the body of a torpedo, 
experience, according to Galvani, a strong con- 
traction at every discharge of the fish. 

The electrical organ of the. gymnoti acts only 
under the immediate influence of the brain and 
the heart. On cutting a very vigorous fish 
through the middle of the body, the fore part 
alone gave me shocks. The shocks are equally 
strong, in whatever part of the body the fish is 
touched ; it is most disposed however, to dart 
them forth, when the pectoral fin, the electrical 
organ, the lips, the eyes, or the gills are pinched. 
Sometimes the animal struggles violently with a 
person holding it by the tail, without communi- 
cating the least shock. Nor did I feel any when 
I made a slight incision near the pectoral fin of' 
the fish, and galvanized the wound by the simple 
contact of two pieces of zinc and silver. The 
gymnotus bent itself convulsively, and raised 
it’s head out of the water, as if affrighted by a 
sensation altogether new; but I felt no vibra- 


362. 


tion in the hands, which held the two metals. 
The most violent muscular movemenis are not 
always accompanied by electric discharges. , 
The action of the fish on the organs of man 
is transmitted and intercepted by the same 
bodies, that transmit and intercept the electrical 
current. of a conductor charged by a Leyden 
vial, or Volta’s pile. Some anomalies, which 
we thought we observed, are easily explained, 
when we recollect, that even metals (as is proved 
from their ignition when exposed to the action 
of the pile) present a slight obstacle to the pas- 
sage of electricity ; and that a bad conductor 
annihilates the effect of a feeble electricity on 
our organs, while it transmits to us the effect 
of a very strong electricity. The repulsive force, 
that zinc and silver exercise between each other, 
being far superior to that between gold and. 
silver, I have found, that, when a frog, prepared 
and armed with silver, is galvanized under 
water, the conducting arc of zinc produces con- 
iractions, as soon as one of it’s extremities ap- 
proaches the muscles within three lines distance; 
while an are of gold does not excite the organs, 
when the stratum of water between the gold and 
the muscles is more than half a line thick. In 
the same manner, by employing a conducting 
are composed of two pieces of zinc and silver 
soldered together endwise; and resting, as before, 
one of the extremities of the metallic arc on the 


363 


ischiatic nerve, it is necessary, in order to pro- 

duce contractions, to bring the other extremity of 

the-conducting arc nearer and nearer to the 

muscles, in proportion as the irritability of the 

organs diminishes. ‘Toward the end of the expe- 

riment, the slightest stratum of water prevents 

the passage of the electrical current, and it is 
only by the immediate contact of the are with 

the muscles, that the contractions take place. I 

dwell on these effects, dependant on three vari- 

able circumstances ; the energy of the electro- 

motive apparatus, the conductibility of the 

medium, and the irritability of the organs that 

receive the impressions ; as it is because experi- 

ments have not been sufficiently multiplied with 

a view to these three variable elements, that, in 

the action of electrical eels and torpedoes, the 

accidental circumstances have been taken for ‘ 
absolute conditions, without which the electric 
shocks are not felt. 

In wounded gymnoti, which give feeble but 
very equal shocks, these shocks appeared to us 
constantly stronger on touching the body of 
the fish with a hand armed with metal, than 
with the naked hand. They are stronger also, 
when, instead of touching the fish with one hand, 
naked, or armed with metal, we press it at 
once with both hands, either naked or armed. 
These differences, I repeat, become sensible 
only when you have gymnoti enough at your 


364 


disposal, to be able to choose the weakest; and 
the extreme equality of the electric discharges 
admits of distinguishing between the sensations 
felt alternately by the hand naked or armed 
with a metal, by one or both hands naked, and 
by one or both hands armed with metal. It is 
also in the case only of small shocks, weak and 
uniform, that the shocks are more sensible on 
touching the gymnotus with one hand (without 
forming a chain) with zinc, than with copper or 
iron. 

Resinous substances, glass, very dry wood, 
horn, and even bones, which are generally be- 
lieved to be good conductors, prevent the action 
of the gymnoti from being transmitted to man. 
I was surprised at not feeling the least shock on 
pressing wet sticks of sealingwax against the 
organs of the fish ; while the same animal gave 
me the most violent strokes, when excited by 
means of a metallic rod. Mr. Bonpland received 
shocks, when carrying a gymnotus on two cords 
of the fibres of the palm-tree, which appeared to 
us extremely dry. A strong discharge makes 
it's way through very imperfect conductors. 
Perhaps also the obstacle, which the conducting 
are presents, renders the discharge more painful. 
I touched the gymnotus with a wet pot of brown 
clay, without effect; yet I received violent 
shocks, when I carried the gymnotus in the same 
pot, because the contact was greater. 


366 


When two persons, insulated or not insulated, 
hold each other’s hands, and one of these per- 
sons only touches the fish with the hand, either 
naked or armed with metal, the shock is most 
commonly felt by both at once. It happens 
however also, that, in the most painful shocks, 
the person who comes into immediate contact 
with the fish alone feels the shock. When the 
gymnotus is exhausted, or in a very weak state 
of excitability, and will no longer emit strokes 
on being irritated with one hand ; the shocks are 
felt, in a very vivid manner, on forming the 
chain, and employing both hands. Even then 
however, the electric shock takes place only at 
the will of the animal. Two persons, one of 
whom holds the tail, and the other the head, 
cannot, by joining hands and forming a chain, 
force the gymnotus to dart his stroke. 

In employing very delicate electrometers in 
a thousand ways, insulating them on a plate of 
glass, and receiving very strong. shocks which 
passed through the electrometer, I could never 
discover any plienomenon of attraction or repul- 
sion. The same observation was made by Mr. 
Fahlberg at Stockholm. This philosopher how- 
ever has seen an electric spark, as Walsh and 
Ingenhousz had done before him at London, by 
placing the gymnotus in the air, and interrupt- 
ing the conducting chain by two gold leaves 
pasted upon glass, and a line distant from each 


366 : 


other. No person, on the contrary, has ever 
perceived a spark issue from the body of the fish 
itself. We have irritated it for a long time dur- 
ing the night, at Calabozo, in perfect darkness, 
without observing any luminous appearance. 
Having placed four gymnoii of unequal strength 
in such a manner as to receive the shocks of the 
most vigorous fish by communication, that is to 
say, by touching only one of the other fishes, I 
did not observe, that these last were agitated at 
the moment when the current passed by their 
bodies. Perhaps the current established itself 
only on the humid surface of the skin. We will 
not however conclude from this, that the gym- 
noti are insensible to electricity ; and that they 
cannot fight with each other at the bottom of the 
pools, -Their nervous system must be subject 
to the same agents as the nerves of other ani- 
mals. I have indeed seen, that, on baring their 
nerves, they undergo muscular contractions at 
the simple contact of two heterogeneous metals; 
and Mr. Fahlberg, of Stockholm, found, that his 
gymnotus was convulsively agitated, when placed 
in a copper vessel, and feeble discharges from a 
Leyden vial passed through it’s skin. 

After the experiments I had made on gymnoti, 
it became highly interesting to me, at my return 
to Europe, to know with precision the various 
circumstances, in which another electrical fish, 
the torpedo of our seas, gives or does not give 


367 


shocks. Though this fish had been examined 
by a great number of natural philosophers, I 
found all that had been published on it’s elec- 
trical effects extremely vague. It has been very 
arbitrarily supposed, that this fish acts like a 
Leyden vial, which may be discharged at will, by 
touching it with both hands; and this supposition 
appears to have led observers into error, who have 
devoted themselves to researches of this kind. 
Mr. Gay-Lussac and myself, during our journey 
to Italy, made a great number of experiments 
on torpedoes taken in the Gulf of Naples. , These 
experiments furnish many results somewhat dif- 
ferent from those I collected on the gymnoti. 
It is probable, that the cause of these anomalies 
proceeds rather from the inequality of electric 
power in the two fishes, than the different dis- 
position of their organs *. 

Though the power of the torpedo cannot be 
compared with that of the gymnoti, it is suffi- 
cient to cause very painful sensations. A person 
accustomed to electric shocks can with difficulty 
hold in his hands a torpedo of twelve or fourteen 
inches, and in possession of all it’s vigour. When 
the animal no longer gives any but very feeble 
strekes under water, the shocks become more 
sensible if it be raised above the surface. I have 


* Geoffroy de St, Hilaire, in the Ann. du Muséum, vol. i, 
p. 392-407. 


368 | 


often observed the same phenomenon in galvan- 
izing frogs. 

The torpedo moves the pectoral fins convul- 
sively, every time it emits a stroke; and this 
stroke is. more or less painful, according as the 
immediate contact takes place by a greater or 
less surface. We have above observed, that the 
gymnotus gives the strongest. shocks without 
making any movement with the eyes, head, or 


fins*. Is this difference caused by the position: 


of the electric organ, which is not double in the 
gymnoti? or, does the movement of the pectoral 
fins of the torpedo directly prove, that the fish 
restores the electrical equilibrium by it’s own 
skin, discharges itself by it’s own body, and that 
we generally feel only the effect of a lateral 
shock ? 
We cannot discharge at will either a torpedo 
or a gymnotus, as we discharge at willa Leyden 
vial or a Voltaic pile. A shock is not always 
felt, even in touching the electric fish with both 
hands. We must irritate it, to make it give 
the shock. This action in the torpedoes, as well 
as in the gymnoti, is a vital action; it depends 
on the will only of the animal, which perhaps 
does not always keep its electrical organs 


* The anal fin of the gymnoti only has a sensible motion, 
when these fishes are excited under the belly, where the elec- 
tric organ is placed. 


369 


charged, or does not always employ the action 
of it’s nerves to establish the chain. between the 
positive and negative poles. This is. certain, 
that the torpedo gives a long series of shocks 
with astonishing celerity; whether it be, that 
the plates or laminz of his organs are not wholly 
exhausted, or that the fish ee them in- 
stantaneously, 

The electric stroke is felt, when the animal i is 
disposed to give it, whether we touch with a 
single finger only one of the surfaces of the 
organs, or apply both hands to the two surfaces, 
the superior and inferior, at once. In either case 
it is altogether indifferent, whether the person, 
who touches the fish with one finger or both 


hands, be insulated or not. All that has been 
said on the necessity of a communication with 
‘the damp ground, to establish a circuit, is 
founded on inaccurate observations. 


Mr. Gay-Lussac made the important. observa- 
tion, that, when an insulated person touches the 
torpedo with one finger, it is indispensable, that 
the contact. be immediate. The fish may with 
impunity be touched with a key, or any other 
metallic instrument; no shock is felt, when a 
conducting or nonconducting bedy is interposed 
between the finger and the electrical organ of 
the torpedo. This circumstance furnishes a 
great difference between the torpedo and the 

YOU, Iv. 2B 


370) 


gymnotus, the latter giving his strokes through 
an iron rod several feet long. 

When the torpedo is placed on a metallic 
plate of very little thickness, so that the plate 
touches the inferior surface of the organs, the 
hand that supports the plate never feels any 
shock, though another insulated person excites 
‘the animal, and the convulsive movement of the 
pectoral fins denotes the strongest and most 
reiterated discharges. 

If, on the contrary, a person support the tor- 
pedo, placed upon a metallic plate, with the 
left hand, as in the foregoing experiment ; and. 
the same person touch the superior surface of 
the electrical organ with the right hand; a 
strong shock is then felt in both arms. The 
sensation is the same, when the fish is placed 
between two metallic plates, the edges of which 
do not touch, and the person applies both hands 
at once to these plates. The interposition of 
one metallic plate prevents the communication, 
if that plate be touched with one hand only, 
while the interposition of two metallic plates 
does not prevent the shock, when both hands 
are applied. In the latter ‘ease, it cannot be 
doubted, that the circulation of the fluid is es- 
stablished by the two arms. 

If, in this situation of the fish between two 
plates, there exist any immediate communica- 


371 


tion between the edges of these two plates, no 
shock takes place. The chain between the two 
surfaces of the electric organ is then formed by 
the plates; and the new communication, esta- 
blished by the contact. of the two hands with 
the two plates, remains without effect. We 
carried the torpedo with impunity between two 
dishes of metal, and felt the strokes it gave only 
at the instant when the dishes no longer touched 
each other at the edges. 

Nothing in the torpedo, or in the gymnotus, 
indicates, that the animal modifies the electrical 
state of the bodies by which it is surrounded. The 
most delicate electrometer is no way affected, in 
whatever manner it is employed, whether bring- 
ing it near the organs, or insulating the fish, 
covering it with a metallic plate, and causing 
the plate to communicate by a conducting wire 
with the condenser of Volta. We were at great 
pains to vary the experiments, by which we 
sought to render the electrical tension in the 
organs of the torpedo sensible; but they were 
constantly without effect, and perfectly con- 
firmed what Mr. Bonpland and myself had ob- 
served respecting the gymnoti during our abode 
in South America. ' 

Electrical fishes, when very vigorous, act with 
the same energy under water and.in theair. This 
observation ‘led us to examine the conducting 
property of water; and we found, that, when 

232 


372 


several persons form the chain between the su- 
perior and inferior surface of the organs of the 
torpedo, the shock is felt only when these per- 
sons have united their hands. The action is 
not intercepted, if two persons, who support the 
torpedo with their right hands, instead of taking 


one another by the left hand, plunge each a me- 


tallic point into a drop of water placed on an 
insulating substance. On substituting flame for 
the drop of water, the communication is inter- 
rupted, and is only reestablished, as in the gym- 
noti, when the two points immediately touch 
each other in the interior of the flame. 

We are very far, unquestionably, from having 
revealed all the secrets of the electrical action 
of fishes, which is modified by-the influence of 
tHe brain and the nerves; but the experiments, 
which we have just related, are sufficient to 
prove, that these fishes act by a concealed elec- 
tricity, and by electromotive apparatuses of a 
peculiar construction, which are recharged with 
extreme rapidity. Mr. Velta admits, that the 
discharges of the contrary eleciricities in the 
torpedoes and the gymnoti are made by their 
own skin; and that, when we touch them with 
one hand only, or by means of a metallic point, 
we feel the effect of a lateral shock, the electrical 
current not being directed solely the shortest 
way. When a, Leyden vial is placed on a wet 
woollen cloth, which is a bad conductor, and 


373 


the vial is discharged in such a manner, that the 
cloth makes part of the chain; prepared frogs, 
placed at different distances, indicate by their 
contractions, that the current spreads itself over 
the whole cloth in a thousand different ways. 
According to this analogy, the must violent 
shock given by the gymnotus at a distance 
would be but a feeble part of the stroke, that 
reestablishes the equilibrium in the interior of 
the fish*. As the gymnotus directs it’s fluid 
where it pleases, it must also be admitted, that 
the discharge is not made by the whole skin at 
once; but that the animal, excited perhaps by 
means of the motion of a fluid poured into one 
part of the cellular membrane, establishes at 
will the communication between it’s organs and 


* The heterogeneous poles of the double electrical organs 
must be found in each orgau. Mr. Todd has recently proved, 
by experiments made on torpedoes of the Cape of Good 
Hope, that the animal continues to give violent shocks, when 
one of these organs is extirpated. On the contrary, all 
electrical action is stopped, ‘and this point, already elucidated 
by Galvani, is of the greatest importance, if a great injury be 
done to the brain, or if the nerves, which supply the plates of 
the electrical organs, be divided. In the latter case, the 
nerves being cut, and the brain left untouched, the ‘torpedo 
continues to live, and perform every muscular movement. 
A fish, exhausted by too numerous electrical discharges, sul- 
fered much more than another fish, deprived, by dividing the 
nerves, of any communication between the brain and the elec- 
trometive apparatus, Pil. T'rans,, 1816, part I, p. 120. 


such or such a part of the skin. It may be con- 
ceived, that a lateral stroke, out of the direct 
current, must become imperceptible under the 
two conditions of a very weak discharge, or a 
very great obstacle presented by the nature and 
length of the conductor. Notwithstanding these 
considerations, it appears to me very surprising, 
that shocks of the torpedo, very strong in ap~ 
pearance, are not propagated to the hand, when 
a very thin plate of metal is interposed between 
it and the fish. 

Doctor Schilling had announced, that the 
gymnotus approached the loadstone involun- 
tarily. We were astonished to find this idea 
adopted by Mr. Pozo. We tried in a thousand 
ways this pretended influence of the magnet on 
the electrical organs, without having ever ob- 
served any sensible effect. The fish no more 
approached the loadstone, than a bar of iron not 
magnetic. Iron filings thrown on it’s back re- 
mained motionless. 

The gymnoti, objects of predilection and of 
the most lively interest to the philosophers of 
Europe, are at once dreaded and detested by 
the natives. They furnish indeed, in their mus- 
cular flesh, a pretty good aliment ; but the elec- 
tric organ fills the greater part of their body, 
and this organ is slimy and disagreeable to 
the taste; and accordingly it is separated with 
care from the rest of the body. The presence 


of the gymnoti is also considered as the principal 
cause of the want of fish in the ponds and pools 
of the Llanos. The gymnoti kill many more 
than they devour: and the Indians told us, that 
when they take young alligators and gymnoti at 
the same time in very strong nets, the latter 
never display the slightest trace of a wound, be- 
cause they disable the young alligators before 
they are attacked by them. All the inhabitants 
of the waters dread the society of the gymnoti. 
Lizards, tortoises, and frogs seek the pools, 
where they are secure from their action. It 
became necessary to change the direction of a 
road near Uritucu, because these electrical eels 
were so numerous in one river, that they every 
year killed a great number of mules of burden, 
as they forded the water. 

Though in the present state of our knowledge 
we may flatter ourselves with havirg thrown 
some light on the extraordinary effects of electri- 
cal fishes, a great number of physical and phy-" 
siological researches still remain to be made. 
The brilliant results, which chemistry has ob- 
tained by means of the pile, have occupied all 
observers, and turned. attention for some time 
from the examinations of the phenomena of 
vitality. Let us hope, that these phenomena, 
the most awful and the most mysterious of all, 
will occupy in their turn the sagacity of natural 
philosophers. This hope will be easily realized, 


i 376 


if they succeed in procuring anew living gym- 
noti in one of the great capitals of Europe: The 
discoveries that will be made on the electro- 
motive apparatus of these fish, much more ener- 
getic, and more easy to preserve, than the tor- 
pedoes *, will extend to all the phenomena of 
muscular motion subject to the will. It will 
perhaps be found, that, in most animals, every 
contraction of the muscular fibre is preceded 
by a discharge from the nerve into the muscle; 
and that the simple contact. of heterogeneous 
substances is a source of movement and of life 


* In order to investigate the phenomena of the living 
electromotive apparatus in their greatest simplicity ; and not 
to mistake circumstances, which depend on the degree of 
energy of the electric organs, for general conditions; it is 
necessary, to perform the experiments on those electrical 
fishes that are most easily tamed. If the gymnoti were not 
known, we might suppose from the observations made on 
torpedoes, that fishes cannot give their shocks from a dis- 
,tance through very thick strata of water, or through a bar of 
iron, without forming a circuit. Mr. Williamson has felt 
strong shocks, when he héld only one hand in the water, and 
this hand,without touching the gymnotus, was placed betweenit 
and the small fish, toward which the stroke was directed from 
twelve or fifteen inches distance. (Phil. Trans., vol. Ixv, p. 99 
and 108.) When the gymnotus was enfeebled (in a bad 
state of health), the dateral shock was imperceptible ; and in 
order to feel the shock it was necessary, to form a chain, and 
touch the fish with both hands at once. Cavendish, in his 
ingenious experiments on an artéficial torpedo, bad well 


remarked these differences, depending on the greater or less. 


energy of the charge. (Phil. Trans., 1776, p. 212.) 


377 


in all organized beings. Did an ingenious and 
lively people, the Arabians, guess from remote 
antiquity, that the same force, which inflames 
the vault of Heaven in storms, is the living 
and invisible weapon of inhabitants of the 
water? It is asserted, that the electrical fish of 
the Nile bears a name in Egypt, that signifies 
thunder *. 

We left the town of Calabozo on the 24th of 
March, highly satisfied with our abode, and the 
experiments we had made on an object so worthy 
of the attention of physiologists. I had besides 
obtained some good observations of the stars ; 
and discovered with surprise, that the errors of 
maps amounted here also to a quarter of a de- 


gree of latitude. No person had taken an ob- 
servation before me on this spot; and geo- 
graphers, magnifying as usual the distance from 
the coast to the islands, have carried. back 
beyond measure all the points toward the 
South +. 


* Annal. du Mus., vol. i, p. 398. It appears however, that 
a distinction is to be made between rahd, thunder, and rahadd, 
the electrical fish; and that this latter word means simply 
what causes trembling. Silv. de Sacy, in Abd-Allatif, p. 167. 

+ I found the latitude of Calabozo, which in the map of 
Arrowsmith is called Calabaco, according to meridian’ alti- 
tudes of Canopus, to be 8° 56’ 8”: and the longitude, by, 
the timekeeper adjusted at Caraccas, '70° 10’ 40", that is 
0° 16/ 56’ Hast of Guacara. D’Anville places Calabozo in 
8° 33°; La Cruz, in.8° 48’, Sce my Recueil d Obs. Astr., 


378 


As we advanced into the southern part of the 
Llanos, we found the ground more dusty, more 
destitute of herbage, and more cracked by the 
effect of long drought. The palm-trees disap- 
peared by degrees. The thermometer kept, 
from eleven in the morning till sunset, at 34° 
or 35°. The more the air appeared calm at 


vol. i, p. 212—215. The magnetic dip at Calabozo was 
387° cent. div. The needle oscillated two hundred and 


twenty-two times in ten minutes, or ten oscillations less than 


at Caraccas. I obtained forthe magnetic variation on the 
48th of March, 1800, 4° 54/10” N. E. The elevation of 
Calabozo above the level of the sea is 53 toises. (The Nivel- 
lement Barométrique indicates by mistake 94 toises. In the 
Journal was entered “ Bar. 333:7', but 40 feet above the 
Rio Guarico.” The feet were taken for toises.) I give here 
the following observations, for the most part not yet pub- 
lished. At the Hacienda de Cura my barometer indicated 
at 5° (therm. cent. 27:6°) 320°5': at Guacara, at 10° (th. 
25°) 321°5': at Nueva Valencia, at 14” (th, 264°) 320°4': 
at Guigue, at 2" (th, 30°3°) 321°2': at Villa de Cura, at 6° 
(th. 263°) 317-6): at San Juan, at 1” (th, 25-2") 322'8': at 
Parapara, at 23" (th. 27:2°) 331°5': at Cayman, in the Llano, 
at 14" (th. 28°3°) 333:3': at Calabozo, five toises above the 
river Guarico, at 23° (th. 31°2°) 333°7': at St. Geronimo 
del Guayaval, at 21°(th, 32°) three toises above the Rio 
Guarico, 336:4': at San Fernando de Apure, five toises 
above the level of the waters of the Apure, at 23" (th. 31°4° ) 
33564 These numbers give differences of relative height. 
The correction of the basin of the barometer has not been 
made to reduce the barometer to the level of the sea, 387°8'. 
For the absolute heights consult my Obs. Ast., vol.i, p. 297 


and 367. 


379 


eight or ten feet high, the more we were en- 
veloped in those whirlwinds of dust, caused by 
the little currents of air that sweep the ground. 
About four o'clock in the afternoon we found a 
young Indian girl stretched upon the savannah. 
She was quite naked, lay upon her back, and 
appeared to be only twelve or thirteen years of 
age. Exhausted with fatigue and thirst, her 
eyes, nostrils, and mouth filled with dust, she 
breathed with a rattling in her throat, and was 
unable to answer our questions. A pitcher over- 
turned, and half filled with sand, was lying at 
her side. Happily one of our mules was laden 
with water ; and we roused the young girl from 
her lethargic state by washing her face, and 


forcing her to drink a few drops of wine. She 
‘was at first frightened at seeing herself sur- 
rounded by so many persons; but by degrees 
she took courage, and conversed with our guides. 
She judged from the position of the Sun, that 


she must have remained during several hours 
in that state of lethargy. We could not pre- 
vail on her to mount one of our beasts of 
burden. She would not return: to Uritucu. 
She had been in service at a neighbouring farm ; 
and her masters had discharged her, because at 
the.end of a long sickness they found she was 
less able to work than before. Our menaces and 
our prayers were fruitless ; insensible to suffer- 
ing, like the rest of her race, she persisted in 


her resolution of going to one of the Indian 
missions, that surround the city of Calabozo. 
We took the sand out of her pitcher, and filled 
it with water. She resumed her way along the 
steppe, before we had remounted our horses, 
and was soon separated from us by a cloud of 
dust. During the night we forded the Rio- 
Uritucu *, which is filled with a breed of croco- 
diles remarkable for their ferocity. We were 
advised, to prevent our dogs from going to drink 
in the rivers ; for it often happens, that the cro- 
codiles of Uritucu come out of the water, and 
pursue dogs upon the shore. This intrepidity is 
so much the more striking, as at eight leagues 
distance the crocodiles of the Rio Tisnao are 
timid enough, and little dangerous. The man- 
ners of animals vary in the same species accord- 
ing to local circumstances difficult to investi- 
gate. We were shown a hut, or rather a kind of 
shed, in-which our host of Calabozo, Don Mi- 
guel Cousin, had witnessed a very extraordinary 
scene. Sleeping with one of his friends on a 
bench covered with leather, Don Miguel was 
awakened early in the morning by violent shakes, 
and a horrible noise. Clods of earth were 
thrown into the middle of the hut... Presently 
a young crocodile two or -three feet long issued 
from under the bed, darted at a dog that lay on 


* Passo de Uritucu. 


381 


the threshold of the door, and, missing him in 
the impetuosity of his spring, ran toward the 
beach to attain the river. On examining the 
spot where the barbacon, or bedstead, was placed, 
the cause of this strange adventure was easily 
discovered. The ground was disturbed to a 
considerable depth. It was dried mud, that had 
covered the crocodile in that state of lethargy, 
or summer sleep, in which many of the species 
lie during the absence of the rains amid the ~ 
Llanos. The noise of men and horses, per- 

haps the smell of the dog, had awakened the ~ 
crocodile. The hut being placed at the edge of 

the pool, and inundated during part of the 

year, the crocodile had no doubt entered, at 

the time of the inundation of the savannahs, by 

the same opening by which Mr. Pozo saw it go 

out. The Indians often find enormous boas, 

which they call Uji, or water-serpents*, in the 

same lethargic state. To reanimate them, they 

must be irritated, or wetted with water. Boas are 

killed, and immersed in the streams, to obtain, 

by means of putrefaction, the tendinous parts of 
the-dorsal muscles, of which excellent strings for 

the guitar are made-at Calabozo, preferable to 

those furnished by the intestines of the alouate 

monkeys. 


* Culebras de agua, traga-venado, “‘ swallower of oie oe 
The word uji belongs to the Tamanack language. 


382 


We have just seen, that the drought and heat 
of the Llanos act hike cold upon animals and 
plants. Beyond the tropics the trees lose their 
leaves in a very dry air. Reptiles, particularly 
crocodiles and boas, having very indolent habits, 
leave with difficulty the basins where they have 
found water at the period of great inundations. 
In proportion as the pools become dry, thes 
animals penetrate into the mud, in search of the 
degree of humidity that gives flexibility to their 
skin and integuments. In this state of repose they 
are seized with stupefaction : but they preserve a 
communication perhaps with the external air ; 
and, however little this communication is, it 
may suffice to keep up the respiration of an ani- 
mal of the saurien family, provided with enor- 
mous pulmonary bags, exerting no muscular mo- 
tion, and in which almost all the vital functions 
are suspended *. It is probable, that the mean 
temperature of the dried mud, exposed to the 
solar rays, is more than 40°. When the North 
of Egypt, where the coolest-} month does not 
fall below 13-4°, still sustained crocodiles, they 
were often found torpid with cold. They were 
subject to a winter sleep, like our frogs, our 


* See my experiments on the respiration of young croco- 
diles in the Obs. de Zoologie, vol. i, p. 258. ‘ 

+ This is the mean temperature of the month of February 
at Cairo, lat. 30° 2': toward Thebes the diminution of the 
temperature is naturally Jess. 


383 


salamanders, our sand-martins, and our mar-' 
mosets. If the hibernal lethargy be observed at 
once in animals with cold and those with hot 
blood, we shall be less surprised to learn, that’ 
these two classes furnish alike examples of a 
summer sleep. In the same manner as the cro- 
codiles of South America, the tenrecs *, or Ma- 
dagascar hedge-hogs, in the midst of the torrid 
zone, pass three months of the year in lethargy. 
On the 25th of March we traversed the 
smoothest part of the steppes of Caraccas, the 
Mesa de Pavones. It is entirely destitute of the 
corypha and murichi palm-trees. As far as the 
eye can reach not a single object fifteen inches 
high can be discovered. The air was clear, and 
the sky of a very deep blue ; but the horizon 
reflected a livid and yellowish light, caused no 
doubt by the quantity of sand suspended in the 
atmosphere. We met some large herds, and 
with them flocks of birds of a black colour, with 
an olive reflection. They are of the genus cro- 
tophaga }, and follow the cattle. We had often 
seen them perched on the backs of cows, seek- 
ing for gadflies and other insects. Like many 
birds of these desert ‘places, they fear so little 
the approach of man, that children often take 


* Centenes, Illiger.. (Erinaceus ecaudatus, Lin.) 
+ The Spanish colonists call the crotophaga ani, zamurito, 
(little carrion vulture, vultur aura minuta), or garapatero, 


** eater of garapatas,” insects of the family. of acarides, 
| Sargpans, ¥ j 


$84 


them with the hand. In the valleys of Aragua, 
where they are very common, we have seen them 
perch upon our hammocks, while we were re- 


posing in them in open day. 

We discover between Calabozo, Uritueu, and 
the Mesa de Pavones, wherever men have made 
excavations of some feet deep, the geological 
constitution of the Llanos. <A formation of red 
sandstone * (or ancient conglomerate) covers 
an extent of several thousand square leagues. 
We shall find it again hereafter in the vast plains 
of the Amazon, on the eastern boundary of the 
province of Jaén de Bracamoros. This prodi- 
gious extension of red sandstone, in the low 
grounds that stretch along the East of the 
Andes, is one'of the most striking phenomena, 
with which the study of rocks in the equinoctial 
regions furnished me. 

The red sandstone of the Llanos of Caraceas 
lies in a concave ‘position +, between the primi- 
tive mountains of the shore and of Parime. On - 
the North it is backed’ by the transition slates {, 
and on the. South it rests immediately on the 
_ granites of the Oroonoko. We observed in it 
rounded fragments of quartz, kieselschiefer, and. 


%* Rothes todtes liegende, or eltester fletssandstein of the 
school of Freyberg ; poudingue psammitique of Messrs. Brong- 
niart and Bonnard. 

‘+ Muldenformyge lagerung. 
$ At Malpasso and Piedras Azules, See above, p. 280. 


389 


Lydian stone, cemented by an olive brown 
ferruginous clay. It is altogether the same for- 
mation as the todteliegende of Thuringia. The 
cement is sometimes of so vivid a red, that the 
people of the country take it for cinnabar. We 
found a Capuchin monk at Calabozo, who in 
vain attempted to extract mercury from this red 
sandstone. Inthe Mesa de Paja this rock con- 
tains strata of another quartzose sandstone, 
very fine-grained ; more to the South it contains 
masses of brown iron, and fragments of petrified 
wood, of the monocotyledonous family; but we 
did not see in it any shells. The red sandstone, 
called by the Llaneros, piedra de arrecifes *, is 
every where covered with a stratum of clay. This 
clay, dried and hardened in the Sun, splits into 
separate prismatic pieces with five or six sides. 
Does it belong to the trap formation of Parapara ? 
It becomes thicker, and mixed with sand, as we 
approach the Rio Apure; for near Calabozo it 
is one toise thick, near the mission of Guayaval 
five toises ; which may lead to the belief, that 
the strata of red sandstone dip toward the South. 
We gathered in the Mesa de Pavones little 
nodules of azure iron ore disseminated in the 
clay +. 

A dense, whitish-gray limestone, with a smooth 


*® Stone of the reefs. 
t+ Blaue Eisenerde, blue phosphated iron. 
VOL. IV. NG 


fracture, somewhat analogous to the formation 
of Caripe *, and consequently to that of Jura, 
lies: on the red sandstone between Tisnao and 
Calabozo: in several other places, for instance 
in the Mesa de San Diego, and between Ortiz 
and the Mesa de Paja +, we find above the lime- 
stone lamellar gypsum alternating with strata 
of marl. Considerable quantities of this gypsum 
are sent to the city of Caraccas {, situate amid 


primitive mountains. 

This gypsum generally forms only small beds, 7 
and is mixed with a great deal of fibrous 
gypsum. Is it of the same formation as that of 
Guire, on the coast of Paria, which contains 
sulphur? or do the masses of this latter sub- 


stance, found in the valley of Buen Pastor and 
on the banks of the Oroonoko, belong, with the 
argillaceous gypsum of the Llanos, to a second- 
ary formation much more recent § ? 


*® See vol. iii, chap. vi, p. 107; chap. vili, p. 175; chap. 
xi, p. 365. Does this formation of secondary limestone of 
the Llanos contain galena? It has been found in strata of 
black marl, at Barbacoa, between Truxillo and Barquesi- 
meto, North-West of the Llanos. 

+ Also near Cachipe and San Juacquim, in the Llanos of 
Barcelona. — 

+ This trade is carried on at Parapara. <A load of eight 
arobas sells at Caraccas for twenty-four piastres. 

§ See above, ch. ii, vol. i, p. 257; chap. vi, vol. iii, p. 108; 
and chap, xiv in the present volume, 


387 


These questions are very interesting in the 
study of the relative antiquity of rocks, which is 
the principal basis of geognosy. I know not of 
any formations of muriat of soda in the Llanos. 
Horned cattle prosper here without those famous 
bareros, or muriatiferous lands, that abound in 
the Pampas of Buenos Ayres. 

After having wandered a long time, and always 
without any traces of a road,in the desert savan- 
nahs of the Mesa de Pavones, we were agreeably 
surprised to find a solitary farm, the Hato de 
Alta Gracia, surrounded with gardens and 
basins of limpid water. Hedges of bead-trees 
encircled groups of icacoes loaded with fruit. 
Farther on, we passed the night near the small 
village of San Geronymo del Guayaval, founded 
by Capuchin missionaries. It is situate near the: 
banks of the Rio Guarico, which falls into the 
Apure. I visited the ecclesiastic, who had no 
other habitation than his church, not having yet 
built a house. He was a young man, and re- 
ceived us in the most obliging manner, giving 
us all the information we desired. His village, 
or to use the word established among the monks, 
his mission, was not easy to govern. The 
founder, who had not hesitated to establish for. 
his own profit a pulperia, in other words, to sell 
bananas and guwarapo in the church itself, had 
shown himself as little delicate in the choice of 
the new colonists. Many vagabonds of the 

2:0 2 


385 


Llanos had settled at Guayaval, because the int- 
habitants of a mission are exempt from the 
authority of the secular arm. Here, as in New 
Holland, it cannot be expected, that good colon- 
ists will be formed before the second or third 
generation. 

- We passed the Guarico, and encamped in the 
savannahs South of Guayaval. Enormous bats, 
no doubt of the tribe of phyllostomes, hovered 
as usual over our hammocks a great part of the 
night. It seems at every moment as if they were 
going to fasten on the face. Early in the morn- 
ing we pursued our way over low grounds, often 
inundated. In the season of rains, a boat may 
be navigated, as on a lake, between the Guarico 


and the Apure. We were accompanied by a 
man, who had visited all the farms (hatos) of 
the Llanos, in order to buy horses. He had 
given two thousand two hundred piastres for 
a thousand horses. The price of course is lower 
in proportion as the purchase is more consider- 
able *. We arrived on the 27th of March at the 


* In the Llanos of Calabozo and of Guayaval, a young 
bull, two or three years old, costs one piastre. If castrated 
(an operation rather dangerous in so hot a climate) from 
five to six piastres. An ox hide dried in the Sun is worth 
two rials of plate and a half (one peso — eight rials); a hen, 
two rials ; a sheep, at Barquesimeto and Truxillo, for there 
are none to the East of these towns, three rials. As these 


prices will necessarily vary in proportion as_ the Spanish. 


389 


Villa de San Fernando, the capital of the mis- 
sion of the Capuchins in the province of Varinas. 
This was the termination of our journey over the 
Plains ; for we passed the three months of 
April, May, and June on the rivers. 


colonies augment in population, it appeared to me interesting 
to note these statements, which may one day serve as a 


foundation for some researches in political economy. 


390 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


San Fernando de Apure.—Intertwinings, and 
bifurcations of the rivers Apure and Arauca. 
—Navigation on the Rio Apure. 


Tit the second half of the eighteenth century 
the names of the great rivers Apure, Arauca, 
and Meta were scarcely known in Europe; even 
less than they had been in the two preceding 
ages, when the valiant Felipe de Urre, and 
the conquerors of Tocuyo, traversed the Llanos, 
to seek beyond the Apure the great city of Do- 
rado, and the rich country of the Omeguas, the 
Tombuctoo of the New Continent. Such dar- 
ing expeditions could not be made without all 
the apparatus of war; and the weapons, that 
were meant for the defence of the new colonists, 
were employed without intermission against the 
unhappy natives. When more peaceful times 
succeeded to those of violence and public cala- 
mity, two powerful Indian tribes, the Cabres 
and the Caribbees ef the Oroonoko, rendered 
themselves masters of the country, which the 


391 


Conquistadores had ceased to ravage. Poor 
monks only were then permitted to advance to’ 
the South of the Steppes. An unknown world 
commenced for the Spanish colonists beyond the 
Uritucu; and the descendants of those intrepid 
warriors, who had pushed their conquests from 
Peru to the coasts of New Grenada and the 
mouth of the “Amazon, were ignorant of the 
roads that lead from Coro to the Rio Meta. 
The shore of Venezuela remained a separate 
country ; and the slow conquests of the Jesuit 
missionaries were successful only by skirting the 
banks of the Oroonoko. These fathers had 
already penetrated beyond the great cataracts 
of Atures and Maypures, when the Andalusian 
Capuchins had scarcely reached the plains of 
Calabozo, from the coast and the valleys of 
Aragua. It would be difficult te explain these 
contrasts by the system according to which the 
different monastic orders are governed ; it is the 
aspect of the country, that contributes power- . 
fully to the more or less rapid’ progress of the 
missions. They extend slowly into the interior 
of the land on mountains, or in steppes wherever 
they do not follow the course of a particular 
river. It will scarcely be believed, that the 
Villa de Fernando de Apure, only fifty leagues 
distant in a direct line from that part of the 
coast of Caraccas the longest inhabited, was 
founded only in 1789. We were shown a parch- 


ment, full of fine paintings, containing the privi- 


leges' of this little town. The parchment arrived 
from Madrid, at the solicitation of the monks, 
when yet only a few huts of reeds were to be seen 
around a great cross raised in the centre of the 
hamlet. The missionaries and the secular go- 
vernments being alike interested in exaggerat- 
ing in Europe what they have done to augment 
the culture and population of the provinces be- 
yond sea, it often happens, that names of towns 
and villages are placed. on the list of new con- 
quests, long before their foundation. We shalk 
point out some on the banks of the Oroonoko 
and the. Cassiquiare, which, long projected, 
have never had any other existence than in the 
maps of the missions engraved at Rome and 
Madrid. 

The situation of San Fernando, on a large 
navigable river, near the mouth of another river, 
that. traverses the whole province of Varinas, is 
extremely advantageous for trade. © Every pro- 
duction of that province, hides, cacao, cotton, 
and the indigo of Mijagual which is of the first 
quality, passes through this town toward the 
mouths of the Oroonoko. During the season 
of rains large vessels go from Angostura up as 
far as San Fernando de Apure, and by the Rio 
Santo Domingo as far as Torunos, the port of 
the town of Varinas. At that period the inun- 
dations of the rivers, which form a labyrinth of 


393 


branches, between the Apure, the Arauca, the 
Capanaparo, and the Sinaruco, cover a country 


of nearly four hundred square leagues... At this 
point the Oroonoko, turned aside from it’s. course, 
not by neighbouring mountains, but by the rising 
of counterslopes, runs toward the East, instead of 
following it’s ancient direction in the line of the 
meridian. » Considering the surface of the globe 
as a polyedron, formed of planes variously ine 
clined *, we may conceive by the mere inspec- 
tion of the maps, that the intersection of these 
slopes, rising toward the North, the West, and 
the South -+-, between San Fernando de Apure, 
Caycara, and the mouth of the Meta, must 
cause a considerable depression. The ‘savan- 
nahs in this basin are covered with twelve or 
fourteen feet of water ; and present, at the period 
of rains, the/aspect of a great lake. The farms 
and villages placed on a sort of shoals,, searcely 
rise two or three feet above the surface of the 
water. Every thing here recalls to mind the 


* See a paper onthe art of constructing canals, by Messrs. 
Dupuis-Torcy and Brissot, in the Journal de. l’Ecole Poly- 
technique, vol. vii, p. 265. 

+ The risings toward the North and the West are con- 
nected with two lines of ridges, the mountains of Villa de Cura 
and of Merida. The third slope, running from North to 
South, is that of the land strait, between the Andes and 
the chain of Parime. It determines the general inchination 
of the Oroonoko, from. the mouth of the Guaviare to that of 
the Apure. 


394 


inundations of Lower Egypt, and the lake of 
Xarayes, heretofore so celebrated among geo- 
graphers, though it exists only during some 
months of the vear. The swellings of the rivers 
Apure, Meta, and Oroonoko, are also periodical. 
In the rainy season the horses, that wander in 
the savannah, and have not time to reach the 
rising grounds of the Llanos, perish by hundreds. 
The mares are seen, followed by their colts *, 
swimming during a part of the day to feed upon 
the grass, the tops of which alone wave above 
the waters. In this state they are pursued by 
the crocodiles, and it is by no means uncommon 
to find the prints of the teeth of these carnivorous 
reptiles on their thighs. The carcases of horses, 
mules, and cows, attract. an innumerable quan- 
tity of vultures. The zamuros- are the ibises, 
or rather the aquiline vultures, of this country. 
They have the mien of Pharaol’s chicken, and 
render the same service to the inhabitants of the 
Llanos as the vultur percnopterus to the inhabi- 
tants of Egypt. 

We cannot reflect on the effects of these inun- 
dations, without admiring the prodigious pliabi- 
lity of the organization of the animals, that man 


* The colts are drowned every where in large numbers, 
because they are sooner tired of swimming, and strive te 


follow the mares in places where these alone can touch the 
ground. 


¢* Vultur aura, L.; earrion vulture. 


395 


has subjected to his sway. In Greenland the 
dog eats the refuse of the fisheries; and, when 
fish are wanting, feeds on seaweed. ‘The ass, 
and the horse, originally natives of the cold and 
barren plains of Upper-Asia, follow man to the 
New World, return to the savege state, and 
lead a restless and painful life in the burning 
climate of the tropics. Pressed alternately, 
by excess of drought and of humidity, they 
sometimes seek a pool in the midst of a bare 
and dusty soil, to quench their thirst ; and at 
other times flee from water, and the overflowing 
rivers, as menaced by an enemy that threatens 
them on all sides. Harrassed during the day 
by gadflies, and moschettoes, the horses, mules, 
and cows find themselves attacked at night. by 
enormous bats, that fasten on their backs, and. 
cause wounds that become dangerous, because 
they are filled with acaridz and other hurtful 
insects. In the time of great drought, the mules 
gnaw even the thorny melocactus *, melon 
thistle, in order to drink it’s cooling juice, and 
draw it forth as from a vegetable, fountain, 
During the great inundations these same animals 
lead an amphibious life, surrounded by crocodiles, 
water-serpents, and manatees. Yet, such are 


* The asses are particularly adroit in extracting the 


moisture contained in the cactus melocactus. They push 
aside the thorns with their hoofs; but some become lame in 
consequence of this operation. 


396 


the immutable laws of nature, their races are 
preserved in the struggle with the elements, and 


amid so many sufferings and dangers. When 
thé waters retire, and the rivers return again 
into their beds, the savannah is spread over with 
a fine odoriferous grass; and the animals of 
old Europe and Upper-Asia seem to enjoy, as 
in their native climate, the renewed vegetation 
of spring. 

During the time of great fleods, the inhabi- 
tants of these countries, to avoid the force of 
the currents, and the danger arising from the 
trunks of trees, which these currents bring 
down, instead of ascending in their boats the 
beds of rivers, cross the savannahs. ‘To go from 
San Fernando to the villages of San Juan de 
Payara, San Raphael de Atamaica, or San 
Francisco de Capanaparo, they direct their 
course due South, as if they were crossing a 
single river of twenty leagues broad. The junc- 
tions of the Guarico, the Apure, the Cabullare, 
and the Arauca with the Oroonoko, form, at a 
hundred and sixty leagues from the coast of 
Guyana, a kind of interior Delta, of which hydro- 
graphy furnishes few examples in the Old World. 
According to the height of the mercury in the 
barometer, the waters of the Apure have only a 
fall of thirty-four toises from San Fernando to 
the sea. The fall from the mouths of the Osage 
and the Missoury to the bar of the Missisippi is 


397 


not more considerable. The savannahs of 
Lower Louisiana every where remind us of the 
savannahs of the Lower Oroonoko. 

We remained three days in the little town ‘of 
San Fernando. We lodged with the Capuchin 
missionary, who lived much at his ease. We 
were recommended to him by the bishop of 
Caraccas, and he showed us the most obliging 
attentions. He consulted me on the works, 
that had been undertaken to prevent the flood 
from undermining the shore, on which the town 
was built. The flowing of the Portuguesa into 
the Apure gives the latter an impulse toward 
the South-West; and, instead of procuring a 
freer course for the river, attempts were made 
to confine it by dykes and piers. It was easy to 
predict, that these would be the more rapidly’ 
destroyed by the swell of the waters, as the 
shore had been weakened by taking away the 
‘ earth behind the dyke, to be employed in these 
hydraulic constructions. 

San Fernando is celebrated for the excessive 
heat, that prevails there the greater part of the 
year: and before I begin the recital of our long 
navigation on the rivers, I shall relate some 
acts, that are calculated to throw light on the 

meteorology of the tropics. We went provided 
_ with thermometers to the flat shores, that border 
the river Apure, which is covered with white 
‘sand. At two in the afternoon I found the sand, 


398 


wherever it was exposed to the Sun, at 52°5° *, 
The instrument, raised eighteen inches above 
the sand, marked 42°8°; and at six feet high, 
38°7°. The temperature of the air under the 
shade of a ceiba, was 36°2°. These observations 
were made during a dead calm. As soon as 
the wind began to blow, the temperature of the 
air rose 3°; yet we were not enveloped by a 
wind of sand: but the strata of air had been in 
contact with a soil more strongly. heated, or 
‘through which whirlwinds of sand had passed. 
This western part of the Llanos is the hottest, 
because it receives air that has already crossed 
the rest of the barren steppe. The same differ- 
ence has been ebserved between the eastern 
and western parts of the deserts of Africa, where 
the tradewinds blow. 

The heat augments sensibly in the Llanos 
during the time of rains, particularly in the 
month of July, when the sky is cloudy, and 
sends back the radiant heat toward the earth. 
During this season the breeze entirely ceases ; 
and, according to good thermometrical observa- 
tions made by Mr. Pozo, the thermometer rises 
in the shade to 39° and 39-5° +, though kept 
at the distance of more than fifteen feet. from 
the ground. As we approached the banks of 


* 42° 'R. 
F 91°2° or 31°6° R, 


399 


the Portuguesa, the Apure, and the Apurito, the 
air became cooler from the evaporation of so 
considerable a mass of water. This effect is 
more especially perceptible at sunset ; during 
the day, the shores of the rivers, covered with 
white sand, reflect the heat in a manner insup- 
portable, more even than the yellowish-brown 
clayey grounds of Calabozo and Tisnao. 

On the 23th of March I was on the shore at 
sunrise, to measure the breadth of the Apure, 
which is two hundred and six toises. The thun- 
der rolled every where around. It was the first 
storm, and the first rain of the season. The 
river was swelled by the East wind ; but it soon 
became calm, and then some great cetacez, of 
the family of blowers, perfectly resembling the 
porpoises * of our seas, began to play in long files 
on the surface of the water. The slow and in- 
dolent crocodiles seem to dread the neighbour- 
hood of these animals, so noisy and impetuous 
in their evolutions. We saw them dive when- 
ever the blowers approached them. It is a very 
extraordinary phenomenon, to find cetaceous 
animals at such a distance from the coast. The 
Spaniards of the missions designate them, as 
they do the porpoises of the ocean, by the name 
of toninas. The Indian name is orinucna +. 


*® Delphinus phocena, LL. 


+ In the Tamanack language, 


400 


They are three or four feet long; and bending 
their back, arid pressing with their tail on the 
inferior strata of the water, they expose to view 
a part of the back and of the dorsal fin. I did 
not succeed in obtaining any, though I often 
engaged the Indians to shoot at them with their 
arrows. Father Gili asserts, that the Gumaoes 
eat their flesh. Are these cetaceous animals pe- 
culiar to the great rivers of South America, like 
the manatee, which, according to the anatomical 
researches of Mr. Cuvier, is also a fresh water 
cetaceous animal? or must we admit, that they 
zo up from the sea against the current, as the 
delphinaptera beluga sometimes does in the 
rivers of Asia? What would lead me to doubt 
this last supposition is, that we saw toninas 
above the great cataracts of the Oroonoko, in the » 
Rio Atapabo, Did they penetrate into the centre 
of equinoctial America from the mouth of the 
Amazon, by the communication of this, river 
with the Rio Negro, the Cassiquiare, and the 
-Oroonoko? ‘They are found here at all seasons, 
and nothing seems to announce, that they make 
periodical voyages like salmon. 

While the thunder rolled around us, the sky 
yet displayed only scattered clouds, that ad- 
vanced slowly toward the zenith, and in an op- 
posite direction. ‘The hygrometer of Deluc was 
at 53°; the centigrade thermometer, oe". 


* Hygrometer of Saussure, 879°; th. 19° R. 


401 


The electrometer, armed with a smoking match, 
gave no sign of electricity. As the storm ga- 
thered, the blue of the sky changed at first to 
deep azure, and then to gray. The vesicular 
vapour became -visible, and the thermometer 
rose 3°, as is almost always the case within the 
tropics from a cloudy sky, that sends back the 
radiant heat of the soil. A heavy rain fell. 
Being sufficiently habituated to the climate not 
to fear the effect of tropical rains, we remained 
on the shore, to observe the electrometer. I 
held it more than twenty minutes in my hand, 
six feet above the ground, and observed, that 
in general the pith balls separated only a few 
seconds before the lightning was seen. The se- 
paration was four lines. The electric charge 
remained the same during several minutes ; and 
having time to determine the nature of the elec- 
tricity, by approaching a stick of sealingwax, I 
saw here in the plain what I have often observed 
on the back of the Andes during a storm, that 
the electricity of the atmosphere was first posi- 
tive, then null, and then negative. These oscil- 
lations from- positive to negative (from the 
vitreous to the resinous state) were often re- 
peated. Yet the electrometer constantly denoted 
a little before the lightning only no E., or + E., 

and never — E. ‘Toward the end of the hae! 
the west wind became very impetuous. The 
clouds dispersed, and the thermometer sunk to 

VOL. IV. _ 2D 


402 


22° on account of the evaporation from the soil, 
and the freer radiation toward the sky. 

I have entered into these details on the elec- 
tric charge of the atmosphere, because travellers 
in general have confined themselves to the de- 
scription of the impressions produced on a Eu- 
ropean newly arrived by the solemn spectacle of 
a tropical storm. In a country, where the year 
is divided into two great seasons of drought and 
wet, or, as the Indians say in their expressive 
language, of Sun * and rain +, it is highly inte- 
resting to follow the progress of meteorological 
phenomena in the transition from one season: to 
another. We had already observed in the val- 
leys of Aragua, from the 18th and 19th of Feb- 
ruary, clouds forming at the commencement of 
the night. In the beginning of the month of 
March, the accumulation of the vesicular va- 
pours, visible to the eye, and with them signs of 
atmospheric electricity, augmented daily. We 
saw flashes of heat lightning to the South; and 
the electrometer of Volta displayed constantly 
at sunset vitreous electricity. ‘The separation 


* In Maypure camoti, properly the resplendant ardor (of 
the Sun). The Tamanacs call the season of drought zamu, 
the time of grasshoppers. 

+ In the Tamanac language canepo. The year is desig- 
nated, among several nations, by the name of one of the two 
seasons. The Maypures say, so many Suns (or rather so many 
ardors of the Sun); the Tamanacs, so many rains, 


403 


of the little pith balls, nuli during the rest of the 
day, was from three to four lines at the com- 
mencement of the night; which is triple what I 
generally observed in Europe *, with the same 
instrument, in calm weather. Upon the whole, 
from the 26th of May, the electrical equilibrium 
of the atmosphere seemed broken. During 
whole hours the electricity was null; then be- 
came very strong, from four to five lines; and 
soon after was again imperceptible. The hy- 
drometer of Deluc continued to indicate great 
dryness from 33° to 35° +, and yet the atmos- 
phere appeared no longer the same. -Amid these 
perpetual variations of the electric charge of the 
air, the trees, divested of their foliage, already 


began to unfold new leaves, and seemed to feel 


the approach of spring. 

The variations which we have just described 
are not peculiar to one year. Every thing in the 
equinoctial zone has a wonderful uniformity of 
succession, because the active powers of nature 
limit and balance each other, according to laws 


* At Salzbourg, at Bareith, and at Jena, in Germany ; in 
the plain of St. Denis near Paris; and on the table-land in 
Castille. See the table of my experiments on the electricity 
of the atmosphere in the Journal de Physique, vol. xlviii, 
p. 193. : 

+ 68° to '70°8° of the hygrometer of Saussure,- Reaumur’s 
therm. from 23° to 26°; which proves the dryness of the air 
in the equinoctial zone. 

2p 2 


404 


that are easily recognized. I shall here note the 
progress of atmospherical phenomena in the 
islands to the East of the Cordilleras of Merida 
and of New Grenada, in the Llanos of Venezuela 
and the Rio Meta, from four to ten degrees of 
North latitude, wherever the rains are constant 
from May to October, and comprehending con- 
sequently the periods of the greatest heats, which 
is in July and August *. 

Nothing can equal the clearness of the atmos- 
phere from the month of December to that of 
February. The sky is then constantly without 
clouds; and if one should appear, it is a pheno- 
menon that engages the whole attention of the 
inhabitants. The breeze from the East, and 
the East-North-East, blows with violence. As it 
brings with it air always of the same tempera- 
ture, the vapours cannot become visible by 
cooling. 

About the end of February and the begin- 
ning of March, the blue of the sky is less intense, 
the hygrometer indicates by degrees greater hu- 
midity, the stars are sometimes veiled by a slight 
stratum of vapours, and their light is no longer 
steady and planetary; they are seen twinkling 


* The maximum of the heat is felt on the coast, at Cu- 
mana, at La Guayra, and in the neighbouring island of Mar- 
garetta, not before the month of September ; and the rains, 
if this name can be given to a few drops that fall at intervals, 
are observed dnly in the months of October and November. 


405 


from time to time at 20° above the horizon. 
The breeze at this period becomes less strong, 
less regular, and is often interrupted by dead 
calms. ‘The clouds accumulate toward the South- 
South-East. They appear like distant moun- 
tains, with outlines strongly. marked. From 
time to time they detach themselves from the 
horizon, and traverse the vault of the sky with 
a rapidity, which little corresponds with the 
feeble wing that reigns in the inferior strata of 
the air. At the end of March, the southern 
region of the atmosphere is illumined by small 
electric explosions. They are like phospho- 
rescent. gleams, circumscribed by one group of 
vapours. The breeze then passes from time to 
time, and for several hours together, to the West 
and South-West. This is a certain sign of the 
approach of the rainy season, which begins at 
the Oroonoko about the end of April. The sky 
begins to be obscured, the azure disappears, and 
a gray tint is spread uniformly over it. At the 
same time the heat of the atmosphere progres- 
sively increases; and soon they are no longer 
clouds, but condensed vapours, that cover the 
whole vault.of the sky. The plaintive cry of the 
howling monkies begins to be heard before the 
rising of the Sun. “The atmospheric electricity, 
which, during the time of great droughts, from 
December to March, had been constantly, in 


406 


the day, from 1:7 to 2 lines on the electrometer 
of Volta, becomes extremely variable from the 
month of March. It appears null during whole 
days; and then for some hours the pith balls of 
the electrometer of Volta diverge three or four 
lines. The atmosphere, which is generally in 
the torrid, as well as in the temperate zone, in a 
state of vitreous electricity, passes alternately, 
for eight or ten minutes, to the resinous state. 
The season of rains is that of storms; and yet a 
great number of experiments, made during three 
years, prove to me, that it is precisely in this 
season of storms we find the electric tension 
least in the lower regions of the atmosphere. 
Are storms the effect of this unequal charge of 
the different superincumbent strata ofair? What 
prevents the electricity from descending toward 
‘the earth, in an air become more humid since 
the month of March? The electricity at this 
period, instead of being diffused throughout the 
whole atmosphere, appears accumulated on the 
exterior envelope, at the surface of the clouds. 
According to Mr. Gay-Lussac it is the formation 
of the cloud itself, that carries the fluid toward 
it’s surface. The storm rises in the plains two 
hours after the Sun has passed the meridian ; 
consequently a short time after the moment of 
the maximum of diurnal heat under the tropics. 
It is extremely rare in the islands to hear thun- 


407 


der during the night, orin the morning. Storms 
at night are peculiar to certain vallies of rivers, 
that have a particular climate. 

What then are the causes of this rupture of 
the equilibrium in the electric tension of the 
air? of this continual condensation of the 
vapours into water? of this interruption of 
the breezes ? of this commencement and dura- 
tion of the rainy seasons? I doubt whether 
electricity have any influence on the formation 
of vesicular vapours. It is rather the forma- 
tion of these vapours that augments and modi- 
fies the electrical tension. To the North and to 
the South of the equator, storms or great explo- 
sions take place at the same time in the tempe- 


rate and in the equinoctial zone. Is there an 
action that is propagated through the great 
aérial ocean from the first of these zones to- 


ward the tropics? How can it be conceived, 
that, under this zone, where the Sun rises con- 
stantly to so great a height above the horizon, 
its passage through the zenith can have so 
powerful an influence on the metcorological 
changes? I am of opinion, that, no local cause 
determines the commencement of the rains un- 
der the tropics; and that a more intimate know- 
ledge of the superior currents of air will eluci- 
date these problems so complicated in appear- 
‘ance. We can observe only what passes in the 
lower strata of the atmosphere. The Andes are 


\ 


408 


scarcely inhabited to above two thousand toises 
high ; and at this height the proximity of the 
soil, and the masses of mountains, that form the 
shoals of the aérial ocean, have a sensible in- 
fluence on the ambient air. What we observe 
on the table-land of Antisana is not what we 
should find at the same height in a balloon, hover- 
ing over the Llanos or the surface of the ocean. 
We have just seen, that the season of rains 
and storms in the northern equinoctial zone 
coincides with the passage of the Sun through 
the zenith * of the place, with the cessation of 
the breezes or North-East winds, and with the 
fréquency of calms, and bendavales, which are 
stormy winds from the South-East and South- 
West accompanied bya cloudy sky. I believe, 
that, in reflecting on the general laws of the 
equilibrium of the gazeous masses that consti- 
tute our atmosphere, we find, in the interruption 
of the current that blows from an homonymous 
pole, in the want of the renewal of air under the 
torrid zone, and in the continued action of an 
ascending humid current, a very simple cause 
of the coincidence of these phenomena. While 
the breeze from the North-East blows with all 


* These passages take place in the fifth and tenth degrees 
of North lat., between the 3d and the 16th of April, and be- 
tween the 27th of August and the 8th of September. 

+ Compare my Essai politique sur la Nowvelle Espagne, vol. ti, 
p. 982, 712, and 767. 


409 - 


it's violence North of the equator, it prevents the 
atmosphere, that covers the equinoctial lands 
and seas, from saturating itself with moisture. 
The hot and moist air of the torrid zone rises: 
aloft, and flows off again toward the poles ; while 
inferior polar currents, bringing drier and colder 
strata, are every instant taking the place of the 
columns of ascending air. By this constant 
action of two opposite currents, the humidity, 
far from being accumulated in the equatorial 
region, is carried toward the cold and temperate 
regions. During this season of breezes, which is 
that when the Sun is in the southern signs, the 
sky in the northern equinoctial zone is constantly 
serene. The vesicular vapours are not con- 
densed, because the air, unceasingly renewed, is’ 
far from the point of saturation, In proportion 
as the Sun, entering the northern signs, rises 
toward the zenith, the breeze of the North-East 
softens, and by degrees entirely -ceases. The 
difference of temperature between the tropics 
and the temperate northern zone is then the least 
possible. It is the summer of the boreal pole ; 
and, if the mean temperature of the winter, be- 
tween 42° and 52° cf North latitude, be from 
20° to 26° of the centigrade thermometer less 
than the equatorial heat, the difference in sum- 
mer is scarcely from 4° to.6°. The Sun being 
in the zenith, and the breeze havirig ceased, the 
causes that produce humidity, and accumulate 


410 


it in the northern equinoctial zone, become at 
once more active. The column of air, which 
reposes on this zone, is saturated with vapours, 
because it is no longer renewed by the polar 
current. Clouds form in this air saturated and 
cooled by the combined effects of radiation and 
the dilatation of the ascending air. This air 
augments it’s capacity for heat in proportion as 
it rarifies.. With the formation and collection of 
the vesicular vapours, the electricity accumu- 
lates in the higher regions of the atmosphere. 
The precipitation of the vapours is continual 
during the day. It generally ceases at night, 
and frequently even before sunset. The showers 
are regularly more violent, and accompanied 
with electric explosions, a short time after the 
maximum of the diurnal heat. This state of 
things remains the same, till the Sun enters into 
the southern signs. ‘This is the commencement 
of cold in the northern temperate zone. The 
current from the North pole is then reestab- 
lished, because the difference between the heat 
of the equinoctial and temperate regions aug- 
ments daily. The North-East breeze blows 
with violence, the air of the tropics is renewed, 
and can no longer attain the degree of satura- 
tion. The rains consequently cease, the vesicu- 
lar vapour is dissolved, and the sky resumes all 
it’s clearness and it’s azure tint.. Electrical ex- 
plosions are no longer heard, doubtless because 


4\] 


electricity finds no more those groups of vesicular 
vapours in the high regions of the air, I had 
almost said that coating of clouds on which the 
fluid can accumulate. 

We have here considered the cessation of the 
breezes as the principal cause * of the equatorial 
rains. ‘These rains in each hemisphere last only 
as long as the Sun has a declination homony- 
mous with that hemispkere. It is necessary to 
observe, that the absence of the breeze is not 
always succeeded by a dead calm ; but that the 
calm is often interrupted, particularly along the 
western coasts of America, by bendavales, or 
South-West and South-East winds. ‘This phe- 
nomenon seems to demonstrate, that the columns 
of humid air, that. rise in the northern equatorial 
zone, sometimes flow off toward the South pole. 
In fact, the countries situate under the torrid 
zone, both North and South of the equator, fur- 
nish during their summer, while the Sun passes 
through their zenith, the maximum of difference 
of temperature with the air of the heteronymous 
pole. The southern temperate zone has it’s 
winter, while it rains to the North of the equa- 
tor; and while a mean heat prevails from 5° to 
6° greater than in the time of drought, when the 


* T have in this discussion designedly excluded the un- 
certain hypotheses, founded on the combinations of oxygen 


and hydrogen, and on the property aitvibated to electricity 
of forming and precipitating vesicular. vapours, 


412 


Sun is lower.* The continuation of the rains, 
while the bendavales blow, proves, that the cur- 
rents from the remoter pole do not act in the 
northern equinoctial zone like the currents of 
the nearer pole, on account of the greater hu- 
midity of the southern polar current. The air, 
wafted by this current, comes from a hemisphere 
consisting almost entirely of water. It traverses 
all the southern equatorial zone to reach the 
parallel of 8° of North latitude; and is conse- 
quently less dry, less cold, less adapted to act 
as a counter-current, to renew the equinoctial 
air, and prevent it’s saturation, than the northern 
polar current, or the breeze from the North- 
East-+. We may suppose, that the bendavales 
are inpetuous winds on some coasts, for instance 
on that of Guatimala, because they are not the 
effect of a regular and progressive descent of the 
air of the tropics toward the South pole, but 
alternate with calms, are accompanied by elec- 
trical explosions, and are real squalls, that indi- 
cate a reflux, an abrupt and instantaneous rup- 
ture of equilibrium in the aérial ocean. 

* From the equator to 10° of North lat., the mean tempe- 
ratures of the summer and winter months scarcely differ 2° 
or 8°; but at the limits of the torrid zone, toward the tropic 
of Cancer, the difference amounts to 8° or 9°. 

+ In the two temperate zones, the air loses it’s transparency 
every time that the wind blows from the heteronymous pole, 


that is to say, from the pole that has not the same denomina- 
tion as the hemisphere where the wind blows. 


ke 


. 


413 


We have here discussed one of the most im- 
portant phenomena of the meteorology of the 
tropics, considered in it’s most general view. 
In the same manner as the limits of the trade- 
winds do not form circles parallel to the equa- 
tor *, the action of the polar currents is variously 
felt under different. meridians. The chains of 
mountains and the coasts in the same hemis- 
phere have often opposite seasons. We shall 
hereafter have occasion to notice several ex- 
amples of these anomalies ; but, in order to dis- 
cover the laws of nature, we must know before 
we examine into the causes of local perturba- 
tions, the mean state of the atmosphere, and the 
constant type of it’s variations. 

The aspect of the sky, the progress of the 
electricity, and the shower of the 28th of March, 
announced the commencement of the rainy sea- 
son; we were still advised however, to go from 
San Fernando de Apure by San Francisco de 
Capanaparo, the Rio Sinaruco, and the Hato de 
San Antonio, to the village of the Otomacks, 
recently founded near the banks of the Meta, 
and to embark on the Oroonoko a little above 
Carichana.- This way by land lies across an un- 
healthy and feverous country. An old farmer, 
Don Francisco Sanehez, obligingly offered to 


* See above, vol. ii, p.9 and 72; and my Mémoire sur les 
lignes isothermes, p. 114. 


414 


conduct us. His dress denoted the great sim- 
plicity of manners, that prevails in those distant 
countries. He had acquired a fortune of more 
than 100,000 piastres, and yet he mounted on 
horseback with bare feet, armed with large 
silver spurs. We knew by the experience of 
several weeks the dull uniformity of the vegeta- 
tion of the Llanos, and, preferred the longer 
road, that leads by the Rio Apure to the Oroo- 
noko. We chose one of those very large canoes, 
called lanchas by the Spaniards*. A  pilot+ 
and four Indians were sufficient to manage it. 
They constructed near the stern, in the space of 
a few hours, a cabin covered with the leaves of 
the corypha, sufficiently spacious to contain a 
table and benches. These were made of. ox 
hides, strained tight, and nailed to frames of 
brazil wood. I mention these minute circum- 
stances, to prove that our accommodations on 
the Rio Apure were far different from those, to 
which we were reduced in the narrow boats of 
the Oroonoko. We loaded the canoe with pro- 
vision for a month. Fowls, eggs, plantains, 
cassava, and cacao, are found in abundance at 


* We payed for the conveyance from San Fernando de 
Apure to Carichana on the Oroonoko, a distance that takes 
eight days, ten piastres for the Jancha, beside the price of the 
days’ works, which is half a piastre, or four rials, for the pilot, 
and two rials for every Indian rower. 

Tt El patron. 


4S 


San Fernando. The good capuchin * father gave 
us sherry wine, oranges, and tamarinds, to make 
cooling beverages. We could foresee, that a 
roof constructed of palm-tree leaves would be- 
come excessively heated in the bed of a large 
river, where we were almost always exposed to 
the perpendicular rays of the Sun. The Indians 
relied less on the provision we had purchased, 
than on their hooks and nets. We took also 
some firearms, which we found in pretty general 
use as far as the cataracts; but farther South 
‘the immense humidity of the air prevents the, 
missionaries from using musquets. The Rio 
Apure abounds in fish, manatees, and turtles, 
the eggs of which afford an aliment more nutri- 
tious than agreeable to the taste. It’s banks are 
peopled by an innumerable quantity of birds, 
among which the pauxi and the guacharaca, 
which may be called the turkeys and pheasants 
of those countries, are found the most useful. 
Their flesh appeared to be harder and less white 
than that of our gallinaceous tribe in Europe, 
because they use much more muscular exercise--. 
We did not forget to add to our provision, fish- 


* Bray Jose Maria de Malaga. 

+ The muscular contraction (the discharge from the nerve 
into the muscle) is attende@ with a chemical change in the 
elements, There is an absorption of oxygen from the arterial 
blood, and, during this absorption, the muscular fibre blackens, 
and becomes carbonized, 


416 


ing-instruments, and fire-arms, a few casks of 
brandy, to serve as a medium of barter with the 
Indians of the Oroonoko. 

We departed from San Fernando * on the 
30th of March, at four in the afternoon. The 
weather was extremely hot; the thermometer 
rising in the shade to 34°, though the breeze 
blew very strongly from the South-East. Owing 
to this contrary wind we could not set our sails. 
We were accompanied in the whole of this 
voyage on the Apure, the Oroonoko, and the 
Rio Negro, by the brother-in-law of the gover- 


nor of the province of Varinas, Don Nicolas 


Sotto, who, recently arrived from Cadiz, had 
made an excursion to San Fernando.: Desirous 
of visiting countries so calculated to excite the 
curiosity of a European, he did not hesitate to 
confine himself with us during seventy-four days 
in a narrow boat, infested with moschettoes. 


* I found, by meridian altitudes of # in the Southern 
Cross, the latitude of San Fernando de Apure (at the house 
of the missionary) 7° 53/12, (Obs. Ast., vol. i, p. 216.) 
The longitude by the timekeeper was 70° 21'10//; the dip 
of the needle, 36:°71¢, cent. div. The intensity of magnetic 
action manifested itself, as at Calabozo, by two hundred and 
twenty-two oscillations in 10/7. The name of San Fernando 
‘is not yet found on modern maps, for instance on the fine 
maps of Arrowsmith and Brué, riotwithstanding the astrono- 
nomical position of this town was published twelve years ago 
in my Conspectus Longitudinum et Latitudinum America aequi- 
noctialss. 


ALT 


His amiable disposition and gay temper often 
contributed to make us forget the sufferings of 
a voyage, that was not wholly exempt from dan- 
ger. We passed the mouth of the Apurito, and 
coasted the island of the same name, formed by 
the Apure and the Guarico. This island is in 
fact only a very low spot of ground, bordered by 
two great rivers, both of which at a little dis- 
tance from each other fall into the Oroonoko, 
after having formed a junction below San Fer- 
nando by the first bifurcation of the Apure. 
Isla del: Apurito is twenty-two leagues in 
length, and two or three leagues in breadth. - It 
is divided by the Cano de la Tigrera, and the 
~ Cano del Manati, into three parts ; the two ex- 
tremes of which bear the names of Isla de Blanco, 
and Isla de los Garzitas. I enter into these par- 
ticulars, because all the maps hitherto published 
disfigure in the strongest manner the course and 
branches of the rivers between the Guarico and 
the Meta. The right bank of the Apure, below 
the Apurito, is somewhat better cultivated than 
the left bank, where the Yaruroes (or Japuin 
Indians) have constructed a few huts with reeds 
and. stalks of palm-leaves. They live by hunt- 
ing and fishing ; and being very skilful in killing 
jaguars, it is they who principally carry the 
skins, known in Europe by the name of tiger- 
skins, to the Spanish villages. A part of these 
Indians have been baptized, but they never visit 
VOL, IV. 25 


418 


the Christian churches. They are considered as 
savages, because they choose to remain indepen- 
dant. Other tribes of Yaruroes live under the 


rule of the missionaries, in the village of Acha- 


guas, situate to the South of the Rio Payara. 
The individuals of this nation, whom I had an 
opportunity of seeing at the Oroonoko, haye 
some features in their physiognomy that are er- 
roneously called Tatarian, and which belong to 
branches of the Mongul race. Their look is 
stern, the eye.very long, high cheekbones, but 
the nose prominent throughout it’s whole length. 
They are taller, browner, and less thick-set than 
the Chayma Indians. The missionaries praise 
the intellectual character of the Yaruroes, who 
were formerly a powerful and numerous nation 
on the banks of the Oroonoko, especially in the 
environs of Caycara, below the mouth of the 
Guarico. We passed the night at Diamante, a 
small sugar plantation formed. opposite the island 
of the same name. 

During the whole of my yoyage from San 
Fernando to San Carlos del Rio Negro, and 
thence to the town of Angostura, I confined my- 
self to writing day by day, either in the boat, or 
where we disembarked at night, what appeared 
to me worthy of observation. Violent rains, and 
the prodigious quantity of moschettoes with 
which the air is filled on the banks of the Oroo- 
noko and the Cassiquiare, necessarily. occasioned 


| 
' 
m 
bs 
H 
HI 
} 
j 


419 


some breaks in this labour; which I supplied by 
notes taken a few days after. The following 
pages are extracts from my journal. Whatever 
is written while the objects we describe are 
before our eyes-bears a character of truth, I had 
almost said of individuality, which gives attrac- 
tion to things the least important. 

In order to avoid useless repetitions, I have 
sometimes added to this journal the notions I 
afterward acquired respecting the objects I had 
described. The more nature appears great and 
awful in forests. traversed by immense rivers, the 
more we should preserve in our pictures of the 
scenery that character of simplicity, which con- 
stitutes the principal and often the sole merit of 
a first sketch. 

March the 31st. A contrary wind obliged us 
to remain on shore till noon. We saw a part of 
‘some canefields laid waste by the effect of a con- 
flagration, which had spread from a neighbour- 
ing forest. The wandering Indians every where 
set fire to the forest where they have encamped 
at night; and during the season of drought, 
vast provinces would be the prey of these con- 
flagrations, if the extreme hardness of the wood 
did not prevent the trees from being entirely 
consumed. We found trunks of desmanthus, 
and. mahogany (cahoba), that were scarcely 
charred two inches deep. 

Having passed the Diamante, we ced pete a 

‘2-5 2 


420 


land inhabited only by tigers, crocodiles, and 
chiguires, a large species of the genus cavia of 
Linneus. We saw flocks of birds, crowded so 
close together, as to appear against the sky like 
a dark cloud,.that every instant changed it’s 
form. ‘The river widens by degrees. One of 
its banks is generally barren and sandy from 
the effect of inundations: the other is higher, 
and covered with lofty trees. Sometimes the 
river is bordered by forests on each side, and 
forms a straight canal a hundred and fifty toises 
broad. ‘The manner in which the trees are dis- 
posed is very remarkable. We first find bushes 
of sauso*, forming a kind of hedge four feet 
high ; and appearing as if they had been clipped 
by the hand of man. A copse of cedars, bra- 
zillettoes, and lignum vite, rises behind this 
hedge. Palm-trees are rare; we saw only a few 
scattered trunks of the thorny piritu and corozo. 
The large quadrupeds of those regions, the tigers, 
tapirs, and pecaris, have made openings in the 
hedge of sausos which we have just described. 
Through these the wild animals pass, when they 
come to drink at the river. As they fear but 
little the approach of a boat, we had the pleasure 
of viewing them pace slowly along the shore, 


* Hermesia castaneifolia. This is a new genus, approach- 
ing the alchornea of Swartz. (See our Plantes Equinox, vol. i, 
p- 163, pl. xlvi.) 


421 


ull they disappeared in the forest, which they 
entered by one of the narrow passes left here 
and there between the bushes. I confess that 
these scenes, which were’ often repeated, had, 
ever for me a peculiar attraction. The pleasure 
they excite is not owing solely to the interest, 
which the naturalist: takes in the objects of his 
study ; it is connected with a feeling common 
to all men, who have been brought up in the 
habits, of civilization. You find yourself in a 
new world, in the midst of untamed and savage 
nature. Now it is the jaguar, the beautiful 
panther of America, that appears upon the 
shore; and now the hocco* with it’s black 
plumage and it’s tufted head, that moves slowly 
along the sausoes. Animals of the most differ- 
ent classes succeed each other. “ Esse como 
en el Paraiso +-,” said our pilot, an old Indian of 
the missions. Every thing indeed here recalls 
to mind that state of the primitive world, the in- 
nocence and felicity of which ancient and vener- 

able traditions have transmitted to all nations : 
but, in carefully observing the manners of ani- 
mals between themselves, we see that they mu- 
tually avoid and fear each other. The golden 
age has ceased; and in this Paradise of the 
American forests, as well as every where else, 


* Crax alector, the peacock pheasant ; c. pauxi, the cashew 
bird. 
t “ It is just as it was in Paradise,” 


422 


sad and long experience has taught all beings, 
that benignity is seldom ‘found in alliance with 
strength. 

When the shore is of considerable breadth, 
the hedge of sauso remains at a distance from 
the river. In this intermediate ground we see 
crocodiles, sometimes to'the number of eight or 
ten, stretched on the sand. Motionless,. the 
jaws opened at right angles, they repose by each 
other without displaying any of those marks of 
affection, observed in other animals that live in 
society. The troop separates as soon as they 
quit the shore. It is, however, probably com- 
posed of one male only, and many females ; for, 
as Mr. Descourtils, who has so much studied 
the crocodiles of Saint Domingo, observed before 
me, the males are rare, because they kill one 
another in fighting during the season of their 
loves. These monstrous reptiles are so numer- 
ous, that throughout the whole course of the 
river we had almost at every instant five or. six 
in view. Yet at this period the swelling of the 
Rio Apure was scarcely perceived ; and conse- 
quently hundreds of crocodiles were still buried 
in the mud of the savannahs. About four in the 
afternoon we stopped to measure'a dead croco- 
dile, that the waters had thrown on the shore. 
It was only sixteen feet eight inches long; some 
days after Mr. Bonpland found another, a male, 
twenty-two feet three inches long. In every 


i 


423 


zone, in America as in Egypt, this animal attains 
the same size. The species so abundant in the 
Apure, the Oroonoko *, and the Rio de la Mag- 
dalena, is not a cayman, or alligator, but a real 
. crocodile, with feet dentated at the external edges, 
analogous to that of the Nile. When it is recol- 
lected, that the male enters the age of puberty 
only at ten years, and that it’s length is then 
eight feet, we may presume, that the crocodile 
measured by Mr. Bonpland was at least twenty- 
eight years old. The Indians told us, that at 
San Fernando scarcely a year passes, without 
two or three grown up persons, particularly 
women who fetch water from the river, being 
drowned by these carnivorous lizards. They 
related to us the history of a young girl of Uri- 
tucu, who by singular intrepidity and presence 
of mind, saved herself from the jaws of a cro- 
codile. When she felt herself seized, she sought 
the eyes of the animal, and plunged her fingers 
into them with such violence, that the pain 
forced the crocodile to let her loose, after having 
bitten off the lower part of her left arm. The 
girl, notwithstanding the enormous quantity of’ 
blood she lost, happily reached the shore, swim- 
ming with the hand she had still left. In those 
desert countries, where man is ever wrestling 


*“ It is the arua of the Tamanack Indians, the amana of the 
Maypure Indians, thé crocodilus acutus of Mr. Cuvier. 


424 


with nature, discourse daily turns on the means, 
that may be employed. to escape from a tiger, 
a boa or fraga venado, or a crocodile ; every one 
prepares, himself in some sort for the dangers 
that await him. I knew, said the young girl of 
Uritucu coolly, “ that the cayman lets go his 
hold, if you push your fingers into his eyes.” 
Long after my return to Europe I learned, that 
in the interior. of. Africa the Negroes know and 
practise the same means. . Who does not recol- 
lect with a lively interest fsaaco, the guide of 
the unfortunate Mungo Park, seized twice, near 
Boulinkombou *, by a crocodile, and twice 
escaping from the jaws of the monster, having 
succeeded in placing his fingers under water in 
both his eyes? The African Isaaco, and. the 
young American, owed their safety to the same 
presence of mind, and the same combination of 
ideas. 

The movements of the crocodile of the Apure 
are abrupt and rapid when it attacks any object; 
but it moves with the slowness of.a salamander, 
when it is not excited by rage or hunger. The 
animal in running makes a rustling noise, that 
seems to proceed from the rubbing of the scales 
of it’s skin against one another. In this move- 
ment it bends it’s back, and appears higher on 
it’s legs than when at rest. We often heard this 


* Mungo Park’s last Travels in Africa, 1815, p. 89. 


noise of the scales very near us: on the shore; 
but it is not true, as the Indians pretend, that, 
like the pangolins, the old crocodiles “ can erect 
their scales, and every part of their armour.” 
The motion of these animals is no doubt gene- 
rally in a straight line, or rather like that of an 
arrow which changes it’s direction at certain 
distances. However; notwithstanding the little 
apparatus of false ribs, that connects the vetebree 
of the neck, and seems to impede the lateray 
movement, crocodiles can turn easily when they 
please. I often saw young ones biting their 
tails ; and other observers have seen the same 
action in crocodiles, at their, full growth. If 
their movements almost always appear to be 
straight forward, it is because, like our small 
lizards, they: execute them. by starts. Crocodiles 
are excellent swimmers; they go..with facility 
against the most rapid current. It appeared to 
me, however, that in descending the river they 
had some difficulty in turning quickly about. 
A large dog, that had accompanied us in our 
journey from Caraccas to the, Rio Negro, was 
one day pursued in swimming by an enormous 
crocodile, which had nearly reached him, when 
the dog escaped it’s enemy by turning round 
suddenly and swimming against the. current. 
The crocodile performed the same movement, 
but much more slowly than the dog, which 
happily gained the shore. : 


426 


The crocodiles of the Apure find abundant 
nourishment in the chiguires * (the thick-nosed 
tapir of naturalists), which live fifty or sixty 
together in troops on the banks of the river. 
These unfortunate animals, as large as our pigs, 
have no weapons of defence; they swim some- 
what better than they run: yet they become the 
prey of the crocodiles in the water, as of the 
tigers on land. It is difficult to conceive, how, 
persecuted by two powerful enemies, they can 
become so numerous; but they breed with the 
same rapidity as the cobayas, or little guinea- 
pigs, which come to us from Brazil. 

We stopped below the mouth of the Cano de 
la Tigrera, in a sinuosity called la Vuelta del 
Joval, to measure the velocity of the water at it’s 
surface. It was not more than 3°2 feet* in a 
second; which gives 2°56. feet for the mean 


* Cavia capybara, Lin. The word chiguire belongs to the 
language of the Palenkas and the Cumanagotoes. (See chap. 
ix, vol. iii, p. 283.) ‘The Spaniards call this animal guarda- 
tinaja; the Caribbees, capigua; the Tamanacks, cappiva ; 
the Maypures, chiato. According to Azzara, it is known 
at Buenos Ayres by the Indian names of capiygua and capi- 
guara. ‘These various denominations display a striking 
analogy between the languages of the Oroonoko, and’ those 
of the Rio de la Plata. 

+ In order to measure the velocity of the surface of rivers, 
I generally measured on the beach a'basis of 250 feet, and 
observed with the chronometer the time, that a floating body 


abandoned fo the current required, to reach this distance: 


427 


velocity. The barometrical heights, attending 
to the effects of the little horary variations, in- 
dicated scarcely a slope of seventeen inches in a 
mile of nine hundred ‘and fifty toises. The 
velocity is the simultaneous effect of the slope of 
the ground, and the accumulation of the waters 
by the swelling of the upper parts of the river. 
“We were again surrounded by chiguires, which 
swim like dogs, raising the head and neck above 
the water. We saw with surprise a large croco- 
dile on the opposite shore, motionless, and sleep- 
ing in the midst of these nibbling animals. It 
awoke at the approach of our canoe, and went 
into the water slowly, without affrighting the 
chiguires. ‘Our Indians accounted for this indif- 


ference by the ‘stupidity of the animal ; but it is 
more probable, that the’ chiguires know by 
long experience, that the crocodile of the Apure 
and the Oroonoko does not attack upon land, 
unless he finds the object he would seize imme- 
diately in his way, at the instant when he throws 
himself into the water. 


Near the Joval nature assumes an awful and 
savage aspect. We there saw the largest tiger we’ 
had ever met with. The natives themselves were 
astonished at it’s prodigious length, which sur- 
passed that of all the tigers of India I had seen 
in the collections of Europe. The animal lay 
stretched beneath the shade of a large zamang*. 


* A species of mimosa, 


428 


It had just killed a chiguire, but had not yet 
touched it’s prey, on which it kept one of it’s 
paws. The zamuroes, a species of vulture which 
we have compared above to the percnopterus of 
Lower-Egypt, were assembled in flocks to de- 
vour the remains of the jaguar’s repast. They 
afforded the most.curious spectacle, by a singular 
mixture..of boldness and timidity. .They ad- 
vanced within the distance of two feet from the ~ 
jaguar, but at the least movement the - beast 
made they. drew back. In order to observe 
more nearly the manners of these animals, we 
went into the little boat, that accompanied our 
canoe. Tigers very rarely attack boats by swim- 
ming to them; and never but when their fero- 
city is heightened by a long privation of food. 
The noise of our’ oars led the animal to rise 
slowly, and hide. itself behind the sauso bushes, 
that bordered the shore... The vultures tried to 
profit by this moment of absence to devour the 
chiguire: but the tiger, notwithstanding the 
proximity of our boat, leaped into the midst of 
them ; and in a fit of rage, expressed by his gait 
- and the movement of his tail, carried off his prey 
to the forest. The Indians regretted, that they 
were not provided with their lances, in order te 
go on shore, and attack the tiger. They are 
accustomed to this weapon, and were right in 
not trusting to our musquets, which, in an air 
so excessively humid, often miss fire. 


429 


Continuing to descend the river, we met with 
the great herd of chiguires, which the tiger had 
put to flight, and from which he had selected 
his prey. These animals saw us land with great 
tranquillity ; some of them were seated, and 
gazed upon us, moving the upper lip like rabbits. 
They seemed not to be afraid ‘of men, but the 
sight of our great dog put them to flight. Their 
hind legs being longer than their fore legs, their 
pace is a slight gallop, but with so little swiftness, 
that we succeeded in catching two of them. 
The chiguire, which swims with ‘the greatest 
agility, utters a short moan in running, as if it’s 
respiration were impeded. Jt is the largest of 
the family of gnawing animals. It defends 
itself only at the last extremity, when it is sur- 
rounded and wounded. Having great strength 
in it’s grinding teeth *, particularly the hinder 
ones, which are pretty long, it can tear the paw 
of a tiger, or the leg of a horse, with it’s bite. 
It's flesh has a smell of musk somewhat dis- 
agreeable; yet hams are made of it in this 
country, which almost justifies the name of 


* We reckoned eighteen on each side. On the hind feet, 
at the upper end of the metatarsus; there is a callosity three 
inches long and three quarters of an inch broad, destitute of 
hair, The animal when seated rests upon this part. No 
tail is visible externally ; but on putting aside the hair we 
discover a tubercle, a mass of naked and wrinkled flesh, 
of a conical figure, and half an inch long. 


430 


water hog, given to the chiguire by some of the 
older naturalists. The missionary monks do 
not hesitate to eat these hams during Lent. 
According to their zoological classification, they 
place the armadillo, the thick-nosed tapir, and 
the manatee, near the tortoises; the first, be- 
cause it is covered with a hard armour, like 
a sort of shell; and the others because they 
are amphibious. The chiguires are found! in 
such numbers on the banks of the rivers Santo 
Domingo, ‘Apure, and Arauca, in the marshes 
and: the inundated savannahs * of the Llanos, 
that the pasturages suffer from them. They 
browze. the: grass which fattens the horses best, 
and which bears the name-of chiguirero, “ chi- 
guire grass.” They: feed also upon fish ; and we 
saw with surprise, that, affrighted by the approach 
of a boat, the animal in diving remains eight or 
ten minutes under water. 

We passed the night as usual, in the open air, 
though ina plantation, the proprietor of which em- 
ployed himself in hunting tigers. He was almost 
naked, and. of a dark brown complexion like a 
Zambo. This did not prevent his thinking him- 
self of the cast of Whites. He called his wife 
and his daughter, who were as naked as himself, 
donna Isabella, and donna Manuela. Without 


* Near Uritucu, in the Cano de] Ravanal, we saw a drove 
of 80 or 100 of these animals, 


431 


having ever quitted the banks of the Apure, he 
took a lively interest “in the news of Madrid, 
in those wars which never ended, and in every 
thing down yonder; todas las cosas de alla.” 
He knew, that the king was soon to come and 
visit “ the grandees of the country of Caraccas,” 
but, added he with some pleasantry, “as the 
people of the court can eat only wheaten bread, 
they will never pass beyond the town of Victoria, 
and we shall not see them here.” I had brought 
with me a chiguire, which I had intended. to 
have roasted; but our host assured us, that 
such “ Indian’ game” was not food fit for nos 
otros cavalleros blancos, “white gentlemen like 
him and me.” Accordingly he offered us some 


venison, “which he had killed the day. before 
with an arrow, for he had neither. powder nor 
firearms. 


We supposed, that a small wood of plantain 
trees concealed from us the hut of the farm: 
but this man, so proud of his nobility and the 
colour of his skin, had. not; taken the trouble of 
constructing an ajoupa of palm-leaves. He in- 
vited us, to have our hammocks hung near his 
own, between two trees; and he assured us with 
an air of complacency, that, if we came up the 
river in the rainy season, we should find him 
beneath a, roof*. We soon had reason to com- 


* Baxo techo. 


432 


plain of a philosophy, which, indulgent to indo-' 
lence, renders a man indifferent to the conve- 


niences of life. A furious wind arose after 
midnight, lightnings ploughed the horizon, the 
thunder rolled, and we were wet to the skin. 
During this storm a whimsical incident served 
to amuse us for a moment. Donna Isabella’s- 
cat had perched upon the tamarind-tree, at the 
foot of which we lay. It fell into the hammock 
of one of our companions, who, wounded by the 
claws of the cat, and awakened from a profound 
sleep, thought he was attacked by some wild 
beast of the forest. We ran to him on hearing 
his cries, and had some trouble to convince him 
of his error. While it rained in torrents on our 
hammocks, and the instruments we had landed; 
don Ignacio congratulated us on our good for- 
tune in not sleeping on the strand, but finding 
ourselves in his domain, among Whites and 
persons of rank; entre gente blanca y de trato. 
Wet as we were, we could not easily persuade 
ourselves of the advantages of our situation, and 
listened with some impatience to the long nar- 
rative our host gave us of his pretended expedi- 
tion to Rio Meta, of the valour he had displayed 
in a bloody combat with the Guahibo Indians, 
and “ the services that he had rendered to God 
and his king, in carrying away children (los 
Indiecitos) from their parents, to distribute them 
in the missions.” How singular a spectacle, to 


433 


find in that vast solitude a man, who believes 
himself of European race, and knows no other 
shelter than the shade of a tree, with all the 
vain, pretensions, all the hereditary prejudices, 
all the errors, of long civilization ! 

April the Ist. At sunrise we quitted signior 
don Ignacio, and signora donna Isabella his 
wife. The weather was cooler, for the thermo- 
meter, which generally kept up in the day to 30° 
or 30°, had sunk to 24°. The temperature of 
the river was little changed, it continued con- 
stantly at 26° or 27°. The current carried with 
it an enormous quantity of trunks of trees. We 
might imagine, that on ground entirely smooth, 
and where the eye cannot distinguish the 
least hill, the river would have formed by the 
force of it’s current a channel in a straight line. 
A glance at the map, which I traced by the 
compass, will prove the contrary. The two 
banks, worn by the waters, do not furnish 
an equal resistance ; and almost imperceptible 
inequalities of the level suffice ’ to produce 
great sinuosities.. Yet below the Joval, where 
the bed of the river enlarges a little, it forms 
a channel that appears perfectly straight, and 
is shaded on each side by very tall trees. 
This part of the river is called Cano Ricco. I 
found it to be one hundred and thirty-six toises 
broad. We passed a low island, inhabited by 
thousands of flamingoes,rose-coloured spoonbills 

VOL. IV. ORs 


herons, and moorhens, which displayed a mixture 
of the most various colours. These birds were 
so close together, that they seemed to be unable 
to stir. The island they inhabit is called Isla 
de Aves. Lower down we passed the point, 
where the Rio Arichuna, an arm of the Apure, 
branches off to the Cabulare, carrying off a 
considerable body of it's waters. We stopped 
on the right bank, at a little Indian mission, in- 
habited by the tribe of the Guamoes. There 
were yet only sixteen or eighteen huts constructed 
with the leaves of the palm-tree; yet, in the 
statistical tables presented annually by the mis- 
sionaries to the court, this assemblage of huts 
is:‘marked with the name of the village de Santa 
Barbara de Arichuna. 

The Guamoes * are a race of Indians very 
difficult to fix on a settled spot. They have 
great similiarity of manners with the Achaguas, 
the Guajiboes +, and the Otomacoes, partaking 
their disregard of cleanliness, their spirit of 
vengeance, and their taste for wandering ; but 
their langnage differs essentially. The greater 
part of these four tribes live by fishing and hunt- 
ing, ip plains often inundated, and situate be- 
tween the Apure, the Meta, and the Guaviare, 
The nature of these regions seems to invite the 


* Father Gili asserts, that their Indian name is Uamu and 
Pau,.and that they originally dwelt on the Upper Apare. 
+ Theit Indian name is Guaiva, pronouneed Guahiva. : 


435 


nations to a wandering life. On entering the 
mountains of the Cataracts of the Oroonoko, we 
shall soon find among the Piraoas, the Macoes, 
and the Maquiritares, milder manners, the love 
of agriculture, and great cleanliness in the in- 
terior of their huts. On the backs of moun- 
tains, in the midst of impenetrable forests, man 
is compelled to fix himself, and cultivate a small 
spot of land. This cultivation requires little 
care; while in a country where there are no 
other roads than rivers, the life of the hunter is 
laborious and difficult. The Guamoes of the 
mission of Santa Barbara could not furnish us 
with the provision we wanted. They cultivate 
only a little cassava. They appeared hospitable; 
and, when we entered their huts, offered us 
dried fish and water (in their tongue cub). 
This water was cooled in porous vessels. 

Beyond the Vuelta del Cochino roto, in a spot 
where the river has scooped itself.a new bed, we 
passed the night on a bare and very extensive 
strand. The forest being impenetrable, we had 
the greatest difficulty to find dry wood to light 
fires, near which the Indians believe themselves 
in safety from the nocturnal attacks of the tiger. 
Our own experience seems to depose in favour 
of this opinion; but M. d’Azzara asserts, that: 
in his time a tiger in Paraguay carried off a man, 
who was seated near a fire lighted in the 
savannah. . 

F.2 


436 


The night was calm and serene, and there was 
a beautiful moonlight. The crocodiles. were 
stretched along the shore. They placed them- 
selves in such a manner as to be able to see the 
fire. We thought we observed, that it’s splen- 
dour attracted them, as it attracts fishes, crayfish, 
and other inhabitants of the water. The In- 
dians showed us the traces of three tigers in the 
sand, two of which were very young. A female 
had no doubt conducted her little ones to drink 
at the river. Finding no tree on the strand, 
we stuck our oars in the ground, and to these 


we fastened our hammocks. Every thing passed. 


tranquilly till eleven at night; and then a noise 
so terrific arose in the neighbouring forest, that 
it. was almost impossible to close our eyes. 
Amid the cries of so many wild beasts howling 
at once, the Indians discriminated such only as 
were heard separately. These were the little soft 
cries of the sapajous, the moans of the alouates, 
the howlings of the tiger, the couguar, or 
American lion without mane, the pecari, and the 
sloth, and the voices of the curassoa, the patraka, 
‘and some other gallinaceous birds.. When the 
jaguars approached the skirt of the forest, our 
dog, which till then had never ceased barking, 
began to howl and seek for shelter beneath our 
hammocks. Sometimes, after a long silence, the 
cry of the tiger came from the tops of the trees ; 
and in this case it was followed by the sharp and 


tong whistling of the monkeys, which appeared 
to flee from the danger that threatened them. 

I notice every circumstance of these nocturnal 
scenes, because, being recently embarked on the 
Rio Apure, we were not yet accustomed to them. 
We heard the same noises repeated, during the 
course of whole months, whenever the forest 
approached the bed of the rivers. The security 
displayed. by thé Indians inspires travellers with 
confidence. You persuade yourself with them, 
that the tigers are afraid of fire, and do not at- 
tack a man lying in his hammock. These attacks 
are in fact extremely rare; and, during a long 
abode in South America, I remember only one 
example of a Llanero, who was found torn in 
his hammock opposite the island of Achaguas. 

When the natives are interrogated on the 
causes of this tremendous noise made by the 
beasts of the forest at certain hours of the night, 
they reply pauly, “‘ they are keeping the feast of 
the full moon.” 

I believe this agitation is most frequently the 
effect of some contest, that has arisen in the 
depths of the forest. The jaguars, for instance, 
pursue the pecaris and the tapirs, which, hav- 
ing no defence but in their numbers, flee in 
close troops, and break down the bushes they 
find in their way. Affrighted at this struggie, 
the timid and mistrustful monkies answer from 
the tops of the trees the cries of the large ani- 


435 


mals. They awaken the birds that-live in so- 
ciety, and by degrees the whole assembly is in 
movement. We shall soon find, that it is not 
always in a fine moonlight, but more particularly 

_at the time of a storm and violent showers, that 
this tumult takes place among the wild beasts. 
“ May Heaven grant them a quiet night and 
repose, and us also !” said the monk who accom- 
panied us to the Rio Negro, when, sinking with 
fatigue, he assisted in arranging our aceommo- 
dations for the night. It was indeed a strange 
situation, to find no silence in the solitude of 
woods. In the inns of Spain we dread the sharp 
sounds of guitars from the next apartment; 
in those of the Oroonoko, which.are an open 
beach, or the shelter of a solitary tree, we are 
afraid of being disturbed in our sleep by voices 
issuing from the forest. 

April the 2d. We set sail before sunrise. 
The morning was beautiful and cool, according 
to the feelings of those, who are accustomed to 
the heats of these climates. ‘The thermometer 
rose to 28° only in the air; but the dry and 
white sand of the beach, notwithstanding it’s 
radiation toward a sky without a cloud, retained 
a temperature of 36°. The porpoises (foninas) 
ploughed the river in long files. The shore was 
covered with fishing birds.. Some of these em- 
barked on the fleating wood, that passed down 
the river, and surprised the fish that preferred 


439 


the middle of the stream. Our canoe touched 
several times during the morning. ‘These shocks, 
when violent, are capable of splitting a light 
bark. We struck on the points of several large 
trees, which remain for years in an oblique posi- 
tion, sunk in the mud. These trees descend 
from Sarare, at the peried of great inundations. 
These so fill the bed of the river, that canoes in 
going up find it difficult sometimes to make their 
way over the shoals, or wherever there are ed- 
dies. We reached a spot near the island of 
Carizales, where we saw trunks of the locust- 
tree of an enormous size above the surface of the 
water. They were covered with a species of 
plotus, nearly approaching the anhinga, or white 
bellied darter. These birds perch in files, like 
pheasants and parrakas. ‘They remain for hours 
entirely motionless, with the beak raised toward 
the sky, which gives them a singular air of stu- 
pidity. 

Below the island of Carizales we observed a 
diminution of the waters of the river, at which 
we were so much the more surprised, as, after 
the bifurcation at la Boca de Arichuna, there is 
no branch, no natural drain, that takes away 
water from the Apure. The loss is solely the 
effect of evaporation, and of filtration on a sandy 
and wet shore. We .may form an idea of the 
magnitude of these effects, when we recollect, 
that we found the heat of the dry sands, at dif- 


440 


ferent hours of the day, from 36° to 52°, and. 
that of sands covered with three or four inches 
of water 32°. The beds of rivers are heated as 
far as the depth, to which the solar rays can 
penetrate without having undergone too great 
an extinction in their passage through the super- 
incumbent strata of water. Besides, the effect 
of filtration extends far beyond the bed of the 
river; it may be said to be lateral. The shore, 
which appears dry to us, imbibes water as far 
as the level of the surface of the river. We saw 
water gush out at the distance of fifty toises from 
the shore, every time that the Indians stuck their 
oars into the ground; now these sands, wet 
underneath, but dry above, and exposed to the 
solar rays, act like a sponge. They are losing 
the infiltrated water every instant by evapora- 
tion. The vapour, that is emitted, traverses the 
upper stratum of sand strongly heated, and be- 
comes sensible to the eye, when the air cools 
toward the evening. As the beach dries, it draws 
from the rivers new portions of water; and it 
may be considered, that this continual alterna- 
tion of vaporization and lateral imbibition must 
cause an immense loss, difficult to submit to 
exact calculation. The increase of these losses 
would: be in proportion to the length of the 
course of the rivers, if from their source to their 
mouth they were equally surrounded by a flat 
shore; but these shores being formed by depo- 


44] 


sitions from the water, and the water having 
less velocity in proportion as it is more remote 
from it’s source, deposing necessarily more in 
the lower than in the upper part of it’s course, 
many rivers of hot climates undergo a diminu- 
tion in the quantity of their water, as they ap- 
proach their mouth. Mr. Barrow has observed 
these curious effects of sands in the southern 
part of Africa, on the banks of Orange river. 
They are even become the subject of a very im- 
portant discussion, in the various hypotheses 
that have been formed on the course of the 
Niger. 

Near the Vuelta de Basilio, where we landed 
to collect plants, we saw on the top of a tree 
two beautiful little monkies, black as jet, of the 
size of the sai, with prehensile tails. Their 
physiognomy and their movements sufficiently 
showed, that they were neither the quato [simia 
beelzebub, LJ, nor the chamek, nor any of the 
ateles. Our Indians themselves had never seen 
any that resembled them. These forests abound 
in sapajous unknown to the naturalists of Eu- 
‘rope; and as monkeys, especially those that 
live in troops, and for this reason are more enter- 
prising, make long emigrations at certain pe- 
riods, it happens, that at the beginning of the 
rainy season the natives discover round their 
huts different kinds, which they had never before 
observed. On this same bank, our guides showed 


442 


us a nest of young iguanas, that were only four 
inches long. It was difficult to distinguish them 
from a common lizard. There was nothing yet 
formed but the dewlap below the throat. The 
dorsal spines, the large erect scales, all those 
appendages, that render the iguana so monstrous 
when it attains the length of three or four feet, 
were scarcely traced. 

The flesh of this animal of the saurien family 
appeared to us to have an agreeable taste in 
every country, where the climate is very dry ; 
we even found it so at periods when we were not 
in want of other food. It is extremely white, 
and next to the flesh of the armadillo, here 
called cachicamo, one of the best eatables to be 
found in the huts of the natives. 

It rained toward the evening. Before the rain 
fell, swallows, exactly resembling our own, skim- 
med over the surface of the water. We saw 
also a flock of paroquets pursued by little gos- 
hawks without crests. The piercing cries of 
these paroquets contrasted singularly with the 
whistling of the birds of prey. We passed the 
night in the open air, upon the beach, near the 
island of Carizales. There were several Indian 
huts in the neighbourhood, surrounded with 
plantations. Our pilots assured us beforehand, 
that we should not hear the cries of the jaguar, 
which, when not extremely pressed by hunger, 
withdraws from places where he does not rule 


443 


alone. - “ Men put him out of humour,” los hom- 
bres lo enfadan, say the people in the missions. 
3 “ 


A pleasant, and simple expression, that marks a 
well-observed fact. 

April the 3d. Since our departure from San 
Fernando we have not meta single boat on this 
fine river. Every thing denotes the most pro- 
found solitude. In the morning our Indians 
caught with a hook the fish known in the coun- 
try by the name of caribe, or caribito, because 
no other fish has such a thirst for blood. It at- 
tacks bathers and swimmers, from whom it often 
carries away considerable pieces of flesh. When 
a person is only slightly wounded, it is difficult 
for him to get out of the water without receiving 
a severer wound. The Indians dread extremely 
these caribes; and several of them showed us 
the scars of deep wounds in the calf of the leg, 
and in the thigh, made by these little animals, 
which the Maypures call wmati. . They live at the 
bottom of rivers; but if a few drops of blood be 
shed on the water, they arrive by thousands at 
the surface. When we reflect on the number of 
these fish, the most voracious and cruel of which 
are only four or five inches long; on the trian- 
gular form of their sharp and cutting teeth, and 
on the amplitude of their re¢ractile mouth, we 
need not be surprised at the fear which the caribe 
excites in the inhabitants of the banks of the 


444 


Apure and the Orconoko. In places where the 
river was very limpid, and where not a fish ap- 
peared, we threw into' the water little morsels of 
flesh covered with blood. In a few minutes a 
cloud of caribes came to dispute the prey.’ The 
belly of this fish has a cutting edge, indented 
like a saw; a character that may be traced in 
several kinds, the serra-salmes, the myletes, and 
the pristigastres. 'The presence of a second adi- 
pous dorsal fin; and the form of the teeth, covered 
by lips distant from each other, and largest in 
the lower jaw ; place the caribe among the serra- 
salmes. . It’s mouth is much wider than that of 
the myletes of Mr. Cuvier. It’s body toward the 
back is ash-coloured, with a tint of green; but 
the belly, the gill-covers, and the pectoral, anal, 
and Ventral fins, are of a fine orange. Three 
species (or varieties) are known in the Oroonoko, 
and are distinguished by their size. The mean, 
or intermediate, appears to be identical with the 
mean species of the piraya, or piranha, of Marc- 
grav*. JI described and drew-+ it on the spot. 
The caribito has a very agreeable taste. As no 
one dares to bathe where it is found, it may be 
considered as one of the greatest scourges of 


‘ 


* Salmo rhombeus, Lin. 

+ See the memoir on the fishes of Equinoctial America, 
which I published conjointly with Mr. Valenciennes, in the 
Obsero. de Zoolugie, vol. ii, p. 145. 


445 


those climates, in which the sting of the nros- 
chettoes, and the irritation of the skin, render 
the use of baths so necessary. 


We stopped at noon in a desert spot called 
Algodonal. I left my companions, while they 
drew the boat to land, and were occupied in 
preparing our dinner. I went along the beach 
to observe nearer a group of crocodiles sleeping 
in the Sun, and placed in such a manner, as to 
have their tails, furnished with ‘broad plates, 
resting on one another. Some little herons *, 
white as snow, walked along their backs, and 
even upon their heads; as if they were passing 
over trunks of trees. - The crocodiles were ofa 
greenish-gray, half covered with dried mud; 
from their colour and immobility they might . 
have been taken for statues of bronze. This ex- 
cursion had nearly proved fatal tome. I had 
kept my eyes constantly turned toward the river; 
but, on picking up some spangles of mica ag- 
glomerated together in the sand, I discovered 
the recent footsteps of a tiger, easily distinguish- 
able from their form and size. The animal had 

* Garzon chico. It is believed in Upper Egypt, that the 
herons have an affection for the crocodile, because they 
take advantage in fishing of the terror, that this monstrous 
animal causes among the fishes, which he drives from the 
bottom to the surface of the water; but on the banks of the 
Nile, the heron keeps prudently at some distance from tlie 


crocodile. (Geoffroy de St. Hilaire, in the Ann. du Musée, 
wol. 1x, p. 384.) 


446 


gone toward the forest; and turning my eyes 
on that side, I found myself within eighty 
steps of a jaguar, lying under the thick foliage of ‘ 
a ceiba. No tiger had ever appeared to me so 


large. 

There are accidents in life, against which we 
might seek in vain to fortify our reason. I was 
extremely frightened, yet sufficiently master of 
myself, and of my motions, to enable me to fol- 
low the advice which the Indians had so often 
given us, how to act insuch cases. I continued 
to walk on without running ; avoided moving my 
arms; and thought I observed that the jaguar’s 
attention was fixed on a herd of capybaras, which 
were crossing theriver. I then began to return, 
making a large circuit toward the edge of the 
water. As the distance increased, I thought I 
might accelerate my pace. How often was I 
tempted to look back, in order to assure myself 
that I was not pursued! Happily I yielded very 
tardily to this desire. The jaguar had remained 
motionless. These enormous cats with spotted 
robes are so well fed in countries abounding in 
capybaras, pecaris, and deer, that they rarely 
attack men. I arrived at the boat out of breath, 
and related my adventure to the Indians. 'They 
appeared very little moved by it ; yet, after hav- 
ing loaded our firelocks, they accompanied us 
to the ceiba, beneath which the jaguar had lain. 
He was there no longer, and it would have been 


447 


imprudent to have pursued him into the forest, 
where we must have dispersed, or marched in 
file, amid intertwining lianas. 

In the evening we passed the mouth of the 
Cano del Manati, thus named on account of the 
immense quantity of manatees caught there every 
year. This herbivorous animal of the cetaceous 
family, called by the Indians apcia and avia*, 
attains here generally ten or twelve feet in 
length. It weighs from five hundred to eight 
hundred pounds +. We saw the water covered 
with it’s excrements, which are very fetid, but 
perfectly resembling those of an ox. It abounds 
in the Oroonoko, below the cataracts, in the Rio 
Meta, and in the Apure, between the two islands 
of Carrizales and Conserva. We found no ves- 
tiges of nails on the external surface or the edge 
of the fins, which are quite smooth ; but little ru- 
diments of nails appear at the third phalanx, when 
the skin of the fins is taken off {. We dissected 


* The first of these words belongs to the Tamanack lan- 
guage, and the second to the Otomack. Father Gili proves, 
in opposition to Oviedo, that the manati (fish with hands) is 
not Spanish, but belongs to the languages of Haiti (St. Do- 
mingo) and the Maypures. Storia del Orinoco, vol. i, p. 84; 
vol. iii, 225. I believe also, that, according to the genius of 
the Spanish tongue, the animal would have been called manudo 
or aanon, but never manati. 


+ Itis asserted, that one has been seen of eight thousand 


pounds weight. 
t See on the manatee of the Oroonoko, and that of the 


445 


one of these animals, which was nine feet long, 
at Carichana, a mission of the Oroonoko. The 
upper lip was four inches longer than the lower. 
It is covered with a very fine skin, and serves as 
a proboscis or probe to distinguish surrounding 
objects. The inside of the mouth, which has a 
sensible warmth in an animal newly killed, pre- 
sents a very singular conformation. ‘The tongue 
is almost motionless ; but before the tongue there 
is a fleshy excrescence in each jaw, and a con- 
cavity, lined with a very hard skin, into which 
the excrescence fits. The manatee eats such 
quantities of grass, that we have found it’s sto- 
mach, which is divided into several cavities, and 
it’s intestines, which are a hundred and eight 
feet long, alike filled with it. On opening the 
animal at the back, we were struck with the 
magnitude, form, and situation of it’s lungs. 
They have very large cells, and resemble im- 
mense swimming bladders. They are three feet 
long. Filled with air, they have a bulk of more 
than a thousand cubic inches. I was surprised 
to see, that, possessing such considerable recep- 
tacles for air, the manatee comes so often to the 
surface of the water to breathe. It’s flesh, which, 


West India islands, my Rec. @Observations de Zool., vol. it, 
p- 170. Father Caulin has already said of the manatee, 
“ Tiene dos brazuelos sin division de dedos y sin unas.” (Hist. de 
Nueva Andalousia, p. 49). 


449 


from what prejudice I know not, is considered 
unwholesome and calenturiosa*, is very savoury. 
It appeared to me to resemble pork rather than 
beef. It is most esteemed by the Guanoes and 
the Otomacks; and these two nations addict 
themselves particularly to the catching of the 
manatee. It’s flesh, salted and dried in the Sun, 
can be preserved a whole year; and, as the 
clergy regard this mammiferous animal as a 
fish, it is much sought for during Lent. The 
vital principle is singularly strong in the mana- 
tee; it is tied after being harpooned, but is not 
killed till it has been taken into the canoe. This . 
is effected, when the animal is very large, in the 
middle of the river, by filling the canoe two- 
thirds with water, sliding it under the animal, 
and then baling out the water by means of a 
calebash. ‘This fishery is the easiest after great 
inundations, when the manatee has passed from 
the great rivers into the lakes and surrounding 
marshes, and the waters diminish rapidly. At 
the period when the Jesuits governed the. mis- 
sions ef the lower Oroonoko, they assembled 
every year at Cabruta, below the mouth of the 
Apure, to have a grand fishing for manatees, 
with the Indians of their missions, at the foot of 
the mountain now called El Capuchino. The 
fat of the animal, known by the name of man- 


* Causing fever, 


2G 


450 


teca de manati, is used for lamps in the churches; 
and is also employed in preparing food. It has 
not the fetid smell of whale oil, or that of other 
cetaceous animals that spout water. The hide 
of the manatee, which is more than an inch and 
half thick, is cut into slips, and serves, like 
thongs of ox leather, to supply the place of cord- 
age in the Llanos. When immersed in water, 
it has the defect of undergoing an incipient 
degree of putrefaction. Whips are made of 
it in the Spanish colonies. Hence the words 
latigo and manatiare synonimous. — These whips 
of manatee leather are a cruel instrument of 
punishment for the unhappy slaves, and even for 
the Indians of the missions, who, according to 
the laws, ought to be treated like free men. 

We passed the night opposite the island of 
Conserva. In skirting the forest, we were struck 
at the view of an enormous trunk of a tree se- 
venty feet high, and thickly set with branching 
thorns. It is called by the natives barba de 
tigre. It was perhaps a tree of the berberideous 
family *. The Indians had kindled fires at the 


* We found, on the banks of the Apure, ammania apurensis, 
cordia cordifolia, c. grandiflora, mollugo sperguloides, myos- 
otis lithospermoides, spermacocce diffusa, coronilla oecidentalis, 
bignonia apurensis, pisonia pudescens, ruellia viscosa, some new 
species of jussieua, and a new genus of the composite family, 
approximating to rolandra, the ¢richospira menthoides of Mr. 
Kunth, 


451 


edge of the water. We again perceived, that 
their light attracted the crocodiles, and even the 
porpoises (foninas), the’ noise of which inter- 
rupted our sleep, till the fire was extinguished. 
We had two persons on the watch this night; 
which I mention only because it serves to paint 
the savage character of these places. A female 
jaguar approached our station in taking her 
young one to drink at the river. The Indians 
succeeded in chasing her away, but we heard 
for a long time the cries of the little jaguar, 
which mewed like a young cat. Soon after our 
great dog was bitten, or, as the Indians say, 
pricked at the point of the nose by some enor- 
mous bats, that hovered around our hammocks. 
They were furnished with a long tail, like the 
molosses: I believe however, that they were 
phyllostomes, the tongue of which, furnished with 
papillee, is an organ of suction, and is capable of 
being considerably élongated. The wound was 
very small and round. Though the dog uttered 
a plaintive cry, when he felt himself bitten, it 
was not from pain, but because he was affrighted 
at the sight of the bats, that came out from be- 
neath our hammocks. These accidents are 
much more rare than is believed even in the 
country itself. In the course of several. years, 
notwithstanding we slept so often in the open 
air, in climates where vampires * and other ana- 
* Verspertilio spectrum. 
262 


452 


logous species are so common, we were never 
wounded. Besides, the puncture is no way dan- 
gerous, and in general causes so little pain, that 
it often does not awaken the person, till after the 
bat has withdrawn. 

April the 4th. This was the last day we 
passed on the Rio Apure. The vegetation of it's 
banks becomes more and more uniform. We 
had begun for some days past, particularly since 
we had left the mission of Arichuna, to suffer 
cruelly from the stings of insects, that covered 
our faces and hands. They were not moschet- 
toes, which have the appearance of little flies, or 
of the genus simelium, but zancudoes, which 
are real gnats, very different from our culex 
pipiens *. These tipularise appear only after sun- 
set. Their proboscis is so long, that, when they 
fix on the lower surface of a hammock, they 
pierce the hammock and the thickest garments 
with their sting. 

We had intended to pass the night at the 
Vuelta del Palmito ; but the number of jaguars at 
this part of the Apure is so great, that our Indians 
found two hidden behind the trunk of a locust- 
tree, at the moment when they were going to 
sling our hammocks. We were advised to re- 


* Mr. Latreille has discovered, that the moschettoes of 
South Carolma are of the genus simulinm (atractocera 
mieigen). 


453 


embark, and take our station in the island of 
Apurito, near it’s junction with the Oroonoko. 
That portion of the island belongs to the pro- 
vince of Caraccas, while the right hanks of the 
Apure and the Oroonoko make a part, one of 
the province of Varinas, the other of Spanish 
Guayana. We found no trees to which we could 
suspend our hammocks, and were obliged to 
sleep on ox hides spread on ‘the ground. The 
boats are too narrow, and too full of zancudoes, 
to pass the night in them. 

In the place where we had landed our instru- 
ments, the banks being steep, we saw new proofs 
of what I have elsewhere called the indolence of 
the gallinaceous birds of the tropics. The cu- 
rassoas and cashew birds* have the habit of 
going down several times a day to the river to 
allay their thirst. They drink a great deal, and- 
at shortintervals. A great number of these birds 
had joined themselves near our station to a 
flock of parraka pheasants. They had great 
difficulty in climbing up the steep banks; they 
attempted it several times without using their 
wings.” We drove them before us, as you would 
drive sheep. The zamuro vultures also raise 
themselves from the ground with great reluc- 
tance. 

I had a good observation after midnight of the 


* The latter (crax pauxi) is less common than the former. 


454 


‘meridian height of «in the Southern Cross. The 
latitude of the mouth of the Apure is 7° 36’ 23”. 
Father Gumilla fixes it at 5° 5’; D’Anville at 
7° 3’; and Caulin at 7° 26’. The longitude of 
the Boca of the Apure, calculated from the alti- 
tudes of the Sun, which I took on the 5th of 
April in the morning, is 69° 7’ 29”, or 1° 12’ 41” 
east of the meridian of San Fernando. 

April the 5th. We were singularly struck at 
the small quantity of water, which the Rio Apure - 
furnishes at this season to the Oroonoko. The 
Apure, which, according to my measurements, 
was still one hundred and thirty-six toises broad 
at Cano Ricco, was only sixty or eighty at it’s 
mouth *. It’s depth here was only three or four 
toises. It loses no doubt a part of it’s waters by 
the Rio Arichuna, and the Cano del Manati, two 
branches of the Apure, that flow into the Payara 

“and the Guarico ; but it’s greatest loss appears 
to be caused by filtrations on the beach, of which 
we have spoken above. The velocity of the 
Apure near it’s mouth was only 3:2 feet a se- 
cond; so that I could easily have calculated the 
whole quantity of the water, if I had taken by 
a series of proximate soundings the whole di- 
mensions of the transverse section. The baro- 
meter, which at San Fernando, twenty-eight 


_* Not quite so broad as the Seine at the Pont Royal, op- 


posite the palace of the Tuileries. 


455 


feet above the mean height of the Apure, had 
kept, at half after nine in the morning, at 
335°6 lines, was, at eleven in the morning, 
at the entrance of the Apure into the Oroo- 
noko, 337°3 lines *. In estimating the total 
length, including the sinuosities-+, at ninety- 
four miles, or eighty-nine thousand three hun- 
dred toises, and attending to the little correc- 
tion arising from the horary movement of the 
barometer, we find a mean fall of thirteen 
inches (exactly 1:15 foot) in a mile of nine 
hundred and fifty toises. Ia Condamine and 
the learned Major Rennel suppose, that the 
mean fall of the Amazon and the Ganges does 
not amount even to four or five inches in a 
mile ¢. 

We touched. several times on shoals before we 
entered the Oroonoko. The lands gained from 
the water are immense toward the confluence 
of the two rivers. We were obliged to be towed 
along by the bank. What a contrast between 
this state of the river, immediately before the 
entrance of the rainy season, when all the effects 
of the dryness of the air and of evaporation have 
attained their maximum, and that autumnal 


* The temperature of the air in these two places being 
31:2° and 32°4°, 

+ estimated them at a quarters of the distance. 

t Tuckey, Exped. to the Congo, 1818; Introduction, 
p. 17. 


456 


state, when the Apure, like an arm of the sea, 
covers the savannahs as far as the eye can 
reach! We discerned toward the South the 
lonely hills of Coruato; while to the East the 
granitie rocks of Curiquima, the sugarloaf of 
Caycara, and the ‘mountains of the Tyrant * 
(Cerros del Tirano) began to rise on the horizon. 
It is not without emotion, that we behold for 
the first time, after long expectation, the waters 
of the Oroonoko, at a point so distant from the 
coast. 


* This name alludes no doubt to the expedition of Antonio 
Sedeno: thus the port of Caycara, opposite Cabruta, still 
bears the name of this Conquistador. 


BOOK VII. 


CHAPTER XIX. 


Junction of the Apure and the Oroonoko.—Moun- 
tains of Encaramada.—Uruana.—Baraguan. 
—Carichana.— Mouth of the Meta.—Island of 


Panumana. 


On leaving the Rio Apure, we found ourselves in 
a eountry of a totally different aspect. An im- 
mense plain of water stretched before us like a 
lake, as far as we could see. White-topped 
waves rose to the height of several feet, from the 
conflict of the breeze and the current. The air 
resounded no longer with the piercing cries of 
‘the herons, the flamingoes, and the spoonbills, 
crossing in long files from one shore to the other. 
Our eyes sought in vain those water fowls, the 
inventive snares of which vary in each tribe. 
All nature appears less animated. Scarcely 
could we discover in the‘ hollows of the waves a 
few large crocodiles, ‘cutting obliquely, by the 


458 


help of their long tails, the surface of the agi- 
tated waters. The horizon was bounded by a 
zone of forests, but these forests no where reached 
so far as the bed of the river. A vast beach 
constantly parched by the heat of the Sun, de- 
sert and bare as the shores of the sea, resembled 
at a distance, from the effect of the mirage, pools 
of stagnant water. These sandy shores, far from 
fixing the limits of the river, rendered them un- 
certain, by approaching or withdrawing them 
alternately, according to the variable action of 
the inflected rays. 

In these scattered features of the landscape, 
in this character of solitude and of greatness, we 
recognize the course of the Oroonoko, one of the 
most majestic rivers of the New World. The 
water, like the land, displays every where a cha- 
-_racteristic and peculiar aspect. The bed of the 
Oroonoko resembles not the bed of the Meta, the 
Guaviare, the Rio Negro, or the Amazon. These 
differences do not depend altogether on the 
breadth or the velocity of the current: they are 
connected with a multitude of impressions, 
which it is easier to perceive upon the spot, than 
to define with precision. Thus the mere form 
of the waves, the tint of the waters, the aspect of 
the sky and the clouds, would lead an expe- 
rienced navigator to guess, whether he were in 
the Atlantic, in the Mediterranean, or in the 
equinoctial part of the Great Ocean. 


459° 


The wind blew fresh from East-North-East. 
It’s direction was favourable for our sailing up 
the Oroonoko, toward the mission of Encara- 
mada; but our canoes were so ill calculated to 
resist the shocks of the waves, that, from the 
violence of the motion, those who suffered ha- 
bitually at sea were incommoded on the river. 
The short, broken waves are caused by the con- 
flict of the waters at the junction of the two 
rivers. This conflict is very violent, but far from 
being so dangerous as Father Gumilla asserts *. 
We passed the Punta Curiquima, which is an 
isolated mass of quartzose granite, a small pro- 
montory composed of rounded blocks. ‘There, 
on the right bank of the Oroonoko, Father Ro- 
tella founded, in the time of the Jesuits, a mis- 
sion of Palenka and Viriviri or Guire Indians. 
At the period of inundations, the rock Curiqui- 
ma and the village placed at it’s foot were sur- 
rounded every where by water. This serious 
inconvenience, and the sufferings of the mission- 
aries and Indians from the innumerable quan- 
tity of moschettoes and niguas +, led them to 
forsake this humid spot. It is now entirely de- 
sert, while opposite to it, on the right bank of 
the river, the little mountains of Coruato are 


* Orinoco illustrado, vol. i, p. 47. 


+ The chego, pulex penetrans, which penetrates under the 
nails of the toes in men and monkeys, and there deposits it’s 


£285. 


466 


the retreat of wandering Indians, expelled citherr 
from the missions, or from tribes that are not. 
subjected to the government of the monks. 

Struck with the extreme breadth of the Oroo- 
‘noko, between the mouth of the Apure and the 
rock Curiquima, I ascertained it by means of 
a base measured twice on the western beach.. 
The bed of the Oroonoko in it’s present state of 
low water, was 1906* toises broad ; but this. 
breadth attains 5517-+ toises, when, in the rainy. 
season, the rock Curiquima, and the farm of 
Capuchino near the hill of Pocopocori, become 
islands. The swelling of the Oroonoko is aug- 
mented by the impulse of the waters of. the 
Apure, which far from forming, like other rivers, 
an acute angle with the upper part of that into. 
which it flows, meets it at right angles. The 
temperature of the waters of the Oroonoko, mea- 
sured in several parts of it’s bed, was in the 
middle of the thalweg, or deepest part of the 
channel, where the current has the most swift- 
ness, 28°3°, and toward the banks, 29°2°. 

We went up first toward the South-West, as 
. far as the shore of the Guaricoto. Indians, on the 
left bank of the Oroonoko, and then toward the 
South. The river is so broad, that the moun- 


* 3714 metres, or 4441 varas, supposing 1 metre = 0°51307 
of a toise = $:19546 vara. 
+ 10753 metres, or 12895 varas. 


461 


tains of Encaramada appear to rise from the 
water, as if they were seen above the horizon of 
the sea. They form a continued chain from 
East to West. As you approach them, the as- 
pect of the country becomes more picturesque. 
These mountains are composed of enormous 
blocks of granite, cleft and piled one upon 
another. Their division into blocks is the effect 
of decomposition. What contributes above all 
to embellish the scene at Encaramada is the 
force of vegetation, that covers the sides of the 
rocks, leaving bare only their rounded summits. 
They look like ancient ruins rising in the midst 
of a forest. The mountain immediately at the 
back of the mission, the Tepupano* of the Ta- 


manack Indians, is covered by three enormous 
granitic cylinders, two of which are inclined, 
while the third, worn away at it’s basis, and more 
than eighty feet high, has preserved a vertical 
position. This rock, which calls to mind the 
form of the Schnarcher in the Hartz, or that of 
_ the Organs of Actopan in Mexico +, composed 


* Tepu-pano, “ place of stones,” in which we recognize 
itepu, “ stone, rock,” as in ¢epu-zri, mountain. We here again 
perceive that Lesgian Oigour-Tatar root ¢ep (stone), found in 
America among the Mexicans, in tepet/; among the Garibbees, 
in tebou ; among the 'Tamanacks, in ¢epuiri ; a striking analogy 
between the languages of Caucasus and Upper- Asia and those 
-of the banks of the Oroonoko. 


+ In Captain Tuckey’s Voyage on the Riyer Congo, we 


462 


formerly a part of the rounded summit of the 
mountain. In every zone it is the property of 
unstratified granite, to separate by decomposi- 
tion into blocks of prismatic, cylindric, or 
columnar figures. 

Opposite the shore of the Guaricotoes, we 
drew near another heap of rocks, which is very 
low, and three or four toises long. It rises in 
the midst of the plain, and has less resemblance 
to a tumulus than to those masses of granitic 
stones, which in the North of Holland and of 
. Germany bear the name of Huenenbette, beds (or 
tombs) of heroes. The shore at this part of the 
Oroonoko is no longer of pure and quartzose 
sand; but is composed of clay and spangles of 
mica, deposited in very thin strata, and most 
frequently with a dip of forty or fifty degrees. 
It looks like decomposed mica-slate. This 
change in the geological constitution of the 
shore extends far beyond the mouth of the Apure. 
We had begun to observe it in this latter river as 
far offas Algodonal and Cano del Manati. The 
spangles of mica come no doubt from the granite 
mountains of Curiquima and Encaramada ; since 
farther to the North ard to the East we find 
only quartzose sand, sandstone, compact lime- 
stone, and gypsum. Alluvial earth carried suc- 


find re resented a granitic rock, the Tadd Enzazi, which 
P 5 ’ 
bears a striking resemblance to the mountain of Encaramada. 
te) : 


463 


cessively from the South to the North need not 
surprise us in the Oroonoko; but to what shall 
we attribute the same phenomenon in the bed 
of the Apure, seven leagues West of it’s mouth? 
In the present state of things, notwithstanding 
the swellings of the Oroonoko, the waters of the 
Apure never retrograde so far; and, to explain 
this phenomenon, we are forced to admit, that the 
micaceous strata were deposited at a time, when 
the whole of the very low country, that lies be- 
tween Caycara, Algodonal, and the mountains 
of Encaramada, formed the basin of an inland 
lake. 

We stopped some time at the port of Encara- 
mada ; it is a sort of embarcadere, a place where 
Doats assemble. A rock of forty or fifty feet 
high forms the shore. It is composed of the 
same blocks of granite, heaped one upon another, 
‘as at the Schneeberg in Franconia and in almost 
all the granitic mountains of Europe. Some of, . 
these detached masses have a spheroidal form ; 
they are not balls however, with concentric 
layers, as we have elsewhere described; but 
merely rounded blocks, nuclei separated from 
their envelopes by the effect of decomposition. 
‘This granite is of a grayish lead-colour, often 
black, as if covered with oxide of manganese ; 
but this colour does not penetrate one fifth of a 
line into the rock, which is of a reddish white 


464 


within, coarse grained, and destitute of horn- 
blende. , 

The Indian names of the mission of San Luis 
del Encaramada, are Guaga and Caramana*. 
This small village was founded in 1749 by Fa- 
ther Gili, the Jesuit, author of the Storia dell 
Orinoco, published at Rome. This missionary. 
learned in the Indian tongues, lived in this soli- 
tude during eighteen years, till the expulsion of 
the Jesuits. To form a precise idea of the sa- 
vage state of these countries, we must recollect, 


* All the missions of South America have names composed 
of two words, the first of which is necessarily the name of 
a saint, the patron of the church, and the second an Indian 
name, that of the nation, or the spot where the establishment is 
placed. Thus we say, San Jose de Maypures, Santa Cruz de 
Cachipo, San Juan Nepomuceno de los Atures, &c. These. 
compound names appear only in the official documents ; the 
inhabitants adopt but one of the two names, and generally, 
provided it be sonorous, the Indian. As the names of saints 
are sevéral times repeated in neighbouring places, great con- 
fusion in geography arises from these repetitions. ‘The names 
of San Juan, San Diego, and San Pedro, are scattered in our’ 
maps as if by chance. It is pretended, that the mission of 
Guaji affords a very rare example of the composition of two 
Spanish words. The word Encaramada means things raised 
one upon another, from encaramar, attollere. It is derived from 
the figure of Tepupano and the neighbouring rocks: perhaps 
it is only an Indian word, caramana, in which, as in manatz,. 
from a love for etymology, a Spanish signification was bes 
lieved to be discovered. 


465 


that Father Gili speaks of Carichana *, which is 
forty leagues from Encaramada, as of a spot far 
distant ; and that he never advanced so far as 
the first cataract of the river, of which he ven- 
tured to undertake the description. 

In the port of Encaramada we met with some 
Caribbees of Panapana. A Cacique was going 
up the Oroonoko in his canoe, to join in the fa- 
mous fishing of turtles’ eggs. His canoe was 
rounded toward the bottom like a bongo, and 
followed by a smaller boat. called curiara, He 
was seated beneath a sort of tent, toldo, con- 
structed, as well as the sail, of palm-leaves. 
His cold and silent gravity, the respect -with 
which he was treated by his attendants, evéry 
thing denoted him to be a person of importance. 
He was equipped, however, in the same manner 
as his Indians. They were all equally naked, 
armed with bows and arrows, and covered with 
onoto, which is the colouring fecula of the bixa 
orellana. The chief, the domestics, the furni- 
ture, the boat, and the sail, were all painted red. 
These Caribbees are men of an almost athletic 
stature ; they appeared to us much taller than 
the Indians we had hitherto seen. Their smooth 
and thick hair, cut upon their forehead like that 
of choristers, their eyebrows painted black, their 
look at once gloomy and animated, give their 


* Saggio di Storia Americana, vol. i, p. 122. 


VOL. IV. 2H 


466 


physiognomy a singular’ hardness of expression. 
Having till then seen only the skulls of some 
Caribbees of the West India islands preserved 
in the collections of Europe, we were surprised 
' to find, that these Indians, who were of pure 
race, had the forehead much more rounded than 
it has been described. The women, very tall, 
but disgusting from their want of cleanliness, 
carried their infants on their backs, having their. 
thighs and legs bound at certain distances by 
broad strips of cotton cloth. The flesh, strongly 
compresed beneath the ligatures, was swelled in 
the interstices. It is generally to be observed, 
that the Caribbees are as attentive to their ex- 
terior, and their ornaments, as it is possible for 
men to be, who are naked and painted red. 
They attach great, importance to certain forms 
of the body; and a mother would be accused 
of culpable indifference toward her children, if 
she did not employ artificial means, to shape the 
calf of the leg after the fashion of the country. 
As none of our Indians of Apure understood the 
Caribbee language, we could, obtain no informa- 
-tion from the Cacique of Panama respecting the 
encampments, that are made at this season in 
several islands of the Oroonoko for collecting 
turtles’ eggs. 

Near Encaramada a very long island divides 
the river. into two branches. We passed the 
night in a rocky creck, opposite the mouth of 


467 


the Rio Cabullare, which is formed by the Pay- 
ara and the Atamaica, and is sometimes consi- 
dered as one of the branches of the Apure, be- 
cause it communicates with this river by the 
Rio Arichuna. The evening was beautiful. The 
moon illumined the tops of the granitic rocks. 
The heat was so uniformly distributed, that, 
notwithstanding the humidity of the air, no 
twinkling of the stars was remarked, even at 
four or five degrees above the horizon. The 
light of the planets was singularly dimmed ; 
and if, on account of the smallness of the appa- 
rent diameter of Jupiter, I did not suspect some 
error in the observation, I should say, that here, 
for the first time, we thought we distinguished 
the disk of Jupiter with the naked eye. Toward 
midnight, the. North-East wind became ex- 
tremely violent. It brought no clouds, but the 
vault of the sky was covered more and more 
with vapours. Strong gusts were felt, and made 
us in fear for the safety of our canoe. During 
this whole day we had seen very few crocodiles, 
but all of an extraordinary size, from twenty to 
twenty-four feet. The Indians assured us, that 
the young crocodiles prefer the marshes, and 
the rivers that are less broad, and less deep. 
They crowd together particularly in the Canos,. 
and we might be tempted to say of them, what 
Abd-Allatif says of the crocodiles of the Nile *, 


* Descript. de CEgypte, translated by Mr, Silvestre de Sacy. 
2H 2. 


468 


“that they swarm like worms in the shallow 
waters of the river, and in ‘the shelter of unin- 
habited islands.” 

April the 6th. | Continuing to ascend the Oroo- 
noko, first toward the South, and then toward 
the South-West, we perceived the southern side 
of the Serrania, or chain of the mountains of 
Encaramada. The part nearest the river is only 
a hundred and forty or a hundred and sixty 
toises high ; but from it’s abrupt declivities, it’s 
situation in the midst of a savannah, and it’s 
rocky summits, cut into shapeless prisms, the 
Serrania appears singularly elevated. It’s great- 
est breadth is only three leagues. According to 
informations given me by the Indians of the 
Pareka nation, it is considerably wider toward 
the East. The summits of Encaramdda form the 
northernmost link of a group of mountains, that 
border ‘the right bank of the Oroonoko, between 
the latitudes of 5° and 7° 30’ from the mouth of 
the Rio Zama to that of the Cabullare. The 
different links, into which this group is divided, 
are separated by little plains covered with gra- 
mina. They do not preserve a direction per- 
fectly parallel to each other ; for the northern- 
most stretch from West to East, and the south- 
ernmost from North-West to South-East. This 
change of direction sufficiently explains the in- 
crease of breadth observed in the Cordillera of 
Parime toward the East, between the sources of 


469 


the Oroonoko and of the Rio Paruspa. On pe-- 
netrating beyond the great cataracts of Atures 
and of Maypures, we shall see seven principal 
links, those of Encaramada or Sacuina, of Cha- 
viripa, of Baraguan, of Carichana, of Uniama, 
of Calitamini, and of Sipapo, successively appear. 
This sketch may serve to give a general idea of 
the geological constitution of the ground. We 
recognize every where on the globe a tendency 
toward regular forms in those mountains, that 
appear the most irregularly grouped. Every 
link appears, in a transverse section, like a dis- 
tinct summit, to those who navigate the Oroo- 
noko ; but this division is merely in appearance. 
The regularity in the direction and separation 
of the links seems to diminish in proportion as 
we advance toward the East. The mountains 
of Encaramada join those of Mato, which give 
birth to the Rio Asiveru or Cuchivero ; those of 
Chaviripe are prolonged by the granitic moun- 
tains of Corosal, of Amoco, and of Murcielago, 
toward the sources of the Erevato and the Ven- 
tuari. 

It was across these mountains, which are in- 
habited by Indians of a gentle character, and 
addicted to agriculture *, that, at the time of the 


* The Maypoyes, Parecas, Javaranas, and Curacicanas, who 
possess fine plantations, conucos, in the savannahs, by which 
these forests are bounded. 


470 


expedition for settling boundaries, General Itur- 
-riaga took some horned cattle, to supply with 
provision the New Town of San Fernando de 
Atabapo. The inhabitants of Encaramada then 
showed the Spanish soldiers the way by the Rio 
Manapiari* which falls into the Ventuari. By 
descending these two rivers, the Oroonoko and 
the Atabapo may be reached without passing the 
great cataracts, which present- almost insur- 
mountable obstacles to the conveyance of cattle. 
The spirit of enterprise, which had so eminently 
distinguished the Castillians at the period of the 
discovery of America, appeared again for some 
time in the middle of the eighteenth century, 
when Ferdinand VI was desirous of knowing 
the real limits of his vast possessions, and in the 
forests of Guyana, that classic land of falsehood. 
and fabulous traditions, the wily Indians revived 
the chimerical idea of the wealth of Dorado, 
which had so much occupied the imagination of 
the first conquerors. 

Amid these mountains of Encaramada, which, 
like most coarse-grained granitic rocks, are 
destitute of metallic veins, we cannot help in- 


* Between’ Encaramada and the Rio Manapiare, Don 
‘Miguel Sanchez, chief of this little expedition, crossed the 
Rio Guainaima, which flows into the Cuchivero. Sanchez . 
died, from the fatigues of this journey, on the borders of the 


Ventuari. 


471 


quiring whence came those grains of gold, which 
Juan Martinez* and Raleigh profess to have seen 
in such abundance in the hands of the Indians © 
of the Oroonoko. From what I observed in that - 
part of America, I am led to think, that gold, like 
tin f, is sometimes disseminated in an almost im- 
perceptible manner in the mass itself of granite 
rocks, without our being able to admit that there 
is a ramification and an intertwining of small 
veins. Not long ago the Indians of Encaramada 
found in the Quebrada del Tigre < a piece of 
native gold two lines in diameter. It was 
rounded, and appeared to have been washed 
along by the waters. This discovery excited the 
attention of the missionaries much more than of 
the natives; it was followed by no other of the 
same kind. 

I cannot quit this first link of the mountains 
of Encaramada, without recalling to mind a fact, 
that did not remain unknown to Father Gili ; 
and which was often mentioned to me during 
our abode in the missions of the Oroonoko. The 


* The companion of Diego de Ordaz. 

+ Thus tin is found in granite of recent formation, at 
Geyer; in hyalomicte, or graisen, at Zinnwald ; and in sye- 
nitic porphyry, at Altenberg, in Saxony, as well as near 
Naila, in the Fichtelgebirge. 1 have also seen, in the Upper 
Palatinate, micaceous iron, and black earthy cobalt, far from 
any kind of vein, disseminated in a granite destitute of mica, 


as magnetic iron sand is in volcanic rocks. 
{ Ravine of the tiger. 


2 


natives of those countries have retained the be- 
lief, that, “at the time of the great waters, when 
“ their fathers were foreed to have recourse to 
“boats, to escape the general inundation, the 
“ waves of the sea beat against the rocks of En- 
“ caramada.” ‘This belief is not confined to one 
nation singly, the Tamanacks ;' it makes part of 
a system of historical traditions, of which we find 
scattered notions among the Maypures of the 
great cataracts ; among the Indians of Rio Ere- 
vato *, which runs into the . Caura; and among 
almost all the tribes of the Upper Oroonoko. 
When the Tamanacks are asked how the human 
race survived this great deluge, the age of water 
of the Mexicans, they say, “aman and a woman 
saved themselves on a high mountain, called 
Tamanacu, situate on the banks of the Asiveru; 
and, casting behind them, over their heads, the 
fruits of the mauritia palm-tree, they saw the 
seeds contained in those fruits produce men and 
women, who repeopled the Earth.” Thus we 
find in all it’s simplicity, among nations now 
savage, a tradition, which the Greeks have em- 
bellished with all the charms of imagination! 
A few leagues from Encaramada, a rock, called, 
Tepu-mereme, or “ the painted rock,” rises in the 


* For the Indians of the Erevato, I can cite the testimony 
of our unfortunate friend, Fray Juan Gonzales, who lived for 
a long time in the missions of the Caura, See above, vol. iii, 
p. 301. 


midst of the savannah. It displays resemblances 
of animals, and symbolic figures, resembling 
those we saw in going down the Oroonoko, at a 
small distanee below Encaramada, near the town 
Caycara. Similar rocks in Africa are called by 
travellers Fetish Stones. I shall not make use 
of this term, because fetishism does not prevail 
among’ the natives of the Oroonoko; and the 
figures of stars, of the Sun, of tigers, and of cro- 
codiles, which we found traced upon the rocks in 
spots now uninhabited, appeared to me in no way 
to denote the objects of worship of those nations. 
Between the banks of the Cassiquiare and the 
Oroonoko; -between Encaramada, the Capu- 
chino, and Caycara, these hieroglyphic figures 
are often placed at great heights on the walls of 
rock, that could be accessible only by construct- 
ing very lofty scaffolds. When the natives are 
asked how those figures could have been sculp- 
tured, they answer with a smile, as relating a 
fact of which a stranger, a white man only, could 
be ignorant, that “at the period of the great 
waters, their fathers went to that height in 
boats.” 

These ancient traditions of the human race, 
which we find dispersed: over the whole surface 
of the Globe, like the relics of a vast shipwreck, 
are highly interesting in the philosophical study 
of our own species. Like certain families of the 
vegetable kingdom, which, notwithstanding the 


474 


diversity of climates and the influence of heights, 
retain the impression of a common type, the 
cosmogonic traditions of nations display every 
where the same physiognomy, and preserve fea- 
tures of resemblance, that fill us with astonish- 
ment. How many different tongues, belonging 
to branches that appear completely distinct, 
transmit to us the same facts! The basis of the 
traditions concerning races that are destroyed, 
and the renewal of nature, scarcely vary *; 
though every nation gives them a local colour- 
ing. In the great continents, as in the smallest 
islands of the Pacific Ocean, it is always on the 
loftiest and nearest mountain, that the remains 
of the human race have been saved; and this 
event appears the more recent, in proportion as 
the nations are uncultivated, and as the know- 
ledge they have of their own existence has not a 
very remote date. After having studied with 
attention the Mexican monuments anterior to 
the discovery of the New World; after having 
penetrated into the forests of the Oroonoko, and 
observed the diminutiveness of the European 
establishments, their solitude, and the state of 


the tribes that have remained independent’; we 
cannot permit ourselves to attribute the analo- 
gies we have just cited to the influence of the 


_ ® See my Monwmens des Peuples indigenes de U Amérique, 
p. 204, 206, 228, and 227, 


475 


missionaries, and that of Christianity, on the na- 
tional traditions. Nor is it more probable, that 
the aspect of marine bodies found on the sum- 
mit of mountains gave birth among the nations 
of the Oroonoko to the idea of those great inun- 
dations, which have extinguished for a time the 
germes of organic lifeon our Globe. The coun- 
try, that extends from the right bank of the 
Oroonoko to the Cassiquiare and the Rio Negro, 
is a country of primitive rocks. I saw there one 
small formation of sandstone, or conglomerate ; 
but no secondary limestone, no trace of petri- 
factions. 


A fresh North-East wind carried us full sail 
toward the boca de la Tortuga. We landed at 


eleven in the morning in an island, which the 
Indians of the missions of Uruana considered as 
their property, and which‘is placed in the mid- 
dle of the river. This island is celebrated for 
the turtle fishery; or, as they say here, the 
cosecha, the harvest of eggs, that takes place 
annually. We here found an assemblage of 
‘Indians, encamped under huts constructed with 
palm-leaves. This encampment contained more 
than three hundred. persons. Accustomed since 
we had left San Fernando de Apure, to see only 
desert shores, we were singularly struck by the 
movement that prevailed here. We found, be- 
side“the Guamoes and the Ottomacks of Uruana, 
who are both considered as savage races not to 


476 


be tamed, Caribbees and other Indians of the 
Lower Oroonoko. Every tribe was separately 
encamped, and distinguished by the pigments, 
with which their skin was painted. Some white 
men were seen amid this tumultuous assemblage, 
chiefly pulperos, or little traders of Angostura, 
who had come up the river to purchase oil of 
turtles’ eggs from the natives. The missionary 
of Uruana, a native of Alcala de Henarez, came 
to meet us. He was extremely astonished at 
seeing us. After having admired our instru- 
ments, he gave us an exaggerated picture of the 
sufferings, to which we should be necessarily ex- 
posed in ascending the Oroonoko beyond the 
cataracts. The object of our voyage appeared 
to him very mysterious. “ How is it possible to 
believe,” said he, “ that you have left your 
country, to come and be devoured by moschet- 
toes on this river, and. measure lands that are 
not yours?” We were happily furnished with 
recommendations. from the Father guardian of 
the missions of Saint Francis; and the brother- 
in-law of the governor of Varinas, who accompa- 
nied us, soon dissipated the doubts, to which our 
dress, our accent, and our arrival in this sandy 
sland, had given rise among the Whites. The 
-missionary invited us to partake a frugal repast 
of fish and plantains. He told us, that he was 
come to encamp with the Indians during the 
time of the harvest of eggs, “ to celebrate mass 


i 
1 


every morning in the open air, to procure the 
oil necessary for the lamp of the Church, and 
especially to govern this republica de Indios y 
Castellanos, in which every one wished to profit 
singly by what God had granted to all,” 

We made the tour of the island, accompanied - 
by the missionary, and by a pulpero, who boasted 
of having visited ten years successively the camp | 
of the Indians, and the pesca de tortugas. This 

part of the banks of the Oroonoko is frequented 
here, as the fairs of Frankfort and Beaucaire 
are with us. We were on a plain of sand per- 
fectly smooth ; and were told, that, as far as we 
could see along the beach, turtles’ eggs were 
concealed under a layer of earth. The miission- 
ary carried a long pole in his hand. He showed 
us, that, by means of this pole (vara) the extent 
of the stratum of eggs could be determined, as 
the miner determines the limits of a bed of marl, 
of bog iron-ore, or of coal. On. thrusting the 
vara perpendicularly into the ground, you feel 
by the sudden want of resistance, that you have 
penetrated into the cavity, or layer of loose 
earth, containing the eggs. We saw, that 
the stratum is generally spread with’ so much 
uniformity, that the pole finds it every where in — 
a radius of ten toises around any given mark. 
Here they talk continually of square perches of 
eggs; it is like a mine country, that is divided 
into lots, and worked with the greatest regu- 


478 . 


larity. The stratum of eggs, however, is far from 
covering the whole island: they are not found 
wherever-the ground rises abruptly, because. the 
turtle cannot mount these little heights. I re- 
lated to my guides the emphatic description of 
Father Gumilla *, who asserts, that the shores of 
the Oroonoko contain fewer grains of sand, than 
the river contains turtles; and that these ani- 
mals would prevent vessels from advancing, if 
men and tigers did not annually.destroy so great 
anumber. “ Son cuentos de frailes,” said the 
pulpero of Angostura in a low voice; for the only 
travellers in this country being poor missionaries, 
they here call tales of monks, what we call tales 
of travellers in Europe. 

The Indians assured us, that in going up the 
Oroonoko from it’s mouth to the junction of the 
Apure, not one island, or one beach is to be 
found, where eggs can be collected in abun- 
dance. The great turtle, arrau +, dreads places 


* Tam difficultoso es contar las arenas de las dilatadas 


playas del Orinoco como contar el immenso numero de tor- 
tugas, que alimenta eu sus margenes y corrientes. Se no 
ubiesse tan exorbitante consumo de tortugas, de tortuguillos, 
y de huevos, el Rio Orinoco, aun de primera magnitud, se 
bolberia innavegable, sirviendo de embarazo a las embarca- 
ciones Ja multitud imponderable de tortugas. Orinoco-illustr.,. . 
vol. i, p. 331—336. 
+ Pronounce ara-ou. ‘This word belongs to the Maypure 
language, and must not be confounded with arua, which 


479 


inhabited by men, or much frequented by boats. 
It is a timid and mistrustful animal, that raises 
it’s head above the water, and hides itself at the 
least noise. The shores, where almost all the 
turtles of the Oroonoko appear to assemble an- 
nually, are situate between the junction of the 
Oroonoke with the Apure, and the great cata- 
racts, or Raudales ; that is to say, between Ca- 
bruta and the mission of Atures. There are 
found the three famous fisheries ; those of Enca- 
ramada, or Boca del Cabullare; of Cucuruparu, 
or Boca de la Tortuga; and of Pararuma, a little 
below Carichana. It seems, that the arrax does 
not pass beyond the cataracts;.and we were 
assured, that only the turtles called terekay * 
are found above Atures and Maypures. ‘This is 
the place to say a few words on the difference 
between these two species, and on their connec- 
tion with the various families of the chelonian 
order. j 

We shall begin with the arrau, which the 
Spaniards of the missions .call simply tortuga, 
and the existence of which is of so great impor- 
_ tance to the nations on the Lower Oroonoko. 
It is a large fresh-water tortoise, with palmate 


means a crocodile among the Tamanacks, neighbours of the 

Maypures. The Otomacks call the turtle of Uruana, achea; 

the Tamanacks, peje, Hs ‘i 
* In Spanish terecayas. 


480 


and membranous feet; the head very flat, with two 
fleshy and acutely-pointed appendages under the 
chin; five claws to the fore-feet, and four to the 
hind feet, which are furrowed underneath. The 
upper shell has five scutels in the centre, eight 
lateral, and twenty-four marginal. The colour is 
darkish gray above, and orange beneath. The feet 
are also yellow, and very long. There is a deep 
furrow between the eyes. The claws are very 
strong and very crooked. |The anus is placed at 
the distance of one fifth from the extremity of 
the tail. The full-grown animal -weighs from 
forty to fifty pounds. It’s eggs, much larger 
than those of pigeons, are less elongated than 
the eggs of the terekay. ‘They are covered with 
a calcareous crust, and, it is said, have sufficient 
firmness for the children of the Otomack Indians, 
who are great players.at ball, to throw them up 
into the air from one to another to catch. If 
the arrau inhabited the bed of the river above 
the cataracts, the Indians of the Upper Oroonoko 
would not travel so far, to procure the flesh and 
the eggs of this tortoise. Yet formerly whole 
tribes from the Atabapo and the Cassiquiare have 
been known to pass the Raudales, in order to 
take part in the fishery at Uruana. 

The terekay is less than the arrau. It is in 
general only fourteen inches in diameter. The 


- number of scutels in the upper shell is the same,, 


481 


but they are somewhat differently arranged. I 
counted three in the centre of the disk, and five 
‘hexagonal on each side. The margins contain 
twenty-four, all quadrangular, and much curved. 
The upper shell is of a black colour inclining to 
green; thefeetand clawsare like those of the arrau. 
The whole animal is of an olive-green, but it has 
_two spots of red mixed with yellow. on the top of 
the head. The throat is also yellow, and fur- 
nished with a prickly appendage. The terekays 
do not assemble in numerous societies like the 
arraus, or tortugas, to lay their eggs in common, 
and deposit them upon the same shore. The 
eggs of the terekay have an agreeable taste, and 
are much sought after by the inhabitants of 


Spanish Guyana. They are found in the Up- 
per Oroonoko, as well as below the cataracts, 
_ and even in the Apure, the Uritucu, the Guarico, 
and the small rivers that traverse the Llanos 


of Caraccas. The form of the feet and head, 
the appendages of the chin and throat, and the 
position of the anus, seem to indicate, that the 
arrau, and probably the terekay also, belong to 
a new subdivision of the tortoises, that may be 
separated from the emydes. From their cirri, 
and the position of the anus, they approximate 
the emys nasuta of Mr. Schweigger and the ma- 
tamata of French Guyana ; but differ from the 
latter in the form of the scutels, which are not 
VOL, IV. 21 


482 


rough with pyramidal eminences *. The period 
at which the large arrau tortoise lays it’s eggs 


* I would propose to place them provisionally near the 
matamata of Bruguitres, or testudo fimbriata of Gmelin 
(Schoepf, tab 21), which Mr. Dumeril has taken to form his 
genus chelys. 

Testudo arrau, testa ovali subconvexa, ex griseo nigrescenti, 
subtus lutea, scutellis disci 5, lateralibus 8, marginalibus 24, 
omnibus planis (nec mucronato-conicis), pedibus luteis, mento 
et gutture subtus biappendiculatis. 

Testudo terekay, testa ovali, atro-viridi, scutellis disci 3, 
lateralibus 10, marginalibus 24, capitis vertice maculis duabus 
ex rubro flavescentibus notato, gutture lutescenti, appendiculo 
spinoso. 

These descriptions are far from being complete, but are the 
first which have been attempted of two chelonians, so long 
celebrated from the narratives of the missionaries, and so re- 
markable for the advantages derived from them by the na- 
tives. Among the animals contained in the collection of the 
Jardin du Roi, it is observable, that in the testudo fimbriata 
(with twenty-five margifial scales) the aperture of the anus is 
placed nearly in the same manner as in the two tortoises of 
the Oroonoko, of which I have here given the description, 
and in the tryonix egyptiaca, that is to say, at one fourth 
from the extremity of the tail, This position of the anus de- 
serves to fix the attention of zoologists: it, as well as the ex- 
istence of an elongated proboscis in the matamata, approxi- 
mates the chelides to the tryonix; but these genera differ in 
the number of their claws, and the consistence of their shell. 
Mr. Geoffroy, guided by other considerations, had already 
supposed the existence of these relations. (Ann. du Muséum, 
vol. xiv, p.19.) The anus in the chelonians, the land-tor- 
toises, and the real emydes, is placed at the base of the tail. 
I find described in my journal only very young arraus, | 


~~. 483 


coincides with the period of the lowest waters, 
The Oroonoko beginning to increase from the 
vernal equinox, the lowest shores are found un- 
covered from the end of January till the 20th or 
25th of March. The arrau tortoises, collected 
in troops from the month of January, issue then 
from the water, and warm themselves in the 
Sun, reposing on the sands. The Indians be- 
lieve, that a great heat is indispensablé to the 


have made no mention of a proboscis; and, if I dared to 
trust my memory, I should say, that the adult arrau is not 
furnished with one like the matamata. We must not forget, 
however, that the genus chelys has been formed from the 
knowledge of one species only, and what belongs to the genus, 
and what belongs to the species, may have been confounded. 
The true characteristics of the new genus chelys are the form 
of the mouth, and the membranous appendages of the chin 
and neck. I never found in America the real testudo fim- 
briata of Cayenne, the scales of which have a conic and py- 
ramidal form; and I was the more surprised to see, that 
Father Gili, missionary at Encaramada, three hundred and 
twenty leagues from Cayenne, in a work published in 1788, 
already distinguished the arrau and the terekay from a much 
smaller tortoise, which he calls matamata. He gives it in his 
Italian description, if guscio no convesso come nelle altre tarta- 
rughe, ma piano, scabroso e deforme. These last characters very 
well agree with the testudo fimbriata ; and, as Father Gili 
was acquainted neither with zoology, nor with the books 
that treat of this science, we may suppose, that he described 
the matamata of the Oroonoko as he saw it. From these 
researches it results, that’ three neighbouring species, the 
arrau, the terekay, and the testudo fimbriata, inhahit one and 
the same region of the New Continent, 


2s Babe 


484 


health of the animal, and that it’s exposure to 
the Sun favours the laying of the eggs. The 
arraus are found on the beach a great part of 


the day during the whole month of February. ~ 


At the beginning of March the straggling troops 
assemble, and swim toward the small number of 
islands, where they habitually deposit their eggs. 
It is probable, that the same tortoise visits every 
year the same shores. At this period, a few 
days before they lay their eggs, thousands of 
these animals appear ranged in long files on the 
borders of the islands of Cucuruparu, Uruana, and 
Pararuma, stretching out their necks and hold- 
ing their heads above water, to see whether they 
have nothing to dread from tigers or men. The 
Indians, much interested that the bands already 
assembled should rentain complete, that the tor- 
toises should not disperse, and that the laying of 
the eggs should be performed tranquilly, place 
centinels at certain distances’ along the shore. 
The people who pass in boats are told to keep in 
the middle of the river, and not frighten the tor- 
toises by cries. The laying of the eggs takes place 
always during the night. It begins soon after 
sunset. With it’s hind feet, which are very long, 
and furnished with crooked claws, the animal 
digs a hole of three feet in diameter and two 
feet in depth. The Indians assert, that the tor- 
toise, to harden the sand of the beach, moistens 
it with it’s urine. This they think they perceive 


485 


by the smell, when they open a hole, or, as they 
say here, a nest of eggs *, recently made. These 
animals feel so pressing a desire to lay their eggs, 
that some of them descend into holes, that have 
been dug by others, and are not yet. covered 
with earth. They there deposit a new layer of 
eggs on that which has been recently laid. In 
this tumultuous movement an immense number 
of eggs are broken. The missionary showed us, 
by removing the sand in several places, that this 
loss may amount to one fifth of the whole gather- 
' ing. The yolk of the broken eggs contributes 
in drying to cement the sand; and we found 
very large concretions of grains of quartz and 
broken shells. The number of animals that dig 
the beach during the night is so considerable, 
that day surprises many of them before the lay- 
ing of their eggs is terminated. They are then 
urged on by the double necessity of depositing 
their eggs, and closing the holes they have dug, 
that they may not be perceived by the tigers. 
The tortoises that thus remain too late are in- 
sensible to their own danger. They work in the 
presence of the Indians, who visit the beach at a 
very early hour, and who call them mad tor- 
éoises. Notwithstanding the impetuosity of their 
movements, they are easily caught with the 
hand. 


* Nidada de huevos. 


486 


The three encampments formed by the Indians 
in the places indicated above begin about the 
end of March or commencement of April. The 
gathering of the eggs is conducted in a uniform 
manner, and with that regularity, which charac- 
terizes all monastic institutions. Before the ar- 
rival of the missionaries* on the banks of the 
river, the Indians profited much less from a 
production, which nature has there deposited in 
such abundance. Every tribe searched the 
beach in it’s own way ; and an immense num- 
ber of eggs were uselessly broken, because they 
were not dug with precaution, and more eggs 
were uncovered than could be carried: away. 
It was liké a mine worked by unskilful hands. 
The Jesuits have the merit of having reduced 
this operation to regularity; and though the 
monks of St. Francis, who have succeeded the 
Jesuits in the missions of the Oroonoko, boast of 
having followed the example of their predeces- 
sors, they unhappily do not effect all that pru- 
dence requires. The Jesuits did not suffer the 
whole beach to be searched; they left a part 
intact, from the fear of seeing the breed of arra 
tortoises, if not destroyed, at least considerably 
diminished. The whole beach is now dug up 
without reserve; and accordingly it seems to 
be perceived that the gathering is less productive 
from year to year. 

When the camp is formed, the missionary of 


487 


Uruana names his lieutenant, or commissary, 
who divides the ground where the eggs are 


found into different portions, according to the 
number of the Indian tribes who take part in the 
gathering. They are all Indians of missions, as 
naked and rude as the Indians of the woods ; 
though they are called reducidos and neofitos, 
because they go to church at the sound of the 
bell, and have learned to kneel down during the 
consecration of the host. 

The lieutenant or commissionado del Padre 
begins his operations by sounding. He ex- 
amines by means of a long wooden pole or a 
cane of bamboo, as we have said above, how far 
the stratum of eggs extends. ‘This stratum, ac- 
cording to our measurements, reached from the 
shore as far as one hundred and twenty feet dis- 
tant. Its mean depth is three feet. The co- 
missionado places marks, to indicate the point, 
where each tribe should stop in it’s labours. We 
were surprised to hear this harvest of eggs esti- 
mated like the produce of a well cultivated acre. 
An area accurately measured of one hundred 
and twenty feet. long, and thirty feet wide, has 
been known to yield one hundred jars of oil, or 
to the value of a thousand francs. ‘The Indians 
remove the earth with their own hands; they 
place the eggs they have collected in small bas- 
kets, called mappiri, carry them to’ the camp, 
and throw them into long troughs of wood filled 


488 


- with water. In these troughs the eggs, broken 
and stirred with shovels, remain exposed to the 
Sun, till the yolk, the oily part, which swims on 
the surface, has time to inspissate. As fast. as 
this oily part is collected on the surface of the 
water, it is taken off, and boiled over a quick 
fire. This animal oil, called manteca de tor- 
tugas *, keeps the better, it is said, in propor- 
tion as it has undergone a stronger ebullition. 
When well prepared, it is limpid, inodorous, and 
scarcely yellow. The missionaries compare it 
to the best oil of olives; and it is used not 
merely to burn in lamps, but in dressing victuals, 
to which it imparts no disagreeable taste. It is 
not easy, however, to procure oil of turtles’ eggs 
quite pure. It has generally a putrid smell, 
owing to the mixture of eggs, in which, from the 
prolonged action of the Sun, little tortoises, Jos 
tortuguillos, are already formed. We felt this 

- yery disagreeably at our return from the Rio 

Negro, on employing a fluid fat, which had 

become brown and fetid. Fibrous matter was 

found collected at the bottom of the vessel; a 

sign of the impurity of the tortoise-oil. 

I acquired some general statistical notions 
on the spot, by consulting the missionary of 

Uruana, his lieutenant, and the traders of An- 


* Tortoise grease. The Tamanack Indians call it. by the 
name of carapa; the Maypures, by the name of tani. 


489 


gostura. The shore of Uruana furnishes one 
thousand botijas * or jars of oil (manteca) 
annually. : The price of each jar at the capital 
of Guiana, vulgarly called Angostura, is from 
two piastres to two and a half. We may admit, 
that the total produce of the three shores, where 
the cosecha or gathering of eggs is annually 
made, is five thousand botijas. Now as two 
hundred eggs yield oil enough to fill a bottle, or 
limeta, it requires five thousand eggs for a jar 
or botya of oil. Estimating at one hundred, or 
one hundred and sixteen, the number of eggs, 
that one tortoise produces ; and reckoning that 
one third of these is broken at the time of laying, 
particularly by the mad tortoises; we may pre- 
sume, that, to obtain annually five thousand 
jars of oil, three hundred and thirty thousand 
arrau tortoises, the weight of which amounts to 
ore hundred and sixty-five thousand quintals, 
must come and lay thirty-three millions of eggs 
on the three shores appropriated to this harvest. 
The results of these calculations are much below 
the truth. Many tortoises lay only sixty or 
seventy eggs; and a great number of these ani- 
mals are devoured by jaguars at the moment 
they get out of the water. The Indians bring ~ 
away a great number of eggs to eat them dried 


* Each boftija contains twenty-five bottles: it’s capacity is 
from 1000 to 1200 cubic inches, 


490 


in the Sun; and they break a considerable num- 
ber through carelessness during the gathering. 
The number of eggs that are hatched before the 
people can dig them up is so prodigious, that 
near the encampment of Uruana I saw the 
whole shore of the Oroonoko swarming with 
little tortoises an inch in diameter, escaping 
with difficulty from the pursuits of the Indian 
children. If to these considerations be added, 
that all the arraus do not assemble on the three 
shores of the encampments ; and that there are 
many that lay their eggs in solitude, and some 
weeks later *, between the mouth of the Oroo- 
noko and the confluence of the Apure ; we must 
admit, that the number of turtles, which an- 
nually deposite their eggs on the banks of the 
Lower Oroonoko, is near a million. This num- 
ber is very considerable for so large an animal, 


* The arraus, which lay their eggs before the beginning of 
March; for in the same species the more or less frequent 
basking in the Sun, the food, and the peculiar organization 
of each individual, occasion differences; come out of the 


water with the terekays, which lay in January and February. 
Father Gumilla believes them to be arraus, that were not able 
to lay their eggs the preceding year! All that Father Gili 
relates of the terekay (vol.i, p, 96, 101, and 297) agrees en- 
tirely with what I learned from the governor of the Otomacks 


of Uruana, who understood Spanish, and with whom I could 
converse. It is difficult to find the eggs of the terekays, be- 
cause these animals, far from collecting in thousands on the 
same beach, deposit their eggs as they are scattered about. 


ate tsi aad ee ree 


leeobiaitt <acs 


prions sania aii 


49] 


weighing half a quintal, and of which the greater 
part is destroyed by men. In general nature 
multiplies less the great species of animals than 
the small. 

The labours of collecting the éggs, and pre- 
paring the oil, last three weeks. It is at this 
period only, that the missionaries have any com- 
munication with the coast, and the civilized 
neighbouring countries. The monks of St. Fran- 
cis, who live South of the cataracts, come to the 
harvest of eggs \ess to procure oil, than to see, 
as they say, “ white faces ;” and to learn, “ whe- 
ther the king inhabits the Escurial or Saint 
Ildefonso, whether the convents remain sup- 
pressed in France, and above all whether the 
Turks continue to keep quiet.” These are the 
only subjects, that are interesting to a monk of 
the Oroonoko, and on which the little traders of 
Angostura, who visit the encampments, can give 
no very exact notions. In those distant coun- 
tries no doubt is ever entertained of the news 
brought by a white man from the capital. To 
doubt is almost to reason; and how can it be 
otherwise than irksome to exercise the under 
standing, where people pass their lives in com- 
plaining of the heat of the climate, and the sting- 
ing of moschettoes? The profit of the traders 
in oil amounts to seventy or eighty per cent; 
for the Indians sell it them at thé price of a 
piastre a jar or botija, and the expense of car- 


492 


riage is not more than two fifths of a piastre per 
jar*. The Indians, when they go to the cosecha 
de huevos, bring away also a considerable quan- 
tity of eggs dried in the Sun, or exposed to a 
slight ebullition. Our rowers had baskets or 
little bags of cotton cloth filled with these eggs. 
Their taste is not disagreeable, when well pre- 
served. We were shown large shells of turtles, | 
emptied by the jaguar-tigers. These animals } 
follow the arraus toward the beaches, where the 
laying of the eggs is to take place. They sur- | 
. prise them on the sand ; ‘and, in order to devour | 
them at their ease, turn them in such a manner | 
that the under shell is uppermost. In this si- 
tuation the turtles cannot rise ; and as the jaguar 
turns many more than he can eat in one night, 
the Indians often avail themselves of his cunning 
and malignant avidity. 
- When we reflect on the difficulty that the 
naturalist finds in getting out the body of the 
turtle without separating the upper and under 
shells, we cannot enough admire the suppleness 
of the tiger’s paw, which empties the double 
armour of the arrau, as if the adhering parts of 


* First cost of 300 hotzjas, 300 piastres. Expenses of con- 
veyance: a boat, danchu, with four rowers, and a master, 
60 p.: two cows, for the food of the rowers during two months, | 
10 p.: cassava, 20 p.: petty expenses in the camp, 30 p.: | 
total, 420 p. The 300 botijas fetch at Angostura from 600 
to 750 piastres, according to the mean price of ten years. 


493 


the muscles had been cut by means of a surgical 
instrument. ‘The jaguar pursues the turtle quite 
into the water, when it is not very deep. It 
even digs up the eggs; and together with the 
crocodile, the herons, and the gadlinazo vulture, 
is the most cruel enemy of the little turtles 
recently hatched. The island of Pararuma had 
been so much infested with crocodiles the pre- 
ceding year, during the harvest of éggs, that the 
Indians in one night caught eighteen, of twelve 
or fifteen feet long, by means of curved pieces of 
iron, baited with the flesh of the manatee. Be- 
side the beasts of the forest we have just named, 
the wild Indians also do much damage to the 
fabrication of the oil. Warned by the first 
slight rains, which they call turtle rains (peje 
canepori*), they hasten to the banks of the 
Oroonoko, and kill with poisoned arrows the 
turtles, as with the head raised, and the paws 
extended, they warm themselves in the Sun. 
Though the little turtles (tortugwillos) may 
have burst the shell of their egg during the day, 
they are never seen to come out. of the ground 
but at night. The Indians assert, that the young 
animal. fears the heat of the Sun. They tried 
also to show us, that when the tortuguillo is car- 
vied in a bag to a distance from the shore, and 


* In the Tamanack language, from peje, a’ tortoise, and 
eanepo, rain. 


——— 


See ee 


494 


placed in sucha manner, that it’s tail is turned 
to the river, it takes without hesitation the 
shortest way to the water. I confess, that this 
_ experiment, of which Father Gumilla speaks, 
does not always succeed equally well: yet in 
general it appears, that at great distances from 
the shore, and even in an island, these little 
animals feel with extreme delicacy on what side 
the most humid air blows. 

Reflecting on this almost continued layer of 
eggs, that extends along the beach, and on the 
thousands of little turtles, that seek the water as 
soon as they are hatched, it is difficult to admit, 
that so many turtles, which have made their 
nests in the same spot, can distinguish their own 
young, and lead them like the crocodiles to the 
pools in the vicinity of the Oroonoko. It is 
certain, however, that the animal passes the first 
years of it’s life in the pools where the water is 
less deep, and does not return to the bed of the 
great river, till it is full grown. How then do 
the tortuguillos find these pools? Are they led 
thither by female turtles, which adopt the young 
as by chance? The crocodiles, less numerous, 
deposite their eggs in separate holes; and we 
shall soon find, that, in this family of sauriens, 
the female returns about the time when the in- 
cubation is terminated ; calls her young, which 
answer to her voice; and often assists theni to 
get out of the ground. The arrau tortoise no 


495 


doubt like the crocodile knows the spot, where 
she has made her nest; but, not daring to re- 
turn to the beach, where the Indians have formed 
their encampment, how can she distinguish her 
own young from the tortuguillos that do not be- 
long to her? On the other hand, the Otomack 
Indians declare, that, at the period of the inun- 
dations, they have met with female turtles fol- 
lowed by a great number of young ones. These 
were perhaps arraus, that laid eggs on a desert 
beach, to which they could return. Males are 
extremely rare among these animals. Scarcely 
is one male found among several hundred fe- 
males. ‘The cause of this scarcity cannot be the 
same as with the crocodiles, which fight in the 
season of their loves. 

Our pilot had anchored at the Playa de huevos, 
to purchase some provision, which began to run 
short with us. We found there fresh meat, 
Angostura rice, and even biscuit made of wheaten 
flour. Our Indians filled the boat with little 
live turtles, and eggs dried in the Sun, for their 
own use. Having taken leave of the missionary 
of Uruana, who had treated us with great cor- 
diality, we set sail about four in the afternoon. 
The wind was fresh, and blew in squalls. Since 
we had entered the mountainous part of the 
country, we had discovered, that our canoe car- 
ried sail very badly; but the master,was desir- 
ous of showing the Indians, who were assembled 


496 


on the beach, that, in going as near the wind as 
possible, he should reach at one single tack the 
middle of the river. At the very moment when 
he was boasting of his dexterity, and the bold- 
ness of his manoeuvre, the force of the wind upon 
the sail became so great, that we were on the 
point of going down, Our side of the boat was 
under water, which entered with such violence, 
that it was up to our knees. It passed over a 
little: table, at which I was writing in the after 
part of the boat. I had some difficulty to save 
my journal, and in an instant we saw our books, 
papers, and dried plants, all swimming. Mr. 
Bonpland was lying asleep in the middle of the 
canoe. Awakened by the entrance of the water, 
and the cries of the Indians, he judged of our 
situation with that coolness, which he always 
displayed in the most difficult, circumstances. 
The lee side righting itself from time to time 
during the squall, he did not consider the boat 
as lost. He thought, that, were we even forced 
to abandon it, we should save ourselves by swim- 
ming, since there was no crocodile in sight. 
Amid this uncertainty, we saw the cordage of 
the sail suddenly give way. The same gust of 
wind, that had thrown us on our beam, served 
also to right us. We instantly laboured to bale 
the boat with calebashes ; the sail was set afresh; 
and in less than half an hour we were again in 
a state to proceed. The wind had abated a 


497 


‘little. Squalls alternating with dead calms ara 
very common in that part of the Oroonoko, 
which is bordered by mountains. They become - 
very dangerous for boats deeply laden, and with- 
out decks. We had escaped as by miracle. 
To the reproaches that were heaped on our 
pilot for having kept too near the wind he op- 

— posed his Indian phlegm ; and answered coldly, 
“ that the Whites would not want Sun enough 
on those banks to dry their papers.” We lost 
only one book ; the first volume of the Genera 
Plantarum of Schreber, which had fallen into 
the water. Such losses are felt by those who 
are reduced to a small number of works of 

science. 

At the beginning of the night we landed on a 
barren island in the middle of the river, near the 
mission of Uruana. We supped by a beautiful 
moonlight, and were seated on large shells of 
turtle, that were found scattered on the beach. 
What delightful satisfaction did we feel at find- 
ing ourselves thus assembled! We figured to 
ourselves the situation of a man, who had been 
saved alone from shipwreck, wandering on these 
desert shores, mecting at every step with other 
rivers, that fall into the Oroonoko, and which it 
is dangerous to pass by swimming, on account 
of the multitude of crocodiles, and caribe fishes. 
We represented to ourselves such a man, awake 
to the most tender affections of the soul, ignos 

VOL. IV, 2k 


498 


rant of the fate of the companions of his misfor- 
tune, and thinking more of them than of him- 
self. If we love to indulge such melancholy 
meditations, it is because, when just escaped 
from danger, we seem to feel something like a 
want of strong emotions. The minds of each 
of us were full of what we had just witnessed. 
There are periods in life, when, without being 
discouraged, the future appears more uncertain. 
It was only three days since we had entered the 
Oroonoko ; and there yet remained three months 
for us to navigate rivers incumbered with rocks, 
and in smaller boats than that in which we had 
nearly perished. 

The night was intensely hot. We lay upon 
skins spread on the ground, not finding any 
trees to which we could fasten our hammocks. 
The torments of the moschettoes increased every 
day ; and we were surprised to find, that on this 
spot our fires did not prevent the approach of 
the jaguars. They swam across the arm of the 
river that separated us from the main land. 
Toward morning we heard their cries very near. 
They had come to the island where we passed 
the night. The Indians told us, that, during 
the collecting of the turtles’ eggs, tigers are 
always more frequent in those regions, and dis- 
play at that period the greatest intrepidity. 

April the 7th. We passed, on our right, the 
mouth of the great Rio Arauca, celebrated on 


499 


account of the immense number of birds that 
frequent it; and, on our left, the mission of 
Uruana, vulgarly called the Concepcion de 
Urbana. This small village, which counts five 
hundred souls, was founded by the Jesuits about 
the year 1748, by the union of the Otomack and 
Caveres or Cabre Indians. It is placed at the 
foot of a mountain, composed of detached blocks 
of granite. This mountain I believe bears the 
name of Saraguaca. UHeaps of stones, separated 
one from the other by the effect of decomposi- 
tion, form caverns, in which we find indubitable 
proofs of the ancient. cultivation of the natives. 
Hieroglyphic figures, and even characters in 
regular lines, are seen sculptured there. I doubt 
whether these characters bear any analogy to 
alphabetic writing *. We visited the mission of 
Uruana at our return from the Rio Negro, and 
saw with our own eyes those heaps of earth 
which the Otomacks eat, and which are become 
an object of such lively discussion in Europe. 
On measuring the breadth of the Oroonoko 
between the islands called Isla de Uruana and 
Isla de la Manteca, we found it, during the high 
waters, 2674 + toises, which make nearly four 


* See my Monuments of the ancient Inhabitants of Ame- 
rica, vol. i, (or vol. xiii, of the present work,) Eng. edit. 
p. 153. 

+ Oy 5211 metres, or 6230 varas. 


Dix 2 


ted 


500 


nautical miles. ‘This is eight times the breadth 
of the Nile at Manfalout and Syout*, yet we 
were at the distance of a hundred and ninety- 
four leagues from the mouth of the Oroonoko. 
The temperature of the water at it’s surface 
was 27°8° of the centigrade thermometer, near 
Uruana. That of the river Zara, or Congo, m 
Africa, at an equal distance from the equator -/-, 
was found by Captain Tuckey, in the months of 
July and August, to be only from 23°9° to 25°62. 
We shall hereafter see, that the waters of the 


Oroonoko, as well near the banks, where they 


flow beneath a thick shade, as in the channel in 
the middle of the river, rise to 29°5° t, and never 
sink below 27°5°§; but the air also at this 
period, from April to June, was generally be- 
tween 28° and 30° in the day, and at night be- 
tween 24° and 26°, while in the valley of Congo 
the temperature kept, from eight in the morning 
till noon, between 20°6° and 26°7°. 

The western bank of the Oroonoko remains 
low farther than the mouth of the Meta; while 
from the mission of Uruana the mountains ap- 
proach the eastern bank more-and more. As 
the strength of the current increases in propor- 
tion as the river grows narrower, the progress of 


* Girard, sur la Vallée d’ Egypt, p. 12. 
+ In the southern hemisphere, 

t As high as 23-6° R. 

§-22-0° R. 


501 , 


eur boat became much slower. We continued 
to ascend the Oroonoko under sail, but the high 
and-woody grounds deprived us of the wind. 
At other times the narrow passes between the 
mountains, by which we sailed, sent us violent 
gusts, but of short duration. The number of 
crocodiles augmented below the confluence of 
the Rio Arauca, particularly opposite the great 
lake of Capanaparo, which communicates with 
the Oroonoko, as the Laguna de Cabullarito 
communicates at the same time with the Oroo- 
noko and the Rio Arauca. The Indians told us, 
that the crocodiles came from the inlands, where 
they had been buried in the dried mud of the 
savannahs. As soon as the first showers awaken 


‘them from their lethargy, they crowd together 


in troops, and hasten toward the river, there to 
disperse again. Here, in the equinoctial zone, 
it is the increase of humidity that recalls them 
to life; while in Georgia and Florida, in the 
temperate zone, it is the augmentation of heat, 
that rouses these animals from a state of nervous 
and muscular debility, during which the active 
powers of respiration are suspended, or singularly 
diminished. The season of great drought, im- 
properly called the swmmer of the torrid zone, 
corresponds to the winter of the temperate zone; 
and it is a curious physiological phenomenon, to 
observe the alligators of North America plunged 
into a winter sleep by excess of cold, at the same 


} 


: 


a 


Sa TSI 


502 


period when the crocodiles of the Llanos begin 
their stesta, or summer sleep. If it were pro- 
bable, that these animals of the same family had 
heretofore inhabited the same northern country, 
we might suppose, that, in advancing toward the 
equator, they feel the want of repose after exer- 
cising their muscles for seven or eight months ; 
and that they retain under a new sky the habits*, 
that appear to be essentially linked with their 
organization. 

Having passed the mouths of the channels, 
that communicate with the lake of Capanaparo, 
we entered a part of the Oroonoko, where the 
bed of the river is narrowed by the mountains 
of Baraguan. It is a kind of strait, reaching 
nearly to the confluence of the Rio Suapure. 
From these granite mountains the natives here- 
tofore gave the name of Baraguan to that 
part of the Oroonoko, which is comprised be- 
tween the mouths of the Arauca and the Ata- 
bapo. Among savage nations great rivers bear 
different denominations in the different portions 
of their course. The passage of Baraguan pre- 
sents a picturesque scene. The granite rocks 
are perpendicular. They form a range of moun- 
tains lying North-West and South-East ; and 
the river cutting this dyke nearly at a right 
angle, the summits of the mountains appear like 


* See above, p. 89. 
? 


503 


separate peaks. Their elevation in general does 
not surpass one hundred and twenty toises; but, 
their situation in the midst of a small plain, their 
steep declivities, and their sides destitute of ve- 
getation, give them a majestic character. They 
are composed of enormous masses of granite, of 
a parallelopipedal figure, but rounded at the 
edges, heaped one upon another. The blocks 
are often eighty feet long, and twenty or thirty 
broad. They would seem to have been piled up 
by some external force, if the proximity of a 
rock identical in it’s composition, not separated 
into blocks but filled with veins *, did not prove, 
that the parallelopipedal form is owing solely to 
the action of the atmosphere. These veins, two 
or three inches thick, are distinguished by a fine- 
grained quartz granite, crossing a coarse-grained 
granite almost porphyritic, and abounding in fine 
crystals of red feldspar. I sought in vain in the 
Cordillera of Baraguan for hornblende, and those 
steatitic masses, that characterize several gra- 
nites of the high Alps in Switzerland. 

We landed in the middle of the strait of Ba- 
raguan, to measure it’s breadth. ‘The rocks pro- 


* Their direction is generally, hor. 3. I also saw a great 
number of these veins following the directions hor, 6—11, im 
the winter harbour (Puerto de invierno) of Atures. These con- 
tain no vacuities, no vestige of druses. ‘They are, as at Bara- 
guan, veins of fine-grained granite traversiag coarse-grained 


granite. 


504 


ject so much toward the river, that I measured 
with difficulty a base of eighty toises. I found 
the river eight hundred and eighty-nine toises 
broad. In order to conceive how this passage 
bears the name of a strait, we must recollect, 
that the breadth of the river from Uruana to the 
junction of the Meta is in general from 1500 to 
2500 toises. In this place, extremely hot and 
barren, I measured two granitic summits, much 
rounded, one of which was only a hundred and 
ten, and the other eighty-five toises. There are 
higher summits in the interior of the group, but 
in general these mountains, of so wild an aspect, 
have not the elevation that is assigned to them 
by the missionaries. 
We looked in vain for plants in the clefts of 
the rocks, which are as steep as walls, and fur- 
nish some traces of stratification *. We found 
only an old trunk of aubletia +, with large po- 
miform fruit, and a new species of the family of 
the apocyneze*t. All the stones were covered 
with an innumerable quantity of iguanas and 


* In one single place we saw the granite of Baraguar 
stratified and divided into beds of three inches thick. The 
direction of these beds was N. 20° W.; and their dip 85° 
North-East. It was coarse-grained granite, stratified like 
that of Las Trincheras, and not gneiss, (See above, chap. 
Xvi, p. 198.) 

. + Aubletia tiburba, 
ft Allamanda salicifolia. 


505 


geckoes with spreading and membranous fingers, 
These lizards, motionless, the head raised, and 
the mouth open, seemed to suck in the heated 
air. The thermometer placed against the rock 
rose to 50'2°*. ‘The soil appeared undulating, 
from the effect of mirage, without a breath of 
wind being felt. The Sun was near the zenith, 
and it’s dazzling light, reflected by the surface 
of the river, contrasted with the reddish vapours 
that enveloped all the surrounding objects. How 
vivid is the impression produced by the calm of 
nature, at noon, in these burning climates! 
The beasts of the forest retire to the thickets ; 
the birds hide themselves beneath the foliage of 
the trees, or in the crevices of the rocks. Yet, 
amid this apparent silence, when we lend an at- 
tentive ear to the most feeble sounds transmitted 
by the air, we hear a dull vibration, a continual 
murmur, a hum of insects, that fill, if we may 
use the expression, all the lower strata of the air. 
Nothing is better fitted to make man feel the 
extent and power of organic life. Myriads of 
insects creep upon the soil, and flutter round the 
plants parched by the ardour of the Sun. A 
confused noise issues from every bush, from the 
decayed trunks of trees, from the clefts of the 
rock, and from the ground undermined by the 
lizards, millepedes, and cecilias. These are so 


nN 


* 401° R, 


506 


many voices proclaiming to. us, that all nature 
breathes; and that, under a thousand different 
forms, life is diffused throughout the cracked 
and dusty soil, as well as in the bosom of the . 
waters, and in the air that circulates around us. 

The sensations, which I here recalled to mind, 
are not unknown to those, who, without having 
advanced to the equator, have visited Italy, 
Spain, or Egypt. That contrast of motion and 
silence, that aspect of nature at once calm and 
animated, strikes the imagination of the travel- 
ler, when he enters the basin of the Mediterra- 
nean, within the zone of olives, dwarf palms, and 
date-trees. 

We passed the night on the eastern bank of 
the Oroonoko, at the foot of a granitic hill. 
Near this desert spot was formerly seated the 
mission of San Regis. We could have wished 
to find a spring in the Baraguan. The water of 
the river had a smell of musk, and a sweetish 
taste extremely disagreeable. In the Oroonoko, 
as well as in the Apure, we are struck with the 
difference, that the various parts of the river ex- 
hibit near the most barren shore. The water is 
sometimes very potable, and sometimes seems to 
be loaded with gelatinous matter. “ It is the 
bark” (the coriaceous covering) “ of the putrified 
cayman, that is the cause,” say the natives. 
«The more aged the cayman, the more bitter 
his bark.” I have no doubt, that the carcasses 


507 


of these large reptiles, those of the manatees, 
which weigh five hundred pounds, and the pre- 
sence of the porpoises (éorinas) with their muci- 
laginous skin, may contaminate the water, es- 
pecially in the creeks, where the river has little 
velocity. Yet the spots, where we found the 
most fetid water, were not always those, where 
dead animals were accumulated on the beach. 
When, in such ardent climates, where we are 
constantly tormented by thirst, we are reduced 
to drink the water of a river at the temperature 
of 27° or 28°, it were to be wished at least, that 
water so hot, and so loaded with sand, should be 
free from smell. ; 

April the 8th. We passed the mouths of the 
Suapure, or Sivapuri, and the Caripo, on the 
East; and that of the Sinaruco on the West. 
This last river is, next to the Rio Arauca, the 
most considerable between the Apure and the 
Meta. The Suapure, full of little cascades, is 
celebrated among. the Indians for the quantity 
of wild honey, which the forests in it’s neigh- 
bourhood afford. The melipone there suspend 
their enormous hives to the branches of trees. 
Father Gili navigated in 1766 on the Suapure, 
and on the Turiva, which falls intoit. He there 
found tribes of the nation of Areverians. We 
passed the night a little below the island Macu- 
pina. 5 

April the 9th. We arrived early in the morn- 


508 


x 


ing at the beach of Pararuma, where we found ' 
an encampment of Indians, similar’ to that we | 
had seen at the Boca dela Tortuga. They had 

assembled to search the sands, collect the tur- 

tles’ eggs, and extract the oil ; but they had un- 

fortunately made a mistake of several days. 
The little turtles * had come out of their shells, 
before the Indians had formed their camp. Ac- 
cordingly the crocodiles and the garzes, a species 
of large white herons, had availed themselves of 
the delay. These animals, alike fond of the 
flesh of the young turtles, devour an ihnumera- 
ble quantity. They fish during the night, for 
the tortuguillos do not come out of the earth, to 
gain the neighbouring river, till after the even- 
ing twilight. The zamuro vultures + are too 
indolent to hunt after sunset. They stalk around 
the shores in the day: alight in the midst of the 
Indian encampment, to steal provision; and 
often find no other means of satisfying their vo- 
racity, than by attacking young crocodiles of 
seven or eight inches long, either on the land, 
or in water of little depth. It is curious to see | 
the address, with which these little animals de- 
fend themselves for some time against the vul- 
tures. As soon as they perceive them, they raise 
themselves on their fore paws, bend their back, 


| 
: 


* Los tortuguillos. 
+ Sce above, chap. viii, vol. iii, p. 20. 


509 


and lift up the head, opening their wide jaws. 


They turn continually, though slowly, toward 


their enemy, to show him their teeth, which, 
even when the animal is recently come out of 
the egg, are already very long and sharp. Often 
while one of the zamuroes attracts the whole at- 
tention of a young crocodile, another seizes so 
favourable an opportunity for an unforeseen at- 
tack. He pounces on the crocodile, grasps it by 
the neck, and bears it off to the higher regions 
of the air. We had an opportunity of observing 
this manoeuvre during several mornings, at the 
town of Mompex*, where we had collected more 
than forty crocodiles, that had been fifteen or 
twenty days hatched, in a spacious court sur- 
rounded by a wall. 

We found among the Indians assembled at 
Pararuma some white. men, who had come from 
Angostura to purchase the manteca de tortuga. 
After having wearied us for a long time with 
their complaints of the “ bad harvest,” and of 
the mischief done by the tigers among the tur- 
tles, at the moment of laying their eggs, they 
conducted us beneath an ajoupa, that rose in the 
centre of the Indian camp. We there found the 
missionary-monks of Carichana and the Cata- 
racts seated on the ground, playing at cards, 
and smoking tobacco in long pipes. From their 


* On the borders of the river Magdalena, 


510 


ample blue garments, their shorn heads, and 
their long beards, we might have taken them 
for natives of the East. These poor priests re- 
ceived us in the most affectionate manner, giv- 
ing us every kind of information necessary for 
the continuation of our voyage. They had suf- 
fered from tertian fevers for some months; pale 
and emaciated, they easily convinced us, that the 
countries we were going to visit were not with- 
out danger to the health of travellers. 

The Indian pilot, who had brought us from 
San Fernando de Apure as far as the shore of 
Pararuma, was unacquainted with the passage 
of the rapids * of the Oroonoko, and would not 
undertake to conduct our bark any farther. 
‘We were obliged to conform to his will. Hap- 
pily for us, the missionary of Carichana con- 
sented to sell us a fine canoe at a very moderate 
price: and Father Bernardo Zea, missionary of 
the Atures and Maypures near the great cata- 
racts, offered, though ill, to accompany us as far as- 
the frontiers of Brazil. ‘The number of natives, 
who assist in passing boats through the Raudales 
is so small, that, but for the presence of the 
monk, we should have risqued spending whole 
weeks in these humid and unhealthy regions. 
On the banks of the Oroonoko, the forests. of the: 
Rio Negro are considered as a delicious spot. 


* Vittle cascades, chorros, raudalitos. 


511 


The air is indeed cooler and more healthful, 
The river is free from crocodiles ; you can bathe 
without apprehension, and by night as well as 
by day are less tormented by the stings of insects 
than on the Oroonoko. Father Zea hoped to 
reestablish his health by visiting the missions of 
Rio Negro. He talked of those places with that 
enthusiasm, which is felt in all the colonies of 
the continent for every thing far off. 

The assemblage of Indians at Pararuma again 
excited in us that interest, which every where 
attaches man in a cultivated state to the study 
of men in a savage condition, and the successive 
developement of his intellectual faculties. How 
difficult to recognize in this infancy of society, 
in this assemblage of dull, silent, inanimate 
Indians, the primitive character of our species ! 
Human nature is not here displayed with those 
features of artless simplicity, of which poets in 
every language have drawn such enchanting 
pictures. The savage of the Oroonoko appeared 
to us to be as hideous as the savage of the Mis- 
sisippi, described by that philosophical traveller *, 
who best knew how to paint man under different 
climates. We are eager to persuade ourselves, 
that these natives, crouching before the fire, or 


. seated on large shells of turtles, their bodies 


covered with earth and grease, their eyes stu- 


* Mr. de Yolney. 


=e 


512 


pidly fixed for whole hours on the beverage they 
are preparing, far from being the primitive type 
of our species, are a degenerate race, the feeble 
remains of nations, who, after having been long 
dispersed in the forests, are replunged into bar- 
barism. 

Red paint being in some sort the only cloth- 
ing of the Indians, two kinds may be distin- 
guished among them, according as they are 
more or less affluent. ‘The common decoration 
of the Caribbees, the Otomacks, and the Jaruroes, 
is onoto *, called by the Spaniards achote, and 
by the planters of Cayenne rocou. It is the co- 

-louring matter extracted from the pulp of the 
bixa orellana +. The Indian women prepare the 
onoto by throwing the seeds of the plant into a 
tub filled with water. ‘They beat this water for 
an hour, and then leave it to deposit tranquilly 
the colouring fecula, which is of an intense brick- 
red. After having separated the water, they 
take out the fecula, dry it between their hands, 
knead it with oil of turtles’ eggs, and form it 


* Properly anoto. ‘This word belongs to the Tamanack 

Indians. The Maypures call it majepa. The Spanish mis- 
-sionarics say onotarse, to rub the skin with anotto, to onoto 
oneself. 

+ Even the word bixa, adopted by botanists, is derived 
from the ancient language of Haiti, or of the island of St. 
Domingo. Rocov, the term commonly used by the French, 
is derived from the Brazilian word, wucu. 


i 
I 
i 


Sa att 


513 


into round cakes of three or four ounces weight. 
When turtles’ oil is wanting, some nations mix 
with the onofo the fat of the crocodile. 

Another pigment, much more valuable, is ex- 
tracted from a plant of the family of the bigno- 


* nize, which Mr. Bonpland has made known by 


the name of bignonia chica*. The Tamanacks 
call it craviri; the Maypures, chirraviri. It 
climbs up and clings to the tallest trees by the 
aid of tendrils. It’s bilabiate flowers dre an inch 
long, of a fine violet colour, and disposed by 
twoes or threes. The bipinnate leaves become 
reddish in drying. The fruit is a pod, filled 
with winged seeds; and is two feet long. This 
bignoniaceous plant grows spontaneously, and in 
great abundance, near Maypures; and in going 
up the Oroonoko, beyond the mouth of the Gua- 
viara, from Santa Barbara to the lofty mountain 
of Duida, particularly near Esmeralda. We 
also found it on the banks of the Cassiquiare. 
The red pigment of chica is not obtained from 
the fruit, like the onoto, but from the leaves 
macerated in water. The colouring matter 
separates in the form of a light powder. It is 
collected, without being mixed with turtles’ oil, 
into little loaves eight or nine inches long, and 
from two to. three high, rounded at the edges. 


* Plantes Equinoxiales, vot. i, p. 108, pl.xxxi. Gilt, Saggio, 
vol. i, p. 218. | y 


VOL. IV. 2 


O14 


These loaves, when heated, emit an agreeable 
smell of benzoin. When the chica is subjected 
to distillation, it yields no sensible traces of am- 
monia. It is not, like indigo, a substance com- 
bined with azot. It dissolves slightly in sul- 
phuric and muriatic acids, and even in alkalis. 
Ground with oil, the chica furnishes a red colour, 
that has a tint of lake. Applied on wool, it 
might be confounded with madder red. There 
is no doubt, that the chica, unknown in Europe 
before our travels, may be employed usefully in 
the arts. The nations on the Oroonoko, by 
whom this pigment is best. prepared, are the 
Salivas, the Guipunaves *, the Caveres, and the 
Piraoas. The processes of infusionand macera- 
tion are in general very common among all the 
nations on the Oroonoko. Thus the Maypures 
carry on a trade of barter with the little loaves 
of puruma, which is a vegetable fecula, dried in 
the manner of indigo, and yielding a very per- 
manent yellow colour. The chemistry of the 
savage is reduced to the preparation of pigments, 
that of poisons, and the dulcification of the amy- 
laceous roots, which the aroides and the euphor- 


biaceous plants afford. 

The greater part of the missionaries of the 
Upper and Lower Oroonoko permit the Indians 
of their missions to paint their skins. It is pain- 


a 


* Or Guaypunaves; they call themselyes Uipunavi. 


516 


ful to add, that some of them speculate on this 
state of nudity of the natives. In their huts, 
pompously called conventos *, I have often seen 
stores of chica, which they sold as high as four 
francs the cake (turta). To form a just idea of 
the extravagance of the decoration of these naked 
Indians, I must observe, that a man of large 
stature gains with difficulty enough by the la- 
bour of a fortnight, to procure in exchange the 
chica necessary to paint himself red. Thus as’ 
we say in temperate climates of a poor man, 
“ he has not enough to clothe himself,” you hear 
the Indians of the Oroonoko say, “ that man is 
so poor, that he has not enough to paint (s‘onoter, 
se maepayer) half his body.” The little trade in 
chica is carried on. chiefly with the tribes of the © 
Lower Oroonoko, whose country does not pro- 
duce the plant that furnishes this much valued 
substance. The Caribbees and the Otomacks 
paint only the head and the hair with chica, but 
the Salivas possess this pigment in sufficient 
abundance, to cover their whole bodies. _When 
the missionaries send on their own account small 
cargoes of cacao, tobacco, and chiguichiqui + 
from the Rio Negro to Angostura, they always 
add some cakes of chica, as being articles of 


* In the missions, the parsonage house bears the name of 


convent ; it is a casa del padre. 
+ Ropes made with the petioles of a palm-tree with pin- 
nate leaves, of which we shall speak in the sequel. 
2u2 


516 


merchandize in great request. Some persons of 
European race employ this red fecula, dilateda in 
water, as an. excellent diuretic. 

The custom of painting is not equally ancient 
among all the tribes of the Oroonoko. — It has in- 
creased since the time when the powerful nation of 
the Caribbees made frequent incursions into those 
countries. The victors and the vanquished were 
alike naked; and to please the conqueror it was 
necessary to paint like him, and to assume his 
colour. The infiuence of the Caribbees has now 
ceased, and they remain circumscribed between 
the rivers. Carony, Cuyuni, and Paraguamuzi; 
but the Caribbean fashion of painting the whole 
body is still preserved. The custom has sur- 
vived the conquest. 

Does the use of the oxoto and chica derive it’s 
origin from the desire of pleasing, and the taste 
for ornament, so common among the most sa- 
vage nations? or must we suppose it to be 
founded on the observation, that these colouring 
and oily matters, with which the skin is plastered, 
preserve it from the sting of the moschettoes? 
I have often heard this question discussed in 
Europe ; but in the missions of the Oroonoko, 
and wherever within the tropics the air is filled 
with venomous insects, the inquiry would appear 
at best idle. The Caribbee and the Saliva, who 
are painted red, are not less cruelly tormented 
by the moschettoes and the zancudoes, than the 


517 


Indians whose bodies are plastered with no 
colour. The sting of the insect causes no swell- 
ing in either; and scarcely ever produces those 
littie pustules, which occasion such smarting and 
itching to Europeans recently disembarke1.. 
But the Native and the White suffer equally 
from the sting, till the insect has withdrawn it’s 
sucker from the skin. After a ttousind useless 
essays, Mr. Bonpland and myself tried the ex- 
pedient of rubbing our hands and arms with 
the fat of the crocodile, and the oil of turtles - 
eggs; but we never felt the least relief, and 
were stung as before. I am not ignorant, that 
the Laplanders boast of oil and fit as the most 
useful preservatives; but the insects of Scandi- 
navia are not of the same species as thos? of the 
Oroonoko. The smoke of tobacco drives away 
our gnats, while it is employed in vain agains; 
the zancudoes. If the application of fat and as- 
tringent * substances preserved the unhappy in- 
habitants of these countries from the torment of 
insects, as Father Gumilla pretends, why has 
not the custom of painting the skin become 
general on these very banks? Why do so many 
naked + natives paint only the face, though liy- 


* The pulp of the anotta, and even the chica, are astringent 
and slightly purgative, ‘ 
+ The Guaypunaves, the Caveres, the Guahibes. 


518 


ing in the neighbourhood of those * who paint 
the whole body? 

We are struck with the observation, that: the 
Indians of the Oroonoko, like the natives of 
North America, prefer the substances that yield a 
red colour to every other. Is this predilection 
founded on the facility, with which the savage 
procures ochrey earths, or the colouring fecula 
of anotta, and of chica? I doubt this much. 
Indigo grows wild in.a great part of Equinoctial 
America., This plant, like so many other legu- 
minous plants, would have furnished the natives 
abundantly with pigments to colour themselves 
blue like the ancient Britonst. Yet we see no 
American tribe painted with indigo. It appears 
to me probable, as I have already hinted above, 
that the preference given by the Americans to 
‘the red colour is generally founded on the ten- 
dency, which nations feel to attribute the idea of 
beauty to whatever characterizes their national 
physiognomy. Men whose skin is naturally of 
a brownish red, love a red colour. If they be 
born with a forehead little raised, and the head 
flat, they endeavour to depress the forehead of 


* The Caribbees, the Salives, the Tamanacks, and the 
Maypures. 


+ The half-clad nations of the temperate zone often paint 
their skin of the same colour, as that with which their clothes 
are dyed, 


pie heck rte se Soc 


519 


their children. If they be distinguished from 
other nations by a thin beard, they try to eradi- 
cate the few hairs, that nature has given them. 
They think themselves embellished in proportion 
as they heighten the characteristic marks of their 
race, or of their national conformation. 

We were surprised to see, that, in the camp of 
Pararuma, the women far advanced in years 
were more occupied with their ornaments than 
the youngest women. We saw an Indian wo- 
man of the nation of the Otomacks employing 
two of her daughters in the operation of rubbing 
her hair with the oil of turtles’ eggs, and paint- 
ing her back with onoto and caruto. The orna- 
ment consisted of a sort of lattice work formed 
of black lines crossing each other on a red 
ground. Each little square had a black dot in 
the centre. It was a work of incredible patience. 
We returned from a very long herborization, and 
the painting was not half finished. This re- 
search of ornament seems the more singular, 
when we reflect, that the figures and marks are 
not produced by the process of tatooing, but 
that paintings executed with so much care * are 


* The black and caustic pigment of the caruto (genipa 
Americana) however resists a long time the action of water, 
as we found with regret, having one day, in sport with the 
Tudians, caused our faces to be marked with spots and strokes 
of Caruto. When we returned to Angostura, in the midst 
of Europeans, these marks were still visible. 


520 


effaced, if the Indian expose himself impru- 
dently to a violent shower. There are some 
nations, that paint only to celebrate festivals ; 
others are covered with colour during the whole 
year: and the latter consider the use of onoto 
as so indispensable, that both men and women 
would perhaps be less ashamed, to present them- 
selves without a guayuco* than destitute of 
paint. These guayucoes of the Oroonoko are 
partly bark of trees, and partly cotton cloth. 
Those of the men are broader than those worn 


by the women, who, the missionaries say, have 
in general a less lively feeling of modesty. A 
similar observation had been already made by 
Christopher Columbus. Must we not attribute 


this indifference, this want of delicacy in women 
belonging to nations of which the manners are 
not much depraved, to that rude state of slavery, 
to which the sex is reduced in South America by 
the men’s injustice and the abuse of power? 
When we speak in Europe of a native of Guy- 
_ ana, we figure to ourselves a man, whose head 
and waist are decorated with fine feathers of the 
macaw, the toucan, the tanager, and the hum- 
ming bird. Our painters and sculptors have 
long since regarded these ornaments as the cha- 


® A word of the Caribbean language. The perizoma of the 
Indians of the Oroonoko is rather a band than an apron. 
See above, vol. iil, p. 231, 232. 


eee 


etiam totam iia etek St 


521 


racteristic marks of an American. We were 
surprised at not finding in the Chayma missions, 
in the encampments of Uruana and of Pararuina, 
I might almost say on all the shores of the 
Oroonoko and the Cassiquiare, those fine plumes, 
those feathered aprons, which are so often brought 
by travellers from Cayenue and Demerary. 
These tribes for the most part, even those whose 
intellectual faculties are the most expanded, who 


cultivate alimentary plants, and know bow to 


weave cotton, are altogether as naked*, as poor, 
and as destitute of ornaments, as the natives of 
New Holland. The excessive heat of ihe air, 
the profuse perspiration in which the body is 
bathed at every hour of the day and a great part 
of the night, render the use of clothes insupport- 
able. - Their objects of ornament, and particu- 
larly their plumes of feathers, ae reserved for 
dances and solemn festivals. The plumes worn 
by the Guaypunaves + are the most celebrated 
for their choice of the fine feathers of manakins 
and parrots. 

The Indians are not always satisfied with one 
colour-uniformly spread : they sometimes imitate 
in the most whimsical manner, in painting their 


® For instance, the Macoes and the Piraoas. The Carib- 
bees must be excepted, whose perizoma is a cotton cloth, so 
broad, that it might cover the shoulders. 

t+ These came originally from the banks of the Inirida, one 


» 


of the rivers that fall into the Guaviare. 


He 
if 
Ne 


a2? 


skin, the form of European garments. We saw 
some at Pararuma, who were painted with a 
blue jacket and black buttons. The mission: 
aries related to us, that the Guaynaves of the 
Rio Caura are accustomed to stain them- 
selves red with anotta, and to make broad 
transverse stripes on the body, on which they 
stick spangles of silvery mica. Seen at a dis- 
tance, these naked men appear to be dressed in 
laced clothes. If painted nations had been ex- 
amined with the same attention as clothed na 
tions, it would have been perceived, that ‘the 
most fertile imagination, and the most mutable 
caprice, have created the fashions of painting, as 
well as those of garments. 

Painting and tatooing are not restrained in ~ 
either of the two worlds to one race, or. one 
zone only. These kinds of ornaments are most 
common among the Malay and American races; 
but in the time of the Romans they existed also 
among the white race in the North of Europe. 
As the most picturesque garments and modes of 
dress are found. in the Grecian Archipelago, and 
Western Asia, so, the type of beauty in painting 
and tatooing is diplayed by the islanders of the 
South Sea*. Some clothed nations still paint 
their hands, their nails, and their faces. It would 
seem, that painting is then confined to those 
parts of the body, that remain uncovered ; and 

* In the Archipelago of Mendoza’s. islands, 


523 


while rouge, which recalls to mind the savage 
state of man, disappears by degrees in Europe, 
(in some towns of the province of Peru) the 
ladies think they embellish their delicate and 
white skins, by covering them with colouring 


vegetable matter, starch, whites of eggs, and 
flour. After having lived a long time among 
men painted with anotta and chica, we are sin- 
gularly struck with these remains of ancient 
barbarism, retained amid all the usages of civil- 
ization. 

The encampment at Pararuma afforded us an 
opportunity of examining for the first time seve- 
ral animals alive, which till then we had seen 
only in the collections of Europe. These little 
animals form a branch of commerce for the mis- 
sionaries. They exchange tobacco, the resin 
called mani, the pigment of chica, gallitos (rock 
manakins), orange monkeys, capuchin monkeys, 
and other species of monkeys in great request on 
the coast, for cloth, nails, hatchets, fish-hooks, 
and pins. The productions of the Oroonoko 
are bought at a low price of the Indians, who 
live in dependance on the monks; and these 
same Indians purchase of the monks at a very 
high price, and with the money they have gained 
at the harvest of eggs, fishing and gardening 
implements, We made the acquisition of several 
animals, which we kept. with us throughout the 
rest of our voyage on the river, and studied their 


524 


manners. I have published these observations 
in another work, and in order to avoid treating 
twice on the same subject, I shall here confine 
_ myself to the, most succinct observations, adding 
the notes I have since found scattered among 
my journals, 

The gallitoes, or rock manakins, that are sold 
at Pararuma, in pretty little cages made of the 
footstalks of palin-leaves, are infinitely more’ 
rare on the banks of the Oroonoko, and in the 
North and West of Equinoxial America, than 
in French Guyana. They have hitherto been 
found only near the mission of Encaramada, and 
in the Raudales or cataracts of Maypures. . I 
say expressly in the cataracts, because these 
birds choose the hollows of the little granitic 
rocks, that cross the Oroonoko, and form such 
numerous cascades, for their habitual dwelling. 
We sometimes saw them appear in the morning 
in the midst of the foam of the river, calling their 
females, and fighting in the manner of our cocks, 
folding up the double moveable crest, that de- 
corates the crown of their head. As the Indians 
very rarely take the full-grown gallitoes, and the 
males only are valued in Europe, which from the 
third year display a beautiful saffron colour, 
purchasers should be on their guard not to con- 
found young females with young males. Both 
are of an olive-brown; but the pollo, or young 
male, is distinguishable at the earliest age, by 


525 


it’s size, and it’s yellow feet. The female re- 
mains all her life of a dull dusky brown colour, 


with yellow only on the under wing-coverts and 
tips of the wings*. To preserve in our collec- 
tions the fine tint of the plumage of a male and 
full-grown rock manakin, it must not be exposed. 
to the light. This tint grows pale ‘more easily 
than in the other genera of the passerine order. 
The young males, as in most other birds, have 
the plumage or. livery of their mother. I am 
surprised to see, that so excellent an observer as 
Mr. Le Vaillant-+ can doubt, whether the females 
in fact.always remain of a dusky olive tint. The 
Indians of the Raudales all assured me, that 
they had never seen a saffron-coloured female. 
Among the inonkeys, tbat the Indians had 
brought to the fair of Pararuma, we distin- 
guished several varieties of the sai, belonging 
to the little groups of creeping monkeys called 
matchi in the Spanish colonies ; marimondes 4, 
or ateles with a red belly; ¢itis, and viuditas. 
The last two species particularly attracted our 
attention, and we purchased them to send to 


* Especially the part which ornithologists call the carpus. 
+ Oiseaux de Paradis, vol. ii, p. 61. 
{ Simia capucina, capuchin monkey. See my Observ. de 
Zoologie, vol. i, p. 323 —325, 336, and 355, on the confusion 
that prevails in the nomenclature of the sai and the neigh- 
bouring species. 

§ Simia belzebuth. 


nf 


26 


Europe*. We must not confound the ouistiti + 
of Buffon, which is the zi of Mr. d’Azara; the 
titi ¢ of Carthagena and the isthmus of Darien, 
which is the pinche of Buffon ; and the titi § of 
the Oroonoko, which is the sa¢miri of French 
naturalists. In the different Spanish colonies 
the name of titi is given to monkeys, that belong , 
to three different subgenera ||, and vary in the 
number of their grinders ¥. This number ex- 
cludes even the finest of the three fitis, that of 
the Oroonoko, from the genus which Mr. Illiger 
has formed under the denomination of ouistiti, 
or hapale. It is almost needless to observe, 
after. what I have said, how much it is to be 
wished, that we should abstain in works of 
science from those vulgar names, which, dis- 
figured by our orthography, and varying in every 
province, augment the deplorable confusion of 
zoological nomenclature. 


* A fine saimiri, or titi of the Oroonoko, may be purchased 
at Pararuma for eight or nine piastres. The missionary pays 
one and a half to the Indian, who has caught and tamed the 
monkey. 

+ Simia jacchus, str ate monkey. 

t Simia oedipus, red-tailed monkey. 

§ Simia sciurea, orange monkey. 

| The genera callithrix, jacchus, and midas, of Mr.Geoffroy 
de St. Hilaire. 

q The titi of the Oroonoko (of the family of sagoins) has 
six grinders ; the titis of Darien and Paraguay (of the <étied 
of hapales) have five grinders on each side. 


527 


The titi of the Oroonoko (simia sciurea), ill- 
drawn hitherto, though well known in our col- 
lections, is called bititent by the Maypure In-. 
dians. It is very common to the South of the 
cataracts. It’s face is white; and. a little spot 
of bluish-black covers the mouth and the point 
of the nose. The t¢itis of the most elegant form, 
and the most beautiful colour (with hair of a 
golden yellow), come from the banks of the 
Cassiquiare. Those that are taken on the shores 
of the Guayiare are large and difficult to tame. 
No other monkey has so rhuch the physiognomy 
of achild as the iti ; there are the same expres- 
sion of innocence, the same playful smile, the 
same rapidity in the transition from joy to sor- 
row. Its large eyes are instantly filled with 
tears, when it is seized with fear. It is ex- 
tremely fond of insects, particularly of spiders. 
The sagacity of this little animal is so great, that 
one of those we brought in our boat to Angos- 
tura distinguished perfectly the different plates 
annexed to the Tableau élémentaire d’ Histoire 
naturelle of Mr. Cuvier. The engravings of 
this work are not coloured ; yet the titi advanced 
rapidly it’s little hand in the hope of catching a 
grasshopper or a wasp, every time that we 
showed it the eleventh plate, on which these 
insects are represented. It remained in the 
greatest indifference, when it was shown engray- 
ings of skeletons or heads of mamumiferous ani- 


528 


mals *. When several of these little monkeys, 
shut up in the same cage, are exposed to the 
rain, and the habitual temperature of the air 
sinks suddenly two or three degrees, they twist 
their tail, which, however, is not prehensile, 
round their neck, and intertwine their arms and 
legs to warm one another. The Indian hunters 
told us, in the forests they often met groupes of 
ten or twelve of these animals, that sent forth 
lamentable cries, because those without endea- 
voured to enter aiid the group to find warmth 
and shelter. By shooting arrows dipped in weak 
poison+ at one of these groups, a great number 
of young monkeys are taken alive at once.» The 
titi in falling remains clinging to it’s mother. 


If it is not wounded by the fall, it does not quit 
the shroulde or the neck of the dead animal. 
Most of those that are found alive in the huts of 
the Indians have been thus taken from the dead 
bodies of their mothers. ‘Those that are full 
grown, when cured of a slight wound, commonly 


®@ T[ shall observe on this occasion, that I have never heard 
of a picture, on which hares or deer were represented of their 
natural size, and with ‘the greatest perfection, ‘having made 
the least impression even on hunting-dogs, the intelligence of 
which appeared the most improved. Is there an example 
well ascertained of a dog having recognized a full-length pic- 
ture of it’s master’ In all these cases, the sight is not assisted 
by the smell. 

-¢ Curare destemplado, 


529 


die before they can accustom themselves to a 
domestic state. The #itis are in general d:licate 
and timid little animals. It is very difficult to 
convey them from the missions of the Oroonoko 
to the coast of Caraccas, or of Cumana. They 
become melancholy and dejected in proportion 
as they quit the region of the forests, and enter 
the Lianos. This change cannot be attributed 
to a slight increase of the temperature ; it seems 
rather to depend on a greater intensity of light, 
a less degree of humidity, and some chemical 
property of the air of the coast. 

The saimiris, or tifis of the Oroonoko, the 
ateles, the sajous, and other: quadrimanous ani- 
mals long known in Europe, form a striking 
contrast both in their gait and habits with the 
macavahu*, called by the missionaries viudita, 
or widow in mourning. The hair of this little 
animal is soft, glossy, and of a fine black. It’s 
face is covered with a mask of a square form, 
and a whitish colour tinged with blue. This 
mask contains the eyes, nose, and mouth. The 
ears have a rim: they are small, very pretty, and 
almost bare. The neck of the widow presents in 
front a white band, an inch broad, and forming 
a semicircle. The feet, or rather the hinder 
hands, are black like the rest of the body; but 


* The Maravitan name of the simia lugens. See my 
Observ. de Zoologie, vol,i, p, 319. 


VOL. IV. 2M 


530 


the fore hands are white without, and of a glossy 
black within. It is in these marks, or white 
spots, the missionaries think they recognize the 
veil, the neckerchief, and the gloves, of a widow 
in mourning. The character of this little mon- 
key, which sits up on it’s hinder extremities only 
when eating, is very little indicated in it’s ap- 
pearance. It has a wild and timid air; it often 
refuses the aliments that are offered to it, even 
when tormented by a ravenous appetite. It has 
little inclination for the society of other mon- 
keys. The sight of the smallest saimiri puts it 
to flight. It’s eye denotes great vivacity. We 
have seen it remain whole hours motionless 
without sleeping, and attentive to every thing 
that was passing around. But this wildness and 
timidity are merely apparent. The viudita alone, 
and left to itself, becomes furious at the aspect 
ofa bird. It then climbs and runs with asto- 
nishing rapidity ; darts upon it’s prey like a cat; 
_and kills whatever it can seize. This monkey, 
very rare, and very delicate, is found on the 
right bank of the Oroonoko, in the granitic 
mountains that rise behind the mission of Santa 
Barbara. It inhabits also the banks of the 
Guaviare, near San Fernando de Atabapo. 

The viudita accompanied us on our whole voy- 
age on the Cassiquiare and the Rio N egro, pass- 
ing the cataracts twice. In order-to study the 
manners of animals, it is a great advantage to 


531 


observe them during several months in the«pen 
air, and not in houses, where they lose all their 
natural vivacity. 

The lading of the new canoe intended for us 
‘was begun this very evening. It was, like all 
Indian boats, a trunk of a tree hollowed out by 
the double means of the hatchet and of fire. It 
was forty feet long, and three broad. Three 
persons could not sit in it side by side. These 
canoes are so crank, they require, from their 
instability, a cargo so equally distributed, that, 
when you want to rise for an instant, you must 
warn the rowers (bogas) to lean to the opposite 
side. Without this precaution the water would 
necessarily enter the side pressed down. It is 
difficult to form a just idea of the inconvenien- 
ces, that are suffered in such wretched vessels. 

The missionary of the Raudales made the pre- 
parations for the voyage with greater activity 
than we wished. From fear of not having a 
sufficient number of Maco and Guahibe Indians, 
who are acquainted with the labyrinth of small 
channels and cascades, of which the Raudales 
or cataracts are composed, two Indians were 
put during the night in the cepo; that is to say, 
made to lie with their legs placed between two 
pieces of wood, notched and fastened together 
by a chain with a padlock. Early in the morn- 
ing we were awakened by the cries of a young 
man, mercilessly beaten with a whip of manatee 

2mM2 


932 


skin. | His name was Zerepe, a very intelligent 
Indian, who was highly useful to us in the se- 
quel, but who now refused to accompany us. 
Born in the mission of Atures, of a Maco father, 
and a mother of the nation of the Maypures, he 
had returned to the woods (al monte),.and had 
lived some years with the unsubdued Indians. 
He had thus acquired the knowledge of several 
languages, and the missionary employed him as 
an interpreter. We obtained with difficulty the 
pardon of this young man. “ Without these 
acts of severity,” we were told, “ you would 
want for every thing. The Indians of the Raz: 
dales and the Upper Oroonoko are a stronger 
and more laborious race than the inhabitants o¢ 
the Lower Oroonoko. They know, that. they 
are much sought after at Angostura. If left to 
_ their own will, they would all go down the river 
to sell their productions, and live in full liberty 
among the Whites. The missions would be 
deserted.” 

These reasons are, I confess, more specious 
than true. Man, in order to enjoy the advan- 
tages of a social state, must no doubt sacrifice a 
part of his natural rights, and his ancient inde- 
pendence. But, if the sacrifice imposed on him 
be not compensated by the benefits of civiliza- 
tion, the savage, wise in his simplicity, retains 
the wish of returning to the forests that gave 
him birth. It is because the Indian of the 


533 


woods is treated like a person in a state of vil- 
lanage in the greater part of the missions, be- 
cause he enjoys not the fruits of his labours, 
that the Christian establishments on the Oroo- 
noko remain deserts. A government founded 
on the ruins of the liberty of the natives extin- 
guishes the intellectual faculties, or stops their 
progress. 

When it is said, that the savage, like the child, 
can be governed only by force, this is to esta- 
blish false analogies. The Indians of the Oroo- 
noko have something infantine in the expression 
of their joy, and the quick succession of their 
emotions ; but they are not great children ; they 
are as little so as the poor labourers in the East 
of Europe, whom the barbarism. of our feudal 
institutions has held in the rudest state. To 
consider the employment of force as the first and 
sole means of the civilization of the savage, is a 
principle as far from being true in the education 
of nations, as in the education of youth. What- 
ever may be the state of weakness or degrada- 
tion in our species, no faculty is entirely anni- 
hilated.. The human understanding exhibits 
only different degrees of strength and develop- 
ment. The savage, like the child, compares the 
present with the past; he directs his actions, 
. not according to blind instinct, but from motives 
of interest. Reason can every where enlighten 
reason; and it’s progress will be retarded in 


534 


proportion as the men, who think themselves 
called upon to bring up youth, or govern nations, 
proud of the feeling of their superiority, and 
despising those on whom they should act, think 
proper to substitute constraint and force, for that 
moral influence, which can alone unfold. the 
rising faculties, calm the irritated passions, and 
give stability to social order. 

April the 10th. We could not set sail. before 
ten in the morning. We.could with difficulty 
reconcile ourselves to our new canoe, which we 
considered as a new prison. To gain something 
in breadth, a sort: of lattice-work: had been con- 
structed on the after part of the boat with 
branches of trees, that on each side reached: be- 
yond the gunwale. Unfortunately, the roof of 
leaves *, that covered this lattice-work,. was 
so low, that you were obliged to lie down, 
without seeing any thing, or, if seated, to sit 
nearly double. The necessity of carrying. the 
canoe across the rapids, and even from one:river 
to another; and the fear of giving too much 
held to the wind, by making the toldo higher, 
render this construction necessary for vessels, 
that go up toward the Rio Negro. The. shed 
was intended for four persons, lying on the deck 
or lattice-work of brushwood; but the legs 
reached far beyond it, and when it rained half 


* Et toldo. 


5330 


the body was wetted. We are laid also upon 
ox-hides, or skins of tigers ; and the branches of 
trees they are thrown over are painfully felt 
through so thin a covering. The fore part of 
the boat was filled with Indian rowers, furnished 
with paddles three feet long in the form of 
spoons. They are all naked, seated two by two, 
and row in cadence with a surprising uniformity, 
Their songs are sad, and monotonous. The 
small cages containing our birds and our mon- 
keys, the number of which augmented as we ad- 
vanced, were hung some to the toldo, and others 
to the bow of the boat. This was our travelling 
menagery. Notwithstanding the frequent losses 
occasioned by accidents, and above all by the 
fatal effects of exposure to the Sun, we had four- 
teen of these little animals alive at our return 
from the Cassiquiare. Naturalists, who wish to 
collect and bring living animals to Europe, 
might cause boats to be constructed expressly 
for this purpose at Angostura, or at Gr and-Para, 

the two capitals situate on the banks of the 
Oroonoko and the Amazon, the first third of 
which boats might contain two rows of hutches 
sheltered from the ardour of the Sun. Every 
night, when’ we established our watch, the col- 
lection of animals and our instruments occupied 
the centre’; around -these were placed first’ our 
hammocks, then the hammocks of the Indians ; 

and on the outside were the fires, that are thought 


536 


indispensable against the attacks of the jaguar. 
About sunrise the monkeys in our cages an- 
swered the cries of the monkeys of the forest. 
These communications between animals of the 
Same species sympathizing with one another, 
though unseen, one party enjoying that liberty, 
which the other regrets, have in them something 
melancholy and affecting. 
In a canoe not three feet wide, and so incum- 
bered, there rémained no other. place for the 
dried plants, trunks, a sextant, a dipping needle, 
and the meteorological instruments, than the 
space below the lattice-work of branches, on 
which we were compelled to remain stretched 
the greater part of the day. To take the least 
object out of a trunk, or to use an instrument, it 
was necessary to gain the shore and disembark. 
To these inconveniences were joined the tor- 
ment of the moschettoes, that abounded under 
this low roof, and the heat that radiated from the 
leaves of the palm-trees, the upper surface of 
which was continually exposed to the solar rays: 
We attempted every instant, and always without 
success, to amend our situation. While one of 
us hid himself under a sheet, to ward off the in- 
sects, the other insisted on haying green wood 
lighted beneath the ¢oldo, in order to drive away 
thé moschettoes by the smoke. The painful sen- 
sations of the eyes, and the increase of heat, 
already stifling, rendered both these means alike 


537 


impracticable. With some gaiety of temper, 

with dispositions of mutual benevolence, and 

with a vivid taste for the majestic nature of these 

great valleys of rivers, travellers easily support : 
evils that become habitual. I have entered into. 
these minute details, only to paint the manner 

of navigating on the Oroonoko; and to prove, 

that, notwithstanding our earnest desire, Mr. 

Bonpland and I could. not multiply our observa- 

tions as much as the interesting nature of the 

surrounding objects demanded. 

Our Indians showed us the place on the right 
bank of the river, where the mission of Pararu- 
ma, founded by the Jesuits about the year 1733, 
was formerly situated. The mortality occa- 
sioned by the smallpox among the Saliva Indians 
was the principal cause of the destruction of the 
mission. The few inhabitants, who survived this. 
cruel epidemic, were joined to the village of 
Carichana, which we shall soon visit. It was 
at Pararuma, that, according to the testimony of 
Father Roman, hail was seen to fall during a 
great storm, about the middle of the last cen- 
tury. This is almost the only instance of it I 
know ina plain, that is nearly on a level with 
the sea; for hail falls generally between the tro- 
pics only at three hundred tcises of elevation *. 


* See above, vol. iii, p.463. In a very ingenious discus- 
sion on the meteorology of the tropics and of the temperate 


538 


If it form at an equal height over plains and 
table-lands, we must suppose, that it melts ag 
it falls, in passing through the lowest strata of 
the atmosphere, the mean temperature of which 
(between 0* and 300). is from 27°5° to 24° of the 
centigrade thermometer. I acknowledge it is 
very difficult to explain, in the present state of 
meteorology, why it hails at Philadelphia, at 
Rome, and at Montpellier, during the hottest 
months, the mean temperature of which attains 
25° or 26°; while the same phenomenon’ is not 
observed at Cumana, at La Guayra, and, in 
general, in the equatorial plains. In the United 
States, and in the South of Europe, the heat of 
the plains (from 40° to 43° of latitude) is: nearly 
the’. same as within the tropics ; and according 
to my researches, the decrement of caloric 
equally varies but little. If then the absence of 
hail within the torrid zone, at the level of the 
sea, be produced by the melting of the hail- 
stones in crossing the lower strata of the air, we 


zone, Thibault de Chanyalon puts the question, why, above 
the plains in the’ temperate zone only, storms are attended 
with hail. “ The heat ofthe plains,” he says, “ can be no 
obstacle to the formation of: hail ;, in Europe it is never more 
common than in the hot-seasons.” He asserts, that at Mar- 
tinico hail has been seen to fall once in the plains, in 1721. 
(Voyage @ la Martinique, p. 185, No. 40), ‘This assertion ap- 
pears questionable. (Moreau de Jonnés sur le Climat des 
Antilles, p. 49.) 


039 


must suppose, that these hailstones at the mo- 
ment of their formation are larger in the tempe- 
rate than in the torrid zone. We yet know so 
little of the conditions, under which water con- 
geals in a stormy cloud in our climates, that we 
cannot judge whether the same conditions be 
fulfilled under the equator above the plains. I 
doubt hail’s being always. formed in a. region of 
the air, of which the mean temperature is nought, 
and which with us is found in summer only at 
one thousand five hundred, or one thousand six 
hundred toises of height. The clouds, in which 
we hear the rattling: of the hailstones against one 
another before they fall, and which move, hori- 
zontally, have always appeared: to me much less 


elevated: and at these-smaller heights we may | 


conceive, that’ extraordinary refrigerations: are 
caused by the dilatation of the ascending air, of 
which the capacity for caloric augments; by 
currents of cold air coming from a higher’ lati- 
tude; and above all, according to Mr. Gay- 
Lussac, by the radiation from the upper surface 
of the clouds. I shall have occasion to return 
to this subject, when speaking of the different 
forms, under which hail and’ hoar-frost. appear 
on the Andes, at two thousand and two thousand 
six hundred toises of height ; and when examin- 
ing the question, whether we may consider the 


stratum of clouds, that envelopes the mountains,. 


as a horizontal continuation of the stratum, 


os 


ess 


—s 


ae eet eae oe 


540 


which we see immediately above us in the 
plains. , 

The Oroonoko, full of islands, begins to divide 
itself into several branches, of which the most 
western remained dry during the months of 
January and February. The total breadth of 
the river exceeds two thousand five hundred or 
three thousand toises. .We perceived to the 
East, opposite the island of Javanavo, the mouth 
of the Cano Aujacoa,. Between this Cano and 
the Rio Paruasi *, or Paruati, the country be- 
comes more and more woody. A solitary rock, 
of an infinitely picturesque aspect, rises in the 
midst of a forest of palm-trees, not far from the 
Oroonoko +. It is a pillar of granite, a prisma- 
tic mass, the bare and steep sides of which at- 
tain nearly two hundred feet in height. It’s top, 
which surpasses the highest trees of the forest, 
is terminated by a shelf of rocks, with a hori- 
zontal and smooth surface. Other trees crown 
this summit, which the missionaries call the 
peak, or Mogote de Cocuyza. This monument 
of- nature, in it’s simple grandeur, recalls to mind 
the Cyclopean monuments. It’s outlines, strongly 
marked, and the group of trees and shrubs by 


* The Jesuit, Father Morillo, had formed on the banks of 


the Paruasi a mission of the same name, by assembling to- 
gether some Maypoyes or Mapoi Intlans ; but it was soon 
abandoned. (Gili, vol. i, p. 37.) 

+ Opposite the Hato de San Antonio. 


541 


which it is crowned, stand out from the azure of 
the sky. It seems a forest rising above a forest. 
Farther on, near the mouth of the Paruasi, 
the Oroonoko narrows. On the East a moun- 
tain is perceived with a bare top, projecting in 
the form of a promontory. It is nearly three 
hundred feet high, and ‘served as a fortress for 
the Jesuits., They had here constructed a small 
-fort, which was furnished with three batteries of 
cannon, and constantly occupied by a military 
detachment. We saw these cannons dismounted, 
and half-buried in the sand, at Carichana and 
at Atures. The fort of the Jesuits (or fortaleza 
de San Francisco Xavier) has been destroyed 
since the dissolution of their society ; but the 
place is still called el Castillo. I find it set 
down, in a manuscript map, lately constructed 
at Caraccas, by a member of the secular clergy, 
under the denomination of Trinchera del despo- 
tismo monacal*. In all revolutions the geo- 
graphical nomenclature partakes of the spirit of 
innovation, that seizes on the multitude. 


The garrison, which the Jesuits maintained 


on this rock, was not intended merely to protect 
the missions against the incursions of the Carib- 
bees: it was employed also in an offensive war, 
or, as. they say here, in the conquest of souls, 
conquesta de almas. The soldiers, excited by 


* Intrenchment of monachal despotism. 


eee 


oer 


te 


gE 


a Hs 


542 


the allurement of gain, made military incursions 
(entradas) into the lands of the independant 
Indians. They killed all those who dared to 
make any resistance, burnt their huts, destroyed 
the plantations, and carried away the old men, 
women, and children, as prisoners. These pri- 
soners were divided among the missions of the 
Meta, the Rio Negro, and the Upper Oroonoko. 
The most distant places were chosen, that they 
might not be tempted to return to their native 
country. This violent manner of conquering — 
souls, though prohibited by the Spanish laws, 
was tolerated by the civil governors, and boasted 
of by the superiors of the society, as beneficial 
to religion, and the aggrandizement of the mis- 
sions. “ The voice of the Gospel is heard only,” 
said a Jesuit of the Oroonoko * with simplicity, 
in the Lettres Edifiantes, “ where the Indians 
have heard also the voice of arms; el ecco de la 
_polvera. Mildness is a very slow measure. By 
chastising the natives, we facilitate their con- 
version.” These principles, which degrade hu- 
manity, were certainly not common to all the 
members of a society, which in the New World, 
and wherever education has remained exclusively 
in the hands of monks, has rendered service to 
letters and civilization. But the entradas, the 


* Cartas edificantes de la Compania de Jesus, 1757, vol. xvi,. 
p- 92. 


343 


spiritual conquests with the assistance of bayo- 
nets, was an inherent vice in a system, that 
tended to the rapid aggrandizement of the mis- 
sions. It is soothing to find, that the same sys- 
tem is not followed by the monks of St. Fran- 
cisco, St. Dominic, and St. Augustin, who now 
govern a vast portion of South America; and 
who, by the mildness or harshness of their man- 


ners, exert a powerful influence over the fate of 
so many thousands of natives. Military incur- 
sions are almost, entirely abolished ; and when 
they do take place, they are disavowed by the 
superiors of the orders. We will not decide at 
present, whether this melioration of the mo- 
narchal system be owing to a want of activity, 


and a cold indelence ; or must be attributed, as 
we would wish to believe, to the progress of 
knowledge, and to feelings more elevated, and 
more conformable to the true spirit of Chris- 
tianity. 

‘Beyond the mouth of the Rio Paruasi, the 
Oroonoko again narrows, Full of little islands 
and masses of granitic rocks, it presents rapids, 
or small cascades *, which at first sight may 
alarm the traveller, by the continual eddies of 
the water, but which at no season of the year 
are dangerous for boats. He must have navyi- 
gated but little, who would say, with Father 


* Los remolinos. 


Sees —— 


544 


Gili *, in general so exact, and so judicious, 
“e terribile pe molt? scogli il tratto del fiume 
tral Castello e Caricciana.” A range of shoals, 
that crosses almost the whole river, bears the 
name of Raudal de Marimara-+. We passed it 
without difficulty by a narrow channel, in which 
the water seems to boil up, as it issues out im- 
petuously + below the Piedra de Marimara, a 
compact mass of granite eighty feet high, and 
three hundred feet in circumference, without fis- 
sures, or any trace of stratification. The river 
penetrates far into the land, and forms spacious 
bays in the rocks. One of these bays, included 
between two promontories destitute of vegeta- 
tion, is called the Port of Carichana§. The 
spot has a savage aspect. In the evening the 
rocky coasts project their vast shadows over the 
surface of the river. The waters appear black, 
from reflecting the image of these granitic 
masses, which, as we have already said, some- 
times in the colour of their external surface re- 
semble coal, and sometimes lead ore. We 
passed the night in the small village of Cari- 
chana, where we were received at the priest’s 


* Vol.i, p. 11. 

+ We rocognize this name in that of the mountain of 
Castillo, which is Marimaruta, or Marimarota. ( Gumiilla,, 
vol. i, p. 283.) 

+ These places are called chorreras in the Spanish colonies. 

§ Piedra y pucrto de Carichana. 


: 545 


house, or convento, from the recommendation of 
the worthy missionary, Fray Jose Antonio de 
Torre. It was nearly a fortnight since we had 
slept under a roof. 

April the 11th. To avoid the effects of the 
inundations, often so fatal to health, the mission 
of Carichana has been placed at three quarters 
of a league distance from the river. The Indians 
are of the nation of Salivas; they have a dis- 
agreeable and nasal pronunciation. Their lan- 
guage, of which the Jesuit Anisson has composed 
a grammar still in manuscript, is, with the Carib- 
bean, the Tamanack, the Maypure, the Otto- 

_mack, the Guahive, and the Jaruro, one of the 
mother tongues most general on the Oroonoko. 
Father Gili * thinks, that the Ature, the Piraoa, 
and the Quaqua or Mapoje, are only dialects of 
the Saliva. My journey was much too rapid to 
enable me to judge of the accuracy of this.asser- 
tion; but we shall soon see, that in the village 
of Atures, celebrated on account of it’s situation 
near the great cataracts, neither the Saliva nor 
the Ature is now spoken, but the language of 
the Maypures. In the Saliva of Carichana, man 
is called cocco, woman gnacu, water cagua, fire 
egussa, the earth’ seke, the sky-+- mumeseke, 
(earth on high), the jaguar impi, the croeo- 


* Vol iii, p. 205. 
+ Ib. p. 212. 
VOL, 1V. ZN 


546 


dile cuipoo, maize giomu, the plantain paratund, 
cassava peibe. I shall mention one of those des- 
criptive compounds, that seem to characterize 
the infancy of language, though they are retained 
in some very perfect idioms *. Thus, as in the 
Biscayan language, thunder is called “ the 
noise of the cloud (odotsa);” the Sun bears the 
name in the Saliva of mume-seke-cocco, the man 
(cocco) of the earth’(seke) above (mume). 

The most ancient abode of the Saliva nation 
appears to have been on the wesiern banks of 
the Oroonoko, between the Rio Vichada + and. 
the Guaviare, and also between the Meta and 
the Rio Paute. Salivas are now found not only 
at Carichina, but in the missions of the province 
of Casanre, at Cabapuna, Guanapalo, Cabiuna, 
and Macuco. The number of inhabitants in this 
last village; founded by the Jesuit Father Manvel 
Roman, in 1730, amounts to one thousand three 
hundred. The Salivas area social, mild, almost 
timid people; and more easy, I will not say ‘to 
civilize, ‘but ‘to subdue, than the other tribes on 
the Oroonoko. The Salivas, im order to ‘escape 
from the dominion of the Caribbees, willingly 
joined the first missions of the Jesuits. Accord- 
ingly these Fathers every where in their writings 


* See above, chap. ix, vol. iii, p. 269. 
+ The Saliva mission, on the rio Vichada, was destroyed 
by the Caribbees. (Casani, Hist. gen.; cap. 26, p. 168.) 


ite ao hese ret: 


547 


praise the docility and intelligence of this people *. 
The Salivas have a great taste for music ; in the 
most remote times they had trumpets of baked 
earth, four or five feet long, with several large 
globular cavities communicating with one an- 
other by narrow pipes. These trumpets send 
forth most dismal sounds. The Jesuits have 
cultivated with success the natural taste of the 


Salivas for instrumental music; and even since 


the destruction of the society, the missionaries | 
of Rio Meta have continued at San Miguel 
de Macuco a fine church music, and musical 
instruction for the Indian youth. Very lately a 
traveller was surprised, to see the natives playing 
on the violin, the violoncello, the triangle, the 
guitar, and the flute +. 

The system of the solitary missions of the 
*Oroonoko is less favourable to the progress of 
civilization, afid the increase of the population of 
the Salivas, than that which is adopted by the 
monks of Saint Augustin { in the plains of Ca- 
sanare, and of Meta. The natives of Macuco 
have improved from their intercourse with the 


* Gumilla, vol. i, chap. xiii, p. 209—224; Gili, vol. i, 
p. 57; vol. ii, p. 44. 

+ Diario del Presbitero Josef Cortez Madariaga en su Viage 
de Santa Fe de Bogota por et Rio Meta a Caracas (1811), fol. 15 
{MS.). 

t Recoletos, depending on the great College de la Cande- 
daria de Santa Fe de Bogota. | 

2n2 


o48 


Whites, who inhabit the same village, and who 

are almost all refugees from Socorro*. At the 

Oroocnoko, in the time of the Jesuits, the three 

villages of Pararuma, Castillo, or Marumarutu, 

and Carichana, were united into one, that of 

Carichana, which thence became a very consi- 

derable mission. In 1759, when the Fortalza 
de San Francisco Xavier and. it’s three batteries 

still existed, Father Caulin -- reckoned four hun- 

dred Salivas in the mission of Carichana. In 

1800 I found scarcely a hundred and _ fifty. 

There remains of this village only a few huts 

built with clay, and placed symmetrically — 
around an immense cross. 

We found among these Saliva Indians a white 
woman, the sister of a Jesuit of New Grenada. 
It is difficult to define the satisfaction that is felt, 
when, in the midst of nations of whose language 
you are ignorant, you meet with a being with 
whom you can converse without an interpreter. 


* The town of Socorro, South of the Rio Sogamozo, and 
North-North-East of Santa Fe de Bogota; was the centre of 
the insurrection, that broke out in the kingdom of New Gre- 
nada, in 1781, under the Archbishop-Viceroy Gongore, on 
account of the vexations which the people suffered from the 
introduction , of the monopoly of tobacco. Many industrieus 

inhabitants of Socorro emigrated at that time into the Llanos 
of Meta, to escape the persecutions, which followed the gene- 
ral amnesty granted by the court of Madrid. These emigrants 
are called in the missions, Socorrenos refugiados. 

+ Hist. corografica, p. 71, 


549 


Every mission has at least two interpreters . 
(lenguarazes). ‘They are Indians, a little less 
stupid than the rest, by whose means the mis- 
sionaries of the Oroonoko, who now very rarely 
give themselves the trouble of. studying the 
idioms of the country, communicate with the 
neophytes. These interpreters attended us in 
all our herborizations ; but they rather under- 
stand than speak Castilian. With their indolent 
indifference, they answer us by chance, but al- 
ways with an officious smile ; “ Yes, Father, no, 
Father,” to every question addressed to them. 

The vexation that arises from such conversa- 
tion continued for months may easily be con- 
ceived, when you wish to be enlightened upon 
objects in which you take the most lively inte- 
rest. We were often forced. to’ employ several 
ixiterpreters at a time, and several successive 
translators, in order to communicate with the 
natives *. 


* To form a just idea of the perplexity of these communi- 
cations by interpreters, we may recollect, that, in the expedi- 
tion of Lewis and Clarke to the river Columbia, in order to 
converse with the Chopunnish Indians, Captain Lewis ad- 
dressed one of his men in English ; that man translated the 
question into French to Chaboneau; Chaboneau translated it 
to his Indian wife in Minnetaree; the woman translated it 
into Shoshonee to. a prisoner; and the prisoner translated it 
into Chopunnish. It may be feared, that the sense of the 
question was a little altered by five [four] successive  trans- 
lations, 


—— 


So a et 


=—— 


ws eS 


os ee 


550 


“ After leaving my mission,” said the good 
monk of Uruana, “ you will travel like mutes.” 
This prediction was nearly accomplished ; and, 
not to lose the advantage we might derive from 
intercourse even with the rudest Indians, we 
sometimes preferred the language of signs. 
When a native perceives that you will not em- 
ploy an interpreter; when you interrogate him 
directly, showing him the objects; he rouzes 
himself from his habitual apathy, and displays 
an extraordinary capacity, to make himself com- 
prehended. He varies the signs, pronounces 
the words slowly, and_repeats them without 
being desired. The consequence conferred upon 
him, in suffering yourself to be instructed by 
him, flatters his self-love. This facility in mak- 
ing himself comprehended is particularly: re- 
markable in the independant Indian : and in the 
Christian establishments I would advise travel- 
lers, to address themselves in preference to 
those of the natives, who have not been long 
reduced, or who from time to time return to the 
forest, to enjoy their former liberty*. It can- 
not be doubted that direct intercourse with the 
natives is more instructive and more certain, 
than the communication by interpreters +, pro- 


* Indios newvamente reductdos ; Indios medio-reducidos, OAgZOS,, 
que vuelven almonte. 
+ See above, chap, ix, vol, iii, p. 289~—241. 


551 


vided the questions be simplified, and repeated 
to several individuals under different forms. 
The variety of idioms that are spoken on the 
banks of the Meta, the Oroonoko, the Cassi- 
quiare, and the Rio Negro, is besides so prodi- 
gious, that a traveller, however great may be 
his talent for languages, can never flatter himself 
with learning enough to make himself understood 
along the navigable rivers, from Angostura to 
the small fort of San Carlos del Rio Negro. In 
Peru and Quito it is sufficient to know the 
Qquichua, or the Inca language; in Chili, the 
Araucan; and in Paraguay, the Guarany; in 
order to be understood by the greater part of 
the population. But it is not the same in the 
missions of Spanish Guyana, where nations of 
different races are mingled in the same vil- 
lage. It is not even sufficient, to have learned. 
the Caribbee or Carina, the Guamo, the Gua- 
hive *, the Jaruro, the Ottomack, the Maypure, 
the Saliva, the Marivitan, the Maquiritare, and 
the Guaica, ten languages, of which there exist 
only imperfect grammars, and which have less 
affinity with each other than the Greek, the Ger- 
man, and the Persian. 

The environs of the mission of Carichana ap- 
peared to us to be delightful. The little village 
is situate in one of those plains covered with 


* Pronounce Gua.iva, in Spanish Guajiva. 


002 


grasses, that separate all the links of the granitic 
mountains, from Encaramada as far as beyond 
the Cataracts of Maypures. The line of the 
forests is seen only in the distance. The horizon 
is every where bounded by mountains, partly 
woody, and of a dark tint; partly bare, with 
rocky summits, gilt by the beams of the setting 
Sun. What gives a peculiar character to the 
scenery of this-country are banks of rock * 
nearly destitute of vegetation, that are often 
more than eight hundred feet in circumference, 
yet scarcely rise a few inches above the sur- 
rounding savannahs. They now make a part of 
the plain. We ask ourselves with surprise, whe- 
ther some extraordinary revolutions have carried 
away the earth and plants; or the granite nu- 
cleus of our planet show itself bare, because the 
germes of life are not yet developed on all it’s 
points. The same phenomenon seems to be 
found also in the Shamo, that separates Munga- 
lia from China. Those banks of solitary rock 
in the desert are called tsy. I think they would 
be real table-lands, if the surrounding plains 
were stripped of the sand and mould that cover 
them, and which the waters have accumulated 
in the lowest places. On these stony flats of 
Carichana we observed with eagerness the ris- 
ing vegetation in the different degrees of it’s de 


* Lavas. 


velopment. We there found lichens cleaving 
the stone, and collected in crusts more or less 
thick ; little portions of quartzose sand nourish- 
ing succulent plants; and lastly layers of black 
mould deposited in the hollows, formed from the 
decay of roots and leaves, and shaded by tufts 
of ever-green shrubs. I should not mention our 
gardens, and the timid works of art, if I had to 
speak of the great effects of nature; but this 
contrast of rocks and_ thickets loaded with 
flowers, these tufts of little trees scattered in the 
savannah, involuntarily recall to mind what our 
plantations display of most varied and most 
picturesque. It would seem as if man, guided 
by a deep feeling of the beauties of nature, had 
sought to soften the savage rudeness of these 
places. . 

At the distance of two or three leagues from 
the mission, we find, in these plains intersected 
by granitic hills, a vegetation no less rich than 
varied. On comparing the site of Carichana 
with that of all the villages above the Great 
Cataracts, we are surprised at the facility with 
which we traverse the country, without follow- 
ing the banks of the rivers, or being stopped by 
the thickness of the. forests. . Mr. Bonpland 
made several excursions on horseback, that fur- 
nished him with a rich harvest of plants*, I 

* Combretam frangulefolium, bignonia ‘carichanensis, b. 


Auviatilis, b. sulicifolia, hypericum eugeniefolium, convolvulus 


. 


554 


shall mention only the paraguatan, a magnifi- 
cent species of the macrocnemum, the bark of 
which yields a red dye * ; the guaricamo, with a 
poisonous root}; the jacaranda { obtusifolia ; 
and the serrape, or jape{ of the Saliva Indians, 
which is the coumarouna of Aublet, so. celebrated 
throughout Terra Firma for it’s aromatic fruit. 
This fruit, which at Caraccas is placed among 
linen, as in Europe itis in snuff, under the name 
of the t¢onca, or tongo bean, is regarded as 
poisonous. It is a false notion, very general in 
the province of Cumana, that the excellent dram 
fabricated at Martinico owes it’s peculiar flavour 
to the zape. In the missions it is called sima- 
ruba; a name that may occasion serious mis- 
takes, the true simaruba being a febrifuge. 
species of the quassia genus, found in Spanish 
Guyana only in the valley of Rio Caura, where 
the Paudacot Indians give it the name of achec- 
chari. 

I found the dip of the magnetic needle in the 
great square at Carichana 33°7° (new division). 
The intensity of the magnetic action was ex- 


discolor, casearia capitata, spathodia orinocensis, heliotropium 
cinereum, h. filiforme, &c. 

* Macrocnemum tinctorium. 

+ Ityania coccinea. 

1 See our Plantes Equinoxiales, vol. i, p. 62, tab. 18. 

§ Dipterix odorata, Willd., or baryosma tongo of Gaertner. 
The jape furnishes Carichana with an excellent timber. 


559 


pressed by two hundred and twenty-seven oscil- 
lations in ten minutes of time; an increase of 
force * that would seem to indicate some local 
attraction. Yet the blocks of the granite black- 
ened by the waters of the Croonoko have no 


perceptible action upon the needle. ‘The baro- ’ 


metric height at noon was 336°6 lines+; the 
centigrade thermometer being at 30°6° in the 
shade. The temperature of the air at night 
lowered to 26°2°; the hygrometer of Deluc keep- 
ing at 46°. 

The river had risen several inches in the day, 
on the 10th of April; this phenomenon surprised 
the natives so much the more, as the first swel- 
lings are almost imperceptible, and are usually 


followed in the month of April by a fall for some 
days. The Oroonoko was already three feet 
higher than the level of the lowest waters. ‘The 
natives showed us on a granitic wall the traces 
of the great rise of the waters of late years. We 
found them to be forty-two feett high, which is 


* See above, chap. xviii. p. 416. The latitude of Carichana, 
deduced from that of Uruana and of the mouth of the Meta, 
is 6° 29’, 

+ The barometer, in the port of Carichana, kept at six in 
the evening, at 335°7 lines; the thermometer in the open air, 
at 26°8°. See above, p. 455. 

t Or thirteen metres and half. The height of the mean 
rise of the Nile is fourteen cubits of the Nilometer of Elephan- 
tino, or 7°41 metres. 


— ——— 


— 


ats 


* 656 


double the mean rise of the Nile. But this mea- 
sure was taken in a place, where the bed of the 
Oroonoko is singularly hemmed in by rocks, and 
I could only notice the marks shown me by the 
natives. It may easily be conceived, that the 
effect and the height of the increase differs ac- 
cording to the profile of the'river, the nature of 
the banks more or less elevated, the number of 
rivers flowing in, that collect the pluvial waters, 
and the length of ground passed over. What is 
indubitable, and has struck the imagination of 
all who inhabit these countries, is, that at Cari- 
chana, at San Borja, at Atures, and at May- 
pures, wherever the river -has forced it’s way 
-through the mountains, you see at a hundred, 
sometimes at a hundred and thirty feet, above 
the highest present increase of the river, black 
bands and erosions, that indicate the ancient 
abode of the waters. Is this river then, the 
Oroonoko, which appears to us so grand and so 
majestic, only the feeble remains of those im- 
mense currents of fresh water, which, swelled by 
Alpine snows, or by more abundant rains, every 
where shaded by thick forests, and destitute of 
those shores that favour evaporation, heretofore 
traversed the country at the East of the Andes, 
like arms of inland seas? What must have been 
the state of those low countries of Guyana, that 
now undergo the effects of annual inundations ? 
What immense numbers of crocodiles, manatees, 


557 

and boas musi have inhabited these vast spaces 
of land, converted alternately into marshes of 
stagnant water, and into barren and _ fissured 
plains! The more peaceful world which we in- 
habit has then succeeded to a world of tumult. 
The bones of mastodontes and real American 
elephants are found dispersed on the table-lands 
of the Andes. The megatherium inhabited the 
plains of Uruguay. On digging deep into the 
ground in high vallies, where neither palm-trees 
nor arborescent ferns can grow, strata of coal 
are discovered, that imbed gigantic vestiges of 
monocotyledonous plants. 

There was a remote period then, in which the 
‘classes of plants were otherwise distributed, 
when the animals were larger and. the rivers 
broader and of greater depth. There end those 
records of Nature, that it is in our power to con- 
sult. We are ignorant whether the human race, 
which at the time of the discovery of America 
scarcely formed a few feeble tribes on the East 
of the Cordilleras, had already descended into the 
plains; or whether the ancient tradition of the 
great waters, which is found among the nations 
of the Oroonoko, the Erevato, and the Caura, 
belong to other climates, whence it has been 
propagated to this part of the New Continent. 

April the 11th. We left Carichana at two 
in the afternoon, and found the course of the | 
river more and more encumbered by blocks of 


908 


granite rocks. We passed on the West the 
Cano Orupe *, and then the great rock known 
by the name of Piedra del Tigre. The river 
is there so deep, that no bottom can be found 
with a line of twenty-two fathoms. Toward 
evening the weather became cloudy and gloomy. 
The proximity of the storm was marked by 
squalls alternating with dead calms. The rain 
was violent, and the roof of foliage, under 
which we lay, afforded but little shelter. Hap- 
pily these showers drove away, at least for some 
time, the moschettoes, with which we had 
been severely tormented during the day. We 
found ourselves before the cataract of Cariven, 
and the impulse of the waters was so strong, 
that we had great difficulty in gaining the land. 
We were continually driven back to the middle 
of the current. At length two: Saliva Indians, 
excellent swimmers, leaped into the water, and 
drew the boat to shoré by means of a rope; and 
made it fast to the Piedra de Carichana vieja, a 
shelf of bare rock, on which we passed the night. 
The thunder continued to roll during a part of 
the night; the increase of the river became con- 
siderable; and we were several times afraid, that 
our frail bark would be forced from the shore by 
the impetuosity of the waves. 

The granitic rock on which we lay is one of 


* Urupt. 


559 


those, where travellers on the Oroonoko have 
heard from time to time, toward sunrise, sub- 
terraneous sounds, resembling those of the 
organ. The missionaries call these stones laxas 
de musica. “ It is witchcraft (cosa de bruxas),” 
said our young Indian pilot, who could speak 
Spanish. We never ourselves heard these mys- 
terious sounds, either at Carichana vieja, or in 
the Upper Oroonoko; but from information 
given us by witnesses worthy of belief, the exist- 
ence of a phenomenon, that seems to depend on 
a certain state of the atmosphere, cannot be 
denied. The shelves of rock are full of very 
narrow and deep crevices. They are heated 
during the day to 48° or 50°. I often found 
their temperature at the surface, during the 
night, at 39°, the circumambient. atmosphere 
being at 28°. It may easily be conceived, that 
the difference of temperature between the sub- 
terraneous and the external air attains it's max- 
imum about sunrise, or at that moment which is 
at the same time farthest from the period of the 
maximum ‘of the heat of the preceding day. 
May not these sounds of an organ then, which 
are heard when a person sleeps upon the rock, 
his ear in contact with the stone, be the effect 
of a current of air, that issues out through the 
crevices? . Does not the impulse of the air against 
the elastic spangles of mica, that intercept the 
crevices, contribute to modify the sounds ? May 


[SSS SS a 


SS 


560 


we not admit, that the ancient inhabitants. of 
Egypt, in passing incessantly up and down the 
Nile, had made the same observation on some 
rock of the Thebaid ; and that the music of the 
rocks there led to the jugglery of the priests in 
the statue of Memnon? Perhaps, when “ the 
rosy-fingered Aurora rendered her son, the glo- 
rious Memnon, vocal *,’ the voice was that of a 
man hidden-beneath the pedestal of the statue ; 
but the observation of the natives of the Oroonoko, 
which we relate, seems to explain in a natural 
manner what gave rise to the Egyptian belief of 
a stone, that poured forth. sounds at sunrise. » 
Almost at the same period, at which I com- 
municated these conjectures to some of the 
learned of Europe, three French travellers, 
Messrs. Jomard, Jollois, and Devilliers, were 
led to analogous ideas. They heard at sunrise, 
in a monument of granite placed at the centre 
of the spot on which the palace of Karnak stands, 
a noise resembling that of a string breaking. 
Now this comparison is precisely that, which the 
ancients ‘employed in speaking of the voice of 
Memnon. The French travellers thought like 
me, that the passage of rarified air through the 
* These are the words of an inscription, which attests, 
that sounds were heard on the 13th of the month Pachon, in 


the tenth year of the reign of Antoninus. See Mon. de 
? Egypte ancienne, vol. ii, pl. xxii, fig. 6. 


561 


fissures of a sonorous stone might have suggested 
to the Egyptian priests, to invent the juggleries 
of the Memnonium *. 

April the 12th. We set off at four in the 
morning. The missionary foresaw, that we 
should. have great difficulty in passing the rapids 
and the mouth of the Meta. The Indians rowed 
twelve hours and a half without. intermission. 
During this time, they took no other nourish- 
ment than cassava and plantains. When we 
consider the difficulty of overcoming the impe- 
tuosity of the current, and of passing the cata- 
racts ; when we reflect on the constant employ- 
ment of the muscular powers, during a naviga- 
tion of two months; we are equally surprised at 
the constitutional vigour and the abstinence of 
the Indians of the Oroonoko and the Amazon. 
Amylaceous and saccharine substances, some- 
times fish and the fat of turtles eggs, supply the 
place of food drawn from the first two classes -- 
of the animal kingdom, those of quadrupeds 
and birds. 

We found the bed of the river, to the length 
of six hundred toises, full of granitic rocks. 
Here is what is called the Raudal de Cariven f. 
We passed through channels that were not five 


* Ib. vol. i, p. 103 and 234. 
+ Animals with red and warm blood. 
t Or Cartven:. 


VOL. IV. 20 


562 


feet broad. Our canoe was sometimes jammed 
between two blocks of granite. We sought to 
avoid those passages, into which the waters 
rushed with a horrible noise. There is no real 
danger, when you are steered by a good Indian 
pilot. When the current is too difficult to resist, 
the rowers leap into the water, and fasten a rope 
to. the point of a rock, to warp the boat along. 
This manceuvre is very slow ; and we sometimes 
availed ourselves of it, to climb the rocks among 
which we were entangled. ‘They are of all di- 
mensions, rounded, very black, glossy like lead, . 
and destitute of vegetation. It is an extraordi- 
nary sight, to see the waters of one of the 
largest rivers on the Globe in some sort disap- 
pear. We perceived even far from the shore 
those immense blocks of granite, rising from the 
ground, and leaning one against another. The 
intervening channels in the Rapids are more 
than twenty-five fathoms deep; and are the 
more difficult to be observed, as the rocks are 
often narrow toward their bases, and form vaults 
suspended over the surface of the river. We 
perceived no crocodiles in the Raudal de Ca- 
riven ; these animals seem to shun the noise of 
cataracts. 

From Cabruta to the mouth of the Rio Sina- 
ruco, a distance of nearly two degrees of lati- 
tude, the left bank of the Oroonoko is entirely 
uninhabjted ; but to the West of the Raudal de 


563 


Cariven an enterprising man, Don Felix Relin- 
chon, has assembled some Jaruro and Otomack 
Indians in a small village. It is an attempt at 
civilization, on which the monks have had no 
direct influence. It is superfluous to add, that 
Don Felix lives at open war with the missiona- 
ries on the right bank of the Oroonoko. We 
shall discuss in another place the important 
question, whether in the present state of Spanish 
America these Capitanes pobladores and funda- 
dores can be substituted for the monastic sys- 
tem, and which of these two governments, alike 
capricious and arbitrary, is most to be dreaded 
by the poor Indians. 

Going up the river we arrived at nine in the 
morning before the mouth of the Meta, opposite’ 
the spot where the mission of Santa Teresa, 
founded by the Jesuits, was heretofore situate. 

Next to the Guaviare the Meta is the most 
considerable river that flows into the Oroonoko. 
It may be compared to the Danube, not for the 
length of it’s course, but for the volume of it’s 
waters. It’s mean depth is thirty-six feet, and 
it reaches as far as eighty-four. The union of 
these two rivers presents a very impressive as- 
pect. Lonely rocks rise on the eastern bank. 
Blocks of granite, piled upon one another, appear 
from afar like castles in ruins. Vast_ sandy 
shores keep the skirting of forest at a distance 
from the river; but we discover amid them in 

202 


564 


the horizon solitary palm-trees, backed by the 
sky, and crowning the tops of the mountains. 
We passed two hours on a large rock, stand- 
ing in the middle of the Oroonoko, and called 
the Stone of Patience *, because the canoes, in 
going up, are sometimes detained there two days, 
to extricate themselves from the whirlpool caused 
by this rock. I succeeded in fixing my instru- 
ments on it. Altitudes of the Sun gave me 
70° 4’ 29” + for the longitude of the mouth of 
the Meta. This chronometric observation proves, 
that in this point the map of South America by 
@ Anvilleisalmost exempt from error in longitude, 
while the error in latitude is a whole degree. 
The Rio Meta, which traverses the vast plains 


of Casanare, and which is navigable as far as 
the foot of the Andes of New Grenada, will one 
day be of great political importance to the inha- 
bitants of Guyana and Venezuela. From the 
Golfo Tristo and the Mouth of the Dragon a 
small fleet may go up. the Oroonoko and the 


* Piedra de la Paciencia. 

+ See my Ods, Astr., vol.i, p. 222. Father Caulin, speak- 
ing of the observations made on the expedition of Iturriaga 
and Solano, in 1756, says expressly, that the latitude of the 
mouth of the Meta is 6° 20’ ' (Hist. Corografica, p.'10); 
yet in the maps constructed according: ta these same observa- 
tions, those of Surville and La Graz, we find the mouth of 
the Meta in 6° 7/ and.6° 10%. Gumilla thought. it in 
1° 887; Gili, in 4.207, 


560 


Meta to within fifteen or twenty leagues of Santa 
Fe de Bogota. The flour of New Grenada may 
be conveyed down the same way. ‘The Meta is 
like a canal of communication between countries 
placed in the same latitude, but differing in their 
productions as much as France and Senegal. 
This circumstance gives importance to the exact 
knowledge of thé sources of a river so badly 
laid down in otr maps. The Meta takes it’s 
origin from the union of two rivers, that descend 
from the Paramoes of Chingasa and Suma Paz. 
The first is the Rio Negro, which lower down 
receives the Pachaquiaro ; the second is the Rio 
de Aguas Blancas, or Umadea. The junction 
takes place near the port of Marayal. ‘There 
are only eight or ten leagues distance from the 
Passo de la Cabulla, where you quit the Rio 
Ne¢#*ro, to the capital of Santa Fe. IT noted these 
curious facts, such as I had collected them from 
oculay witnesses, in the first edition of my map 
of the Rio Meta. The narrative of the voyage 
of the canon Don Josef Cortes Madariaga has 
not only confirmed all I had marked in my first 
sketches of the sources of the Meta, but has fur- 
nished me with some valuable materials for 
completing my labours. From the villages of 
Xiramena and Cabullaro to those of Guanapalo 
and Santa Rosalia de Cabapuna, a distance of 
sixty leagues, the banks of the Meta are more 
inhabited than those of the Oroonoko. We find 


566 


in this space fourteen Christian settlements, in 
part very populous; but from the mouths of the 
rivers Pauto and Casanare, for a space of more 
than fifty leagues, the Meta is infested by the 
Guahiboes *, who are savages. 

The navigation. of this river was much more 
active in the time of the Jesuits, and particularly 
during the expedition of Iturriaga, in 1756, than 
it is at present. Missionaries of the same order 
then governed the banks of the Meta and of the 
Oroonoko. The villages of Macuco, Zurimena, 
and Casimena, were founded by the Jesuits, as 
well as those of Uruana, Encaramada, and 
Carichana. 

These fathers had conceived the project. of 
forming a series of missions from ‘the junction of 
the Casanare with the Meta to that of the Meta 
with the Oroonoke. A narrow zone of culti- 
vated land would have crossed the vast steppes, 
that separate the forests of Guyana from the 
Andes of New Grenada. 

At the period of the harvest of turtles’ egas, 
not only the flour of Santa Fe descended the 
river,,but the salt of Chita -+-, the cotton cloth 
of San Gil, and the printed counterpanes of 
Socorro, To give some security to the little 


* T find the word written Guajibos, Guahioos, and Guagivos. 
They call themselves Gua-iva. 

+ To the East of Labranza Grande, and the North-West 
of Pore, now the capital of thé province of Casanare. 


567 


traders, who devoted themselves to this inland 
commerce, attacks were made ‘from time to time; 
from the Castillo or fort of Carichana, on the 
Guahiboes. . 

The same means, that favoured the sale of the 
productions of New Grenada, having served to 
introduce a contraband trade’ on the coasts of 
Guyana, ‘the merchants of Carthagena have in- 
duced the government to put heavy shackles on 
the freedom of commerce on the Meta. The 
same spirit of monopoly has shut up the Meta, 
the Rio Atracto, and the river of Amazons. 
Strange policy that, which teaches mother-coun- 
tries to leave those regions uncultivated, where 
nature has deposited all the germes of fertility ! 
The wild Indians have every where availed them- 
selves of this want of population. They have 
drawn near the rivers, they molest the passen- 
gers, and attempt to reconquer what they have 
lost for so many ages. In order to hold the 
Guahiboes in awe, the Capuchin missionaries, 
who succeeded the Jesuits in the government of 
the missions of the Oroonoko, formed the pro- 
ject of founding a city at the mouth of the Meta, 
under the name of the Villa de San Carlos. In- 
dolence, and the dread of tertian fevers, have 
prevented the execution of this project ; and all 
that has ever existed of the city of San Carlos, 
is a coat of arms painted on fine parchment, 
with an enormous cros& erected on the bank of 


568 


the Meta. The Guahiboes, who it is said are 
some thousands in number, are become so inso- 
lent, that, at the time of our passage by Cari- 
chana, they sent word to the missionary, that 
they would come on rafts, and burn his village. 
These rafts (valzas), which we had an opportu- 
nity of seeing, are scarcely three feet broad, and 
twelve feet long. They carry only two or three 
Indians; but fifteen or sixteen of these rafts 
are fastened to each other.with the stems of the 
paullinia, the dolichos, and other creeping plants. 
It is difficult to conceive how these small craft 
remain tied together in passing the rapids. 
Many fugitives from the villages of the Casanare 
and the Apure have joined the Guahiboes, and 
taught them the practice of eating beef, and pro- 
curing hides. ‘The farms of San Vicente, Rubio, 
and San Antonio, have lost great numbers of 
their horned cattle by the incursions of the In- 
dians. They also prevent travellers, as far as 
the junction of the Casanare, from sleeping on 
the shore in going up the Meta. It often hap- 
pens while the waters are low, that the little 
traders of New Grenada, some of whom still 
visit the encampment of Pararuma, are killed, 
by the poisoned arrows of the Guahiboes. 

From the mouth of the Meta the Oroonoko 
appeared to us to be freer from shoals and 
rocks. We navigated in a channel five hundred 
toises broad. The Indians remained rowing in 


569 


the beat, without towing or pushing it forward 
with their arms, and wearying us with their 
savage cries. We passed the Canos of Uita and 
Endava on the West: It was night when we 
reached the Raudal de Tabaje*. The Indians 
would not hazard passing the cataract; and we 
slept on a very incommodious spot, on the shelf 
of a rock, with a slope of more than eighteen 
degrees, and of which the crevices sheltered a 
swarm of bats. We heard the cries of the jaguar 
very near us during the whole night. They 
were answered by our great dog in lengthened 
howlings. I waited the appearance of the stars 
in vain; the sky was of a tremendous blackness ; 


and the hoarse sounds of the cascades of the | 


Oroonoko contrasted with the noise of the thun- 
der, that was rolling at a distance toward the 
forest. 

April the 13th. Early in the morning we 
passed the Rapids of Tabaje, the limit of Father 
Gumilla’s voyage +, and again disembarked. 
Father Zea, who accompanied us, desired to per- 
form mass in the new mission of San Borja, es- 
tablished two years before. We there found six 
houses inhabited by uncatechised Guahiboes. 


* Tuvaje, no doubt Atavcaje. 

+ Orenoque illustré (French translation), vol. i, p. 49 and 
“4, Yet Gumilla affirms, p. 66, that he navigated the Gua- 
viare, He places the Raudal de Taboje im lat. 1° 4’, an error 
of 5° ‘107, 


570 


They differ in nothing from the wild Indians. 
Their eyes, pretty largeand black, expressed more 
vivacity than those of the Indians who inhabit 
the ancient missions. . We in vain offered them 
brandy: they would not even taste it. The 
faces of all the young girls were marked with 
round black spots; like the patches, by which 
the women of Europe formerly imagined they 
set off the whiteness of their skins. The bodies 
of the Guahiboes were not painted. Several of 
them had beards, of which they seemed proud ; 
and, taking us by the chin, showed us by signs, 
that they were made like us. Their shape was 
in general slender. I was again struck, as I 
had been among the Salivas and the Macoes, 
with the little uniformity of features to be found 
in the Indians of the Oroonoko. Their look is 
sad and gloomy ; but neither stern nor ferocious, 
Without having any notion of the practices of 
the Christian religion (the missionary of Cari- 
chana celebrates mass at San Borja only three 
or four times a year), they behaved with the 
utmost decency at church. The Indians love 
to exhibit themselves ; and will submit tempo- 
rarily to any restraint or subjection, provided 
they are sure of drawing attention. At. the 
moment of the consecration, they made signs 
to one another, to indicate beforehand, that 
the priest was going to carry the chalice to 
his lips. With the exception of this gesture, 


571 


they remained motionless and in imperturbable 
apathy. 
The interest with which we examined these 
poor savages became perhaps the cause of the 
destruction of the mission. Some among them, 
who preferred a wandering life to the labours of 
agriculture, persuaded the rest to return to the 
plains of the Meta. They told them, “ that the 
white men would come back to San Borja,’ to 
take them away in the boats, and sell them as 
poitos, or slaves, at Angostura.” The Guahiboes 
awaited the news of our return from the Rio 
Negro by the Cassiquiare ; and when they heard 
that we were arrived at the first great cataract, 
that of Atures, they all deserted, and fled to the 
savannahs that border the Oroonoko on the 
West. The Jesuit Fathers had already formed 
a mission on this spot, and bearing the same 
name. No tribe is more difficult to fix to the 
soilthan the Guahiboes. They like better to feed 
on stinking fish, scolopendras, and worms, than 
to cultivate a little spot of ground. The other 
Indians say, that “a Guahibo eats every thing 
that exists above, and every thing under ground.” 
In ascending the Oroonoko more to the South, 
the heat, far from increasing, became easier to 
Hear. The air in the day was at 26° or 27°5°*; 
and at night, at 93°7°+. The water of the 


* 20°3° or 22° R. + 19° R. 


372 


Oroonoko retained it’s habitual temperature of 
27°7°*. The torment of the moschettoes aug- 
mented severely, notwithstanding the deerease 
of the heat. We had never suffered so much 
from them as at San Borja. We could neither 
speak nor uncover the face, without the mouth 
and ‘nose being filled with insects. We were 
surprised not to find the thermometer at 35° or 
36°; the extreme irritation of the skin made ws 
believe, that the air was scorching. We passed 
the night on the beach of Guaripo-}. The fear 
of the little caribe fish prevented us from bath- 
ing. The crocodiles we had met with this day 
were all of an extraordinary size, from twenty- 
two to twenty-four feet. 

April the 14th. Our sufferings from the xan- 
cudoes made us depart at five o'clock in the 
morning. There are fewer insects iti the strata 
of air that repose immediately on the river, than 
near the edge of 'the forests. We Stopped to 
breakfast at the island of Guachaco +, where the 
granite is immediately covered by a formation 
of sandstone, or agglomerate. This sandstone 
contains fragments of quartz, and even of feld- 


<p RO DO ae 

+ Height of. the barometer, at 6" in the evening, 335°6 
lines ; cent. therm., 25:3°. The little irregularities of the 
horary variations render the influence of the slope of the river 
on the height of the barometer scarcely perceptible. 

t Or Fachaco. 


a 


a 


57 


© 


spar, cemented by indurated clay. It exhibits 
little veins of brown iron ore, which separate in 
laminze, or plates, of one line in thickness. We 
had already found these plates on the shores 
between Encaramada and Baraguan, where the 
missionaries had sometimes taken them for an 
ore of gold, and sometimes for tin. It is pro- 
pable, that this secondary formation occupied 
formerly a larger space. Having passed the 
mouth of the Rio Parueni, beyond which the 
Maco Indians dwell, we spent the night on the 
island of Panumana. I could with difficulty 
take the altitudes of Canopus, in order to fix the 
longitude * of the point, near which the river 
suddenly turns toward the West. The island of 
Panumana is rich in plants. We there again 
found those shelves of bare rock, those tufts of 
melastomas, those thickets of small shrubs, the 
blended scenery of which had charmed us in 
the plains of Carichana. The mountains of the 
Great Cataracts bounded the horizon toward the 
South-East. In proportion as we advanced, we 
perceived that the shores of the Oroonoko exhi- 
bited a more imposing and picturesque aspect. 

* Long. 70° 8/ 39’ ; admitting, according to the itinerary 
distances, the latitude of the island to be 5° 41’, 


\ 


, END OF VOL. IV. 


z 
< 
wl 
> 
4 
i 
9 
z 
< 
= 
o 
> 
.-) 
2 
om 
ka 
& 
z 
=I 
a) 
r¥) 
s 
a 
I 
& 
° 
De 
= 


vero 
eas ee 


