Source note (Tower of Babel staging): Alexander von Humboldt, Cosmos: A Sketch of a Physical Description of the Universe, translated by E. C. Otté (London: Henry G. Bohn, 1849), Vol. III. Text from Internet Archive item cosmossketchofph03humbuoft (OCR).
Public domain work. This file was produced from a public scan; OCR imperfections may remain.

i 


01182413 3 


3 1761 


°o 
ji 
2 
Oo 
Cc 
Oo 
- 
wu 
o 
> 
4 
w 
c 
uu 
2 
2 
= 


nM 





Handle with 


EXTREME CARE 


This volume is damaged or brittle 


and CANNOT be repaired! 
* photocopy only if necessary 


- return to staff 
« do not put in bookdrop 


Gerstein Science 3 rirmation Dei " : 





issese 


peaetiaiihs 












‘nrg LIBRARY, 


, a ‘ort 
ELEGANTLY PRINTED, AND BOUND IN corn, AT 38. 6D, PER vo ee 











alc Ar Ge ere 


qos -_ ir me 
i 2 






2 


“ 
. 
_ 





AHL et pe 
ty 
the ph 100" 






2 
OF 
4 “ 
LA 





pete 
; 
Gh. 
Ye 


-_ 

~ 

ce 
—~— 





Cutae 





as 
jbo 
" eds D OL ‘a At. 





WMIPAMMCE. 4 


M2, 
{ Bip, 


a 




























27 KAN KES MISTURT UPES, TRANS ATCU DTI 
> Complete in 3 vols. Vol. af x Ponies of Julius il., afer Raphael. — 
. COXE'S MEMOIRS OF THE DUKE OF MARLBOROUGH, (to form 
“Vol. lL. With fine Portrait. 
i oe AN ATLAS, _of 26 fine large Maps and Plans of Marlborough’s Campaigns, being all 
ey on ee blished’ vat the original edition at £12 12s. may now be had, in one’ epee, bit bo 












. 






LING Re he Mededeyine ne ie) WY 
peeses ee LE EL eae BSS 
IS I= AIS 
ats AS EE AS Se SSR RASS SI EX oA 
PODS PDD RS ESSE 








BOWS STANDARD UpRARY: << See 


‘SHERIDAN’ S DRAMATIC WORKS AND LIFE. ~ Portrait. - a) 
_COXE'S. MEMOIRS OF MARLBOROUGH. VOL. 2. Portrait of the Duchess Ss 
-GOETHE’S AUTOBIOGRAPHY, 13 BOOKS. PORTRAIT. TEN 


_RANKE'S HISTORY OF THE POPES, VOL. 2. With Index, and Portrait 
of Innocent X. S 


. LAMARTINE’S HISTORY OF THE GIRONDISTS. VOL. 3. With a Memoir = 
of Lamartine, and a Sketch of the last Revolution. ie 


. COXE’S MEMOIRS OF THE DUKE OF MARLBOROUGH. VOL. 3. “is : 

. WHEATLEY ON THE COMMON PRAYER. FRONTISPIECE. 4: oi 
: m : he 
. RANKE’S POPES. VOL. 3. Portrait of Clement VII, Say 
. MILTON'S PROSE WORKS. VOL.1. Portrait. £) 
3; MENZEL’S HISTORY OF GERMANY. COMPLETE IN 3 VOLS. vou. Ook 
Portrait of Charlemagne. se 
}. MILTON'S PROSE WORKS. VOL. 2. Frontispiece. ie Boh 
)}. MILTON’S PROSE WORKS. VOL. 3. Jortrait of Laud, ; pied ss 
|. MENZEL’S HISTORY OF GERMANY. VOL. 2. Portrait of Charles V. “is BNC 


2, SCHLEGEL'S ASTHETIC AND MISCELLANEOUS WORKS, CONTAINING. ©20x 
Letters on Christian Art, Essay on Gothic Architecture, Remarks on the Romance- €23XG 
Poetry of the Middle Ages, on Shakspeare, the Limits of the Beautiful, and on the ©) 
Language and Wisdom of the Indians. _ Sy 2 

3, GOETHE'S WORKS. VOL. 2, containing the remainder of his Autobiography, BIS 3 
together with his Travels in Italy, France, ‘and Switzerland. Sy Xx 


4. SCHILLER'S WORKS. VOL. 4, CONTAINING “‘ THE ROBBERS,” “ FIESKO,” x 
“Love and Intrigue,” and “The Ghost-Seer,” translated by HENRY G. Boun. go. <8) 





6. MENZEL’S GERMANY. VOL. 3. Portrait of Prince Metternich. & KB 
6. SCHLEGEL’S LECTURES ON MOv.::N HISTORY. ON 
7. LAMARTINE'’S HISTORY OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION OF 1848, SAR 
With Frontispiece, containing 6 Portraits. xy R 

8. JUNIUS'S LETTERS, WITH ALL THE, NUTES OF WOODFALL’S EDITION, aes 
and important additions. 2vols. Vol. 1, containing all the Original Letters. aN, 

19. VASARI'S LIVES OF THE MOST CELEBRATED PAINTERS, SCULPTORS, sie 
_ AND ARCHITECTS. Translated by Mus. Foster. Vol. 1. Portrait. AY 

30. JUNIUS'S LETTERS. VOL. 2, containing the Private and Miscellaneous Biso)> 
Letters, an Essay disclosing the Authorship, and a very elaborate Index. : E i 

31. TAYLOR'S (JEREMY) HOLY LIVING AND DYING. Portrait. SO 
52. GOETHE'S WORKS. VOL. 3, CONTAINING “FAUST,” « IPHIGENIA,” Noe 
“TORQUATO 'TASSO,” and “EGMONT.” Translated by’ Miss SWANWICK, BOX: 
With “GOETZ VON BERLICHINGEN, ” by Sim Waurer Scorr. Sa . 

63. NEANDER’S CHURCH HISTORY, THE TRANSLATION CAREFULLY BQyYY 
Revised by the Rey. A.J. W. Morgrson. Vol. I aa 

54. NEANDER'S LIFE OF CHRIST. COMPLETE IN 1 VOL. | SX 
65. VASARI'S LIVES, BY MRS. FOSTER. VOL. 2. ; os) 
66. NEANDER’S CHURCH HISTORY. VOL. 2. Oov 
2 Ai 

= Z\~ 


Uniform with his SYANDARD LiBRARY, price 8s. 6d., 


. BOHN’S EXTRA VOLUMES. BRN 


Pe) 
KOR 
CONESIS. 


SONG 

1. GRAMMONT’S MEMOIRS OF THE COURT OF CHARLES IL With the Sok 
oscobel Narratives. Portrait of Nell Gwynne. — ; & 2: 

2 & 3. RABELAIS’ WORKS. COMPLETE IN2 VOLS. ae 4 Sel 
4. COUNT HAMILTON'S FAIRY TALES. PORTRAIT. eS ae aa 
: = pe 

“ 


oe < S T= aS Sto oS LOSS gS Sn SIS KISS 
rN mISR LLY ae IOS ww! Rin - - Sv ~ Boat “ a - 
ROA STNG a ee PNP INS ONS NS ee “ RS PANN, oy 
— ing Fu fo - 





NSD 
Frei ak Ny 
Se SoS ROO 1 OY AS RSRES ARS RAO OG oN REN 
BA i> SAF <4 5m Foley 


xy y ROLES VAIS SAINSAF- wR 
STAR? SA REISE SSSI SIA ISSA AIS SAS 


a 
gr ir | 
ie elt T? am 
* ea, ee 





BOHN’S SCIENTIFIC LIBRARY. 





HUMBOLDTS COSMOS. 





FSIS3k 
Fo COSMOS: 


A SKETCH 


PHYSICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE UNIVERSE. 


BY 


ALEXANDER VON HUMBOLDT. 


TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN, 


BY E. C, OTTE, 


Nature vero rerum vis atque majestas in omnibus momentis fide caret, si quis modo partes 
ejus ac non totam complectatur animo.—Plin., Hist. Nat., lib. vii. c. 1. 


VOL. III. 


LONDON: 
HENRY G. BOIIN, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN. 
1851. 





LONDON : 


PRINTED BY HARRISON AND SON, 
ST. MARTIN’S LANE, 











“9 F'6 © we ee Bs oe wiers 


CONTENTS OF VOL. III. 





INTRODUCTION. 

Page 

Historical Review of the attempts made with the object of con- 
sidering the Phenomena of the Universe as an Unity of 


Nature 


SPECIAL RESULTS OF OBSERVATIONS IN THE 
DOMAIN OF COSMICAL PHENOMENA. 


A. UrANoLoGIcAL portion of the physical peer of the 
world. Os, ASTRO GHEE aL, cotrigsctss ts tonne chactegcapeassendiaspessent 29—32 


I. The realms of space, and conjectures regarding that which 

_ appears to occupy the ati scipddiialta between the heavenly 

bodies tes 33—50 
II. Natural and telescopic vision, 51—96: Scintillation of the stars, 

99—111; Velocity of light, 111—1 19; Results of photo- 

metry, Pe. Seciieiantbegie . d1—137 
III. Number, distribution, and colour of the fixed stars, 138— 

188; Stellar masses (stellar swarms), 188—~193; The Milky 

Way interspersed with a few nebulous spots, 193—203........ 138—203 


IV. New stars, and stars that have vanished, 204—217 ; Variable 
stars, whose recurring periods have been determined, 217— 
240; Variations in the intensity of the light of stars whose 
periodicity is as yet uninvestigated, 240—247 .....eeeees 204—247 


V. Proper motion of the fixed stars, 248—252; Problematical 
existence of dark cosmical bodies, 252—255; Parallax— 
measured distances of some of the fixed stars, 255—264 ; 
Doubts as to the assumption of a central body for the 
whole sidereal heavens, 264—270 ........... +---248—270 


VI. Multiple, or double stars—Their number and reciprocal dis- 
tances—Period of revolution of two stars round a common 









































centre Of gravity... : erat ay, 271—289 
TABLES. 

Photometric Tables of Stars..........s.cs0.sssscsssssrsssresasess .134—137 

Clusters of Stars ......... cas 191—193 

New, Stars.... bees biaphereisssaibchecdinns 7 scatbaniee sotes 209—217 

ils io, Oe sec otsnsenstesedtahaenebssirepingueds tages sustenstsc 233—240 

Parallaneae ces sttpcjiceiscciscensoubs0 abebinwapitss esis . 262 





Elements of Orbits of double stars ...ccccscsccs.sssccesssciesosoccsuseodacsasooneseve 289 










ae TE SS hay 
+ 2 ete: =a fe 







eon ’ et a 1) iT cid PP re 












Hf ne fs EGET de daly. afl Sablnes see lt noel ee 
gees 2 Von 
bier 2 Pi ifees) Prt #* ~— aA J) ee, 


Tena) Perm: ; ¢ ak « 
F 


: 
“i “GET ely ay 


OF dee Hee a 





ete! oF Sepa She een RK de 


= . 


SPECIAL RESULTS OF OBSERVATION 


IN THE 


DOMAIN OF COSMICAL PHENOMENA, 





INTRODUCTION. 


In accordance with the object I have proposed to myself, 


_and which, as far as my own powers and the present state 


of science permit, I have regarded as not unattainable, I 


» haye,in the preceding volumes of Cosmos, considered Nature 


in a twofold point of view. In the first place, I have 
endeayoured to present her in the pure objectiveness of 
external phenomena; and, secondly, as the reflection of 
the image impressed by the senses upon the inner man, that | 
is, upon his ideas and feelings. 

The external world of phenomena has been delineated under 
the scientific form of a general picture of nature in her two 
great spheres, the uranological and the telluric or terrestrial. 
This delineation begins with the stars, which glimmer amidst 
nebule in the remotest realms of space, and passing from our 
planetary system to the vegetable covering of the earth, 
descends to the minutest organisms which float in the atmo- 
sphere, and are invisible to the naked eye, In order to give due 
prominence to the consideration of the existence of one 
common bond encircling the whole organic world, of the control 
of eternal laws, and of the causal connexion, as far as yet 
known to us, of whole groups of phenomena, it was necessary 
to avoid the accumulation of isolated facts. This precaution 

You, III. B 


2 COSMOS. 


seemed especially requisite where, in addition to the dynamic 
action of moving forces, the powerful influence of a specific 
difference of matter manifests itself in the terrestrial por- 
tion of the universe. The problems presented to us in the 
sidereal, or uranological, sphere of the Cosmos, are, consi- 
dering their nature, in as far as they admit of being ob- 
served, of extraordinary simplicity, and capable, by means 
of the attractive force of matter and the quantity of its mass, 
of being submitted to exact calculation in accordance with the 
theory of motion. If, as I believe, we are justified in regard- 
ing the revolving meteor-asteroids (aérolites) as portions of our 
planetary system, their fall upon the earth constitutes the sole 
means by which we are brought in contact with cosmical sub- 
stances of a recognisable heterogeneity.’ I here refer to the 
cause which has hitherto rendered terrestrial phenomena 
less amenable to the rules of mathematical deduction than 
those mutually disturbing and re-adjusting movements of the 
cosmical bodies, in which the fundamental force of homo- 
geneous matter is alone manifested. 

I have endeavoured, in my delineation of the earth, to arrange 
natural phenomena in such a manner as to indicate their causal 
connexion. In describing our terrestrial sphere, I have consi- 
dered its form, mean density, electro-magnetic currents, the 
processes of polar light, and the gradations according to which 
heat increases with the increase of depth. The reaction of 
the planet’s interior on its outer crust implies the existence of 
volcanic activity; of more or less contracted circles of waves of 
eommotion (earthquake waves), and their effects, which are not 
always purely dynamic; and of the eruptions of gas, of mud, 
and of thermal springs. The upheaval of fire-erupting moun- 
tains must be regarded as the highest demonstration of the 
inner terrestrial forces. "We have therefore depicted volcanoes, 
bothcentral and chain formations, as generative no less than as 


1 Cosmos, vol. i. pp. 45-47, 125. 





INTRODUCTION. 8 


destructive agents, and as constantly forming before our eyes 
for the most part periodic rocks (rocks of eruption); we 
have likewise shown in contrast with this formation how sedi- 
mentary rocks are in the course of precipitation from fluids, 
which hold their minutest particles in solution or suspension. 
Such a comparison of matter still in the act of development 
and solidification with that already consolidated in the form 
of strata of the earth’s crust, leads us to the distinction of 
geognostic epochs, and to a more certain determination of the 
chronological succession of those formations in which le 
entombed extinct genera of animals and plants—the fauna 
and flora of a former world, whose ages are revealed by the 
order in which they occur. The origin, transformation, 
and upheaval of terrestrial strata, exert, at certain epochs, an 
alternating action on all the special characteristics of the 
physical configuration of the earth’s surface; influencing 
the distribution of fluids and solids, and the extension and 
articulation of continental masses in a horizontal and vertical 
direction. On these relations depend the thermal conditions 
of oceanic currents, the meteorological processes in the aérial 
inyestment of our planet, and the typical and geographical dis- 
tribution of organic forms. Sucha reference to the arrangement 
of telluric phenomena presented in the picture of nature, 
will, I think, suffice to show that the juxtaposition of great, 
and apparently complicated, results of observation, facilitates 
our insight into their causal connection. Our impressions of 
nature will, howeyer, be essentially weakened, if the picture 
fail in warmth of colour by the too great accumulation of 
minor details. 

In a carefully-sketched representation of the phenomena 
of the material world, completeness in the enumeration of 
individual features has not been deemed essential, neither 
does it seem desirable in the delineation of the reflex 
of external nature on the inner man... Here it was 

B2 


4 - COSMOS. 


necessary to observe even stricter limits. The boundless 
domain of the world of thought, enriched for thousands of 
years by the vigorous force of intellectual activity, exhibits, 
among different races of men, and in different stages of 
civilization, sometimes a joyous, sometimes a melancholy tone 
of mind ;? sometimes a delicate appreciation of the beautiful, 
sometimes an apathetic insensibility. The mind of man is 
first led to adore the forces of nature and certain objects of 
the material world; at a later period it yields to religious 
impulses of a higher and purely spiritual character. The 
inner reflex of the outer world exerts the most varied 
influence on the mysterious process of the formation of 
language,‘ in which the original corporeal tendencies, as well 
as the impressions of surrounding nature, act as powerful 
concurring elements. Man elaborates within himself the 
materials presented to him by the senses, and the products 
of this spiritual labour belong as essentially to the domain of 
the Cosmos as do the phenomena of the external world. 

As a reflected image of Nature, influenced by the crea- 
tions of excited imagination, cannot retain its truthful purity, 
there has arisen besides the actual and external world, an 
ideal and internal world, full of fantastic, and partly sym- 
bolical myths, heightened by the introduction of fabulous 
animal forms, whose several parts are derived from the 
organisms of the present world, and sometimes eyen from the 
relics of extinct species. Marvellous flowers and trees spring 
from this mythic soil, as the giant ash of the Edda-Songs, 





* Cosmos, vol.i. pp. 8-5; vol. ii. pp. 376 and 456. 

® Ibid., vol. ii. pp. 392-396, and 411-415. 

* Tbid., vol. i. pp. 366-369 ; vol. ii. pp. 473-478. 

5 M. von Olfer’s Ueberreste vorweltlicher Riesenthiere in 
Benehung auf Ostasiatische Sagen in the Abh. der Berl. Akad., 
1832, s. 51. On the opinion advanced by Empedocles 
regarding the cause of the extinction of the earliest animal 
forms, see Hegel’s Geschichte der Philosophie, bd. ii. s. 344. 


INTRODUCTION. 5 


the world-tree, Yggdrasil, whose branches tower above the 
heavens, while one of its triple roots penetrates to the 
“foaming cauldron springs” of the lower world.® Thus the 
cloud-region of physical myths is filled with pleasing or 
with fearful forms, according to the diversity of character 
in nations and climates; and these forms are preserved for 
centuries in the intellectual domain of successive generations. 

If the present work does not fully bear out its title, the 
adoption of which I have myself designated as bold and 
inconsiderate, the charge of incompleteness applies especially 
to that portion of the Cosmos which treats of spiritual life; 
that is, the image reflected by external nature on the inner 
world of thought and feeling. In this portion of my work 
I haye contented myself with dwelling more especially upon 
those objects which lie in the direction of long-cherished 
studies; on the manifestation of a more or less lively appre- 
ciation of nature in classical antiquity and in modern times ; 
on the fragments of poetical descriptions of nature, the 
colouring of which has been so essentially influenced by indi- 
viduality of national character, and the religious monotheistic 
view of creation; on the fascinating charm of landscape- 
painting ; and on the history of the contemplation of the physi- 
cal universe, that is, the history of the recognition of the uni- 
verse as a whole, and of the unity of phenomena,—a recognition 
gradually developed during the course of two thousand years. 

In a work of so comprehensive a character, the object of 
which is to give a scientific, and at the same time an animated 
description of nature, a first imperfect attempt must rather 
lay claim to. the merit of inciting than to that of satisfying 





* See, for the world-tree Yggdrasil, and the rushing (foam- 
ing) cauldron-spring Hvergelmir, the Deutsche Mythologie 
of Jacob Grimm, 1844, s. 580, 756; also Mallet’s Northern 
Antiquities, (Bohn’s edition), 1847, pp. 410, 489, and 492, 
and frontispiece to ditto. 


6 COSMOS, 


inquiry. .4 Book of Nature, worthy of its exalted title, can 

never be accomplished until the physical sciences, notwith- 

standing their inherent imperfectibility, shall, by their gradual 

development and extension, have attained a higher degree-of 
advancement, and until we shall have gained a more extended 

knowledge of the two grand divisions of the Cosmos,—the 

external world, as made perceptible to us by the senses; 

and the inner, reflected intellectual world. 

I think I have here sufficiently indicated the reasons 
which determined me not to give greater extension to the 
general picture of nature. It remains for this third and last 
volume of my Cosmos, to supply much that is wanting in the 
previous portions of the work, and to present those results 
of observation on which the present condition of scientific 
opinion is especially grounded. I shall here follow a similar 
mode of arrangement to that [previously adopted, for the 
reasons which I have advanced, in the delineation of nature. 
But before entering upon the individual facts on which special 
departments of science are based, I would fain offer a few 
more general explanatory observations. The unexpected 
indulgence with which my undertaking has been received by 
a large portion of the public, both at home and abroad, 
renders it doubly imperative that I should once more define, 
as distinctly as possible, the fundamental ideas on which the 
whole work is based, and say something in regard to those 
demands which I have not even attempted to satisfy, because, 
according to my view of empirical—7. e., experimental— 
science, they did not admit of being satisfied. These explana- 
tory observations involuntarily associate themselves with his-_ 
torical recollections of the earlier attempts made to discover 
the one universal idea to which all phenomena, in their causal 
connection, might be reduced, as to a sole principle. 

The fundamental principle’ of my work on the Cosmos, as 





7 Cosmos, vol. i. pp. 28-31, and 51-60. 


INTRODUCTION. 7 


enunciated by me more than twenty years ago, in the French 
and German lectures I gave at Paris and Berlin, compre- 
hended the endeavour to combine all ccsmical phenomena 
in one sole picture of nature; to show in what manner the 
common conditions, that is to say, the great laws, by which 
individual groups of these phenomena are governed, have 
been recognized; and what course has been pursued in ascend- 
ing from these laws to the discovery of their causal con- 
nexion. Such%an attempt to comprehend the plan of the 
universe—the order of nature—must begin with a genera- 
lization of particular facts, and a knowledge of the con- 
ditions under which physical changes regularly and periodi- 
cally manifest themselves; and must conduct to the thoughtful 
consideration of the results yielded by empirical observation, 
but not to ‘a contemplation of the universe based on specu- 
lative deductions and development of thought alone, or to a 
theory of absolute unity independent of experience.” ‘Weare, 
I here repeat, far distant from the period when it was thought 
possible to concentrate all sensuous perceptions into the 
unity of one sole idea of nature. The true path was indicated 
upwards of a century before Lord Bacon’s time, by Leonardo 
da Vinci, in these few words: ‘‘ Cominciare dall’ esperienza 
e per mezzo di questa scoprirne la ragione .”*—“ Commence 
by experience, and by means of this discover the reason.” In 
many groups of phenomena we must still content ourselves 
with the recognition of empirical laws; but the highest and 
more rarely attained aim of all natural inquiry must ever be 
the discovery of their causal connexion.’ #The most satisfactory 

8 Op. cit. vol. ii. p. 661. | 

* In the Introductory Observations, in Cosmos, vy. i. p. 30, 
it should not have been generally stated that ‘‘the ultimate 
object of the experimental sciences is to discover laws, and to 
trace their progressive generalization.” The clause “in 


many kinds of phenomena,” should have been added. The 
€aution with which I have expressed myself in the 2nd 





8 COSMOS, 


and distinct evidence will always appear where the laws 
of phenomena admit of being referred to mathematical prin- 
ciples of explanation. Physical cosmography constitutes 
merely in some of its parts a cosmology. ‘The two expres- 
sions cannot yet be regarded as identical. The great and 
solemn spirit that pervades the intellectual labour, of which 
the limits are here defined, arises from the sublime conscious- 
ness of striving towards the infinite, and of grasping all that is 
revealed to us amid the boundless and inexhaustible fulness 
of creation, development, and being. 

This active striving which has existed in all ages, musé 
frequently and under various forms, have deluded men into the 
idea, that they had reached the goal, and discovered the prin- 
ciple which could explain all that is variable in the organic 





vol. of this work (p. 694), on the relation borne by Newton 
to Kepler, cannot, I think, leave a doubt that I clearly 
distinguish between the discovery and interpretation of 
natural laws, 7. e., the explanation of phenomena. I there 
said of Kepler: “The rich abundance of accurate observations 
furnished by Tycho Brahe, the zealous opponent of the 
Copernican system, laid the foundation for the discovery 
_of those eternal laws of the planetary movements which 
prepared imperishable renown for the name of Kepler, and 
which, interpreted by Newton, and proved to be theoretically 
and necessarily true, have been transferred into the bright 
and glorious domain of thought, as the intellectual recognition 
of nature.” Of Newton, I said (p. 786): ‘* We close it 
[the great epoch of Galileo, Kepler, Newton, and Leibnitz, | 
with the figure of the earth as it was then recognized from 
theoretical conclusions. Newton was enabled to give an 
explanation of the system of the universe, because he suc- 
ceeded in discovering the force from whose action the laws 
of Kepler necessarily result.” Compare on this subject (‘‘ On 
Laws and Causes’’) the admirable remarks in Sir John Hers- 
chel’s address at the fifteenth meeting of the British Associa- 
tion at Cambridge, 1845, p. xlii.; and Edinb. Rev. vol. 87, 
1848, pp. 180-183, 


INTRODUCTION. 9 


world, and all the phenomena revealed to us by sensuous 
perception. After men had for a long time, in accordance 
with the earliest ideas of the Hellenic people, venerated the 
agency of spirits, embodied in human forms,” in the creative, 
changing, and destructive processes of nature; the germ of a 
scientific contemplation developed itself in the physiological 
fancies of the Ionic school. The first principle of the origin 
of things, the first principle of all phenomena, was referred 
to two causes!’—either to concrete material principles, the so- 
called elements of Nature, or to processes of rarefaction and 
condensation, sometimes in accordance with mechanical, some~ 
times with dynamic views. The hypothesis of four or five 
materially differing elements, which was probably of Indian 
origin, has continued from the era of the didactic poem of 
Empedocles, down to the most recent times, to imbue all opi- 
nions on natural philosophy—a primeval evidence and monu- 
ment of the tendency of the human mind to seek a generaliza- 
tion and simplification of ideas, not only with reference to 
the forces, but also to the qualitative nature of matter. 

In the latter period of the development of the Ionic phy- 
siology, Anaxagoras of Clazomenz advanced from the pos- 
tulate of simply dynamic forces of matter, to the idea of a 
spirit independent of all matter, uniting and distributing the 





© In the memorable passage (Metaph. xu. 8. p. 1074, 
Bekker.) in which Aristotle speaks of “ the relics of an earlier 
acquired and subsequently lost wisdom,” he refers with extra 
ordinary freedom and significance to the veneration of phy- 
sical forces, and of gods in human forms: ‘“ much,” says 
he, ‘“‘has been mythically added for the persuasion of the 
onan as also on account of the laws and for other usefut 
ends,” 

“The important difference in these philosophical direc- 
tions rpdémo., is clearly indicated in Arist. Phys. Auscult. 
1. 4, p. 187, Bekk. (Compare Brandis in the Rhein. Museum 
Jir Philologie, Jahrg. iii. s, 105.) 


10 , COSMOS. 


homogeneous particles of which matter is composed. The 
world-arranging Intelligence (vots) controls the continuously 
progressing formation of the world, and is the primary source 
of all motion, and therefore of all physical phenomena. Anaxr 
agoras explains the apparent movement of the heavenly bodies 
from east to west by the assumption of a centrifugal force,” 
on the intermission of which, as we have already observed, 
the fall of meteoric stones ensues. This hypothesis indicates 
the origin of those theories of rotatory motion which more 
than two thousand years afterwards attained consider- 
able cosmical importance from the labours of Descartes, 
Huygens, and Hooke. It would be foreign to the present 
work, to discuss whether the world-arranging Intelligence of 
the philosopher of Clazomenee indicates the godhead itself, or 
the mere pantheistic notion of a spiritual principle animating 
all nature. 

In striking contrast with these two divisions of the Ionic 
school, is the mathematical symbolism of the Pythagoreans, 
which in like manner embraced the whole universe. Here, 
in the world of physical phenomena cognizable by the senses, 
the attention is solely directed to that which is normal in 
configuration (the five elementary forms), to the ideas of 





® Cosmos, vol. i. pp. 122, 123, (note), and vol. 11. p. 690 
(and note). Simplicius, in a remarkable passage, p. 491, 
most distinctly contrasts the centripetal with the centrifugal 
force. He there says, “‘ the heavenly bodies do not fall in 
consequence of the centrifugal force being superior to the 
inherent falling force of bodies and to their downward ten- 
dency.’ Hence, Plutarch in his work, De facie in orbe Lune, 
p- 923, compares the moon, in consequence of its not falling 
to the earth, to ‘fa stone in a sling.” For the actual signifi- 
cation of the wep:x@pynots of Anaxagoras, compare Schaubach in 
Anaxag. Clazom. Fragm. 1827, pp. 107-109. 

8 Schaubach, Op. cit. pp. 151-156, and 185-189. | Plants 
are likewise said to be animated by the intelligence, vods; 
Aristot. de Plant. i. p. 815, Bekk. 


INTRODUCTION. il 


numbers, measure, harmony, and contrarieties. Things are 
reflected in numbers which are, as it were, an imitative repre- 
sentation (#iunows) of them. The boundless capacity for repe-~ 
tition, and the illimitability of numbers, is typical of the cha- 
racter of eternity and of the infinitude of nature. The essence 
of things may be recognized in the form of numerical rela- 
tions: their alterations and metamorphoses as’ numerical 
combinations. Plato, in his Physics, attempted to refer the 
nature of all substances in the universe, and their different 
stages of metamorphosis, to corporeal forms, and these again 
to the simplest triangular plane figures.“ But in reference 
to ultimate principles (the elements, as it were, of the 
elements), Plato exclaims, with modest diffidence, ‘“ 
alone, and those whom he loves among men, know what 
Chey are.” Such a mathematical mode of treating physical 
phenomena, together with the development of the atomic 
theory, and the philosophy of measure and harmony, have 
long obstructed the development of the physical sciences, and 
misled fanciful inquirers into devious tracks, as is shown in 
the history of the physical contemplation of the universe. 
“There dwells a captivating charm, celebrated by all anti- 
quity, in the simple relations of time and space, as manifested 
in tones, numbers, and lines.” ® 
The idea of the harmonious government of the universe 
reveals itself in a distinct and exalted tone throughout the 
writings of Aristotle. - All the phenomena of nature are de- 
picted in the Physical Lectures (Auscultationes Physice) as 
moving, vital agents of one general cosmical force. Heaven and 





** Compare on this portion of Plato’s mathematical physics, 
Béckh De platonico syst. celestium globorum, 1810 et 1811; 
Martin, Etudes sur le Timée, tom. ii. pp. 234-242; and 
Brandis in the Geschichte der. Griechisch-Rimischen Philo- 
sophie, Th. ii. Abth. i. 1844, § 375. 

*° Cosmos, vol. ii. p. 736, note; compare also Gruppe 
Ueber die Fragmente des Archytas, 1840, s. 33. 


12 COSMOS. 


nature, (the telluric sphere of phenomena,) depend upon the 
“unmoved motus of the universe.” **® The “ ordainer” and the 
ultimate cause of all sensuous changes must be regarded as 
something non-sensuous and distinct from all matter.” Unity 
in the different expressions of material force is raised to the 
rank of a main principle, and these expressions of force are 
themselves always reduced to motions. Thus we find already 
in “the book of the soul”’® the germ of the undulatory 
theory of light. The sensation of sight is occasioned by a 
vibration—a movement of the medium between the eye and 
the object seen—and not by emissions from the object or 
the eye. Hearing is compared with sight, as sound is like- 
wise a consequence of the vibration of the air. 

Aristotle, while he teaches men to investigate generalities 
in the particulars of perceptible unities, by the force of 
reflective reason, always includes the whole of nature, and 





% Aristot. Polit. vil. 4, p. 1826, and Metaph. xii. 7, p. 
1072, 10 Bekk. and xii. 10, p. 1074-5. The pseudo- 
Aristotelian work de Mundo, which Osann ascribed to Chry- 
sippus (see Cosmos, vol. ii. p. 380) also contains (cap. 6, 
p- 397) a very eloquent passage on the world-orderer and 
world-sustaimer. 

The proofs are collected in Ritter, History of Philosophy 
(Bohn, 1838-46), Vol. 3, p. 180 e¢ seg. 

*® Compare Aristot. de Anima, ii. 7 pag. 419. In this 
passage the analogy with sound is most distinctly expressed ; 
although in other portions of his writings Aristotle has greatly 
modified his theory of vision. Thus in de Insomniis, cap. 2, 
p- 459, Bekker., we find the following words :—“ It is evident 
that sight is no less an active than a passive agent, and that 
vision not only experiences some action from the air (the me- 
dium), but itself also acts upon the medium.” He adduces in 
evidence of the truth of this proposition, that a new and very 

ure metallic mirror will, under certain conditions, when 
feoked at by a woman, retain on its surface cloudy specks 
that cannot be removed without difficulty. Compare also 
Martin, Hiudes sur le Timée de Platon. tom. ii. pp. 159-168, 


INTRODUCTION. 13 


the internal connexion not only of forces, but also of organic 
forms. In his book on the parts (organs) of animals, he clearly 
intimates his belief that throughout ail animate beings there 
is a seale of gradation, in which they ascend from lower 
to higher forms. Nature advances in an uninterrupted pro- 
gressive course of development, from the inanimate or “ ele- 
mentary” to plants and animals; and “lastly, to that which, 
though not actually an animal, is yet so nearly allied to one, 
that on the whole there is little difference between them.” ” 
In the transition of formations, ‘‘the gradations are almost 
imperceptible.”*° The unity of nature was to the Stagirite 
the great problem of the Cosmos. ‘ In this unity,” he 
observes, with singular animation of expression, ‘there is 
nothing unconnected or out of place, as in a bad tragedy.’’*! 

The endeavour to reduce all the phenomena of the universe 
to one principle of explanation, is manifest throughout the 
physical works of this profound philosopher and accurate ob- 
server of nature; but the imperfect condition of science, and 
ignorance of the mode of conducting experiments, ?.e., of calling 
forth phenomena under definite conditions, prevented the com- 
prehension of the causal connection of even small groups of phy- 
sical processes. All things were reduced to the ever-recurring 





1? Aristot. de partibus Anim., lib. iv. cap. 5, pag. 681, 
lin. 12. Bekker. 

» Aristot. Hist. Anim., lib. ix., cap. 1, pag. 588, lin. 10-24. 
Bekker, When any of the representatives of the four ele- 
ments in the animal kingdom on our globe fail, as for instance 
those which represent the element of the purest fire, the 
intermediate stages may perhaps be found to occur in the 
moon (Biese, Die Phil. des Aristoteles, bd. ii. s. 186). It is 
singular enough, that the Stagirite should seek in another 
planet those intermediate links of the chain of organised 
beings which we find in the extinct animal and vegetable 
forms of an earlier world. 

** Aristot. Metaph. lib. xiii. cap. 8, pag. 1090, lin. 20, 
Bekker. . 


14 COSMOS. 


contrasts of heatand cold, moisture and dryness, primary density 
and rarefaction—eyen to an evolution of alterations in the or- 
ganic world by a species of inner division (antiperistasis) which 
reminds us of the modern hypothesis of opposite polarities and 
the contrasts presented by + and—.*” The so-called solutions 
of the problems only reproduce the same facts in a disguised 
form, and the otherwise vigorous and concise style of the 
Stagirite degenerates in his explanations of meteorological 
or optical processes, into a self-complacent diffuseness and a 
somewhat Hellenic verbosity. As Aristotle’s inquiries were 
directed almost exclusively to motion, and seldom to differ- 
ences in matter, we find the fundamental idea, that all tellurie 
natural phenomena are to be ascribed to the impulse of the 
movement of the heavens—the rotation of the celestial sphere 
—constantly recurring, fondly cherished and fostered,” but 
neyer declared with' absolute distinctness and certainty. 





*® The dvrimepioracis of Aristotle plays an important part in 
all his explanations of meteorological processes ; so also in the 
works de generatione et interitu, lib. ii. cap. 38, p. 3380: in the 
Meteorologicis, lib. i. cap: 12, and lib. iii. cap. 3, p. 872, and 
in the Probleme (lib. xiy. cap. 3, lib. viii, no. 9, p. 888, and 
lib. xiv. no. 8, p. 909,) which are at all events based on 
Aristotelian principles. In the ancient polarity hypothesis 
kat avturepioraow Similar’ conditions attract each other, and 
dissimilar ones (+ and —) repel each another in opposite 
directions. (Compare Ideler, Meteorol. veterum Grec. et Rom. 
1832, p. 10.) The opposite conditions instead of being 
destroyed by.combining together, rather increase the tension. 
The yvxpdy increases the “Oepydv; as inversely “in the for- 
mation of hail the surrounding heat makes the cold body 
still colder as the cloud sinks into warmer strata of air.” 
Aristotle explains by his antiperistatic process and the 
polarity of heat, what modern physics have taught us to refer 
to conduction, radiation, evaporation, and changes in the 
capacity of heat. See the able observations of Paul. Erman in 
the Abhandi. der Berliner Akademie auf das Jahr. 1825, 8. 128. 

* «By the movement of the heavenly sphere, all that is 


INTRODUCTION. 15 


The impulse to which I refer, indicates only the com- 
munication of motion as the cause of all terrestrial phe- 
nomena. Pantheistic views are excluded; the > 
is considered as the highest “ordering unity,)} manifested 
in all parts of the universe, defining and detefmining the 
nature of all formations, and holding together all things as an 
absolute power.” *) The main idea and these teleological 
views are not applied to the subordinate processes of inor- 
ganic or elementary nature, but refer specially to the higher 
organizations * of the animal and vegetable world. It is 
worthy of notice, that in these theories, the (Godhead is 
attended by a number of astral spirits, who (as if acquainted 
with perturbations and the distribution of masses) main- 
tain the planets in their eternal orbits.* The stars here 





unstable in natural bodies, and all terrestrial phenomena are 
produced.” Aristot. Meteor. i. 2, p. 339, and de gener, et 
corrupt. 11.10, p. 336. 

* Aristot. de Colo, lib. i. c. 9, p. 279, lib. ii. c. 8, p. 286; 
pn li. c. 13, p. 292. Bekker. (Compare Biese, bd. i. s.352-1, 
357.) 

*® Aristot. Phys. Auscult. lib. ii. ¢. 8, p. 199; de Anima, 
lib. ii. c. 12, p. 434; de Animal. generat. lib. y. c. 1, p. 778. 
Bekker. 

*° See the passage in Aristot. Meteor. xii. 8, p. 1074, of 
which there is a remarkable elucidation in the Commentary of 
Alexander Aphrodisiensis. The stars are not inanimate bodies 
but must be regarded as active and living beings. (Aristot. 
de Celo, lib. ii. cap. 12, p. 292.) They are the most 
divine of created things; ra Oeérepa trav havepov. Aristot. 
de Colo, lib. i. cap. 9, p. 278, and lib. ii. cap. 1, p. 284.) In the 
small pseudo-Aristotelian work, de Mundo, which frequently 
breathes a religious spirit in relation to the preserving 
almightiness of God, (cap. 6, p. 400,) the high ether is also 
called divine, (cap. 2, p. 392). That which the imaginative 
Kepler calls moving spirits (anime motrices) in his work, 
Mysterium cosmographicum (cap. 20, p. 71) is the distorted idea 
of a force (virtus), whose main seat is in the sun (anima 


16 COSMOS. 


reyeal the image of the divinity in the visible world. 
We do not here refer, as its title might lead to suppose, to 
the little pseudo-Aristotelian work, entitled the ‘* Cosmos,” 
undoubtedly a Stoic production. Although it describes the 
heavens and the earth, and oceanic and aerial currents, with 
much truthfulness, and frequently with rhetorical animation 
and picturesque colouring, it shows no tendency to refer 
cosmical phenomena to general physical principles based on 
the properties of matter. 

I have purposely dwelt at length on the most brilliant 
period of the Cosmical views of antiquity, in order to contrast 
the earliest efforts made towards the generalization of ideas, 
with the efforts of modern times. In the intellectual movement 
of centuries, whose influence on the extension of Cosmical 
contemplation has been defined in another portion of the 
present work, * the close of the thirteenth and the beginning 
of the fourteenth century were specially distinguished; but 
the Opus majus of Roger Bacon, the Mirror of Nature 
of Vincenzo de Beauvais, the Physical Geography (Liber 
cosmographicus) of Albertus Magnus, the Picture of the 
World (Imago Mundi) of Cardinal Petrus d’Alliaco (Pierre 
d’Ailly) are works, which, however powerfully they may 
have influenced the age in which they were written, do not 
fulfil by their contents the promise of their titles. Among 
the Italian opponents of Aristotle’s physics, Bernardino 
Telesio of Cosenza is designated the founder of a rational 
science of nature. All the phenomena of inert matter are con- 
sidered by him as the effects of two incorporeal principles (agen- 
cies or forces)—heatand cold. All forms of organic life—* ani- 





mundt), and which is decreased by distance, in accordance 
with the laws of light, and impels the planets in elliptic orbits. 
(Compare Apelt, Hpochen der Gesch. der Menschheit. bd. 1, 
s, 274.)° 

71 Cosmos, vol. ii. p. 615-625. 


INTRODUCTION. 17 


mated” plants and animals—are the effect of these two ever 
divided forces, of which the one, heat, specially appertains to 
the celestial, and the other, cold, to the terrestrial sphere. 

With yet more unbridled fancy, but with a profound spirit of 
enquiry, Giordano Bruno of Nola attempted to comprehend 
the whole universe, in three works,” entitled, De la causa 
Principio e Uno; Contemplationi circa lo Infinito, Universo — 
e Mondi innumerabili; and De Minimo et Maximo. In the 
natural philosophy of Telesio, a contemporary of Copernt-- 
cus, we recognise at all events the tendency to reduce the 
changes of matter to two of its fundamental forces, which, 
although ‘‘ supposed to act from without,” yet resemble the 
fundamental forces of attraction and repulsion in the dyna- 
mic theory of nature of Boscovich and Kant. The cosmicak 
views of the philosopher of Nola are purely metaphysical, and 
do not seek the causes of sensuous phenomena in matter 
itself, but treat of “the infinity of space, filled with self-illu- 
mined worlds, of the animated condition of those worlds, and 
of the relations of the highest. intelligence-God—to the 
universe.’ 

Scantily endowed with mathematical knowledge, Giordano 
Bruno continued nevertheless to the period of his fearful mar- 
tyrdom ” an enthusiastic admirer of Copernicus, Tycho Brahe, 





*° Compare the acute and learned commentary on the works 
of the Philosopher of Nola in the treatise, Jordano Bruno par 
Christian Bartholméss, tom. ii. 1847, pp. 129, 149, and 201. 

*” He was burnt at Rome on the 17th of February, 1600, 
pursuant to the sentence “ut quam clementissime et 
citra sanguinis effusionem puniretur.”’ Bruno was imprisoned 
six years in the Piombi, at Venice, and two years in the In- 
quisition at Rome. When the sentence of death was an- 
nounced to him, Bruno, calm and unmoved, gave utterance to 
the following noble expression, ‘‘ Majori forsitan cum timore 
sententiam in me fertis quam ego accipiam.” When a fugitive 
from Italy, in 1580, he taught at Geneya, Lyons, Toulouse, 


VOL. III, Cc 


18 COSMOS. 


and Kepler. He was contemporary with Galileo, but did 
not live to see the invention of the telescope by Hans Lipper- 
shey and Zacharias Jansen, and did not therefore witness 
the discovery of the “lesser Jupiter world,” the phases of 
Venus, and the nebule. With bold confidence in what he 
terms the dwme interno, ragione naturale, altezza dell’ intelletto 
‘ (force of intellect), he indulged in happy conjectures re- 
garding the movement of the fixed stars, the planetary 
nature of comets, and the deviation from the spherical form 
observed in the figure of the earth.* Greek antiquity is 
also replete with uranological presentiments of this nature, 
which were realised in later times. 

In the development of thought on cosmical relations, of which 
the main forms and epochs have been already enumerated, Kep- 
ler approached the nearest to a mathematical application of the 
theory of gravitation, more than seventy-eight years before the 
appearance of Newton’s immortal work, Principia Philosophie 
Naturalis. For while the eclectic Simplicius only expressed in 
general terms “‘ that the heavenly bodies were sustained from fall- 
ing in consequence of the centrifugal force being superior to the 
inherent falling force of bodies and to the downward traction ;”’ 
while Joannes Philoponus, a disciple of Ammonius Hermeas, 





Paris, Oxford, Marburg, Wittenberg (which he calls the 
Athens of Germany), Prague, and Helmstedt, where, in 1589, 
he completed the scientific instruction of Duke Henry Julius 
of Brunswick-Wolfenbittel. Bartholméss, tom. i. pp. 167 
178. He also taught at Padua subsequently to 1592. 

*° Bartholméss, tom. ii. pp. 219, 252, 370. Bruno carefully 
collected all the separate observations made on the celestial 
phenomenon of the sudden appearance, in 1572, of a new star 
in Cassiopeia. Much discussion has been directed in modern 

times to the relation existing between Bruno, his two 
Calabrian fellow-countrymen, Bernardino Telesio and Thomas ~ 
Campanella, and the platonic cardinal, Nicolaus Krebs of 
Cusa; see Cosmos, p. 691, note. 


INTRODUCTION. 19 


ascribed the movement of the celestial bodies to “a primitive 
impulse, and the continued tendency to fall;” and while, 
as we have already observed, Copernicus defined only the 
general idea of gravitation, as it acts in the sun, as the centre of 
the planetary world, in the earth and in the moon, using these 
memorable words, ‘‘ Gravitatem non aliud esse quam appe- 
tentiam quandam naturalem partibus inditam a divina’ provi- 
dentia opificis universorum, ut in unitatem integritatemque 
suam sese conferant, in formam globi coéuntes ;’’ Kepler in 
his introduction to the book, De Stella Martis,** was the first 
who gave numerical calculations of the forces of attraction 
reciprocally exercised upon each other, according to their rela- 
tive masses, by the earthand moon. He distinctly adduces the 
tides as evidence ® that the attractive force of the moon /virtus 





5! «Si duo lapides in aliquo loco Mundi collocarentur pro- 
pinqui invicem, extra orbem virtutis tertii cognati corporis ; 
illi lapides ad similitudinem duorum Magneticorum corporum 
coirent loco intermedio, quilibet accedens ad alterum tanto 
intervallo, quanta est alterius mo/es in comparatione. Si luna 
et terra non retinerentur vi animali (!) aut alia aliqua 
zequipollente, queelibet in suo cireuitu, Terra adscenderet ad 
Lunam quinquagesima quarta parte intervalli, Luna descen- 
deret ad Terram quinquaginta tribus circiter partibus inter- 
yalli; ibi jungerentur, posito tamen quod substantia utriusque 
sit unius et ejusdem densitatis.”” Kepler, Astronomia nova, 
seu Physica celestis de Motibus Stelle Martis, 1609. Introd. 
fol. y. On the older views regarding gravitation, see Cosmos, 
vol. ii. p. 691. 

*% “Si Terra cessaret attrahere ad se aquas suas, aque 
marinze omnes elevarentur et in corpus Lune infiuerent. 
Orbis virtutis tractoriz, que est in Luna, porrigitur usque ad 
terras, et prolectat aquas quacunque in verticem loci incidit 
sub Zonam torridam, quippe in occursum suum quacunque in 
verticem loci incidit, insensibiliter in maribus inclusis, sensi- 
biliter ibi_ ubi sunt latissimi alvei Oceani propinqui, aquisque 
spaciosa reciprocationis libertas.” (Kepler, 1.c.) ‘ Undas.a 
Luna trahi ut ferrum a Magnete.” .. . . Kepleri Harmonice 


c2 


20 COSMOS. 


tractoria) extends to the earth; and that this force, similar to 
that exerted by the magnet on iron, would deprive the earth 
of its water if the former should cease to attract it. Unfor- 
tunately this great man was induced ten years afterwards, in ~ 
1619, probably from deference to Galileo, who ascribed the 
ebb and flow of the ocean to the rotation of the earth, to re- 
nounce his correct explanation, and depict the earth in the 
Harmonice Mundi as a living monster, whose whale-like mode 
of breathing occasioned the rise and fall of the ocean in re- 
curring periods of sleeping and waking, dependant on solar 
time. When we remember the mathematical acumen that 
pervades one of the works of Kepler, and of which Laplace has 
already made honourable mention,® it is to be lamented that 
the discoverer of the three great laws of all planetary motion 
should not have advanced on the path whither he had been led 
by his views on the attraction of the masses of cosmical bodies. 





Mundt, libri quinque, 1619, lib. iv. cap. 7, p. 162. The same 
work which presents us with so many admirable views, among 
others, with the data of the establishment of the third law (that 
the squares of the periodic times of two planets are as the 
cubes of their mean distances), is distorted by the wildest 
flights of fancy on the respiration, nutrition, and heat of the 
earth-anmal, on the soul, memory (memoria anime Terre), 
and creative imagination (anime Telluris imaginatio) of this 
monster. This great man was so wedded to these chimeras, 
that he warmly contested his right of priority in the views 
regarding the earth-animal, with the mystic author of the 
Macrocosmos, Robert Fludd, of Oxford, who is reported to have 
participated in the invention of the thermometer. (Harm. 
Mundi, p. 252.) In Kepler’s writings, the attraction of masses 
is often confounded with magnetic attraction. ‘* Corpus solis 
esse magneticum. Virtutem, que Planetas moyet, residere 
in corpore solis.” Stella Martis, pars iil. cap. 32,34. To 
each planet was ascribed a magnetic axis, which constantly 
pointed to one and the same quarter of the heavens. (Apelt, 
Joh. Kepler's astron. Weltansicht, 1849, s. 73. 
% Compare Cosmos, p. 710 (and note), 


INTRODUCTION, 21 


Descartes, who was endowed with greater versatility of 
physical knowledge than Kepler, and who laid the foundation 
of many departments of mathematical physics, undertook to 
comprise the whole world of phenomena, the heavenly sphere 
and all that he knew concerning the animate and inanimate 
parts of terrestrial nature, in a work entitled Zrazté du Monde, 
and also Summa Philosophie. The organisation of animals, and 
especially that of man—a subject to which he devoted the 
anatomical studies of eleven years**—was to conclude the 
work. In his correspondence with Father Mersenne, we 
frequently find him complaining of his slow progress, and of the 
difficulty of arranging so large a mass of materials. ‘The Cosmos 
which Descartes always called “his world,” (son monde) was 
at length to have been sent to press at the close of the year 
1633, when the report of the sentence passed by the Inquisition 
at Rome on Galileo, which was first made generally known four 
months afterwards, in October, 1633, by Gassendi and 
Bouillaud, at once put a stop to his plans, and deprived pos- 
terity of a great work, completed with much pains and infinite 
care. The motives that restrained him from publishing the 
Cosmos were, love of peaceful retirement in his secluded 
abode at Deventer, and a pious desire not to treat irreveren- 
tially the decrees pronounced by the Holy Chair, against the 
planetary movement of the earth.* In 1664, fourteen years 
after the death of the philosopher, some fragments were first 
printed under the singular title of Le Monde, ou Traité de la 
Lumiere. The three chapters which treat of light, scarcely, 


* See La Vie de M. Descartes, (par Baillét) 1691, P. 1, 
p. 197, and Giwvres de Descartes, publiées par Victor Cousin, 
tom. 1. 1824, p. 101. 

%° Lettres de Descartes au P. Mersenne, du 19 Nov. 1633, 
et du 5 Janvier 1634. (Baillet, P. 1. pp. 244-247.) 

* The Latin translation bears the title, Mundus sive Dis- 
sertatio de Lumine ut et de aliis Sensuum Objectis primariis. 
See Descartes, Opuscula posthuma physica et mathematica, 
Amst. 1704, 





22 - COSMOS. 


however, constitute a fourth part of the work; whilst those 
sections which originally belonged to the Cosmos of Descartes, 
and treated of the movement of the planets, and their distance 
from the sun, of terrestrial magnetism, the ebb and flow of the 
ocean, earthquakes, and volcanoes, have been transposed to 
the third and fourth portions of the celebrated work, Principes 
de la Philosophie. 

Notwithstanding its ambitious title, the Cosmotheoros of 
Huygens, which did not appear till after his death, scarcely 
deserves to be noticed in this enumeration of cosmological 
efforts. It consists of the dreams and fancies of a great 
man on the animal and vegetable worlds, of the most 
remote cosmical bodies, and especially of the modifications 
of form which the human race may there present. The reader 
might suppose he were perusing Kepler’s Somnium Astrono- 
micum, or Kircher’s Iter Extaticus. As Huygens, like the 
astronomers of our own day, denied the presence of air and 
water in the moon,” he is much more embarrassed regarding 





7 «Tunam aquis carere et aére: Marium similitudinem 
in Luna nullam reperio. Nam regiones planas que montosis. 
multo obscuriores sunt, quasque vulgo pro maribus haberi 
video et oceanorum nominibus insigniri, in his ipsis, 
longiore telescopio inspectis, cavitates exiguas inesse com- 
perio rotundas, umbris intus cadentibus; quod maris. 
superficiei convenire nequit; tum ipsi campi illi latiores 
non prorsus «equabilem superficiem preferunt, cum diligen- 
tius eas intuemur. Quod circa maria esse non possunt, sed 
materia constare debent minus candicante, quam que est. 
partibus asperioribus in quibus rursus quedam viridiori 
lumine ceeteras precellunt.” Hugenit Cosmotheoros, ed. alt. 
1699, lib. 11, p. 114. Huygens conjectures however that. 
Jupiter is agitated by much wind and rain, for “ ventorum 
flatus ex illa nubium Jovialium mutabili facie cognoscitur,” 
(lib. i. p. 69). These dreams of Huygens, regarding the 
inhabitants of remote planets, so unworthy of a man versed 
- in exact mathematics, have, unfortunately, been revived by 
Emanuel Kant, in his admirable work Allgemeine Naturge~ 
schichte und Theorie des Himmels, 1755 (s. 178-192). 


INTRODUCTION. 23 


the existence of inhabitants in the moon, than of those in 
the remoter planets, which he assumes to be “ surrounded with 
vapours and clouds.” 

The immortal author of the Philosophie Naturalis Principia 
Mathematica (Newton) succeeded in embracing the whole 
uranological portion of the Cosmos in the causal connexion of 
its phenomena, by the assumption of one all-controlling fun- 
damental moving force. He first applied physical astronomy 
to solve a great problem in mechanics, and elevated it to the 
rank of a mathematical science. The quantity of matter in 
every celestial body gives the amount of its attracting force; a 
force which acts in an inverse ratio to the square of the distance, 
and determines the amount of the disturbances, which not only 
the planets but all the bodies in celestial space exercise on 
each other. But the Newtonian theory of gravitation, so 
worthy of our admiration from its simplicity and generality, 
is not limited in its cosmical application to the uranological 
sphere, but comprises also telluric phenomena, in directions 
not yet fully investigated ; it.affords the clue to the periodic 
movements in the ocean and the atmosphere ; * and solves the 
problems of capillarity, of endosmosis, and of many chemi- 
eal, electro-magnetic, and organic processes. Newton,” 
even distinguished the attraction of masses, as manifested in 
the motion of cosmical bodies and in the phenomena of 





* See Laplace (des oscillations de Uatmosphére, du flux 
solaire et lunaire) in the Mécanique Céleste, livre iv. and in the 
Exposition du Syst. du Monde, 1824, pp. 291-296. 

* Adjicere jam licet de spiritu quodam subtilissimo corpora 
erassa pervadente et in iisdem latente, cujus vi et actionibus 
particule corporum ad minimas distantias se mutuo attrahunt 
et contigue facte coherent. Newton, Principia Phil. Nat. 
(ed. Le Sueur et Jacquier, 1760) Schol. gen., t. iii. p. 676, 
compare also Newton’s Opticks, (ed. 1718). Query 31, pp. 
305, 353, 367, 372. (Laplace, Syst. du Monde, p. 384, and 
Cosmos, p. 44.) 


94 COSMOS. 


the tides, from molecular attraction, which acts at infinitely 
small distances and in the closest contact. 

Thus we see that among the various attempts which have been 
made to refer whatever is unstable in the sensuous world to 
a single fundamental principle, the theory of gravitation is the 
most comprehensive and the richest in cosmical results, It 
is indeed true, that notwithstanding the brilliant progress that 
has been made in recent times in steechiometry (the art of 
calculating with chemical elements and in the relations of 
volume of mixed gases) all the physical theories of matter have 
not yet been referred to mathematically-determinable prin- . 
ciples of explanation. Empirical laws haye been recognized, 
and by means of the extensively diffused views of the atomic 
or corpuscular philosophy, many points have been rendered 
more accessible to mathematical investigation; but owing tothe 
unbounded heterogeneousness of matter and the manifold con- 
ditions of aggregation of particles, the proofs of these empirical 
laws cannot as yet by any means be developed from the theory 
of contact-attraction, with that certainty which characterizes 
the establishment of Kepler’s three great empirical laws derived 
from the theory of the attraction of masses or gravitation. 

At the time, however, that Newton recognized all move- 
ments of the cosmical bodies to be the results of one and 
the same force, he did not, like Kant, regard gravitation as an 
essential property of bodies;*° but considered it either as the 





-4 Hactenus phenomena celorum et maris nostri per vim 
gravitatis exposui, sed causam gravitatis nondum assignavi. 
Oritur utique heec vis a causa aliqua, que penetrat ad usque 
centra solis et planetarum, sine virtutis diminutione; quaque 
agit non pro quantitate superficierum particularum, in quas 
agit (ut solent causge mechanice), sed pro quantitate materia 
solide.—Rationem harum gravitatis proprietatum ex pha- 
nomenis nondum potui deducere et hypotheses non fingo. 
Satis est quod gravitas revera existat et agat secundum leges 
a nobis expositas. Newton, Principia Phil. Nat., p. 676, 


INTRODUCTION. 25 


result of some higher and still unknown power, or of “ the 
centrifugal force of the ether, which fills the realms of space, 
and is rarer within bodies, but increases in density outwards. 
The latter view is set forth in detail in a letter to Robert 
Boyle* (dated February 28, 1678), which ends with the 





“To tell us that every species of things is endowed with an 
occult specific quality, by which it acts and produces manifest 
effects, is to tell us nothing; but to derive two or three general 
principles of motion from phenomena, and afterwards to tell 
us how the properties and actions of all corporeal things follow 
from those manifest principles, would be a very great step in 
philosophy, though the causes of those principles were not yet 
discovered: and therefore I scruple not to propose the prin- 
ciples of motion, and leave their causes to be found out.” 
Newton’s Opticks, p. 377. In a previous portion of the same 
work, at query 31, p. 351, he writes as follows: ‘ Bodies act 
one upon another by the attraction of gravity, magnetism, and 
electricity; and it is not improbable that there may be more 
attractive powers than these. How these attractions may be 
performed I do not here consider. What I call attraction 
may be performed by zmpulse, or by some other means unknown 
tome. I use that word here to signify only in general any 
force by which bodies tend towards one another, whatsoever 
be the cause.” 

‘ « T suppose the rarer ether within bodies, and the denser 
without them.” Operum Newtoni, tomus iy. (ed. 1782, Sam. 
Horsley,) p. 386. The above observation was made in refer- 
ence to the explanation of the discovery made by Grimaldi of 
the diffraction or inflection of light. At the close of Newton’s 
letter to Robert Boyle. February 1678, p. 394, he says: “ I 
shall set down one conjecture more which came into my mind: 
it is about the cause of gravity.” . .. . His correspondence 
with Oldenburg (December 1675) shows that the great philo- 
sopher was not at that time averse to the “ «ther hypotheses.” 
According to these views, the impulse of material light causes 
the ether to vibrate; but the vibrations of the sether alone, 
which has some affinity to a nervous fluid, does not generate 
light. In reference to the contest with Hooke, consult 
Horsley, t. iv. pp. 378-380. 


26 COSMOS. 


words, “I seek the cause of gravity in the ether.” Eight 
years afterwards, as we learn from a letter he wrote to Halley, 
Newton entirely relinquished this hypothesis of the rarer and 
denser ether.” Itis especially worthy of notice that in 1717, 
nine years before his death, he should have deemed it necessary 
expressly to state in the short preface to the second edition of 
his Optics, that he did not by any means consider gravity as 
an “essential property of bodies”; ** whilst Gilbert, as early 





“ See Brewster’s Life of Sir Isaac Newton, pp. 3038-305. 

* Newton’s words “not to take gravity for an essential 
bi sao of bodies” in the “Second Advertisement” contrast 
with his remarks on the forces of attraction and repulsion, 
which he ascribes to al/ molecular particles, in order, according 
to the theory of emission, to explain the phenomena of the 
refraction and repulsion of the rays of light from reflecting 
surfaces “without their actual contact.” (Newton, Opiicks, 
book u., prop. 8, p. 241, and Brewster, Op. cit., p. 301.) 
According to Kant, (see Die Metaphysischen Anfangsgriinde 
der Naturwissenschaft, 1800, s. 28,) we cannot conceive the 
existence of matter without these forces of attraction and re- 
pulsion. All physical phenomena are therefore reduced by ~ 
him, as previously by Goodwin Knight (Philos. Transact. 
1748, p. 264), to the conflict of two elementary forces. In 
the atomic theories which were diametrically opposed to 
Kant’s dynamic views, the force of attraction was referred, in 
accordance with a view specially promulgated by Lavoisier, 
to the discrete solid elementary molecules of which all bodies 
are supposed to consist; while the force of repulsion was 
attributed to the atmospheres of heat surrounding all element- 
ary corpuscles. This hypothesis, which regards the so-called 
caloric as a constantly expanded matter, assumes the existence 
of two elementary substances, as in the mythical idea of two 
kinds of ether. (Newton, Opticks, query 28, p. 339.) Here 
the question arises, what causes this caloric matter to expand ? 
Considerations on the density of molecules in comparison 
with that of their aggregates (the entire body) lead, according 
to atomic hypotheses, to the result, that the distance between 
elementary corpuscles is far greater than their diameters. 


INTRODUCTION. 27 


as 1600, regarded magnetism as a force inherent in all matter. 
So undetermined was even Newton, the profound and expe- 
rienced thinker, regarding the ‘ ultimate mechanical cause” 
of all motion. , 

It is indeed a brilliant effort, worthy of the human mind, to 
comprise, in one organic whole, the entire science of nature from 
the laws of gravity to the formative impulse (nisus formativus) 
in animated bodies; but the present imperfect state of many 
branches of physical science offers innumerable difficulties to 
the solution of such a problem. The imperfectibility of all 
empirical science, and the boundlessness of the sphere of obser- 
yation, render the task of explaining the forces of matter 
by that which is variable in matter, an impracticable one. 
What has been already perceived by no means exhausts that 
which is perceptible. If, simply referring to the progress of 
science in modern times, we compare the imperfect physical 
knowledge of Gilbert, Robert Boyle, and Hales, with that of 
the present day, and remember that every few years are 
characterized by an increasing rapidity of advance, we shall 
be better able to imagine the periodical and endless changes 
which all physical sciences are destined to undergo. New 
substances and new forces will be discovered. 

Although many physical processes, as those of light, heat 
and electro-magnetism, haye been rendered accessible to a 
mathematical investigation, by being reduced to motion or 
vibrations, we are still without a solution to those often mooted 
and perhaps insolvyable problems: the cause of chemical 
differences of matter; the apparently irregular distribution of 
the planets in reference to their size, density, the inclination 
of their axes, the eccentricity of their orbits, and the num- 
ber and distance of their satellites ; the configuration of con- 
tinents, and the position of their highest mountain chains. 
Those relations in space, which we have referred to merely 
by way of illustration, can at present be regarded only as 


28 COSMOS, 


something existing in nature, as a fact, but which I cannot 
designate as merely causal, because their causes and mutual 
connection have not yet been discovered. They are the result 
of occurrences in the realms of space coeval with the for- 
mation of our planetary system, and of geognostic processes 
in the upheaval of the outer strata of the earth into continents 
and mountain chains. Our knowledge of the primeval ages 
of the world’s physical history does not extend sufficiently far 
to allow of our depicting the present condition of things as 
one of development.“ 

Wherever the causal connection between phenomena has 
not yet been fully recognized, the doctrine of the Cosmos, or the 
physical description of the universe, does not constitute a 
distinct branch of physical science. It rather embraces the 
whole domain of nature, the phenomena of both the celestial 
and terrestial spheres—but embraces it only under the 
single point of view of efforts made towards the knowledge 
of the universe as a whole.* As in the “exposition of past 
events in the moral and political world, the historian“ can only 
divine the plan of the government of the world, according 
to human views, through the signs which are presented to him, 
and not by direct insight ;”’ so also the enquirer into nature, 
in his investigation of cosmical relations, feels himself pene- 
trated by a profound consciousness that the fruits hitherto 
yielded by direct observation and by the careful analysis of 
phenomena, are far from having exhausted the number of 
impelling, producing, and formative forces. 





“ Cosmos, pp. 79-82. 
© Op. cit. pp. 56, 38-44. 
4° Wilhelm yon Humboldt, Gesammelte Werke, bd. i. s. 23. 





29 


A. 


RESULTS OF OBSERVATIONS IN THE URANOLOGICAL PORTION 
OF THE PHYSICAL DESCRIFTION OF THE WORLD. 


WE again commence with the depths of cosmical space, and 
the remote sporadic starry systems, which appear to te- 
lescopic vision as faintly shining nebule. From these we 
gradually descend to the double stars, revolving round one 
common centre of gravity, and which are frequently bi- 
coloured, to the nearer starry strata, one of which appears 
to enclose our own planetary system; passing thence 
to the air-and-ocean-girt terrestrial spheroid which we 
inhabit. We have already indicated in the introduction to the 
General Delineation of Nature,’ that this arrangement of ideas is 
alone suited to the character of a work on the Cosmos, since 
we cannot here, in accdrdance with the requirements of direct 
sensuous contemplation, begin with our own terrestrial abode, 
whose surface is animated by organic forces, and pass from 
the apparent to the true movements of cosmical bodies. 

The uranological, when opposed to the ¢edluric domain of 
the Cosmos, may be conyeniently separated into two divisions, 
one of which comprises astrognosy, or the region of the fixed 
stars, and the other our solar and planetary system. It is 
unnecessary here to describe the imperfect and unsatisfac- 
tory nature of such a nomenclature and such classifications. 
Names were introduced into the physical sciences before the 
differences of objects and their strict limitations were suffi- 
ciently known.? The most important point, however, is the 
connection of ideas, and the order in which the objects are to 





* Cosmos, pp. 62-66, ? Op. cit. pp. 38, 39, 


30 COSMOS. 


be considered. Innovations in the nomenclature of groups, 
and a deviation from the meanings hitherto attached to well- 
known names, only tend to distract and confuse the mind. 


a, ASTROGNOSY. (Tue Domain oF THE Frxep SxraRrs.) 


Nothing is stationary in space. Even the fixed stars 
move, as Halley* endeayoured to show in reference to Sirius, 
Arcturus, and Aldebaran, and as in modern times has been 
incontrovertibly proyed with respect to many others. The 
bright star Arcturus has, during the 2100 years (since the 
times of Aristillus and Hipparchus) that it has been observed, 
changed its position in relation to the neighbouring fainter 
stars 24 times the moon’s diameter. Encke remarks “ that 
the star » Cassiopeiee appears to have moved 34 lunar 
diameters, and 61 Cygni about 6 lunar diameters, if the 
ancient observations correctly indicated its position.” Con- 
clusions based on analogy justify us in believing that there 
is everywhere progressive, and perhaps also rotatory motion. 
The term “ fixed stars ” leads to erroneous preconceptions ; it 
may have referred, in its earliest meaning among the Greeks, 
to the idea of the stars being rivetted into the crystal vault of 
heayen; or, subsequently, in accordance with the Roman 
interpretation, it may indicate fixity or immobility. The 
one idea involuntarily led to the other. In Grecian anti- 
quity, in an age at least as remote as that of Anaximenes of 
the Ionic school, or of Alemeon the Pythagorean, all stars 
were divided into wandering (dorpa m\avepeva or mAavyra) and 
non-wandering fixed stars (amAaveis dorépes or dmavn dorpa),* 
Besides this generally adopted designation of the fixed stars, 





§ Halley, in the Phelos. Transact. for 1717, vol. xxx. 
p- 736. 

* Pseudo-Plut., de plac. Philos., ii. 15, 16; Stob. Helog. 
phys., p. 582; Plato in the Zimeus, p. 40. 


ASTROGNOSY. 31 


which Macrobius in his Somniwm Scipionis, latinized by 
Sphera aplanes,> we frequently meet in Aristotle (as if he 
wished to introduce a new technical term) with the phrase 
rivetted stars, evdedepeva dorpa, instead of dmdav7,® as a desig- 
nation for fixed stars. From this form of speech arose the 
expressions of sidera infixa calo of Cicero, stellas quas 
putamus affixas of Pliny, and astra fixa of Manilius, which 
corresponds with our term fixed stars.’ This idea of fixity 
leads to the secondary idea of immobility, of persistence in 
one spot, and thus the original signification of the expressions 
infixum or afixum sidus, was gradually lost sight of in the 
Latin translations of the middle ages, and the idea of im- 
mobility alone retained. This is already apparent in a highly 
rhetorical passage of Seneca, regarding the possibility of dis- 
covering new planets, in which he says (Vat. Quest., vii. 24): 
** Credis autem in hoc maximo et pulcherrimo corpore inter 
innumerabiles stellas, que noctem decore vario distinguunt, 





5 Macrob., Somn. Scup., i. 9-10; stelle inerrantes, in-Cicero 
de nat. Deorum, iii. 20. 

® The principal passage in which we meet with the tech- 
nical expression éydedeuéva dorpa, is in Aristot. de Calo, ii. 8, 
p- 289, 1. 34, p. 290,1. 19, Bekker. This altered nomenclature 
forcibly attracted my attention in my investigations into the 
optics of Ptolemy, and his experiments on refraction. . Pro- 
fessor Franz, to whose philological acquirements I am indebted 
for frequent aid, reminds me that Ptolemy (Syntax, vii. 1,) 
speaks of the fixed stars as affixed or rivetted; #omep 
mpoonepuxdres. Ptolemy thus objects to the expression 
opaipa dmhavys (orbis inerrans); “in as far as the stars con- 
stantly preserve their relative distances they might rightly be 

‘termed amAaveis; but in as far as the sphere in which they 

complete their course, and in which they seem to haye grown, 
as it were, has an independent motion, the designation amAavjs 
1s Inappropriate if applied to the sphere.” 

7 Cicero, de nat. Deorum, i. 13; Plin. ii. 6 and 24; Mani- 
lius, ii. 35. 


3a COSMOS, 


quee aéra minime vacuum et inertem esse patiuntur, quinque 
solas esse, quibus exercere se liceat; ceteras stare fixum et 
immobilem populum 2?’ ** And dost thou believe that in this - 
so great and splendid body, amongst innumerable stars, which 
by their various beauty adorn the night, not suffering the air 
to remain void and unprofitable, that there should be only five 
stars to whom it is permitted to be in motion, whilst all the 
rest remain a fixed and immoyeable multitude.’’ This fixed 
and immoveable multitude is nowhere to be found. 

In order the better to classify the main results of actual 
observations, and the conclusions or conjectures to which they 
give rise, in the description of the universe, I will separate 
the astrognostic sphere into the following sections: — 

I. The considerations on the realms of space and the 
bodies by which they appear to be filled. 

II. Natural and telescopic vision, the scintillation of the 
stars, the velocity of light, and the photometric experiments on 
the intensity of stellar light. 

III. The number, distribution, and colour of the stars ; 
the stellar swarms, and the milky way which is interspersed 
with a few nebule. 

IV. The newly appeared and periodically changing stars, 
and those that have disappeared. 

VY. The proper motion of the fixed stars, the problematical 
existence of dark cosmical bodies; the parallax and measured 
distance of some of the fixed stars. 

VI. The double stars, and the period of their revolution 
round a common centre of gravity. 

VII. The nebule which are interspersed in the Magel- 
lanic clouds with numerous stellar masses, the black spots 
(coal-bags) in the vault of heaven. 





33 


i 


THE REALMS OF SPACE, AND CONJECTURES REGARDING THAT 
WHICH APPEARS TO OCCUPY THE SPACE INTERVENING 
BETWEEN THE HEAVENLY BODIES. 


THAt portion of the physical description of the universe 
which treats of what occupies the distant regions of the 
heavens, filling the space between the globular cosmical bodies, 
and is imperceptible to our organs, may not unaptly be 
compared to the mythical commencement of ancient history. 
In infinity of space, as well as in eternity of time, all things 
are shrouded in an uncertain and frequently deceptive twi- 
light. The imagination is here doubly impelled to draw 
from its own fulness, and to give outline and permanence to 
these indefinite changing forms.’ This observation will, I 
trust, suffice to exonerate me from the reproach of confound- 
ing that which has been reduced to mathematical certainty 
by direct observation or measurement, with that which is 
founded on very imperfect induction. Wild reveries belong 
to the romance of physical astronomy; yet the mind fa- 
miliar with scientific labours, delights in dwelling on sub- 
jects such as these, which, intimately connected with the 
present condition of science, and with the hopes which it 
inspires, have not been deemed unworthy of the earnest atten- 
tion of the most distinguished astronomers of our day. 

By the influence of gravitation, or general gravity, as well 
as by light and radiating heat,® we are brought in contact, as 





® Cosmos, vol. i. p. 71. (Compare the admirable observa- 
tions of Encke, Ueber die Anordnung des Sternsystems, 1844, s. 7.) 
® Cosmos, vol. i. pp. 145, 146. 


VOU. IIl. D 


34 COSMOS. 


we may with great probability assume, not only with our own 
Sun, but also with all the other luminous suns of the firma- 
ment. The important discovery of the appreciable resistance 
which a fluid filling the realms of space is capable of oppos- 
ing to a comet having a period of revolution of five years, 
has been perfectly confirmed by the exact accordance of 
numerical relations. Conclusions based upon analogies may 
fill up a portion of the vast chasm which separates the certain 
results of a mathematical natural philosophy from conjec- 
tures verging on the extreme, and therefore obscure and 
barren confines of all scientific development of mind. 

From the infinity of space,—an infinity, however, doubted 
by Aristotle,"°—follows the idea of its immeasurability. Se- 
parate portions only have been rendered accessible to measure- 
ment, and the numerical results, which far exceed the grasp 
of our comprehension, become a source of mere puerile grati- 
fication to those who delight in high numbers, and imagine 
that the sublimity of astronomical studies may be heightened 
by astounding and terrific images of physical magnitude. The 
distance of 61 Cygni from the Sun is 657000 semi-diameters 
of the Earth’s orbit; a distance which light takes rather more 
than ten years to traverse, whilst it passes from the Sun to 
the Earth in 8’ 1778. Sir John Herschel conjectures, from 
his ingenious combination of photometric calculations,” that 
if the stars in the great circle of the Milky Way which he 
saw in the field of his twenty-feet telescope were newly-arisen 
luminous cosmical bodies, they would have required 2000 
years to transmit to us the first ray of light. All attempts to 
present such numerical relations fail, either from the immen- 
sity of the unit Ls which they must be measured, or from 





10 Aristot. de Celo, 1, 7, p. 276; Bekker. 
1 Sir John Herschel, Outlines of Astronomy, 1849, § 803, 
p. 541. 


a“ 


° THE PROPAGATION OF LIGHT. 35 


the high number yielded by the repetition of this unit. 
Bessel” very truly observes that “the distance which lght 
traverses in a year is not more appreciable to us than the 
distance which it traverses in ten years. Therefore every 
endeayour must fail to convey to the mind any idea of a 
magnitude exceeding those that are accessible on the earth.” 
This overpowering force of numbers is as clearly manifested 
in the smallest organisms of animal life as in the milky way 
of those self-luminous suns which we call fixed stars. What 
masses of Polythalamize are inclosed, according to Ehren- 
berg, in one thin stratum of chalk! This eminent investi- 
gator of nature asserts that one cubic inch of the Bilin 
polishing slate, which constitutes a sort of mountain cap 
forty feet in height, contains 41000 millions of the micro- 
scopic Galonella distans; while the same yolume contains 
more than 1 billion 750000 millions of distinct individuals 
of Galionelia ferruginea.* Such estimates remind us of the 
treatise named Arenarius (Wappirns) of Archimedes—of the 
sand-grains which -might fill the universe of space! If the 
starry heavens, by incalculable numbers, magnitude, space, 
duration, and length of periods, impress man with the con- 
viction of his own insignificance, his physical weakness, 
and the ephemeral nature of his existence; he is, on the 
other hand, cheered and invigorated by the consciousness of 
having been enabled, by the application and development of 
intellect, to investigate very many important points in refer- 
ence to the laws of Nature and the sidereal arrangement 
of the universe. 

Although not only the propagation of light, but also a special 
form of its diminished intensity, the resisting medium acting 





2 Bessel, in Schumacher’s Jahrbuch Jur 1839, s. 50. 
** Ehrenberg, Abhandl. der Berl. Akad., 1838, s. 59; also 
in his Infusionsthiere, s. 170. 


D2 


36 COSMOS. ‘ 


on the periods of revolution of Encke’s comet, and the evapo- 
ration of many of the large tails of comets, seem to prove that the 
regions of space which separate cosmical bodies are not void,"* 
but filled with some kind of matter; we must not omit to 
draw attention to the fact, that among the now current 
but indefinite expressions of ‘the air of heaven,” “ cosmical 
(non-luminous) matter,” and “ ether,” the latter, which has 
been transmitted to us from the earliest antiquity of Southern 
and Western Asia, has not always expressed the same idea: 
Among the natural philosophers of India, ether (dkd’sa) was 
regarded as belonging to the pantschatd, or five elements, and 
was supposed to be a fluid of infinite subtlety, pervading the 
whole universe, and constituting the medium of exciting life, 
as well as of propagating sound.” Etymologically considered, 
dkd’sa signifies, according to Bopp, “luminous or shining, 
and bears, therefore, in its fundamental signification, the 
same relation to the ‘ether’ of the Greeks as shining does to 
burning.” 





4 Aristotle (Phys. Auscult., iv. 6-10, pp. 2138-217, Bekker.) 
proves, in opposition to Leucippus and Democritus, that there 
is no wnfilled space—no vacuwm in the universe. 

16 Akd’sa signifies, according to Wilson’s Sanscrit Dic- 
tionary, ‘‘the subtle and ethereal fluid supposed to fill and 
pervade the universe, and to be the peculiar vehicle of life 
and sound.” “The word dkd’sa (luminous, shining) is derived 
from the root ‘d’s (to shine), to which is added the preposi- 
tion d. The quintuple of allthe elements is called pantschatd, 
or pantschatra, and the dead are, singularly enough, desig- 
nated as those who have been resolved into the five elements 
(prapta pantschatra). Such is the interpretation given in the 
text of Amarakoscha, Amarasinha’s Dictionary.”—(Bopp.) 
Colebrooke’s admirable treatise on the Sankhya Philosophy, 
treats of these five elements; see Zransact. of the Asiat. Soc., 
vol. i. Lond. 1827, p. 31. Strabo refers, according to 
Megasthenes, (xv. § 59, p. 713, Cas.) to the all-forming fifth 
element of the Indians, without, however, naming it. 


COSMICAL ETHER. 37 


In the dogmas of the Ionic philosophy of Anaxagoras and 
Empedocles, this ether (ai@np) differed wholly from the actual 
(denser) vapour-charged air (4jp) which surrounds the earth, 
and ‘‘ probably extends as far as the moon.” It was of ‘a fiery 
nature, a brightly-beaming, pure fire-air,”® of great subtlety 
and eternal serenity.”” This definition perfectly coincides 
with its etymological derivation from ai@ew to burn, for which 
Plato and Aristotle, from a predilection for mechanical views, 
singularly enough substituted another (dei@eiv), on account of 
the constancy of the revolving and rotatory movement.” The 





6 Empedocles, v. 216, calls the ether raupavdar, brightly 
beaming, and therefore self-luminous. | 


” Plato, Cratyl. 410 B., where we meet with the expression 
debenp. Aristot. de Celo, 1, 3, p. 270, Bekk. says in oppo- 
sition to Anaxagoras: aiéépa mpocwvdpacay toy dvetdtw rérov, 
amd tov Oey dei tov didiov xpdvoy Oéyevor THY emovupiay aiTa. 
‘Avaayépas Sé xarakéypytat T® ovdpatt ToUT@ OV KaA@s* dvopdcer 
yap aidépa dyti mupés. We find this more circumstantiaily re- 
ferred to in Aristot. Meteor., 1, 3, p. 339, lines 21-34, Bekk. : 
“The so-called ether has an ancient designation, which 
Anaxagoras seems to identify with fire; for, according to 
him, the upper region is full of fire, and to be considered 
as ether; in which, indeed, he is correct. For the ancients 
appear to have regarded the body which is in a constant state 
of movement, as possessing a divine nature, and therefore 
called it ether, a substance with which we have nothing 
analogous. ‘Those, however, who hold the space surrounding 
bodies to be fire no less than the bodies themselves, and who 
look upon that which lies between the earth and the stars as 
air, would probably relinquish such childish fancies if they 
properly investigated the results of the latest: researches of 
mathematicians.” (The same etymology of this word, im- 
plying rapid revolution, is referred to by the Aristotelian, 
or Stoic, author of the work De Mundo, cap. 2, p. 892, Bekk.) 
Professor Franz has correctly remarked, “that the play of 
words in the designation of bodies zn eternal motion (cpa dei 
6éov) and of the divine (Ociov) alluded to in the Meteorologica, 
is strikingly characteristic of the Greek type of imagination, 


38 COSMOS. 


idea of the subtlety and tenuity of the upper ether does not 
appear to have resulted from a knowledge that the air on 
mountains is purer and less charged with the heavy vapours 
of the earth, or that the density of the strata of air decreases 
with their increased height. In as far as the elements of 
the ancients refer less to material differences of bodies, or. 
even to their simple nature (their incapacity of being decom- 
posed), than to mere conditions of matter, the idea of the upper 
ether (the fiery air of heaven) has originated in the primary 
and normal contraries of heavy and light, lower and upper, 
earth and fire. ‘These extremes are separated by two znéer- 
mediate elementary conditions, of which the one, water, ap- 
proximates most nearly to the heavy earth, and the other, air, 
to the lighter element of fire.” 

Considered as a medium filling the regions of space, the 
ether of Empedocles presents no other. analogies excepting 





and affords additional evidence of the inaptitude of the an- 
cients for etymological inquiry.”” Professor Buschmann calls 
attention to a Sanscrit term, dschtra, ether or the atmosphere, 
which looks very like the Greek ai@jp, with which it has been 
compared by Vans Kennedy, in his Researches into the Origin 
and A finity of the principal Languages of Asia and Europe, 1828, 
p- 279. This word may also be referred to the root (as, asch) 
to which the Indians attach the signification of shining or 
beaming. 

6 Aristot. de Calo, iv. 1, and 3-4, pp. 308, and 311-312, 
Bekk. If the Stagirite withholds from ether the character of 
a fifth element, which indeed is denied by Ritter ( Geschichte 
der Philosophie, th. iii. s. 259), and by Martin (Htudes sur 
le Timée de Platon, t. ii. p. 150); it is only because, ac- 
cording to him, ether, as a condition of matter, has no con-— 
trary. (Compare Biese, Philosophie des Arvstotiles, bd. xi. 
s.66.) Amongst the Pythagoreans, ether, as a fifth element, 
was represented by the fifth of the regular bodies, the dode- 
cahedron, composed of twelve pentagons. (Martin, t. ii. 
pp. 245-200. 


COSMICAL ETHER. 39 


those of subtlety and tenuity with the ether, by whose trans- 
verse vibrations modern physicists have succeeded so happily 
in explaining, on purely mathematical principles, the pro- 
pagation of light, with all its properties of double refrac- 
tion, polarisation, and interference. The natural philosophy 
of Aristotle further teaches that the ethereal substance 
penetrates all the living organisms of the earth—both plants 
and animals; that it becomes in these the principle of vital 
heat, the very germ of a psychical principle, which, uninflu- 
enced by the body, stimulates men to independent activity.’ 
These visionary opinions draw down ether from the higher 
regions of space to the terrestrial sphere, and represent it 
as a highly rarefied substance constantly penetrating through 
the atmosphere and through solid bodies ; precisely similar 
to the vibrating light-ether of Huygens, Hooke, and modern 
physicists. But what especially distinguishes the older Ionic 
from the modern hypothesis of ether, is the original assump- 
tion of luminosity, a view, however, not entirely advocated. 
by Aristotle. The upper fire-air‘of Empedocles is expressly 
termed brightly radiating (mayavéor), and is said to be 
seen by the inhabitants of the earth in certain phenomena, 
gleaming brightly through fissures and chasms (xdéopara) which 
occur in the firmament.” 

The numerous investigations that have been made in recent 
times regarding the intimate relation between light, heat, 
electricity, and magnetism, render it far from improbable that, 
as the transyerse vibrations of the ether which fills the regions 
of space give rise to the phenomena of light, the thermal and 
electro-magnetic phenomena may likewise have their origin 
in analogous kinds of motion (currents). It is reserved for 
future ages to make great discoveries in reference to these 





= 


* See the proofs collected by Biese, op. cit., bd. xi. s. 93. | 
* Cosmos, vol. i. p, 148. 


40 COSMOS. 


subjects. Light, and radiating heat, which is inseparable 
from it, constitute a main cause of motion and organic 
life, both in the non-luminous celestial bodies, and on the 
surface of our planet. Even far from its surface, in the 
interior of the earth’s crust, penetrating heat calls forth electro- 
magnetic currents, which exert their exciting influence on 
the combinations and decompositions of matter,—on all for- 
mative agencies in the mineral kingdom—on the disturbance 
of the equilibrium of the atmosphere,—and on the functions 
of vegetable and animal organisms. If electricity moving in 
currents develops magnetic forces, and if, in accordance with 
an early hypothesis of Sir William Herschel,” the sun itself 
is in the condition of ‘‘a perpetual northern light,” (I should 
rather say of an electro-magnetic storm), we should seem 
warranted in concluding that solar light, transmitted in the 
regions of space by vibrations of ether, may be accompanied 
by electro-magnetic currents. 

Direct observations on the periodic changes in the declina- 
tion, inclination, and intensity of terrestrial magnetism, have, 
it is true, not yet shown with certainty that these conditions 





*t Compare the fine passage on the influence of the sun’s 
rays, in Sir John Herschel’s Outlines of Astronomy, p. 237: 
‘“‘ By the vivifying action of the sun’s rays, vegetables are 
enabled to draw support from inorganic matter, and become, 
in their turn, the support of animals and of man, and the 
sources of those great deposits of dynamical efficiency which 
are laid up for human use in our-coal strata. By them the 
waters of the sea are made to circulate in vapour through the 
air, and irrigate the land, producing springs and rivers. By 
them are produced all disturbances of the chemical equilibrium 
of the elements of nature, which, by a series of compositions 
and decompositions, give rise to new products, and originate 
a transfer of materials.” 

* Philos. Transact. for 1795, vol. Ixxxv. p. 318; John 
Herschel, Outlines of Astr., p. 238; see also Cosmos, yol.i. 
p. 183. 


RADIATING HEAT. 41 


are affected by the different positions of the sun or moon, 
notwithstanding the latter’s contiguity to the earth. The 
magnetic polarity of the earth exhibits no variations that can 
be referred to the sun, or which perceptibly affect the pre- 
cession of the equinoxes.* The remarkable rotatory or oscil- 
latory motion of the radiating cone of light of Halley’s 
comet, which Bessel observed from the 12th to the 22nd of 
October, 1835, and endeavoured to explain, led this great 
astronomer to the conviction that there existed a polar force, 
““whose action differed considerably from gravitation or the 
ordinary attracting force of the sun; since those portions of 
the comet which constitute the tail are acted upon by a repulsive 
force proceeding from the body of the sun.”** The splendid 
comet of 1744, which was described by Heinsius, led my 
deceased friend to similar conjectures. 

The actions of radiating heat in the regions of space are 
regarded as less problematical than electro-magnetic pheno- 
mena. According to Fourier and Poisson, the temperature 
of the regions of space is the result of radiation of heat from 
the sun and ail astral bodies, minus the quantity lost by 
absorption in traversing the regions of space filled with ether.*® 
Frequent mention is made in antiquity by the Greek and 
Roman” writers of this sted/ar heat; not only because, from 





*8 See Bessel, in Schumacher’s Astr. Nachr., bd. xiii. 1836, 
no. 300, s. 201. 

** Bessel, op. ctt., s. 186-192, 229. 

*® Fourier, Théorie analytique de la Chaleur, 1822, p- ix. 
(Annales de Chimie et de Physique, tom. iii. 1816, p. 350; 
tom. iv. 1817, p. 128; tom. vi. 1817, p. 259; tom. xiii. 1820, 
p- 418). Poisson, in his Théorie mathématique de la Chaleur 
(§ 196, p. 436, § 200, p. 447, and § 228, p. 521), attempts 
to give the numerical estimates of the stellar heat (chaleur 
stellaire) lost by absorption in the ether of the regions of 
space. 


** On the heating power of the stars, see Aristot. de Meteor. 


42 COSMOS. 


a universally prevalent assumption, the stars appertained to 
the region of the fiery ether, but because they were supposed 
to be themselves of a fiery nature*’—the fixed stars and the 
sun being, according to the doctrine of Aristarchus of Samos, 
of one and the same nature. In recent times, the observa- 
tions of the above-mentioned eminent French mathematicians, 
Fourier and Poisson, have been the means of directing attention 
to the average determination of the temperature of the regions 
of ‘space; and the more strongly since the importance of 
such determinations on account of the radiation of heat from 
the earth’s surface towards the vault of heaven, has at length 
been appreciated in their relation to all thermal conditions, 
and to the very habitability of our planet. According to 
Fourier’s Analytic Theory of Heat, the temperature of celestial 
space (des espaces planétaires ou célestes) is rather below the | 
mean temperature of the poles, or even perhaps below the 
lowest degree of cold hitherto observed in the polar regions. 
Fourier estimates it at from — 58° to — 76° (from — 40° 
to — 48° Reaum.). The icy pole ( péle glacial), or the point 
of the greatest cold, no more corresponds with the terrestrial 
pole than does the ¢hermal equator, which connects together 
the hottest points of all meridians with the geographical 
equator. Arago concludes, from the gradual decrease of mean 
temperatures, that the degree of cold at the northern ter- 
restrial pole is — 13°, if the maximum cold observed by Captain 
Back at Fort Reliance (62° 46’ lat.) in January, 1834, were 
actually — 70° (— 56°°6 Cent., or — 45°-3 Reaum.).* The 





1, 3, p. 340, lin, 28; and on the elevation of the atmospheric 
strata at which heat is at the minimum, consult Seneca in Naé. 
Quest.,ii. 10 : “‘Superiora enim aéris calorem vicinorum siderum 
sentiunt.”’ 

27 Plut. de plac. Philos., ii, 13. 

*8 Arago, Sur la température du Pole et des espaces célestes 
in the Annuaire du Bureau des Long. pour 1825, p. 189, et 


POLES OF GREATEST COLD. 43 


lowest temperature that, as far as we know, has as yet been 
obseryed on the earth, is probably that noted by Neveroff, at 
Jakutsk, (62° 2’ lat.) on the 21st of January, 1838. The in- 
struments used in this observation were compared with his own 
by Middendorff, whose operations were always conducted with 
extreme exactitude. Neveroff found the temperature on the 
day above named to be — 76° (or — 48° Reaum.). 

Among the many grounds of uncertainty in obtaining a nume- 
riceal result for the thermal condition of the regions of space, 
must be reckoned that of our inability at present to ascertain 
the mean of the temperatures of the poles of greatest cold of the 
two hemispheres, owing to our insufficient acquaintance with 
the meteorology of the antarctic pole, from which the mean 
annual temperature must be determined. I attach but little 





pour 1834, p. 192; also Saigey, Physeque du Globe, 18382, 
pp- 60-76. Swanberg found, from considerations on re- 
fraction, that the temperature of the regions of space was 
— 58°°5. Berzelius, Jahresbericht fiir 1830, s. 54. Arago, 
from polar observations, fixed it at — 70°; and Pectet at — 76°. 
Saigey, by calculating the decrease of heat in the atmosphere, 
from 367 observations made by myself in the chain of the 
Andes and in Mexico, found it — 85°; and from thermome- 
trical measurements made at Mont Blanc, and during the 
aeronautic ascent of Gay-Lussac — 107°-2. Sir John Herschel 
(Edinburgh Review, vol. 87, 1848, p. 223) gives it at — 182°. 
We feel considerable surprise, and have our faith in the cor- 
rectness of the methods hitherto adopted somewhat shaken, 
when we find that Poisson, notwithstanding that the mean 
temperature of Melville Island (74° 47’ N. Lat.) is —1° 66, 
gives the mean temperature of the regions of space at only 
8°-6, having obtained his data from purely theoretical pre- 
mises, according to which the regions of space are warmer 
than the outer limits of the atmosphere (see the work already 
referred to, § 227, p. 520); while Pouillet states it, from 
actinometric experiments, to be as low as — 223°°6. See 
Comptes rendus de 1 Académie des Sciences, tom. vii. 1838, 
pp. 25-65. 


44 COSMOS. 


physical probability to the hypothesis of Poisson, that the 
different regions of space must have a very various tempera- 
ture, owing to the unequal distribution of heat-radiating stars, 
and that the earth, during its motion with the whole solar 
system, receives its internal heat from without, while passing 
through hot and cold regions.” 

The question whether the thermal conditions of the celestial 
regions, and the climates of individual portions of space, 
have suffered important variations in the course of ages, de- 
pends mainly on the solution of a problem warmly discussed 
by Sir William Herschel: whether the nebulous masses are 
subjected to progressive processes of formation, while the cos- 
mical vapour is being condensed around one or more nuclei 
in accordance with the laws of attraction? By such a 
condensation of cosmical vapour, heat must be liberated, as 
in every transition of gases and fluids into a state of solidifica- 
tion.” If, in accordance with the most recent views, and 
the important observations of Lord Rosse and Mr. Bond, we 
may assume that all nebule, including those which the highest 
power of optical instruments has hitherto failed in resolving, 
are closely crowded stellar swarms, our faith in this perpe- 
tually augmenting liberation of heat must necessarily be in 
some degree weakened. But even small consolidated cosmical 
bodies which appear on the field of the telescope as distinguish- 
able, luminous points, may change their density by combining 
in larger masses ; and many phenomena presented by our own 
planetary system lead to the conclusion, that planets have been 
solidified from a state of vapour, and that their internal heat 
owes its origin to the formative process of conglomerated matter, 





® See Poisson, Théorie Mathém. de la Chaleur, p. 438. 
According to him, the consolidation of the earth’s strata 
began from the centre, and advanced gradually towards the 
surface; § 193, p. 429. Compare also Cosmos, vol. i. p. 169. 

% Cosmos, vol. i. pp. 67, 134. 


TEMPERATURE OF SPACE. 45 


It may at first sight seem hazardous to term the fearfully 
low temperature of the regions of space (which varies 
between the freezing point of mercury and that of spirits 
of wine) even indirectly beneficial to the habitable climates 
of the earth and to animal and vegetable life. But in proof 
of the accuracy of the expression, we need only refer to 
the action of the radiation of heat. ‘The sun-warmed surface 
of our planet, as well as the atmosphere to its outermost 
strata, freely radiate heat into space. The loss of heat 
which they experience arises from the difference of tem- 
perature between the vault of heaven and the atmospheric 
strata, and from the feebleness of the counter-radiation. How 
enormous would be this loss of heat,” if the regions of space, 
instead of the temperature they now possess, and which we 
designate as — 76° of a mercury thermometer, had a tempe- 
rature of about — 1400° or even many thousand times lower! 

It still remains for us to consider two hypotheses in relation 
to the existence of a fluid filling the regions of space, of which 





31 « Were there no atmosphere, a thermometer freely ex- 
posed (at sunset) to the heating influence of the earth’s radia- 
tion, and the cooling power of its own into space, would indicate 
a medium temperature between that of the celestial spaces, 
{— 132° Fahr.) and that of the earth’s surface below it, 82° 
Fahr., at the equator, 33° Fahr., in the Polar Sea. Under 
the equator then it would stand, on the average, at — 25° 
Fahr., and in the Polar Sea at — 68° Fahr. The presence 
of the atmosphere tends to prevent the thermometer so ex- 
posed from attaining these extreme low temperatures: first, 
by imparting heat by conduction; secondly, by impeding 
radiation outwards.” Sir John Herschel, in the Ldinburgh 
Review, vol. 87, 1848, p- 222. ‘Si la chaleur des espaces 
planétaires n’existait point, notre atmosphére éprouverait un 
refroidissement, dont on ne peut fixer la limite. Probable- 
ment la vie des plantes et des animaux serait impossible a la 
surface du globe, ou reléguée dans une étroite zone de cette 


surface.” (Saigey, Physcquedu Globe, p. 77.) 


46 COSMOS. 


one,—the less firmly based hypothesis,—refers to the limited 
transparency of the celestial regions; and the other, founded 
on direct observation and yielding numerical results, is de- 
duced from the regularly shortened periods of revolution of 
Encke’s comet. Olbers in Bremen, and, as Struve has ob- 
served, Loys de Cheseaux at Geneva, eighty years earlier” 
drew attention to the dilemma, that since we could not con- 
ceive any point in the infinite regions of space unoccupied 
by a fixed star, ¢. e. a sun, the entire vault of heaven must 
appear as luminous as our sun if light were transmitted to us 
in perfect intensity; or, if such be not the case, we must 
assume that light experiences a diminution of intensity in its 
passage through space, this diminution being more exces- 
sive than in the inverse ratio of the square of the dis- 
tance. As we do not observe the whole heavens to be almost 
uniformly illumined by such a radiance of light (a subject 
considered by Halley®* in an hypothesis which he subse- 
quently rejected) the regions of space cannot, according to 
Cheseaux, Olbers, and Struve, possess perfect and absolute 
transparency. ‘The results obtained by Sir William Herschel 
from gauging the stars,“ and from his ingenious experi- 
ments on the space-penetrating power of his great telescopes, 
seem to show, that if the light of Sirius in its passage to us 





3 Traité de la Cométe de 1743, avec une Addition sur la 
force de la Lumiere et sa Propagation dans Véther, et sur la 
distance des étoiles fixes ; par Loys de Cheseaux (1744). On 
the transparency of the regions of space, see Olbers, in Bode’s 
Jahrbuch fur 1826, s. 110-121; and Struve, Hiudes d’ Astr. 
Stellare, 1847, pp. 83-98, and note 95. Compare also 
Sir John Herschel, Outlines of Astronomy, § 798, and Cosmos, 
vol. i. p. 142. 

% Halley, On the Infinity of the Sphere of Fixed Stars, 
in the Philos. Transact., vol. xxxi. for the year 1720, 
pp. 22-26. 

4 Cosmos, vol. i. p. 70. 


RESISTING MEDIUM. 47 


through a gaseous or ethereal fluid loses only 35th of its in- 
tensity, this assumption, which gives the amount of the 
density of a fluid capable of diminishing light, would suffice to 
explain the phenomena as they manifest themselves. Among 
the doubts advanced by the celebrated author of ‘‘ The New 
Outlines of Astronomy,” against the views of Olbers and 
Struve, one of the most important is that his twenty-feet 
telescope shows, throughout the greater portion of the Milky 
Way in both hemispheres, the smallest stars projected on a 
black ground.” 

A better proof, and one based, as we have already stated, 
upon direct observation of the existence of a resisting fluid, 
is afforded by Encke’s comet, and by the ingenious and im- 
portant conclusion to which my friend was led in his observa- 
tionson this body. This resisting medium, must, however, be 
regarded as different from the all-penetrating light-ether, be- 
cause the former is only capable of offering resistance inasmuch 
as it cannot penetrate through solid matter. These observa- 
tions require the assumption of atangentiai force to explain the 
diminished period of revolution (the diminished major-axis of 
the ellipse), and,this is most directly afforded by the hypothesis 
of a resisting fluid.” The greatest action is manifested during 





% «Throughout by far the larger portion of the extent of the 
Milky Way in both hemispheres, the general blackness of the 
toa of the heavens, on which its stars are projected... . 

n those regions where the zone is clearly resolved into stars, 
well separated, and seen projected on a black ground, and 
where we look out beyond them into space ” Sir 


John Herschel, Outlines of Astr., pp. 537, 589. 


* Cosmos, vol. i. pp. 69, 70, 92; compare also Laplace, 
Essai Philosophique sur les Probabilités, 1825, p. 133; Arago 
in the Annuaire du Bureau des Long. pour 1832, p. 188, 
er 836, p. 216; and Sir John Herschel, Outlines of Astr., 

* The oscillatory movement of the emanations from the 
head of some comets, as in that of 1744, and in Halley’s as 


48 COSMOS. 


the twenty-five days immediately preceding and succeeding 
the comet’s perihelion passage. The value of the constant 
is therefore somewhat different, because in the neighbour- 
hood of the sun the highly attenuated, but still gravitating 
strata of the resisting fluid, are denser. Olbers maintained® 
that this fluid could not be at. rest, but. must rotate directly 
round the sun; and therefore the resistance offered to retro- 
grade comets, like Halley’s, must differ wholly from that 
opposed to those comets having a dircct course, like Encke’s. 
The perturbations of comets having long periods of reyolu- 
tion, and the difference of their magnitudes and sizes, com- 
plicate the results, and render it difficult to determine what 
is ascribable to individual forces. 

The gaseous matter constituting the belt of the Zodiacal 
light may, as Sir John Herschel* expresses it, be merely the 
denser portion of this comet-resisting medium. Although it 
may be shown that all nebule are crowded stellar masses, 
indistinctly visible, it is certain that innumerable comets fill 
the regions of space with matter through the evaporation of 
their tails, some of which have a length of 56000000 of miles. 





observed by Bessel, between the 12th and 22nd of October, 
1835, (Schumacher Astron. Nachr.,nos. 800, 302, §185, 282), 
“may, indeed, in the case of some individuals of this class of 
cosmical bodies, exert an influence on the translatory and 
rotatory motion, and lead us to infer the action of polar forces 
(§ 201, 229,) which differ from the ordinary attracting force 
of the sun;” but the regular acceleration observable for 
sixty-three years in Encke’s comet, (whose period of revolu- 
tion is 84 years), cannot be regarded as the result of in- 
cidental emanations. Compare on this cosmically important 
subject, Bessel in Schum. Astron. Nachr., no. 289, s. 6, and 
no. 810, s. 8345-350, with ncke’s Treatise on the hypothesis 
of the resisting medium, in Schum., no. 305, s. 265-274. 

38 Olbers in Scnum. Astr. Nachr.. no. 268, s. 58. 

* Outlines of Astronomy, § 556, 597. 





LIMIT OF THE ATMOSPHERE. 49 


Arago has ingeniously shown, on optical grounds," that the 
variable stars which always exhibit white light without any 
change of colour in their periodical phases, might afford a 
means of determining the superior limit of the density to be 
assumed for cosmical ether, if we suppose it to be equal to 
gaseous terrestrial fluids in its power of refraction. 

The question of the existence of an ethereal fluid filling 
the regions of space is closely connected with one warmly 
agitated by Wollaston,“ in reference to the definite limit 
of the atmosphere,—a limit which must necessarily exist at 
the elevation where the specific elasticity of the air is equi- 
poised by the force of gravity. Faraday’s ingenious experi- 
ments on the limits of an, atmosphere of mercury (that is, 
the elevation at which mercurial vapours precipitated on 
gold-leaf cease perceptibly to rise in an air-filled space) 
have given considerable weight to the assumption of a 
definite surface of the atmosphere “similar to the surface 
of the sea.” Can any gaseous particles belonging to the 
region of space blend with our atmosphere and produce 
meteorological changes? Newton inclined to the idea that 





4 «© En assimilant la matiere trés rare qui remplit les espaces 
célestes quant a ses propriétés réfringentes aux gas terrestres, la 
densité de cette matiére ne saurart dépasser une certaine limite 
dont les observations des étoiles changeantes, p. e. celles d’ Algol 
ou de B de Persée, peuvent assigner la valeur.” Arago in the 
Annuaire pour 1842, pp. 386-3845. “On comparing the 
extremely rare matter occupying the regions of space with 
terrestrial gases, in respect to its refractive properties, we 
shall find that the density of this matter cannot exceed a 
definite limit, whose value may be obtained from observations 
of variable stars, as, for instance, Algol or 8 Persei.” 

“ See Wollaston, Philos. Transact for, 1822, p. 89; Sir 
John Herschel, op. cit. § 34, 36. it 

“ Newton, Princ. Mathem., t. iii. (1760) p. 671. “ Vapores 

VOL. Ill. E 


50 COSMOS. 


such might be the case. If we regard falling stars and 
meteoric stones as planetary asteroids, we may be allowed 
to conjecture that in the streams of the so-called November 
phenomena,” when, as in 1799, 1833 and 1834, myriads of | 
falling stars traversed the vault of heaven, and northern lights 
were simultaneously observed, our atmosphere may have re- 
ceived from the regions of space some elements foreign to it, 
which were capable of exciting electro-magnetic processes. 





qui ex sole et stellis fixis et caudis cometarum oriuntur, inci- 
dere possunt in atmospheeras planetarum..... . A 
*® Cosmos, vol. i. pp. 112, 124. 





51 


Il. 


- 


NATURAL AND TELESCOPIC VISION.—SCINTILLATION OF 
THE STARS.—VELOCITY OF LIGHT.—RESULTS OF PHO- 
TOMETRY. 


THE increased power of vision yielded nearly two hundred 
and fifty years ago by the invention of the telescope, has afforded 
to the eye, as the organ of sensuous cosmical contemplation, 
the noblest of all aids towards a knowledge of the contents of 
space, and the investigation of the configuration, physical 
character, and masses of the planets and their satellites. The 
first telescope was constructed in 1608, seven years after the 
death of the great observer, Tycho Brahe. Its earliest 
fruits were the successive discovery of the satellites of Jupiter, 
the Sun’s spots, the crescent-shape of Venus, the ring of 
Saturn as a triple planetary formation, (planeta tergeminus, ) 
telescopic stellar swarms, and the nebulz in Andromeda.? In 
1634, the French astronomer, Morin, eminent for his observa- 
tions on longitude, first conceived the idea of mounting a 
telescope on the index bar of an instrument of measurement, 
and seeking to discover Arcturus by day.? The perfection in 





1 See Cosmos, vol. ji. pp. 699-718, with notes. 

2 Delambre, Histoire de I Astronomie moderne, tom. ii. 
pp- 255, 269, 272. Morin, in his work, Scventia Longitu- 
dinum, which appeared in 1684, writes as follows:—Applicatio 
tubi optict ad alhidadam pro stellis fixis prompte et accurate 
mensurandis a me excogitata est. Picard had not, up to the 
year 1667, employed any telescope on the mural circle; and 
Hevelius, when Halley visited him at Dantzic in 1679, and 
admired the precision of his measurement of altitudes, was 
observing through improved slits or openings. (Baily’s Catal. 
of Stars, p. 38.) 


E22 


52 COSMOS. 


the graduation of the are would have failed entirely, or to a 
considerable extent, in affording that greater precision of 
observation at which it aimed, if optical and astronomical 
instruments had not been brought into accord, and the cor- 
rectness of vision made to correspond with that of measure- 
ment. The micrometer-application of fine threads stretched 
in the focus of the telescope, to which that instrument owes 
its real and invaluable importance, was first devised, six years. 
afterwards (1640), by the young and talented Gascoigne.* 
While, as I have already observed, telescopic vision, obser- 
vation, and measurement, extend only over a period of about. 
240 years in the history of astronomical science, we find, 
without including the epoch of the Chaldeans, Egyptians, and. 
Chinese, that more than nineteen centuries have intervened 
between the age of Timochares and Aristillus* and the dis- 
coveries of Galileo, during which period the position and course 
of the stars were observed by the eye alone, unaided by instru- 
ments. When we consider the numerous disturbances which 
during this prolonged period checked the advance of civiliza- 
tion, and the extension of the sphere of ideas among the nations 
inhabiting the basin of the Mediterranean, we are astonished 
that Hipparchus and Ptolemy should haye been so well 
acquainted with the precession of the equinoxes, the com- 
plicated movements of the planets, the two principal inequa- 
lities of the moon, and the position of the stars; that Coper- 





° The unfortunate Gascoigne, whose merits remained so 
long unacknowledged, lost his life, when scarcely twenty- 
three years of age, at the battle of Marston-Moor, fought by 
Cromwell against the royalists. See Derham in the Philos. 
Transact., vol. xxx. for 1717-1719, pp. 603-610. To him 
belongs the merit of a discovery which was long ascribed to 
Picard and Auzout, and which has given an impulse pre- 
viously unknown to practical astronomy, the principal object 
of which is to determine positions in the yault of heaven. 

4 Cosmos, vol. il. p. 544. 


DIOPTRIC TUBES. 53 


nicus should have had so great a knowledge of the true 
system of the universe; and that Tycho Brahe should haye 
been so familiar with the methods of practical astronomy 
before the discovery of the telescope. Long tubes, which 
were certainly employed by Arabian astronomers, and very 
probably also by the Greeks and Romans, may indeed, in 
some degree, have increased the exactness of the observations 
by causing the object to be seen through diopters or slits. 
Abul-Hassan speaks very distinctly of tubes, to the extre- 
mities of which ocular and object diopters were attached; and 
instruments so constructed were used in the observatory 
founded by Hulagu at Meragha. If stars be more easily dis- 
covered during twilight by means of tubes, and if a star be 
sooner revealed to the naked eye through a tube than without 
it, the reason lies, as Arago has already observed, in the 
circumstance that the tube conceals a great portion of the 
disturbing light (rayons perturbateurs) diffused in the atmo- 
spherie strata between the star and the eye applied to the 
tube. In like manner, the tube prevents the lateral impression 
of the faint light which the particles of air receive at night 
from all the other stars in the firmament. The intensity of 
the image and the size of the star are apparently augmented. 
In a frequently emendated and much contested passage of 
Strabo, in which mention is made of looking through tubes, 
this “‘ enlarged form of the stars’’ is expressly mentioned, and 
is erroneously ascribed to refraction.° 





® The passage in which Strabo (lib. iii. p. 188, Casaub.) 
attempts to refute the views of Posidonius is given as follows, 
according to the manuscripts :—‘‘ The image of the sun is 
enlarged on the seas at its rising as well as at its setting, 
because at these times a larger mass of exhalations rises from 
the humid element; and.the eye, looking through these exha- 
lations, sees images refracted into larger forms, as observed 
through tubes. ‘The same thing happens when the setting 


54 COSMOS. 


Light, from whatever source it comes,—whether from the 
sun, as solar light, or reflected from the planets; from the 
fixed stars; from putrescent wood; or as the product of the 
vital activity of glow-worms,—always exhibits the same con- 





sun or moon is seen through a dry and thin cloud, when 
those bodies likewise appear reddish.’ This passage has re- 
cently been pronounced corrupt (see Kramer, in Strabonis Geogr. 
1844, vol. i. p. 211), and 8? da\ov (through glass spheres) sub- 
stituted for 8? aidkév (Schneider, Helog. phys., vol. ii. p. 278). 
The magnifying power of hollow glass spheres, filled with 
water (Seneca, i, 6), was, indeed, as familiar to the ancients 
as the action of burning glasses or crystals (Aristoph. Nwo., 
v. 765), and that of Nero’s emerald (Plin., xxxvil. 5); but 
these spheres most assuredly could not have been employed 
as astronomical measuring instruments. (Compare Cosmos, 
vol. i. p. 619, and note {.) Solar altitudes, taken through thin 
light clouds, or through volcanic vapours, exhibit no trace 
of the influence of refraction. (Humboldt, Recwed d’ Ob- 
serv. astr., vol. i. p. 123.) Colonel Baeyer observed no 
angular deviation in the heliotrope light on the passage of 
streaks of mist, or even from artificially developed vapours, 
and therefore fully confirms Arago’s experiments. Peters, 
at Pulkowa, in no case found a difference of 0”:017 on com- 
paring groups of stellar altitudes, measured in a clear sky, and 
through light clouds. See his Recherches sur la Parallaxe des 
Etoiles, 1848, pp. 80, 140-143; also Struve’s Etudes Stel- 
laires, p. 98. On the application of tubes for astronomical 
observation in Arabian instruments, see Jourdain, Sur U’ Od- 
servatoire de Meragha, p. 27; and A. Sedillot, Mém. sur les 
Instruments astronomiques des Arabes, 1841, p. 198. Arabian 
astronomers have also the merit of having first employed 
large gnomons with small circular apertures. In the colossal 
sextant of Abu Mohammed al-Chokandi, the limb, which was 
divided into intervals of five minutes, received the image of the 
sun. ‘A midi les rayons du soleil passaient par une ouver- 
ture pratique dans la voite de l’observatoire qui couvrait ’in- 
strument, suivant le tuyau, et formaient sur la concayite du 
sextant une image circulaire, dont le centre donnait, sur are 
gradué, le complement de la hauteur du soleil. Cet instru- 


PRISMATIC SPECTRA. 55 


ditions of refraction.’ But the prismatic spectra yielded by 
different sources of light (as the sun and the fixed stars) 
exhibit a difference in the position of the dark lines (raves du 
spectre) which Wollaston first discovered in 1808, and the posi- 
tion of which was twelve years afterwards so accurately deter- 
mined by Fraunhofer. While the latter observer counted 600 
dark lines (breaks or interruptions in the coloured spectrum), 
Sir David Brewster, by his admirable experiments with nitric 
oxide, succeeded, in 1838, in counting more than 2000 lines.. 
It had been remarked that certain lines failed in the spec- 
trum at some seasons of the year; but Sir David Brewster 





ment differe de notre mural, qu’en ce qu'il etait garni d’un 
simple tuyau au lieu d’une lunette.” ‘At noon, the rays of 
the sun passed through an opening in the dome of the observa- 
tory, above the instrument, and following the tube formed in 
the concavity of the sextant a circular image, the centre of 
which marked the sun’s altitude on the graduated limb. 
This instrument in no way differed from our mural circle, 
excepting that it was furnished with a mere tube instead of a 
telescope.” Sedillot, pp. 37, 202, 205. Dioptrie rulers (pin- 
nule) were used by the Greeks and Arabs in determining the 
moon’s diameter, and were constructed in such a manner, that 
the circular aperture in the moving object diopter was larger 
than that of the fixed ocular diopter, and was drawn out until 
the lunar disc, seen through the ocular aperture, completely 
filled the object aperture. Delambre, Hist. de Astron. du 
moyen age, p. 201; and Sedillot, p. 198. The adjustment of 
the dioptric rulers of Archimedes, with round apertures or slits, 
in which the direction of the shadows of two small cylinders 
attached to the same index bar was noted, seems to have been 
originally introduced by Hipparchus. (Baily, Hist. del Astron. 
mod., 2nd ed. 1785, tom. i. p. 480.) Compare also, Theon 
Alexandrin., Bas., 1538, pp. 257, 262; Les Hypotyp. de Proclus 
Diadochus ed. Halma, 1820, pp. 107, 110; and Ptolem. 
Almag., ed. Halma, tom. i. Par. 1813, p. lvii. 

* According to Arago; see Moigno, Répert. d’ Optique mo- 
derne, 1847, p. 158. | 


56 COSMOS. 


has shown that this phenomenon is owing to different altitudes 
of the sun, and to the different absorption of the rays of light 
in their passage through the atmosphere. In the spectra of 
the light reflected from the moon, from Venus, Mars, and the 
clouds, we recognize, as might be anticipated, all the pecu- 
liarities of the solar spectrum; but on the other hand, the 
dark lines in the spectrum of Sirius differ from those of 
Castor, and the other fixed stars. Castor likewise exhibits 
different lines from Pollux and Procyon. Amici has con- 
firmed this difference, which was first indicated by Fraunhofer, 
and has ingeniously called attention to the fact that in fixed 
stars which now have an equal and perfectly white light the 
dark lines are not the same. A wide and important field is 
thus still open to future investigations,’ for we have yet to 
distinguish between that which has been determined with 
certainty, and that which is merely accidental and depending 
on the absorbing action of the atmospheric strata. 

We must here refer to another phenomenon, which is 
powerfully influenced by the specific character of the source 
of light. The light of incandescent solid bodies, and the 
light of the electric spark, exhibit great diversity in the 
number and position of Wollaston’s dark lines. From Wheat- 
stone’s remarkable experiments with revolving mirrors it 
would appear that the light of frictional electricity has a 
greater velocity than solar light, in the ratio of 3 to 2; that 
is to say, a velocity of 95908 miles in one second. 

The stimulus infused into all departments of optical science 
by the important discovery of polarisation,* to which the in- 
genious Malus was led in 1808, by a casual observation of the 





7 On the relation of the dark lines of the solar spectrum 
in the Daguerreotype, see Comptes rendus des séances de 1 Aca- 
démie des Sciences, tom. xiv. 1842, pp. 902-904, and tom. xvi. 
1843, pp. 402-407. 

® Cosmos, vol. il. p. 715. 


POLARISATION OF LIGHT. . 57 


light of the setting sun, reflected from the windows of the Palais 
du Luxembourg, has afforded unexpected results to science by 
the more thorough investigation of the phenomena of double re- 
fraction, of ordinary (Huygens’s) and of chromatic polarisation, 
of interference, and of diffraction of light. Among these results, 
may be reckoned the means of distinguishing between direct 
and reflected light,® the power of penetrating, as it were, into 
the constitution of the body of the sun and of its luminous 
envelopes,” of measuring the pressure of atmospheric strata, 





9 Arago’s investigation of cometary light may here be 
adduced as an instance of the important difference between 
proper and reflected light. The formation of the comple- 
mentary colours, red and green, showed by the application of 
his discovery (in 1811) of chromatic polarisation, that the 
light of Halley’s Comet (1835) contained reflected solar light. 
I was myself present at the earlier experiments for comparing, 
by means of the equal and unequal intensity of the images in 
the polariscope, the proper light of Capella with the splendid 
Comet, as it suddenly emerged from the rays of the sun at 
the beginning of July, 1819. (See Annuaire du Bureau des 
Long. pour 1886, p. 282; Cosmos, vol. i. p. 90; and Bessel in 
Schumacher’s Jahrbuch fur 1837, 169.) 

10 Lettre de M. Arago a M. Alexandre de Humboldt, 1840, 
p- 37:—‘ A Vaide dun polariscope de mon invention, je 
reconnus (avant 1820) que la lumiére de tous les corps ter- 
restres incandescents, solides ou liquides, est de la lumiére 
naturelle, tant qu’elle emane du corps sous des incidences per- 
pendiculaires. La lumiére, au contraire, qui sort de la surface 
incandescente sous un angle aigu, offre des marques manifestes 
de polarisation. Je ne m’arréte pas a te rappeler ici, comment 
je déduisis de ce fait la conséquence curieuse que la lumiére 
ne s’engendre pas seulement a la surface des corps; qu’une 
portion nait dans leur substance méme, cette substance fit- 
elle du platine. J'ai seulement besoin de dire qu’en répétant 
la méme série d’épreuves, et avec les mémes instruments sur la 
lumiére que lance une substance gazeuse enflammée, on ne lui 
trouve, sous quelque inclinaison que ce soit, aucun des caractéres 
de la lwmiére polarisée; que la lumiére des gaz, prise a la 


58 COSMOS. 


and eyen the smallest amount of water they contain, of 
serutinizing the depths of the ocean and its rocks by means ot 





sortie de la surface enflammée, est de la lumiére naturelle, ce 
‘qui n’empéche pas qu'elle ne se polarise ensuite complétement 
si on la soumet a des reflexions ou a des réfractions conven- 
ables. De la une méthode trés simple pour découvrir a 40 
millions de lieues de distance la nature du soleil. La lumiére 
provenant du bord de cet astre, la lumiére emanée de la matiére 
solaire sows un angle argu, et nous arrivant sans avoir éprouvé 
en route des réflexions ou des réfractions sensibles, offre-t-elle 
des traces de. polarisation, le soleil est un corps solide ou 
liquide. Siln’y a, au contraire, aucun indice de polarisation 
dans la lumiére du bord, la partie incandescente du soleil est 
gazeuse. C’est par cet enchainement méthodique d’ observations 
qu’on peut arriver 4 des notions exactes sur la constitution 
physique du soleil.” ; 

“By the aid of my polariscope I discovered (before 
1820) that the lght of all terrestrial objects in a state of 
incandescence, whether they be solid or liquid, is natural 
as long as it emanates from the object in perpendicular rays. 
The light emanating from an incandescent surface at an acute 
angle presents on the other hand manifest proofs of polarisation. 
I will not pause to remind you that this circumstance has led 
me to the remarkable conclusion that light is not generated on 
the surface of bodies only, but that some portion is actually 
engendered within the substance’ itself, even in the case of 
platinum. I need only here observe, that in repeating the 
same series of experiments (and with the same instruments) on 
the light emanating from a burning gaseous substance, I could 
not discover any characteristics of polarised light, whatever 
might be the angle at which it emanated; and I found that the 
light of gaseous bodies is natural light when it issues from the 
burning surface, although this circumstance does not prevent its 
subsequent complete polarisation, if subjected to suitable re- 
flections or refractions. Hence we obtain a most simple method 
of discovering the nature of the sun at a distance of 40 millions 
of leagues. For if the light emanating from the margin of the 
sun, and radiating from the solar substance at an acute angle, 
reach us without haying experienced any sensible reflections 
or refractions in its passage to the earth, and if it offer traces 


~ 


POLARISATION OF LIGHT. 59 


a tourmaline plate," and, in accordance with Newton’s pre- 
diction, of comparing the chemical composition” of seve- 
ral substances* with their optical effects. It will be suffi- 





of polarisation the sun must be a solid or a liqud body. But 
if on the contrary the light emanating from the sun’s margin 
give no indications of polarisation, the cmcandescent portion 
of the sun must be gaseous. Itis by means of such a method- 
ical sequence of observations that we may acquire exact 
ideas regarding the physical constitution of the sun.”” (On'the 
Envelopes of the Sun, see Arago, in the Annuaire pour 1846, 
p. 464.) I give all the circumstantial optical disquisitions which 
I have borrowed from the manuscript or printed works of my 
friend, in his own words, in order to avoid the misconceptions 
to which the variations of scientific terminology might give 
rise in re-translating the passages into French, or any other 
of the various languages in which the Cosmos has appeared. 

1 « Sur leffet d’une lame de tourmaline taillee parallélement 
aux arétes du prisme servant, lorsqu’elle est convenablement 
située, a éliminer en totalité les rayons refléchis par la surface 
de la mer et mélés a la lumiére provenant de l’écueil.” “On 
the effect of a tourmaline plate cut parallel to the edges of the 
prism, in concentrating (when placed in a suitable position) 
all the rays of light reflected by the surface of the sea, and 
blended with the light emanating from the sunken rocks.” 
See Arago, Instructions de la Bonite, in the Annuaire pour 
1836, pp. 339-343. } 

« De la possibilité de déterminer les pouvoirs réfringents des 
corps d’aprés leur composition chimique.’ On the possibility 
of determining the refracting powers of bodies according to their 
chemical composition (applied to the ratio of the oxygen to the 
nitrogen in atmospheric air, to the quantity of hydrogen con- 
tained in ammonia and in water, to carbonie acid, aleohol and 
the diamond). See Brot et Arago, Mémoire sur les affnités 
des corps pour la lumiére, Mars, 1806; also Mémoires mathém. 
et phys. de l Institut, t. vii. pp. 327-346; and my Mémoire 
sur les réfractions astronomiques dans la zone torride, in the 
fecueil d’ Observ. astron., vol. i. pp. 115 and 122. 

* Expériences de M. Arago sur la puissance réfractive des 
corps diaphanes (de lair see et de UV air humide) par le déplace- 
ment des franges, in Moigno, Répertoire d’ Optique mod., 1847, 
pp. 159-162. 


60 COSMOS. 


cient to mention the names of Airy, Arago, Biot, Brewster, 
Cauchy, Faraday, Fresnel, John Herschel, Lloyd, Malus, 
Neumann, Plateau, Seebeck, . . . . . to remind the scientific 
reader of a succession of splendid discoveries, and of their 
happy applications. The -great and intellectual labours of 
Thomas Young more than prepared the way for these im- 
portant efforts. Arago’s polariscope and the observation of 
the position of coloured fringes of diffraction (in consequence 
of interference) have been extensively employed in the prose- 
cution. of scientific inquiry. Meteorology has made equal 
advances with physical astronomy in this new path. 

However diversified the power of vision may be in different 
persons, there is nevertheless a certain average of organic 
capacity, which was the same among former generations, as, 
for instance, the Greeks and Romans, as at the present day. 
The Pleiades prove that several thousand years ago, even as 
now, stars which astronomers regard as of the 7th magnitude, 
were invisible to the naked eye of average visual power. 
The group of the Pleiades consists of one star of the 3rd 
magnitude, Aleyone; of two of the 4th, Electra and Atlas ; 
of three of the 5th, Merope, Maia, and Taygeta; of two 
between the 6th and the 7th magnitudes, Pleione and Celzeno ; 
of one between the 7th and the 8th, Asterope; and of many 
very minute telescopic stars. I make use of the nomencla- 
ture and order of succession at present adopted, as the same 
names were amongst the ancients in part applied to other 
stars. The six first-named stars of the 3rd, 4th and 5th magni- 
tudes were the only ones which could be readily distinguished.™ 





14 Hipparchus says (ad Arati Phen. 1, pag. 190, in Urano- 
Jogio Petavii), in refutation of the assertion of Aratus, that 
there were only six stars visible in the Pleiades :—*“ One star 
escaped the attention of Aratus. For when the eye is atten- 
tively fixed on this constellation on a serene and moonless 
night, seven stars are visible, and it therefore seems strange 


VISIBILITY OF STARS. 61 


Of these Ovid says (Faust. iv. 170), 
** Que septem dici, sex tamen esse solent.’’ 

One of the daughters of Atlas, Merope, the only one who 
was wedded to a mortal, was said to have veiled herself 
for very shame, or even to have wholly disappeared. This 
is probably the star of about the 7th magnitude, which 
we call Celeno; for Hipparchus, in his commentary on 
Aratus, observes that on clear moonless nights seven stars 
may actually be seen. Celeno therefore must have been 
seen, for Pleione, which is of equal brightness, is too near 
to Atlas, a star of the 4th magnitude. 

The little star, Aleor, which, according to Triesnecker, is 
situated in the tail of the Great Bear, at a distance of 
11’ 48” from Mizar, is, according to Argelander, of the 5th mag- 
nitude, but overpowered by the rays of Mizar. It was called 
by the Arabs, Saidak, “the Test,” because, as the Persian 
astronomer Kazwini™ remarks, ‘‘ It was employed as a test of 





that Attalus, in his description of the Pleiades, should have 
neglected to notice this oversight on the part of Aratus, as 
though he regarded the statement as correct.’’ Merope is called 
the invisible (mavapavys) in the, Catasterisms (X XIII.) ascribed to 
Eratosthenes. On a supposed connexion between the name 
of the vezled (the daughter of Atlas) with the geographical 
myths in the Meropis of Theopompus, as well as with the great 
Saturnian Continent of Plutarch and the Atlantis, see my 
Examen crit. de Uhist. de la Géographie, t. 1. p. 170. Compare 
also Ideler, Untersuchungen uber den Ursprung und die Bedeu- 
tung der Sternnamen, 1809, p.145; and in reference to astrono- 
mical determination of place, consult Madler, Untersuch. iiber 
die Fixstern-Systeme, th. 11. 1848, s. 36 and 166; also Baily 
in the Mem. of the Astr. Soc., vol. xiii. p. 33. 

*© See Ideler, Sternnamen, s.19and 25. Arago in manuscript 
notices of the year 1847, writes as follows.—‘‘On observe 
qu'une lumiére forte fait disparaitre une lumiére faible placée 
dans le voisinage. Quelle peut en étre Ja cause? II est pos- 
sible physiologiquement que l’ébranlement communiqué 4 la 
rétine par la lumiére forte s’étend au dela des points que la 


62 COSMOS. 


the power of vision.” Notwithstanding the low position 
of the Great Bear under the tropics, I have very dis- 
tinctly seen Alcor, evening after evening, with the naked: 





lumiére forte a frappés, et que cet ébranlement secondaire 
absorbe et neutralise en quelque sorte l’ébranlement prove- 
nant de la seconde et faible lumiére. Mais sans entrer dans 
ces causes physiologiques, il y a une cause directe qu’on peut 
indiquer pour la disparition de la faible lumiére: c’est que les 
rayons provenant de la grande n’ont pas seulement formé une 
image nette sur la rétine, mais se sont dispersés aussi sur toutes 
les parties de cet organe a cause desimperfections de transparence 
dela cornée. Les rayons du corps plus brillant a en traversant 
la cornée se comportent comme en traversant un corps legére- 
ment depoli. Une partie des ces rayons refractés réguliére- 
ment forme image méme de a, l’autre partie dispersée éclaire 
la totalité de la rétine. C'est done sur ce fond lumineux que 
se projette l'image de l'objet voisin 6. Cette derniére image 
doit done ou disparaitre ou étre affaiblie. De jour deux 
causes contribuent a l’affaiblissement des étoiles. L’une de 
ces causes c’est l'image distincte de cette portion de l’atmo- 
sphére comprise dans la direction de l’étoile (de la portion 
aérienne placée entre l’ceil et l’etoile) et sur laquelle l'image 
de l'étoile vient de se peindre; l'autre cause c’est la lumiére 
diffuse provenant de la dispersion que les defauts de la cornée 
impriment aux rayons €manants de tous les points de l’atmo- 
sphére visible. De nuit les couches atmospheriques inter- 
posées entre l’eeil et l’étoile vers laquelle on vise, n’agis- 
sent pas; chaque etoile du firmament forme une image 
plus nette, mais une partie de leur [umiére se trouve 
dispersée a cause du manque de diaphanite de la cornee. 
Le méme raisonnement s’applique a une deuxiéme, troi- 
siéme ... . milliéme étoile. La rétine se trouve donc 
éclairée en totalite par une lumiére diffuse, proportionnelle au 
nombre de ces étoiles et a leur éclat. On congoit par la que 
cette somme de lumiére diffuse affaiblisse ou fasse entiére- 
ment disparaitre l'image de l’eétoile vers laquelle on dirige la 
vue.” 

“We find that a strong light causes a fainter one placed 
near it to disappear. What can be the cause of this phe- 
nomenon? It is physiologically possible that the vibration 





VISIBILITY OF STARS. 63 


eye, on the rainless shores of Cumana, and on the pla- 
teaux of the Cordilleras, which are elevated nearly 13000 
feet above the level of the sea, while I haye seen it! less 
frequently and less distinctly in Europe and in the dry 





communicated to the retina by strong light may extend 
beyond the points excited by it; and that this secondary 
vibration may in some degree absorb and neutralise that 
arising from the second feeble light. Without, however, 
entering upon these physiological considerations, there is a 
direct cause to which we may refer the disappearance of 
the feeble light: viz., that the rays emanating from the 
strong light, after forming a perfect image on the retina, 
are dispersed over all parts of this organ in consequence 
of the imperfect transparency of the cornea. The rays of 
the more brilliant body a, in passing the cornea, are affected 
in the same manner as if they were transmitted through a 
body whose surface was not perfectly smooth. Some of 
these regularly refracted rays form the image a, whilst the 
remainder of the dispersed rays illumine the whole of the 
retina. On this luminous ground the image of the neigh- 
bouring object 6 is projected. This last image must there- 
fore either wholly disappear or be dimmed. By day two 
causes contribute to weaken the light of the stars; one is the 
distinct image of that portion of the atmosphere included in 
the direction of the star (the aerial field interposed between 
the eye and the star), and on which the image of the star is 
formed, while the other is the light diffused by the dispersion 
which the defects of the cornea impress on the rays emanat- 
ing from all points of the visible atmosphere. 4¢ night, the 
strata of air interposed between the eye and the star to which 
we direct the instrument, exert no disturbing action ; each star 
in the firmament forms a more perfect image, but a portion of 
the light of the stars is dispersed in consequence of the im- 
perfect transparency of the cornea. The same reasoning 
applies to a second, a third, or a thousandth star. The retina 
then is entirely illumined by a diffused light, proportionate to 
the number of the stars and to their brilliancy. Hence we 
may imagine that the aggregate of this diffused light must 


either weaken, or entirely obliterate the image of the star 
towards which the eye is directed.” 


+ 


64 t COSMOS. 


atmosphere of the Steppes of Northern Asia.. The limits 
within which the naked eye is unable to separate two very 
contiguous objects in the heavens depend, as Madler has 
justly observed, on the relative brilliancy of the stars. The 
two stars of the 8rd and 4th magnitudes, marked as a Capri- 
corni, which are distant from each other six-and-a-half minutes, 
can with ease be recognized as separate. Galle thinks that 
« and 5 Lyre, being both stars of the 4th magnitude, may be 
distinguished in a very clear atmosphere by the naked eye, 
although situated at a distance of only three-and-a-half minutes 
from each other. 

The preponderating effect of the rays of the neighbouring 
planet is also the principal cause of Jupiter's satellites remain- 
ing invisible to the naked eye; they are not all, however, as 
has frequently been maintained, equal in brightness to stars of 
the 5th magnitude. My friend, Dr. Galle, has found from 
recent estimates, and by a comparison with neighbouring 
stars, that the third and brightest satellite is probably of the 
5th or 6th magnitude, whilst the others, which are of various 
degrees of brightness, are all of the 6th or 7th magnitude. 
There are only few cases on record in which persons of ex- 
traordinarily acute vision—that is to say, capable of clearly 
distinguishing with the naked eye stars fainter than those of 
the 6th magnitude,—have been able to distinguish the satellites 
of Jupiter without a telescope. The angular distance of the 
third and brightest satellite from the centre of the planet is 
4’ 42”; that of the fourth, which is only 3th smaller than the 
largest is 8’ 16": andall J upiter’s satellites sometimes exhibit, 
as Arago maintains,” a more intense light for equal surfaces 





. 16 Avago, in the Annuaire pour 1842, p. 284, and in the 
Comptes rendus, tom. xv. 1842, p. 750. (Schum. Aséron. 
Nachr.,no. 702.) “I have instituted some calculations of mag- 
nitudes, in reference to your conjectures on the visibility 
of Jupiter’s satellites,” writes Dr. Galle, in letters addressed 


RADIATIONS OF THE STARS. 65 


than Jupiter himself; occasionally, however, as shown by 
recent observations, they appear like gray spots on the planet. 
The rays or tails, which to our eyes appear to radiate from 
the planets and fixed stars, and which were used, since the 
earliest ages of mankind, and especially amongst the Egyptians, 





to me, ‘but I have found, contrary to my expectations, 
that they are not of the 5th magnitude, but, at most, only 
of the 6th or even of the 7th magnitude. The 3rd and brightest 
satellite alone appeared nearly equal in brightness to a neigh- 
bouring star of the 6th magnitude, which I could scarcely 
recognize with the naked eye, even at some distance from 
Jupiter; so that, considered in reference to the bright- 
ness of Jupiter, this satellite would probably be of the 
5th or 6th magnitude if it were isolated from the planet. 
The 4th satellite was at its greatest elongation, but yet I 
could not estimate it at more than the 7th magnitude. The 
rays of Jupiter would not prevent this satellite from being 
seen if it were itself brighter. From a comparison of Alde- 
baran with the neighbouring star @ Tauri, which is easily 
recognized as a double star (at a distance of 54 minutes), 
I should estimate the radiation of Jupiter at five or six minutes, 
at the least, for ordinary vision.”” These estimates cor- 
respond with those of Arago, who is even of opinion that this 
false radiation may amount in the case of some persons to double 
this quantity. The mean distances of the four satellites from 
the centre of the main planet are undoubtedly 151”, 2’57”, 442”, 
and 816”. ‘* Si nous supposons que l'image de Jupiter, dans 
certains yeux exceptionnels, s’¢panouisse seulement par des 
rayons d’une ou deux minutes d’amplitude, il ne semblera pas 
impossible que les satellites soient de tems en tems apercus, sans 
avoir besoin de recourir a l’artifice de l'amplification. Pour 
verifier cette conjecture, j'ai fait construire une petite lunette 
dans laquelle I’ objectif et l'oculaire ont a peu prés le méme foyer, 
et qui dés lors ne grossit point. Cette lunette ne détruit pas 
entiérement les rayons divergents, mais elle en réduit considér- 
ablement la longueur. Cela a suffi pour qu'un satellite con- 
venablement écarté de la planéte, soit devenu visible. Le fait a 
ete constaté par tous les jeunes astronomes de I’ Observavoire.”’ 
“ If we suppose that the image of Jupiter appears to the eyes 


VOL. III. F 


66 COSMOS. 


as pictorial representations to indicate the shining orbs of 
heaven, are at least from five to six minutes in length. (These 
lines are regarded by Hassenfratz as caustics on the crystalline 
lens : intersections des deux caustiques. ) 

“The image of the star which we see with the naked eye 
is magnified by diverging rays, in consequence of which it 
occupies a larger space on the retina than if it were concen- 





of some persons to be dilated by rays of only one or two 
minutes, it is not impossible that the satellites may from time 
to time be seen without the aid of magnifying glasses. In 
order to verify this conjecture I caused a small instrument to 
be constructed in which the object-glass and the eye-piece 
had nearly the same focus, and which therefore did not mag- 
mify. This instrument does not entirely destroy the diverging 
rays, although it considerably reduces their length. This 
method has sufficed to render a satellite visible when at a 
sufficient distance from the planet. This observation has been 
confirmed by all the young astronomers at the Observatory.” 
(Arago in the Compies rendus, tom. xv. 1842, p. 751.) 

As a remarkable instance of acute vision and of the great 
sensibility of the retina in some individuals who are able to 
see Jupiter's satellites with the naked eye, I may instance 
the case of a master tailor, named Schon, who died at 
Breslau in 1837, and with reference to whom I haye re- 
ceived some interesting communications from the learned 
and active director of the Breslau Observatory, Von Bogus- 
lawski. ‘‘ After having (since 1820) convinced ourselves, by 
several rigid tests, that in serene moonless nights Schén was 
able correctly to indicate the position of several of Jupiter’s 
satellites at the same time, we spoke to him of the emana- 
tions and tails which appeared to prevent others from seeing 
so clearly as he did, when he expressed his astonishment at 
these obstructing radiations. From the animated discussions 
between himself and the bystanders regarding the difficulty 
of seeing the satellites with the naked eye, the conclusion 
was obvious, that the planet and fixed stars must always 
appear to Schén like luminous points having no rays. He. 
saw the third satellite the best, and the first very plainly when: 


NATURAL VISION. 67 


trated in a single point. The impression on the nerves is 
weaker. A very dense starry swarm, in which scarcely any 
of the separate stars belong even to the 7th magnitude, may,. 
on the contrary, be visible to the unaided eye in consequence: 
of the images of the many different stars crossing each other 
upon the retina, by which every sensible point of its surface is 
more powerfully excited, as if by one concentrated image.” ™ 





it was at the greatest digression, but he never saw the second 

and the fourth alone. When the air was not in a very favour- 

able condition the satellites appeared to him like faint streaks: 
of light. He never mistook small fixed stars for satellites, 
probably on account of the scintillating and less constant. 
light of the former. Some years before his death Schon com- 
plained to me that his failing eye could no longer distinguish 

Jupiter’s satellites, whose position was only indicated, even 

in clear weather, by light faint streaks.”” These circumstances 

entirely coincide with what has been long known regarding” 
the relative lustre of Jupiter’s satellites, for the brightness and 

quality of the light probably exert a greater influence than 

mere distance from the main planet on persons of such great. 
perfection and sensibility of vision. Schén never saw the 

second nor the fourth satellite. The former is the smallest of 
all; the latter, although the largest after the third and the most. 
remote, is periodically obscured by a dark colour, and is gené- 

rally the faintest of all the satellites. Of the third and the 

first which were best and most frequently seen by the naked 

eye, the former, which is the largest of all, is usually the 

brightest; and of a very decided yellow colour; the latter 

occasionally exceeds in the intensity of its clear yellow light 

the lustre of the third, which is also much larger. (Madler, 
Astr. 1846, s. 231-234, and 439.) Sturm and Airy, in the: 
Comptes rendus, t. xx. pp. 764-6, show how, under proper 

conditions of refraction in the organ of vision, remote luminous‘ 
points may appear as light streaks. 

““L'image épanowe d'une étoile de 7éme grandeur 
n’ébranle pas suffisamment la rétine: elle n’y fait pas naitre ’ 
une sensation appréciable de lumiére. Si Vimage n’était™ 
pomt epanome (par des rayons divergents), la sensation * 

F 2 


68 COSMOS. 


. Telescopes, although in a much less degree, unfortunately also 
give the stars an incorrect and spurious diameter ; but accord- 





aurait plus de force, et l’étoile se verrait. La premiére classe 
d’étoiles invisibles a l'ceil nu ne serait plus alors la septieme: 
pour la trouver, il faudrait peut-étre descendre alors jusqu’a 
la 12éme. Considérons un groupe d’étoiles de 7éme grandeur 
tellement tapprochées les unes des autres que les intervalles 
échappent necessairement a l’ceil. SS? la vision avait de la 
netteté, si limage de chaque etoile était trés petite et bien 
terminée, l‘observateur aperceverait un champ de lumiére dont 
chaque point aurait /’éclat concentré d'une étoile de 7éme gran- 
deur. L’éclat concentré dune etoile de 7éme grandeur suffit a. 
la vision a l’ceil nu. Je groupe serait done visible a |’cil nu. 
Dilatons maintenant sur la rétine l’image de chaque étoile du 
groupe; remplacons chaque point de l’ancienne image geéneé- 
rale par un petit cercle: ces cercles empiéteront les uns sur 
leg autres, et les divers points de la rétine se trouveront 
éclaires par de la lumiére venant simultanément de plusieurs 
étoiles. Pour peu qu’on y réflechisse, il restera évident qu’ 
excepté sur les bords de l'image générale, l’aire lumineuse 
ainsi éclairée a préecisement, a cause de la superposition des 
cercles, la méme intensité que dans le cas ot chaque étoile 
n’éclaire qu'un seul point au fond de l’ceil; mais si chacun 
de ces points recoit une lumiére égale en intensité a la 
lumiére concentrée d’une étoile de 7éme grandeur, il est clair 
que lépanouissement des images individuelles des etoiles 
contigues ne doit pas empécher la visibilite de l’ensemble. | 
Les instruments telescopiques ont, quoiqu’a un beaucoup 
moindre degré, le défaut de donner aussi aux étoiles un 
chamétre sensible et factice. Avec ces instruments, comme a 
Veeil nu, on doit done apercevoir des groupes, composés 
-@étoiles inférieures en intensité a celles que les mémes 
Junettes ou telescopes feraient apercevoir isolément.” 

“The expanded image of a star of the 7th magnitude does 
not cause sufficient vibration of the retina, and does not give 
rise to an appreciable sensation of light. If the image were 
not expanded (by divergent rays), the sensation would be 
stronger and the star discernible. The lowest magnitude at 
which stars are visible would not therefore be the 7th, but 
some magnitude as low perhaps as the 12th degree. Let us 


VISION. 69 


ing to the splendid investigations of Sir William Herschel, 
these diameters decrease with the increasing power of the in- 
strument. ‘This distinguished observer estimated that, at the 
excessive magnifying power of 6500, the apparent diameter 
of Vega Lyre still amounted to 0’36. In terrestrial objects 
the form, no less than the mode, of illumination, determines 
the magnitude of the smallest angle of vision for the naked 





consider a group of stars of the 7th magnitude so close to 
one another that the intervals between them necessarily escape 
the eye. Jf the sight were very clear, and the image of each 
star small and well defined, the observer would perceive a field 
of light, each point of which would be equal to the concen- 
trated brightness of a star of the 7th magnitude. The concen- 
trated light of a star of the 7th magnitude is sufficient to be 
seen by the naked eye. The group, therefore, would be visible 
to the naked eye. Let us now dilate the image of each star of 
the group on the retina, and substitute a small circle for each 
point of the former general image; these circles will impinge 
upon one another, and the different points of the retina will 
be illumined by light emanating simultaneously from many 
stars. A slight consideration will show, that, excepting at 
the margins of the general image, the luminous air has, in 
consequence of the superposition of the circles, the same 
degree of intensity as in those cases where each star illu- 
mines only one single point of the retina; but if each of 
these points be illumined by a light equal in intensity to the 
concentrated light of a star of the 7th magnitude, it is evi- 
dent that the dilatation of the individual images of contiguous 
stars cannot prevent the visibility of the whole.” Telescopie 
instruments haye the defect, although in a much less degree, 
of giving the stars a sensible and spurious diameter. We 
therefore perceive with instruments, no less than with the 
naked eye, groups of stars, inferior in intensity to those which 
the same telescopic or natural sight would recognize, if they 
were isolated.” _ Arago, in the Annuaire du Bureau des Longi= 
tudes pour lan 1842, p. 284. 

8 Sir William Herschel, in the Philos. Transact. for 1803, 
vol. 93, p. 225, and for 1805, vol. 94, p. 184. Compare also 
Arago, in the Annuaire pour 1842, pp. 860-374. : 


70 COSMOS. 


eye. Adams very correctly observed that a long and slen- 
der staff can be seen at a much greater distance than a 
Square whose sides are equal to the diameter of the staff. 
A stripe may be distinguished at a greater distance than a 
spot, even when both are of the same diameter. Arago has 
made numerous calculations on the influence of form (outline 
of the object) by means of angular measurement of distant 
lightning conductors visible from the Paris Observatory. The 
minimum optical visual angle at which terrestrial objects can 
be recognized by the naked eye has been gradually estimated 
lower and lower from the time when Robert Hooke fixed it 
exactly at a full minute, and Tobias Mayer required 34” to 
perceive a black speck on white paper, to the period of Leeu- 
wenhoek’s experiments with spider's threads, which are visible 
to ordinary sight at an angle of 4”°7, In the recent and 
most accurate experiments of Hueck, on the problem of the 
movement of the crystalline lens, white lines on a black 
ground were seen at an angle of 1”:2; a spider's thread at 
0-6; and a fine glistening wire at scarcely 0:2. This pro- 
blem does not admit generally of a numerical solution, since it 
entirely depends on the form of the objects, their illumination, 
their contrast with the back-ground, and on the motion or 
rest, and the nature of the atmospheric strata in which the 
observer is placed. 

During my visit at a charming country-seat belonging to 
the Marques de Selvalegre, at Chillo, not far from Quito, 
where the long extended crests of the voleano of Pichincha 
lay stretched before me ata horizontal distance, trigonometri- 
cally determined at more than 90000 feet, I was much 
struck by the circumstance that the Indians who were 
standing near me distinguished the figure of my travelling 
companion Bonpland (who was engaged in an expedition to 
the volcano) as a white point moving on the black basaltic sides 
of the rock, sooner than we could discover him with our teles- 


VISIBILITY OF OBJECTS. 71 


copes. The white moving image was soon detected with 
the naked eye both by myself and by my friend the unfortu- 
nate son of the Marques, Carlos Montufar, who subsequently 
perished in the civil war. Bonpland was enveloped in a white 
cotton mantle, the Poncho of the country; assuming the 
breadth across the shoulders to vary from three to five feet, 
according as the mantle clung to the figure or fluttered in the 
breeze, and judging from the known distance, we found that 
the angle at which the moving object could be distinctly seen, 
varied from 7” to 12”. White objects on a black ground are, 
according to Hueck’s repeated experiments, distinguished at a 
greater distance than black objects on a white ground. The 
light was transmitted in serene weather through rarefied strata 
of air at an elevation 15360 feet above the level of the sea to 
our station at Chillo, which was itself situated at an elevation 
of 8575 feet, The ascending distance was 91225 feet, or 
about 171 miles. The barometer and thermometer stood at 
very different heights at both stations, being probably at the 
upper one about 17:2 inches and 46°°4, while at the lower 
station they were found, by accurate observation, to be 22°2 
inches and 65°°7. Gauss’s heliotrope light, which has become 
so important an element in German trigonometrical measure- 
ments, has been seen with the naked eye reflected from the 
Brocken on Hohenhagen, at a distance of about 227000 feet, 
or more than 42 miles; being frequently visible at points 
in which the apparent breadth of a three-inch mirror was 
only 0'°43. 

The visibelity of distant objects is modified by the absorp- 
tion of the rays passing from the terrestrial object to the 
naked eye at unequal distances, and through strata of air 
more or less rarefied and more or less saturated with moisture ; 
by the degree of intensity of the light diffused by the radiation 
of the particles of air; and by numerous meteoroiogical pro- 
cesses not yet fully explained. It appears from the old ex- 


72 COSMOS. 


periments of the accurate observer, Bouguer, that a difference 
of ;5th in the intensity of the light is necessary to render 
. objects visible. ‘To use his own expression, we only negatively 
see mountain-tops from which but little light is radiated, and 
which stand out from the vault of heaven in the form of dark 
masses ; their visibility is solely owing to the difference in the 
thickness of the atmospheric strata extending respectively to 
the object and to the horizon. Strongly illumined objects, such 
as snow-clad mountains, white chalk cliffs, and conical rocks 
of pumice-stone, are seen positively. 

The distance at which high mountain summits may be 
recognized from the sea is not devoid of interest in relation to 
practical navigation, where exact astronomical determinations 
are wanting to indicate the ship’s place. I have treated 
this subject more at length in another work,” where I con- 
sidered the distance at which the Peak of Teneriffe might be 
seen, | 

The question whether stars cari be seen by daylight with the 
naked eye through the shafts of mines, and on very high 
mountains, has been with me a subject of inquiry since my 
early youth. I was aware that Aristotle had maintained*® 





19 Humboldt, Rélation hist. du Voyage aux Régions équinox. 
tom. i. pp. 92-97; and Bouguer, Zrazté d’ Optique, pp. 860 
and 365. (Compare also Captain Beechey in the Manual 
of Scientific Enquiry for the use of the Royal Navy, 1849, 

ri.) 

Peo The passage in Aristotle referred to by Buffon occurs in 
a work where we should have least expected to find it—De 
Generat. Animal., v. i. p. 780, Bekker. Literally trans- 
lated, it runs as follows:—‘ Keenness of sight is as much 
the power of seeing far, as of accurately distinguishing 
the differences presented by the objects viewed. These two 
properties are not met with in the same individuals. For 
he who holds his hand over his eyes, or looks through a 
tube, is not on that account more or less able to distinguish 


VISIBILITY OF STARS, 73 


that stars might occasionally be seen from caverns and cisterns, 
as through tubes. Pliny alludes to the same cireumstance, and 
mentions the stars that have been most distinctly recognized . 
during solar eclipses. While practically engaged in mining 
operations I was in the habit, during many years, of passing a 
great portion of the day in mines where I could see the sky 
through deep shafts, yet I never was able to observe a star ; 
nor did I ever meet with any individual in the Mexican, 
Peruvian, or Siberian mines, who had heard of stars having 
been seen by day-light; although in the many latitudes, in 
both hemispheres, in which I have visited deep mines, a suffi- 
ciently large number of stars must have passed the zenith to 
have afforded a favourable opportunity for their being seen. 
Considering this negative evidence, lam the more struck by the 
highly credible testimony of a celebrated optician, who in his 
youth saw stars by day-light, through the shaft of a chimney. * 





differences of colour, although he will see objects at a greater 
distance. Hence it arises that persons in caverns or cisterns 
are occasionally enabled to see stars.” The Grecian ’Opiypara, 
and more especially gpéara, are, as an eye-witness, Pro- 
fessor Franz, observes, subterranean cisterns or reservoirs 
which communicate with the light and air by means of a 
vertical shaft, and widen towards the bottom, like the neck 
of a bottle. Pliny (lib. ii. cap. 14) says, ‘‘ Altitudo cogit 
minores videri stellas; affixas ccelo solis fulgor interdiu non 
cerni, quum eque ac noctu luceant; idque manifestum fiat 
defectu solis et prealtis puteis.” Cleomedes (Cycl. Theor., 
p. 83, Bake) does not speak of stars seen by day, but 
asserts “that the sun, when observed from deep cisterns, 
appears larger, on account of the darkness and the damp 
air.” 

* «We haye ourselves heard it stated by a celebrated opti- 
cian that the earliest circumstance which drew his attention 
to astronomy, was the regular appearance, at a certain hour, 
for several successive days, of a considerable star, through 
the shaft of a chimney.” John Herschel, Outlines of Astr., 
§ 61. The chimney-sweepers whom I have questioned agree 


74 COSMOS. 


Phenomena, whose manifestation depends on the accidental 
concurrence of favouring circumstances, ought not to be dis- 
believed on account of their rarity. 

The same principle must, I think, be applied to the asser- 
tion of the profound investigator, Saussure, that stars have 
been seen with the naked eye in bright day-light, on the 
declivity of Mont Blanc, and at an elevation of 12757 feet. 
** Quelques-uns des guides m’ont assuré avoir vu des étoiles 
en plein jour; pour mov je n’y songeais pas, en sorte que je 
n’ai point été le temoin de ce phénoméne; mais I’ assertion 
uniforme des guides ne me laisse aucun doute sur la réalité. Tl 
faut d’ailleurs étre entiérement a l’ombre d’une épaisseur con- 
siderable, sans quoi l’air trop fortement éclairé fait evanouir la 
faible clarte des etoiles.”” ‘‘ Several of the guides assured me,” 
says this distinguished Alpine inquirer, “ that they had seen 
stars at broad day-light; not having myself been a witness of 
this phenomenon, I did not pay much attention to it, but the 
unanimous assertions of the guides left me no doubt of its 
reality.” It is essential, however, that the observer should 
be placed entirely in the shade, and that he should even have 
a thick and massive shade above his head, since the stronger 
light of the air would otherwise disperse the faint image of 
the stars.”” These conditions are therefore nearly the same as 
those presented by the cisterns of the ancients, and the chimneys 
above referred to. Ido not find this remarkable statement 
(made on the morning of the 2nd of August, 1787,) in any 
other description of the Swiss mountains. Two well-informed, 





tolerably well in the statement that “they have never seen 
stars by day, but that, when observed at night, through deep 
shafts, the sky appeared quite near, and the stars larger.” 
I will not enter upon any discussion regarding the connec- 
tion between these two illusions. 

* Consult Saussure, Voyage dans les Alpes, (N — 
1779, 4to.) tom. iv. § 2007, p. 199. 


VISIBILITY OF STARS. 75 


admirable observers, the brothers Hermann and Adolph Schla- 
gentweit, who have recently explored the eastern Alps, as far 
as the summit of the Gross Glockner, (13016 feet,) were never 
able to see stars by daylight, nor could they hear any report of 
such a phenomenon having been observed amongst the goat- 
herds and chamois hunters. Although I passed many years 
in the Cordilleras of Mexico, Quito, and Peru, and frequently 
in clear weather ascended, in company with Bonpland, to eleva- 
tions of more than fifteen or sixteen thousand feet above the 
level of the sea, I never could distinguish stars by day-light, 
nor was my friend Boussingault more successful in his subse- 
quent expeditions; yet the heavens were of an azure so 
intensely deep, that a cyanometer (made by Paul of Geneva,) 
which had stood at 39° when observed by Saussure on 
Mont Blane, indicated 46° in the zenith under the tropics at 
elevations varying between 17000 and 19000 feet.* | Under 
the serene etherially-pure sky of Cumana, in the plains near 
the sea-shore, I have frequently been able, after observing an 
eclipse of Jupiter’s satellites, to find the planet again with the 
naked eye, and have most distinctly seen it when the sun’s 
dise was from 18° to 20° above the horizon. 

The present would seem a fitting place to notice, although 
cursorily, another optical phenomenon, which I only observed. 
once during my numerous mountain ascents. Before sunrise, 
on the 22nd of June, 1799, when at Malpays, on the declivity 
of the Peak of Teneriffe, at an elevation of about 11400 feet 
above the sea’s level, I observed, with the naked eye, stars 
near the horizon flickering with a singular oscillating motion. 
Luminous points ascended, moved Jaterally, and fell back to 
their former position. This phenomenon lasted only from 





* Humboldt, Essai sur la Géographie des Plantes, p. 103. 
Compare also my Voy. aua Régions équinox., tom. i. pp. 143, 
248. 


76 COSMOS. 


seven to eight minutes, and ceased long before the sun’s dise 
appeared above the horizon of the sea. The same motion was 
discernible through a telescope, and there was no doubt that 
it was the stars themselves which moved.™ Did this change 
of position depend on the much contested phenomenon of 
lateral radiation? Does the undulation of the rising sun’s 
disc, however inconsiderable it may appear when measured, 
present any analogy to this phenomenon in the lateral alteration 
of the sun’s margin? Independently of such a consideration, 
this motion seems greater near the horizon. This phenomenon 
of the wndulation of the stars was observed almost half a cen- 
tury later at the same spot by a well-informed and observing 
traveller, Prince Adalbert, of Prussia, who saw it both with 
the naked eye and through a telescope. I found the obser- 
vation recorded in the Prince’s manuscript journal, where he 
had noted it down, before he learned, on his return from the 
Amazon, that I had witnessed a precisely similar phenomenon.” 


é 





** Humboldt, in Fr. Von Zach’s Monatliche Correspondenz 
zur Erd-und Himmels-Kunde, bd. i, 1800, s. 396; also Voy. aux 
Rég. équin., tom. i. p. 125.—** On croyait voir de petites fusées 
lancées dans l’air. Des points lumineux élevés de 7 4 8 degrés, 
paraissent d’abord se mouvoir dans le sens vertical, mais puis 
se convertir en une veritable oscillation horizontale. Ces 
images lumineux étaient des images de plusieurs etoiles agran- 
dies (en apparence) par des vapeurs et revenant au méme 
point d’ou elles étaient partis.” ‘“‘ It seemed as if a number of 
small rockets were being projected in the air; luminous points, 
at an elevation of 7° or 8°, appeared moving, first in a vertical, 
and then oscillating ina horizontal direction. These were the 
images of many stars, apparently magnified by vapours, and 
returning to the same point from which they had emanated.” 

*° Prince Adalbert of Prussia, Aus meinem Tagebuche, 
1847, s. 213. Is the phenomenon I have described connected 
with the oscillations of 10’-12”, observed by Carlini, in the 
passage of the Polar star over the field of the great Milan 
meridian telescope? (See Zach's Correspondance astrono- 


ASTRONOMICAL DISCOVERIES. 77 


I was never able to detect any trace of lateral refraction on 
the declivities of the Andes, or during the frequent mrages 
in the torrid plains or Llanos of South America, notwith- 
‘standing the heterogeneous mixture of unequally heated 
atmospheric strata. As the Peak of Teneriffe is so near us, 
and is so frequently ascended before sun-rise by scientific 
travellers provided with instruments, I would hope that this 
reiterated invitation on my part to the observation of the 
undulation of the stars may not be wholly disregarded. 

I have already called attention to the fact that the basis 
of a very important part of the astronomy of our planetary 
system was already laid before the memorable years 1608 and 
1610, and therefore before the great epoch of the invention of 
telescopic vision, and its application to astronomical purposes. 
The treasure transmitted by the learning of the Greeks and 
Arabs, was augmented by the careful and persevering labours 
of George Purbach, Regiomontanus (7. e. Johann Miiller) and 
Bernhard Walther of Nirnberg. ‘To their efforts succeeded a © 
bold and glorious development of thought—the Copernican 
system ; this again was followed by the rich treasures derived 
from the exact observations of Tycho Brahe, and the combined 
acumen and persevering spirit of calculation of Kepler. Two 
great men, Kepler and Galileo, occupy the most important 
turning-point in the history of measuring astronomy ; both 
indicating the epoch that separates observation by the 
naked eye, though aided by greatly improved instruments of 
measurement, from f¢elescopic vision. Galileo was at that 
period forty-four, and Kepler thirty-seven years of age; Tycho 





mique et géog., vol. ii. 1819, p. 84.) Brandes (Gehler’s 
Umgearb. phys. Wortersb, bd. iv. s. 549) refers the pheno- 
menon to mage. The star-like heliotrope light has also 
- frequently been seen, by the admirable and skilful observer, 
Colonel Baeyer, to oscillate to and fro, in a horizontal 
direction. 


78 COSMOS. 


Brahe, the most exact of the measuring astronomers of that — 
great age, had been dead seven years. I have already men- 
tioned, in a preceding volume of this work (see p. 711), that 
none of Kepler’s contemporaries, Galileo not excepted, be- 
stowed any adequate praise on the discovery of the three laws 
which have immortalised his name. Discovered by purely 
empirical methods, although more rich in results to the whole 
domain of science, than the isolated discovery of unseen cosmical 
bodies, these laws belong entirely to the period of natural 
vision, to the epoch of Tycho Brahe and his observations ; 
although the printing of the work entitled Astronomia nova 
seu Physica ceelestis de motibus Stelle Martis, was not com- 
pleted until 1609, and the third law, that the squares of the 
periodic times of revolution of two planets are as the cubes of 
their mean distances, was first fully developed in 1619, in the 
Harmonice Mundi. 

The transition from natural to telescopic vision which cha~ 
racterizes the first ten years of the seventeenth century, was 
more important to astronomy (the knowledge of the regions of 
space), than the year 1492, (that of the discoveries of Columbus). 
in respect to our knowledge of terrestrial space. It not only in- 
finitely extended our insight into creation, but also, besides en- 
riching the sphere of human ideas, raised mathematical science 
to a previously unattained splendour, by the exposition of new 
and complicated problems. Thus the increased power of the 
organs of perception re-acts on the world of thought, to the 
strengthening of intellectual force, and the ennoblement of 
humanity. To the telescope alone we owe the discovery, in 
less than two-and-a-half centuries, of thirteen new planets, 
of four satellite-systems, (the four moons of Jupiter, eight 
satellites of Saturn, four, or perhaps six of Uranus, and one of 
Neptune), of the sun’s spots and facule, the phases of Venus, — 
the form and height of the lunar mountains, the wintry polar’ 
zones of Mars, the belts of Jupiter and Saturn, the rings of: 


ASTRONOMICAL DISCOVERIES, 79 


the latter, the interior planetary comets of short periods of 
revolution, together with many other phenomena which like- 
wise escape the naked eye. While our own solar system, 
which so long seemed limited to six planets and one moon, 
has been enriched in the space of 240 years with the dis- 
coveries to which we have alluded; our knowledge regarding 
successive strata of the region of the fixed stars has unexpect- 
edly been still more increased. Thousands of nebule, stellar 
swarms, and double stars, have been observed. The changing 
position of the double stars which revolve round one common 
centre of gravity has proved, like the proper motion of all 
fixed stars, that forces of gravitation are operating in those 
distant regions of space, as in our own limited mutually- 
disturbing planetary spheres. Since Morin and Gascoigne 
(not indeed till twenty-five or thirty years after the invention 
of the telescope,) combined optical arrangements with mea- 
suring instruments, we have been enabled to obtain more 
accurate observations of the change of position of the stars. 
By this means we are enabled to calculate, with the greatest: 
precision, every change in the position of the planetary bodies, 
the ellipses of aberration of the fixed stars and their parallaxes, 
and to measure the relative distances of the double stars even 
when amounting to only a few tenths of a seconds-are. The 
astronomical knowledge of the solar system has gradually ex- 
tended to that of a system of the universe. 

We know that Galileo made his discoveries of Jupiter’s. 
satellites with an instrument that magnified only seven 
diameters, and that he never could have used one of a higher 
_ power than thirty-two. One hundred and seventy years later, 
we find Sir William Herschel, in his investigations on the 
magnitude of the apparent diameters of Arcturus (0”-2 within 
the nebula) and of Vega Lyre, using a power of 6500. Since 
the middle of the seventeenth century, constant attempts have 
been made to increase the focal length of the telescope. 


80 COSMOS. 


Christian Huygens, indeed, in 1655, discovered the first 
satellite of Saturn, Titan (the sixth in distance from the 
eentre of the planet), with a twelve-feet telescope; he sub- 
sequently however examined the heavens with instruments of 
a greater focal length, even of 122 feet; but the three object- 
glasses in the possession of the Royal Society of London, 
whose focal lengths are respectively 123, 170, and 210 feet, 
and which were constructed by Constantine Huygens, brother 
of the great astronomer, were only tested by the latter, as 
he expressly states,” upon terrestrial objects. Auzout, who 
in 1663 constructed colossal telescopes without tubes, and 
therefore without a solid connexion between the object- 
glass and the eye-piece, completed an object glass, which, 
with a focal length of 320 feet, magnified 600 times.” 
The most useful application of these object-glasses, mounted 
on poles, was that which led Dominic Cassini, between the 
years 1671 and 1684, to the successive discoveries of the 
eighth, fifth, fourth, and third satellites of Saturn. He made 
use of object-glasses that had been ground by Borelli, Cam- 
pani, and Hartsoeker. Those of the latter had a focal length 
of 266 feet. 

During the many years I passed at the Paris Observatory, 
I frequently had in my hands the instruments made by 
Campani, which were in such great repute during the reign 
of Louis XIV; and when we consider the faint light of 
Saturn’s satellites, and the difficulty of managing instruments, 





6 The remarkable artistical skill of Constantin Huygens, 
who was private secretary to King William the Third, has 
enly recently been presented in its proper light by Uyten- 
brock in the “‘ Oratio de fratribus Christiano atque Constantino 
Hugenio, artis dioptrice cultoribus,” 1888; and by Prof. 
Kaiser, the learned director of the Observatory at Leyden 
(in Schumacher’s Astron. Nachr., no. 592, s. 246). 

21 See Arago, in the Annuaire pour 1844, p. 381. 


TELESCOPES. 81 


worked by strings only,* we cannot sufficiently admire the 
skill and the untiring perseverance of the observer. ' 

The advantages which were at that period supposed to be 
obtainable only by gigantic length, led great minds, as is. 
frequently the case, to extravagant expectations. Auzout 
considered it necessary to refute Hooke, who is said to have. 
proposed the use of telescopes having a length of upwards of 
10000 feet, (or nearly two miles,) * in order to see animals in, 
the moon. A sense of the practical inconvenience of optical. 
instruments having a focal length of more than a hundred. 





*8 Nous avons placé ces grands verres, tantét sur un grand. 
mat, tantdt sur la tour de bois venue de Marly; enfin nous: 
les avons mis dans un tuyau monté sur un support en forme. 
d’échelle a trois faces, ce qui a eu (dans la découverte des 
satellites de Saturne) le succes que nous en avions espéré.” 
‘We sometimes mounted these great instruments on a 
high pole,” says Dominique Cassini, ‘and sometimes on the: 
wooden tower that had been brought from Marly; and we 
also placed them in a tube mounted on a three-sided ladder, 
a method which, in the discovery of the satellites of Saturn, 
gave us all the success we had hoped.” Delambre, Hist. de 
l Astr. moderne, tom. ii. p. 785. Optical instruments having 
such enormous focal lengths remind us of the Arabian instru- 
ments of measurement—quadrants with a radius of about 190: 
feet, upon whose graduated limb the image of the sun was re- 
ceived as in the gnomon, through a small round aperture. Such 
a quadrant was erected at Samarcand, probably constructed 
after the model of the older sextants of Al-Chokandi (which 
were about 60 feet in height). Compare Sédillot, Prolégo-. 
ménes des Tables d’ Oloug. Beigh, 1847, p. lvii. and cxxix. 

*® See Delambre, Hist. de l Astr. mod., t. ii. p. 594. The, 
mystic Capuchin Monk, Schyrle von Rhéita, who how-. 
ever was well versed in optics, had already spoken in his 
work, Oculus Enoch et Elie, (Anty. 1645) of the speedy prac-’ 
ticability of constructing telescopes that should magnify: 
4000 times, by means of which the lunar mountains might. be 
accurately laid down, Compare also Cosmos, p. 705 (note). 


VOL. III. G 


82 - COSMOS. 


feet, led, through the influence of Newton, (in following out 
the earlier attempts of Mersenne and James Gregory of 
Aberdeen,) to the adoption, especially in England, of shorter 
reflecting telescopes. The careful comparison made by Brad- 
ley and Pond, of Hadley’s five-feet reflecting telescopes, with 
the refractor constructed by Constantin Huygens, (which 
had, as already observed, a focal length of 123 feet,) fully 
demonstrated the superiority of the former. Short’s expen- 
sive reflectors were now generally employed until 1759, when 
John Dollond’s successful practical solution of the problem of 
achromatism, to which he had been incited by Leonhard 
Kuler, and Klingenstierna, again gave preponderance. to 
refracting instruments. The right of priority which appears 
to have incontestably belonged to the mysterious Chester 
More, Esq., of More Hall in Essex, (1729,) was first made 
known to the public, when John Dollond obtained a patent 
for his achromatic telescopes.” 

The triumph obtained by refracting instruments was not, 
however, of long duration. In eighteen or twenty years 
after the construction of achromatic instruments by John 
Dollond, by the combination of crown with flint glass, new 
fluctuations of opinion were excited by the just admiration 
awarded, both at home and abroad, to the immortal labours 
of a German, William Herschel. The construction of numerous 
seven-feet and twenty-feet telescopes, to which powers of from 
2200 to 6000 could be applied, was followed by that of his 
forty-feet reflector. By this instrument he discovered, in 
August and September, 1789, the two innermost satellites of 
Saturn—Enceladus, the second in order, and soon afterwards, 
Mimas, the first or the one nearest to the ring. The dis- 
covery of the planet Uranus in 1781, was made with Herschel’s 
seven-feet telescope, while the faint satellites of this planet 





°° Edinb. Encyclopedia, vol. xx. p. 479. 





TELESCOPES. 83 


were first observed by him in 1787, with a twenty-feet “ front 
view” reflector." The perfection, unattained till then, which 
this great man gave to his reflecting telescopes, in which light 
was only once reflected, led, by the uninterrupted labour of 
more than forty years, to the most important extension of all 
departments of physical astronomy in the planetary spheres, 
no less than in the world of nebule and double stars. 

. The long predominance of reflectors was followed, in the 
earlier part of the nineteenth century, by a successful emula- 
tion in the construction of achromatic refractors, and helio- 
meters, paralactically moved by clockwork. A homogeneous, 
perfectly smooth flint-glass, for the construction of object- 
glasses of extraordinary magnitude, was manufactured in the 
institutions of Utzschneider and Fraunhofer at Munich, and 
subsequently in those of Merz and Mahler; and in the esta- 
blishments of Guinand and Bontems, (conducted for MM. Lere- 
bours and Cauchoix,) in Switzerland and France. It will be 
sufficient in this historical sketch to mention, by way of 
example, the large refractors made under Fraunhofer’s direc- 
tions for the Observatories of Dorpat and Berlin, in which 
the clear aperture was 9°6 inches in diameter, with a focal 
length of 14-2 feet, and those executed by Merz and Mahler, 
for the Observatories of Pulkowa and Cambridge, in the 
United States of America;®” they are both adjusted with 





1 Consult Struve, Htudes d’ Astr. steliaire, 1847, note 59, 
p. 24. I have retained the designations of forty, twenty, and 
seven-feet Herschel reflecting telescopes, although in other 
parts of the work (the original German) I have used French 
measurements. I have adopted these designations not merely 
on account of their greater convenience, but also because they 
have acquired historical celebrity from the important labours 
both of the elder and younger Herschel in England, and of — 
the latter at Feldhausen, at the Cape of Good Hope. 

% See Schumacher’s Astr. Nachr.,no. 371 and 611. Cauchoix 


G2 


84 COSMOS, 


object-glasses of 15 inches in diameter, and a focal length 
of 22°5 feet. The heliometer at the Konigsberg Observatory, 
which continued for a long time to be the largest in exist- 
ence, has an aperture of 6°4 inches in diameter. This in- 
strument has been rendered celebrated by the memorable 
labours of Bessel. The well-illuminated and short dyalitic 
refractors which were first executed by Plésl in Vienna, and 
the advantages of which were almost simultaneously recognized 
by Rogers in England, are of sufficient merit to warrant their 
construction on a large scale. 

During this period, to the efforts of which I have referred, 
because they exercised so essential an influence on the ex- 
tension of cosmical views, the improvements made in instru- 
ments of measurement (zenith sectors, meridian circles, and 
micrometers) were as marked in respect to mechanics as they 
were to optics and to the measurement of time. Among the 
many names distinguished in modern times in relation to in- 
struments of measurement, we will here only mention those 
of Ramsden, Troughton, Fortin, Reichenbach, Gambey, Ertel, 
Steinheil, Repsold, Pistor, and Oertling; in relation to chrono- 
meters and astronomical pendulum clocks, we may instance 
Mudge, Arnold, Emery, Earnshaw, Breguet, Jiirgensen, 
Kessels, Winnerl, and Tiede; while the noble labours of 
William and John Herschel, South, Struve, Bessel, and 
Dawes, in relation to the distances and periodic motions of 
the double stars, specially manifest the simultaneous perfec- 
tion acquired in exact vision and measurement. Struve’s 
classification of the double stars gives about 100 for the 
number whose distance from one another is below 1”, and 336 





and Lerebours have also constructed object-glasses of more 
than 13°38 inches in diameter, and nearly 25 feet focal 
length. ihe | 


TELESCOPES. ' $86 


for those between 1” and 2”; the measurement in every 
case being several times repeated.* 

During the last few years, two men, unconnected with any 
industrial profession—the Earl of Rosse, at Parson’s Town, 
(about fifty miles west of Dublin,) and Mr. Lassell, at Star- 
field, near Liverpool, have, with the most unbounded liberality, 
inspired with a noble enthusiasm for the cause of science, 
constructed under their own immediate superintendence 
two reflectors, which have raised the hopes of astronomers 
to the highest degree.* Lassell’s telescope, which has an 
aperture only two feet in diameter, with a focal length 
of twenty feet, has already been the means of discovering 
one satellite of Neptune, and an eighth of Saturn, besides 





% Struve, Stellarum duplicium et multyplicium Mensure 
micrometrice, pp. 2, 41. 

** Mr. Airy has recently given a comparative description 
of the methods of constructing these two telescopes, including 
an account of the mixing of the metal, the contrivances 
adopted for casting and polishing the specula and mounting 
the instruments; Abstr. of the Astr. Soc., vol. ix. no. 5, March, 
1849. The effect of Lord Rosse’s six-feet metallic reflector, 
is thus referred to. (p. 120.) ‘The Astronomer Royal, Mr. 
Airy, alluded to the impression made by the enormous light 
of the telescope: partly by the modifications produced in 
the appearances of nebule already figured, partly by the great 
number of stars seen even at a distance from the Milky Way, 
and partly from the prodigious brilliancy of Saturn. The 
account given by another astronomer of the appearance of 
Jupiter was, that it resembled a coach-lamp in the telescope; 
and this well expresses the blaze of light which is seen in 
the instrument.” Compare also. Sir John Herschel, Outl. of 
Asir., § 870. ‘The sublimity of the spectacle afforded by 
the magnificent reflecting telescope constructed by Lord 
Rosse of some of the larger globular clusters of nebula is 
declared by all who have witnessed it, to be such as no 
words can express. This telescope has resolved or rendered 
resolvable multitudes of nebule which had resisted all inferior 
powers.” 


86 COSMOS. 


which two satellites of Uranus have been again distinguished. 
The new colossal telescope of Lord Rosse has an aperture of 
six feet, and is fifty-three feet in length. It is mounted in the 
meridian between two walls, distant twelve feet on either 
side from the tube, and from forty-eight to fifty-six feet in 
height. Many nebule, which had been irresolvable by any 
previous instruments, have been resolved into stellar swarms 
by this noble telescope; while the forms of other nebule 
have now, for the first time, been recognized in their true 
outlines. A marvellous effulgence is poured forth from the 
speculum. 

The idea of observing the stars by daylight with a tele- 
scope first occurred to Morin, who with Gascoigne (about 1638, 
before Picard and Auzout) combined instruments of measure- 
ment with the telescope. Morin himself says,® ‘It was not 
Tycho’s great observations in reference to the position of the 
fixed stars, when, in 1582, twenty-eight years before the in- 
vention of the telescope, he was led to compare Venus by day 
with the sun, and by night with the stars,” but ‘the simple 
idea that Arcturus and other fixed stars might, like Venus, when 
once they had been fixed in the field of the telescope before 
sunrise, be followed through the heavens, after the sun had 
risen, that led him to a discovery which might prove of impor- 
tance for the determination of longitude at sea.” Noone was 
able before him to distinguish the fixed stars in the presence of 
the sun. Since the employment, by Rémer, of great meridian 
telescopes in 1691, observations of the stars by day have 
been frequent and fruitful in results, having been, in some 
cases, advantageously applied to the measurement of the 
double stars. Struve states® that he has determined the 
smallest distances of extremely faint stars in the Dorpat 





*® Delambre, Hist. de l’ Astron. moderne, t. ii. p. 255, 
%* Struve, Mens microm. p. xliv. 


TELESCOPES. 87 


refractor, with a power of only 320, in so bright a crepus+ 
cular light, that he could read with ease at midnight. The 
polar star has a companion of the 9th magnitude, which is 
situated at only 18” distance: it was seen by day in the Dor- 
pat refracting telescope, by Struve and Wrangel,” and was in 
like manner observed on one occasion by Encke and Arge- 
lander. 

Many conjectures have been hazarded regarding the cause 
of the great power of the telescope at a time when the dif- 
fused light of the atmosphere, by multiplied reflection, exerts 
an obstructing action.* This question, considered as an 





31 Schumacher’s Jahrbuch fiir 1839, s. 100. 

* La lumiére atmosphérique diffuse ne peut s’expliquer 
par le reflet des rayons solaires sur la surface de séparation 
des couches de differentes densites dont on suppose l’atmos- 
phére composée. En effet, supposons le soleil placé 4. 
Vhorizon, les surfaces de separation dans Ja direction du 
zenith seraient horizontales, par conséquent la réflexion serait 
horizontale aussi, et nous ne verrions aucune lumiére au 
zenith. Dans la supposition des couches, aucun rayon ne 
nous arriverait par voie d’une premiére réflexion. Ce ne 
seraient que les réflexions multiples qui pourraient agir. 
Done pour expliquer la dwmiere diffuse, il faut se figurer 
’ Yatmosphére composée de molécules (sphériques, par exemple)’ 
dont chacune donne une image du soleil 4 peu prés comme 
les boules de verres que nous placons dans nos jardins. L/air 
pur est bleu, parceque d’aprés Newton, les molécules de 
Yair ont /épaisseur qui convient a la réflexion des rayons 
bleus. Il est done naturel que les petites images du soleil que 
de tous cdtés réfléchissent les molécules sphériques de l’air et 
qui sont la lumiére diffuse aient une teinte bleue: mais ce 
bleu n’est pas du bleu pur, c’est un blanc dans lequel le bleu 
prédomine. Lorsque le ciel n’est pas dans toute sa pureté et 
que Tair est méle de vapeurs visibles, la lumiére diffuse 
regoit beaucoup de blanc. Comme la lune est jaune, le bleu 
de l’air pendant la nuit est un peu verditre, c’est-d-dire, mé« 
langé de bleu et de jaune.” 

“ We cannot explain the diffusion of atmospheric light by 


88 COSMOS. 


optical problem, excited the strongest interest in the mind of 
Bessel, whose too early death was so unfortunate for the 
cause of science. In his long correspondence with myself, he 
frequently reverted to this subject, admitting that he could not 
arrive at any satisfactory solution. I feel confident it will not 
be unwelcome to my readers, if I subjoin, in the form of a note, 
some of the opinions of Arago,® as expressed in one of the 





the reflection of solar rays on the surface of separation of the 
strata of different density, of which we suppose the atmo- 
sphere to be composed. In fact, if we suppose the sun to be 
situated on the horizon, the surfaces of separation in the 
direction of the zenith will be horizontal, and consequently 
the reflection would likewise be horizontal, and we should 
not be able to see any light at the zenith. On the supposi- 
tion that such strata exist: no ray would reach us by means 
of direct reflection. Repeated reflections would be necessary 
to produce any effect. In order, therefore, to explain the 
phenomenon of diffused light, we must suppose the atmo- 
sphere to be composed of molecules (of a spherical form, 
for instance), each of which presents an image of the 
sun somewhat in the same manner as an ordinary glass 
ball. Pure air is blue, because, according to Newton, 
the molecules of the air have the thickness necessary to 
reflect blue rays. It is therefore natural that the small 
images of the sun, reflected by the spherical molecules of the 
“atmosphere, should present a bluish tinge; this colour is not, 
however, pure blue, but white, in which the blue predomi- 
nates. When the sky is not perfectly pure and the atmo- 
sphere is blended with perceptible vapours, the diffused light 
is mixed with a large proportion of white. As the moon is 
yellow, the blue of the air assumes somewhat of a greenish 
tinge by night, or, in other words, becomes blended with 
yellow. >__MSS. of 1847. 

° Dun des Effets des Lunettes sur la Visibilité des étoiles. 
(Lettre de M. Arago 4 M. de Humboldt en Déc. 1847.) 
- * L’ceil n’est doué que d’une seasibilité circonsecrite, bornée. 
Quand la lumiére qui frappe la rétine, n’a pas assez d’inten- 
site, l'oeil ne sent rien. C’est par un manque d'intensité que 
beaucoup d’é¢oz/es, méme dans les nuits les plus profondes 
échappent 4 nos observations. Les lunettes ont pour effet, 


TELESCOPES. 89 


numerous manuscripts to which I was permitted free access 
during my frequent sojourn in Paris. According to the inge- 
nious explanation of my friend, high magnifying powers facili- 
tate the discovery and recognition of the fixed stars, since 





quant aux étoiles, d'augmenter Vintensité de image. . Le 
faisceau cylindrique de rayons paralléles venant d'une étoile, 
qui s’appuie sur la surface de la lentille objective, et quia 
cette surface circulaire pour base, se trouve considérable- 
ment resserre a la sortie de la lentille oculaire. Le diamétre 
du premier cylindre est au diamétre du second, comme la 
distance focale de l’objectif est a la distance focale de l’ocu- 
laire, ou bien comme le diamétre de l’objectif est au dia- 
métre de la portion d oculaire qu occupe le faisceau emergent. 
Les intensitées de lumiére dans les deux cylindres en question 
(dans les deux cylindres, incident et €mergent) doivent étre 
entr’elles comme les étendues superficielles des bases. Ainsila 
lumiére €mergente sera plus condensée, plus intense que la 
lumiére naturelle tombant sur l’objectif, dans le rapport de la 
surface de cet objectif a la surface circulaire de la base du fais- 
ceau emergent. Le faisceau émergent, quand la lunette grossit, 
étant plus étroit’que le faisceau cylindrique qui tombe sur 
Vobjectif, il est evident que la pupille, quelle que soit son 
ouverture, recueillera plus de rayons par l'intermédiaire de la 
lunette que sans elle. La lunette augmentera donc toujours 
Vintensité de la lumiére des éfoiles. 

“Le cas le plus favorable, quant a leffet des lunettes, est 
évidemment celui ot l’eil recoit la totalité du faisceau émer- 
gent, le cas ot ce faisceau a moins de diamétre que la pupille. 
Alors toute la lumiére que Vobjectif embrasse, concourt, par 
lentremise du télescope, 4 la formation de image. A l’eil 
nu, au contraire, wne portion seule de cette méme lumiére est 
mise a profit; c’est la petite portion que la’ surface de la 
pupille découpe dans le faisceau incident naturel. L’inten- 
site de image télescopique d’une étoile est done a l’intensité 
de limage 4 Veil nu, comme la surface de I objectif est a celle 
de la pupille. 

‘Ce qui précéde est relatif a la visibilité d'un seul point, d’une 
seule étoile. Venons 4 l'observation d’un objét ayant des 
dimensions angulaires sensibles, 4 l’observation d’une planéte. 


90 - COSMOS. 


they convey a greater quantity of intense light to the eye 
without perceptibly enlarging the image; while, in accordance 
with another law, they influence the aerial space on which 
the fixed star is projected. The telescope, by separating, 





Dans les cas les plus favorables, c’est-a-dire lorsque la pupille © 
recoit la totalite du pinceau emergent, l’intensite de l'image 
de chaque point de la planéte se calculera par la proportion 
que nous venons de donner. La quantite totale de lumiére 
concourant a former /’ ensemble de Vimage a l ceil nu, sera done 
aussi a la quantité totale de lumiére qui forme l'image de la 
planéte a l’aide d'une lunette, comme la surface de la pupille 
est a la surface de l’objectif. Les intensiteés comparatives, 
non plus de points isoles, mais des deux images d’une planéte, 
qui se forment sur la rétine a l’ceil nu, et par l’intermédiaire 
d’une lunette, doivent evidemment dimnuer proportionnelle- 
ment aux étendues superficielles de ces deux images. Les 
dimensions inéatres des deux images sont entr’elles comme le 
diamétre de l’objectif est au diamétre du faisceau emergent. 
Le nombre de fois que la surface de l'image amplifiée surpasse | 
la surface de limage a l’ceil nu, s’obtiendra done en divisant 
le carré du diameétre de lobjectif par le carré du diamétre du 
Jaisceau émergent, ou bien la surface de Vobjectif par la surface 
de la base circulaire du farsceau émergent. 

“‘ Nous avons deja obtenu le rapport des quantités totales de 
lumiére qui engendrent les deux images d@’une planete, en divi- 
sant la surface de lobjeciif par la surface de la pupille. Ce 
nombre est plus petit que le quotient auquel on arrive en 
divisant la surface de Voljectif par la surface du faisceau émer- 
gent. Il en résulte, quant aux planétes, qu’une lunette fait 
moins gagner en intensité de lumiére, qu’elle ne fait perdre en 
agrandissant da surface des images sur la rétine; l’intensité 
de ces images doit donc aller continuellement en s‘affaiblissant 
a mesure que le ‘pouvoir amplificatif de la lunette ou du 
télescope s’accroit. 

‘“‘L’atmosphére peut étre considéree comme une planéte a 
dimensions indéfinies. La portion qu’on en verra dans une 
lunette, subira donc aussi la loz d’affuiblissement que nous 
venons dindiquer. Le rapport entre lintensité de la lumiére 
d'une planéte et le champ de lumiére atmosphérique a travers 





TELESCOPES. 9] 


as it were, the illuminated particles of air surrounding 
the object-glass, darkens the field of view, and diminishes 
the intensity of its illumination. We are enabled to 
see, however, only by means of the difference between the 





lequel on la verra, sera le méme 4a |’ceil nu et dans les lunettes 
de tous les grossissements, de toutes les dimensions. Les 
lunettes, sows le rapport de Vintensité, ne favorisent done pas 
la visibilité des planétes. 

“Tl n’en est point ainsi des éfovles. L’intensité de l'image 
d’une étoile est plus forte avec une lunette qu’a l’eeil nu; au 
contraire, le champ de la vision, uniformément eclairé dans 
les deux cas par la lumiére atmosphérique, est plus clair 4 
Veil nu que dans la lunette. Il y a done deux raisons, sans 
sortir des considérations d’intensité, pour que dans une lunette 
Vimage de | étoile prédomine sur celle de l’atmosphére, notable- 
ment plus qu’a l’ceil nu. | 

“Cette predominance doit aller graduellement en aug- 
mentant avec le grossissement. En effet, abstraction faite de 
certaine augmentation du diamétre de l'etoile, consequence 
de divers effets de diffraction ou d’interférences, abstraction 
faite aussi d’une plus forte réflexion que la lumiére subit sur 
les surfaces plus obliques des oculaires de trés courts foyers, 
Vintensité de la lumieére de  étoile est constante tant que |’ ouver- 
ture de l’objectif ne varie pas. Comme on I’a vu, la clarté du 
champ de la lunette, au contraire, diminue sans cesse 4 mesure 
que le pouvoir amplificatif s’accroit. Done toutes autres 
circonstances restant eégales, une étoile sera d’autant plus 
visible, sa predominence sur la lumiére du champ du télescope 
sera d’autant plus tranchée qu’on fera usage d’un grossisse- 
ment plus fort.”’ 

' The eye is endowed with only a limited sensibility; for 
when the light which strikes the retina is not sufficiently 
strong, the eye is not sensible of any impression. In con- 
sequence of deficient intensity, many stars escape our ob- 
servation, even in the darkest nights. Telescopic glasses 
have the effect of augmenting the intensity of the images of 
the stars. The cylindrical pencil of parallel rays emanating 
from a star, and striking the surface. of the object-glass, on 
whose circular surface it rests as on a base, is considerably 


92 COSMOS. 


light of the fixed star and of the aerial field or the mass of air 
which surrounds the star in the telescope. Planetary discs 
present very different relations from the simple ray of the 
image of a fixed star; since, like the aerial field (J’ac7 aérienne), 





contracted on emerging from the eye-piece. The diameter of 
the first cylinder is to that of the second as the focal distance 
of the object-glass is to the focal distance of the eye-piece, 
or as the diameter of the object-glass is to the diameter of 
the part of the eye-piece covered by the emerging rays. The 
intensities of the light in these two cylinders (the incident and 
emerging cylinders) must be to one another as the superficies 
of their bases. ‘Thus, the emerging light will be more con- 
densed, more zntense, than the natural light falling on the 
object-glass, in the ratio of the surface of this object-glass to 
the circular surface of the base of this emerging pencil. As 
the emerging pencil is narrower in a magnifying instrument. 
than the cylindrical pencil falling on the object-glass, it is 
evident that the pupil, whatever may be its aperture, will 
receive more rays, by the intervention of the telescope, than 
it could without. ‘The intensity of the light of the stars will, 
therefore, always be augmented, when seen through a telescope. 

‘The most favourable condition for the use of a telescope 
is undoubtedly that in which the eye receives the whole of 
the emerging rays, and, consequently, when the diameter of 
the pencil is less than that of the pupil. The whole of the light 
received by the object-glass then co-operates, through the 
agency of the telescope, in the formation of the image. In 
natural vision, on the contrary, a portion only of this light is 
rendered available, namely, the small portion which enters 
the pupil naturally from the incident pencil. The intensity of 
the telescopic image of a star is, therefore, to the intensity 
of the image seen with the naked eye, as the surface of the 
olyect-glass vs to that of the pupil. 

“The preceding observations relate to the visibility of 
one point, or one star. We will now pass on to the conside- 
ration of an object having sensible angular dimensions, as, 
for instance, a planet. Under the most favourable conditions 
of vision, that is to say, when the pupil receives the whole 
of the emerging pencil, the intensity of each point of the 


TELESCOPES. 93 


they lose in intensity of light by dilatation in the magnifying 
telescope. It must be further observed, that the apparent 
motion of the fixed star, as well as of the planetary disc, is 
increased by high magnifying powers. This circumstance may 





planet’s image may be calculated by the proportions we have 
already given. The total quantity of light contributing to 
form the whole of the image, as seen by the naked eye, will, 
therefore, be to the total quantity of the light forming the 
image of the planet by the aid of a telescope, as the surface 
of the pupil is to the surface of the object-glass. ‘The com- 
parative intensities, not of mere isolated points, but of the 
images of a planet formed respectively on the retina of the 
naked eye, and by the intervention of a telescope, must evidently 
diminish proportionally to the superficial extent of these two 
images. ‘The linear dimensions of the two images are to one 
another as the diameter of the object-glass is to that of the 
emerging pencil. We therefore obtain the number of times 
that the surface of the magnified image exceeds the surface 
of the image when seen by the naked eye by dividing the 
square of the diameter of the olject-glass by the square of the 
diameter of the emerging pencil, or rather the surface of the 
olject-glass by the surface of the circular base of the emerging 
pencil. 

* By dividing the surface of the object-glass by the surface 
of the pupil, we have already obtained the ratio of the total 
quantities of light produced by the two images of a planet. 
This number is lower than the quotient which we obtain by 
dividing the surface of the object-glass by the surface of the 
emerging pencil. It follows, therefore, with respect to 
planets, that a telescope causes us to gain less in intensity of 
light than is lost by magnifying the surface of the images on 
the retina; the intensity of these images must therefore 
become continually fainter, in proportion as the magnifying 
power of the telescope increases. 

_**The atmosphere may be considered as a planet of indefinite 
dimensions. ‘The portion of it that we see in a telescope 
will therefore also be subject to the same law of diminution 
that we have indicated. The relation between the intensity of 
the light of a planet and the field of atmospheric light through 


94 COSMOS. 


facilitate the recognition of objects by day, in instruments 
whose movements are not regulated paralactically by clock- 
work, so as to follow the diurnal motion of the heavens. 
Different points of the retina are successively excited. “ Very 
faint shadows are not observed,’’ Arago elsewhere remarks, 
“until we can give them motion.” | : 

In the cloudless sky of the tropics, during the driest season 





which it is seen, will be the same to the naked eye and in 
telescopes, whatever may be their dimensions and magnifying 
powers. Telescopes, therefore, do not favour the visibility of 
planets in respect to the intensity of their light. 

‘The same is not the case with respect to the stars. The 
intensity of the image of a star is greater when seen with 
the telescope than with the naked eye; the field of vision, 
on the contrary, uniformly illumined in both cases by the 
atmospheric light, is clearer in natural than in telescopic 
vision. There are two reasons then, which, in connexion 
with the consideration of the intensity of light, explain why 
the image of a star preponderates in a telescope rather than 
in the naked eye over that of the atmosphere. 

“This predominance must gradually increase with the 
increased magnifying power. In fact, deducting the constant 
augmentation of the star’s diameter, consequent upon the 
different effects of diffraction or interference, and deducting 
also the stronger reflection experienced by the light on the 
more oblique surfaces of ocular glasses of short focal lengths, 
the intensity of the light of the star ts constant, as long as the 
aperture of the object-glass does not vary. As we have 
already seen, the brightness of the field of view, on the con- 
trary, diminishes incessantly in the same ratio in which the 
magnifying power increases. All other circumstances, there- 
fore, being equal, a star will be more or less visible, and its 
prominence on the field of the telescope will be more or less 
marked, in proportion to the magnifying powers we employ.” 
Arago, Manuscript of 1847. 

I will further add the following passage from the Annuaire 
du Bureau des Long. pour 1846 (Notices Scient. par M. Arago), 
p. 381. , 


TELESCOPES. 95 


of the year, I have frequently been able to find the pale disc 
of Jupiter with one of Dolland’s telescopes, of a magnifying 
power of only 95, when the sun was already from 15° to 18° 
above the horizon. The diminished intensity of the light 
of Jupiter and Saturn, when seen by day in the great Berlin 
refractor, especially when contrasted with the equally reflected 
light of the inferior planets, Venus and Mercury, frequently 
excited the astonishment of Dr. Galle. Jupiter’s occul- 





“ T’expérience a montré que pour le commun des hommes, 
deux espaces éclaires et contigus ne se distinguent pas l’un 
de l’autre, 4 moins que leurs intensites comparatives ne pré- 
sentent, au minimum, une difference de yj. Quand une lu- 
nette est tournée vers le firmament, son champ semble uni- 
formement éclairé: c’est qu’ alors il existe, dans un plan 
passant par le foyer et perpendiculaire a l’axe de l’objectif, une 
emage indéfine de la region atmosphérique vers laquelle la 
lunette est dirigée. Supposons qu’un astre, c’est-a-dire un objet 
situé bien au-dela de l’atmosphére, se trouve dans la direction de 
la lunette: son image ne sera visible qu’autant qu’elle augmen- 
tera de ;';, au moins, l’intensite de la portion de l'image 
focale indéfinie de l'atmosphére, sur laquelle sa propre image 
limitée ira se placer. Sans cela, le champ visuel continuera a 
paraitre partout de la méme intensité.’’ | 

‘** Experience has shown that, in ordinary vision, two illu- 
minated and contiguous spaces cannot be distinguished from 
each other, unless their comparative intensities present a mini- 
mum difference of ,,th. When a telescope is directed towards 
the heavens, its field of view appears uniformly illumined: 
there then exists in a plane passing through the focus, and 
perpendicular to the axis of the object-glass, an indefinite 
-amage of the atmospheric region towards which the instru- 
ment is pointed. If we suppose a star, that is to say, an object 
very far beyond the atmosphere, situated in the direction 
of the telescope, its image will not be visible, except it exceed, 
by at least =,th, the intensity of that portion of the indefinite 
focal image of the atmosphere on which its limited proper 
image is thrown. Otherwise, the visual field will continue to 
appear everywhere of the same intensity.” 


96 COSMOS, 


tations have occasionally been observed by daylight, with 
the aid of powerful telescopes, as in 1792, by Flaugergues, and 
in 1820, by Struve. Argelander (on the 7th of December, 
1849, at Bonn) distinctly saw three of the satellites of 
Jupiter, a quarter of an hour after sunrise, with one of Fraun- 
hofer’s five-feet telescopes. He was unable to distinguish 
the fourth; but, subsequently, this and the other satellites 
were observed emerging from the dark margin of the moon, 
by the assistant-astronomer, Schmidt, with the eight-feet helio- 
meter. The determination of the limits ofthe telescopic 
visibility of small stars by daylight, in different climates, 
and at different elevations above the sea’s level, is alike 
interesting in an optical and a meteorological point of 
view. 

Among the remarkable phenomena whose causes have been 
much contested, in natural as well as in telescopic vision, we 
must reckon the nocturnal scintillation of the stars. Ac- 
cording to Arago’s investigations, two points must be spe- 
cially distinguished in reference to this phenomenon “— 





40 The earliest explanations given by Arago of scintillation 
occur in the appendix to the 4th book of my Voyage aux 
Régions équinoxiales, tom. i, p. 623. I rejoice that I am able 
to enrich this section on natural and telescopic vision, with 
the following explanations, which, for the reasons already as- 
signed, I subjoin in the original text. 

Des causes de la scintillation des étovles. 

“Ce qwil y a de plus remarquable dans le phenomeéne de | 
la scintillation, c’est le changement de couleur. Ce change- 
ment est beaucoup plus fréquent que l’observation ordinaire 
Vindique. En effet, en agitant la lunette, on transforme 
l'image dans une ligne ou un cercle, et tous les points de cette 
ligne ou de ce cercle paraissent de couleurs différentes. C'est 
la résultante de la superposition de toutes ces images que l’on 
voit, lorsqu’on laisse la lunette immobile. Les rayons qui se 
réunissent au foyer d’une lentille, vibrent d’accord ou en 
désaccord, s’ajoutent ou se détruisent, suivant que les couches 


SCINTILLATION OF THE STARS. 97 


Firstly, Change in the intensity of the light, from a sudden de- 
crease to perfect extinction and rekindling; Secondly, Change 
of colour. Both these alterations are more intense in reality 
than they appear to the naked eye; for when the several 
points of the retina are once excited, they retain the impression 
of light which they haye received, so that the disappearance, 





qu’ils ont traversées, ont telle ou telle refringence. L’ensemble 
des rayons rouges peut se détruire seu/, si ceux de droite et de 
gauche, et ceux de haut et de bas, ont traverse des milieux 
inégalement refringents. Nous avons dit seul, parceque la 
difference de réfringence qui correspond a la destruction du 
rayon rouge, n’est pas la méme que celle qui améne la de- 
struction du rayon vert, et reciproquement. Maintenant, si 
des rayons rouges sont détruits, ce qui reste sera le blanc 
moins le rouge, c’est-a-dire du vert. Si le vert au contraire 
est détruit par iterférence, Vimage sera du blanc moins le vert, 
e’est-a-diredu rouge. Pour expliquer pourquoi les planétes 
a grand diamétre ne scintillent pas ou trés peu, il faut se rap- 
peler que le disque peut étre considéré comme une aggrégation 
d’etoiles ou de petits points qui scintillent isolement ; mais 
les images de différentes couleurs que chacun de ces points 
pris isolement donnerait, empiétant les unes sur les autres, 
formeraient du blanc. Lorsqu’on place un diaphragme ou un 
bouchon percé d’un trou sur l’objectif d’une lunette, les étoiles 
acquicrent un disque entouré d’une série d’anneaux lumineux. 
Si l’on enfonce V’oculaire, le disque de l’étoile augmente de 
diamétre, et il se produit dans son centre un trou obscur ; si on 
Yenfonce davantage, un point lumineux se substitue au point 
noir. Un nouvel enfoncement donne naissance a un centre 
noir, etc. Prenons la lunette lorsque le centre de l'image est 
noir, et visons 4 une étoile qui ne scintille pas: le centre 
restera noir, comme il l’était auparavant. Si au contraire on 
dirige la lunette a une étoile qui scintille, on verra le centre 
de Vimage lumineux et obscur par intermittence. Dans la 
position ot le centre de l'image est occupé par un point lumi- 
neux, on verra ce point disparaitre et renaitre successivement. 
Cette disparition ou réapparition du point central est la preuve 
directe de l’tnterférence variable des rayons. Pour bien con- 
cevoir l’absence de lumiére au centre de ces images dilatées, 


VOL. ITI. H 


98 COSMOS. 


obscuration, and change of colour, in a star, are not perceived 
by us to their full extent. The phenomenon of scintillation 
is more strikingly manifested in the telescope, when the 
instrument is shaken, for then different points of the retina 
are successively excited, and coloured and frequently inter- 
rupted rings are seen. ‘The principle of interference explains 





il faut se rappeler que les rayons réguli¢rement réfractés par 
Vobjectif ne se reunissent et ne peuvent par conséquent 
interferer qu’au foyer: par consequent les images dilatées que 
ces rayons peuvent produire, resteraient toujours pleines (sans 
trou). Si dans une certaine position de loculaire un trou se 
presente au centre de l'image, c’est que les rayons réguliére- 
ment refractes interferent avec des rayons diffractés sur les 
bords du diaphragme circulaire. Le phénoméne n’est pas 
constant, parceque les rayons qui interférent dans un certain 
moment, n’interférent pas un instant aprés, lorsqu’ils ont 
traversé des couches atmosphériques dont le pouvoir réfringent 
a varie. On trouve dans cette experience la preuve manifeste 
du réle que joue dans le phenoméne de la scintillation l’inégale 
réfrangibilite des couches atmospheriques trayersées par les 
rayons dont le faisceau est trés étroit. I] resulte de ces 
considérations que l’explication des scintillations ne peut étre 
rattachée qu’aux phenoménes des interferences lumineuses. 
Les rayons des étoiles, aprés avoir traversé une atmosphére 
ou il existe des couches inegalement chaudes, inégalement 
denses, inégalement humides, vont se réunir au foyer d’une 
lentille, pour y former des images d’intensité et de couleurs 
perpétuellement changeantes, c’est-a-dire des images telles 
que la scintillation les présente. Il y a aussi scintillation hors 
du foyer des lunettes. Les explications proposees par Galileo, 
Scaliger, Kepler, Descartes, Hooke, Huygens, Newton et John 
‘Michell, que j’ai examiné dans un memoire présenté a 
‘VInstitut en 1840 (Comptes rendus, t. x. p. 83), sont inad- 
missibles. ‘Thomas Young, auquel nous devons les premiéres 
lois des interferences, a cru inexplicable le phénoméne de la 
scintillation. La faussete de l’ancienne explication par des 
vapeurs qui voltigent et déplacent, est déja prouvée par la 
circonstance que nous voyons la scintillation des yeux, ce 
qui supposerait un déplacement d’une minute. Les ondula- 


SCINTILLATION OF THE STARS. 99 


how the momentary coloured effulgence of a star may be fol- 
lowed by its equally instantaneous disappearance or sudden 
obscuration, in an atmosphere composed of ever-changing 
strata of different temperatures, moisture, and density. The 
undulatory theory teaches us generally that two rays of light 
(two systems of waves) emanating from one source (one centre 





tions du bord du Soleil sont de 4” a 5”, et peut-étre des 
piéces qui manquent, done encore effet de l’interférence des 
rayons.”” 

On the causes of the scintillation of the stars. 

* The most remarkable feature in the phenomenon of the 
stars’ scintillation is their change of colour. This change is 
of much more frequent occurrence than would appear from 
ordinary observation. Indeed, on shaking the telescope the 
image is transformed into a line or circle, and all the points of 
this line or circle appear of different colours. We have here 
the results of the superposition of all the images seen when 
the telescope is at rest. The rays united in the focus of a 
lens, vibrate in harmony or at variance with one another, 
and increase or destroy one another according to the various 
degrees of refraction of the strata through which they have 

ssed. The whole of the red rays alone can destroy one 
another, if the rays to the right and left, above and below 
them have passed through unequally refracting media. We 
have used the term alone, because the difference of refraction 
necessary to destroy the red ray is not the same as that which 
is able to destroy the greenray, and vice versa. Now, if the 
red rays be destroyed, that which remains will be white minus 
red, that is to say green. If the green on the other hand be 
destroyed by interference, the image will be white minus green, 
that is to say red. To understand why planets having large 
diameters should be subject to little or no scintillation, it must 
be remembered that the disc may be regarded as an aggrega- 
tion of stars, or of small points, scintillating independently of 
each other, while the images of different colours LAM by 
each of these points taken alone would impinge upon one 
another and form white. If we place a diaphragm or a cork 
pierced with a hole on the object-glass of a telescope, the 
stars present a disc surrounded by a series of luminous rings. 


H 2 


100 cosmos. 


of commotion), destroy each other by inequality of path; 
that the light of one ray added to the light of the other 
produces darkness. When the retardation of one system of 
waves in reference to the other amounts to an odd number 
of semi-undulations, both systems endeavour to impart simul- 
taneously to the same molecule of ether equal but opposite 
velocities ; so that the effect of their combination is to produce 
rest in the molecule, and therefore darkness. In some cases, 





On pushing in the eye-piece, the disc of the star increases 
in diameter and a dark point appears in its centre; when the 
eye-piece is made to recede still further into the instrument, 
a luminous point will take the place of the dark point. On 
causing the eye-piece to recede still further, a black centre 
will be observed. If while the centre of the image is black 
we point the instrument to a star which does not scintillate, 
it will remain black as before. If, on the other hand, we 
point it to a scintillating star, we shall see the centre of the 
image alternately luminous and dark. In the position in 
which the centre of the image is occupied by a luminous point, 
we shall see this point alternately vanish and reappear. This 
disappearance and reappearance of the central point is a 
direct proof of the variable interference of the rays. In order 
to comprehend the absence of light from the centre of these 
dilated images, we must remember that rays regularly refracted 
by the object-glass do not reunite and cannot consequently 
interfere except in the focus; thus the images produced by 
these rays will always be uniform and without a central point. 
If in a certain position of the eye-piece, a point is observed 
in the centre of the image, it is owing to the interference of 
the regularly refracted rays with the rays diffracted on the 
margins of the circular diaphragm. The phenomenon is not 
constant, for the rays which interfere at one moment no 
longer do so in the next, after they have passed through atmos- 
pheric strata possessing a varying power of refraction. We 
here meet with a manifest proof of the important part 
played in the phenomenon of scintillation by the unequal 
refrangibility of the atmospheric strata traversed by rays — 
united in a yery narrow pencil.” 


SCINTILLATION OF THE STARS. 101 


the refrangibility of the different strata of air intersecting the 
rays of light exerts a greater influence on the phenomenon 
than the difference in length of their path." 

The intensity of scintillations varies considerably in the 
different fixed stars, and does not seem to depend solely on 
their altitude and apparent magnitude, but also on the nature 
of their own light. Some, as for instance Vega, flicker less 
than Arcturus and Procyon. The absence of scintillation in 
planets with larger discs, is to be ascribed to compensation 
and to the neutralizing mixture of colours proceeding from 
different points of the disc. The disc is to be regarded as 
an aggregate of stars which naturally compensate for the 
light destroyed by interference, and again combine the 





** It follows from these considerations that scintillation must 
necessarily be referred to the phenomena of /uminous inter- 
Jerences alone. The rays emanating from the stars, after 
traversing an atmosphere composed of strata having different 
degrees of heat, density, and humidity, combine in the focus of 
a lens, where they form images perpetually changing in 
intensity and colour, that is to say, the images presented by 
scintillation. ‘There is another form of scintillation, inde- 
pendent of the focus of the telescope. The explanations of 
this phenomenon advanced by Galileo, Scaliger, Kepler, Des- 
cartes, Hooke, Huygens, Newton, and John Michell, which I 
examined in a memoir presented to the institute in 1840 
(Comptes Rendus, t. x. p. 83), are inadmissible. Thomas 
Young, to whom we owe the discovery of the first laws of 
interference, regarded scintillation as an inexplicable phe- 
nomenon. ‘The erroneousness of the ancient explanation 
which supposes that vapours ascend and displace one another, 
is sufficiently proved by the circumstance that we see scintil- 
lations with the naked eye, which presupposes a displacement 
of a minute. The undulations of the margin of the sun are 
from 4” to 5”, and are perhaps owing to chasms or interruptions, 
and therefore also to the effect of interference of the rays of 
light.” (Extracts from Arago’s MSS. of 1847.) 

“ See Arago, in the Annuaire pour 1831, p. 168. 


102 COSMOS. 


coloured rays into white light. For this reason we most 
rarely meet with traces of scintillation in Jupiter and Saturn, 
but more frequently in Mercury and Venus, for the apparent 
diameters of the discs of these last named planets diminish to 
4”-4 and 95. The diameter of Mars may also decrease to 
3”°3 at its conjunction. In the serene cold winter nights of 
the temperate zone, the scintillation increases the magnificent 
impression produced by the starry heavens, and the more so 
from the circumstance that, seeing stars of the 6th and 7th 
magnitude flickering in various directions, we are led to 
imagine that we perceive more luminous points than the 
unaided eye is actually capable of distinguishing. Hence 
the popular surprise at the few thousand stars which accurate 
catalogues indicate as visible to the naked eye! It was known 
in ancient times by the Greek astronomers, that the flickering 
of their light distinguished the fixed stars from the planets ; 
but Aristotle, in accordance with the emanation and tan- 
gential theory of vision, to which he adhered, singularly 
enough ascribes the scintillation of the fixed stars merely 
to a straining of the eye. “The rivetted stars (the fixed 
stars),’ says he,” “sparkle, but not the planets: for the 
latter are so near, that the eye is able to reach them; but 
in looking at the fixed stars (mpos dé rovs pevovras) the eye 
acquires a tremulous motion owing to the distance and the 
effort.” 

In the time of Galileo, irate. 1572 and 1604,—an epoch 
remarkable for great celestial events, when three stars® of 
greater brightness than stars of the first magnitude suddenly 
appeared, one of which, in Cygnus, remained luminous for 
twenty-one years,—Kepler’s attention was specially directed 
to scintillation as the probable criterion of the non-planetary 





> 


” Aristot. de Celo, ii. 8, p. 290, Bekker. 
® Cosmos, p. 709. 


SCINTILLATION OF THE STARS. 103 


nature of a celestial body. ‘Although well versed in the 
science of optics, in its then imperfect state, he was unable 
to rise above the received notion of moving vapours.“ In 
the Chinese Records of the newly appeared stars, according 
to the great collection of Ma-tuan-lin, their strong scintillation 
is occasionally mentioned. 

The more equal mixture of the atmospheric strata, in 
and near the tropics, and the faintness or total absence of 
scintillation of the fixed stars when they have risen 12° or 
15° above the horizon, give the vault of heaven a peculiar 
character of mild effulgence and repose. I have already 
referred in many of my delineations of tropical scenery to this 
characteristic, which was also noticed by the accurate ob- 
servers, La Condamine and Bouguer, in the Peruyian plains, 
and by Garcin,” in Arabia, India, and on the shores of the 
Persian Gulf (near Bender Abassi). 3 

As the aspect of the starry heavens, in the season of 
the serene and cloudless nights of the tropics, specially 
excited my admiration, I have been careful to note in my 
journals the height above the horizon at which the scin- 
tillation of the stars ceased in different hygrometric con- 
ditions. Cumana and the rainless portion of the Peruvian 
coast of the Pacific, before the season of the garua (mist) 
had set in, were peculiarly suited to such observations. On 
an average the fixed stars appear only to scintillate when less 
than 10° or 12° above the horizon. At greater elevations, 
they shed a mild, planetary light; but this difference is 
most strikingly perceived, when the same fixed stars are 
watched in their gradual rising or setting, and the angles of 
their altitudes measured, or calculated by the known time and 





a Cause seintillationis in Kepler, de Stella nova in pede 
Serpentarit, 1606, cap. xviii. pp. 92-97. > 

© Lettre de M. Garcin, Dr. en Med. & M. de Réaumur in 
ae de U Académie Royale des Sciences, Année 1748, pp. 


104 COSMOS. 


latitude of the place. In some serene and calm nights, the 
region of scintillation extended to an elevation of 20° or even 
25°: but a connection could scarcely ever be traced between 
the differences of altitude or intensity of the scintillation 
and the hygrometric and thermometric conditions, obsery- 
able in the lower and only accessible region of the atmosphere. 
I have observed, during successive nights, after considerable 
scintillation of stars, having an altitude of 60° or 70°, when 
Saussure’s hair-hygrometer stood at 85°, that the scintillation 
entirely ceased when the stars were 15° above the horizon, 
although the moisture of the-atmosphere was so considerably 
increased that the hygrometer had risen to 93°. The intricate 
compensatory phenomena of interference of the rays of light 
are modified, not by the quantity of aqueous vapour con- 
tained in solution in the atmosphere, but by the unequal 
distribution of vapours in the superimposed strata, and by 
the upper currents of cold and warm air, which are not 
perceptible in the lower regions of the atmosphere. The 
scintillation of stars at a great altitude was also strikingly 
increased during the thin yellowish red mist, which tinges 
the heavens shortly before an earthquake. ‘These obser- 
yations only refer to the serenely bright and rainless seasons 
of the year, within the tropics, from 10° to 12° north and 
south of the equator. The phenomena of light exhibited 
at the commencement of the rainy season, during the sun’s 
zenith-passage, depend on very general, yet powerful, and 
almost tempestuous causes. The sudden decrease of the north- 
east trade-wind; and the interruption of the passage of regular 
upper currents from the equator to the poles, and of lower 
currents from the poles to the equator, generate clouds, and 
thus daily give rise, at definite recurring periods, to storms of 
wind and torrents of rain. I have observed during several 
successive years that in regions where the scintillation of the 
fixed stars is of rare occurrence, the approach of the rainy 


SCINTILLATION OF THE STARS. 105 


season is announced many days beforehand, by a flickering 
light of the stars at great altitudes above the horizon. This 
phenomenon is accompanied by sheet lightning, and single 
flashes on the distant horizon, sometimes without any visible 
cloud, and at others darting through narrow, vertically ascend- 
ing columns of clouds. In several of my writings I have 
endeavoured to delineate these precursory characteristics and 
physiognomical changes in the atmosphere.“ 

The second book of Lord Bacon’s Novum Organum gives 
us the earliest views on the velocity of light and the pro- 
bability of its requiring a certain time for its transmission. 
He speaks of the time required by a ray of light to traverse 
the enormous distances of the universe, and proposes the 
question whether those stars yet exist which we now see 
shining.” We are astonished to meet with this happy con- 





* See Voyage aux Régions équin., t. i. pp. 511 and. 512, 
and t. ii. pp. 202-208; also my Views of Nature, pp. 16, 138. 

** En Arabie, de méme qu’a Bender-Abassi, port fameux du 
Golfe Persique, l’air est parfaitement serein presque toute 
Vanneée. Le printemps, l’eté, et l’automne se passent, sans 
qu’on y voie la moindre rosée. Dans ces mémes temps tout 
le monde couche dehors sur le haut des maisons. Quand on 
est ainsi couche, il n’est pas possible d’exprimer le plaisir qu’on 
prend a contempler la beauté du ciel, ’éclat des étoiles. C'est 
une lumiére pure, ferme et éclatante, sans étincellement. Ce 
n’est qu’au milieu de l’hiver que la scintillation, quoique trés 
foible, s’y fait apercevoir.”’ 

“In Arabia,” says Garcin, “as also at Bender-Abassi, a 
celebrated port on the Persian Gulf, the air is perfectly serene 
throughout nearly the whole of the year. Spring, summer, 
and autumn, pass without exhibiting a trace of dew. Durin 
these seasons all the inhabitants sleep on the roofs of their 
jouses. It is impossible to describe the pleasure experienced 
in contemplating the beauty of the sky, and the brightness 
of the stars, while thus lying in the open air. The light of 
the stars is pure, steady, and brilliant ; and it is only in the 
middle of the winter, that a slight degree of scintillation is 
observed.” Garcin, in Hist. de l Acad. des Sc., 1748, p. 30. 

*" In speaking of the deceptions occasioned by the velocity of 


106 COSMOS. 


jecture in a work whose intellectual author was far behind 
his contemporaries in mathematical, astronomical, and phy- 
sical knowledge. The velocity of reflected solar light was 
first measured by Rémer, (November, 1675,) by comparing the 
periods of occultation of Jupiter’s satellites ; while the velocity 
of the direct light of the fixed stars was ascertained (in the 
autumn of 1727) by means of Bradley’s great discovery of 
aberration, which afforded objective evidence of the translatory 
movement of the earth, and of the truth of the Copernican 
system. In recent times a third method of measurement has 
been suggested by Arago, which is based on the phenomena 
of light observed in a variable star, as, for instance, Algol in 
Perseus. To these astronomical methods may be added one 





sound and light, Bacon says:—‘“ This last instance, and others 
of a like nature, have sometimes excited in us a most marvel- 
lous doubt, no less than whether the image of the sky and stars 
is perceived as at the actual moment of its existence, or rather 
a little after, and whether there is not (with regard to the 
visible appearance of the heavenly bodies) a true and apparent 
place which is observed by astronomers in parallaxes. It ap- 
peared so incredible to us that the images or radiations of 
heavenly bodies could suddenly be conveyed through such 
immense spaces to the sight, and it seemed that they ought 
rather to be transmitted in a definite time. That doubt, how- 
ever, as far as regards any great difference between the true and 
apparent time, was subsequently completely set at rest, when 
we considered.” . . . . The works of Francis Bacon, vol. xiv. 
Lond. 1831 (Novum Organum), p. 177. He then recals the 
correct view he had previously announced precisely in the 
manner of the ancients. Compare Mrs. Somerville’s Connexion 
of the Physical Sciences, p. 36, and Cosmos, p. 145. 

#8 See Arago’s explanation of his method in the Annuaire 
du Bureau des Longitudes pour 1842, pp. 837-343. “ L’ob= 
servation attentive des phases d’Algol a six mois d’intervalle 
servira 4 déterminer directement la vitesse de la lumiére de 
cette étoile. Prés du maximum et du minimum le change- 
ment d’intensité s’opére lentement ; il est au contraire rapide 
a_certaines époques intermédiares entre celles qui correspon- 





SCINTILLATION OF THE STARS. 107 


of terrestrial measurement, lately conducted with much in- 
genuity and suecess by M. Fizeau in the neighbourhood of 
Paris. It reminds us of Galileo’s early and fruitless experi- 
ments with two alternately obscured lanterns. 

Horrebow and Du Hamel estimated the time occupied in 
the passage of light from the sun to the earth at its mean 
distance, according to Rémer’s first observations of Jupi- — 
ter’s satellites, at 14’ 7”, Cassini, at 14’ 10”; while Newton 





dent aux deux états extrémes, quand Algol, soit en diminuant, 
soit en augmentant d’éclat, passe pour la troisiéme grandeur.” 

“The attentive observation of the phases of Algol at a six- 
month interval will serve to determine directly the velocity of 
that star’s light. Near the maximum and the minimum the 
change of intensity is very slow; it is, on the contrary, rapid 
at certain intermediate epochs between those corresponding 
to the two extremes, when Algol, either diminishing or in- 
creasing in brightness, appears of the third magnitude. 

“© Newton, Opticks, 2nd ed. (London, 1718), p. 325, 
*‘ Light moves from the sun to us in seven or eight minutes 
of time.’”” Newton compares the velocity of sound (1140 
feet in 1”) with that of light. As, from observations on 
the occultations of Jupiter’s satellites (Newton’s death oc- 
curred about half a year before Bradley’s discovery of aberra- 
tion) he calculates that light passes from the sun to the earth,’a 
distance, as he assumed, of 70 millions of miles, in 7’ 30” ; this 
result yields a velocity of light equal to 1555555 miles in a 
second. The reduction of these [ordinary] to geographical 
miles (60 to 1°) is subject to variations according as we assume 
the figure of the earth. According to Encke’s accurate calcula- 
tions in the Jahrbuch fiir 1852, an equatorial degree is equal 
to 69°1637 English miles. According to Newton’s data we 
should therefore have a velocity of 134944 geographical miles. 
Newton however assumed the sun’s parallax to be 12”. If 
this, according to Encke’s calculation of the transit of Venus, 
be 8”:57116, the distance is greater, and we obtain for the 
velocity of light (at seven and a half minutes) 188928 geo- 
graphical, or 217783 ordinary miles, in a second of time; 
therefore too much, as before we had toolittle. It is certainly 
very remarkable, although the circumstance has been over- 


108 COSMOS, 


approximated very remarkably to the truth when he gave 
it at 7’ 30”. Delambre,® who did not take into account 
any of the observations made in his own time, with the 





looked by Delambre (Hist. de ? Astronomie Moderne, tom. ii. 
p-. 653,) that Newton (probably basing his calculations upon 
more recent English observations of the first satellite) should 
have approximated within 47” to the true result, (namely, that 
of Struve, which is now generally adopted,) while the time 
assigned for the passage of light over the semi-diameter of 
the earth’s orbit continued to vacillate between the very high 
amounts of 11’ and 14’ 10”, from the period of Rémer’s dis- 
covery, in 1675, to the beginning of the 18th century. The 
first treatise in which Rémer, the pupil of Picard, com- 
municated his discovery to the Academy, bears the date 
of November, 22, 1675. He found, from observations of 
forty emersions and immersions of Jupiter’s satellites, “a 
retardation of light amounting to 22 minutes for an inter- 
val of space, double that of the sun’s distance from the 
earth.” (Memoirs de Acad. de 1666-1699, tom. x. 1730, 
p- 400.) Cassini does not deny the retardation, but he does 
not concur in the amount of time given, because, as he 
erroneously argues, different satellites presented different 
results. Du Hamel, secretary to the Paris Academy, (Regie 
Scientiarum Academie Historia, 1698, p. 148,) gave from 10 
to 11 minutes, seventeen years after Romer had left Paris, 
although he refers to him; yet we know, through Peter 
Horrebow (Basis Astronomie sive Triduum Roemerianum, 
1735, pp. 122-129), that Romer adhered to the result of 11’, 
when in 1704, six years before his death, he purposed bringing 
out a work on the velocity of light; the same was the case 
with Huygens (Zract. de Lumine, cap. i. p. 7). Cassini's 
method was very different ; he found 7’ 5” for the first satellite, 
and 14’ 12” for the second, having taken 14’ 10” for the basis 
of his tables for Jupiter pro peragrando diametri semissi, 'The 
error was therefore on the increase, (Compare Horrebow, 
Triduum, p. 129; Cassini, Hypotheses et Satellites de Jupiter 
in the Mém. de l Acad., 1666-1699, tom. vill. pp. 485, 475; 
Delambre, Hist. de l’ Astr. mod., tom. 11. pp. 751, 782; Du 
Hamel, Physica, p. 435.) 
° Delambre, Hist, de l’ Astr. mod., tom. ii. p. 658. 


SCINTILLATION OF THE STARS. 109 


exception of those of the first satellite, found 8’ 13-2, 
Encke has very justly noticed the great importance of under- 
taking a special course of observations on the occultations 
of Jupiter’s satellites, in order to arrive at a correct idea 
regarding the velocity of light, now that the perfection at- 
tained in the construction of telescopes warrants us in hoping 
that we may obtain trustworthy results. 

Dr. Busch,” of K6énigsberg, who based his calculations on 
Bradley’s observations of aberration, as re-discovered by Rigaud 
of Oxford, estimated the passage of light from the sun to 
the earth at 8’ 12”:14, the velocity of stellar light at 167976 
miles in a second, and the constant of aberration at 20-2116; 
but it would appear, from the more recent observations on 
aberration carried on during eighteen months by Struve with 
the great transit instrument at Pulkowa,” that the former 





. Reduction. of Bradley's observations at Kew and Wansted, 
1836, p. 22; Schumacher’s Astr. Nachr., bd. xiii. 1836, 
no. 309; (compare Miscellaneous Works and Correspon- 
dence of the Rev. James Bradley, by Prof. Rigaud, Oxford, 
1832). On the mode adopted for explaining aberration 
in accordance with the theory of undulatory light, see 
Doppler in the AbAl. der Kon. bihmischen Gesellschaft der 
Wiss. d5te Folge. bd. iii. s. 754-765. It is a point of extreme 
importance in the history of great astronomical discoveries, that 
Picard, more than half a century before the actual discovery 
and explanation by Bradley of the cause of aberration, probably 
from 1667, had observed a periodical movement of the Polar 
star to the extent of about 20”, which could “neither be the 
effect of parallax or of refraction, and was very regular at 
opposite seasons of the year.’ (Delambre, Hist. de I’ Astr. 
moderne, tom. ii. p. 616.) Picard had nearly ascertained the 
velocity of direct light before his pupil, Romer, made known 
that of reflected light. 

® Schum. Astr. Nachr., bd. xxl. 1844, no. 484; Struve, 
Etudes @ Astr. stellaire, pp. 103, 107 (compare Cosmos, 
p. 144.) The result given in the Annuaire pour 1842, p. 
287, for the velocity of light in a second, is 308000 kilomenes, 
or 77000 leagues (each of 4000 metres), which corresponds 


110 COSMOS. 


of these numbers should be considerably increased. The 
result of these important observations gave 8’ 17°78; from 
which, with a constant of aberration of 20-4451, and Encke’s 
correction of the sun’s parallax in the year 1835, together 
with his determination of the earth’s radius, as given in his 
Astronomisches Jahrbuch fiir 1852, we obtain 166196 geo- 
graphical miles for the velocity of light in a second. The 
probable error in the velocity seems scarcely to amount to 
eight geographical miles. Struve’s result for the time which 
light requires to pass from the sun to the earth differs about 
zisth from Delambre’s (8’ 132), which has been adopted 
by Bessel in the Zab. Regiom., and has hitherto been followed 
in the Berlin Astronomical Almanack. The discussion on this 
subject cannot, however, be regarded as wholly at rest. Great 
doubts still exist as to the earlier adopted conjecture that the 
velocity of the light of the polar star was smaller than that of 
its companion in the ratio of 133 to 134. 

M. Fizeau, a physicist, distinguished alike for his great 
acquirements and for the delicacy of his experiments, has sub- 
mitted the velocity of light to a terrestrial measurement, by 
means of an ingeniously constructed apparatus, in which arti- 
ficial light (resembling stellar light) generated from oxygen and 
hydrogen, is made to pass back by means of a mirror between 
Suresne and La Butte Montmartre, over a distance of 28321 feet 
to the same point from which it emanated. A disc having 720 
teeth, which made 12°6 rotations in a second, alternately ob- 





to 215834 miles, and approximates most nearly to Struve’s 
recent result, while that obtained at the Pulkowa Obser- 
vatory is 189746 miles. On the difference in the aberra- 
tion of the light of the Polar star and that of its companion, 
and on the doubts recently expressed by Struve, see Madler, 
Astronomie, 1849, s. 398. William Richardson gives as the 
result of the passage of light from the sun to the earth 8’ 19-28, 
from which we obtain a velocity of 215392 miles in a second. 
(Mem. of the Astron, Soc., vol. iv. P. i. p. 68.) 


Se 








7 
SCINTILLATION OF THE STARS. -: 111 


scured the ray of light and allowed it to be seen between the 
teeth on the margin. It was supposed from the marking of a 
counter (compteur) that the artificial light traversed 56642 
feet, or the distance to and from the stations in +,z4,,th part 
of a second, whence we obtain a velocity of 191460 miles in 
a second.® This result therefore approximates most closely 
to Delambre’s (which was 189173 miles) as obtained from 
Jupiter’s satellites. 

Direct observations and ingenious reflections on the ab- 
sence of all coloration during the alternation of light in the 
variable stars—a, subject to which I shall revert in the sequel 
—led Arago to the result, that, according to the undulatory 
theory, rays of light of different colour, which consequently 
haye transverse vibrations of very different length and velocity, 
moye through space with the same rapidity. The velocity of 
transmission and the refraction differ therefore in the interior of 
the different bodies through which the coloured rays pass.* 





5 Fizeau gives his result in leagues, reckoning 25 (and 
consequently 4452 metres) to the equatorial degree. He 
estimates the velocity of light at 70000 such leagues, or 
about 210000 miles in the second. On the earlier experi- 
ments of Fizeau, see Comptes rendus, tom. xxix. p. 92. In 
- Moigno, Répert. d’ Optique moderne, P. iii. p. 1162, we find 
this velocity given at 70843 leagues (of 25=1°) or about 
212529 miles, which approximates most nearly to the result 
of Bradley, as given by Busch. 

% «T)’aprés la théorie mathématique dans le systéme des 
ondes, les rayons de différentes couleurs, les rayons dont les 
ondulations sont inégales, doivent neanmoins se propager dans 
Ether avec la méme vitesse. Iln’y a pas de difference a cet 
egard entre la propagation des ondes sonores, lesquelles se 
propagent dans l’air avec la méme rapidité. Cette égalité de 
propagation des ondes sonores est bien établie expérimentale- 
ment par la similitude d’effet que produit une musique donnée 
a toutes distances du lieu oi J’on l’exécute. La principale 
difficulté, je dirai unique difficulté, qu’on etit éleyée contre le 


% 


112 COSMOS. 


¥or Arago’s observations have shown that refraction in the prism 
is not altered by the relation of the velocity of light to that 
of the earth’s motion. All the measurements coincide in the 
result, that the light of those stars towards which the earth is 





systéme des ondes, consistait done a expliquer, comment la 
vitesse de propagation des rayons de differentes couleurs dans 
les corps differents pouvait étre dissemblable et servir a rendre 
compte de l’inégalite de refraction de ces rayons ou de la dis- 
persion. On a montre recemment que cette difficulté n’est 
pas insurmontable; qu’on peut constituer l’Ether dans les 
corps inégalement denses de maniére que des rayons a ondu- 
lations dissemblables s’y propagent avec des vitesses inégales : 
reste 4 déterminer, si les conceptions des geométres a cet égard 
sont conformes a la nature des choses. Voici les amplitudes 
des ondulations déduites experimentalement d’une série de 
faits relatif aux interférences : 


Violet’ t,< «se  O'OGDEES 
Jaune a a at Med ir kates | gle yi | 


Rouge . . - « « « 0°000620 


La vitesse de transmission des rayons de différentes couleurs 
dans les espaces célestes est la méme dans le systéme des 
ondes et tout-d-fait indépendante de l’étendue ou de la vitesse 
des ondulations.”’ 

“ According to the mathematical theory of a system of 
waves, rays of different colours, having unequal undulations, 
must nevertheless be transmitted through ether with the 
same velocity. There is no difference in this respect from 
the mode of propagation of waves of sound which are 
transmitted through the atmosphere with equal velocity. 
This equality of transmission in waves of sound may be well 
demonstrated experimentally by the uniformity of effect pro- 
duced by music at all distances from the source whence it 
emanates. The principal, I may say the only objection, ad- 
vanced against the undulatory theory, consisted in the diffi- 
culty of explaining how the velocity of the propagation of rays 
of different colours through different bodies could be dissimi- 
lar, while it accounted for the inequality of the refraction of the 
rays or of their dispersion. It has been recently shown that 


VELOCITY OF LIGHT. 113 


moving presents the same index of refraction as the light of those 
from which it is receding. Using the language of the emission 
hypothesis, this celebrated observer remarks, that bodies send 
forth rays of all velocities, but that among these different velo- 
cities one only is capable of exciting the sensation of light.® 





this difficulty is not insurmountable, and that the ether 
may be supposed to be transmitted through bodies of unequal 
density in such a manner that rays of dissimilar systems of 
wayes may be propagated through it with unequal velocities ; 
but it remains to be determined whether the views advanced 
by geometricians on this question are in unison with the actual 
nature of things. The following are the lengths of the undu- 
lations, as experimentally deduced from a series of facts in 
relation to interference : 


mm 


Violet Oe a. 4. 3, PONCSZS 
OR. Ces a a a POUUUEOL 
wee re oes oe OW OO0E 20 


The velocity of the transmission of rays of different colours 
through celestial space, is equal in the system of waves, 
and is quite independent of the length or the velocity of 
the undulations.” Arago, JZS. of 1849. Compare also the 
Annuaire pour 1842, pp. 333-336. The length of the lumi- 
nous waye of the ether, and the velocity of the vibrations, 
determine the character of the coloured rays. To the violet, 
which is the most refrangible ray, belong 662, while to the 
red, (or least refrangible ray with the greatest length of wave,) 
there belong 451 billions of vibrations in the second. 

% «= J’ai prouvé, il y a bien des années, par des observations 
directes que les rayons des étoiles vers lesquelles la Terre 
marche, et les rayons des étoiles dont la Terre s’éloigne, se 
réfractent exactement de la méme quantite. Un tel résultat 
ne peut se concilier avec la théorie de l’émission qu’a Vaide 
d’une addition importante a faire a cette théorie: il faut ad- 
mettre que les corps lumineux emettent des rayons de toutes 
les vitesses, et que Jes seuls rayons d’une vitesse déterminée 
sont visibles, qu’eux seuls produisent dans |’cil la sensation 
de lumiére. Dans la théorie de l’ emission, le rouge, le jaune, 
le vert, le bleu, le yiolet solaires sont respectiyement accompag- 


VOL, III. I 


114 COSMOS. 


On comparing the velocities of solar, stellar, and terres- 
trial light, which are all equally refracted in the prism, 
with the velocity of the light of frictional electricity, we 
are disposed, in accordance with Wheatstone’s ingeniously 
conducted experiments, to regard: the lowest ratio in which 
the latter exceeds the former as 3:2. According tothe lowest 
results of Wheatstone’s optical rotatory apparatus, electric 





nés de rayons pareils, mais obscurs par défaut ou par exeés 
de vitesse. A plus de vitesse correspond une moindre réfrac- 
tion, comme moins de vitesse entraine une réfraction plus 
grande. Ainsi chaque rayon rouge visible est accompagne de 
rayons obscurs de la méme nature, qui se réfractent les uns 
plus, les autres moins que lui: ainsi # existe des rayons dans 
les stries notres de la portion rouge du spectre ; la méme chose 
doit étre admise des stries situées dans les portions jaunes, 
vertes, bleues et violettes.”’ 

“T showed many years ago, by direct observations, that the 
rays of those stars towards which the earth moves, and the rays 
of those stars from which it recedes, are repeated in exa 
the same degree. Such a result cannot be reconciled with the 
theory of emission, unless we make the important admission 
that luminous bodies emit rays of all velocities, and that only 
rays of a determined velocity are visible, these alone being 
capable of impressing the eye with the sensation of light. In 
the theory of emission, the red, yellow, green, blue, and violet 
solar rays, are respectively accompanied by like rays, which 
are, however, dark from deficiency or excess of velocity. 
Excessive velocity is associated with a slight degree of re- 
fraction, while a smaller amount of velocity involves a slighter 
degree of refraction. ‘Thus, every visible red ray is accom- 
panied by dark rays of the same nature, of which some are 
more, and others tess, refracted than the former; there are 
consequently rays in the black lines of the red portion of the 
spectrum ; and the same must be admitted in reference to the 
lines situated in the yellow, green, blue, and violet portions.” 
Arago, in the Comptes rendus de V Acad. des Sciences, t. xvi. 
1848, p. 404. Compare also t. vill. 1839, p. 326, and Pois- 
son, Traité de Mécanique, ed. ii. 18338, t. 1. § 168. Accord- 


ee 


a 


ing to the undulatory theory, the stars emit wayes of extremely 


various transyerse velocities of oscillations. 





VELOCITY OF LIGHT. 115 


light traverses 288000 miles in a second.” If we reckon 
189938 miles for stellar light, according to Struve’s observa- 
tions on aberration, we obtain the difference of 95776 miles 
as the greater velocity of electricity in one second. , 

These results are apparently opposed to the views advanced 
by Sir William Herschel, according to which solar and stellar 
light are regarded as the effects of an electro-magnetic pro- 
eess—a perpetual northern light. I say apparently, for no one 
will contest the possibility that there may be several very 
different magneto-electrical processes in the luminous cosmical 
bodies, in which light—the product of the process—may 
possess a different velocity of propagation. ‘To this conjec- 
ture may be added the uncertainty of the numerical result 
yielded by the experiments of Wheatstone, who has himself 
admitted that they are not sufficiently established, but need 
further confirmation before they can be satisfactorily compared 
with the results deduced from observations on aberration and 
on the satellites. 

The attention of physicists has been powerfully attracted to 
the experiments on the velocity of the transmission of elec- 





% ‘Wheatstone in the Philos. Transact. of the Royal Soc. for 
1834, pp. 589, 591. From the experiments described in this 
paper it would appear that the human eye is capable of per- 
ceiving phenomena of light, whose duration is limited to the 
millionth part of a second (p. 591). On the hypothesis re- 
ferred to in the text, of the supposed analogy between the light 
of the sun and polar light, see Sir John Herschel’s Results of 
Astron. Observ. at the Cape of Good Hope, 1847, p. 351. 
Arago, in the Comptes rendus pour 1838, t. vii. p. 956, has 
referred to the ingenious application of Breguet’s improved 
Wheatstone’s rotatory apparatus for determining between the 
theories of emission and undulation, since, according to the 
former, light moves more rapidly through water than through 
air, while, according to the latter, it moves more rapidly 
through air than through water. (Compare also Comptes rendus 
pour 1850, t. xxx. pp. 489-495, 556.) 


I2 


116 COSMOS. 


tricity, recently conducted in the United States by Walker 
during the course of his electro-telegraphic determinations of 
the terrestrial longitudes of Washington, Philadelphia, New 
York, and Cambridge. According to Steinheil’s description of 
these experiments, the astronomical clock of the Observatory 
at Philadelphia was brought to correspond so perfectly with 
Morse’s writing apparatus on the telegraphic line, that this 
clock marked its own course by points on the endless paper 
fillets of the apparatus. The electric telegraph instantaneously 
conveys each of these clock times to the other stations, indi- 
cating to these the Philadelphia time by a succession of similar 
points on the advancing paper fillets. In this manner arbitrary 
signs, or the instant of a star’s transit, may be similarly noted 
down at the station by a mere movement of the observer's finger 
on the stop. ‘The special advantage of the American method 
consists,” as Steinheil observes, “in its rendering the determi- 
nation of time independent of the combination of the two senses, 
sight and hearing, as the clock notes its own course, and indicates 
the instant of a star’s transit (with a mean error, according to 
Walker’s assertion, of only the 70th part of a second.) A 
constant difference between the compared clock times at Phila- 
delphia and at Cambridge is dependent upon the time occupied 
by the electric current in twice traversing the closed circle 
between the two stations.” 

Eighteen equations of condition, from measurements made 
on conducting wires of 1050 miles, gave for the velocity of 
transmission of the hydro-galvanic current 18700 miles,” 





& Steinheil in Schwmacher’s Astr. Nachr., no. 679 (1849), 
s. 97-100; Walker an the Proceedings of the American Philo- 
sophical Society, vol. vy. p. 128. (Compare earlier propositions 
of Pouillet in the Comptes rendus, t. xix. p. 1386.) The more — 
recent ingenious experiments of Mitchel, Director of the Obser- 
vatory at Cincinnati (Gould’s Astron. Journal, Dec. 1849, p. 3, 
On the velocity of the electric wave), and the investigations of 


VELOCITY OF ELECTRICITY. 117 


which is fifteen times less than that of the electric current in 
Wheatstone’s rotatory discs. As in Walker’s remarkable expe- 
riments fwo wires were not used, but half of the conduction, 
to use a conventional mode of expression, passed through 
the moist earth, we should seem to be justified in concluding 
that the velocity of the transmission of electricity depends upon 
the nature as well as the dimensions® of the medium. Bad 
conductors in the voltaic circuit become more powerfully heated 
than good conductors; and the experiments lately made by 
Riess® show that electric discharges are phenomena of a very 
various and complicated nature. The views prevailing at the 
present day regarding what is usually termed “ connection 
through the earth” are opposed to the hypothesis of linear, 
molecular conduction between the extremities of the wires, 
and to the conjectures of the impediments to conduction, of 
accumulation, and disruption in a current; since what was 
formerly regarded as intermediate conduction in the earth is 
now conjectured to belong exclusively to an equalisation or 
restoration of the electric tension. 

Although it appears probable, from the extent of accuracy 





Fizeau and Gounelle at Paris, in April, 1850, differ both from 
Wheatstone’s and Walker’s results. ‘The experiments recorded 
in the Comptes rendus, t. xxx. p. 489, exhibit striking differ- 
ences between iron and copper as conducting media. 

8 See Poggendorff’s Annalen, bd. Ixxiil. 1848, s. 337, and 
Pouillet, Comptes rendus, t. xxx. p. 501. 

*° Riess in Poggend. Ann., bd. 78, s. 433. Onthe non-con- 
duction of the intermediate earth see the important experiments 
of Guillemin Sur le courant dans une pile rsolée e¢ sans commu- 
nication entre les poles in the Comptes rendus, t. xxix. p. 521. 
**Quand on remplace un fil par la terre, dans les télégraphes 
electriques, la terre sert plutét de reservoir commun, que de 
moyen d’union entre les deux extremités du fil.”” ‘* When the 
earth is substituted for half the circuit in the electric tele- 
graph, it serves rather as a common reservoir than as a means 
of connexion between the two extremities of the wire.” 


118. COSMOS. 


at present attainable in this kind of observation, that the 
constant of aberration, and consequently the velocity, of light, 
is the same for all fixed stars, the question has frequently been. 
mooted, whether it be not possible that there are luminous. 
cosmical bodies, whose light does not reach us, in conse- 
quence of the particles of air being turned back by the force 
of gravitation exercised by the enormous masses of these bodies.. 
The theory of emission gives a scientific form to these imagi-. 
native speculations.” I here only refer to such views because: 
it will be necessary in the sequel that we should consider certaim 





 Madler, Astr., s. 380; also Laplace according to Moigno, 
Répertoire d’ Optique moderne, 1847, t.i. p. 72. “Selon la 
theorie de lemission on croit pouvoir démontrer que si le 
diamétre d’une étoile fixe serait 250 fois plus grand. que celui 
du soleil, sa densité restant la méme, l’attraction exercée a sa. 
surface detruirait la quantite de mouvement, de la molécule 
lumineuse emise, de sorte qu’elle serait anvieibie a de grandes 
distances.” ‘‘ It seems demonstrable by the theory of emission 
that if the diameter of a fixed star be 250 times greater than 
that of the sun—its density remaining the same—the attraction 
exercised on the surface would destroy the amount of motion 
emitted from the luminous molecule; so that it would be in- 
visible at great distances.” If, with Sir William Herschel, 
we ascribe to Arcturus an apparent diameter of 0”1, it 
follows that the true diameter of this star is only eleven times 
greater than that of our sun. (Cosmos, p. 138.) From the 
above considerations on one of the causes of non-luminosity 
the velocity of light must be very different in cosmical bodies 
of different dimensions. This has, however, by no means been 
confirmed by the observations hitherto made. Arago says in 
the Comptes rendus, t. viii. p. 326, “ Les experiences sur l’egale 
deviation prismatique des étoiles, vers lesquelles la terre 
marche ou. dont elle s’éloigne, rend compte de l’éegalité de 
vitesse apparente de toutes les étoiles.” ‘*‘ Experiments made 
on the equal prismatic deviation of the stars towards which 
the earth is moving, and from which it is receding, explain 
the apparent equality of velocity in the rays of all the 
stars.” 


STELLAR LIGHT. 119 


peculiarities of motion ascribed to Procyon, which appeared 
to indicate a disturbance from dark cosmical bodies. It is the 
object of the present portion of this work to. notice the 
different directions to which scientific inquiry had inclined, 
at the period of its composition and publication, and thus to 
indicate the individual character of an epoch in the sidereal 
as well as the tellurie sphere. 

The photometric relations (relations of brightness) of the 
self-luminous bodies with which the regions of space are filled, 
have for more than two thousand years been an object: of 
scientific observation and inquiry. The description of the 
starry firmanent did not only embrace determinations of places, 
the relative distances of luminous cosmical bodies from one 
another and from the circles depending on the apparent course 
of the sun and on the diurnal movement of the vault of heaven; 
but it also considered the relative intensity of the light of the 
stars. The earliest attention of mankind was undoubtedly 
directed to this latter point ; individual stars having received 
names before they were arranged with others into groups and 
constellations. Among the wild tribes inhabiting the densely 
wooded regions of the Upper Oronoco and the Atabapo, where. 
from the impenetrable nature of the vegetation I could only 
observe high culminating stars for determinations of latitude, 
I frequently found that certain individuals, more especially 
old men, had designations for Canopus, Achernar, the feet of 
the Centaur and « in the Southern Cross. If the catalogue of 
the constellations known as the Catasterisms of Eratosthenes, 
can lay claim to the great antiquity so long ascribed to it, 
(between Autolycus of Pitane and Timocharis, and therefore 
nearly a century and a half before the time of Hipparchus,) 
we possess in the astronomy of the Greeks a limit for the period 
when the fixed stars had not yet been arranged according to 
their relatiye magnitudes. In the emuneration of the stars 
belonging to each constellation, as given in the Catasterisms, 


120 COSMOS. 


frequent reference is made to the number of the largest and 
most luminous or of the dark and less easily recognized stars ;* 
but we find no relative cémparison of the stars contained in 
the different constellations. The Catasterisms are, according to 
Bernhardy, Baehr, and Letronne, more than two hundred years 
less ancient than the catalogue of Hipparchus, and are besides 
a careless compilation and a mere extract from the Poeticum 
Astronomicum (ascribed to Julius Hyginus), ifnot from the poem 
‘Epuis of the older Evatosthenes. The catalogue of Hipparchus, 
which we possess in the form given to it in the Almagest, 
contains the earliest and most important determination of 
classes of magnitude (gradations of brightness) of 1022 stars, 
and therefore of about }th of all the stars in the firmament 
visible to the naked eye, and ranging from the 1st to the 6th 
magnitude inclusive. It remains undetermined whether these 
estimates are all due to Hipparchus, or whether they do not 


rather appertain in part to the observations of Timocharis or 


Aristyllus, which Hipparchus frequently used. 

This work constituted the important basis on which was 
established the science of the Arabs and of the astronomers 
of the middle ages: the practice, transmitted to the nine- 
teenth century, of limiting the number of stars of the first 
magnitude to 15 (although Madler counts 18, and Riimker 
after a more careful observation of the southern celestial. 
hemisphere upwards of 20) takes its origin from the classifi- 
cation of the Almagest, as given at the close of the table of 
stars in the eighth book. Ptolemy, referring to natural vision, 
called all stars dark which were fainter than those of his 6th 
class ; and of this class, he singularly enough only instances 





® Eratosthenes, Catasterismi, ed. Schaubach, 1795, and 
Eratosthenica, ed. G. Bernhardy, 1822, p. 110-116. A 
distinction is made between stars Najrpods (Heydhous) and 
apavpovs (cap. 2, 11, 41). Ptolemy also limits of dudpdorae 
to those stars which do not regularly belong to a constellation. 


MAGNITUDES OF STARS. 121 


49 stars distributed almost equally over both hemispheres. 
Considering that the catalogue enumerates about one-fifth 
of all the fixed stars visible to the naked eye, it should, 
according to Argelander’s investigations, haye given 640 stars 
of the 6th magnitude. The nebulous stars (vepedoedeis) of 
Ptolemy and of the Pseudo-Eratosthenian Catasterisms, are 
mostly small stellar swarms,” appearing like nebule in the 
clearer atmosphere of the southern hemisphere. I more 
particularly base this conjecture on the mention of a nebula in 
the right hand of Perseus. Galileo, who, like the Greek and 
Arabian astronomers, was unacquainted with the nebula in 
Andromeda which is visible to the naked eye, says in his 
Nuncius sidereus, that stelle nebulose are nothing more than 
stellar masses scattered in shining groups through the ether 
(areole sparsim per ethera fulgent).@ The expression (Tay 
Heydhay rakis), the order of magnitudes, although referring only 
to lustre, led, as early as the ninth century, to hypotheses on the 
diameters of stars of different brightness :™ as if the intensity 
of light did not depend on the distance, volume, and mass, 
as also on the peculiar character of the surface of a cosmical 
body in more or less favouring the process of light. 

At the period of the Mongolian supremacy, when, in the 
fifteenth century, astronomy flourished at Samarcand, under 
Timur Ulugh Beig, photometric determinations were facilitated 
by the subdivision of each of the six classes of Hipparchus 
and Ptolemy into three subordinate groups; distinctions, for 
example, being drawn between the small, intermediate, and 





® Ptol. Almag. ed. Halma, tom. ii. p. 40, and in Eratosth. 
Catast., cap. 22, p. 18. 4 d€ Kehadt Kad.) pry dvarros éparat, 
dia b€ veherddous cvarpopijs Soxet tisw dpacba. ‘Thus, too, 
Geminus, Phen. (ed. Hilder, 1590), p. 46. 

® Cosmos, pp. 713-14. 

*' Muhamedis Alfragani Chronologica et Ast. Elementa, 
1590, cap. xxiy. p. 118. 


122 COSMOS. 


large stars of the second magnitude—an attempt which reminds: 
us of the decimal gradations of Struve and Argelander.® 
This advance in photometry, by a more exact determination 
of degrees of intensity, is ascribed in Ulugh Beig’s tables to 
Abdurrahman Sufi, who wrote a work “on the knowledge of 
the fixed stars,” and was the first who mentions one of the 
Magellanic clouds under the name of the White Ox. Since 
the discovery and gradual improvement of telescopic vision, 
these estimates of the gradations of light have been extended 
far below the sixth class. The desire of comparing the in- 
crease and decrease of light in the rewly appeared stars in 
Cygnus and Ophiuchus (the former of which continued 
luminous for twenty-one years), with the brightness of other 
stars, called attention to photometric determinations. The 
so-called dark stars of Ptolemy, which were below the 6th 
magnitude, received numerical designations according to the 
relative intensity of their light. .‘* Magnitudes, from the 8th 
down to the 16th,” says Sir John Herschel, “are familiar to 
those who are in the practice of using powerful instruments.” © 
But at this faint degree of brightness, the denominations for 
the different gradations in the scale of magnitudes are very 
undetermined, for Struve occasionally classes, among the 12th 
or 13th, stars which Sir John Herschel designates as belonging 
to the 18th or 20th magnitudes. 

The present is not a fitting place to discuss the merits 
of the very different. methods which have been adopted for the 
measurement of light within the last hundred-and-fifty years, 
from Auzout and Huygens to Bouguer and Lambert; and 
from Sir William Herschel, Rumford, and Wollaston, to 





6 Some MSS. of the Almagest refer to such subdivisions 
or intermediate classes, as they add the words peifov or edooor 
to the determination of magnitudes.- (Cod. Paris, no. 2389.) 
Tycho expressed this increase or diminution by points. 

6 Sir John Herschel, Outlines of Astr., pp. 520-27. 


———————— 


EE EE ——— Soe 


a 


Pr maaan 


me <2 eee ee 





PHOTOMETRIC METHODS. 123 


Steinheil and Sir John Herschel. It will be sufficient for the 
object of this work briefly to indicate the different methods. 
These were a comparison of the shadows of artificial lights, 
differing in numbers and distance; diaphragms; plane glasses. 
of different thickness and colour ; artificial stars formed by 
reflection on glass spheres ; the juxta-position of two seven-feet 
telescopes, separated by a distance which the observer could 
pass in about a second; reflecting instruments in which two 
stars can be simultaneously seen and compared, when the tele- 
scope has been so adjusted that the star directly observed gives 
two images of like intensity ;” an apparatus having, (in front 





* This is the application of reflecting sextants to the 
determination of the intensity of stellar light; of this instru- 
ment I made greater use when in the tropics than of the 
diaphragms recommended to me by Borda. I began my in- 
vestigation under the clear skies of Cumana, and continued 
them subsequently till 1803, but under less favourable con- 
ditions, on the elevated plateaux of the Andes, and on the 
coasts of the Pacific, near Guayaquil. I had formed an arbi- 
trary seale in which I marked Sirius, as the brightest of all 
the fixed stars, equal to 100; the stars of the first magnitude 
between 100 and 80, those of the second magnitude between 
80 and 60, of the third between 60 and 44, of the fourth 
between 45 and 30, and those of the fifth between 30 and 20. 
I especially measured the constellations of Argo and Grus, in 
which I thought I had observed alterations since the time of 
Lacaille. It seemed to me after a careful combination of 
magnitudes, using other stars as intermediate gradations, that 
Sirius was as much brighter than Canopus, as a Centauri 
than Achernar. My numbers cannot, on account of the above 
mentioned mode of classification, be compared directly with 
those which Sir John Herschel made public as early as 1838. 
(See my Recueil d’Observ. astr., vol. i. p. Ixxi., and Relat. 
hist. du Voyage aux Régions équin., t. 1, pp. 518 and 624; 
also Lettre de Mr. de Humboldt 4 Mr. Schumacher en Fevr. 1 839, 
in the Asér, Nachr., no. 374.) In this letter I wrote as follows: 
““M. Arago, qui posséde des moyens photométriques entiére- 
ment differents de ceux qui ont été publiés jusqu’ici, m’avait 
rassure sur la partie des erreurs qui pouyaient proyenir du 


124 COSMOS. 


of the object-glass,) a mirror and diaphragms, whose rota- 
tion is measured on a ring; telescopes with divided object- 
glasses, on either half of which the stellar light is received 
through a prism; astrometers® in which a prism reflects the 





changement d’inclinaison d’un miroir entamé sur la face in- 
terieure. I] blame d’ailleurs le principe de ma méthode et le 
regarde comme peu susceptible de perfectionnement, non seule- 
ment a cause de la difference des angles entre l’étoile vue 
directement et celle qui est amenée par réflexion, mais surtout 
parceque le résultat de la mesure d’intensité dépend de la 
partie de l’ceil qui se trouve en face de l’oculaire. I] ya erreur 
lorsque la pupille n’est pas trés exactement a la hauteur de la 
limite inferieure de la portion non entamée du petit miroir.” 
**M. Arago, who posesses photometric data, differing entirely 
from those hitherto published, had instructed me in reference to 
those errors which might arise from a change of inclination of a 
mirror silvered on its inner surface. He moreover blames 
the principle of my method, and regards it as little susceptible 
of correctness, not only on account of the difference of angles 
between the star seen directly and by reflection ; but espe- 
cially because the result of the amount of intensity depends 
on the part of the eye opposite to the ocular glass. ‘There 
will be an error in the observations when the pupil is not 
exactly adjusted to the elevation of the lower limit of the un- 
plated part of the small mirror.” 

® Compare Steinheil, Elemente der Helligheits-Messungen am 
Sternenhimmel, Munchen 1836, (Schum. Astr. Nachr. no. 609,) 
and John Herschel, Results of Astronomical Observations made 
during the years 1834-1838 at the Cape of Good Hope (Lond. 
1847), pp. 358-357. Seidel attempted in 1846 to determine 
by means of Steinheil’s photometer the quantities of light of 
several stars of the first magnitude, which attain the requisite 
degree of latitude in our northern latitudes. Assuming Vega 
to be=1, he finds for Sirius 5°13; for Rigel, whose lustre 
appears to be on the increase, 1°30 ; for Arcturus 0°84 ; for Ca- 
pella 0°83; for Procyon 0°71; for Spica 0°49 ; for Atair 0°40; 
for Aldebaran 0°36; for Deneb 0°35; for Regulus 0°34; for 
Pollux 0°30; he does not give the intensity of the light of 
Betelgeux, on account of its being a variable star, as was parti- 
cularly manifested between 1836 and 1839. (Outlines, p. 523.) 





PHOTOMETRY. : 125 


image of the moon or of Jupiter, and concentrates it through 
a lens at different distances into a star more or less bright. 
Sir John Herschel, who has been more zealously engaged than 
any other astronomer of modern times in making numerical 
determinations in both hemispheres of the intensity of light, 
confesses that the practical application of exact photometric 
methods must still beregarded asa “ desideratum in astronomy,” 
and that “photometry is yet in its infancy.”’ The increasing 
interest taken in variable stars, and the recent celestial phe- 
nomenon of the extraordinary increase of light exhibited in 
the year 1837 in a star of the constellation Argo, has made 
astronomers more sensible of the importance of obtaining 
certain determinations of light. 

It is essential to distinguish between the mere arrangement 
of stars according to their lustre, without numerical estimates 
of the intensity of light (an arrangement adopted by Sir John 
Herschel in his Manual of Scientific Enquiry prepared for the 
Use of the Navy), and classifications in which intensity of 
light is expressed by numbers, under the form of so-called 
relations of magnitude, or by more hazardous estimates of 
the quantities of radiated light.” The first numerical scale, 
based on estimates calculated with the naked eye, but im- 





Compare for the numerical data of the photometric results 
4 tables of Sir John Herschel’s A str. Obs. at the Cape, a) p. 341; 
b) pp. 867-371; c) p. 440; and d) in his Outlines of Astr., pp. 522 
-525, 645-646. For a mere arrangement without numbers 
see the Manual of Scientific Enquiry prepared for the use of the 
Navy, 1849, p.12. In order to improve the old conventional 
mode of classing the stars according to magnitudes, a scale of 
photometric magnitudes consisting in the addition of 0°41, as 
explained more in detail in Asér. Obs. at the Cape, p. 370, 
has been added to the vulgar scale of magnitudes in the 
Outlines of Astronomy, p. 645, and these scales are subjoined 


to this portion of the present work, together with a list of 
northern and southern stars, 


126 COSMOS. 


proved by an ingenious elaboration of the materials” probably 
deserves the preference over any other approximative method 
practicable in the present imperfect condition of photometrical 
instruments, however much the exactness of the estimates 
must be endangered by the varying powers of individual ob- 
servers—the serenity of the atmosphere—the different altitudes 
of widely distant stars, which can only be compared by means 
of numerous intermediate stellar bodies—and above all by the 
unequal colour of the light. Very brilliant stars of the 
1st magnitude, such as Sirius and Canopus, a Centauri and 
Achernar, Deneb and Vega, on account of their white light, 
admit far less readily of comparison by the naked eye 
than fainter stars below the 6th and 7th magnitudes. Such 
a comparison is even more difficult when we attempt to 
contrast yellow stars of intense light, like Procyon, Capella, 
or Atair, with red ones, like Aldebaran, Arcturus, and Betel- 
geux.” 

Sir John Herschel has endeavoured to determine the rela- 
tion between the intensity of solar light, and that of a star of 
the 1st magnitude by a photometric comparison of the moon 
with the double-star a Centauri of the southern hemisphere, 
which is the third in brightness of all the stars. He thus 
fulfilled (as had been already done by Wollaston) a wish 
expressed by John Michell” as early as 1767. Sir John 
Herschel found from the mean of eleven measurements con- 
ducted with a prismatic apparatus; that the full moon was 
27408 times brighter than « Centauri. According to Wol- 
laston the light of the sun is 801072 times brighter than 





7 Argelander, Durchmusterung des nordl. Himmels zwi- 
schen 45° und 80° Decl. 1846, s. xxiv.—xxvi.; Sir John 
Herschel, Astr. Observ. at the Cape of Good Hope, pp. 327, 
340, 365. 

1 Op. cit., p. 804, and Oudl., p. 522. 

7 Philos. Transact., vol. lyii. for the year 1767, p. 2384. — 


a = _ 


ee ee 





PHOTOMETRY. 127 


the full moon;” whence it follows that the light transmitted 
to us from the sun is to the light which we receive from « 
Centauri as 22000 millions to1. It seems therefore very pro- 
bable, when, in accordance with its parallax, we take into 
account the distance of the star, that its (absolute) proper 
luminosity exceeds that of our sun by 2,3; times. Wollaston 
found the brightness of Sirius 20000 million times fainter 
than thatof the sun. From what we at present believe to be 
the parallax of Sirius (0°’230) its actual (absolute) intensity of 
light exceeds that of the sun 63 times.“ Our sun there- 
fore belongs, in reference to the intensity of its process of 
light, to the fainter fixed stars. Sir John Herschel esti- 





8 Wollaston in the Piulos. Transact. for 1829, p. 27. 
Herschel’s Outlines, p. 553. Wollaston’s comparison of the 
light of the sun with that of the moon was made in 1799, and 
was based on observations of the shadows thrown by lighted 
wax tapers, while in the experiments made on Sirius in 1826 
and 1827, images reflected from thermometer bulbs were em- 
ployed. The earlier data of the intensity of the sun’s light, 
compared with that of the moon, differ widely from the results 
here given. They were deduced by Michelo and Euler, from 
theoretical grounds at 450000 and 374000, and by Bouguer 
from measurements of the shadows of the light of wax tapers, 
at only 300000. Lambert assumes Venus, in her greatest inten- 
sity of light, to be 3000 times fainter than the full moon. Ac- 
cording to Steinheil, the sun must be 3286500 times further 
remoyed from the earth than it is, in order to appear, like Arc- 
turus, to the inhabitants of our planet (Struve, Stellaruwm Com- 
positarum Mensure Micrometrice, p. clxiii.) ; and according to 
Sir John Herschel the light of Arcturus exhibits only half the 
intensity of Canopus; Herschel, Observ. at the Cape, p. 34. 
All these conditions of intensity, more especially the impor- 
tant comparison of the brightness of the sun, the full moon, and 
of the ash-coloured light of our satellite which varies so greatly 
according to the different positions of the earth considered as 
a reflecting body, deserve further and serious investigation. 

* Outl. of Astr., p. 553; Astr. Observ, at the Cape, p. 363. 


128 COSMOS. 


mates the intensity of the light of Sirius to be equal to the 
light of nearly two hundred stars of the 6th magnitude. Since 
it is very probable, from analogy with the experiments already 
made, that all cosmical bodies are subject to variations both 
in their movements through space and in the intensity of 
their light, although such variations may occur at very long 
and undetermined periods, it is obvious, considering the de- 
pendence of all organic life on the sun’s temperature and 
on the intensity of its light, that the perfection of photo- 
metry constitutes a great and important subject for scientific 
inquiry. Such an improved condition of our knowledge can 
render it alone possible to transmit to future generations 
numerical determinations of the photometric condition of the 
firmament. By these means we shall be enabled to explain 
numerous geognostic phenomena relating to the thermal history 
of our atmosphere, and to the earlier distribution of plants 
and animals. Such considerations did not escape the in- 
quiring mind of William Herschel, who, more than half a 
century ago, before the close connection between electricity 
and magnetism had been discovered, compared the ever 
luminous cloud-envelopes of the sun’s body with the polar 
light of our own terrestrial planet.” 

Arago has ascertained that the most certain method for the 
direct measurement of the intensity of light consists in observing 
the complementary condition of the coloured rings seen by trans- 
mission and reflection. I subjoin in a note,” in his own words, 





7% William Herschel On the nature of the sun and fixed stars 
in the Philos. Transact. for 1795, p. 62; and On the changes 
that happen to the fixed stars in the Philos. Transct. for 1796, 
p- 186, Compare also Sir John Herschel, Observ. at the 


Cape, pp. 350-352. 
_ % Extract of a Letter from M. Arago to M. de Humboldt, 


May, 1850. 
Mesures photométriques. 
“Ii n’existe pas de Photométre proprement dit, c’est-a-dire 


Se eld a eS 











PHOTOMETRY. 129 


the results of my friend’s photometric method, to which, he 
has added an account of the optical principle on which his 
eyanometer is based. 

The so-called relations of the magnitude of the fixed stars, as 





d'instrument donnant l’intensité d’une lumiére isolée; le Pho- 
tométre de Leslie, 4 l'aide duquel il avait eu l’audace de 
youloir comparer la lumiére de la lune a la lumiére du soleil, 
par des actions calorifiques, est complétement défectueux. J’ai 
prouvé, en effet, que ce prétendu Photométre monte quand 
on l’expose a la lumiére du soleil, quil descend sous l’action 
dela lumiére du feu ordinaire, et quil reste complétement 
stationnaire lorsqu’il recoit la lumiére d’une lampe d’Argand. 
Tout ce qu’on a pu faire jusqu’ici, c’est de comparer entr’elles 
deux lumiéres en présence, et cette comparaison n’est méme a 
l'abri de toute objection que lorsqu’on raméne ces deux 
lumiéres a l’égalité par un affaiblissement graduel de la lumiére 
la plus forte. C'est comme criterium de cette egalité que j’ai 
employé les anneaux colores. Si on place l'une sur l’autre deux 
lentilles d’un long foyer, il se forme autour de leur point de 
eontact des anneaux colores tant par voie de réflexion que 
par yoie de transmission. Les anneaux refléchis sont com- 
plémentaires en couleur des anneaux transmis; ces deux 
series d’anneaux se neutralisent mutuellement quand les deux 
lumiéres qui les forment et qui arrivent simultanément sur 
les deux lentilles, sont égales entr’elles. 

** Dans le cas contraire on voit des traces ou d’anneaux 
reflechis ou d’anneaux transmis, suivant que la lumiére qui 
forme les premiers, est plus forte ou plus foible que la lumiére 
a laquelle on doit les seconds. C’est dans ce sens seulement 
que les anneaux colorés jouent un réle dans les mesures de 
la lumiére auxquelles je me suis livré.” 

(b.) Cyanométre. 

““Mon cyanométre est une extension de mon polariscope. 
Ce dernier instrument, comme tu sais, se compose d’un tube 
ferme a l'une de ses extrémités par une plaque de cristal de 
roche perpendiculaire a l’axe, de 5 millimétres d’épaisseur ; 
et d'un prisme doué de la double réfraction, placé du cété de 
Voeil, Parmi les couleurs variées que donne cet appareil, 
lorsque de la lumiére polarisée le trayerse, et qu’on fait tourner 

VOL. III. K 


130 COSMOS. 


given in our catalogues and maps of the stars, sometimes indi- 
eate as of simultaneous occurrence that which belongs to very 
different periods of cosmical alterations of light. The order 
of the letters which, since the beginning of the seventeenth 





le prisme sur lui-méme, se trouve par un heureux hasard la 
nuance du bleu de ciel. Cette couleur bleue fort affaiblie, 
c’est-d-dire trés meélangée de blanc lorsque la lumiére est pres- 
que neutre, augmente d’intensite—progressivement, 4 mesure 
que les rayons qui penétrent dans l’instrument, renferment 
une plus grande proportion de rayons polarisés. 

**Supposons done que le polariscope soit dirigé sur une 
feuille de papier blanc; qu’entre cette feuille et la lame de 
cristal de roche il existe une pile de plaques de verre suscep- 
tible de changer d’inclinaison, ce qui rendra la lumiére éclair- 
ante du papier plus ou moins polarisée; la couleur bleue 
fournie par l’instrument va en augmentant avec l’inclinaison de 
la pile, et l’on s’arréte lorsque cette couleur parait la méme 
que celle de la region de l’atmosphére dont on veut déter- 
miner la teinte cyanométrique, et qu’on regarde a l’eil nu 
immediatement a cote de Vinstrument. La mesure de cette 
teinte est donnée par l’inclinaison de la pile. Si cette derniére 
partie de l’instrument se compose du méme nombre de plaques 
et d’une méme espéce de verre, les observations faites dans 
divers lieux seront parfaitement comparables entr’elles.” 


(a.) Photometric Measurements. 

“ There does not exist a photometer properly so called, that 
is to say, no instrument giving the intensity of an isolated light; 
for Leslie’s photometer, by means of which he boldly supposed 
that he could compare the light of the moon with that of the 
sun, by their caloric actions, is utterly defective. I found, in 
fact, that this pretended photometer rose on being exposed to 
the light of the sun, that it fell when exposed to a moderate 
fire, and that it remained altogether stationary when brought 
near the light of an Argand lamp. All that has hitherto 
been done has been to compare two lights when contiguous 
to one another, but even this comparison cannot be relied on 
unless the two lights be equalized, the stronger being gradually 
reduced to the intensity of the feebler. For the purpose of 
judging of this inequality I employed coloured rings. On 











PHOTOMETRY. 131 


century, have been added to the stars in the generally con- 
sulted Uranometria Bayert, are not, as was long supposed, 
certain indications of these alterations of light. Argelander 
has ably shown, that the relative brightness of the stars cannot 





placing on one another two lenses of a great focal length, co- 
loured rings will be formed round their point of contact as much 
by means of reflection as of transmission. . The colours of the 
reflected rings are complementary to those of the transmitted 
rings; these two series of rings neutralise one another when 
the two lights by which they are formed and which fall 
simultaneously on the two lenses are equal. 

‘In the contrary case, we meet with traces of reflected. or 
transmitted rings, according as the light by, which the former 
are produced, is stronger or fainter than that from which 
the latter are formed. It is only in this manner that co- 
loured rings can be said to come into play in those photo- 
metric measurements to which I have directed my attention.” 


(b.) Cyanometer. 

“My cyanometer is an extension of my polariscope. This 
latter instrument, as you know, consists of a tube closed at one 
end by a plate of rock crystal, cut perpendicular to its axis, 
and 5 millimétres in thickness; and of a double refracting 
prism placed near the part to which the eye is applied. Among 
the varied colours yielded by this apparatus, when it is 
traversed by polarised light and the prism turns on itself, we 
fortunately find a shade of azure. This blue, which is very 
faint, that is to say mixed with a large quantity of white when 
the light is almost neutral, gradually increases in intensity in 
proportion to the quantity of polarised rays which enter the 
instrument. 

“Let us suppose the polariscope directed towards a sheet 
of white paper; and that between this paper and the plate 
of rock crystal there is a pile of glass plates capable of being 
variously inclined, by which means the illuminating light of 
the paper would be more or less polarised; the blue colour 
yielded by the instrument will go on increasing with the in- 
clination of the pile ; and the process must be continued until 
the colour appears of the same intensity with the region 
of the atmosphere whose cyanometrical tinge is to be deter- 


K 2 


132 COSMOS. 


be inferred from the alphabetical order of the letters, and that 
Bayer was influenced in his choice of these letters, by the 
form and direction of the constellations.” 





PHOTOMETRIC ARRANGEMENT OF THE FIXED STARS. 


I close this section with a table taken from Sir John 
Herschel’s Outlines of Astronomy, pp. 645 and 646. Iam 
indebted for the mode of its arrangement, and for the follow- 
ing lucid exposition, to my learned friend Dr. Galle, from 
whose communication, addressed to me, in March, 1850, I 
extract the subjoined observations :— 

**'The numbers of the photometric scale in the Outlines of 
Astronomy have been obtained by adding throughout 0°41 
to the results calculated from the vulgar scale. Sir John 
Herschel arrived at these more exact determinations by ob- 
serving their ‘‘ sequences” of brightness, and by combining 
these observations with the average ordinary data of magni- 
tudes, especially on those given in the catalogue of the Astro- 
nomical Society for the year 1827. See Observ. at the Cape, 
pp- 304-352. The actual photometric measurements of seve- 
ral stars as obtained by the Astrometer (op. cit. p. 853), have 
not been directly employed in this catalogue, but have only 
served generally to show the relation existing between the 
ordinary scale (of 1st, 2nd, 3rd, &c., magnitudes) to the actual 
photometric quantities of individual stars. This comparison 
has given the singular result that our ordinary stellar magni- 
tudes (1, 2, 3...) decrease in about the same ratio as a star of 
the 1st magnitude when removed to the distances of 1, 2,3... 





mined, and which is seen by the naked eye in the immediate 
vicinity of the instrument. The amount of this colour is given 
by the inclination of the pile; and if this portion of the appa- 
ratus consist of the same number of plates formed of the same 
kind of glass, observations made at different places may readily 
be compared together.” 

" Argelander de fide Uranometrie Bayert, 1842, pp. 14-23. 
‘* In eadem classe littera prior majorem splendorem nullo modo 
indicat” (§ 9). Bayer did not therefore show that the light 
of Castor was more intense in 1603 than that of Pollux. 








PHOTOMETRIC SCALE. 183 


by which its brightness, according to photometric law, would 
attain the values 1, 4, 4, ~yth...(Observ. at the Cape, pp. 371, 
372; Outlines, pp.521, 522); in order, however, to make this 
accordance still greater, it is only necessary to raise our pre- 
viously adopted stellar magnitudes about half a magnitude (or 
more accurately considered 0°41)so that a star of the 2°00 mag- 
nitude would in future be called 2°41,and star of 2°50 would be- 
come 2°91, andso forth. Sir John Herschel therefore proposes 
that this “‘ photometric”’ (raised) scale shall in future be adopted 
( Observ. at the Cape, p. 372, and Outlines, p. 522)—a proposition 
in which we cannot fail to concur. For while on the one hand 
the difference from the vulgar scale would hardly be felt (Od- 
serv. at the Cape, p. 8372); the table in the Outlines (p. 645) 
may, on the other hand, serve as a basis for stars down to the 
fourth magnitude. The determinations of the magnitudes of 


_ the stars according to the rule, that the brightness of the stars 


of the Ist, 2nd, 3rd, 4th magnitude is exactly as 1, 4, 4,+),. ..as 
is now shown approximatively, is therefore already practicable. 
Sir John Herschel employs aCentauri as the standard star of the 
first magnitude, for his photometric scale, and as the unit for the 
quantity of light ( Outlines, p. 523; Observ. at the Cape, p. 372). 
If therefore we take the square of a star’s photometric mag- 
nitude, we obtain the inverse ratio of the quantity of its light 
to that of aCentauri. Thus for instance if « Orionis have a pho- 
tometric magnitude of 3, it consequently has 1 of the light of 
a Centauri. ‘The number 3 would at the same time indicate 
that « Orionis is 3 times more distant from us than a Centauri, 
provided both stars be bodies of equal magnitude and bright- 
ness. If another star, as for instance Sirius, which is four 
times as bright, were chosen as the unit of the photometric 
magnitudes indicating distances, the above conformity to law 
would not be so simple and easy of recognition. It is also 
worthy of notice that the distance of a Centauri has been 
ascertained with some probability, and that this distance is 
the smallest of any yet determined. Sir John Herschel 
demonstrates (Outlines, p. 521,) the inferiority of other scales 
to the photometric, which progresses in order of the squares, 
1, 4, o is: -- He likewise treats of geometric progressions, as 
for instance, 1, 3, 3, 4,...or 1, 4,4, s,.... The gradations. 
employed by yourself in your observations under the equator, 
during your travels in America, are arranged in a kind of” 


134 COSMOS. 


arithmetical progression (Recueil d’Observ. Astron., vol. i. 
p. Ixxi., and Schumacher’s Astron. Nachr. no. 374). These 
scales however correspond less closely than the photometric 
scale of progression (by squares) with the vulgar scale. In 
the following table the 190 stars have been given from the 
Outlines, without reference to their declination, whether 
southern or northern, being arranged solely in accordance 
with their magnitudes.” 


List of 190 stars from the 1st to the 3rd magnitude, arranged 
according to the determinations of Sir John Herschel, giving 
the ordinary magnitudes with greater accuracy, and likewise 
the magnitudes in accordance with his proposed photometric 
classification :— 


STARS OF THE First MAGNITUDE. 























Magnitude. Magnitude. 
Star. Star. 
Vulg. | Phot. Vulg. | Phot. 
SSETIUB: s,0c0s 5-0: 0°08 | 0°49 fa Orionis ......... 1:0: | 1°43 
ym Argus (Var.) ...| — — fa Eridani ......... 1:09 | 1°50 
Canopus ......... 0°29 | 0°70 Aldebaran ...... ti: [ame 
a Centauri ......... 0°59 | 1:00 | 6 Centauri......... L17 | 1°58 
Arcturus ......... 0-77 | 118 }|a@ Crucis. | 12 1°6 
Rigel ic.h.cc...5. 0°82 | 1°23 Antares ......... 1°2 1°6 
Capella .....;..... 1:0 1:4 a Aquile ......... 1°28 | 1°69 
NIG Ss cccnicnpohe 1:0 1:4 PSNR, | cassie <> ae 1°38 | 1°79 
Procyon ......... 1:0 1°4 











STARS OF THE SEcoND MAGNITUDE. 





























Magnitude. |. Magnitude. 
Star. Star. 

Vulg. | Phot. Vulg. | Phot. 
Fomalhaut ...... 1:54 | 1°95 JA “Seorpi Bier. Ree 1°87 | 2°28 
Bi Cracis ...4..5...:. 1°57 | 1°98 Ja COygni............ 1:90 | 2°31 
Uc: a 16: | 2°0: CENCE wy... ncncies 1:94 | 2°35 
Regulus ............ 16: | 20: Je Urse(Var.) ...| 195 | 2°36 

a Gruis ............] 1°66 | 2°07 Ja Urse Var.) ...| 1°96 | 2°37 | 
Y NORM sets oes as 198) | 214 4 SC Orionia | s..x<..°- 2°01 | 2°42 
€ AOTIORAB, 0 ....0. 03. 1°84 | 2°25 | 6 Argus ............ 2°08 | 2°44 
¢ YCOMET Bi Ks Hak O88. (2-227 Ba Poreci...:.KR2. 2°07 | 2°48 


— 





Se =e eee eee 





—- — 


SraRs OF THE SEeconpD MacnrrupE—continued. 


PHOTOMETRIC SCALE. 


135 














Magnitude. Magnitude. 
Star. Star, 

Vulg. | Phot. Vulg. | Phot. 
eee 2°08 | 2°49 | y Leonis............ 2°34 | 2°75 
e Argus... 218 | 259 | 6 Gruis ............ 2°36 | 277 
n Urse (Var.) ...| 2°18 | 2°59 Ja Arietis. ..., 2°40 |} 2°81 
y Orionis ......... 218 | 2°59 [o Sagittarii ...... 2°41 | 2°82 
a Triangaustr. ... | 2°23 | 2°64 [0 Argus............ 2°42 | 2°83 
« Sagittarii ......| 2°26 | 267 |Z Urse . 2:43 | 2°84. 
PB Tauri ............ | 2°28 | 269 16 Andromedx 2°45 | 2°86 

ae 2°28 | 2°69 1 6 Ceti............... 2°46 | 2°87 
@ Scorpii ......... 2°29 | 270 |X Argus............ 2°46 | 2°87 
a Hydre ..,...... 2°30 | 271 | 6 Aurige ......... 2°48 | 2°89 
© Canis ...... 2°32 | 2°73 [| y Andromede ...| 2°50 | 2°91 
a Pavonis ......... 2°33 | 2°74 




















Srars oF THE THiRD MAGNITUDE. 




















Magnitude. Magnitude. 
Star. Star. 

Vulg. | Phot. Vulg. | Phot, 

y Cassiopeiz ...... 2°52 | 2°93 Jc Argus ........... 2°80 | 3°21 
a Andromede...... 2°54 | 2°95 fe Bootis............ 2°80 | 3°21 
@ Centauri ......... 2°54 | 2°95 Ja Lupi ............ 2°82 | 3°23 
a Cassiopeiz ...... 2°57 | 2°98 Je Centauri......... 2°82 | 3°23 
Drsamis .............| 2°58 1.299 9 Canis ............. 2°85 | 3°26 
« Orionis............| 2°59 | 3°00 | 6 Aquarii ......... 2°85 | 3°26 
y Geminorum...... 2°59 | 300 }0 Scorpili............ 2°86 | 3°27 
6 Orionis............ 2°61 | 3°02 Je Cygni 2°83 | 3°29 
Algol ( Var.) 2°62 | 3°03 | Ophiuchi......... 2°89 | 3°30 

© ROR ML 5.,.5.::..... 2:62 | 3°03 [Fy Corvi ............ 2°90 | 3:31 
y Draconis ......... 2°62 | 303 Ja Cephéei............ 2°90 | 3°31 
£ Leonis ............ 2°63 | 3°04 | 6 Centauri......... 2°91 | 3°32 
a Ophiuehi ......... 2°63 | 3°04 Ja Serpentis ...... 2°92 | 3°33 
8 Cassiopeiz ...... 2°63 | 3°04 [0 Leonis.............| 2°94 | 3°85 
Y RE Bhi cc en sss 263 | 3°04 |x Argus............ 2°94 |. 3°35 
Gt -OROB 5.0.3. --. 2°65 | 3°06 | 6 Corvi ............ 2°95 | 3°36 
PB Bagi oi a8... 2°65 | 3°06 16 Scorpii ......... 2°96 | 3°37 
y Centauri ......... 2°68 | 3°09 §Z Centauri.. 2°96 | 3°37 
a Corone............ 2°69 | 3°10 |Z Ophiuehi.... be sbadese 2°97 | 3°38 
y Urs 2°71 | 3°12 | a Aquarii ...,..... 2°97 | 3°38 
e Scorpii.. 2°71 | 3°12 | w Argus............ 2°98 | 3:39 
Z Argus 2°72 | 3:13 | y Aquile ......... | 2°98 | 3°39 
B Ursee 2-77 | 3°18 10 Cassiopeie ...... 2°99 | 3°40 
a Pheenicis ......... 2°78 | 3:19 [6 Centauri......... 2°99 | 3°40 























136 COSMOS. 
Stars oF THE THIRD MacnitupE—coniinued. 
Magnitude. Magnitude. 
Star. Star. 

Vulg. | Phot. Vulg. | Phot. 
a Leporis ......... 3°00 | 3°41 | y Persei ............ 3°34 | 8°75 
© Ophiucehi......... 3°00 | 3°41 | Urse ............ 3°35 | 3°76 
2 Sagittarii ...... 3°01 | 3:42 16 Triang. bor. ... | 3°35 | 3°76 
 Bootis............ 3°01 | 3°42 | wScorpii ......... 3°35 | 3°76 
n Draconis........ «| 8°02 | 3:43 | 6 Leporis ......... 3°35 | 3°76 
az Ophiuchi ...... 3°05 | 3°46 fy -Lupi ............ 3°36 | 3°77 
B Draconis.........| 3:06 | 38°47 ] 0 Persei............ 3:36 | 3°77 
6B Libre ...... 3°07 | 3-48 |v Urse . 3°36 | 3:77 
y Virginis......... 3°08 | 3:49 fe Auriga (Var.).. 3:37 |:3°78 
punts the 3°08 | 3°49 |v Scorpii............ 3°37 | 3°78 
B Arietis ......... 3:09 | 3°50 Je Orionis ......... 3°37 | 3°78 
y Pegasi.,.......... | 3°11 | 3°52 [y Lynceis............ 3°39 | 3°80 
© Sagittarii ...... 3°11 | 3-52 12 Draconis......... 3°40 | 3°81 
fre $:12 4°3°58 ba Ame... o 3°40 | 3°81 
A Sagittarii ...... 3°13 | 3°54 | m Sagittarii......... 3°40 | 3°81 
sO ae ae 3°14 | 3°55 | w Hereulis......... | 3°41 | 3°82 
é Virginis? ...... 3°14 | 3°55 | 6 Can. min.? ...... | 3°41 | 3°82 
a Columbe ...... 3°15 | 3°66 U2 ‘Tanet i... 4... 3°42 | 3°83 
S Aurige ......... 3°17 | 3:58 | 6 Draconis......... 3°42 | 3°83 
Pp Merenlis.....:.:. 3-18 | 3-59 | Geminorum ... | 3°42 | 3°83 
« Centauri .,....... 3°20 | 3-61 | y Bootis............ 3°43 | 3°84 
© Capricorni ...... 3°20 | 3-61 |« Geminorum 3°43 | 3°84 
0 Cori +55. 03-5: 3°22 | 3-63 [a Muscee 3°43 | 3°84 
a Can. ven. ...... 3°22 | 3-63 | a Hydri? ......... 3°44 | 3°85 
8 Ophiuchi ...... 3-23 | 3-64 |r Scorpii ......... 3°44 | 3°85 
6 Cygni ............ 3:24 | 3-65 | 0 Herculis......... 3°44 | 3°85 
e* Perdet so Fs: 3:26 | 3-67 | 0 Geminorum 3°44 | 3°85 | 
9 ERUE S525. shit 3:26 | 3-67 |p Orionis ......... 3°45 | 3°86 
6 Eridani ......... 3:26 | 3-67 | Cephei ......... 3°45 | 3°86 
& Argus. 3-26 | 3:67: 1S Urew 2. ..c.es.. 8°45 | 3°86 ° 
DS SA Cy ei 3°27 | 3-68 12 Hydre ......... 3°45 | 3°86 
£ Persei 3°27 | 3:68 | y Hydre ......... 3°46 | 3°87 
Z Herculis......... 3:28 | 3-69 | Triang.austr.... | 3°46 | 3°87 
ge Corvi «.. ...u35;:'| 828 F BGO he® Ura *...5:3: 3°46 | 3°87 
PeaAUriow |. ..2::; 3°29 | 3-70 |» Aurige ......... 3°46 | 3°87 © 
y Urs. min 3°30 | 3°71 fy Lyre .........:.. 3°47 | 3°88 
» Pegasi. 3°31 | 3-72 |» Geminorum 3°48 | 3°89 
1 ee 3°31 | 3-72 |y Cephei ......... 3:48 | 3-89 
a Toncani .;....:.. 3°32 | 3°78 fn Ursee ......0.55.: 3°49 | 3°90 
8 Capricorni ...... 3°32 | 3-73 | « Cassiopeie ...... 3°49 | 3°90 
ee 3°32 | 3-73 [3 Aquile ........ 8°50 | 3°91 © 
€ Aquile ......... 3°32 | 3:73 |o Scorpii 3°50 | 3°91 
OGM cect anci-: 3°33 | 3°74 Ir Argus............ 3°50 | 3°91 




















te ee ee 





— 





PHOTOMETRIC SCALE. 137 


“The following short table of the photometric quantities of 
17 stars of the 1st magnitude (as obtained from the photome- 
tric scale of magnitudes) may not be devoid of interest :” 


Sirius i ‘ g - . 4165 
» Argus ; : F : : — 
Canopus . ; - ; : . 2°041 
a Centauri . : i ; ‘ . 1:000 
Arcturus . i : ; : ~ Orie 
Rigel . . t ; j f . 0°661 
Capella. ; : é . . 0°510 
a Lyrae : . ‘ : : . 0°510 
Procyon . . ‘ : ° . 0°510 
aOrionis . é i ¢ ; . 0-489 
aFridani . ‘ P - ‘ . 0°444 
Aldebaran . : : ‘ A . 0°444 
8 Centauri . ; : ‘ m . 0°401 
a Crucis : ; , E 3 . 0-391 
Antares. t E 4 . O°s91 
aAquile , : é : : . 0°350 
Spica . ; . ‘ . . 0°312 


* The following is the photometric quantity of stars strictly 
belonging to the 1, 2................ 6 magnitudes in which the 
quantity of the light of « Centauri is regarded as the unit :” 


Magnitude on the vulgar scale. Quantity of Light. 
1:00 0°500 
2°00 0°172 
3°00 0-086 
4°00 0:051 
5°00 0°034 


6°00 0°024 





138 


ITI. 
NUMBER, DISTRIBUTION, AND COLOUR OF THE FIXED 
STARS,— STELLAR MASSES (STELLAR SWARMS.) — THE 


MILKY WAY INTERSPERSED WITH A FEW NEBULOUS 
SPOTS. 


We have already, in the first section of this fragmentary As- 
trognosy, drawn attention to a question first mooted by Olbers.? 
If the entire vault of heaven were covered with innumerable 
strata of stars, one behind the other, as with a wide-spread 
starry canopy, and light were undiminished in its passage 


through space, the sun would be distinguishable only by 


its spots, the moon-would appear as a dark disc, and amid 
the general blaze not a single constellation would be 
visible. During my sojourn in the Peruvian plains, between 
‘the shores of the Pacific and the chain of the Andes, I was 
vividly reminded Of a state of the heavens, which, though 


diametrically opposite in its cause to the one above referred 


to, constitutes an equally formidable obstacle to human 
knowledge. A thick mist obscures the firmament in this region 
for a period of many months, during the season, called e/ 
tiempo de la garua. Nota planet, not the most brilliant stars 
of the southern hemisphere, neither Canopus, the southern 
Cross, nor the feet of the Centaur, are visible. It is frequently 
almost impossible to distinguish the position of the moon. 
If by chance the outline of the sun’s disc be visible during 
the day it appears devoid of rays, as if seen through 
coloured glasses, being generally of a yellowish red, some- 





1 Vide supra, p. 46 and note. 


— 











NUMBER OF THE FIXED STARS. 139 


times of a white, and occasionally even of a bluish green 
colour. The mariner, driven onwards by the cold south cur- 
rents of the sea, is unable to recognize the shores, and in the 
absence of all observations of latitude sails past the harbours 
which he desired to enter. A dipping needle alone could, as 
I have elsewhere shown, save him from this error, by the 
local direction of the magnetic curves.’ 

Bouguer and his coadjutor, Don Jorge Juan, complained, 
long before me, of the “‘unastronomical sky of Peru.” A 
graver consideration associates itself with this stratum of 
vapours in which there is neither thunder nor lightning, in 
consequence of its incapacity for the transmission of light or 
electric charges, and above which the Cordilleras, free and 
cloudless, raise their elevated plateaux and snow-covered 
summits. According to what modern geology has taught us 
to conjecture regarding the ancient history of our atmosphere, 
its primitive condition, in respect to its mixture and deasity, 
must have been unfavourable to the transmission of light. 
When we consider the numerous processes which in the pri- 
mary world may have led to the separation of the solids, 
fluids, and gases around the earth’s surface, the thought inyo- 
luntarily arises how narrowly the human race escaped being: 
surrounded with an untransparent atmosphere, which though 
perhaps not greatly prejudicial to some classes of vegetation, 
would yet have completely veiled the whole of the starry 
canopy. All knowledge of the structure of the universe would 
thus have been withhe!d from the inquiring spirit of man. 
Excepting our own globe,and perhaps the sun and the moon, 
nothing would have appeared to us to have been created. An 
isolated triad of stars—the sun, the moon, and the earth—would 
have appeared the sole occupants of space. Deprived of a 
great, and indeed of the sublimest portion of his ideas of” 





* Cosmos, vol. i. p. 171 and note. 


140 COSMOS. 


the Cosmos, man would have been left without all those in- 
citements which, for thousands of years, have incessantly im- 
pelled him to the solution of important problems, and have 
exercised so. beneficial an influence on the most brilliant 
progress made in the higher spheres of mathematical develop- 
ment of thought. Before we enter upon an enumeration of 
what has already been achieved, let us dwell for a moment on 
the danger from which the spiritual development of our race 
has escaped, and the physical impediments which would have 
formed an impassable barrier to our progress. 

In considering the number of cosmical bodies which fill 
the celestial regions, three questions present themselves to 
our notice. How many fixed stars are visible to the naked 
eye?. How many of these have been gradually catalogued, 
and their places determined according to longitude and lati- 
tude, or according to their right ascension and declination? 
What is the number of stars from the 1st to the 9th and 10th 
magnitudes, which have been seen in the heayens by means 
of the telescope? These three questions may, from the ma- 
terials of observation at present in our possession, be deter- 
mined at least approximatively. Mere conjectures based on 
the gauging of the stars in certain portions of the Milky Way, 
differ from the preceding questions, and refer to the theo- 
retical solution of the question: How many stars might be 
distinguished throughout the whole heavens with Herschel’s 
twenty-feet telescope, including the stellar light ‘ which is 
supposed to require 2000 years to reach our earth?’’® © 

The numerical data which I here publish in reference to 
this subject, are chiefly obtained from the final results of my 
esteemed friend Argelander, director of the Observatory at 
Bonn. I have requested the author of the Durchmusteruug 





8 On the space-penetrating power of telescopes, see Sir 
John Herschel, Outlines of Astr., § 803. 








WUMBER OF THE FIXED STARS. 141 


des nirdlichen Himmels (Survey of the Northern Heavens) to 
submit the previous results of Star-catalogues to a new 
and careful examination. In the lowest class of stars visible 
to the naked eye, much uncertainty arises from organic differ- 
ence in individual observations ; stars between the 6th and 
7th magnitude being frequently confounded with those strictly 
belonging to the former class. We obtain, by numerous 
combinations, from 5000 to 5800, as the mean number of the 
stars throughout the whole heavens visible to the unaided eye. 
Argelander‘ determines the distribution of the fixed stars ac- 





* T cannot attempt to include in a note all the grounds on 
which Argelander’s views are based. It will suffice if I 
extract the following remarks from his own letters to me: 
**Some years since (1843,) you recommended Captain Schwink 
to estimate from his Mappa Ceelestis, the total number of stars 
from the Ist to the 7th magnitude inclusive, which the heavens 
appeared to contain; his calculations give 12148 stars for the 
space between 30° south and 90° north declination; and conse- 
quently, if we conjecture that the proportion of stars is the same 
from 30° S. D. to the South Pole, we should have 16200 stars of 
the above-named magnitudes throughout the whole firmanent. 
This estimate seems to me to approximate very nearly to the 
truth. It is well known, that on considering the whole mass, 
we find each class contains about three times as many stars 
as the one preceding. (Struve, Catalogus Stellarum duplicium, 
p. xxxiv; Argelander, Bonner Zonen, s. xxvi.) I haye given 
in my Uranometria, 1441 stars of the 6th magnitude, north of 
the equator, whence we should obtain about 3000 for the 
whole heavens; this estimate does not, however include the 
stars of the 6-7 mag., which would be reckoned among those 
of the 6th, if only entire classes were admitted into the cal- 
culation. I think the number of the last-named stars might 
be assumed at 1000, according to the above rule, which would 
give 4000 stars for the 6th, and 12000 for the 7th, or 18000 
for the 1st to the 7th inclusive. From other considerations 
on the number of the stars of the 7th magnitude, as given in 
my zones,—namely 2257, (p. xxvi.) and allowing for those 
which haye been twice or oftener obseryed, and for those 


142 COSMOS. 


cording to difference of magnitude, down to the 9th, in about 
the following proportion,— 
Ist Mag. 2nd Mag. 3rd Mag. 4th Mag. Sth Mag. 
20 65 190 425 1100 
6th Mag. 7th Mag. 8th Mag. 9th Mag. 
3200 13000 40000 142000 





which have probably been overlooked, I approximated some- 
what more nearly to the truth. By this method, I found 2340 
stars of the 7th magnitude, between 45° and 80° N. D.; and 
therefore, nearly 17000 for the whole heavens. Struve, in 
his Description de 0 Observatoire de Poulkova, p. 268, gives 
13400 for the number of stars down to the 7th magnitude, in 
the region of the heavens explored by him (from — 15° to + 
90°), whence we should obtain 21300 for the whole firma- 
ment. According to the Introduction to Weisse’s Catal. e 
Zonis Regiomontanis, ded. p. xxxii. Struve found in the zone 
extending from — 15° to + 15° by the calculus of probabili- 
ties, 3903 stars from the Ist to the 7th, and therefore 15050 
for the entire heavens. This number is lower than mine, 
because Bessel estimated the brighter stars nearly half a mag- 
nitude lower than I did. We can here only arrive at a mean 
result, which would be about 18000 from the Ist to the 7th 
magnitudes inclusive. Sir John Herschel, in the passage of the 
Outlines of Astronomy, p. 521, to which you allude, speaks 
only of ‘“‘ the whole number of stars already registered, down to 
the seventh magnitude inclusive, amounting to from 12000 to 
15000.” As regards the fainter stars, Struve finds within the 
above-named zone, (from — 15° to + 15°) for the faint stars 
of the 8th magnitude, 10557, for those of the 9th, 37739. 
and consequently, 40800 stars of the 8th, and 145800 of the — 
9th magnitude for the whole heavens. Hence, according to 
Struve, we have from the 1st to the 9th magnitude inclusive, 
15100 + 40800 + 145800 = 201700 stars. He obtained 
these numbers by a careful comparison of those zones or parts 
of zones, which comprise the same regions of the heavens, 
deducing by the calculus of probabilities the number of stars 
actually present from the numbers of those common to, or 
different, in each zone. As the calculation was made from 
a yery large number of stars, it is deserving of great 














NUMBER OF THE FIXED STARS. 148 


The number of stars distinctly visible to the naked eye 
(amounting in the horizon of Berlin to 4022, and in that of 





confidence. Bessel has enumerated about 61000 different 
stars from the Ist to the 9th inclusive, in his collective 
zones between — 15° and +. 45°, after deducting such stars 
as have been repeatedly observed, together with those 
of the 9°10 magnitude; whence we may conclude, after 
_ taking into account such as have probably been overlooked, 
that this portion of the heavens contains about 101500 
stars of the above-named magnitudes. My zones between 
+ 45° and + 80°, contain about 22000 stars, (Durchmus- 
terung des nordl. Himmels, s. xxv.) which would leave 
about 19000, after deducting 3000 for those belonging to 
the 9°10 magnitude. My zones are somewhat richer than 
Bessel’s, and I do not think we can fairly assume a larger 
number than 2850, for the stars actually existing between 
their limits (+ 45° and + 80°); whence we should obtain 
130000 stars to the 9th magnitude inclusive, between — 15° 
and + 80°. This space is, however, only 0°62181 of the 
whole heavens, and we therefore obtain 209000 stars for the 
entire number, supposing an equal distribution to obtain 
throughout the whole firmament; these numbers again closely 
approximate to Struve’s estimate, and indeed, not impro- 
bably exceed it to a considerable extent, since Struve 
reckoned stars of the 9°10 magnitude among those of 
the 9th. The numbers which, according to my view, may 
be assumed for the whole firmament, are therefore as follows : 
Ist mag., 20; 2nd,65; 3rd, 190; 4th, 425; 5th, 1100; 6th, 
3200; 7th, 13000; 8th, 40000; 9th, 142000; and 200000 
for the entire number of stars from the Ist to the 9th magni- 
tude inclusive. ; 

If you would contend that Lalande (Hist. céleste, p. iv.) has 
given the number of stars observed by himself with the naked 
eye at 6000, I would simply remark that this estimate con- 
tains very many that have been repeatedly observed, and 
that after deducting these, we obtain only about 3800 stars 
for the portion of the heavens between—26° 30’ and + 90° 
observed by Lalande. As this space is 0°72310 of the whole 
heavens, we should again have for this zone 5255 stars visible 


144 COSMOS. 


Alexandria to 4638,) appears at first sight strikingly ~small.° 
If we assume the moon’s mean semi-diameter at 15’ 335, it 
would require 195,291 surfaces of the full moon to cover the 
whole heavens. If we further assume that the stars are uni- 
formly distributed, and reckon in round numbers 200000 
stars from the 1st to the 9th magnitude, we shall have nearly 
a single star for each full-moon surface. This result ex- 
plains why, also, at any given latitude, the moon does not 





to the naked eye. An examination of Bode’s Uranography 
(containing 17240 stars), which is composed of the most hete- 
rogeneous elements, does not give more than 5600 stars from 
the 1st to the 6th magnitude inclusive, after deducting the 
nebulous spots and smaller stars as well as those of the 6-7th 
magnitude, which have been raised to the 6th. A similar 
estimate of the stars registered by La Caille between the 
south pole and the tropic of Capricorn, and varying from the 
ist to the 6th magnitude, presents for the whole heavens two 
limits of 3960 and 5900, and thus confirms the mean result 
already given by yourself. You will perceive that I have en- 
deavoured to fulfil your wish for a more thorough investigation 
of these numbers, and I may further observe that M. Heis of 
Aix-la-Chapelle has for many years been engaged in a very 
careful revision of my Uranometrie. From the portions of this 
work already complete, and from the great additions made to 
it by an observer gifted with keener sight than myself, I find 
2836 stars from the Ist to the 6th magnitude inclusive for 
the northern hemisphere, and therefore, on the pre-supposi- 
tion of equal distribution, 5672 as the number of stars visible 
throughout the whole firmament to the keenest unaided 
vision.” (From the Manuscripts of Professor Argelander, 
March, 1850.) 

5 Schubert reckons the number of stars, from the 1st to the 
6th magnitude, at 7000 for the whole heavens (which closely ap- 
proximates to the calculation made by myself in Cosmos, p. 140,) 
and upwards of 5000 for the horizon of Paris. He gives 70000 
for the whole sphere, including stars of the 9th magnitude. 
( Astronomie, th. i1.s.54.) ‘These numbersareall much too high. 
Argelander finds only 58000 from the Ist to the 8th magnitude. 





NUMBER OF THE FIXED STARS. 145 


more frequently conceal stars visible to the naked eye. If the 
calculation of occultations of the stars were extended to those 
of the 9th magnitude, a stellar eclipse would, according to 
Galle, occur on an ayerage every 44’ 30”, for in this period 
the moon traverses a portion of the heavens equal in extent to 
its own surface. Itis singular that Pliny, who was undoubtedly 
acquainted with Hipparchus’s catalogue of stars, and who 
comments on his boldness in attempting as it were ‘‘ to leave 
heaven as a heritage to posterity,’ should have enumerated 
only 1600 stars visible in the fine sky of Italy!® In this 
enumeration he had, however, descended to stars of the 5th, 
whilst half a century later Ptolemy indicated only 1025 stars 
down to the 6th magnitude. 

Since it has ceased to be the custom to class the fixed stars 
merely according to the constellations to which they belong, and 
they have been catalogued according to determinations of place, 
that is,in their relations to the great circles of the equator or the 
ecliptic, the extension as well as the accuracy of star catalogues 
has advanced with the progress of science and the improved 





¢ “Patrocinatur vastitas coeli, immensa discreta altitudine, in 
duo atque septuaginta signa. Heec sunt rerum et animantium 
effigies, in quas digessere ccelum periti. In his quidem mille 
sexcentas adnotavere stellas, insignes videlicet effectu visuve” 
.... Plin., ii. 41.—‘* Hipparchus nunquam satis laudatus, ut 
quo nemo magis approbaverit cognationem cum homine siderum 
animasque nostras partem esse cceli, novam stellam et aliam 
in evo suo genitam deprehendit, ejusque motu, qua die fulsit, 
ad dubitationem est adductus, anne hoe szepius fieret move- 
renturque et ese quas putamus affixas; itemque ausus rem 
etiam Deo improbam, adnumerare posteris stellas ac sidera ad 
nomen expungere, organis excogitatis, per que singularum 
loca atque magnitudines signaret, ut facile discerni posset ex 
eo, non modo an obirent nascerenturve, sed an omnino aliqua 
transirent moyerenturye, item an crescerent minuerenturque, 
ccelo in hereditate cunctis relicto, si quisquam qui cretionem 
eam caperet inventus esset.” Plin., ii. 26. 


VOL. ill. L 


146 COSMOS. 


construction of instruments. No catalogues of the stars com- _ 
piled by Timocharis and Aristyllus (283, B.c.) havereached us; 
but although, as Hipparchus remarks in the fragment “ on the 
length of the year,” cited in the seventh book of the Almagest 
(cap. 3, p. xv. Halma,) their observations were conducted in 
a very rough manner (mdvv ddocxepHs) there can be no doubt 
that.they both determined the declination of many stars, and 
that these determinations preceded, by nearly a century and 
a half, the table of fixed stars compiled by Hipparchus. This 
astronomer is said to have been incited by the phenomenon of 
a new star to attempt a survey of the whole firmament, and 
endeavour to determine the position of the stars; but the truth 
of this statement rests solely on Pliny’s testimony, and has 
often been regarded as the mere echo of a subsequently in- 
vented tradition.’ It does indeed seem remarkable that 
Ptolemy should not refer to the circumstance, but yet it must 
be admitted that the sudden appearance of a brightly luminous 
star in Cassiopeia (November, 1572,) led Tycho Brahe to 
compose his catalogue of the stars. According to an in- 
genious conjecture of Sir John Herschel,® the star referred to 
by Pliny may have been the new star which appeared in 
Scorpio in the month of July of the year 134 before our era, 
(as we learn from the Chinese Annals of the reign of Wou-ti, 
of the Han dynasty.) Its appearance occurred exactly six 
years before the epoch at which, according to Ideler’s inyesti- 
gations, Hipparchus compiled his catalogue of the stars. 
Edward Biot, whose early death proved so great a loss to 
science, found a record of this celestial phenomenon in 
the celebrated collection of Ma-tuan-lin, which contains an 





7 Delambre, Hist. de U’ Astr. anc., tom. i. p. 290, and Hist. 
dev Astr. mod., tom. ii. p. 186. 

8 Qutlines, § 831; Edward Biot sur les Htoiles Extraordi- 
naires observées en Chine, in the Connaissance des temps pour 
1846. 








ee bear, Son 5. *. 2S 





EARLY ASTRONOMY. 147 


account of all the comets and remarkable stars observed be- 
tween the years B.c. 613, and a.p. 1222. 

The tripartite didactic poem of Aratus,’ to whom we are 
indebted for the only remnant of the works of Hipparchus that 
has come down to us, was composed about the period of Era- 
tosthenes, Timocharis, and Aristyllus. The astronomical non- 
meteorological portion of the poem is based on the uranography 
of Eudoxusof Cnidos. The catalogue compiled by Hipparchusis 
unfortunately not extant; but, according to Ideler,”° it probably 
constituted the principal part of his work, cited by Suidas, 
**On the arrangement of the region of the fixed stars and the 
celestial bodies,” and contained 1080 determinations of posi- 
tion for the year B.c. 128. In Hipparchus’s other Commentary 
on Aratus the positions of the stars, which are determined 
more by equatorial armillz than by the astrolabe, are referred 
to the equator by right ascension and declination; while in 
Ptolemy’s catalogue of stars, which is supposed to have been en- 
tirely copied from that of Hipparchus, and which gives 1025 
stars, together with five so-called nebule, they are referred by 
longitudes and latitudes to the ecliptic." On comparing the 





° It is worthy of remark that Aratus was mentioned with 
approbation almost simultaneously by Ovid (Amor., i. 15,) 
and by the Apostle Paul, at Athens, in an earnest discourse 
directed against the Epicureans andStoics. Paul (Acts, ch. xvii. 
v. 28), although he does not mention Aratus by name, un- 
doubtedly refers to a verse composed by him (Phen.,y. 5) on 
the close communion of mortals with the Deity. 

© Ideler, Untersuchungen iiber den Ursprung der Sternnamen, 
8. xxx.-xxxv. Baily in the Wem. of the Astron. Soc., vol. xiii. 
18438, pp. 12 and 15, also treats of the years according to our 
era, to which we must refer the observations of Aristyllus, as 
well as the catalogues of the stars compiled by Hipparchus 
(128, and not 140, B.c.) and by Ptolemy (188 a.p.). 

™ Compare Delambre, Hist. de I’ Astr. anc., tom. i. p. 184; 
tom. i. p. 260. The assertion, that Hipparchus, in addition 
to the mght ascension and declination of the stars, also.indi- 

L2 


148 COSMOS. 


number of fixed stars in the Hipparcho-Ptolemaic Catalogue, 
Almagest, ed. Halma, t. 1. p. 83, (namely, for the 1st mag., 13 
stars; 2nd, 45; 3rd, 208; 4th, 474; 5th, 217; 6th, 49,) with 
the numbers of Argelander as already given, we find, as might 
be expected, a great paucity of stars of the 5th and 6th magni- 
tudes, and also an extraordinarily large number of those belong- 
ing to the 38rd and 4th. The vagueness in the determinations 
of the intensity of light in ancient and modern times renders 
direct comparisons of magnitude extremely uncertain. 





cated their positions in his catalogue, according to longitude 
and latitude, as was done by Ptolemy, is wholly devoid of 
probability and in direct variance with the Almagest, book vii. 
cap. 4, where this reference to the ecliptic is noticed as some- 
thing new, by which the knowledge of the motions of the 
fixed stars round the pole of the ecliptic may be facilitated. 
The table of stars with the longitudes attached, which Petrus 
Victorius found in a Medicean Codex and published with the’ 
life of Aratus at Florence in 1567, is indeed ascribed by him 
to Hipparchus, but without any proof. It appears to be a 
mere rescript of Ptolemy’s catalogue from an old manuscript 
of the Almagest, and does not give the latitudes. As Ptolemy 
was imperfectly acquainted with the amount of the retrogres- 
sion of the equinoctial and solstitial points (4/mag., vii. c. 2, 
p- 13, Halma), and assumed it about 28, too slow, the catalogue 
which he determined for the beginning of the reign of Anto- 
ninus (Ideler, op. cit. s. xxxiv.) indicates the positions of the 
stars at a much earlier epoch (for the year 63 a.p.) (Regarding 
the improvements for reducing stars to the time of Hippar- 
chus, see the observations and tables as given by Encke in 
Schumacher’s Astron. Nachr.,no. 608,s. 113-126.) The earlier 
epoch to which Ptolemy unconsciously reduced the stars in his 
catalogue, corresponds tolerably well with the period to which 
we inay refer the Pseudo-Eratosthenian Catasterisms, which, as 
I have already elsewhere observed, are more recent than the 
time of Hyginus, who lived in the Augustine age, but appear 
to be taken from him and haye no connection with the poem 
of Hermes by the true Eratosthenes. (Hratosthenica, ed. 
Bernhardy, 1822, pp. 114, 116, 129.) These Pseudo-Eratos- 
thenian Catasterisms contain, moreover, scarcely 700 indi- 
vidual stars distributed among the mythical constellations. 








EARLY. CATALOGUES. 149 


Although the so-called Ptolemaic catalogue of the fixed 
stars enumerated only one-fourth of those visible to the 
naked eye at Rhodes and Alexandria, and, owing to erroneous 
reductions of the precession of the equinoxes, determined their 
positions as if they had been observed in the year 63 of our 
era; yet, throughout the sixteen hundred years immediately 
following this period, we have only three original catalogues 
of stars, perfect for their time; that of Ulugh Beg (1487), that 
of Tycho Brahe (1600), and that of Hevelius (1660). During 
the short intervals of repose which, amid tumultuous revolu- 
tions and devastations of war, occurred between the ninth and 
fifteenth centuries, practical astronomy, under Arabs, Persians, 
and Moguls (from Al-Mamun, the son of the great Harun Al- 
Raschid, to the Timurite, Mohammed Taraghi Ulugh Beg, the 
son of Shah Rokh) attained an eminence till then unknown. 
The astronomical tables of Ebn-Junis (1007), called the Hake- 
mitic tables, in honour of the Fatimite Calif, Aziz Ben-Hakem 
Biamrilla, afford evidence, as do also the L/khanic tables” of 
Nassir-Eddin Tusi (who founded the great observatory at 
Meragha, near Tauris, 1259), of the advanced knowledge of 
the planetary motions,—the improved condition of measuring 
instruments, and the multiplication of more accurate methods 
differing from those employed by Ptolemy. In addition to 
clepsydras,* pendulum-oscillations” were already at this period 
employed in the measurement of time. 





% Cosmos, pp. 594-5. The Paris Library contains a 
manuscript of the Ilkhanic Tables by the hand of the son of 
Nassir-Eddin. They derive their name from the title “ Ikhan,” 
assumed by the Tartar princes who held rule in Persia. 
Reinaud, Introd. de la Géogr. d’ Aboulféda, 1848, p. cxxxix. 

* For an account of clepsydras, see Beckmann’s Inventions, 
vol. i. 841, e¢ seg. (Bohn’s edition. )}— Ed. 

*S Sedillot fils, Prolégoménes des Tables Astr. d’ Oloug-Beg, 
1847, p. exxxiy. note 2. Delambre, Hist. del’ Astr. du moyen 
dge, p. 8. 


150 COSMOS. 


The Arabs had the great merit of showing how tables might 
be ‘gradually amended ‘by a comparison with observations: 
Ulugh Beg’s catalogue of the stars, originally written in 
Persian, was entirely completed from original observations 
made in the Gymnasium at Samarcand, with the exception 
of a portion of the southern stars enumerated by Ptolemy,™ 
and not visible in 39° 52’ lat. (?) It contains only 1019 
positions of stars, which are reduced to the year 1437. A 
subsequent commentary gives 300 other stars, observed by 
Abu-Bekri Altizini in 1533. Thus we pass from Arabs, 
Persians, and Moguls, to the great epoch of Copernicus, and 
nearly to that of Tycho Brahe. 

The extension of navigation in the tropical seas, and im 
high southern latitudes, has, since the beginning of the six- 
teenth century, exerted a powerful influence on the gradual 
extension of our knowledge of the firmament, though in 
a less degree than that effected a century later by the ap- 





* In my investigations on the relative value of astronomical 
determinations of position in Central Asia (Asze centrale, 
t. lii. yp. 581-596), I have given the latitudes of Samarcand 
and Bokhara according to the different Arabic and Persian 
MSS. contained in the Paris Library. I have shown that the 
former is probably more than 39° 52’, whilst most of the best 
manuscripts of Ulugh Beg give 39° 37’, and the Avtaé al-athual 
of Alfares, and the Kanum of Albyruni give 40°. I would 
again draw attention to the importance, in a geographical no 
less than an astronomical point of view, of determining the 
longitude and latitude of Samarcand by new and trustworthy 
observations. Burnes’s Travels have made us acquainted with 


the latitude of Bokhara, as obtained from observations of 


culmination of stars; which gave 39° 43’ 41”. There is there- 
fore only an error of from 7 to 8 minutes in the two fine Persian. 
and Arabic MSS. (Nos. 164 and 2460) of the Paris Library. 
Major Rennell,- whose combinations are generally so suc~ 
cessful, made an error of about 19’ in determining the latitude 
of Bokhara. (Humboldt, Asie centrale, t. iii. p. 592, and 
Sédillot in the Prolégoménes d’ Oloug-Beg, pp. ¢xxiil.-Cxxv.) 


ail ———————— 











PROGRESS OF ASTRONOMY. 151 


plication of the telescope. Both were the means of revealing 
new and unknown regions of space. I have already in other 
works considered” the reports circulated first by Americus 
Vespucius, then by Magellan, and Pigafetta (the companion of 
Magellan and Elcano), concerning the splendour of the southern 
sky; and the descriptions given by Vicente Yafiez, Pinzon, 
and Acosta, of the black patches (Coal Sacks), and by 
Anghiera and Andrea Corsali of the Magellanic clouds. A 
merely sensuous contemplation of the aspect of the heavens 
here also preceded measuring astronomy. The richness of the 
firmament near the southern pole, which, as is well known, is 
on the contrary peculiarly deficient in stars, was.so much 
exaggerated that the intelligent Polyhistor Cardanus indi- 
cated in this region 10000 bright stars which were said to 
have been seen by Vespucius with the naked eye.” 

Friedrich Houtman and Petrus Theodori of Embden (who, 
according to Olbers, is the same person as Dircksz Keyser) 
now first appeared as zealous observers. They measured dis- 
tances of stars at Java and Sumatra; and at this period the 
most southern stars were first marked upon the celestial maps 


of Bartsch, Hondius, and Bayer, and by Kepler’s industry 


were inserted in Tycho Brahe’s Rudolphine tables. 

Scarcely half a century had elapsed from the time of Ma- 
gellan’s circumnayigation of the globe before Tycho com- 
menced his admirable observations on the positions of the 
fixed stars, which far exceeded in exactness all that had hitherto 
been done in practical astronomy, not excepting even the la- 
borious observations of the Landgrave William IV. at Cassel. 
Tycho Brahe’s catalogue, as revised and published by Kepler, 
contains no more than 1000 stars, of which one-fourth at 





tay Cosmos, pp. 664-8; Humboldt, Examen crit. de 0 His- 
towre de la Géogr., t. iv. pp. 321-336; t. v. pp. 226-238. 

*° Cardani Paralipomenon, lib. viii. cap. 10. (Opp., t. ix. 
ed. Lugd. 1663, p. 508.) 3 


152 COSMOS. 


most belong to the sixth magnitude. This catalogue, and that 
of Hevelius, which was less frequently employed, and con- 
tained 1564 determinations of position for the year 1660, were 
the last which were made by the unaided eye, owing their 
compilation in this manner to the capricious disinclination of 
the Dantzig astronomer to apply the telescope to purposes of 
measurement. 

This combination of the telescope with measuring instru- 
ments—the union of telescopic vision and measurements—at 
length enabled astronomers to determine the position of stars 
below the sixth magnitude, and more especially between the 
seventh and the twelfth. The region of the fixed stars might 
now for the first time be said to be brought within the 
reach of observers. Enumerations of the fainter telescopic 
stars, and determinations of their position, have not only 
yielded the advantage of making a larger portion of the regions 
of space known to us by the extension of the sphere of observa- 
tion, but they have also (what is still more important) indirectly 
exercised an essential influence on our knowledge of the struc- 
ture and configuration of the universe, on the discovery of new 
planets, and on the more rapid determination of their orbits. 
When William Herschel conceived the happy idea of as it were 
casting a sounding line in the depths of space, and of counting 
during his gaugings the stars which passed through the field of 
his great telescope,” at different distances from the Milky Way, 
the law was discovered that the number of stars increased 
in proportion to their vicinity to the Milky Way—a law which 
gave rise to the idea of the existence of large concentric rings 
filled with millions of stars which constitute the many-cleft 
Galaxy. The knowledge of the number and the relative posi- 
tion of the faintest stars facilitates (as was proved by Galle’s 
rapid and felicitous discovery of Neptune, and by that of 
several of the smaller planets) the recognition of planetary 





“ Cosmos, pp. 71-738. 








IMPORTANCE OF CATALOGUES. 153 


eosmical bodies which change their positions, moving as it were 
between fixed boundaries. Another circumstance proves even 
more distinctly the importance of very complete catalogues of 
the stars. If a new planet be once discovered in the vault of 
heaven, its notification in an older catalogue of positions will 
materially facilitate the difficult calculation of its orbit. The 
indication of a new star which has subsequently been lost sight 
of, frequently affords us more assistance than, considering the 
slowness of its motion, we can hope to gain by the most careful 
measurements of its course through many successive years. 
Thus the star numbered 964 in the catalogue of Tobias Mayer 
has proved of great importance for the determination of Uranus, 
and the star numbered 26266 in Lalande’s catalogue”™ for that 
of Neptune. Uranus, before it was recognized as a planet, had, 
as is now well known, been observed twenty-one times; once, 
as already stated, by Tobias Mayer, seven times by Flamstead, 
once by Bradley, and twelve times by Le Monnier. It may be 
said that our increasing hope of future discoveries of planetary 
bodies rests partly on the perfection of our telescopes (Hebe, 
at the time of its discovery in July, 1847, was a star of the 8°9 
magnitude, while in May, 1849, it was only of the 11th mag- 
nitude), and partly, and perhaps more, on the completeness of 
our star-catalogues, and on the exactness of our observers. 
The first catalogue of the stars which appeared after the 
epoch when Morin and Gascoigne taught us to combine tele- 
scopes with measuring instruments, was that of the southern 





* Baily, Cat. of those stars in the “* Histoire Céleste’”’ of 
Jerome de Lalande, for which tables of reduction to the epoch 
1800 have been published by Prof. Schumacher, 1847, p. 1195. 
On what we owe to the perfection of star catalogues see the 
remarks of Sir John Herschel in Cat. of the British Assoc., 
1845, p. 4, § 10. Compare also on stars that have disap- 
peared Schumacher, Astr. Nachr., no. 624, and Bode, Jahrb. 

Jur 1817, s. 249. : 


154 COSMOS. 


stars compiled by Halley. It was the result of a short resi- 
dence at St. Helena in the years 1677 and 1678, but, singn- 
larly enough, does not contain any determinations below 
the 6th magnitude.” Flamstead had, indeed, begun his 
great Star Atlas at an earlier period; but the work of this 
celebrated observer did not appear till 1712. It was sue- 
ceeded by Bradley’s observations (from 1750 to 1762), which 


led to the discovery of aberration and nutation, and haye been 


rendered celebrated by the Fundamenta Astronomie of our 
countryman Bessel (1818),” and by the stellar catalogues of La 
Caille, Tobias Mayer, Cagnoli, Piazzi, Zach, Pond, Taylor, 
Groombridge, Argelander, Airy, Brisbane, and Riimker. 

We here only allude to those works which enumerate a great 
and important part” of the stars of the 7th to the 10th magni- 





1° Memours of the Royal Astron. Soe., vol. xiii. 1843, 
pp. 33 and 168. 
*© Bessel, Hundamenta Astronomie pro anno 1755, deducta 


ex observationibus viri incomparabilis James Bradley in Specula ~ 


astrononuca Grenovicenst, 1818. Comparealso Bessel, Tabule 
Regiomontane reductionum observationum astronomicarum ab 
anno 1750 usque ad annum 1850 computate (1830). 

*t [ here compress into a note the numerical data taken 
from star catalogues, containing lesser masses and a smaller 
number of positions, with the names of the observers, and 
the number of positions attached :—La Caille, in scarcely. 
ten months, during the years 1751 and 1752, with instru- 
ments magnifying only eight times, observed 9766 southern 
stars, to the 7th magnitude inclusive, which were reduced to 
the year 1750 by Henderson; Tobias Mayer, 998 stars to 
1756; Flamstead, originally only 2866, to which 564 were 
added by Baily’s eare; (Mem. of the Astr. Soc., vol. iv. 
pp- 1291-64); Bradley, 3222, reduced by Bessel to the year 
1755; Pond, 1112; Piazzi, 7646 to 1800; Groombridge, 
4243, mostly cireumpolar stars, to 1810; Sir Thomas Brisbane, 
and Riimker, 7385 stars, observed in New Holland, in the 
years 1822-1828; Airy, 2156 stars, reduced to the year 
1845; Rimker, 12000 on the Hamburg horizon; Argelander,. 


ee ee SS oe ee 





STAR CATALOGUES. 155 


tude which occupy the realms of space. The catalogue known 
under the name of Jerome de Lalande’s, but which is, however, 
solely based on observations made by his nephew, Frangois 
de Lalande, and by Burckhardt between the years 1789 and 
1800, has only recently been duly appreciated. After having 
been carefully revised by Francis Baily, under the direction of 
the “ British Association for the Advancement of Science,” (in 
1847,) it now contains 47390 stars, many of which are of the 
9th and some even below that magnitude. Harding, the diseo- 
verer of Juno, catalogued above 50000 stars in twenty-seven 
maps. Bessel’s great work on the exploration of the celestial 
zones, which comprises 75000 observations (made in the years 
1825-1833 between — 15° and + 45° declination) has been 
continued from 1841 to 1844 with the most praiseworthy care, 
as faras + 80° decl., by Argelander at Bonn. Weisse of Cracow, 
under the auspices of the Academy of St. Petersburgh, has re- 
duced 31895 stars for the year 1825, (of which 19738 belonged 
to the 9th magnitude) from Bessel’s zones, between — 15° 
and + 15° decl.;” and Argelander’s exploration of the 
northern heavens from + 45° to + 80° decl. contains about 
22000 well determined positions of stars. 

I cannot, I think, make more honourable mention of the 
great work of the star maps of the Berlin Academy, than by 
quoting the words used by Encke, in reference to this under- 
taking, in his oration to the memory of Bessel :— With’ 
the completeness of catalogues is connected the hope that 


(Cat. of Abo,) 560; Taylor, (Madras,) 11015. The British 
Association Catalogue of Stars, (1845,) drawn up under Baily’s 
superintendence, contains 8377 stars from the 1st to 74 magni- 
tudes. For the southern stars we have the rich catalogues 
of Henderson, Fallows, Maclear, and Johnson at St. Helena. 

a _Weisse, Positiones medic stellarum fixarum in Zones, 
Regiomontanis a Besselio inter —15° et + 15° decl. observa- 
tarum ad annum 1825 reducte, (1846); with an important 
Preface by Struve 





156 COSMOS. 


by a careful comparison of the different aspects of the heavens 
with those stars which have been noted as fixed points, we 
may be enabled to discover all moving celestial bodies, whose 
change of position can scarcely, owing to the faintness of their 
light, be noted by the unaided eye, and that we may in this 
manner complete our knowledge of the solar system. While 
Harding’s admirable atlas gives a perfect representation of 
the starry heavens—as far as Lalande’s Histoire Céleste, on 
which it is founded, was capable of affording such a picture— 
Bessel, in 1824, after the completion of the first main section 
of his zones, sketched a plan for grounding on this basis a 
more special representation of the starry firmament, his 
object being not simply to exhibit what had been already 
observed, but likewise to enable astronomers by the complete- 
ness of his tables at once to recognize every new celestial 
phenomenon. Although the star maps of the Berlin Aca- 
demy of Sciences, sketched in accordance with Bessel’s plan, 
may not have wholly completed the first proposed cycle, 
they have nevertheless contributed in a remarkable degree 
to the discovery of new planets, since they have been the prin- 
cipal if not the sole means to which, at the present time (1850), 
we owe the recognition of seven new planetary bodies.””* Of 
the twenty-four maps designed to represent that portion of 
the heavens which extends 15° on either side of the equator, 
our Academy has already contributed sixteen. These contain, 
as far as possible, all stars down to the 9th magnitude and 
many of the 10th. 

The present would seem a fitting place to refer to the 
‘average estimates which have been hazarded on the number 
of stars throughout the whole heavens, visible to us by the 
aid of our colossal space-penetrating telescopes. Struve 
‘assumes for Herschel’s twenty-feet reflector, which was em- 





3 Encke, Gedéchinissrede auf Bessel, s. 13. 


ait 








ee oe ae 








DISTRIBUTION OF THE FIXED STARS. 157 


ployed in making the celebrated star-gauges or sweeps, that a 
magnifying power of 180 would give 5800000 for the number 
of stars lying within the zones extending 30° on either side of 
the equator, and 20874000 for the whole heavens. Sir 
William Herschel conjectured that 18 millions of stars in the 
Milky Way, might be seen by his still more powerful forty- 
feet reflecting telescope.” 

After a careful consideration of all the fixed stars, whether 
visible to the naked eye or merely telescopic, whose positions 
are determined, and which are recorded in catalogues, we turn 
to their distribution and grouping in the vault of heaven. 

As we have already observed, these stellar bodies, from the 
inconsiderable and exceedingly slow (real and apparent) change 
of position exhibited by some of them—partly owing to pre- 
cession and to the different influences of the progression of our 
solar system, and partly to their own proper motion—may be 
regarded as landmarks in the boundless regions of space, 
enabling the attentive observer to distinguish all bodies that 
move among them with a greater velocity or in an opposite 
direction—consequently all which are allied to telescopic 
comets and planets. The first and predominating interest ex- 
cited by the contemplation of the heavens is directed to the 
fixed stars, owing to the multiplicity and overwhelming mass 
of these cosmical bodies; and it is by them that our highest 
feelings of admiration are called forth. The orbits of the 
planetary bodies appeal rather to inquiring reason, and, by 
presenting to it complicated problems, tend to promote the 
development of thought in relation to astronomy. 

Amid the innumerable multitude of great and small stars 
which seem scattered, as it were by chance, throughout the 
vault of heaven, even the rudest nations separate single 





* Compare Struve, Etudes d’ Astr. stellaire, 1847, pp. 66 and 
72; Cosmos, p. 140; and Madler, Asér., 4te Aufl. § 417. 


158 COSMOS. 


(and almost invariably the same) groups, among which certain 
bright stars catch the observer’s eye, either by their proxi- 
mity to each other, their juxtaposition, or, in some cases, by 
a kind of isolation. This fact has been confirmed by recent 
and careful examinations of several of the languages of so- 
called savage tribes. Such groups excite a vague sense of 
the mutual relation of parts, and have thus led to their 
receiving names, which, although varying among different 
races, were generally derived from organic terrestrial objects. 
Amid the forms with which fancy animated the waste and 
silent vault of heaven, the earliest groups thus distinguished 
were the seven-starred Pleiades, the seven stars of the Great 
Bear, subsequently (on account of the repetition of the same 
form) the constellation of the Lesser Bear, the belt of Orion 
(Jacob’s staff), Cassiopeia, the Swan, the Scorpion, the 
Southern Cross (owing to the striking difference in its diree- 
tion before and after its culmination), the Southern Crown, 
the Feet of the Centaur (the Twins, as it were, of the 
Southern hemisphere), &c. 

Wherever steppes, grassy plains or sandy wastes present a 


far-extended horizon, those constellations whose rising or, 


setting corresponds with the busy seasons and requirements of 
pastoral and agricultural life, have become the subject of atten- 
tive consideration, and have gradually led to a symbolising 
connection of ideas. Men thus became familiarised with the 
aspect of the heavens before the development of measuring 
astronomy. They soon perceived that besides the daily move- 
ment from east to west, which is common to all celestial bodies, 
the sun has a far slower proper motion in an opposite direc- 
tion. The stars which shine in the evening sky sink lower 
every day, until at length they are wholly lost amid the 
rays of the setting sun; while, on the other hand, those stars 
which were shining in the morning sky, before the rising of 
the sun, recede further and further from it. In the ever- 








‘ 


DISTRIBUTION OF THE FIXED, STARS. 159 


changing aspect of the starry heavens, successive constellations 
are always coming to view. A slight degree of attention suf- 
fices to show that these are the same which had before vanished 
in the west; and that the stars which are opposite to the sun, 
setting at its rise, and rising at its setting, had about half-a- 
year earlier been seen in its vicinity. From the time of 
Hesiod to Eudoxus, and from the latter to Aratus and Hip- 
parchus, Hellenic literature abounds in metaphoric allusions to 
the disappearance of the stars amid the sun’s rays, and their ap- 
pearance in the morning twilight,—their helacal setting and 
rising. An attentive observation of these phenomena yielded 
the earliest elements of chronology, which were simply ex- 
pressed in numbers, while mythology, in accordance with the 
more cheerful or gloomy tone of national character, continued 
simultaneously to rule the heavens with arbitrary despotism. 
The primitive Greek sphere, (I here again, as in the history 
of the physical contemplation of the universe,” follow the in- 
vestigations of my intellectual friend Letronne,) had become 
gradually filled with constellations, without being in any de- 
gree considered with relation to the ecliptic. Thus Homerand 


Hesiod designate by name individual stars and groups; the 


former mentions the constellation of the Bear (‘ otherwise 
known as the Celestial Wain, and which alone never sinks into 
the bath of Oceanos,”’) Bootes, and the Dog of Orion; the latter 
speaks of Sirius and Arcturus, and both refer to the Pleiades, 
the Hyades, and Orion.” Homer’s twice repeated assertion 
that the constellation of the Bear alone never sinks into the 
ocean, merely allows us to infer that in his age, the Greek 
sphere did not yet comprise the constellations of Draco, Cepheus 
and Ursa Minor, which likewise do not set. The statement 
does not prove a want of acquaintance with the existence of 





*% Cosmos, p. 583. 


*° ‘Ideler, Unters. iiber die Sternnamen, s. xi. 47, 139, 144, 
243; Letronne Sur U Origine du Zodiaque Grec, 1840, p. 25. 


160 COSMOS. 


the separate stars forming these three catasterisms, but simply 
an ignorance of their arrangement into. constellations. A 
long and frequently misunderstood passage of Strabo (lib. i. 
p. 3, Casaub.) on Homer, J/. xviii. 485-489, specially proves 
a fact--important to the question,—that in the Greek sphere 
the stars were only gradually arranged in constellations. Homer 
has been unjustly accused of ignorance, says Strabo, as if he had 
known of only one instead of two Bears. It is probable that 
the lesser one had not yet been arranged in a separate group ; 
and that the name did not reach the Hellenes, until after the 
Pheenicians had specially designated this constellation and made 
use of it for the purposes of navigation. All the scholia on 
Homer, Hyginus and Diogenes Laertius, ascribe its introduc- 
tion to Thales. In the Pseudo-Eratosthenian work to which 
we have already referred, the lesser Bear is called @owixn (or 
as it were the Pheenician guiding star). A century later 
(Ol. 71,) Cleostratus of Tenedos, enriched the sphere with the 
constellations of Sagittarius, Toéérns, and Aries, Kpuds. 

The introduction of the Zodiac into the ancient Greek 
sphere coincides according to Letronne with this period of the 
domination of the Pisistratide. Eudemus of Rhodes, one of 
the most distinguished pupils of Aristotle, and author of a 
‘‘ History of Astronomy,” ascribes the introduction of this 
Zodiaeal belt % rod Cwdvaxod Siafwors, also Cwidzios KvKdos) to 
(Enopides of Chios, a contemporary of Anaxagoras.” The 
idea of the relation of the planets and fixed stars to the swn’s 





7 Letronne, op. cit., p. 25; and Carteron, Analyse des Re- 
cherches de M. Letronne sur les représentations zodvacales, 1843, 
p. 119. “Itis very doubtful whether Eudoxus (Ol. 103) ever 
made use of the word (dikes, We first meet with it in 
Euclid, and in the Commentary of Hipparchus on Aratus 
(Ol. 160). The name ecliptic, exAeurikds, is also very recent.” 
Compare Martin in the Commentary to Theonis Smyrnat 
Platonici Iiber de Astronomia, 1849, pp. 50, 60. 


Oe ee? ee 








ZODIACAL SIGNS. 161 


course, the division of the ecliptic into twelve equal parts 
(Dodecatomeria) originated with the ancient Chaldeans, and 
very probably came to the Greeks, at the beginning of the 
fifth, or even in the sixth century before our era, direct from 
Chaldea, and not from the Valley of the Nile.* The Greeks 
merely separated from the constellations, named in their 
primitive sphere, those which were nearest. to the ecliptic, 
and could be used as signs of the zodiac. If the Greeks. 
had borrowed from another nation anything more than the idea 
and number of the divisions (Dodecatomeria) of a zodiac,—if 
they had borrowed the zodiac itself with its signs,—they 
would not at first have contented themselves with only 
eleven constellations. The Scorpion would not have been 
divided into two groups; nor would zodiacal constellations 
have been introduced, (some of which, like Taurus, Leo, Pisces, 
and Virgo, extend over a space of 385° to 48°, while 
others, as Cancer, Aries, and Capricornus, occupy only from 





* Letronne, Orig. du Zod., p. 25; and Analyse crit. des 
Représ. zod., 1846, p.15. Ideler and Lepsius also consider it 
probable “that the knowledge of the Chaldean zodiac, as 
well in reference to its divisions as to the names of the latter, 
had reached the Greeks in the 7th century before our era, 
although the adoption of the separate signs of the zodiac in. 
Greek astronomical literature was gradual and of a subse- | 
quent date.” (Lepsius, Chronologie der Aigypter, 1849, s. 65 
and 124.) Ideler is inclined to believe that the Orientals had 
names but not constellations for the Dodecatomeria, and 
Lepsius regards it as a natural assumption “ that the Greeks 
at the period when their sphere was for the most part unfilled 
should have added to their own the Chaldean constellations, 
from which the twelve divisions were named.” But are we 
not led on this supposition to inquire why the Greeks had at 
first only eleven signs instead of introducing all the twelve 
belonging to the Chaldean dodecatomeria? If they intro- 
duced the twelve signs they are hardly likely to haye removed 
one in order to replace it at a subsequent period, 


VOL. III. M 


162° . COSMOS. 


19° to 23°), which are inconveniently grouped to the north 
and south of the ecliptic, either at great distances from 
each other, or, like Taurus and Aries, Aquarius and Capri- 
cornus, so closely crowded together as almost to encroach on 
each other. These circumstances prove that catasterisms 
previously formed were converted into signs of the zodiac. 
.The sign of Libra, according to Letronne’s conjecture, 
was introduced at the time of, and perhaps by Hip- 
parchus. It is never mentioned by Eudoxus, Archimedes, 
Autolyeus, or even by Hipparchus in the few fragments of 
his writings which have been transmitted to us (excepting 
indeed in one passage, probably falsified by a copyist.)” 
The earliest notice of this new constellation occurs in 





* On the passage referred to in the text, and interpolated 
by a copyist of Hipparchus, see Letronne, Orig. du Zod., 1840, 
p: 20. As early as 1812, when I was much disposed to 
believe that the Greeks had been long acquainted with the 
sign of Libra, I directed attention in an elaborate memoir 
(on all the passages in Greek and Roman writers of an- 
tiquity, in which the Balance occurs as a sign of the 


zodiac) to that passage in Hipparchus (Comment. in Aratum, - 


lib. iii. cap. 2) which refers to the @npiov held by the Centaur 
(in his fore-foot) as well as to the remarkable passage of 
Ptolemy, lib. ix. cap. 7 (Halma, t. u.p.170). In the latter 
the Southern Balance is named with the affix xara Xa)Saiovs, 
and is opposed to the pincers of the Scorpion in an observation, 
‘which was undoubtedly not made at Babylon, but by some of 
the astrological Chaldeans, dispersed throughout Syria and 
Alexandria. ( Vues des Cordilléres et Monumens des peuples indi- 


genes del’ Amérique, t. ii. p. 380.) Buttman maintained, what 


is very improbable, that the xyAai originally signified the two 
scales of the Balance, and were subsequently by some miscon- 


ception converted into the pincers of a Scorpion. (Compare . 


Ideler, Untersuchungen uber die astronomischen Beobachtungen 
der Alten., s. 374, and Ueber die Sternnamen, s. 174-177, with 


Carteron, Recherches de M. Letronne,p.118.) Itisa remark. | 
able circumstance connected with the analogy between 


a 








ZODIACAL SIGNS. 163 


Geminus and Varro, scarcely half a century before our 
era; and as the Romans, from the time of Augustus 
to Antoninus, became more strongly imbued with a pre- 
dilection for astrological inquiry, those constellations which 
“lay in the celestial path of the sun” acquired an ex- 
aggerated and fanciful importance. The Egyptian zodi- 
acal constellatigns found at Dendera, Esneh, the Propylon of 
Panopolis, and on some mummy-cases, belong to the first 
half of this period of the Roman dominion, as was maintained 
by Visconti and Testa, at atime when the necessary materials 
for the decision of the question had not been collected, and the 
wildest hypothesis still prevailed regarding the signification 
of these symbolical zodiacal signs, and their dependence on 
the precession of the equinoxes. The great antiquity which, 
from passages in Manu’s Book of Laws, Valmiki’s Ramayana 
and Amarasinha’s Dictionary, Augustus William von Schlegel 
attributed to the zodiacal circles found in India, has been 
rendered very doubtful by Adolph Holtzmann’s ingenious 
investigations.” 





many of the names of the twenty-seven ‘“‘ houses of the moon,” 
and the Dodecatomeria of the zodiac, that we also meet with 
the sign of the Balance among the Indian Nakschatras (Moon- 
houses), which are undoubtedly of very great antiquity. (Vues 
des Cordilléres, t. ii. pp. 6-12.) 

_* Compare A. W. von Schlegel Ueber Sternbilder des 
Thierkreises im alten Indien, in the Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde 
des Morgenlandes, bd. i. Heft 3.1837, and his Commentatio de 
Zodiact antiguitate et origine, 1839, with Adolph Holtzman, 
Ueber den griechischen Ursprung des indischen Thierkreises, 1841, 
s. 9, 16, 23. ‘The passages quoted from Amorakoscha, and 
Ramayana,” says the latter writer, “‘ admit of undoubted inter- 
pretation, and speak of the zodiac in the clearest terms; but 
if these works were composed before the knowledge of the Greek 
signs of the zodiac could have reached India, these passages 
ought to be carefully examined for the purpose of ascertaining 
whether they may not be comparatively modern interpolations.” 


mM 2 


164 COSMOS. 


- The artificial grouping of the stars into constellations which 
arose incidentally during the lapse of ages—the frequently in- 
convenient extent and indefinite outline—the complicated 
designations of individual stars in the different constellations— 
the various alphabets which have been required to distinguish 
them, as in Argo—together with the tasteless blending of mythi- 
cal personages with the sober prose of philosophigal instruments, 
chemical furnaces, and pendulum clocks, in the southern 
hemisphere—have led to many propositions for mapping the 
heavens in new divisions, without the aid of imaginary 
figures. This undertaking appears least hazardous in respect 
to the southern hemisphere, where Scorpio, Sagittarius, Cen- 
taurus, Argo, and Eridanus alone possess any poetic interest.* 

The heavens of the fixed stars (orbis inerrans of Apuleius) 
and the inappropriate expression of fixed stars, (astra fixa of 

Manilius) remind us, as we have already observed in the in- 
troduction to the Astrognosy,” of the connexion, or rather 
confusion of the ideas of insertion, and of absolute immo- 
bility or fixity. When Aristotle calls the non-wandering 
celestial bodies (admAavq aorpa) rivetted (evdedeneva), when Pto- 
lemy designates them as engrafted (mpoomeuxdres), these 
terms refer specially to the idea entertained by Anaximenes 





1 Compare Buttman, in Berlin astron. Jahrbuch fur 1822, 
s. 93, Olbers on the more recent constellations in Schumacher’s 
Jahrbuch fiir 1840, s. 283-251, and Sir John Herschel, 
Revision and Rearrangement of the Constellations, with special 
reference to those of the Southern Hemusphere, in the Memoirs 
of the Astr. Soc., vol. xii. pp. 201-224, (with a very exact 
distribution of the southern stars from the Ist to the 4th 
magnitude). On the occasion of Lalande’s formal discussion 
with Bode on the introduction of his domestic cat and of a 
reaper (Messier /) Olbers complains that in order “ to find space 
in the firmament for King Frederick’s glory, Andromeda 
must lay her right arm in a different place from that which it 
had occupied for 3000 years !” 

% Vide supra, pp. 80-31, and note. 








THE FIXED STARS. 165 


of the crystalline sphere of heaven. The apparent motion 
of all the fixed stars from east to west, while their relative dis- 
tances remained unchanged, had given rise to this hypothesis. 
‘The fixed stars (drAav7 dorpa) belong to the higher and more 
distant regions, in which they are rivetted, like nails, to the 
crystalline heavens; the planets (dorpa mAavopueva or mhavyra), 
which move in an opposite direction, belong to a lower and 
nearer region.” ** As we find in Manilius, in the earliest ages 
of the Cesars, that the term séella fixa was substituted for 
infiza, or affixa, it may be assumed that the schools of Rome 
attached thereto at first only the original signification of 
rivetted, but as the word jfixus also embraced the idea of immo- 
bility, and might even be regarded as synonymous with zmmotus 
andimmobilis, we may readily conceive that the national opinion, 
or rather usage of speech, should gradually have associated with 
stella fixa the idea of immobility, without reference to the fixed 
sphere to which it was attached. In this sense Seneca might 
term the world of the fixed stars fixum et immobilem populum. 

Although, according to Stobeus, and the collector 
of the ‘Views of the Philosophers,’ the designation 
“crystal vault of heaven’’ dates as far back as the early 
period of Anaximenes, the first clearly defined signifi- 
cation of the idea on which the term is based, occurs 
in Empedocles. This philosopher regarded the heaven of 
the fixed stars as a solid mass, formed from the ether which 
had been rendered crystalline and rigid by the action of fire.™4 





* According to Democritus and his disciple Metrodorus, 
Stob. Eelog. phys., p. 582. 
* Plut. de plac. phil. ii. 11; Diog. Laert., viii. 77; Achil- 
es Tat. ad Arat. cap. 5, Eym-, kpvoradden rodroy (rév odpavdv) 
<ivai dyow, ek tod mayerddovs ovdAdeyévra; in like manner we 
only meet with the expression crystal-like in Diog. Laert., viii. 
77, and Galenus, Hist. phil., 12, (Sturz, Empedocles Agrigent, 
t. 1. p, 321). Lactantius de opificio Dei, ec. 17. “An, si 
mihi quispiam dixerit eneum esse celum, aut vitreum, aut, 


166 COSMOS. 


According to his theory the moon is a body conglomerated 
{like hail) by the action of fire, and receives its light 


ut Empedocles ait, aerem glaciatum, statimne assentiat quia 
celum ex qua materia sit, ignorem.” “If any one were 
to tell me that the heavens are made of brass, or of glass, 
or, as Empedocles asserts, of frozen air, I should incon* 
tinently assent thereto, for I am ignorant of what substance 
the heavens are composed.’ We have no early Hellenic 
testimony of the use of this expression of a glass-like or 
vitreous heaven (celum vitreum), for only one celestial body, 
the sun, is called by Philolaus, a glass-like body, which throws 
upon us the rays it has received from the central fire. 
(The view of Empedocles, referred to in the text, of the reflee- 
tion of the sun’s light from the body of the moon, (supposed 
to be consolidated in the same manner as _hail-stones,) is fre- 
quently noticed by Plutarch, apud Euseb. Prep. Evangel. 1, 
pag. 24. D, and de facie in orbe Lune, cap. 5). Where Uranos 
is described as xaAxeos and oidypeos by Homer and Pindar, the 
expression refers only to the idea of steadfast, permanent, and 
imperishable, as in speaking of brazen hearts and brazen 
voices. Volcker uber Homerische G'eographie, 1830, s, 5. 
The earliest mention before Pliny, of the word xpicraddos 
when applied to ice-like, transparent rock-crystal oceurs in 
Dionysius Periegetes, 781, Aelian, xv. 8, and Strabo, xy. 
p- 717, Casaub. The opinion, that the idea of the erystalline 
heavens being a glacial vault (aer glaciatus of Lactantius) 
arose amongst the ancients, from their knowledge of the 
decrease of temperature, with the increase of height in the 
strata of the atmosphere, as ascertained from ascending great. 
heights and from the aspect of snow-covered mountains, is 
refuted by the circumstance that they regarded the fiery ether 
as lying beyond the confines of the actual atmosphere, and 
the stars as warm bodies. (Aristot., Meteor. 1, 3, de Calo, 11, 
7,p- 289). In speaking of the music of the spheres (Aristot. 
de Calo, 11, p. 290), which according to the views of the 
‘Pythagoreans is not perceived by men, because it is con+ 
tinuous, whereas tones can only be heard when t 

‘are interrupted by silence, Aristotle singularly enough main- 
tains that the movement of the spheres generates heat in 
the air below them, while they are themselves not heated. 











THE FIXED STARS. 167 


from the sun. The original idea of transparency, congela- 
tion, and solidity, would not, according to the physics of the 





—_— 


Their vibrations produce heat, but nosound. ‘The motion 
of the sphere of the fixed stars is the most rapid, (Aristot. de 
Celo, ii. 10, p. 291); as this sphere and the bodies attached 
to it are impelled in a circle, the subjacent space is heated 
by this movement, and hence heat is diffused to the surface 
of the earth.” (Meteorol. 1,3, p. 340.) It has always struck 
me as a circumstance worthy of remark, that the Stagirite 
should constantly avoid the word erystal heaven; for the ex- 
‘pression, “rivetted stars’’ (évdedepeva dorpa), which he uses, 
indicates a general idea of solid spheres, without, however, 
specifying the nature of the substance. We do not meet 
with any allusion to the subject in Cicero, but we find in his 
Commentator Macrobius, (Cic. Somnium Scynonis, 1, e. 20, 
p- 99, ed. Bip.) traces of freer ideas on the diminution of 
temperature, with the increase of height. According to him, 
eternal cold prevails in the outermost zones of heaven. “Ita 
enim non solum terram sed ipsum quoque ceelum, quod vere 
mundus vocatur, temperari a sole certissimum est, ut extre- 
mitates ejus, quee via solis longissime recesserunt, omni ca- 
reant beneficio caloris, et una frigoris perpetuitate torpescant.”’ 
** For as it is most certain that, not only the earth, but the 
heavens themselves, which are truly called the universe, are 
rendered more temperate by the sun, so also their con- 
fines, which are most distant from the sun, are deprived 
of the benefits of heat, and languish in a state of perpetual 
cold.” These confines of heaven (extremitates celi), im which 
the Bishop of Hippo (Augustinus, ed. Antv. 1700, 1, p. 102, 
and iii. p. 99) placed a region of icy-cold water near Saturn 
the highest, and therefore the coldest, of all the planets, are 
within the actual atmosphere, for beyond the outer limits of 
this space lies, according to a somewhat earlier expression of 
Macrobius, (1, c. 19, p. 93,) the fiery ether which enigmatically 
enough, does not prevent this eternal cold: ‘‘ Stelle supra 
ccelum locate, in ipso purissimo «there sunt, in quo omne 
quidquid est, lux naturalis et sua est, quee tota cum igne suo 
ita sphere solis incumbit, ut ceeli zone, que procul a sole 
sunt, perpetuo frigore oppresse sint.” “The stars above 
‘the heavens are situated in thé pure ether, in which all 


“168 COSMOS. ‘7 


-ancients,* and their ideas of the solidification of fluids, have 
‘referred directly to cold and ice; but the affinity between 
-KpvoradXos, Kpvos, and xpuoraive, as well as this comparison 
‘with the most transparent of all bodies gave rise to the 
‘more definite assertion that the vault of heaven consisted of 
ice or of glass. Thus we read in Lactantius: ‘“ Coelum aerem 
glaciatum esse,” and “ vitreum cclum.” Empedocles un- 
doubtedly did not refer to the glass of the Pheenicians, but 
‘to air, which was supposed to be condensed into a transparent 
“solid body by the action of the fiery ether. In this comparison 
with ice, (kpvoraddos) the idea of transparency predominated ; 
no reference being here made to the origin of ice through cold, 
but simply to its conditions of transparent condensation. 
While poets used the term crystal, prose writers (as found in 
the note on the passage cited from Achilles Tatius, the com- 
mentator of Aratus) limited themselves to the expression 
-erystalline or crystal-like, xpvoaraddoédyjs. In like manner 
.mayos (from myyvvc6u, to become solid), signifies a piece of ice 
~—its condensation being the sole point referred to, 

The idea of a crystalline vault of heaven was handed down 
to the middle ages by the Fathers of the Church, who believed 
the firmament to consist of from 7 to 10 glassy strata, incasing 
one another like the different coatings of an onion. This sup- 
‘position still keeps its ground in some of the monasteries of 





things, whatever they may be, have a natural and proper light 
of their own,” (the region of self-luminous stars) ‘‘-which so 
impends over the sphere of the sun with all its fire, that those 
zones of heaven which are far from the sun are oppressed by 
perpetual cold.’’ My reason for entering so circumstantially 
into the physical and meteorological ideas of the Greeks and 
Romans, is simply because these subjects, except in the works 
of Ukert, Henri Martin, and the admirable fragment of the 
Meteorologia Veterum of Julius Ideler, have hitherto been very 
imperfectly, and for the most part superficially, considered. 

*° The ideas that fire has the power of making rigid, (Aristot. 








VAULT OF HEAVEN. 169 


Southern Europe, where I was greatly surprised to hear a vene- 
rable prelate express an opinion in reference to the fall of aero- 
lites at Aigle, which at that time formeda subject of considerable 
interest, that the bodies we called meteoric stones with vitri- 
fied crusts were not portions of the fallen stone itself, but 
simply fragments of the crystal vault shattered by it in its 
fall. Kepler, from his considerations of comets which 
intersect the orbits of all the planets,®* boasted, nearly two 
hundred and fifty years ago, that he had destroyed the 77 
concentric spheres of the celebrated Girolamo Fracastoro, as 
well as all the more ancient retrograde epicycles. The ideas 
entertained by such great thinkers as Eudoxus, Meneechmus, 
Aristotle, and Apollonius Pergzeus, respecting the possible me- 
chanism and motion of these solid, mutually intersecting spheres 
by which the planets were moved; andthe question whether they 
regarded these systems of rings as mere ideal modes of repre- 
sentation, or intellectual fancies, by means of which difficult 
problems of the planetary orbits might be solved or determined 
approximately; are subjects of which I have already treated 





Probil., xiv. 11,) and that the formation of ice itself may be 
promoted by heat, are deeply-rooted in the physics of the 
ancients, and based on a fanciful theory of contraries (dn- 
_ dperistasis)—on obscure conceptions of polarity (of exciting 
opposite qualities or conditions). (Cosmos, p. 14, and note.) 
The quantity of hail produced was considered to be propor- 
_tional to the degree of heat of the atmospheric strata. (Aristot. 
_Meteor., i. 12.) In the winter fishery on the shores of the 
Euxine, warm water was used to increase the ice formed in the 
neighbourhood of an upright tube. (Alex. Aphrodis., fol. 86, 
and Plut. de primo frigido, c. 12.) 

* Kepler expressly says in his Stella Marts, fol. 9: “ So- 
lidos orbes rejeci.” ‘I have rejected the idea of solid orbs;” 
and in the Stella Nova, 1606, cap. 2, p. 8: ‘* Planete in puro 

. there, perinde atque aves in aére cursus suos conficiunt.” 
‘‘'The planets perform their course in the pure ether as 
_ birds pass through the air.” Compare, also, p. 122. He in. 


170 COSMOS. 


in another place,” and which are not devoid of interest in our 
endeavours to distinguish the different periods of development 
which have characterised the history of astronomy. 

Before we pass from the very ancient, but artificial zodiacal 
grouping of the fixed stars, as regards their supposed inser- 
tion into solid spheres, to their natural and actual arrangement, 
and to the known laws of their relative distribution, it will be 
necessary more fully to consider some of the sensuous pheno- 
mena of the individual cosmical bodies—their extending 
rays, their apparent, spurious disc, and their differences of 
colour. In the note referring to the invisibility of Jupiter’s 
satellites,* I have already spoken of the influence of the 
so-called tails of the stars, which vary in number, position, 
and length in different individuals. Indistinctness of vision 
(la vue imdistincte) arises from numerous organic causes, 
depending on aberration of the sphericity of the eye, diffraction 
at the margins of the pupil, or at the eye-lashes, and on the 
more or less widely diffused irritability of the retina from the 
excited point.* I see very regularly eight rays at angles of 45° 





clined, however, at an earlier period, to the idea of a solid icy 
vault of heaven congealed from the absence of solar heat: 
“‘ Orbis ex aquajfactus gelu concreta propter solis absentiam.’’ 
(Kepler, Epit. Astr. Copern., i. 2, p. 51.) Two thousand years 
before Kepler, Empedocles maintained that the fixed stars 
were rivetted to the crystal heavens, but that the planets were 
free and unrestrained”’ (rods Se wAavgras aveioOa). (Plut. plac. 
phil., ii. 13; Emped.il, p. 335 Sturz; Euseb. Prep. evang., xv. 
30, col. 1688, p. 839.) It is difficult to conceive how, ac- 
cording to Plato in the Timeeus (Zim., p. 40, B., see Bohn’s 
edition of Plato, vol. ii. p. 344, but not according to Aris- 
totle,) the fixed stars, rivetted as they are to solid spheres, 
could rotate independently. 7 Cosmos, vol. ii. pp. 696-7. 

38 Vide supra, p. 64, and note. 

89 « Les principales causes de la vue indistinete sont: aber- 
ration de sphéricite de |’ceil, diffraction sur les bords de la pu- 
pille, communication d’irritabilité 4 des points voisins sur la 





INDISTINCT VISION. 171 


in stars from the 1st to the 3rd magnitude, As, according to 
Hassenfratz, these radiations are caustics intersecting one 





rétine. La vue confuse est celle oi le foyer ne tombe pas ex- 
actement sur la rétine, mais tombe au-devant ou derriére la 
rétine. Les queues des étoiles sont l’effet de la vision indis- 
tincte, autant qu’elle dépend de la constitution du cristallin. 
D’aprés un trés ancien mémoire de Hassenfratz (1809) * les 
queues au nombre de 4 ou 8 qu ’offrent les étoiles ou une bougie 
vue 4 25 métres de distance, sont les caustiques du cristallin 
formées par l’intersection des rayons réfractés.’ Ces caustiques 
se meuvent 4 mesure que nous inclinons la téte.—La proprieteé 
de la lunette de terminer l'image fait qu’elle concentre dans 
un petit espace la lumiére qui sans cela en aurait occupé un 
plus grand. Cela est vrai pour les étoiles fixes et pour les 
disques des planétes. La lumiére des étoiles qui n’ont pas 
de disque réels, conserve la méme intensité, quel que soit le 
grossissement. Le fond de l’air duquel se détache I’étoile 
dans la lunette. devient plus noir par le grossissement qui di- 
late les molecules de l’air qu’embrasse le champ de la lunette. 
Les planétes 4 vrais disques deviennent elles-mémes plus 
pales par cet effet de dilatation.—Quand la peinture focale est 
nette, quand les rayons partis d’wn point de l'objet se sont 
eoncentrés en un seul point dans l'image, l’oculaire donne des 
resultats satisfaisants. Si au contraire les rayons émanés d’un 
point ne se reunissent pas au foyer en un seul point, s‘ils y 
forment un petit cercle, les images de deux points contigus de 
Pobjet empiétent nécessairement l’une sur l'autre ; leurs rayons 
se confondent. Cette confusion la lentille oculaire ne saurait 
la faire disparaitre. L/office qu'elle remplit exclusivement, 
c'est de grossir; elle grossit tout ce qui est dans l'image, les 
défauts comme le reste. ‘Les étoiles n’ayant pas de diamétres 
angulaires sensibles, ceux qu’elles conservent toujours, tiennent 
pour la plus grande partie au manque de perfection des instru- 
mens (a la courbure moins réguliére donnée aux deux faces de 
la lentille objective) et 4 quelques défauts et aberrations de 
notre cil. Plus une étoile semble petite, tout étant égal quant 
au diamétre de l’objectif, au grossissement employé et a l’éclat 
de l’etoile observée, et plus la lunette a de perfection. Or le 
meilleur moyen de juger si les étoiles sont trés petites, si des 
points sont représentés au foyer par des simples points, e’est 


172 COSMOS. 


nother on the crystalline lens, they necessarily move 
according to the direction in which the head is in- 





évidemment de viser a des étoiles excessivement rapprochées 
entr’elles et de voir si dans les étoiles doubles connues les 
images se confondent, si elles empictent l’une sur l’autre, ou 
bien si on les apergoit bien nettement séparées.”’ 

‘“* The principal causes of indistinct vision are: aberration of 
the sphericity of the eye, diffraction at the margins of the 
pupil,andirritation transmitted to contiguous points of the retina. 
Indistinct vision exists where the focus does not fall exactly on 
the retina, but either somewhat before or behind it. The tails 
of the stars are the result of indistinctness of vision, as far as it 
depends on the constitution of the crystalline lens. According 
to a very old paper of Hassenfratz (1809) ‘ the 4 or 8 tails 
which surround the stars or a candle seen at a distance 
of 25 metres [82 feet], are the caustics formed on the erystal- 
line lens by the intersection of refracted rays.’—These caustics 
follow the movements of the head.—The property of the tele- 
scope in giving a definite outline to images, causes it to con- 
centrate in a small space, the light which would otherwise be 
more widely diffused. This obtains for the fixed stars and for 
the discs of planets. The light of stars having no actual 
discs, maintains the same intensity, whatever may be the mag- 
nifying power of the instrument. The aerial field from which 
the star is projected in the telescope is rendeyed more black 
by the magnifying property of the instrument, by which the 
molecules of air included in the field of view are expanded. 
Planets having actual discs become fainter from this effect of 
expansion. When the focal image is clearly defined, and 
when the rays emanating from one point of the object are con- 
centrated into one point in the image, the ocular focus affords 
satisfactory results. But if, on the contrary, the rays ema- 
nating from one point do not reunite in the focus into one 
point, but form a small circle, the images of two contiguous 
points of the object will necessarily impinge upon each other ; 
-and their rays will be confused. This confusion cannot be 
removed by the ocular ; since the only part it performs is that 
of magnifying. It magnifies everything comprised in the 
image, including its defects. As the stars have no sensible 
angular diameters, those which they present are principally 





RAYS OF THE STARS. 173 


clined.” Some of my astronomical friends see three, or at 
most four rays above, and none below the star. It has always 
appeared extraordinary to me, that the ancient Egyptians 
should invariably have given only five rays to the stars (at 
distances, therefore, of 72°); so that a star in hieroglyphics 
signifies, according to Horapollo, the number five.“ 

The rays of the stars disappear when the image of the radiat- 
ing star is seen through a very smallgaperture made with a 
needle in a card, and I have myself frequently observed both 
Canopus and Sirius in thismanner. The same thing occurs in 
telescopic vision through powerful instruments, when the stars 
appear either as intensely luminous points, or as exceed- 
ingly small discs. Although the fainter scintillation of the 
fixed stars in the tropics conveys a certain impression of 
repose, a total absence of stellar radiation would, in my 
opinion, impart a desolate aspect to the firmament, as seen by 
the naked eye. [Illusion of the senses, optical illusion, and 
indistinct vision, probably tend to augment the splendour of 
the luminous canopy of heaven. Arago long since proposed 





owing to the imperfect construction of the instrument (to the 
different curvatures of the two sides of the object-glass), and 
to certain defects and aberrations pertaining to the eye itself. 
The smaller the star appears, the more perfect is the instru- 
ment, providing all relations are equal as to the diameter of 
the object-glass, the magnifying power employed, and the 
brightness of the star. Now -the best means of judging 
whether the stars are very small, and whether the points are 
represented in the focus by simple points, is undoubtedly that 
of directing the instrument to stars situated very near each 
other, and of observing whether the images of known double 
stars are confused, and impinging on each other, or whether 
they can be seen separate and distinct.” (Arago, WS. of 
1834 and 1847.) . 

“ Hassenfratz, Sur les rayons divergens des SEtoiles in 
Delametherie, Journal de Physique, tom. xix. 1809, p. 324. 

“ Horapollinis Niloi Hieroglyphica, ed. Con. Leemans, 


174 | COSMOS. 


the question, why fixed stars of the first magnitude, notwith- 
standing their great intensity of light, cannot be seen when 


rising above the horizon in the same manner as under similar. 


circumstances we see the outer margin of the moon’s dise.@ 

» Even the most. perfect optical instruments, and those hav- 
ing the highest magnifying powers, give to the fixed stars 
spurious dises (diamétres factices); “the greater aperture,” 
according to Sir John Herschel, “even with the same mag- 
nifying power giving the smaller disc.” Occultations of the 
stars by the moon’s dise show that the period oecupied in 
the immersion and emersion is so transient that it cannot be 
estimated at a fraction of a second of time. The frequent oc- 
currence of the so-called adhesion of the immersed star to the 
moon’s disc, is a phenomenon depending on inflection of light 
in no way connected with the question of the spurious dia- 
meter of the star. We have already seen that Sir William 
Herschel, with a magnifying power of 6500, found the diame- 
ter of Vega 0:36. The image of Arcturus was so dimin- 
ished in a dense mist, that the dise was below 0”:2. Itis 
worthy of notice that, in consequence of the illusion occasioned 
by stellar radiation, Kepler and Tycho, before the invention 





1835, cap. 13, p. 20. The learned editor notices, how- 
ever, in refutation of Jomard’s assertion (Deser. de [ Egypte, 
tom. vii. p. 423), that a star, as the numerical hieroglyphic 
for 5, has not yet been discovered on any monument or 
papyrus-roll. (Horap., p. 194.) 

_“ JT found an opinion prevalent among the sailors of the 
Spanish ships of the Pacific, that the age of the moon might 
be determined before the first quarter, by looking at it 
through a piece of silk and counting the multiplied images. 
Here we have a phenomenon of diffraction observed through 
fine slits. 

.°® Outlines, § 816. Arago has caused the spurious dia- 
meter of Aldebaran to increase from 4” to 15” in the imstru- 
ment by diminishing the object-glass. 


Ee 





THE COLOUR OF THE STARS. 175 


of the telescope, respectively ascribed to Sirius“ a diameter 
of 4’ and of 2’ 20”. 

The alternating light and dark rings which surround the 
small spurious discs of the stars when magnified two or 
three hundred times, and which appear iridescent when 
seen through diaphragms of different form, are likewise the 
result of interference and diffraction, as we learn from the 
observations of Arago and Airy. The smallest objects which 
can be distinctly seen in the telescope as luminous points, 
may be employed as a test of the perfection in construe- 
tion and illuminating power of optical instruments, whether 
refractors or reflectors. Amongst these we may reckon mul-— 
tiple stars, such as + Lyre, and the 5th and 6th star discovered 
by Struve, in 1826, and by Sir John Herschel in 1832, in the 
trapezium of the great nebula of Orion,“ forming the qua- 
druple star 4 of that constellation. 

A difference of colour in the proper light of the fixed stars, 





“ Delambre, Hist. de U Astr. moderne, tom. i. p. 193; 
Arago, Annuaire, 1842, p. 366. 

* «Two excessively minute, and very close companions, to 
perceive both of which, is one of the severest tests which can be 
applied to a telescope.”’ (Outlines, § 837. Compare also Sir 
John Herschel, Observations at the Cape, p. 29; and Arago, 
in the Annuaire pour 1834, pp. 302-305.) Among the dif- 
ferent planetary cosmical bodies by which the illuminating 
power of a strongly magnifying optical instrument may be 
tested, we may mention the Ist and 4th satellites of Uranus, re- 
discovered by Lassell and Otto Struve in 1847, the two inner- 
most and the 7th satellite of Saturn (Mimas, Enceladus, and 
Bond’s Hyperion), and Neptune’s satellite discovered by Lassell. 
The power of penetrating into celestial space occasioned 
Bacon, in an eloquent passage in praise of Galileo, to whom 
he erroneously ascribes the invention of telescopes, to com- 
pare these instruments to ships which carry men upon an 
unknown ocean:—“ Ut propriora exercere possint cum cceles- 


tibus commercia.” (Works of Francis Bacon, 1740, vol. i. 
Novum Organum, p. 361.) 


176 COSMOS. 


as well as in the reflected light of the planets, was recognized 
at a very early period; but our knowledge of this remarkable 
phenomenon has been greatly extended by the aid of telescopic 
vision, more especially since attention has been so especially 
directed to the double stars. We do not here allude to the 
change of colour which, as already observed, accompanies 
scintillation even in the whitest stars, and still less to the 
transient and generally red colour exhibited by stellar light 
near the horizon, (a phenomenon owing to the character of 
the atmospheric medium through which we see it,) but to the 
white or coloured stellar light radiated from each cosmical 
body, in consequence of its peculiar luminous process, and the 
different constitution of its surface. The Greek astronomers 
were acquainted with red stars only, while modern science has 
discovered, by the aid of the telescope, in the radiant fields of 
the starry heaven, as in the blossoms of the phanero- 
gamia, and in the metallic oxides, almost all the gradations of 
the prismatic spectrum between the extremes of refrangibility of 
the red and the violet ray. Ptolemy enumerates in his catalogue: 
of the fixed stars six (idxippor) fiery red stars, viz:** Arcturus 
Aldebaran, Pollux, Antares, a Orionis (in the right shoulder), 





* The expression tmdxppos, which Ptolemy employs indis- 
criminately to designate the six stars named in his catalogue, 
implies a slightly marked transition from fiery- yellow to fiery- 
red; it therefore refers, strictly speaking, to a fiery-reddish 
colour. He seems to attach the general predicate gav6ds, 
Jiery-yellow, to all the other fixed stars. (Almag., vill. 3 ed. 
Halma, tom. ii. p. 94.) Kuppds is, according to Galen, (Meth. 
med. 12,) a pale fiery-red inclining to yellow. Gellius com- 
pares the word with melmus, which, according to Servius, has 
the same meaning as “ gilvus” and ‘“fulvus.” As Sirius 
is said by Seneca (Nat. Quest., i. 1) to be redder than Mars, 
and belongs to the stars called in the Almagest tmdxippor, 
there can be no doubt that the word implies the predominance, 
or, at all events, a certain proportion of red rays. ‘The asser- 
tion that the affix mwouxidos, which Aratus, y. 327, attaches to 





COLOUR OF THE STARS. 177 


and Sirius. Cleomedes even compares Antares in Scorpio 
with the fiery red Mars,” which is called both avppds and 
. mupoedns. 
Of the six above named stars, five still retain a red or 
reddish light. Pollux is still indicated as a reddish, but 
Castor as a greenish star.“ Sirius therefore affords the 
only example of an historically proved change of colour, 
for it has at present a perfectly white light. A great 
physical reyolution® must therefore have occurred at the 
surface or in the photosphere of this fixed star, (or remote 
sun, as Aristarchus of Samos called the fixed stars) before 
the process could have been disturbed by means of which 
the less refrangible red rays had obtained the preponderance, 
through the abstraction or absorption of other complementary 





Sirius, has been ¢ranslated by Cicero as “rutilus,”’ is erro- 
neous. Cicero says, indeed, v. 348:— 
** Namque pedes subter rutilo cum lumine claret, 
- Fervidus ille Canis stellarum luce refulgens ;’’ 
‘but “ rutilo cum lumine”’ is not a ¢ranslation of motxidos, but 
the mere addition of a free translation. (From letters ad- 
_dressed to me by Professor Franz.) << If,” as Arago observes 
(Annuaire, 1842, p. 351), “the Roman orator, in using the 
term rutilus, purposely departs from the strict rendering of 
the Greek of Aratus, we must suppose that he recognized the 
reddish character of the light of Sirius.” 
“ Cleom., Cycl. Theor., i. ii. p. 59. 
# Madler, Astr. 1849, s. 391. 
*® Sir John Herschel, in the Edinb. Review, vol. 87, 
‘1848, p. 189, and in Schum. Ast. Nachr., 1839, no. 372:— 
“« It seems much more likely that in Sirius a red colour should 
be the effect of a medium interfered, than that in the short 
space of 2000 years so vast a body should have actually under- 
gone such a material change in its physical constitution. It 
may be supposed owing to the existence of some sort of cos- 
mical cloudiness, subject to internal movements, depending on 
causes of which we are ignorant.” (Compare Arago in the 
Annuaire pour 1842, pp. 350-353.) : 


VOL. III. N 


“178 COSMOS. 


rays, either in the photosphere of the star itself, or in the 
‘moving cosmical clouds by which it is surrounded. It is to 
be wished that the epoch of the disappearance of the red 
colour of Sirius had been recorded by a definite reference to the 
time, as this subject has excited a vivid interest in the minds 
of astronomers since the great advance made in modern 
optics. Atthe time of Tycho Brahe the light of Sirius was un- 
_doubtedly already white, for when the new star which appeared 
in Cassiopeia, in 1572, was observed in the month of March, 
1573, to change from its previous dazzling white colour to a 
-reddish hue, and again became white in January, 1574, the red 
appearance of the star was compared to the colour of Mars and 
_Aldebaran, but not to that of Sirius. M. Seédillot, or other phi- 
-lologists conversant with Arabic and Persian astronomy, may 
perhaps some day succeed in discovering evidence of the 
earlier colour of Sirius, in the periods intervening from El- 
Batani (Albategnius) and El-Fergani (Alfraganus) to Abdur- 
rahman Sufi and Ebn-Junis (that is, from 880 to 1007), and 
from Ebn-Junis to Nassir-Eddin and Ulugh-Beg (from 1007 
to 1437). 

El-Fergani (properly Mohammed Ebn-Kethir El-Fergani), 
who conducted astronomical observations in the middle of the 
tenth century at Rakka (Aracte) on the Euphrates, indicates 
as red stars (stelle ruffe of the old Latin translation of 1590) 
Aldebaran, and, singularly enough,” Capella, which is now 
yellow and has scarcely a tinge of red, but he does not men- 
tion Sirius. If at this period Sirius had been no longer red, 
it would certainly be a striking fact that El-Fergani, who 
invariably follows Ptolemy, should not here indicate the 


—— ——— 





In Muhamedis Alfragani chronologica et astronomica 
‘Elementa, ed. Jacobus Christmannus, 1590, cap. 22, p. 97, 
we read:—* Stella ruffa in Tauro Aldebaran; stella ruffa in 
Geminis que appellatur Hajok, hoc est Capra.” Alhajoe, 
Aijuk ave, however, the ordinary names for Capella Aurigz, 











SIRIUS. 179 


change of colour in so celebrated a star. Negative proofs are 
however not often conclusive, and indeed El-Fergani makes no 
reference in the same passage to the colour of Betelgeux (a 
Orionis), which is now red, as it was in the age of Ptolemy. 
It has long been acknowledged that of all the brightest 
luminous fixed stars of heaven, Sirius takes the first and most 
- important place, no less in a chronological point of view, than 
through its historical association with the earliest develop- 
ment of human civilization in the valley of the Nile. The era 
of Sothis—the heliacal rising of Sothis (Sirius)—on which 
Biot has written an admirable treatise, indicates, according to 
the most recent investigations of Lepsius,” the complete ar- 
rangements of the Egyptian calendar into those ancient epochs, 
including nearly 3300 years before our era, “‘ when not only 
the summer solstice, and consequently the beginning of the 
_rise of the Nile, but also the heliacal rising of Sothis, fell on the 
day of the first water-month (or the first Pachon).” I will 
collect in a note the most recent, and hitherto unpublished, 
etymological researches on Sothis or Sirius from the Coptic, 
Zend, Sanscrit, and Greek, which may perhaps be acceptable 
to those who, from love for the history of astronomy, seek 





in the Arabic and Latin Almagest. Argelander justly observes, 
-in reference to this subject, that Ptolemy in the astrological work 
(TerpaBiBros ovvragis), the genuine character of which is testi- 
fied by the style as well as by ancient evidence, has associated 
planets with stars according to similarity of colour, and has 
thus connected Martis stella, Que writ sicut congruit igneo 
¢psius colori, with Aurige stella, or Capella, (Compare 
_Ptol., Quadripart. Construct., libri iv. Basil, 1551, p. 383.) 
Riceiok (Almagestum novum, ed. 1650, tom. i. pars i. lib. 6, 
eap. 2, p. 394) also reckons Capella together with Antares, 
Aldebaran, and Arcturus among red stars. 

* See Chronologie der dEgypter, by Richard Lepsius, bd. i. 
1849, s. 190-195, 213. The complete arrangement of the 
Egyptian calendar is referred to the earlier part of the year 

8280 before our era, ¢. e. about a century and.a half after the 


N 2 


‘180 - COSMOS. 


“in languages and their affinities, monuments of the earlier 
_ conditions of knowledge.” 





building of the great pyramid of Cheops-Chufu, and 940 years 
before the period generally assigned to the Deluge. (Compare 
~ Cosmos, vol. ii. p. 475 and note.) In the calculations based 
_ on the circumstance of Colonel Vyse having found that the 
. inclination of the narrow subterranean passage leading into the 
_ interior of the pyramid, very nearly corresponded to the angle 
26° 15’, which, in the time of Cheops (Chufu), was attained 
’ by the star z Draconis, which indicated the pole, at its inferior 
culmination at Gizeh, the date of the building of the pyramid 
(is not assumed at 3430 B.c, as given in Cosmos according 
_ to Letronne, but at 3970 B.c. (Outlines of Astr., § 319.) 
This difference of 540 years tends to strengthen the assump- 
‘ tion, that a Drac. was regarded as the pole-star, as in 3970 it 
was still at a distance of 3° 44’ from the pole. 
* T have extracted the following observations from letters 
. addressed to me by Professor Lepsius (February, 1850). “ The 
iigyptian name of Sirius is So¢Ais, designated as a female star; 
hence, 7 26s is identified in Greek with the goddess Sote 
‘(more frequently S¢¢ in hieroglyphics,) and in the tempie or 
the great Ramses at Thebes with Isis-Sothis (Lepsius, Chron. 
‘der hgypter, bd. i. s. 119, 186). The signification of the 
root is found in Coptic, and is allied with a numerous family 
of words, the members of which, although they apparently 
differ very widely from each other, admit of being arranged 
somewhat in the following order. By the threefold transfer- 
- ence of the verbal signification, we obtain from the original mean- 
ing, to throw out—projicere (sagittam, telum)—first, seminare, 
to sow; next, extendere, to extend or spread (as spun threads;) 
and lastly, what is here most important, to radiate light and 
to shine (as stars and fire). From this series of ideas we may _ 
deduce the names of the divinities, Satis (the female archer) ; 
Sothis, the radiating, and Seth, the fiery. We may also hiero- 
_glyphically explain sz or set, the arrows as well as the ray; seéa, 
to spin; setu, scattered seeds. Sothis is especially the brightly 
radiating, the star regulating the seasons of the year and 
periods of time. The small triangle, always represented yellow, 
-which is a symbolical sign for Sothis, is used to designate the 
‘radiating sun when arranged in numerous triple rows issuing 


THE COLOUR OF THE STARS. 181° 


Besides Sirius, Vega, Deneb, Regulus, and Spica, are at the » 
present time decidedly white ; and among the small double ~ 





in a downward direction from the sun’s disk. Seth is the fiery 


scorching god, in contradistinction to the warming, fructifying 


water of the Nile, the goddess Satis who inundates the soil. ~ 


She is also the goddess of the cataracts, because the overflowing | 
of the Nile began with the appearance of Sothis in the heavens , 
at the summer solstice. In Vettius Valens the star itself is , 


called 276 instead of Sothis; but neither the name nor the 


subject admits of our identifying Thoth with Seth or Sothis, as _ 
Ideler has done. (Handbuca der Chronologie, bd. i. s. 126.)” » 


(Lepsius, bd. i. s. 136.) 


I will close these observations taken from the early Egyp- » 


tian periods with some Hellenic, Zend, and Sanscritetymologies : 


“ Seip, the sun,” says Professor Franz, ‘is an old root, differing - 


only in pronunciation from ep, b€pos, heat, summer, in which 


we meet with the same change in the vowel sound asin reipos . 


and répos or tépas, The correctness of these assigned relations. 


~ of the radicals ceip and 6ep, G€pos, is proved not only by the em- 
ployment of epeiraros in Aratus, v. 149 (Ideler, Sternnamen, 


s. 241), but also by the later use of the forms ceipos, ceipios, and - 
ceipwos hot, burning, derived from seip. Itis worthy of notice . 


that vecpa or Oeipiwd ivaria is used the same as Gepiva ivaria, . 
light summer clothing. The form ceétpios seems, however, to . 
have had a wider application; for it constitutes the ordinary » 
term appended to all stars influencing the summer heat : hence, , 
according to the version of the poet, Archilochus, the sun was . 


geiptos dorip, while Ibycus calls the stars generally ceipia, 


luminous. It cannot be doubted that it is the sun. to which - 
Archilochus refers in the words, modAots pev adrod ceiptos | 
karavavet dfvs €\Adprov, According to Hesychius and Suidas, - 
Zeipios does indeed signify both the sun and the Dog-star; but 
I fully coincide with M. Martin, the new editor of Theon of , 
Smyrna, in believing that the passage of Hesiod (Opera et - 
Dies, v. 417,) refers to the sun, as maintained by Tzetzes and - 


Proclus, and not to the Dog-star. From the adjective ceipus, 


which has established itself as the ‘ eprtheton perpetuum’ of the | 
Dog-star, we derive the verb ceipidv, which may be translated - 


‘to sparkle.’ Aratus, v. 331, says of Sirius, 6f€a vepides, ‘it 


sparkles strongly.’ When standing alone, the word «py, the. 


182 — COSMOS. 


stars Struve enumerates about 300, in which both stars are 
white.” Procyon, Atair, the Pole Star, and more especially - 
8 Ursee Min. have a more or less decided yellow light. We 
have already enumerated among the larger red or reddish | 





Siren, has a totally different etymology; and your conjecture, 
that it has merely an accidental similarity of sound with the 
brightly shining star Sirius, is perfectly well-founded. The 
opinion of those who, according to Theon Smyrneeus (Liber de 
Astronomia, 1850, p. 202), derive Zetpqy from cerpidfery (a more- 
over unaccredited form of epray) is likewise entirely erroneous. 
While the motion of heat and light is implied by the expres- 
sion ceipios, the radical of the word Ze:pyy represents the flow- 
ing tones of this phenomenon of nature. It appears to me 
probable, that 2epyy is connected with eipew (Plato, Cratyl. 
398 D, 7d yap eipew A€yew éori,) in which the original sharp 
aspiration passed into a hissing sound.” (From letters of 
Prof. Franz to me, January, 1850.) 

-The Greek 2eip, the sun, easilyadmits, according to Bopp, “of 
being associated with the Sanscrit word svar, which does not 
indeed signify the sun itself, but the heavens, (as something 
shining.) The ordinary Sanscrit denomination for the sun is 
sitirya, a contraction of svdrya, which is not used. The root 
svar signifies in general to shine. The Zend designation for the 
sun is Avare, with the h instead of the s. The Greek Oep, Oépos 
and deppos comes from the Sanscrit word gharma (Nom. 
gharmas,) warmth, heat.” | 

-The acute editor of the Rigveda, Max Miller, observes, 
that ‘‘the special Indian astronomical name of the Dog-star, 
LIubdhaka, which signifies a hunter, when considered in re- . 
ference to the neighbouring constellation Orion, seems to indi- 
cate an ancient Arian community of ideas regarding these groups 
of stars.” He is moreover principally inclined “to derive Se/pios 
from the Veda word sera (whence the adjective sairya,) and 
the root sr?, to go, to wander ; so that the sun and the brightest 
of the stars, Sirius, were originally called wandering stars.” 
(Compare also Pott, Htymologische Forschungen, 1838, 
s. 180. 

8 etl Stellarum compositarum Mensure micrometrice, 
1837, p. Ixxiv. et lxxxiil. : 


THE COLOUR OF THE STARS. 183 - 


stars Betelgeux, Arcturus, Aldebaran, Antares, and Pollux... 
Riimker finds y Crucis of a fine red colour, and my old friend, © 
Captain Bérard, who is an admirable observer, wrote from 
Madagascar in 1847, that he had for some years seen a. 
Crucis growing red. The star » Argis, which has been 
rendered celebrated by Sir John Herschel’s observations, and 
to which I shall soon refer more circumstantially, is under- 
going a change in colour, as well as in intensity of light. In 
the year 1843, Mr. Mackay noticed at Calcutta that this star 
was similar in colour to Arcturus, and was therefore reddish - 
yellow;* but in letters from Santiago de Chili, in Feb. 
1850, Lieutenant Gilliss speaks of it as being of a darker - 
colour than Mars. Sir John Herschel, at the conclusion of 
his Observations at the Cape, gives a list of seventy-six ruby- 
coloured small stars, of the 7th to the 9th magnitude, some of » 
which appear in the telescope like drops of blood. The majo- 
rity of the variable stars are also described as red and reddish,® © 
the exceptions being Algol in Caput Medusz, 8 Lire and €- 
Auriga, which have a pure white light. Mira Ceti, in which. 
a periodical change of light was first recognized, has a strong 

reddish light; but the variability observed in Algol and 

8. Lyree, proves that this red colour is not a necessary condi- 

tion of a change of light, since many red stars are not 

variable. The faintest stars in which colours can.be dis- 

tinguished belong, according to Struve, to the 9th and 10th 

magnitudes. Blue stars were first mentioned by Mariotte,” 

1686, in his Zraité des Couleurs. The light of a Lyre is 
bluish ; and a smaller stellar mass of 84 minutes in diameter - 
in the southern hemisphere consists, according to Dunlop, of 

blue stars alone. Among the double stars there are many in 





.* Sir John Herschel, Observations at the Cape, p. 34. 
% Madler’s Astronomie, s. 436. 

_*® Cosmos, vol. ii. p, 7138. 
* Arago, Annuaire pour 1842, p. 348. 


184° COSMOS. 


which the principal star is white, and the companion blue 3. 
and some in which both stars have a blue light,® (as 6 Serp. 
and 59 Androm.) Occasionally, as in the stellar swarm near 
x of the Southern Cross, which was mistaken by Lacaille for 
a nebulous spot, more than a hundred variously-coloured red, 
green, blue, and bluish-green stars are so closely thronged to- 
gether that they appear in a powerful telescope “like a superb © 
piece of fancy jewellery.” ® 

The ancients believed they could recognize a remarkable 
symmetry in the arrangement of certain stars of the Ist 
magnitude. Thus their attention was especially directed 
to the four so-called regal stars which are situated at op- 
posite points of the sphere, Aldebaran and Antares, Re- 
gulus and Fomalhaut. We find this regular arrangement, 
of which I have already elsewhere treated,” specially referred 
to in'a late Roman writer, Julius Firmicus Maternus,® who 
belonged to the age of Constantine. The differences of right - 
ascension in these regal stars, stelle regales, are 11h. 57m. and - 
12h: 49m. The importance formerly attached to this subject is 
probably owing to opinions transmitted from the East, which 
gained a footing in the Roman empire under the Casars, 
together with a strong national predilection for astrology. 
The leg, or north star of the Great Bear, (the celebrated star 
of the Bull’s leg in the astronomical representations of Den- 
dera, and in the Egyptian Book of the Dead) is perhaps the 
star indicated in an obscure passage of Job (ch. ix. ver. 9), 
in which Arcturus, Orion, and the Pleiades are contrasted with 
‘the chambers of the south,” and in which the four quarters 





§ Struve, Stelle comp., p. \xxxii. 

°° Sir John Herschel, Observations at the Cape, pp. 17, 102. 
(‘* Nebule and Clusters, No. 3485.”’) 

° Humboldt, Vues des Cordilléres et Monumens des peuples 
indigénes de Vv Amérique, tom. ii. p. 55. 

8 Julii Firmici Matern: Astron., libri viii. Basil, 1551, 
lib. vi. cap. i. p. 150. 











SOUTHERN STARS. 185. 


of the heavens in like manner are indicated by these four 
groups.” 

While a large and splendid portion of the southern heavens 
beyond stars having 58° S. Decl. were unknown in ancient 
times, and even in the earlier part of the middle ages, the know- » 
ledge of the southern hemisphere was gradually completed 
about a century before the invention and application of the 
telescope. At the time of Ptolemy there were visible on the . 
horizon of Alexandria, the Altar, the feet of the Centaur, . 
the Southern Cross, then included in the Centaur, and 
according to Pliny also called Cesaris Thronus, in honour 
of Augustus,® and Canopus (Canobus) in Argo, which is 
called Ptolemeon by the scholiast to Germanicus.* In the 





® Lepsius, Chronol. der digypter, bd. i. s. 148. In the 
Hebrew text mention is made of Asch, the giant (Orion?), the 
many stars (the Pleiades, Gemut?) and “ the Chambers of the 
South.” The Septuagint gives: 6 mov “EXeudda kai ‘Eomepov 
kal ’Apkrovpov kal Tapeta vdrov, 

The early English translators, like the Germans and Dutch, 
understood the first group referred to in the verse to signify 
the stars in the Great Bear. Thus we find in Coverdale’s 
version, “‘ He maketh the waynes of heaven, the Orions, the 
vii. stars and the secret places of the south.’””-—Adam Clarke’s 
Commentary on the Old Testament.—(TR.) 

8 Tdeler, Sternnamen, s. 295. 

*’ Martianus Capella changes Ptolemeon into Ptolemeus ; 
both names were devised by the flatterers at the court of the 
Egyptian sovereigns. Amerigo Vespucci thought he had 
seen three Canopi, one of which was quite dark (fosco), Cano- 
pus ingens et niger of the Latin translation : most probably one ~ 
of the black coal-sacks. (Humboldt, Examen crit. de la Géogr. 
tom. v. pp. 227, 229.) In the above-named Elem. chronol. et 
Astron. by El Fergani (p. 100), it is stated that the Christian 
pilgrims used to call the Sohel of the Arabs (Canopus) the 
star of St. Catherine, because they had the gratification of 
observing it, and admiring it as a guiding star when they 
journeyed from Gaza to Mount Sinai. In a fine episode to 
the Ramayana, the oldest heroic poem of Indian antiquity, the 


186 _ COSMOS. 


catalogue of the Almagest, Achernar, a star of the Ist mage 
nitude, the last in Eridanus, (Achir el-nahr, in Arabic,) is also. 
given, although it was 9° below the horizon. A report of the 





stars in the vicinity of the South Pole are declared for a 

singular reason to have been more recently created than the 
northern. When Brahminical Indians were emigrating 
from the north-west to the countries around the Ganges, . 
from the 80th degree of north latitude to the lands of the 
tropics, where they subjected the original inhabitants to 
their dominion, they saw unknown stars rising above the 
horizon as they advanced towards Ceylon. In accordance 
with ancient practice, they combined these stars into new 
constellations. A bold fiction represented the later-seen 
stars as having been subsequently created by the mira- 
culous power of Visvamitra, who threatened “the ancient 
gods that he would overcome the northern hemisphere, 

with his more richly starred southern hemisphere.” (A. W.von 
Schlegel, in the Zeitschrift fur die Kunde des Morgenlandes, 
bd. i. s. 240.) While this Indian myth figuratively depicts 
the astonishment excited in wandering nations by the aspec! 

of a new heaven (as the celebrated Spanish poet, Garcilaso 
de la Vega, says of travellers, “‘they change at once their 
country and stars,” mudan de pays y de estrellas,) we are 
powerfully reminded of the impression that must have been 
excited, even in the rudest nations, when, at a certain part of. 
the earth’s surface, they observed large, hitherto unseen stars 
appear in the horizon, as those in the feet of the Centaur, in 

the Southern Cross, in Eridanus or in Argo, whilst those 

with which they had been long familiar at home wholly dis- 

appeared. The fixed stars advance towards us, and again 

recede, owing to the precession of the equinoxes. We. 
have already mentioned that the Southern Cross was 7° 
above the horizon, in the countries around the Baltic, 2900 ~ 
years before our era; at a time, therefore, when the great. 
pyramids had already existed five hundred years. (Compare 

Cosmos, pp.'189 and 660.) ‘‘ Canopus, on the other hand, can 

never have been visible at Berlin, as its distance from the 
South Pole of the ecliptic amounts to only 14°. It would have 
required a distance of 1° more to bring it within the limits of 
visibility for our horizon.” ug 








DISTRIBUTION OF STARS. 187 


existence of this star must therefore have reached Ptolemy 
through the medium of those who had made voyages to the 
southern parts of the Red Sea, or between Ocelis and the Mala- 
bar emporium, Muziris.” Though improvements inthe art of 
navigation led Diego Cam, together with Martin Behaim, along 
the western coasts of Africa, as early as 1484, and carried Bar- 
tholomew Diaz in 1487, and Gama in 1497 (on his way to 
the East Indies), far beyond the equator, into the Antarctic 
Seas, as far as 35° south lat., the first special notice of the 
large stars and nebulous spots, the first description of the 
“Magellanic clouds” and the “ coal-sacks,” and even the 
fame of ‘‘ the wonders of the heavens not seen in the Medi- 
terranean,” belong to the epoch of Vincenze Yafiez Pinzon, 
Amerigo Vespucci, and Andrea Corsali, between 1500 and 
1515. The distances of the stars of the southern hemis- 
phere were measured at the close of the 16th and the be- 
ginning of the 17th century.* — | 

Laws of relative density in the distribution of the fixed 
stars in the vault of heaven, first began to be recognized 
when Sir William Herschel, in the year 1785, conceived the 
happy idea of counting the number of stars which passed at 
different heights and in various directions over the field of view, 
of 15’in diameter, of his twenty-feet reflecting telescope. Fre- 
quent reference has already been made in the present work to 
his laborious process of “ gauging the heavens.”” The field of 
view each time embraced only 7;,45;th of the whole hea- 
vens ; and it would therefore require, according to Struve, 
eighty-threee years to gauge the whole sphere by 4 similar pro- 
cess.” In investigations of the partial distribution of stars, 
we must specially consider the class of magnitude to which 


'®& Cosmos, vol. ii. pp. 538, 539. 


_® Olbers in Schumacher’s Jahrb. fiir 1840, s. 249, and 
Cosmos, vol. i. p. 51. 


 Htudes d’ Astr. stellaire, note 74, p. 31. 





188 - COSMOS. 


they photometrically belong. If we limit our attention to the * 
bright stars of the first three or four classes of magni- ° 


tudes, we shall find them distributed on the whole with 
tolerable uniformity,® although in the southern hemisphere, 
from € Orionis to @ Crucis, they are locally crowded together 


in a splendid zone in the direction of a great circle. The 
various opinions expressed by different travellers on the | 


relative beauty of the northern and southern hemispheres, 
frequently, I believe, depends wholly on the circumstance, 
that some of these observers have visited the southern regions 
at a period of the year when the finest portion of the con- 
stellations culminate in the day-time. It follows, from the 
gaugings of the two Herschels in the northern and southern 
hemispheres, that the fixed stars from the 5th and 6th to the 
10th and 15th magnitudes (particularly, therefore, telescopic 
stars) increase regularly in density as we approach the 


galactic circle (6 yadafias kvkdos); and that there are therefore 


poles rich in stars, and others poor in stars, the latter being 


at right angles to the principal axis of the Milky Way. The - 


density of the stellar light is at its minimum at the poles of 
the galactic circle; and it increases in all directions, at first 


slowly, and then rapidly, in proportion to the increased | 


galactic polar distance. 
By an ingenious and careful consideration of the results of 
the gauges already made, Struve found that on the average 


- 


there are 29:4 times (nearly 30 times) as many stars in the: 
centre of the Milky Way as in regions surrounding the’ 
galactic poles. In northern galactic polar distances of: 


0°, 30°, 60°, 75°, and 90°, the relative numbers of the stars 
in a telescopic field of vision of 15’ diameter, are 4°15, 6°52, 


- 


17:68, 30°30, and 122°00. Notwithstanding the great simi-— 


larity in the law of increase in the abundance of the stars, we 





8 Outlines of Astr., § 785. 





CLUSTERS OF STARS. . 189 


again find in the comparison of these zones, an absolute pre- 
ponderance™ on the side of the more beautiful southern 


. heavens. 


When in 1843 I requested Captain Schwinck (of the 


- Engineers) to communicate to me the distribution according 


to right ascension of the 12148 stars (from the 1st to the 7th 


. inclusive), which, at Bessel’s suggestion, he had noted in his 
. Mappa celestis, he found in four groups— 


Right Ascension 50° to 140° 3147 stars. 


fh 140° 230° =. 2627_—=«,, 
, 230° 320° =: 3523-_—é=, 
ns 320 50° «2851 og, 


These groups correspond with the more exact results of the 
Etudes stellaires, according to which the maxima of stars 
of the 1st to the 9th magnitude occur in the right ascension 
6h. 40m. and 18h. 40m., and the minima in the right ascen- 
sion of Lh. 30m. and 13h. 30m.” 

It is essential that, in reference to the conjectural structure 


of the universe and to the position or depth of these strata 


of conglomerate matter, we should distinguish among the 
countless number of stars with which the heavens are 
studded, those which are scattered sporadically, and those 
which occur in separate, independent, and crowded groups. 


The latter are the so-called stellar clusters or swarms, which 


frequently contain thousands of telescopic stars in recogniz- 
able relations to each other, and which appear to the unaided 
eye as round nebule, shining like comets. These are, the 





*° Op. cit.,§ 795, 796; Struve, Etudes d’ Astr. stell. pp. 66, 


_ 78, (and note 75). 


 Struye, p. 59. Schwinck finds in his maps, R. A. 0°—90°, 
2858 stars; R. A. 90 — 180°, 3011 stars; R. A. 180 — 270°, 
2688 stars; R. A. 270° — 360, 3591 stars; sum total, 12148, 
stars to the 7th magnitude. 


190 ; COSMOS. 


-nebulous stars of Eratosthenes” and Ptolemy, the nebulose 
of the Alphonsine Tables in 1483, and the same of which 
Galileo said in the Nuncius sidereus, ‘* Sicut areole sparsim 
per ethera subfulgent.” 

These clusters of stars are either scattered separately 
throughout the heavens, or closely and irregularly crowded 
together, in strata, as it were, in the Milky Way, and in the 
Magellanic clouds. The greatest accumulation of globular clus- 
ters, and the most important in reference to the configuration of 
the galactic circle, occurs in a region of the southern heayens” 
between Corona Australis, Sagittarius, the tail of Scorpio, and 
the Altar. (R.A. 16h. 45m.-19h.) All clusters in and near 
the Milky Way are not, however, round and globular; there 
are many of irregular outline, with but few stars and not a 
very dense centre. In many globular clusters the stars are 
uniform in magnitude, in others they vary. In some 
few cases they exhibit a fine reddish central star.% (R. A. 
2h.10m.; N. Decl. 56° 21’.) It is a difficult problem in 
dynamics to understand how such island-worlds, with their 
multitude of suns, can rotate free and undisturbed. Nebulous 
spots and clusters of stars appear subject to different laws 
in their local distribution, although the former are now 
very generally assumed to consist of very small, and still 
more remote stars. The recognition of these laws must 
specially modify the conjectures entertained of what has 
been boldly termed the “structure of the heavens.” It is 
moreover worthy of notice that, with an instrument of equal 
aperture and magnifying power, round nebulous spots are 
more easily resolved into clusters of stars than oval ones.” ~ 





71 On the nebula in the right hand of Perseus, (near the hilt 
of his sword,) see Eratosth. Catast., c. 22, p. 51, Schaubach. 
% John Herschel’s Observations at the Cape, § 105, p. 136. 
% Outlines, § 864-869, pp. 591-596 ; Madler’s Astr., s. 764. 
4 Observations at the Cape, § 29, p. 19. ; 





CLUSTERS OF STARS 191 


I will content myself with naming the following among the 
isolated systems of clusters and swarms of stars. 

The Pleiades: doubtless known to the rudest nations 
from the earliest times; the marier’s stars—Pleias, amo Tov 
mreiv, (from mAciv, to sail,) according to the etymology of the 
old scholiast of Aratus, who is probably more correct than 
those modern writers, who would derive the name from 
mhéos, plenty. The navigation of the Mediterranean lasted 
from May to the beginning of November, from the early 
rising to the early setting of the Pleiades. 

Preesepe in Cancer: according to Pliny, nubecula quam 
. Presepia vocant inter Asellos, a vepédwov of the Pseudo-Eratos- 
thenes. 

The cluster of stars on the sword-hilt of Perseus, frequently 
mentioned by Greek astronomers. 

Coma Berenices, like the three former, visible to the nakedeye. 

A cluster of stars near Arcturus (No. 1663), telescopic: 
R. A. 18h. 34m. 12s., N. Decl. 29° 14’; more than a thousand 
stars from the 10th to the 12th magnitude. 

Cluster of stars between 7 and ¢ Herculis, visible to the 
naked eye in clear nights. A magnificent object in the 
telescope (No. 1968), with a singular radiating margin; 
R. A. 16h. 35m. 37s., N. Decl. 36° 47’; first deseribed by 
na in 1714. 

A cluster of stars near » Centauri; described by Halley 
as early as 1677; appearing to the naked eye as a round 
cometic object, almost as bright as a star of the 4th or 
5th magnitude; in powerful instruments it appears com- 
posed of countless stars of the 13th to the 15th magnitude, 
crowded together and most dense towards the centre; 
R, A. 13h. 16m. 38s., S. Decl. 46° 35’; No. 3504 in Sir John 
Herschel’s catalogue of the clusters of the southern hemisphere, 
15’ in diameter. (Odservations at the Cape, pp. 21, 105; 
Outlines of Astr., p. 595.) | 


. 192 COSMOS. 


Cluster of stars near « of the Southern Cross (No. 8435), 
composed of many-coloured small stars from the 12th to 
the 16th magnitude, distributed over an area of 2,th of a 
- square degree; a nebulous star, according to Lacaille, but so 
completely resolved by Sir John Herschel that no nebulous 
_ mass remained; the central star deep red. (Observations at 
. the Cape, pp. 17, 102, pl. 1, fig. 2.) 

Cluster of stars, 47 Toucani, Bode; No. 2322 of Sir John 
Herschel’s catalogue, one of the most remarkable objects in the 
southern heavens. I was myself deceived by it for several even- 
ings, imagining it to be a comet, when, on my arrival at Peru, I 
. saw it in 12° south lat. rise high above the horizon. The visi- 
bility of this cluster to the naked eye is increased by the 
circumstance, that, although in the vicinity of the lesser 
Magellanic cloud, it is situated in a part of the heavens con- 
. taining no stars, and is from 15’ to 20’ indiameter. It is of a 
pale rose colour in the interior, concentrically enclosed by a 
_ white margin composed of small stars (14th to 16th mag.) 
of about the same magnitude, and presenting all the charac- 
teristics of the globular form.” 

A cluster of stars in Andromeda’s girdle near y of this 
constellation. The resolution of this celebrated nebula 
into small stars, upwards of 1500 of which have been re- 
cognized, appertains to the most remarkable discoveries 
in the observing astronomy of the present day. The merit of 
this discovery is due to Mr. Geo. Bond, assistant astronomer” 
at the Observatory of Cambridge, United States, (March, 





-. % «A stupendous object—a most magnificent globular 
cluster,” says Sir John Herschel, ‘‘ completely insulated, upon 
‘a ground of the sky perfectly black thr oughout the ’ whole 
breadth of the sweep.” Observations at the Cape, pp. 18 and 
‘51, Pl. it. fig. 1; Ouwthnes, § 895, p. 615. 

7 Bond, in the Memoirs of the ‘American Academy of Aris 
and Sciences, new series, vol. ii. p. 75. 








CLUSTERS OF STARS. 193 


1848,) and testities to the admirable illuminating power of 
the refractor of that Observatory which has an object-glass 
fifteen inches in diameter; since even a reflector with a 
speculum of eighteen inches in diameter did not reveal “a 
trace of the presence of a star.” Although it is probable 
that the cluster in Andromeda was, at the close of the tenth 
century, already recorded as a nebula of oval form, it is more 
certain that Simon Marius (Mayer of Guntzenhausen), the 
same who first observed the change‘of colour in scintillation,” 
perceived it on the 15th of December, 1612; and that he was 
the first who described it circumstantially, as a new starless 
and wonderful cosmical body, unknown to Tycho Brahe. Half 
a century later, Boulliaud, the author of Astronomia philolaica, 
occupied himself with the same subject. This cluster of stars 
which is 23° in length and more than 1° in breadth, is spe- 
cially distinguished by two remarkable very narrow black 
streaks, parallel to each other, and to the longer axis of the 
cluster, which, according to Bond’s investigations, traverse the 
whole length like fissures. This configuration vividly reminds 
us of the singular longitudinal fissure, in an unresolved ne- 
bula of the southern hemisphere, No. 3501, which has been 
described and figured by Sir John Herschel. (Observations at 
the Cape, pp. 20, 105, pl. iv. fig. 2.) 
_ Notwithstanding the important discoveries for which we 
are indebted to Lord Rosse and his colossal telescope, I 
have not included the great nebula in Orion’s belt in this 
selection of remarkable clusters of stars, as it appeared to me 
more appropriate to consider those portions of it’ which have 
been resolved, in the section on Nebule. 

The greatest accumulation of clusters of stars, although by 
no means of nebule, occurs in the Milky Way,” (Galazias, 





™ Outlines, § 874, p. 601. 

© Delambre, Hist. de l’ Astr. moderne, t. i. p. 697. 

® We are indebted for the first and only complete description 
VOL. III. Oo 


194 | COSMOS. 


the celestial river of the Arabs,®) which forms almost a great 
eircle of the sphere, and is inclined to the equator at an angle 
of 63°. The poles of the Milky Way are situated in Right 
Ascension 12h. 47m. N. Decl. 27°; and R. A. 0h. 47m. S. 
Decl. 27°; the south galactic pole therefore lies near Coma 
Berenices, and the northern between Phoenix and Cetus. 
While all planetary local relations are referred to the ecliptic,— 
the great circle in which the plane of the sun’s path intersects 
the sphere—we may as conveniently refer many of the 
local relations of the fixed stars, as, for instance, that of their 
accumulation or grouping, to the nearly complete circle of 
the Milky Way. Considered in this light, the latter is to 
the sidereal world what the ecliptic is to the planetary 





of the Milky Way, in both hemispheres, to Sir John Herschel, 
in his Results of Astronomical Observations, made during the 
years 1834-1838, at the Cape of Good Hope, § 316-335, 
and still more recently in the Outlines of Astronomy, § 787— 
799. Throrghout the whole of that section of the Cos- 
mos which treats of the directions, ramifications, and various 
contents of the Milky Way, I have exclusively followed the 
above named Astronomer and Physicist. (Compare also 
Struve, Etudes d’A str. stellaire, pp. 35-79 ; Madler, Ast., 1849, 
§ 213; Cosmos vol. i. pp. 88, 140, and 305.) I need scarcely 
here remark that in my description of the Milky Way, in 
order not to confuse certainties with uncertainties, I have 
not referred to what I had myself observed with instruments 
of a very inferior illuminating power, in reference to the very 
great inequality of the light of the whole zone, during my 
long residence in the southern hemisphere, and which I have 
recorded in my journals. E 

8 The comparison of the ramified Milky Way with a — 
celestial river, led the Arabs to designate parts of the con- — 
stellation of Sagittarius, whose bow falls in a region rich in © 
stars, as the cattle going to drink, and to associate with them the 
ostrich, which has so little need of water. (Ideler, Untersuch- 
ungen uber den Ursprung und die Bedeutung der Sternnamen, 
§ 78, 183, and 187; Niebuhr, Beschreibung von Arabien, s. 112, 








MILKY WAY. 195 


world of our solar system. The Milky Way cuts the equator 
in Monoceros, between Procyon and Sirius, R. A. 6h. 54m., 
(for 1800), and in the left hand of Antinous, R. A. 19h. 15m. 
The Milky Way, therefore, divides the celestial sphere into 
two somewhat unequal halves, whose areas are nearly as 8 to 
9. In the smaller portion lies the vernal solstice. The Milky 
Way varies considerably in breadth in different parts of 
its course.“ At its narrowest, and at the same time most 
brilliant, portion, between the prow of Argo and the Cross, 
and nearest to the Antarctic pole, its width is scarcely 3° 
or 4°; at other parts it is 16°, and in its divided portion, 
between Ophiuchus and Antinous, as much as 22.° William 
Herschel has observed, that judging from his star-gaugings, the 
Milky Way would appear in many regions to have 6° or 7° 
greater width than we should be disposed to ascribe to it from 
the extent of stellar brightness visible to the naked eye.® 
Huygens, who examined the Milky Way with his twenty- 
three feet refractor, declared, as early as the year 1656, that 
the milky whiteness of the whole Galactic zone was not to be 
ascribed to irresolvable nebulosity. A more careful application 
of reflecting telescopes of great dimensions and power of light 
has since proved, with more certainty, the correctness of the 
conjectures advanced by Democritus and Manilius, in re- 
ference to the ancient path of Phaéton, that this milky 
glimmering light was solely owing to the accumulated strata 
of small stars, and not to the scantily interspersed nebule. 
This effusion of light is the same at points, where the whole 
can be perfectly resolved into stars, and even in’ stars which 
are projected on a black ground, wholly free from ne- 
bulous vapour.“ It is-a remarkable feature of the Milky 





 Outhnes, p. 529; Schubert, Asz., th. iii. s. 71. 
& Struve, Hiudes @Astr. stellaire, p- 41. 
Cosmos, vol. i. p. 140. 


St « Stars standing on’a clear black ground.” (Observations 
02 


196 COSMOS. 


Way, that it should so rarely exhibit any globular clusters 
and nebulous spots of a regular or oval form ;* while both are 
met with in great numbers at a remote distance from it; as, 
for instance, in the Magellanic clouds, where isolated stars, 
globular clusters in all conditions of condensation, and ne- 
bulous spots of a definite oval or a wholly irregular form, 
are intermingled. A remarkable exception to the rarity of 
globular clusters in the Milky Way, occurs in a region be- 
tween R. A. 16h. 45m. and 18h. 44m. between the Altar, the 
Southern Crown, the head and body of Sagittarius, and the 
tail of the Scorpion.*® We even find betweens and 6 of the 
latter one of those annular nebule, which are of such extremely 
rare occurrence in the southern hemisphere. 

In the field of view of powerful telescopes (and we must 
remember that, according to the calculations of Sir William 





at the Cape, p. 891). ‘* This remarkable belt (the Milky Way, 
when examined through powerful telescopes) is found (won- 
derful to relate!) ¢o consist entirely of stars scattered by millions, 
like glittering dust on the black ground of the general heavens.” 
Outlines, pp. 182, 587, and 539. 

8% «< Globular clusters, excepting in one region of small ex- 
tent (between 16h. 45m. and 19h. in R. A.) and nebule of 
regular elliptic forms, are comparatively rare in the Milky 
Way, and are found congregated in the greatest abundance 

“in a part of the heavens the most remote possible from that 
-eircle.” (Outlines, p. 614.) Hugyens himself, as early as 1656, . 
“had remarked the absence of nebulosity and of all nebulous 
-spots in the Milky Way. In the same place where he mentions 
the first discovery and delineation of the great nebulous spots 
in the belt of Orion, by a twenty-eight-feet refractor (1656), 
lie says (as I have already remarked at p. 713 and note), viam 
lacteam perspicillis inspectam nullas habere nebulas, and that 
the Milky Way, like all that has been regarded as nebulous 
stars, is a great cluster of stars. The passage is to be found 
in Hugenti Opera varia, 1724, p. 598. 

% Qbservations at the Cape, § 105, 107, and 328. On the 

annular nebule, No. 3686, see p. 114. 


MILKY WAY. 197 


Herschel, a twenty-feet instrument penetrates 900, and a 
forty-feet one 2800 distances of Sirius) the Milky Way 
appears as diversified in its sidereal contents as it is irregular 
and indefinite in its outlines and limits when seen by the un- 
aided eye. While in some parts the Milky Way exhibits, 
throughout a large space, the greatest uniformity in the light 
and apparent magnitudes of the stars, in others the most 
brilliant patches of closely-crowded luminous points are inter- 
rupted by granular or reticular darker™ intervals containing 
but few stars; and in some of these intervals in the interior 
of the Galaxy not the smallest star (of the 18m. or 20m.) is 
to be discovered. It almost seems as though, in these regions, 
we actually saw through the whole starry stratum of the 
Milky Way. In gauging with a field of view of 15’ diameter, 
fields presenting on an average forty or fifty stars are almost 
immediately succeeded by others exhibiting from 400 to 500. 
Stars of the higher magnitudes often occur in the midst of the 
most minute telescopic stars, whilst all the intermediate classes 
are absent. Perhaps those stars which we regard as be- 
longing to the lowest order of magnitudes do not always ap- 
pear as such, solely on account of their enormous distance, but 
also because they actually have a smaller volume and less con- 
siderable development of light. 

In order rightly to comprehend the contrast presented by the 
greater brilliancy, abundance, or paucity of stars, it will be ne- 
cessary to compare regions most widely separated from each other. 
The maximum of the accumulation and the greatest lustre of 
stars are to be found between the prow of Argo and Sagittarius, 
or, to speak more exactly, between the Altar, the tail of the 
Scorpion, the hand and bow of Sagittarius, and the right foot 
of Ophiuchus. “No region of the heavens is fuller of objects, 





* << Tntervals absolutely dark and completely void of any star 
of the smallest telescopic magnitude.” Outlines, p. 536. 


198 _ COSMOS, 


beautiful and remarkable in themselves, and rendered still 
more so by their mode of association’ and grouping.® Next in 
brightness to this portion of the southern heavens is the pleasing 
and richly-starred region of our northern hemisphere in Aquila 
and Cygnus, where the Milky Way branches off in different 
directions. While the Milky Way is the narrowest under the 
foot of the Cross, the region of minimum brightness (where 
there is the greatest paucity of stars in the Galactic zone) is 
in the neighbourhood of Monoceros and Perseus. 

The magnificent effulgence of the Milky Way in the 
southern hemisphere is still further increased by the cireum- 
stance, that between the star » Argus, which has become so 
celebrated in consequence of its variability, and a Crucis, under 
the parallels of 59° and 60° south lat., it is intersected at an angle 
of 20° by the remarkable zone of very large and probably very 
proximate stars, to which belong the constellations Orion, 
Canis Major, Scorpio, Centaurus, and the Southern Cross. The 
direction of this remarkable zone is indicated by a great circle 
passing through ¢ Orionis and the foot of the Cross. The pie- 





8 «No region of the heavens is fuller of objects, beautiful 
and remarkable in themselves, and rendered still more so by 
their mode of association, and by the peculiar features as- 
sumed by the Milky Way, which are without a parallel in any 
other part of its course.” Observations at the Cape, p. 386. 
This vivid description of Sir John Herschel entirely coincides 
with the impressions I have myself experienced. Capt. Jacob, 
of the Bombay Engineers, in speaking of the intensity of light 
in the Milky Way, in the vicinity of the Southern Cross, re- 
marks with striking truth, “‘ Such is the general blaze of star- 
light near the Cross from that part of the sky, that a person 
is immediately made aware of its having risen above the 
horizon, though he should not be at the time looking at the 
heavens, by the increase of general illumination of the atmo- 
sphere, resembling the effect of the young moon.” (See Piazzi 
Smyth, On the orbit of a Centauri, in the Transact. of the Royal 
Soc. of Edinburgh, vol. xvi. p. 445.) 


.  — “ 





MILKY WAY. 199. 


turesque effect of-the Milky Way, if I may use the expression, 
is increased in both hemispheres by its various ramifications. 
It remains undivided for about two-fifths of its length. Ac- 
cording to Sir John Herschel’s observations the branches 
separate in the great bifurcation, at « Centauri,” and not at 
8 Cent., as given in our maps of the stars, or, as was asserted by 
Ptolemy,” in the constellation of the Altar; they reunite again 
in Cygnus. 

_ In order to obtain a general insight into the whole course 
and direction of the Milky Way with its subdivisions, we 
will briefly consider its parts, following the order of their 
Right Ascension. Passing through y and « Cassiopeie, the 
Milky Way sends forth towards « Persei a southern branch 
which loses itself in the direction of the Pleiades and Hyades. 
The main stream, which is here very faint, passes on through 
Auriga, over the three remarkable stars , ¢, 7, the Heedi of 
that constellation, preceding Capella between the feet of Gemini 
and the horns of the Bull, (where it intersects the ecliptic 
nearly in the solstitial colure,) and thence over Orion’s club to 
the neck of Monoceros, intersecting the equinoctial (in 1800) 
at R.A.6h.54m. From this point the brightness considerably 
increases. At’the stern of Argo one branch runs southward to 
y Argiis, where it terminates abruptly. The main stream is 
continued to 33° S. Decl., where, after separating in a fan- 
like shape (20° in breadth) it again breaks off, so that there is 
a wide gap in the Milky Way in the line from y to A Argis. 
It begins again in a similar fan-like expansion, but contracts 
at the hind feet of the Centaur and before its entrance into 





° Outlines, § 789, 791; Observations at the Cape, § 325. 

*° Almagest, lib. viii. cap. 2, (t. ii. pp. 84, 90, Halma). 
Ptolemy’s description is admirable in some parts, ‘especially 
when compared with Aristotle’s treatment of the subject of 
the Milky Way, in Meteor. (lib. i. pp. 29, 34, ea dase to 
Ideler’s edition). 


200 COSMOS. 


the Southern Cross, where it is at its narrowest part, and is 
only 3° or 4° in width. Soon after this the Milky Way again 
expands into a bright and broad mass, which encloses 8 Cen- 
tauri as well as a and 8 Crucis, and in the midst of which lies 
the black pear-shaped coal-sack, to which I shall more specially 
refer in the 7th section. In this remarkable region, somewhat 
below the coal-sack, the Milky Way approaches nearest to 
the South Pole. ; 

The above-mentioned bifurcation, which begins at a Cen- 
tauri, extended, according to older views, to the constellation 
Cygnus. Passing from a Centauri, a narrow branch runs 
northwards in the direction of the constellation Lupus, where 
it seems gradually lost; a division next shows itself at y 
Norme. ‘The northern branch forms irregular outlines till it 
reaches the region of the foot of Ophiuchus, where it wholly 
disappears ; the most southern branch then becomes the main- 
stream, and passes through the Altar and the tail of the Scor- 
pion, in the direction of the bow of Sagittarius, where it 
intersects the ecliptic in 276° long. It next runs in an irre- 
gular patchy and winding stream through Aquila, Sagitta, and 
Vulpecula up to Cygnus; between e, a, and y, of which con- 
stellation a broad dark vacuity appears, which, as Sir John 
Herschel] says, is not unlike the southern coal-sack, and 
serves as a kind of centre for the divergence of three great 
streams.*' One of these, which is very vivid and conspi- 
cuous, may be traced running backward, as it were, through 
8 Cygni and s Aquile, without, however, blending with the 
stream already noticed, which extends to the foot of Ophiuchus. 
A considerable offset or protuberant appendage is also 
thrown off by the northern stream from the head of Cepheus, 





Outlines, p. 531. The strikingly dark spot between 
a and y Cassiopeie is also ascribed to the contrast with the 
brightness by which it is surrounded. See Struve, Htudes 
stell., note 58. 





MILKY WAY. 201. 


and therefore near Cassiopeia, (from which constellation we 
began our description of the Milky Way) towards Ursa Minor 
and the pole. 

From the extraordinary advancement which the applica- 
tion of large telescopes has gradually effected in our know- 
ledge of the sidereal contents and of the differences in the con- 
centration of light observable in individual portions of the 
Milky Way, views of merely optical projection have been re- 
placed by others referring rather to physical conformation. 
Thomas Wright of Durham,” Kant, Lambert, and at first 
also Sir William Herschel, were disposed to consider the form 
of the Milky Way, and the apparent accumulation of the stars 
within this zone, as a consequence of the flattened form and 
unequal dimensions of the world-island (starry stratum,) in 
which our solar system is included. The hypothesis of the 
uniform magnitude and distribution of the fixed stars has 
recently been attacked on many sides. The bold and gifted 
investigator of the heavens, Wm. Herschel, in his last works, 
expressed himself strongly in favour of the assumption of an 
annulus of stars; a view which he had contested in the talented 
treatise he composed in 1784. The most recent observations 
have favoured the hypothesis of a system of separate concentric 
rings. The thickness of these rings seems very unequal; and 
the different strata whose combined stronger or fainter light 
we receive, are undoubtedly situated at very different altitudes, 





* De Morgan has given an extract of the extremely rare 
work of Thomas Wright of Durham, ( Theory of the Universe, 
London, 1750,) p. 241 in the Philos. Magazine, ser. iii. 
no. 32. Thomas Wright, to whose researches the attention 
of astronomers has been so permanently directed since the 
beginning of the present century, through the ingenious 
speculations of Kant and William Herschel, observed only 
with a reflector of one foot focal length. 

* Pfaff, in Will. Herschel’s stimmtl. Schriften, bd. i. (1826) 
s. 78-81; Struve, Etudes stell., pp. 35-44. 


202 COSMOS. 


2.¢. at very unequal distances from us; but the relative bright- 
ness of the separate stars which we estimate as of the 10th to 
the 16th magnitude, cannot be regarded as affording sufficient 
data to enable us in a satisfactory manner to deduce numeri- 
cally from them the radius of their spheres of distances.™ 

. In many parts of the Milky Way the space-penetrating 
power of instruments is sufficient to resolve whole star-clouds, 
and to show the separate luminous points projected on the dark 
starless ground of the heavens. We here actually look through 
as into free space. “It leads us,” says Sir John Herschel,‘irre- 
sistibly to the conclusion that in these regions we see fairly 
through the starry stratum.’ In other regions we see as it 
were through openings and fissures, remote world-islands, or 
outbranching portions of the annular system; in other parts, 
again, the Milky Way has hitherto been fathomless, even with 
the forty-feet telescope.% Investigations on the different in- 
tensity of light in the Milky Way, as well as on the magni- 
tudes of the stars, which regularly increase in number from the 
galactic poles to the circle itself (an increase especially ob- 
servable for 30° on either side of the Milky Way in stars 
below the 11th magnitude,” and therefore in +8 of all the 





% Encke, in Schumacher’s Ast. Nachr., no. 622, 1847, 
s. 341-346. 

% Outlines, pp. 586, 537, where we find the followimg 
words on the same subject :—‘‘ In such cases it is equally 
impossible not to perceive that we are looking ¢hrough a sheet 
of stars nearly of a size, and of no great thickness compared 
with the distance which separates them from us.” 

% Struve, Hiudes stell., p. 63. Sometimes the largest 
instruments reach a portion of the heavens, in which the 
existence of a starry stratum, shining at a remote distance, is 
only announced by “an uniform dotting or stippling of the 
field of view.” See, in Observations at the Cape, p. 390, the 
section ‘‘On some indications of very remote telescopic 
branches of the Milky Way, or of an independent sidereal 
system or systems bearing a resemblance to such branches.” _ 
” Observations at the Cape, § 314. 


ee 





ee ee ee 


a i oe 


nn 7 
2 Oe es 


ee 





MILKY WAY. 2038 


stars), have led the most recent investigator of the southern 
hemisphere to remarkable views and probable results in re- 
ference to the form of the galactic annular system, and 
what has been boldly called the swn’s place in the world- 
island to which this annular system belongs. The place 
assigned to the sun is eccentric, and probably near a point 
where the stratum bifurcates or spreads itself out into two 
sheets,* in one of those desert regions lying nearer to the 
Southern Cross than to the opposite node of the Milky Way.” 
“The depth at which our system is plunged in the sidereal 
stratum, constituting the galaxy, reckoning from the southern 
surface or limit of that stratum, is about equal to that distance 
which on a general average corresponds to the light of a star 
of the 9th or 10th magnitude, and certainly does not exceed 
that corresponding to the 11th.’ Where, from the peculiar 
nature of individual problems, measurements and the direct 
evidence of the senses fail,we see but dimly those results which 
intellectual contemplation, urged forward by an intuitive im- 
pulse, is ever striving to attain. 





* Sir William Herschel, in the Philos. Transact. for 1785, 

P. 21; Sir John Herschel, Observations at the Cape, § 293. 
ompare also Struve, Descr. de [Observatoire de Poulkova, 

1845, pp. 267-271. 

*® «T think,” says Sir John Herschel, “ it is impossible to 
view this splendid zone from a Centauri to the Cross without 
an impression amounting almost to conviction, that the 
Milky Way is not a mere. stratum, but annular; or, at least, 
that our system is placed within one of the poorer or almost 
vacant parts of its general mass, and that eccentrically, so as 
to be much nearer to the region about the Cross than to that 
diametrically opposite to it.” (Mary Somerville, On the 
Connexion of the Physical Sciences, 1846, p. 419.) 

1 Observations at the Cape, § 315. | 





204 COSMOS. 


IV. 


NEW STARS AND STARS THAT HAVE VANISHED.—VARIABLE 
STARS, WHOSE RECURRING PERIODS HAVE BEEN DETER- 
MINED.—VARIATIONS IN THE INTENSITY OF THE LIGHT 
OF STARS WHOSE PERIODICITY IS AS YET UNINVESTI- 
GATED. 


New Srars.—The appearance of hitherto unseen stars in 
the vault of heaven, especially the sudden appearance of 
strongly scintillating stars of the first magnitude, is an 
occurrence in the realms of space which has ever excited 
astonishment. This astonishment is the greater, in propor- 
tion as such an event as the sudden manifestation of what 
was before invisible, but which nevertheless is supposed 
to have previously existed, is one of the very rarest phe- 
nomena in nature. While in the three centuries from 
1500 to 1800, as many as forty-two comets, visible to 
the naked eye, have appeared to the inhabitants of the 
northern hemisphere—on an average, fourteen in every 
hundred years—only eight new stars have been observed 
throughout the same period. The rarity of the latter be- 
comes still more striking, when we extend our consideration 
to yet longer periods. From the completion of the Alphonsine 
tables, an important epoch in the history of astronomy, down 
to the time of William Herschel—that is, from 1252 to 
1800—the number of viszble comets is estimated at about 
sixty-three, while that of new stars does not amount to more 
than nine. Consequently, for the period during which, in the 
civilized countries of Europe, we may depend on possessing 
a tolerably correct enumeration of both, the proportion of 
new stars to comets visible to the naked eye is as one to 





NEW SsTARS. 205 


seven. We shall presently show that if from the tail-less 
comets we separate the new stars which, according to the 
records of Ma-tuan-lin, have been observed in China, and 
go back to the middle of the second century before the 
Christian era, that for about 2000 years scarcely more than 
twenty or twenty-two of such phenomena can be adduced 
with certainty. 

Before I proceed to general considerations, it seems not 
inappropriate to quote the narrative of an eye-witness, and 
by dwelling on a particular instance to depict the vividness 
of the impression produced by the sight cf a new star. ‘On 
my return to the Danish islands, from my travels in Germany,” 
says Tycho Brahe, ‘“‘I resided for some time with my uncle, 
Steno Bille (ut aulicee vitee fastidium lenirem), in the old and 
pleasantly situated monastery of Herritzwadt; and here I 
made it a practice not to leave my chemical laboratory until 
the evening. Raising my eyes, as usual, during one of my 
walks, to the well-known vault of heaven, I observed, with 
indescribable astonishment, near the zenith, in Cassiopeia, a 
radiant fixed star, of a magnitude never before seen. In my 
amazement, I doubted the evidence of my senses. However, 
to convince myself that it was no illusion, and to have the testi- 
mony of others, I summoned my assistants from the labora- 
tory, and inquired of them, and of all the country people 
that passed by, if they also observed the star that had thus 
suddenly burst forth. Isubsequently heard that, im Germany, 
waggoners and other common people first called the attention 
of astronomers to this great phenomenon in the heavens—a 
circumstance which, as in the case of non-predicted comets, 
furnished fresh occasion for the usual raillery at the expense of 
the learned. 

“This new star,” Tycho Brahe continues, “I found to be with- 
out a tail, not surrounded by any nebula, and perfectly like all 
other fixed stars, with the exception that it scintillated more 


206 COSMOS. 


strongly than stars of the first magnitude. Its brightness 
was greater than that of Sirius, a Lyre, or Jupiter. For 
splendour, it was only comparable to Venus when nearest 
to the earth (that is, when only a quarter of her dise is illu- 
minated). Those gifted with keen sight could, when the air 
was clear, discern the new star in the day-time, and even at 
noon. At night, when the sky was overcast, so that all 
other stars were hidden, it was often visible through the clouds, 
if they were not very dense (nubes non admodum densas). 
Its distances from the nearest stars of Cassiopeia, which 
throughout the whole of the following year I measured with 
great care, convinced me of its perfect immobility. Al- 
ready, in December, 1572, its brilliancy began to diminish, 
and the star gradually resembled Jupiter; but by January, 
15738, it had become less bright than that planet. Successive 
photometric estimates gave the following results: for Febru- 
ary and March, equality with stars of the first magnitude 
(stellarum affixarum primi honoris—for Tycho Brahe seems to 
have disliked using Manilius’s expression of stelle fixe); for 


April and May, with stars of the second magnitude; for July 


and August, with those of the third; for October and November, 
those of the fourth magnitude. Towards the month of No- 
vember, the new star was not brighter than the eleventh 


in the lower part of Cassiopeia’s chair. The transition to 


the fifth and sixth magnitude took place between December, 


1578, and February, 1574. In the following month, the new 


star disappeared, and, after having shone seventeen months, 


was no longer discernible to the naked eye.” (The telescope 


was not invented until thirty-seven years afterwards.) — 
The gradual diminution of the star’s luminosity was more- 


over invariably regular; it was not (as is the case in the 


present day with 7 Argis, though indeed that is not to be 
called a new star) interrupted by several periods of re-kindling 
or by increased intensity of light. Its colour also changed with 


eee ee 





NEW STARS. 207 


its brightness (a fact which subsequently gave rise to many 
erroneous conclusions as to the velocity of coloured rays in 
their passage through space). At its first appearance, as long 
as it had the brilliancy of Venus and Jupiter, it was for two 
months white, and then it passed through yellow intored. In 
the spring of 1573, Tycho Brahe compared it to Mars; after- 
wards he thought that it nearly resembled Betelgeuze, the star in 
the right shoulder of Orion. Its colour for the most part was like 
the red tint of Aldebaran. In the spring of 1573, and especially 
in May, its white colour returned (albedinem quandam sublivi- 
dam induebat, qualis Saturni stelle subesse videtur). So it re- 
mained in January, 1574; being, up to the time of its entire 
disappearance in the month of March, 1574, of the fifth 
magnitude, and white, but of a duller whiteness, and exhibiting 
a remarkably strong scintillation in proportion to its faint- 
ness. 

The circumstantial minuteness of these statements’ is of 
itself a proof of the interest which this natural phenomenon 
could not fail to awaken, by calling -forth many important 
questions, in an epoch so brilliant in the history of astro- 
nomy. For (notwithstanding the general rarity of the 
appearance of new stars) similar phenomena, accidentally 
crowded together within the short space of thirty-two 
years, were thrice repeated within the observation of Euro- 
pean astronomers, and consequently served to heighten the 
excitement. The importance of star-catalogues, for ascer- 





al 


* De admiranda Nova Stella, anno 1572, exorta in Tycho- 
ms Brahe, Astronomie instaurate Progymnasmata, 1603, 
pp- 298-304, and 578. In the text I have closely followed 
the account which Tycho Brahe himself gives. The very 
doubtful statement (which is, however, repeated in several 
astronomical treatises) that his attention was first called 
to the phenomenon of the new star by a concourse of country 
people, need not therefore be here noticed. 


208 COSMOS. 


taining the date of the sudden appearance of any star, was 
more and more recognized; the periodicity* (their re-appear-. 
ance after many centuries) was discussed; and Tycho Brahe 
himself boldly advanced a theory of the process by which 
stars might be formed and moulded out of cosmical vapour, 
which presents many points of resemblance to that of 
the great William Herschel. He was of opinion that the 
vapoury celestial matter which becomes luminous as it 
condenses, conglomerates into fixed stars: ‘Coli mate- 
riam tenuissimam, ubique nostro visui et planetarum circuitibus 
perviam, in unum globum condensatam, stellam effingere.” 
This celestial matter, which is universally dispersed through 
space, has already attained to a certain degree of condensation 
in the Milky Way, which glimmers with a soft silvery bright- 
ness. Accordingly, the place of the new star, as well as of 
those which became suddenly visible in 945 and 1264, was on 
the very edge of the Milky Way (quo factum est quod nova 
stella in ipso galaxie margine constiterit). Indeed, some 
went so far as to believe that they could discern the very spot 
(the opening or Azatus) whence the nebulous celestial matter 
had been drawn from the Milky Way.* All this reminds one 





* Cardanus, in his controversy with Tycho Brahe, went 
back to the star of the Magi, which, as he pretended, was 
identical with the star of 1572. Ideler, arguing from his 
own calculations of the conjunctions of Saturn with Jupiter, 
and from similar conjectures advanced by Kepler on the 
appearance of the new star in Ophiuchus in 1604, supposes 
that the star of the Magi, through a confusion of aornp with 
dorpov, which is so frequent, was not a single great star, but 
a remarkable conjunction of stars,—the close approximation 
of two brightly shining planets at a distance of less than a 
diameter of the moon. TZychonis Progymnasmata, pp. 324— 
330; contrast with Ideler, Handbuch der mathematischen und 
technischen Chronologie, bd. ii. s. 3899-407. 

® Progymn., pp. 324-330. Tycho Brahe, in his theory of 
the formation of new stars from the Cosmical vapour of the 





TEMPORARY STARS. 209: 


of the theories of transition of the cosmical vapour into clus- 
ters of stars, of an agglomerative force, of a concentration 
to a central nucleus, and of hypotheses of a gradual formation 
of solid bodies out of a vaporous fluid;—views which were 
generally received in the beginning of the nineteenth cen- 
tury, but which at present, owing to the ever-changing 
fluctuations in the world of thought, are in many respects 
exposed to new doubts. 

Among newly-appeared temporary stars the following 
(though with variable degrees of certainty) may be reckoned. 
I have arranged them according to the order in which they 
respectively appeared. 

(a) 1384 Be. . . in Scorpio. 


(6) 123 av. . . in Ophiuchus. 
Kerr L682 sy ctheis . in Centaurus. 
AAP PEGE ert 

(6) 880" oe ' . in Sagittarius. 


(f). 389... - . in Aquila. 

(gy B39Bi% sy fs - in Scorpio. 

GAYE SQ Tie: S080 . in Scorpio. 

isp? 945>°"55°° . between Cepheus and Cassiopeia. 
thy 1012: . in Aries. 

5) 1) - in Scorpio. 

Gn). 1280 0 55.6). . in Ophiuchus. | 

(m) 1264 ,, .. . between Cepheus and Cassiopeia. 
eres sy . in Cassiopeia. 

(7) tote } 

Co See . in Scorpio. 

(0): 16008: ¢ 455, . in Cygnus. 

(s) 1604 ,,. . in Ophiuchus. 


Milky Way, builds much on the remarkable passages of Aris- 
totle on the connexion of the tails of comets (the vapoury 
radiation from their nuclei with the galaxy to which I have 
already alluded. (Cosmos, vol. i. p. 88.) 

VOL. III. P 





210 COSMOS. 


By BGM ssc Lectin 
(uw) 1670 4 . . in Vulpes. 
(v) 1848, yy - in Ophiuchus. 


EXPLANATORY REMARKS, 


(a) This star first appeared in July, 134 years before our 
era. We have taken it from the Chinese Records of Ma- 
tuan-lin, for the translation of which we are indebted to the 
learned linguist Edward Biot (Connaissance des Temps pour 
Van 1846, p.61). Its place was between 8 and p of Scorpio. 
Among the extraordinary foreign-looking stars of these records, 
called also guest-stars, (étozles hétes, “ Ke-sing,”’ strangers of a 
singular aspect,) which are distinguished by the observers 
from comets with tails, fixed new stars and advancing tail-less 
comets are ‘certainly sometimes mixed up. But in the record 
of their motion (Ke-sing of 1092, 1181, and 1458), and in 
the absence of any such record, as also. in the occasional 
addition, ‘the Ke-sing dissolved’? (disappeared), there is 
contained, if not an infallible, yet a very important criterion. 
Besides, we must bear in mind that the lght of the nu- 
cleus of all comets, whether with or without tails, is dull, 
never scintillates, and exhibits only a mild radiance, while 
the luminous intensity of what the Chinese call extraor- 
dinary (stranger) stars, has been compared to that of 
Venus,—a circumstance totally at variance with the na- 
ture of comets in general, and especially of those with- 
out tails. The star which appeared in 134 B.c., under the 
old Han dynasty, may, as Sir John Herschel remarks, have 
been the new star of Hipparchus, which, according to the 
statement of Pliny, induced him to commence his catalogue 
of the stars. Delambre twice calls this statement a fiction, 
*‘une historiette.” (Hist. de I Astr. anc., t. i. p. 290; and 
Hist. de l’ Astr. mod., t. i. p. 186.) Since, aceording to 
the express statement of Ptolemy. (4/mag...vil. p. 2, 13 
Haima), the catalogue of Hipparchus belongs to the year 
128. 38.c., and Hipparchus (as I have already remarked else~ 
where) carried on his observations in Rhodes (and perhaps. 
also in Alexandria), from 162 to 127 3.c., there is nothing 


irreconcilable with this conjecture. It is very probable that 


the great Nicean astronomer had pursued his obseryations for 


et ee 





TEMPORARY STARS. 211 


a considerable period before he conceived the idea of forming 
a regular catalogue. The words of Pliny, “suo evo genita,” 
apply to the whole term of his life. After the appearance 
of Tycho Brahe’s star in 1572, it was much disputed whether 
the star of Hipparchus ought to be classed among new stars, or 
comets without tails. Tycho Brahe himself was of the former 
opinion (Progymn., pp. 319-325). The words “ ejyusque motu 
addubitationem adductus,’” may undoubtedly lead to the 
supposition of a faint, or altogether tail-less comet; but 
Pliny’s rhetorical style admitted of such vagueness of ex- 
pression. 

(4) A Chinese observation. It appeared in December, a.p. 
128, between a Herculis and # Ophiuchi. Ed. Biot, from 
Ma-tuan-lin. (It is also asserted that a new star appeared in 
the reign of Hadrian, about a.p. 130.) 

(c) A singular and very large star. This also is taken 
from Ma-tuan-lin, as well as the three following ones. 

It appeared on the 10th of December, 173, between «@ 
and 8 Centauri, and at the end of eight months disappeared,. 
after exhibiting the five colours one after another. ‘* Succes- 
sivement”’ is the term employed by Ed. Biot im his trans- 
lation.. Such an expression would almost tend to suggest a 
series of colours similar to those in the above described 
star of Tycho Brahe; but Sir John Herschel more correctly 
takes it to mean a coloured scintillation (Outlines, p. 563), and 
Arago interprets in the same way a nearly similar expression 
employed by Kepler when speaking of the new star (1604) in 
Ophiuchus. (Annuaire pour 1842, p. 347.) 

(d) This star was seen from March to August, 369. 

(e) Between a and @ Sagittarii. In the Chinese Record 
it is expressly observed, “ where the star remained (7. e. 
without: movement) from April to July, 386.” 

(f) A new star, close to « Aquile. In the year 389, 
in the reigm of the Emperor Honorius, it shone forth with 
the brilliancy of Venus, according to the statement of Cus- 
pinianus, who had himself seen it. It totally disappeared in 
about three weeks.+ 





* Other accounts place the appearance in the year 388 
or 398. Jacques Cassini, Llémens d’ Astronomte, 1740’ (Etoiles 
nouvelles), p. 59. 7 : 


P2 


212 COSMOS. 


(g) March, 393. This star was also in Scorpio, in the tail of 
that constellation. From the Records of Ma-tuan-lin. 

(h) The precise year (827) is doubtful. It may with 
more certainty be assigned to the first half of the ninth century, 
when in the reign of Caliph Al Mamoun the two famous Arabian 
astronomers, Haly and Guiafar Ben Mohammed Albumazar 
observed at Babylon a new star, whose light, according to 
their report, “equalled that of the moon in her quarters.” 
This natural phenomenon likewise occurred in Scorpio. The 
star disappeared after a period of four months. 

(¢) The appearance of this star (which is said to have 
shone forth in the year 945, under Otho the Great), like 
that of 1264, is vouched for solely by the testimony of the 
Bohemian astronomer Cyprianus Leovitius, who asserts that 
he derived his statements concerning it from a manuscript 
chronicle. He also calls attention to the fact, that these two 
phenomena (that in 945 and that in 1264) took place between 
the constellations of Cepheus and Cassiopeia, close to the 
Milky Way, and near the spot where Tycho Brahe’s star. 
appeared in 1572. Tycho Brahe (Progym., pp. 831 and 709) 
defends the credibility of Cyprianus Leovitius, against the 
attacks of Pontanus and Camerarius, who conjectured that the 
statements arose from a confusion of new stars with long- 
tailed comets. 

(k) According to the statement of Hepidannus, the monk 
of St. Gall (who died a.p. 1088, whose annals extend from 
the year A.D. 709 to 1044), a new star of unusual magnitude 
and of a brilliancy that dazzled the eye (oculos verberans), 
was, for three months, from the end of May in the year 1012, 
to be seen in the south, in the constellation of Aries. In 
a most singular manner it appeared to vary in size, and 
occasionally it could not be seen at all. ‘ Nova stella 
apparuit insolitee magnitudinis, aspectu fulgurans et oculos 
verberans non sine terrore. Que mirum in modum ali- 
quando contractior, aliquando diffusior, etiam extinguebatur 
interdum. Visa est autem per tres menses in intimis finibus 
Austri, ultra omnia signa que videntur in ceelo.” (See Hepi- 
danni Annales breves, in Duchesne, Historie Francorum 
Scriptores, t. iii. 1641, p. 477. Compare also Schnurrer, 
Chrontk der Seuchen, th. 1. s. 201). To the manuscript made. 
use of by Duchesne and Goldast, which assigns the pheno- 


TEMPORARY STARS. 213 


menon to the year 1012, modern historical criticism has, 
however, preferred another manuscript which, as compared 
with the former, exhibits many deviations in the dates, 
throwing them six years back. Thus, it places the appearance 
of this star in 1006. (See Annalse Sangallenses majores, in 
Pertz, Monumenta Germanie historica Scriptorum, t. 1. 1826, 
p. 81.) Even the authenticity of the writings of Hepidannus 
has been called into question by modern critics. The singular 
phenomenon of variability has been termed by Chladni the 
conflagration and extinction of a fixed star. Hind (Notices of 
the Astron. Soc., vol. viii. 1848, p. 156) conjectures that 
this star of Hepidannus is identical with a new star, which 
is recorded in Ma-tuan-lin, as having been seen in China, 
in February, 1011, between ¢ and @ of Sagittarius. But in 
that case there must be an error in Ma-tuan-lin, not only in 
the statement of the year, but also of the constellation in 
which the star appeared. 

(4) Towards the end of July, 1203, in the tail of Scorpio. 
According to the Chinese Record, this new star was “ of a 
bluish-white colour, without luminous vapour, and resembled 
Saturn.” (Edouard Biot, in the Connaissance des Temps pour 
1846, p. 68.) 

(m) Another Chinese observation, from Ma-tuan-lin, whose 
astronomical records, containing an accurate account of the 
positions of comets and fixed stars, go back to the year 613 
B.c., to the times of Thales and the expedition of Colzeus of 
Samos. This new star appeared in the middle of December, 
1230, between Ophiuchus and the Serpent. It dissolved 
towards the end of March, 1231. 

(n) This is the star mentioned by the Bohemian astro- 
nomer, Cyprianus Leovitius (and referred to under the 9th 
star, in the year 945). About the same time (July, 1264), a 
great comet appeared, whose tail swept over one half of the 
heavens, and which, therefore, could not be mistaken for a 
new star suddenly appearing between Cepheus and Cas- 
slopeia. 

(0) This is Tycho Brahe’s star of the 11th of November, 
1572, in the Chair of Cassiopeia, R. A. 3° 26’; Decl. 63° 3’ 
(for 1800). 

(p) February, 1578. Taken from Ma-tuan-lin.. The con- 
stellation is not given, but the intensity and radiation of the 


214 COSMOS. 


light must have been extraordinary, since the Chinese Record 
appends the remark, “a star as large as the sun!” 

(g) On the Ist of July, 1584, not far from x of Scorpio; 
also a Chinese observation. 

(rv) According to Bayer, the star 34 of Cygnus. Wilhelm 
Jansen, the celebrated geographer, who for a time had been 
the associate of Tycho Brahe in his observations, was the first, 
as an inscription on his celestial globe testifies, to draw atten- 
tion to the new star in the breast of the Swan, near the 
beginning of the neck. Kepler, who, after the death of 
Tycho Brahe, was for some time prevented from carrying on 
any observations, both by his travels and want of instruments, 
did not observe it till two years later, and indeed (what is 
the more surprising, since the star was of the 3rd magni- 
tude) then first heard of its existence. He thus writes:— 
‘‘Cum mense Maio, anni 1602, primum litteris monerer de 
novo Cygni phenomeno.” (Kepler, De Stella nova tertit 
honoris in Cygno, 1606, which is appended to the work De 
Stella nova in Serpent., pp. 152, 154,164, and 167.) In 
Kepler’s treatise it is nowhere said (as we often find asserted 
in modern works) that this star of Cygnus upon its first 
appearance was of the Ist magnitude. Kepler even ealls it 
“‘ parva Cygni stella,” and speaks of it throughout as one of 
the 3rd magnitude. He determines its position in R. A. 
300° 46’; Decl. 36° 52’ (therefore for 1800: R. A. 302° 36’; 
Decl. + 37° 27’). The star decreased in brillianey, especially 
after the year 1619, and vanished in 1621. Dominique 
Cassini (see Jacques Cassini, Hlémens d Astr., p. 69) saw it, 
in 1655, again attain to the 3rd magnitude, and then dis- 
appear. Hevelius observed it again in November, 1665, at 
first extremely small, then larger, but never attaining to the 
3rd magnitude. Between 1677 and 1682 it decreased to 
the 6th magnitude, and as such it has remained in the 
heavens. Sir John Herschel classes it among the variable 
stars, in which he differs from Argelander. 

(s) After the star of 1572 in Cassiopeia, the most famous 
of the new stars is that of 1604 in Ophiuchus (R. A. 259° 42’; 
and §. Deel. 21° 15’, for 1800). With each of these stars a 
great name is associated. The star in the right foot of 
Ophiuchus was originally discovered, on the 10th of October, 
1604, not by Kepler himself, but by his pupil, the Bohemian. 


———— a 


TEMPORARY STARS. 215 


astronomer, John Bronowski. It was larger than all stars of 
the first order, greater than Jupiter and Saturn, but smaller 
than Venus. Herlicius asserts that he had previously seen 
it on the 27th of September. Its brilliancy was less than 
that of the new star, discovered by Tycho Brahe in 1572. 
Moreover, unlike the latter, it was not discernible in the day- 
time. But its scintillation was considerably greater, and 
especially excited the astonishment of all who sawit. As 
scintillation is always accompanied with dispersion of colour, 
much has been said of its coloured, and continually changing 
light. Arago (Annuaire pour 1834, pp. 299-301, and Ann. 
pour 1842, pp. 345-347) has already called attention to the 
fact that the star of Kepler did not by any means, like that. 
of Tycho Brahe, assume, at certain long intervals, different 
colours, such as yellow, red, and then again white. Kepler 
says expressly that his star, as soon as it rose above the 
exhalations of the earth, was white. When he speaks of 
the colours of the rainbow, it is to convey a clear idea of its 
coloured scintillation. His words are: ‘‘ Exemplo adamantis. 
multanguli, qui solis radios inter convertendum ad spectan- 
tium oculos variabili fulgore revibraret, colores Iridis (stella 
nova in Ophiucho) successive vibratu continuo reciprocabat.” 
(De nova Stella Serpent., pp. 5 and 125.) In the beginning 
of January, 1605, this star was even brighter than Antares,. 
but less luminous than Arcturus. By the end of March in 
the same year, it was described as being of the 3rd magni- 
tude. Its proximity to the sun prevented all observation for 
four months. Between February and March, 1606, it totally 
disappeared. The inaccurate statements as to the great 
variations in the position of the new star, advanced by 
Scipio Claramontius and the geographer Blaew, are scarcely 
(as Jacques Cassini, Hiémens d’ Astr., p. 65, long since 
observed) deserving of notice, since they have been refuted 
by Kepler’s more trustworthy treatise. The Chinese Record 
of Ma-tuan-lin mentions a phenomenon which exhibits some 
points of resemblance, as to time and position, with this 
sudden appearance of a new star in Ophiuchus. On the 30th 
of September, 1604, there was seen in China a reddish- 
yellow (“ ball-like?’’) star, not far from # of Scorpio. It 
shone in the south-west till November of the same year, 
when it became invisible. It re-appeared on the 14th of 
January, 1605, in the south-east; but its light became 


216 COSMOS. 


slightly duller by March, 1606. (Connarssance des Temps pour 
1846, p. 59.) The locality, x of the Scorpion, might easily 
be confounded with the foot of Ophiuchus; but the expres- 
sions south-west and south-east, its re-appearance, and the 
circumstance that its ultimate total disappearance is not: 
mentioned, leave some doubts as to its identity. 

(¢) This also is a new star of considerable magnitude and 
seen in the south-west. It is mentioned in Ma-tuan-lin. No 
further particulars are recorded. 

(w) This is the new star discovered by the Carthusian monk 
Anthelmus on the 20th of June, 1670, in the head of Vulpes, 
(R. A. 294° 27’; Decl. 26° 47',) and not far from 8 Cygni. 
At its first appearance, it was not of the first, but merely 
of the 3rd magnitude, and on the 10th of August it 
diminished to the 5th. It disappeared after three months, 
but showed itself again on the 17th of March, 1671, when it 
was of the 4th magnitude. Dominique Cassini observed it 
very closely in April, 1671, and found its brightness very 
variable. ‘The new star is reported to have regained its 
original splendour after ten months, but in February, 1672, it 
was looked for in vain. It did not re-appear until the 29th 
of March in the same year, and then only as a star of the 6th 
magnitude; since that time it has never been observed. 
(Jacques Cassini, Elémens d’Asir., pp. 69-71.) These 
phenomena induced Dominique Cassini to search for stars 
never before seen (by him!). He maintained, that he had 
discovered fourteen such stars of the 4th, 5th, and 6th 
magnitudes, (eight in Cassiopeia, two in Eridanus, and four 
near the North Pole). From the absence of any precise data 
as to their respective positions, and especially since, lke 
those said to have been discovered by Maraldi between 1694 
and 1709, their existence is more than questionable, they 
cannot be introduced in our present list. (Jacques Cassini, 
Elémens d’ Astron., pp. 73-77; Delambre, Hist. de} 1’ Astr. 
mod., t. ii. p. 780). : 

(v) A hundred and seventy-eight years elapsed after the 
appearance of the new star in Vulpes without a similar 
phenomenon having occurred, although in this long interval 
the heavens were most carefully explored and its stars 
counted, by the aid of a more diligent use of telescopes 
and by comparison with more correct catalogues of the stars. 


NEW STARS. 217 


On the 28th of April, 1848, at Mr. Bishop’s private observa~ 
tory, (South Villa, Regent's Park,) Hind made the important 
discovery of a new reddish-yellow star of the 5th magnitude 
in Ophiuchus (R. A. 16° 50’ 59”; S. Decl. 12° 89’ 16”, for 
1848). In the case of no other new star have the novelty of 
the phenomenon, and the invariability of its position, been 
demonstrated with greater precision. At the present time 
(1850) it is scarcely of the 11th magnitude, and according to 
Lichtenberger’s accurate observations it will most likely soon 
disappear. (Notices of the Astr. Soc., vol. viii. pp. 146 and 
155-158.) 

The above list of new stars, which within the last two 
thousand years have suddenly appeared and again disappeared, 
is probably more complete than any before given, and may 
justify a few general remarks. We may distinguish three 
classes: new stars which suddenly shine forth and then after 
a longer or shorter time disappear; stars whose brightness is 
subject to a periodical variability which has been already 
determined; and stars, like » Argus, which suddenly exhibit 
an unusual increase of brilliancy, the variations of which 
are still undetermined. All these phenomena are, most 
probably, intrinsically related to each other. ‘The new star 
in Cygnus (1600) which, after its total disappearance (at 
least to the naked eye) again appeared and continued as a 
star of the 6th magnitude, leads us to infer the affinity of 
the two first kinds of celestial phenomena. The celebrated 
star discovered by Tycho Brahe in Cassiopeia in 1572 was 
considered, even while it was still shining, to be identical 
with the new star of 945 and 1264. The period of 300 
years which Goodricke conjectured, has been reduced by 
Keill and Pigott to 150 years. The partial intervals of the 
actual phenomena, which perhaps are not very numerically 
accurate, amount to 319 and 308 years. Arago® has pointed 
out the great improbability that Tycho Brahe’s star of 1572 
belongs to those which are periodically variable. Nothing as 





° Arago, Annuaire pour 1842, p. 332. 


218 COSMOS. 


“yet seems to justify us in regarding al/ new stars as variable 
in long periods, which from their very length have remained 
unknown to us. If, for instance, the self-luminosity of all 
the suns of the firmament is the result of an electro-magnetic 
process in their photospheres, we may consider this process 
of light as variable in many ways, without assuming any 
local or temporary condensations of the celestial ether, or any 
intervention of the so-called cosmical clouds. It may either 
occur only once or recur periodically, and either regularly or 
irregularly. The electrical processes of light on our earth, 
which manifest themselves either as thunder-storms in the 
regions of the air, or as polar effluxes, together with much 
apparently irregular variation, exhibit nevertheless a certain 
periodicity dependent both on the seasons of the year and the 
hours of the day; and this fact is, deed, frequently observed 
in the formation for several consecutive days, during per- 
fectly clear weather, of a small mass of clouds in particular 
regions of the sky, as is proved by the frequent failures in 
attempts to observe the culmination of stars. 

The circumstance that almost all these new stars — 
forth at once with extreme brilliancy, as stars of the 1st 
magnitude, and even with still stronger scintillation, and that 
they do not appear, at least to the naked eye, to increase 
gradually in brightness, is, in my opinion, a singular 
peculiarity, and one well deserving of consideration. Kepler® 
attached such weight to this criterion, that he refuted the 
idle pretension of Antonius Laurentinus Politianus, to having 
seen the star in Ophiuchus (1604) before Bronowski, simply 
by the circumstance that Laurentinus had said—‘ Apparuit 
noya stella parva et postea de die in diem crescendo apparuit 
lumine non multo inferior Venere, superior Jove.” There 
are only three stars which may be looked upon in the light 
of exceptions, that did not shine forth at once .as of the Ist 





§ Kepler, De Stelia nova in pede Serp., p. 3. 


ee 





i eee 





NEW STARS. 219 


magnitude; viz. the star which appeared in Cygnus in 1600, 
and that in Vulpes in 1670, which were both of the 3rd, 
and Hind’s new star in Ophiuchus in 1848, which is of the 
‘Sth magnitude. 

It is much to be regretted, as we have already observed, 
that after the invention of the telescope in the long period 
of 178 years, only two new stars have been seen, whereas 
these phenomena have sometimes oceurred in such rapid 
succession, that at the end of the fourth century four 
were observed in twenty-four years; in the thirteenth 
century, three in sixty-one years; and during the era of 
Tycho Brahe and Kepler at the end of the sixteenth and 
beginning of the seventeenth centuries, no less than six were 
observed within a period of thirty-seven years. Throughout 
this examination I have kept in view the Chinese obser- 
vations of extraordinary stars, most of which, according to 
the opinion of the most eminent astronomers, are deserving 
of our confidence. Why it is that of the new stars seen in 
Europe, that of Kepler in Ophiuchus (1604) is in all pro- 
bability recorded in the records of Ma-tuan-lin, while that 
of Tycho in Cassiopeia (1572) is not noticed, I for my part 
am as little able to explain as I am to account for the 
fact, that no mention was made in the sixteenth century , 
among European astronomers, of the great luminous pheno- 
menon which was observed in China in February, 1578. The 
difference of longitude (114°) could only in a few instances 
account for their not being visible. Whoever has been 
engaged in such investigations, must be well aware that the 
want of record either of political events or natural pheno- 
mena, either upon the earth or in the heavens, is not inva- 
riably a proof of their never having taken place; and on com- 
paring together the three different catalogues which are given 
in Ma-tuan-lin, we actually find comets (those for instance of 
1385 and 1495), mentioned in one but omitted in the others. 


220 COSMOS. 


Even the earlier astronomers (Tycho Brahe and Kepler), as 
weil as the more modern (Sir John Herschel and Hind) have 
called attention to the fact that the great majority (four- 
fifths, I make it) of all the new stars described both in 
Europe and China, have appeared in the neighbourhood of 
or within the Milky Way. If that which gives so mild and 
nebulous a light to the annular starry strata of the Milky 
Way is, as is more than probable, a mere aggregation of small 
telescopic stars, Tycho Brahe’s hypothesis, which we have 
already mentioned, of the formation of new, suddenly-shining 
fixed stars, by the globular condensation of celestial vapour, 
falls at once to the ground. What the influence of gravi- 
tation may be among the crowded strata and clusters of 
stars, supposing them to revolve round certain central 
nuclei, is a question not to be here determined, and belongs 
to the mythica] part of Astrognosy. Of the twenty-one 
new stars enumerated in the above list, five (those of 134, 
393, 827, 1203, and 1584) appeared in Scorpio, three in 
Cassiopeia and Cepheus (945, 1264, 1572), and four in 
Ophiuchus (123, 1230, 1604, 1848). Once, however (1012), 
one was seen in Aries at a great distance from the Milky 
Way (the star seen by the monk of St. Gall). Kepler 
himself, who however considers as a new star that de- 
scribed by Fabricius, as suddenly shining in the neck of 
Cetus in the year 1596, and as disappearing in October of 
the same year, likewise advances this position as a proof to 
the contrary. (Kepler, De Stella Nova Serp., p. 112.) Is it 
allowable to infer, from the frequent lighting up of such stars 
in the same constellations, that in certain regions of space— 
those, namely, where Cassiopeia and Scorpio are to be seen— 
the conditions of their illuminations are favoured by certain 
local relations? Do such stars as are peculiarly fitted for 
the explosive temporary processes of light, especially lie in 
those directions? 





VANISHED STARS. 221 


The stars whose luminosity was of the shortest duration, 
were those of 389, 827, and 1012. In the first of the above- 
named years, the luminosity continued only for three weeks ; 
in the second, four months; inthe third,three. On the other 
hand, Tycho Brahe’s star in Cassiopeia continued to shine for 
seventeen months; while Kepler’s star in Cygnus (1600) was 
visible fully twenty-one years before it totally disappeared. 
It was again seen in 1655, and still of the 3rd magnitude, 
as at its first appearance, and afterwards dwindled down to 
the 6th magnitude, without, however (according to Arge- 
lander’s observations), being entitled to rank among pe- 
riodically variable stars. 


STARS THAT HAVE DISAPPEARED.—The observation and 
enumeration of stars that have disappeared is of importance for 
discovering the great number of small planets which probably 
belong to our solar system. Notwithstanding, however, the 
great accuracy of the catalogued positions of telescopic fixed 
stars and of modern star-maps, the certainty of conviction that 
a star in the heavens has actually disappeared since a certain 
epoch can only be arrived at with great caution. Errors of 
actual observation, of reduction, and of the press,7 often dis- 
figure the very best catalogues. The disappearance of a 





7 On instances of stars which have not disappeared, see 
Argelander in Schumacher’s Astronom. Nachr., no. 624, 
s. 371. To adduce an example from antiquity, I may point 
to the fact that the carelessness with which Aratus com- 
piled his poetical catalogue of the stars has led to the 
often-renewed question, whether Vega Lyre is a new star 
or one which yaries in long periods. For instance, Aratus 
asserts that the constellation of Lyra consists wholly of small 
stars. It is singular that Hipparchus, in his Commentary, 
does not notice this mistake, especially as he censures Aratus 
for his statements as to the relative intensity of light in 
the stars of Cassiopeia, and Ophiuchus. All this, however, 
is only accidental and not demonstrative; for when Ara- 


222 COSMOS. 


heavenly body from the place in which it had before been 
distinctly seen, may be the result of its own motion as much 
as of any such diminution of its photometric process (whether 
on its surface or in its photosphere), as would render the 
waves of light too weak to excite our organs of sight. 
What we no longer see, is not necessarily annihilated. The 
idea of destruction or combustion, as applied to disappearing 
stars, belongs to the age of Tycho Brahe. Even Pliny, 
in the fine passage where he is speaking of Hippar- 
chus, makes it a question: Stelle an obirent nasceren- 
turve? The apparent eternal cosmical alternation of existence 
and destruction is not annihilation; it is merely the transition 
of matter into new forms, into combinations which are sub- 
ject to new processes. Dark cosmical bodies may by a 
renewed process of light again become luminous. 


PERIODICALLY VARIABLE Stars. — Since all is in 
motion in the vault of heaven, and everything is variable 
both in space and time, we are led by analogy to infer 
that as the fixed stars universally have not merely an appa- 
rent, but also a proper motion of their own, so their surfaces 
or luminous atmospheres are generally subject to those 
changes which recur, in the great majority, in extremely long 





tus also ascribes to Cygnus none but stars ‘of moderate 
brilliancy,’’ Hipparchus expressly refutes this error, and 
adds the remark, that the bright star m the Swan (Deneb) 
is little inferior in brilliancy to Lyra (Vega Lyre). Pto- 
lemy classes Vega among stars of the Ist magnitude, and 
in the Catasterisms of Eratosthenes (cap. 25), Vega is 
called Aevkdv kai Aaprpov. Considering the many imaccuracies 
of a poet, who never himself observed the stars, one is 
not much disposed to give credit to the assertion that it was 
only between the years 272 and 127 B.c., @e., between 
the times of Aratus and Hipparchus, that the star Vega 
Lyre (Fidicula of Pliny, xviii. 25,) became a star of the Ist 
nagnitude. . 





PERIODICAL STARS. 223 


and therefore wnmeasured and probably undeterminable periods, 
or which, in a few, occur without being periodical, as it were, 
by a sudden revolution, either for a shorter or for a longer 
time. The latter class of phenomena (of which a remarkable 
instance is furnished in our own days bya large star in Argo) 
will not be here discussed, as our proper subject is those 
fixed stars whose periods have already been investigated and 
ascertamed. It is of importance here to make a distine- 
tion between three great sidereal phenomena, whose con- 
nexion has not as yet been demonstrated; namely, variable 
stars of known periodicity; the instantaneous lighting up 
in the heavens of so-called new stars; and sudden changes 
in the luminosity of long-known fixed stars, which pre- 
viously shone with uniform intensity. We shall first of all 
dwell exclusively on the first kind of variability ; of this the 
earliest instance accurately observed is furnished (1638) by 
Mira, a star in the neck of Cetus. The East-Friesland 
pastor, David Fabricius (the father of the discoverer of the 
spots on the sun), had certainly already observed this star 
on the 13th of August, 1596, as of the 3rd magnitude, and 
in October of the same year he saw it disappear. But it 
was not until forty-two years afterwards that the alternating, 
recurring variability of its light, and its periodic changes,, 
were discovered by the Professor Johann Phocylides Holwarda, 
Professor of Francker. This discovery was further followed. 
in the same century by that of two other variable stars 8 Perse 
(1669), described by Montanari, and x Cygni (1687) by Kirch. 

The irregularities which have been noticed in the periods, 
together with the additional number of stars of this class which 
have been discovered have, since the beginning of the nine- 
teenth century, awakened the most lively interest in this 
complicated group of phenomena. From. the: difficulty of 
the subject, and from my own wish to be able to set down 
in the present work the numerical elements of this variability 


24 COSMOS. 


(as being the most important result of all observations), so 
far as in the present state of the science they have been 
ascertained, I have availed myself of the friendly aid of that 
astronomer who of all our contemporaries has devoted him- 
self with the greatest diligence, and with the most brilliant 
success, to the study of the periodically varying stars. The 
doubts and questions called forth by my own labours I con- 
fidently laid before my worthy friend Argelander, the director 
of the Observatory at Bonn; and it is to his manuscript com- 
munications that I am solely indebted for all that follows, 
which for the most part has never before been published. 
The greater number of the variable stars, although not 
all, are of a red or reddish colour. Thus, for instance, 
besides 8 Persei (Algol in the head of Medusa), 8 Lyre 
and e Aurige have also a white light. The star 7 Aquile 
is rather yellowish; so also in a still less degree is ¢ Gemi- 
norum. The old assertion that some variable stars (and 
especially Mira Ceti) are redder when their brilliancy is 
on the wane than on the ‘increase, seems to be groundless. 
Whether in the double star a Herculis (in which, according to 
Sir John Herschel, the greater star is red, but according to 
Struve yellow, while its companion is said to be dark blue) 
the small companion, estimated at between the 5th to the 
7th magnitude, is itself also variable, appears very pro- 
blematical. Struve® himself merely says, Suspicor minorem 
esse. variabilem. Variability is by no means a necessary 





® Compare Madler, Asé., s. 488, note 12, with Struve 
Stellarum compos. mensure microm. pp. 97 and 98, star 2140. 
‘‘T believe,” says Argelander, ‘‘it is extremely difficult with 
a telescope having a great power of illumination to estimate 
rightly the brightness of two such different stars as the 
two components of a Herculis. My experience is strongly 
against the variability of the companion; for during my many 
observations in the day-time with the telescopes of the 





VARIABLE STARS. 225- 


concomitant of redness. ‘There are many red stars: some of 
them very red—as Arcturus and Aldebaran—in which, how-. 
éver, no variability has as yet been discovered. And it is 
also more than doubtful in the case of a star of Cepheus 
(No. 7582 of the catalogue of the British Association), 
which, on account of its extreme redness, has been called 
by William Herschel the Garnet Star (1782). 
It would be difficult to indicate the number of periodically 
variable stars for the reason that the periods already deter- 
mined are all irregular and uncertain, even if there were no 
other reasons. The two variable stars of Pegasus, as well as 
a Hydre, « Aurige, and a Cassiopeize, have not the certainty 
that belongs to Mira Ceti, Algol, and 6 Cephei. In inserting’ 
them, ‘therefore, in a table, much will depend on the degree 
of certainty we are disposed to be content with. Argelander, 
as will be seen from the table at the close of this investiga- 
tion, reckons the number of satisfactorily determined periods 
at only twenty-four.? 
The phenomenon of variability is found not only both in 
red, and in some white stars, but also in stars of the most 
diversified magnitude; as, for example, in a star of the Ist 
magnitude, a Orionis; by Mira Ceti, a Hydre, a Cassiopeia, 
and 8 Pegasi, of the 2nd magnitude; B Persei, of the 2°3rd 
magnitude; and in 7 Aquile, and Lyre, of the 3-4th mag- 
nitude. There are also variable stars, and indeed in far 
greater numbers, of the 6th to the 9th magnitude; such as 





meridian circles of Abo, Helsingfors, and Bonn, I have never 
seen a Herculis single, which would assuredly have been the 
ease if the companion at its minimum were of the seventh 
magnitude. I believe the latter to be constant, and of the 
5th or 56th magnitude. 

* Madler’s Table (Astron., s. 435) contains eighteen stars, 
with widely differing numerical elements. Sir John Herschel 
enumerates more than forty-five, including those mentioned 
in the notes. Outlines, § 819-826. 


YOu. III. Q 


226: COSMOS. 


the variabiles Corone, Virginis, Cancri, et Aquarii. The star 
x Cygni likewise presents very great fluctuations at its maximum. 
That the periods of the variable stars are very irregular 
has been long known; but that this variability, with all its 
apparent irregularity, is subject to certain definite laws, 
was first established by Argelander. This he hopes to be 
able to demonstrate in a longer and independent treatise of 
his own. Inthe case of x Cygni he considers that two pertur- 
bations in the period—the one of 100, the other of 83—are 
more probable than a single period of 108. Whether such 
disturbances arise from changes in the process of light which 
is going on in the atmosphere of the star itself, or from the 
periodic times of some planet which revolves round the 
fixed star or sun x Cygni, and by attraction influences the 
form of its photosphere, is still a doubtful question. The 
greatest irregularity in change of intensity has unquestionably 
been exhibited by the variabilis Scuti (Sobieski’s shield). 
For this star diminishes, from the 5:4th, down to the 9th 
magnitude; and moreover, according to Pigott, it once totally 
disappeared at the end of the last century. At other times 
the fluctuations in its brightness have been only from the 
65th to the 6th magnitude. The maximum of the variations 
of x Cygni have been between the 67th and 4th magnitude ; 
of Mira, from the 4th to the 2°lst magnitude. On the other 
hand, in the duration. of its periods 6 Cephei shows an eg- 
traordinary, and indeed of all variable stars the greatest 
regularity, as is proved by the 87 minima observed between 
the 10th of October, 1840, and 8th of January, 1848, and 
even later. In the case of « Auriga, the variation of its — 
brilliancy discovered by that indefatigable observer, Heis, 
of Aix-la-Chapelle,” extends only from the 34th to the 4-5th. 
magnitude. 


#0 Argelander, in Schumacher’s Astron. Nachr., bd. xxvi. 
(1848), no. 624, s. 369. 





i) 





VARIABLE STARS. 227 


Ac great difference in the maximum of brightness is exhibited 
by Mira Ceti. In the year 1779, for instance (on the 6th of 
November), Mira was only a little dimmer than Aldebaran, and 
indeed not unfrequently brighter than stars of the 2nd mag- 
nitude; whereas at other times this variable star scarcely 
attained to the intensity of the light of 6 Ceti, which is of the 
4th magnitude. Its mean brightness is equal to that of y Ceti 
(3rd magnitude). If we designate by 0 the brightness of the. 
faintest star visible to the naked eye, and that of Aldeba- 
ran by 50, then Mira has varied in its maximum from 20 to 
47. Its probable brightness may be expressed by 30: it is 
oftener below than above this limit. The measure of its 
excess, however, when it does occur, is in proportion more 
considerable. No certain period of these oscillations has as 
yet been discovered. There are however indications of a 
period of 40 years, and another of 160. 

The periods of variation in different stars vary as 1:250. 
The shortest period is unquestionably that exhibited by B 
Persei, being 68 hours and 49 minutes; so long at least as 
that of the polar star is not established at less than two 
days. Next to 8 Persei come 6 Cephei (5d. 8h. 49m.), 
n Aquile (7d. 4h. 14m.), and ¢ Geminorum (10d. 3h. 35m.). 
The longest periods are those of 30 Hydre Hevelii, 495 days; 
x Cygni, 406 days; Variabilis Aquarii, 388 days; Serpentis 
S, 367 days; and Mira Ceti, 332 days. In several of the vari- 
able stars it is well established that they increase in brillianey 
more rapidly than they diminish. This phenomenon is the 
most remarkable in 6 Cephei. Others, as for instance 8 
Lyre, have an equal period of augmentation and diminution 
of light. Occasionally, indeed, a difference is observed in this 
respect in the same stars, though at different epochs in their 
process of light. Generally Mira Ceti (as also 6 Cephei) is 
more rapid in its augmentation than in its diminution; but 
m the former the contrary has also been observed. . 

oat ic aa 


228 COSMOS. 


Periods within periods have been distinctly observed in 
the case of Algol, of Mira Ceti, of 8 Lyre, and with great 
probability also in x Cygni. The decrease of the period of 
Algol is now unquestioned. Goodricke was unable to per- 
ceive it, but Argelander has since done so; in the year 1842 
he was enabled to compare more than 100 trustworthy 
observations (comprising 7600 periods), of which the ex- 
tremes differed from each other more than 58 years. (Schu- 
macher’s Astron. Nachr.,. nos. 472 and 624.) The decrease 
in the period is becoming more and more observable." For 
the periods of the maximum of Mira (including the maximum 
of brightness observed by Fabricius in 1596), a formula™ 





u « Tf,” says Argelander, ‘‘I take for the 0 epoch the 
minimum brightness of Algol, in 1800, on the 1st of J anuary, 
at 18" 1™ mean Paris time, I obtain the duration of the 
periods for :— 

—1987 .. 2% 205 48™, or 59s°416 + 0*:316 


—1406 .. n 58°°737 + 0-094 
egg) eae te 585-393 + 0°175 
hk Me i 58°154 + 0-039 
+2328 .. iN 58°-193 + 0°-096 
43885 .. et 57°-971 + 0s-045 
45441 _55°:182 + 05.348 


‘In this table the numbers have the following signification :— 
if we designate the minimum epoch of the Ist of Jan. 1800, 
by 0, that immediately preceding by — 1, and that immediately 
following by +1, and so on, then the duration between — 1987 
and — 1986 would be exactly 2° 20" 48™ 59*-416, but the 
duration between + 5441 and + 5442 would be 2% 20" 48™ 
558182; the former applies to the year 1784, the latter to 
the year 1842, : 

* The numbers which follow the signs + are the probable 
errors. That the diminution becomes more and more rapid, 
is shown as well by the last number as by all my observations 
since 1847.” 

” Argelander’s formula for representing all observations 
of the maxima of Mira Ceti is, as communicated by himself, 
as follows :— | 


” 


VARIABLE STARS, 229 


has been established by Argelander, from which all the 
maxima can be so deduced that the probable error in a long 
period of variability, extending to 331d. 8h. does not in the 
mean exceed 7 days, while, on the hypothesis of an uniform 
period, it would be 15 days. 

The double maximum and minimum of § Lyre, in each 
of its periods of nearly 13 days, was from the first correctly 
ascertained by its discoverer, Goodricke (1784); but it has 
been placed still more beyond doubt’* by very recent obser- 
yations. It is remarkable that this star attains to the same 
brightness in both its maxima; but in its principal minimum 
it is about half a magnitude fainter than in the other. Since 
the discovery of the variability of 8 Lyre, the period in a 
pertod has probably been on the increase. At first the vari- 
ability was more rapid, then it became gradually slower; and 
this decrease in the length of time reached its limit between 





1751 Sep. 9°76 + 331°-:3363 E. 
+10*-5, sin. (359° E+ 86° 23’) + 187-2, sin. (45°E+ 231° 42’) 
+339, sin. ($§° E + 170° 19’) + 65%3, sin. (15° E + 6° 37’) 
where E represents the number of maxima which have oc- 
curred since Sept. 9, 1751, and the co-efficients are given 
in days. Therefore, for the current year (E being = 109), 
the following is the maximum :— ; 
1751 Sep. 9°76 + 36115%65 + 8%44 — 124-24. 
+ 18759 +4 27434 = 1850 Sep. 81-54. 

‘The strongest evidence in favour of this formula is, that it 
represents even the maximum of 1596, ( Cosmos, vol. ii. p. 713,) 
which, on the supposition of a uniform period, would deviate 
more than 100 days. However, the laws of the variation of 
the light of this star appear so complicated, that in par- 
ticular cases—e. g. for the accurately observed maximum 
of 1840—the formula was wrong by many days (nearly 
twenty-five).” 

*8 Compare Argelander’s essay written on the occasion of 
the centenary jubilee of the K6nigsberg University, and en- 
titled, De Stella 8 Lyre Variabili, 1844 / 


230 -- Gosmos. 


the years 1840 and 1844. During ‘that time its period was 
nearly invariable; at present it is again decidedly on the de- 
crease. Something similar to the double maximum of 8 Lyre 
occurs in 6Cephei. There isa tendency to a second maximum, 
in so far as its diminution of light does not proceed uniformly ; 
but after having been for some time tolerably rapid, it comes 
to a stand, or at least exhibits a very inconsiderable diminu- 
tion which suddenly becomes rapid again. In some stars it 
would almost appear as though the light were prevented from 
fully attaining a second maximum. In x Cygni it is very 
probable that two periods of variability prevail,—a longer one 
of 100 years, and a shorter one of 84. 

The question whether, on the whole, there is greater 
regularity in variable stars of very short than in those of 
very long periods, is difficult to answer. The variations from 
an uniform period can only be taken relatively; 7. e. in parts of 
the period itself. To commence with long periods, x Cygni, 
Mira Ceti, and 30 Hydre, must first of all be considered. In 
x Cygni, on the supposition of a uniform variability, the 
deviations from a period of 406-0634 days, (which is the 
most probable period,) amount to 39:4 days. Even though a 
portion of these deviations may be owing to errors of 
observation, still at least 29 or 30 days remain beyond doubt; 
7. e. one-fourteenth of the whole period. In the case of 
Mira Ceti,“ in a period of 331°340 days, the deviations 
amount to 55:5 days, even if we do not reckon the 
observations of David Fabricius. If, allowing for errors of 
observation, we limit the estimate to 40 days, we still obtain 
one-eighth; consequently, as compared with x Cygni, nearly 


The work of Jacques Cassini (Llémens d’Astronomie, 
1740, pp. 66-69), belongs to the earliest systematic attempts 
to investigate the mean cnmaeee of the period of the variation 
of Mira Ceti. 





VARIABLE STARS. 231 


twice as great a deviation. In the case of 30 Hydre, which 
has a period of 495 days, it is still greater, probably one-fifth, 
It is only during the last few years (since 1840, and still 
later) that the variable stars with very short periods have 
been observed steadily, and with sufficient accuracy; so that 
the problem in question, when applied to them, is still more 
difficult of solution. From the observations, however, which 
have as yet been taken, less considerable deviations seem to 
oceur. In the case of » Aquile (with a period of 7d. 4h.) 
they only amount to one-sixteenth or one-seventeenth of the 
whole period; in that of 8 Lyre (period 12d, 21h.) to one 
twenty-seventh or one-thirtieth; but the inquiry is still 
exposed to much uncertainty as regards the comparison of 
long and short periods. Of 8 Lyre between 1700 and 1800 
periods have been observed; of Mira Ceti, 279; of x 
Cygni, only 145. 

The question that has been mooted, whether stars which 


‘have long appeared to be variable in regular periods, ever 


cease to be so, must apparently be answered in thé negative. 


_As among the constantly variable stars there are some which 
at one time exhibit a very great, and at another a very small 


degree of variability, (as, for instance, variabilis Scuti,) so, 


‘it seems, there are also others whose variability is at certain 
‘times so very slight, that, with our limited means, we are 


unable to detect it. To such belongs variabilis Corone bor. 


(No. 5236 in the Catalogue of the British Association), 


recognized as variable by Pigott, who observed it for a 


considerable time. In the winter of 1795-6 this star became 
‘totally invisible; subsequently it again appeared, and the 
-variations of its light were observed by Koch. ‘In 1817, 
“Harding and Westphal found that its brightness was nearly 
constant, while in 1824 Olbers was again enabled to perceive 
‘@ variation in its luminosity. Its constancy now again 


returned, and from August, 1843, to September, 1845, was 


232. COSMOS, 


established by Argelander. At the end of September, a fresh. 
diminution of its light commenced. By October, the star 
was no longer visible in the comet-seeker, but it appeared 
again in February, 1846, and by the beginning of June had 
reached its usual magnitude (the 6th). Since then it has 
maintained this magnitude, if we overlook some small. 
fluctuations whose yery existence has not been established . 
with certainty. To this enigmatical class of stars belong” 
also variabilis Aquarii, and probably. Janson and Kepler’s. 
star in Cygnus of 1600, which we have already mentioned 
among the new stars. 


TaBLE of the Variable Stars by F. Argelander. 

















No Name of the Length of Brightness in the Name of Discoverer and 
cole Star. Period. Maxtiniin. tWisewiias: date of Discovery. 
D. H. M.|Magnitude} Magnit. 
1 | o Ceti ; 331 20 —| 4 to 21 0 | Holwarda 1639 
2|6 Persei . 2 20 49 2°3 4 | Montanari 1669 
3\x Cygni . 406 130/67to 4 0 | Gottfr. Kirch 1687 
4 | 30, Hydre Hev. | 495——J| 5to 4 0 | Maraldi 1704 
5 | Leonis R, 420 M. | 312 18 — 5 0 | Koch 1782 
6 | m Aquilae , . 7 414 3°4 5:4 | E. Pigott 1784 
7 |B Lyre . ~ | 1221 45 3°4 45 | Goodricke 1784 
8 | 6 Cephei ; 5 8 49 43 5:4 | Ditto 1784 
9 | a Hereulis 66 8 — 3 3°4 | Wm. Herschel 1795 
10 | Corone R . 323 — — 6 0 | E. Pigott 1795 
11 |SeutiR =. 71 17 — |6'5 to 54 |9to 6 | Ditto 1795 
12 | Virginis R 145 21—| 7 to 67 0 | Harding 1809 
13 | Aquarii R 388 138 — | 9 to 67 0 | Ditto 1810 
14 | Serpentis R 359 — — 6°7 0 | Ditto 1826 
15 | Serpentis S . | 367 5—| 8 to 78 0 | Ditto 1828 
16 |CancriR . , | 380 — — 7 0 | Schwerd 1829 
17 | a Cassiopeize 79 3— 2 3°2 | Birt 1831 
18 | a Orionis , 196 — — 1 1:2 | John Herschel 1836 
19 | a Hydre 55 — — 2 2°3 | Ditto 1837 
20 | « Aurigee 2 3°4 4°5 | Heis 1846 
21;ZGeminorum .| 10 335 4°3 5:4 | Schmidt 1847 
22 |B Pegasi . » | 4023 — 2 2°3 | Ditto 1848 
23 | PegasiR . . | 8350 — — 8 0 | Hind 1848 
24 |CancriS . q 78 0 | Ditto 1848 

















VARIABLE STARS. 233 


EXPLANATORY REMARKS, 


The 0 in the column of the minima indicates that the 
star is then fainter than the 10th magnitude. For the 
purpose of clearly and conveniently designating the smaller 
variable stars, which for the most part have neither names 
nor other designations, I have allowed myself to append to 
them capitals, since the letters of the Greek and the smaller 
Latin alphabet have, for the most part, been already employed 
by Bayer. 

Besides the stars adduced in the preceding table, there 
are almost as many more which are supposed to be variable, 
since their magnitudes are set down differently by different 
observers. But as these estimates were merely occasional, 
and have not been conducted with much precision, and as 
different astronomers have different principles in estimating 
magnitudes, it seems the safer course not to notice any such 
cases, until the same observer shall have found a decided 
variation in them at different times. With all those adduced 
in the table this is the case; and the fact of their periodical 
change of light is quite established, even where the period 
itself has not been ascertained. The periods given in the 
table are founded, for the most part, on my own examination 
of all the earlier observations that have been published, and 
on my own observations within the last ten years, which have 
not as yet been published. Exceptions will be mentioned in 
the following notices of the several stars. 

In these notices the positions are those for 1850, and are 
expressed in right ascension and declination. The frequently 
repeated term gradation indicates a difference of brightness, 
which may be distinctly recognized even by the naked eye, or 
in the case of those stars which are invisible to the unaided 
sight, by a Frauenhofer’s comet-seeker of twenty-five and 
a-half inches focal length. For the brighter stars above the 
6th magnitude, a gradation indicates about the tenth part: 
of the difference by which the successive orders of mag- 
nitude differ from one another; for the smaller stars the 
usual classifications of magnitude are considerably closer. 

(1) o Ceti, R. A. 82° 57’, Decl. —3° 40’; also called Mira, 
on account of the wonderful change of light which was first: 
observed in this star. As early as the latter half of the 
seventeenth century, the periodicity of this star was recog-- 
nized, and Bouillaud fixed the duration of its period at. 333 


234 COSMOS. 


days; it was found, however, at the same time, that this dura- 
tion was sometimes longer, and sometimes shorter,’and that 
the star at its greatest brilliancy appeared sometimes brighter, 
and sometimes fainter. This has been subsequently fully 
confirmed. Whether the star ever becomes perfectly invisible 
is as yet undecided; at one time, at the epoch of its minimum 
it has been observed of the 11th or 12th magnitude, at another, 
it could not be seen even with the aid of a three or a four- 
feet telescope. This much is certain, that for a long period 
it is fainter than stars of the 10th magnitude. But few ob- 
servations of the star at this stage have as yet been taken ; 
most having commenced when it had begun to be visible 
to the naked eye as a star of the 6th magnitude. From this 
period the star increases in brightness at first with great 
rapidity, afterwards more slowly, and at last, with a scarcely 
perceptible augmentation; then again, it diminishes at first 
slowly, afterwards rapidly. On a mean the period of aug- 
mentation of light from the 6th magnitude extends to 50 days; 
that-of its decrease down to the same degree of brightness 
takes 69 days; so that the star is visible to the naked eye for 
about fourmonths. However, this is only the mean duration 
of its visibility; occasionally it has lasted as long as five 
months, whereas, at other times it has not been visible for 
more than three. In the same way, also, the duration both 
of the augmentation and of the diminution of its light is 
subject to great fluctuations, and the former is at all times 
slower than the latter: as, for instance, in the year 1840, 
when the star took sixty-two days to arrive at its greatest 
brightness, and then in forty-nine days became invisible to 
the naked eye. The shortest period of increase that has as 
yet been observed took place in 1679, and lasted only thirty 
days; the longest (of sixty-seven days) occurred in 1709. 
The decrease of light lasted the longest in 1839, being then 
ninety-one days; the shortest in the year 1660, when it was 
completed in nearly. fifty-two days. Occasionally, the star 
at the period of its greatest brightness exhibits for a whole 
month together scarcely any perceptible variation; at others, 
a difference may be observed within a very few days. On 
some occasions after the star had decreased in brightness for 
several weeks there was a period of perfect cessation; or, at 
least, a scarcely perceptible diminution of light during several 
days: this was the case in 1678 and in 1847. 3 








VARIABLE STARS. 935 


The maximum brightness, as already remarked, is by no 
means always the same. If we indicate the brightness of the 
faintest star that is visible to the naked eye by 0, and that of 
Aldebaran, (a Tauri,) a star of the lst magnitude, by 50, 
then the maximum of light of Mira fluctuates between 20 
and 47, 7. e. between the brightness of a star of the 4th, and 
of the Ist or 2nd magnitude: the mean brightness is 28, or 
that of the star y Ceti. But the duration of its periods is 
still more irregular: its mean is 331d. 20h., while its flue- 
tuations have extended to a month; for the shortest time 
that ever elapsed from one maximum to the next was only 
306 days, the longest on the other hand 367 days. ‘These 
irregularities become the more remarkable, when we compare 
the several occurrences of greatest brightness with those which 
would take place if we were to calculate these maxima on 
the hypothesis of an uniform period. ‘The difference between 
caleulation and observation then amounts to 50 days, :and 
it appears, that for several years in succession those differ- 
ences are nearly the same, and in the same direction. This 
evidently indicates that the disturbance in the phenomena 
of light is one of a very long period. More accurate cal- 
culations, however, have proved that the supposition of one 
disturbance is not sufficient, and that several must be 
assumed, which may, however, all arise from the same cause; 
one of these recurs after 11 single periods; a second, after 88 ; 
athird, after 176; and a fourth, after 264. From hence arises 
the formula of sines (given at p. 228, note 12), with which, 
indeed, the several maxima very nearly accord; although 
deviations still exist which cannot be explained by errors of 
observation. 

(2) B Persei, Algol; R. A. 44° 36, Decl. + 40° 22’. 
Although Geminiano Montanari observed the variability of 
this star in 1667, and Maraldi likewise noticed it, it was 
Goodricke that first, in 1782, discovered the regularity of the 
variability. The cause of this is probably that this star does 
not, like most other variable ones, gradually increase and 
diminish in brightness, but for 2d. 13h. shines uniformly as a 
star of the 2°3rd magnitude, and only appears less bright for 
7 or 8 hours, when it sinks to the 4th magnitude. The 
augmentation and diminution of its brightness are not quite 
regular; but when near to the minimum, they proceed with 
greater rapidity; whence the time of least brightness may: 


236 COSMOS. 


be accurately calculated to within 10 to 15 minutes. It is 
moreover remarkable that this star, after having increased 
in light for about an hour, remains for nearly the same 
period at the same brightness, and then begins once more per- 
ceptibly to increase. ‘Till very recently the duration of the 
period was held to be perfectly uniform, and Wurm was able 
to present all observations pretty closely, by assuming it to 
be 2d. 21h. 48m. 584s. However, a more accurate calculation, 
in which was comprehended a space of time nearly twice 
as long as that at Wurm’s command, has shown that the 
period becomes gradually shorter. In the year 1784, it was 
2d. 20h. 48m. 59°4s., and in the year 1842, only 2d. 20h. 
48m. 55°2s. Moreover, from the ‘most recent observations 
it becomes very probable that this diminution of the period 
is at present proceeding more rapidly. than before, so that 
for this star also a formula of sines, for the disturbance of 
its period, will in time be obtained. Besides, this diminu- 
tion will be accounted for, if we assume that Algol comes 
nearer to us by about 2000 miles every year, or recedes from 
us thus far less each succeeding year; for in that case his 
light would reach us as much sooner every year, as the de- 
crease of the period requires; 7. e. about the twelve thou~ 
sandth of a second. If this be the true cause, a formula of 
sines must eventually be deduced. 

(3) x Cygni, R. A. 296° 12’, Decl. +32° 32’. This star 
also exhibits nearly the same irregularities as Mira, The 
deviations of the observed maxima from those calculated for 
a uniform period amount to 40 days, but are considerably 
diminished by the introduction of a disturbance of 83 single 
periods, and of another of 100 such periods. In its maximum 
this star reaches the mean brightness of a faint 5th magni- 
tude, or one gradation brighter than the star 17 Cygni- 
The fluctuations, however, are in this case also very consi- 
derable, and have been observed from 13 gradations below 
the mean to 10 above it. At this lowest maximum the star 
would be perfectly invisible to the naked eye, whereas, on the 
contrary, in the year 1847, it could be seen without the aid 
of a telescope for fully 97 days; its mean visibility extends 
to 52 days, of which, on the mean, it is 20 days on the 
increase, and 32 on the decrease. 

(4) 30 Hydre Hevelii, R. A. 200° 23’, Decl. —22°30'. Of 
this star, which, from its position in the heavens, is only 





VARIABLE STARS. 237 


visible for a short time during every year, all that can be said 
is, that both its period and its maximum brightness are sub- 
ject to very great irregularities. 

(5) Leonis R, = 420 Mayeri; R. A. 144° 52’, Decl. 
+ 12° 7. This star is often confounded with 18 and 19 
Leonis, which are close to it; and in consequence has been 
very little observed; sufficiently; however, to show that the 
period is somewhat irregular. Its brightness at the maximum 
seems also to fluctuate through some gradations. 

(6) » Aquilze, called also 7 Antinoi; R. A. 296° 12’, Decl. 
+ 0° 37'.. The period of this star is tolerably uniform, ’ 
7d. 4h. 18m. 53s.; observations, however, prove that at 
Jong intervals of time trifling fluctuations occur in it, not 
amounting to more than 20 seconds. ‘The variation of light 
proceeds so regularly, that up to the present time no devia- 
tions have been discovered which could not be accounted 
for’ by errors of observation. In its minimum, this star is 
one gradation fainter than + Aquile; at first it increases 
slowly, then more rapidly, and afterwards again more slowly: 
and in 2d. 9h. from its minimum, attains to its greatest 
brightness, in which it is nearly three gradations brighter 
than 8, but two fainter than d Aquile. From the maximum 
its brightness does not diminish quite so regularly: for when 
the star has reached the brightness of 8 (7. e. in 1d. 10h. after 
the maximum), it changes more slowly than either before or 
afterwards. 

(7) B Lyre, R. A. 281° 8’, Decl. + 33° 11’; a star 
remarkable from the fact of its having two maxima and two 
tfoinima. When it has been at its faintest light, one-third 
of a gradation fainter than ¢ Lyre, it rises in 3d. 5h. to its first 
maximum, in which it remains three-fourths of a gradation 
fainter than y Lyre. It then sinks in 3d. dh. to its second 
minimum, in which its light is about five gradations greater 
than that of ¢. After 3d. 2h. more, it again reaches, in its 
second maximum, to the brightness of the first ; and afterwards. 
in 3d. 12h., declines once more to its greatest faintness; so 
that, in 12d. 21h. 46m. 40s. it runs through all its variations 
of light. This duration of the period, however, only applies 
to the years 1840 to 1844; previously it had been shorter— 
in the year 1784, by about 23h.; in 1817 and 1818, by more 
than an hour: and, at present, a shortening of it is again 
clearly perceptible. There is therefore no doubt that in the 


238 | COSMOS. 


case of this star the disturbance of its period may be expressed 
by a formula of sines. 

(8) 3 Cephei, R. A. 335° 54’, Decl. + 57° 39. Of all the 
known variable stars, this exhibits in every respect the greatest 
regularity. The period of 5d. 8h. 47m. 394s. is given by 
all the observations from 1784 to the present day, allowing 
for errors of observation, which will account for all the slight 
differences exhibited in the course of the alternations of 
light. This star is in its minimum three-quarters of a 
gradation brighter than «; in its maximum, it resembles « of 
the same constellation (Cepheus). It takes 1d. 15h. to pass 
from the former to the latter; but, on the other hand, more 
than double that time, viz. 3d. 18h. to change again to its 
minimum: during eight hours of the latter period, however, 
it scarcely changes at all, and very inconsiderably for a whole 
day. 

9) a Herculis, R.A. 256° 57’, Decl. + 14° 34’; am ex- 
tremely red double star, the variation of whose light is in every 
respect very irregular. Frequently, its light scarcely changes 
for months together; at other times, in the maximum, it is 
nearly five gradations brighter than in the minimum; 
consequently, the period also is still very uncertain. The dis- 
coverer of the star’s variation had assumed it to be sixty-three 
days. I at first set it down at ninety-five, until a careful 
reduction of all my observations made during seven years at 
length gave me the period assigned in the text. Heis believes 
that he can represent all the observations by assuming a 
period of 184-9 days, with two maxima and two minima. 

(10) Corone R, R. A. 235° 36’, Decl. + 28° 37. This 
star is variable only at times: the period set down has been 
calculated by Koch from his own observations, which unfortu- 
nately have been lost. 

(11) Scuti R, R. A. 279° 52’, Decl. — 5°51’. The varia- 
tions of brightness of this star are at times confined within a 
very few gradations, whereas at others it diminishes from the 
5th to the 9th magnitude. It has been too little observed to 
determine when any fixel rule prevails in these deviations. 
The duration of the period is also subject to considerable 
fluctuations. 

(12) Virginis R, R. A. 187° 43’, Decl. + 7°49’. It main- 
tains its period and its maximum brightness with tolerable 
reguiarity ; some deviations, however, do occur, which appear 





VARIABLE STARS. 239 


to me too considerable to be ascribed merely to errors of 
observation. 3 

(13) Aquarii R, R. A. 354° 11’, Decl. — 16° 6’. 

(14) Serpentis R, R. A. 235° 57’, Decl. + 15° 36%. 

(15) Serpentis S, R. A. 228° 40’, Decl. +- 14° 52’. 

(16) Caneri R, R. A. 122° 6’, Decl. + 12° 9’. 

Of these four stars, which have been but very slightly ob- 
served, little more can be said than what is given in the table. 

(17) a Cassiopeiz, R. A. 8° 0’, Decl. + 55° 43’. This star 
is very difficult to observe. The difference between its 
maximum and minimum only amounts to a few gradations, 
and is, moreover, as variable as the duration of the period. 
This circumstance explains the varying statements on this 
head. That which I have given, which satisfactorily repre- 
sents the observations from 1782 to 1849, appears to me the 
most probable one. 

(18) @ Orionis, R. A. 86° 46’, Decl. + 7° 22’. The varia- 
tion in the light of this star likewise amounts to only four 
gradations from the minimum to the maximum. For 912 
days it increases in brightness, while its diminution extends 
over 1043, and is imperceptible from the twentieth to the 
seventieth day after the maximum. Occasionally its varia-. 
bility is scarcely noticeable. It is a very red star. 

(19) a Hydre, R.A. 140° 3’, Decl. — 8° 1’. Of all the 
variable stars, this is the most difficult to observe, and its 
period is still altogether uncertain. Sir John Herschel sets it 
down at from twenty-nine to thirty days. 

(20) « Aurige, R. A. 72° 48’, Decl. + 43° 36’. The 
alternation of light in this star is either extremely irregular, or 
else, in a period of several years, there are several maxima and 
minima—a question which cannot be decided for many years. 

(21) ¢ Geminorum, R. A. 103° 48’, Decl. + 20° 47. 
This star has hitherto exhibited a perfectly regular course in 
the variations of itslight. Its brightness at its minimum keeps 
the mean between » and v of the same constellation; in the 
maximum it does not quite reach thatofa. It takes 4d. 2th. 
to attain its full brightness, and 5d. 6h. for its diminution. 

(22) 6 Pegasi, R. A. 344° 7’, Decl. + 27° 16. Its period 
is pretty well ascertained, but as to the course of its variation 
of light nothing can as yet be asserted. 

(23) Pegasi R, R. A. 844° 47’, Decl. + 9° 43’. 


240 ' COSMOS. 


(24) Caneri 8, R. A. 128° 50’, Decl. + 19° 34’. 
Of these two stars, nothing at present can be said. 


Bonn, August, 1850. Fr. ARGELANDER. 


_ Varration oF Licut 1n Stars wHosE PxrRiopicity Is 
UnascertTaIneD.—In the scientific investigation of important 
natural phehomena, either in the terrestrial or in the side- 
real sphere of the Cosmos, it is imprudent to connect toge- 
ther, without due consideration, subjects which, as regards 
their proximate causes, are still involved in obscurity. On 
this account we are careful to distinguish stars which have 
appeared and again totally disappeared (as in the star in Cas- 
siopeia, 1572);—-stars which have newly appeared and not 
again disappeared (as that in Cygnus, 1600);—variable stars 
with ascertained periods (Mira Ceti, Algol) ; and stars whose 
intensity of light varies, of whose variation, however, the 
periodicity is as yet unascertained (as » Argts). It is by no 
means improbable, but still does not necessarily follow that 
these four kinds of phenomena” have perfectly similar causes 
in the photospheres of those remote suns, or in the nature of » 
their surfaces. 

As we commenced our account of new stars with the most 





% Newton (Philos. Nat. Principia mathem., ed. Le Seur 
et Jacquier, 1760, tom. iii. p. 671) distinguishes only two 
kinds of these sidereal phenomena. ‘“‘Stellee fixee que per 
vices apparent et evanescunt, queque paulatim crescunt, 
videntur revolvendo partem lucidam et partem obscuram per 
Vices ostendere.”” The fixed stars which alternately appear 
and vanish and which gradually increase, appear by turns to 
show an illuminated and a dark side. This explanation of 
the variation of light had been still earlier advanced by 
Riccioli. With respect to the caution necessary in predi- 
cating periodicity, see the valuable remarks of Sir John Her- 
schel, in his Observations at the Cape, § 261. 





VARIABLE STARS. 241 


remarkable of this class of celestial phenomena—the sudden. 
appearance of Tycho Brahe’s star—so, influenced by similar 
considerations, we shall begin our statements concerning the 
variable stars whose periods have not yet been ascertained, 
with the unperiodical fluctuations in the light of » Argtis, which 
to the present day are still observable. This star is situated 
in the great and magnificent constellation of the Ship, “the 
glory of the southern skies.” Halley, as long ago as 1677, on 
his return from his voyage to St. Helena, expressed strong 
doubts concerning the alternation of light in the stars of Argo, 
especially on the shield of the prow and on the deck (domdioxy 
and xardorpwpa), whose relative orders of magnitude had been 
given by Ptolemy.”* However, in consequence of the little 
reliance that can be placed on the positions of the stars as set 
down by the ancients, of the various readings in the several 
MSS. of the Almagest, and of the vague estimates of inten-. 
sity of light, these doubts failed to lead to any result. Accord- 
ing to Halley’s observation in 1677, 7 Argis was of the 4th 
magnitude; and by 1751, it was already of the 2nd, as ob-. 
served by Lacaille. The star must have afterwards returned 
to its fainter light, for Burchell, during his residence in 
Southern Africa, from 1811 to 1815, found it of the 4th 
magnitude; from 1822 to 1826, it was of the 2nd, as seen 
by Fallows and Brisbane; in February, 1827, Burchell, who 
happened at that time to be at San Paolo, in Brazil, found 
it of the Ist magnitude, perfectly equal to a Crucis. After- 
a year, the star returned to the 2nd magnitude. It was of. 
this magnitude when Burchell saw it on the 29th of Febru- 
ary, 1828, in the Brazilian town of Goyaz; and it is thus 
set down by Johnson and Taylor, in their catalogues for the 
period between 1829 and 18338. Sir John Herschel also, at 





16 Delambre, Hist. de I’ Astron. ‘ancienne, tom. li. p. 280, 
and Hist. del Astron. au 18iéme Siecle, p. 119. 


VOL. III. R 


242 COSMOS. 


the Cape of Good Hope, estimated it as being between the 
2nd and 1st magnitude, from 1834 to 1837, 

When, on the 16th of December, 1837, this famous astro- 
nomer was preparing to take the photometric measurements 
of the innumerable telescopic stars, between the 11th and 
16th magnitudes, which compose the splendid nebula around 
7 Argis, he was astonished to find this star, which had so often 
before been observed, increase to such intensity of light that 
it almost equalled the brightness of « Centauri, and exceeded 
that of all other stars of the 1st magnitude, except Canopus 
and Sirius. By the 2nd of January, 1838, it had for that 
time reached the maximum of its brightness. It soon became 
fainter than Arcturus; but in the middle of April, 1838, it 
still surpassed Aldebaran. Up to March, 1843, it continued 
to diminish, but was even then a star of the 1st magnitude; 
after that time, and especially in April, 1848, it began to 
increase so much in light, that, according to the obser- 
vations of Mackay at Calcutta, and Maclear at the Cape, 
n Argis became more brilliant than Canopus, and almost 
equal to Sirius.’ This intensity of light was continued 
almost up to the beginning of the present year (1850). 
A distinguished observer, Lieutenant Gilliss, who com- 
mands the Astronomical Expedition sent by the Govern- 
ment of the United States to the Coast of Chili, writes 
from Santiago, in February, 1850: “7 Argis, with its 
yellowish-red light, which is darker than that of Mars, is 
at present next in brilliancy to Canopus, and is brighter 
than the united light of a Centauri.”** Since the appearance 





m Compare Sir John Herschel’s Observations at the Cape, 


§ 71-78 ; and Outlines of Astron., § 830 (Cosmos, vol.i. p. 144). 

” Letter of Lieutenant Gilliss: astronomer of the Observa- 
tory at Washington, to Dr. Fliigel, Consul of the United 
States of North America at Leipsic (in manuscript). The 


site y+ 








VARIABLE STARS. 248 


of the new stars in Ophiuchus in 1604, no fixed star has 
attained to such an intensity of light, and for so long a 
period—now nearly seven years. In the 173 years (from 
1677 to 1850) during which we have reports of the magnitude 
of this beautiful star in Argo, it has undergone from eight to 
nine oscillations in the augmentation and diminution of its 
light. As an incitement to astronomers to continue their 
observations on the phenomenon of a great but unperiodical 
variability in » Argis, it was fortunate that its appearance 
was coincident with the famous five years’ expedition of Sir 
John Herschel to the Cape. 

Tn the case of several other stars, both isolated and double, 
observed by Struve (Stellarum compos. Mensure Microm., 
pp. lxxi.-lxxii.) similar variations of light have been no- 
ticed, which have not as yet been ascertained to be periodical. 
The instances which we shall content ourselves with adducing, 
are founded on actual photometrical estimations and calcu- 
lations made by the same astronomer at different times, and 
not on the alphabetical series of Bayer’s Uranometry. In 
his treatise De fide Uranometrie Bayeriane, 1842, (p. 15,) 
Argelander has satisfactorily shown that Bayer did not by 
any means follow the plan of designating the brightest stars 
by the first letters of the alphabet; but that, on the contrary, 
he arranged the letters by which he designated stars of equal 
magnitude according to the positions of the stars in a con- 
stellation, beginning usuaily at the head, and proceeding, in 
regular order, down to the feet. The order of letters in 





cloudless purity and transparency of the atmosphere, which 
last for eight months, at Santiago, in Chili, are so great, that 
Lieutenant Gilliss, (with the jist great telescope ever con- 
structed i America, having a diameter of 7 inches, con- 
structed by Henry Fitz of New York, and William Young of 
Philadelphia), was able clearly to recognize the sixth star in 
the trapezium of Orion. : 
R 2 


944 COSMOS. 


Bayer’s Uranometria has long led to a belief that a change 
of light has taken place in a Aquile, in Castor Geminorum, 
and in Alphard of Hydra. 

Struve, in 1838, and Sir John Herschel, observed Capella 
increase in light. The latter now finds Capella much brighter 
than Vega, though he had always before considered it fainter.” 
Galle and Heis come to the same conclusion, from their pre- 
sent comparison of Capella and Vega. The latter finds Vega 
between 5 and 6 gradations, consequently more than half a 
magnitude, the fainter of the two. 

The variations in the light of some stars in the constellations 
of the Greater and of the Lesser Bear are deserving of especial 
notice. ‘* The star » Urse majoris,’’ says Sir John Herschel, 
“is at present certainly the most brilliant of the seven bright 
stars in the Great Bear, although, in 1837, ¢ unquestionably 
held the first place among them.’’ This remark induced me 
to consult Heis, who so zealously and carefully occupies 
himself with the variability of stellar light. ‘The follow- 
ing,” he writes, ‘is the order of magnitude which results 
from my observations, carried on at Aix-la-Chapelle between 
1842 and 1850: 1. « Urse majoris, or Alioth; 2. a, or 
Dubhe; 3. », or Benetnasch; 4. 8, or Mizar; 5. B; 6.4; 7. 2. 
The three stars, s, #, and , of this group are nearly equal 
in brightness, so that the slightest want of clearness in the 
atmosphere might render their order doubtful; ¢ is decidedly 
fainter than the three before mentioned. The two stars 6 
and y, (both of which are decidedly duller than Z) are nearly 
equal to each other; lastly 0, which in ancient maps is usually 





19 Sir John Herschel (Observations at the Cupe, pp. 334, 
350, note 1. and 440). For older observations of Capella and 
Vega, see William Herschel, in the Philos. Transact., 1797, 
p- 807, 1799, p. 121; and Bode’s Jahrbuch fiir 1810, s. 148. 
Argelander, on the other hand, advances many doubts as 
to the variation of Capella and of the stars of the Bear. 





VARIABLE STARS. 945 w\ 


set down as of the same magnitude with 8 and y, is by 
more than a magnitude fainter than these; « is decidedly 
variable. Although in general this star is brighter, I have 
nevertheless in three years observed it on five occasions 
to be undoubtedly fainter than a I also consider 8 Urse 
majoris to be variable, though I am unable to give any fixed 
periods. In the years 1840 and 1841, Sir John Herschel 
found 8 Urse minoris much brighter than the Polar star; 
whereas still earlier, in May, 1846, the contrary was ob- 

served by him. He also conjectures 8 to be variable.” 
- Since 1843, I have, as a rule, found Polaris fainter than B 
Urse minoris; but from October, 1843, to July, 1849, Polaris 
was, according to my registers, 14 times brighter than 8. 
I have had frequent opportunities of convincing myself that 
the colour of the last-named star is not always equally red; 
it is at times more or less yellow, at others most decidedly 
red.”** All the pains and labour spent in determining the 
relative brightness of the stars will never attain any certain 
result until the arrangement of their magnitudes from mere 
estimation shall have given place to methods of measurement 
founded on the progress of modern optical science.” The 
possibility of attaining such an object need not be despaired 
of by astronomers and physicists. 

The probably great physical similarity in the process of 





* Observations at the Cape, § 259, note 260. 
- * Beis, in his Manuscript Notices of May, 1850; also 
Observations at the Cape, p. 325; and P. von Boguslawski, 
Uranus for 1848, p. 186. The asserted variation of ». #, and 3 
Ursee maj. is also confirmed in Outlines, p.559. See Madler, 
Asir., p. 482. On the succession of the stars which, from 
their proximity, will in time mark the north pole, until, after 


the lapse of 12000 years, Vega, the brightest of all possible 
polar stars, will take their place. 
_ ® Cosmos, vide supra, p. 128. 


246 COSMOS. 


light in all self-luminous stars (in the central body of our own 
planetary system, and in the distant suns or fixed stars) has 
long and justly directed attention to the importance*® and 
significance which attach to the periodical or non-periodical 
variation in the light of the stars in reference to clima- 
tology generally ;—to the history of the atmosphere, or 
the varying temperature which our planet has derived in 
the course of thousands of years from the radiation of the 
sun;—with the condition of organic life, and its forms of 
development in different degrees of latitude. The variable 
star in the neck of the Whale (Mira Ceti) changes from 
the 2nd magnitude to the 11th, and sometimes vanishes 
altogether; we have seen that » Argts has increased from 
the 4th to the Ist magnitude, and among the stars of this 
class has attained to the brillianey of Canopus, and almost to 
that of Sirius. Supposing that our own sun has passed 
through only a very few of these variations in intensity 
of light and heat, either in an increasing or decreasing 
ratio, (and why should it differ from other suns?) such a 
change, such a weakening or augmentatien of its light-pro- 
cess, may account for far greater and more fearful results 
for our own planet than any required for the explanation of 
all geognostic relations, and ancient telluric revolutions. — 
William Herschel and:Laplace were the first to agitate these 
views. If I have dwelt upon them somewhat at length, it is 
not because I would seek exclusively in these the solution of 
the great problem of the changes of temperature in our earth. 
The primitive high temperature of this planet at its forma- 
tion, and the solidification of conglomerating matter—the 





3 William Herschel, On the Changes that happen to the 
Fixed Stars, in the Philos. Transact. for 1796, p. 186. Sir 
John Herschel in the Observations at the Cape, pp. 350-852; 
as also in Mrs. Somerville’s excellent work, Connexion of the 
Physical Sciences, 1846, p. 407. : . 





VARIABLE STARS. 247 


radiation of heat from the deeper strata of the earth through 
open fissures, and through unfilled veins—the greater power 
of electric currents—a very different distribution of sea and 
land ;—may also, in the earliest epochs of the earth’s 
existence, have rendered the diffusion of heat independent of 
latitude; that is to say, of position relatively to a central 
body. Cosmical considerations must not be limited merely 
to astrognostic relations. 


248 


7: 


PROPER MOTION OF THE FIXED STARS.—PROBLEMATICAL 
EXISTENCE OF DARK COSMICAL BODIES.—PARALLAX.— 
MEASURED DISTANCES OF SOME OF THE FIXED STARS. 
—DOUBTS AS TO THE ASSUMPTION OF A CENTRAL BODY 
FOR THE WHOLE SIDEREAL HEAVENS. 


THe heaven of the fixed stars, in contradiction to its very 
name, exhibits, not only changes in the intensity of light, 
but also further variation from the perpetual motion of the 
individual stars. Allusion has already been made to the 
fact that, without disturbing the equilibrium of the star- 
systems, no fixed point is to be found in the whole heavens, 
and that of all the bright stars observed by the earliest of the 
Greek astronomers, not one has kept its place unchanged. In 
the case of Arcturus, of » Cassiopeie, and of a double star in 
Cygnus, this change of position has, by the accumulation 
of their annual proper motion during 2000 years, amounted 
respectively to 24, 34, and 6 moon’s diameters. In the 
course of 3000 years about twenty fixed stars will have 
changed their places by 1° and upwards.’ Since the proper 
motions of the fixed stars rise from th of a second to 
7°7 seconds (and consequently differ, at the least, in the 
ratio of 1:154), the relative distances also of the fixed stars 





* Encke, Betrachtungen iiber die Anordnung des Stern- 
systems, 8.12. Vide supra, p. 30. Madler, Astr., s. 445. 


PROPER MOTION OF THE STARS. 249 


from each other, and the configuration of the constellations 
themselves, cannot in long periods remain the same. The 
Southern Cross will not always shine in the heavens exactly 
in its present form; for the four stars of which it consists 
move with unequal velocity in different paths. How many 
thousand years will elapse before its total dissolution, cannot 
be calculated. In the relations of space and the duration of 
time, no absolute idea can be attached to the terms great and 
small. 

In order to comprehend under one general point of view the 
changes that take place in the heavens, and all the modifications 
which in the course of centuries occur in the phystognomic 
character of the vault of heaven, or in the aspect of the firma- 
ment from any particular spot, we must reckon as the active 
_ causes of this change: (1), the precession of the equinoxes 
and the nutation of the earth’s axis, by the combined opera- 
tion of which new stars appear above the horizon, and others 
become invisible; (2), the periodical and non-periodical varia- 
tions in the brightness of many of the fixed stars; (3), the 
sudden appearance of new stars, of which a few have 
continued to shine in the heavens; (4), the revolution of 
telescopic double stars round a common centre of gravity. 
Among these so-called fixed stars which change slowly and 
unequally both in the intensity of their light and in their 
position, twenty principal planets move in a more rapid 
course, five of them being accompanied by twenty satellites. 
Besides the innumerable, but undoubtedly rotatory fixed 
stars, forty moving planetary bodies have up to this time 
(October, 1850) been discovered. In the time of Copernicus 
and of Tycho Brahe, the great improver of the science of 
observation, only seven were known. Nearly two hundred 
comets, five of which have short periods of revolution and are 
interior, or, in other words, are inclosed within those of the 


250 COSMOS. 


principal planets, still remain to be mentioned in our list of 
planetary bodies. Next to the actual planets and the new 
cosmical bodies which shine forth suddenly as stars of the 
Ist magnitude, the comets, when, during their usually brief 
appearance they are visible to the naked eye, contribute the 
most vivid animation to the rich pictwre—I had almost said 
the impressive /andscape—of the starry heavens. 

The knowledge of the proper motion of the fixed stars 
is closely connected historically with the progress of the 
science of observation through the improvement of instru- 
ments and methods. The discovery of this motion was first 
rendered practicable when the telescope was combined with 
graduated instruments; when from the’ accuracy of within a 
minute of an are (which after much pains Tycho Brahe first 
succeeded in giving to his observations on the Island of Hven) 
astronomers gradually advanced to the accuracy of a second 
and the parts of a second ;—and when it became possibie to 
compare with one another results separated by a long series of 
years. Such a comparison was made by Halley with respect to 
the positions of Sirius, Arcturus, and Aldebaran, as determined 
by Ptolemy in his Hipparchian catalogue, 1844 years before. 
By this comparison he considered himself justified (1717) in 
announcing the fact of a proper motion in the three aboyve- 
named fixed stars.? The high and well-merited attention 
which, long subsequent even to the observations of Flamstead 
and Bradley, was paid to the table of right ascensions con- 
tained in the Zriduum of Romer, stimulated Tobias Mayer 
(1756), Maskelyne (1770), and Piazzi (1800), to compare 





* Halley, in the Philos. Transact. for 1717-1719, vol. xxx. 
p- 736. The essay, however, referred solely to variations 
in latitude. Jacques Cassini was the first to add varia- 
tions in longitude. (Arago, in the Annuaire pour 1842, 
p- 387.) . 





PROPER MOTION OF THE STARS. 251 


Rémer’s observations with more recent ones.* The proper 
motion of the stars was in some degree recognized as a general 
fact, even in the middle of the last century; but for the more 
precise and numerical determination of this class of pheno- 
mena we are indebted to the great work of William Herschel 
in 1783, founded on the observations of Flamstead,* and still 
more to Bessel and Argelander’s successful comparison of 
Bradley's ‘Positions of the Stars for 1755” with recent 
catalogues. 

The discovery of the proper motion of the fixed stars has 
proved of so much the greater importance to physical astro- 
nomy, as it has led to a knowledge of the motion of our own 
‘solar system through the star-filled realms of space, and, 
indeed, to an accurate knowledge of the direction of this 
motion. We should never have become acquainted with this 
fact, if the proper progressive motion of the fixed stars were 
so small as to elude all our measurements. The zealous 
attempts to investigate this motion, both in its quantity and 
its direction, to determine the parallax of the fixed stars, 
and their distances, have, by leading to the improvement and 
perfection of are-graduation and optical instruments in 
connexion with micrometric appliances, contributed more 
than anything else to raise the science of observation to the 
height which, by the ingenious employment of great meridian- 
circles, refractors, and heliometers, it has attained, especially 
since the year 1830. 

The quantity of the measured proper motions of the stars 
varies, as we intimated at the commencement of the pre- 
sent section, from the twentieth part of a second almost to 
eight seconds. The more luminous stars have in general 
a slower motion than stars from the 5th to the 6th and 





, Delambre, Hist. de Astron. moderne, t. ii. p. 658: 
Also in Hist. de ? Astron. au 18éme siécle, p. 448. 
* Philos. Transact., vol. Ixxiii. p. 188. 


252 | COSMOS. 


7th magnitudes.* Seven stars have revealed an unusually 
great motion, namely :—Arcturus, lst magnitude (2”:25) ; 
« Centauri, Ist magnitude (3’°58);° » Cassiopeie, 6th mag- 
nitude (3°”74); the double star, } Eridani, 5-4 magnitude 
(408); the double star 61 Cygni, 5:6 magnitude, (5-123), 
discovered by Bessel in 1812, by means of a comparison with 
Bradley’s observations; a star in the confines of the Canes 
Venatici,’ and the Great Bear, No. 1880 of the catalogue of 
the circumpolar stars by Groombridge, 7th magnitude (ac- 
cording to Argelander, 6-974); « Indi (7’:74, according to 
D'Arrest);° 2151 Puppis, 6th magnitude (7871). The 
arithmetical® mean of the several proper motions of the fixed 
stars in all the zones into which the sidereal sphere has been 
divided by Madler, would scarcely exceed 0-102. 

An important inquiry into the “ Variability of the proper 
motions of Procyon and Sirius,”’ in the year 1844, a short 





> Bessel, in the Jahrbuch von Schumacher fiir 1839, s. 38. 
Arago, Annuaire pour 1842, p. 389. 

6 ~ Centauri, see Henderson and Maclear, in the Memoirs 
of the Astron. Soc., vol. xi. p. 61; and Piazzi Smyth, in the 
Edinburgh Transact., vol. xvi. p. 447. The proper motion 
of Arcturus, 2°25 (Baily,in the same Memoirs, vol. v. p. 165), 
considered as that of a very bright star, may be called very 
large in comparison with Aldebaran, 0’:185 (Midler, Central- 
sonne, 8. 11), and a Lyre, 0-400. Among the stars of the 
Ist magnitude, # Centauri, with its great proper motion of 
3”°58, forms a very remarkable exception. The proper motion 
of the binary system of Cygnus amounts, according to Bessel 
(Schum. Astr. Vachr., bd. xvi, s. 93), to 5123. 

7 Schumacher’s Astr. Nachr., no. 455. 

8 Op. cit., no. 618, s. 276. D’Arest founds this result on 
comparisons of Lacaille (1750) with Brisbane (1825), and of 
Brisbane with Taylor (1835). The star 2151, Puppis, has a 
proper motion of 7-871, and is of the 6th magnitude. 
(Maclear, in Madler’s Unters. tiber die Fixstern-Systeme, th. 
li. 8. 5.) 

® Schum. Asty. Nachr., no. 661,.s. 201. 


PROPER MOTION OF THE STARS. 2538 


time, therefore, before the beginning of his last and painful 
illness, led Bessel, the greatest astronomer of our time, to the 
conviction ‘ that stars whose variable motion becomes appa- 
rent by means of the most perfect instruments, are parts of 
systems confined to very limited spaces in proportion to their 
great distances from one another.” This belief in the exis- 
tence of double stars, one of which is devoid of light, was so 
firmly fixed in Bessel’s mind, as my long correspondence with 
him testifies, that it excited the most universal attention, 
partly on his account, and partly from the great interest 
which independently attaches itself to every enlargement of 
our knowledge of the physical constitution of the sidereal 
heavens. ‘“ The attracting body,” this celebrated observer 
remarked, ‘must be very near either to the fixed star which 
reveals the observed change of position, or to the sun. As, 
however, the presence of no attracting body of considerable 
mass at a very small distance from the sun, has yet been 
perceived in the motions of our own planetary system, we are 
brought back to the supposition of its wery small distance from 
a star, as the only tenable explanation of that change in the 
proper motion which, in the course of a century, becomes 
appreciable.” © Ina letter (dated July, 1844) in answer to 
one in which I had jocularly expressed my anxiety regard- 
ing the spectral world of dark stars, he writes: “At all 
events, I continue in the belief that Procyon and Sirius are 
true double stars, consisting of a visible and an invisible star. 
No reason exists for considering luminosity an essential pro- 
perty of these bodies. The fact that numberless stars are 
visible, is evidently no proof against the existence of an 
equally incalculable number of invisible ones. The physical 
difficulty of a change in the proper motion, is satisfactorily 
set aside by the hypothesis of dark stars. No blame attaches 





Schum. Astr. Nachr., nos. 514-516. 


254 COSMOS. 


to the simple supposition that the change of velocity only 
takes place in consequence of the action of a force, and that 
forces act in obedience to the Newtonian laws.” 

A year after Bessel’s death, Fuss, at Struve’s suggestion, 
renewed the investigation of the anomalies of Procyon and 
Sirius, partly with new observations with Ertel’s meridian- 
telescope at Pulkowa, and partly with reductions of, and 
comparisons with, earlier observations. The result, in the 
opinion of Struve and Fuss” proved adyerse to Bessel’s 
assertion. A laborious investigation which Peters has now 
completed at Konigsberg, on the other hand, justifies it; as 
does also a similar one advanced by Schubert, the calculator 
for the North American Nautical Almanack. 

The belief in the existence of non-luminous stars was 
diffused even among the ancient Greeks, and especially in 
the earliest ages of Christianity. It was assumed that 
among the fiery stars which are nourished by the celestial 
vapours, there revolve certain other earthlike bodies, which, 
however, remain invisible to us.” The total extinction of 
new stars, especially of those so carefully observed by Tycho 
Brahe and Kepler in Cassiopeia and Ophiuchus, appears to 
corroborate this opinion. Since it was at the time conjec- 
tured that the first of these stars had already twice appeared, 
and that too at intervals of nearly 300 years, the idea of 
annihilation and total extinction naturally gained little or 
no credit. The immortal author of the Mécanique Celeste bases 
his conviction of the existence of non-luminous masses in the 
' Universe on these same phenomena of 1572 and 1604: 
‘* These stars that have become invisible after having sur- 
passed the brilliancy of Jupiter, have not changed their place 





41 Struve, Htudes d’Astr. stellaire, Texte, p. 47, Notes, pp. 
26, and 51-57; Sir John Herschel, Oudl., § 859 and 860. 
% Origen, in Gronov. Thesaur., t. x. p. 271. 


PROPER MOTION OF THE STARS. 255 


during the time of their being visible.” (The luminous pro- 
cess in them has simply ceased.) ‘There exist therefore in 
celestial space dark bodies of equal magnitudes, and probably 
in as great numbers as the stars.” '* So also Madler, in his 
Untersuchungen iiber die Fixstern-Systeme, says :“*—** A dark 
body might be a central body; it might, like our own sun, 
be surrounded in its immediate neighbourhood only by dark 
bodies like our planets. The motions of Sirius and Procyon, 
pointed out by Bessel, force us to the assumption that there 
are cases where luminous bodies form the satellites of dark 
masses.” It has been already remarked that the advocates 
of the emanation theory consider these masses as both invisible, 
and also as radiating light: invisible, since they are of such 
huge dimensions that the rays of light emitted by them (the 
molecules of light) being impeded by the force of attraction, 
are unable to pass beyond a certain limit. If, as may 
well be assumed, there exist, in the regions of space, dark 
invisible bodies in which the process of light-producing 
vibration does not take place, these dark bodies cannot fall 
within the sphere of our own planetary and cometary system, 
or at all events their mass can only be very small, since 
their existence is not revealed to us by any appreciable 
disturbances. 

‘The inquiry into the quantity and direction of the motion of 
the fixed stars, (both of the ¢rue motion proper to them, and 
also of their apparent motion, produced by the change in the 
place of observation, as the earth moves in its orbit,) the 





*° Laplace, Expos. du Syst. du Monde, 1824, p. 395. 
Lambert, in his Kosmologische Briefe, shows remarkable ten- 
dency to adopt the hypothesis of large dark bodies. 

* Madler, Untersuch. iiber die Fixstern-Systeme, th. ii. (1848), 
s. 3; and his Astronomy, s. 416. 

*° Cosmos, vol. iii. p. 117 and note: Laplace, in Zach's 
Allg. Geogr. Ephem., bd. iv. s. 1; Madler, Astr., s. 393. 


956 COSMOS. 


determination of the distances of the fixed stars from the 


sun, by ascertaining their parallax; and the conjecture as to 


the part in universal space towards which our planetary system 


is moving—are three problems in,astronomy, which, through 


the means of observation already successfully employed in 
their partial solution, are closely connected with each other. 
Every improvement in the instruments and methods which 
have been used for the furtherance of any one of these difficult 
and complicated problems, has been beneficial to the others. 
I prefer commencing with the parallaxes and the determination 
of the distances of certain fixed stars, to complete that which 
especially relates to our present knowledge of isolated fixed 
stars. 


As early as the beginning of the seventeenth century, 


Galileo had suggested the idea of measuring the ‘“ certainly 


very unequal distances of the fixed stars from the solar 


system,” and indeed with great ingenuity, was the first to 
point out the means of discovering the parallax: not by 
determining the stars’ distance from the zenith or the pole, 
‘but by the careful comparison of one star with another 
very near it.” He gives, in very general terms, an account 
of the micrometrical method, which William Herschel, 
(1781,) Struve, and Bessel subsequently made use of. 
“‘Perché io non credo,” says Galileo, in his third dialogue 
(Giornata terza), “che tutte le stelle siano sparse in una 


sferica superficie egualmente distant: da un centro; ma stimo, 


che le loro lontananze da noi siano talmente varie, che 
aleune ve ne possano ésser 2 e 3 volte pit remote di alcune 
altre; talché quando si trovasse col telescopio gwalche preecto- 


lissima stella vicinissima ad aleuna delle maggiort, e che 





1% Onere di Galileo Galilet, vol. xii. Milano, 1811, p. 206. 
This remarkable passage, which expresses the possibility and 


the project of a measurement, was pointed out by Arago ; 


see his Annuatre pour 1842, p. 382. 


* 


DISTANCES OF THE STARS. 257 


pero quella fusse altissima, potrebbe accadere che qualche sen- 
sibil mutaztone succedesse tra di loro.” ‘* Wherefore I do 
not believe,’ says Galileo, in his third discourse (Giornata 
terza), “that all the stars. are scattered over a spherical 
superticies, at equal distances from a common centre ; but Lam 
of opinion that their distances from us are so various that 
some of them may be two or three times as remote as. 
others, so that when some minute star is discovered by 
the telescope close to one of the larger, and yet the 
former is highest, it may be that some sensible change 
might take place among them.’ The introduction of the 
Copernican system imposed, as it were, the necessity of nume- 
tically determining, by means of measurement, the change 
of direction occasioned in the position of the fixed stars by 
the earth’s semi-annual change of place in its course round 
the sun. Tycho Brahe’s angular determinations, of which 
Kepler so successfully availed himself, do not manifest any 
perceptible change arising from parallax in the apparent posi- 
tions of the fixed stars, although, as I have already stated, 
they are accurate to a minute of the arc. For this the 
Copernicans long consoled themselves with the reflection, that 
the diameter of the earth’s orbit (1654 millions of geographical 
miles) was insignificant, when compared to the immense 
distance of the fixed stars. 

_ The hope of being able to determine the existence of parallax 
must accordingly have been regarded as dependent on the 
_ perfection of optical and measuring instruments, and on the 
possibility of accurately measuring very small angles. As long 
as such accuracy was only secure within a minute, the non- 
observance of parallax merely testified to the fact, that the dis- 
tance of the fixed stars must be more than 3488 times the earth’s 
mean distance from the sun, or semi-diameter of its orbit.’ 





7 Bessel, in Schumacher’s Jahrb. fiir 1839, s. 511. 
VOL. III. s 


258 COSMOS. 


This lower limit of distances rose to 206265‘ semi-diameters 
when certainty to a second was attained in the observations 
of the great astronomer, James Bradley; and in the brilliant 
period of Frauenhofer’s instruments, (by the direct measure- 
ment of about the 10th part of a second of arc) it rose still 
higher to 2062648 mean distances of the earth. The labours 
and the ingeniously contrived zenith apparatus of Newton’s 
great contemporary, Robert Hooke (1669), did not lead to the 
desired end. Picard, Horrebow, (who worked out Rémer’s 
rescued observations) and Flamstead, believed that they had 
discovered parallaxes of several seconds, whereas they had con- 
founded the proper motions of the stars with the true changes 
from parallax. On the other hand, the ingenious John Michell 
(Phil, Trans. 1767, vol. lvii. pp. 234-264), was of opinion 
that the parallaxes of the nearest fixed stars must be less than 
0”-02, and in that case could only “ become perceptible when 
magnified 12000 times.” In consequence of the widely dif- 
fused opinion, that the superior brilliancy of a star must inva- 
riably indicate a greater proximity, stars of the 1st magnitude, 
as, for instance, Vega, Aldebaran, Sirius, and Procyon, were, 
with little success, selected for observation by Calandrelli and 
the meritorious Piazzi (1805). These observations must be 
classed with those which Brinkley published in Dublin 
(1815), and which ten years afterwards were refuted by Pond, 
and especially by Airy. An accurate and satisfactory know- 
ledge of parallaxes, founded on micrometric measurements, 
dates only from between the years 1832 and 1838. 

Although Peters,’* in his valuable work on the distances 
of the fixed stars (1846), estimates the number of parallaxes 
hitherto discovered at 338, we shall content ourselves with 
referring to 9, which deserve greater, although very different, 
degrees of confidence, and which we shall consider in the 
probable order of their determinations. 





8 Struve, Asér. stell., p. 104. 


_ DISTANCES OF THE STARS. 259 


The first place is due to the star 61 Cygni, which 
Bessel has rendered so celebrated. The astronomer of 
Kénigsberg determined, in 1812, the large proper motion 
of this double star, (below the 6th magnitude,) but it was 
not until 1838, that, by means of the heliometer, he dis- 
covered its parallax. Between the months of August, 1812, 
and November, 1813, my friends Arago and Mathieu institu- 
tuted a series of numerous observations, for the purpose of 
finding the parallax of the star 61 Cygni, by measuring its 
distance from the zenith. Inthe course of their labours they 
arrived at the very correct conclusion that the parallax of 
this star was less than half a second.’® So late as 1815 and 





© Arago, in the Connaissance des Temps pour 1834, p. 281: 
—‘‘ Nous observames avec beaucoup de soin, Mr. Mathieu 
et moi, pendant le mois d’Aott, 1812, et pendant le mois de 
Novembre suivant, la hauteur angulaire de l’étoile audessus 
de l’horizon de Paris. Cette hauteur, a la seconde époque, 
ne surpasse la hauteur angulaire a la premiére que de 0°66. 
Une parallaxe absolue d’une seule seconde aurait néces- 
sairement amené entre ces deux hauteurs une difference de 
1”-2. Nos observations n’indiquent done pas que le rayon 
de Vorbite terreste, que 39 millions de lieues soient vus de 
la 61° du Cygne sous un angle de plus d’une demi-seconde. 
Mais une base yue perpendiculairement soutend un angle d’une 
demi-seconde quand on est éloigné de 412 mille fois sa lon- 
gueur. Done la 61° du Cygne est au moins a une distance de 
la terre égale 4 412 mille fois 39 millions de lieues.” 
** During the month of August, 1812, and also during the fol- 
lowing November, Mr. Mathieu and myself very carefully 
observed the altitude of the star above the horizon, at Paris. 
At the latter period its altitude only exceeded that of the 
former by 0”-66. An absolute parallax of only a single second 
would necessarily have occasioned a difference of 1”-2 be- 
tween these heights. Our observations do not therefore’ 
show that a semi-diameter of the earth’s orbit, or 39 millions 
of leagues, are seen from the star 61 of Cygnus, at an angle 
of more than 05. Buta base viewed perpendicularly sub- 


s2 


260 . CUSMOS. 


1816, Bessel, to use his own words, “had arrived at no avail 
able result.”*° The observations taken from August, 1837, to 
October, 1838, by means of the great heliometer erected in 
1829, first led him to the parallax of 0’-3488, which corresponds 
with a distance of 592200 mean distances of the earth, and 
a period of 91 years for the transmission of its light. Peters 
confirmed. this result in 1842, by finding 03490, but sub- 
sequently changed Bessel’s result into 0’°3744 by a correction 
for temperature.” 





tends an angle of 0:5 only when it is observed at a distance 
of 412000 times its length. . Therefore the star 61 Cygni is 
situated at a distance from our earth at least equal to 412 
thousand times 39 millions of leagues.” 

20 Bessel, in Schum. Jahrb. 1839, s. 39-49, and in the- 
Astr. Nachr., no. 366, gave the result 0”:3136, as a first 
approximation. His later and ir result was 0’°3483. (Asér. 
Nachr., no. 402, in bd. xvii. s. 274.) Peters obtained by 
his own observations the following. almost identical, result, 
of 0:3490. (Struve, Asér. sfell.. p. 99.) The alteration which, 
after Bessel’s death, was made by Peters in Bessel’s cal- 
culations of the angular measurements, obtained by the 
K6nigsberg heliometer, arises from the circumstance that 
‘Bessel expressed his intention (Asé¢r. Nachr., bd. xvii. s. 267) 
of investigating further the influence of temperature on 
-the results exhibited by the heliometer. This purpose he had 
-in fact partially fulfilled in the first volume of his Astronomische 
Untersuchungen, but he had not applied the corrections of 
-temperature to the observations of parallax. This application 
was made by the eminent astronomer Peters (Hrgdnzungsheft 
-zu den Astr. Nachr., 1849, 8.56), and the result obtained, 
-owing to the corrections of temperature, was, 0’°3744 instead 
at 034838. 

~4 This result of 03744 gives, according to Argelander, as 
the distance of the double star 61 Cygni from the sun, 550900 
‘mean distances of the earth from the sun, or 45576000 
miles, a distance which light traverses in 3177 mean days. 
To judge from the three consecutive statements of parallax 


DISTANCES OF THE STARS. 261 


The parallax of the finest double star of the 
southern hemisphere (4 Centauri) has been calculated at 
0”-9128 by the observations of Henderson, at the Cape of 
Good Hope, in 1832, and by those of Maclear, in 1839.” 
According to this statement it is the nearest of all the fixed 
stars that have yet been measured, being three times nearer 
than 61 Cygni. 

The parallax of « Lyre has long been the object of 
Struve’s observations. The earlier observations (1836) gave* 
between 0”-07 and 0-18; later ones gave 0”:2613, and a dis- 
tance of 771400 mean distances of the earth, with a period 
of twelve years for the transmission of its light.* But Peters 
found the distance of this brilliant star to be much greater, 
since he gives only 0”°103 as the parallax. This result con- 
trasts with another star of the 1st magnitude (a Centauri), 
and one of the 6th (61 Cygni). 

The parallax of the Polar Star has been fixed by Peters at 
0”-106, after many comparisons of observations made be- 
tween the years 1818 and 1838; and this is the more satisfac- 
tory, as the same comparisons give the aberration at 20’°455.” 





given by Bessel, 0”:3136, 0’-3483, and 0”:3744, this celebrated 
double star has apparently come gradually nearer to us in 
light passages amounting respectively to 10, 94, and 8% years. 

* Sir John Herschel, Outlines, pp. 545 and 551. Madler 
(Astr., s. 425) gives'in the case of a Centauri, the parallax 
09213 instead of 09128. 

* Struve, Stell. compos. Mens. microm., pp. clxix.—clxxii. 
Airy makes the parallax of « Lyre, which 5 had pre- 
viously reduced to 0:1 still lower, indeed too small to be 
measureable by our present instruments. (Jem. of the Royal 
Astr. Soe., vol. x. p. 270.) 

* Struve, on the Micrometrical admeasurements by the 
Great Refractor at Dorpat, (Oct. 1839,) in Schum., Asér. 
Nachr., no. 396, s. 178. 

* Peters, in Struye, Asé, séell., p- 100. 


262 COSMOS, 


The parallax of Arcturus, according to Peters, is 0-127. 
Riimker’s earlier observations with the Hamburgh meridian 
-circle had made it considerably larger. The parallax of another 
star of the Ist magnitude, Capella, is still less, being, according 
to Peters, 0”:046. 

The star No. 1830 in Groombridge’s Catalogue, which, 
according to Argelander, showed the largest proper motion 
of all the stars that hitherto have been obseryed in the 
firmament, has a parallax of 0”:226, according to 48 zenith 
distances which were taken with much accuracy by Peters 
during the years 1842 and 1848. Faye had believed it to 
be five times greater, 1”:08, and therefore greater than the 
parallax of a Centauri.” 

















Fixed Star. Parallax. Peoheve Name of Observer. 
a Centauri. .. 0” 913 0”:070 Henderson and Maclear 
61 Cygni . . .| 0%3744 | 0”020 | Bessel 
_ Sirius. . 0”: 230 > . | Henderson 
1830 Groombridge 0”. 226 | 0”141 | Peters 
« Ursee Maj. . .| 0” 133 | 0”106 | Peters 
Arcturus. . . .| 0”: 127 | 07073 Peters 
alyre ... .| 0” 207 | 0”-038 | Peters 
Polaris . ......d. 07.106 0”-012 Peters 
Capella . . . .| 0” 046 | 0%-200 Peters 





It does not in general follow from the results hitherto 
obtained that the brightest stars are likewise the nearest 
to us. Although the parallax of « Centauri is the greatest 
of all at present known, on the other hand, Vega Lyre, 
Arcturus, and especially Capella, have parallaxes from three to 
eight times less than a star of the 6th magnitude in Cygnus. 
Moreover, the two stars which after 2151 Puppis and « Indi 
show the most rapid proper motion, viz. the star just men- 
tioned in the Swan (with an annual motion of 5”-123), and 





*° Peters, in Struve, Astr. Stell., p. 101. 


| DISTANCES OF THE STARS. 2638 


No. 1880 of Groombridge, which in France is called Arge- 
lander’s star (with an annual motion of 6”:974), are three 
and four times more distant from the sun than a Centauri, 
which has a proper motion of 3”°58. Their volume, mass, 
intensity of light,” proper motion, and distance from our 
solar system, stand in various complicated relations to each 
other. Although, therefore, generally speaking, it may be 
probable that the brightest stars are nearest to us, still there 
may be certain special very remote small stars, whose photo- 
spheres and surfaces, from the nature of their physical con- 
stitution, maintain a very intense luminous process. Stars 
which from their brilliancy we reckon to be of the 1st magni- 
tude, may be further distant from us than others of the 4th, 
or even of the 6th magnitude. When we pass by degrees 
from the consideration of the great starry stratum of which 
our solar system is a part, to the particular subordinate sys- 
tems of our planetary world, or to the still lower systems of 
Jupiter's and Saturn’s moons, we perceive central bodies 
surrounded by masses in which the successive order of 
magnitude and of intensity of the reflected light does not 
seem to depend on distance. The immediate connexion sub- 
sisting between our still imperfect knowledge of parallaxes, 
and our knowledge of the whole structural configuration of the 
universe, lends a peculiar charm to those investigations which 
relate to the distances of the fixed stars. 

_ Human ingenuity has invented for this class of investiga- 
tions methods totally different from the usual ones, and which, 
being based on the velocity of light, deserve a brief mention 
in this place. Savary, whose early death proved such a loss 
to the physical sciences, had pointed out how the aberration of 
light, in double stars, might be used for determining the paral- 





* On the proportion of the amount of proper motion to 
the proximity of the brighter stars. See Struve, Stell. 
compos. Mensure microm., p. clxiv. 


264 COSMOS. 


laxes. If, for instance, the plane of the orbit which the secon- 
dary star describes around the central body is not at right angles 
to the line of vision from the earth to the double star, but 
coincides nearly with this line of vision itself, then the secon- 
dary star in its orbit will likewise appear to describe nearly a 
straight line, and the points in that portion of its orbit which 
is turned towards the earth will all be nearer to the observer 
than the corresponding points of the second half, which is 
turned away from the earth. Such a division into two halves 
produces not a real but an apparent unequal velocity, with 
which the satellite in its orbit recedes from, or approaches, the 
observer. If the semi-diameter of this orbit were so great 
that light would require several days .or weeks to traverse 
it, then the time of the half revolution through its more 
remote side will prove to be longer than the time in the 
side turned towards the observer. The sum of the two un- 
equal times will always be equal to the true periodic time ; 
for the inequalities caused by the velocity of light reciprocally 
destroy each other. From these relations of duration, it is 
possible, according to Savary’s ingenious method of changing 
days and parts of days into a standard of length, (on the as- 
sumption that light traverses 14356 millions of geographical 
miles in twenty-four hours), to arrive at the absolute mag- 
nitude of a semi-diameter of the earth’s orbit; and the distance 
of the central body and its parallax may be then deduced 
from a simple determination of the angle under which the 
radius appears to the observer.” 

In the same way that the determination of the parallaxes 
instructs us as to the distances of a small number of the fixed 
stars, and as to the place which is to be assigned to them in 
the regions of space, so the knowledge of the measure and 





* Savary, in the Connaissance des Temps pour 1830, pp. 56 
-69, and pp. 163-171; and Struye, zbid."p. clxiv. 


PROPER MOTION OF THE STARS. 265 


duration of proper motion, that is to say, of the changes which 
take place in the positions of self-luminous stars, throws some 
light on two mutually dependent problems; namely, the motion 
of the solar system,” and the position of the centre of gravity in 
the heaven of the fixed stars. That which can only be reduced 
in so very incomplete a manner to numerical relations, must for 
that very reason be ill calculated to throw any clear light onsuch 
causal connexion. Of the two problems just mentioned, the 
first alone (especially since Argelander’s admirable investiga- 
tion) admits of being solved with a certain degree of satis- 
factory precision; the latter has been considered with much 
acuteness by Madler, but according to the confession of this 
astronomer himself,” his attempted solution is, in consequence 
of the many mutually compensating forces which enter into it, 
devoid “ of anything like evidence amounting to a complete 
and scientifically certain proof.’ 

After carefully allowing for all that is due to the precession 
of the equinoxes, the nutation of the earth’s axis, the aber- 
ration of light, and the change of parallax caused by the earth’s 
revolution round the sun, the remaining annual motion of 
the fixed stars comprises at once that which is the con- 
sequence of the translation in space of the whole solar sys- 
tem, and that also which is the result of the actual proper 
motion of the fixed stars. In Bradley’s masterly labours on 
nutation, contained in his great treatise of the year 1748, we 
meet with the first hint of a translation of the solar system, 
and in a certain sense also with suggestions for the most 
desirable methods of observing it. ‘“ For if our own: solar 
system be conceived to change its place with respect to‘abso- 





** Cosmos, vol. i. p. 136. 

*° Madler, Astronomie, s. 414. 

* Arago, in his Annuaire pour 1842, p. 383, was the 
first to call attention to this remarkable passage of Brad- 
ley’s. See, in the same Annuaire, the section on the trans- 
lation of the entire solar system, pp. 389-399. 


266 COSMOS. 


lute space, this might, in process of time, occasion an appar- 
ent change in the angular distances of the fixed stars; and in 
such a case, the places of the nearest stars being more affected 
than of those that are very remote, their relative positions 
might seem to alter, though the stars themselves were really 
immoveable. And on the other hand, if our own system be at 
rest, and any of the stars really in motion, this might likewise 
vary their apparent positions, and the more so, the nearer they 
are to us, or the swifter their motions are, or the more pro- 
per the direction of the motion is, to be rendered perceptible 
by us. Since, then, the relative places of the stars may be 
changed from such a variety of causes, considering that 
amazing distance at which it is certain some of them are 
placed, it may require the observations of many ages to deter- 
mine the laws of the apparent changes even of a single star; 
much more difficult, therefore, it must be to settle the laws 
relating to all the most remarkable stars.”’ 

After the time of Bradley, the mere possibility, and the 
greater or less probability, of the movement of the solar system, 
were in turn advanced in the writings of Tobias Mayer, Lam- 
bert, and Lalande ; but William Herschel had the great merit 
of being the first to verify the conjecture by actual observations 
(1783, 1805, and 1806). He found (what has been confirmed, 
and more precisely determined by many later and more accurate 
inquiries,) that our solar system moyes towards a point 
near to the constellation of Hercules, in R. A. 260° 44’, and, 
N. Decl. 26° 16’ (reduced to the year 1800). Argelander, 
by a comparison of 319 stars, and with a reference to Lun- 
dahl’s investigations, found it for 1800: R.A. 257° 54°1, 
Decl. + 28° 49’:2: for 1850, R. A. 258° 235, Decl. +28° 456. 
Otto Struve (from 392 stars) made it to be for 1800: 
R. A. 261° 269, Decl. + 87° 85°5; for 1850, 261° 52°6, 
Decl. 37° 330. According to Gauss,” the point in question 





- ® In a letter addressed to me; see Schum. Astr. Nachr., 
no. 622, 8, 348 


MOTION OF THE STARS. 267 


falls within a quadrangle, whose extremes are, R. A. 258° 40’, 
and Decl. 30° 40’; R. A. 258° 42’, Decl. + 30° 57 R.A. 259° 
13’, Decl. + 81° 9’; R. A. 260° 4’, Decl. + 30° 32’. 

It still remained to inquire what the result would be 
if the observations were directed only to those stars of the 
southern hemisphere which never appear above the horizon in 
Europe. To this inquiry Galloway has devoted his especial 
attention. He has compared the very recent calculations 
(1830) of Johnson at St. Helena, and of Henderson at the 
Cape of Good Hope, with the earlier ones of Lacaille and 
Bradley (1750 and 1757). The result® for 1790 was, R. A. 
260° 0’, Decl. 34° 23’; therefore for 1800 and 1850, 260° 5’ 
+ 34° 22’ and 260° 33’, + 34° 20’. This agreement with the 
results obtained from the northern stars is extremely satisfactory. 

If then the progressive motion of our solar system 
may be considered as determined within moderate limits, 
the question naturally arises: Is the world of the fixed 
stars composed merely of a number of neighbouring partial 
systems divided into groups, or must we assume the 
existence of an universal relation, a rotation of all self-lumi- 
nous celestial bodies (swns) around one common centre of 
gravity which is either filled with matter, or vod? 
We here, however, enter the domain of mere con- 
jecture, to which, indeed, it is not impossible to give a 
scientific form, but which, owing to the incompleteness of 
the materials of observation and analogy which are at pre- 
sent before us, can by no means lead to the degree of evidence 
attained by the other parts of astronomy. The fact that we are 
ignorant of the proper motion of an infinite number of very 
small stars from the {0th to the 14th magnitude, which appear 
to be scattered among the brighter ones, especially in the im- 
portant part of the starry stratum to which we belong, the 





* Galloway, on the Motion of the Solar System, in the 
Philos. Transact. 1847, p. 98. 


268 COSMOS. 


annuli of the Milky Way, is extremely prejudicial to the 
profound mathematical treatment of problems so difficult of 
solution. The contemplation of our own planetary sphere, 
whence we ascend, from the small partial systems of the moons 
of Jupiter, Saturn, and Uranus, to the Aigher and general solar 
system, has naturally led to the belief, that the fixed stars 
might in a similar manner be divided into several indivi- 
dual groups, and separated by immense intervals of space, 
which again (in a higher relation of these systems one to 
another) may be subject to the overwhelming attractive 
force of a great central body, (one sole sun of the whole 
universe). ** The inference here advanced and founded 
on the analogy of our own solar system, is, however, re- 
futed by the facts hitherto observed. In the multiple stars 
two or more self-luminous stars (suns) revolve not round 
one another, but round an external and distant centre of 
gravity. Nodoubt something similar takes place in our own 
planetary system, inasmuch as the planets do not properly 
move round the centre of the solar body, but around the com- 
mon centre of gravity of all the masses in the system. But 
this common centre of gravity falls, according to the rela- 
tive positions of the great planets Jupiter and Saturn, some- 
times within the circumference of the sun’s body, but oftener 
out of it. The centre of gravity, which in the case of the 
double stars is a void, is accordingly in the solar system at 
one time void, at another occupied by matter. All that has 
been advanced with regard to the existence of a dark 
central body in the centre of gravity of double stars, or at 
least of one originally dark, but faintly illuminated by the 





% The value or worthlessness of such views has been 
discussed by Argelander in his essay, ‘“‘ Ueber die evgene 
Bewegung des Sonnensystems, hergeleitet aus der egenen 
Bewegung der Sterne, 1837, s. 39. 

% See Cosmos, vol. i. p. 135 (Bohn’s ed.). (Miadler, Asér., 
p- 400.) 


_ MOTION OF THE STARS. 269 


borrowed light of the planets which revolve round it, belongs 
to the ever enlarging realm of mythical hypotheses. 

It is a more important consideration, and one more de- 
serving of thorough investigation, that, on the supposition of 
a revolving movement, not only of the whole of our planetary 
system which changes its place, but also for the proper 
motion of the fixed stars at their various distances, the centre 
of this revolving motion must be 90° distant® from the point 
towards which our solar system is moving. In this connexion of 
ideas the position of stars possessing a great or very small 
proper motion becomes of considerable moment. Argelan- 
der has examined, with his usual caution and acuteness, the 
degree of probability with which we may seek for a general 
centre of attraction for our starry stratum in the constel- 
lation of Perseus.*’ Madler, rejecting the hypothesis of the 
existence of a central body, preponderating in mass, as the 
universal centre of gravity, seeks the centre of gravity 
in the Pleiades, in the very centre of this group, in or 
near * to the bright star 7 Tauri (Alcyone). The present is 





*®© Argelander, zbid. p. 42; Madler, Centralsonne, s. 9, and 
Asir., s. 403. 

* Argelander, bid. p. 43; and in Schum. Asér. Nachr., 
no. 566. Guided by no numerical investigations, but fol- 
lowing the suggestions of fancy, Kant long ago fixed upon 
Sirius, and Lambert upon the nebula in the belt of Orion, 
as the central body of our starry stratum. (Struve, Asér. 
Stell., p. 17, no. 19.) 

* Madler, Astr., s. 880, 400, 407, and 414; in his Cen- 
tralsonne, 1846, pp. 44-47; in Untersuchungen iiber die 
izstern-Systeme, th. ii. s. 188-185. Aleyone is in R. A. 
54° 30’, Decl. 23° 36’, for the year 1840. If Alcyone’s 
parallax were really 00065, its distance would be equal 
to 313 million semi-diameters of the earth’s orbit, and thus 
it would be 50 times further distant from us than the distance 
of the double star 61 Cygni, according to Bessel’s earliest 
calculation. The light which comes to the earth from the 


270° COSMOS. 


not the place to discuss the probability or improbability * of 
such an hypothesis. Praise is, however, due to the eminently 
active director of the Observatory at Dorpat, for having by 
his diligent labours determined the positions and proper 
motions of more than 800 stars, and at the same time excited 
investigations which, if they do not lead to the satisfactory 
solution of the great problem itself, are nevertheless caleu- 
lated to throw light on kindred questions of physical as- 
tronomy. 





sun in 8’ 18”-2, would in that case take 500 years to pass 
from Aleyone tothe earth. The fancy of the Greeks delighted 
itself in wild visions of the height of falls. In Hesiod’s 
Theogona, v. 722-725, it is said, speaking of the fall of the 
Titans into Tartarus: ‘If a brazen anvil were to fall from 
heaven nine days and nine nights long, it would reach the earth 
on the tenth.” This descent of the anvil in 777600 seconds’ 
of time gives an equivalent in distance of 309424 geographical 
miles, (allowance being made, according to Galle’s caleula- 
tion, for the considerable diminution in the foree of attrac- 
tion at planetary distances,) therefore 14 times the distance 
of the moon from the earth. But, according to the Jlad, i. 
v. 592, Hephaestus fell down to Lemnos in one day, “ when 
but a little breath was still in him.” ‘The length of the chain 
hanging down from Olympus to the earth, by which all the 
gods were challenged to try and pull down Jupiter (Jihad, viii. 
y. 18), is not given. The image is not intended to convey 
an idea of the height of heaven, but of Jupiter’s strength and. 
omnipotence. 

8° Compare the doubts of Peters, in Schum. Asér. Nachr., 
1849, s. 661, and Sir John Herschel, in the Outl. of Astr., 
p. 589:—In the present defective state of our know- 
ledge respecting the proper motion of the smaller stars, we 
cannot but regard all attempts of the kind as to a certain ex- 
tent premature, though by no means to be discouraged as. 
forerunners of something more decisive.” : 








271 


VI. 


MULTIPLE OR DOUBLE . STARS.—- THEIR NUMBERS AND 
RECIPROCAL DISTANCES.—PERIOD OF REVOLUTION OF 
TWO SUNS ROUND A COMMON CENTRE OF GRAVITY. 


WHEN, in contemplating the systems of the fixed stars, we 
descend from hypothetical, higher, and more general con- 
siderations to those of a special and restricted nature, we 
enter a domain more clearly determined, and better calculated 
for direct observation. Among the multiple stars, to which 
belong the denary or double stars, several self-luminous cosmical 
bodies (suns) are connected by mutual attraction, which 
necessarily gives rise to motions in closed curved lines. 
Before actual observation had established the fact of the revolu- 
tion of the double stars, such movements in closed curves were 
only known to exist in our own planetary solar system. On 
this apparent analogy inferences were hastily drawn, which 
for a long time gave rise to many errors. As the term 
* double stars” was indiscriminately applied to every pair of 
stars, the close proximity of which precluded their separation 
by the naked eye (as, in the case of Castor, # Lyre, 8 Orionis, 
and « Centauri) this designation naturally comprised two 
classes of multiple stars: firstly, those which, from their in- 
cidental position in reference to the observer, appear in close 
proximity, though in reality widely distant and belonging to 
totally different strata; and, secondly, those which, from their 
actual proximity, are mutually dependent upon each other 





* Compare Cosmos, vol. i. pp. 136-139. (Struve, déber 


Doppelsterne nach Dorpater Micrometer-Messungen von 1824 
bis 1837, s. 11.) 


272 CUSMOS. 


in mutual attraction and reciprocal action, and thus constitute 
a particular, isolated, sidereal system. The former have long 
been called opézcally, the latter physically, double stars. By 
reason of their great distance, and the slowness of their ellip- 
tical motion, many of the latter are frequently confounded 
with the former. As an illustration of this fact, Alcor, (a star 
which had engaged the attention of many of the Arabian 
astronomers, because, when the air is very clear, and the organs 
of vision peculiarly sharp, this small star is visible to the naked 
eye together with ¢ in the tail of Ursa Major, forms, in the 
fullest sense of the term, one of these optical combinations, 
without any closer physical connexion. In sections II. and 
III. I have already treated of the difficulty of separating 
by the naked eye adjacent stars, with the very unequal in- 
tensity of light, of the influence of the higher brilliancy and 
the stars’ tails, as well as of the organic defects which pro- 
duce indistinct vision. 

Galileo, without making the double stars an especial object 
of his telescopic observations (to which his low magni- 
fying powers would have proved a serious obstacle), 
mentions (in a famous passage of the Giornata terza of his 
Discourses, which has already been pointed out by Arago) the 
use which astronomers might make of optically double stars 
(quando si trovasse nel telescopio qualche picciolissima stella 
vicinissima ad alcuna delle maggiori) for determining the 
parallax of the fixed stars .* As late as the middle of the 





* Vide supra. As a remarkable instance of acuteness of 
vision, we may further mention, that Méstlin, Kepler’s 
teacher, discovered with the naked eye fourteen, and some 
of the ancients nine, of the stars in the Pleiades. (Madler, 
Untersuch. tiber die Fixtern-Systeme, th. i. s. 36.) 

3 Vide supra. Doctor Gregory of Edinburgh also, in 1675, 
(consequently thirty-three years after Galileo’s decease), re- 


DOUBLE STARS. 273 


last century, scarcely twenty double stars were set down in 
the stellar catalogues, if we exclude all those at a greater 
distance from each other than 32”; at present—a hundred 
years later (thanks chiefly to the great labours of Sir Wil- 
liam Herschel, Sir John Herschel, and Struve), about 6000 
have been discovered in the two hemispheres. To the earliest 
described double stars‘ belong ¢ Urse maj. (7th September, 
1700, by Gottfried Kirch), a Centauri (1709, by Feuillée), 
y Virginis (1718), « Geminorum (1719), 61 Cygni (1758), 
(which, with the two preceding, was observed by Bradley, 
both in relation to distance and angle of direction), p Ophi- 
uchi, and ¢ Cancri. The number of the double stars recorded 
has gradually increased, from the time of Flamstead, 
who employed a micrometer, down to the star-catalogue 
of Tobias Mayer, which appeared in 1756. Two acutely 
speculative thinkers, endowed with great powers of com- 
bination, Lambert (Photometria, 1760; Kosmologische Briefe 
uber die Einrichtung des Weltbaues, 1761) and John Michell, 
1767, though they did not themselves observe double stars, 
were the first to diffuse correct views upon the relations of 
their attraction in partial bmary systems. Lambert, like 
Kepler, hazarded the conjecture that the remote suns (fixed 
stars) are, like our own sun, surrounded with dark bodies, 
planets, and comets; but of the fixed stars proximate to 
each other,® he believed, however much on the other hand 
he may appear inclined to admit the existence of dark 
central bodies, “that within a not very long, period they 
completed a revolution round their common centre of gravity.” 





commended the same parallactic method ; see Thomas Birch, 
Hist. of the Royal Soc., vol. iti. 1757, p. 225. Bradley 
(1748) alludes to this method at the conclusion of his cele- 
brated treatise on Nutation. 

4 Madler, As¢r., s. 477: 

* Arago, in the Annuaire pour 1842, p. 400.. 

VOL, III. T 


274 _ COSMOS. 


Michell® who was not acquainted with the ideas of Kant and 
Lambert, was the first who applied the calculus of proba- 
bilities to small groups of stars, which he did with great 
ingenuity, especially to multiple stars, both binary and qua- 
ternary. He showed that it was 500000 chances to 1 that 
the collocation of the six principal stars in the Pleiades did 
not result from accident, but that, on the contrary, they owed 
their grouping to some internal and reciprocal relation. He 
was so thoroughly convinced of the existence of luminous stars, 
revolving round each other, that he ingeniously proposed to 
employ these partial star-systems to the solution of certain 
astronomical problems.’ 





6 An Inquiry into the probable parallax and magnitude 
of the fixed stars, from the quantity of light which they afford 
us, and the particular cireumstances of their situation, by 
the Rey. John Mitchell; in the Philos. Transact., vol. lvii. 
pp. 234-261, 

7 John Michell, zdzd., p. 238. ‘If it should hereafter be 
found that any of the stars have others revolving: about them 
(for no satellites by a borrowed light could possibly be visible), 
we should then have the means of discovering ... .. “| 
‘Throughout the whole discussion he denies that one of the 
two revolving stars can be a dark planet shining with a 
reflected light, because both of them, notwithstanding their 
distance, are visible to us. Calling the larger of the two the 
‘‘ Central Star,’ he compares the density of both with the 
density of our sun, and merely uses the word “ satellite ” 
relatively to the idea of revolution, or of reciprocal motion; 
he speaks of the “greatest apparent elongation of those 
stars, that revolve about others as satellites.” He fur- 
ther says, at pp. 243 and 249: “We may conclude with the 
highest probability (the odds against the contrary opinion 
being many million millions to one) that stars form a kind of 
system by mutual gravitation. It is highly probable in par- 
ticular, and next to a certainty in general, that such double 
stars as appear to consist of two or more stars placed near 
together are under the influence of some general law, such 


perhaps as grayity.....” (Consult also Avago, in the 








DOUBLE STARS. 275° 


Christian Mayer, the Manheim astronomer, has the great 
merit. of having first (1778) made the fixed stars a special 
object of research, by the sure method of actual observations. 
The unfortunate choice of the term satellites of the fixed stars, 
and the relations which he supposed to exist among the 
stars between 2° 30’ and 2° 55’ distant from Arcturus, exposed 
him to bitter attacks from his contemporaries, and among 
these to the censure of the eminent mathematician, Nicolaus 
Fuss. That dark planetary bodies should become visible by 
reflected light, at such an immense distance, was certainly 
improbable. No value was set upon the results of his care- 
fully conducted observations, because his theory of the phe- 
nomena was rejected; and yet Christian Mayer, in his re- 
joinder to the attack of Father Maximilian Hell, Director 
of the Imperial Observatory at Vienna, expressly asserts 
“that the smaller stars, which are so near the larger, are 
either illuminated, naturally dark planets, or that both of 
these cosmical bodies—the principal star and its companion 
—are self-luminous suns revolying round each other.” The 





Annuaire pour 1834, p. 308, and Ann. 1842, p. 400.) No great 
reliance can be placed on the individual numerical results of 
the calculus of probabilities given by Michell; as the hypotheses 
that there are 230 stars in the heavens which, in intensity of 
light, are equal to 8 Capricorni, and 1500 equal to the six 
greater stars of the Pleiades, are manifestly incorrect. The 
ingenious cosmological treatise of John Michell ends with a 
very bold attempt to explain the scintillation of the fixed stars 
by a kind of “pulsation in material effluxes of light ””—an 
elucidation not more happy than that which Simon Marius, one 
of the discoverers of Jupiter’s satellites (see Cosmos, vol. ii. 
p: 404,) has given at the end of his Mundus Jovialis (1614). 
But Michell has the merit of having called attention to the 
fact (p. 263) that the scintillation of stars is always accom- 
panied by a change of colour. ‘“ Besides their brightness, 
there is'in the scintillation of the fixed stars a change of 
colour.” (Vide supra.) 
T 2 


276 COSMOS. 


importance of Christian Mayer’s labours has, long after his 
death, been thankfully and publicly acknowledged by Struve 
and Madler. In his two treatises, Vertheidigung neuer Beo- 
bachtungen von Fixstern-trabanten (1778), and Dissertatio de 
novis in Ceelo sidereo Phenomenis (1779), eighty double stars 
are described as observed by him, of which sixty-seven are 
less than 32” distant from each other. Most of these were 
first discovered by Christian Mayer himself, by means of the 
excellent eight-feet telescope of the Manheim Mural Quad- 
rant; ‘“‘many even now constitute very difficult objects of 
observation, which none but very powerful instruments are 
capable of representing, such as eg and 71 Herculis, « Lyre, 
and w Piscium.” Mayer, it is true, (as was the practice long 
after his time,) only measured distances in right ascension 
and declination by meridian instruments, and pointed out, 
from his own observations, as well as from those of earlier 
astronomers, changes of position; but from the numerical 
value of these he omitted to deduct what (in particular cases) 
was due to the proper motion of the stars.® 

These feeble, but praiseworthy beginnings were followed 
by Sir William Herschel’s colossal work on the multiple 
stars, which comprises a period of more than twenty-five 
years. For although Herschel’s first catalogue of double 
stars was published four years after Christian Mayer’s treatise 
on the same subject, yet the observations of the former go 
back as far as 1779— indeed, even to 1776, if we take into 
consideration the investigations on the trapezium in the 
great nebula of Orion. Almost all we at present know of 
the manifold formation of the double stars has its origin 
in Sir William Herschel’s work. In the catalogues of 1782, 





§ Struve, in the Recueil des Actes de la Séance publique de 
Lt Acad. Imp. des Sciences de St. Pétersbourg, le 29 Déc. 
1832; pp. 48-50. Madler, Astr., s. 478. 


DOUBLE STARS. 277 


1783, and 1804, he has not only set down and determined 
the position and distance of 846 double stars,’ for the most 
part first discovered by himself, but, what is far more impor- 
tant than any augmentation of number, he applied his 
sagacity and power of observation to all those points which 
have any bearing on their orbits, their conjectured periodic 
times, their brightness, contrasts of colours, and classification 
according to the amount of their mutual distances. Full 
of imagination, yet always proceeding with great caution, it 
was not till the year 1794, while distinguishing between 
optically and physically double stars, that he threw out 
his preliminary suggestions as to the nature of the relation of 
the larger star to its smaller companion. Nine years after- 
wards, he first explained his views of the whole system of 
these phenomena, in the 93rd volume of the Philosophical 
Transactions. The idea of partial star-systems, in which 
several suns reyolve round a common centre of gravity, was 
then firmly established. The stupendous influence of attrac- 
tive forces, which in our solar system extends to Neptune, a 
distance 30 times that of the earth (or 2488 millions of 
geographical miles) and which compelled the great comet 
of 1680 to return in its orbit, at the distance of 28 of 
Neptune’s semi-diameters (853 mean distances of the earth, 
or 70800 millions of geographical miles), is also manifested 
in the motion of the double star 61 Cygni, which, with a 
parallax of 0’:3744, is distant from the sun 18240 semi- 
diameters of Neptune’s orbit (¢. e. 550900 ecarth’s mean 
distances, or 45576000 millions of geographical miles). 





* Philos. Transact. for the year 1782, pp. 40-126; for 1783, 
pp. 112-124; for 1804, p. 87. Regarding the observations 
on which Sir William Herschel founded his views respecting 
the 846 double stars, see Madler, in Schumacher’s Jahrbuch 
Sir 1839, s. 59; and his Untersuchungen ber die Fixstern- 
Systeme, th. i. 1847, s. 7,. 


278 COSMOS. 


But although Sir William Herschel so clearly discerned the 
causes and general connexion of the phenomena, still, in the 
first few years of the nineteenth century, the angles of posi- 
tion derived from his own observations, owing to a want of 
due care in the use of the earlier catalogues, were confined 
to epochs too near together to admit of perfect certainty in 
determining the several numerical relations of the periodic 
times, or the elements of their orbits. Sir John Herschel him- 
self alludes to the doubts regarding the accuracy of the assigned 
periods of revolution of « Geminorum (334 years instead of 
520, according to Madler),”° of y Virginis (708 instead of 169), 
and of y Leonis (1424 of Struve’s great catalogue), a splendid 
golden and reddish-green double star (1200 years). 

After William Herschel, the elder Struve (from 1813 to 
1842), and Sir John Herschel (from 1819 to 1838), availing 
themselves of the great improvements in astronomical instru- 
ments, and especially in micrometrical applications, have, 
with praisewerthy diligence, laid the proper and special 
foundation of this important branch of astronomy. In 1820, 
Struve published his first Dorpat Table of double stars, 
796 in number. This was followed in 1824 by a second, 
containing 3112 double stars, down to the 9th magnitude, 
in distances under 32”, of which only about one-sixth had 
been before observed. To accomplish this work, nearly 
120000 fixed stars were examined by means of the great 
- Fraunhofer refractor. Struve’s third Table of multiple stars 
appeared in the year 1837, and forms the important work 
Stellarum compositarum Mensure micrometrice.' It contains 





© Madler, zbid., th. i. s. 255. For Castor we haye two 
old observations of Bradley, 1719 and 1759 (the former taken 
in conjunction with Pond, the latter with Maskelyne), and 
two of the elder Herschel, taken in the years 1779 and 1803. 
For the period of revolution of y Virginis, see Madler, 
Fiastern-Syst., th. ii. s. 234-40, 1848. 

1 Struve, Mensure microm., pp. 40 and 234-248. On the 


DOUBLE STARS. 279 


2787 double stars, several imperfectly observed objects being 
earefully excluded. 

Sir John Herschel’s unwearied diligence, during his four 
years’ residence in Feldhausen, at the Cape of Good Hope, 
which, by contributing to an accurate topographical know- 
ledge of the southern hemisphere, constitutes an epoch in 
astronomy,'® has been the means of enriching this number by 
the addition of more than 2100 double stars (which, with 
few exceptions, had never before been observed). All these 
African observations were taken by a twenty-feet reflecting 
telescope ; they were reduced for the year 1830, and are in- 
cluded in the six catalogues which contain 3346 double stars, 
and were transmitted by Sir John Herschel to the Astronomical: 
_ Society for the 6th and 9th parts of their valuable Memorrs.* 
In these European catalogues are laid down the 380 double 
stars which the above celebrated astronomer had observed in 
1825, conjointly with Sir James South. 

We trace in this historical sketch the gradual advance 
made by the science of astronomy towards a thorough know- 
ledge of partial, and especially of binary systems. The num- 
ber of double stars (those both optically and physically double). 
may at present be estimated with some certainty at about 6000, 
if we include in our calculation those observed by Bessel 

with the excellent Fraunhofer heliometer, by Argelander'* 


whole 2641 + 146, 7. e. 2787 double stars have been ob- 
served. (Madler, in Schum. Jahrb., 1839, s. 64.) " 

“ Sir John Herschel, Astron. Observ. at the Cape of Good 
Hope, pp. 165-303. 

8 Ibid., pp. 167 and 242. 

“ Argelander, in order carefully to investigate their proper 
motion, examined a great number of fixed stars. See his 
essay, entitled “ DLX Stellarum fixarum positiones media, 
meunte anno 1830, ex observ. Aboe habitis (Helsingforsia, 
1825).” Madler (Asér., s. 625) estimates the number of mul- 
tiple stars in the northern hemisphere, discovered at Pulkowa 
since 1837, at not less than 600. 





280 COSMOS. 


at Abo (1827-1835), by Encke and Galle, at Berlin (1836 
and 1839), by Preuss and Otto Struve, in Pulkowa (since 
the catalogue of 1837), by Madler, in Dorpat, and by Mitchell, 
in Cincinnati (Ohio) with a seventeen-feet Munich refractor. 
How many of these 6000 stars, which appear to the naked 
eye as if close together, may stand in an immediate relation o, 
attraction to each other, forming systems of their own, and 
revolving in closed orbits—or, in other words, how many are 
so-called physical (revolving) double stars—is an important 
problem, and difficult of solution. More revolving compa- 
nions are gradually but constantly being discovered. Ex- 
treme slowness of motion, or the direction of the plane of the 
orbit as presented to the eye, being such as to render the posi- 
tion of the revolving star unfavourable for observation, may 
long cause us to class physically double stars among those 
which are only optically so; that is, stars of which the proximity 
is merely apparent. But a distinctly-ascertained appreciable 
motion is not the only criterion. The perfectly uniform 
motion in the realms of space, (7.e. a common progressive 
movement, like that of our solar system, including the 
earth and moon, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune» 
with their satellites,) which in the case of a considerable 
number of multiple stars has been proved by Argelander and 
Bessel, bears evidence that the principal stars and their 
companions stand in undoubted relation to each other in 
separate partial systems. Madler has made the interesting 
remark, that whereas previous to 1836, among 2640 double 
stars that had been catalogued, there were only 58 in which 
a difference of position had been observed with certainty, and 
105 in which it might be regarded as more or less proba- 
ble; at present, the proportion of physically double stars to 
optically double stars has changed so greatly in favour of the 
former, that among the 6000 double stars, according to a 
table published in 1849, 650 are known in which a change of 


DOUBLE STARS. 281 


relative position can be incontestably proved.* The earliest 
comparison gave one-sixteenth, the most recent gives one- 
ninth, as the proportion of the cosmical bodies which, by an 
observed motion both of the primary star and the companion, 
are manifestly proved to be physically double stars. 

Very little has as yet been numerically determined re- 
garding the relative distribution of the binary star-systems 
throughout space, not only in the celestial regions, but even 
on the apparent vault of heaven. In the northern hemi- 
sphere, the double stars most frequently occur in the direction 
of certain constellations (Andromeda, Bootes, the Great Bear, 
the Lynx,and Orion). For the southern hemisphere Sir John 
Herschel has obtained the unexpected result “that in the 
extra-tropical regions of this hemisphere the number of 
multiple stars is far smaller than that in the corresponding 
portion of the northern.” And yet these beautiful southern 
regions have been explored under the most favourable cir- 
cumstances, by one of the most experienced of observers, 
with a brilliant twenty-feet reflecting telescope which sepa- 
rated stars of the 8th magnitude, at distances even of three- 
- quarters of a second.” 





* The number of fixed stars in which proper motion has 
been undoubtedly discovered (though it may be conjectured 
in the case of all) is slightly greater than the number of 
double stars in which change of position has been observed. 
(Madler, Asir., s. 394, 490, and 520-540.) Results obtained 
by the application of the Calculus of Probabilities, according 
as the several reciprocal distances of the double stars are 
between 0" and 1”, 2” and 8", or 16” and 32”, are given by 
Struve, in his Mens microm., p.xciv. Distances less than 0"°8 
have been taken, and experiments with very complicated 
systems have confirmed the astronomer in the hope that these 
estimates are mostly correct within 0’"1. (Struve, iiber Doppel- 
sterne nach Dorpater Beob., s. 29.) 

"6 Sir John Herschel, Observations at the Cape, p. 166. 


282 COSMOS. 


The frequent occurrence of contrasted colours constitutes an 
extremely remarkable peculiarity of multiple stars. Struve, in 
his great work™ published in 1837, gave the following results 
with regard to the colours presented by six hundred of the 
brighter double stars. In 375 of these, the colour of both 
principal star and companion was the same and equally in- 
tense. In 101, a mere difference of intensity could be dis- 
cerned. The stars with perfectly different colours were 120 
in number, or one-fifth of the whole; and in the remaining 
four-fifths the principal and companion stars were uniform 
in colour. In nearly one-half of these six hundred, the 
principal star and its companion were white. Among those 
of different colours, combinations of yellow with blue (as in 
t Cancri), and of orange with green, (as in the ternary star 
y Andromede, )** are of frequent occurrence. 

Arago was the first to call attention to the fact that the 
diversity of colour in the binary systems principally, or at 
least in very many cases, has reference to the complementary’ 
colours—the subjective colours, which when united form 
white.’”® It is a well known optical phenomenon that a faint 





” Struve, Mensure microm., pp. xxvii to Lxxxiv. 

18 Sir John Herschel, Outlines of Astr., p. 579. 

9 Two glasses, which exhibit complementary colours, when 
placed one upon the other, are used to exhibit white images 
of the sun. During my long residence at the Observatory 
at Paris, my friend very successfully availed himself of this, 
contrivance,—instead of using shade glasses to observe the 
sun’s disc. The colours to be chosen are red and green, 
yellow and blue, or green and violet. ‘‘ Lorsqu’une lumi-: 
ére forte se trouve auprés d’une lumiére faible, la derniére 
prend la teinte complementaire de la prémiere. C’est la le con- 
traste; mais comme le rouge n’est presque jamais pur, on peut 
tout aussi bien dire que le rouge est complémentaire du bleu. 
Les couleurs voisines du spectre solaire se substituent.” 
“When a strong light is brought into contact with a feeble. 
one, the latter assumes the complementary colour of the for- 


DOUBLE STARS. 2838 


white light appears green when a strong red light is brought 
near it ; and that a white light becomes blue when the stronger 
surrounding light is yellowish. Arago, however, with his 
usual caution, has reminded us of the fact that even though 
the green or blue tint of the companion star is sometimes the 
result of contrast, still on the whole it is impossible to deny 
the actual existence of green or blue stars.” There are 





mer. This is the effect of contrast; but as red is scarcely 
ever pure, it may as correctly be said that red is the com- 
plementary of blue: the colours nearest to the solar spectrum 
reciprocally change.”’ (Arago, WS. of 1847.) 

* Arago, in the Connaisance des Temps pour Tan 1828, 
pp- 299-300; and in the Annumre pour 1834, pp. 246-250; 
pour 1842, pp. 347-350: ‘“ Les exceptions que je cite, 
prouyent que j’avais bien raison en 1825 de n’introduire 
la notion physique du contraste dans la question des étoiles 
doubles qu’avee la plus grande réserve. Le bleu est la 
couleur réelle de certaines étoiles. I] résulte des observations 
recueillies jusqu'ici que le firmament est non seulement par- 
semé de soleils rouges et yaunes, comme le savaient les anciens, 
mais encore de soleils bleus et verts. C’est au tems et a des 
observations futures 4 nous apprendre si les étoiles vertes et 
bleues ne sont pas des soleils déja en voie de décroissance; si 
les différentes nuances de ces astres n’indiquent pas que la 
combustion s’y opére a différens degrés; sila teinte, avec excés 
de rayons les plus réfrangibles, que présente souvent la petite 
etoile, ne tiendrait pas a la force absorbante d’une atmosphére 
que deévelopperait l’action de I’ étoile, ordinairement beaucoup 
plus brillante, qu’elle accompagne.” ‘The exceptions I have 
named proved that in 1825 I was quite right in the cautious re- 
servations with which I introduced the physical notion of con- 
trast in connexion with double stars. Blue is the real colour 
of certain stars. The result of the observations hitherto made 
proves that the firmament is studded not only with red and 
yellow suns, (as was known long ago to the ancients,) but also 
with due and green suns. Time and future observations must 
determine whether red and blue stats are not suns, the bright- 
ness of which is already on the wane; whether the varied 
appearances of these orbs do not indicate the degree of com- 


284 COSMOS. 


instances in which a brilliant white star (1527 Leonis, 1768 
Can. ven.) is accompanied bya small blue star; others, where 
ina double star (8 Serp.) both the principal and its companion 
are blue.” In order to determine whether the contrast of 
colours is merely subjective, he proposes (when the distance 
allows) to cover the principal star in the telescope by a thread 
or diaphragm. Commonly it is only the smaller star that is 
blue: this, however, is not the case in the double star 23 
Orionis (696 in Struve’s Catalogue, p. lxxx.); where the prin- 
cipal star is bluish, and the companion pure white. If in the 
multiple stars the differently coloured suns are frequently 
surrounded by planets invisible to us, the latter, being dif- 
ferently illuminated, must have their white, blue, red, and 
green days.” 

As the periodical variability* of the stars is, as we have 
already pointed out, by no means necessarily connected 
with their red or reddish colour, so also colouring in gene- 
ral, or a contrasting difference of the tones of colour be- 





bustion at work within them; whether the colourand the excess 
of the most refrangible rays often presented by the smaller 
of two stars be not owing to the absorbing force of an atmo- 
sphere developed by the action ,of the accompanying star, 
which is generally much the more brilliant of the two.”” (Arago 
in the Annuaire pour 1834, pp. 295-301.) 

21 Struve, Ueber Doppelsterne nach Dorpater Beobachtungen, 
1837, s. 38-86, and Mensure microm. p. |xxxiii., enumerates 
sixty-three double stars, in which both the principal and 
companion are blue or bluish, and in which therefore the 
colours cannot be the effect of contrast. When we are forced 
to compare together the colours of double stars, as reported 
by several astronomers, it is particularly striking to observe 
how frequently the companion of a red or orange-coloured 
star is reported by some observers as blue, and by others 
as green. 

* Arago, Annuaire pour 1834, p. 302. 

*3 Vide supra, p.p. 175-1838. 


DOUBLE STARS. 285 


tween the principal star and its: companion is far from being 
peculiar to the multiple stars. Circumstances which we find 
to be frequent, are not on that account necessary conditions 
of the phenomena; whether relating to a periodical change 
of light, or to the revolution in partial systems round a 
common centre of gravity. A careful examination of the 
bright double stars (and colour can be determined even in 
those of the 9th magnitude) teaches that, besides white, 
all the colours of the solar spectrum are to be found in the 
double stars, but that the principal star, whenever it is not 
white, approximates in general to the red extreme (that of 
the least refrangible rays), but the companion to the violet 
extreme (the limit of the most refrangible rays). The reddish 
stars are twice as frequent as the blue and bluish; the white 
are about 25 times as numerous as the red and reddish. It 
is moreover remarkable that a great difference of colour is 
usually associated with a corresponding difference in bright- 
ness. In two cases—in ¢ Bootis, and y Leonis—which, 
from their great brightness can easily be measured by 
powerful telescopes, even in the day-time, the former con- 
sists of two white stars of the 3rd and 4th magnitudes, 
and the latter of a principal star of the 2nd, and of a 
companion of the 38°5th, magnitude. This is usually called 
the brightest double star of the northern hemisphere, whereas 
a Centauri™ and « Crucis, in the southern hemisphere, sur- 





* «This superb double star (a Cent.) is beyond all com- 
parison the most striking object of the kind in the heavens, 
and consists of two individuals, both of a high ruddy or orange 
colour, though that of the smaller is of a somewhat more 
sombre and brownish cast.’’ (Sir John Herschel, Odserva- 
tions at the Cape of Good Hope, p. 300.) And, according 
to the important observations taken by Captain Jacob, of the 
Bombay Engineers, between the years 1846 ‘and 1848, the 
principal star is estimated of the 1st magnitude, and the 
satellite from the 2°5th to the 3rd magnitude. (Zransact. of 
the Royal Soc. of Edinb., vol. xvi. 1849, p. 451.) 


286 COSMOS. 


pass all the other double stars.in brilliancy. As in ¢ Bootis, 
so also in a Centauri and y Leonis, we observe the rare 
combination of two great stars with only a slightly different 
intensity of light. 

No unanimity of opinion yet prevails respecting the vari- 
able brightness in multiple stars, and especially in that of 
companions. We have already” several times made men- 
tion of the somewhat irregular variability of lustre in the 
orange-coloured principal star in # Hereulis. Moreover, the 
fluctuation in the brightness of the nearly equal yellowish 
stars (of the 3rd magnitude) constituting the double star 
y Virginis and Anon. 2718, observed by Struve, (1831-1833,) 
probably indicates a very slow rotation of both suns upon 
their axes.** Whether any actual change of colour has ever. 
taken place in double stars (as, for instance, in y Leonis and 
y Delphini); whether their white light becomes coloured, 
and on the other hand, whether the coloured light of the 
isolated Sirius has become white, still remain undecided 
questions.” Where the disputed differences refer only to 
faint tones of colour, we should take into consideration the 
power of vision of the observer, and if refractors have not 
been employed, the frequently reddening influence of the 
metallic speculum. 

Among the multiple Seiki, we may cite as ternaries, 
é Libre, @ Caneri, 12 Lyncis, 11 Monoc.); as quaternaries 
102 and 2681 of Struve’s Catalogue, a Andromede, e Lyre: 
in 6 Orionis,. the famous trapezium of the greater nebula of 
Orion, we have a combination of six,—probably a system 
subject to peculiar physical attraction, since the five smaller 
stars (6°3m.; 7m.; 8m.; 11°3m.; and 12m.) follow the proper 
motion of the principal star 4°7m. No change in their rela- 





5 Cosmos, vol. iii, p. 224 and note. 
*6 Struve, aber Doppelst. nach Dorp. Beob., s. 38. 
7 Thid., s. 36. 


DOUBLE STARS. 287 


tive positions has yet been observed.* In the ternary com- 
binations of € Libre and ¢ Cancri, the periodical movement 
of the two companions has been recognized with great cer- 
tainty. The latter system consists of three stars of the 
8rd magnitude, differing very little in brightness, and the 
nearer companion appears to have a motion ten times more 
rapid than the remoter one. 

The number of the double stars, the elements of whose 
orbits it has been found possible to determine, is at present 
stated at from fourteen to sixteen.” Of these ¢ Herculis 
has twice completed its orbit since the epoch of its first 
discovery, and during this period has twice (1802 and 1831) 
presented the phenomenon of the apparent occultation of 
one fixed star by another. For the earliest calculations of 
the orbits of double stars, we are indebted to the industry of 
Savary (¢ Urse Maj.), Encke (70 Ophiuchi), and Sir John 
Herschel. These have been subsequently followed by Bessel, 
Struve, Madler, Hind, Smyth, and Captain Jacob. Savary’s 
and Encke’s methods require four complete observations, 
taken at sufficient intervals from each other. The shortest 
periods of revolution are thirty, forty-two, fifty-eight, and 
seventy-seven years; consequently, intermediate between the 
‘periods of Saturn and Uranus; the longest that have been 
determined with any degree of certainty exceed five hundred 
years, that is to say, are nearly equal to three times the period 
of Le Verrier’s Neptune. The eccentricity of the elliptical 
‘orbits of the double stars, according to the investigations 
hitherto made, is extremely considerable; resembling that of 
comets, increasing from 0°62 (e Coron), up to 0°95 (a Cen- 
tauri). The least eccentric interior comet—that of Faye— 
* 8 Madler, Astr.,s. 517. Sir John Herschel, Outl., p. 568. 

*° Compare Madler, Untersuch. iiber die Fixstern-Systeme, 


th. i. s. 225-275; th. ii. s. 235-240; and his Asér., s. 541. 
Sir John Herschel, Outl., p. 5738. 





288 COSMOS. 


has an eccentricity of 0°55, or less than that of the orbits of 
the two double stars just mentioned. According to Madler’s 
and Hind’s calculations, » Corone and Castor exhibit much 
less eccentricity, which in the former is 0°29, and in the latter 
0°22 or 0:24. In these double stars the two suns describe 
ellipses which come very near to those of two of the smaller 
principal planets in our solar system, the eccentricity of 
the orbit of Pallas being 0°24, and that of Juno, 0‘25. 

If, with Encke, we consider one of the two stars in a binary 
system, the brighter, to be at rest, and on this supposition 
refer to it the motion of the companion, then it follows from 
the observations hitherto made that the companion describes 
round the principal star a conic section, of which the latter 
is the focus; namely, an ellipse in which the radius vector 
of the revolving cosmical body passes over equal superficial 
areas in equal times. Accurate measurements of the angles 
of position and of distances, adapted to the determination of 
orbits, have already shown, in a considerable number of 
double stars, that the companion revolves round the princi- 
pal star considered as stationary, impelled by the same gra- 
vitating forces which prevail in our own solar system. This 
firm conviction, which has only been thoroughly attained 
within the last quarter of a century, marks a great epoch in 
the history of the development of higher cosmical knowledge. 
Cosmical bodies, to which long use has still preserved the 
name of fixed stars, although they are neither rivetted to 
the vault of heaven nor motionless, have been observed 
to occult each other. The knowledge of the existence of 
partial systems of independent motion tends the more to 
enlarge our view, by showing that these movements are 
themselves subordinate to more general movements animat- 
ing the regions of space. 


289 


Elements of the Orbits of Double Stars. 























Period of 
Name. Semi-Major | Lecentricity. | Revolution Calculator. 
Axis. in years. 

(1) & Ursae Maj. | 3"°857 0°4164 58°262 | Savary 1830 
3278 | 03777 60°720 | John Herschel 
Tables of 1849 
2295 0°4037 61°300 | Midler 1847 

(2) p Ophiuchi... | 4"°328 0°4300 , 73°862 | Encke 1832 
(8) f Hereulis ... | 1208 0°4320 30°22 | Miidler 1847 
(4) Castor ......... 8"-086 0°7582 252°66 | John Herschel 
Tables of 1849 
5"°692 0°2194 51977 | Midler 1847 

: 6""300 0°2405 632°27 | Hind 1849 
(5) y Virginis ...| 3"°580 0°8795 182'12 | John Herschel 
Tables of 1849 

3863 0°8806 169°44 | Midler 1847 

(6) a Centauri ... | 15"°500 0°9500 77°00 =| Captain Jacob 

1848 
You. III. U 


hace ORR a: 
tekagnneé aah PE 
iss 1 % 


Nee y 
at 
; Cate 


a a) on, i 


WA at ata fF vet 
iy iol ABE Wied t 
Ment Tm 


. i: AO yl dy Nia toy, 
/ ; ~ Ag ee mT 
. so ean 
ah irs Hh 


AS 
af 


4 RY i 


dy Sem! 


@ or 





a made Ses as san aoe 











INDEX TO VOL. III. 


AcHnromartic telescopes, 82. 

Adalbert, Prince, of Prussia, his 
observations on the undulation 
of the stars, 76. 

Alcor, a star of the constellation 
Ursa Major, employed by the 
Persians as a test of vision, 61, 
272. 

Alcyone, one of the Pleiades, ima- 
gined the centre of gravity of the 
solar system by Madler, 269. 

Alphonsine tables, date of their 
construction, 204. 

Anaxagoras of Clazomenee, his the- 
ory of the world-arranging intel- 

-ligence, 9; origin of the modern 
theories of rotatory motion, 10. 

Andromeda’s girdle, nebula in, 192. 

Arago, M., letters and communica- 
tions of, to M. Humboldt, 57, 
61, 87, 88, 96, 128, 282; on the 
effect of telescopes on the visi- 
bility of the stars, 88; on the 
velocity of light, 106, 111; on 
photometry, 123, 128; his cyanc- 
meter, 129. 

Aratus, a fragment of the work of 
Hipparchus preserved in, 147. 
Archimedes, his ‘‘ Arenarius,’’ 35. 

Arcturus, true diameter of, 118. 

Argelander, his view of the number 
of the fixed stars, 141; his addi- 
tions to Bessel’s catalogue, 155 ; 
on periodically variable stars, 
224. 

mn Argfis, changes in colour and 
brilliancy of, 183, 241. 

Aristotle, his distinct apprehension 
of the unity of nature, 11—14; 
his defective solution of the pro- 
blem, 14; doubts the infinity of 
space, 34; his idea of the genera- 
tion: of heat by the movement of 
the spheres, 166. 


U 





Astrognosy, the domain of the fixed 
stars, 30. 

Astronomy, the observation of 
groups of fixed stars, the first 
step in, 158; very bright single 
stars, the first named, 119. 

Atmosphere, limits of the, 49; 
effects of an untransparent, 139. 

Augustine, St., cosmical views of, 
167. 

Autolycus of Pitane, era of, 119. 

Auzout’s object-glasses, 80. 


Bacon, Lord, the earliest views on 
the velocity of light found in his 
“ Novum Organum,” 105. 

Baily, Francis, his revision of De 
Lalande’s Catalogue, 155. 

Bayer’s lettering of the stars of any 
constellation not an evidence of 
their relative brightness, 132. 

Bérard, Captain, on the change of 
colour of the star y Crucis, 183. 

Berlin Academy, star-maps of the, 
155. 

Bessel, on repulsive force, 41; his 
star-maps have been the principal 
means of the recognition of seven 
new planets, 156; calculation of 
the orbits of double stars by, 287. 

Binary stars, 271. 

Blue stars, 183; less freee than 
red, 285. 

Blue and green suns, the rapchakie 
cause of their colour, 283. 

Bond, of the Cambridge Observa-. 
tory, United States, his resolu- 
tion of the nebula in Andro- 
meda’s girdle into small stars, 
192. 

Brewster, Sir David, on the dark 
lines of the prismatic spectra, 55. 

British Association, their edition of 
Lalande’s Catalogue, 155. 

2 


> 


Cae 


Bruno, Giordano, his cosmical views, 
17; his martyrdom, 17. 

Busch, Dr., his estimate of the ve- 
locity of light incorrect, 109. 


Catalogues, astronomical, their great 
importance, 153; future disco- 
veries of planetary bodies mainly 
dependent on their completeness, 
153; list of, 154; Halley’s, Flam- 
stead’s, and others, 154; La- 
lande’s, Harding’s, Bessel’s, 155. 

Catasterisms of Eratosthenes, 119. 

a Centauri, Piazzi Smyth on, 198, 
252; the nearest of the fixed 
stars that have yet been mea- 
sured, 261. 

Central body for the whole sidereal 
heavens, existence of, doubtful, 
268. 

Chinese Record of extraordinary 
stars (of Ma-tuan-lin), 146, 210 
—215; deserving of confidence, 
219. 

Clusters of stars, or stellar swarms, 
189 ; list of the principal, 191. 
Coal-sacks, a portion of the Milky 
Way in the southern hemisphere 

so called, 185. 

Coloured rings afford a direct mea- 
sure of the intensity of light, 128. 

Coloured stars, 175; evidence of 
change of colour in some, 177 ; 
Sir John Herschel’s hypothesis, 
177; difference of colour usually 
accompanied by difference of 
brightness, 285. 

Comets, information regarding celes- 
tial space, derived from observa- 
tion on, 36, 47; number of visi- 
ble ones, 204. 

Concentric rings of stars, a view 
favoured by recent observation, 
201. 

Constellations, arrangement of stars 
into, very gradual, 160 

Contrasted colours of double stars, 
282. 

Cosmical contemplation, extension 
of, in the middle ages, 16. 





Cosmical vapour, question as to 
condensation of, 44; Tycho 
Brahe’s and Sir William Her- 
schel’s theories, 208. 

‘* Cosmos,” a pseudo-Aristotelian 
work, 16. 

Crystal vault of heaven, date of the 
designation, 165 ; its signification 
according to Empedocles, 165; 
the idea favoured by the Fathers 
of the Church, 168. 

Cyanometer, Arago’s, 129. 


Dark cosmical bodies, question of, 
222, 255. 

Delambre, on the velocity of light, 
108. 

Descartes, his cosmical views, 21 ; 
suppresses his work from defer- 
ence to the Inquisition, 21. 

Dioptric tubes, the precursors of 
the telescope, 53. 

Direct and reflected light, 57. 

Distribution of the fixed stars, ac- 

cording to right ascension, 189. 

Dorpat table (Struve’s) of multiple 
stars, 278. 

Double stars, the name too indis- 
criminately applied, 271; distri- 
bution into optical and physical, 
272; pointed out by Galileo as 
useful in determining the parallax, 
272; vast increase in their ob- 
served number, 273, 279; those 
earliest described, 273 ; number 

. in which a change of position has 
been proved, 280; greater num- 
ber of double stars in the north- 
ern than in the southern hemi- 
sphere, 281; occurrence of con- 
trasted colours, 282; calculation 
of their orbits, 287; table of the 
elements, 289. 


Earth-animal, Kepler and Fludd’s 
fancies regarding the, 20. 

Edda-Songs, allusion to, 4, 5. 

Egypt, zodiacal constellations of, 
their date, 163. 


Se Bel 


Egyptian calendar, period of the 
complete arrangement of the, 179. 

Ehrenberg, on the incalculable num- 
ber of animal organisms, 35. 

Electrical light, velocity of trans- 
mission of, 114. 

Electricity, transmission of, through 
the earth, 117. 

Elements, Indian origin of the hy- 
pothesis of four or five, 9. 

Emanations from the head of some 
comets, 47. 

Encke, his accurate calculation of 
the equivalent of an equatorial 
degree, 107 ; on the star-maps of 
the Berlin Academy, 156; an 
early calculator of the orbits of 
double stars, 287; his theory of 
their motion, 288. 

Encke’s comet, considerations on 
space, derived from periods of 
revolution of, 36; a resisting 
medium proved from observation 
on, 47. 

Ether, different meanings of, in the 
East and the West, 36, 37. 

Ether (Ak@’sa, in Sanscrit), one of 
the Indian five elements, 36. 

Ether, the, fiery, 42. 

Euler’s comparative estimate of the 
light of the sun and moon, 177. 


Fixed stars, the term erroneous, 30, 
164; scintillation of the, 96 ; va- 
riations in its intensity, 101; our 
sun one of the fainter fixed stars, 
127; photometric arrangement of, 
132; their number, 14] ; number 
visible at Berlin with the naked 
eye; 143; at Alexandria, 144; 
Struve and Herschel’s estimates, 
157 ; grouping of the, 157 ; distri- 
bution of the, 189; proper motion 
of the, 248; parallax, 256; num- 
ber of, in which proper motion 
has been discovered, greater than 
of those in which change of posi- 
tion has been observed, 281. 

Fizeau, M., his experiments on the 
velocity of light, 107, 110. 





Formula for computing variation of 
light of astar, by Argelander, 228. 


Galactic circle, average number of 
stars in, and beyond the, 188. 
Galileo indicates the means of dis- 

covering the parallax, 256. 

Galle, Dr., on Jupiter’s satellites, 
64; on the photometric arrange- 
ment of the fixed stars, 132. 

Garnet star, the, a star in Cepheus, 
so called by William Herschel, 
225. 

Gascoigne applies micrometer 
threads to the telescope, 52 

Gauging the heavens, by Sir William 
Herschel, 187; length of time 
necessary to complete the pro- 
cess, 187. 

Gauss, on the point of translation 
in space of the whole solar sys- 
tem, 266. 

Gilliss, Lieutenant, on the change 
of colour of the star 9 Argts, 
183. 

Gravitation, not an essential pro- 
perty of bodies, but the result of 
some higher and still unknown 
power, 24. 

Greek sphere, date of the, 160, 162. 

Green and blue suns, 283. 

Groups of fixed stars, recognised 
even by the rudest nations, 157 ; 
usually the same groups, as the 
Pleiades, the Great Bear, the 
Southern Cross, &c., 158. 


Halley asserted the motion of Sirius 
and other fixed stars, 30. 

Hassenfratz, his description of the 
rays of stars as caustics on the 
crystalline lens, 66, 171. 

Heat, radiating, 41. 

Hepidannus, monk of Saint Gall, 
a new star recorded by, 213, 220. 

Herschel, Sir William, on the vivi- 
fying action of the sun’s rays, 40; 
his estimate of the number of the 
fixed stars, 157; his ‘‘ gauging 
the heavens,’’ and its result, 187. 


De 


Herschel, Sir John, on the trans- 
mission of light, 34; on the in- 
fluence of the sun’s rays, 40; 
compares the sun to a perpetual 
northern light, 40; on the atmo- 
sphere, 45; on the blackness of 
the ground of the heavens, 47; 
on stars seen in daylight, 73; on 
photometry, 125; photometric 
arrangement of the fixed stars, 
132; on the number of stars 
actually registered, 142; on the 
cause of the red colour of Sirius, 
177; on the Milky Way, 196; 
on the sun’s place, 203; on the 
determined periods of variable 
stars, 225; number of double 
stars the elements of whose orbits 
have been determined, 287. 

Hieroglyphical signification of a 
star, according to Horapollo, 173. 

Hind’s discovery of a new reddish- 
yellow star of the 5th magnitude, 
in Ophiuchus, 217; has since 
sunk to the 11th magnitude, 
217; calculation of the orbits of 
double stars by, 287. 

Hipparchus, on the number of the 
Pleiades, 60; his catalogue con- 
tains the earliest determination 
of the classes of magnitude of the 
stars, 120; a fragment of his 
work preserved to us in Aratus, 
147. 

_Holtzmann, on the Indian zodiacs, 
163.. 

Homer, not an authority on the 
state of Greek astronomy in his 
day, 160, 166. 

Humboldt, Alexander von, works 
of, quoted in various notes:— 
Ansichten der Natur, 105. 

Asie Centrale, 150. 
Essai sur la Géographie des 
Plantes, 75. 

Examen critique de I’ Histoire 
de la Géographie, 61, 151. 
Lettre 4 M. Schumacher, 123, 

185. 





Recueil d’Observations Astro- 
nomiques, 54, 59, 123. 
Relation Historique du Voyage 
aux Régionséquinoxiales, 72, 
75, 105, 123. 
Vue des Cordilléres et Monu- 
mens des Peuples indigénes 
de Amérique, 162, 180. 
Humboldt, Wilhelm von, quoted, 28. 
Huygens, Christian, his ambitious 
but unsatisfactory Cosmotheus, 
22; examined the Milky Way, 
195. 
Huygens, Constantine, his improve- 
ments in the telescope, 80. 
Hvergelmir, the cauldron-spring of 
the Edda-Songs, 5. 


Indian fiction regarding the stars of 
the Southern hemisphere, 187. 
Indian theory of the five elements 

(Pantschaté), 36. 
Indian zodiacs, their high antiquity 
doubtful, 163. 


Jacob, Capt., on the intensity of 
light in the Milky Way, 198; 
calculation of the orbits of double 
stars, by, 287. 

Joannes Philoponus, on gravitation, 
19. 

Jupiter’s satellites, estimate of the 
magnitudes of, 64; case in which 
they were visible by the naked 
eye, 66; occultations of, observed 
by daylight, 80. 


Kepler, his approach to the mathe- 

‘ matical application of the theory 
of gravitation, 18; rejects the 
idea of solid orbs, 169. 


Lalande, his Catalogue, revised by 
Baily, 155. 

Lassel’s telescope, discoveries made 
by means of, 85. 

Lepsius, on the Egyptian name 
(Sothis) of Sirius, 180. 

Leslie’s photometer, defects of, 129. 

Libra, the constellation, date of its 


8 


introduction into the Greek 
sphere, 162. 

Light, always refracted, 54; pris- 
matic spectra differ in number of 
dark lines according to their 
source, 55, 56; polarisation of, 
57; velocity of, 105; ratio of 
solar, lunar, and stellar, 126; 
variation of, in stars of ascer- 
tained and unascertained period- 
icity, 228, 240. 

Light of the sun and moon, Euler’s 
and Michelo’s estimates of the 
comparative, 127. 

Limited transparency of the celestial 
regions, 46. 


Macrobius, ‘‘ Sphera aplanes’’ of, 
31: 


Midler, on Jupiter’s satellites, 67 ; 
on the determined periods of 
variable stars, 225; on future 
polar stars, 245; on non-lumi- 
nous stars, 255; on the centre of 
gravity of the solar system, 269. 

Magellanic clouds, known to the 
Arabs, 122. 

Magnitude of the stars, classes of, 
120, 121. 

Malus, his discoveries regarding 
light, 57. 

‘*Mappa ceelestis’’ of Schwinck, 
189 


Ma-tuan-lin, a Chinese astrono- 
mical record of, 146. ; 

Mayer, Christian, the first special 
observer of the fixed stars, 275. 

Melville Island, temperature of, 43. 

Michell, John, 126; applies the 
calculus of probabilities to small 
groups of stars, 274; little re- 
liance to be placed in its indivi- 
dual numerical results, 275. 

Michelo’s comparative estimate of 
mn light of the sun and moon, 
177. 

Milky Way, average number of stars 
in, and beyond the, according to 
Struve, 188; intensity of its light 
in the vicinity of the Southern 





4 


zl 


Cross, 198; its course and direc- 
tion, 199; most of the new stars 
have appeared in its neighbour. 
hood, 220. 

Morin proposes the application of 
the telescope to the discovery of 
the stars in daylight, 51, 86. 

Motion, proper, of the fixed stars, 
248; variability of, 252. 

Multiple stars, 175, 271; variable 
brightness of, difference of opinion 
regarding, 286. 


Nebule, probably closely crowded 
stellar swarms, 44. 

Neptune, the planet, its orbit used 
as a measure of distance of 61 
Cygni, 277. 

New stars, 204; their small num- 
ber, 204; Tycho Brahe’s descrip- 
tion of one, 205; its disappear- 
ance, 206; speculations as to 
their origin, 218; most have ap- 
peared near the Milky Way, 
220. 

Newton, embraces by his theory of 
gravitation the whole uranological . 
portion of the Cosmos, 23. 

Non-luminous stars, problematical 
existence of, 254.. 

Numerical results, exceeding the 
grasp of the comprehension, fur- 
nished alike by the minutest 
organisms and the so-called fixed 
stars, 34; encouraging views on 
the subject, 35. 


Optical and physical double stars, 
272; often confounded, 272. 

Orbits of double stars, calculation 
of the, 287; their great eccentri- 
city, 287; hypothesis, that the 
brighter of the two stars is at 
rest, and its companion revolves 
about it, probably correct, and a 
great epoch in cosmical know- 
ledge, 288. 

Orion, the six stars of the trapezium 
of the nebula of, probably subject 
to peculiar physical attraction, 287. 


Leg 


Pantschata, or Pantschatra, the 
Indian theory of the five elements, 
36. 

Parallax, means of discovering the, 
pointed out by Galileo, 256; 
number of parallaxes hitherto 
discovered, 258; detail of nine 
of the best ascertained, 259. 

Penetrating power of the telescope, 
196. 

Periodically changeable stars, 222. 

Periods within periods of varia- 
able stars, 228; Argelander on, 
228. 

Peru, climate of, unfavourable to 
astronomical observations, 139. 

Peters, on parallax, 261. 

Photometric relations of self-lumi- 
nous bodies, 119; scale, 132. 

Photometry, yet in its infancy, 125; 
first numerical scale of, 126; 
Arago’s method, 128. 

Plato, on ultimate principles, 11. 

Pleiades, one of the, invisible to the 
naked eye of ordinary visual 
power, 60; described, 191. 

' Pliny estimates the number of stars 
visible in Italy at only 1600, 
145. 

Poisson, his view of the consolida- 
tion of the earth’s strata, 44. 

Polarisation of light, 57—60. 

Poles of greatest cold, 43. 

Pouillet’s estimate of the tempe- 
rature of space, 43. 

Prismatic spectra, 55; difference of 
the dark lines of, 56. 

Ptolemy, his classification of the 
stars, 120; southern constella- 
tions known to, 185. 

Pulkowa, number of multiple stars 
discovered at, 279. 

Pythagoreans, mathematical sym- 
bolism of the, 10. 


Quaternary systems of stars, 286. 
Radiating heat, 41. 


Ratio of various colours among the 
multiple and double stars, 285. 





Rays of stars, 66, 171; number of, 
indicate distances, 173; disappear 
when the star is viewed through @ 
very small aperture, 173. 

Red stars, 176; variable stars mostly 
red, 224, 

Reflecting sextants applied to the 
determination of the intensity of 
stellar light, 123. 

Reflecting and refracting telescopes, 
82. 

Regal stars of the ancients, 184. 

Resisting medium, proved by obser- 
vations on Encke’s and other 
comets, 47. 

Right ascension, distribution of 
stars according to, by Schwinck, 
189. 

Rings, coloured, measurement of 
the intensity of light by, 128. 

Rings, concentric, of stars, the hy- 
pothesis of, favoured by the most 
recent observations, 201. 

Rosse’s, Lord, his great telescope, 
85; its services to astronomy, 85. 

Ruby-coloured stars, 183. 


Saint Gall, the monk of, observed 
a new star distant from the 
Milky Way, 220. 

Saussure asserts that stars may be 
seen in daylight on the Alps, 74; 
the assertion not supported by 
other travellers’ experience, 75. 

Savary, on the application of the 
aberration of light to the deter- 
mination of the parallaxes, 264 ; 
an early calculator of the orbits 
of double stars, 287. 

Schlegel, A. W. von, probably mis- 
taken as to the high antiquity of 
the Indian zodiacs, 163. 

Schwinck, distribution of the fixed 
stars in his ‘‘ Mappa ceelestis,’’ 
189. 

Scintillation of the stars, 96; varia- 
tions in its intensity, 101; men- 
tioned in the Chinese records, 
103; little observed in tropical 


Saga at 


regions, 103; always accompanied 
by a change of colour, 275. 

Seidel, his attempt to determine the 
quantities of light of certain stars 
of the Ist magnitude, 124. 

Self-luminous cosmical bodies, or 
suns, 271. 

Seneca, on discovering new planets, 
31. 

Simplicius, the Eclectic, contrasts 
the centripetal and centrifugal 
forces, 10; his vague view of gra- 
vitation, 18. 

Sirius, its absolute intensity of 
light, 127; historically proved to 
have changed its colour, 177; its 
association with the earliest de- 
velopment of civilization in the 
valley of the Nile, 179; etymolo- 
gical researches concerning, 180. 

Smyth, Capt. W. H., calculations 
of the orbits of double stars by, 

Wee 

Smyth, Piazzi, on the Milky Way, 
199; on a Centauri, 252. 

Sothis, the Egyptian name of Sirius, 
179. 


South, Sir James, observation of 
380 double stars by, in conjunc- 
tion with Sir John Herschel, 
279. 

Southern constellations known to 
Ptolemy, 185. 

Southern Cross, formerly visible on 
the shores of the Baltic, 186. 

Southern hemisphere, in parts re- 
markably deficient in constella- 
tions, 151; distances of its stars, 
first measured about the end of 
the 16th century, 187. 

Space, conjectures regarding, 33 ; 
compared to the mythic period of 
history, 33; fallacy of attempts 
at measurement of, 34; portions 
between cosmical bodies not void, 
36; its probable low tempera- 
ture, 42. 

Spectra, the prismatic, 55; dif- 
ference of the dark lines of, 
according to their sources, 56. 





‘¢ Spheeraaplanes’’ of Macrobius, 31. 

Spurious diameter of stars, 174. 

Star of the Magi, Ideler’s explana- 
tion of the, 208. 

Star of St. Catherine, 185. 

Star systems, partial, in which seve- 
ral suns revolve about a common 
centre of gravity, 277. 

Stars, division into wandering and 
non-wandering, dates at least from 
the early Greek period, 30; mag- 
nitude and visibility of the, 60; 
seen through shafts of chimneys, 
73; undulation of the, 75; ob- 
servation of, by daylight, 86; 
scintillation of the, 96; variations 
in its intensity, ]01; the brightest 
the earliest named, 119; rays of, 
66, 171—173; colour of, 175; 
distribution of, 189; concentric 
rings of, 201; variable, 218; 
vanished, 221; _ periodically 
changeable, 222; non-luminous, 
of doubtful existence, 254 ; ratio 
of coloured stars, 285. 

Steinheil’s experiments on the velo- 
city of the transmission of elec- 
tricity, 116; his photometer, 124. 

Stellar clusters, or swarms, 189. 

Struve, on the velocity of light, 109; 
his estimate of the number of the 
fixed stars, 157; on the Milky 
Way, 188; his Dorpat tables, 
278; on the contrasted colours 
of multiple stars, 282; calcula- 
tion of the orbits of double stars 
by, 287. 

Sun, the, described as ‘‘a perpetual 
northern light,’’ by Sir William 
Herschel, 40; in intensity of 


light, merely one of the fainter . 


fixed stars. 127; its place pro- 
bably in a comparatively desert 
region of the starry stratum, and 
eccentric, 203. 

Suns, self-luminous cosmical bodies, 
271. 


Table of photometric arrangement 
of 190 fixed stars, 134; of 17 


sy 


stars of Ist magnitude, 137; of | 
the variable stars, by Argelander, | 


232, and explanatory remarks, 
233—240 ; of ascertained ‘paral- 
laxes, 262; of the elements of 
the orbits of double stars, 289. 
Telescope, the principle of, known 
to the Arabs, and probably to the 
Greeks and Romans, 53; disco- 
veries by its means, 783; succes- 


sive improvements of the, 80; 


enormous focal length of some, 
81; Lord Rosse’s, 85; Bacon’s 
comparison of, to discovery ships, 
175; penetrating power of the, 
196. 

Telesio, Bernardino, of Cosenza, his 
views of the phenomena of inert 
matter, 16. 

Temperature, low, of celestial space, 
42; uncertainty of results yet 
obtained, 43 ; its influence on the 
climate of the earth, 45. 

Temporary stars, list of, 209; notes 
to, 210—217. 

Ternary stars, 286. 

Timur Ulugh Beig, improvements 
in practical astronomy in the 
time of, 121. 

Translation in space of the whole 
solar system, 265; first hinted 
by Bradley, 265; verified by 
actual observation by William 
Herschel, 266 ; Argelander, 
Struve, and Ganiaa’s views, 266. 

Trapezium in the great nebula of 
Orion, investigated by Sir William 
Herschel, 276. 

Tycho Brahe, his vivid description 
of the appearance of a new star, 
205; his theory of the formation 
of such, 208. 

‘* Ultimate mechanical cause” of all 
motion, unknown, 27. 

Undulation of the stars, 75. 

Undulations of rays of light, various 
lengths of, 112. 

Unity of nature distinctly taught by 
Aristotle, 11—14. 





Uranological and telluric domain of 
the Cosmos, 29. 

Uranus observed as a star by Flam- 
stead and others, 153. 


Vanished stars, 221; statements 
about such to be received with 
great caution, 221. 

Variable brightness of multiple and 
double stars, 285. 

Variable'stars, 218; mostly of a red 
colour, 224; irregularity of their 
periods, 226; table of, 232. 

Velocity of light, 105; methods of 
determining, 106; applied to the 
determination of the parallax, 265. 

Visibility of objects, 70 ; how modi- 
fied, 71. 

Vision, natural and telescopic, 51 ; 
average natural, 60; remarkable’ 
instances of acute natural, 66,70. 


Wheatstone’s experiments with re- 
volving mirrors, 56; velocity of 
electrical light determined by, . 
114. 

White Ox, name given to the nebula 
now known as one of the Magel- 
lanic clouds, 122. 

Wollaston’s photometric researches, 
127. 

Wright, of Durham, his view of the 
origin of the form of the Milky 
Way, 201. 


Ygegdrasil, the world-tree of the 
Edda-Songs, 4, 5. 


Zodiac, period of its introduction 
into the Greek sphere, 160; its 
origin among the Chaldeans, 161; 
the Greeks borrowed from ‘them 
only the idea of the division, and 
filled its signs with their own 
catasterisms, 161; great antiquity 
of the Indian Pasar: / doubtful, 163. 

Zodiacal light, Sir John Herschelon 
the, 48. 








Select Catalogue of 
NEW BOOKS AT REDUCED PRICES, 


PUBLISHED OR SOLD BY 


HENRY G. BOHN, 
YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN, LONDON. 





THE COMPLETE CATALOGUE OF NEW BOOKS AND REMAINDERS, IN 100 PAGES, MAY 
BE HAD GRATIS. 


*.* All the Books advertised in the Aorate Catalogue are neatly boarded in cloth, 
or bound. 





FINE ARTS, ARCHITECTURE, SCULPTURE, PAINTING, HERALDRY, 
ANTIQUITIES, TOPOGRAPHY, SPORTING, PICTORIAL AND HIGHLY 
ILLUSTRATED WORKS, ETC. ETC. 


ANGLER’S SOUVENIR. Fcap. 8vo, embellished with upwards of 60 beautiful Engravings on 
Steel by BeckwiTu and TorpHam, and hundreds of engraved Borders, every page being sur- 
rounded (pub. at 18s.), cloth, gilt, 9s. Tilt, 183& 


ARTIST'S BOOK OF FABLES, com og a Series of Original Fables, illustrated by 280 
exquisitely beautiful Engravings on by Harvey and other eminent Artists, after De- 
at the late JAMES NORTHCOTE, R.A. Post 8vo, Portrait (pub. at 1/. 1s.), ber 
gilt, 9s 


BARBER’S ISLE OF WIGHT. 42 fine Steel Plates, and Dr. MANTELL’s GEOLOGICAL — 
8v0, gilt, cloth, 10s. 6d. 


BEWICK’'S SELECT FABLES, with a Memoir, vo, with several Portraits of Bewick, and 
upwards of 350 penning on Wood, original impressions (pub. at Il. 1s.), bdg. 10s- 
Newcasis®, 1820 


BILLINGTON'S ARCHITECTURAL DIRECTOR, being an approved Guide to Archi-~ 
ei pre oltre Students, Builders, and Werkmen, to which is added a History of the 


a Glossary of Architecture. New Edition, enlarged, 8vo, 100 Plates, cloth sty 
(oahe at 11. 8s.) 10s. 6d. 


BOOK OF COSTUME, from the earliest period to the present time. Upwards of 200 oe 
Engravings on Wood, by Linton. 8vo (pub. at 1/. 1s.), gilt cloth, gilt edges, 10s. 6d. 


BOOK OF GEMS, OR THE POETS AND ARTISTS OF GREAT Biaea: 
3 vols. 8vo. 150 exquisite Line Engravings after TURNER, BONINGTON, LANDSEER, ROBERTS, 
MULREADY, etc. etc.; also numerous Autographs (pub, at 4/. 14s, 6d,} Cloth eiegantly gilt, 
21. 5s., or in morocco, 31. 38 


S0pK or woe OR THE MODERN POETS AND ARTISTS OF GREAT 
N. 8vo. 50 exquisitel, Y beautiful Line Engravings after TURNER, BONINGTON, etc. 
5 oat. at 1/. 11s. 6d.), cloth elegantly gilt, 15s., or morocco, lJ. 1s. 1844 


BOOK OF RAPHAEL’S CARTOONS, BY CATTERMOLE. 8vo. with an exquisite 
rtrait of Raphael, a View of Hampton Court, and seven very high finished Steel Engrav- 
tae of the celebrated Cartoons at lampton Court (pub. at 1lés.), th, gilt, 7s. 6d. 1845 


BOOK OF SHAKSPEARE GEMS. A Series of Landscape Il'ustrations of the most inte- 
resting pegs of Shaks —— s Dramas; with Historical and Descriptive Accounts, by 
Wasuincton Irvine, JEssE, W. Howirr, WorpswortH, InGuLis, and others. 8v0, 
with 45 highly-finished Steel Engrayings (pub. at 1/. 1ls. 6d.) gilt cloth, 14s. 1845 


BOCK OF WAVESLEY GEMS, A Series of 64 highly-fiaished Line Engravings of the most 
interesting Incidents and Scenery in Waiter Scott’s Noveis, by AEATH, FINDEN, ROLLs, and 
others, after Pictures by LESLIE, SroTHaRD, Cooper, HowakD, &c., with illustrative letter~ 
_ (press, 8yo. (pub, at 1/. 11s. 6d,), cloth, elegantly gilt, 15. 184€ 

B 


= CATALOGUE OF NEW BOOKS 


J 





BROCKEDON’S PASSES OF THE ALPS. 2vols. medium 4to. Cantenogs 109 beratitah 
Engravings (pub. at 10/. 10s. in boards), half-bound merocco, gilt edges, 3/. 13s. 6d. } 


BRITTON’'S CATHEDRAL CHURCH OF LINCOLN, rary 36 ae Plates, by Le Krux, 
(pub. at 3/. 3s.}, cloth, 1/. 5s. Royal 4to, Large Paper, cloth 12. 1 


nts voiume was published to complete Mr. Britton’s Cathedrals ad is wanting in most of 
e sets. 


BRYAN’S DICTIONARY OF PAINTERS AND ENGRAVERS. New Edition, cor- 
rected, greatly enlarged, and continued to the present time, by GroRGE anes Esq. me 
plete in one large volume, impl 8vo, numerous plates of monograms, 21. 2s; 


BULWER'S PILGRIMS OF THE RHINE. 8vo. Embellished with 27 exquisite Line En- 
gravings after David Roberts, Maclise, and Parris (pub. at 1/. 11s. 6d.), cloth gilt, 14s, 


BURNET TS ILLUSTRATED EDITION OF Sik JOSHUA REYNOLDS aN 
NTING, 4to, 12 fine Plates, cloth (pub. at 2/, 2s.), 1d. 


vee same, large paper, royal 4to, proof impressions of Tinipa, cloth (pub. at 42 4s.), a ny 


CANOVA'S WORKS, engraved in outline by Moses, with Descriptions and a Biographicat 
Memoir by Cicognara. 3 vols, ee a A. 155 plates, and. fine Portrait hy W orthiagton, half- 
bound morocco (pub. at 6/. 128.) 20, 

the same, 3 vols. 4to, large Sa half-bound, uncut (pub. at 97. 18s.), 42 4s. 

the same, 3 vols. 4to, large paper, India Proofs, in parts, (pub. at 15d. 15s.) 77. 10s. 


CARTER’S ANCIENT ARCHITECTURE OF ENGLAND. Illustrated by 103 Cc per 
plate Engravings, comprising upwards of Two Thousand specimens. Edited by JoHN 
TON, Es@. Royal folio (pub. at 12d, 12s.), half-bound morocco, 4/. 4s, 


CARTER S ANCIENT SCULPTURE AND PAINTING NOW REMAINING 
ENGLAND, from the Earliest Period to the Reign of Henry VIII. With Historical and 

Critical Illustrations, by Douce, GoucH, MEYRICK, Dawson TURNER, and Britron. 
Royal folio, with i20 large Engravings, many of which are beautifully coloured, and several 
illuminated with gold (pub. at 152. 15s.), half-bound morocco, 81. 83. 1838 


CARTER'S GOTHIC ARCHITECTURE, and Ancient Buildings in aeeeees with 120 
Views, etched by himself. 4 vols. square 12mo (pub. at 2/, 2s.), half morocco, 1 1824 


CATEIN'S NORTH AMERICAN. INDIANS. 2-vols. impl. 8vo. 360 Engravings (pub. at 
12s. 6d.), cloth, emblematically gilt, 1d. 10s, 1848 


CATTERMOLE'S EVENINGS AT HADDON HALL. 24 exquisite Engravings on Steel, 
from Designs by himself. Post 8vo (originally pub, at 1/. 11s. 6d.), gilt cloth, gilt edges, 7s. 6d. 


CHAMBERLAINE’S IMITATIONS OF DRAWINGS from the Great Masters, in the 
Royal Collection, engraved by BARToLOzzI and others, impl. fol. 70 Plates (pub. at 120, tes.) 
half-bound morocco, gilt edges, 5/. 5s. 


CLAUDE’S LIBER VERITATIS. A Collection of 300 Engravings in-imitation of the original 
Drawings of CLAUDE, by Eartom. 3 vols. folio (pub. at 310, 10s.), half-bound moroces, gilt 
edges, 10/..10s. 


CLAUDE, BEAUTIES OF, 24 FINE ENGRAVINGS, containing some of his choicest 
Landscapes, heautifully Engraved on Steel, folio, with descriptive ietter-press, and Portrait, 
in a portfolio (pub. at3d. 18s.), Ll. 5s. 


VELT’S PICTURE GALLERY. With an Introduction by Mrs. JAMESON. Royal 4to 
ey i ee engraved in outline. India Proofs (pub. at 52. 5s.), half-bound Ba a4 
extra, 31. 33, 


COOKE'S SHIPPING AND CRAFT. A Series of 65 brilliant Etchings, comprising Pictur- 
esque, but at the same time extremely accurate Representations. Royal to (pub. at 3d, 18s, 6d.), 
gilt cloth, ll, lls. 6d. 


COOKE'S PICTURESQUE SCENERY OF LONDON AND ITS VICINITY: 50 beaus 
tiful Etchings, after Drawings. by CaLcorr, STANFIELD, Provz, Roberts, HARDING, 
STaRk, and CormAN. Royal 4to. Proofs (pub. at 5/.), gilt cloth, 2/. 2s. 


HOTELS DE VILLE, TOWN HA - 

Coney S$, qneey eee OR oie In FRANCE, Fras RAM eee 
AND ITALY. = vine large Plates. Imperial folio(pub. at 102. 10s.), half morocco, gilt edges, 
3d. 183. 


CORNWALL, AN ILLUSTRATED. ITINERARY OF; including Historical and Deserip« 
tive jie Imperial 8vo, illustrated by 118 beautiful Engravings on Steel wy a We pe ny 
LANDELLS, HINCHCLIFFE, *} ackso™, WILuiamMs, SLY, etc. after drawings by CRE 
(Pub, at 16s,), half morocco, 8s. wisi 
Cornwall is undoubtedly.the most interesting county in England, 


CORONATION OF GEORGE, THE FOURTH, by Sir Grorce NAYzEn, in a Series of 
above 40 magnificent wimecpr es ofthe Procession, Ceremonial, and Banquet, a 
faithful portraits of many of the distinguished Individuals who were present; with histori 
and descriptive. letter-press, peste folio (pub. at 52/, 10s.), half bound morocco, gilt, edges, 
122, 12s. 


COSMAN> SEPULCHRAL BRASSES IN NORFOLK AND SUFFOLK, tending to 
illustrate the Ecclesiastical, Military, and Civil Costume of former ages, with Letter-press 
Deacriptions, etc. by Dawson TuRNER, Sir S. Merxick, etc. 173 Plates, The enamelled 
Brasses are splendidly illuminated, 2 vols, imp]. 4to half-bound morocco, gilt edges, Ol. 63. 1833. 


she same, large paper, imperial folio, half moreces, gilt eiges, 81. Ss, 














PUBLISHED OR SOLD BY H. G. BOHN. 8 





‘ CHINGS OF ARCHITECTURAL REMAINS in various counties in 
paged Me mb a Letter-press Descriptions by RickMAN, 2 vols. imperial] folio, containing 240 
nighly spirited Etchings (pub, at 24/.), half morocco, 8/. 8s. 1838 


DANIELL’S ORIENTAL SCENERY AND ANTIQUITIES. The original magnificent 
edition, 150 splendid coloured Views, on the largest scale, of the Architecture, Antiquities, and 
Landscape Scenery of Hindoostan, 6 vols, in 3, elephant fotio (pub, at 2104.), elegantly half- 
bound morocco, 52d. 10s. 


DANIELL’'S ORIENTAL SCENERY, 6 vols. in 3, small folio, 150 Plates (pub. at 187, 18s. 
haif-bound morocco, 6/, 6s. i 
This is reduced from the preceding large work, and is uncoloured. 


DANIELL’S ANIMATED NATURE, being Picturesque Delineations of the most interesting 
Subjects from all Branches of Natural History, 125 Engravings, with Letter-press Descriptions 

2 vols. small folio (pub. at 15/, 15s.), half morocco (uniform with the Oriental Scenery), 3/. 3s. 
DON QUIXOTE, PICTORIAL EDITION. _ Translated by Jarvis, carefully revised- 
With: a copious original Memoir of Cervantes. Illustrated by upwards of 820 beautiful Wood 
Engravings, after the celebrated Designs of Tony JOHANNOT, including 16 new and beautiful 
large Cuts, by ARMSTRONG, now first added. 2 vols. royal 8vo (pub. at 2/, 10s.), cloth gilt, 

88. 1843 


DULWICH GALLERY, 2 Series of 50 Beautifully Coloured Plates from the most Celebrated 
Pictures in this Remarkable Collection; executed by R.. Cockgeurn (CuStodian). All 
mounted on Tinted Card-board in the manner of Drawings, imperial folio, including 4 very 
large additional Plates, published ea scoree | at from 8 to 4 guineas each, and not before 
included inthe Series. Ina handsome portfolio, with morocco back fpr. at 40/.), 16/. 16s. 

‘s This is one of the most’splendi¢ and interesting of the British Picture Galleries, and has 
for some years beer quite unattainable, even at the full price.” 


EGYPT AND THE PYRAMIDS—COL. VYSE'S GREAT WORK ON THE 
PYRAMIDS OF GIZEH. With an appendix, by J. 8S. Perrine, Esa., on the Pyramids at 
Abou Roash, the Fayoum, &c. &c. 2 vols. imperial 8vo, with 60 Plates, lithographed by 
HAGHE (pub. at 2/. 12s. 6d.), 1. 1s. 1840 


EGYPT—PERRING’S FIFTY-EIGHT LARGE VIEWS AND ILLUSTRATIONS OF 
THE PYRAMIDS OF GIZEH, ABOU ROASH, &c. Drawn from actual Survey and 
Admeasurement. With Notes and References to Col. Vyse’s great Work, also to Denon, the 
great French Work on Egypt, Rosellini, Belzoni, Burckhardt, Sir Gardner Wilkinson, Lane, 
and others. 3 Parts, elephant folio, the size of the great French ** Egypte” (pub. at 15/. 15s.) 
in printed wrappers, 32. 3s.; half-bound morocco, 41. 14s. 6d. 1842 


'S ISLE OF WIGHT. 4to. 50 large Plat 
meme eT ub. 7l. 78.), cloth, 22. 58. pean bt daita ls Kuan meas eh 


FLAXMAN’'S HOMER. Seventy-five beautiful Compositions to the Inrtap and Opyssry, 


engraved under Fraxman’s inspection, by PrroLi1, MosEs, and BLAKE. 2 vols. oblong folio 
(pub. at 5/. 5s.), boards 2/. 2s. 803 


LAXMAN'S ASCHYLU ~six beautiful Co r 
fF er fae ae S, Thirty. au mpositions from. Oblong folio eager 


FLAXMAN’S HESIOD, Thirty-seven beautiful Compositions from. Oblong folio (pub. at 
2l. 128. 6d.), boards WU. 5s. 1817 
*‘ Flaxman’s unequalled Compositions from Homer, Zischylus, and Hesiod, bh 
been the admiration of Europe; of their simplicity and beauty the pen is quite jocupetie of 
conveying an adequate impression.’’—Sir Thomas Lawrence. 


fLAXMAN’S ACTS OF MERCY. A Series of Eight Compositions, in the manner of 
Ancient Sculpture, engraved in imitation of the original Drawings, by F.C. L “ e 
folio (pub. at 2/. 28.); half-hound morocco, 16s. rade ee, sini: ene 


OISSART, ILLUMINATED ILLUSTRATI 3 - i 
- Gold and Colours. 2 vols. super-royal 8vo, hatteos sok Gann pig aia os - 


——— the same, large paper, 2 vols. royal 4to, half-bound, uncut (pub. at 102, 10s.), 62. 6s. 


GELL AND GANDY’S POMPEIANAS or, the Topography, Edifices, and O 
Pom = —— a egg oes the Result natty x Excavations previous to i819. 2 pot 
royal 8vo, best edition upwards o au ine Engravings b 
HEATH, Prx, etc. (pub. at 7i. 4s.), boards, 3. 33. Aa a ning erer 


GEMS OF ART, 36 FINE ENGRAVINGS, after Rewpranxpt, Curr, Reynorps, Povs- 


SIN, MURILLO, TENIERS, CORREGIO, VANDERVELDH, folio, proof impressi i i 
(pub. at 81. 8s.), 1. 11s. 6d.” ' whe Set eet 


GILLRAY'S CARICATURES, printed from the Original Plates, all engraved by himself 
between 1779 and 1810, ¢ ing the best Political and Humorous Satires of the "Reign Of 
George the Third, in apwards of 600 highly spirited aang. In 1 large vol. atlas folio 

(exactly uniform with the original Hogarth, as sold by the advertiser), half-bound red morocco 

extra, gilt edges, 8/. 8s. 


GILPIN'S PRACTICAL HINTS ee 
finits tn Ouinte Meiers: Se We tae ei 


GO fag {pub a etry cloth, RATED BY RETZSCH in 26 beautiful Outlines. Royal 


his edition contains a translation of the original poem, with historical and descriptive notes, 
B 


4 CATALOGUE OF NEW BOOKS 








GOODWIN'S DOMESTIC ARCHITECTURE. A Series of New Designs for Mansio 
Villas, Rectory-Houses, Parsonage-Houses; Bailiff’s, Gardener’s, Gamekeeper’s, and 
Gate Lodges: Cottages and other Residences, in the Grecian, Italian, and Old English park 
of Architecture: with Estimates. 2 vols. royal 4to, 96 Plates (pub. at Sle 5s.), cloth, 2. 2s. 6d. 


GRINDLAY'S (CAPT.) VIEWS IN INDIA, SCENERY, COSTUME, AND ARCHI- 
E: chiefly on the Western Side of I ndia. Atlas 4to. Consisting of 36 most beauti- 
foliy Meolouied Plates, highly finished, in imitation of Drawings; with Descriptive Letter- 
press. (Pub. at 12/. 12s.), half-bound morocco, gilt edges, 81, 8s. 
This is perhaps the most t exquisitely-coloured volume of innova ever produced. 


HANSARD’S ILLUSTRATED BOOK OF ARCHERY. Being the complete History and 
Practice of the Art: interspersed with numerous Anecdotes; forming a complete Manual for 
the Bowman. 8vo. Illustrated hy 39 beautiful Line Engravings, exquisitely finished, by 
ENGLEHEART, PORTBURY, etc., after Designs by STEPHANOFF (pub. at ll. 11s. 6d.), gilt cloth, 
10s. Gd. 


HARRIS'S GAME AND WILD ANIMALS OF SOUTHERN AFRICA. Ls e imp 
lio. 30 beautifully coloured Engravings, with 30 Vignettes of Heads, Skins, & RPM. on 
9 10s.), hf. morocco, 6, 6s. 


HARRIS’S WILD SPORTS OF SOUTHERN AFRICA. Impl. 8yo. 26 bh co- 
loured Engravings, and a Map (pub. at 2/. 2s.), gilt cloth, gilt edges, 1/. 1s. 844 


HEATH'S CARICATURE SCRAP BOOK, on 60 Sheets, containing upwards of 1000 Comic 
Subjects after Seymour, CRUIKSHANK, Puiz, and other eminent Caricaturists, oblong folio’ 
(pub. at 2/. 2s.), cloth, gilt, 15s. 

This clever and entertaining volume is now enlar ~ y ten additional sheets, each con- 
taining numerous subjects. It includes the whole of srt / s Omnium Gatherun, hoth Series; 
Illustrations of Demonology and Witchcraft; Old Ways and New Ways; Nautical Dictionary ;, 
Scenes in London; Sayings and Doings, etc. ; a series of humorous illustrations of Proverbs, 
etc. As a large and ‘almost infinite storehouse of humour it stands alone. To the young 
artist it would be found a most valuable collection of studies; and to the family circle a con~ 

stant source of unexceptionable amusement. 


HOGARTH’S WORKS ENGRAVED BY HIMSELF. 153 fine Plates (including the two 
well-known ‘* suppressed Plates’), with elaborate Letter-press Descriptions, by J. NicHOoLs.’ 
Atlas folio (pub. at 50/.), half-bound morocco, gilt back and edges, with a secret pocket for 
suppressed plates, 7/. 7s. 1822: 


HOLBEIN'S COURT LOF, HENRY THE EIGHTH. A Series of 80 exquisitely beautiful 
Portraits, engraved by BarroLozzi1, CoorEr, and others, in imitation of the original! 
Drawings preserved in the Royal Collection at Windsor; with Historical and Biographicat?! 
Letter-press by EpMunn LopGE, Esa. Published by JouN CHAMBERLAINE, Imperial 4to’ 
(pub. at 152. 15s.), half-bound morocco, full gilt back and edges, 5/. 15s. 6d. 1812 


HOFLAND'S BRITISH ANGLER’S MANUAL; Edited by Epwarp Jzssz, Es@.; or, 
the Art of Angling in England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland; including a Piscatorial ‘Account 
of the principal Rivers, Lakes, and Trout Streams; with Instructions in Fly Fishing, Trolling, 
and Angling of every Description. With upwards of 80 exquisite Plates, many of which are. 
highly-finished Landscapes engrayed on Steel, the remainder beautifully engraved on Wood. 
8vo, elegant in gilt cloth, 12s. 1848 


HOPE'S COSTUME OF THE ANCIENTS. _Ilustrated in upwards of 320 beautifully- 
engraved Plates, containing Representations of Egyptian, Greek, and Roman Habits and 
Dresses. 2 vols. royal 8yo, New Edition, with nearly 20 additional Plates, boards, wag 
to 20. 5s. 1 


HOWARD (FRANK) ON COLOUR, asa Means of Anz, being an adaptation of the Expe- 
rience of Professors to the practice of” Amateurs, illustrated by 18 coloured Plates, post 8vo, 
cloth gilt, 8s. 

In this able volume are shown the ground colours in which the most celebrated painters 
worked, It is very valuable to the connoisseur, as well as the student, in painting and water- 
colour drawing. 


HOWARD'S (HENRY, R. A.) LECTURES ON PAINTING. Delivered at the Sg 


Academy, with a Memoir, by his son, Frank HowarD, large post 8v0, cloth, 7s. 6d. 


HOWARD'S (FRANK) SPIRIT OF SHAKSPEARE. 483 fine outline Plates, illustrative of 
all the principal Incidents in the Dramas of our national Bard, 5 vols. 8vo (pub. at 14/. 8s.),' 
cloth, 2/. 2s, 1827—33 « 

*,* The 483 Plates may be had without the letter-press, for illustrating all 8yo editions of 
Shakspeare, for 1. 11s. 6d. 


HUMPHREY'S (H. NOEL) ART. OF ILLUMINATION AND MISSAL PAINTING, 


illustrated with 12 splendid Examples from the Great Masters of the Art, selected from M Sy 
all beautifully illuminated. Square 12mo, decorated binding, 1/. ls. 


HUMPHREY'S COINS OF ENGLAND, a Sketch of the progress | of the English Coinage, 
from the earliest period to the present timé, with 228 beautiful fac-similes of the most interest- 
ing specimens, illuminated in gold, silver, and copper, square 8vo, neatly decorated binding, 18s. 


HUNT'S EXAMPLES OF TUDOR ARCHITECTURE ADAPTED TO MODERN 
HABITATIONS. Royal 4to, 37 Plates (pub. at 2/. 2s.), half morocco 1, 4s, 


HUNT'S DESIGNS FOR PARSONAGE-HOUSES, ALMS-HOUSES, ETC. vo 
4to, 21 Plates (pub, at 1é. 1s.), half morocco, lis, 


PUBLISHED OR SOLD BY H. G. BOHN. 5 





HUNT'S DESIGNS FOR GATE LODGES, GAMEKEEPERS’ COTTAGES, ere. 
Royal 4to, 13 Plates (pub. at il. 1s.), half morocco, 1 


HUNTS ARCHITETTURA CAMPESTRE; OR, DESIGNS FOR LODGES, GAk- 
NERS’ HOUSES, Etc. IN THE ITALIAN STYLE. 12 Plates, royal 4to (pub. at 
7 aT half morocco, 14s. 1827 


ILLUMINATED BOOK OF CHRISTMAS CAROLS, square 8vo. 24 Borders illuminated 
ae Gold and Colours, and 4 beautiful Miniatures, richly Ornamented Binding (pub. at Met ie )s 


ILLUMINATED BOOK OF NEEDLEWORK, By Mrs. Owen, with a History of Needle- 
work, by the Counress of WILTON, Coloured Plates, pust 8vo (pub, at 18s.), gilt cloth, 9s. 1817 


ILLUMINATED CALENDAR FOR 1850. Copied from a celebrated Missal known as the 
* Hours’’ of the Duke of Anjou, imperial 8vo, 36 exquisite Miniatures and Borders, in AP aud 
colours, Ornamented Binding (pub, at 2/. 2s.), 15s. 


ILLUSTRATED FLY-FISHER’S TEXT BOOK. A Complete Gvide to the Science of Trout 
dad Salmon Fishing. By THEOPHILUS SouTH, GENT. (Ep. CHitTy, BARRISTER). With 

23 beautiful Engravings on Steel, after Paintings hy CooPER, NEWTON, FIELDING, LEE, and 
others. 8vo (pub. at 1/. lls. 6d.) cloth, gilt, 10s. 6d. 1815 


ITALIAN SCHOOL OF DESIGN. Consisting of 100 Plates, chiefly ocd by BaRto- 
LoZZ1I, after the original Pictures and Drawings of GUERCINO, MICHAEL ANGELO, DOMEN!- 
CHINO, ANNIRALE, Lupovico, and AcosTino CARACcI, PIETRO DA CorToONA, CARLO Ma- 
RATTI, and others, in the Collection of Her Majesty. Imperial 4to (pub. at 10/. 10s.), half mo- 
rocco, gilt edges, 3/. 3s. Tsi2 


JAMES’ (G. P. R.) BOOK OF THE PASSIONS, royal 8vo, illustrated with 16 splendid 
- Line Engravin: after drawings by Enwarkp CouRROULD STEPHANOFF CHALON, KENNY 
MEAnDowWs, an JENKINS; engraved under the superintendence of CHARLES HEATH. New 
and improved edition (just published), elegant in gilt cloth, gilt edges (pub. at 1/. lls. 6d.), 


JAMESON'S BEAUTIES OF THE COURT OF CHARLES THE SECOND. 2 —_ 
impl. 8yo, 21 beautiful Portraits (pub. at 2/. 5s.), cloth, 1/. 1s. 


JOHNSON'S SPORTSMAN’S CYCLOPEDIA of the Science and Practice of the Field, the 
Turf, and the Sod, or operations of the Chase, the Course, and the Stream, in one very thick 
vol. 8yo, illustrated with upwards of 50 Steel Engravings, after COOPER, WARD, HANCOCK, and 
others (pub. at 1/, 11s. 6d.), cloth, lis. 


KNIGHTS (HENRY GALLY), ECCLESIASTICAL, ARCRT eC TURE OF ITALY, 








ROM THE TIME OF CON IFTEENTH Y. With an 
Epunobrtion and Text. Imperial follow eis Sew danttcne 40 Suaatitak yet highly inte. 
resting Views of Ecclesiastical Buildings in Italy, several of which are exp ely 
in gold and colours, half-bound morocco, 5/. 5s. 1843 


Second and Concluding Series, containing 41 beautiful and highly-interesting Views of Eccle- 
siastical Buildings in Italy, arranged in Chronological Order; with Descriptive Letter-press. 
Imperial folio, half-houn morocco, 51. 58. 1844 


KNIGHT'S (HENRY GALLY) SARACENIC AND NORMAN REMAINS. To illus- 
trate the Normans in Sicily, Imperial folio. 30 large Engravings, consisting of Picturesque 
Views, Architectural Remains, Interiors and Exteriors of Buildings, with Descriptive a 
* press. Coloured like Drawings, half-bound morocco, 8/, 8s. 1846 

But very few copies are now first executed in this expensive manner. 


KNIGHT'S PICTORIAL LONDON. 6 vols. bound in 3 thick handsome vols. oe Se, 
illustrated by 650 Wood Engravings (pub. at 3/. 3s.), cloth, gilt, 17. 18s. ~4t 


LONDON. BTCC NSON Ss LONDINA ILLUSTRATA; OR, GRAPHIC AND 
HISTORICAL ILLUSTRATIONS of the most Interesting and Curious Architectural 
Monuments of the City and Suburbs of London and Westminster, e.g., Monasteries, Churches, 
Charitable Foundations, Palaces, Halls, Courts, Processions, Places of early Amusements, 
Theatres, and Old Houses. . 2 vols. imperial +to, containing 207 Copper-plate Engravings, Apt 
Historical and Descriptive Letter-press (pub. at 26/. 5s.), half-bound morocco, 5/. 5s. 1819-2 


LOUDON’ S EDITION OF REPTON ON LANDSCAPE GARDENING AND 
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE, New Edition, 250 Wood Cuts, Portrait, thick 8yo, cloth 
ietieea (pub. at 12. jee sec 


LYSON's 'S ENVIRONS OF LONDON; being an Historical Account of the Towns, Villages 
Hamlets inthe Counties of Surrey, Kent, Essex, Herts, and Middlesex, 5 vols. 4to, Plates 
(out at 10/. 10s.), cloth, 22. 10s. 


The same, large paper, 5 vols. royal 4to (pub. at 15/. 15s.), cloth, 3d. 3s. 


MACGREGOR’ S PROGRESS OF AMERICA FROM THE DISCOVERY BY 
MBUS, to the year 1846, comprising its History and Statistics, 2 remarkably — 
Magri a imperial 8yo. cloth lettered (pub. at 4/. 14s. Gd,), 1d. 11s. 6d. 


MARTIN 'S CIVIL COSTUME OF ENGLAND, from the Conquest to the Present Period. 
from Tapestry, MSS. &c, Royal 4to, 61 Plates, beautifully Illuminated in Gold and Colours, 
cloth, gilt, 2/, 12s, 6d. 1843 


6 CATALOGUE OF NEW BOOKS 





MEYRICK’'S PAINTED ILLUSTRATIONS OF ANCIENT ARMS AND ARMOUR, 
a Critical Inquiry into Ancient Armour as it existed in Europe, but particularly in England, 
from the Norman Conquest to the Reign of Charles II, with a Glossary, etc. by Sin SAMUEL 
RusH Meyrick, LL.D., F.S.A., etc,, new and greatly improved Edition, corrected aed to. 
larged throughout by the Author himself, with the assistance of Literary and Antiquarian 
Friends (ALBERT WAY, etc.), 3 vols. imperial 4to, illustrated by more than 100 Plates, 
splendidly illuminated, mostly in gold and silver, exhibiting some of the finest Specimens 
existing in England; alsoa new Plate of the Tournament of Locks and Keys (pub. at 2i/.), 
half-bound morocco, gilt edges, 10/, 10s. 1844 

Sir WALTER Scort justly describes this collection as “‘THE INCOMPARABLE ARMOURY.” 
—Edinburgh Review, 


MEYRICK’S DESCRIPTION OF ANCIENT ARMS AND ARMOUR, in the Collec- 
tion of Goodrich Court, 150 Engravings by Jos. SkELTON, 2 vols. folio (pub. at 11. 1ls.), 
half morocco, top edges gilt, 4/. 14s. 6d. 


MILLINGEN’S ANCIENT UNEDITED MONUMENTS; comprising Painted Greek 
Vases, Statues, Busts, Bas-Reliefs, and other Remains of Grecian Art. 62 large and beautiful 
Engravings, mostly coloured, with Letter-press Descriptions, imperial 4to (pub. at 9/. 9s.), 

. half morocco, 4/. 14s. 6d. 1822 


MOSES’ ANTIQUE VASES, CANDELABRA, LAMPS, “TRIPODS, PATERZ, 
Tazzas, Tombs, Mausoleums, Sepulehral Chambers, Cinerary Urns, Sarcophagi, Cippi; and 
other Ornaments, 170 Plates, several of which are coloured, with Letter-press, by Hors, small 
$vo (pub. at 3/. 3s.), cloth, 1/. 5s. 1814 


Arabs now existing in the Peninsula, including the magnificent Palace of Alhambra; ~ 
celebrated Mosque and Bridge at Cordova; the Royal Villa of Generaliffe; and the Casa de 
Carbon: accompanied by Letter-press Descriptions, in 1 vol. atlas folio, original and brilliant 

1813 


MURPHY'S ANCIENT CHURCH OF BATALHA, IN PORTUGAL, Plans, Bile- 
vations, Sections, and Views of the; with its History and Description, and an Introductory 
Discourse on GOTHIC ARCHITECTURE, imperial folio, 27 fine Copper Plates, engraved 
by Lowry (pub. at 6/. 6s.), half morocco, 2/, 8s. 1795 


NAPOLEON GALLERY; Or Illustrations of the Life and Times of the Emperor, with 99 
Etchings on Steel by REVEIL, and other eminent artists, in one thick volume post 8vo. (pub. 
at 1l. 1s.), gilt cloth, gilt edges, 10s. 6d. 1846 


i 
NICOLAS'S (SIR HARRIS) HISTORY OF THE ORDERS OF KNIGHTHOOD 
OF THE BRITISH EMPIRE; with an Account of the Medals, Crosses, and Clasps which 
have been conferred for Naval and Military Services ; together with a History of the Order of 
the Guelphs of Hanover. 4 vols. imperial 4to splendidly printed and illustrated hy numerous 
fine Woodcuts of Badges, Crosses, Collars, Stars, Medals, Ribbands, Clasps, etc. and many 
large Plates, illuminated in gold and colours, including full-length Portraits of Queen Vic- 
toria, Prince Albert, the King of Hanover, and the Dukes of Cambridge and Sussex, (Pub. 
at 14d, 14s.), cloth, with morocco backs, 5/. 15s. 6d. #,% lete to 1847 


———_—_—— the same, with the Plates richly coloured but not illuminated, and without the 
extra portraits, 4 vols. royal 4to. cloth, 3/. 10s. 6d. 

‘‘Sir Harris Nicolas has produced the first comprehensive History of the British Orders of 
Knighthood; and it is one of the most elaborately prepared and splendidly printed works that ever 
issued from the press. The Author appears to us to have neglected no sources of information, 
and to have exhausted them, as far as regards the general scope and purpose of the inquiry. 
The Graphical Illustrations are such as become a work of this character upon such a subject; 

* at, ofcourse, a lavish cost. The resources of the recently revived art of wood-engraving have 
been combined with the new art of printing in colours, so as to produce a rich effect, almost 
rivalling that of the monastic illuminations. Such a book is sure of a place in every great library. 
It contains matter calculated to interest extensive classes of readers, and we hope by our 
specimen to excite their curiosity.’’—Quarterly Review. 


NICHOLSON’S ARCHITECTURE; ITS PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE. 218 

Plates by Lowry, new edition, revised by Jos. Gwitt, Ese@., one volume, royal pi 

12, 11s. 6d. 848 

For classical Architecture, the text book of the Profession, the most useful Guide to the 

Student, and the best Compendium for the Amateur. An eminent Architect has declared 

it to be ‘*not only the most useful book of the kind ever published, but absolutely indispen- 
sable to the Student.” a 


PICTORIAL HISTORY OF GERMANY DURING THE REIGN OF FREDERICK 
THE GREAT, including a complete History of the Seven Years’ War. By FRaAncis 
KuGter. Illustrated by ADOLPH MENZEL. Royal 8vo, with above 500 Woodcuts (pub. at 
1/, 8s.), cloth gilt, 12s. 1845 


PICTORIAL GALLERY OF RACE-HORSES. Containing Portraits of all the Winning 
Horses of the Derby, Oaks, and St. Leger Stakes during the last Thirteen Years, and a His- 
tory of the principal Operations of the Turf. By WiLpRAKE (Geo. Tattersall, Esq.). Royal 
8vo, containing 95 beautiful Engravings of Horses, after Pictures by Cooper, HERRING, 
Hancock, ALKEN, &e. Also full-length characteristic Portraits of celebrated living Sports- 
men (‘* Cracks of the Day’’), by SexMouR (pub, at 2/. 2s.), scarlet cloth, gilt, 1/, 1s. 





SQ E TOUR OF THE RIVER THAMES, in its Western Course, including 
PICTURES Descriptions of Richt;ond, Windsor, and a ton Court. By JoHN FisHEeR 
URRAY. ved by upwards of 100 very highly-finis ed Wood Engravings by Orrin 
Smairu ees LANDELLs, LINTON other eminent artists; to which are added . 
several beautiful Copper and Steel Plate Engravings by Cooke and others. One large _, 
some volume, royal 8vo (pub, at 1/. 5s.', gilt cloth, 10s. 6d. 
The most beautiful volume of Topographic Lignographs ever produced. 


PINELLI'S ETCHINGS OF ITALIAN MANNERS AND et atmo re = 
Carnival, Banditti, &c., 27 Plates, imperial 4to, half-bound morocco 


PRICE (SIR UVEDALE) ON THE PICTURESQUE in cane and Landsea shies. 
ng, with an Essay on the Origin of Taste, and much additional matter. By Sir THomas 
Dick LavpER, Bart. 8vo, with 60 beautiful Wood Engravings by Monracu STANLEY 
(pub. at lv. 1s.), gilt cloth, 12s. 1842 


PUGIN’S GLOSSARY OF ECCLESIASTICAL CRNAMENT AND COSTUME; 
setting forth the Origin, History, and Signification of the various Emblems, Devices, and Sym 
polical Colours, peculiar to Christian Designs of the Middle Ages. Illustrated. by nearly 80 
ary splendidly printed in gold and colours. Royal 4to, half moroceo-extra, top edges gilt, 

« 78 


PUGIN’'S ORNAMENTAL TIMBER GABLES, selected from Ancient any as 
England and Normandy. Royal 4to, 30 Plates, cloth, 1/, 1s. ; 


PUGIN'S EXAMPLES OF GOTHIC ARCHITECTURE, selected from Ancient 
F Edifices in England; consisting of Plans, Elevations, Sections, and Parts at large, with Histo- 
rical and Descriptive letter-press, illustrated by 225 Engravings by LE Krux. 3 vols. 4to 
(pub. at r2/. 125.) cloth, 72. 17s. 6d. 1839 


2UGIN’S GOTHIC ORNAMENTS. 90 fine Plates, drawn on Stone by J. D. HaRDING et 
others. Royal 4to, half morocco, 31. 3s, 


“UGIN’S NEW WORK ON FLORIATED ORNAMENT, with 30 pists, Se 
fm Gold and Colours, royal 4to, elegantly bound in cloth, with rich gold ornaments, 
3. 


RADCLIFFE’S NOBLE SCIENCE OF FOX-HUNTING, for the use of Sportsmen, ro * 
cu oe 2 AeaTy 40 beautiful Wood Cuts of Hunting, Hounds, &c. (pub. at 11. 8s.), clo 


RETZSCH’S OUTLINES TO SCHILLER’S “FIGHT Wits} THE DRAGON,” 
Royal 4to., containing 16 Plates, Engraved by MosEs, stiff covers, 7s. 6 


RETZSCH’S ILLUSTRATIONS TO SCHILLER’S “ FRIDOLIN,” Royal 4to., contain- 
ing 8 Plates, Engraved by MosgEs, stiff covers, 4s. 6d. 


REYNOLDS’ (SIR JOSHUA) GRAPHIC WORKS. 300 beautiful Engravings (com- 
prising nearly 400 subjects) after this delightful painter, engraved on Steel by S. W. Reynolds. 
3 vols. folio (pub. at 36/.), half bound morocco, gilt edges, 12/. 12s. 


REYNOLDS’ (SIR JOSHUA) LITERARY WORKS. Comprising his Discourses; 

delivered at the Royal Academy, on the Theory and Practice | of Painting; his Journey te 

sanders and Holland, with Criticisms on Pictures; Du Fresnoy’s Art of Painting, with Notes 

+0 which is prefixed, a Memoir of the Author, with Remarks illustrative of his Principles and 

naactice, by BEECHEY. New Edition. 2 vols. feap. 8vo, with Portrait (pub. at 18s.), git 
»soth, 10s. 

** His admirable Discourses contain such a body of just criticism, clothed in such aE see 
elegant, and nervous language, that it is no exaggerated panegyric to assert, that they will last 
as long as the English tongue, and contribute, not less than the productions of his pencil, to 
render his name immortal.’’—Northcote. 


ROBINSON'S RURAL ARCHITECTURE; being a Series of Designs for Ornamental 
Cottages, in 96 Piates, with Estimates. Fourth, greatly improved, Edition. Royal 4to (pub. 
at 4/. 4s. ), half morocco, 2U, 5s. 


ROBINSON'S NEW SERIES OF ORNAMENTAL COTTAGES AND VILLAS. 
56 Plates by HARDING and ALLOM. Royal 4to, half morocco, 21. 2s. 


ROBINSON'S ORNAMENTAL VILLAS, 96 Plates (pub. at 41. 4s.), half morocco, 27. 5s. 
ROBINSON’S FARM BUILDINGS. 56 Plates (pub. at 27. 2s.), half morocco, 1, 11s. 6d. 
ROBINSON'S LODGES AND PARK ENTRANCES. 48 Plates (pub. at 27. 2s.), half 


morocco, il, 1 


ROBINSON'S VILLAGE ARCHITECTURE. Fourth Edition, with additional Plate. 41 
Plates (pub. at 1, 16s.), half bound uniform, 1/. 4s. ¢ 


BINSON’S NEW VITRUVIUS BRITANNICUS; Or, Views, Plans, and Elevations ox 
ROE ih Mansions, viz., Woburn Abbey, Hatfield House, and Hardwicke ret also Cassio-~ 
bury House, by J oHN Britrron, imperial folio, 50 fine engravings, by Le Keux ir at 
16/. 16s.) half morocco, gilt edges, 31, 13s. Gd. 847 


Cc A GALLERY, . comprising 33 beautiful Engravings, after pictures at 
ROFAL ieee Ss PALACE, pertivetariy REMBRANDT, the OsTADES, TENIERS, GERARD 
Dow, Boru, Curr, ReEyNoxips, Tirran, and RuBENS, engraved by GrEeaTBACH, S. W. 
RevsoLDs, PRESBURY, BURNET, &c.; with letter-press by LANNELL, royal 4to (pub. at 

41. 4s.), haif morocco? id, Ils, 6d, 


8. CATALOGUE OF NEW BOOKS 





DEPENDENCIKS. Three vols., 4to., 159 plates, (pub. at 62. Gs.) cloth, 42. 4s. 


SHAKSPEARE PORTFOLIO; a Series of 96 Grapuic InLusTRATIONS i 
the most eminent British Artists, including Smirke, Stothard, Stepbanof Cooma ati i 
Hilton, Leslie, Briggs, Corbould, Clint, &c., beautifully engraved by Heath, reatbach, 
Robinson, Pye, Finden, Englehart, Armstrong, Rolls, and others (pub. at 8/. 8s.), in a ease 
with leather back, imperial 8vo, 1/. 1s. ; : 


SHAW AND BRIDGENS’ DESIGNS FOR FURNITURE, with Candelabra and interior 
Decoration, 60 Plates, royal 4to, (pub. at 3/. 3s.), half-bound, uncut, ll. lis, 6d. 1838 
The same, large paper, imp]. 4to, the Plates coloured (pub. at 6. 6s.), hf.-bd., uncut, 3/. 3s. 


SHAW’S LUTON CHAPEL, its Architecture and Ornaments, illustrated in a series of 26 
highly finished Line Engravings, imperial folio (pub. at 32. 3s.), half morocco, uncut, IZ. 16s. 
1 


RUDING’S ANNALS OF THE COINAGE OF GREAT BRITAIN AND ITS 
1840 


SILVESTRE’S UNIVERSAL PALEOGRAPHY, or Fac-similes of the writings of every 
age, taken from the most authentic Missals and other interesting Manuscripts existing fn the 
Libraries of France, Italy, Germany, and England. By M. Silvestre, containing upwards of 
300 large and most beautifully executed fac-similes, on Copper and Stone, most richly illumi- 
nated in the finest style of art, 2 vols. atlas folio, half morocco extra, gilt edges, 314, 10s. 

The Historical and Descriptive Letter-press by Champollion, Figeac, and Cham- 

pollion, jun. With additions and corrections by Sir Frederick Madden. 2 vols, royal 8vo, 

cloth, 1. 16s. 1850 

the same, 2 vols. royal 8vo, hf. mor. gilt edges (uniform with the folio work), 27. 8s. 


SMITH'S (C. J.) HISTORICAL AND LITERARY CURIOSITIES. Consisting of 
Fac-similes of interesting Autographs, Scenes of remarkable Historical Events and interesting 
Localities, Engravings of Old Houses, Illuminated and Missal Ornaments, Antiquities, &c. 
&c., containing 100 Plates, some illuminated, with occasional Letter-press. In 1-yolume 4to, 
half morocco, uncut, reduced to 3/. 1840 


SMITH’S ANCIENT COSTUME OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND, From 
the 7th to the 16th Century, with Historieal Illustrations, folio, with 62 coloured plates illu- 
minated with gold and silver, and highly finished (pub. at 10/. 10s.) half bound, morocco, 
extra, gilt edges, 3/. 13s. 6d. 


SPORTSMAN'S REPOSITORY; comprising a Series of highly finished Line Engravings, 
representing the Horse and the Dog, in all their varieties, by the celebrated engraver JOHN 
Scort, from original paintings by Reinagle, Gilpin, Stubbs, Cooper, and Landseer, accom~ 
panied by a comprehensive Description by the Author of the “ British Field Spurts,’” 4to, with 
37 large Copper Plates, and numerous Wood Cuts by Burnett and others (pub. at 2/. 12s. 6u.), 
cloth gilt, 1/. 1s. 

STORER’S CATHEDRAL ANTIQUITIES OF ENGLAND AND WALES. 4 vols. 

* $vo., with 256 engravings, (pub. at 7/, 10s.) half morocco, 2/, 12s. 6d. 

STOTHARD’S MONUMENTAL EFFIGIES OF GREAT BRITAIN. 147 beautifally 
finished Etchings, all of which are more or less tinted, and some of them highly illuminated in 
gold and colours, with Historical Descriptions and Introduction, by Kemps. Folio (pub. at 
19/.), half morocco, 8J. 8s. 

STRUTT’'S SYLVA BRITANNICA ET SCOTICA; or, Portraits of Forest Trees distin- 
guished for their Antiquity, Magnitude, or Beauty, comprising 50 very large and highly-finished 
painters’ Etchings, imperial folio (pub. at 9/. 9s.), half morocco extra, gilt edges, 4/. 10s. 


STRUTT’S DRESSES AND HABITS OF THE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND, from 
the Establishment of the Saxons in Britain to the present time; with an Historical and 
Critical Inquiry into every branch of Costume. New and greatly improved Edition, with Cri- 
tical and Explanatory Notes, by J. R. Phancue’, Esq@., F.S, 2 vols. royal 4to, 153 Plates, 
cloth, 4/.4s. The Plates, coloured, 7/.7s. The Plates splendidly illuminated in gold, silver, 
and opaque colours, in the Missal style, 20/. 1842 


STRUTT'S REGAL AND ECCLESIASTICAL ANTIQUITIES OF ENGLAND. 
Containing the most authentic Representations of all the English Monarchs from Edward the 
Confessor to Henry the Eighth: together with many of the Great Personages that were emi- 
nent under their several Reigns. New and greatly improved Edition, by J. R. PLhancuer/, 
Esq., F.S.A. Royal 4to, 72 Plates, cloth, 2/. 2s. The Plates coloured, 4/. 4s. Splendidly 
illuminated, uniform with the Dresses, 12/. 12s. ; 4842 


UBBS' ANATOMY OF THE HORSE. 24 fine large Copper-plate Engravings. Impe- 

lite folio (pub. at 4/. 4s.), boards leather back, 1/. 11s. 6d, ® oF BP), +O 

The original edition of this fine old work, which is indispensable to artists. It has long been 
considered rare. 

TATTERSALL’S SPORTING ARCHITECTURE, comprising the Stud Farm, the ‘Hall 
the Stable, the Keane}, Race Studs, &c. with 43 beautiful steel and wood illustrations, several 
after HANCOCK, cloth gilt (pub. at 1/. 11s. 6d.), 1/. 1s. 1850 

TAYLOR'S HISTORY OF THE FINE ARTS IN GREAT BRITAIN. 2 vols, pox 
8vo, Woodcuts (pub. at 1. 1s.), cloth 7s. 6d. 1841 

“ The best view of the state of modern art.”—United States’ Gazette. 


: NALS AND ANTIQUITIES OF RAJAST’HAN; OR, THE CENTRAL 
OOS WESTERN RAJPOOT STATES OF INDIA, ‘COMMONLY CALLED RAJPOOT- 
ANA). By Lieut.-Colonel J. Top, imperial 4tc, embellished with above 28 extremely beauti- 

fal line Engravings by FrnDEN, and capital large folding map (4/. 14s. 6d.), cloth, 252. 18:9 














PUBLISHED OR SOLD BY H. G. BOHN. 9 





TURNER AND GIRTIN’'S RIVER SCENERY; felio, 20 beautiful engravings on steel, 
after the drawings of J. M. W. TurneER, brilliant impressions, in a portfolio, with morocco 
back (pub. at 5/. 5s.), reduced to 1/. ls. 6d. 

——_—_———- the same, with thick glazed paper between the plates, half bound morocco, gilt 

edges (pub. at 6/. 6s.), reduced to 2/. 2s. 


WALKER'S ANALYSIS OF BEAUTY IN WOMAN. Preceded by a critical View of the 
neral Hypotheses respecting Beauty, by LEONARDO DA VINCI, MENGS, WINCKELMANN, 

UME, HoGARTH, BuRKE, KNIGHT, ALISON, and others. New Edition, royal 8vo, illus- 
trated by 22 beautiful Plates, after drawings from life, by H. Howarp, by Gaucit and LANE 
(pub, at 22. 2s.), gilt cloth, 1/. 1s. 1846 


WALPOLE’S (HORACE) ANECDOTES OF PAINTING IN ENGLAND, with some 
Account of the Principal Artists, and Catalogue of Engravers, who have been horn or resided 
in England, with Notes by Dattaway; New Edition, Revised and Enlarged, by RaLPH 
WornvM, Esq., complete in 3 vols. 8vo, with numerous beautiful portraits and plates, 2/. 2s. 


WATTS’S PSALMS AND HYMNS, Irrusrrarep Enrrion, complete, with indexes of 
*‘Subjects,”’ ‘* First Lines,’? and a Table of Scriptures, 8vo, printed in a very large and beauti- 
ful type,sembellished with 24 beautiful Wood Cuts by Martin, Westall, and others (pub. at 
1. 1s.), gilt cloth, 7s. 6d._ b , 


WHISTON’S JOSEPHUS, ILLUSTRATED EDITION, compiete; containing both the 
Antiquities and the Wars of the Jews. 2 vols. 8vo, handsomely printed, embellished with 52 
beautiful Wood Engravings, by various Artists (pub. at 1. 4s.), cloth bds., elegantly gilt, a 


WHITTOCK’S DECORATIVE PAINTER’S AND GLAZIER’S GUIDE, containing the 
most approved methods of imitating every kind of fancy Wood and Marble, in Oil or Distemper 
Colour, Designs for Decorating Apartments, and the Art of Staining and Painting on Glass, 
&c., with Examples from Ancient Windows, with the Supplement, 4to, illustrated with 104 
plates, of which 44 are coloured, (pub. at 2/, 14s.) cloth, 1/. 10s. 


WHITTOCK’S MINIATURE PAINTER’S MANUAL. Foolscap 8vo., 7 coloured plates, 


and numerous woodcuts (pub. at 5s.) cloth, 3s. 


WIGHTWICK'S PALACE OF ARCHITECTURE, a Romance of Art and History. Impe- 
rial 8vo, with 211 Illustrations, Steel Plates, and Woodcuts (pub. at 2/. 12s. 6d.), cloth, 1/. 1s. F 
184 


WILD’S ARCHITECTURAL GRANDEUR of Belgium, Germany, and France, 24 fine 
Plates by LE Krux, &c. Imperial 4to (pub. at 1. 18s.), half morocco, IJ. 4s. 1837 


WILD’S FOREIGN CATHEDRALS, 12 Plates, coloured and mounted like Drawings, in a 
handsome portfolio (pub. at 12d, 12s.), imperial folio, 5/. 5s. A 


WILLIAMS’ VIEWS IN GREECE, 64 beautiful Line Engravings hy MirrzR, HorspurcnH, 
and others. 2 vols. imperial 8vo (pub. at 6/. 6s.), half bound mor. extra, gilt edges, 2/. 12s. 6d. 
‘ 1829 


WINDSOR CASTLE AND _ITS ENVIRONS, INCLUDING ETON, hy Leircx 
REITCHIE, new edition, edited by E. Jessx, Esa., illustrated with upwards of 50 beautiful 
Engrayvings on Steel and Wood, royal 8vo., gilt cloth, lis. 


WOOD'S ARCHITECTURAL ANTIQUITIES AND RUINS OF PALMYRA AND 
BALBEC, 2jvols. in 1, imperial folio, containing 110 fine Copper-plate Engravings, some 
very large and folding (pub. at 7/. 7s.), half morocco, uncut, 3/. 13s. 6d. 1827 





Patural Pistorp, Aariculture, &e. 





ANDREWS’ FIGURES OF HEATHS. with Scientific Descriptions. 6 vols. royal 8vo, 
with 300 beautifully coloured Plates (pub. at 15/.), cloth, gilt, 7/. 10s. 1845 


BARTON AND CASTLE'S BRITISH FLORA MEDICA;.- OR, HISTORY OF THE 
MEDICINAL PLANTS OF GREAT BRITAIN. 2 vols. 8vo, illustrated by upwards of 200 
Coloured Figures of Plants (pub. at 3/. 3s.), cloth, 1/. 16s. 1845 


‘BAUER AND HOOKER'’'S ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE GENERA OF FERNS, 
in which the characters of each Genus are displayed in the most elaborate manner, in a series 


of magnified Dissections and Figures, highly finished in Colours. Imp. 8vo, Plates, 62. 1838-42 


BEECHEY.— BOTANY OF CAPTAIN BEECHEY’S VOYAGE, comprising an 
Account of the Plants collected by,Messrs. Lay and CoLrixE, and other Officers of the 
Expedition, during the Voyage to the Pacific and Behring’s Straits. By Srr Witnram 
Jackson Hooker, and G. A. W. Arnott, Esa., illustrated by 100 Plates, beautifully en- 
graved, complete in 10 parts, 4to (pub. at 7/. 10s.), 52. 1831-41 


BEECHEY.—ZOOLOGY OF CAPTAIN BEECHEY’S VOYAGE, compiled from the 
Collections and Notes of Captain Breecney and the Scientific Gentlemen who accompanied 
the Expedition. The Mammalia, by Dr. RicHarpson; Ornithology, by N. A. Vicors, Es@., 
Fishes, by G. T. Lay, Esa., and E. T. Bennett, Esa.; Crustacea, by RICHARD OWEN; 
Ese.; Reptiles, by Joun EDwarp Gray, Esa.; Shells, by W. SowERBy, Es@.; and Geology, 
by the Rey. Dr, BucKLAND. 4to; illustrated by 47 Plates, containing many hundred Figures, 
beautifully coloured by SowERBY (pub. at Si. 5s.), Cloth, 3/. 13s. 6d. 1839 


40 _-* CATALOGUE OF NEW BOOKS 





BOLTON'S NATURAL HISTORY OF_ BRITISH SONG BI Illustrated wit 
s, the size of Life, of the Birds, both Male and Female, in Tips Natural Atiioudes 
their Nests and Eggs, Food, Favourite Plants, Shrubs, Trees, &c. &c. New Edition, revised 
and very considerably augmented. 2 vols. in 1, medium 4to, containing 80 beautifully coloured 
plates (pub. at 8/. 8s.), half bound morocco, gilt backs, gilt edges, 3/. 3s. 1845 


BRITISH FLORIST, OR LADY'S i Seeibe: 
coloured ton of flowers and aie ie a hn res 


BROWN’'S ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE LAND AND FR 
OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND; with Figures, cha ns Sagat pee rose 
the Species. Royal 8vo, containing on 27 large Plates, 330 Figures of all the known British 
Species, in their full size, accurately drawn from Nature (pub. at 15s.), cloth, 10s. 6d. 1845 


CURTIS'S FLORA LONDINENSIS; Revised and Improved by Groncr GRAVES, ex- 
tended and continued by Sir W. Jackson HooKER; comprising the History of Plants indi- 
genous to Great Britain, with Indexes; the Drawings made by SYDENHAM, EpWwarps, and 
Linp1iEy. 5 vols. royal folio (or 109 parts), containing 647 Plates, exhibiting the full natural 
size ofeach Plant, with magnified Dissections of the Parts of Fructification, &¢., all beauti- 
fully coloured (pub. at 87/. 4s. in parts), half bound morocco, top edges gilt, 30/. 1835 


DENNY—MONOGRAPHIA  ANOPLURORUM 

ener, OF FAR eee poe’ Under the patronage sre ; pais 
on), 8vo, numerous bea culo i 

Psi hey 1 So y cvloured plates of Lice, containing several hundred capa re 


DON’S GENERAL SYSTEM OF GARDENING AND BOTANY. 4 volumes, royal 4to, 
1831-1838 


numerous woodcuts (pub. at 14/. 8s.), cloth, L/. 11s. 6a. 


DON’S HORTUS CANTASBRIGIENSIS; thirteenth Edition, 8vo (pub. at 12. 4s.), cloth, 12s. 
1845 


DONOVAN'S NATURAL HISTORY OF THE INSECTS OF INDIA. Enlarged, by 
J. O. Westwoop, Esq., F.L.S., 4to, with 58 plates, containing upwards of 120 exquisitely 
coloured figures (pub. at 6/. 6s.), cloth, gilt, reduced to 20. 2s, 1842 


DONOVAN’S NATURAL HISTORY OF THE INSECTS OF CHINA. Enlarged 
J..O. Westwoop, Esq., F.L.S., 4to, with 50 plates, containing upwards of 120 more os 
coloured figures (pub. at 62. 6s.), cloth, gilt, 20. 5s. : ‘ 

““Donovan’s works on the Insects of India and China are splendidly illustrated and ex- 
tremely useful.’’—Naturaiist. ila 

*“‘The entomological plates of our countryman Donovan, are highly coloured, elegant, and 
useful, especially those contained in his quarto volumes (Insects of India and China), where a 
great number of species are delineated for the first time.’’—Swainson. 


DONOVAN'S WORKS ON BRITISH NATURAL HISTORY. Viz.—Insects, 16 vols, 
—Birds, 10 vols.—Shells, 5 vols.—Fishes, 5 vols.—Quadrupeds, 3 vols,—together 39 vols. 8vo. 
containing 1198 beautifully coloured plates (pak, at 66/. 98.), boards, 23/. 17s. The same set of 
39 vols. bound in 21 (pub. at 73/. 16s.), half green morocco extra, gilt edges, gilt backs, 302. 
Any of the classes may be had separately. 


DOYLE’S CYCLOPEDIA OF PRACTICAL HUSBANDRY, and Rural Affairs in 
~ en beni pac Edition, Enlarged, thick 8vo., with 70 wood engravings (pub. at 13s.), cloth, 

8s . 1843 
DRURY'S ILLUSTRATIONS OF FOREIGN ENTOMOLOGY; wherein are exhibited 
. upwards of 600 exotic Insects, of the East and West Indies, China, New Holland, North and 
South America, Germany, &c. By J. O. Westwoop, Es@., F.L.S., Secretary of the Entomo- 
logical Society, &c. 3 vols, 4to, 150 Plates, most beautifully coloured, containing above 600 
figures of Insects (originally pub. at 152. 15s.), half bound morocco, 62. 16s. 6d. 1837 


EVELYN’S SYLVA AND TERRA. A Discourse of Forest Trees, and the Propagation of 
Timber, a Philosophical Discourse of the Earth; with Life of the Author, and Notes by Dr. A. 
Hunter, 2 vols. royal 4to. Fifth improved Edition, with 46 Plates (pub. at 5/. 5s.), | 2l. 

825 


FITZROY AND DARWIN.—ZOOLOGY OF THE VOYAGE IN THE BEAGLE. 
166 plates, mostly coloured, 3 vols. royal 4to. (pub. at 9/.), cloth, 5/. 53. 1838-43 


GREVILLE'’S CRYPTOGAMIC FLORA, comprising the Principal Species found in Great 
Britain, inclusive of all the New Species recently discovered in Scotland. 6 vols. royal 8vo, 
360 beautifully coloured Plates (pub. at 16/. 16s.), half morocco, 81. 8s. 1823-8 

This, though acomplete Work in itself, forms an almost indispensable Supplement to the 
thirty-six volumes of Sowerby’s English Botany, which does not comprehend Cee 
Plants. It is one of the most scientific and best executed works ou ludigenous Botany ever 
produced in this country. 


HARDWICKE AND GRAY'S INDIAN ZOOLOGY. ‘Twenty parts, forming two vol8., 
royal folio, 202 coloured plates (pub, at 21/.), sewed, 12/. 12s., or half moroccy, giit edges, 
14d, l4s. 


HARRIS'S AURELIAN; OR ENGLISH MOTHS AND BUTTERFLIES, Their 
Natural History, together with the Plants on which they feed; New and greatly improved 
Edition, by J. O. Westwoon, Esa., F.L.S., &c., in 1 vol. sm. folio, with 44 plates, Pbingeite g 
above 400 fxrures of Moths, Butterflies, Caterpillars, &c., and the Plants on which they. feed, 
exquisitely coloureu after the original drawings, half-bound morocco, 4/. 4s. 

i tremely heautiful work is the only one which contains our English Moths and Butter- 
flies ofthe full natural size, in all their changes of Caterpillar, Chrysalis, &c., with the plants 
on which they feed. ; 


PUBLISHED OR SOLD BY H. G. BOHN. Il 





HOOKE VILLE, ICONES FILICUM; OR. FIGU RES OF FERNS 
ae ANd. SRE Ss, \ nen which have been alto {her unnoticed by Botauists, ur have 
hoi ig tee ays tel igure 2 2 _— folio, with 240 beau’ coloured Plates (pub. at 251. 4s. dy 
half morocco, gilt e 1829-31 
The grandest and 403 Samer of the many scientific Works produced by Sir William Hooker. 


R containing Figures and Descriptions of Rare, or otherwise 
MO TB eccn Pica eceetalty of ack an are deserving of being cultivated in ‘our Gar- 
dens. 3 vols. imperial 8vo, containing 232 large and beautifully coloured Plates (pub. at 15/. ds 
cloth, 62. 6s. 1823-18. 
‘This is the most superb and attractive of all Dr. Hooker’s valuable works. 
“The ‘Exotic Flora,’ by Dr. Hooker, is like that of all the Botanical publications of the in- 
defatigable author, excellent ; and it assumes an appearance of finish and perfection to 
which neither the Botanical Magazine nor Register can externally lay claim.’»—Zoudon, 


HOOKER’S JOURNAL OF BOTANY; containing Figures and Descriptions of such Plants 

as recommend themselves by their ere rarity, or history, or by the uses to which they are 

plied in_the Arts, in Medicine, an Domestic Economy; together with occasional 

Be tanical Notices and Information, ain occasional Portraits and Memoirs of eminent 
Botanists. 4 vols. 8vyo, numerous plates, some coloured (pub. at 3l.), cloth, 11. 1834-4: 


HOOKER: Ss BOTANICAL MISCELLANY; * containing Figures and Descriptions of Plants. 
y their novelty, rarity, or history, or by the uses to which they 
aa po in the Arts, in Melticing, and in Domestic Economy, together with occasional 
Botanical Notices and z daterwadion, including many valuable Communications from distin- 
guished Scientific Travellers. Complete in 3 thick vols, royal 8vo, with 153 plates, many finely” 
coloured (pub. at 5/. 5s.), gilt cloth, 2/. 12s. 6d. 1830-3 


HOOKER'S FLORA GOREALP AMERICANA ; OR, THE BOTANY OF BRITISH 





RTH AMERICA. ustrated by 240 plates, complete in Twelve Parts, royal 4to, (pub. 
- mL 12s.), 84. The Twelve Parts complete, done up in 2 vols. royal 4to, extra cloth, ag 


HUISH ON BEES; THEIR NATURAL HISTORY AND GENERAL MANAGEMENT. 
New and greatly improved Edition, containing also the latest Discoveries and Improvements: 

in every department of the Apiary, with a description of the most ap eon eee HIVEs now in use, 
thick 12mo, Portrait and numerous Woodcuts (pub. at 10s. 6d.), cloth, gilt, 6s. 6d. 1s44 


JOHNSON’S GARDENER, complete in 12 vols. with numerous woodcuts, containing the 
Potato, one vol.—Cucumber, one vol.—Grape Vine, two vols.—Auricula and Asparagus, one- 
yol.—Pine Apple, two vols.—Strawberry, one vol.—Dahlia, one vol.—Peach, one barca, PT 
two vols.—together 12 vols. 12mo, woodcuts (pub. at 1/. 10s.), cloth, 12s, 8it 


either of the volumes may be had separately (pub. at 2s. 6d.), at Is. 


JOHNSON'S DICTIONARY OF MODERN GARDENING, numerous Woodcuts, very: 
thick 12mo, cloth lettered (pub. at 10s. 6d.), 4s. A comprehensive "and elegant volume. 1846 


LATHAM’S GENERAL HISTORY OF BIRDS. Being the Natural History and Descrip- 
tion of all the Birds (above four thousand) hitherto known or described by Naturalists, with 
the Synonymes of preceding Writers; the second enlarged and improved Edition, compre- 
heading all the discoveries in Ornithology subsequent to the former publication, and a General 
Index, 11 vols. in 10, 4to, with upwards of 200 coloured Plates, lettered (pub. at 26/7. 8s.), cloth, 
71. 173.6d. Winchester, 1821-28. The same with the plates eg AT coloured like 
1i vols. in 10, elegantly half bound, green morocco, gilt edges, 120. 


LEWIN’S NATURAL HISTORY OF THE_BIRDS OF NEW SOUTH WALES. 
Third Edition, with an Index of the Scientific Names and Synonymes by Mr, Goutp and ate 
Erron, folio, 27 plates, coloured (pub. at 4/, 4s.), hf. bd. morocco, 2/. 2s, 


LINDLEY'S BRITISH FRUITS; OR, FIGURES AND DESCRIPTIONS OF THE MOST 
ORTANT VARIETIES OF FRUIT CULTIVATED IN GREAT BRITAIN. 3 vols. 
opal $vo, containing 152 most beautifully coloured plates, chiefly by Mrs. WiTHERs, Artist 

to the Horticultural Society (pub. at 102. ids.), half bound, morocco extra, gilt edges, 51. a 





“This is an exquisitely beautiful work. Every plate is like a’Thighly finished ae, 
similar to those in the Horticultural Transactions.” 


LINDLEY’S DIGITALIUM MONOGRAPHIA. Folio, 28 plates of the Foxglove (pub. at 
41. 48.}, cloth, 1. 11s. 6d. 


the same, the plates beautifully coloured (pub. at 62. 6s.), cloth, 27. 12s. 6d. 


pee Nie (MRS.) ENTERTAINING NATURALIST, being Popular Descri raw 
, and Anecdotes of more than Five Hundred Animals, comprehending all the Quadra 

Binds, Fishes, Reptiles, Insects, &c., of which a knowledge is indispensable in polite e +t 

tion. With indians of Scientific and Popular Names, an Explanation of Terms, and an Ap- 

16 ee of Fabulous Animals, illustrated b wards of 500 beautiful woodcuts by BrEWIck, 

ARVEY, WHIMPER, and others. New Rai on, revised, enlarged, and corrected to the 

present state of Zoological Knowledge. In one thick vol. post 8voO. gilt cloth, 78. 6d. 1850 


LOUDON: S (J. C.) ARBORETUM ET FRUTICETUM BRITANNICUM, or the 
Trees and Shrubs of Britain, Native and Foreign, delineated and described; with their propa- 

gation, culture, mays pom and uses. Second improved Edition, § vols. Svo, with above 
400 plates of trees, and upwards of 2500 woodcuts of trees and shrubs (pub. at 10/.), 54, 5s. S844 





; 


12 CATALOGUE OF NEW BOOKS 





MANTELL’'S (DR.) NEW GEOLOGICAL WORK. THE MEDALS OF CREATION © 
or First Lessons in Geology, and in the Study of Organic Remains; includin Geological Ex7 
cursions to the Isle of Sheppey, Brighton, Lewes, Tilgate Forest, Charnwood Forest, Farring- 
don, Swindon, Calne, Bath, Bristol, Clifton, Matlock, Crich Hill, kc. By Gipron ALGER- 
NON MANTELL, Esa@., -D., F.R.S., &c. Two thick vols. foolseap 8vo, with coloured: 

Plates, and several hundred beautiful Woodcuts of Fossil Remains, cloth gilt, 12. 1s. 184+ 


MANTELL’S WONDERS OF GEOLOGY, or a Familiar Exposition of Geotagice! Phe- 
nomena. Sixth greatly enlarged and improved Edition. 2 vols. post 8vo, coloured Plates, and 
upwards of 200 Woodeuts, gilt cloth, 18s. 1848 


MANTELL’S GEOLOGICAL EXCURSION ROUND THE ISLE OF WIGHT, 
aud along the adjacent Coast of Dorsetshire. In 1 vol. post 8vo, with numerous beautifully 
executed Woodcuts, and a Geological Map, cloth gilt, 12s. 18 


MUDIE’'S NATURAL HISTORY OF BRITISH BIRDS; OR, THE FEATHERED 
TRIBES CF THE BRITISH ISLANDS. 2 vols. 8vo. New Edition, the Plates beauti- 
fully coioured (pub. at 1/. 8s.), cloth gilt, 16s. 1835 

“This is, without any exception, the most truly charming work on Ornithology which has. 
hitherto appeared, from the days of Willoughhy downwards. Other authors describe, 
Mudie paints; other authors give the husk, Mudie the kernel. We most heartily concur 
with the opinion expressed of this work by Leigh Hunt (a kindred spat) in the first few 
numbers of his right pleasant London Journal. The descriptions of Bewick, Pennant, 
Lewin, Montagu, and even Wilson, will not for an instant stand comparison with the 
spirit-stirring emanations of Mudie’s ‘living pen,’ as it has been called. We are not ac- 
quainted with any author who so felicitously unites beauty of style with strength and nerve 
of expression ; he does not specify, but paints.’’— Wood’s Ornithological Guide. 


RICHARDSON’'S GEOLOGY FOR BEGINNERS, comprising a familiar Explanation of 
Geology and its associate Sciences, Mineralogy, Physical Geology, Fossil Conchology, Fossil 
Botany, and Paleontology, including Directions for forming Collections, &c. iy Gir 
RicHarpsox, F.G.S. (formerly with Dr. Mantell, now of the British Museum). Second 
Edition, considerably enlarged and improved. One thick vol. post 8vo, illustrated by upwards 
of 260 Woodcuts (pub. at 10s. 6d.), cloth, 7s. 6d. 1846 


SELBY'S COMPLETE BRITISH ORNITHOLOGY. A most magnificent work of the 
Figures of British Birds, containing exact and faithful representations in their full natural size; 
of all the known species found in Great Britain, 383 Figures in 228 beautifully coloured Plates. 
2 vols. elephant folio, elegantly half bound morocco (pub. at 105/.), gilt back and gilt edges, 
31/. 10s, 1834 

**The grandest work on Ornithology published in this country, the same for British Birds 
that Audubon’s is for the birds of America. Every figure, excepting in a very few instances of 
extremely large birds, is of the fill natural size, beautifully and accurately drawn, with all the 
spirit of life.’’—Ornithologist’s Text Book. ; 

** What a treasure, during a rainy forenoon in the country, is such a gloriously illuminated 
work as this of Mr. Selby! Itis, without doubt, the most splendid of the kind ever published 
in Britain, and will stand a comparison, without any eclipse of its lustre, with the most magni- 
ficent ornithological illustrations of the French school. Mr. Selby has long and deservedly 
ranked high as a scientific naturalist.””—Blackwood’s Magazine. 


SELBY'’S ILLUSTRATIONS OF BRITISH ORNITHOLOGY. 2 vols. 8vo. Second 
Edition (pub, at 1. 1s.), boards, 12s. 1833 


SIBTHORP’S FLORA GRACA. The most costly and magnificent Botanical work ever pub- 
lished. 10 vols. folio, with 1000 beautifully coloured Plates, half bound morocco, publishing 
by subscription, and the number strictly limited to those subscribed for (pub. at penn 631. 
Separate Prospectuses of this work are now ready for delivery. Only forty copies of the 
original stock exist. No greater number of subscribers’ names can therefore be received. 


SIBTHORP’S FLORA GRACA PRODROMUS. Sive Plantarum omnium Enumeratio, 
quas in Provinciis aut Insulis Gracie invenit Jou. Stnrnorp: Characteres et Synonyma 
omnium cum Annotationibus Jac. Epy. SmirH. Four parts, in 2 thick vols, 8vo (pub. at 
2. 2s.), 14s. Londini, 1816 


SOWERBY’S MANUAL OF CONCHOLOGY. Containing a complete Introduction to the 
Science, illustrated by upwards of 650 Figures of Shells, etched on copper-plates, in which the 
most characteristic examples are given of all the Genera established up to the present time, 
arranged in Lamarckian Onley, accompanied by copious Explanations; Observations respect- 
ing the Geographical or Geological distribution of each; Tabular Views of the Systems of 
Lamarck and De Bilainville; a Glossary of Technical Terms, &c. New Edition, considerably 
enlarged and improved, with numerous Woodcuts in the text, now first added, 8vo, cloth, 18s. 
The plates coloured, cloth, 12. 16s. 18 


SOWERBY'S GONCHOLOGICAL. ILLUSTRATIONS; OR, COLOURED FIGURES 
OF ALL THE HITHERTO UNFIGURED SHELLS, complete in 200 Shells, 8vo, compris- 
ing severa] thousand Figures, in parts, all beautifully coloured (pub. at 15/.), 71. 10s, 1845 


SPRY'S BRITISH COLEOPTERA DELINEATED; containing Figures and Descriptions 
of all the Genera of British Beetles, edited by SHUCKARD, 8vo, with 94 plates, comprising 688 
figures of Beetles, beautifally and most accurately drawn (pub. at 20. 2s.), cloth, 1/. ls. ~~ 1840 

‘The most perfect work yet published in this department of British Entomolugy.”’ 7 


STEPHENS’ BRITISH ENTOMOLOGY, 12 vols. 8vo, 100 coloured Plates (pub. at 21/.}, 
half bound, 8/. 8s. - 4828-46 


——Or separateiy, LEPIDOPTERA, 4 vols, 4/. 4s. CoLEoPTERA, 5 vols, 4i. 4s. DERMAPTERA, 
Ortnorp., NEvkur., &c., 1 vol. li. ls. Hy mMbROPTERA, 2 vols. 2/. 2% . 


PUBLISHED OR SOLD BY H. G. BOHN. 13 





. SWAINSON’S EXOTIC CONCHOLOGY; OR, FIGURES AND DESCRIPTIONS OF 
RARE, BEAUTIFUL, OR UNDESCRIBED SHELLS. Royal 4to, containing 94 large and 
beautifully coloured figures of Shells, half bound mor. gilt edges (pub. at 5/. 5s), 2/. 12s. 6d. 
SWAINSON'S ZOOLOGICAL ILLUSTRATIONS; OR, ORIGINAL FIGURES AND 
- DESCRIPTIONS OF NEW, RARE, OR INTERESTING ANIMALS, selected chiefly 
from the Classes of Ornithology, Entomology, and Conchology. 6 vols. royal 8vo, containing 
318 finely coloured plates (pub. at 16/, 16s.), half bound morocco, gilt edges, 9/. 9s. 


SWEET’S FLORA AUSTRALASICA; OR. A SELECTION OF HANDSOME OR 
CURIOUS PLANTS, Natives of New Holland and the South Sea Islands. 15 Nos. forming 

1 vol. royal 8vo, complete, with 56 beautifully coloured plates (pub. at 3/. 1is.), cloth, 1/. 16s. 

_ 1827-28 


SWEET'S CISTINEA; OR, NATURAL ORDER OF CISTUS, OR ROCK ROSE. 30 
Nos. forming 1 vol. royal 8vo, complete, with 112 beautifully coloured plates (pub. at 5/. 5s.), 
cloth, 2/. 12s. 6d. 1828 
“ One of the most interesting, and hitherto the scarcest of Mr. Sweet’s beautiful publications.’’ 





Hiscellaneous Enalish Witerature, 


INCLUDING 


HISTORY, BIOGRAPHY, VOYAGES AND TRAVELS, POETRY AND THE 
DRAMA, MORALS, AND MISCELLANIES, 





BACON'S WORKS, both English and Latin. ‘With an Introductory Essay, and copious 
Indexes. Complete in 2 large vols. imperial 8vo, Portrait (pub. at 2/. 2s.), cloth, 1/. 16s. 1838 


BACON'S ESSAYS AND ADVANCEMENT OF LEARNING, with Memoir and Notes 
by Dr. Taylor, square 12mo, with 34 Woodcuts (pub. at 4s.), ornamental wrapper, 2s. 6d. 
1840 


BANCROFT’S HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES, from the Discovery of the 
American Continent. Twelfth Edition, 3 vols, 8vo (published at 2/. 10s.), cloth, 1/. 11s. 6d. 
1847 


BATTLES OF THE BRITISH NAVY, from 4.p. 1000 to 1840. By JoserH ALLEN, of 
Greenwich Hospital. 2 thick elegantly printed vols. foolscap 8vo, illustrated by 24 Portraits 
of British Admirals, beautifully engraved on Steel, and numerous Woodcuts of Battles (pub. 
at 1d. 1s.), cloth gilt, 14s. 1842 

‘These volumes are invaluable; they contain the very pith and marrow of our best Naval 
Histories and Chronicles.’’—Sun. 

“The best and most complete repository of the triumphs of the British Navy which has yet 
issued from the press.’’—United Service Gazette. 


BORDERER'S, THE TABLE BOOK, or Gatherings of the Local History and Romance of 
the English and Scottish borders, by M. A. RicHarnson (of Newcastle), 8 vols. bound in 4, 
oe 8vo, Illustrated with nearly 1000 interesting Woodcuts, extra cloth (pub. at 3/. 10s.), 

. lls. ; Ne tl 
*,* One of the cheapest and most attractive sets of books imaginable. Meee Oe 


‘BOSWELL'S LIFE OF DR. JOHNSON; BY THE RIGHT HON. J. C. C 
Incorporating his Tour to the Hebrides, and accompanied by the Commentaries pe seen 
ceding Editors: with numerous additional Notes and Illustrative Anecdotes; to which are 
added Two Supplementary Volumes of Anecdotes by HAwkINs, PiozzI, Murrny, TYERS 
aed Ma ped gees: and ge 0 vols. 1300s giustentod by upwards of 50 Views, Por- 
raits, an eets of Autographs, finely engraved on Steel, from Dtawings by Stanfiel - 
ing, Ke. cloth, reduced to 1d. 10s. ‘ wii ~~ tee 

This new, improved, and greatly enlarged edition, beautifully printed in the popular f 
Sir Walter Scott, and ‘Byron’s Works, is just such an edition as Dr. Johnson himeelf "iver sik 
recommended. In one of the Ana recorded in the supplementary volumes of the present edi- 
tion, he says: ‘‘ Books that you may carry to the fire, and hold readily in your hand, are the 
most useful after all. Such books form the mass of general and easy reading.”’ 


BOURRIENNE’S MEMOIRS OF NAPOLEON, one stout, closely, but el ] 
yale ipolecep 12mo, with fine equestrian Portrait of Napoleon and Froutisplece ge Sey 5 
cloth, 3s. 6d. 1si4 


BRITISH ESSAYISTS, viz., Spectator, Tatler, Guardian, Rambler, Adventurer, Idler, and 
ae om 3 thick vols. 8vo, portraits (pub. at 2/. 5s.), cloth, 1/. 7s. Either volume may be 
ad separate. 


BRITISH POETS, CABINET EDITION, containing the complete works of the pri 
English poets, from Miiton to Kiike White. 4 sais, ibosk 8vo hates of Standard. Piteare 
printed in a very small but beautitul type, +2 Medallion Portraits (pub. at 20. 28.), cloth, 15s, 

’ 


14 CATALOGUE OF NEW BOOKS 





GHAM" R OLITI 
BROUCHAMS (LORD) POLITICAL, PHILOSOPHY, and Het onthe Dish Gnu 


British Constitution (a portion of the preceding work), 8vo, cloth, 3s. 
BROUGHAMN’S (LORD) HISTORICAL SKETCHES OF STATESMEN, and other 
Pub fine portraits 


lic Characters of the time of George IIT. Vol. III. royal 8vo, with 10 
(pub. at 1/, 1s.), cloth, 10s. 6d, 


BROUGHAN'S (LORD) LIVES OF MEN OF LETTERS AND SCIENCE, Who 
fiourished in the time of George III, royal 8vo, with 10 fine portraits (pub. at 1/, 1s.), eho 
> 








the same, also with the portraits, demy 8vo (pub. at ll, 1s.), cloth, 10s. 6d, © 1846 


BROWNE'S (SIR THOMAS) WORKS, COMPLETE. including his Vulgar Errors, 
Religio Medici, Urn Burial, Christian Morals, Correspondence, Journals, and Tr many of 
them hitherto unpublished. The whole collected and edited by Suwon WILKIN, F.L.S. 4 
vols. Svo, fine Portrait (pub. at 2/. 88.), cloth, 1. lls. 6d. Pickering, 1836 


“Sir Thomas Browne, the contemporary of Jeremy Taylor, Hooke, Bacon, Selden, and 
Robert Burton, is undoubtedly one of the most eloquent and poetical of that great literary era, 


His Choma are often truly sublime, and always conveyed in the most impressive language.’» 
—Chambers, 


BUCKINGHAM'S AMERICA; HISTORICAL, STATISTICAL, AND DESCRIPTIVE, 

viz.: Northern States, 3 vols.; Eastern and Western States, 3 vols.; Southern or Slave States, 

2 vols.; Canada, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, and the other British Provinces in North 

America, l vol. Together 9 stout vols. 8vyo, numerous fine Engravings (pub. at 6/. 10s. 6d.), 

cloth, 2/. 12s. 6d. 1841-43 

_ “Mr. Buckingham goes deliberately through the States, treating of all, historically and sta- 

tistically—of their rise and progress, their manufactures, trade, population, topography, fer- 

7 resources, morals, manners, education, and so forth. His volumes wili be fi a store- 
ouse of k 7 dg 4th 


**A very entire and comprehensive view of the United States, diligently collected by a mam 
of great acuteness and observation.’’—Liferary Gazette. 


BURKE'S (EDMUND) WORKS. With a Biographical and Critical Introduction by Roeers. 
2 vols. imperial 8vo, closely but handsomely printed (pub. at 2/, 2s.), cloth, 1/. 10s. ~ 184 


BURKE'S ENCYCLOPADIA OF HERALDRY; OR, GENERAL ARMOURY 
OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, AND IRELAND. ber agoy Registry of all Armorial 
Bearings, Crests, and Mottoes, from the Earliest Period to the Present Time, including the 
late Grants by the College of Arms. With an Introduction to Heraldry, and a Dictionary of 
Terms. Third Edition, with a Supplement. One very large vol. sapere 8vo, beautifully 

rinted in small type, in double columns, by WHITTINGHAM, embellished with an elaborate 

rontispiece, richly illuminated in gold and colours; also Woodcuts (pub. at 2/. 2s.), cloth 
gilt, 12. 5s. : 1844 

The most elaborate and useful Work of the kind ever published. It contains upwards of 
30,000 armorial bearings, and incorporates all that have hitherto been given by Guitlim, Ed- 
mondson, Collins, Nisbet, Berry, Robson, and others; besides many thousand names which 
have never appeared in any previous Work. This volume, in fact, in a small compass, but 
without abridgment, contains more than four ordinary quartos. 


BURNS’ WORKS, WITH LIFE BY ALLAN CUNNINGHAM, AND NOTES BY 
SIR WALTER SCOTT, CAMPBELL, WORDSWORTH, LOCKHART, &e. Royal 8vo, 
fine Portrait and Plates (pub. at 18s.), cloth, uniform with Byron, 10s. 6d. 1842 

This is positively the only complete edition of Burns, in a single vetume, 8vo. It contains. 
not only every scrap which Burns ever wrote, whether prose or verse, but also a considerable 
number of Scotch national airs, collected and illustrated by him (not given elsewhere) and full 
and interesting accounts of the occasions and circumstances of his various writings. The 
very complete and interesting Life by Allan Cunningham alone occupies 164 pages, and the 
Indices and Glossary are very copious. The whole forms a thick elegantly printed volume, 
extending in all to 848 pee. The other editions, including one published in similar aed 
with an abridgment of the Life by Allan Cunningham, comprised in only 47 pages, and 
whole volume in only 504 pages, do not contain above two-thirds of the above. 


CAMPBELL’S LIFE AND TIMES OF PETRARCH. With Notices of Boccaccio and his 
Illustrious Contemporaries. Second Edition. 2 vols. 8vo, fine Portraits and Plates (pub. at 
1. 11s. 6d.), cloth, 12s, 1843 


CARY’'S EARLY FRENCH POETS, a Series of Notices and Translations, with an Intro- 


ductory Sketch of the History of French Poetry; Edited by his Son, the Rev. Henry Cany.' 
foolseap, 8vo, cloth, 5s. 1846. 


CARY’S LIVES OF ENGLISH POETS, supplementary to Dr. Jounson’s “ Lives,’ 
Edited by his Son, foolscap 8vo, cloth, 7s. 1846 


ATHAM PAPERS, being the Correspondence of William Pitt, Earl of Chatham- 
bags A by the Executors of his Son, John Earl of Chatham, and published from the Original 
Manuscripts in their possession. 4 vols. 8vo (pub. at 3/. 12s.), cloth, 1. 5s. 





Murray, 1838-40 

‘©A production of greater historical interest could hardly be imagined. It is a standard 
work, which will directly pass into every library.’’—Literary Gazette. : 

“There is hardly any man in modern times who fills so large a space in our history, and of 
whom we know so little, as Lord Chatham; he was the greatest Statesman and Orator that 
this country ever produced. We regard this Work, therefore, as one of the greatest value,” 

Edinburgh Review. 3 


=- 


PUBLISHED OR SOLD BY H. G. BOHN. #15 


ea 


CHATTERTON'S WORKS. both Prose and Poetical, including his Letters; with Notices 
of his Life, History of the garhig Controversy, and Notes Critica: ana Explanatory. 2 vol’s 
post 8vo, elegantly printed, with Engraved Fac-similes of Chatterton’s Handwriting and the 
wley ley MSS. (pub. at 15s.), cloth, 9s. Large Paper, 2 vols. crown 8vo (pub, at 14. 1s.), ioe 

18: 


«Warton, Malone, Croft, Dr. Knox, Dr. Sherwin, and shasta in prose; and Scott, cake 
\ ®vorth, Kirke White, Montgomery, Shelley, Coleridge, and Keats, in verse; have conferred 
. das rtality upon the Poems of Chatterton.” 
* rton’s was a genins like that of Homer and Shakspeare, which appears not above 
once in many centuries.’’—Vicesimus Knox. 


€LARKE'S (DR.'E. D.) TRAVELS. IN VARIOUS COUNTRIES OF EUROPE, 
ASIA, AND AFRICA, 11 vols, 8vo, maps and plates (pub. at 10/.), cloth, 3i. 3s. 1827-34 


‘CLASSIC TALES, Cabinet Edition, comprising the Vicar of Wakefield, Eliza Paul and 
Virginia, Gulliver’s Travels, Sterne’s Sentimental Journey, Sorrows of Werter, Theodosius 
and Constantia, Castle of eee sy and Rasselas, complete in 1 vol. 12mo.; 7 medallion por- 
traits (pub. at 10s, 6d.), cloth, 3s.\6d. 


COLMAN’S (GEORGE) POETICAL WORKS, vege his Broad Grins, Vapeting, and 
Eccentricities, 2imo, woodcuts (pub. at 2s. 6d.), "cloth, 1s. Gd. 


Cooner's 7" £ if) HISTORY a oe HE NAVY OF THE UNITED STATES a 
e Earliest Perioa to the Peace of 1815, 2 vols, 8vo (pub. at 1/. 10s.), git 





Sane 

COPLEY’S {FORMERLY MRS. HEWLETT) HISTORN | OF SLAVERY AND Ts 
ABOLITI on, with an Appendix, small 8vo, fine Portrait of 
Clarkson pub. at 8 a ee ey al 1839 


COSTELLO'S SPECIMENS OF THE EARLY FRENCH POETRY, from the time of 
the Troubadours to the Reign of Henry IV, post 8vo, with 4 Plates, splendidly illuminated in 
-gold and colours, cloth gilt, 18s. 1835 


COWPER'S COMPLETE WORKS, EDITED BY SOUTHEY; comprising his Poems 
Correspondence, and Translations; witha Life of the Author. 15 vols. post 8vo, embellishe 
pe numerous exquisite Eugravings, after the designs of Hanvzy (pub. at 3/. 15s. )s oe 
2 s 

This is the only com age edition of Cowper’s Works, prose and poetical, which Fon wid 
been given to the world. Many of them are still exclusively copyright, and consequently 
cannot appear in any other edition. 


CRAWEURD'S (J.) EMBASSY TO SIAM AND COCHIN-CHINA. 2 vols. —_ 
Maps, and 25 Plates (pub. at 1/. 11s. 6d.), cloth, 12s 


CRAWFURD'S EMBASSY TO AVA, with an Appendix on Fossil Remains by Professor 
. Buckianpd. 2 vols, 8vo, with 13 Mats, Plates, Vignettes (pub. at i/. Is. 6d.), cloth, 
128. 1834 


CRUIKSHANK'S THREE COURSES AND A DESSERT. A Series of Tales, in Three 
Sets, viz., Irish, Legal, and Miscellaneous. Crown 8vo, with 51 extremely clever and comic 
Tllustrations (publishing in the Iustrated Library at 5s.) 

“This is an extraordinary performance. Such an union of the painter, the poet, and the 
novelist, in one person, is unexampled. A tithe of the talent that goes to making the stories 
would set up a dozen of annual writers; and a ‘tithe of the inventive genius that is displayed in 
the illustrations would furnish a gallery.’ »— Spectator. 


DAVIS'S SKETCHES OF CHINA, During an Inland Journey of Four Months; with an 
Account ofthe War. Two vols., post 8vo, with a new map of China (pub. at lés.), cloth, ‘9s, ; 
184 


DIBDIN'S BIBLIOMANIA: OR BOOK-MADNESS. A Bibliographical Romance. New 
Bdition, with considerable Additions, including a Key to the assumed Characters in the 
per and a Supplement. 2 vols. royal 8vo, handsomely printed, embellished by numerous 
Woodcuts, many of which are now first added (pub. at 3/. 3s.), cloth, ld. lis. 6d. Large Paper, 
imperial 8vo, of which only very few copies were printed (pub. at 5i. oat cloth, 34, 138. most 


842 

This celebrated Work, which unites the entertainment of a romance with the most Jatuabic 

information on all bibliographical sabjects, has long been very scarce and sold for considerable 
sums—the small paper for 8/. 8s., and the large paper for upwards of 50 guineas! !! 


DIBDIN'S (CHARLES) SONGS, Admiralty edition, com mpeg with a Memoir by T. 
Disp1, illustratea Characteristic Sketches, engraved on Steel by GrorcE CrurK- 
SHANK, 12mo, cloth wenees. 53. 18 


DOMESTIC COOKERY, by a Lady (Mrs, RuypELL) New Edition, with numerous en 
Receipts, by Mrs. BIRCH, 12mo., with 9 plates (pub. at 6s.) cloth, 3s. 


PRAKE’S SHAKSPEARE AND HIS THMES, including the Biography of the Poet, 
Criticisms on his Genius and Writings, a new Chronology of his Plays, and a History of the 
Manners, Customs, and Amusements, Superstitions, Poetry, and Literature of the Elizabethan 
bra. 2 vols. 4to (above 1400 pages), with fine Portrait and a Plate of Autographs (pub. aoe 
51. 58.), cloth, 1d. 1s. 817 

“‘A masterly production, the publication of which will form an epoch in the Shaksperian on 
tory of this country. It comprises also a complete and critica! vee fe of all the Plays and 
Poems = siieuta aeoteien and a ore and powerful sketch of the contemporary litera- 
ture.”’—Gentleman’s 


16 CATALOGUE OF NEW BOOKS 


Ser... 


ENGLISH CAUSES CELEBRES, OR, REMARKABLE TRIALS. Square 12mo, (uh 


at 4s.), ornamental wrapper, 2s. 


FENN’'S PASTON LETTERS, Original Letters of the Paston Family, written during oe 
Reigns of Henry VI, Edward IV, and Richard III, by various Persons of Rank and Conse- 
quence, chiefly on Historical Subjects. New Edition, with Notes and Corrections, complete, 
2 vols. bound in 1, square 12mo (pub. at 10s.), cloth gilt, 5s. Quaintly bound in maroon 
morocco, carved boards, in the early style, gilt edges, 15s. $49 

The original edition of this very curious and interesting series of historical Letters is a rare 
book, and sells for upwards of ten guineas. The present is not an phsldement, as might be 
supposed from its form, but gives the whole matter by omitting the licate version of the 
letters written in an obsolete langyege, and adopting only the more Paces readable version 
published by Fenn. 

‘* The Paston Letters are an important testimony to the progressive condition of society, and 
come in as a precious link in the chain of the moral history of Lon gym which they alone in 
this period supply. They stand indeed singly in Europe.’’—Hallam. 


es, S WORKS, EDITED BY_ROSCOE, COMPLETE IN ONE VOLUME, 
Tom Jones, Amelia, Jonathan Wild, Joseph ‘Andrews, Plays, Essays, and Miscellanies.) 
(reitmn 8vo, with 20 capital Plates by CRurKsHANK ipub, at 1/. 4s.), cloth gilt, 14s. 848 
“Of all the works of imagination to which English genius has given origin, the writings of 
Henry Fielding are aaegh etleeg decidedly and exclusively her own.’’—Sir Watter Scott. 
‘*The prose Homer of human nature.”’—Lord Byron. 


FOSTER: S ESSAYS ON DECISION OF CHARACTER; ona Man’s Writing Memoirs 
Himself; on the epithet Romantic; on the Aversion of Men of Taste to Evangelical oro 
n, &c. Feap. 8vo, Eighteenth Edition (pub. at 6s.), cloth, 
“ Y have read with the greatest admiration the Essays of Mr. Cwokiee: He is one of the hae 3 
profound and eloquent-writers that England has produced.’’—Sir James Mackintosh. 


FOSTER’S ESSAY ON THE EVILS OF POPU a! IGNORANCE. New Edition, 
ae printed, in feap. Svo, now first uniform with his Essays on Decision of apres 
cloth 847 

“Mr. Foster always considered this his best work, and the one by which he ‘hed: his 
literary claims to be estimated.’ 
work which, popular and sieiceh as it Contessediee is, has never met with the thousandth 
part of the attention which it deserves.’’—Dr. Pye Smith. 


FROISSART'S CHRONICLES OF ENGLAND, FRANCE, AND SPAIN, &c. New 
Edition, by Colonel Johnes, with 120 beautiful Woodcuts, 2’ vols. super-royal 8vo, cloth 
lettered (pub. at 1/. 16s.), 1/. 8s. 1849 


FROISSART, ILLUMINATED ILLUSTRATIONS OF, 74 pistes, | ses in gold and 


colours, 2 vols. super-royal 8vo, half bound, uncut (pub. at 4/. 10s.), 32 
the same, large paper, 2 vols. royal 4to, half bound, uncut pa at 102. 10s.), 62. 6s, 


FROISSART S CHRONICLES, WITH THE 74 ILLUMINATED ILLUSTRATIONS 
; 2 vols, super-royal 8vo, elegantly half bound red morocco, gilt edges, = 
cated tooled (pub. at 62. 6s.), 47. 10s. 849 


GAZETTEER.—NEW EDINBURGH UNIVERSAL GAZETTEER, AND Piers ti 
PHICAL DICTIONARY, more igen than any hitherto published. Kew Edition, revised 
and completed to the present time, by JoHN THomsown (Editor of the Universal Atlas, &c.), 
very thick 8vo (1040 pages), Maps ( on at 18s.), cloth, 12s. 

This comprehensive volume is the latest, and by far the hest Universal Gazetteer of its size. 
It includes a full account of Affghanistan, New Zealand, &c. &c. 


GELL'S (SIR. WILLIAM) TOPOGRAPHY OF ROME AND ITS VICINITY. An 
improved Edition, complete in 1 vol. 8vo, with several Plates, cloth, 12s, With a very large 
ap of Rome and. its Environs (from a most careful trigonometrical survey), mounted on aa 

and folded in a case so as to form avolume. Together 2 vols. 8vo, cloth, 1. 1s. 

**These volumes are so replete with what is valuable, that were we to employ our auaits 
journal, we could, after all, afford but a meagre indication of their interest and worth. Itis, 
indged, a lasting memorial of eminent siti exertion, devoted to a subject of great import- 
ance, and one dear, not only to every scholar, ut to every reader of intelligence to whom the 
truth of history is an object of consideration.’’ 


GILLIES’ (DR.) HISTORICAL COLLECTIONS, Relating to Remarkable Periods of the 
Success of the Gospel, including the Appendix and Supplement, with Prefaces and Cane 
tinuation by the Rev. H. Bow AR, royal 8vo (pub. at 15s, od.), cloth; 7s. 6d. 1845 


GLEIG’'S MEMOIRS OF WARREN HASTINCS, first Governor-General of Benet, 
vols. 8vo, fine Portrait (pub. at 2/. 5s.), cloth, 1/. 1s. 


GOETHE'S FAUST, PART THE SECOND, as completed in 1831, translated into ot 
Verse by Joun MacponaLp BELL, Esq. Second Edition, feap. 8vo (pub. at 6s.), cloth, 3s. a 
1 


SOLDSMITH'S WORKS, with a Life and Notes. 4 vols. feap. 8vo, with engraved Titles and 
lates by STOTHARD and CRUIKSHANK. New and elegant Edition (pub. at 1/.), extra 
cloth » 12s. 1848 
**Can any author—can even Sir Walter Scott, be compared with Goldsmith for the Meme 
pecusy and aang of his compositions? You may take — oe ‘cut him out in little sap skdioot 
lights oes he pr resent to the imagination.”’—Athen 
e volumes of Goldsmith will ever eonstitute one of t the most precious ‘ wells of English 
undefiled.’ ”— Quarterly Review. 


GORDON'S HISTORY OF THE GREEK REVOLUTION, and of the Wars and Cam- 
aigns arising from the Unde, “oap of the Greek Patriots in emancipating their country from the 
urkish yoke. By the late Tuomas GorpDoN, General of a Division of the Greek Army. 

Second Edition, 2 vols. 8v0, Maps and Plans (pub, at 1/, 10s.); cloth, 10s. Gd. 1642 











_ 


PUBLISHED OR SOLD BY H. G. BOHN. 17 





PORTON'S BIOGRAPHICAL DICTIONARY, 3 thick vols. 8vo, cloth lettered (pub. at 
P20. 28.), 1. 11s. 6d. 


AS OF ENGLAND and Principal Sea Bathing Places. 3 vols. 

GRANY Ah sad seat ee one upwards of 50 beautiful Ser or (pab. at 1. 138. ), cloth, 15 

GRANVILLE'S (DR.) SPAS OF GERMANY, 8vo, with 39 Woodcuts and Maps yah. of 
; «), cloth 


HALL’S (CAPTAIN BASIL) PATCHWORK, consisting of Travels, and Adventures in 
mate cae Italy, France, Sicily, Malta, &c. 3 vols, 12mo, Second Edition, cloth, gilt (pub. at 
15s. , 7s. . 


MEEREN 'S (PROFESSOR) HISTORICAL WORKS, translated from the German, viz.— 
Asia, New Edition, complete in 2 vois,—AFRIcA, 1 vol._EUROPE AND 17S COoLonNIEs, 1 
vol.—ANCIENT GREECE, and HIstoricaL TREATISES, 1 vol.—MANUAL OF ANCIENT His- 
ad 1 vol,—together 6 vols. Svo (formerly pub. at 7/.), cloth ——— uniform, 31, 3s, 
* New and Complete Editions, with General Indexes. 
és PiGiasady Heeren’s Historical Researches stand in the very highest rank among those with 
which modern Germany has enriched the Literature of Europe.”— Quarterly Review. 


HEEREN’ S HISTORICAL REAR ES INTO THe POLITICS, INTERCOURSE, 
ADES OF THE CIENT NATIONS OF RICA; including the Carthaginians, 

fthiopiane, and Egy emg W New Edition, cortectek Pitan it with an Index, Life of the 
Author, new Appendixes, and other Additions. Complete in 1 vol. 8vo, cloth, 16s. 1850 


HEEREN'S HISTORICAL RESEARCHES INT? THE POLITICS, INTERCOURSE, 

E ANCIENT NATIONS SIA; including the Persians, Phoe- 

siete abr fee forihion and Indians. Now ede improved Edition, complete in 2 

vols. 8vo, elegantly printed (pub. originally at 2/. 5s.), cloth, 14, 4s. 1846 

‘One of the most valuable acquisitions made to our historical stories since the days of 
Gibbon.”’—Atheneum. 


HEEREN roa MANUAL OF one HISTORY CF THE POLITICAL SYSTEM OF 
AND ITS COL , from its formation at the close of the Fifteenth Century, 
re ‘te on aibabadaiiaed upon ae Sait of Napoleon, translated from the Fifth German aay eT 
New Edition, complete in 1 vol. Svo, cloth, 14s. 1846 
“The best History of Modern Europe that has yet appeared, and it is likely long to remain 
without a rival.’’—Atheneum. 
** 4 work of sterling value, which will diffuse useful knowledge for generations, after all the 
shallow pretenders to that distinction are fortunately forgotten.’’—Literary Gazette. 


HEEREN S. jANGIENT GREECE. translated by Bancrort; and HISTORICAL 
The Political Consequences of the Reformation. II. The Rise, Pro- 

sg iy Practical Ti ps Bild of Political Theories. III. The Rise and Growth of the Conti- 
nental Interests of Great Britain. In 1 vol. 8vo, with Index, cloth, 15s. 1847 


HEEREN’'S MANUAL OF ANCIENT HISTORY, particularly with regard to the Consti- 
tutions, the Commerce, and the Colonies of the States of Antiquity. Third Edition, corrected 
andimproved. Svo (pub. at 15s.), cloth, 12s. 

*,% New Edition, with Inder. 1847 

“ey We never remember to have seen a Work in which so much useful knowledge was con- 
densed into so small a compass. A careful examination convinces us that this book will be 
useful for our English higher schools or colleges, and will contribute to direct attention to the 
better and more instructive parts of history. The translation is executed with great fidelity.’’ 
—Quarterly Journal of Education. 


HEEREN’S MANUAL OF ANCIENT GEOGRAPHY. For the use of Schools and 
Private Tuition. Compiled from the Works of A. H. L. HEEREN, 12mo (pub. at 2s. 67:), 
cloth, 2s. Oxford, Talboys, 1830 

**An excellent and most useful tittle volume, and admirably adapted for the use of schools 
and rivate instruction.’’—Literary Gazette. 
valuable addition to our list of school books.’’—Atheneum. 


JACOB'S HISTORICAL INQUIRY INTO THE PRODUCTION AND CON- 
SUMPTION OF THE PRECIOUS METALS, 2 vols. 8vo (pub. at 17. 4s.), cloth, 16s. 1838 


JAMES'S WILLIAM THE THIRD, commiting the History of his Reign, illustrated in a 
series of unpublished letters, addressed to the Duke of Shrewsbury, by JAMES VERNON, 
Secretary of State, with Introduction and Notes, by G. P. R. James, Esq. 3 vols. Svo, ee 
traits (pub. at 27. 2s. ), cloth, 18s. 841 


JAENISCH’S CHESS PREC Anal d, 
with Notes, by WALKER, Pick cea hab. abtbajeod ay Pi ey ore aaa t 


JOHINSON'S (DR.) ENGLISH DICTIONARY, printed verbatim from the Author’s last 
Folio Edition. With all the Examples in full. To which are prefixed a History of the Lan- 
guage, and an English Grammar. 1 large vol. imperial 8vo (pub. at 2/. 2s.), cloth, 1/. 8s. | 1846 


JOHNSON’S (DR.) LIFE AND WORKS, by Murruy. New and improved Edition, com- 
plete in 2 thick vols. 8vo, Portrait, cloth lettered (pub. at 12. 11s. 6d.), 15s. 1850 


JOHNSONIANA; a Collection of Miscellaneous Anecdotes and Sayings, gathered from nearly a 
hundred different Publications, and not contained in BoswEtt’s Life of Johnson. Edited by 
J. W. CRoKER, M.P. thick tcap. 8vo, portait and frontispiece (pub. at 10s.), cloth, 4s. ae 


18 CATALOGUE OF NEW BOOKS 





Jon TONs TRAVELS IN SOUTHERN ABYSSINIA, through the Country of Ada, 
the Kingdom of Shoa. 2 vols. 8yo, map and plates (pub. at U. 8s.), cloth, 10s. 6d. 


ONDERFUL MUSEUM. 5 vols. 8vo ‘ds of 100 sonnei 
KIRBY'S (eas. at 4d, 4s.), cloth, 1d. 1s. 5 ee “eet: 


KNIGHT'S JOURNEY-BOOKS OF ENGLAND, BERKSHIRE, including a full Deserip- 
tion oF Windsor. With 23 Engravings on Wood, and a large illuminated Map. Reduced 
to ls. 

HAMPSHIRE, Rr the Bras of Wight. With 32 Engravings on Wood, and a large illu- 
minate a 
neo SHIRE, including ‘ie’ : Peak, &c. With 23 Engravings on Wood, ard a large illumi- 
d Map. Reduced to Is. 6d. 
KEN’ . With 58 Engravings on “Wood, and a'large illuminated Map. Reduced to 2s. 6d. - 


KNOWLES'S IMPROVED WALKER'S PRONOUNCING DICTIONARY, containin 
above 50,000 additional] Words; to which is added an Accentuated Vocabulary of Classical an 
Scripture Proper Names, new ae wae in 1 thick handsome volume, large $8vo, with Portrait, 
cloth lettered (pub. at 1/. 4s.), 7s. 6d. 1849 


LACONICS; OR, THE BEST WORDS OF THE BEST AUTHORS. Seventh 
Seca vols. 18mo, with elegant Frontispieces, containing 30 Portraits (pub. at 15s.), cloth 
ilt, 7s 1840 
. This pleasant collection of pithy and sententious readings, from the best English authors of 
all ages, has long enjoyed great and deserved popularity. 


LANE'S KORAN, SELECTIONS FROM THE, with an interwoven Co: 


ape, from the Arabic, methodically arranged, and illustrated by Notes, 8vo (pub. ails. od), 
cloth, 5s. 


LEAKE's (COL) TRAVELS IN THE MOREA.” 3 vols, sro. With a very large Map of 


the Morea, and ee of 30 various Maps, Plans, Plates of ancient Greek are oF tes” 
(pub. at 2/. 5s.) cloth, 1/. 8s. 


LEWIS’S (MONK) LIFE AND CORRESPONDENCE, with many Pieces in Prose a 
Verse never before published. 2 vols. 8vo, portrait (pub. at 1. 8s.), cloth, 12s, 


LISTER'S LIFE OF EDWARD FIRST EARL OF CLARENDON. With ovina 
Bi, 8.) cloth, 18s and Authentic Papers, never before published. 3 vols. 8vo, Portrait (pub. at 
2 ;, clo’ 
«A Work of laborious research, written with masterly ability.”—Atlas. 


LOCKHART’S HISTORY OF Bs co VEST we EXICO AND NEW SPAIN, 
AND MEMOIRS OF TH DEL CASTILLO. 
Written by himself, and now Hrat pene bn eaerstaed aoa the attetaal Spanish. 2 vols. 
it (pub. at 1/, 4s. }, cloth, 12s. 1844 
Bernal Diaz’s account bears all the marks of authenticity, and is accompanied with such 
a naiveté, with such interesting details, and such amusing vanity, and yet so pardonable 
mn an old soldier, who has been, as he boasts, in a hundred and nineteen battles, as renders his 
book one of the most Singular that is to be found in any language.”—Dr. Robertson in his 

“* History of America.” 


LODGES | (EDMUND) ILLUSTRATIONS OF BRITISH HISTORY, BIOGRAPHY, 
ERS, in the Reigns of Henry VIII., Edward VI., Mary, Elizabeth, and James I. 
nme eh a Edition, with above 80 autographs of the principal characters of the Th 
vols. 8vo (pub. at 1/..16s.), cloth, 12. 


MACGRI coor ‘S PROGRESS OF AMERICA FROM THE DISCOVERY BY 
, to the year 1846, comprising its History and Statistics, 2 remarkably thick 
a2 salle “and 8vo, cloth lettered (pub. at 4/. 14s. 6d.), 1. Lis. 6d. 1847 


map (pub. at 11. 8s.), cloth, 1 


MARTIN'S Nacetrorenest BRITISH COLONIAL LIBRARY; forming a popular 
and Authentic Description of all the Colonies of the British ee and embracing the 
History—Physical _ Geograpty-—Geolagy-Cisaste-—Anmem, VShinpt le, and Mineral King- 
doms—Government nance—Military Defence—Commerce—S ee System— 
a pre ulation, White and Coloured—Education and the Press—Emi a faechcioth ey 
State, &c., oF each Settlement. Founded on Official and Public —— furnished b 
Government, the Hon. East India Company, &c. Illustrated by original Maps and Plates, 
10 vols. foolscap 8vo (pub. at 3/.), cloth, 1/. 15s. 
These 10 vols. contain the 5 vols. 8vo, verhatim, with a few additions. Each volume of the 
whose series is complete in itself, and sold separately, as follows, at 3s. 6d.:— 
Vol. 1.—THE CANADAS, UPPER AND LOWER. 
Vol. Il.—Nzew SovrH WaALeEs, VAN DiEmMEN’s LAND, SWAN River, and Sourn Aus. 
TRALIA 
Vol. 111.—Txe Care or Goon Hors, Mauritius, and SrycHELLEs. ; 
Vol. I1V._THe West Inpres. Vol. 1.—Jamaica, Honduras, Trinidad, Tobago, Granada, 
oc icone and the Virgin Isles. ’ 
1. V.—TuEe West Inpirs. Vol. I1.—British Guiana, Barbadoes, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, 
Sabai Essequibo, Berbice, Anguilla, Tortola, St. Kitt’s, Barbuda, Antigua, Montserrat, 
a and Nevis. 
Vol. VI.—Nova Scotra, New Brunswick, Care BRETON, PRincE Epwarp’s Isxz, 
Tue BERMUDAS, NEWFOUNDLAND, and Hupson’s Bay. 
Vol. VII.—GipraLTar, Mata, Tux Jonran Istanps, &e, 
Vol. VIII.—Tue East Inpres. Vol. I. containing Bengal, Madras, Bombay, Agra, &c. 
Vol. IX.—THE East Invies. Vol. II. 
Vol. X.—BRITISH POSSESSIONS IN THE INDIAN AND ATLANTIC OCEANS, Viz. rey se 
Penang, Malacca, Singapore, Sierra Leone, the Gambia, Cape Coast Castle, Accra, th 
and Islands, St. Helena, and Ascension. 


MALCOLM'S MEMOIR OF CENTRAL INDIA. Two vols. 8vo, third edition, with = 











ee ee ee 


PUBLISHED OR SOLD BY H. G. BOHN. 19 





MARTIN’S (MONTGOMERY) CHINA, Political, Commercial, and Social. Two vols. 
. 8vo, 6 maps, statistical tables, &c. (pub. at 1, 4s.), cloth, 14s. 1847 


MAXWELL’S LIFE OF THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON. 3 handsome volumes, 8vo. 
Embellished with numerous highly-finished Line-Engravings by CooreR and other eminent 
Artists, consisting of Battle-Pieces, Portraits, Military Plans and Maps; besides a great 
number of fine Wood Engravings. ( Pub. at 3l. 7s.), elegant in gilt cloth, 1/. 16s. Large paper, 
‘India proofs (pub. at 5i.), gilt clotn, 3/. 3s. 1839-41 

“‘Mr. Maxwell’s ‘ Life of the Duke of Wellington,’ in our opinion, has no rival among similar 
publications of the day. ._. . . We pronounce it free from flattery and bombast, succinct 
and masterly. . . . . The type and mechanical execution are admirable; the plans of 
battles and sieges numero ample, and useful; the portraits of the Duke and his warrior 
contemporaries many and faithful; the battle pictures animated and brilliant; and the 

Dm tomy of costumes and manners worthy of the military genius of Horace Vernet himself.””— 


MILL’S ELEMENTS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY, new Edition, revised and corrected, 
8vo (pub. at 8s.), cloth, 3s. 6d. 1844 
MILTON’S WORKS, BOTH PROSE AND POETICAL, with an Introductory Review, 
by FLercHER, complete in 1 thick vo]. imperial 8vo (pub. at 1/. 5s.), cloth lettered, 1/. 1s. 1838 
This is the only complete edition of Milton’s Prose Works, at a moderate price. : 


MITFORD'S HISTORY OF GREECE, BY LORD REDESDALE, the Chronology cor- 
rected and compared with Clinton’s Fasti Hellenici, by Kine, (Cadell’s last and much the best 
Edition, 1838) 8 vols. 8vo ( rage at 4/. 4s.), gilt cloth, 1/. 18s. 

Tree-marbiled calf extra, y, CLARKE, 4. 4s, a 

In respect to this new and improved edition, one of the most eminent scholars of the present 
pe Booey expressed his opinion that “the increased advantages given to it have doubled the 

ginal value of the work.” 

It should be observed that the numerous additions and the amended Chronology, from that 
valuable performance, the Fasti Heilenici, are subjoined in the shape of Notes, so as not to 
interfere with the integrity of the text. 

As there are many editions of Mitford’s Greece before the public, it may be necessary to 
observe that the present octavo edition is the only one which contains Mr. King’s last correc~ 
tions and additions (which, as stated in his advertisement, are material) ; it is at the same 
time the only edition which should at the present day be chosen for the gentleman’s library, 
being the handsomest, the most correct, and the most — 

Lord Byron says of Mitford, ‘‘ His is the best Modern History of Greece in any language, 
and he is perhaps the best of aN modern historians whatsoever. His virtues are learning, 
labour, research, and earnestness.”’ 

“Considered with respect, not only to the whole series of ancient events which it comprises, 
but also to an — prominent portion of that series, Mr. Mitford’s History is the best that 
has appeared since the days of Xenophon.”’—E£dinburgh Review. 

MONSTRELET’S CHRONICLES OF ENGLAND AND FRANCE, by Colonel 
JOHNEs, with Notes, and upwards of 100 Woodcuts (uniform with Froissart), 2 vols. super- 
royal 8vo, cloth lettered (pub. at 1/. 10s.), 1. 4s. 

MOORE'S (THOMAS) €PICUREAN, A TALE; AND ALCIPHRON, A POEM. 
TURNER’S Illustrated Edition, feap. 8vo, 4 beautiful Engravings (pub. at 10s. 6d.), cloth, 3s., 
or elegantly bound in morocco, 7s. 6d. 1839 

MORE'S UTOPIA, OR, THE HAPPY REPUBLIC. a Philosophical Romance; to which 
is added, THE NEW ATLANTIS, by Lorp Bacon; with a Preliminary Discourse, and 
Notes, by J. A. St. Joun, fcap. 8vo (pub. at 6s.), cloth, 4s. 6d.—With the Life of Sir Thomas 
More, by Str JAMES MACKINTOSH, 2 vols. feap. 8vo, cloth, 8s. 1845 


NELSON'S LETTERS AND DISPATCHES, by Sir Harris Nicotas, 7 vols. 8vo (pub. 
at 5d. 10s.), cloth, 32. 10s. 1845-46 
NIEBUHR’S HISTORY OF ROME epitomized, with Chronol 1 Tabl 
pendix, by TRAVERS Twiss, B.C.L. 2 ce 2 8vo, an (pub. at 1d. 5 ig éd. a 
the same, in calf, gilt (for school prizes), 15s. 


OSSIAN’S POEMS, translated by MacPHERsoN, with Dissertations concerning the Era and 
Poems of Ossian; and Dr. BLarr’s Critical Dissertation, complete in 1 neatly printed vol. 
18mo, Frontispiece (pub. at 4s,), cloth, 3s. 


E SIR WILLIAM) TRAVELS IN V 
Ousthnts cit ML LAM,, TRAMELS 1M vantous COUNTRIES OF THE 
Manuscripts; and 8@ Plates and Maps, 3 vols. 4to (pub. at 11/.), extra cloth boards, 3/. 3s. 


FORD ENGLISH PRIZE ESSAY Edition, b } 
ae cloth woes a TS 58.), 1d. Eve ae : on, brought down to 1836, 5 vols. crown 


ARDOE’S (MISS) CITY OF THE MAGYAR, Or H i 
2 40, 3 vols. an with 9 Engravings (pub. at yah cg putes naan SAR RREA yrs 


PARRY’S CAMBRIAN PLUTARCH, comprising Memoirs of some of th i 
Welshmen, from the earliest times to the present, evo (pub. at 10s. 6d.), cloth, aon om aed 


PERCY'S RELIQUES OF ANCIENT ENGLISH POETRY, consisting of Old Heroj 
Ballads, Songs, and other Pieces of our Earlier Poets, to er with some few of later date, 
and a copious Glossary, complete in 1 vol. medium 8vo. New and elegant Edition, with beau— 
tifully engraved Title and Frontispiece, by SrEPHANOFF ( pub. at 15s,), cloth, gilt, 7s. 6d. 1844 

“But above all, T then first became acquainted with Bishop Percy’s ‘Reliques of Ancient 
ping Poe re; mee be ane I nes oe e AY. By eae together, I bought unto myself a 
copy o ese oved vo es;.nor do e e I ever re i 

the enthusiasm.”’—Sir Waiter . Sneea eo eee 
uae Reliques are the most agreeable selection, perhaps, which exists in any language.” 





20 CATALOGOY OF NEW BOOKS 





POPULAR ERRORS EXPLAINED AND ILLUSTRATED. By Joun Trxus) (Author) > 


of Laconics, and Editor of the ‘Illustrated London News,’’) thick fcap. 8vo, por but 
elegantly printed, Frontispiece, cloth, reduced to 5s. 1841 


PRIOR’S LIFE OF EDMUND BURKE, with unpublished Specimens of his Poetry-ond 22 


eras Third and much improved Edition, 8vo, Portrait and Autographs (pub, at 14s,}, ih 


cloth, 9s. 
ap Excellent feeling, in perspicuous and forcible language.”’—Quarterly Review, 


PRIOR’S LIFE OF OLIVER GOLDSMITH, tote a variety of Original Sources, 2 vols. BvD, ) 


handsomely printed (pub. at 1/. 10s.), gilt cloth, 

‘‘The solid worth of this biography consists in the many striking anecdotes which Mr. Prior 
has gathered in the course of his anxious researches among Goldsmith's surviving acquaint- 
ances, and the immediate descendants of his personal friends in London, and relations in 
Ireland; above all, in the rich mass of the poet's own familiar letters, which he has been 
enabled to bring together for the first time. No poet’s letters in the world, not even those of 
Cowper, appear to us more interesting.’’—Quarterly Review. 


RAFFLES. HISTORY OF JAVA, AND LIFE, with an account of Bencoolen, and Details 
of the Commerce and Resources of the Indian Archipelago. Edited by Lapy RAFries. 
Together 4 vols. 8vo, and a splendid quarto atlas, containing upwards of 100 Plates by DANIEL, 
many finely coloured (pub. at 4/. 14s.), cloth, 2/. 8s. 18 


RICH’S BABYLON AND PERSEPOLIS, viz. Narrative of a Journey to the Site of 
Babylon; Two Memoirs on the Ruins; Remarks on the Topography of Ancient Babylon, by 
Major RENNELL; ; Narrative of a Journey to Persepolis, with hitherto unpublished Cuneiform 
Inscriptions. 8vo, Maps and Plates (pub. at 1/. 1s.), cloth, 10s. 6d. Dunean, 1839 


RITSON'S VARIOUS WORKS AND METRICAL ROMANCES, as Published by 
Pickering, the Set, viz:—Robin Hood, 2 vols.—Annals of the Caledonians, 2 vols.—Ancient 
Songs and Ballads, 2 vols.—Memoirs of the Celts, 1 vol.—Life of King Arthur, 1 vol.—Ancient 
Popular Poetry, 1 vol.—Fairy Tales, 1 vol.—Letters.aud Memoirs of Ritson, 2 yols: ar etd 
12 vols. post 8vo (pub. at 6/. 5s. 6d.), cloth gilt, 32. 8s. 827-33 

Or separately as follows : 

RITSON’S ROBIN HOOD, a Collection of Ancient Poems, Songs, and Ballads, relative to that 
celebrated Outlaw ; with Historical Anecdotes of his Life. 2 vols, 16s. 

RITSON’S ANNALS OF THE CALEDONIANS, PICTS, AND SCOTS. 2 vols. 16s. 

BRITSON’S MEMOIRS OF THE CELTS OR GAULS. 10s. 

RITSON’S ANCIENT SONGS AND BALLADS. 2 vols. 18s. 

RITSON’S PIECES OF ANCIENT POPULAR POETRY. Post 8vo, 7s, 


RITSON’S FAIRY TALES, now first collected; to which are prefixed two Dissertationsail: On 
Pigmies. 2. On Fairies, 83. 


RITSON’S LIFE AND LETTERS OF JOSEPH RITSON, Ese. edited from Originals in the 
Possession of his Nephew, by Sin HARRIS NICOLAS, 2 vols. 1 
“No library can be called complete in old English lore, which has not the whole of the pro- 
ductions of this laborious and successful antiquary.’’—Atheneum. 
‘Joseph Ritson was an antiquary of the first order.” —Quarterly Review. 


ROBINSON CRUSOE, Cabinet Pictorial Edition, including his Further Adventures, with 
Life of Defoe, &c. upwards of 60 fine Woodcuts, from Designs by HARVEY, fcap. 8vo, New 
and improved Edition, with additional cuts, cloth gilt, 5s. 1846 
The only small edition which is quite complete. 
‘* Perhaps there exists no work, either of instruction or entertainment, in the English lan- 
guage which has been more generally read, or more deservedly admired, than the Life and 
Adventures of Robinson Crusoe.’’—Sir Walter Scott. 


RODNEY’'S (LORD) LIFE, by Lieut.-Gen. Munpy, New Edition, fcap. Svo, Portrait, cloth 
(pub. at 6s.), 3s. 6d. 


RO era ANCIENT HISTORY, a New and complete Edition, with engraved Frontispieces 

7 Maps. 2 vols. bound in 1 stout handsome vol. royal 8vo (pub. at 1/, 4s.), cloth, 12s. 1844 

ante only complete edition in a compact form; it is uniform in size and appearance with 

Moxon’s Series of Dramatists, &c. The revious editions of Rollin in a single volume are 
greatly abridged, and contain scarcely half the work. 


ROSCOE’'S LIFE AND PONTIFICATE OF LEO THE TENTH. New and much 
improved Edition, edited by his Son, Tuomas Roscor. Complete in 1 stout vol. 8vo, closely 
but very handsomely printed, illustrated by 3 fine Portraits, and numerous illustrative ous 
gravings, as head and tail-pieces, cloth, 1/. 4s. 


ROSCOE S LIFE OF LORENZO DE MEDICI, CALLED “THE iinanineeee ¢ 
ew and much improved Edition, edited by his Son, THOMAS Roscor. Complete in 1 stout 
‘ah 8vo, closely but very Rsposouely printed, illustrated by numerous Engravings, introduced 

as head and tail-pieces, cloth, 1845 
“T have not terms sufficient 39 express my admiration of Mr. Roscoe’s genius and erudition, 
or my gratitude for the amusement and information I have received. I recommend his labours 
tv our country as works of unquestionable genius and uncommon merit. They add the name of 
Roscoe to the very first rank of English Classical Historians.””—Matthias, Pursuits of Literature. 
** Roscoe is, I think, by far the best of our Historians, hoth for beauty of style and for eevee 
reflections; and his translations of poetry are equal to the originals.”— Walpole, Earl of Orford, 


ROSCOE'S ILLUSTRATIONS, HISTORICAL AND CRITICAL, of the Life of 
Lorenzo de Medici, with an Appendix of Original Documents. 8vo, Portrait of Lorenzo, and 
Plates (pub. at 14s.), boards, 7s., or in vig printed to match the original edition. ppeels 
and Plates (pub. at 1/. 11s. 6d.), boards, 10s. 

«* This volume is supplementary to all editions of the work. 


PUBLISHED OR SOLD BY H. G. BOHN. 21 





BURGHE BALLADS, edited by Joun Payne Corner, post 4to, beautifully printed 
oe? WHITTINGHAM, and embellished with 50 curious Woodcuts, half bound morocco, in the 
Boxburgh style (pub. at 1l, 4s.), 12s. 1847 


SCOTT'S (SIR WALTER) POETICAL WORKS. Containing Lay of the Last Minstrel, 
ore Lady ofthe Lake, Don Roderic, Rokeby, Ballads, Lyrics, and Songs, with Notes 
and a Life of the Author, complete in one elegantly printed vol. 18mo, Portrait and Frontis- 
piece (pub. at 5s.), cloth, 3s. 6d. 1843 


SHAKESPEARE'S PLAYS AND POEMS. Vatpy’s Cabinet Pictorial Edition, with Life, 
ossarial Notes, and Historical Digests of each Play, &c. 15 vols. feap. 8vo, with 171 Plates 
engraved on Steel after designs of the most distinguished British Artists, also Fac-similes rs 

ail the known Autographs of Shakespeare (pub. at 3/. 15s.), cloth, richly gilt, 2/, 5s. 843 


SHAKSPEARE’S PLAYS AND POEMS, in 1 vol. pda with Explanatory Notes, and a 
Memoir by Dr. Jounson, portrait (pub. at 15s.), cloth, 7s. 6d. 


SHAKSPEARE: S PLAYS AND POEMS, Pocket Edition, with a Life by ALEXANDER 
CHALMERS, complete in 1 thick vol. 12mo, printed i in a Diamond type, with 40 steel =e 
ings (pub. at 10s, 6d.), cloth, 5s. 848 


SHERIDAN’S {THE RIGHT HON. R. BRINSLEY) SPEECHES, with a Sketch of his 

Life, Edited by a Constitutional Friend. New and handsome library Edition, with Portrait, 
complete in 3 vols. 8vo (pub. at 2/. 5s.), cloth, 18s. 

*‘ Whatever Sheridan has done, has been par excellence, always the best of its kind. He has 
written the best comedy sha agg for Scandal), the best drama (The Duenna), the best farce (The 
Critic), and the best address (Monologue on Garrick); and to crown all, delivered the very 
best oration (the famous Begum Speech) ever conceived or heard in this country. 7» Byron. 


SHIPWRECKS AND DISASTERS AT SEA; narratives of the most remarkable Wrecks 
.Conflagrations, Mutinies, &c. comprising the “Voss of the Wager,”’ *‘ Mutiny of the ara 3 
&c. 12mo, frontispiece and vignette (pub. at 6s.), cloth, 3s. 846 


SMOLLETT'S WORKS, Edited by Roscoz. Complete in 1 vol. (Roderick Random, Hum- 
aaah Clinker, Peregrine Pickle, Launcelot Greaves, Count Fathom, Adventures of an Atem, 
Larter Plays, &c.) Medium 8vo, with 21 capital Plates, by CRUIKSHANK (pub. at li, brs }: 

cloth gilt, 14s. 


** Perhaps no books ever written excited such peals of inextinguishable laughter as Phaed 
lett’s.”’—Sir Walter Scott. 


SOUTHEY’S LIVES OF UNEDUCATED POETS. To which are added, ‘ Attempts in 
Verse,” by Joun Jones, an OldServant. Crown 8vo (pub. at 10s. 6d.), cloth 4s. 


Murray, 1836 


SPENSER'S POETICAL: WORKS. Complete, with Introductory Observations on the 
Faerie Queen, and Glossarial Notes, handsomel: grinted in 5 vols. post 8vo, fine Portrait 
(pub. at 2d. 128. 6d.), cloth, 1. Is. 1845 


STERNE’S WORKS, complete in 1 vol. 8vo, Portrait and vignette (pub. at 18s.), cloth, 10s. 6d, 


ST; PIERRE'S WORKS, including the ‘Studies of Nature,’? ‘Paul and Virginia,’ and the 
‘Indian Cottage,” with a Memoir of the Author, and Notes, b by the Rey. E. Crar RKE, 
complete | in 2 thick vols. feap. Svo, Portrait and Frontispieces (pub. at 16s.), cloth, 7s. 1846 
SWIFT'S WOR KS, Edited by Roscoz. Complete in 2 vols. Medium 8vo, Portrait (pub. at 
Ul, 128.), cloth gilt, 1. 4s 1848 

“‘ Whoever in the three kingdoms has any books at all, has Swift.’’—Lord Chesterfield. 


TAYLOR'S (W. B. S.) HISTORY OF THE UNIVERSITY OF DUBLIN, numerous 
Wood Engravings of its Buildings and Academic Costumes (pub. at 1l.), cloth, 7s. 6d. 1845 


THIERS’ HISTORY OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION, the 10 parts in 1 thick vol. 
royal Svyo, handsomely printed, cloth lettered (pub. at ll. 5s.), 103. 


the same, the parts separately, each (pub. at 2s. 6d.) 1s. 6d. 


THIERS’ HISTORY OF THE CONSULATE AND EMPIRE OF NAPOLEON, 
the 10 parts in 1 thick volume, royal 8yo, handsomely printed, cloth catemise (pub. at 1d. 5s.); 








the same, the parts separately, each (pub. at 2s. 6d.) 1s. 6d. 
TUGEER SE, LIGHT OF NATURE PURSUED. Complete in 2 vols. 8vo (pub. at 1. 10s), 


“The ‘Light of Nature’ is a work which, after much consideration, I think myself ane. 


rized to call the most or and rofound » that has ever a 7 
pecilee bse Fahy iginal Pp S ever appeared on moral philosophy.”’—Sir 


-TYTLER’S ELEMENTS OF GENERAL HISTORY, New Edition, thick 12mo os 
closely printed pages), steel frontispiece (pub. at 53.) cloth, "38. 6d 


WADE'S BATISH HISTORY, CHRONOLOGICALLY ARRANGED. Comprehending 
a classified Analysis of Events and Occurrences in Church and State, and of the Constitutional, 
Political, Commercial, Intellectual, and Social Progress of the United Kingdom, from the first 
Invasion by the Romans to the Accession of Queen Victoria, with very copious Index and 


Supplement. New Eaition. 1 large and remarkably thick vol. royal 8vo (1200 pages), 
cioth, 18s, 184 


22 CATALOGUE OF NEW BOOKS 








WATERSTON’S CYCLOPADIA OF COMMERCE dg ag itl LAW, FINANCE, 
COMMERCIAL, GEOGRAPHY AND NAVIGATION. New Edi tion, including the New 
Tariff (complete to the present time); the French Tain, as far as it concerns this country; 
and a Treatise on the Principles, Practice, and History ‘of Commerce, by J. R. M‘Cuntocn. 
lvery thick closely printed vol. 8vo (900 pages), with 4 Maps (pub. at 1/. 4s.), extra cloth, 


10s. 6d. 
“This capital work will be found a most valuable manual to every commercial anda 
useful book to the general reader. 7; aor 


WEBSTER'S ENLARGED DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE, 
Containing the whole of the former editions, and large additions, to which is prefixed an Intro- 
ductory Dissertation on the connection of the languages of Western Asia and Europe, edited 
by Cuauncey A. Goopricu, in one thick elegantly printed volume, 4to., cloth, 2d. 28. ined The 
most complete dictionary extant). 


xsi FARRIERY, improved by RossER, 8vo, with plates engraved on Steel (pub. at Heb 


wuyTes HISTORY OF THE BRITISH TURF, FROM THE erasing rig ee 
HE PRESENT DAY. 2 vols. 8vo, Plates (pub. at 1/. 8s.), cloth, 12s, 


WILLss PENCILLINGS BY THE WAY. A new and beautiful Edition, with ations, 
feap. 8vo, fine Portrait and Plates (pub. at 6s.), extra red Turkey cloth, richly eee 3s. co 
‘*A lively record of first impressions, conveyin vividly what was seen, ae or Ee fe 
active and inquisitive os through some of the er interestin, ype of Europe. His 
curiosity and love of enterprise are unbounded. The narrative is told in easy, fluent language, 
with a poet’s power of illustration.’’—Edinburgh Review. 


WORCESTER’S NEW CRITICAL AND PRONOUNCING DICTIONARY _ OF 
THE ENGLISH LANGU to which is added Walker’s Key, anda Pronouncing Vi 
bulary of modern Gestrenhinas idan thick imperial 8vo (pub. at 1/. 5s.), cloth, 18s. 5847 


*,* The most extensive catalogue of words ever produced. 


WRANGELL’S EXPEDITION TO SIBERIA AND THE POLAR SEA, wetied 4 
Lieut.-Col. Sabine, thick 12mo, large map and port. (pub. at 6s.), cloth, 4s. 6d. 


WRIGHT'S COURT HAND RESTORED, or fue i assisted in reading old charters, 
deeds, &c. small 4to, 23 plates (pub. at 1Z. 6s. , cloth 1846 





Theology, Morals, Ceelesiastical Wistorp, &e. 


BINGHAN'S ANTIQUITIES OF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH. New and improved 
Edition, carefully revised, with an enlarged Index. 2 vols. impl. 8vo, cloth, 1/. 11s. 6d. 1850 
ingham is a writer who does equal honour to the English clergy and to the English 
nation, and whose learning is only to be equalled by his moderation and impartiality,”’— 
Quarterly Review. 


BUNYANS PILGRIM’S PROGRESS. Quite complete, with a Life and Notes, by wee a 
cotT. Feap. 12mo, with 25 fine full-sized Woodcuts by HARVEY, containing all in 
Southey s edition: also a fine Frontispiece and Vignette, cloth, 3s. 6d. lose 


CALMETS DICTIONARY OF THE BIBLE, WITH THE BIBLICAL FRAG 
S; by the late CHarntEs TAYLOR. 5 vols. 4to, Illustrated by 202 Copper-plate En- 
per Fighth greatly enlarged Edition, beautifully printed on fine wove paper (pub. at 
102. 10s.), gilt cloth, 4/. 14s. 6d. 1847 
‘Mr. Taylor’s improved edition of Calmet’s Dictionary is indispensably pee to every 
Biblical Student. The additions made under the title of ‘Fragments’ are extracted from the 
most rare and authentic Voyages and Travels into Judea and other Oriental countries; and 
comprehend an assemblage of curious and illustrative descriptions, explanatory of S 


ture 
incidents, customs, and manners, which could not possibly be e xplained by any other medium. 


The numerous engravings throw great light on Oriental customs.’’—Horne. 


CALMET'S DICTIONARY OF THE HOLY BIBLE, abridged, 1 large vol. imperial ee 
Woodcuts and Maps (pub, at 1/, 4s.), cloth, 15s. 


CARYS. TESTIMONIES Rt ww SHE nt ERS oe a ae pest - FOUR CENTU- 


NGLAND, ae oat forth i in the Xxxix Articles, 8vo itd a ey, dole 7s. 6d. 
Oxford, Talboys. 

“This work may be classed with those of Pearson and Bishop Bull; and such a classifica- 
tion is no- mean honour.’’—Church of England Quarterly, 


CHARNOCKS DISCOURSES UPON THE EXISTENCE AND ATTRIBUTES 
S Phe row re Complete in 1 thick closely printed vol. 8vo, with Portrait (pub. at wal 
cloth, 6s. 6d. 


“ Perspicuity and depth, metaphysical sublimity and evangelical simplicity, immense ate 
ing but irrefragable reasoning, conspire to render this performance ore of the most inestimable 
productions that ever did honour to the sanctified judgment and genius of a tuman being,”— 

Opladys 


PUBLISHED OR SOLD BY H. G. BOHN. 93 





CHRISTIAN EVIDENCES. Containing the following esteemed Treatises, with Prefatory 
Memoirs by the Rev. J.S. Memes, L.L.D. viz:—Watson’s Apology for Christianity; Watson’s 
Apology for the Bible; Paley’s Evidences of Christianity; Paley’s Hor Pauline ; Jenyn’s 
Internal Evidence of the Christian Religion; Lesjie’s ‘I’ uth of Christianity Demonstrated ; 
Leslie’s Short and Easy Method with the Deists; Leslie’s Short and Easy Method with the 
Jews; Chandler’s Plain Reasons for being a Christian; Lyttleton on the Conversion of St. 
Paul; Campbell's Dissertation on Miracles; Sherlock’s Trial of the Witnesses, with ser 
‘West on the Resurrection. In 1 vol. royal 8vo (pub, at 14s.), cloth, 10s. 


CHRISTIAN TREASURY. Consisting of the following Expositions and Treatises, Edited by 

——— viz: —Magee’ s Discourses and Dissertations on the Scriptural Doctrines of Atonement 
therspoon’s Practical Treatise on Regeneration ; Boston’ s Crook in the Lot ; 

Guild's Moses Unveiled; Guild’s Harmony of all the Prophets; Less’s Authenticity, Un- 

Preservation. and Credibility of the New Testament; Stuart’s Letters on the 

lity of Christ. In i vol. royal 8vo (pub. at 12s.), cloth, 8s 1844 


cnunen's CONCORDANCE TO THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT, revised 
condensed by G. H. Hannay, thick 18mo, beautifully printed (pub. at 6s.), cloth, 3s. pore 


An extremely B eayes-s and very cheap edition. It contains all that is useful in the a fe 
work, omitting on ositions, conjunctions, &c. which can never be made available for 
purposes of nee) ndeed it is all that the Scripture student can desire.’’—Guardian. 


FULLER'S (REV. ANDREW) COMPLETE WORKS; with a Memoir of his Life, by ais 
Son, 1 large vol. imperial 8vo, New Edition, Portrait (pub. "at 11. 10s. ), cloth, 1/. 5s. 


GREGORY'S BR. OLINTHUS) LETTERS ON THE EVIDENCES nociuuine 
RISTIAN RELIGION, addressed to a Friend. Eighth Edition, 
See Additions ma tanactone. Complete in 1 thick well-printed vol. feap. 8vo a. " 

at 7s. 6d.), cloth, 5s. 
“We earnestly recommend this work to the attentive perusal of all cultivated minds. We 
are acquainted with no book in the circle of English Literature which is equally calculated to 
ae oung Byrayt just views of the evidence, the nature, and the importance of revealed 


‘on.?* Hall, 
ees SOLAN) LECTURES ON THE PENTATEUCH. 8vo, New Edition lash. 


HALLS (BISHOP) ENTIRE WORKS, with an account of his Life and Sufferings. New 
tion, with considerable Additions, a Translation of all the Latin Pieces, and a Glossaty, 

Toles’ and Notes, by the Rev. PereR HALL, 12 vols. 8vo, Portrait (pub. at 7/. 4s.), cloth, 5/. 
Oxford, Tulboys, 1837-39 


HALLS (THE REV.. wg ac Hd COMPLETE WORKS, with a Memoir of his Life, by 

Dr. OrintuHvs Grecory, and Observations on his Character as a Preacher, by JOHN FosTER, 

Author of Essays on Popular Ignorance, &c. 6 vols. 8vo, handsomely pr:nted, with beautiful 
Portrait (pub. at 3/. 16s.), cloth, contents lettered, 1l. 1s. 6d. 

The same, printed ina smaller size sf vols. feap. 8vo, 1/. 1s. cloth, lettered. 

‘Whoever wishes to see the English language tn its perfection must read the writings of that 
great Divine, Robert Hall. He combines the beauties of Jounson, ADDIsoN, and BURKE, 
without their imperfections.’”’—Dugald Stewart. 

**JT cannot do r than refer the academic reader to the immortal works of Robert Hall. 
For moral grandeur, for Christian trath, and for sublimity, we may doubt whether they have 
their match in the sacred oratory of any age or country.”’—Professor Sedgwick. 

‘The name of Robert Hall will be placed by posterity among the best writers of the age, as 


well as the most vigorous defenders of religious truth, and the brigh htest examples of Christian 
charity.” —Sir J. Mackintosh. 


HENRY’S (MATTHEW) COMMENTARY ON THE BIBLE, by BICKERSTETH, zn 
vols. 4to, New Edition, printed on fine paper (pub. at 9/. 9s.), cloth, 31. 138. 6d. 


irs (REV. ROWLAND) MEMOIRS, by his Friend, the Rev. W. Jones, Edited, with 
a Preface, by the Rey. JAMES SHERMAN Negev gs Hiu1’s Successor as Minister of Surrey 
come te Second Edition, carefully revised, thick post Svo, fine Steel Portrait (pub. at 10s.) 
1845 


HOPKIN ISS (BISHOP) WHOLE WORKS, with a memoir of the Author, in 1 thick vol. 
royal 8vo (pub. at !8s.), cloth, 14s. The same, with a very extensive general Index of Et 
and et 2 vols. royal 8vo (pub. at 1. 4s.), cloth, 18s. 

“ Bisho Hopkins’s works form of themselves. a sound body of divinity. He is clear, velie- 
ment, persuasive.”’— Bickersteth. 


HOWE'S woRKS, with Life, by Caxanry, 1 large vol. imperial 8vo, Portrait (pub. at 1/. Me) 


‘oe I mys te far more = a gedoree Howe than —_ any St I “ogee read, here 
an aston ea yey conceptions. e€ was ungu ona the greatest of the 
_ puritan divines: ’—Robert H. ; 7 3 ; 


gg Engage countess OF) LIFE AND TIMES.. By a Member of the Houses 
of Shir Hastings. Sixth Thousand. with a copious Index. 2 large vols. 8vo, ror 
of the a ewe Whitefield, and Wesley (pub. at 1/. 4s.), cloth, 14s. 


HUNTINGDON'S (REV. W. N-) ) WORKS, Edited by his Son, 6 vols. 8vo, Portraits and Plates 
(pub. at 3/. 18s. 6d.), cloth, 22. 


LEIGHTON'S {ARCHBISHOP) WHOLE WORKS; to which is prefixed a Life of the 
Author, EARSON. New Edition, 2 thick vols. 8vo, Portrait (pub, at 1/. 43.) 
extra cloth, en Bove only suaia Edition. 1849 





. 


i HARTWELL HORNE, 21 vols. 8vo (pu 


24 CATALOGUE OF NEW BOOKS 





LEIGHTON’S COMMENTARY ON PETER; with Life, by PEARson, complete. a 4 
thick handsomely printed vol. 8vo, Portrait (pub. at 2s.), cloth, 9s. 


LIVES OF THE ENGLISH SAINTS. By the Rey. J. H. Newman and others, 14 vols. 
12mo (pub. at 21. 8s.), sewed in ornamented covers, 11, 1s. 1844-5 


M‘CRIE'S LIFE OF JOHN KNOX, with Illustrations of the History of the Reformation in 
Scotland. New Edition with numerous Additions, and a Memoir, &c. by ANDREW CRICHTON. 
Fcap. 8vo (pub. at 5s.), cloth, 3s. 6d. , , 1847 


MAGEE’'S (ARCHBISHOP) WORKS, comprising Discourses and Dissertations on the 
Scriptural Doctrines of Atonement and Sacrifice; Sermons, and Visitation Charges. Witha 
Memoir of his Life, by the Rev. A. H. Kenny, D. D. 2 vols. 8vo (pub. at 1. 6s.), cloth, ary ae 


“Discovers such deep research, yields so much valuable information, and affords so Sieny 
helps to the refutation of error, as to constitute the most valuable treasure of biblical learning, 
of which a Christian scholar can be possessed.’’—Christian Observer. - 


MORE'S (HANNAH) LIFE, by the Rev. Henry Tuomsoy, post 8vo, printed uniformly 
with her works, Portrait, and Wood Engravings (pub. at 12s.), extra cloth, 6s. Cadell, 1838 
‘¢ This may be called the official edition of Hannah More’s Life. It brings so much new and 
interesting matter into the field respecting her, that it will receive a hearty welcome from the 
public. Among the rest, the particulars of most of her publications will reward the curiosity 

of literary readers.’’—Literary Gazette. 


MORE'S (HANNAH) SPIRIT OF PRAYER, fcap. 8vo, Portrait (pub. at 6s.), Jot kis 


MORE’S (HANNAH) STORIES FOR THE MIDDLE RANKS OF SOCIETY, 
and Tales for the Common People, 2 vols. post 8vo (pub. at 14s.), cloth, 9s. Casell, 1830 


MORE’S (HANNAH) POETICAL WORKS, post 8vo (pub. at 89.), cloth, 32. 6d. 
Cadell, 1829 


MORES (HANNAH) MORAL SKETCHES OF PREVAILING OPINIONS AND 
ee ” ERS, Foreign and Domestic, with Reflections on Prayer, post 8vo et hee 98.), 


MORE'S (HANNAH) ESSAY ON THE CHARACTER AND PRACTICAL 
WRITINGS OF ST. PAUL, post 8vo (pub. at 10s. 6d.), cloth, 5s. Cadell, 183 


MORE'S (HANNAH) CHRISTIAN MORALS. Post 8vo (pub. at 10s. 62.), _ — hu 
’ 


MORE'S (HANNAH) PRACTICAL PIETY; Or, the Influence of the ude of ithe 
Heart on the Conduct of the Life, 32mo, Portrait, cloth, 2s. 6d. 
The only complete small edition. It was revised just before her death, and contains titan 
improvement, which is copyright. 


MORE’S (HANNAH) SACRED DRAMAS, chiefly intended for Young People, to Wilich fs is 
added “ Sensibility,’’ an Epistle, 32mo (pub, at 2s. 6d.), gilt cloth, gilt edges 
This is the last genuine edition, and contains some copyright editions, witch are not in aby 
other. 


MORE’S (HANNAH) SEARCH AFTER HAPPINESS; ha yea Ballads, Tales, Hymns, 
and Epitaphs, 32mo (pub. at 2s. 6d.), gilt cloth, gilt edges, 1s. 6d : 1850 


NEFF {FELIX) LIFE AND LETTERS OF, tpeidinted from the French of M. Bost, by 
. Wyatr, feap. 8vo, Portrait (pub. at 6s. ), cloth, 3s. 6d. 1843 


PALEY’S WORKS, in 1 vol. consisting of his Natural Theology, Moral and Political Philosophy, 
Evidences of Christianity, Hore Pauline, Clergyman’s Companion in Visiting the Sick, yas 
8vo, handsomely printed in double columns (pub. at 10s. 6d.), cloth, 5s. 


PALEY’S COMPLETE WORKS, with a Biographical Sketch of the ‘Author, by RrEy. D s. 
WAYLAND, 5 vols. 8vo (pub, at 1/. 15s.), cloth, 18s. 837 


PASCAL’S THOUGHTS ON RELIGION, and Adam’s Private Thoughts on mayen 
edited by the Rev. E. BICKERSTETH, fcap. 8v0. (pub. at 5s.), cloth, 3s. 6d. 847 


PICTORIAL DICTIONARY OF THE HOLY BIBLE, Or, a Cyclopedia of Ilustrati 
raphic, Historical, and Descriptive of the Sacred Writings, by Teroremie: to as Manners, 
Customs, yng Traditions, Antiquities, and Literature of Eastern Nations, 2 vols. 4to (up- 


wards of 1430 double column pages in good type), with upwards of 1000 illustrative Woodcuts 
(pub, 22, 10s.), extra cloth, 1/. 5s. 1846 


SOT Ts (HE. utOMAS) COMMENTARY ON, THE BIBLE: ciate 
ast Corrections and Im an eautiful 
imperial 8vo (pub. at Al. de, ), cloth, LL, 168. oodeut IMustrations ond Bate "ai. 


SIMEON’S WORKS, including his Skeletons of Sermons and Hore Homileticz, or Discours 
digested into one continued Series, and forming a Commentary upon every Book of the old 
and New Testament; to which are annexed an improved edition of Claude’s Essay on the 
Composition of a Serinon, and he’ comprehensive Indexes, edited by the Rev. THoMAS 

at 104, 108.), cloth, 74, 7s, 





PUBLISHED OR SOLD BY H. G. BOHN. 25 





The following miniature editions of Simeon's popular works are uniformly printed in 32mo, and 
bound in cloth: 


THE CHRISTIAN’S ARMOUR, 9d. 

THE EXCELLENCY OF THE LITURGY, 9d. 

THE OFFICES OF THE HOLY SPIRIT, 9d. 

HUMILIATION OF THE SON OF GOD: TWELVE SERMONS, 9d. 
APPEAL TO MEN OF WISDOM AND CANDOUR, 94. 
DISCOURSES ON BEHALF OF THE JEWS, 1s. 6d. 


**The works of Simeon, containing 2536 discourses on the pas passages of the Old and 
New Testament will be found peculiarly adapted to assist the studies of the younger clergy in 
their preparation for the pulpit; they will likewise serve as a Body of Divinity ; and are by 
many recommended as a Biblical Commentary, well adapted to be read in families.’’—Lowndes. 


SMYTH’S (REV. DR.) EXPOSITION OF VARIOUS PASSAGES OF HOLY 
SCRIPTURE, adapted to the Use of Families, for every Day throughout the Year, 3 vols. 8vo 
~ (pub. at 1d, Lis. 6d. . cloth, 9s. 1842 


SOUTH'S (DR. ROBERT) SERMONS: to which are annexed the chief heads of the 


sae) a Biographical Memoir, and General Index, 2 vols. royal 8vo (pub. at 1/. re ): 
cloth, 18s. 


STEBBING’'S HISTORY OF THE CHURCH OF CHRIST, bodes the Diet of Augsburg, 
1530, to the present Century, 3 vols. 8vo (pub. at 1/. 16s.), cloth, 


STURM’S MORNING COMMUNING WITH_ GOD, OR DEVOTIONAL 
MEDITATIONS FOR EVERY DAY IN THE YEAR, translated from the German. as 
Edition, post Svo, cloth, 5s. 847 


TAYLOR’ S (JEREMY) COMPLETE WORKS, with an Essay, Biographical and Critical, 
3 latge vols. imperial 8vo, Portrait (pub. at 3/..15s.), cloth, 3/. 3s. 


TAYLOR'S (ISAAC OF Crab) NATURAL HISTORY OF ENTHUSIASH, 
: Tenth Edition, fcap. 8vo, cloth 


“tis refreshing to us to inset satis a work bearing, as this unquestionably does, the Le ai 

of bold, powerful, and original thought. Its most strikingly original views, however, never 

; transgress the bounds of fist Protestant orthodoxy, or violate the spirit of truth and sober- 

“ness; and yet it discusses topics constituting the very root and basis of those furious polemics 
which have shaken repeatedly the whole intellectual and moral world.”—Atheneum. 


TAYLOR'S (ISAAC) FANATICISM. Third Edition, carefully revised. Feap, 8vo0, cloth, gt 


“Tt is the reader’s fault if he does not rise from the pernsal of such a volume as the scene 
a wiser and a better man.”’—Eclectic Review. 


TAYLOR'S (ISAAC) SATURDAY EVENING. Seventh Edition. Fcap. 8vo, cloth, re 


**¢ Saturday Evening,’ and ‘ Natural History by Enthusiasm,’ are two noble productions.’’— 
Blackwood’s Magazine. 


TAYLOR'S (ISAAC) ELEMENTS OF THOUGHT, or concise Explanations, alphabeti- 


cally arranged, of the principal Terms employed in the usual Branches of Intellectual Philo- 


sophy. Ninth Edition. 12mo, cloth, 4s. 1849 
TAYLORS (ISAAC) ANCIENT CHRISTIANITY, AND THE DOCTRINES OF THE 
MES.” Fourth Edition, with a Supplement oe 

aise Shale prey Gai mn u. ye ), ats, 18s. 184 


pesagh ear ny SUSAAC) LECTURES ON SPIRITUAL CHRISTIANITY. s8vo ue. ae 
8 , cloth 


TOMLINE'S (BISHOP) ELEMENTS OF CHRISTIAN THEOLOGY, Fourteenth 
x 0) ri se er ——— Notes and Sea by STEBBING. 2 vols. 8vo, cloth, lettered (pub. 
at ld. 1s.), 10s 


TOMLINES {BISHOP). PRR OUeTION ae THE STUDY OF THE BIBLE, 
N THE Y. Containing Proofs of the Authenticity 
pte iaeriation ote Holy Roistora, a antes of the History of the Jews; an Account of 
the Jewish Sects; and a brief Statement of the Contents of the several Books of the Old and 
New Testaments. Nineteenth Edition, elegantly printed on fine paper. 12mo, (pub. at 5s. ve )s 
cloth, 3s. 6d. 845 
** Well adapted as a manual for students in divinity, and may be read with advantage es i 
most experienced divine.’’—Marsh’s Lectures. 


WADDINGTON'S (DEAN OF DURHAM). HISTORY OF THE CHURCH, 
eo Met aty Ba orgs. AGES TO THE REFORMATION, 3 vols. 8vo (pub. at 1, 10s.), 


WADDINGTON'S (DEAN OF DURHAM E CHURCH, 
URING THE REFORMATION. 3 vols. a aire gt Ps ‘4 Gi cae 1841 * 


WILBERFORCE'S PRACTICAL VIEW OF CHRISTIANITY. With a comprehensive 
“nuk a or aos by the Rey, T. Price, 18mo. printed in a large handsome type (gab. S 
1 Sh 1y 


WILLMOTT'S (R. A.) PICTURES OF CHRISTIAN LIFE Fcap. 8vo (pub. at 6s.), 
. cloth, 2s. 6d, Hatchard, 1841 


26  GATALOGUE CF NEW BOOKS 





Foreign Wanquages and Witerature ; 


INCLUDING He Se3 


CLASSICS AND TRANSLATIONS, CLASSICAL CRITICISM, DICTION- 
ARIES, GRAMMARS, COLLEGE AND SCHOOL BOOKS, 





ATLASES.—WILKINSON’S CLASSICAL a ) SCRIPTURAL ATLAS, with Histo- 
rical and Chronological Tables, imperial 4to, New improved Edition, 53 maps, coloured 
(pub. at 2/. 4s.), half bound morocco, 1d. lis, 6d, 1sa2 


WILKINSON’S GENERAL ATLAS. New and npr Edition, with all the Railroads 
inserted, Population according to the last Census, Jiamentary Returns, &c. imperial 4to 
46 Maps, coloured (pub. at ll, 16s.), half bound morocco, 1/. 5s. 1842 


AINSWORTH’S LATIN DICTIONARY, by Dr. Jamrzson, an enlarged Edition, contain- 
ing all the words of the Quarto Dictionary. Thick 8vo, neatly bound (pub. at l4s.), 9s. 1847 


BENTLEY'S (RICHARD) WORKS. Containing Dissertations a the Epistles of Phalaris, 
Themistocles, Socrates, a and the Fables of we | ie pistola ad Jo. Mia Ser- 
mons; Boyle Lecture; Remarks on Free-thinking; Critical Works, &c. Edited, with copious 


Indices and Notes, by the Rev. ALEXANDER Dyce. 3 vols. 8vo; a beautifully po Pret on 


(pub. at li. 18s.), cloth, 1/. 1s. . 
BIBLIA HEBRAICA, EX EDITIONE VANDER HOOGHT. Recognovit J. D. 


ALLE- 
MAND. Very thick 8¥0, handsomely printed (pub. at 1/. 5s,), cloth, 10s. 6d. Lond. Duncan, 1830 _ 


BIGGRAPHIE UNIVERSELLE, Ancienne et Moderne. Nouvelle Edition, revue, corrigée et 
augmentée par une Société de Gens de Lettres et de Savants, 21 vols. napecial 8vo (printed in 
a compressed manner in double columns, but very clear type} 


BOURNE’ Ss. (VINCENT) POETICAL WORKS, Latin and English, 1smo (pub. at fa. 6d.), 


cloth, 2 
a same, large paper, an elegant volume, 12mo (pub. at 5s.), cloth, 3s. 6d. . 1838 


CICERO'S LIFE, FAMILIAR LETTERS, AND LETTERS 


TO ATTICUS, 
by MIDDLETON, MELMOTH, and HeEBERDEN, complete in one thick vol. royal 8vo, pares. J 


(pub. at 1/. 4s.), ‘cloth, 128. 


CORPUS POETARUM LATINORUM. Edidit G.S. WALKER. Complete in 1 very thick 
vol, royal 8vo (pub. at 2/. 2s.), cloth, 
This comprehensive volume paler a library of the poetical Latin classics, correctly 
printed from the best texts, viz:— 


Catullus, Virgil, Lucan, Sulpicia, Calpurnius Siculus, 
Tibullus, Ovid, Persius, Statius Ausonius, cvs 
Propertius, Horace, Juvenal Silius Italicus, Claudian. 
Lucretius, Pheedrus, Martial, Valerius Flaccus, 


DAMM LEXICON GRACUM, HOMERICUM ET PINDARICUM. Cura Duxcay, 
oyal 4to, New Edition, printed on fine aper (pub. at 5/. 5s.), cloth, 1/. 1s. 1842 


wh An excellent pete the merits of which have been universally acknowledged by literary ° 


characters.’’—Dr. D 


DEMOSTHENES, translated by Leann, the two vols. are complete in 1 vol. 12mo, hand- . 


somely printed in double columns, in pearl type, portrait (pub. at 5s.), cloth, 3s. 


DONNEGAN’S GREEK AND ENGLISH LEXICON, enlarged; with examples, HitereMly - 


translated, selected from the classical authors, Fourth’ edition, considerably en 
ay revised, and materially improved throughout; thick 8vo (1752 pages) (pub, at 2/, 2s. 8. )s 
cloth, 1/. 1s, 1846 


GAELIC-ENGLISH AND ENGLISH-GAELIC DICTIONARY, with Examples, Phrases, 


and Etymological Remarks, by two Members of the Highland Society. Complete in 1 thick 
vol. S¥9 New Edition, containing many more words than the 4to Edition (pub. at 1. A 4 
c. 10s. 6d. 


GRAGLIA’'S ITALIAN-ENGLISH AND ENGLISH-ITALIAN_DICTIONARY, =" 
eee pine Grammar and Supplementary Dictionary of Naval Terms, 18mo, La 
pa , 


HERMANN’S MANUAL OF THE POLITICAL ANTIQUITIES OF (GREECE, 


Historically considered, translated from the German, 8vo (pub. at 15s.), Oeaied 10s. 6d. 
Pe Biiet ap Ohavee 1836 
**Wermann’s Manual of Greek Antiquities is most important.”—Thirlwal?s reece, 
vol. i. p. 443, 


HERODOTUS, CARY'S (REV. H.) GREEK AND ENGLISH LEXICON 7O 


OTUS, Ensenind to the Text of Gaisford and Baehr, and all other Editions, 8vo, clot 


(oan, (3 12s.), &s 
LEMPRIERES CLASSICAL DICTIONARY. Miniature Edition, containing a full Aggs’int 


of all the Proper Names mentioned in Ancient Authors, and muc useful information res; ect- 
ing the uses and habits of the Greeks and Romans. New and ih ap main in 
printed in pearl type, in 1 very thick vol. 18mo (pub. at 7s, 6d. \ cloth, 4s 


» Sewed (pub, at 10/, 103,), 5d. 5s. 
Bruxelles, 1843-47 ~ 


eee ee ee 


a ea, ae 2 


= eS 


ee a a 


— a 








ee aa 





PUBLISHED OR SOLD BY H. G. BOHN. 27 





LEE'S HEBREW GRAMMAR, compiled from the best Authorities, and_principally from 
Oriental Sources, designed for the use of Students in the Universities. New Edition, enriched 
with much original matter. Sixth Thousand, 8vo (pub. at 12s.), cloth, 8s. Lond, Duncan, 1846 


LEE'S Faby nsapg 3 _GHALDEE, AND ENGLISH. LEXICON. Compiled from ‘the best 
; European, Jewish and Christian, including buxtorr, TayLor, 
ote d a Peaenins containing all the Words, with their Inflections, Idiomatic 
Usages, &c. “found in the Hebrew and Chaldee Text of the Old Testament; with numerous 
co ons of former Lexicographers and Commentators, followed by an English Index, ini 
thick vol. 8vo. Third Thousand (pub. at 1/. 5s.), cloth, 15s. London, 1844 


LEVERETT'S LATIN-ENGLISH AND ENGLISH-LATIN LEXICON, compiled or 
Faccrotatrand SCHELLER. Thick royal 8vo (pub. at 1/. 11s. 6d.), cloth, 1 


Livil gruSTORiA EX RECENSIONE DRAKENBORCHI! ET veaveues 
otationes CrevieRt, STROTHII, Feeney et aliorum; Animadversiones NiesunRi, 
— Fo etacont et suas addidit TRAVERS Twiss, J. C. B. Colf. Univ. Oxon. Socius et Tutor. 
Cum Indice amplissimo, 4 vols. 8vo (pub. at 1/. 18s. ) cloth, 1/. 88. Oxford, 1841 
This is the best and most useful edition of Livy ever published in octavo, and it is preferred 
in all our universities and classical schools. 


LIVY. Edited by PrenpevitiE. Livii Historiz libri quinque y princes, with English Mates, 
by PRENDEVILLE. New Edition, 12mo, neatly bound in roan, 5s 


the same, Books I to III, separately, cloth, 3s. 6d. 
the same, Books IV and V, cloth, 3s. 6d. 


NEWMAN'S PRACTICAL SYSTEM OF RHETORIC; or, the Priadigipe and Beles of 
Style, with Examples. Sixth Edition, 12mo (pub. at 5s, 6d.), cloth, 4s. 


NIEBUHR'S HISTORY OF ROM itomized (for the use of colleges and schools), wifh 

ae =e, me Tables and Appendix, by TRAVERS ss, B.C.D. complete in 2 vols. bound in 

1, 8vo (pub. at 12. 1s.), cloth, 10s. 6d. Oxford, Talboys, 1837 

as This edition by Mr. Twiss is a very valuable addition to classical learning, clearly and ably 
embodying all the latest efforts of the laborious Niebuhr.’’—Literary Gazette. 


OXFORD CHRONOLOGICAL TABLES OF UNIVERSAL HISTORY, from the 
earliest Period to the present Time; in which all the great Events, Civil, Religions, Scientific, 
and Literary, of the various Nations of the World are placed, at one view, under the eye of the 
Reader in a Series of parallel columns, so as to exhibit the state of the whole Civilized World 
at any epoch, and at the same time form a continuous chain of History, with Genealogical 
5 ager of all om i Dynasties. Complete in 3 Sections; viz:—1l. Ancient pen be 
II. Middle Age: odern History. With a most complete Index to the entire wor 
folio (pub. at 31% 16s. ), half bound morocco, UU. 1s. 


ie 








The above is also sold separately, as follows :— 
THE a pa AGES AND MODERN HISTORY, 2 parts in 1, folio (pub. at 1/. 2s. 6d), 
sew ‘ 


MODERN HISTORY, folio (pub. at 12s.), sewed, 8s. 
peng ary ig LIVES, by the Laneuornes. Complete in 1 thick vol. 8vo (pub. at 1582), 


dienamaoes DICTIONARY OF LATIN SYNONYMES, for the Use of Schools atid 
Private Students. Translated and Edited by Dr, LIEBER. Post 8vo (pub. at 7s.), cloth, 4s. 6d. 
1841 


RITTER'S HISTORY OF ANCIENT PHILOSOPHY, translated from the German, by 
ORRISON, rinity College, > wera aeg 4 vols. 8vo, now completed, with a 
General: Index, cloth, hetigred (pub, at 3/. 4s.), 22. 2s. Oxford, 1846 
The Fourth Volume may be had separately. Cloth, 16s 
“An ox geal work: it may be said to have superseded all the previous histories of philo- 
sophy, and to have become the standard work on the subject. Mr. “meme is also exempt 
from the usual faults of translators.’’—Quarteriy Review. 


SCHOMANN’ S HISTORY OF THE A M 
translated from the Latin, with a complete ise re nape Pag TAY oe 8 tah iene a 


A book of the same school and character as the works of HEEREN, BokcHK, SCHLEGEL, &c. 


ELLENDT'S GREEK AND ang LEXICON TO pia translated by 


Cary. 8vo (pub. at 12s.), cloth Oxford, Talboys, 1841 
STUART'S HEBREW a des = an Introduction to a Course of 
Hebrew Study. Third Edition, 8vo (pub. at 14s.), cloth, Ozford, Taiboys, 1834 


This work, which was designed by its learned author to ines the study of Hebrew, bas 
had a very extensive sale in America. It forms a desirable adjunct to all Hebrew Grammars, 
and is sufficient to complete the system of instruction in that language. 


TACITUS, CUM NOTIS B 
yet By 4 vols. 8vo ane og gine ge nae tagheveereeena Semiramis, 


The most Geoiies Edition, 


PARITUS, A NEW AND LITERAL TRANSI ATION. s8vo (pub. at 16s.), cloth, 10s. bd 
Oxford, Tatboys, 1839. 


28 CATALOGUE OF NEW BOOKS 





TENNEMANN’'S MANUAL OF THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY, translated from 

the German, by the Rev. ARTHUR JoHNsON, M.A. Professor of Anglo-Saxon in the University 

of Oxford, In 1 thick closely printed vol. 8vo (pub. at 14s.), boards, 9s. ax/ford, Talboys, 1832 

‘A work which marks out all the leading epochs in philosophy, and gives minute chronolo~ 

gical information concerning them, with biographical notices of the founders and followers of 

the principal schools, ample texts of their works, and an account of the principal editions. In 

a word, to the student of philosophy, I know of no work in English likely to prove half so use- 
ful.’’—Hayward, in his Translation of Goethe’s Faust. 


TERENTIUS, CUM NOTIS VARIORUM, CURA ZEUNII, cura Gres; acced. Index 


copiosissimus. Complete in 1 thick vol. 8vo (pub. at 16s.), cloth, 8s. 


TURNER'S (DAWSON W.) NOTES TO HERODOTUS, for the Use of College 
Students. $8vo, cloth, 12s. 1847 


VALPY’S GREEK TESTAMENT, WITH ENGLISH NOTES, accompanied by parallel 
passages from the Classics, Fifth Edition, 3 vols. 8vo, with 2 maps (pub. at 2/.), cloth, 12. at 
/ 184 


VIRGIL. EDWARDS'S SCHOQL EDITION. Virg'lii 7neis, cura Epwarps, et Questi- 
ones Virgilianee, or Notes and Questions, adapted to the middle forms in Schools, 2 vols. in 1, 
12mo, bound in cloth (pub. at 6s. 6d.), 3s. 

*,* Either the Text or Questions may be had separately (pub. at 3s. 6d.), 2s. 6d. 


WILSON'S (JAMES, PROFESSOR OF FRENCH IN ST. GREGORY'S COLLEGE) 
FRENCH-ENGLISH AND ENGLISH-FRENCH DICTIONARY, containing full Expla- 
nations, Definitions, Synonyms, Idioms, Proverbs, Terms of Art and Science, and Rule’ of 
Pronunciation in each Language. Cor piled from the Dictionaries of the Academy, Bowyer, 
CHAMBAUD, GARNER, LAVEAUX, DES CARRIERES and Farn, JOHNSON and WALKER. lL 
large closely printed vol. imperial 8vo (pub. at 2/. 2s.), cloth, 1. $s. 1841 


XENOPHONTIS OPERA, GR. ET LAT. SCHNEIDERI ET ZEUNII, Accedit Index 
(Porson and ELMSLEY’s Edition), 10 vols. 12mo, handsomely printed in a large type, done up 
in 5 vols. (pub. at 4/. 10s.), cloth, 18s. 1841 


The same, large paper, 10 vols. crown 8vo, done up in 5 vols. cloth, 1. 5s. 


XENOPHON’S WHOLE WORKS, translated by SpExmawN and others. The only complete 
Edition, 1 thick vol. 8vo, portrait (pub. at lds.), cloth, 1s. 








sAobels, GHorks of 4fFiction, Wight Meadina, 





AINSWORTH'S WINDSOR CASTLE. An Historical Romance, Illustrated by Groncs 
CRUIKSHANK and Tony JOHANNOT. Medium 8vo, fine Portrait, and 105 Steel and Wood 
Engravings, gilt, cloth, 5s. 1843 


BREMER'S (MISS) HOME: OR, FAMILY CARES AND FAMILY JOYS, translated by 
Mary Howirr. Second Edition, revised, 2 vols. post 8vo (pub. at 1/. 1s.), cloth, 7s. 6d. 184% 


THE NEIGHBOURS, A STORY OF EVERY DAY LIFE. Translated by Mary 
Howirt. Third Edition, revised. 2 vols. post 8vo (pub. at 18s.), cloth, 7s. 6d. 1843 


CRUIKSHANK “AT HOME;” a New Family Album of Endless Entertainment, consisti 
ofa Series of Tales and Sketches by the most popular Authors, with numerous clever an 
humorous Illustrations on Wood, by CRuIKSHANK and SEyMouR. Also, CRUIKSHANK’S 
ODD VOLUME, OR BOOK OF VARIETY. Illustrated by Two Odd Fellows—SeymMoun 
and CRUIKSHANK. Together 4 vols. bound in 2, fceap. 8vo (pub. at 2/, 18s.), cloth, gilt, 10s. “ 

- 1845 


HOWITT’S (WILLIAM) LIFE AND ADVENTURES OF JACK OF THE MILL 
A Fireside Story. By Wit~r~1am Howitt. Second Edition. 2 vols, fcap. vo, with 46 Iilus- 
trations on Wood (pub. at lis.), cloth, 7s. 6d. 1845 


HOWITT'S (WILLIAM) WANDERINGS OF A JOURNEYMAN TAILOR, 
THROUGH EUROPE AND THE EAST, DURING THE YEARS 1824 to 1840. Trans- 
lated by WiLt1aAM Howirr. Fcap. 8vo, with Portrait (pub. at 6s.), cloth, 3s. 6d. 1844 


HOWITT’S (WILLIAM) GERMAN EXPERIENCES. Addressed to the English, both 
Goers abroad and Stayers at Home. 1 vol. fcap. 8vo (pub. at 6s.), cloth, 3s. 6d, 1844 


JANE’'S (EMMA) ALICE CUNNINGHAME, or, the Christian as Daughter, Sister, Friend, 
and Wife. Post 8vo (pub. at 5s.), cloth, 2s. 6d, 1846 


JOE MILLER’S JEST-BOOK; being a Collection of the most excellent Bon Mots, Brilliant 
Jests, and Striking Anecdotes in the English Language. Complete in 1 thick and closely but 
elegantly printed vol. fcap. 12mo, Frontispiece (pub. at 4s.), cloth, 3s. 1840 


: LAS) CAKES AND ALE, A Collection of humorous Tales and 
hua ooh A sig a with Plates, by GEORGE CRUIKSHANK (pub, at 15s.), ea 


a 





PUBLISHED OR SOLD BY H. G. BOHN. 29 





LAST OF THE PLANTAGENETS, an Historical Narrative, illustrating the Public Even 
and Domestic and Ecclesiastical Manners of the loth and 16th Centuries. Feap. 8vo, _— 
Edition (pub. at 7s. 6d.), cloth, 3s, 6d. 839 

CEVER’ de Sea O'LEARY; HIS WANDERINGS AND PONDERINGS IN 

DS. Edited by Harry LoRREQUER, CRUIKSHANK’s New lllustrated Edition. 
Somiete $e 1 vol. 8vo (pub. at 12s.), cloth, 9s. 1845 


LOVER’ : LEGENDS AND STORIES OF IRELAND. Both Series. 2 vols. fcap. es 
h Edition, embellished with Woodcuts, by HARVEY (pub. at 15s.), cloth, 6s. 6d. 
onan HANDY ANDY. A Tale of Irish Life. Medium 8vo. Third Edition, wih “ 
characteristic Tilustrations on Steel (pub. at 13s.), cloth, 7s. 6d. 
LOVER'S TREASURE TROVE; ORL. S. D. A Romantic Irish Tale of the last cake 
oye Medium 8vo. Second Edition, with 26 characteristic Illustrations on Steel (pub. at en. 
cloth, 9s. 

MARRYAT'S (CAPT.) POOR JACK, Illustrated by 46 large and exquisitely Sista 
Engravings on Wood, after the masterly designs of CLARKSON STANFIELD, 1 handsome 
vol. royal 8yo (pub. at 14s. ), gilt cloth, 9s. 1850 

MARRYAT'S PIRATE AND THE THREE CUTTERS, 8vo, with 20 most splendid line 
Engravings, after STANFIELD, Engraved on Steel by CHaRLES HEATH (originally ee, at 
1, 4s.), gilt cloth, 10s. 6d. 1849 

MILLER’S GODFREY MALVERN, OR THE LIFE OF AN AUTHOR. By the 
Author of ** Gideon Giles,” % Royston Gower,”’ ‘‘ Day in the tiles &c. &e. 2 volsin 1, 
Svo, with 24 clever Illustrations by Pu1z (pub. at 13s.), “cloth, 6s. 6d. 1843 

‘This work has a tone and an individuality which distinguish it from all others, and cannot 
be read without pleasure. Mr. Miller has the forms and colours of rustic life more completely 
under his control than any of his predecessors.’’—Atheneum. 


“MITFORD: S (MISS) OUR VILLAGE; complete in 2 vols. post 8vo, a Series of Rural Tales 
and Sketches. New Edition, beautiful Woodcuts, gilt cloth, 10s, 


PHANTASMAGORIA OF FUN, Edited and Illustrated by AtrrED Crowe@vILt. 2 vols. 
post 8vo, illustrations by LEEcH, CRUIKSHANK, &c. (pub. at 18s.), cloth, 7s. 6d. 1843 


PICTURES OF THE FRENCH. A Series of Literary and Graphic Delineations of French 
haracter. By JuLES JANIN, BALZAC, CORMENIN, and other celebrated French Authors. 
1 large vol. royal 8vo, Illustrated by re of 230 humorous and extremely clever Wood 
r= Engravings by distinguished Artists (p ub. at 1/. 5s.), cloth gilt, 10s. 1840 
This book is extremely clever, both fh the letter-press and plates, and has had an immense 

run in France, greater even than the Pickwick Papers in this country. 


POOLE’S! paMic aor ee woes OR, SKETCHES AND RECOLLECTIONS 
PRY. Second Edition, 2 vols., post 8vo., fine portrait, 
shoth 4 aie vith inte pth Poh ah (pub. at 18s.), 7s. 6d. 1843 


SKETCHES FROM FLEMISH LIFE. By Henprrx Conscience. Square 12mo, 130 Wood 
Engravings (pub. at 6s.), cloth, 4s. 6d. 


TROLLOPE'S (MRS.) LIFE AND ADVENTURE 
THE eeraie BOY, medium 8yo, with 24 Steel Paint ee Fe ARM as 


TROLLOPE'’S (MRS.) JESSIE PHILLIPS. A Tale of the Present Day, medium 8vo, vet. 
and 12 Steel Plates (pub. at 12s.), cloth gilt, 6s. 6d. 


UNIVERSAL SONGSTER, Illustrated by CruIKsHAnx, being the largest collection of the 
hest Songs Me English’ ery by We age of 5,000), 3 vols. 8vo, with 87 humorous En- 
gravings on Steel and Wood, by GEorGE CRUIKSHANK, and $ medallion Portraits a 

' il. 16s.), cloth, 13s. 6d. ne (pub. at 





GHubentle and Llementary Wooks, ek pieentane Xe. 





ALPHABET OF QUADRUPEDS, Illustrated by Figures selected from the works of the 
Old Masters, square 12mo, with 24 spirited Engravings after BERGHEM, REMBRANDT, Curr, 
Pavuit Porrer, &c. and with initial letters by Mr. SHAw, cloth, gilt edges (pub. at 4s. 6d.), 3s. 
1850 





the same, the plates coloured, gilt cloth, gilt edges (pub. at 7s. 6d.) 5s. 


CRABB’ S (REV. G.) NEW PANTHEON, or Mythology of all Nations; Hy f 
Use of Schools and Young Persons; with Questions for Eopauatiin on the Bie a Piyebern 
1smo, with 30 pleasing lithographs (pub. at 3s.), cloth, 2s, 1847. 


CROWQUILL’S a dng Lol GRAMMAR. 16mo, with 120 humorous illustrations (pub. 
at 5s.), cloth, gilt edges, 2s. 6d. 


DRAFER'S JUVENILE NATURALIST or Country Walks in Sprin 
a ior square 12mo, with 80 beautifully executed Woodcuts pring, Summer, cloth, elt 
edges, 4s. 6d. 


ENCYCLOPADIA OF MANNERS AND ETIQUET TE on rising an improved edition 
of Chesterfield’s Advice to his Son on Men and Manners; oung Man’s own Book; a 
Manual of Folitencas; Intellectual Improvement, and Moral Dapatinent: 24mo, Frontispiece, 
cloth, gilt edges, 2s. 1343" 


30 CATALOGUE OF NEW BOOKS 


- 


TRIAN MANUAL FOR rb : 3 
aie Woodcuts eal 4 )» it ae ili Be org eg Fe2p. 8vo, upwards * Hen 


GAMMER GRETHEL’'S FAIRY TALES AND POPULAR STORIES. translated from 
he G fG taining 42 Fairy 
e = — oabe wt ( —_ 57 lth pit t Stem, post 8yo, numerous Woodcuts by Gapase 


GOOD-NATURED BEAR, a Story for Children of all A b H. uare 
plates (pub. at 5s.) cloth, 3s., or with the plates coloured, - sie [= ma rere os + tod 


M'S TALES FROM i 
GRIM sit i ae EASTERN LANDS. Square 12mo, plates (pub. at 5s.), a 


HALL'S (CAPTAIN BASIL) PATCHWORK, a New Series of Fragments of Voya 
NOs ges and 
Travels, Second Edition, 12mo, cloth, with the back very rich] priate 
patchwork devices (pub. at 15s.), 7s. Gd. ee Sa en aa 


HOLIDAY LIBRARY, Edited by Wrztram Hazuirr. Uniformly printed in 
(pur, at 19s. 6d.), cloth, 10s. 6¢d., or separately, viz:—Orphan o Waterloo, os. a felis 
range, 3s. 6d. Legends of Rubezahl, and Fairy Tales, 3s. 6d. 1845 


HOWITT'S (WILLIAM) JACK OF THE MILL. 2 vols. 12mo (pub. at 15s.), cloth gilt, 
$s. 6d. 1844 


HOWITT’S (MARY) CHILD'S PICTURE AND VERSE BOOK, commonly called 
Pen Ceockes's ee at 72 translated into English Verse, with French and German 
erses opposite, forming a ott, square 12mo, with 100 1 Wood E 58 (pub. 
10s. 6¢/.), extra ‘Turkey cloth, gilt Sdeen 58. : ee a rae 
This is one of the most elegant juvenile books ever produced, and has the novelty of being in 
three languages. 


LAMB'S TALES FROM SHAKSPEARE, designed principally for the use of Young Persons 
(written by Miss and CHARLES LAMB), Sixth Edition, embellished with 20 large and beautiful 
Woodcut Engravings, from designs by HARVEY, feap. 8vo (pub. at 7s. 6d.), cloth gilt, 5s. 1843 

‘* One of the most useful and agreeable companions to the understanding of Shakspeare which 
have been produced. The youthful reader who is about to taste the charms of our great Bard, 
is strongly recommended to prepare himself by first reading these elegant tales.”’—Quarteriy 


Review. 


L. E. L. TRAITS AND TRIALS OF EARLY. LIFE. A Series of Tales addressed to 
Young People. By L. E. L. (Miss Lanpon). Fourth Edition, feap. 8vo, with a beautiful 
Portrait Engraved on Steel (pub. at 5s.), gilt cloth, 3s. 1845 


LOUDON'S (MRS.) ENTERTAINING NATURALIST, being popular Descriptions, 
Yales and Anecdotes of more than 500 Animals, comprehending all the Quadrupeds, Birds, 
Fishes, Reptiles, Insects, &c. of which a knowledge is indispensable in Polite Education; 
Tilustrated by upwards of 500 beautiful Woodcuts, by BEwick, Harvey, WHIMPER, and 
others, post 8vo, gilt cloth, 7s. 6d. 1850 


MARTIN AND WESTALL’S PICTORIAL HISTORY OF THE BIBLE, the letter- 
press by the Rev. Hopart CAUNTER, 8vo, 144 extremely beautiful Wood Engravings by the 
first Artists (including reduced copies of MARTIN’s celebrated Pictures, Belshazzar’s Feast, 
The Deluge, Fall of Nineveh, &c.), cloth gilt, gilt edges, reduced to 12s. Whole bound mor. 
richly gilt, gilt edges, 18s. 1846 

A most elegant present to young people. 


PARLEY'S (PETER) WONDERS OF HISTORY. Square 16mo, numerous Woodcuts 
(pub. at 6s.), cloth, gilt edges, 3s. 6d. 1846 


PERCY TALES OF THE KINGS OF ENGLAND; Stories of Camps and Battle-Fields, 
Wars, and Victories (modernized from HoLINSHED, FROIssARtT, and the other Chroniclers) 
2 vols. in 1, square 12mo. (Parley size.) Fourth Edition considerably improved, completed 
to the present time, embellished with 16 exceedingly beautiful Wood Engrayings (pub. at 9s.), 
cloth gilt, gilt edges, 5s. 185¢ 
This beautiful volume has enjoyed a large share of success, and deservedly. 


RCBIN HOOD AND HIS MERRY FORESTERS. By SreruHen Percy. Square !2mo, 
8 Illustrations by GiLBERT (pub. at 5s.), cloth, 3s, 6d., or with coloured Plates, 5s. 1850 


STRICKLAND'S (MISS) EDWARD EVELYN, a Tale of the Rebellion of 1745; to which is 
added ‘‘TYhe Peasant’s Tale,’ by JEFFERYS TAYLOR, fcap. 8vo, 2 fine Plates (pub. at 5s.), 
cloth gilt, 2s. 6d. 1849 

By the popular Author of the Lives of the Queens of England. ; 


TOMKIN’S BEAUTIES OF ENGLISH POETRY, selected for the Use of Youth, and 
designed to Inculcate the Practice of Virtue. Twentieth Edition, with considerable additions, 
royal I8mo, very elegantly printed, with a beautiful Frontispiece after Harvey, elegant gilt 
edges, 3s. 6d. 1847 


WOOD-NOTES FOR ALL SEASONS (OR THE POETRY OF BIRDS), a Series of 
Songs and Poems for Young People, contributed by Barry CoRNWALL, WORDSWORTH, 
Moore, COLERIDGE, CAMPBELL, JOANNA BAILLIE, ELIzA Cook, Mary Howirr, MRs. 
Hermans, Hocc, CHARLOTTE SMITH, &c. feap. 8vo, very prettily printed, with 15 beautiful 
Wood Engravings (pub. at 3s. 6d.), cloth, gilt edges, 2s. 


YOUTH'S (THE) HANDBOOK OF ENTERTAINING KNOWLEDGE, in a Series of 
Familiar Conversations on the most interesting productions of Nature and Art, and on other 
Instructive Topics of Polite Education. By a Lady (Ms. PALuisER, the Sister of Captain 
M i2zrvar), 2 vols. feap. 8vo, Woodcuts (pub. at 15s.), cloth gilt, 6s. 1844 

This is a very clever and instructive book, adapted to the capacities of yow1g people, on the 
plan of the Conversations on Chemistry, Mineralogy, Botany, Xc, 








a 





PUBLISHED OR SOLD BY H. G. BOHN. ok 





SBusic and Musical Works. 





THE MUSICAL LIBRARY. A Selection of the best Vocal and Instrumental Music, both 
English and Foreign. Edited by W. Ayrron, Esq. of the Opera House. 8 vols. folio, com- 
ehending a oy pieces of Music, beautifully printed with metallic types (pub. at 
4s.), sewed, 1d. Ils, : 
‘The Voeal and Instrumental may be had separately, each in 4 vols. 16s. 


MUSICAL CABINET AND HARMONIST. A Collection of Classical and Popular Vocal 
and Instrumental Music; comprising Selections from the best productions of all the Great 
Masters; English, Scotch, and Irish Melodies; with many of the» National Airs of other 
Countries, embracing Overtures, Marches, Rondos, Quadrilles, Waltzes, and Gallopades: a!so 
Madrigals, Duets, and Glees; the whole adapted either for the Voice, the Piano-forte, the 
Harp, or the Organ; with Pieces occasionally for the Fiute and Guitar, under the superin- 
tendence of an eminent Professor. 4 vols. small folio, comprehending more than 300 pieces of 
Music, beautifully printed with metallic types (pub. at 2/. 2s.), sewed, 16s. 

The great sale of the Musical Library, in consequence of ite extremely low price, has induced 
the Advertiser to adopt the same plan of selling the present capital selection. As the contents 
are quite different from the Musical Library, and the intrinsic merit of the selection is equal, 
the work will no doubt meet with similar success. : 


MUSICAL GEM; a Collection of 300 Modern Songs, Duets, Glees, &c. by the most celebrated 
Composers of the present day, adapted for the Voice, Flute, or Violin (edited by Jonn Parry), 
3 vols, in b, 8vo, with a nope ly engraved Title, and a very richly illuminated Frontispiece , 
(pub. at 1. Is.), cloth gilt, 10s. 6d. 1841 
The ahove capital collection contains a great number of the best copyright: pieces, including 
some of the most popular songs of Braham, Bishop, &c. It forms a most attractive volume. 





HMevicine, Suraery, Anatomy, Chemistry, 
Bhpsioleqn, Ke. 





BARTON AND CASTLE'S BRITISH FLORA MEDICA; Or, History of the Medicinal 
a) cee Tae 2 vols. 8vo, upwards of 200 finely coloured figures of Plants (pub. at 

32. 3s..), cloth, 1/. 16s. 5 
An exceedingly cheap, elegant, and valuable work, necessary to every medical practitioner. % 


BATEMAN AND WILLAN’S DELINEATIONS OF CUTANEOUS DISEASES. 
4to, containing 72 Plates, beautifully and very accurately coloured under the superintendence 
ef an eminent Professional Gentleman (Dr. CaRsweLL), (pub. at 12/. 12s.), half bound mor. 


bl, 5s. 0 
“« Dr. Bateman’s valuable work has done more to extend the knowledge of cutaneous diseases 
than any other that has ever appeared.”’—Dr, A. T. Thompson. 


BEHR'S HAND-BOOK OF ANATOMY, by Braxerr (Demonstrator at Guy’s Hospital), 
thick 12mo, closely printed, cloth lettered (pub. at 10s. 6d.), 3s. 6d, 1846 


BOSTOCK’S (DR.) SYSTEM OF PHYSIOLOGY, comprising a Complete View of the 
resent state of the Science. 4th Edition, revised and corrected throughout, 8vo (900 pages), 
ie. at 1/.), cloth, 8s. ; 1834 


BURNS'S PRINCIPLES OF MIDWIFERY, tenth and best edition, thick Svo, cloth lettered, 
(pub. at 16s.), 58. 


CELSUS DE MEDICINA, Edited by E. Mrttrean, M.D. cum Indice copiosissimo ex edit. 

Targe. Thick 8vo, Frontispiece (pub. at i6s.), cloth, 9s. 1831 

This is the very best edition of Celsus. It contains critical and medical notes, applicable to 

the practice of this country; a paralle} Table of ancient and modern Medical terms, synonymes, 

weights, measures, &c. and, indeed, everything which can be useful to the Medical Student; 
together with a singularly extensive Index. 


HOPE'S MORBID ANATOMY, royal 8vo, with 48 highly finished coloured Plates, contain- 
ine Fo ae Delineations of Cases in every known variety of Disease (pub. at 5/. os) 
oth, 3l. 3%. ; 


LAWRENCE'S LECTURES ON COMPARATIVE ANATOMY, PHYSIOLOGY, 
ZOOLOGY, AND THE NATURAL HISTORY OF MAN. New Edition, post 8vo, with a 
Frontispiece of Portraits, engraved on Steel, and 12 Plates, cloth, 5s. 


LAWRENCE (W.) ON THE DISEASES OF THE EYE. Third Edition, revised and 

enlarged. S8yo (820 closely printed pages), (pub. at 1/, 4s.), cloth, 10s. 6d. 1844 
LEY’S (DR.) ESSAY ON THE CROUP, 8vo, 5 Plates (pub. at 15s.), cloth, 3s. 6d. 1836 
LIFE. OF SiR ASTLEY COOPER, interspersed with his Sketches of Distinguished Cha- 


racters, by BRANsBY COOPER, 2 vols. 8vo, with fine Portrait, after Sir Thomas Lawrence 
(pub. at 12. 1s.), cloth, ius. 6d. 1813 


NEW LONDON SURGICAL POCKET-BOOK, thick royal 18mo (pub, at 12s.), hf. hed: Ss, 


32 - CATALOGUE OF NEW BOOKS. 





NEW LONDON CHEMICAL POCKET-BOOK; adapte 
royal 18mo, numerous Woodcuts (pub. at 7s. 6d.), hf. bd. 3s. 


. : 
hint ly a ON 1 MED feAL EOCKET BOOK, including Pharmacy, Posology, &c. poral 


ARIS’ : ATI ; 
Pp RIS’ (DR), TREATISE ON DIET AND THE DIGESTIVE FUNCTIONS, 


UMBE’'S PRACTICAL TREATISE 
ig: Fourth edition, Plates, thick Svo (pub. ae ll. tle ree eee OF THE SKIN. 


NCLAIR’S (SIR JOHN) CODE O - s re 
st complete AS thick vol. ly Portrait ( Aa ate BAT hic LONGEVITY smi aaa 


SOUTH'’S DESCRIPTION OF THE BONES, together with their several connexions 
with each other, and.with the Muscles, specially adapted for Students in Anatomy, numerous 
Woodcuts, third edition, 12mo, cloth lettered (pub. at 7s.), 3s. 6d. 1837 


STEPHENSON'S MEDICAL ZOOLOGY AND MINERALOGY; including also an 
igo d A the Animal and Mineral Poisons, 45 coloured Plates, royal 8vo (pub. at 2/. hs 


TYRRELL ON THE DISEASES OF THE EYE, being a Practical Work on their Treat- 
ment, Medically, Topically, and by Operation, by F. TyRRELL, Senior Surgeon to the Royal 
London Ophthalmic Hospital. 2 thick vols. 8vo, illustrated by 9 Plates, containing upwards of 
60 finely coloured figures (pub. at 1/. 16s.), cloth, 1, 1s. 1840 


WOODVILLE’S MEDICAL BOTANY. Third Edition, enlarged by Sir W. Jackson 
HookeER. 5 vols. 4to, with 310 Plates, Engraved by SowERBY, most carefully coloured (pub. 
at 10/. 10s.), half bound morocco, 5/. 5s. The Fifth, or Supplementary Volume, entirely by Sir 
W. J. Hooker, to complete the old Editions. 4to, 36 coloured Plates (pub. at 2/. 12s. 6d.), 
boards, 1/, 11s. 6d. ’ 1832 


to the Daily use of the Student, 
€d. 18i4 


. 





SPathematics. 





BRADLEY'S GEOMETRY, PERSPECTIVE, AND PROJECTION, for the use of 
Artists. 8 Plates and numerous Woodcuts (pub. at 7s.), cloth, 5s. 1846 


EUCLID’S SIX ELEMENTARY BOOKS. by Dr. Larpyer, with an Explanatory Com- 
mentary, Geometrical Exercises, and a Treatise on Solid Geometry, 8vo, Ninth Edition, 
cloth, 6s, 


EUCLID IN PARAGRAPHS: The Elements of Euclid, containing the first Six Books, and 
the first T'wenty-one Propositions of the Eleventh Book, 12mo, with the Planes shaded, (pub. 
. at 6s.), cloth, 3s. 6d. Camb. 1845 


JAMIESON’S MECHANICS FOR PRACTICAL MEN, including Treatises on the Com- 
position and Resolution of Forces; the Centre of Gravity; and the Mechanical Powers; illus- 
trated by Examples and Designs. Fourth Edition, greatly improved, 8vo (pub. at lis.), 
cloth, 7s. 6d. , 1850 

‘*A great mechanical treasure.’’—Dr. Birkbeck. 





BOOKS PRINTED UNIFORM WITH THE STANDARD LIBRARY. 
JOYCE'S SCIENTIFIC DIALOGUES, enlarged by Pinnock, for the Instruction and 


I 

i People. N and atly improved and enlarged Edition, by 
eee wacacaa, oneal to tlie (present State of knowledge (600 pages), numerous 

Woodcuts, 5s. 
STURM'S MORNING COMMUNINGS WITH GOD, or Devotional Meditations for 
every Day in the Year, 5s. > 1849 

CHILLINGWORTH’S RELIGION OF PROTESTANTS. 500 pp. 3s. 6a. 

“CARY'S TRANSLATION OF DANTE. (Upwards of 600 pages), extra blue cloth, with 9 
richly gilt back, 7s. 6d. ‘ 1847 
VIA d THE BRITISH ARMIES, enlarged and improved, and 
etetn aoe ‘Atha lalhe 2 oi. ; several highly finished Steel Portraits, and a rontispiece, 
extra gilt cloth, 7s. 6d. 1847 
MICHELET'S HISTORY OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION, translated oy C. Cocks, 

2 vols. in 1, 48. 
ROBINSON CRUSOE, including his further Adventures, with a Life of Defoe, &c. upwaxds 

of 60 fine Woodcuts, from designs by HARVEY and WHIMPER, 5s. 


RLING’'S (MISS) NOBLE DEEDS OF WOMAN, or Examples of Female Courage, 
ah ig ies ok Ay Virtue, Third Edition, enlarged and improved, with two very beautiful Frontis- 
pieces, elegant in cloth, 5s. ’ 1848 





i LONDON; PRINTED BY HARRISON AND SOX, ST. MARTIN’S LANE, 


—# - 


- 


litle 





SF Poe | _- 
LR 
144 


~ 


5 
N 
aA 


~ 


lr wh 
AY, 


\ 


ek ne ek 
TUS, 
PIZZAS 


ia! 


PIG 
“> uN 
NOG 


& 
Z4UMNOGLSN 


\ 


— 
-, 


Uniform with the STANDARD LIBRARY, price 5s. (excepting “ Cosmos,” which is ouly 35.6 


i BOHN’S SCIENTIFIC LIBRARY. 


1. THE CHESS PLAYER'S HAND-BOOK. BY H. STAUNTON, ESQ. q 


trated with Diagrams. 


2. LECTURES ON PAINTING BY THE ROYAL ACADEMIC a 
Portraits, and an Introductory Essay, and Notes by R. Worn Shey ea 

3 & 4. HUMBOLDT’S COSMOS; OR, SKETCH OF A PHYSICA 

, of the Universe. Translated ’by E. C. Orre. In 2 Vols., with ine Ponce a 
new Edition (though published ~*. so very low a price) is more complete than ¢ 
which has preceded it. The * tes are much enlarged, and placed beneath 
text. Iiumboldt’s analytical summaries, and the passages hitherto suppress 
are included; and new and comprehensive Indices subjoined. 

5. STAUNTON’'S CHESS PLAYER'S COMPANION, COMPRI 
Treatise on Odds, a Collection of Match Games, including naenisrens with ht 
St. Amant, and a Selection of Original Problems, . 

6. HAND-BOOK OF GAMES, BY VARIOUS AMATEURS AND PROFESSOF 
comprising new and ay treatises on ,all the principal Games of ¢hance, s} 
and manual dexterity. Jllustrated by numerous Diagrams. be 

7. HUMBOLDT'S NEW WORK: VIEWS OF NATURE, OR CONT "10 
of the Sublime Phenomena of Creation. Translated by E.C. Orre an tee Bo 
With fine coloured view of Chimborazo, a facsimile letter from the author, tran; 
tions of the Latin, Spanie», and French quotations, a very complete index, &e. 


8. HUMBOLDT'S COSMO_, VOL. 3. 





Also, price 5s., uniform with the STANDARD LiBRARY, 


BOHN'S ANTIQUARIAN LIBRARY, 


1. BEDE’S ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY, & THE ANGLO-SAXON CHRONIC! 
2. MALLET'S NORTHERN ANTIQUITIES, BY BISHOP PERCY; WITH , 


Abstract of the Eyrbiggia Saga, by Sin WaLrer Scorr. New edition, revised ; 
enlarged by J. A. BLACKWELL. 


3. WILLIAM OF MALMESBURY’S CHRONICLE OF THE KINGS OF ENGLAR 
4. SIX OLD ENGLISH CHRONICLES, VIZ., ASSER’S LIF 
the Chronicles of Ethelwerd, Gildas, Nennius, Geoffry of Monmouth; aa Tick 
of Cirencester. a: : 
5. ELLIS'S EARLY ENGLISH METRICAL ROMANCES, REVI | 
OrcHARD HALLIWELL. Complete in one vol., with splendid Vtuninsted Pronto 
6. CHRONICLES OF THE CRUSADERS; RICHARD OF DEVIZES, | 
de Vinsauf, Lord de Joinville. Complete in one volume, with a a ent te 
nated Frontispiece. 


7. EARLY TRAVELS IN PALESTINE, WILLIBALD, SEWULF, BEN 
Tudela, Mandeville, La Brocquiere, and Maundrell, In one volume. Ne 


8. BRAND'S POPULAR eS abe Me OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, Ali 





Ireland, by Sin Heney Ex.is. Vol. I. 


(Se ‘ieee 
) 9. ROGER OF WENDOVER’S FLOWERS OF HISTORY (FORMER 
to Matthew Paris.) VERY. ERLY ASCRIB 


10. BRAND'S POPULAR ANTIQUITIES. VOL. 2. 
11. ROGER OF WENDOVER'S FLOWERS OF HISTORY. VOL. 2. 
12. BRAND'S POPULAR ANTIQUITIES. VOL. 3. 


413. KEIGHTLEY’S FAIRY MYTHOLOGY. NEW EDITION, EN 
Re Author. One Vol. Frontispiece by George Cruikshank. Ritts one 





Also, uniform with the STANDARD LIBRARY, price 5s., 


BOHN’S ECCLESIASTICAL LIBRARY, 


1. EUSEBIUS’ ECCLESIASTICAL HISTORY, CAREFULLY TRANSLATED FRC 
the Greek, with illustrative Notes. @ 


~ - ~ i~ Ii ~—™ IS TN 

TE MAT CNA ENTE NRT NAT ANA NST, 

SLA SASEN SESSA 
\Z ZN 





| ~ 
RO 
SIP PEI I 


SIS IAI ISIS 


NIN UN, 


C2 
. Dyi* AK GO) Lis Ghd i 






Od 


N2A 
‘ i 














is 











































































a Also, 5s. (except Thucydides Virgil, Horace, and Cicero, which are 3s. 6d. each), 
ai | 7 Sass = = . NRY 
S University of Toronto') ;. 
- ee | ie a 
— Library “Ano 
; 3. 
ITH 
ef 36. 
iays. 
: |||DO NOT te 
> [eA - . 
& te 
# 9 +REMOVE CKLEY. 
a2 & | \L. PRO- 
4 2 THE , PARA- 
bs : | ee 
3g » CARD i 
fe 5 4, AND 
® & es 
> a |FROM nods | 
- THIS 
co ‘ 
ss . / PEAT 
38 POCKET ms 
bs | ae 
ae hy @ man\PS; | 
tx) “J : : 
“ae: i an 
Oo. | 
ot 2 4! Acme Library Card Pocket BY : 
ee LOWE-MARTIN CO. LIMITED | 
a : 
AUS0,-wrony or ww aE ee re ee ene : 
MILLERS PHILOSOPHY OF HISTORY, in 4 vols. Portrait. : 













I~ OO“ TAN ~~ SZ I~ NS 
NAA » MAL YN SZ ‘\ 
SINS MAAS 


Kos 
VA — 












PEA DILE & ge 
“XX > is —y —syl 

DEANE ALANS SU ANE NZANE NZ ANS ALANS NZANE NZANE « 
Ae be 















Sf III OI NN x ~ 
ae N N NZ MAS N 
OR MO AR RE AOS 
























eth 


i a a a 
nent ii he a 







5 
| 


i "i 


D a wih 


es Mii at eit) 


i, 


_ 


i 


aa 












oe 





















































| 
| 


C 

| 

7 i) 

. iy | 
| 




















ae 











Mur 1 Pi 4 AOh aA 
its uy ot 
ae ae Ny Hl sai A mt ‘ 
rab ie ny ii 
%. Asters if 


i ey it li ae, 
Mile ci if 

































































= 


Re 
~ 
~ ne = 
- Sa _ 

ax ~ r ~ 

fe a pate : 

° ae ask nef hase Kees stated 
- ws one al = i“ 7 
= th ool, reales - ea eos i Mrs ee 
angeotate : — espe athe ° - a 
ee ores amnan on ae x ag She 
~ At Cees ea * = SUES + 
—4 ee walbn pre aretaT + 
reaegadpenste, Mes ey mew bs ore . 
e ye fobs! =e eee 
ee RE RE EY MEE I A Rw | ew RRR See Fe A ” rv 
rae cafe mii i 
nes al 
= 6 bet ~ t wibers r as 

- wp Sie, cereal elec ; 
. bey ne per That 
ne is ~ AT sy ~ ” 

Cuong en ‘aioe sy 

- 1 Degeomnematen 7 ao 

sass ena irinbiaistinensen ty 
ar gt pee ioe ne r : : 
aneraree Peat eT wt ae Lely . M of 1 


i i te By 
aati Ae : 


bay, etry GE, 
erie ecshaey 


swmmetorsie 





Serene nw eee 

















ti iit 
Ha!) iat nee ; Uva oye ASE 


yh vy We iH 
He AT fi Aa yt 


| ak [hi i i 
; b . i sy at 3 Line i ! site 
i 1 a ity i ho ONAN peal 
i at f 4d i] i 1 as fi emg s, HA ?. 
iif Ha rabaedt | abt Veoter Prati i 
Rat bois ! 
" i} 


= 
- oe 




























apa ay Has le All's {ts te / 4) ‘ 


i t: tis 
et 
ui jth Hitananittl i ij! ut MA 4) 4 if : 
He Masa We “a iy a Wie 
Mi a mal iri 
| 3 i 


> 
a 
— 
ere 
nem 
ao ae 
howe 
— 
= 
imo 
Reinet 
‘ 









at 
Fm 
aad 
_areratew 
a 


rae 1 Qa 


hae 





te it 
‘ Hus Mie 3 § ij: ot 
i nue ue i fa 


H ih i) oh Miia] eine Mia 
i i ‘lhe Hh "4 \ Ni ike te aa i ( 


Oe) eee i “| 
erg iy : a Bae a) | 
Aa | M 
iin Hanae Ay | | We ve 
Nit hy i Fi : | feed | HA | - 
ag 9 513 ah . i"), 


Siti ne 4 






























































































mn uit (i ‘ ( i 
if qa 

, 2 is i‘ 
aS va a ile 
hil hy 


( 
a Mi 4 sl ‘i {kt iA 


Nias ee iP i | 
ei 1h i ae te 
nn He LS ARM A Vatsbayiiia; eins i) Mie nite Hehe i Rei he 


Hin ‘i 
- tht { ii ii th 79) niin vt the att t r 
ET itr a aT Te 2 











Fhibibbiassinede Nit 


TUL fa QUE ag 4 


