Source note (Tower of Babel staging): Alexander von Humboldt, Personal Narrative of Travels to the Equinoctial Regions of the New Continent, translated by Helen Maria Williams (London: Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme & Brown, 1821), Vol. V. Text from Internet Archive item personalnarrati5humb (OCR).
Public domain work. This file was produced from a public scan; OCR imperfections may remain.



aad SH ty
sae
v


se Sif


Beat


EX LIBRIS
DUMBARTON OAKS
LIBRARY


THE LASTER yi 0,
Taunton Castle.


Presented by


SiR PRIOR GOLDNEY, Barl, B,
19u.


G.5486


Personal Parrative
OF TRAVELS


-EQUINOCTIAL REGIONS


NEW CONTINENT,


DURING THE YEARS 1799—1804.


BY
ALEXANDER DE HUMBOLDT,
AND


AIME BONPLAND:


WITH MAPS, PLANS, &¢.


WRITTEN IN FRENCH BY


ALEXANDER DE HUMBOLDT,


AND TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH BY


HELEN MARIA WILLIAMS.
VOL. V.
euESEEeneee conceal
LONDON:


PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, HURST, REES, ORME, AND BROWN,
. : PATERNOSTER ROW.


182].


W. Pople, Printer, 67, Chancery Lane.


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER XX..


PAGE,
The Mouth of the Rio Anaveni—Peak of Uniana


—Mission of Atures—Cataract, or Raudal of
Mapara—Islets of Surupamana, and Uirapari 29 249


CHAPTER XXI.
Raudal of Garcita—Maypures—Cataracts of Quit-
tuna—Mouth of the Vichada and Zama— Rock
of Aricagua—Siquita mit open Fabaac ney nae aE ca


CHAPTER XXII.
San Fernando de Atabapo—San Balthasar—The


Rivers Temi and Tuamini— Javita — Portage
from the Tuamini to the Rio Negro}: — 2


NOTES TO BOOK VII.


A—Remark on the Comparison of Roots in Lan-
guages that differ in Grammatical Structure -


BOOK VIII.


CHAPTER XXIIL


The Rio Negro— Limits of Brazil—The Cassiquiare
—Bifurcation of the Oroonoko - ~


CHAPTER XXIV.


The Upper Oroonoko, from Esmeralda to the Con-
fluence of the Guaviare—Second Passage across
the Cataracts of Atures and Maypures—Lower
Oroonoko between the Mouth of the Rio Apure
and Angostura, the Capital of Spanish Guyana


JOURNEY


TO THE


EQUINOCTIAL REGIONS


OF


THE NEW CONTINENT. .


CHAPTER XxX.


The Mouth of the Rio Anaveni.—Peak of Uni-
ana.— Mission of Atures, -Cataract, or Rau-
dal of Mapara.—Islets of Surupamana, and


Tirapuri.
. ae i, Bi Go Te


Tue river of the Oroonoko, .in running from
south to north, is crossed by a chain of granitic
mountains. Twice confined in it’s course, it

turbulently breaks on the rocks, that form steps
and transverse dykes, Nothing can be grander
than the aspect of this spot. Neither the fall
of the Tequendama*, nor the magnificent scenes
of the Cordilleras, could weaken the impression
produced upon my mind by the first view of the


* Near Santa Fe de Bogota.
VOL. V. BR


2


rapids of Atures and of Maypures. When you
are so stationed, that the eye can at once take
in the long succession of cataracts, the immense
sheet of foam and vapours, illumined by the
rays of the setting Sun, it seems as if you saw
the whole river suspended over it’s bed.

Scenes so astonishing must for ages have
fixed the attention of the inhabitants of the new
world. - When Diego de Todaz, Alfonso de
Herera, and the intrepid Raleigh, anchored at
the mouth of the Oroonoko, they were informed
by the Indians of the Great Cataracts, which
they themselves had never visited, and which
they even confounded with cascades farther to the
east. Whatever obstacles the force of vegeta-
tion under the torrid zone may be to the inter-
course among nations, all that relates to the
course of great rivers acquires a celebrity, which
extends to vast distances. The Oroonoko, the
Amazon, and the Uruguay, traverse, like in-
land arms of seas, in different directions, a land
covered. with forests, and inhabited by tribes,
part of whom are cannibals. It is not yet two
hundred years, since civilization, and the mild
light. of a more humane religion, have pursued
their way along the banks of these ancient ca-
nals traced by the hand of nature; long however
before the introduction of agriculture, before
communications for the purpose of barter were
established among these scattered and often.


2
3


hostile tribes, the knowledge of extraordinary
phenomena, of falls of water, of volcanic fires,
and of snows resisting all the ardent heat of
summer, was propagated by a thousand fortui-
tous circumstances. Three hundred leagues
from the coast, in the centre of South America,
among nations whose excursions do not extend
to three days journey, we find an idea of the
ocean, and words* that denote a mass of salt
water extending as far as the eye can discern.
Various events, which repeatedly occur in sa-
vage life, contribute to enlarge these concep-
tions. In consequence of the petty wars between
neighbouring tribes, a prisoner is brought into a
Strange country, and treated as a poito or meroyt,
that is to say, as aslave. After having been
repeatedly sold, he is dragged to new wars, es-
capes, and returns home; he relates what he
has seen, and what he has heard from those,
whose tongue he had been compelled to learn.
Thus on discovering a coast, you hear of great
inland animals ¢; thus, on entering the valley of
a vast river, you are surprised to find, that sa-
vages, who are strangers to navigation, have


* Parava in the Tamanac language. Parana in the May-
pure.


+ The first of these words belongs to the Caribbee lan.
guage, the second to the Maypure tongue.


t Crevier, Anim. fossiles, Discours prélimin., p. 22.


B 2


4


acquired a knowledge of distant things. In
the infant state of society, the exchange of ideas
precedes to a certain point the exchange of pro-
ductions.

The two great cataracts of the Oroonoko, of
which the celebrity is so far spread and so an-
cient, are formed by the passage of the river
across the mountains of Parima*. They are
called by the natives Mapara and Quittuna ;
but the missionaries have substituted for these
names those of Atures and Maypures, after the
names of the first tribes, which they assembled
together in the nearest villages. On the coast
of Caraccas, the two Great Cataracts are denot-
ed by the simple appellation of the two Rauda-
les}, or rapids; a denomination which implies,
that the other falls of water, even the rapids of
Camiseta and of Carichana, are not considered
as worthy of attention, when compared with the
cataracts of Atures and Maypures.

These last, situate between five and six de-
grees of north latitude, and a hundred leagues
west of the Cordilleras of New Grenadaf, in the
meridian of Porto Cabello, are only twelve lea-
gues distant from each other. It is surprising,


* See chap. xvii, vol. iv, p. 304.

+ From the Spanish word raudo, rushing, rapidus.

+ West of the Paramo of Zoraca, near Tunja, a town of
New Granada.


9)


that their existence was not known to d’Anville,
who, in his large, fine map of South America,
marks the inconsiderable cascades of Marimara
and San Borja, by the names of the rapids of Ca-
richana and Tabaje. The great Cataracts di-
vide the Christian establishments of Spanish
Guyana into two unequal parts. Those situ-
ate between the Raudalof Atures and the mouth
of the river are called the missions of the lower
Oroonoko ; the missions of the upper Oroonoko
comprehend the villages between the Raudal of
Maypures, and the mountains of Duida*. The
course of the lower Oroonoko, if we estimate the
sinuosities with Mr. de la Condamine at one
third of the distance in a direct line, is two hun-
dred and sixty nautical leagues; the course of
the upper Oroonoko, supposing it’s sources to be
. three degrees east. of Duida, includes one hun-
dred and sixty-seven leagues,

Beyond the Great Cataracts an unknown
land begins. The country is partly mountain-
ous, and partly flat, receiving at once the con-
fluents of the Amazon and the Oroonoko. From
the facility of it’s communications with the Rio
Negro and the Gran Para, it appears to belong
still more to Brazil than to the Spanish colonies.


* Missiones del Alto gy dl Baxo Orinoco. The missions of
the Cassiquiare are not included in this statement, though
this river forms a branch of the npper Oroonoko.


6


None of the missionaries, who have described
the Oroonoko before me, neither Father Gumil-
la, Gili, nor Caulin, had passed the Raudal of
Maypures. If the last have made known with
some precision the topography of the upper
Oroonoko, and the Cassiquiare, this informa-
tion was obtained only from the military em-
ployed in the expedition of Solano. We found
but three Christian establishments, above the
Great Cataracts, along theshores of the Oroonoko,
in an extent of more than a hundred leagues ;
and these three establishments contained scarcely
six or eight white persons, that is to say, persons
of European race. We cannot be surprised,
that such a desert region should have been at
all times the classical soil of fable and fairy
visions. It is there, that “grave missionaries
have placed nations with one eye in the fore-
head, the head of a dog, or the mouth below the
stomach. It is there they have found all that
the ancients relate of the Garamantes, of the
Arimaspes, and of the Hyperboreans. It would
be an error to suppose, that these simple and
often rustic missionaries had themselves invent-
ed all these exaggerated fictions; they derived
them in great part from the recitals of the In-
dians. A fondness for’ narration prevails in the
missions, as it does at sea, in the East, and in
every place where the mind wants amusement.
A missionary, from his vocation, is not inclined


7


to scepticism ; he imprints on his memory what
the natives have so often repeated to him ; and,
when returned to Europe, and restored to the
civilized world, he finds a compensation for his
toils in the pleasure of creating astonishment
by a recital of facts, which he thinks he has
collected, and by an animated description of
remote things. These tales of travellers and of
monks (cuentos de viageros y frailes) increase
in improbability in preportion as you increase
your distance from the forests of the Oroonoko,
and approach the coasts, inhabited by the
whites. When at Cumana, Nueva Barcelona,
and other sea-ports, which have frequent com-


munication with the missions, you betray any
sign of incredulity, you are reduced to silence by
these few words, “I'he fathers have seen it, but
far above the Great Cataracts, mas ariba de los
Raudales.”


Entering a country so little frequented, and of
which a part only has been described by those
who passed through it, I have several motives for
adhering to the journal form in my narrative,
Under this form the reader will distinguish with
greater facility what I had an opportunity of
observing myself, and what I relate from the
testimony of the missionaries and natives. He
will follow the travellers in their daily oceupa- .
tions, and, appreciating at once the shortness
ef the time at their disposal, and the difficulties


8


they had to surmount, will judge them with
more indulgence.

Aprilthe 15th. We left the Island of Panu-
mana at four in the morning, two hours before
sunrise. _The sky was in great part obscured,
and lightnings furrowed thick clouds at more
than forty degrees of elevation. We were sur-
prised at not hearing the sound of thunder; .was
it on account of the prodigious height of the
storm? It appears to us, that in Europe the
electric flashes without thunder, vaguely called
heat lightning, are seen generally nearer the
horizon. Under a cloudy sky, that sent back
the radiant caloric of the soil, the heat was sti-
fling ;. not a breath of wind agitated the foliage


of the trees. The jaguars as usual had crossed


the arm of the Oroonoko,by which we were
separated from the shore, and we heard their
cries extremely near. During the night the
Indians had advised us to quit our station in the
open air, and retire to a deserted hut belonging
to the conucos of the inhabitants of Atures.
They had taken care to barricade the opening
with planks, a precaution which seemed to us
superfluous; but near the cataracts tigers are
so numerous, that two years before, in these
very conucos of Panumana, an Indian returning
to. his hut, toward the close of the rainy season,
found a tigress settled in it with her two young.
These animals had inhabited the dwelling for


>


9


several months; they were dislodged from it
with difficulty, and it was only after an obsti-
nate combat, that the former master could
take possession of his house. The jaguars are
fond of retiring-to deserted ruins, and I believe
it is more prudent in general for a solitary tra-
veller to encamp in the open air, between two
fires, than to seek shelter in uninhabited huts.
On quitting the island of Panumana, we per-
ceived on the western bank of the river the fires
of an encampment of Guahibo savages. The
missionary, who accompanied us, caused a few
musket-shots to be fired in the air, which he
said was to intimidate them, and prove to them,
that we were in a state to defend ourselves.
The savages were no doubt destitute of canoes,
and had no wish to trouble us in the middle of
the river. We passed at sunrise the mouth of the
Rio Anaveni, which descends from the eastern
mountains. On it’s banks, now deserted, father
Olmos had established; in the time of the, Je-
suits, a small village of Japuins* or, Jaruroes.
The heat. of the day was so powerful, that we
rested a long time in a woody spot, to fish with
a hook and line, and it was with, some trouble
we carried away all the fish we had caught.
We did not arrive till very late at the foot of
the Great Cataract, in a bay called the lower


* Gili, vol. 1, p. 36.


10


harbour* ; and we followed, not without diffi-
culty, in a dark night, the narrow path, that
leads to the mission of Atures, a league distant
from the river. We crossed a plain covered
with large blocks of granite.

The little village of San Juan Nepomuceno de
los Atures was founded by the Jesuit Francisco
Gonzalez + in 1748. In going up the river
this is the last of the Christian establishments,
that owe their origin to the order of St Ignatius.
The more southern establishments, those of
Atabapo, of Cassiquiare, and of Rio Negro, were
formed by the fathers of the Observance of St.
Francis. The Oroonoko appears to have flowed
heretofore where the village of Atures now
stands, and the flat savannah, that surrounds


the village, no doubt made part of the bed of


the river. I saw to the east of the mission a
succession of rocks, that seemed to have formed
the ancient shore of the Oroonoko. In the lapse
of ages the river has been impelled toward the
west, in consequence of the accumulation of
earth, which occurs more frequently on the side
of the eastern mountains, that are furrowed by
torrents. The cataract bears the name of Ma-


* Puerto de Abaxo.

+ And not by Father Olmos; as Caulin asserts in his
Chorographie. Father Olmos was at Atures at the time of
the expedition of the boundaries, and rendered it essential ser-
vices,


il


para*, as we have mentioned above ; while the
name of the village is derived from that of
the nation of Atures, which is now believed to
be extinct. I find on the maps of the seven-
teenth century Island and Cataract of Athule ;
which is the word Atures written according to
the pronunciation of the Tamanacks, who con-
found, like so many other people, the consonants
Zand r. This mountainous region was so little
known in Europe even in the middle of the
eighteenth century, that d’Anville, in the first
edition of his South America, makes a branch
issue from the Oroonoko, near Salto de los Atu-
res, and fall into the Amazon, to which branch
he gives the name of Rio Negro.

Ancient maps, as well as Father Gumilla’s


* T am ignorant of the etymology of this word, which I
believe means only a fall of water. Gili translates into May-
pure a small cascade (raudalito) by uccamatisi mapara canaca-
patwri (vol. 1, p. xxxix). Should we not spell this word
matpara? mat being a radical of the Maypure tongue, and
meaning bad (Hervas, Suggio, n. 29). The radical par
{para) is found among American tribes more than five hun-
dred leagues distant from each other, the Caribs, Maypures,
Brazilians, and Peruvians, in the words sea, rain, water, lake.
We must not confound mapara with mapaja; this last word
signifies, in Maypure and Tamanack, the papaw or melon-
tree, no doubt on account of the sweetness of it’s fruit, for.
mapa means in the Maypure, as well as in the Peruvian and
Omagua tongues, the honey of bees. The Tamanacks call a


cascade, or raudal, in general uatapurutpe ; the Maypures,
uca.,


12


work, place the mission in latitude 1° 30%.
Abbé Gili gives it 3° 50’. I found* by meri-
dian altitudes of Canopus, and « of the Southern
Cross, 5° 38’ 4” for the latitude ; and by the time
keeper 45 41’ 17” of longitude west of the meri-
dian of Paris. The dip of the magnetic needle
was on the 16th of April 32:25° (centesimal
division). The intensity of the magnetic force
was expressed by two hundred and twenty-three
oscillations in 10’ of time, when it was at Paris
by two hundred and forty-five oscillations.

We found this small mission in the most de-
plorable state. It contained even at the time
of the expedition of Solano, commonly called
the expedition of the boundaries, three hundred
and twenty Indians. This number had diminish-
ed, at our passage by the Cataracts, to forty-
seven; and the missionary assured us, that this


* Obs. Astr. vol. 1, p. 226. I took my observations near
the small church of the mission. Don Jose Solano, the cos.
mographer of the expedition of the boundaries, had found
(no doubt with quadrants not rectified by inverting the instru-
ment, and without observing stars on the north and south)
5° 35’ (Caulin, p. 71). Father Gili (vol. 1, p. xxxii) thinks,
that the commissioners of the boundaries stopped at 4°18! 227),
Ashe places Cabruta (the latitude of which place, inferred
from that of the Capuchino, appears to me to be 7° 40’) in
5°, we cannot suppose, that he meant to write 5° 18’ instead
of 4° 18’. Did he not rather deduce Cabruta from the erro.
neous position of Atures ?


18


diminution became from year to year more sefi-
sible. He showed us, that in the space of
thirty-two months only one marriage had been
entered in the registers of the parish church.
Two others had been contracted by uncatechized
natives, and celebrated before the Indian Gover-
nador, to certify, as we say in Europe, the civil
condition. At the first foundation of the mis-
sion, the Atures, Maypures, Meyepures, Aba-
nis, and Quirupas, had been assembled together.
Instead of these tribes we found only Guahi-
boes, and a few families of the nation of Macoes.
The Atures* have almost entirely disappeared ;
they are no longer known, except by the tombs
in the cavern of Ataruipe, which recall to mind
the sepulchres of the Guanches at Teneriff. We
learnt on the spot, that the Atures, as well as
the Quaquas, and the Macoes or Piaroas, be-
longed to the great stock of the Saliva nations ;
while the Maypures, the Abanis, the Parenis,
and the Guaypunnaves, are of the same race as


* « Already in my time,” says Gili the missionary, “ there
did not exist above a score of Atures in the raudal of this
name. We thought this nation almost extinct, there being
no. longer any of these Indians in the forest. Since this
period, the military of the expedition of the boundaries assert,
that they discovered a tribe of Atures on the east of the Es-
meralda, between the rivers Padamo and Ocamu.” (Gili,
vol. i, p. 834. See also the map of Surville made for the
works of Father Caulin.)


i4


the Cabres or Caveres, celebrated for their long
wars withtheCaribs. In this labyrinth of petty na-
tions, divided from one another as the nations of
Latium, Asia Minor,andSogdiana, formerly were,
we can trace no general relations but by follow-
ing the analogy of tongues. ‘These are the only
monuments, that have reached us from the early
age of the world ; the only monuments, which,
without being fixed to the soil, at once movable
and lasting, have as it were traversed time and
space. They owe their duration, and the extent
they occupy, much less to conquering and po-
lished nations, than to those wandering and
half-savage tribes, who, fleeing before a power-
ful enemy, carried along with them in their ex-
treme wretchedness only their wives, their child-
ren, and the idiom of their fathers.

Between the latitudes of 4° and 8°, the Oroo-
noko not only separates the great forest of the
Parima from the bare savannahs of the Apure,
Meta, and Guaviare, but also forms the boundary
between tribes of very different manners. In
the west, along plains destitute of trees, wander
the Guahiboes, the Chiricoas, and the Guamoes;
dirty and disgusting nations, proud of their sa-
vage independance, whom it is difficult to fix
to the soil, or habituate to regular labor. The
Spanish missionaries characterize them well by
the name of Indios andantes (Indians, who are
always on the march, vagabond Indians). To


15


the east of the Oroonoko, between the neigh-
bouring sources of the Caura, Cataniapo, and
Ventuari, live the Macoes, the Salivas, the
Curacicanas, Parecas, and Maquiritares, mild,
tranquil tribes, addicted to agriculture, and
easily subjected to the discipline of the missions,
The Indian of the plains differs from the Indian
of the forests in language as well as manners
and mental disposition; both have an idiom
that abounds in spirited and bold terms ; but
the language of the former is harsher, more con-
cise, and more impassioned ; that of the latter,
softer, more diffuse, and fuller of ambiguous
expressions.

The mission of Atures, like most of the
missions of the Oroonoko, situate between the
mouths of the Apure and the Atabapo, is com-
posed of both the classes of tribes we have just
described. We there find the Indians of the
forests, and the Indians heretofore nomade* (In-
dios monteros and Indios laneros, or andantes),
We visited with the missionary the huts of Ma-
coes, whom the Spaniards call Piraoas, and
those of the Guahiboes. The first. indicated


* I employ the word nomade as synonimous to wandering,
and not in it’s primitive signification, The wandering nations
of America (those of the indigenous tribes it is to be under-
stood) are never shepherds ; they live by fishing and hunting,
on the fruit of a few trees, the farinaceous medullary sub-
stance of palm-irees, &c.


16


more love of order, cleanliness, and ease. The
independant Macoes (I would not denote them
by the name of savages) have their rochelas, or
fixed dwellings, two or three days’ journey east
of Atures, toward the sources of the little river
Cataniapo. They aré very numerous ; cultivate,
as most of the natives of the woods, not maize,
but cassava; and live in great harmony with
the Christian Indians of the mission. The har-
mony was established, and wisely cultivated by
the Franciscan monk, Bernardo Zea. This Al-


calde of the reduced Macoes quitted the village .


of Atures for a few months every year, to live
in the plantations which he possessed in the
midst of the forests near the hamlet of the inde-
pendent Macoes. In consequence of this peace-
ful intercourse, many of the Indios monteros came
and established themselves some time ago in


the mission. They asked eagerly for Knives, -


fishing hooks, and those coloured glass-beads,
which, notwithstanding the positive prohibition
of the priests, were employed not as necklaces,
but as ornaments of the guayuco*. Having
obtained what they sought, they returned to the
woods, weary of the regulations of the mission.
Epidemic fevers, which prevailed with violence
at the entrance of the rainy season, contributed
greatly to this unexpected flight. In 1799 the


* Perigoma.


i7


mortality was very considerable at Carichana,
on the banks of the Meta, and at the Rau-
dal of Atures. The Indian of the forest con-
ceives a horror for the life of the civilized man,
when, I will not say any misfortune befalls his
family settled in the mission, but merely any
disagreeable or unforeseen accident. Natives,
who were neophytes, have been known to desert
for ever the Christian establishments, on ac-
count of a great drought; as if this calamity
would not have reached them equally in their
plantations, had they remained in their primi-
tive independence.

What are the causes of those fevers, that pre-
vail during a great part of the year in the vil-
lages of Atures and Maypures, around the two
Great Cataracts of the Oroonoko, and which
render these spots so much to be dreaded by
European travellers? They are violent heats
joined with the excessive humidity of the air,
bad. nutriment, and, if we may believe the na-
tives, the pestilent exhalations, that rise from the
bare rocks of the Raudales.. These fevers of
the Oroonoko appeared to us to resemble alto-
gether those, that are felt every year between
-New-Barcelona, La Guayra, and. Porto-Cabello,
in the vicinity of the sea; and often degenerate
‘into adynamic fevers. “I have had my little
fever (mi calenturita) only eight months,” said
the good missionary of the Atures, who accom:

VOL. Vv. c


18


panied us to the Rio Negro ; speaking of it as
of an habitual evil, which it was easy to bear.
The fits were violent, but of short duration.
He was sometimes seized with them when lying
along in the boat under a shelter of branches of
trees, sometimes when exposed to the burning
rays of the sun on an open beach. These tertian
agues are attended with great debility of the
muscular system ; yet we find poor ecclesiastics
on the Oroonoko, who support for several years
these calenturitas, or tercianas : their effects are
not so fatal as those, which are experienced from
fevers of much shorter duration in temperate
climates.

I have just mentioned the noxious influence
on the salubrity of the atmosphere, which is at-
tributed by the natives, and even the missiona-
ries, to the bare rocks. This opinion is the more
worthy of attention, on account of it’s being con-
nected with a physical phenomenon lately ob-
served in different parts of the globe, which has
not yet been sufficiently explained. Among the
cataracts, and wherever the Oroonoko, between
the missions of Carichana and of Santa Barbara,
periodically washes the granitic rocks, they
become smooth, black, and as if coated with
black-lead. The colouring matter does not pene-
trate the stone, which is coarse-grained granite,
containing a few solitary crystals of hornblende.
Considering the primitive formation of Atures


19


in the great, we perceive, ‘that, like the granite
of Syene in Egypt, it is a granite with horn-:
blende, and not a real syenite formation. Many
of the layers are entirely destitute of hornblende.
The black crust is 0-3 of a line in thickness 3 it
is found chiefly on the quartzose parts. The crys-
tals of feldspar have sometimes preserved exter-
nally their reddish white colour, and rise above
the black crust. On breaking the stone with a
hammer, the inside is found to be in fact white,
and without any trace of decomposition. These
enormous stony masses appear sometimes in
rhombs, sometimes under those hemispheric
forms, which are peculiar to granitic rocks when
they separate in blocks. They give the land-
scape a singularly gloomy aspect ; their colour
being in strong contrast with that of the foam of
the river which covers them, and of the vegeta-
tion by which they are surrounded. The Indi-
ans say, that the rocks are “ burnt, or carboniz-
ed by the rays of the sun.” We saw them not
only in the bed of the Oroonoko, but in some
spots as far as five hundred toises from it’s pre-
sent shore, on heights which the waters now
never reach even in their greatest swellings.
What is this brownish black crust, which
gives these rocks, when they have a globular
form, the appearance of meteoric stones? What
idea can we form of the action of the water,
which produces a deposit, or a change of colour
6.2


20
so extraordinary? We must observe in the first
place, that this phenomenon does not belong to
the cataracts of the Oroonoko alone, but is found


in both hemispheres. At my return from Mexi-
co in 1867, when I showed the granites of Atu-


res and Maypures to Mr. Roziére, who had tra-


velled over the valley of Egypt, the coasts of the
Red Sea, and Mount Sinai, this learned geolo-
gist let me see, that the primitive rocks of the
little cataracts of Syene display, like the rocks
of the Oroonoko, a glossy surface, of a blackish
gray, or almost leaden colour, and of which
some of the fragments seem coated with tar.
Recently, in the unfortunate expedition of Cap-
tain Tuckey, the English naturalists were struck
with the same appearance in the yellalas (ra-
pids and shoals) that obstructed the river Congo
or Zaire. Dr. Koenig has placed in the British
Museum, by the side of the syenites of the Con-
go, the granites of Atures taken from a series of
rocks, which were presented by Mr. Bonpland
and myself to the illustrious president of the
Royal Society of London. “ These fragments,”
says Mr. Keenig*, “alike resemble meteoric
stones ; in both rocks, those of the Oroonoko
and of Africa, the black crust is composed, ac-
cording to the analysis of Mr. Children, of the
oxyd of iron and manganese.” Some experiments


* Voyage to the river Congo, p. 488.


21


made at Mexico, conjointly with Mr. del Rio,
had led me to think, that the rocks of Atures,
which blacken the paper* in which they are
wrapped, contain, beside oxyd of manganese,
carbon, and supercarburetted iron. At the
Oroonoko, granitic masses of forty or fifty: feet
thick are uniformly coated with these oxyds ;
and, however thin these crusts may appear,
they must nevertheless contain pretty consider-
able quantities of iron and manganese, since they
occupy a space of above a league square.

ft must be observed, that all these pheno-
mena of coloration have hitherto appeared in
the torrid zone only, in rivers that have periodi-
cal overflowings, of which the habitual tempera-
ture is from twenty-four to twenty-eight cente-
simal degrees, and which flow, not over grit-
stone, or calcareous rocks, but over granite,
gneiss, and hornblende rocks}. Quartz and
feldspar scarcely contain five or six thousandths
of oxyd of iron and of manganese ; but in mica
and hornblende these oxyds, and particularly
that of iron, amount, according to Klaproth and


* T remarked the same phenomenon from spongy grains of
platina one or two lines in length, collected at the stream-
works of J'addo, in the province of Choco. Wrapped up in
white paper during a journey of several months, they had left
a black stain, like that of plumbago or supercarburetted
iron.

+ EHorneblendegestem.


22 «


Herrmann, to fifteen or twenty parts in a hun-
dred. The hornblende contains also some car-
bon*, like the Lydian stone and kieselschiefer.
Now if these black crusts were formed by a slow
decomposition of the granitic rock, under the
double influence of humidity and the tropical
sun, how is it to be conceived, that these oxyds
are spread so uniformly over the whole surface
of the stony masses, and are not more abun-
dant round a crystal of mica or hornblende,
than on the feldspar and milky quartz? The
ferruginous sand-stones, granites, and marbles,
that become cinereous and sometimes brown in
damp air, display an aspect altogether different.
In reflecting upon the lustre and equal thick-
ness of the erusts, we are rather inclined to
think, that this matter is deposited by the Oroo-
noko, and that the water has penetrated even
into the clefts of the rocks. Adopting this hypo-
thesis, it may be asked, whether the river hold
the oxyds suspended like sand, and other earthy
substances, or they be found in a state of che-
mical solution. The first supposition is less
admissible, on account of the homogeneity of
the crusts, which contain neither grains of sand,
nor spangles of mica, mixed with the oxyds. We
must then recur to the idea of a chemical solu-


* Hoffmann und Breithaupt, Mineralogie, 1816, Bz: Abth.
2, p. 120 and 151.


OR
aed


tion; and this idea is no way at variance with
‘the phenomena, that we daily observe in our
laboratories. The waters of great rivers con-
tain carbonic acid ; and, were they even entirely
pure, they would still be capable, in very great
volumes, of dissolving some portions of oxyd, or
those metallic hydrats, which are regarded as
the least soluble. The mud of the Nile, which
is the sediment of the matters that the river
holds suspended, is destitute of manganese ;
but contains, according to the analysis of Mr.
Regnault, six parts in a hundred of oxyd of
iron; and it’s colour, at first black, changes to
yellowish brown by desiccation and the con-
tact of air*. The mud consequently is not the


cause of the black crusts on the rocks of Syene.
Mr. Berzelius had the goodness, at my request,


* The mud of the Nile contains,


Carbonat of Magnesia
Carbonat of lime
Alumin


(Observations sur la Vallée @Egypte, par M. Girard, p. 64.)
[ filtered at Atures the water of the Oroonoko; and it ap-
peared to me, to contain nothing but quartzose sand, and many
spangles of mica.


24


to examine these crusts, and recognized in them,
as in those of the granites of the Oroonoko and
Rio Congo, the union of iron and manganese.
This celebrated chemist thinks, that the rivers
do not take up these oxyds from the soil over
which they flow, but derive them from their
subterraneous sources, and deposit them on the
rocks in the manner of cementation, by the
action of particular affinities, perhaps by that
of the potash of the feldspar. A long residence
at the cataracts of the Oroonoko, the Nile, and
the Rio Congo, and an examination of the cir-
cumstances that accompany this phenomenon
of coloration, could alone lead to the complete
solution of the problem we have discussed. Is
this phenomenon independent of the nature of
the rocks? I shall content myself with observ-
ing in general, that neither the granitic masses
remote from the ancient bed of the Oroonoko,
but exposed during the rainy season to the al-
ternations of heat and moisture, nor the grani-
tic rocks bathed by the brownish waters of the
Rio Negro, assume the appearance of meteoric
stones. The Indians say, “ that the rocks are
black only where the waters are white.” They
ought perhaps to add, “ where the waters ac-
quire. great swiftness, and strike with force
against the rocks of the banks.” Cementa-
tion seems to explain why the crusts augment
so little in thickness.


I know not whether it bean error, that in the
missions of the Oroonoko the neighbourhood of
bare rocks, and especially of the masses that
have crusts of carbon, oxyd of iron, and manga-
nese, are considered as injurious to health. In
the torrid zone still more than in others, the
people multiply pathogenic causes at will. They
are afraid to sleep in the open air, if forced to
expose the face to the rays of the full moon.
They also think it is dangerous, to sleep on gra-
nite near the river; and many examples are
cited of persons, who, after having passed the
night on these black and naked rocks, have
awakened in the morning with a strong paroxysm
of fever. Without entirely lending faith to this
assertion of the missionaries and natives, we
generally avoided the laxas negras, and stretched
ourselves on the beach covered with white sand,
when we found no tree from which to suspend
our hammocks. At Carichana, the village is
intended to be destroyed, and it’s place changed,
merely to remove it from the black rocks, from
ground where for a space of more than 10,000
‘square toises, banks of bare granite form the
surface. From similar motives, which must
appear very chimerical to the naturalists of
Europe, the Jesuits Olmo, Forneri, and Mellis,
removed a village of Jaruroes to three different
spots, between the Raudal of Tabaje and the
Rio Anaveni. I have thought it proper to re-


26


late these facts, as they came to my knowledge,
because we are almost wholly ignorant what
the gaseous mixtures are, that cause the insa-
lubrity of the atmosphere. _ Can it be admitted,
that, under the influence of excessive heat, and
of constant humidity, the black crusts of the


granitic rocks are capable of acting upon the.


ambient air, and producing miasmata with .a
triple basis of carbon, azot, and hydrogen? Of
this I doubt. The granites of the Oroonoko, it
is true, often contain hornblende ; and those who
are accustomed to practical labour in the mines
are not ignorant, that the most noxious exhala-
tions rise from galleries wrought in syenitic *
and hornblende rocks: but in an atmosphere
renewed every instant by the action of little
currents of air, the effect cannot be the same. as
in a mine.

It is probably dangerous to sleep on the /axas
negras, only because these rocks retain a very
elevated temperature during the night. I have
found their temperature in the day at 48°, the
air in the shade being at 29°7°; during the night
the thermometer on the rock indicated 36°, the
air being at 26°. When the accumulation of
heat in the stony masses has reached a stationary
degree, these masses become at the same hours
nearly of the same temperature. . What they

* For instance at Scharfenberg, near Misnia, in Saxony.
See Lampadius, Samml. pract. chem. Abhaudl. B yp. 181.


RENT FER


27


have acquired more in the day they lose at night
by radiation, the force of which depends on the
state of the surface of the radiating body, the
interior arrangement of it’s particles, and above
all on the clearness of the sky, that is on the
transparency of the atmosphere and the absence
of clouds. When the declination of the sun
varies very little, this luminary adds daily the
same quantities nearly of heat, and the rocks are
not hotter at the end than in the middle of sum-
mer. . There is a certain maximum, which they
cannot pass, because they do not change the
state of their surface, their density, or their ca-
pacity for caloric. On the shores of the Oroo-
noko, when you get out of your hammock during
the night, and touch with your bare feet the
rocky surface of the ground, you are singularly
struck by the sensation of heat, which you ex-
perience. I observed pretty constantly, in putting
the bulb of the thermometer in contact with the
ledges of bare rocks, that the laxas negras are
hotter during the day than the reddish-white
granites ata distance from the river; but the
latter cool during the night less rapidly than the
former. It may be easily conceived, that the
emission and loss of caloric is more rapid in
masses with black crusts, than in those which
abound in laminz of silvery mica. When you
walk, between the hours of 1 and 3 in the after-


noon, at Carichana, Atures, or Maypures, among


28


those blocks of stone destitute of vegetable
mould, and piled up to great heights, you are
suffocated as if you were placed before the
opening of a furnace. The winds, if they be
ever felt in those woody regions, far from bring-
ing coolness, appear more heated when they
have passed over beds of stone, and heaps of
rounded blocks of granite. This augmentation
of heat adds to the insalubrity of the climate.
Among the causes of the depopulation of the
Raudales, I have not reckoned the small-pox,
that malady, which in other parts of America
makes such cruel ravages, that the natives,
seized with dismay, burn their huts, kill their
children, and renounce every kind of society *,
This scourge is almost unknown on the banks
of the Oroonoko, and should it penetrate to
them, it may be hoped, that it’s effects would be
immediately countervailed by vaccination, the
blessings of which are daily felt along the coasts
of Terra Firma. What depopulates the Christian
settlements is the repugnance of the Indians for
the regulations of the missions, the insalubrity


* ofa climate at once hot and damp, bad nourish-


ment, want of care in the diseases of children;
and the guilty practice of mothers of preventing
pregnancy by the use of deleterious herbs.


* As the Mahas in the plains of the Missoury, according
to the accounts of the American travellers, Clark and Lewis.


4
{


ee evs


29


Among the barbarous people of Guyana, as well
as those of the half-civilized islands of the South
sea, young wives will not become mothers. If
they have children, their offspring are exposed
not only to the dangers of savage life, but also
to other dangers arising from the strangest po-
pular prejudices. When twins are born, false
notions of propriety and family honor require,
that one of them should be destroyed. “To
bring twins into the world, is to be exposed to
public scorn; itis to resemble rats, opossums,
and the vilest animals, which bring forth a great
number of young at atime.” Nay, more: “two
children born.at the same time cannot belong to
the same father.” This is an axiom of physio-
logy of the Salivas; and in every zone, and.in
different states of society, when the vulgar seize
upon an axiom, they adhere to it with more
stedfastness than the better informed men, by
whom it was first hazarded. To avoid a disturb-
ance of conjugal tranquillity, the old female re-
lations of the mother, or the mure japoic-nei
(midwives), take care, that one of the twins shall
disappear. If the new-born infant, though not
a twin, have any physical deformity, the father
instantly puts it to death. They will have only
robust and well-made children, for deformities
indicate some influence of the evil spirit Iolo-
quiamo, or the bird Tikitiki, the enemy of the
human race. Sometimes children of a feeble


30


constitution undergo the same fate. When the
father is asked what is become of one of his sons,
he will pretend, that he has lost him by a natural
death. He will disavow an action, that appears
to him blamable, but not criminal. “ The poor
mure *,’ he will tell you, “ could not follow us ;
we must have waited for him every moment ; he
has not been seen again, he did not come to sleep
where we passed the night.” Such is the can-
dor and simplicity of manners, such the boasted
happiness of man in the state of nature! He
kills his son, to escape the ridicule of having
twins, or to avoid journeying more slowly ; in
fact, to avoid a little inconvenience.

These acts of cruelty, 1 confess, are less fre-
quent, than they are believed to be; yet they
occur even in the missions, during the time when
the Indians leave the village, to retire to the
conucos of the neighbouring forests. It would
be erroneous, to attribute these actions to the
state of polygamy, in which the uncatechized
Indians live. Polygamy no doubt diminishes


the domestic happiness and internal union of


families; but this practice, sanctioned by Is-
maelism, does not prevent the people of the east
from loving their children with tenderness.
Among the Indians of the Oroonoko, the father
returns home only to eat, or to sleep in his ham-


* In Tamanack mure signifies a child ; emuru, a son.


ee aaa


31


mock ; he lavishes no caresses on his infants, or
on his wives, whose office it is to serve him. Pa-
rental affection begins to display itself only when
the son has become strong enough, to take a
part in hunting, fishing, and the agricultural
labours of the plantations.

If the pernicious practice of taking drinks
that cause abortion diminish the number of
births, these drinks do not destroy health suffi-
ciently, to prevent young women from becoming
mothers at a more advanced age. This pheno-
menon, very remarkable in a physiological view,
has long since struck the missionary monks.
The Jesuit Gili, the confessor during fifteen
years of the Indians of the Oroonoko, who boasts
of knowing 7 segreti delle donne maritate, ex-
presses himself upon this point with singular
simplicity. “In Europe,” says he, “ married
women are afraid of having children, because
they know not. how to feed, clothe, and provide
for them. All these apprehensions are unknown
to the women of the Oroonoko. They choose —
the time when they will become mothers from
two systems diametrically opposite, and accord-
ing to the ideas which they have formed of the
means of preserving their freshness and beauty.
Some say, and this is the most general opinion,
that it is best to begin late to bear children, that
they may be able in the first years of their mar-
riage to devote themselves undisturbed to do-


32


®


on the contrary, that they shall fortify their
health, and attain a happier old age, by becom-
ing mothers when very young. According as
the Indians adopt the one or the other of these
systems, the abortive medicaments are adminis-
tered at different periods.” In reflecting on
these selfish calculations among savages, we
think we may congratulate the civilized nations
of Europe, that they have hitherto had no know-
ledge of ecbolics in appearance so little injurious
to health. The introduction of these drinks
would perhaps increase the depravity of man-
ners in towns, where one quarter of the children
see the light only to be abandoned by their
parents. The new abortives however might
possibly occasion the same danger in our  cli-
mates, as the use of savine, aloes, and the
essential oils of cinnamon and cloves. The
robust constitution of the savage, in whom
the different systems are more independent of
each other, resists better and for a longer time
an excess of stimulants, and the use of deleteri-
ous agents, than the feeble constitution of civil-
ized man. I thought it necessary to enter into
these pathological details, far from agreeable as
they are, because they make known a part of the
causes, which in the rudest state of our species,
as well as in a high degree of civilization, render
the progress of population almost imperceptible.


mestic and agricultural labours. Others believe .


33


Other causes are united with those which I have
just pointed out. It has been observed in the
college of the missions of Piritu, established at
Nueva-Barcelona, that on comparing the Indian
villages situate on the banks of rivers, with
those which have been constructed in very dry
places, the balance of births is found constantly
in favour of the latter. The custom of the In-
dian women of bathing several times a day
before the sun rises, and after it sets, at the
moment when the air is coldest, appears to en-
feeble their constitutions *.


* The population increases with extraordinary rapidity in
the ancient missions of Piritu at a distance from the Oroo-
noko. It will be gratifying to see the results, which I shall
cite in this note, from MS. registers for the year 1799 in my
possession. I select the most considerable villages.


Proportion Proportion
of births to’ of deaths to}
the total’ | Deaths | the total
population.’ population,


NAMES OF THE Total Births.
MISSIONS, poptlations


La Pur. Concepcion f 1-10th 1-20th
de Piritu. - ;


Nuestra Segnoradel 2 110th 1-19th.
Pilar - - -§ '


San Antonio de ai 1-1Mth 1-18th
rines - -


San Jose de Caigua - 1-16th 1-36th


San Pablo Apostolo 1-9th 1-13th
de Huere - -


Santa Rosa de Ocopi 1-10th 1-234


34


The Padre-guardian of the Observantins,
alarmed at the rapid depopulation of two villages
situate near the cataracts, had some years before
proposed to the governor of the province, who
resides at Angostura, to supply the loss of
Indians by Negroes. It is well known, that the
African race wonderfully resists hot and damp
climates. A colony of free Negroes has pros-
pered completely on the unhealthy banks of the
Caura, in the mission of San Luis Guaragua-
raico, where they obtain the richest: harvests of
maize. The Padre-guardian wished to remove
a part of these black planters to the cataracts of
the Oroonoko, or purchase slaves in the West


The proportions present great differences, because they are
taken from one year only. Since, according to the calculation
of probabilities, the accuracy of the result increases as the
total sum of the population is more considerable, I shall add,
that 38 villages gave me, on a total population of 24,778 souls,
1934 births, and 961 deaths. The proportions of the births
and deaths to the total population therefore were 12 to 1 and
25 to1. In France these proportions are 28 to 1 and 30 to 1,
Thus the 38 villages of the missions of Piritu had increased
in one year 4 per cent, or I-24th of the population; while
near the Oroonoko the increase was not 1 and 1-5th per cent,
or 1-85th of the population. It is almost superfluous. to add,
that the great difference of these results must be attributed to
physical and moral causes, extremely complicated. It ap-
peared to me in general, that the population in the missions of
Piritu, near the coast, increases in 10 years 30 percent, In
Great Britain this increase was found from 1801 to 1811 to be
14 per cent ; in the United States of America, 86 per cent.


35


India Islands, uniting with them the fugitive
negroes of Essequibo, as had been done at Rio
Caura. It is probable, that this scheme would
have produced happy effects. It reminds us on
a small scale of the establishment at Sierra
Leone ; and, in affording a prospect of meliorat-
ing the condition of the blacks, it seemed to lead
back Christianity to it’s primitive purpose, that
of favouring the happiness and liberty of the
lowest classes of the people. A mistaken pity
destroyed this project. The governor replied to
the monks, “ that, since they could not assure
the life of the Negroes, any more than that of
the Indians, it was not just to compel the former
to inhabit the villages of the cataracts.” The
preservation of these missions now depends in -
some measure on two families of Guahiboes and
of Macoes, who alone show some traces of civil-
ization, and love a sedentary life. Should these
families become extinct, the other Indians,
already impatient under the system of the mis-
sions, will abandon father Zea; and, at a spot
which may be regarded as the key of the Oroo-
noko, travellers will find no succour, and no
pilot, who can pass the boats through the rapids.
The communication between the little fort of the
Rio Negro and the capital of Angostura, if not
interrupted, at least will be rendered very diffi-
cult. It requires an intimate knowledge of the
local situation, to venture amid the labyrinth of
p 2


36


shoals and little rocks, that obstruct the bed of
the river near Atures and Maypures.

While our boat was unloading, we examined
closely, wherever the shore could be approached,
the terrific spectacle of a great river narrowed
and reduced as it were to foam. I shall endea-
vour to paint, not the sensations we felt, but the
aspect of a spot so celebrated among the scenes
of the new world. The more imposing and ma-
jestic the objects we describe, the more essential
it becomes, to seize them in their smallest de-
tails, to fix the outline of the picture we would
present to the imagination of the reader, and to
describe with simplicity what characterizes the
great and imperishable monuments of nature.

The navigation of the Oroonoko from it’s
mouth as far as the confluence of the Anaveni,
an extent of 260 leagues, is not impeded. There
are shoals and-eddies near Muitaco, in a cove
that bears the name of the Mouth of Hell* ;
and there are rapids -+ (Rawdelitos) near Cari-
chana and San Borja: but in all these places
the river is never entirely barred, as a channel
is left by which boats can pass up and down.

In all this navigation of the Lower Oroonoko,
travellers experience no other danger than that
of the natural rafts formed by trees, which are


* Boca del Infierno.
+ The three raudales of Marimara, Cariven, and Tabaje,
which we have described in vol. iv, p. 543, 561, and 569.


Sree peniimen eRe ch a i


37


uprooted bythe river, and swept alonginit’s great
floods. Wo to the canoes, that during the night
strike against these rafts of wood interwoven
with lianas! Covered with aquatic plants, they
resemble here, as in the Mississipi, floating
meadows, the chinampas * of the Mexican lakes.
The Indians, when they wish to surprise a tribe
of their enemies, bring together several canoes,
fasten them to each other with cords, and cover
them with grass and branches, to imitate this
assemblage of trunks of trees, which the Oroo-
noko sweeps along in it’s thalweg, or middle
current. The Caribs are accused of having
heretofore excelled in the use of this artifice ;
at present the Spanish smugglers in the neigh-
bourhood of Angostura have recourse to the same
expedient, to escape the vigilance of the custom-
house officers.

After having gone up the Oroonoko beyond
the Rio Anaveni, we find, between’ the moun-
tains of Uniana and Sipapuf, the Great Cata-
racts of Mapara and Quittuna, or, as they are
more commonly called by the missionaries, the
Raudales of Atures and Maypures. These bars,
which extend from one bank to the other, pre-
sent in general a similar aspect; they are com-
posed of innumerable islands, dikes of rock,


* Floating gardens.
+ According to the Indian pronunciation “ Tipapu.”


38


and blocks of granite piled on one another and
covered with palm-trees, among which one of
the greatest rivers of the New World chafes in
foam. But notwithstanding a uniformity of
aspect, each of these cataracts preserves an indi-
vidual character. The first, or northernmost, is
most easily passable when the waters are low.
The Indians prefer crossing the second, the
Maypures, at the time of great floods. Be-
yond the Maypures and the mouth of the Canno
Cameji, the Oroonoko is again free from ob-
stacles for the length of more than 167 leagues,
or nearly to it’s source; that is to say, as far as
the Raudalito of Guaharibos, east of Canno
Chiguire and the lofty mountains of Yumari-
quin.

Having visited the basins of the two rivers
Oroonoko and Amazon, I was singularly struck
by the differences they display in their course of
unequal extent. The falls of the Amazon, which
is nearly 980 nautical leagues * (20 to a degree)


* Reckoning the sinuosities, as for the Oroonoko, at one
third of the course of the river in a straight line, according to
the custom of hydrographers, M. de la Condamine gives the
Amazon 1100, and the Ucayale 500 leagues in length. (Voyage
a0 Equateur, p. 189.) I find for the Ucayale, on rectifying
the longitude of the sources of the Apurimac, 360 leagues.
All the statements given in geographical works respecting
relative lengths of the course of rivers are extremely inaccu-
rate, because the estimations of old maps. are repeated, and
because the sinuosities (the space which a boat carried along


So eT AS


39


in length, are pretty near. it’s source, in the first
sixth of it’s total length; and five sixths of it’s course
are entirely free. We find the great falls of the
Oroonoko on a point far more unfavourable to
navigation ; if not at the half, at least much be-
yond the first third of it’s length. In both rivers
it is neither the mountains, nor the different
- stages of flat lands lying over one another,
whence they take their origin, that cause. the
cataracts; they are produced by other moun-
tains, other stages [biefs], which, after a long
and tranquil course, the rivers have to pass
over, precipitating themselves from step to step.

The Amazon does not pierce it’s way through
the principal chain of the Andes, as was affirmed
at a period when it was gratuitously supposed,
that, wherever mountains are divided into
parallel chains, the intermedial or central ridge
must be more elevated than the others. This
great river rises (and it is a point of some im-
portance to geology) to the east of the western
chain; which alone in this latitude merits the
denomination of the high chain of the Andes,
It is formed by the junction of the river Agua-
miros with the Rio Chavinillo, which issues
from the lake Llauricocha, in a longitudinal
valley bounded. by the western and the inter-


by the mid stream would traverse) are calculated according


to methods altogether different.


40


medial chain of the Andes. In order to form
an accurate idea of these hydrographical rela-
tions it must be recollected, that a division into
three chains takes place in the colossal groupe
or knot of the mountains of Pasco and Huanuco.
The western chain, which is the loftiest, and
takes the name of the Cordillera real de Nieve,
directs it’s course (between Huary and Caxa-
tambo, Guamachuco and Luema, Micuipamba
and Guangamarca *) by the Nevados of Viuda,
Pelagatos, Moyopata, and Huaylillas, and by the
Paramos of Guamani and Guaringa, toward the
town of Loxa. The intermedial chain separates
the waters of the Upper-Maragnon from those
of the Guallaga, and during a long time reaches
but the small elevation of a thousand toises 3; it
enters the region of perpetual snows only to the
south of Huanuco in the Cordillera of Sasa-
guanca. It stretches at first toward the north,
by Huacrachuco, Chachapoyas, Moyobamba,
and the Paramo of Piscoguannuna; and then
progressively lowers toward Peca, Copallin, and
the mission of San Yago, at the eastern extre-
mity of the province of Jaen de Bracamoros.
The third, or easternmost chain, skirts the right
bank of the Rio Guallaga, and loses itself in the


® In the Partidos or provinces of Conchucos, Guamachuco,


and Caxamarca, belonging to the intendancias of Tarma and
Truxillo,


4}


latitude of 7°. As long as the Amazon flows
from south to north in the longitudinal valley,
between two chains of unequal height, (that is,
from the farms of Quivilla and Guancaybamba,
where the river is crossed on wooden bridges, as
far as the confluence of the Rio Chinchipe,)
there are neither bars, nor any obstacle what-
ever to the navigation of boats. The falls of
water begin only where the Amazon turns
toward the east, crossing the intermedial chain
of the Andes, which widens considerably toward
the north. It meets with the first rocks of red
sand-stone, or of ancient conglomerate, between
Tambillo and the Pongo of Rentema, near
which I measured the breadth, depth, and swift.
ness of the waters; and leaves the rocks of red
sand-stone east of the famous strait of Manse-
riche, near the Pongo of Tayuchuc, where the
hills rise no higher than 40 or 50 toises above
the level of the Amazon *, The river does not


° The facts which I here relate respecting the Upper Ma-
ragnon, and the direction of the intermedial chain of the
Andes, which is connected with’ the principal chain by the
mountains of Zamora, and the Paramo of Assuay, differ from
what M. de la Condamine published in his works, and in
memoirs, in other respects very valuable, They are founded
on notions, which I had an opportunity of acquiring, during
my stay at Loxa, in the kingdom of Quito, at Tomependa, on
the borders of the Amazon, and in Peru, at Micuipampa, at
Caxamarca, and at Truxillo. It is sufficient to mention here,
that from Chili to the kingdom of New Granada, the Cor-


42


reach the easternmost chain, which bouuds the
Pampas del Sacramento. From the hills of
Tayuchuc as far as Grand Para, during a course
of more than 750 leagues, the navigation is free
from obstacles. It results from this rapid sketch,
that, if the Maragnon had not to pass over the
hilly country between San Yago and Tome-
penda, which belongs to the central chain of
the Andes, it would be navigable from it’s mouth
as far as Pumpo, near Piscobamba, in the pro-
vince of Conchucos, 43 leagues north of it’s
source.

We have just seen, that in the Oroonoko, as
in the Amazon, it is not near the origin of the
rivers, that the great cataracts are found. After
a tranquil course of more than 160 leagues,
from the little Raudal of Guaharibos, east of
Esmeralda, as far as the mountains of Sipapu,
the river, augmented by the waters of the Jao,
the Ventuari, the Atabapo, and the Guaviare,
suddenly changes it’s primitive situation from
east to west, and runs from south to north ; and,
in crossing the land strait * in the plains of Meta,


dilleras furnish five knots of mountains, those of Porco, Cusco,
Pasco, Assuay, and los Pastos. The knots are formed by the
union of several chains, and the structure or frame of the An-
des is. disclosed to us by an accurate knowledge of these
knots, as I shall demonstrate in a separate chapter.

® This strait, which we have several times mentioned, is
formed by the Cordilleras of the Andes of New Grenada, and
the Cordillera of Parima. (See vol. iv, page 311 and 468.)


43


meets the advanced buttresses of the Cordillera
of Parima. This obstacle is the cause of cata-
racts far more considerable, and more injurious
to the navigation, than all the Pongos of the
Upper Maragnen, since, as we have shown
above, they are proportionally nearer to the
mouth of the river. I have entered into these
geographical details, to prove by the example
of the two greatest rivers of * the New World,
Ist, that it cannot be ascertained in an absolute
manner, that, beyond a certain number of
toises, a certain height above the level of the
sea, rivers are not navigable; 2dly, that the
rapids are not always occasioned, as several
treatises of general topography affirm, by the
height of the first obstacles, by the first lines of
ridges, which the waters have to surmount near
their sources.

The northernmest of the great cataracts of the
Oroonoko is the only one bounded. on each side
by lofty mountains. The left bank of the river
is generally lower, but makes part of a plane,
which rises again west of Atures, toward the
Peak of Uniana, a pyramid nearly three thou-
sand feet high, and placed on a wall of rock
with steep slopes. The situation of this solitary
peak in the plain contributes to render it’s aspect
more imposing and majestic. Near the mission,


* We may add the instances of the Ohio and Dnieper.


44


in the country which surrounds the cataract,
the aspect of the landscape varies at every step.
We find united in a small space all that is most
rude and gloomy in nature, with an open
country, and lovely pastoral scenery. In the
physical, as in the moral world, the contrast of
effects, the comparison of what is powerful and
menacing with what is soft and peaceful, becomes
a faithful source of our pleasures and our emo-


tions.
I shall here repeat some scattered features of


a picture, which I traced in another work, a
short time after my return to Kurope*. The
savannahs of Atures, covered with slender plants
and grasses‘, are real meadows resembling


those of Europe; they are never inundated by
the rivers, and seem to wait to be ploughed by
the hand of man. Notwithstanding their extent,
they do not display the monotony of our plains;
they surround groups of rocks, and blocks of
granite piled on one another. On the very
borders of these plains and this open country
you find glens scarcely lighted by the rays of
the setting sun, and gullies where the humid


* Ansichten der Natur., P. I, p. 1'70.

% Panicum rottboelloides, p. monostachyum, p. glutinosum,
p. aturense, oplismenus Burmanni (common to America and
the East Indies), thrasia paspaloides, choetospora pterocarpa,
juncus platycaulos, aristida spadicea, polypogon interruptus,
cyperus cuspidatus, c. sesleroides, isolepis anata, i. dichotoma.


45


soil, loaded with arums, -heliconias, and lianas,
manifests at every step the wild fecundity of
nature. Every where just rising above the
earth appear those shelves of granite completely
bare, that I described at Carichana, and which
I have seen no where in the ancient world of
such prodigious breadth as in the valley of
the Oroonoko. Where springs gush from the
bosom of these rocks, verrucarias, psoras, and
lichens are fixed on the decomposed granite,
and have there accumulated mould. Little eu-
phorbias, peperomias, and other succulent plants,
have taken the place of the cryptogamous tribes;
and evergreen shrubs, rhexias, and purple flow-
ered melastomas, form verdant isles amid desert
and rocky plains. We are never wearied of
repeating, that the distribution of these spots,
the clusters of small trees with coriaceous and
shining leaves scattered in the savannahs, the
limpid rills that dig themselves a channel across
the rocks, and wind alternately through fertile
places and over bare shelves of granite, every
thing here recalls to mind what our gardens
and plantations contain most picturesque and
lovely. We seem to recognize the industry of
man, and the traces of cultivation, amid the
wildness of the scenery.

But it is not the disposition of the ground
that immediately skirts the mission of Atures,
which alone gives the landscape so remarkable


46


a physiognomy ; the lofty mountains, that bound
the horizon on every side, contribute to it also
by their form, and the nature of their vegeta-
tion. These mountains are in general but se-
ven or eight hundred feet in height above the
surrounding plains. Their summit is rounded,
as for the most part in granitic mountains, and
covered with a thick forest of the laurel-tribe.
Clusters of palm-trees*, the leaves of which,
curled like feathers, rise majestically at an angle
of seventy degrees, are dispersed amid trees
with horizontal branches; and their bare
trunks, like columns of a hundred, or a hun-
dred and twenty feet high, shoot up into the
air, and appearing distinctly against the azure
vault of the sky, “ resemble a forest planted
upon another forest.” When, as the moon was
going down behind the mountains of Uniana,
her reddish disk was hidden behind the pinnated_
foliage of the palm trees, and again appeared in
the aérial zone, that separates the two forests, I
thought myself transported for a few moments
to the hermitage of the old man, which Mr.
Bernardin de Saint-Pierre has described as one
of the most delicious scenes of the Isle of Bour-
bon, and I felt how much the mien of the plants
and their groupings resembled each other in the
two worlds. In describing a small spot of land


*® El cucurito.


47


in an island of the Indian Ocean, the inimitable
author of Paul and Virginia has sketched the
vast picture of the landscape of the tropics.
He knew how to paint nature, not because he
had studied it scientifically, but because he felt
it in all it’s harmonious analogies of forms, co-
lours, and interior powers.

Kast of the Atures, near these rounded moun-
tains crowned by two superimposed forests of
the laurels and palms, other mountains rise of
a very different aspect. Their ridge is bristled
with pointed rocks, that rise like pillars above
the summits of the trees and shrubs. These
effects are common to all granitic table-lands,
at the Harz, in the metalliferous mountains of
Bohemia, in Gallicia, on the limit of the two
Castiles*, or wherever a granite of new forma-
tion appears above the ground. The rocks,
placed at distances from each other, are com-
posed of blocks piled together, or divided into
regular and horizontal beds. When they are
situate near the Oroonoko, the flamingoes, sol-
dadoes+-, and other fishing birds, perch on their
summits, and appear like men posted as senti-
nels. The resemblance is sometimes so great,
that, as several ocular witnesses tell us, the in-
habitants of Angostura, soon after the founda-


* From four hundred to six hundred toises above the level
of the ocean.


+ A large species of heron,


48


tion of their city, were one day alarmed by the
sudden appearance of herons, soldadoes, and gar-
zas, On a mountain toward the south. They
believed they were menaced with an attack of
Indios monteros (Indian savages) ; and, notwith-
standing the opinion of some persons accus-
tomed to this land of illusion, the people were
not perfectly tranquillized, till they saw the
birds soaring in the air, and continuing their
migration toward the mouths of the Oroonoko.
The fine vegetation of the mountains is spread
over the plains*, wherever the rock is covered
with mould. We generally find, that this
black mould, mixed with fibrous vegetable mat-
ter, is separated from the granitic rock by a


layer of white sand. The missionary assured
us, that a verdure of perpetual freshness pre-
vails in the vicinity of the cataracts, produced
by the quantity of vapour, which the river, bro-
ken into torrents and cascades for the length of


* Near Atares we found the sipania glomerata,'s. dichoto-
ma, utricularia fimbriata, matuschskea hispida, coutoubea mi-
nor, solanum platyphyllum, schwenkia americana, platycarpum
orinocense (a fine tree, figured by Mr. Bonpland in the first
volume of our Plantes equinoxiales), couvolvulus aturensis, po-
dostemum rupioides, abolboda pulcheti/a, phyllanthus piscato-
rum, myrtus phylliroides, many plumerias, melastomas, cu-
pheas, jussiewas ; &c. It is asserted, that father Olmo disco-
vered, in 1747, near Atures, in the country of the Piraoas,
the warimacu, or wild cinnamon tree, which is unquestionably
the laurus cinnamemoides of Mutis.


49


three or four thousand toises, diffuses in the
air.

We had scarcely heard the thunder roll once
or twice at Atures, and the vegetation already
every where displayed that vigorous aspect, that
brilliancy of colour, which are found on the
coast only at the end of the rainy season. The
old trees were decorated with beautiful orchi-
deas*, yellow bannisterias, blue flowered bigno-
nias, peperomias, arums, and pothoses. A sin-
gle trunk displays a greater variety of vege-
table forms, than an extensive space of ground
contains in our countries. Close to the para-
site plants peculiar to burning climates we ob-
served, not without surprise, in the centre of
the torrid zone, and near the level of the sea,
mosses resembling in every thing those of Eu-
rope. We gathered near the Great Cataracts
of Atures that fine species of grimmia‘ with
fontinalis leaves, which has so much fixed the
attention of botanists. It is suspended to the

* Cymbidium violaceum, habenaria angustifolia, &c.

+ See vol. iii, p. 75.

+ Grimmia _fontinaloides. See Hooker, Musci  Exotict
Humboldtiana, 1818, tab, ii. The learned author of the Mo-
nography of the Jungermanias, Mr, Jackson Hooker, has
had the goodness to take upon himself with noble disinterest-
edness, to publish at his own expense, at London, the whole
collection of cryptogamous plants, which were brought by
Mr. Bonpland and myself from the equinoctial regions of


America.
VOL. V. E


30


branches of the loftiest trees. Of the phenero-
gamous plants, the families that prevail in the
woody spots are the mimosas, ficuses, and the
laurineas*. This fact is the more characteristic,
as, according to the recent observation of Mr.
Brown, the laurinez appear to be almost en-
tirely wanting on the opposite continent in the
equinoctial part of Africa. Plants that love
humidity adorn the scenery surrounding the
cataract. We there find in the plains groups of
heliconias and other scitamineze with large and
glossy leaves, bambusas, and the three palm
trees, the murichi, gagua, and vadgiai, each of
which forms separate groups. The murichi, or
mauritia with scaly fruits, is the celebrated sago-
tree of the Guaraon Indians ; it is a real social
plant}. It has palmate leaves, and has no rela-
tion to the palm trees with pinnate and curled
leaves; to the jagua, which appears to be.a
species of the cocoa tree; or to the vadgiai { or


* The laurineas of the low and hot region of Equinoctial
America are ocoteas, (as for example, between Carichana
and San Fernando de Atabapo, ocotea lineata, ocotea cymba-
rum, ocotea javitonsis), Other laurineas (the perseas, and
the litseas) appear to belong to the subalpine and temperate
region, which rises to more than from five hundred. to eight
hundred toises above the level of the ocean, See our Nov.
Genera et Species, vol. ii, p. 157 and 169.

+ See vol. iv, p. $34; and vol. iii, p. 278.

{ Or vadschiat in the Parequa language. See our Nov.
Generu et Species Plant., vol. i, p. 315.


51


cucurito, which may be assimilated to the fine
species oreodoxa. The cucurito, which is the
palm most prevalent around the cataracts of the
Atures and Maypures, is remarkable for it’s
stateliness. It’s leaves, or rather it’s palms,
crown a trunk of eighty or one hundred feet
high; their direction is almost perpendicular
when young, as well as at their full growth, the
points only being incurvated. They are real
plumes of the most soft and verdant green.
The cucurito, the pirijao, the fruit of which re-
sembles the apricot, the oreodoxa regia or palma
real of the island of Cuba, and the ceroxylon of
the high Andes, display the most majestic forms,
that we saw among the palm trees of the new
world. As we advance toward the temperate
zone, the plants of this family decrease in size
and beauty. What a difference between the
species we have just mentioned, and the date
tree of the East, which is become to the land-
scape painters of Europe, unfortunately, the
type of a group of palm-trees !

We must not be surprised that persons, who
have travelled only in the north of Africa, in
Sicily, or in Murcia, cannot conceive, that of
all the forms of large trees, that of the palm
is the most grand and beautiful. Incomplete
analogies prevent Europeans from having a just
idea of the aspect of the torrid zone. All the
world knows, for instance, that this zone is em-

E 2


52


bellished by the contrasts displayed in the foli-
age of the trees, and particularly by the great
number of those with pinnate leaves*. The
ash, the service-tree, the inga, the acacia of the
United States, the gleditsia, the tamarind, the
mimosas, the desmanthus, have all pinnate
leaves, with foliole more or less long, slender,
tough, and shining. But cana group of ashes,
service-trees, or sumach, recall to our imagina-
tion the picturesque effect produced by the
shade of tamarinds or mimosas, when the azure
of the sky appears through their small, slender,
and delicately pinnated leaves? These conside-
rations are more important, than they may at
first seem. The forms of plants determine the
physiognomy of nature; and this physiognomy
influences the moral dispositions of nations.
Every type comprehends species, which, while
of the same appearance in their general mien,
differ in the varied developement of the similar
organs. The palm-trees, the scitaminez, the
malvacez, the trees with pinnate leaves, do not
all display the same picturesque beauties; and
generally the most beautiful species of each
type, in plants as in animals, belong to the
equinoctial zone.


* Foltis pinnatis. All the forms, from the fraxinus to the
desmanthus, have been arranged in order, according as the
foliole become smaller.


53


The proteacee *, crotons, agaves, and the
great tribe of the cactuses, which inhabit exclu-
sively the New World, disappear gradually, as
you ascend the Oroonoko above the mouths of
the Apure and the Meta. It is rather the shade
and humidity, however, than the distance from
the coast, which oppose the migration of the
cactuses toward the south. We found real fo-
rests of them mingled with crotons, covering a
great space of arid land to the east of the An-
des, in the province of Bracamoros, toward the
Upper Maragnon. The arborescent ferns seem
to fail entirely near the cataracts of the Oroono-
ko; we found no species as far as San Fernan-
do de Atabapo, that is, to the confluence of the
Oroonoko and the Guaviare.

Having now examined the vicinity of the
Atures, it remains for me to speak of the rapids
themselves, which are found in a part of the
valley, where the bed of the river, deeply in-
gulfed, has almost inaccessible banks. It was
only in a very few spots, that we could enter
into the Oroonoko to bathe between two cata-
racts, in coves, where the waters have eddies of
little velocity. Persons who have dwelt in the
Alps, the Pyrenees, or even the Cordilleras, so
celebrated for the fractures and the vestiges of


* Rhopalas, which characterise the vegetation of the Lla-


nos.


04


destruction, which they display at every step,
can scarcely figure to themselves from a simple
narration the state of the bed of the river. It is
traversed, in an extent of more than five miles,
by innumerable dikes of rock, that form so
many natural dams, so many barriers resem-
bling those of the Dnieper, which the ancients*
designated by the name.of phragmoi. The
space between the rocky dikes of the Oroonoko
is filled with islands of different dimensions;
some hilly, divided into several paps, and two or
three hundred toises in length, others small,
low, and like simple shoals. These islands di-
vide the river into a number of torrents, that
boil up, as they break against the rocks; they
are all furnished with jaguas.and cucuritoes with
plumy leaves; and seem a mass of palm-trees
rising amid the foamy surface of the waters.
The Indians, to whom the boats are entrusted,
to be passed empty across the raudales, distin-
guish every shelf, and every rock, by a particular
name. On entering from the south you find first
the Leap iof the Toucan, Salto del Piapoco ; and
between the islands of Avaguri and Javariveni


* Constant. Porphyrog. de Administrando Imperio, ch. 52.
It has been found possible, to render the rapids of the Dnie-
per navigable from the village of Staroi-Kaidak, as far as the
mouth of the Ossiborowka. See Julius Klaproth, in the
Magazin Encyclopédique, 1817, September, p. 139.


Jo


is the Raudal of Javariveni, where, on our re-

turn from Rio Negro, we passed some hours
amid the rapids, waiting for our boat. A great
part of the river appeared dry. Blocks of gra-
nite are heaped together, as in the morraines,
which the glaciers of Switzerland drive before
them. The river is every where ingulfed in
caverns ; and in one of these caverns we heard
the water roll at once over our heads and be-
neath our feet. The Oroonoko seems divided
into a multitude of arms or torrents, each of
which seeks to force a passage through the
rocks. We were struck with the little water to -
be seen in the bed of the river, the frequency of
subterraneous falls, and the tumult of the wa

ters breaking on the rocks in foam.


Cuncta fremunt undis ; ac multo murmure montis
Spumeus invictis canescit fluctibus amnis*.


Having passed the Raudal of Javarivent (I
only name here the principal falls) we come to
the Raudal of Canucari, formed by a ledge of
rocks, that unites the islands of Surupamana
-and Uirapuri. When the dikes, or natural dams,
are only two or three feet high, the Indians
venture to descend them in boats. In going up
the river, they swim on before, and, after many


* Pharsal., lib, x, v. 132.


56


vain efforts, succeedin fixing a rope to one of the
points of rock that crown the dike, and then,
by means of this rope, draw the bark to the top
of the raudal. The bark, during this arduous
task, often fills with water; at other times it is
stove against the rocks, and the Indians, their
bodies bruised and bleeding, extricate them-
selves with difficulty from the whirlpools, and
reach, by swimming, the nearest island. When
the steps or rocky barriers are very high, and
entirely bar the river, light boats are carried on
shore, and with the help of branches of trees
placed under them to serve as rollers, they are
drawn* as far as the place where the river again
becomes navigable. This operation is seldom
necessary when the water is high. We cannot
speak of the cataracts of the Oroonoko, without
recalling to mind the manner heretofore em-
ployed for descending the cataracts of the Nile,
of which Seneca has left us a description pro-
bably more poetical than accurate. I shall only
cite the passage, which traces with fidelity what
may be seen every day at Atures, Maypures,
and in some Pongoes of the Amazon. ‘‘ Two
men embark in a small boat, one steers, and the
other empties it as it fills with water. Long


* Arastrando la piragua. From this word arastrar, to
draw on the ground, is derived the Spanish term arastradero,
a portage, as it is called in North America.

+ Nat. Quest., lib. 4, cap. 2, (Edit. Elzev., tom. ii, p. 609.)


a


57


buffeted by the rapids, the whirlpools, and con-
trary currents, they pass through the narrowest
channels, avoid the shoals, and rush down with
the whole river, guiding the course of the boat
in it’s accelerated fali.”

In hydrographic descriptions of countries, the
vague names of cataracts, cascades, falls, and
rapids (saltos, chorros, pongos, cachoeiras, and
raudales,) which denote those tumultuous move-
ments of water, which arise from very different
circumstances of the ground, are generally con-
founded with one another. Sometimes a whole
river precipitating itself from a great height, and
by one single fall, renders the navigation impos-
sible. Such is the majestic fall of the Rio Te-
quendama, which I have represented in my
Views of the Cordilleras ; such are the falls of
the Niagara, and the Rhine, much less remark-
able for their elevation, than for the mass of
water they contain. Sometimes stony dikes of
small height succeed each other at great dis-
stances, and form distinct falls; such are the
cachoeiras of the Rio Negro, and the Rio Ma-
deira, the saltos of the Rio Cauca, and the great-
er part of the pongos, that are found in the Up-
per Maragnon, from the confluence of the Chin-
chipe to the village of San Borja. The highest
and most formidable of these pongos, which
are descended on rafts, that of Mayasi, is how-.
ever only three feet in height. Sometimes,


58


small rocky dikes are so near each other, that
they form for several miles an uninterrupted
succession of cascades and whirlpools, chorros
and remolinos ; these are properly what are
called rapids, raudales. Such are the yellalas,
or rapids of the Rio Zaire*, or Congo, which
Captain Tuckey has recently made known to
us; the rapids of the Orange river in Africa,
above Pella; and the falls of the Missouri,
which are four leagues in length, where the
river issues from the Stony Mountains. Such
also are the cataracts of Atures and Maypures ;
the only cataracts, which, situate in the equin-
octial region of the New World, are decorated
with the noble growth of palm trees. At all


seasons they exhibit the aspect of real cascades,
and present the greatest obstacles to the naviga-
tion of the Oroonoko, while the rapids of the
Ohio} and of Upper Egypt are scarcely visible


* Voyage to explore the River Zaire, 1818, p. 152,327,340.
What the inhabitants of Upper Egypt and Nubia call chel/d/
in the Nile, is called yel/aia iu the Rio Congo. ‘This analogy
between words signifying rapids is remarkable, cn account of
the enormous distance of the yellalas of the Congo from the
chellal and djenadel. of the; Nile. Did the word chellal
penetrate with the Moors into the west of Africa? If, with
Mr. Burckhardt, we consider the origin ofthis word as Ara-
bic (Travels in Nudia, 1819, p. 84), it must be derived from
the root challu (to disperse), which forms chelél, water falling
through a narrow channel.

+ Le Tort’s rapids, and the falls of Louisville.


39


at the period of high waters. A solitary cata-
ract, like Niagara or the cascade of Terni,
affords an admirable but single picture, that
varies only as the observer changes his place.
The rapids, on the contrary, above all when they
are adorned with large trees, embellish a land-
seape during a length of several leagues. Some-
times the tumultuous movement of the waters is
caused only by extraordinary contractions of the
beds of the rivers. Such is the Angostura of
Carare, in the river Magdalen, a strait that im-
pedes the communication between Santa Fe de
Bogota and the coast of Carthagena : such is
the pongo of Manferiche, in the Upper Marag-
non, which Mr. de la Condamine thought much
more dangerous than it really is, and which the
pastor of San Borja is obliged to go up, every
time that he exercises his ministry in the village
of San Yago.

The Oroonoko, the Rio Negro, and almost all
the confluents of the Amazon and the Maragnon,
have falls or rapids, either because they cross the
mountains where they take rise, or because they
find other mountains in the middle of their
course. If, as we have above observed, “the
Amazon, from the pongo of Manseriche (or, to
speak with more precision, from the Pongo: of
Tayuchuc,) as far as it’s mouth, a space of more
‘than seven hundred and. fifty leagues, furnish
no tumultuous movement of the waters, this


60


river owes this immense advantage to the con-
stant direction of it’s course. It flows from
west to east in a vast plain, that forms a longi-
tudinal valley, between the mountains of Parima
and the great mass of the mountains of Brazil.

I was surprised to find by actual measure-
ments, that the rapids of the Oroonoko, the tur-
bulent noise of which is heard at the distance
of more than a league, and which are so emi-
nently picturesque from the varied appearance
of the waters, the palm trees, and the rocks, have
not probably, on their whole length, a height of
more than twenty-eight feet perpendicular. In
reflecting on this, we find that it is a great deal
for rapids, while it would be very little for a
single cataract. The Yellalas of the Rio Congo,
in the contracted part of the river from Banza
Noki as far as Banza Inga, furnish, between the
upper and lower levels, a much more considera-
ble difference; but Mr. Barrow observes, that
among the great number of these rapids there
is one fall, which alone is thirty feet high. On
the other hand, the famous pongos of the river
Amazon, so dangerous to go up, the falls of
Rentema, of Escurrebragas, and of Mayasi, have
but a few feet of perpendicular height. . They
who are engaged in hydraulic works know the
effect, that a bar of eighteen or twenty inches
high produces in a great river. The whirling
and tumultuous movement of the water does


61


not depend solely on the greatness of partial
falls; what determines the force and impetuo-
sity is the nearness of these falls, the steepness
of the rocky dikes, the returning sheets of wa-
ter*, which strike against and surmount each
other, the form of the islands and shoals, the
direction of the counter currents, and the con-
traction and sinuosity of the channels through
which the waters force a passage between two
adjacent levels. In two rivers equally large,
that of which the falls have least height may
sometimes present the greatest dangers, and the
most impetuous movements.

I have given with hesitation my Opinion of
the perpendicular height of the raudales of the
Oroonoko, limiting it to one extreme quantity.
I carried the barometer to the little plain, that
surrounds the mission of Atures, and to the
cataracts, but I could not obtain any constant
differences. Every one knows how delicate a
business it is, to measure small heights by the
barometer. It would have required an instru-
ment, in which the point of nought was not
determined by a constant flowing. Little irre-
gularities of the horary variation (irregularities
that bear more on the quantity of the variation,
than on the period) render the results uncer-


* Bremontier, Recherches sur le Mouvement des Ondes, 1809,
§6.


62


tain, when you have not two barometers at -the
two stations, and have to determine differences
of half.a line of atmospheric pressure.

It is probable, that the river loses part of the
quantity of it’s waters in the cataracts, not only
on account of the increased evaporation owing
to the dispersion of minute drops in the atmo-
sphere, but still more from filtrations into the
subterraneous cavities. These losses howéver
are not very perceptible, when we compare the
mass of waters entering into the raudal with
that which issues out near the mouth of the
Rio Anaveni.. It was by a similar comparison
that the existence of subterraneous cavities in
the yellalas or rapids of the river Congo was
discovered. .The pongo of Manseriche, which
ought rather to be called a strait than a fall,
ingulfs, in a manner not yet sufficiently ex-
plored, a part of the waters, and all the floating
wood of the Upper Maragnon.

When, seated on the bank of the Oroonoko,
our eyes ave fixed on those rocky dikes, the
mind inquires, whether, in the lapse of ages, the
falls change their form or height. I am not
much inclined to believe in such effects of the
shock of water against blocks of granite, and
in the erosion of siliceous matter. The holes
narrowed toward the bottom, the funnels that are
discovered in the raudales,as well as nearso many
other cascades in Europe, are owing only to the


638


friction of the sand, and the movement of quartz
pebbles. We have seen some of these pébbles,
that were whirled perpetually by the current at
the bottom of the funnels, and contributed to aug-
ment them in every direction. The pongos of the
river Amazon are very destructible, because the
rocky dikes are not granite, but a conglomerate,
a red sandstone with large fragments. A part of
the pongo of Rentema was broken down eighty
years ago, and, the course of the waters being in-
terrupted by a new bar, the bed of the river re-
mained dry for some hours, to the great aston-
ishment of the inhabitants of the village of
Payaya, seven leagues below the pongo. The
Indians of Atures assert (and in this their testi-


mony is contrary to the opinion of Caulin *),
that the rocks of the raudal preserve the same
aspect ; but that the partial torrents, into which
the great river divides itself as it passes through


* Historia corographica, p. 72. This author seems to think,
that the raudales haye become easier to pass since the time of
father Gumilla, because in 1'743 the expedition of the bound-
aries, under the orders of Don Jose Solano, succeeded in
making nine large boats (champanes) go up the raudales ;
while father Gumilla asserts, that no hai otro arbitrio. en el
raudal de Atures que llevar las embarcationes por tierra. The
jesuit certainly could not mean, that the boats are transporte
ed by land the whole length of the rapids, I was assured on
the spot, that the Indian pilots conveyed the champanes of the
royal expedition up the cataracts, in the same manner as they
have always done the small boats of travellers.


64


the heaped blocks of granite, change their direc-
tion, and carry sometimes more sometimes less
water towards one or the other bank. The
causes of these changes may be very remote
from the cataracts ; for in the rivers that spread
life over the surface of the globe, as in the ar-
teries by which it is diffused through organized
bodies, all the movements are propagated to
great distances. Oscillations, that at first seem
partial, react on the whole liquid mass contained
in the trunk, and in its numerous ramifica-


tions.

I am not ignorant, that some writers, on com-
paring the actual state of the rapids of Syéne,
the separate steps of which have scarcely a fall


of six inches *, with the pompous descriptions of
the ancients, have been eager to recognize in
the bed of the Nile the effects of those erosions,
of that action of running waters, by which geo-
logists long believed, that they explained with
success the formation of vallies, and the chaos
of rents in the Cordilleras. The inspection of
these places little favors this opinion. We will
not deny the action of rivers and running waters,
when they furrow friable ground, covered with
secondary formations. But the granitic rocks


* The chellal between Philce and Syene has ten steps,
forming together 5 or 7 feet in height, according as the waters
of the Nile are high or low. The length of the cataract is


500 toises.


65


of elephantina have probably no more changed
their absolute height during thousands of years,
than the summits of Mount Blanc and of Ca-
nigou. When you have closely inspected the
great scenes of nature in different climates, it is
impossible not to admit, that those deep clefts,
those strata raised on end, those scattered
blocks, those traces of a general convulsion, are
the results of extraordinary causes, very different
from those which act slowly on the surface of
the globe in it’s present state of tranquillity and
repose. What the waters carry away from the
granite by erosion, what the humid atmosphere
destroys by it’s contact with hard and unde-
composed rocks, almost wholly escapes our
perception ; and [ cannot believe, as some geo-
logists admit, that the granitic summits of the
Alps and the Pyrenees lower in proportion to
the accumulation of pebbles in the gullies at the
foot of the mountains. In the Nile, as well as
in the Oroonoko, the rapids may diminish their
fall, without the rocky dikes being perceptibly
altered. The relative height of falls may be
changed by the deposits of mud formed below
the rapids. The beds of rivers, on account of
the action of the currents, tend incessantly tow-
ard a kind of curve, upon which depends what
is called the stability of the bed; and this stabi-
lity can be affected only by the transport of
friable matters, which the waters carry away,
*


66


and again deposit continually in places where
they diminish in velocity.

If these reflexions throw some light on the
interesting phenomenon of cataracts, they are
not sufficient, I confess, to explain the exagge-
rated accounts, which the ancients* have left
us of the rapids of Syene. Did they not attri-
bute to this lower fall what they had vaguely
learned of the upper falls of the river, those of
Nubia and Dongola, which are more numerous,
and more formidable ~~? Syene stood on the


* Strabo must be excepted, whose description is no less
simple than accurate. According to this author, the rapidity
and direction of the currents have changed since the century
before our era; the chellal could then be ascended on both
sides. There now exists a navigable channel only on one
side. The passage of the cataract is therefore become less
easy. Strab. Lib. xvii, p. 817 (translation of Mr. Letronne,
vol. v, p. 428).

t See Jemard, in the Description de U Egypte ancienne,
Syene, p. 17 and 28. Messrs. Burkhardt and Banks, Lord
Belmore, and Mr. Salt, have recently visited these upper ca-
taracts. Those of Sukkoy, situate above Ebsambal, at the
boundary between the zones of sandstone and granite, are
heard at a distance of two miles. South of the great Djena-
del, in the desert of Batn el Hadjar, several less considerable
rapids follow. The southernmost cataract of the Nile, or
rather of the two Niles united, is that of Koke, near Napata.
(See the learned article Egypt, by Doctor Thomas Young, in
the 4th vol. of the Encyclop. Britannica.) Had the ancients a
confused notion of the great cataracts of the eastern Nile, or
the Blue Nile, which have an elevation of more than 200 feet


67


limits of the Roman empire *, almost at those of
the known world ; and in space, as in the con-
ceptions of the human understanding, fantastic
images are created where positive ideas end.
The inhabitants of Atures and Maypures,
whatever the missionaries may have asserted in
their works, are not more struck with deafness
by the noise of the great cataracts, than the Ca-
tadupes of the Nile. When this noise is heard
in the plain that surrounds the mission, at the
distance of more than a league, you seem to be
near a coast skirted by reefs and breakers. The
noise is three times as loud by night as by days
and gives an inexpressible charm to these soli-
tary scenes. What can be the cause of this in-
creased intensity of sound in a desert, where
nothing seems to interrupt the silence of nature?
The velocity of the propagation of sound, far
from augmenting, decreases with the lowering
of the temperature. The intensity diminishes
in air agitated by a wind, which is contrary to
the direction of the sound ; it diminishes also by
dilatation of the air, and is weaker in the higher
than in the lower regions of the atmosphere,
where the number of particles of air in motion


between Fazuclo, and Alata? (Bruce’s Travels, vol. v, p.
105, 316.)
® Claustra imperii romani, says Tacitus. In the name of
the Island Phile we recognize the Coptic word phe-lakh, the
extremity (the end of Egypt).
F2


68


is greater in the same radius. The intensity is
the same in dry air, and in air mingled with
vapours; but it is feebler in carbonic acid gas,
than in mixtures of azot and oxygen. From these
facts, which are all we know with any certainty,
it is difficult to explain a phenomenon observed
near every cascade in Europe, and which, long
before our arrival in the village of Atures, had
struck the missionary and the Indians. The
nocturnal temperature of the atmosphere is 3°
less than the temperature of the day; at the
same time the apparent humidity augments at
night, and the mist that covers the cataracts be-
comes thicker. We have just seen, that the
hygroscopic state of the air has no influence on
the propagation of the sound, and that the cool-
ing of the air diminishes it’s swiftness.

It may be thought, that, even in places not
inhabited by man, the hum of insects, the song
of birds, the rustling of leaves agitated by the
feeblest winds, occasion during the day a con-
fused noise, which we perceive the less because
it is uniform, and constantly strikes the ear.
Now this noise, however slightly perceptible it
may be, may diminish the intensity of a louder
noise ; and this diminution may cease, if during
the calm of the night the song of birds, the hum
of insects, and the action of the wind upon the
leaves, be interrupted. But this reasoning,
even admitting it’s justness, can scarcely be ap-


69


plied to the forests of the Oroonoko, where the
air is constantly filled by an innumerable quan-
tity of moschettoes, where the hum of insects is
much louder by night than by day, and where
the breeze, if ever it be felt, blows only after
sunset.

I rather think, that the presence of the sun
acts upon the propagation and intensity of the
sound by the obstacles, which they find in the
currents of air of different density, and the par-
tial undulations of the atmosphere caused by
the unequal heating of different parts of the
‘soil. In calm air, whether it be dry, or mingled
with vesicular vapours equally distributed, the
sonorous undulation is propagated without diffi-
culty. But when the air is crossed in every
direction by small currents of hotter air, the so-
norous undulation is divided inte two undula-
tions, where the density of the medium changes
abruptly ; partial echoes are formed, that weaken
the sound, because one of the streams comes
back upon itself; and those divisions of undu-
lations take place, of which Mr. Poisson has
recently developed the theory with great saga-
city *. It is not therefore the movement of the
particles of air from below to above in the as-
cending current, or the small oblique currents,
that we consider as opposing by a shock. the


* Annales de Chimie, tom. vii, p. 293.


70


propagation of the sonorous undulations. A
shock, given to the surface of a liquid, will form
circles around the centre of percussion, even
when the liquid is agitated. Several kinds of
undulations may cross each other in water, as in
air, without being disturbed in their propaga-
tion ; little movements may ride over each other,
and the real cause of the less intensity of sound
during the day appears to be the interruption of
homogeneity in the elastic medium. During the
day, there is a sudden interruption of density,
wherever small streamlets of air of a high tem-
perature rise over parts of the soil unequally
heated. The sonorous undulations are divided,
as the rays of light are refracted, and form the
mirage (looming), wherever strata of air of un-
equal density are contiguous. The propagation
of sound is altered, when a stratum of hydrogen
gas is made to rise in a tube closed at one end
above a stratum of atmospheric air; and Mr.
Biot has well explained by the interposition of
bubbles of carbonic acid gas, why a glass filled
with Champagne wine is little sonorous so long as
the gas is evolved, and continues to pass through
the strata of the liquid.

In announcing these ideas, I might almost
rest on the authority of an ancient philosopher,
whom the moderns continue to treat with dis-
dain, though the most distinguished zoologists
have ‘long rendered ample justice to the saga-


71


city of his observations. “ Why,” says Aris-
totle in his curious book of Problems, “ why is
sound better heard during the night? Because
there is more calmness on account of the ab-
sence of caloric (of the hottest) *. This absence


* Thave placed in a parenthesis, a literal version of the
term employed by Aristotle, to express in reality what we
now term the matter of heat. Theodore de Gaza, in his Latin
translation, expresses in the shape of a doubt what Aristotle
positively asserts. I shall remark on this occasion, that,
notwithstanding the imperfect state of science among ‘the
ancients, the works of the Stagirite contain more ingenious
observations, than those of other philosophers. It is in vain
we look in Aristoxenes (Lib. de Musica), in Theophilactus Si-
mocatta (de Questionibus physicis), or in the 5th Book of the
Quest. nat, of Seneca, for an explanation of the nocturnal
augmentation of sound. A person deeply versed in the
knowledge of the ancients, Mr. Laurencit, has communicated
to me a passage of Plutarch (ed. Par., 1624, vol. ii, p.'721,
D), which confirms that of Aristotle, and which I shall cite,
from the simple version of Amyot. ‘ Boethus, le premier
interlocuteur, prétend que la froidure de Ja nuit fige et con-
dense Pair, et que l’on entend mal le son pendant le jour,
parce qu’il y a moins de vides. Ammonius, le second inter-
locuteur, rejette les vides de Bocthus, et admet, avec Anax-
agore, que, de jour, le soleil remue lair d’un mouvement
tremblant et plein de battement ; que l’on entend mal Je jour
a cause de la poussiére qui volette dans lair, qui siffle et qui
murmure, mais que, la nuit, le branlement cesse, et par con-
séquent le sifflement de la poussitre. Boethus se justifie de
vouloir corriger Anaxagore ; mais il pense quill faut renoncer
aux sons des petits corps, et qu’il suffit d’admettre le branle-
ment et le mouvement @iceux. Lair étant la substance


propre a la voix, sil est rassis, donne yoie toute droite, unie


*


ye.


renders every thing calmer, for the sun is the
principle of all movement.” Aristotle had no
doubt a vague presentiment of the cause
of the phenomenon; but he attributes to
the motion of the atmosphere, and the shock of
the particles of air, what seems to be rather
owing to abrupt changes of density in the conti-
guous strata of air.

The 16th of April, towards evening, we re-
ceived tidings, that in less than six hours our
boat had passed the rapids, and arrived in good
condition in a cove called el Puerto de arriba *,
or the Port of the Expedition. “Your boat will
not be wrecked, because you carry no merchan-
dize, and travel with the monk of the raudales,”


was said to us sneeringly by a little brown man,
whom by his accent we recognized to be a Ca-
talan, at the encampment of Pararuma. He was
a trader in tortoise-oil, who trafficked with the
Indians of the missions, and was no great friend


et continue aux petites parcelles et au mouvement de la voix
de tout loin. La bonace tranquille est resonnante ; au con-
traire, la tourmente est sourde. L’agitation de Yair ne permet
pas que la forme de la voix, bien expresse et articulée, ar-
rive jusqu’au sentiment, mais toujours en dte et emporte quel-
que chose de la force et de la grandeur, Le soleil, ce grand
gouverneur et capitaine du ciel, remue jusqu’aux moindres
parcelles de Vair ; et, tout aussitét qu’il se montre, il excite
et remue toute chose.” (Guvres de Plutarque, par Amyot,
éd. de Broter. 1802, Tom. viii, p. 385.)
* Upper harbour.


73


to the missionaries. “The frail vessels,” he
added, “ are those of the Catalans, when, pro-
vided with a licence from the Governor of Gua-
yana, and not with a permission from the presi-
dent of the missions, they endeavour to trade
beyond Atures and Maypures. After having
caused our boats to be wrecked in the raudales,
which are the key of the missions of the Upper
Oroonoko, the Cassiquiare, and the Rio Negro,
they make the Indians of Atures reconduct us
to Carichana, and oblige us to relinquish our
mercantile speculations.” An impartial histo-
rian of the country through which I passed, I
do not adopt an opinion advanced perhaps too
lightly. The present missionary of the raudales
is incapable of exercising the vexations, of which
the little Catalan traders complain ; but it may
be asked, what is the source of this profound
hatred of the government of the missions, even
in the Spanish colonies? If the rich only were
calumniated, the missionaries of the Upper Oroo-
noko ought to escape the shafts of malignity.
“They do not possess a house, a goat, scarcely
even a cow; while their brethren, the Capuchins
of the missions of Carony, have herds of 40,000
cattle. It is not then against the wealth of the
Observantins, that the resentment of the indus-
trious class of the planters is directed; but
against the exclusive principles of their govern-
ment, that obstinate tendency to shut their ter-


14


ritory to white men, and the shackles which they
lay on the exchange of productions. Monopo-
lies every where irritate the people; not only
such as have an influence on commerce and the
material wants of life, but also the right, which
one cast or branch of the community arrogates
to itself, of bringing up youth, or of governing,
not to say civilizing, the savages.

We were shown in the little church of
Atures some remains of the ancient wealth of
the Jesuits. A silver lamp of considerable
weight lay on the ground half-buried in the
sand. Such an object, it is true, would no
where tempt the cupidity of the savage; yet I
ought here to remark, to the honor of the natives
of Oroonoko, that they are not addicted to steal-
ing, like the much less: savage tribes of the
islands in the South Sea. The former havea
great respect for property; they do not even
attempt to steal provision, hooks, or hatchets.
At Maypures and Atures locks on the doors are
unknown ; they will be introduced only when
whites and men of mixed race establish them-
selves in the missions.

The Indians of Atures are mild, moderate, and
accustomed, from the effects of their idleness, to
the greatest privations. Formerly, excited to
labour by the Jesuits, they did not want for
food. The fathers cultivated maize, French
beans (frisoles), and other European vegeta-


bles; they even planted sweet oranges and ta-
marinds round the villages; and they possessed
twenty or thirty thousand head of cows and
horses, in the savannahs of Atures and Cari-
chana. They had at their service a great num-
ber of slaves and servants (peones), to take
care of their herds. Nothing is now cultivated
but a little cassava, and a few plantains. ‘The
fertility of the soil however is such, that at
Atures I counted ona single branch of musa
108 fruits, 4 or 5 of which would almost suffice
‘for the daily nourishment of a man. The culture
of maize is entirely neglected, and the horses
and cows have disappeared. Near the raudal,
a part of the village still bears the name of Passo
del ganado (ford of the cattle), while the descen-
dants of those very Indians, whom the Jesuits
had assembled in a mission, speak of horned
cattle as of animals of a race that is lost. In
going up the Oroonoko, toward San Carlos del
Rio Negro, we saw the last cow at Carichana.
The fathers of the Observance, who now govern
these vast countries, did not immediately suc-
ceed the Jesuits. During an interregnum of
eighteen years, the missions were visited only
from time to time, and by Capuchin monks.
The agents of the secular government, under
the title of Commissioners of the King, managed
the hatos or farms of the Jesuits with culpable
negligence. They killed the cattle in order to.


76


sell the hides. Many heifers were devoured by
tigers, and a greater number perished in conse-
quence of wounds made by the bats of the rau-
dales, which are much less, but far bolder than
the bats of the Llanos. At the time of the ex-
pedition of the boundaries, the horses of Enca-
ramada, Carichana, and Atures, were conveyed
as far as San Jose of Maravitanos, where, on the
banks of the Rio Negro, the Portugueze could
only procure them after a long passage, and of
a very inferiour quality, by the river Amazon
and Grand Para. Since the year 1795, the
cattle of the Jesuits have entirely disappeared.
There now remains in testimony of the ancient
cultivation of these countries, and the industri-
ous activity of the first missionaries, only a few
trunks of the orange and tamarind in the savan-
nahs, surrounded by wild trees.

The tigers, or jaguars, which are less danger-
ous for the cattle than the bats, come into the
village at Atures, and devour the pigs of the
poor Indians. The missionary related to us a
striking instance of the familiarity of these
animals, upon the whole so ferocious. Some
months before our arrival, a jaguar, which was
thought to be young, though of a large size, had
wounded a child in playing with him; I use
confidently this expression, which may seem
strange, having on the spot verified facts which
are not without interest in the history of the


my ie
dé


manners of animals. Two Indian children, a
boy and a girl, about eight and nine years of age,
were seated on the grass near the village of
Atures, in the middle of a savannah, which we
have often traversed. At two o'clock in the
afternoon, a jaguar issued from the forest, and
approached the children, bounding around them;
sometimes he hid himself in the high grass, some-
times he sprang forward, his back bent, his
head hung down, in the manner of our cats.
The little boy, ignorant of his danger, seemed
to be sensible of it only when the jaguar with
one of his paws gave him some blows on the
head. These blows, at first slight, became ruder
and ruder, the claws of the jaguar wounded
the child, and the blood flowed with violence.
The little girl then took a branch of a tree,
struck the animal, and it fled from her. The
Indians ran up at the cries of the children, and
saw the jaguar, which retired bounding, without
making the least show of resistance.

The little boy was brought to us, who appear-
ed lively and intelligent. The claw of the ja-
guar had taken away the skin from the lower
part of the forehead, and there was a second
scar at the top of the head. What meant this
fit of playfulness in an-animal, which is not dif-
ficult to tame in our menageries, but which
shows itself always so wild and cruel in a savage
state: If we admit, that, being sure of it’s


prey, it played with the little Indian, as our
cats play with birds, the wings of which have
been clipped, how shall we explain the patience
of a jaguar of large size, which sees itself pur-
sued by a little girl? If the jaguar were not
pressed by hunger, why was it seen to approach
the children? There is something mysterious in
the affections and hatreds of animals. We have
seen lions kill three or four dogs, that were put
into their den, and instantly caress a fifth, which,
less timid, took the king of animals by the
mane. These are instincts of which men know
not the secret. It would seem as if weakness
inspired so much the more interest, in proportion
as it appeared more confiding.

We have mentioned, that domestic pigs are
attacked by the jaguars. There are in these
countries, beside the common pigs of European
race, several species of pecaris, or pigs with
lumbar glands, two of which only are known to
the naturalist of Europe. The Indians call the
little pecari (dicotiles torquatus, Cuv.) in the
Maypure tongue chacharo *; while they give the
name of apida-f to a pig, which they say has no


* Or paquira in Tamanack, whence is derived the Creole


word baquira.

+ Gili, vol. I, p. 252. Caulin, Histo. corog., p. 37. Gumilla,
vol I, p. 295. The apida is probably the great pecari of our
collections, or dicotiles labiatus. It is possible, that the lum-
bar glands are not equally apparent in all the three species
on the banks of the Oroonoko, the puinke, the apida or tiri-


gua, and the chacharo or potiche,


79


pouch, is larger, and of a dark brown colour,
with the lower jaw and the abdominal zone
white. The chacharo, reared in the houses,
becomes tame like our sheep and goats. It
reminds us by the gentleness of it’s manners of
the curious analogies which anatomists have
observed, between the pecaris and the ruminat-
ing animals, The apida, which is domesticated
like our swine in Europe, wanders in large herds
composed of several hundreds. These herds
are announced from far, not only by their hollow
and hoarse gruntings, but above all by the im-
petuosity with which they break down the
shrubs in their way. Mr. Bonpland, in an herb-
orising excursion, warned by his Indian guide to
hide himself behind the trunk of a tree, saw a
number of these pecaris (cochinos or puercos del
monte) pass close by him. The herd marched
in a close body, the males before, and each sow
accompanied by her young. The flesh of the
chacharo is flabby, and little agreeable; it af-
fords however a plentiful nourishment to the
natives, who kill these animals with small lances
tied to cords. We were assured at Atures, that
the tiger dreads being surrounded in the forests
by these herds of wild pigs; and that, to avoid
being stifled, he tries to save himself on a tree.
Is this a hunter’s tale, or a fact duly observed ?
We shall soon see, that in several parts of Ame-
rica the hunters believe in the existence of a


80


javali, ov native boar with external recurved
tusks*. I never saw one, but this animal is
mentioned in the works of the Spanish mission-
aries, a source too much neglected by zoologists,
though they contain, amid the grossest exagera-
tions, very curious local observations.

Among the monkeys, which we saw at the
mission of the Atures, we found one new species,
of the tribe of sais and sajous, which the Creoles
vulgarly call machis. It is the owavapavi with
gray hair and a bluish face. It has the orbits
of the eyes, and forehead, as white as snow,
which at first sight distinguish it from the stmia
capucina, the simia apella, the simia trepida, and
the other weeping monkeys hitherto so confu-
sedly described-+. This little animal is as gentle
as-itis ugly. Every day in the courtyard of the
missionary it seized a pig, upon which it re-
mained from morning till night, traversing the
savannahs. We have also seen it upon the back


* Mr. Cortes asserts, that he killed on the borders of the
Magdalena a wild boar, puerco mana, with recurved tusks,
and longitudinal stripes on the back. Are there hogs
from Europe in this country, that bave become wild?


+ See my Monography of the Oroonoko monkeys, in the
Rec. Obs. Zoologic., vol. i, p. 324 and 356. The ouavapavi
(a word of the Guareken language) is my simia albifrons, ex
albo cinerascens, vertice nigro, facie cerulea, fronte et orbi-


tis niveis, cruribus et brachiis fuscescentibus.


8]


of a large cat, which had been brought up with
it in father Zea’s house.

It was among the cataracts that we began to
hear of the hairy man of the woods, called sal-
vaje, that carries off women, constructs huts, and
sometimes eats human flesh. The Tamanacks
call it achi *, and the Maypures vasitri, or great
devil, The natives and the missionaries have
no doubt of the existence of this anthropomor-
phous monkey, which they singularly dread.
Father Gilift gravely relates the history of a
lady in the town of San Carlost, who much
praised the gentle character and attentions of
the man of the woods. | She lived several years
with one in great domestic harmony, and only
requested some hunters to take her back, “ be-
cause she was tired, she and her children (a little
hairy also), of living far from the church and
the sacraments.” The same author, notwith-
standing his credulity, confesses, that he had
not been able to find an Indian, who asserted
positively that he had seen the salvaje with his
own eyes. This fable, which the missionaries,
the European planters, and the negroes of Africa,
have no doubt embellished with many features
taken from the description of the manners of the


* Pronounce atschi.
t+ Saggio, vol. i, p. 248, 315.
+ In the Llanos of Venezuela.


G


32


ourang outang*, the gibbon, the jocko or chim-
panzee, and the pongo, pursued us during five
years from the northern to the southern hemis-
phere; and we were every where blamed, in the
most cultivated class of society, for being the only
persons to doubt the existence of the great an-
thropomorphous monkey of America. We shall
first observe, that there are certain regions,
where this belief is particularly prevalent among
the people; such are the banks of the Upper
Oroonoko-+, the valley of Upar near the lake of
Maracaybo, the mountains of Santa Martha and
of Merida, the provinces of Quixos, and the
banks of the Amazon near Tomependa.... In all
these places, so distant one from the other, it is
repeated, that the salvaje is easily recognized, by
the traces of it’s feet; the toes of which are


* Simia satyrus. We must not believe, notivithstanding
the assertions of almost all zoological writers, that the word
orang outang is applied exclusively in the Malay language to
the simia satyrus of Borneo, This expression, on the con-
trary, means any very large monkey, that resembles man in
figure. (Marsden, Hist. of Sumatra, 3d edit., p. 117). Mo-
dern zoologists have arbitrarily appropriated provincial
names to certain species ; and by continuing to prefer these
names, strangely disfigured in their orthography, to the latin
systematic names, the confusion of the nomenclature has
been increased.


+ Near the Rio Paruasi (see vol. iv, p. 540) a moun-
tain bears the name of Achi-tipuiri, which means in Ta-
manack mountain of the man of the woods.


83


turned backward. But if there exist a monkey
of a large size in the New Continent, how has it
happened, that during three centuries no man
worthy of belief has been able to procure the
skin of one? Several hypotheses present them-
selves to the mind, in order to explain the source
of so ancient an error or belief. Has the fa-
mous capuchin monkey of Esmeralda *, the ca-
nine teeth of which are more than six lines and
a half long, the physiognomy much more like
man’s-¢ than that of the ourang outang, and which,
when irritated, rubs it’s beard with it’s hand,
given rise to the fable of the salvaje 2? It is not
so large indeed as the coaita (simia paniscus) ;
but when seen at the top of a tree, and the
head only visible, it might easily be taken for a
human being. It may be also (and. this opinion
appears to me the most probable), that the man
of the woods was one of those large bears, the
footsteps of which resemble those of a man, and
which is believed in every country to attack wo-
men. The animal killed in my time at the foot of
the mountains of Merida, and sent, by the name
of salvaje, to Colonel Ungaro, the governor of
the province Varinas, was in fact a bear with
black and smooth fur. Our fellow-traveller, Don
Nicolas-Sotto, had examined it closely. Did


* Simia chiropotes. See my Obs. de Zool., voll i, p. 312.


+ The whole, of the features, the expression of the physi-
ognomy, not the forehead.


Gio


84


the strange idea of a plantigrade animal, the
toes of which are placed as if it walked back-
ward, take it’s origin from the habit of the real
savages of the woods, the Indians of the weakest
and most timid tribes, of deceiving their ene-
mies, when they enter a forest, or cross a sandy
shore, by covering the traces of their feet with
sand, or walking backward ?

I have just expressed my doubts of the exist-
ence of an unknown species of large monkey in
a continent, which appears entirely destitute of
quadrumanes of the family of the ourangs,
cynocephali, mandrils, and pongoes. Let us
not forget, that all articles of popular belief,
even the most absurd in appearance, repose on
real facts, but ill observed. In treating them
with disdain, the traces of a discovery may often
be lost in natural philosophy, as well as in zoo-
logy. We will, not then admit, with a Spanish
author, that the fable of the man of the woods
was invented by the artifice of Indian women,
who pretended to have been carried off, when
they had been long absent unknown fo their
husbands; we rather counsel travellers, who
shall visit after us the missions of the Oroonoko,
to continue our researches on the salvaje or
great devil of the woods ; and examine whether
it be some unknown species of bear, or some
very rare monkey analogous to the simia chiro-


85


potes, or simia satanas, that can have given rise
to such singular tales.

After having spent two days near the cata-
ract of Atures, we were glad to have our boat -
reladen, and leave a spot where the tempera-
ture of the air is generally by day twenty-nine
degrees, and by night. twenty-six degrees of the
centigrade thermometer. This temperature
seemed to us to be stiil much more elevated,
from the feeling of heat which we experienced.
The want of concordance between the instru-
ments and the sensations must be attributed to
the continual irritation of the skin excited by
the moschettoes. An atmosphere filled with veno-
mous insects always appears to be more heated
than it isin reality. Saussure’s hygrometer, ob-
served as usual in the shade*, marked by day, at
the minimum (at three in the afternoon) 78:2°;
by night, at the maximum, 81:5°. This degree of
humidity is 5° less than the mean humidity of
the coast of Cumana; but it is 10° above the
mean humidity of the Llanos, or plains destitute
of trees. The cataracts and the thickness of the


* From 42° to 45° of the whale-bone hygrometer. (See
vol. iv, p. 145, 326, and 400.. The barometer rose on the
15th of April, at.the puerto de arriba de Atuyes (at ten in the
morning) to $36°5 lines ; in the village, situate in the middle
of a small table-land, on the 16th of April, at eleven in the
morning, to 334:3 lines. The centigrade thermometer at
noon in the shade was at 27°2°; in the sun at 31°9°; appa-


rent action of the sun, 4°7°,


86


forests contribute to augment the quantity of
vapours contained in the air. We were horribly
tormented in the day by the moschettoes, and the
jejen, small venomous flies, or simuliums, and at
night, by the zancudoes, a large species of gnat,
that are dreaded even by the natives. We be-
gan to have our hands much swelled, and this
swelling increased daily till owr arrival on the
banks of the Temi. The means that are em-
ployed to escape from these little animals are
very extraordinary. The good missionary Ber-
nardo Zea, who passes his life tormented by
moschettoes, had constructed near the church,
on a scaffolding of trunks of palm-trees, a
small apartment, in which we breathed more
freely. To this we went up in the evening, by
means of a ladder, to dry our plants, and write
our journal. The missionary had justly observ-
ed, that the insects abounded more particularly
in the lowest strata of the atmosphere, that which
reaches from the ground to the height of twelve
or fifteen feet. At Maypures the Indians quit
the village at night, to go and sleep on the little
islets in the midst of the cataracts. There they
enjoy some rest; the moschettoes appearing to
shun air loaded with vapours. We found every
where fewer in the middle of the river, than
near it’s banks, and thus less is suffered in des-
cending the Oroonoko, than in going up ina
boat.


87


- Persons who have not navigated the great
rivers of equinoctial America, for, instance, the
Oroonoko and the Rio Magdalena, can scarcely
conceive, how without interruption, at every
instant of life, you may be tormented by insects
flying in the air, and how the multitude of these
little animals may render. vast regions almost
uninhabitable. However accustomed you may
be to endure pain without complaint, however
lively an interest you may take in the objects of
your researches, it is impossible not to be con-
stantly disturbed by the moschettoes, zancu-
does, jejens, and tempraneroes, that. cover the
face and hands, pierce the clothes with their
long sucker in the form of a needle, and, getting
into the mouth and nostrils, set you coughing
and sneezing whenever you attempt to speak in
the open air. In the missions of the Oroonoko,
in the villages placed on the banks of the river,
surrounded by immense forests, the plaga de las
moscas, the plague of the flies, affords an inex-
haustible subject of conversation. When two
persons meet in the morning, the first questions
they address to each other are, “« How did you
find the zancudoes during the night?) How are
we to day for the moschettoes *.” These ques-
tions remind us of a Chinese form. of politeness,


* Que le han parecido los crancudos de noche? come stamos


hoy de mosquitos ®


88


which indicates the ancient state of the country
where it took birth. Salutations were made
heretofore in the celestial empire in the following
words, voueto-hou*, “ Have you been incommod-
ed in the night by the serpents?’ We shall
soon see, that on the banks of the Tuamini, in
the river Magdalena, and still more at Choco,
the country of gold and platina, the Chinese
compliment on the serpents might be added to
that of the moschettoes.

This is the place in which to speak of the
geographical distribution of those insects of the
family of tipulee, which affords very remarkable
phenomena. It does not appear to depend sole-
ly on the heat of the climate, the excess of hu-
midity, or the thickness of forests, but on local
circumstances, that are difficult to characterize.
It may be first observed, that the plague of mos-
chettoes and zancudoes is not so general in the
torrid zones, as is commonly believed. On the
table-lands, elevated more than four hundred
toises above the level of the ocean, in the very
dry plains remote from the beds of great rivers,
for instance at Cumana and Calabozo, there are
not sensibly more gnats, than in the most popu-'
lous parts of Europe. They are perceived to
augment enormously at Nueva Barcelona, and
more to the west, on the coast that extends to-


* Deguignes, Dict. Chinors, p. 26.


89


ward Cape Codera. Between the little harbour
of Higuerote* and the mouth of the Rio Unare,
the wretched inhabitants are accustomed, to
stretch themselves on the ground, and pass the
night buried in the sand three or four inches
deep, leaving out the head only, which they
cover with a handkerchief. You suffer from the
sting of insects, but in a manner easy to bear,
in descending the Oroonoko from Cabruta to-
ward Angostura, and in going up from Cabruta
toward Uruana, between the latitudes of 7° and
8°. But beyond the mouth of the Rio Arauca,
when you have passed the strait of Baraguan,
the scene suddenly changes. From this spot
there is no more repose for the traveller. If he


have any poetical remembrance of Dante, he
will think he has entered the citta dolente, he
will seem to read on the granitic rocks of Bara-
guan these memorable lines of the third canto ;


Noi sem venuti al luogo, ov’ ? tho detto
Che tu vedrai Je genti doloroset.


The lower strata of air, from the surface of
the ground to the height of fifteen or twenty
feet, are filled with venomous insects like a con-
densed vapour. If in an obscure spot, for in-
stance in the grottoes of the cataracts formed


* See vol. iii, p. 370.
+ Tnferno, canto iii, 16.


90


by superincumbent blocks of granite, you direct
your eyes toward the opening enlightened by the
sun, you see clouds of moschettoes more or less
thick, according as these little animals, in their
slow and regular movements to their own music
[mouvemens lenis et cadencés |, form into groups,
or spread themselves abroad. At the mission
of San Borja, the suffering from moschettoes
is greater than at Carichana; but in the rauda-
les, at Atures, and above all at Maypures, this
suffering may be said to attain it’s maximum.
I doubt whether there be a country upon Earth,
where man is exposed to more cruel torments in
the rainy season. Having passed the fifth de-
gree of latitude, you are somewhat less stung ;
but on the Upper Oroonoko the stings are more
painful, because the heat, and the absolute want
of wind, renders the air more burning, and more
irritating in it’s contact with the skin.

“ How comfortable must people be in the
moon" said a Saliva Indian to father Gumilla ;
“she looks so beautiful and so clear, that she
must be free from moschettoes.” ‘These words,
which denote the infancy of a people, are very.
remarkable. The satellite of the Earth is every
where to the American savage the abode of the -
blessed, the country of abundance. The Eski-
mo, who counts among his riches a plank, a
trunk of a tree, thrown by the currents ona
coast destitute of vegetation, sees in the moon


91


plains covered with forests ; the Indian of the
forests of Oroonoko there beholds open savan-
nahs, where the inhabitants are never stung by
moschettoes.

Arrived farther toward the south, where the
system of yellowish-brown waters commences,
generally called black waters, aguas negras, on
the banks of the Atabapo, the Tuni, the Tuamini,
and the Rio Negro, we enjoyed a repose, I had
almost said a happiness, unexpected. These
rivers cross thick forests, like the Oroonoko, but
the tipulary insects, as well as the crocodiles,
shun the proximity of the black waters. Are
these waters, which are a little colder, and
chemically different from the white waters, ad-
verse to the larvae and the chrysalids of tipulary
insects and gnats, which may be considered as
real aquatic animals? Some small rivers, the
colour of which is deep blue, or yellowish brown,
the Toparo, the Mataveni, and the Zama, are
exceptions to the almost general rule of the
absence of moschettoes over the black waters.
These three rivers swarm with them; and the
Indians themselves fixed our attention on the
problematic causes of this phenomenon. In go-
ing down the Rio Negro, we breathed freely at
Maroa, Daripe, and San Carlos, villages situate
on the boundaries of Brazil. But this improve-
ment of our situation was of short continuance ;
our sufferings recommenced as soon as we en- ~


92


tered the Cassiquiare. At Esmeralda, at the
eastern extremity of the Upper Oroonoko, where
ends the known world of the Spaniards, the
clouds of moschettoes are almost as thick as at
the great cataracts. At Mandavaca we found
an old missionary, who told us with an air of
sadness, that he had spent his twenty years of
moschettoes* in America. He desired us to
look well at his legs, that we might be able to
tell one day, “ por alla (beyond sea), what the
poor monks suffer in the forests of Cassiquiare.”
Every sting leaving a small darkish brown point,
his legs were so speckled, that it was difficult to
recognize the whiteness of his skin through the
spots of coagulated blood. If the insects of the
simulium genus abound in the Cassiquiare, which
has white waters, the culices, or zancudoes, are
so much the more rare ; you scarcely find any
there, while on the rivers of black waters, in the
Atabapo and the Rio Negro, there are generally
some zancudoes and no moschettoes. We have
mentioned above, that in the petty revolutions;
which from time to time agitate the order of the
Observance of St. Francis, when the padre-guar-
dian chooses to exercise his vengeance on a lay
brother, he sends him to Esmeralda ; this is a
state of exile, or, as the monks jocularly say, he
is condemned to the moschettoes.


* <¢ Va tengo mis vente annos de mosquitos.”


93


T have just shown, from my own observations,
how much the geographical distribution of veno-
mous insects varies in this labyrinth of rivers
with white and black waters. It were to be
wished, that a learned entomologist could study
on the spot the specific differences of these
noxious insects*, which in the torrid zone, in
spite of their littleness, act an important part in
the economy of nature. What appeared to us
very remarkable, and is a fact known to all
the missionaries, is, that the different species do
not associate together, and that at different
hours of the day you are stung by distinct spe-
cies. Every time that the scene changes, and,
to use the simple expression of the missionaries,
other insects “mount guard,” you have a few
minutes, often a quarter of an hour of repose.
The insects that disappear have not their places
instantly supplied in equal numbers by their
successors. From half after six in the morning
till five in the afternoon, the air is filled with
moschettoes ; which have not, as we find related
in some travels, the form of our gnatsf, but


* The mosquitos bovos or tenbigudi; the meleros, which
always settle upon the eyes; the tempraneros, or putchiki ;
the jejenes ; the gnat rwai; the great zancudos, or matchaki ;
the cafafi, &c.

+ Kalm, Reise in Nord-America, tom. ii, p. 268.

{ Culex pipiens. This difference between mosquito (little

fly, simulium) and zancudo (gnat, culex) exists in all the


94


that of a small fly. They are simuliums of the
family nemocerz of the system of Latreille.
Their sting is as painful as that of the stomoxes*.
It leaves a little reddish brown spot, which is
extravasated and coagulated blood, where their
proboscis has pierced the skin. An hour before
sunset a species, of small gnats, called tempra-
neros}, because they appear also at sunrise,
take the place of the moschettoes. Their. pre-
sence scarcely lasts an hour and a half; they
disappear between six and seven in the evening,
or, as they say here, after the Angelus (a la ora-
cion). After a few minutes repose, you feel
yourself stung by zancudoes, another species of
gnat (culex) with very long legs +. The zancu-
do, the proboscis of which contains a sharp-
pointed sucker, causes the most acute pain, and


Spanish colonies. The word zancudo signifies longipes, long-
legs, qui tiene las suncas largas. The moschettoes of the Oroo-
noko are the moustiques; the zancudoes are the maringouins
of French travellers.


* Conops calcitrans.


+ Which appear ut an early hour (temprano). Some persons
say, that the zancudo is the same tempranero, which returns at
night, after hiding itself for some time. I have doubts of
this identity of the species; the pain caused by the sting of
the two insects appeared to me different.


} The zancudoes of the Oroonoko, called aniz-by the May-
pures, have the corselet of a brownish green, with white
wings, the feet blackish brown, with the extremities whitc.


95


a swelling that remains several weeks. It’s
hum resembles that of our gnats in Europe, but.
is louder and more prolonged. The Indians
pretend to distinguish “ by their song” the zan-
cudoes and the tempraneroes; the latter of
which are real twilight insects, while the zancu-
does are most frequently nocturnal insects, and
disappear toward sunrise.

In our way from Carthagena to Santa Fe de
Bogota, we observed, that between Mompox and
Honda, in the valley of the great Rio Magdale-
na, the zancudoes darkened the air from eight
in the evening till midnight; that toward mid-
night they diminished in number, and were hid-
den for three or four hours ; and lastly that they
returned in crowds, and with a voracious ap-
petite, toward four in the morning. What is
the cause of these alternations of motion and
rest? Are these animals fatigued by long flight?
It is very rare at Oroonoko to see real gnats by -
day; whileatthe riverof Magdalenawe wer estung
night and day, except from noon till two o’clock.
The zancudoes of the two rivers are no doubt
of different. species; are the compound eyes of
one of these species more affected by the splen-
dor of the solar Jight than the eyes of the
other ?

We have seen, that the insects of the tropics
every where follow a certain standard in the
periods at which they alternately arrive and dis-


96


appear. At fixed and invariable hours, in the
same season, and the same latitude, the air is
peopled with new inhabitants, and in a zone
where the barometer becomes a clock*, where
every thing proceeds with such admirable regu-
larity, we might guess blindfold the hour of the
day or night, by the hum of the insects, and by
their stings, the pain of which differs according to
the nature of the poison, that each insect ae
sits in the wound.

At a period when the geography of animals
and of plants had not yet been studied, the
analogous species of different climates were often
confounded. It was believed, that the pines
and ranunculuses, the stags, the rats, and the
tipulary insects of the north of Europe, were to:
be found in Japan, on the ridge of the Andes,
and at the straits of Magellan. Naturalists
justly celebrated have thought, that the zancudo
of the torrid zone was the gnat of our marshes,
become more vigorous, more voracious, and
more noxious, under the influence of a burning
climate. This is a very erroneous opinion. I
carefully examined and described upon the spot
those zancudoes, which torment us the most.
In the rivers Magdalena and Guayaquil alone
there are five distinct species. Mr. La-


* By the extreme regularity of the horary variations of
the atmospheric pressure.


97


treille, the first entomologist of the age, was
kind enough to look over the detailed descrip-
tion of those little animals, which I shall give
in a note*.


* The following is the description of the five new spe-
cies :

1, CULEX CYANOPENNIS, abdomine fusco, piloso, annulis
sex albis ; alts ceruleis, tarsis albo annulatis. Thorax fusco-ater,
pilosus. Abdomen supra fusco-cerulescens, hirtum, annulis
sex albis, Ale cerulez, splendore semi-metallico, viridenti-
venose, spe pulverulente, margine externo ciliato. Pedes


fusci, tibiis hirtis, tarsis nigrioribus, annulis quatuor niveis.


Antenne maris pectinate.

Habitat locis paludosis ad ripam Magdalene fluminis prope
Teneriffe, Mompox, Chilloa, Tamalameque cet. (Regno No-
vogranatensi. )

2, CULEX LINEATUS, violaceo-fuscescens ; thorace fusco,
utringue linea longitudinali maculisque inferis argenteis; alis
virescentibus ; abdomine annulis sex argenteis ; pedibus atro-
fuscis ; posticorum tibiis apicibusque albis.

Habitat ad conflnentem 'Tamalamequen in ripa Magdale-
ne fluminis. (Regno Novogr.)

3. CULEX FEROX, supra ceruleo aureoque varius, annulis
quinque albis inferis; alis virescentibus ; pedibus nigricanti-
ceruleis, metallico-splendentibus ; posticis longissimis, basi api-
ceque niveis.

Omnium maximus differt 1 a C. hemorrhoidali Fab. cui
pedes quoque ccerulei, thorace superne ceruleo et auro ma-
culato ; 2 a C. cyanopenni corpore superne ceruleo, pedibus
hand annulatis, haud fuscis. An Nhatin Marcgr., p. 257?

Habitat ad ripam inundatam fluminis Guayaquilensis,
prope San Borondon. (Regno Quitensi.)

4, CULEX CHLOROPTERUS, viridis, annulis quinque albis ;
alis virescentibus, pedibus fuscis ad basim subtus albis.

VOL. V. H


96


The culices of South America have generally
the wings, corselet, and legs of an azure co-
lour, annulated, and variable from a mixture
of spots of metallic lustre. Here, as in Europe,
the males, which are distinguished by their fea-
thered antennze, are extremely rare; you are
seldom stung except by females. The pre-
ponderance of this sex explains the immense
increase of the species, each female laying seve-
ral hundred eggs. In going up one of the great
rivers of America, it is observed, that the appear-
ance of a new species of culex denotes the prox-
imity of a new stream flowing in. I shall men-
tion an instance of this curious phenomenon.
The culex lineatus, which belongs to the canno
of Tamalamec, is only perceived in the valley of
the Rio Grande de la Magdalena at a league
north of the junction of the two rivers ; it goes
up, but scarcely ever descends the Rio Grande.
It is thus, that, on a principal view, the appear-
ance of a new substance in the gangue indicates
to the miner the neighbourhood of a secondary
vein, that joins the first.

On recapitulating the observations which we


Habitat cum precedenti.
5, CuLEX MACULATUS, viridi-fuscescens, annulis octo albis,


alis virescentibus, maculis tribus anticis, atro-ceruleis, auro
immiztis ; pedibus fuseis, basi alba.

Habitat cum c. feroce et ¢. chloroptero in ripa fluminis Rio
de Guayaquil propter las Bodegas de Babaoyo.


99


have here recorded, we see, that within the tropics,
the moschettoes and zancudoes do not rise on the
slope of the Cordilleras* toward the temperate
region, where the mean heat is below 19° or 20°
centigrade +; and that, with few exceptions, they
shun the black waters, and dry and unwooded
spots{. The atmosphere swarms with them much
more in the Upper, than in the Lower Oroonoko,
because in the former the river is surrounded
with thick forests on it’s banks, and the skirts
of the forests are not separated from the river by
a barren and extensive beach. The moschet-
toes diminish on the New Continent with the


* The culex pipiens of Europe does not, like the culex of
the torrid zone, shun mountainous places. Mr. Giesecke
suffered from these insects in Greenland, at Disco, in latitude
70°. They are found in Lapland in summer, at three or four
hundred toises high, and at a temperature of 11° or 19° cent.
They give to the alpine region a character of movement and
life, which Mr. Wahlenberg seems to regret that he did not
find in the Alps of Switzerland, “ ubi culices apesque nullas cho-
reas agunt.” See the work of this traveller, de V. egetatione et
Clim. Helvet. septentr. p. Xxxv.

+ Below 152° or 16° Reaumur. (This is the mean tem-
perature of Montpellier and Rome.)

{ Trifling modifications in the waters, or in the air, often
appear to prevent the development of the moschettoes. Mr,
Bowdich remarks, that there are none at Coomassie, in the
kingdom of the Ashantees, though the town is surrounded by
marshes, (Mission to Ashantee, 1819, p. 321,) and though the


thermometer keeps up between seventeen and twenty-eight
centesimal degrees, day and night (13°6° and 22-4°of Reaumur.)
H 2


100


ri
diminution of the water, and the destruction of
the woods ; but the effects of these changes are
as slow as the progress of cultivation. The towns
of Angostura, Nueva Barcelona, and Mompox,
where from the want of police, the streets, the
great squares, and the interior of court-yards are
covered with brush-wood*, are sadly celebrated
for the abundance of zancudoes.

Men born in the country, whether they be
whites, mulattoes, negroes, or Indians, all suffer
from the sting of these insects. But, as cold
does not render the north of Europe uninhabita-
ble, so the moschettoes do not prevent: men
from dwelling in countries where they abound,
if these countries, by their situation and govern-
ment, afford resources for agriculture and indus-
try. The inhabitants pass their lives in com-
plaining de la plaga, del insufrible tormento de
las moscas ; yet, notwithstanding these continual
complaints, they do not seek the less, and even
with a sort of predilection, the commercial
towns of Mompox, Santa Marta, and Rio la
Hacha. Such is the force of habit in evils which
we suffer every hour of the day, that the three
missions of San Borja, Atures, and Esmeralda,
where, to make use of an hyperbolical expres-
sion of the monks, there are more moschettoes


* With iatropha gossypifolia, scoparia, cleome, croton, &
cassia.


101


than air*, would no doubt become flourishing
towns, if the Oroonoko afforded planters the
same advantages for the exchange of produce, as
the Ohio and the Lower Missisippi. The abun-
dance of venomous insects slackens, but does
not stop entirely the progress of population ; it
prevents the whites from settling only in those
places, where the commercial and political state
of the country promise no real advantages.

I have indicated in another part of this work
the curious fact, that the whites born in the tor-
rid zone walk barefoot with impunity, in the
same apartment where a European recently
landed is exposed to the attack of the niguas or
chegoes (pulex penetrans). These animals, al-
most invisible to the eye, get under the nails of
the feet, and there acquire the size of a small
pea by the quick increase of it’s eggs, which.
are placed in a-bag under the belly of the insect.
The nigua therefore distinguishes what the most
delicate chemical analysis could not distinguish,
the cellular membrane and blood of a Eure-
pean from those of a creole white. It is not so
with the moschettoes. These insects, whatever
may be said on the coast of South America,
attack equally the natives and the Europeans ;
it is only the effects of the sting, that are dif-
ferent in the two races of men. The same veno-


* Mas moscos que ayre.


102


mous liquid, deposited in the skin of. a copper-
coloured man of Indian race, and in that of a
white man newly landed, causes no swelling to
the former, while on the latter it produces hard
blisters, greatly inflamed, and painful for seve-
ral days; so different is the action of the der-
moid system, according to the degree of irritabi-
lity of the organs in different races, and differ-
ent individuals !

I shall here recite several facts, which prove
incontestibly, that the Indians, and in general
all the people of colour, at the moment of being
stung, suffer like the whites, although perhaps
with less intensity of pain. In the day, even
when labouring at the oar, the natives, in order
to chase the insects, are continually giving one
another smart slaps with the palm of the hand.
Rude in all their movements, they strike them-
selves and their comrades mechanically during
their sleep. The violence of their blows reminds
us of the Persian tale * of the bear, that tried to
kill with his paw the insects on the forehead of
his sleeping master. Near Maypures we saw
some young Indians seated in a circle and rub-
bing cruelly each others backs with the bark of
trees dried at the fire. Indian women were oc-
cupied with a degree of patience, of which the
copper-coloured race alone are capable, in extir-


* Anvart Soheily, book i, p. 64 (Calcutta, 1815).


103


pating by means of a sharp bone the little mass
of coagulated blood, that forms the centre of
every sting, and gives the skin a speckled ap-
pearance. One of the most barbarous nations of
the Oroonoko, that of the Otomacs, is acquainted
with the use of moschetto curtains (mosquiteros)
formed of a tissue of fibres of the palm tree, mu-
richi. We had lately seen, that at Higuerote,
on the coast of Caraccas, the people of a copper
colour sleep buried in the sand. In the villages
of the Rio Magdalena the Indians often invited
us to stretch ourselves with them on ox-skins,
near the church, in the middle of the plaza
grande, where they had assembled all the cows
in the neighbourhood. The proximity of cattle
gives some repose to man. The Indians of the
Upper Oroonoko and the Cassiquiare, seeing
that Mr. Bonpland could not prepare his herbal,

on account of the continual torment of the mos-
chettoes, invited him to enter their ovens (hor-
nitos). Thus they call little chambers, without
doors or windows, into which they creep hori-
zontally through a very low opening. When
they have driven away the insects by means
of a fire of wet brush-wood, which emits a great
deal of smoke, they close the opening of the
oven. The absence of moschettoes is purchased
dearly enough by the excessive heat of stagnant
air, and the smoke of a torch of copal, which
lights the oven during your stay in it. Mr.


104


Bonpland, with courage and patience well
worthy of praise, dried hundreds of plants, shut
up in these hornitos of the Indians.

The care which the Indians take to be less
incommoded by the insects sufficiently proves,
that, notwithstanding the different organization
of the dermoid system, the copper-coloured man
is sensible to the stings of insects, like the white
man ; but we here repeat, that the former seems
to feel less pain, and the sting is not followed by
those swellings, that succeed without interrup-
tion during several weeks, heighten the irrita-
bility of the skin, and throw persons of a delicate
constitution into that feverish state, which al-
ways accompanies eruptive maladies. The whites
born in equinoctial America, the Europeans who
have long sojourned in the missions, on the bor-
ders of forests and great rivers, suffer much
more than the Indians, but infinitely less than
Europeans recently arrived. It is not there-
fore, as some travellers assert, the thickness
of the skin, that renders the sting more or
less painful at the moment when it is received ;
it is not on account of the particular. organi-
zation of the integuments, that the Indians feel
the sting less followed by swelling and inflam-
matory symptoms; it is on the nervous irritabi-
lity of the dermoid system, that the acuteness
and duration of the pain depend. This irritabi-
lity is augmented by very warm clothing, by the


105


use of alcoholic liquors, by the habit of scratch-
ing the wounds, and lastly, and this physiologi-
cal observation is the result of my own experi-
ence, that of baths taken at too short intervals.
In places where the absence of crocodiles per-
mits people to enter the river, Mr. Bonpland
and myself observed, that the immoderate use
of baths, while it moderated the pain of old
stings of zancudoes, rendered us more sensible
to new. By bathing more than twice a day,
the skin is brought into a state of nervous irrita-
bility, of which no idea can be formed in Eu-
rope. It would seem as if all feeling were car-
ried toward the integuments.

As the moschettoes and gnats pass two
thirds of their’ lives in the water, we must not
be surprised, that in the forests crossed by great
rivers these noxious insects become more rare in
proportion as you remove from theshore. ‘They
seem to prefer the spots where their metamor-
phosis took place, and where they go to deposit
their eggs. In fact, the wild Indians (Indios
Monteros) accustom themselves with so much
more difficulty to the life of the missions, as they
feel in the Christian establishments a torment,
which: they scarcely know in their own inland
dwellings. The natives at Maypures, Atures,
and Esmeralda, have been seen fleeing al monte*,
solely from the dread of moschettoes. Unfortu-


* < To the woods.”


106


nately, all the missions of the Oroonoko have
been placed too near the banks of the river
from the first. At Esmeralda the inhabitants
assured us, that, if the village were placed in one
of the five plains surrounding the high moun-
tains of Duida and Maraguaca, they should
breathe freely, and enjoy some repose. The
great cloud of moschettoes*, to use the expression
of the monks, reposes only over the Oroonoko
and it’s tributary streams, and is dissipated in
proportion as you remove from the rivers; so
that we should form a very inaccurate idea of
Guyana and Brazil, were we to judge of that
great forest four hundred leagues wide, lying
between the sources of the Madeira and the
Lower Oroonoko, from the vallies of the rivers
by which it is crossed.

I learnt, that the little insects of the family
of the nemocerz migrate from time to time
like the alouat monkeys that live in society.
In certain spots, at the commencement of the
rainy season, different species appear, the sting
of which had not yet been felt. We were
informed at the Rio Magdalena, that at Simiti
no other culex than the jejen-+ was formerly
known ; and the night was passed tranquilly,
for the zejen is not a nocturnal insect. Since the


* Ta mube de Moseas.”’


+ Or cezen.


107


year 1801, the great blue winged gnat (culex ey-
anopterus) has appeared in-such numbers, that the
poor inhabitants of Simiti know not how to pro-
cure a tranquil sleep. In the marshy channels
(esteros) of the isle of Baru, near Carthagena,
is found a little white fly, called cafaf*. Itis
scarcely visible to the naked eye, and causes very
painful swellings. The toldos or cottons used for
moschetto curtains, must be wet, in order that
the cafafi may not penetrate through the inter-
stices left by the crossing threads. This insect,
happily rare elsewhere, goes up, in January, by
the channel or dique of Mahates, as far as Mo-
rales. When we went to this village in the
month of May, we found there simudice and zan-


cudoes, but no jejens.

Slight differences of food and climate appear
to change, in the same species of moschettoes
and gnats, the activity of the poison, which these
animals distil from their sharp sucker, toothed
at the lower end. The insects most trouble-


some at Oroonoko, or as the Creoles say, the
most ferocious (los mas feroces), are those of
the Great Cataracts of Esmeralda, and Manda-
vaca. Onthe Rio Magdalena the culex cyanop-
terus is dreaded, particularly at Mompox, Chil-
loa, and Tamalameca. At these places this in-
sect is larger and stronger, and it’s legs blacker.


* Perhaps of the section of culiciform tipule.


108


Itis difficult not to smile at hearing the mission-
aries dispute on the size and voracity of the
moschettoes at different parts of the same river,
In the centre of a country ignorant of all that is
passing in the rest of the world, this is the fa-
vourite subject of conversation. “How I pity
your situation !” said the missionary of the rau-
dales to the missionary of Cassiquiare, at our
departure; “ you are alone, like me, in this
country of tigers and monkeys ; with you fish
is still more rare, and the heat more violent ;
but. as for my flies, (mia moscas) I can boast,
that with one of mine I would beat three of
yours.”

This voracity of insects in certain Spots, the
rage with which they attack man*, the activity
of the venom varying in the same species, are
very remarkable facts; which find their analogy
however in the classes of large animals. The
crocodile of Angostura pursues men, while at
Nueva-Barcelona, in the Rio Neveri, you may
bathe tranquilly in the midst of these carnivorous
reptiles. The jaguars of Maturin, Cumanacoa,
and the isthmus of Panama, are cowardly in


* This voracity, this appetite for blood, seems surprising
in little insects, that live on vegetable juices, and in a country
almost entirely uninhabited. “What would these animals
eat, if we did not pass this way?” say the Creoles, in going
through countries where there are only crocodiles covered

“with a scaly skin, and hairy monkeys,


109


comparison of those of the Upper Oroonoko,
The Indians well know, that the monkeys of some
valleys can easily be tamed, while others of the
same species, caught elsewhere, will rather die
of hunger, than submit to slavery*.

The common people in America have framed
systems respecting the salubrity of climates and
pathological phenomena, no less than the learn-
ed of Europe; and their systems, as with us, are
diametrically opposite to each ‘other, according
to the provinces into which the new continent is
divided. At the Rio Magdalena the frequency
of moschettoes is regarded as troublesome, but
salutary. These animals, say the inhabitants,
give us slight bleedings, and preserve us, in a


country excessively hot, from the tabardillo,
scarlet fever, and other inflammatory diseases.
At the Oroonoko, the banks of which are very
dangerous to health, the sick accuse the mos-
chettoes of all the evils they experience. ‘‘ These


* I might have added the example of the scorpion of Cu-
mana, which it is very difficult to distinguish from that of the
island of Trinidad, Jamaica, Carthagena, and Guayaquil ;
yet the former is not more to be feared than the scorpio euro-
peus (of the south of France), while the latter produces con-
sequences far more alarming than the scorpio occitanus (of
Spain and Barbary). At Carthagena and Guayaquil, the
sting of the scorpion (alacran) instantly causes the loss of
speech. Sometimes a singular torpor of the tongue is ob-
served for fifteen or sixteen hours. The patient, when stung
in the legs, stammers as if he had been struck with apoplexy.


110


insects are born of corruption, and increase it ;
they vitiate and inflame the blood (vician y enci-
enden la sangre).” It would be useless here to
refute the popular belief, that considers the ac-
tion of the moschettoes as salutary by it’s local
bleedings. Even in Europe the inhabitants of
marshy countries are not ignorant, that the in-
sects irritate the dermoid system, and stimulate
its functions by the venom, which they deposit
in the wounds they make. Far from diminish-
ing the inflammatory state of the integuments,
the stings increase it.

The frequency of gnats and moschettoes cha-
racterizes unhealthy climates only so far as the
development and multiplication of these insects
depend on the same causes, that give rise to mi-
asmata. These noxious animals love a fertile
soil covered with plants, stagnant waters, and a
humid air never agitated by the wind; they pre-
fer to an open country those shades, that soften-
ed day, that tempered degree of light, caloric,
and humidity, which, while it favors the action
of chemical affinities, accelerates the putrefaction
of organized substances. Do the moschettoes
themselves increase the insalubrity of the at-
mosphere? When we reflect, that to the height
of three or four toises a cubic foot of air is often
peopled by a million of winged insects*, which


* It is sufficient to mention on this occasion, that the cubic
foot contains 2,985,984 cubic lines.


lil


contain a caustic and venomous liquid; when
we recollect, that. several species of the culexr}
are 18 line long from the head to the ex-
tremity of the corselet (without reckoning the
legs); lastly, when we consider, that in this
swarm of moschettoes and gnats, diffused in the
atmosphere like smoke, there is a great num-
ber of dead insects, raised by the force of the
ascending current, or by that of the lateral cur-
rents, which are caused by the unequal heating
of the soil ; we are led to inquire, whether the
presence of so many animal substances in the
air must not occasion particular miasmata. I
think, that these substances act on the atmos-
phere differently from sand and dust ; but it will
be prudent, to affirm nothing on this subject.
Chemistry has not yet unveiled any of the nume-
rous mysteries of the insalubrity of the air ; it has
only taught us, that we are ignorant of many
things, with which fifteen years ago we believed
we were acquainted, thanks to the ingenious
dreams of ancient eudiometry.

What is less uncertain, and in some sort con-
firmed by daily experience, is, that at the Oroo-
noko, Cassiquiare, Rio Caura, and wherever the
air is very unhealthy, the sting of the moschet-
toes augments the disposition of the organs to


+ For instance, the species which I have named culex cya-
nopterus.


112


receive the impression of miasmata. . When you
are exposed day and night during whole months
to the torment of insects, the continual irrita-
tion of the skin causes febrile commotions; and,
from the counteraction so anciently recognised
between the dermoid and the gastric systems,
injures the functions of the stomach. Digestion
first becomes difficult; the cutaneous inflam-
mation excites profuse sweats ; a thirst not to be
quenched succeeds; and, in persons of a feeble
constitution, increasing impatience is succeeded
by a depression of mind, during which all the
pathogenic causes act with violence. It is now
neither the dangers of a navigation in small
boats, the savage Indians, nor the serpents, cro-
codiles, or jaguars, that make the Spaniards
dread a voyage on the Oroonoko’; it is, as they
say with simplicity, “ el sudar y las moscas, the
sweatings and the flies.” Let us hope, that man,
in. changing the surface of the soil, will succeed
in altering by degrees the constitution of the
atmosphere. The insects will diminish; when
the old trees of the forest have disappeared ; and
when in those now desert: countries the rivers
are seen bordered with cottages, and the plains
covered with pastures and harvests.

Whoever has lived long in countries infested
by moschettoes will have felt like us, that there
exists no radical cure for the torment of these
insects. The Indians, covered with anotta, bolar


113


earth, or turtle oil, give themselves smart-slaps


every instant with the palm of their hands, on
the shoulders, the back, and the legs, nearly as
if their bodies were not painted. It is doubtful,
whether in genéral the painting relieve, certain-
ly it does not prevent the evil. Europeans,
recently arrived at the Oroonoko, the Rio Mag-
dalena, the river Guayaquil, or Rio Chagre (I
mention the four rivers where the insects are
most to be dreaded) cover at first the face and
hands ; they soon feel a heat difficult to endure,
are weary of being condemned to complete inac-
tivity, and finish with leaving the face and hands
uncovered. Persons, who would renounce all kind —
of occupation during the navigation of these
rivers, might bring some particular garment
from Europe in the form of a bag, under which
they could remain covered, opening it only every
half-hour,, This bag should be distended by
whalebone hoops, for a simple mask and gloves
would be scarcely supportable. Sleeping on the
ground, on skins or in hammocks, we could not
make use of the moschetto curtains (éoldos) at
the Oroonoko. The ¢o/do is useful only where
it forms a tent so well closed around the _ bed,
that there is not the smallest opening, by which
a gnat can pass. This is difficult to accomplish ;
and often when you succeed (for instance, in
going up the Rio Magdalana, where you travel
with some degree of convenience), you ‘are
VOL. V. I


114

forced, in order to avoid being suffocated by the
heat, to come out from beneath your ¢o/do, and
walk about in the open air. A feeble wind,
smoke, and powerful smells, scarcely afford any
relief in places, where the insects are very nu-
merous, and very voracious. It is erroneously
affirmed, that these little animals fly from the
peculiar smell emitted by the crocodile. We
were horribly stung at Bataillez, in the road
from Carthagena to Honda, while we were dis-
secting a crocodilo eleven feet long, the smell
of which infested all the surrounding atmo-
sphere. The Indians much commend the fumes
of burnt cowdung. When the wind is very
strong, and accompanied by rain, the moschet-
toes disappear for some time; they sting most
cruelly at the approach of a storm, particularly
when the electric explosions are not followed by
heavy showers.

Any thing waving about the head’ and the
hands contributes to chase away the insects.
“ The more you stir yourself, the less you will
be stung,” say the missionaries. The zancudo
makes a buzzing before it settles ; but, when it
has assumed confidence, when it has once begun
to fix its sucker, and swell with sucking, you
‘may touch it’s wings without it’s being frighten-
ed. It remains the whole time with it’s two
hind legs raised in the air; and, if it be left to
suck to satiety undisturbed, no swelling takes


4


115


place, and no pain is left behind. We often re-
peated this experiment on ourselves in the valley
of the Rio Magdalena, by the advice of the
natives. It may be asked, whether the insect
deposit the stimulating liquid only at the
moment of it’s flight, when it is driven away, or
repump the liquid, when it is left to suck as
much as it will. I incline to this latter opinion ;
for on presenting quietly the back of the hand to
the culex cyanopterus, 1 observed, that the pain,
very violent in the beginning, diminishes in pro-
portion as the insect continues to suck; and
ceases altogether, when it voluntarily flies away.
I also tried to wound my skin with a pin, and
rubbed the. pricks with bruised moschettoes
(mosquitos machucados) ; and no swelling ensued.
The irritating liquor of the dipterae nemocere,
in which the chemists have not yet recognized
any acid properties, is contained as in the ant,
and other hymenopterous insects, in particular .
glands ; and is probably too much diluted, and
consequently too much weakened, if the skin be
rubbed with the whole of the bruised insect.
I have united at the close of this chapter all
we learned during the course of our travels on
‘phenomena, which naturalists have singularly
neglected hitherto, though they exert a great
influence on the welfare of the inhabitants, the
salubrity of the climate, and the establishment
of new colonies on the rivers of equinoctia
12


116


America. JI would not attempt to justify myself
for having treated this object in details that
might appear too minute, if they were not con-
nected with general physiological views. Our
imagination is struck only by what is great ;
but it belongs to the philosophy of nature, to
pause at what is little. We have just seen, that
winged insects, collected in society, and conceal-
ing in their sucker a liquid that irritates the skin,
are capable of rendering vast countries almost
uninhabitable. Other insects equally small, the
termites (comejen) create obstacles to the pro-
gress of civilization in several hot and temperate
parts of the equinoctial zone, that are difficult to
be surmounted. They devour paper, pasteboard,
parchment, with frightful rapidity, destroying
records and libraries. Whole provinces of Spa-
nish America do not afford one written docu-
ment, that dates a hundred years back. What
improvement can the civilization of nations
acquire, if nothing link the present with the
past, if the depositaries of human knowledge
must be repeatedly renewed, if the records of
genius and reason cannot be transmitted to pos-
terity ?

In proportion as you ascend the tableland of
the Andes, these evils disappear. Man breathes
a fresh and pure air. The insects no more dis-
turb the labors of the day, or the slumbers of the -
night. Documents can be collected in archives


117


without our having to complain of the voracity


of the termites. The moschettoes are no longer
‘feared at two hundred toises of height ; and the
termites, still very frequent at three hundred
toises of elevation,* become very rare at Mexico,
Santa Fe de Bogota, and Quito. In these
greatg capitals, situate on the back of the Cor-
dilleras, we find libraries and archives, that
the enlightened zeal of the inhabitants aug-
ments from day to day. These circumstances,
which I here only indicate, are combined with
others, that insure a moral preponderance to
the Alpine region over the lower regions of the
torrid zone. If we admit, agreeably to the
ancient traditions collected in both the old and
new worlds, that at the time of the catas-
trophe, which preceded the renewal of our spe-
cies, man descended from the mountains into
the plains, we may admit with still greater
confidence, that these mountains, the cradle
of so’ many various nations, will for ever re-
main the centre of human civilization in the
torrid zone. From their fertile and temperate
table-lands, from these islets scattered in the
aérial ocean, knowledge, and the blessings of
social institutions will be spread over the


* There are some at Popayan, (height 910 t.; mean tem-
perature 18°7° cent.) but they are species that gnaw wood
only.


118


vast forests, that extend at the foot of the Andes,
and are inhabited in our days by tribes, whom
the very wealth of nature has retained in indo-
lence.


CHAPTER XXI.


Raudal of Garcita.—Maypures.— Cataracts of
Quittuna.— Mouth of the Vichada and Zama.
—Rock of Aricagua.—Siquita.


WE went to rejoin our boat in the Puerto de
Arriba, above the cataract of Atures, opposite
the mouth of the Rio Cataniapo. In the narrow
path, that leads to the embarcadero, we be-
held for the last time the peak of Uniana. It
appeared like a cloud rising above the horizon
of the plains. The Guahiboes wander at the
foot of the mountains, and extend their course
as far as the banks of the Vichada. We were
shown at a distance, on the right of the river,
the rocks that surround the cavern of Ataruipe ;
but we had not time to visit that cemetery of
the destroyed tribe of the Atures. We regretted
this so much the more, as father Zea was never |
weary of talking to us of the skeletons painted
with anotta, which this cavern contained ; of


120


the large vases of baked earth, in which the
bones of separate families appeared to be collect-
ed; and of many other curious objects, which
we proposed to examine at our return from the
Rio Negro. “ You will scarcely believe,” said
the missionary, “ that these skeletons, these
painted vases, things which we believed were
unknown to the rest of the world, have brought
trouble upon me and my neighbour, the mis-
sionary of Carichana. You have seen the misery
in which I live in the rawdales. Devoured by
moschettoes, and often in want of plantains
and cassava, I have found envious people even
in this country! A white man who inhabits the
pastures between the Meta and the Apure, de-
nounced me recently in the Audiencia of Ca-
raccas, as concealing a treasure I had discovered
"jointly with the missionary of Carichana amid
the tombs of the Indians. It is asserted, that
the jesuits of Santa Fe de Bogota were apprised
beforehand of the destruction of their company ;
and that, in order to save the riches they pos-
sessed in money and precious vases, they sent
them either by the Rio Meta, or the Vichada,
to the Oroonoko, with orders to have them hid-
den in the islets amid the raudales. These are

the treasures, which I am supposed to have ap-
. propriated unknown to my superiors.. The
Audiencia of Caraccas brought a complaint be-
fore the governor of Guayana, and: we were or-


121


dered to appear in person. We took a useless
journey of one hundred and fifty leagues ; and
although we declared, that we had found in the
caverns only human bones, and dried bats and
polecats, commissioners were gravely nominated
to come hither, and inspect on the spot what
remains of the treasures of the jesuits. We
shall wait a long time for these commissioners.
When they have gone up the Oroonoko‘as far
as San Borja, the fear of the moschettoes will
prevent them from going farther. The cloud of
flies (nube de moscas), which envelops us in the
raudals, is a good defence.”

The account given by the missionary was
entirely conformable to what we afterward learn-
ed at Angostura from the mouth of the go-
vernor. Fortuitous circumstances had given rise
to the strangest suspicions. In. ‘the caverns,
where the mummies and skeletons of the na-
tion of the Atures are found, even in the midst
of the cataracts, and in the most inaccessible
islets; the Indians long ago discovered boxes
bound with iron, containing various Kuropean
tools, remnants of clothes, rosaries, and glass
trinkets. These objects are thought to have
belonged to Portugueze traders of the Rio Ne-
gro and’ Grand Para, who, before the establish-
ment of the jesuits on the banks of the Oroono-
ko, went up to Atures by portages and the inte-
rior communications of rivers, inorder to traffic


122


with the natives. It is supposed, that these
Portugueze sunk beneath the epidemic maladies
so common in the raudales, and that their trunks
became the property of the Indians, the wealth-
iest of whom are accustomed to cause them-
selves to be buried with all they possessed most
valuable during their lives. From these very
uncertain traditions the tale of a hidden trea-
sure has been fabricated. As in the Andes of
Quito every ruined building, without excepting
the foundations of the pyramids erected by the
French academicians for the measurement of the
meridian, is regarded as Inga pilca*, that is, the
work of the Inca ; so at Oroonoko every hidden
treasure can belong only to an order, which, no
doubt, governed the missions better than the
capuchins and the monks of the Observance,
but of which the riches and success in the civiliza-
tion of the Indians have been much exaggerated.
When the jesuits of Santa Fe were arrested, those
heaps of piastres, those emeralds of Muzo, those
bars of gold of Choco, which the enemies of the
company supposed they possessed, were not found
in their dwellings. Still it was wrong to con-
clude from this, that the treasures did not the less
exist ; but that, entrusted to faithful Indians,
they had been hidden amid the cataracts of the
Oroonoko, to be recovered at some future day,


* Pilca (properly in Quichua pirca), wall of the Inca.


123


when the company should be reestablished. 1
can cite a respectable testimony, which proves
incontestibly, that the viceroy of New Grenada
had not warned the jesuits of Santa Fe of the
danger, with which they were menaced. Don
Vicente Orosco, officer of engineers in the ser-
vice of the King of Spain, related to me, that
being arrived at Angostura, jointly with Don
Manuel Centurion*, to arrest the Missionaries
of Carichana, he met an Indian boat, that was
going down the Rio Meta. The boat being
manned with Indians, who could speak none
of the tongues of the country, gave rise to suspi-
cions. After useless researches, a bottle was at
length discovered, containing a letter, in which
the superiors of the company, residing at Santa
Fe, informed the missionaries of the Oroonoko
of the persecutions, to which the jesuits were
exposed in New Grenada. This letter recom-
mended no measure of precaution ; it was short,
without ambiguity, and respectful toward the
government, whose orders were executed with
useless and unreasonable severity.

Eight Indians of Atures had conducted our
boat through the raudals; and seemed well
satisfied with the slight retribution we gave
them}. They gain little by this employment ;
and in order to give a just idea of the poverty


® The same who was governor of Guyana till 1777.
+ Scarcely a franc and a half for each man.


124


and want of commerce in the missions of the
Oroonoko, I shall observe, that during three
years, with the exeeption of the boats sent an-
nually to Angostura by the commander of San
Carles du Rio Negro, to fetch the pay of the
soldiers, the missionary had seen but five canoes
of the Upper Oroonoko pass the cataract, which
were bound for the harvest of turtles’ eggs, and
eight boats laden with merchandize.

April the 17th. After three hours’ march, we
reached our boat about eleven in the morning.
Father Zea caused to be embarked, with our
instruments, the small store of provision, that he
had been able to procure for the voyage, which
he was going to continue with us ; they consisted
of a few bunches of plantains, some cassava, and
fowls. At the embarcadero we immediately
passed the mouth of the Cataniapo*, a small
river, the banks of which, at three days’ journey
distance, are inhabited by the Macoes, or Pia-
roas, who belong to the great family of the Sali-
va nations. We have had occasion above, to
praise their mildness, and their disposition for
agricultural labours-. ,

Beside the Piaroas of Cataniapo, who pierce
their ears in order to place in them the teeth of
caimans and pecaris, three other tribes of Ma-


* Cateniapu, or Catiniapo.
+ See p. 15, of this volume.


5
coes are known; one, on the Ventuari, above
the Rio Mariata* ; the second, on the Padamo,
north of the mountains of Maraguaca; and the
third, near the Guahariboes, toward the sources
of the Oroonoko, above the Rio Gehette. . This
last. tribe bears the name of Maco-Macoes. I
collected the following words from a young
Maco of the banks of the Cataniapo, whom we
met near the embarcadero, and who wore in
his ears, instead of a tusk of the pecari, a large
wooden cylinder. I shall here transcribe the
words, because they are not found among the
materials, which I communicated to Mr. Vater,
the learned author of Mithridates.

Plantain, Paruru, (in Tamanac also, paruru).

Cassava, Elente, (in Maco, cahig).

Maize, Niarne.


The Sun, Jama, (in Saliva, mumeseque cocco).
The Moon, Jama (in Saliva, vewio).

Water, Ahia (in Saliva, cagua).

One, Nianti.

Two, Tajus.

Three, Percotahwa.

Four, Imontegroa.


* The Piaroas or Riraoas of the Ventuari were visited by
father Forneri, a jesuit.

+ This custom is observed among the Cabres, the Maypu-
res, and the Pevas of the Amazon. These last, described by
Mr. de la Condamine, stretch their ears by weights of a con-
siderable size.


_126


The young man could not reckon as far as five,
which certainly is no proof, that the word five
does not exist in the Maco tongue. I know not
whether this tongue bea dialect of the Saliva, as
is pretty generally asserted ; for the idioms, that
are derived from one another, sometimes fur-
nish words utterly different for the most com-
mon and most important things*. But in dis-
cussions on mother-tongues and derivative lan-
guages, it is not the sounds, the roots only, that
are decisive ; but rather the interior structure,
and the grammatical forms. In the American id-
ioms, which are notwithstanding rich, the Moon
is commonly enough called the Sun of night, or
even the Sun of sleep ; but the Moon and Sun
very rarely bear the same name, as among the
Macoes. I know only a few examples in the
most northerly part of America, among the
Woccons, the Chippeways, the Muskogulges,
and the Mohawks}. Our missionary asserted,
that jama, in Maco, indicated at the same time
the Supreme Being, and the great orbs of night
and day; while many other American tongues,
for instance the Tamanack, and the Caribbee,


"The great family of the Esthonian (or Tschoude) lan.
guages, and of the Samojede languages, affords numerous ex-
amples of these differences.


t Nipia-kisathwa in the Shawanese (the idiom of Canada),


from nippi, to sleep, and kisathwa, the Sun.


have distinct words to denote God, the Moon,
and the Sun. We shall soon see how much the
missionaries of the Oroonoko are afraid of em-
ploying, in their translations of the prayers of
the church, the native words, which denote the
Divinity, the Creator (Amanene), the Great Spi-
rit who animates all nature. They choose rather
to Indianize the Spanish word Dios, converting
it, according to the differences of pronunciation,
and the genius of the tongues, in to Diost, Tiosu,
or Piosu. |

Again embarked on the Oroonoko, we found
the river free from shoals; and after a few hours
passed the raudal of Garcita, the rapids of which
are easy to go up, when the waters are high. A
small chain of mountains is seen to the east,
that of Cumadaminari, which consists of gneiss,
and not of stratified granite. We were struck
with a succession of great holes, which are per-
ceived at more than one hundred and eighty feet
above the present level of the Oroonoko, and which
notwithstanding appear to be the effects of the
erosion of the waters. We shall see hereafter,
that this phenomenon occurs again nearly at
the same height, both in the rocks that border
the cataracts of Maypures, and fifty leagues to
the east, near the mouth of the Rio Jao. We
slept in the open air, on the left bank of the
river, below the island of Tomo, The night was
beautiful and serene, but the stratum of mos-


128


chettoes was so thick near the ground, that I
could not succeed in levelling the artificial hori-
zon; consequently, I lost the opportunity ~ of
observing the stars. Had I beew furnished with
an horizon of mercury on this voyage, it would
have been of great use to me.

April the 18th. We set out at three in the
morning, in order to. be more sure of arriving
before the close of day at the cataract known
by the name of the Raudal des Guahibos. We
stopped at the mouth of the Rio Tomo. The
Indians went on shore, to prepare their food,
and take some repose. When we reached the
foot of the raudai, it was near five in the after-
noon. It was extremely difficult to go up the
current and struggle against a mass of water,
which is precipitated from a bank of gneiss seve-
ral feet high. An Indian threw himself into the
water, to reach by swimming the rock, that
divides the cataract into two parts. A rope
was. fastened to the point of this rock, and when
the canoe was hauled near enough, our instru-
menis, our dry plants, and the little provision
we had collected at Atures, were landed in the
raudal itself. We remarked with surprise, that
the natural dam, over which the river is preci-
pitated, furnishes a dry space of considerable
- extent ; where we stopped to see the boat go
up. j

The rock of gneiss exhibits circular holes, the


129


largest of which are four feet deep, and eighteen
inches wide. ‘These funnels contain quartz,
pebbles, and appear to be formed by the friction
of masses rolled along, and subjected to the im-
pulse of the waters. Our situation, in the midst
of the cataract, was singular enough, though
without presenting the smallest danger. The
missionary, Who accompanied us, had his fever
fiton him. In order to quench the thirst by
which he was tormented, the idea. suggested
itself to us of preparing a refreshing beverage for
him in one of the excavations of the rock. We
had taken in at Atures a mapire* filled with
sugar, limes, and those grenadillas, or fruits of
the passion-flower, called parchas by the Spani-
ards: As we were absolutely destitute of large
vessels, ‘to contain and mix liquids, we poured,
by means of a tutuma (fruit of crescentia cuyete,
calabash), the water of the river into,one of the
holes of the rock. To this we added sugar, and
the juice of acid fruits. In a few minutes we
had an excellent beverage, which was almost a
refinement of luxury in that wild spot ; but the
sensation of our wants, rendered us.every day
more industrious.
Having: quenched our thirst, we felt, a great
desire to bathe. . On examining attentively, the
‘narrow and rocky dike, on which we were, sta-


* [Indian basket.


K


130


tioned, we perceived, that in it’s upper part it
formed small nooks, where the water was still
and limpid. We had the pleasure of bathing
tranquilly amid the noise of the cataract, and the
cries of our Indians. I enter into these minute
details, because, while they furnish a lively picture
of our manner of travelling, they remind those
who wish to undertake distant journeys, that
in every situation of life some enjoyments may
be obtained.

After an hour of expectation, we at length saw
the beat arrive above the raudal. We reem-
barked our instruments and provision, and has-
tened to quit the rock of Guahibos. There
began a navigation, which was not exempt from
danger. The river is eight hundred toises broad,
and must be crossed obliquely, above the cata-
ract, at the point where the waters, led by the
slope of their bed, rush with extreme violence
toward the dam, from which they are precipi-
tated. We were surprised by a storm, accom-
panied happily by no wind, but the rain fell in
torrents. After rowing for twenty minutes, the
pilot declared, that, far from gaining upon the
current, we again approached the raudal. These
moments of uncertainty appeared to us very
long; the Indians spoke only in whispers, as
they do always when they think their situation
perilous. They redoubled their efforts, and we


13k


arrived at nightfall, without any accident, in the
port of Maypures.

Storms within the tropics are as short as vio-
lent.. The lightning had fallen twice near our
boat, and had no doubtstruck the surface of the
water. I mention this phenomenon, because
it..is pretty generally believed in those coun-
tries, that the clouds, the surface of which is
charged with electricity, are at so great a
height, that the lightning reaches the ground
more rarely than in Europe. The night was
extremely dark, and a journey of two hours re-
mained, befere we could reach the village of
Maypures. . We were wet tothe skin. In pro-
portion as the rain ceased, the zancudoes reap-
peared, with that. voracity which the tipulary
insects always display immediately after a storm.
My. fellow-travellers were uncertain, whether
we ought to take our station in the port, or
proceed on our way on foot, in spite of the dark-
ness of the night.. Father Zea, who is the mis-
sionary of the two raudals, was determined to
reach his home. He had caused the construc-
tion of a large house of two stories, to be begun
by the Indians of the mission. “ You will there
find,” said be with simplicity, “ the same con-
veniences as in the open alr ; I have not a
bench, not a table, but you will not suffer so
much from the flies, which are less troublesome
in the mission, than on the banks of the river.”

kK 2


132


We followed the counsel of the missionary.
He eaused torches of copal to be lighted, of
which we have spoken above. They are tubes
made of bark of trees three inches in diameter,
and filled with this resin. We walked at first
on beds of rock, that were bare and slippery,
and then entered a thick grove of palm-trees.
We were twice obliged to pass a stream on
trunks of trees hewn down. The torches had
already gone out. Being formed on a strange
principle, the ligneous wick surrounding the
resin, these torches yield more smoke than light,
and are easily extinguished. Our fellow-traveller,
Don Nicolas Soto, lost his balance in crossing
the marsh on a round trunk. We were at first
very uneasy on his account, not knowing from
what height he had fallen ; but happily the gully
was not deep, and he received no hurt. The
Indian pilot, who expressed himself with some
facility in the Spanish, did not fail to talk to us
of snakes, water-serpents, and tigers, by which
we might be attacked. Such conversations are
matters of course, when you travel at night with
the natives. By intimidating the European tra-
veller, the Indians believe, that they shall render
themselves more necessary, and gain the confi-
dence of the stranger. The rudest inhabitant
of the missions understands the deceptions,
which every where arise from the relations
between men of unequal fortune and civiliza-


133


tion. Under the absolute and sometimes vexa~
tious government of the monks, he seeks to
meliorate his condition by those little artifices,
which are the weapons of childhood, and of all :
physical and intellectual weakness.

Having arrived during the night at San Jose
de Maypures, we were forcibly struck by the
aspect and solitude of the place; the Indians
were plunged in profound sleep, and nothing
was heard but the cries of nocturnal birds, and
the distant sound of the cataract. In the calm
of the night, amid the deep repose of nature,
the monotonous sound of a fall of water has
something in it sad and solemn. We remained
three days at Maypures, a small village founded
by Don Jose Solano at the time of the expedi-
tion of the boundaries, the situation of which is
more picturesque, it might be said still more
admirable, than that of Atures.

‘The raudal of Maypures, called by the In-
dians Quittuna, is formed, as all cataracts are,
by the resistance which the river finds in it’s
way across a ridge of rocks, or a chain of
mountains. The nature of this scene may be
studied by examining the plan, which I sketch-
ed on the spot, to show the Governor-General of
Caraccas the possibility of avoiding the raudal,
and of facilitating the navigation, by digging a
canal between two tributary streams of the
Oroonoko, in a valley that appears to have been


134


heretofore the bed of the river*. The lofty
mountains of Cunavami and Calitamini, between
the sources of the rivers Cataniapo and Ventu-
ari, stretch toward the west in a chain of gra-
nitic hills. From this chain flow three small
rivers, which embrace in some sort the cataract
of Maypures. There are, on the eastern bank,
the Sanariapo, and on the western, the Cameji
and the Toparo. Opposite the village of May-
pures, the mountains fall back in an arch, and,
- like a rocky coast, form a gulf open to the south-
east. ‘The irruption of the river is effected be-
tween the mouths of the Toparo and the Sana-
riapo, at the western extremity of this majestic
amphitheatre.

The Oroonoko now rolls it’s waters at the foot
of the eastern chain of the mountains. It has
abandoned the ground to the west, where, in a
deep valley, the ancient shore is easily recog-
nized. A savannah, scarcely raised thirty feet
above the mean level of the waters, extends from
this desiceated valley as far as the cataracts
There the smail church of Maypures has been
constructed with trunks of palm-trees, and is
surrounded by seven or eight huts.’ The dried
valley, which runs in a’straight line from south
to north, from Cameji to Toparo, is filled with


* See thé/plan of the ‘raudal, in ty itinerary chart of the
Oroonoko (Geographical Atlas, pl. 16).


135


granitic and solitary mounds, all resembling
those, which are found in the shape of islands
and shoals in the present bed of the river. I
was struck with this analogy of form, on com-
paring the rocks Keri and Oco, situate in the
deserted bed of the river, west of Maypures,
with the islets of Ouivitari and Caminitamini,
which rise like old castles amid the cataracts to
the east of the mission. The geological aspect
of these scenes, the insulary form of the ele-
vations farthest from the present shore of the
Orgonoko, the cavities which the waves appear
to have hollowed in the rock Oco, and which
are precisely on the same level (25 or 30
toises high) as the excavations perceived oppo-
site to them in the isle of Ouivitari ; these unit-
ed appearances prove, that the whole of this
bay, now dry, was formerly covered by the
waters. Those waters probably formed a lake,
the northern dike preventing their running out :
but, when.this dike. was broken down, the sa-
vannah, that surrounds the mission, appeared. at
first like a very low island, bounded by two arms
of thesame river. It may be supposed, that the
Oroonoko continued for some time to fill the ra-
vin, which we shall call the valley of Keri, because
it contains the reck of this name; and that the
waters retired wholly toward the eastern chain,
leaving dry the westerniarm of the river, only as
they gradually diminished. Coloured stripes,


136


which no doubt owe their black tint to the
oxyds of iron and manganese, seem to prove the
justness of this conjecture. They are found on
all the stones, far from the mission, and indicate
the ancient abode of the waters. In going up
the river, the merchandize is discharged at the
confluence of the Rio Toparo and the Oroonoko.
The boats are entrusted to the natives, who have
so perfect a knowledge of the raudal, that they
bave a particular. name for every step. They —
conduct the boats as far as the mouth of. the
Cameji, where the danger is considered as past.

The following is the state of the cataract of
Quittuna or Maypures, at. the two periods when
I examined it, in going down and up the river.
It is formed, like that of Mapara or Atures, by
an archipelago of islands, which to the length of
three thousand toises fill the bed of the river,
and by rocky dikes, which join the islands to-
gether. The most famous of these dikes, or
natural dams, are Purimarimi, Manimi, and the
Leap of the Sardina*. I name them in the
order, in which I saw them in succession from
south to north. The last. of these three stages
is near nine feet high, and forms by it’s breadth
a magnificent cascade. I must here repeat
however, that the turbulent shock of the preci-
pitated and broken waters does not so much
depend on the absolute: height of each istep,


* Salto de la Sardina. ’


137


each transverse dike, as upon the multitude of
counter-currents, the grouping of the islands
and shoals, that lie at the foot of the raudalitos
or partial cascades, and. the. contraction .of the
channels, which often do not leave the naviga-
tion a free passage of twenty or . thirty. feet.
The eastern part of the cataract, of Maypures
is much more dangerous than the western ;, and
therefore the Indian pilots prefer the left. bank,
of the river, to conduct the. boats down or. up.
Unfortunately, in the season of low waters, this
bank remains partly dry, and recourse; must. be
had to the process of portage* ; that.is, the boats
are obliged to be dragged ‘on .cylinders,,; or
round logs. We. have already observed above,
that at the season of high waters in the Oroonoko,,
but then only, the raudal of Maypures is easier
to pass than the raudal of Atures.

To take in at one view the grand character of
these stupendous scenes, the spectator must, be.
stationed on the little mountain of Manimi,.a
granitic ridge, that rises from the savannah,
north of the church of the mission, ‘and is itself
only a continuation of the steps, of which the
raudalito of Manimi is composed... We_ often,
visited this mountain, for we were never weary of,
the view.of this astonishing, spectacle, concealed
in one of the most remote corners of the Earth.


* Arastrar la Piragua,


138


Arrived at the summit of the rock, the eye sud-
denly takes in a sheet of foam, extending a whole
mile. ‘Enormous masses of stone, black as iron,
issue from it’s bosom. Some are paps grouped in
pairs, like basaltic hills ; others resemble towers,
strong castles, and ruined buildings. Their
gloomy tint contrasts with the silvery splendour of
the foam. Every rock, every islet is covered with
vigorous trees, collected in clusters. At the foot
of those paps, far as the eye can reach, a thick
vapour is suspended over the river, and through
this whitish fog the tops of the lofty palm-trees
shoot up. What name shall we give to these
majestic plants? I suppose them to be the vad-
giai; a new species of the genus oreodoxa, the
trunk ‘of which is more than eighty feet high.
The leafy plume of this palm-tree had a brilliant
lustre, and rises almost straight toward the sky.
At every hour of the day the sheet of foam. dis-
plays different aspects. Sometimes the hilly
islands and the palm-trees project their broad
shadows, sometimes the rays of the setting sun
are refracted in the humid ‘cloud, that shrouds
the cataract. Coloured arcs are formed, and
vanish and appear again alternately ; light sport
of the air, their images wave above the plain.
“Such is the character of the landscape’ dis-
covéred from the top of the mountain of Manimi,
which no traveller has yet deseribed. I do not
hesitate to repeat, that neither time, nor the view


139


of the Cordilleras, nor any abode in the tempe-
rate vallies of Mexico, have effaced from my mind
the powerful impression of the aspect of the ca-
taracts. When I read a description of ‘those
places in India, that are embellished by running
waters and a vigorous vegetation, my imagina-
tion retraces a sea of foam and palm-trees, the
tops of which rise above a stratum of vapour.
The majestic scenes of nature, like the sublime
works of poetry and the arts, leave remembrances
that are incessantly awakening, and through the
whole of life mingle with all our feelings of what
is grand and beautiful. a
The calm of the atmosphere, and the tumul-
tuous movement of the waters, produce a con-
trast peculiar to this zone. Here no breath of
wind ever agitates the foliage, no cloud veils the
splendour of the azure vault of Heaven ; a great
mass of light is diffused in the air, or the earth
strewn with plants with glossy leaves, and on
the bed of the river, which extends far as the
eye can reach. This appearance surprises the
traveller born in the north of Europe. The idea
of wild scenery, of a torrent rushing from rock
to rock, is linked in his imagination with that of
a climate, where the noise of the tempest is
mingled with the sound of the cataracts; and
where in a gloomy and misty day, sweeping
clouds seem to descend into the valley, and rest
upon the tops of the pines. The landscape of


140


the tropics in the low regions of the continents
has a peculiar physiognomy, something of great-
ness and repose, which it preserves even where
one of the elements is struggling with invincible
obstacles. Near the equator, hurricanes and
tempests belong to islands only, to deserts des-
titute of plants, and to those spots, where parts
of the atmosphere repose upon surfaces, from
which the radiation of heat is very different.

The mountain of Manimi forms the eastern
limit of a plain, which furnishes for the history
of vegetation, that is, for it’s progressive develop-
ment in bare and desert places, the same pheno-
mena, which, we have described above'in speak-
ing of the raudal of Atures. During, the rainy
season, the waters heap vegetable earth upon
the granitic rock, the bare, shelves of which ex-
tend horizontally. These islands of mould, de-
corated with the most -beautiful* and most


* The vegetation of Maypures is characterized by the
following plants, most of which have already been published
by Messrs. Bonpland and Kunth, in the Nova Gen. et Spec.
Plantarum. Sacaranda obtusifolia, ancistrocarpus maypuren-
sis, nona -xyluopioides, euphorbia tenella, peperomia maypu-
riensis, pothos, angustatus, smilax maypurensis, oplismenus poly-
stachius, poa maypuriensis, eryocaulon umbellatum, psidium phyl-
liroides (the fruit of which is employed by the Indians for
‘refreshing lemonades), oenothera maypuriensis, passiflora auri-
culata, solanum platyphyllum, aristolochia nummularifolia, me-
lastoma ‘insectifera.... The :pine-apples, which grow in the
savannahs near Atures, have an exquisite flavour.


141


odoriferous plants, resemble the blocks of granite
covered with flowers, which the inhabitants of
the Alps call gardens or courtils, and which
pierce the glaciers of Savoy. In the midst of
the cataracts, on shelves difficult of access, the
vanilla vegetates. Mr. Bonpland gathered there
very aromatic pods of an extraordinary length.
In a place where we had bathed the day before,
at the foot of the rock of Manimi, the Indians
killed a serpent seven feet and half long, which
we were able to examine at our ease. The Ma-
coes called it camudu*. It’s back displayed
upon a yellow ground transverse bands, partly
black, and partly inclining to a brown-green :
under the belly the bands were blue; and united
in rhomboid spots. It was a fine animal, not
venomous, and which, the ‘natives say, attains
more than fifteen feet in length: » I thought at
first, that the camudu was a boa ; but I saw with
surprise, that the scales beneath the tail were
divided into two rows. It was therefore a viper,
coluber ; perhaps a python of the New Continent:
I say perhaps, for great naturalists-++ appear to
admit, that all the pythons. belong to’ the an-
cient, and all the boas to the New World. As
the boa of Pliny ¢ was a serpent of Africa and


* Camudu, scutis ventralibus 168, subcaudalibus duplici
serie dispositis ‘75.

+ Cuvier, Regne Animal, vol. ii, p. 66, 69, 71.

t Was it the coluber elaphis, or the coluber Aisculapii, or


142


of the south of Europe, it were to be wished, that
Mr Daudin; had named. the boas of America,
pythons, and the pythons of India, boas. The
first notions of an enormous reptile, that seizes
man, and even the great. quadrupeds, breaks
their bones by. twisting itself round. their
bodies, and swallows goats and kids, came to
us from India and the coast of Guinea. How-
ever indifferent. names may be, we.can scarcely
admit the idea, that. the hemisphere, in which
Virgil sung the torments of Laocoon, a fable
which the Greeks of Asia. borrowed from much
more southern nations, does not possess the boa
constrictor... 1 will not augment. the confusion
of zoological nomenclature by proposing. new
changes, and shall confine myself to observing,
that at least the missionaries, and. the latinized
Indians of the missions*, if not the vulgar among
the planters:of. Guyana, clearly distinguish the
traga-venados (devins, real boas, with simple
anal plates,) from the culebras de agua}, water-
snakes, likethecamudu (pythons withdoubleanal
seales). The ¢raga-venados have no. transyerse
bands’ on the back, but ia chain of rhomboid or
hexagonal spots. Some species prefer the dryest


a python, like that killed by the army of Regulus ? (Cuvier,
Reg. anim., vol. ii, p. 65.)

* See vol. iii, p. 239.

+ The great python of Java is also called ular sawa, which


means, in the Malay tongue, river serpent.


=


_ culebras de agua.


143


places ; others love the water, as the gic or


Advancing toward the west, we find ‘the
paps, or islets, in the deserted branch of: the
Oroonoko, crowned with the same palm-trees,
that rise on the rocks of the cataracts. One of
these paps, called Keri, is celebrated in the
country on aecount of a white spot, that shines
from afar, in which the natives profess to see the
image of the full Moon. I could not climb this
steep rock, but I believe the white spot to be a
large nodule of quartz, formed by the union of
several of those veins, which are so common’ in
granites passing into gneiss. Opposite Keri;‘or
the rock of the Moon, on the’ twin mountain
Ouivitari, which is an islet in the midst of the
cataracts, the Indians point out with mysterious
fondness a similar white spot. It has the form
of a disk ; and they say, this is the image of the
Sun, camost. Perhaps the geographical situa-
tion of these two objects has contributed to their
having received these names. Keri is ‘on’ 'tike
side of the setting, camosi on that of the rising
Sun. Languages being the most ancient histo-
rical monuments of nations, some distinguished
learned men have been singularly struck by the
analogy the American word camosi bears to ca-
mosch, which seems to have signified originally
the Sun, in one of the Semitic dialects. This
analogy has given rise to hypotheses, which


144


appear to me at least very problematical*. The
god of the Moabites, Chamos, or Camosch+,,
who has so wearied the patience of the learned,
Apollo Chomens cited by Strabo and by Ammi-
anus Marcellinus, Beelphegor, Amun or. Ha-
mon, and. Adonis, all, without doubt, represent
the Sun, in. the. winter solstice ;,. but. what. can
we conclude: from a solitary and fortuitous. re-
semblance. of sounds, in languages that have
nothing besides in, common ? ;

The Maypure tongue is still spoken at Atures,
although the mission is inhabited, only by Gua-
hivoes and, Macoes. At Maypures the Guareken
and Pareni tongues only, are now. spoken. From
the Rio Anaveni, which falls into the Oroonoko
north of Atures, as far as beyond Jao, and to
the mouth of the.Guaviare (between the fourth
and sixth degrees of latitude), we every, where
find rivers, the termination of which, veni*,. re-
calls. to mind, the. extent to which the Maypure
tongue heretofore prevailed. Veni, or weni, sig-
nifies. water, or a river. The words camosi and
keri, which we have just cited, are of the idiom


_.* There appeared in 1806 at Leipsick a book with this
title. Untersuchungen ueber die von Humboldt am Orinoco ent-


deckten Spuren der Phenicishen Sprache.

+ Voss. Theol. Gent. Lib. 2, cap.7, p. 174. Creuzer, Sym-
bolik der alten Velker, vol. 3, p. 248. De Wette, Hebr. arch.
1814, p. 281.

{ Anaveni, Mataveni, Mariveni, &c.


145


of the Pareni Indians *, whom I think I have
heard from the natives, lived originally on the
banks of the Matavenif. The Abbé Gili con-
siders the Pareni as a simple dialect of the May-
pure. This question cannot be solved by a com-
parison of the roots merely. Being totally igno-
rant of the grammatical structure of the Pareni,
I can raise but feeble doubts against the opinion
of the Italian missionary. The Pareni is perhaps
a mixture of two tongues, that belong to differ-
ent familes ; like the Maquiritari, which is com-
posed of the Maypure and the Caribbee; or,
to cite an example. better known, the modern
Persian, which is allied at the same time to the
Sanscrit and to the Semitic tongues. The fol-


lowing are Pareni words, which I carefully com-
pared with Maypure words.


* Or Parenas, who must not be confounded either with the
- Paravenes of the Rio Caura (Caulin, p. 68), or with the Pare-
cas, whose language belongs to the great family of the Ta-
manack tongues. A young Indian of Maypures, who called
himself a Paragini, answered my questions, almost in the
same words, that Mr. Bonpland heard from a Pareni, and
which I have given in the text. I have thought it necessary
to indicate the differences in the table, p. 147.

+ To the south of the Rio Zama. We slept in the open
air near the mouth of the Mataveni on the 28th of 1 in
our return from the Rio Negro.

t The words of the Maypure language have been taken
per the works of Gili and Hervas. I collected the words
placed between two parentheses from a young Maco Indian,
who understood the Maypure language.

VOL. V. L


PARENI TONGUE.


The Sun
The Moon


Lightning
The head
The hair
The eyes
The nose
The mouth
The teeth
The tongue
The ear
The cheek
The neck


Notate
Notasine
'Nocaco


Nocano
Nucavi
The breast ~...... ..
The back
The thigh
The nipples
The foot...


MAYPURE TONGUE.


Kie (Kiepurig)
Kejapi (Cagijapiy


Nupuriki
Nukirri
Nunumacu
Nati
Nuare
Nuakini


Nukii


* T am ignorant of what ima signifies in this compound
word. no means in Maypure the sky and thunder. Ina
signifies mother.


+ The syllables no and nu, joined to the words that desig-


nate parts of the body, might have been suppressed ; they


answer to the possessive pronoun my.


147


_.PARENI TONGUE. MAYPURE TONGUE.


The toes Nociziriani

The calf of the leg Nocavua

A crocodile Cazuiti Amana

|Cimasi Timaki
Jomuki

--|Arata


LOL TGR TOM eEpce
Tobacco
Mimosa inga (Caraba)
Cecropia peltata ...|(Jocovi)
Myrtus pimenta .. |(Pumake)
(Cajuli)
x COM are an .|Puziana (Pagiana) ...
Sinapa (Achinafe) {Avanume(Avanome)
Meteuba (Meteufafa)|Apekiva (Pejiveji)
Puriana vacavi (Jalivac)
Puriana vacavi uscha-
mite. 1/3: sara: | (Javiji)


Puriassima vacavi


* We may be surprised to find the word teot, denote the


eminently nutritive substance, that supplies the place of
corn (the gift of a beneficent divinity), and on which the sub-
sistence of man within the tropics depends. I shall mention
on this occasion, that the word Jeo, or Teot, which in Azteck
signifies God (Teotl, properly Teo, for ¢/ is only a termina-
tion), is found in the language of the Betoi of the Rio Meta.
The name of the Moon, in this langnage so remarkable for the


+ Has this word been introduced from a communication with
Europeans ? It is almost identical with the Mexican (Azteck)
word cacava, See my Essai Polit., vol. ii, p. 435.


Ney


148


This comparison seems to prove, that the ana-
logies observed in the roots of the Pareni and
the Maypure ‘are not to be neglected ; they are
however scarcely more frequent, than those that
have been observed between the Maypure of the
Upper Oroonoko, and the tongue of the Moxoes,
which is spoken on the banks of the Marmora*,
from 15° to 20° of South latitude. The Parenis
have in their pronunciation the English ¢h, or
tsa of the Arabians, as I clearly heard in the
word Amethami, devil, evil spirit. I shall not
notice again the origin of the word camosi.
Solitary resemblances of sounds are as little
proof of communication between nations, as the
dissimilitude of a few roots furnishes against
the incontestible affiliation of the German from
the Persian and the Greek. It is remarkable
however, that the names of the Sun and Moon
are sometimes found to be identical in languages,
the grammatical construction of which is entire-
ly different ; I shall cite as examples the Gua-


complications of it’s grammatical structure, is Tco-ro. The
name of the Sun is Teo-umasoi. The particle ro designates a


woman, wmasoia man. Among the Betoi, the Maypures,


and so many other nations of both continents, the Moon is
believed to be the wife of the Sun. But what is this root
Teo? It appears to me very doubtful, that Teo-ro should
“signify God-woman, for Memelu is the name of the All-power-
ful Being in Betoi.

* Vater, in the Mithridates, vol. iii, bth. ii, p, 618.


149


rany and the Omagua*, two languages of na

tions formerly very powerful. It may be con-'
ceived, that, with the worship of the stars and
of the powers of nature, the words which have
a relation to these objects might pass from one
idiom to another. I showed the constellation
of the Southern Cross to a Pareni Indian, who
covered the lantern while I was taking the cir-
cummeridian heights of the stars; and he
called it Bahumehi, a name which the caribe
fish, ov serra-salme, equally bears in Pareni.
He was ignorant of the name of the belt of Ori-
on; but a Poignavit Indian, who knew the
constellations better, assured me, that in his
tongue the belt of Orion bore the name of Fue-
bot ; he called the Moon Zenquerot. These two
words have very singular features for words of
American origin. As the names of the constella-
tions may have been transmitted to immense dis-
tances from one nation to another, these Poignavi


* Sun and Moon, in Guarany, Quarast and Jasi; in
Omagua, Huarassi and Jase. I shall give farther on these
same words in the principal languages of the two worlds,
(See note A, at the end of the seventh book.)

ft At the Oroonoko the Puznaves, or Poignaves, are distin-
guished from the Guaypunaves (Uipunavi). The latter, on
account of their language, are considered as belonging to the
Maypure and Cabres nations; yet water is called in Poig-
nave, as well as in Maypure, oueni.


150


words have fixed the attention of the learned,
who have endeavoured to recognize the Pheeni-
cian and Moabite tongues in the word camosi of
the Pareni. Fuebot and Zenquerot seem to
remind us of the Phoenician words mot (lutum),
ardod (robur), ephot, &c. But what can we con-
clude from simple terminations, which are most
frequently foreign to the roots? In Hebrew,
the feminine plurals terminate also in oth. I
noted entire phrases in Poignavi ; but the young
man, whom 1. interrogated, spoke so. quick,
that I could not seize the division of the words,
and should have written them as Aristophanes
writes Persian*.

In reflecting on the names of the missions
founded by Spanish monks, we'may be led into
error with respect to the elements of the popu-
lation employed at the period of their founda-
tion. ‘The Jesuits led the Maypure Indians to
Encaramada and Atures, when they construct-
ed these two villages ; but the mission of May-
pures itself was not founded by an assemblage
of the Indians of the same name. This mission
consisted originally of Guipunabis, who came


* See the speech of Artabanes, in Acharn. Act 1, scene 3.
I cite this passage, because, like the Poenulus of Plautus, it
reminds us in what manner travellers have at all times disfi-


gured the languages of the nations they have visited, and the


sounds of which they fancied they could express by the
letters of their own alphabet.


151


;
from the banks of the Inirida, and appear from
the analogy of their languages, {o belong to the
same branch of the nations of tlhe Upper Oroo-
noko as the Maypures, the Gatis the Avani,
and perhaps the Pareni. The mis§ion, near the
raudal of Maypures, was very considerable in
the time of the Jesuits ; as it reckoned six hun-
dred inhabitants, among whom were several
families of whites. Under the government of
the Fathers of the Observance, the population
was reduced to less than sixty. It must be
observed, that in this part of South America
cultivation has been diminishing for half a cen-
tury, while beyond the forests, in the provinces
near the sea, we find villages that contain from
two to three thousand Indians. The inhabi-
tants of Maypures are a mild temperate people,
and distinguished by great cleanliness. The
savages of the Oroonoko for the most part
have not that inordinate fondness for strong
liquors, which prevails in North America. It
is true, that the Otomacks, the Jaruroes, the
Achaguas, and the Caribs, are often intoxicated
by the immoderate use of chiza, and many
other fermented liquors, which they know how
to prepare with cassava, maize, and the saccha-
rine fruits of the palm-trees ; but travellers have
as usual generalized what belongs only to the
manners of some tribes. We were frequently
unable to prevail upon the Guahiboes or the


°


Maco-Piaroas, to take a drop of brandy, while
they were labouring for us, and seemed ex-
hausted by fatigue. It will require a longer
residence of Europeans in those countries, to
spread there ‘the vices, that are already com-
mon among the Indians on the coast. In the
huts of the natives of Maypures we found an
appearance of order and. neatness, rarely met
with in the houses of the missionaries.

These natives cultivate plantains, and cassava,
but no maize. Seventy or eighty pounds weight
of cassava in thin cakes, which are the bread of
the country, cost six reals of plate, or nearly
four franks. Like the greater part of the In-
dians of the Oroonoko, the inhabitants. of May-
pures have beverages which may. be called
nourishing ; one of these, much. celebrated in
that country, is furnished by a palm-tree, that
gtows wild in the vicinity of the mission on the
banks of the Auvana. This tree is the Seje®
I estimated the number of flowers on one race-
mus at forty-four thousand; and that of the
fruit, of which the greater part fall without ripen-
ing, at eight thousand. The fruit is a smali
fleshy drupe. It is immersed for a few minutes
in boiling water, in order that the kernel may be
separated from the parenchymatous: part of the
sarcocarp, which has a sweet taste, and is


* Sce Nova Genera et Species Plantarum, tom. 1, p. ob.


153


pounded and brayed in a large vessel filled with
water. The infusion, which is prepared cold,
yields a yellowish liquor, which tastes like milk
of almonds. Sometimes papelon or unrefined
sugar is added. The missionary told us, that
the natives become visibly fatter during the
two or three months, in which they drink this
seye liquor, into which they dip their cakes of
cassava. The piaches, or Indian jugglers, go
into the forests, and sound the botwto (the sacred
trumpet) under the seje palm-trees, “ to force
the tree,” they say, “ to yield an ample produce
the following year.” The people pay for this
operation, as the Monguls, the Moors, and
the nations still nearer to'us, pay the chamans,
the marabous, and other classes of priests, to
drive away by mystic words, or by prayers, the
white ants and the locusts, or to procure a ces~
sation of continued rain, and invert the order of
the seasons.

Tengo en mi pueblo la fabrica de loxa*, said
father Zea, when conducting us to an Indian
family, who were occupied in baking by a fire of
brushwood, in the open air, large earthen vessels,
two feet and a half high. This branch of ma-
nufacture is peculiar to the various. tribes of the
great family of the Maypures, ‘and it appears
they have followed it from time immemorial.


* « T have a manufacture of pottery in my village”.


154


In every part of the forests, far from any human
habitation, on digging the earth fragments of
pottery and delft are found. The taste for this
kind of fabrication seems to have been common
heretofore to the natives of both Americas. To
the north of Mexico, on the banks of the Rio
Gila, among the ruins of an Azteck city* ; in the
United States, near the twmuli of the Miamis+;
in Florida, and in every place where any traces
of ancient civilization are found ; the soil covers
fragments of painted pottery; and the extreme
resemblance of the ornaments they display is
striking. Savage nations, and those civilized
peoplet, who are condemned by their political
and religious institutions always to imitate
themselves, strive as if by instinct, to perpetuate
the same forms, to preserve a peculiar type or
style, and to follow the methods and processes
which were employed by their ancestors. In
North America, fragments of delft have been
discovered in places where lines of fortification


* Casas grandes. (Political Essay on New Spain, vol. i,
p. 298.)

+ Drake, in his interesting work, “ View of Cincinnati,”
1815, p. 200, 209, and 218.

+ The Hindoos, the Tibetians, the Chinese, the ancient
Egyptians, the, Aztecks, the Peruvians, with whom the
tendency toward civilization in a body prevented the free
development of the faculties of individuals, (See my Re-
searches on the American Monuments, Introduction, vol.
xiii, p. 11 of the present work.)


55


are found, and the walls of towns constructed
by an unknown nation, now entirely extinct.
The paintings on these fragments have a great
similitude to those, which are executed in our
days on earthen ware by the natives of Louisi-
ana and Florida. Thus too the Indians of May-
pures often painted before our eyes the same
ornaments, as we had observed in the cavern
of Ataruipe,.on the vases containing human
bones. They are real grecques, meandrites, and
figures of crocodiles, of monkeys, and of a large
quadruped, which J could not recognize, though
it has always the same squat form. I might
remind, the reader on this occasion of a head
with the trunk of an elephant, whichI discovered
in an-ancient Mexican painting on the Museum
at Veletri* ; and might: hazard. the hypothesis,
that the great quadruped painted on the vases
of Maypures belongs to another country, and
that the. type had. been brought. thither in the
great migration of the American nations from
the north-west to the south and. south-east ;
but where can we. stop amid, such) vague and
uncertain conjectures? I am rather inclined to
believe, that the Indians of the Oroonoko meant
to figure a tapir-}, and that the deformed, repre-


* See vol. xii, p. 211.


+ Danta in the Spanish Colonies, where the name of tapir
is totally unknown ; in the Tamanac, uarzar; in, Maypure ,


156


sentation of a native animal is become by de-
grees one of the types that has been preserved.
Imperfection and chance often produce forms,
the origin of which we gravely discuss, because
we believe they have arisen from a combination
of ideas, and a studied imitation.

What the Maypures execute with the greatest
skill are grecques, in straight lines variously
combined, similar to those that we find on the
vases of Magna Grecia, on the Mexican edifices
at Mitla, and in the works of so many nations,
who, without communication with each other,
find alike a sensible pleasure in the symmetric
repetition of the same forms. Arabesques,
meanders, and grecques, please our eyes, be-
cause the elements, of which their series is
composed, follow in rhythmic order. The eye
finds in this order, in the periodical return of the
same forms, what the ear distinguishes in the
cadenced succession of sounds and concords.
Can we then admit a doubt, that the feeling of
rhythm manifests itself in man at the first dawn
of civilization, and in the rudest essays of poe-
try and song?

The natives of Maypures, among whom the
women principally fabricate pottery, purify the


kiema; in Mbaja (the language of Choco), apolicunagigua-
ga; in Moxo (the tongue spoken on the banks of the Ma-


more), samo ; in Chiquito, oquitopaquis ; in Guarany, mborebi.


157


clay by repeated washings, form it into cylinders,
and mould the largest vases with their hands.
The American Indian is unacquainted with the
potter’s wheel, which was familiar to the na-
tions of the east in the remotest antiquity. We
cannot be surprised, that the missionaries have
not introduced this simple and useful machine
among the natives of the Oroonoko, when we
recollect, that three centuries have not sufficed to
make it known among the Indians of the Penin-
sula of Araya opposite the port of Cumana*.
The colours used by the Maypures are the oxyds
of iron and manganese, and particularly the
yellow and red ochres, that are found in the
hollows of sandstone. Sometimes the feculz
of the bignonia chica-} are employed, after the
pottery has been exposed to a feeble fire. This
painting is covered with a varnish of algarobo,
which is the transparent resin of the hymenza
courbaril. The large vessels in which the chiza
is preserved are called ciamacu ; the smallest
bear the name of muera, from which word the
Spaniards of the coast have framed murcura.
Not only the Maypures, but also the Guaypuna-
bis, the Caribbees, the Otomacks, and even the
Guamoes, are known at the Oroonoko for the
fabrication of painted pottery, which extended


* See vol. ii, p. 286,
t See vol iv, p. 613.


158


formerly toward the banks of the Amazou.
Orellana was struck with the painted orna-
ments on the ware of the Omaguas, who in
his time were a numerous and commercial


nation.

Before we quit these traces of infant industry
among nations, which we indistinctly compre-
hend under the denomination of savages, I shall
add one remark, which may throw some light
on the history of American civilization. In the
United States, west of the Alleghany mountains,
particularly between the Ohio and the great
lakes of Canada, on digging the earth fragments
of painted pottery, mingled with brass tools,
are pretty constantly found. This mixture may
well surprise us in a country, where the natives
at the first arrival of the Europeans were igno-
rant of the use of metals. In the forests of
South America, which extend from the equator
as far as the parallel of eight degrees of north
latitude, from the foot of the Andes to the At-
lantic, this painted pottery is discovered in the
most desert places, but it is found accompanied
by hatchets 6f jade and other hard stones only,
skilfully perforated. No metallic tools or orna-
ments have ever been discovered in digging the
earth, though in the mountains on the shore*,
and at the back of the Cordilleras, the art of


* See vol. ili, p. 525.


159


melting gold and copper, and of mixing the
latter metal with tin to make cutting instru-
ments*, was known. What is the cause of this
contrast between the temperate and the torrid
zone? The incas of Peru had pushed their
conquests and their religious wars as far as the
banks of the Napo and the Amazon, where
their language extended over a small space of
land ; but the civilization of the Peruvians, the
inhabitants of Quito, and the Muyscas of New
Grenada, never appears to have had any sensible
influence on the moral state of the nations of
Guyana. It must be observed farther, that in
North America, between the Ohio, Miami, and
the Lakes, an unknown people, whom system-
atic authors would make the descendants of the
Toltecks and Aztecks, constructed walls of earth,
and sometimes of stone without, mortar}, from
ten to fifteen feet high, and seven or eight thou-
sand feet long. These problematical ‘circum-
vallations sometimes enclosed a hundred and
fifty acres of ground. In the plains of the Oroo-
noko, as in those of Marietta, the Miami, and
the Ohio, the centre of an ancient civilization is
found in the west on the back of the moun-


* New Spain, vol. ii, p. 485,

+ Of siliceous limestone, at Pique, on the Great Miami ;
of sandstone at Creek Point, ten leagues from Chillakothe,
where the wall is fifteen hundred toises long. Drake,
p. 212.


160


tains ; but the Oroonoko, and the countries
lying between this great river and the Amazon,
_ appear never to have been inhabited by nations,
whose constructions have resisted the injuries of
time. Though symbolical figures are found en-
graven on the hardest rocks, yet to the south of
eight degrees of latitude, no twmulus, no circum-
vallation, no dyke of earth, similar to those that
exist farther north in the plains of Varinas and
Canagua*, have been found. Such is the con-
trast that may be observed between the eastern
parts of both Americas, those which extend from
the table-land of Cundinamarca} and the moun-
tains of Cayenne toward the Atlantic, and those
which stretch from the Andes of New Spain
toward the Alleghany mountains. Nations
advanced in civilization, of whom we discover
traces on the banks of Lake Teguyo and in the
Casas grandes of the Rio Gila, might have sent
some tribes eastward into the open countries of


the Missouri and the Ohio, where the climate |


differs little from that of New Mexico; but in
South America, where the great flux of nations
has continued from north to south, those who
had. long enjoyed the mild temperature of the


* See vol. iv, p. 314,


+ This is the ancient name of the empire of the Zaques


founded by Bochica, or Idacanzas, the high priest of Iraca,
in New Grenada.


161


back of the Equinoctial Cordilleras no doubt
dreaded a descent into burning plains bristled
with forests, and inundated by the periodical
swellings of rivers. It is easy to conceive how
much the force of vegetation, and the nature of
the soil and climate, within the torrid zone,
embarrassed the natives in regard to migration
in numerous bodies, prevented settlements  re-
quiring an extensive space, and perpetuated the
misery and barbarism of solitary hordes.

The feeble civilization introduced in our days
by the Spanish monks pursues a retrograde
course. Father Gili relates, that, at the time of
the expedition to the boundaries, agriculture be-
gan to make some progress on the banks of the
Oroonoko; and that cattle, especially goats,
had multiplied considerably at Maypures. We
found none, either in the mission, or in any
other village of the Oroonoko; the goats had -
been devoured by the tigers. The black ana
white breed of pigs only, the latter of which are
called French pigs, puercos franceses, because
they are believed to have come from the Caribbee
islands, have resisted the pursuit of wild beasts
We saw with much pleasure gwacamayas, or
tame macaws, round the huts of the Indians,
and flying to the fields like our pigeons. This
bird is the largest and most majestic species of
parrot with naked cheeks, that we found in our
travels. It is called in Maratibitan, cahuei.

VOL. V. M


162


Including the tail, it is two feet three inches
_ long. We had observed it also on the banks of
the Atabapo, the Temi, and the Rio Negro.
The flesh of the cahuei, which is frequently
eaten, is black, and somewhat tough. These
macaws, the plumage of which glows with the
most vivid tints of purple, blue, and yellow, are
a great ornament to the Indian farm-yards ;
they do not yield in beauty to the peacock, the
golden pheasant, the pauxis*, or the alectors. The
practice of rearing parrots, birds of a family se
different from the gallinaceous tribes, had al-
ready struck Columbus}. When he discovered
America, he saw macaws, or large parrots, which
served as food to the natives of the Caribbee
islands instead of fowls.

A majestic tree more than sixty feet high,
which the planters call frutia de burro, grows
round the little village of Maypures. It is a


* The word pauxi does not denote a species in the Spa-
nish colonies, but the two subgenera crax and ourax of Mr.
Cuvier. (A distinction is made between pauai de piedra,
crax pauxi, and paumi de copete, crax alector). The two other
subgenera of the alector are called at the Oroonoko pavas de
monte (penelope) and guacharacas (ortalida).

t+ Gryn., Orb. Nov. p. 68. The Spaniards found also in
Coriana, (on the coast of Coro), in the farm yards of the
Indians, anseres anates (ib. p. 88). Were these the Mus-
covy ducks (anas moschata,) known in the farm-yards of
France by the equally improper names of Barbary and Turk-


163


new species of the unona*, which has the state.’
liness of the uvaria zeylanica of Aublet-:, and
which I formerly called uvaria fébrifwga. ’ It’s
branches are straight, and rise in’ a pyramid,
nearly like the poplar of the Mississipi, falsely
called the Lombardy poplar. "The tree is ééle:
brated on account of the use madé'of it’s ato-
matic fruit, the infusion of which is a powerful
febrifuge. The poor missionaries of the Oroo-
noko, who are afflicted with tertian‘ fevers dur-
ing a great, part of the year, seldom travel with-


ish ducks, and which we found wild on the banks of the
Magdalena ?


* Mr. Dunal, to whom we communicated our plants of
the annonac eous family, has described it by the name of unona
xylopioides. (Monogr. Anon., p. 117, tab. 21; Decandolle,
Regn. veget., vol. i, p. 498.) See also vol. iii, of the present
work, p. 31, note.

+ This species of the Flor. Guy. vol. 2, tab. 243, often er-
roneously quoted as the waria zeylanica, is the unona aroma-
tica, Dun. (unona concolor, Willd.), the aromatic fruit of
which is known by the name of malaguette, or Ethiopiati
pepper (Dunal, Anon., p. 46 and 112:) We must'‘not:con-
found’ the uvaria’ zeylatiica‘ of Aublét, which is said to be a .
native of the coast of Afiticaj and»which now grows wild in
French. Guyana, the unona, narum (uvaria zeylanica, La-
mark), and the uvaria zeylanica of Linneus. . The last two


species are only shrubs. I am surprised that Gili speaks
of the arbol del burro of the Encaramada (the arara of the
Tamanacks) only as of timber for building. Saggio, vol, 1,
p. 163.


mM 2


164


out a little bag filled with fruttas de burro.
I have already observed elsewhere, that between
the tropics the use of aromatics, for instance
very strong coffee, the croton cascarilla, or the
pericarps of our unona xylopioides, is generally
preferred to that of the astringent bark of cin-
chona, or of bonplandia trifoliata, which is the
Angostura bark. The people of America have
the most inveterate prejudices against the em-
ployment of the different kinds of cinchona;
and in the very countries where this valuable
remedy grows, they try fo cut off the fever by
infusions of scoparia dulcis, and hot lemonades
prepared with sugar and the small wild lime,
the rind of which is equally oily and aromatic.
The weather was very little favourable for
astronomical observations. I obtained however,
on the 20th of April, a good series of correspond-
ing altitudes of the sun, according to which the
chronometer gave 70° 37’ 33” for the longitude
of the mission of Maypures; the latitude was
found by a star observed toward the north to be
5° 13’ 57” ; and by a star observed toward the


south,5° 13/7”. The error of the mostrecent maps .
’ Pp


is half a degree of longitude, and half a degree
of latitude*. It would be difficult to relate the
trouble and torments, which these nocturnal
observations cost us. No where is a denser


* See my Astronomical Observations, vol. 1, p. 227 and
258. i


165


cloud of moschettoes to be found. It formed as
it were a particular stratum some feet above the
ground, and thickened as we brought lights to
illumine the artificial horizon. The inhabitants
of Maypures for the most part quit the village,
to sleep in the islets amid the cataracts, where
the number of insects is less; others make a fire
of brush-wood in their huts, and suspend their
hammocks in the middle of the smoke. The
centigrade thermometer kept up in the night to
27° or 29°; and in the day to 30°. I found on
19th of April, at two o’clock in the afternoon, the
a granitic sand, loose and coarse grained,
60°3 ; another granitic sand of the same white
colour, but fine grained and more dense,
52°5°; and the temperature of a bare rock of
granite 476°. The thermometer, at the same
time, 8 feet above the ground in the shade was
29°6°; in the sun, 36°2°.. An hour after sun-
set, the coarse grained sand had the tempera-
ture of 32°; and the granite rock, 38°8°; the
air was then at 28°5°; the water of the Oroo-
noko in the raudal, near the surface, 27°6°;
and that of a fine spring issuing from granite,
behind the house of the missionary, 27°8°+. This
is perhaps somewhat less than the mean annual


* 48,.2°. R. Grasses of the freshest green vegetated in this
sand,
P'99-8° R.


166


heat of the atmosphere at Maypures. I found
the dip of the magnetic needle at Maypures
31°12 (centesimal division), consequently 1:15°
less than, the dip at the village of Atures, which
is 25’ of latitude farther north. I do not find in
my registers the original observation of the
intensity of the magnetic force ; it is, merely
said, that I had determined it in the open. air,
near the church, and that it differed little from
that of Atures.

April the 21st. Having spent two days and
half in the little village of Maypures, on the
banks of the Great Upper Cataract, we em-
barked at two in the afternoon in the same
canoe, which the missionary of Carichana had
parted with tous ; and which was much damaged
by. the shoals it had struck against, and the care-
lessness of the Indians. Still greater dangers
awaited it. It was to be dragged over land,
across.an isthmus of thirty-six thousand feet;
from the Rio Tuamini to the Rio Negro, to go
up by, the Cassiquiare to the Oroonoko, and to
repass the two raudales. We examined the
bottom and sides of the canoe, and judged it to
be capable of sustaining this long journey,

When the traveller has passed the Great Ca-
taracts, he feels as if he were in a new world;
and had overstepped the barriers, which nature
seems to have raised between the civilized coun-
tries of the coast, and the savage and unknown


167


interior. Toward the east, in the bluish dis-
tance, appeared for the last time the high chain
of the Cunavami mountains. It’s long, hori-
zontal ridge reminded us of the Mesa of Bergan-
tin, near Cumana; but it terminates by a trun-
cated summit. The Peak of Calitamini (the
name given to this summit) glows at sunset as
with a reddish fire. This appearance is every
day the same. No one ever approached this
mountain, the height of which does not exceed
six hundred toises*. I believe this splendor,
commonly reddish and sometimes silvery, to be
a reflexion produced by large plates of talc, or
by gneiss passing into mica-slate. The whole
of this country contains granitic rocks, on which
here and there, in little plains, an argillaceous
grit-stone immediately reposes, containing frag-
ments of quartz, and of brown iron ore.

In going to the embarcadere, we caught on
the trunk of a heveat a new species of tree frog,
remarkable for it’s beautiful colours; it had a
yellow belly, the back and head of a fine velvet-
ty purple, and a very narrow stripe of white
from the point of the nose to the hinder ex-
tremities. This frog was two inches long, and
allied to the rana tinctoria, the blood of which,


* It is seen at Maypures under an apparent angle of
1g.287,
+ One of the trees, the milk of which yields caoutchouc.


168


it is asserted, introduced into the skin of a par-
rot, in places where the feathers have been
plucked out, occasions the growth of frizzled
feathers of a yellow or red colour. The Indians
showed us on the way what is no doubt very
curious in that country, traces of cart wheels in
the rock. They spoke, as of an unknown ani-
mal, of those beasts with large horns, which,
at the time of the expedition to the boundaries,
drew the boats through the valley of Keri from
the Rio Toparo to the Rio Cameji, to avoid the
cataracts, and spare the trouble’ of unloading
the merchandize. I believe those poor inhabi-
tants of Maypures would now be as much as-
tonished at the sight of an ox of the Spanish
breed, as the Romans were at the sight of the
Lucanian oxen, as they called the elephants of
the army of Pyrrhus.

By a running canal through the valley of
Keri, joining the little rivers Cameji and Toparo,
the passage of boats through the raudales
might be rendered superfluous. On this simple
idea was founded the project, the first sketch of
which I submitted to the Spanish government
by means of the captain-general of Caraccas,
Mr. de Guevara-Vasconzelos.’ The cataract of
Maypures furnishes, by the nature of the sur-
rounding soil, facilities which would be sought
in vain at Atures. The canal would be two
thousand eight hundred and fifty, or one thou-


169


sand three hundred and sixty toises in length,
according to the spot where it was commenced,
either near the mouths of the two little rivers,
or nearer their sources. The general slope of the
ground appears to have an inclination of six or
seven toises, from S.S.E. to N.N.W., and the
soil of the valley of Keri is entirely flat, with
ihe exception of a small ridge, or ligne de faite,
in the parallel of the church of Maypures,
which separates the two tributary streams so
that they take different courses. The execution
of this project would cost but little, the isth-
mus consisting for the most part of alluvial
earth. The employment of gunpowder would
be altogether unnecessary. ‘This canal, which
ought not to exceed ten feet in breadth, might
be regarded as a navigable arm .of the Oroono-
ko. It would not require the construction of
sluices, and the boats going to the Upper Oroo-
noko would no longer be damaged, as they now
are, by friction against the rugged rocks of the
raudal. They would be tracked up; and as it
would not be necessary to unload the merchan-
dize, a considerable loss of time would be avoid-
ed. It has been inquired, what would be the
use of the canal I have proposed? The follow-
ing is the answer [ gave to the ministry in 1801,
at the time of my journey to Quito. “I have
suggested the construction of the canal of May-
pures, and of another of which I shall speak’


170


hereafter, on the supposition only, that. the
government will occupy itself seriously with the
commerce and agricultural industry of the Up-
per Oroonoko. In the present state of things,
in the neglect to which you seem to doom the
banks of that majestic river, canals would be
almost useless.”

We embarked at Puerto de Arriba, and pass-
ed the Raudal de Cameji with some difficulty.
This passage is reputed to be dangerous, when
the water is very high; but we found the sur-
face of the river beyond the raudal as smooth as
glass. We passed the night in a rocky island
called Piedra Raton; which is three quarters
of a league long, and displays that singular
aspect of rising vegetation, those clusters of
shrubs, scattered over a bare and rocky soil, of
which we have often spoken. I obtained seve-
ral observations of the stars during the night,
and found the latitude of this island to be 5° 4’
31”, and it’s longitude 70° 37’. . The river gave
the images of the stars by reflexion ; although
we were in the middle of the Oroonoko, the
cloud of moschettoes was so thick, that I had
not the patience to level the artificial horizon.

April the 22d. We departed an hour and
a half before sunrise. The morning was humid,
but delicious; not a breath of wind was felt,
for south of Atures and Maypures a perpetual
calm prevails. On the banks of the Rio Negro


171


and the Cassiquiare, at the foot of Cerro Duida,
and at the mission of Santa Barbara, we never
heard that rustling of the leaves, which has a
peculiar charm in burning climates. The wind-
ings of rivers, the shelter of mountains, the
thickness of the forests, and the almost con-
tinual rains, at one or two degrees of latitude
north of the equator, contribute no doubt. to
this phenomenon, which is peculiar to the mis-
sions of the Oroonoko.

In the valley of the Amazon, which is south
of the equator, but at the same distance from it,
a strong wind rises every day two hours after
the culmination of the sun. This wind blows
constantly against the stream, and is felt only
in the bed of the river. Below San Borja it is
an easterly wind; at Tomependa, I found: it
between north and north-north-east ; itis still the
same breeze, the wind. ofthe rotation of the globe,
but modified by slight local circumstances. By
favor of this general breeze you may go up the
Amazom from the Grand-Para as far as. Tefe
under sail, a length of seven hundred and fifty
leagues. Im the province of Jaen de Bracamo-
ros, at the foot of the western declivity of the
Cordilleras, this Atlantic: breeze rises sometimes
toa real tempest. Yow cam scarcely keep! upon
your legs when you approach the banks of the
river ; such are the singular disparities between
the Upper Oroonoko and the Upper Maragnon.


172


It is highly probable, that the great salubrity
of the Amazon is owing to this constant breeze.
In the stagnant air of the Upper Oroonoko the
chemical affinities act more -powerfully, and
more deleterious miasmata are formed. The in-
salubrity of the climate would be the same on
the woody banks of the Amazon, if this river,
running like the Niger from west to east, did
not follow in it’s immense length the same di-
rection, which is that of the trade-winds. The
valley of the Amazon is closed only at it’s west-
ern extremity, where it draws near the Cordil-
leras of the Andes. Toward the east, where
the sea breeze strikes the New Continent, the
shore is raised but a few feet above the level of
the Atlantic. The Upper Oroonoko first runs
from east to west*, and then from north to
south. Where it’s course is nearly parallel to
that of the Amazon, a very hilly country, the
group of the mountains of Parima and of Dutch
and French Guyana, separates it from the At-
lantic, and prevents the wind of rotation from
reaching Esmeralda. This wind begins to be
powerfully felt only from the confluence of the
Apure, where the Lower Oroonoko runs from
west to east, in a vast plain open toward the
Atlantic, and therefore the climate of this part
of the river is less noxious than that of the Up-
per Oroonoko.


* Properly from E.S.E., to W.N.W.


173


In order to add a third point of comparison,
I shall mention the valley of the Rio Magda-
lena, which like the Amazon has one direction
only, but unfortunately instead of being that
of the breeze it is from south to north. | Situate
in the region of the trade-winds, the Rio Mag-
dalena has the stagnant air of the Upper Oroo-
noko. From the canal of Mahates as far as—
Honda, particularly south of the town of Mom-
pox, we never felt the wind blow but at the
approach of the storms of night. When, on the
contrary, you proceed up the river beyond Hon-
da, you find the atmosphere often agitated.
The strong winds that are ingulfed in the valley
of Neiva are noted for their excessive heat. We
may be at first surprised to perceive, that the
calm ceases as we approach the lofty moun-
tains, in the upper course of the river, but this
astonishment ends when we recollect, that the
dry and burning winds of the Llanos de Newva
are the effect of descending currents. The
columns of cold air rush from the top of the
Nevados of Quindiu and of Guanacas into the
‘ valley, driving before them the lower strata of
the atmosphere. Every where the unequal heat-
ing of the soil, and the proximity of mountains
covered with perpetual snows, cause partial cur-
rents within the tropics, as well as in the tem-
perate zone. The violent winds of Neiva are
not the effect of a repercussion of the. trade-


174


winds; they rise where the breeze cannot come ;
and if the mountains of the Upper Oroonoko,
the tops of which are generally crowned with
trees, were more elevated, they would produce
the same impetuous movements in the atmos-
phere, as we observe in the Cordilleras of Peru,
of Abyssinia, and of Thibet. The intimate con-
nection that exists between ‘the direction of
rivers, the height and disposition of the adjacent
mountains, the movements of the atmosphere,
and the salubrity of the climate, is a subject
well worthy attention. The study of the sur-
face and the inequalities of the soil would indeed
be irksome and steril, were it not connected
with more general considerations.

At the distance of six miles from the island of
Piedra Raton we passed first, on the east, the
mouth of the Rio Sipapo, called Tipapu* by the
Indians; and then, on the west, the mouth'of
the Rio Vichada. Near the latter are some
rocks covered by the waier, that form a small
eascade, or raudalito. ‘The Rio Sipapo, which


* The sources of the Rio Tipapu, it is said, are north of
the parallel of Atures, on the eastern side of those granitic
mountains, from which the Rio Cataniapo rises. Inthe
upper part. of it’s course it bears the name of Uapu or Tuapu.
One of it’s tributary streams, the 4uvana, which Surville has
transformed into Abana, and Caulin into Amanaveni (water or
river, vent, of Amana), is remarkable for the fine cascade of
Arucuru, above the Raudal’ of Quiamacuana.


175


Father Gili went up in 1757, and which he
says is twice as broad as the Tiber, comes from
a considerable chain of mountains, which in it’s
southern part bears the name of the river, and
joins the group of Calitamini, and of Cunava-
mi. Next to the Peak of Duida, which rises
above the mission of Esmeralda, the Cerros of
Sipapo appeared to me the most lofty of the
whole Cordillera of Parima. They form an
immense wall of rocks, shooting up abruptly
from the plain, the craggy ridge of which runs
from S.S.E. to N.N.W. I believe these crags,
these indentations, which equally occur in the
sandstone of Mount Serrat in Catalonia, are
owing to blocks of granite heaped _ together.
The Cerros de Sipapo* wear a different, aspect
every hour of the day. At sunrise the thick
vegetation, with which these mountains are
clothed, is tinged with that dark green inclining
to brown, which is peculiar to a region where
trees with coriaceous leaves prevail. Broad and
strong shadows are projected on the neighbour-
ing plain, and form a contrast with the vivid
light diffused over the ground, in the air, and


* I set these mountains at the island Piedra Raton,
whence they bore S. 45° E., at the mission of Santa Bar-
bara, N. 26° W.; at the mouth of the Mataveri, N. 49° E.
The mountains, which the missionary Gili designates by the
name of Cerros de Jujamari, form no doubt a separate group,
east or north-east of the Cerros de Sipapo.


176


on the surface of the waters. But toward noon,
when the sun reaches it’s zenith, these strong
shadows gradually disappear, and the whole
group is veiled by an aerial vapour of a much
deeper azure than that of the lower regions of
the celestial vault. These vapours, circulating
around the rocky ridge, soften it’s outline, tem-
per the effects of the light, and give the landscape
that aspect of calmness and repose, which in
nature, as in the works of Claude Lorrain and
Poussin, arises from the harmony of forms and
colours.

Cruzero, the powerful chief of the Guaypu-
nabis, long resided behind these mountains of
Sipapo, after having quitted with his warlike
horde the plains between the Rio Inirida and the
Chamochiquini. The Indians told us, that the
forests which cover the Sipapo abound in vehw-
co de maimure. This liana is celebrated among
the Indians, and serves for making baskets and
weaving mats. The forests of Sipapo are alto-
gether unknown, and there the missionaries
place the nation of the Rayas*, who have their
mouth in the navel. An old Indian, whom we
met at Carichana, and who boasted of having
often eaten human flesh, had seen these acephali


* Rays, on account of the pretended analogy with the fish
of this name, the mouth of which seems as if forced back-
ward below the body. ; !


|
i
a
|

|
i

il


177


* with his own eyes.” These absurd fables are
spread as far as the Llanos, where you are not
always permitted to doubt the existence of the
Raya Indians. In every zone intolerance ac-
companies credulity; and it might besaid, that
the fictions of ancient geographers had passed
from one hemisphere to the other, did we not
know, that the most fantastic productions of
the imagination, like the works of nature, fur-
nish every where a certain analogy of aspect and
of form.

We landed at the mouth of the Rio Vichada
or Visata, to examine the plants of that coun-
try. The scenery is very singular.. The forest
is thin, and an innumerable quantity of small
rocks rise from the plain. These form massy
prisms, ruined pillars, and solitary towers, fif-
teen or twenty feet high. Some are shaded by
the trees of the forest, others have their sum-
mits crowned with palms. These rocks are of
granite passing into gneiss. If this were not
the region of primitive formations, the traveller
might think himself transported amid the rocks
of Adersbach in Bohemia, or of Streitberg and.
of Fantaisie in Franconia, where the sandstones
and secondary limestones do not affect stranger
forms. At the confluence of the Vichada the
rocks of granite, and what is still more remark-
able the soil itself, are covered with moss and
lichens. These latter resemble the. cladonia


VOL. V. N


178


pyxidata and the lichen rangiferinus, so com-
mon in the north of Europe. We could scarcely
persuade ourselves, that we were elevated less
than one hundred toises above the level of the
Ocean, in five degrees of latitude, in the centre
of that torrid zone, which has so long been
thought to be destitute of cryptogamous plants.
The mean temperature* of this shady and humid
spot probably exceeds twenty-six degrees of the
centigrade thermometer. Reflecting on the small
quantity of rain which -had hitherto fallen, we
were surprised at the beautiful verdure of the
forests. This circumstance characterizes the
valley of the Upper Oroonoko; on the coast of
Caraccas, and in the Llanos, the trees in win-
ter} are stripped of their leaves, and the ground
is covered only with a yellow and withered
grass. Between the solitary rocks which we
have just described arise some high plants of
columnar cactus (cactus septemangularis), a
very rare appearance south of the cataracts of
Atures and Maypures.

Amid this picturesque scene, Mr. Bonpland
was fortunate enough to find several specimens
of laurus cinnamomoides, a very aromatic species


* This estimation is founded on the temperature of the
sources of the «tures.

+ In the season called summer in South America, north of
the equator. See vol. iv, p. 88.


179
Be
of cinnamon, known at the Oroonoko by the
names of varimacu and of canelilla*. This
valuable production is found also in the valley
of Rio Caura, as well as near the Esmeralda,
and east of the Great Cataracts. The jesuit
Francisco de Olmo appears to haye been the
first who discovered the canelilla, which he did
in the country of the Piaroas, near the sources
of the Cataniapo. The, missionary Gili, who
did not advance so far as the country I am now
describing, seems to confound the varimacu
or guarimacu, with the myristicay or nutmeg
tree of America. These barks and aromatic
fruits, the cinnamon, the nutmeg,) the myrthus
pimenta, and the laurus pucheri, would have


become important objects of trade, if Europe, at
the period of the discovery of the New World,
had not already been accustomed to the spices
and aromatics of India. The cinnamon of the
Oroonoko, and that of the Andaquies missions,


* The diminutive of the Spanish word. canela, which signi-
fies, clianamomum (kinnamomon of the Greeks). ‘This last
word is among the small number of those, which passed in
the most remote antiquity from the Phoenician (a Semitic
tongue) into the western languages. (Gessenaus Gesch. der
Hebraischen Sprache, 1815, p. 66.)

+ We have given a figure of a nutmeg tree of the New
Continent, the myristica otoba, in the “ Equinoctial Plants,”
vol. ii, p.'78, plate 103. _ This plant differs from the virola
sebifera of Aublet.

N 2


180


the cultivation of which Mr. Mutis introduced
at Mariquita* are however less aromatic than
the cinnamon of Ceylon, and would still be so,
even if dried and prepared by similar processes.

Every hemisphere produces plants of a differ-
ent species ; and it is not by the diversity of
climates that we can attempt to explain, why
equinoctial Africa,has no laurinez, and the New
World no heaths ; why the calceolarize are found
only in the southern hemisphere ; why the birds
of the continent of India glow with colours less
splendid than the birds ef the hot parts of Ame-
rica; finally, why the tiger is peculiar to’Asia,
and the ornithorhincus to New-Holland. In the
vegetable as well as in the animal kingdom,
the causes of the distribution of the species are
among the number of mysteries, which natural
philosophy cannot reach. This science is not
occupied in the investigation of the origin of
beings, but of the laws according to which they
are distributed on the globe. It examines the
things that are, the coexistence of vegetable and
animal forms in each latitude, at different
heights, and at different degrees of tempera-
ture ; it studies the relations under which par-
ticular organizations are more vigorously deve-
loped, multiplied, or modified ; but it approaches
not problems, the solution of which is impossible,


* A town of New Grenada, west of Honda.


181


since they touch the origin, the first existence
of a germe of life. We may add, that the at-
tempts which have been made, to explain the
distribution of various species on the globe by
the sole influence of climate, date at a period
when physical geography was still in it’s infancy ;
when, recurring incessantly to pretended con-
trasts between the two worlds, it was imagined,
that the whole of Africa and of America resem-
bled the deserts of Egypt and the marshes of
Cayenne. At present, when men judge of the
state of things not from one type arbitrarily cho-
sen, but from positive knowledge, it is ascer-
tained, that the two continents in their im-
mense extent contain countries that are altoge-
ther analogous. There are regions of America
as barren and burning as the interior of Africa.
The islands that produce the spices of India are
scarcely remarkable for their dryness ; and it is
not.on account of the humidity of the climate,
as it has been affirmed in recent works, that
the New Continent is deprived of those fine
species of Jaurineze and myristice, which are
found united in one little corner of the Earth in
the Archipelago of India. For some years past
the real cinnamon has been cultivated with
success in several parts of the New Continent ;
and a zone that. produces the coumarouna*, the


* The Tonga bean, coumaronna odora of Aublet.


182


vanilla, the pucheri, the pine-apple, the myrtus
pimenta, the balsam of tolu, the myroxylon pe-
ruvianum, the crotons, the citrosmas, the pe-
joa*, the incienso of the Silla of Caraccas}, the
queremex, the pancratium, and so many majestic
liliaceous plants, cannot be considered as desti-
tute of aromatics. Besides, a dry air favors the
development of the aromatic, or exciting pro-
perties, only in certain species of plants. The
most cruel poisons are produced in the most
humid zone of America; and it is precisely
under the influence of the long rains of the
tropics, that the American pimento, capsicum
baccatum}, the fruit of which is often as caustic
and fiery as Indian pepper, vegetates best. From
the whole of these considerations it follows, Ist,
that the New Continent possesses spices, aro-
matics, and very active vegetable poisons, that
are peculiar to itself, differing specifically from
those of the ancient world ; 2dly, that the primi-
tive distribution of species in the torrid zone
cannot be explained by the influence of cli-


* Gaultheria odorata.

+ Trixis nertifolia, See vol. iii, p. 500. (Baillieria neriifo.
lia; Nov. Gen., vol. iv, p. 227.)

} Thibaudia quereme. (Nov. Gen., vol. iii, p. 274.)

§ Mr. Robert Brown, in his important researches on the
origin of the cultivated plants of equinoctial Africa, considers
the genus capsicum as belonging exclusively to the New
Continent. (Botany of Congo, 1818, p. 52.)


183


mate solely, or by the distribution of tempera-
ture, which we observe in the present state of
our planet ; but that this difference of climates
leads us to perceive, why a given type of orga-
nization develops itself more vigorously in such
or such local circumstances. We can conceive,
that a small number of the families of plants,
for instance the musaceze and the palms, can-
not belong to very cold regions, on account of
their internal structure, and the importance of
certain organs* ; but we cannot explain why
no one of the family of melastomas vegetates
north of the parallel of thirty degrees, or why
no rose-tree belongs to the southern hemi-
sphere. Analogy of climates is often found in
the two continents, without identity of produc-
tions.

The Rio Vichada (Bichada), which has a
small raudal at it’s confluence with the Oroo- ~
noko, appeared to me, next to the Meta and the
Guaviare, to be the most considerable river
coming from the west. During the last forty
years no European has navigated the Vichada.
I could learn nothing of it’s sources; they rise,
I believe, with those of the Tomo, in the plains
that extend to the south of Casimena. It ap-
pears to me at least not to be doubtful, that the
most ancient missions were founded on the


* The frondes, so important from their size, would not
resist vigorous cold.


184


banks of the Vichada by Jesuits who came from
the missions of Casanare. Fugitive Indians of
Santa Rosalia de Cabapuna, a village situate on
the banks of the Meta, have arrived even re-
cently, by the Rio: Vichada, at the cataract of
Maypures; which sufficiently proves, that the
sources of this river are not very distant from
the Meta. Father Gumilla has: preserved the
names of several German and Spanish Jesuits,
who in 1734 fell victims to their zeal for reli-
gion by the hands of the Caribs, on the now
desert banks of the Vichada.

Having passed the Canno Pirajavi on the
east, and then a small river on the west, which
issues, as the Indians say, from a lake called
Nao, we rested at night on the shore of the
Oroonoko, at the mouth of the Zama, a very
considerable river, as unknown as the Vichada.
Notwithstanding the black waters of the Zama,
we suffered greatly from insects. The night
was. beautiful, without a breath of wind in the
lower regions of the atmosphere, but towards
two in the morning we saw thick clouds
crossing the zenith rapidly from east to west.
When declining toward the horizon, they tra-
versed the great nebulz of Sagittarius and the
Ship, they appeared of a dark blue. The light
of the nebulz is never more splendid, than
when they are in part covered by sweeping
clouds. We observe the same phenomenon in


185


Europe in the Milky Way, in the aurora borealis
when it beams with a silvery light; and at the
rising and setting of the sun, in the part of the
sky that is whitened* from causes, which philo-
sophers have not yet sufficiently explained.

The vast space of ground, that lies between
the Meta, the Vichada, and the Guaviare, is
altogether unknown a league from the banks ;
but is believed to be inhabited by wild Indians
of the tribe of Chiricoas, who fortunately build
no boats. Formerly, when the Caribbees, and
their enemies the Cabres, traversed these re-
gions with their little fleets of rafts and ca-
noes, it would have been imprudent to have
passed the night near the mouth of a river run-
ning from the west. The little settlements of
the Europeans having now caused the indepen-
dent Indians to retire from the banks of the
Upper Oroonoko, the solitude of these regions
is such, that from Carichana to Javita, and
from Esmeralda to San Fernando de Atabapo,
during a course of one hundred and eighty
leagues, we did not meet one single boat.

At the mouth of the Rio Zama we entered a
class of rivers, that merits great attention. The
Zama, the Mataveni, the Atabapo, the Tuamini,
the Temi, and the Guainia, are aguas negras,
that is, their waters, seen in a large body, ap-


- * The dawn: in French aube (alba), albente calo.


186


pear brown like coffee, or of a greenish black.
These waters notwithstanding are the most beau-
tiful, the clearest, and the most agreeable to the
taste. I have observed above, that the croco-
diles, and, if not the zancudoes, at least the
moschettoes generally shun the black waters.
The people assert too, that these waters do not
embrown the rocks ; and that the white rivers
have black borders, while the black rivers have
white. In fact, the shores of the Guainia,
known to the Europeans by the name of the
Rio Negro, frequently exhibit masses of quartz
issuing from granite, and of a dazzling white-
ness. The waters of the Mataveni, when exa-
mined in a glass, are pretty white ; those of the
Atabapo retain a slight tinge of yellowish-brown.
When the least breath of wind agitates the sur-
face of these black rivers, they appear of a fine
grass green, like the lakes of Switzerland. In
the shade, the Zama, the Atabapo, and the
Guainia, are as dark as coffee grounds. These
phenomena are so striking, that the Indians
every where distinguish the waters by black
and white. The former have often served me
for an artificial horizon ; they reflect the image
of the stars with admirable clearness.

The colour of the waters of springs, rivers,
and lakes, ranks among those physical pro-
blems, which it is difficult, if not impossible, to
solve by direct experiments. The tints of re-


187


flected light are generally very different from
the tints of transmitted light; particularly
when the transmission ‘takes place through a
great portion of fluid. If there were no absorp-
tion of rays, the transmitted light would be of a
colour complementary to that of the reflected
light ; and in general we judge ill of transmitted.
light, by filling with water a shallow glass with
a narrow aperture. . In a river the colour of the
reflected light comes to us always from the
interior strata of the fluid, and not from the
upper stratum*.

Some celebrated naturalists, who have exa-
mined the purest. waters of the glaciers, and
those which flow from mountains covered with
perpetual snows, where the earth is destitute of
the relics of vegetation, have thought, that the
proper colour of water might be blue, or green.
Nothing, in fact, proves, that water is by nature
white, and that we must always admit the pre-
sence of a colouring principle, when water
viewed by reflection is coloured. In the rivers
that contain a colouring principle, this princi-
ple is generally so little in quantity, that it
eludes all chemical research. The tints of the
Ocean seem often to depend neither on the
nature of the bottom, nor on the reflection of


* Newton, Opt. Lib.1, p. 2, prop. 10, prob. 5. Delaval,
on the permanent Colours of opake Bodies, in the Manchester
Mem., 1789, vol. ii, p. 240.


188


.


the sky on the clouds. It is said, a great natu-
ralist, Sir Humphry Davy, thinks, that the tints
of different seas may very likely be owing to
different proportions of iodin.
On consulting the geographers of antiquity
we find, that the Greeks were struck by the
blue waters of Thermopylz, the red waters of
Joppa, and the black waters of the hot-baths
of Astyra, opposite Lesbos*. Some rivers, the
Rhone for instance, near Geneva, have a decidedly
blue colour. It is said, that the snow waters, in
the Alps of Switzerland, are sometimes of aneme-
rald green approaching to grass green. Several
lakes of Savoy and of Peru have a brown colour
approaching black. Most ofthese phenomena of
coloration are observed in waters that are be-
lieved to be the purest, and it is rather from
reasonings founded on analogy, than from any
direct analysis, that we may throw some light
on so uncertain a matter. In the vast system
of rivers which we have traversed (and this fact
appears to me striking) the black waters are
principally restricted to the equatorial band.
They begin to be found about five degrees of
north latitude ; and abound thence to beyond
the equator as far as about two degrees of south


_* Pausanias, vol. 2, Messen., cap. 35 (Clavier’s edit., p.
488). Sce also Strabo, lib. 16, ed. Almalov., vol. 2, p-
1125, B.


189


latitude. The mouth of the Rio Negro is in-
deed in the latitude of 3° 9’; but in this inter-
val the black and white waters are so singularly
mingled in the forests and the savannahs, that
we know not to what cause the coloration of
the waters must be attributed. The waters of
the Cassiquiare, which fall into the Rio Negro,
are as white as those of the Oroonoko, from
which it issues. Of two tributary streams of the
Cassiquiare very near each. other, the Siapa and
the Pacimony, one is white, the other black.
When the Indians are interrogated respecting
the causes of these strange colorations, they
answer, as questions in natural philosophy or
physiology are sometimes answered in Europe,
by repeating the fact in other terms. If you
address yourself to the missionaries, they reply,
as if they had the most convincing proofs of
their assertion, “the waters are coloured by
washing the roots of the sarsaparilla.” The smi-
laceze no doubt abound on the banks of the Rio
Negro, the Pacimony, and the Cababury ; their
roots, macerated in the water, yield an extrac-
tive matter, that is brown, bitter, and mucilagi-
nous; but how many tufts of smilax have we
seen in places, where the waters were entirely
white! Inthe marshy forest which we travers-.
ed, to convey our canoe from the Rio Tuamini to
the Canno Pimichin and the Rio Negro, why, in
the same soil, did we ford alternately rivulets of


196


black and white water?) Why was no river ever
found white near it’s springs, and black in the
lower part of it’s course? I know not whether
the Rio Negro preserve it’s yellowish brown
colour as far as it’s mouth, notwithstanding the
great quantity of white water it receives from
the Cassiquiare and the Rio Blanco. Mr. de
la Condamine, not having seen this river north
of the equator, could not judge of the difference
of colour.

Although on account of the abundance of the
rivers vegetation is more vigorous close to the
equator than eight or ten degrees north or south,
it cannot be affirmed, that the rivers with black
waters rise principally in the most shady and
thickest forests. On the contrary, a great num-
ber of the aguas negras come from the open
savannahs, that extend from the Meta beyond
the Guaviare toward the Caqueta. In a voyage
which I made with Mr. de Montufar from the
port of Guayaquil to Bodegas de Babaojo, at the
period of the great inundations, I was struck by
the analogy of colour displayed: by the vast sa-
vannahs of the Jnvernadero del Garzal and of
Lagartero, and the aspect of the Rio Negro
and the Atabapo. These savannahs, partly in-
undated during three months, are composed
of paspalum, eriochloa, and several species of
cyperaceze. We sailed on waters that were
from four to five feet deep; their temperature


191


was by day from 33° to 34° of ‘the centigrade
thermometer; they exhaled a strong smell of
sulphuretted hydrogen, to which no doubt some
rotten plant of arum and heliconia, that swam
on the surface of the pools, contributed. The
waters of Lagartero were of a golden yellow by
transmitted, and coffee brown by reflected light.
They are no doubt coloured by a carburet of
hydrogen. An analogous phenomenon is  ob-
served in the dunghill waters prepared by our
gardeners, and in the waters that issue from
bogs. May we not also admit, that it is a
mixture of carbon and hydrogen, an extractive
vegetable matter, that colours the black rivers,
the Atabapo, the Zama, the Mataveni, and the
Guainia? The frequency of the equatorial rivers
contributes no doubt to this coloration by filtra-
tions through a thick wad of grasses; I sug-
gest these ideas only in the form of a doubt.
The colouring principle seems to be in very
little abundance ; for I observed, that the waters
of the Guainia or Rio Negro, when subjected to
ebullition, do not become brown like other
fluids charged with carburets of hydrogen.

It is also very remarkable, that this pheno-
menon of black waters, which might be supposed
to belong only to the low regions of the torrid
zone, is found also, though rarely, on the table-
lands of the Andes: The town of Cuenca in the
Kingdom of Quito, is surrounded by three small


192


rivers, the Machangara, the Rio del Matadero,
and the Yanuncai; of which the two former are
white, and the waters of the last are black
(aguas negras). These waters, like those of
the Atabapo, are of a coffee colour by reflec-
tion, and pale yellow by transmission. They are
very fine, and the inhabitants of Cuenca, who
drink them in preference, do not fail to attribute
their colour to the sarsaparilla, which it is said
grows abundantly on the banks of the Rio Ya-
nungai*.

April 23d. We left the mouth of the Zama
at five in the. morning. The river continued
to be skirted on both sides by a thick forest:
The mountains on the east seemed to retire by
degrees farther back. We passed first the
mouth of the Rio. Mataveni, and afterward an
islet of a very singular form; a square granitic
rock, that rises like a trunk in the middle of
the water. It is called by the missionaries
El Castillito. Black bands seem to indicate,
that the highest swellings of the Oroonoko do
not rise at this place above eight feet; and
that the great swellings observed lower down
are. owing to the tributary streams, which


* Although the species of smilax abound principally in hot
and temperate regions (from 0 to 500 toises), we have how-
ever found them between 700 and 1400 toises, See our
Nov. Gen. Plant., vol, 1, p, 72.


198


flow into it north of the raudales of Atures
and Maypures. We passed the night on the
right bank opposite the mouth of the Rio Siu-
curivapu, near a rock called Aricagua. Dur-
ring the night an innumerable quantity of
bats issued from the clefts of the rock, and
hovered around our hammocks. I have men-
tioned in another place how injurious these
animals are to the cattle ; their number is par-
ticularly augmented in years of great drought*.

April 24th. A violent rain obliged us early
to rejoin our boat. We departed at two o'clock,
after having lost some books, which we could
not find in the- darkness of the night, on the
rock of Aricagua. The river runs straight
from south to north; its banks are low, and
shaded on both sides by thick forests. We
passed the mouths of the Ucata, the Arapa, and
the Caranaveni. About four in the afternoon
we landed at the Conucos de Siquita, the In-
dian plantations of the mission of San Fernando.
These good people wished to detain us among
them, but we continued to go up against the
current, which ran at the rate of five feet a
second. This was the result of a measurement
I made by observing: the time, that a floating
body took to go down a given distance. We


* In Brazil, in the province of Ciara, the bats cause such


destruction among the cows, that rich farmers are sometimes
reduced by them to indigence. Corog. Bras., vol. 2, p. 224.


VOL. V. ¢)


194


entered the mouth of the Guaviare in a dark
night, passed the point where the Rio Atabapo
joins the Guaviare, and arrived at the mission
after midnight. We were lodged as usual at the
Convent, that is, in the house of the missionary,
who, though much surprised at our unexpected
visit, did not the less receive us with the kind-
est hospitality.


CHAPTER XXIL.


San Fernando de Atabapo.—San: Balthasar.—
The rivers Temi and Tuamini.—dJavita.—Por-
tage from the Tuamini to the Rio Negro.


During the night we had left, almost unper-
ceived, the waters of the Oroonvko ; and at sun-
rise found ourselves as if transported to a new
country, on the banks of a river the name of
which we had scarcely ever heard pronounced,
and which was to conduet us, by the portage of
Pimichin, to the Rio Negro, on the frontiers of
Brazil. “ You will go up,” said the president
of the missions, who resides at San Fernando,
“ first the Atabapo, then the Temi, and finally,
the Tuamini. When the force of the current of
black waters hinders you from advancing, you
will be conducted out of the bed of the river
through forests, which you will find inundated.
Two monks only are settled in those desert
places, between the Oroonoko and the Rio Ne-
gro; but at Javita you will be furnished with the

; o 2


196


means of having your canoe drawn over land
in the course of four days to Canno Pimichin.
If it be not broken to pieces, you will descend
the Rio Negro without any obstacle (from north-
west to south-east) as far as the little fort of San
Carlos; you will go up the Cassiquiare (from
south to north), and then return to San Fer-
nando in a month, descending the Upper Oroo-
noko from east to west.” Such was the plan
traced for our navigation, and which we exe-
cuted, not without suffering, but without dan-
ger, and with facility, in the space of thirty-
three days. The sinuosities in this labyrinth
of rivers are such, that, without the aid of the
itinerary map which I traced, it would be almost
impossible to form an idea of the road by which
we went from the coast of Caraccas, through
the inland country, to the limits of the Capi-
tania General of Grand Para. I must remind
those who disdain to fix their eyes on maps
filled with names difficult for the memory to
retain, that the Oroonoko runs from it’s source,
or at least from Esmeralda, as far as San Fer-
nando de Atabapo, from east to west; that from
San Fernando, where the junction of the Gua-
viare and the Atabapo takes place, as far as the
mouth of the Rio Apure, it flows from south to
north, forming the Great Cataracts ; and, final-
ly, that from the mouth of the Apure as far as
Angostura and the coasts of the Ocean it’s


197


direction is from west to east. In the first part
of it’s course, where the river flows from east
to west, it forms that celebrated bifurcation so
often disputed by geographers, of which I was
the first enabled to determine the situation by
astronomical observations. One arm of the
Oroonoko, the Cassiquiare, running from north
to south, falls into the Guainia, or Rio Negro,
which, in it’s turn, joins the Maragnon, or river
of Amazons. The most natural way therefore,
to go from Angostura to Grand Para, would.
be to ascend the Oroonoko as far as Esmeralda,
and then to go down the Cassiquiare, the Rio
Negro, and the Amazon ; but, as the Rio Negro
in the upper part of it’s course approaches very
near the sources of some rivers, that fall into
the Oroonoko near San Fernando de Atabapo
(where the Oroonoko abruptly changes it’s di-
rection from east to west, to take that from
south to north), the ascending that part of the
river between San Fernando and. Esmeralda,
in order to reach the Rio Negro, may be avoid-
ed. Leaving the Oroonoko near the mission of
San Fernando, you go up the assemblage of little
black rivers (the Atabapo, the Temi, and the
Tuamini), and the boats are carried across an
isthmus six thousand toises broad, to the banks
of a stream (the Canno Pimichin), which flows
into the Rio Negro. This course, which we
’ took, and which has been frequented more


198


particularly since the period, when Don Ma-
nuel Centurion* was governor of Guyana, is
so short, that a messenger now carries despatches
from San Carlos del Rio Negro to Angostura in
twenty-three or twenty-four days, while former-
ly, in going up the Cassiquiare, it required fifty
or sixty. You may consequently travel by the
Atabapo, from the Amazon to the Oroonoko,
without going up the Cassiquiare, so formid-
able from the force of it’s current, the want of
provision, and the torment of moschettoes, J]
will add, for the French reader, an example
drawn from the hydrographic maps of France.
In order to go fron:, Nevers on the Loire to Mon-
tereau on the Seine, you might, instead of pro-
ceeding by the canal of Orleans, which joins,
like the Cassiquiare, two systems of rivers, esta-
blish a portage between the tributary streams of
the Loire and the Seine, and, by going up the
Nievre, cross an isthmus near the village of
Menou, and descend the Yonne to enter. the
Seine.

We shall soon see the great advantage, that
would result froma running canal across the
marshy ground between the Tuamini and the
Pimichin, If this project be some day carried
into execution, there would be no other obstacle
to vanquish in going from the fort of San Car-


* Caulin, p. 76.


199


los to Angostura, the capital of Guyana, than
that of ascending the Rio Negro as far as the
mission of Maroa ; the rest of the navigation
would be performed by means of the currents of
the Temi, the Atabapo, and the Oroonoko.

The road from San Carlos to San Fernando
de Atabapo is far more disagreeable, and half
as long again by the Cassiquiare, as by Javita
and the Canno Pimichin. In this region, into
which the expedition of the boundaries carried
no astronomical instruments, I determined, by
means of the chronometer of Louis Berthoud,
and by the meridional heights of stars, the situ-
ations of San Balthasar de Atabapo, Javita, San
Carlos del Rio Negro, the rock Culimacavi, and
of Esmeralda; the map I have constructed
has consequently solved the doubts that remain-
ed of the respective distances of the Christian
establishments. When no other road exists but
that of tortuous and intermingled rivers, when
little villages are hidden amid thick forests, and
when, in a country entirely flat, no mountain,
no eminent object is visible from two points at
once, it is only in the sky that we can read
where we are upon the Earth. In the wildest
countries of the torrid zone we feel more than
any where the want of astronomical observa-
tions. They are not only useful means of finish-


ing and improving maps, but are indispensable
for tracing the first sketch of the ground.


200)


The missionary of San Fernando, with whom
we remained two days, has the title of President
_ of the Missions of the Oroonoko. The twenty-
six ecclesiastics settled on the banks of the Rio
Negro, the Cassiquiare, the Atabapo, the Caura,
and the Oroonoko, are under his orders; and
he depends in his turn on the guardian of the
convent of Nueva-Barcelona, or, as they say
here, the Colegio de la Purissima Concepcion de
Propaganda Fide. His village announces some-
what less indigence than those we had hitherto
found on our way, yet the number of inhabi-
tants does not exceed two hundred and twenty-
six. I have already mentioned repeatedly, that
the missions near the coast, and which are
equally subject to the Observantin monks, for:
instance, Pilar, Caigua, Huere, and Cupapui,
contain each from eight hundred to two thou-
sand inhabitants. They are larger and finer
villages than we meet with in the most cultivat-
ed parts of Europe. We were assured, that the
mission of San Fernando was much more popu-
lous immediately after it’s first foundation, than
it is at present.. As we passed through it a
second time, on our.return from the Rio Negro,
I shall here collect together the observations
which we made on a point of the Oroonoko,
that may become hereafter highly important
to the trade and industry of the colonies.

San Fernando de Atabapo is placed near the


201


confluence of three great rivers ; the Oroonoko,
the Guaviare, and the Atabapo. It’s situation
is similar to that of Saint Lewis or of New Ma-
drid, at the junctions of the Mississipi with the
Missouri and the Ohio. In proportion as com-
merce grows brisk in these countries traversed
by immense rivers, the towns situate at their
confluence will necessarily become the stations
of boats, depositaries of merchandize, and real
centres of civilization. Father Gumilla confesses,
that in his time no person had any knowledge
of the course of the Oroonoko above the mouth
of the Guaviare. He adds with simplicity, that
he was forced to address himself to the inhabi-
tants of Timana and of Pasto, to obtain some


‘vague notions of the Upper Oroonoko*. We


* Los restantes Rios de que se forma el Orinoco (arriba de ta
boca del Guabiare) todavia no se han registrado: y solo los de-
marco en mt plan por las noticias acquiridas de los habitadores de
Timana y Pasto de donde el principal y los Rios accessorios des-
ctenden. (Gum., Orinoco ill., 1745, tom. i, p. 52.) The first
edition of this work is in 1741, and it must be by error, that
the approbation of the censor of the Company, Antonid de
Goyenéche, is dated the 14th of July, 1731. ‘The fathers
Gumilla and Rotella began their first establishments in
1733 (Gili, vol.i, p. 60. Gum. vol. i, p. 209, 239, and 285 ;
vol. ii, p. 96.) ; consequently the manuscript of the Orinoco
illustrado could not have been finished in 1731. ‘This date is
important, because those of several geographical discoveries
depend on it. I must observe on this occasion, that father
Gumilla was only four years on the banks of the Oroonoko,
not thirty, whatever the French translator of the Orinoco


202


should not now seek for information in the
Andes of Popayan respecting a river, that
rises on the western back of the mountains of
Cayenne. Father Gumilla did not confound,
as he has been falsely accused of doing, the
sources of the Guaviare with those of the Oroo-
noko ; but, ignorant of that part of the latter
river which runs from east to west, from Esme-
ralda toward San Fernando, he supposes, that,
in order to-ascend the Oroonoke above the cata-
racts and the mouths of the Vichada and the
Guaviare, it is necessary to proceed in a south-
west direction. Geographers at that period had
placed the sources of the Oroonoko near those
of the Putumayo and the Caqueta, on the east-
ern declivity of the Andes of Pasto and of Popa-
yan, consequently, according to my observations
of the longitude* on the back of the Cordilleras
and at Esmeralda, two hundred and forty
leagues distant from their true situation. The
inaccurate ideas which La Condamine. had
given of the branchings of the Caqueta, which
seemed to corroborate the hypothesis of Sanson,
have contributed to errors that have been pro-


tustrado { Gili, tom. i, p. 26.) may pretend. In Europe,
under the vague names of the missions of the Oroonoko are


confounded parts of New-Granada the most remote from
the river,


* At Pasto, and at Esmeralda.


203


pagated for ages. D’Anville, in the first edition
of his great map of South America, (an edition
extremely rare, which I found in the French
King’s library,) laid down the Rio Negro as an
arm of the Oroonoko, that branched off from
the principal track between the mouths of the
Meta and the Vichada, near the cataract of
los Astures (Atures). This great geographer was
then entirely ignorant of the existence of the
Cassiquiare and the Atabapo; and he makes
the Oroonoko or Rio Paragua, the Japura, and.
the Putumayo take their rise from three branch- .
ings of the Caqueta. It was the expedition of
the boundaries, commanded by Ituriaga and
Solano, that made known the real state of
things. Solano was the geographical engineer
of this expedition ; he advanced in 1756 as far as
the mouth of the Guaviare, after having passed
the Great Cataracts. He found, that, to con-
tinue to go up the Oroonoko, he must direct his
course toward the east; and that this river
received at the point of it’s great inflexion, in the
latitude of 4° 4’, the waters of the Guaviare,
which two miles higher had received those of
the Atabapo. Interested in approaching the
Portugueze possessions as near as possible,
Solano resolved to proceed forward toward the
south. At the confluence of the Atabapo and
the Guaviare he found an Indian settlement of


204


the warlike nation of the Guaypunabis*. He
gained their favour by presents, and with them
founded the mission of San Fernando, to which,
in order to dazzle the ministry of Madrid, he
gave the pompous appellation of Villa.

To make known the political importance of
this mission, we must recollect, what was at
that period the balance of power between the
petty Indian tribes of Guyana. The banks
of the Lower Oroonoko had been long ensan-
guined by the obstinate struggle between two
powerful nations, the Cabres and the Caribbees.
The latter, whose principal abode since the close
of the seventeenth century is between the sources
of the Carony, the Esquibo, the Oroonoko, and
the Rio Parima, once not only bore sway as far
as the Great Cataracts, but made incursions also
into the Upper Oroonoko, employing portages
between the Paruspat- and the Caura, the Ere-


* Guipunaves, properly Uipunavi. They must not be
confounded with the Puinaves or Poignaves of Ventuari, the
names of some of the stars among whom I made known above.
Father Gili thinks, that the names Massarinavi, Guaypu-
navi, and Puinavi, denote the descendants, or sons (navi), of
three heads of families called Massari, Guay, and Pui. Thus
the Achaguas call in the Maypure tongue a tribe of Caribs
Chavinavi, or children (sons, navi) of the tiger (chavi); thus
the Portugueze are called Jaranavi, or children (navi) of
the flute (jara). Stor. Amer. vol. 2, p. 205.

t The Rio Paruspa falls into the Rio Paragua, and the
latter into the Rio Carony, which is one of the tributary


205


vato and the Ventuari, the Conorichite and the
Atacavi. None knew better than they the inter-
minglings of the rivers, the proximity of the’
tributary streams, and the ways by which the
distances to be passed might be diminished.
The Caribbees had vanquished and almost ex-
terminated the Cabres. Masters of the Lower
Oroonoko, they met with resistance from the
Guaypunabis, who had founded their dominion
on the Upper Oroonoko ; and who, together with
the Cabres, the Manitivitanoes, and the Parenis,
are the greatest cannibals of these countries.
They inhabited originally the banks of the great
river Inirida at it’s confluence with the Chamo-
chiquini, and the hilly country of Mabicore,


About the year 1744, their chief, or, as the
' natives say, their apoto (king), was called Ma-
capu. He was a man no less ‘distinguished by
his intelligence than his valour; had led a part
of the nation to the banks of the Atabapo ; and,


streams of the Lower Oroonoko,. There is also an ancient
portage of the Caribbees between the Paruspa and the Rio
Chavaro, which flows into the Rio Caura above the mouth
of the Erevato. In going up the Erevato you reach the
savannahs, that are traversed by the Rio Manipiare above the
tributary streams of the Ventuari. The Caribbees in their
distant excursions sometimes passed from the Rio Caura to
the Ventuari, thence to the Padamo, and then by the Upper
Oroonoko to the Atacavi, which westward of Manuteso
takes the name of the Atabapo,


206


when the jesuit Roman made his memorable
expedition from the Oroonoke to the Rio Negro,
Macapu suffered this missionary to take with
him some families of the Guaypunabis, to settle
, them at Uruana, and near the cataract of May-
pures. I have already observed, that this peo-
ple belong, from their language, to the great
branch of the Maypure nations. They are
more industrious, we might also say more civi-
lized, than the other nations of the Upper Oroo-
noko. The missionaries relate, that the Guay-
punabis, at the time of their sway in those coun-
tries, were pretty generally clothed, and had
considerable villages. After the death of Ma-
capu, the command devolved on another war-
rior, Cuseru, called by the Spaniards Captain
Cruzero. He éstablished lines of defence on
the banks of the Inirida, with a kind of little
fort, constructed of earth and timber. |The
piles were more than sixteen feet high, and sur-
rounded both the house of the apoto and a maga-
zine of bows and arrows. Father Forneri has:
described this building, remarkable in a coun-
try in other respects so savage.

The Marepizanas and the Manitivitanoes
were the preponderant nations on the banks of
the Rio Negro. The former had for it’s chiefs,
about the year 1750, two warriors called Imu
and Cajamu. The king of the Manitivitanoes
was Cocuy, famous for his cruelty and his re-


207


finements in debauchery. His sister was still
living in my time, in the vicinity of the mission
of Maypures. We smile at hearing, that the
names of Cuseru, Imu, and Cocuy are as cele-
brated in those countries, as the names of Hol- .
kar, Tippoo, and the most powerful princes,
are in India. The chiefs of the Guaypunabis
and the Manitivitanoes fought with small bodies
of two or three hundred men; but in their pro-
tracted struggles they devastated the missions,
where the poor monks had only fifteen or twenty
Spanish soldiers at their disposal. These hordes,
contemptible for their numbers and means of
defence, spread as much terror as armies; and
if the Jesuits succeeded in preserving their set-
tlements, it was only by. opposing cunning to
strength. They attached some powerful chiefs
to their interests, and enfeebled the Indians
by disunion. When the expedition of. Ituriaga
and Solano arrived at the Oroonoko, the mis-
sions had no longer to fear* the incursions of


* From the year 1733 to 1735 the Caribbee nation was
dangerous to the missions of the Lower Oroonoko, It was
during this interval, that the missionaries of Mamo, and the
bishop, Don Nicolas de Labrid, who had been a canon of
_ the Chapter of Lyons, were massacred by the savages. Fa-
ther Rotella founded in 1740 the mission of Cabruta, by
assembling together the Cabres, to oppose the incursions of
the Caribbees. These incursions ceased entirely about the
year 1750. : :


208


the Caribbees. Cuseru, the chief of the Guaypu-
nabis, had fixed his dwelling behind the granitic
mountains of Sipapo. He was the friend of
the Jesuits; but other nations of the Upper
Oroonoko and the Rio Negro, the Marepiza-
noes, the Amuizanoes, and the Manitivitanoes,
led by Imu, Cajamu, and Cocuy, penetrated
from time to time to the north of the Great
Cataracts. They had other motives for fighting
than that of hatred; they hunted men, as was
formerly the custom of the Caribbees, and is
still the practice in Africa. Sometimes they
furnished slaves (poitos) to the Dutch or Para-
naquiri (inhabitants of the sea); sometimes
they sold them to the Portugueze or Iaranavi
(sons of musicians)*. In America, as in Africa,
the cupidity of the Europeans has produced the
same evils, by exciting the natives to make war,
in order to procure slavest. Every where the
centact of nations far different from each other
_ in their degree of civilization leads to the abuse
of physical strength, and of intellectual prepon-
derance. The Phoenicians and Carthaginians
formerly sought slaves in Europe. Europe now
presses in their turn both on the countries where

* The savage tribes designate every commercial nation of
Europe by surnames, the origin of which appears altogether
accidental. T have already mentioned in another place (vol.
iii, p. 268), that the Spaniards were called clothed men,


Pongheme or Uavemi, by way of distinction.
t See above, vol, ii, p. 245 ; and vol, iii, p. 2.


209


she gathered the first germes of science, and
on those where she now almost involuntarily
spreads them by carrying thither the produce of
her industry.

I have faithfully recorded what I could col-
lect on the state of these countries, where the
vanquished nations become gradually extinct,
and leave no other signs of their existence than
a few words of their language, mixed with that
of the conquerors. We have seen, that in the
north, beyond the cataracts, the preponderant na-
tions were at first the Caribbees and the Cabres,
toward the south, on the Upper Oroonoko, the
Guaypunabis ; and on the Rio Negro, the Mare-
pizanoesand the Manitivitanoes. The long resist-
ance, which the Cabres, united under a valiant
chief, had made to the Caribbees, had become fa-
tal to them subsequent to the year 1720. They
at first vanquished their enemies.near the mouth
of the Rio Caura; and a great number. of Ca-
ribbees perished in a precipitate flight, between
the Rapids of Torno and the Isla del Infierno.
The prisoners were devoured ; and, by one of
those refinements of cunning and cruelty, which
are common to the savage nations of both Ame-
ricas, the Cabres spared the life of one Carib-
bee, whom they forced to climb up a tree to
witness this barbarous spectacle, and carry back
the tidings to the vanquished. The triumph of
Tep, the chief of the Cabres, was but of ‘short

VOL. V. P


216


duration. The Caribbees returned in such great
numbers, that only a feeble remnant of the
anthropophagous Cabres was left on the banks of
the Cuchivero.

Cocuy and Cuseru were carrying on a war
of extermination on the Upper Oroonoko, when
Solano arrived at the mouth of the Guaviare.
The former had embraced the cause of the
Portugueze ; the latter was a friend of the Je-
suits, and gave them warning every time that
the Manitivitanoes were marching against the
Christian establishments of Atures and Cari-
chana. Cuseru made himself a Christian a few
days only before his death ; but in battle he
wore on his left hip a crucifix, which had been
given him by the missionaries, and through
which he believed himself invulnerable. We
were told an anecdote, that paints the violence
of his character. He had married the daughter
of an Indian chief of the Rio Temi. In a pa-
roxysm of rage against his father-in-law, he
declared to his wife, that he was going to fight
with him; she reminded him of the courage and
singular strength of her father; when Cuseru,
without uttering a single word, took a poison-
ed arrow, and plunged it into her bosom.
The arrival of a small body of Spaniards in
1756, under the order of Solano, awakened
suspicion in this chief of the Guaypunabis. He
was on the point of attempting a contest with


21]


them, when the Jesuits made him sensible, that
it would be his interest to remain at peace with
the Christians. Cuseru dined at the table of the
Spanish general ; when he was allured by pro-
mises, and the prediction of the approaching fall
of his enemies. From being a king he became
the mayor of a village; and consented to settle
with his people at the new mission of San Fer- -
nando de Atabapo. Such is most frequently the
sad end of those chiefs, whom travellers and
missionaries style Indian princes. “In my
mission,” says the honest father Gili, “ I had
five reyecillos, or little kings, those of the Tama-
nacs, the Avarigotes, the Parecas, the Quaquas,
and the Méépures. Atchurch I placed them in
file on the same bench; but I took care to give
the first place to Monaiti, king of the Tama-
nacs, because he had helped me to found the
village ; and he seemed quite proud of this pre-
cedency.” We agree with Father Gili, that it is
rare to find men who have fallen from high -
power so easy to he satisfied.

When Cuseru, the chief of the Guaypunabis,
saw the Spanish troops pass the cataracts, he
advised Don Jose Solano to wait a whole year
before he formed a settlement on the Atabapo ;
predicting the misfortunes, which were not long
in taking place. ‘ Let me labour with my peo-
ple in clearing the ground,” said Cuseru to the.
Jesuits ; “I will plant cassava, and you will find

2


212


hereafter wherewith to subsist so many persons.”
Solano, impatient to advance, refused to listen
to the counsel of the Indian chief; and the new
inhabitants of San Fernando had to suffer all the
evils of scarcity. Canoes were sent at a great
expense to New Grenada, by the Meta, and the
Vichada, in search of flour, The provision


_arrived too late, and many Spaniards and In-


dians perished by those diseases which are pro-
duced in every climate by want and moral de-
jection.

Some traces of cultivation are still found at
San Fernando. Every Indian has a small plan-
tation of cacao trees, which produce abundantly
the fifth year; but they cease to bear fruit sooner
than in the vallies of Aragua. The nut is small,
and of an excellent quality. One almeida, twelve
of which compose a fanega, may be bought at
San Fernando for six reals, or nearly four franks;
on the coast it costs at least twenty or twenty-
five franks ; but the whole mission scarcely pro-
duces eighty vanegasa year ; and as the monks
of the missions of the Oroonoko and the Rio
Negro only trade in cacao, according to an
ancient abuse, the Indian is not stimulated to
extend this cultivation, which affords him
scarcely any benefit. There are some savan-
nahs and good pasturage round San Fernando,
but hardly seven or eight cows are to be found,
the remains of a considerable herd, which was


213


brought into these countries at the expedition
to the boundaries. The Indians are a little
more civilized here than in the rest of the mis-
sions; and we found to our surprise a black-
smith of the native race.

What struck us most in the mission of San
Fernando, and gives a peculiar physiognomy to
the landscape, is the pihiguao or piryao palm.
It’s trunk, armed with thorns, is more than
sixty feet high; it’s leaves are pinnated, very
thin, undulated, and frizled toward the points.
Nothing is more extraordinary than the fruits
of this tree; every cluster contains from fifty to
eighty ; they are yellow like apples, grow pur-
ple in proportion as they ripen, two or three
inches thick, and generally, from abortion, with-
out akernel. Among the eighty or ninety spe-
cies of palm trees that are peculiar to the New
Continent, which I have enumerated in the
Nova Genera Plantarum cequinoctialium*, there
are none in which the sarcocarp is developed in
a manner so extraordinary. The fruit of the
pirijao furnishes a farinaceous substance, as
yellow as the yelk of an egg, slightly saccharine,
and extremely nutritious. It is eaten like plan-
tains or potatoes, boiled, or-roasted in the ashes,
and affords an aliment as wholesome as it is
agreeable. The Indians and the missionaries


* Vol. 1, p. 316.


214


are unwearied in their praises of this noble palm-
tree, which might be called the peach palm, and
which we found cultivated in abundance at San
Fernando, San Balthasar, Santa Barbara, and
wherever we advanced toward the south or the
east along the banks of the Atabapo and the
Upper Oroonoko.- In those wild regions are
we involuntarily reminded of the assertion of
Linnzeus, that the country of palm-trees was
the first abode of our species, and that man is
essentially palmivorous*. On examining the
provision accumulated in the huts of the In-
dians, we perceive that their subsistence during
several months of the year depends as much on
the farinaceous fruit of the pirtjao, as on the
cassava and plantain. The tree bears fruit but
once a year, but to the amount of three clus-
ters, consequently from one hundred and_ fifty,
to two hundred fruits.

San Fernando de Atabapo, San Carlos, aud
San Francisco Solano, are the most considerable
settlements among the missions of the Upper
Oroonoke. We found at San Fernando, as
weil as in the neighbouring villages of San Bal-
thazar and Javita, pretty parsonage houses,
covered by lianas, and surrounded by gardens.


+ Homo habitat intra tropicos, vescitur palmis, lotopha-
gus ; hospitatur extra tropicos sub novercante Cerere, carni-
vorus. (Syst. Nat., vol, i, p. 24.)


————


215


The tall trunks of the pirijao palms formed in
our eyes the most beautiful ornament of these
plantations. In our walks, the president of the’
mission gave us an animated account of his
incursions on the Rio Guaviare. He related to
us how much these journeys, undertaken “ for
the conquest of souls,” are desired by the In-
dians of the missions. All, even women and
old men, take part in it.” On the vain pretext
of recovering neophytes who have deserted the
village, -children above eight or ten years of
age are carried off, and distributed among the
Indians of the missions as serfs, or poitoes. The
journals, which father Bartholomew Mancilla
kindly communicated to us, contain very
valuable geographical materials. I shall give
farther on an abstract of these discoveries, in
treating of the principal tributary streams of
the Oroonoko, which are the Guaviare, the
Ventuari, the Meta, the Caura, and the Carony.
It will be sufficient here to observe, that, ac-
cording to the astronomical observations I took
on the banks of the Atabapo, and on the western
declivity of the Cordillera of the Andes, near
the Paramo de la suma Paz, the distance is
one hundred and seven leagues only from San
Fernando to the first villages of the provinces of
Caguan and San Juan de los Llanos. I was
assured also by some Indians, who dwelt for-
merly to the west of the Island of Amanaveni,


216


beyond the confluence of the Rio Supavi, that
going in a boat on the Guaviare (in the man-
ner of the savages) beyond the strait (angos-
tura) and the principal cataract, they met, at
three days distance, bearded and clothed men,
who came in search of the eggs of the turtle
terekey. 'This meeting affrighted the Indians so
much, that they fled precipitately, redescend-
ing the Guaviare. It is probable, that these
bearded white men came from the villages of
Aroma and San Martin, the Rio Guaviare being
formed by the union of the rivers Ariari and
Guayavero. We must not be surprised, that
the missionaries of the Oroonoko and the Ata-
bapo little suspect how near they live to the
missionaries of Mocoa, Rio Fragua, and Cagu-
an. In these desert countries, the real distances
can be known only by observations of the longi-
tude ; and it was in consequence of astronomi-
cal data, and the information I gathered in
the convents of Popayan and of Pasto, to the
west of the Cordillera of the Andes, that I
formed an accurate idea of the respective situ-
ations of the Christian settlements on the Ata-
bapo, the Guayavero, and the Caqueta*.

Every thing changes on entering the Rio
Atabapo; the constitution of the atmosphere,
the colour of the waters, and the form of the


* The Caqueta bears lower down the name of the Yupura,


217


trees that cover the shore. You no longer suffer
during the day the torment of moschettoes ; and
the gnats with long legs (zancudoes) become
rare during the night. Beyond the mission of
San Fernando these nocturnal insects disappear
altogether. The waters of the Oroonoko are
turbid, and loaded with earthy matter; and in
the coves, from the accumulation of dead croco-
diles,and other putrescent substances, diffuse a
musky and faint smell. We were sometimes
obliged to strain this water through a linen
cloth before we drank it. The waters of the
Atabapo on the contrary are pure, agreeable to
the taste, without any trace of smell, brownish
by reflected, and of a pale yellow by transmitted
light. The people call them light, in opposition
to the heavy and turbid waters of the Oroo-
noko. Their temperature is generally two de-
grees, and when you appproach the mouth of
the Rio Temi three degrees, cooler than the
temperature of the Upper Oroonoko. After
having been compelled during a whole year to
drink water at 27° or 28°*, a lowering of a few
degrees in the temperature produces a very
agreeable sensation. I think this lowering of
the temperature may be attributed to the river
being less broad, and without the sandy beach,
the heat of which at the Oroonoko is by day


# 224° or 22°8° of Reaumur.


218


more than 50°, and also to the thick shade of
the forests, which are traversed by the Atabapo,
the Temi, the Tuamini, and the Guainia, or Rio
Negro.

What proves the extreme purity of the black
waters is their limpidity, their transparency, and
the clearness with which they reflect the images
and colours of surrounding objects. The small-
est fish are visible in them at a depth of twenty
or thirty feet; and most commonly the bottom
of the river may be distinguished, which is not
a yellowish or brownish mud, like the colour of
the water, but a quartzose and granitic sand
of dazzling whiteness. Nothing can be com-
pared to the beauty of the banks of the Ata-
bapo. Loaded with plants, among which rise
the palms crowned with leafy plumes; the banks
are reflected inthe waters ; and the verdure of the
reflected image seems to have the same vivid hue
as the object itself directly seen, the surface of
the fluid is so homogeneous, smooth, and desti-
tute of that mixture of suspended sand and
decomposed organic matter, which roughens
and streaks the surface of less limpid rivers.

On quitting the Oroonoko, several small ra-
pids must be passed, but without any appear-
ance of danger. Amid these raudalitos, ac-
cording to the opinion of the missionaries, the
Rio Atabapo falls into the Oroonoko. I rather
think, that the Atabapo falls into the Guaviare ;


219


and that the part of the river, which we meet
with from the Oroonoko as far as the mission
of San Fernando, ought to bear this name. The
Rio Guaviare, which is much wider than the
Atabapo, has white waters, and in the aspect of
it’s banks, it’s fishing-birds, it’s fish, and the
great. crocodiles which live in it, resembles the
Oroonoko much more than that part of the
latter river which comes from the Esmeralda.
When a river springs from the junction of two
other rivers, nearly alike in size, it is difficult to
judge which of the two confluent streams must
be regarded as it’s source. The Indians of San
Fernando still maintain an opinion diametrically
opposite to that of the geographers. They
affirm, that the Oroonoko rises from two rivers,
the Guaviare and the Rio Paragua. They give
this latter name to the Upper Oroonoko, from
San Fernando and Santa Barbara to beyond
the Esmeralda. According to this hypothesis
they say, that. the Cassiquiare is not an arm of
the Oroonoko, but of the Rio Paragua. In look-
ing on the map I have traced, it may be per-
ceived, that these denominations are entirely
arbitrary. It is of little import, that the name
of Oroonoko is refused to the Rio Paragua, pro-
vided we trace the course of these rivers such as
it is in nature, and do not separate by a chain of
mountains, as was done previously to my tra-
vels, rivers that. communicate together, and


220


form one system. When we would give the
name of a large river to one of the two branches
by which it is formed, it should be applied to
that branch, which furnishes most water. Now
at the two seasons of the year when I saw the
Guaviare, and the Upper Oroonoko or Rio Para-
gua (between the Esmeralda and San Fernan-
do), it appeared to me, that the latter was not
so large as the Guaviare. Similar doubts have
been entertained by geographical travellers on
the junction of the Upper Mississipi with the
Missouri and the Ohio, on the junction of the
Maragnon with the Guallaga and the Ucayale,
and on the junction of the Indus with the Chu-
nab (Hydaspes of Cashmere) and the Gurra, or
Sutledge*. ‘To avoid embroiling farther a no-
menclature of rivers so arbitrarily fixed, I will
not propose new denominations. I shall con-
tinue with father Caulin and the Spanish geo-
graphers, to call the river Esmeralda the Oroo-
noko, or Upper Oroonoko; but I must ob-
serve, that if the Oroonoko, from San Fernando
de Atabapo as far as the Delta which it forms
opposite the island of Trinidad, were regarded as
the continuation of the Rio Guaviare; and if


* The Hydaspes is properly a tributary stream of the
Chunab or Acesines. The Sutledge, or Hysudrus forms,
together with the Beyah or Hyphases, the river Gurra.
These are the beautiful regions of the Pundjab and Douab,


celebrated in history from Porus down to Sultan Acbar.


221


that part of the Upper Oroonoko between the
Esmeralda and the mission of San Fernando
were considered as a tributary stream; the
Oroonoko would preserve, from the savannahs
of San Juan de los Llanos and the eastern de-
clivity of the Andes to it’s mouth, a more uni-
form and natural direction, that from south
west to north-east.

The Rio Paragua, or that part of the Oroo-
noko which you go up to the east of the mouth
of the Guaviare, has clearer, more transparent,
and purer water than the part of the Oroonoko
below San Fernando. The waters of the Gua-
viare, on the contrary, are white and turbid;
they have the same taste, according to the In-
dians, whose organs of sense are extremely
delicate and well practised, as the waters of the
Oroonoko near the Great Cataracts. “ Bring
me the waters of three or four great rivers of
these countries,” an old Indian of the mission of
Javita said to us, “ on drinking them I will tell
you without fear of mistake, whence the water
was taken; whether they come from a white or
black river ; the Oroonoko or the Atabapo, the
Paragua or the Guaviare.’ The great croco-
diles and porpoises (toninas), which are alike
common in the Rio Guaviare and the Lower
Oroonoko, are entirely wanting, as we were told,
in the Rio Paragua (or Upper Oroonoko, be-
tween San Fernando and the Esmeralda). These


222°


are very remarkable differences in the nature of
the waters, and the distribution of animals!
The Indians do not fail to cite them, when they
would prove to travellers, that the Upper Oroo-
noko, to the east of San Fernando, is a distinct
river that falls into the Oroonoko, and that the
real origin of the latter must be sought in the
sources of the Guaviare. The geographers of
Europe are no doubt in the wrong not to em-
brace the way of thinking of the Indians, who
are the geographers of their own country ; but
in respect to nomenclature and orthography, it is
often prudent, to follow an error we have point-
ed out.

The astronomical observations* made in the
night of the 25th of April did not give me the
latitude with satisfactory precision. The sky
was cloudy, and I could obtain only a few
heights of 2 Centauri, and the beautiful star at
the foot of the Southern Cross. According to
these heights, the latitude of the mission of San
Fernando appeared to me to be 4° 2’ 48”. In
father Caulin’s map, founded on the observa-
tions of Solano made in 1756, it is 4° 1’. This


* See my Rec. d’ Obs. Astro., vol. i, p. 280, 253, 275.

+ In the text of the book, which, as it happens unfortu-
nately for the most part in narratives of travels, is in contra-
diction with the map, the latitude of the junction of the Gua-
viare and the Atabapo is said to be a little less than three
degrees. . Does not this difference proceed from the falsified


phic og neaeapincip


223


agreement proves the justness of a result, which
however I could only deduce from altitudes
considerably distant from the meridian. A good
observation of the stars at Guapasoso* gave me
4° 2° for San Fernando de Atabapo. (Gumilla
placed the confluence of the Atabapo and the
Guaviare in 0°30’; D’Anville, in 2°51’.) Iwas
able to fix the longitude with much more precision
in my way to the Rio Negro, and in returning
from that river. It is 70° 30’ 46” (or 4° 0 west
of the meridian of Cumana). The going of the
chronometer was so regular during the naviga-
tion in a boat, that from the 16th of April to the
9th of July it varied only from 27:9”, to 28°5”.
At San Fernando de Atabapo I found the dip of
the magnetic needle, rectified with great care,
to be 29°7° cent. div.; the intensity of force 219.
The angle and the oscillations therefore had
diminished considerably from Maypures, in a
difference of latitude of 1° 11’. The surround-


copies of Solano’s observations which have been circulated ?
Gili mentions an instance in the latitude of Atures, which led
him into error in all the more southern points, (Saggio, vol. 1,
p- 320; and above, p. 12, note.)


* Obs. Astr. vol. 1, p. 263. The longitude of San Fer-
nando has been given in Arrowsmith’s map as I published it
(68° 10% from Greenw.), but the latitude is laid down at
4° 19/. In this point, as in so many others, the calculations
of d’Anville on the longitude have been happier than those of
his successors.


224


ing rock was no longer a ferruginous sandstone,
but granite passing into gneiss.

April 26th. We advanced only two or three
leagues, and passed the night on a rock near
the Indian plantations or conucos of Guapasoso,.
The river losing itself by it’s inundations in the
forests, and it’s real banks being unseen, the
traveller can set his foot on the land only where
a rock or a small table-land rises above the
water. The granite of those countries, by the
disposition which the thin lamine of black mica
affect, sometimes resembles graphic granite ;
but most frequently, and this determines the
age of it’s formation, it passes into a real gneiss.
It’s beds, very regularly stratified, run from
south-west to north-east, as in the Cordillera on
the shore of Caraccas. The dip of the granite-
gneiss is 70° north-west. It is traversed by an
infinite number of veins of quartz, which are
singularly transparent, and three or four, and
sometimes fifteen inches thick. I found no
cavity, (druse,) no crystallized substance, not
even rock-crystal ; and no trace of pyrites, or
any other metallic substance. I enter into
these particulars on account of the chimerical
ideas, that have been spread ever since the six-
teenth century, after the voyages of Berreo and
Raleigh*, “ on the immense riches of the great
and fine empire of Guyana.”


* Raleigh’s work bears the pompous title of The Disco-


29


The river Atabapo displays every where a pe-
culiar aspect; you see nothing of it’s real
banks formed by flat lands, eight or ten feet
high; they are concealed by a row of palms,
_ and small trees with slender trunks, the roots
of which are bathed by the waters. There are
many crocodiles from the point where you quit
the Oroonoko to the mission of San Fernando,
and their presence indicates, as we have said
above, that this part of the river belongs to the
Rio Guaviare and not to the Atabapo. In the
real bed of the latter river, above the mission of
San Fernando, there are no longer any croco-
diles : we find there some bavas, a great many
Jresh-water dolphins, but no manatees. We also
seek in vain on those banks the thick-nosed
tapir, the araguates, or great howling monkeys,
the zamuro, or vultur aura, and the crested
pheasant, known by the name of gwacharaca.
Enormous water-snakes, in shape resembling the
boa, are unfortunately very common, and are
dangerous to the Indians who bathe. We saw
them almost from the first day, swimming by
the side of our canoe; they were at the most,
twelve or fourteen feet long. The jaguars of .
the banks of the Atabapo and the Temi are


very of the large, rich, and beautiful Empire of Guiana.
Lond. 1596.” (See also Raleghi admiranda Descriptio
Regni Guiane, Auri abundantissimi, Ed. Hondius Nori-
berge, 1599).

VOL. Vv. Q


~ 296


\


large and well fed ; they are said, however, te


be less daring than the jaguars of the Oroonoko.


_ April 27th. The night was beautiful, dark
clouds passed from time to time over the zenith
with extreme rapidity. Not a breath of wind
was felt in the lower strata of the atmosphere;
the breeze existed only at the height. of a.thou-
sand toises. I dwell upon this peculiarity; for
the movement we saw was not produced by the
counter-currents (from west to east), which are
sometimes thought to be observed in the torrid
zone on the loftiest mountains of the Cordilleras ;
it was the effect of a real breeze, of an east wind.
I had some good observations of the meridian
altitude of 4 in the Southern Cross; the partial
results oscillated only eight er ten seconds
round the mean*. The latitude of Guapasose
is 3° 63°55”. The black water of the river
served me for an horizon, and I felt so much
the more pleasure in making these observations,
as in the white rivers, the Apure and the Oroo-
noko, we had been cruelly stung by insects,
Mr. Bonpland in marking the time by the chro-


nometer, and I in levelling the horizon. We


left. the conucos. of Guapasoso at two o’clock ;
continued to ascend the river toward the south,
and found it, or rather that part of it’s bed
which is free from trees, narrowing more and


* Obs. Astr. vol. 1, p. 233,


227


more. It began to rain toward sunrise. Un-
accustomed to these forests, which are less inha-
bited by animals than those of the Oroonoko,
we were almost surprised to hear no longer
the howlings of the monkeys. The dolphins, or
toninas, sported by the side of our boat. Ac-
cording to the relation of Mr. Colebrooke, the
delphinus gangeticus, which is the fresh-water
porpoise of the ancient continent, in like man-
ner accompanies the boats that go up toward
Benares ; but from Benares to the point where
the Ganges receives the salt. waters is only two
hundred leagues, while from the Atabapo to
the mouth of the Oroonoko is more than three
hundred and twenty.

Near noon we passed the mouth of the little
river Ipurichapano on the east, and afterward,
the granitic pass, known by the name of Piedra
del Tigre. This solitary rock is only sixty feet
high, yet it enjoys great celebrity in these coun-
tries, Between four and five degrees of latitude,
a little to the south of the mountains of Sipapo,
we reach the southern extremity of that chain of
cataracts, which I proposed, in a memoir pub-
lished in 1800, to call the Chain of Parima.
At 4° 20’ it stretches from the right bank of the
Oroonoko toward the east and east-south-east.
The whole of the land extending from the moun-
tains of the Parima toward the river of Amazons,
which is traversed by the Atabapo, the Cassi-

Q2


228


quiare, and the Rio Negro, is an immense
plain, covered partly with forests, and partly
with grasses. Small rocks rise here and there
like castles. We regretted, that we had not
stopped to rest near the rock of the Tiger ; for
in going up the Atabapo we had great difficulty
to find a spot of dry ground, open and spacious
enough to light fires, and place our instruments
and our hammocks.

April 28th. It rained hard from sunset, and
we were afraid that our collections would be
damaged. The poor missionary had his fit of
tertian fever, and besought us to reembark im-
mediately after midnight. We passed at day-
break the Piedra and the Raudalito* of Gua-
-rinuma. The rock is on the east bank ; it is a
bare shelf of granite covered with psora, clado-
nia, and other lichens. I fancied myself trans-
ported to the north of Europe, and on the ridge
of the mountains of gneiss and granite between
Freiberg and Marienburg in Saxony. The cla-
donias appeared to me to be identical with the
lichen rangiferinus, the 1. pixidatus, and the 1. po-
lymorphus of Linneus. After having passed the
rapids of Guarinuma, the Indians showed us in
the middle of the forest, on our right, the ruins
of the mission of Mendaxari, which has been long
abandoned. On the east bank, near the little


* The rock and little cascades.


229


rock of Kemarumo, in the midst of Indian plan-
tations, a gigantic bombax* attracted our curi-
osity. We landed in order to measure it; the
height was nearly one hundred and twenty feet,
and the diameter between fourteen and fifteen.
This enormous effort of vegetation surprised us
the more, as we had till then seen on the banks
of the Atabapo only small trees with slender
trunks, which from afar resembled young cherry
trees. The Indians assured us, that these small
trees do not form a very extensive group. They
are checked in their growth by the inundations
of the river; while the dry grounds near the
Atabapo, the Temi, and the Tuamini, furnish
excellent timber for building. These forests
however, (and this observation is important, if
we wish to form a precise idea of the equatorial
plains of the Rio Negro, and the Amazon) do
not stretch indefinitely to the east and west
toward the Cassiquiare and the Guaviare ; they
are bounded by the open savannahs of Manute-
so, and the Rio Inirida. We found it difficult
in the evening to stem the current, and passed
the night in a wood a little above Mendaxari ;
which is another granitic rock traversed by a
stratum of quartz. We found in it a group of
fine crystals of black schorl.

April 29th. The air was cooler. We had


* Bombax ceiba.


230


no zancudoes, but a sky constantly clouded,
and without stars. I began to regret the Lower
Oroonoko. We still advanced slowly from the
force of the current, and stopped a great, part


of the day in seeking for plants. It was night


when we arrived at the mission of San Baltha-
sar, or, as the monks say, (Balthasar bemg
only the name of an Indian chief,) at the mission
of la divina Pastora de Balthasar de Atabapo.
We were lodged with a Catalan missionary, a
lively and agreeable man, who displayed in
these wild countries the activity that charac-
terizes his nation. He had planted a fine gar-
den, where the fig-tree of Europe was found in
company with the persea, and the lemon-tree
with the mammee. The village was built with
that regularity, which in the north of Germany,
and in protestant America, we find in the ham-
lets of the Moravian brethren ; and the Indian
plantations seemed better cultivated than. else-
where. Here we saw for the first time that
white and fungous substance, which I have
made known by the name of dapichoand zapis*.
We immediately perceived, that it was analo-
gous to the elastic resin; but, as the Indians
made us understand by signs, that it was found
under ground, we were inclined to think, till


* These two words belong to the Poimisano and Para-
gini tongues. (Pronounce it dapitcho.)


23)

we arrived at the mission of Javita, that the
dapicho was a fossil caoutchouc, though differ-
ent from the elastic bitumen of Derbyshire. A
Poimisano Indian, seated by the fire, in the hut
_ of the missionary, was employed in reducing
the dapicho into black caoutchouc. He had
spitted several bits on a slender stick, and was
roasting them like meat. The dapicho blackens
in proportion as it grows softer, and gains in
elasticity. The resinous and aromatic smell,
which filléd the hut, seémed to indicate, that
this coloration is the effect of the decomposi-
tion of a'carburet of hydrogen, and that the
carbon appears in proportion as the hydrogen
burns at a low heat*. The Indian beat the
softened and blackened mass with a piece of
brazil wood, ending in form of a club; he then
kneaded the dapicho into balls of three or four
inches in diameter, and let it cool. These balls
exactly ‘resemble the caoutchoud of the shops,
but their'surface remains in general slightly
viscous.’ They are used at San Balthasar in the
Indian’ game of tennis, which is so celebrated
among’ the ‘inhabitants of Uruana and Encara-
mada‘; they are cut into cylinders, to be used
as corks, and ‘are far preferable to those made
of the bark ‘of the cork-tree.


* See Mr. Allen’s Memoir. (Journal de Phys., vol. xvii,
p. 77.)


232


This use of the caoutchouc appeared to us
the more worthy notice, as we had been often
embarrassed by the want of the corks of Eu-
rope. The great utility of cork is felt only in
countries, where trade has not supplied this
bark in plenty. Equinoctial America no where
produces, not even on the back of the Andes, an
oak resembling the quercus suber ; and neither
the light wood of the bombax, the ochroma*,
and other malvaceous plants, nor the rhachis
of maize, of which the natives make use, can
well supply the place of our corks. The mis-
sionary showed us, before the Casa de lus Sol-
teros (the house where the young unmarried
men reside), a drum, which was a hollow cy-
linder of wood, two feet long, and eighteen
inches thick. This drum was beaten with great
masses of dapieho, which served as drum-sticks ;
it had openings which could be stopped by the
hand at will, to vary the sounds, and was fixed
on two light supports. Savage nations love
noisy music; the drum, and the botutos, or
trumpets of baked earth, in which a tube of
three or four feet long communicates with several
swellings, are indispensable instruments among
the Indians for their grand pieces of music.

April 30th. The night was sufficiently fine
for observing the meridian heights of « of the


* Palo de Valza.


|
an
|


235


Southern Cross, and the two large stars in the
feet of the Centaur. I found the latitude of San
Balthasar 3° 14’ 23”. Horary angles of the Sun
gave 70° 14’ 21” for the longitude by the chro-
nometer. The dip of the magnetic needle was
27°8° (cent. div.). We left the mission at a
late hour in the morning, and continued to go
up the Atabapo for five miles ;, then, instead of
following that river to it’s source in the east,
where it bears the name of Atacavi, we entered
the Rio Temi. Before we reached it’s conflu-
ence, a granitic hummock, that rises: on the
western bank, near the mouth of the Guasacavi,
fixed our attention ; it is called the Rock of the
Guahiba woman*, ov the Rock of the Mother,
Piedra de la Madre. We inquired the cause
of so singular a denomination. Father Zea
could not satisfy our curiosity ; but some weeks
after, another missionary, one of the predeces-
sors of this ecclesiastic, whom we found settled
at San Fernando as president of the missions, ,
related to us an event, which I recorded in my
journal, and which excited in our minds the
most painful feelings. If, in these solitary
scenes, man scarcely leaves behind him any
trace of his existence, it is doubly humiliating
for a European to see perpetuated by the name
of a rock, by one of those imperishable monu-


* Predra‘de la Guahiba.


234


ments of nature, the remembrance of the moral
degradation of our species, and the contrast
between the virtue of a savage, and the barba-
rism of civilized man !

In 1797 the missionary of San Fernando had
led his Indians to the banks of the Rio Gua-
viare,; on one of those hostile incursions, which
are prohibited alike by religion and the Spanish
laws. They found in an Indian hut a Guahiba
mother with three children, two of whom were
still infants. They were occupied in preparing
the flour of cassava. Resistance was impossible ;
the father was gone to fish, and the mother tried
in vain to flee with her children. Scarcely had
she reached the savannah, when she was seized
by the Indians of the mission, who go to hunt
men, like the Whites and the Negroes in Africa.


The mother and her children were bound, and


dragged: to the bank of the river. The monk,
seated in his boat, waited the issue ofan expe-
dition, of which he partook not the danger.
Had the mother made too violent: a resistance,
the Indians would have killed her, for every thing
is. permitted when they go to. the conquest
of souls (@ la conquista espiritual), and. it is
children in particular they seek to capture, in
order to treat them in the »mission as poitos,
or slaves.of the Christians. The prisoners were
carried to San Fernando in the hope, that the
mother would be unable to find her way back


235


to her home by land. Far from those children
who had accompanied their father on the day
in which she had been carried off, this unhappy
woman showed signs of. the deepest despair.
She attempted to take back, to. her family the
children, who had, been snatched away. by the
missionary ; and fled with them repeatedly from
the village of San Fernando, but the Indians
never failed to seize her anew; and the mis-
sionary, after having, caused her to be merci-
lessly beaten, took the cruel resolution of sepa-
rating the mother from the two children, who
had been, carried. off with her. She was con-
_ veyed alone toward the missions of) the Rio
Negro, going up the Atabapo. Slightly bound,
she was seated at the bow of the boat, ignorant
of the fate that awaited her ; but she judged by
the direction of the Sun, that she was removing
farther and farther from her hut and her native
country. She succeeded in breaking her bonds,
threw herself into the water, and swam to the
left, bank of the Atabapo. The current carried
her to a shelf of rock, which bears her name to
this day.. She Janded,, and took shelter in the
woods, but the president of the. missions order-
ed. the Indians. to row to the shore, and follow
the traces of the Guahiba.. In the evening she
was brought back. Stretched upon the .rock
(la Piedra de la Madre) a cruel punishment was.
inflicted on her with those straps of manatee


236


leather, which serve for whips in that country,
and with which the alcades are always fur-
nished. This unhappy woman, her hands tied
behind her back with strong stalks of mavacure,
was then dragged to the mission of Javita.

She was there thrown into one of the caravan-
seras that are called Casa del Rey. It was the
rainy season, and the night was profoundly
dark. Forests till then believed to be impene-
trable separated the mission of Javita from that
of San Fernando, which was twenty-five leagues
distant in a straight line. No other path is
known than that of the rivers; no man ever
attempted to go by land from one village to
another, were they only a few leagues apart.
But such difficulties do not stop a mother, who
is separated from her children. Her children
are at San Fernando de Atabapo; she must
find them again, she must execute her project
of delivering them from the hands of Christians,
of bringing them back to their father on the
banks of the Guaviare. The Guahiba was care-
lessly guarded in the caravansera. Her arms
being wounded, the Indians of Javita had loos-
ened her bonds, unknown to the missionary and
the alcades. She succeeded by the help of her
teeth in breaking them entirely ; disappeared
during the night ; and at the fourth rising Sun
was seen'at the mission of San Fernando, ho-
vering around ae hut where her children were


237


confined. ‘‘ What that woman _ performed,”
added the missionary, who gave us this sad
narrative, “‘ the most robust Indian would not
have ventured to undertake. She traversed the
woods at a season, when the sky is constantly
covered with clouds, and the Sun during whole
days appears but for a few minutes. Did the
course of the waters direct her way? The in-
undations of the rivers forced her to go far from
the banks of the main stream, through the
midst of woods where the movement of the
waters is almost imperceptible. How often
must she have been stopped by the thorny lia-
nas, that form a network around the trunks
they entwine! How often must she have swum
across the rivulets, that run into the Atabapo!
This unfortunate woman was asked how she
had sustained herself during four days? She
said, that exhausted with fatigue, she could find
no other nourishment than those great. black
ants called vachacos, which climb the trees in
long bands, to suspend on them their resinous
nests.” We pressed the missionary to tell us,
whether the Guahiba had peacefully enjoyed
the happiness of remaining with her children ;
and if any repentance had followed this excess
of cruelty. He would not satisfy our curiosity ;
but at our return from the Rio Negro we learnt,
that the Indian mother was not allowed time to
cure her. wounds, but was again separated from


238


her children, and sent to one of the missions of
the Upper Oroonoko. There she died, refusing
all kind of nourishment, as the savages do in
great calamities.

Such is the remembrance annexed to this
fatal rock, to the Piedra dela Madre. In the
relation of my travels I feel no propensity to
pause at a picture of individual calamity, of
evils which are every where frequent, where
there are masters and slaves, civilized Euro-
peans living with people in a state of barba-
rism, and priests executing the plenitude of
arbitrary power on men ignorant and without
defence. Historian of the countries through
which I passed, I generally confine myself to
pointing out what is imperfect, or fatal to hu-
manity, in their civil or religious institutions.
If I have dwelt longer on the Rock of the Gua-
hiba, it was to display an affecting instance of
maternal tenderness in a race of péoplé so long
calumniatéd ; and because I thought some bene-
fit might accrue from publishing a fact, which
I had from the monks of St. Fraiicis, and which
proves how much the system of the miissions calls
for the care of the legislator.

Above the mouth of the Guasticavi we en-
tered the Rio Temi, the course of which is
from south to north. Had we continued to
ascend the Atabapo, we should have turned
toward the east-south-east, going farther from


239


the banks of the Guainia or Rio Negro. The
Temi is only eighty or ninety toises broad, but
in any other country than Guiana would be
still a considerable river. The aspect of the
country is uniform, a forest covering ground
perfectly flat. The fine pirijao palm, with
it's fruit like peaches, and a new species of
bache or mauritia, it’s trunk bristled with
thorns, rise amid smaller trees, the vegetation
of which appears to be retarded by the con-
tinuance of the inundations. This mauritia
- aculeata is called by the Indians juria or
cauvaja; it’s leaves are in the form of a fan,
and bent toward the ground ; at the centre of
every leaf, no doubt from the effect of some dis-
ease of the parenchyma, concentric circles of al-
ternate blue and yellow appear, the yellow
prevailing toward the middle. We were singu-
larly struck by this appearance; the leaves,
coloured like the peacock’s tail, are supported
by short and very thick trunks. The thorns are
not slender and long like those of the corozo and
other thorny palm trees; but on the contrary
very woody, short, and broad at the base, like
the thorns of the hura crepitans. On the banks
of the Atabapo and the Temi, this palm tree is
distributed in groups of twelve or fifteen stems,
as close together as if they rose from the same
root. These trees resemble in their appearance,
form, and scarcity of leaves, the fan-palms and
palmettoes of the ancient continent. We re-


240


’


marked, that some plants of the juria were
entirely destitute of fruit, and others exhibited a
considerable quantity ; this circumstance seems
to indicate a palm-tree of separate sexes.
Wherever the Rio Temi forms coves, the
forest is inundated to the extent of more than
half a league square. To avoid the sinuosities
of the river, and shorten the navigation, it is
here performed in a very extraordinary manner.
The Indians made us leave the bed of the river ;
and we went up toward the south, across the
forest, through paths (sendas), that is, through
open channels of four or five feet broad. The
depth of the water seldom exceeds half a fa-
thom. These sendas are formed in the inun-
dated forest like paths on dry ground. The
Indians, in going from one mission to another,
pass with their boats as much as possible by the
same way; but the communications not being
frequent, the force of vegetation sometimes pro-
duces unexpected obstacles. An Indian furnish-
ed with a machette, (a great knife the blade cf
which is fourteen inches long), stood at the
head of our boat, employed continually in chop-
ping off the branches, that cross each other
from the two sides of the channel. In the
_ thickest part of the forest we were astonished
by an extraordinary noise. On beating the
bushes a shoal of toninas (fresh water dolphins)
four feet long surrounded our boat. These ani-
mals had concealed themselves beneath the


i


branches of a fromager or bombax ceiba. They
fied across the forest, throwing out those spouts
of compressed air and water, which have given
them in every language the name of blowers.
How singular was this spectacle in the middle
of the land, three or four hundred leagues from
the mouths of the Oroonoko and the Amazon ?
I am not ignorant, that the pleuronectes* of the
Atlantic go up the Loire as far as Orleans ; but
I persist in thinking, that the dolphins of the
Temi, like those of the Ganges, and like the
skate (rata) of the Oroonoko, are of species essen-
tially different from the dolphins and skates of
the ocean. In the immense rivers of South
America, and the great lakes of North America,
Nature seems to repeat several pelagic forms.
The Nile has no porpoises}: those of the sea
go up the Delta no farther than Biana and Me-
tonbis toward Selamoun.

At five in the evening we regained with some
difficulty the real bed of the river. Our canoe
remained fast some minutes between two trunks
of trees ; and was scarcely disengaged, when we
reached a spot where several paths or small


* Dabs.
¢ Those dolphins, that enter the mouth of the Nile, had
however, so much struck the ancients, that in a bust in sye-
nite, preserved in the museum at Paris, (hall of Melpomene,
No. 266) the. sculptor has represented them half concealed
in the undalatory beard of the god of the river.
VOL, V. R


242


channels crossed each other. The pilot was
puzzled to distinguish the most open path.
We have mentioned above, that in the province of
Varinas you travel in a boat across open savan-
nahs from San Fernando de Apure as far as the
banks of the Arauca ; here we navigated through
a forest so thick, that we could guide ourselves
neither by the sun nor by the stars. We were
again struck during this day by the want of ar-
borescent ferns in that country; they diminish
visibly from six degrees of north latitude, while
the palm-trees augment prodigiously toward the
equator. Fern-trees belong to a climate less
hot, and a soil a little mountainous, to table-
lands three hundred toises high. It is only
where there are mountains, that these majestic
plants descend toward the plains ; they seém to
flee from perfectly flat grounds, as those through
which run the Cassiquiare, the Temi, Inirida,
and the Rio Negro. We passed in the night
near a rock, called the Piedra de Astor by the
missionaries. The ground from the mouth of
the Guaviare constantly displays the same
geological constitution. It is a vast granitic
plain, in which from league to league the rock
pierces the soil, and forms not hillocks, but
small masses, that resemble pillars or ruined
buildings.

May the Ist.. The Indians chose to depart
long before sunrise. We were stirring before


243


‘them however, because I waited though vainly
for a star ready to pass the meridian. In those
humid regions covered with forests, the nights
became more obscure in proportion as we drew
nearer the Rio Negro, and the interior of Bra-
zil. We remained in the bed of the river till
day-break, afraid of losing ourselves among the
trees. At sunrise we again entered the inun-
dated forest, to avoid the force of the current.
Arrived at the junction of the Temi with ano-
ther little river, the Tuamini, the waters of
which are equally black, we followed the latter
toward the south-west. This direction led us
near the mission of Javita, which is founded on
the banks of the Tuamini; and at this Christian
settlement we were to find the aid necessary for
transporting our canoe by land to the Rio Ne-
gro. We did not arrive at San Antonio de
Javita till near eleven in the morning. An
accident of small importance in itself, but which
shows the excessive timidity of the little sago-
ins, had retained us some time at the mouth
of the Tuamini. The noise of the blowers had
frightened our monkeys, and one of them fell
into the water. As the animals of this species,
perhaps on account of their extreme meagre-
ness, swim badly, it was saved with some diffi-
culty.

At Javita we had the pleasure of finding
a very intelligent and affable monk. We were
R 2


244


obliged to remain four or five days at his mis-
sion. This delay was inevitable for transport-
ing our boat across the portage of Pimichin ;
and we availed ourselves of it, not only to visit
the surrounding country, but also to cure our-
selves of an evil, which we had suffered for two
days. We felt an extraordinary irritation on
the joints of the fingers, and on the back of our
hands. The missionary told us it was caused
by the aradores (ploughman insects), which get
under the skin. We could distinguish with a
lens nothing but streaks, or parallel and whitish
furrows. It isthe form of these furrows, that
has obtained this insect the name of ploughman.
A mulatto woman was sent for, who boasted
of being thoroughly acquainted with all the
little insects, that burrow in the human skin ;
the chego, the nuche, the coya, and the arador ;
she was the curandera, the physician of the
place. She promised to extirpate the insects,
that caused this smarting irritation, one by one.
She heated at a lamp the point of a little bit of
very hard wood, and dug with this point the
furrows that marked the skin. After long re-
searches, she announced with the pedantic gra-
vity peculiar to the mulatto race, that an arador
was found. I saw a little round bag, which I sus-
pected to be the egg of an acarus. I was to find
relief, (when the mulatto woman had succeeded
in taking out three or four of these aradores.


SUR 2 eae


245


Having the skin of both hands filled with acari,
I had not patience to wait the end of an opera-
tion, which had already lasted till late at night.
The next day an Indian of Javita cured us radi-
cally, and with surprising promptitude. He
brought us the branch of a shrub, called uzao,
with small leaves like those of cassia, very cori-
aceous and glossy. He made a cold infusion of
the bark of this shrub, which had a bluish co-
lour, and the taste of liquorice (glycyrrhiza).
When beaten, it yields a great deal of froth.
The irritation of the aradores ceased by using
simple lotions of this uzao water. We could
not find this shrub in flower, or bearing fruit ;
it appears to belong to the family of the legu-
minous plants, the chemical properties of which
are singularly varied. We dreaded so much
the sufferings to which we had been exposed,
that we constantly kept some branches of the
uzao in our boat, till we reached San Carlos.
This shrub grows in abundance on the banks of
the Pimichin. Why has no remedy been dis-
covered for the irritation produced by the sting
of the zancudoes (culex), as well as for that oc-
casioned by the aradores or microscopic acari ?

In 1755, before the expedition to the boun-
daries, better known by the name of the expe-
dition of Solano, the whole country between the
missions of Javita and San Balthasar was re-
garded as dependant on Brazil. ‘The Portu


246


gueze had advanced from the Rio Negro, by the
portage of Canno Pimichin, as far as the banks
of the Temi. An Indian chief of the name of
Javita, celebrated for his courage and his spirit
of enterprise, was the ally of the Portugueze.
He pushed his hostile incursions from the Rio
Jupura, or Caqueta, one of the great tributary
streams of the Amazon, by the rivers Uaupe
and Xie as far as the black waters of the Temi
and the Tuamini, a distance of more than a hun-
dred leagues. He was furnished with a patent,
which authorised him, “ to draw the Indians
from the forest, for the conquest of souls.” He
availed himself amply of this permission; but
his incursions had an object, which was not
altogether spiritual, that of making slaves (poi-
tos), to sell to the Portugueze. When Solano,
the second chief of the expedition of the boun-
daries, arrived at San Fernando de Atabapo, he
had captain Javita seized, in one of his incur-
sions to the banks of the Temi. He treated
him with gentleness, and succeeded in gaining
him over to the interests of the Spanish govern-
ment by promises, that were not fulfilled. The
Portugueze, who had already formed some sta-
ble settlements in these countries, were driven
back as far as the lower part of the Rio Negro ;
and the mission of San Antonio, of which the
more usual name is Javita, after that. of it’s
Indian founder, was removed farther north of


ij
:
|


247


the sources of the Tuamini, to the spot where it
is now found. This old captain, Javita, was
still living, when we proceeded to the Rio Ne-
gro. He is an Indian of great vigour of mind
and body. He speaks Spanish with facility,
and has preserved a certain influence over the
neighbouring nations. As he attended us in all
our herborizations, we obtained from his own
mouth information so much the more useful, as
the missionaries have great confidence in his
veracity. He assured us, that in his youth he
had seen almost all the Indian tribes, that inha-
bit the vast regions between the Upper Oroo-
noko, the Rio Negro, the Inirida, and the Ju-
pura, eat human flesh. The Daricavanas, the
Puchirinavis, and the Manitibitanoes, appeared
to him to be the greatest cannibals among them.
He believes, that this abomiable practice is with
them the effect of a system of vengeance; they
eat only enemies, who are made prisoners in bat-
tle. The instances where, by a refinement of
cruelty, the Indian eats his nearest relations,
his wife, an unfaithful mistress, are, as we shall
see below, extremely rare. The strange cus-
tom of the Scythians and Massagetes, the Ca-
panaguas of the Rio Ucayale, and the ancient
inhabitants of the West India islands, of honor-
ing the dead by eating a part of the corpse, is
unknown on the banks of the Oroonoko. In
both continents this feature of manners belongs


248


only to nations, that hold in horror the flesh of
a prisoner. ‘The Indian of Haiti (Saint Domin-
go) would think he was wanting to the memory
of a relation, if he had not thrown into his drink
a small portion of the body of the deceased, after
having dried it like one of the mummies of the
Guanches, and reduced it to powder*. This
gives us just occasion, to repeat with an eastern
poet, “ of all animals man is the most fantastic
in his manners, and the most disorderly in his
propensities.”

The climate of the mission of San Antonio de
Javita is extremely rainy. When you have
passed the latitude of three degrees north, and
approach the equator, you have seldom an op-
portunity of observing the sun or the stars. It
rains almost the whole year, and the sky is con-
stantly cloudy... As the breeze is not felt in this
immense forest of Guyana, and the refluent
polar currents do not reach it, the column of air.
that reposes on this wooded zone is not renewed
by dryer strata. Saturated with vapours, it
condenses them into equatorial rains. The
missionary assured us, that it often rained here
four or five months without cessation. I mea-
sured the water that fell on the first of May
in the space of five hours; it was twenty one


* Bembo, Hist. Venet., book 6, vol. i, p, 219.
+ See chap. 18, vol. iy, p. 409.


249


lines in height. The third of May I even col-
lected fourteen lines in three hours. It must
be remarked, that these observations were
not made during a shower, but in an ordinary
rain. It is well known, that at Paris there fall
only twenty-eight or thirty lines of water in
whole months, even in the most rainy*, in
March, July, and September. I am not igno-
rant, that with us also showers have happened,
during which the rain has amountedto more than
an inch in an hour}, but we must compare only
the mean state of the atmosphere in the tem-
perate and torrid zones. It appears to result
from observations, which I made successively at
the foot of Guayaquil, on the shore of the
South-sea, and in the town of Quito at one thou-
sand four hundred and ninety-two toises height,
that there falls ordinarily two or three times
less water in an hour on the back of the Andes,
than at the level of the Ocean. It rains oftener
in the mountains, but there falls less water at
once, ina given time. The sky is sensibly more
serene on the banks of the Rio Negro, at Maroa,
and at San Carlos, than at Javita and on the


* Arago, in the Annales de Physique, vol. iii, p. 441 ;
vol. vi, p. 440; vol. ix, 430; vol. xii, p. 422.

+ The rain fell thirteen inches two lines in eighteen hours
at Viviere, and one inch one line in one hour at Montpellier.
(Ann. de Phys., vol, viii, p. 437 ; and Poitevin, Essay on the
’ Climate of Languedoc, Journ. de Phys., vol..1x, p. 391.)


250


banks of the Temi. I attribute this difference
to the proximity of the savannahs of the Lower
Guainia, which permits the free access of the
breeze, and which also by their radiation cause
a stronger ascendant current than lands co-
vered with forests.

The temperature of Javita* is cooler than that
of Maypures, but considerably hotter than that
of the Guainia or Rio Negro. The centigrade
thermometer kept up in the day to twenty-six
or twenty-seven degrees; and in the night to
twenty-one degrees. The diurnal heat north of
the cataracts, and particularly, north of the
mouth of the Meta, was generally twenty-eight


or thirty degrees, and the nocturnal heat twenty-


five or twenty-six degrees. This diminution of
heat on the banks of the Atabapo, the Tuamini,
and the Rio Negro, is no doubt owing to the
long absence of the Sun, a sky constantly cloudy,
and the evaporation of a humid soil. I do not
speak of the refrigerant influence of the forests,
as furnishing in their innumerable leaves so
many thin substances, that grow cool by ra-

* The Ist of May, at 19 in the morning, therm. of Reau-
mur, 17°7°; hygr. of whalebone, 61°; cloudy : at noon th.
21-9°; hygr. 48°; sky serene: at 4h 30’, th. 19°8°; hygr.
556°: at 7h, th. 202°; hygr. 60°: at 10n, th. 19°;
hygr. 62°; cloudy: at 11h, th. 1820; hygr. 65°. The 3d
of May, at 204, th. 19°; hygr. 63°; cloudy: at 0», th.
21°5°; hygr. 49°; clear: at3h15’, th, 22°; hygr. 46°50:
at 8h, th. 20°2°; hygr. 61°; cloudy.


aI


SST NS


251


diating toward the sky. ‘This effect must be
scarcely sensible on account of the cloudy state
of the atmosphere. It appears also, that the
elevation of the site of Javita contributes to the
coolness of the climate. Maypures is probably
from sixty to seventy toises above the level
of the ocean, San Fernando. de Atabapo one
hundred and twenty-two toises, and Javita one
hundred and sixty-six toises. The little atmos-
pheric tides varying on the coast (at Cumana)
from one day to another from 0°8 of a line to
two lines, and I having unfortunately broken
the instrument before I again reached the shore,
I am not quite sure of these results. | In mak-
ing observations at Javita on the horary varia-
tions of the atmospheric pressure, I discovered,
that a small bubble of air intercepted* apart
of the column of mercury, and modified by it’s
thermometric dilatation, the effects of the tides.
In wretched boats, and encumbered as we
were, it was almost impossible to hold the baro-
meter in a vertical position, or much inclined.
I took advantage of our stay at Javita to re-


* [ relate this minute circumstance, to remind travellers
how necessary it is, to have barometers, the tube of which is
visible throughout it’s whole length. A very small bubble of
air may intercept half, or even the whole of the column of
mercury, without the sound of the mercury striking against


the extremity of the tube being changed.


252


adjust and verify the instrument. It marked*,
after I had well rectified the level, 325°4 lines,
at the temperature of 25°4°, at half after eleven
in the morning. I attach some importance to
this observation, because, in order to know the
configuration of a continent, it is more useful
to determine the height of plains two or three
hundred leagues distant from the coast, than
to measure the peaks of the Cordilleras. A
barometric determination made at Sego on the
Niger, at Bornou, or on the table lands of Kho-
ten and of Hami, would be more interesting
for geology than the measurement of the moun-
tains of Abyssinia and of Musart. The horary
variations of the barometer take place in the
forests of Javita at the same hours as on the
coast, and at the farm of Antisana, where my
instrument was suspended at the height of
two thousand one hundred and four toises.
They were from nine in the morning till four in
the afternoon 1:6 line. The 4th of May they
were even nearly two lines. The hygrometer
of Deluc, reduced to that of Saussure, kept


* The remark made on the correction of the basin (chap.
17, vol. iv, p. 378, note) is applicable to the heights which I
have indicated, vol. iv, p. 455, 555, and 572; and p. 85 of
the present volume. These heights indicate only relative
differences, I believe I have estimated a little too high
(Obs. Astr., vol. i, p. 298) the absolute elevation of May-


pures.


i} 4
t
if
‘
|
i
i


253


constantly in the shade, reckoning only the
observations made at periods when it did not,
rain, between eighty-four and ninety-two de-
grees. The humidity had consequently much
augmented beyond the Great Cataracts, and in
the middle of a continent shaded by forests, and
watered by equatorial rains, it was almost as
great as on the ocean*.

From the 30th of April to the 11th of May, I
had not been able to see any star in the meri-
dian, to determine the latitude of places. I
watched whole nights in order to make use of the
method of double altitudes; but all my efforts
were useless. The fogs of the north of Europe
are not more constant than those of the equato-
rial regions of Guyana. On the 4th of May, I
saw the sun for some minutes; and found by
the chronometer and the horary angles the
longitude of Javita to be 70° 22’, or 1° 15’ far-
ther west than the longitude of the junction of
the Apure with the Oroonoko. This result is
interesting for laying down on our maps the
unknown country lying between the Xié and
the sources of the Issana, placed on the same
meridian with the mission of Javita. The dip
of the magnetic needle at this mission was 26°4°
(cent. div.); it had consequently diminished


® See above, vol. ii, p. 90; and p. 86 of the present vo-
fume.


254


5'85°, from the- great northern cataract, in a
difference of latitude of 2° 50’. The diminution
of the intensity of the magnetic force was not
less sensible. This, which at Atures amounted
to two hundred and twenty-three oscillations,
was expressed at Javita by only two hundred
and eighteen oscillations in 10° of time.

The Indians of Javita, to the number of one
hundred and sixty, now belong for the most
part to the nations of the Poimisanoes, the Echi-
navis, and the Paraginis ; and are employed in
the construction of boats. ‘These are formed of
the trunks of a large species of laurel, called
sassafras* by the missionaries, which are hol-
lowed by the joint means of fire and the hat-
chet. These trees are more than one hundred
feet high ; the wood is yellow, resinous, almost
incorruptible in the water, and has a very agree-
able smell: We saw them at San Fernando, at
Javita, and more particularly at Esmeralda,
where the greatest number of the canoes of
the Oroonoko are constructed, because the ad-
jacent forests furnish the largest trunks of sassa-
fras.. The Indians are paid a piastre the half
toise, or vara, of the bottom of the boat (which is
the trunk hollowed) ; a boat therefore of sixteen


* Ocotea cymbarum, very different from the laurus sassa-
fras of North- America. (See our Nov. Gen. et Spec.,
vol. ii, p. 166.) The laurus javitensis is also employed in the


construction of canoes.


255


varas long costs, for the purchase of the wood, and
the labour of the carpenter, only sixteen piastres ;
but thenails, and the fitting up of the gunwales,
by which the boat is enlarged, double the price.
At the Upper Oroonoko I have seen forty pias-
tres, or two hundred franks, given for a canoe
forty-eight feet long.

The forest, between Javita and the Canno
Pimichin, affords an immense quantity of gigan-
tic trees, ocoteas and real laurels (the third
group of the laurinez, the persea, has been
found wild only above one thousand toises of
height), the amasonia arborea *, the retiniphyl-
lum secundiflorum +, the curvana, the jacio t,
the iacifate, of which the wood is red like the
brasilletto, the guamufate with it’s fine leaves of


calophyllum from seven to eight inches long,
the amyris caranna, and the mani. All these
trees (with the exception of our new genus reti-
niphyllum) were more than one hundred or one


* This is a new species of the genus taligalea of Aublet. On
the same spot grow the bignonia magnoliefolia, b. jasminifolia,
solanum fopiro, justicia pectoralis, faramea cymosa, piper javi-
tense, scleria hirtella, echites gavitensis, lindsea javitensis, and
that curious plant of the family of the verbenacee, which I
have dedicated to an illustrious scientific gentleman, Leo-
pold von Buch, in whose first labours‘ I participated. (See
Nov. Gen. vol. ii, p..270, pl. 182, buchia plantaginea.)

+ See our Plant. Equin., vol. 1, p.-86, tab, 25.
{ A species of siphonia, perhaps the hevea of Aublet,


256


hundred and ten feet high. Their trunks throw-
ing out branches only toward the summit, we
had some trouble in procuring at the same time
leaves and flowers. The latter were frequently
strewed upon the ground at the foot of the trees ;
but, the plants of different families being grouped
together in these forests, and every tree being
covered with lianas, it appeared dangerous to
rely on the sole authority of the natives, when
they assured us, that a flower belonged to such
or such a tree. Amid these riches of nature
herborizations caused us more chagrin than sa-
tisfaction. What we could gather appeared to
us little interesting, compared to what we could
not reach. It rained unceasingly during several
months, and Mr. Bonpland lost the greater part
of the specimens, which he had been compelled
to dry by artificial heat. Our Indians named
the trees, as usual, on chewing the wood. They
distinguished the leaves better than the corollz
or the fruit. Occupied in seeking timber for
building (trunks for canoes), they are little at-
tentive to the flowers. ‘‘ All those great trees
bear neither flowers nor fruits,” the Indians re-
peated unceasingly. Like the botanists of anti-
quity they denied, what they had not taken the
trouble to observe. They were tired with our
questions, and exhausted our patience in turn.
We have mentioned above, that, the same
chemical properties being sometimes found in


(


the same organs of different families of plants,
‘these families supply the place of each other in
various climates. Several species of palms *
furnish the equinoctial inhabitants of America
and Africa with oil, which we draw from the
olive. What the coniferze are to the temperat

zone, the terebinthaceze and the guttiferee are to
the torrid. In the forests of those burning cli-
mates, where there is neither pine, nor thuya,
nor taxodiums, nor even a podocarpus, resins,
balsams, and aromatic gums are furnished by
the maronobeas, the icicas, and the amyrises,
The collecting of these gummy and resinous sub-
stances is an object of trade in the village of
Javita. The most celebrated resin bears the
name of mani; and of this we saw masses of


several hundred weight, resembling colophony
and mastic. The tree which is called mani by
the Paraginis, and which Mr. Bonpland believes


* In Africa, the elais or maba; in America the cocoa-tree.
(See above, vol. iii, p. 202). Inthe cocoa-tree it is the pe-
risperm ; and in the elais (as in the olive, and the oleinex in
- general) it is the sarcocarp, or the pulp of the pericarp, that
yields oil. This difference, observed in the same family,
appears to me very remarkable, though it is inno way con-
tradictory to the results obtained by Mr. de Candolle in his
ingenious researches on the chemical properties of plants. If
our alfonsia oleifera belong to the genus elais, as Mr. Brown
with great reason believes (“ Plants of Congo,” p. 37), it
follows, that in the same genus the oil is found in the sarco-
carp and in the perispern.

VOL. V.


258


to be the moronobea coccinea, furnishes but a
small quantity of the substance employed in the
trade with Angostura. The greatest part comes
from the mararo or caragna, which is an amyris.
It is remarkable enough, that the name mani,
which Aublet heard from the Galibis* of Cay-
enne, was again found by us at Javita, three
hundred leagues distant from French Guyana.
The moronobea or symphonia of Javita yields a
yellow resin; the caragna+, a resin strongly
odoriferous, and white as snow; the latter be-
comes yellow, where it is adherent to the inter-
nal part of old bark.

We went every day to see if our canoe ad-
vanced on the portages. ‘Twenty-three Indians


* The Galibis or Caribis (the r has been changed into /, as
often happens) are of the great stock of the Caribbee na-
tions. The products useful in commerce and in domestic
life have received the same denomination in every part of
America, which this warlike and commercial people have
overrun. (See above, vol. iii, p. 284).

+ Caranna, Are not the substances known by this name
at the Oroonoko partly gums? I was assured at Esme-
ralda, that savage nations, living to the east of the high
mountain of Duida, eat the caranna. This name is given to
very different plants. I regret not having been able to
make any chemical researches on the nature of the juices,
which transude from the trees of the Oroonoko. The resins
belong principally to the conifers and the terebinthaces ;
the gum-resins (cambogia, assafoetida) to the guttiferee and
the umbellifere ; and the gums to the leguminacez and the
rosacez.


259


were employed in dragging it by land, placing
branches of trees to serve as rollers. A small
boat passes ina day, or a day and half, from the
waters ofthe Tuamini to those of Canno Pimichin,
which flow into the Rio Negro. Our canoe being
very large, and having to pass the cataracts a
second time, it was necessary to avoid: with par-
ticular care any friction on the bottom. In con.
sequence the passagé lasted more than four
days. It is only since 1795 that a road has been
traced through the forest. The Indians of Ja-
vita’ performed the half of this labour : the other
half'was the task of the' Indians of Maroa, Da-
vipe, and San Carlos. This road, measured by
“means of a cord of a Hundred varas, was found
by father Eugenio Cereso to be seventeen thou.
sand one hundred and eighty. varas* long. By
substituting a canal for this portage, as: I pro-
posed to the ministry of King Charles the
Fourth, the communication between the Rio
Negro and Angostura +, between the Spanish
Oroonoko and the Portugueze possessions on the
Amazon, would be singularly facilitated. Boats
coming from San Carlos would no longer pro-
ceed by the Cassiquiare, which is full of wind-
ings, and dreaded for the strength of it’s current;
they would no longer go. down the Oroonoko


* According to Antilla, 1‘vara 0°83 of a metre.
t See pages 168, and 198 of the present'volume,
s 2


260


from it’s bifurcation to San Fernando de Ata-
bapo ; they would only have to go up a distance
half as long as by the Rio Negro and the Canno
Pimichin. When arrived at the new canal of
Javita, they would descend by the Tuamini, the
Temi, the Atabapo, and the Oroonoko, as far as
Angostura. This voyage from the frontiers of
Brazil to the capital of Guyana might, I believe,
be easily performed in twenty-four or twenty-
six days; it is in ordinary weather ten days
shorter, and less fatiguing for the rowers (bogas),
because the struggle against the currents is one
half less than in proceeding by the Cassiquiare*,


* In the present state of things (without the canal that [
projected being traced) boats have come from the fort of San
Carlos on the Rio Negro to Angostura, by the Canno Pimi-
chin, not as Father Caulin says, in ten days, but in twenty-
three or twenty-four. The following is the conclusion I
made from my own experience, compared with the state-
ments of the missionaries. You may go, under circumstances
moderately favorable,

By the portage of Pimichin, By the Cassiquiare,


‘ \ days days
From St. Carlos to Javita From St. Carlos to the bi-


in: - 5 4 furcation in - dl
From Javita to San Fer- From the bifurcation, to
nando - San Fernando
From San Fernando to From San Fernando to
Carichana - Atures - 4
From Carichana to An- From Atures to Angostu-
gostura - ra = 17
From San Carlos to Aun- From San Carlos to An-


261


But to ascend the Oroonoko, and go from An-
gostura to the Rio Negro, the difference of time
employed would be but a few days, since the
traveller must then go up the little rivers, by the
Pimichin, while by the old way he descends the
Cassiquiare. It may be conceived, that the ra-
pidity of this voyage from the mouth of the
Oroonoko to San Carlos depends on several
variable circumstances, on the force of the breeze
that blows from Angostura to Carichana, the
state of the cataracts of Atures and Maypures,
and the greater or less fulness of the beds of the
rivers. The breeze is pretty fresh during the
months of November and December, and the
force of the current of the Oroonoko is not con-


days days
gostura, by going down gostura, by going up


the little rivers Temi the Cassiquiare 37

and Atabapo 28
To ascend the Oroonoko, takes 1st, by the Pimichin, and
going up the little rivers from Angostura to Carichana, fifteen
days ; from Carichana to San Fernando, thirteen days ;
from S. Fernando to 8, Carlos, seven days ; in all thirty-five
days ; 2dly, by going down the Cassiquiare from Angostura
to San Fernando, twenty-eight days ; from S. Fernando to
the bifurcation, nine days; from the bifurcation to San Car-
los, five days; in all forty-two days. The swellings of the
Oroonoko and the Cassiqniare, with the force of the cur-
rents, change all the results of these estimations. The mis-


sionaries believe the navigation from S. Carlos to Angostura,
by the Cassiquiare, to be five hundred leagues. I have
noticed above, that it is only three hundred and ten leagues.


262


siderable; but the small rivers at this period
have so little water, that every minute there is
a risk of taking the ground. The missionaries
prefer making this voyage in the month of April,
the time of the harvest of turtle’s eggs, which
animates a part of the banks of the Oroonoko.
The moschettoes are then less dreaded, the river
is half full, the breeze is still available, and the
Great Cataracts may be passed with facility.
The barometric heights * observed at the mis-
sion of Javita, and at the landing place at Pimi-
chin, prove, that the general slope of the canal
would be thirty or forty toises from north te
south. Accordingly the great number of small
streams, across which the boats must be con-
veyed in the portage, all flow toward the Pimi-
chin. We saw with astonishment among these
rivulets of black water there are some, the water
of which, seen by reflected light, were as white
as those of the Oroonoko. What can be the
cause of this difference? All these springs rise
in the same savannahs, in the same marshes of
the forest. The measurement made by father
Cereso not being in a right line, and it’s direc-
tion inclining too much toward the east, the


* At Javita, bar. corrected May the 4th, at 9» in the even-
ing, 325-5lines ; at 11» 826°1 lines. Therm. from 18° to 19°
of Reaumur, At the landing place at Pimichin, May the
Gth, at 11 in the morning, 328°3 lines; th. 20°3° of Reau-
mur.


@


263


canal would not be six thousand toises long. I
traced the shortest way by means of the com-
pass, and some marks were made in the oldest
trees of the forest. The ground is perfectly
level; and for five leagues round there is not the
smallest hill. In the present state of things, the
portage should be facilitated by improving the
road, by giving it the proper direction, by draw-
ing the canoes on carriages, and by throwing
bridges over the rivulets, which sometimes stop
the Indians for whole days.

In this forest we at length obtained precise in-
formation respecting the pretended fossil caout-
chouc, called dapicho by the Indians. ‘The old
captain Javita led us to the brink of a rivulet,
which runs into the Tuamini; and showed us,
that, after digging two or three feet) deep, in a
marshy soil, this substance was found between
the roots of two trees known by the name of the
jacio, and the curvana. The first is the hevea
of Aublet, or siphonia ofthe modern botanists,
known to furnish the caoutchouc of commerce
in Cayenne and the Grand Para ; the second has |
pinnate leaves, and it's juice is milky, but very
thin, and almost destitute of viscosity. The
dapicho appears to be the result of an extravasa-
tion of the sap from the roots. This extravasa-
tion takes place more especially when the trees
have attained a great age, and the interior of
the trunk begins to decay. The bark and al-


264


burnum crack; and thus is effected naturally,
what the art of man performs to collect in abun-
dance the milky juices of the hevea, the castil-
loa, and the caoutchouc fig-tree. Aublet relates,
that the Galibis and the Garipons of Cayenne
begin by making a deep incision at the foot of
the trunk, so as to penetrate into the wood;
soon after they join with this horizontal notch
others both perpendicular and oblique, reaching
from the top of the trunk nearly to the roots.
All these incisions conduct the milky juice to-
wards one point, where the vase of clay is placed,
in which the caoutchouc is to be deposited. We
saw the Indians of Carichana operate nearly in
the same manner.

If, as I suppose, the accumulation and over-
flowing of the milk in the jacio and the curvana
be a pathologic phenomenon, it must sometimes
take place at the extremity of the longest roots,
for we found masses of dapicho of two feet in
diameter, and four inches thick, eight feet dis-
tant from the trunks. Sometimes you dig in
vain at the foot of dead trees, at others the da-
picho is found beneath the hevea or jacio still
green, The substance is white, corky, fragile,
and resembles by it’s laminated structure and
undulating edge the boletus igniarius. The da-
picho perhaps takes a long time to form; it is
probably a juice thickened by a particular dis-
position of the vegetable organs, diffused and


265


coagulated in a humid soil secluded from the
contact of light *; it is caoutchouc in a particu-
lar state, I had almost said an etiolated caout-
chouc. The humidity of the soil seems to ac-
count for the undulating form of the edges of
the dapicho, and it’s division into layers.

I often observed at Peru, that on pouring
slowly the milky juice of the hevea, or the sap
of the carica, into a large quantity of water, the
coagulum forms undulating outlines. The da-
picho is certainly not peculiar to the forest that
extends from Javita to Pimichin, although this
is the only spot, where it has hitherto been found.
I have no doubt, that on digging in French
Guyana beneath the roots and the old trunks
of the hevea, those enormous masses of corky
caoutchouc t, which I have just described,
would from time to time be found. As it
is observed in Europe, that at the fall of the
leaf the sap is conveyed toward the root, it
would be curious to examine, whether, within
the tropics, the milky juices of the urticeze, the


* See vol. iv, p. 225.
+ Thus at five or six inches depth between the roots of


the hymenea courbaril masses of the resin anime (erroneously
called copal) are discovered. They are sometimes taken for
amber found in inland places. This phenomenon seems to -
throw some light on the origin of those large masses of elec-
trum, which are picked up from time to time on the coast of
Prussia. (Sckweigger Beob., 1819. p. 104.)


266


euphorbiacez, and the apocynee, descend also
at certain seasons. Notwithstanding a great
equality of temperature, the trees of the torrid
zone follow a cycle of vegetation, of changes
periodically returning. The existence of the
dapicho is more interesting to physiology, than
to vegetable chemistry. Mr. Allen has pub-
lished. a memoir on the difference observable
between the caoutchouc in it’s ordinary state,
and the substance from Javita, which I sent to
Sir Joseph Banks. A yellowish white caout-
chouc is now to be found in the shops, which
may be easily distinguished from the dapicho,
because. it is neither dry like cork, nor friable,
but extremely elastic, glossy, and soapy. I
lately saw considerable quantities of it in Lon-
don, the price of which varied from six to fif-
teen franks a pound. This caoutchouc, white,
and greasy to the touch, is prepared in the
East Indies. It exhales that animal and fetid
smell, which I have attributed in another place
to a mixture of caseum and albumen.* When


* The pellicles, which the milk of hevea in contact with
the atmospheric oxygen deposits, become brown on expo-
sure to the sun. If the dapicho grow black as it. is softened
before the fire, it is from a slight combustion, from a change
in the proportion of its elements. Iam surprised, that some
chemists consider the black caoutchouc of the shops as mixed
with soot, as blackened by the smoke to which it has been
exposed. (Thomson's Chemistry, 1818, vol, iv, p. 197.)


EE


267


we reflect on the immense variety of plants in
the equinoctial regions, that are capable of fur-
nishing caoutchouc, it is to be regretted, that
this substance, so eminently useful, is not found
among us at.a lower price. Without cultivating.
trees with a milky sap, a sufficient quantity
of caoutchoue might be collected in the mis-
sions of the Oroonoke alone for the consump-
tion of civilized Europe*. In the kingdom of


* We saw in Guyana, beside the yacio and the curvana,
two other trees, that yield caoutchouc in abundance; on the
banks of the Atabapo, the guamaqui with jatropha leaves,
(perhaps the bagassa of Aublet, pl. 376); and at Maypures
the come. Researches on plants that are useful in physic or
the arts are of such general interest, that I venture to record
them in this work. I published in my third volume, chap.
vi, p. 31, the results of my experiments on the cinchona, and
other plants possessing the febrifuge principle. I shall here
give a sketch of the plants of the two hemispheres, which are
capable of furnishing caoutchouc more or less abundanily ;
euphorbiacee ; hevea guyanensis (siphonia caoutchouc), commi-
phora madagascariensis, excecaria agallocha, hura crepitans,
mabea piriri, omphalia diandra, euphorbia purpurea, sapium
aucuparium, plukenetia verrucosa : urticew ; cecropia peltata,
artocarpus integrifolia, several species of ficus (f. religiosa, f.
anthelmintica, f, toxicaria), ambora tambourissa, bagassa guy-
annensis, brosimum alicastrum : apocynee; urceola elastica, va-
hea madagascariensis, some species of asclepias: campanulacee ;
lobelia caoutchouc (Nov. Gen., vol. iii, p. 304.) Imight have
added several papaveracee and sapotee, for there is no milky
plant, that does not contain some trace of caoutchouc, It is
said, that Mr. Benjamin Barton Smith has extracted at


268


New Grenada some successful attempts. have
been made, to fabricate boots and shoes of this
substance without a seam. Among the Ameri-
can nations the Omaguas of the Amazon best
understand how to manufacture caoutchouc.
Four, days had passed, and our canoe had
not yet arrived at the landing place of Rio
Pimichin. ‘ You want for nothing in my mis-
sion,” said father Cereso, “ you have plantains
and fish; at night you are not stung by mos-
chettoes; and the longer you stay, the better
chance you will have of seeing the stars of my
country. If your boat be destroyed in the
portage, we will give you another ; and I shall
have had the satisfaction of passing some weeks


Philadelphia a great deal of caoutchouc from the smilax
caduca, (Pil. Mag. vol. xl, p. 66.) This fact appears very
extraordinary, if we recollect the properties of the other
smilacee. It would be the first instance of caoutchouc in a
monocotyledonous plant. After so many researches as have
been made latterly by botanical travellers, it were much to
be wished, that our chemical treatises were less inaccurate
in the indication of plants, that furnish resins, gums, balsams,
and colouring matter. We find constantly under the article
caoutchouc the hevea and the jatropha elastica mentioned
as two different trees. Such of this elastic substance as is
found in the shops is the produce of the hevea, or the sipho-
nia cahuchu of Guyana and Brazil, of the lobelia caoutchouc
of Popayan, of the castilloa elastica of Mexico, of the ficus
and the urceola elastica (a genus of Roxburgh nearly ap-
proaching the. vahea) of India, and of the commiphora of
Madagascar.


269


con gente blanca y de raxon.*” Notwithstand-
ing our impatience, we listened with interest
to the information given us by the worthy mis-
sionary. It confirmed all we had already heard.
of the moral state of the natives of those coun-
tries. They live distributed in hordes of forty
or fifty, under a family government ; and re-
cognize a common chief (apoto, sibierene) only
at the moment when they make war against
their neighbours. The mistrust of these hordes
toward one another is so much stronger, as
those who live in the nearest neighbourhood
speak languages altogether different. In the
open plains, or the countries with savannahs,
the tribes are fond of choosing their habitations
from an affinity of origin, and a resemblance of
manners and idioms. On the table-land of
Tatary, as in North America, great families of
nations have been seen, united in several co-
lumns, to push their migrations across countries
little wooded, and easily traversed. Such were
the journeys of the Toltec and Aztec race in the:
high plains of Mexico from the sixth to the
eleventh century of our era; such probably was
also the movement of nations, by which the
petty tribes of Canada were grouped together.
the Mengwef, or five nations, the Algonquins


% ¢ With white and rational people.” European self-love
usually opposes the gente de razon to the gente parda.
+ Troquois.


270


Lenni-Lenapes*, the Chickasaws, and: the
Muskogees-+>. As the immense country between
the equator and the eighth degree of north lati-
tude forms but one forest, the hordes were
there dispersed by following the branchings of |
rivers, and the nature of the land compelled
them to become more or: less agriculturists.
Such is the labyrinth of these rivers, that fami-
lies settled themselves without knowing what
race of men lived nearest the spot. In Spanish
Guyana. a mountain, a forest half a league
broad, sometimes separates hordes, that would
require two days of navigation to meet. It is
thus that the communication of rivers in open
countries, or in a state of advanced civilization,
contributes powerfully to generalize languages,
manners, and political institutions ; but in the
impenetrable forests ofthe torrid zone, as in-the
first rade condition of our Species, they increase
the dismemberment of great nations, favor the
transition of dialects into languages that appear
to us radically distinct, and cherish. national
hatred and mistrust. Between the banks of'the


* From the word Jenne: (native) has:been formed Tllenoh,
and Illinois, the name of. the great nation described by: Lay
Hontan. (Philad. Historical Trans., 1819, p. 404.)

+ Imight have designated the stock of this nation by the
name of Natchez. It is the language of this extinct tribe,
that is the mother tongue of the idioms of Florida, and of the
southern tribes beyond the Alleghany mountains.


Caura and the Padamo every thing bears the
stamp of disunion and weakness. Men avoid
because they do not understand each other;
they mutually hate, because they mutually fear.

When we examine attentively this wild part of
America, we fancy ourselves transported to those
primitive times, when the Earth was peopled by
degrees ; and seem tobe present at the birth of
human societies. In the ancient world we see
pastoral life prepare the hunting nations for agri-
culture. In the new we seek in vain these pro-
gressive developments of civilization, these mo-
ments of repose, these stages in the life of nations.
The luxury of vegetation embarrasses the Indians
in the chace ; and their rivers resembling arms of
the sea, the depth of the waters prevents fishing
during whole months. Those species, of rumi-
nating animals, that constitute the wealth of the
nations of the ancient world, are wanting in the
new. The bison and the musk ox have never
been reduced to a domestic state; the breeding of
llamas and guanacoes has not given birth to the
habits of pastoral life. In the temperate zone,
on the banks of the Missouri, as well as, on the
table-land of New-Mexico, the American, is a
hunter; but in the torrid zone, in the forests. of
Guyana, he cultivates. cassava, plantains, and
sometimes maize. Such, is the admirable fer-—
tility of nature, that the field of the native is a
little spot of land; to clear which requires only


272


setting fire to the brambles, and putting a few
seeds or slips into the ground is all the hus-
bandry it demands. If we go back in thought
to the most remote ages, in these thick forests
we must always figure to ourselves. nations
drawing the greatest part of their nourishment
from the earth; but, as this earth produces
abundance in a small space, and almost with-
out toil, we must also represent to ourselves
these nations as often changing their dwelling
along the banks of the same river. In fact,
even now the native of Oroonoko travels with
his seeds ; and transports his farm (conuco), as
the Arab transports his tent, and changes his
pasturage. ‘The number of cultivated plants,
which are found wild amid the woods, proves
the nomade habits of an agricultural: people.
Can we be surprised, that from these habits
they lose almost all the advantages, that result
in the temperate zone from stationary culture,
from that of corn*, which requires extensive
lands, and the most assiduous labour ?

The nations of the Upper Oroonoko, the
Atabapo, and the Inirida, like the ancient Ger-
mans and the Persians, have no other worship
than that of the powers of nature. They call
the good principle Cachimana ; it is the Manitou,
the Great Spirit, that regulates the seasons, and


* See vol. iii, p. 13.


273


favors the harvests. By the side of Cachimana
there is an evil principle, Zolokiamo, less power-
ful, but more artful, and in particular more
active. The Indians of the forest, when they
visit occasionally the missions, conceive with
difficulty the idea of a temple or an image.
“‘ These good people,” said the missionary, like
“ only processions in the open air. When I last
celebrated the patron festival of my village,
that of San Antonio, the Indians of Inirida were
present at mass. ‘Your God,’ said they to me,
‘ keeps himself shut up in a house, as if he were
old and infirm; ours is in the forest, in the
fields, and on the mountains of Sipapu, whence
the rains come.” Among the more numerous,
and on this account less barbarous tribes, reli-
gious societies of a singular kind are formed.
Some old Indians pretend, to be better instruct-
ed than others in what regards the divinity;
and to them is confided the famous botuto, of

which I have spoken, and which is sounded
under the palm-trees, that they may bear abun-
dance of fruit. On the banks of the Oroonoko
there exists no idol, as among all the nations
who have remained faithful to the first worship
of nature, but the botuto, the sacred trumpet, is
become an object of veneration. To be initiated
into the mysteries of the botuto, it is requisite to
have pure manners, and to have lived single.
The initiated are subjected to flagellations, fast-


VOL. V. : T


274


ings, and other painful exercises. There are
but a small number of these sacred trumpets.
The most anciently celebrated is that upon a
hill near the confluence of the Tyumo and the
Guainia. It is pretended, that it is heard at
once on the banks of the Tuamini, and at the
mission of San Miguel de Davipe, a distance of
ten leagues. Father Cereso assured us, that the
Indians speak of the botuto of Tomo as an ob-
ject of worship common to many surrounding
tribes. Fruit. and intoxicating liquors are placed
by the sacred trumpet. Sometimes the Great
Spirit (Cachimana) himself makes the botuto re-
sound; sometimes he is content to manifest his
will by him, to whom the keeping of the instru-
ment is entrusted. These juggleries being very
ancient (from the fathers of our fathers, say the
Indians), we must not be surprised, that some
incredulous are already to be found; but these
express their disbelief of the mysteries of the
botuto only in whispers. Women are not per-
mitted to see this marvellous instrument; and:
are excluded from all the ceremonies of this wor-
ship. Ifa woman have the misfortune to see the
trumpet, she is put to death without mercy.
The missionary related to us, that in 1798 he
was happy enough to save a young girl, whom a
jealous and vindictive lover accused of hav-
ing followed from a motive of curiosity the
Indians, who sounded the bofuto in the planta-


275


tions. “ They would not have murdered her
publicly,” said father Cesero, ‘‘ but how was she
to be protected from the fanaticism of the natives,
in a country where it is so easy to give poison?
The young girl told me of her fears, and I sent
her to one of the missions of the Lower Oroo-
noko.” Ifthe people of Guyana had remained
masters of that vast country ; if, without having
been impeded by Christian settlements, they
could follow freely the development of their bar-
barous institutions ; the worship of the botuto
would no doubt become of some political im-
portance. ‘That mysterious society of the initi-
ated, those guardians of the sacred trumpet,
would be transformed into a ruling cast of
priests, and the oracle of Tomo would gradually
form a link between. the bordering. nations. It
is thus that community of worship (communia
sacra), religious ceremonies, and mysteries, have
drawn together, pacified, and perhaps civilized.
so many nations of the ancient continent*.

In the evening of the 4th of May we were in-
formed, that an Indian, who assisted in dragging’
our bark over the portage of Pimichin, had’been
stung by a viper. He was a tall strong man,
and was brought to the mission in a very alarm-
ing state. He had dropped. down: senseless ;)
and nausea, vertigo, and: congestions: in the


* Heeren, Gesch. der Staaten des Alterthums, 1799,.p. 15,
41, 143.


ty 2


276


head, had succeeded the fainting. The liana
called vejuco du guaco *, which Mr. Mutis has
rendered so celebrated, and which is the most
certain remedy for the bite of venomous serpenis,
is yet unknown in these countries. A number
of Indians hastened to the hut of the sick man,
and he was cured with an infusion of raiz de
mato. We cannot indicate with certainty what
plant furnishes this counterpoison. Travelling
botanists feel too often great regret at not seeing
in flower o1 in fruit the plants that are most useful
to man, while so many species little remarkable
for their properties are displayed daily before
our eyes with all the parts of fructification. I
am inclined to think, that the raiz de mato is an
apocynea, perhaps the cerbera thevetia, called
by the inhabitants of Cumana lingua de mato,
or contra-culebra, and which they also use against
the bite of serpents. A genus nearly approach-
ing the cerbera-+ is employed in India for the
Same purpose. It is common enough to meet in


* It isa mikania, which was confounded for some time in
Europe with the ayapana. Mr. Bonpland has given the
first figure of it in our Plante Equinoct. vol. ii, p. 84, tab,
105, (Nov. Gen., vol. 4, p. 107.) Mr. de Candolle thinks,
that the guaco may be the eupatorium satureizfolium of
Lamarck (Encyclop. Bot., vol. ii, p. 411); but this eupa-
torium differs by it’s lineary leaves, while the mikania gua-
co lfas triangular, oval, and very large leaves. (De Cand.,
Propr. med., p. 180.)

+ Ophioxylon serpentinum.


277


the same family of plants with vegetable poisons,
and antidotes against the venom of reptiles. As
a great number of tonics and narcotics are anti-
dotes more or less active, we find these in fami-
lies very different* from each other, in the aris-
tolochiz, the apocyneze, the gentiane, the
polygalze, the solanez, the composite, the mal-
vaceze, the drymyrhizeze, and, which is still more
surprising, even in the palm-trees.

In the hut of the Indian, who had been dan-
gerously bitten by a viper, we found balls two or
three inches in diameter of an ea:thy and im-
pure salt, called chivi, which is prepared with
great care by the natives. At Maypures a con-
ferva is burnt, which is left by the Oroonoko on


the neighbouring rocks, when, after high swell-
ings, it again enters it’s bed. At Javita a salt is
fabricated by the incineration of the spadix and
fruit of the palm-tree seje or chimut. This fine
palm-tree, which abounds on the banks of the
Auvana, near the cataract of Guarinuma, and


* J shall mention as examples of these nine families ; aristo-
lochia anguicida, cerbera thevetia, ophiorhiza mungos, polygala
senega, nicotiana tabacum, (one of the remedies most used
in Spanish America), mikania guaco, hibiscus abelmoschus
(the seeds of which are very active,) lanpujum rumphii, and
kunthia montana (Canna de la Vibora). Nov. Gen., vol. i,
p. 303.

+ See above, p. 152, At the Rio Negro a salt is ob-
tained from the spathe of another palm-tree, called chiqut-
chiqua.


278


between Javita and the canno Pimichin, appears
to be a new species of cocoa-tree. It may be
recollected, that the fluid contained in the fruit
of the common cocoa-tree is often saline, even
when the tree grows far from the seashore. At
Madagascar salt is extracted from the sap of a
palm-tree called cira*. Beside the spadix and
the fruit of the seje palm, the Indians of Javita
lixiviate also the ashes of the famous liana called
cupana, which is a new species of the genus paul-
linia, consequently a very different plant from
the cupania of Linneus. I shall mention on this
occasion, that a missionary seldom travels with-
out being provided with some prepared seeds of
the cupana. This preparation requires great
care. The Indians scrape the seeds, mix them
with flour of cassava, envelop the mass in plan-
tain leaves, and set it to ferment in water, till it
acquires a saffron-yellow colour. This yellow
paste dried in the sun, and diluted in water, is
taken in the morning as a kind of tea. This
beverage is bitter and stomachic, but appeared
to me to have a very disagreeable taste.

On the banks of the Niger, and in a great
part of the interior of Africa, where salt is ex-
tremely rare, it is said of a rich man, “ he is so
happy as to eat salt at his meals.” This happi-
ness is not too common in the interior of Guy-


* Jacquin, Hort. Schoenb., vol. i, p. x.


ana. The whites only, particularly the soldiers
of the little fort of San Carlos, know how to pro-
cure pure salt, either from the coast of Caraccas,
or from Chita* by the Rio Meta. Here, as
throughout America, the Indians eat little meat,
and consume scarcely any salt; the salt-duty
therefore produces little profit to the revenue,
even where the number of natives is very consi-
derable, for instance, at Mexico and Guatimala.
The chivi of Javita is a mixture of muriat of po-
tash and of soda, of caustic lime, and of several
other earthy salts+. The Indians dissolve a
few particles in water, fill with this solution
a leaf of heliconia folded in a conical form, and
let drop a little, as from the extremity of a filter,
on their food.

May the 5th. We set off, to follow on foot
our canoe, which had arrived at length by the
portage at Canno Pimichin. We had to ford a
great number of streams; and those passages
require some caution, on account of the vipers
with which the marshes abound. The Indians
pointed out to us on the moist clay the traces of
the little black bears, which are so common on
the banks of the Temi. They differ at ieast in


* North of Morocote, at the eastern declivity of the
Cordillera of New Grenada. The salt of the coasts, which
the Indians call yuquira, costs two piastres the almuda at San
Carlos.

+ Compare Azzara, Voy. au Paraguay, vol. i, p. 55.


280
size from the ursus americanus ; the missionaries
call them osso carnicero, to distinguish them from
the osso palmero or tamanoir (myrmecophaga
jubata), and from the osso hormigero, or anteater
tamandua. These animals are good to eat; the
first two defend themselves by rising on their
hind feet. The tamanoir of Buffon is called
varaca by the Indians; it is irascible and
courageous, which is extraordinary in an animal
without teeth. We found, as we advanced,
some vistas in the forest, which appeared to us
so much the richer, as it became more accessible.
We here gathered some new species of coffee
(the American tribe, with flowers in panicles,
forms probably a particular genus); the galega
piscatorum, of which the Indians make use, as
they do of jacquinia, and of a composite plant
of the Rio Temi, as a kind of barbasco, to intox-
icate fish*; and finally, the liana, known in
those countries by the name of vejuco de mava-
cure, which yields the famous poison curare. It
is neither a phyllanthus, nor a coriaria, as Mr.
Wildenouw thought, but, according to Mr.
Kunth’s researches, very probably a strychnos.
We shall have occasion farther on, to speak of
this venomous substance, which is an important
object of trade among the savages. If a travel-


* Kunth, in the Nov. Gen., vol. iii, p. 371. The compo-:
site of the Temi is the baillieria barbasco. (Ibid. vol. iv, p.
226.)


281


ler, favoured like us by the hospitality of the
missionaries, were to remain one year on the
banks of the Atabapo, the Tuamini, and the
Rio Negro, and another year in the mountains
of Esmeralda and the Upper Oroonoko, he would
no doubt triple the number of genera described
by Aublet and Mr. Richard.

The trees of the forest of Pimichin preserve
the gigantic height of eighty or one hundred and
twenty feet. In these burning climates the
laurineee and amyris* furnish that fine timber
for building, which, on the north-west coast of
America, on mountains where the thermometer
falls in winter to 20° cent. below nought, we find
in the family of the coniferee. Such in every
zone, and in all the families of American plants,
is the prodigious force of vegetation, that, in the
latitude of fifty-seven degrees north, on the
same isothermal line with Saint Petersburgh
and the Orkney Islands, the pinus canadensis
displays trunks one hundred and fifty feet high,
and six feet in diameterf+. Toward night we


* The great white and red cedars of these countries are
not the cedrela odorata, but the amyris altissima, which is an
icica of Aublet.


+ Mr. Langsdorf saw among the inhabitants of Norfolk
Sound boats made of one piece, fifty feet long, four feet and
a half broad, and three high at the sides. They contain
thirty persons. (Bemerk. auf einer Reise um die Welt, vol. ii,
p. 89). These boats remind us of the canoes of the Rio


282


arrived at a small farm, in the puerto or landing
place of Pimichin. We were shown a cross
erected near the road, which marked the spot
“ where a poor capuchin missionary had been
killed by wasps.” I repeat what we were told
by the monks of Javita and the Indians. They
talk much in these countries of wasps and veno-
mous ants, but we saw neither one nor the other
of these insects. It is well known, that in the
torrid zone slight stings often cause fits of fever
almost as violent as those, that with us accom-
pany severe organic injuries. The death of this
poor monk must have been the effect of fatigue
and damp, rather than of the venom contain-
ed in the stings of wasps, which the Indians
dread extremely. We must not confound the
wasps of Javita with the melipones bees, called
by the Spaniards little angels* which covered
our faces and hands on the summit of the Silla
de Caraccas.

The landing place of Pimichin is surrounded
by a small plantation of cacao trees; they are
very vigorous, and here, as on the banks of the
Atabapo and the Guainia, loaded with flowers
and fruits at all seasons. They begin to bear
from the fourth year; on the coast of Caraccas


Chagre in the isthmus of Panama, in the midst of the torrid
zone. The populus balsamifera attains also an immense
height, on the mountains that border Norfolk Sound.

* Angelitos. See vol. iii, p. 618.


283


they do not bear till the sixth or eighth year.
The soil of these countries is sandy, wherever it
is not marshy; but the light lands of the Tua-
mini and Pimichin are extremely productive*,
When we reflect, that the cacao tree is a native
of these forests of the Parima south of six de-
grees of north latitude, and that the humid
climate of the Upper Oroonoko far better suits
this valuable tree, than the air of the provinces
of Caraccas and Barcelona, which becomes every
year dryer, we saw with regret this fine part of the
globe in the hands of monks, who encourage no
kind of cultivation. The mission of the Obser-
yantins alone could furnish annuaily for expor-


* At Javita, an extent of fifty feet square, planted with
jatropha manihot (yucca) yields in two years, in the worst
soil, a harvest of six ¢ortas of cassaya; the same extent on a
middling soil yields in fourteen months a produce of nine
tortas. In an excellent soil, around clumps of mauritia (in
the palmares morichales), there is every year from fifty feet
square a produce of thirteen or fourteen fortas. A torta
weighs three quarters of a pound, and three tortas cost gene-
rally in the province of Caraccas one rial of plate, or one
eighth of a piastre. These statements appear to me to be of
some importance, when we wish to compare the nutritive
matter, which man can obtain from the same extent of soil,
by covering it, in different climates, with bread-trees, plan-
tains, jatropha, maize, potatoes, rice, and corn. The slowness
of the harvest of jatropha has, I believe, a beneficial influence
on the manners of the natives, by fixing them to the soil, and
compelling them to sojourn longer on the same spot.


284


tation fifty thousand fanegas* of cacao, the va-
lue of which in Europe would amount to more
than six millions of francs. Around the connu-
coes of Pimichin grows in it’s wild state the
igua, a tree that resembles the caryocar nuci-
ferum, which is cultivated in Dutch and French
Guyana, and which, with the almendron of
Mariquita (caryocar amygdaliferum), the juvia
of the Esmeralda (bertholletia excelsa), and the
geoffroea of the Amazon, yields almonds the
most in request of South America. No commer-
cial advantage is here made of the agua; but I
saw vessels arrive on the coasts of Terra Firma,
that came from Demerary laden with the fruit
of the caryocar tomentosum, which is the pekea
tuberculosa of Aublet. These trees reach a
hundred feet in height, and display by the
beauty of their corolla, and the multitude of
their stamens, a magnificent appearance. I
should tire the reader by continuing the enu-
meration of the vegetable wonders, which these
vast forests contain. Their variety depends on
the coéxistence of such a great number of
families in a small space of ground, on the stim-
ulating power of light and heat, and on the per-
fect elaboration of the juices, that. circulate in
these gigantic plants.


* A fanega weighs one hundred and ten Spanish pounds.
We estimate the hundred at one hundred and twenty francs.
See vol. iv, p. 238,


285


We psssed the night in a hut lately abandon-
ed. An Indian family had there left their fish-
ing instruments, pottery, nets made of the petio-
lee of palm-trees, all that composes the house-
hold furniture of that careless race of men, little
attached to property. A great store of mani
(a mixture of the resin of the moronobea and the
amyris caranna) was accumulated round the
house. This is used by the Indians here, as at
Cayenne, to pitch their canoes, and fix the boney
spines of the ray at the point of their arrows.
We found in the same place jars filled with
a vegetable milk, which serves as a varnish, and
is celebrated in the missions by the name of
leche parapintar*. They coat with this viscous
juice those articles of furniture, to which they
wish to give a fine white colour. It thickens
by the contact of the air, without growing yel-
low, and appears singularly glossy. We have
already mentioned+, that the caoutchouc is the
oily part, the butter of all vegetable milk. It is
no doubt a particular modification of caout-
chouc, that forms this coagulum, this white and
. glossy skin, that seems as if covered with a
copal varnish. If different colours could one


* The Echinavis say, no doubt by corruption, milk of
pendare. They call the unknown tree, that yields this milk,
javicou. This tree, which grows on the banks of the Rio
Negro, we could not find.

+ Vol. iv, p. 226,


286


day be given to this milky varnish, a very expe-
ditious method, I think, would be found of paint-
ing and varnishing our carriages at once. The
more we study vegetable chemistry in the torrid
zone, the more we shall discover in some remote
spot, but attainable by the trade of Europe, and
half-prepared in the organs of plants, products
that we believe belong only to the animal king-
dom, or which we obtain by processes of art,
which, though sure, are often tedious and diffi-
cult. Already we have found the wax that coats
the palm-tree of the Andes of Quindiu, the
silk of the palm-tree of Mocoa, the nourishing
milk of the palo de vaca, the butter-tree of Afri-
ca, and the caseous substance obtained from the
almost animalized sap of the carica papaya
These discoveries will be multiplied, when, as
the political state of the world seems now to
indicate, European civilization shall flow in
great measure toward the equinoxial regions of
the New Continent.

I mentioned above, that the marshy place
between Javita and the embarcadera of Pimi-
chin is celebrated in the country for the quan-
tity of vipers it breeds. Before we took pos-
session of the deserted hut, the Indians killed
two great mapanarc serpents*... These grow to


* This name is given in the Spanish colonies to very
different species. The coluber mapanare of the province of
Caraccas has one hundred and forty-two ventral plates, and


287


four or five feet long. They appeared to me to
be the same species, as those I described in the
Rio Magdalena. It is a beautiful animal, but
extremely venomous, white below the belly, and
spotted with brown and red on the back. As
the inside of the hut was filled with grass, and
as we lay upon the ground, there being no
means of suspending our hammocks, we were
not without inquietude during the night. In
the morning a large viper was found on lifting
up from the ground the jaguar skin, upon which
one of our domestics had slept. The Indians
say, that these reptiles, slow in their movements
when they are not pursued, creep near a man
because they are fond of heat. In fact, on the
banks of the Magdalena a serpent entered the
bed. of one of our fellow-travellers, where he
remained a part of the night, without doing
him any harm. Without wishing here to
take up the defence of vipers: and rattlesnakes,
I believe it may be affirmed, that, if these ve-
nomous animals had such a disposition for
offence as is supposed, the human species would
certainly not have resisted their numbers’ in
some parts of America; for instance on the


thirty-eight candal, scales (double). The coluber mapanare
of the Rio Magdalena has two hundred and eight ventral
plates, and sixty-four double candal scales. Sce the second
vol. of my Observations de Zoologie.


288


banks of the Oroonoko, and the humid moun-
tains of Choco.

May the 6th. We embarked at sunrise, after
having carefully examined the bottom of our
canoe. It had become thinner, but had received
no crack in the portage. We reckoned, that
the same boat would still bear the voyage of
three hundred leagues, which remained for us
to make, in going down the Rio Negro, ascend-
ing the Cassiquiare, and redescending the Oroo-
noko as faras Angostura. The Pimichin, which
is called a rivulet (canno), is as broad as the
Seine opposite the gallery of the Tuileries; but
small trees that love the water, corossols* and
achras, narrow the bed so much, that there


remains open a channel of only fifteen or twenty
toises. Next to the Rio Chagre this river is one
of the most celebrated in America for the num-


ber of it’s windings ; eighty-five are reckoned,
which greatly lengthen it. They often forma
right angle, and occur every two or three
leagues. To determine the difference of longi-
tude between the landing place and the point
where we were to enter the Rio Negro, I took
by the compass the course of the Canno Pimi-
chin, and noted the time during which we
followed the same direction. The velocity of
the current was only 2:4 feet in a second; but


* Anona,


289


our canoe made by rowing 4°6 feet. The embar-
cadere of the Pimichin appeared to me to be
eleven thousand toises west of it’s mouth, and
0° 2’ west of the mission of Javita. This canno
is navigable during the whole year, and has but
‘one raudal, which is somewhat difficult to go
up; it’s banks are low, but rocky. After hav-
ing followed for four hours and a half the wind-
ings of this narrow channel, we at length en-
tered the Rio Negro *.

The morning was cool and beautiful. We
had been confined thirty-six days in a narrow
boat, so unstable, that it would have been over-
set by any person rising imprudently from his
seat, without warning the rowers to preserve her


trim, by leaning on the opposite side. We had
suffered severely from the sting of insects, but
we had withstood the insalubrity of the cli-
_ mate; we had passed without accident the
great number of falls of water and_ bars,
that impede the navigation of the rivers, and
often render it more dangerous than long voy-


* In the map of the Oroonoko, constructed by Surville for
Caulin’s work, which is the most recent of those that pre-
ceded my itinerary map, the Pimichin is confounded with the
Itinivini or Conorichite, which is an arm of the Cassiquiare.
La Cruz, who had worked before Surville on the materials
furnished by Solano, knew the Pimichin well. It is an im-
portant point for the communications of the missions of the
Rio Negro with that part of the coast, where the seat of
government is placed.

VOL. VY. iO}


290


ages by sea. After all we had endured, I may
be permitted, perhaps, to speak of the satisfac-
tion we felt in having reached the tributary
streams of the Amazon, having passed the isth-
mus that separates two great systems of rivers,
and in being sure of having fulfilled the most
important object of our voyage, the determining
astronomically the course of that arm of the
Oroonoko, which falls into the Rio Negro, and
of which the existence has been alternately
proved and denied during half a century. In
proportion as we draw near to an object we
have long had in view, it’s interest seems to
augment. The uninhabited banks of the Cassi-
quiare, covered with forests, without memorials
of times past, then occupied my imagination, as
do now the banks of the Euphrates, or the Oxus,
celebrated in the annals of civilized nations.
In that interior part of the New Continent. we
almost accustomed ourselves to regard men as
not being essential to the order of nature. The
earth is loaded with plants, and nothing impedes
their free development. An immense layer of
mould manifests the uninterrupted action of or-
ganic powers. The crocodiles and the boas are
masters of the river; the jaguar, the pecari, the
dante, and the monkeys, traverse the forest
without fear, and without danger; there they
dwell as in an ancient inheritance. This aspect
of animated nature, in which man is nothing,


291


has something in it strange and sad. . To this
we reconcile ourselves with difficulty on the
ocean, and amid the sands of Africa; though in
these scenes, where nothing recalls to mind our
fields, our woods, and our streams, we are less
astonished at the vast solitude through which
we pass. -Here, in a fertile country adorned
with eternal verdure, we seek in vain the traces
of the power of man; we seem to be transported
into a world different from that which gave us
birth. These impressions are so much the more
- powerful, in proportion as they are of longer
duration. <A soldier, who had spent his whole
life in the missions of the Upper Oroonoko, slept
with us on the bank of the river. He was an
intelligent man, who, during a calm and serene
night, pressed me with questions on the magni-
tude of the stars, on the inhabitants of the
Moon, on a thousand subjects of which I was as
ignorant as himself. Being unable by my an-
swers to satisfy his curiosity, he said to me in a
firm tone; “ with respect to men, I -believe
there are no more above, than you would have
- found, if you had gone by land from Javita to
Cassiquiare. I think I see in the stars, as here,
a plain covered with grass, and a forest (mucho
monte) traversed by a river.” In citing these
words, I paint the impression produced by the
monotonous aspect of those solitary regions.
May this monotony not be found to extend itself
u2


292


to the journal of our navigation, and tire the
reader accustomed to the description of the
scenes and historical memorials of the ancient
continent !


NOTES


SEVENTH BOOK.


NOTE A.


IF in the philosophical study of the structure of languages
the analogy of a few roots acquires value only when they
can be geographically connected together (Malte. Brun. Geo.
Univ. vol. 5, p. 211, 227), neither is the want of resemblance
in roots any very strong proof against the common origin of
nations. In the different dialects of the Totonac language
(that of one of the most ancient tribes of Mexico), the Sun
and the Moon have names, which custom has rendered en-
tirely different. This difference is found among the Caribbees
between the language of men and women; a phenomenon
that probably arises from the circumstance, that among pri-
soners men were oftener put to death than women. These
introduced by degrees words of a foreign language into the
Caribbee ; and, as the girls followed the occupations of the
women much more than the boys, a language was formed
peculiar tothe women. [ shall record in this note the names
of the Sun and Moon in a great number of American and
Asiatic idioms, again reminding the reader of the uncertainty -
of all judgments founded on the simple comparison of solitary
words,


294 NOTES.


New Continenr: Eastern’ Eskimoes (Greenlanders).
Sun: ajut, kaumat, sakanach.—Moon: anningat, kaumei,
tatcok. Western Eskimoes (Kadjak).S.: tschingugak, mad-
schak.—M, : igaluk, tangeik. Chippeways. S.: kissis.—M. :
debicot. Delaware. 8.: natatane.—M.: keyshocof. Nootka.
S.: opulszthl.— M.: omulszthl. Otom:. S.: hindi.— M. :
zana. Aztec or Mexican. S.: Tonatiuh.—M. : meztli. Cora.
S.: taicaa—M. maitsaca. Huasteca. S.: aquicha.—M. : aytz.
Muysca. S.: auhé (sua),—M.: chia. Varuroes. 8: do.—
M.: goppe. Caribbees and Tamanacs. 8.: veiou (huciou).—
-M.: nouno (nonum). Maypures. S.: kit. M.: kejapi. Lule.
S.: innii—M.: allit. Vilela. S.: olo.—M.:. copi. Moxoes.
S.: sachii—M.: cohe. Chigquitoes. S.: suus.—M. copi. Gua-
ran. S,: quarasii—-M.: jasi. Tupi (Brasilians). S.: coaracy.
M.: iacy. Perwvian (Qquichua). S.: intii—M. quilla. Arau-
can (Chili). S.: antux—M.: cuyen.

ANCIENT CONTINENT: Mongul. S.: nara (naran).—
M.: sara (saran), Mantchou. 8. : choun.—M.: bia,.—Tschag-
hata. S.: koun.—M. : ay. Osséte (of Caucasus). 8.: khourr.
—M.: mai. Tibetan. S.: niyma.—M.: rdjawa. Chinese. S. :
Jy.—M. : yue. Japanese. S.: fi—M. tsouki. Sanscrit. S. :
surya, aryama, mitra, aditya, arka hamsa.—M.: tschandra,
tschandrama, soma, masi. Persian. S.: chor, chorschid, afitab.
(Zend, houere. Palavi, schemschia, zabzeba, kokma).—M. :
mah (Palavi, koka). Semitic nations: 1.) Canaanites, a) Phe-
nician, 8.3; schemesih.b.) [ebrew. S.: schemesch.—M. : yarea.
2.) Arameans, a) or. Chaldean. S. : schimscha.—M. : yarha.
b.) oc. Syrian. S.: schemscho,—M.: yarho. 3.) Arabic. S. :

schams.—M.: kamar. Ethiopian. S.: tzahay.—M. : warha.
~ The American words are written according to the Spanish
orthography. I would not change the orthography of the
Nootka word onulszth, taken from Cook’s voyage, to show
how much Mr, Volney’s idea of introducing a uniferm nota-
tion of sounds is worthy of attention, if it be not applied to
the learned languages of the east written without vowels. In
onulszth there are four signs for one single consonant. We


NOTES 295


have seen above, that American nations, the languages of
which have a very different structure, denote the Sun by the
same name; that the Moon is sometimes called Sun to sleep,
Sun of night, light of night; and that sometimes the two orbs
have the same denomination. These examples are drawn
from the Guarany, the Omagua, Shawanese, Miami, Maco, and
Chippewayan idioms. (See above, p. 126, 149). Thus, on the
ancient continent, the Sun and Moon are denoted in Arabic
by niryn, ‘ the luminaries ;” thus in Persian, the most com-
mon words, afitab and chorsehid, are compounds. By the
migration of tribes from Asia to America, and from America
to Asia, a certain number of roots have passed from one lan-
guage into others ; and these roots have been transported,
like the fragments of a shipwreck, far from the coast into the
islands. (Sun, in New England, kone; in Tschagatai, koun;
in Yakout, kouini. Star, in Huastec, ot ; in Mongul, oddon ;
in Aztec, citlal, citl ; in Persian, sitareh; house, in Aztec,
calli; in Wogoul, kuala or kolla. Water, in Azteck, atel
(itels, a river, in Vilele) ; in Mogul, Tslteremiss, and Tshouvass,
dtl, atelch, etel, or idel. Stone, in Caribbee, tebou; in the
Lesghian of Caucasus, teb ; in Aztec, tepetl; in Turkish,
tepe. Food, in Quichua, micunnan; in Malay, macannon.
A boat, in Haytian, canoa; in Ayno, cahani; in Green-
landish, cayac ; in Turkish, cayic; in Samoyede, cayouc ; in
the Germannic tongues, kahn.) But we must distinguish from
these foreign elements what belongs fundamentally to the
American idioms themselves. Such is the effect of time, and
the communications among nations, that the mixture with an
heterogeneous language has not only an influence upon roots,
but most frequently ends by modifying and denaturalizing
grammatical forms. “ When a language resists a regular
analysis,” Mr. William de Humboldt observes judiciously in
his Considerations on the Mexican, Cora, Totonac, and Ta-
rahumar, “‘ we may suspect some mixture, some foreign in-
fluence; for the faculties of man, which are, as we may say,
reflected in the structure of languages, and in their grammati-


cal forms, act constantly in a regular and uniform manner.”


BOOK VIIL.


CHAPTER XXIII.


The Rio Negro.—Limits of Brazil— The Cassi-
quiare.— Bifurcation of the Oroonoko.


TuE Rio Negro, if compared to the Amazons,
the Rio de la Plata, or the Oroonoko, is but a
river of the second order. It’s possession has
been for ages of great political importance to the
Spanish government, because it might furnish a
rival power, Portugal, with an easy road of in-
troduction into the missions of Guyana, and
disturbiag the capitania general of Caraccas in
it’s southern limits. Three hundred years have
elapsed in vain territorial disputes. According
to the difference of the times, and the degree of
civilization of the natives, they have sometimes
leaned on the authority of the sovereign Pon-
tiff, and sometimes on the support of astronomy ;


298


and the disputants being generally more inte-
rested in prolonging than in terminating the
struggle, the nautical sciences, and the geography
of the New Continent, have alone gained by this
interminable litigation*. It may be remembered
how great an. influence the bulls of the Popes
Nicholas V, and Alexander VII, the treaty of
Tordesillas, and the necessity of fixing the line
of demarcation, have had on the ardor with which
the solution of the problem of the longitude, the
correction of ephemerides, and the improvement
of mathematical instruments, have been sought.
When the affairs of Paraguay, and the possession
of the colony del Sacramento, became of great
importance to the courts of Madrid and Lisbon,
commissioners of the boundaries were sent to the
Oroonoko, the Amazon, and the Rio Plata.
With these idle persons, who filled the archives
with protests and statements, were some well-
informed engineers, and some naval officers
versed in the methods, that were proper to deter-
mine the situation of places far from the coast.
The little that was known, up to the end of the
last century, of the astronomical geography of the
interior of the New Continent, was owing to
those estimable and laborious men, the French
and Spanish academicians, who measured a me-


* Ulloa, Dissert. historica y geogr. sobre el Meridiano de De-
marcacion, Madrid, 1749, p. 41. Salazar de los Progressos de


la Navigacion en Espana, p. 115.


299


ridian line at Quito, and to officers* who went
from Valparaiso to Buenos Ayres to join the ex-
pedition of Malaspina. It is pleasing to recall |
to mind the advantages, which the sciences
almost accidentally reaped from those commis-
sions of boundaries, which were burdensome to
the state, and less frequently dissolved than for-
gotten even by the very men who had claimed
their formation.

Those persons who know the uncertainty of
the American maps, and have seen those uncul-
tivated lands between the Jupura and the Rio
Negro, the Madeira and the Ucayale, the Rio
Branco and the coasts of Cayenne, which up to
our own days have been gravely disputed in
Europe, can never be sufficiently surprised at the
perseverance, with which the property of a few
square leagues is litigated. These disputed
grounds are generally separated from the culti-
vated part of the colonies by deserts, the extent
of which is unknown. In the celebrated con-
ferences of Puente de Caya- the question was
agitated, whether, in fixing the line of de-
marcation three hundred and seventy Spa-
nish leaguest to the west of the Cape Verd
islands, the pope meant, that the first meridian


* Don Jose de Espinosa, and don Felipe Bauza.

+ From the 4th of Nov. 1681, to the 22d of January,
1682.

{£ Or 22° 14/, reckoned on the equator.


300


should be reckoned from the centre of the island
of St. Nicholas, or (as the court of Portugal
asserted), from the western extremity of the little
island of Saint Antonio. In the year 1754, the
time of the expedition of Ituriaga and Solano,
negociations were entered into on the possession
of the banks of the Tuamini, then desert, and of
a marshy ground which we crossed in one even-
ing going from Javita to Canno Pimichin. The
Spanish commissioners very recently would
have placed the divisional line at the opening of
the Apoporis into the Jupura *, while the Portu-
gueze astronomers carried it back as far as Salto
Grande +. The missionaries, and the public in
general, take a lively interest in these territorial
disputes. In the Spanish as well as in the Portu-
gueze colonies, the government is accused of in-
dolent supineness. Whenever the people have
no institutions founded on liberty, public spirit


* More accurately Hyapura, or Caqueta.


+t Mapa del Rio Marannon para accompannar a la relacion
sobre las operaciones projectadas en la demarcacion de limites por
la quarta partida de division, construida por el Ten. Coronel y
Ingen, ordinario Don Francisco Requena, Primer Comisario de la
masma division, Governador y Comand. general de la prov. de
Maynas, 1783 (manuscript), From this map, which I copied
during my stay at Quito, I gathered some geographical in-
formation altogether unknown respecting the countries be-
tween the Napo, the Putumayo, the Jupura, and the Rio
Negro.


301


is agitated only when there is any question of
extending or narrowing the limits of the country.

The Rio Negro and the Jupuro are two tri-
butary streams of the Amazon, and may be
compared in length to the Danube. The upper
parts belong to the Spaniards, while the lower
are occupied by the Portugueze. The popula-
tion on these two majestic rivers has accumu-
lated where it draws nearest the centre of the
most ancient civilization. The banks of the
Upper Jupura or Caqueta have been cultivated
by missionaries, who descended from the Cor-
dilleras of Popayan and Neiva. The Christian
settlements are very numerous from Mocoa to
the mouth of the Caguan; while on the Lower
Jupura the Portugueze have scarcely founded
a few villages. On the Rio Negro, on the con-
trary, the Spaniards have not been able to rival
their neighbours. How could they find support
in a population so distant as that of the province
of Caraccas? Steppes and forests nearly desert
separate, at a distance of one hundred and sixty
leagues, the cultivated part of the coast from the
four missions of Marsa, Tomo, Daripe, and San
Carlos, which are all that the Spanish monks of
Saint Francis could establish along the Rio
Negro. Among the Portugueze of Brazil the
military system, that of presides and capitanes
pobladores, has prevailed over the government
of the missionaries. Grand Para is no doubt far


302


distant* from the mouth of the Rio Negro: but
the facility of navigation on the Amazon, which
runs like an immense canal in one direction
from west to east, has enabled the Portugueze
population to extend itself rapidly along the
river. The banks of the Lower Maragnon, from
Vistoza as far as Serpa, as well as those of the
Rio Negro from Fort da Bara to San Jose da
Marabitannas, are embellished by rich cultiva-
tion, and by a great number of large villages
and towns.

These local considerations are combined with
others, that pertain to the moral disposition of
the nations. The north-west coast of America
furnishes to this day no other stable settlements
but Russian and Spanish colonies. Before the
inhabitants of the United States in their pro-
gressive movement from east to west.could reach
the shore between the latitude of 41° and 50°,
that long separated the Spanish monks and the
‘Siberian hunters}, the latter had established
themselves south of the river Columbia. Thus
in New California the missionaries of Saint Fran-
cis, men estimable for their morals, and their


* One hundred and fifty, leagues in a straight line,

+ The hunters connected with military posts, and depend-
ant on the Russian Company, the principal proprietors of
which live at Irkoutsk. In 1804 the little fortress (crepost)
at the bay of Jakutal was still six hundred leagues distant
from the most northern Mexican possessions,


303


agricultural activity *, learnt with astonishment,
that Greek priests had arrived in their neigh-
bourhood ; and that two nations, who inhabit
the eastern and western extremities of Europe,
were become neighbours on a coast of America
opposite to China. In Guyana circumstances
were of a very different complexion: the Span-
iards found on their frontiers those very Portu-
gueze, who, by their language, and their muni-
cipal institutions, form with them one of the most
noble remains of Roman Europe; but whom
mistrust, founded on unequal strength, and too
great proximity, has converted into an often hos-
tile, and always rival power. When quitting
the coasts of Venezuela (where, as at the Havan-
nah, and in the rest of the West India islands,
men are daily occupied by the commercial
politics of Europe), you proceed toward the
south, you feel that you are removing daily
with increased rapidity from all that belongs to
the mother country. Amid the steppes of the
Llanos, in those huts covered with ox-hides and
surrounded by wild herds, the subjects of con-
versation are the cares that the cattle require,
the drought of the climate, so unfavourable to
pasturage, and the damage occasioned by the
bats among the heifers and the colts. Em-
barked on the Oroonoko, and arrived at the


* Seemy Political Essay on New Spain, vol, 1, p, 320.


304


missions of the forests, you perceive that the
attention of the inhabitants is fixed on other
objects, on the inconstancy of the Indians who
desert the villages, on the harvest of turtle’s
eggs being more or less abundant, and on the
inconveniences occasioned by a burning and
unhealthy climate. If the sting of the moschet-
toes suffer the monks to admit any other idca,
it is that of venting in whispers their complaints
against the president of the missions, and de-
ploring the blindness of those, who would reelect,
at the next chapter, the guardian of the convent
of Nueva Barcelona. Every thing here has a
local interest, and that interest, as the monks
say, is confined to the affairs of the community,
“to these forests, estas selvas, which God has
ordained us to inhabit.” This circle of ideas,
narrow and sad enough, enlarges as you pass
from the Upper Oroonoko to the Rio Negro,
and approach the frontiers of Brazil. There the
‘demon of European politics seems to occupy
every mind. The neighbouring country, which
extends beyond the Amazon, is called in the
language of the Spanish missions neither Brazil,
nor the Capitania-general of Grand Para ; it is
Portugal, and the copper coloured Indians, the
half-black mulattoes whom I have seen going
up from Barcelas to the little Spanish fort of
San Carlos, are Portugueze. These appella-
tions are found in the mouths of the people as


|
|
:
|


305


far as the coast of Cumana; and they are fond
of relating to travellers how much, at the time
of the expedition of Solano, they struck the
imagination of a commander at la Vieja Guay-
ana, a native of the mountains of Bierzo. This
old officer complained of having come by sea to
the banks of the Oroonoko. “ If it be true,”
said he, “ as they affirm here, that this vast pro-
vince of Spanish Guyana extends as far as Por-
tugal (@ los Portugueses), why did the court
make me embark at Cadiz? I should have
liked quite as well to have gone some leagues
farther by land.” . These expressions of ignorant
simplicity recall to mind the strange opinion
of cardinal Lorenzana. ‘This prelate, other-
wise well versed in historical studies, says, in a
work printed in our own days at Mexico*, that
the possessions of the king of Spain in New
California and New Mexico, the northern ex-
tremity of which is in the latitude of 37° 48’,
“ border on Siberia by land.”

If two nations adjacent to each other in Eu- ~
rope, the Spanish and the Portugueze, have alike
become neighbours in the New Continent, they
owe this state of things, not to say this disad-
vantage, to the spirit of enterprise, the active
courage which both displayed at the period of
their military glory and_ political greatness.
The Castilian language is now spoken in both


* Historia de Nueva Espanna y Cartas de Hernan Cortes.
VOL. V. x


306


Americas throughout an extent of -more thati
one thousand nine hundred leagues in length:
if, however, we consider South America apart,
we there find the Portugueze language spread
over a larger space of ground, and spoken
by a smaller number of individuals than the
Castilian. It would seem, as if the bond, that
so closely connects the fine languages of Camo-
éns and Lope de Vega, had served only to sepa-
rate nations farther, who had become neigh-
‘bours against their will. National hatred is
not modified solely by a diversity of origin, of
manners, and of progress in civilization ; when-
ever it is powerful, it must be considered as the
effect. of geographical situation, and the con-
flicting interests thence resulting. Nations de-
test each other a little less, when they are more
distant ; and when, their languages being radi-
cally different, they do not even attempt to
combine together. Travellers who have passed
' through New California, the interior provinces of
Mexico, and the northern frontiers of Brazil,
have been struck by these shades in the moral
dispositions of bordering nations.

When I was in the Spanish Rio milo the
divergent politics of the courts of Lisbon and
Madrid had augmented that system of mistrust,
which even in calmer times the commanders
of petty neighbouring forts love to encourage.
Boats went up from Barcelos as far as the Spa-
nish missions, but the communications were of


307


little frequency. A commander of sixteen or
eighteen soldiers wearied ‘ the garrison” by
measures of safety, which were dictated “ by
?


if he were at-
surround the enemy.”


the important state of affairs ;
tacked, he hoped to
When we spoke of the indifference, with which


(<4


no doubt the Portugueze government regarded
the four little villages, that the monks of Saint
Francis had founded on the Upper Guainia,
the inhabitants were hurt by the motives, which
we alleged with the view to give them confi-
dence. A people, who have preserved in vigour
through the revolutions of ages a national ha-
tred, like occasions of cherishing it. The mind
delights in every thing impassioned, in the con-
sciousness of an energetic feeling, in the affec-
tions and in rival hatreds, that are founded on
antiquated prejudices. Whatever constitutes the
individuality of nations flows from the mother
country to the most remote colonies ; and na-
tional antipathies are not effaced, where the
influence of the same languages ceases. We
know from the interesting narrative of Krusen-
stern’s voyage, that the hatred of two fugitive
sailors, one a Frenchman and the other English,
was the cause of a long war between the inha-
bitants of the Marquesas Islands. On the banks
of the Amazon and the Rio Negro, the Indians
of the neighbouring Portugueze and Spanish
villages detest each other. These poor people
x2


305


speak only the American tongues, they are


ignorant of what passes “ on the other bank of


the Ocean, beyond the great salt pool ;” but the
gowns of their missionaries are of a different
colour, and this displeases them extremely.

I have stopped to paint the effects of national
animosities, which sage administrators have en-
deavoured to calm, but have been unable entirely
te set at rest. This rivalry has contributed to
the imperfection of the geographical knowledge,
which we have hitherto obtained respecting the
tributary rivers of the Amazon. When the
communications of the natives are impeded,
and one nation is established near the mouth,
and another in the upper part of the same river,
it is difficult for the persons who attempt to con-
struct maps, to acquire precise information.
The periodical inundations, and still more the
portages, by which boats are passed from one
stream to another, the sources of which are in
the same neighbourhood, have led to erroneous
ideas of bifurcations and branchings of rivers
that do not exist. The Indians of the Portu-
gueze missions, for instance, enter (as I was
informed. upon the spot) the Spanish Rio Negro
on one side by the Rio Guainia* and the Rio
Tomo ; and the Upper Oroonoko on the other


* Itis thus that the Xie or Uexié (Oueicie, Guaixia ?),
which flows in near the mission of San Marcellino, is called
at San Carlos del Rio Negro.


309


by the portages between the Cababuri, the Pas-
simoni, the Idapa, and the Macava, to gather
the aromatic seeds of the puchery laurel behind
the Esmeralda. The Indians, I repeat, are ex-
cellent geographers; they turn the enemy, not-
withstanding the limits traced upon the maps,
in spite of the forts and the estacamentos ; and
when the missionaries see them arrive from such
distances, and in different seasons, they begin
to frame hypotheses of pretended communica-
tions of rivers. Each party has an interest in
concealing what it knows with certainty; and
that propensity for all that is mysterious, which
is so common and so powerful among the igno-
rant, contributes to perpetuate the doubt. It
may be observed farther, that the various Indian
nations, who frequent this labyrinth of rivers,
give them names entirely different ; and these
names are disguised and lengthened by termi-
nations that signify water, great water, current.
How often have I been perplexed by the ne-
cessity of settling the synonymy of rivers, when
I have sent for the most intelligent among the
natives, in order to interrogate them by means
of an interpreter on the number of tributary
streams, on the sources of the rivers, and on the
portages !
in the same mission, it is difficult to make the
witnesses agree. Our maps are loaded with
names arbitrarily shortened or disfigured. ‘To


Three or four languages being spoken


310


examine how far what they contain is accurate,
we must be guided by the geographical situa-
tion of the confluent rivers, I might almost say
by a certain etymological tact. The Rio Uau-
pe* or Uapes of the Portugueze maps is the
Guapue of the Spanish, and the Ucayari of the
natives. The Anava- of the ancient geogra-
phers is the Anauahu of Arrowsmith, and the
Uanauhau or Guanauhu of the Indians. The
desire of not having any void in the maps, in
order to give them an appearance of accuracy,
has caused rivers to be created, to which names
have been applied, that have not been recog-
nized as synonimous. It is only of late, that
travellers in America, in Persia, and in India,
have felt the importance of being correct in the
denomination of places. When we read the
voyage of the famous Raleigh, it is difficult
indeed to recognize in the lake of Mrecabo the
laguna of Maracaybo, and in the marquis Para-
co the name of Pizarro, the destroyer of the
empire of the Incas.

The great tributary streams of the Amazon
are designated even by the missionaries of Ku-
ropean race by different names in their upper
and lower course. The Iza is called higher up
Putumayo ; the Jupura toward it’s sources bears
the name of Caqueta. The researches made in


* A tributary stream of the Rio Negro.
+ A tributary stream of the Rio Branco.


311


the missions of the Andaquies* on the real ori-
gin of the Rio Negro have been so much the
more fruitless, because the Indian name of the
river was unknown. I heard it called Guainia
at Javita, Maroa, and San Carlos. The learned
historian of Brazil, Mr. Southey, whom I
have found very accurate on all the points
where I could compare his geographical state-
ments with those which I collected in my tra-
vels, says expressly, that the Rio Negro, in the
lower part of it’s course, is called Guiari, or
Curana, by the natives; in the upper part,
Ueneyat. It is the word Gueneya, instead of
Guainia ; for the Indians of those countries say
indifferently Guaranacua or Ouaranacua +, Gua-


rapo or Uarapo. Of this last Hondius{, and
all the ancient geographers, have made, by a
mistake pleasant enough, their Europa fluvius.
This is the place in which to speak of the
sources of the Rio Negro, which have so long


been an object of contention among geographers.
The interest we feel in this question is not that
alone, which is attached to the origin of all great
rivers, but is connected with a crowd of other


* At the eastern declivity of the Andes of Pasto and of
Sebondoy.

+ Southey’s History of Brazil, vol. i, p. 598.

t A river that falls into the Rio Negro opposite Carvoeyro.

§ In his map for Raleigh’s voyage. The Guarapo flows into


the Lower Oroonoko, below Guayana Vieja-


312


questions, that comprehend the pretended bi-
furcations of the Caqueta, the communications
between the Rio Negro and the Oroonoko, and
the local fable of Dorado, heretofore called
Enim, or the empire of the Grand Paytiti.
When we study with care the ancient maps of
these countries, and the history of their geogra-
phical errors, we see how by degrees the fable
of Dorado has been transported toward the
west with the sources of the Oroonoko. Born
on the eastern declivity of the Andes, it was
fixed at first, as I shall show in another place,
to the south-west of the Rio Negro. The vali-
ant Philip de Urre sought for the great city of
Manoa by traversing the Guaviare. Even now
the Indians of San Jose de Maravitanos relate,
that “on sailing to the north-east for fifteen
days on the Guape, or Uaupe, you reach a
famous Laguna de oro, surrounded by moun-
tains, and so large, that the opposite shore can
not be discerned*. A ferocious nation, the
Guanes, do not permit the collecting of the gold
of a sandy plain, that surrounds the lake. Fa-
ther Acunna places the lake Manoa, or Yene-
fii, between the Jupura and the Rio Negro.
Some Manao Indians, (this is the word Manoa,
transposing the vowels, which is done by so


* Journals of the Travels of Don Pedro Apollinario Diaz
de la Fuente (manuscript).


313


many American nations) brought Father Fritz,
in 1687, several slips of beaten gold. This na-
tion, the name of which is still known * on the
banks of the Urarira, between Lamalonga and
Moreira-+, dwelt on the Jurubesh (Yurubech,
Yurubets). M. de ia Condamine is right in say-
ing, that this Mesopotamia between the Caqueta,
the Rio Negro, the Jurubesh, and the Iquiare,
was the first theatre of el Dorado. But where
shallwe findthese names of Jurubesh and Iquiare,
given by the Fathers Acunna and Fritz? I
think I recognized them in the rivers Urubaxi
and Iguarit on some manuscript Portugueze
maps which I possess, and which were drawn
at the hydrographic repository of Rio Janeiro.
During a great number of years I have assidu-
ously studied the geography of South America,
north of the Amazon, from the most ancient
maps and a collection of many unpublished
materials. Desirous that my work should pre-
serve the character of a scientific performance,
T ought not to hesitate about treating of subjects,


* See the Corografia brasiliensis, which has just appeared
at Rio Janeiro, vol, ii, p. 353.

+ The Guape and the Urarira fall into the Rio Negro.

{ It may be written Urubaji. The 7 and the x have be-
come the German ch to Father Fritz. The Urubaxi, or
Hiyevrubaxi (Yurubech), falls into the Rio Negro near Santa
Isabella ; the Iguari (Iquiare ?) runs into the Issana, which
is also a tributary stream of the Rio Negro


314


on which I may flatter myself that I can throw
some light; I ‘mean the sources of the Rio
Negro and the Oronooko, the communication
between these rivers and the Amazon, and the
problem of the auriferous soil, which has cost
the inhabitants of the New World so many tears,
and so much blood. I shall touch on these
questions, according as my journals lead me
toward the places, where they are most agitated
by the inhabitants themselves. As it would be
necessary, however, to enter into minute details,
if I attempted to give all the proofs of my asser-
tions, I shall here confine myself to the mention
of the most striking results, and shall reserve


the more ample discussion for the Analysis of


the maps, and the Essay on the Astronomical
Geography of the New Continent, which will be
published at the head of the Geographical
Atlas.

These researches lead to the general conclu-
sion, that, in the distribution of the waters cir-
culating on the surface of the Globe, as well as
in the structure of organic bodies, nature has pur-
sued a much less complicated plan, than has
been believed by those, who have suffered them-
selves to be guided by vague conceptions and a
taste for the marvellous. We find too, that all
the anomalies, all the exceptions to the laws of
hydrography, which the interior of America dis-
plays, are merely apparent ; that the course of


315


running waters furnishes phenomena equally
extraordinary in the ancient world, but that
these phenomena from their littleness have less
struck the imagination of travellers. When
immense rivers may be considered as composed
of several parallel furrows* of unequal depth ;
when these rivers are not enclosed in valleys ;
and when the interior of a great continent is as
flat as the shores of the sea with us; the ramifi-
cations, the bifurcations, and the interlacings in
the form of net work, must be infinitely multi-
plied. From what we know of the equilibrium
of the seas, I cannot think, that the New World
issued from the waters later than the Old; and
that organic life is there younger, or more re-
cent: but, without admitting oppositions be-
tween the two hemispheres of the same planet,
we may conceive, that in the hemisphere most
abundant in waters the different systems of
rivers required more time, to separate them-
selves from one another, and establish their
complete independance. The deposites of mud,
which are formed wherever the running waters
lose somewhat of their swiftness, contribute no
doubt to raise the beds of the great confluent


* See my memoir on the causes of the bifurcations of
rivers, in the Journal of the Royal Polytechnic School, vol. iv,
p. 60.


316


streams, and augment their inundations; but
at. length these deposites obstruct entirely the
branches of the rivers, and the narrow channels,
that connect the neighbouring streams. The
substances washed down by rainwaters form by
their accumulation new bars, isthmuses of depo-
sited earth, and points of division, which did not
before exist. It hence results, that these natu-
ral channels of communication are by de-
grees divided into two tributary streams, and.
from the effect of a transverse rising acquire
two opposite slopes. A part of their waters
is turned back toward the principal .reci-
pient, and a buttress rises between the two paral-
lel basins, which occasions all traces of their
ancient communication to disappear. From
this period the bifurcations no longer connect
different’ systems of rivers; and, where they
continue to take place at the time of great in-
undations, we see that the waters diverge from
the principal recipient only to enter it again
after a longer or shorter circuit. The limits,
which at first appeared vague and uncertain,
begin to be fixed ; and in the lapse of ages, from
the action of whatever is moveable on the sur-
face of the Globe, from that of the waters, the
deposites, and the sands, the basins of the
rivers separate, as the great lakes are subdivided*,


* For instance, the lakes of the valley of Mexico since the


sixteenth century «


317


and as the inland seas lose their ancient com-
munications*.

The certainty acquired by geographers since
the 16th century of the existence of several bi-
furcations, and the mutual dependance, of vari-
ous systems of rivers in South America, have led
them to admit an intimate connection between
the five great tributary streams of the Oroonoko
and the Amazon; the Guaviare, the Inirida,
the Rio Negro, the Caqueta or Hyapura}-, and
the Putumayo or Iza. These hypotheses, which
our maps exhibit under different forms, took
rise partly in the missions of the plains, and
partly on the back of the Cordilleras of the
Andes. In travelling from Santa-Fe de Bogota,


by Fusagasuga to Popayan and Pasto, you are
told by the mountaineers, that the Paramos
de la Summa Paz (of eternal Peace), of Is-


* The geological constitution of the soil seems to indicate,
that, notwithstanding the actual difference of level in their
waters, the Black Sea, the Caspian, and lake Aral, commu-
nicated with each other in an era anterior to historic times.
The overflowing of the Aral into the Caspian Sea seems
even to be partly of a more recent date, and independant of
the bifurcation of the Gihon (Ozus), on which one of the
most learned geographers of our days, Mr. Ritter, has thrown
new light. Erdkunde, vol. 1, p. 665 and 695.

+ Hyapura or Jupura, Thus, instead of Javary, Yutai,
and Yurua, (tributary streams of the Amazon), the people
of the country say Hyabary, Hyutahy, and Hyuruha (Co-
rogr. bras., vol, ii, p. 286).


318


eance, and of Aponte, gave birth on their eastern
declivity to all the rivers, that traverse the
forests of Guyana between the Meta and the
Putumayo. The-tributary streams-being taken
for the main trunks, and the course of all these
rivers being prolonged as far as the chain of the
mountains, the sources of the Oroonoko, the
Rio Negro, and the Guaviare, are confounded
together. The extreme difficulty of descending
the rapid declivity of the Andes toward the east,
the shackles with which a narrow policy fetters
the commerce with the Llanos of the Meta, San
Juan, and Caguan, and the little interest that is
felt in following and exploring the branches of
these rivers, have all served to augment. this
geographical uncertainty. When I was at Santa
Fe de Bogota, the road that leads by the vil-
lages of Usme, Ubaque, or Caqueza, to Apiay
and the embarcadera of the Rio Meta, was
scarcely known. It was but recently I could
rectify the map of this river by the journals of
the canon Cortes Madariaga, and the notions
acquired during the war of independance in Ve-
nezuela.

The following is all that we know with cer-
tainty on the situation of the sources at the foot
of the Cordilleras, between 4° 20’ and 1° 10’ of
north latitude. Behind the Paramo cf Suma
Paz, of which I took the bearings from Pandi,
rises the Rio de Aguas Blancas, which, with the


peas ee


319


Pachaquiaro, or Rio Negro of Apiay, forms the
Meta; more to the south lies the Rio Ariari,
which is one of the tributary streams of the Gua-
viare, the mouth of which I saw near San Fer-
nando de Atabapo. In following the back of
the Cordillera toward the Ceja and the Paramo
de Aponte, we find the Rio Guayavero, which
passes near the village of Aramo, and joins the
Aviari*. Below this confluence, the two rivers
take the name of Guaviare. South-west of the
Paramo de Aponte, at the foot of the mountains,
near Santa Rosa, rises the Rio Caqueta; and
on the Cordillera itself the Rio de Mocoa, cele-
brated in the history of the conquest. These


* The passage of these two rivers, the Ariari and Guaya.
vero (Guayare or Canicamare), is clearly distinguishable in the
account of the expedition of Jorge de Espira (Georg von
Speier) from Coro to the province of Choques, in 1536, But
what is that great river Papamene (Rio de Plata), which
this conquistador passed after the Guayavero, and which co-
mienca & las espaldos, that is, to the south-east of the villa de
Timana? Beyond a doubt it is the Caqueta, or the Rio
Pragua, which flows into the Caqueta. (Fray Pedro Simon,
Notici. de la Conquista, p. 188—201, and 332). Mr, Southey
well observes, that an ample folio volume might be filled with
the accounts of the expeditions, that have been made to dis-
cover el Dorado. A compilation of this kind would furnish
not merely a sad picture of human sufferings, cruelties, and
follies, but might also serve to throw some light on the geo-
graphy of the interior of South America, if, (which has not


been hitherto attempted) the roads pursued by these expe-


ditions were discussed,


320


two rivers, which are united a little above the
mission of San Augustin de Nieto, form the
Jupura, or Caqueta. The sources of the Rio
de Mocoa are separated by the Cerro del Porta-
chuelo, a mountain that rises on the table-land
itself of the Cordilleras, from the lake (Sienega)
of Sebondoy, which is the origin of the Rio Pu-
tumayo or Iza. The Meta, the Guaviare, the
Caqueta, and the Putumayo, are consequently
the only great rivers, that rise immediately from
the eastern declivity of the Andes of Santa Fe,
Popayan, and Pasto. The Vichada, the Zama,
the Inirida, the Rio Negro, the Uaupe, and the
Apoporis, which are marked in our maps as
reaching to the west as far as the mountains,
take rise at a great distance from them, either
in the savannahs between the Meta and_ the
Guaviare, or in the mountainous country, which,
according .to the information given me by
the natives, begins at four or five days’ journey
distant, to the west of the missions of Javita
and Maroa, and extends, through the Sierra
Tunuhy, beyond the Xie, toward the banks of
the Issana.

It is remarkable, that this ridge of the Cor-
dilleras, which contains the sources of so many
majestic rivers, (the Meta, the Guaviare, the
Caqueta, and the Putumayo,) is as little covered
with snow, as the mountains of Abyssinia from
which flows the blue Nile; but, on the contrary,


321


on going up the tributary streams which furrow
the plains, a volcano is found still in activity,
before you reach the Cordillera of the Andes.
This phenomenon was discovered recently by
the monks of St. Francis, who go down from
Ceja by the Rio Fragua to Caqueta. A solitary
hill, emitting smoke night and day, is found on
the north-east of the mission of Santa Rosa, and
west of the Puerto del Pescado. This is the
effect of a lateral action of the volcanoes of Po-
payan and Pasto; as the Guacamayo and the
Sangay, situate also at the foot of the eastern
declivity of the Andes, are the effect of a lateral
action produced by the system of the volcanoes
of Quito. After having closely inspected the


banks of the Oroonoko and the Rio Negro, where
the granitic rock every where pierces the soil ;
when we reflect on that total absence of vol-


canoes in Brazil, Guyana, on the coast of Vene-
zuela, and perhaps in all that part of the conti-
nent, which lies to the east of the Andes; we
contemplate with interest the three burning vol-
canoes, that are situate near the sources of
the Caqueta, the Napo, and’the Rio de Macas,
or Morona.

Although the imposing greatness of the Rio
Negro had already struck Orellana, who saw it
in 1593 at it’s confluence with the Amazon un-
das nigras spargens, it was not however till a
century later, that geographers sought for it’s

VOL, V. ¥


322


origin on the declivity of the Cordilleras. The
voyage of Acunna gave rise to hypotheses, which
have been propagated down to our own days,
and which Messrs. de la Condamine and d’An-
ville have multiplied beyond measure. Acunna
had been told, in 1638, at the mouth of the
Rio Negro, that one of it’s branches communi-
cated with another great river, on which the
Dutch were settled. Mr. Southey* judiciously
observes, that this notion, received at an im-
mense distance from the coast, proves the fre-
quency and activity of the intercourse at that
period between the barbarous nations of those
countries (particularly among those of the Ca-
ribbean race). It remains doubtful, whether
the Indians whom Acunna interrogated meant
to acquaint him with the communication be-
tween the Oroonoko and the Rio Negro by
means of the Cassiquiare, a natural channel,
which I went up from San Carlos to Esmeralda ;
or only to give him a vague idea of the portages
between the sources of the Rio Branco+ and
the Rio Essequibo. Acunna himself was not
of opinion, that the great river, the mouth of
which was in possession of the Dutch, was the


* History of Brazil, vol. i, p. 599.

+ Itis the Rio Parime, Rio Blanco, Rio de Aguas Blan-
cas of our maps, that flows into the Rio Negro below Bar-
cellos, and is called by the inhabitants of it’s banks, Que-
euene.


323


Oroonoko; he imagined, that there was a com-
munication with Rio San Felipe, which flows
out west of Cape North, and by which, accord-
ing to him, the tyrant Lopez de Aguirre ter-
minated his long navigation. This last hypo-
thesis appears to me very conjectural, although,
as we have seen above, the tyrant, in his strange
letter to Phillip Il, confesses himself, that, “he
knows not how he and his men got through so
great a mass of water.*”

Until Acunna had acquired in his voyage
some vague notions of the communications with
another great river north of the Amazon, the
best informed missionaries considered the Oroo-
noko as a continuation of the Caqueta (Kaque-
ta, Caketa). “ This river,” says Fray Pedro
Simon+ in 1625, “ rises on the eastern declivity


* See vol. iv, p. 259, and vol.ii, p. 220. In reading’
again carefully the narrative of the voyage of Lopez de
Aguirre, of which Fray Pedro Simon has preserved a mi-
nute account (Notic. 6, c. 23—25, p. 471-482), I see no-
thing to indicate, that the expedition ever went out of the
bed of the Amazon. We see the river ehlarging itself by
degrees, and that Aguirre went out (in the beginning of
the month of July 1561) through an opening full of very
low and small islands, which was eighty leagues broad.


The facility, with which his sloops performed in seventeen


days the passage of the “* golfo que ay desde ta boca del Rio
hasta la isla de la Margarita,” might appear surprising, if we
did not recollect the force of the currents, which in these
latitudes run to thé north.west.
+ We must here recollect, that Fray Pedro Simon, Pro-
¥ 2


324


of the Paramo d’ Iscance. It receives the
Papamene, which comes from the Andes of
Nueva, and takes successively the names of Rio
Iscance, ‘Tama (on account of the adjacent pro-
vince of Tama Indians), Guayave, Baraguan,
and Oroonoko.” ‘The position of the Paramo of
Iscance, a lofty pyramidal summit, which I saw
from the table-land of Mamendoy and the beau-
tiful banks of the Mayo, characterises in this
description the. Caqueta. The Rio Papamene
is the Rio de la Fragua, which forms with the
Rio de Mocoa one of the principal branches of
the Caqueta; and is known to us by the chival-
rous travels of George of Spires and Philip von
Huten*. These two warriors did not reach the
banks of the Papamene, till they had passed the
Ariari and Guayavero. The Tama Indians} are


vincial of the Order of Saint Francis in New Grenada, exa-
mined with his own eyes a great part of South-America, and
wrote his history in part from the important memoirs of the
great Conquistador and Adelantado Gonzalo Ximenes di Que-
sada, who described his own expeditions in two volumes,
with the title of Ratos de Suesca, as well as from the journals
of the Fathers Francisco Medrano, Pedro Aguado, and Juan
de Castellanos.

* It is difficult to recognize the illustrious name of Huten
in the Spanish historians, They call Philip von Huten, by
retrenching the aspirate 4, Felipe de Uten, de Urre, or de
Utre. ‘Uten como algumos quieren que se llamase Utre.”
(Simon, p. 351.)

+ They, as well as the Coreguajes, speak the Cora lan-
guage.


325


still one of the nations that spread widest along
the northern bank of the Caqueta; it is not
surprising therefore, that this river received,
according to Fray Pedro Simon, the name of
Rio Tama. The sources of the tributary streams
of the Caqueta lying very near those of the Gua-
viare, one of the largest tributary rivers of the
Oroonoko, led to the error entertained from
the beginning of the seventeeth century, that
the Caqueta (Rio de Iscance and Papamene),
the Guaviare (Guayare), and the Oroonoko,
were the same river. No person had descended
the Caqueta toward the Amazon, and recog-
nized, that the river called lower down Jupura,
is identically the same with the Caqueta. A
tradition preserved in our days among the inha-
bitants of those countries, according to which a
branch of the Caqueta, below the confluence of
the Caguan and Payoya, flows into the Inirida
and the Rio Negro, has no doubt contributed to
the opinion, that the Oroonoko rises on the
back of the mountains of Pasto.

We have just seen, that it was supposed in
New Grenada, that the waters of the Caqueta,
like those of the Ariari, the Meta, and the
Apure, flowed toward the great basin of the
Oroonoko. If the direction of these tributary
streams had been observed with more attention,
it would have been perceived, that, notwith-
standing the general slope of the ground to-


326


ward the east, there are in the terrestrial polye-
drons, of which the plains are composed, slopes
of a second order, inclining to the north-east
and to the south-east. An almost imperceptible
ridge or line of summits stretches itself, in the
latitude of two degrees, from the Andes of Ti-
mana toward the isthmus, that separates Javita
from Canno Pimichin, and by which we had
caused our canoe to be carried. North of this
parallel of Timana, the course of the waters* is
directed to the north-east, or east; and forms
the tributary streams of the Oroonoko, or the
tributaries. of these streams. But south of the
parallel of Timana, in plains which appear to
resemble perfectly those of San Juan, the Ca-
queta or Jupura, the Putumayo or Iza, the
Napo, the Pastaza, and the Morona, run to the
south-east and south-south-east, into the basin
ofthe Amazon. It is even very remarkable,
that this ridge of separation is itself but a pro-
longation of that, which I found in the Cordil-
leras on the road from Popayan to Pasto. « In
drawing aline of summits through Ceja (a little
south of Timana) and the Paramo de las Papas
toward, l Alto. del Roble, between 1° 45’ and!
2° 20’ of latitude, at nine hundred: and! seventy
toises of elevation, we find the divortia aquarum


* The Inirida, the-Guaviare, the Vichada, the Zama, the
Meta, the @asanare, the Apure.


327


between the Caribbean sea and the Pacific
Ocean*.

Before the voyage of Acunna an idea was
spread among the missionaries, that the Caqueta,
the Guaviare, and the Oroonoko, were but dif-
ferent names for the same river; but Sanson
ihe geographer, in the maps which he framed
on the observations of Acunna, conceived the
idea of dividing the Caqueta into two branches,
one of which should be the Oroonoko, and the
other the Rio Negro, or Curiguacura. This bi-
furcation at right angles is figured on all the
maps of Sanson, Coronelli, Du Val, and De Yisley,
from 1656 to 1703. It was presumed that im
this manner the communications of the great
rivers might be explained, of which Acunna
had brought the first tidings from the mouth of
the Rio Negro; and it was never suspected,
that the Jupura was the real continuation of the
Caqueta. Sometimes the name of the Caqueta
was made to disappear entirely, and the’ river
that formed the bifurcation was termed the Rio
Paria or Yuyapari, which are the ancient deno-
minations of the Oroonoko. De l’Isle, toward the


* See my map of the Rio de la Magdalena, and my Ods.
Astron., vol. i, p. 304. (Nivellement geologique, No. 130.)


+ Sce three maps of South America, by Sanson, in 1656,
1669, and 1680; map of Du Val in 1684; map of Coronelli,
in 1689; maps of De V'Islc, in 1700 and 1703.


328


close of his days, suppressed* the bifurcation of
the Caqueta, to the great regret of la Conda-
minef; made the Putumayo, the Jupura, and
the Rio Negro, entirely independant rivers ;
and, as if to banish all hope of communication
between the Oroonoko and the Rio Negro, figur-
“ed a lofty chain of mountains between the two
rivers. Father Fritz{ had before followed the
same system, which was believed to be the most
probable in the time of Hondius.

The voyage of M. de la Condamine, which
has thrown so much light on different parts of
America, has embroiled all that is connected
with the courses of the Caqueta, the Oroonoko,
and the Rio Negro. This illustrious traveller
has well observed, it is true, that the Caqueta
(of Mocoa) was the river, which, in the Ama-
zon, bears the name of Jupura; but he not only
adopted the hypothesis of Sanson, he even trip-
led the number of bifurcations of the Caqueta.
By the first, a branch (the Jaoya) of the Caque-
ta flows into the Putumayo; a second forms the

-Jupura and the Rio Paragua; and by a third
the Rio Paragua is subdivided into two rivers,


* Already in his map of 1722.

+ Meém. de 7 Acad., 1745, p. 438.

{ See a manuscript map (Tabula geografica del Rio Maran-
non) of 1690, which I found among a collection of d’ Anville’s
maps, preserved at Paris in the archives of the ministry of
foreign affairs, No. 9545.


329


the Oroonoko and the Rio Negro. This ima-
ginary system is represented in the first edition*
of the fine map of America by d’Anville. It
thence results, that the Rio Negro separates
itself from the Oroonoko below the Great Cata-
racts; and that, in order to reach the mouth of
the Guaviare, you must go up the Caqueta be-
yond the bifurcation, which gives birth to the
Rio Jupura. When M. de la Condamine learn-
ed, that the Oroonoko, far from having it’s
source at the foot of the Andes de Pasto, came
from the back of the mountains of Cayenne, he
modified his ideas in a very ingenious manner.
The Rio Negro no longer issued from the Oroo-
noko ; the Guaviare, the Atabapo, the Cassiqui-
are, and the mouth of the Inirida (under the
name of the Iniricha, take nearly their true situ-
ations on the second map of d’Anville; but the
third bifurcation of the Caqueta gives rise to the
Inirida and the Rio Negro. This. system was
maintained by Father Caulin, marked upon the
map of La Cruz, and copied on all those, that
appeared up to the commencement of the 19th
century. The names of the Caqueta, the Oroo-
noko, and the Inirida, it is true, do not excite
that interest, and those historical remembrances,
that belong to the rivers of the interiour of Ni-


* Sce above, p, 11. (Cartas de la Bibliotheque du Roi, No.
745.)


330


gritia ; but the varions combinations of the geo-
graphers of the New Continent recal to mind
the strange manner, in which the courses of the
Niger, the White Nile, the Gambaro, the Jolliba,
and the Zaire, have been traced. From year to
year, the domain of hypotheses is lessened ; pro-
blems are better defined ; and that ancient part
of geography, which might be called speculative,
not to say conjectural, is circumscribed within
narrower limits.

It is not therefore on the banks of the Caque-
ta, but on those of the Guainia or Rio Negro,
that any positive notion can be acquired res-
pecting the sources of the last-mentioned river.
The Indians who inhabit the missions of Maroa,
Tomo, and San Carlos, have no knowledge of
an upper communication* between the Guainia
and the Jupura. I measured it’s breadth oppo-
site the little fort of Saint Augustin, and found
it was} 292 toises; it’s mean breadth, near


* Father Caulin makes the strange conjecture, that the
upper part of the Rio Negro has received the name of Ca-
queta from the Spanish Americans, because it has been con-
founded with another Rio Negro (Rio de Caquesa), that rises
near the villaze of Caquesa, east of Santa-~Fe de Bogota,
and forms the Rio Meta, after having joined the Umadea.
(Hist. corogr., p. 82.)

+ Basis 212 metres, angles 90° and 69° 36’. The breadth
of the river is 570 metres, or 682 varas, This is three times
the breadth of the Seine near the Garden of Plants, at
Paris.


331


Maroa, is from 200 to 250 toises. It is esti-
mated by M. de la Condamine, near the mouth
in the Amazon, in the narrowest part, at
1200 toises, an inerease of 1000 toises om
10° of the length of it’s course* in a di-
rect. line. Notwithstanding the still considera-
ble volume of water, which we found between
Maroa and San Carlos, the Indians assert, that
the Guainia rises at five days of navigation
west-north-west of the mouth of the Pimichin,
in a mountainous country, which gives birth
to the sources of the Inirida. As you may go
up the Cassiquiare in ten or eleven days from
San Carlos to the point of the bifurcation of the
Oroonoko, five days’ journey may be estimated,
as you ascend against a much less rapid current,
at a little more than 1° 20’ of direct distance;
which would place the sources of the Guainia,
according’ to: my observations of the longitude
made at Javita and San Carlos, 71° 35 west of
the meridian of Paris. Notwithstanding the
perfect accordance which prevailed in the testi-
mony of the natives, I believe, that the sources
are still more to the west; the boats being able
to go up only as far as the bed of the river per-
mits. We must not pronounce in too positive
a manner from: the analogy of the rivers of
Europe on the proportion between the breadth


* Reckoning the meam degree at 57,008 toises.


332


and length of the upper course*. The rivers in


America often acquire an extraordinary in-
crease} in the volume of their waters, during a
course of no considerable length.

What particularly characterises the Guainia
in it’s upper course is the want of sinuosities ; it
is like a large canal traced in a direct line
through a thick forest. Whenever the river
changes it’s direction, it presents openings to the
eye of equal length. The banks are high, but
even, and seldom rocky. The granite, traversed
by immense veins of white quartz, appears in
general only in the middle of the bed. In going
up the Guainia to the north-west, the current
augments in rapidity every day of the naviga-
tion. The banks of the river are desert; it is
only toward the sources (Jas cavezeras), that the
hilly country is inhabited by the Manivas and
Poignaves. The sources of the Inirida (Iniri-
cha), I was told by the Indians, are but two or


* The Seine and the Marne, for instance, furnish more
than 2° of distance (on a calculation of their direct course),
from Paris to their sources.

+ The length of the course of the Rio Ventuari and the
Rio Caura is only 1° 20’ and 1°50’, IT do not mention the
immense river Guayaquil, and others that rise on the west-
ern declivity of the Andes, because they form (like the
Thames and the Severn) vast gulfs at the mouth, a species of
Jakes, the fresh waters of which, in their oscillating move-
ments, are repelled or stopped by the tides of the Ocean.


|
i
|


333


three leagues distant from those of the Guainia,
where a portage might be established. Father
Caulin learned at Cabruta, from an Indian chief,
named Tapo, that the Inirida approaches very
near the Patavita (Paddavida, on the map of |
La Cruz), which is a tributary stream of the
Rio Negro. The natives of the banks of the
Upper Guainia know nothing of this name, or of
that of a lake (Laguna del Rio Negro), which is
ound on the ancient Portugueze maps*. This
pretended Rio Patavita is probably nothing
more than the Guainia of the Indians of Maroa;
since, as long as geographers believed in the bi-
furcation of the Caqueta+, they made the Rio
Negro rise from that branch, and from a river


which they called Patavitat. According to the
accounts of the natives, the mountains, at the
sources of the Inirida and the Guainia, do hot
exceed the height of Baraguan, which I found to
be one hundred and twenty toises.

The manuscript Portugueze mapsy, construct-


*® See also the Amérique Meridionale of M. Brué, 1816.

+ La Condamine in the Mém. del’ Acad., 1745, p. 451;
and see, at /’ Amazone, 1745, p. 123. D’Anville in the Jour-
nal des Savans, March 1750, p. 185.

¢ The confluence of this supposed branch with the Pata-
vita, according to M. Bonne, whose astronemical deductions
(where he had good data) are very judicious, is in 1° 30/ of
north latitude, and 75° of west longitude. (Atlas de Raynal,
No. 81.)

§ In studying these maps, which are very instructive,


334


ed recently at the hydrographic depot of Rio
Janeiro, confirm the notions that I acquired on
the spot. ‘They mark none of the four commu-
nications of the Caqueta or Jupura with the
Guainia (Rio Negro), the Inirida, the Uaupes
(Guapue), and the Putumayo ; they represent
each of these tributary streams as an independant
river ; they suppress the Rio Patavita, and place
the sources of the Guainia only 2° 15’ west of
the meridian of Javita. 'The Rio Uaupes, one of
the ‘tributary streams of the Guainia, seems to
prolong it’s course much more to the west than
the Guainia itself, and it’s direction is such,
that, without crossing it, no branch of the Ca-
queta could reach the Upper Guainia. I shall


with respect to the eastern part of Brazil, we recognize the
extreme difficulty, which the Portugueze geographers found
in combining their ideas of the Lower Jupura, and the Lower
Putumayo, with the Spanish notions of the sources of these
rivers, They commit the error, for instance, of naming that
part of the Putumayo or Iza, where the Missions of San An-
tonio de Amaguajes, Socombios, and San Diego, are situate,
the Upper Jupura; they make the Rio de Mocoa and the
Rio Fragua fall into the Apoporis, which is but a tributary
stream of the Caqueta; and they take from the Rio Iza
(Issa or Putumayo) two thirds of it’s course, TI shall ob-
serve on this occasion, that the most recent Portugueze maps,
like the most ancient maps of D’Anville and de la Cruz, lay
down the Chamusigueni, (Chamequisseen of Arrowsmith,
Chamochiqueni of my itinerary map of the Oroonoko), as a
tributary stream of the Rio Negro, while the Indians report
it to be a tributary stream of the Inirida. (Caulm, p. 75.)


|
|
:
,
|
|


335


terminate this discussion by bringing a direct
proof against the assertion of those, who would
make the Guainia rise, like the Guaviare and
the Caqueta, from the eastern declivity of the
Cordillera of the Andes. During my abode at
Popayan, the guardian of the convent of St.
Francis, Fray Francisco Pugnet, an amiable and
judicious man, gave me very precise ideas of the
missions of the Andaquies, where he had long
resided. He had performed a very difficult jour-
ney from the banks of the Caqueta to those of
the Guaviare. Since Philip Von Huten (Urre)
and the earliest times of the conquest, no Euro-
pean had traversed this unknown land. Father
Pugnet set out from the mission of Caguan,
situate on the Rio Caguan, one of the tributary
streams of the Caqueta. He passed over an
immense savannah entirely destitute of trees,
the eastern parts of which are inhabited by the
Tamas and Coreguajes, After six days jour-
neying toward the North, he arrived at a small
place called Aramo, on the banks of the Guay-
avero, about fifteen leagues west of the point,
where the Guayavero and the Aiari form the
great Rio Guaviare. Aramo is the westernmost
village of the missions of San Juan de los Lla-
nos. There Father Pugnet heard of the great
cataracts of the Rio Guaviare, those* no doubt,


* See above, p. 216,


336


which the president of the missions of the Oroo-
noko visited, in going up the Guaviare from San
Fernando de Atabapo) ; but he crossed no river
on his way from Caguan to Aramo. It is there-
fore fully proved, that in the longitude of seven-
ty-five degrees* at forty leagues distance from
the declivity of the Cordilleras, in the midst of
the Llanos, there exists neither the Rio Negro
(Patavita, Guainia), nor Guapue (Uaupe) nor
Inirida, and that these three rivers rise to the east
of that meridian. These particulars are extremely
valuable ; the geography of the interior of Africa
is not more embroiled than that of the country
between the Atabapo and the sources of the
Meta, the Guaviare, and the Caqueta. “It is
difficult to believe,” says Mr. Caldas in a scien-
tific journal-+ published at Santa-Fe de Bogota,
“that we do not possess one map of the plains,
which commence at the eastern declivity of these
mountains, which we see daily before our eyes,
and on which the chapels of Guadaloupe and
Monserrat are erected. No person knows the
breadth of the Cordilleras, or the course of the
rivers which fall into the Oroonoko and the
Amazon ; and yet it will be by these tributary


* [have determined this longitude from the observations
of the Portugueze astronomers at the Jupuru and the Apo-


poris, and from the difference of the meridians of Popayan,
and of San Juan de los Llanos,
+ Semanario del Nuevo Reino do Granada, vol. i, p, 44.


337


streams, by the Meta, the Guaviare, the Rio
Negro, and the Caqueta, that the inhabitants of
Cundinamarca will communicate, in happier
times, with those of Brazil and Paraguay.”

I am aware, a persuasion is pretty generally
spread in the missions of the Andaquies, that the
Caqueta sends off, between the confluents of the
Rio de la Fragua and of the Caguan*, a branch
to the Putumayo; and farther down, below the
mouth of the Rio Payoya, another branch to the
Oroonoko: but this opinion rests only on a
vague tradition of the Indians, who often con-
found portages ~~ with bifurcations. The cata-
racts at the mouth of the Payoya, and the fero-
city of the Huaques, called also Murcielagos
(bats), because they suck the blood of ‘their
prisoners, prevent the Spanish missionaries from
descending the Caqueta. No white man has
ever come from San Miguel de Mocoa to the
confluence of Caqueta with the Amazon. The-
Portugueze astronomers, at the time of the last
commission of boundaries, first went up the
Caqueta, as far as the latitude of 0° 36’ south,
and then the Rio de los Enganos (Deceitful
River) and the Rio Cunare, which are tributary


* Near the ruined. mission of Santa Maria, a little below
the Rio Mecaya.

+ I know two of these portages between tributary streams
of the Apoporis (the Cananare and Japui) and others of the
Daupes (the Jucari, the Capuri, and the Tiquie).

VOL. V. Z


335


streams of the Caqueta, as far as 0° 28’ north
latitude*. In this navigation, they saw ne
branch of the Caqueta issuing toward the north.
The Amu, and the Yabilla, of which they care-
fully examined the sources, are small rivers that
fall into the Rio de los Enganos, and with this
river, into the Caqueta. If therefore the bifurca-
tion take place, it can be found only in the very
short distance that lies between the confluence
of the Payoya and the second eataract, above
the mouth of Deceitful River; but, I repeat,
the course of this river, and of the Cunare, the
Apoporis, and the Uaupes, would hinder this
pretended branch of the Caqueta from reaching
the Upper Guainia. Every thing appears to in-
dicate the existence of a ridge, a rising of coun-
ter-slopes between the tributary streams of the
Caqueta, and those of the Uaupes and the Rio
Negro. Still more: we found, by the height of
the mercury in the barometer, the absolate ele-
vation of the ground on the banks of the Pimi-
chin to be one hundred and thirty toises. Sup-
posing, that the hilly ground near the sources of


* These positions, founded on direct observations, are
taken from the great manuscript map of Mr, Requena, one
of the commissioners of the boundaries. Is it of the Rio Pa-
yoya M. de la Condamine has made his Rio Jaoya, which,
according to him, unites the Caqueta to the Putumayo ? The
missionaries of the Upper Caqueta do not know this name of
Jaoya.


339


ibe Guainia is fifty toises more elevated than
that of Javita, it follows, that the bed of the
river, in the upper part of it’s course, is at least
two hundred toises above the level of the ocean,
a height equally little with that, which the ba-
romeier indicates for the banks of the Amazon
near Tomependa, in the province of Jaen de
Bracamoros. Now, if we reflect on the steep
descent of this immense river from Tomependa
as far as the meridian of 75°, and if we recollect
the distance from the missions of the Rio Caguan
to the Cordillera, we cannot doubt, that the bed
of the Caqueta, below the mouths of the Caguan
and the Payoya, must be much lower than the
bed ofthe Upper Guainia, toward which it would
have to send a part of it’s waters. Besides, the
waters of the Caqueta are quite white, while
those of the Guainia are black or coffee-coloured.
There is no example of a white river becoming
black in it’s course. The Upper Guainia,
therefore, cannot be a branch of the Caqueta.
I doubt even if we can justify the supposition,
that the Guainia, as principal and independant
recipient, obtains the smailest quantity of water
toward the south by a lateral branch *.


* Two letters of the guardian Fray Jose Joacquini Barru-
tieta (of the 15th of November 1761, and the 28d of July
1763,) in the archives of the convent of Saint Francis, were
communicated to me at Popayan; in which this monk, an
enthusiast for the greatness and importance of the Caaue


Fie


340


The little group of mountains, with which
we became acquainted at the sources of the


says, that this river sends a branch to the north, which
branch in it’s bifurcation gives birth to the Oroonoko and the
Rio Negro. He calls the branch of the Oroonoko Paragua,
that of the Rio Negro Casiri. He seems to hint, that the
Casiri is not the only source of the Rio Negro, and that this
great river perhaps receives only the waters of the Caqueta
by the Casiri. Barrutieta had seen neither the branch of
the Caqueta which goes to the north, nor the bifurcation of
this branch. He had never been below the mouth of the
Caqueta ; and the priests, who have since inhabited these
missions, believe, that father Barrutieta could have derived
these ideas only from maps constructed in Europe. Never
has any tributary stream of the Oroonoko, coming from the
west, borne the name of Paragua (see above, p. 219) ; and
the hypothesis, that the Caqueta by a bifurcation gives birth
to the Oroonoko and the Rio Negro, dates already, as we
have seen, from the time of the geographer Sanson, in the
year 1656. We know with certainty, by the voyage which
I made with M. Bonpland, and by that of father Mancilla,
that neither the Oroonoko, nor the Guaviare, which has been
asserted to be the real trunk of the Oroonoko, receives a
branch of the Caqueta.. If the missionaries of the Andaquies
(that is to say, the monks of the Rio Mocoa, the Caqueta, the
Rio de la Fragua, and the Rio Caguan) believe in a southern
branch of the Caqueta, which, below the mouth of the Macaya


or Picudo, flows toward the Putumayo, the missionaries of the


Putumayo on the contrary deny it’s existence. They assured
me, that they had never heard of any branch of the Caqueta
in going up from the ower missions of the Putumayo, (Marive,
the Assumption, San Ramon,) or from the mouth of the Rio
Yaguas to the upper missions (Mamos, San Diego, San Rafa-
el de Amaguajes}, or at the mouth of the Rio del Guiuce.


34]


Guainia, is so much the more remarkable from
_it’s being isolated in the plain that extends to
the south-west of the Oroonoko. It’s situation
with regard to longitude might lead to the
belief, that it stretches into a ridge, which forms
first the strait (Angostura) of the Guaviare*,
and then the great cataracts (saltos, cachoeiras)
of the Uaupes and the Jupura. Does this
ground, composed probably of primitive rocks,
like that which I examined more to the east,
contain disseminated gold? Are there stream-
works of gold more to the south, toward the


Ts the Canno de la Luna this branch? or does it simply fur-
nish the facility of a portage? We see that the communica-
tion of the Caqueta (Japura) with the Upper Guainia, that is
with the Rio Negro, above Maroa, is extremely doubtful,
but another communication may be more reasonably admitted
in the low and marshy ground, that extends to the north
of the entrance of the Jupura into the Amazon. The small
rivers Anany (Unini, Univini) and Yaumuhi (Jau), two tribu-
tary streams of the Rio Negro, issuing out between the Villa
de Moura and Yau, communicate by the lake Atinineni
(Ativini) with the Cadaya, the eastern most branchof the Ju-
pura. (Corog. brazil., tom. ii, p. 285 and 348.) Mr. Southey
perhaps alludes to this branch in his Hostory of Brazil, vol. i,
p. 591. The communication which Mr. Requena supposes
between the Puapua, a tributary of the Jupura, and two con-
fluents of the Rio Negro, the Xivara (Chivara, Teyn), and
the Unevixi (Uynuaxi), is only a portage.

* Near this strait, (founding the itinerary distances on the
situation of San Fernando de Atabapo, in longitude 73° 45")
father Mancilla saw a chain of mountains, that skirted the ho-
rizon to the south.


342


Uaupes, on the Iquiare (Iguiari, Iguari), and on
the Yurubesh (Yurubach, Urubaxi)? It was
there Philip von Huten first sought El Dorado,
and with a handful of men fought the battle of
Omaguas, so celebrated in the sixteenth cen-
tury. In separating what is fabulous from the
narratives of the Conquistadores, we cannot fail
to recognize in the names preserved on the same
spots a certain basis of historic truth. We
follow the expedition of Huten beyond the Gua-
viare and the Caqueta; we find in the Guay-
pes*, governed by the cacique of Macatoa, the
inhabitants of the river of Uaupes, which also
bears the name of Guape, or Guapue; we call
to mind, that father Acunna calls the Iquiari
(Quiquiare) a gold river; and that fifty years
later father Fritz, a missionary of great veracity,
received, in the mission of Yurimaguas, the Ma-
naos(Manoas), adorned with plates of beaten gold,
coming from the country between the Uaupes
and the Caqueta, or Jupura. The rivers, that
rise on the eastern declivity of the Andes (for
instance the Napo) carry along with them a
great deal of gold, even when their sources are
found in trachytic soils. Why may there not
be an alluvial auriferous soil to the east of the
Cordilleras, as there is to the west, in the So-
nora, at Choco, and at Barbacoas? I am far


* Fray-Pedro Simon, p. 345.


343


from wishing to exaggerate the riches of this
soil; but I do not think myself authorized to
deny the existence of precious metals in the
primitive mountains of Guyana for the sin-
gle reason, that in our journey through that
country we saw no metallic veins. It is some-
what remarkable, that the natives of the Oroo-
noko have a name in their languages for gold
{carucuru in Caribbee, caricuri in ‘Tamanac,
cavitta in Maypure), while the word they use to
denote silver, prata, is manifestly borrowed from
the Spanish*. The notions collected by Acun-
na, father Fritz, and La Condamine, on the
stream-works of gold south and north of the
Rio Uaupes, agree with what I learnt of the


auriferous soil of those countries. However great
we may suppose the communications that took
place between the nations of the Oroonoko before
the arrival of the Europeans, they certainly did
not draw their gold from the eastern declivity of


* The Parecas say, instead of prata, rata (Gili, vol. ii, p.
4). It is the Castillian word plata ill pronounced. Near
the Yurubesh there is another inconsiderable tributary stream
of the Rio Negro, the Curicur-iari. It is easy to recognize
in this name the Caribbee word carucur, gold, The Caribbees
pushed their incursions from the mouth of the Oroonoko
south-west toward the Rio Negro; and it was this restless
people, who carried the fable of El Dorado, by the same way,
but in an opposite direction (from south-west to north-east),
from the Mesopotamia between the Rio Negro and the Ju-

- pura to the sources of the Rio Branco.


344


the Cordilleras. This declivity is poor in mines,
particularly in mines anciently worked ; it is
almost entirely composed of volcanic rocks in
the provinces of Popayan, Pasto, and Quito.
The gold of Guyana probably came from the
country east of the Andes. In our days a lump
of gold has been found in a ravine near the
mission of Encaramada, and we must not
be surprised, if, since the Europeans settled
themselves in these wild Spots, we hear less of
the plates of gold, gold dust, and amulets of
jade, which could heretofore be obtained from
the Caribbee and other wandering nations by
barter. The precious metals were never very
abundant on the banks of the Oroonoko, the
Rio Negro, and the Amazon; and disappeared
almost entirely when the system of the missions
caused the distant communications between the
natives to cease.

The climate of the Upper Guainia is less hot,
and perhaps somewhat less humid, than the
climate of the banks of the Tuamini. I found
the temperature of the water of the Rio Negro,
in the month of May*, at 23:9°; the air being
by day 22-7°, and at night 21:8° of the centi-
grade thermometer}. This coolness of the wa-


* 19°2° Reaumur, or 75° Fahrenheit.
+ The following is a statement of the observations, which
I made at San Carlos del Rio Negro, the sky being con-


345


ters, almost identical with that of the Rio Con-
go, is very remarkable in the proximity of the
equator*. The Oroonoko, between four and
eight degrees of latitude, has generally from
27°5° to 29°5° of temperature. The springs
which issue from the granite at Maypures are
at 27°8°. The decrease of heat, that is observed
in approaching the equator, is singularly con-
formable to the hypotheses of some naturalists
of antiquity} ; it is however merely a local phe-
nomenon, less owing to the height of the ground,
than to a constantly rainy or cloudy sky, the
humidity of the soil, the thickness of the forests,
the evaporation of the plants, and the want of
sandy beaches adapted to concentrate caloric


stantly cloudy. Height above the level of the sea, 125
toises.


May. Barometer Thermometer Whalebone
in lines. of Reaumur. Hygrometer.


8 at 215 328°2° 177° 54°
9 at 215 3279 175 55
at 212 30’ = 328°2 17°6 57
at 229 30%  328°3 Leo 56-2
at Ob $278 | 18:2 53
at 3230’ 3276 18°4 61:3
at 4215’ 326°8 18°2 516
at 5545’ = 327'2 18°2 52°1
The hygrometer kept up, while it did not rain, between 47°
and 60° Deluc (83'4° and 902° Saussure).
* Tn 1° 53! and 2° 15’ north latitude.
+ Geminus Isag. in Aratum, c.18, Strabo, Geogr., lib. 2,
p. 97.


346


and throw it off by radiation. The influence of
a sky veiled by vapours is manifest in the stripe
of the shore of Peru, where no rain ever falls,
and the Sun, during a great part of the year, at
the period of the garua (fog), displays itself to
the naked eye like the disk of the Moon. Be-
tween the parallels of ten and twelve degrees of
south latitude, the mean temperature is scarcely
more elevated than at Algiers and Cairo*. It


* The following are the differences observed in the places
at unequal distances from the equator, such as I have marked
ther in degrees of the centigrade thermometer, in the table
of the climates of America, (See my work De Distributione
Geogr. Plantarum Secundum Celi Temperiem et Alt. Mont.,
p-92-94.)

Lima vel littora Oceani Pacifici inter 8° et 180 latitudinis
australis, ubi sepe terra quatitur ; fulgura ex longinquo tan-
tum conspiciuntur, nunquam autem audito tonitru. Folia a
nullo imbre, sed a copioso rore madent, ccelo per medium
annum velato, nubilo

(Interdiu 23°-25°5° ; noctn 15°-17°, Calor max, 28°;
min. 18°).

Sylow Orinocenses summe vastitatis, ob estus fere intolera-
biles, immanibus serpentibus, crocodilis, trigride jaguare
atque vario et malefico genere animalium infeste. Per tot
secula homines Europzos latuerunt. Alt. 70-90 hex.; cal.
MEL Uen eS Been Y CARAT REC e a et re cahee pee pe Les MRR AE RE aS 276°.

Ripe fluminis Guainie, a Hispanis Rio Negro dicti, quod
Orinoci aquas per Cassiquiarem affluentes ad Amazonum
amnem transmittit, Regia magne solitudinis propter limites
Guyane et Brasiliz, fere sine humani cultus vestigio, fruti-
cum et procerarum arborum ferax, nec gignende herbe apta.
Obumbratus eam percurrit amnis et magnam ibi aquarum


347


rains on the banks of the Rio Negro almost the
whole year, with the exception of the months of
December and January. Even in the season of
drought the blue sky is seldom seen during two
or three days in succession. In serene weather
the heat appears so much greater, as the rest of
the year, although the nocturnal temperature is
twenty-one degrees, the inhabitants complain of
cold during the night. I repeated the ex-
periments at San Carlos, which I had made
at Javita, on the quantity of rain that falls
in a given space of time. These researches are
important for explaining the enormous swell-
ings of the rivers near the equator, which were
long thought to receive the snow-waters of
the Cordilleras. I have seen fall at different
times, in two hours, 7°5 lines; in three hours,
18 lines; in 9 hours, 48°2 lines. As it rains
without intermission (a small, but very thick
rain), I have thought, that the quantity of water,
which falls annually in the forests, can not be
less than ninety or one hundred inches. The
justness of this estimation, however extraordi-
‘nary it may appear, was confirmed by observa-
tions made with great ‘care in the kingdom of
New-Spain by the colonel of engineers, Mr. de


copiam, ex crebris imbribus collectam, in almentum suum
nemora ducunt': ‘dies sepe nubili; nocturno tempore aer
spiritu fere movetur noullo, Alt. 130hex. ; eal, med... :23°2°.


348


Costanzo. There fell at Vera-Cruz, in 1803, in
the months of July, August, and September only,
thirty-five inches two lines (pied du roi) ; in the
whole year, sixty-two inches two lines of rain-
water ; yet there is a great difference between the
bare and arid climate of the coast of Mexico, and
that of the forests. On that coast not a drop of
rain falls in December or January; and the
months of February, April, and May, generally
produce only from two inches to two inches
three lines: at San Carlos, on the contrary, the
atmosphere seems to resolve itself into water
during nine or ten successive months. In these
humid climates, the earth in the space of a year
would be covered with a stratum of water eight
feet deep, if there were no evaporation or flow-
ing off of the fluid. These equatorial rains,
which swell the majestic rivers of America,
are accompanied by electric explosions; and
while at the extremity of that continent, on
the western coast of Greenland, the noise of
thunder is not heard once during five or. six
years* ; here, near the equator, the clouds are
almost daily rumbling. The coincidence of the
electric explosions and the rains, however, does


* The Chevalier Giseke, who resided seven years in the
seventieth degree of latitude, saw lightning only once, during
the long exile, to which he condemned himself from his love
of the sciences. On the coast of Greenland the noise of
avalanches, or that caused by the fall of ice, is often con-
founded with the sound of thunder.


349


not justify the ancient hypothesis of the forma-
tion of water in the air by the combination of
oxygen and hydrogen. In vain has hydrogen
been sought as far as three thousand six hun-
dred toises of height. The quantity of water
contained in saturated air augments much more
rapidly from twenty to twenty-five degrees than
from ten to fifteen degrees. A single degree of
cooling produces consequently a greater quan-
tity of visible vapours in the torrid than in the
temperate zone. Air unceasingly renewed by
the effect of currents may furnish by simple
precipitation all the water, which so much
strikes the imagination of philosophers in the
equatorial rains.

The colour of the water of the Rio Negro is
(by reflection) darker than that of the Atabapo
or the Tuamini. I even saw with surprise, how
little the mixture of the white waters of the
Cassiquiare alters the tint below the fort of San
Carlos. The author of the modern Chorography
of Brazil justly observes*, that the river is of an
amber colour, wherever it is shallow, and of a
dark brown like coffee grounds, wherever the
depth of the waters is considerable. The name
of Curana, which is given by the natives to the


* Vol. ii, p. 386. We may be surprised to find M. de la
Condamine attributing the denomination of Rio Negro “ to
the great transparency of that sea of fresh water, which the
Amazon receives near the fort of Barra.”


390


Lower Guainia, signifies also black water*. The
junction of the Guainia or Rio Negro with the
Amazon is considered of such importance in the
government of Grand Para, that the Rio das
Amazonas loses it’s name west of the Rio Ne-
gro, and takes that of the Rio dos Solimoes (pro-
perly Sorimoes, in allusion to the poison of the
nation of the Sorimans). The Amazon, to the
west of the Ucayale, is called Rio Maranhao, or
Maranon. 'The banks of the Upper Guainia in
general abound much less in fishing birds, than
those of the Cassiquiare, the Meta, and the
Arauca, where ornithologists would find suffici-
ent to enrich immensely the collections of Eu-
rope. ‘This scarcity of animals arises no doubt
from the want of shoals and flat shores, as well!
from the quality of the black waters, which (on
account of their very purity) furnish less aliment
to aquatic insects and fish. Notwithstanding
this scarcity, the Indians of these countries, dur-
ing two periods of the year, feed on birds of pas-
sage, which repose in their long migrations on the
waters of the Rio Negro. When the Oroonoko
begins to swell-+-, that is after the vernal equinox,


* Eyen farther north, the root cur, in the Maypure lan-
guage, indicates what is black ; for in curifint (black colour)
the last two syllables are but a termination of quality, as is
proved by the words marakini, white ; evakini, yellow ; coan-
itukini, married.

+ The swellings of the Nile take place much later than


|
}


351


an innumerable quantity of ducks (patos care-
teros) remove from eight and three degrees
of north latitude, to one and four degrees of
south latitude, toward the south-south-east.
These animals then abandon the valley of the
Oroonoko, no doubt because the increasing depth
of the waters, and the inundations of the shores,
prevent them from catching fish, insects, and
aquatic worms. They are killed by thousands
in their passage across the Rio Negro. When-
they go toward the equator, they are very fat
and savoury; but in the month of September,
when the Oroonoko decreases, and returns, into
it’s bed, the ducks, warned either by the voice
of the most experienced birds of passage, or by
that internal feeling, which, not knowing how to
define, we call instinct, return from the Ama-
zon and the Rio Branco toward the north. At
this period they are too lean to tempt the appe-
tite of the Indians of the Rio Negro, and escape
pursuit more easily from being accompanied by
a species of herons (gavanes), which are excel-
lent eating. Thus the Indians eat ducks in
March, and herons in September. We could
not learn what becomes of the gavanes during
the swellings of the Oroonoko, and why they do


those of the Oroonoko; after the summer solstice, below
Syene ; and at Cairo in the beginning of July. The Nile
begins to sink near that city generally about the 15th of
October, and continues sinking till the 20th of May.


not accompany the patos careteros in their mi-
gration from the Oroonoko to the Rio Branco.
These regular migrations of birds from one part
of the tropics toward the other, in a zone which
is during the whole year of the same temperature,
are very extraordinary phenomena. The south-
ern coasts of the West India islands receives
also every year, at the period of the inundations
of the great rivers of Terra Firma, numerous
flights of the fishing birds of the Oroonoko,
and of its tributary streams. We must pre-
sume, that the variations of drought and hu-
midity in the equinoctial zone have the same
influence, as the great changes of temperature
in our climates, on the habits of animals. The
heats ofsummer, and the pursuit of insects, call
the humming birds into the northern parts of
the United States, and into Canada, as far as
the parallels of Paris and Berlin; in the same
manner a greater facility for fishing draws the
palmipede and long legged birds from the north
to the south, from the Oroonoko toward the
Amazon. Nothing is more marvellous, and
nothing is yet known less clearly in a geogra-
phical point of view, than the direction, extent,
and term of the migrations of birds !

After having entered the Rio Negro by. the
Pimichin, and passed the small cataract at the
confluence of the two rivers, we discovered, at
the distance of a quarter of a league, the mission


353


of Maroa. This village, containing one hundred
and fifty Indians, displayed an agreeable air of
ease and prosperity. .We purchased some fine
species of the toucan (piapoco) alive; a courage-
ous bird, the intelligence of which developes
itself like that of our domestic ravens. We
passed on the right, above Maroa, first the mouth
of the Aquio*, then that of the Tomo-+. On
the banks of the last river dwell the Cheruvicha-
henas, some families of whom I have seen at San
Francisco Solano. It is also remarkable for the


* Aqui, Aaqui, Ake of the most recent maps, The river
has been well placed by d’Anville; Arrowsmith makes it


recede two degrees too much to the west. From the mouth


of the Pimichin to Maroa is } legua; from Maroa to the
Aquio 41. ; from the Aquio to the Tomo £/.; from the Tomo
to the Conorichite and the mission of Davipe 2 3 1. (1 legua=

- 2854 toises).. The Indians of Maroa made known to me a
tributary stream of the Rio Negro, which, coming from the
north, flows in from seven to eight leagues west of their mis-
sion. They call it Asimasi.

+ Tomui, Temujo, Tomon. New Portugueze maps, con-
structed at the Hydrographic Depot of Rio Janeiro, indicate
strange interbranchings of the Tomon with a Rio Pama and
the Rio Xie. This last name is nnknown to La Cruz and
Canlin ; but I have several motives for believing, that the
great Rio Uteta (Ueteta), figured on our maps, and for which
I made vain researches on the banks of the Rio Negro, is
the Rio Guaicia or Xie. This identity appears to me to be
proved more especially by the name of a tributary stream of
‘the Uteta, which is called by Caulin the Rio Tevapuri; for
there is a stream of this name flowing into the Guaicia.


VOL. V. dg


clandestine communications which it favors with

the Portugueze possessions. The Tomo lies

near the Rio Guaicia (Xie), and the mission of
Tomo sometimes receives by that way fugitive
Indians from the Lower Guainia. We did not

enter the mission, but father Zea related to us
with a smile, that the Indians of Tomo and
Maroa had been one day in full insurrection,
because an attempt was made, to force them to
dance the famous dance of the devils. ‘The mis-
sionary had taken a fancy, to have the ceremo-
nies by which the piaches, whe are at once
priests, physicians, and conjurors, evoke the evil
spirit, Jolokiamo, represented in a burlesque
manner. He thought, that the dance of the
devils would be an excellent means of proving
to the neophytes, that Tolokiamo had no longer
any power over them. Some young Indians,
confiding in the promises of the missionary, con-
sented to act the devils, and were already deco-
rated with black and yellow plumes, and jaguar
skins with long sweeping tails. The place where
the church stands was surrounded by the sol-
diers who are distributed in the missions, in
order to add more effect to the counsels of the
monks; and those Indians, who were not entire-
ly satisfied with respect to the consequences of
the dance, and the impotency of the evil spirit,
were brought to the festivity. The party of the
ancient and most timid however prevailed; all


355


were seized with a superstitious dread ; all re-
solved to flee al monte, and the missionary ad-
journed his project of turning into derision the
demon of the natives. What extravagant ideas
present themselves to the imagination of an idle
monk, who passes his life in the forests, far from
every thing that can recall human civilization
to his mind. The violence with which the
attempt was made to execute in public at Tomo
the mysterious dance of the devils is so much
more strange, as all the books written by the
missionaries relate the efforts they have used,
to prevent the funereal dances, the dances of
the sacred trumpet, and that ancient dance of
serpents, the Queti, in which these wily ani-
mals are represented as issuing from the
forests, and coming to drink with the men,
in order to deceive them, and carry off the
women.

After two hour’s navigation from the mouth
of the Tomo we arrived at the little mission of
San Miguel de Davipe, founded in 1775, not by
monks, but by a lieutenant of militia, Don Fran-
cisco Bobadilla. The missionary of the place,
father Morillo, with whom we spent some hours,
received us with great hospitality. He even
offered us Madeira wine; but as an object of
luxury we should have preferred wheaten bread.
The want of bread becomes far more sensible in
length of time than. that of a spirituous liquor.

2a 2


300


The Portugueze of the Amazon carry smalt
quantities of Madeira wine, from time to time,
to the Rio Negro ; and the word madera signi-
fying wood in the Castilian language, the poor
monks, who are not much versed in the study of
geography, had a scruple of celebrating mass
with Madeira wine, which they took for a fer-
mented liquor extracted from the trunk of some
tree, like the palm wine; and requested the
guardian of the missions to decide, whether the
vino de madera were wine from grapes (de wvas),
or the juice of a tree (vino de algun palo). At
the beginning of the conquest, the question was
agitated, whether it were allowable for the
priests in celebrating mass, to use any fermented
liquor analogous to the wine of the grape. The
question, as might have been foreseen, was de-
cided in the negative.
We bought some provision at Davipe, parti-
cularly fowls and a pig. This purchase inte-
rested our Indians much, who had been a long
while deprived of meat. They pressed us to de-
part, in order to reach the island of Dapa, where
the pig was to be killed, and roasted during the
night. We had scarcely time to examine in the
convent (convento) the great stores of mant
resin, and cordage of the chiquichiqui palm,
which deserves to be more known in Kurope.
This cordage is extremely light, floats upon the
water, and is more durable in the navigation of


357


rivers than ropes of hemp. It must be preserved
at sea by being often wetted, and little exposed.
to the ardor of the tropical sun. Don Antonio
Santos, celebrated in the country for his journey
in search of lake Parima, taught the Indians of
the Spanish Rio Negro, to make use of the pe-
tioles of the chiquichiqui, a palm-tree with pin-


nate leaves, of which we saw neither the flowers
nor the fruit. This officer is the only white
man, who ever came from Angostura to Grand
Para, in passing by land from the sources of
the Rio Carony to those of the Rio Branco.
He had studied the mode of fabricating ropes
from the chiquichiqui in the Portugueze colonies;
and, after his return from the Amazon, he intro-
duced this branch of industry into the missions
of Guyana. It were to be wished, that exten-
sive rope walks could be established on the
banks of the Rio Negro and the Cassiquiare, in
order to make these cables an article of trade
with Europe. A small quantity is already ex-
ported from Angostura to the West Indies ;
and costs from fifty to sixty per cent less than
cordage of hemp*. Young palm trees only

* A cable of chiquichiqui, sixty-six varas (171 preds de roz)
long, and five inches four lines in diameter, costs the missionary
twelve great piastres; and is sold at Angostura for twenty-
five piastres. A rope one inch diameter, and seventy varas


(one hundred and eighty-two pieds de roi) long, sells in the
missions for three piastres ; on the coast for five,


398


being employed, they must be planted and care-
fully cultivated.

A little above the mission of Davipe; the Rio
Negro receives a branch of the Cassiquiare, the
existence of which is a very ‘remarkable pheno-
menon in the history of the branchings of rivers.
This branch issues * from the Cassiquiare, north
of Vasiva, bearing the name of the Itinivini;
and, after having traversed for the length of
twenty-five leagues a flat country, almost en-
tirely destitute of inhabitants, falls into the Rio
Negro under the name of the Rio Conorichite.
It appeared to me to be more than one hundred
and twenty toises broad near it’s mouth, and it
augments the volume of it’s black waters by a
great mass of white. Although the current of
the Conorichite is very rapid, this natural canal
abridges three days of the navigation from Da-
vipe to Esmeralda. We cannot be surprised


* JT describe the Itinivini (or rather Itiniveni, water, vent,
f Itin) according to the ideas given me at the mouth of that
viver, which is the effect of a second bifurcation, a branch of
a, branch of the Oroonoke, Father Caulin, much more exact
in general than those who constructed the map of his work,
asserts, that the communication of the Conorichite with the
Cassiquiare is owing to a bifurcation of the Canno Meé,
which is a tributary stream of the Conorichite. Our maps,
while they arbitrarily suppress the communication between
Davipe and Vasiva, place a small fort (fuerto) in the midst


of this desert.


399


at_ a double communication between the Cassi-
quiare and the Rio Negro, when we recollect,
that so many rivers of America form a species of
deltas at their confluence with other rivers.
Thus the Rio Branco and the Rio Jupura enter
by a great number of branches into the Rio
Negro and the Amazon. At the confluence of
the Jupura there is a much more extraordinary
phenomenon. Before this river joins the Ama-
zon, the latter, which is the principal recipient,
sends off three branches ealled Uaranapn, Man-
hama, and Avateparana, to the Jupura, which is
but a tributary stream. The Portugueze astro-
nomer, Mr. Ribeiro, has proved this important
fact*. The Amazon gives waters to the Jupura
itself, before it receives this tributary stream.
The Rio Conorichite or Itinivini served power-
fully heretofore, to facilitate the trade in slaves
carried on by the Portugueze in the Spanish
territory. The slave traders went up by the
Cassiquiare and the Canno Meé to Conorichite ;
and thence dragged their canoes by a portage to
the rochelas of Manuteso,. in order to enter the
Atabapo. I have marked this road in my
itinerary map of the Oroonoke, This abomina-


* There are great changes to be made in our maps relatively
to the eight pretended branches of the Jupura, Compare
Southey’s History of Brazil, p. 595, and the Curogr. Bras.,
p- 285.


360


ble trade lasted till about the year 1756; wher
the expedition of Solano, and the establishment
of the missions on the banks of the Rio Negro,
put an end to it. Ancient laws of Charles
V and Philip ITT had forbidden * under the
most severe penalties (such as the being ren-
dered incapable of civil employment, and a
fine of two thousand piastres), “ converting the
natives to the faith by violent means, and send-
ing armed men against them ;” but notwith-
standing these wise and humane laws, the Rio
Negro, in the middle of the last century, was no
farther interesting in European politics, accord-
ing to the expression of M. de la Condamine,
than as it facilitated the entradas, or hostile incur-
sions, and favoured the purchase of slaves. The
Caribbees, a trading and warlike people, received
from the Portugueze and the Dutch knives,
fish-hooks, small mirrors, and all sorts of glass
beads. They excited the Indian Chiefs to make
war against each other, bought their prisoners,
and carried off themselves by stratagem or force
all whom they found in their way. These in-
cursions of the Caribbees comprehended an im-
mense extent of land ; they went from the banks


* Ley de Carlos V, (Valladolid, 26 En. 1523) que no se
puede hacer guerra a los Indios para que reciben la Santa Fe Ca-
tolica. Ley de Filippe IIL (del 10 Oct. 1618) que no se envia
gente armada a reducir Indios.


361


of the Essequebo and the Carony, by the Rupu-
nuri* and the Paraguamuzi+ on one side, di-
rectly south, toward the Rio Branco; and on
the other, to the south-west, following the por-
tages between the Rio Paraguat, the Caura, and
the Ventuario ||. The Caribbees, when arrived
amid the numerous tribes of the Upper Oroo-
noko, divided themselves into several bands,
in order to reach, by the Cassiquiare, the Caba-
bury, the Itinivini, and the Atabapo, on a great
many points at once, the banks of the Guainia
or Rio Negro, and carry on the slave-trade with
the Portugueze. Thus the unhappy natives, be-
fore they came into immediate contact with the
Europeans, suffered from their neighbourhood.


* There is a portage between the Rio Rupunuri, or Ru-
punuvini, a tributary stream of the Essequebo, and the Canno
Pirara, a tributary stream of the Rio Parime, or Rio Branco.

+ To go from the Paraguamuzi, which flows into the Rio
Carony, to the Canno Curaricara (Urarictera ?), a tributary
stream of the Rio Parime, you pass the chain of the moun-
tains of Quimiropaca, which, stretching from west to cast,
unites the mountains of the Upper Oroonoko with those of
Dutch and French Guayana. :

¢ You pass from the Caura to the Carony by a portage
between the Chavarro, which flows into the Caura, and the
Paruspo, which falls into the Paragua, one of the tributary
streams of the Carony.

| In going from the Caura to the Ventuario, you cross the
savannahs that separate the sources of the Erevato, a tribu-
tary stream of the Caura, from those” of the Manapiare,
which flows into the Ventuario.


362


The same causes produce every where the same
effects. The barbarous trade, which civilized
nations have carried on, and still continue in
part, on the coast of Africa, extends it’s fatal
influence even to regions, where the existence
of white men is unknown.

Having quitted the mouth of the Conorichite,
and the mission of Davipe, we reached at sun-
set the island of Dapa, lying in the middle of
the river, and in a very picturesque situation.
We were astonished to find on this spot some
cultivated ground, and on the top of a small
hill an Indian hut. Four natives were seated
round a fire of brush-wood, and eating a sort of
white paste with black spots, which much ex-
cited our curiosity. These were vachacos, large
ants, the hinder parts of which resemble a lump
of grease. They had been dried, and blackened
by smoke. We saw several bags of them sus-
pended above the fire. ‘These good people paid
little attention to us; yet there were more than
fourteen persons in this confined hut, lying
naked in hammocks placed one above another.
When Father Zea arrived, he was received with
great demonstrations of joy. The military are
in greater numbers on the banks of the Rio
Negro, than on those of the Oronooko, on ac-
count of guarding the frontiers ; and wherever
soldiers and monks dispute for power over the
Indians, the latter are most attached to the


363


monks. Two young women came down from
theirhammocks, to prepare for us cakes of cassava.
We inquired of them by an interpreter, whether
the soil of the island were fertile ; they answered,
that cassava grew poorly, but that it was a good
land for ants, and food was not wanting. In
fact, these vachacos furnish subsistence to the
Indians of the Rio Negro and the Guainia.
They do not eat the ants from luxury, but be-
cause, according to the expression of the mis-
sionaries, the fat of ants (the white part of the
abdomen) is a very substantial food. When the
cakes of cassava were prepared, Father Zea,
whose fever seemed rather to sharpen than en-
feeble his appetite, ordered a little bag to be
brought to him filled with smoked vachacos, He
mixed these bruised insects with flour of cassava,
which he pressed us to taste. It somewhat re-
sembled rancid butter, mixed with the crumb
of bread. The cassava had not an acid taste,
but some remains of European prejudices pre-
vented our subscribing to the praises bestowed
by the good missionary on what he called an
excellent paste of ants.

The violence of the rain obliged us to sleep
in this encumbered hut. The Indians slept only
from eight till two in the morning, the rest of
the time they conversed in their hammocks, pre-
pared their bitter beverage of cupana, threw
fresh fuel on the fire, and complained of cold,


364


although the temperature of the air was at 21°.
This custom of being awake, and even on foot
four or five hours before sunrise, is general
among the Indians of Guyana. When in the
entradas an attempt is made to surprise the na-
tives, the hours chosen are those of the first
sleep, from nine ‘till midnight.

We left the island of Dapa long before day-
break ; and notwithstanding the rapidity of the
current, and the zeal of our rowers, we only
arrived at the foot of San Carlos del Rio Negro
after twelve hours of navigation. We passed on
the left the mouth of the Cassiquiare, and, on
the right, the small island of Cumarai. This
fort is believed in the country to be placed on
the equatorial line* ; but, according to the ob-
servations which I made at the rocks of Culima-
cari, it isin 1° 54’ 11”. Every nation has a ten-
dency to enlarge the space occupied by it’s pos-
sessions on the map, and to extend their limits.
The reduction of itinerary distances to distances
in a right line being neglected, the frontiers are
always most disfigured. The Portugueze, set-


* Before my visit to the Rio Negro in 1801, and before
the first results of my observations were published by M. La-
lande, and baron von Zach, the best maps placed San Carlos
(according to la Cruz and Surville) in 0°’53’ of north latitude.
Till that period no astronomical observations had been made
between San Carlos, Esmeralda, San Fernando de Ataba-
po, and Javita.


365


ting out from the Amazon, place San Carlos *
and San Jose de Maravitanos too far to the
north, while the Spaniards, setting out from the
coast of Caraccas, assign to them too southern
a position. This consideration may be applied
to all the maps of the colonies. If we know
where they have been drawn, and in what di--
rection the persons arrived at the frontiers, we
may foresee to what side the errors in latitude
and longitude will lean.

We lodged at San Carlos with the commander
of the fort, who is a lieutenant of militia. From
the top of a gallery of the house we enjoyed a
delightful view of three islands of great length,
and covered with thick vegetation. The river
runs in a straight line from north to south, as if
it’s bed had been dug by the hand of man. The
sky being constantly cloudy gives those coun-
tries a solemn and gloomy character. We
found in the village a few juvia trees ; that ma-
jestic plant, which furnishes the triangular nuts
called in Europe the almonds of the Amazon.
We have made it known by the name of the
bertholletia excelsa. The trees acquire the
height of thirty feet.


* Thus the manuscript map of Mr. Requena, founded on
the astronomical observations of the Portugueze, places San
Carlos 1° 27! more to the north than the Spanish maps, found-
ed on the journals of Solano’s expedition.

+ The islands of Zaruma, Imipa, and Mibita, or Mine.


366


The military establishment of this frontier
consisted of seventeen soldiers, ten of whom
were detached for the security of the neighbour-
ing missions. The humidity of the air is such,
that there are not four muskets in a condition
to be fired. The Portugueze have from twenty-
five to thirty men, better clothed and armed, at
the little fort of San Jose de Maravitanos. We
found in the mission of San Carlos but one
garita, a square house, constructed with un-
baked bricks, and containing six field pieces.
The little fort, or, as they think proper to call
it here, the Castillo de San Felipe, is situate op-
posite San Carlos, on the western bank of the
Rio Negro.. The commander made some scru-
ple of showing the fortaleza to Mr. Bonpland
and me; our passports expressed clearly the
power of measuring mountains, and performing
trigonometric operations on the land, whenever
we thought proper; but not of seeing fortified
places. Our fellow traveller, Don Nicholas
Solo, a Spanish officer, was more fortunate than
ourselves ; he was permitted to pass the river.
He found in a small plain, stripped of it’s wood,
the commencement of a fortification of earth,
which, had it been finished, would have required
five hundred men for it’s defence. It is a square
structure, the ditch of which is scarcely visible.
The parapet is five feet high, and strengthened
by large stones. There are two bastions on the


367


side next the river, on which four or five pieces
of cannon may be placed. The whole fortifica-
tion contains fourteen or fifteen cannons, the
greater part dismounted, and guarded by two
men. Three or four Indian huts surround the
fort. This is what is called by the name of the
village of San Felipe ; and, to make the minis-
try of Madrid believe how much these Christian
settlements increase, separate parochial registers
are kept for this pretended village. Every even-
ing after the Angelus a report was made to the
commander, announcing to him gravely, that
all appeared quiet around the fortress; it re-
called to me what travellers relate of the small
forts raised on the coast of Guinea, to protect
the European factories, which have garrisons of
four or five men. The soldiers of San Carlos
are not happier than those of the African fac-
tories ; for at places so distant the same abuses
prevail in the military administration. According
to a custom very anciently tolerated, the. chiefs
do not pay the troops in money, but deliver te
them clothing (ropa), salt, and provision, at a
high price. There exists such a dread at
Angostura of being detached, or rather exiled to
the missions of the Carony, the Caura, and the
Guainia, that it is difficult to find recruits.
Subsistence is excessively dear on the banks of
the Rio Negro, because very little cassava and
few plantains are cultivated, and. the river (like


368


all those with black and limpid waters) is ill
stored with fish. The best of their provision
comes from the Portugueze settlements on the
Rio Negro, where more ease and industry reign
among the Indians; and yet the trade with the
Portugueze is scarcely an object of two thousand
piastres of annual importation *.

The banks of the Upper Guainia will be more
productive, when the destruction of the forests
has diminished the excessive humidity of the air
and the soil, and the insects, which devour the
roots and leaves of the herbaceous plants, are
reduced in number. In their present state of
culture, maize scarcely grows, and the tobacco,
which is of the finest quality, and much cele-
brated on the coast of Caraccas, is well culti-
vated only on spots amid old ruins, remains of
the huts of the pueblo viejo. Thanks to the
nomade habits of the natives, enough of these
ruins are found, where the earth has been dug
and exposed to the air, without producing
plants. The tobacco sowed in forests recently


* Price at San Carlos; maize, the fanega, three piastres and
a half; coffee, the pound (thirty-two Castillian ounces) one
rial of plate; sarsaparilla, the pound, one piastre ; rice, the
almuda, five reals.

+ By the names of andullos del Rio Negro, y del Alto Ori-
noco. At the Rio Negro fifteen tobacco plants furnish two
pounds of excellent tobacco, ‘The leaves are carefully dried,
and formed into carrots fifteen inches long, which are tied
round with packthread.


369


eut down is watery, and without flavour. In-
digo grows wild near the villages of Maroa,
Davipe, and Tomo. Under a different system
from that which we found in those countries, the
Rio Negro will produce indigo, coffee, cacao,
maize, and rice in abundance.

The voyage from the mouth of the Rio Negre
to Grand-Para occupying only twenty or twen-
ty-five days, it would not have taken us much
more time to have gone down the Amazon as
far as the coast of Brazil, than to return by the
Cassiquiare and the Oroonoko to the northern
coast of Caraccas. We were informed at San
Carlos, that, on account of political circum-
stances, it was difficult at that moment to pass
from the Spanish to the Portugueze settlements ;
but we did not know till after our return to
Europe the extent of the danger, to which we
should have been exposed in proceeding as far
as Barcellos. It was known at Brazil, perhaps
by means of the newspapers, the well-meant but
indiscreet. zeal of which has so often proved .
injurious to travellers, that I was going to visit
the missions of the Rio Negro, and examine the
natural canal, which unites two great systems of
rivers.. In those desert forests instruments had
been seen only in the hands of the commission-
ers of boundaries ; and at that time the subal-
tern agents of the Portugueze government could
no more conceive than the good missionary,

VOL. Vv. ' 28


376


whom I have mentioned in a former chapter,
how a man of sense could expose himself to the
fatigues of a long journey, “ to measure lands
that did not belong to him.” Orders had been
issued, to seize my person, my instruments, and
above all those registers of astronomical obser-
vations, so dangerous to the safety of states-
We were to be conducted by way of the Ama-
zon to Grand Para, and thence sent back +o
Lisbon. If I mention these projects, the success
of which would have had so untoward an influ-
ence on the duration of a journey calculated to
last five years, it is only to prove how much the
spirit, that animates the government of colonies,
differs in general from that which directs the
affairs of the mother country. ‘The ministry of
Lisbon, informed of the zeal of it’s subaltern
agents, instantly gave orders, that I should not
be disturbed in my operations ; but that on the
contrary they should be encouraged, if I tra-
versed any part of the Portugueze possessions.
From this enlightened ministry I received the
first news of the solicitude of which I had been
the object, and to which at that remote distance
I could not have appealed.

We found among the Portugueze at San Car-
los several military men, who had gone from
Barcellos to Grand Para. I shall here collect
together all I could learn respecting the course
of the Rio Negro. It being very rare for any


371


one to go up the Amazon beyond the mouth of
the Cababuri, a river celebrated for the collec-
tion of sarsaparilla, all that has been recently
published, even at Rio Janeiro, on the geography
of those countries, is extremely confused. In
going down the Guainia, or Rio Negro, you
pass on the right the Canno Maliapo, and on the
jeft the Cannos Dariba and Eny. At five leagues
distance, consequently nearly in 1° 38’ of north
latitude, is the island of San Josef, which is pro-
visionally recognized (for in the interminable
dispute of the boundaries every thing is provi-
sional) as the southern extremity of the Spanish
possessions. A little below this island, in a spot
where there are a great number of orange-trees
now growing wild, you are shown a small rock,
two hundred feet high, with a cavern called by
the missionaries the Glorieta de Cocuy. ‘This
summer-house, for such isthe signification of the
word glorieta in Spanish, recalls however re-
membrances, thatare not the most agreeable. It
was there that Cocuy, the chief of the Manitivi-
tanoes, of whom we have spoken above*, had his
harem of women, and where (to tell the whole),
from a peculiar predilection, he devoured the
finest and fattest. I have no doubt, that Cocuy


* P. 206, 207 of the present volume. At San Carlos an


instrument of music is still pres rved, a kind of large drum,


ornamented with very rude [ndian paintings, which relate te
the exploits of Cocuy.


Ope?


was a little of a cannibal; “ it is,” says father
Gili, with the simplicity of an American mis-
sionary, ‘a bad habit of these people of Guy-
ana, in other respects so good, and so mild ;”
but trath obliges me to add, that the tradition
of the harem and the orgies of Cocuy is more
current in the Lower Oroonoko, than on the
banks of the Guainia. At San Carlos the very
suspicion of a1 action so degrading to human


nature is rejected; is this because the son of


Cocuy, who is become a Christian, and who ap-
peared to me an intelligent and civilized man,
is at present captain of the Indians of San Car-
los ?

Below the Glorieta, on the Portugueze terri-
tory, are the fort of San Josef de Manavitanos,
the villages of Joam Baptista de Mabbe, San
Marcellino (near the mouth of the Guaisia, or
Uexie, of which we have often spoken above),
Nossa Senhora da Guya, Boavista near the Rio
Izanna, San Felipe, San Joaquin de Coanne at
the confluence* of the famous Rio Guape, Calde-
ron, San Miguel de Iparanna with a small fort,
San Francisco de las Caculbaes, and, finally,
the fortress of San Gabriel de Cachoeiras. I
enter expressly into this geographical detail, to
show how many settlements the Portugueze


government have formed, even in this remote


* See above, p. 312.


sant i


part of Brazil. There are eleven villages in an
extent of twenty-five leagues. I know of nine-
teen more as far as the mouth of the Rio Negro,
beside the sixtowns of Thomare, Moreira (near the
Rio Demenene or Uaraca, where dwelt anciently
the Guyana Indians), Barcellos*, San Miguel
del Rio Branco, near the river of the same name,
so well known in the fictions on El Dorado,
Moura, and Villa do Rio Negro. The banks of
this tributary stream of the Amazonalone are con-
sequently ten times more peopled than all those of
the Upper and Lower Oroonoko, the Cassiquiare,
the Atabapo, and the Spanish Rio Negro, together.
This contrast depends little on the different ferti-
lity of the soil, or the greater facility of navigation
which the Rio Negro affords, by preserving the
same direction from north-west to south-east.
It is the effect of political institutions. Under
the colonial system of the Portugueze, the In-
dians are dependant at the same time on. the
civil and military chiefs, and the ecclesiastics of
Mount Carmel; it is a mixed government, in
which the secular power preserves it’s indepen-
dance. The monks of the Observance, who are
the missionaries of the Oroonoko, unite on the
contrary all power in one hand. Both these


* At the confluence of the Rio Buhybuhy. The town
heretofore stood forty leagues higher up, a circumstance
which has occasioned great confusion in the modern maps.


374


governments are vexatious in many points of
view ; but the loss of liberty is at least compen-
sated in the Portugueze colonies by somewhat
more of ease and civilization.

Among the tributary streams which the Rio
Negro receives from the north, three ought to
fix particularly our attention, because on ac-
count of their branchings, their portages, and the
situation of their sources, they have a marked
influence on the problem so often debated of the
origin of the Oroonoko. The most southern of
these tributary streams are the Rio Branco*,


* As the names Rio Branco and Rio Parime signify in Por-
tugueze and in Caribbee river of white waters, and great water,
it is natural, that. these expressions, applied to different tribu-
tary streams at once, have caused many errors in geography.
The great Rio Branco, or Parime, often mentioned in this
work, is formed by the Urariquera and the Tacutu, and
flows, between Carvoeyro and Villa de Moura, into the
Rio Negro, It is the Quecuene of the natives ; and forms
at it’s confluence with the Rio Negro a very narrow Delta,
between the principal trunk and the Amayauhau, which is a
little branch more to the west. The ancient maps of D’An-
ville, La Cruz, and Caulin, enlarge this Delta in a fabulous
manner, and exhibit all the rivers that flow into the Rio
Negro, for the.distance of forty leagues, between the ancient
mission of Dari and Carvoeyro, as branches of the Rio
Branco. Thus the Daraha, the Padaviri, and the Uaraca,
which are tributary streams, independant of each other, have
received the names of fourth, third, or second branch ;
thus the great Rio Parime, or Quecuene, has been sometimes
distinguished from another Rio Branco, which is the Pada-


375


which was long believed to issue conjointly with
the Oroonoko from lake Parima ; and the Rio
Padaviri, which communicates by a portage with
the Mavaca, and consequently with the Upper
Oroonoko, to the east of the mission of Esme-
ralda. We shall have occasion to speak of the
Rio Branco and the Padaviri, when we arrive
in that mission; it suffices here to pause at the
third tributary stream of the Rio Negro, the Ca-
pabury, the interbranchings of which with the
Cassaquiare are alike important in their con-
nexion with hydrography, and with that of the
trade in sarsaparilla.

The lofty mountains of Parime, which bor-
der the northern bank of the Oroonoko in the
upper part of it’s course above Esmeralda, send
off a chain toward the south, of which the Cerro
de Unturan forms one of the principal sum-
mits. This mountainous country of smail extent,
but rich in vegetable productions, above all in
the mavacure liana, employed in the fabrication
of the curare poison, in almond-trees (the juvia,


viri, because it is placed between the Villa de Thomare and


Lamalongo. D’Anville calls almost all the rivers which have
white waters, aguas brancas, Rio Branco. To be convinced of
the extreme confusion, which still prevails in the geography
of the Rio Negro, it will suffice, to compare the names of the
tributary streams and the missions on the maps, alike minute,
of La Cruz, Caulin, Faden, and Arrowsmith, with the cor-
responding names on the maps in the hydrographic dépot at
Rio Janeiro.


376


or bertholletia excelsa), in aromatic pucheries,
and in wild cacao trees, forms a point of divi-
sion between the waters that flow to the Oroo-
noko, the Cassiquiare, and the Rio Negro. The
tributary streams on the north, or of the Oroo-
noko, are the Mavaca and the Daracapo ; those
on the west, or of the Cassiquiare, are the Idapa
and the Pacimoni* ; and those on the south, or
of the Rio Negro, are the Padaviri and the Caba-
burif. The latter is divided near it’s source
into two branches, the westernmost of which.is
known by the name of Bariat. The Indians of
the mission of San Francisco Solano gave us the
most minute descriptions of it’s course. It
affords the very rare example of a branch, by
which an inferior tributary stream, instead of


* Pasimona, and even Baximonari, in maps.

+ Cavaboris, Cababuris, Cabury, Cauhabury, and even
Catabuhu, in maps, It appears, that the Baria, which forms
a natural channel of efflux, is sometimes dry in very hot
summers (Corogr. Bras., vol. ii, p. 554). The upper part of
the Cababuri was called Maturaca (Meturacao) ; the branch
which flows into the Pacimoni béars the name of Iminara
(Umariuani, Umarynauhy, Umanivari,) and afterward the
name of Baria.


t The waters of the Baria, which is a branch of the Cababuri,
run toward the west, and mingle themselves successively with
those of the Pacimoni, the Cassiquiare, and the Rio Negro.
As this last river flows toward the east, the waters of the
Baria, after a circuit of one hundred and ten leagues, reach
the mouth of the Cababuri.


377


receiving the waters of the superior stream,
sends on the contrary a part of it’s own waters
to that stream, in a direction opposite to that of
the principal recipient. I have collected on one
plate of my Atlas several examples of these ra-
mifications with countercurrents, these appa-
rent movements against the general slope, these
bifurcations of rivers, the knowledge of which
is interesting to hydrographic engineers. ‘This
plate will remind them, that they must not
consider as chimerical all that deviates from the
type, which we have formed for ourselves from
observations collected in too limited a part of
the Globe.

The Cababuri runs into the Rio Negro near
the mission of Nossa Senhora das Caldas; but
the rivers Ya and Dimity*, which are higher
tributary streams, have communications also
with the Cababuri; so that, from the little fort
of San Gabriel de Cachoeiras ~~ as far as San
Antonia de Castanheira the Indians of the Por-
tugueze possessions can enter the territory of
the Spanish missions by the Baria and the Paci-
moni. If I employ the word territory, it is ac-> ©
cording to the practice of the monks of the Ob-


* Bimitti, or Cunimiti.

+ There is an uninterrupted succession of small cataracts
from San Gabriel as far as San Bernardo. ‘The most consi-
derable is near the first of these places, and is called Cacho-
eira de Crocobi or Corocuvi.


378


servance. We scarcely know on what the right
of property is founded in those uninhabited
countries, the natural limits of which are un-
known, and which no attempt has been made to
cultivate. The inhabitants of the Portugueze
missions assert, that their territory extends to all
the spots at which they can arrive in a boat
upon a river, the mouth of which is in the Por-
tugueze possessions. But occupation does not
always constitute a right of property ; and, ac-
cording to what we have shown of the multiplied
interbranchings of rivers, it might prove alike
dangerous for the courts of Madrid and of Lis-
bon, to sanction this strange axiom of the juris-
prudence of the missions.

The chief object of the incursions by the Rio
Cababuri is the collection of sarsaparilla and
the aromatic seeds of the puchery laurel (laurus
pichurim). ‘These valuable articles of commerce
are sought for as far as two days journey from
Esmeralda, on the borders of a Jake, which is on
the north of the Cerro Unturan, passing by
portages from the Pacimoni to the Idapa, and
from the Idapa to the Mavaca, near the lake of
this name. The sarsaparilla of these countries
is celebrated at Grand Para, Angostura, Cu-
mana, Nueva Barcelona, and in other parts of
Terra Firma, by the name of zarza del Rio
Negro. It is the most. active of all that are
known, and is much preferred to the zarza of


ie ems Se


Be aici eR i nt ea ia Nar Be TH The 2! Star


379


the province of Caraccas, or of the mountains
of Merida; it is dried with great care, and ex-
posed purposely to smoke, in order that it may
become blacker. This liana grows in profusion
on the humid declivities of the mountains of
Unturan and Achivaquery. M. de Candolle *
is right in suspecting, that different species of
smilax are gathered under the name of sarsapa-
rilla, We found twelve new species, among
which the smilax siphilitica of the Cassiquiare,
and the s. officinalis of the river Magdalena, are
the most esteemed on account of their diuretic
properties. Syphilitic maladies being as com-
mon as benign in these countries among the
whites and the mixed casts, the quantity of sar-
saparilla employed in the Spanish colonies as a
domestic medicine is very considerable. We
see by the works of Clusius, that at the begin-
ning of the Conquista Europe obtained this
salutary medicament from the Mexican coast of
Hondurast and the port of Guayaquil. The
trade in zarza is now more active in those ports,
which have interiour communications with the
Oroonoko, the Rio Negro, and the Amazon.
The trials made in several botanical gardens
of Europe prove, that the smilax glauca of Vir-


* Propr. medic., p. 292.
+ See our Nov. Gen, vol. i, p. 271.
{ Near five thousand quintals are annually exported from
Vera Cruz. See my Polit, Essay, vol. ii, p. 442.


380


ginia, which it is pretended is the s. sarsaparilla
of Linneus, may be cultivated in the open air,
wherever the mean temperature of the winter
rises above six or seven degrees of the centigrade
thermometer* ; but those species that possess
the most active virtues belong exclusively to the
torrid zone, and require a much higher degree
of heat. In reading the works of Clusius, it can
scarcely be conceived, why our writers on the
materia medica persist in considering a plant of
the United States as the most ancient type of
the officinal species of the genus smilax.

We found in the possession of the Indians of
the Rio Negro some of those green stones, known
by the name of the Amazon stones, because the
natives pretend, according to an ancient tradi-
tion, that they come from the country “ of the
women without husbands (Cougnantainsecouima),
or women living alone (Aikeambenano+).” “We


* The winter temperature at London and Paris is 4°2° and
3°7°; at Montpellier, 6°7°; at Rome, 7-7; in that part of
Mexico, and the Terra Firma, where we saw the most active
species of the sarsaparilla growing, (that which supplies the
trade of the Spanish and Portugueze colonies) from twenty to
twenty-six degrees cent. The roots of another family of mo-
nocotyledons (of some cyperacez) possess also diaphoretic and
resolvent properties. The carex arenaria, thec. hirta, &c.
furnish the German sarsaparilla of druggists. According to
Clusius, Europe received the first sarsaparilla from Jucatan,
and the island of Puna, opposite Guayaquil.

+ This word is of the Tamanac language ; they are the


Sole Donne of the Italian missionaries.


|
|
|
i


38i


were told at-San Carlos, and in the neighbouring
villages, that the sources of the Oroonoko, which
we found east of the Esmeralda; and in the
missions of the Carone and at Angostura, that
the sources of the Rio Branco are the native
spots of the green stones. These indications con-
firm the report of an old soldier of the garrison
of Cayenne, mentioned by M. de la Condamine,
that. these mineral substances were obtained
from the country of women, west of the rapids of
the Oyapoc. The Indians who inhabit the fort of
Topayos on the Amazon, five degrees east of the
mouth of the Rio Negro, possessed formerly a
great number of these stones. Had they re-
ceived them from the north, that is from the
country pointed out by the Indians of the Rio
Negro, which extends from the mountains of
Cayenne toward the sources of the Essequebo,
the Carony, the Oroonoko, the Parime, and the
Rio Trombetas* ? or did they come from the
south by the Rio Topayos, which descends from
the vast table-land of the Campos Parecis? Su-
perstition attaches great importance to these
mineral substances; they are worn suspended
from the neck as amulets, because, according to
popular belief, they preserve the wearer from
nervous complaints, fevers, and the sting of


* Between 57° and 67° of longitude, and 0° and 5° of
north latitude,


382


venomous serpents. Thus they have been for
ages an article of trade among the natives, beth
in the north and on the south of the Oroonoko.
The Caribbees, who may be considered as the
Bucharians of the New World, made them
known on the coast of Guyana; and the same
stones, like money in circulation, having passed
successively from nation to nation in opposite
directions, their quantity is perhaps not aug-
mented, and the spot which produces them is
rather unknown than concealed. In the midst
of enlightened Europe, on occasion of a warm
contest respecting native bark, a few years ago,
the green stones of the Oroonoko were gravely
proposed as a powerful febrifuge. After this
appeal to the credulity of the Europeans, we
cannot be surprised to learn, that the Spanish
planters share the predilection of the Indians for
these amulets, and that they are sold at a very
considerable price*. The form given to them most
frequently is that of the Persepolitan cylinders+,
longitudinally perforated, and loaded. with in-
seriptions and figures. But itis not the Indians
of our days, the natives of the Oroonoko and
the Amazon, whom we find in the last degree
of barbarism, that pierced such hard substances,


* The price of a cylinder two inches long is from twelve to
fifteen piastres,
t Dorow, ueber die Assyrische Ketischrift, 1820, p. 4.


i
i)
}
i
t


383


giving them the forms of animals and_ fruits.
-Such works, like the perforated and sculptured
emeralds, which are found in the Cordilieras of
New Grenada and Quito, denote anterior civil-
ization. The present inhabitants of those coun-
tries, particularly those of the hot region, so
little comprehend the possibility of cutting hard
stones, (the emerald, jade, compact feldspar,
and rock-crystal), that they imagine the green
stone is naturally soft when taken out of the
earth, and hardens after having been moulded
by the hand.

It results from these observations, that the
natural soil of the Amazon stone is not in the
valley of the river Amazon ; and that, far from
deriving it’s name from the river, it has obtained
it,as well as the river itself, from a nation of war-
like women, whom Father Acunna, and Oviedo
in his letter to Cardinal Bembo, compare to the
Amazons of the ancient world. What we see in
our cabinets under the false denomination of
Amazon stone (amazonenstem), is neither jade,
nor compact feldspar, but a common feldspar
of an apple-green colour, that comes from the
Ourals and lake Onega in Russia, and which I
never saw in the granitic mountains of Guyana.
Sometimes also this very rare and hard stone of
the Amazons is confounded with the hatchet-
nephrite (beilstein)* of Werner, which has much


* Punamustein, jade axinien, The stone-hatchets found


less tenacity. The substance which I obtained
from the hands of the Indians, belongs to the
saussurite *, to the real jade, which approaches
oryctognostically to compact feldspar, and which
forms one of the constituent parts of the verde de
Corsica, or gabbroy. It takes a’ fine polish,
and passes from apple-green to emerald-green ;
it is translucent at the edges, extremely tena-
cious, and sonorous to such a degree, that, being
formerly cut by the natives into very thin plates,
perforated at the centre, and suspended by a
thread, it yields an almost metallic sound, ‘if
struck by another hardt body. This observa-
tion adds to the connection which we find, not-
withstanding the difference of fracture and of
specific gravity, between the saussurite and the
petrosiliceous basis of the porphyrschiefer, which


in America, for instance in Mexico, are not of beilstein, but of
compact feldspar.


* Jade of Saussure, according to the system of Brongniart ;


tenacious jade, and compact tenacious feldspar of Haiiy ;
some varieties of the variolithe of Werner.

+ Euphotide of Haiiy, or schillerfels of Raumer. (See
the classical memoir of Mr. Leopold von Buch, weber den
Gabbro in the Mém. de la Société d’ Hist. Nat. de Berlin, 1810,
vol. 4, p. 134.)

t M. Brongniart, to whom I showed these plates on my
return to Europe, very justly compared these jades of Pa-
rime to the sonorous stones employed by the Chinese in their
musical. instruments called king. Traité de Min. vol, i, p.
265.


385


is the phonolite (Alingstein). I have already
observed, that, as it is very rare to find in Ame-
rica nephrite, jade, or compact feldspar in it’s
native place, we may well be astonished at the
quantity of hatchets, which are every where dis-
covered in digging the earth, from the banks of
the Ohio as far as Chili. We saw in the moun-
tains of the Upper Oroonoko, or of Parime, only
granular granites containing a little hornblend,
granites passing into gneiss, and schistoid horn-
blends. Has nature repeated on the east. of
Esmeralda, between the sources of the Carony,
the Essequebo, the Oroonoko, and the Rio Bran-
co, the transition formation of Tucutunemo*
reposing on mica-schist?> Does the Amazon
stone come from the rocks of euphotide, which
form the last member of the series of primitive
rocks ?

We find among the people of both worlds
at the first degree of dawning civilization, a
peculiar predilection for certain stones ; not
only for those which from their hardness may
be useful to man as cutting. instruments-+, but
also for mineral substances, which, on account
of their colour and their natural form, he be-


* See vol. iv, p. 284, and my Researches onthe American
Monuments, vol. ii (xiv of the present work), 38.
+ The lydian stone, the kieselschiefer, the axinian jade,
the obsidian, &c.
VOL. V. 94 (6


386


lieves to bear some relation to the organic func-
tions, and even to the propensities of the soul.
This ancient worship of stones, these benign
virtues attributed to jade and hematite, belong
to the savages of America as well as to the inha-
bitants of the forests of Thrace, whom the vene-
rable institutions of Orpheus, and the origin of
mysteries, forbid us to consider as savages.
The human race, when nearer it’s cradle, be-
lieves itself to be autocthonic, and feels as if
it were enchained to the Earth, and the sub-
stances contained in her bosom. The powers of
nature, and still more those which destroy, than
those which preserve, are the first objects of it’s
worship. It is not solely in the tempest, in the
sound that precedes the earthquake, in the fire
that feeds the volcano, that these powers are
manifested ; the inanimate rock, the stones by
their lustre and their hardness, the mountains
by their mass and their solitude, act upon the
untaught mind with a force, which in a state of
advanced civilization can no longer be con-
ceived. This worship of stones, when once esta-
blished, is preserved amid more modern forms
of worship; and what was at first the object
of religious homage becomes that of supersti-


tious’confidence. Divine stones are transformed _


into amulets, which preserve the wearer from
every ill, mental and corporeal. Although a
distance of five hundred leagues separates the


387


banks of the Amazon and the Oroonoko from
the Mexican table-land; although history re-
cords no fact, that connects the savage nations
of Guyana with the civilized nations of Anahuac,
the monk Bernard de Sahagun, at the beginning
of the conquest, found green stones which had
belonged to Quetzalcohuatl*, preserved at Cho-
lula as relics. This mysterious personage is the
Budha of the Mexicans; he appeared in the
time of the Toltecks, founded the first religious
congregations, and established a government
similar to that of Meroé and of Japan.

The history of the jade, or of the green stones
of Guyana, is intimately connected with that of
the warlike women, whom the travellers of the
sixteenth century named the Amazons of the
New World. M. de la Condamine has produced
many testimonies in favour of this tradition.
Since my return from the. Oroonoko and the
river Amazons, I have often been asked at
Paris, whether I embraced the opinion of that
learned man, or believed, like several of his. con-
temporaries, that he undertook the deferice of
the Cougnantainsecouima, the independant wo-
men who received men into their society only
in the month of April, merely to captivate, in a
public sitting of the Academy, the attention


* Researches on the American’ Monuments, vol. ii, (of the
present: work xiv,) p. 250.
2c2


388


of an audience somewhat eager for novelties.
This is the place for me to express myself with
frankness on a tradition, which has so romantic
an appearance; and I am farther led to do this
by M. de la Condamine’s assertion, that the
Amazons of the Rio Cayame* crossed the Ma-


*® Fray Pedro Simon, p. 480. La Condumine, Voyage &
PAmazone, p. 101, 113, and 140, Cayley’s Life of Sir Walter
Raleigh, vol. i, p. 169. Gili, vol. i, p. 145—154, Orrellana,,
arriving at the Maragnon by the Rio Coca and the Napo,
fought with the Amazons, as it appears, between the mouth
of the Rio Negro and that of the Xingu. M..de la Conda-
mine asserts, that in the seventeenth century they passed the
Maragnon between Tefe and the mouth of the Rio Puruz,
near the Canno Cuchivara, which is a western branch of the
Puruz. These women therefore came from the banks of the
Rio Cayame, or Cayambe, consequently from the unknown
country, which extends sou th of the Maragnon, between the
Ucayale and the Madeira. Raleigh also places them on the
south of the Maragnon, but in the province of Topayos, and
on the river of the same name. He says they were “ rich in
golden vessels, which they had acquired in exchange for the fa-
mous green stones, or piedras hijadas. (Raleigh means, no doubt,
piedras del higado, stones that cure diseases of the liver.) It
is remarkable enough, that, one hundred and forty-eight
years after, M. de la Condamine still found “ a greater. num-
ber of those green stones (divine stones), which differ neither
in colour nor in hardness from oriental jade, among the
Indians who inhabit near the mouth of the Rio Topayos, than


any where else. The Indians said, that they inherited —


these stones, which cure the nephritic colic and epilepsy,
from their fathers, who received them from the women without
husbands.” What hes been related regards the Amazons


}
j
I


389


ragnon, to establish themselves on the Rio Ne-
gro. A taste for the marvellous, together with
a wish to adorn the descriptions of the New
Continent with some features drawn from clas-
sic antiquity, have no doubt contributed to give
great importance to the first narratives of Orel-
lana. | In perusing the works of Vespucci, Fer-
dinand Columbus, Geraldini, Oviedo, and Pietro
Martyr d’Anghieri, we recognize this tendency
of the writers of the sixteenth century, to find
among the newly discovered nations all that the
Greeks have taught us of the first age of the
world, and of the manners of the barbarous


south of the Maragnon; north of this river they are placed
(according to different traditions collected in Cayenne, Grand
Para, and at the Oroonoko), 1st. to the west of the great
rapids of Oyapoc, beyond the Amicouan Indians (with long
ears, Orejones, and Orellades) ; 2dly, west of the sources of
the Rio Irijo or Arijo, which flows into the Amazon a little
to the south of the Rio Araguary; 3dly, near the sources
of the Cuchivero, which falls into the Oroonoko between Ca-
bruta and Alta Gracia. The first two of these lead us near-
ly opposite to the region, in the valley of the Lower Marag-
non, which was said to be inhabited by the Amazons. The
resemblance between the names of the Cuchivaro (a tributary
stream. of the Maragnon, near which the Amazons passed the
great river) and of the Cuchivero, (a tributary stream of the
Oroonoko) according to father Gili, is not accidental. This
missionary seems to think, that the Aikeambenano, who des-
cended from the Amazons of the Maragnon, gave their new
abode the denomination of the old. I doubt this fact, and
the whole of this genealogy.


390


Scythians and Africans. Led by these travel-
lers into another hemisphere, we fancy ourselves
going over past times; for the hordes of Ame-
rica, in their primitive simplicity, display to
Europe “ a sort of antiquity, of which we are
almost the contemporaries.” What was then
but an ornament of style, and a pleasure of the
mind, is become in our days the subject of grave
discussions. In a memoir published at Louis-
iana, the whole of Grecian fable is explained,
without excluding the Amazons, by a knowledge
of the localities of lake Nicaragua, and of some
other American scenes !

If Oviedo, in addressing his letters to Cardinal
Bembo, believed he ought to flatter the taste of
a man so familiar with the study of antiquity,
the navigator Sir Walter Raleigh had a less
poetic aim*. He sought to fix the attention of
Queen Elizabeth on the great Empire of Guy-
ana, the conquest of which he proposed to her
government. He gave the description of the
rising of that gilded king (el dorado)-+-, whose
chamberlains, furnished with long sarbacans,
blew powdered gold every morning on his body,
after having rubbed it over with aromatic: oils:


* This is the opinion of Mr. Southey. (History of Brazil,


vol. i, p. 608 and 653.) See also Cayley’s Life of Raleigh, -


vol. i, p. 163, 198, and 226. “
+ The word dorado is not the name of a country; it sig-
nifies simply the gilded, el rey dorado.


}
:


SS


391


but nothing could be better adapted to strike
the imagination of queen Elizabeth, than the
warlike republic of women without husbands,
who resisted the Castilian heroes. I point out
the motives, which led those writers, who have
given most reputation to the Amazons of Ame-
rica to exaggerate: but these motives do not, I
think, suffice for rejecting a tradition entirely,
which is spread among various nations, who have
no communications with each other.

The testimonies collected by M. de la Conda-
mine are very remarkable; he has published
them in detail, and I have a pleasure in adding,
that, if this traveller has passed in France and
England for a man whose curiosity was the
most constantly awake, he is considered in
Quito, in the country he described, as the tra-
veller who has adhered the most stedfastly to
truth. Thirty years after M. de la Condamine,
a Portugueze astronomer, Mr. Ribeiro, who has
traversed the Amazon, and the tributary streams
which run into that river on the northern side,
has confirmed on the spot all that the learned
Frenchman had advanced. He found the same
traditions among the Indians; and he collected
them with so much the greater impartiality, as
he did not himself believe, that the Amazons
formed a separate horde. Not knowing any of
the tongues spoken on the Oroonoko and the
Rio Negro, I could learn nothing certain on


392


the popular traditions of women without hus-

bands, and. on the origin of the green. stones,

which are believed to be intimately connected

with them. I shall however recite a modern

testimony of some weight, that of father Gili.

“ Upon inquiring,” says this well-informed mis-
i


sionary, “of a Quaqua Indian, what nations
inhabited the Rio Cuchivero, he named to me
the Achirigotoes, the Pajuroes, and the Aikeam-
benanoes*. Well acquainted with the Tama- |
nac tongue, I instantly comprehended the sense
of this last word, which is a compound, and sig-
nifies women living alone. The Indian confirm- ]
ed my observation, and related, that the Aikeam- |
benanoes were a community of women, who
fabricated long sarbacans, and other weapons of
war. They admit once a year the men of the
neighbouring nation of Vokearoes into their
society, and send them back with presents of
sarbacans. All the male children born in this
horde of. women are killed in their infancy.”
This history seems framed on the traditions,
which circulate among the Indians of the Ma-
ragnon, and among the Caribbees ; yet the Qua-
qua Indian, of whom father Gili speaks, was
ignorant of the Castilian language; he had
never had any communication with white men ;
and certainly knew not, that south of the Oroo-


* In Italian, Acchirecotti, Pajuri, and Aicheam-benano.


$93


noko there existed another river, called the river
of the Aikeam-benanoes, or the Amazons.

What must we conclude from this narration
of the ancient missionary of Encaramada? not
that there are Amazons on the banks of the
Cuchivero, but that women, in different parts of
America, wearied of the state of slavery in which
they were held by the men,. united themselves
together, like the fugitive negroes, in a palenque
fstaccado]; that the desire of preserving their
independance rendered them warriors.; and that
they received visits from a neighbouring and
friendly horde, perhaps a little less methodi-
cally than tradition relates. It is sufficient, that
this society of women acquired some power in
one part of Guyana, for events the most simple, |
which may have been repeated in different
places, to have been described in a uniform and
exaggerated manner. This is the character of
traditions ; and if the most extraordinary rising
of the slaves, of which I have spoken above*,
had taken place in the middle of the continent,
instead of having happened near the coast of
Venezuela, a credulous people would have seen
in every palenque of Maroon Negroes the court
of king Miguel, his council of state, and the
Negro bishop of Buria. The Caribbees of the
continent held intercourse with those of the


* Vol.iv, p. 252.


394


islands, and no doubt in this way the traditions
of the Maragnon and the Oroonoko were propa-
gated toward the north. Before the voyage of
Orellana, Christopher Columbus thought he had
already found the Amazons in the Caribbee is-
lands. This great man was told, that the small
island of Madanino (Montserrat) was inhabited
by warlike women, who lived the greater part of
the year separate from men*. At other times
also, the conguistadores imagined, that the wo-
men, who defended their huts}.in the absence
of their husbands, were republics of Amazons ;
and, what was an error less excusable, made a
like supposition respecting the religious congre-
gations, the convents { of Mexican virgins, who,
far from admiting men at any season of the year
into their society, lived according to the austere
rule of Quetzalcohuatl. Such was the disposition
of men’s minds, that in the long succession of tra~
vellers, who crowded on each other in their dis-
coveries, and in narrations of the marvels of the
New World, every one chose to have seen, what
his predecessors had announced.

We passed three nights at San Carlos del Rio


* Petr. Martyr, p. 17. Hackluyt’s Collect. (Lond, 1812),
p- 384. Grycus, p. 69. ‘

+ Fray Pedro Simon, Not. 6, cap. 26.

4 One of these convents was near Cozumel, on an is-
land. (Gryneus, p. 500.)


——s .
oe


RNAi


ee ed


395


Negro. I count the nights, because I watched
during the greater part of them, in the hope of
seizing the moment of the passage of some star
over the meridian. That 1 might have nothing
to reproach myself with, I kept the instruments
always ready for an observation. I could not
even obtain double altitudes, to calculate the
latitude by the method of Douwes. What a. con-
trast between two parts of the same zone; be-
tween the sky of Cumana, where the air is con-
stantly pure, as in Persia and Arabia, and the
sky of the Rio Negro, veiled like that of the
Feroe islands, without Sun, or Moon, or stars!
I felt so much the more pain in leaving the fort
of San Carlos, as I could not then hope to ob-
tain near that spot a good observation for the
latitude*. I found the dip of the magnetic nee-
dle 22°6° cent. div. The magnetic force was
expressed by two hundred and sixteen oscilla-
tions in ten minutes of time. As'the magnetic
parallels rise to the westward, and as I found on
the back of the Cordilleras, between Santa Fe
de Bogota and Popayan, the same dips observed


* Five altitudes of the Sun, taken the 8th of May, (all that
J could obtain,) gave me, according to the time-keeper,
69° 58' 39”, for the longitude of San Carlos, The error
therefore of the map of La Cruz, and of those by whom it
has been copied, was nearly two degrees. All that part of
America was carried too far toward the east. (See my


_ Observe. Astr., vol. 1, p. 238.)


396


on the Upper Oroonoko and the Rio Negro,
these observations are of great importance for
the theory of lines of equal intensity, or isody-
namic lines*. The number of oscillations is
the same at Javita and at Quito, and yet the
‘magnetic dip is 26°4° at the former of these
places; and at the latter, 14°85°. The force
under the magnetic equator (at Peru) being ex-
pressed by unity, we find the intensity of force at
Cumana = 1:1779; at: Carichana = 1°1575 ; at
Javita 10675 ; at San Carlos = 1:0480. Such is
the decrement of the force from north to south in
eight degrees of latitude, between sixty-six degrees
and a half and sixty-nine degrees of longitude
west of Paris. I mention expressly the difference
of the meridians ; for in submitting my isodyna-
mic observations} to new researches, a geome-
trician deeply versed in the study of terrestrial
magnetism, Mr. Hansteen, discovered, that the
intensity of the force varies in the same mag-
netic. parallel according to fixed laws, and that
the knowledge of these laws causes a great part
of the anomalies to disappear, which this phe-
nomenon seemed to offer. It is in general cer-
tain, as I have concluded from the whole of my
observations, that the intensity of force aug-


* See the great work of Mr. Hansteen, which has appeared
in Norway, under the title of Ueber der Magnetismus der
Erde, 1819; p. 14, and 66—77.

+ Journal de Physique, vol. lix, p. 287.


397


ments from the magnetic equator to the pole * ;
but the rapidity of this increase appears to vary
under different meridians. When two places
have the same dip, the force is greatest to the
west of the meridian which traverses the centre
of South America; and diminishes on the same
parallel at the east toward Europe. In the
southern hemisphere it seems to attain it’s mini-
mum on the eastern coast of Africa; and then
augments anew, on the same magnetic parallel,
as far as toward New Holland. I found the
intensity of the force at Mexico almost as great
as at Paris, yet the difference of the dip is more
than thirty-one degrees cent}. My needle, which
oscillated beneath the magnetic equator (in
Peru) two hundred and eleven times, would not
have oscillated under the same equator, in the
meridian of the Philippine Islands, at the utmost
only two hundred and two or two hundred and
three times. This striking difference results
from the comparison of my observations of in-
tensity made at Santa Cruz in Teneriff with
those collected there by Mr. de Rosselt seven
years before.


* From the point where the magnetic equator crosses
Peru as far as Paris, 1: : 1°3703. (Obs. Astr., vol. i, p. Ixxv.
Mémoires d’ Arcueil, vol. 1, p. 21.)

+ Mexico (in lat, 19° 26° 45”, long. 101° 25’ 30”), Dip
46'85°. Intensity of force, 242. Paris (in lat. 48° 507 15",
long. 0°0). Dip in 1798, '77-62°. Intensity, 245.

1 My needle oscillated at Teneriff two hundred and thirty-


398


The magnetic observations made on the banks
of the Rio Negro are, of all those we know in
the interior of a great continent, the nearest to
the magnetic equator. They have consequently
served to determine* the position of this equa-
tor, which I crossed more to the west on the
ridge of the Andes, between Micuipampa and
Caxamarca, in the seventh degree of south lati-
tude. The magnetic parallel of San Carlos (that
of 22:6° cent.) passes through Popayan, and in
the South Sea through a point (at 3° 12’ north
lat., and 89° 36’ west long.), where I was for-
tunate enough to have an opportunity of mak-
ing observations in very calm weather+.


eight times ; that of Mr. de Rossel, two hundred and eighty-
eight times. The first therefore would have made two hun-
dred and forty-five oscillations at Brest, reducing it to the
observations of Mr. de Rossel. This is exactly the number,
which it gave at Paris, and this number confirms the exact-
ness of the comparison. (Hansteen, p.'70 and 72.)

* Mr. Hansteen finds, according to my observations, the
maghetic equator in the longitude of San Carlos del Rio
Negro (69° 58’ west of Paris) in the latitude of nine
degrees and a half south, Mr. Orléet, in’ a valuable paper
presented lately to the Academy of Sciences, makes the fine
of no dip pass through 7 44! of south latitude. M. Biot gives
San Carlos 10° 13’ 14’ of magnetic latitude.

¢ Popayan (lat, 2° 26/17" north; long. 78° 59’). Dip
23°05° cent. South Sea (the spot mentioned in the text).
Dip. 228° cent. But the isodynamic parallel of San Carlos,
that is to say, the line of equal intensity, passes to the south
of these two places.


399


May the 10th. Our canoe had received it’s
lading during the night; and we embarked a
little before sunrise, to go up the Rio Negro as
far as the mouth of the Cassiquiare, and to
devote ourselves to researches on the real course
of this river, which unites the Oroonoko to the
Amazon. The morning was fine; but, in pro-
portion as the heat augmented, the sky became
obscured. The air is so saturated by water: in
these forests, that the vesicular vapours become
visible on the least increase of evaporation at the
surface of the Earth. The breeze being never
felt, the humid strata are not displaced and
renewed by dryer air. We were every day
more grieved at the aspect of the cloudy sky.
M. Bonpland was losing by this excess of damp-
ness the plants he had collected: and I for my
part was afraid, that I should again find the
fogs of the Rio Negro in the valley of the Cassi-
quiare. No one in these missions for half a cen-
tury past had doubted of the communication,
which exists between two great systems of
rivers ; the important point of our voyage was
confined therefore to fixing by astronomical
observations the course of the Cassiquiare, and
particularly the point of it’s entrance into
the Rio Negro, and that of the bifurcation of
the Oroonoko, Without a sight of the Sun and
the stars this object would be frustrated, and
we should have exposed ourselves in vain to long


400


and painful privations. Our fellow travellers
would have returned by the shortest way, that
of the Pimichin, and the small rivers; but M.
Bonpland preferred like me persisting in the
plan of the voyage, which we had traced for
ourselves in passing the Great Cataracts. We
had already travelled one hundred and eighty
leagues in a boat from San Fernando de Apure,
to San Carlos (on the Rio Apure, the Oroonoko,
the Atabapo, the Temi, the Tuamini, and the
Rio Negro). In again entering the Oroonoko
by the Cassiquiare we had to navigate three
hundred and twenty leagues, from San Carlos to
Angostura. By this way we had to struggle
against the currents during ten days ; the rest
was to be performed by going down the stream
of the Oroonoko. It would have been blamable
to have suffered ourselves to be discouraged: by
the fear of a.cloudy sky, and by the moschettoes
of the Cassiquiare. Our Indian pilot, who had
been recently at Mandavaca, promised us the
Sun, and “ those great stars that eat the clouds,”
as soon as we should have left the black waters
of the Guaviare. We therefore executed our
first project of returning to San Fernando de
Atabapo by the Cassiquiare, and, fortunately for
our researches, the prediction of the. Indian was
verified. The white waters brought us by de-
grees a more serene sky, stars, moschettoes, and
crocodiles.


SA EE TSA


401


We passed between the islands of Zaruma
and Mini, or Mibita, covered with thick vegeta-
tion; and, after having ascended the’ rapids of
the Piedra dé Uinumane, we entered the Rio
Cassiquiare at the distance of eight miles from
the small fort of San Carlos. The Piedra, or
granitic rock which forms the little cataract,
attracted our attention by the number of veins
of quartz by which it is traversed. ‘These veins
were several inches broad, and their masses
proved, that their date and formation were very
different. I saw distinctly, that, wherever they
crossed each other, the veins containing micaand
black schorl traversed and drove out of their di-
rection those, which contained only white quartz
and feldspar. According to the theory of Wer-
ner, the black veins were consequently of a more
recent formation than the white. Being a disci-
ple of the school of Freiberg, I could not but
pause with satisfaction at the rock of Uinumane,
to observe the same phenomena near the equator,
which I had so often seen in the mountains of
my own country. I confess, that the theory,
which considers the veins as clefts filled from
above with various substances, pleases me some-
what less now, than it did at that period; but
these modes of intersection and driving aside,
observed in the stony and metallic veins, do
not the less merit the attention of travellers, as
being one of the most general and constant of

VOL, V. 2D


402


geological phenomena. On the east of Javita,
all along the Cassiquiare, and particularly in the
mountains of Duida, the number of veins in the
granite increases. These veins are full of holes
and druses, and their frequency seems to indicate,
that the granite of these countries is not of very
ancient formation.

We found some lichens on the rock Uinuma-
ne, opposite the island of Chamanare, at the
edge of the rapids ; and as the Cassiquiare near
it's mouth turns abruptly from east to south-
west, we saw for the first time this majestic
branch of the Oroonoko in all it’s breadth. | It
much resembles the Rio Negro in the general
aspect of the landscape. The trees of the forest,
as in the basin of the latter river, advance as far
as the beach, and there form a thick copse ; but
the Cassiquiare has white waters, and more fre-
quently changes it’s direction. It’s breadth near
the rapids of Uinumane almost surpasses that
of the Rio Negro. I found it every where from
two hundred and fifty to two hundred and eighty
toises, as far as above Vasiva. Before we pass-
ed the island of Garigave, we perceived to the
north-east, almost at the horizon, a little hill
with a hemispheric summit ; the form which in
every zone characterises the mountains of gra-
nite. Continually surrounded by vast plains,
the solitary rocks and hills excite the attention
of the traveller. Contiguous mountains are only


403


found more to the east, toward the sources of
the Pacimoni, Siapa, and Mavaca. Having
arrived on the south of the Raudal of Caravine, -
we perceived that the Cassiquiare, by the wind-
ings of it’s course, again approached San Carlos.
The distance from this fort to the mission of
San Francisco Solano, where we slept, is only
two leagues and a half, by land; but it is rec-
‘koned seven or eight by the river. I passed a
part of the night in the open air, waiting vainly
for stars. The air was misty, notwithstanding
the aquas blancas, which were to lead us beneath
an, ever-starry sky.

The mission of San Francisco Solano, situate
on the left bank of the Cassiquiare, was thus
named in honor of one of the chiefs of the expe-
dition of the boundaries, Don Joseph Solano, of
whom we have often had occasion to speak im
this work. This well-informed officer never
went beyond the village of San Fernando de:
Atabapo; he saw neither the waters of the Rio
Negro and the Cassiquiare, nor those of the
Oroonoko east of the mouth of the Guavyiare.
It is by an error founded on ignorance of the
Spanish language, that geographers have fan-
cied they'saw in the celebrated map of La Cruz
Olmedilla the traces of a road four hundred
leagues long, by which it is pretended that Don
Joseph Solano reached the sources of the Oroo-
_noko, lake Parime, or the White sea, and the
2d2


404


banks of the Cababury and the Uteta! The imis-
sion of San Francisco was founded, as were most
of the Christian settlements south of the Great
Cataracts of the Oroonoko, not by monks, but by
military authority. At the time of the expedition
of the boundaries, villages were built in proportion
as a subteniente, or a corporal, advanced with his
troop. Part of the natives, in order to preserve
their independence, retired without a struggle ;
others, of whom the most powerful chiefs* had
been gained, joined the missions. Where there
was no church, they contented themselves with
erecting a great cross of red wood, at the side of
which they constructed a casa fuerte, that is, a
house, the walls of which were formed of large
beams, resting horizontally upon each other.
This house had two stories ; in the upper story
two cannons of small calibre were placed ; and
two soldiers lived on the ground-floor, and were
served by an Indian family. Those of the na-
tives with whom they were at peace cultivated
spots of land round the casa fuerte. The sol-
diers called them together by the sound of the
horn, or a botuto of baked earth, whenever any
hostile attack was dreaded. Such were the
pretended nineteen Christian settlements found-
ed by Don Antonio Santos in the way from


* On the Cassiquiare these were captain Mara, chief of the: ,


Maisanas, and Imt, chief of a branch of the Marepizanas..


405


@


Esmeralda to the Erevato. Military posts,
which had no influence on the civilization of
the natives, figured on the maps, and in the
works of the missionaries, as villages (pueblos)
and reducciones apostolicas*. The preponde-
rance of the military was maintained on the
banks of the Oroonoko till 1785, when the sys-
tem of the monks of Saint Francis began. The
small number of missions founded, or rather
reestablished, since that period, are owing to the
fathers of the Observance ; for the soldiers now
distributed among the missions are dependant
on the missionaries, or at least are reputed to be


‘so, according to the pretensions of the ecclesias-


tical hierarchy.

The Indians whom we found at San Francisco
Solano were of two nations ; Pacimonalec, and
Cheruvichahenas. The latter being descended
from a considerable tribe settled on the Rio
Tomo, near the Manivas of the Upper Guainia,
I tried to gather from them some ideas of the
upper course and the sources of the Rio Negro;
but the interpreter, whom I employed, could not
make them comprehend the sense of my ques-
tions. They only repeated to satiety, that the
sources of the Rio Negro and the Inirida were
as near to each other, as “ two fingers of the


* See the Corografia:del Padre Caulin, p.'77 ; and the so
of the Missions of the Oroonoko, by Surville, 1778.


406


hand.” In one of the huts of the Pacimonales
we made the acquisition of two large fine birds,
a toucan ( piapoco)*, approaching the ramphas-
tos erythrorhynchos, and an ana, a species of
macaw, seventeen inches long, having the whole
body ofa purple colour, like the p. macao. We
had already in our canoe seven parrots, two ma-
nakins (pipra), a motmot, two guans, or pavas de
monte, two manaviris (cercoleptes or viverra
caudivolvula), and eight monkeys, namely, two
ateles+}, two titist, one viudita||, two douroucou-
lis or nocturnal monkeys§, and the ‘cacajao with
ashort tail]. Father Zea whispered some com-
plaints at the daily augmentation of this ambula-
tory collection. The toucan resembles the raven
in it’s manners and intelligence. It is.a coura-
geous animal, but easily tamed. It’s long and
stout beak serves to defend it at a distance.
It makes itself master of the house, steals what-
ever it can come at, and loves to bathe often


* Kiapoco, ov aviapoce.

+ Marimonda of the Great Cataracts, simia belzebuth,
Brisson.

{ Simia sciurea, the saimiri of Buffon. (See my Rec.
d’ Observ. de Zoologie, vol. i, p. 827, 334, 353, and 357.)

|| Simia lugens. (Ib., p. 319).

§ Cusicusi or simia trivirgata. (Ib. p. 307 and 358.) This
is the aotus of Illiger.

{| Simia melanocephala, mono feo. (Ib. p. 317.) These
last three species are new.


A07


and fish on the banks of the river. The toucan
we had bought was very young; yet it took
delight, during the whole voyage, in teazing the
cusicusis, or nocturnal monkeys, which are sad
and passionate. I did not observe what has
been related in some works of natural history,
that the toucan is forced, from the structure of
it’s beak, to swallow it’s food by throwing it up
into the air. It raises it indeed with some diffi-
culty from the ground, but, having once seized
it with the point of it’s enormous beak, it has
only to lift it wp by throwing back it’s head,
and hold it perpendicularly as long as it is in
the act of swallowing. This bird makes extraor-
dinary gestures when preparing to drink. The
monks say, that it makes the sign of ‘the
cross upon the water; and this popular be-
lief has obtained for the toucan, from the
creoles, the singular name of diostede (God
grant it thee). :

Most of our animals were confined in small
willow cages; others ran at full liberty all over
the boat. At the approach of rain, the macaws
sent forth frightful cries, the toucan wanted to
gain the shore to fish, and the little monkeys,
the titis, went in search of father Zea, to take
shelter in the large sleeves of his Franciscan
habit. These scenes were often repeated, and
made us forget the torment of the moschettoes.
At night, when we rested, we placed a leather


408


case (petaca), containing our provision, in the
centre; then our instruments, and the cages of
the animals ; our hammocks were suspended
around these ; and beyond, were those of the
Indians. | The exterior circle was formed by the
fires, which are lighted. to keep off the jaguars
of the forest, Such was the order of our en-
campment on the banks of the Cassiquiare:
The Indians often spoke to us of alittle nocturnal
animal, with a long nose, that surprises: the
young parrots in their nests, and makes use of
it’s hands to eat, like the monkeys, and the ma-
niveris, or kinkajous. They call it guwachi ; it is,
no doubt, a coati, perhaps the viverra nasua,
which I saw wild in Mexico, but not in that
part of South America which I visited. The
missionaries gravely prohibit the natives from
eating the flesh of the guachi, to which, accord-
ing to far-spread superstitious ideas, they attri-
bute the same stimulating qualities, which the
people of the east seek in the skink*, and the
Americans in the flesh of the alligators.

May the I]th. We left the mission of San
Francisco Solano at a late hour, to make but.a
short day’s journey. The uniform stratum of
vapours began to be divided into clouds with
distinct outlines ; and there was a light east


wind in the upper regions of the air. We re-_


* Lacerta scincus, Li.


|
;


409


cognized in these signs an approaching change
of the weather; and were unwilling to go far
from the mouth of the Cassiquiare, in the hope of
observing during the following night the passage
of some star over the meridian. We discoyered
the Canno Daquiapo to the south, the Guacha-
paru to the north, and a few miles farther the
rapids of Cananivacari. The velocity of the cur-
‘ent being 6:3 feet in a second, we had to
st uggle against the turbulent waves of the
Raudal. We went on shore, and M. Bonpland
discovered within a few steps of the beach an
almendron*, or majestic bertholletia _excelsa.
The Indians. assured us, that the existence of
this valuable plant of the banks of the Cassi-
quiare was unknown at San Francisco Solano,
Vasiva, and Esmeralda. They did not think,
that this tree, which was more than. sixty feet
high, had been sown accidentally by some tra-
veller. Experiments made at San Carlos haye
shown how rare it is, to succeed in causing the
bertholletia to germinate, on account of it’s lig-
neous pericarp, and the oil contained in it’s nut,
which so easily becomes rancid. Perhaps this.
tree denoted the existence of a forest of berthol-
letia in the inland country on the east and north-
east. We know at least with certainty, that
this fine tree grows wild in the latitude of three


* Juvia.


410


degrees, inthe Cerros de Guanaya. The plants
that live in society have seldom marked limits,
and it happens, that, before we reach a palmar
or a pinal*, we -find solitary palm-trees and
pines. They are somewhat like colonists, that
have advanced in the midst of a country peopled
with different vegetable productions.

Four miles distant from the rapids of Cunani-
vacari rocks of the strangest form rise in ‘the
plains. First appears a narrow wall eighty feet
high, and perpendicular ; and ‘at the southern
extremity of this wall are two turrets, the
courses of which are of granite, and nearly hori-
zontal. ‘The arrangement of the rocks of Gua-
nari is so symmetrical, that they might be taken
for the ruins of an ancient edifice. Are they
the remains of islets in the midst of an inland
sea, that covered the flat ground between Sierra
Parime and Mount Parecis}-? or have these
walls of rock, these turrets of granite, been


* Two words of the Castilian tongue, which, according to
a Latin form, denote forests of palm-trees (palmetwm) and of
pines (pinetum).

+ Sierra de la Parime, or of the Upper Oroonoko; Sierra
(or Campos) dos Parecis, making part of the mountains of
Matto Grosso, and forming the northern back of the Sierra
de Chiquitos. I here name the two chains of mountains
ronning from east to west, that bordé; ‘the plains or basins
of the Cassiquiare, the Rio Negro, and the Amazon, between
3° 30° of north, and 14° of south latitude.


|


411


heaved up by the elastic forces, that still act in
the interior of our planet? We may be per-
mitted to meditate a little on the origin of
mountains, after having seen* the disposition
of the Mexican volcanoes, and of the summits
of vent-holes on an elongated crevice; having
found in the Andes of South America primitive
and volcanic rocks in a straight line in the same
chain; and when we recollect that island, three
miles in circumference, and of a great height,
which in our days issued from the depths of the
ocean near Oonalashka.

The banks of the Cassiquiare are embellished
by the chiriva palm tree with pinnate leaves
silvery beneath. The rest of the forest fur-
nishes only trees with large, coriaceous, glossy
leaves, that have plain edges. This peculiar
physiognomy-f of the vegetation of the Guainia,
the Tuamini, and the Cassiquiare, is owing to


* See vol. iv, p. 38, and my Polit. Essay on New Spain,
vol. i, p. 45, 253. Langsdorf’s Travels, vol. 2, p. 30, 242, and
particularly the new facts published ‘by Mr. Leopold von
Buch, in two celebrated memoirs Sur les Cratéres de Souléve-
ment, and the astonishing revolutions, which the island of
Lancerota underwent from 1730 to 1736. The Russians
call the new island, near Oonalashka, Gromofsin, the Child of
Thunder.

+ This physiognomy struck us forcibly in the vast forest.of
Spanish Guyana only between the latitudes of two and three
degrees north,


412


the preponderance of the families of the gutti-
feree, the sapotze, and the laurinez, in the equa-
torial regions. The serenity of the sky promis-
ing us a finé night, we resolved at five in the
evening to rest near the Piedra di Culimacari,
a solitary granitic rock, like all those which I
have described between the Atabapo and the
Cassiquiare. We found by the bearings of the
sinuosities of the river, that this rock is nearly
in the latitude of the mission of San Francisco
Solano. In those desert countries, where man
has hitherto left only fugitive traces of his exist-
ence, I constantly endeavoured to make my ob-
servations near the mouth of a river, or at the
foot of a rock distinguishable by it’s figure. It
is such points only, immutable by their nature,
that. can serve for the basis of geographical
maps. I obtained in the night, of the 10th of
May a good observation * of latitude by « of
the Southern Cross; the longitude was deter-
mined, but with less precision, by the time-
keeper, taking the altitudes of the two beautiful
stars which shine in the feet of the Centaur.


* All the partial altitudes differ but from six to ten se-
conds from the mean latitude. See my Obs. Asir., vol. i, p.
239. A defect in the figures im my journal would have
rendered the longitude uncertain to forty-four seconds of
time, or nearly one sixth of a degree ; but the horary angles
taken at San Carlos being exact to three or four seconds
nearly, we have reduced the longitude of Culimacari from


that of the little fort of S. Carlos.


.|
|
|
]


aE Dain tnt in eden <1


413


This observation made known to us at the same
time, with sufficient precision for the purposes of
geography, the positions of the mouth of the
Pacimoni, of the fortress of San Carlos, and
of the junction of the Cassiquiare with the
Rio Negro. The rock of Culimacari is precise-
ly in 2° 0 42” of latitude, and probably in
69° 33’ 50” of longitude. I stated in two me-
moirs written in Spanish, and addressed, one to
the captain general of Caraccas, the other to the
minister, secretary of state, Mr. d’Urquijo, all
that was interesting in these astronomical de-
terminations relatively to the knowledge of the
limits of the Portugueze colonies. At the time
of the expedition of Solano, the junction of the
Cassiquiare and the Rio Negro was placed half a
degree north of the equator* ; and although the
commission of boundaries never obtained a de-
finitive result, the equator has always been
regarded in the missions as a limit provisionally
recognized. Now it results from my observa-
tions, that San Carlos del Rio Negro+, or, as

* The real latitude of this junction appears to me to differ
little from 2° 2’. It’s longitude is 70° 0/,

+ Mr. Faden also, in his map of South America, placed
S. Carlos in lat. 0° 54’; and Mr. Arrowsmith, not. in the
edition of 1811, but in the first edition of 1804, made the
equator pass (like La Cruz), one degree too far to the north,
through the month of the Uteta, or Xie. We must not be
surprised, that the maps of Brazil, constructed recently at the
Hydrographic Depot of Rio Janeiro, mark San Carlos nearly


414


they say pompously here, the fortress of the
frontier, far from being, as father Caulin affirms,
in €° 20’ of latitude, or in 0° 53’, where La
Cruz and Surville, (who are the official geogra-
phers of the real Expedicion de Limites) have
thought proper to fix it, is in 1° 53’ 42”. The
equator therefore does not pass to the north of
the little Portugueze fort of San Jose da Mara-
bitannas, as it has been marked* in all the maps


in it’s real position. It is expressly said in an advertisement
added to the map ofthe Rio Negro by Jose Joaquim Victorio
da Costa, Jose Simoens de Carvalho, and Manoel de Gama
Lobo, that whatever relates to Spanish Guyana is taken
from the map of the Voyage de Depons, which was traced by
Mr. Poirson, from my observations made on the spot. (See
my Obs. Astr., Vol. i, p. 288.) The Portugueze had. the
habit, as I have said above (p. 364, 5) of extending their
frontiers toward the north ; and perhaps observations, made
at the forts of San Gabriel das Cachoeiras and San Jose da
Maribitanuas, had enlightened the Portugueze astronomers,
before my voyage, respecting the real situation of San Carlos.
In the map of Requena,, traced in 1783) and. founded on
Portugueze materials, it is marked two degrees seventeen
minutes. It is even twenty-four minutes in fault, toward the
north. The two hundred and thirty-five points, of which T
fixed the astronomical'situation by my own observations in the
inland country, were calculated and published for the first
time by: Mr. Oltmans in 1808 (consequently a year before the
publication of my Recueil d’Observations Astronomiques), in
a memoir entitled Conspectus' Long. et Lat. per Decursum
Annorum: 1799-—1804, in Plaga equinoctiale astronomice obser=
vatarum,
“® Did d’Anville: alone guess, in 1750, that the equator


415


hitherto, except in the new edition of that of
Me. Arrowsmith, but twenty-five leagues far-
ther south, between San Felipe and the mouth
of the Rio Guape.. The manuscript map of Mr.
Requena, of which I am in possession, proves,
that the Portugueze astronomers had been aware
of this fact from the year 1783, consequently
thirty-five years before it began to be indicated.
on our maps in Europe. '

It. being an opinion anciently received in the
Capitania-General of Caraccas, that the able
engineer, Don Gabriel Clavero, had constructed
the fort of San Carlos del Rio Negro, on the
equinoctial line itself; and as the latitudes ob-
served near this line were, according to M. de
La Condamine*, in fault by an excess toward


passes through the confluence of the, Rio Uaupe ? That geo-
grapher has in fact marked it near a river, to which he gives
the strange name of the Rio Cachiquari de Baupes ; but he
places the mouth of the real Cassiquiare in 1° 20’ of south
latitude, consequently three degrees twenty-two minutes
too: far to the south. Such must be the:effeets of this kind
of guess work, unsupported by any astronomical observation
for a hundred.leagues round.

* « 7 was assured,” says, M. de la Condamine, “ on arriy-
ing at, Para, that I was precisely under the line; yet L found
the latitude one degree twenty-eight minutes south, This la-
titude of a place, where no observation had: been. made, is
found marked by Laet, but no\subsequent geographer had
followed this indication.” (Voyage & Amazone, p. 179,).Fa-
ther Samuel. Fritz, furnished with a, semicircle, of wood,


416


the south; I was prepared to find the equator
one degree north of San Carlos, consequently on
the banks of the Temi and the Tuamini. The
observations made at the mission of San Balta-
sar (the passage of three stars over the meri-
dian) had already led me to perceive, that this
hypothesis was erroneous ; but it was only by
the latitude of Piedra Culimacari, that I learnt
to know the real situation of the frontiers. The
isle of San Jose, in the Rio Negro, considered
up to this day as the limit between the Spanish
and Portugueze possessions, is at least, in 1° 38’
north latitude; and if the commission of Ituri-
aga and Solano had attained the object of it’s
long negotiations, if the equator had been defi-
nitively recognized by the court of Lisbon as
the frontier of the two states, six Portugueze
villages, and even the fort of San Jose, lying
on the north of the Rio Guape, would now
belong to the crown of Spain*. What it would
then have acquired, thanks to some _pre-
cise astronomical observations, is more impor-


of three inches radius, had pretty well ascertained the latitude
of Para, although he places in general the river Ama-
zon, where it'extends to the east of the mouth of the Rio
Negro, too far to the south, (Lettres edifiantes, ed. of 1717,
vol, 12, p. 212.)

* The missions of San Miguel, Santa Ana, San Felipe,
Nosso Senhora de Guia; San Joam Baptista de Mabbe, San
Marcellino, and the fort of San Jose da Marabitanuas.


ho


4


tant, than what it possesses at present ; but let
us hope, that two nations, who have sown the
first. seeds of civilization over the immense ex-


tent of South America east of the Andes,’ will


not. renew the quarrels concerning. boundaries
on a portion of land 32 leagues broad, and on
the possession of a river, of which the navigation
should be as free as that of the Oroonoko and
the Amazon *,


* T unfolded these ideas-in a memoir, which I addressed
to the chevalier don Mariano Luis de Urquijo, in 1800. Al-
though the ‘count at that time possessed unlimited jower, I
was permitted to declare my opinions with frankness to a mi-
nister, who was constantly animated by the noble desire of
knowing the real state of the colonies. The following re-
flexions are placed at the conclusion of my memoir on the
limits. “ Parece que un Monarca que tiene tam dilatadas y
vastas colonias, no necesita aumentarlas con un corto terreno
en las margenes del Rio Negro; perd es preciso considerar
que lo que se ha perdido, vale mas que las quatro missiones
de Tomo, Maroa, Davipe y San Carlos. Seria util tambien
que se atendiese a sostener los limites al Este, porque al pre-
sente los Indios de las missiones Portuguesas (sin ser vistos
de la fortaleza de San Carlos), suben por los rios Cababury,
Baria, Pacimoni y Idapa hasta Mavaca y la Esmeralda, mas
de 60 leguas detras de los establecimientos Espaiioles, bus-
cando en el territorio Espafiol la preciosa Zarza que es un
ramo de comercio del Grand Para. Aunque no hai proba-
lidad_ que, por las .circumstancias politicas actuales, V. E.
pueda atender a estos assuntos, parece siempre util que el go-
bierno est? puntualmente instruido sobre la verdadera situa-
cion de sus limites. To que seria lo mas digno de ser obte-
nido baxo el reynado del Rey Carlos IV, por el medio de


VOL. V. 25


.


418


May the 12th. Satisfied with our observations,
we left the rock of Culimacari at half after one
in the morning. The torment of moschettoes, to
which. we-were exposed, augmented in propor-
tion as we increased our distance from the Rio
Negro. There are no zancudoes (culex) in the
valley of Cassiquiare, but the simulium, and all
the other insects of the tipulary family, are only
so much more frequent and venomous*. Having
still eight nights to pass in the open air in this
damp and unhealthy climate, before we could
reach the mission of Esmeralda,. our pilot
sought to arrange our voyage in such a manner,
as might enable us to enjoy the hospitality of
the missionary of Mandavaca, and some shelter
in the village of Vasiva. We went up with dif-
ficulty against the current, which was nine feet,
and in some places (where I measured it with
precision) 1] feet 8 inches in a second, that is
almost eight miles an hour. Our resting-place
was probably not farther than three leagues in a


mutuas concesiones, seria una libertad entera y reciproca de
comercio en estos magestuosos rios, .el Orinoco, el Cassi-
quiare, el Rio Negro y el Maraiion. Nada seria mas propio
para fomentar la prosperidad de unos payses tam atrasados en
el cultivo de las tierras, para sosegar el ardor con el qual los
Americanos piden el exercicio de sus derechos naturales y
para disminuir la antipatia que existe desgraciadamente entre
dos naciones limitaneas.”
* See above, p. 91.


A419


right line from the mission of Mandavaca ; yet,
though we had no reason to complain of the
want of activity of our rowers, we were 14 hours
in making this short passage.

Towards sunrise we passed the mouth of the
Rio Pacimoni, a river which has been mentioned
above* when speaking of the trade in sarsaparilla,
and which furnishes (by means of the Baria) so
remarkable an intertwining with the Cababuri.
The Pacimoni rises in a hilly ground, from the
confluence of three small rivers-~, not marked
on the maps of the missionaries. It’s waters
are black, but in a less degree than those of the
lake of Vasiva, which also communicates with
the Cassiquiare. Between those two tributary
streams coming from the east lies the mouth of
the Rio Idapa, the.waters .of which are, white.
I shall not reeur again to the difficulty of ex-
plaining this coexistence of rivers differently
coloured within a small space of ground; and
shall only observe, that at the mouth of the Pa-
cimoni, and on the borders of the lake Vasiva,
we were again struck with the purity and ex-
treme transparency of the brown waters. An-
cient Arabian travellers have observed, that the
Alpine branch of the Nile, which joins the Bahar
el Abiad near,Kalfaja, has green waters, which


* Chapter xxii, p. 376.
+ The Rios Guajavaca, Moreje, and Cachevaynery.
222


420


are so transparent, that the fish may be seen at
the bottom of the river *.

We passed some turbulent rapids before we
reached the mission of Mandavaca. The vil-
lage, which bears also the name of Quirabuena,
contains only sixty natives. The state of the
Christian settlements is in general so miserable,
that, in the whole course of the Cassiquiare, on
a length of 50 leagues, not 200 inhabitants are
found. The banks of this river: were indeed
more peopled before the arrival of the mission-
aries; the Indians have withdrawn into the
woods, toward the east; for the plains of the


*® Et. Quatremere, Mém. sur ’ Egupte, vol. ii, p.7; Burck-
hardt, Tr. p. 498. It is very remarkable, that the Blue Nile
(Bahar el Azrek) is called by some Arabian geographers the
Green Nile, and that the Persian poets often term the sky green
(akhzar), as the berylblue (zark). It cannot be supposed,
that the people of Semitic race confound green and blue in
their sensations, as their éar sometimes confounds the vowels
oandu, e anda. The word azrek is applied to all water
which is very limpid, and not milky; and abi-rank, (colour
of water) signifies blue. Abd-Allatif, speaking of that green
and transparent branch of the Nile, which comes from a Jake
in the mountains south-east of Sennaar, attributed:the green
colour of this Alpine lake “ to the vegetable substances,
which abound in stagnant waters.” Account of Egypt, trans-
lated by M. Silvestre de Sacy, p. 887. This is the explana-
tion which I gave above (p. 191) of those coloured waters,
falsely called aguas negras. The most limpid and transparent
waters are every where those that are not white.


421


west are almost deserted. ‘The natives subsist
during a part of the year on those large ants, of
which I have spoken above. These insects are
as much esteemed here, as the spiders of the
tribe of epeiree in the southern hemisphere, where
the savages of New Holland deem them delici-
ous. We found at Mandavaca the good old mis-
sionary, who had already spent “ twenty years
of moschettoes in the bosques del Cassiquiare,”
and whose legs were so spotted by the stings of
insects, that the whiteness of: the skin could
scarcely be perceived. He talked to us of his
solitude, and of the sad necessity, which often
compelled him to leave the most atrocious
crimes unpunished in the two missions of Man-
davaca and Vasiva. In the latter place, an In-
dian alcayde had a few years before eaten one
of his wives, after having taken her to his co-
nuco *, and fattened her by good feeding. The
cannibalism ofthe nations of Guyana is never
caused by the want of subsistence, or by the
superstitions of their religion, as in the islands
of the South Sea; but is generally the effect of
the vengeance of a conqueror, and (as the mis-
sionaries say,) “‘ of a vitiated appetite.” Victory
over a hostile horde is celebrated by a repast, in


* A hut surrounded with cultivated ground, a sort of
countryehouse, which the natives prefer to residing in the
missions,


' 422


which some parts of the body of a prisoner are
devoured. Sometimes a defenceless family is
surprised in the night ; or an enemy, who is met
with by chance in the woods, is killed by a poi-
soned arrow. The body is cut to pieces, and
carried as a trophy to the hut. It is civiliza-
tion only, that has made man feel the unity of
the human race; which has revealed to him, as
we may say, the ties of consanguinity, by which
he is linked to beings, to whose language and
manners he is a stranger. Savages know only
their own family; and a tribe appears to them
but a more numerous assemblage of relations.
When those who inhabit the missions see Indians
of the forest, who are unknown to them, arrive,
they make use of an expression, which has struck
us by it’s simple candor: “they are no doubt
my relations, I understand them when they
speak to me.” But these very savages detest all,
who are not of their family, or their tribe ; and
hunt the Indians of a neighbouring tribe, who
live at war with their-own, as we hunt game.
They know the duties of family and of relation-
ship, but not those of humanity, which require
the feeling of a common tie with beings framed
like ourselves. No emotion of pity prompts
them to spare the wives or children of a hostile
race ; and the latter are devoured in preference,
at the repasts given at the conclusion ofa battle,
or of a warlike incursion.


423


The hatred which savages for the most part
feel for men, who speak another idiom, and ap-
pear to them to be barbarians of an inferior
race, is sometimes rekindled in the missions,
after having long slumbered. A short time

before our arrival at Esmeralda, an Indian, born


in the forest * behind the Duida, travelled alone
with another Indian, who, after having been
made prisoner by the Spaniards on the banks, of
the Ventuario, lived peaceably in the village, or,
as it is expressed here, “ within the sound of
the bell,” debaxo de la campana. 'The latter
could only walk slowly, because he laboured
under one of those fevers; to which the natives
are subject, when they arrive in the missions,
and abruptly change their diet. Wearied of
his delay, his fellow-traveller killed him, and
hid the body behind a copse of thick trees,
near Esmeralda. This crime, like many others
among the Indians, would have remained un-
known, if the murderer had not made prepara-
tions for a feast on the following day. He tried
to induce his children, born in the mission and
become Christians, to go with him for some


* En el monte. The Indians born in the missions are dis-
tinguished from those born in the woods. The word monte
signifies more frequently.in the colonies a forest (bosque) than
a mountain, and this circumstance has led to great errors in
our maps, on which chains of mountains (sierras) are agarose
where there are only thick forests, monte espeso.


424


parts of the dead body. They had much diffi-
culty in persuading him, to desist from his pur-
pose; and the soldier, who was posted at Esme-
ralda, learned from the domestic squabble caused
by this event, what the Indians would have
hidden from his knowledge.

It is known that anthropophagy, and the
practice of human sacrifices, with which it is
often connected, are found in all parts of the
Globe, and among people of very different
races*; but what strikes us more in the study
of history is, to see human sacrifices retained in
a state of civilization somewhat advanced, and
that the nations, who hold it a point of honor
to devour their prisoners, are not always the
rudest and most ferocious. This observation,
which has something in it distressing and pain-
ful, has not escaped such of the missionaries, as
are sufficiently enlightened to reflect on the
manners of the’ surrounding tribes. The Ca-


* Some casual instances of children carried off by the
Negroes in the island of Cuba have led to the belief in the
Spanish colonies, that there are tribes of cannibals in Africa.
This opinion however, supported by some travellers (Bow-
dich, p. 481), is contrary to the researches of Mr. Barrow
on the interiour of that country, (Exp. to the Zure, Introd. p.
xx.) Superstitious practices may have given rise to impu-
tations perhaps as unjust as those, of which Jewish fami-
lies were the victims in the ages of intolerance and perse-


cution.


425


bres, the Guipunavis, and the Caribbees, have
always been more powerful and more civilized*
than the other hordes of the Oroonoko ; and yet
the former two are as much addicted to anthro-
pophagy, as the last are repugnant to it. .We
must carefully distinguish the different branches,
into which the great family of the Caribbee
nations is divided. These branches are as nu-
merous as those of the Monguls, and the wes-
tern Tatars or Turcomans. The Caribbees of
the continent, those who inhabit the plains be-
tween the Lower Oroonoko, the Rio Branco,
the Essequebo, and the sources of the Oyapoc,
hold in horror the practice of devouring their
enemies. This barbarous custom+, at the first


* Non v 2 a mi credere, toltone questo vizio di mangiare le
umane carni, una nazione pid stimabile di Guipunavi. Hanno
un fare Europeo, un aria militare e civile, Gih, tom. i,
p. 45.

+ See Geruldini Itinerarium, p. 186, and the eloquent tract
of cardinal Bembo on the discoveries of Columbus. |“ Insu-
larum partem homines incolebant feri trucesque, qui puero-
rum et virorum carnibus, quos aliis in insulis bello aut latro-
ciniis cepissent, vescebantur ; @ ferinis abstinebant, Canibales
appellati.” (Hust. Venet., 1551, p. 83.) The custom of sparing
the lives of female prisoners confirms what I have said
above, p. 298, of the Janguage of the women. Does the word
cannibal, applied to the Caribbees of the West India islands,
. belong to the language of this Archipelago (that of Haiti) ?
or must we scek for it in an idiom of Florida, which
some traditions indicate as the first country of the Carib-


426


discovery of America, existed. only among the
Caribbees of the West Indies. It is they, who
have rendered the names of cannibals, Carib-
bees, and anthropophagi, synonymous; it was
their cruelties, that prompted the law * promul-
gated in 1504, by which the Spaniards were
permitted to make a slave of every individual of
an American nation, which could be proved to
be of Caribbee origin. I believe however, that
the anthropophagy of the inhabitants. of the
West India islands was much exaggerated in
the tales of the first travellers}. Herera, a
grave and judicious historian, has not disdained
to relate these tales in the Decades historicas ;
he has even credited that extraordinary event,
which led the Caribbees to renounce this bar-
barous custom. The natives of a little island
devoured a Dominican monk, whom they had
carried off from the coast of Portoricot; they


bees? (Petr. Martyr.,p.6. Rochefort, Hist. des Antilles, book
2, chap.7.) If this word be significative, it seems to denote
rather “ strong and valiant strangers,” than anthropophagi.
(Herera, Decad. i, p. 11.) Garcia, in his etymological
reveries, finds it to be simply Phenician. Annibal and Can-
nibal, according to him, must be derived from the same
semitic root. i

* See the history of this law, which declares the liberty of
all nations not Caribbees, in Gomara, p. 278-281.

+ Vespucci, p. 91. Gryneus, p. 68.
+ Herera, Decad. 1, p.18.


427


all fell sick, and would no more eat monk or
layman.”

If the Caribbees of the Oroonoko, since the
commencement of the sixteenth century, have
differed in their manners from those of the West
India islands ; if it be always erroneously, that
they are accused of anthropophagy ; “it is diffi-
cult to attribute this difference to a melioration
of their social state. The strangest contrasts
are found blended in this mixture of nations,
some of whom live only upon fish, monkeys,
and ants ; while others are more or less culti-
vators of the ground, more or less occupied in
fabricating and painting pottery, or weaving
hammocks or cotton cloth. Several of the latter
tribes have preserved inhuman customs altoge-
ther unknown to the former. The character
and manners of a nation are expressive at the
same time, like it’s language, of it’s present and
past state: and it is only by knowing the whole
history of the civilization or degradation of
a horde; it is only by tracing societies in their
progressive development, and the different
stages of their existence ; that we can succeed in
solving problems, which the knowledge of their
present relations only would fail to render clear.

‘““ You cannot imagine,” said the old mission-
ary of Mandavaca, “ all the perversity of this
familia de Indios. You receive men of a new
tribe into the village; they appear to be mild, .


428


good, and laborious ; but, suffer them ‘to take
part in an incursion (entrada) to bring in the
natives, and. you can scarcely prevent them from
murdering all they meet, and hiding some por-
tions of the dead bodies.” In reflecting on the
manners of these Indians, we are almost terri-
fied at that combination of sentiments, which
seem mutually to exclude each other; that
faculty of nations to become but partially hu-
manized ; that preponderance of customs, pre-
judices, and traditions, over the natural reflec-
tions of the heart*. We had a fugitive Indian
from the Guaisia in our canoe, who had become
sufficiently civilized in a few weeks, to be useful
tous in placing the instruments necessary for
our observations at night. He was no less mild
than intelligent, and we had some desire of
taking him into our service. What was our
regret, when, talking to him by means of an
interpreter, we learned, “that the flesh of the
marimonde monkeys, though blacker, appeared
to him to have the taste of human flesh.” He
told us “ that his relations (that is the people of
his tribe) preferred the inside of the hands in
man, as in bears.” This assertion was accom-
panied with gestures of savage joy. We in-
quired of this young man, so calm and so affec-


*-T have treated of this matter in another work. See my
Americ Monum., vol. i, p. 221.


429


tionate in the little services which he rendered
us, whether he still felt sometimes a desire to
eat of a Cheruvichahena. He answered without
discomposure, that, living in the mission, he
would only eat what he saw was eaten by
los Padres. Reproaches addressed to the na-
tives on the abominable practice, which we here
discuss, produce no effect ; it is as if a Bramin
of the Ganges, travelling in Europe, reproached
us with our habit of feeding on the flesh of ani-
mals. In the eyes of the Indian of the Guaisia,
the Cheruvichahena was a being entirely different
from himself; and whom he thought it was no
more unjust to kill, than the jaguars of the
forest. It was merely from a sense of propriety,
that, as long as he should remain in the mission,
he would only eat the same food as los Padres.
The natives, if they return to their tribe (al
monte), or find themselves pressed by hunger,
soon resume their ancient habits of anthropo-
phagy. And why should-we be so much asto-
nished at this inconstancy in the tribes of the
Oroonoko, when we are reminded, by terrible
and well ascertained examples, of what has
passed among civilized nations in times of great
scarcity? In Egypt, in the thirteenth century,
the habit of eating human flesh pervaded all
classes of society ; extraordinary snares were
spread for physicians in particular. They were
called to attend persons, who pretended to be


sick, but who were only hungry; and it was not
in order to be consulted, but devoured. An
historian of great veracity, Abd-Allatif, has re-
lated, how’a practice, which at first inspired
dread and horror, soon occasioned not the slight-
est surprise™.”

Although the Indians of the Cassiquiare readi-
ly return to their barbarous habits, they display,


* Account of Egupt by Abd-Allatif, Physician of Bagdad,
translated into French by M. Silv. de Sacy, p. 360—374.
** When the poor began to cat human flesh, the horror and
astonishment caused by repasts so dreadful were such,
that these crimes furnished the never ceasing subject of every
conversation. But at length the people became so accus-
tomed to it, and conceived such a taste for this detestable food,
that people of wealth and respectability were found to use
it as their ordinary food, to cat it by way of regale, and even
to lay in a stock of it. This flesh was prepared in different
ways, and the practice being once introduced, spread into
the provinces, so that examples of it were found in every
part of Egypt. It then no longer caused any surprise; the
horror, it had at first inspired, vanished ; and it was men-
tioned as an indifferent and ordinary thing. This fury of
devouring one another became so common among the poor,
that the greater part perished in this manner, These wretches
employed all sorts of artifices, to seize men by surprise, or
decoy them into their houses under ‘false pretences. ‘This
happened to three physicians among. those who visited -me ;
and,a bookseller, who sold me books, an old and very corpu-
lent man, fell into their snares, and escaped with great diffi-
culty. All the facts which we relate as ocular witnesses fell
under our observation accidentally, ‘for we generally avoided
seéing spectacles, whichinspired us.with so much jhorror!”’


431


while in the ‘missions, intelligence, some love of
labour, and in particular a great facility in learn-
ing the Castilian language. The villages being
for the most part inhabited by three or four
tribes, who do not understand each other, a
foreign idiom, which is at the same time that of
the civil power, the language of the missionary,
affords the advantage of more general means of
communication. I heard a Poignave Indian
conversing in Spanish with a Guahibo, though
both had come from their forests within ‘three
months. They uttered a phrase every quarter
of an hour, prepared with difficulty, and in
which the gerund of the verb, no doubt accord-
ing to the grammatical turn of their own tongues,
was constantly employed. (When I seeing Pa-
dre, Padre to me saying*; instead of, when
I saw the missionary, he ‘said to me). I have
mentioned in another place, how wise it appear-
ed to me in the Jesuits, to generalize one ‘of the
tongues of civilized America, for instance that
of the Peruvians}, and instruct the Indians in
an idiom, which is foreign to them ‘in it’s roots,
but not in it’s structure and grammatical forms.
This was following the system, which the Incas,
or king-priests, of Peru had employed for ages,


* Quando io mirando Padre, Padre me diniendo. On adding
the verb substantive, it is almost the English turn of phrase,
I was going.

+ The Qquichua language, lengua del Inga.


432


in order to humanize the barbarous nations of
the Upper Maragnon, and maintain them under
their domination; a system somewhat less
strange than that of making the natives of Ame-
rica speak Latin, as was gravely proposed in a
provincial concile at Mexico.

We were told, that the Indians of the Cassi-
quiare and the Rio Negro are preferred on the
Lower Oroonoko, and especially at Angostura,
to the inhabitants of the other missions, on
account of their intelligence and activity. Those
of Mandavaca are celebrated among the tribes
of their own race, for the fabrication of the
curare poison, which does not yield in strength
to the.curare of Esmeralda. Unhappily this
fabrication occupies the natives far more than
agriculture. Yet the soil on the banks of the
Cassiquiare is excellent. We find there a gra-
nitic sand, of a blackish brown colour, which is
covered in the forests with thick layers of /umus,
and on the banks of the river with clay almost
impermeable to water. The soil of the Cassi-


quiare appears more fertile than that of the
valley of the Rio Negro, where maize does not


prosper. Rice, beans, cotton, sugar, and indigo,
yield rich harvests, wherever their cultivation
has been tried*. We saw wild indigo around


* Mr. Bonpland found at Mandavaca, in the huts of the
natives, a plant with ¢uberose roots, exactly like cassava (yuc-


453


the missions of San Miguel de Davipe, San Car-
Jos and Mandavaca. No doubt can be ad-
mitted; that several nations of America, par-
ticularly the Mexicans, long before the conquest,
employed real indigo in their hieroglyphical
paintings ; and that small cakes of this sub-
stance were sold at the great market of Tenoch-
titlan*. But a colouring matter, chemically
identical, may be extracted from plants belong-
ing to neighbouring genera ; and I should not at
present venture to affirm, that the native indi-
goferce of America do not furnish some generic
difference from the indigofera anil, and the
indigofera argentea, of the ancient continent.
In the coffee-trees of the two worlds this differ-
_ ence has been observed. :
Here, as at the Rio Negro, the humidity of
the air, and the abundance of insects, which is
it’s natural consequence, are obstacles almost
invincible to new cultivation. We never found
the hygrometer of Deluc, even when the sky
was serene and blue, below 52°}. Every where
you meet with those large ants, that march in
close bands, and direct their attacks so much
the more on cultivated plants, as these are her-


ca). Itis called cumapana, and is eaten baked on the ashes.
It grows spontaneously on the banks of the Cassiquiare.


* See my Polit. Essay, vol. ii, p. 447,
+ Highty-seven degrees, Sauss.
VOL. Vv. 2F


Ld


\


434


paceous and succulent, while the forests of these
countries afford only plants with woody stalks.
When a missionary would cultivate sallad, or
any culinary plant of Europe, he is compelled
as it were, to suspend his garden in the air.
He fills an old boat with good mould, and, hav-
ing sowed the seeds, suspends it four feet above
the ground with cords of the chiquichiqui palm
tree; but most frequently places it on a slight
scaffolding. This‘ protects the young plants
from weeds, worms, and the ants, which pursue
their migration in a right line, and, not knowing
what vegetates above, seldom turn from their
course to climb up stakes, that are stripped of
their bark. I mention this circumstance, to
prove how difficult, within the tropics, on the
banks of great rivers, are the first attempts of
man to appropriate to himself a little spot of
earth in that vast domain of nature, invad-
ed by animals, and covered by spontaneous
plants.

May the 13th. I had obtained during the
night some observations of the stars, unfortu-
nately the last at the Cassiquiare. The latitude
of Mandavaca is 2° 4/ 7”; it’s longitude, ac-
cording to the time-keeper, 69° 27’. I found
the magnetic dip 25:25° cent. div., so that it
had increased considerably from the fort of
San Carlos. Yet the surrounding rocks are
of the same granite, mixed with a little horn-


435


blende, which we had found at Javita, and
which assumes a syenitic aspect. We left Man-
davaca at half after two in the morning. We
had still to struggle during eight days against the
currents of the Cassiquiare; and the country,
through which we had to pass in order again to
reach San Fernando de Atabapo, is so desert,
that we could only hope after a passage of thir-
teen days, to find another Observantin mission,
that of Santa Barbara. After six hours’ voyage,
we passed on the east the mouth of the Idapa, or _
Siapa, which rises on the mountain of Uuturan,
and furnishes near it’s sources a portage to the
Rio Mavaca, one of the tributary streams of the
Oroonoko. This river has white waters, and
is not more than half as broad as the Pacimoni,
the waters of which are black. ° It’s upper course
is strangely disfigured on the maps of La Cruz
and Surville, which have served as models
to all subsequent maps. I shall have occa-
sion to mention the hypotheses, that have
given rise to these errors, in speaking of
the origin of the Oroonoko. If father Caulin
could have seen the map, which has been pre-
fixed to his work, he would have been surprised
to find fictions reproduced in it, which he has
himself combated by accurate ideas acquired on
the spot. This’ missionary simply says, that the
Idapa rises in a mountainous country, near

which live the Amuisana Indians. These In-
2¥r 2


436


dians have been transformed into Amoizanas, or
Amazons; and jhe Rio Idapa has been made to
rise from a spring, which, the moment it issues
out of the ground, divides itself into two branches,
the courses of which are diametrically opposite.
This bifurcation of a spring is altogether imagi-
nary.

We stopped. near the raudal of Cunuri. The
noise of the little cataract augmented sensibly
during the night. Our Indians asserted, that
it was a certain presage of rain. I recollected,
that the mountaineers of the Alps have great
confidence in the same prognostic*. In fact, it


* « Tt is going to rain, because we hear the murmur of
the torrents nearer,’ say the mountaineers of the Alps, like
those of the Andes. Mr. Deluc has tried to explain this
phenomenon by a change in the barometric pressure, by an
increase in the number of the bubbles of air, that burst at
the surface of the water. (Modificat, de ? Atmosphere, § 1031.)
This explanation is equally forced and unsatisfactory. I
will not attempt to replace it by another hypothesis, but I
shall observe, that the cause of the phenomenon is a modifi-
cation of the atmosphere, which has an influence at once on
the sonorous and on the /uminous undulations. "The prognostic
drawn from the increase and the intensity of sound is inti-
mately connected with the prognostic drawn from a less ex-
tinction of light. The mountaineers predict a change of wea-
ther, when, the air being calm, the Alps covered with perpetual
snows seem on a sudden to be nearer the observer, and their
outlines appear. with great distinctness on the azure vault of
the sky. What is it, that eauses the want of homogeneity in
the vertical strata of the atmosphere to disappear instanta-
neously ?


437


rained long before sunrise; and the araguate
monkeys had warned us by their lengthened
howlings of the approach of the shower, long
before the noise of the cataract increased.

May ‘the 14th. The moschettoes, and still
more the ants, drove us from the shore before
two in the morning. We had till then believed,
that the latter did not crawl along the cords,
by which the hammocks ave usually suspended ;
but whether this opinion were erroneous, or the
ants fell upon us from the tops of the trees, it is
certain, that we had great difficulty to keep our-
selves free from these troublesome insects. The
river became narrower as we advanced, and it’s
banks were so marshy, that it was not without
much labour. Mr. Bonpland could get.to a
carolinea princeps loaded with large purple
flowers. This tree is the most beautiful orna-
ment of these forests, and of those of the Rio
' Negro. We examined repeatedly, during this
day, the temperature of the Cassiquiare. The
water at the surface of the river was only 24°
(when the air was at 25°6°). This is nearly the
temperature of the Rio Negro, but four or five
degrees less than that of the Oroonoko*. After
having passed on the west the mouth of the
Canno Caterico, which has black waters of ex-
traordinary transparency, we left the bed of the


* See vol. iv, p. 500 and 572; and p. 163 and 217 of the
present volume. ‘


438


river, to land at an island on which the mission
of Vasiva is established *.' The lake, which sur-
rounds this mission, is a league broad, and com-
municates by three outlets with the Cassiquiare.
The surrounding country, full of marshes, is
extremely feverish. The lake, the waters of
which appear yellow by transmitted light, is
dry in the season of great heat, and the Indians
themselves are unable to resist the miasmata,
that rise from the mud. The complete absence
of wind contributes to render the climate of this
country more pernicious. A sketch of the plan of
Vasiva, which I drew on the day of our arrival, I
have had engraved. Part of the village has been
removed to a dryer spot, toward the north, and
this change has become the source of a long
quarrel between the governor of Guyana and the
monks. He maintained, that they had no right
to remove their villages without the permission
of the civil power ; but, being completely igno-
rant of the situation of the Cassiquiare, he ad-
dressed his reprimands to the missionary of Ca-
richana, who lives at the distance of one hun-
dred and fifty leagues from Vasiva, and-could
not comprehend what was meant. These geo-
graphical mistakes are very common in coun-
tries, that are generally governed by men who
have never been in possession of a map. The


* Barometer at Vasiva, 327°2 lines.


439


mission of Padamo was given in 1785 to father
Valor, with an injunction, to “ repair thither im-
mediately, the Indians being without a pastor.”
This was more than fifteen years after the vil-
lage of Padamo had ceased to exist, and the
Indians had fled al monte.

From the 14th to the 21st of May we slept
constantly in the open air; but I cannot indi-
cate the spots where we halted. These re-
gions are so wild, and so little frequented, that
with the exception of some rivers, the Indians
were ignorant of the name of all the- objects
which I set by the compass. No observation
of a star helped me to fix the latitude in the
space of a degree. After having passed the
point* where the Itinivini separates itself from
the Cassiquiare, to take it’s course to the west,
toward the granitic hills of Daripabo, we found
the marshy banks of the river ornamented with
bamboos. These arborescent gramina rise to
the height of twenty feet; their stem is con-
stantly arched toward the summit. It is a new
species of bambusa with very broad leaves. Mr,
Bonpland fortunately found one in flower; a


* It.is above Vasiva, nearly in 2° 80! of latitude; the
same branch of the Cassiquiare enters, by the name of the
Conorichite, into the Rio Negro, near Tomo. (See above, -
p- 358.) More to the north come in succession the Canno
Curamuni, the Port of wild Cacao-trees, the Rio’ Maminavi,
the lake Duractumuni, and the Rio Pamoni.


440


circumstance I mention, because the genera nas-
tus and bambusa had before been very badly dis-
tinguished, and nothing is more rare in the New
World, than to see these gigantic gramina in
flower. Mr. Mutis herbalised during twenty
years in a country, where the bambusa guadua
forms marshy forests several leagues broad,
without having ever been able to procure the
flowers. We sent that learned naturalist the
first ears of bambusa from the temperate vallies
of Popayan. From what cause do the parts of.
fructification develope themselves so rarely ina
plant that is indigenous, and that vegetates with
such extraordinary vigor, from the level of the
ocean to that of nine hundred toises, that is to
a subalpine region, the climate of which, be-
tween the tropics, resembles that of the south
of Spain? ‘The bambusa latifolia seems to be
peculiar to the basins of the Upper Oroonoko,
the Cassiquiare, and the Amazon; it is a social
plant, like all the gramina of the family of the
nastoides*; but in that part of Spanish Guy-
ana which we traversed it does not form those


* See for the natural history of this family my work de
Distribut. geogr. Plant., p. 206-214. With the bambusa
latifolia, which Mr. Bonpland has described and drawn in
our Equinoxial Plants, vol. i, p. 68, the pariana campestris,
dufourea glabra, and some fine species of the arborescens
bypericum, grow on the banks of the Cassiquiare.


44]


large assemblages, which the Spanish Americans
call guadales, or forests of bamboos.

Our first resting place above Vasiva was
easily arranged. We found a little nook of
dry ground, free from shrubs, to the south of »
the Canno Curamuni, in a spot.where we saw
some capuchin monkeys*, recognizable by their _
black beard, and their gloomy and sullen air,
walking slowly on the horizontal branches of a
genipa. The five following nights were so
much the more troublesome, as we approached
the bifurcation of the Oroonoko. The luxuri-
ousness of the vegetation increases in a manner,
of which it is difficult even for those, who-are
accustomed to the aspect of the forests between
the tropics, to form an idea. There is no longer
a beach: a palisade of tufted trees forms the
bank of the river. You see a canal two hun-
dred toises broad, bordered by two enormous
walls, clothed with lianas and foliage. We often
tried to land, but without being able to step out
of the boat. Toward sunset we sailed along the
bank for an hour, to discover, not an opening
(since none exists), but a spot less wooded, where
our Indians by means of the hatchet and ma-
nual labour, could gain space enough for a
resting place for twelve or thirteen persons. It


* Simia chiropotes, a new species, (See my Rec. d’Obs.
Zool,, vol, i, }. 312, 315, 358.)


442


was impossible to pass the night in the canoe;
the moschettoes, which tormented us during the
day, accumulated toward evening beneath the
toldo, that is, the roof covered with palm leaves,
which served to shelter us from the rain. Our
hands and faces had never before been more
swelled. Father Zea, who till then boasted of
having in his missions of the cataracts the larg-
est and most, valiant moustiques (das mas fero-
ces), at length gradually acknowledged, that the
sting of the insects of the Cassiquiare was the
most painful he had ever felt. We experienced
great difficulty amid a thick forest in finding
wood to make a fire, the branches of the trees,
in those equatorial regions where it always rains,
being so full of juice, that they will scarcely
burn at all. Where there is no bare shore, that
old wood can scarcely be procured, which the
Indians say is baked in the sun. However, fire
was necessary to us only as a defence against
the beasts of the forest; for’ we had such a
scarcity of provision that we had little need
of it to prepare our food.

On the 18th of May, toward the evening, we
discovered a spot where the bank of the river
was furnished with wild cacao-trees. The nut
of these cacaos is small and bitter; the Indians
of the forest suck the pulp, and throw away the
nut, which is picked up by the Indians of the
missions, and sold to persons who are not very


443


nice in the fabrication of their chocolate. “This
is the Puerto del Cacao,” said the pilot ; “ it is
here our Padres sleep, when they go to Esme-
ralda to buy sarbacans and juvia (the pleasant
nuts of the bertholletia).” Not. five boats how-
ever pass annually by the Cassiquiare; and
since we left Maypures, that is for a whole
month, we had not met one living soul on the
rivers which we went up, except in the imme-
diate neighbourhood of the missions. To the
south of lake Duractumuni we slept in a forest
of palm trees. It rained violently, but the
pothoses, arums, and lianas, furnished so thick a
natural trellis, that we were sheltered as undera
vault of foliage. The Indians, whose hammocks
were placed on the edge of the river, interwove
the heliconias and other musaceze, so as to form
a kind of roof over them. Our fires lighted up
to the height of fifty or sixty feet the palm trees,
the lianas loaded with flowers, and the columns of
white smoke, which ascended in a straight line
toward thesky. The whole exhibited a magnifi-
cent spectacle ; but, to enjoy it with tranquillity,
we should have breathed an air free from in-
sects.

The most discouraging of all physical suffer-
ings are those, which, uniform in their duration,
can be combated only by long patience. It is
probable, that in the exhalations of the forests of
the Cassiquiare Mr. Bonpland imbibed the seeds


444


of that severe malady, under which he nearly
sunk on-our arrival at Angostura. Happily for
him and for me, nothing led us to presage the
danger, with which he was menaced. The view
of the river, and the hum of the insects, were a
little monotonous ; but some remains of our
natural cheerfulness enabled us to find sources
of relief amid our wearisome voyage. We dis-
covered, that by eating small portions of dry
cacao, ground without sugar, and drinking a
large quantity of the river water, we succeeded
in appeasing our appetite for several hours.
The ants and the moschettoes occupied us more
than the humidity and the want of food. Not-
withstanding the wants to which we were exposed
during our excursions in the Cordilleras, the
navigation from Mandavaca to Esmeralda has
always appeared, to us the most painful part of
our travels in America. I advise those, who are
not very desirous of seeing the great bifurcation
of the Oroonoko, to take the way of the Ata-
bapo in preference to that of the Cassiquiare.
Above the Canno Duractumuni, the Cassi-
quiare pursues a uniform direction from north-
east to south-west. There, on it’s right bank,
they have-begun to found the new village of Va-
siva. The missions of Pacimona*, Capivari,


* Perhaps it may have been intended to indicate Manda-


sava under this name.


and Buenaguardia, like the pretended fort near
the lake of Vasiva, are only fictions of our
maps. We were surprised to see how much the
high steep banks of the Cassiquiare had been un-
dermined on each side by the sudden risings of
the river. Trees rooted up formed as it were
natural rafts ; and, half buried in the mud, were ©
extremely dangerous for canoes. It is probable,
that, if the bark of the traveller were overset in ‘
this uninhabited region, he would disappear,
without any indication of his misfortune marking
where, or how he had perished. It would
merely be known long after, that a boat, which
left Vasiva, had never been seen a hundred
leagues off, at the missions of Santa Barbara
‘and of San Fernando de Atabapo. We pass-
ed the night of the 20th of May, the last
of our voyage on the Cassiquiare, near the
point of the bifurcation of the Oronooke. We
had some hope of being able to make an astro-
nomical observation, as falling stars of remark-
able magnitude were visible through the va-
pours, that veiled the sky; whence we con-
cluded, that the stratum of vapors must be
very thin, since meteors of this kind have scarce-
ly ever been seen below a cloud. Those we
now beheld shot toward the north, and succeed-
ed each other at almost equal intervals... The
Indians, who little ennoble by their expressions


446


the wanderings of imagination, name the falling
stars the urine; and the dew the spittle of the
stars*, The clouds thickened anew, and we
discerned neither meteors, nor the real stars,
for which we had impatiently waited during
several days.

We had beentold, that we should find the insects
at Esmeralda “still more cruel and voracicus,”
than inthe branch of the Oronooko which we were
going up; notwithstanding this expectation, we
‘indulged with satisfaction the hope of sleeping
at length in a spot that was inhabited, and of
taking some exercise in herbalizing. Our satis-
faction however was disturbed at our last rest-
ing place on the Cassiquiare. I shall venture
to relate a fact, which has nothing in it very
interesting to the reader, but which I think I
may be permitted to record in a journal that
depicts the incidents of a voyage through so
wild a country. We slept on the edge of a
forest. In the middle of the night we were
warned by the Indians, that they heard very
near us the cries of the jaguar, and that they
came from the top of some neighbouring trees.
Such is the thickness of the forests in these
regions, that. scarcely any animals are to be
found there, but such as climb trees, the qua-
drumanes, the cercoleptes, the viverras, and


* In Tamanac, chirique-chucuru and urrupu-saccare.


various species of the felis genus. Our fires
burning bright, and having by long habit be-
come tranquil (I might almost say systemati-
cally.) respecting dangers that are not chimeri-
cal, we paid little attention to the cries of the
jaguars. ‘They were attracted by the smell and
voice of our dog. This animal (which was of
the mastiff breed) began at first to bark ; and,
when the tiger drew nearer, to howl, hiding
himself below our hammocks, as if he sought
for the succour of man. During our halts on
the banks of the Rio Apure, we had been accus-
tomed to these alternations of courage and fear
in this young animal, which was gentle and
extremely carressing. How great was our cha-
grin, when in the morning, at the moment of re-
embarking, the Indians informed us, that the
dog had disappeared! There could be no doubt,
that it had been carried off by the jaguars. Per-
haps, hearing their cries no longer, it had wan-
dered from the fires on the side of the beach;
perhaps we had not. heard it’s moans, being
plunged in a profound sleep. We have often
heard the inhabitants of the banks of the Oroo-
~ noko and the Rio Magdalena affirm, that the
oldest. jaguars, consequently . those that have
hunted at night during several years, are suffi-
ciently cunning to carry off animals from the
midst of a halting place, grasping the neck so as
to prevent their cries. We waited part of the


448


morning in the hope, that our dog had only
strayed. Three days after we came back to the
. Same place; we heard again the cries of the
jaguars, for these animals have a predilection
for particular spots; but all our researches were
vain. The dog, which had accompanied us
from Caraccas, and had so often in swimming
escaped the pursuit of the crocodiles*, had
been devoured in the forest. I mention this
incident only to throw some light on the artifices
of those large cats with speckled coats. .

May the 21st. We again entered the bed of
the Oroonoko, three leagues below the mission
of Esmeralda. It was then a month since we
had left that river near the mouth of the Gua-
viare. We had still a voyage of seven hundred
and fifty miles to perform to Angostura, but it
was with the stream, and this consideration
lessened our discouragement. In descending
great rivers, the rowers take the thalweg, the
middle of the bed, where there are few mos-
chettoes; while in going up they are obliged, in
order to avail themselves of the dead waters and
counter currents, to sail near the shore, where
the proximity of the forests, and the detritus of
organic substances thrown on the beach, accu-


* See vol. iv, p. 425.
+ Of nine hundred and fifty toises ia or two hundred
and fifty nautical leagues,


449


mulate the tipulary insects*. The point of the
celebrated bifurcation of the Oroonoko has a
very imposing aspect. Lofty granitic moun-
tains rise on the northern bank ; and amid them
are discovered at a distance the Maraguaca and
the Duida. There are no mountains on the
left bank of the Oroonoko, west or east of the
bifurcation, till opposite the mouth of the Tama-
~ tama. There stands the rock Guaraco, which
is said to throw out flames from time to time in
the rainy season. When the. Oroonoko is no
longer surrounded by mountains toward the
south, and reaches the opening of a valley, or
rather a depression of the ground, which termi-
‘nates at the Rio. Negro, it divides itself into two
branches. The principal trunk (the Rio Para-
gua of the Indians) continues it’s course toward
the west-north-west, turning: round the group of
the mountains of Parime; the branch which
forms the communication with the Amazon runs
into plains, the general slope of which is toward
the south, but of which the partial planes incline
in the Cassiquiare toward the south-west, and in
the basin of the Rio Negro toward the south-
east. A phenomenon so strange in appearance,
which I verified on the spot, merits particular
attention ; and so much the more, as it may


* Orellana has made the same observation in the Ama-
zon. (Southey, vol. i, p. 618.) ?
VOL. V. 26


450


throw some light on. analogous facts, which
are thought to have been observed in the interior
of Africa. I shall terminate this chapter by some
general reflexions on the hydraulic system of Spa-
nish Guyana; and shall prove, by examples
drawn from the ancient continent, that this
bifurcation, which has so long confounded the
geographers who have constructed maps of Ame-
rica, is the effect of a concurrence of circum-
stances, which, though rare, are to be found
alike in both hemispheres,

Accustomed to consider the rivers of Europe
only in that part of their course where they are
contained between two lines of ridges (lignes de
faites], consequently enclosed in vallies; and
forgetting, that the obstacles which inflect both
the tributary streams and principal recipients
are less frequently chains of mountains, than
small risings of counter-slopes ; we find a diffi-
culty in conceiving the simultaneous existence
of these windings, these bifurcations, these com-
munications of rivers in the New World. That
vast continent is still more remarkable for the
extent and uniformity of it’s plains, than for the
gigantic elevation of it’s Cordilleras. The
phenomena which we observe in our hemisphere
only on the coast of the ocean, or round the
inland seas in the steppes of Bactriana, the
Aral, and the Caspian, are found in America
three or four hundred leagues distant from the


45]


mouths of rivers. The small streamlets of water,
which wind along our meadows (the most perfect
of our plains) may convey a feeble image of
these interbranchings and bifurcations; but dis-
daining to pause on objects so diminutive, we
are more struck with the contrast than the ana-
logy of the hydraulic systems of the two worlds.
The idea, that the Rhine might send out’ a
branch to the Danube, the Vistula to the Oder,
the Seine to the Loire, appears at first sight so
absurd, that, even when we no longer doubt of
the communication between the Oroonoko and
the Amazon, we still require, that the possibility
of what exists should be proved.

In going up by the delta of the Oroonoko
toward Angostura and the confluence of the
Rio Apure, we leave the high chain of the
mountaing of Parime constantly on our left.


brated geographers have admitted) a barrier;
that separates the two basins of the Oroonoko
and the Amazon, furnishes on the contrary on
it’s southern side, or back, the sources of the
former of these rivers. The Oroonoko (exactly
like the Arno in the celebrated voltata between
Bibicuo. and Ponta Sieve) describes three quar-
ters of an oval, the greatest axis of which lies
in the direction of the latitude. It turns round
a group of mountains, which from it’s two oppo-
site sides alike sends down to it waters. From
262


452


the Alpine vallies of the Maraguaca, the river
runs first toward the west, and west-north-west,
as if it were flowing to the South Sea; when,
near the confluence of the Guaviare, it begins to
bend toward the north, and follows the direc-
tion of a meridian as far as the mouth of the
Apure, which is a second point of counter flex-
ure [rebroussement.| In this part of it’s course
the Oroonoko fills a sort of gutter, formed by
the gentle slope which descends from the very
remote chain of the Andes of New Grenada,
and the very short counterslope rising on the
east toward the abrupt side of the mountains
of Parime. This disposition of the ground is
the cause of the largest tributary streams of the
Oroonoko being those of the west. The princi-
pal recipient being very near the mountains of
Parime, which it turns round from south. to
north (as if it would run toward Porto Cabello,
on the northern coast of Venezuela), it’s bed is
obstructed by rocks. This is the region of the
' Great Cataracts ; the river, roaring along, opens
itself a passage across the buttresses that project
toward the west; so that, in the great land
strait* between the Cordilleras of New Grena-
* (Détroit terrestre.) This is an opening eighty leagues
broad, the only one by which the united basins of the Upper
Oroonoko and the Amazon communicate with the basin of the °
Lower Oroonoko, or the Llanos of Venezuela, We consider


is opening geologically as a /and strait, because it affords a
1 p $s 5 y
passage to running waters; and because, without this the


da and the Sierra Parime, the rocks which
skirt the western bank belong to this very
Sierra. Near the confluence of the Rio Apure,
the Oroonoko changes a second time, and:almost
suddenly, it’s direction from south to north to a
direction from west to east, as we have seen the
confluence of the Guaviare mark the point,
where the course toward the west is converted
abruptly into a direction toward the north. In
these two inflexions, it is not the impulsion of
the waters of the tributary stream only, that
determines the direction of the principal reci-
pient, but also a peculiar disposition of the
slopes and counter-slopes, which has an influ-
ence on the direction of the confluents, or. se-
condary rivers, and at the same time on that of
the Oroonoko. We should seek in vain on
these points of counterflecure, so important to
geography, any mountains or hills, that prevent
the great river from continuing it’s original
course. None exist at the mouth of the Gua-
viare ; and the little hill of Cabruta, near the
confluence of the Apure, has certainly had no
influence on the direction of the Oroonoko.
These variations of direction are the effect of
more general causes ; they result from the dis-


chain of Parime, which extends from east to west, like the
chains of the coast of Caraccas, and of Mato-Grosso, or Chi-
quitos, would be immediately connected with the Andes of
New Grenada,


454


position of ‘the great slopes, which compose
the polyedrical surface of the plains. The
chains of mountains do not rise like walls on
horizontal plains; their masses, more or less
‘prismatic, are always supported by table-lands,
and these are lengthened out into slopes, more
or less inclining toward the thalweg of the
river. It is therefore because the plains rise
toward the mountains, that the rivers so seldom
break against the mountains ; and that they feel
in some sort the influence of those lines of ridges
at very great distances. The geographers who
have studied topography in nature, and who have
taken levels of the ground, will not be surprised
to see, that in maps, the scale of which does not
admit of marking the inclinations of slopes from
three to five degrees, nothing materially indicates
the causes of the great inflexions of rivers. The
Oroonoko, from the confluence of the Apure to
it’s mouth on the eastern coast of America,
runs ina line parallel to it’s first direction, but in
an opposite course. It’s ¢halweg is formed on
the north by an almost imperceptible ‘slope,
which rises toward the chain on the shore of
Venezuela ; and on the south by 'the short'and
steep counter-slope, which’ rests ‘on’ the Sierra
Parime. By this particular disposition of the
ground, the Oroonoko surrounds the same
group of granitic mountains on the south, the
west, and the north; and, after a course of


459


one thousand three hundred and fifty miles (at
nine hundred and fifty toises), is found only
three hundred miles distant from it’s sources.
The mouth of this river is situate nearly in two
degrees, the meridian of it’s springs.

The course of the Oroonoko, of which we
have rapidly traced, the sketch, displays three
peculiarities well worthy of attention. Ist. The
constancy with which it remains near the group
of mountains, round which it turns at the south,
the west, and the north; 2dly, the situation of
it’s sources on ground,.which would seem to
belong to the basins of the Rio Negro and the
Amazon ; 3dly, it’s bifurcation, sending a branch
to another system of rivers. According to ideas
purely theoretic, we should be tempted to admit,
that rivers, having once issued from Alpine
vallies, at. the tops of which they take birth,
must rapidly leave the mountains on a plane
more or less inclined, the greatest declivity of
which would be perpendicular to the axis of the


chain, or the principal line of ridges. Such a
supposition, however, would be contrary to what
we. obserye in the most, majestic rivers of India
and China. A characteristic feature* of these


* Ritter Erdkunde, vol.i, p.248. We must not confound
those rivers, which during some time stretch along a chain of
mountains, after having reached the plains, with those. rivers
that flow in valleys which are longitudinal, and consequently
parallel also to the great axis of the chain,


456


rivers is, that, on issuing from the mountains
they pursue a course parallel to the chain. The
plains, the slopes of which rise toward the moun-
tains, take irregular forms at their feet. The
nature of these foliated rocks, and the direction
of the strata, parallel to the direction of the
great chains, may often be the cause of the phe-
nomenon we are discussing: but the granite of
the Sierra Parime, being almost always in mass,
and not stratified, the proximity in which the
Oroonoko follows the outlines of this group of
mountains indicates a depression of the ground,
which arises from a greater geological pheno-
menon, from a cause connected perhaps with
the formation of the Cordilleras itself. In in-
land seas and lakes, the deepest places are
those, where the coast is most elevated and
abrupt. When we descend the Oroonoko from
Esmeralda to Angostura, whether our course
be toward the west, the north, or the east,
jn a distance of two hundred and fifty leagues,
we always perceive very lofty mountains
on the right bank; and plains, that extend
as far as the eye can reach, on the left. The
line of the greatest depths, of the maxima of
depression, is consequently found at the very
foot of the Cordillera, on the cireumference of
the Sierra Parime.

Another peculiarity in the course of the Oroo-
noko, which strikes us at the first view, is that


the basin of this river seems to be primitively
confounded with the basin of another river, that
of the Amazon. In casting a look at the map,
we see the Upper Oroonoko traverse the same
plain from east to west, through which the Ama-
zon runs ina parallel but contrary direction ;
that is, from west to east. This identity of their
basins however is merely apparent ; it must not
be forgotten, that the great surfaces of ground,
which we call plains, have their valleys like the
mountains. Every plain is composed of differ-
ent systems of alternate slopes* ; and these sys-
tems are found to be separated by ridges, or
_ secondary lines of elevation, which their small
height renders almost. imperceptible to the eye.
A continued plain, covered with forests, fills the
vast space between 3° 30’ of north and 14° of
south latitude, between the Cordillera of Parime
and that of Chiquitos and of Brazil}+. All
the waters, as far as the parallel of the sources
of the Rio Temit, on a surface of two hundred
and four thousand square leagues4, flow into the


principal recipient of the Amazon ; but farther
seeing from a particular disposition of the


* Slopes which incline in opposite directions, with respect
to the horizon.

+ See chap. 17, vol. iv, p. 306; and the present chap.
p. 410.

t North latitude 2° 45/.

§ A surface ten times greater than all France.


458


ground, on a surface of less than fifteen hundred
square leagues, another great river, the Oroo-
noko, forms a distinct hydraulic system. The
central plain of South America comprehends
consequently, two basins of rivers ; for a basin
is the whole of all the surfaces of circumjacent
lands, the lines of the greatest. slope in which
terminate in the thalweg, that is to say, in the
longitudinal depression, which forms the bed of
the principal recipient. In the short space be-
tween the longitude of sixty-eight and seventy
degrees, the Oroonoko receives the waters which
flow down the southern slope of the Cordillera
of Parime; but the streams * which issue from
the same slope east of the meridian of sixty-
eight degrees, between Mount Maraguaca, and
the mountains of Portugueze Guyana, flow to
the Amazon. Itis therefore only on a length of
fifty leagues, that, in this immense equatorial
valley, planes situate immediately at the foot of
the Cordillera of Parime have lines of the great-


* The Padaviri and the Rio Branco (tributary streams
of the Rio Negro); the Rio Trombetas, the Gurupataba,
and the Rio Para, which fall immediately into the Amazon.
These rivers, all belonging to the same basin, rise from the
continuation of the Cordillera of Parime, east of the sources
of the Oronooko, where this Cordillera stretches along by the
Sierra’ Pacaraimo (the point of division between the waters
of the Rio Branco and those of the Rio Carony) toward
French and Portugueze Guyana, that is, toward the sources
of the Essequibo and the Oyapoc.


459


est declivity, which lead out of the valley first to
the north, and then toward the east. Hun-
gary* furnishes an analogous and very remark-
able example of rivers, which, rising on the south
of a chain of mountains, belong to the hydraulic
system of it’s northern declivity. The division
of waters between the Baltic and the Black Sea
is found on the south of Tatra, one of the groupes
of the Carpathian mountains, between Teplicz
and Ganocz, on a table-land which  has-only
three hundred toises of elevation. The Waag
and the Hernad flow south, toward the Danube;
while the Poprad turns round the group of Tatra
to the west, and with the Dunajetz runs north
into the Vistula. The Poprad, which. by ‘it’s


situation seems to belong to the tributary streams
of the Black Sea, disengages itself apparently


* The Carpathian mountains, which are generally repre-
sented as an uninterrupted chain between Poland and Hun-
gary, only form elevated groups, connected together by table-
lands of two or three hundred toises high. Thus the group
of Tatra, to which belongs the Peak of Lomnitz, one thousand
three hundred and tweny toises in height, terminates abruptly
at the east, while on the west it is united by a very long ridge
to the group of Tatra, which has only nine hundred toises of
absolute elevation, The Dunajetz, which rises on the north
of Tatra, receives the Poprad, which comes from the southern
slope of the same group; the Waag, which rises on the
south, receives the Arva, which comes from the northern de-
clivity. See the great Map of Hungary by Lipsky and Wah-
lenberg, Flora Carpath., p. *xxiii and lix.


460 °


from their basin, and mingles it’s waters with
those of the Baltic.

In South America an immense plain contains
the basin of the Amazon, and a portion of the
basin of the Oroonoko: but in Germany, be-
tween Melle and Osnabrueck, we have -the
rare example of a very narrow valley containing
two basins of little riversindependant of each
other. The Else and the Haase begin to rise in
a near and parallel course from south to north ;
but on entering the plain, they diverge to the
east and west, and join two hydraulic systems
entirely different, those of the Werra and of the
Ems.

I come now to the third peculiarity to be
observed in the course of the Upper Oroonoko,
that bifurcation, the existence of which was held
in doubt at the moment of my departure for
America. This bifurcation (divergium amnis),
according to the astronomical observations*


* These observations were of some importance, because no
other has ever been made at a more central point of South
America, north of the equator. In the night of the 22d of
May, I observed the passage over the meridian of a of the
Cross, and 8 of the Centaur, The first gives, for the latitude
of the mission of Esmeralda, 3° 11/8”; the second. 3° 10’ 52".
Six horary angles of the Sun, none of which differed more
than 1-2” from the mean, fix, according to the chronometer,
the longitude of the mission at 68° 23/19’. . As the rate of
the timekeeper could be verified by twice passing the


461


which I made at the mission of Esmeralda, is in
3° 10’ of north latitude, and 68° 37’ of longi-


Great Cataracts and the mouth of the Apure, and as the
daily loss was extremely uniform (between San Fernando de
Atabapo and Maypures, at 24° and 29° of temperature,
28°5"; between San Fernando de Atabapo, the Rio Negro,
the Cassiquiare, and Esmeralda, from 22° to 24° of tempera-
ture, 27°9”), the central point of Esmeralda may be consi-
dered as sufficiently well determined. This may be relied on
with more confidence, as my chronometric longitudes of the
interior rest on those of Cumana and Caraecas, two points of
the coast where I had observations of the satellites of Jupiter,
lunar distances, and an eclipse of the Sun. The positions of’
the maps which appeared before the publication of my obser-
vations of the Oroonoko err by excess toward the east and
the south, D’Anville alone, by a happy tact, saw better
than those who have followed him. As geographers hereto-
fore differed much in the absolute longitudes, which they as-
signed to the points of land-fall (at Barbadoes, the island of
Trinidad, or at Cumana), I have reduced, in the following
table, the longitudes to the meridian of the Castle of Saint
Antonio at Cumana :


EsMERALDA,
. lat. 8911! long, 1° 537 from astronomical obsery.
F 1 58 2 19. D’Anville.


3 38 0 18 Surville and Caulin.
3 28 0 8 Faden.


WwW
WwW
E. - 8 40 0 15 La Cruz Olmedilla.
E.
E.
W. 3 38 0 8 Buache.


The Spanish maps, constructed from the materials furnished
by the expedition of Solano, admit 3° 44’ for the difference
of meridians between Esmeralda and San Fernando de Ataba-
po; butt is only 2°'7’. These same maps place Esmeralda


462


tude west of the meridian of Paris. What we
find: in all the zones along the coast occurs in
the interior of South-America. Very simple
geometric considerations enable us to conceive,
that the configuration of the soil, and the im-
pulse of the tributary streams, modify the direc-
tion of the running waters according to stable
and uniform laws. The deltas are the effect of
a bifurcation in the plain of a shore; and on
observing them carefully, we sometimes find,
near the bifurcation, communications with other
rivers, branches of which are in the vicinity.
Now, wherever, in the interior of great conti-
nents, we find a flat surface like that of a shore,
the same phenomena must occur. The causes
that produce bifurcations near the mouth of a
great river may also give rise to them near it’s
source, and in the upper part of it’s course.
Three circumstances. contribute toward this
principally ; the very small undulations of a
plain, that contains at once two basins of rivers,


at 11° 35’ from Cayenne ; the real distance is 18° 48. (See
for the bases of these calculations the Rec. @Observ. Astr.,
which I published conjointly with Mr. Oltmans, vol. 1,
p- 255 and 261—278). These remarks I believe will suf-
fice, to lead those who occupy themselves with astronomical
geography to perceive, that I had some motives for consider-
ing the astronomical observations made on the banks of the
Upper Oroonoko, the Cassiquiare, and the Rio Negro, as
very essential to the improvement of the maps of America.


463


the breadth of one of the principal recipients,
and the situation of the thalweg, at the very edge
of the limit of the two basins.

If the line of the greatest slope pass through a
given point, and if, indefinitely prolonged, it
do not meet the river, that.point (whatever may
be it’s proximity to the thalweg) scarcely belongs
to the same basin. In adjacent basins we often
see the tributary streams of one recipient rise
very near to another recipient, between two tri-
butary streams of the latter. These particular
relations of coordination, which are observed in
alternate slopes, give forms that are more or less
sinuous to the boundaries of the basins. The
longitudinal furrow, or thalweg, is not neces-
sarily found in the middle of the basin : it does
not even always occupy it’s lowest parts; for
these parts may be environed by ridges, that
prevent their being reached by the most sloping
lines. The unequal length of two tributary
streams, that terminate at the two banks of the
same river, enables us to judge with some pre-
cision of the situation of the thalweg with respect
to the boundaries of the basin. When the prin-
cipal recipient approaches one of these bounda-.
ries, when it flows near the ridge that constitutes
the line of partition between the two basins,
there is the greatest chance of a bifurcation.
The least depression of this ridge may then cause
the phenomenon which we are discussing, if an


e


464


acquired velocity do not retain the whole of the
river in it’s bed. The bifurcation takes place,
when the limit of the two basins crosses the bed
of the principal recipient longitudinally: it is
then that a part of the thalweg of a contains some
points, the most sloping lines of which lead to
the thalweg of b. The branch which is separated
can no more return toward a for a stream of
water, which has once entered a basin, can
never extricate itself, without having passed
through the bed of the river, where all the waters
of the basin unite.

It remains to examine, how in similar cir-
cumstances the breadth of a river favours the
chance of these bifurcations, which, like canals
with points of partition *, furnish, from the na-
tural disposition of the ground, a navigable line
between the basins of two neighbouring rivers.
On sounding a river in a transverse line, we ob-
serve, that it’s bed is ordinarily composed -of
several furrows of unequal depths. The broader
a river is, the more numerous are these furrows;
they even preserve at great distances a parallel-
ism more or less perfect. Hence it results, that
rivers may for the most part be considered as


* In canals dug by the hand of man, the summit line (ligne
de faites) is placed between the two recipients; on the con-
trary, in the branches that unite naturally two systems of
rivers, the line of elevation, or the ridge of partition, cuts the
bed of one of the two rivers longitudinally.


465


composed of several canals very close to each
other, and that a bifurcation is formed, when a
smalf portion of ground near the bank is lower
than the bottom of a lateral furrow *.
According to the circumstances which we have
just related, the bifurcations of rivers take place
either in the same basin, or on the ridge of a
partition between two basins. In the first case,
they are either branches, that reenter the
thalweg from which they were separated at a
greater or less distance, or branches { which join
the lower tributary streams §. When the bifur-


* See the memoir of Hydrography, which I published in
1810 in the Journal de l’Ecole Polytechnique, vol, 4, p. 65—68.

+ Near the principal recipient, the connection between the
alternate slopes of different orders is generally such, that the
branches seldom flow from it. The great island, however, on
which the village of Morales stands, is three or four leagues
broad between the principal recipient of the Rio Magdalena
and the Brazo de Ocana.

+ See my maps of the Rio Apure and the Rio Magdalena.
The Guaricoto issues from the Apnre to jointhe Portugueza,
which is a tributary stream of the Apure. Thus the Cafo de
Lobo separates itself from the Magdalena to fall into the
Canca, (See above, on an analogous interbranching of the
Amazon and the Jupura, p. 359.) As our maps in general
do not indicate the direction of the course of the waters, the
land lying between different branches of rivers, of which the
uppermost take water from the principal recipient while the
lowermost give water to it, is often taken, on a simple in-
spection of the figure, for a dedéa of tributary streams.

§ There are, 1st, Oceanic deltas, as at the mouths of the
VOL, V. 2H


466


cation takes place at the boundary of two basins,
and this boundary passes through the bed of the
principal recipient, the branch that runs off es-
tablishes an hydraulic communication between
two systems of rivers, and fixes our attention the
more in proportion as it is broader and more
navigable. The Cassiquiare is two or three
times broader than the Seine near the Jardin
des Plantes; and to show how remarkable this
river is, 1 shall mention *, that, on seeking care-


Oroonoko, the Rio Magdalena, and the Ganges ; 2dly, deltas,
on the shore of indand seas, like those of the Oxus, and of the
Sihon, or Sir ; Bdly, deltas of tributary streams, like those at
the mouth of the Apure, the Arauca, and the Rio Branco.
When several secondary rivers are formed in the vicinity of
the deltas of tributary streams, all that is observed on the shore
near Oceanic deltas takes place in the inlands; the nearest
branches communicate their waters to each other, and form
a net-work of rivers, that can with difficulty be recognized in
the time of great inundations. On an extraordinary inter-
branching with a counterslope, see above, p. 377.

* [ take into consideration only the communication be.
tween two systems of independant rivers (that is, of rivers
both of which flow into the Ocean), and I suppose, that these
communications take place far from the shore, by means of
a branch that issues from one of the principal recipients to
fall into the other, either directly, or by joining a tributary
stream, [ excltide consequently Oceanic bifurcations or deltas ;
branches which a river tiear the coast sends to another river
flowing into the Ocean very near the former; the numerous
examples of communications of rivers observed in the inlands
between two tributary streams of the same river; finally, the
lakes or marshes situate on a dine of ridges between two


|
|
a
iY


5
et
|
;
!
Li
Li
H
ti


467


fully for examples of bifurcations in the interior
of countries, even among streams much less con-
siderable, I have hitherto found only three or
four with any certainty. I shall not mention
the interbranchings of the great rivers of Indo-
China, the natural canals that seem to unite the
rivers of Ava and Pegu*, and those of Siam and
-Cambodja; the mode of these communications
not having been sufficiently examined. I shall


basins, and, like the pools of Longpendu in France (Brisson,
in the Journal de ? Ecole Polyt., vol. 7, p. 280), like lake
Lessoe in Norway (Buch, Voyage en Laponie, vol. 1, p. 182),
like the lakes and marshes of the governments of Olonetz
and of Perme in Russia, and those of the steppes (pampos)
of Patagonia, pouring their waters into two systems of rivers
independent of each other.

* According to the researches of Mr. Dalrymple, the
Anan appears to form, at a hundred leagues from the coast,
a canal, resembling that of the Cassiquiare, between the Mei-
Kong, or Cambodja, and the Menam, or River of Siam.
The communications between the great river Ava or Irawad-
dy, and the Sittang or Martaban (River of Pegu?), appear
to me to be owing only to the overflowing of some lakes at
a point of partition between the two basins, far from the bed
of the two principal recipients, (See the great map of Asia
by Mr. Arrowsmith, 1818, and a judicious disquisition on the
course of the river of the Birman empire in Malte-Brun,
Geogr., vol. 4, p.170, 190.) An analogous partition of
waters appearsto form, near Jaghederpoor, that extraordinary
communication between two great rivers of Indostan, the
Mahanuddy and the Godavery. Mr. Bowdich has recently
announced, in the account of his Journey te the Ashantees
(p. 187, 484), a double bifurcation of the Niger, according

2H 2


468


confine myself to the mention of an hydraulic
phenomenon, which the fine maps of Norway
by Baron Hermelin have made known in the
greatest detail. A branch of the river Torneo,
in Lapland, (the Tarendo-Elf) runs to the Calix-
Elf, which forms a little separate hydraulic sys-
tem. This Cassiquiare of the northern zone is
only ten or twelve leagues long, but it makes a
real river island of all the land in the vicinity of
the gulf of Bothnia. We learn from Mr. von
Buch +, that the existence of this natural canal
was long denied, as obstinately as that of a
branch of the Oroonoko flowing into the basin
of the Amazon. Another bifurcation, more in-
teresting on account of the ancient communica-
tion between the nations of Latium and Etruria,
appears to have taken place formerly near the


to which the Quolla must communicate with the Rio Congo or
Zaire, This traveller thinks, that a branch of the Quolla
runs toward the south-west, under the name of the Ogooa-
wai; and that this Ogooawai, near Adjoomba, divides itself
anew, forming on the west the river Assazec, which flows
into the sea near Cape Lopez, and on the east, near Tanyan,
a tributary stream of the Congo.

+ Voyage en Norwege, vol. 2, p. 237. The south of France
furnishes, but ata little distance only from the Mediterranean,
an example of bifurcation similar to those of the Cassiquiare
and the Conorichite. See, on the great map of Cassini, the
extraordinary  interbranchings between fhe Sorgue, the
Louveze, and the river Vesque, near Avignon and Mon:


teux.


i


469


lake of Thrasimene. The Arno, in the. cele-
brated voltata which it makes toward the south,
the west, and the north, between Ribiero and
Ponta Sieve, . divided itself near the Arazzo into
two branches, one of which went to the sea
by Florence and Pisa, as at present; and the
other, after having followed the Val de Chiana,
mingled it’s waters with the Tiber, either imme-
diately, or after having confounded them with
those of the Paglia. Mr. Fossombroni has shown
how in the middle ages, from the effect of de-
posits of earth from the river, a point of parti-
tion was formed in the Val de Chiana ; and how
the northern part of the 4rno Teverin now flows
(ona counterslope) from south to north, from the
little lakes of Montepulciano into the Arno*.
The classical soil of Italy contains then, among
so many prodigies of nature and of art, one of
those bifurcations, of which the forests of the
New World display another example on a much
larger scale.

I have been often asked since my return from
the Oroonoko, whether I were inclined to be-
lieve, that the channel of the Cassiquiare would
be choked up by successive accumulations of
earth ; and whether I did not think, that the two


* Carte d’Italie de Bacler Dalbe, No. 18, 23,24. Fossombroni,
"Memoria idraulica sopra la Val de Chiana, 1789, p. 17.
Prony, on the hydraulic system of Italy, in the Journal de
1’ Ecole Polytechnique, vol. 4, p. 62.


476


greatest systems of rivers in equinoctial America
would in the lapse of ages become entirely dis-
tinct. Having prescribed to myself the law of
describing facts only, and of comparing what I
have learned with certainty of the relation that
exists in different countries between the configu-
ration of the ground and the course of the wa-
ters, I ought to avoid whatever is merely hypo-
thetical. I shall first observe, that the Cassi-
quiare, in it’s present state, is not, as the poets
of Latium express it, placidus et mitissimus
amnis: it little resembles that errans languido
flumine Cocytus, for in the greater part of it’s
course it has the excessive velocity of six or
eight feet in a second. It is not therefore to be
feared, that it will entirely fill up a bed of seve-
ral hundred toises in breadth. The existence of
this branch of the Upper Oroonoko is too great
a phenomenon for the little changes, that we
observe on the surface of the Globe, to make it
disappear, or even to modify it considerably.
We will not deny, that, respecting rivers less
broad, and of little velocity, there exists in all
running waters a general tendency to diminish
their interbranchings, and separate their basins.
‘The most majestic rivers, when we examine the
abrupt sides of the distant hills or shores, appear
only like small streamlets of water wandering
in vallies, which they could not hollow out
themselves; and the present state of their bed is


es


471


sufficient to remind us of the progressive dimi-
nution of the running waters. We every where
see ancient traces of branches dried up, and bi-
furcations * of which scarcely an historical do-
cument remains. The different furrows more or
less parallel, which compose the beds of the
American rivers, and make their waters appear
_ far more ample than they are in reality, gradu-
ally change their direction ; they grow wider,
and are confounded together by, the erosion of
the longitudinal ridges, by which they are sepa-
rated. What was at first but a branch, soon
becomes the only recipient ; and, in streams that
have little velocity, the bifurcations or inter-
branchings between two hydraulic systems dis-
appear in three ways ; either the outlet, or chan-
nel of communication, draws the whole of the
bifurcated river into it’s basin ; or the channel is
choked up by deposits, where it issues from the
principal recipient ; or, finally, in the midst of
it’s course it forms a transverse ridge, a point of


partition, which gives a counter-slope } to the
upper part, and occasions the waters to flow


back in an opposite direction. Very low coun-
tries subject to great periodical inundations, like


* Those ofthe Gihon (Ritter, Geogr. vol. 2, p. 665—693),
and of the Nile, near the opening of Fayoum (Rozivre, Const.
phys. de VEgypte, p. 82—58 ; Girard, Vallée deVEgypte, p. 4).

+ This is at present the case in the Ammo Teverin, between
Chiusi and Citta della Pieve in the Val de Chiana.


Guyana in America, and Dar-Saley, or Bagher-
, mi*,-in Africa, suggest to us how much the
communications by natural channels may have
been heretofore more frequent than at. present-f-.

After having considered the bifurcation of the
Oroonoko in relation to comparative hydro-
graphy, it remains for me to relate succinctly the
history of the discovery of this extraordinary
phenomenon. The same thing has happened
with respect to the communication of two great,
systems of rivers, as to the course of the Niger
toward the east. It required, that a discovery
should be repeatedly. made, which appeared at
first contrary to analogy and received hypothe-
ses. When travellers had recognized the mode
of communication between the Oroonoko and
the Amazon, the possibility of the fact was still
repeatedly called in question. A chain of moun-
tains, which the geographer Hondius had ima-
gined, at the end of the sixteenth century, in
order to-separate the basins of the rivers, was in


* To the south-east of Bornou and the Lake Nou, in that
part of Soudan, where, according to the latest ideas acquired


by my unfortunate friewd;>Mr. Ritchie, the Niger receives
the.Shary, and falls into the White Nile.

+: On the communications that still exist temporarily, at
the time of" ‘Breat, .rains,. between the basin of the river St.
Lawrence and ‘that of the Mississippi, see chap, xvi, vol. iv,
p- 151 ; and on the inundation of a ravin, by means of which
a monk of Choco has joined the South Sea to the Atlantic
Ocean, see my. Political Essay, vol. 1, p. 25.


473


turn admitted and denied. It was forgotten,
that these mountains, even if they existed, did
not prove in an absolute manner the separation
‘of the hydraulic systems ; and that the waters -
have opened passages even across the Cordil-
leras of the Andes, and the chain of Himalaya *,
the most elevated in the known world. It was
affirmed, and not without reason, that voyages,
which had been said to have been performed in
the same boat, did not prove, that the naviga-
tion had not been interrupted by portages +. I
have been fortunate enough, to verify myself all
the circumstances of this long contested bifurca-
tion; but Iam far from blaming such of the
learned, as, guided by a noble zeal in the re-


‘search of truth, have hesitated to admit what did
not appear to them sufficiently clear.

The river of Amazons having been fre-
quented by the Portugueze and the Spaniards,


* The Sutledge, the Gogra, the Gunduk, the Arun, the
Teesla, and the Boorampooter, pass through transverse valleys,
that is, perpendicular to the great axis of the Himalaya chain.
All these rivers consequently break the chain, as the Amazon,
the Paute, and the Pastaza, break the Cordillera of the
Andes. (See above, chap. 20, p. 41.)

+ The same doubts on the existence of some portages, where
other geographers suppose a communication by water, have
been-recently brought forward with respect to the problematic.
communication of the Niger with the Nile; and what is still
more extraordinary, with respect to Behring’s Strait, and
the voyage of the Cossack Deschnew.


474


long before the Upper Oroonoko was known to
these rival nations, the first vague ideas of the
communications between these two rivers came
to Europe from the mouth of the Rio Negro.
The Conquistadores, and several historians, as
Herera, Fray Pedro Simon, and Father Garcia*,
confound the Oroonoko and the Maragnon
under the names of the Rio Grande and Mar
Dulee (Great River, Sea of fresh water). The
name of the former river is not even found on
the famous map of America: by Diego Ribero,
constructed in 1529. The expeditions of Orellana
(1540), and of Lopez de Aguirre (1560), furnish
no information with regard to the bifurcation of
the Oroonoko; but the rapidity with which
Aguirre arrived at the island of la Margaretta
had long led to the belief, that, instead of going
out by one of the great mouths of the Amazon,
he had reached the sea by some interior com-
munication between the rivers. This hypo-


* Fray Gregorio Garcia (Origen de los Indwos, Valencia,
1607, p. 165) relates, that he learned from a monk, who had
the misfortane of being obliged to follow Pedro de Ursua and
the tyrant Lopez de Aguirre, that the Maragnon, after having
crossed the great plains (L/anos) of Dorado and the Amazons,
flows into the sea opposite the islands of Margaretta and
Trinidad, (See also Herera, vol. i, c. viii, p. 14; and Fr.
Pedro Simon, vol. 2, ch. vii.)


+See vol. ii, p. 220; vol. iv, p. 192,257; and p. 328, of


the present volume.


475


thesis was maintained by the Jesuit Acunha : but
it is little conformable to the results of the re
searches, which I have made in the works of the
first historians of the conquest *. Acunha as-


* Acunha. Nuevo Diseubrimiento del Rio de las Amazonas,
Madrid, 1614. The comparison (p. 32) of the distance from
the Oroonoko and La Boca de Dragos to the mouths of the
Rio Felipe and the Maragnon would seem to prove, that
Acunha places the Rio de Felipe a little to the north-west of
the North Cape ; while in another place (p 2) he says, that
Aguirre went from the Maragnon by “ a branch opposite the


island of Trinidad.” Ancient geographers are extremely


confused on all that relates to the coast between Point Ti-
gioca and Cape Grange, as is proved by the name of North
Cape, given to Cape Orange (Laet, Nov. Orbis, p. 636) and
the position of the Rio Vicente Pinson, which led the diplo-
matic body into errorat the conclusion of the peace of Utrechte
It appears to me by no means probable, that Aguirre went
out beyond the North Cape by the interbranchings of the
esteres, which exist between the Amazon (below Macapa);
the Araguari, and the Matario. I should rather think (Gu-
milla, vol. v, p 43), that Acunha meant to denote by the
name of Rio Felipe the northernmost mouth of the Amazon,
that which lies between the western point of the island. of
Caviana and North Cape. The new maps of the hydro-
graphic depot of Rio Janeiro call this mouth the channel of
Braganza. The first conquistadores had called the little river
Meary or Mearim, situate a hundred leagues south-east of
the mouth of the Amazon, Maragnon (Maranhao). See, on
the geographical error, which gave rise to this denomination
of the river, and of all the adjacent province, the Corogr.Bras.,
vol. ii, p. 251, 253, 260, The opinion of the ancient geo-
graphers, who considered the Oronooko, the Amazon or Orel-


476


serts with simplicity, “‘ that God would scarcely
have permitted a tyrant to be successful, and
make the fine discovery of the mouth of the
Maragnon.” He supposes, that Aguirre reached
the sea by the Rio de Felipe, which “ lies some
leagues distant from North Cape.”

Raleigh, in different voyages performed by
himself, or at his expense* , learned nothing of
an hydraulic communication between the Oroo-
noko and the Amazon; but Keymis, his liéuten-
ant, who from flattery (and particularly in
imitation of the name of Orellana given to the
Maragnon) designates the Oroonoko under the
name of Raleana, was the first who had a vague
idea of the portages between the Essequibo, the
Caroni, and the Rio Branco, or Parima-}. These
portages were by him converted into a great salt
lake; and thus they appear in the map con-
structed in 1599 from the narratives of Raleigh.
A Cordillera is figured between the Oroonoko
and the Amazon; and, omitting the bifurcation
which exists, Hondius indicates another alto-
gether imaginary; making the Amazon com-


lana, and the Meary or Maranhao, as the same river, was
founded on an imperfect knowledge of the mouths of these
three rivers, and not on hypotheses of interior communica-
tions.

* Cayley’s Life of Sir Walter Raleigh, vol..i, p.152, 227,
229, 263, 276; and vol, ii, p. 103, 118.

+ Ibid., vel. 1, p. 232, 286, 251, 283.


477


municate (by the Rio Tocantines) with the Pa-
rana and the river of San Francisco. This com--
munication was retained on the maps for more
than a century, as well as a pretended bifurca-
tion of the Rio Magdalena, of which one branch
was made to extend to the gulf of Maracaybo.
In 1639, the Jesuits Christoval de Acunha
and Andres de Artedia made the journey from
Quito to Grand Para in the suite of captain
Teixeira ; at the confluence of the Rio Negro
with the Amazon they learned, “ that the former
river (called Curiguacura, or Uruna, by the
natives, on account of it’s brown tint and limpid
waters) sends a branch to the Rio Grande*,
which runs into the North Sea, and the mouth
of which is surrounded by Dutch settlements.”
Acunha advises, to construct a fortress, “ not at
the confluence of the Rio Negro with the Ama-
zon, but where the branch of communication


» « Tos primeros Indios que pueblan un brazo que el
Rio Negro aroja, por donde segun informacion se viene salir
al Rio Grande, ea cuya boca en el mar del Norte estan los
Olandeses, son los Guaranaquazanas.” (Acunha, p. 32.)
Lower down, this traveller says, that the fort ought to’ be
placed, ‘en el brazo que desemboca al Rio Grande que
desagua al Oceano, el qual brazo no es en ninguna manera
el Orinoco.” He places the Rio Felipe “ algunas leguas des-
pues del Cabo del Norte.” This is all that is found in the
original edition of the voyage of Acunha, on a point suffici-
ently important to the history of geography. Teixeira went
up the Amazon, accompanied by two thousand Indians.


478


breaks off.” He discusses what the Rio Grande
may be; and he concludes, that it certainly is
not the Oroonoko, but perhaps the Rio Dulce
or the Rio de Felipe, that by which Aguirre
reached the sea*. Acunha inclines to the last


* I doubt if Acunha had himself a precise idea of what he
calls Rio Dulce and Rio Felipe, when distinguishing the
latter from the principal mouth of the Amazon. Vicente
Pinzon, coming in the year 1500 from the mouth of the
Maragnon to the coast of Paria, had given the name of Rio
Dulce to the mouth of a river, “near which, at twenty
leagues from the coast, he took in water.” Herera (vol. i.
sec, i, p. 108) believes it to be a branch of the Yuyapari, or
Oroonoko: I rather think it is the Oroonoko itself. But
what river is that, which the Dutch call Rio Dulce, or Felipe
Hadias? (Southey; vol. i, p. 602). Of this T am ignorant.
The very rare map of Paulo di Forlani of Verona (/a Des-
crittione di tutto tl Peru) preserved in the King’s Library at
Paris, number 457, gives the Maragnon, the Oregliana, the
Rio Dulce, and the Rio Viaparo, from south ito north, as so
many independant rivers. The first is, from it’s situation,
the Rio Meary of the province of Maranham, to which is
given the length of the course of the Amazon, such as it
was laid down by Orellana in 1540. The second is indi-
cated as a very small river, although, judging from the lati-
tude, it is the real river of the Amazons, of which Pinzon
discovered the mouths in 1600; and which, as Mr. Southey
has fully proved, then took the name of the Maranon, long
before the expedition of Aguirre. The third river appears to
be the Marony (Marowine, Maraveni, Marwyne), or the
great river of Essequibo; finally, the fourth, the Viaparo, it
cannot be doubted, is the Oroonoko. The geographer
De VIsle indicates a river near Cape Orange, “ which must


479


of these suppositions. We must distinguish, in
notions of this kind, what travellers have learn-
ed from Indians at the mouth of the Rio Negro,
and what they have themselves added from the
hypotheses furnished by the state of geography
in the age in which they lived. A branch that
issues from the Rio Negro is supposed to run
into a great river, which flows into the North
Sea, on a coast inhabited by red-haired men ;
for it is thus the natives, accustomed only to see
white men with black or brown hair (Portugueze
or Spanish), designate the Dutch. Now from
the confluence of the Rio Negro with the Ama-
zon, as far as Canno Pimichin, by which I en-
tered the former of these rivers, we are at pre-
sent acquainted with all the tributary streams
on the north and the east; and there is but one,
the Cassiquiare, which communicates with ano-
ther river. The sources of the Rio Branco are


communicate with the Amazon,” and by which the tyrant
Aguirre might have gone out. This river he calls Arcoa.
I find it to be the Aracow of Sanson, and the Aracawa of
@’Anville, between the Cassipour and the Oyapoc (Wiapoco
of the ancient geographers). It is probable, that the note of
De I’'Isle was meant to refer to the Oyapoc, .a considerable
river, to which extraordinary branchings were erroneously
attributed. Acunha (p. 21,§ 44) believes in several com-
munications between the mouth of the Amazon and the
rivers, that throw themselves into the sea west of North
Cape; and he calls the Rio de Felipe “wna boca transversal
del Rio de las Amazonas.”


486


traced very minutely on the new maps in the
hydrographic depot of Brazil: and we know,
that this river communicates by no lake with
the Rio Carony, the Essequibo, or any other
stream of the coast of Surinam or of Cayenne.
A lofty chain of mountains, that of the Pacaray-
mo, separates the sources of the Paraguamusi
(a tributary stream of the Carony) from those of
the Rio Branco, as Don Antonio Santos recog-
nized in 1775, in his voyage from Angostura to
Grand Para*. South of the chain of Pacaray-
mo and of Quimiropaca, there is a portage of
three days between the Sarauri (a branch of the
Rio Branco) and the Rupunuri (a branch of the
Essequibo). This was the portage traversed in
1739 by the surgeon Nicholas Hortsmann, a
native of Hildersheim, whose journal I have had
in my possession ; and this was the way also by
which don. Francisco Jose Rodriguez Barata,
lieutenant colonel of the Ist regiment of the line
of Para, went twice from the Amazon to Suri-
nam on affairs of his government in 1793. _ Still
more recently, in the month of February, 1811,
some English and Dutch colonists arrived at
the portage of Rupunuri, to solicit from the
commander of the Rio Negro permission to
proceed to the Rio Branco ; and the commandant


# Manuscript journal of Don Nicolas Rodriguez, which I
acquired during my stay at the Oroonoko.


48}


having granted their request, these colonists ar-
rived at fort San Joaquim on the Rio Branco
in their boats*. We shall have to speak here-
after of this isthmus, or partly . mountainous
partly marshy ground, where Keymis (the
author of the narrative of Raleigh’s second
voyage) places el Dorado and the great city of
Manoa; but which separates, as we now know
with certainty, the sources of the Carony, the
Rupunuri, and the Rio Branco, three tributary
streams of three different systems of rivers, the
Oroonoko, the Essequibe, and the Rio Negro,
or the Amazon.

It results from what has been observed, that
the natives, who talked to Teixeira and Acunha
of the communication of two great rivers, de-
ceived themselves on the direction of the waters
of the Cassiquiare, or that Acunha misinter-
preted their words. The latter supposition is
so much the more probable, as in making use of
an interpreter, like the Spanish traveller, I often
experienced myself how easy it is to mistake
respecting branches which a river sends forth
or-receives ; or, on the direction of a tributary
stream which follows the Sun, or which moves
in “opposition to the Sun.” I suspect the


* Manuscript notes, that were obligingly communicated
' to me by the Chevalier de Brito, ambassador from Portugal
- at Paris in 1817,

VOL, V. 21


Indians meant to tell Acunha of communica.
tions which might take place with the Dutch
possessions by portages from the Rio Branco to
the Rio Essequibo. The Caribbees, no doubt,
reached the banks of the Rio Negro both ways,
by the isthmus of Rupunuri, and by the Cassi-
quiare; but an uninterrupted communication
of rivers must have appeared to the natives an
object more adapted to fix the attention of stran-
gers; and if the mouth of the Oroonoko be not
found, properly speaking, in the Dutch posses-
sions, it is at least extremely near them. ‘The
abode of Acunha at the confiuence of the Ric
‘Negro not only procured to Europe the first
knowledge of the communication between the
Amazon and the Oroonoko, but had also re-
sults advantageous to humanity. The troop of
Teixeira wanted to force it’s commander to enter
the Rio Negro, in order to carry off slaves.
The two monks, Acunha and Artedia, pro-
tested in writing against this unjust and impo-
litic expedition. They maintained at the same
time a principle somewhat strange, that “ con-
science did not permit Christians to drag into
slavery any natives, but such as were to serve
as interpreters.” Whatever may be thought of


this axiom, the noble and courageous protest of
the two monks caused the failure of the pro-
jected enterprise*.


# Acunha, p. 34, § 67.


483


The geographer Sanson traced a map of the
Oroonoko and the Amazon, in 1680, from the
narrative of the voyage of Acunha, . This map
was with respect to the Amazon, what the map
of Gumilla was during a long time for the Lower
Oroonoko. In the part which extends north of
the equator it is merely hypothetical, and
figures, as we have observed above, the bifurca-
tion of the Caqueta at a right angle. One of
the branches of the Caqueta is the Oroonoko,
the other the Rio Negro. Thus Sanson thought
he could combine in this map, and in another
of all South America, published in 1656, the ,
vague notions that Acunha had acquired in
1639, respecting the branchings of the Caqueta*,
and the communications of the Amazon with the
Oroonoko. The erroneous idea, that the Rio
Negro issues from the Oroonoko, or from the
Caqueta, of which the Oroonoko is but a
branch, was retained-+ till near the middle of
the seventeenth century, the period when the
Cassiquiare was discovered.

Father Fritz, who went to Quito with ano-


* “ El grande Rio Caqueta,” says Acunha (Nuevo Des-
cubr., p. 21, § 45), “ tiene muchos brazos; el mas meridi-
onal va al Rio de las Amazonas, pero el que mas se inclinaa
1a vanda del Norte es el Rio por el qual el Capitan Fernan
Perez de.Quesada se dexava llevar a la parte de Santa Fe y
la Provincia del Algodonal.”

+ See above, p. 322.
212


484


ther German jesuit, traced a map* of the Ama-
zon in 1690, the best that had been made before
the voyage of M. dela Condamine. This map
guided the French academician in his naviga-
tion; as the ancient maps of La Cruz and Cau-
lin guided me on the Oroonoko. It seems sur-
prising, that father Fritz, notwithstanding his
long residence on the banks of the Amazon,
(having been detained a prisoner two years by
the commander of a Portugueze fort), had not
acquired any notion of the Cassiquiare. The
historical illustrations, which he has’ inserted in
the margin of his manuscript map, and which
I have recently examined with care, are imper-
fect, and but few. He makes a chain of moun-
tains} pass between two systems of rivers, and
contents himself with bringing one of the
brauches, which give birth to the Rio Negro, near


_ * It was not sent to Europe till 1707 ; and was published
only in 1717, in the fine collection of the Lettres Edifiantes.
+ That chain of mountains, of which there is no trace in


nature (I speak as an eye witness), south of the Oroonoko,
between San Fernando de Atabapo and the Cassiquiare,
appeared again in the thirteenth article of the preliminary
treaty of peace and boundaries, October the 1st, 1777. We
have had occasion to observe above, that the diplomatic
body do not always consult geographers, and that errors of
situation, which we are willing to believe involuntary, have
become, since the eighth article of the peace of Utretcht, a
source of disputes incessantly reviving with respect to the
limits of French and Portugueze Guyana.


485


& tributary stream of the Oroonoko, which from
it’s situation appears to be the Rio Caura.
Every thing remained uncertain during the


space of a century, which separates the voyage
of Acunha from the discovery of the Cassiquiare
by father Roman.

_ The communication of the Oroonoko with
the Amazon by the Rio Negro, and a bifurcation
of the Caqueta, imagined by Sanson, and re-
jected by father Fritz and by Bleauw, reappeared
in the first maps of De l'Isle ; but were abandoned
by that celebrated geographer toward the end of
his days*. ‘Those’ who had mistaken the mode
of this communication hastened to deny the
communication itself. Itisin fact well worthy of
remark, that, at the time when the Portugueze
went up most frequently by the Amazon,
the Rio Negro, and the Cassiquiare}, and when
father. Gumilla’s letters were carried (by the
natural interbranching of the rivers) from the
lower Oroonoko to Grand Para, this very mis-
sionary makes every effort to spread the opinion
through Europe, that the basins of the Oreo-
noko and the Amazon are perfectly separate.
He asserts, that, having several times gone up

* See above, p. 327, notet, 328 note*.
+ From 1737 to 1740.

+ Orinoco illustr., vol. 1, p. 41. I conclude from a passage
in vol. i, p. 367, that this work, published in 1741, was writ-
ten in 1939. Itis therefore by mistake, as we have observed
before, that the Licencias of the censor are dated in 1731.


486


the former of these rivers as far as the Raudal
of Tabaje, situate in the latitude of 1° 4’, he
never saw a river flow in or out, that could be
taken for the Rio Negro. He adds farther,
that “ a great Cordillera*, which stretches from
east to west, prevents the mingling of the wa-
ters, and renders all discussion on the pretended
communication of the two rivers useless.” The
errors of father Gumilla arise from his firm
persuasion, that he had reached the parallel. of
1° 4’ on the Oroonoko. He deceived himself}
by more than 5° 10’ of latitude ; for I found by
observation at the mission of Atures, thirteen
leagues south of the rapids of T abaje, the lati-
tude to be 5° 37’ 34”. Gumilla having gone
but little above the confluence of the Meta, it is
not surprising, that he had no knowledge of the
bifurcation of the Oroonoko, which is found by
the sinuosities of the river to be one hundred and


# Father Caulin, who wrote in 1759, although his accurate
and very useful book (Historia corografica de la Nueva Anda-
lusia y vertientes del Rio Orinoco) appeared only in 1779, has
combated with great discernment the idea of a chain of moun-
tains, that prevents all communication between the basins of
the Oroonoko and the Amazon. ‘The error of father
Gumilla,” says he, (libro i, cap. 10, p. 79), ‘“ consists in the
supposition of a Cordillera, which, uninterrupted, and like an
immense wall, stretches from the frontiers of New Granada
to the coasts of Cayenne. He forgets that chains of moun-
tains are often divided by deep (transversal) vallies, when,
seen from afar, they appear contiguas 0 indivisas.”’

+ See vol. iy, p. 569.


487


twenty leagues distant from the Raudal of
Tabaje. This missionary, who resided on the
banks of the Oroonoko three years (not thirty,
as his translators pretend), should have con-
fined himself te the relation of what he had seen
with his own eyes in navigating on the Apure,
the Meta, and the Oroonoko, from Guayana
Vieja as far as the neighbourhood of the first
greatcataract. The admiration his work at first


ited, the only one which had appeared on
those countries before the works of father Cau-
lin and Gili, was succeeded by too marked a
disdain in the Spanish colonies. The Orinoco
illustrado does not indeed display that intimate
knowledge of localities, or that candid simpli-


city, which gives a certain charm to the narra-
tives of the missionaries; there is some affecta-
tion in the style, and a constant tendency to
exaggeration; but, notwithstanding these de-
fects, father Gumilla’s book contains many just
observations on the manners and natural dispo-
sitions of the different tribes of the Lower Oroo- ,
noko and the Llanos of Casanare.

M. de la Condamine*, during his memorable
navigation on the river of Amazons in 1743,
carefully collected a great number of proofs of
this communication of the rivers, denied by the
Spanish jesuit. The most decisive proof then


* Voyage to the Amazon, p. 119.


‘488


appeared to him to be the unsuspected testimony
of a Cauriacani Indian woman, with whom he
had conversed, and who had come in a boat
from the banks of the Oroonoko (from the mis-
sion of Pararuma*) to Grand Para. Before the
return of M. de la Condamine to his own coun-
try, the voyage of father Manuel Roman, and
the fortuitous meeting of the missionaries of the
Oroonoko and the Amazon, left no doubt of
this fact, of which Acunha first obtained the
knowledge.

The incursions undertaken from the middle
of the seventeenth century, to procure slaves,
had gradually led the Portugueze from the Rio
Negro, by the Cassiquiare, to the bed of a great
river, which they did not know to be the Upper
Oroonoko. A flying camp, composed of the troop
of ransomers+-, favoured this inhuman commerce.
After having excited the natives to make war,
they ransomed the prisoners; and, to give an
appearance of equity to the frade, monks ac-
companied the troop of ransomers, to examine
“ whether those who sold the slaves had a right
to do so, by having made them prisoners in
open war.” From the year 1737, these voyages
of the Portugueze to the Upper Oroonoko be-
came very frequent. The desire of exchanging


* See above, chap. 19, vol, iv, p. 537.
+ Tropa de rescate; from rescatar, redimere,


A489


slaves (pottos) for hatchets, fish-hooks, and glass
trinkets, induced the Indian tribes to make’ war
upon one another. The Guipunaves, led on by
their valiant and cruel chief, Macapu, descend-
ed from the banks of the Inirida toward the
confluence of the Atabapo and the Oroonoko.
“ They sold,” says the missionary Gili, ‘“ the
slaves whom they did not eat*.”. The jesuits of
the Lower Orooncko became uneasy at this
state of things, and the superior of the Spanish
missions, father Roman, the intimate friend of .
Gumilla, took the courageous resolution of
crossing the Great Cataracts, and visiting the
Guipunaves, without being escorted by Spanish
soldiers. He left Carichana the 4th of Febru-
ary, 1744; and having arrived at the confluence
of the Guaviare, the Atabapo, and the Oroonoko,
where the last mentioned river suddenly changes
it’s course from east to west, to a direction from
south to north, he saw from afar a canoe as
large as his own, and filled with men in Euro-
pean dresses. He caused a crucifix to be placed
‘at the bow of his boat in sign of peace, accord-
ing to the custom of the missionaries when they
navigate in a country unknown to them. The


* « J. Guipunavi avventizj abitatori dell’ Alto Orinoco,
recavan de’ danni incredibili alle vicine mansuete nazioni ;
altre mangiandone, altre conducendone schiave ne’ Porto-
ghesi dominj.” (Gi, tom. i, p. 81.) See also above, chap.
xxii, p. 208, 1


490


whites, who were Portugueze slave-traders of
the Rio Negro, recognized with marks of joy
the habit of the order of saint Ignatius. ‘They
heard with astonishment, that the river, on
which this interview took place, was the Oroo-
noko; and they brought father Roman by the
Cassiquiare to the Brazilian Settlements on the
Rio Negro. The superiour of the Spanish mis-
sions was forced to remain near the flying camp
of the ¢roop of ransomers, till the arrival of the
Portugueze jesuit Avogadri, who was gone upon
business to Grand Para. Father Manuel Ro-
man returned with his Saliva Indians by the
same way, that of the Cassiquiare and the Up-
per Oroonoko, to Pararuma*, a little to the north
of Carichana, after an absence of seven months.
He was the first white man, who went from the
Rio Negro, consequently from the basin of the


* The 15th of October, 1774. M. de la Condamine quitted
the town of Grand Para December the 29th, 1748 ; it follows
from a comparison of the dates, which I gave in the histori-
cal sketch of the discoveries jn Guyana, that the Indian
woman of Pararuma, carried off by the Portugueze, and to
whom the French traveller had spoken, had not come with
father Roman, as was erroneously affirmed. The appearance
of this woman on the banks of the Amazon is interesting with
respect to the researches lately made on the mixture of
races and languages; it proves the enormous distances, at
which the individuals of one tribe are compelled to mix with
those of another. ae


491


Amazon, without passing his boats over any
portage, to the basin of the Lower Oroonoko.
The tidings of this extraordinary voyage were
spread with such rapidity, that M. de la Conda-
mine was able to proclaim them*, at a public
sitting of the Academy, seven months after the
return of father Roman to Pararuma. “The
communication between the Oroonoko and the
Amazon,” said he, “ recently averred, may pass
so much the more for a discovery in geography,
as, although the junction of these two rivers
is marked on the ancient maps (according to
the information given by Acunha), it had been
suppressed by all the modern geographers, in
their new maps, as if in concert. It is not the
first time, that what is positive fact has been
thought fabulous, that the spirit of criticism has
been pushed too far, and that this communication
has been treated as chimerical by those, who
ought to have been better informed.” Since the
voyage of father Roman in 1774, no person in
Spanish Guyana, or on the coasts of Cumana and
Caraceas, has longer admitted a doubt of the
existence of the Cassiquiare and the bifurcation


* They had been communicated to him by father John Fer-
reyro, rector of the college of jesuits at Para. Voy. al Ama-
zone, p. 120. Mém. de l Académie, 1745, p. 450. Caulin, p.
79. See also, in the work of Gili, the fifth chapter of the first
book, published in 1780, with the title ; Delta scoperta delle
communicazione dell’ Orinoco col Maragnone, vol. i, p. 31
to 34.


492


of the Oroonoko. Father Gumilla himself,
whom Bouguer met at Carthagena, confessed
that he had been deceived; and he read to
father Gili, a short time before his death, a sup-
plement to his history of the Oroonoko, intend-
ed for a new edition, in which he recounts
gaily* the manner in which he had been unde-
ceived. The expedition of the boundaries, under
Iturriaga and Solano, completed in great detail
the knowledge of the geography of the Upper
Oroonoko, and the intertwinings of this river
with the Rio Negro. Solano established him-
self in 1756 at the confluence of the Atabapo ;
and from that time the Spanish and Portugueze
commissioners often passed in their canoes, by
the Cassiquiare, from the Lower Oroonoko to
the Rio Negro, to visit each other at their head-
quarters of Cabruta-+ and Marivaf. Since


* Lepidamente, al suo solito, says the missionary Gili,

+ General Ituriaga, confined by illness, first at Muitaco,
or ‘Real Corona, and afterward at Cabruta, received a visit
in 1760 from the Portugueze colonel don Gabriel de Sousa
y Figueira, who came from Grand Para, having made a voy-
age of nearly nine hundred leagues in his boat. The Swedish
botanist, Loefling, who was chosen to accompany the expe-
dition of the boundaries at the expense of the Spanish govern-
ment, multiplied in his ardent imagination to such a point the
branchings of the great rivers of South America, that he
appeared well persuaded of being able to navigate by the
Rio Negro aud the Amazon to the Rio dela Plata. (Iter,
p. 181.)

t This place, called Marioba and Mariova by d’Anville


493 :


the year 1767, two or three canoes come an-
nually from the fort of San Carlos, by the bi-
furcation of the Oroonoko, to Angostura, to
fetch salt and the pay of the troops. These
voyages, from one basin of a river to another,
by the natural canal of the Cassiquiare, excite
no more attention in the colonists at present,
than the arrival of boats, that descend the Loire
by the canal of Orleans, awakens on the banks
of the Seine.

Although since the voyage of father Roman, in
1744, precise notions have been acquired in the
Spanish possessions in America, both of the direc-
tion of the Upper Oroonoko fromeast to west, and
of the manner of it’s communication with the Rio


Negro, this knowledge did not reach Europe till
a much later period. In 1750, La Condamine
and D’Anville* still admitted, that the Oroonoko


and La Cruz, is no longer found on the new maps of the Rio
Negro constructed at the hydrographic depot of Rio Ja-
neiro, Mr, Apollinario Diez de la Fuente, in a manuscript
journal of which [ am in possession, calls it Maribaes, mili-
tary head-quarters. It is no doubt, the ancient Barcelos,
between the town of Thomar and the great mouth of the
Rio Branco.


* See the classical memoir of this great geographer in the
Journal des Savans, March, 1750, p.184. ‘ One fact,” says
‘@’Anville, “‘ which cannot be considered as equivocal, after
the proofs with which we have been recently furnished, is
the communication of the Rio Negro with the Oroonoko ;


494


was a branch of the Caqueta coming from the
south-east, and that the Rio Negro issued im-
mediately from it. It was in the second edi-
tion* only of his South America, that D’Anville,
without renouncing ‘that intercommunication of
the Caqueta, by means of the Iniricha (Inirida),
with the Oroonoko and the Rio Negro, makes
the Oroonoko take it’s rise at the east, near the
sources of the Rio Branco, and marks the Rio
Cassiquiare as bearing the waters of the Upper
Oroonoko to the Rio Negro. It is probable,
that this indefatigable and learned writer had
obtained information on the manner of the bifur-
cation from his frequent communications with


but we must not be ashamed to admit, that we are not yet
sufficiently informed of the manner, in which this communi-
cation takes place.” I was surprised to see in a very rare
map, which I found at Rome (Provincia Quitensis Soc. Jesu
in America, auctore Carolo Brentano et Nicolao de la Torre :
Rome, 1745), that seven years after the discovery of father
Roman, thejesuits of Quito were ignorant of the existence of
the Cassiquiare. The Rio Negro is figured in this map asa
branch of the Oroonoko.

* Probably of 1760. (Barbié du Bocage, Not. des Qu-
vrages de d’ Anville, p. 98.) It is to be regretted, that
d’Anville, in making important corrections on the plates of
his maps, had not the habit of marking the dates of these
changes. Those geographers who are ignorant of this cir-
cumstance may be led into error respecting the date of disco-
veries, which were posterior to the year indicated on the
niap where they are traced,


495


‘the missionaries*, who were then, as they are
at present, the only geographers of the most
inland parts of the continents. He erred 3-5°
of latitude on the confluence. of the Cassiquiare
with the Rio Negro, but he then indicated with
sufficient precision the situation of the Atabapo,
and of the woody isthmus by which I passed from
Javita to the banks of the Rio Negro. The
maps of La Cruz Olmedilla-+ and of Survillet,


* Aecording to the annals of Berredo, it would appear,
that from the year 1739, the military incursions from the
Rio Negro to the Cassiguiare had confirmed the Portu-
gueze jesuits in the opinion, that there was a commnnication
between the Amazon and the Oroonoko, Southey, vol. i, p.
658.

+ The basis of all the new maps of America has been that of
La Cruz. (Mapo geograjico de America meridional por D. Juan
de la Cruz Cano y Olmedilla, Geogr. pens. de S. M., 1775.)
The original edition, which I possess, is the more rare, the
plates having been broken, it is commonly believed, by order
of a minister of the colonies, who feared, that the map was
but too exact. I can affirm, that the map does not merit
this reproach, except on a small number of points.

} Fray Antonio Caulin, an Observantin monk, accompa-
nied the expedition of Ituriaga and Solano. We see in the
ninth chapter of the first book of his Historia corograficu de
Nueva Andalucia, that he had constructed two maps in 1756,
one of which comprehended the Lower Oroonoko from it’s
mouth as far as Atures ; and the other, the Upper Oroo-
noko, the Cassiquiare, and the Rio Negro. He wished to
separate what he had verified with his own eyes, from what
was only founded on mere report. Surville, availing himself
of the two manuscript. maps of Caulin, and mingling with


496


published in 1775 and 1778, together with the
work of father Caulin, have best made known
the labours of the expedition of the boundaries ;
for the numerous contradictions, that are found
in them, relate to the sources of the Orconoko
and the Rio Branco, and not to the course of
the Cassiquiare and the Rio Negro, which they
indicate as well as could be required in. the
absolute want of any astronomical observation.

Such was the state of the hydrographic dis-
coveries in the interior of Guyana, when, a short
time before my departure from Europe, a man
of science, whose labours have been so useful to
the progress of geography, thought fit to make
new researches respecting the narrative of Acun-
ha, the map of father Samuel Fritz, and. the
America Meridional of La Cruz Olmedilla. The
political state of France had perhaps prevented
M: Buache from procuring or examining the
works of Caulin and Gili, two missionaries, who
resided on the banks of the Oroonoko, when the
expedition of the boundaries established the
communications, which have been regularly
kept up during more than half a century, be-
tween the Spanish fort of the Rio Negro and
the Town of Angostura, by the Cassiquiare and


them many of his own systematic ideas, constructed in 1778,
his Mapo corografico de la Nueva Andalucia. This map is very
often contradictory to Caulin’s book, to which it is annexed.


i


497


the Upper Oroonoko. In the Carte générale de
‘Guyane, published in 1798, the Cassiquiare, and
that part of the Upper Oroonoko situate to the
east of Esmeralda, are marked as a tributary
river of the Rio Negro, and as not being con-
nected with the Oroonoko. A chain of moun-
tains is made to pass across the plain, that
forms the isthmus between the Tuamini and the
Pimichin ; this chain is supposed to run toward
the north-east, and form a point of partition
between the waters of the Oroonoko and those
of the Rio Negro and the Cassiquiare, twenty
leagues west of Esmeralda. In a note added to
this map, it is said, that, “the long-supposed
communication between the Oroonoko and the
Amazon is a monstrous error in geography,
~ which the map of La Cruz has multiplied, with-
out foundation ; and that, to rectify the ideas
entertained on this point, it is necessary to
observe the direction of the great chain, which
separates the waters.”

I was fortunate enough to reconnoitre this
chain on the spot. I passed with my boat in
the night of the 24th of May, along that part of
the Oroonoko, where Mr. Bauche supposes the
bed of the river to be cut by a Cordillera. If
there had been a line of summits, (a point of
partition) on that spot, I should have gone up
a river for the first twenty leagues to the west
of the Esmeralda, instead of descending, as I

VOL, V, 2x


498


did, favoured by a rapid current. The same
river, which rises to the east of that mission,
and sends a branch (the Cassiquiare) to the
Rio Negro, continues it’s course, without inter-
ruption, toward Santa Barbara and San Fer-
nando de Atabapo. It is that part of the
Upper Oroonoko, which runs from the south-
east to the north-west, and which is called Rio
Paragua by the Indians. The same river, after
having mingled it’s waters with those of the
Guaviare and the Atabapo, flows toward the
north, and passes over the Great Cataracts.
All these circumstances are in general well
marked in the great map of La Cruz; but M.
Buache no doubt supposed, that in the dif-
ferent voyages said to have been performed by
water from the Amazon to the Oroonoko, the
boats had been dragged over some portage
(arastradero) from one stream to another. This
respectable geographer might be led so much
the more readily to admit, that the rivers had
not in nature the course prescribed to them in
the new Spanish maps, as these very maps
display the most singular and improbable branch-
ings of confluent streams around lake Parima
(that pretended White Sea six hundred leagues
square), We might apply to the Oroonoko what
father Acunha said of the Amazon, when des-
cribing it’s marvels, “ naecieron hermanadas


499


en las cosas. grandes la novedad y el descre-
dito*.”

Had the nations of the lower region of equi-
noxial America participated in the civilization
spread over the cold and alpine region, that im-
mense Mesopotamia between the Oroonoko and
the Amazon would have favored the develop-
ment of their industry, animated their com-
merce, and accelerated the progress of social
order. We see every where in the ancient
world the influence of locality on the dawning
civilization of nations}. The island of Meroe
between the Astaboras and the Nile, the Pun-
jab of the Indus, the Duab of the Ganges, and
the Mesopotamia of the Euphrates, furnish ex-
amples, that are justly celebrated in the annals
of the human race. But the feeble tribes, that
wander in the savannahs and the woods of east-
ern America, have little profited from the ad-
vantages of their soil, and the interbranchings
of their rivers. The distant incursions of the
Caribbees, who went up the Oroonoko, the Cas-
siquiare, and the Rio Negro, to carry off slaves
and exercise pillage, compelled some rude tribes
to rouse themselves from their indolence, and
form associations for their common defence ;


* « Tn great objects” (in the extraordinary phenomena of —
nature) “ novelty always excites mistrust.”
+ Ritwgr, Erdkunde, vol.i, p. 181.
2x2


500


the little good, however, which these wars with
the Caribbees (the Bedoueens of the rivers of
Guyana) produced, was a slight compensation
for the evils that followed in their train, by
rendering the manners of the tribes more fero-
cious, and diminishing their population. We
cannot doubt, that the physical aspect of Greece,
intersected by small chains of mountains, and
mediterranean gulfs, contributed at the dawn of
civilization to the intellectual development of
the Greeks. But the action of this influence of
climate, and of the configuration of the soil, is
felt in all it’s force only among a race of men,
who, endowed with a happy disposition of the
mental faculties, receive some exterior impulse.
In studying the history of our species, we see, at
certain distances, these foci of ancient civiliza-
tion dispersed over the Globe like luminous
points; and we are struck by the inequality
of improvement in nations inhabiting analo-
gous climates, and whose native soil appears
equally favoured by the most precious gifts of
nature.

Since my departure from the banks of the
Oroonoko and the Amazon, a new era unfolds
itself inthe social state of the nations of the West. ~
The fury of civil discussions will be succeeded by
the blessings of peace, and a freer development
of the arts of industry. The bifurcation of the
Oroonoko, the isthmus of Tuamini, so easy to


501


pass over by an artificial canal, will fix the atten-
tion of commercial Europe.. The Cassiquiare,
as broad as the Rhine, and the course of which
is one hundred and eighty miles in length, will
no longer form in vain a navigable canal be-
tween two basins of rivers, which havea surface
of one hundred and ninety thousand square
leagues. The grain of New Grenada will be
carried to the banks of the Rio Negro; boats
will descend from the sources of the Napo and
the Ucuyabe, from the Andes of Quito and of
Upper Peru, to the mouths of the Oroonoko, a
distance which equals that from 'Tombuctoo to
Marseilles. A country nine or ten times larger
than Spain, and enriched with the most varied
productions, is navigable in every direction, by
the medium of the natural canal of the Cassi-
quiare, and the bifurcation of the rivers. This
phenomenon, which will one day be so impor-
iant for the political connections of nations,
unquestionably deserved to be carefully exa-
mained...


CHAPTER XXIV.


The Upper Oroonoko, from Esmeralda to the
confluence of the Guaviare.—Second passage
across the Cataracts of Atures and Maypures.
—Lower Oroonoko between the mouth of the
Rio Apure and Angostura, the capital of
Spanish Guyana.


[rr remains for me to speak of the most solitary
and remote Christian settlement on the Upper
Oroonoko. Opposite the point where the bifur-
cation takes place, the granitic group of Duida
rises in an amphitheatre on the right bank of the
river. This mountain, which the missionaries
calla volcano, is nearly 8000 feet high. Perpendi-
cular on the south and the west, it has an aspect of
solemn greatness ; it’s summit is bare and stony,
but, wherever it’s less steep declivities are co-
vered with mould, vast forests appear suspend-
ed on. it’s flanks. At the foot of Duida is
placed the mission of Esmeralda, a little ham-
let with eighty inhabitants, surrounded by a
lovely plain, bathed by rills of black, but limpid


503


waters. This is a real meadow, decorated with
clumps of the mauritia palm, which is the sago-
tree of America. Nearer the mountain, the dis-
tance of which from the Cross of the mission I
found to be 7300 toises, the marshy plain changes
to a savannah, and spends itself along the lower
region of the Cordillera. Large pine-apples are
there found of a delicious flavour; that species
of bromelia always grows solitary among the
gramina®* like our colchicum autumnale, while
the karatas, another species of the same genus,
is a social plant, like our whortles and. heaths.
The pine-apples of Esmeralda are cultivated
throughout Guyana. - There are certain spots in
America, as in Europe, where, different fruits
attain their highest’ degree of perfection.” ‘The
sapota plum (achras) should be eaten at the
Island of Margaretta or at Cumana: the chili-
moyas (very different from the custard apple,
and sweet sop of the West India Islands,) at
Loxa, in Peru; the grenadilles, or parchas, at
Caraccas ; and the pine-apple at Esmeralda, or
in the island of Cuba; to find no exaggeration
in the praises, which the first travellers bestowed
on the excellence of the productions of the torrid


* The country round Esmeralda abounds in graminez and
cyperacee ; setaria composita, paspalum conjugatum, pariana
campestris, mariscus levis, juncus floribundus, ehonurus ciliaris,
choetospora capitata.


504

zone. ‘The pine-apple forms the ornament of
the fields near the Havanndh, where it is planted
in parallel rows; on the sides of the Duida it
embellishes the turf of the savannahs, lifting it’s
yellow fruit, crowned with a bunch of silvery
leaves, above the setaria, the paspalum, and a
few cyperaceze. This plant, which the Indians
of the Oroonoko call ana-curua, has been propa-
gated ever since the sixteenth century in the in-
terior of China*, and some English travellers
found it recently, together with other plants
indubitably American, (maize, cassava, tobacco,
and pimento) on the banks of the Rio Congo, in
Africa.

There is no missionary at Esmeralda; the
monk, appointed to celebrate mass in that ham-
let, is settled at Santa Barbara, more than fifty
leagues distant.. It requires four days to go up
the river; and he therefore visits this spot but
five or six times ina year. We were cordially
received by an old officer, who took us for Ca-
talonian shopkeepers, whom our little trade haa
led to the missions. On seeing packages of
paper for the purpose of drying our plants, he
smiled at our simple ignorance. ‘“ You come,”


* See my Essai polit., vol. i, p. 442. No doubt remains of
the American origin of the bromelia ananas. Cayley, Life of
Raleigh, vol.i, p. 61. Gili, vol. i, p. 210, 336. Robert
Brown, Geogr. Observ. on the Plants of the Congo, 1818, p. 50.


505


said he, “ toa country, where this kind of mer-
chandize has no sale; we write little here ; and
the dried leaves of maize, the platano (plantain
tree), and the wijaho (heliconia), serve us, like
paper in Europe, to wrap up needles, fish hooks,
and other little articles, of which we are careful.”
This old officer united in his person the civil


and ecclesiastical. authority. He taught the
children, I will not say the Catechism, but the
Rosary ; he rang the bells to amuse himself; and,
impelled by an ardent zeal for the service of the
church, sometimes used. his chorister’s wand in
a manner not very agreeable to the natives.
Notwithstanding the extreme smallness of the
mission, three Indian languages are spoken at
Esmeralda; the Idapimanare, the Catarapenno,
and the Maquiritan. The last of these prevails
in the Upper Oroonoko, from the confluence of
the Ventuari as far as that of the Padamo* ; as
the Caribbee does in the Lower Oroonoko; the
Otomac, near the confluence of the Apure; the
Tumanac and the Maypure, at the Great Cata-
racts ; and the Maravitan, on the banks of the
Rio Negro. These are the five, or six lan-


* The Arivirianoes of the banks of the Ventuario speak a
dialect of the language of the Maquiritares. “The latter live
jointly with a tribe of the Macoes in the savannahs, that are
traversed by the Padamo, They are so numerous, that they

have even given their name to this tributary stream of the
Oroonoko. (See the great map of La Cruz.)


506


guages most generally spoken. We were sur-
prized to find at Esmeralda many zamboes, mu-
lattoes, and copper-coloured people, who call
themselves Espannoles, and fancy they are white,
because they are not so red as the Indians.
These people live in the most absolute want ;
they have for the most part been sent hither in
banishment (desterrados). Solano, in his haste
to found colonies in the interior of the country,
in order to guard it’s entrance against the Por-
tugueze, assembled in the Llanos, and as far as
the island of Margaretta, vagabonds and malefac-
tors, whom justice had vainly pursued, and made
them go up the Oroonoko to join the unhappy
Indians, who had been carried off from the
woods. A mineralogical error gave celebrity to
Esmeralda. The granites of Duida and Mara-
guaca contain in open veins fine rock crys-
tals, some of them of great transparency, others
coloured by chlorit, or blended with actinote;
and they were taken for diamonds and emeralds.

So near the sources of the Oroonoko, we
heard of nothing in these mountains but the
proximity of El Dorado, the lake Parima, and
the ruins of the great city of Manoa. A man,
still known in the country for his credulity and
his love of exaggeration, don Apollinario Diez
de la Fuente, assumed the pompous title of ca-
pitan poblador, and cabo militar of the fort of
Cassiquiare. This fort consisted of a few trunks


507


of trees, joined together by planks; and, to-
complete the deception, a demand was made at
Madrid of the privileges of a villa for the mis-
sion of Esmeralda, which was but a hamlet with
twelve or fifteen huts. It is to be feared, that
don Apollinario, who was afterward governor
of the province of Los Quixos *, had some influ-
ence in the construction of the maps of La Cruz
and Surville. Knowing simply the points of the
compass, he did not hesitate, in the numerous
memoirs which he sent to the court, to style
himself the cosmographer of the expedition of
the boundaries.

While the chiefs of that expedition were well
persuaded of the existence of the Nueva Villa de


Esmeraldas, and of the mineral riches of the
Cerro Duida, which contains only mica, rock-
crystal, actinote, and ruthile (titanite), a colony
composed. of elements altogether heterogeneous,
perished by degrees. The vagabonds of the
Llanos had as little taste for labour as the na-


tives, who were compelled to live “ within the
sound of the bell.” The former found a motive
in their pride, to justify their indolence. In the
missions, every mulatto, who is not decidedly
black as an African, or copper-coloured as an
Indian, calls himself a Spaniard ; he belongs to
the gente de razon, the race endued with reason;


* Dependent on the kingdom of Quito,


508


and that reason, sometimes, it must be admitted,
arrogant and indolent, persuaded the whites,
and those who fancy they are so, that to till the
ground is the task of slaves, of pottos and of the
native neophytes. The colony of Esmeralda
had been founded according to the principles of
that of New Holland ; but it was far from being
governed with the same wisdom. The American
colonists, being separated from their native soil,
not by seas, but by- forests intermixed with sa-
vannahs, dispersed ; some taking the road to the
north, toward the Caura and the Carony ; others
proceeding south to the Portugueze possessions.
Thus the celebrity of this villa, and of the eme-
rald mines of Duida,. vanished in a few years,
and Esmeralda, on account of the immense
number of insects that obscure the air at all sea-
sons of the year, was regarded by the monks as
a place of banishment and malediction.

I mentioned above, that the superior of the
missions, when he would make the lay brothers
return to their duty, menaces sometimes to send
them to Esmeralda; “ that is,” say the monks,
“ to be condemned to the moschettoes ; to be de-
voured by those buzzing flies (zancudos gritones),
with which God has peopled the earth to chas-
tise man*.” Such strange punishments have


* <¢ Estos mosquitos que llaman zancudos gritones que pa-


rece los cria la naturaleza para castigo y tormento. de los.
hombres.” (Fray Pedro Simon. p. 481.)


509


not always affected solely the lay brothers.
There happened in 1788 one of those monastic
revolutions, of which it is difficult to form a
conception in Europe, according to the ideas
that prevail of the peaceful state of the Christian
settlements in the New World. During a long
time the monks of the order of St. Francis, set-
tled in Guyana, had been desirous of forming a
separate republic, and rendering themselves in-
dependent of the college of Piritu at Nueva Bar-
celona. Discontented with the election of Fray
Gutierez de Aguilera, chosen by 4 general
chapter, and confirmed by the king in the im-
portant office of president of the missions, five or
six monks of the Upper Oroonoko, the Cassi-
quiare, and the Rio Negro, assembled together
at San Fernando de Atabapo; chose hastily a
new superior from their own body; and caused
the old one, who, unfortunately for himself, had.
come to visit those countries, to be seized. They
put him in irons, threw him into a boat, and.
conducted him to Esmeralda, as to a place of
proscription. The great distance of the coast
from the theatre of this revolution led the monks
to hope, that their crime would remain long un-
known beyond the Great Cataracts. They
wished to gain time to intrigue, to negotiate, to
frame acts of accusation, and employ the little
artifices, by which, in every country, the invalid-
ity of a first election is proved. The ancient


510


superior groaned in his prison at Esmeralda, and
fell dangerously ill from the double influence of
the excessive heat, and the continual irritation
of the moschettoes. WHappily for fallen power
the monks did not remain united. A missionary
of the Cassiquiare conceived serious alarms on
the issue of this affair; he dreaded being sent a
prisoner to Cadiz, or, as they say in the colonies,
baxo partido de registro ; fear made him change
his party, and he suddenly disappeared. Indians
were placed on the watch at the mouth of the
Atabapo, at the Great Cataracts, and wherever
the fugitive was likely to pass in order to reach
the Lower Oroonoko. Notwithstanding these
precautions, he arrived at Angostura, and thence
reached the college of the missions of Piritu ;
denounced his colleagues ; and was appointed,
in recompense of this information, to arrest
those with whom he had conspired against the
president of the missions*, At Esmeralda,
where the political events that have agitated


* Two of the missionaries, considered as the leaders of the
insurrection were embarked at Angostura, in order to be tried
in Spain. The vessel in which they were conveyed became
leaky, and put into Spanish Harbour in the island of Trinj-
dad. The governor Chacon interested himself in the fate of
the monks ; they were pardoned, a sally of vivacity somewhat
contrary to monastic discipline, and were again employed in
the missions. I was acquainted with them both during my
abode in South America.


oll


Europe for thirty years past have not yet-been
heard of, a lively interest is still preserved for
what is called el alboroto de los frailes (the
sedition of the monks). In this country, as in
the East, no conception is formed of any other
revolutions than those that are made by the
governors themselves ; and we have just seen,
that the effects are not very alarming.

If the villa of Esmeralda, with a population of
twelve or fifteen families, be at present consider-
ed as a frightful abode, this must be attributed
to the want of cultivation, the distance from
every other inhabited country, and the excessive
quantity of moschettoes. The site of the mis-
sion is highly picturesque; the surrounding
country is lovely, and of great fertility. I never
saw clusters of plaintains of so large a size as
these; and indigo, sugar, and cacao might be pro-
ducedin abundance, if any trouble were taken for
their cultivation. The Cerro Duidais surrounded
with fine pasturage ; and, if the Observantins of
the college of Piritu partook a little of the indus-
try of the Catalonian Capuchins settled on the
banks of the Carony, numerous herds would be
seen wandering between the Cunucunumo and
the Padamo. In the present state of things, not
a cow or a horse is to be found; and the inha-
bitants, victims of their own indolence, are often
reduced to eat hams of alouate monkies, and
flour of the bones of fish, of which I shall have


512


occasion to speak hereafter. A little cassava
and a few plantains only are cultivated; and
when the fishery is not abundant, the natives o¢
a country so favoured by nature are exposed to
the most cruel privations.

The pilots of the small number of boats, that
go from the Rio Negro to Angostura by the
Cassiquiare, being afraid to ascend as far as
Esmeralda, this mission would have been much
better placed at the point of the bifurcation of
the Oroonoko. It is probable, that this vast
country will not always be doomed to the deser-
tion in which it has hitherto been left from the
errors of monkish administration, and the spirit
of monopoly that characterises corporations. We
may even predict on what points of the Oroo-
noko industry and commerce will become most
active. In every zone, population is concentred
at the mouth of tributary streams. The Rio
Apure, by which the productions of the provinces
of Varinas and Merida are exported, will give
great importance to the little town of Cabruta,
which will then be in rivalship with San Fer-
nando de Apure, where all commerce has hitherto
centred. Higher up, a new settlement will be
formed at the confluence of the Meta, which

“communicates with New Grenada by the Lla-
nos of Casanare. The two missions of the
Cataracts will increase from the activity, to
which the transport of oats at those points will


513


give rise; for, an unhealthy and damp climate,
and the excessive abundance of moschettoes, will .
as little impede the progress of cultivation at the
Oroonoko, as at the Rio Magdalena, whenever a
powerful mercantile interest shall call new
planters thither. Habitual evils are those which
are least felt; and men born in America do not
suffer the same intensity of pain as Europeans
recently arrived. Perhaps also the destruction
of forests round the inhabited places, although
slow, will a little diminish the cruel torment of
the tipulary insects. San Fernando de Atabapo,
Javita, San Carlos, and Esmeralda, appear (from
their situation at the mouth of the Guaviare, the
portage between Tuamini and the Rio Negro,
the confluence of the Cassiquiare, and the point
of bifurcation of the Upper Oroonoko) to pro-
mise a considerable increase of population and
prosperity. The same circumstances will take
place in the fertile but uncultivated countries,
through which flow the Guallaga, the Amazon,
and the Oroonoko ; as well as at the isthmus of
Panama, the lake of Nicaragua, and the Rio
Huasacualeo, which furnish a communication
between the two seas. ‘The imperfection of ‘po-
litical institutions may for ages have converted
places, where the commerce of the world should
be found concentred, into deserts ; but the time
approaches, when these obstacles will exist no
longer. A vicious administration cannot always,
VOL. V. 2 pe


514


struggle against the united interests of men;
and civilization will be carried insensibly into
those countries, the great destinies of which
nature itself proclaims, by the physical configu-
ration of the soil, the immense windings of the
rivers, and the proximity of two seas, that bathe
the coasts of Europe and of India.

Esmeralda is the most celebrated spot on the
Oroonoko for the fabrication of that active poi-
son *, which is employed in war, in the chace,
and, what is singular enough, as a remedy for
gastric obstructions. The poison of the ticunas
of the Amazon, the upas-tieute of Java, and the
curare of Guyana, are the most deleterious
substances that are known. Raleigh+-, toward
the end of the sixteenth century, had heard the
name of wrari pronounced as being a vegetable
substance, with which arrows were envenomed ;
yet no fixed notions of this poison had reached
Europe. The missionaries Gumilla and Gili had
not been able to penetrate into the country,
where the curare is manufactured. Gumilla
asserts, that “this preparation was enveloped
in great mystery ; that it’s principal ingredient
was furnished by a subterraneous plant, by a
tuberose-root, which never puts forth leaves, and
which is called the root, by way of eminence,


* In Tamanac, marana, in Maypure, macuri.
+ Cayley’s Life of Raleigh, vol. ii, p. 18. Ap. p. 8.


515


raiz de si misma ; that the venomous exhalations,


which arise from the pots, cause the old women
(the most useless) to perish, who are chosen to
watch over this operation; finally, that these
vegetable juices never appear sufficiently con-
centrated, till a few drops produce at a distance
a repulsive action on the blood. An Indian
wounds himself slightly ; and a dart, dipped in
the liquid curare, is held near the wound. If it
make the blood return to the vessels without
having been brought into contact with them,
ihe poison is judged to be sufficiently concen-
trated.” I shall not stop to refute these popular
tales collected by Father Gumilla. Why indeed
should this missionary have hesitated to admit
the action of the curare at a distance, when he
had no doubt of the properties of a plant, which
caused vomiting or purging, according as the
leaves had been torn upward or downward from
their stem* ?

When we arrived at Esmeralda, the greater
part of the Indians were returning from an ex-


* « [Jamo la atencion de los Fisicos sobre el fraylecillo 6
la tuatua (eu euphorbiacea). Quantas ojas comiere, tan-
tas evacuaciones ha de expeler. Si arranca las ojas tirano
acia abaxo, cada oja causa una evacuacion; si las arranca

hacia arriba, causan vomitos; y si arrancan unas para arriba y
otras acia abaxo, concurre uno y otro efecto.” Gunilla, vol.
ii, p. 298, Caulin, p. 29.

2u2


'


516


cursion, which they had made to the east beyond
the Rio Padamo, to gather juvias, or the fruit
of the bertholletia, and the liana which yields
the curare. Their return was celebrated by a
festival, which is called in the mission la fiesta
de las juvias, and which resembles our harvest
homes and vintage feasts. ‘The women had pre-
pared a quantity of fermented liquor, and during
two days the Indians were in a state of intoxica-
tion. Among nations that attach great impor-
tance to the fruits of the palm-trees, and of some
others useful for the nourishment of man, the
period when these fruits are gathered is marked
by public rejoicings, and time is divided accord-
ing to these festivals, which succeed oné another


in a course invariably the same. We were for-
tunate enough to find an old Indian less drunk
than the rest, who was employed in preparing
the curare poison from freshly-gathered plants.
He was the chemist of the place. We found at
his dwelling large earthen pots for boiling the
vegetable juice, shallower vessels to favour the


evaporation by a larger surface, and leaves of
the plaintain tree rolled up in the shape of our
filters, and used to filtrate the liquids, more or
less loaded with fibrous matter. The greatest
order and neatness prevailed in this hut; which
was transformed into a chemical laboratory.
The Indian, who was to instruct us, is known
throughout the mission by the name of the mas¢er


517


of poison (amo del curare); he had that self-suf-
ficient air and tone of pedantry, of which the
pharmacopolists of Europe were formerly ac-
cused. “I know,” said he, “ that the whites
have the secret of fabricating soap, and that
plack powder, which has the defect of making a
noise, and killing animals, when they are want-


ed. The curare, which we prepare from father


to son, is superior to any thing you can make
down yonder (beyond sea). It is the juice of an
herb, which kills silently (without any one
knowing whence the stroke comes).”

This chemical operation, to which the master
of the curare attached so much importance, ap-
peared to us extremely simple. The liana (be-
juco), which is used at Esmeralda for the prepa-
ration of the poison, bears the same name as in
ihe forests of Javita. It is the hejuco de mava-
cure, which is gathered in abundance east of the
mission, on the left bank of the Oroonoko, be-
yond the Rio Amaguaca, in the mountainous
and granitic lands of Guanaya and Yumariquin.
Although the bundles of beuco, which we found
in the hut of the Indian, were entirely destitute
of leaves, we had no doubt of their being pro-
duced by the same plant of the strychnos family

"(nearly allied to the rouhamon of Aublet), which
we had examined in the forest of Pimichin *.


* Sce above p. 280. I shall here insert the description of ‘


o18


The mavacure is employed fresh or dried indif-


the curare, or bejuco de Mavacure, taken from a mantuscript,
yet unpublished of my learned fellow labourer Mr. Kunth,
Corresponding member of the Institute. «* Ramuli lignosi,
oppositi,ramulo altero abortivo, teretiusculi, fuscescenti-tomen-
tosi, inter petiolos lineola pilosa notati, gemmula aut processu
filiformi (pedunculo?) terminati. Fora opposita, breviter pe-
tiolata, ovato-oblonga, acuminata, integerrima, reticulato-trip-
linervia,nervo medio subtus prominente,membranacea, ciliata,
utrinque glabra,nervo medio fuscescenti-tomentoso,lacte viridia,
Subtus pallidiora, 1}-24 pollices longa,8-9 lineaslata. PETIOLI
lineam longi,tomentosi,inarticulati.” Mr.Kunth adds,The curare
cannot be a species of the genus phyllantus, because the leaves
of the latter are alternate,and provided with two stipule,while
in the curare the leaves are opposite, and without any trace of
stipule. The idea of Mr, Willdenow, that the curare belongs
to the genus coriaria, of which the berries only are poisonous»
is altogether as little admissible. The leaves of the coriaria are
somewhat fleshy, and sometimes alternate 3 in the curare they
are membranous, and constantly opposite to each other. The
petiole, in the coriaria, are perceptibly articulated to the
branches, and fall off easily in the dried specimens; the curare,
on the contrary, shows no articulation, The small gemmulz,
which de Jussieu mentions in describing the coriaria in his Fa-
milies of Plants, are not found in the curare. Finally, the young
branches are angular in the coriaria,and cylindrical in the curare.
They have in the latter, a tendency to. stretch out spirally as
im the rouhamon of Aublet (lasiostoma, Willd.). It is to
this last genus I would assimilate the curare ; for the real
strychnee appear to belong exclusively to the East Indies,
We find in the curare a row of small hairs between each pair
of petiole ; and this character, long since observed in the
strychnex, which are known for their deleterious properties, is
of great weight in the comparison, which we think ourselves
justified in making between such venomous plants.”


519


ferently during several weeks. The juice of the
liana, when it has been recently gathered, is not
regarded as poisonous ; perhaps it acts in a sen-
sible manner only when. it is strongly concen-
irated. It is the bark and a part of the albur-
num, which contain this terrible poison. Branches
of the mavacure 4 or 5 lines in diameter are
scraped with a knife ; and the bark that comes
off ig bruised, and reduced into very thin fila-
ments, on the stone employed for grinding cas-
sava. The venomous juice being yellow, the
whole fibrous mass takes this colour. It is
thrown into a funnel nine inches high, with an
opening 4 inches wide. This funnel was of all
the instruments of the Indian laboratory that of
which the master of poison seemed to be most


proud. He asked us repeatedly, if por alla
(down yonder, that is in Europe) we had ever
seen any thing to be compared to his embudo.
It was a leaf of the plantain-tree rolled up in the
form of a cone, and placed in another stronger
cone made of the leaves of the palm-tree. The
whole of this apparatus was supported by slight


frame work made of the petioli and ribs of palm-
leaves. A cold infusion is first prepared by pouring
water on the fibrous matter, which is the ground
bark of the mavacure. A yellowish water filters
during several hours, drop by drop, through the
leafy funnel. This filtered water is the venom
ous liquor, but it acquires strength only when it


520


is concentrated by evaporation, like melasses, in
a large earthen pot. The Indian from time to
time invited us to taste the liquid; it’s taste,
more or less bitter, decides when the concentra-
tion by fire has been carried sufficiently far.
There is no dangerin this operation,the curare be-
ing deleterious only when it comes into immediate
contact with the blood. The vapors therefore,
that are disengaged from the pans, are not
hurtful, notwithstanding what has been asserted
on this point by the missionaries of the Oroonoko.
Fontana, in his fine experiments on the poison of
the ticunas of the river of Amazons, long ago
proved, that the vapours rising from this poison,
when thrown on burning charcoal, may be in-
haled without apprehension ; and that it is false
as M. de La Condamine has announced, that
Indian women, when condemned to death, have
been killed by the vapours of the poison of the
ticunas.

The most concentrated juice of the mavacure
is not thick enough to stick to the darts. Itis
therefore only to give a body to the poison, that
another vegetable juice, extremely glutinous,
drawn from a tree with large leaves, called
kiracaguero, is poured into the concentrated in-
fusion. As this tree grows at a great distance
from: Esmeralda, and was at that period as
destitute of flowers and fruits as the bejuco de
mavacure, we could not determine it botani-


cally. 1 have several times mentioned that kind
of fatality, which withholds the most interesting
plants from the examination of travellers, while
thousands of others, of the chemical properties
of which we are ignorant, are found loaded with
flowers and fruits. In travelling rapidly, even
within the tropics, where the flowering of the
ligneous plants is ofsuch long duration, scarcely
an eighth of the trees can be seen furnishing the
essential parts of fructification. The chances of
being able to determine, I do not say the family,
but the genus and species, is consequently as 1
to 8; and it may be conceived, that this unfa-
vourable chance is felt most powerfully, when it
deprives us of the intimate knowledge of objects,
which afford a higher interest than that of
descriptive botany.

At the instant when the glutinous juice of the
kiracaguero tree is poured into the venomous
liquor well concentrated, and kept in a state of
ebullition, it blackens, and-coagulates into a .
mass of the consistence of tar, or of a thick
sirup. This mass is the curare of commerce.
When we hear the Indians say, that the kiraca-
guero is as necessary as the bejuco de mavacure
to the fabrication of the poison, we may be led
into error, supposing, that, the former also
contains some deleterious principle, while. it
only serves (as the algarobbo, or any other
gummy substance would do), to give more body


922


the concentrated juice of the curare. The change
of colour, which the mixture undergoes, is owing
to the decomposition of a hydruret of carbon; the
hydrogen is burned, and the carbon is set free.
The curare is sold in little calebashes ; but it’s
preparation being in the hands of a few families,
and the quantity of poison attached to each dart
being extremely small, the curare of the first
quality, that of Esmeralda and Mandavaca, is
sold at avery high price. I have seen 5 or 6
franks paid for two ounces. This substance,
when dried, resembles opium; but it attracts
humidity powerfully, when it is exposed to the
air. It’s taste is of an agreeable bitter, and M.
Bonpland and myself have often swallowed small
portions of it. There is no danger in so doing,
if it be certain, that neither lips nor gums bleed.
In the recent experiments made by Mr. Mangili
on the venom of the viper, one of his assistants
swallowed all the venom that could be extracted
from four large vipers of Italy, without being
affected by it*. The' Indians consider the cu.
rare, taken internally, as an excellent stomachic.
The same poison prepared by the Piraoas and
Salivas +, though it has some celebrity, is not


* Giornale di Fisica e di Chimica, vol. ix, p. 458,

+ The Cabres, or Caveres, before their almost total des-
traction, were also much addicted to the fabrication of the
curare.


923


so much esteemed as that of Esmeralda, ‘The
process of this preparation appears to be every
where nearly the same ; but there is no proof,
that the different poisons sold by the same name
at the Oroonoko and the Amazon are identical,
and drawn from the same plants. Mr. Orfila
therefore, in his excellent work on general Toxi-
cology, has very judiciously separated the woo-
vara of Dutch Guyana, the curare of the Oroo-
noko, the ticuna of the Amazon, and all those
substances, which have been too vaguely united
under the name of American poisons*. Perhaps
some future day one and the same alkaline prin-
ciple, similar to the morphin of opium, and the
vauquelin of the strychnos, will be found in ve-
nomous plants, which belong to different ge-
nera.

At the Oroonoko, the curare de raix (of the
root) is distinguished from the curare de bejuco
(of lianas, or of the bark of branches). We
saw only the latter prepared ; the former is
weaker, and much less esteemed. At the river
of the Amazons we learned to distinguish the
poisons of the Ticuna, Yagua, Peva, and Xibaro
Indians, which, proceeding from the same plant,
perhaps differ only by a more or less careful pre-
paration. The ¢oxique des Ticunas, to which M.


* Emmer, de Effectu Venenorum weget, American., Tub.
1817,


524


de la Condamine has given so much celebrity in
Europe, and which begins to bear the name of
ticuna, somewhat improperly, is extracted from
a liana, that grows in the island of Mormorote,
in the Upper Maragnon. This tovique belongs
partly to the Ticunas, who remain independant
on the Spanish territory near the sources of the
Yacarique ; and partly to Indians of the same
tribe, inhabiting the Portugueze mission. of
Loreto. Poisons being indispensable in those
climates to the existence of hunting nations, the
missionaries of the Oroonoko and the Amazon
seldom oppose this kind of manufacture. The
poisons we have just named differ totally from
that of La Peca*, and from the poison of Lamas
and of Moyobamba. I enter into these details,
because the vestiges of plants, which we were
able to examine, proved to us (contrary to the
common opinion), that the three toxiques of the
Ticunas, of La Peca, and of Moyobamba, are
not taken from the same species, probably not
even from congeneric plants. In proportion as
the preparation of the curare is simple, that of
the poison of Moyobamba is long and compli-
cated. With the juice of the bejuco de ambihu-
asca, which is the principal ingredient, are
mixed pimento (capsicum), tobacco, barbasco
{jacquinia armillaris), sanango (tabernzemon-


* A village of the province of Jaen de Bracamoros.


tana), and the milk of some other apocynez.
The fresh juice of the ambihuasca exerts a dele-
terious action, if it touch the blood*; the juice
of the mavacure is a mortal poison only when it
is concentrated by fire ; and ebullition deprives
the juice of the root of jatropha manihot (yucca
amarga) of all its baneful qualities, In rub-
bing a long time between my fingers the liana
which yields the cruel poison of La Peca, when
the weather was excessively hot, my hands were
benumbed; and a person who was employed
with me felt the same effects from this rapid
absorption by the uninjured integuments.

I shall not here enter into any detail on the
physiological properties of those poisons of the
New World, which kill with the same prompti-
tude as the strychneze of Asia (the vomit nut,
the upas tieutee, and the bean of Saint Ignatius),
but without producing vomiting when they are
received into the stomach, and without an-
nouncing the approach of death by the violent
excitement of the spinal marrow. During our
abode in America, we sent some curare of the
Oroonoko, and joints of bamboo filled with the
poison. of the Ticunas and of Moyobamba, to
Mr. Fourcroy and Mr. Vauquelin; and, after
our return, we also furnished Mr. Magendie and


* Manuscript notes of Mr, Andivieles, an inhabitant of
Lamas.


526


Mr. Delille, who have employed themselves so
usefully on the fowiques of the torrid zone, with
-curare enfeebled by being transported through
damp countries. Scarcely a fowl is eaten on
the banks of the Oroonoko, which has not been
killed with a poisoned arrow. The missionaries
pretend, that the flesh of animals is never so
good, as when these means are employed. Fa-_
ther Zea, who accompanied us, though ill of a
tertian fever, caused every morning the live
fowl allotted for our repast, to be brought to his
hammock together with an arrow. Notwith-
standing his habitual state of weakness, he
would not confide this operation, to which he
attached great importance, to any other person.
Large birds, a guan (pava de monte) for in-
stance, or a curassoa (alector), when wounded -
in the thigh, perish in two or three minutes;
but it is often ten or twelve before a pig ora
pecari expires. M. Bonpland found, that the
same poison, bought in different villages, varied
much. We had procured at the river of Ama-
zons some real toxique of the Ticuna Indi-
ans, which was weaker than all the varicties
of the curare of the Oroonoko. It would be
useless to tranquillize travellers respecting the
apprehensions, which they often testify at their
arrival in the missions, on learning that the
fowls, monkeys, guanas, and even the fish which
they eat, have been killed with poisoned arrows.


527


These fears vanish by habit and reasoning. Mr.
Magendie has even proved by ingenious experi-
ments on transfusion, that the blood of animals,
in which the bitter strychnoses of India have
produced a deleterious effect, has no fatal action
on other animals. A dog received a consider-
able quantity of poisoned blood into his veins
without any trace of irritation being perceived
in the spinal marrow*.

I placed the most active curare in contact
with the crural nerves of a frog, without per-
ceiving any sensible change in measuring the
degree of irritability of the organs, by means of
an arc formed of heterogeneous metals. Galva-
nic experiments succeeded upon birds, some
minutes after I had killed them with a poisoned
arrow. These observations are not uninterest-
ing, when we recollect, that a solution of the
upas tieute poured upon the sciatic nerve, or
insinuated into the texture of the nerve, pro-
duces also a sensible effect on the irritability of
the organs by immediate contact with the me-
dullary substance}. The danger ofthe curare, as
of most of the other strychnez, (for we continue
to believe, that the mavacure belongs to a neigh-
bouring family,) results only from the action of
the poison on the vascular system. At May-


* Magendie, sur les Organes de ? Absorption, 1809, p. 18.
- + Raffineau-Delille, sur le Poison de Java, 1809, p. 15.


528


pures, a Zambo, descended from an Indian and a


Negro, prepared for Mr. Bonpland some of those
poisoned arrows, that are placed in sarbacans to
kill small monkeys or birds. He was a car-
penter of remarkable muscular strength. Havy-
ing had the imprudence to rub the curare be-
tween his fingers after being slightly wounded,
he fell on the ground seized with a vertigo, that
lasted nearly half an hour. Happily it was
only weakened curare (destemplado), which is
used for very small animals, that is, for those
which it is pretended can be recalled to life by
putting muriat of soda into tle wound. During
our voyage in returning from Esmeralda to
Atures, I escaped myself an imminent dan-
ger. The curare, having imbibed the humidity
of the air, had become fluid, and was spilt from
an ill-closed vessel upon our linen. They who
washed the linen had neglected to examine the
inside of a stocking, which was filled with cwrare ;
and it was only on touching this glutinous mat-
ter with my hand, that I was warned not to draw
on the poisoned stocking. The danger was so
much the greater, as my feet at that time
bled from the wounds made by chegoes (pulex
penetrans), which had been ill extirpated. This
incident may remind travellers of the prudence
requisite in the conveyance of poisons.

A fine chemical and physiological investiga-
tion remains to be accomplished in Europe on


529


the toxiques. of the New World, when, by more
frequent communications, the curare de bejuco,
the curare de raiz, and the various poisons of
the Amazon, Guallaga, and Brazil, can be pro-
cured, without being confounded together, from
the places where they are prepared. Chemists
having discovered the pure hydrocyanic acid *
and so many new substances eminently dele-.
terious, the introduction of poisons prepared by
Savage nations will be less feared in Europe ;
we cannot however appeal too strongly to the
vigilance of those; who in the midst of very
populous cities (the centres of civilization, mi-
sery, and depravity) preserve such noxious sub-
stances. Our botanical knowledge of the plants
employed in making poison can be but very
Slowly acquired. Most of the Indians, who
addict themselves to the fabrication of poisoned
arrows, are totally ignorant of the nature of
the venomous substances, which they receive
from other people. A mysterious veil every
where covers. the history of toxiques and of
antidotes. Their preparation among the sa-


* M. Gay-Lussac observes, that this- acid, for the fine
discovery of which we are indebted to him, cannot become
very dangerous to society, because it’s smell betrays it’s
presence, and because the facility with which it is decom-
posed makes it difficult to preserve,

VOL, V. 2M


e


530


vages is the monopoly of the piaches, who are at
once priests, jugglers, and physicians ; it is only


from the natives transplanted to the missions,
that any certain notions can be acquired on
matters so problematical. Ages had elapsed
before the Europeans were taught to know, from
ihe investigations of Mr. Mutis, the bejuco del


guaco (mikania guaco*), which is the most
powerful of all antidotes against the bite of
serpents, and of which we were fortunate enough
to give the first botanical description.

The opinion is very general in the missions,
that no cure is possible, if the curare be fresh,
well concentrated, and have staid long in’ the
wound, so as to have entered abundantly into
the circulation. Among the specifics employed
onthe banks of the Oroonoko, and, according
to Mr. Leschenault, in the Indian Archipelago,
the most celebrated is muriat of soda}. The


* See pl. 105 of the Plantes Equinomiales, which I published
conjointly with Mr. Bonpland, vol. 1i, p. 84.


+ Oviedo (Sommario delle Indie Orientali) boasts of sea
water as an antidote against vegetable poisons. The people
in the missions never fail to relate to European travellers,
that they have no more to fear from arrows dipped in curare,
if they have a little salt in their mouth, than from the electric
shocks of the gymnoti, when chewing tobacco. (See chap.
17, vol. iv, p. $479 Raleigh recommends as an antidote to
the ourari (curare) the juice of garlick, (Cayley, vol. i, P-
196.)


wound is rubbed with this salt, which is also
taken internally, I had myself no direct and
sufficiently convincing proof of the action of
this specific. The experiments of Messrs. De-
lille and Magendie rather make against it's
utility, On the banks of the Amazon, the pre-
ference among the antidotes is given to sugar ;
and the muriat of soda being a substance al-
most unknown to the Indians of the forests, it
is probable, that the honey of bees, and that
farinaceous sugar, which oozes from plantains
dried in the sun, were anciently employed
throughout Guyana. In vain haveammonia and
eau de luce been tried against the curare; it
is now known how uncertain these pretended
specifics are, even when applied to wounds
caused by the bite of serpents. Sir Everard
Home* has shewn, that a cure is often attri-
buted to a remedy, when it is owing only to the
slightness of the wound, and to avery circum-
scribed action of the foxique. Animals may
with impunity be wounded with poisoned ar-
rows, ifthe wound be well laid open, and the
point imbued with poison be withdrawn imme-
diately after the wound is made. If salt or
sugar be employed in these cases, people are
tempted to take it for an excellent specific.
Indians, who had been wounded in battle by


* Philos, Trans., 1810, Part I, p. 75.
2m 2


532


weapons dipped in the curare, described to us
the symptoms of being poisoned as, entirely
similar to those observed in the bite of serpents.
The wounded person feels congestions in the
head ; and vertigoes that compel him to seat
himself on the ground. He feels nausea, vo-
mits repeatedly ; and, while he is tormented by
a raging thirst, numbness seizes all the parts
that are near the wound.

The old Indian, who was called the master of
poison, seemed flattered by the interest we had
taken in his chemical processes.. He found us
sufficiently intelligent to have no doubt, that
we knew how to make soap, and, next to the
fabrication of curare, this art appeared to him
one of the finest inventions of the human mind.
When the liquid poison was poured into the
vessels prepared for this purpose, we accompa-
nied the Indian to the festival of the juvias.
The harvest of juvias, or fruits of the bertholletia
excelsa, was celebrated by dancing, and the
excesses of the most savage intoxication. The
hut, where the natives were assembled, displayed
during several days a very singular aspect.
There was neither table nor bench, but large
roasted monkeys, blackened by smoke, were
ranged in order resting against the wall. These
were the marimondes (ateles belzebuth), and
those bearded monkeys called capuchins, which
must not be confounded with the weeper, or sai


533


(simia capucina of Buffon). The manner of :
roasting these anthropomorphous animals con-
tributes singularly to render their appearance
disagreeable in the eyes of civilized man. A
little grating or lattice of very hard wood is
formed, and raised one foot from the ground.
The monkey is skinned, and bent into a sitting
posture; the head generally resting on the
arms, which are meagre and long; but some-
limes these are crossed behind the back. When
it is tied on the grating, a very clear fire is
kindled below. The monkey, enveloped in
smoke and flame, is broiled and blackened at
the same time*. On seeing the natives devour
the arm or leg of a roasted monkey, it is diffi-
cult not to believe, that this habit. of eating
animals, that so much resemble man in their
physical organization, has, in a certain degree,
contributed to diminish the horror of anthropo-
phagy among savages. Roasted monkeys, par-
ticularly those that have a very round head,
display a hideous resemblance to a child; the
Europeans therefore, who are obliged to feed
on quadrumanes, prefer separating the head
and the hands, and serve up only the rest of


* Soon after my return to Europe, an engraving was pub~
lished at Weimar from a drawing composed with great spirii
by Mr. Schick at Rome, representing one of our resting
places on the banks of the Oroonoko. In the foreground
some Indians are occupied in roasting a monkey.


004


the animal at their tables. The flesh of mon-
keys is so lean and dry, that Mr. Bonpland has
preserved in his collections at Paris an arm and
hand, which had been broiled over the fire at
Esmeralda; and no smell arises from them after
a great number of years.

We saw the Indians dance. The monotony
of this dance is increased by the women not
daring to take a part in it. The men, young
and old, form a circle, holding each other's
hands ; and turn sometimes to the right, some-
times to the left, for whole hours, with silent
gravity. Most frequently the dancers themselves
are the musicians. Feeble sounds, drawn from
a series of reeds of different lengths, form a slow
and plaintive accompaniment. The first dan-
cer, to mark the time, bends both knees in a
kind of cadence. Sometimes they all make a
pause in their places, and execute little oscilla-
tory movements, bending the body from one
side to the other. These reeds ranged in a line,
and fastened together, resemble the pipe of
Pan, as we find it represented in the bacchana-
lian processions on Grecian vases. To unite
reeds of different lengths, and make them sound
in succession by passing them before the lips,
is a simple idea, and naturally presented itself
to every nation. We were surprised to see with
what promptitude the young Indians construct-
ed and tuned these pipes, when they found


9395


reeds (carices) on the bank of the river. Men
in a state of nature, in every zone, make great
use of these gramina with high stalks. The
Greeks said with truth, that reeds had contri-
buted to subjugate nations by furnishing arrows,
to soften men’s manners by the charm of music,
and to unfold their understanding by affording
‘the first instruments for tracing letters. These
different uses of reeds mark in some sort three
different periods in the life of nations. We
must admit, that the tribes of the Oroonoko
are found at the first step of dawning civiliza-
tion. The reed serves them only as an instru-
ment of war and of hunting; and the Pan’s
pipes, of which we have spoken, have not yet, on


those distant shores, yielded sounds capable of
awakening mild and humane feelings.
We found in the hut allotted for the festival


several vegetable productions, which the Indians
had brought from the mountains of Guanaya,
and which fixed all our attention. I shall only
stop here to mention the fruit of the juvia, reeds
of a prodigious length, and shirts made of the
bark of marima. The almendron, or juvia, one of
the most majestic trees of the forests of the New
World, was almost unknown before our voyage
to the Rio Negro. It begins to be found four
days distance east of Esmeralda, between the
Padamo and Ocamo, at the foot of the Cerro
Mapaya, on the right bank of the Oroonoko.


536


It is still more abundant on the left bank, at
the Cerro Guanaja, between the Rio Amaguaca
and the Gehette. The inhabitants of Esmeral-
da assured us, that in advancing above the Ge-
hette and the Chiguire, the juvia and cacao-
trees become so common, that the wild Indians
(the Guaicas and Guahariboes blancos) do not
disturb the Indians of the missions, when ga-
thering in their harvests. They do not envy
them the productions, with which nature has
enriched their own soil. ‘Scarcely any attempt
has been made to propagate the almendrones in
the settlements of the Upper Oroonoko. The
indolence of the inhabitants is a greater obstacle
than the rapidity, with which ‘the oil becomes
rancid in the amygdaliform seeds, We found
only three trees at the mission of San Carlos,
and two at Esmeralda. These majestic trees,
eight or ten years old, had not yet borne flow-
ers, I mentioned above, that Mr. Bonpland
had made known the almendrones to the In-
dians, among the trees that cover the banks of
the Cassiquiare, near the rapids of Cananiva-
cari*.

Fiver since the sixteenth century the seeds
with ligneous and triangular teguments, but
not the great drupe like a cocoa-nut, which con-
tains the almonds, had been known in Europe,


* See ahove, p. 409,


537


I recognise this in an?imperfect engraving of
Clusius*. This botanist designates them under
the name of almendras del Peru. They had no
doubt been carried, as a very rare fruit, to the
Upper Maragnon, and thence, by the Cordil-
leras, to Quito and Peru. The Novus Orbis of
Jean de Laet, in which I found the first ac-
count of the cow-tree, furnishes also a descrip-
tion and a figure singularly exact of the fruit of
the bertholletia. Laet calls the tree totocke,
and mentions the drupe} of the size of the


* Enaoticor., lib. 2, cap. 18, p. 44.  Clusius distinguishes
very properly the almendras del Peru, our bertholletia excelsa,
or juoia, (fructus amygdale-nucleo, triungularis, dorso lato,
in bina latera angulosa desinente, rugosus, paululum cunei-
formis) from the pekea, or amygdala guayauica (Ezot., lib.
ii, cap. 6, p. 27). Raleigh, who knew none of the produc-

tions of the Upper Oroonoko, does not speak of the juvza ;
but it-appears, that he first brought to Europe the fruit of the
mauritia palm, of which we have so often spoken. (See
Clus, Exot., lib. xvi, cap. 4, p. 25. Fructus elegantissimus,
squamosus, similis palme-pini.)

+ The following is the remarkable daeosiniion, for which
botanists have scarcely looked in a work merely geogra-
phical, published in 1640.. “ Arbor (ademonie) totocke est
valde procera et ramosa: foliis grandibus et que forma non
multum abludunt ab ulmi frondibus, obscure viridentibus,
nisi quod postica parte nonnihil Videntur candisare. Nullos
fert flores sed certas gemmas que colore nihil differunt a
foliis, quee sensim crassescunt et protrudunt fructum grandem
et mole interdum capitis humani, pene rotundum antica parte
nonnihil compressum, cortice ligneo, duro et admodum


538


human head, which contains the almonds. The
weight of these fruits, he says, is so enormous,
that the savages dare not enter the forests with-
out covering their heads and shoulders with a
buckler of very hard wood. These bucklers
are unknown to the natives of Esmeralda, but
they also told us of the dangers incurred when
the fruit ripens, and falls from a height of fifty
or sixty feet. The triangular seeds of the juvia
are sold in Portugal and England under the
vague name of chesnuts (castanas) or nuts of
Brazil and the Amazon; and it was long be-
lieved, that, like the fruit. of the pekea, they
grew on separate stalks. They have furnished
an article of a tolerably brisk trade for a cen-


crasso, exterius striato et tuberoso, coloris fusci et pene
nigri. Dividitur interius certis septis in sex veluti regiones,
in quarum singulis concluduntur octodecim et interdum
duodecim nuces arcte inter se conjuncte : que singule ite-
rum ligneo et satis duro cortice tectee sunt et varie forme
pleraeque tamen triangulares una parte convexiore, cum tribus
veluti suturis, valde rngose et aspere, minus tamen quam
exterior cortex, tres uncias longe et sesquiunciam late,
coloris rossi, et interdum cinerei aut fusci: his continetur
oblongus nucleus, totas implens instar amygdali, rubicunda
membrana tectus, carne candidissima, solida et nonnihil
oleosa ; sapore magis videtur accedere ad avellanas quam
aniygdala, horum tamen usum in omnibus egregie potest
suplere, etiam ad tragemata facienda, uti a nostris (Belgis)
fuit observatum. Barbari dicunt, si Venerem ambis, comede
totocke fructum.” (Laet, p. 632, Compare our Plantes equi-
noxiales, tom, i, p..122, PI. 36.)


509


tury past to the inhabitants of Grand Para, by
whom they are sent either directly to Europe,
or to Cayenne, where they are called touka.
The celebrated botanist, Mr. Correa de Serra,
told us, that this tree abounds in ‘the forests
in the neighbourhood of Macapa, at the mouth
of the Amazon ; that it there bears the name of
capucaya ; and that the inhabitants gather the
almonds, like those of the lecythis, to express
the oil. A cargo of almonds of the juvia, brought
into Havre, captured by a privateer, in 1807,
was employed for the same purpose.

The tree, that yields the chesnuts of Brazil, is
generally not more than two or three feet in
diameter, but attains one hundred or one hun-
dred and twenty feet in height. It does not
resemble the mammee, the star-apple, and seve-
val other trees of the tropics, the branches of
which (as in the laurel-trees of the temperate
zone) rise almost straight toward the sky. The
branches of the bertholletia are open, very long,
almost entirely bare toward the base, and loaded
at their summits with tufts of very close foliage.
This disposition of the semicoriaceous leaves,
a little silvery beneath, and more than two feet
long, makes the branches bend down toward the
ground, like the fronds of the palm-trees. We
did not see this majestic tree in blossom, it is -
not loaded with flowers* till it’s fifteenth year,


** According to accounts somewhat vague, they are yel-


540


and they appear about the end of March and
the beginning of April, The fruits ripen toward
the end of May, and some trees retain them till
the end of August. These fruits, which are as
large as the head of a child, often twelve or
thirteen inches in diameter, make an enormous
noise in falling from the tops of the trees. I
know nothing more fitted to seize the mind
with admiration of the force of organic action
in the equinoctial zone, than the aspect of
these great ligneous pericarps, for instance,
the cocoa-tree of the Maldives (lodoicea) among
the monocotyledons, and the bertholletia and
the lecythis among the dicotyledons. In our
climates the cucurbitacez only produce in the
space of a few months fruits of an extraordinary
size; but these fruits are pulpy and succulent.
Between the tropics, the bertholletia forms in
less than fifty or sixty days a pericarp, the lig-
neous part of which is half an inch thick, and
which it is difficult to saw with the sharpest
instruments. A great naturalist* has already ob-
served, that the wood of fruits attains in general


low, very large, and ‘have some similitude to those of the
bombax ceiba.. Mr, Bonpland says however, in his botani-
eal journal written on the banks of the Rio N egro, flos viola-
ceus. It was thus the Indians of the river. had described to
him the colour of the corolla.


* Richard, Analyses des Fruits, p. 9.


541


a hardness, which is scarcely to be found in the
wood of the trunks of trees. The pericarp of
the bertholletia has traces of four cells, and }
have sometimes found even five. The seeds
have two very distinct coverings, and this cir-
- cumstance renders the structure of the fruit
more complicated than in the. lecythis, the
pekea or caryocar, and the saouvari. The first
tegument is osseous, or ligneous, triangular,
tuberculated on it’s exterior surface, and of the
colour of cinnamon. Four or five, and some-
times eight of these triangular nuts, are attached
to a central partition. As they are loosened in
time, they move freely in the large spherical
pericarp. The capuchin monkeys (simia chiro-
potes) are singularly fond of the chesnuts of
Brazil; and the noise made by the seeds, when
the fruit is shaken as it fell from the tree, ex-
cites the appetency of these animals in the high-
est degree. Ihave most frequently found only
from fifteen to twenty-two nuts in each fruit.
The second tegument of the almonds is mem-
branaceous, and of a brown yellow. Their taste
is extremely agreeable when they are fresh ; but
the oil, with which they abound, and which is
so useful in the arts, becomes easily rancid.
Although at the Upper Oroonoko we often ate
considerable quantities of these almonds for
want of other food, we never felt any bad effects
— from so doing. The spherical pericarp of the


542


bertholletia, perforated at the summit, is not
dehiscent ; the upper and swelled part of the
columella forms (according to Mr. Kunth) a
sort of inner cover, as in the fruit of the lecythis,
but it seldom opens of itself. Many seeds, from
the decomposition of the oil contained in the
cotyledons, lose the faculty of germination,
before the rainy season, in which the ligneous
integument of the pericarp opens by the effect of
putrefaction. A tale is very current on the
banks of the Lower Oroonoko, that the capu-
chin and cacajao monkeys (simia chiropotes,
and simia melanocephala) place themselves in a
circle, and, by striking the shell with a stone,
succeed in opening it, to take out the triangular
nuts. This operation must be impossible, on
account of the extreme hardness and thickness
of the pericarp. Monkeys may have been seen
busied in rolling along the fruit of the berthol-
letia, but though this fruit has a small hole
closed by the upper extremity of the columella,
nature has not furnished monkeys with the
means of opening the ligneous pericarp, as it has
of opening the covercle of the lecythis, called
in the missions the covercle of the cocoa of the
monkeys*. According to the report of several
Indians of great veracity, the little glires only,


* La tapa (the covercle) del coco de Monos.


543


particularly the cavies (the acuri and the lapa}),
by the structure of their teeth, and the incon-
ceivable perseverance with which they pursue
their destructive operations, succeed in perfo-
rating the fruit of the zwvia. As soon as the
triangular nuts are spread on the ground, all
the animals of the forest, the monkeys, the ma-
naviris, the squirrels, the cavies, the parrots,
and the macaws, hasten thither, to dispute the
prey. They have all strength enough to break
the ligneous tegument of the seed ; they get out
the kernel, and carry it to the tops of the trees.
“Jt is their festival also,” said the Indians who
had returned from the harvest ; and on hearing
their complaints of the animals you perceive,
that they think themselves alone the legitimate
masters of the forest. _

The frequency of the juvia to the east of
Esmeralda seems to indicate, that the Flora of
the Amazon begins at that part of the Upper
Oroonoko, which extends south of the moun-
tains. This is in‘some sort a new proof of the
union of two basins of rivers. M. Bonpland
has very clearly shown the means, which should
be employed to multiply the bertholletia excel-
sa on the banks of the Oroonoko, the Apure,
the Meta, and throughout the province of Vene-
zuela, In those places where this tree grows


+ Cavia agati, c, paca.


544


naturally, thousands of seeds, the germination
of which has just commenced, should be gather-
ed, and placed as in a nursery in boxes filled
with the mould, in which they have begun to
vegetate. The young plants, sheltered from the
rays of the sun by the leaves of musaceze or of
palm-trees, might be transported in canoes. or
on rafts. It is well known how difficult it is,
notwithstanding the use. of chlorine, which
I have indicated elsewhere, to make seeds
with a horny perisperm germinate in Europe;
such as the palm-trees, the coffeaceze, the quin-
quinas, and the large ligneous nuts, the kernel
of which contains an oil that becomes rancid.
All these difficulties would be vanquished, if
only such seeds were transported, as had ger-
minated under the tree itself. In this manner
we succeeded in carrying a great number of
very rare plants, for instance, the coumarouna
odora, or the Tonga bean, from the Cataracts
of the Oroonoko to Angostura, and spreading
them in the surrounding plantations.

One of the four canoes, which had taken the
Indians to the gathering of the juvias, was filled
in great part with that species of reeds (carices),
of which the sarbacans are made. These reeds
were from fifteen to seventeen feet long, yet no
trace of a knot for the insertion of leaves and
branches was perceived. They were quite
straight, smooth without, and perfectly cylin-


545


drical. These carices come from the foot of the
mountains of Yumariquin and Guanaja. . They
are much sought after, even beyond the Oroo-
noko, by the name of the reeds of Esmeralda.
A hunter preserves the same sarbacan during
his whole life, and boasts of the lightness and
precision of his. sarbacan, as we boast of the
same qualities in our fire-arms. What is the
monocotyledonous plant*, that furnishes these
admirable reeds? Did we see in fact the inter-
nodes (parts between the knots) of a gramen of
the tribe of nastoides? or may this carex be
perhaps a cyperaceous plant-+ destitute of
knots ? I cannot solve this question, or determine
to what genus another plant belongs, which
furnishes the shirts of marima.- We saw on the
slope of the Cerra Duida shirt trees fifty feet
hight. The Indians cut off cylindrical pieces
two feet in diameter, from which they peel the
red and fibrous bark, without making any longi-
tudinal incision. This bark affords them a sort of
garment, which resembles sacks of a very coarse


* The smooth surface of the sarbacans sufficiently proves,
that they are not furnished by a plant of the family of umbel-
lifere.

+ The caricillo del manati, which grows abundantly on the
banks of the Oroonoko, attains from eight to ten feet in
height.

t Arbor ramosissima, foliis oblongis acutis, integerrimis,
longe petiolatis, petiolis fuscis.

VOL. V. 2N


346


texture, and without a seam. The upper open-


ing serves for the head; and two lateral holes
are cut to admit the arms. The natives wear
these shirts of marima in the rainy season :
they have the form of the ponchos and ruanas of
cotton, which are so common in New Grenada,
at Quito, and in Peru. As in these climates
the riches and beneficence of nature are regard-
ed as the primary causes of the indolence of
the inhabitants, the missionaries do not fail to
say in showing the shirts of marima, “in the
forests of the Oroonoko garments are found
ready made on the trees.” We may add to this
tale of the shirts the pointed caps, which the
spathes of certain palm-trees furnish, and which
resemble coarse network*.

At the festival of which we were spectators,
the women were excluded from the dance, and
every sort of public rejoicing; they were daily
occupied in serving the men with roasted mon-
key, fermented liquors, and the palm cabbage.
I mention this last production, which has the
taste of our cauliflowers, because in no other
country had we seen specimens of such an
immense size. The leaves that are not unfold-
ed are confounded with the young stem, and we
measured cylinders of six feet long and five
inches in diameter. Another substance, which


* See chap. 16, vol. iv, p. 226.


547


is much more nutritive, is obtained from the
animal kingdom: this is fish flour*. The
Indians in all the Upper Oroonoko fry fish,
dry them in the sun, and reduce them to pow-
der without separating the bones. I have seen
masses of fifty or sixty pounds of this flour,
which resembles that of cassava. When it is
wanted for eating, it is mixed with water, and
reduced toa paste. In every climate the abun-
dance of fish has led to the invention of the
same means of preserving them. Pliny and
Diodorus Siculus have described the fish bread
of the ichthyophagous nations}, that dwelt
on the Persian gulf, and the shores of the Red
Sea.


At Esmeralda, as every where else through-
out the missions, the Indians who will not be
baptized, and who are merely aggregated in the
community, live in a state of polygamy. The
number of wives differs much in different tribes ;


* Mamaoc de pescado,


+ These nations, in a still ruder state than the natives of
the Oroonoko, contented themselves with drying the raw
fish in the sun, They made up the fish paste in the form of
bricks, and sometimes mixed with it the aromatic seed of
paliurus (rhamnus), as in Germany, and some other countries
of the north, cummin and fennel seed are mixed with wheat-
en bread, Pliny, lib. '7, cap. 3 (vol. i, p. 374. ed. Par.,
1723). Diod. Sic.,p.154. Arrian. Ind., p. 566.

2n 2


548


it is most considerable among the Caribbees,
and all the nations that have preserved the cus-
tom of carrying off young girls from the neigh-
bouring tribes. How shall we speak of domestic
happiness in so unequal an association? The
women live in a sort of slavery, as they do in
most nations in a state of barbarism. The hus-
bands being in the full enjoyment of absolute
power, no complaint is heard in their presence.
An apparent tranquillity prevails in the house ;
the women are eager to anticipate the wishes of
an imperious and sullen master; and they take
care indistinctly of their own children and those
of their rivals. The missionaries assert, what
may easily be believed, that this domestic peace,
the effect of common fear, is singularly disturb-
ed when the husband is long absent. The
wife who contracted the first ties then’ applies
to the others the names of concubines and ‘ser-
vants. The quarrels continue till the return of
the master, who knows how to calm their pas-
sions by the sound of his voice, by a mere
gesticulation, or, if he think it necessary, by
means a little more violent. A certain inequa-
lity in the rights of the women is sanctioned by
the language of the Tamanacs. The husband
calls the second and third wife the companions
of the first; and the first treats these compa-
nions as rivals and enemies (ipucjatoje), which


is less polite, but more true, and more expres-
sive. The whole weight of labour being sup-
ported by these unhappy women, we must not
be surprised, if in some nations their number is
extremely small. Where this happens, a kind
of polyandry is formed, which we find more
fully displayed in Thibet, and on the lofty moun-
tains at the extremity of the Indian peninsula.
Among the Avanoes and the Maypures, .bro-
thers have often but one wife. When an
Indian, who lives in polygamy, becomes a Chris-
tian, he is ‘compelled by the missionaries, to
choose among his wives her whom he prefers,
and to reject the others. The moment of sepa-
ration is the critical moment; the new convert
finds the most ‘valuable qualities in the wives he |
must abandon. One understands gardening
perfectly ; another knows how to prepare the
chiza, an intoxicating beverage extracted from
the root of cassava; all appear to him alike
necessary. Sometimes the desire of preserving
his wives overcomes in the Indian his inclina-
tion to Christianity; but most frequently. the
husband prefers submitting to the choice of the
missionary, as to ablind fatality.

The Indians, who from the month of May
to that of August take journeys to the east of
Esmeralda, to gather the vegetable productions
of the mountains of Yumariquin, gave us precise


590


notions of the course of the Oroonoko to the east
of the mission. This part of my téinerary map
differs entirely from those that preceded. it.
I shall begin the description of this country
with the granitic group of Duida, at the foot of
which we sojourned. This group is bounded on
the west by the Rio Tamatama, and on the east
by the Rio Guapo. Between these two tributary
streams of the Oroonoko, amid the Morichales,
or clumps of mauritia palm-trees, which sur-
round Esmeralda, the Rio Sodomoni descends,
celebrated for the excellence of the pine apples
that grow upon it’s banks. . I measured on the
29d of May, in the savannah at the foot of
Duida, a base of four hundred and seventy-five
metres in length; the angle, under which the
summit. of the mountain appeared at. the. dis-
tance of thirteen thousand three hundred and
twenty-seven metres, was still nine degrees. A
trigonometric measurement made with care
gave me for Duida (that is for the most elevated
peak, which is south-west of the Cerro Mara-
guaca) two thousand one hundred and seventy-
nine metres, or one thousand one hundred and
eighteen toises, above the plain of Esmeralda*.


* Base directed toward the summit of Duida, four hun-
dred and seventy-five metres. Double angles of altitude at
the two extremities of the base 18° 07 10", and 18° 38’ 0”.
Height of Duida above the base 2179 metres = 1118 toises


551


It’s height above the level of the ocean is there-
fore probably near thirteen hundred toises ; I
say probably, because I had the misfortune to
break my barometer before I reached Esme-
ralda. ‘The rains fell so violently in our resting
places, that we could not preserve the instru-
ment from the effects of humidity, and the tube
was broken by the unequal dilatation of the
wood. I regretted this accident the more, as
never had a barometer resisted longer jour-
neys. I had used it during three years in Eu-
rope, amid the mountains of Styria, France,
and Spain, and in America on the way from
Cumana to the Upper Oroonoko. The country
between Javita, Vasiva, and Esmeralda, is a
vast plain; and having opened the barometer
in the former two of these places, Ido not fear
being mistaken in more than fifteen or twenty
toises in the absolute height. of the savannahs of
Sodomoni. The Cerro Duida yields little in
height (scarcely eighty or one hundred toises)
to the summit* of St. Gothard, or the Silla of
€araccas on the shore of Venezuela. It is in-
deed considered as a colossal mountain in those
countries; and this celebrity gives a precise


= 2605 varas, Cast. Height of Esmeralda above the level
of the sea, probably 177 toises, See above, chap. 22, p.
251, ;


* Le Pettine.


52


idea of the mean height of Parima and of all
the mountains of easterm America. To the east
of the Sierra Nevada de Merida, as well as to
the south east of the Paramo de las Rosas, none
of the chains, that extend in the direction of the —
latitude, reach the height of the central ridge of
the Pyrenees.

The granitic summit of Duida is so nearly
perpendicular, that the. Indians have vainly
attempted the ascent. It is known, that moun-
tains the least elevated are sometimes the most
inaccessible. At the beginning and the end of
the rainy season small flames, which seem to
change their place; are seen on the top. of
Duida, This phenomenon, which it is difficult
to doubt, on account of the agreement in the
testimony concerning it, has given this moun-
tain the improper name of a volcano. As it
Stands nearly alone, it might be supposed, that
lightning from time to time sets fire to the
brush-wood ; but this supposition loses it’s pro-
bability, when we reflect on the extreme difficul-
ty, with which plants are set on fire in these
damp climates. It must be observed also, that
these little flames are said to appear often where
the rock seems scarcely covered with turf, and
that the same igneous phenomena are displayed
on days entirely exempt from storms on the
summit of Guaraco, or Murcielago, a hill
opposite the mouth of the Rio Tamatama, on


553


the southern bank of the Oroonoko. This hifh
is scarcely elevated one hundred toises above
the neighbouring plains. If the assertions of
the natives be true, it is probable, that some
subterraneous cause exists in Duida and Gua-
raco, that produces these flames ; for they never
appear in the lofty neighbouring mountains of
Jao and Maraguaca, so often wrapped in elec-
tric storms. ‘The granite of the Cerro Duida is
full of veins, partly open, and partly filled with
crystals of quartz and pyrites. Gaseous and
inflammable emanations, either of hydrogen, or
of naphtha, may pass through these veins. Of
‘ this the mountains of Caramania, of Hindoo-kho,
and of Himalaya, furnish frequent examples.
We saw the appearance of flames in many parts
of eastern America subject to earthquakes,
even from secondary rocks, as at Cuchivero
near Cumanacoa*. The fire shows itself when
the ground, strongly heated by the sun, re-
ceives the first. rains; or when, after violent
showers, the earth begins to dry. The first
cause of these igneous phenomena is at immense
depths below the secondary rocks, in the primi-
tive formations: the rains, and the decomposi-
tion of atmospheric water, act only a secondary
part. The hottest springs of the Globe issue
immediately from granite}. Petroleum gushes


* See vol, iii. chap. 6, p. 82.
+ See vol, iv, chap. 16, pp. 17) and 198,


554


from mica-schist ; and frightful detonations. are
heard at Encaramada, between the rivers Arau-
ca and Cuchivero, in the midst of the granitic
soil ¢ of the Oroonoko and the Sierra Parima.
Here, as every where else on the Globe, the
focus of volcanoes is in the most. ancient soils ;
and it appears, that an intimate connection
exists between: the great phenomena, that heave
up and liquify the crust of our planet, and those
igneous meteors, which are seen from time to
time on it’s: surface, and which from their little-
ness we are tempted to attribute solely to the
influence of the atmosphere.

Duida, though lower than the height assigned
to it by popular belief, is however, the most
prominent point of the whole group of moun-
tains, that separate the basin of the Lower Oroo-
noke from that of the Amazon. These moun-
tains lower still more rapidly on the north-east,
toward the Purunama, than on the east, toward
the Padamo and the Rio Ocamo. In the former
direction, the most elevated summits. after
Duida, are Cuneva, at the sources of the Rio
Paru (one of the tributary streams of the
Ventuari), Sipapo, Calitamini, which | forms
one group with Cunavami and the peak of
Uniana*. East of Duida, on the right bank of


t Vol. ii, chap. 5, p. 291; vol. iv, chap. 14, p. 45.
* See vol. ii, chap. 1%, p. 304; chap. 19, p. 469; vol. v,
chap. 20, p. 43, 134; chap. 21, p. 167, 175; chap. 23, p


555


the Oroonoko, Maravaca, or Sierra Maraguaca,
is distinguished by it’s elevation, between the
Rio Caurimoni and the Padamo ; and on the
left bank of the Oroonoko rise the mountains of
Guanaja and Yumariquin, between the Rios
“Amaguaca and Gehette. It is almost superflu-
ous to repeat, that the line which passes through
these lofty summits (like those of the Pyrenees,
the Carpathian mountains, and so many other
chains of the ancient continent). is very distinct
from the line, that marks the partition of the
waters: This latter line, which separates. the


375, 451. Inever heard the Indians of the Upper Oxoo-
noko name the three mountains, Jujamari, Jayi, and Siama-
cu, which the missionary Gili (vol. i, p. 89, 183, 156; vol.
ii, p. 28) indicates as being very lofty, giving at the same
time the most confused notions of ‘their geographical sitta-
tion! | Jujamari. appears to be north-east of the Cerro de
Sipapo, which, I> have. described above 5 Javi and.Siamacu
(Chamacu, Samacn),, of the existence of which Caulin also
was ignorant, are (I believe) between the sources of the
Ventuari and the Cuchivero. The natives described Sia-
macu to father Gili as a very cold place. Now, on a moun-
tain eight hundred toises high, the centigrade thermometer, in
that zone, may fall to ten degrees, which causes a feeling of
cold very sensible to people habituated to a, temperature of
twenty-eight or thirty degrees. . At Caraccas (height four
handrer and fifty-four toises), I saw the thermometer at
42° 5’, The name of Siamacu is perhaps derived from the
rounded form of the mountain, This name indicates in
Tamanac a vase of hemispheric form, used to keep the ehisa
in.


6


tributary streams of the Lower and Upper
Oroonoko, cuts the meridian of 64° in 4° of lati-
tude. After having separated the sources of the
Rio Branco and the Caroni, it runs to the north-
west, sending off the waters of the Padamo, the
Jao, and the Ventuari, toward the south, and
the waters of the Arui, the Caura, and the Cu-
chivero, toward the north.

The Oroonoko may be ascended without dan-
ger from Esmeralda as far as the cataracts.oc-
cupied by the Guaica Indians, who prevent ‘all
ulterior progress of the Spaniards. This is a
voyage of six days and half*. In the first two
you arrive at the mouth of the Rio Padamo, after
having passed, on the north, the little rivers of
Tamatama, Sodomoni, Guapo, Caurimoni, and

‘Simirimoni ; and on the south, the Cuca, situate
between the rock of Guaraco, which is said to
throw out flames, and the Cerro Canclilla. In
this passage the Oroonoko continues to be three
or four hundred toises broad. The tributary
Streams are most frequent on the right bank,


*« From Esmeralda to the mouth of the Rio Padamo, two
days ; from Padamo to the confluence of the Mavaca, one
day anda half; from the Mavaca to the Rio Manayiche, one
day ; from the Manaviche to the Rio Gehette, or the Raudal
of the Guahariboes, one day ; in all six days and a half. [The
different portions of the voyage added together make but
five days and a half, and with this the account in the text
agrees. Ep.] g


557


because on this side the river is bounded by the
lofty mountains of Duida and Maraguaca, on
which the clouds are piled together, while the
left bank is low and contiguous to a plain, the
general slope of which inclines to the south-west.
The northern Cordilleras are covered with fine
timber. The growth of plants is such in this
ardent and constantly humid climate, that the
trunks of the bombax ceiba* are sixteen feet in
diameter. The Rio Padamo, or Patamo, by
which the missionaries of the Upper Oroonoko
communicated heretofore with those of the Rio
Caura, has become a source of error to geogra-
phers. Father Caulin gives it the name of Ma-
coma, and places another Rio Patamo between
the point of bifurcation of the Oroonoko and a
mountain called Ruida, which is no doubt iden-
tically the same with the Cerro Duida. Sur-
ville makes the Padamo communicate with the
Rio Ocamo (Ucamu), which is entirely inde-
pendant of it; finally, a small tributary stream
of the Oroonoko, on the west of the bifurcation,
is indicated in the great map of La Cruz as the
Rio Padamo-+, and the river that really bears
this name is called Rio Maquiritari. From the


* The extraordinary dimensions attained by those species
of bombax, which are of very light wood, was known to Car-
dinal Bembo. Hist. Ven., 1551, fol. 83.

+ The Patamo of La Cruz is changed, so as to make it
almost Greek, into Potamo, in Arrowsmith’s map.


558


mouth of this river, which is of considerable
breadth, the Indians arrive, in a day and half, at
the Rio Mavaca, which rises in the lofty moun-
tains of Unturan*, which we have already
mentioned. The portage between the sources
of this tributary stream and those of the Idapa
or Siapa, has given rise to the fable of the com-
munication of the Idapa with the Upper Oroo-
noko. The Rio Mavaca communicates with a
lake, to the banks of which the Portugueze + of
the Rio Negro repair, without the knowledge of
the Spaniards of Esmeralda, to gather the aro-
matic seeds of the laurus pucheri, known in
trade by the names of the pichurim bean, and
toda specie. Between the confluence of the Pa-
damo and that of the Mavaca, the Oroonoko
receives on the north the Ocamo, into which the


* See above, chap. 23, p. 376, and 419.


+ They enter the Spanish territory by the communication
between the Cababury, and the Pacimoni. The pichurim
bean is the puchirt of M: de la Condamine, which abounds at
the Rio Xingu, a tributary stream of the Amazon, and on
the banks of the Hyurubaxy, or Jurubesh of father Fritz,
which runs into the Rio Negro. Voyage a l’ Amazone, p. 146;
and Corog. Bras., vol. ii, p. 278, 322, 361. The puchery, or
pichurim, which is grated like nutmeg, differs from another
aromatic fruit (a laurel?) known in trade at Grand Para by
the names of cucheri, cuchiri, or cravo (clavus) do Maran-
hao, and which, on account of it’s smell, is compared with
cloves.


559


Rio Matacona falls. At the sources of the lat-
ter live the Guainares, who are much less cop-
per-coloured, or tawny, than the other inhabi-
tants of those countries. This is one of the
iribes called by the missionaries fair Indians, or
Indios blancos, respecting whom I shall soon
treat more at large. Near the mouth of the
Ocamo, travellers are shown a rock, which is the
wonder of the country. It is a granite passing
into gneiss, and remarkable for the peculiar dis-
tribution of the black mica, which forms little
ramified veins. The Spaniards call this rock
Piedra, Mapaya (the map-stone). The little
fragment which I procured indicated a stratified
rock, rich in white feldspar, and containing,
beside spangles of mica, which are grouped in
streaks, and variously twisted, some crystals of
hornblende. It is not a syenite, but probably a
granite of new formation, analagous to those, to
which the stanniferous granites (hyalomictes),
and the pegmatites, or graphic granites, belong.

Beyond the confluence of the Mavaca, the
Oroonoko suddenly diminishes in breadth and
depth, becoming extremely sinuous like an
Alpine torrent. It’s two banks are surrounded
by mountains, and the number of it’s tributary
streams on the south augments considerably,
yet the Cordillera on the north remains the
most elevated. It requires two days to go
from the mouth of the Mavaca to the Rio Gi-


560


hette, the navigation being very inconvenient,
and the boats, on account of the want of water,
being often dragged along the shore. The tri-
butary streams in this distance are, on the south,
the Daracapo and the Amaguaca; which skirt
on the west and east the mountains of Guanaya
and Yumariquin, where the bertholletias (ches-
nuts of the Maragnon) are gathered. The Rio
Manaviche flows down from the mountains on


the north, the elevation of which diminishes pro-
gressively from the Cerro Maraguaca. As you
continue to go up the Oroonoko, the whirlpools
and little rapids (chorros y remolinos) become
more and more.frequent; on the north lies the
Canno Chiquire, inhabited by the Guaicas, an-


other tribe of white Indians ; and two leagues
distant is the mouth of the Gehette, where there
isa great cataract. A dyke of granitic rocks
crosses the Oroonoko; these rocks are the
columns of Hercules, beyond which no white
man has been able to penetrate. It appears, that
this point, known by the name of the great
Raudal de Guaharibos, is three quarters of
a degree west of Esmeralda, cansequently in
67° 38’ of longitude. A military expedition,
undertaken by the commander of the fort of San
Carlos, Don Francisco Bovadilla, to discover the
sources of the Oroonoko, led to the most minute
information we had respecting the cataracts of
the Guahariboes. This commander had heard,


56]


. that some fugitive Negroes from Dutch Guyana,
proceeding toward the west (beyond the isthmus
between the sources of the Rio Carony and the
Rio Branco), had joined the independant In-
dians.. He attempted an entrada (hostile incur-
sion), without having obtained the permission of
the governor; the desire of procuring African
slaves, better fitted for labour than the copper-
coloured race, was a far more powerful motive
than that of zeal for the progress of geography.
I had an opportunity at Esmeralda, and at the
Rio Negro, of interrogating several intelligent
military men, who had made a part of that ex-
pedition. Bovadilla arrived without difficulty
as far as the little Raudal* opposite the Ge-
hette ; but having advanced to the foot of the
rocky dike, that forms the great cataract, he
was suddenly attacked, while he was breakfast-
ing, by the Guahariboes and Guaycas, two war-
like tribes, celebrated for the activity of the
curare, with which their arrows are empoisoned.
The Indians occupied the rocks, that rise in the
middle of the river, and seeing the Spaniards
without bows, and having no knowledge of fire-
arms, they provoked the whites, whom they
believed to be without defence. Several of the


* This cataract is called Raudal de abaxo, in opposition to
the great Raudal de Guaharibos, which is situate higher up
toward the east,


VOL. V. 20


562


latter were dangerously wounded, and Bovadilla
found himself forced to give the signal of battle.
A horrible carnage ensued among the natives,
but none of the Dutch Negroes, who it was be-
lieved had taken refuge in those parts, were
found. Notwithstanding a victory so easily
won, the Spaniards did not dare to advance to-
ward the east in a mountainous country, and
along a river inclosed by very high banks.

The Guahariboes blancos have constructed a
bridge of lianas above the cataracts, supported
on rocks that rise, as it generally happens in the
Pongos of the Upper Maragnon, in the middle
of the river. The existence of this bridge *,
which is known to all the inhabitants of Esme-


ralda, seems to indicate, that the Oroonoko is
already very narrow at this point. It is gene-
rally estimated by the Indians to be only two
or three hundred feet broad. They say, that
the Oroonoko above the Raudal of the Guahari-


boes is no longer a river, but a brook (ria-
chuelo) ; while a well-informed ecclesiastic, Fray
Juan Gonzales, who had visited those countries,
assured me, that the Oroonoko, where it's ulte-


* The Amazon also is passed twice on bridges of wood
near it’s origin in the lake Lauricocha ; first north of Cha-
vin, and then below the confluence of the Rio Aguamiras.
These, the only two bridges that have been thrown over the
largest river we yet know, are called Puente de Quivilla, and
Puente de Guancaybamba.


563


terior course is no longer known, continues to
be two thirds of the breadth of the Rio Negro
near San Carlos. This opinion appears to me
less probable ; but I relate what I have collected,
and affirm nothing positively. I know by the
numerous measurements which I have taken,
how easily we may be deceived in the dimensions
of the beds of rivers. In fact, rivers appear
more or less broad according as they are sur-
rounded by mountains or plains, free from islets,
or full of shoals, swelled by violent rains, or
bereft of their waters by long drought. We
may recollect also, that the course of the Ganges
is unknown to the north of Gangootra ; and that,
on account of it’s little breadth, this point is be-
lieved to be very near it’s source.
In the rocky dike that crosses the Oroonoko,
forming the Raudal of the Guahariboes, Spanish
soldiers pretend to have found the fine kind of
saussurite (amazon stone), of which we have
spoken above. This tradition however is very
uncertain ; and the Indians, whom I interro-
gated on the subject, assured me, that the green
stones, called piedras de Macagua* at Esme-
ralda, were purchased from the Guaicas and


* See above, p. 383. The etymology of this name, which is
unknown to me, might lead to the knowledge of the spot,
where these stones are found. I have sought in vain the name
of Macagua among the numerous tributary streams of the
Tacutu, the Mahu, the Rupunury, and the Rio Trombetas.

202


564


Guahariboes, who traffic with hordes much far-
ther to the east. The same circumstances take
place respecting these stones, as with so many
other valuable productions of the Indies. On
the coast, at the distance of some hundred
leagues, the country where they are found is
positively named’; but when the traveller with
difficulty penetrates into this country, he dis-
covers, that the natives are ignorant even of
the name of the object of his research. It
might be supposed, that the amulets of saussu-
rite found in the possession of the Indians of the
Rio Negro come from the Lower Maragnon,
while those that are received by the missions of
the Upper Oroonoko and the Rio Carony come
from a country situate between the sources of the
Essequibo and the Rio Branco. Yet, neither sur-
geon Hortsmann, a native of Hildesheim, nordon
Antonio Santos, whose journal I examined, had
seen the amazon stone in it’s natural place; and |
the opinion that this stone is taken in a soft state
like-paste from the little lake Amucu, transform-
ed into Laguna del Dorado, though very preva-
lent at Angostura, is wholly without foundation.
A fine geographic discovery remains to be made
in the eastern part of America, that of finding
in a primitive soil a rock of euphotide contain-
ing the piedra de Macagua.

I shall here proceed to give some information
respecting the tribes of dwarf and fair Indians,


565


which ancient traditions placed for centuries
near the sources of the Oroonoko. I had an
opportunity of seeing some of these Indians at
Esmeralda, and can affirm, that the shortness of
the Guaicas *, and the fairness of the Guahari-.-
boes, whom Father Caulin + calls Guaribos
blancos, have been alike exaggerated. The Gua-
icas, whom I measured, were in general from
four feet seven inches to four feet eight. inches
high (ancient measure of France). We were
assured, that the whole tribe were of this extreme
littleness ; but we must not forget, that what is
called a tribe constitutes, properly speaking, but
one family. The exclusion of all foreign mixture
contributes to perpetuate varieties, or the aber-
rations from a common standard. The Indians
of the lowest stature next to the Guaicas are the
Guainares and the Poignaves. It is singular,
that all these nations are found close to the
Caribbees, who are remarkably tall. They all
inhabit the same.climate, and subsist on the
same aliment. They are varieties in. the race,
which no doubt existed previously to the settle-


* It appears, that there are Guaicas also to the north-east
of Esmeralda, near the Rio Cuyuni, in the missions of the
Capuchins, Caulin, p. 57.


4


+ He places them at the sources of the Canno Amaguaca.


(Corogr., p. 81). .They now wander more to the north-east,


near the Great Cataract, above the Gehette and the Chiguire.
Gili (vol. i, p. 334) calls them in Italian, Guazwr beanchz,


566


ment of these tribes, (tall and short, fair and
dark brown) in the same country. The four
nations of the Upper Oroonoko, that appeared
to me to be the fairest, are the Guahariboes of
the Rio Gehette, the Guainares of the Ocamo,
the Guaicas of Canno Chiguire, and the Maquiri-
tares of the sources of the Padamo, the Jao, and
the Ventuari. It being very striking to see
natives with a fair skin beneath a burning sky,
and amid nations of a very dark hue, the Spa-
niards have forged two daring hypotheses, in
order to explain this phenomenon. Some assert,
that the Dutch of Surinam and the Rio Esquibo
may have intermingled with the Guahariboes
and the Guainares ; others insist, from hatred to
the Capuchins of the Carony, and the Observan-
tins of the Oroonoko, that the fair Indians are
what are called in Dalmatia * muso di frate,
children whose legitimacy is somewhat doubtful.
In both cases the Indios blancos would be mes-
tizoes, sons of an Indian woman and a white
man. Now, having seen thousands of mestizoes,
I can assert, that this comparison is altogether
inaccurate. The individuals of the fair tribes,
whom we examined, have the features, the sta-
ture, and the smooth, straight, black hair, which
characterizes other Indians. It would be im-
possible to take them for a mixed race, like the


* At Cataro and Ragusa,


567


descendants of natives and Europeans. Some
of these people are very little, others of the or-
dinary stature of the copper-coloured Indians.
They are neither feeble, nor sickly, nor albinoes ;
and they differ from the copper-coloured races
only by a much less tawny skin. It would be
useless after. these considerations, to insist on
the distance of the mountains of the Upper
Oroonoko from the shore inhabited by the
Dutch. I will not deny, that descendants of
fugitive Negroes (negros alxados del palenque)
may have been seen among the Caribbees, at
the sources of the Esquibo; but no white man
ever went from the eastern coast to the Rio
Gehette and the Ocamo in the interior of Guy-
ana. It must also be observed, although we
may be struck with the singular union of fair
tribes at one point to the east of Esmeralda, it
is no less certain, that tribes have been found
in other parts of America, distinguished from
the neighbouring tribes by the colour of their
skin being much less tawny. Such are the
Arivirianoes and Maquiritares of the Rio Ven-
iuario and the Padamo, the Paudacotoes and
Paravenas of the Erevato, the Viras and Ariguas
of the Caura, the Mologagoes of Brazil, and the
Guayanas of the Uruguay *.


* The Cumangotoes, the Maypures, the Mapojoes, and
some hordes of the Tamanacs, are also fair, but in a less


568


The whole of these phenomena are so much
the more worthy of attention, as they are dis-
played in that great branch of the American
nations, that is generally opposed to the circum-
polar branch, to that of the Tschougaz-Eski-


degree than the tribes I have just named. We may add to
this list (which the researches of Sommering, Blumenbach,
and Prichard, on the varieties of the human species, have
_rendered so interesting) the Ojes of the Cuchivero, the Boanes
(now almost destroyed) of the interior of Brazil, and in the
north of America, far from the north-west coast, the Man-
dans and the Akansas (Walkenaer Geogr., p. 645. Gili, vol,
ii, p..34. Vater, Amerikan, Sprachen, p.81. Southey, vol. i,
p. 603.) The most tawny, we might almost say the black-
est of the American race, are the Otomacs and the Guamoes.
These have perhaps given rise to the confused notions of
American Negroes, spread through Europe in the first ages
of the conquest. (Herera, Dec. i, lib. 3, cap. 9, vol. i, p. 79.
Garcia, Origen de los Americanos, p. 259.) Who.-are those
Negros de Quareca, placed by Gomara, p, 277, in that very
isthmus of Panama, whence we received the first absurd
tales of an American people of Albinoes? In reading with
attention the authors of the beginning of the 16th century,
we see, that the discovery of America, which was that of a
new race of men, had singularly awakened the interest tra-
vellers took respecting the varieties of our species. Now, if
a black race had been mingled with copper coloured men,
‘as in thé South-sea Islands, the conguistadores would not
have failed to speak of it in a precise manner. Besides, the
religious traditions of the Americans relate the appearance,
in the heroic times, of white and bearded men as priests and
legislators ; but none of these traditions make mention of a
black race,


569


moes *, whose children are fair, and who ac-
quire the Mungal or yellowish tint only from
the influence of the air and the dampness. In
Guyana, the hordes that live in the midst of the
thickest forests are generally less tawny than
those, that inhabit the shores of the Oroonoko,
and are employed in fishing. But this slight
difference -, which is alike found in Europe
between the artisans of towns and the cultivators
of the fields or the fishermen on the coasts, no
way explains the problem of the Indios blancos,
the existence of those American tribes with the
skin of Mestizoes. These are surrounded with
other Indians of the woods (Indios del monte),
who are of a reddish-brown, although now ex-
posed to the same physical influences. The
causes of these phenomena are very ancient, and


* See chap. 9, vol. ili, p. 290—298. The Chevalier
Gieseke has recently confirmed all that Crantz had related
of the colour of the skin of the Eskimoes. This race. (even
in the latitude of seventy-five and seventy-six degrees,
where the climate is so rigorous) is not in general so dimi-
nutive-as it was long believed to be. Ross, Voyage to the
North, p. 127.


+ Gomara (p. 278) has expressed himself on this point
with that precision, which distinguishes his style, and his
manner of painting objects. ‘ Los Indios son leonados 0
membrillos cochos, o tiriciados o castalos por naturaleza y no
por desnudez, como pensavan muchos, aunque algo les ayuda
_para ello ir desnudos.”


‘570


we may repeat with Tacitus ; est durans originis
vis.

These tribes with a fair complexion, which we
had an opportunity of seeing at the mission of
Esmeralda, inhabit part of a mountainous
country, that extends between the sources of six
tributary streams of the Oroonoko, the Padamo,
the Jao, the Ventuari, the Erevato, the Aruy,
and the Paraguay *. The Spanish and Portu-
gueze missionaries have the custom of designat-
ing this country more particularly by the name
of Parima. Here, as in several other countries
of Spanish America, the savages have recon-
quered what had been wrested from them by
civilization, or rather by it’s precursors, the mis-
sionaries. The expedition of the boundaries
under Solano, and the extravagant zeal displayed
by a governor of Guyana ++ for the discovery of
Dorado, revived in the latter half of'the eigh-
teenth century, in some individuals, that spirit


* They are six tributary streams on the right bank of the
Oroonoko ; the first three run toward the sonth, or the Up-
per Oroonoko; the three others toward the north, or the
Lower Oroonoko. The word Parima, which signifies water,
great water, is applied sometimes, and more especially, to the
land bathed by the Rio Parima, or Rio Branco (Rio de
Aguas Blancas), a stream running into the Rio Negro ; some-
times to the mountains (Sierra Parima), which divide the
Upper and Lower Oroonoko.

+ Don Manuel Centurion, Governador y Comendante
general of Guyana from 1766 to 1777.


571


of enterprise, which characterized the Castilians
at the period of the discovery of America. In
going along the Rio Padamo, a road was ob-
served across the forests and savannahs, ten
days journey long, from Esmeralda to the sources
ofthe Ventuari; and in two days more, from these
sources, by the Erevato, the missions on the Rio
Caura were reached. Two intelligent and dar-
ing men, don Antonio Santos, and Captain Ba-
reto, had established, with the aid of the Ma-
quiritares, a chain of military posts on this line
from Esmeralda to the Rio Erevato. They were
houses of two stories (casas fuertes), mounted
with swivels, such as I have described above *,
which figured as nineteen villages on the maps
published at Madrid. The soldiers, left to
themselves, exercised all kinds of vexations on
the natives (Indians of peace), who had culti-
vated spots around the casas fuertes ; and these
vexations being less methodical, that is to
say, worse contrived, than those to which the
Indians are by degrees accustomed in the mis-
sions, several tribes formed a league, in 1776,
against the Spaniards. All the military posts
were attacked on the same night, on a line of
nearly fifty leagues in length. The houses were
burnt, and many soldiers massacred; a very
small number only owing their preservation to
the pity of the Indian women. This nocturnal


* Chap. 23, p. 404, é


expedition is still mentioned with horror. .Con-
certed in the deepest silence, it was executed
with that concert, which the natives of both
Americas, skilful in concealing their hostile pas-
sions, know how to practise in whatever con-
cerns their common interests. Since 1776 no
attempt has been made to reestablish the road,
which leads by land from the Upper to the
Lower Oroonoko, and no white man has been
able to pass from Esmeralda to the Erevato,
It is certain however, that in the mountainous
lands, between the sources of the Padamo and
the Ventuari (near the sites called by the In-
dians Aurichapa, Ichuana, and Irique,) there
are many spots with a temperate climate, and
with pasturages capable of feeding a great num-
ber of cattle*. The military posts have been


* The following are the most precise notions I could
obtain on the spot, which differ much from those that father


Caulin had acquired in Spain, long after his return from the
Lower Oroonoko. The road to the Erevato passed between
the mountains of Duida and Maraguaca, near the sources of
the Rio Guapo. The military posts were Macha, Mauracare,
Maracune, Matapi on the banks of the Padamo, Cointinamo
on a tributary stream of the Rio Padamo, Mereico, el Ore-
jon, Aurichapa, Irique, Ichuana de la Savana, Maveina, and
Periquete on the Upper Ventuario. As, from the extraordi-
nary configuration of the land (see above, p. 451), a part of
the Upper Oroonoko runs from east to west, in a direction
parallel to the Lower Oroonoko, which flows from west to
east, geographers, destitute of statements on the longitude
of the confluent streams, seyeral of which are in the same


573


very useful in preventing the incursions of the
Caribbees, who, from time to time, carry off


meridian, have commitied great errors im the respective
places they assign to these streams. According to astrono- -
mical observations, (those especially, which I made on the
22d of May, and the [2th of June), the village of :Esme-
ralda, on the Upper Oroonoko, is one degree eighteen mi-
nutes west of the town of Muitaco, or Real Corona, on the
Lower Oroonoko ; according to the maps of La Cruz and
Surville, Esmeralda is 0° 25’ east of Real Corona. The
confluence of the Rio Arui with the Lower Oroonoko is,
according to the Spanish maps, on the meridian that cuts the
Upper Oroonoko at the point of bifurcation : according to my
astronomical observations, and the maps published since my
voyage to the Oroonoko, the meridian of the bifurcation (that of
the origin of the Cassiquiare) crosses the Lower Oroonoko' ©
thirty-four leagues west of the mouth of the Arui, between
the town of Alta Gracia and the confluence of the Cuchivero,
Now, on connecting the mouth of the Rio Caura with the
farm of Capuchino and Real Corona, two points, the situation
of which I determined directly, we find it to be in the longi-
tude of 67° 42’, or at most 67°45’, A road traced from
Padamo to the mouth of the Rio Caura would go to the
north east, instead of going to the north west, as the maps of
La Cruz and Surville indicate. This result is very impor-
tant for ascertaining the situation of the sources of the Ven-
tuari and the Erevato. As the geographers who have pre-
ceded me place the mouth of the Padamo forty minutes
farther east of the bifurcation of the Oroonoko than it
really is, they find this mouth not 0° 26’ to the west,as in my
Atlas of South America, but 2° 10’ east of the confluence of
the Caura. We are indeed ignorant of the difference of longi-
tude between the mouth of the Rio Caura and that point of
the Erevato (a tributary stream of the Caura), at which the
* ancient road from Esmeralda terminated’; but it is difficult


574


slaves, though in very.small numbers, between
the Erevato and the Padamo. They would have
resisted the attacks of the natives, if, instead of
leaving them isolated, and solely dependant on
the soldiers, they had been formed into commu-
nities, and governed like the villages of neophyte


Indians.

We left the mission of Esmeralda on the 23d
of May. Without being ill, we felt ourselves in
a state of languor and weakness, caused by the
torment of insects, bad nourishment, and a long
voyage, in narrow and damp boats. We had
not gone up the Oroonoko beyond the mouth of
the Rio Guapo, which we should have done, if
we could have attempted to reach the sources of
the river. In the present state of things, private
individuals, who are permitted to enter the mis-
sions, should confine their journey to the pacific
part of the country. There remain fifteen leagues
from the Guapo to the Raudal of the Guahari-
boes. At this cataract, which is passed ona
bridge of lianas, Indians are posted armed with
bows and arrows, who prevent the whites, or
to believe, that the Upper Erevato is found in nature carried
so far back toward the west, that the direction of the road
from Padamo to the Erevato should be north west. What is
more certain, and very remarkable, on account of the position
of the mouth of the Ventuari (1° 36’ west of Esmeralda), is,
that we find the sources of the Ventuari, or rather the upper
part of it’s course, in the direction of the road from the
Padamo to the Erevato,


575


those who come from the territory of the whites,
from advancing toward the west. How could
we hope to pass a point, where the commander
of the Rio Negro, don Francisco Bovadilla was
stopped, when, accompanied by his soldiers, he
tried to penetrate beyond the Gehette? The
carnage then made among the natives has ren-
dered them more distrustful, and more averse
to the inhabitants of the missions. It must be
remembered, that the Oroonoko had hitherto
offered to geographers two distinct problems,
alike important, the situation of it’s sources, and
the mode of it’s communication with the Amazon.
The latter of these problems formed the object
of the journey, which I have described: with
respect to the discovery of the sources, this re-
mains to be completed by the Spanish and Por-
tugueze governments. A small detachment of
soldiers, proceeding from Angostura or the Rio
Negro, would be sufficient to resist the Guaha-
riboes, the Guayras, and the Caribbees, whose
force and numbers are alike exaggerated in the
missions. This expedition might proceed either
from Esmeralda toward the east, or by the Rio
Caroni and the Paragua toward the south-west,
or lastly, by the Rio Padaviri, or the Rio Branco
and the Urariquera, toward the north-west. As
the Oroonoko is probably not known near it's
origin by this name, or by that of Paragua *, the


%* This is the Indian name of the Upper Oroonoko. (See


576


surest course would be, to go beyond the Ge-
hette, after having crossed the country between
Esmeralda and the Raudal of the Guahariboes,
of which I have given above a particular de-
scription. By this means the principal trunk of
the river would not be confounded with an
upper tributary stream, and the traveller would
continue to go up the Oroonoko, along one bank
or the other, where the bed was obstructed by
rocks. If however, instead of going toward the
east, he would seek the sources directing his
course toward the west, by the Rio Carony, the
Essequibo, or the Rio Branco, the object of the
expedition could not be considered as attained,
unless he descended that river, which he sup-
posed to be identified with the Oroonoko, as far
as the mouth of the Gehette and the mission of
Esmeralda. The Portugueze fort of San Joaquim,
on the left bank of the ‘Rio Branco, near the
confluence of the Tacutu, would be another
point of departure favourably situate; and which


above, p. 219.) As the words Paragua and Parima signify
water, great water, sea, lake, we must not, be surprised, if
streams entirely independant of each other bear these names,
The Spaniards give the name of Paragua to that tributary
stream of the Rio Carony, which receives the Paruspa, by
which the Caribbees proceeded formerly into the valley of
Caura.. The Portugueze give the name of the Rio Parima
sometimes to the whole of the Rio Branco (Rio de Aguas
blancas) itself, sometimes to a small tributary stream of this
river.


577


I recommend, because I am ignorant whether
the mission of Santa Rosa, established more to
the west on the banks of the Urariapara, under
the government of don Manuel Centurion, at
the time of the foundation of the Ciudad de
Guirior, still exists *. The surest manner of
arriving at the sources of the Oroonoko would
be by following the course of the Paragua to the
west from the destacamento, or military post, of
Guirior, situate in the missions of the Catalan
Capuchins, or proceeding toward the west, from
the Portugueze fort of San Joaquim, in the
valley of the Rio Uruariquera. The observations
of the longitude, which I made at Esmeralda,
may facilitate this research, as I have shown in


* The name of Santa Rosa is found on the most recent
maps of the dépdt at Rio Janeiro, which are very minute
on the northern part of the Rio Branco, The Urariapara
falls into the Rio Urariquera (the Curaricara of Suryille’s
map), which receives the little Rio Parima, and which, with
the Tacutu, forms, near the fort of San Joaquim, the Rio
Branco, As the Urariquera flows from east to west, it is
in going up this river that you approach nearest to Esmeral-
da and the source of the Oroonoko. On the north of the
Urariquera, the Cordillera of Pacaraimo, which was crossed
by Don Antonio Santos, also stretches itself in the direction
of the latitude. It forms the point of division between the
waters of the Rio Branco, and those of the Essequibo and
the Carony, (See above, p.480.) An assemblage of huts,
pompously called Ciudad de Guirior, stands on the Rio Para-
gua (a tributary steam of the Carony), where it receives the
Paraguamusi.


VOL. V. 2p


78


a memoir addressed to the Spanish ministry
during the reign of Charles the Fourth.

If in the great and useful establishment of the
American missions. those improvements were
gradually made, which have been demanded by
several bishops; if, instead of recruiting mis-
sionaries at hazard in the Spanish convents,
young ecclesiastics were prepared for these func-
lions.in seminaries or colleges of missions found-
ed in America; the military expeditions, which I
propose, would become useless. The habit of
Saint Francis, whether brown, like that of the
Capuchins of Carony, or blue, like the habit of
the Observantins of the Oroonoko, has still a
certain charm for the Indians of those countries.
They annex to this habit I know not what ideas
of prosperity and comfort, the hope of acquiring
hatchets, knives, and implements for. fishing.
Even those, who, proud of their independance
and their separate state, refuse to suffer them-
selves to be “governed by the sound of the bell,”
receive with pleasure the visit of a neighbouring
missionary. What has driven the natives from
the banks of the river was the exactions of the
soldiers, and the hostile incursions of the monks ;
the entradas and conquistas apostolicas.. By
renouncing the unreasonable system of introduc-
ing the customs of convents into the forests and
savannahs' of America, by leaving the Indians to
enjoy the fruits of their labours, and by govern-


579


ing them less, that, is by not shackling every in-
stant their natural liberty, the missionaries
would see the sphere of their activity, which
ought to be that of civilization, rapidly increase.
Monastic establishments have diffused in the
equinoxial part of the New World, as in the
north of Europe, the first germes of social life.
They still form a vast zone around the European
possessions ; and, whatever abuses may have
crept into institutions, where all power is con-
founded in one, they would be with difficulty
replaced by others, which, without producing
more serious inconveniences, would be as little
chargeable, and as well adapted to the silent
phlegm of the natives. I shall recur again to
these settlements, the political importance of
which is not sufficiently understood in Europe.
It will be sufficient here to observe, that expe-
ditions of discovery accompanied by an armed —
force would be useless, were the government
and the bishops to employ themselves seriously
in the melioration of the missions. The Chris-
tian settlements the most distant from the coast
are at present the most neglected. The poor
monks are left in absolute want. Occupied in
acquiring subsistence, making unceasing efforts
to be placed in some mission less remote from
civilization, that is from white and rational peo-
ple*, they are little tempted to go forward.


* See above, p. 269.


Aye


580


Their progress would become rapid, if (after the
example of the Jesuits) extraordinary succours
were assigned to the most distant missions ; and
if the most courageous and intelligent ecclesias-
tics, and those best versed in the Indian lan-
guages, were placed in the most advanced posts,
at Guirior, San Luis del Erevato, and Esmeral-
da*. The little that remains to be discovered
of the Oroonoko (probably a space of twenty-
five or thirty leagues) would then be soon ex-
plored ; for in both Americas the missionaries
arrive every where first, because they find faci-
lities, which are wanting to every other traveller:
“You boast of your journeys beyond Lake Su-
perior,” said an Indian of Canada to some fur


traders of the United States ; “ you forget then,
that the black coats passed it long before you:
and that it was they who showed you the way
to the west.”


Our canoe was not ready to receive us till
near three o'clock in the afternoon. It had
been filled with an innumerable quantity of ants
during the navigation of the Cassiquiare; and
the toldo, or roof of palm-leaves, beneath which we
had again to remain stretched out during twenty-
two days, was freed with difficulty from these


* These three points are on the confines of the missions
of the Rio Carény, the Rio Caura, and the Upper Oroo-
noko,


581


insects. We employed part of the morning in
repeating to the inhabitants of Esmeralda the
questions, which we had already put to them on
the existence of a lake toward the east. We
showed. copies of the maps of Surville and La
Cruz to old soldiers, who had been posted in the
mission ever since it’s first establishment. They
laughed at the pretended communication of the
Oroonoko with the Rio Idapa, and at the White
Sea, which the former river was supposed to
cross. What we politely call geographical fic-
tions, appeared to them lies of the other world
(mentiras de por alla). These good people could
not comprehend, how men, in making the map
of a country, which they had never visited, could
pretend to know things in minute detail, of
which persons who lived on the spot were igno-
rant. The lake Parima, the Sierra Mey, the
springs that separate at the point where they
issue from the earth, were entirely unknown at
Esmeralda. We were repeatedly assured, that
no one had ever been to the east of the Raudal
of the Guahariboes ; and that beyond this point,
according to the opinion of some of the natives,
the Oroonoko descends like a small torrent from
a group of mountains, inhabited by the Coroto
Indians. I urge these circumstances, because,
if at the time of the royal expedition of the boun-
daries, or after that memorable occasion, any
white man had actually reached the sources of


582


the Oroonoko, and the pretended lake Parima,
the tradition would have been preserved in the
nearest mission, which must have been passed
in order to make so important a discovery.
Now the three persons, who had knowledge of
the labours of the expedition of the boundaries,
Father Caulin, La Cruz, and Surville, have pub-
lished notions on the origin of the Oroonoko,
that are diametrically opposite to each other.
How could these contradictions have existed, if,
instead of having founded their maps on calcu-
lations and hypotheses framed at Madrid, those
learned men had had before their eyes the narra-
tive of one real journey. Father Gili, who had
inhabited the banks of the Oroonoko during
eighteen years*, when the expedition of the
boundaries arrived, says expressly: “ that don
Apollinario Diez was sent in 1765, to attempt
the discovery of the source of the Oroonoko:
that he found the river, east of Esmeralda, full
of ‘shoals; that he returned for want of pro-
vision; and that he learned nothing, absolutely
nothing, of the existence of a lake.” This asser-
tion is in perfect conformity with what I heard
myself thirty-five years later at Esmeralda,
where the name of don Apollinario is still in the
mouths of all the inhabitants, and whence jour-
neys are making continually beyond the con-


* From 1749 to 1767, Gili, vol. i, p. 19 and 324,


583


fluence of the Gehette. The probability of a
fact is powerfully shaken, when it can be proved
to be totally unknown on the very spot, where it
ought to be known best; and when those, by
whom it is related, contradict each other, not in
the Jeast essential circumstances, but in all that
are the most important. I will enlarge no
longer on a discussion merely geographical; I
shall here show, how the errors of the modern
maps have arisen from the habit of constructing
them upon the ancient maps; how portages
have been taken for branchings of rivers; how
rivers, called by the Indians great waters, have
been transformed into lakes ; how two of these
lakes (Cassipa and Parima), have been con-
founded and misplaced since the sixteenth cen-
tury ; finally, how we find in the names of the
tributary streams of the Rio Branco the key of
the greater part of these superannuated fictions.

We were surrounded, when we embarked, by
those inhabitants, who call themselves whites
and of Spanish race. These poor people con-
jured us, to solicit from the governor of Angos-
tura their return to the steppes (Llanos), or, if
this favour were refused, their removal to the
missions of the Rio Negro, as to a cooler climate,
more free from insects. “ However great may
have been our faults,” said they, ‘“‘ we have ex-
piated them by twenty years of torments amid
this swarm of moustiques.” I pleaded the cause


of these proscribed men in a report made to the
government on the state of industry and com-
merce in those countries. My efforts were fruit-
less; the government at the period of my
voyage was indeed moderate, and generally in-
clined to mild measures; but they, who are
acquainted with the complicated machinery of
the ancient Spanish monarchy, know how little
the spirit of the ministry concerned itself in the
well-being of the inhabitants of the Oroonoko,
New California, and the Philippine Islands.
When travellers attend only to the sensations
they feel, they dispute with each other on the
abundance of the moschettoes, as on the pro-
gressive increase or diminution of the tempera-
ture, The state of our organs, the motion of
the air, it’s degree of humidity or dryness, it’s
electric intensity, a thousand circumstances
contribute at once, to make us suffer more or
less from the heat and the insects. My fellow
travellers thought unanimously, that Esmeralda
was more tormented by moschettoes than the
banks of the Cassiquiare, and even than the two
missions of the Great Cataracts: as I was less
sensible than they of the high temperature of the
air, it appeared to me, that the irritation pro-
duced by the insects was somewhat less at Es-
meralda, than at the entrance of the Upper
Oroonoko, We made use of cooling lotions ;
‘the juice of limes, and still more that of the


585,


pine-apple, perceptibly moderated the inching of .
old stings: without diminishing the swellings, —
they rendered them less painful. When you
hear the complaints, that are made of these tor-
menting insects in hot countries, it is difficult to
believe, that their absence, or rather their sud-
den disappearance, could become a subject of
inquietude. The inhabitants of Esmeralda re-
lated to us, that in the year 1795, an hour before
sunset, when the moschettoes form a very thick
cloud, the air was suddenly free from them
during twenty minutes. Not one insect was
perceived, although the sky was without clouds,
and no wind announced rain. It is necessary
to have lived in those countries, to comprehend
the degree of surprise, which the sudden disap-
pearance of the insects must have produced.
The inhabitants congratulated each other, and
inquired, whether this state of happiness, this
relief from pain (felicidad y alivio), could be of
any duration. But soon, instead of enjoying
the present, they yielded to chimerical fears, and
imagined, that the order of nature was perverted.
Some old Indians, the sages of the place, assert-
ed, that the disappearance of the insects must
be the precursor of a great eathquake. Warm
disputes arose ; the least noise amid the foliage
of the trees was listened to with an attentive
ear; and when the air was again filled with
moschettoes, they were almost hailed with plea-


586


sure. We could not guess what modification of
the atmosphere had caused. this phenomenon,
which must not be confounded with the periodi-
cal replacing of one species of insects by another.
The animated recital of the natives, however,
fixed our attention: we fancied we saw man
distrustful, uncertain with what he is menaced,
regretting his accustomed sufferings.

The weather, when we left Esmeralda, was
very stormy. The summit of Duida was enve-
loped in clouds, but this mass of vapours, so
black, and so strongly condensed, still supported
itself at the height of nine hundred toises above
the surrounding plains. In judging ofthe mean
elevation of the clouds, that is of their lower
stratum in different zones, we must not con-
found the sporadic or solitary group with that
sheet of vapours, which, extending in a continu-
ed body above the plains, terminates at a chain
of mountains. It is these sheets of vapours
only, which can be considered as giving any
certain results; solitary groups of clouds are
often ingulfed in the vallies by the sole effect of
descending currents. We saw clouds near the
town of Caraccas* at five hundred toises above


* Below the Cross of la Guayra. (See vol. iii, p, 581;
and Obs. Astr., vol. i, p. 296.) I have entered into these
particulars on the height of clouds, to show how much it is to
be desired, that this height had been oftener determined by
aerostatic voyages, When the balloon ascends in the midst


387


the level of the sea; yet we cannot easily ad-
mit, that the clouds above the coast of Cumana
and the island of Margaretta sustain themselves
at so smalla height. ‘The storm which growled
around the top of Duida did not descend inte
the valley of the Oroonoko ; we did not in ge-
neral observe in that valley those strong electric
explosions, which almost every night, during
the rainy season, alarm the traveller along the
Rio Magdalena, in going up from Carthagena
to Honda. It would seem as if the storms ina
flat country followed the furrow or bed of a
large river more regularly than in a country
unequally studded with mountains, and exhi-
biting various branchings of lateral valleys. We
repeatedly examined the temperature of the water
of the Oroonoko at it’s surface, while the ther-


of a plain, you are sure of obtaining results, that are inde-
pendant of the local effect which has just been mentioned.
Gay-Lussac and Biot, in their aerostatic ascents, found the
inferior limit of the clouds above Paris at six hundred toises,
in the great heats of summer. The fogs, in which you are
so frequently enveloped at Xalapa, on the eastern declivity
of the Cordillera of Mexico, led me to admit formerly, that
the mean height of the clouds above Vera Cruz was only
seven hundred toises; but the proximity of woody and
damp mountains, the radiation from the soil and leaves dur-
ing the night in a serene sky, and the electric conductibility
of the rock, render those conclusions somewhat uncertain,
that are drawn from the measure of the height of clouds
adhering to mountains.


988


mometer in the air kept up at 30°3°; it was
only 26° centesimal, consequently 3° lower than
at the Great Cataracts, and 2° higher than the
waters of the Rio Negro. In the temperate
zone in Europe, the Danube and the Elbe*
attain in the middle of summer only from 17°
to 19°. I could never find a difference at the
Oroonoko between the diurnal and nocturnal
heat of the waters, except when I plunged the
thermometer into shallow parts of the river,
where it flows with extreme slowness over a
wide, sandy beach, as at Uruana, and toward
the mouth of the Apure. Although in the
forests of Guyana, the radiation from the soil is
much siackened beneath a sky constantly cloudy,
the temperature of the air diminishes sensibly
during the night. The upper stratum of water
is then hotter than the surrounding soil; and if
the mingling of two portions of air almost satu-


* The following are the differences founded on direct expe-
riments made before my departure from Europe, during a
long residence at Vienna and Dresden.


Latitude 48—49°, Latitude 5—8°,


Temperature of the rivers

in summer, 17—19° cent. | 26—29°, (The Oroonoko.)
‘Temperature of the airin the

hottest month, 18—19°5°, | 28—29o,
Mean temperature of the

year, 10—12°,


589 °


rated* with moisture, resting on the forest and
on the bed of the river, produce no perceptible
mist, it is difficult to attribute this circumstance
to the little coolness of the night’. During my
abode on the banks of the Oroonoko and_ the
Rio Negro, the water of these rivers was often
from two to three degrees hotter than the noc-
turnal temperature of the air unagitated by the
wind.

After four hours navigation in going down the
Oroonoko, we arrived at the point of the bifur-
cation. Our resting place was on the same
beach of the Cassiquiare; where a few days
before our great dog had probably been carried
off by the jaguars. All the researches made by
the Indians to discover some traces of this ani-


mal were fruitless. The sky remaining cloudy,
I waited in vain for the stars, but I- repeated the
observation of the magnetic dip, which I had


* See vol. ii, p. 92; and p. 85 of the present volume,

+ See the interesting papers of Sir Humphrey Davy on -
the formation of fogs. (PAil. Trans., 1819, Pak, p, 20e3)
At the Great Cataracts the air at night was between twenty-
seven and twenty-nine degrees, and the water of the Oroo-
noko at 276° ; but on the banks of the Rio Negro, I have
seen the cent. thermometer sink at night, in the air, to 22°,
and the surface of the river keep at 24°, (See above, p.
165 and 344.) Thus at the Lower Oroonoko, east of the
mouth of the Apure, where the breeze blows freely, the
water of the river is generally at 28° while the nocturnal
temperature of the air sinks to 26° or lower.


590


made at Esmeralda. I had found it at the foot
of Duida 28-25° div. cent., almost 3° more than
at Mandavaca. I obtained at the mouth of the
Cassiquiare 28°75°; the influence of Duida
therefore appeared to be imperceptible. The
cries of the jaguars * were heard during the
whole night. They are extremely frequent in
those countries, between the Cerro Maraguaca,
the Unturan, and the banks of the Pamoni.
There also is found that black tiger +-, of which
I saw some fine skins at Esmeralda. This animal
is celebrated for it’s strength and ferocity ; it ap-
pears to be still larger than the common jaguar.
The black spots are scarcely visible on the dark-
brown ground of it’s skin. The Indians assert,
that these tigers are very rare, never mingle with


* This frequency of large jaguars is somewhat remarkable
in a country destitute of cattle, The tigers of the Upper Oroo-
noko Jead a wretched life in comparison of those of the Pampas
of Buenos Ayres and the Llanos of Caraccas, covered with
herds of cattle. More than four thousand jaguars are killed
annually in the Spanish colonies, several of them equal-
ling the mean size of the royal tiger of Asia. .T'wo thousand
skins of jaguars were formerly exported annually from
Buenos Ayres alone; they are called by-the furriers of
Europe skins of the great panther,


+ Gmelin in his Synonima, seems to confound this animal
by the name of felis discolor with the great American lion,
felis concolor, which is very different from the little lion
(puma) of the Andes of Quito. (Lin. Syst, Nat. vol. i, p.
79. Cuvier, Regne animal, yol. i, p. 160.)


591


the common jaguars, and “ form another race.”
I believe, that Prince Maximilian of Neuwied,
who has enriched American zoology by so many
important observations, acquired the same no-
tions farther to the south, in the hot part of
Brazil. Albino varieties of the jaguar have
been seen in Paraguay: for the spots of these
animals, which might be called the beautiful
panthers of America, are sometimes so pale, as
to be scarcely distinguishable on a very white
ground. In the black jaguars, on the contrary,
it is the colour of the ground that makes the
spots disappear. It requires to have lived long
in those countries, and to have accompanied the
Indians ef Esmeralda in the perilous chace of
the tiger, to pronounce with certainty upon the
varieties and the species. In all the mammiferee,
and particularly in the numerous family of the
apes, we ought, I believe, to fix our attention
less on the passage from one colour to another
in the individuals, than’on their habit of sepa-
rating themselves, and forming distinct bands.
May the 24th. We left our resting place
before sunrise. In a rocky cove, which had
been the dwelling of some Durimundi Indians,
the’aromatic odour of the plants was so power-
ful, that, although sleeping in the open air, and
having our nervous system rendered little irrit-
able, in consequence of the habits of a life ex-
posed to fatigues, we were incommoded by it.


592


We could not discover what the flowers were,
that diffused this perfume. ‘The forest was im-
penetrable: M. Bonpland believed, that large
clumps of pancratium and other liliaceous
plants were concealed in the neighbouring
marshes. Descending the Oroonoko by the
favour of the current, we passed first the mouth
of the Rio Cunucunumo, and then the Guanami
and the Puruname. The two banks of the prin-
cipal river are entirely desert ; lofty mountains
rise toward the north, and on the south a vast
plain extends far as the eye can reach beyond
the sources of the Atacavi, which lower down
takes the name of the Atabapo. There is some-
thing melancholy and painful in this aspect of a
river, on which not even a fisherman’s canoe is
seen. Some independant tribes, the Abirianoes
and the Maquiritares, dwell in the mountainous
country; but in the neighbouring savannahs*,
bounded by the Cassiquiare, the Atabapo, the
Oroonoko, and the Rio Negro, there is now
scarcely any trace of a human habitation. I
say now ; for here, as in other parts of Guayana,
rude figures - representing the Sun, the Moon,


* They form a quadrilateral plot of a thousand square
leagues, the opposite sides of which have contrary slopes, the
Cassiquiare flowing toward the south, the Atabapo toward
the north, the Oroonoko toward the north-west, and the Rio
Negro toward the south-east.


+ Compare vol. iv, p. 473; and p. 382 of the present vo-
lume.


593


and different animals, are traced on the hardest
rocks of granite, and attest the anterior existence
of a people, very different from those who be-
came known to us on the banks of the Oroo-
noko. According to the accounts of the natives,
and of the most intelligent missionaries, these
symbolic signs resemble perfectly the characters
we saw a hundred leagues more to the north,
near Caycara, opposite the mouth of the Rio
Apure.
We are the more struck with the remains of
an ancient civilization, in proportion as they fill
a wider space, and form a stronger contrast
with the barbarism, in which since the conquest
we find the hordes of the hot and oriental regions
of South America. In adyancing from the
plains of the Cassiquiare and the Conorichite,
one hundred and forty leagues toward the east,
between the sources of the Rio Branco and the
Rio Essequibo, we also meet with rocks with
symbolical figures. I have lately verified this
fact, which appears to me extremely curious, in
the journal of the traveller Hortsmann, a copy
of which I have before me in the hand-writing
of the celebrated d’Anville. That traveller, whom
] have several times had occasion to mention in
this work, went up the Rupunuvini*, one of the


* This word no doubt signifies water (vent, oueni) of Rupu-
nuni, or Rupunuri. (See above, p. 480). Veniis a word of


VOL. V. 2a


594


tributary streams of the Essequibo. Where this
river, full of small cascades, winds between the
mountains of Macarana, he found *, before he
reached lake Amucu, “ rocks covered with
figures, or (as he says in Portugueze) with
varias letras.” We do not take this word letters
in it’s real signification. We were also shewn
near the rock Culimacari, on the banks of the
Cassiquiare, and at the port of Caycara in the
Lower Oroonoko, traces, which were believed
to be regular characters. They were however
only mishapen figures, representing the heavenly
bodies, and tigers, crocodiles, boas, and instru-
ments used for the fabrication of the flour of
cassava. It was impossible to recognize in
these painted rocks} (the name by which the


the great branch of the Maypure, Cabre, Guaipunave,
Avane, and Pareni tongues.

* April the 18th, 1740. Nicholas Hortsmann noted
daily on the spot every thing, that appeared to him worthy
of observation. He deserves confidence the more, as, being
disappointed by the failure of the object of his researches
(the lake Dorado, and the mines of gold and diamonds), he
seems to regard with disdain every thing he met on his way.


+ In Tamanac, tepumereme. (Tepu, a stone, rock ; as in
Mexican, ¢etl, a stone, and fepet/, a mountain; in Turcota-
tarian, tepe.) The Spanish Americans also call the rocks
covered with sculptured figures piedras pintadas ; those for
instance, which are found on the summit of the Paramo of
Guanaeas, in New Grenada, and which recall to mind the
tepumereme of the Oroonoko, the Cassiquiare, and the Rupu-


nuvint.


595


natives denote those masses loaded with figures)
any symetrical arrangement, or characters with
regular spaces. The traces discovered in the
mountains of Uruana, by the missionary Fray
Ramon Bueno, approach nearer to alphabetical
writing ; these very characters, however, which I
have elsewhere discussed, still have many doubts*.

Whatever may be the meaning of these figures,
and with whatever view they were traced upon
granite, they do not less merit the attention
of those, who occupy themselves with the philo-
sophic history of our species. In travelling
from the coast of Caraccas toward the equator,
we are at first led to believe, that monuments of
this kind are peculiar to the chain of mountains
of Encaramada; they are found at the port-of
Sedeno, near Caycara+, at San Rafael del Ca-
puchino, opposite Cabruta, and in almost every
place where the granitic rock pierces the soil in
the savannah, which extends from the Cerro Cu-
riquima toward the banks of the Caura. The
nations of the Tamanac race, the ancient inha-
bitants of those countries, have a local mytho-
logy, and traditions which relate to these sculp-
tured rocks. Amativaca, the father of the Ta-
manacs, that is the creator of the human race


*® See vol. iv, p. 499; and my Views of the Cordilleras
and Monuments of the Ancient Inhabitants of America, vol.
i (or xiii of the present work), p. 153.

+ In the mountains of the tyrant, Cerros del tyrano.


2eQ2


596


(for every nation regards itself as the root of the
other nations), arrived in a bark, at the time of
the great inundation, which is called the age of
water*, when the billows of the ocean broke
against the mountains of Encamarada in the
interior of the land. All mankind, or, to ex-
press myself better, all the Tamanacs, were
drowned, with the exception of one man and
one woman, who saved themselves on a moun-
tain near the banks of the Asiveru, called Cu-
chivero by the Spaniards}. This mountain is
the Ararat of the Aramean or Semitic nations,
and the Tlaloc or Colhuacan of the Mexicans.
Amalivaca, sailing in his bark, engraved the
figures of the Moon and the Sun on the Painted
rock (Tepumereme) of Encaramada. Some
blocks of granite piled upon one another, and
forming a kind of cavern, are still called the
house ov dwelling of the great forefather of the
Tamanacs{. The natives show also a large
stone near this cavern, in the plains of Maita,
which they say was an instrument of music, the
drum of Amalivaca\. We must here observe,


* Itis the Atonatiuh of the Mexicans, the fourth age, the
fourth regeneration of the world, See my Amer. Monum.
vol. ii (xiv of the present work), p. 63. —

t See vol. iv, p. 472; and Gif, vol. ii, p, 284; vol. iii, p. 4,
p. 18.

t Amalioaca-jeutitpe.
§ Amalivaca-chambural.


597


that this heroic personage had a brother, Vochi,
who helped him to give the surface of the Earth
it’s present form. The Tamanacs relate, that
the two brothers, in their system of perfectibility,
sought at first, to arrange the Oroonoko in such
a manner, that the current of the water could
always be followed either going down or going up
the river. They hoped by this means to spare men
the trouble of rowing in proceeding toward the
source of rivers; but, however great the power
of these regenerators of the world, they could
never contrive to give a double slope to the
Oroonoko, and were compelled to relinquish
this singular hydraulic system. Amalivaca had
daughters, who had a decided taste for travel-
ling. The tradition says, no doubt in a figura-
tive style, that he broke their legs, to render
them sedentary, and force them to people the
land of the Tamanacs. After having regulated
every thing in America, on that side of the great
water, Amalivaca again embarked, and “ re-
turned to the other shore,” to the same place
from which he came. Since the natives have
seen the missionaries arrive, they imagine, that
Europe is this other shore; and one of them
inquired with great simplicity of father Gili,
whether he had seen the great Amalivaca yon-
der, the father of the Tamanacs, who had cover-
ed the rocks with symbolic figures.

These notions of a great cataclysm; of a cou-


598


ple saved on the summit of a mountain, and
throwing behind them the fruits of the mauritia
palm-tree, to repeople the Earth*; of that
national divinity, d4malivaca, who arrived by
water from a distant land, prescribed laws to
nature, and forced the nations to renounce their
migrations; these various features of a very
ancient system of belief, are well worthy to fix
our attention. What the Tamanacs, and the
tribes whose languages are analogous to the Ta-
manac tongue, now relate to us, they have no
doubt learned from other people, who inhabited
before them the same regions}. The name of
Amalivaca is spread over a region of more than
five thousand square leagues; it is found de-
signating the father ‘of mankind (our great
grandfather) as far as to the Caribbee nationsf,
whose idiom approaches that of the Tamanac
only in the same degree as the German ap-
proaches the Greek, the Persian, and the Sans-
crit. “Amalivaca is not originally the Great
Spirit; the Aged of Heaven, that invisible being,
whose worship springs from that of the powers
of nature, when nations rise insensibly to the
sentiment of the unity of these powers ; he is


* See vol. iv, p. 472.
+ The Parecas, Avarigotoes, Quiriquiripas, and Mariqui-
tares,
¢ The Caribbees say Amarivaca, as they call themselves
Carina and Calina (Galibis) by changing the r into /.


599


rather a personage of the heroic times, a man,
who, coming from afar, lived in the land of the
Tamanacs and the Caribbees, sculptured sym-
bolical figures upon the rocks, and disappeared
by going back to the country he had previously
inhabited beyond the Ocean. The anthropo- °
morphitism of the divinity has two sources*
diametrically opposite; and this opposition
seems to arise less from the various degrees of
intellectual culture, than from the different
dispositions of nations, some of which are more
inclined to mysticism, and others more governed
by the senses, and by external impressions.
Sometimes man makes the divinities descend
upon Earth, charging them with the care of
ruling nations, and giving them laws, as in the
fables of the East; sometimes, as among the
Greeks and other nations of the West, they are
the first monarchs, priest-kings, who are strip-
ped of what is human in their nature to be
raised to the rank of national divinities. dma-
livaca was a stranger, like Manco-Capac, Bo-
chica, and Quetzalcohuatl ; those extraordinary
men, who, in the alpine or civilized part of Ame-
rica, on the table lands of Peru, New Grenada,
and Anahuac, organized civil society, regulated
the order of sacrifices, and founded religious
congregations. The Mexican Quetzalcohuatl,


* Creuzer, Symbolik der alten Valker, vol, iii, p. 89.


600


whose descendants Montezuma* thought he
recognized in the companions of Cortez, dis-
plays an additional resemblance to Amalivaca,
the mythologic personage of savage America,
or the plains of the torrid zone. When advanc-
ed in age, the high-priest of Tula left the coun-
try of Anahuac, which he had filled with. his
miracles, to return to an unknown region, called
Tlalpallan. When the monk Bernard de Saha-
gun arrived in Mexico, the same questions
precisely were put to him, as those which were
addressed to father Gili two hundred years
later in the forests of the Oroonoko ; he was
asked, whether he came from the other shore,
from the countries to which Quetzalcohuatl had
retired}.

We have seen above, that the region of
sculptured rocks, or of painted stones, extends
far beyond the Lower Oroonoko, beyond the
country (latitude 7° 5’ to 7° 40’; longitude
68° 50’ to 69° 45’) to which belongs what may
be called the local fable of the Tamanacs. We
again find these same sculptured rocks between
the Cassiquiare and the Atabapo (lat. 2° 5’ to
3° 20’; long. 69° to 70°); and between the
sources of the Essequibo and the Rio Branco


* The second king of this name, of the race of Acamapit-
zin, properly called Montezuma-I/huicamina.
t Torguemada, vol. ii, p. 58.
+ The situation indicated as long. 62° 32' is properly that


601


(lat. 3° 50°; long. 62° 32’). I do uot assert,
that these figures prove the knowledge of the
use of iron, or that they denote a very advanced
degree of culture; but even on the supposition,
that, instead of being symbolical, they are the
fruits of the idleness of hunting nations, we
must still admit an anterior race of men, very
different from those who now inhabit the banks
of the Oroonoko and the Rupunuri. The more
a country is destitute of remembrances of gene-
rations that are extinct, the more important it
becomes to follow the least traces of what
_appears to be monumental. The eastern plains of
North America display only those extraordinary
circumyallations, that remind us of the fortified
camps (the pretended cities of an immense ex-
tent) of the ancient and modern nomade tribes of
Asia. In the oriental plains of South America,
the force of vegetation, the heat of the climate,
and the too lavish gifts of nature, have opposed
obstacles still more powerful to the progress
of human civilization. Between the Oroonoko
and the Amazon I heard no mention of one wall
of earth, one vestige of a dike, one sepulchral


of the confluence of the Pirara with the Rio Mahu, one of
the upper branches of the Rio Branco. I found this situa-
tion on the difference of longitude which M. de la Condamine
has given between the Para and the fort of Rio Negro,
determining the mouth of the Rio Branco (long, 64° 38’)
from the longitude of the fort.


602


tumulus ; the rocks alone show us, and this
through a great extent of country, rude sketches,
which the hand of man has traced in times
unknown, and which are connected with religi-
ous traditions. When both Americas shall be
peopled by men, who regard with less disdain
the soil that feeds them, the relics of former
ages will be more numerous in our eyes from
day to day. A feeble light will spread over
the history of the barbarous nations, over these
steep rocks, which tell us, that the regions now
desert were heretofore inhabited by a race of
more intelligent and active men.

Before I quitted the most savage part of the
Upper Oroonoko, I thought it was proper to
mention facts, which are important only when
they are considered in their connection with
each other. All I could relate of our navigation
from Esmeralda to the mouth of the Atabapo
would be merely a dry enumeration of rivers
and uninhabited places. From the 24th to the
27thof May, we sleptbut twice on the land ; our
first resting place was at the confluence of the Rio
Jao, and our second below the mission of Santa
Barbara, in the island of Minisi. The Oroonoko
being free from shoals, the Indian pilot made us
navigate all night, abandoning the boat to the
current of the river. This part of my map, be-
tween the Jao and the Ventuari, has conse-
quently little accuracy in what regards the wind-


603


ings of the Oroonoko. Setting apart the time
which we spent on the shore in preparing the
rice and plaintains that served us for food, we
took but thirty-five hours in going from Esme-
ralda to Santa Barbara. The chronometer gave
me for the longitude of the latter mission 70° 3’;
we had therefore made near four miles an hour,
a velocity (of 1-05 toise in a second) which was
partly owing to the current, and partly te the
action of the oars. The Indians assert, that the
crocodiles do not go up the Oroonoko above the
mouth of the Rio Jao, and that the manatees
are not even found above the cataract of May-
pures. It is easy to be deceived respecting the
first of these two animals; the traveller most
habituated to see them may mistake a trunk of
a tree twelve or fifteen feet long for a crocodile
swimming with part of the head and tail only
above the water.

The mission of Santa Barbara is situated a
little to the west of the mouth of the Rio Ven-
tuari, or Venituari, which was examined in 1800
by Father Francisco Valor. We found in this
small village of one hundred and twenty inha-~
bitants some traces of industry: but the produce
of this industry is of little profit to the natives ;
it is reserved for the monks, or as they say in
those countries, for the church and the convent.
We were assured, that a great lamp of massive
silver, purchased at the expense of the neophytes,


604 .


is expected from Madrid. Let us hope, that,
after the arrival of this lamp, they will think
also of clothing the Indians, of procuring for
them some instruments of agriculture, and of
assembling their children in a school. Although
there are a few oxen in the savannahs round the
mission, they are rarely employed in turning the
mill (¢rapiche), to express the juice of the sugar-
cane; this is the occupation of the Indians, who
work without pay, as they do every where when
they are understood to work for the church.
The pasturages at the foot of the mountains that
surround Santa Barbara are not so rich as at
Esmeralda, but superior to those at San Fer-
nando de Atabapo. The grass is short and
thick, yet the upper stratum of earth furnishes
only a dry and parched granitic sand. The
savannahs, far from fertile, of the banks of the
Guaviare, the Meta, and the Upper Oroonoko,
are equally destitute of that mould, which
abounds in the surrounding forests, and of the
thick stratum of clay, that covers the sandstone
of the Llanos, or steppes, of Venezuela. The
small herbaceous mimosas contribute in this
zone to fatten the cattle, but are very rare be-
tween the Rio Jao and the mouth of the Gua-
viare.

During the few hours of our stay at the mis-
sion of Santa Barbara, we obtained pretty ac-
curate ideas respecting the Rio Ventuari, which,


605


next to the Guaviare, appeared to me to be
the most considerable tributary stream of the
Oroonoko. It’s banks, heretofore occupied by
the Maypures, are still peopled by a great num-
ber of independant nations. On going up by the
mouth of the Ventuari, which forms a delta
covered with palm-trees *, you find on the east,
after three days journey, the Cumaruita and the
Paru, two streams that rise at the foot of the
lofty mountains of Cuneva. Higher up, on the
west, lie the Mariata and the Manipiare +, in-
habited by the Macoes and Curacicanas. The
latter nation is remarkable for the ardour with
which it cultivates cotton. In a hostile incur-
sion (entrada) a large house was found contain-
ing more than thirty or forty hammocks of, a
very fine texture of spun cotton, cordage, and
fishing implements. The natives had fled ; and
Father Valor informed us, ‘‘ that the Indians of
the mission, who accompanied him, had set fire
to the house, before he could save these produc-
tions of the industry of the Curacicanas.” The
neophytes of Santa Barbara, who think them-
selves very superior to these pretended savages,
appeared to me far less industrious. The Rio
Manipiare, one of the principal branches of the


* Palma del Cucurito.


+ Rio Manapiari, according to the pronunciation of the
Indians of Esmeralda,


606


Ventuari, approaches near it’s source those lofty
mountains, the northern ridge of which gives
birth to the Cuchivero. It is a prolongation of
the chain of Baraguan; and there Father Gili
places the table-land of Siamacu, of which he
vaunts the temperate climate*. The upper
course of the Rio Ventuari, beyond the con-
fluence of the Asisi and the Great Raudales, is
almost unknown. I was informed only, that
the Upper Ventuari bends so much toward the
east f+, that the ancient road from Esmeralda
to the Rio Caura crosses the bed of the river.
The proximity of the tributary streams of the
Carony, the Caura, and the Ventuari, has fa-
cilitated for ages the appearance of the Carib-
bees on the banks of the Upper Oroonoko.
Bands of this warlike and trading people went
up from the Rio Carony, by the Paragua, to the
sources of the Paruspa. A portage conducted
them to the Chavarro, an eastern tributary
stream of the Rio Caura; they descended with
their canoes first this stream, and then the Caura
itself, as far as the mouth of the Ereyato. After
having gone up this last river toward the south-
west, and traversed vast savannahs for three
days, they entered by the Manipiare into the
great Rio Ventuarit. I trace this road ' with


* See above, p. 555. + See above, p, 572, note.
$ The Rio Cuyuni, the Paragua, and the tributary
streams of the Caura (the Chavarro and the Erevato), flow


|
1


607


precision, not only because it was that by which
the traffic of native slaves was carried on, but
also to call the attention of those men, who at
some future day shall govern Guyana, to the
high importance of this labyrinth of rivers.

It is by the four largest tributary streams,
which the majestic river of the Oroonoko tre-
ceives on the right, the Carony, the Caura, the
Padamo, and the Ventuari, that European civil-
ization will one day penetrate into this country
of forests and mountains, which has a surface of
10,600 square leagues, and which is surrounded
by the Oroonoko on the north, the west, and
the south. The Capuchins of Catalonia, and
the Observantins of Andalusia and Valentia, have


already made settlements in the vallies of the
Carony and the Caura. The tributary streams
of the Lower Oroonoko, being the nearest to the
coast and the cultivated region of Venezuela,
were naturally the first to receive missionaries,


more or less in the direction of the latitude ; so that, with the
exception of a few portages, there is a navigation from east
to west, going from Essequibo and Demerary, for a dis-
tance of one hundred and forty leagues, in the latitude of
6° and 7°. This navigation is performed in the interior, pa-
rallel to the course of the Lower Oroonoko, remaining from
thirty to forty leagues distant from this great river to the
south. This course may be compared in little to the great
line of navigation established in Siberia from west to east, by
the uniform direction of the tributary streams of the Obi, the
Jenisei, and the Lena.


608


and with them some germes of social life. In
1797, the settlements of the Capuchins on the
Rio Caroni already contained 16,600 Indians,
peaceably inhabiting villages; while at the Rio
Caura, under the government of the Observan-
tins, there was at that period, according to
enumerations alike official, only 640. This dif-
ference results from the vast extent and excel-
lence of the pastures on the banks of the
Caroni, the Upatu, and the Cuyuni, the prox-
imity of the mouths of the Oroonoko, and of the
capital of Guyana, to the missions of the Capu-
chins ; and finally, from the interior government,
the active industry, and the mercantile spirit of
the Catalonian monks. Corresponding to the
Caroni and the Caura, which flow toward the
north, are two great tributary streams of the
Upper Oroonoko, that send their waters toward
the south; these are the Padamo and the Ven-
tuari. No village has hitherto risen on their
banks, though they offer advantages for agricul-
ture and pasturage, which would be sought in
vain in the valley of the immense river, to which
they are tributary. In the centre of these sa-
vage countries, where there will long be no
other road than the rivers, every project of civil-
ization should be founded on an intimate know-
ledge of the hydraulic system, and the relative
importance of the tributary streams.

In the morning of the 26th of May we left the


609


little village of Santa Barbara, where we found
several Indians of Esmeralda, who had come
with great regret, by order of the missionary,
to construct a house for him of two stories.
During the whole day we enjoyed the view of
the fine mountains of Sipapo *, which rise at a
distance of more than eighteen leagues toward
the north-north-west. The vegetation of the
banks of the Oroonoko is singularly varied in
this part of the country ; the arborescent ferns +
descended from the mountains, and mingled
with the palm-trees of the plain. We rested
that night on the island of Minisi; and, after
having passed the mouths of the little rivers
Quejanuma, Ubua, and Masao, we arrived, on
the 27th of May, at San Fernando de Atabapo.
It was a month since we had lodged in the same
house belonging to the president of the missions
when going up the Rio Negro. We then di-
rected our course toward the south, by the
Atabapo and the Temi; we now returned from
the west, having made a long circuit by the
Cassiquiare and. the Upper Oroonoko.. During
this long absence, the president of the missions
had conceived serious inquietudes respecting the


* See above,.p. 175.

+ The geographical distribution of these plants is extremely
singular. Scarcely any are found on the eastern coast of —
Brazil. (See the interesting work of Prince Maximilian of
Neuwied, Reise nach Brasilien, vol. i. p. 274.)

VOL. V. 2R


610


real object of our journey, my connections with
the higher clergy of Spain, and the knowledge I
had acquired of the state of the missions. At
the moment of our departure for Angostura, the
capital of Guyana, he pressed me earnestly to
leave a writing in his hands, bearing testimony
to the good order, that prevailed in the Chris-
tian settlements on the Oroonoko, and the mild-
ness with which the natives are generally treat-
ed. ‘This proposition of the superior, arising from
a praiseworthy zeal for the good of his order,
embarrassed me a little. I answered, that the
testimony of a traveller born in the bosom of the
Calvinist church could.scarcely have any weight
in the interminable quarrels, which almost every
where, in the New World, divide the secular
and ecclesiastical powers. I hinted to him, that,
being two hundred leagues from the coast, in
the centre of the missions, and, as the inhabi-
tants of Cumana say archly, en el poder de los
frayles *, a writing, which we should compose
together on the banks of the Atabapo, would
not perhaps appear an act freely consented to


on my part. The president was not alarmed at —


the idea of having treated with hospitality a
Calvinist ; the first, I believe, who had been
seen in the missions of Saint Francis ; but the
missionaries in America cannot be accused of


* In the power of the monks.


611


intolerance. They are not occupied by the
heresies of Europe, except perhaps on the con-
fines of Dutch Guyana, where the preachers
think proper also to go on missions, The pre-
sident insisted no longer on the writing which I
was to sign, and we availed ourselves of the few
moments that remained, to discuss with frank-
ness the situation of the country, and the hope
of making the Indians participate in the benefits
of civilization. I insisted on the evil, which had
~ arisen from the entradas, or hostile incursions ;
on the little advantage, which the natives de-


rived from the fruits of their labours; on the


journeys which they were compelled to make for
concerns that were not their own; finally, on
the necessity of bestowing some education in a
particular college on the young ecclesiastics, who
were called to govern very numerous communi-
ties. The president seemed to listen to me placidly.
I believe, however, he would have wished (no
doubt from zeal for the sciences), that those who
gather plants, and examine rocks, would re-
nounce that indiscreet interest in the copper-
coloured race, and in the affairs of human
society in general. This desire is common
enough in both worlds ; and is found wherever
authority is disquieted, because it henenca itself
not firmly seated.
We remained only one day at San Fernando
de ake although this village, embellished
2Rr2


612


by the pihiguao palm-tree*, with fruit like
peaches, appeared to us a delicious abode. Tame
paucis surrounded the Indian huts ; in one of
which we saw a very rare monkey, that inhabits
the banks of the Guaviare. This monkey is the
caparro, which I have made known in my Odser-
vations de Zoologie et d Anatomie comparée %,
and which forms, as Mr. Geoffroy believes, a new
genus (lagothrix) between the ateles, and the
alouates. The hair of this monkey is a gray
‘like that of the marten, and extremely soft to
the touch. The caparre is distinguished by a
round head, and a mild and agreeable expres-
sion of countenance. I believe the missionary
Gili § is the only author, who has made men-
tion before me of this curious animal, around
which zoologists begin to group other monkeys
of Brazil. Having quitted San Fernando May
the 27th, we arrived, by favor of the rapid eur-
rent. of the Oroonoko, in ‘seven hours at the
mouth®°of the Rio Mataveni. We passed the
night in the open air, under the granitic rock
E] Castillito ||, which rises in the middle of the


* See above, Chap. xxii, p. 213.
+ Not the ourax of Cuvier (crax pauxi, Lin.), but the
.crax alector.
t Vol. i, p. 822, 354.
§ “ During the eighteen years, which [ passed in the mis-
sions of the Oroonoko, I saw only one caparro. Gili, vol. i,


p. 240. '
|| See above, Chap. xxi, p. 192.


613


river, and the form of which reminded us of the
Mausethurm of the Rhine, opposite Bingen.
Here, as on the banks of the Atabapo, we were
struck by the sight of a small species of drosera,
having altogether the appearance of the drosera
of Europe.

The Oroonoko had sensibly swelled during
the night; and the current, strongly accele-
rated, bore us in ten hours from the mouth of
the Mataveni to the Upper Great Cataract, that
of the Maypures, or Quittuna. The distance
passed over was thirteen leagues. We recalled
to mind with much satisfaction the scenes, where
we had reposed in going up the river; we found
again the Indians, who had accompanied us in
our herbalizations; and we, visited anew the
fine spring *, that issues from a rock of stratified
granite behind the house of the missionary: it’s
temperature was not changed more than 0°3°.
From the mouth of the Atabapo as far as that
of the Apure we travelled as through a country
which we had long inhabited. We were reduced
to the same abstinence; we were stung by the
same moschettoes ; but the certainty of reaching
in a few weeks the term of our physical suffer-
- ings kept up our spirits.

The passage of the canoe through the Great
Cataract obliged us to stop two days at May-


* It was 27°80 cent. on the 19th BF April; I found it on
the 30th of May 27:5


614


pures. Father Bernardo Zea, missionary at the
Raudals, who had accompanied us to the Rio
Negro, though ill, would conduct us with his
Indians as far as Atures. One of them,?Zerepe,
the interpreter, who had been so unmercifully
beaten at. the beach of Pararuma™*, fixed our
attention by an expression of deep sorrow. We
learned, that he had just lost a girl to whom he
was engaged, and he had lost her in consequence
of false intelligence, which had been spread re-
specting the direction of our voyage. Born at
Maypures, Zerepe had been brought up in the
woods by his parents, who were of the tribe of
the Macoes. He had brought with him to the
mission a girl of twelve years of age, whom he
intended to marry at our return from the Cata-
racts. The Indian girl was little pleased with
the life of the missions, and she was told, that
the whites would go to the country of the Por-
tugueze (Brazil), and would take with them
Zerepe. Disappointed in her hopes, she seized
a boat, and, with another girl of her own age,
crossed the Great Cataract, and fled al monte.
The recital of this act of courage was the great
news of the place. Tne affliction of Zerepe
however was not of long duration ; born among
the Christians, having travelled as far as the
foot of the Rio Negro, understanding Spanish
and the language of the Macoes, he thought


* See above, chap, xix, p. 531, 582:


615


himself superior to the people of his tribe. How
then could he fail to forget a girl born in the
forest ?

On the 3lst of May we passed the rapids of
Guahiboes and Garcita. The islands, which
rise in the middle of the waters of the river,
shone with the purest verdure. The rains of
winter had unfolded the spathes of the vadgiat
palm-tree, the leaves of which rise straight
toward the sky*. The eye is never wearied of
the view of those scenes, where the trees and
rocks give the landscape that great and severe
character, which is marked in the arts by the
name of the heroic landscape. We landed before
sunset on the eastern bank of the Oroconoko, at


the Puerto de la Expedicion, in order to visit the
cavern of Ataruipe, of which I have spoken
above +, and which is the place of sepulchre of -
a whole nation destroyed. I shall attempt to
describe this cavern, so celebrated among the
natives.


We climbed with difficulty, and not. without
some danger, a steep rock of granite, entirely
bare. It would have been almost impossible to
fix the foot on it’s smooth and sloping surface,
if large crystals of feldspar, resisting decompo-
sition, did not stand out from the rock, and fur-


* See above, chap. xx, p. 50.


+ See above, chap. xx, p, 72; and chap. xxi, p. 119.


f


616


nish points of support. Scarcely had we attain-
ed the summit of the mountain, when we be-
held with astonishment the singular aspect of
the surrounding country. The foamy bed of the
waters is filled with an Archipelago of islands
covered with palm-trees. Toward the west, on
the left bank of the Oroonoko, stretch the sa-
vannahs of the Meta and the Casanare. They
resembled a sea of verdure, the misty horizon
of which was illumined by the rays of the set-
ting sun. It’s orb, resembling a globe of fire,
suspended over the plain; and the solitary
Peak of Uniana, which appeared more. lofty
from being wrapped in vapours that softened
its outline; all. contributed to augment the


majesty of the scene. Near us the eye looked
down into a deep valley, enclosed on every side.
Birds of prey and goatsuckers winged their
lonely flight in this inaccessible circus. We
found a pleasure in following with the eye their
fleeting shadows, as they glided slowly over the
flanks of the rock.


A narrow ridge led us to a_ neighbour-
ing mountain, the rounded summit of which
supported immense blocks. of granite. These
masses are more than forty or fifty feet in
diameter; and their form is so perfectly spheri-
cal, that, appearing to touch the soil only by a
small number of points, it might be supposed,
at the least shock of an earthquake they


617


would roll into the abyss. I do not remember
to have seen any where else a similar phenome-
non, amid the decompositions of granitic soils.
If the balls rested on a rock of a different na-
ture, as it happens in the blocks of Jura, we.
might suppose, that they had been rounded by
the action of water, or thrown out by the force
of an elastic fluid; but their position on the
summit of a hill alike granitic makes it more
probable, that they owe their origin to the pro-
gressive decomposition of the rock.

~The most remote part of the valley is covered
by a thick forest. In this shady and solitary
spot, on the declivity of a steep mountain, the
cavern of Ataruipe opens itself; it is less a
cavern than a jutting rock, in which the waters
have scooped a vast hollow, when, in the ancient
revolutions of our planet, they attained that
, height*. We soon reckoned in this tomb of
a whole extinct tribe near six hundred skeletons
well preserved, and so regularly placed, that it
would have been difficult to make an error in
their number. Every skeleton reposes in a sort
of basket, made of the petioles of the palm-tree.


* I saw no vein, no four filled with crystal. (See vol.
iii, p. 138.) The decomposition of granitic rocks, and
their separation into large masses, dispersed in the plains
and valleys under the form of blocks and of balls with concen-
tric layers, appear to favor the enlarging of these natural
excayations, which resemble real caverns.


618


These baskets, which the natives call mapires,
have the form of a square bag. Their size is
proportioned to the age of the dead; there are
some for infants cut off at the moment of their
birth. We saw them from ten inches to three
feet four inches long, the skeletons in them
being bent together. They are all ranged
near each other, and are so entire, that not a
rib, or a phalanx is wanting. The bones have
been prepared in three different manners, either
whitened in the air and the sun ; dyed red with
onoto, a colouring matter extracted from the
bixa orellana ; or, like real mummies, varnished
with odoriferous resins, and enveloped in leaves
of the heliconia or of the plantain tree. The
Indians related to us, that the fresh corpse is
placed in damp ground, in order that the flesh
may be consumed by degrees; some months
after, it is taken out, and the flesh remaining on
the bones is scraped off with sharp stones. Se-
veral hordes in Guyana still observe this cus.
tom. Larthen vases half-baked are found near
the mapires, or baskets. They appear to con-
tain the bones of the same family. The largest
of these vases, or funeral urns, are three feet
high, and five feet and a half long. Their
colour is greenish gray; and their oval form is
sufficiently pleasing to the eye. The handles are
made in the shape of crocodiles, or Serpents ; the
edge is bordered with meanders, labyrinths, and


- 619


real. grecques, in straight lines variously com-
bined. Such paintings are found in every zone,
among nations the most remote from each other,
either with respect to the spot which they
occupy on the Globe, or to the degree of civili-
zation which they have attained. The inhabi-
tants of the little mission of Maypures still
execute them on their commonest pottery* ;
they decorate the bucklers of the Otaheiteans,
the fishing implements of the Eskimoes, the
walls of the Mexican palace of Mitla-+-, and the
vases of ancient Greece. Every where a rhyth-
mic repetition of the same forms flatters the eye,
as the cadenced repetition of sounds soothes the
ear. Analogies founded on the internal nature
of our feelings, on the natural dispositions of.our
intellect, are not calculated to throw light
on the filiation and the ancient connections of
nations.

We could not acquire any precise idea of the
period, to which the origin of the mapires and
the painted vases, contained in the ossuary ca-
vern of Ataruipe, can be traced. The greater
part seemed not to be more than a century old;
but it may be supposed, that, sheltered from all
humidity, under the influence of a uniform tem-


* See above, chap. xxi, p. 154.
+ See my Views of the Cordilleras, and Monuments of the
Ancient Inhabitants of America, PI. 50. [Vol. ii, English edi-


tion, or xiv of the present work, p, 158, Pl. 19.]


620


perature, the preservation of these articles would
be no less perfect, if it dated from a period
far more remote. A tradition circulates among
the Guahiboes, that the warlike Atures, pursued
by the Caribbees, escaped to the rocks that
rise in the middle of the Great Cataracts; and
there that nation, heretofore so numerous, be-
came gradually extinct, as well as it’s language*.
The last families of the Atures still existed in
1767, in the time of the missionary Gili. At
the period of our voyage an old parrot was
shown at Maypures, of which the inhabitants
related, and the fact is worthy of observation,
that, “they did not understand what it said,
because it spoke the language of the Atures.”
We opened, to the great concern of our guides,
several mapires, in order to examine attentively
the form of the skulls; they all displayed the
characteristics of the American race, with
the exception of two or three, which approach-
ed. indubitably to the Caucasian. We have
observed abovef, that in the middle of the Ca-
taracts, in the most inaccessible spots, cases are
found strengthened with iron bands, and filled
with European tools, vestiges of clothes, and glass
trinkets. These articles, which have given rise
to the most absurd reports of treasures hidden


* See above, chap. xx, p. 13; and chap. xxi, p. 144.
+ See above, chap. xxi, p. 121,


621 f
by the Jesuits, probably belonged to Portugueze
traders, who had penetrated into these savage
countries. Now may we suppose, that the skulls
of European race, which we saw mingled with
the skeletons of the natives, and preserved with
the same care, were the remains of some Portu-»
gueze travellers, who had died of sickness, or
had been killed in battle? The aversion which
the natives affect for whatever is not of their
own race renders this hypothesis little probable.
Perhaps fugitive mestizoes of the missions of the
Meta and Apure may have come and settled
near the Cataracts, marrying women of the
- tribe of the Atures. Such mixed marriages
sometimes take place in this zone, though they
are more rare than in Canada, and in the whole
of North America, where hunters of European
origin unite themselves with savages, assume-
their habits, and sometimes acquire great politi-
cal influence.

We took several skulls, the skeleton of a child _
of six or seven years old, and two of full-grown
men of the nation of the Atures, from the caverp
of Ataruipe. All these bones, partly painted red,

partly varnished with odoriferous resins, were
placed in the baskets (mapires or canastos),
which we have just described. They made
almost the whole load of a mule; and as we knew
the superstitious aversion of the Indians for dead
bodies, when they have given them sepulture,


622


we had carefully enveloped the canastos in mats
recently woven. Unfortunately for us, the pe-
netration of the Indians, and the extreme quick-
ness of their senses, rendered all our precautions
useless. Wherever we stopped, in the missions
of the Caribbees, amid the Llanos, between An-
gostura. and Nueva Barcelona, the natives
assembled round our mules to admire the mon-
keys which we had purchased at the Oroonoko.
These good people had scarcely touched our
baggage, when they announced the approaching
death of the beast of burden, “ that carried the
dead.” In vain we told them, that they were
deceived in their conjectures; and that the
baskets contained the bones of crocodiles and
manatees: they persisted in repeating, that they
smelt the resin, that surrounded the skeletons,
and “ that they were their old relations.” We
were obliged to make the monks interpose their
authority, in order to conquer the aversion of
the natives, and procure for us a change of
mules.

One of the skulls, which we took from the
cavern of Ataruipe, has appeared in the fine
work published by my old master, Blumenbach,
on the varieties of the human species. The
skeletons of the Indians were lost on the coast
of Africa, together with a considerable part of
our collections, in a shipwreck, in which perished
our friend and fellow-traveller, Fray Juan Gon-


623


zales *, a young monk of the order of Saint
Francis.

We withdrew in silence from the cavern of
Ataruipe. It was one of those calm and serene
nights, which are so common in the torrid zone.
The stars shone with a mild and planetary light.
Their scintillation was scarcely sensible at the
horizon}, which seemed illumined by the greaz
nebulz of the southern hemisphere. An innu-
merable multitude of insects spread a reddish
light on the ground, loaded with plants, and re-
splendent with these living and moving fires, as
if the stars of the firmament had sunk down on
the savannah. On quitting the cavern, we
stopped several times to admire the beauty of


this singular scene. The odoriferous vanilla, and
festoons of bignonia, decorated the entrance ;
and above, on the summit of the hill, the arrowy
branches of the palm-irees waved murmuring in


the air {.

We descended toward the river, to take the
road to the mission, where we arrived late in the
night. Our imagination was struck by all we
had just seen. Occupied continually by the pre-
sent, in a country where the traveller is tempted


* See vol. ili, chap. 11, p. 350.
+ See chap. x and xiii, vol. iii, p. 314 and 538.
+ See the third discourse delivered at one of the public
sittings of the Academy of Berlin. (Tableaux de la Nature,
traduites de ? Allemand par M, Eyries, vol. ii, p. 231.)


624


to regard human society as a new institution, he
is more powerfully interested by remembrances
of times past. ‘These remembrances were not
indeed of-a distant date; but in all that is mo-
numental antiquity is a relative idea, and we
easily confound what is ancient with what is
obscure and problematic. The Egyptians con-
sidered the historical remembrances of the
Greeks as very recent. If the Chinese, or, as
they prefer calling themselves, the inhabitants of
the celestial empire, could have communicated
with the priests of Heliopolis, they would have
smiled at those pretensions of the Egyptians to
antiquity. Contrasts not less striking are found
in the north of Europe and of Asia, in the New
World, and in every region, where the human
race has not preserved a long consciousness of
itself. The migration of the Toltecks, the most
ancient historical event on the table-land of
Mexico, dates only in the sixth age of our era.
The introduction of a good system of intercala-
tion, and the reform of the calendars, the indis-
pensable basis of an accurate chronology, took
place in the year 1091. These epochas, which
to us appear so modern, fall on fabulous times,
when we reflect on the history of our species
between the banks of the Oroonoko and the
Amazon. We there see symbolic figures sculp-
tured on the rocks, but no tradition throws
light upon their origin. In the hot part of


i
i
i


625


Guyana we can go back only to the period,
when the Castillian and Portugueze conquerors,
and more recently peaceful monks, penetrated
amid so many barbarous nations.

It appears, that, to the north of the Cataracts,
in the strait of Baraguan, there are caverns
filled with bones, similar to those which I have
just described *: but I was informed of this fact
only after my return; our Indian pilots did not
mention it, when we landed at the strait.. These
tombs no doubt have given rise to a fable of the
Otomacs, according to which the granitic and
solitary rocks of Baraguan, the forms of which
are very singular, are regarded as the grand-
fathers, the ancient chiefs of the tribe. The cus-
tom of separating the flesh from the bones, very
anciently practised by the Massagetes, is still
known among several hordes of the Oroo-
noko. It is even asserted, and with some pro-
bability, that the Guaraons plunge their dead
bodies under water enveloped in nets ; and, that
the small caribe fishes, the serra-salmes, of
which we saw every where an innumerable
quantity, devour in a few days the muscular
flesh, and thus prepare the skeleton. It may be
supposed, that this operation can be practised
only in places where crocodiles are not common.


* Gumilla, vol. i, p. 127, Gih, vol. ui, p. 107.
+ See vol. iv, p. 443. .
VOL. V. 2s


626


Some tribes, for instance the Tamanacs, are
accustomed to lay waste the fields of the deceas-
ed, and cut down the trees which he has planted.
They say, “ that the sight of objects, which
belonged to their relations, makes them melan-
choly.” They like better to efface than to pre-
serve remembrances. These effects of Indian
sensibility are very detrimental to agriculture,
and the monks oppose with energy these super-
stitious practices, to which the natives converted
to Christianity still adhere in the missions.

The tombs of the Indians of the Oroonoko
have not been sufficiently examined, because
they do not contain valuable articles like those
of Peru; and even on the spot no faith is now
lent to the chimerical ideas, which were hereto-
fore formed of the wealth of the ancient inhabi-
tants of Dorado. The thirst of gold every where
precedes the desire of instruction, and a taste for
researches into antiquity ; in all the mountain-
ous part of South America, from Merida and
Santa Marta to the table-lands of Quito and
Upper Peru, the labours of absolute mining have
been undertaken to discover tombs, or, as the
Creoles say, employing a word altered from the
language of the Incas, guacas. When in Peru,
at Mancichi, I went into the guaca of Toledo,
from which masses of gold were extracted, of
the value, in the sixteenth century*, of five


* T found this calculation on the fth paid in 1576, and


627


millions of franks. No trace of the precious
metals has been found in the caverns, which
have served the natives of Guyana for ages as
sepulchres. This circumstance’ proves, that,
even at the period when the Caribbees, and other
travelling nations, made incursions to the south-
west, gold had flowed in very small quantities
from the mountains of Peru toward the eastern
plains.

Wherever the granitic rocks do not furnish
any of those large cavities, that ate owing to
their decomposition, or an accumulation of their
blocks, the Indians confide the dead to the earth
itself. The hammock (chinchorro), a kind of
net in which the deceased had reposed during his
life, serves him for a coffin. This net is fastened
tight around the body, a hole is dug in the hut,
and there the dead is laid. This is the most
usual method, according to the report of the
missionary Gili, and what I myself learned from
Father Zea. I do not believe, that there exists
one ¢umulus in Guyana, not even in the plains of
the Cassiquiare and the Essequibo. Some how-
ever are to be met with in the savannahs of
1592, imto the treasury (Caras reales) of Truxillo. The
registers have been preserved. In Persia, in Upper Asia,
and in Egypt, where the tombs have been searched at very


different periods, no such immense treasures, I believe,
have ever been found.


2382


628


Varinas*, as in Canada, to the west of the Alleg-
hanies}. It seems remarkable enough, that,
notwithstanding the extreme abundance of wood
in those countries, the natives of the Oroonoko
were as little accustomed as the ancient Scythians
to burn the dead. They formed funeral piles
for this purpose sometimes after a battle only,
when the number of the dead was considerable.
Thus, in 1748, the Parecas burned not only the
bodies of their enemies, the Tamanacs, but also
those of their own relations, who fell on the
field of battle. The Indians of South America,
like all nations that live in a state of na-
ture, are strongly attached to the spots, where
the bones of their fathers repose. This feeling,


which a great writer has painted in a manner so
affecting in the episode of Atala, is cherished in
all it’s primitive ardour by the Chinese. These
people, among whom every thing is the produce
of art, or rather of the most ancient civilization,
do not change their dwelling without carrying
‘along with them the bones of their ancestors.


* Near Mijagual. See vol. iv,.p. 314.


+ This kind of mummies and skeletons contained in bask-
ets were recently discovered in a cavern in the United States.
Tt is believed, they belong to a race of men analogous to
that of the Sandwich Islands. The description of these
tombs (Mitchell, in the Bibl. Univ., Aodt, 1817, p. 335) has
however some similitude with that of the tombs of Ata-
ruipe.


629


Coffins are seen deposited on the banks of great
rivers, in order to be transported, with the fur-
niture of the family, to a remote province.
These removals of bones, heretofore more com-
mon * among the savages of North America, is
not practised among the tribes of Guyana ; but
these are not nomades, like nations that live
exclusively by hunting.

We staid at the mission of Atures only the
time necessary for passing the canoe through the
Great Cataract. The bottom of our frail bark
was become so thin, that it required great care,
to prevent it from splitting. We took leave of
the missionary, Bernardo Zea, who remained at
Atures, after having accompanied us during two
months, and shared all our sufferings. This
poor monk continued to have the same fits of a
tertian ague; but, to him they had become an
habitual evil, to which he paid little attention.
Other fevers of a more detructive kind prevailed
at Atures, at our second visit. The greater
part of the Indians could not leave their ham-
mocks, and we were obliged to send in search of
cassava bread, the most indispensable food of the
country, to the independant but neighbouring
tribe of the Piraoas. We had hitherto escaped


 * The missionaries of the United States complain of the
noisome smell, that is diffused by the Nanticokes, when tra-
velling with the bones of their ancestors. llistoir. trans.,
1819, vol. i, p. 75,


630


ihese malignant fevers, which, I believe, are not
contagious.

We ventured to pass in our canoe through the
latter half of the Raudal of Atures. We landed
here and there, to climb upon the rocks, which
like narrow dikes joined the. islands to one
another. Sometimes the waters precipitate
themselves over the dikes, sometimes they fall
within them with a hollow noise. A consider-
able portion of the Oroonoko was dry, because
the river had found an issue by subterraneous
caverns, In these solitary haunts the rock ma-
nakin with gilded plumage (pipra rupicola), one
of the most beautiful birds of the tropics, builds
it’s nest. The Raudalito of Carucari is caused
by an accumulation of enormous blocks of
granite. These blocks, several of which are
spheroids of five or six feet in diameter, are
piled together in such a manner, as to form
spacious caverns. We entered one of these ca-
verns, to gather the confervas, that were spread
over the clefts and humid sides of the rock.
This spot displayed one of the most extraordi-
nary scenes of nature, that we had contemplated
on the banks of the Oroonoko. The river rolled
it's waters turbulently over our heads*. It
seemed as if it were the sea dashing against reefs
of rocks; but at the entrance of the cavern we


* Sco above, chap. 20, p. 4.


631


could remain dry beneath a large sheet of water,
that precipitated itself in an arch from above
the barrier. In other cavities, deeper, but less
spacious, the rock was pierced by the effect of
successive filtrations. We saw columns of
water, eight or nine inches broad, descend from
the top of the vault, and find an issue by clefts,
that seemed to communicate at great distances
with each other. ;
The cascades of Europe, forming only one
fall, or several falls close to each other, can
never produce such variety in the shifting land-
scape. This variety is peculiar to rapids, to a
succession of small cataracts several miles in
length, to rivers that force their way across
rocky dikes and accumulated blocks of granite.
We enjoyed this extraordinary sight longer than’
we wished. Our boat was to coast the eastern
bank of a narrow island, and to take us in again
after a long circuit. We passed an hour and
half in vain expectation of it. Night approached,
and with it a tremendous storm. It rained with
violence. We began to fear, that our frail bark
had been wrecked against the rocks, and that
the Indians, conformably to their habitual indif-
ference for the evils of others, had returned tran-
quilly to the mission. We were only three per-
sons : completely wet, and uneasy respecting the
fate of our boat, it appeared far from agreeable
to us, to pass, without sleep, a long night of the


632


torrid zone, amid the noise of the Raudales.
M. Bonpland resolved 'to leave me in the island
with don Nicolas Sotto*, and swim across the
branches of the river, that are separated by the
granitic dikes. He hoped to reach the forest,
and seek assistance at Atures from Father Zea,
We dissuaded him with difficulty from under-
taking this hazardous enterprise. He knew
little of the labyrinth of small channels, into
which the Oroonoko is divided. Most of them


have strong whirlpools, and what passed before
our eyes, while we were deliberating on our
situation, proved sufficiently, that the natives
had deceived us respecting the absence of croco-
diles in the cataracts. The little monkeys,


which we had carried along with us for months,
were deposited on the point of our island. Wet
by the rains, and sensible of the least lowering
of the temperature, ‘these delicate animals sent
forth plaintive cries, and attracted to the spot
two crocodiles, the size and leaden colour of
which denoted their great age. Their unex-
pected appearance made us reflect on the dan-
ger we had run in bathing, at our first passing
by the mission of Atures, in the middle of the
Raudal. After long waiting, the Indians at
length arrived at the close of day. The natural
coffer-dam, by which they had endeavoured. ta


* See vol. iv, chap. 18, p. 416.


633


descend, in order to make the circuit of the
island, had become impassable, on account of
the little depth of the water. The pilot sought
a long while for a more accessible passage in
this labyrinth of rocks and islands. Happily
our canoe’ was not damaged, and in less than
half an hour our instruments, provision, and
animals, were embarked.

We navigated part of the night, to pitch our
tent again in the island of Panumana. We re-
cognized with pleasure the spots, where we had
herbalized when going up the Oroonoko. We
examined once more on the beach of Guachaco


that small formation of sand stone, which re-
poses directly on granite. It’s position is the


same as that of the sandstone, which my unfor-
tunate countryman, Mr. Burckhardt, observed
at the entrance of Nubia, superimposed on the
granite of Syene. We passed, without visiting
it, the new mission of San Borga, where (as we
learned with much regret a few days after) the
little colony of Guahiboes had fled al monte,
from the chimerical fear, that we should carry
them off, to sell them as poitos, or slaves *.
After having passed the rapids of Tabaje, and
the Raudal of Cariven, near the mouth of the
great Rio Meta, we arrived without accident at
Carichana. The missionary + received us with


* See vol..iv, chap. 19, p. 571.
+ Fray Jose Antonio de Torre.


634


that kind hospitality, which we had already
enjoyed on our first passage. The sky was little
favourable for astronomical observations ; we
had obtained some new ones in the two Great
Cataracts; but thence, as far as the mouth of the
Apure, we were obliged to renounce the attempt.
Mr. Bonpland had the satisfaction at. Carichana
of dissecting a manatee more than nine feet
long. It was a female, the flesh of which ap-
peared to us not unsavoury. I have spoken in
another place of the manner of catching this her-
bivorous cetacea *. The Piraoas, some families
of whom inhabit the mission of Carichana, detest
this animal to such a degree, that they hid them-
selves, to avoid being obliged to touch it, when
it was conveying to our hut. They said, “ that
the people of their tribe die infallibly, when they
eat of it.” This prejudice is the more singular,
as the neighbours of the Piraoas, the Guamoes
and the Otomacs, are very fond of the flesh of
the manatee. We shall soon see, that the flesh
of the crocodile is also an object of horror to
some tribes, and of predilection to others.

The island of Cuba furnishes a fact little
known in the history of the manatee. South of
the port of Xagua, several miles from the coast,
there are springs of fresh water in the middle of
the sea. They are supposed to be owing to a


* See vol.iv, chap, 18, p. 447.


635


hydrostatic pressure exerted in subterraneous
channels, that communicate with the lofty
mountains of Trinidad. Small vessels some-
times take in water there; and, what is well
worthy of observation, large manatees remain
habitually in those spots. I havealready called
the attention of naturalists to the crocodiles
that advance from the mouth of rivers far into
the sea*. Analogous circumstances may have
caused, in the ancient catastrophes of our planet,
that singular mixture of pelagian and fluviatile
bones and petrifactions, which is observed in
some rocks of recent formation.

Our stay at Carichana was very useful in
recruiting us from our fatigues. Mr. Bonpland
bore with him the germe of a cruel malady ;
he stood in need of repose; but, as the delta of
the tributary streams} included between the
Horeda and Paruasi is covered with a rich
vegetation, he made long herbalizations, and
was wet through several times ina day. We
found fortunately in the house of the missionary
the most attentive care; bread was procured
for us of the flour of maize, and even milk. The
cows yield milk plentifully in the lower regions
of the torrid zone, wherever good pasturage is
found. I insist on this fact, because local circum-


* See vol. iii, chap. 11, p. 360.»
+ See above, chap. 23, p. 465, 466.


636


stances have spread through the Indian Archipe-
lago the prejudice of considering hot climates as
repugnant to the secretion of milk. We may
conceive the indifference of the natives of the
New World for a milk diet, the country having
been originally destitute of animals capable of
furnishing it* ; but how can we avoidbeing asto-
nished at this indifference inthe immense Chinese
population, livingingreatpart without thetropics,
and in the same latitude with the nomade and
pastoral tribes of central Asia? If the Chinese
have ever been a pastoral people, how have they
lost the tastes and the habits so intimately con-
nected with this state, which precedes agricul-
tural institutions? ‘These questions appear to
me extremely interesting with respect both to
the history of the nations of oriental Asia, and.


*® See chap. 27, vol. iv, p.317: and chap. 22, p. 271 of
the present volume. The rein-deer are not domesticated in
Greenland as they are in Lapland; and the Eskimoes care
little for their milk. The bisons taken very young accustom
themselves, on the west of the Alleghanies, to graze with the
herds of European cows. The females in some districts of
India yield a little milk, but the savages have never thought
of milking them. What is the origin of that fabulous story re-
lated by Gomara (chap. 43, p. 86), according to which the first
Spanish navigators saw, on the coast of South Carolina,
“stags led to the savannahs by herdsmen?” ‘The females
of the bison, according to Mr. Buchanan and the philoso-
phical historian of the Indian Archipelago, Mr. Crawford,
yield more milk than common cows.


637


to the ancient communications that are sup-
posed to have existed between that part of the
world and the north of Mexico.

We went down the Oroonoko in two days,
from Carichana to the mission of Uruana, after
having again passed the celebrated strait of
Baraguan *. We stopped several times to de-
termine the velocity of the river, and it’s tem-
perature at the surface, which was 27: 4°.
The velocity was found to be two feet in a
second (sixty-two toises in 3’ 6”), in places
where the bed of the Oroonoko was more than
twelve thousand feet broad, and from ten to
twelve fathoms deep. The slope of the river
is in fact extremely gentle from the Great Cata-


racts to Angostura}; and, if a barometric mea-
surement were wanting, the difference of height
might be determined by approximation, by mea-
suring from time to time the velocity of the
stream, and the extent of the section in breadth
and depth. We had some observations of the


* See vol. iv, chap. 19, p. 502.
+ The descent of the Nile also, from Cairo to Rosetta, a
distance of fifty-nine leagues (at 2273 t.), is only four inches
ina league. Descr. de I’ Egypte Moderne, vol. i, p. 58.

{ Edinburgh Review,. vol. xxiv, p. 414. According to
Clark and Lewis, the velocity of the Missouri, near where it
flows into the Mississipi, is seven feet in a second, and in
some places more than twelve feet ; which equals the velocity
of the Cassiquiare, See above, p. 418.


638


stars at Uruana. I found the latitude of the
mission to be 7° 8’ ; but the results from different
stars left a doubt of more than 1’. The stratum
of moschettoes, which hovered over the ground,
was so thick, that I could not succeed in recti-
fying properly the artificial horizon. I tor-
mented myself in vain; and regretted, that I
was not provided with a mercurial horizon. On
the 7th of June, good absolute altitudes of the
Sun* gave me 69° 40’ for the longitude. We
had advanced from Esmeralda 1° 17’ toward
the west, and this chronometric determination
merits entire confidence, on account of the dou-
ble observations, made in going and returning,
at the Great Cataracts, and at the confluence of
the Atabapo and of the Apure.

“The situation of the mission of Uruana is ex-
tremely picturesque. The littie Indian village
is placed at the foot of a lofty granitic mourtain.
Rocks every where appear in the form of pillars
above the forest, rising higher than the tops of
the tallest trees. The Oroonoko no where dis-


* The partial heights do not differ 2’. In these places,


filled with venomous insects, observations are made most
favourably by day. The meridian altitudes of the Sun may
be taken by means of a reflecting instrument, in which the
parallelism of the great and little mirror corresponds with a
point of the limb twenty-five or thirty degrees beyond the
‘commencement of the division. (Ods. Asér., vol. 1, p: XY,
222, 262, and 272).


639


plays a more majestic aspect, than when con-
templated from the hut of the missionary, Fray
Ramon Bueno. It is more than two thousand
six hundred toises broad *, and runs without
any winding, like a vast canal, straight toward
the east. Two long and narrow islands (Isla
de Uruana and Isla vieja de la Manteca) con-
tribute to give extent to the bed of the river ;
the two banks are parallel, and we cannot call
it divided into different branches. . The mission
is inhabited by the Otomaes--, a tribe in the
rudest state, and presenting one of the most.
extraordinary physiological. phenomena. The
| Otomacs eat earth; that is, they swallow every
day, during several months, very considerable
_ quantities, to appease hunger, without injuring
_ their health: Since my return to Europe, this
incontestable fact has become a subject of warm
dispute, because two assertions have been con-
founded together, which are extremely different;
that of eating earth, and that of being nourished
by it. Though we could stay only one day at
Uruana, this short. space of time sufficed to in-
struct us in the preparation of the poya (or balls
of earth). I also found some traces of this vi-
tiated appetite among the Guamoes; and be-
tween the confluence of the Meta and the Apure,


* Base, 140 metres, angles 90° and 88° 27 40’. Breadth
5211 metres.
+ Otomacos in Spanish, Ottomacu in Indian,


640


where every body speaks of geophagy as of a
thing anciently known. I shall here confine
myself to an account of what we ourselves saw,
or heard from the missionary, whom an unhappy
fatality had doomed to live for twelve years
among the savage and turbulent tribe of the


Otomacs.

The inhabitants? of Uruana belong to those
nations of the savannahs (Indios andantes), whos
more difficult to civilize than the nations of the
forest * (Indios del monte), have a decided aver-
sion to cultivate the land, and live almost exclu-
sively on hunting and fishing. They are men of
a very robust constitution ; but ugly, savage,
vindictive, and passionately fond of fermented
liquors. They are omnivorous animals in the
highest degree; and therefore the other Indians,
who consider them as barbarians, have a com-
mon saying, “ nothing is so disgusting, that an
Otomac will not eat it.” While the waters of
the Oroonoko and it’s tributary streams are low,
the Otomacs subsist on fish and turtles. The
former they kill with surprising dexterity, by
shooting them with an arrow, when they appear
at the surface of the water. When the rivers
swell, which in South America, as well as in
Egypt and in Nubia, is erroneously attributed to
the melting of the snows, and which occurs


* On the difference between them, see above, p. 271:


641


periodically in every part of the torrid zone, fish-
ing almost entirely ceases. It is then as difficult
to procure fish in the rivers which are become
deeper, as when you are sailing on the open sea.
It often fails the poor missionaries, on fast days
as well as flesh-days, though all the young In-
dians are under the obligation of « fishing for
the convent.” At the period of these inunda-
tions, which last two or three months, the Oto-
macs swallow a prodigious quantity of earth.
We found heaps of balls in their huts, piled up
in pyramids three or four feet high. ‘These balls
were five or six inches in diameter. The earth,
which the Otomacs eat, is a very fine and unc-
tuous clay, of a yellowish gray colour ; and,
being slightly baked in the fire, the hardened
crust’ has a tint inclining to red, owing’ to the
oxid of iron. which is mingled with it.’ We
brought away some of this earth, which we took
from the winter provision of the Indians ; and it
is absolutely false, that it is steatitic, and contains
magnesia. Mr. Vauquelin did not discover any
traces of this earth in it: but he found, that it
contained more silex than alumin, and three
or four per cent of lime.

The Otomacs do not eat every kind of clay
indifferently ; they choose the alluvial beds
or strata that contain the most unctuous earth, -
and the smoothest to the feel. I inquired of the
missionary, whether the moistened clay were

VOL, V. 2T


642


made to undergo, as Father Gumilla asserts,
that peculiar decomposition, which is indicated
by a disengagement of carbonic acid and sul-
phuretted hydrogen, and which is designated in
every language by the term of putrefaction *;
but he assured us, that the natives neither cause
the clay to rot, nor do they mingle it with flour
of maize, oil of turtles’ eggs, or fat of the croco-
dile. We ourselves examined, both at the
Oroonoko and after our return to Paris, the balls
of earth, which we brought away with us, and
found no trace of the mixture of any organic:
substance, whether oily or farinaceous. The
savage regards every thing as nourishing, that
appeases hunger: when therefore you inquire of
an Otomac, on what he subsists during the two
months when the river is the highest, he shows
you his balls of clayey earth. This he calls his
principal food ; for at this period he can seldom
procure a lizard, a root of fern, or a dead ‘fish
swimming at the surface of the water. If'the
Indian eat earth from want during two months
(and from three quarters to five quarters of a
pound in twenty-four hours), he does not the
less regale himself with it during the rest of the
year. Every day in the season of drought, when


* Tienen hoyos en la qual hai greda fina, bien amasada,
podrida a fuerza de continua agua, como la preparan los alfa-
reros para hacer loza fina, Gumilla, tom. i, p. 200.


643


fishing is most abundant, he scrapes his balls of
poya, and mingles a little clay with his other
aliment. What is most surprising is, that the
Otomacs do not become lean by swallowing such
quantities of earth: they are, on the contrary,
extremely robust, and far from having the belly
tense and puffed up. The missionary Fray
Ramon Bueno asserts, that he never remarked
any alteration in the health of the natives at the
period of the great risings of the Oroonoko.

The following are the facts in all their sim-
plicity, which we were able to verify. The Oto-
macs during some months eat daily three quar-
ters of a pound of clay slightly hardened by fire,
without their health being sensibly affected by
it. They moisten the earth afresh, when they
are going to swallow it. It has not been possi-
ble to verify hitherto with precision how much
nutritious vegetable or animal matter the Indians
take in a week at the same time; but it is cer-
tain, that they attribute the sensation of satiety,
which they feel, to the clay, and not to the
wretched aliments which they take with it occa-
sionally. No physiological phenomenon being
entirely insulated, it may be interesting to ex-
amine several analogous phenomena, which I
have been able to collect. ;

I observed every where within the torrid zone,
in a great number of individuals, children, wo-
men, and sometimes even full-grown men, an

272


644


inordinate and almost irresistible desire of swal-
lowing earth; not an alkaline or calcareous earth,
to neutralize (as it is vulgarly said) acid juices,
but a fat clay, unctuous, and exhaling a strong
smell. It is often found necessary to tie the
children’s hands, or to confine them, to prevent
their eating earth, when the rain ceases to fall.
At the village of Banco, on the bank of the river
Magdalena, I saw the Indian women who make
pottery continually swallowing great pieces of
clay. These women were not in a state of preg-
nancy; and they affirmed, that “ earth is an
aliment, which they do not find hurtful.” In
other American tribes people soon fall sick, and
waste away, when they yield too much to this
mania of eating earth. We found at the mission
of San Borja an Indian child of the Guahiba
nation, who was as thin as a skeleton. The
mother informed us by an interpreter, that the
little girl was reduced to this lamentable state of
atrophy in consequence of a disordered appetite,
having refused during four months to take almost
any other food than clay. Yet San Borja is only
twenty-five leagues distant from the mission of
Uruana, inhabited by that tribe of the Otomacs,
who, from the effect no doubt of a habit pro-
gressively acquired, swallow the poya without
experiencing any pernicious effects. Father
Gumilla asserts, that the Otomacs purge them-
selves with oil, or rather with the melted fat of


645


the crocodile, when they feel any gastric ob-
structions; but the missionary whom we found
among them was little disposed to confirm this
assertion. It may be asked, why the mania of
eating earth is much more rare in the frigid and
temperate zones, than in the torrid ; and why in
Europe it is found only among women in a state
of pregnancy, and sickly children. This differ-
ence between hot and temperate climates arises
perhaps only from the inert state of the functions
of the stomach, caused by strong cutaneous
perspiration. It has been supposed to be ob-
served, that the inordinate taste for eating earth
‘augments among the African slaves, and becomes
more pernicious, when they are restricted to a
regimen purely vegetable, and deprived of spiri-
tuous liquors*. ‘If the latter render the prac-
tice of eating earth less injurious, we may al-
most felicitate the Otomacs on their decided
taste for intoxication.

The Negroes on the coast of Guinea delight
in eating a yellowish earth, which they call
caouac. The slaves who are taken to America
try to procure for themselves the same enjoy-
ment; butit is constantly detrimental to their
health. They say, “ that the earth of the West
Indies is not so easy of digestion as that of their
country.” Thibaut de Chanvalon, in his Voy-


* Moreau de Jounes Obs. on the Dirt-eaters in the West
Indies (Bullet. de la Soc. Méd., Mai, 1816).


646


age to Martinico, expresses himself very judici-
ously on this pathological phenomenon. “ Ano-
ther cause,” he says, “ of this pain in the sto-
mach is, that several of the Negroes, who come
from the coast of Guinea, eat earth; not froma
depraved taste, or in consequence of a disease,
but from a habit contracted at home in Africa,
where they eat, they say, a particular earth, the
taste of which they find agreeable, without suf-
fering any inconvenience. They seek in our
islands for the earth the most similar to this,
and prefer a yellowish red volcanic tufa. It is
sold secretly in our public markets ; but this is
an abuse, which the police ought to correct.
The Negroes who have this habit are so fond of
caouac, that no chastisement will prevent their
eating it*.”

In the Indian Archipelago, at the island of
Java, Mr. Labillardiére saw, between Surabaya
and Samarang, little square and reddish cakes
exposed to sale. These cakes, called tanaampo,
were cakes of clay, slightly baked, which the
natives eat with appetite}. The attention of
physiclogists, since my return from the Oroo-
noko, having been powerfully fixed on these
phenomena of geophagy, Mr. Leschenault (one
of the naturalists of the expedition to the South-
ern Lands under the command of Captain Bau-


* Voyage a la Martinique, 1763, p. 84.
+ Voyage in Search of La Perouse, vol. ii, p. 322.


647


din) has published some curious details on the
tanaampo, or ampo, of the Javanese. ‘“ The red-
dish and somewhat ferruginous clay,” he says*,
<‘ which the inhabitants of Java are fond of eat-
ing occasionally, is spread on a plate of iron,
and baked, after having been rolled into little
cylinders in the form of the bark of cinnamon.
In this state it takes the name of ampo, and is
sold in the public markets. This clay has a
peculiar taste, which is owing to the torrefac-
tion; it is very absorbent, and adheres to the
tongue, which it dries. In general it is only the
Javanese women who eat the ampo, either. in
the time of their pregnancy, or in order to
grow thin; the want of plumpness being a
kind of beauty in this country. The use of
this earth is fatal to health; the women lose
their appetite imperceptibly, and no longer
take without disgust a very small quantity of
food ; but the desire of becoming lean, and of
preserving a slender shape, can brave these dan-
gers, and maintains the credit of the ampo.”
" ‘The savage inhabitants of New Caledonia also,
to appease their hunger in times of scarcity, eat
great pieces of a friable lapis ollarist. Mr.
Vauquelin analysed this stone, and found in it,


* Letter from Mr. Leschenault to Mr. de Humboldt
on the Kind of Earth which is eaten at Java. (See Tableaux
de la Nature, vol. i, p. 209.)

+ Labillardiere, vol. ti, p. 205.


648


beside magnesia and silex in equal portions, a
small quantity of oxid of copper. Mr Goldber-
ry had seen the Negroes in Africa, in the islands
of Bunck and Los Idolos, eat an earth of which
he had himself eaten, without being incommod-
ed by it, and which also was a white and friable
steatite*. In looking over these examples,
which are all taken from the torrid zone, We are
struck by the idea of finding a taste, which
nature it would seem should have reserved for
the inhabitants of the most steril regions, prevail
among races of rude and indolent men, who live
in the finest and most fertile countries on the
globe. We saw at Popayan, and in several
mountainous parts of Peru, lime reduced toa
very fine powder, sold in the public markets to
the natives among other articles of provision.
This powder, when used, is mingled with coca,
that is, with the leaves of the erythroxylon peru-
vianum. It is well known, that Indian messen-
gers take no other aliment for whole days than
lime and coca; both excite the secretion of
spittle, and of the gastric juice ; they take away
the appetite, without giving any nourishment to
the body. In other parts of South America, on
the coast of Rio de la Hacha, the Guajiroes swal-
low lime alone, without adding any vegeta-
ble matter to it. They always carry with them


* Goldberry, Voyage en Afrique, vol ii, p. 465.


649


a little box filled with lime, as we do snuff-boxes,
and as in Asia people carry a betel box. This
American custom excited the curiosity of the
first Spanish navigators*. Lime blackens the
teeth ; and in the Indian Archipelago, as among
several American hordes, to blacken the teeth is
to beautify them. In the cold regions of the
kingdom of Quito, the natives of Tigua eat ha-
bitually from choice, and without being incom-
moded by it, a very fine clay, mixed with quart-
zose sand. ‘This clay, suspended in water,
renders it milky. We find in their huts large
vessels filled with this water, which serves as a
beverage, and which the Indians call agua or
leche de llanka-.

When we reflect on the whole of these facts,
we perceive, that this disorderly appetite for
clayey, magnesian, and calcareous earth, is most
common among the people of the torrid zone;
that it is not always acause of disease; and that
some tribes eat earth from choice, while others
(the Otomacs in America, and the inhabitants
of New Caledonia, in the Pacific Ocean,) eat it
from want, and to appease hunger. A great
number of physiological phenomena __ prove,
that a temporary cessation of hunger may be
produced, without the substances that are sub-


* Grynai Orb. Nov., p. 228.
+ Milk of clay.. Llanka is a word of the gencral language
of the Incas, signifying fine clay.


650


mitted to the organs of digestion being, properly
speaking, nutritive. The earth of the Otomacs,
composed of alumen and silex, furnishes proba-
bly nothing, or almost nothing, to the composi-
tion of the organs of man. These organs con-
tain lime and magnesia in the bones, in the
lymph of the thoracic duct, in the colouring
matter of the blood, and in white hairs; they
afford very small quantities of silex in black
hair ; and, according to Mr. Vauquelin, but a
few atoms of alumin in the bones, though this is
contained abundantly in the greater part of
those vegetable matters, which form part of our
nourishment. It is not the same with man as
with animated beings placed lower in the scale
of organization. In the former, assimilation is
exerted only on those substances, that enter
essentially into the composition of the bones,
the muscles, and the medullary matter of the
nerves and the brain. Plants, on the contrary,
draw from the soil the salts that are found acci-
dentally mixed in it; and their fibrous texture
varies according to the nature of the earths, that
predominate in the spots which they inhabit.
An object well worthy of research, and which
has long fixed my attention*, is the small num-
ber of simple substances (earthy and metallic),


* Aphor. ex Physiologia chimica Plantarum, in m y Flora Freib.


subterranea, p. 42.


651


that enter into the composition of animated be-
ings, and which alone appear fitted to maintain
what we may call the chemical movement of
vitality.

We must not confound the sensations of hun-
ger with that vague feeling of debility, which is
produced by want of nutrition, and by other
pathologic causes. The sensation of hunger
ceases long before digestion takes place, or the
chyme is converted into chyle. It ceases either
by anervous and tonic impression exerted by the
aliments on the coats of the stomach; or be-
cause the digestive apparatus is filled with sub-
stances, that excite the mucous membranes to
an abundant secretion of the gastric juice. To
this tonic impression on the nerves of the sto-
mach the prompt and salutary effects of what
are called nutritive medicaments may be attri-
buted, such as chocolate*, and every substance
that gently stimulates and nourishes at the same
time. Itis the absence of a nervous stimulant,
that renders the solitary use of a nutritive sub-
stance (of starch, gum, or sugar,) less favour-
able to assimilation, and to the reparation of the
losses, which the human body undergoes. Opi-
um, which is not nutritive, is employed with


* Polit. Essay on New Spain, vol. ii, p. 365. Meat roast-
ed, or much broiled, is more stimulating than boiled meat.


The manner of preparing food changes it’s chemical propor-
tions.


652


success in Asia, in times of great scarcity : it
acts as atonic. But when the matter, which
fills the stomach, can be regarded neither as an
aliment, that is, as proper to be assimilated, nor
as a tonic stimulating the nerves, the cessation
of hunger is probably owing only to the secre-
tion of the gastric juice. We here touch upon
a problem of physiology, which has not been
sufficiently investigated. Hunger is appeased,
the painful feeling of inanition ceases, when the
stomach is filled. It is said, that this viscus
stands in need of ballast ; and every language
furnishes figurative expressions, which convey
the idea, that a mechanical distention of the sto-
mach causes an agreeable sensation. Very
recent works of physiology still speak of the
painful contraction, which the stomach expe-
riences during hunger, the friction of it’s sides
against one another, and the action of the acid
gastric juice on the texture of the digestive appa-
ratus. ‘The observations of Bichat, and more
particularly the fine experiments of Mr. Magen-
die, are in contradiction to these superannuated
hypotheses. After twenty-four, forty-eight, or
even sixty hours of abstinence, no contraction
of the stomach is observed ;_ it ‘is only on the
fourth or fifth day, that this organ appears to
change in a small degree it’s dimensions. The
quantity of the gastric juice diminishes with the
duration of abstinence. It is probable, that this


653


juice, far from accumulating, is digested as an
alimentary substance. Ifa cat or dog be made
to swallow a substance, which is not susceptible
of being digested, a pebble for instance, a mu-
cous and acid liquid is formed abundantly in
the cavity of the stomach, somewhat resem-
bling by it’s composition the gastric juice of the
human body*. It appears to me very probable,
according to the analogy of these facts, that,
when the want of aliments compels the Oto-
macs and the inhabitants of New Caledonia to
swallow clay and steatite during a part of the
year, these earths occasion a powerful secretion
of the gastric and pancreatic juices in the di-
gesting apparatus of these people. ‘The obser-
vations, which I made on the banks of the Oroo-
noko, have been recently confirmed by the direct
experiments of two distinguished young physio-
logists, Messrs. Hippolyte Cloquet, and Bres-
chet. After long fasting, they ate as much as
five ounces of a silvery green and very flexible
laminar talc. Their hunger was completely
satisfied, and they felt no inconvenience from a
kind of food, to which their organs were unac-
customed. It is known, that great use is still
made in the East of the bolar and sigillated
earths of Lemnos, which are clay mingled with
oxid of iron. In Germany, the workmen em-


* Magendie, Precis Elément. de Physiologie, vol. i, p. 18
and 25,


ployed in the quarries of sandstone worked at
the mountain of Kiffheeuser spread a very fine
clay upon their bread, instead of butter, which
they call steinbutter*, stone butter; and they
find it singularly filling, and easy of digestion}.

When in consequence of the changes, that
are now preparing in the system of the Spanish
colonies, the missions of the Oroonoko shall
become more frequented by enlightened tra-
vellers, the number of days will be determined
with precision, during which the Otomacs can
subsist without adding to the clay they swallow
any other aliment from the vegetable or animal
kingdom. A considerable portion of gastric and
pancreatic juice must be employed, to digest, or
rather to envelope and expel with the fecal mat-
ter, so great a quantity of clay. We may con-
ceive, that the secretion of these juices fit to
enter into the mass of the chyle is augment-
ed by the presence of earths in the stomach
and intestines; but how does it happen, that
such abundant secretions, which, far from fur-
nishing the body with new matter, only produce
the removal of substances already acquired by
other means, do not cause at length a feeling of


* This steinbutter must not be confounded with the moun-
tain butter, bergbutter, which is a saline substance, owing to a
decomposition of aluminous schists,

t Freiesleben, Kupferschiefer, vol. iv, p. 118. Kesler, in
Gilbert’s Annalen, B. 28, p. 492.


655


exhaustion? The state of perfect health enjoy-
ed by the Otomacs during the time when they
use little muscular exercise, and are subjected
to'so extraordinary a regimen, is a phenomenon
difficult to be explained. It can be attributed
only to a habit, prolonged ‘from generation to
generation. The structure of the digestive ap-
paratus differs much in animals, that feed ex-
clusively on flesh or on seeds ; it is even proba-
ble, that the gastric juice changes it’s nature,
according as it is employed in effecting the
digestion of animal or vegetable substances; yet
we are able gradually to change the regimen of
herbivorous and carnivorous animals, to feed
the former with flesh, and the latter with vege-
tables, Man can accustom himself to an extra-
ordinary abstinence, and find it but little pain-
ful, if he employ tonic or stimulating substances
(various drugs, small quantities of opium, betel,
tobacco, leaves of coca); or if he supply his
stomach from time to time with earthy, insipid
substances, that are not in themselves fit for
nutrition. Like man in a savage state, some
animals also, when pressed by hunger in winter,
swallow clay or friable steatites ; such are the
wolves in the north-east of Europe, the rein-
deer, and, according to the testimony of Mr.
Patrin, the kids in Siberia. The Russian hunt-
ers on the banks of the Jenisey and the Amour
use a clayey matter, which they call rock butter,


656


as a bait. The animals scent this clay from
afar; and are fond of the smell, as the clays of
bucaros, known in Portugal and Spain by the
name of odoriferous earths (tierras  olorosas),
have an odour agreeable to women*. Brown
relates, in his History of Jamaica, that the croco-
diles of South America swallow small stones,
and pieces of very hard wood, when the lakes
which they inhabit are dry, or when they are in
want of food. Mr. Bonpland and I observed in
a crocodile, eleven feet long, which we dissected
at Batalley, on the banks of the Rio Magdalena,
that the stomach of this reptile contained. fish
half digested, and rounded fragments of granite
three or four inches in diameter. It is difficult
to admit, that the crocodiles swallow these stony
masses accidentally, for they do not catch fish
with their lower jaw resting on the ground at
the bottom of the river. The Indians have
framed the absurd hypothesis, that these indo-
lent animals like to augment their weight, that
they may have less trouble in diving.. I rather
think, that they load their.stomach with large
pebbles, to excite an abundant secretion of gas-
tric juice. The experiments of Mr. Magendie


* Bucaro, vas fictile odoriferum. People are fond of drink-
ing out of these vessels on account of the smell of the clay.
The women of the province of Alentejo acquire a habit of
chewing the bucaro earth ; and feel a great privation, when
they cannot indulge this vitiated taste,


657


render this explanation extremely probable.
With respect to the habit of the granivorous
birds, particularly the gallinacez and ostriches,
of swallowing sand and small pebbles, it has been
hitherto attributed to an instinctive desire of
accelerating the trituration of the aliments in
a muscular and thick stomach.

We have seen above, that tribes of Negroes
on the Gambia mingle clay with their rice ; some
families of Otomacs had perhaps formerly the
custom of causing maize and other farinaceous
seeds to rot in their poya, in order to eat earth
and amylaceous matter together : perhaps it was
a preparation of this kind, that father Gumilla
deseribed confusedly in the first volume of his
work, when he affirms, “ that the Guamoes and
the Otomacs feed upon earth only because it ‘is
impregnated with the sustancia del maiz, and the
fat of the cayman.” I have already observed
above, that neither the present missionary of
Uruana, nor Fray Juan Gonzales, who lived
long in those countries, knew any thing of this
mixture of animal and vegetable substances with
the poya. Perhaps father Gumilla has con-
founded the preparation of the earth, which the
natives swallow, with the custom they still re-
‘ tain (of which Mr. Bonpland acquired the cer-
tainty on the spot) of burying in the ground the
beans of a species of mimosaceze*, to cause them


* Of the group of ingas.


Qu


658


to enter into decomposition, in order to reduce
them, into a white bread, savoury, but diffieult
of digestion. I repeat, that the balls of poya,
which we drew from the winter~ stores of
the Indians, contained no trace of animal
fat, or, of amylaceous matter. Gumilla being
one of the most credulous travellers we know,
it almost perplexes us to credit facts, which he
has thought fit to reject. Fortunately, in the
second volume of his work, he resumes a great
part. of what he advanced in the first; he
no longer doubts, that “ half at least (a lo
menos) of the bread of the Otomacs and the
Guamoes is clay.” He asserts, “that children
and full grown persons not only eat this bread
without suffering in their health, but also great
pieces of pure clay (muchos terrones de pura
greda.)” - He adds, that those who feel a weight
on the stomach purge themselves with the fat of
the crocodile, which restores their appetite, and
enables them to continue te eat pure earth*, I
doubt the manteca de caiman being a purgative ;
but, as it is very fluid, it may contribute to
envelop the earth, which has not been expelled
among the fecal matter. It is certain, that the
Guamoes are very fond, if not of the fat, at least
of the flesh of the crocodile, which appeared to
us white, and without any smell of inusk. In


*


Gumilla, vol. ii, p. 260.


i
|


659


Sennaar, according to Mr. Burckhardt, itis alike.
much esteemed, and sold in the markets.

I cannot silently pass over some questions,
that have been agitated in different memoirs
published on occasion of my voyage on the
Oroonoko. Mr. Leschenault inquires, whether
the ampo (the clay of Java) may not be: useful
in appeasing hunger occasionally, in circum-
stances when a person is destitute of food, or
compelled to have recourse to substances un-
wholesome or hurtful, though derived from the
organic kingdoms. JI believe, that in’ experi-
ments tried on the consequences of long absti-
nence, an animal forced to swallow clay (in the
manneét of the Otomacs) would suffer lessthan an-
other animal, the stomach of which had received
no aliment. An Italian physiologist *, struck
with the small quantities of the phosphats of
lime and magnesia, of silex, sulphur, soda, fluor,
iron, and manganese ; and the large quantities of
carbon, oxygen, azot, and hydrogen, which are
contained in the solid and liquid parts of the
human body; inquires whether respiration may ,
not be regarded as a continued act of nutrition,
while the digestive apparatus is filled with clay.
The chemical analysis of the air inhaled and the
air expired does not favour this hypothesis. It


*®* Physico-chemical Researches, vol. i, p. 291, 294.


2 ose


660


is difficult to ascertain the loss of a very smali
quantity of azot, and it may be admitted, that in
general the functions of respiration are confined
to the removal of carbon and hydrogen from the
body.

A moistened mixture of phosphat and carbonat
of lime, cannot be nourishing like substances
equally destitute of azot, (such as sugar, gum,
starch,) but drawn from the organic kingdom.
Our digestive apparatus is like a galvanic pile,
which decomposes only certain substances. The
assimilation ceases, not solely because the matter,
which the stomach receives, does not contain
aliments similar to those, which compose the
human body; but also because the digestive
power, that of chemical decomposition, does not
extend indifferently to all combinations. We
‘can scarcely dwell on these speculations of ge-
neral physiology, without inquiring what would
‘have been the state of society, or rather of the
human race, if man had no need of the produc-
tions of organization and vitality as aliment.
No habit can essentially change the mode of
nutrition. We shall never learn to digest. and
assimilate earth: but since the grand experi-
ments of Gay-Lussac and Thenard have made
known to us, that only slight differences in the
proportions of oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon,
distinguish the hardest wood from the substance


661


of starch *, how can we deny, that chemistry
may one day succeed in converting those enor-
mous vegetable masses, those textures of hard-
ened fibres, that compose the trunks of the trees
of our forests, into alimentary substances: Such
a discovery, to be important, must be founded on
cheap and simple processes: but in this suppo-
sition, which appears scarcely probable, it would
change the organization of political bodies, the
price of labour, and the actual distribution of
the population of the Globe. In rendering man
more independant, it would tend to dissolve the
bonds of society, and to sap the foundations of
industry and civilization.

The little village of Uruana is more difficult
to’ govern, than the greater part of the other
missions. ‘The Otomacs are a restless, turbulent
people, with unbridled passions. They are not
only fond to excess of the fermented liquors from


* Starch. Oak timber.


Oxygen 41°78.
Carbon.........48° 52°53.


Hydrogen 5°69


100°00
The unwholesome bread of the Laplanders, called birch-
bread and pine bread, is made from the alburnum of trees;
but they hare lately succeeded in making cakes somewhat


nutritive, witha mixture of wheaten flour and rasped wood of


the oak.


662


eassava and maize, and of palm wine, but they
throw themselves into a peculiar state of intoxi-
cation, we might almost say of madness, by the
use of the powder of niopo*. They gather the
long pods of.a mimosacea, which we have made
known by the name of acacia niopo +, cut them
into pieces, moisten them, and cause them to
ferment. When the softened seeds begin to
grow black, they are kneaded like a paste, mixed
with some flour of cassava and lime procured
from the shell of a helix, and the whole mass is
exposed to a very brisk fire, on a grate of hard
wood. The hardened paste takes the form of
small cakes. When it is to be used, it is reduced
to a fine powder, and placed on a dish five or
six inches wide. The Otomac holds this dish,
which has a handle, in his right hand, while he
inhales the niopo by the nose, through a forked
bone of a bird, the two extremities of which are
applied to the nostrils. This bone, without


* In Maypure, nupa; the missionaries say fiopo,

+ Itis an acacia with very delicate leaves, and not an inga,
as Mr. Willdenow has said by mistake. (Spec. Plant. vol. iv,
pl. 2, p.1027.) We brought home:another species of mimo-
sacea (the chiga of the Otomacs, and the sepa of the May-
pures), that yields seeds, the flour of which is eaten at Uru-
ana like cassava. From this flour the chiga bread is prepared,
which is so common at Cunariche, and on the banks of the
Lower Oroonoko. The chiga is a species of nga, and L know


of no other mimosacea, that can supply the place of the ce-
realia,


663


which the Otomac believes that he could not take
this kind of snuff, is seven inches long: it ap-
peared to me to be the leg bone of a large sort of
plover (échassier). I sent the niopo, and all this
singular apparatus, to Mr. de Fourcroy at Paris.
The niopo is so stimulating, that the smallest
portions of it produce’a violent sneezing in those,
who are not accustomed to it’s use. Father
Gumilla says*, “ This diabolical powder of
the Otomacs, furnished by an arborescent to-
bacco-plant, intoxicates them by the nostrils
(emboracha ‘por las narices), deprives them of
reason for some hours, and renders them furious
in battle.” However varied may be the family
of the leguminous plants in the chemical and
medical properties of their seeds, juices, and
roots, we cannot believe, from what we know
hitherto of the group of mimosacez, that it is
principally the pod of the acacia niopo, that im-
parts the stimulant power to the snuff of the
Otomacs. This power is owing, no doubt, to
the lime freshly calcined. We have shown above,
that the mountaineers of the Andes of Popayan,
and the Guajiroes who wander between the lake
of Maracaybo and the Rio la Hacha, are also
fond of swallowing lime as a stimulant, to aug-
ment the secretion of the spittle and the gastri

juice. ;


* Orinoco illust., vol.i, p. 202.


664


In sending to Europe the complicated appa-
ratus, which the Otomacs employ in order to
inhale the powder of niopo, I directed the atten-
tion of the learned to an analogous custom, which
Mr. de la Condamine observed among the natives
of the Upper Maragnon. The Omaguas, whose
name is rendered celebrated by the expeditions
attempted in search of Dorado, have the same
dish, and the same hollow bone of a bird, by
which they convey to their nostrils their powder
of curupa. The seed that yields this powder is
no doubt also a mimosacea; for the Otomacs,
according to Father Gili, denote even now, at
the distance of one hundred and sixty leagues
from the Amazon, the acacia niopo by the name
of curupa*. Since the geographical researches,
which I have recently made on the theatre of
the exploits of Philip von Huten, and on the real
situation of the province of Papamene +, or of
the Omaguas, the probability of an ancient com-
munication between the Otomacs of the Oroo-
noko and the Omaguas of the Maragnon has
become more interesting and more. proba-
ble. The former came from the Meta, perhaps
from the country between the Meta and the
Guaviare ; the latter assert, that they descended


* Gili, vol.i, p. 201. La Condamine, Voyage a? Amazone,
p. 62.
t See above, p. 319, 328, 340.


ee


665


in great numbers * to the Maragnon by the Rio
Japura, coming from the eastern declivity of the
Andes of New Grenada. Now, it is precisely
‘between the Guayavero, which joins the Gua-
viare, and the Caqueta, which takes lower down
the name of Japura, that the country of the
Omagua appears to be situate, of which the ad-
venturers of Coro and Tocuyo in vain attempted
theconquest. Thereisno doubt a striking contrast
between the present barbarism of the Otomaes,
and the ancient civilization of the Omaguas ; but
all parts of the latter nation were not perhaps
alike advanced in civilization, and the example
of tribes fallen into complete barbarism are un-
happily but too common in the history of our
species. Another point of resemblance may be
remarked between the Otomacs and the Oma-
guas. Both of these nations are celebrated
among all the tribes of the Oroonoko and the
Amazon for the frequent use which they make of
caoutchouc, or the inspissated milk of the euphor-
biaceze and the urticee.


* I donot admit, with Mr, de la Condamine, that the whole
nation of the Omaguas came from the north. (See the learned
researches of Mr. Vater on the ancient seats of that powerful
people, tolerably advanced in civilization, in Mithridates,
vol, ii, pl.1, p, 598.) The Om-aguas or En-aguas called
themselves also Aguas (Acunha, p.24). For this reason, no
doubt, the province of Papamene, or of the Omaguas, bore
the name of Dit-Agua. (Fray Pedro Simon, p. 340.)


y


666


The real herbaceous tobacco* (for the mission-
aries have the habit of calling the niopo or cu-
rupa tree-tobacco) has been cultivated from time
immemorial by all the native people of the Oroo-
noko; and at the period of the conquest, the
habit of smoking was found to be alike spread
over both Americas. The Tamanacs and the
Maypures of Guyana wrap maize leaves round
their cigars, as the Mexicans did at the arrival
of Cortes. The Spaniards have substituted paper
for the leaves of maize, in imitation of them.
The poor Indians of the forests of the Oroonoko
know as well as did the great nobles at the court
of Montezuma, that the smoke of tobacco is an


* The word tobacco (tadacco), like thé words savannah,
maize, cacique, maguey (agave), and manatee, belongs to the
ancient language of Haiti, or Saint Domingo. It did not
properly denote the herb, but the tube, the instrument through
which the smoke was inhaled. It seems surprising, that a
vegetable production so universally spread should have diffe-
rent names among neighbouring people. The pete-ma. of the
Omaguas is, no doubt, the pety of the Guaranies; but the
analogy between the Cabre and Algonkin, or Lenni-Len-
ape, words, which denote tobacco, may be merely accidental.
The following are the synonimes in thirteen languages.

North-America, Azteck, or Mexican; yet?: Algonkin;
sema: Huron; oyngoua.

South-America. Peruvian or qquichua ; sayri: Chiquito.
pais: Guarany ; pety: Vilela; tusup: Mbaja, west of the
Paraguity, nalodagadi: Moxo between the Rio Ucayale and
the Rio Madeira; sadare: Omagua; petema: Tamanac ;
vavat; Maypure; yema: Cabre; scema.


ee


667


excellent narcotic ; and they use it not only in
order to procure their afternoon nap, but also to
put themselves into that state of quietism, which
they call with great simplicity dreaming with the
eyes open, or a day dream. The use of tobaeco
appeared to me to be now very rare in the. mis-
sions; and in New Spain, to the great regret of
the revenue officers, the natives, who almost all
descend from the lowest class of the Azteck
people *, do not smoke at all. Father Gili+
affirms, that the practice of chewing tobacco is
unknown to the Indians of the Lower Oroonoko.
I doubt a little the truth of this assertion, having
been told, that the Sercucumas of the Erevato
and the Caura, neighbours of the whitish Tapa-
ritoes, swallow tobacco chopped small, and im-
pregnated with some other very stimulant juices,
to prepare themselves for battle. Of the four
species of nicotiana cultivated in Europe (n. ta-
bacum, n. rustica, n. paniculata, and n. gluti-
nosa,) we found only the two latter growing wild;
but the nicotiana loxensis, and the n. andicola,
which I found on the bank of the Andes, at 1850
toises of elevation, almost the height of the Peak
of Teneriffe, are very similar to the n. tabacum
and n. rustica +. The whole genus however is


* See my Essai pol., vol. ii, p. 465.
+ Vol. ii, p. 407%.


+ See our Nov. Gen. et Spec., vol. iii, p. 4; Schleezer,


Briefw., vol. ili, p- 153.


668


almost exclusively American, and the greater
number of the species appeared to me to belong
to the mountainous and temperate region of the
tropics.

It is neither from Virginia, nor from South
America, as it is said erroneously in several agri-
cultural and botanical works, but from the Mexi-
can province of Yucatan, that Europe received
the first tobacco seeds, about the year 1559*.
The man who has boasted most of the fecundity
of the banks of the Oroonoko, the celebrated
Raleigh, contributed most also to introduce the
custom of smoking among the nations of the
north. Already, at the end of the 16th century,
bitter complaints were made in England “ of
this imitation of the manners of a savage peo-
ple.” It was feared, that by the practice of
smoking tobacco Anglorum corpora in barbaro-
rum naturam degenerent+.


* The Spaniards became acquainted with tobacco in the
West India islands at the end of the 15th century. I have
remarked above (vol. iii, p. 62.), that the cultivation of this
narcotic plant preceded the beneficent cultivation of the
potato in Europe more than 120 or 140 years. When Ra-
leigh brought tobacco from Virginia to England in 1586,
whole fields of it were already cultivated in Portugal,

+ This remarkable passage of Camden is as follows, An-
nal. Elizabet., p. 1483 (1585); ‘¢ ex illo sane tempore (taba-
cum) usu cepit essc creberrimo in Anglia et magno pretio
dum quamplurimi graveolentem illius fumum per tubulum
testaceum hauriunt ct mox e naribus efflant, adeo ut Anglo-


ee


669


When the Otomacs of Uruana by the use of
niopo (of their arborescent tobacco), and of fer-
mented liquors, have thrown themselves into a
state of intoxication, which lasts several days,
they kill one another without ostensibly fighting.
The most vindictive among them poison the nail
of their thumb with curare ; and, according: to
the testimony of the missionary, the mere im-
pression of this poisoned nail may become mor-
tal, if the curare be very active, and immediate-
ly mingle with the mass of the blood. When
the Indians, after a quarrel at night, commit a
murder, they throw the dead’ body into: the
river, fearing that some manifest indications of
the violence exercised.on. the deceased might be
observed. “ Every time,” said father Bueno,
“ that I see the women fetch water from a part
of the shore, to which they are not accustomed
to go for it, I suspect, that a murder has been
committed in my mission.”

We found in the Indian huts at Uruana the
same vegetable substance (fouchwood of ants*),


rum corpora in barbarorum naturam degenerasse videantur,
quum iidem ac barbari delectentur.” We may see from this
passage, that they emitted the smoke through the nose; but
at the court of Montezuma the pipe was held in one hand,
while the nostrils were stopped with the other, is order that
the smoke might be more easily swallowed. Life of Raleigh,
vol, i, p, 82.


* ¥, esca de hormigas.


670


with which we had become acquainted at the
Great Cataracts, and which is employed to stop
bleeding: This touchwood,, which might less
improperly be called ants nests, is much sought
for in a region, the character of the inhabitants
of which is so little pacific. A new speeies of ant,
of a fine emerald green (formica spinicollis*),
collects for it’s habitation a cotton down, of a yel-
lowish brown colour, and very soft to the touch,
from the leaves of a melastomaceaf. I have no
doubt, that the yesca or touchwood of ants of the
Upper Oroonoko (the animal is found, we were
assured, only South of Atures) will one day
become an article of trade. This substance is
very superior to the ants’ nests of Cayenne, which
are employed in the hospitals of Europe, but
can rarely be procured.

On the 7th of June we quitted with regret
father Ramon Bueno. Among the ten mission-
aries, whom we had found in different parts of
the vast extent of Guyana, he alone appeared to
me to be attentive to all that regarded the na-
tives. He hoped to return in a short time to
Madrid, where he intended to publish the result


* Pugi in Guaraken; madi in Equinabi. See the note
which I added to the description of the formica spinicollis
given by Mr. Latreille, in my O6s. de Zoologie, vol. ii, p. 101,
Pl. xxxviii; fig. 6.

t The leaves of the guari tree, are covered on the lower
surface with a reddish down.


671


of his researches on the figures and characters
that cover the rocks of Uruana. It was in the
countries we had just passed through, between
the Meta, the Arauca, and the Apure, that, at
the time of the first expeditions to the Oroono-
ko, for instance that of Alonzo de Herera, in
1535, mute dogs were found, called by the’ na-
tives maios, and auries*. This fact is curious in
many points of view. We cannot doubt that
the dog, whatever father Gili may assert, is in-
digenous in South America. The different Indian
languages furnish words to designate this ani-
mal, which are scarcely derived from any Euro-
pean tongue. ‘To this day the word auri, men-
tioned three hundred years ago by Alonzo de
Herera, is found in the Maypure}. The dogs
we saw at the Oroonoko may perhaps have des-
cended from those, that the Spaniards carried to
the coast of Caraccas; but it is not less certain,
that there existed a race of dogs before the con-
quest in Peru, in New Grenada, and in Guyana,
resembling our shepherds’ dogs. The allco of
the natives of Peru, and in general all the dogs
that we found in the wildest countries of South
America, bark frequently. The first historians
however all speak of mute dogs (perros mudos) ;
they still exist in Canada; and, what appears to.


* Herera, Decad. V, vol. iii, p. 212.
tT Gili, vol ii, p.. 378.


672


me worthy of attention, it was this dumb variety
that. was eaten in preference in Mexico*, and at
the Oroonoko. A very well informed traveller,
Mr. Giesecke, who resided six years in Green-
land, assured me, that the dogs of the Eskimoes,
which pass their lives in the open air, and bury
themselves in winter beneath the snow, equally
do not bark, but howl like wolves-+-.

The practice of eating the flesh of dogs is now
entirely unknown on the banks of the Oroonoko ;
but, as it is a Tatar custom spread through
all the eastern part of Asia, it appears to me
highly, interesting for the history of nations, to
have ascertained, that it existed heretofore in the
hot. regions of Guyana, and on the table-lands of
Mexico. I must observe also, that on the con-
fines. of the province of Durango, at the northern
extremity of New Spain, the Cumanches have
preserved the habit of loading the backs of the
great dogs, that accompany them in their migra-


* See on the Mexican techichi, and on. the numerous diffi-
culties, that occur in the history of mute dogs, and dogs des-
titute of hair, my Tableaux de la Nature, vol. i, p. 117-124.

+ They sit down in a circle; one of them begins to howl
alone, and the others follow in the same tone. The groupes
of alouate monkeys how! in the’ same manner, and among
them the Indians distinguish “ the leader of the band.” See
above, vol. iv, p. 267. It was the practice at Mexico to cas-
trate the mute dogs, in order to fatten them. This operation
must have contributed to alter the organ of the voice. See
Antiqued. del Mex. por el Cardinal Lorenzana, p. 108.


673


tions*, with their tents of buffalo leather. | It is
well known, that employing dogs as beasts of
burden and of draught is equally common near
the Slave Lake, and in Siberia. I dwell on these
features of conformity in the manners of nations,
which become of some weight, when they are
far from solitary, and are connected with the
analogies furnished by thestructure of languages,
the division of time, and religious creeds and
institutions.

We passed the night at the island of Cucuru-
paru+, called also Playa de la Tortuga, because
the Indians of Uruana go thither to collect the
turtles’ eggs. It is one of the best determined
points of latitude along the banks of the Oroo-
noko. I was there fortunate enough to observe
the passage of three stars over the meridianf.


* See the Journal of the Tour of Bishop Tamaron, fol. 7
(manuscript), and my Essai polit., vol. i, p. 290.

+ Gili (vol. i, p. 99) writes Curucuruparu.

t See vol. iv, p. 479. I found by « of the Southern Cross
7° 15' 30"; by « of the Centaur, 7° I5! 48”; by @ of the
Centaur, 7° 15' 42”. I consider as doubtful, on my itinerary
inap, Pl. 16, the situation of the mouth of the Cano de la Tor-
tuga. As the Oroonoko has the immense breadth of two
thousand toises, and the boats do not descend along the same
bank by which they go up, it is difficult to make the bearings
tally. Between Caycara and the Great Cataracts I deter-
mined astronomically San Rafael ‘del’ Capuchino, the mouth
of the Apure, the island of Cucuruparu, the mission of Uru-
ana, and Atures. I could determine only the longitude of


VOL. V. 2X


674


To the east of the island is the mouth of the
Cano de la Tortuga, which descends from the
moantains of Cerbatana, continually wrapped in
electric clouds. On the southern bank of the
Cano, between the tributary streams Parapa-
ra and Oche, lies the almost ruined mission of
San Miguel de la Tortuga. The Indians assur-
ed us, that the environs of this little mission
abound in otters with a very fine fur, called by
the Portugueze water dogs*; and, what is still
more remarkable, in lizards (lagartos) with two
feet. The whole of this country, very accessible
between the Rio Cuchivero and the strait of
Baraguan, is worthy of being visited by a well-
informed zoologist. The lagarto, destitute of
hinder extremities, is perhaps a species of syren,
different from the siren lacertina of Carolina.
If it were a saurien, a real bimanis (chirotes,
Cuv.), the natives would not have compared it
to a lizard. Beside the arau turtles, of which I
have given abovet a detailed account, an innu-
merable quantity of land tortoises also, called
morocoi, are found on the banks of the Oroono-
ko, between Uruana and Encaramada. During


the mouth of the Meta; and, to improve the geography of
the Oroonoko, I recommend to travellers furnished with accu-
rate instruments, to ascertain the latitude of la Boca de Meta,
Carichana, and Encaramada.
* Perritos deagua ; in Maypure nevi.
~ + Vol, iv, p. 475-495.


675


the great heats of summer, in the time of
drought, these animals remain hidden, without
taking food, beneath stones, or in the holes
which they have dug. They issue from their
shelter, and begin to eat, only when they per-
ceive the humidity of the first. rains penetrate
into the earth. The terekays, or tajelus, turtles
that live in fresh water, have the same habits*.
I have already spoken of the summer sleep of
some animals of the tropics}. As the natives
know the holes in which the tortoises sleep amid
the dried lands, they get out a great number
at once, by digging ‘fifteen or eighteen inches
deep. Father Gili says, that this operation,
which he had seen, is not without danger, be-
cause the serpents often bury themselves in sum-
mer with the terekays.

From the island of Cucuruparu, as far as the
capital of Guyana, vulgarly called Angostura,
we were but nine days on the water. The dis-
tance is a little less than ninety-five leagues.
We seldom slept on shore; but the torment of
the moschettoes diminished sensibly in proportion
as we advanced. We landed on the 8th of June
at a farm (hatu de San Rafael del Capuchino),
opposite the mouth of the Rio Apure. I obtain-
ed some good observations of latitude and longi-


* Gili, vol.1, p. 257,
+ See above, vol iv, p. 380,381; and my Tableaus de la
Nature, vol. i, p. 50 and 188.
2x2


676


tude*. Having two menths before taken horary
angles on the bank opposite Capuchino, these
observations were important for determining the
rate of my chronometer, and connecting the situ-
ations on the Oroonoko with those on the shore
of Venezuela. The situation of this farm, being
at the point where the Oroonoko changes it’s
course, which was from south to north, and
hence runs from west to east, is extremely pictu-
resque. Granitic rocks} rise like islets amid
vast meadows. From their tops we discerned
toward the north the Llanos or steppes of Cala-
bozo bounding the horizon. Long accustomed
to the aspect of forests, this view powerfully
struck the imagination. The steppes after sun-
set assume a tint of greenish gray. The visual
ray being intercepted only by the rotundity of
the Earth, the stars seemed to rise as from the
bosom of the ocean, and the most experienced


* T had found, April the 4th, for the Boca del Rio Apure
(on the western bank of the Oroonoko), the lat. '7° 36’ 30” ;
the longitude ‘69° 730”; June the 8th, I found, for the
Hato del Capuchino (on the eastern bank of the Oroonoko),
the lat. '7° 3'7/ 45” ; the long. 69° 5’ 30”. See my Obs. Astr.
vol. i, p. 244.

+ They are Punto Curiquima, Cerro del Capuchino, or
Pocopocori, Cerro Sacuima, and Pan de Azucar de Caycara,
on the right bank of the Oroonoko ; Loma de Cabruta, Cerro
Aguaro, and Cortato (the refuge of Indian malefactors, whe
have deserted from the neighbouring missions), on. the left
bank of the Oroonoko.


aS


677


mariner would have fancied himself placed on a
projecting cape of a rocky coast. Our host was
a Frenchman*, who lived amid his numerous
herds. Though he had forgotten his native lan-
guage, he seemed pleased to learn, that we came
from his country, which he bad left forty years
before ; and he wished to retain us for some
days at his farm. The political revolutions of
Europe were to him almost unknown. He saw
only a movement against the clergy and the
monks; and observed, that “this movement
would last as long as the monks continued to
make resistance.” ‘This manner of seeing was
very natural for a man, who had passed his life .
on the borders of the missions, and who had
heard unceasingly of the conflict between the
secular and ecclesiastical powers. The small
towns of Caycara and Cabruta were only a few
miles distant from the farm ; but during part of
the year our host was in complete solitude.
The Capuchino becomes an island by the inunda-
tions of the Apure and the Oroonoko, and the
communication with the neighbouring farms can
be kept up only by means of a boat}. The


* M. Francois Doizan.

+ To the south west are Hato del Re, and Hato de San An-
jonio. From Uruana as far as the mouth of the Cuchivero,
the vegetation of these countries appeared to us to be charac-
terized in the savannahs by isolepis squarrosa, i. vahlii, i.
gracilis, oplismenus Burmanni ; and in woody places by the


678


horned cattle then seek the higher grounds, that
extend on the south toward the chain of the
mountains of Encaramada. This granitic chain
is intersected by vallies, which contain magne-
tic sands (granulary oxidulated iron), owing no
doubt to the decomposition of some amphibolic
or chloritic strata.

On the morning of the 9th of June we met a
great number of boats laden with merchandize,
sailing up the Oroonoko, in order to enter
the Apure. This is a commercial road much
frequented between Angostura and the port of
Torunos in the province of Varinas. Our fellow
traveller, Don Nicolas Soto, brother in law to
the governor of Varinas, took the same course,
to return to his family. At the period of the
high waters, several months are lost in striving
against the currents of the Oroonoko, the Apure,
and the Rio de Santo Domingo. The boatmen
are forced to carry out ropes to the trunks of
trees, and thus warp their canoes up. In the
great sinuosities of the river whole days are some-
times passed without advancing more than two


beautiful apciba or aubletia tibrbu, plumeria mod/is, allaman-
da cathartica, echites macrophylla, bignonia salicifolia, b. cari-
chanensis, b. verrucosa, sabicea hirsuta, piper anisatum, and
rubia orinocensis. We were surprised to find this latter
plant, which belongs to the almost northern group of the
stellate, among the rubiacez of the low regions of the tropics.
(Brown, on the Plants of the Congo, p. 28.)


ij
|


t
tf
}
a
|


679


or three hundred toises. Since my return to
Europe, the communications between the mouth
of the Oroonoko and the provinces situate on the
eastern slope of the mountains of Merida, Pam-
plona, and Santa Fe de Bogota, are become more
active; and it may be hoped, that steamboats
will facilitate these long voyages on the Lower-
Oroonoko, the Portuguesa, the Rio Santo Do-
mingo, the Orivante, the Meta, and the Gua-
viare. Magazines of cleft wood might be form-
ed, as on the banks of the great rivers of the
United States, sheltering them under sheds.
This precaution would be indispensable, as, in the
country through which we passed, it is not easy
to procure dry fuel fit to keep up a brisk fire
beneath the boiler of a steam engine.

We disembarked below San Rafael del Capu-
chino, on the right, at the Villa de Caycara, near
a cove called Puerto Sedeno. It is a collection
of a small number of houses, that bears the
pompous name of villa. Alta Gracia, la Ciudad
de la Piedra, Real Corona, Borbon, all the towns
ihat lie between the mouth of the Apure and
Angostura, are equally miserable. Imentioned
above, that the presidents of the missions, and
the governors of the provinces, had formerly the
habit of demanding the privileges of villas and
ciudades at. Madrid, the moment the first foun-
dations of a church were laid. This was a
means of persuading the ministry, that the colo-


680


nies augmented rapidly in population and pros-
perity. Sculptured figures of the Sun and Moon,
such as I have already mentioned, are found
near Caycara, at the Cerro del Tirano*. It is
“the work of the old people” (that is of our
fathers), say the natives. On a rock more
distant from the shore, and called Tecoma, the
symbolic figures are found, it is said, at the
height of a hundred feet. The Indians knew
heretofore a'road, that led by land from Caycara
to Demerary and Essequebo. Did the tribes,
that sculptured the figures} described by the
traveller Hortsmann, come by this same road to
the lake Amucu ?

On the northern bank of the Oroonoko, oppo-
site Caycara, is the mission of Cabruta, founded
by the jesuit Rotella, in 1740, as an advanced
post against the Caribbees. An Indian village,


* The tyrant who gave this name to these mountains is not
Lope de Aguirre, but probably, as the name of the neigh-
bouring cove seems to prove, the celebrated conquistadur An-
tonio Sedeno ; who, after the expedition of Herera, sonzht to
penetrate by the Oroonoko to the Rio Meta. He was in a
state of rebellion against the audiencia of Saint Domingo. I
am ignorant however how Sedeno came to Caycara ; for his-
torians relate, that he was poisoned on the banks ef the Rio
Tisnado, one of the tributary streams of the . Portuguesa.
(Frey Pedro Simon, Not. 4, cap. 21, No. 3, p.303. Caulin,
p. 158).

+ See above, p. 593.


681


known by the name of Cabritu*, had existed on
the same spot for several ages. At the time
when this little place became a Christian settle-
ment, it was believed to be situate in the latitude
of five degrees}, or two degrees forty minutes
more to the south than I found it by direct
observations made at San Rafael, and at la
Boca del Rio Apure. No idea was then con-
ceived of the direction of a road, that could lead
by land to Nueva Valencia and Caraccas, which
were supposed to be at an immense distance.
The merit of having first crossed the Llanos, to
get from the Villa de San Juan Baptista del Pao
to Cabruta, belongs to a woman. Father Gilit
relates, that Donna Maria Bargas was so pas-
sionately fond of the Jesuits, that she attempted
herself to discover the way to the missions.
She was seen with astonishment to arrive at
Cabruta from the north. She took up her abode
near the fathers of Saint Ignatius, and died in
their settlements on the banks of the Oroonoko.


* A cacique of Cabritu received Alonso de Herera at his
dwelling, on the expedition he attempted for going up the
Oroonoko, in 1535,

+ See the maps of Gumilla and Caulin. D’ Anvilleended .
by guessing better the latitude of Cabruta ; which he places
in the first edition of his South America at 5° 22/, but in the

second at Jo 2’, The new map of Arrowsmith indicates this


important point by the name of Carula.
t Vol. i, p. 04.


Sg


oes


SF ae


682


Since that period, the southern part of the Lla-
nos has been considerably peopled; and the
road, that leads from the vallies of Aragua by
Calabozo to San Fernando de Apure and Ca-
bruta, is much frequented. The chief of the
famous expedition of the boundaries made choice
of the latter place in 1754, to establish yards for
building the vessels necessary for conveying his
troops intended for the Upper Orooncko. ‘The
little mountain, that rises north-east of Cabruta,
can be discerned from afar in the steppes, and
serves as a landmark for travellers.

We embarked in the morning at Caycara;
and driving with the current of the Orooncko,
we first passed the mouth of the Rio Cuchivero,
where an ancient tradition has placed the 4i-
keam-benanos, or women without husbands * ;
and we there reached the paltry village of Alta
Gracia, which bears the name of a Spanish town.
It was near this place, that Don Jose de Ytur-
riaga founded the pueblo de Ciudad Real, which
still figures on the most modern maps, though
it has not existed for fifty years past, on account
of the insalubrity of it’s situation. After having
passed the point where the Oroonoko turns to
the east, forests are constantly seen on the right
bank, and the Llanos or steppes of Venezuela on
the left. The forests, which border the river,


* See above, p. 392.


683


are not however so thick as those of the Upper
Oroonoko. The population augments percepti-
bly as you advance toward the capital: you
find few Indians, but Whites, Negroes, and men
of mixed descent. The number of the Negroes
is not great; but here, as every where else, the
poverty of their masters is far from procuring
for them more humane treatment, and more
favourable to their preservation. An inha-
bitant of Caycara, Mr. V a, had just been
condemned to four years imprisonment, and a
fine of one hundred piastres, for having, in a
paroxysm of rage, tied a Negress by the legs to
‘the tail of his horse, and dragged her at full gallop
through the savannah, till she expired of agony.
I am glad to record, that the Audiencia was gene-
rally blamed in the country, for not having
punished more severely so atrocious an action.
Yet a small number of persons, who pretended to
be the most enlightened and most sagacious of
the community, deemed the punishment of a
White contrary to sound policy, at the moment
when the Blacks of Saint Domingo were in com-
plete insurrection. When institutions that have


become odious are menaced, men are never
wanting, who, in order to maintain them, advise
no relaxation of what they contain that is most
hostile to reason and justice. Since I left those
countries, civil dissensions have put arms into
the hands of the slaves; and fatal experience


SS St SS = ee


684


has led the inhabitants of Venezuela to regret,
that they refused to listen to don Domingo To-
var, and other virtuous citizens, who, as early as
the year 1795, lifted up their voices in the
cabildo of Caraccas, to prevent the introduction
of Blacks, and to propose means that might have
meliorated their condition.

After having slept on the 10th of June in an
island in the middle of the river, I believe that
called Acaru by Father Caulin, we passed the
mouth of the Rio Caura. This, the Aruy, and
the Carony, are the largest tributary streams,
that the Oroonoko receives on it’s right bank.
Having been able during my abode in the mis-
sions of Saint Francis, to collect many geogra-
phical materials respecting the Caura, I have
traced a particular map of it*. All the Chris-
tian settlements are now found near the mouth of
the river; and the villages of San Pedro, Aripao,
Urbani, and Guaraguaraico, succeed each other
at the distance of a few leagues. The first,
which is the most populous, contains however
but two hundred and fifty souls. That of San
Luis de Guaraguaraico is a colony of Negroes,
either freed or fugitives from Essequibo, which
merits the particular attention of government.
It can never be sufficiently recommended, to


* dilas geogr., P1.20. See above, on the Rio Caura, p. 34,
and 606.


686


endeavour to attach the slaves to the soil, and
suffer them to enjoy as farmers the fruits of
their agricultural labours. The land on the
Caura, for the most part a virgin soil, is ex-


tremely fertile. There are pasturages for more
than 15,000 beasts; but the poor inhabitants
have neither horses nor horned cattle. More
than six sevenths of the banks of the Caura are
either desert, or occupied by independent and
savage tribes. The bed of the river is twice
choked up by rocks; occasioning the famous
Raudales of Mura and of Para or Paru, the latter
of which has a portage, because it cannot be
passed by canoes. At the time of the expedition
of the boundaries, a small fort was erected on
the northern cataract, that of Mura. The go-
vernor, don Manuel Centurion, hastened to give
the name of Ciudad de San Carlos to a few
houses, which some Spanish families (that is to
say, not Indians), consisting of Whites and Mu-
lattoes, had constructed near the fort. South of
the cataract of Para, at the confluence of the
Caura and the Erevato, the mission of San Luis
was then found; and a road by land led thence
to Angostura, the capital of the province. All
these attempts at civilization have been fruitless.
No village any longer exists above the Raudal
of Mura; and here, as in many other parts of
the colonies, the natives have as we may say re-
conquered the country from the Spaniards.


686


The valley of Caura, however, may become one
day or other highly interesting from the value of
it’s productions, and the communications which
it furnishes with the Rio Ventuari, the Carony,
and the Cuyuni. I have shown above the im-
portance of the four tributary streams, which the
Orocnoko receives from the mountains of Parima.
Near the mouth of the Caura, between the vil-
lages of San Pedro de Alcantara and San Fran-
cisco de Aripao, a small lake of four hundred
toises in diameter was formed in 1790, by the
sinking in of the ground, in consequence of an
earthquake *. It was a portion of the forest of
Aripao, which sunk to the depth of eighty or a
hundred feet below the level of the neighbouring
land. The trees remained green for several
months; and some of them, it was believed,
continued to push forth leaves beneath the water.
This phenomenon is the more worthy of atten-
tion, as the soil of these countries is probably
granitic. I doubt the secondary formations of
the Llanos being continued toward the south as
far as the valley of Caura.

The 11th of June we landed on the right bank
of the Oroonoko at Puerto de los Frailes tT, at the


* On Saint Mathew’s day, in 1790, at three o’clock in the
morning.

+ Opposite ‘the granitic rock called Piedra de Don Ignacio,
after the name ofa famous smuggler, who-roamed the country
hetween the Essequebo and the Llanos of Caraccas.


|
|
|
!
|
|
|


/


distance of three leagues above the Ciudad de
la Piedra, to take altitudes of the Sun. The
longitude of this point is 67° 26’ 20”, or 1° 41’
east of the mouth of the Apure. Farther on,
between the towns of la Piedra and Muitaco, or
Real Corona, occur the Torno and the Mouth of
Hell, two obstacles, which were formerly dreaded
by voyagers. The Oroonoko suddenly changes
it’s direction ; it flows first to the east, then to
the north-north-west, and then again to the east.
A little above the Canno Marapiche, which opens
on the northern bank, a very long island divides
the river into two branches. We passed on the
south of this island without difficulty ; toward
the north a chain of small rocks, half covered .
when the water is high, forms whirlpools and
rapids. This is what is called. la Boca del In-
fierno, and the Raudal de Camiseta. The first
expeditions of Diego de Ordaz (1531) and
Alonso'de Herera (1535) have given celebrity to
this bar. The Great Cataracts of the Atures
and Maypures were then unknown; and the
clumsy vessels (vergantines), in which travellers
persisted in going up the river, rendered the
passage through the rapids extremely difficult.
At present no apprehension is felt in ascending
- or descending the Oroonoko, at any season, from
it's mouth as far as the confluence of the Apure
and the Meta. The only falls of water, in .this
space are those of Torno or Camiseta, Marimara,


688


and Cariven, or Carichana Vieja*. Neither of


these three obstacles is to be feared with expe-
rienced Indian pilots. I dwell on these hydro-
graphic details, because a great political and
commercial interest is now connected with the
communications between Angostura and the
banks of the Meta and the Apure, two rivers that
lead to the eastern side of the Cordilleras of New
Grenada. The navigation from the mouth of
the Lower Oroonoko to the province of Varinas
is difficult only on account of the force of the
current. The bed of the river no where, presents
obstacles more difficult to vanquish, than those
of the Danube between Vienna and Lintz. We
meet with no great bars, no real cataracts, but
above the Meta. The Upper Oroonoko there-
fore, with the Cassiquiare and the Rio Negro,
forms a particular system of rivers, where the
active industry of Angostura and the shore of
Caraccas will remain long unknown.

I obtained horary angles of the Sun in an
island in the midst of the Bova del Infierno,
where we had set up our instruments}. The
longitude of this point according to the chrono-
meter is 67° 10’ 31”. I attempted to determine
the magnetic dip and intensity, but was pre-


* See vol. iv, p. 544 and 562,
+ At 9» 20’ in the morning, the thermometer at the sur-
face of the Oroonoko 28'2° cent.; in the air, 26°6°; hygr.
88° Sauss.; sky cloudy.


689


vented by a heavy storm of rain. As the sky
became serene again in the afternoon, we went
to rest that night on a vast beach, on the south-
ern bank of the Oroonoko, nearly in the meri-
dian of the little town of Muitaco, or Real
Corona. I found the latitude by three stars *
to be 8° 0 26”, and the longitude 67° 5’ 19”.
When the Observantin monks in 1752 made their
first. entradas on the territory of the Caribbees,
they constructed on this spot a small fort, or
casa fuerte. The proximity of the lofty moun-
tains of Araguacais renders Muitaco one of the —
most healthy places on the Lower Oroonoko.
There Yturriaga took up his abode in 1756, to
repose himself after the fatigues of the expedition
of the boundaries ; aud, as he attributed his re-
covery to this hot rather than humid climate, the
town, or more properly the village, of Real Co-
rona took the name of pueblo del Puerto sano.
In going down the Oroonoko more to the east,
we left the mouth of the Rio Pao on the north,
and that of the Arui on the south. The latter
river is somewhat considerable, and is often
mentioned by Raleigh. Geographers have long
made the Aroy or Arvi (Arui), the. Caroli


* See my Obs. Astr., vol.i, p. 247. The latitude of Real
Corona is consequently near 70° 59'.20”. This xesult accords
accidentally, within a-few seconds, with that which the astro-
nomers of the expedition of the boundaries found in 1756,
(Caulin, p. 56.)

VOL. V. 2Y


690


(Carony), and the Coari* (Caura), take their
rise from the famous lake Cassipa, for which
they afterward substituted the Laguna del Do-
rddo. The current of the Oroonoko diminished
in velocity as we advanced. I measured several
times a basis along the beach, to ascertain the
time which floating bodies took in traversing a
known distance. Above Alta Gracia, near the
mouth of the Rio Ujape, I had found the velo-
city of the Oroonoko 2°3 feet in a second; be-
tween Muitaco and Borbou it was only 1-7 foot.
The barometric observations made in the neigh-
bouring steppes prove the smallness of the slope
of the ground from the longitude of 69° to the
eastern coast of Guyana. We found in this
country, on the right bank of thé Oroonoko,
small formations of primitive gruensteim,superim-
posed on granite (perhaps even embedded in the
rock). Wesaw between Muitaco and the island
of Ceiba a hill entirely composed of balls with
contentric layers ; in which we perceived an in-
timate mixture of hornblende and feldspar, with
some traces of pyrites. The gruenstein resembles
that in the vicinity of Caraccas; but it was im-
possible to ascertain the position of a formation,
which appeared to me to be of the same age as


* The names printed in Italics are the names of the Arui,
Carony, and Caura, as disfigured by Raleigh and the geo-
graphers Hondius and Sanson.


691


the granite of Parima. Muitaco was the last
spot where we slept in the open air on the shore
of the Oroonoko : we navigated two nights more
before we reached Angostura, which terminated
our voyage. This navigation in the middle of
the thalweg of a great river is extremely plea-
sant; there is nothing to be feared except those
natural rafts, formed by trees which the river
roots up, when overflowing it’s banks. When
the nights are dark, canoes are liable to strike
against these floating islands, as upon sand-
banks.

It would be difficult for me to express the sa-
tisfaction we felt on landing at Angostura, the
capital of Spanish Guyana. The inconveniences
that are undergone at sea in small vessels cannot
be compared to those, that are suffered under a
burning sky, surrounded by a swarm of moschet-
toes, and lying whole months stretched along in
a canoe, which on account of it’s instability does
not permit of taking the least bodily exercise.
In seventy-five days we had made a voyage of
five hundred leagues (twenty to a degree) on the
five great rivers, Apure, Oroonoko, Atabapo, Rio
Negro, and Cassiquiare ; and in this vast space
we had found but a very small number of inha-
bited places *. Although, after the life we had


* J shall here note for the use of persons who inhabit those
countries the following itinerary distances. From San Fer-


oy 2


692


led in the woods, our dress was not in very good
order, Mr. Bonpland and I hastened to present
ourselves to Don Felipe de Ynciarte, the gover-
nor of the province of Guyana. He received us
in the most obliging manner, and made us lodge
with the secretary of the intendance. Coming
from an almost desert country, we were struck
‘with the bustle of a town, which has only six
thousand inhabitants. We admired the conve-
niences, with which industry and commerce fur-
nish civilized man. Humble dwellings appeared
to us magnificent ; and every person, with whom
we conversed, seemed to be endowed with. su-
perior intelligence. Long privations give a value
to the smallest enjoyments; and I cannot ex-
press the pleasure, with which we saw for the
first time wheaten bread on the governor's table.
I am perhaps wrong in recording sensations, that
are familiar to all those who have made distant
voyages. We enjoy the happiness of finding


nando de Apure to Cabruta, 34 nautical leagues; from Ca-
bruta, or from the confluence of the Oroonoko and the Apure,
to Jayita, 1201.; from Javita to San Carlos del Rio Negro,
30 1.; from San Carlos to Esmeralda, 70 1.; from Esmeralda
to Angostura, 2501, Supposing the sources of the Oroonoko
to be 30 leagues east of Esmeralda, we find, that the course
of the Upper Oroonoko above the Raudale of Maypures com-
prises 175 leagues; the Lower Oroonoko (from Maypures
to the mouths of the river) 2601. In these estimations the
sinuosities of the rivers are assumed, with Mr. de la Conda-
mine, to be one third of the «lirect distance.


des clk veo


693


ourselves again in the midst of civilization ; but
this happiness is of short duration to persons,
who are powerfully affected by the marvels, with
which nature has embellished the torrid zone.
The fatigues we have endured are soon forgot-
ten ; and we have scarcely reached the coast, the
region inhabited by European colonists, when
we form the project of returning to the interior
of the country.

A painful circumstance obliged us to sojourn
a whole month in the town of Angostura. We
felt ourselves on the first days after our arrival
tired and weakened, but in perfect health. Mr.
Bonpland began to examine the small number of
plants, which he had been able to save from the


influence of so damp a climate; and I was oc-
cupied in settling by astronomical observations
the longitude and latitude of the capital *, as


% J found the latitude of Santo Tomas de la Nueva Guyana,
vulgarly called Angostura, or the Strait, near the cathedral
80 8/11”; the longitude, 660 15’ 21”. (Obs. Astr., vol. 1,
p. 249.) The town is consequently only 0° 15! east of the
meridian of the castle of St. Antonio at Cumana., La Cruz
and Faden had placed it from 20’ to 30’ too much to the
east, and 4’ too much to the south. ‘The dip of the magnetic
needle at Angostura, according to my observations, was 39°
cent. div. The intensity of force was expressed by 222 os-
cillations in 10’ of time. It is remarkable, that the isodyna-
mic line of Angostura passes through Calabozo (geogr. lat,
8° 58/8”), where the dip is only Q°3° less. See vol. iv,
p- 377, 378.


694


well as the dip of the magnetic needle. These
labours were soon interrupted. We were both
attacked almost on the same day by a disorder,
which with my fellow-traveller took the charac-
ter of an ataxic fever. At this period the air
was ina state of the greatest salubrity at An-
gostura; and as the only mulatto servant we
had brought from Cumana felt the symptoms of
the same disorder, the persons who took un-
wearied care of us had little doubt, that we had
imbibed the germe of the typhus in the damp
forests of Cassiquiare. It is common enough for
| travellers, to feel no effects from miasmata till
the moment when, having reached a purer at-
mosphere, they begin to enjoy some repose. A
certain excitement of the mental powers may
suspend for some time the action of pathogenic
causes. Our mulatto servant having been much
more exposed to the rains than we were our-
selves, his disorder increased with frightful ra-
pidity. His prostration of strength was so
great, that on the ninth day his death was an-
nounced to us. He was however only in a state
of. swooning, which lasted several hours, and
was followed by a salutary crisis. I was attacked
at the same time with a very violent fever, and
in the middle of the fit was made to take a mix-
ture of honey and of the extract of the bark of
Carony*. This is a remedy much boasted of in


* Extract of the cortex Angosture.


695


the country by the Capuchin missionaries. The
intensity of the fever augmented, but it left me
on the following day. Mr. Bonpland remained
in a very alarming state, which during several
weeks gave us the most serious inquietude.
Fortunately he preserved sufficient strength of
mind, to prescribe for himself; and preferred
gentler remedies, better adapted to his constitu-
tion than the extract of the bark of Carony. The
fever was continual; and, as almost always hap-
pens within the tropics, a complication of dysen-
tery aggravated the symptoms. Inthe course of
this painful disease Mr. Bonpland displayed that
courage and mildness of character, which never
forsook him in the most trying situations. I
was agitated by sad presages. The botanist
Loefling, a pupil of Linneus, had died not far
from Angostura, near the banks of the Carony,
a victim of his zeal for the progress of natural
history. We had not yet passed a year in the
torrid zone; and my memory, too faithful,
reminded me of every thing I had read in Europe
on the dangers of the air that is breathed in the
forests. Instead of going up the Oroonoko,
we might have sojourned some months in the
temperate and salubrious climate of the Sierra
Nevada de Merida. It was I who had chosen
the path of the rivers; and the danger of my
fellow-traveller presented itself to my mind as
the fatal consequence of this imprudent choice.


696


After having attained in a few days an extra-
ordinary degree of exacerbation, the fever as-
sumed a less alarming character. The inflam-
mation of the intestines yielded to the use of
emollients drawn from malvaceous plants. The
sidas and the melochias have singularly active
properties in the torrid zone ; the recovery of the
patient however was extremely slow, as it always
happens with Europeans, who are not thoroughly
seasoned to the climate. The period of the
rains drew near; and in order to return to the
coast of Cumana, it was necessary again to cross
the Llanos, where, amid half-inundated lands, a
shelter is rarely found, or any other nourishment
than meat dried in the sun. To avoid exposing
Mr. Bonpland to a dangerous relapse, we re-
solved to stay at Angostura till the 10th of July.
We spent part of this time at a neighbouring
plantation *, where mango trees and breadfruit
trees -~ were cultivated. The latter had attained
in the tenth year a height of more than forty
feet. We measured several leaves of the arto-


* Trapiche of Don Felix Fareras.


+ Artocarpus incisa, Father Andujar, Capuchin mission-


ary of the province of Caraccas, zealous in the pursuit of —


natural history, has introduced the breadfruit tree from
Spanish Guyana to Varinas, and thence to the kingdom of
New Grenada. Thus the western coasts of America, bathed
by the Pacific ocean, receive from the. English settlements
in the West Indies a production of the Friendly Islands,


697


carpus that were three feet long, and eighteen
inches broad, remarkable dimensions in a plant
of the family of the dicotyledons.

I shall terminate this chapter by a succinct
description of Spanish Guyana (Provincia de la
Guyana), which is a part of the ancient Capi-
tania general of Caraccas. Having made known
at large whatever is remarkable on the banks of
the Apure, the Oroonoko, the Atabapo, the Rio
Negro, and the Cassiquiare, that relates to the
history of our species, and of the productions of
nature, it may be interesting to collect these
seattered features, and trace the general picture
_ of a country, which, awaiting a higher destiny,
begins already to fix the attention of Europe. I
shall first describe the situation of Angostura, the
present capital of the province ; and shall then
trace the Oroonoko as far as the delta, which it
forms at it’s mouth. Making known at. the
same time the real course of the Rio Carony, the
fertile banks of which contain the greater part of
the Indian population of Guyana, I shall show
from the history of geography the origin of those
fabulous lakes, which long disfigured our maps.

Since the end of the sixteenth century three
towns have successively borne the name of Saint,
Thomas of Guyana. The first was opposite the
Island of Faxardo, at the confluence of the Ca-
rony and the Oroonoko. — It was this which was .


698


destroyed * by the Dutch, under the command
of captain Adrian Janson, in 1579. The second,
founded -~ by Antonio de Berrio, in 1591, near
twelve leagues east of the mouth of the Carony,
made a courageous resistance t to Sir Walter
Raleigh, whom the Spanish writers of the con-
quest know only by the name of the pirate
Reak. The third town, now the capital of the
province, is fifty leagues west of the confluence
of the Carony. It was begun in 1764, under the
governor Don Juacquin Moreno de Mendoza,
and is distinguished in the public documents
from the second town, vulgarly called the for-
tress (el castillo, las fortalezas), or Old Guayana
(Vieja Guayana), by the name of Santo Thome
de la Nueva Guayana. This name being very
long, that of Angostura { (the strait) has been


* Laet, Nov. Orbis, lib. 17, p. 660. Gumilla, vol. i, p. 31,
35, places erroneously the expeditions of Raleigh in the years
1645 and 1547. The first of the voyages undertaken at Ra-
leigh’s expense was in 1595; the second, that of Laurence
Keymis, in 1596; the third, described by Thomas Masham,
in 1597; and the fourth, in 1617. The first and last only
were performed by Raleigh in person. This celebrated man
was beheaded October the 29th, 1618. (Harris’s Coll. vol. ii,
p. 252.) It is therefore the second town of Santo Tomas,
now called Vieja Guyana, which existed in the time of Raleigh.

+ Caulin, p. 175, and not in 1586. (Depons, Voyage & la
Terre- Ferme, vol. iii, p. 254.)

+ Fray Pedro Simon, not. 7, Chap. xxii—xxvill, p, 685—
661.

§ Europe has learnt the existence of a town of Angostura


699


commonly substituted for it. The inhabitants
of those countries find it difficult to recognize
on our maps, in Santiago de Leon and Santo
Thomé, the two capitals of Venezuela and Guy-
ana.

Angostura, the longitude and latitude of which
I have already indicated from astronomical ob-
servations, stands at the foot of a hill of amphi-
bolic schist * destitute of vegetation. The
streets are regular, and for the most part parallel
with the course of the river. Several of the
houses are built on the bare rock ; and here, as
at Carichana, and in many other parts of the
missions, the action of black and strong strata,
when strongly heated by the rays of the Sun,


upon the atmosphere, is considered as injurious
to health. I think the small pools of stagnant
water (lagunas y anegadizos), which extend
behind the town toward the south-east, are


by the trade carried on by the Catalonians in the Carony bark,
which is the beneficial bark of the bonplandia trifoliata. This
bark, coming from Nueva Guayana, was called corteza or
cascarilla del Angostura, cortex Angosture. Botanists so little
guessed the origin of this géographical denomination, that they
began by writing dugustura, and then dugusta. Very recent
political events have rendered the names of the small towns
of Angostura, Calabozo, and even of San Fernando de Apure,
familiar to those who feel an interest in the struggle between
the colonies and the mother-country. The Raudal of Cami-
seta is called Angustura in the maps of Gumilla and D’ Anville,
+ Hornblendschiefer.


700


more to be feared. The houses of Angostura
are lofty, agreeable, and the greater number
built of stone; which construction proves, that
the inhabitants have little dread of earthquakes.
But unhappily this security is not founded on
‘induction from very precise facts. It is true,
that the shore of Nueva Andalusia sometimes
undergoes very violent shocks, without the com-
motion being propagated across the Llanos.
The fatal catastrophe of Cumana on the 4th
of February, 1797, was not felt at Angostura ;
but in the great earthquake of 1766, which des-
troyed the same city, the granitic soil of the two
banks of the Oroonoko was agitated as far
as the Raudales of Atures and Maypures.
South of these Raudales shocks are sometimes
felt, which are confined to the basin of the Upper
Oroonoko and the Rio Negro. ‘They appear: to
depend on a volcanic focus distant from that of
the Caribbee islands. We were told by the mis-
sionaries at Javita and San Fernando de Ata-
bapo, that in 1798 violent earthquakes took
place between the Guaviare and the Rio Negro,
which were not propagated on the north toward
Maypures.. We cannot be sufficiently attentive
to whatever relates to the simultaneity of the os-
cillations, and to the independance of the move-
ments in contiguous ground. Every thing seems
to prove, that the propagation of the commotion
is not superficial, but depends on very deep crevi-
ces, that terminate in different centres of action.


701


The scenery around the town of Angostura is
little varied; but the view of the river, which
forms a vast canal stretching from the south.
west to the north-east, is singularly majestic.
The government, *at the end of a long contro-
versy on the defence of the place, and the reach
of cannon shot, wished to know exactly the
breadth of the Oroonoko at the point called the
strait, where stands a rock (el Pennon), that
disappears entirely when the waters are at their
height. Though there is an engineer attached
to the provincial government, a few months
before my arrival at Angostura don Mathias
Yturbur had been sent from Caraccas, to mea-
sure the Oroonoko between the demolished fort
of San Gabriel and the redoubt of San Rafael.
I was told vaguely, that this measure had given
a little more than eight hundred varas castel-
lanas. The plan of the town, annexed to the
great map of South America by La Cruz Olme-
dilla, indicates nine hundred and forty. I took
with great care two trigonometric measurements,
one in the strait itself, between the two forts of
San Gabriel and San Rafael; the other east of
Angostura, in the great walk (Alameda) near
the Embarcadero del Ganado. 'The result of the
first measure * (at the minimem of breadth) was
three hundred and eighty toises ; and that of the


_* The base measured along the key, 245°6 met, Angles;


702


second * four hundred and ninety. These mea-
sures surpass four or five times that of the Seine
near the Jardin des Plantes, and yet this part of
the Oroonoko is called a choking, or a strait.
Nothing is better fitted to give an idea of the
mass of water of the great rivers of America,
than the dimensions of these pretended straits.
The Amazon, according to my measurement +,
is two hundred and seventeen toises wide at the
Pongo de Rentema; and according to Mr. de
la Condamine, twenty-five toises at the Pongo
de Manseriche, and at the strait of Pauzis,
nine hundred toises. This last strait conse-
quently differs little from the breadth of the
Oroonoko at the strait of Baraguan *.

When the waters are high, the river inundates
the keys ; and it sometimes happens, that even
in the town imprudent men become the prey of
crocodiles. I shall transcribe from my journal
a fact, that took place during Mr. Bonpland’s


74° 33' 10" and 90°. Distance deduced 889 metres, of 456
toises ; but we must subtract '76 toises, or the distance from
Punta San Gabriel to the Carcel on the key. Now 456 t.—
76 = 380 t., or 885 varas cast.

* Base measured in the Alameda, 193'6 met. Angles ;
78° 34’ 25" and 90. Distance deduced, 958 met. = 491 t., or
1145 varas. The breadth naturally varics according to the
rising of the waters.

t+ I measured the Amazon when the water was low, 400
toises above the mouth of the Rio Chinchipe.

+ I found it to be 889 toises, See Chap. xix, vol. iv,
p. 504,


703


illness. A Guaykeri Indian from the island de
la Margaretta went to anchor his canoe in a
cove, where there were not three feet of water.
A very fierce crocodile, that habitually haunted
that spot, seized him by the leg, and withdrew
from the shore remaining on the surface of the
water. The cries of the Indian drew together a
crowd of spectators. This unfortunate man was
first seen seeking with astonishing courage for a
knife in the pocket of his pantaloons. Not being
able to find it, he seized the head of the crocodile,
and thrust his fingers into it’s eyes. No man in
the hot regions of America is ignorant, that this
carnivorous reptile, covered with a buckler of
hard and dry scales, is extremely sensible in the
only parts of his body which are soft and unpro-
tected, such as the eyes, the hollow underneath
the shoulders, the nostrils, and beneath the lower
jaw, where there are two glands of musk. The
Guaykeri Indian had recourse to the same means
which saved the Negro of Mungo Park, and the
girl of Uritucu, whom I have mentioned above*:
but he was less fortunate than they had been,
for the crocodile did not open it’s jaws, and lose
hold of it’s prey. The animal yielding to the
pain plunged to the bottom of the river; and,
after having drowned the Indian, came up to the
surface of the water, dragging the dead body to


* Chap. xviii, vol. iv, p. 428.


704


an island opposite the port. I arrived at the
moment when a great number of the inhabitants
of Angostura had witnessed this melancholy
spectacle.

As the crocodile, on account of the structure
of it’s larynx, of the hyoid bone, and of the folds
of it’s tongue, can seize, though not swallow, it’s
prey under water; a man seldom disappears,
without the animal being perceived some hours
after, near the spot where the misfortune has
happened, devouring it’s prey on a neighbouring
beach. The number of individuals, who perish
annually the victims of their own imprudence,
and of the ferocity of these reptiles, is much

' greater, than it is believed to be in Europe. It
is particularly so in villages, where the neigh-
bouring grounds are often inundated. Thesame
crocodiles remain long in the same places. They
become from year to year more daring, espe-
cially, as the Indians assert, if they have once
tasted of human flesh. These animals are so
wary, that they are killed with difficulty. A
ball does not pierce their skin ; and the shot is
only mortal, when directed at the throat, or be-
neath the shoulder. The Indians, who know
little of the use of fire-arms, attack the crocodile
with lances, after it is caught with large pointed
iron hooks, baited with pieces of meat, and fast-
ened by a chain to the trunk of a tree. They do
not approach the animal till it has struggled a


705


long time to disengage itself from the iron fixed
in the upper-jaw. There is little probability,
that a country, in which a labyrinth of rivers
without number brings every day new bands of
crocodiles from the eastern back of the Andes, by
the Meta and the Apure, toward the coast of
Spanish Guyana, should ever be delivered from
these reptiles. All that will be gained by civil-
ization will be, to render them more timid, and
more easily put to flight.

Affecting instances are related of African
slaves, who have exposed their lives to save those
of their masters, who had fallen into the jaws of
a crocodile. A few years ago, between Uritucu
and the Mission de Abaxo*, a Negro, hearing
the cries of his master, flew to the spot armed
with a long knife (machette), and plunged into
the river. He forced the crocodile, by putting
out his eyes, to let go his prey, and hide himself
under the water. The slave bore his expiring
master to the shore; but all succour was un-
availing to restore him to life. He died of suf-
focation, for his wounds were not deep. The
crocodile, like the dog, appears not to close it’s
jaws firmly while swimming. It is almost super-
flous to add, that the children of the deceased,
though poor, gave the slave his freedom.

The inhabitants of the banks of the Oroonoko


* In the Llanos of Ca labozo.
VOL. V. es


706


and it’s tributary streams discourse continually
on the dangers, to which they are exposed. They
have marked the manners of the crocodile, as the
torero has studied the manners of the bull. They
have learnt to judge previously, in some sort, of
the movements of the animal, it’s means of at-
tack, and the degree of it’s boldness. “When
they are assailed, they put in practice with that
presence of mind, and that resignation, which
characterize the Indians, the Zamboes, and cop-
per-coloured men in general, the counsels they
have heard from their infancy. In countries
where nature is so powerful and so terrible, man
is constantly prepared for danger. We have
mentioned above the answer of the young Indian
girl, who delivered herself from the jaws of the
crocodile. “I knew he would let me go, if I
thrust my fingers into his eyes.” This girl be-
longed to the indigent ‘class of the people, in
whom the habits of physical want augment the
energy of the character; ‘but how can we
avoid being surprised, to observe in the coun.
tries, convulsed ‘by terrible earthquakes, on
the table-land of the province of Quito, women
belonging to the highest classes of society dis-
play in the moment of peril the same calm, the
same reflecting intrepidity? I shall mention
one example only in support of ‘this assertion.
On the 4th of February, 1797, when 35,000
Indians perished in the Space of a few minutes,
a young mother saved herself and her children,


707


crying out-to them to extend their arms at the
moment when the, cracked ground was ready to
swallow them up. When this courageous, wo-
man heard the astonishment, that was expressed
at. a.presence of mind so extraordinary, she,an-
swered with great simplicity, ‘“ I had |been told
in my infancy, if the earthquake surprise you
in a house, place yourself under a doorway, that
communicates from one apartment -to another ;
if you be in the open air, and feel the,ground
opening beneath you, extend jboth your arms,
and try to support yourself on the edge of the
crevice.” Thus in savage regions, or in coun-
tries exposed. to frequent convulsions, man “is
prepared. to struggle with. the beasts of the


forest, to deliverjhimself from the jaws .of ,the
crocodile, and -to escape from.the. conflict of the
elements.


Whenever, in very hot and, damp. years, per- —
nicious fevers become common at Angostura,
the problem is discussed, whether \the.govern-
ment did,right in transferring the town from the
Vieja \Guayana to the Strait between the
island of Maruanta and the confluence -of
the Rio;Orocopiche. Jt is ,asserted, that the
ancient town, standing nearer the sea, en-
joyed the advantage of the cooling breezes ;
and that the great mortality prevailing there
was less owing’to'local causes, than to the way
of living of the ‘inhabitants. The fertile and

222


708


humid banks of the Oroonoko, below the mouth
of the Carony, yield an immense quantity of
squashes*, plantains, and papaws+. ‘These fruits
were eaten raw, even before they had reached
their maturity ; and the people being at the same
time addicted to the use of spirituous liquors in
excess, this improper way of living diminished the
population from year to year. The archives of
Caraccas are filled with memorials on the neces-
sity of changing the seat of the present capital of
Guyana. According to the official papers which
have been communicated to me, it has been pro-
posed sometimes to go back to the Fortaleza or
Vieja Guayana ; sometimes to place the capital
close to the great mouth of the Oroonoko, ten
leagues west of Cape Parima, at the confluence of
the Rio Acquiret ; and sometimes to have it re-
moved twenty-five leagues below Angostura, tothe
fine savannah that surrounds the Indian village
of San Miguel. The government was no doubt
influenced by a narrow policy in pretending,
that, “ for the better defence of the province, it
was fit to place the capital at the enormous
distance of eighty-five leagues from the sea,
and to construct no town in this space, that
could be exposed to the incursions of the ene-


* Patillas.


+ Fruit of the carica papaya.
t Mr. de Pons calls it the Rio Aguirre (vol. iii, p, 338).
Compare Caulin, p. 56.


709


my.” Joined to the difficulty which European
vessels find in going up the Oroonoko as far as
Angostura (which is much greater than that of
ascending the Potomac to Washington), the cir-
cumstance of the centre of commerce being
placed above the point, where the banks of the
river present most attraction to the activity of
the colonists, is extremely unfavourable to agri-
cultural industry. It is not even true, that the
town of Angostura, or Santo Thome de la Nueva
Guayana, was founded where cultivation began
in 1764: at that period, as at present, the great
mass of the population of Guayana was contain-
ed in the missions of the Catalonian Capuchins,
between the Rio Carony and the Cuyuni. Now
this district, the most important of the whole
province, and in which an enemy could procure
necessaries of all kinds, is defended, or at least
supposed to be so, by Vigja Guayana, but in no
degree by the fortifications of the new town of
Angostura.

The spot which has been proposed near San
Miguel is a little to the east of the confluence of
the Carony, consequently between the sea and
that part of the country which is most inhabited.
In going lower down, and transferring the capi-
tal of the province close to the mouth of the
Oroonoko, as Mr. de Pons proposed, the proxim-
ity of the Caribbees, who are easily driven away,
is less to be dreaded, than the possibility of an


710


enemy turning the place, and’ penetrating inte
the province by the small western mouths of the
Oroonoko, the Canos of Macareo and Manamot
On‘a river, the delta of which begins'to be form:
ed at the distance of forty-six leagues: from the
ocean, the most advantageous situation for a
great town depends on two circumstances; it’s
military defence; and the interests of commerce
and of agriculture. Cominerce requires, that
the town should lie as near as possible to the
great mouth of the river, Boca de Navios ; while
military security leads to the preference of a spot
above the formation of the delta, west of the point
where the Cano Manamo separates from the
principal trunk, and communicates by numerous
bifurcations with the eight secondary mouths
(bocas chicas) between ‘the island of Congrejos
and the mouth of the Rio Guarapiche. The situ
ations both of Vieja and Nueva Guayana fulfil
the latter condition; and that of the ancient
town has the farther advantage of covering to a
certain point the fine establishments of the Cata-
fonian Capuchins of Carony. The scttlements
may be attacked, by landing on the right bank
of the Brazo Imataca ; but the mouth of the
Carony, where the canoes feel the commotion of
the waters of thé neighbouring cataracts (salto
de ‘Caront), is defended by the forts of Vieja
Guayana.

I have entered into these minute details; be-


711


cause political events have recently given great
importance to those thinly inhabited. countries,
I have discussed the different projects according
to the knowledge of the local circumstances of
the Lower Oroonoko, which my situation and
my connexions with the Spanish government
enabled me to acquire. It is time to oppose
‘the mania, so common in‘the Spanish and Por-
tugueze colonies, of transplanting towns like a
camp of nomade tribes. It is not the importance
or solidity of the public edifices, which forbids
the destruction of the town of Angostura. It’s
situation at the foot of a rock seems to limit the
means of enlarging it. Notwithstanding these
inconyeniencies, however, it is better not to des-
troy what has prospered for fifty years. Ideas of
general stability are insensibly an nexed to the ex-
istence of a capital, however small ; and, if the in-
terests of commerce require a partial change, ano-
ther port might be constructed nearer the great
mouth of the Oroonoko, and Angostura be still
preserved as the seat of administration, and the
centre of. public business. Thus, la Guayra is
the harbour of Caraccas; and Vera Cruz may
one day become the port of Xalapa. The ves-
sels of Europe, and of the United States of
America, that may come to stay some months
in those latitudes, would willingly go as far up
as Angostura ; while other vessels would take


712


in their cargoes in the harbour nearest the Pun-
ta Barima, where in time of peace the magazines,
ropewalks, and dock-yards, would be found.
To protect the country between the capital and
the harbour, or Puerto de la Boca grande, from
a hostile invasion, the banks of the Oroonoko
might be fortified according to a system of
defence adapted to the nature of the ground; for
instance, at Imataca or at Zacupana, at Baran-
cas or at San Rafael (where the Cano Manamo
separates from the principal trunk), at Vieja
Guayana, at the island of Faxardo (opposite the
mouth of the Rio Carony), and at the confluence
of the Mamo. The little forts, constructed at
a small expense, would serve at the same time as
arefuge for the gun-boats stationed at the points,
which the enemy’s vessels must approach on
tacking, to sail up against the current. I dwell
so much the more on these means of defence, as
they have been too long neglected*.

The northern coasts of South America are
defended for the most part by a chain of moun-
tains, that extends from west to east, and sepa-
rates the shore from the Llanos of New-Anda-


* It is almost difficult to believe, that the whole defence of
the province, during my stay at Angostura, depended on 7
lanchas canoneras, and six hundred soldiers of all complex-
ions and descriptions, including what are called the garrisons
of four frontier forts, the destacamentos of Nueva Guayana,
San Carlos del Rio Negro, Guirior and Cuyuni.


713


lusia, Barcelona, Venezuela, and Varinas. It
may be observed, that these coasts have fixed
the attention of the mother country, too exclu-
sively. There we find six strong places*, pro-
vided with a fine and numerous artillery ; name-
ly, Carthagena, San Carlos de Maracaybo, Por-
to-Cabello, La Guayra, le Morro de Nueva
Barcelona, and Cumana. The eastern coasts of
Spanish America, those of Guayana and Buenos
Ayres, are low and without defence; they fur-
nish to a daring enemy the facility of penetrating
into the country as far as the eastern back of
the Cordilleras of New Granada and Chili. The
direction} of the Rio Plata, formed by the
Uruguay, the Parana, and the Paraguay, forces
an invading army, when it would march toward
the east, to traverse the steppes (pampas ) as far
as Cordova or Mendoza ; but north of the equa-
tor, in Spanish Guyana, the course { of the
Lower Oroonoko and it’s two great tributary
streams, the Apure and the Meta, furnish in the
direction of the latitude a path. of rivers, which


* Those of Carthagena and Porto Cabello are of the first
rank. In naming the points of defence from west to east,
I might have mentioned also the batteries Santa Marta, Ciu-
dad de la Hacha, and Coro; but these works are of little
importance.

+ From south to north; on an extent of land of twenty-two
degrees of latitude.

t From west to east for thirteen degrees of longitude,


714


facilitates the transport of stores and provision.
He who is master of Angostura may advance at
will toward the north, in the steppes (Llanos) of
Cumana, Barcelona, and Caraccas; toward the
north-west, in the province of Varinas ; and to-
ward the west, in those of Cassanare, as far as
the foot of the mountains of Pamplona. The
plains of the Oroonoko, of the Apure, and of the
Meta, alone separate the province of Spanish
Guyana from the rich, populous, and well culti-
vated region near the seashore. The fortified
places (Cumana, la Guayra, and Porto Cabello)
scarcely protect this region from expeditions
landing on the northern coast. I ground these
statements on the configuration of the ground,
and the present distribution of the points of de-
fence. They will I think suffice to show, how
intimately the political security of the United
Provinces of Caraccas and New- Grenada is con-
nected with the defence of the mouths of the
Oroonoko; and how Spanish Guyana, though
scarcely cleared, and destitute of population,
acquires a high importance in the struggle be-
tween the colonies and the mother country.
This military importance was foreseen more
than two centuries ago by the celebrated Raleigh.
In the account of his first expedition, he often
recurs to the facility, with which queen Eliza-
beth might conquer a great part of the Spanish


colonies*, “ by the course of the Oreoncko, and


the innumerable rivers’ which run into it.” We
mentioned above, that Girolamo Benzoni pre-
dicted in 1545 the revolutions of the’ island of
St. Domingo, “ which must soon become the
property of the Blacks.” Here; ina work pub-
lished in 1596, a plan of campaign is traced,
the merit of which has been justified by recent
events. :

The town of Angostura in the early years of
it’s foundation had no direct communication with
the metropolis. The inhabitants were contented
with carrying on a trifling contraband trade in
dried meat and tobacco with the West India
islatids, and with the Dutch colony of Essequi-
bo, by the Rio Carony. Neither wine, oil, nor
flour, three articles of importation the most
sought after, was received directly from Spain.

* The Discuserie of the Empire of Guiana. Lond. 1596, p.
28, 95, and 100, In speaking of the defence of the mouth
of the Oroonoko, Raleigh observes judiciously, and with
great knowledge of the locality, ‘ This country is besides so
defensible, that if two fortes be builded in one of the pro-
vinces which I have seen, the flood setteth in so neere the
bank, where the channel also lyeth, that no shippe can passe
up, bat within a pickes length of the artillerie ; first of the
oné, and afterwardes of the other.” He then adds, in that
style of exaggeration, which appeared to him necessary in
order to make his projects of conquest relished, “ The two
fortés will be a sufficient guarde both of the empire of Inga,
and to an hundred other several kingdomes, lying within the
said river; even to the citie of Quito in Peru.”


716


Some merchants in 1771 sent the first schooner
to Cadiz; and since that period a direct ex-
change of commodities with the ports of Anda-
lusia and Catalonia has become extremely active.
The population of Angostura*, after having been
a long time languishing, has much increased
since 1785: at the time of my abode in Guy-
ana, however, it was far from being equal to that
of Staebroeck, the nearest English town. The
mouths of the Oroonoko have an advantage over
every other part in Terra Firma. They afford
the most prompt communications with the penin-
sula. The voyage from Cadiz to Punta Barimais
performed sometimes in eighteen or twenty days.
The return to Europe takes from thirty to thirty-
five days. These mouths being placed to wind-
ward of all the islands, the vessels of Angostura
can maintain a more advantageous commerce
with the West Indies than La Guayra and Porto
Cabello. The merchants of Caraccas therefore
have been always jealous of the progress of indus-


* Angostura, or Santo Thome de la Nueva Guayana, in


1768, had only 500 inhabitants. (Caulin, p. 68.) They were’


numbered in 1780, and the result was 1513 (455 Whites,
449 Blacks, 363 Mulattoes and Zamboes, and 246 Indians).
The population in the year 1789 rose to 4590; and in 1800,
to 6600 souls. (Official Lists, MS.) The capital of the English
colony of Demerara, the town of Staebroeck, the name of
which is scarcely known in Europe, is only fifty leagues dis-
tant, south-east of the mouths of the Oroonoko. It contains,
according to Bolingbroke, nearly 10,000 inhabitants.


717


try in Spanish Guyana ; and Caraccas. having
been hitherto the seat of the supreme government,
the port of Angostura has been treated with still
less favor than the ports of Cumana and Nueva
Barcelona, With respect to the inland trade,
the most active is that. of the province of Vari-
nas, which sends mules, cacao, indigo, cotton,
and sugar to Angostura ; and in return receives
generos, that is, the products of the manufactu-
ring industry of Europe. I have seen long
boats (lanchas) set off, the cargoes of which
were valued at eight or ten thousand piastres.
These boats went first up the Oroonoko to Ca-
bruta; then, along the Apure to San Vicente ;
and finally, on the Rio Santo Domingo, as far
as Torunos*, which is the port of Varinas Nue-
vas. The little town of San Fernando de Apure,
of which I have given a description abover, is
the magazine of this river trade, which might
become much more considerable by the intro-
duction of steam boats.

The left bank of the Oroonoko, and all the
mouths of this river, with the exception of the
great Boca de Navios, belong to the province of
Cumana. This circumstance gave rise long ago
to the project of building another town opposite
Angostura (where the battery of San Rafael is


* A little to the west of the town of Obispos.
$ Chap, 18, vol. iv. p. 392.


718


now placed), in order to export the mules and
dried meat of the Llanos from the territory of
the province of Cumana itself, without crossing
the Oroonoko. The little jealousies, that always
subsist between two neighbouring governments,
will serve to favor this project ; but in ithe pre-
sent state of the cultivation of the country it is
to be wished, that it may be postponed yet a
long time. ‘Wherefore erect-on the’banks of ithe
Oroonoko two rival towns, scarcely four hun-
dred toises distant from each other ?

I have now described the country through
which we passed during a voyage of five hun-
dred leagues; ‘it remains for me to make known
the small space of three degrees. fiftyitwo mi-
nutes of longitude, that separates ‘the present
capital from the mouth of theOreonoko. The
exact knowledge of the delta, :and ofithe course
of ‘the Rio Carony, is at once jinteresting to hy-
drography, and to European commerce. In
order to judge of the extent and configuration
of ‘a country intersected ‘by the *branches.of ithe
Oroonoko, and.subject to periodical inundations,
Ifound it necessary ‘to examine. astronomically
the situation of the points, in:which the:summit
and the extreme branches of the de/taterminate,
Mr. de-Churruca, who was appointed itogether
with Don Juacquin Fidalgo, to survey the north-
ern coasts of Terra Firma and the West India
_ islands, has ascertained the latitude and longi-


719


tude of la Boca de Manamo, Punta Baxa, and
Vieja Guayana. The Memoirs of Mr. Espinosa

have made known to us ‘the real situation of
Punta Barima; so that on correcting the abso-

lute longitudes by those of Puerto Espana in the

island of Trinidad, and of the castle of Saint

Antonio at Cumana, (two points settled by my

own observations.and the judicious researchesiof
Mr. Oltmanns,) I think I ‘can furnish state-
ments sufficiently accurate. It is to be wished,
that the difference of meridian between Puerto

Espana and the little mouths of the Oroonoko,

between San Rafael (the summit of the delta)

and Santo Thomé del Angostura, may some day

be determined by the chronometer in an unin-

terrupted voyage. The situation of the latter

as I have given it rests on that of Cumana, and

(by the confluence of the Apure) on Caraccas

and. Porto Cabello*.

* See my Obs. Astr., vol, i, p-xxxviil. Espinosa, Memorias de
los Navegantes Espannoles, vol. i, p. 81, and the Carta egferica
de Costas de Tierra Firma de Don Joaquin Francisco Fidalgo.
publicada en 1816, compared with the sketches of the Bocas
del Orinoco, which I procured at Angostura. The following
are the results of my researches: Punta Barima, the eastern
bank of the great mouth (Boca de Navios) of the Oroonoko,
corrected by Puerto Espaiia and Portorico, according to
Mr. Oltmanns, sixty-two degrees twenty-six minutes forty-
sixiseconds ; by Cumana, according to my direct obseryations,
sixty-two degrees twenty minutes ten seconds, L have thought


it right to fix on sixty-two degrees, twenty-three minutes, be-
because the Spanish navigators setout from the island of Trini-


720


The whole eastern coast of South America,
from Cape Saint Roque, and particularly from
the port of Maranham%, as far as the group of the
mountains of Paria, is so low, that it appears to
me difficult to attribute the delta of the Oroono-
ko, and the formation of it’s soil, to the accu-
mulated mud of one river. Ido not deny, that
the delta of the Nile, according to the testimony
of the ancients, was heretofore a gulf of the


dad, and I had settled the longitude of Angostura from that of
Cumana, one of the points of America, the position of which
rests on the most certain statements. Boca de Manamo, nearly
the westernmost of the becas chicas del Orinoco, sixty-four de-
grees forty-four minutes. San Rafael, near the point where
the Cano Manamo, which forms the bocus chicas, separates
from the principal trunk, sixty-four degrees eighteen minutes,
Viejo Guayana, sixty-four degrees forty-three minutes. (The
latitude observed on land by Churruca is eight degrees eight
minutes twenty-four seconds ; almost the same therefore as
the latitade of Angostura, which I found to be eight degrees
eight minutes eleven seconds. La Cruz and Arrowsmith
place Vieja Guayana eighteen and twenty-six seconds north
of Angostura.) Santo Thome del Angostura, sixty-six degrees
fifteen minutes twenty-one seconds.

* According to the excellent observations yet unpublished
of Baron de Roussin, captain in the French navy, who
has lately made a survey of the coast of Brazil, the latitude
of Fort St. Antonio de la Barre is two degrees twenty-nine
minutes two seconds south ; longitude forty-six degrees thirty-
four minutes fifty-nine seconds (supposing the fort Anatho-
mirim in the island of St. Catherine fifty degrees fifty-one
minutes fifteen seconds west of Paris):


721


Mediterranean, filled up by successive allu-
vions. It may be easily conceived, that at the
mouth of all great rivers, where the velocity of
the stream suddenly diminishes, a bank, an is-
land, a deposition of substances which cannot be
carried on farther, is formed. It may also be
conceived, that the river, obliged to flow round
this new bank, divides itself into two branches ;
and that the accumulating earth, finding a point
of support at the summit of the delta, extends
farther and farther, widening these branches*.
What takes place at the first bifurcation may be
effected in each partial channel; so that by the
same processes, nature may form a labyrinth of
small bifurcated channels, which are filled up or
grow deeper in the lapse of ages, according to
the force and direction of the waters. The
principal trunk of the'Oroonoko has no doubt in
this manner divided itself, twenty-five leagues
west of the Boca de Navios, into two branches,
those of the Zacupana and Imataca. The net-
work of less considerable branches which the
rivers ends toward the north, and the mouths of
whichbearthename of bocas chicas (little mouths),
appears to be a phenomenon entirely similar to
that-of the deltas of tributary streams}. When


* Girard, sur la Vallée d Egypte, p. 56.
+ On the deltas of tributary streams opposed to the oceanic
deltas, see above, chap. xxiii, p. 466. :


VOL. V. oA


722


a river several leagues from the coast (for in-


stance the Apure or the Jupura) joins another


river by a great number of branches, these mul-
tiplied bifurcations are merely furrows’ traced in
avery flat soil. It is the same with the oceanic
deltas, wherever the coasts, by general inunda-
tions anterior to the existence of the Oroonoko
and the Amazon, have been covered by deposi-
tions of accumulated. earth. I doubt whether
all these oceanic deltas have been gulfs, or, as
some modern geographers say, negative deltas.
When the mouths of the Ganges, the Indus, the
Senegal, the Danube, the Amazon, the Oroo-
noko, and Missisippi, have been more carefully
examined in a geological view, it will be per-
ceived, that they have not all the same origin ;
the coasts that advance abruptly into the sea
from the effect of increasing alluvions* will be
distinguished from those, that follow the general
configuration of the continents; lands formed by
a bifurcated river will be distinguished from
plains traversed by a few lateral branches, form-
ing part of a soil of alluvions, the extent of whith
exceeds several’thousand square leagues.

The delta of the Oroonoko, between the Isla
Cangrejos and the Boca de Manamo, (the land
inhabited by the Guaraon Indians,) may be


* Like the deltas of the Nile, the Ganges, the Danube,
and the Missisippi.


723


compared to the island of Marajo or Joanes*,
near the mouth of the Amazon. One of these
pieces of alluvial land is on the north, the other
on the south of the principal trunk of the river.
But the form of the island Joanes is connected
with the general configuration of the soil of the
province of Maranhao, as the coasts of the becas
chicas of the Oroonoko are with that of Esse-
quibo and the gulf of Paria. Nothing appears
to me to prove, that this gulf extended formerly
toward the south from the boca de Manamo as
far as Vieja Guayana; or that the Amazon
filled with it’s waters the whole bay between
Villa Vistoza and Grand Para. All that sur-
rounds rivers is not their own work. ‘They have
most frequently scooped themselves out a bed in
alluvial lands, the origin of which dates from


more ancient geologic causes, from the great ca-


* This pretended island, which the jesuit Andrew da Bar-
ros asserts to be larger than the kingdom of Portugal, though
it is only fifteen hundred square leagues, is inhabited by the
Nhengahybas (or Igaruanas, that is, boatmen), who know the -
mouth of the Amazon as well as the Guaraons know that of
the Oroonoko, The topography of the island Joanes, and
_ of the vicinity of Belem or of Para, has little accuracy on
the most recent maps. ‘The following is the real state of
things: a very narrow channel (the Tagypuru) issues from the
Amazon below the Villa de Gurupa, and joins the lake
Annapu near the town of Melgago. The Rio Annapa, which
is the Guanapu of D’Anville, falls into this lake. East of
Melgago, the Tagypuru receives the great river of the Tocan-
tins, on which stands the town of Para.


SA 2


724


tastrophes which our planet has undergone. It is
proper to examine, whether between the bifur-
cated branches of a river the mud do not repose
upon a stratum of pebbles, which are found far
from running waters. The greatest separation
of the branches of the Oroonoko is forty-seven
nautical leagues. This is the breadth of the
oceanic delta between Punta Barima and the
westernmost of the bocas chicas. An exact sur-
vey of those countries being hitherto wanting,
the number of the mouth is not known. A
vulgar tradition gives seven to the Oroonoko, and
reminds us of the septem ostia Nili, so celebra-
ted in antiquity. But the delta of Egypt was not
always confined to this number ; and eleven con-
siderable mouths at least may be counted on the
inundated coast of Guyana*. After the Boca de


* Boca de Navios; B, de Lauran (Loran, Laurent); B
de Nua, two or three leagues west of the Isla Cangrejos,
and two or three fathoms deep; B. chica de Mariusas, five
leagues farther, little known; B. de Vinquinia; B. grande
de Mariusas, very navigable ; .B. de Macareo (the cano of this
name admits large vessels as far as San Rafael, where it
issues from the principal trunk) ; B. de Cucuina, nartower
but deeper; B. de Pedernales, navigable; B. de Manamo
grande, near the islands of Plata and Pesquero ; B.de Gua-
na. ‘From boca de Nuina to boca de Manamo grande,
the partial distances were indicated to me at five, seven,


°


eight, ‘six, four, eight, and seven leagues. The synony-
my of these branches of the Oroonoko is somewhat em-
barrassing. Is not the B. de Capure, between Pedernales


425


Navios, which mariners recognize by the Punta
Barima, the Bocas of Mariusas, Macareo, Pe-
dernales, and Manamo grande, are most useful
for navigation. That part of the delta, which
extends to the west of the Boca de Macareo, is
bathed by the waters of the gulf of Paria, or
Golfo triste. This basin is formed by the east-
ern coast of the province of Cumana, and the
western coast of the island of Trinidad; it com-
municates with the Caribbean sea by the famous
mouths of the Dragon (Bocas de Dragos), which
‘the coasting pilots have regarded ever since the
time of Christopher Columbus, though impro-
perly, as the mouths of the Oroonoko*.


and Macareo, identical with the B. de Cucuina? Does not
the Cano de Laurent, which is said to be extremely wide
where it separates from the Oroonoko, and very narrow at
it’s mouth, lead to one of the two Bocas de Mariusas ?

* The waters, which issue so impetuously from the Bocas
de Dragos (See chap. 3, vol. ii, p. 29), are 1st, those of the
Atlantic Ocean, the currents of which run toward the coast of
Guyana through the Canal del Sur (between Punta de Man-
gles of the continent, and Punta Galiota of the island of
Trinidad) west-north-west ; 2d, the fresh waters of the Bo-
cas chicas of the Oroonoko (of the Canos Pedernales and
Manamo grande joined with that of the great Rio Guarapi-
che). It cannot be doubted, that the gulf of Paria formed
heretofore an inland basin, when the island of Trinidad was
still united on the north to cape Paria, and on the south-
west (Punta de Icacos) to the Punto Foleto, situate east of
the boca de Pedernales. Three small rocky islands, partly
cultivated with cotton (Islas de Monos, de Huebos and de Cha-


, 726


When a vessel coming from sea would en-
ter the principal mouth of the Oroonoko, the
boca de Navios, it should make the land at the
Punta Barima. The right or southern bank is
the highest : the granitic rock pierces the marshy
soil at a small distance in the interior, between
the Canno Barima, the Aquire, and the Cuyuni.
The left, or northern bank of the Oroonoko,
which stretches along the delta toward the Boca
de Mariusas and the Punta Baxa*, is very low ;
and is distingyishable at a distance only by the
clumps of Mauritia palm-trees, which embellish
the passage. This is the sago-tree-+ of the


cachacares) divide the passage, which is three or four leagues
broad (between the north-west cape of the island of Trini-
dad, near the port of Chaguaramas, and the Punta de la
Pena, the eastern extremity of the coast of Paria) into four
small channels; Boca de Monos, B.de Huebos, B. de Navios,
and B. grande. These mouths collectively are called Bocas
de Dragos. There are some other small islands nearer the
eastern coast of Paria (El Fraile, El Pato, and El Patito),
the existence of which attests the convulsions, to which this
country has been exposed.

* According to Churruca, lat. 9° 35’ 30” (or 0° 54! 55”
farther north than Punta Parima). I find the longitude
to be 63° 21’, as deduced from my. observations at Cumana.

+ The nutritious fecula or medullary flour of the sago trees
is found principally in a group of palms, which Mr. Kunth
has distinguished by the name of calamee. It is collected
however in the Indian Archipelago as an article of trade from
the trunks of the cycas revoluta, the phoenix farinifera, the
eorypha umbraculifera, and the caryota urens. (4inslie, Ma-


pees


427


country ; it yields the flour of which the ywru-
ma bread is made, and, far from being a palm-
tree of the shore, like the chamzerops humilis,
the common cocoa-tree, and the lodoicea of
Commerson, is found as a palm-tree of the
marshes as far as the sources of the Oroonoko*.


teria Medica of Hindostan, Madras, 1813, p. 39.) The
quantity of nutritious matter, which the real sago-tree of
Asia affords (sagus Rumphii, or metroxylon'sagu, Roxburgh),
exceeds that which is furnished by any other plant useful to
man, One trunk of a tree in it’s fifteenth year sometimes
yields six hundred pounds weight of sago, or meal (for the

_word sago signifies meal in the dialect of Amboina). Mr.
Crawford, who resided a long time in the Indian Archipela-
go, calculates, that an English acre (four thousand and
twenty square metres) could contain four hundred and thirty-
five sago-trees, which would yield one hundred and twenty
thousand, five hundred pounds avoirdupois of fecula, or
more than eight thousand pounds yearly. (History of the
Indian Archipelago, vol, i, p. 387 and 398.) This produce is
triple that of corn, and double that of potatoes in France.
But the plantain produces on the same surface of land still
more alimentary substance than, the sago-tree. (See my
Political Essay on New Spain, vol. i, p. 363.)

* See above, p. 503. I dwell much on these divisions of
the great and fine families of palms according to the distri-
bution of the species: Ist, in dry places, or inland plains
(corypha tectorum) ; 2d, on the sea coast (chamezrops
humilis, cocos nucifera, corypha maritima, lodoicea sechel-
larum, Labill.); 3d, in the fresh water marshes (sagus rump-
hii, mauritia flexuosa); and 4th, in the alpine regions
between seven and fifteen hundred toises high*(ceroxylon
andiccla, oreodoxa frigida, kunthia montana). This last


728


In the season of inundations these clumps of
mauritia, with their leaves in the form of a fan,
have the appearance of a forest rising from the
bosom of the waters. The navigator, in proceed-
ing along the channels of the delta of the Oroo-
noko at night, sees with surprise the summit of
the palm-trees illumined by large fires. These
are the habitations of the Guaraons (Tivit-
ivas and Waraweties of Raleigh*), which are
suspended from'the trunks of trees. These tribes
hang up mats in the air, which they fill with
earth, and kindle, ona layer of moist clay, the fire
necessary for their household wants. They have
owed their liberty and their political indepen-
dence for ages to the quaking and swampy soil,
which they pass over in the time of drought, and
on which they alone know how to walk in secu-
rity to their solitude in the delta of the Oroono-
ko, to their abode on the trees, where religious


group of palme montane, which rises in the Andes of Gua-
nacas néarly to the limit of perpetual snow, was (I believe)
entirely unknown before our travels in America, (Nov. Gen.
vol. i, p, 8317; Semanario de Santa Fe de Bogota, 1819, No.21,
p. 163.)

* The Indian name of the tribe of Uaraus (Guarau-nos of
the Spaniards) may be recognized in the Warawety (Ouarau-
ety) of Raleigh, one of the branches of the Tivitivas. See
Discovery of Guiana, 1576, p. 90, and the sketch of the
habitations of the Guaraons, in Raleghi brevis Descrip,
Guiane, 1594, tab. 4, (Laet. p. 648, 661 3 Gih, vol. i, p,
xxXxv ; Depons, vol. i, p. 292, 308 ; Leblond, p. 480, 444.)


729


enthusiasm will probably never lead any Ame-
rican stylites*. I have already mentioned in
another place, that the mauritia palm-tree, the
tree of life of the missionaries, not only affords
the Guaraons a safe dwelling during the risings
of the Oroonoko; but that it’s shelly fruit, it’s
farinaceous pith, it’s juice abounding in saccha-
rine matter, and the fibres of it’s petioles, fur-
nish them with food, wine-+, and thread proper
for making cords and weaving hammocks. These
customs of the Indians of the delta of the Oroo-
noko were found formerly in the Gulf of Darien
(Uraba), aud in the greater part of the inundated
lands between the Guarapiche and the mouths
of the Amazon. It is curious to observe in the


lowest degree of human civilization the existence
of a whole tribe depending on one single species
of palm-tree, similar to those insects, which feed
on one and the same flower, or on one and the
same part of a plant.

We must not be surprised to find the breadth


* This sect was founded by Simeon Sisanites, a native of
Syria. He passed thirty-seven years in mystic contem-
plation, on five pillars, the last of which was thirty-six cubits 4
high. The Sancti columnares attempted to establish their aerial
cloisters in the country of Treves, in Germany; but the
bishops opposed these extravagant and perilous enterprises.
(Mosheim, Instit. Hist. Eccles., p. 192.)

+ The use of this murich: wine however is not very common.
The Guaraons prefer in general a beverage of fermented
honey.


730


of the principal mouth of the Oroonoko (Bo-
ca de Navios) so differently estimated. The
great Island Cangrejos is separated only by a
narrow channel from the inundated land, which
extends between the Bocas de Nuina and de
Mariusas, so that twenty or fourteen nautical
miles (at nine hundred and fifty toises) are
obtained, according as the measure is taken (in a
direction opposite to that of the current) from
Punta Barima to the nearest opposite bank, or
from the same Punta to the eastern bank of the
Isla Cangrejos. The navigable channel is
crossed by a sand-bank or bar, on which are
seventeen feet of water; the breadth of which
is supposed to be from two thousand five hun-
dred to two thousand eight hundred toises.
The Oroonoko, like the Amazon, the Nile, and
all the rivers that separate into several branches,
is less wide at the mouth, than might be sup-
posed from the length of it’s course, and the
breadth it preserves at some hundred leagues
inland. It is known from the labours of Malas-
pina, that the Rio de la Plata, from Punta del
Este near Maldonado as far as Cabo San Anto-
nio, is more than one hundred and twenty-four
miles (41°3 leagues) broad; but in going up
toward Buenos Ayres, this breadth diminishes
- go rapidly, that opposite the Colonia del Sacra-
mento it is already no more than twenty-one
miles. What is commonly called the mouth of


the Rio de Ja Plata is but a gulf, into which the
Uruguay and the Parana fall, two rivers much
less considerable in breadth than the Oroonoko.
In order to exaggerate the breadth of the mouth
of the Amazon, the islands of Marajo and Ca-
viana are considered as comprised within it; se
as to give the immense breadth of 3:5°, or 70
leagues, from la Punta Tigioca to Cabo del
Norte. But an examination of the hydraulic
system of the channel of Tagypuru, the Rio
Tocantins, the Amazon, and the Araguari, which
unite the immense volume of their waters, is
sufficient to show, how chimerical this estimation
is. Between Macapa and the western bank of
the island Marajo (ilha de Joanés ), the Amazon,
properly so called, is divided into two branches,
which together are only thirty-two miles (eleven
leagues) broad. Lower down, the northern
bank of the island of Marajo stretches east and
west, while the coast. of Portugueze Guayana,
between Macapa and Cabo del Norte, runs
from south to north. Hence it follows, that the
Amazon, where the two islands of Maxiana and
Caviana are situate, and the waters of the river
first come into contact with those of the Atlantic,
forms a gulf nearly forty miles broad. The
Oroonoko is inferior to the Amazon in the length
of it’s course, still morethan in it’s breadth within
land: it belongs to the rivers of the second
rank. But it must be remarked, that all these


732


classifications, from the length of the course, or
the breadth of the mouth of rivers, are extremely
arbitrary. The rivers of the British islands are
terminated by gulfs or lakes of fresh water, in
which the tides cause swellings and periodical
oscillations ; and remind us sufficiently, that we
must not judge of the importance of an hydraulic
system * merely from the extent of the mouths
of rivers. Every idea of relative magnitude fails
in precision, if we cannot compare the volume of
the waters, ascertained by the measurement of
the velocity, and the area of the transverse sec-
tions +. It is to be regretted, that measure-
ments of this kind require facilities, which soli-
tary travellers can scarcely procure; that, for
instance, of sounding the whole bed of a river,
and of sounding it at different times of the year,
Rivers of great apparent breadth having basins
of little depth, and traversed by several parallel
furrows t+, they contain much less water, than
their first view would lead us to suppose; and
the volume of their waters varies so considerably


* The Thames and the Severn; and in the New World
the Rio Guayaquil, which rises at the foot of Chimborazo,
and exhibits a striking disproportion between the brevity of
it’s course, and the breadth of it’s mouth.

+ For the knowledge of these active sections (sections vives)
in the Ganges and the Nile we are indebted to the important
labours of Major Rennell and Mr. Girard.


{ See above, p. 464.


33


at the two periods of their maximum and mini-
mum *, that during the floods it is often fifteen
or twenty times as much as at the season of
drought.

When we have doubled the Punta Barima,
and entered the bed of the Oroonoko, we find it
to be only three thousand toises in breadth.
Greater estimations have arisen from the error
of pilots in measuring the river in a line not
perpendicular to the direction of the current.
It would be useless to fortify the island of Can-
grejos, near which the water is from four to five
fathoms deep. Vessels there would be out of
gun-shot. The labyrinth of channels that lead
to the little mouths (hocas chicas) changes daily


* Mr. Girard found the volume of the Nile, at the port of
Syout, in the time of low water, 678-cubit metres in a se-


cond, while the gauges gave him during the inundations
10247 cubic metres (sur la Vallée d’ Egypte, p. 13). We may
judge by analogy of the enormous increase of the Oroonoko,
if we recollect, that it rises 25 feet in places where I found
it’s mean breadth to be 1000 toises. The following is a com-
parative table of some of the great rivers of the New World,
calculating the iength of the course, according to the most re-
cent maps, and adding one third for the sinuosities :

The Amazon, 980 leagues, of 20 to a degree.

The Missisippi, 560 leagues, in going up by the principal
branch to the Chippeway, but 815 leagues in going up to the
sources of the Missouri.

The Rio de la Plata, 530 leagues, in going up by the Rio
Paraguay.

The Oroonoko, the known part 420 leagues. (The Indus
has a course of 510, and the Ganges of 426 leagues.)


734


in depth and figure. Many pilots are persuaded,


that the Cannos of Cocuina, Pedernales, and
Macareo, by which a smuggling trade is carried
on with the island of Trinidad, have gained in
depth of late years; and that the river has a
tendency to withdraw from the Boca de Navios,
and to run toward the north-west. Before the
year 1760, barks that drew more than ten or
twelve feet of water seldom ventured into the
little channels of the delta. The fear of the small
mouths of the Oroonoko has now almost vanished ;
and enemies’ ships, which have never navigated
in those parts, find officious and experienced
guides in the Guaraons. The civilization of this
tribe, which may be compared from it’s situation
to the Nhengahybas or Igaruanas of the mouths
of the Amazon, is of the highest importance to
a government that would remain master of the
Oroonoko.

The flux and reflux of the tide are felt in
the month of April, when the river is lowest,
beyond Angostura, at a distance of more than
eighty-five leagues * in theinland. At the con-


* The difference of longitude is 3° 52’. It may seem sur-
prising, that, admitting here with common pilots only eighty-
five nautical leagues distance, I estimate the sinuosities of
the Oroonoko below Angostura only at one ninth. TI believe,
however, that this estimation is not too small; since, having
measured on a very accurate manuscript map which I possess,
with an opening of the compasses of 9’, the sinuosities of the


{


735


fluence of the Carony, sixty leagues from the
coast, the water rises one foot three inches.
These oscillations of the surface of the river, this
suspension of it’s course, must not be confounded
with a tide that flows up. At the great mouth
of the Oroonoko, near Cape Barima, the tide
rises to a height of two or three feet; but farther


Oroonoko from the mouth of the Rio Mamo (ten leagues above

that of the Carony) to Punta Barima, I found 207’; while an

opening of the compasses of half a degree gave me 186’, We

must not hence conclude, that La Condamine and d’ Anville

are in an error, when, in order to ‘estimate the course of a

river, they add in general one quarter or one third. (Jour-

nal des Savans, Jan. 1750, p. 183.) This point being of
great importance for the construction of maps, I had much

satisfaction in being able to verify it recently, The learned

commentator on Strabo, Mr. Gosselin, has measured the sinu~

osities of the Nile on the great map of the institute of Egypt
in forty-seven sheets, with an opening of the compasses of
1000 metres, or nearly one third of a nautical league ; and he
found the length of the course of the waters from Syene to

Damietta 1,180,400 metres, or, at a mean degree, 637’ 35”
(near 212 nautical leagues of 5562 metres). Geogr. de Strabon,
vol. v, p. 808. Now I found 173 leagues, with an opening
of the compasses of halfa degree, on the fine map of Colonel
Leake. ‘The sinuosities of a river, therefore, which is not
very winding, were a little more than one quarter. D?Anville
adopted this same proportion for the Napo and the Pastaza.
In the most tortuous rivers nearly one third must be added, if
the length of the course have been measured with an opening
of the compasses from 30/ to 1°, that is, suppressing sinuosi-
ties less-than this space. (La Condamine, Voyage a1’ Amazone,
p« 87.) :


736


on toward the north-west, in the Golfo triste,
between the boca de Pedernales, the Rio Guari-
piche, and the western coast of Trinidad, the
tides rise seven, eight, and even ten feet. Such
is the influence of the configuration of the coast,
and of the obstacles which the Mouths of the
Dragon present to the running off of the waters,
on points thirty or forty leagues distant from each
other. All that is related in very recent works,
on the particular currents caused by the Oroo-
noko at 2° or 3° distance in the open sea, on the
changes observed in the colour of the sea, and
on the fresh waters of the Golfo Triste (Mar
dulce of Gumilla), is entirely fabulous. The
currents, on the whole of this coast, run from
Cape Orange toward the north-west; and the
variations, which the fresh waters of the Oroo-
noko produce in the force of the general cur-
rent, and in the transparency and the reflected
colour of the sea, rarely extend farther than three
or four leagues east-north-east of the island of
Cangrejos. The waters in the Golfo triste are
salt, though in a less degree than in the rest of the
Caribbean Sea, on account of the small mouths
of the Delta of the Oroonoko, and the mass of
water furnished by the Rio Guarapiche. For
these reasons there are no salt-pits on this coast;
and I have seen vessels from Cadiz arrive at
Angostura laden with salt, and (which charac-
terises the state of colonial industry) even with
bricks. for building the cathedral.


737


The astonishing distance at which the little
tides of the coast are felt in the bed of the Oroo-
noko and of the Amazon *, has been hitherto
considered as a ccrtain proof, that these two
rivers have only a slope of a few feet during a
course of eighty-five and of two hundred leagues.
This proof however does not appear irrefragable,
if we reflect, that the magnitude of the trans-
mitted undulations depends much on local cir-
cumstances, on the form, the sinuosity, and the
number of the channels of communication, the
resistance of the bottom on which the tide flows
up, the reflexion of the waters by the opposing
banks, and their confinement in a straight.
A skilful engineer + has recently shown, that, in
the bed of the Garonne, the oscillations of the
tides go up, as on an inclined plain, far above
the level of the waters of the sea at the mouth
of the river. At the Oroonoko, the tides of un-
equal height of Punta Barima and of Golfe triste
are transmitted in unequal intervals of time by
the great channel of the Boca de Navios, and by


* The river of Amazons swells periodically at the strait of
Pauxis, 192 leagues from the coast.


+ Mr. Bremontier. At la Réole the tide appears to flow
ten toises, at Bourdeaux five toises, above the low-water
mark near Royan. Yet the tides are the same height at
Royan and at Bourdeaux. It were to be wished, that these
datacould be rectified by a more accurate survey. (Recherches
sur le Mouvement des Eaux, p. 809, § 72 and 83.)

VOL. V. 3B 2


738


the narrow, winding, and numerous channels of
the bocas chicas. As these little channels sepa-
rate at one point only from the principal trunk
near San Rafael, curious researches might be
made on the retardation of the tides, and the
propagation of the waves in the bed of the
Oroonoko, above and below San Rafael, at Cape
Barima in the ocean, and at the boca of Manamo
in the Golfe triste. Hydraulic architecture,
and the theory of the movement of fluids in con-
tracted channels, would alike gain from a labour,
for the execution of which the Oroonoko and
the Amazon furnish peculiar facilities.

The navigation of the river, whether vessels
arrive by the Boca de Navios, or risk entering
the labyrinth of the Bocas chicas, requires various
precautions, according as the bed is full, or the
waters very low. The regularity of these pe-
riodical risings of the Oroonoko has been long
an object of admiration to travellers, as the over-
flowings of the Nile furnished the philosophers
of antiquity with a problem difficult to solve.
The Oroonoko and the Nile, contrary to the
direction of the Ganges, the Indus, the Rio de
la Plata, and the Euphrates, flow alike from
the south toward the north; but the sources
of the Oroonoko are five or. six degrees nearer
the equator, than those of the Nile. Obser-
ving every day the accidental variations of
the atmosphere, we find it difficult to persuade


|
MW
5


739


ourselves, that in a great space of time the
effects of these variations mutually compensate
each other: that in a long succession of years
the means of the temperature of the humidity,
and of the barometric pressure,’ differ so little
from month to month; and that nature, not-
withstanding the multitude of partial perturba-
tions, follows a constant type in the series of
meteorologic phenomena. Great rivers unite in
one receptacle the waters, which a surface of
several thousands of square leagues receives.
However unequal may be the quantity of rain,
that falls during several successive years in
such or such a valley, the swellings of rivers,
that have a very long course, are little affected
by these local variations. The swellings repre-
sent the mean state of the humidity, that reigns
in the whole basin; they follow annually the
same progression, because their commencement
and their duration depend also on the mean of
the periods, apparently extremely variable, of the
beginning and end of the rains in the different
latitudes, through which the principal trunk and
it’s various tributary streams flow. Hence it
follows, that the periodical oscillations of rivers
are, like the equality of temperature of caverns
and springs, a sensible indication of the regular
distribution of humidity and heat, which takes
place from year to year on a considerable extent
of land. They strike the imagination of the
3B


740


vulgar, as order every where astonishes, when
we cannot easily ascend to first causes; as the
means of temperature of a long succession of
months or years surprise those, who see for
the first time a treatise on climates. Rivers that
belong entirely to the torrid zone display in their
periodical movements that wonderful regularity,
which is peculiar to a region where the same
wind brings almost always strata of air of the
same temperature ; and where the change of the
Sun in it’s declination causes * every year at the
same period a rupture of equilibrium in the elec-
tric intensity, in the cessation of the breezes,
and the commencement of the season of rains.
The Oroonoko, the Rio Magdalena, and the
Congo or Zaire, are the only great rivers of the
equinoxial region of the globe, which, rising near
the equator, haye their mouths in a much higher
latitude, though still within the tropics. The
Nile and the Rio de la Plata direct their course
in the two opposite hemispheres, from the torrid
zone toward the temperate -f.


* See the theory which I explained above, vol. iv, p. 409.

t In Asia, the Ganges, the Burampooter, and the majestic
rivers of Indo-China, direct their course toward the equator.
The former flow from the temperate to the torrid zone. This
circumstance of courses pursuing opposite directions (toward
the equator, and toward the temperate climates) has an influence
on the period and the height of the risings, on the nature and
variety of the productions on the banks of the rivers, on the


741


As long as, confounding the Rio Paragua of
Esmeralda with the Rio Guaviare, the sources
of the Oroonoko were sought toward the south-
west, on the eastern back of the Andes, the ris-
ings of this river were attributed to a periodical
melting of the snows. ‘This reasoning was as
far from the truth as that, in which the Nile
was formerly supposed to be swelled by the
waters of the snows of Abyssinia. The Cordit-
leras of New Grenada, near which the western
tributary streams of the Oroonoko*, the Gua-
viare, the Meta, and the Apure, take their rise,
enter no more into the limit of perpetual snows,
with the sole exception of the Paramos of Chita
and Mucuchies, than the Alps of Abyssinia.
Snowy mountains are much more rare in the
torrid zone +, than is generally admitted ; and
the melting of the snows, which is not copious
there at any season, does not at all increase
at the time of the inundations of the Oroonoko.
The sources of this river are found (east of the
Esmeralda) in the mountains of Parima, the
highest summits of which do not exceed 1,200


less or greater activity of trade, and, I may add, from what
we know of the nations of Egypt, Meroé, and India, on the
progress of civilization along the valleys of the rivers.
* See above, p. 201, 215, and 319.
+ See my Nowvelles Recherches sur les Montagnes de 1 Hima-
laya et la Hauteur des Neiges perpétuelles sous ? Equateur, in the


‘Annales de Chimie et de Physique, vol. xiv, p.41.


742


or 1,300 toises in elevation; and from la Grita
as far as Neiva (from 7°5° to 3° of latitude) the
eastern branch of the Cordillera presents nume-
reus Paramos from 1800 to 1900 toises high * ;
and only one group of Nevados, that is of moun-
tains which surpass 2400 toises, in the five Pica-
chos of Chita. The three great western tributary
streams of the Oroonoko rise from the Paramos
‘de Cundinamarca, which are destitute of snow.
The secondary tributary streams only, which fall
into the Meta and the Apure, receive some aguas
de nieve, such as the Rio Casanare, which de-
scends from the Nevado de Chita, and the Rio
Santo Domingo -, which descends from the


* From north to south; the Paramos of Porqueras and of
Laura (near Ja Grita) ; of Cacota; of Almorzadero, Zoraca,
Guachaneque, and Chingasa (between Pamplona and Santa
Fe de Bogota); la Suma Paz, between Pandi and Neiva,
Seeymy Atlas Geogr., Pl. 17, 19, 21,24. The mean temper-
ature of the mountainous deserts, which the Spanish inhabi-
tants of the equinoxial zone call Paramos, is 9° I sometimes
found the centigrade thermometer there at 4°. I saw no snow
fall sporadically under the equator below 1860 or 1900 toises
of absolute height. See the Memoir which T have just cited,
p. 36.

+ The Nevado de Mucuchies, the eastern part of the Sier*a
Nevada de Merida, gives rise on the south to the Rio de Santo
Domingo ; and on the north to the Rio Chama, which runs
into the gulf of Maracaybo. A tributary stream of the first
of these rivers, the Paguay, comes from the western part
of the Sierra Nevada de Merida. There is therefore, in the
whole circumference of the basin of the Oroonoko, no other


743


Sierra Nevada de Merida, and traverses the pro-
vince of Varinas.

The cause of the periodical swellings of the
Oroonoko acts equally on all the rivers, that
take rise in the torrid zone. After the vernal
equinox, the cessation of the breezes announces
the season of rains. The increase of the rivers,
which may be considered as natural ombrometers,
is in proportion to the quantity of water, that
falls in the different regions. This quantity, in
the centre of the forests of the Upper Oroonoko
and the Rio Negro, appeared to me to exceed
90 or 100 inches annually *. Such of the na-
tives therefore, as have lived beneath the misty
sky of the Esmeralda and the Atabapo, know,
~ without the smallest notion of natural philoso-
phy, what Eudoxus and Eratosthenes knew here-
tofore -+, that the inundations of the great rivers
are owing solely to the equatorial rains. The
following is the usual progress of the oscillations
of the Oroonoko. Immediately after the vernal
equinox (the people say on the 25th of March),
the commencement of the rising is perceived.
It is at first only an inch in twenty-four hours ;


summit that enters into the region of perpetual snows, but
that Sierra Nevada de Merida (lat. 7°50’), and the Nevado de
Chita (lat. 5° 45’).


* See above, p. 248 and 326.
+ Strabo, Lib. 17, p..789. Diod. Sie., Lib.1, c. 5. -


744


sometimes the river again sinks in April; it
attains it’s maximum in July ; remains full (at
the same level) from the end of July till the
25th of August; and then decreases progres-
sively, but more slowly than it increased. It is
at it’s minimum in January and February. In
both worlds the rivers of the northern torrid
zone attain the greatest height nearly at the
same period. The Ganges, the Niger, and the
Gambia, reach the maximum, like the Oroonoko,
in the month of August*. The Nile is two
months later; either on account of some local
circumstances in the climate of Abyssinia, or of
the length of it’s course, from the country of
Berber, or 17:5° of latitude -, to the bifurcation


* Nearly forty or fifty days after the summer solstice.


+ The point (17° 35’) where the Tacazze, or Astaboras,
enters the Nile. (See the excellent work of Mr. Burckhardt,
p. 163.) The Nile receives no river below this, either on the
east or on the west; a solitary instance in the hydrographic
history of the globe. The distance from the mouth of the
Tacazze to the Delta is nearly 1850 nautical miles; so that
admitting the mean velocity of the Nile (Gzrard, p. 13) to be
four feetin a second, or two miles and ahalfin an hour, I find
twenty-two days and a half for the time of the descent of a
particle of water. This is also nearly ihe time a swell would
take to descend from the sources of the Oroonoko to it’s
mouth, through an itinerary length of 1308 nautical miles.
The velocity of the Nile in Nubia is no doubt a little greater,
than I have estimated it in this calculation. The retardation
of the oscillations of the Nile is very remarkable, compared


745


of the Delta. The Arabian geographers assert,
that in Sennaar and in Abyssinia the Nile
begins to swell in the month of April (nearly as
the Oroonoko) ; the rise however does not be-
come sensible at Cairo till toward the summer
solstice; and the water attains it’s greatest
height at the end of the month of September *,
The river keeps at the same level till the middle
of October ; and is at it’s minimum in April and
May, a period when the rivers of Guyana begin
to swell anew. It may be seen from this rapid
statement, that, notwithstanding the retardation
caused by the form of the natural channels, and
by local climatic circumstances, the great phe-
nomenon of the oscillations of the rivers of the
torrid zone is every where the same. In the two
zodiacs vulgarly called Tatar and Chaldean, or
Egyptian, (in the zodiac which contains the
sign of the Rat, and in that which contains those
of the Fishes and Aquarius,) particular constel-
lations are consecrated to the periodical over-
flowings of the'rivers. Real cycles, divisions of
time, have been gradually transformed into di-
visions of space; but the generality of the phy-
sical phenomena of the risings seems to prove,
that the zodiac which has been transmitted to us
by the Greeks, and which, by the precession of |


with those of other rivers of the tropics. Dees this denote a
more remote cause of the rising of the waters ?
* Nearly cighty or ninety days after the summer solstice,


746


the equinoxes, becomes an historical monument
of high antiquity, may have taken birth far from
Thebes, and from the sacred valley of the Nile.
In the zodiacs of the New World, in the Mexi-
can for instance, of which we discover the ves-
tiges in the signs of the days, and the periodical
series which they compose, there are also signs
of rain and of inundation corresponding to the
Chou (Rat) of the Chinese * and Thibetan cycle
of Tse, and to the Fishes and Aquarius of the do-
decatemorion. These two Mexican signs are
Water (Atl) and Cipactli, the sea monster fur-
nished with a horn. This animal is at once the
Antelope-fish of the Hindoos, the Capricorn of
our zodiac, the Deucalion of the Greeks, and
the Noah (Coxcox) of the Aztecks +. Thus we


* The figure of water itself is often substituted for that of
the Rat ( Arvicola) in the Tatar zodiac. The Rat takes the
place of Aquarius. (Gaubil, Obs. mathém., vol. iii, p- 33.)

+ Coxcox bears also the denomination of Teo-Cipactli, in
which the root god or divine is added to the name of the sign
Cipacth, It is the man of the fourth age; who, at the fourth
destruction of the world (the last renovation of nature), saved
himself with his wife, and reached the mountain of Colhuacan,
According to the commentator Germanicus, Deucalion was
placed in Aquarius ; but the three signs of the Fishes, Aqua-
rius, and Capricorn (the antelope-fish), were heretofore inti-
mately linked together. ‘The animal, which, after having
long inhabited the waters, takes the form of an antelope, and
climbs the mountains, reminds people, whose restless imagi-
nation seizes the most remote similitudes, of the ancient tra-
ditions of Menou, of Noah; and of those Deucalions ecle-


747


find the general results of comparative hydro-
graphy in the astrological monuments, the di-
visions of time, andthe religious traditions of
nations the most remote from each other in their
situation, and in their degree of intellectual ad-
vancement.

As the equatorial rains take place in the flat
country when the Sun passes through the zenith
of the place, that is when it’s declination becomes -
homenymous with the zone comprised between
the equator and one of the tropics, the waters of
the Amazon sink, while those of the Oroonoko
rise perceptibly. In a very judicious discussion
on the origin of the Rio Congo *, the attention of
philosophers has been already called to the mo-
difications, which the periods of the risings must
undergo in the course of a river, the sources and
the mouth of which are not on the same side of
the equinoxial line-+. The hydraulic systems
brated among the Scythians and the Thessalians.” As the
Tatarian and Mexican zodiacs contain the signs of the


Monkey and the Tiger, they, no doubt, originated in the torrid
zone. With the Muyscas, inhabitants of New Grenada, the


first sign, as in eastern Asia, was that of Water, figured by a


frog. It is also remarkable, that the astrological worship of
the Muyscas came to the tableland of Bogota from the eastern —
side, from the plains of San Juan, which extend toward the
Guaviare and the Oroonoko. See - several hieroglyphic
paintings in my Amer. Monuments.
* Voyage to the Zaire, p. xvii.
+ Among the rivers of America this is the case with the
Rio Negro, the Rio Branco, and the Jupura. ©


748


of the Oroonoko and the Amazon furnish a com-
bination of circumstances still more extraordi-
nary. They are united by the Rio Negro and
the Cassiquiare, a branch of the Oroonoko; it is
a navigable line, between two great basins of
rivers, that is crossed by the equator. The river
Amazon, according to the information which I
obtained on it’s banks, is much less regular in the
periods of it’s oscillations than the Oroonoko; it
generally begins however to increase in Decem-
ber, and attains it’s maximum of height in
March*. It sinks from the month of May,
and is at it’s minimum of height in the months of
July and August, at the time when the Lower
Oroonoko inundates all the surrounding land.
As no river of America can cross the equator
from south to north, on account of the general
configuration of the ground, the risings of the
Oroonoko have an influence on the Amazon;
but those of the Amazon do not alter the pro-
gress of the oscillations of the Oroonoko. It
results from these data, that, in the two basins
of the Amazon and the Oroonoko, the concave
and conver summits of the curve of progressive
increase and decrease ~ correspond very regu-
larly with each other, since they exhibit the dif-


* Nearly seventy or eighty days after our winter solstice,
which is the summer solstice of the southern hemisphere.


+ Girard, fig. 1, where we find the curve of the rise of the


749


ference of six months, which results from the
situation of the rivers in opposite hemispheres.
The commencement of the risings only is less
tardy in the Oroonoko. This river increases
sensibly as soon as the Sun has crossed the
equator; in the Amazon, on the contrary, the
risings do not commence till two months after
the equinox. It is known, that, in the forests
north of the line the rains are earlier, than in
the less woody plains of the southern torrid zone.
To this local cause is joined another, which acts
perhaps equally on the tardy swellings of the
Nile. The river Amazon receives a great part
of it’s waters from the Cordillera of the Andes,
where the seasons, as every where among moun-
tains, follow a peculiar type, most frequently
opposite to that of the low regions.

The law of the increase and decrease of the
Oroonoko is more difficult to determine with


Nile. The following are the analogous results for two great
rivers of South America compared with the Nile.


OROONOKO. AMAZON, NILE.
(Lat. 3° to 8° N.) |(Lat. 3° N. to 16°S.)) (Lat. 11° 30’ to
31° 15/ N,)
Beginning of April (Abyssinia) ;
the rise... April. December. June (Cairo).
Maximum... Aug. March. September.


Minimum Jan.¥eb.| July, August. | April.

The Oroonoko, like the Nile, increases during 100-or 115
days. The mazimum of the Rio del Norte is in May, (Pol.
Essay, vol. i, p. 303.)


750


respect to space, or to the magnitude of the
oscillations, than with regard to time, or the
-period of the maxima and minima. Having been
able to measure but imperfectly the rising of the
river, [ report, not without hesitation, estimates,
that differ much from each other *. Foreign
pilots admit ninety feet for the ordinary rise in
the Lower Oroonoko. Mr. de Pons, who has in
general collected very accurate notions during
his stay at Caraccas, fixes it at thirteen fathoms.
The heights naturally vary according to the
breadth of the bed, and the number of tributary
streams which the principal trunk receives. The
swellings of the Nile in Upper Egypt are from
thirty to thirty-five feet; at Cairo twenty-three
feet; and in the northern part of the Delta
four feet. It appears, that the mean rise at
Angostura does not exceed twenty-four or twen-
ty-five feet. In this spot am island, situate in
the middle of the river, would furnish the same
facility for measuring the increase, as that
afforded by the nilometer (Megyas) placed at


* Tuckey, Maritime Geogr., vol. iv, p. 309. Hippisiey,
Exped. to the Oroonoko, p. 38. Gumilla, vol. i, p. 56—59.
Depons, vol. iii, p. 301. The greatest height of the rise of
the Missisippi is, at Natchez, fifty-five English feet. This


river (the largest perhaps of the whole temperate zone) is at |


it’s maxmum from February to May ; at it’s minimum in Au-
gust and September. idiot, Journal of an Expedition to the
Ohio, p. 120.


751


the point of the island of Roudah. An eminent
scientific gentleman, who has recently resided
on the banks of the Oroonoko, Mr. Zea, will
supply what is wanting in my observations on a
point so important. The people believe, that
every twenty-five years the Oroonoko rises
three feet higher than common ; but the idea of
this cycle does not rest on any precise measures.
We know by the testimony of antiquity, that
the oscillations of the Nile have been sensibly
‘the same with respect to their height and dura-
tion for thousands of years; which is a proof
well worthy of attention, that the mean state of
the humidity and the temperature does not vary
in that vast basin. Will this constancy in phy-
sical phenomena, this equilibrium of, the ele-
ments, be preserved in the New World also after
some ages of cultivation? J think we may re-
ply in the affirmative ; for the united efforts of
man cannot have an influence on the general
causes, on which the climate of Guyana de-
pends.

According to the barometric height of San
Fernando de Apure, I find from that town to the
Boca de Navios the slope of the Apure and the
Lower Oroonoko to be three inches and a quar-
ter to a nautical mile of nine hundred and fifty
toises*. We may be surprised at the strength


* The Apure itself-has a slope of thirteen inches to the
mile, See vol, iv, p. 455.


of the current in a slope so little perceptible ;
but I shall remind the reader on this occasion,
that, according to measurements made by order
of Mr. Hastings, the Ganges was found in a
course of sixty miles (comprising the windings)
to have also only four inches fall toa mile; and
that the mean swiftness of this river is in the
seasons of drought three miles an hour, and in
those of rains six or eight miles. The strength
of the currént therefore, in the Ganges as in the
Oroonoko, depends less on the slope of the bed,
than on the accumulation of the higher waters,
caused by the abundance of the rains, and the
number of tributary streams *. European co-
lonists have already been settled for two hundred
and fifty years on the banks of the Oroonoko;
and during this long period of time, according
to a tradition which has been propagated from
generation to generation, the periodical oscilla-
tions of the river (the time of the beginning of
the rising, and that when it attains it’s maximum)
have never been retarded more than twelve or
fifteen days. | .

When vessels that draw a good deal of water sail
up toward Angostura in the months of January
and February, by favour of the seabreeze and the
tide, they run the risk of taking the ground.
The navigable channel often changes it’s breadth


* Barrow, in the Voyage to the Zaire, Intr., p. xvii.


258


and direction; no buoy however has yet been
laid down, to indicate any deposit of earth
formed in the bed of the river, where the waters
have lost their original velocity. There exists
on the south of Cape Barima, as well by the
river of this name as by the Rio Moroca and
several esteres*, a communication with the Eng-
lish colony of Essequebo. Small vessels can
penetrate into the interior as far as the Rio Pou-
maron +, on which are the ancient settlements
of Zealand and Middlebourg. Heretofore this
communication interested the government. of-
Caraccas only on account of the facility it far-
nished to an illicit trade; but since Berbice, De-
merara, and Essequebo, have fallen into the
hands of a more powerful neighbour, it fixes the
attention of the Spanish Americans as being
connected with the security of their frontiers.
Rivers which have a course parallel to the coast,
and are no where farther distant from it than
five or six nautical miles+, characterize the


*® Aestuaria, estuaries,


+ Near Cape Nassau. Colonel Ynciarte, before he was


settled at Angostura, was employed by the Spanish govern-
ment to make asurvey of the labyrinth of channels (esteros .
y cafius) between. the great mouth of the Oroonoko and that
of the Essequebo. Unfortunately this officer was not fur-
nished with a chronometer.

t See for instance, on Mr. Van der Bosch’s fine maps, the
course of the Commewyne; which joins the river of Surinam
at right angles, as the Cayuni joins the Essequebo.


VOL. V. 3 ¢


754


whole of the shore between the Oroonoko and
the Amazon.

Ten leagues distant from Cape Barima, the
great bed of the Oroonoko is-divided for the first
time into two branches of two thousand toises in
breadth. ‘They are known by the Indian names
of Zacupana and Imataca. The first, which is
the northernmost, communicates on the west of
the islands Congrejos and del Burro with the
bocas chicas of Lauran*, Nuina, and Mariusas.
As the Isla del Burro disappears in the time
of great inundations, it is unhappily not suited
to fortifications. The southern bank of the brazo
Imataca is cut by a labyrinth of little channels,
into which the Rio Imataca and the Rio Aquire-+
flow. <A long series of little granitic hills rises
in the fertile. savannahs between the Imataca
and the Cuyuni; it is a prolongation of the Cor-
dilleras of Parima, which, bounding the horizon
south of Angostura, forms the celebrated cata-
racts of the Rio Caroni, and approaches the
Oroonoko like a projecting cape near the little
fort of Vieja Guyana. The populous missions
of .the Caribbee and Guyana Indians, governed
by the Catalonian Capuchins, lie near the
sources of the Imataca and the Aquire. The
easternmost of these missions are those of Mi-


* Canno frances.
+ These channels communicate with the Canno de Arecifes,
which opens two leagues west of cape Barima.


ee ee —


ee pn


|
|
|
A
i
|:
i)
|
|


755


amu, Cumamu, and Palmar, situate in a hilly
country, which extends toward Tupuquen, Santa
Maria, and the Villa de Upata. Going up the
Rio Aquire, and directing your course across
the pastures toward the south, you reach the
mission of Belem de Tumeremo, and thence the
confluence of the Curumu with the Rio Cuyuni,
where the Spanish post or destacamento de Cuy-
uni* was formerly established. I enter into
this topographic detail, because the Rio Cuyuni,
or Cuduvini, runs parallel to the Oroonoko from
west to east, through an extent of 2°5° or 8° of
longitude +, and furnishes an excellent natural
boundary between the territory of Caraccas and
that of English Guyana.

The two great branches of the Oroonoko, the
Zacupana and the Imataca, remain separate for
fourteen leagues ; on going up farther, the waters
of the river are found united ¢ in a single chan-
nel extremely broad. This channel is near eight
leagues long; at it’s western extremity a second
bifurcation appears; and as the summit of the


* On the cast of the mountains of Kinoroto.


+ Including the Rio Juruam, one of the principal branches
of the Cuyuni. The Dutch military post is five leagues west
of the union of the:Cuyuni with the Essequebo, where the
former of these rivers receives the Mazuruni.

¢ At this point of Union are found two villages of Guara-
ons. They also bear the names of Imataca and Zacupaua.
See vol, iii, p. 279.

362


756


delta is in the northern branch of the bifurcated
river, this part of the Oroonoko is highly impor-
tant for the military defence of the country. All
the channels*, that terminate in the bocas chicas,
rise from the same point of the trunk of the
Oroonoko. The branch (Cano Manamo) that
separates from it near the village of San Rafael
has no ramification till after a course of three or
four leagues; and by placing a small fort above
the island of Chaguanes, Angostura might. be
defended against an enemy, that should attempt
to penetrate by one of the bocas chicas. In my
time the station of the gunboats was east of San
Rafael, near the northern bank of the Oroonoko.
This is the point}, which vessels must pass. in
sailing up toward Angostura by the northern
channel, that of San Rafael, which is the broad-
est but the mest shallow.

Six leagues above the point where the Oroo-
noko sends off a branch to the bocas chicas, is


* Cannode Manamo grande, C.de Manamo chico, C. Pedernales,
C. Macareo, C. Cutupiti, C. Macuona, C. grande de Mariusas,
&e, The last three branches form by their union the sinuous
channel called the Vuelta del Torno. Though the labyrinth of
these small branches appears to be subject to frequent changes,
‘t is not less certain, that an accurate plan might be taken of
the great branches of the Delta of the Oroonoko. This fa-
pour would no doubt be long; but by rectifying from time to
time the soundings marked on it, it would become a great help
to the navigation.

+ Barancas, near the island of Yaya.


|


|
|
j
j
|
}
_


Zod


placed an ancient fort (los Castillos de la Vieja
or Antigua Guayana) ,the first construction of
which goes back to the sixteenth century. In
this spot the bed of the river is studded with
rocky islands *; and it is asserted, that it’s
breadth is nearly six hundred and fifty toises.
The town is almost destroyed, but the fortifica-
tions -- subsist, and are well worthy the atten-
tion of the government of Terra Firma, ‘There
is a magnificent view from the battery established
on a bluff north-west of the ancient town, which
at the period of great inundations is entirely
surrounded with water. Pools that communi-


cate with the Oroonoko form natural basins,
adapted for the reception of vessels that want


repairs. It is to be hoped, that, when peace is
restored to those countries, and a narrow policy
no longer checks the course of industry, those
basins of Vieja Guayana will be surrounded with
yards for building vessels. Next to the Amazon,
there is no river, which, from the forests through
which it flows, can furnish more valuable timber
for ship-building. This timber, drawn from the
great families of the laurinee, guttiferee, rutaceze,
and arborescent legumina, affords all the desir-


* West of the Islas Iguanas.
+ Los fuertes de San Francisco de Asis y del Padrasta, [
know not whether the remains of the Castzllo de San Fernando,
or of Limones, still exist opposite Vieja Guayana, on the north.


era bank.


798


able varieties of density, specific gravity, and
more or less resinous qualities. All that is
wanting in this country is a wood. fit fer masts,
light, elastic, and with parallel fibres, such as is
furnished by the coniferze of the temperate re-
gions, and of the lofty mountains of the tropics.
After having passed the little forts of Vieja
Guayana, the bed of the Oroonoko again widens.
The state of cultivation of the country on the
two banks affords a striking contrast.. On the
north is seen the desert. part of the province of
Cumana, steppes (Llanos) destitute of habita-
tions, and extending beyond the sources of the Rio
Mamo, toward the tableland or mesa of Guanipa.
On the south we find three populous villages be-
longing to the missions of Carony, namely, San
Miguel de Uriala *, San Felix, and San Joaquin.
The last of these villages, situate on the banks of
the Caronyimmediately below the great cataract,
is consideredas the embarcadero of the Catalonian
missions. On navigating more to the east, be-
tween the mouth of the Carony and Angostura,
the pilot should avoid the rocks of Guarampo,
the sandbank of Mamo, and the Piedra del Ro-
sario. From the numerous materials which I
brought home, and from astronomical discus-
sions, the principal results of which I have indi-
cated above, I have constructed a map of the


* Sce above, p. 709.


country bounded by the dedta of the Oroonoko,
the Carony, and the Cuyuni. This part of Guy-
ana, from it’s proximity to the coasts, will some
day offer the greatest attraction to, European
settlers.

The whole population of this vast province in
it’s present state is, with the exception of a few
Spanish parishes *, scattered on the banks of
the Lower Oroonoko, and subject to two mo-
nastic governments. Estimating the number of
the inhabitants of Guyana, who do not live in
savage independance, at thirty-five thousand,
we find nearly twenty-four thousand settled in
the missions, and thus withdrawn as it were
from the direct influence of the secular arm.
At the period of my voyage, the territory of the
monks of the Observance of St. Francis con-
tained seven thousand three hundred inhabi-
tants, and that of the Capuchinos Catalanes seven-
teen thousand; an astonishing disproportion,
when we reflect on the smallness of the latter
territory compared to the vast banks of the
Upper Oroonoko, the Atabapo, the Cassiquiare,
and the Rio Negro. It results from these state-
ments, that nearly two thirds of the population
of a province of sixteen thousand eight hundred
square leagues are found concentred between the
Rio Imataca and the town of Santo Thome del
Angostura, on a space of ground only fifty-


* Pueblus yrvillas de Espanoles,
4 yi


466


five leagues in length, and thirty in breadth.
Both of these monastic governments are
equally inaccessible to Whites, and form status
in statu. The first, that of the Observantins, I
-have described from my own observations; it
remains for me to record here the notions I
could procure respecting the second of these
governments, that of the Catalonian Capuchins.
Fatal civil dissensions, and epidemic fevers, have
of late years diminished the long increasing pros-
perity of the missions of the Carony ; but, not-
withstanding these losses, the region which we
are going to examine is still highly interesting
with respect to political economy.

The missions of the Catalonian Capuchins,
which in 1804 contained at least sixty thou-
sand head of cattle grazing in the savannahs,
extend from the eastern banks of the Carony
and the Paragua as far as the banks of the Ima-
taca, the Curumu, and the Cuyuni; at the
south - east they border. on English Guyana,
or the colony of Essequebo; and toward the
south, in going up the desert banks of the Para-
gua and ‘the Paraguamasi, and crossing the
Cordillera of Pacaraimo, they touch the Por-
tugueze settlements on the Rio Branco. The
whole of this country is open, full of fine savan-
nahs, and no way resembling that through
which we passed on the Upper Oroonoko. The
forests become impenetrable only on advancing


761 —


toward the south; on the north are meadows
intersected with woody hills. .’[he most pictu-
resque scenes lie near the falls of the Carony,
and in that chain of mountains, two hundred
and fifty toises high, which separates the tribu-
tary streams of the Oroonoko from those of the
Cuyuni. There are situate the Villa de Upata*,
the capital of the missions, Santa Maria, and
Cupapui. Small tablelands afford a healthy
and temperate climate. Cacao, rice, cotton,
indigo, and sugar, grow in abundance, wherever
a virgin soil, covered with a thick coat of grasses,
is subjected to cultivation. The first Christian
settlements in those countries are not, I believe,
of an earlier date than 1721. The elements of
which the present population is composed are
the three Indian races of the Guayanoes, the
Caribbees, and the Guaycas. The last are a
people of mountaineers, and are far from being
so diminutive in size as the Guaycas whom we
found at Esmeralda}. It is difficult to fix them


* Founded in 1762. Population; 657 souis in 1797;
769 souls in 1803. The most populous villages of these
missions, Alta Gracia, Cupapui, Santa Rosa de Cura, and
Guri, had between 600 and 900 inhabitants, in 1797; but
in 1818 epidemic fevers diminished the population more than
a third. In some missions these diseases have swept away
nearly half of the inhabitants. See Trip from Angostura to
the Capuchin Missions of the Caroni, in the Jour. of the Royal
Instit., 1820, No. 16, p. 260—287, and No. 17, p. 1-182.

+ See above, p. 563.


762


to the soil; and the three most modern missions
in which they have been collected, those of
Cura, Curucuy, and Arechica, are already des-
troyed. The Guayanoes, who early in the six-
teenth century gave their name to the whole
of that vast province, are less intelligent, but
milder, and more easy, if not to civilize, at least
to subjugate, than the Caribbees. Their lan-
guage appears to belong to the great branch of
the Caribbee and Tamanac tongues. It displays
the same analogies of roots and grammatical
forms, which is observed between the Sanskrit,
the Persian, the Greek, and the German. It is
not easy to fix the forms of what is indefinite by
its nature; and to agree on the differences,
which should be admitted between dialects, deri-
vative languages, and mother tongues. The
Jesuits of Paraguay have made known to us
another tribe of Guayanoes* in the southern
hemisphere, living in the thick forests of Parana.
Though it cannot be denied in general, that, in
consequence of distant migrations+-, the nations
that are settled north and south of the Amazon
have had communications with each other, I
will not decide, whether the Guayanoes of Pa-
rana and of Uraguay exhibit any other relation


* They are also called G'uananas, or Gualuchas. (See
Azara, Voyage to Paraguay, vol. ii, p. 221.)
+ Like thé celebrated migrations of the Om-aguas, or


Omeguas.


763


to those of Carony, than that of an homonomy,
which is perhaps only accidental*.

The most considerable Christian settlements
are now concentred between the mountains of
Santa Maria, the mission of San Miguel, and
the eastern bank of the Carony, from San Bue-
naventura as far as Guri} and the embarcadero
of San Joaquin; a space ef ground which has
not more than four hundred and sixty square
leagues of surface. The savannahs to the east and
the south are almost uninhabited; we find
there only the solitary missions of Belem, Tu-
muremo, Tupuquen, Puedpa, and Santa Clara,
It were to be wished, that the spots preferred for
cultivation were distant from the rivers, where
the land is higher, and the air more favorable to
health. The Rio Carony, the waters of which,
of an admirable clearness, are not well stocked
with fish, is frée from shoals from the Villa de
Barceloneta, a little above the confluence of the
Paragua, as far as the village of Guri. Farther
north it winds between innumerable islands and
rocks; and the small boats of the Caribbees


* Beside the Caribbees, the Guayanoces, and the Guayeas,
there are also, in the missions of Carony, Pariagotoes, Gua-
raunoes, and Aruacas. See on these different races, vol. iii,
p. 275 and 287,

+ Euri, in the map inserted in the Journal of the Royal
{nstitution, No. 17, The village of Rosario de Guacipati is
ealled in that map Wasipatt:


764


only venture to navigate amid these razdales, or
rapids of the Carony. Happily the river is often
divided into several branches ; and consequently
that can be chosen, which according to the
height of the waters presents the fewest whirl-
pools and shoals. The great Salto, celebrated
for the picturesque beauty of it’s situation, is a
little above the village of Aguacaqua, or Carony,
which in my time had a population of seven
hundred Indians. This cascade is said to be
from fifteen to twenty feet high; but the bar
does not cross the whole bed of the river, which
is more than three hundred feet broad. | When
the population. is more extended toward the
east, it will avail itself of the course of the small
rivers Imataca and Aquire, the navigation of
which is pretty free from danger. The monks,
who like to keep themselves isolated, in order to
withdraw from the eye of the secular power,
have been hitherto unwilling to settle on the
banks of the Oroonoko. It is however by this
river only, or by the Cuyuni and the Essequebo,
that the missions of Carony can export their pro-
ductions. The latter way has not yet been tried,
though several Christian settlements* are formed


* Guacipati, Tupuquen, Angel de la Custodia, and Cura,
where the military post of the frontiers was stationed in 1800,
which had becn anciently placed at the confluence of the
Cuyuni and the Curumu.


765


on one of the principal tributary streams of the
Cuyuni, the Rio Juruario*. This stream fur-
nishes at the period of the great swellings the ~
remarkable phenomenon of a bifurcation. It
communicates by the Juraricuima and the Au-
rapa with the Rio Carony+; so that the land
comprised between the Oroonoko, the sea, the
Cuyuni, and the Carony, becomes a real island.
Formidable rapids impede the navigation of the
Upper Cuyuni; and hence of late an attempt
has been made, to open a road to the colony of
Essequebo much more to the south-east, in order
to fall in with the Cuyuni much below the mouth
of the Curumu.

The whole of this southern territory is tra-
versed by hordes of independant Caribbees ; the
feeble remains of that warlike people, who were
so formidable to the missionaries till 1733 and
1735, at which period the respectable bishop
Gervais de Labridt, canon of the metropolitan
chapter of Lyon, father Lopez, and several other
ecclesiastics, perished by the hands of the Carib-
bees. These dangers, too frequent formerly,


* Rio Yuarnare of the English map which I have just
quoted.
+ Caulin, p.57 and 61.
t Consecrated a bishop for the four parts of the world
(obispo para las quatro partes del mundo) by pope Benedict the
13th.


766


exist no longer, either in the missions of Caro-
ny, or in those of the Oroonoko; but the inde-
pendant Caribbees continue, on account of their
connection with the Dutch colonists of Esseque-
bo, an object of mistrust and hatred to the
government of Guyana. ‘These tribes favor
the contraband trade along the coast, and by
the channels or estuaries, that join the Rio
Barima to the Rio Moroca; they carry off the
cattle belonging to the missionaries, and excite
the Indians recently converted, and living within
the sound of the bell, to return to the forests.
The free hordes have every where a powerful
interest in opposing the progress of cultivation,
and the encroachments of the Whites. The
Caribbees and the Aruacas procure firearms at
Essequebo and Demerara ; and, when the traf-
fic of American slaves (poitos) was most active,
adventurers of Dutch origin took part in these
incursions on the Paragua, the Erevato, and the
Ventuario. Men-hunting took place on these
banks, as heretofore (and probably still) on
those of the Senegal and the Gambia. In both
worlds Europeans have employed the same
artifices, and committed the same atrocities,
to maintain a trade that dishonours humanity.
The missionaries of the Carony and the Oroono-
ko attribute all the evils they suffer from the
independent Caribbees to the hatred of their
neighbours, the Calvinist preachers of Esseque-


767


bo. Their works are therefore filled with com-
plaints* of the secta diabolica de Calvino y de
Lutero, and against the heretics of Dutch Guy-
ana, who also think fit sometimes to go on
missions, and spread the germe of social life
among the savages.

Of all the vegetable productions of those
countries, that which the industry ef the Cata-
lonian Capuchins has rendered the most celebra-
ted is the tree, that furnishes the cortex Angostu-
re, which is erroneously designated by the name
of cinchona of Carony. We were fortunate
enough to make it first known as a new genus
distinct from the cinchona, and belonging to the
family of meliacez, or of zanthoxylus}. | This


* Caulin, p. 373. Gumilla, vol, i, p. 20. Fray Pedre
Simon, p.211. Lettres édif., vol. xvi, No. 20.

+ See our Equin. Plants, vol. i, p. 61, pl. 89. Willdenow,
in the Ménoires de ? Académie de Berlin, 1802, p.24. De
Candolle, Propriétés des Plantes, p. 98. Richard, in the
Mém de V’ Institut, 1811, P.i, p. 82, Pl. 10. Beside the ticorea
of Aublet, there is reason to believe a second species of the
genus bonplandia, the real bonplandia trifoliata, also grows im
French Guyana. Mr. Kunth recognized it among the plants:
of Cayenne sent home by Mr. Martin. At Guayaquil I had
inscribed the bonplandia in my Table of the Geography of
Plants, under the provisional name of cusparia febrifuga ; this
name, which has by mistake remained on the plate published
after my retnrn to Europe, has been copied into many works.
on the materia medica. The bonplandia of Cavanilles is a Mex-
ican plant, to which we have given the name of caldasia gemi-
niflora, and which is become common in our gardens. (Willd.,


768


salutary drug of South America was formerly |


attributed to the brucea ferruginea, which grows
in Abyssinia, to the magnolia glauca, and to
the magnolia plumieri. During the dangerous
disease of Mr. Bonpland, Mr. Ravago sent a
confidential person to the missions of Carony, to
procure. for us, by favor of the Capuchins of
Upata, branches. of the tree in flower, which we
wished to be able to describe. We. obtained
- very fine specimens, the leaves of which, eight-
een inches long, diffused an agreeable aromatic
smell. We. soon perceived, that the cuspare
(the indigenous name of the cascarilla or corteza
del Angostura) forms a new genus; and on
sending the plants of the Oroonoko to Mr. Will-
denow, I begged he would dedicate this plant to
Mr. Bonpland. The tree, known at present by
the name of bonplandia trifoliata, grows at the
distance of five or six leagues from the eastern
bank of the Carony, at the foot of the hills that
surround the missions Capapui, Upata, and
Alta Gracia. The Caribbee Indians make use


Hortus Berol., vol. i, p.71.) ‘The abbé Cavanilles, in dedi-
cating this genus of the family of the polemoniaceous plants to
Mr. Bonpland, had no knowledge of the memoir on the
cortex Angosture, which Mr, Willdenow had presented to the
Academy of Berlin. | The term angostura as a generic name
is altogether inadmissible. - Would a plant be named roma,
which, without growing in the vicinity of that city, had be-
come an article of trade among the Romans ?


769


of an infusion of the bark of the cuspare, which
they consider as a strengthening remedy. Mr.
Bonpland discovered the same tree west of Cu-
mana, in the gulf of Santa Fe, where it may
become one of the articles of exportation from
New Andalusia.

The Catalonian monks prepare an extract of
the cortex angosturee, which they send to the
convents of their province, and which deserves
to be better known in the north of Europe. It
is to be hoped, that the febrifuge and antidysen-
teric bark of the bonplandia will continue to be
employed, notwithstanding the introduction of
another described by the name of false Angos-
tura bark, and often confounded with the for-
mer.. This false Angostura, or Angostura pseudo-
Jerruginea, comes, it is said, from: the brucea
antidysenterica ; it acts powerfully on the
nerves *, produces violent attacks of tetanos,
and contains, according to the experiments of
Pelletier and Caventon, a peculiar alkaline sub-
stance + analogous to morphin and sirychnin.


* According to the experiments of Emmert, Marc, and
Orfila.

fi La brucine. Mr. Pelletier has wisely avoided using the
word angosturine, because it might indicate a substance taken
from the real cortex angosture, or bonplandia trifoliata: (An-
nales de Chimie, vol, xii, p. 117.) We saw at Peru the barks
of two new species of weinmannia and wintera mixed with
those of cinchona ; a mixture less. dangerous, but still inju-

VOL, V. 3D


770


As the tree which yields the real cortex Angos-
turce does not grow in great abundance, it is to
be wished, that plantations of it were formed.
The Catalonian monks are well fitted to spread
this kind of cultivation; they are more economi-
cal, industrious, and active, than the other mis-
sionaries. They have already established tan-
yards and cotton spinning ina few villages* ; and
if they suffer the Indians henceforth to enjoy the
fruit of their labors, they will find great resources
in the native population. Concentred on a small
space of land, these monks have the consciousness
of their political importance, and have from time
to time resisted the civil authority, and that of
their bishop. The governors who reside at 'An-
gostura have struggled against them with very
unequal success, according as the ministry of
Madrid showed a complaisant deference for the
ecclesiastical hierarchy, or sought to limit it’s
power. In 1768 don Manuel Centurion carried
off twenty thousand head of cattle from’ the
missionaries, in order to distribute them among
the indigent inhabitants. This liberality, ex-
erted in a manner not very legal, produced
very serious consequences. The governor was
disgraced on the complaint of the Catalonian
monks, though he had considerably extended


rious, on account of the superabundance of tannin and acrid
matter contained in the false cascarillas.
* At Miamo,.Tumeremo, &c.


771


the territory of the missions toward the south,
and founded the villa de Barceloneta, above the
confluence of the Carony with the Rio Paragua,
and the Ciudad de Guirior, near the union of
the Rio Paragua and the Paraguamusi. From
that period till the political troubles, which now
agitate the Spanish colonies, the civil adminis-
tration has carefully avoided all intervention in
the affairs of the Capuchins ; whose opulence
has been exaggerated, like that of the Jesuits of
Paraguay.

The missions of the Carony, by the configu-
ration of their soil * and the mixture of savan-
nahs and arable lands, unite the advantages of
the Llanos of Calabozo and the vallies of Aragua.
The real wealth of this country is founded on
the care of the herds, and the cultivation of
colonial produce. It were to be wished, that
here, as in the fine and fertile province of Vene-
zuela, the inhabitants, faithful to the labours of
the fields, would not addict themselves too has-
tily to the research of mines. The example of
Germany and Mexico prove no doubt, that the
working..of metals is not at. all incompatible
with a flourishing state of agriculture; but,
according to popular traditions, the banks of
the Carony lead to the lake Dorado, and the

* It appears, that the little table-lands between the moun-
tains of Upata, Cumamu, and Tupuquen, are more than one


hundred and fifty toises above the level of the sea,


3p 2


772


palace of the gilded man* ; and this lake, and
this palace, being a local fable, it might be dan- —
gerous to awaken remembrances, which begin
gradually to be effaced. I was assured, that
in 1760 the independent Caribbees went to
Cerro de Pajarcima, a mountain to the south of
Vieja Guayana, to submit the decomposed rock
to the-action of washing. The gold dust col-
lected by this labour was put into calebashes of
crescentia eujete, and sold to the Dutch at Esse-
quebo. Still more recently, some Mexican
miners, who abused the credulity of Don Jose
Avalo+ the intendant of Caraccas, undertook a
very considerable work in the centre of the mis-
sions of the Rio Carony, near the town of Upa-
ta, in the Cerros del Potrero and de Chirica.
. They declared, that the whole rock was aurife-
rous ; stamping-mills, brocards, and smelting
furnaces were constructed. After having ex-
pended very large sums, it was discovered, that
the pyrites contained no trace whatever of gold.
These essays, though fruitless, served to renew
the ancient ideat, “that every shining rock in
Guyana is wna madre del oro.” Not contented
with taking the mica-slate to the furnace, strata


* El Dorado, thatis, el rey o’ hombre dorado. See above,
p. 390.
+ See above, vol, iii, p. 531.
t Raleigh, Discovery of the Empire of Guiana, ’p. 2 and
34,


773


of amphibolic slates were shown to me near An-
gostura, without any mixture of heterogeneous
substances, which had been worked under the
whimsical name of black ore of gold, oro negro-

This is the place to make known, in order to
complete the description of the Oroonoko, the
principal results of my researches on el Dorado,
the White Sea, or Laguna Parime, and the
sources of the Oroonoko, as they are marked in
the most recent maps. The idea of an aurife-
rous earth, eminently rich, has been connected,
ever since the end of the 16th century, with that
of a great inland lake, which furnishes at the
same time waters to the Oroonoko, the Rio
Branco, and the Rio Essequebo. I believe,
from a more accurate knowledge of the country,
a long and laborious study of the Spanish authors
who treat of el Dorado, and above all from
comparing a great number of ancient maps ar-
ranged in chronological order, I have succeeded
in discovering the source of these errors. All
fables have some real foundation ; that of Dorado
resembles those mythoi of antiquity, which, tra-
yelling from country to country, have been suc-
cessively adapted to different localities. In the
sciences, in order to distinguish truth from error,
it often suffices to retrace the history of opinions,
and to follow their successive developments.
The discussion to which I shall devote the end
of this chapter is important, not only because it


“44


throws light on the events of the conquest, and
that long series of disastrous expeditions made
in search of Dorado, the last of which (I am
ashamed to say) was in the year 1775; it also
furnishes, in addition to this simply historical
interest, another more substantial, and more
generally felt, that of rectifying the geography
of South America, and of disembarrassing the
maps published in our days of those great lakes,
and that strange labyrinth of rivers, placed as
if by chance between sixty and sixty-six degrees
of longitude. No man in Europe believes any
longer in the wealth of Guyana, and the empire
of the grand Patiti. The town of Manoa, and
it’s palaces covered with plates of massy gold,
have long since disappeared; but the geogra-
phical apparatus serving to adorn the fable of
Dorado, the lake Parima, which, similar to the
lake of Mexico, reflected the image of so many
sumptuous edifices, has been religiously pre-
served by geographers. In the space of three
centuries the same traditions have been differ-
ently modified ; from ignorance of the American
languages, rivers have been taken for lakes,
and portages for branches of rivers; one lake,
the Cassipa, has been made to advance five de-
grees of latitude toward the south, while ano-
ther, the Parima or Dorado, has been trans-
ported the distance of a hundred leagues, from
the western to the eastern bank of the Rio


775


Branco. From these various changes, the pro-
blem we are going to solve has become much
more complicated, than is generally supposed.
The number of geographers, who discuss the
basis of a map, with regard to the three points
of measures, of the comparison of descriptive
works, and of the etymological study* of names,


* J use this expression, perhaps an improper one, to mark
a species of philological examination, to which the names of
rivers, lakes, mountains, and tribes, must be subjected, in
order to discover their identity in a great number of maps.
The apparent diversity of names arises partly from the dif-
ference of the dialects spoken by one and the same family of
people, partly from the imperfection of our European ortho-
graphy, and from the extreme negligence with which geogra~
phers copy one another. We recognize with difficulty the
Rio Uaupe in the Guapue or Guape ; the Xié, in the Gaa-
icia; the Raudal d’Atores, in Athule ; the Caribbees, in
the Calinas and Galibis ; the Guaraunoes, or Uarau, in the
Waraw-ites; &c. It is however by similar mutations of let-
ters, that the Spaniards have made Aijo of filius ; hambre, of
fames ; and Felipo de Urre, and even Utre, of the Conquista-
dor Philip von Hutten; that the Tamanacs in America
have substituted choraro for soldado ; ‘and the Jews in China,
Talemeiohang for Jeremiah. (See above, vol. iii, p. 254—
257, 276, 277, 280; and vol. iv, p. 340 and 478.) Analogy
and a certain etymological tact must guide geographers in
researches of this kind, in which they would be exposed to
serious errors, if they were not to study at the same time the
respective situations of the upper and lower tributary streams
of the same river, Our maps of America are overloaded
with names, for which rivers have been created ; as, in the


catalogues of organic beings called Systema Nature, a plant,


776


is extremely small. Almost all the maps of
South America, which have appeared since the
year 1775, are, in what regards the interior of
the country comprised between the steppes of
Venezuela- and the river of the Amazons, be-
tween the eastern back of the Andes and the


or an animal, which has been described under different
names, is indicated as two or three distinct species. This
desire of compiling, of filling up vacancies, and of employing
without investigation heterogeneous materials, has given our
maps of countries the least visited an appearance of exactness,
the falsity of which is discovered, when we arrive on the
spot. Mr. de la Condamine has made the same observation 5
“the maps of Guyana,” says he, “ swarm. with details as
false as they are circumstantial.” (Voyage & I’ Amazon,
p. 189.) While I indicate in the text the three principal
foundations of geographical labours, I carefully distinguish
the discussion of measures (that is, astronomical observations,
and geodesic and itinerary operations) from the study which
is necessary of voyages, of the descriptions of provinces, and
of ancient and modern maps. If every country were trigono-
metrically surveyed, the construction of maps would be re-
duced to a mechanical operation, The sagacity of the geo-
grapher is exerted on what is doubtful; and in our days
sound criticism must be necessarily founded on two distinct
branches of knowledge, on the discussion of the-relative
value of the astronomical methods employed, and on the study
of descriptive works (travels, statistical tracts, and histories
of conquests) in the languages in which their authors have
written. This study of the originals is so much the more in-
dispensable, because in most descriptive works (as D’Anville
has already judiciously observed) the maps annexed are in


many points in direct contradiction with the text.


é


coast of Cayenne, a simple copy of the great
Spanish map of La Cruz Olmedilla. A line,
indicating the extent of country which Don Jose
Solano boasted of having discovered and pacified
by his troops and emissaries, was taken for the
road followed by that officer, who never went
beyond San Fernando de Atabapo, a village
one hundred and sixty leagues distant from the
pretended lake Parima. The study of the work
of father Caulin, who was the historiographer of
the expedition of Solano, and who states very
clearly, from the testimony of the Indians, “ how
the name of the river Parima gave rise to the
fable of Dorado, and of an inland sea,” has been
neglected. No use either has been made of a
map of the Oroonoko, three years posterior to
that of La Cruz, and traced by Surville from the
collection of true or hypothetical materials pre-
served in the archives of the Despacho universal
de Indias. The progress of geography, as. ma-
nifested on our maps, is much slower than might:
be supposed from the number of useful results,
which are found scattered in the works of dif-
ferent nations. Astronomical observations and
topographic information accumulate during a
long lapse of years, without being made use of ;
and from a principle of stability and preserva-
tion, in other respects praiseworthy, those who
construct maps often choose rather to add no-
thing, than to sacrifice a lake, a chain of moun-


778


tains, or an interbranching of rivers, which have
figured there during ages.

The fabulous traditions of Dorado and the
lake Parima having been diversely modified ac-
cording to the aspect of the countries to which
they were to be adapted, we must distinguish
what they contain that is real from what is
merely imaginary. To avoid entering here into
minute particulars, which will find a more proper
place in the Analysis of the Geographical Atlas,
I shall begin first to call the attention of the
reader to those spots, which have been at various
periods the theatre of the expeditions undertaken
for the discovery of Dorado. When we have
learnt to know the aspect of the country, and
the local circumstances, such as they can now
be described, it will be easy to conceive, how
the different hypotheses recorded on our maps
have taken rise by degrees, and have modified
each other. To oppose an error, it is sufficient
to recall to mind the variable forms, in which
we have seen it appear at different periods.

Till the middle of the 18th century, all the
vast space of land comprised between the moun-
tains of French Guyana and the forests of the
Upper Oroonoko, between the sources of the
Carony and the river of Amazons (from 0° to 4°
of north latitude, and from 57° to 68° of longi-
tude), was so littl known, that geographers
could place in it lakes where they pleased, create


779


communications between rivers, and figure
chains of mountains more or less lofty. They
have made full use of this liberty ; and the situa-
tion of lakes, as well as the course and branch-
ings of rivers, has been varied in so many ways,
that it would not be surprising, if among the
great number of maps some were found, that
trace the real state of things. The field of hy-
potheses is now singularly narrowed. I have
determined the longitude of Esmeralda in the
Upper Oroonoko; more to the east, amid the
plains of Parima (a land as unknown as Wangara
and Dar-Saley in Africa), a band of twenty
leagues broad has been travelled over from north
to south, along the banks of the Rio Carony and
the Rio Branco, in the longitude of sixty-three
degrees. This is the perilous road, which was
taken by don Antonio Santos in going from
Santo Thomé del Angostura to Rio Negro and
the Amazon; by this road also the colonists of
Surinam communicated very recently with the
inhabitants of Grand Para*. This road divides
the terra incognita of Parima into two unequal
portions ; and fixes limits at the same time to
the sources of the Orooneko, which it is no
longer possible to carry back indefinitely toward
the east, without supposing that the bed of the
Rio Branco, which flows from north to south, is


* See above, p. 480.


780


crossed by the bed of the Upper Oroonoko,
which flows from east to west. If we follow
the course of the Rio Branco, or that stripe of
cultivated land, which is dependent on the Capi-
tania General of Grand Para, we see lakes,
partly imaginary, and partly enlarged by geo-
graphers, forming two distinct groups. The
first of these groups includes the lakes, which
they place between the Esmeralda and the Rio
Branco; and to the second belong those, that
are supposed to lie between the Rio Branco and
the mountains of Dutch and French Guyana.


It results from this sketch, that the question, ,


whether there exists a lake Parima on the east of
the Rio Branco, is altogether foreign to the pro-
blem of the sources of the Oroonoko.

Beside the country which we have just noticed


(the Dorado de la Parime, traversed by the Rio


Branco), another part of America is found, two
hundred and sixty leagues toward the west, near
the eastern back of the Cordillera of the Andes,
equally celebrated in the expeditions to Dorado.
This is the Mesopotamia between the Caqueta,
the Rio Negro, the Uaupes, and the Jurubesh,
of which I have given a particular account
above *: it is the Dorado of the Omaguas,
which contains the lake Manoa of Father Acunha,
the Laguna de Oro of the Guanes, and the auri-


* In the present vol., p. 311,319, 340.


781


ferous land, whence. Father Fritz received plates
of beaten gold in his mission on the Amazon,
toward the end of the seventeenth century.

The first, and above all the most celebrated
. enterprises attempted in search of El Dorado
were directed toward the eastern back of the
Andes of New Grenada. Fired with the ideas,
which an Indian of Tacunga had given of the
wealth of the king or Zaque of Cundirumarca*,
Sebastian de Belaleazar, in 1535, sent his cap-
tains Anasco and Ampudia, to discover the
valley of Dorado+ twelve days journey from
Guallabamba, consequently in the mountains
between Pasto and Popayan. The information
which Pedro de Anasco had obtained from the
natives, joined to that which was received sub-


sequently (1536) by Diaz de Pineda, who had
discovered the provinces of Quixos and Canela,
between the Rio Napo and the Rio Pastaca, gave


* Herera Dec. V, Lib. 7, cap. 14 ,(vol. iii, p. 178). Is
it not rather the true ancient name of New Grenada, which
other writers on the Conquest call Cundinamarca? It is how-
ever the last form, which has been revived in our days, in the
war of the independance of the colonies.

+ El valle del Dorado. Pineda relates, “ que mas adelante
de la provincia de la Canela se hallan tierras mui ricas adonde
andaban los hombres armados de piecas y joyas de oro y que
no hévia sierra, ni montana.” Herera Dec. v, lib. x, cap.
xiv (tom. 3, p. 244), and Dec. vi, lib. viii, cap. vi (tom. iv,
p. 180). Geogr. Blaviana, vol. xi, p. 261. Southey, tom. 1,
p. 78 et 373.


782


birth to the idea, that on the east of the Nevados
of Tunguragua, Cayambe, and Popayan, “ were
vast plains, abounding in precious metals, and
where the inhabitants were covered with armour
of massy gold.” Gonzalo Pizarro, in searching
for these treasures, discovered accidentally, in
1539, the cinnamon-trees of America (laurus
cinnamomoides, Mut.) ; and Francisco de Orel-
lana went down the Napo, to reach the river of
Amazons. Since that period expeditions were
undertaken at the same time from Venezuela,
New Grenada, Quito, Peru, and even from
Brazil and the Rio dela Plata *, for the conquest
of Dorado. Those, of which the remembrance
have been best preserved, and which have most
contributed to spread the fable of the riches of
the Manaos, the Omaguas, and the Guaypes,
as well as the existence of the Lagunas de oro,
and the town of the Gilded King (Grand Patiti,
Grand Moxo, Grand Paru, or Enim), ave the
incursions made to the south of the Guaviare,
the RioFragua, and the Caqueta. Orellana, hav-
ing found idols of massy gold, had fixed men’s
ideas on an auriferous land between the Papa-
mene and the Guaviare. His narrative, and
those of the voyages of Jorge de Espira (George


* Nuflo de Chaves wert from the Ciadad de la Asumpcion,
situate on the Rio Paraguay, to discover, in the latitude of
24° south, the vast empire of Dorado, which was every where
supposed to be on the eastern back of the Andes,


ee eee ok ee


783


von Speier), Hernan Perez de Quesada, and
Felipe de Urre (Philip von Huten), undertaken
in 1536, 1542, and 1545, furnish, amid much
exaggeration, proofs of very exact local know-
ledge *. When these are examined merely in a
geographical point of view, we perceive the con-
stant desire of the first conguistadores, to reach
the land comprised between the sources of the
Rio Negro, of the Uaupés (Guape), and of the
Jupura, or Caqueta. This is the land, which,
in order to distinguish it from the Dorado de la
Parime, we have called above the Dorado des
Omaguas ~~. No doubt the whole country be-
tween the Amazon and the Oroonoko was
vaguely known by the name of Provincias del
Doradot; but in this vast extent of forests,
savannahs, and mountains, the progress of those
who sought the great lake with auriferous banks,
and the town of the Gilded King, was directed
toward two points only, on the north-east and
south-west of the Rio Negro; that is to Parima


* We may be surprised to see, that the expedition of Auten
is passed over in absolute silence by Herera. (Dec. 7, 26.10,
cap. vii, vol. iv, p. 288). Fray Pedro Simon gives the whole
particulars of it, true or fabulous; but he composed his work
from materials, that were unknown to Herera. (See above,
p. 324.)

+ In 1560 Pedro de Ursua even took the title of Governa-
dor del Dorado y de Omagua. (Fray Pedro Simon, vol. vi,
chap. x, p. 480.)

{ Herera, Dec. 5, lib. 9, cap. vi (vol. i, p, 211).


784


(or the isthmus between the Carony, the Esse-
quebo, and the Rio Branco), and to the ancient
abode of the Manaos, the inhabitants of the
banks of the Jurubesh. I have just mentioned
the situation of the latter spot, which is cele-
brated in the history of the conquest from 1535
to 1560; and it remains for me to speak of the
configuration of the country between the Spanish
missions of the Rio Carony, and the Portugueze
missions of the Rio Branco or Parima. This is
the country lying near the Lower Oroonoko, the
Esmeralda, and French and Dutch Guyana, on
which, since the end of the sixteenth century,
the enterprises and exaggerated nairatives of
Raleigh have shed so bright a splendour.

From the general disposition of the course of
the Oroonoko, directed successively toward the
west, the north, and the east, it’s mouth lies
almost in the same meridian as it’s sources * : so
that by proceeding from Vieja Guyana to the
south the traveller passes through the whole of


* The difference does not probably exceed 8° of longitude.
The Raudal of Guatharibos, east of Esmeralda, is in the
longitude of 67° 38’... I believe consequently, that the sources
of the Oroonoko are a little more to the east than the meri-
dian of Santo. Thome del Angostura, which, according: to my
observation, is in 66°15’21”. It results fram the whole of
my discussions on the astronomical geography of Guyana,
that Vieja Guayana (long. 64° 43“) and the confluence of the
Rio Branco with the Rio Negro (long. 64° 34’) do not sensi-
bly differ in meridian.


785


the country, in which geographers have succes-
sively placed an inland sea (Mar Blanco ), and
the different lakes which are connected with the
fable of el Dorado de la Parime. We find first
the Rio Carony, which is formed by the union *
of two branches of almost equal magnitude, the
Carony, properly so called, and the Rio Paragua.
The missionaries of Piritu call the latter riveralake
(laguna): it is full of shoals, and little cascades ;
but, “ passing through a country entirely flat, it
is subject at the same time to great inundations,
and it’s real bed (su verdadera caxa) can scarcely
be discovered +.” The natives have given it the
name of Parugua or Parava{, which means in
the Caribbee language sea, or great lake. These
local circumstances and this denomination no
doubt have given rise to the idea of transform-
ing the Rio Paragua, a tributary stream of the
Carony, into a lake called Cassipa, on account
of the Cassipagotoes §, who lived in those coun-


* Near the mission of San Pedro de las Bocas (between
San Sebastian de Abaratayme and Santa Magdalena de Cu-
rucay), six leagues north-east of the Villa de Barceloneta.

+ Caulin, p.60. These observations of the author of the
Corografia are so much the more remarkable, as he was en-
tirely ignorant of the existence of a lake Cassipa on our maps.

+ Gili, vol. i, p. 323.

§ Raleigh, p. 64, 69. I always quote, when the contrary
is not expressly said, the original edition of 1596, Have
these tribes of Cassipagotoes, Epuremei, and Orinoqueponi,
so often mentioned by Raleigh, disappeared? or did some


VOL. V. BE


186


tries. Raleigh gives this basin forty miles in
breadth ; and, as all the lakes of Parima must
have auriferous sands, he does not fail to assert,
that in summer, when the waters retire, pieces
of gold of considerable weight are found there.

The sources of the tributary streams of the
Carony, the Arui, and the Caura (Caroli, Arvi,
and Caora*, of the ancient geographers) being
very near each other +, this suggested the idea
of making all these rivers take their rise from
the pretended lake Cassipat. Sanson has so


misapprehension give rise to these denominations? I am
surprised to find the Indian words (of one of the different
Caribbee dialects ?) Ezrabeta cassipuna aquerewana, translated
by Raleigh, “ the great princes or greatest commander.” Since
acarwana certainly signifies a chief, or any person who com-
mands (Raleigh, p. 6 and 7), cassipuna perhaps means great,
and lake Cassipa is synonimous with great lake. n the same
manner Cass-iquiare may be a great river, for igquiare, like
vent, is, on the north of the Amazon, a termination common
to all rivers, Goto, however, in Cassipa-goto, is a Caribbee
term denoting a tribe, See above, p. 402.


* D’Anville names the Rio Caura, Coari; and the Rio
Arui, Aroay. J have not been able hitherto to guess. what is
meant by the dloica (Atoca, Atoica of Raleigh), which issues
from the lake Cassipa, between the Caura and the Arui,

+ See above, p. 582, 684, 689.

} Raleigh makes only the Carony and the Arui issue from
it (Hondius, Niewwe Caerte van het wonderbare landt Guiana
besocht door Sir Water Ralegh, 1694-1596): but in posterior
maps, for instance that of Sanson, the Rio Caura issues also
from lake Cassipa.


787


much enlarged this lake, that he gives it forty-
two leagues in length, and fifteen in breadth *.
The ancient geographers placed opposite to each
other, with very little hesitation, the tributary
streams of the two banks of a river; and they
place the mouth cf the Carony, and lake Cas-
sipa, which communicates by the Carony with
the river Oroonoko, sometimes { above the con-
fluence of the Meta. Thus it is carried back
by Hondius as far as the latitudes of 2° and 3°,
giving it the form of a rectangle, the longest
sides ofwhic h run,from north to south, This
circumstance is worthy of remark, because, in
assigning gradually a more southern latitude to
the lake Cassipa, it has been detached from the
Carony and the Arui, and has taken the name
of Parima, To follow this metamorphosis in it's
progressive developement, we must compare the
maps which have appeared since the voyage of
Raleigh till now. La Cruz, who has been
copied by all the modern geographers, has pre-
served the oblong form of the lake Cassipa for
his lake Parima, although this form is entir ely
different from that of the ancient lake Parima,
or Ropunuwini, of which the great axis was
directed from east to west. The ancient lake


* Map of Terra Firma, 1686.
+ Sanson, Map for the voyage of Acunha, 1680. Id, South
America, 1659. Coronelli, Indes ocerdentales, 1689.


eae


788


(that of Hondius, Sanson, and Coronelli) was
also surrounded by mountains, and gave birth
to no river, while the lake Parima of La Cruz
and the modern geographers communicates
with the Upper Oroonoko, as the Cassipa with
the Lower Oroonoko *. i
I have stated the origin of the fable of the lake
Cassipa, and the influence it has had on the
opinion, that the lake Parima is the source of
the Oroonoko. Let us now examine what re-
lates to this latter basin, this pretended interior
sea, called Rupunuwini by the geographers of the
sixteenth century. In the latitude of four degrees
or four degrees and a half, (in which direction
unfortunately, south of Santo Thome del Angos-
tura to the extent of eight degrees, no astrono-
mical observation has been made -) is a long


* Those geographers, who have effaced the ancient lake
Parima from their maps, for instance Sanson (River of the
Amazons, 1680), de Lisle (Amér. Mérid. 1700), d’ Anville, in
the first edition of 7’ Amérique méridionale, and Robert de Vau-
gondi (Nouveau Monde, 1778), have religiously preserved a
lake Cassipa, the source of the Carony and the Arui. D’An-
ville, in the second edition of his map, indicates at the same
time both the lakes Cassipa and Parima. La Cruz was too
well informed by the accounts of the missionaries respecting
the sources of the Caura, not to omit the Cassipa.

+ Ifa line be drawn (west of Cayenne) through the falls
of the Maroni and the Essequebo, Vieja Guayana, and the
right bank of the Oroonoko, to Esmeralda, and thence through
the confluence of the Rio Branco with the Rio Negro, along
the latter river as far as Vistoza (on the left bank of the
Amazon), and to the sources of the Oyapok, we shall have


789


and narrow Cordillera, that of Pacaraimo, Qui-
miropaca, and Ucucuamo; which, stretching
from east to south-west, unites the group of
mountains of Parima to the mountains of Dutch
and French Guyana. It divides it’s waters be-
tween the Carony, the Rupunury or Rupunu-
wini, and the Rio Branco; and consequently
between the vallies of the Lower Oroonoko, the
Essequebo, and the Rio Negro *. On the north-
west of the Cordillera de Pacaraimo, which has
been traversed but by a small number of Eu-
ropeans (by the German surgeon, Nicolas Horts-
mann, in 1739; by a Spanish officer, Don An-
tonio Santos, in 1775; by the Portugueze
colonel, Barata, in 1791; and by several Eng-


an area of 48,000 square leagues, in which not a single situa-
tion has been astronomically determined. ‘his country lies
between the missions of the Oroonoko, and French and
Dutch Guyana. Thus also west of the missions of the Oroo-
noko, between the Atabapo and the eastern back of the
Andes, there are 25,000 square leagues destitute of points
astronomically determined. The geographer, who would
ground a map of South America on observations of latitude
and longitude, finds on the north of the Amazon a terra incognita
three times as big as Spain. The places which I determined
astronomically between San Fernando de Apure, Javita, San
Carlos del Rio Negro, and Santo Thomas del Angostura, that
is, between 1° 53' aud 8° 8 of latitude, and 66” 15/ and
70° 20’ of longitude, are very advantageously situate, airite
they divide this vast extent of land into two parts, and fur-
nish fixed points on the east and west of the Oroonoko,
* See above,’p: 481, 576.


790


lish settlers, in 1811), descend the Noeapra, the
Paraguamusi, and the Paragua, which fall into
the Rio Carony: on the north-east, the Rupu-
nuwini, a tributary stream of the Rio Essequebo.
Toward the south, the Tacutu and the Urari-
quera form together the famous Rio Parima, or
Rio Branco *.

This isthmus, between the branches of the Rio
Essequebo and the Rio Branco (that is, between
the Rupunuwini on one side, and the Pirara,
the Mahu, and the Ururicuera or Rio Parima on
the other), may be considered as the classical
soil of the Dorado of Parima. The rivers at the
foot of the mountains of Pacaraimo are subject
to frequent overflowings. Above Santa Rosa,
the right bank of the Urariapara, a tributary
stream of the Uraricuera f, is called el Valle de


* Tt would be equally well founded to assume, that the
Rio Branco rises from the union of the Mahu (Mao) and the
Rio Parima properly so called ; for the Tacutu receives the
waters of the Mahu, and the Urariquera those of the Rio
Parima. When several branches of almost equal magnitude
unite, the natives, as well as geographers, vary in the deno-
mination of the new river, which rises from this junction.

+ Curaricara, in the journals of don Antonio Santos and
don Nicolas Rodriguez, of which Tam in possession. These
travellers, crossing the Cordilléra of Quimiropaca, and pass-
ing by Santa Rosa, went from the Nocaprai, a tributary
stream of the Paraguamusi, to the Urariapara; and thence
descended toward the Portugueze fortress of San Joaquim,
situate at the confluence of the Uraricuera and the Tacuta,


791


la Inundacion. Great pools also are found be-
tween the Rio Parima.and the Xurumu. These
are marked on the maps recently constructed in
Brazil, which furnish the most ample details of
those countries. More to the west, the Canno
Pirara, a tributary stream of the Mahu, issues
from a lake covered with rushes. This is the
lake Amucu described Nicolas Hortsmann ; and
respecting which some Portugueze of Barcelos,
who had visited the Rio Branco (Rio Parima or
Rio Paravigiana*) gave me precise notions
during my stay at San Carlos del Rio Negro.
The lake Amucu is several leagues broad, and
contains two small islands, which Santos heard
called Islas Ipomucena. The Rupunuwini (Ru-
punury), on the banks of which Hortsmann dis-
covered rocks covered with hieroglyphical
figures-+, approaches very near this lake, but does
not communicate with it. The portage between
the Rupunuwini and the Mahu is farther north,
where the mountain of Ucucuamo { rises, which


* Is this name, which I take from the oral communica-
tion of Portugueze colonists, a corruption.of Paravillanas ?


La Cruz gives this name to the easternmost branch of .the
Rio Branco. See above, p. 374. :


+ See above, p. 593. On the south of the Rupunury, but
below the Uanauhau (Anava), other tributary streams of the
Rio Branco rise from the small lakes Curincu, Uraricory,
and Uadauhau. Corogr. bras., vol. ii, p. 347.


{ I follow the orthography of the manuscript journal of


792


the natives still call the Mountain of Gold.
They advised Hortsmann, to seek round the Rio
Mahu for a mine of silver’ (no doubt mica with
large plates), of diamonds, and of emeralds: He
found nothing but rocky crystals. His account
seems to prove, that the whole length of the
mountains of the Upper Oroonoko (Sierra Pa-
rima) toward the east is composed of granitic
rocks, full of druses and open veins, like the Peak
of Duida*. Near these lands, which still enjoy a
great celebrity for their riches, on the western
limits of Dutch Guyana, live the Macusis, Atu-
rajoes, and Acuvajoes. The traveller Santos
found them stationed between the Rupunuwini,
the Mahu, and the chain of Pacaraimo. Jt is the
aspect of the micaceous rocks of the Ucucuamo, the
name of the Rio Parima, the inundations of the ri-
vers Urariapara, Parima, and Xurumu, and more
especially the existence of the lake Amucu (near the
Rio Rupunuwini, and regarded as the principal
source of the Rio Parima), which have given
rise to the fable of the White Sea and the Do-
rado of Parima. All these circumstances (which
have served on this very account to-corroborate
the general opinion) are found united on a space
of ground, which is eight or nine leagues broad
from north to south, and forty long from east to


Rodriguez ; it is the Cerro Acuquamo of Caulin, or rather of
his commentator. (Hist. corogr., p, 176.)
* See above, p. 506, and 553.


west. This direction too was always assigned
to the White Sea, by lengthening it in the direc-
tion of the latitude, till the beginning of the six-
teenth century *. Now this White Sea is no-
thing but the Rio Parima, which is still called
the White River, Rio Branco, or Rio del Aguas
blancus, and runs through and inundates the
whule of this land. The name of Rupunuwini+
is given to the White Sea on the most ancient
maps; which identifies the place of the fable,
since of all the tributary streams of the Rio Es-
sequebo the Rupunuwini is the nearest to the
lake Amucut. Raleigh, in his first voyage


* The latitudes of the lake Amucu and of the confluence
of the Uraricuera with the Rio Parima and with the Rio
Xurumu, differ very little ; but on account of the direction
of the Uraricuera (a western branch of the Rio Branco),
which flows from west to east, the difference in the longitude
becomes considerable. The Valle de la Inundacion, of which I
have spoken above, is three degrees and a half west of lake
Amucu and of the Rupunuwini, a circumstance which may
have given rise to a fabulous enlargement of the Mar Blanco.


+ See for instance the Terra Firma of Sanson, 1656,
(Hondius, in the map of Guyana, 1599, writes by mistake
Foponowini.)

{ This identity of name between the lake Parima and a
tributary stream of the Essequebo had already attracted the
attention of D’Anville (Journal des Savans, 1750, p. 185),
but did not prevent this learned geographer from restoring
in the second edition of his Amérique méridionale the great
lake Parima. This edition is of 1760. (Notice,des Ouvrages
‘de D’ Anville, par M. Barbié du Bocage, p. 98.)


794


(1595), had formed no precise idea of the situa-
tion of el Dorado and the lake Parima, which
he believed to be salt, and which he calls
“another Caspian Sea.” It was not till the
second voyage (1596), performed equally at the
expense of Raleigh, that Laurence Keymis fixed
so well the localities of Dorado, that he appears
to me to have no doubt of the identity of the
Parima de Manoa with the lake Amucu, and
with the isthmus between the Rupunuwini (a
tributary stream of the Essequebo) and the Rio
Parima or Rio Branco. “ The Indians,” says
Keythis, “ go up the Dessekebe (Essequebo) in
twenty days, towards the south. To mark the
greatness of this river, they call it the brother
of the Oroonoko. After twenty days navigating
they convey their canoes by a portage, a single
day, from the river Dessekebe to a lake, which
the Jaos call Roponowini, and the Caribbees
Parime. This lake is as large as a sea; it is
covered with an infinite number of canoes; and
I suppose” (the Indians then had told him no-
thing of this), “ that this lake is no other than
that which contains the town of Manoa’*.
Hondius has given a curious plate of this _port-
age; and, as the mouth of the Carony was then


* Cayley’s Life of Raleigh, vol. i, p. 159, 236, and 283.
Masham, in the third voyage of Raleigh (1596), repeats these
accounts of the lake Rupunuwini.


5
supposed to be in latitude 4° (instead of 8° 8’),
the portage of Parima was placed close to the
equaior*. At the same period the Viapoco
(Oyapoc) and the Rio Cayane (Maroni ?) were
made to issue from this lake Parima-y. The same
name being given by the Caribbees to the west-
ern branch of the Rio Branco has perhaps con-
tributed as much to the imaginary enlargement
of the lake Amucu, as the inundations of the
various tributary streams of the Uraricuera,
from the confluence of the Tacutu to the Vaile
de la Inundacion.

We have shown above, that the Spaniards
took the Rio Paragua, or Parava, which falls
into the Carony, for a lake, because the word
parava signifies sea, lake, river. Parima seems
also to denote vaguely great water ; for the root
par is found in the Caribbee words that desig-


nate rivers, pools, lakes, and the oceant. In
Arabic and in Persian, bahr and deria are also
applied at the same time to the sea, to lakes,
and to rivers; and this practice, common to
many nations in both worlds, has, on our anci-
ent maps, converted lakes into rivers, and rivers


* Brevis Descriptio Regni Guane, 1599, p. 11, tab. 4.
+ Cayley, vol. ii, p. 46. Hakluyt, vol. iii, p. 692.

{ See above, vol. iii, p- 277. In Persian, the root water
(ab) is found also in luke (abdan). For other etymologies of
the words Parima aud Manoa see Gila, vol. i, p. 81, and 141;
and Gumilla, vol. i, p. 403.


796


into lakes. In support of what I here advance
I shall appeal to very respectable testimony,
that of father Caulin. “ When I inquired of the
Indians,” says this missionary, who sojourned
longer than I on the banks of the Lower Oroo-
noko, “ what Parima was ; they answered, that
it was nothing more than a river, that issued
from a chain of mountains, the opposite side of
which furnished waters to the Essequebo.” Cau-
lin, knowing nothing of lake Amucu, attributes
the erroneous opinion of the existence of an
inland sea solely to the inundations of the plains,
a las inundaciones dilatadas por los bajos del
pays*. According to him, the mistakes of
geographers arise from the vexatious circum.
stance of all the rivers of Guyana having differ-
ent names at their mouths and near their sources.
“I have no doubt,” he adds, “ that one of the
upper branches of the Rio Branco is that very
Rio Parima, which the Spaniards have taken
fora lake (a quien suponian laguna). Such are
the opinions, which the historiographer of the
expedition of the boundaries had formed on the
spot}. He could not expect, that La Cruz and


* This is also the opinion of Mr. Walkenaer (Cosmologie,
p. 599), and of Mr. Malte-Brun (Geogr., vol. v, p. 523).

+ The Rio Trumbetas and the Saraca, two tributary
streams of the Amazon, which Caulin takes also for branches
of the Rio Branco, are entirely independant of this river.
(Ilist. corogr., p. 86.) If father Caulin, in one of the notes


797


Surville, mingling old hypotheses with accurate
ideas, would reproduce on their maps the Mar
Dorado, or Mar Blanco. Thus, notwithstanding
the numerous proofs, which I have furnished
since my return from America, of the non-
existence of an inland sea, the origin of the
Oroonoko, a map has been published in my
name*, on which the Laguna Parima figures
anew.

From the whole of these statements it follows,
Ist, that the Laguna Rupunuwini, or Parima of
the voyage of Raleigh and of the maps of Hon-
dius, is an imaginary lake, formed by the lake
Amucu, and the tributary streams of the Ura-
ricuera, which often overflow their banks ; 2dly,


that the Laguna Parime of Surville’s map is the
lake Amucu, which gives rise to the Rio Pirara,


added in 1779, make mention of the Laguna Parima (Lab. 1,
c. 10, p. 60), it is only to denote the lake, from which the
Piraraissues. (Gili, vol. i, p. 325.)

* Carte de Vv Amérique, dressée sur les Observations de M. de
Humboldt, par Fried. (Vienna, 1818.) Notwithstanding my
observation of the latitude at the rock of Culimacari, which
gives 1° 53’ 42” for San Carlos del Rio Negro, the equator
is made to pass on this map, not between San Felipe and the
mouth of the Guape, but at the confluence of the Uteta or
Xie. This error is also found on the maps of Laurie and
Whittle (1809), and on that of Cary (1817). See above, p.
413. .

+ This is the lake Amaca of Surville and La Cruz. By
a singular mistake, the name of this lake is transformed inte
a village on Arrowsmith’s map.


798


and (conjointly with the Mahu, the Tacutu, the


Uraricuera or Rio Parima properly so called) to.


the Rio Branco; 3dly, that the Laguna Parime
of La Cruz is an imaginary swelling of the Rio
Parime (confounded with the Oroonoko) below
the junction of the Mahu with the Xurumu.
The distance from the mouth of the Mahu to
that of the Tacutu is scarcely 0° 40’; La Cruz*
enlarges it to 7° of latitude. He calls the upper
part of the Rio Branco (that which receives the
Mahu) Oroonoko, or Puruma. There can be
no doubt of it’s being the Xurumu, one of the
tributary streams of the Tacutu, which is well
known to the inhabitants of the neighbouring
fort of San Joaquim. All the names+ that


* The mouth of the Tacutu, which is in nearly 3° of north
latitude, is (according to La Cruz) in 3° south. D’Anville
had guessed better than his successors. He makes it’s situ-
ation in 1° 10! north. .

+ The Sierra Mey (Mehi?) and the 4tures Indians have
been placed near the lake Parima and the imaginary sources
of the Oroonoko (Caulin, p. 81). The Caratitimani, one of
the tributary streams of the eastern bank of the Rio Branco,
receives in fact the Cano 4éuru, and Santos found Atu-
rajocs on the Mahu (Mao). The last river has perhaps given
it’s name to the Sierra Mez, of which the Indians of Esmeral-
da know nothing. (See above, p. 581.) Raleigh gives the
name of Wacarima to the chain of mountains on the north of
lake Parima, or lake Rupunuwint. We have just seen, that
the Cordillera of Pacaraymo extends in fact to the north of
the Rupunuwini, the Rio Xurumu, and the Rio Parima, tribu-
tary streams of the Uraricuera. The Majanaos (Maanaos’),


799


figure in the fable of Dorado are found in the
tributary streams of the Rio Branco. Slight
local circumstances, joined to the remembrances
of the salt lake of Mexico, more especially of
the celebrated lake Manoa in the Dorado des
Omaguas, have served to complete a picture
created by the imagination of Raleigh, and his
two lieutenants Keymis and Masham. The
inundations of the Rio Branco, I conceive, may
be compared at the utmost to those of the Red
river of Louisiana, between Natchitotches and Ca-
dos, butnot to the Laguna de los Xarayes, which
is a temporary swelling of the Rio Paraguay*.


Indians who now wander on the south-east of the lake Ama-
cu, have been confounded, as Mr. Buache has well. observed,
with the Manaos (Manoas) of Jurubesh, celebrated in the
history of the Dorado of the Omaguas and of the lake Manao, °
on the south of the Rio Negro. (Carte généraie de la Guyane,
1797.) La Cruz calls the White Sea (which is an imagi-
nary dilatation of the White River, or Rio Branco) Parana-
Pitinga ; but, among the Omaguas of the Upper Maragnon,
the Brazilians or northern Guaranies, and the Caribbees,
consequently among nations more than 360 leagues distant
from each other, paranu signifies beth a river and a Jake.
The Europeans give the name of Rio Parana to the eastern
branch of the Rio de la Plata; which is as if they said, Rio
Flumen. The river, that separates the provinces of Alma-
guer and Pasto, is called in the same manner Rio Mayo,
though mayu, in the fine language of the Incas, signifies
river in general.

* Southey, vol. i, p. 180. These periodical overflowings
of the Rio Paraguay have long acted the same part in the


800


We have now examined a White Sea*, which
the principal trunk of the Rio Branco is made to
traverse; and another-+ which is placed on the
east of this river, and communicates with it by
the Cano Pirara.. A third lake { is figured on
the west of the Rio Branco, respecting which I
found recently some curious details in the ma-
nuscript journal of the surgeon Hortsmann.
< At the distance of two days’ journey below the
confluence of the Mahu (Tacutu) with the Rio
Parima (Uraricuera) a lake is found on the top
of a mountain. This lake is stocked with the
same fish as the Rio Parima; but the waters of
the former are black, and those of the latter
white §.” May not Surville, from a vague notion
of this basin, have imagined, in his map prefixed


southern hemisphere, as lake Parima has been made to per-

form in the northern. Hondius and Sanson have made the

Rio de la Plata, the Rio Topajos (a tributary stream of the

Amazon), the Rio Tocantines, and the Rio de San Francisco, °
issue from the Laguna de los Xarayes.

* That of D’Anville and La Cruz, and of the greater part
of the modern maps.

+ The lake of Surville, which takes the place of lake
Amucu.

t The lake which Surville calls Laguna tenida hasta ahora
por la Laguna Parime.

§ “* Aos 24 de junho 1740. Rio Parima, no qual logo,
2 dias depois da minha entrada, esta hum monte, o qual tem
hum grande lago no cima; o qual fiz ver e achei peixe, no
dito lago, da mesma sorte como se acham no mesmo Rio ; de-
mais a agua he preta no lago, e no Rio Branco.”


801


to father Caulin’s work, an Alpine lake of ten
leagues in length, near which, towards the east,
rise at the same time the Oroonoko, and the
Rio Idapa, a tributary stream of the Rio Negro?
However vague may be the account of the sur-
geon of Hildesheim, it is impossible to admit,
that the mountain, which has a lake at it’s sum-’
mit, is to the north of the parallel of 2° 30’; and
this latitude coincides nearly with that of the
Cerro Unturan. Hence it follows, that the
Alpine lake of Hortsmann, which has escaped
the attention of D’Anville, and which is perhaps
situate amid a group of mountains, lies north-
east of the portage from the Idapa to the Ma-
vaca, and south-east of the Oroonoko, where it


goes up above Esmeralda*.

Most of the historians, who have treated of
the first ages of the conquest, seem persuaded,
that the name provincias or pais del Dorado
denoted originally every region abounding in


* See my itinerary map, Pl. 16; and above, p. 375 and
556. This reasoning is founded on the latitude of Esmera!-
da, which I found to be 3° 11’. A lake situate to the north
ofthe Cerro Unturan, and on the banks of which the Portu-
gueze colonists gather the pichurim bean, seems to prove, that
there exist Alpine lakes in the unknown land between the
Oroonoko and the Idapa. There are probably 4° of longi-
tude between the point of the Rio Branco, which Hortsmann
had reached on the 24th of June, 1740, and the Raudal des
Guaharibos, the last point of the Upper Oroonoke, of which
we have at present any certain knowledge.


VOL. V. 3F


802


gold. Forgetting the precise etymology of the
word Dorado (the gilded), they have not. per-
ceived, that this tradition is a local fable, as were
almost all the ancient fables of the Greeks, the
Hindoos, and the Persians. The history of the
Gilded Man belongs originally to the Andes of
New Grenada, and particularly to the plains in
the vicinity of their eastern side: we see it pro-
gressively advance, as I observed above, three
hundred leagues toward the east-north-east,
from the sources of the Caqueta to those of the
Rio Branco and the Essequebo, Gold was
sought in different parts of South America before
1536, without the word Dorado having been
ever pronounced, and without the belief of the
existence of any other centre of civilization and
wealth, than the empire of the Inca of Cuzco.
Countries which now do not furnish commerce
with the smallest quantities of the precious
metals, the coast of Paria, Terra Firma (Castilla
del Oro), the mountains of Saint Martha, and
the isthmus of Darien, then enjoyed the same
celebrity, which has been more recently acquired
by the auriferous lands of Sonora, Choco, and
Brazil*.


* I have developed the causes of the apparent riches of
coasts recently discovered, in.a work, which treats particu-
Jarly of the accumulation: of the precious metals in Europe


and Asia, Essai Polit. sur la. Nowo. Esp., tom. ii, chap. 2, p.
646, :


803


Diego de Ordaz (1531) and Alonzo de Herera
(1535)directed their journeys of discovery along
the banks of the Lower Oroonoko. The former is
the famous conquistador of Mexico, who boast-
ed* that he had taken sulphur out of the crater
of the Peak of Popocatepetl, and whom. the
emperor Charles V permitted to bear a burning
volcano in his arms. Ordaz, named adelantado
of all the country which he could conquer
between Brazil and the coast of Venezucia,
which was then called the country of the Ger-
man Company of Welsers (Belzares) of Augs-
bourg, began his expedition by the mouth of
the Maragnon. He there saw, in the hands of
the natives, “ emeralds as big as a man’s fist.”
They were no doubt pieces of those saussurite
jade, or compact feldspar, which we brought
home from the Oroonoko, and which Mr. de la
Condamine found in abundance at the mouth
of the Rio Topayos}. The Indians related to
Diego de Ordaz, “ that on going up during a
certain number of suns toward the west, he
would find a large rock (pena) of green stone ;”
but before they reached this pretended moun-
tain of emerald (rocks of euphotide ?) a ship-
wreck put an end to all farther discovery. The —
Spaniards saved themselves with difficulty in


* Tb. vol. ii, p. 672.
“+ See above, p. 380, 392.


3 F2


804


two small vessels. They hastened to get out of
the mouth of the Amazon; and the currents,
which in those parts run with violence to the
north-west, led Ordaz to the coast of Paria,
where in the territory of the cacique Furipari
(Uriapari, Viapari), Sedeno had constructed
the Casa fuerte de Paria*. This post being
very near the mouth of the Oroonoko, the
Mexican conquistador resolved to attempt an
expedition on this great river. He sojourned
first at Carao (Caroa, Carora), a large Indian
-village, which appears to me to have been a
little to the east of the confluence of the Carony ;
he then went up the Cabruta (Cabuta, Cabritu),
and to the mouth of the Meta ( Metacuyu), where
he found great difficulty in passing his boats
through the Raudal of Cariven. We have seen
above, that the bed of the Oroonoko near the
mouth of the Meta is filled with shoals. The
Aruacas, whom Ordaz employed as guides ad-
vised him to go up the Meta; where, on ad-
vancing towards the west, they asserted he


* This station, and those of Cubagua, Araya, and Maca-
rapana (Amaracapan), were celebrated in the 16th century,
as are in our days those of Sierra Leone and Port Jackson.
The situation of the fortress of Paria appears to me to have
been, not on the coast of Paria, but to the south of it, be-
tween the Guarapicbe and the mouth of the Cano Manamo.
Very ancient maps sometimes even place the Fuerte in the
delta of the Oroonoko. It must be observed too, that the
name of Paria was then applied to a great part of South
America.


5


would find men clothed, and gold in abundance.
Ordaz pursued in preference the navigation of
the Oroonoko, but the cataracts of Tabaje (per_
haps even those of the Atures) compelled him
to terminate his discoveries*.

It is worthy of remark, that in this voyage,
far anterior to that of Orellana, and consequent-
ly the greatest which the Spaniards had then
performed on a river of the New World, the
name of the Oroonoko was for the first time
heard. Ordaz, the leader of the expedition,
affirms, that the river, from it’s mouth as far as
the confluence of the Meta, is called! Uriaparia,
but that above this confluence it bears the name
of: Orinucu. This word (formed analogously


with the words Tamanacu, Otomacu, Sinarucu)
is in fact of the Tamanac tongue; and, as the


* Herera, Dec. 4, p. 219; Dec. 5, p. 22. Fray Pedro
Simon, p. 1701-28. Caulin, p. 142. Southey, vol. 1, p. 78
Ordaz gives no name to the cataracts by which he was stop-
ped; but those, which T have mentioned in the text, appear to
me to be clearly indicated by their geographical situation.
(See above, vol. iv, p. 561, and 569.) Father Caulin con-
founds the Raudal of Cariven with that of Camiseta; and
the Raudal of Tabaje, near San Borja, with that of Caricha-
na; though historians place the first (una cinta de _penas)
below Cabruta, and the cataract which prevented all farther
navigation above the confluence of the Meta. Admitting
that the distances are not much exaggerated in the narratives
of the conquistadores, we may believe, that Ordaz went as
far as the Raudal of Atures.


806


Tamanacs dwell south-east of Encaramada, it is
natural, that the conquistadores heard the actual
name of the river only on drawing near the Rio
Meta*. On this last tributary stream Diego de
Ordaz received from the natives the first idea of


* Gili, vol. iu, p. 381.° The following gre the most anci-
ent names of the Oroonoko, known to the natives near it’s
mouth, and which historians give us altered by the double fault
of pronunciation and orthography ; Yuyapari, Yjupari, Huria-
paria, Uriapari, Viapart Rio de Paria. The ‘Tamanac word
Orinucu was disfigured by the Dutch pilots into Worinogque.
The Otomacs say Joga-apurura (great river) ; the Cabres
and Guaypunabis, Paragua, Bazagua, Parava, three words
signifying great water, river, sea. That part of the Oroo-
neko between the Apure and the Guaviare is often denoted
by the name of Baraguan. A famous strait, which we have
described above, bears also this name, which is no doubt a
corruption of the word Paragua. Great rivers in every zone
are called by the dwellers on their banks the river, without
any particular denomination. If other names be added, they
change in every province, Thus the small Rio Turiva, near
ihe Encaramada, has five names in the different parts of it’s
course. ‘he Upper Oroonoko, or Paragua, is called by the
Maquiritares (near Esmeralda) Maraguaca, on account of
the lofty mountains of this name near Duida. (See above, vol
iil, p.276; vol. iv, p. 502; and the present vol. p. 219,478,
Gili, vol.i, p. 22 and 364. Caulin, p. 75.) Inmost of the names
of the rivers of America we recognize the roct water. Thus
yacu in the Peruvian, and veni in the Maypure, signify water
and river, In Lule I find fo, water; foyavalto, a river ;
foysi, a lake; as in Persian, ab is water; abi frat, river
Euphrates ; abdan, a lake. The root water is preserved in
the derivatives,


807


civilized nations, who inhabited the table-lands
of the Andes of New Granada; “ of a very
powerful prince with one eye (indio tuerto), and
of animals less than stags, but fit for riding like
Spanish horses.” Ordaz had no idea, that these
animals were the lamas, or ovejas del Peru.
Must we admit, that the lamas, which were
used in the Andes to draw the plough and as
beasts of burden, but not for riding, were already
common on the north and east’ of Quito? I
find, that Orellana saw these animals at the
river of Amazons, above the confluence of the
Rio Negro, consequently in a climate very dif-
ferent from that of the table-land of the Andes".
The fable of an army of Omaguas. mounted on
lamas served to embellish the account given by
the fellow travellers of Felipe de Urre of their
adventurous expedition to the Upper Caqueta.
We cannot be sufficiently attentive to these tra-
ditions, which seem to prove, that the domestic
animals of Quito and Peru had already begun to
descend the Cordilleras, and spread themselves
by degrees in the eastern regions of South Ame-
rica.

Herera, the treasurer of the expedition of
Ordaz, was sent in 1533 by the governor Gero-
nimo de Ortal, to pursue the discovery of the
Oroonoko and the Meta. He lost nearly thir-


* Herera, Dec. 6, p- 195,


808


teen months between Punta Barima and thie
confluence of the Caroni in constructing flat-
bottomed boats, and making the preparations
indispensable for a long voyage. We cannot
read without astonishment the narrative of those
daring enterprises, in which three or four hun-
dred horses were embarked, to be put ashore
whenever cavalry could act on one of the banks.
We find in the expedition of Herera the same
stations, which we already knew; the fortress
of Paria, the Indian village of Uriaparia (no
doubt below Imataca, on a point. where. the
inundations of the Delta prevented the Span-
iards from being able to procure firewood),
Caroa, in the province of Carora*; the rivers
Caranaca (Caura?) and Caxavana (Cuchivero?) ;


* Probably the territory of the missious of Carony, inha-
bited by Caribbees, along the Rio Aquire (4quil of Herera).
The initial syllable car denotes a Caribbee origin, as in Cari-
aco, Carupano, Caripe, Caroni (Caruni), Carapo, &c. (Garcia,
del Origen de los Indios, p, 234). Caribana, near the gulf of
Darien, the ancient seat of the Caribbees, was called Cariai,
(Petr, Martyr, p. 242,255. Churchill, p. 608. -Gomara, p-
35. Letiera rarissima di Christ. (Colombo, 1810, p. 25.) The
ancient name of the island of Guadaloupe was Carucueira ;
and that of the island of Trinidad, Cairi. (Geraldini, p. 193.)
A great number of the geographical names of those regions
were no doubt significative, since they are found several times
along the coast of Paria, and in the West India islands ;
such as Tacarigua, Cumana, Chuparipari, Arauca, Cariero,
and Gauya-Gugare,


809


the village of Cabritu (Cabruta), and the Rau-
dal* near the mouth of the Meta (probably the
Raudal of Cariven and the Piedra de la Pacien-
cia). As the Rio Meta, on account of the prox-
imity of it’s sources and of it’s tributary streams
to the auriferous Cordilleras of new Grenada
(Cundinamarca), enjoyed great celebrity, He-
rera attempted to go up this river. He there
found nations more civilized than those of the
Oroonoko, but that fed on the flesh of mute
dogs}. Herera was killed in battle by an
arrow poisoned with thejuice of curare (yierva) ;
and when dying named Alvaro de Ordaz his
lieutenant, who led the remains of the expedition
(1535) to the fortress of Paria, after having lost
the few horses, which had resisted a campaign
of eighteen months.

Confused. reports which were circulated on
the wealth of the inhabitants of the Meta, and —
the other tributary streams that descend from
the eastern side of the Cordilleras of New Gre-
nada, engaged successively Geronimo de Ortal,
Nicolas Federmann, and Jorge de Espira (Georg
von Speier), in 1535 and 1536, to undertake
expeditions by land towards the south and south-


* « La singla de peiiascos, vista por Ordaz, que travesa el
rio por debaxo las aguas y que hace gran oleaje.’’ Fray Pedro
Simon, p. 227. Herera, Dec. V, p. 116, 155, 212. Caulin,
p. 150, 153,

t+ See above, p. 671.


310


west. From the promontory of Paria as far as
Cabo de la Vela, little figures of molten gold
had been found in the hands of the natives, as
early.as the years 1498 and 1500. The principal
markets for these amulets, which the women
used as ornaments, were the villages of Curiana
(Coro) and Cauchieto* (near the Rio la Hacha).
The metal employed by the founders of Cau-
chieto came from a mountainous country more
tothe south. It may be conceived, that the
expeditions of Ordaz and Herera served to in-
crease the desire of drawing nearer to those
auriferous countries. Georg von Speier left
Coro (1535), and penetrated by the mountains
of Merida to the.banks of the Apure and the
Meta. He passed these two rivers near their
sources, where they have but little breadth.
The Indians told him, that farther on white
men wandered about the plains. Speier, who
imagined that he was not far from the banks of
the Amazon, had no doubt, that these wander-
ing Spaniards were men unfortunately ship-
wrecked in the expedition of Ordaz. He crossed
the savannahs of San Juan de los Llanos, which
were said to abound in gold ; and made a long
stay at an Indian village, called Pueblo de Nu-
estra Senora, and afterward la Fragua}, south-


* See above, vol. ili, p. 526.
+ This Indian village, the name of which the Spaniards


Sli


‘east of the Paramo de Ja Suma Paz. I have
been on the western back of this group of moun-
tains, at Fusagasuga, and there heard, that the
plains, by which they are skirted toward ‘the
east, still enjoy some celebrity for. wealth among .
the natives. Speier found in the populous vil-
lage of la Fragua a Casa del Sol (temple of the
Sun), and a convent of virgins, similar to, those
of Peru and New Grenada. Were these the
consequence of a migration of religious) rites
toward the east? or must we admit, that the
plains of San Juan were their first cradle? Tra-
dition indeed records, that Bochica, the legislator
of New Grenada, and high-priest of Iraca, had
gone up from the plains of the east to the table-
land of Bogota. But Bochica being at. once
the offspring and the symbol of the Sun, his
history may contain allegories, that are merely
astrological*. Speier, pursuing his way toward
the south, and crossing the two branches of the
Guaviare, which are the Ariare and the Guaya-
vero (Guayare or Canicamare), arrived on the
banks of the great Rio Papamene+ or Caqueta.


have changed, is not situate on the Rio Fragua itself, one of
the branches of the Caqueta, for Speier passed the Rio Ariare
after having sojourned in the village of Fragua.

* See my Views of the Cordillerasand American Monuments,
vol. ii, (or xiv of the present work) p. 135.

+ See above, p, 319. The geographer La Cruz Olmedil-
la, gives the name of Papemene to the little river Timana,


8)2


The resistance he met with during a whole year
in the province de los Choques put an and in
1537 to this memorable expedition*. Nicolas
Federmann and Geronimo de Ortal (1536), who
went from Macarapana and the mouth of the
Rio Neveri, followed (1535) the traces of Jorge
de Espira. The former sought for gold in the
Rio Grande de la Magdalena ; the latter endea-
voured to discover a temple of the Sun (Casa del


- Sol) on the banks of the Meta. Ignorant of the


idiom of the natives, they seemed to see every
where, at the foot of the Cordilleras, the reflexion
of the greatness of the temples of Iraca (Soga-
mozo), which was then the centre of the civiliza-
tion of Cundinamarca.

I have now examined in a geographical point


which falls into the Rio Magdalena above the Rio Suaza ;
but Fray Pedro Simon leaves no doubt respecting the real
course of the Papamene (a name which signifies river of si-
ver), He says expressly (p. 332 and 666) ; ‘‘ nace este
gran rio a. la parte del este de las Cordilleras de Timana,
como las aguas del oeste caen al rio de Ja Magdalena.” The
provincial of New Grenada, Fray Pedro Simon, composed
his memoirs from those of the Adelantado Gonzalo Ximenez
de Quesada, whose government ‘‘ tenia por terminos por la


, parte del este la provincia de Papamene.” He must there-


fore have been well informed of the localities. Raleigh
believes erroneously, that the Rio Papamene is the river, by
which Orellana proceeded down to the Amazon. He con-
founds the Napo with the Caqueta. (Raleigh, p. 13.)

* Fray Pedro Simon, p. 171, 179, 188, 202, 278: and
Herera, Descr. geogr., p 32


fe teen


813


of view, the expeditions on the Orconoko, and
in a western and southern direction on the
eastern back of the Andes, before the tradition
of el Dorado was spread among the conquistado-
res: This tradition, as we have noticed above,
had it’s origin in the kingdom of Quito, where
Luis Daza (1535) met with an Indian of New
Grenada, who had been sent by his prince (no
doubt the zippa of Bogota, or the xague of
Tunja), to demand assistance from Atahualpa,
inca of Peru. This ambassador boasted, as is
usual, the wealth of his country; but what
particularly fixed the attention of the Spaniards,
who were assembled with Daza in the town of
Tacunga (Llactacunga), was the history of a
lord, “‘ who, his body covered with powdered
gold, went into a lake amid the mountains*.”
This lake may have been the Laguna de Totta,
a little to the east of Sogamozo (Iraca) and of
Tunja (Hunca, the town of Huncahua), where
two chiefs, ecclesiastical and secular, of the
empire of Cundinamarca, or Cundirumarca, re-
sided; but no historical remembrance being
attached to this mountain lake, I rather suppose,
that it was the sacred lake of Guatavita-}, on the


* Herera, Dec. V, p. 179 and 245. Fray Pedro Simon, p.
327. Piedrahita, p. 75. Lettera di Fernando Oviedo al
Cardinale Bembo de’ 20 Gennajo 1643, in Ramusio Coll.,
tom. iii, p. 416.

+ Views of the Cordilleras, vol. ii, (or xiv), Pl. 67. Herera,
Descr. geogr., p. 32.


814


east of the mines of rock salt of Zipaquira, inte
which the gilded lord was made to enter. I saw
on it’s banks the remains of a staircase hewn in
the rock, and serving for the ceremonies of ablu-
tion. The Indians said, that powder of gold and
golden vessels were thrown into this lake, as asa-
crifice to the idols of the adoratorio de Guatavita.
Vestiges are still found of a breach, which was
made by theSpaniards for the purpose of draining
the lake. The temple of the Sun at Sogamozo
being pretty near the northern coasts of Terra
Firma, the notions of the gilt man were soon
applied to a high priest of the sect of Bochica,
or Idacanzas, who every morning, before he per-
formed lis sacrifice; caused powder of gold to
-be'stuck upon his hands and face, after they
had been smeared with grease. Other accounts,
preserved in a letter of Oviedo addressed to the
celebrated cardinal Bembo say, that Gonzalo
Pizarro, when he discovered the province of
cinnamon trees, “sought at the same time a
great prince, noised in those countries, who was
always ‘covered with powdered gold, so that
from head to foot he resembled a wna figura
@oro lavorata di mano dun buonissimo orifice.
The powdered gold is fixed on the body. by
means of an odoriferous resin ; but, as this kind
of garment would be uneasy to him while he
slept, the prince washes himself every evening,
and is gilded anew in the morning, which proves,


815


that the empire of el Dorado is infinitely rich in
mines.” It seems probable, that there was some-
thing in the ceremonies of the worship intro-
duced by Bochica, which gave rise to a tradition
so generally spread. ‘The strangest customs are
found in the New World. In Mexico the sacri-
ficers painted their bodies, and wore a kind of
cope with hanging sleeves of tanned human
skin. I have published drawings of them made
by the ancient inhabitants of Anahuac, and pre-
served in the books of their rituals.

On the banks of the Caura, and in other wild
parts of Guyana, where painting the body ‘is
used instead of tatooing, the nations anoint:
themselves with turtle fat, and stick spangles of
mica with metallic lustre, white as silver, and
red as copper, on their skin, so that at a distance
they seem to wear laced clothes.” The fable of
the gilded man is perhaps founded on a similar
custom; and, as there were two sovereign
princes in New Grenada*, the lama of Iraca,
and the secular chief or zaque of Tunja, we
cannot be surprised, that the same ceremony was
attributed sometimes to the prince, and sometites
tothe high priest. Itis more extraordinary, that as
early as the year 1535 the country of Dorado was
sought for on the east of the Andes. Robertson is


* According to the analogy of the ancient government of
: Meroé, that of Thibet, and of the dairz and kubo in Japan.


816


mistaken* in admitting, that Orellana received
the first notions of it (1540) on the banks of the
Amazon. The history of Fray Pedro Simon,
founded on the memoirs of Quesada, the con-
queror of Cundirumarca, proves directly the
contrary ; and Gonzalo Diaz Pe Pineda, as early
as 1536, sought for the gilded man beyond the
plains of the province of Quixos. The ambas-
sador of Bogota, whom Daza met with in the
kingdom of Quito, had spoken of a country
situate toward the east. Was this because the
table-land of New Grenada is not on the north,
but on the north-east of Quito? We may ven-
ture to say, that the tradition of a naked man
covered with powdered gold must have belonged
originally to a hot region, and not to the cold
table-lands of Cundirumarca, where I often
saw the thermometer sink below four or five
degrees ; however, on account of the extraordi-
nary configuration of the country, the climate
differs greatly at Guatavita, Tunja, Iraca, and
on the banks of the Sogamozo. Sometimes also
religious ceremonies are preserved, which took
rise in another zone ; and the Muyscas, accord-
ing to ancient traditions, made Bochica, their
first. legislator and the founder of their worship,
arrive from the plains situate to the east of the
Cordilleras. I shall not decide whether these


* Hist, of America, vol, ii, p. 215,


traditions expressed_an historical fact, or merely
indicated, as we have already observed in ano-
ther place, that the first. lama, who was. the
offspring and symbol of the Sun, must necessa-
rily have come from the countries of the East.
Be it as it may, it is not less certain, that the
celebrity, which the expeditions of Ordaz, He-
rera, and Speier had already given to the Oroo-
noko, the Meta, and the province of Papamene,
situate between the sources of the Guaviare and
the Caqueta, contributed to fix the fable of el
Dorado near to the eastern back of the Cordil-
leras.

The junction of three bodies of troops on the
tableland of New Grenada spread through al
that part of America occupied by the Spaniards
the news of an immensely rich and populous
country, which remained to be conquered. Sebas-
tian de Belalcazar marched from Quito by way of
Popayan al 5386) to Bogota ; Nicolas Federmann,
coming from Venezuela, arrived from the East
by the plains of Meta. These two captains
found already settled on the table land of Cun-
dirumarea the famous adelantado Gonzalo Xi-
menez de Quesada, one of whose descendants I
saw near Zipaquira, with barefeet, attending cat-
tle. The fortuitous meeting of the three conquis-
tadores, one of the most extraordinary and dra-
matic. events of the history of the conquest,
took place in 1538.  SBelalcazar’s narratives

VOL. V. 3G


818


inflamed the imagination of warriors eager for
adventurous enterprises ; and the notions com-
municated to Luis Daza by the Indian of Ta-
cunga were compared with the confused ideas,
which Ordaz had collected on the Meta res-
pecting the treasures of a great king with one
eye (Indio tuerto), and a people clothed, who
rode upon lamas. An old soldier, Pedro de
Limpias, who had accompanied Federmann to
the tableland of Bogota, carried the first news
of Dorado to Coro, where the remembrance of
the expedition of Speier (1535—1537) to the
Rio Papamene was still fresh. It was from this
Same town of Coro, that Felipe von Huten
(Urre, Utre) undertook his celebrated voyage to
the province of the Omaguas, while Pizarro,
Orellana, and Hernan Perez de Quesada, bro-
ther of the adelantado, sought for the gold coun-
try at the Rio Napo, along the river of the Ama-
zons, and on the eastern chain of the Andes of
New Grenada. The natives, in order to get rid
of their troublesome guests, continually describ-
ed Dorado as easy to be reached, and situate at
no considerable distance. It was like a phan-
tom, that seemed to flee before the Spaniards,
and to call on them unceasingly. It is in the
nature of man wandering on the Earth, to
figure to himself happiness beyond the region
which he knows. £1! Dorado, similar to Atlas
and the islands of the Hesperides, disappeared


819


by degrees from the domain of geography, and
entered that of mythological fictions.

I shall not here relate the numerous enter-
prises, which were undertaken for the conquest
of this imaginary country. Unquestionably we
are indebted to them in great part for our
knowledge of the interior of America; they have
been useful to geography, as errors and daring
hypotheses are often to the search of trath : ‘but
in the discussion on which we are employed, it is
incumbent on me to rest only upon those facts,
which have had the most direct influence on the
construction of ancient and modern maps. Her-
nan Perez de Quesada, after the departure of his
brother the adelantado for Kurope, sought anew
’ (1539), but this time in the mountainous land
north-east of Bogota, the temple of the Sun
(Casa del Sol), of which Geronimo de Ortal had
heard speken ‘in 1536 on ‘the banks of the Meta.
The worship of the Sun introduced by Bochica,
and the celebrity of the sanctuary of Ivaca, or
Sogamozo, gave rise to those confused reports of
temples and idols of massy gold; but ‘on the
mountains as inthe plains, the traveller believed
himself to be always at a-distance from them,
because the reality never corresponded with the
chimerical dreams of the imagination. Fran-
cisco de Orellana, after having vainly sought
Dorado with Pizarvo inthe Provincia de los Ca-
nelos, and on the auriferous banks of the Napo,

3G2


820


went down (1540) the great river of the Ama-
zons. He found there, between the mouths of
the Javari and the Rio de la Trinidad (Yupura ?),
a province rich in gold, called Machiparo (Mu-
chifaro), in the vicinity of that of the Aomaguas,
or Omaguas. © These notions contributed to
carry Dorado toward the south-east, for the
names Omaguas (Om-aguas, Aguas), Dit-aguas,
and :Papamene, designated the same country ;
that which Jorge de Espira had discovered in
his expedition to the Caqueta*. The Omaguas,
the Manaos or Manoas, and the Guaypes-+-
(Uaupes or Guayupes) live in the plains on the
north of the Amazon. They are three powerful
nations, the latter of which, stretching toward
the west along the banks of the Guape or Uaupe,
had been already mentioned in the voyages of
Quesada and Huten. These two conquistadores,
alike celebrated in the history of America, reach-
ed by different roads the Nanos of San Juan,
then called Valle de Nuestra Senora. Hernan
Perez de Quesada (1541) passed the Cordilleras
of Cundirumarea, probably between the Paramos
of Chingasa and Suma Paz; while Felipe de
Huten, accompanied by Pedro de Limpias (the
same who had carried to Venezuela the first news


* Herera, Dec. VI, p. 150,195; Dec. VII, p. 289. Laet,
p. 626. See also above, p. 664, 665.


t See above, p. 341, 842. Herera, Dec. VII, p. 78.


821


of Derado from the tableland of Bogota), di-
rected his course from north to south, by
the road which Speier had taken to the east-
ern side of the mountains. Huten left Coro,
the principal seat of the German factory, or
company of Welser, when Henry Remboldt was
it’s director. After having traversed (1541) the
plains of Casanare, the Meta, and the Caguan,
he arrived at the banks of the Upper Guaviare
(Guayuare), a river which was long believed to
be the source of the Oroonoko, and the mouth
of which I saw in passing by San Fernando de
Atabapo to the Rio Negro. Not far from the
right bank of the Guaviare Huten entered Ma-
catoa, the city of the Guapes.. The people there
were clothed, the fields appeared. well cultivat

ed; every thing denoted a degree of civi-
lization unknown in the hot region of Ame-
rica, which extends to the east of the Cor-
dilleras. Speier, in his expedition to the Rio
Caqueta and the province of Papamene, had
probably crossed the Guaviare far above Maca-
toa, before the junction of the two branches of
this river, the Ariari and the Guyavero, Huten
was told, that on advancing more to the south-
east he would enter the territory of the great
nation of the Omaguas, the priest king of which
was called Quareca, and which possessed nume-
rous herds of Jamas. These traces of cultiva-
tion, these ancient resemblances to the tableland


§22


of Quito, appear to me very remarkable. It ha:
already been said above, that Orellana saw /a-
mas at the dwelling of an Indian Chief on the
barks of the Amazon, and that Ordaz had heard
mention made of them in the plains of Meta.

T pause where ends the domain of geography>
and shall not follow Huten in the description
either of that town of immense extent, which he
saw from afar; or of the battle of the Oma-
guas, where thirty-nine Spaniards (the names
of fourteen are recorded in the annals of the
time) fought against fifteen thousand Indians.
These false reports contributed greatly to em-
bellish the fable of Dorado. The name of the
town of the Omaguas is not found in the narra-
tive of Huten; but the Manoas; from whom fa-
ther Fritz received in the 17th century plates of
beaten gold, in his mission of Yurim-Aguas, are
neighbours of the Om-aguas. The name of
Manoa subsequently passed from the country of
the Amazons to an imaginary town, placed in the
Dorado de la Parima. The celebrity attached
to those countries between the Caqueta (Papa-
mene) and the Guaupe (one of the tributary
streams of the Rio Negro) excited Pedro de
Ursua in 1560 to that fatal expedition, which
ended by the revolt of the tyrant Aguirre*.


* See above, vol. iv, p. 257, where we have given the
translation of a letter addressed to Philip II by Aguirre.


# i


823


Ursua, in going down the Caqueta to enter the
river of the Amazons, heard of the province of
Caricuri*. This denomination clearly indicates
the country of gold, for 1 find that this metal is
called caricuri in the Tamanac, and carucuru in
the Caribbee. Is it a foreign word, that denotes
gold among the nations of the Oroonoko, as the
words sugar and cotton are in our European
languages? This would prove, that these nations
learned to know the precious metals among the
foreign products, which came to them from the
Cordilleras+, or from the plains at the eastern
back of the Andes.

We arrive now at the period when the fable of
Dorado was fixed in the eastern part of Guyana,
first at the pretended lake Cassipa (on the banks
of the Paragua, a tributary stream of the Caro- |
ny), and afterward between the sources of the
Rio Essequebo and the Rio Branco. ‘This cir-
cumstance has had the greatest influence on the
state of geography in those countries. Antonio
de Berrio, son in lawt and sole heir of the great


* Fray Pedro Simon, p. 422,

+ In Peruvian or Quichua (lengua del Inga) gold is called
cori, whence are deriyed chichicori, gold in. powder, and cori-
koya, gold ore.

t Properly “ casado cou una sobrina.” (Fray Pedro Si-
mon, p. 597 and 608, Harris, Coll., vol. ii, p. 212. Laet, p.-
652. -Caulin, p. 175.) Raleigh calls Quesada Cemenes de
Casada. He also confounds the periods’ of the voyages of


824


adelantado Gonzalo Ximenez de Quesada, passed
the Cordilleras to the east of Tunja*, embarked
on the Rio Casanare, and went down by this
river, the Meta, and the Oroonoko, to the island
of Trinidad. We scarcely know this voyage
except by the narrative of Raleigh ; it appears to
have preceded a few years the first foundation of
Vieja Guayana, which was in the year 1591. A
few years later (1595) Berrio caused his maese de
campo, Domingo de Vera, to prepare in Europe
an expedition of two thousand men to go up the
Oroonoko, and conquer Dorado, which then
began to be called the country of the Manoa,
and even the Laguna de la gran Manoa. Rich
landholders sold their farms, to take part in a
croisade, to which twelve Observantin monks,
and ten secular ecclesiastics were annexed. The


Ordaz (Ordace), Orellana (Oreliano), and Ursua. ‘See Em-
pire of Guiana, p. 13—20,

* No doubt between the Paramos of Chita and of Zoraca,
taking the road of Chire and Pore. LBerrio told Raleigh,
that he came from the Rio Casanare to the Pato, from the
Pato to the Meta, and from the Meta to the Baraguan (Oroo-
noko). We must not confound this Rio Pato (a name con-
nected no-doubt with that of the ancient mission of Patuto)
with the Rio Paute. (See my Atlas, Pl. 19.) The Meta
bears erroneously on the maps of the 17th century the name
of Baraguan (Churchill, Coll., vol. viii, p. '75'7), of San Pedro,
and of Rio Barquecimito. The last is a tributary stream of
the Portuguesa and the Apure,


paamenln Ned


825


tales related by one Martinez* (Juan Martin de
Albujar?), who said he had been abandoned in


* T believe I can demonstrate, that the fable of Juan
Martinez, spread abroad by the narrative of Raleigh, was
founded on the adventures of Juan Martin de Albujar,. well
known to the Spanish historians of the Conquest ; and who,
in the expedition of Pedro de Silva (1570), fell into the
hands of the Caribbees of the Lower Oroonoko. This Albu-
jar married an Indian woman, and became a savage himself,
as happens sometimes in our days on the western limits of
Canada, and of the United States. After having long wan-
dered with the Caribbees, the desire of rejoining the Whites
led him by the Rio Essequebo to the island of Trinidad. He
made several excursions to Santa Fe de Bogota, and at length
settled at Carora, (Simon, p. 591.) I know not whether he
died at Portorico; but it cannot be doubted, that it was he
who learned from the Caribbee traders the name of the Ma-
noas (of Jurubesh). As he lived on the banks of the Upper
Carony, and reappeared by the Rio Essequebo, he may. have
contributed also, to place the lake Manoa at the isthmus of
Rupunuwini. Raleigh makes his Juan Martinez disembark
below Morequito, a village at the east of the confluence of the
Carony with the Oroonoko. Thence he makes him dragged
by the Caribbees from town to town, till he finds at Ma-
noa a relation of the inca Atabalipa (Atahualpa), whom he
had known before at Caxamarca, and who had fled before the
Spaniards. It appears, that Raleigh had forgotten, that the
voyage of Ordaz (1531) was two years anterior to the death
of Atahualpa, and the entire destruction of the empire of
Peru! He must have confounded the expedition of Ordaz
with that of Silva (1570), in which Juan Martin de Albuzar
partook, The latter, who related his tales at Santa Fe, at
Venezuela, and perhaps at Portorico, must have combined
what he had heard from the Caribbees with what he had


ay
ie
it
i
‘i
i
i]
i
,
i
i
Ww
Mi
i


ee


2 aa


a Aes


$26


the expedition of Diego de Ordaz, and led from
town to town till he reached the capital of Do-
rado, had inflamed the imagination of Berrio.
It is difficult to distinguish what this conquis-
tador had himself observed in going down the
Oroonoko from what he said he had collected
in a pretended journal of Martinez, deposited at
Portorico. It appears, that in general at that
period the same ideas prevailed respecting Ame-
rica, as those which we have long entertained in
regard to Africa; it was imagined, that more
civilization would be found toward the cen-
tre of the continent, than on the coasts. Already
Juan Gonzalez, whom Diego de Ordaz had sent
in 1531, to explore the banks of the Oroonoko:
announced, that “ the farther you went up this
river, the more you saw the population increas-
ed*.” Berrio mentions the often inundated pro-
vince of Amapaja, between the confluence of
the Meta and the Cuchivero, where he found
many little idols of molten gold, similar to
those which were fabricated at Cauchieto, east
of Coro. He believed this gold to be a pro-


learned from the Spaniards respecting the town of the Oma-
guas seen by Huten, of the gilded man who sacrificed in
alake, and of the flight of the family of Atahualpa into the
forests of Vilcabamba, and the eastern Cordillera of the
Andes. (Garcilasso, vol. ii, p. 194.)

* “ Mientras mas se subia el Rio Viapari (Orinoco), may-
ores se hallaban las poblaciones.” Herera, Dec. IV, p. 220.


827


duct of the granitic soil, that covers the moun-
tainous country between the Carichana, Uruana,
and Cuchivero. In fact, the natives have re-
cently found a mass of native gold* in the
Quebrada del Tigre, near the mission of Enca-
ramada. Berrio mentions on the east of the
province of Amapaja the Rio Carony (Caroly),
which was said to issue from a great lake,
because one of the tributary streams of the
Carony, the Rio Paragua (river of the great
water), had been taken for an inland sea, from
ignorance of the Indian languages. Several
Spanish historians} believed, that this lake, the
source of the Carony, was the Grand Manoa
of Berrio; but the notions he communicated to
Raleigh show, that the Laguna de Manoa (del
Dorado, or de Parime) was supposed to be to
the south of the Rio Paragua, transformed into
Laguna Cassipa. “ Both these basins had auri-
ferous sands ; but.on the banks of the Cassipa
was situate Macureguarai (Margureguaira),
the capital of the cacique of Aromajat, and the
first city of the imaginary empire of Guyana.”
* See above, vol. iv, p. 471.

+ “ Le gran Manoa es una gran laguna que da principio 4
un tio, gue entra por la canda del sur en el Orinoco cerca la Ciu-
dad de San Thome.” Simon, p. 608.

t Aru-Mayu? ‘Is this name connected with that of the
Rio Arui, the sources of which are so near the Rio Paragua,


that it was believed to issue from the same lake as this
river ?


828


As these often inundated lands have been at
all times inhabited by nations of the Caribbee
race, who carried on a very active inland trade
with the most distant regions, we must not be
surprised, that more gold was found here in the
hands of the Indians than elsewhere. The
natives of the coast did not employ this metal in
the form of ornaments or amulets only ; but
also in certain cases* as a medium of exchange.
It is not extraordinary therefore, that gold has
disappeared on the coast of Paria, and among
the nations of the Oroonoko, since their inland
communications have been impeded by the Eu-
ropeans. The natives who have remained inde-
pendant are in our days, no doubt, more wretch-
ed, more indolent, and in a ruder state, than
they were before the Conquest. The king of
Morequito whose son Raleigh took to England,
had visited Cumana in 1594, to exchange a
great quantity of images of massy gold for iron
tools, and European merchandize. The unex-
pected appearance of an Indian chief augmented
the celebrity of the riches of the Oroonoko. It
was supposed, that Dorado must be near the
country, from which the king of Morequito
came ; and as this country was often inundated,
and rivers vaguely called great seas, great basins
of water, Dorado must be on the banks of a


* Among the Teques. See above, vol. iii, p. 530.


829


lake. It was forgotten, that the gold, brought
by the Caribbees and other trading people, was
as little the produce of their. soil, as the dia-
monds of Brazil and India are the produce of
the. regions of Europe, where they are most
abundant. The expedition of Berrio, which had
increased in number during the stay of the
vessels at Cumana, la Margaretta, and the
island of Trinidad, proceeded by Morequito
(near Vieja Guayana) toward the Rio Paragua,
a tributary stream of the Carony; but sickness,
the ferocity of the natives, and the want of
subsistence, opposed invincible obstacles to the
progress of the Spaniards. They all perished ;
except about thirty, who returned in a deplorable
state to the post of Santo Thome.

These disasters did not calm the ardor dis-
played during the first half of the 17th century
in the search of Dorado. The governor of the
island of Trinidad, Antonio de Berrio, became
the prisoner of Sir Walter Raleigh, in the cele-
brated incursion of that navigator, in 1595, on
the coast of Venezuela and at the mouths of
the Oroonoko. Raleigh collected from Berrio,
and from other prisoners made by Captain
Preston * at the taking of Caraccas, all the


* These prisoners belonged to the expedition of Berrio and
of Hernandez de Serpa. The English landed at Macuto
(then Guayca Macuto), whence a white man, Villalpando,
led them by a mountain path between Cumbre and the Silla


830


information which had been obtained at that
period on the countries situate to the south of
Vieja Guayana. He lent faith to the fables
invented by Juan Martin de Albujar, and enter-
tained no doubt either of the existence of the
two lakes Cassipa and Ropunuwini, or of that
of the great empire of the inca, which, after the
death of Atahualpa, the fugitive primces were
supposed to have founded near the sources of
the Essequilvo. We are not in’ possession of a
map, that was constructed by Raleigh, and
which he recommended to lord Charles Howard
to keep secret. ‘The geographer Hondius has
filled up this void; and has even added to his
map a table of longitudes and latitudes, among
which figure the laguna del Dorado, and the
ville impériale de Manoas*. Raleigh, when at
anchor near the Punta del Galle + in the island


(perhaps passing ever the ridge of Galpano) to the town of
Caraccas. (Simon, p.594; Raleigh, p. 19.) Those only
who are acquainted with the situation can be sensible, how
difficult and daring this enterprise was.

* Joidocus Hondius, brevis et admiranda Deseriptio Regeni
Guiane, 1699, \p. 13. Raleigh, p. 21, 25, 46, 52, 65, 69, 72,
90, 98, 108.

+ The northern part of la Punta de Icacos, which is the
south-east cape of the island of Trinidad. There Christopher
Columbus cast anchor, Aug, the 3d, 1498. A great~confu-
sion exists in the denomination of the different capes of the
island of Trinidad; and as recently, since the expedition
of Fidalgo and Churruca, the Spaniards reckon the longitudes


§31


of Trinidad, made his lieutenants explore the
mouths of the Oroonoko, principally those of


in South America west of fa Punta de la Galera (lat, 10° 50’,
long. 63° 20’. See my Observ. Astr., vol. i, p. 39.) it is im-
portant to fix the attention of geographers on this point. The
following is the result of my researches : Columbus called the
south-east cape of the island Panta Galera, on account of the
form of a rock “ que desde lexos parecia galera que iba a la
vela.” (History of the Admiral by his son Ferdinand Colum-
bus, in Churchill’s Collection, vol. ii, p. 584. Herera, Dec.
I, p. 80.) We see clearly by the narrative of Columbus, that
from Punta de la Galera he sailed to the west and landed at a
low cape, which he calls Panta del Arenal; this is our Pun-
ta de Icacos. In this passage, near a place (Punta de la
Playa) where he stopped to take in water (perhaps at the
mouth of the Rio Erin), he saw to the south for the first time, the
continent of America, which he called Isla Santa, It was
therefore the eastern coast of the province of Cumana, to the
east of the Cano Macareo, near Punta Redonda, and not the
mountainous coast of Paria (Isla de Gracia of Columbus),
which was first discovered, Columbus relates, that, after
having anchored near the Isloto del Gallo, now called El
Soldado, and having passed the Boca de Sierpe, between
Punta del Arenal and the continent, he sailed to the north
through the Golfo de la Balena (G. de Paria, Golfo triste,
G. de las Perlas), and saw the Boca de Dragos in that direc-
tion. On the maps of La Cruz (1775) and of Caulin (1778)
the south-east cape of Trinidad (lat. 10° 9') has continued ‘to
be named, as by Columbus, Punta Galera; which is the
Ponta Galeota of modern navigators. ‘But already Hondius
(in the maps of 1598, Herera (Descripcion de los Indios,
1615), Sanson (map of 1669), D’Anville, and all the modern
English and French geographers, with the exceptioniof Bonne
(in the Atlas of Raynal), denote the north-east cape of the


832


Capuri*, Grand Amana (Manamo Grande), and
Macureo (Macareo). As his ships drew a great
deal of water, he found it difficult to enter the
bocas chicas, and was obliged to construct flat-
bottomed barks. He remarked the fires of the
Tivitivas (Tibitibies), of the race of the Guaraon
Indians, on the tops of the mauritia palm trees ;
and appears to have first brought the fruit to
Europe, fructum squamosum, similem palme pint.
I am surprised, that he scarcely mentions{ the


island of Trinidad (lat. 10° 50’), the spot which was falsely
believed to have been the first seen by Columbus, by the name
of Punta de la Galera.

* See above, p. 724, and 755, where I have given the
topography of the delta of the Oroonoko. The name of
Capure is now given to one of the bocas chicas, between the
Pedernales and Macareo. The geographers of the 16th cen-
tury were agreed to denote the Boca de Navios hy this name.
The narrative of Raleigh (p. 38—42) leaves much doubt on
this subject. Is the word Capure significative ? Raleigh
(p. 72) gives this name to a northern branch of the: Meta,
which during more than half a century is found thus marked
in all the maps of Sanson, and of those who copied him.
Now this Rio Capuri, which flows out near the Cabruta, is,
in my opinion, no other than the Rio Apure itself, called
Apuri by the Indians. The Voaré of Raleigh, a tributary
stream of the Capuri, is probably the Rio Guaricu or Vari-cu
of the Indians. ¢

+ See above, p. 535.

+ He merely says (p. 46) : ‘ Those Spaniards which fled
from Triniado, and also those that remained with Carapana im
Emeria (now the mission of the Capuchins of Carony), were
joined in some. village upon the Orinoco.”


$33


settlement, which had been made by Berrio
under the name of Santo Thomeé (la Vieja Guay-
ana). This settlement however dates from
1591; and though, according to Fray Pedro
Simon, “ religion and policy prohibited all mer-
cantile connection between Christians (Spani-
ards) and Heretics (the Dutch and English),”
there was then carried on at the end of the
16th century, as in our days, an active contra-
band trade by the mouths of the Oroonoko.
Raleigh passed the river Europa (Guarapo), and
“the plains of Saymas (Chaymas*), which ex-
tend, keeping the same level, as far as Cumana
and Caraccas ;” he stopped at Morequito (per-
haps a little to the north of the site of the villa
de Upata, in the missions of the Carony), where
an old cacique confirmed to him all the reveries
of Berrio on the. irruption of foreign nations
(Orejones and Epuremei) into Guyana. The
Raudales or cataracts of the Caroli (Carony), a
river which was at that period considered as
the shortest way for reaching the towns of
Macureguarai and Manoa, situate on the banks .
of lake Cassipa and of lake Rupunuwini or Do-
rado, put an end to this expedition.

Raleigh went scarcely the distance of sixty
leagues along the Oroonoko ; but he names the
upper tributary streams, according to the vague


* See above, vol. iii, p. 221-77.
3H


S34


notions he had collected, the Cari, the Pao, the
Apure (Capuri?), the Guarico (Voari?), the
Meta*, and even, “ in the province of Baraguan,
the great cataract of Athule (Atures), which
prevents all farther navigation.” Notwithstand-
ing Raleigh’s exaggeration, so little worthy of a
statesman, his narrative contains important ma-
terials for the history of geography. The Oroo-
noko, above the confluence of the Apure, was
at that period as little known to Europeans, as
in our times the course of the Niger below Sego.


* Raleigh distinguishes the Meta from the Beta, which flows
into the Baraguan (the Oroonoko) conjointly with the Daune
near Athule; ashe also distinguishes the Casanare, a tributary
stream of the Meta, and the Casnero, which comes from
the south, and appears to be the Rio Cuchivero, All above
the confluence of the Apure was then very confusedly
known ; and streams, that flow into the tributary streams of
the Oroonoko, were considered as flowing into this river
itself. The Apure (Capuri) and the Meta appeared long to
be the same river, on account of their proximity, and the
numerous branches by which the Arauca and the Apure
join each other. Is the name of Beta perchance connected
with that of the nation of Betoyes, of the plains of the Casa-


“ nare and the Meta ? Hondius, and the geographers who have


followed him, with the exception of De L’Isle (1700), and
of Sanson (1656), place the province of Amapaja erroneous-
ly to the east of the Oroonoko. We see clearly by the nar-
rative of Raleigh (p. 26 and 72); that Amapaja is the inun-
dated country between the Meta and the Guarico. Where
are the rivers Dauney and Ubarro? The Guaviare appears
to me to be the Goavar of Raleigh.


835


The names of several very remote tributary
streams were. known, but not their situation ;
and when the same name, differently pronounc-
ed, or not properly apprehended by the ear, fur-
nished different sounds, their number. was multi-
plied. Other errors had perhaps their source in
the little interest, which Antonio de Berrio, the
Spanish governor, felt in communicating true
and precise notions to Raleigh; who indeed
complains of his prisoner, “‘ as being utterly
unlearned, and not knowing the east from the
west” (p. 28). I shall not here discuss the
point, how far the belief of Raleigh, in all he
‘relates of inland seas, similar to the Caspian sea ;
on “the imperial and golden city of Manoa,”
and on the magnificent palaces built by the
emperor Inga of Guyana, in imitation of those
of his ancestors at Peru, was reai or pretended.
The learned historian of Brazil, Mr. Southey,
and the biographer of Raleigh, Sir G. Cayley,
have recently thrown much light on this sub-
ject. It seems to me difficult to doubt of the
extreme credulity of the chief of the expedition, ©
and of his lieutenants. We see Raleigh adapted
every thing to the hypotheses he had previously
formed. He was certainly deceived himself ;
but when he sought to influence the imagination
of queen Elizabeth, and execute the projects of
his own ambitious policy, he neglected none of
the artifices of flattery. He described to the
3H 2


Queen “ the transports of those barbarous na-
tions at the sight of her picture ;” he would have
“the name of the august virgin, who knows
hew to conquer empires, reach as far as the
country of the warlike women of the Oroonoko
and the Amazon;” he asserts, that, * at the
period when the Spaniards overthrew the throne
of Cuzco, an ancient prophecy was found, which
predicted, that the dynasty of the Incas would
one day owe it’s restoration to Great Britain ;”
he advises, that, “ on pretext of defending the
territory against external enemies, garrisons of
three or four thousand English should be placed
in the towns of the Inca, obliging this prince to
pay a contribution annually to Queen Elizabeth
of three hundred thousand pounds sterling ;”
finally, he adds, like a man who foresees the
future, that ‘‘ all the vast countries of, South
America will one day belong to the English na-
tion.®”


* “ T shewed them her majesties picture which the Casi-
gui so admired and honoured, as it had been easy to have
brought them idolatrous thereof.—And I further remember
that Berreo confessed to me and others (which I protest be-
fore the Majesty of God to be true), that there was found
among prophecies in Peru (at such time as the Empire was
reduced to the Spanish obedience) in their chiefest temples,
amongst divers others which foreshewed the losse of the said
Empyre, that from Jnglatierra those Ingas should be again in
time to come restored.—The Inga would yield to her Majesty
by composition many hundred thousand pounds yearely as ta


837


The four voyages of Raleigh to the Lower
Oroonoko succeeded each other from 1595. to
1617. After all these useless attempts, the ardor
of research for Dorado has greatly diminished.
No expeditions have since been. formed by a
numerous band of colonists; but some solitary
enterprises have been undertaken, and encou-
raged by the governors of the provinces. The
notions, which were spread by the journeys of
father Acunha in 1688, and father Fritz in 1637,
to the auriferous land of the Manoas of Juru-
besh, and to the Laguna de Oro*, contributed
to renew the ideas of Dorado in the Portugueze
and Spanish colonies north and south of the
equator. At Cuenza.in the kingdom of Quito,


I met with some men, who were employed by
the bishop Marfil, to seek at the east of the
Cordilleras, in the plains of Macas, the ruins of
the town of Logrono, which was believed to be
situate in a country rich in gold. We learn by
the journal of Hortsmann, which I have often


defend him against all enemies abroad and defray the expences
of a garrison of 3000 or 4000 soldiers.—It seemeth to me
that this Empyre of Guiana is reserved for the English
nation.” (Raleigh, p.7, 17, 51, 100.)

# See above, p.312. I found, among the valuable collections
of D’Anville preserved in the Archives of foreign affairs at
Paris (No. 9545), a curious manuscript map, tracing the
journey of father Fritz. Tabula geografiea del Rio Marajion,
1690.


838


quoted, that. it was supposed in 1740, Dorado
might be reached from Dutch Guyana by going
up the Rio Essequebo. Don Manuel Centu-
rion, the governor of Santo Thome del Angos-
tura, displayed an extreme ardor for reaching
‘the imaginary lake of Manoa. Arimuicaipi, an
Indian of the nation of the Ipurucotoes, went
down the Rio Carony, and, by false narrations,
inflamed the imagination of the Spanish colo-
nists. He showed them in the southern sky the
clouds of Magellan, the whitish light of which
he said was the reflexion of the argentiferous
rocks situate in the middle of the Laguna Pari-
ma.: This was describing in a very poetical
manner the splendour of the micaceous and
talcky slates of his country! Another Indian
chief, known among the Caribbees of Essequebo
by the name of captain Jurado, vainly attempt-
ed to undeceive the governor Centurion. Fruit-
less attempts were made by the Caura and the
Rio Paragua; and several hundred persons
perished miserably in these rash enterprises,
from which however geography has derived some
advantages. Nicolas Rodriguez and Antonio
Santos (1775—1780) were employed by the
Spanish governor. Santos, proceeding by the
Carony, the Paragua, the Paraguamusi, the Ano-
capra, and the mountains of Pacaraymo and
Quimiropaca, reached the Uraricuera and the
Rio Branco. I found some valuable informa-


en


839


tion in the journals of these perilous expedi-
tions.

The maritime charts, which the Florentine
traveller, Amerigo Vespucci*, constructed in the
early years of the 16th century, as Piloto mayor
of the Casa de Contratacion of Seville, and in
. which he placed, perhaps artfully, the words,
Tierra de Amerigo, have not reached our times.
The most ancient monument we possess of the
geography of the New Continent} is the ‘Map
of the World by John Ruysch, annexed to a
Roman edition of Ptolemy in 1508. We there
find Yucatan and Honduras (the most southern
part of Mexicof) figured as anisland, by thename
of Culicar. There is no isthmus of Panama, but


a passage, which permits of a direct navigation
from Europe to India. The great southern
island (South America) bears the name of Terra
de Pareas, bounded by two rivers, the Rio La-
reno, and the Rio Formoso. . These Pareas are,


' * He died in 1512, as Mr. Munoz has proved by the docu-
ments of the archives of Simancas. (Hist. del Nuevo Mundo,
vol. i, p- 17.) Tiraboschi, Storia della Litteratura, vol. vi,
Pi. 1. p. 179, 190.

+ See the learned researches of Mr. Walckenaer, in the
Bibliographie univ., vol. vi, p. 209, art, Buckinck. Qn the
maps addeil to Ptolemy in 1506 we find no trace of the dis-
coveries of Columbus,

t No doubt the lands between Yucatan, Cape Gracias
a Dios, and Veragua, discovered by Columbus (1502 and
1503), by Solis, and by Pingon (1506).


840


no doubt, the inhabitants of Paria, a name which
Christopher Columbus had already heard* in
1498, and which was long applied to a great
part of America. Bishop Geraldini says clearly,
in a letter addresssd to pope Leo X in 1516,
insula illa, que Europa et Asia est major, quam
indocti Continentem Asice appellant, et alii Ame-
ricam vel Pariam nuncupant}. 1 find in the Map
of the World of 1508 no trace whatever of the
Oroonoko. This river appears for the first time,
by the name of Rio dulce, on the celebrated map
constructed in 1529 by Diego Ribero, cosmo-
grapher of the emperor Charles V, which was
published, with a learned commentary by Mr.
Sprengel in 1795. Neither Columbus (1498),
nor Alonzo de Ojeda, accompanied by Amerigo
Vespucci (1499), had seen the real mouth of the
Oroonoko ; they confounded it with the north-
ern opening of the gulf of Paria, to which they
atiributed, by an exaggeration so common to
the navigators of that time, an immense volume
of fresh water. It was Vicente Yanez Pincon,
who,, after having discovered the mouth of the
Rio Maragnon‘, first saw (1500) that of the


* Indigene sine ullo metu ad nostros festinant, a quibus
Pariam vocari terram illam collegerunt. Petr. Mart. Ocean.
1533, p. 16.

+ Alexandri Geraldini Itinerarium, p. 250.
{ The name of Méragion was known fifty-nine years before


841


Oroonoko. He called this river Rio dulce; a
name which, since Ribero, was long preserved.


on our maps, and which has sometimes been
given erroneously to the Maroni, and to the


Essequebo*.

The great lake Parima did not appeary on
our maps till after the first voyage of Raleigh.
It was Jodocus Hondius, who, as early as the
year 1599, fixed the ideas of geographers, and
figured the interior of Spanish Guyana as a
country well known. He transformed the isth-
mus between the Rio Branco and the Rio Ru-
punuwini (one of the tributary streams of the
Essequebo) into the lake Rupunuwini, Parima,
or Dorado, two hundred leagues long, and forty


the expedition of Lopez de Aguirre ; the denomination of the
river is therefore erroneously attributed to the nickname of ma-
ranos (hogs), which this adventurer gave his companions in
going down the river of the Amazons. Was not this vulgar
jest rather an allusion to the Indian name of the river?

* See above, p. 478. The Oroonoko is also wanting ona
very fine map, which bears the title of Delineatzo australis par-
tis America, authore Arnoldo Florentio a Langern. (D’ Anville’s
Collection of Manuscripts, No. 9179.)


4+ I find no trace of it on a very rare map, dedicated to
Richard Hakluyt, and constructed on the meridian of Tole.
do. (Novus Orbis, Paris 1587.) In this map, published
before the voyage of Quiros, a group of islands is marked
(Infortunate Insule) where the Friendly Islands actually are.
Ortelius (1570): already knew them. Were they islands
seen by Magellan ?


842


broad, and bounded by the latitudes of 1° 45’
south, and 2° north. This inland sea, larger
than the Caspian, is sometimes traced in the
midst of a mountainous country, without com-
munication with any river*; and sometimes
the Rio Oyapok (Waiapago, Japoc, Viapoco)
and the Rio de Cayana+ are made to issue from
it. The first of these rivers, confounded in the
eighth article of the treaty of Utrecht with the
Rio de Vicente Pingon (Rio Calsoéne of D’An-
ville) has been, even down to the late congress
of Vienna, the subject of interminable discus-
sions between the French and Portugueze diplo-
matistsy. The second is an imaginary prolonga-
tion) either of the Tonnegrande, or of the Oyac


* See for instance, Hondius, Nieuwe Caerte van het goud-
rycke landt Guiana, 1599 ; and Sanson’s Map of America, in
1656 and 1669.

t Brasilia et Caribana, Auct. Hondio et Hueisen, 1599.

t I have treated this question in a Mémoire sur la fixation
des limites de la Guyane Francaise, written at the desire of the
Portugueze government, during the negociations of Paris in
1817. (See Schoell, Archives polit., or Pirces mnédites, vol. i,
p: 48—58.) Ribero, in his celebrated map of the world of
1529, places the Rio de Vicente Pingon south of the Ama-
zon, near the gulf of Maranhao. This navigator landed at
this spot, after having been at Cape Suint Augustin, and
before he reached the mouth of the Amazon.  Herera,
Dec. I, p. 107. The narrative of Gomara, Hist. nat., 1553,
p. 48, is very confused in a geographical point of view.

§ “ Cujane flumen longe altius penetrat in Continentem.”
(Laet, p. 640,) On comparing’the’ maps of French Guy-


843


(Wia?). The inland sea (Laguna Parime) was
at first placed in such a manner, that it’s western
extremity coincided with the meridian of the
confluence of the Apure and the Oroonoko. By
degrees it was advanced toward the east*, the
western extremity being found to the south of
the mouth of the Oroonoko. This change pro-
duced others in the respective. situations of the
lakes Parima and Cassipa, as well as in the
direction of the course of the Oroonoko. This
great river is represented as running, from it's
delta as far as beyond the Meta, from south to
north, like the river Magdalena. The tributary
streams therefore, which were made to - issue
from the lake Cassipa, the Carony, the Arui, and
the Caura, then took the direction of the lati-
tude, while in nature they follow that of a meri-
dian. Beside the lakes Parima and Cassipa, a
third was traced upon the maps, from which the
Aprouague (Apurwaca) was made to issue. It
was then a general practice among geographers,
to attach all the rivers to great lakes. By this
means Ortelius joined the Nile to the Zaire or
Rio Congo, and the Vistula to the Wolga and
the Dnieper. North of Mexico, in the pre-


ana, we observe, since D’Anville, a great confusion in the
denomination of the little rivers between the Aprouague and


' the Maroni.


* Compare the maps of 1599 with those of Sanson (1656)
and of Bleuw (1633).


844


tended kingdoms of Quivira and Cibola, render-
ed celebrated by the falsehoods of the monk
Marcos de Niza, a great inland sea was imagin-
ed, from which the Rio Colorado of. California
was made to issue*. -A branch of the Rio Mag-
dalena flowed to the Laguna de Maracaybo ;
and the lake of Xarayes, near which a southern
Dorado+ was placed, communicated with the
Amazon, the Miarit (Meary), and the Rio de


* This is the Mexican Dorady, where it was pretended,
that vessels had been found on the coasts (of New Albion ?)
loaded with the merchandize of Catayo and China (Gomara
Hist, Gen. p. 117), and where Fray Marcos (like Huten in
the country of the Omaguas) had seen from afar the gilded
roofs of a great town, one of the Siete Ciudades. The inhabi-
tants have great dogs, en los quales quando se mudan cargan su
menage. (Herera, Dec. VI, p. 157, 206.) Later discoveries
however leave no doubt, that there existed a centre of civili-
zation in those countries. (See my Political Essay on New
Spain, vol. i. p. 298, 310 ; vol. ii, p. 582.)

+ Herera, Descripcion de las Indias, p. 53.

{ As this river flows into the gulf of Maranhao (so named
because some French colonists, Rifault, De Vaux, and Ra-
vardiere, believed they were opposite the mouth of the Ma-
ragnon or Amazon), the ancient maps call the Meary Marag-
non, or Maranham. (See the maps of Hondius, and Paulo
de Forlani.) Perhaps the idea, that Pingon, to whom the
discovery of the real Maragnon is due, had landed in those
parts, since become celebrated by the shipwreck of Ayres
da Cunha, has also contributed to this confusion. The
Meary appears to me identical with the Rio de Vicente Pin-
con of Diego Ribero, which is more than one hundred and for-
ty leagues from that of the modern geographers. (See above,


845


San Francisco. These hydrographic reveries
have for the most part disappeared; but the
lakes Cassipa and Dorado have been long simul-
taneously preserved on our maps.

In following the history of geography, we see
the Cassipa, figured as a rectangular parallelo-
gram, enlarge by degrees at the expense of the
Dorado. While the latter is sometimes sup-
pressed, no one ventures to touch the former*,
which is the Rio Paragua (a tributary stream of
the Caroni) enlarged by temporary inundations.
When D’Anville learned from the expedition of
Solano, that the sources of the Oroonoko, far
from lying to the west, on the back of the Andes
of Pasto, came from the east, from the moun-
tains of Parima, he restored in the second edi-
tion of his fine map of America (1760) the
Laguna Parime, and very arbitrarily made it to
communicate with three rivers, the Oroonoko,
the Rio Branco, and the Essequebo, by the Mazu-
runi and the Cujuni; assigning to it the latitude,
from 3° to 4° north, which had till then been
given to lake Cassipa,


p.474.) At present the name of Maragnon has remained at
the same time to the river of the Amazons, and to a province
much farther eastward, the capital of which is Maranhao, or
Saint Lewis de Maragnon.

-% Sanson, Course of the Amazon, 1680; De Lisle,
Amérique Mérid., 1700. D’Anville, first edition of his Ame-
rica, 1748.


846


La Cruz Olmedilla, the Spanish geographer,
followed, in 1775, the example set by D’Anyville.
The ancient. lake Parima, situate under the
equator, was entirely independant of the Oroo-
noko; the new, which appeared in the place of
the Cassipa, and in the same form of a quadri-
lateral, the longest sides of which lie from south
to north *, furnishes the most singular hydraulic
communications. The Oroonoko, in the map
of La Cruz, under the names of Parima and
Puruma (Xuruma?), takes it’s rise in the moun-
tainous land between the sources of the Ventuari
and of the Caura (in the latitude of five degrees,
and in the meridian of the mission of Esmeralda),
from a small lake called Jpava. This lake
would be placed in my itinerary map to the
north-east of the granitic mountains of Cunevo,
a situation which sufficiently proves, that it
might be the origin of a tributary stream of the
Rio Branco or the Oroonoko, but not the origin
of the Orooncko itself. This Rio Parima, or
Puruma, after a course of forty leagues east-
north-east, and sixty leagues south-east, receives
the Rio Mahu, which is already known to us as
one of the principal branches of the Rio Branco;
it then enters into the lake Parima, which is
supposed to be thirty leagues long and twenty


* The greater axis of the real lake of Parima was from


east to west.


Ed


broad. From this lake three rivers immediately
issue, the Rio Ucamu (Ocamo), the Rio Idapa
(Siapa), and the. Rio Branco. The Oroonoko,
or Puruma, is indicated, as a subterraneous fil-
tration, at the western back of the Sierra Mei,
which skirts the lake or White Sea on the
west. This second source of the Oroonoko is
found in two degrees of north latitude, and thirty
degrees and a half east of the meridian of Esme- _
ralda. The new river, after a course of. fifty
leagues west-north-west, receives first the Uca-
mu, which issues from the lake Parima; and
then the Rio Maquiritari (Padamo), which rises
between the lake Ipava and another Alpine lake,
called by La Cruz Laguna Cavija. The word
lake being cavia in Maypure, the denomination
of Laguna Cavia signifies, like Laguna Parime,
simply a basin of water, Laguna de aqua. This
strange disposition of the rivers is become the
type of almost all the modern maps of Guyana.
A misunderstanding, founded on ignorance of
the Spanish language, has contributed to give
great authority to the map of La Cruz, in which
some accurate notions are mingled with sys-
tematic ideas drawn from ancient maps. A
dotted line surrounds the cguntry, respecting
which Solano was able to procure some informa-
tion; and this line has been taken for Solano’s
route, who consequently would have seen the~
south-western extremity of the White Sea. We


848


read on the map of La Cruz, “ this line points
out what has been discovered and pacified by
the governor of Caraccas, don Jose Solano.”
It is well known in the missions, that Solano
never left Fernando de Atabapo, that he did not
see the Oroonoko east of the Guaviari, and that
he could obtain no information respecting those
countries but from common soldiers, who were
ignorant of the language of the natives. The
work of Father Caulin, who was the _historio-
grapher of the expedition, the testimony of don
Apollinario Diez de la Fuente, and the voyage
of Santos, sufficiently prove, that no person has
ever seen the White Sea of La Cruz; which, as
the names of the tributary streams indicate, is
an imaginary enlargement of the western branch
of the Rio Branco above the confluence of the
Tacutu and the Uraricuera or Rio Parima.
But, even admitting facts, the falsehood of
which is sufficiently proved in the present day,
it could scarcely be conceived from the hydro-
graphic principles generally adopted, by what
right the lake Ipava could be called the source
of the Oroonoko. When one river runs into a
lake, and three others issue from it, we know
not’ to which of these rivers we ought to give
the name of the former. Much less can any
motive justify the geographer in preserving the
same: name for a river, the source of which is
separated from the lake by a lofty chain of


349


mountains, and which is supposed to be the
effect of a subterraneous infiltration.

Four years after the celebrated map of La
Cruz Olmedilla appeared the work of father
Caulin, who had accompanied the expedition of
the boundaries. This book was written on: the
banks of the Oroonoko itself, in 1759; and
some notes were added subsequently in Europe.
The author, a monk of the Observance of Saint
Francis, is distinguished by his candor, and by
a spirit of criticism superior to that of all his
predecessors. He did not go himself beyond —
the Great Cataract of Atures, but all that So-
lano and Ituriaga had collected, whether true
or doubtful, was at his disposal. Two maps,
traced by father Caulin in 1756, were reduced
in 1778 into one, and completed, according to
pretended discoveries, by Mr. de Surville, one
of the keepers of the archives in the secretary of
state’s office. I have already observed, in speak-
ing of our abode at Esmeralda, the point nearest
the unknown sources of the Oroonoko, how
arbitrary these alterations were. They were
founded on the false reports, by which the cre-
dulity of the governor Centurion and of.don
Apollinario Diez de la Fuente, a cosmographer
destitute of instruments, knowledge, and. books,
was daily flattered.

The journal of father Caulin is.in perpetual
contradiction with the map prefixed to it. The

VOL. V. 31


850


author develops the circumstances, that gave
rise to the fable of the lake Parima; but the map
restores this lake, placing it however far from
the sources of the Oroonoko, to the east of the
Rio Branco. According to father Caulin, the
Oroonoko is called Rio Maraguaca in the me-
ridian of the granitic mountain of this name,
which is figured on my itinerary map. “ It is
rather a torrent than a river; issuing conjointly
with the Rio Omaguaca and the Macoma, in
two degrees and a half of latitude, from the little
lake Cabiya (Manomaname in Cabre, Caricha
in Guaypunabi).” It is this lake, which La
Cruz designated as the source of the Maquiri-
tari (Padamo), and placed in latitude of five
degrees and a half to the north of lake Ipava.
The existence of the Rio Macoma of Caulin ap-
pears to be founded on a confused idea of the
Padamo, the Ocamo, and the Matacona, which,
before my travels, were believed to communi-
cate together. Perhaps also the lake, from
which the Mavaca issues (a little to the west of
the Amaguaca), has given rise to these errors
on the origin of the Oroonoko, and the neigh-
bouring sources of the Idapa *.

Surville substitutes for the lake Parime of La
Cruz another lake in the latitude of 2° 10’, which
he regards as the source of the Ucamu (Ocamo).


* Caulin. p. 51-82 See above, p. 376 and 558.


aaa


351


Near this alpine lake rise from the same source
the Oroonoko and the Rio Idapa, a tributary
stream of the Cassiquiare. The lake Amucu,
the source of the Mahu, is enlarged into the
Mar Dorado, or Laguna Parime. The Rio
Branco is no longer connected, except by two
of it’s smallest tributary streams, with the basin,
from which the Ucamu issues. It results from
this arrangement, altogether hypothetiéal, that
the origin of the Oroonoko is in no lake, and
that it’s sources are entirely independant of lake
Parime and the Rio Branco, Notwithstanding
the bifurcated source, the hydrographic system
of Surville’s map is less absurd, than that which
is traced on the map of La Cruz. If modern
geographers have so long persisted in following
the Spanish maps, without comparing them to-
gether, we may at least be surprised, that they
have not given the preference to the most mo-
dern map, that of Surville, published at the
expense of the king, and by order of the minister
for India, don Jose de Galvez.

I have now stated, as I announced above, the
variable forms which geographical errors have
assumed at different periods. I have explained
what in the configuration of the soil, the course
of the rivers, the names of the tributary streams,
and the multiplicity of the portages,.may have
given rise to the hypothesis of an inland sea in
the centre of Guyana. However dry discus-

312


852


sions of this nature may appear, they ought not
to be regarded as steril and fruitless. ‘They
show travellers what remains to be discovered ;
and make known the degree of certainty, which
long-repeated assertions may claim. It is with
maps, as with those tables of astronomical po-
sitions, which are contained in our ephemerides,
designed for the use of navigators: the most
heterogeneous materials have been employed in
their construction during a long space of time;
and, without the aid of the history of geography,
we could scarcely hope to discover at some fu-
ture day on what authority every partial state-
ment rests. .

Before I resume the thread of my narrative,
it remains for me to add a few general reflexions
on the auriferous lands situate between the
Amazon, and the Oroonoko. We have just
shown, that the fable of Dorado, like the most
celebrated fables of the nations of the ancient
‘world, has been applied progressively to differ-
ent spots. We have seen it advance from the
south-west to the north-east, from the oriental
declivity of the Andes towards the plains of Rio
Branco and the Essequebo, an identical direc-
tion with that in which the Caribbees for ages
conducted their warlike and mercantile expe-
ditions. It may be conceived, that. the gold of
the Cordilleras might be conveyed from hand to
hand, through an infinite number of tribes, as


853


far as the shore of Guyana; since, long before
the fur-trade had attracted English, Russian,
and American vessels to the north-west coast
of America, iron tools had been carried from
New Mexico and Canada beyond the Stony
Mountains. From an error in longitude, the
traces of which we find in all the maps of the
16th century, the auriferous mountains of Peru
and New Grenada were supposed to be much
nearer the mouths of the Oroonoko and the
Amazon, than they are in fact. Geographers
have the habit of augmenting and extending
beyond measure countries that are recently dis-
covered. In the map of Peru published at Ve-
rona by Paulo di Forlani, the town of Quito is
placed at the distance of 400 leagues from the
coast of the South Sea, on the meridian of
Cumana; and the Cordillera of the Andes there
fills almost the whole surface of Spanish, French,
and Dutch Guyana*. This erroneous opinion


* La Descrittione di tutto it Peru. In this very scarce
map Cumana is situate fifty leagues in land; the town of
Quito in four degrees of south latitude ; Pasto in the meri-
dian of Surinam; and Cuzco south-west of Quito. A small
alpine lake, which I saw between Otavalo and the Villa de
Ibarra is marked on the spot where the Laguna de Parime
is placed in modern maps. When the Spaniards began to
penetrate into Guyana, proceeding from the east, the names
of places near the South Sea were transferred toward the
west. Sanson also (1669) calls the country between the
Meta and the Guaviare the Province of Paria.


854


of the breadth of the Andes has no doubt con-
iributed to give so much importance to the gra-
nitic plains, that extend on their eastern side.
Unceasingly confounding the tributary streams
of the Amazon with those of the Oroonoko *, or
(as the lieutenants of Raleigh called it to flatter
their chief) the Rio Raleana, to the latter were
attributed all the traditions, which had been
collected respecting the Dorado of Quixos, the
Omaguas, and the Manaos+. The geographer


* ‘The Amazon was confounded with the Orooncko at the
same period when other geographers distinguished between
the Amazon, the Orellana, and the Maragnon, “ Fluvius
Orenoque Andalusiam novam a Gujana dirimens, alias ab
Hispanis Orellana vocatus fuit.” (Blaeww, p: 17.)

t+ In the map of P. du Val d’ Abbeville (No. 9561 of
Db’ Anville’s collection, preserved in the archives of the Mi-
nistry of Foreign Affairs), we read, near the lake Parime,
Orejones (nobles of Peru), and Establishment of the Incas.
See also Destription générale de P Amérique par Pierre @ Avity,
seigneur de Montmartin, recue par J. B. de Rocoles, 1660,
p- 136.) The flight of Manco-Inca, brother of Atahualpa, to
the east of the Cordilleras, no doubt gave rise to the tradition
of a new empire of the Incas in Dorado. It was forgotten,
that Caxamarca and Cuzco, two towns where the princes of
that unfortunate family were at the time of their emigration,

_ are situate to the south of the Amazon, in the latitudes of
seven degrees eight minutes and thirteen degrees twenty-one
minutes south, and consequently four hundred leagues south-
west of the pretended town of Manoa on the lake Parima
(three degrees and a half north lat.). It is probable, that,
from the extreme difficulty of penetrating into the plains east
of the Andes covered with forests, the fugitive princes never


835


Hondius supposed, that the Andes of Loxa,
celebrated for their forests of cinchona, were


went beyond the banks of the Beni. _ The following is what I
learnt with certainty respecting this emigration of the family
of the Inca, some sad vestiges of which I saw on passing by
Caxamarca. Manco-[nca, acknowledged as the legitimate
successor of Atahualpa, made war without success against
the Spaniards. He retired at length into the mountains
and thick forests of Vilcabamba, which are accessible either
by Hluamanga and Antahuaylla, or by the valley of Yucay
north of Cuzco. Of the two sons of Aanco- Inca, the eldest,
Sayri-Tupac, surrendered himself to the Spaniards, upon the
invitation of the viceroy of Peru, Hurtado de Mendoza.
He was received with great pomp at Lima, was baptized
there, and died peaceably in the fine valley of Yucay. The
youngest son of Manco-Inca, Tupac-Amaru, was carried off
by stratagem from the forests of Vilcabamba, and beheaded
on pretext of a conspiracy formed against the Spanish usur-
pers. At the same period, thirty five distant relations of the
Inca Atahualpa were seized, and conveyed to Lima, in order
to remain under the inspection of the Audiencia. (Garcilasso,
Vol. 2, p. 194, 480, and 501.) It is interesting to inquire,
whether any other princes of the family of Manco-Capac have
remained in the forests of Vilcabamba, and if there still exist
any descendants of the Incas of Peru between the Apurimac
and the Beni. This supposition gave rise in 1741 to the
famous rebellion of the Chuneoes, and to that of the Amajes
and Campoes led.on by their chief, Juan Santos, called the
false Atahualpa.. The late political events of Spain have li-
berated from prison the remains of the family of Jose Gabriel
Condorcanqui, an artful and intrepid man, who, under the
name of the Inca Tupac-Amaru, attempted in 1781 that re-
storation of the ancient dynasty, which Raleigh had projected
in the time of queen Elizabeth.


856


only twenty leagues distant from the lake Pa-
rima, or the banks of the Rio Branco. This
proximity procured credit to the tidings of the
flight of the Inca into the forests of Guyana, and
the removal of the treasures of Cuzco to the
easternmost parts of that country. No doubt
in going up toward the east, either by the
Meta or by the Amazon, the civilization of the
natives, between the Puruz, the Jupura, and
the Iquiari, was observed to increase. They
possessed amulets, little idols of molten gold,
and chairs sculptured with art ; but these traces
of dawning civilization are far distant from those
cities and houses of stone described by Raleigh
and those who followed him. We have made
drawings of some ruins of great edifices east of
the Cordilleras, when going down from Loxa
toward the Amazon, in the province of Jaen de


Bracamoros; and thus far the Incas had carried...


their arms, their religion, and their arts. The
inhabitants of the Oroonoko were also, before
the conquest, when abandoned to themselves,
somewhat more civilized than the independant
hordes of our days. They had populous villages
along the river, and a regular trade with more
southern nations; but nothing indicates, that
they ever constructed an edifice of stone. We
saw no vestige of any during the course of our
navigation.

Though the celebrity of the riches of Spanish


857


Guyana is owing for the most part to the geo-
graphical situation of the country, and the errors
of the ancient maps, we are not justified in de-
nying the existence of any auriferous land in
that extent of country of eighty-two thousand
square leagues, which stretches between the
Oroonoko and the Amazon, on the east of the
Andes of Quito and New Grenada. What I
saw of this country between two and eight de-
grees of latitude, and sixty-six and seventy-one
degrees of longitude, is entirely composed of
granite, and of a gneiss passing into micaceous
and talcous slate. These rocks appear naked
in the lofty mountains of Parima, as well as in
the plains of the Atabapo and the Cassiquiare.
The granite prevails there over the other rocks ;
and, though in both continents the granite of
ancient formation is pretty generally destitute
of gold-ore, we cannot thence conclude, that
the granite of Parima contains no vein, no stra-
tum of auriferous quartz. On the east of the
Cassiquiare, toward the sources of the Oroonoko,
we saw the number of these strata and these
veins increase. The granite of these countries,
by it’s structure, it’s mixture of hornblende,
and other geological features alike important,
appears to me to belong to a more recent forma-
tion, perhaps posterior to the gneiss, and ana-
logous to the stanniferous granites, the hyalo-
mictes, and the pegmatites. Now the least


858


ancient granites are also the least destitute of
metals ; and several auriferous rivers and tor-
rents in the Andes, in the Salzbourg, Fichtel-
gebirge, and the tableland of the two Castiles,
lead us to believe, that these granites sometimes
contain native gold, and portions of auriferous
pytites and galena disseminated throughout the
whole rock, as is the case with tin, and magnetic
and micaceous iron. The group of the moun-
tains of Parima, several summits of which attain
the height of one thousand three hundred toises*,
was almost entirely unknown before our visit to
the Oroonoko. This group however is a hun-
dred leagues long, and eighty broad ; and though
wherever Mr. Bonpland and I traversed this vast
group of mountains, it’s structure seemed to us
extremely uniform, it would be wrong to affirm,
that it may not contain very metalliferous ¢ran-
sition rocks and micaslates superimposed on the
granite.

I have already observed, that the silvery lus-
ire and frequency of mica have contributed to
give Guyana great celebrity for metallic wealth.
The peak of Calitamini, glowing every evening


* The loftiest mountains, which have hitherto been mea-
sured in Brazil, are only nine hundred toises high ; such are,
Itacolumi, in the Capitania of Minas-Geraes (near Villa-
rica), the Serra d’Itambe, the Serra de Caras, &c. See the
excellent memoirs of M, d’Eschwege. (Journ. von Braszlien,
1818, Vol. 1, p. 213).


859


at sunset with a reddish fire, still attracts the
attention of the inhabitants of Maypures*. It
is the islets of micaslate, situate in lake Amucu,
which according to the fabulous stories of the
natives augment by their reflexion the lustre of
the nebule of the southern sky}. “Every
mountain,” says Raleigh, “every stone in the
forests of the Oroonoko, shines like the precious
metals; if it be not gold, it is madre del oro.”
This navigator asserts, that he brought back
gangues of auriferous white quartz (“ harde
white sparr”) ; and to prove the richness of this
ore, he gives an account of the assays, that were
made by the officers of the mint at London 2 50
have no reason to believe, that the chemists of
that time sought to lead queen Elizabeth into
error, and I will not insult the memory of Ra-
leigh by supposing, like his contemporaries §,
that the auriferous quartz, which he brought
home, had not been collected in America. We
cannot judge of things from which we are sepa-
rated by a long interval of time. The gneiss of
the Littoral chain|| contains traces of the precious


* See above, p. 167.
+ See above, ip. 838,
{ Messrs. Westewood, Dimocke, and Bulmar.
§ See the defence of Raleigh, in the preface to the Disco-
very of Guiana, 1596, p. 2—4,
| In the southern branch of this chain, which passes by
Yusma, Villa de Cura, and Ocumare; particularly near


860


metals; and some grains of gold have been
found in the mountains of Parima, near the mis-
sion of Encaramada. How can we infer the
absolute sterility of the primitive rocks of Guyana
from testimony merely negative, from the cir-
cumstance, that during a journey of three
months we saw no auriferous vein appearing
above the soil?

In order to bring together whatever may en-
lighten the government of this country on a
subject so long disputed, I shall enter into a few
more general geological considerations. The
mountains of Brazil, notwithstanding the nu-
merous traces of imbedded ore which they dis-
play between Saint Paul and Villarica, have
furnished hitherto only stream-works of gold.
More than six sevenths of the seventy-eight
thousand marks* of this metal, which at. the
beginning of the 19th century America has an-
nually furnished to the commerce of Europe,
have come, not from the lofty Cordillera of the
Andes, but from the alluvial lands on the east
and west of the Cordilleras. These lands are
raised but little above the level of the sea, like
those of Sonora in Mexico, and of Choco and
Barbacoas in New Grenada; or they stretch
along in tablelands, as in the interior of Bra-


Buria, los Teques, and los Marietus. See above, Vol. ii,
p. 525, 529.


* Value 65,878,000 franks.


861


zil*. Is it not probable, that some other depo-
sitions of auriferous earth extend toward the
northern hemisphere, as far as the banks of the
Upper Oroonoko and the Rio Negro, two rivers
which form but one basin with that of the
Amazon? I observed, when speaking of the
Dorado de Canelas, the Omaguas, and the
Iquiare, that almost all the rivers, which flow
from the west, wash down gold in abundance,
and very far from the Cordilleras. From Loxa
to Popayan these Cordilleras are composed al-
ternately of trachytes and primitive rocks. The
plains of Zamora, of Logrono, and of Macas
(Sevilla del Oro), the great Rio Napo with it’s
tributary streams-+ (the Ansupi and the Coca,


* The height of Villarica is six hundred and thirty toises ;
but the great tableland of the Capitania de Minas Geraes
has only three hundred toises of absolute height. See the
profile, which Colonel d’Eschwege has published at Weimar,
with an indication of the rocks, in imitation of my profile of
the Mexican tableland.

+ The little rivers Cosanga, Quixos, and Papallacta or
Maspa, which form the Coca, rise on the eastern slope of
the Nevado de Antisana. The Rio Ansupi brings down the
largest grains of gold; it flows into the Napo, south of the
Archidona, above the mouth of the Misagualli. Between
the Misagualli and the Rio Coca, in the province of Avila,
five other northern tributary streams of the Napo (the Si-
guna, Munino, Suno, Guataracu, and Pucuno) are known
as being singularly auriferous. These local details are taken
from several manuscript reports of the governor of Quixos,
from which I traced the map of the countries situate to the
east of the Antisana. :


862


in the province of Quixos), the Caqueta de
Mocoa as far as the mouth of the Fragua, in
fine, all the country comprised between Jaen de
Bracomoros and the Guaviare*, preserve their
ancient celebrity for metallic wealth. More to
the east, between the sources of the Guainia
(Rio Negro), the Uaupes, the Iquiare, and the
Yurubesh, we find an incontestibly auriferous
soil. There Acunha and father Fritz placed
their Laguna del Oro; and various accounts,
which I obtained at San Carlos from Portugueze
Americans, explain perfectly what La Condamine
has related of the plates of beaten gold found in
the hands of the natives. If we pass from the
Iquiari to the left bank of the Rio Negro, we
shall enter a country entirely unknown between
the Rio Branco, the sources of the Essequebo,
and the mountains of Portugueze Guyana.
Acunha speaks of the gold washed down by the
northern tributary streams of the Lower Ma-
ragnon, such as the Rio Trombetas (Oriximina),
the Curupatuba, and the Ginipape (Rio de Paru).
It appears to me a circumstance worthy of at-
tention, that all these rivers descend from the
same tableland, the northern slope of which
contains the lake dmucu, the Dorado of Raleigh
and the Dutch, and the isthmus between the
Rupunuri (Rupunuwini) and the Rio Mahu.
Nothing opposes our admitting, that there are


* From Rio Santiago, a tributary stream of the Upper
Maragnon, to the Llanos of Caguan and of San Juan,


863


auriferous alluvial lands far from the Cordilleras
of the Andes, on the north of the Amazon; as
there are on the south, in the mountains of Brazil.
The Caribbees of the Carony, the Cuyuni, and
the Essequebo have practised on a small scale
the washing of the alluvial earth from the re-
motest times*. When we examine the structure
of mountains, and embrace in one point of view
an extensive surface of the globe, distances dis-
appear, and places the most remote draw near
‘each other insensibly. The basin of the Upper
Oroonoko, the Rio Negro, and the Amazon, to
which I have consecrated the whole of the eighth
book of my work, is bounded by the mountains
of Parime on the north, and by those of Minas-
Geraes, and Matogrosso on the south. The
opposite slopes of the same valley often display
an analogy in their geological relations.

I have described in this and the preceding
volume the vast provinces of Venezuela and
Spanish Guyana. While examining their na-
tural limits, their climate, and their produc-
tions, I have discussed the influence produced
by the configuration of the soil on agriculture,
commerce, and the more or less rapid progress
of society. I have successively passed over the
three regions that suceeed each other from north
to south; from the Mediterranean of the West


* Sce note A, at the end of this volume.


864


Indies to the forests of the Upper Oroonoko and |
of the Amazon. The fertile land of the shore,
the centre of agricultural riches, is succeeded
by the steppes, inhabited by pastoral - tribes.
These steppes are in their turn bordered by the.
region of forests, the inhabitants of which enjoy,
I will not say liberty, which is always the result
of civilization, but a savage independance. On
the limit of these two latter zones the struggle
now exists, which will decide the emancipation
and future prosperity of America. ‘The changes
which are preparing cannot efface the individual
character of each region; but the manners and
condition of the inhabitants will assume a more
uniform colour. This consideration perhaps
adds an interest to a tour, made in the begin-
ning of the 19th century. We like to see traced
in the same picture the civilized nations of the
shore, and the feeble remains of the natives of
-the Oroonoko, who know no other worship than
that of the powers of nature; and who, like the
Germans of Tacitus, deorum nominibus appellant
secretum illud, quod sola reverentia vident.


NOTE TO BOOK THE EIGHTH.


NOTE A.


“ Qn the north of the confluence of the Curupatuba with
the Amazon,” says-Acunha (p. 40), ‘“ is the mountain of °
Paraguaxo, which, when illumined by the sun, glows with
the most beautiful colours ; and thence from time to- time
issues a horrible noise (revienta con grandes estruenos).” Is
there a volcanic phenomenon in this eastern part of the New
Continent? or is it the love of the marvellous, which has
given rise to the tradition of the bellowings (bramidos) of
Paraguaxo? The lustre emitted from the sides of the moun-
tain recalls to mind what we have mentioned above of the


micaceous rocks of Calitamini, and the island Ipomucena, in


the pretended lake Dorado. In one of the Spanish letters in-
tercepted at sea by Captain George Popham, in 1594, it is
said, “ Having inquired of the natives, whence they obtained
the spangles and powder of gold, which we found in their
huts, and which they stick on their skin by means of some
greasy substances, they told us, that, in a certain plain, they
tore up the grass, and gathered the earth in baskets, to sub-
ject it.to the process of washing.” (Raleigh, p. 109.) Can
this passage be explained by supposing, that the Indians
sought thus laboriously, not for gold, but for spangles of
mica, which the natives of Rio Caura still employ as an or-
nament, when they paint their bodies ?


END OF VOL. V.


VOL. V.


ERRATA.


Vol. IV.

_ Page 225, add as a note to gelatine, 1. 10, Philos. Trans.
1800, p. 163.

466, |. '7 from bottom, for Panama, read Panapana.

ENO, Didier: Laos Ceca vis Uruana. .... Carichana.


read... Aramo,
destaeamento.


———


This volume terminates the second volume (in Quarto) of
the Personal Narrative. Each volume of this work appears
in two parts; to the last will be annexed a very copious Table
of Contents, in which the physical and geological observa-
tions will be methodically arranged. It may not be amiss,
to take this opportunity of stating, that eighteen volumes of
the large edition of the Voyage to the Equinowial Regions of the
New Continent have now appeared, eleven of which are in
quarte. There remain to be published, 2 Vols. (in quarto) of
the Personal Narrative, 1 Vol. of Zoology, 2 Vols. of the
Nova Genera et Species Plant. @quin., the Magneticul Observa-
tions, and the new edition of the Geography of Plants.

The sketches of maps cited in the discussion on lake Pa-
rima,(p. 839 to 859 of the present volume), will appear in the
next number of the Geographical Atlas. The map of the
Rio Grande de la Magdalena, containing a considerable part
of New Grenada, is the result of the astronomical observa-
tions and barometric measurements, which L made during a
navigation of sixty-five days. T drew this map on a very
large scale, in the monjh of August, 1801, during my resi-
dence at Santa-Fe de Bogota. It is the first map of the
River Magdalena constructed astronomically. Copies of it
were left in the hands of tlie viceroy, and of the celebrated
botanist, Mr. Mutis ; other copies were sent.to Carthagena
and to Spain. Having given this wap to be engraved in
1816, I could not avail myself of the topographic particulars
of the islands and the sinuosities of the river, which are found
in the Spanish map published at London, in the month of
September, 1820, by lieutenant-colonel Don Vicente Talledo,
entitled, Mapa corografico de la Provincia de Cartagena de
Indias. This curious map comprehends the half of the Rio
Magdalena, from it’s mouth as far as the Strait of Carare.
The. court of Madrid, informed of my geographical labors,
by the viceroy, don Pedro de Mendinueta, was desirous of


having the degree of their precision ascertained on the spot,


2
Mr. Talledo, and a skilful pilot, Mr. Alvarez, were appointed
in 1804, to take the plan of the Magdalena from the mouth
as far as Honda. I know, that they made use, like me, of
sextants, and artificial horizons; but I am ignorant whether
they were also furnished with chronometers. The map of the
province of Carthagena by Mr. Talledo is the result of these “
long and useful operations. I had marked on the drawing,
copies of which were left at New Grenada, a table of latitudes
and longitudes, determined between Turbaco and Santa-Fe
de Bogota. In examining these particular points on Mr.
Talledo’s map, the following comparison is the result ;


PLACES. MAP MAP
The longitudes arc re-|jof Mr. de HumBoxpT, |lof Mr. TaLtEDo, taken
duced to the Meri-|} drawn at Santa-Fe, in 1804.
dian of Ja Popa de in 1801.
Cartagena de Indias,
which is 1/ 25” east
of the port.


Turbaco
Mahates
Island of Cotoreo.;
Pinto

Mompox

Badillas (Vadillo).
Island of Bruxas.,
Carare nro 3e al)


Pee PP Oro


This agreement in the results is so much the more remark-
able, as it comprises every point of which I fixed the longi-
tude from Turbaco to Nare. “Does it prove the exactness of
my Jabours? or has Mr. Talledo (without any indication of it
‘on his map) preferred my observations to his own? If the
latter be the case, I regret that he adopted calculations made
provisionally in 1801, instead of the’ positions published by


3


Mr. Oltmanns and me in 1811, in my Collection of Astrono-
mical Observations, Vol. 1, p. 20. A more profound exa-
mination of the declination of the southern stars, and of the


|
|
|
|


. rate of the chronometer, necessarily modified the latitudes
i and longitudes a little; so that on the map engraved in 1816,
| by Mr. Michaelis, the longitudes of Pinto and the Island of
i Bruxas are 0° 47/ and 1° 34’. The profile of the land be-
] P

: tween Honda and the tableland of Bogota is founded on the
| barometric observations, which I have published in my
i| Nivellement des Andes, No. 64-130.
|
)
:
i
]


ALEXANDRE DE HUMBOLDT,


| Paris, March, 1821,


i .


W. Pople, Printer, 67, Chancery Lane.


eee


ee sisi ee Somanceaae ———— -
_ renin A SR Ser arlene” estes ae: eet A a =


Massgss


