AN ENQUIRY CONCERNING THE PRINCIPLES OF MORALS
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/humemorals): the 1751 first edition (London: printed for A. Millar). The nine sections, both appendices, and the concluding Dialogue complete.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

| | AN |

ENQUIRY
CONCERNING THE _

PRENCGCIPLES.


O.F.


MORALS.


rid


= he


@ di ‘is ° habe Yolp
ENOQU 4 R Y

Ay tir 08) cANCERNING THE J Ceasgh
PRINCIPLES

a OF


MORALS.


BY DAVID HUME, Eq, ¢


ge ee eee


LONDON:


; Printed for A. Mizar, over-againtt Carherine-ftreet
in the Sirazd. 1751.


'


ThE Me YORK
PUBLIC LIBRARY
SU995TB


; ASTOR, LENOX AND
“LDEN EGUNDATIUNS


:
!


bo 1945 L
a


CONTENTS.


Sxcrox,


Page.
EB. Of the general Principles of Morals, I
IY, Of Benevolence. | 11
EVI.. Of Fuffice: 33
IV. Of Political Society. 63
MV. Why Utility pleajes. 73
VI. Of Qualities ufeful to Ourfelves. 105

“Wit. of Qualities immediately agreeable to Our

Sekves. 143
| VI, Of Qualities immediately agreeable to
Orbers. 161

WIM. Conelufion of the Whole. 173
Arrenpsx J, Concersing Moral Sentiment. 197
Aprenpix II. Some farther Confiterations :

with regard to Fufice. . 213


| Mf Dialogue.


Ry


. ‘ys


ERRATA.


Page r. Line ro. for excepted read expe@ed. P.12..L.24. read
Cur OWR Gratification, P, 35 L. Be for one read a P. 18. L. Ze
for orbers read other Motives. P. 19. L. 9. for for read of. P.
a1. L. 3. for from it read from Fame. P. 36. L. 6. for Fellow.
read Fellows. ¥. 43. L. i for pointed read painted. P. 46.
L. 22. read ferve to ne manner, P. 47. L. 4. for te whom be is
not bound by any Ties read to none of which be is-bound. P. 50.
Bk. ult. read Render Poffeffions ever fo equal, Men's different Des
grees. P. 69. L. 17. where the Search for Health op Dleafure

rings. P. 82. L. 18. for then read rbefe. P. 83.1. 4. read
that of the Community. P. 86. L. 45, read Circumflance,. P,

1..L, x. read threaten’d. P, 95. L. 1. for alone read along,

~98. L.5.. for will read foall, P. 117. L. to. read pret
nearly of the fame Kind or Species. P. 129. L. 34. for prof. y74
read poffeffes. P. 145. L. 5. read this Paffage.. P. 150. L. 22.
for ewers read ever, P. 174. L. 18, read‘ ferve: to no manner.
P. 278. L. 24. read arife. P. 202. L.g. read is-often bighly
laudable. P. 205.. L. 6. read and muff fufpend. P. 217. L.
penult. read tends. P..227. L. 37. read bad been courted. P. .
233, L..21. read shat there was a Nation,


In the Notes.


Page 15. Line penult. for rbefe Effays read sii: Eng,
P. 55. Le 9. for Effay read Seéfion, "? %


{1)


SECTION a


& the General Principle f Mé ORALS,


A |


| ISPUTES with Perfons, pertinacioufly
ID obftinate in- their. Principles, are, of all
others, the moft irkfome; except, per-

haps, thofe with Perfons, who really do not believe
"at all the Opinion they defend, but engage in the
Controverfy, from Affeétation, from a Spirit of Op-
pofition, or from-a Defire of fhowing Wit and Inge-
nuity, fuperior to the reft of Mankind. The fame
blind Adherence to their own Arguments'is to be ex-
cepted in both ; the fame Contempt of their Antago-
mifts ; and the {ame ‘paflionate Vehemence, in inforc-
ing Soplfiftry’and- Falthood. And: as reafoning is
not the Sour¢e, whence cither Difputant derives his
‘Tenets ; ‘tis in vain to expel, that any Logic, which
{peaks not to the Affections, will ever engage him to |
embrace founder Principles. -
B Tucss


!


Hei eigh So >


uy  ° SECTION TY.


Tuosez who have refufed the Reality of moral
Diftinétions, may be ranked in the latter Clafs, a-
mongft the difingenuous Difputants; nor is it con-
peivable, that any human Creature could ever feri-
oufly believe, that all Characters and Adtions were
alike entitled to the Affeftion and Regard of every
one. The Difference, which Nature has plac’d be-
twixt one Mah and aziother, is fo wide, and this
Difference is {till fo much farther widened, by Educa-
tion, Example, and Habit, that, where the oppofite
Extremes come at once under our Apprehenfion,
there is no Scepticifm fo {crupulous, and fcarce any
Affarance fo determin'’d, as abfolutely to deny all
DiftinGion betwixt them. Let a Man’s Infenfibility
be ever fo preat, he muft often be touch’d with the
Images of RIG H T and WRONG; and let his
Prejudices be ever fo abftinate, he mutt obferve, that
others are fafceptible of like Impreffions. The only

' Way, therefore, of converting an Antagonift of this
Kind, is to leave him to himfelf. For, finding th:
No-body keeps up the Controverfy with him, "tis

-probable he will, at laf, of himfelf, from mere

Wearinels, come over to the Side of common Senfé
and Reafon. _


Tusre has been a Controverfly ftarted of late,
gouch better worth Examination, concerning th
, gener


Of the General Principles of Morats. ‘sg.
general Foundation of MORALS, whether they
are derived from REASON orfromSENT I-


- MENT; whether we attain the Knowledge of
: them by a Chain ef Argument and Dedaétion, or by


‘an immediate Feeling and finer internal Senfe ; whe-


ther, like all found Judgment of Trath and Falthoed,


they fhould be the fame in every rational inteHigent


1 Being; or whether, like the Perception of Beauty -


and Deformity, they are founded entirely on the par’
ticular Fabric and Conftitation of the human Species.


Tur antient Philofephers, tho’ they often affirm,
that Virtue is nothing but Conformity to Reafon, yet,”


| in general, feem to confider Morals as derwing their


Exiftence from Tafte and Sentiment. On the other


' Hand, our modern Enquirers, tho’ they alfo talk


much of the Beauty of Virtue, and Deformity of
Vice, yet have commonly endeavoured to account


| for thefe DiftinGions by metaphyfical Reafonings,:


and by Deductions from the moft abftract Principles


“of human Underftanding. Such Confafion reign'd


in thefe Subje@ts, that an Oppofition of the. greateft
Confequence could prevail betwixt one Syftem and
amother, and even in the Parts almoft of each indivi-
dual Syftem ; and yet No-body, till very lately, was:
ever fenfible of it. The elegant and fublime Lord
Shaftesbury, who firft gave Occafion to remark this.
DiftinGion, and- whe, in general, adher'd to the

, ; B 2- Prin-


Ae ,SECTION IL
Principles of the Antients, is wis pane eatinely
| free from the fame Confufion,.


Ir muft be acknowledged, ahat both ‘Sides of the
Queftion are fufcepuble. ; of. {pecious Arguments.
Moral DiftinGtions, it may. be faid, are difcernjble by
pure Reafon: Elfe, whence the many Difpates, that
reign, in common Life, as well as in Philofophy,
with regard to this Subject: The long Chain of Proofs
ofteradduc'd qn both Sides; the. Examples cited, the
Authorities appeal’d to, the Analogies employ'd, the
Fatlacies:davected, ‘tht Inferences drawn, ‘and the Ie-
 veral Conclufions adjuited: to their proper Principles.
Truth is difputable ; not, Taite: What exifts in the
Nature of Things-is the Standard of' our. Judgment ;
what each Man feels within himéelf .is the Standard
of. Sentiment. Propofitions in Geometry: may be
prov °g, Syftems in Phyfics may be -eontroverted ;
but the Harmony of Verfe, the the Tendernefs of Paffion,
the Briiliancy of Wit muft give immediate Pleafure.
No. Man reafons concerning another’s Beauty ; but
frequently concerning the : Juftice or Enpiftice of his
— Adions.: .Inevery. Trial of Criminals, their firft'Ob-
jef is to difprove the FaGs alledged, .and deny the
AAjons imputed te them: The fecond to prove, that.
even if thefe AGions were real, they might be juftified, |
as innocent and lawful. "Tis copfefledly by Dedac-
tions. = ‘the Underianding, ce the firft Point is af
3% 3 certain’d ;


Of the General Principles of Morac. ’5.
certain’d : How can we fuppofe, that a different Fa-
‘culty of the Mind 1s employ’d in fixing the other ?


On the other Hand, thofe, who would refolve alk
moral Determinations tnto Sentiment, may endeavour


- to fhow, that ‘tis impofiible for Reafon ever to-draw


Conclufions of this Nature. To Virtue, fay they,
it belongs to be amia*le, and Vice odious. This forms
their very Nature or Effence. But can Reafon or Ar-
gumentation diftribute thefe different Epithcts to any
Subjects, and pronounce @ pricri, that this mutt pro-
duce Love, and that Hatred ? Or what otlier Rea-
fon can we ever. affign for thefe “ Affeetions, but the
original Fabric and Formation of the human Mind,
which is naturally adapted to receive them?


‘Tue End of all moral. Speculations is to teach us
our Duty ; and by proper Reprefentatians of the De-
formity of Vice and Beauty of Virtue, beget cor-
refpondent Habits, and engage us to avoid the one,


and: embrace the other. But is this ever to be ex-


‘peéted from Inferences and Conclufions of the Un-


derftanding, which, of ‘themtfelvés, have no Hold of


cae


the Affeétions, nor fet thé aétive Powers of Men in.


‘ Motion and Employment ? ‘They difcover Truth 5


- but where the Truths they difcover are indifferent,
and beget no Defire or Averfion, they can have no:


~ Influence on Condust and Behaviour, What is ho-


B 3 nourable,.


6. SECTION Ff.
nourable, what is fair, what is becoming, what is
noble, what is generous, takes Poffeffion of the Heart,
and animates us to embrace and to maintain it. What
is intelligible, what is evident, what is probable,
what is true, procures only the cool Affent of the Un-
derftandiny ; and gratifying a {peculative raene
puts an end to our Refearches.


_Exticuisa all the warm Feelings and Prepoffef-
fions in favour of Virtue, and all Difguft or Averfion
againft Vice: Render Men totally indifferent towards
thefe DiftinGtions ; and Morality Js nO longer a prac-
‘tical Study, nor has any ee to regulate our
“Lives and Adtions.


Tnesx Arguments on both Sides (and many more
might be adduc’d) are fo plaufible, that Lam apt to
- fufpe& they may, both of them, be folid and fatis-
faftory, and that Reafon and Sentiment concur in al-
moft all moral Determinations and Conclufions.
- The final Sentence, ’tis probable, which pronounces
Charagters and A@ions amiable or odious, praife.
worthy or blameable; that which ftamps on them
‘the Mark of Honour or Infamy, Approbation or
Cenfure ; that which renders Morality an a@tive Prin.
‘ciple, and conftitutes Virtue our Happinefs, and Vice
our Mifery: °Tis probable, I fay, that this final
Sentence depends on fome internal Senfe or Feeling,

| which


: Of the General Principles of Mona.s. y
which Nature has made univerfal to the wholy


Species. For what elfe can have an Influence of this


Nature? But, in order to pave the Way for fucha
Sentiment, and give Men a proper Difcernment of
its Objet, "tis often neceflary, we find, that much
Reafoning fhould precede, that -nice Diftinétions
be made, juft Conclufions drawn, diftant Comparifons
form’d, accurate Relations examin’d, and general
Fats fix'd and afcertain’d. Some Species of beauty,
efpecially the natural Kinds, on their firft Appear-
ance, command our Affedtion, and -A pprobation ;
and where they fail of this Effect, ‘tis impoffible for
any Reafoning to redrefs their Influence, or adapt.
them better to our Tafte and Sentiment. But in many


_ Orders of Beauty, . particularly thofe of the finer.


Arts, ’tis requifite to employ much Reafoning, ia
order to feel the proper Sentiment ; and a falfe Reliih
may frequently be corregted by Argument and Re-
fleétion. There are juft Grounds to conclude, that °
moral Beauty partakes much of this latter Species,
and demands the Affiftance of our intelletual Fa»
culties, in order to give it a fuitable Influence on the
human Mind.


Bur tho’ this Queftion, concerning the general’


7 Principle of Morals, be extremely curious and im-


portant; ‘tis needlefs for us, at prefent, to employ
farther Care im our Enquiries concerning it. For if
we canbe fo happy, in the Courfe of this Enquiry.

 B4 | as.


mance EE


$8 ' SECTION I.
as to fix the juft Origin of Morals, ‘twill then eafily
appear how far Sentiment or Reafon enters into all
Determinations of this Nature ®*.. ‘ Mean while, it
. will {carce be pofithle for us, ’ere this Controverfy is
fully decided, to proceed in that accurate Manner,
xequir'd in the Sciences ; by beginning with exa&
Definitions of VIR TU Eand VICE, which are
the Objects of our prefent Enquiry. But we thall do
what may juftly be efteem‘d as fatisfaftory. We fhall
confider the Matter as an Object of Experience,
We fhall calk every Quality or ABion of the Mind, vir-
tious, which és attended with the general Approbation
of Mankind: And we shall denominate vicious, every
Quality, which. is the Obje@ of general Blame or Cen-
Sure. -'Thefe Qualities we fhall endeavour to colleét ;
and after examining, on both Sides, the feveral
Circumftances, in which they agree, ‘tis hop’d we
may, at laf, reach the Foundation of Ethics, and
find thofz univerfal Principles, from which all moral
Blame or Approbation is ultimately derived. As
this is a-Queftion of Fag, net of abftra& Science,
‘we can only expeét Succefs, by following this expe-
rimental Method, and deducing general Maxims from
a Comparifon of particular Inftances. The other
fcientifical Method ; where a general abftract Prin-
ciple is firft eftablifh’d, and is afterwards branch’d

® See Appendix Fist. |
out


Of the General Principles of Moras. 9:
out into a Variety of Inferences and Conclufions,
may be more perfect in itfelf, but fuits lefs the Im-
perfection of human Nature, and is a common
Source of Illufion and Miftake, in this as well as in-
other Sizbjects. Men are now-cured of their Paffion.


for Hypothefes and Syftems in natural Philofophy,


and will hearken to no Arguments but thofe deriv'd
from Experience. "Tis full Time they fhould begin:
a like Reformation in all moral Difquifitions ; and.
reject every Syftem of: Ethics, however fubtile or in--
genious, that is not founded on Faét and Obferva—
tion.


Bs SECTLON


Nn


(13)


SECTION IL.


Of BenevoLence.


PART I.


HERE isa-Principle, fappos’d to prevail ao

mongft many, which is utterly incompatible.
with all Virtue or moral Sentiment; and as it can.
proceed from nothing but the moft deprav'd Difpo-
fition, foin its Turn it tends ftill farther to fofter and“
encourage that Depravity. This Principle is, that
alt Benevolence is mere Hypocrify, Friendthip 2 Cheat,.
Public Spirit a Farce, Fidelity a Snare to: procure:
Truf and Confidence ; and while all of us, at the
Bottam, purfue only our private Intereft, we wear |
thefe fair Difguifes, in order to put others off theig
Gaardl, and expofe them the more to our Wiles and:
Machinations. What Heart one mutt: be poffeis'd’.
of, who profeffes fach Principles, and who-fecls no.
internal Sentiment to belye fo pernicious.a. Theory,.
‘tis eafy toimagine : And alfo, what Degree of Af-.
fodtion and Benevolence he can. bear. to.a Speciesy.
oe B46 whony:


32 SECTION II.

whom he reprefents under fuch odious Colours, and
fuppofes fo little fufceptible of Gratitude or any Re-
tam of Affection. Or if we will not afcribe thefe
Principles altogether to a corrupted Heart, we muft,
at leaft, account for them from the moft carelefs and
precipitate Examination. Superficial Reafeners,
indeed, ebferving many falfe. Pretences amongf
Mankind, and’ feeling, perliaps, no very ftrong Re-
ftraint in their own Difpofition, might draw a general
and a hafty Conclufion, that all is equally corrupted,
and that Men, different from alf other Animals, and
indeed -from all other Species of Exiftence, admit of
no Degrees. of Good or Bad, but are, in every In-
ftance, the fame Creatures, ane different ue
ii A ppearances,


_. "Tuer g is another Principle, eee refembling
the former ; which has been much. infifted on. by.
Philofophers, and hae been the Foundation of many
a fair Syftem ; that. whatever Affection one, may feel,
_ or imagine he feels for others, no.Paffion is, or can
he difinterefted ;. that the mof. generous F riendihip,
however fincere, is a Modification of Self-leve’; and
that even. unknown. to: Onurfelves, we feck only our
Gratification, while we appear the. moft deeply en.
" gag’d in Schemes for the Liberty and Happinefs of
Manking: By a Tura of Imagination, by a Refine-
ment of Refieftien; by an Enthufiafm. of Paffion,
: : we


. Of Bensvorence. © ~ ag
qe feem to take Part in the Interefts of others, and’
gmagine Ourfelves diveited of all felfifh Views and
Confiderations : But at the Bottom, the moft generous
Patriot and moft niggardly Mifer, the braveft Hero


and moft abject Coward, have, in every Action, an


equal Regard to their own Happinels and elares: .


u 2


Waosvin ceaciodes, from the feeming Tendency


_ of this Opinion, that thofe, who make Profeffion of


it, cannot poflibly feel the true. Sentiments of Bene-

volence, or have any Regard for genuine Virtue, will

often.- find himfelf,, in Practice, very mach miftaken,

Probity and. Honour were no Strangers to Epicurus

and his Seét. Atticus. and Horace feem to have « en-

joy’d from Nature, and cultivated by Reflection, as
generous and friendly Difpofitions as any- Difciple of
the aufterer Schools. And. amongft the. Moderns,

Hobbes and Locke, who maintain ‘d the felfith Syftem.

of Morals, liv'd moft irreproachable. Lives ; tho’ the

former lay not under any Reftraints of Religion,

which might fapply the Defects of his Philofophy.


AN. Bpiturtan ora Hobbi iff readily allows, that there.
is fach a. Thing ? as Friend hip in the Wortd, without.
Hypocrify” or Difguife.; 3 tho? he may attempt, by 2.
fphilofophicat’ Chymiftry, to ‘refolve the Elements of
this Paffion, if I'may fo fpeak, into thofe of another,,


~ and explain every Affe&tion to be Self-love, twifted


and


N


34 SECTION ff,


and moulded'into a Variety of Shapes and Appears


ances. But as the fame Furn of Imagination pre-
wails not in every Man, nor gives the fame Dire&ier


to the original Paffion ; this is fufficient, even ace -


cording to the felfith Syftem, to make the wideft Dif-
ference in human Chiarafters, and denominate one


Man virtuous and humane, another vicious and


meanly interefted. I effeem tlie Man, whofe Self-
love, by whatever Means, is fo dire&ted as to give
him a-Concern for others, and render him ferviceable
to Society: As I hate or defpife him, who has no
Regard’ to any Thing beyond his own pitiful Gratrfi-
cations and Enjoyments. In vain would you fuggett,
that thefe Characters, tho’ feemingly oppofite, are,
atthe Bottom, the fame, and that a very inconfidér-
able Turn of Imagination forms the whole Difference
betwixt them. Each Character, notwithftanding
thefe inconfiderable Differences, appears to me, in


_ Praétice,. pretty durable and’ untranfmutable. And" -
J find not, inthis, more. than in other Subje&s, that. .


the natural Sentiments, arifing from the general Ap-
pearances of Things, are eafily déftroy'd by refin’d’
RefleGtions cancerning the minute Origin of thefe
Appearances. Does not the lively, cheerful Colour
of a Countenance infpire me with Complacency and
Pleafure ; even tho’ I learn from Philofophy, that alf
‘Difference of Complexion. arifes from the. moft mic

"puts


|


. Of Bewnvorence, “1g
-nute Differences of Thicknefs, in the..mof minute
-Parts of the Skin; by which Differences one Super-
ficies.is qualify’d to reflect one of the original Colours
of Light, and abforb the others 2


Bur tho’ the Queftion, concerning the univerfal
‘or partial Selfithnefs of Man, be not fo material, as
is ufually imagin'd, to Morality and Praétice, it is
certainly of great Confequence in the fpeculative.
Science of human Nature, and is a proper Object of
Curiofity and Enquiry. It may not, therefore, be
improper, in this ti to beftow.a few Reflections
‘upon it *.


Tus moft obviaus-Objedtion tothe felfifi Hypo-
thefis, is, that being contrary to common Feeling and
our moft anprejadic’d Notions and Opinions ; there
® Benevolence naturally divides into two Kinds, the general snd
ferticular, The firft is, where we have no Friendthip or Con.
Bexion or Efteem for the Perfon, but feel only a general Sympathy
with him or a Compafiion for his Pains, and a Congratulation with
his Plea(ures. The-other Species of Benevolence is founded on an


_ Opinion of Virtue, on Services done us, or on fome particular


Cons:xions. Both thefe Sentiments muft be allow’d real in human
Mlatare; bot whetherthey will refolve into fome nice Confiderations
of Self-love, is a Queftion more curious then important. The fore
“mer Sentiment,“ viz. that of g-neral Benevolence of Humanity or
Sympathy, we“thall have Occafion frequently to treat of in the
Corfe of thefe Effays ; end I affume it as real, from general Fx


. perience, witheot any other Proof,


aT


EE ee es


6 SECTION ‘II.
is requir'd the ‘highefi Stretch of Phitofopliy to efa-
- blith:{o extraordinary a Paradox.  ’To-the moft-care-
. Jefs Obferver, there-appear to be fuch Difpofitions as
Benevolence and‘ Generofity ; fuch Affections as
~ Love, Friendhhip, Compafiion, ‘Gratitude. Thefe
- Sentiments” have their Catfes, Effects, Objegts, and
: Operations, ‘markt by common Language and Obfer-
~ vation, and. plainly diftinguith’d from the felfith ‘Paf-
‘fions, And as this is thé obvious Appearance of.
. Things, it muft be admitted ; till fome Hypothefis be
- difcover'd, ‘which, .by: penetrating deeper irito-human
i Nature,- inray' préve the former Affettions to. be-No-
thing but Modifications of the latter. All Attempts
of this Kind have hitherto prov’d fruitlefs, and feem
-to have proceeded entirely from that’ Love of Simpii-
- city, which has been the Source of ‘much falfe Rea-
 foning in’Philofophy. F fhall not here enter into any
: Detail on the: -prefent Subjeft. - Many.able Philofo-
“phers have fhown the-Infaficiency of thefe Syftents.
' And I fhall take for granted what, I’ believe, the
, fmallett Refledtion will make evident. to every ne
oe Eequres:


, a «(
' Bur the Nature of the Sabet fitnithes the fttony=
“eft Prefumption, that no better Syffem will ever, for
. the future, be invented, to account for the Origin of
--the benevolent from the felfifh Affe€tions, and redute
all the various Emotions of. the human Mind’to a per-.
. fe.


| Of Bengvorence.— 1”
fect Simplicity and Uniformity. The Cafe is not the
fame in this Species of Philofophy as in Phyfics.
Many an Hypothefis in Nature, contrary to firft Ap-
pearances, has been found, on more accurate Scru-
tiny, folid and fatisfaftory, Inftances of this Kind
are fo frequent, that a judicious, as well as wittyPhi- |
lofopher * has ventur’d to affirm, if there be more
than one Way, in which any Phenomenon may be


_produe’d, that there is a general Prefumption for its


arifing from the. Caufes, which are the leaft obvious
and familiar. But the Prefumption always lies on the
other Side,: in all Enquiries concerning the Origin of
our Paffions, and the internal Operations of the hu-
man Mind. The fimpleft and moft obvious Caufe,
that can there be affign’d for any Phenomenon, is
probably the true one. When a Philofopher, in the
Explication of his Syftem, is oblig’d to have Recourfe
to fomé very intricate and refin’d Refle&tions, and to
fuppofe them effential to the Production of any Paf-
fion or Emotion, we have Reafon to be extremely on
our Guard againft fo fallacious an Hypothefis. The
Affections are not fufceptible of any Impreffion from
the Refinements of Reafon or Imagination ; and ’tis
always found, that a vigorous Exertion of the latter
Faculties, from the narrow Capacity of the human


‘ Mind, defroys all Energy and Activity in the former.


@ Monfr, Fontenclle.


a


Our


en


_


48 SEE€TION I.
Our predominant Motive or Intention is, indeed,
~ frequently conceal’d from Ourfelves, when it is
gningled and confounded with others, which the
Mind, from Vanity or Self-conceit, is defirous
fuppofing of greater Force and Influence : But there
is no Inftance, that a Concealment of this Nature
has ever arifen from the Abftrufenefs and Intricacy
‘of the Motive. A Man, who has Joft a Friend and
‘Patron, may flatter himfelf, that all his Grief arife:
from generous Sentiments, withoat any Mixture of
: narrow or interefted Confiderations: But a Man, whc
grieves for a valuable Friend, that needed his Patron-
age and Proteétion ; how can we fuppofe, that hs
paffionate Tendernefs arifes from fome metaphyfical
-Regards to a Self-intereft, which has no Foundation
cor Reality? Wemay as wellimagine, that minute
Wheels and Springs, like thofe of a Watch, give
Motion to a loaded Waggon, as account for the
_.Origin of Paffion from fach abftrufe Reflections.


Animas are found fufceptible of Kindnefs, both
to their own Species and to ours ; nor is there, in
this Cafe, the leaft Sufpicion of Difguife or Artifice.
‘Shall we account for all their Sentiments too, from
refin'd Dedudtions of Self-intereft? Or if we ad-
mit a difinterefted Benevolence in the inferior Species,
by what Rule of Analogy can we refute i it.in the Su-
perior ? :

“Rey:


‘Of BENEVOLENCE. - ¥9


Love betwixt the Sexes begets a Complacency
and Good-will, very diftin& from the Gratification
of an Appetite. Tendernefs to their Offspring, in
all fenfible Beings, is commonly able alone to.
-counterballance the ftrongeft Motives of Self-love,
and has no Manner of Dependance on that Affection.
What Intereft can a fond Mother have in View, who
fofes her Health by afliduous Attendance on her fick
Child, and afterwards languithes, and dies for Grief,
when freed, by its Death, from the Slavery of aoa)
_ Attendance ? -


_ IsGratitude no Affection of the human Breaft, or 1s


that aWord merely, without anyMeaning or Reality?


Have we no Complacency or Satisfaction in one
‘Man's Company above another’s, and no Defire of
‘the Welfare of our Friend, even tho’ Abfence or .
-Death fhould prevent us from all Participation in it ?
Or what is it commonly, that gives us any Partici-
‘pation in it, even while alive and prefent, but our
Affeétion and ene to him ?


Tuese and a thonfand other Inftances ‘are Marks
of a generous Benevolence in haman Nature, where
no real Intereft binds us to the Objeét. And how an
ivaaginary Intereft, known and avow’d for fuch, can
-be the Origin of any Paflion or Emotion, feems dif-

ficult


20 SECTION IL.

ficult to explain. No fatisfactory Hypothefis of this
‘Kind has yet been difcover’d ; nor is there the fmalle
Probability, that the fature Induftry of Men will ever
be attended with more favourable Succefs.


Bur farther, if we confider rightly of the Matter,
we fhall find, that the Hypothefis, which allows of a
difinterefted Benevolence, diftin® from Self-love, has
really more Simp/icity in it, and is more conformable
to the Analogy of Nature, than. that which pretends

to refolve all Friendthip and Hemanity into this latter
Principle. There are: bodily Wants or Appetités,
acknowledged by every one, which neceffarily pre- '
cede all fenfual Enjoyment, and carry us direétly to
- feck Poffeffion of the Obje@. Thus, Hunger and
: Thirft have eating and drinkirig for their End ; and

from the Gratification of thefe- primary Appetites

-arifes a Pleafure, which may. become the Objeé of
another Species of Defire or Inclination, that is {e-
-condary and interefted. In the fame Manner, there
-are mental Paffions, by .which we are impell’d
immediately to feek. particular Objects, fuch: as
Fame or Power or Vengeance, without any Regard
to Intereft ; and when thefe Objetts are attain’d, 2
pleafingEnjoyment enfues, as the Confequence of our
indulg’d Affections. Nature muft, by the internal
Frame and Conftitution of the Mind, give an origi-
nal Propenfity to Fame, ‘ere we can reap any Pleafure

from


Of Bengvorence. . |


_* from it, or purfue it from Motives of Self-love, and
_ aDefire of Happinefs. If I have no Vanity, I take
i no Delight in Praife: If I be void of Ambition,


Power, gives no Enjoyment: If I be not angry, the
Punifhment of an Adverfary. is totally indifferent to


, Te. In all thefe Cafes, there is a Paflion, which:


, eee rs


points immediately ta.the Obje, and. conftitates it:


our Good' or Happinefs ; as there are other fecon-
dary Paflions, which afterwards arife, and purfue it


. as a Part of our Happinefs, when once it is confti-


. tuted fuch, by our original Affections. Werethere .


no Appetites of any Kind, antecedent to Self-love,


| that Propenfity could fcarce ever exert itfelf ; becaufe
- we fhould, in that Cafe, have felt few and flender
. Pains or Pleafures, and have little Mifery or Happi-


; nefs, to avoid or to purfue, oe


.
e
+e ~_ ae wo


Now wheré ‘is the Difficulty of’ corictiving, that
this-may Hikewifé be the Cafe with Benevolence and


_ Friendihip, and that, from the: original ‘Frame of our
" ‘Temper,' we titty feel a Defire of ancther'y Happi-
. nefs or Good, which; by Means’ of . that -Affe@tion,
_ becomes’ our -own Good, and is’afterwards parfued,


_ from tHe conjéin'd Motives of Benevolence and Self-
enjoyment? Who - fees: not- that Vengeance, from


the Force aloné of Paffion, may be-fo eagerly pur-


fued, as to make us knowingly negleét every Confi--


dedation: of Eafe, Intereft, or Safety; and, like


j {ome


22° SECTION HU,

fome vindiftive Animals, infufe our very Souls
the Wounds we give an Enemy *? ‘And what a m2.
lignant Philofophy muft it be, that will not allow, »
Humanity and Friendfhip, the {ame Privileges, whic
are indifputably granted to the darker Paffions of Ea-
mity and Refentshent ? Such a. Philofophy is
more like a Satyr, than a true Delineation or De-
{cription, of humen Nature; and may be a good
Foundation for-paradoxical: Wit and Raillery, butis
avery bad one-for any ferious Argument or Reafos-


PART IL.


T may be efteem’d, perhaps, a fuperfluous Task
to prove, that the benevolent or fofter Affections
are VIRTUOUS; and wherever they appex,
atract the Efteem, Approbation, and Good-will of
— The: Epithets jociable, good-natur'd, ly.
ane, merciful, grateful, friendly, generous, beneficent
are Epi in all Languages, and univerfally exprei
the higheft Merit, which Laman Nature is capable 0
attaining: Where thefe, amiable Qualities are at-
tended with Birth and. Power and eminent Abilitic;,
and difplay themfelves in the good Government or
~ ©- Animafque in vulnere ponunt, Vic.
— Pum aaa noeeat, fui negligens, faye Seneca of Anger. Dera. Lu
ufeful


~~»


ow ~™ ot ll. Op Ol! Oe KK


ee


Of BENEVOLENCE, a
ufeful Inftruétion of Mankind, they feem even to


. saife the Poffeffors of them above the Rank of suman
. Nature, and approach them, in fome Meafure, to the


Divine. Exalted’ Capacity, undaunted Courage,


. profperoys Succefs ; thefe may only expofe a Hero
_ Or Politician to the Envy and Malignity of the Pub-


——


lic :. But as -foon as the Praifes are. added of humane.
and beneficent ; when Inftances are. difplay'd of


_ -Lenity, Tendernefs, or Friendfhip; Envy itfelf is
. filent, or joins the general Voice of epee and.


Acclamation.


- ‘Wun Pericles, the great tits Statefman and
General, was on his Death-bed, his furrounding


' Friends, efteeming him now infenfible, began to
* Gndulge their Sorrow for their expiring Patron, by


Va


enumerating his great Qualities and Succeffes, his
-Conquefts and Vittories, the unufual Length of his


*  Adminiftration, and his nine Trophies, erected over
’ ght Enemies of the Republic, Youforget, cries the:


dying Hero; who had heard all, you forget the mof?
eminent of my Praifes, while you dwell fo much on rbofe


 «uulgar Advantages, in aubich Fortune bad a principal


Share. You bave not obferv'd, that no Citinen bas ever


- _yet wore Mourning on my Account *.


© Plot. in Pericles :
. fy


24 SECTION UW.


In Men of more ordinary Talents and Capacity,
the focial Virtues become, if poffible, ftill more ef-
{entially requifite ; there being nothing eminent, in
that Cafe, to compenfate.for the:Want of them, or
preferve the Perfon from our fevéreft Hatred, .as well


as Contempt. A high “Ambition; an elevated Cou-


rage is-apt, (ays Cicera, in lefs perfec: Charatters, to
degenerate into a turbulent Ferocity. The more
focial and fofter Virtues are there chiefly to be re-
garded. Thefe are always good and amiable *.


, THe principal Advantage, which Fuvenal difco-
vers in the extenfive Capacity of the human Species,
is, that it renders our Benevolence alfo more exten-
five, and gives us larger Opportunities of {preading
our kindly Influence than what are indulg’d to the
inferior Creation f. It. mutt, indeed, . be confeft;
that by doing Good only, ‘can a Man tuly-enjoy the
Advantages of being eminent. His exalted Statian,
of itfelf, but the, more expoles him to, Tempeft and
Thunder. His fole _ Prerogative. is to afford Shelter
to Inferiors, who repofe: themfelves under his Cover
and Protection. _ a aes:


Bur I forget, that it is not my prefent Bufinefs to '


recommend Generofity and Benevolence, orto paint,


® Cic, de Officiis, Lib. 3. + Sat. xv. 139, & feq.


|


ae, —_— | ~~ SEES. ee |e en, 4 eee. geen, ey,


Of Benevorence? we
ja their true Colours, all the genuine Charms of the
focial Virtues. Thefe, indeed, fufficiently engage. _
every. Heart,-on the firft Apprehenfion of them ; and
‘Us difficult.to abftain from fome Sally of Panegyric,
as often as they eccur in.Difcourfe or Reafoning,
But our.Obje& here being more the fpeculative, than
the. practical Part-of Morals, "twill fuffice to remark,
what will readily, I believe, be allow'd, that no
Qualities are more entitled to the general Good-will
and Approbation of Mankind, than Beneficence and
Humanity, Friendfhip -and ‘Gratitude, Natural Af.
feétion and. Public Spirit, or whatever proceeds from
a .tender Sympathy with others, and a generous
Concern for our Kind and Species. Thefe, where-
ever they appear, feem to transfufe themfelves, in a
Manner, into: each Beholder, and to call forth, in
their own Behalf, the fame favourable and affection-
ate Sentiments, which they exert on all around
them. :


PART If,


A ZE may obferve, that, in difplaying the Praifes
of any humane, beneficent Man, there is
one Circumftance, which never fails to be amply in-


fifted on, viz. ‘the -Happinefs‘and Satisfaétion, -de-


tiy'd to Society from his Intercourfe and Good.
Cc offices,


26 SECTIO.N IL.
.ofaces. To his Parents, we are apt to fay, he en-
dears himfelf, by his pious Attachment and duteous
Care, ftill more than by the Connexions of Nature.
‘His Children never feel his Authority, but when em-
ploy’d for their Advantage. With him, the-Ties of
Love are confolidated by Beneficence and Friend-
‘fhip. The Ties of Friendfhip approach, in a fond,
Obfervance of each obliging Office, to thofe of Love
and, Inclination. His. Domeftics and Dependants
have in him a fure Refource ;: and no longer dread.
the Power of Fortane, but fo far as fhe exercifes it
over him. From him, the hungry receive Food,
the naked Cloathing, the ignorant and flothful Skill
and Induftry. Like the Sun, an inferior Minifter


cof Providence, he cheers, invigorates, ‘and, fuftains


the furrounding World. :


_ Tr confin’d.to private Life, the Sphere of his Ac-


tivity is narrower; but his Influence is all benign
and gentle. If exalted into a higher Station, Man.
kind and Pofterity reap the Fruit of his Labours.


As thefe Topics of Praife never fail to be em-
ploy’d, and with Succefs, where we would infpire
Efteem for any one ;‘may we not thence conclude,
that the U TILIT Y, refulting from the focia}
Virtues, forms, at leaft, a Part of their Merit, and

| is


-”-


Of Bewevorence. . 2p
is one Soarce of that euooanee and ave fo uni-
oer ee them a :


Wuen we recommend even an Animal or Plant as
weful and beneficial, we give it an Applaufe and Re--
commendation fuited to its Nature. As on the
‘other Hand, Reflection on the baneful Influence of
any of thefe inferior Beings always infpires ‘us with
the Sentiments of Averfion. The Eye is pleas’d
with the Profpe&t of Corn-fields and loaded Vine-
yards ; Horfes grazing, and Flocks pafturing : But
flies the View of Bryars and Brambles, affording
Shelter to Wolves and Serpents.


A Machine, a Piece of Furniture, a Garment, a
Houfe, well contriv’d for Ufe and Conveniency, is
fo far beautiful, and is contemplated with Pledfure
and Approbation. An experienc’d Eye is here fen-
fible to many Excellencies, which efcape Perfons
ignorant and uninftructed,


Can any Thing ftronger be faid in Praife of a
_ Profeffion, fuch as Merchandize or Manufactory,
, than to obferve the Advantages, which it procures
| to Society? And is not a Monk and Inquifitor en-
_ rag'd, when we treat his Rank and Order as ufelefs.
_ OF pernicious to Mankind ?


C 2 | THe


~ to the Support and Well-being of Mankind, This is


28 SECTION IL.


‘Tue Hiftorian exults in difplaying the Benefit
arifing from his Labours. The Writer of Romances
alleviates or denies -the bad Confequences.afcrib’d
to his Manner of Compofition.


Ix general, what Praife is imply’d ‘in:the’‘fimple
Epithet, w/e/ul! What Reproach in the contrary !


Your Gods, fays Cicero *, in: Oppofition to the
Epicureans, cannot juftly claim any Worthip or Ado-
ration, with whatever imaginary PerfeCtons-you may
fuppofe them endow’d. ‘They are totally ufelefs and
ina@tive. And even the Egyptians, whom you fo
much ridicule, never confecrated any Animal but
on Account of its Utility.


Tue Sceptics affert +, ‘tho’ abfurdly, that the
Ovigin of all religious Worfhip was deriv’d from the
Ueility of-inanimate Objeéts, as the Sun and Moon,


‘alfo the common Reafon, affign’d by Hiftorians, for
the Deification of eminent ‘Heroes .and Legiflators {.


To plant a Tree, to cultivate a Field, to beget
Children ; meritorious Aéts, according to the Re-
ligion of Zoroafter.


* De Nat, Deor. Lib. v, + Sext, Emp. adverfus Math. Lib. ne
q Diod. Sic. pafim,


Of Benxvorence.. ag


In all Determinations of Morality, this Circum-
ftance of public Utility is ever principally in View ;
and wherever Difputes arife, whethér in Philofophy’
or common Life, concerning the Bounds ef Duty,
the Queftion cannot, by any Means, be decided.
with greater Certainty, than by afcertaining, on any:
Side, the true. Interefts of Mankind. If any falfe
Opinion, embrac’d- from Appearances, has beea
found to prevail ; as foon as farther Experience,
and.founder Reafoning have given us jufter Notions
of human Affairs; we retract our firft Sentiments,
and adjuft a-new the Boundaries of moral Good and.


Axtms to common Beggars is naturally prais‘d-;
Dbecaufe it feems to carry Relief to the diftreft’
and indigent : But when we obferve the Encourage--
ment thence arifing to Idlenefs and Debauchery, we
regard that Species of Charity rather as a.Weaknefs
than a Virtue.


Tyrannicide or the Affafination of: Ufurpers and:
oppreffive. Princes was highly prais’d in antient:
Times ; becaufe. it both freed Mankind from many’
of thefe Monfters, and feem’d to keep the others in
Awe, whom the Poinard orthe Poifon could not reach,
But Hiftory and Experience having fince convine’d —

C 3 : uss,


30 SECTION Ik

us, that this Praétice encreafes the Jealoufy and
Cruelty of ‘Princes ; a Timoleon and a Brutus, tho’
treated with Indulgence on Account of the Prejudices


ef their Times, are now confider'd as very improper
Models for Imitation. |


. Liseratity in Princes is regarded as a Mark of
Beneficence : But when it occurs, that the homely
Bread of the Honeft and Induftrious is often thereby
converted into.delicious Cates for the Idle and the
Prodigal, we foon retract our heedlefs Praifes. The
Regrets of a Prince, for having loft a Day, were
noble and generous: But had he intended to have
{pent it in. Acts of Generofity to-his greedy Courtiers;
*twas better loft than mifemploy’d after that Man-
her, i


. Luxury, or a Refinement on the Pleafures and
Roiveatenciss of Life, had long heen fuppos’d: the
Scurce of every Corruption and Diforder in Go-
vernment, and the immediate Caufe of Faétion,
Sedition, civil Wars, and the total Lofs of Liberty.
dt was, therefore, univerfally regarded as a Vice,
and was an Object of Declamation to all Satyrifts
and fevere Moralifts. Thofe, who prove, or at-
tempt to prove, that fuch Refinements rather tend to
the Encreafe of Induftry, Civility, and Arts, regu-
date a-new ow moral as Ww ol as pelitical Sentiments,

and


a a nr ee ee ee ng


ee a -


, Of Bunevo.ence. 3K


and reprefent as laudable and innocent, what had:
formerly been regarded as pernicious and blame-
able.


Upon the Whole, then, it feems undeniable, that
there is fuch a Sentiment in human Nature as dif-
interefted Benevolence ; that nothing can beftow
more Merit on any human Creature than the Pof-
feffion of it in an eminent Degree; and that a Part,
at leaft, of its Merit arifes from its Tendency to
promote the Interefts of our Species, and beftow
Happinefs on human Society. We carry our View
into the falutary Confequences of fuch a Character
and Difpofition ; and whatever has fo benign an In-
fluence, and forwards fo defirable an End is beheld
with Complacency and Pleafure. The focial Vir-
tues are never regarded without their beneficial
Tendencies, nor view’d as barren and unfruitful.
The Happinefs of Mankind, the Order of Society,
the Harmony of Families, the mutual Support of
Friends are always confider'd as the Refult of their
gentle Dominion over the Breafts of Men.


_ How confiderable a Part of their Merit we ought.
to afcribe to their Utility, will better appear from
fature Difquifitions * ; as well as the Reafon, why
this Circumftance has fuch a Command over our.
Efteem and Approbation. f


® Se&, 3d and 4th, +. Se&,. 5th.
C4 SECTIQOMb


( 33.):


:


SECTION IH.


Of JusTrick.


PART I.


“EA HAT Justice: is ufefil to Society, and’
confequently that Part of its Merit, at leaft,

muft arife from. that .Confideration ; *twould-be a
faperfluous Undertaking: to prove. That public
Utility: is the. fo/e Origin of Juftice, and.that Re-
fleGtions on the beneficial Confequences of this Vir-
tue are the /o/e Foundation of its Merit ; this Pro- -
pofition,- being more curious and important, will
better deferve our Examination and-Enquiry.


Lexus fuppofe, that Nature has beftow’d on hu.
mah Race fuch profufe Abundance of all external
Conveniencies, that, without any Uncertainty in the
Event, without any Care or Induftry on our Part, .
gvery Individual finds himfelf . fully provided of

C 5. whateveg.


34. SECTION II.

whatever his moft voracious Appetites ean want, or
luxurious Imagination wifh or defire. His natural
Beauty, we fhall fuppofe, furpaffes all acquir’d Or-
naments: ‘The perpetual Clemency of the Seafons
renders ufelefs all Cloaths or Covering: The raw
Herbage affords him the moft delicious Fare ; the
clear Fountain, the richeft Beverage. No labGrious
Occupation requir’d : No:Tillage: No Navigation.
Mufic, Poetry, and Contemplation: form his fole
Bufinefs : Converfation, Mirth, and Friendfhip his
fole Amufement..


Ir feems evident, that, in fuch a happy State,
évery other focial Virtue would flourifh, and receive


hen Hus 4 @ tenfold Encreafe ;. but the cautious, jealous Virtue
«case Justof Juftice would never once have been dreamt of.
grq] a7


sfex For what Purpofe make a Partition of Goods, where
_ th + ——— every one has already more than enough ? Why


give Rife to Property; where there cannot poffibly
be any Injury ? Why call this Obje&t mine, when,
upon the Seizure of it by another, I need but ftretch
out my Hand to poffefs myfelf of what is equally
valuable? Juftice, in that Cafe, being totally
USELESS, would be an idle Ceremonial, and
could never poflibly have Place among tt the Cata-
logue of Virtues.


Ws


~
e
: .
a SE EE ETN RE A AT TT, ST, A: , ATE
* "9, a3 a ab - 2 Paes Sal


i a. ~~ oe yy


or fosrres: =| 35


We fee, even in the prefent necefiitous Condition.
of Mankind, that, wherever any Benefit is beftow’d
by Nature in an unlimited Abundance, we leave it
always in common amongft the whole human Race,.
and make no Subdivifions of Right and Property..
‘Water and Air, tho’ the moft neceffary of all Ob-:
jects, are not challeng’d by Individuals; nor can
any one commit Injuftice by the moft lavith Ufe and.
‘Enjoyment of thefe Bleffngs. In fertile, extenfive'
Countries, with few Inhabitants, Land is regarded.
‘on the fame F ooting. And no Topic is fo much in-
fitted on by thofe, who defend the Liberty of the~
Seas, as the unexhaufted Ufe of them in Navigation.
Were the Advantages, procur’d by Navigation, as
inexhauftible, thefe. Reafoners never had had any
Adverfaries to refute ; nor had any Claims been ever
advanc’d of. a feparate, exclufive Dominion over the


Ocean:


Ir may happen in fome- Countries, at fome Pe-~
riods, that there be eftablifh’d a Property in Water,
none in Land * ; if the latter be in greater Abun-
dance than can be us’d by the Inhabitants, and the.
former be.found, with Difficulty, and in very {mall.
‘Quantities. |


PGenefis, chap, xiii, and xxi,
C 6 Acar


36, SECTION II.


Acain ; fuppofe, that, tho’ the. Neceffities of ha-
man Race continue the fame. as at-prefent; yet the
Mind is fo enlarg’d, and fo- replete with Friendthip
and Generofity, that every Man has the utmoft Ten-
dernefs for every Man, and feels no more-Concern
for his own Intereft than for that of- his Fellow: k
feems evident, that.the US E.of Juftice would, in
this Cafe, be fufpended by fuch an extenfive Bene-
volence, nor would the Divifians and Barriers of
Property and Obligation have .ever been thought of.
Why fhould I bind another, by a Deed or Promife,
_to do me any Good-office, when I know he is be-

fore-hand prompted, by the. ftrongeft: Inclination,
to feek my Happinefs, and would; of himfelf, per-
form the defir’d-Service; except the Hirt, he there.
by receives, be greater than the Benefit accruing to
me: In which Cafe, he Knows, that, from my in-
nate Humanity and Friendfhip, I fhould’be the frft
to oppofe myfelf to his imprudent Generofity
Why raife Land-marks betwixt my Neighbour’s
Field and mine, when my Heart-has made.no Divi-
-fion betwixt our Interefts ; but fhares all-his Joys and
Sorrows with equal Force and Vivacity as if origi-
nally my own? Every Man, upon this Suppofition,
being a Second-felf to. another, would truft. all his
Interefts to the Difcretion of every Man, without
Jealoufy, without Partition, without DiSinétion.
| And


Ce a aaa en cena een pane ee) eee Oe i


Of Justices. $y
And thewhole Race. of Mankind: would form only
one Family ;: where all lay. in commos; and’ was
us’d, freely, without Regard to Property ; but cau-
tioufly too, with as entire Regard to the Neceflities
ef each Individual, as.if:our own Interefts were mo&
intimately -concern’d.


In. the prefent ‘Difpofition. of. the human Heart,
*twould, perhaps, be. difficult to find.compleat In-
ftances of fuch enlarg’d Affections ;. but ftill we may
ebferve, that the Cafe of Families approaches. to-
wards it; and the ftronger is the mutual Benevolence
amongft the Individuals, the nearer it.approaches ;
till. all Diftingtion of Property be, in. a great
Mealure, loft and confounded amongft.them. Be-
twixt marry’d Perfons, the. Cement of Friend-


. fhip is by. the: Laws fuppos’d fo ftrong as to


abolifh ail Divifion-of.Poffeffions ; and has often,
in Reality, the Force afcribed to it. And ‘tis
obfervable, that, during the. Ardour. of new En-
thufiafms, where every. Principle is inflam’d into


. Hxtravagance, the Community of Goods has fre-


quently. heen attempted; and nothing but Experience
of its Inconveniencies, from the returning or dif-
guis'd Selfighnefs of Men, could make the imprudent


Fanatics adopt a-new the Ideas. of Juftice and of fe-


parate Property. So true is it, that that Virtue de-
nives


98 SECTION ' IIL,
rives its Exiftence altogether from its neceflary Ue te
the Intercourfe and Society of Mankind. )


-'To make this Truth more evident, let us reverfe.
the foregoing Suppofitions ; and carrying every
Thing to the oppofite Extreme, confider what would.
be the Effect of thefe new Situations. Suppofe a
‘Society to fall into fach Want of. all common Ne~
ceffaries, that the utmoft Frugality and Induftry can-
not preferve the greateft. Number from perifhing,
and the whole from-extreme Sufferance: It will
readily, I believe, be admitted, that the ftri& Laws.
of Juftice are. fufpended, .in fuch a prefling Emer-
gence, and give Place to the ftronger Motives of.
Neceflity and Self-prefervation: . Is it any Crime,.
after a Shipwreck, to feize whatever Means or In-.
ftrument of Safety one.can lay hold of, without Re-
gard to former Limitations of Propérty ? Or if a:
City befieg’d were. ftarving with Hunger; can we.
imagine, that. Men will fee any Means of. Life be-
fore them, and perish, from a {crupulous Regard to:
what, in, other Situations, would be. the Rules of.
Equity and Juftice? The USE and TENDENCY
of that Virtue. is to procure Happinefs and Security,
by preferving Order in Society : But where the So-
€iety is ready to perifh from extreme. Neceffity, no
greater Evil can be dreaded from Violence.and In-
' uftive; and-every Man may now provide for himfelf,.


by


ah at rere, 8 x we} Eetemmedete el 4» om


iy) Qa, |


‘ Ofjustres. — 3
by all Means, which Prudence can dictate; or Hu-
manity permit. The Public, even in lefs urgent Ne-~ ©
ceflities, open Granaries, without the Confent of
Proprietors ; as juftly fuppofing, that the Authority
of Magiftracy may, confiftent with Equity, extend
fo far : But were any Number of Men to affemble,
without the Tye of Laws or civil Jurifdiction ;
would an equal Partition of Bread in a Famine,
even without the Proprietor’s Confent, be regarded
as criminal or injurious ?


_ Suppose alfo, that it fhould be a virtuous Man’s
Fate to fall into the Society of Ruffians, remote
from the Protection of Laws and Government ;.
what Conduét muft he embrace in that melancholy
Situation? He fees fuch a defperate Rapacioufnefs
prevail ; fach a Difregard te Equity, fach Contempt.
of Order, fuch ftupid Blindnefs to future Confe-
quences, as muft immediately have the moft tragical
Conclufion, and muft terminate in Deftruétion to
the greater Number, and. in a total Diffolution of
Society. to. the reft. He, mean while, can have no.
ether Expedient,.than to arm himfelf, to whom-
ever the Sword he. feizes, or the Buckler may be-
long : Make Provifion of all Means of Defence and
Security: And his particular Regard to: Juttice. being
po lenger of US E to his own Safety or that of
others, he mutt confult alone the Diétates of Self-

‘ , ys-fervation,


£0 SEC TION Ill.
prefervation, without: Concern for thofe, who. no
longer -merit “his. Care and Attention.


Wuen any-Man, even in political Society, renders.
himfelf, by his Crimes, obnoxious to the Public, he,
is punifh’d by the Laws in his Goods and Perfon ;
that is,. the ordinary Rules of Juftice are, with Re-
gard to him, fufpended for a Moment, and it be-
comes equitable to infli& on him, for the Benefit of
Society, what, otherwife, he could not fuffer with
out Wrong or Injury.


Tue Rage and Violence of public War $. what
is it but a Sufpenfion of Juftice amongft the warring


Parties, who perceive, that that Virtue is now no:
longer of any Uf or Advantage to them? The Laws.
of War, which then fucceed to thofe of Equity and.


Juftice, are Rules calculated fer the Advantage and
_ Usility of that particular State, ip-which Men are now
plact'd. Aid were a civiliz’d Nation engag’d witli
Barbarians, who obferv’d -no- Rules even of War 3
the former muft” alfo -fufpend their Obfervance of
them, where: they no longer ferve to any Purpofe ;


and must render every Action or Rencounter as.


bloody and ‘pernicious as poflible to.the firft Ag-
greffors.


Tuvg


|


eee, a CEE, a eee Ae EEE. aE, ,  < Saeree eme
ee cg RO a eke Hig tgte a a 4 a aa Pawar’ rr. rr Sone we pee, Soe 4 : q Se gene


:


Of Fusrice. qt


Tus the Rules of Equity. or Juftice depend en-
tirely on the particular State and Condition, in
which Men. are plac'd, and owe their Origin-and
Exiftence to that U TI LIT Y, which refults to
the Public from their ftriét and regular Obfervance.
Reverfe, in any confiderable. Circumftance, the Con-
dition of Men: Produce extreme Abundance. or
extreme Neceflity: Implant. in the human Breaft
perfeét Moderation and Humanity,. or perfect Rapa-
cioufnefs and Malice: By rendering Juftice totally
ufelefs, you thereby totally deftroy its Effence, and
fufpend its Obligation upon Mankind.


Tue common Situation of Society is a Medium
amidft all thefe Extremes. We are naturally par-
tial to Ourfelves, and to our Friends ; but are ca-
pable of learning the Advantage, refulting from a
more equal Condué&. Few Enjoyments are given
us from the open and liberal Hand of Nature ; but
by Art, Labour, and Induftry,. we can extract them
in great Abundance. Hence the Ideas of Pro-


‘perty become neceflary in all civil Society : Hence


Juftice derives its Ufefulnefs to the Public: And
hence alone arifes.its Merit and moral Obligation.


Tese Conclufions are fo natural and obvious,
that they have not efcap’d. even the Poets, in their
Defcrip-


42 SECTION II.

Defcriptions of the Felicity, attending the Golden
Age or.the Reign of Saturn. The Seafons, in that
firft Period of Nature, were fo temperate, if we
credit thefe agreeable Fi€tions, that there was no
Neceflity for Men to provide themfelves with Cloaths
and Houfes, as a Security againft the Violence of
Heat and Cold: The Rivers flow‘d with Wine and
Milk: The Oaks yielded Honey; and Nature
fpontaneoufly produc’d her greateit Delicacies. Nor
were thefe the chief Advantages of that happy Age.
The Storms and Tempefts were not alone remov’d
from Nature; but thofe more furious Tempefts were
unknown to human Breafts, which now caufe fuch
Uproar, and engender fuch Confufion. Avarice,
Ambition, Cruelty, Selfifhnefs were never heard of :
Cordial Affection, Compaffion, Sympathy were the
only Movements, with which the Mind was yet ac-
quainted. Even the punttilious DiftinGtion of Mine
and Thine was banifh’d from amongft that happy
Race of Mortals, and carry’d with it the very No-
tion of Property and Obligation, Juftice and In.
juftice,


Tus poetical Fidtion of the Golden Age is, in fome
Refpeéts, of a Piece with the phil/fophical Fidion:
of the State of Nature ; only that the former is re-
prefented as the moft charming and moft peaceable.
Connon that can poflibly beimagin’d ; whereas the

latter


a


Gi Aes Ae ee EE Qe ee ee: 0 OE EEE
as A a od “5 2 ener ae eck 1.47 a 7S gs te. “cr = on =F Lye ae 2 : corEs ej : aor ; : [Ae


Of Justice. 43
latter is pointed out as a State of mutual War and
Violerice, attended with the moft extreme Neceffity.
@n the firft Origin of Mankind, as we are told, their
Fgnorance and favage Nature were fo prevalent,
that they could give no mutual Truft, but muft each
depend upon himfelf, and his own Force or Cunning
fot Protection and Security. No Law was heard of :

- No Rule of Juftice known : No Diftin&tion of Pro-
perty regarded: Power was the only Meafure of
Right ; and a perpetual War of All againft All was
the Refult of their untam’d Selfifhnefs and Barba-
rity *,


~
res


‘


“WHETHER


@ This Fition of a State of Nature, ‘as a State of War,
was ‘not firf ftarted by Mr. Hebdes, as is commonly imagin’d, Plate
endeavours to refute an Hypothefis very like it in the 2d, 34 and
4th Books de Republica. Cicero, on the contrary, fuppofes it
certain and univerfally acknowledged in the following beautiful
Paffage, which is the only Authority I fhall cite for thefe Reafon-
ings 3 Not imitating in this the Example of Puffendorf, nor even
that of Grotius, who think a Verfe from Owid or Plautus or Pee
tronius a neceflary Warrant for every moral Truth ; or the Exame
ple of Mr, Woolafton, who has conftant Recourle to Hebrew and
Arabic Authors for the fame Purpofe. Quis enim weftrim, judices,
ignorat, ita naturam rerum tuliffe, ut quodam tempore bomines,
nondum neque naturali, neque civili jure deferipto, fufi per agres,
ac difperfi vagarentur, tantumque baberent quantum manu ac virie
bus, per cedem ac vulnera, aut eripere, ant retinere potuiffent ?
Qys igitur primi virtute GP confilio preflanti extiterunt, ti per fpetto
genere humane docilitatis atque ingenii, diffipates, unum in locus
songregarunt, ecofque ex feritate illa ad juftitiam ac manfuetudinem
_ tranfdu xerunt,


44 SECTION. IIT.


Wueruer fuch a‘ Condition of human: Nature
could ever exift, or if it did, could continue’fo long
4s to merit the Appellation of a State, may juftly be
doubted. Men are neceffarily born in a Family-
fociety, at leaft ; and are train’d up by their Parents
to fome Rule of Conduét and Behaviour. But this
muft be admitted, that if fuch.a State of mutual
War and Violence was ever real, the Sufpenfion of
all Laws of Juftice, from their abfolute Inutility, is
@ neceflary and infallible Confequenee.


THE more we vary our Views of human Life,.
and the newer and more unufual the Lights are, in
which we furvey it, the more fhall we be convine'd,
that the Origin here affign’d for the Virtue of. Juftice:
is real and fatisfactory.


Were there a Species of: Creatures, intermingted
with Men, which, tho’ rational, weve poffeft of fuch


tranfduxerunt, Tum res ad communem utilitatem, quas publicas apa
pellamus, tum conventicula’ bomitum, que poftea civitates nominata
funt, tum domicilia conjunfia, quas urbes dicamus, inventeG die
vino & bumano jure, meenibus fepferunt, Atque inter banc vitam;
perpolitam bumanitate, & illam immanem, nibil tam intere? quam
JUS atque VIS. Horum utro uti nolimus, altero eft utendum;
Vim volumus extingut ® Fus valeat neceffe ef, id eff, judicia;
quibus omne jus continetur. Fudicia difplicent, aut nulla funt
wis dominetur neceffe fh @ Hecvident omnes, ProSext. 1. 42.


© inferior.


| | Of jJusrrex. 45
‘aferior Strength, both of Body and Mind, that
they were incapable of all Refiftance, and could
never, upon ‘the higheft Provocation, make us feel
the -Effetts-of their.Refentment ; the neceflary Con-
fequence, J think, -is, that.we fhould be bound, by
the Laws of Fiumanity, to give gentle Ufage to
thefe Creatures, but fhould not, properly fpeaking,
lie -under any Reftraint.of Juftice with Regard to
them, nor.could they poffefs any Right or Property,
exclafive of fuch arbitrary Lords. Our Intereourfe
with them could -not be’call’d Society, which fup-
pofes.a Degree of Equality ; but abfolute Command
on the one Side, and fervile Obedience on the other.
Whatever we covet, they mutt inftantly refign : Our
-Permiffion is the only Tenure, by which they hold
their Poffeffions : Our Compaffion and Kindnefs the
only Check, by which they curb our lawlefs Will ;
And as no Inconvenience ever refults from the Ex-
ercife of a Power, fo firmly eftablifh’d in Nature,
the Reftraints of Juftice and Property, being totally
ufele/s, would never have Place, in fo = a Cen-
fetleracy.


_ Tuts is-plainly the. Situation of Men with regard
to Animals; and how far :thefe may be.faid to pof-
fefs Reafon, I leave it to others to determine. The
great Superiority of civiliz’d Eurgpeans above bar-
barous Indians, tempted us to imagine .ourfelves .on

the


46- SECTION Il.

the fame Footing with regard to them, and made us

throw off all Reftraints of. Juftice; and evén of Hu-

manity, in our Treatment of them. .In many Na-

tions, the female Sex: are reduc’d to like. Slavery,
| and are render'd incapable of all Property, in Op-


pofition to their lordly Mafters. But tho’the Males,.


when united, have, in. all: Countries, brute Force


fufficient to maintain this fevere Tyranny ; yet fuch.


are the Infinuation, Addrefs, and Charms of their
fair Companions, that they are commonly able to
break the Confederacy, and fhare with the fuperior
Sex in all the Rights and Privileges of Society.


‘Were the human Species fo fram’d by Nature as


that each Individual poffeft within himfelf every
Faculty, requifite both for his own Prefervation and
for the Propagation of his Kind : Were all. Society
and Intercourfe cut off betwixt Man and Man, by the
primary Intention of the fupreme Creator : It feems


evident, that fo folitary a Being would be as much.
incapable of Juftice, as of facial Difcourfe and.


Converfation, Where mutual Regards and For-
bearance ferve no Manner of Purpofe, they would
never direct the Conduét of any reafonable Man.
The headlong Courfe of the Paffions would be


check’d by no Reflection on future Confequences. |


And as each Man is here fuppos’d to love himfelf
alone, and te depend ony on himfelf. and his own
Activity


a
> a ate


- =—


Of Justice. « . at
A@ivity for Safety and Happinefs, he would, on
every Occafion, to the utmoft of his Power, chal-
lenge the Preference above every other Being, to
whom he. is not bound by any Ties, either - Natuge
or of Interett, | ie


Bur fuppofe the Conjunction of the Sexes to be


_ eftabfith’d in Nature, a Family immediately arifes ;


ard particular Rules being found requifite for its
Subfiftance, ‘thefe are immediately embrac’d ; tho” .
without comprehending the reft of Mankind within
their Prefcriptions. Suppofe, that feveral Families
unite together into one Society, which is totally dif,
join’d from all others, the Rules, which preferve
Peace and Order, enlarge themfelves to the utmof
Extent of that Society ; but, being entirely ufelefs,
lofe their Force when carry’d one Step farther. But
again fuppofe, that feveral diftin& Societies main-
tain a Kind of Entercourfe for mutual Convenience
and Advantage, the Boundaries.of Julftice ftill grow
larger and larger, . in Proportion | to the Largenefs of
Men’ s Views, and the Force of their mutual Con-
nexions. Hiftory, Experience, Reafon fufficiently
inftrué us in this natural Progrefs of human Senti-
ments, and the gradual Encreafe of our Regards to
Property and Juftice in Proportion as we become
acquainted with the extenfive Usility of that Virtues


PART


@ SECTION UL


PART I.


F we examine all the particular Laws, by which
Juftice is direéted, and Property determin’d ; we
fhall ftill be prefented with the fame Conclufien.
The Good of Mankind is the only Objeé of all
thefe Laws and Regulations. Nat only ‘tis requifite,
for the Peace and Intereft of Society, that Men’s
Poffeflions fhould be feparated ; but the Rules,
which we follow in making the Separation, are fuch
as can beft be contriv’d to ferve farther the Intereits
of Society. |


We ‘hall fappofe, that a Creature, poffelt of
Reafon, but unacquainted with human Nature, de-
liberates with himfelf what R D LE S of Juftice or
Property would beft promote public Intereft, and
eftablith Peace and Security amongft Mankind :
His moft obvious Thought would be, to affign the
largeft Poffeffions to the moft extenfive Virtue, and
give every one the Power of doing Good, proper-
tien‘d to his Inclination. Ina perfeét-Theocracy,
where a Being, infinitely intelligent, governs by par-


ticular Volitions, this Rule would certainly have


Place, and might ferve the wifeft Purpofes: But
were Mankind to execute fach a Law ; (fo great is


the Uncertainty of Merit, both from its natural Ob-
| {curity,


Of Justice. £9
fcurity, and from the Self-conceit of each Indivi_
dual) that no determinate Rule of Conduét would
ever refult from it ; and the total Diffotution of So-
Ciety muft be the immediate Confequence. Fanatics
may fuppofe, that Dominion is founded in Grase, and
that Saints alone inberit the Earth; but the civil
Magiftrate very juftly puts thefe fublime Theorifts
on the fame Footing with common Robbers, and
teaches them, by the fevereft Difcipline, that a Rule,
which, in Speculation, may feem the moft advanta-
geous to Society, may yet be found, in Practice, to-
tally pernicious and deftructive,


Tuar there were religious Fanatics of this kind in
England, during the civil Wars, we learn from
Hiftory ; tho’ ‘tis probable, that the obvious Tex-
dency of thefe Principles excited fuch Horrour in
Mankind, as foon oblig’d the dangerous Enthufiafts
to.renounce, or at leaft conceal their Tenets, Per-
haps, the Levellers, who claim’d an equal Diftribu-
tion of Property, were a Kind of political Fanatics,
which arofe from the religious Species, and more
openly avow’d their Pretenfions, as carrying a mere
plaufible Appearance, of being practicable, as well
as ufeful to human Society. |


Ir muft, indeed, be confeft, that Nature is fo
liberal to Mankind, that were all her Prefents equally
D _ divided


ZO SECTION IiIl.

-divided amongft the Species, and improv’d by Art
and Induftry, every Individual would enjoy all the
Neceffaries, and even moft of the Comforts of Life ;
nor would ever be liable to any Ills, but fuch as
might accidentally arife from the fickly Frame and
Conftitution of -his Body. It muft alfo be confeft,
‘that, wherever we depart from this Equality, we
rob the Poor of more Satisfaction than we add to
the Rich, and that the flight’ Gratification of a fri-
volous Vanity, in one Individual, frequently cofts
more than Bread te many Families, and even Pro-
~vinces. It may .appear withal, that the Rule of
Equality, as it would be highly weful, is not aleoge-
‘ther impradicaile ; but has taken Place, at leaft, in
an imperfect Degree, in fome Republics ; particu-
larly, that of Sparta ; where it was attended, as ’tis
faid, with the moft benéficial Confequences. Not
to mention, that the Agrarian Laws, fo frequently
claim’d in Reme, and carry'd to Execution in many
Greek Cities, proceeded, all of them, from a general
Idea of the Utility of this Principle.


But Hiftorians, and even common Senfe, may in-
form us, that, however fpecious thefe Ideas of per-
fed Equality may feem, they are really, at the Bot-
tom, impradficable ; and were they not fo, would be
extremely pernicious to human Society.” Render the
FoTefions of Men ever fo equal, their different De-

| grees


e
ee ree =


> Pa


ee he


oa
—
.


' Of Justice. — ay
grees of Art, Care, and Induftry will immediately
break that Equality. Or if you check thefe Virtues,
you reduce Society to the extremeft Indigence ; and
inftead of preventing Want and Beggary in a few,
render it unavoidable to the whole Community.
The moft rigorous Inquifition too, is requifite to
watch every Inequality on its firft Appearance ; and
the moft fevere JyrifdiGion, to punith and redrefs it.
But befides, that fo much Authority nauft foon de-
generate into Tyranny, and be exerted with great
Partialities ; who can poffibly be poffeft of it, in
fuch a Situation as is here fuppos’d ? Perfect Equa-
lity of Poffeffions, deftroying all Subordination,
weakens extremely the Authority of Magiftracy, and
muft reduce all Power nearly to a Level, as well as
Property.


We may conclude, therefore, that, in order to
eftablifh Laws for the Regulation of Property, we
muft be acquainted with the Nature and Situation
of Man, muft rejett Appearances, which may be
falfe, tho’ {fpecious, and muft fearch for thafe Rules,
which are, on the whole, moft x/efk/ and beneficial.
Vulgar Senfe and flight Experience are fafficient for
this Purpofe ; where Men give not way to too delfifh
Avidity, or too extenfive Enthufiafm.


D 2° Wuo


53 SECTION Ir.


“Wuo fees not, for Inftance, that whatever is. pro-
duc’d or improv’d by a Man’s Art or Induftry ought,
for ever, to be fecur’d to him, in order to give:En-
couragement to fuch #/e/u/ Habits and Accomplith-
ments? That the Property ought alfo to defcend to
‘Children and Relations, for the fame u/e/u/. Purpofe?
‘That it may be alienated by Confent, in.order.to be-
get that Commerce.and -Intercourfe, ‘which is fo de-
neficial to human Society ? And that all Contra&s
cand Promifes ought carefully to be fulfill’d, ‘in order
‘zo fecure-mutual Truft and Confidence, by which
‘the general Interef# of Mankind is fo much pro-
amoted ? |


‘Examine the Writers on the Laws of Nature ;
cand you will always find, that, whatever Principles
they -fet out with, they are fure to terminate here at
Jaft, and to aflign, as the ultimate Reafon for every
Rule they eftablith, the Convenience and Necefiities
of Mankind. A Conceflion thus extorted, in Op-
pofition to Syftems, has 'more Authority, than if it
had been made, in Prefecution of them.


Wnuart other Reafon, indeed, could Writers ever
give, why this muft be mine and that yours ; fince
uninftructed Nature, furely, never made any fuch
Diftintion? Thefe Objects are, of themfelves,

foreign


4


——


Of Jusrice: x
foreign to-us; they are totally disjoin’d and feparate;:
and nothing but the general Interefts of Society can*
form the Conne¢tion.


Sometimes, the Interefts of Society may require
a Rule of. Justice in a particular Cafe ; but may not:
determine any particular Rule, amongft feveral,
which are all equally beneficial. In that Cafe, the”
flighteft. Analogies are laid hold of, in order to pres -
vent that Indifference and Ambiguity, which would
be the Source of perpetual Quarrels and Diffentions,.
Thus Poffeffion alone, and firft Poffeffion, is fuppos’d
eto convey Property, where no-body. elfe..has any.
precedent Claim and Pretenfion. Many of the
Reafonings of Lawyers are of this analogical Na-.
ture,.and depend- on-very flight Connexions of: the. .
Imagination.

¥s it ever fcrupled, in extraordinary Cafes, to vio-
late all Regard to the private Property of Individuals,
and facrifice to public Intereft a Diftinction, which.
had been. eftablifh’d for the Sake of that Intereft ?
The Safety of the People is the fupreme Law: All.
other particular Laws are fubordinate to it, and de-.
pendant on it: And if, in the common Courfe of
Things, they be followed and regarded ; "tis only


“ Becaufe the public Safety and Intereft, commonly dee.


mand fo equal and impartial an Admihifiration,


D 3. SOME


$4 ~ SECTION IU.


Sometimes bothU*ility and Analogy fail, and leave
the Laws of Juftice in total Uncertainty. Thus,
‘tis highly requifite, that Prefcription or long Pof-
feffion fhould convey Property ; but what Number
of Days or Months or Years fhould be fufficient for
that Purpofe, "tis impoflible for Reafon alone to de-
termine. C#vi/ Laws here fupply the Place of the
natoral Code, and affign different Terms for Prefcrip-
tion, according to the different Utilities, propos’d
by the Legiflator. Bills of Exchange and promiffory
Notes, by the Laws of moft Countries, preferibe
fooner than Bonds and Mortgages, and Contratts of
a more formal Nature.

In general we may obferve, that all Queftions of
Property are fubordinate to the Authority of civil
Laws, which extend, reftrain, modify, and alter
the Rules of natural: Juftice, according to the par-
ticular Convenience of each Community. The Laws
have, or ought to have, a conftant Reference to the
Conftitution of Government, the Manners, the Cli-
mate, the Religion, the Commerce, the Situation of
each Society. Adate Author of great Genius, as
well as extenfive Learning, has profecuted this Sub-


ee a este. ;
os Pa ae Paw. ee fiat sre ae Se


je&t at large, and has eftablifh’d, from thefe Prine |
ciples, the beft Syftem of political Knowledge, that, .
perhaps, |


Of JusTice. 55
perhaps, has. ever yet been communicated to the
World *.


- WHAT


* The Author of L’Ejprit des Lox. This illuftrious Writer, .
however, fets out with a different Theory, aad fuppofes al] Right -
ta be founded on certain Rapports or Relations ;.which is a Syftem,
that, in my Opinion, never will reconcile with true Philofophy-
Father Malebranche, as far as I can learn, was the firft, that ftarted.
this abftraét Theory. of Mcrals, which was aftetwards adopted by
Dr, Clarke and others ; and as it excludes all Sentiment, and pre
tends to found every Thing on Reafon, it has not wanted Followetg
in this philofophic Age. See Ej/ay 1. and Appendix, With rc gard
to Fuftice, ‘the Virtue here treated of, the Inference againt this
‘Theory feems fhort and conclufive.. Property is allaw’d to be de».
pendant on civil Laws : Civil Laws are allow’d to have no Objeét
but the Intereftof Society : This therefore muft be allow’d to be
the fole Foundation of Property and Justice. Not to mentior, that-
our Obligation itfelf to obey the Magiftrate and his Laws is founded
on nothing but the Interefts of Society.


If the Ideas of Jaftice, fometimes, do not follow the Difpofiti-
ons of civil Law ; we fhall find, that thefe Cafes, inftead of Ob-
jJetione, are Confirmations of the Theory delives’d above. Where
acivil Law is fo perverfe as to crofs all the Interefts of Society, it
lofes all its Authority, and Men jodge by the Ideas of natural
Jattice, which are conformable to thofe Interefts. Sometimes alfo
civil Laws, for ufeful Puspofes, require a Ceremony or Form ; and:
where that is wanting, their Decrees run contrary to. the ufual
Tenor of Juftice ; but one, who takes Advantage of fuch Chicanes,
is not regarded as en. honett Man. Thus, the Intesefts of Society
require, that Contra@s be fulfill’d ; and there is not a moré mate.
sial Article either of natural or civil Juftice : But the Omiffion-
of a trifling Circumftance will often, by Law, invalidate a Contraét,.
in foro bumano, but not in foro confcientia, as Divioes exprefs them~
felves. In thefe Cafes, the Magiftrate is fuppos’d only to withe
D4 draw


-


56 SECTION II. ‘s
WHAT is a Max's Property? Any Thing
which it is lawful for him and for him alone, to ufe.
But what Rule have we, by which we can diftinguifo
rhefe ObjeGs.? Here we muft have Recourfe to
Statutes, Cuftoms, Precedents, Analogies, and a
hundred: other Circumftances ; feme of which are
_conftant:and inflexible, fome variable. and arbitrary.
But the ultimate Point, in which they all profeffedly
terminate, is, the Intereft and Happinefs of human
Society. Where this enters not into Confideration,
nothing can appear more whimfical, unnatural, and
even fuperftitious than all or moft of the Laws of
Juftice and of Property. |


Tse, who ridicule vulgar Superftitions, and ex.
pofe the Folly of particular Regards to Meats, Days,
Places, Poftures, Apparel, have. an eafy Tak ; while
they confider all the Qualities and Relations of the
Objects, and difcover no adequate Caufe for that
Affection ar Antipathy, Veneration or Horrour,
which have fo mighty an Influence over a con-
fiderable Part. of Mankind.. A Syrianx would have
ftarv'd rather than tafte Pigeon; an Egyptian would


draw his Power of enforcing the Right, Not to have alter’d the
Right. Where his Intention extends to the Right, and is con-
formable to the Interefts of Society ; it never faile to alter the
Right 3 a clear Proof of the Origin of Juftice and of Property, as
aflign’d above,


_


not


oe


ee eee)


Of Justice. gn


not have approach’d Bacon: But if thefe Species of °


Food be examin'd by the Senfes of Sight, Smell or: :
Tafte, or {crutiniz’d by the Sciences of Chymiftry
Medicine, or Phyfics; no Difference is ever found
betwixt them and any other Species, nor can that:
precife Circumftance be pitch’d on, which may afford -
a juft Foundation for the religious Paffion. A Fowl
on Tharfday is lawful Food ; on Friday, abominable:
Eggs in this Houfe, and in this Diocefe are per-
mitted during Lent ;_a hundred Paces farther, to eat
them is a damnable Sin.. This Earth or Building,
yefterday, was prophane ; to-day, by the muttering
of certain: Words, it.has become holy and facred.
Such Reflections, as thefe, in the Mouth of .a Philo.
fopher, one. may fafely fay, are too obvious to have
any Influence ; becaufe they muft always, to every
Man, occur at firft Sight; and where they prevail .

not, of themfelves, they are furely obftructet- by
Education, Prejudice and Paffion, not: by Ignorance .
or Miftake.


Ir may: appear, to a careléfs' View ; or rather, 2
too abftracted Refle&tion; that there enters a like
Superiftition into aif the Regards of Juftice ;- and that,
if a: Man fubjects its Objects; or what we-call:-Pro.
perty, to the fame Scrutiny of Senfe and Science, he
will not, by. the moft aecurate Enquiry, find
any Foundation for the Difference made by moral

D s. Senti»


Pare : é


58 SECTION Iii.
Sentiment. I may lawfully nourifh myfelf from this
Tree ; but the Fruit of another of the fame Species,
ten Paces off, "tis criminal for metotouch. Had IF
‘{ wore this Apparel an Hour agb, I had merited the
fevereft Punifhment ; but 2 Man, by pronouncing a
few magical Syllables, has now render’d it fit for my
Ufe and Service. Were this Houfe plac’d in the
neighbouring Territory, #% had been immoral for me
to. dwell in it; but being built on this Side the River,
it is fubject to.a different municipal Law, and I incer
no Blame or Cenfure. The fame Species of Reafon-
ing, it may be thought, which fo fuccefsfully expofes.
Superftition, is alfo applicable te Juftice ; nor is it
poflible, in the. one Cafe more than in the other, to
Poms out, in the Object, that precife. Quality or Cir-
¢cumftance, which ts the Foundation of the Sentiment..


he oe


Ka eer


ee Son ae


So ct


pe there is this material Difference betwixt:
uperfition and Fujffice, that: the former is frivolous,
ufelefs, and burthenfome ; the latter is abfolutely re-
quifite to the Well-being of Mankind and Exiftence.
of Society. When we abftraét from this Circum-.
flance (for "tis too apparent ever to be overlookt) it:
muft be confeft, that all Regards to Right and Pro-
+ {> perty, feem entirely without Foundation, as much as
the grofleft and moft vulgar Superftition. Were.the
Intereits of Society no. way concern’d, ‘tis as unin-
telligible, why another’s ai certain Sounds,


N { RE ae
cREN tats in


‘y an rts )


ow


=<


~Sa—
Pogge


Oienibosi ope — Re TE,


=


a_i, - aa cae atin,
es - # Ps


Of Justice: 5g.
implying Confent, fhould thange the Nature of. my


Actions with regard to a particular Object, as why.’
the reciting of a Liturgy by a Prieft, in a certain
Habit and Pofture, fhould dedicate a Heap of Brick
and Timber, and render it, thenceforth and for ever,.
facred *


THESE.


® °Tis evident, that the Will or Confent afone never transfers
Property, nor caufes the Obligation of a Promife (for the fame
Reafoning extends to both)-but the will muft be expreft by Words os.
Signs, in arder to impofe a Tye upon any Man, The Expreffion,
being once brought in as fubfervient to the Wil], foon becomes the
principal Part of the Promife ; nor will a Man be lefs bound by his.
Word, tho” he fecretly give a different Direétion to his Intention,
and with-hold the Affent of his Mind. But tho’ the Expreffion
makes, on moft Occafions, the whole of the Promife, yet it does
mot always fo ;.and one, who thould make ufe of any Expreffion,.


of which he knows not the Meaning, and which he ules without


any Senfe of the Confequences, would not certainly be beund by it.
Nay, tho’ he know its Meaning, yet if be ules it in Jeft only,
and with fuch Signs as feew evidently, he-has no ferious Intention
of binding himfElf, he would not lie under any Obligation of Per-
formance ; but’tis neceffary, that the Words be a perfect Expref~
fion of the Will, without any contrary Signs. Nay, even this
we suf not carry. fo far as to imagine, that one, whom, by our
Quicknels of Underitanding, we- conjecture, from certain: Signs,
to have an Intention of deceiving us, is not bound by his Ex-.
prefiion or verbal Promife, if we sccept of it 3. but mutt limit this
Conclufion to thofe Cafes, where the Signs are of a diferent Nature
from thofe of Deceit. All thote Contradictions are eafily accountede
for, if Juftice arifes ensirely from. its Ufefuloels to Society ; 3 bac:
will never be. « "don ri other nae


60 SECTION IIL
& .


|


e


(


/


/|


_ has the Indignation of Mankkind rofe fo ftrong againft thefe Cafuifts s


~~


Trese Reflections are far from weakening the Ob
ligations of Juftice, or diminifhing any Thing from
the moft facred Attention to Property. On the con-
trary, fuch Sentiments muft acquire: new Force from
the prefent. Reafoning. For what ftronger Founda»
tion can be-defir'd or conceiv'’d for any Duty than to:
obferve, that human Society, or even human Nature:
could not fubfitt, without the Eftablifhmentof it, and
will’ fill’ arrive at greater Degrees of Happinefs and
Perfeaion, the more inviolable the Regard is, which
18 pay’d to that Duty ?.

*T'ss remarkable, that the moral Decifions of the Fefuits and


other relax’d Cafuifts, were commonly form’d in Profecution of
fome fuch Subtilities of Reafoning as are here pointed at, and pro


ceeded as much from the Hebit of: {cholaftic Refinement as from.
any Corrraption of the Heart, if we may follow the Authority of


Moofr. Bayle. See his Distionary, Article Loyola, And why


but becaufe every one perceiv'd, that haman Seciety.could not fub-
Git were fach Pradtices authoriz’é, and that Morals muft always be
handled with: a; View to peblic Latereff, more than philofophical


rer nee oeet7 ear eter OC ee pete. sce SY ene
Regularity? If the fecret Direétion of the Intention, faid every


Man_of Senfe, could invalidate a Contract > where is our Security -?:


And yet a metaphyfical-Schoolman might think, that-where an Ime
teation was fappes’d to be requifite, if. that Intention really had not
Place, 5 Caines ought to follow, and no Qbligation be im_


pos'd. Fhe-cafoittical. Subtilities may not be greater than the Sub-
tilities of Lawyers, hinted at-above ; but-as the former are pernicious,
and the latter inaccent and even neceffary, this isthe Reafon of the.


very diftcrent Reception they. meet with from the Workd,.


z Tas
« é »
ty
’ 4 ; - <
r oe 7 ‘ ee e
: w 4 4
e? ,


Of Justice. 6t


Tuus we feem, upon the Whole, to have attain’d
2 Knowledge of the Force of that Principle here in-
fitted on, and can determine what Degree of Efteem
er moral Approbation may refult from Reflections on
public Intereft and Utility. The Neceflity of Juftice
to the Support of Society is the S O L E Foundation
of that Virtue; and fince no moral Excellence is
more highly efteem’d, we may conclude, that this
Circumftance of Ufefulnefs has, in general, the
ftrongeft Energy, and moft entire Command over our
Sentiments. It mutt, therefore, be the Source of a
confiderable Part of the Merit, afcrib’d to Humanity,
Benevolence, Friendfhip, public Spirit, and other
focial Virtues of that Stamp; as it is the SOLE
Source. of the moral Approbation pay’d to Fidelity,
Juftice, Veracity, Integrity, and thofe other eftimable
and. ufeful Qualities and Principles. *Tis entirely
agreeable to the Rules of Philofophy, and even of
common Reafon; where any Principle has been found
to. have a great Force and Energy in one Inftance,
to afcribe to it a like Energy in all fimilar Inftances **


® This is Sir Lf/aac Newten’s fecond Rule of philofophizings
Principia, Lib, 3.


SECT.


ee me we


( 63 )


SECTION IV.


Of Potrricar Society.


H A D every Man fafficient Sagacity to perceive,

at all Times, the ftrong Intereft, which binds
him to the Obfervance of Juftice and Equity, and
Strength of Mind fufficient to perfevere in a fteady
Adherence to a general and a diftant Intereft, in Op-
pofition to the Allurenients of prefent Pleafure and
Advantage : There had never, in that Cafe, been
any fuch Thing 29 Government or political Society,
but each Man following his natural Liberty, had
liv'd in entire Peace and Harmony with all others.
What Need of pofitive Laws, where natural Justice
is, of itfelf, a fafficient Reftraint? Why create
Magiftrates, where there never arifes any Diforder
or Iniquity ? Why abridge our tative Freedom,
when, in every Inftance, the utmoft Exertion of it is
found innocent and beneficial ? *Tis. evident, that, if”
Government were totally ufelefs, it never could have
Place, and that the SO LE Foundation of the


i Duty


if


4 SECTION VW.
Duty of ALLEGIANCE is the Advantage


which it procures to Society, by preferving Peace and
Order amongft Mankind.


When a Number of political Societies are erected,
and maintain 2 great Entercourfe together, a new Set
of Rules are immediately difcover’d to be u/ful in
that particular Situation ; and accordingly: take place,
under the Title of LAWS of NATIONS.
Of this Kind are, the Sacrednefs of the Perfons of
Ambaffadors, abftaining from poifon’d Arms, Quar-
ter in War, with others of tha that: Kind ; which are
plainly calculated for the Advantage of States and
Kingdoms, in.their Entercourfe with each other.


Tue. Rules of Juice, fuch as prevail amongft
Individuals, are not altogether fufpended amongtt
political Societies. All. Princes: pretend'a Regard to
the Rights of others; and fome, no doubt, without


Hypocrify, Alliances and Treaties are every Day


made betwixt independent States, which would only


- be fo much Wafte of Parchment, if they were not


found, by Experience, to have /ome Influence and
Authority... But here is the Difference betwixt King.
doms and Individuals. Human Nature cannot, by
any Means,. fubfift, without the Affociation of Indi-.
viduals ;, and that Affociation never could have
Place, were.na Regard pay’d to the paw of Equity

1 and


Of Political Society. 65
and Juftice. Diforder, Confufion, the War of All
againft All are the neceflary Confequences of fuch a
licentious Conduct. But Nations can flourifh with-
out Entercourfe. They may even fubfift, in fome
Degree, under a general War. The Obfervance of
Juftice, tho’ ufeful among them, is not guarded by
fo ftrong a Neceffity as among Individuals ; and the
moral Obligation holds Proportion with the U/efulnc/s.
All Politicians will allow, and. moft Philofophers»
that REASONS of STATE may, in parti-
cular Emergencies, difpence with the Rules of Juftice,
and invalidate any Treaty or Alliance, where the
ftri&t Obfervance of it would be prejudicial, in a
confiderable Degree, to either of the contracting
Parties. But nothing fefs than the extremeft Neceflity,
tis confeft, can juftify Individuals in a Breach of
Promife, or an Invafion of the Properties of others. ©


. In a confederated Commonwealth, fuch as the
Achean Republic of old, or the Savi/s Cantons and
United Provinces in modern Times; as the League
has here a peculiar Usility, the Conditions of Unida, ~
have a peculiar Sacrednefs and Authority, and 2
Violation of them would be equally criminal, or
even more criminal, than any private Injury or In-
jaftice. | |

THE


e!


66 SECTION Iv.


Tre long and helplefs Infancy of Man ‘requires
the Combination of Parents for. the Subfiftance of
their Young ; and that Combination requires the
Virtue of CHAS TITY or Fidelity to the Mar-
riage-bed.’ Without fuch an Usility, "twill readily
be own’d, fuch a Virtue would never havé been
thought of *7-
—— ;


An Infidelity of this Nature is much more per-
nicious in Women than in Mex. Hence the Laws of
Chaftity are much ftrifter over the one Sex than over
the other +.


Tiose


* The only Solution, which P/ato gives to all the Objeétions,
that might be raie’d againft the Community of Women, eftablith’d
in his imaginary Common-wealth, is, Katruica yee fy Tero Rat
AGyETas Mas AsAgLeTas, OTs TO (LEP arhEAseov xadov. Toe 3s BAae
Cegov asrxeov, Scite enim ifud & dicitur & dicetur, Id quod utile
Sit bonefum effe, quod autem inutile fit turpe effe. De Rsp. Lib. 5.
P. 457. Exedit. Serr. And this Maxim will admit of no Doubt,
where public Utility is cancern’d ; which is Plate’s Meanings
And indeed te what other Purpefe do all the Ideas of Chaftity and


Modefty ferve ? Nifi utile off gued facimus, frufira eff gloria, faye.


Phadrus. Kandov rov Baalepay udev, fays Plutarch de vitiofo pu-
dore, Nihil eorum qua damnofa unt, pulchrum eft. The fame
wes the Opinion of the Stoies. dari vy ot Zraine ayacer simat.
WPEALLAY 1 UE ETEPAY COPEALIAG, WDEAELY pety ALYOYTES THY AAETHY.
kat ony ofudasay weak. Sext. Emp. Lib. 3. Cap. 20.


+t Tuxss Rules have all a Reference to Generation ; and yet
‘Women paft Child-bearing are no more fuppos’d to be exempted


. from them than thofetmain the Flower of their Youth and Beauty.


General


Taos who live in the fame Family have fo many
Opportunities of Licences of this Kind, that nothing
could preferve Purity of Manners, were Marriage

allow’d amongft the neareft Relations, or any Inter-

courfe of Love betwixt them ratify’d by Law and
| Cufom. INCEST), therefore, being pernicious
| in a fuperior Degree, has alfo a fuperior Turpitude
|


| Of Poktical Socinty. 67


and mosal Deformity, annex’d to it.


Wuar is the Reafon, why, by the Greek Laws,
one might marry a Half-fifter by the Father, but not
by the Mother? Plainly this. ‘The Manners of the
Greeks were fo referv'd, that 2 Man was never per-


General Rules are often extended beyond the Principle, whence
they firft arife ; and this in all Matters of Tafte and Sentiment.
°Tis a vulgar Story atParis, that during the Rage of theAififipp/,
_ a bump-back’d Fellow went every Day into the Rué de Quinceme
‘¢ poix, where the Stock-jobbera met in great Crowds, and wag
-_ well pay’d for allowing them to make ufe of his Hump as a Defk,
in order to fign thelr Contraéts upon it, Would the Fortune he
sais’d by this Invention make him a handfome Fellow ; tho’ it
| beconfeft, that perfonal Beauty arifes very much from Ideas of
‘f Utility 2. The Imagination is influenced by Affociations of Ideas ;
' which, tho’ they arife, at firft, from the Judgment, afe not
-, eafily alter’d by every particular Exceptien, that occurs to us,
| To which we may add, in the prefent Cafe of Chaftity, that the
‘-. Example of the Old would be pernicious to the Young 3 and that
' ‘Women continually thinking, that a certain Time would bring
them the Liberty of Indulgence, weuld naturally advance that
Period, and think more lightly of this whole Duty, fo requifite
to Society.


ff


«
o


8 SECTION Iv.


mitted to approach the Women’s Apartment, even in
the fame Family, unlefs where he vifited his own
Mother. His Step-mother and her Children were as
much fhut up from him as the Women of any other
Family, and there was as little Danger of any crimi-
nal Intercourfe betwixt them: Uncles and Nieces,
for alike Reafon, might marry at Athexs ; but neither
thefe nor Half-brothers and Sifters could contraé that
Alliance at Rome, where the Intercourfe was more
open betwixt the Sexes. Public Utility is the Caufe
of all thefe Variations.


To repeat, to a Man’s Prejudice, any Thing thst


efcap’d him in private Converfation, or tomake any


fuch Ufe of his private Letters, is highly blam’d.
‘The free and focial Intercourfe of Minds muft be ex-
tremely checkt, where no fuch Rules of Fidelity are
eftablifh’d.


Evew in repeating Stories, whence we can fee no
ill Confequences to refult, the giving one’s Authors is


- regarded as a Piece.of Indifcretion, -if not of Immo-


rality. 'Thefe Stories, in pafling from Hand to Hand,


_and receiving all the ufual Variations, frequently


come about to the Perfons concern’d, and produce
Animofities and Quarrels among People, whofe
Intentions are the moft innocent and inoffenfive.


To


Of Political Society, 69


‘To pry into Secrets, to open or even read the
Letters of others, to play the Spy upon their Words
and Looks and Aétions: What Habits more incon-
venient in Society? What Habits, of confequence,
more blameable ? :

' Tuts Principle is alfo the Foundation of moft of
the Laws of Good-manners ; a Kind of leffer Mora-
lity calculated for the Eafe of Company and Con-
verfation, Too much or too little Ceremony are
both blam’d, and every Thing, that promotes Eafe,
without an indecent Familiarity, is ufeful and land-
able.


' Constancy in Friendfhips, Attachments, and Fa-
miliarities is commorily very laudable, and is requifite
to fupport Truft and good Correfpondence in Society.
But in Places of general, tho’ cafual Concourfe,
where Health and Pleafure bring People promif-
cuoully together, public Conveniency has difpens’d
with this Maxim; and Cuftom there promotes an
unreferv'd Converfation for the Time, -by indulging
the Privilege of dropping afterwards every indifferent
Acquaintance, without Breach of Civility or Good-
manners.


Even


70 =i EEC TION WV.


Even in Societies, that are eftablifh’d on Principles
the moft immoral, and the moft deftructive to the
Interefts of the general Society, there are requir’d
certain Rules and Maxims, which a Species of falfe
Honour, as well as private Intereft, engages the
Members to obferve. Robbers: and Pyrates, it has
often been remark’d, could not maintain their per-
“nicious Confederacy, did they not eftablifhh a new
diftributive Juftice amongft. themfelves, and recall
thofe- Laws of . Equity, which they have violated
with the reft of Mankind.


I sate a drinking Companion, fays the Greek Pre-
verb, who never forgets. The Follies of the lat


Debauch fhould be buried in eternal Oblivion, in
order‘to give full Scope to the Follies of the next.


Amoncs? Nations, where an immoral Gallantry,
if cover'd with a thin Veil of Myftery, is, in fome
Degree, authoriz’d by Cuftom, there immediately
arife a Set of Rules, calculated for the Conveniency


of that Attachment. The famous Court or Parlia-


ment of Love in Provence decided formally all dif-
ficult Cafes of this Natare.


In Societies for Play, there are Laws requir'd for
the Conduét of the Game, and thefe Laws are dif-


ferent


|
sal
(
|


-
‘ ,


OF Political Society. 7%


. ferent in each Game. The Foundation, I own, of


fuch Societies is frivolous ; and the Laws are, in a
great Meafure, tho’ not altogether, capricious and
arbitrary. So far is there a material Difference be-
twixt them and the Rules of Juftice, Fidelity and
Loyalty. The general Societies of Men are abfo-
lately requifite for the Subfiftence of the Species 5
and the public Conveniency, which regulates Morals,
is inviolably eftablifh’d in the Nature of Man, and of
the World, in which he lives. The Comparifon,
therefore, in thefe Refpetts, is very imperfeh. We
may only learn from it the Neceffity of Rules, where-
ever Men have any Intercourfe with each other.


Tuey cannot even pafs each other on the Road
without Rules. Waggoners, Coachmen, and Pofti-
lions have Principles, by which they give way ; and
thefe are chiefly founded on mutual Eafe and Con-
venience. Sometimes alfo they are arbitrary, or at.
beft dependant on a Kind of capricious Analogy,
like many of the Reafonings of Lawyers *.


*® That the lighter Machine yields to the heavier, and in Mae
chines of the fame Kind, that the empty yield to the loaded ;
this Rule is founded on Convenience. That thofe whoare going
to the Capital teke place of thofe who arecoming from it ; this
feems to be founded on fome Idea of the Dignity of the great
City, and of the Preference of the future to the paft. From like
Reafons amongft Foot-walkers, the Right-hand entitlesa Man to
the Wall, and prevents joftling, which peaceable People find very

difagreeable and inconvenient, T
0


72 SECTION lv.


T’o carry the Matter farther, we may obferve, that
tis impofible for Men fo much as to murther each
other without Statutes and Maxims, and an Idea of
Juftice and Honour. War has its Laws as well
_as Peace ; and even that {portive Kind of War carried
on amongf Wreftlers, Boxers, Cudgel - players,
Gladiators, is fupported by fixt Principles and Regu-
- lations. Common Intereft and Utility beget infallibly
a Standard of Right and Wrong amongft the Parties
— concern’d,


nr mmmmmmeersa aetna anemone sneennne eee ene oo ae


SECTION


|


|
|
|
|
so
|


|


(73) °


SECTION VV.


Why Urirrry pleajes,


PART I.


‘JT feems fo natural a Thought to afcribe to their

Utility the Praife which we beftow on the focial
Virtues, that one would expect to meet with this
Principle every-where in moral Writers, as the chief
Foundation of their Reafoning and Inquiry. In
common Life, we may obferve, that the Circumftance
of Utility is always appeal’d to; nor is it fuppos’d,
that a greater Elogy can be given to any Man, than


_ to difplay his Ufefulnefs to the Public, and enumerate


the Services he has perform’d to Mankind and Society ,


_ What Praife, even of an inanimate Form, if the


Regularity and Elegance of its Parts deftroy not its


* Fitnefs for any ufeful Purpofe! And how fatis-


factory an Apology for any Difproportion or feeming
Deformity, if we can fhow the Neceflity of that
E particular


7h: SECTION V.
particular Conftruétion for the Ufe intended! A

Ship appears infinitely more beautiful to an Artif,

or one moderately fkill'd in Navigation ; where its

Prow is wide and {welling beyond its Poop, than if it

were fram’d with a precife geometrical Regularity,

in Contradiction to all the Laws of Mechanics. A

Building, whofe Doors and Windows were exa&

Squares, would hurt the Eye by that very Proportion ;

as il] adapted to the human Figure, for whofe Service

the Fabric was intended What Wonder then, that

a Man, whofe Habits and Conduct are hurtful to

Society, and dangerous or pernicious to every one,

that has an Intercourfe with him, fhould, on that
Account, be an Objeét of Difapprobation, and com-
municate to every Spectator the ftrongeft Sentiments

of Drfguft and Hatred *?


“Bur.


* We ought not to imagine, becaufe an inanimate Object
may be ufeful as well as a Man, that therefore it ought &lfo,
according to this Syftem, to merit the Appellation -of wirtuous.
The Sentiments, excited by Utility, are, in the two Cafes, very
different ; and the one is mixt with Affection, Efteem, Appro-
bation, &c. and not the other. In like Manner, an inanimate
Objeé&t may have good Culour and Proportions as well as a human
Figure. But can we ever be in Love with the former 2? There
area numerous Set of Paffions and Sentiments, of which think-
ing rational Beings are, by the original Conftitution of Nature,
the only proper Objefts : And tho’ the very fame Qualities be
transferr'd to an infenfible, inanimate Being, they will not excite

the


Why Uriniry pleafes. 7%


Bur perhaps the Difficulty of accounting for thefe
Effects of Ufefulnefs, or its contrary, has kept Philo-
fophers from admitting them into their Syftems of
Ethics, and has induc’d them rather to employ any
other Principle, in explaining the Origin of moral
Good and Evil. But’tis no juft Reafon for rejecting
any Principle, confirm'd by Experience, that we can
give no fatisfaétory Account of its Origin, nor are
able to refolve it into other more general Principles.
And if we would employ a little Thought on the


prefent Subject, we need be at no Lofs to account for


the Influence of Utility, and to deduce it from Prin-
ciples, the moft known and avow’d in human Na-
ture,


the fame Sentiments. The beneficial Qualities of Herbs and Mi-
serals are, indeed, fometimes call’d their Virrucs ; but this is an
Effect of the Caprice of Language, which ought not to be
regarded in Reafoning. For tho’ there be a Species of Approba-
tion, attending even inanimate Objects, when beneficial, yet this
Sentiment is fo weak, and fo differeat from what is directed to
beneficent Magiftrates or Statefmen, that they ought not to be
rank’d under the fame Clafs or AppeHation.


A very fmall Variation of the Object, even where the fame
Qualities are preferv’d, will deftroy a Sentiment. Thus ; the
fame Beauty, transferr’d to a different Sex, excites no amorous
Paffion, where Nature is aot extremely perverted,


E 2 Fros


+6 SECTION V.


From the apparent Ufefulnefs of the focial Virtues,
it has readily been inferr’d by Sceptics, both antient
and modern, that all moral Diftin@tions arife from
Education, and were, at firft, invented, and after-
wards encourag’d, by the Arts of Politicians, in order.
to render Men tractable, and fubdue their natural
Ferocity and Selfifhnefs, which incapacitated them
for Society. This Principle, indeed, of Precept and
Education muft be fo far own’d to have'a powerful
Influence, that it may frequently encreafe or dimi-
nifh, beyond their natural Standard, the Sentiments
of Approbation or Diflike ; and may even, in par-
ticular Inftances, create, without any natural Prin.
ciple, a new -Sentiment of this Kind ; as is evident
in all fuperftitious Practices and Obfervances: But
that a// moral Affection or Diflike arifes from this
Origin will never furcly be allow’d by any judicious
Enquirer. Had Nature made no fuch Diftinction,
founded on the original Frame and Conftitution of
the Mind, the Words, honcurable and fhameful, lovely
and odious, noble and de/picable, never had had place
in any Language ; nor could Politicians, had they
invented thefe Terms, ever have been able to render
them intelligible, or make them convey any Ideato
the Audience. So that nothing can be more fuper-

ficial than this Paradox of the Sceptics ; and ‘twere
well, if, in the abitrufer Studies of Logics and Me-_
taphyfics,


_ ~ a, ll, 7) A a \ -


2


yo


Why Utitrty pleafes. "9
taphyfics, we could as eafily get rid of the Cavils of
that Seét, as in the more practical and intelligible
Sciences of Politics and Morals.


Tue focial Virtues muft, therefore, be allow’d to
have a natural Beauty and Amiablenefs, which, at
firft, antecedent to all Precept or Education, recom-
mends them to the Efteem of uninftru&ted Mankind,
and engages their Affections. And as the Utility of
thefe Virtues is the chicf Circumftance, whence they
derive their Merit, it follows, that the End, which
they have a Tendency to promote, mult be fome
way agreeable to us, and take hold of fome natural —
Affection. It muft pleafe, either from Confiderations


of Self-intereft, or from more generous Motives and
Regards.


It has often been afierted, that, as every Man has
a ftrong Connexion with Society, and perceives the
Impofiibility of his folitary Subfiftence, he becomes,
on that Account, favourable to all thofe Habits or
Principles, which promote Order in Society, and en-
fure to him the quiet Poffeflion of fo ineftimable a
Bleffing. As much as we value our own Happinefs
and Welfare, as much muft we value the Practice of
Juftice and Humanity, by which alone the focial
Confederacy can be maintain’d, and every Man reap
the Fruits of mutual Protection and Affiftance.


E 3 Tus


78 SECTION V.


*?
z &


¥ Tuts Dedu&tion of Morals from Self- love Or a
Regard to private Intereft, is a very obvious Thought,
and has not arifen altogether from the wanton Sallies
and fportive Affaults of the Sceptics. To mention
no others, Pc/yéius, one of the graveft, and moft
. judicious, as well as moft moral Writers of Antiquity: |
has afligu’d this felfifh Origin to all our Sentiments of
Virtue *. But tho’ the folid, prattical Senfe of that
Author, and his Averfion to all vain Subtilties render |
his Authority on the prefent Subje& very confider- |
able ; yet this is not an Affair to be decided by Au-
thority ; and the Voice of Nature and Experience .
feems plainly to oppofe the felfifh Theory. |


——- oe


‘We frequently beftow Praifes on virtuous Actions x
perforin’d in very diftant Ages and dinate Countrien,


where the utmoft Subtilty of Imagination would net
difcover any Appearance of Self-intereft, or find any


Atcc2 LT 4 ap Siw. oe e482 X__)


* Undutifulnefs to Parents, is difapprov’d of by Mankind,
SrLoOpONAEVEG TO KAsAACY, Mal wUArOYICopssHUC OT! TO WagawAne LED
Exacois auTov ouyxupnrst. Ingratitude for a like Reafon (tho’
he feems there to mix a more generous Regard) cpvayavanrevracg

_ py Te Wrac, avapeporrac Pew avruc Te wagawAnoiey. Ef oP
YeroylyvETas TiC EVVeLa GWagtxace TH xaInuoyroc Surapesors Kay
Sewpac. Lib. 6. Cap. 4. Perhaps the Hiftorian only meant, /
that our Sympathy and Humanity was more enlivened, by our
confidering the Similarity of our Cafe with that of the Perfon®
fuffesing ; which is a juft Sentiment.

“4
RS hee en €s nnexion
JL- tte Ze 7 {
; oe ae ow : per oe a_i /
nae? on Cpls angioma! [
fee 0 go gfe


1 Oo-@e
ee a ee


a
x : “
VA,


Why Uririty plea/es. 79°
Connexion of our prefent Happinefs and Security
with Events fo widely feparated from us.


A generous, a brave, anoble Deed, perform'd by
an Adverfary, commands our Approbation ; while
in its Confequences it may be acknowledged preju-
dicial to our particular Interefts.


WuereE private Advantage concurs with general
Affection for Virtue, we readily perceive and avow
the Mixture of thefe diftin&t Sentiments, which have
a very different Feeling and Influence on the Mind,
We praife, perhaps, with more Alacrity, where the
generous, humane Action contributes to our particu-
lar Intereft: But the Topics of Praife we infift on
are very wide of this Circumftance. And we may
attempt to bring over others to our Sentiments, with-
out endeavouring to convince them, that they reap
any Advantage from the Aétions, which we recom-
mend to their Approbation and Applaufe.


Frame the Model of a praife-worthy Character,
confifting of all the moft amiable moral Virtues :
Give Inftances, in which thefe difplay themfelves,
aftcr an eminent and extraordinary Manner: You
readily engage the Efteem and Approbation of all ’
your: Audience, who never fo much as enquir’d in
what Age and Country the Perfon liv'd, who poffeft

E 4 thefe


80 SECTION V.

thefe noble Qualities: A Circumftance, however>
of all others, the moft material to Self-love, or a
Concern for our own individual Happinefs, .


Once on a2 Time, a Statefmen, in the Shock and
Concurrence of Parties, prevail’d fo far as to procure,
by his Eloquence, the Banifhment of an able Adver-
fary ; whom he fecretly follow’d, offering him
Money for his Support during his Exile, and footh-
ing him with Topics of Confolation on his Misfor-

_\thnes. Jas! cries the banifh’d Statefman, with
| - what Regret muft I leave my Friends in this City, where
even Enemies are fo generous! Virtue, tho’ in an

| Enemy, here pleas’d him: And we alfo give it the

- |juft Tribute of Praife and Approbation ;- nor do we
| retract thefe Sentiments, when we hear, that the
A@ion paft at Athens, about two thoufand Years ago,
| and that the Perfons Names were E/chines and De-


mofihenes.
/ WH AT is that to me ? ‘There are few Occafions,
/ when this Queftion is not pertinent: And had it that
-univerfal, infallible Influence fuppos’d, it would turn
| into Ridicule every Compofition, and almoft every
Converfation, which contain any Praifeor Cenfure —
of Men and Manners. .


~~


I a sie SE ee


| Why Urrtiry pleafes. 8


"T1s but a weak Subterfuge, when prefs’d by thefe
Faéts and Arguments, to fay, that we tranfport our-
felves, by the Force of Imagination, into diftant
® Ages and Countries, and confider the Advantage,
é: which we fhould have reapt from thefe Charaéters,.

had we been Contemporaries, and had any Commerce

with the Perfons. °Tis not conceivable, how a real
- Sentiment. or Paffion can ever arife from a known

imaginary Intereft ; efpecially when our read Intereft
is fill kept in View, and is often acknowledg’d to

* be entirely diftin® from the imaginary, and even
fometimes oppofite to it.


A Man, brought to the Brink of a Precipice;
| eannot look down without trembling ; and the Sen-
timent of imaginary Danger a&tuates him, in Oppo-
fition to the Opinion and Belief of real Safety. But |
‘. the Imagination is here affifted by the Prefence of a
ftriking Obje&t ; and yet prevails not, except it be
alfo aided by Novelty, and the unufual Appearance
of the Objeét. Cuftom foon reconciles us to Heights
» and Piecipices, and wears off thefe falfe and delufive ( |
Terrors. The Reverfe is obfervable in the Eftimates _
we. form of Characters and Manners ;. and the more
we habituate ourfelves to an accurate Scrutiny of
the moral Species, the more delicate Feeling do we.
| acquire of ess moft minute Diftinctions betwixt Vice


d
: ee ? me & ee)
Hee oos a oe eG


4
4
L


82 SECTION V.


and Virtue. Such frequent Occafion, indeed, have ©


we, in common Life, to pronounce all Kinds of
moral Determinations, that no Objeé&t of this Kind
can be new or unufual to us; nor could any fale
Views orPrepoffeffions maintain their Ground againft
an Experience, fo common and familiar. Experi-
ence and Cuftom being chiefly what form the Af-
fociations of Ideas, ‘tis impoffible, that any Affocr-
ation could eftablifh and fupport itfelf, in direft Op-
pofition to thefe Principles.


Ustrutness is agreeable, and engages our Ap-.
probation... This is a Matter of Fa&t, confirm’d by
daily Obfervation. But, w/eful? For what? For
fome Body’s Intereft, furely. Whofe Intereft then ?
Not our own only : For our Approbation frequently
extends farther. It muft, therefore, be the Intereft

re of thofe, who are ferv’d by the Character or Action

approv'd of ; and then we may conclude, however

a remote, are not totally indifferent tous. By open-

Q ing up this Principle, we fhall difcover the greas
Secret of moral Diftinctions.


P pane


Why Utiuity pleases. 83
PART If.


‘\. QELF-LOVEis a Principle in human Na-

ture of {uch extenfive Energy, and the Intereft

of each Individual is, in general, fo clofely con-

nected with that of Community, that thofe Philofo-

e’ phers were excufable, who fancy’d, that all our

| Concern for the Public might, perhaps, be refolv'd

“into a Concern for our own Happinefs and Prefer-

\. vation. They faw, every Moment, Inftances of Ap-

| ‘probation or Blame, Satisfaction or Difpleafure to-

wards Charaéters and Actions ; they denominated the

Objeéts of thefe Sentiments, Virtues or Vices; they

+  obferv'd, that the former had a Tendency to en-

‘ creafe the Happinefs, and the latter the Mifery of

Society ; they afk’d, if it was poffible we could have

i any general Concern forSociety, or any difinterefted

~~ Refentment of the Welfare or Injury of others ;

they found it fimpler to confider all thefe Seritiments

as Modifications of Self-love ; and they difcover'd

a Pretext, at leaft, for this Unity of Principle, in

~ that clofe Union of Intereft, which is fo obfervable
betwixt the Public and each Individual.


Bur notwithftanding this frequent Confifion of.
Interefts, ‘tis eafy to attain what natural’ Philofo--
phers, after my Lord Bacon, have affected to call


, A ) the. .
= . <2 oe A ee, eee
J , ° 9 LC Say fr-2 oe ee £7 iS.
| Zon Ke Le Ae. ae bec acer
yj fawn ewe ae a y~— i< L aa. en Piece 3
Pe Pore aaa Zz Cages ae. ote Oe.


vet


84 SECTION V..
the Experimentum crucis, or that Experiment, whick
points out the Way we fhould follow, in any Doubt
or Ambiguity. We have found Inftances, wherein
private Intereft was feparate from public ; wherein
it was even contrary: And yet we obferv’d the
moral Sentiment to continue, notwithftanding this
_Disjunétion of Interefts. And wherever thefe diftin®
Interefts fenfibly concur’d, we always found a fen-
fible Encreafe of the Sentiment, and a more warm
AffeCtion to Virtue, and Deteftation of Vice, or what
we properly call, Gratitude and Revenge. Cempell'd
by thefe Inftances, we muft renounce the Theory,.
which accounts for every moral Sentiment by the
Principle of Self-love. We muft adopt a more pub-
lic Affection, and allow, that the Interefts of Society
are not, even on their own Account, altogether indif-
ferent tous. Ufefulnefs is only a Tendency to a cer-,
tain End; and ’tis a Contradiction in Terms, that any’
Thing pleafes ag Means to an End, where the End
— itfelf does no way affet us. If therefore Ufefulnefs
be a Source of moral Sentiment, and if this Ufeful-
nefs be not always confider’d with a Reference to
Self ; it follows, that every Thing, which contri-
butes to the Happinefs of Society, recommends it-
felf dire€ily to our Approbation and Good-will.
Here is a Principle, which accounts, in great Part,
for the Origin of Morality: And what need we feek
for


~_s ee ele nO ge le —_—


—_


mn. ow


Why Uriity pleases. 89
for abftrufe-and remote Syftems, when there occurs
one fo obvious and natural * ?


Have we any Difficulty to comprehend the Force
of Humanity and Benevolence? Or to conceive,
that the very Afpe&t of Happinefs, Joy, Profperity,
gives Pleafure ; that of Pain, Sufferance, Sorrow,
communicates Uneafinefs? ‘The human Countenance,
fays Horace +, borrows Smiles or Tears from the
human Countenance. Reduce a Perfon to Solitude,
and he lofes all Enjoyment, except merely of the
fpeculative Kind ; and that becaufe the Movements
of his Heart are not forwarded by correfpondent


* °Tis needlefs to puth our Refearches fo far as toafk, why
we have Homanity or a Fellow-feeling with others. °Tis fuffi-
cient, that this is experiene’d to be a Principle in human Na«
ture. We muft ftop fomewhere in our Examination of Caufes 5


and there are, in every Science, forme general Principies, beyond


which we cannot hope to find any Principle more general. Now
Man is abfolutely indifferent to the Happinefs and Mifery of


others. ‘The firft has a natural Tendency to gjve Pleafure ; the


fecond, Pain. - This every one may find in himfelf. It is not
probable, that thefe Principles can be refolv’d into Principles .
more fimple and univerfal, whatever Attempts may have been made
to that Purpofe. But if it were poffible, it belongs not to the
prefent Subject ; and we may here fafely confider thefe Principles
as original: Happy, if we can render all the Confequences fufi-


ciently plain and perfpicuous.


+ Uti ridentibus arrident, ita flentibus adfient
Humani vultus, Hor.


Move-_


86 SECTION V.

Movementsin his Fellow-creatures. The Signs of
Sorrow and Mourning, tho’ arbitrary, affect us with

Melancholy ; but the natural Symptoms, Tears,
and Cries, and Groans, never fail to infufe Com.
_paffion and Uneafinefs. And if the Effects of Mifery
_ touch us in fo lively a Manner ; can we be fuppos'd
altogether infenfible or indifferent towards its Caufes ;
when a malicious or treacherous Character and Be-
haviour is prefented to us ?


We enter, [ fhalf fuppofe, into a convenient,
warm, well-contriv’d Apartment: We: neceffarily
receive a Pleafare from its very Survey ; becaufe it
prefents us with the pleafing Ideas of Eafe, Satis-
fa&tion, and Enjoyment. The. hofpitable, good-
humour’d, humane Landlord appears. This Cir-
ftance furely muft embellifh the whole ; nor can we
eafily forbear refleCting, with Pleafure, on the Satis-
faétion and Enjoyment, which refults to every one:
from his Iatercourfe and Good-offices.


His whole Family, by the Freedom, Eafe,
Confidence, and calm Satisfaction, diffus'd over
their Countenances, fufficiently exprefs their Hap-
pinefs. I have a pleafing Sympathy in the Profpe&
gf fo much Joy, and can never confider the Source:
of it, without the moft agreeable Emotions.


Hs


ee oe


a Le, eae, + a 2


=f


rae


Why Urirry phajes. «8


He tells me, that an oppreffive and powerful
Neighbour had attempted to difpoffefs him of his
Inheritance, and had long difturb’d all his innocent
and focial Enjoyments. I feel an immediate Indig-
nation arife in me againft fuch Violence and Injury.


Bur ‘tis no Wonder, he adds, that a private
Wrong fhould proceed from a Man, who had en-
flav’d Provinces, depopulated Cities, and made the
Field and Scaffold ftream with human Blood. I am
ftrack with Horror at the Profpect of fo much
Mifery, and am actuated by the ftrongeft Antipathy |
againft its Author,


In general, ‘tis certain, that wherever we go,
whatever we reflect on or converfe about; every
Thing ftill prefents us with the View of human Hap-
pinefs or Mifery, and excites in our Breafts‘a fym-
pathetic Movement of Pleafure or Uneafinefs. In
our ferious Occupations, in our carelefs Amufements,
this Principle ftill exerts its active Energy.


A Man, who enters the Theatre, is immediately
ftruck with the View of fo great a Multitude, par-
ticipating of one common Amufement ; and -expes
riences, from their very Afpeét,- a fuperior Senfibi-


ligy


Si SECTION V.


lity or Difpofition of being affected with every Sen-


timent, which he fhares with his Fellow-creatures,


He obferves the Adors to be animated by the


_ Appearance of a full Audience ; and rais’'d to a


Degree of Enthufiafm, which they cannot command
in any folitary orcalm Moment.


_ _Evary Movement of the Theatre, by a tkillfuf
Poet, is communicated, as it were by Magic, to the
Spectators, who weep, tremble, refent, rejoice, and.
are enflam’d with al] the Variety of Paffions, which
aftuate. the feveral Perfonages of the Drama.


Where any Event crofles our Wifhes, and inter-
rupts the Happinefs of the favaurite Perfonages, . we.
feel a fenfible Anxiety and Concern. But where
their Sufferings proceed from the Treachery, Cruelty
or. Tyranny. af an Enemy, aur Breafts are affected


with the livelieft: Refentment againft the Author of


thefe Calamities.


"Tis here efteem’d contrary to the Rules of Art
to reprefent any Thing cogl and, indifferent. A
diftant Friend, or a Confident, who has no immedi-
ate Intereft i in the Cataftrophe, ought, if poffible, to
be avoided by the Poet; as communicating a like

Indif-


Why Uritity pleafes. - So
Indifference to the Audience, and checking the
Progrefs of the Paffions.


No Ses. of Poetry is more entertaining than
Pafforal ; and every one is fenfible, that the chief ©
Source of its Pleafure arifes from thofe Images of a
gentle and tender Tranquillity, which it reprefents
in its Perfonages, and of which it communicates a
like Sentiment to the Readers. Sannazarius, who
transfer’d the Scene to the Sea-fhore, tho’ he pre-
fented the moft magnificent Objeé& in Nature, is
confeft to have err’d in his Choice. The Idea of
Toil, Labour, and Danger, fuffer’d by the F ifher-
men, is painful, by an unavoidable Sympathy, which
attends every Conception of human Happinefs or
Mifery. |


WueEn I was twenty, fays a French Poet, Ovid
was my Choice: Now I am forty, I declare for
Herace. We enter, to be fure, more readily into
Sentiments, that refemble thofe we feel every Mo-
ment : But no Paffion, when well reprefented, can
be altogether indifferent to us; becaufe there is
none, of which every Man has not within him, at
leaft, the Seeds and firft Principles. “Fis the Bufi-
nefs. of Poetry to approach every Object by lively
Imagery and Defcription, and make it look like
Truth and Reality : A certain Proof, that wherever

that


90 SECTION V.
that Reality is found, our Minds are difpos'd to be
' ftrongly affected by it.


Any recent Event or Piece of News, by which
the Fortunes of States, Provinces or many Indivr-
duals, are affected, is extremely interefting even to
thofe whofe Welfare is not immediately engag’d.
Such Intelligence is propagated with Celerity, heard
with Avidity, and enquir'd into with Attention and
Concern. The Interefts of Society appear, on this
Occafion, to be, in fome Degree, the Interefts of
each Individual. The Imagination is fure to be af-
- feéted ; tho’ the Paffions excited may not always be
fo ftrong and fteady as to have great Influence on the
Conduct and Behaviour.


Tue Perufal of a Hiftory feems a calm Entertain.
ment ; but would be no Entertainment at all, did
not our Hearts beat with correfpondent Movements
‘to thofe defcribed by the Hiftorian.


Thucydides and Guicciardin fapport with Difficulty
our Attention, while the former defcribes the trivial
Rencounters. of the {mall Cities of Greece, and the
latter the harmlefs Wars of Pi/a. The few Perfons
interefted, and the fmaJl Intereft fill not the Imagi-
nation, and engage not the Affections. .The deep
Dittrefs of the numerous Athenian Army before Sy-

racufe §


a


Why Uririty pleafes. g1
racufe; the Danger, which fo nearly threatens
Venice; thcfe excite Compaffion ; thefe move Terror _
_and Anxiety. |


THE indifferent, uninterefting Stile of Suetonius,
equally with the mafterly Pencil of Tacitus, may
convince us of the cruel Depravity of Nero or Ti-
berius : But what a Difference of Sentiment! While
the former coldly relates the Faéts ; and the latter
fets before our Eyes the venerable Figures of a
Soranus and a T. hrafea, intrepid in their Fate, and
only mov’d by the melting Sorrows of their Friends
and Kindred. What Sympathy then touches every
human Heart! What Indignation againft the in-
human Tyrant, whofe caufelefs Fear or unprovok’d |
Malice, gave rife to fuch deteftable Barbarity !


Ir we bring thefe Subjects nearer: If we remove
all Sufpicion of Fiétion and Deceit ; What powerful
Concern is excited, and how much fuperior, in
many Inftances, to the narrow Attachments of Self-
love and private Intereft! Popular Sedition, Party
Zeal, a devoted Obedience to fa€tious Leaders ;
thefe are fome of the moft vifible, tho’ lefs laudable
Effects of this focial Sympathy in human Nature.


Tue


92. SECTION V.


Tue Frivoloufnefs of the Subje&t too, we may
obferve, is not able to detach us entirely from what
carries an Image of human Sentiment and Affection.


Wuen a Perfon ftutters, and pronounces with
Difficulty, we even fympathize with this trivial Un-
eafinefs, and fuffer for him. And ’tis a Rule in
Criticifm, that every Combination of Syllables or
’ Letters, which gives Pain to the Organs of Speech
in the Recital, appears alfo, from a Species of Sym-
pathy, harfh and difagreeable to the Ear. Nay,
when we run over a Book with our Eye, we are
fenfible of fuch unharmonious Compofition ; be-
caufe we ftill imagine, that a Perfon recites it to us>
and fuffers from the Pronunciation of thefe jarring
Sounds. So delicate is our Sympathy !


Easy and unconftrain’d Poftures and Motons
are always beautiful : An Air of Health and Vigour
is agreeable : Cloaths, that warm, without burthen-
ing the Body ; that cover, without imprifoning the


Limbs, are well-fafltion’d. In every Judgment of


Beauty, the Sentiments and Feelings of the Perfons
affected enter into Confideration, and communicate
to the Spectators fimilar Touches of Pain or Plea-

{ure.


Why Uririry pleafes. 93
fure *. What Wonder, then, if we can pronounce
no Sentence concerning the Charaéters and Con-
duct of Men without confidering the Tendencies of
their A€tions, and the Happinefs or Mifery, which
thence arifes to Society? What Affociation of
Ideas would ever gperate, were that Principle here
totally inactive + ?


* Decentior equus enjus aftrifta funt ika ; fed idem welaier,
Pulcher afpeu fit athleta, cujus jacertos exercitatis expreffit. ;
idem certamini paratior, Numquaz enim {pecies ab utilitate divi
ditur. Sed boc quidem difcernere modici judici? ef. Quintilian Inft.
Lib. 8, Cap. 3,


+ In Proportion to the Station which a Man poffeffes, accord=
ing to the Relations in which he is plac’d 5; we always expeét from
him a greater or lefs Degree of Good, and when difappointed,
blame his Inutitity ; and much more, do we blame him, if any
Wl or Prejudice arifes from his Condu& and Behaviour. When the
Interefts of one Country interfere with thofe of another, we
eftimate the Merits of a Statefman by the Good or III, which ree
falts to his ewn Country from his Meafures and Councils, without
Regard to the Prejudice he brings on its Enemies and Rivals. His
Fellow-citizens are the Objeéts, which lie neareft the Eye, while
we determine his Charaéter. And as Nature has implanted in
every one a fuperior Affection to bis own Country, we never ex.
pect any Regard to dittant Nations, where the fmalleft Competition
arifes. Not to mention, that while every Man confults the Good
of his own Community, we are fenfible, that the general Intereft
of Mankind is better promoted, than by any loofe indeterminate
Views to the Good of a Species, whence no beneficial Action could
ever refult, for want of a duly limited Object, on which they
Could exert themfelves,


_ Ir


4 SECTION V.


Ir any Man, from a cold Infenfibility, or narrow


Selfithnefs of Temper, is unaffected with the Images’


of human Happinefs or Mifery, he muft be equally
indifferent to the Images of Vice and Virtue: As
on the other Hand, ‘tis always found, that a warm
Concern for the Interefts of our Species is attended
with a delicate Feeling of all moral Diftinétions ; a
firong Refentment of Injury done to Men ; a lively
Approbation of their Welfare. In this Particular,
tho’ great Superiority is obfervable of one Man
above another ; yet none are fo entirely indifferent
‘to the Intereft of their Fellow-creatures, as to per-
ceive no Diftin&tions of moral Good and Evil, in


-confequence of the different Tendencies of Actions —


and Principles. How, indeed, can we fuppofe it
pofible of any one, who wears a human Heart,
that, if there be fubjeéted to his Cenfure, one Cha-
racter or Syftem of Conduét, which is beneficial,
and another, which is pernicious, to his Species or
Community, he will not fo much as give a cool
Preference to the former, or afcribe to it the {malleft
Merit or Regard? Let us fuppofe fuch a Perfon
ever fo felfifh ; let private Intereft have ingroft ever
fo much his Attention; yet in Inftances, where
that is not concern’d, he muft unavoidably feel /ome
Propenfity to the Good of Mankind, and make it
an Object of Choice, if every Thing elfe be equal.

Would


a
speed Oe ee tA ae 2
Ht we ce ae ow ane oa 7 . Bs


Aan 2 eee
gece.


Se


Why Urizitry pleafes. 95
Would any Man, that is walking alone, tread juft
as willingly on another’s gouty Toes, whom he has
no Quarrel ‘with, as on the hard Flint and Pave-
ment? There is here furely a Difference in the
Cafe. We furely take into Confideration the Hap-
pinefs and Mifery of others, in weighing the feveral
Motives of Action, and incline to the former, where
no private Regards draw us to feek our own Pro-
motion or Advantage by the Iniury of our Fellow-
Creatures. And if the Principles of Humanity are
capable, in many Inftances, of influencing our
Actions, they muft, at all Times, have fome Autho-


.Yity over our Sentiments, and give us a general Ap-


probation of what is ufcful to Society, and Blame
of what is dangerous or pernicious. ‘The Degrees
of thefe Sentiments may be the Subjcct of Contro-
verfy, but the Reality of their Exiftence, one fhould
think, muft be admitted, in every Theory or Syftem.


A Creature, abfolutely malicious and {piteful,
were there any fuch in Nature, muft be worfe than
indifferent to the Images of Vice and Virtue. All
his Sentiments muft be inverted, and direétly oppo-
fite to thofe, which prevail in the human Species.
Whatever contributes to the Good of Mankind, as
it crofles the conftant Bent of his Withes and De-
fires, mutt produce Uneafinefs and Difapprobation ;
and on the contrary, whatever is the Source of Dif-

order


96 SECTION V.

order and Mifery in Society, muft, for the fanie
Reafon, be regarded with Pleafure and Complacency.
Timon, who probably from his affected Spleen, more
than any inveterate Malice, was. denominated the
Man-hater,. embrac’d A/cibiades, ‘tis faid, with great
Fondnefs. Go on, my Boy! cries he, Acquire the
Confidence of the People: You will one Day, I fore-
Jee, be the Caufe of great Calamities to them*, Could
we admit the two Principles of the Manichean!, "tis
an infallible Confequence, that their Sentiments of
human Actions, as well as of every Thing elfe, mutt
be totally oppofite ; and that every Inftance of
Juftice and Humanity, from its neceflary Tendency,


mutt pleafe the one Deity, and difpleafe the other, _


All Mankind fo far refemble the good Principle,
that where Intereft or Revenge or Envy perverts not
our Difpofition, we are always enclin’d, from our
natural Philanthropy, to give the Preference to the
Happinefs of Society, and confequently to Virtue,


above its oppofite. Abfolute, unprovok’d, difinter-_


efted Malice has never, perhaps, Place in any human
Breaft ; or if ithad, muft there pervert all the Sen-
- timents of Morals, as well as the Feelings of Huma.
nity. Ifthe Cruelty of Nero be allow’d altogether
voluntary, and not rather the Effe&t of conftant
Fear and Refentment ; ’tis evident, that Tige/izus,


* Plutarch ia vita Ale.
preferably


as


ed 7


.


Rhy Uriuiry pleafes. 97
preferably to Seneca or Burrbus, muft have poffelt
his fteady and uniform Approbation.


A Statesman or Patriot; that ferves our owa
Country, in-our own Time, has always a more
pafonate Regard paid him, than one whofe bene-
ficial Influence operated on diftant Ages or remote
Nations; where the Good, refulting from his gene-
rous Humanity, being lefs connected with us, feems
more obfcure, and affects us with a lefs lively Sym-
pathy. We may own the Merit to be equally great,
tho’ our Sentiments are not rais’d to an equal
Height, in both Cafes. The Judgment here cor-
rects the Inequalities of our internal Emotions and
Perceptions; in like Manner, as it preferves us from
Error, in the fevera] Variations of Images, prefented
to our external Senfes. The fame Objett, at a
double Diftance, really throws on the Eye a Picture
of but half the Bulk ; and yet we imagine it ap-
pears of the fame Size in both Situations ; becaufe
we know, that, on our Approach to it, its Imave °
would expand on the Senfes, and that the Diterence
confifts not in the Object itfelf, but in our Pofition
with regard to it. And, indeed, without fuch Cor-
rection of Appearances, both in internal and exter-
mal Sentiment, Men could never think or talk
fteadily on any Subject; while their fluctuating Si-
talations produce a continual Variation on Objects,
F and


98 SECTION V.
and throw them into fuch different and contrary
Lights and Pofitions *.


THE more we converfe with Mankind, and the


greater focial Entercourfe we maintain, the more
will we be familiariz’d to thefe general Preferences


and Diftinctions, without which our Converfation
and Difcourfe could {carcely be render'd intelligible
to each other. Every Man’s Intereft is peculiar to
himfelf, and the Averfions and Defires, which re-
{ult from it, cannot be fuppos’d to affect others in a


* For a like Reafon, the Tendencies of Actions and Ch#.
“rafters, not their real accidental Confequences, are alone re-
garded in our moral Determinations or general Judgments ; tho”
in our real Feeling or Sentiment, we cannot help paying greater
Regard to one whofe Station, join’d to Virtue, renders him
really ufeful to Society, than to one, who exerts the focial Vir-
tues only in good Intentions and benevolent Affections. Separat-
ing the Character from the Fortune, by an eafy and neceffary
Effort of Thought, we pronounce thefe Perfons alike, and give
them the fame general Praife. The Judgment correéts or en-


deavours to correét the Appearance : But is not able entirely
to prevail over Sentiment.


Why is this Peach-tree faid to be better than that other ; but
becaufe it produces more or better Fruit? And would not the
fame Praife be given it, tho” Snails or Vermin had deftroy’d the
Fruit, before it came to full Maturity >) In Morals too, is not
the Tree known by the Fruit? And cannot we eafily diftinguifh


betwixt Nature and Accident, in theone Cafe as well as in the
other ?


e like


le a


oe


are


Ne


Why Uririry pleafes, _ 99

Ike Degree. General Language, therefore, being
form’d for general Ufe, muft be moulded on fome
more general Views, and muft affix the Epithets of
Praife or Blame, in Conformity to Sentiments,
which arife from the general Interefts of the Com-
munity. And if thefe Sentiments, in moft Men,
be not fo ftrong as thofe, which have a Reference
to private Good ; yet fill they muft make fome
Diftin@ion, even in Perfons the moft deprav’d and
felifh ; and muft attach the Notion of Good to a
beneficent Conduct, and of Evil to the contrary.
Sympathy, we fhall allow, is much fainter than our
Concern for Ourfelves, and.Sympathy with Perfons,
remote from us, much fainter than that with Perfons,
near and contiguous ; but for this very Reafon,
tis neceffary for us, in our calm Judgments and
Difcourfe concerning the Characters of Men, to
neglect all thefe Differences, and render our Senti-
ments more public and focial. Befides, that we
Ourfelves often change our Situation in this Parti-
cular, we every Day meet with Perfons, who are ina
different Situation from us, and who could never con-
verfe with us on any reafonable Terms, were we ta
remain conftantly in that Pofition and Point of View,
which is peculiar to Ourfelf. The Entercourfe of
Sentunents, therefore, in Society and Converfation
makes us form fome general, inalterable Standard,
by which we may approve or difapprove of Cha-
F 2 racters


90995 TH


foo SECTION V.

wacters and Manners. And tho’ the Heart takes not
part entirely with thofe general Notions, nor regu-
4ates all its Love and Hatred, by the univerfal, ab-
ftra& Differences of Vice and Virtue, without re-
gard to Self or the Perfons, with whom we are more
immediatély cormected ; yet have thefe moral Dif.
ferences a confiderable Influence, and being fuffici-
ent, atleaft, for Difcourfe, ferve all our Purpofes in
Company, in the Pulpit, on the Theatre, and in
the Schools *.


‘Tnus, m whatever Light we take this Subjeé,
the Merit, afcrib’d to the focial Virtues, appears
fill uniform, and arifes chiefly from that Regard,
-which the natural Sentiment of Benevolence engages
us to pay to the Interefts of Mankind and Society,
If we confider the Principles of the human Make ;
fuch asthey appear to daily Experience and Obfer-


* °Tis wifely ordain’d by Nature, that private Connexions
fhould commonly prevail over univerfal Views and Confiderations ;
otherwife our Affections and Actions would be diffipated and
loft, for Want of a proper limited Obje€t. Thus a fmall Benefit
done to Ourfelves, or our near Friends, excites more lively Sen-
timents of Love and _Approbation than a great Benefit toa diftant
Common-wealth : But fill we know here, asin all the Senfes,
to correct thefe Inequalities by Refleétion, and retain a general
Standard of Vice and Virtue, founded chiefly on general Ufeful-
nefs.


4 vation ;


3 _ttllenteemmminliatiare tn


ji


|
|
|
|


Po


| Why Utiity fpleafes. FOE

vation ; we muft, 2 priori, conclude it impoffible for

fuch a Creature as Man to be totally indifferent to

the Well or Ill-being of his Fellow-creatures, and

not readily, of himfelf, to pronounce, where no-

thing gives him any particular Byafs, that what pro-

motes their Happinefs is good, what tends to their

Mifery is evil, without any farther Regard or Con-

fideration. Here then are the faint Rudiments, at

leat, or Outlines, of a general Diftinétion betwixt

Ations ; and in Proportion as the Humanity of the

Perfon is fuppos'd to encreafe, his Connexion to

thofe injur’d or benefited, and his lively Conception

of their Mifery or Happinefs ; his confequent Cen--
fure or Approbation acquires proportionable Force
and Vigour. There is no Necefiity, that a generous.
Aion, barely mention’d in an old Hiftory or remote
Gazette, fhould communicate any ftrong Feelings of
Applaufe and Admiration. '-Virtue, plac’d at fuch a
Diftance, is like a fixt Star, which, tho’, to the Eye
of Reafon, it may appear as luminous as the Sun in
his Meridian, is fo infinitely remov’d, as to afvect
the Senfes, neither with Light nor Heat. Bring this
Virtue nearer, by our Acquaintance or Connexion:
with the Perfons, or even by an eloquent Narration
and Recital of the Cafe ; oar Hearts are immediately
caught, our Sympathy enliven’d, and our cool Ap-
probation converted into the warmeft Sentiments of
Friendship and Regard. Thefe feem neceffary and
F 3 infallible


162 SECTION V.

infallible Confequences of the general Principles of
human Nature, as difcover’'d in common Life and
Practice. .


Acarn ; reverfe thefe Views and Reafonings :
Confider the Matter 2 pofteriori ; and weighing the
Confequences, enquire, if the Merit of all focial
Virtue is not deriv’d from the Feelings of Humanity,
with which it affects the Spectators. It appears to be
Matter of Fatt, that the Circumftance of Usikty,
in all Subjeéts, is a Source of Praife and Approba-
tion: That it is conftantly appeal’d to in all moral
Decifions concerning the Merit and Demerit of
Adtions; That it is the /o/e Source of that high Re-
gard paid to Juftice, Fidelity, Honour, Allegiance
and Chaftity : That it is infeperable from all the
other focial Virtues of Humanity, Generofity, Cha-
rity, Affability, Lenity, Mercy and Moderation :
And in a Word, that it is the Foundation of the
chief Part of Morals, which has a Reference to
Mankind and Society.


Ir appears alfo, in our general Approbation or
Judemeat of Characiers and Manriers, that the ufe-
ful Tendency of the focial Virtues‘moves us not by
an 1y Regards to Self-intereft, but has an Influence
much more univerfal and extenfive. It appears,
that a Tendency to public Good, and to the pro-

moting


os Jem, ee ee ee ie


Why Uritity pleafes. 103
motirig of Peace, Harmony, and Concord in Co-
ciety, ky affecting the benevolent Principles of our
Frame, engages us on the Side of the focial Virtues.
And it appears, as an additional Confirmation, that
thefe Principles of Humanity and Sympathy enter
fo deep into all our Sentiments, and have fo power-
ful an Influence, 2s:may enable them to excite the
ftrongeft Cenfure and Applaufe. The prefent
Theory is the fimple Refult of all thefe Inferences,
each of which feems founded on uniform Experience
and Obfervation.


Were it doubtful, whether there was any. fach
Principle in our Nature as Humanity or a Concern
for others, yet when we fee, in numberlefs Inftances,
that, whatever has a Tendency to promote the In-
terefts of Society, is fo highly approv'd of, we ought
thence ta learn the Force of the benevolent Principle;
fince "tis impoffible for any Thing to pleafe as Means
to an End, where the End itfelf is totally indifferent;
On the other Hand, were it doubtful, whether there
wes, implanted in our Natures, any general Prin-
ciple of moral Blame and Approbation, yet when
we fee, in numberlefs Inftances, the Influence of
Humanity, we ought thence ta conclude, that ’tis
impoffible, ‘but that every Thing, which promotes
the Interefts of Society, muf& communicate Pleafure,


and what is pernicious give Uneafinefs. But when
F4 thefe


104 SECTION V.

thefe different Reflections and Obfervations concur
in eftablifhing the fame Conclufion, muft they not
beitow an undifputed Evidence upon it ?


*T1s hc wever hop’d, that the Progrefs of this Ar-
gument will bring a farther Confirmation of the pre-
{ent Theory, by fhowing the Rife of other Senti-
ments of E:teem and Regard from the fame or like


Priaciples.


SECT.


A — meee,


( 105 )


,SECTION VI.
Of Quauities ufeful to Ourfelves.


PART I


O THING is more ufual, than for Philofo-

phers to encroach upon the Province of Gram-
marians; and to engage in Difputes of Words, while
they imagine, that they are handling Controverfies
of the deepeft Importance and Concern. Thus,
were we here to affert or todeny, that all laudable
Qualities of the Mind were ta be confider'd as Virtues or
moral Attributes, many would ‘magine, that we had
enter'd upon one of the profoundeft Speculations of
Ethics ; tho’ "tis. probable, all the while, thar the:
greateft Part of the Difpute would be found entirely
verbal. To avoid, therefore, all frivolous Subtilties
and Alftercations, as much as pofikle, we fhall con-
tent Curfelves with obferving, /7/?, that, in common
Life, the. Sentiments of Centure or Approbation,.
produc’d by mental “Qualities of every Kind, ‘are
Fs very


106 SECTION VI.

very fimilar ; and j/econdly, that all antient Moralifts,
(the beft Models) in treating of them, make little or
no Difference amongft them.


FIRST. Itfeems certain, that the Sextiment
of confcious Worth, the Self-fatisfa€tion, proceeding
from a Review of a Man’s own Conduét and Cha-
racter ; it feems certain, I fay, that this Sentiment,
which, tho’ the moft common of all others, has no
proper Name in our Language *, arifes from ¢he
Endowments of Courage and Capacity, Induftry and
Ingenuity, as well as from any other mental Excel-
Iencjes. Who, on the other Hand, is not deeply
mortify’d with reflecting on his own Folly or Diffo-
lutencfs, and feels not a fecret Sting or Compunction,

-whenever his Memory prefents any paft Occurence,
where he behav’d with Stupidity or Il-manners ?
No Time can efface the cruel Ideas.of a Man’s own
Til-conduét, or of Affronts, which Cowardice or
Impudence have brought upon him. They ftll


* The Term, Pride, is commonly taken in a bad Senfe;
bot this Sentiment feems indifferent, and may be either good or
bad, according as it is well or ill founded, and according to the
other Circumftances, that ‘accompany it. The French exprefs
this Sentiment by the Term, amour propre, but as they alfo ex-
prefs Self-love as well as Vanity, by the fame Term, there arifes


thence a great ConfuGon ip Roshefoucauit, and many of their
moral Writers,


haunt


Of QuaxitrEs ufeful to Ourfelves. 107
haunt his folitary Hours, damp his moft afpiring
Thoughts, and fhow him, even to himfelf, in the
moft contemptible and moft odious Colours imagin-
able.


Wuart is there too we are more anxious to conceal
from others than fuch Blunders, Infirmities, and
Meanneffes, or more dread to have expos’d by Rail-
lery and Satyre? And is not the chief Object of
Vanity, our Bravery. or Learning, our Wit or Breed-
ing, our Eloquence or Addrefs, our Tafteor Ability?
Thefe we difplay with Care, if not with Oftentation ;
and commonly fhow more Ambition of excelling in

them, than even in the focial Virtues themfelves,
which are, in Reality, of fuch fuperior Excellence.
Good-nature and Honefty, efpecially the latter, are
fo indifpenfibly requir’d, that, tho’ the greateft Cen-
fure attends any Violation of thefe Duties, no emi-
nent Praife follows fuch common Inftances of them,
as feem effential to the Support of human Society.
And hence the Reafon, in my Opinion, why, tho’
Men often praife fo liberally the Qualities of their
Heart, they are fhy of commending the Endowments
of their Head ; becaufe the latter Virtues, being fup-
pos’d more rare and extraordinary, are obferv'd to be
‘tthe more ufual Objects of Pride and Sclf-conceit ;
and when boatted of, beget a ftrong Sufpicion of thefe
Sentiments,

F 6 >T 18


108 , SECTION VI.


*T 1s hard to tell, whether you hurt a Man’s Cha-
racter moft by calling him a Knave or a Coward, and
whether a beaftly Glutton or Drunkard be not as
odious and contemptible as a felfifh, ungenerous
Mifer. Give me my Choice; and I would rather,
for my own Happinefs and Self-enjoyment, have a
friendly, humane Heart than poffefs all the other
Virtues of Demofthenes and Philip united : But I would
rather pafs with the World for one endow’d with ex-
tenfive Genius and intrepid Courage, and fhould
thence expect ftronger Inftances of general Applaufe
and Admiration. The Figure a Man makes in Life,
the Reception he meets with in Company, the Efteem
paid him by his Acquaintance ; all thefe Advantages
epend as much upon his good Senfe and Judgment
as upon any other Part of his Character. Had a
Man the beft Intentions in the World, and were the
fartheft remov'd from all Injuftice and Violence, he
would never be able to make himfelf be much re.
garded, without a moderate Share, at leaft, of Parts
_and Underitanding.


Wuat-.is it then we can here difpute about? If
Senfe and Courage, Temperance and Induftry,
Wit and Knowledge confeffedly form a confiderable
Part of perfonal Merit ; if a Man poffeft of them is
both better fatisfy’d with himfelf, and better entitled


to


ad


oe A ee a ia a te a


Of Quatitiss ufeful to Ourfelues, . 109
to the Good-will, Efteem, and Services of others,
than one entirely devoid of them; if, in fhort, the
Sentiments be familar, that arife from thefe Endow-
ments and from the focial Virtues ; is there any Rea-
fon for being fo extremely f{crupulous about a Word,
or doubting whether they are entitled to the Deno-
mination of Virtue *? It may, indeed, be pre-
tended, that the Sentimentof Approbation, which
thofe Accomplifhments produce, befides its being in-
ferior, is alfo fomewhat different from that, which |
attends the Virtues of Juftice and Humanity. But
this feems not a fufficient Reafon for ranking them
entirely under different Claffes and Appellations.
The Charatter of Cz/ar and that of Cato, as drawn
by Sa/uf?, are both of them virtuous, in the ftricteft
Senfe of the Word; but in a diferent Way : Nor
are the Sentiments entirely the fame, which arife
from them. The one produces Love ; the other,


* It feems to me, that in our Language, Courage, Tempe.
sance, Induftry, Frugality, &c. according to popular Stile, ase
cali’d Virtues; but when a Man is faid to be virtuous, or is denoe
minated a Man of Virtue, we chiefly regard his fucial Qualities
>Tis needlefs for a moral, philofophical Difcourfe to enter into
all thefe Caprices of Language, which are fo variable in different
Diale&ts, and in different Ages of the fame Dialeft. The Ser
timents of Men, being more uniform, as well as mose impostaat,
are a fitrer Subje&t of Speculation: Tho’ at the fame Time, we
may jatt obferve, that wherever the focial Virtues are talk'd of,

*cis- plainly imploy’d, by this Diftinction, that = are alfo
saa Virtues of a different Nature, gigi


Efteerm ;


lo SECTION VI.

Efteem : The one is amiable ; the other awful: We
could wifh to meet the one Character in a Friend ;
the other we fhould be ambitious of in Ourfelves.
In like Manner the Approbation, which attends na-
tural Abilities or Temperance or Induftry, may be
fomewhat different from that which is paid to the
focial Virtues, without making them entirely of a
different Species. And indeed, we may obferve,‘
that the natural Abilities, no more than the other
Virtues, produce not, all of them, the fume Kind of
Approbation. Good Senfe and Genius beget Efteem
and Regard : Wit and Humour excite Love and Af-
feétion *. .


e Mosr


# Love and Efteem are ntarly the fame Paffion, and arifé from
fimilar Caufes. The Qualities, which produce both, are fuch as
communicate Pleafure. But where this Pleafure is fevere and
ferious ; or where its Object is great and makes.a ftrong Im-
preffion, or. where it produces any Degree of Humility and
Awe: In all thefe Cafes, the Paffion, which arifes from the
Pleafure, is more properly denominated Efteem than Love. Be-
‘nevolence attends both: But is connected with Love ina more
eminent Degree. There feems to be fill a ftronger Mixture of
‘Pride in Contempt than of Humility in Efteem ; and the Reafon
“would not be difficult.to one, who ftudy’d accurately the Paffions.
All thefe various Mixtures and Compofitions and Appearances of
Sentiment form a very curious Subject of Speculation, but are
wide of our prefent Purpofe. Thro’out thefe Effays, we always
-eonfider in general, what Qualities are a Subje€t of Praife or of
Cenfure, without entering into.all the minute Differences of Sen-
_ ‘timent, which they excite, *Tis evident, that whatever is con-
temn’'d,


Of Quatitizs ufeful to Ourfelves. Tin.


Mosr People, I believe, will naturally, without
Premeditation, affent to the Definition of the elegant
and judicious Poet.


2


Virtue (for mere Good-nature is a Fool)
Is Senfe and Spirit, with Humanity *,


Wuar Pretenfions has a Man to our generous Af-
fiftance or Good-offices, who has diffipated his ‘
Wealth in profufe Expences, idle Vanities, chimeri-
cal Projects, diffolute Pleafures, or extravagant
Gaming? Thefe Vices (for we fcruple not to call
them fuch) bring Mifery unpity’d, and Contempt on
every ong addicted to them.


ACH EUS, a wife and prudent Prince, felt
into a fatal Snare, which coft him his Crown and
Life, after having us’d every reafonable Precaution
to guard himfelf againft it. On that Account, fays
the Hiftorian, he is a juft Object of Regard and
Compaifion: His Betrayers alone of Hatred and
Contempt tf.
temn’d, is alfo diflik’d, as well as what is hated; and we here
endeavour to take Objects, according to their moft fimple Views —
and Appearances. Thefe Sciences are but too apt to appear.ab-
ftsact to common Readers, even with all the Precautions we can


take to clear them from fuperfluous Speculations, and bring them
down to every Capacity.


® The Art of preferving Heakb, Book Ce + Polybivs,
Lib, 8. Cap, me


THE


112 SECTION VI.


Tue précipitate Flight and improvident Negli-
gence of Pompey, at the Beginning of the civil Wars,
appear’d fuch notorious Blunders to Cicero, as quite
pall’d his Friendship towards that great Man. J the


fame Manner, {ays he, as Want of Cheanknefi, De-


cency, or Difcretion in a Miftrefs are found to alienate
our Affedions. For fo he exprefies himfelf, where he
talks, not in the Character of a Philofopher, but in
that of a Statefman and Man of the World,.to his
Friend Atticus*.


But fecondly, the fame Cicero, in Imitation of all
the antient Moralifts, when he reafons as a Philofo-
pher, enlarges very much his Ideas of Virtue, and
comprehends every laudable Quality or Endowment
of the Mind, under that honourable Appellation.
The Prudence, explain'd in his Offces +, is that Sa-
gacity, which leads ta the Difcovery of Truth, and
preferves us from Error and Miftake. Magnanimity,
Temperance, Decency are there alfo at large difcours’d
of. And as that eloquent Moralift follow’d the com-
mon rectiv’d Divifion of the four cardinal Virtues;
our focial Deties form but one Head, in the general
Diftribution of his Subject,

@ Lib. g. Epift. 10. 9 + Libs x. Cap. 6,


¢


Of QuauitiEs ufeful to Ourfelves. 113


We need only perufe the Titles of Chapters in
Ariftotle’s Ethics to be convinc’d, that he ranks Cou-
rage, ‘Temperance, Magnificence, Magnanimity,
* Modefty, Prudence, and a manly Freedom amongtt
the Virtues, as well as Ju‘tice and F riendhip.


To fufain and to abftain, that is, to be patient and
continent, appear’d to fome of the Antients, a fum-
mary Comprchenfion of all Morals.


EPICTETUS has fcarce ever mentioned the
Sentiment of Humanity and Compaffion, but in
order to put his Difciples on their Guard againft it.
The Virtue of the Stcics feems to confift chiefly in a
firm'Temper and a found Underftanding. With them,
as with So/omon and the Eaftern Moralifts, Folly and
Wifdom are equivalent to Vice and Virtue.


Men will praife thee, fays David *, when thou
doft well unto thyfelf. I hate a wife Man, fays the
Greek Poet, who is not wife to himfelf +.

P LUT ARCH is no more crampt by Syftems
in his Philofophy than in his Hiftory. Where he
compares the great Men of Greece and Rome, he fairly

* Pfalmggth, + Miso Topica occ us aura cep@, Ineett
apud Lucianum, Apologia pra mercede conductis,

{ets


114 SECTION VI.

fets in Oppofition all their Blemifhes and Accom-
plithments of whatever Kind, and omits nothing
confiderable, that can either deprefs or exalt their
Characters. His moral Difcourfes contain the fame
free and natural Cenfure of Men and Manners.


Tue Charaéter of Hannibal, as drawn by Licy *,
is efteem'd partial, but allows him many eminent
Virtues. Never was there a Genius, fays the Hifto-
rian, more equally fitted for thofe oppofite Offices of
Command and Obedience; and ’twere, therefore,
difficult to determine whether he render’d himfelf
dearer to the General or to the Army: To none,
would Hafdrubal entruft more willinzly the Condu@
of any dangerous Enterprize ; under none, did the
Soidiers difcover more Courage and Confidence.
Great Boldnefs in affronting Danger ; great Prudence
in the Midft of it. No Labour could fatigue his
Body or fubdue his Mind. Cold and Heat were in-
different to him : Meat and Drink he fought as Sup-
plies to the Neceflities of Nature, not as Gratifica-
tions of his voluptuous Appetites: Waking or Reft
“heus'd indifcriminately, by Night or by Day---Thefe
great VIRTUES were ballanc’d by great VICES:
Inhuman Cruelty ; Perfidy more than Punic; noTruth,
no Faith, no Regard to Oaths, Promifes or Religion.


“ “S-Lib, at. Cap. 4


THe


ee oe


lr


_ ee, Te a ogy l,l


-—- = ce ee ee ee


+ i a iat de a


OF Quarities x/eful to Ourfelves. it


Tue Character of Alexander the Sixth, to be found
in Guicciardin *, is pretty fimilar, but jufter ; and is
a Proof, that even the Moderns, where they fpeak
naturally, hold the fame Language with the Antients.
In this Pope, fays he, there was a fingular Capacity
and Judgment : Admirable Prudence ; a wonderful
Talent of Perfuafion ; and in all momentuous En-
terprizes, a Diligence and Dexterity incredible But
thefe Virtues were infinitely overballanc’d by his
Vices; no Faith, no Religion, infatiable Avarice,
exorbitant Ambition, and a more than barbarous
Cruelty.


POLY BIUS 4, seprehending Timeus for his
Partiality againft Agathocles, whom he himfelf allows
to be the moft cruel and impious of all Tyrants,
fays: If he took Refuge in Syracuf, as afferted by
that Hiftorian, flying the Dirt and Smoke and Toil
of his former Profeflion of a Potter; and if, pro-
ceeding from fuch ‘lender Beginnings, he became
Mafter, in a little Time, of all Sicily; brought the
Certlaginian State into the utmoft Danger ; and at
laft dy’d in Old-age, and in Poffeffion of kingly
Dignity : Muft he not be allow’d fomething prodi~
gious and extraordinary, and to have poffeft great
Talents and Capacity for Bufinefs and Action ?

®L
Z Libht 8 f Lib, 22. His


116 SECTION VI.

His Hiftorian, therefore, ought not to have alone
related what tended to his Reproach and Infamy ;
but alfo what might redound to his PRAISE and
HONOUR.


In general, we may obferve, that the Diftinction
of voluntary or involuntary was little regarded by
the Antients in their moral Reafonings ; where they
frequently treated the Queftion as very doubtful,
whether Virtue could be taught or not * ? ‘They juftiy
confider’'d, that Cowardice, Meannefs, Levity,
Anxiety, Impatience, Folly, and many other Qua-
lities of the Mind, might appear ridiculous, and de-
form’d, contemptivie and adious, tho’ independant
of the Will. Nor could it be fuppos’d, at all Times,
in every Man’s Power to attain every Kind of mental,
more than exterior Beauty.


Byr modern Philofophers, treating all Morals,
as on a like Footing with civil Laws, guarded by the
San@tions of Reward and Punifhment, were neceffa-
rily led to render this Circumftance, of voluntary
or involuntary, the Foundation of their whole
Theory. Every one may employ Terms in what
Senfe he pleafes: But this, in the mean Time, mutt


® Vid,. Plate in Menone, Semeca de otie fap, Cap. 31. Soalfo -


Horace, Virtutem doftrina peret, noturane donet, Epj& Lib. 1.


i 18, , oe ‘ re | - >
, ” "be


Of QuaritisEs ufeful to Ourfelves. 1ly
be allow’d, that Sentiments are every Day experienc’d
of Blame and. Praife, which have Objeéts beyond
the Dominion of the Will or Choice, and of which
it behoves us, if not as Moralifts, as fpeculative
Philofophers at leaft, to give fome fatisfactory choy
and Explication.


A Biemisn, a Fault, a Vice, a Crime ;- thefe
Expreflions feem to denote different Degrees of Cen-
fure and Difapprobation ; which are, however, all
of them, at the Bottom, pretty nearly the fame Kind
of Species. The Explication of one will lead us
eafily into a jaft Conception of the others.


PART IL


T feems evident, that where a Quality or Habit

is fubjected to our Examination, if it appear, in
any refpect, prejudicial to the Perfon, poffeft of it,
‘or fuch as incapacitates him for Bufinefs and Aion,
it is inftantly blam’d, and rank’d amongtt his Faults
and Imperfections. Indolence, Negligence, Want
of Order and Method, Obftinacy, Ficklenefs, Rath-
nefs, Credulity; no one ever efteem’d thefe Qua-
lities, indifferent to a Chara@ter ; much lefs, extoll’d
them as Accomplifhments or Virtues. The Preju-
dice, refulting from them, immediately ftrikes our
Eye,


ws SECTI-ON VI.
Eye, and gives us the Sentiment of Pain and Dit:
approbation.


No Qualiity, ‘tis allow'd, is abfolutely either
blameable or praife-worthy. °Tis all according to
its Degrees. A due Medium, fay the Peripatetics,
is the Characteriftic of Virtue. ~ But this Medium is
chiefly determin’d by Utility. A proper Celerity,
for Inftance, and Difpatch in Bufinefs.is commend-

able. When defedtive, no Progrefs is ever made in
the Execution of any Purpofe: When excefiive, it
engages us in precipitate, and ill-concerted Meafures
and Enterprizes. By fuch Reafonings as thefe we
fix the proper and commendable Mediocrity in all
‘moral and prudential Difquifitions ; and never lofe


View of the Advantages, which refult from any
Charaéter or Habit.


Now as thefe Advantages are enjoy’d by the Per-
fon, poffeft of the Charatter, it can never be Se/f-
love, which renders the Profpeét of them agreeable
tous, the Spectators, and prompts our. Efteem and
Approbation. No Force of Imagination can con-
vert us into another Perfon, and make us fancy,
that we being that Perfon, reap Benefit from thofe
valuable Qualities, which belong to him. Or if it
did, no Celerity of Imagination could immediately
tranfport .us back, into ourfelves, and make us love
_and efteem the Perfon, as different from us. Views


i and


__ i i anes, Maio
a gone ie > ar mr r-


Of Quatitiss afeful to Ourfelves. wg
and Sentiments, fo oppofite to known Truth, and to
each other, could never have place, at the fame
Time, in the fame Perfon. All Sufpicion, therefore, of
felfifh Regards are here totally excluded. ’Tis a quite —
different Principle, which adtuates our Bofom, and
interefts us in the Felicity of the Perfon we contem-
plate. ‘Where his natural Talents and acquir'd Abi-
lities give us the Profpe& of Elevation, Advance-
ment, a Figure in Life, profperous Succefs, a fteady
Command over Fortune, and. the Execution of great
or advantageous Undertakings ; we are ftruck with
fuch agreeable Images, and feel a Complacency and
Regard immediately arife towards him. The Ideas
of Happinefs, Joy, Triumph, Profperity are con-
neéted with every Circumftance of his Charaéter,
and diffufe over our Minds a pleating Sentiment of
Sympathy and Humanity *.


LET


® One may venture to affirm, that there is no human Creature,

to whom the Appearance of Happinefs, (where Envy or Revenge
has no Place) does not give Pleafure, that of Mifery, Uneafinefs.
This feems infeperable from our Make and Conftitution. But they
are only the more generous Minds, that are thence prompted to feele
zealoufly the Good of others, and to have a real Paffi6n for their
- Welfare, Wath Mea of narrow. and ungenerous Spirits, thisSym-.
pathy goes not beyond a flight Feeling of the Imagination, which
ferves only: to excite Sentiments-of Complacency or Cenfure, and
make them apply to the Object either honourable or difhonourable
Appellations, A griping Mifer, for Inftance, praifes extremely
se and Frugality, even in others, and fets them, in his Efti-
mation,


-~


azo SECTION VI.


Ler us fuppofe a Perfon originally fo fram'd as
to have no Manner of Concern for his Fellow-crea-
tares, but to regard the Happinefs and Mifery of
all fenfible Beings with greater Indifference even
than two contiguous Shades of the fame Colour,
Let us fuppofe, if the Profperity of Nations were


lay'd on the one hand and their Ruin on the other,


and he were defir’d tq choofe ; that he would ftand,
like the Schoolman’s Afs, irrefolute and undeter-
min’d, betwixt equal Motives; or rather, like the
fame Afs betwixt two Pieces of Wood or Marble,
without any Inclination or Propenfity on either Side.
The Confequence, I believe, muft be allow’d juft,
that fuch a Perfon, being abfolutely unconcern’d,
either as to the public Good of a Community or the
private Utility of others, would look on every Qua-
lity, however pernicious, or however beneficial, to
Society or te its Poffeffor, with the fame Indifference
as on the moft common and uninterefting Object.


- Bur if, inftead of this fancy’d Monfter, we fup-
pofe a Manto form a Judgment or Determination in


mation, above all the other Virtues. He knows the Good, that
refults from them, and feels that Species of Happinefs with a more
lively Sympathy, then any other you could reprefent tohim ; tho”
perhaps he would not part with a Shilling to make the Fortane of
the induftrious Man, whom he praifes fo highly,

, the


!
|
|
|
|


me mI


Of QuauitieEs ufeful to Ourfelves. 121
the Cafe ; there is to him a plain Foundation of
Preference, where every Thing elfe is equal ; and
however cool his Choice may be, if his Heart be
felfith, or if the Perfons interefted be remote from
him ; there mutt ftill be a Choice, and a Diftin&tion
betwixt what is ufeful, and what is pernicious. Now
this Diftin@tion is the fame in all its Parts, with the
moral DiftinGion, whofe Foundation has been fo of-
ten, and fo much in vain, enquir’d after. The fame
Endowments of the Mind, in every Circumftance,
are agreeable to the Sentiment of Morals and to that
of Humanity ; the fame Temper is fufceptible of
high Degrees of the one Sentiment and of the other 5
and the fame Alteration in the Objects, by their
nearer Approach or by Connexions, enlivens the one
and the other. By all the Rules of Philofophy,
therefore, we muft conclude, that thefe Sentiments
are originally the fame ; fince, in each particular,
even the moft minute, they are govern’d by the fame
Laws, and are mov'd by the fame Objects.


Wuy do Philofophers infer, with the greateft
Certainty, that the Moon is kept in its Orbit by the
fame Force of Gravity, which makes Bodies fall
near the Surface of the Earth, but becaufe thefe
Effe&ts are, upon Computation, found fimilar and
equal? And muft nat this Argument bring equal .
Conviction, in moral as in natural Difquifitions ?

G To


122 SECTION VI,


To prove, by any long Detail, that all the Qua-
lities, ufeful to the Poffeffor, are approv’d, and the
contrary cenfur’d, would be fuperfluous. The leaf
Refleétion, on what is every Day experienc’din Life,
will be fufficient. We fhall only mention a few In-
ftances, in order to remove, if poffible, all Doubt
and Hefitation.


Tue Quality, the moft neceffary for the Execution
of any ufeful Enterprize, is DISCRETION;
by which we carry on a fafe Intercourfe with others,
give due Attention to our own and to their Charaéter,
weigh each Circumftance of the Bufinefs we under-


take, and employ the fureft and fafeft Means for the E


Attainment of any End or Purpofe. To a Cromwell,


perhaps, or a De Retz, Difcretion may appear an —


Alderman-like Virtue, as Dr. Swift calls it; and
being incompatible with thofe vaft Defigns, to which
their Courage and Ambition prompted them, it


|


|


might really, in them, be a Fault or Imperfeétion. —


But in the Condué of ordinary Life, no Virtue is


more requifite, not only to obtain Succefs, but to -


avoid the moft fatal Mifcarriages and Difappoint-
- ments. The greateft Parts without it, as obferv'd by
an elegant Writer, may be fatal to their Owner ; as


Polyphemus depriv’d of his Eye was only the more ex- |


pos'd,


Of QuaxitiEs ufeful to Ourfelves. 123


pos’d, on Account of his enormous See and
Stature.


Tue beft Character, indeed, were it not rather toe
perfect for human Nature, is that which gives no-
thing to Temper of any Kind ; but alternately em-
ploys Enterprize and Caution, as each is w/efu/ to the
particular Purpofe intended. Such is the Excellence,
which St. Evremond afcribes to Marefchal Turenne,
who difplay’d every Campaign, as he grew older,
more Temerity in his military Enterprizes ; and be-


ing now, from long Experience, perfectly acquainted
with every Incident in War, he advanc’d with


greater Firmnefs and Boldnefs, in a Road fo well
known to him. Fabius, fays Machiavel, was cau-
tious ; Scipio enterprizing: And both fucceeded,
becaufe the Situation of the Roman Affars, during
the Command of each, was peculiarly adapted to


his Genius ; but both would have fail'd, had thefe -


Situations been inverted. He is happy, whofe Cir.
cumftances fuit his Temper ; but he is more excellent,
who can fuit his Temper to any Circumftances.


Wuart need is there to difplay the Praifes of
INDUSTRY, and to extol its Advantages, in
the Acquifition of Power and Riches, or in raifing
what we call a Fortune inthe World ? The Tortoife,
according to the Fable, by his Affiduity, gain’d the


G2 Race


Ld A
whe anes ae eee


124 SECTION VI.

Race of the Hare, tho’ poffeft of much {uperior
Swiftnefs. A Man’s Time, when well hufbanded,
is like a cultivated Field, of which a few Acres pro-
duce more of what is ufeful to Life, than extenfive
Provinces, even of the richeft Soil, when over-run
with Weeds and Brambles. —


Bur all Profpeét of Succefs in Life, or even of
tolerable Subfiftence, muft fail, where a reafonable
FRUGALITY is wanting. The Heap, in-
ftead of encreafing, diminifhes daily, and leaves its
Poffeffor fo much more unhappy, that not having
been able to confine his Expences to a larger Reve-
nue, he will ftill lefs be able to live contentedly on a
{maller. The Souls of Men, according to Plato *,
inflam’d with impure Appetites, and lofing the Body,
which alone afforded Means of Satisfaction, hover
about the Earth, and haunt the Places, where their
Bodies are repofited ; poffeft with a longing Defire
to recover the loft Organs of Senfation So may we
fee worthlefs Prodigals, having confum’d their For-
tunes in wild Debauches, thrufting themfelves into
every plentiful Table, and every Party of Pleafure,
hated even by the vicious, and defpis'd even by
Fools.


© Phade,
Tuzg


_ -


sh a ia


Of Quauitiés wfeful to Ourselves. 12¢


Tue one Extreme of Frugality'is Avarice, which,
as it both deprives a Man of all Ufe of his Riches,


and checks Hofpitality and every focial Enjoyment,


is juflly cenfur’d on adouble Account: Prodigality,
the other Extreme, is commonly more hurtful to a
Man himfelf; and each of thefe Extremes is blam’d
above the other, according to the Temper of the
Perfon who cenfures, and according to his greater or


lefs Senfibility to Pleafure, either focial or fenfual.


Aut Men, tis allow’d, are equally defirous of
Happinefs ; but all Men are not equally fuccefsful in
the Purfuit : Of which one chief Caufe is the common
Want of STRENGTH of MII D, which
might enable us to refi the Temptation of prefent
Eafe or Pleafure, and carry us forward in the Search
of more diftant Profit and Enjoyment. Our Affec-
tions, on.a general Profpect of their Objects, form
certain Rules of Conduct, and ceriain Meafures of
Preference of one above another: And thefe De-
cifions, tho’ really the Refult of our calm Paifions,
and Propenfities, (for what elfe can proncznce any
Object eligible or the contrary ?) are yet faid, by a
natural Abufe of Terms, to be the Determinations
of pure Reafcn and RefleGion. But when fome of
thefe Objects approach nearer us, or acquire the Ad-
vantages of favourable Lights and Pofitions, which

G3 catch


126 SECTION VI.

catch the Heart or Imagination ; our general Refo-
lutions are frequently confounded, a {mall Enjoyment
preferr'd, and lafting Shame and Sorrow entail’d
upon us. And however Poets may employ their
Wit and Eloquence, in celebrating prefent Pleafure,
and rejecting all diftant Views to Fame, Health, or
Fortune ; "tis obvious, that this Pra¢tice is the Source
ef all Diffolutenefs and Debauchery, Repentance
and Mifery. A Man of a ftrong and determin’d
Temper adheres tenacioufly to his general Refolu-
tions, and is neither feduc'd by the Allurements of
Pleafure, nor terrify’d by the Menaces of Painy
but keeps ftill in View thofe diftant Purfuits, by which
he, at once, enfures his Happinefs and his Ho-
nour,


SELF-SATISFACTION, at leaft in fome Degree, is
an Advantage, that equally attends thee FOOL
and the WISE-MAN: But ’tis the only one;
nor is there any other Circumftance in the Conduét
ef Life, where they are upon an equal Footing.
Bufinefs, Books, Converfation; for all of thefe, a
Fool is totally incapacitated, and except condemn’d
by his Station to the coarfeft Drudgery, remains a
ufelefs Burthen upon the Earth. Accordingly, ‘tis
found, that Men are infinitely jealous of their Cha-
sacter in this Particular; and many Inftances are
feen of Profligacy and Treachery, the moft avow'd,


and


i Toe ae
e SP 2s a * 1, ¥ 1


Of Quaritises ufeful to Oxrfelves. 129
and unreferved ; none of bearing patiently the Im-
putation of Ignorance and Stupidity. Dicearchus,
the Macedonian General, who, as Po/yéivs * tells us,
openly erected one Altar to Impiety, and another to
Injuftice, in order to bid Defiance to Mankind ;
even he, I am well affur'd, would have ftarted at-
the Epithet of Foo/, and have meditated Revenge for
fo injurious an Appcllation. Except the Affection of
Parents, the ftrongeft and moft indiffoluble Bond in
Nature, no Connexion has Strength fuficient to fup-
port the Difguft arifing from this Charafer. Love
itfelf, which can fubfift under Treachery, Ingrati-
tude, Malice, and Infidelity, is immediately ex-
tinguifh’d by it, when perceiv’d and acknow‘edg’d ;
nor are Deformity and Old age more fatal to the Do-
minion of that Paffion. So dreadful are the Ideas
of an utter Incapacity for any Purpofe or Under-
taking, and of continu’d Error and Mifconduét in
Life ! ,


Wuen "tis afk’d, whether a quick or a flow Ap-
prehenfion be moft valuable ? Whether one, that,
at firft View, penetrates far into a Subject, but can
perform nothing upon Study ; or a contrary Cha-
racter, which rouft work out every Thing by Dint of
Application ? Whether a clear Head or a copious


* Lib. 17. Cap. 35.


G4 Invention ?


128 SECTION VI.

Invention? Whether a profound Genius ora fure
Judgment? In fhort, what Character, or peculiar
Turn of Underftanding is more excellent than
another? Tis evident, we can anfwer none of


_ thefe Queftions, without confidering which of thofe


Qualities capacitates a Man beft for the World, and
carrics him fartheft in any of his Undertakings.


Ir refin’d Senfe and exalted Senfe be not fo u/eful
as common Senfe, their Rarity, their Novelty, and


_the Noblenefs of their Objects make fome Compen-


fation, and render them the Admiration of Man-
kind: As Gold, tho’ lefs ferviceable than Iron, ac-
quires, from its Scarcity, a Value, which is much
{uperior.


Tur Defe&s of Judgment can be fupply’d by no
Art or Invention ; but thofeof MEM OR Y fre-
quently may, both in Bufinefs and in Study, by
Method and Induftry, and by Diligence in commit-
ting every Thing to Paper ; and we fcarce ever hear
2 fhort Memory given as a Reafon for a Man’s Want
of Succefs in any Undertaking. But in antient
‘Times, when no Man could make a Figure without
the Talent of fpeaking, and when the Audience
were too delicate to bear fuch crude, undigefted
Harangues 2s our extemporary Orators offer to pub-


lic Aflemblies ; the Faculty of Memory was then of
the


ie
7 oe te Tt ae at ne


: ee ee ee a sie oe


Of Quauitizs ufeful to Ourfelves. 129
the utmoft Confequence, and was accordingly much
more valued than at prefent. Scarce any great
Genius is mention’d in Antiquity, who is not cele- -
brated for this Talent; and. Cicero enumerates it
amongft the other fublime Qualities of Cz/ar him-
felf *.


Particutar Cuftoms and Manners alter the Ufe-
fulnefs of Qualities: they alfo alter their Merit.
Particular Situations and Accidents have, in fome
Degree, the fame Influence. He will always be ~
more efteem’d, who profeffes thofe Talents and Ac-
complifhments, which fuit his Station and Pro-
fefion, than he whom Fortune has mifplac’d in the
Part fhe has affign’d him. ‘The private or felfith
Virtues are, in this refpeét, more arbitrary than the
public and focial. In other refpeéts, they are, per-
haps, lefs liable to Doubt and Controverfy.


In this Kingdom, fuch continu’d Oftentation, of
late Years, has been difplay’d among Men in aéive
Life, with regard to putlic Spirit, and among thofe
in /peculative with regard to Benevolence ; and fo
many falfe Pretenfions to each have been, no doubt,
detected, that Men of the World are apt, without


* Fuit in illo ingenium, ratio, memoria, litere, cura, cogi-
tatio, diligentia, &c, Phillip. 2.


G 5 any


130 SECTION VI.

any bad Intention, to difcover a fullen Incredylity
on the head of thefe moral Endowments, and even
fometimes abfolutely to deny their Exiftence and
Reality, In like Manner, I find, that, of old, the
perpetual Cant of the Stoics and Cynics concerning
Virtue, their magnificent Profeffions and flender Per-
formances, bred a Difguft in Mankind ; and Lucian,


who, tho’ licentious on the Article of Pleafure, is —


yet, in other refpects, a very moral Writer, cannot»
fometimes, talk of Virtue, fo much boafted, with-
out betraying Symptoms of Spleen and Irony *. But
furely, this peevifh Delicacy, whence-ever it arifes,
can never be carry'd fo far as to make us deny the
Exiftence of every Species of Virtue, and all Diftinc-
tion of Manners and Behaviour. Befides Difcretion,


Caution, Enterprize, Indufiry, Affiduity, Frugality,


OLEconomy, Good-fenfe, Prudence, Difcernment ; befides
thefe Virtues, I fay, whofe very Names force an
Avowal of their Merit, there are many others,
to which the moft determin’d Sceptifm cannot, for a
Moment, refufe the Tribute of Praife and Appro.


bation : Temperance, Sodriety, Patience, Conflancy,


* Aperny Tia xat arwpata mat AnpYg psyadn TH oe
Luveipovrwy. Luc. Timon. Again, Kat cuvayayeyres (0 Piroropos)
QUES ATATNTR MELLAKIG THYTE gokudUAANTOY acETHY Teeyaduc.
Icuro-men. Inanother Place, Hae yag sew 1 wodvdevAant@s
GQETN, Nab Pusic, Nas ELpeapeceyn, nas TVX) ost ley xab
neva Teayparey ovouatee Deor. Concil,


6 Perfeverauce,


= ee ee


——-— —


Of Quauitiss uefa! to Ourfelues. . 938
Perfeverance, Forethought, Confideratenefs, Secrecys
Order, Infinuation, Addrefs, Prefence of Mind, Quick-
nefs of Conception, Facility of Expreffion ; thefe anda
thoufand more of the fame Kind, no Man will ever
deny to be Excellencies and Endowments. As their
Merit confifts in their Tendency to ferve the Perfon,
poffeft of them, without any magnificent Claims of
public -and focial Defert, we are the lefs jealous of
their Pretenfions, and readily admit them into the
Catalogue of Virtues. We are not fenfible, that,
by this Conceffion, we have pav’d the Way for all
the other moral Excellencies, and cannot confiftently
hefitate any longer, with regard to difinterefted Be-
nevolence, Patriotifm, and Humanity.


Ir feems, indeed, certain, that firft Appearances
are here, as ufual, extremely deceitful, and that ’tis
more difficult, in a fpeculative Way, to refolve into
Self-love the Merit we afcribe to the felfith Virtues ~
above-mention’d, than that even of the focial Virtues
of Juftice and Beneficence. For this lattes Furpofe,
we need but fay, that whatever Conduct and Beha-
viour promotes the Good of the Community, is
lov'd, prais’d, and efteem’d by the Community, on
Account of that Utility and Intereft, of which every
one partakes: And tho’ this Affection and Regard
‘be, in Reality, Gratitude,” not. Self-love, yet a
Diftinction, even of this obvious Nature, may not

| G 6 readily


132 SECTION VI. |
readily be made by fuperficial Reafoners ; and there
is Room, at leaft, to fupport the Cavil and Difpute
fora Moment. But as Qualities, which tend only
to the Utility of their Poffeffor, without any Refer-
ence to us, or to the Community, are yet efteem’d
and valu'd ; by what Theory or Syftem can we ac-
count for this Sentiment from Self-love, or deduce it
from that favourite Origin? There feems here a
Neceflity of confefling that the Happinefs and
Mifery of others are not Spectacles altogether in-
different to us, but that the View of the. former,
whether in its Caufes or Effects, like Sun-fhine or
the Profpe&t of well-cultivated Plains (to carry our
Pretenfions no higher) communicates a fecret Joy
and Satisfaction ; the Appearance of the latter,
- Tike a lowering Cloud or barren Landfkip, throws a
melancholy Damp over the Imagination. And this
Conceffion being once made, the Difficulty is over ;
and a natural, unforc’d Interpretation of the Pha-
nomena of human Life will afterwards, we may
hope, prevail, amongft all {peculative Enquirers.


PART.


. (res, ee a sl. , fim


-———- _«


Of QuaLitiEs ufeful to Ourfelves. 134


PART UL.


T may not be improper, in this Place, to exa-

mine the Influence of bodily Endowments and of ©
the Goods of Fortune, over our Sentiments of Re-
gard and Efteem, and to confider whether thefe
Phenomena, ftrengthen or weaken the prefent
Theory.


"Tis evident, that one confiderable Source of
Beauty in all Animals is the Advantage they reap
from the particular Fabric or Structure of their Limbs
and Members, fuitable to the particular Manner of
Life, to which they are by Nature deftind. The
juft Proportions of a Horfe, defcrib’d by Xenophon
and Virgil, are the fame, which are receiv’d at this
_ Day by our modern Jockeys ; becaufe the Founda.
tion of them is the fame, viz. Experience of what
is detrimental or ufeful in the Animal.


Broap Shoulders, a lank Belly, firm Joints,
taper Legs ; all thefe are beautiful in our Species,
becaufe Signs of Force and Vigour. Ideas of Uti-
lity and its contrary, tho’ they do not altogether de-
termine what is handfome or deform’d, are evidently

the


134 SECTION VE
the Source of a confiderable Part of Approbation or
Diflike. |


In ancient Times, bodily Strength and Dexterity,
being of greater U/e and Importance in War, was
alfo much more efteem’d and valu’d, than at prefent.
Not to infift on Homer and the Poets, we may ob-
ferve, that Hiftorians fcruple not to mention Force of”
Body among the other Accomplifhments even of
Epaminondas, whom they acknowledge‘to be the
greateft Hero, Statefman, and General of all the
Greeks*. A like Praife is given to Pompey, one of
the greateft of the Romans +. This Inftance is
fimilar to what we obferv’d above with regard to
Memory.


Wuar Derifion and Contempt, with both Sexes,
attend Jm{otence ; while the unhappy Object is re-


® Diodoras Siculus, Lib. x 5 It may not be improper to giva
the Character of Epaminondas, as drawn by the Hiftorian, in order
to fhow the Ideas of -perfect Merit, which prevailed in thofe Ages.
In other illuftrious Men, fays he, you will obferve, that each
poffeft fome one fhining Quality, which was the Foundation of his
Fame : In Epaminondas all the Virtues are found united ; Force of
Body, Eloquence of Expreffion, Vigour of Mind, Contempt of
Riches, Gentlenefs of Difpofition, and what is chiefly to be re-
garded, Courage and Condu& in War,


T Cum alacribus, faltw ;*cumvelocibus, curfu 3 cum validis ree
* gertabat, Salluft. apud Veget.


garded


7 a


wa


ww?


Of Quatitiss ufeful to Ourfelves. 136
garded as one’ depriv’d of fo capital a Pleafure in
Life, and at the fame Time, as difabled from com-
municating it toothers. Barrenne/s in Women, be-
ing alfo a Species of Jnutility, is a Reproach, but
not in the fame Degree : Of which the Reafon is
very obvious, according to the prefent Theory *.


Tuere is no Rule in Painting or Statuary more
indifpenfible than that of ballancing the Figures,
and placing them with the greateft Exactnefs on their
proper Center of Gravity. A Figure, which is not
juftly ballanc’d is ugly ; becaufe it conveys the dif-


agreeable Ideas of Fall, Harm and Pain +.
A


* To the fame Purpofe, we may obferve a Phenomenon,
which might appear fomewhat trivial and ludicrous; if any Thing
could be trivial, which fortify’d Conclufions of fuch Importance ;
or ludicrous, which was employ’d in a philofophical Reafoning.
Tis a general Remark, that thofe we call good Women’s Men,
who have either fignaliz’d themfelves. by their amorcus Exploits,
or whofe Make of Body or other Symptoms promife any extraordi-
nary Vigour of that Kind, are well receiv’d by the fair Sex, and
naturally engage the Affe€tions even of thofe whofe Virtue or
Situation prevents any Defign of ever giving Employment to thofe
Talents. ‘The Imagination is pleas’d with thefe Conceptions, and
entering with Satisfaction into the Ideas of fo favourite an Enjoy-
ment, feels a Complacency and Good-will towards the Perfon. A
like Principle operating more extenfively, is the general Source of
moral Affection and Approbation.


+ All Men are equally liable to Pain and Difeafe and Sicknefs 3
and may again recover Health and Eafe. Thefe Circumftances, as
they make no Diftinétion betwixt one Man and another, are no

Source


136 SECTION VI.


A Disposition or Turn of Mind, which quali-
fies a Man to rife in the World, and advance his
Fortune, is entitled to Efteem and Regard, as has
been already explain’d. It may, therefore, naturally
be fuppos’d, that the actual Poffeffion of Riches and
Authority will have a confiderable Influence over
thefe Sentiments.


Let us examine any Hypothefis, by which we can
account for the Regard, pay’d the Rich and Power-
ful : We fhall find none fatisfactory but that which
derives it from the Enjoyment, communicated by the
Images of Profperity, Happinefs, Eafe, Plenty,
Command, and the Gratification of every Appetite.
Self-love, for Inftance, which fome affe&t fo much
to confider as the Source of every Sentiment, is


Source of Pride or Humility, Regard or Contempt. But comparing


our own Species to fuperior ones, "tis a very mortifying Confiderae .


tion, that we fhould be fo liable to all Difeafes and Infirmities 5
and Drvines accordingly employ this Topic, in order to deprefs Self-
conceit and Vanity. They would have more Succefs, if the com-
mon Bent of our Thoughts were not perpetually turn’d to compare
ourfelves with each other, The Iofirmities of old Age are morti«
fying ; becaufe a Comparifon with the Young may take place, The
King’s Evil is induftrioufly conceal’d, becaufe it affeéts others, and
is tran{mitted to Pofterity. The Cafe is nearly the fame with fuch
‘Dueafes as convey any naufeous or frightful ich 3; the Epilepfy,
for Inflance, Ulcers, Sores, Scabs, &c,


plainly


7


Of Quauities wfeful to Ourfelves. 137
plainly infufficient to this Purpofe. Where no Good-
will or Friendthip appears, ‘tis difficult to conceive
on what we can found our Hope of Advantage from
the Riches of others ; tho’ we naturally efteem and
refpect the Rich, even before they difcover any
fuch favourable Difpofition towards us.


We are affected with the fame Sentiments, when
we lie fo much out of the Sphere of their Activity,
that: they cannot even be fuppos’d to poffefs the
Power of ferving us. A Prifoner of War, in all
civiliz’d Nations, is treated with a Regard, fuited to
his Condition ; and Riches, “tis evident, go far to-
wards fixing the Condition of any Perfon. If Birth
and Quality enter for a Share, this ftill affords us an
Argument to our prefent Purpofe. For what is it
we call a Manof Birth, but one, who is defcended
from a long Succeffion of rich and powerful An-
ceftors, and who acquires our Efteem by his Con-
nexion with Perfons, whom we eftceem? His An-
ceftors, therefore, tho’ dead, are refpected, in fome
Meafure, on Account of their Riches; and confe-
quently, without any Kind of Expedtation.


Bur not to go fo far as Prifoners of War or the
Dead, to find Inftances of this difinterefted Regard
for Riches; we may only obferve, with a little At-


tention, thofe Phenomena, that occur in common
Life


138 $$ SECTION VI. _

Life and Converfation. A Man, who is himfeff,
we fhall fuppofe, of a competent Fortune, and of
no Profeffion, coming into a Company of Strangers,
naturally treats them with different Degrees of Ref-
pect and Deference, as he is inform’d of their dif-
ferent Fortuncs and Conditions ; tho’ *tis impofiible
he can fo fuddenly propofe, and perhaps would not
accept of, any pecuniary Advantage fromthem. A
Traveller is always admitted into Company, and
mects with.Civility, in Proportion as his Train and
Equipage fpeak him a Man of great or moderate
Fortune. In fhort, the different Ranks of Man are,
in a great Mcafure, regulated .by Riches ; and that
with regard to Superiors as well as Inferiors, Strangers
as well as Acquaintance.


Wuat remains, therefore, but to conclude, that
as Riches are defir’d for ourfelf only as the Means
of gratifying our Appetites, either at prefent or in
fome imaginary future Period ; they beget Efteem
in others merely from their having that Influence.
This indeed is their very Nature or Effence: They
have a direct Reference to the Commodities, Con-
veniencies, and Pleafures of Life: A Banker’s Bill,
who is broke, or Gold in a defart Ifland, would


otherwife be full as valuable. When we approach a -


Man, who is, as we fay, at his Eafe, we are pre-
fented with the pleafing Ideas of Plenty, Satisfaction,
Cleanlinefs,


ho Se mate. , J


Of Quaities afeful te Ourfelves. 139
Cleanlinefs, Warmth; a chearful Houfe, elegant‘
Furniture, ready Service, and whatever is defirable
in Meat, Drink, or Apparel. On the contrary,
when a poor Man appears, the difagreeable Images
of Want, Penury, hard Labour, dirty Furniture,
coarfe or ragged Cloaths, naufeors Mcat and diftafte-
ful Liquor, immediately ftrike our Fancy. What
elfe do we mean by faying the one is rich, the cther
poor? And as Regard or Contempt is the natural
Confequence of thefe different Situations in Life ;
tis eafily feen what additional Light and Evidence
this throws on our preceding Theory, with Regard
to all moral Diftinétions *.


.


* There is fomething very extraordinary, and feemingly une
accountable in the Operation of our Paffions, when we confider
the Fortune and Situation of others, Very often another's Ade
vancement and Profperity produces Envy, which has a ftrong Mix«
ture of Hatred, and arifes chiefly from the Comparifon of ourfelves
with the Perfon. At the very fame Time, or at leaft, in very
fhort Intervals, we may feel the Paffion of Refpect, which isa
Species of Affection or Good-will, with a Mixture of Humility.
On the other hand, the Misfortunes of our Fellows often caufe
Pity, which has a ftrong Mixture of Good-will. This Sentiment
of Pity is nearly ally’d to Contempt, which is a Species of Diflike,
along with a Mixture of Pride. I only point out thefe Phenomena,
as a Subject of Speculation to fuch as are curious with regard to
moral Enquiries. °Tis fuffi-ient for the prefent Purpofe to obferve
in general, that Power and Riches commonly caufe Refpect, Pow
verty and Meannefs Contempt, tho’ particular Views and Incidents
may fometimes raife the Paffions of Envy and of Pity.


A May,


40 SECTION VI


A Man, who has cur’d himfelf of all ridiculous
Prepoffefions, and is fully, fincerely, and fteddily
convine’d, from Expericnce as well as Philofophy,
that the Differences of Fortune make lefs Difference
in Happinefs than is vulgarly imagin’d ; fuch a one
meafures not out Degrees of Efteem according to the
Rent-rolls of his Acquaintance. He may, indeed,


externally pay a fuperior Deference to the great Lord —


above the Vaffal ; becaufe Riches are the moft con-
venient, being the moft fixt and determinate, Source
of DiftinGtion : But his internal Sentiments are more
regulated by the perfonal Charaé@ters of Men, than
by the accidental and capricious Favours of For-


tune.


In moft Countries of Europe, Family, that is,
hereditary Riches, mark'd with Titles and Symbols
from the Sovereign, is the chief Source of Diftinc-
tion. In England, more Regard is paid to prefent
Opulence and Plenty. Each Prattice has its Ad-
vantages and Difadvantages. Where Birth is re-
{fpected, unattive fpiritlefs Minds remain in haughty
Indolence, and dream of nothing but Pedigrees and


Genealogies : The generous and ambitious feek


Honour and Command and Reputation and Favour. |


Where Riches are the chief Idol, Corruption, Ve-
nality, Rapine prevail: Arts, Manufactures, Com-
merce,


Ee ae. eteiieieteteteeiee ieee


i


Of Quauities ufeful to Ourfelves. 14!
merce, Agriculture flourifh. The formér Prejudice,
being favourable to military Virtue, is more fuited
to Monarchies. The other being the chief Spur to
Induftry, agrees better with a republican Govern-
ment. And we accordingly find, that each of thefe
Forms of Government, by varying the Usility of
thofe Cuftoms, has commonly a proportionable _
Effect on the Sentiments of Mankind.


SECTION


( 143 )


SECTION VII.


Of QUALITIES immediately agreeable to
Our felves.


HOEVER has paft an Evening with
ferious melancholy People, and has ob.

ferv’d how fuddenly the Converfation was animated,
and what Sprightlinefs diffus’d itfelf over the Coun-
tenance, Difcourfe, and Behaviour of every one,
on the Acceffion of a good-humour’d, lively Com-
panion ; fuch a one, I fay, will eafily allow, that
CHEERFULNESS carries great Merit with
it, and naturally conciliates the Affeftion and Good-
will of Mankind. No Quality, indeed, more rea-
dily communicates itfelf to all around ; becaufe
none has a greater Propenfity to difplay itfelf, in
jovial Talk and pleafant Entertainment. The Flame
{preads thro’ the whole Circle ; and the moft fullen
‘and morofe are often caught by it. That the me-
lancholy


144 SECTION VII.

lancholy hate the merry, even tho’ Horace fays it, I
have fome Difficulty to allow ; becaufe I have al-
ways obferv'd, that, where the Jollity is moderate
and decent, ferious People are fo much the more de-
lighted, that it diffipates the Gloom, with which
they are commonly oppreft ; and gives them an un-
ufual Satisfaction and Enjoyment.


From this Influence of Cheerfulnefs, both to
communicate itfelf, and to engage Approbation, we
may perceive, that there are another Set of Virtues,
which, without any Utility or any Tendency to
farther Good, either of the Community or of the
Poffeffor, diffufe a Satisfaction on the Beholders,
and conciliate Friendfhip and Regard. Their im-
mediate Senfation, to the Perfon poffeft of them,
is agreeable: Others enter into the fame Humour,
and catch the Sentiment, by a Contagion or natural
Sympathy: And as we cannot forbear loving what-
ever pleafes, a kindly Emotion arifes towards the
Perfon, who communicates fo much Delight and
Satisfaction. He is a more animating Spectacle :
His Prefence diffufes over us more ferene Compla-
cency and Enjoyment: Our Imagination, entering
into his Feelings and Difpofition, is affected in a
more agreeable Manner, than if a melancholy, de-


jected, fullen, anxious Temper were prefented to


our Notice and Obfervation. Hence the Affection
and


Rede eT


i eli i


-es


_—


-


~


Of Qualities immediately agreeable to Ourfelves. 145°
‘and Approbation, which attends the former: The
Averfion and Difguft, with which we regard the
latter *. |


Few Men would envy the Charatter, which Ce/ar
£ives Caffius, fs ; |


He loves no Play,
As thou do'ft, Anthony : He hears no Mofics
Seldom hefmiles ; and {miles in fuch a Sort,
As if he mockt himfelf, and fcorn’d his Spirit
That could be mov'd to {mile at any thing.


Not only fuch Men, as Cefar adds, are commonly
dangerous, but alfo, having little Enjoyment within
themfelves, they . can never become agreeable to
others, or contribute any Thing to focial Pleafure
and Entertainment. In all polite Nations and Ages,
a Relith of Pleafure, if accompany’d with Tempe-
rance and Decency, is’ efteem’d a confiderable


* There is no Man, who, on particular Occafions, is not afe
feéted with all the difsgreeable’ Paffions, Fear, Anger, DejeGtion,
Grief, Melancholy, Anxiety, &c. But thefe, fo far as they are
natural, and univerfal, make no Differeace betwixt one Man and
smother, and can never be the Object of Blame. Tis only when
the Difpofition gives a Propenfity to any of thefe difagreeable
Paffions, that they disfigure the Charaéter, and by giving Uneafinefey
convey the Sentiment of Difapptobation to the SpeCtaten,


: nnn '  -Merit,


146 SECTION VIL.


Merit, even in the greateft Men ; and becomes ftill
more requifite in thofe of inferior Rank and Cha-

racter. “Tis an agreeable Reprefentation, whicha

French Writer gives of the Situation of his own
Mind in this ‘Particular. Virtue I love, {ays he,
without Aufterity : Pleafure, without 6 aa And
Life, without fearing its End *.


Who is not ftruck with any fignal Inftance of
GREATNESS of MIND or Dignity of
Character ; with Elevation of Sentiments, Difdain
‘of Slavery, and with that noble Pride and Spirit,
which arifes from confcious Worth and Virtue?
The Sublime, fays Longixus, is often nothing but the
Echo or Image of Magnanimity ; and where this
Quality appears in any one, even without uttering a
Syllable, it excites our Applaufe and Admiration ;
as may be obferv’d of the famous Silence of jax in
the Odyfey, which expreffes more noble Difdain and
refolute Indignation, than any Language can con-


vey f.


Were I Alexander, fay’d Parmenio, I would accept
of thefe Offers made by Darius. So would I too, reply’d
Alexander, were IParmenio. This Saying is admir-
able, fays Longinus, from a like Principle ae


o Paime la vertu, fans rude ;
—f aime le plaifir, fans moleffe ;
S aime la vie, & n’en rains point la fin. St. Evremond.
+ Cap. Qe t Idem,
GO!


. eon : icc
—- ¢ p ss


is


Of Qua ities immediately agreeable toOurfelves, 147


GO! cries the fame Herg to his Soldiers, when
they refus’d to follow him to the Indies, go tell ‘your
Countrymen, you left Alexander compleating the Con.
queft of the World. “ Alexander,” {aid the Prince of
Condé, who always admir’d the Paffage, “ abandon’d
“* by his Soldiers, amongft Barbarians, not yet fully
“ fubdu’d, felt in himfelf fuch a Dignity and Right
“ of Empire, that he conld not believe jt poffible


 « any one would refufe to obey him. Whether in


“ Europe or in Afia; amongtt Greeks or Perfians, all
“* was indifferent to him : Wherever he found Men,


_ “ he fancy’d he would find Subjeéts,”


Tue Confident of Medea in the Tragedy recom-


_ mends Caution and Submiffion ; and enumerating


all the Diftreffes of that unfortunate Heroine, afks


_ her, what fhe has to fupport her againft fo many
Enemies, Myelf, replies the ; Atyslf, I Jay 3 and


it rs enough, Boileau juftly recommends this Paffage
as an Inftance of true Sublime *.


Wuetn Phocion, the modeft, the gentle Phocion,


~ was led to Execution, he turn’d about to one of his


Fellow-fufferers, who was lamenting his own hard


* Reflection ro fur Longin,


H 2 Fate.


qd SECTION VI. |
Fate. Js it not Glory enough for you, fays he, that-yox
die along with Phocion * ?


Pracz in Oppofition the Picture which Tacites
draws of ViteHius, fallen from Empire, prolonging
his Ignominy from a wretched Love of Life, de-
‘liver'd ever to the mercilefs Rabble ; toft, buffetted,
cand kickt about ; and conftrain’d, by their holding
a Poynaril under his Chin, to raife his Head, and
expofe himfelf to every Contumely. What abje&
Infamy ! What low Humiliation ! Yet even here,
Says the Hiftorian, he difcover’'d fome Symptoms of
a Mind not altogether degenerate. To a Tribune,
‘who infulted him, he reply’ d, I am fill your Em-

peror t.


We never excufe the abfolute Want of Spirit and
Dignity of Character, or a proper Senfe of what is
due to one’s felf, in Society and the common Inter-


@ Plutarch in Phe, ~


+ Tacit. Hitt, Lib, 3. The Author entering upon the Nar-
aation fays, Laniata vefie, fadum [peftaculum ducebatur, multis is-
repantibus, nullo inlacrimante : deformitas exitus mifericordiam
ebftulerat. To enter thoroughly into this Method of thinking, we


— = me


AP see, han eee Riis -


smuft make Allowance for the antient Maxims, that no one ought


. ‘to prolong his Life after it became difhonourable ; but as he


always a Right to difpofe of it, it then became a Duty to
with it.


¢


Of Qua ities immediately agreeablétoOurfelves. t4q5
courfe of Life. ‘This Vice conftitutes what we pro
perly call Meannefs ; when a Man-can fubmit to the
_ bafeftSlavery, in order to gain his Ends ; fawn upon:
thofe, who abufe him ; and degrade himfelf by In-
timacies and Familiarities with undeferving Inferiors.
A certain Degree of generous Pride or Self-value is.
fo requifite, that the Abfence of it in the Mind dif-
pleafes after the fame Manner, as the Want of a
Nofe, Eye, or any of the moft material Features of:
the Face or Members of the Body *. |


Tue Utility of COURAGE, both to the:
Public and to the Perfon pofieft of it, is an obvious.
Foundation. of Merit.: But to any one, who con-
fiders the Matter juftly, it will appear, that this
Quality has a peculiar Luftre, which it derives alto-
gether from itfelf, and from that noble Elevation
infeperable from it. Its Figure, drawn by Painters.
and by Poets, difplays, in each Feature, a Sublimity


* The Abfence of a Virtae may often be a Vice 3 and that of
the highef{ Kind ; as in the Inftance of Ingratitude, as well as:
Meannefs. Where we expect a Beauty, the Difappointment gives-
an uneafy Senfation, and produces a. real Deformity. An Abjette.
mefs of Chara&ter, likewife, is difguftful and contemptible ip ane
other View.. Where a Man bas no Senfe of Value in himfelf, we:
are not likely to have any higher Eftimation of him. And if the-
fame Perfon, who crouches to his Superiors, is infolent to his Infe«
riors (as often happens) this Contrariety of Bebaviour, inftead of:
Correcting the former Vice, aggravates it extremely, by the Ade-
dition .of a Vice, fill more odious, See Sect, 8. i


H 3 | and:


"ESO SECTION VIL

and daring Confidence ; which catches the Eye, en-
gages the Affections, and diffufes, by Sympathy, a
like Sublimity of Sentiment over every Spe&ator.


Unper what glorious Colours does Demo/fthezes *
reprefent Philip ; where the Orator apologizes for
his own Adminiftration, and juftifies that pertina-
cious Love of Liberty, with which he had infpir'd
the Athenians. “ I beheld PA:/ip,” fays he, “ he,
“‘ with whom was your Conteft, refolutely, while
“in Purfuit of Empire and Dominion, expofing
‘“* himfeif to every Wound; his Eye goar’d, his
“ Neck wrefted, his Arm, his Thigh pierc’d,
whatever Part of his Body Fortune fhould feize
on, that cheerfully relinquifhing, provided that,
“* with what remain’d, he might live in Honour and
** Renown. And fhall it be faid, that he, born in
‘‘ Pella, a Place heretofore mean and ignoble, fhould
“* be infpir’d with fo high an’Ambition and Thirf
‘S of Fame: While you, Athenians,” &c. Thefe
Praifes excite the higheft Admiration; but the
Views prefented by the Orator, carry us not, we
fee, beyond the Hero himfelf, nor even regard the
future advantageous Confequences of his Valour.


Tue martial Temper of the Romans, inflam’d by
continual Wars, had rais’d their Efteem of Courage


e Pro Corona, . a


fo


i, fm mn eer


Of QuALITIES immediately agreeable toOurfelves. 13%
fo high, that, in their Language, it was call’d
Virtue, by way of Excellence and Diftinétion from
‘all other moral Qualities. The Suevi, in the Opi-
nion of Tacitus *, dreft their Hair with a laudalle
Intent: Not for the Purpofes of loving or being belov'd:
They adorn’d themfelwes only | for their Enemies, and in
order to appear more territle, A Sentiment of the
Hiftorian, which would found a little oddly, in other
Nations and other Ages.

Tue Scythians, according to Hercdotus +, after
fleaing the Skin from the Heads of their Enemies,
whom they have flain, drefs it like Leather, and ufe
it as a Towel; and whoever has moft of thefe
Towels is moft efteem’d amongft them. So much
had martial Bravery, in that Nation, as well as in
“many others, deftroy’d the Sentiments of Humanity ;
a Virtue furely much more ufeful and engaging.


*T'1s indeed obfervable, that, amongft all uncul-
tivated Nations, which have not, as yet, had full
Experience of the Advantages, attending Benefi-
cence, Juftice, and the focial Virtues, Courage is
the predominant Excellence ; what is moft celebrated
by Poets, recommended by Parents and Inftructors,
and admir’d by the Public in general. The Ethics


# Demoribus Germ, +t Lid. 4.
H 4 of


352 SECTION Vit.

of Homer are, in this Particular, very different from
thofe. of Fenelon, his elegant Imitator ; and fuch as
are well fuited to an Age, wherein one.Hero, as re-
markt by Thucydides *, could afk another, without
Offence, if he was a Robber or not. Such alfo,
very lately, was the Syftem of Ethics, that prevail’d
in many barbarous Parts of Ireland; if we may
credit Spenfer, in his qecicvons: Accosnt. of the State
of that Kingdom +.


Or the fame Clafs of Virtues with Courage is that
undifturb’d, philofophical TRANQUILLITY,
fuperior to Pain, Sorrow, Anxiety, and each Affault
of adverfe Fortune. Canfcious of his own Virtue,
fay the Philofophers, the Sage elevates himfelf above
every Accident of Life; and fecurely plac’d in the
Temple of Wifdom, looks down on inferior More
tals, engag’d in Paurfuit of Honours, Riches, Re-
putation, and each. frivolous Enjoyment. Thefe


Pretenfions, no. doubt, when ftretch’d to the utmoft,.


* Lib. : ty


+ It is a common Ufe, fays he, emongt their Gentlemens


Sons, that, as foon as they are able to ufe their. Weapons, they


ftrait gather to themfelves three or. four-Stragglers or Kern, with —
whom wandering a while up and down idly the Country, taking. °


only Meat, he at laft falleth into fome bad Occafion, that fhall be
offer’d ; which being once made known, he is thenceforth counted
a Manof Worth, in whom thereis Couragey,


are


Of Quaxitigs immediately agreeable toOurfelves. 15 3
are much too magnificent for human Nature. They
carry, however, a Grandeur, with them, which:
feizes the Spectator, and ftrikes him with Admira-.
tion. And the nearer we.can approach, in Practice, .
to this fublime Tranquillity and Indifference (for we:
muft diftinguifh it from a ftupid Infenfibility) the.
more fecure. Enjoyment shall we attain within our-.
felves, and the more Greatnefs of Mind fhall we:
difcover to the World. The philofophical Trane.
quillity may, indeed, be confider’d only as-a Branch:
of Magnanimity.- |


Who admires not Socrates ; his perpetual Serenity.
and Contentment, amidit the greateft Poverty and.
domeftic Vexations; his refolute Contempt of Riches,
and magnanimous Care of preferving Liberty, .
while he refufed all Affiftance from his Friends and
Difciples, and avoided even the Dependance of an:
Obligation? £piéetushad not fo much as a Door to-
his little. Houfe or Hovel ; and therefore, foon loft .
his Iron Lamp, the only Furniture he had worth
taking. But refolving to difappoint all Robbers for -
the future, he fupply’d its Place with an earthen
Lamp, which he very peaceably kept Poffeffion of.
ever after. :


re


H 5 ce


irg SECTION VIt.


Ix Antiquity, the Heroes of Philofophy, as welt
as theie of War and Patriotifm, have a Grandeur
and Force of Sentiment, which aftonifhes our nar-
rw Souls, and is rafhly rejef&ted as extravagant and
fupernatural. They, in their Turn, I allow, would
havc had equal Reafon to confider, as romantic and
incredible, the Degree of Humanity, Clemency,
Order, Tranquillity, and other focial Virtues, to
which, m. the Adminiftration of Government, we
have attain’d in modern Times, had any one been
then able to have made a fair Reprefentation of
them. Such is the. Compenfation, which Nature,


"or rather Education has made, in the Diftribution of


Excellencies and Virtues, in thefe different Ages,


sae Meritof BENEVOLENCE, arifing from
its Utility, and its Tendency to the Good of Man-
kind, has been already explain’d, and is, nodoubt; the
Source of a confiderable Part of that Efteem, which is
fo univerfally pay’d it. But it will alfo be allow’d, that
the very Softnefs and Tendernefs of the Sentiment,
its engaging Endearments, its fond Expreffions, its de-
licate Attentions, and all that Flow of mutual Con-
fidence and Regard, which enter into a warm At-
tachment of Love and Friendfhip: It will be al-
iu “d, I fay, that thefe Feelings being delightful in
themfelves, are neceffarily communicated to the


Spectators,


Of Qua.itizs immediately agreeadle to Ourfelwes. 153
Spectators, and melt them into the fame Fondnefs
and Delicacy. The Tears naturally ftart’in our
Eyes on the Obfervation of a warm Sentiment of
this Nature: Our Breaft heaves, our Heart is agitat-
ed, and every humane tender Principle of our Frame,
is fet in Motion, and gives us the pureft and molt
fatisfactory Enjoyment,


-Wuen Poets form Defcriptions of E/zian Fields, °
where: the bleffed Inhabitants ftand in no Need of
each other’s Affiftance, they yet reprefent. them, as
Maintaining a conftant Entercourfe of Love and
_Friendfhip, and footh our Fancy with the pleafing
Image of thefe foft and gentle Paffions. The Idea
of tender Tranquillity in a paftoral Arcadia is agree-
able from a like Principle, as has been obferw’d


above *. ;


Wuo would live amidft perpetual Wrangling, and
Scolding, and mutual Reproaches ? The Rough-
nefs and Harfhnefs of thefe. Emotions difturb and
difpleafe us : We fuffer by Contagion and Sympathy ;.
_nor can we remain indifferent Spectators, even tho’
certain, that no pernicious Confequences would ever
follow from fuch angry Paftions,


© Sect, 5, Past an
H 6 As


156 SECTION VIL


A s a certain Proof, that the whole Merit of Bene-
volence is not deriv’d from its Ufefulnefs, we may
obferve, that, in -a kind Way. of Blame, we fay, a
Perfon is too good; when-he exceeds his-Part in So-
ciety, and carries his Attention for others beyond the:
proper Bounds and Meafure: In like Manner, -we
fay a Man is too high-/pirited, too intrepid, too indiffer-


ent about Fortune: Reproaches, which really, at the.


bottom, imply more. Regard and Efteem than many.


Panegyrics. Bemg accuftom’d to rate the Merit and.


Demerit of Characters chiefly by their ufeful or per-
nicious Tendencies, we cannot forbear applying the
Epithet of Blame, when we difcover a Sentiment,
which rifes to a. Degree that is hurtful : But it may


—_


Mee ee eee,


happen, at the fame Time, that its noble Elevation,


or its engaging Tendernefs fo feizes the Heart, as.
rather to encreafe our Friendfhip and Concern for.
the Perfon *.


Tue Amours and Attachments of Harry the IVth, °


dyring the civil Wars of the League, frequently hurt
chis Intereft and his: Caufe ; but ail the young, at


* Cheerfulnefa. could fcarce admit of Blame from its Excefs,
wereit not, that diffolute Mirth, without a proper Caufe or Sub-


je“, is a fure Symptom and Characteriftic ef Folly, and on that
Account, difguftful,


ad


‘leaf,


5


in ee 2 ce 20 ceiiieiiiene


Of QUALITIES immediately agreeable to Ourfelves, ro
‘Yeaft, and amorous, -who can fympathize with that
Paffion, will allow, thgt this very _Weaknefs (for
they will Teadily call it fuch). chietly endears that.
‘Hero, and interbits them-in-his Fortunes, |


Tue exceffive Bravery and refolute Inflexibility of
‘Charles the XIIth ruin’d his own.Country, and in-
-fefted all his Neighbours : But. have fych Splendour
and Greatnefs in their Appearance, as ftrike us with
Admiration ; and they might, in fome. Degree, be
even approv’d of, if they betray’d not fometimes toa
evident Symptoms of. Madnefs.and Diforder.


Tue. Athenians pretended .to the-frft Invention. of
Agriculture and of Laws ; and always valu’d them-
felves extremely on the Benefit thereby procur'd to
‘the whole Race of Mankind. They alfo boafted,
and with -Reafon, of their warlike Enterprizes ,
particularly againft. thofe innumerable Fleets and
Armies of Perfians, which invaded Greece during
-the Reign of Derius and of Xerxes. But sho’ there
-be no Comparifon, in Point of Utility, betwixtithefe
-peaceful and military Honours ; yet we find, that
-the Orators,-who :hawe wrote fuch elaborate Paage-
-gyrics on that famous City, ‘haye.chiefly.triumph’d in
- - difplaying the warlike Atchievments. Ly/ias, -Toucy-
dides, Plato.and Dicrates .difcover, alb.of' them, the
fame ‘Partiality : -which, -tho’.condemyd by - -calan.

1 '  Reafon


198 SECTION VIE.
‘Reafon and Reflection, appears fo natural in the
-Mind of Man.


Ts obfervable, that the great Charm of Poetry
confifts in lively Pitures of the fublime Paffions,
~Magnanimity, Courage, Difdain of Fortune ; or
‘thofe of the tender Affections, Love and F riendfhip ;
‘which warm the Heart, and diffufe over us fimilar
Sentiments and Emotions. And tho’ every Kind of
Paffion, even the moft difagreeable, fuch as Grief
and Anger, are obferv’d, when excited by Poetry,
to convey a Pleafare and Satisfaction, froma Me-
chanifm of Nature, not eafy to be explain’d: Yet
| thofe more elevated or fofter Affections have a pecu-
‘liar Influence, and pleafe from more than one Caufe
or Principle. Not to mention, that they alone in-
tereft us in the Fortune of the Perfons réprefented,
or communicate any Efteem and Affection for their
Chara@er,


Anp can it poffibly be doubted, that this Talent


itfelf of Poets, to: move the Paffions, this PA- |


THETIC and SUBLIME of Sentiment, is. a
-very confiderable Merit, and. being enhanc’d by its


extreme Rarity, may exalt the Perfon poffeft of it, -


-above every Character of the Age, in which he
_ lives? The Prudence, Addrefs, Steadinefs, and be-
nign Government of Auguffus, adorn’d with all the
: Splendour


i, a ee ani


Of QuaritieEs immediately agreeable to Ourfelves. 15g
Splendour of his noble Birth and imperial Crown,
render him but an unequal Competitor for Fame
with Virgil, who lays nothing into the oppofite Scale
but the divine Beauties of his poetical Genius.


Tue very Senfibility to thefe Beauties or a
DELICACY of Tafte, is itfelf a Beauty in any
Character ; as conveying the pureft, the moft dur-
able, and moft innocent of all Enjoyments.


TuEse are fome Inftances of the Species of
Virtue, that are prais’d from the immediate Pleafure,
which they communicate to the Perfon, pofleft of
them. No Views of Utility or of future beneficial
Confequences enter into this Sentiment of Appro-
bation ; yet is it of a fimilar Kind to that other
Sentiment, which arifes from Views of public or
private Utility. The fame focial Sympathy, we may
abferve, or Fellow-feeling with human Happinefs or
Mifery, gives Rife to both ; and this Analogy in all
the Parts of the prefent Theory may juftly be re-
garded as a Confirmation of it,


SEC T,


{ r6r ) | 2


SECTION VII.


Of Quatti TI ES immediately agreeable to
Others *,


S the mutual Shocks, in Society, and the Op-

pofitions of Intereft and Self-love have con-
‘ftrain’d Mankind to eftablith the Laws of Fufice ;
‘In order to preferve the Advantages of common Af-
fiftance and Proteétion : in like Manner, the eternal
‘Contrarieties, in Company, of Men’s Pride and Self-
conceit have introduc'd the Rules of GOOD-
MANNERS or POLITENESS, in order to
facilitate the Intercourfe of Minds, and an un-
difturb’d Commerce and Converfation. Amongft


® °Tis the Definition of Virtue, that "tis a Quality of the Mink
agreeable to or approv'd of by ewery one, that confiders or contente
flatesit. But fome Qualities produce Pleafare, becaufe they are
ufeful to Society, or ufeful or agreeable to the Perfon himfelf 5
others produce it more immediately ; Which is the Clafs of Virtues

here confider’d,
well-bred


162 SECTION VIII.
well-bred People, a mutual Deference is affected ;
Contempt of others difguis’d : Authority conceal’d :
- Attention given to each in his Turn: And an eafy
Stream of Converfation maintain’d, without Vehe-
mence, without mutual Interruption, without Eager-
nefs for Victory, and without any Airs of Superio-
rity. Thefe Attentions and Regards are immediately
agreeable to others, abftracted from any Regard to.
Utility or beneficial Tendencies : They conciliate
Affection, promote Efteem, and enhance extremely
the Merit of the Perfon, who regulates his Behaviour
by them.


Many of the Forms of Breeding are arbitrary
and cafual; But the Thing expreft by them is ftill
the fame. - A Spaniard goes out of his own Houfe
before his Gueft, to fignify, that he leaves him
Mafter of all. In other Countries, the Landlord
walks out laft, as a common Mark of Deference and
Regard. — |


Bur in order to render a Man perfect Geod-company,
he muft have WIT and INGENUITY as well as
.Good-manners. What Witis, it may not be eafy to
define ; but ‘tis eafy furely to determine, that “tis a
Quality immediately agreeable to others, and com-
municating, on its fir’ Appearance, a lively Joy and
Satisfaction to every one, that has any Comprehen-

fion


Of Quarities immediately agreeable to Others. 163
fion of it. The moft profound Metaphyfics, indeed, —
might be employ’d, in explaining the various Kinds
and Species of Wit ; and many Claffes of it, which
are now receiv’d on the fimple Teftimony of Tafte
and Sentiment, might, perhaps, be refolv’d into
more generat Principles. But this is fufficient for
our prefent Purpofe, that it does affect Tafte and
Sentiment, and beftowing an immediate Enjoyment,
is a fure Source of Approbation and Affection.


In Countries, where Men pafs all their Time in
Converfation, and Vifits and Affemblies, thefe compa-
nionable Qualities, fo to fpeak, are of high Eftima-
tion, and form a chief Part of perfonal Merit. In
Countries, where Men live a more domeftic Life,
and either are employ’d in Bufinefs or amufe them-
felves in a narrower Circle of Acquaintance, the
more folid Qualities are chiefly regarded. Thus, I
have obferv’d, that, amongft the French, the firft
Queftions, with regard to a Stranger, are, Js 4e
polite? Has he Wit? In our own Country, the
chief Praife beftow’d is always that of a good-natur'd,
Jenfible Fellow.


In Converfation, the lively Spirit of Dialogue is
agreeable, even to thofe who defire not to have any
Share of the’ Difcourfe: Hence a Teller of long
Stories or a pompous Declaimer is very litte approv’d

| of.


¥64 SECTION VIII.

of. But moft Men defire likewife their Share in the
Converfation, and regard, with a very evil Eye,
that Loguacity, which deprives them of a Right they
are naturally fo jealous of.


Tuere are a Set of harmlefs Lyars, frequently to


be met with in Company, who deal much in the Mar-
velous and Extraordinary. Their ufual Intention is to
pleafe and entertain ; but as Men are delighted with
nothing but what they conceive to be Truth, thefe
People miftake extremely the Means of pleaf.ng,
and incur univerfal Blame. Some Indulgence, how-
ever, to Lying or Fiction is given in bymourous
Stories ; becaufe it is there agreeable and enter-
taining ; and Truth is not of any Importance.


Eroquencz, Genius of all Kinds, even good
Senfe, and found Reafoning, when it rifes to an
eminent Degree, and is employ'’d upon Subjects of
"any confiderable Dignity and nice. Difcernment ;
all thefe Qualities feem. immediately agreeable, and
have a Merit diftin& fromtheir Ufefulnefs. Raritys.
hkewife, which fo much enhances the Price of every
Thing, muft fet an additional Value on thefe noble
Talents of ae puman Mind.


MODESTY may be. underftood in different


Senfes, even abftraéted from Chaftity, which has


been:


Of Quatitiss immediately agreeable to Others. 165
been already treated of. It fometimes means that
‘Tendernefs and Nicety of Honour, that Appreben-
fion of Blame, that Dread of Intrufion or Injury to-
wards others, that Psdor, which is the proper Guar-
dian of every Kind of ‘Virtue, and a fure Preferva-
tive againft Vice and Corruption. But its moft afual
Meaning is, when it is oppos’d to Impudence and dr-
ragance, and expreffes a Diffidence of our own Judg-
ment, and a due Attention and Regard to others.
In young Men chiefly, this Quality is a fure Sign of
Good-fenfe ; and is alfo the certain Means of aug-
menting that Endowment, by preferving their Ears
open to Inftruétion, and making them full grafp after
mew Attainments. But it has a farther Charm te
every Spectator ; by flattering each Man’s Vanity,
and prefenting the Appearance of a docile Pupil,
who receives, with proper Attention and Refped,
every Word they utter *. *


@ Men have in general a much greater Propenfity to over-value
‘than under-value themfelves ; notwithftanding the Opinion of
Arifietle, This makes us more jealous of the Excefs on the former
Side, and cavfes us to regard, with a particular Indulgence, all
Tendency to Modefty and Self-diffidence ; as efteeming the Danger
lef of falling into any vicious Extreme of that Nature. Tis thus,
_ 4n Countries, where Men's Bodies are apt to exceed in Corpulency,
perfonal Beauty is plac’d in a much greater Degree of Slendernefs,
than in Countries where that is the moft ufual Defect. Being fo
often firuek with Inftances of one Species of Deformity, Men
think they can gever keep at too great a Diftance from it, —


166 | SECTION VIL


A Desire of Fame, Reputation, or a Character


with others, is fo far from being blameable, that ie
feems


always to have a Leaning to the oppofite Side. In like Manner,
were the Door open*d to Self-praife, and were Montaigne’s
Maxim obferv'd, that one fhould fay as frankly, I bave Senfe, I
have Learning, I have Courage, Beauty, or Wit; as "tis fure we
often think fo ; were this the Cafe, I fay, every one is fenfible,
that fuch a Flood of Impertinence would break in upon us as
would render Society altogether intolerable. For this Reafon
Cuftom has eftablifh’d it as a Rule, in common Societies, that
Men fhould never praife themfelves, and not even fpeak much
of themfelves ; and "tis only amongft intimate Friends or People
of very manly Behaviour, that one is allow’d to do himfelf
Juftice. No body finds fault with Maurice, Prince of Orange,
for his Reply to one, who afk’d him whom he efteem’d the firft
General of the Age, Tbe Marguis de Spinola, faid he, is the
fecond. Tho” "tis even obfervable, that the Self-praife imply’d
' js here better imply’d, than if it had been direétly exprefs’d,
without any Cover or Difguife,


He mutt be avery fuperficial Thinker, who imagines, that all
Inftances of mutual Deference are to be underftood in earneft,
_ and that a Man would be more efteemable for being ignorant of
his own Merits and Accomplifhments. A {mall Byafs towards
Modefty, even in the internal Sentiments, is favourably regarded,
efpecially in young People ; and a ftrong Byafs is requir’d in the
outward Behaviour: But this excludes not a noble Pride and
Spirit, which may openly difplay itfelf in its full Extent, when
one lies under Calumny or Oppreffion of any Kind. The gene-
rous Contumacy of Socrates, as Cicero calls it, has been highly
celebrated in all Ages ; and when join’d to the ufual Modefty of
his Behaviour, forms a moft thining Charaéter. Iphicrates, the
Atbenian Genera), being accus’d of betraying the Interefts of
his Country, afk'd his Accufer, Would you, fays he, ona like

Occasion,


2


~ oe ao


Of Quau Tiss immediately agreeable to Others. 167
feems infeparable from Virtue, Genius, Capacity,
and a generous or noble Difpofition. An Attention,
even to trivial Matters, in order to pleafe, is alfo
expected and demanded by Society ; and no one is
furpriz’d, if he finds a Manin Company, to obferve
a greater Elegance of Drefs and more pleafant Flow
of Converfation, than when he pafles his Time, at
home, and altogether with his own Family. Where-
in, then, confifts V A NIT Y, which is fo juftly
regarded as a Fault or Imperfection? It feems to
confift chiefly in fuch an intemperate Difplay of our
Advantages, Honours and Accomplifhments ; in
fuch an importunate and open Demand of Praife and
Admiration, as is offenfive to others, and encroaches
too far on their fecret Vanity and Ambition. Ie is
befides a fure Symptom of the Want of true Dignity


Occafion, bave been guilty of that Crime ? By no Means, reply’d
the other. And can you then imagine, cry’d the Hero, that
Iphicrates would be guilty? Quinétil, Lib. 5. Cap. 12. In
fhort, a generous Spirit and Self-value, well founded, decently
difguis’d, and courageoufly fupported under D.ftrefs and Calumny,
is a very great Virtue, and feems to derive its Merit from the
noble Elevation of its Sentiment, or its immediate Agreeablenefs
to its Poffeffor. In ordinary Characters, we approve of a Byafe
to Modefty, which is immediately agreeable to others. The
vic ous Excefs of the former Virtue, v2. Infolence or Haughti-
nefs, is immediately difagreeable to others : The Excefs of the
Jatter is fo to the Poffeffor. Thus are the Boundaries pf thefe
Duties adjufted,


and


168 SECTION VI.


and Elevation of Mind, which is fo great an Ormsz- ¢ |


ment to any Character, For why that impatient
Defire of Applaufe ; as if you were not juftly en-
titled to it, and might not reafonably expedt it would
for ever attend you? Why fo anxious to inform us
of the great Company you have kept ;- the obliging
Things, that were faid to you ; the Honours, the
Diftin&ions you met with ; as if thefe were not
Things of Courfe, and what we could readily, of
ourfelves, have imagin’d, without being told of
them? —


DECENCY, or a proper Regard to Age, Sex,
Character and Station in the World, may be rank’d
among the Qualities, which are immediately agree-
able to others, and which, by that Means, acquire
Praife and Approbation. An effeminate Behaviour
in a Man, a rough Manner in a Woman ; thefe are
. ugly, becaufe unfuitable to each Character, and
different from the Qualities we expec in the Sexes.
*Tis as if a Tragedy abounded in comic Beauties,
or a Comedy in tragic. ‘The Difproportions hurt the
Eye, and convey a difagreeable Sentiment to the
‘Spectators, the Source of Blame and Difapproba-
tion, Thisis that Jndecorum, which is explain’d fo
much at large by Cicero in his Offices.


AMONGST


— Of Quatities immediately agreeable to Others. 169


AmoncstT the other Virtues, we may alfo give
CLEANLINESS a Place ; fince it naturally
renders us agreeable to ethers, and is no inconfider-
able Source of Love and Affection. No one will
deny, that a Negligence in this Particular is a Fault;
and as Faults are nothing but {maller Vices, and this
Fault can have no other Origin than the uneafy Sen-
fation, which it excites in others ; we may, in this
Inftance, feemingly fo trivial, clearly difcover the
Origin of moral Diftinctions, about which the

, Learned have involved themfelves in fuch Mazes of
Perplexity and Error.


Burt befides all the agreeable Qualities, the Origin
of whofe Beauty we can, in fome Degree, explain
and account for, there ftill remains fomething myfte-
rious and unaccountable, which conveys an imme-


: Cans
- ~~


diate Satisfaction to the Spectators, but how, or
* why, or for what Reafon, they cannot pretend to
* determine. There is a MAN NER, a Grace, a
Genteelnefs, an I-know-not-what, which fome Men
| poffefs above others, which is very different from ex-
ternal Beauty and Comelinefs, and which, however,
catches our Affection almoft as fuddenly and power-
fally. And tho’ this Manner be chiefly talk’d of in
the Paffion betwixt the Sexes, where the conceal’d
Panne is ealily explain’d, yet furely much of it pre-
I vails


170 SECTION VIII.

wails in all our Eftimation of Charaéters, and forms
no inconfiderable Part of perfonal Merit. ‘This Clafs
of’ Virtues, therefore, muft be trufted entirely to the
blind, but fure Teftimony of Tafte and Sentiment ; |
and muft be confider’d as a Part of Ethics, left by
Nature to baflle all the Pride of Philofophy, and
make her fenfible of her narrow Boundaries and
fender Acquifitions.


We approve of another, becaufe of his Wit, Po-
litenefs, Modefty, Decency, or any agreeable Qua-
lity he poffeffes, although he be not of our Acquain-
‘tance, nor has ever given us any Entertainment, by
Means of thefe Accomplifhments. The Idea, which
we form of their Effect on his Acquaintance, has an
agreeable Influence on our Imagination, and gives us
the Sentiment of Approbation. This Principle enters
into all the Judgments, which we form concerning
Morais.


ieee . 2


-


( 171 )


SECTION: EX.


Conciusion of the Wale.


PART I.


T may juftly appear furprizing, that any Man,
in fq late an Age, fhould find it requifite to
prove, by elaborate Reafonings, that VIRTUE .
or PERSONAL MERIT confifts altogether .in
the Poffeffion of Qualities, u/efal or agreeatle to the
Perfon himfelf or to others. It might be expected


that this Principle would have occur’d even to the


firft rude, unpractis’d Enquirers concerning Morals,
and been receiv’d, from its own Evidence, without
any Argument or Difputation. Whatever is valuable
in any Kind fo naturally claffes itfelf under the Di-
vifion of u/eful or agreeable, the utile or the dulce,
that "tis not eafy to imagine, why we fhould ever
feek farther, or confider the Queftion as a Matter of
nice Refearch or Enquiry. And as every Thing

Iz ufeful


«


192 SECTION IX.

ufeful or agreeable muft poffefs thefe Qualities with
regard either to the Per/on himfelf or to others, the
compleat Delineation or Defcription of Merit feems
to be perform’d as naturally as a Shadow is caft by
the Sun, or an Image is reflected upon Water. If
the Ground, on which the Shadow is caft, be not
broken and uneven, nor the Surface, from which
the Image is reflected, difturb’d and confus’d, a juft
Figure is immediately prefented, without any Art
or Attention. And it feems a. reafonable Prefump-
tion, that Syftems and Hypothefes have perverted
our natural Underftanding, when a Theory, fo
fimple and ebvious, could fo long have efcap'd the
mo elaborate Scrutiny and Examination.


Bur however the Cafe may have far’d with Phi-
lofophy ; in common Life, thefe Principles are ftill
implicitely maintain’d ; nor is any other.Topic of
Praife or Blame ever recur’d to, when we employ
any Panegyric or Satyre, any Applaufe or Cenfure
of human Aéton: and Behaviour. If we obferve
Men, in every Intercourfe of Bufinefs or Pleafure,
in each Conference and Converfation, we fhall find
them no where, except in the Schools, at any Lofs
upon this Subject. What fo natural, for Inftance,
as the following Dialogue? You are very happy,
we fhall fuppofe one to fay, addrefling himfelf to

another,


~


Conciusion of the Whole. 173
another, that you have given your Daughter to C/e-
anthes: He is a Man of Honour and Humanity.
Every one, who has any Intercourfe with him, is
fure of fair and kind Treatment *. I congratulate
you too, fays another, on the promifing Expectations
of this Son-in-law ; whofe afliduous Application to
the Sudy of the Laws, whofe quick Penetration and
early Knowledge both of Men and Bufinefs, prog-
nofticate the greateft Honours and Advancement +.
You furprize me much, replies a third, when you
talk of Cleanthes as a Man of Bufinefs and Appli-
cation. I met him lately in a Circle of the gayeft
Company, and he was the very Life and Soul of
our Converfation: So much Wit with Good-manners ;
fo much Gallantry without Affe€tation ; fo much in-
genious Knowledge fo genteely deliver'd, I have
never before obferv'd in any one ¢. You would ad-
mire him ftill more, fays a fourth, if you knew him
more familiarly. ‘That Cheerfulnefs, which you
might remark in him, is not a fudden Flahh ftruck
out by Company: Jt runs thro” the whole Tenor of
his Life, and preferves a perpetual Serenity on his
Countenance, and“Tranquillity in his Soul. He has
met with fevere Trials, Misfortunes as well as


' Dangers; and by his Greatnefs of Mind, was ftill


* Qualities ufeful to others. + Qualities ufeful to the Perfon
himfelf.  $ Qualities immmediately agreeable to others,


I 3 f{uperior


174. SECTION IX.


fuperior to all of them *. The Image, Gentlemen,


you have here delineated of Cleanthes, cry I, is that —


of accomplifh’d Merit. Each of you has given a
Stroke of the Pencil to his Figure; and you have
unawares exceeded all the Pictures drawn by Gratian
or Caftiglione. A Philofopher might fele&t this Cha-
racter as a Model of perfect Virtue.


Axp as every Quality, which is ufeful or agreeable
to ourfelves or others, is, in common Life, admitted
under the Denomination of Virtue or perfonal
Merit ; fo no other will ever be receiv’d, where
Men judge of Things by their natural, unprejudic’d
Reafon, without the delufive Gloffes of Superftition
and falfe Religion: Celibacy, Fafting, Penances,
Mortification, Self-denial, Humility, Silence, So-
litcce and the whole Train of mankifh Virtues 3
for what Reafon are they every where rejected by
Men of Senfe, but becaufe they ferve no Manner of
Purpofe ; neither advance a Man’s Fortune in the
World, nor render him a more valuable Member of
Society ; neither qualify him for the Entertainment
of Company, nor encreafe his Power of Self-en-
joyment? We obferve, on the contrary, that they
crofs all thefe defirable Ends; ftupify the Under.
' ftanding and harden the Heart, obfcure the Fancy


* Quilitics immediately agreeable to the Perfon himfelf.
. and


\


Coxciusron of the Whole. 175
and fower the Temper. We juftly, therefore trans-
fer them to the oppofite Column, and place them in
the Catalogue of Vices; nor has any Superftition
Force fufficient, amongft Men of the World, to
pervert entirely thefe naturalSentiments. A gloomy,
hair-brain’d Enthufiaft, after his Death, may have
Place in the Calendar ; but will {carce ever be ad-
mitted, when alive, into Intimacy and Society, ex-
cept by thofe who are as delirious and difmal as
himfelf.


Ir feems a Happinefs in the prefent Theory, that
it enters not into that vulgar Difpute concerning the
Degrees of Benevolence or Seif-love, which prevail
in human Nature; a Difpute, which is never likely
to have any Iffue, both becaufe Men, who have
‘taken Party, are not eafily convinc’d, and becaufe
the Phenomena, which can be produc’d on either
Side, are fo difpers’d, fo uncertain, and fubject to fo
many Interpretations, that “tis fcarce poflible accu
‘rately to compare them, or draw from them any de-
terminate Inference or Conclufion. "Tis fufficient
for our prefent Purpofe, if it be allow’d, what furely;,
_without the: greateft Abfurdity, cannot be difputed,
that there is fome Benevolence, however fmall, in-
fus’d into our Bofom ; fome Spark of Friendthip for
human Kind ; fome Particle of the Dove, kneaded
into our Frame, along with the Elements of the

14 Wolf


176 SECTION IX.

Wolf and Serpent. Let thefe generous Sentiments
be fuppos’d ever fo weak ; let them be hardly fuf-
ficient to move even a Hand or Finger of our Body;
they muft ftill direé&t the Determinations of our Mind,
and where every Thing elfe is equal, produce a cool
Preference of what is ufeful and ferviceable to Man-
kind, above what is pernicious and dangerous. A
moral Diftin&ion, therefore, immediately arifes; a
general Sentiment of Blame and Approbation ; a
Tendency, however faint, to the Objects of the one,
and a proportionable Averfion to thofe of the other.
Nor will thofe Reafoners, who fo earneftly maintain
the predominant Selfifhnefs of human Kind, be any
way fcandaliz’d at hearing of the weak Sentiments
of Virtue, implanted in our Nature. On the con-
trary, they are found as ready to maintain the one
Tenet as the other ; and their Spirit of Satyre, (for
{uch it appears, rather than of Corruption) naturally
gives Rife to both Opinions ; which have, indeed,
a great, and almoft indiffoluble Connexion together,


Avarice, Ambition, Vanity, and all Paffions,
vulgarly, tho’ improperly, compriz’d under the De-
nominatlon of Se//-/ove, are here excluded from our
Theory concerning the Origin of Morals, not be-
caufe they are too weak, but becaufe they have not
a proper Direction, for that Purpofe. ‘The Notion
of Morals implies fome Sentiment, common to all

Mankind,


rd


Conciusion of the Whole. 177
Mankind, which recommends the fame Object to
general Approbation, and makes every Man, or
moft Men, agree in the fame Opinion or Decifion
concerning it. It alfo implies fome Sentiment, fo
univerfal and comprehenfive as to extend to all Man-
kind, and render the Aétions and Conduét, even of
Perfons the moft remote, an Object of Cenfure or
Applaufe, according as they agree or difagree with
that Rule of Right; which is eftablifh’d. Thefe two
requifite Circumftances belong alone to the Senti-
ment of Humanity here infitted on. ‘The other
Pafflions produce, in every Breaft, many ftrong Sen-
timents of Defire and Averfion, Affection and
Hatred ; but thefe neither are felt fo much in com-
mon, nor are fo comprehenfive, as to be the Foun-
dation of any general Syftem and eftablith’d Theory
of Blame or Approbation.


Wuewn a Man denominates another his Exemy, his
Rival, his Antagoni/t, his Adverfary, he is underftood
to fpeak the Language of Self-love, and to exprefs
Sentiments, peculiar to himfelf, and arifing from his
. particular Circumftances and Situation : But when
he beftows on any Man the Epithets of vicious or
odious or deprav'd, he then {peaks another Language,
and exprefies Sentiments, in which he expects all his
Audience are to concur withhim. He muft here,
therefore, depart from his private and particular

I 5 Situatior,


678 SECTION IX,
Situation, and muft choofe a Point of View, conr-
mon to him with others: He muft move fome uni-
verfal Principle of the human Frame, and touch a
String, to which all Mankind have an Accord and
Symphony. If he means, therefore, to exprefs,
that this Man poffeffes Qualities, whofe Tendency is
_pernicious to Society, he has chofen this common
Point in View, and has touch’d the Principle of Hu-
manity, in which every Man, in fome Degree,
concurs. While the human Heart.is compounded of
the fame Elements as at.prefent, it will never be al-
together indifferent to the Good of Mankind, nor
entirely unaffected with the Tendencies of Characters.
and Manners. And tho’ this Affection of Humanity
may not generally be efteem’d fo ftrong, as Ambitior
er Vanity, yet, being common to all Men, it cam
alone be the Foundation of Morals, or of any ge-
neral Syftem of Condutt and Behaviour. One Man's
Ambition is not another’s Ambition ; nor will the
fame Event or Object fatisfy both: But the Huma-
nity of one Man is the Humanity of every one ; and


the fame Object touches this Paffion in all human
Creatures.


Burt the Sentiments, which arifes from Humanity,
are not only the fame in ali human Creatures, and
produce the fame Approbation or Cenfure ; but they
alfo comprehend all human Creatures ; nor is there

any


ot meee, Reece


en ee ie a i ee, ee ea
skid ts A a ine 8) ae ima a ae te ‘er bS.


Yam


———


Be


Conciusi0n of the Whole. 17g
any one, whofe Conduct and Charaéter is not, by
their Means, an Objeét, to every one, of Cenfure
or Approbation. On the contrary thofe other Paf-
fions, commonly denominated felfifh, both produce ‘
different Sentiments in each Individual, according to
his particular Situation; and alfo contemplate the
greateft Part of Mankind with the utmoft Indiffe-
rence and Unconcern. Whoever has a high Regard
and Efteem for me flatters my Vanity ; whoever
expreffes Contempt mortifies and difpleafes me : But
as my Name is known but to a fmall Part of Man-
kind, there are few, that come within the Sphere of
this Paflion, or excite, on its Account, either my
Affection or Difguft. But if you reprefent a tyran-.
nical, infolent, or barbarous Behaviour, in any ©
Country or in any Age of the World ; I foon carry
my Eye to the pernicious Tendency of fuch a Con-
duct, and feel the Sentiments of Repugnance and
Difpleafure towards it. No Charaéter can be fo re-
mote as to be, in this Light, altogether indifferent
to me. What is beneficial to Socicty or to the
Perfon himfelf muft ftill be prefer’d. And every
Quality or Action, of every human Being, mutt,
by this Means, be rank’d under. fome Clafs or
Denomination, expreflive of general Cenfure or


Applaufe.


I6 Wuat


180 SECTION IX. -


Wuat more, therefore, can we afk to diftinguifh


the Sentiments, dependant on Humanity, from thofe.,


connecied with any other Paffion, or to fatisfy us
why the former is the Origin of Morals, and not the
latter? Whatever Condu& gains my Approbation,
by touching my Humanity, procures alfo the Ap-
plaufe of all Mankind, by affeGing the fame Prin-
ciple in them: But what ferves my Avarice or Am-
bition pleafes only thefe Paffions in me, and affects
not the Avarice or Ambition of the reft of Mankind.
No Condu&, in any Man, which has a beneficial
Tendency, but is agreeable to my Humanity, how-
ever remote the Perfon : But every Man, fo far re-
mov'd as neither to crofs nor ferve my Avarice and
Ambition, is altogether indifferent to thofe Paflions.
The DiftinGiion, therefore, betwixt thefe different
Species of Sentiment being fo ftrong and evident,
Language muft foon be moulded upon it, and muft
invent a peculiar Set of Terms to exprefs thofe uni-
verfal Sentiments of Cenfure or Approbation, which
arife from Humanity or from Views of general Ufe-
fulnefs and its contrary. VIRTUE and VICE
become then known : Morals are recogniz'd: Cer-
tain general Ideas are fram’d of human Conduét and
Behaviour: Such Meafures are expected fram Men,
in fuch Situations: This Action is determin’d con-


~


formable


ConcLusion of the Whole. «181
formable to our abftrat Rule ; that other, contrary.
And by fuch univerfal Principles are the particular
Sentiments of Self-love frequently controul’d and
limited *.


_ From Inftances of popular Tumults, Seditions>
Factions, Panics, and all Paffions, which are fhar’d
with a Multitude; we may learn the Influence of
Society, in exciting and fupporting any Emotion ;


* Ic feems certain, both from Reafon and Experience, that 2
rude, untaught Savage regulates chiefly his Love and Hatred by the
Ideas of private Utility and Injury, and has but faint Conceptions
of a general Rule or Syftem of Behaviour, The Man, who ftands
oppofite to him in Battle, he hates heartily, not only for the pre-
fent-Moment, which is almcft unavoidable, but for ever after 3 nor
is he fatisfy’d without the moft extreme Punithment and Vengeance.
But we, accuftom’d to Society and to more enlarg’d Reflections,
confider, that this Man ts ferving his ow Country and Community 3
that any Man, in the fame Situation, would do the fame ; that we
our{clves, in like Circumitances, obferve a like Condu& ; that in
general human Society is beft fupported on fuch Maxims; And by
thefe Suppofitions and Views, we correct, in fome Meafure, our
ruder and narrower Paffions. And tho’ much of our Friendthip
and Enmity be ftill regulated by private Confiderations of Benefit and
Harm, we pay, at leaft, this Homage to general Rules, which we
are accuitom’d to refpect, that we commonly pervert our Adverfary’,
Conduct, by imputing Malice or Injuftice to him, in order to give
Vent to thofe Paffions, which arife from Self-love and private In-
tereft. When the Heart is full of Rage, it never wantePretexts
of this Nature ; tho’ fometimes as frivolous, as thofe, from which
Horace, being almoft cruth’d by the Fall of a Tree, affeéts to ace
cufe of Pasricide the first Planter of ite


while


182 SECTION IX.
while the mot ungovernable Diforders are rais’d,
we find, by that Means, from the flighteft and moft
frivolous Occafions. So/om was no very cruel, tho’,
perhaps, an unjuft Legiflator, who punifh’d Neuters
in civil Wars; and few, I: believe, would, in fuch
Cafes, incur the Penalty, were their Affection and
Difcourfe allow’d fufficient to abfolve them. No
Selfifhnefs, and fcarce any Philofophy, has there
Force fufficient to fupport a total Coolnefs and Indif-
ference; and he muft be more or lefs than Man,
who kindles not in the common Blaze. What Won-
der, then, that moral Sentiments are found of fuch
Influence in Life ; tho’ fpringing from Principles,
which may appear, at firft Sight, fomewhat {mall
and delicate ? But thefe Principles, we muft remark,
are fociat and univerfal: ‘Fhey form, in a Manner,
the Party of Human-kind againft Vice or Diforder,
its common Enemy: And as the benevolent Concern
for others is diffus'd, in a greater or lefs Degree,
over all Men, and is the fame in all, it occurs more
frequently in Difcourfe, is fofter’d by Society and
Converfation, and the Blame and Approbation,
confequent on it, are thereby rouz’d from that Le-
thargy, into which they are probably lull’d, in fo-
litary and uncultivated Nature. Other Paffions, tho’
_ perhaps originally ftronger, yet being felfifh and
private, are often over-power’d by its Force, and®
yield


Ce


Conctusion of the Whole. 183
yield the Dominion of our Breaft to thofe focial and
public Principles.


ANOTHER Spring of our Conftitution, that brings
great Addition of Force to moral Sentiment, is, the
Love of Fame ; which rules, with fuch uncontrol’d
Authority, in all generous Minds, and is often the
grand Obje&t of all their Defigns and Undertakings.
By our continual and earneft Purfuit of a Charaéter,
a Name, a Reputation in the World, we bring our
own Deportment and Condutt frequently in Review,,.
and confider how they appear in the Eyes of thofe,
who approach and regard us. This conftant Habit
of furveying ourfelf, as it were, in Reflexion, keeps
alive all the Sentiments of Right and Wrong, and.
begets, in noble Natures, a certain Reverence for
themfelves as well as others ; which is the furett
Guardian of every Virtue. The animal Conve-
niencies and Pleafures fink gradually in their Value . ~
while every inward Beauty and moral Grace is ftudi-
eufly acquir'd, and the Mind is accomplith’d in each |
Perfection, that can adorn or embellith a rational
Creature.


Here is the moft perfeét Morality we are ac-
quainted with : Here is difplay’d the Force of many
Sympathies. Our moral Sentiment is itfelfa Feeling |
chiefly of that Nature: And our Regard toa Cha-

sacter


184 SECTION Ix.

raéter with others feems to arife only from a Care of
preferving a Character with ourfelves, in order to
which we find it neceflary to prop our tottering
Judgment on the correfpondent Approbation of
Mankind.


Bur in order to accommodate Matters, and re-
move, if poflible, every Difficulty, let us allow all
thefe Reafonings to be falfe. Let us allow, that
when we refolve the Pleafure, that arifes from Views
of Utility, into the Sentiments of Humanity and
Sympathy, we have embrac’d a wrong Hypothefis.
Let us confefs it neceffary to find fome other Expli-
cation of that Applaufe, which is paid to all Ob-
jects, whether inanimate, animate or rational, if
they have a Tendency to promote the Welfare and
Advantage of others. However difficult it be to
conceive, that an Object is approv’d of, on Account
of its Tendency to a certain End, while the End
itielf is totally indifferent; let us {wallow this Ab-
furdity, and confider what are the Confequences.
‘The preceding Delineation or Definition of VIRTUE
muft iiill retain its Evidence and Authority : It muft
ftill be allow’d, that every Quality of the Mind,
wnich 1s wfeful or agreeable to the Perfun him/elf or to
others, communicates a Pleafare to the Speétator,
engages his Eltcem, and is admitted under the ho-
nourable Denomination of Virtue or Merit, Are

not


a - —- ee ee


ee, —_ -


a Co


Canciusion of the Whole. 185
not Juftice, Fidelity, Honour, Veracity, Allegiance,
Chaftity efteem’d folely on Account of their Ten-
dency to promote the Good of Society? Is not that
Tendency infeperable from Humanity, Benevolence,
Lenity, Generofity, Gratitude, Moderation, Ten-
dernefs, Friendthip, and all the other focial Vir-
tues? Can it pofibly be doubted, that Induftry,
Difcretion, Frugality, Secrecy, Order, Perfeverance,
Forethought, Judgment, and that whole Clafs of
Virtues, of which many Pages would not contain
the Catalogue ; can it be be doubted, I fay, that
the Tendency of thefe Virtues to promote the In-
tereft and Happinefs of their Poffeffor is the ‘fole
Foundation of their Merit? Who can difpute that
a Mind, which fupports a perpetual Serenity and
Cheerfulnefs; a noble Dignity and undaunted Spirit,
atender Affection and Good-will to all around ; as
it has more Enjoyment within itfelf, is alfo a
more animating and rejoicing Spectacle, than if de-
jected with Melancholy, tormented with Anxiety,
Irritated with Rage, or funk into the moft abje&
Bafenefs and Degeneracy? And as to the Qualities,
. Immediately agreeable to others, they {peak fufficiently
for themfelves ; and he muft be unhappy, indeed,
either in his own Temper, or in his Situation and
Circumftances, who has never perceiv’d the Charms
of a facetious Wit or flowing Affability, of a delicate

| Modetfty


186 SECTION IX
Modefty or decent Genteelnefs of Addryefs and Man-


ner.


_ I am fenfible, that nothing can be more unphilo-
fophical than to be pofitive or dogmatical on any
Subjeét ; and that, even if excefive Scepticifm could
be maintain’d, it would not be more deftructive to
all juft Reafoning and Enquiry. I am convinc‘d,
that, where Men are the mutt fure and arrogant, they
are commonly the mot miftaken, and have there
given Reins to Paflion, without that proper Delibera-
tion and Sufpence, which can alone fecure them from
the groffeft Abfurdities. Yct I muft confefs, that
this Enumeration puts the Matter in fo ftrong a
Light, that I cannot, a/ prefext, be more affur'd of
any Truth, which I learn from Reafoning and Ar-
gument, than that Virtue confifts altogether in the
Ufefulnefs or Agreeablenefs of Qualities to the
Perfon himfelf, pofieft of them, or to others, who
have any Intercourfe with him. But when I reflect,
that, tho’ the Bulk and Figure of the Earth have
been meafur'd and delineated, tho’ the Motions of the
Tides have been accounted for, the Order and
CEconomy of the heavenly Bodies fubjected to the:
proper Laws, and INFINITE itfelf reduc‘d to
Calculation; yet Men ftill difpute concerning the
Foundation of their moral Duties: When I reflect
on this, I fay, I fall back into Diffidence and Scep-
. ticifm,


tg li


i= ===


a a


Concxiusion of the Whole. 187
ticifm, and fufpeét, that an Hypothefis, fo obvious»
had it been a true one, would, long ‘ere now, have


been receiv'd, by the unanimous Suffrage and Con-
fent of Mankind.


PAR YF ILE.


HERE remains nothing, but to confider
briefly our Od/gation to Virtue, and to eh-

quire, whether every Man, who has any Regard ta
his own Happinefs and Welfare, will not beft find
his Account in the Practice of every moral Duty. If
this can be clearly afcertain’d from the foregoing
Theory, w2 fhall have the Satisfaction to reflects ©
that we have advanc’d Principles, which not only,
tis hop’d, will ftand the Teft of Reafoning. and
Enquiry, but may contribute to the Amendment of
Men’s Lives, and their Improvement in Morality
and focial Virtue. And tho’ the philofophical Truth
of any Propofition by no Means depends on its
Tendency tc promote the Intereft of Society; yet a
Man has but a bad Grace, who delivers a Theory,
however true, which, he mutt confefs, leads to a
Practice, dangerous and pernicious, Why rake into
thofe Corners of Nature, which fpread a Nuifance
all around? Why dig up the Peftilence from the
Pit, in which it is bury’d? ~The Ingenuity of your
- Refearches


188. SECTION IE.


Refearches may be admir’d ; but your Syftems will |


be detefted : And Mankind will agree, if they can-
not refute them, to fink them, at leaft, in eternal
Silence and Oblivion : Truths, which are pernicious
to Society, if any fuch there be, will yield to Errors,
which are falutary and advantageous. .


But what philofophical Truths can-be more ad-
vantageous to Society, than thofe here deliver'd,
which reprefznt Virtuc in all her genuine and moft
engaving Charms, and make us approacl: her with
Eafe, Familiarity and Affection? The difmal Drefs
falls off, with which many Divines, and fome Philo-
fophers had cover’d her; and nothing appears but
Gentlenefs, Humanity, Beneficence, Affability; nay
even, at proper Intervals, Play, Frolic, and Gaiety:
She talks not of ufelefs Aufterities and Rigors, Suf-
ferance and Sclf-denial. She declares, that her fole
Purpofe is, to make her Votaries and all Mankind,
during every Inftant of their Exiftence, if poffible,
cheerful and happy ; nor does fhe ever willing!y pare
with any Pleafure but in Hopes of ample Compen-
_ fation in fome other Period of their Lives. The fole
Trouble fhe demands is that of ju Calculation, and
a fteddy Preference of the greater Happinefs. . And
if any auftere Pretenders approach her, Enemies to
Joy and Pleafure, fhe either rejects them as Hypo-
crites and Deceivers, or if fhe: admits them in her

Train,


ail li


Conciusion of the Whole. 189
Train, they are rank’d, however, among the leaf
favour’d of her Votaries.


Anup indeed, to drop all figurative Expreffion,
what Hopes can we ever have of engaging Mankind
to a Practice, which we confefs full of Aufterity and
Rigour? Or what Morality can ever ferve any ufe-


 fulPurpofe, unlefs it can fhow, by a particular Detail,


that all the Duties it recommends, are alfo the true
Intereft of each Individual? And the peculiar Ad-
vantage of the foregoing Theory, feems to be, that
it furnifhes proper Mediums for that Purpofe.


Tuat the Virtues, which are immediately u/efal
or agreeable to the Perfon, poffeft of them, are de-
firable in a View to Self-intereft, it would furely be
fuperfluous to prove. Moralifts, indeed, may {pare
themfelves all the Pains they often take in recom-
mending thefe Duties. To what Purpofe collect
Arguments to evince, that Temperance is advanta-
geous, and the Excefles of Pleafure hurtful? When
it appears, that thefe Excefles are only denominated
fuch, becaufe they are hurtful ; and that, if the un-
limited Ufe of ftrong Liquors, for Inftance, no
more impair’d Health or the Faculties of the Mind
and Body than the Ufe of Air or Water, it would
not be a whit more vicious or blameable.


Ir


190. SECTION IX.


Ir feems equally fuperfluous to prove, that the
companionable Virtues of Good-manners and Wit,
Decency and Genteelnefs are more defirable than
the contrary Qualities. Vanity alone, without other
_ Confiderations, is a fufficient Motive to make us
with the Poffeffion of thefe Accomplifhments. No
Man was ever willingly deficient in this Particular.
All our Failures here proceed from bad Education,
Want of Capacity, or a perverfe and unpliable Dif-
pofition. Would you have your Company coveted,
admird, follow’d ; rather than hated, defpis’d,
avoided ? Can any one ferioufly deliberate in the
Cafe? As no Enjoyment is fincere, without fome
Reference to Company and Society ; fo no Society
can be agreeable or even tolerable, where a Man
feels his Prefence unwelcome, and difcovers all
around him Symptoms of Averfion and Difguft.


Bur why, in the greater Society or Confederacy
of Mankind, fhould not the Cafe be the {ame as in
particular Clubs and Companies? Why is it more
doubtful, that the enlarg’d Virtues of Humanity,
Generofity, Beneficence are defirable with a View
to Happinefs and Self-intereft, than the limited En-
dowments of Ingenuity and Politenefs? Are we
apprehenfive, that thofe focial Affeftions have a
greater and more immediate Interference, than any

2 other


Pa, astln ene A ne


Ot rap ee i =


Conciusion of the Whole. 16!
other Purfuits, with private Utility, and cannot be
gratify’d without fome important Sacrifices of Ho-
nour and Advantage? If fo, we are but ill inftru@ted
in the Nature of the human Paffions, and are more


influenc’d by verbal Diftin@tions than by real Dif-
ferences.


Wuatever Contradiétion, may vulgarly be fup-
pos'd betwixt the focial and /e/f/b Sentiments or Dif-
pofitions, they are really no more oppofite than.
felfith and ambitious, felfifh and revengeful, felfith
and vain, °Tis requifite there be an original Pro-
penfity of fome Kind, in order to be a Bafis to Self-
love, by giving a Relifh to the Objeéts of its Pur-
{uit ;.and none more fit for this Purpofe than Bene-
ficence or Humanity. The Goods of Fortune are
{pent in one Gratification or other: The Mifer, who
accumulates his annual Income, and lends it out at
Intereft, has really fpent it in the Gratification of
his Avarice. And ’twould be difficult to fhow, why
a Man is more a Lofer by a generous Adtion, than
by any other Method of Expence ; fince the utmoft
he can attain, by the moft elaborate Selfifhnefs, is
the Indulgence of fome Affection.


Now if Life, without Paffion, muft be altogether
infipid and tirefome ; let 2 Man fuppofe he has full
Power of modelling his own Difpofition, and let

him


192 SECTION IX.

him deliberate what Appetite or Defire he would
choofe for the Foundation of his Happinefs and
Enjoyment. Every Affection, he. would obferve,
_ when gratify’d by Succefs, gives a Satisfaction, pro-
portion’d to its Force and Violence ; but befides this
Advantage, common to all, the immediate Feeling
of Benevolence and Friendfhip, Humanity and
Kindnefs, is fweet, {mooth, tender, and agreeable,
independent of all Fortune and Accidents. Thefe
Virtues are befides attended with a pleafing Con-
{cioufnefs and Remembrance, and keep us in Hu-


mour with ourfelves as well as others ; while we re-:
tain the agreeable Reflection of having done our


Part towards Mankind and Society. And tho’ all
Men fhow a Jealoufy of our Succefs in the Purfuits
of Avarice or Ambition ; yet are we almotft fure of
their Good-will and Good-withes, fo long as we
perfevere in the Paths of Virtue, and employ our-
felves in the Execution of generous Plans and Pur-
pofes. What other Paflion is there, where we fhall
find fo many Advantages united ; an agreeable Sen-
timent, a pleafing Confcioufnefs, a good Reputa-
tion? But of thefe Truths, we may obferve, Men
are, of themfelves, pretty much convinc’d ; nor are
they deficient in their Duty to Society, becaufe they
would not with to be generous, friendly, and hu-
mane ; but becaufe they do not feel themfelves fuch.

TREATING


eee


va


Conciusron of the Whole. 193


TrzaTine Vice with the preateft Candour, and
making it all poffible.Conceffions, we muft acknow-
ledge, that there is not, in any Inftance, the fmalleft
Pretext for giving it the Preference above Virtue,
with a View to Self-intereft ; except, perhaps, in
the Cafe of Juftice, where a Man, taking Things
inacertain Light, may often feem to be a Lofer by
his Integrity. And tho’ “tis acknowledg’d, that,
without a Regard to Property, no Society could
fubfift; yet according to the imperfect Way, in which
human Affairs are conducted, a fenfible Knave, in
particular Incidents, may think, that an A& of Ini-
quity or Infidelity will make a confiderable Addition
to his Fortune, without caufing any confiderable
Breach in the focial Union and Confederacy. That
Honefty is the beft Policy, may be a good general
Rule; but is liable to many Exceptions: And he,
it may, perhaps, be judg’d, conducts himfelf with
moft Wifdom, who obferves the general Rule, and
takes Advantage of all the Exceptions,


I must confefs, that if a Man thinks, that this
Reafoning much requires an Anfwer, “twill be a
little difficult to find any, that will to him appear
{atisfactory and convincing. If his Heart does not
rebel againit {uch pernicious Maxims, if he feels no

K Reluctance


194 SECTION IX.
Reluétance to the Thoughts of Villainy or Bafenefs,
he has indeed loft a confiderable Motive to Virtue;


and we may expect, that his Praétice will be an-


fwerable to his Speculation. But in all ingenious
Natures, the Antipathy to Treachery and Roguery
is too ftrong to be counter-ballanc’d by any Views of
Profit or pecuniary Advantage. Inward Peace of
Mind, Confcioufnefs of Integrity, a fatisfaftory Re-
view of our own Conduct ; thefe are Circumftances
very requifite to Happinefs, and will be cherifh’d and
cultivated by every honeft Man, who feels the Im-
portance of them.


Sucn a one has, befides, the frequent Satisfaction
of feeing Knaves, with all their pretended Cunning
and Ability, betray’d by their own Maxims ; and
while they purpofe to cheat only with Moderation
and Secrecy, a tempting Incident occurs, Nature is
frail, and they give into the Snare; whence they can
never extricate themfelves, without a total Lofs of
Reputation, and the Forfeiture of all future Truf
and Confidence with Mankind.


But were they ever fo fecret and fuccefsful, the
honeft Man, if he has any Tin@ture of Philofophy,
or even common Obfervation and Reflection, will
difcover, that they. themfelves are, in the End, the
greateft Dupes, and have facrific’d the invaluable


ee re ete ee


ys


4 Enjoyment


. ee ——_———— ee
+ uv


“Concriusion of the Whok. ros


' Enjoyment of a Character, with themfelves at leaft,


for the Acquifition of worthlefs Toys and Gewgaws.
How little is requifite ta fapply the Necefities of Na-
ture? And in the View of Plea/ure, what Compa-
rifon betwixt the unbought Satisfations of Conver-
fation, Society, Study, even.Health and the common
Beauties of Nature, but efpecially the peaceful Re-
flection on. one’s own Conduét : What Comparifon,
I fay, betwixt thefe, and the feverifh, empty Amufe-


ments of Luxury and Expence? Thefe natural Plea.
fures, indeed, are really without Price; both becaufe
‘they are below all Price in ‘their Attainment, and
-above it in their, Enjoyment,


Kz APPENDIX


Co


ee


( ro7 )


APPENDIXI.


Concerning moral SENTIMENT.


iT F the foregoing Hypothefis be receiv'd, “twill
now be eafy for us to determine the Queftion firft
ftated*, concerning the general Principles of Morals ,
and tho’ we poftpon’d the Decifion of that Queftion,
left it fhould then involve us in intricate Speculations,
which are totally unfit for moral. Difcourfes, we may
refume it at prefent, and examine how far either
Reafon or Sentiment enters into all moral Determi-
nations, |


Tus chief Foundation of moral Praife being fup.


_pos'd to lie in the Ufefulnefs of any Quality or


Adtion ; *tis evident, that Reafon muft enter fur a
confiderable Share in all Determinations of this
Kind ; fince nothing but that Faculty can inftruét us
in the Tendency of Qualities and Actions, and point


* Sef, I,
K 3 out


198: APPENDIX I.

out their beneficial’ Confequences to Society and to
their Poffeflors. In many Cafes, this is an Affair
liable to great Controverfy : Doubts may arife.; ov-
pofite Interefts occur; and a Preference muft be.
given to one Side, from very nice Views and a {mall
Overballance of Utility. This is . particularly re-
markable in Queftions with regard to Juftice ; as is,
indeed, natural to fappofe from that Species of. Uti-
lity; which attends this Virtue *. Were every fingle
Initance of Juftice, like that of Benevolence, bene-
ficial and ufeful to Society ; this would be amore
fimple State of the Cafe, and feldom liable to great
Controverfy.. But as finglé Inftances of Juftice are
often pernicious, in their firft and immediate Ten-
dency, and as the Advantage to Society refults only
from the Obfervance of the general Rule, and from
the Concurrence and Combination of feveral Perfons
in the-fame- equitable Condukt ; the Café here be-
comes more intricate and involv’d. ‘The various Cit-
cumftances of Society ; the various Confequences of
any Praétice; the various Intereits, which may be
propos’d: Thefe om many Occafions are doubtful,
and fubje&t to great Difcuffion and Enquiry.
The Obje€&t of municipal Laws is to fix all
Queftions with regard to Juftice: The Debates of


ee :


Civilians ; the Reflections of Politicians; the Pre- |


® See Appendix IY,.


cedent! _


_ atcee


Concerning moral SENTIMENT. 169
cedents of Hiftories and public Records, are all
dire€ted to the fame Purpofe. And avery accurate
Reafon or Fudgment is often requifite, to give the true


Determination, amidft fuch intricate Doubts arifing -


from obfcure or oppofite Utilities.


Bur tho’ Reafon, when fully affifted and improv'd,
be fufficient to inftraé us in the pernicious or ufeful
Tendencies of Qualities and Ations ; it is not alone
fufficient to produce any moral Blame or Approba-
tion. Utility is only a Tendency to a certain End;
and were the End totally indifferent to us, we fhould —
feel the fame Indifference towards the Means. "Tis
requifite a Sentiment fhould here difplay isfelf, in order
to give a Preference to the ufeful above the perni-
cious Tendencies. This Sentiment can beno other
than a Feeling for the Happinefs of Mankind, and
a Refentment of their Mifery ; fince thefe are the
different Ends, which Virtue and Vice have a Ten-
dency to promote. Here therefore, Reafon inftructs
us in the feveral Tendencies of Actions, and Huma-
nity makes a DiftinGion in favour of thofe, which.


- are ufeful and beneficial. -


Tus Partition betwixt the Faculties of Under-
ftanding and Sentiment, in all moral Decifions,
fecms clear from the preceding Hypothefis. But I
fhall fuppofe that Hypothefis falfe : "Twill then be

K 4 requifite.


200 APPENDIX I.


requifite to look out for fome other Theory, that


may be fatisfactory ; and I dare venture to affirm,


that none fuch will ever be found, as long aswe .


fuppofe Reafon to be the fole Source of Morals. To
prove this, it will be proper to weigh the five follow-
ing Confiderations.


I. "Tis eafy for a falfe Hypothefis to maintain
fome Appearance of Truth, while it keeps altoge-


’ ther in Generals,. makes ufe-of undefin’d Terms, and


employs Comparifons, inftead of Inftances. This
1s particularly remarkable in that Philofophy, which


afcribes the Difcernment of all moral Diftin&tions to:


Reafon alone without the Concurrence of Sentiment.
"Tis impofible, in any particular Inftance, that this
Hypothefis can fo much as be render’d intelligible ;
whatever fpecious Figure it may make in general
Declamations and Difcourfes. Examine the Crime
of - Ingratitude, for Inftance ;, which has Place,
wherever we obferve Good-will, expreft and known,
along with Good-offices perform’d, on the one Side,
and a Return of Ii-will or Indifference, with Iil-
offices or Neglect, on the other: Anatomize all
thefe Circumftances, and examine, by your Reafon
alone, wherein confifts the Demerit or Blame : You
never will come to any Iffue or Conclufian.


Reason


ee ete lie fe ~ ME ne rele ee


lies, tie yy


gn ae


)


Concerning moral SENTIMENT. 20%


Reason judges either of Matter of Fa@ or of Re-
lations. Enquire then, frj?, where is that Matter of
Fa&, which we here call Crime; point it out ; de-
termine the Time of its Exiftence ; defcribe its
Effence or Nature ; explain the Senfe or Faculty, to
which it difcovers itfelf. It refides in the Mind of
the Perfon, who is ungrateful. He muft, therefore,
feel it and be confcious of it. But nothing is there,
except the Paffion of Ill-will or abfolute Indifference.
You cannot fay, that thefe, of themfelves, always, .
and in all Circumftances, are Crimes. No: They
are only Crimes, when directed towards Perfons,
who have before expreft and difplay’d Good-will.
towards us. Confequently, we may infer, that the .
Crime of Ingratitude is not any particular individual
Fa; but arifes from a Complication of Circum-
ftances, which, being prefented to the Spectator, .
excites the Sentiment of Blame, by the particular -
Structure and Fabric of his Mind.


Tuis Reprefentation, you fay, 1s falfe. Crime, .
indeed, confifts not in a particular Faé?, of whofe
Reality we are affur’d by Rea/on : But it confifts in
certain moral Relations, difcoverable by Reafon, in
the fame Manner as we difcover, by Reafon, the
Truths of Geometry or Algebra. But what are
the Relations, I afk, of which you hcre talk? In

K 5 the


202. APPENDIX FE

the Cafe {tated above, I fee firft Good-will and Good--
offices, in one Perfon ; then IH-will and IIl-offices
in the other.: Betwixt thefe, there: is the Relation
of Contrariety, Does the Crime confift in that Re-
-- Jation? But fuppofe a Perfon bore me Ill-will or
did me Ill-offices; and I, inretarn, were indifferent
towards him, or did him Good-offices: Here is the
fame Relation.of. Contrariety.;.and yet my.Condut
is highly laudable. 'Twift.and turn this Matter, a
much as you will, you. can never reft the Morality
‘ on Relation; but muft have Recourfe to the Dec
fions of. Sentiment. 7


Wuen tis affirm’d, that two and three are equal


to the Half of'ten; ‘this Relation of Equality, I
underftand perfeétly.. Iconceive, that if ten be di-
- vided into two Parts, of which. one. has as many.
Unites as the other ; and if any. of thefe Parts be
compar’d- to: two added to three,-it will cantain as
many Unites as that compound Number. But when
you draw thence a Comparifon to moral Relations,.
Town, I am altogether at a lofs to underftand you,
A moral A&tion, a Crime, fuch as Ingratitude, isa
~ complicated Obje&t. Does the Morality confift in
the Relation of its Parts to each other. How?
After what Manner? ‘Specify the Relation: Be
more particular and explicite in your Propofitions;
and you will eafily fee their Falfhood,


= a


amelie =


oe


i


Ne,


_ Concerning moral SENTIMENT. 203)


No, fay you, the Morality confifts in the Relation.
of Actions to the Rule of Right; and they are de-:
nominated good or ill, according as they agree or:
difagree with it. What then is this Rule of Right 2
Wherein does it confift? How is it determin’d ?
By Reafon, you'll fay, which examines the moral.
Relations of Ations. So that moral Relations are
determin’d by the Comparifon of A@tions to a Rule.
And that Rale is determin’d by confidering the
moral Relations of Objeéts. Is not this fine Rea-
foning ? |


Aut this is Metaphyfics, you cry. That is
enough: There needs nothing more to give a ftrong
Prefumption of Falfhood. Yes, reply I: Here are
Metaphyfics furely : But.they are all on your Side,
who advance an abftrufe Hypothefis, which can
never be made intelligible, nor quadrate to any par-
ticular Inftance or I]luftration. The Hypothefis we
embrace is plain. It maintains, that Morality is de-.
termin’d by Sentiment. It defines Virtue to be,
wuhatever mental Adtion or Quality gives to a Spefator
she pleafing Sentiment of Approbation; and Vice the
contrary. We then proceed to examine a plain
Matter of Faét, viz. what Aétions have this Influ-
ence: We confider all the Circumftances,. in which. .
thefe Actions agree : And from thence endeavour to

K 6 extract.


204 APPENDIX IE

extract fome general Obfervations with regard to
thefe Sentiments. If you callthis Metaphyfics, and
find any thing abftrufe here, you need only conclude,
that your Turn of Mind is not fuited to the moral


Sciences. =


II. Wuew a Man, at any Time, deliberates con-
cerning his own Condudt, (as, whether he had
better, in a particular Emergence, affift a Brother or
a Benefactor) he muft confider thefe feparate Rela-
tions, with the whole Circumftances and Situation
of the Perfons,-in order to determine his fuperior
" Duty and Obligation: And in order to determine
the Proportion of Lines in any Triangle, ’tis ne-
- eeflary to examine the Nature of that Figure, and
the Relations, which its feveral Parts bear to each
other. But notwithftanding this apparent Similarity
in the two Cafes, there is, at the bottom, an ex-
treme Difference betwixt them. A {fpeculative
Reafoner concerning Triangles or Circles confiders
the feveral known and given Relations of the Parts
of thefe Figures ; and from thence infers fome un-
known Relation, which is dependent on the former.
But in moral Deliberations, we muft be acquainted,
before-hand, with all the Objeéts, and all their Re-
Jations toeach other ; and from a Comparifon of
the whole, fix our Choice or Approbation. No new

Jat to be afcertain’d: No new Relation to be
Oo difcover'a.


a . & é Z ae ens
_—_——— eee ee ee +
. zi a


Concerning moral SENTIMENT. 20x
difcover'd. .The whole Circumftances of the Cafe
are fuppos’d to be laid before us, ’ere we can fix any
Sentence of Blame or Approbation. If any material.
Circumftance be yet unknown or doubtful, we muft
firft employ our Enquiry or intelle@tual Faculties to
affure us of it; and fufpend for a Time all moral
Decifion or Sentiment. While we are ignorant,
whether a Man was Aggreffor or not, how can we -
determine, whether the Perfon, who kill’d him, be
criminal or innocent? But after every Circumftance,
every Relation is known, the Underftanding has no
farther Room to operate, nor any Objeét, on which
it could employ itfelf. The Approbation or Blame,
which then enfues, cannot be the Work of the Judg-
ment, but of the Heart, and is not a f{peculative Pro- |
pofition or Affirmation, but an attive Feeling or Sen-
timent. Inthe Difquifitions of the Underftanding,
from known Circumftances and Relations, we infer
fome new and unknown. In moral Decifions, the
whole Circumftances and Relations mutt be ante-
cedently known ; and the Mind, from the Contem-


' plation of the Whole, feels fome new Impreffion of


Affection or Difguft, Efteem or Contempt, Appro-
bation or Blame.


Hence the great Difference betwixt a Miftake of
Fad and one of Right ; and hence the Reafon, why


the one is commonly criminal and not the other.
When


206 APPENDIX I.


When OEdipus kill’d Latus, he was ignorant of the:


Relation, and from Circumftances, innocent and in-
voluntary, form’d erroneous Opinions concerning
the Action he commxted. But when Nero kill’d
Agrippina, all the Relations betwixt himfelf andthe
 Perfon, and all the Circumftances of the Fa@ were
antecedently known to him: But the Motive of Re=
venge, or Fear or Intereft, in his favage Heart, pre
vail'd over the Sentiments of Duty and Humanity.
And when we exprefs a Deteftation againft him, to
which he, himfelf, in a little Time, became infen .
fible ; ’tis not, that we fee any Relations, of which
he was ignorant, but that, from the Reétitude of
our Difpofition, we feel Sentiments, againft which
he was harden’d, from Flattery and a long Perfeve-
rance in. the moft enormous Crimes. In thefe Sen-
timents, then, not in a Difcovery of Relations of
any Kind, do all moral Determinations confift.
Before we can pretend to form any Decifion. of this
Kind, every Thing muft be known and afcertain’d
en the Side of the Object or Action. Nothing re-
mains but to feel, on our Part, fome Sentiment of
Blame or Approbation,. whence we pronounce the
AGtion criminal or virtuous.


III. Tis DoGrine will become ftill more evident,.
if we compare moral Beauty with natural, to which,
in many Particulars, it bears fo near a Refemblance.

. Tis


= nie. ee ee ee


| Codceriiing moral SENTIMENT, zof
"Tis on the Proportion, Relation, and Pofition of
Parts, that all natural'Beauty depends ; but ‘twould’
be abfurd. thence to infer,. that: the Perception of
Beauty, like that of Truth in geometrical Problems,
confifts altogether in the Perception of Relations;
and was perform’d entirely, by the-Underftanding cr
intellectual Faculties. In all the Sciences, our
Mind, from the known Relations, inveftigates the
unknown: But in all Decifions of T'afte or external
Beauty, the whole Relations are before-hand obvious
to the Eye, and we thence proceed to feel a Senti-
ment of Complacency or Difguft, according to the
' Nature. of the Object, and. Difpofition- ef our Or:
gans,.


EUCLID has fally explain’d ali the Qualities’
of the Circle ; but has not, in any Propofition, faid
a Word of its Beauty. The Reafon is evident. The
Beauty is not a Quality of the Citcle. It'li¢s not in
any Part of the Line, whofe: Parts are all equally
diftant from a common Center. It is only the Effet;
which that Figure operates upon the: Mind, whofe
peculiar Fabric or Structure renders it fufceptible of
fuch Sentiments. In vain, would you look for it in
the Circle, or feek it; either by your Senfes or by
mathematical: Reafonings, in’ all the Properties of
that Figure,


ATTEND


208 APPENDIX L_


Atrenp to Palladio and Perrault, while they ex-
plain all the Parts and Preportions of a Pillar : They
talk of the Cornice and Freeze and Bafe and Enta-
blature and Shaft and Architrave; and give the De-
{cription and Pofition of each of thefe Members.
But fhould you afk the Defcription and Pofition of
its Beauty, they would readily reply, that the Beauty
is not any of the Parts or Members of a Pillar, but
refults from the Whole, when that complicated Fi-
gure is prefented to an intelligent Mind, {ufceptible
of thofe finer Senfations. Till fuch a Spectator ap-
pear, there is nothing but a Figure of fuch particular
Dimenfions and Proportions : From his Sentiments
alone arifes its Elegance and Beauty.


Acain 3 attend to Cicero, while he paints the
Crimes of a Verres or a Catiline; you muft acknow-
ledge, that the moral Turpitude refults, in the fame
Manner, from the Contemplation of the Whole,
when prefented to a Being, whofe Organs have fuch
a particular Structure and F ormation. ‘The Orator
may paint Rage, Infolence, Barbarity on the one
Side: Meeknefs, Sufferance, Sorrow, Innacence on
the other : But if you feel no Indignation or Com-
paflion arife in ydu from this Complication of Cir-
cumftances, you would in vain afk him, wherein
confifts the Crime or Villainy, which he fo vehe-

mently


Concerning moral SENTIMENT. 209
mently exclaims againft: At what 'Time, or on what.
Subject it firft began to exift: And what has a few
Months afterwards become. ef it, when every Dif-
pofition and Thought of all the Aétors is totally
alter’d or anniliilated. No fatisfa€tory Anfwer can
be given to any of thefe Queftions, upon the abftrac&
Hypothefis of Morals ; and we muft at Iaft acknow-
ledge, that the Crime or Immorality is no particular:
Faét or Relation, which can be the Object of the
Underftanding: But arifes altogether from the Sen-
timent of Difapprobation, which, by the Structure:
of human Nature, we unavoidably feel on the Ap-
prehenfion of Barbarity or Treachery..


IV. Inanrmatre Objects may bear to each other
all the fame Relations, which we obferve in moral
Agents ; tho’ the former can never be the Object of
Love or Hatred, nor are confequently fufceptible of
Merit. or Iniquity. A young Tree,. that over-tops.
or déftroys its Parent, from whofe Seed it fprung,.
ftands in all the fame Relations with Nero, when he
murder’d Agrippina ;. and if Morality confifted in any.
abftra& Relations, would, no doubt, be equally
criminal.


V. Ir appears evident, that the ultimate Ends of
human Adétions can never, in any Cafe, be accounted.


for by Reafon, but recommend themfelves entirely to:


220 APPENDIX I..

the Sentiments and Affections of Mankind, without
any Dependance on the intelleCtual Faculties. Atk
a Man, why be ufes Exercife ; he will anfwer, becaufe
he defires to keep his Health. If you then enquire, wy
he defires Health, he will readily reply, Lecaufe Sickn cfs
is painful. If you pufh your Enquiries farther, and
defire a Reafon, why he hates Pain, “tis impoflible he
can ever giveany. ‘This is an ultimate End, and is
never refer'd to any other Object.


Peruaps, to your fecond Queftion, why he defires
Health, he may alfo reply, that ‘sis reguifite for the
Exercife of his Calling. . Uf you afk, why he is anxious
on that head, he will anfwer, becaufe he defires to get
Money. If youdemand, Why? It is the Infrument
of Pleafure, fays he. And beyond this, ’tis an Ab-
furdity to afk for a Reafon. °Tis impoffible there
can be a Progrefs in infinitum; and that one Thing
can always be the Reafon, why another is defir'd.
Something muft be defirable on its own Account, and
becaufe of its immediate Accord or Agreement with
human Sentiment and Affection.


Now as Virtue is an End, and is defirable on its
own Account, without Fee or Reward, merely for
the immediate Satisfaction it conveys ; "tis requifite
there fhould be fome Sentiment, which it touches,
fome internal Tafte or Feeling, or whatever you

_ pleafe


~ fo =


Concerning moral SENTIMENT. 25I


«


- pleafe to call'it, which diftinguifhes moral Good and


Eyil, and which embraces the one and rejects-the
ether. |


Tuus the diftine Boundaries and Offices of Reafon
and Ta/ffe are eafily afcertain’d. ‘The former conveys
the Knowledge of Truth and Falfhood : The latter
gives the Sentiment-of Beauty and Deformity,
Vice and Virtue. The one difcovers Objeéts, as
they really ftand in Nature, without Addition or
Diminution : The other has a productive Faculty,
and guilding or ftaining all natural Objeéts with the
Colours, borrow'd from internal Sentiment, raifes
in a Manner, a new Creation. Reafon, being cool
and difengag'd, is no Motive to Aétion, and direéts
only the Impulfe, receiv’d from Appetite or Inclina-
tion, by fhowing us the Means of obtaining Happi-
nefs or avoiding Mifery : Tafte, as it gives Pleafure:
or Pain, and thereby conftitutes Happinefs or Mifery,


. becomes a Motive to Action, and is the firft Spring
- or Impulfe to Defire and Volition. From Circum-


ftances and Relations, known or fuppos'd, the for-
mer leads us to the Difcovery of the conceal'd and
unknown : After alt Circumftances and Relations
are laid before us, the latter makes us feel from the
Whole a new Sentiment of Blame or Approbation.
The Standard of the one, being founded on the Na-
ture of Things, is eternal and inflexible, even by

the


212 APPENDIX I.

the Will of the Supreme Being : The Standard of the
other, arifing from the internal Frame and Conftitu-
tion of Animals, is ultimately deriv’d from that Su-
preme Will, who beftow'd on each being its peculiar.


Nature, and arrang’d the feveral Clafles and Orders.


of Exiftence,


APPENDIX


uw -


{ 213) |


APPENDIX IL


Some farther Confiderations with regard te
Justice.


ILE Intention of this Appendix is to give

fome more particular Explication of the Ori- ~
gin and Nature. of Juftice, and mark fome Diffe-
rences enaae it-and the other Virtues.


Tue focial Virtues of Humanity and Benevolence
exert their Influence immediately, by a direct Ten-
dency or Inftinét, which keeps chiefly. in View.the
fimple Object, that moves the Affections, and.com-
prehends not any Scheme or Syftem, nor the Confe-
quences refalting from the Concurrence, Imitation,
or Example. of others. A Parent flies to the Relief
of his Child ; tranfported by that natural Sympathy,
which. adtuates him, and. which affords no Leifure
to refle€t-on the Sentiments. or Conduct of the reft
of Mankind in. like Circumftances. A generous

Man


C


214 APPENDIX IL


Man embraces cheerfully an Opportunity of ferving |


his Friend ; becaufe he then feels himfelf under the
Dominion of the beneficent Affections, nor is he
concern’d whether any other Perfon in the Univerfe
was ever before actuated by fuch noble Motives, or
will ever afterwards prove their Influence. In all
thefe Cafes, the focial Paffions have in View a fingle
individual Object, and purfue alone the Safety or


Happinefe of the Perfon, lov’d and efteem’d. With ©


this, they are fatisfy’d: In this, they acquiefce,
And as the Good refulting from their benign Influ-
ence, is in itfelf compleat and entire, it alfo excites


the moral Sentiment of Approbation, without any


Reflection on farther Confequences, or more enlarg’d


Views of the Concurrence or Imitation of the other.


Members of Society. On the contrary, were the
generous Friend or difinterefted Patriot to, ftand alone
in the Praétice of Beneficence ; this would rather in-
hance his Value in our Eyes, and join the Praife of


Rarity and Novelty to his other more exalted
Merits.


Tue Cafe is not.the fame with the focial Virtues
of Juftice and Fidelity. They are highly ufeful, or
indeed abfolutely neceflary to the Well-being of
Mankind: But the Benefit, refulting from them, is
not the Confequence of every individual fingle A& ;
but arifes from the whole Scheme or Syftem, con-

. gur'd


aii


ee el ee es is. —


Some fartherConfiderations with regard to Fuftice. 216
. cur'’d in by the whole, or the greateft Part of the So--
ciety. General Peace and Order is the Attendant
of Juftice or a general Abftinence from the Poffef-
fions of others: But a particular Regard to the par-
ticular Right of one individual Citizen may fre-
quently, confider’d in itfelf, be attended with per-
nicious Canfequences. The Refult of the feveral
Acts is here often direétly oppofite to that of the
whole Syftem of Alions ; and the former may be
extremely hurtful, while the latter is, to the higheft
Degree, advantageous. Riches, inherited from a
Parent, are, in a bad Man’s Hand, the Inftruments
of Mifchief. The Right of Succeflion may, in one
Inftance, be hurtful. Its Benefit arifes only from
the Obfervance of the general Rule ; and ’tis fuf-
ficient, if Compenfation be thereby made for all the
Ills and Inconveniencies, which flow from particular
Characters and Situations.


CrRvwUS, young and unexperienc’d, eounderd
only the individual Cafe before him, and reflected
on its limited Fitnefs and Convenience, when he
affign’d the long Coat to the tall Boy, and the fhort
Coat to the other of fmaller Size. His Governor
inftruéted him better ; while he pointed out more
enlarg’d Views and Confequences, and inform’d his
Pupil of the general, inflexible Rules, requifite to
fapport general Peace and Order in Society. .

‘HE


216 APPENDIX II,


Tue Happinefs and Profperity of Mankind,
arifing from the focial Virtue of Benevolence and its
Subdivifions, may be compar’d to a Wall, built by
many Hands ; which ftill .rifes by each Stone, that
is heap'd upon it, and receives proportional Encreafe
to the Diligence and Care of each Workman. The
fame Happinefs, rais'd by the focial Virtue of Juftice
and its Subdivifions, may be-compar’d to the build-


ing of a Vault, where each individual Stone would,,


of itfelf, fall. to the Ground ; nor does the whole
‘Fabric fapport itfelf, but by the mutual A ffiftance and
Combination of its correfpendent Parts.


Aut the Laws of Nature, which regulate Pro-
perty, as well as all civil Laws, are general, and
regard alone fome eflential Circumftances of the
‘Cafe, without taking into Confideration the Cha-
_.raéters, Situations and Connexions of the Perfons
-concern’d, or any particular Confequences, that may
‘refult from the Determination of thefe Laws, in
every particular Cafe, that offers. They deprive,
without Scruple, a beneficent Man of all his Poffef-
‘fions, if acquir’d by Miftake, without a good Title ;
in order to beftow them on a felfith Mifer, who has
-already heap’d up immenfe Stores of: fuperfluous


‘Riches. Publie Utility requires, ‘that Property fhould:


sbe regulated by general inflexible Rules; and tho’
fach


'
|
'
.
|
’
|
‘
',
a
4


- i, en 2


Some farther Confiderations with regard to Fuflice. 217
fuch Rules are adopted as beft ferve the fame End of
public Utility, ‘tis impoffible for them to prevent
all particular Hardfhips, or make beneficial Confe-
quences refult from every individual Cafe. "Tis
fufficient, if the whole Plan or Scheme be neceffary
to the Support of civil Society, and if the Ballance
of Good, in the main, does thereby preponderate
much above that of Evil. Even the general Laws
of the Univerfe, tho’ plann’d by infinite Wifdom,


cannot exclude all Evil or Inconvenience, in every
particular Operation.


Ir has been afferted by fome, that all Juftice arifes
fom HUMAN CONVENTIONS, and pro-
ceeds from the voluntary Choice, Confent, or Com-
bination of Mankind. If by Convention be here
meant a Promife (which is the moft ufual Senfe of
the Word) nothing can be more abfurd, thanthis ,
Pofition, The Obfervance of Promifes is itfelf one
of the moft confiderable Parts of Juftice; and we
are not furely bound to keep our Word, becaufe we
have given our Word to keep it. But if by Con-
vention be meant a Senfe of common Intcreft ;
which Senfe each Man feels in his own Breaft, which
he obferves in his Fellows, and which carries him,
in concurrence with others, into a general Plan or
Syftem of Actions, that tend to public Utility ; it
muf be own’d, that, in this Senfe, Juftice arifes

L fram


218 APPENDIX II.

from human Conventions. For if it be allow'd
: (what is, indeed, evident) that the particular Con.
fequencts of a particular A& of Juftice may be
hurtful to the Public as well as to Individuals ; it
follows, that every Man, in embracing that Virtue,
muft have an Eye to the whole Plan or Syftem, and
muft expect the Concurrence of his Fellows in the
fame Condu& and Behaviour. Were all his Views
to terminate in the particular Confequences of each
particular A& of his own, his Benevolence and Hu-
manity, as well as Self-love, might often prefcribe
to him Meafures of Conduét very different from
thofe, which are agreeable to the ftrid Rules of
Right and Juftice.


Tuus two Men pull the Oars of a Boat, by com-
mon Convention, for common Intereft, without any
Promife or Contra&t: Thus Gold and Silver are
made the Meafures of Exchange ; thus Speech and


a a on a a ee
aca ans a Big


Somme: pais 5 OMS 5 aia a ee


Words and Language are fixt, by human Convention _


and Agreement. Whatever is advantageous to two


or more Perfons, if all perform their Part ; but what —


lofes all Advantage, if only one perform, can arife
from no other Principle. ‘There would otherwife be
no Motive for any one of them to enter into that
Scheme of Condu& *.

THE


* This Theory concerning the Origin of Property, and confe-
quently of Jyuftice is, in the main, the fame with that hinted at


and


we


A ile ley,


se a
ee rem


‘Some farther Obfervations with regard to Fuftice, 21g


Tue Word, zatural, is commonly taken in fo
many Senfes, and is of fuch loofe Siynification, that
it feems to little Purpofe to, difpute, whether Juftice
be natural or not. If Self-love, if Benevolence be
natural to Man ; if Reafon and Forethought be alfo


_ natural; then may the fame Epithet be apply’d to


Juftice, Order, Fidelity, Property, Society. Men's
Inclination, their Neceffities lead them to combine ;
their Underftanding and Experience tell them, that
this Combination is impoffible, where each governs
himfelf by no Rule, and pays no Regard to the
Poffeffions of others: And from thefe Paffions
and Reflections conjoin’d, as foon as we obferve


and adopted by Grotius. Hine difcimus, que fuerit caufa, ob quam
a primaeva communione rerum primo mobilium, deinde & immobie
lium difcefjum of : nimirum quod cum non contenti bomines vefct
fponte natis, antra babitare, sorpore aut nudo agere, aut corticibug
arborum ferarumve pellibus vefito, vite genus exquifitius delegif-
fent, induftria opus fuit, quam finguli rebus fingulis adbiberent :


Quo minus autem fru€tus in commune conferrentur, primum obftitit


‘Jocorum, in que bomines difcefferunt, diftantia, deinde juftitia &


amoris defeétus, per quem fiebat, ut nec in labore, nec in confumtione
fru€tuum que debebat, equalitas fervaretur. Simul difcimus, quoe
modo res in proprietatem iverint ; non animi atu folo, neque enim
feire alii poterant, quid alii fuum ejfe vellent, ut co abftinerent, &
idem velle plures poterant ; fed pafto guodam aut expreffo, ut per divie
fionem, aut tacito, ut per cccupationem, De jure belli & pacis,
Lib. 2, Cap. 2, § 2, Art. 4@ 5.


L 3 like


220 APPENDIX IL.

lixe Paffions and Refleions in others, the Sentiment
of Juftice, thro’ all Ages, has infallibly and certainly
had place, to fome Degree or other, in every Indi-
vidual of human Species. In fo fagacious an Ani-
mal, what neceffarily arifes from the Exertion of his
intelle€tual Faculties, may juftly be efteem’d na-
tural *.


Amoncst all civiliz’d Nations, it has been the
conftant Endeavour to remove every Thing arbitrary
and partial from the Decifion of Property, and to
fix the Sentence of Judges by fuch general Views
and Confiderations, as may be, equal to every
Member of the Society, For befides, that nothing
could be more dangereus than to accuftom the
Bench, even in the fmalleft Inftance, to regard pn-
vate Friendfhip or Enmity ; “tis certain, that Men,


® Natural may be oppos’d, either to what is wnafual, miraculons,
or artificial, In the two former Senfes, Juftice and Property are
u-deubtedly natural. But as they fuppofe Reafon, Forethought,
Defign, and a’ fucial Union and Confederacy amongft Men, perhaps,
that Epithet cannot ftri@tly, in the lait Senfe, be apply’d to them.
Had Mentliv’d without Society, Property -had never been known,
and neither Jufice nor Injuflice had ever exified. But Society
among? buman Creatures, had been impofhible, without Reafon


and Forethovght. Infejor Animals, that unite, are guided by
Intinét, which fupplies the Place of Reafon. But all thefe Dil-
pures are merely verbal.


whure


|
|


Some farther Obfervations with regard io Fuftice. 221
' where they imagine, that there was no other Reafon
for the Preference of their Adverfary but perfonal
Favour, are apt to entertain the ftrongeft Jealouiy
and Ill-will againft the Magiitrates and Judges,
When natural Reafon, therefore, points oat no fixt
View of public Urility, by which a Controverfy of
Property can be decided,. pofitive Laws are often
fram’d to fupply.its Place, and dire€ the Procedure
of all Courts of. Judicature. Where. thefe. too fail,.
as often happens, Precedents are. call'd for; and a.
former Decifion, tho’. given itfelf without any fuffici-.
ent Reafon, juftly becomes a fufficient Reafon for a
new Decifion. If dire€t Laws and Precedents le-
wanting, imperfect and indireét ones are brought in
Aid; and the controverted Cafe is rang’d under them,
by analogical Reafonings, and Comparifons, and
Similitudes, and Correfpondencies, that are often
more fanciful than real. In general, it may fafely
be afferted, that Jurifprudence is, in this refpect,
different from all the Sciences ; and in many of its
nicer Queftions, there cannot properly be faid to Le
Truth or Palfhood on either Side. If one Pleader
brings the Cafe under any former Law or Preceder.t,
by arefn'd Analogy or Comparifon ; the oppofite
Pleader is not at a Lofs to find an oprofite Analogy or
-Comparifon: Ard the Preference given by the Judce
is often founded more on Tafte and Imaginaticn
L 3 than »


222 APPENDIX It. 7
than on any folid Argument. Public Utility is the. |
general: View of all Courts of Judicature ; and this


ed


Utility too requires a ftable Rule in all Controverfies :
_ But where feveral Rules, nearly equal and indif-


ferent, prefent themfelves, “tis a very flight Turn of-
Thought, which fixes the Decifion in favour of either


Party. |


(225)


A.


DIALOG iU E


\ AT Y Friend, Pa/amedes, who is as great a Ram-
~ bler in his Principles as in his Perfon, and
who has run over, by Study and Travel, almoft
every Region of the intellectual and material World, -
furpriz’d me lately with an Account of a Nation,
with whom, he told me, he had pafs'd a confiderable
Part of his Life, and whom he found, in the main,
an extreme civiliz’d, intelligent People. |


Tere is a State, fay’d he, in the World, call’d
Four/i, no matter for. its Longitude or Latitude,
whofe Ways of thinking in many Things, particu-
larly in Morals, are diametrically oppofite to ours,
When I came amongft them, I found I muft fubmit
to double Pains; firft to learn the Meaning of the
Terms in their Language, and then to know the Im-
port of thofe Terms, and the Praife or Blame at-
tach'd to them. After a Word had been explain’d
to me, and the Character, which it expreft, had

L 4 been


224 ADIALOGUE.

been defcrib’d, I concluded, that fuch an Epithet
: muft neceffarily be the greateft Reproach in the
World ; and was extremely furpriz'd to find one,. in
a public Company, apply itto a Perfon, with whom
he liv’d in the ftridteft Intimacy and Friendfhip.
You fancy, {aid I, one Day, to an Acquaintance,
that Changuis is your mortal Enemy: I lowe to ex-
tinguifo Quarrels ; and I muft, therefore, tell you, that
i heard him talk of you in the moft advantageous Manner.


Bat to my great Aftonifhment, when I repeated


Changuis'sWords, tho’ I had both remember’d and un-
derftood them perfectly, I found, that they were
taken for the moft mortal Affront, and that I had
very innocently. render’d the Breach betwixt thefe
Perfons altogether irreparable.


As it was my Fortune to come amongft this People
on a very advantageous Footing, I was immediately
introduc’d to the beft Company ; and being defir'd
to live with Alcheic, I readily accepted his Invitation,
as I found him univerfally efteem’d for his perfonal
Merit ; and indeed regarded by every one in hiatal
as a perfect Charatter.


One Evening he invited me, as an Amufement,
to bear him Company in a Serenade, which he in-
tended to give Gu/ki, with whom, he told me, he
was extremely enamour’d; and I foon found his

Tafte


rd


ADIALOGUE. 226%
‘Tafte was not fingular: For we met many of his
Rivals, who had come onthe fame Errand. Iveryf®
naturally concluded, that this Flame of his muftb:
one of the fineft Women in Town ; and I alreacy
felt a fecret Inclination to fee her, and be acquainted
with her. But as the Moon began to rife, I was
much furpriz’dto find, that we were in the Midft of
the Univerfity, where Gul/ki ftudy’d: And I was
fomewhat afham’d for having attended my Friend, .
on fuch an Errand.


I’ was .told’ afterwards, that A/cheic’s Choice of
Gulki was very much approv’d‘of by all the good .
Company in Town ; and that twas expected, while
he gratify’d his own Pa‘fion, he would perform to.
that young Man the fame good Office, which he had:
himfelf ow’d to Ekouf, I¢ feems Alcheic had been...
very handfome in his Youth, and been courted by
many Lovers ; but had beftow’d his Favours chiefiy
on the fage Elcouf; to whom he was fuppos'd to owe,. .
in a great Meafure, the aftonifhing Progrefs he had
made in Philofophy and Virtue.


Ir gave me. fome Sarprize, that d/cheic’s Wife .
(who by-the-bye happen’d alfo to be his Sifter) was |
no. way fcandaliz’d at this Species of Infidelity:


Ie S. Mica. ;


596 ADIALOGUE.


Mvucu about the fame Time I difcover'd (fox it
was not attempted to be kept a Secret from me or
any Body) that A/cheic was a Murderer and a Parri-
cide, and had put to Death an innocent Perfon, the
moft nearly conne&ted with him, and whom he was
oblig’d to protect and defend by all the Ties of Na-
ture and Humanity. When I afk’d, with all the
Caution and Deference imaginable, what was his
Motive for this Action ; he reply’d coolly, that he
was not then fo much at his Eafe as he is at prefent,
and that he had acted, in that Particular, by the Ad-
vice of all his Friends. °


Hav inc heard Alcheic’s Virtue fo extremely cele-


brated, I pretended to join in the general Voice of


Acclamation, and only afk’d, by way of Curiofity,
asa Stranger, which of all his noble Ations was
oft highly applauded ; and I foon found, that all


Sentiments were united in giving the Preference to


the Affaffination of Uskek. This Usbek had been to
the laft Moment 4/ckeic’s intimate Friend, had lay’d.
many high Obligations upon him, had even fav'd
his Life on a certain Occafion, and had, by his Will,

which was found after the Murder, made him his
Heir to a confiderable Part of his Fortune. Alcheic,


it feems, confpir'd with about twenty or thirty more,
moft of them alfo Uséek’s Friends ; and falling all
5 together


4 DIALOGUE, 224
together on that unhappy Man, when he was not
aware, they had tore him with a hundred Wounds ;
‘and given him that Reward for all his paft Favours
and Obligations. Usbek, faid the general Voice of
the People, had many great and good Qualitics :
His very Vices were fhining, magnificent, and ge-
- nerous: But this Action of Alcheic {ets him far above
Usbek in the Eyes of all Judges of Merit ; and is
one of the nobleft, that ever perhaps the Sun fhone
upon.

AnorTuer Part of Alcheic’s Conduaét, which I alfo
found highly applauded, was his Behaviour towards
Cal, with whom he was join’d in a Projector
Undertaking of fome Importance. Ca/ijf, being a
paflionate Man, gave cheic, one Day, a found
Drubbing ; which he took very patiently, waited
the Return of Ca/i/>’s good Humour, kept ftill a fair
Correfpondence with him; and by that Means
brought the Affair, in which they were join’d, to a
happy Iffue, and gain’d himfelf immortal Honour .
by his remarkable Temper and Moderation.


I nave lately receiv’'d a Letter from a Correfpon-
dent in Fourli, by which I learn, that fince my De-
parture, lcheic, falling into a bad State of Health,
has fairly hang'd himfelf ; and has dy’d univerfally
‘regreted and applauded by every one in that Country.
So virtuous and noble a Life, fays each Fourlian,

L 6 could


228 A DIALOGUE.

could not be better crown'd than by fo nobfe an
End ; and he has prov’d by this, as well as by all
his other Actions, what was his conftant Principle
during his Life, and what he boafted of near his laft
Moments, that a wife Man is fcarce inferior to the
great God, Vitz. This is the Name of the Supreme
Deity amongft the Fourkans.


Tue Nations of this People, continu’d Palamedes,
are as extraordinary with regard to Good-manners
_ and Sociablenefs, as with regard to Morals. My
Friend A/cheic form’d once a Party for my Entertain-
ment, compos’d of all the prime Wits and Philofo-
phers of Fourli; and each of us brought his Mefs
along with him to the Place, where we affembled.
I obferv’d one of them to be worfe provided than
the reft, and offer’d him a Share of mine, which hap-
pen'd to be a roafted Pullet: And I could not but
remark, that he, and all the reit of the Company
ftar’d at my Simplicity.. I was told, that A/cheic had
once fo much Intereft with his Club as to prevail
with them to eat in common, and that he had made
ufe of an Artifice to that Purpofe. He perfuaded
_thofe, whom he obferv'd. to: be. worf provided, to
offer their Mefs to the Company ; after which, the
others, who had brought more delicate Fare, were
afham'd not to make the fame Offer. This is regarded
as fo extraordinary a Event, that it has fince, as I


“learn,


er ann
ee ee


: A4DIALOGUEB. 229
learn, been recorded in the Hiftory of Alcheic’s Life;
compos'd by one of the greateft Geniufes of Fourk.


Pray, fays I, Palamedes, when you was at Fourl;,
did you alfo learn the Art of turning your Friends
into Ridicule, by telling them ftrange Stories, and
then laughing at them, if they believ’d you. I affure
you, reply'd he, that had I been difpos’d to learn:
fach a Leffon, there was no Place in the World more
proper. My Friend, fo often mention’d,. did na-
thing, from Morning to Night, but fneer, and
banter, and railly ; and you could fcarce ever diftin-
guifh, whether he was in Jeft or Earneft: But you
think, then, that my Story is improbable ; and that
I have usd, or rather abus’d the Privilege of a
Traveller. ‘To be fure, faysI, you was but in. Jeft.
Such barbarous and favage Manners are. not.only in-
compatible with a. civiliz‘d, intelligent People, fuch
as you faid thefe were; but are fcarce compatible
with human Nature. They exceed all we ever read
of, amongft the Mingrelians and Topinambioues.


Have a care, cry’d he, have a care! You are
not aware you are fpeaking Blafphemy, and are
abufing your Favourites, the Greeks, efpecially the
Athenians, whom I have couchd all along, under
thefe bizarre Names I employ’d. If you confider
aright, there is not one Stroke of the foregoing

Character,


230 A DIALOGUE.

Charaéter, which might not be found in the Man ef
higheft Merit.at Athens, without diminifhing, in the
leaft, from the Brightnefs of his Character. TheGreek
Love, their Marriages *, and the expofing of their
Children cannot but ftrike you immediately. The

Death df Usdek is an. exact Covnter-part to that of
Gzfar. - | ,


Aut to a Trifle, fay'd'I, interrupting him; you
did not mention, that UsdeA-was an Ufurper.


I pip not, reply'd he; left you fhould difcover the
Parallel I aim‘’d at. But even adding this Circum-
ftance, we fhould make no Scruple, according to our
Sentiments of Morals, to denomitate Brutus, and
Caffius, ungrateful Traitors and Affaffins : Tho’ you
know, that they are, perhaps, the higheft Characters
‘of all Antiquity ; and the drhenians erected Statues
to them ; which they plac’d near thofe of Harmadius


and Arifngiton, their own Deliverers, And if you -


think this Circumftance, you mention, fo material
to abfolve thefe Patriots, I fhall compenfate it by
nother, not mention’d, which will equally aggra-
‘wate their Crime. A few Days before the Execution


@ ‘The Laws of :Atbens allow’d a Man to marry his Sifter by
.the Father. Solon’s Laws forbid Hederafty to Slaves, as being of
too great Dignity for fuch mean Pesfom, °


of


| A DIALOGUE. 251
of their fatal Purpofe, they all fwore F ealty to:
Czfar ; and protefting to hold his Perfon ever facred,.
they touch’d the Altar with thofe Hands, whioh they
had already arm’d for his Deftruétion *..


I weep not put you in mind of the famous and
applauded Story of Themiffocles, and of his Patience
towards Exurybiades, the Spartan, his commanding.
Officer, who, heated by a Debate, lifted his Cane
to him in a Council of War (the fame Thing as if he
had cudgel’d him) Srrike ! cries the Athenian, Strike!
but hear me.


_ You are too good a Scholar not to difcover Socrates
and his Athenian Club in my laft Story; and you.
would certainly obferve, that it is exactly copy’d


from Xenophon, with a Variation only of the Names+.


And I think I have fairly made appear, that an
Athenian Man of Merit might be fuch a one as with
us would pafs for Inceftuous, aParricide, an Affaffin,
an ungrateful, perjur’d Traitor, and fomething elfe
too abominable to be nam'd; not to mention his


Rufticity and Ill-manners. ‘And havirig liv’d in this


Manner, his Death may be entirely fuitable : He


* Appian. Bell. Civ. Lib. 3. Suetonius in vita Czefarit
+ Mem. Soc, Lib, 3, fub fine.
may


232 ADIALOGUE.

may conclude the Scene by adefperate A& éf Self.
murder, and dye with the moft abfurd Blafphemies
in his Mouth. And notwithftanding all this, he
fhall have Statues, if not. | Altars, erected to his
Memory ; Poems and Orations fhall be compos’d in
his Praife; great Sects fhall be proud of calling
themfelves by his Name ; and the moft diftant Pofte-
rity fhall blindly continue their Admiration : Tho’
were fuch a one to arife amongft themfelves, they
would juftly regard him with Horror and Execra-


tion.


Yr micHT Have been aware, reply'd ‘T: of: your
Artifice. You feem to take Pleafure in this Topic ;


and are indeed the only Man I ever-knew, who was:


well acquainted with the Antients, and did not ex-
tremely admire them. But inftead of attacking their
Philofophy, their Eloquence, or Poetry, the ufual


Subje&s of Controverfy betwixt us, you now feem |


to impeach their Morals, and accufe them of Igno-
rance in a Science, which is the only one, in my
Opinion, wherein they are not furpafs’d by the Mo-
derns.. Geometry, Phyfics, Aftronomy, Anatomy,
Botany, Geography, Navigation ; in thefe we juftly
elaim the Superiority : But what have we to oppofe
to their Moralifts ? Your Reprefentation of Things
is fallacious. You have no Indulgence for the Man-
ners and Cuftams of different Ages. Would you try


= a.


4


A DIALOGUE. 233
a Greek or Roman by the Common-law of Exgland ?
Hear him defend himfelf by his own Maxims ; and
then pronounce.


THERE are no Manners fo innocent or reafonable,
which may not be render’d odious or ridiculous, if
meafur’d by a Standard, unknown to the Perfons ;
efpecially, if you employ a little Art or Eloquence,
in aggravating fome Circumftances, and extenuating
others, as beft ferves the Purpofe of your Difcourfe.
All thefe Artifices may eafily be retorted on you.
Could I inform the Athenians, for Inftance, there was
a Nation, wherein Adultery, both aétive and paffive,
fo to fpeak, was in the higheft Vogue and Efteem :
Wherein every Man of. Education chofe for his
Miftrefs a marry’d Woman, the Wife, perhaps, of
his Friend and Companion ; and valu'd himfelf upon
thefe infamous Conquefts, as much as if he had been
feveral Times a Conqueror in Boxing or Wreftling
at the O/ympic Games. Wherein every Man, alfo,
took a Pride in his Tamenefs and Facility with re-
gard to his own Wife, and was glad to make Friends
or gain Intereft by allowing her to proftitute her
Charms ; and even, without any fuch Motive, gave
her full Liberty and Indulgence. I afk, what Sen-
timents the Athenians would entertain of fuch a Peo-
ple ; they who never mention’d the Crime of Adul-
tery but in Conjunction with Robbery and Poifon-

ing ?


ZZ 4 ADIALOGUE.
ing? Which would they admire moft, the Villainy
or the Meannefs of fuch a Conduct ?


SHoutp I add, thatthe fame People were as proud
of their Slavery and Dependance as the Athenians
were of their Liberty ; and tho’ a Man among them
were oppreft, difgrac’d, impoverith’d, ‘infulted, or
imprifon’d by the Tyrant, he would ftill regard it as.
the higheft Merit to love, ferve, and obey him ;.


and even to die for his fmalleft Glory or Satisfaction:
Thefe noble Greeks would probably afk me, whether-
I fpoke of a human Society, or of fome inferior,.


fervile Species.


*Twas then I might inform my Athenian Audience,


that thefe People, however, wanted: not Spirit and:


Bravery. If a Man, fays I, tho’ their intimate
Friend, fhould’ throw. out, in a private-‘Company, a:


Raillery againft them, nearly approaching any of.


thofe, with which your Generals and Demagogues
every Day regale each. other, in the F ace of. the
whole City, they never can forgive him 5 but in
order to revenge themfelves, they oblige him imme-
diately to run them thro’ the Body, or be himfelf
murder’d. And if a Man, who ‘is an abfolute
Stranger to them, fhould defire them, at the Peril
ef their own Life, to cut the Throat of their Bofom-
companion, they immediately obey, and think them-

felves


-_ a a


ADIALOGUWE. 23
felves highly oblig’d and honour’d by the Commiffion.
Thefe are their Maxims of Honour: This is their:
favourite Morality.


Bur tho’ fo ready to draw their Sword againft:
their Friends and Countrymen no Difgrace, no In-
famy, no Pain, no Poverty will ever engage thefe:
People to turn the Point of it againft their own.
Breaft. A Man of Rank would row in the Gallies,.
would beg his Bread, would languifh in Prifon,
would fuffer any Tortures; and ftill preferve his
wretched Life. Rather than efcape his Enemies by
a generous Contempt of Death, he would infamoufly
receive the fame Death from his Enemies, aggra--
vated by their triumphant Infults, and by the moff.
exquifite Sufferings. ¥


'Tis very ufual too, continu’d I, amongit this.
People to fhut up feveral of their Children in a per-.
petual Prifon (where every Art of plaguing, and
tormenting them is carefully ftudy’d and praétis’d):
in order, that another Child, whom they own to
have no greater or rather lefs Merit than the reft,.
may enjoy their whole Fortune, and wallow in every
Kind of Voluptuoufnefs and Pleafure. Nothing fo:
virtuous in their Opinion as this barbarous Partia-.


lity.


Bur


236 A DIALOGUE.


Bur what is more particular in this whimficaF ~


Nation, fay I to the Athenians, &, that a Frolic of
yours during the Saturnalia *, when the Slaves
are ferv’d by their Mafters, is ferioufly con-
tinu’d by them thro’ the whole Year, and thro’ the
whole Courfe of their Lives ; and accompany’d too.
with fome Circumftances, which ftill farther augment.
the Abfurdity and Ridicule. Your Sport only elevates
for a few Days thofe whom Fortune has thrown
-down, and whom fhe too, in Sport, may really ele-
vate for ever above you: But this Nation gravely.
exalt thofe, whom Nature has fubjected to them,
and whofe Inferiority and Infirmities are abfolutely
incurable. The Women, tho’ without Virtue, are
their Mafters and Sovereigns: Thefe they reverence,
 praife, and magnify : To thefe, they pay the higheft.
Deference and Refpeét : And in all Places and at.all
Times, the Superiority of the Females is_ readily.
acknowledg’d and fubmitted to by every ape,. who
has the leaft Pretenfions to Education and Politenefs.
Scarce any Crime would be fo univerfally detefted
as an Infraction of this Rule.


* The Greeks kept the Feaft of Saturn or Chronus, as well ap
the Romans, See Lucian, Epift. Saturn,


You


A DIALOGUE. 237


Yow need go no farther, reply'’d Palamedes, Ican
eafily conjeéture the People you aim at. The Strokes,
‘with which you have painted them, are pretty juft ;
‘and yet you muft acknowledge, that fcarce any
People are to be found, either in antient or modern
Times, whofe national Character is, upon the Whole,
“lefs liable to Exceptions. But I give you Thanks for

helping me out with my Argument. I had no In-
tention of exalting the Moderns at the Expence of
the Antients. I only meant to reprefent the Uncer-
tainty of all thefe Judgments concerning. Characters ;
and to convince you, that Fafhion, Vogue, Cuftom,
and Law were the chief Foundation of all moral
Determinations. The Athenians furely, were a civi-
liz’d, intelligent People, if ever there was one;
and yet their Man of Merit might, in this Age,
be held in Horror and Execration. The French are
alfo, without doubt, a very civiliz’d, intelligent
People ; and yet their Man of Merit might, with
the Athenians, be an Objet of the higheft Contempt
and Ridicule, and even Hatred. And what renders

~ the Matter more extraordinary: 'Thefe two-national
Charaéters.are fuppos’d to be the moft fimilar of any
in antient or modern Times ; and while the Engi
flatter themfelves that they refemble the Romans,
their Neighbours on the Continent draw the Paralle}
betwixt themfelves and thefe polite Greets. What
wide ~


238 ADIALOGUE.

‘wide Difference, therefore, in the Sentiments of
Morals, muft be found betwixt civiliz’d Nations and
‘Barbarians, or betwixt Nations whofe Characters


have little in common? How fhall we pretend te-


fix a Standard for Judgments of this.Nature ?


By tracing Matters, reply’d I, a little higher, and
examining the firft Principles, which each Nation
eftablifhes, of Blame or Cenfure. ‘The Rhine flows
North, the Réoze South ; yet both fpring from the
Jame Mountain, and are alfo actuated, in their op-
pofite Direétions, by the fame Principle of Gravity :
The different Inclinations of the Ground, on which
they run, caufe all the Difference of their Courfes.


In how many Circamftances would an Athenian
and French Man.of Merit certainly concur? Good-
fenfe, Knowledge, Wit, Eloquence, Humanity,
Fidelity, Truth, Juftice, Courage, Temperance,
_ Conftancy, Dignity of Mind. “ Thefe you have all
omitted ; in order to infift only on the Points, in
which they may, by Accident, differ. Very well :
Tam willing to comply with you; and fhall endea-
vour to account for thefe Differences from the moft
univerfal, eftablifh'd Principles of Morals.


_ Tue Greek Loves, I carenot to examine more par-
ticularly. I fhall only obferve, that, however blame-
_% able,


ADIALOG UE. 239
-able, they .arofe from a very innocent -Caufe, the
Frequency .of the Gymnaftic Exercifes amongft that —
People ;.and were recommended, tho’ abfurdly, as
the Source of Friendthip, Sympathy, mutual Attach-
ment, and Fidelity * ; Qualities efteem’d in all Na-
tions and all Ages.


Tue Marriage of Half-brothers and Sifters feems
nq great Difficulty. Love betwixt the nearer Rela-
tions is contrary to Reafon and public Utility ; but
the precife Point, where we are to ftop, can {carcely
be. determin’d by natural Reafon; and is therefore a
very proper Subject of municipal Law or Cuftom.
If the Athenians went a little too far on the one Side,
the Canon Law has furely pufh’d Matters a great
way into the other Extremity +.


-Hap you afk’d a Parent at dthens,. why he bereav’h *
his Child of that Life, which he had fo lately given
it, °Tis becaufe I love it, he.would reply ; and re-
gard the Poverty it muft inherit from me, as a greater
Evil than a Death, which it is not capable of dread-
ing, feeling, or refenting {.


How is public Liberty, the moft valuable of all
Bleffings, to be recover'd from the Hands of an


© Plat, Symp. P. 182. Ex Edit. Serr. © + See Enquiry,
Sect, IV. { Plutarch, de amore prolis, fub fine.


Ufurper


240 A DIALOGUE.

Ufurper or Tyrant, if his Power fhields him from
- public Rebellion, and our Scruples from private
Vengeance ? That his Crime is capital by Law, you
acknowledge: And muft the higheft Aggravation of
his Crime, the putting himfelf above Law, form his
full Security ? You can reply nothing, but by fhow-
ing the great Inconveniencies of Affaffination ;
which, could any one have prov’d clearly to the
Antients, he had reform’d their Sentiments in this
Particular.


Acatin, to caft your Eye on the Picture I have
drawn of modern Manners ; there is almoft as great
Difficulty, Tacknowledge, to juftify French as Greek
Gallantry ; except only, that the former is much
more natural and agreeable than the latter. But our
_ Neighbours, it feems, have refolv'd to facrifice fome
of the domeftic to the fociable Pleafares ; and to
prefer Eafe, Freedom, and an open Commerce to a
ftrict Fidelity and Conftancy. Thefe Ends are both
good, and are fomewhat difficult to reconcile ; nor
need we be furpriz’d, if the Cuftoms of Nations en-
cline too much, fometimes to the one Side, fometimes
to the other.


Tue moft inviolable Attachment to the Laws of
our Country is every-where acknowledg'd a capital
Virtue ; and where the People are not fo happy, 4s


to


ADIALOGUE. qt
to have any other Legiflature but a fingle Perfon, the
ftri@teft Loyalty is, in that Cafe, the trueft Pa-
triotif{m.


Noruine furely can be more abfurd and barbarous _
than the Practice of Duelling ; but thofe, who,
juttify it, fay, that it begets Civility and Good-man-
ners. And a Duelift, you may obferve, always
values himfelf upon his Courage, his Senfe of Ho-
nour, his Fidelity and Friendfhip ; Qualities, which _
are here indeed very oddly direéted, but have been
efteem’d univerfally, fince the Foundation of the
World.


Have the Gods forbid Self-murder? An Athe-
nian allows, that it ought to be foreborn, Fas the
. Deity permitted it ? A Frenchman allows, that
_ -Death is preferable to Pain and Infamy.


Yow fee then, continu’d I, that the Principles,
upon which Men reafon in Morals are always the
fame; tho’ the Conclufions they draw are often very
different. That they all reafon aright with regard to:
this Subjeét, more than with regard to any other, it
is not incumbent on any Moralift to fhow. Tis
fufficient, that the original Principles of Cenfure or
Blame are uniform, and that erroneus Conclufions.
can be correéted by founder Reafonings and a larger.


M Experience.


242 ADIALOGUWE.

“Experience. As many Ages as have ¢laps’d fince
the Fall of Greece and Rome, and fuch Changes as
have arriv'’d in Religion, Language, Laws, and
Cuftoms ; none of thefe Revolutions has ever pro-
duc’d any confiderable Innovation in the primary


Sentiments 6f Morals, more than in thofe of external


Beauty. Some minute Differences, perhaps, may
be obferv’d in both. Horace * celebrates a low Fore-
“head, and Anacreon join’d Eye-brows f : But the
Apollo and the Venus of Antiquity are ftill our Models
~for Male and Female Beauty ; in like Manner as the
Charaéter of Scipio continues our Standard for the
Glory of Heroes, and that of Cornelia for the Eo-
nour of Matrons.


Ir appears, that there never was any Quality, re-
-commended by any one, as a Virtue.or moral Ex-
cellence ; but on account of its being ufeful, OF
sagreeable, toa Man bimjelf, or to others. For what
wther Reafon can there ever be for Praife or Appro-
bation? Or where would be the Senfe of extolling
- good Charatter or Aton, which, .at the fame Time,

“is allow’d to be good for nothing ? All the Diffe-
ences, therefore, in Morals may be reduc'd to this


bad Epift. Lib, x. Epift. y Alfo Lib. z. Ode 3°


+ Ode 28, Petronius (Cap. 86.) joins both thefe Circumfances
as Beauties,
one


A DIALOGUE: 243,
one general Foundation, and may be accounted for


by the different Views, which People take of thefe
Circumftances,


Sometimes Men differ in their Judgment about
the Ufefulnefs of any Habit or Action : Sometimes
alfo the peculiar Circumftances of Things render one
moral Quality more ufeful than others, and give it a
peculiar Preference, |


'T 1s not furprifing, that, during a Period of War
ahd Diforder, the military Virtues thould be more


. celebrated than the pacific, and attraé more the Ad-


miration and Attention of Mankind. « How ufual
“ 3s it,” fays Tully *, “to find Cimbrians, Celtibea
“ rians, and other Barbarians, who bear, with in-
flexible Conftancy, all the Fatigues and Dangers
of the Field; but are immediately difpirited


«


«¢
‘


© © under the Saffrance and Hazard of a languifhing


' $6


66


: violently with Swords and Falchions!”


“ Diftemper : While, on the other hand, the Greeks _
patiently endure the flow Approaches of Death,
“‘ when arm’d with Sicknefs and Difeafe ; but tj-
moroufly fly his Prefence,- when he attacks them


So oppo-


. fite is even the fame Virtue of Courage among tt


warlike or peaceful Nations! And indeed, we may


* Tufe, Quzft, Lib, 2s
M z obferve,


“244 ADIALOGUE.

“obferve, that as the Difference betwixt War and.
Peace is the greateft, that .arifes among Nations and
public Societies, it produces alfo the greateft Varia-
tions in moral Sentiment, and diverfifies the moft our
Idea of Virtue and perfonal Merit.


‘SomeTiMEs too, Magnanimity, Greatnefs of
Mind, Difdain of Slavery, inflexible Rigour and
Integrity-may fuit better the Circumftances of one Age


than thofe of another, and have a more kindly In-—


fluence, both on public Affairs, and on-a Man’s own


~ Safety and Advancement. Our Idea of Merit,


therefore, will alfo vary a little with thefe Variations;


and Labeo, perhaps, be cenfur’d for the fame Qua-


hities, which procur’d Cato the higheft Approbation. —


A Decree of Luxury may be ruinous and perni-


cious ina Native of Savitzerland, which only fofters:


the Arts, and encourages Induftry in a Frenchman or
Englifoman. We are not, therefore, to expect,
either the fame Sentiment, or the fame Laws in Bernes
that prevail in London or Paris.


-Dirrerent Cuftoms have alfo fome Influence,


as well as different Utilities ; and by giving an early


Biafs to the Mind, may produce a fuperior Propen-.


fity, either to the ufeful or the agreeable Qualities ; to
thofe,


i A at Se a


A DIALOGUE. -24y


thofe, which regard Self, or thofe, which extend to


Society. Thefe four. Sources of moral Sentiment
fill fubfift; but particular Accidents may, at one.
Time, make one of them flow with greater Abun-


@ince than at another.


‘Tus Cuftoms of fome Nations fut up the Women.
from all focial Commerce: Thofe of others make


them fo effential a Part of Society and Converfation,.


that, except where Bufinefs is canvafs’d, the Male-fex
alone are fuppos’d abfolutely incapable of mutual


‘ Difcourfe and Entertainment. As this Difference i 18°
the moft material, that can happen in private Life,


it muft alfo. produce the greateft Variation in our
moral Sentiments, —


Or all Nations in the World, where Polygamy


‘was not allow’d, the Gree#s feem to have been the


moft referv'd in their Commerce with the Fair-fex,
and to have impos'd on them the ftrifteft Laws of
Modefty and Decency. We have a ftrong Infianct
of this in an Oration of Lyfas*. A Widow injur'd,
ruin’d, undone, callsa Meeting of a fewof her neareft
Friends and Relations ; and tho’ never before ac- -
cuftom’d, faysthe Orator, to fpeak in the Prefence


of Men, the Diftrefs of her Circumffances conftrain’d


a.


® Orat. 33¢ é
o M 3 her


246 4A4DIALOGUE.
her to lay the Cafe before them. Her very Opening
her Mouth in fuch Company requir’d, it feems, an


Apology.


WHEN Demofthenes profecuted hjs Tutors, to make
them refund his Patrimony, it became neceffary for
him, in the Courfe of the Law. fuit, to prove that
the Marriage of Aphobus’s Sifter with Oxeter was en-
tirely fraudulent, and that, notwithftanding her
Sham-marriage, fhe had liv’d with her Brother at
Athens for two Years laft paft, ever fince her Divorce
from her former Hufband. And ‘tis remarkable,
that tho’ thefe were People of the firft Fortune and
Diftin€tion in the City, the Orator could prove this
Fa& no Way, but by calling for her female Slaves
to be put to the Queftion, and by the Evidence of
one Phyfician, who had feen her in her Brother's
Houfe during her IlInefs *. So referv'd were Greek
Manners. |


We may be certain, that an extreme Purity was
the Confequence of this Referve. Accordingly, we
find, that, except the fabulous Stories of an Helen.


and a Clytemneftra, there {carce is an Inftance of any.


Event in the Greek Hiftory, that proceeded from the
Intrigues of Women. On the other hand, in modern


@ Ip Oneterem.
Times,


A4DIYALOGUE, 247"
Times, particularly in a neighbouring Nation, the:
Kemales enter into all:Tranfactions and all Manage- -
ment of Church and State ; and no Man can fuc--
ceed, who takes not care to obtain their good Graces.
Harry the third; by incurring the Difpleafure of-the:
Fair, endanger'd his Crown, and [oft his Life, as.
much as by his Indulgence to Herefy.


’T rs needlefs to diffemble : The Confequence of a:
very free Commerce betwixt: the Sexes, and of their-
living much together, will often terminate in In--
trigues and Gallantry. We mutt facrifice fomewhat
of: the u/eful, if we be very anxious to obtain all the.
agreeable Qualities ; and cannot pretend to reach alike.
every Kind of Advantage. Inftances of Licence,
daily multiplying, will weaken the Scandal with the
one Sex, and teach the other, by Degrees, to adopt
the: famous Maxim of Ja Fontaine, with regard to.
female Infidelity, that if one knows it, it 1s but a fmalf
Matter ; if one knows it not, it is nothing *.


Some People are inclin’d to think, that the beft
Way of: adjufting all Differences, and of keeping
the proper Medium betwixt the agreeatle and u/esuf.
Qualities of the Sex is to live with them after the.


* = Quand on-le {gait c’eft peu de chofe s-
Quand on ne le {fait pas, ce n’eft rien,
. M 4 Manner:


248 ADIALOGUE.


Manner of the Romans and the EnglhjS (for the;
Cuftoms of thefe two Nations feem fimilar in this |
Refpe& *) that is, without Gallantry + and without |
Jealoufy. By a Parity of Reafon, the Cuftoms of |


the Staniards and of the Itakans of an Age ago (for
the prefent are very different) muft be the worft of


any ; becaufe they favour both Gallantry and ese:


a oe


Nor will thefe different Cuftoms of Nations affed |


only the one Sex: The Idea of perfonal Merit in


the Males mutt alfo be fomewhat different, with re- |


gard, at leaft, to Converfation, Addrefs, and Hu-


mour. ‘The one Nation, where the Men live much —


apart, will naturally more efteem Prudence; the
other, Gaiety : With the one, Simplicity of Man-
ners will be in the higheft Refpe& ; with the other,


} |


!
i
\
4
i


aes


Politenefs. ‘The one will diftinguith themfelves by |


~»


* During the Time of the Emperors, the Romans feem to have
been more given to Intrigues and Gallantry than the Engli/b are at
prifent : And the Women of Condition, in order to retain thei,
Lovers, endeavour’d to fix a Name of Reproach on thofe, who
were addi€ted to Wenching and Icw Amours, They were call’d
Ancillariok. See Seneca de Beneficiis. Lib. 3. Cap. g- Seealfo
Martial, Lib. 12. Epig. 58.


+ The Gallantry here meant is that of Amours and Attach-
ments, not that cf Complaifance, which is as much pay’d to the
fair Sex in England 88 in apy other Country.


Good-


4DIALOGUE, 249
Good-fenfe and Judgment ; the other, by Tafte and
Delicacy : The Eloquence of the former will fhine


moft in the Senate; that of the other, on the The-
atre. ;


Turse, I fay, are the natural Effets of fuch
Cuftoms. For it muft be-confeft, that Chance has a
great Influence onnationalManners; and manyEvents _
happen i in Society, which are not to be accounted
for by general Rules. Who could imagine, for
Inftance, that the Romans, who liv’d freely with their
Women, fhould be very indifferent about Mufic>
and efteem Dancing infamous : While the Greeés,
who-never almoft faw a Woman but in their own
Houfes, wére continually piping,. finging, and saat:
ing ? |


Tux Differences of moral Sentiment, which na-
turally arife from a republican or monarchical Go-
vernment, are alfo very obvious; as well as thofe,
which proceed from general Riches or Poverty,
Union or Faétion, Ignorance or Learning. I fhall
conclude this long Difcourfe with obferving, that
different Cuftoms and Situations vary the original
Ideas of Merit (however they may, fome Confe-
quences) in no very effential Point, and prevail
chiefly with regard to young Men, who can afpire

to


450 ADIALOGUE
to the agreeable Qualities, and may attempt to pleafe,.
The MANNER, the ORNAMENTS, the
GRACES, that fucceed in this Shape, are more:
arbitrary and cafual: But the Merit of riper Years is.
almoft every-where the fame ; and confifts chiefly in
Integrity, Humanity, Ability, Knowledge and the:
ether more folid and ufefal Qualities of the human.
Mind.

Wuar you infilton, reply’d Palamedgs, may have
' fome Foundation, when you ftick to the Maxims of
common Life and ordinary Condué. Experience
and the Practice. of the Wosld readily. correét.any
great Extravagance on either Side. But what fay.
you to artificial Lives and Manners? How do yos
reconcile the Maxims, on which thefe are founded ?


Wuart de yeu underftand by artificial Lives and.
Manners, faid I? I explain myfelf, reply’d he.
You know, that Religion had, in antient Times
very little Influence on common Life, and that,
after Men had perform’d their Duty in Sactifices and
Prayers at the Temple, they thought, that the Gods
left the reft of their Condu& to themfelves, and were.
little pteas’d, or offended with thofe Virtues and
Vices, that only affetted the Peace and Happinefs of.
human Society. In thofe Ages, ‘twas the Bufinefs
of Philofophy alone to regulate Men's ordinary Be-

haviour


A DIALOGUE. acu
haviour and Deportment ; and accordingly, we may
obferve, that this being the fole Principle, by which
a Man could elevate himfelf above his Fellows, it
acquird a mighty Afcendant over many, and pro-
duc’d great Singularities of Maxims and of Con-
du&. At prefent, that Philofophy has lof the Al-
Iurement of Novelty, it has no fuch extenfive Influ-
ence ; but feems to confine itfelf moftly to Specula-
tions in the Clofet ; inthe fame Manner, as the an-
tient Religion was limited to Sacrifices in the Tem-
ple. Its Place is now fupply’d by the modern Reli-
gion, which infpeéts our whole Conduct, and pre-
{cribes an univerfal Rule to our Actions, to our
Words, to our very Thoughts and Inclinations ; a
‘Rule fo much the more auftere, that it is guarded by .
infinite, tho’ diftant, Rewards and Punifhments ;
and no Infra€tion of it can eves be conceal’d or dif-
guis'd.


DIOGENES is the mof celebrated Model of
extravagant Philofophy. Let us feek a Parallel to
him in modern Times. We hall not difgrace any
philofophic Name by a Comparifom with the Domj-
nics ox Loyolas, or any canoniz’d Monk or Friar.
Let us compare him to Pafca/, a Man of Parts and.
Genius as well as Diogenes himfelf ; and perhaps too,


a
®


252 a4 DIALOGUE,
a Man of Virtue, had he allow’d his virtuous Incli-
nations to have exerted and difplay’d themfelves. -


Tue Foundation of Diogenes's Condu& was to
render himfelf an independent Being as much.as
poffible, and to confine all his Wants and Defires and
Pleafures within himfelf and his own Mind: The
Aim of Pafcal was to keep a perpetual Senfe-of his
Dependance before his Eyes, and never to forget his
numberlefs Wants and Neceffities. ‘The Antient
fuppotted himfelf’ by Magnanimity, Oftentation,
Pride, and the Idea of his own Superiority above
his Fellow-creatures. The Modern made conftant
Profeffion of Humility and Abafement, of the Con-


tempt and Hatred of himfelf ; and’ endeavour'd to :


attain thefe fuppos’d Virtues, as far as they are at-


tainable. The Autterities of the Greek were in order
to inure himfelf to Hardfhips, and prevent his ever _


fuffering : Thofe of the Frexchman were embrac’d
merely for their own Sake, aud in order to fuffer as


much as poflible. ThePhifofopher-indulp’d himfelf in —


the moft beaftly Pleafures, even.in public : ‘The Saint
refus'd himfelf the. moft innocent, ¢ven in private :


‘The former thought it his Duty to love his Fnends, |


and to raik at them, and reprove them, and {cold
them : The latter endeavour’d to be abfolutely in-
different towards. his neareft Relations, and to love
-and {peak well of his Enemies. The great Object


of \


eo = SA
~ 2 ee ee ee


Pe
=


ADIALOGUE, © 253


~ of Diogenes’s Wit was every Kind of Superftition;


that is, every Kind of Religion known in his Time.
The Mortality of the Soul was his Standard Prin-
ciple ; and even his Sentiments of a Divine Provi-
dence feem to have been very licentious. The mot
ridiculous Superftitions directed Pafcal’s Faith and
Prattice ; arid'an extreme-Contempt of this Life, in
Comparifon-of the future, was the chief Foundation
of his Condutt. |


In fuch a remarkable Contraft do thefe two Men
ftand : Yet both of them have met with univerfa}
Admiration in their different Ages, and have been
propos’d as Models of Imitation. Where then is


i “the univerfal Standard ‘of Morals, which you talk


of? And what Rule fhall we eftablifh for the many
different, nay contrary Sentiments of Mankind ?


An Experiment, faid I, -that fucceeds in the Air;
will not ‘always fucceed in a Vacuum. When Men
depart from the Maxims of common Reafon, and
affect thefe artificial Lives, as you call them, no-one
can anfwer for what will pleafe or.difpleafe them.
They are’-in a different Element from the reft of
Mankind ; and the natural Principles of their Mind
play not with the fame Regularity, as if left to them-
felves, free from the Illufions of religious Superftition
or philofophical Enthufiafm.

FIUN IS, :
